The Works of Thomas Sydenham, Vol. 2 (Thomas Sydenham (R. G. Latham, trans.), 1850)
==========================================================
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/b33098682_0002). Staged for the Tower of Babel library.

4: 


ii 
A 
[x a 

are 


P5925 


NS 


S " 
“ man 


UD 


NR 


4 
AC 
XR SQN 


N 


Za A 


UN M ula ura 
AH. at zt 


Add LA. puo He 


Aree 


2! 


NS 
33 


cC; 
. 


take 


74 


A E 


A ales 


p zt mn 
md 


ES 


ur 


IA Y 


Stes v aS 


e LO 


IN NA 
Rio: 


"rwr 
NA 


OO P ACT CCS 
fA Na tee nh te chro 


B 


NOB ES 

SERS RS 
BENS 
E MN 


^ 


ACC EQ ENSIS AR ALAS 
* E 
RAN, 


SOS 
ON 


SH 
AORN 


SOOO TA AM AOA A SER, : 
IDSEAPN INT OR de TR eG Gre hee SNES NSS 
Seon Ee" 
ENSUSSEN 


Arey Ni ne 
NPR IRAE RTL ON Dr 


X X S WEN 
SAIS ERROR 


ATUM 


* 


ee 


CSSA 


NN 


, 
4 


C 


t 


, 


Lele 
ror Wir eter 


Vaf ef 


n 


SY DEN HAM, im 


mo 


wh 
A 


" 
H 


far rr 


s 
T 


v 


THE 


SYDENHAM SOCIETY 


INSTITUTED 


MDCCCXLIII 


Á 
Amm ———. 


LONDON 


MDCCCL, 


7 rj ed ^ j 


THE WORKS 


OF 


THOMAS SYDENHAM, M.D. 


TRANSLATED FROM THE 
LATIN EDITION OF DR. GREENHILL 


WITH 


A. LItE OF THE AWTHOR 


BY 


R. G, LATHAM, M.D. 


ETC, ETC. ETC. 


IN TWO VOLUMES 


VOL, LH. 


LONDON 
PRINTED FOR THE SYDENHAM SOCIETY 


MDCCCL. 


me 
Mus ^ 


HISTORICAL 
MEDICAL 


<< BRA 


P^ ag de 
P , 


€. AND J. ADLARD, PRINTERS, | 
T TRE. " , tous oR =) E * 
i | EAWTHOLOMEW CLOSE. 


CONTENTS OF VOLUME II. 


EPISTLE I.—EPIDEMIC DISEASES. 
PAGE 
To the most illustrious Doctor Thomas Sydenham, m.p. . : $i 


To the most excellent and learned Dr. Brady, m.p., Master of Gonville and 
: Caius College, and Regius Professor of Medicine in the University of 
Cambridge : : i ; i "RS 


EPISTLE IL—VENEREAL DISEASE. 
To my good friend Dr. Thomas Sydenham, w.». : : : 15929 


To the most learned and illustrious Henry Paman, w.p., Fellow of St. John's 
College, Public Orator of the University of Cambridge, and Professor 


of Medicine in Gresham College ; : : m 


EPISTOLARY DISSERTATION. 


To the most worthy Dr. Thomas Sydenham, m.p. 2 : ES 
Letter to Dr. Cole. A : : : : . 96 


A TREATISE ON GOUT AND DROPSY. 
To the most learned Dr. Thomas Short, m.p., Fellow of the College of Phy- 


sicians, London . : ; : ‘ oboe 
I. On Gout : , . ; ; ; »,123 
II. On Dropsy . : ; ; . 163 
Postscript . ; 1 ; : i -) 182 


SCHEDULA MONITORIA. 


To the most excellent and learned Charles Goodall, m.p., Fellow of the 


College of Physicians in London , : : 187 
I. On the Appearance of a new Fever : : : .. 190 
II. On the Putrid Fever subsequent to the Confluent Smallpox : . 214 


III. On Bloody Urine arising from a Calculus impacted in the Kidneys . 22] 


v1 


CHAP. 


CHAP. 
CHAP. 
CHAP. 
CHAP. 
CuaP. 
CHAP. 
CHAP, 
CHAP. 
CHap. 
CHAP. 


CHAP. 


CHAP. 
CuHap. 
CHAP. 
CHAP. 
CHAP. 
Cnar. 
CHAP. 
CHap. 
CHAP. 
CHAP. 
CHAP. 
CHAP. 


CHAP. 


CHAP. 


CHAP. 


CHAP. 


CHAP. 
CHAP. 


CHAP. 


CHAP. 
CHAP. 
CHAP. 


CHAP. 


CONTENTS. 


PROCESSUS INTEGRI. 


I.—On the Affection called Hysteria in Women; and Hypochondriasis y 

in Men ; . 251 
II.—Of the Depuratory Fever of the Years 1661, 1662, 1663, 1664 . 236 
III.—On the Pestilential Fever of the Years 1665, 1666 : . 287 
IV.—On Intermittent Fever : : . 898 

V.—On the Stationary Fever from 1685 to 1690 : : . 240 
VI.—On Infants suffering under the Stationary Fever ; «i 242 
VII.—On the Scarlet Fever T 3 : ; «ts ds 
VIII.—-On Pleurisy , ; 3 . . 243 
IX.—On Bastard Peripneumony : à , . 244 
X.—On Rheumatism : : : : . 245 
XI.—On Erysipelatous Fever . " , Ee vj 
XII.—On the Pocky Itch, and such other inveterate — of the 

Skin, as do not yield to Venesection and Catharsis : «248 
XIII.—On the Quinsy . , ; ‘ . 249 
XIV.—On the Measles ; : : : 280 
XV.—On Smallpox : : : ‘ ; . 251 
XVI.—On St. Vitus's Dance ; : : . 257 
XVII.—On Apoplexy : ; : , . 259 
XVIII.—Of Ophthalmia A : : ; : 2061 
XIX.—On Procidentia Uteri : : 1 ; "EE 
XX.—On a Nephritic Paroxysm : : «202 
XXI.—On Bloody Urine from a Calculus impacted in the Kidney . 263 
XXII.—On Dysentery, Diarrhcea, and Gripes 3 | 
XXIII.—On Bilious Colic ; b : à . 265 
XXIV.—On Cholera Morbus : : : . 266 
XXV.—On Colica Pictonum ; : ; 41:208 
XXVI.—On the Iliac Passion : : avy “ab: 
XXVII.—On immoderate Menstrual Flow . : , . 269 
XXVIII.—On Hysterical Colic 1 : s 270 
XXIX.—On Jaundice not following Colic. . : . 1272 
XXX.—To prevent Abortion : à s AM 
XXXI.—On an immoderate Flow of the Lochia . ,U 208 
XXXII.—Suppression of the Lochia 1 : ? 20274 
XXXIII.—On Dropsy : i ; , e ÀTU 
XXXIV.—On a Virulent Gonorrhea | : . 278 
XXXV.—On the Lues Venerea ; . A . 280 


CHAP. 
CHAP, 
CHAP. 
CHAP. 
CHap. 
Cuar. 
CHAP, 
CHAP. 
CHAP. 
CHAP. 
CHAP. 
CHAP. 
CHAP. 
CHAP. 
CHAP. 
CnaAP, 
CHAP. 
CHAP. 
CHAP. 
CHAP. 
CHAP. 
CHapP. 
CHAP. 
CHAP. 
CHAP. 


CHAP. 


CONTENTS. 


XXXVI.—On Fluor Albus 

XXXVII.—On Diabetes 

XXXVIII.—On Piles : : 
XXXIX.—On immoderate Hemorrhoidal Discharges 
XL.—On the Epilepsy of Children 

XLI.—On Rickets . 

XLII.—On Fever arising from Dentition 
XLIII.—0On the Hectic Fever of Infants 
XLIV.—On the Convulsive Cough of Children 
XLV.—On Hemorrhage from the Nostrils 
XLVI.—On the Green-Sickness 

XLVII.—On Suppression of the Menses 
XLVIIUIL.—On Vomiting and Spitting of Blood 
XLIX.—On the Puncture of a Tendon 

L.—On Burns 

LI.—On common Mania 

LIT.— On Bruises 

LII1I.—On a Scalded Head . 

LIV.—On the Bite of a Mad Dog 

LV.—On an Ulcer of the Bladder 

LVI.—On inveterate Asthma in Patients of a sanguine Temperament 
LVII.—On Palsy 

LVIII.—On Coughs and Phthisis 

LIX.—On Scorbutus s 

LX.—The Description and Cure of a Decline 
LXI.—On Gout 


APPENDIX. 


INDEX. 


ERRATUM,—P. 158, line 26, for Lucan read Lucian. 


Vil 
PAGE 
282 
283 
ib. 
284 
ib. 
285 
286 
287 


ib. 


293 


296 
297 
300 


Ce Uc 
» 


E 


A y. 


A spulEXE BOO MTEIX 08 


prr 


edi aes TE X «X87 
boten edie, XT uen 


II. 


l pispLIS 


TO 


DR. BRADY, AND DR. PAMAN. 


Pe 


if H I 
M M" 7 


EPrLPSTLE : IT. 


TO THE MOST ILLUSTRIOUS 


DOCTOR THOMAS SYDENHAM, M.D. 


Most LEARNED SrIR,— 


No physician, hitherto, has attentively considered the 
force and influence of the atmosphere upon human bodies; nor 
yet has he sufficiently ascertained the part it plays in prolong- 
ing human life. No one either hath noted the force it exerts 
in fermenting, altering, and circulating the blood. Finally, in 
respect to the manifold changes and alterations of its natural tem- 
perament, changes and alterations which you have properly called 
constitutions, both writers on medicine and writers on natural 
history have been so far from investigating them diligently, that 
they have hardly touched upon them. Considering, however, 
that the air works its way into all parts of the body (even the 
most secret), it follows of necessity that such changes and 
alterations, which the atmosphere undergoes from matters with 
which it 1s impregnated, must also be communicated to the 
blood and juices of the body, and be impressed upon the 
same; so that such and such depraved dispositions of the 
blood originate in such and such depraved constitutions of the 
atmosphere. 

Well, then, have you, in your * Medical Observations, con- 
sidered the various constitutions of the different years, and the 
different parts of years; since it is in these that the actions of 
the air upon the blood, juices, and especially the spirits, are 
beheld. Indeed they may possibly be the matter of the spirits 
themselves. 

Little doubt have I but that the observation of the charac- 
ters of fevers, as determined by the character of the year in 


4 EPISTLE I. 


which they prevail, constitutes the most useful (if not the only) 
way for establishing a method of practice. Proceed then in 
your Observations ; and, if any still remain upon the fevers of 
the years lately elapsed, lay them before the public. So shall 
you consult the interests of humanity. 

In the fifth chapter of the first section of your book,’ you 
have treated briefly on the use of the Peruvian bark, and the 
method of exhibiting it. For my own part, I know physicians 
of no small note, who give it in large doses often repeated. 
Others again contrive extracts and infusions; and then, out of 
the infusions, juleps and emulsions. Thus they profess to cure 
not only intermittent but continued fevers also. In the 
former the remedy is doubtless a great one. For twenty years 
(more or less) I have myself used the bark—ain various forms, 
in manifold preparations, and with the greatest success. 1f, 
however, you know anything peculiar in respect to its pro- 
perties, or have been better taught by experience than myself, 
oblige the world by proclaiming it. 

In the treatment of rheumatism you have proposed free and 
frequent bleedings.” I would ask whether some method less 
prodigal of human blood, and (at the same time) equally cer- 
tain, may not be discovered. 

I know, Most Worthy Sir, that you will experience the 
rebukes of malevolent men and the calumnies of the envious. 
These will attack your reputation, now as before. Liberal and 
candid men, however, whose nature it is to despise such de- 
tractors, will defend you. These they are who, if they wish to 
work out the history of fevers, as shown by long practice, their 
essences, their causes, their differences, and the true mode of 
treating them, will take you to lead them on their way; since 
few or no other methods of investigation and treatment can be 
assigned to any one but yourself. Proceed then as you have 
begun. Scorn the sarcasms of sciolists. Excite the spirits of 
honest men. It is you who have pointed out the way. Let 
those who dislike it find a better. 

Farewell. Do this, and every physician will be beholden to 
you. No one more than your deservedly devoted friend, 


R. BRADY. 
CAMBRIDGE; Dec. 30, 1670. 


1523107 ? Sect. VI, Chap. V, p. 4.—(G.] 


TO THE MOST EXCELLENT AND LEARNED 


DR. BRADY,. M.D., 


MASTER OF GONVILLE AND CAIUS COLLEGE, AND REGIUS PROFESSOR OF MEDICINE 
IN THE UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE. 


1. Tuar I, of all men now alive, should be pre-eminently 
ready to impart to any one, who might ask of me such small 
matters, as in the treatment of disease, I may have discovered, 
is simply what is right and proper. For if what is known to 
me be nothing but what is known to the world at large (a fact 
of which I am only too well convinced), it will not hurt me to 
publish such common-place and every-day pieces of information; 
whilst if I have rea//y attained anything which 1s advantageous 
to medicine, and which paves the way to a more certain treat- 
ment of disease, the publication of the same is less praiseworthy 
in me than it would be in others; since, for thirty years (more 
or less) I have been a sufferer from the gout, and for a long 
time from the stone as well. Hence I feel, on my own part, 
how seriously rejoiced I should be if the suggestions of others 
might bear upon the relief of my own afflictions. 

2. Since, however, the great God hath allowed to few upon 
earth the mighty privilege of serving their kind to its benefit, 
and that only to those who are of earth's best mould— 


* Queis meliore Into finxit precordia Titan." ! 


I must make up by good wishes what I want strength to effect 
in full. For I have always thought (and not without reason) 
that to have published for the benefit of afflicted mortals any 
certain method of subduing even the slightest disease, was a 
matter of greater felicity than the riches of a Tantalus or a 
Croesus. I have called it a matter of greater felicity ; I now 
call it a matter of greater goodness, and of greater wisdom. For 
what more abundant instance of wisdom and goodness can any 


! Juvenal, Sat. xiv, 34. 


“6 *« ee ag EPISTLE I. 


one display than (seeing his own share of our common nature) 
to continually refer such things as he has accomplished, not to 
his own glory, but to the advantage of the world at large, of 
which he himself is so small and contemptible a particle. The 
author that I most admire, as the great teacher both in thought 
and language, the greatest genius of his own, and perhaps of 
all ages, the admired Cicero,’ writes, — “ Ut enim leges omnium 
salutem singulorum saluti anteponunt, sic vir bonus et sapiens, 
et legibus parens, et civilis officii non ignarus, utilitati hominum, 
plus quam unius alicujus, aut suze, consulit." Besides this, 
it is clear, that just as it is a crime to murder a man, so is 
it the part of virtue and honesty to save our fellow-beings when 
we are able, as well as to arm others with such safeguards as 
we have ourselveslearned. And these we may leave to the world 
after our death. Those who hold that it is no matter what 
happens after them, hold a wicked and inhuman doctrine. 

3. All this, however, I will now pass over, and I will confess 
that, small as those matters are which I have been revolving 
in my mind, and concerning which it has pleased you to 
honour me with inquiries, itis to you that I am in duty bound 
to unfold them ; to you, whose illustrious qualities make you 
worthy of that learned body which you adorn, even as the 
Spartans adorned Sparta; and you, to whose erudition, probity, | 
and candour of spirit I, for my part, only pay those high enco- 
miums which are paid by the university which you illuminate. I 
also pass over all those debts of gratitude due from me to you. 
To you that undeserved abuse wherewith I am harassed by 
many is a vexation and sorrow; whilst, of those who utter it, 
this I may safely say, that if a harmless life, hurting none by 
word or deed, had been sufficient to protect me from their 
tongues, they never would have thundered against me. Since 
then, it is from no fault of mine that these calumnies have fallen 
on me (and, as I hope, never shall be), this is my resolution: 
viz. that I will not afflict myself because other men have done 
wrong. All that I shall deem my duty is, as far as my small 
means will allow me, to do the work of an honest man and of 
a good physician. 

4. I will now, then, meet your wishes, in laying before 


' De Fin. Bon. et Mal. iii, 19.—[G.] 


EPIDEMIC DISEASES. 7 


you such observations upon those diseases which are the 
objects of your inquiries, as have occurred to me; "and 
I shall begin with the intermittent fevers which are now 
epidemic. For this reason, it will not be foreign to my purpose 
to run over them in a cursory way, and in their order of suc- 
cession in which they followed the year with which I closed my 
‘History of Acute Diseases,’ these being the diseases of fifteen 
years. I shall also, by the way, touch upon a few points of 
treatment already noted. By this means, the time and progress 
of the present constitution of fevers, and the rate at which it 
has crept upon us, will be made all the clearer. 

9. The year 1676 brought forth the same diseases with that 
constitution which was last named in the ‘ Medical Ob- 
servations, namely, the constitution of the years 1673 (in the 
autumn of which it began), 1674, and 1675. As this consti- 
tution, however, was going out, the diseases that belonged to it 
were less frequent, mild of their sort, and not so epidemic in 
their character, the peculiar disposition of the year notwith- 
standing. This, in respect to the manifold qualities of the air, 
was very different from the years that went before it, inasmuch 
as both the heat of its summer and the cold of its winter far 
surpassed the heat and cold of any twelvemonth within the 
memory of man. Nevertheless, vast as was the difference of 
the seasons, the diseases of the seasons were alike ; a clear proof, 
that the condition of the atmosphere which favours epidemic 
diseases is less a manifest than an occult condition. At the 
same time it must be owned, that, in respect to certain of their 
symptoms, these self-same diseases depended upon a diathesis 
manifest rather than occult. This is proved both by the measles 
and the cholera morbus. Each ofthese diseases set in during the 
year in question, and each of them shall be briefly noticed by me. 

6. The measles began at the beginning of the year. They 
were not very epidemic ; yet they had this peculiarity, that they 
ran on longer than usual. Usually they set in in January, and 
go on increasing till Lady-day. They then gradually diminish, 
and expire about Midsummer. Now, in the present year, they 
lasted till the autumnal equinox, and, unless I am mistaken, 
they took strength and obstinacy from the heats of summer. 
Notwithstanding this, the treatment was the treatment of 
measles in general. 


8 EPISTLE I. 


7. As the summer came to a close, the cholera morbus raged 
epidemically, and being promoted both by the unusual heat of 
the weather, it brought with it worse symptoms, in the way of 
cramps and spasms, than I had ever seen. Not only, as is 
generally the case, was the abdomen afflicted with horrible 
cramps, but the arms and legs, indeed the muscles in general, 
were afflicted also; so much, that the patient would at times 
leap out of bed, and try to ease the pain by stretching his body 
in every direction. 

8. However much the disease might require the usual treat- 
ment for diseases of the same sort, I still thought it well to 
give my anodynes in larger and more frequent doses than 
usual. For instance, I was called in, along with my friend 
Dr. Charles Goodall, the mention of whose name reminds me 
of his candour, probity, friendship, and medical skill to a 
patient who was almost killed by cramp of the kind described. 
The vomiting was enormous, the sweat cold, the pulse almost 
imperceptible. I gave him twenty-five drops of laudanum out 
of a spoonful of strong cinnamon-water, fearing lest a larger 
quantity of the vehicle should so far increase the vomiting as to 
make him rejectit altogether. I then sat by his bedside, and 
watched the effects of the medicine. It was not strong enough 
to check either the spasm or the sickness. This made me repeat 
it in a larger dose ; and this I did more than once, waiting only 
such time, before the second dose, as might inform me of the 
effect of the first, until the symptoms gave way. The least 
motion, however, had a tendency to bring them on again. I 
then strictly enjoined rest for a few days, and the opiate in 
smaller doses and at longer intervals, to be continued even after 
his convalescence. It succeeded as I wished. 

9. Let no one call me rash for thus throwing in laudanum 
so confidently. Experience has taught me, that in any of the 
three great symptoms requiring opiates—intense pain, vomiting 
or purging, and dejection of the animal spirits—the dose must 
be regulated, both in respect to its quantity and frequency, by 
the circumstances of the case only, since a dose that is strong 
enough for one system may be too weak for another; and a 
dose that will endanger the life of one patient, may save that 
of another. 

10, Now these are the diseases that did the mischief during 


EPIDEMIC DISEASES. 9 


the year in question ; the same as those of the preceding ones. 
What they were in 1677 I am unable to say. At that time I 
suffered so much from bloody urine, that the least motion dis- 
tressed me. This was succeeded by gout, where, in addition to 
the extreme pain in my joints, my appetite failed, and my 
strength was prostrated. Swellings, too, of my legs, and other 
symptoms equally dangerous, supervened. Had I died at that 
time, death would have taken me away from the bitters of this 
world, not from its sweets ; nor should I have resisted. I was 
compelled, however, to keep the house for three months, and 
then, for the sake of restoring my health, to retire to the 
country for a like time. In autumn I returned to my family, 
and then learnt from my friends that intermittent fevers had 
been scattered here and there. Of these, however, the greater 
part had not attacked residentsin London. Now, as my health 
would not allow me to visit my patients during the year in 
question, I think it best to pass it over in silence altogether. 

11. The constitution of the following year, viz. 1678, was so 
favorable to intermittent fevers, that they might again take the 
name of epidemics. Since the year 1664 they had nearly been 
banished from London, so that for thirteen years they had at- 
tacked only a few patients sporadically, or else had been brought 
up from the country places. As they are at present, so will 
they be. Nay, they will extend their limits, until the atmo- 
spheric diathesis upon which they depend shall have reached its 
height. Now, however much these so-called intermittents may 
have occurred more rarely during spring, by the end of summer 
and at the beginning of autumn they were pre-eminently preva- 
lent; so much so, as to exclude all other diseases from the name of 
epidemic. During the winter, however, they yielded little by 
little, and, at last, gave place to the smallpox, and other epi- 
demics, which ruled paramount until such time as the season 
for intermittents returned. 

12. I will now give at large such results as I obtained from 
sedulous observation upon the causes and nature of these fevers. 

First, I must note, that although quartans were, at first, 
most common, tertians or quotidians are the commoner now ; 
unless, indeed, we choose to call these last double tertians. In 
like manner, these same tertians or quotidians, setting in with 
chills and shivers, followed by heat, and closing in sweats, ended, 


10 EPISTLE I. 


for awhile, in a complete apyrexy, only attacking the patient 
after a stated interval. Nevertheless, they kept this course 
only until the third or fourth fit; especially if the patient took 
cordials, kept his bed, and so, as the saying is, added fuel to fire. 
Afterwards, they so far assumed a severity foreign to their 
nature, that, mstead of an inter-mission, there was only a re- 
mission. From this they went on to the type of contmued 
fever, and at length affected the brain, and proved mortal to 
many. 

13. As to the treatment, I have known, for many years, the 
extreme danger of attacking tertians and quotidians (forms 
which, whilst fresh, and without any fixed type, are easily in- 
duced to take that of a continued fever) by means of sudorifics; 
since, however much it may be a well-known fact, that as 
soon as the sweats break out the symptoms decrease, and an 
apyrexy succeeds (so that the inference is, that they should be 
indulged to some extent,—at any rate not checked, especially 
when the fit is giving way); the real truth is, that by over- 
sweatings intermittents become continued. Then 


* Periculosz plenum opus alez.” 


The patient lives or dies, as his luck is good or bad. 

Unless I am deceived, the reason is this: a sweat beyond a 
certain amount of profuseness, exceeds the degree necessary for 
the despumation and subsequent elimination of the febrile 
matter thus increased by the heat of the paroxysm. Hence, 
all that portion which answers to the fit being expended, the re- 
mainder stands over for the purposes of exciting inflammation. 

As I was thinking over the inefficacy of such measures as 
bleeding and purging, measures which by weakening the blood 
protract the disease, the Peruvian bark became my sheet-anchor ; 
concerning which, in spite of the prejudices of many learned 
men, as well as those of almost all the vulgar, I may safely 
affirm that I have neither seen nor suspected any evil effects, 
except only such as I noted in my chapter on Rheumatism, 
wherein I remark, that those who have undergone long courses 
of it, are liable to a certain sort of scorbutic rheumatism. This, 
however, is rare, and when it happens is easily cured. 

14. If I were only as sure of the permanence of the effect 
as I am of the harmless character of Peruvian bark, I should 


EPIDEMIC DISEASES. 11 


look upon it as the prince of medicines ; since it not only shows 
eminent efficiency in agues, but is also useful in affections of the 
stomach and womb. So far is it from being prejudicial. 

15. I think that for its bad repute there are two reasons. 

lst. Many of the terrible symptoms that accompany inter- 
mittent fevers after they have long continued their afflicting in- 
fluences on the patient, and in cases where no bark has at first 
been taken, are often attributed to the very fault of the bark, 
when it is given. 

2d. As the bark dispels the disease without any sensible 
evacuation, the opinion gains ground that, as there 1s something 
which ought to be expelled, and which is not expelled, such a 
something must needs remain in the system—imprisoned, as it 
were, by bark, and liable to create fresh troubles; so that the 
patient 1s not free of the disease, but still drags his chain. 

Those who thus argue fail to observe, that as fast as there is 
any sensible morbid matter accumulated during the intervals 
between the fits, it is cleared off by the sweating stage of the 
fit that it occasions; so that all that can remain must be the 
germ of the disease, waiting for time to ripen it. Now as the 
bark presses hard upon the retiring paroxysm, and as it thereby 
intercepts the fuel that the disease requires as a fresh supply, 
all that remains in the blood at all remains in embryo. Hence, 
the bark neither acts by smothering anything, nor as an ob- 
struction; though such are the charges laid against 1t. 

16. But how can we prove that bark owes its virtue to its 
astringency ? Let those who think this, try other astringents. 
I know none that take effect. What, too, shall we say to cases 
where it purged, and yet cured ? Such cases have happened. 

There is but one sort of true wisdom ; that is, to take a 
true measure of one's self, and not to throw dust in one's own 
eyes, by fancying that we are endowed with other faculties than 
those which are subservient to the perception of Natural 
Theology, of Moral Philosophy, or lastly, of the medical, 
mathematical, and mechanical arts, — of Natural Theology, in 
order that we may duly, humbly, and 1n prostration of spirit, 
honour God, the great Architect and Governor,—of the other 
arts, that we may help the common interests of our race. 

Let those who think otherwise, select any hypothesis out of 
the schools of Natural Philosophy, and solve thereby the secret 


12 EPISTLE I. 


of a single specific difference in the whole Rerum Natura. Let 
him say, for instance, why all grass is green, &c. &c. If he do 
this, I will serve under his flag. Till this be done, I must 
limit the function of a physician to industrious investigation 
of the history of diseases, and of the effect of remedies, as 
shown by the only true teacher—experience ; attention being 
directed to that method only which right reason, based upon 
common sense and vot upon speculation, dictates. 

I will now say what I have learned by experience, concerning 
the use of the Peruvian bark. 

17. The Peruvian bark, commonly called Jesuit's bark, has, 
if I rightly remember, been famous in London for the cure of 
intermittent fevers for upwards of five and twenty years, and 
that rightly. The disease in question was seldom or never cured 
by any remedy before it. Hence agues were justly called the 
opprobria medicorum. A short time back, however, it went out 
of use, being condemned on two grounds, and those not light 
ones. Firstly, when given a few hours before the fit, as was 
the usual practice, it would sometimes kill the patient at once. 
This happened to an alderman of London, named Underwood, 
and also to a Captain Potter. | Now this terrible effect of the 
powder, although rare, frightened the more prudent physicians, 
and that rightly. Secondly, the patient who by the help of 
the bark had been freed from an impending fit, would, at the 
end of a fortnight, generally have a relapse, as if the disease 
was still fresh, and had not abated in violence by running its 
course. All this shook the generality in their good opinion of 
the bark, since they considered it no great gain to put off the 
fit by endangering the life of the patient. 

18. Now for many years I have been reflecting on the 
remarkable powers of this bark, considering, that with care and 
diligence, it was really the great remedy for intermittents. 
Hence I looked at two things, the danger to life, and the chance 
of a relapse. Guard against these, and I could cure the patient 
perfectly. 

19. In respect to the danger to life, I laid it less to the bark 
than to its unseasonable administration. During the days 
when there is no fit, a vast mass of febrile matter accumulates 
in the body. Now, if in this case, we give the powder just 
before the fit, we check the method by which nature would get 


EPIDEMIC DISEASES. 13 


rid of it; so that being kept in, it endangers life. Now this I 
thought I could remedy by checking the generation of any new 
febrile matter. Hence I gave the powder immediately after 
the fit. This allayed the succeeding one. Then on the days 
of intermission I repeated it at regular intervals, until a fresh 
fit impended. Thus, by degrees, I brough: the blood under 
the healing influence of the bark. 

20. The relapse, which generally happens at the end of a 
fortnight, seemed to me to arise from the blood not being 
sufficiently saturated with the febrifuge, which, efficient as it 
was, could not exterminate the disease at once. From whence I 
concluded, that to guard against this I must repeat the powder, 
even where the disease was overcome for the present, at 
regular intervals, and before the effects of the preceding dose 
had gone off. 

21. On these principles my method was and is as follows: 
If I visit a patient on (say) a Monday, and the ague be a 
quartan, and it be expected that day, I do nothing, I only hope 
that he will escape the fit next after. Then on the two days 
of intermission, the Tuesday and Wednesday, I exhibit the 


bark thus: 
EK Peruvian bark, very finely powdered, 2j ; / 
Syrup of cloves, or 
Syrup of dried rose-leaves, q. s. 
Make into an electuary; to be divided into twelve parts, of which 
one is to be taken every fourth hour, beginning immediately after 
the paroxysm, and washing down with a draught of wine. 


If the form of a pill be preferred— 


EK Bark, finely powdered, 3j ; 
Syrup of cloves, q. s. 
Make into moderately-sized pills. Take six every four hours. 


With less trouble and equal success you may mix an ounce 
of bark with two pints of claret, and give it as before, in doses 
of eight or nine spoonfuls. On Thursday the fit is expected. 
I do nothing; generally the fit keeps off. The remnants of 
the febrile matter have been cleared away, and thrown off from 
the blood, by the sweats of Monday’s fit, and new accu- 
mulations have been checked by the use of the bark in the 
interval. 

22. To prevent the disease from returning on the eighth 


14 EPISTLE I. 


day, exactly, after the last dose, I give another exactly as before. 
Now though this often puts an end to the ague, the patient is 
all the safer for repeating the process three or even four times, 
especially if the blood be weakened by the previous evacuation, 
or the patient have exposed himself to the cold air. 

23. Now, although bark is no purgative, it sometimes 
happens in certain idiosyncrasies that it purges. In this 
case, so foreign to its usual action, laudanum should be added, 
otherwise the bark may pass off from the bowels, and fail 
to do its work. ‘Ten drops of laudanum out of wine is the 
dose which is to be taken after every other dose of the powder, 
as long as the diarrhoea lasts. 

24. The aforesaid method 1s my method for intermittents of 
all sorts, quartan, tertian, or quotidian. I attack them all after 
the fit, and press on my medicines in the intervals. "The only 
difference is, that a quartan takes an ounce of bark to cure it ; 
whereas the others are either cured or relieved by six drachms. 

25. Now though tertians aud quotidians after one or two fits 
may appear to intermit, they will frequently, as stated above, 
take the appearance of continued fevers, and only remit, and 
that upon the days when we might expect an intermission, espe- 
cially when the patient has been kept to his bed, overheated in 
his regimen, and distressed by attempts to sweat out the fever. 
In this case, my only chance is to take advantage of a remission, 
however slight, and to give the bark immediately after it, and 
to continue it every fourth hour, not stopping for the fit, other- 
wise the time would be too short for the febrifuge power of the 
bark to impart itself to the blood. 

26. Although the fevers that now rage after the second or 
third fit would pass as continued, they are still intermittents. 
I do not, however, hesitate to give bark even when they are most 
continued. 

Repeated doses will cure the patient, provided only that 
no hot cordials, and no continued lying in bed, have lit up fever 
afresh. lf so, bark is useless. As to the wine given with the 
bark, I have never seen it increase the fever. On the contrary, 
heat, thirst, and other febrile symptoms, have disappeared under 
its use, and when it has been given in sufficient quantities. 

Here I may remark, that just as the fever, either spon- 
taneously or under an over-hot regimen, becomes continued, the 


EPIDEMIC DISEASES. 15 


. bark is to be given freely. I have seen cases that have required 
an ounce and a half, or even two ounces of it. 

27. Some persons, however, cannot take the bark, either as 
a powder, a pill, or an electuary. To these I give a cold in- 
fusion, viz. two ounces of bark, coarsely powdered, steeped for 
some time in two pints of Rhenish wine. This being strained 
through a jelly-bag, becomes clear and palatable. 

" Four ounces of this, after standing a few days, are as strong 
as a drachm of powder. As it is neither ungrateful to the 
taste nor oppressive to the stomach, it can be used twice as 
long and twice as often as any of the other formule. 

28. It sometimes happens, that when the ague is irregular, 
and has not taken the true form of typhus, the patient is so 
continually sick, that he cannot keep down the bark at all. 
Here we must check the vomiting before we give the bark. 

With this view I give, six or eight times in two hours, a spoon- 
ful of freshly-squeezed lemon-juice, with a scruple of salts of 
wormwood ; afterwards sixteen drops of liquid laudanum, in a 
spoonful of strong cinnamon-water. Then shortly after, if 
the vomiting has ceased, I begin with the bark. 

29. For infants, whose tender age will scarcely bear the 
remedy in this form, and still less in the quantity sufficient to 
destroy the disease, I order the following julep : 


kK Black cherry-water, 


——= me 


Peruvian bark, very finely powdered, 3iij; 
Syrup of cloves, 3j. 

Mix, and make into a julep. Take one or two spoonfuls, according 
to age, every four hours, until the fits no longer occur: adding, 
in case of diarrhoea, one or two drops of liquid laudanum to every 
other dose. 


30. I must observe, that the short intervals between the fits 
in tertians and quotidians hardly allow time for the blood to 
be fully saturated by the febrifuge virtue of the bark. Hence 
we cannot expect, as we do in quartans, that the patient should 
escape a fit immediately after beginning the medicine. In 
tertians and quotidians the medicine must have two full days 
to effect its promised cure. 

31. If, notwithstanding the cautions above, the patient stiil 
relapse, which he is less likely to do in quartans than in quo- 


16 EPISTLE I. 


tidians and tertians, the prudent physician will not be bigoted 
to the bark, but will use his judgment as to other methods. 
Of these, the best is the so-called bitter decoction. 

32. As to diet and regimen, the patient need be forbid 
nothing that suits his stomach, except only green fruit and cold 
drinks, which weaken the blood, and help to bring back the 
lever: 

Juicy and digestible meats make the best diet, with wine for 
an ordinary drink. By this means alone I have restored many 
whose systems, from frequent relapses, were proof against the 
healing effects of bark. Until the blood has regained its full 
vigour, the patient should not expose himself to the cold air. 

33. Here I must remark upon what I have said elsewhere. 
Speaking of intermittents, I have recommended steady purging 
after the disease has gone. Now, this purging applies only to 
cases that have been cured either spontaneously or by medicines 
other than the bark. The cure by the bark neither requires 
purging, nor bears it; since the bark itself, single-handed, re- 
lieves the fits, and relieves the dyscrasy of the system as well. 
All evacuations, therefore, should be avoided, even the mildest. 
A. clyster of sugar and milk is sufficient to bring on either the 
risk of the disease or the disease itself. 

94. Here I may mention, that during the first days of this 
constitution, a remarkable symptom sometimes supervened on 
the intermittents. Instead of chills and shivers, followed by 
fever, the patient would have the symptoms of a true apoplexy. 
Nevertheless they were only the symptoms of the fever of ague 
attacking the head. One proof of this was the colour of the 
urme.  'This, in ague, is of a deep red, as in jaundice, with a 
brickdust sediment. Now, in this case, however much evacua- 
tions, for the sake of creating a revulsion of the humours from 
the brain, the primary indications in apoplexy, may appear to 
be called for, they are wholly out of place. 

The symptoms are the symptoms of intermittent fever, and 
for intermittent fever the treatment for apoplexy is often fatal. 
Wait till the fit has gone off of itself, then give the bark as soon 
as possible, and repeat it at intervals till a recovery. 

35. Sometimes (though rarely) it happens, that old men who 


! Medical Observations, Part I, Chap. V, p. 41. 


EPIDEMIC DISEASES. 17 


have had ague, and have been bled and purged improperly, be- 
come diabetic, even after the fever has wholly departed. This 
is because their blood is so far weakened as to be incompetent 
to the assimilation of the juices of the ingesta, so that these seek 
an outlet in a crude and unconcocted form by the urinary ducts. 
Then the excessive loss of urine weakens the frame, and the 
whole substance of the body passes off by this channel. In this 
affection, as in all sorts of diabetes, no matter how originating, 
the curative indications must be wholly directed towards re- 
storing and invigorating the blood, and so restraining the pre- 
ternatural flow of urine. 


K Venice treacle, Ziss; 
Conserve of orange-peel, 5j ; 
Diascordium, 3ss ; 
Candied ginger, 
Candied nutmeg, aa 3iij ; 
Gascoigne’s powder, Siss ; 
Pomegranate bark, 
Angelica-root, 
Prepared red-coral, 
Lozenges of terra Lemnia, 4a 3) ; 
Bole armeniac, Dij ; 
Gum arabic, 3ss ; 
Syrup of dried roses, q. s. 
Make into an electuary; of which take a part about the size of a large 
nutmeg every day at five p.m., and at bedtime. Continue for one 
month. Wash down with six spoonfuls of the following infusion : 


K Elecampane, 
Masterwort, 
Angelica, 
Gentian, aa Zss; 
Roman wormwood, 
White horehound, 
Lesser centaury, 
Calamint, aa a handful ; 
Juniper-berries, 3). 

Slice small, and steep in five pints of Canary wine. Let the infusion 
stand in a cool place. Strain when wanted. 


The diet should be digestible meats, such as veal and 
wether-mutton, &c. No vegetables and no fruit. Sherry 
wine at meals. 


36. This cures a disease equally obstinate with diabetes, 
2 
II. 


EPISTLE I. 


fluor albus. Different as this is from diabetes, its indications 
are the same. In fluor albus, however, one bleeding, and a 
purging with the pil. coch. maj., in two-scruple doses, thrice 
repeated, should precede the restoratives. They may then be 
wholly omitted, since each evacuation undoes what the tonics 
had done. But this is by the way. 

37. This is what I have to say in general concerning the 
Peruvian bark. I have no wish to make a pompous display 
of remedies. Those who add to it anything beyond what is 
necessary as a vehicle for getting it down into the stomach are, 
in my mind, either ignorant or dishonest—dishonest in a way 
that a good man would despise. No good man would injure 
his fellow-creatures for his own benefit. 

In respect to the method itself, if the age had but con- 
descended to attend to what I wrote upon the subject four 
years ago, in my ‘ History of Acute Diseases’ (and it is very 
credible that I was aware of what should be done before that 
time), many would be alive who are now under ground. This 
is as follows:! it was written for the service of the world at 
large, and contains, in brief, what I shall enlarge upon in the 
sequel. 

38. “The first thing to look to is this—we must not lay it 
on too soon, i. e. before the disease has, in some measure, ex- 
hausted itself by its own action; certain cases, however, in an 
exhausted and debilitated condition of the patient, may indi- 
cate an earlier adoption of it. In giving it too soon, we have 
not only to fear lest its premature exhibition may render its 
action nugatory, and so disappoint our hopes, but we must 
consider that the very life of the patient may be endangered, 
if we suddenly stop that despumation of the blood which the 
whole effort of fermentation is aiming at. 

* [n the next place, no part of the febrile matter must be 
withdrawn from the system by purging, and much less by ve- 
nesection, with the notion of promoting the action of the bark. 
With the corporeal economy weakened on both sides, the pa- 
roxysms return all the more readily, and all the more certainly, 
when the virtues of the powders have once for all been expended. 
To me it seems better to imbue the blood with the aforesaid 


! Med. Obs., Part I, Chap. V, $8 34, 35. 


EPIDEMIC DISEASES. 19 


drug moderately, gradually, and at long intervals before the 
fits, than to attempt, by a single blow, to cut short the paroxysm 
at its accession ; since, by so doing, we give the remedy a longer 
time to do its work in; and we avoid all those risks which 
might arise to the patient from any sudden and unseasonable 
check, whereby we attempt to suppress the paroxysm during 
its full development, and during the putting forth of all its 
activity. 

“ Finally, the powder must be repeated at short intervals, 
so that the first dose may not have lost its effect before the 
exhibition of a second. By it a frequent and good habit of 
body will be recovered, and the disease be wholly dispelled. 

“Upon this ground I prefer the following form to any 
other: Mix one ounce of Peruvian bark with two of the syrup 
of red roses, of which the patient must take a bolus, of the size 
of a nutmeg, night and morning, every day when there is no 
genuine paroxysm ; he must continue to do so until the whole 
of the confection has beentaken. He must repeat this once a 
fortnight, three times. 

39. “ Much as the medicine in question bears the bell, I have 
still found that spring tertian in young and strong subjects may 
be cured by the following method: bleed on the day when 
there is no fit; then, a few hours after, but on the same day, 
give an emetic of the croc. metall., so timed that the vomiting 
may be done with before the next paroxysm. As soon as this 
is over, try— 

RK Extract of gentian, 
Extract of wormwood, 
Extract of lesser centaury, aa 3ij. 
Mix, and divide into nine doses: one of which is to be taken every 
four hours. Wash down with 


Bitter decoction (without purgatives), 
White wine, aa Ziij. 
40. * For poor men, where we must resort to cheap medi- 
cine, there is another way— 
kk Virginian snake-root (finely powdered), 9j ; 


White lime, Ziij. 
Mix. To be taken two hours before the fit. 


The patient must then sweat under the blankets for three or 


20 EPISTLE f. 


four hours. This he must do again, twice, when the fit is 
coming on.” 

41. The following year (1679), about the beginning of July, 
the same fevers took fresh strength, and increasing day by day, 
raged fiercely, and caused avast mortality in August. Of these 
I have already treated ; I will only add, that in November 
they wholly yielded to a fresh epidemic, itself dependent upon 
a manifest crasis of the air. 

42. With the month of November, coughs set in more epi- 
demically than I have ever seen, almost every family suffering 
from them. Some required no medicine at all; some fell so 
violently on the lungs, that the patient must occasionally vomit 
from the violence of his cough; besides this there was giddi- 
ness. During the first days the cough was more dry than moist, 
nothing of importance being spit up. The expectoration, how- 
ever, increased a little. Now, the drier the cough, the more 
violent was the effort, and the longer the fit; and in proportion 
to the extent of these symptoms, the cough was, in my mind, 
akin to the convulsive cough of children, except that it was 
somewhat milder. In one respect, however, it was severer ; 
it was attended by fever and its symptoms. ‘This I never saw 
in the cough of children. 

49. Usual as it is for coughs to set in towards winter, every 
one wondered at their frequency during this year. I think the 
reason was as follows: the October had been excessively showery, 
and men’s blood tallying with the character of the season, had 
imbibed abundance of crude and moist particles; the tran- 
spiration through the pores of the skin having been checked by 
the cold. Nature, then, throwing this serous load upon the 
windpipe, created a cough. 

44. As to the cure, if medicine was wanted at all, I bled and 
purged. For ejecting redundant particles of serum, there is 
nothing like bieeding and purging, so thoroughly do they empty 
the vessels. 

45. Pectoral remedies, except so far as they satisfy the 
patient, do little to remove the cough; their only action is to 
thicken the matter when it is too thin to be spit out, or to 
dilute it when too viscid. I am certain that much time is lost 
by trusting to them, and that the blood is so weakened by the 
retention of serous particles mimical to nature, and that the 


EPIDEMIC DISEASES. 21 


lungs are so irritated by the cough, and so shaken by the 
violent and continued motion, that the way is paved to a 
decline. Now against this the patient ought to be ensured by 
the speediness of his cure. 

Sudorifics are not much safer. Sometimesthey cause fever; 
sometimes the inflamed particles fall upon the pleura, and 
pleurisy is lit up. This, during the course of the so-called 
epidemic cough has created much danger to many men. 

46. I take a moderate quantity of blood from the arm; I apply 
a large and strong blister to the nape of the neck. This acts as 
a derivative to the peccant matter. I then give a mild purge 
of senna, rhubarb, manna, or solutive syrup of roses; this I 
repeat every day until recovery or improvement. If this dis- 
agree, I give instead, two scruples of the pil. coch. maj. every 
morning, at five o'clock a.m. After this the patient should 
take a nap. 

47. By this method, and this alone, is the convulsive cough 
of children, otherwise so obstinate, cured. What happens to 
others I cannot say. For my own part I have only wasted my 
time when I have treated it differently. The purge should be 
proportionate to the age; mild, and given in spoonfuls. This 
mode of evacuation, the so-called evacuatio, kar! éerixopacw, 
cures the coughing in question, by stopping the influx of the 
hot and spirituous exhalations from falling upon the lungs, 
and it does this by carrying them off by the bowels; since 
without doubt it is these same exhalations that excite the severe 
fits of coughing in infants. 

48. Be the epidemic what it may, provided its attack be 
fresh, we must guard against purging without bleeding pre- 
viously. All diseases dependent upon the epidemic constitution 
of the atmosphere, either are fevers already, or easily become 
so. From any tumult of the blood or humours, from any, 
even the mildest, purge, from a slight aecess of heat, fever 1s 
easily lit up—fever that otherwise Nature would have got rid 
of by some usual evacuation, by a catarrh, by an epidemic 
cough like the one in question, or by that form of diarrhoea 
which attends fever when epidemic. The same applies to any 
other constitution of the atmosphere by which the body is 
determined to any particular form of fever. This does not 


22 EPISTLE I. 


always show itself in act and deed. On the contrary, so be- 
nignant is Nature, that she gets rid of the germ of the disease 
through the mediation of some appropriate evacuation. This 
I affirm, that common as is the custom of purging before we 
bleed, there is but one practice fraught with more danger, that 
is, omitting to bleed at all. 

49. It may be argued that the feculent matters in the prime 
vie will be propelled into the veins if bleeding precede the 
purging: be it so. No preliminary evacuation can make 
good the injury done to the blood by the disturbance of a purge 
without bleeding. Besides this, it cannot be denied that a 
purge taken soon after bleeding acts more mildly, and heats 
and disturbs the blood less than a purge given first. From 
this being either unknown or neglected, many, infants more 
especially, have perished. 

50. Experience has taught me this—Haperience, the best 
guide and teacher that a physician can follow; indeed, if he 
fail to follow her, he had better be no physician at all The 
game is too serious to be played with impunity ; when, on the 
one hand, we have empiries, who, knowing neither the history 
of diseases, nor their methodus medendi, practise on the strength 
of recipes alone; and, on the other, empty sciolists, who rest 
all their claims upon an affected pretension to art, and on 
speculations that may be worked either way. Two such 
sources of mischief, when their strength is united, kill more 
than disease would kill without them. 

51. That practice, and that alone, will do good which elicits 
the indications of cure out of the phenomena of the disease 
itself. This made Hippocrates divine. Even if this method 
of medicine could be handed down by tradition, although the 
cure of one or two diseases might become clear to any one, 
the whole art would require prudent and skilful men, as 
much as they are required at present; and the art itself would 
be equally honorable. True practice consists im the observa- 
tions of nature; these are finer than any speculations. 
Hence the medicine of nature is more refined than the medicine 
of philosophy. 

52. Fevers, which form two thirds of medicine, prove this, 
and any man of moderate reflection shall be my judge. Who, 


EPIDEMIC DISEASES. 23 


even of the weakest empirics, could not cure a fever if he had 
only to satisfy the two common indications, namely, to ex- 
terminate the morbific matter by sweats, and to meet the 
symptoms arising from such evacuations. Venice treacle, 
Gascoigne’s powder, plague water, &c., taken internally along 
with hot regimen, can produce sweats, and this is all a man 
wants, provided that he talks about malignity. Then as to 
symptoms, he has laudanum for sleep, and purges for constipa- 
tion. Nevertheless he cannot, either by himself or from the 
teaching of others, ascertain the species of fever which he 
strives to conquer; that is, if we believe as our posterity will 
believe, that they are several species of fevers, each requiring 
peculiar treatment, and that one and the same fever, of what- 
ever genus, must be treated in one way at its commencement, 
in another during its subsequent stages. 

59. How will a man, not knowing the natural history of a 
disease, the only true guide to its treatment, borrow his indi- 
cations of treatment from the different less prominent phe- 
nomena which may arise from the disease, or which may arise 
from the treatment, but of which he knows nothing? I have 
no time to enumerate the varied and subtle and minute obser- 
vations in the treatment of this and other diseases. They are, 
however, so numerous, and they so illustrate the infinite variety 
of Nature, and they so truly suggest the modes of treatment, 
that our sons and sons’ sons will be employed in adding to 
their number. Under this view, Art is honoured rather than 
vilified, enhanced rather than depreciated, and, as such, admits 
none but the wise and prudent amongst her sons. But this 
by the way. 

54. The aforesaid coughs, if treated badly, light up a fever 
like the epidemic of the winter of 1675. However, as this 
fever was only the offspring and effect of the epidemic cough, I 
treated it as the cough had been treated, by bleeding, a blister 
to the neck, and a purge three morningsrunning. The cough 
without the fever required no time to be fixed for the con- 
tinuance of the cathartics; they were given until convalescence 
or recovery. However, in the fever dependent upon the cough, 
three days’ purging was fully sufficient. 

55. Here I must note that, although troubles and defluxion 


24 EPISTLE I. 


on the lungs accompanied this fever when it first showed itself, 
after a month or two, when the serous flux had been gradually 
eliminated from the blood, a fever, evidently of the same cha- 
racter, though without a cough, became troublesome. This 
was treated like the fever that accompanied the cough, and it 
was due to the permanence of the original impression upon the 
blood. 

56. This fever extended itself in the manner described to 
the beginning of the present year, 1680, when intermittent 
fevers began their appearance as the year began. ‘Then to the 
beginning of 1685, the year of this my second edition, the same 
fevers continued. Although, in London, they are less epidemic 
and more mild than during the four preceding years, they are 
just as bad elsewhere. ven the general constitution is favor- 
able for the production of intermittents, so much so, that I 
venture to say that the only cases of continued fevers that 
I have seen, have been transformed into intermittents, or else 
were some of so-called intercurrent fevers that occur every 
year. So steadily does this constitution conduce to the pro- 
duction of intermittents of the sort in question, that this sort 
must lose ground before the continued depuratory fevers will 
have a chance of becoming epidemic. In the production of 
intermittents, Nature works hastily, and gets over in less time 
than is regular the processes whereby she first tempers, and 
afterwards discharges the morbific matter. Depuratory fevers 
are different. Thirteen or fourteen days elapse before the ap- 
pearance of any sign of the concoction of the febrile matter ; 
which is then to be ejected by sweats, or rather by a somewhat 
free transpiration. 

507. Bearing this in mind, I have no doubt but that the 
depuratory fevers of 1661-62-63 and 64, were merely the dregs 
of the intermittents of several —I cannot say how many——years 
before; when the constitution which gave birth to these last 
changed and laid aside its violence, lost its strength, and pro- 
duced. only humoral and earthy fevers, fevers which cleared the 
blood but slowly,— whilst the fevers which were earlier in date, 
subtle in principle, and intermittent in type, did their work more 
rapidly. If this be true, it is likely that, when the present 
constitution has abated, this same depuratory fever will return, 


EPIDEMIC DISEASES. 25 


that it will last a certain time, and possibly be followed by the 
plague. 

58. During the whole of the three years wherein these fevers 
raged, intermittents appeared at times, sometimes almost as 
epidemics. This was when any manifest property of the air 
favoured them. Whether bark would have cured them, as it 
now cures agues, I cannot say. In plague, and the continued 
epidemics which succeeded in turn, bark is likely to do as little 
as it does in pleurisy, peripneumony, or quinsy, &c., that is, it 
is likely to do more harm than good. Be this as it may, if 
Nature retain the same sequence which she has retained the 
last twenty-four years, the epidemies will follow each other as 
I have described. 

59. 'Phis 1s nearly all which I have observed concerning the 
epidemics of the last years. Respecting the treatment of 
rheumatism, concerning which you put some questions, I, like 
yourself, have lamented that it cannot be cured without great 
and repeated losses of blood. This weakens the patient at the 
time ; and if he have been previously weak, makes him more 
hable to other diseases for some years. Then the matter that 
created the rheumatism falls upon the lungs, in case the patient 
take cold, or from any other shght cause. By this the latent 
disposition exhibits itself in act and deed. For these reasons, I 
determined to try whether any other method, besides that of 
repeated bleeding, would cure the disease. Reflecting upon 
this, and arguing that the disease arose from inflammation, a 
fact, of which one proof out of many is the pleuritic character 
of the blood, I judged it likely that diet simple, cool, and 
nutritious might do the work of repeated bleedings, and save 
the discomforts arising therefrom. Hence I gave my patients 
whey, instead of bleeding them. 

60. Last summer, a respectable and very intelligent apothe- 
cary, a neighbour of mine, Mr. Malthus, sent for me. He 
suffered miserably from rheumatism. ‘The first two days he 
was lame in the hip; the next two he suffered from oppressive 
difficulty of breathing ; then came headache; then pain of the 
right hip, the one first affected ; afterwards all the joints of the 
leg and arm, after the nature of the disease, were affected. 
Being of a weak and dry habit, I feared lest I should pull him 


26 EPISTLE I. 


down too much by bleeding; the more so, as the summer was 
advanced, and the winter might interrupt the restoration of his 
strength ; so I ordered him whey, and nothing else, for four 
days. After this he had, besides the whey, a little fine wheat 
bread once a day, instead of dinner, until he recovered. On this 
diet he continued eighteen days, except that towards the end he 
took a little bread for supper. The whey was the whey of eight 
pints of milk daily, and it fed him sufficiently ; afterwards, as 
he went out in the air, I let him have some roast fowl, and 
other such digestible meats; nevertheless, every third day he 
was limited to the whey. He recovered his full strength, 
escaping all such discomforts as ten years before a similar 
attack, which I treated by bleeding, had entailed upon him. 

61. Should any one despise this method for its simplicity, I 
would let him know, that weak minds only scorn things for being 
clear and plain; besides which, I am fully prepared to serve 
my kind at the price of a little discredit. I say this because, 
if it were not for the prejudices of the vulgar, there are other 
diseases which this treatment would suit. The usual pomp of 
medicine exhibited over dying patients is like the garlands of a 
beast at the sacrifice. 

62. I will now show how despised trifles, with due skill, may 
save lives; a fact disconnected from and foreign to the present 
disease, but not foreign to my object. Two months ago, a neigh- 
bour asked me to see a servant who had swallowed a great quan- 
tity of corrosive sublimate, either ignorantly, or, as I afterwards 
learned, being lovesick. It was nearly an hour since he took 
it; his mouth and lips were swollen; he was violently sick ; he 
had burning pain in the belly, and was all but dead from fever. 
T ordered three gallons of warm water to be taken as quickly as 
possible ; and as often as any was vomited up, fresh draughts. 
I also wished that the bowels should be well washed out with 
warm water, without any addition, thrown up as a clyster, the 
moment that griping told me that the poison was working its 
way downwards. The poor fellow, greedy of life, obeyed my 
orders, and drank some pints more than I prescribed. As the 
case was a strange one, his friends sat by him, and learned that 
what he first threw up tasted acrid, as if saturated with the salt; 
that what followed was less so; and that, at last, there was no 


EPIDEMIC DISEASES. 27 


taste at all. As to the gripes, the warm water alone eased them. 
Thus simply, by the blessing of God, he recovered within a few 
hours, except that his lips remained swollen, and his mouth was 
raw from the contact of the poison he had vomited. These 
symptoms, however, under a diet of milk alone for four days, 
soon disappeared. I preferred water to oil, and to all other 
liquors, because it seemed fitter than any thick fluid for taking 
up the poisonous saline particles. 

63. To return to the rheumatism. Though the whey diet 
may suit young men, and those who have lived steadily, it will 
not suit men of advanced age, nor yet free livers. With them 
it weakens the stomach, chills the blood, and paves the way for 
dropsy. In such cases the treatment must be that which I have 
described in my book on ‘Acute Diseases’ (vi, 5,4). Excepting 
only that, since that was written, I have learned from experience 
that, after the second, or at most the third bleeding, it is better 
to purge than to trust to bleeding single-handed. Through the 
helps afforded to the bleeding by the catharsis, the necessity of 
any great loss of blood is diminished; besides which, a way is 
prepared for the use of paregorics. Otherwise these were inad- 
missible, however great the pain; since by admitting them the 
disease would have been fixed, and have become all the more 
resistant to venesection. The purgatives, however, should be 
simply lenitive—tamarinds, senna, rhubarb, manna, and the 
solutive syrup of roses. Scammony, jalap, and the like, excite 
pain and disturbance. Every evening, after the purging 1s over, 
an early dose, consisting of an ounce of syrup of poppies, should 
be given. 

64. Here I may remark, that I have seen a certain affection 
under the present constitution taking the appearance of rheu- 
matism, and besides this, become not unlike to pains in the 
kidneys,—in respect at least to the severity of the suffering 
in the lumbar region. As this is wont to follow intermittent 
fevers, it may be due to a translation of the febrile matter to 
the muscular parts of the body. It should be treated like the 
fever from which it arises ; frequent bleedings, and all kinds of 
evacuations, make it worse. I have mentioned this lest any 
one should be deceived in it. 

65. Thus far, most illustrious friend, have I been enabled to 


28 EPISTLE I. 


answer those questions which you have honoured me by asking; 
and if my answers have either pleased you or profited others, I 
am well satisfied. 

At least, I may congratulate myself on having had an 
occasion of showing, to the best of my humble powers, an 
example of the respect with which any desire on the part of one 
so conspicuous as yourself is attended to by your most humble 
and devoted servant, 

THOMAS SYDENHAM. 


Lonpon ; Fed. 7, 1679. 


EPISTLE II. 


TO MY GOOD FRIEND 


DR. THOMAS SYDENHAM, M.D. 


Most LEARNED SIR, 


A ereat light arose upon the medical world when your 
‘History of Acute Diseases’ was given to it—a work written, 
not with a view to either lucre or notoriety, but based upon 
sedulous observation and trustworthy experience, and the fruit 
of an honest and candid mind. ‘To you it is enough to have 
done your duty, and to have helped your age. For my own 
part, I have all along concealed what I most have wished for ; 
still you may have a notion of what I desire. He who praises 
you for what is done, presses for ground of fresh praises. 

Concerning acute diseases it is difficult to write. So rapidly 
revolves the wheel, that unless seasonably checked, life is lost, 
beyond remedy and beyond redemption. You, however, have 
noted each change, and have taught what each instant requires— 
a great work, but still incomplete. Its complement, however, 
you have promised, viz. a notice of the chronic diseases. These 
give a truce both to the patient and the physician, allowing 
time for examination and judgment. 

We have often spoken of the so-called venereal disease, an 
ailment so disgraceful, that the nations of Europe deny its 
origin amongst themselves, and in order to throw a shade over 
its rise and progress, make it over to the distant Indies. The 
scourge of the lecherous, the punishment of the fornicator, it is 
slow in progress perhaps, for the sake of giving time for re- 
pentance. 

He who openly expressed the wish that this impure malady 
should be curable in the first instance only, was touched by a 
lively perception both of the disease itself and of human nature. 


30 EPISTLE II. 


As it 1s, its treatment is now with the quacks, barber-surgeons, 
and mountebanks; and as such men, partly from want of skill 
and partly from want of honesty, protract the cure, the ex- 
pense and trouble become so great, that the miserable patient, 
under the hands of his tormentors, becomes sick of life, and 
thinks worse of the cure than the complaint. I remind you 
then, but in a friendly way, of your promises. As an instal- 
ment, send something upon tbe diseases in question. Kindly 
and openly explain the method by which an afflicted patient 
may be easiest relieved. To suffer at the hands of Gop is 
enough ; no need that the physician torture him as well. 

By doing this you will oblige many ; to myself, also, credit 
will redound for having, by my urgent request, been instru- 
mental in bringing such a work to light. 


I am, in all duty bound, 


Your most obedient servant, 
H. PAMAN. 


LAMBETH ParACE; Feb. 12, 1679. 


TO THE 


MOST LEARNED AND ILLUSTRIOUS 


HENRY PAMAN, M.D., 


FELLOW OF ST. JOHN'S COLLEGE, PUBLIC ORATOR OF THE UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE, 
AND PROFESSOR OF MEDICINE IN GRESHAM COLLEGE. 


Most ILLUSTRIOUS SIR,— 


1. ArrHovceH you have so far honoured my lately-pub- 
lished treatise ‘Upon Acute Diseases,’ as, in your courtesy 
and friendly kindness, to speak of it as a work of consummate 
merit, I am still so conscious both of my own imperfections 
and of the small merits of the work in question, that, in my 
own eyes, I am only a guide and pioneer to surer observers 
than myself, who may better be able to investigate the history 
and cure of diseases : 


* fungor vice cotis, acutum 
Reddere quz ferrum valet, exsors ipsa secandi.” ! 


9. And, m truth, so varying, manifold, and (if I may use the 
term) so delicate is Nature, and so much does she sport in the 
production of diseases, that it is not the work of one man's 
lifetime (long as it may be) to graphically depict their varied 
phenomena, and their appropriate cures. Did I say one man’s 
lifetime ? Ten men, succeeding each other through ten life- 
times, would not do it—not even though they had, each and 
all, unrivalled genius, unwearied industry, and the skill arising 
from long and manifold practice. So far am I from considering 
myself as one who has reached the height of the medical art, 
that,— 


* Mecum habito, et novi quam sit mihi curta supellex." ? 


3. In respect to such chronic diseases as I gave you reason 
to expect that I intended to write upon, so thoroughly has the 


! Hor., Ep. ad Pis., 304.—[G. ] ? Persius, Sat. iv, 52.—[G.] 


32 EPISTLE II. 


desire of doing so settled in my mind, that, unless I am mis- 
taken in my own wishes, there is no reason which would induce 
me to pray for a long life, so much as the opportunity thereby 
given me of doing something towards the benefit of my fellows 
by a work of that kind. Every day, however, teaches me the 
difficulty of the undertaking— 


** Periculosze plenum opus alex." 


Difficult to any one, it would be doubly difficult to me, who 
am so imperfectly endowed with the necessary acumen and 
sagacity. Besides this (if we except the divine Hippocrates 
and a few others), there are scarcely any guides whereby the 
dense and thorny way may be made clear; such authors as 
have professed to light the path, being 2gnes fatui rather than 
true beacons, and leading to quagmires and precipices, rather 
than towards the true and genuine investigation of nature. 
All that has been written has been hypothesis ; the unbridled 
wantonness of fanciful art. Indeed, the very phenomena of 
those diseases, which their histories are bound to describe, 
are forgeries of the same mill: all are hypothetical. Hence 
even their practice squares with the hypothetical postulate, and 
not with the facts of nature. Can any better method of de- 
stroying the human race be devised? The judgments of nature 
are but as dust to the feet. It is the speculative brainworms 
of the writer that run wild over every page. 

Notwithstanding, if it so please God, I will try — 


* Quid valeant humeri." 


At present, in order that you may understand how wholly I 
am at your disposal, I make an offer of the present dissertation 
on the Venereal Disease. lt is brief, and is all that I have 
prepared for publication ; still it may pass as a sample of the 
work which I have in contemplation. 

4. As a preliminary, however, I must remark that I have 
met with many persons who, either from the praiseworthy desire 
of terrifying the unchaste by the fear of future trouble, or for 
the sake of claiming credit for continence on their own part, 
have not hesitated to argue that the cure of the venereal disease 
should not be taught. With such I disagree. If we reject all 
cases of affliction which the improvidence of human beings has 


VENEREAL DISEASE. 33 


brought upon themselves, there will be but little room left for 
the exercise of mutual love and charity. God alone punishes. 
We, as we best can, must relieve. Neither must we be too 
curious in respect to causes and motives, nor too vexatious in 
our censorship. 

Hence I will state what I have observed and tried in the 
disease in question; and that not with the view of making 
men's minds more immoral, but for the sake of making their 
body sounder. This is the business of the physician. 

5. The /ues venerea was introduced into Europe A.p. 1493, 
from the West Indies, it being, before that time, unknown 
even by name. Hence the disease is usually considered as 
endemic to the American colonies. In my mind, however, it 
is rather referable to the coast of Guinea, or to some portion 
of the Negro country thereabout. This I think because many 
of my countrymen have told me that, in slave-ships, even before 
they have reached America, the disease breaks out—also that 
it breaks out with the natives in the country itself, and that 
independent of any previous unclean intercourse. Indeed, in 
some cases, it afflicts a whole family—-men, women, and children. 
The disease that thus comes spontaneously is, in no respect, 
different from the true venereal lues. The symptoms, the pain, 
and the ulcers are the same—making allowance for the dif- 
ference of climate only. The name, however, is different. The 
African disease is called the yaws. 

Though the name be different, the treatment is the same. 
Mercurial salivation cures each; notwithstanding the great 
accredited virtues of guaiacum and sarsaparilla ; there, in their 
native country, and with their virtues (as is not the case with 
us,) unimpaired by a long passage. 

6. I therefore think it likely that those Spaniards who first 
imported the disease into Europe, took it from the Negroes of 
Africa, whom they purchased as slaves; and as the inhuman 
practice of selling their fellow-creatures is prevalent on many 
parts of the coast, the countries in question may be the original 
localities where the ailment is endemic. 

Be this as it may, the /ues venerea, having found its way 
into Europe, has spread itself with such rapidity, that if it kept 
up the rate at which it made its way at first, it would be all 


over with the human race within a very few generations ; or, 
pg 3 


34 EPISTLE IT. 


if not, we all should be so laid up in hospitals as to be unable 
to follow the necessary employments. Fortunately, however, 
like some vegetable which, when transplanted to a foreign soil, 
loses the vigour of its growth, the disease in question has de- 
clined in strength since it took root in Europe, so that, day by 
day, its rate of increase is diminished, and its symptoms become 
milder. Whilst it was but a recent visitor, it tated the blood 
throughout, and showed itself in various pains both of the head 
and joints; in foul ulcers as well. A century ago, however, it took 
the form of avirulent gonorrhea, and this is the form it takes now. 
In such cases, the most manifest symptom is the presence of a 
small ulcer, commonly called a shanker, on the private parts ; 
this being the first sign of the disease. In case, however, the 
virus be not sufficiently eliminated by means of the gonorrhea, 
the mass of the blood is quickly tainted and pervaded. 

7. The venereal disease is propagated by generation, in 
which case the taint of either parent is transmitted to the 
miserable offspring. 

Or it may be transmitted by contact, as when some soft part 
of the body is touched by an inflamed and virulent surface. 
Instances of this sort are as follows: 

The child may give to the nurse through the pores of the 
nipples; or the nurse may give to the child though the lips 
and mouth. 

Infants may take it from adults by the mere contact of the 
skin, as when they he naked in the same bed with diseased 
persons. Adults, indeed, would not take it under such cir- 
cumstances, but only from impure coitus. Infants, however, 
have laxer frame and a finer skin, and so take the venom. This 
I noted more than once in the case of children who have slept 
with diseased parents. 

The commonest source of /ues, however, is the contact of 
the parts during an impure coitus. The penis is turgid with 
spirits dedicated to generation, and, from any venereal ulcer or 
venereal pustule concealed in the vagina, is easily impregnated 
with the taint. Now either of these sources of poison may be 
in the vagina of an apparently healthy woman ; since the poison 
may so be entangled by the secretions of the part as to act 
slowly on the blood ; or else it may be diluted by the menstrual 
flux, and (so far) exterminated. 


VENEREAL DISEASE. 38 


8. The contagion first attacks the fleshy substance of the 
penis. This it disposes, firstly to inflammation, secondly to an 
ulcerative diathesis. Hence the discharge which we call 
gonorrhea, gradually distils into the urethra. The following 
facts induce me to think thus. I have seen instances of the 
virulent matter in question exuding through the porous part 
of the glans penis, instead of through the urethra, and that 
when there was not so much as a single ulcer on even the 
prepuce. Afterwards, it penetrates more deeply, and attacks 
the prostate gland with an angry ulcer. This is often seen in 
the dead bodies of those who have died of the disease. 

9. The progress of the disease is according to the following 
stages. Sooner or later—as the woman with whom there had 
been intercourse was diseased, and as his temperament is slow 
or quick to receive the miasma—the patient is afflicted with an 
unusual pain in the genitals, and with a feeling of rotation, as 
it were, in the testicles. Afterwards, unless the patient have 
been circumcised, a spot, about the size and colour of a measle, 
appears on some part of the glans. Immediately after the 
appearance of this, a discharge appears from the urethra, like 
semen at first, but, day by day, losing both the colour and con- 
sistence of semen, until, at length, it take the hue of the yolk 
of an egg, except that it is paler. If the disease be virulent, 
it looks greenish, and is moreover mixed with a watery matter, 
or even tinged with blood. Meanwhile the aforesaid pustule 
becomes an ulcer. At first it resembles the aphthe in the 
mouths of infants. It spreads, however, day by day, becoming 
broader and deeper, whilst the edges grow hard and callous. 
Observe that the pustule is rarely attended by gonorrhcea, in 
patients who have either had gonorrhcea before, or have been 
circumcised. In this last case, the glans being hardened by 
exposure to the atmosphere, and by the frequent rubbing of the 
linen, is more proof against infection. Hence those who have 
been circumcised, and those whose foreskin is naturally re- 
tracted, have a comparative immunity against ulcers. All they 
have is gonorrhea. 

10. Other symptoms now follow. Great pain during 
erections, just as if the penis was violently squeezed sideways. 
This is worst at night, when the patient is warmin bed. This 
painful constriction is pathognomonic of the disease. The freenum 


36 EPISTLE II. 


being contracted, the penis is bent down. When this curve is 
straitened by erection the pain is most acute. Ardor urine 
now occurs. During the passage of the water it is not so sharp. 
When, however, the patient has finished making water, a 
burning pain is felt all along the urethra, and is worst in the 
parts within the glans. Sometimes this acrid discharge excoriates 
the urethra. In such cases Nature, being overhasty in re- 
pairing the lost flesh, replaces it by a loose spongy tissue, which 
growing and hardening, becomes a caruncular excrescence, and 
so blocks up the urethra as to stop the passage of the water. 
Then the caruncule may themselves become ulcerated, and 
discharge a sanious ichor. In this case the physician is 
beset with difficulties, and the patient almost looks on death 
as a relief. 

The virulent matter which should have been discharged by 
the gonorrhea, either from violent movements, or from the use 
of astringents, often falls on the scrotum. Then there is intense 
pain, and inflammation of all the parts. Hither or both sides 
may swell enormously. Meanwhile the gonorrhoaa decreases, 
and the ardor urine continues. 

Such are the common symptoms of the disease during this 
stage. 

11. If, however, from the obstinacy of the disease, or from its 
delay about the parts in question, the contagion move upwards, 
and impress itself gradually upon the blood, or if, from the 
unseasonable use of astringents, the virulent matter be so 
retained within the system that the humours grow putrescent, 
true lues arises. Then we have tumours (or buboes) in the 
groin, and these constitute the first stage. Pain, meanwhile, 
extends itself generally and severely to the head, and to the 
shoulders, arms, and ankles; that is, in the last case, to the 
joints, and the junctures of the joints. "lhey arise irregularly, 
and at intervals. During night, however, when the patient is 
warm in bed, they are worst, and towards morning they disap- 
pear.  Crusts and scabs appear on the skin. These may be 
distinguished from crusts and scabs of a different origin by their 
colour. They are yellow like honeycomb. They occupy the 
different parts of the body with a broad outline, just as the 
leprosy is described in medical books. The worse the eruption 
the easier the patient. The other symptoms grow worse, espe- 


VENEREAL DISEASE. oF 


cially the pain. So violent are its exacerbations, that the 
miserable patient cannot keep himself in bed. He leaps out 
and runs about the chamber restlessly till morning. Add to 
all this that, from the violence of the pain, the bones of the 
skull, the shin-bones, and the arm-bones, are raised into hard 
tubers or ewxostoses, like those osseous excrescences on the 
fetlocks of horses called commonly spavins. These tubers that 
thus beset the bone, are accompanied with continued pain, and 
when inflammation sets in, the bone becomes carious and 
putrescent. Phagedzenic ulcers, also, destroy different parts of 
the body, generally beginning with the fauces; gradually spread- 
ing along the palate to the cartilage of the nose. This they eat 
away; so that the bridge sinks in and the nose flattens. As 
the ulcers, day by day, increase, and the pain increases also, 
the patient, partly wasted away by the continual torture, partly 
eaten up by putridity and ulceration, drags on an existence, 
which pain, foetor, caries, and shame alike render wretched; 
indeed, far worse than death of any kind. At length, limb by 
limb perishing away, the lacerated body, a burden to earth, finds 
ease only in the grave. 

12. The intrinsic nature of the disease— and by 2nírinsic I 
mean essential—as far as it is illustrated by the symptoms just 
depicted, is, in my mind, no better known than the essence of 
any plant or animal. Nevertheless, whatever may be the case 
in this respect, it is an assured fact, that the humour which 
determines it, is of a highly inflammatory kind. Hence this 
long catalogue of ills; and hence, also, it is clear that the 
humour must be eliminated. There is no specific by which lues 
has been cured, unless evacuation have preceded. Mercury is 
no specific, nor yet are the so-called drying-woods. Before they 
can be considered such, cases must be brought of a lues being 
cured by either, without salivation on one side or diaphoresis on 
the other. Besides this, as I have learned from experience, 
that the common sudorifics will cure lues as well as the 
decoction of the woods, so 1 believe that when an equally power- 
ful excitant of salivation has been discovered in either the 
animal or the vegetable world, it will cure as well as mercury. 

Since, however, the disease, in its gonorrhoeal form, is a very 
different disease from the true venereal lues that has infected the 
whole blood, so, also, the evacuation which eliminates the matter 


38 EPISTLE Il. 


of gonorrhea, is not the evacuation for eliminating the matter of 
a full-formed lues. 

13. Gonorrhea, so far as my experience has hitherto gone, 
is to be cured by catharties. These will either carry off the 
peccant matter altogether, or else act as a derivative to those 
juices of the body which feed it. Now any purge will do this. 
Still, those which do it best are those which are most drastic, 
i. e. those which most energetically bring away bile and serum. 
Jalap alone has cured such poor patients as the 


* Res angusta domi” 


has precluded from more expensive medicines. Nevertheless, 
as the disease is attended with a notable amount of inflamma- 
tion, the purgatives that are best applied are those of the 
cooling sort, and these we should begin with, proceed with, and 
end with. 
14. Hence, I generally prescribe-— 
Pc Pil'coch. maj., 415 ; 
Extract of rudium, 5j; 
Resin of jalap, 
Diagrydium, aa 5ss; 
Opobalsum, q. s. n 
Make six pills out of every drachm of the full mass. 


Four of these are to be swallowed every morning at four or 
five a.m., so that the patient may sleep upon them. He must 
do this for twelve or fourteen days, until the ardor urine, and 
the yellow colour of the discharge have materially decreased. 1f 
this take place, the pills may be taken every other day. This 
he does for another fortnight. After this, twice a week is often 
enough. ‘Twice a week, however, the pills must be taken, until 
the discharge from the urethra has wholly ceased. This rarely 
takes place except after many days. However much it may be 
generally believed that those few drops of discharge which may 
be squeezed from the urethra of a morning, after the heat on 
making water and the yellow hue of the excretion have disap- 
peared, are nothing more than the results of weakness of the 
parts, arising from the persistence of the virous matter, many 
a patient has found out, to his cost, that they are something 
more—that they are the remains of the contagion not wholly 
eradicated, but only partially subdued. Hence any new excite- 


VENEREAL DISEASE, 39 


ment may cause a new train of troubles; and, after any over. 
indulgence in drinking, or any unusual exercise, the gonorrhea 
may return. Such is the case where the patient has pre- 
ferred to escape a little purging, rather than to eradicate his 
ailment. 

15. If after a purge of this kind the gonorrhea will not give 
way, it will be advisable, especially with such patients as are 
hard to move, to help the pills with something more potent. 
Such is the following formula, which has done more, by a single 
administration, to eradicate a gonorrhea than any milder 
laxative given frequently. 

K  Tamarinds, Ziss ; 
Senna-leaves, 33] ; 
Rhubarb, Siss ; 
Water, q. s. 
Boil. Strain and add— 
Manna, 
Solutive syrup of roses, aa 3); 
Syrup of buckthorn, 
Rose-juice electuary, aa 5ij. 
Mix, and make into a potion. 


If the cure still be delayed, give the turbeth mineral, in 
eight-grain doses, once or twice a day, at intervals sufficient to 
guard against ptyalism. This takes the lead of all medicines 
as a cure for gonorrhea. 

Or, twice a week, the following— 


EK Pilulz e. duobus, 5ss ; 
Calomel, 9j; 
Opobalsam, q. s. 
Make into four pills; to be taken the first thing in the morning. 


16. At times the patient is so repugnant to the aforesaid 
catharsis, and to its repetition, as to be unable to bear the sight 
or scent of his remedies. At times, too, the system has that 
peculiar idiosyncrasy which renders it so liable to be weakened by 
catharsis, as to become unable to eliminate the necessary amount 
of peecant matter. Hence, whilst we are wasting our labour in 
this direction, a lues may creep on. ‘This is oftenest the case 
with those whose bodies resist purgatives. When this happens, 
we must work with clysters. These act in two ways. They 
purge the humours, and they effect a derivation from the 


40 EPISTLE II. 


affected part. Of the two, perhaps, this method is the quicker; 
but it is not, in my mind, the safer. The first, although slow, 
best guards against the likelihood of any remnant of the virus 
lurking behind in the viscera; and, if it do so, fresh troubles 
will be created. Hence, the safest and quickest way is to 
reconcile the two plans, i.e. to purge by the mouth on those 
days when the clyster is not given. 

17. Hence, I act thus:—The pills aforesaid (or some similar 
ones), I give for two or three mornings running. Then I order 
a clyster in the morning at five p.m. This is thrown up daily, 
until the symptoms have wholly ceased; except, only, that 
once or twice during the week I omit the clyster, and purge 
instead. 


Ix  Rose-juice electuary, 5vj ; 
Venice treacle dissolved in the yolk of egg, 58s ; 
Barley-water, Oj. 
Dissolve. Strain and add— 
Diacatholicum, 3ij. 
Mix, and make into an enema. 


Every night I order twenty-five drops of opobalsam, or of 
balsam from Mecca, to be dropped on sugar, and to be given at 
bedtime. This partakes of the nature of the finer and purer 
turpentines, and shares with them the power of guarding the 
genitals against the tendencies to ulceration. If, however, 
neither can be had, I substitute. the Chian turpentine, giving 
about as much as is the size of a hazel-nut, at the time in 
question. 

18. As the cure, no matter under what method, proceeds, I 
lay an interdict upon all salted or otherwise indigestible meats; 
such as beef, pork, fish, cheese, radishes, and salads. I also 
forbid the fruits of the season. Instead thereof, wether mutton, 
veal, chicken, rabbit, and other light meats are allowed. These, 
however, are allowed but sparingly, in quantities just sufficient 
to guard against a loss of strength. For drink, whey made 
with one of milk to three of water, takes the place of wine and 
spirits. At dinner, however, and at supper, the patient may 
indulge in a draught of small beer. 

To ease the inflammation, and to abate the ardor urine, an 
emulsion of the following sort taken frequently between the 
intervals of purging, 1s useful : 


VENEREAL DISEASE, 41 


Ix Seeds of melon, 
Seeds of gourds, 


-—— pee 


Sweet almonds (skinned), viij. 

Bruise together in a marble mortar. Pour upon them gradually— 
Barley-water, Oss. 

Strain and add— 
Loaf-sugar, q. s. 

Mix, and make into an emulsion secundum artem. 


19. With a sanguine temperament, and with an obstinate 
complaint, when the purging has been continued for a month 
(there or thereabouts) I generally take eight or nine ounces of 
blood from the right arm. — Earlier I do not recommend it ; lest, 
perchance, the contagion take a deeper root. Injections into 
the urethra I put low. Being either pungent or styptic, their 
acrimony oftener does harm than good. A little rose-water 
towards the end of the disease, is, however, allowable. 

20. I know of no better treatment of gonorrhcea than this. 
It has generally succeeded, especially when there has been a re- 
sistance to the action of purgatives. In such cases, the cure is 
slow, though still certain. We must then bleed, and purge 
both oftener and longer. We must also use clysters as aforesaid. 
Catharsis is all in all. In gonorrhea, too, if in any disease 
whatever, the following rule is a true one, viz. that cleanliness 
is medicine. Only keep from mineral waters. What with their 
astringency, and what with their over-sanitary action, they 
confine and nail down, as it were, into the system the remnants 
of the disease. Hence tumours of the scrotum take rise when 
mineral waters are drunk at the beginning of a gonorrhea, and 
warts when they are taken towards the end. This I confidently 
affirm, however much it may be the present custom to prescribe 
them. 

21. I am well aware how certain practitioners vaunt them- 
selves for their treatment of the disease—how they cure it in a 
short time, and how they cure it by means of the most notable 
recipes. At the same time I have observed the evils that arise 
from the use of astringents. Theycork up the virus in the system, 
and luesisthe result. The use of the so-called drying-woods is 
less dangerous; but then it is unprofitable. Under the name of 
specifies, medicines are given which inflame the body in general, 
and inflame the part in particular. This was heated enough 


42 EPISTLE II. 


before. Sometimes, indeed, as I have myself seen, the discharge 
whieh has stopped will set in afresh under the use of them. 

22. In some cases, where the gland is covered by the prepuce, 
this last may become so tumid, hard and callous, as to become 
incapable of being retracted. Now, under such circumstances, 
to attempt a cure by means of catharsis is to labour in vain. 
They may be strong, and they may be repeated ad nauseam ; but 
unless the part itself be reduced to its natural condition, there 
will be a fresh incentive to the disease, and no good will be 
done. In this case I use the following fomentation : 


kK Marshmallow-root, 
Lily-root, aa Ziss ; 
Mallow-leaves, 
Mullein-leaves, 
Elder-leaves, 
Henbane-leaves, 
Chamomile flowers, 
Melilot, aa a handful ; 
Linseed, 
Fenugreek, aa 3ss ; 
Spring-water, q. 8. 

Boil, and make into a fomentation. Apply to the part affected 
once or twice during the day, for one day. 


When the fomentation is ended, anoint the part with fresh 
linseed oil. Then apply a mucilaginous plaster, spread upon 
a piece of lambskin leather, around the orifice of the prepuce. 

If, however, there be any ulcer, either on the prepuce itself, 
or on the gland beneath, by reason of which the foreskin cannot 
be drawn back, we must use, besides the aforesaid fomentation, 
the following liniment : 

K Basilicon, 5vj ; 
Tobacco ointment, 5ij ; 
Red precipitate (washed in rose-water and finely pulve- 
rized), 38s. 


Mix, and make into a liniment. Lay it on lint, and apply it to the ulcer 
immediately after each fomentation. 


23. In cases where the gonorrhoea has been checked over- 
soon, or when improper exercise, or some similar cause, has 
transferred the disease to the scrotum, and when that part has 
become swollen, I apply the aforesaid fomentation twice a day 
to the tumour, that is, provided that the usual poultice of 


VENEREAL DISEASE. 43 


oxycrat and bean-meal have not abated both the pain and 
swelling. 

This is what I do out of doors. Meanwhile I attack the 
enemy within by means of cathartics and refrigerants, and by 
means of a diet of the kind described. Neither do I, by any 
means, scruple about bleeding from the arm (on the side of the 
testicle affected) to nine or ten ounces, in cases where the pain 
and swelling indicate the propriety thereof. So much for the 
gonorrhea. 

24. The disease, however, may be more than gonorrhea. It 
may be a venereal lues ; in plain language, a confirmed pox. 
Here we have a hard knot, for which we want a hard wedge. 

Whatever may be loosely said by learned or unlearned men 
to the contrary, there is (to my knowledge) no true instance of 
this disease having been extirpated except by means of saliva- 
tion excited by mercury; and as such salivation does all that 
is required, I find it incumbent on me to show at large the 
results of reason and observation as to the manner of exciting 
and of regulating 1t. 

35. Taking the question at its beginning, I cannot even guess 
at the import of all those serious precautions in respect to the 
preparation of the system for a course of mercury—the cathar- 
tics, the digestives, the baths, and even the bleedings ; to which 
latter a paramount importance has been assigned. What is 
the real fact? Even this. That salivation is to be induced ; 
that a poison is to induce it; that no medicine not poisonous 
has that effect; that without such an effect of a poison there is 
no safety for the patient. 

I ask, then, in the name of truth, whether the evil effects of 
such a poison are likelier to be withstood by an unimpaired 
system, and by a system competent to meet them, or by a frame 
weakened by a low regimen, and by the loss of blood? Pru- 
dence and consideration alike answer that, in such a case, it is 
better to do nothing than to do too much. And what answers 
experience? Why! that those who have been weakened by 
neither evacuations nor any other methods of treatment, better 
bear up against the effects of a salivation than those who, like 
men that have been maimed before a battle, have been weakened 
and pulled down. 

26. Waiving, then, all these mischievous preliminaries, | 


44 EPISTLE II. 


prescribe, as soon as I am called in, an ointment of one ounce 
of crude mercury, and two of hog’s lard. I add to this none 
of the heating oils whatever; the effect of which is either nought 
or else detrimental— nought if they fail in checking the effect of 
the unguent ; detrimental if they do so. Indeed, in respect to 
the so-called correctives, it is highly probable that all additions 
so denominated have just the effect here as they have in pur- 
gative medicines. There they gripe, and add difficulty to the 
catharsis, there being a struggle between the purge and the 
antidote ; whereas, in reality, the whole efficacy of the former 
consists in the extent to which it is adverse and hostile to the 
human system. 

I order, then, the patient to rub in with his own hands, on 
his arms, thighs, and calves, for three nights running (including 
the one on which the prescription is written), a third part of 
the ointment, This he must do thoroughly ; avoiding carefully 
to touch the groin or the axilla, and defending his belly from 
contact by means of a flannel bandage, sewn up behind. After 
the third munction the gums generally swell, and ptyalism sets 
in. If, however, within three days after the last rubbing-in, 
no salivation take place, then there must be taken eight grains 
of the turbeth mineral in the conserve of red roses; and after 
each vomit or stool, a draught of warm posset. When the 
spitting has begun, the physician must carefully regulate its 
amount, taking care lest, by rashly over-encouraging it, he 
jeopardize the life of the patient. The due amount of ptyalism 
is about four pints in the twenty-four hours. When this is 
reached, or when (without the amount being thus much) the 
symptoms have vanished (a change which often occurs on the 
fourth day of the salivation), the patient’s shirt and bed-linen 
are to be changed; care being taken that the fresh linen has 
been well aired since its last washing. This shift is necessary, 
because the old linen, being impregnated with the ointment, is 
likely to keep up or to increase the salivation ; thus carrying it 
beyond the point beneficial to the patient. If, on the other 
hand, the salivation flag before the symptoms have wholly dis- 
appeared, it may be kept up or brought on afresh by a scruple 
of calomel given as a single dose. 

27. Sometimes, in susceptible constitutions, after only one 
or two rubbings-in, the blood becomes touched with the mercury, 


VENEREAL DISEASE. 45 


and Nature attempts its expulsion by means of the bowels. 
Then arise gripes and slimy stools, just as in dysentery. Then, 
also, the cure of the patient is retarded ; since salivation, and 
salivation alone, is the method that effects it. 

In such cases the mercury, both externally and internally, 
must be stopped, until the symptoms have disappeared. To 
this end the liquid laudanum, in doses repeated and increased 
as occasion requires, is the best remedy for the flux. . Failing, 
this, a drachm and a half of diascordium may be taken as often 
as is needed. ‘The flux generally sets in before the salivation 
begins. When the former has been checked, the latter (al- 
though previously it has shown no signs) will proceed. 

38. When the patient has so far recovered as to complain 
of nothing beyond the soreness of his mouth (the true effect of 
a ptyalism), the salivation, which will of itself, day by day, de- 
crease, is not to be interfered with, neither by purges, nor by 
aught else; since it may easily happen that, after the cessation 
of the pain, and the healing of the ulcers, some sparks of the 
disease may still be kept alive. Now these may give fresh 
trouble, unless the salivation run its course; whilst the latter 
will, in its turn, disappear as the patient recovers, and as he 
exposes himself to the fresh air. Hence I consider it dangerous 
to hasten the departure of an evanescent salivation by either 
purges or the decoction of the woods; practice which, under 
the idea of either eliminating the mercury from the system, or 
of correcting its malignity, is but too common ; and practice 
which accounts for the frequent relapses which are suffered by 
such miserable patients as, having undergone pain, and trouble, 
and hope deferred, long (though in vain) for their recovery. 
So true is that, that, rather than check a salivation prematurely, 
it would be advisable to prolong it by doses of calomel, given 
once a week, even after the recovery of the patient, and after he 
has ventured out in the open air. This is what I have myself 
often done, and continued to do for some months. 

39. Much, however, as I may shrink from purging under a 
salivation of the kind in question, there are times when it neither 
should nor can beavoided. When things have gone so bad as 
to endanger life, it is safe, nay it is necessary, by means of 
purging, to bring down the ptyalism to a degree which may 
make it tolerable. That being done, it may be left to itself. 


46 EPISTLE II. 


30. Now if any one ask whether, when the salivation is over, 
we should be satisfied with the bare ptyalism, or whether we 
should begin a course of purging, or some similarly usual treat- 
ment, I answer (in addition, and to the reasonable and tried 
arguments already adduced), by asking a question myself. 
Why should we purge after salivation a bit more than we salivate 
after purging? — Purgatives (the scammony cathartics most 
especially) are more or less malignant, and leave more or less 
trace of such malignity in the system. This, however, we leave 
to Nature, and Nature subdues 1t. All that is needed is for 
the patient to resume his usual diet, exercise, and air. Again, 
too, I would ask, how can we expect to expel the mercury by 
catharsis, when we have overlooked and even checked the sali- 
vation? the salivation, which is the true and genuine process 
for its elimination? Hallucinations of this kind are the merest 
sparks of reason. Such as they are, however, they often satisfy 
us, miserable mortals, who have to look for truth in a well, and 
who often, like Ixion, embrace a cloud in place of a goddess. 
Then we talk ourselves into a belief of our dreams and fancies, 
mistaking them for demonstrative truths. A specimen of this, 
unless I am mistaken, is the doctrine just noticed. 

91. Still, the method just explained may be adhered to, the 
ointment may be rubbed in three nights running, the turbeth 
mineral may be taken, the calomel may have been given when 
the salivation has either failed or flagged. All this may be 
done, yet the peculiar idiosyncrasy or temperament of the 
patient may be such, that not only shall there be no true 
genuine salivation, but the gums shall not even be made sore ; 
all this being no more than what happens with purgatives. 
Many resist their action; and it so happens, that those who 
do so, are those who resist mercury as well. With such con- 
stitutions, we must guard against doing violence to Nature, and 
not be too obstinate in our attempts. When Nature is re- 
sistant, you may kill the patient in forcing her. Hence, all 
that will come of internal doses, and external applications, 
doubled and redoubled, will be gripes and dysenteric stools ; 
such bemg the method by which Nature gets rid of the poison 
—not by the way of the mouth. To these will be added cold 
sweats, and other bad symptoms ; so much so, that the patient 
will not only die, but die painfully. 


VENEREAL DISEASE. 47 


32. What may be done is this: after waiting four or five days 
after the last rubbing-in, he may repeat it, giving also the 
turbeth mineral, but leaving a few days between each inunction. 
If this fail he must be scrupulous in going farther. The first 
sign of pain in either the stomach or bowels is a warning for 
him to hold his hand, and so he must do as long as the least 
symptom of the sort remain. Nature is against him; and 
with such an adversary, the quickest accumulation of the 
strongest sialagogues will only bring on dysentery, and dysen- 
tery death. Festina lente— a scruple of calomel, once or twice 
a week, either alone, or (in case there be a tendency to 
diarrhoea) with a drachm of diascordium, will land the patient 
safe. The spitting indeed may be less than that of true 
ptyalism. Still it will be more than that of the natural state: 
it will also have the true odour which should accompany it. 
However scanty it may be, it will have this; proof sufficient 
that the blood has put on that condition (putrefaction or 
alteration, as the case may be) which either creates salivation, 
or arises along with it. 

By this method all the symptoms of the disease may be 
subdued, provided only that due time be given. 

33. I must now remark, that although in the cure of a lues 
salivation bears the bell, in the cure of gonorrhea concurrent 
with a lues, it 1s effectual. The lues may have ceased, whilst 
the gonorrhcea continues. Now this shows that it 1s not by any 
truly specific power that mercury cures the venereal disease. An 
indirect (mediate) specific it may be, but only in a loose sense 
of the term, just as I have hinted elsewhere,! that a lancet is a 
specific to a pleurisy. The bleeding cures the one disease, the 
ptyalism the other. 

34. However, to return. When lues and gonorrhea co- 
exist, the cure of the latter must be attempted either before the 
salivation or after it. Of these two opportunities I prefer the 
latter. A gonorrhea with a lues is more curable than a 
gonorrhcea without one; besides which, it is the effect of the 
previous salivation to reduce its virulence. As long, however, 
as there is the least remnant of salivation, cathartics must be 
eschewed. Hence, turbeth mineral given once or twice a week, 
is a safer remedy than any purgative whatever. It promotes 

1 Med. Obs., Preface to the Third Edition, § 23.—[G.] 


48 EPISTLE II. 


the excretion of the matter that determines the gonorrhea. It 
favours the salivation as well. 

35. It must further be observed, that, if a tumour of the 
sort called exostosis fix upon a bone, and remain so long as for 
the bone to be affected with caries, it will be wholly vain to 
attempt a cure of the disease either by means of salivation or 
by any other method, unless the cure of the exostosis be at- 
tempted also. With this view the bone must be laid bare by 
means of caustic, and exfoliation (as the term is) must be en- 
couraged by means of the remedies usually resorted to with 
that intention. 

36. When the mouth becomes ulcerated (a common occur- 
rence in salivation), so that the patient cannot put up with the 
pain, or when the excoriation is accompanied by bleeding, 
relief may be obtained by washing it out, night and day, either 
with rose-water, with milk and water, or with a decoction of 
barley, marsh-mallow root, and quince-seeds. This ulceration 
of the mouth is the only notable symptom, as far as my 
knowledge extends, which attends salivation, provided only that 
it be duly managed. Saving this, and if by any means it could 
be kept off, the cure of this disease would be no harder than 
the cure of many other diseases less talked about. 

37. As to diet and regimen, I consider that, in salivation, at 
least, until towards the end, they may be the same as with 
purgatives. Hence, just as a man who has been purged need 
only keep to his bedroom and take the more digestible sorts of 
food, so, also, I can see no reason why a man under salivation 
must lie in bed and deny himself moderate food; food which 
may help Nature in her struggle with the poison, giving her 
strength and spirit; since, if she flag, and if the spirits and the 
vital strength be wholly exhausted by diaphoresis, purging, and 
fasting (to say nothing of the mischief done by the mercury), 
the unfortunate patient will be worn to death. Very often, 
too, when the disease has been repelled, the patient has wanted 
the strength and spirits necessary for restoring him to health. 
And so he has died from mere weakness. Even if he escape the 
grave, he buys his life at the price of so much torture that it is 
not worth having. So true is what a late poet writes — 


* Graviora morbis patimur remedia, 
Nec vita tanti est, vivere ut possis, mori." 


VENEREAL DISEASE. 49 


38. This is a place for meeting the following objection :— 
* How is it that persons in the stage in question of this disease 
must go to France to be cured?” As far as I can make out, 
the reason is as follows,—the strength of their system is 
impaired, and the thick damp air of England is ill adapted for 
recruiting it, That of France, however, is so adapted, being 
clearer and more healthy. This explains it. French practi- 
tioners, skilful though they may be, understand the method of 
conquering the disease neither better nor worse than the 
English ones. But to return to the diet. 

99. I think—and experience favours my view—that, besides 
oatmeal porridge, panado, milk with beer, and warm small beer, 
&c., broths of veal, chicken, and other such light meats may be 
allowed to the patient. Indeed, I think that they ought to be 
allowed. Afterwards—when the swelling of the gums has so 
far subsided as to allow him to close his teeth, he may indulge 
sparingly in rabbit, chicken, or lamb. He may be in bed or 
sit by the fire, as he likes best; since, as the disease is to be 
cured not by diaphoresis but by ptyalism, I cannot imagine 
why the patient, without any reason, should be smothered 
with heat. 

40. The aforesaid method is both quicker and, in my certain 
belief, easier and safer than any other. "There is less chance 
of a relapse, there is less waste of time 1n preparing the system 
for salivation, and there is less of purgimg and the adminis- 
tration of decoctions when the salivation is over. Any one, 
familiar with the other practice, may verify what I say by trying 
this, With me it has always succeeded as I wished ; and that 
with numerous patients, who had, more than once, undergone 
all the pain and tedium of a salivation, and had relapsed after- 
wards. ‘This was on account of the reasons aforesaid. 

41. I have, however, no reasons, most candid Sir, for thus 
anxiously soliciting your confidence by long and roundabout 
ways of speech. You have long ago formed your opinion of 
me; and have condescended to favour my reputation. I will 
therefore say no more on this disease. It is not, and it has 
not been my habit, to involve simple matters in circuitous and 
irrelevant discourse; and so to conceal the matter in hand, as the 
Nile conceals its sources. Small, however, as may be the 


present treatise, both in size and value, I recommend it to your 
Kr. 4 


30 EPISTLE II. 


favorable consideration. It has been written that it might, in 
some manner, benefit my kind; but it has also been written 
that it might stand as a monument of the respect I bear 
towards yourself. High as I place you, I and others ought to 
place you higher; knowing as we do your learning, your kind- 
ness of manners, your candour and your other excellent virtues. 
It is not in flattery that I speak of the friendship with which 
you have honoured me ; and when I say that I hold it amongst 
the highest and the most honorable of my winnings. Amongst 
other matters which I have observed within the brief space of 
human life, I have ever noted, and I have impressed it upon 
my son, that the intercourse of men eminent from their probity 
and other virtues, has always been a credit and gain. On the 
other hand, the company of the vicious, or rather I should call 
it their combination—even where neither word nor deed has 
been meant to do harm, has, in some unknown matter, in- 
variably done some mischief to either me or mine. 


Long may you live to honour with your friendship, 
Your most respectful servant, 


THOS. SYDENHAM. 


Lonpon ; March 10, 1679. 


EPISTOLARY DISSERTATION 


TO 


DR. COLE. 


m i | H | nd 
cubic, cet. it On DNA 
ah Js as x Sow 


EPISTOLARY DISSERTATION. 


TO THE MOST WORTHY 


DR. THOMAS SYDENHAM, M.D. 


Most rLLUsTRIOUS SIR,— 


You will perhaps wonder at my importunity in breaking 
upon and disturbing your own more important affairs. I trust, 
however, that when you know the reason, you will grant me 
your pardon. My sense of gratitude, my wish to express it, 
and my reverent admiration of your character, are the reasons 
why I disturb you. So much do I own to having received 
benefit by your most elaborate commentaries ‘On Acute Diseases,’ 
that I feel myself entirely bound to return my thanks to the 
author. So accurately have you observed the respective con- 
stitutions of those years, which, as an observer in a new field, 
you undertook to treat upon; so truly have you hit the genuine 
and readily admitted indications of treatment ; such a splendour 
of genius have you thrown over the whole work; and so much 
admirable sagacity have you combined with unwearied labour, 
that the patient and the physician are equally beholden to 
you. 

Now, although whatever you have treated, you have treated 
in such a perfect manner as to extort praise from any one upon 
each point, that part, above all others, wherein I have the 
greatest difficulty to contain my admiration, is your method in 
the treatment of smallpox. Under this I could confidently 
hope that that hitherto deadly distemper would (unless there 
be some malignity, or some other counteracting cause) lay aside 
its terrors, and become one in the list of the most curable dis- 
eases, were it not only for the interference of the nurses (a 
tribe hostile to health of man), who, with their hot regimen and 
drugs, undo all that can be done, ensuring premature death to 


54 EPISTOLARY DISSERTATION. 


so many victims, that you, who lend yourself as a guide to such 
unfortunates, as in the extreme danger of their lives, and in 
utter uncertainty, place themselves under your direction, well 
deserve the title of the champion of the human kind. 

To speak, however, of my more humble self, much as I have 
feared to trust to my own calculations, I have, nevertheless, 
long believed that the eruption of smallpox was not the disease 
itself, but the crisis of the fever, and that, on the principle of 
all physicians, and in the manner of all other crises, the whole 
matter should be intrusted to Nature, so long as everything 
went regularly—and, in a disease like smallpox, as long as the 
blood has not been over-agitated, all does go well. After, how- 
ever, that I had read your golden book, I felt that those fears 
which had so long retained me and others, were a panic ; and 
then, in obedience to your precepts, but against the voice of 
many medical men, as well as others, I treated my patients ac- 
cordingly ; and, as often as I found them obedient, so much 
success did I meet with that I deemed myself the most fortunate 
of men in finding the treasure that I found. Nay, more— 
when called in to patients with the confluent disease, I had no 
hesitation, even when they seemed on the point of death, in 
relying upon your authority and resorting to paregorics; and, 
though cases of this sort were not common, I was so far from 
repenting of my method, that I wondered at my own success. 

Upon this point, then, you seem to have taught me so much 
already, that I fancied that there must be nothing more standing 
over as an exercise for the ingenuity of others, or even for your 
own. Nevertheless, that most learned man, my excellent 
friend and your approving admirer, Mr. Kendrick, has told me 
that you have hinted that certain other observations upon the 
same subject have occurred to you. Now, as these are yours, 
they must be of great value; and, unless you publish them, 
you wrong the world. Let the prayers of an individual dispose 
you, most Illustrious Sir, to lay them before the public. Neither 
will I stop here. Mr. Kendrick also says that you have observed 
some rare facts concerning the so-called hysterical diseases. 
These have long exercised (and tired) the wits of physicians. 
They have also (alas) eluded the recognised methods of treat- 
ment; well showing how unsafe it is in our philosophy to trust 
to simple reason, except in those matters of which we may 


EPISTOLARY DISSERTATION. 55 


ascertain the certainty by means of our senses. Well will you 
deserve, most worthy Sir, both of the present age and of pos- 
terity, if you will condescend to publish what you have con- 
sidered upon these points. ‘This, at least, I hope you will 
allow me to claim, viz., that you take in good part that a person, 
although unknown to you, should not be afraid of asking a 
favour for the sake of the public rather than himself. May 
you also, amongst those innumerable admirers who most es- 
pecially have respect for you, consider as one of the most 
respectful, 
Your most obedient humble servant, 


WILLIAM COLE. 


WORCESTER; Nov. 17, 1681. 


LETTER TO DR. COLE. 


Most ILLUSTRIOUS AND LEARNED SIR,— 


l. Ir I so far indulged my own vanity as to take credit to 
myself for praise that is not my due, I should find it difficult to 
be other than elevated at the honours showered on me by one 
whose lucubrations have made him so well known in the world 
of literature as yourself.  Laudari a laudato may well make 
any man proud. As, however, you have thought me fit, un- 
worthy as I am, to be selected for so great an honour, I can 
only put it down to the account of your kindness and humanity; 
since Nature has ever endued the best and greatest men with 
a feeling of kindness to those who are not guilty of any gross 
error. Nay more, in taking occasion to speak favorably of 
the studies of inferior inquirers, they only follow the bent of 
their own ingenious and candid disposition. Of this you have 
shown an illustrious instance, and one which I gratefully ac- 
knowledge in your notice of myself, and in your notice of those 
trifling works which I have dedicated to the welfare of the 
public. 

2. In respect to those subjects upon which you wait for in- 
formation, whether the smallpox which I have written on before, 
or the hysterical affection concerning which I may have some 
new observations, I have thus much to say. The first I have 
reverted to in order to patch up, from the suggestions of an 
increased experience, those parts wherein I was before found 
wanting. Hysterics I treated because, next to fever, they are the 
commonest of diseases, and because I thought that my humble 
observations might be useful. I will further own that, over and 
above my wish to benefit the public, I wished so to pass the 
long tedious nights of winter as to make my leisure serviceable; 
since I am now getting too old to go beyond my own house. 
for company. But whatever were my motives, I felt myself 
less equal to the task than I expected; my mind being unfitted 
for continuous thought from the effects of gout, which has long 


EPISTOLARY DISSERTATION, 57 


distressed me, and which gets worse as I grow older. Hence 
your letters have reached me opportunely, since they enable me 
to dispatch in the brief form of an answer, the points which I 
intended to treat in full. 

3. Beginning therefore with the smallpox, this must be 
premised, namely, that that species of intermittent fever which 
began in 1677, and is still raging during the present year, 1681 
—this species I say, like epidemics in general, raged most 
during those years which best agreed with its disposition. When 
a different season came on, it gave way to other epidemics that 
such seasons favoured more. For example, at the approach of 
winter, cough, inflammations on the lungs, with the fevers 
dependent thereon, and, lastly, the smallpox took their place. 
However, when spring returned, the fever returned also. Hence 
in 1680, after the fever had raged during the whole autumn, 
winter came, and the smallpox raged instead. Then at the 
turn of the year in 1681, the intermittent fevers broke out 
afresh with diminished violence, indeed, and less epidemic than 
before. Hence the smallpox showed itself in places springing 
up here and there. When summer came the smallpox became 
more common. At last it became an epidemic, and an epi- 
demic of no common mortality. 

4. In 1681 it was clear as the sun at noon that the 
patient ought not to be kept to his bed during the day until 
the whole eruption had shown itself. During both spring 
and winter the dry weather lasted longer than had ever been 
remembered by the oldest man—so much so that all the grass 
was withered up. Now in this case such moisture as the blood 
should have got from the atmosphere was missing, and this made 
the inflammation of the smallpox violent beyond its usual nature, 
and all other symptoms severe in proportion. For this reason 
purple blotches frequently anticipated the full eruption of the 
exanthemata, and the inflammation which forced them forward, 
so disturbed and interrupted the due crasis of the blood—the 
crasis that was necessary for the expulsion of the morbific 
matter—that premature deaths were brought about. The chief 
cause that promoted the mortality was the great tendency which 
arises from the aforesaid reason on the part of the pustules to 
become confluent. In this case the unfavorable constitution of 
the atmosphere did by itself what it generally leaves to quacks 


58 EPISTOLARY DISSERTATION, 


and sciolists, that 1s, it did the work of a hot regimen and un- 
seasonable cordials. The whole matter turns upon the amount 
of the exanthemata, and the patient lives or dies just as it is 
much or little. At the same time it must be owned that both 
bloody urme and purple spots, the surest signs of death, some- 
times occur when no variole have shown themselves, or, at best, 
but few. Generally speaking, they accompany the eruption at 
its worst. At times, however, they set in so soon that they 
take off the patient before a pustule has appeared. This I 
already noted.’ 

5. In my mind it is easy to see why the danger of the patient 
depends upon the number of the pustules. Hach is originally 
a phlegmone, though small. Then it becomes an aposteme. 
How, then, can there fail in being a secondary fever with so 
much pus 2n fieri? and how can this fail to be proportionate to 
the exacerbations of the disease, and the stage wherein the pus 
is excreted? This is, in the mildest form of confluent small- 
pox, the eleventh, in an average case the fourteenth, and 1n the 
worst cases the seventeenth day, of the disease—counting from 
its first attack. Now the confluent smallpox is as much worse 
than the distinct, as the plague is worse than the confluent. 
The three sorts of confluent are also different in their degrees of 
danger. Much of this depends on age and sex. All know, 
that a young man in the prime of hfe hasa worse chance than 
a female or a person under puberty. But this is by the way. 

6. No one will wonder at the ratio between the extent of the 
eruption and the danger of the disease, who considers the case 
of a common boil on the arm or shoulder. The more the pus, 
the more the fever; since, the absorption of the pus into the 
blood, through the veins, according to the laws of the circu- 
lation, supplies the fuel of the disease. Just in proportion as 
the physician finds the face of the patient, during the first days 
of the disease, thick-set with pustules like pin-heads, he may 
safely prognosticate that, one or the other of the aforesaid days, 
death will come down upon him ; the reason being the violence 
of the secondary fever. This must, needs, be proportionate to 
the quantity of pus thrown upon the blood by the innumerable 
apostemes. ‘This sad end may be foreseen days beforehand ; 


! Med. Obs., Sect. ITI, Chap. HI, 88 24, 25.—[G.] 


EPISTOLARY DISSERTATION. 59 


well as the patient may appear to be doing to the friends and 
bystanders. 

7. Hence, if—laying aside the purple blotches, and the 
bloody urine—the only danger that arises to the patient arise 
from the simple abundance of the crop of pustules, I reflect 
upon the cause that may have given rise toit, and (if the thing 
can be done safely) address myself to the checking of it. This 
is the best I can do— 


* Periculose plenum opus aleze." 


If the patient survive, he may attribute it to some lucky acci- 
dent—frequently a profuse epistaxis—but not to any skill of 
mine. ‘The cause of this over-thick eruption is the over-hasty 
assimilation of the variolous matter; and this arises from the 
nature of the patient, which may be so overflowing with heat 
and spirits, as to act lke the artificial heat of an exciting 
regimen. Or it may be from the regimen itself; since hot 
cordials, spirituous liquors, and lying continually in bed, may 
over-exalt the fermentation. By each and all of these pro- 
cesses, the blood becomes disposed to receive, and admit in 
intimate conjunction with itself, the impressions of the disease ; 
and Nature, herself—/uris agitata—and in the plenitude and 
exuberance of the variolous matter, strives her utmost to eject 
the juices in the shape of exanthemata. 

8. Nothing promotes this mordinate eruption so much as 
being kept to the bed before the sixth day from the first access 
of the disease, or the fourth from the breaking-out. By such 
time, all the pustules that mean to appear, have appeared, and 
no more need be expected. 

Even after the sixth day, the warmth of a bed is a little too 
favorable to the supervention of frenzy, watchfulness, and other 
such symptoms. Still they can be guarded against by judicious 
prescriptions. The great danger, however, of the eleventh day, 
arising out of the number of the pustules, is beyond the powers 
of any medicine. 

9. This has to be guarded against. Hence, the patient is, 
by no means whatever, to be allowed to be in bed during the 
daytime, until the evening of the sixth day. This will 
strengthen him much. [From the sixth day forwards he will 
scarcely be able to do otherwise than be abed ; especially if the 


60 | EPISTOLARY DISSERTATION. 


assemblage of pustules be remarkably thick. The acridity of 
the pustules will harass him, and the sitting posture will pro- 
bably make him faint. Putting these observations together, I 
fancy that I discern the finger of Nature, and that it 1s Nature 
who determines when we should, and when we should not keep 
the bed, uninterruptedly. 

10. To prove the truth of this problem, so important in 
diminishing the danger of smallpox, and in order to take my sub- 
ject at the starting-point, and go with it throughout, I will 
draw a sketch of the whole disease, and diligently determine its 
nature, and the method of its treatment. In this I shall look 
for the solution of my question, to the careful observations of 
facts under the cognisance of our senses, and not to the flimsy 
fancies based upon the uncertain foundation of opinions. 

11. In the first place, then, its essence—as far as essences 
can be known at all—seems to be comprehended in a certain 
inflammation of the blood, whereby, during the first few days, 
Nature exerts herself in the preparation and digestion of certain 
inflammatory particles, in order that they may, the more easily, 
be eliminated from the body. During this time, there is 
movement, and confusion, and fever cannot but be present. 
Moreover, the particles of the blood, are angry and enraged, and 
they create disturbance over the whole domain of the circulation. 
Then follow sickness, shooting pains of the head, weakness of 
stomach, and all such symptoms as, needs, must precede the 
expulsion of such morbific matters as fall upon the different parts 
of the system, under the influence of the movement and 
agitation. If, however, Nature succeed in throwing such parti- 
cles from the inner parts of the body, upon the surface, the 
mischief that had begun in the blood, goes on in the flesh. 

As Nature has but one way of getting rid of peccant matter, 
that way being fever of the blood ; so she also has but one way 
of getting rid of foreign bodies; that way being apostemes of 
the flesh. We see this in the case of a thorn. It is only got 
away by exciting an abscess in the circumjacent parts. Now 
these particles when they at first nestle in the fleshy part, 
create phlegmone of no great size, which lie concealed under 
the skin. They increase, however, in size every hour, and 
become more angry and more inflamed. At length they end 
in pus and vomice. Meanwhile it cannot but happen that 


EPISTOLARY DISSERTATION. 61 


some part of them be absorbed by the circulation into the mass 
of the blood. If the sanies be over-much, it lights up a fever, 
which is too strong for the constitution of the patient. It does 
more. It affects the whole mass with a putrid taint. Nor 
is this all. During the latter days of the fever the ptyalism, 
which is of constant occurrence as an inseparable concomitant 
of confluent smallpox is checked suddenly, and the life of the sick 
man iscut short. On the other hand, if the aforesaid purulent 
matter be poured sparingly upon the blood, the powers of Nature 
are sufficient to meet, without trouble, the secondary fever: so 
that, the little abscesses day by day dry up, and the patient 
recovers. 

12. If this view be true, a blind man may see that the 
treatment of the first days is all-important as regards the event. 
Inflame the spirits by cordials and bedclothes, and their power 
of assimilation, already too great, becomes greater still. Add 
to this that the blood and the other humours, heated by such 
processes, yield all the easier to the violent impression of the 
morbific particles. Hence arise more pustules than were 
wanted, and danger to the patient’s life. Contrariwise, the 
opposite regimen, and the free, fresh air, soften down the violence 
of the fevered and acrid particles, and confirm and condense 
the humours, by strengthening them against the morbific spirits, 
so as to withstand their attack; whence no more variolous 
matter is secreted than is proportionate to the genius of the 
disease. 

13. The assimilation of a superfluous amount of morbific 
matter, and the exaltation of the ferment of the disease, are not 
the only mischiefs that torment the patient who always keeps 
his bed. The same source gives rise to bloody urine, and to 
purple spots ; these being the commonest in summer-time, with 
patients in the prime of life. Hach of these symptoms arises 
from the uncontrolled fury of the blood ; which breaks all bar- 
riers, showing itself as bloody urine when it reaches the kidneys, 
and as purple blotches when it strains through the fleshy parts 
which terminate in the extremities of the muscles, and on the 
skin. Now these two symptoms must be guarded against 
during the first days of the disease (those days whereon they 
usually break out) by a diet and regimen more cool than hot. 
When however they have appeared in reality, the physician who 


62 EPISTOLARY DISSERTATION. 


tries to cure them by hot cordials and confinement to the bed, 
is like an old woman who will stop the boiling of her kettle 
by putting fresh coals on the fire. 

14. To speak the truth (however much ignorant dogmatists, 
who are necessarily bad judges, may be scandalized), so far is 
bed, during the first days of the disease,.from being a good 
thing to the patient who is continually kept to it, that in certain 
cases he should be altogether exposed to the fresh air. Such 
is the case if the season be hot, if the patient be in the prime 
of life, if he drink freely, and most of all if such free drinking 
be the cause of the complaint. In these cases I doubt whether 
the over-hasty eruption of pustules can be sufficiently checked 
by abstinence from bed and cordials. The blood without any 
such help is largely supplied with a store of fervid spirits, and 
spirits akin to the disease. Hence it explodes as it were; 
moreover, such a mass of humours breaks out into exanthemata, 
and so great is the abundance of pus thrown upon the blood 
at the end of the disease, that the patient is, as it were, over- 
whelmed, and dies. 

15. Frequently the immoderate exaltation of the ferment, 
creates so much variolous impurity, that the patient dies before 
the disease has fully formed itself. In this case the morbific 
matter, partly from its own great abundance, partly from the 
confused and excited state of the blood, is unable to extricate 
itself. Hence come bloody urine and purple blotches as pre- 
ludes to the fatal catastrophe. The same happens in measles 
and scarlet fever, when the encouragement of the eruption has 
been more successful than well-timed. 

16. Neither does bloodletting in my mind, although re- 
sorted to at times, so efficiently check the over-hasty accumu- 
lation of variolous matter as does the action of the air. This 
cools it, whereas the effects of bloodletting are often marred by 
putting the patient to bed at once, and giving him hot cordials, 
means whereby the blood is rendered more susceptible to the 
impressions of any addition of heat. I assert upon my con- 
science that the worst case of confluent smallpox which I ever 
, Saw, and one which proved fatal on the eleventh day, was that 
of a young lady who had just before been cured of rheumatism 
by the usual method of copious and repeated bleedings. This 
first showed me that bleeding was not so good a means of 


EPISTOLARY DISSERTATION. 63 


bringing the variole within due limits as I thought it was. 
Purging, however, I have frequently observed to have this effect, 
and when repeated before the blood got tainted, it has brought 
out the subsequent variolz in the favorable form of the distinct 
disease. 

17. lam aware that many objections may be against my 
doctrine in this respect, and that, to the generality of mankind, 
and to those who have but little experience in practice, they 
may appear important. Such men pass as judges, and faulty 
theories become recognised on their authority ; theories which 
square better with the comprehension of their followers than 
the matured reflections of more ingenious thinkers. All this is 
part of human nature—which ever loves thus to contemplate 
the exterior surface of things, better than to make itself cog- 
nisant of the deep and more concealed truths, which require 
labour in the extraction. Hence dabblers in science lean upon 
the opinion of the vulgar, and, so, have things their own way ; 
whilst the closer observers are received with calumny and 
ill-words— 


IIoAXoi yàp vupOnKopdpor, vapor 6€ rs ákyor. 


Such, however, they bear with equanimity, satisfied with the 
approval of a wise minority. 

18. The first objection is that, to keep out of bed for the 
first few days will impede the eruption of the pustules, and, by 
consequence, protract the discomfort of the patient, and all the 
other symptoms dependent upon the repression of the erup- 
tion. This I deny. Common experience is against it. The 
point to settle is, which of two dangers is the gravest, i. e. 
whether it 1s worse to check the eruption for a time, and, so 
doing, protract the discomfort which it might have eased, or to 
so accelerate its assimilative tendencies, as to create a ferment, 
which shall kill the patient on the eleventh day. Now, if we 
weigh the matter rightly, we shall (I think) find that very few 
have died because the exanthemata failed in coming out; 
except, indeed, those few whose blood was so over-heated, and 
over-disturbed (maddened as it were), as not to allow time for 
the gradual excretion of the morbific matter—a view which is 
more on my side than against me. 

19. There is no fear but that, even in cases where we do 


64 EPISTOLARY DISSERTATION. 


nothing at all, the variolous matter (however much, during the 
first days of the disease it may fly from part to part, and distress 
such parts as it lays hold on, creating grave symptoms, such as 
vomiting, pains and the like) will eventually be overcome by the 
triumphant powers of Nature, and so be thrown out upon the 
surface of the body ; particularly when the constipated state of 
the bowels (as is generally the case), ensures the eruption— 
certain though late. On the other side—how numerous are 
the ways to death when the pustules are forced, and hastened ! 
The whole list is too long to go through. A few only shall 
be named. 

lst. Increase in the number of pustules, with a corresponding 
increase of secondary fever, and corresponding danger. 

2d. Bloody urine, and purple spots; both arising from extra- 
vasated blood— 


“Qua data porta ruit." 


3d. The total suppression of the eruption arising from the 
inordinate efforts to force it. This has been noticed above.’ 

Now such inordinate efforts are as much out of place in 
medicine, and constitute as bad a method of bringing out a 
regular eruption, as a train of gunpowder let off in a crowded 
room would be for emptying the room gradually and regularly. 
The only result would be, that there would be a crowd towards 
the door, and the doorway would at once be blocked up. 

20. It may now be asked why, during the first days, the 
eruption may not be promoted by a moderately warm bed, as 
well as by total abstinence from bed by daytime? This may be 
met by another question. How is it that a bed without a fire, 
in winter, is warmer than warm clothes and a fire to boot out 
of bed?  'The difference between the facts is undeniable. 
Which then supplies the best means: of checking the exuberant 
agitation of the variolous ferment, the first aim of the physician, 
and the intention which he must satisfy before he has a chance 
of succeeding with any of his medicines? 

21. A source of fallacy to the unwary is the following. A 
patient may be seen to break out into spontaneous sweats, and 
these, as long as he hes in bed, flow regularly, and, as long as 
they flow regularly, ease the patient ; whilst, where there are no 


| See § 15.—[G.] 


EPISTOLARY DISSERTATION. 65 


sweats there is no such relief. Now first let us consider, why 
we take such pains in checking the fever, when the fever is 
Nature’s regular instrument both for the preparation and the 
elimination of any hostile matters lurking in the blood. Who 
can fail to see that in forcing the sweat to ease the fever, 
we throw out the humours in a crude and undigested form— 
like over-hasty fruit—and, by those same sweatings whereby 
we thus force them, supply fresh occasions for a severer subse- 
quent fever ; inasmuch as, by so doing, we drive off the serum of 
the blood, whereby, as well as by the blood itself, the fresh and 
hot variolous particles are diluted. Hence, the particles them- 
selves take strength and severity— since the mass of serum that 
should temper them, is washed out. In one word, forced sweats 
and premature pustules are equally bad for fevers; and, more 
than any other causes, bring on death on the eleventh day. 

22. Now all my cautions against confining the patient to 
bed, go upon the notion that the threatened disease is of 
the confluent kind. As for the distinct sort, even if it can be 
seen beforehand, bed is so much out of the question, that in- 
junctions against it are superfluous. ‘The scanty number of the 
exanthemata makes matters safe either way. 

23. Still I cannot so far flatter myself as to wish these views 
to be received simply on the authority of my own humble 
judgment. Indeed, I think so little of opinions of any sort, 
that I distrust my own when they conflict with any one else’s. 
And I should distrust them in this case, were it not that the 
phenomena of practice support the judgment of reason. Laying 
aside practical observations, one man’s opinion is as good as 
another’s ; that is, it is a mere opinion, and mere opinions are 
only the shadows of the shade of reason. The more I mix 
with men, the more I satisfy myself of the great danger to 
which even the greatest wits are exposed, when they allow 
their brains to become heated and agitated by the perpetual 
speculation upon matters of science, without resorting to facts as 
the test and touchstone of the truth. Now, such opinionists, 
as they are called by Cicero, in purely speculative controversies, 
are infinitely wide of the mark; and that, because, the ideas 
which the mind conceives are no touchstones of truth ; so that, 
without facts—and to these such speculators do not resort— 
they have no means of putting themselves on the right road 


E 


EF. 9 


66 EPISTOLARY DISSERTATION. 


when once they begin to stray. Now, surely, I have a right 
to observe as a fact the different effects, in the way of the 
mildness or severity of the disease, which follow the different 
modes of treatment, and to form an opinion in unison with the 
evidence of that fact. Let others do as much, and I am satis- _ 
fied. It is the height, however, of injustice for a man who, 
during his whole practice, has never once tried how far good 
or evil comes from forbidding a patient to keep his bed, to 


attack me as a retailer of falsehoods. Had such freedom of : 


abuse been always allowed against those whose opinions, how- 
ever true, were contrary to the received doctrines, no man 
would have tried to benefit his race by new discoveries. And 
yet why should I thus expose myself to these calumnies. Why 
—unless it were that frequent and almost daily experience had 
forced upon me the superiority of the present method over the 
common ones. lam not so devoid of sense as to seek for 
notoriety from taking up any exploded doctrine of men, 
who, if I sought for applause, would have been those at whose 
hands I should have sought it. Still less am I so hardened in 
malice as to lay traps for those who may come after me, so 
that even unborn beings may suffer from the influence of my 
name—if, indeed, it be destined to become an influence—and, 
horrible even in idea! I may myself be a murderer after death, 
as well as during life. 

24. Be this as it may, my children and my dearest friends 
have thus been treated. If I have done wrong at all, it has 
been in giving way to the obstinate pertinacity of others ; whose 
decided and contrary opinion I have sometimes been unwilling 
to oppose, lest, in so doing, I should be harsh and stiffnecked. 
As witnesses to this I call those who know me best. 

To crown, however, my misfortunes, it has sometimes hap- 
pened that, after the standers-by had rejected my advice 
throughout the whole disease, I have still been held answerable 
for the loss of the patient ; and this has happened after I have 
talked myself hoarse against the heating treatment of the friends 
and nurses, For reasons like this, I have often thought that 
it would be better for me never to undertake a case of small- 
pox, than to oppose the insuperable prejudices of the 6: z9AAor. 

25. I will own that sometimes smallpox will become con- 
fluent under any treatment. Then, they are always dangerous, 


EPISTOLARY DISSERTATION. 67 


be as careful as you may. This, however, experience enables 
me to assert. The patient who has kept out of bed during 
the day, and taken cooling drinks only from the first, has a 
better chance than the one who has been heated by cordials, 
and covered with bedclothes. The former method checks the 
over-abundance of the crop of pustules, and, by consequence, 
checks also the immoderate effervescence of the secondary fever; 
fever which kills on its own account, and checks the ptyalism ; 
which check kills also. What, too, if by cool treatment we can 
guard against bloody urine, and purple spots ; symptoms which, 
generally, appear during the first days, and before any manifest 
eruption ; just as is the case in measles, scarlet fever, and other 
acute diseases originating in intense inflammation. I say 
nothing about the feeling of refreshment which the patient ex- 
periences when his surface is freely pervaded by the cool air 
of heaven, after leaving a hot bed; a feeling which many have 
acknowledged to me with gratitude; as if by such cool draughts 
they had taken life and spirit afresh. 

26. This has often made me draw a difference between the 
deceptions of reason (so-called) and the realities of our senses ; 
from whence I infer that—provided that they be not absolutely 
unreasonable, and deadly—much more than is usually given 
should be allowed to the appetites and sensations of the patients 
themselves. These are better than the treacherous rules of art. 
E. g. a fever-patient ardently longs for cooling drinks freely 
bestowed. Art denies them. Art has a theory of its own. 
Art has an end and aim of its own. Art assumes that cool 
liquors are adverse to its doctrines ; and so starves an appetite, 
giving a cordial instead. The same patient loathes all food, 
unless accompanied by diluent drinks. Art—the art of nurses 
and lookers-on—contends that he must eat. After a long 
languor, he probably asks for something absurd, or prejudicial, 
and asks earnestly. Art is again in the way, and threatens 
death in case of disobedience—unless, indeed, the artist be 
wise enough to remember Hippocrates—More bad than good, 
whether food or drink, if palatable, is preferable to more good 
than bad, if unpalatable." 

27. All these aberrations of Nature a man of moderate 


! Aphorism. ii, 38, tom. iii, p. 717.—[G.] 


68 EPISTOLARY DISSERTATION. 


medical practice, but of diligent observation, will freely own, 
that many patients who have spurned physic and followed their 
own inventions, have been the better for doing so. Nor will 
any one wonder at this who considers that the All-wise Architect 
and Ruler of all things has reared the fabric of the world in such 
exquisite order, that even as the imperfections of Nature beau- 
tifully conspire to the harmony and symmetry of the whole 
work, so have they each and all some divine contrivance in- 
herent in their proper essences whereby they ward off injury ; a 
phenomenon very visible in the natural terminations of acute 
diseases (acute meaning those of which God is the author, 
chronic meaning those that originate in ourselves), and visible 
also in the propensities which accompany the same—propen- 
sities or natural instincts which hberate the patient from those 
dangers which Art in the hands of foolish men creates. This 
is fortunate for our race. Badly, mdeed, would it have fared 
had it been otherwise, in those early times when the whole 
knowledge of medicine was limited to the narrow barriers of 
Greece; a country that is to the dimensions of the world at 
large what a little country village is to those of Great Britain. 
What, too, shall we say of countries wholly destitute of medi- 
cine? of all Asia, all Africa, and, with the exception of a few 
thinly-peopled colonies, all America? Just as the comic writer 
elegantly distinguishes men of reason and worth from their 
more degraded fellow-creatures who live the foul life of brutes— 


«u L » >» ^ » 3 
Qc xapíev tor ávOpwmoc, ay ávÜpwsoc yp. 


so the Art of Medicine—if Art it really be—is the greatest of 
all gifts appertaining to human life, and preferable to all others 
in the same proportion as life itself is the greatest of enjoy- 
ments. 

28. To return. Notwithstanding my previous cautions, there 
are cases where the patient should be kept to his bed even 
before the breaking-out of the eruption. For instance, an 
infant, who has passed his teething, is seized with a sudden 
spasm. In this case we must reflect whether such a convulsion 
may not depend upon an effort of Nature, whereby she is 
striving to drive to the surface, smallpox, measles, or scarlet 
fever, diseases which, at present, lurk under the skin. In order 
to meet so formidable a symptom, the patient should be put to 


EPISTOLARY DISSERTATION, 69 


bed, and blistered on the nape of the neck. Then a cordial, 
with a little paregoric mixture, must be given. This will act 
potently on the cause of the disease, helping to eliminate it. 
It will also allay the tumult from which the paroxysm arises. 
As to the form—for a boy three years old, five drops of laudanum 
out of a spoonful of plague-water may be given. I think 
nay I am sure—that thousands of infants have died because 
their physician was not aware that convulsions of the kind in 
question are nothing but the forerunner of some eruptive 
disease ; so that, as long as practitioners carelessly mistook such 
symptomatic phenomena for essential diseases, and treated them 
accordingly with repeated clysters, and other evacuations, they 
threw obstacles in the way of the eruption, and rendered the 
fits all the more permanent. This they did by striving so hard 
to cut them short. Had the pustules broken out, they would 
have been cut short of their own accord. I have already stated 
that such infantile variole as begin with a spasm are rarely 
confluent—a well-omened phenomenon.’ This is a reason why 
lying abed during the first days 1s less injurious. 

29. On the other hand, I have observed that variole after 
attacks of coma are pre-eminently confluent. In such cases 
I prefer a vesicatory or a paregoric to continual lying in bed, 
before the eruption. I have also noticed, though very rarely, 
that such convulsions precede the fits of intermittent fever. 
Lastly, I have seen attacks of coma and spasms go together, 
and this both in infants and adults. In such cases no particular 
treatment is required. The fever alone is the essential disease ; 
and the essential disease alone requires care. If I spent my 
skill upon subduing the coma, the concomitant of the fever, 
and, so doing, resorted to bleeding, purging, and repeated 
clysters, in conquering the lethargy, I should aggravate the 
fever ; and then the coma would increase in proportion to such 
aggravation. So far, then, from removing it, I should run a 
chance of making it everlasting. By attacking the fever, how- 
ever, I attack all dependent symptoms. This should be noted. 
Fatal errors may otherwise ensue. I have enlarged on it, how- 
ever, elsewhere.’ 

30. At times, however great may be the comfort of keeping 


! Med. Obs., Sect. III, Chap. II, § 2.—[G.] 
? [bid., Sect. 111, Chap. II, § 62; Sect. V, Chap. II, § 8.—[G.] 


70 EPISTOLARY DISSERTATION. 


awhile out of bed, it must be denied the patient ; since it may 
be contraindicated by great disquiet, intense fever, violent 
vomiting, vertigo, rheumatic pains in the limbs, &c. All these 
symptoms—in young and sanguine patients more especially— 
prognosticate an inordinate assimilation of variolous matter, 
and danger proportionate; danger arising from the press of 
the pustules to find an exit, and the flux that will arise there- 
from. Whilst therefore I do my best to curb this exorbitant 
ferment, when, on the one side, confinement to bed will increase 
its violence, and, on the other hand, the patient will be greatly 
discomforted unless he have some similar support, I find myself 
obliged, under such circumstances, to bleed from the arm, and 
a few hours afterwards, to exhibit a thorough-going emetic of 
the crocus metallorum. This not only drives out the matter 
from whence the inordinate discomfort has arisen, but so 
restores the patient that he can leave his bed like a healthy 
man. Neither is this the only method whereon we must rely 
for breaking the violence of the fermentation. Over and above 
the aforesaid evacuations, the free addition of some spirits of 
vitriol to some thin drink goes far to help the patient out of 
danger; this should be continued until the full eruption of 
the pustules. Notwithstanding these evacuations, and this 
cooling drink, the patient must lie in bed at night only; if 
possible. All that has been mentioned is far less effective in 
checking the over-hasty assimilation of the variolous matter, 
than is a cooling action upon the blood of fresh air renewed by 
the lungs. This relieves, as I have often found by experiment, 
the aforesaid symptoms wonderfully and at once. This some- 
what unusual method is only absolutely necessary with persons 
in the prime of life, of sanguine temperament, and whose 
blood has been inflamed by wine; in those persons, too—ex- 
cepting always infants at the breast—who, besides having small- 
pox, have the aforesaid grave symptoms also. When the blood 
is not so much inflamed, and when the symptoms are milder, 
so that the likelihood of an over-assimilation of variolous matter 
is less, it follows, as a consequence, that the aforesaid evacua- 
tions, and the spirits of vitriol may be dispensed with. 

3l. I have enlarged on all this, because I well know that the 
chance of a patient's death or recovery depends chiefly, if not 
wholly, upon the treatment ofthe first few days. When, how- 


EPISTOLARY DISSERTATION, /l 


ever, the whole crop of pustules has shown—and this takes place 
on the sixth day from the attack, or the fourth from the first 
eruption—the lying abed must, then, be uninterrupted through- 
out. It can, now, no longer be delayed, any more than, earlier, 
it should have been resorted to— that is, provided the case be 
confluent. This, observe, is the disease I am dealing with. 
With few pustules, and those of the distinct sort, the treatment 
is immaterial; provided there is no gross error. The disease 
is a slight one. The ignorance of the physician who aims at 
nothing so much as the promotion of heat, can alone make it 
dangerous. Dangerous, too, it has been made; since in such 
cases the doctor, though unconsciously, helps the disease. 

92. From the sixth (or fourth) day the pustules begin to 
increase, the body grows hot, and the head aches. Hence— 
unless he be an infant—the patient is watchful and unquiet. 
This is the point of the next importance in smallpox. The quieter 
the blood, the better will the pustules acquire their due size and 
growth. The greater the orgasm and tumult, the more are they 
like to shrink, and be checked. This stops the elimination of 
the peccant matter. It also disturbs the economy and crasis 
of each phlegmon. Hence they either fail to ripen, or contain 
ichor instead of true pus, and a black liquor instead of the proper 
honey-like matter. All this is an excretion foreign to the true 
and genuine variolous pustule. Hence, paregorics are—in my 
mind—as fit remedies in smallpox as they are in any disease 
whatsoever: indeed they are quasi-specific, like Jesuit’s bark in 
agues. I say quasi-specific, because I am aware that they act 
as paregorics rather than as absolute specifics. Still, they satisfy 
the simple indication to which we attend, viz. the quieting and 
regulation of the blood and spirits. It is this inordinate move- 
ment of the blood and spirits—the inseparable attendant of the 
confluent smallpox of adults—which, pre-eminently, calls for the 
use of anodynes. ‘To refer the need of them to simple wake- 
fulness is to mistake the genius of the disease. Just asa man 
who is unable to sleep may keep his spirits quiet and composed 
—-a fact that we often see after taking laudanum—so, also, he 
may be able to sleep whilst his spirits are so agitated as to 
interfere with the laudable breaking-out of pustules. This is 
worth notice. 

33. I will now speak of the kinds of anodynes. Although 


72 EPISTOLARY DISSERTATION. 


for many years I havegiven theliquid laudanum for the symptoms 
with fair success, I prefer the syrup of poppies. Both act 
towards the same end, but laudanum heats; which syrup does 
not, when its dose is adapted to the age of the patient and the 
symptoms. What will suit a man of a quiet and regulated 
spirit, will be insufficient for one of a more turbulent tempera- 
ment. Now let us call six drachms a fair dose in ordinary com. 
plaints. In smallpox, if wanted at all, it will be wanted in 
ounce doses. This applies to adults. With infants the dose may 
be diminished according to their age. Infants require pare- 
gorics less than adults. They are more prone to sleep. Still 
even with infants, if the symptoms were dangerous, I should be 
afraid to withhold them. 

What however I most wish to say is, that be the case what it 
may, the dose of a paregoric is difficult to be determined. 
Indeed when given for any inordinate movements of the 
spirits, for violent vomiting and looseness, or for severe pain— 
the three affections wherein I have already said paregorics are 
most wanted—they should be given in such a manner, that if 
the first dose fall short of its full effect, another and another 
should be taken at the due time, until the end is accomplished. 
In this way the effect and not the quantity regulates the dose. 
Even when the action has become favorable, free as has been 
the previous exhibitions of anodynes, they must not be discon- 
tinued too soon. All that should be done is to give the doses at 
intervals ; so regulated as to enable us to ascertain the effect of 
one before we administer another. When, however, our end is 
gained, the dose must be decreased according to the decline of 
the disease. 

34. I can prove all this by many examples. I will give, 
however, but one. On the 18th of April, 1681, a Mrs. Crosse 
called on me, asking me to visit her son, 10 years old, smitten, 
as she feared, with smallpox. Being ill of the gout I asked an 
apothecary to see him for me, and report upon the case. He 
told me that his mother had followed some friends’ advice, and 
given him the Countess’s powder, and other heating drugs ; had 
overlaid him with blankets in order to promote sweat, the sheet- 
anchor of the mother and her advisers ; and had dosed him with 
posset made of marigold-flowers and hartshorn. All this had 
so increased the fever that the patient had become delirious, and 


EPISTOLARY DISSERTATION, 73 


was held down to his bed, where he kept moaning and mur- 
muring to himself. As for the eruption, it was not visible or 
sparingly so. It raised however the skin, as if a thick crop were 
finding its way outwards. This was from the treatment. It had 
checked the eruption which it was meant to promote. I ordered 
him to leave his bed at once ; and forbid him to get into it again, 
except at night-time, before the sixth day was over. Then I pre- 
scribed half an ounce of syrup of poppies. This did no good. I 
repeated it at the end of an hour. In vain. So violent was the 
orgasm of the blood, that nothing under two ounces and a half 
allayed it; given in half-ounce doses, at such intervals as 
enabled me to watch the effects of each. — After this I ordered 
half an ounce to be taken every night until the end of the 
disease. This maintained that composure of the spirits, which 
the previous larger doses had effected. 

35. Now be the dose thus given ever so large and re- 
peated, provided that the turbulence of the blood, and the 
agitation of the spirits be excessive, it will not do its work unless 
the patient be taken out of bed. The heat of bed so exasperates 
the fever, that nothing but a narcotic, stronger than the consti- 
tution will well bear, can allay it. This is what happens— 
though with less danger to life—with bark in agues ; a reason, 
in my mind, why the cure of such fevers has, often, been 
unnecessarily prolonged. At times, too, when the fever has 
re-mitted rather than ?n£er-mitted, so great has been the increase 
of its intensity, that death has but barely been escaped. 

96. Laying aside extraordinary cases, wherein the paregoric 
may be taken during any stage of the disease, I recommend the 
present paregoric to be taken for the first time, on the night of 
the sixth day—that is, the first time the patient is wholly con- 
fined to his bed. It should, then, be continued until the 
seventeenth, or till the danger is over. On the sixth day the flesh 
has become inflamed ; so that the head begins to be disturbed 
and to wander, from the heated humours. 

37. The anodyne in smallpox should be taken earlier than 
in other diseases ; since it 1s in the evening when the fits of heat 
and restlessness set in. Sometimes it happens, that if, during 
the latter days of the disease, it be delayed, the patient will 
suddenly become heavy, complain of discomfort, grow fevered, 
and die—much to the astonishment of his sanguine friends, 


74 EPISTOLARY DISSERTATION. 


who had formed hopes of a recovery. An anodyne given in 
time might have saved this. Hence, on these days, the eleventh 
especially, I order the anodyne to be given early in the evening, 
at four or six p.m.; so that its action may be ready when 
wanted, in case of any sudden attack. I am satisfied, that 
certain persons, well known to me, have died for the want of 
such a remedy under such circumstances. Had they had it 
they would have lived. How truly then may we say— Occasion 
stays for no man. 

98. There is then a double danger. The narcotic may be 
given too late. Or it may be given too early. In this last 
case its action has passed away before the occasion has come. 
Hence, during the last, and most dangerous, days, it should be 
given at stated hours—morning and evening. Neither will the 
aforesaid ounce-dose always be sufficient. The blood may be 
so inflamed, and the spirits so disturbed, that it may have no 
more action than half an ounce in other cases. Experience, 
then, has shown me, that an ounce and a half is the dose— 
particularly with young men, and hot temperaments. This 
can be repeated, until convalescence, morning and evening, with 
impunity, nay with benefit. 

39. In the very worst forms of confluent smallpox I have 
found it necessary to give three paregorics during the day, 
i. e. one every eight hours; since, so great has been the 
orgasm of the spirits, and so much discomfort has arisen there- 
from, that longer intervals were not allowable. Now if the 
diacodium—as it sometimes does—create nausea, the liquid 
laudanum must be substituted. Of this, sixteen drops have 
the same effect as an ounce of the syrup; that is, if it be 
prepared as I have elsewhere directed.” | 

40. Those who disapprove of this method will object that, 
by a narcotie so largely and so frequently given, the peccant 
matter will become fixed and salivation be checked. To this 
I reply, that it is true that the salivation may be diminished ; 
still, it will never wholly cease. Nay, more, some time after 
the anodyne has been given it will break out afresh. From 
this accrues a double advantage. The patient, having been re- 
stored by the anodyne, is all the stronger for the expectoration. 


! "0 katpóc ó£0c.—Hipp., Aphor. i, 1.—[G.] 
? Med. Obs., Sect. IV, Chap. III, $ 14.—[G.] 


EPISTOLARY DISSERTATION. 73 


The excreted saliva, although scantier, is all the better excocted. 
In the next place, the decrease of the ptyalism is well made 
up for by the increased swelling of the hands and face. This 
is all the surer and all the freer for the repetition of the nar- 
cotics, especially on those days when the swelling most regu- 
larly takes place, this being, for the face, from the eighth to 
the eleventh (after which it begins to subside); for the hands 
from the eleventh day until the ripening of the pustules by which 
they are beset. In respect to these, I confidently assert that 
no competent judge can deny that the absence of these swell- 
ings, on the days on which they are due, is a worse omen than 
the interruption of the ptyalism. For my own practice, I 
would rather risk a check to the ptyalism than a check to the 
swelling, and I think that this is so thoroughly required by 
the disease, that the practitioner who debars his patient of such 
an auxiliary has but little observed the complaint. 

41. I must not, however, be mistaken so far as to be sup- 
posed to recommend the daily use of diacodium, in the proper 
dose, in the case of tender infants suffering under the confluent 
disease—except, only, in very seriously dangerous cases. This 
for two reasons: Firstly, mfants have less warmth than those 
with whom the torch of life is more fairly lit. Secondly, the 
tender age of infants ill bears narcotics. Add to this that, left 
to themselves, infants escape the troubles of most diseases 
through sleep. Notwithstanding this, as often as there is 
brain fever, and as often as the pustules are ill conditioned, 
anodynes are indicated; either of these symptoms sufficiently 
proving that the movement both of the blood and animal spirits 
is disturbed. 

42. The two points that I have treated are the cardinal points 
in the treatment of Variola—firstly, the regulation of the over- 
hasty assimilation of the morbid matter during the first days ; 
and secondly, the moderation of the movement of animal spirits 
under the inordinate influence of the inflammation of the ex- 
ternal parts. These they are which, when neglected, originate 
those terrible symptoms which bring the disease to a tragical 
end. These being dealt with, nothing more remains to be 
done by the physician. Nevertheless, the writer of recipes may 
find work. Between, however, these two arts, faculties, or pro- 
vinces (call them which we will) there is a world-wide difference. 


76 EPISTOLARY DISSERTATION. 


43. One point I must still add—if a blister is to be applied 
it should be large, and should be placed on the nape of the 
neck. As to the time, this should be so contrived as for the 
epispastic not to have lost its power before the eleventh day ; 
whilst on the other hand, it should not be applied on that very 
day. If so far delayed, it may do more harm than good-—— 
and that, on account of the heat and disturbance which, in 
conjunction with the secondary fever, it creates to the blood. 
The best time then, is the night previous to this great crisis of 
the disease, immediately after the paregoric then to be admi- 
nistered. With a blister thus laid on, the pain which it causes 
will have ceased before the day of distress and danger; and an 
exit will be given to the peccant matter at the very time neces- 
sary for subduing the bad symptoms then due. I have already! 
fully shown that at this time the face hitherto swollen begins 
to go down, and that the salivation, which has hitherto flowed 
abundantly, decreases; the humour which excited it being now 
condensed and secreted with difficulty. Furthermore laying 
out of the account the fact that, to a certain degree, the blister 
in question is a substitute for the going down of the swelling 
of the face and for the diminution of the salivation, it also con- 
duces towards the abatement of the secondary fever. This now 
rages—the blood being overwhelmed and poisoned through 
the resorption of the pus of so many little abscesses. So true 
is this, that I have remarked that a pulse, which could be f.1t 
at the wrist on the tenth and twelfth days, was imperceptible 
on the eleventh. 

44, In respect to those things which ease the head, either as 
derivatives or revulsives, nothing, in my mind, works so well 
as an onion laid on the sole of the foot. That this really draws 
is clear, from the blisters which it often raises, and from the 
intolerable pain which, in drawing the humours to the parts in 
question, it sometimes (though rarely) excites. I have, indeed, 
occasionally had to ease it with a poultice of white bread-crumbs 
and milk. In adults, then, with the confluent smallpox, I slice 
an onion, wrap it in linen, apply it to their feet on the eighth 
day (the day on which the face first swells), and renew it every 
day until all danger is over, 


! Med. Obs., Sect. III, Chap. II, $$ 14-22.—[G.] 


EPISTOLARY DISSERTATION, PR 


45. Throughout the disease the patient must abstain from 
meat; thin well-hopped small beer alone being allowed for 
drink. This with oatmeal porridge and roasted apples will 
well sustain life. When, however, the ripening of the pustules 
begins, so that the purulent particles regurgitating upon the 
blood infect it with their own venom, it will be advisable to 
indulge the patient with a few spoonfuls of wine every morning 
and evening. As to his bedclothes and blankets, they should 
be neither more nor fewer than he used during health. More- 
over, he is free to move about in the bed as he likes, since by 
so doing he checks those symptomatic sweats, which I consider 
that I have proved to be injurious to the patient. In like 
manner, he will also ensure himself against the over-violent 
inflammation of the eruption— sure to be excited whenever the 
patient lies, as if fixed by a stake, on one part of the bed only— 
so overheating his flesh. 

46. As a sample of the entire practice I will give a very 
recent case. This winter, the noble Lady Dacres sent for 
me to attend her grandson, Mr. Thomas Cheut, in the flower 
of his age, and of a very sanguine temperament. The day 
previous he had sickened. He had also vomited a vast amount 
of bilious matter. His back was in severe pain. To ease all 
this, he went to bed, and tried, during the whole day, to force 
a sweat by loading himself with bedclothes, and by drinking 
hot liquors. In vain. The vomiting (which was violent), and 
the diarrhoea (which was but moderate) mocked the sudorifics ; 
whilst fuel had been added to the flame, by the encouragement 
thus given to the fever. This had much increased. That 
smallpox was coming on, and that it would be confluent, I sus- 
pected from the time of life, and from the extent to which the 
blood had been heated in the attempt to force a sweat (had it 
been in summer there would have been purple blotches and 
bloody urine), as also (and this most especially) from the 
vomiting, distress, and pain. When these with young men 
are excessive the pox will flux. Finding that I could leave no 
stone unturned, I ordered him up from bed; keeping him 
thereto at the usual bed-hours only. The next day (the third), 
as the smallpox did not appear, I bled him, in the morning, to 
eight ounces from the right arm, The blood was of good 
quality, and florid; inasmuch as it had only just taken the 


78 | EPISTOLARY DISSERTATION. 


spirituous taint (uiacua) instead of being putrefied. This it 
is, when the disease is of long standing. And so it shows after 
convalescence. At five p.m. I ordered an ounce of the crocus 
metallorum. On this he vomited freely; and was so far relieved 
from distress that he got up from his bed; whereas before he 
hardly allowed himself to be torn from it—so much did he suffer 
from weakness and giddiness. On the fourth morning I found 
the eruption coming; and that in such numbers that I feared 
their excessive confluence would endanger life. I took great care 
to keep him from being kept close to his bed. I gave him, too, 
for drink a little small beer acidulated with spirits of vitriol. 
So I kept on till the sixth day. During the whole time he 
was well enough to breathe the fresh air, and to take strength 
from doing so. His bowels, however, were somewhat loose. 
About noon, however, he was no longer able to keep from bed ; 
such being usually the case. So he kept it till the end of the 
disease, and that with leave from me; inasmuch as, for all 
that I had done, the pustules had broken out, and were of the 
confluent kind in the greatest degree; less numerous, perhaps, 
than I have seen in cases where the patient has died, but more 
numerous than any where I have known recovery. 

I now gave him an ounce of syrup of poppies out of cowslip 
water at bedtime, and repeated it every night. I allowed him 
no more than his usual bedclothes. He might eat oatmeal 
porridge and barley broth, and, occasionally, a roasted apple. 
He might drink a little small beer. On the eighth day, I 
laid an onion, wrapped in linen, on the soles of his feet, and 
renewed it every day until he was out of danger. After this, 
everything went on in the way that was to be expected from 
the increase of the pustules up to the tenth day. I, then, 
upon visiting him in the morning, detected (although he was 
doing pretty well) some premonitory symptoms of secondary 
fever along with some uneasiness. Fearing danger I gave the 
paregoric already mentioned. All became quiet. The same 
night I ordered an ounce and a half of syrup of poppies. 
The next morning (i. e. that of the eleventh day) the effect of 
the anodyne over night was going off, so that he again was 
getting restless. I now threw in an ounce and a half of dia- 


- $ 36.—[G:] 


EPISTOLARY DISSERTATION. 19 


codium at once, and repeated the same in the evening, and 
so I did night and morning till he thoroughly recovered. 

The patient obeyed my orders, and no further symptoms 
frightened us, except that at times his urine, which he had to 
pass kneeling in bed, was suppressed—a common occurrence 
m young subjects. 

In respect to -the salvation, however much the amount 
of spittmg might be interrupted by such free and frequent 
anodynes, the patient, nevertheless, expectorated a more con- 
cocted phlegm, and his face and hands swelled as we wished 
them, and at the due time. On the eighteenth day he got up, 
when I allowed him some chicken broth, from which he 
gradually went to his accustomed diet. On the twenty-first day 
he was bled from the right arm to eight ounces. The blood was 
as the blood of pleurisy, and almost like pus. Lastly, he was 
purged four times, with intervals between. 

47. Whenever in these pages I talk of the sivth, the eleventh, 
or any other day, I do not mean to be understood to say that 
the confluent smallpox always breaks out on the third. I know 
well that it sometimes so happens that, even in the most con- 
fluent form, the eruption is somewhat later. Generally, 
however, it is on the ¢hird. Hence a person first seized on a 
Monday, will show the first signs of the eruption on Wednesday, 
. and on Thursday week the dangerous eleventh day will have 
arrived. 

48. All this applies to the confluent smallpox only. With 
the distinct sort they have nothing to do. Those who boast 
about curing cases where the rash has been scanty, deceive them- 
selves and others. If they really wish to test their skill, let 
them take a confluent case in a young subject who has drunk 
hard; and not so far blunder as to fancy that, in their easier 
practice, they have saved the lives of patients whom it would’ 
have been a hard matter to have killed. 

49. I cannot conclude without giving an account from my 
good friend Dr. Charles Goodall, m.p., Fellow and Censor of the 
College of Physicians, with which he favoured me whilst I was 
upon the present work. I do it all the more readily, because 
it confirms what I have said here and elsewhere concerning the 
petechiz and the bloody urine, viz. that each of these symptoms 
occurring in acute diseases, is due to over-violent inflammation 


80 EPISTOLARY DISSERTATION. 


of the blood, and demands cooling remedies. The case was as 
follows :— 

50. “A youth, of about 27, of a thin habit, and hot tempe- 
rament, was seized with a violent continued fever in June 
1681. The tongue was dry and rough, the thirst great, the 
pulse quick. There was great pain in the pit of the stomach, 
and greater in the back. Here it was pre-eminently permanent. 
His urine was occasionally bloody. Petechize of dark colour 
thickly beset the neck, chest, and wrists. The physician (who 
first saw him on the sixth day), judging from the bloody urine 
that life was in danger, took, as the first indications of treat- 
ment, the cooling and the thickening of the blood, and then 
the closing of those vessels of the kidneys which were relaxed 
and open. 

51. “ Beginning with a bleeding, and a laxative bolus, I 
ordered him to keep from bed; little doubting but that the 
heat thereof favoured the bloodiness of the urine. I also bid 
him sleep on a cushion covered with leather. He was not to 
lie on his back, except very rarely. He was allowed milk-and- 
water, panado, rice-milk, roasted apples (either by themselves 
or mashed up with spring-water and sugar). "The medicines 
were— 

X Flowers of red roses, 5vj; 
Inner bark of the oak, 5ss ; 
Plantain-seeds (roughly bruised), 3iij ; 
Spring-water, Oiij ; 
Spirits of vitriol, q. s. 
Add these last so as to make the draught agreeably acid. Heat 
slowly in a closed vessel for four or six hours. Strain, and add— 
Cinnamon-water with barley, Ziij; 
Finest white sugar, q. s. 
Flavour to taste. Drink frequently, night and morning. 


“A clyster of milk with syrup of violets was thrown up at 
two p.m. At bedtime the following draught :— 


Kk Cowslip-water, 
Plantain-water, 
Cinnamon-water with barley, aa Zss; 
Distilled vinegar, 3ij ; 
Syrup of poppies, 3yj. Mix. 


“On the seventh day, as the symptoms had scarcely abated, 


EPISTOLARY DISSERTATION. 81 


I ordered the clyster to be thrown up every day. The follow- 
ing emulsion and draught were also prescribed :— 


RK  Chicory-seeds, 


Endive-seeds, 
Lettuce-seeds, 
Purslane-seeds, 2a 5i) ; 
Quince-seeds, 

White poppy-seeds, aa 3iss ; 
Sweet almonds (peeled), iv. 


Bruise in a marble mortar, dropping in by degrees of— 


Barley-water, Oj. 
Add of crystalline sugar, q. s. Make into an emulsion ; 


of which twelve spoonfuls are to be taken every four hours. 


KR Cowslip-flower water, 


Water-lily water, 

Oak-bud water, 

Plantain-water, aa $ss; 

Distilled vinegar, 

Cinnamon-water with barley, àà 3iij ; 
Confection of hyacinth, 3ss ; 

Syrup of poppies, 3j. 


Mix, and make into a draught, to be taken at bedtime. 


53. “On the eighth day, the urine continued bloody, and 
the petechize were numerous; so that, judging that all this came 
from the heat, thinness, and acrimony of the blood, I bled a 
second time; and allowed a free use of small beer flavoured 
with spirits of vitriol. This being distasteful, a posset of 
lemon-juice and milk was allowed, as well as the pulp of lemon 
divided into squares, and covered with sugar. The following 


was added :— 


II. 


K Conserve of Lujula, 


Conserve of dogrose, aa Zss; 
Confection of hyacinth, 3iij ; 
Diascordium, 3iss ; 

Red coral (prepared), 
Dragon’s blood, 

Bole Armeniac, aa 9j; 
Syrup of comfrey, 

Syrup of Mouse-ear, aa q. s. 


Make into an opiate. Of this take a portion about the size of a 
hazel-nut every six hours. Wash down with whey and lemon- 
juice, sweetened, or with the Vulnerary Decoction acidulated 
with spirits of vitriol. 


6 


82 EPISTOLARY DISSERTATION. 


“ Repeat the draught of the night before, with the addition 
of ten drachms of syrup of poppies. 

94. “On the ninth day, the petechiz were gradually de- 
creasing, and the urine was less bloody ; the blood which was 
mixed up with it being more separable, and sinking to the 
bottom of the chamber-pot. The patient, therefore, was en- 
couraged to persist in the use of the remedies, and, a few days 
after, the following formule, with the same intention, were 


prescribed : 
KR Conserve of red roses (passed through a hair-sieve), Ziv; 
Balsam of Lucatelli, 2ij ; 
Bole Armeniac, 
Dragon’s blood, 
Species electuarii Diacorallii, aa 5j; 
Syrup of coral, q. s. 
Make into an electuary ; of which take, twice a day, a portion about 
the size of a nutmeg. Wash down with a draught of the follow- 
ing emulsion :— 


kK Lettuce-seeds, 
Purslane-seeds, aa 3iij ; 
Quince-seeds, 3iss ; 
White poppy-seeds, Zss ; 
Sweet almonds (peeled), v. 

Bruise in a marble mortar. Pour upon the mass— 
Plantain-water, Oi] ; : 
Barley-water with cinnamon, iij. 

Strain. Add sugar, q. s. 


* By means of these remedies, and with the blessing of God, 
the petechiz had departed, and the urine had recovered its 
natural colour within three weeks, whilst the patient gradually 
recovered his former health and strength.” 

55. Now, however much the symptoms aforesaid may be the 
symptoms of continued fever rather than of smallpox, still as 
they accompany either disease, as they originate in vehement 
inflammation and exceeding attenuation of the blood, the blood 
being thus driven violently through the mouths of the ves- 
sels, I have no doubt as to the method that suits the one suiting 
the other also. For this reason I asked my excellent friend 
for leave to insert his case. Now, had he, instead of this, been 
my worst enemy (although, judging from my own feelings to- 
wards others, I hope that I have none such), I should never- 
theless, under the influence of truth, have willingly admitted 


EPISTOLARY DISSERTATION. 83 


that a better cure was never accomplished; so long have I 
been convinced of the greatness of the danger, when patients 
under fever void blood. 

How great, then, is my pleasure in thus gratifymg my 
friendship, and serving truth also. Dr. Goodall was the friend 
who, when many men ventured to assert that I had done but 
little in the investigation and cultivation of medicine, threw 
himself in the way of my maligners, and defended me with the 
zeal and affection of a son towards a father. Greatly, however, as 
I was overpowered by the obligation, I would never have given 
him undeserved praise; since praise and blame unworthily given 
are equally violations of truth. No one, then, will blame me if 
Isay, that he is second to no one known to me ; inasmuch as for 
the many years that I have known him, he has injured no man 
by deed, or even word. What he is in his profession, if God 
grant him life, the world will soon learn. To an erudition, 
founded on the study of all works, ancient and modern, on 
medicine, he adds an exquisite skill in discovering the most 
subtle minutiz of practice, without which no man can justly 
be called a physician. This renders him all that the wishes of 
his patients could make him. | 

56. 'This is what I think of this disease, the practical phe- 
nomena of which have been my instructors rather than the 
temerity of a suggestive and imaginative fancy. Neither can 
I understand how that physician can be deceived, who limits 
and determines all his thoughts to the mere and simple prac- 
tice of his art or faculty ; which he has proposed to himself asa 
thing to be learned thoroughly, aud to be practised creditably. 
On the other hand, he who wastes his time in inventing mat- 
ters which have nothing to do with practice, must needs lose 
his labour in deceiving himself and others. ‘To speculate upon 
the ebbing and flowing of the tide is worthy of a philosopher ; 
yet for a pilot, whose only business it is to see that the ship be 
not sunk, to do so, instead of looking out for and avoiding 
rocks and quicksands, would make him unfit for his business. 
So it is with the medical man. His province is to cure dis- 
ease, and to do naught else. Wise and learned, then, as he 
may be, he will do no real good in medicine, who, instead of 
investigating the occult and tortuous methods whereby Nature 
evolves disease, instead of studying their history, and instead of 


84 EPISTOLARY DISSERTATION. 


putting forth his whole strength to the adaptation of remedies, 
wearies his brain with curious and irrelevant speculations : 
speculations which, for the proper undertaking of medicine, the 
saving of men from death are not one iota of value. This de- 
prives mankind of the advantages that might fairly be expected 
from the genius and learning of many of our fellow-creatures. 
It does more. It makes medicine the art of gossiping rather 
than the art of healing. Hence it comes to this. The 
patient lives or dies, just as the philosopher guesses rightly or 
wrongly. This is always a matter of chance; since the first 
inventors of speculations (just like their slaves and followers) 
fight deadly battles between each other, in behalf of their 
brainworms—and all without reaching the truth; since, how- 
ever much, by seriously inclining our minds, we may discover 
what Nature does, and by what organs she does it, the way in 
which she does it will always be unknown to man. No 
wonder. It is infinitely more credible that we, miserable 
beings, wanderers from the bright path of knowledge, should be 
incapable of comprehending the method of the Supreme 
Artificer in his wondrous and wise machinery, than that a 
coarse smith should be but a rude admirer of the exquisitely 
elegant workmanship of a watch. The brain is the source of 
sense and motion. It is the storehouse of thought and memory 
as well. Yet no diligent contemplation of its structure will 
tell us how so coarse a substance (a mere pulp, and that not 
over-nicely wrought), should subserve so noble an end. No 
one, either, can determine, from the nature and structure of 
its parts, whether this or that faculty would be exerted. 

57. Thus much on the confluent smallpox. Add to this 
what I have already written,* and you have the sum of my 
observations, carefully weighed and considered. 

58. I now gird up my loins to comply with your second 
request, and to explain what I have as yet discovered by ob- 
servation concerning the hysterical diseases. I admit at once, 
that of all diseases, these present the obscurest diagnosis, and 
the most uncertain treatment. Still I will meet your wish, 
and within the brief limits of a letter state my opinion. Indeed 
I am forced to be short, since, so shaken is my health, especially 


! Med. Obs., Chap. III, § 2; IV, $ 6; V, $ 4.—[G.] 


EPISTOLARY DISSERTATION. 85 


at this time of year, that if I were to indulge in any very deep 
train of thought, I should bring on an attack of gout. I will, 
therefore, despatch my subject briefly; keeping to my usual 
method. 

First, will come a short history of the disease according to 
the phenomena of Nature. 

Secondly, my method of practice; as taught by no untrust- 
worthy instructress— Experience. 

59. Of all chronic diseases hysteria— unless I err—is the 
commonest ; since just as fevers—taken with their accompani- 
ments—equal two thirds of the number of all chronic diseases 
taken together, so do hysterical complaints (or complaints so 
called) make one half of the remaining third. As to females, if 
we except those who lead a hard and hardy life, there is rarely 
one who is wholly free from them—and females, be it remem- 
bered, form one half of the adults of the world. Then, again, 
such male subjects as lead a sedentary or studious life, and grow 
pale over their books and papers, are similarly afflicted ; since, 
however, much, antiquity may have laid the blame of hysteria 
upon the uterus, hypochondriasis (which we impute to some 
obstruction of the spleen or viscera) is as like it, as one egg is 
to another. True, indeed, it is that women are more subject 
than males. This, however, is not on account of the uterus, 
but for reasons which will be seen in the sequel.’ 

60. The frequency of hysteria is no less remarkable than the 
multiformity of the shapes which it puts on. Few of the mal- 
adies of miserable mortality are not imitated by it. Whatever 
part of the body it attacks, it will create the proper symptom 
of that part. Hence, without skill and sagacity the physician 
will be deceived ; so as to refer the symptoms to some essential 
disease of the part in question, and not to the effects of 
hysteria. 

61. For instance—attacking the head, it causes an apo- 
plexy, ending in palsy, just like the apoplexy of the old and 
plethoric. This latter, however, arises from the mvestments of 
the brain being overloaded with an excess of phlegm, whereby 
the tracts and pathways of the animal spirits are stopped up. 
The former has no such origin; since it often occurs imme- 


1 § Fee 


86 EPISTOLARY DISSERTATION. 


diately after delivery, and with a great loss of blood, being due 
to either a difficult labour or to some violent mental emotion. 

62. At times it creates terrible spasms, like epilepsy ; when 
the belly, and the parts about the throat swell, and when the 
struggles are so violent, that a naturally weak individual, has 
to be held down by the united efforts of the bystanders. Mean- 
while, she shrieks irregularly and inarticulately, and strikes her 
breast. Such females as are most subject to this (so-called) 
strangulation of the womb are, generally, of a sanguine tem- 
perament and masculine habit. 

63. Oftentimes, it attacks the exterior of the head, creating 
intolerable pain between the cranium and pericranium ; so iso- 
lated, however, as for the thumb, laid across, to cover it. 
Here it keeps fixed. Violent vomitings accompany it. This 
is the Clavus Hystericus—pre-eminently common with the 
chlorotic. 

64. Falling upon the vital parts it creates such a palpitation 
that the patient makes sure that the sound of the heart beating 
against the ribs can be heard by the bystanders. This is com- 
monest with the weakly and pale, and those who look con- 
sumptive. So, also, it is with those who have the green-sickness. 

65. When it falls on the lungs the patient coughs continu- 
ally, but without spitting; and, although this cough may not 
shake the chest so much as the true convulsive sort, the fits 
are much more frequent, and the patient is less able to master 
them. Women, with an excess of phlegm are most liable to 
this cough ; which, otherwise, is very rare. 

66. Descending to the colon, and the parts below the pit of 
the stomach, it inflicts a pain well-nigh as unbearable as that of 
the Iliac Passion, When vomiting follows, the matter brought 
up is green, bilious, and like (as they say) leeks; sometimes of a 
still more unhealthy colour. After this, it may happen that, 
after suffering pains that would vex a Stoic, and after being worn 
out by continual vomiting, the skin becomes of the saffron hue 
of jaundice, and the fit goes off. Meanwhile, all hope of 
recovery dies away; the despair thus arising being as truea 
symptom of hysteria as either the pains or the vomitings, Crude 
and lax constitutions suffer most in this way. So do such 
mothers as have, with great pain, and labour, and loss of 
stamina, given birth to over-sized infants. 


EPISTOLARY DISSERTATION. 87 


67. Falling upon one or other of the kidneys hysteria may 
cause the acute and intense pains of nephritis; pains not only 
simple and confined to the region of the kidneys, but accom- 
panied with vomitings, and pain along the ureters. Then the 
diagnosis is difficult. It may be hysteria or it may be a cal- 
culus; and unless there have been some antecedent mental 
emotion, or else the aforesaid porraceous vomiting, the former 
may be mistaken for the latter. The bladder, too, may help 
in the deception; since pain may be present, and the urine 
may be suppressed. All this is just as if there were a calculus. 
No calculus, however, may exist. Of the two forms, the one 
imitating inflammation of the kidneys, and the other like a 
stone in the bladder, the latter is the rarer. Each, however, is 
commonest in such females as have suffered repeated shocks, 
and been weakened proportionately. 

68. Hysteria on the stomach will create continued vomiting ; 
on the bowels, diarrhoea ; in each case pain being absent, how- 
ever much there may be of the aforesaid* green juice. These 
symptoms, also, are the symptoms of patients who often have 
been attacked. 

69. Just as this disease attacks almost all the mternal parts, 
so also does it sometimes take possession of the external ones ; 
namely, the muscular flesh of the jaws, shoulders, hands, legs, 
and ankles ; sometimes causing pain, sometimes swelling. Of 
such swellings, that of the ankles is the most remarkable, 
differing in two ways from that of dropsy. Dropsical swellings 
are, in the first place, greatest towards the evening; in the 
second, they retain the mark of the finger just like wet paste. 
In hysteria, there is no such impression; and the puffiness is 
greatest in the morning. Generally, also, it is only one ankle 
that swells. In respect, however, to size and shape, hysterical 
and dropsical swellings are so much alike, that the patients 
can rarely be undeceived as to their nature. 

70. Strange to say, the teeth themselves are not free from 
attack. Without the smallest cavity, without any perceptible 
discharge, there shall be all the severe and intractable pains of 
toothache, Still, both the pains and swellings of the external 
parts are chiefly the lot of those who have been so worn out by 
continual and violent attacks, as to find life a burden rather than 
a blessing. 


88 EPISTOLARY DISSERTATION. 


71. Of all pains, however, the most certain is the pain in 
the back. The least touch of the complaint brings it on. 
Furthermore—the aforesaid pains all agree in this. The part 
which they had attacked is, even after their departure, so 
tender, as to feel as if it had been well beaten with sticks, and 
not to bear touching. However, this tenderness gradually 
goes off. 

72. It is very remarkable that, in many cases, a notable 
sensation of cold over the external parts precedes these 
symptoms ; a sensation which not unfrequently lasts throughout 
the fit. More than once I have found this coldness to be like 
that of a corpse ; the pulse meanwhile being natural. 

Again—almost all the hysterical women that I have ever 
seen complain of a dejection (a sinking as they call it) of the 
spirits; and, when they wish to show where this contraction (or 
sinking) exists, they point to the chest. 

Lastly, that hysterical women break out into immoderate 
fits, sometimes of laughing, sometimes of crying, and that with- 
out any manifest cause, is known all the world over. 

73. However, of all phenomena, the most peculiar and 
inseparable is this—that the patients, at various times, void a 
great quantity of limpid urine, clear as the water from the rock. 
By detailed inquiries I have ascertamed that, for hypochon- 
driasis of males, as well as for the hysteria of females, this sign 
is pathognomonic. In males, even a few seconds after passing 
water of the true straw-coloured hue, a sudden and violent 
mental emotion may produce the discharge of an abundant flow 
of urine—not straw-coloured, but of crystalline clearness. As 
long as the urine is of this colourless character, the fit is on the 
patient, and he suffers accordingly. 

74. Hysterical patients and hypochondriacs agree also in 
having rancid or nidorous eructations after meals, no matter 
how moderately they have eaten. Sometimes they are sour, 
like vinegar. This is because the digestion is impaired, and the 
juices are perverted from their natural state. 

75. Nor are the unhappy sufferers from this disease affected 
and shaken in body only— shaken so, as like a ruined building, 
to appear upon the eve of falhng—but their mind sickens more 
than the body. An incurable despair is so thoroughly the 
nature of this disease, that the very slightest word of hope 


EPISTOLARY DISSERTATION, 89 


creates anger. The patients believe that they have to suffer 
all the evils that can befall humanity, all the troubles that the 
world can supply. They have melancholy forebodings. They 
brood over trifles, cherishing them in their anxious and unquiet 
bosoms. Fear, anger, jealousy, suspicion, and the worst 
passions of the mind arise without cause. Joy, hope, and 
cheerfulness, if they find place at all in their spirits, find it at 
intervals *few and far between," and then take leave quickly. 
In these, as in the painful feelings, there is no moderation. 
All is caprice. They love without measure those whom they 
will soon hate without reason. Now they will do this, now 
that; ever receding from their purpose. That which the 
Roman orator remarks upon the superstitious, squares with the 
behaviour of the melancholic: * Sleep is naturally the refuge 
from all labour and anxiety; from the sleep of the superstitious, 
however, cares and fears originate." So also here. All that 
they see in their dreams are funerals and the shadows of 
departed friends. ‘Thus they are racked both in mind and body, 
even as if life were a purgatory wherein they expiated and paid 
the penalty of crimes committed in a previous state. In all this, 
it is neither the maniac nor the madman that we write about. 
Saving and excepting the hallucinations aforesaid, those who 
thus suffer are persons of prudent judgment, persons who in the 
profundity of their meditations and the wisdom of their speech, 
far surpass those whose minds have never been excited by such 
stimuli. Hence, it is not without reason that Aristotle has 
observed, that melancholy men are the men of the greatest 
genius. 

76. Nevertheless, a state of mind thus horrible is the miser- 
able lot of those only, who after a long and severe struggle 
with the complaint, have fairly given in; especially if change 
of fortune, mental disturbance, anxiety, over-study, or excessive 
exertion, conspiring with the impaired diathesis of the body, 
have added fuel to the flame. 

77. 'To simply enumerate all the symptoms of hysteria would 
be the work of a long day; so numerous are they. Yet not 
less numerous than varied, proteiform and chameleon-like. 
Hence I agree in the calculation (though not in the view of 


! Cicero, de Divinat., ii, 72.—[G.] 


90 EPISTOLARY DISSERTATION. 


the nature of the disease) of Democritus ; who writes, in his 
letter to Hippocrates, that the “womb is the cause of in- 
numerable sorrows and troubles.” Not only are they thus 
numerous ; but they are also multiform in type, and (unlike the 
habit of other diseases) are a farrago of disorderly and irregular 
phenomena. Hence it is exceedingly difficult to describe a 
history of the disease. 

78. The remote or external causes of hysteria are over- 
ordinate actions of the body; and still oftener over-ordinate 
commotions of the mind, arising from sudden bursts of anger, 
pain, fear of other similar emotions. Hence, as often as 
females consult me concerning such, or such bodily ailments 
as are difficult to be determined by the usual rules for diagnosis, 
I never fail to carefully inquire whether they are not worse 
sufferers when trouble, low-spirits, or any mental perturbation 
takes hold of them. If so, I put down the symptoms for 
hysterical; a diagnosis which becomes all the more certain 
whenever a large quantity of limpid crystalline urimme has been 
voided. To such, and such like mental emotions bodily de- 
rangements may be added, e. g., long fasting and over-free 
evacuations (whether from bleeding, purging, or emetics) which 
have been too much for the system to bear up against. 

79. Leaving the description of the disease, as determined 
by its leading phenomena, the matters that come next under 
consideration are the efficient, internal, and immediate causes. 
These I will, as far as is possible, work out from the conjoint 
circumstances already described. 

The affection which I have characterised in females as 
hysteria, and in males as hypochondriasis, arises (in my mind) 
from a disorder (ataxy) of the animal spirits. This precipitates 
them on the different parts of the system; so that bearing 
down violently and multitudinously upon particular organs 
they excite spasm and pain wherever the sensations are exqui- 
sitely acute; deranging and perverting the functions both of 
the parts they leave, and of the parts they fall on. No wonder. 
The irregularity of the distribution is opposed to nature ; and 
the economy takes therefrom no small damage. 

80. Of this derangement, or ataxia, the origin and antece- 
.dent cause is the weakened crasis of the spirits, whether 
natural or adventitious. Hence, the slightest occasion dissi- 


EPISTOLARY DISSERTATION. . 91 


pates them, and the system is pulled down without difficulty. 
Just as the outer man is built up as a framework of parts 
visible to the outward sense; so, also, is it the inner man simi- 
larly constituted—of parts, however, consisting in the due and 
proper arrangements of the spirits, an arrangement cognisable 
only to the eye of reason; an arrangement, too, which is so 
united and intimately combined with the temper of the body, 
that it stands or falls according to the firmness of the consti- 
tuent principles. For this reason we see more females than 
males, hysterical; the female being endowed by Nature with a 
more fine and delicate habit of body, as being destined to a 
life of more refinement and care. Man, on the contrary, is 
born to labour at the tillage and pasture of the earth, and at 
the capture of beasts for food. This makes him of a stronger 
and more muscular body. 

81. That this ataxia is the true cause may be proved by the 
phenomena already described; of these I will treat upon the 
chief; beginning with the well-known hysterical affection 
called the strangulation of the womb. Here the spirits con- 
gregated into a mass in the lower belly, rush in a troop, and 
with all their impetus upon the fauces, exciting spasm along the 
whole tract that they traverse, and blowing up the belly to the 
size of a vast globe. This, however, is nothing more than the 
convolution and conglobation of the part affected with spasm, 
which can only be restrained and repressed by the exertion of 
considerable force. Meanwhile, the external parts, and the 
mass of the flesh are so deprived of their due share of spirits 
(these being diverted elsewhere), as to become as cold as death, 
—a phenomenon which occurs in all other forms of hysteria 
as well as this. This, however, has been already stated.! The 
pulse remains natural; and, unless the chill has been preceded 
by any enormous evacuation, there is no danger to life. 

82. The same may be said concerning that violent kind of 
hysteria which looks like bilious colic, or even like the iliac 
passion. Here, the pain around the pit of the stomach is 
intolerable, and the vomiting of matters as green as grass is 
immense. These symptoms, in my mind, arise from nothing 
else but the vehement impulse of the densely-conglomerated 


1 §92-—[G.] 


92 EPISTOLARY DISSERTATION. 


spirits upon the parts in question ; giving rise to pain, to spes, 
and to the total abolition of the faculties. 

83. Now the fact that the matters thus brought away, 
whether by retching or purging, are of the green colour in 
question, is no direct proof that the disease belongs to the 
humours, or that any excessive acrimony thereof, by tearing 
the parts to which it is confined, creates the excess of pain. 
Still less are we to hold that this is the source of the disease, 
and to give cathartics and vomits to get rid of it. Sea-sickness, 
which arises from the effect of a turbulent and unquiet sea in 
agitating the animal spirits, brings up from the stomachs of 
men in health just such coloured egesta; even where half an 
hour before they were at sea there was no such (so-called) leeky 
bile about them. Do not also infants (subjects in whom the 
animal spirits play an important part) void like-coloured matters 
both from the stomach and the bowels? Does not also daily ex- 
perience show that, whether with women or children, we either 
purge or vomit, the colour remains unaltered ; and that both in 
the vomited matters and the motions? Again, the more we give 
such medicines the more the green matter increases; and this 
because the ataxy of the spirit 1s, in both cases, promoted. 
Whether, however, it acts by destroying and perverting the 
fermentation of the parts in question, or whether, through the 
force of the spasms, it forces into the stomach and intestines some 
juice foreign to their nature, and capable of thus staining the 
humours, is uncertain. The chemists, although in the curing 
of disease, the medicines which they make up in their elaborate 
apparatuses, are neither better nor worse than the medicines 
which are boiled in pots, or bruised in mortars, are, still, 
capable of so juggling a feat as, out of two perfectly clear and 
limpid fluids, to bring a single dark-coloured one ; indeed, so 
slippery and evanescent is the speculation of colours, that 
nothing certain concerning the nature of the bodies in which 
they appear can be discovered from their presence. Hence, 
it is no more necessary for all green things to be acrid, than 
for all acrid things to be green. Putting which facts together, 
I look upon the excessive pains, and the rejection of the green 
matter as referable to a single cause, and that, the over-violent 
incursion of the animal spirits upon the parts about the pit of 
the stomach. ‘These they contract to spasm. 


EPISTOLARY DISSERTATION. 93 


84. To the same cause I also refer what I have already 
noticed as the c/avus hystericus. Here the spirits from the 
body at large are concentrated upon a certain point of the 
pericranium, so limited, so boring, and so severe, as to feel as 
if an iron nail were being driven in. This also is attended by 
a notable vomiting of green matter. Now the concentration 
of the spirits from the different parts of the body is not unlike 
the collection of the sun’s rays under a burning glass ; and just 
as these latter, from their united force, have power to scorch, 
so do the former, from the same reason, create pain, by joining 
in the laceration and discerption of the membranes. 

85. From the same ataxia, also, and from the extent to which 
it disturbs the blood, arises that symptom which we have already 
spoken of as being common to hysteria and hypochondriasis, 
viz. the clear and, at the same time, copious urine ; inasmuch 
as the serum of the sick person, which requires a certain time 
to become impregnated with those salts which gave it its natural 
lemon-coloured hue, is, from the interruption of the animal 
economy, voided before it has been sufficiently retained ; a fact 
proved by what we see every day with persons who take in over- 
much drink of any—especially of the weak and thin-—sort. 
The urine that they pass is of the clearest kind. In all such 
cases the blood has more serum than it can retain; so that, 
being unable to keep it in, it lets it out before its due time, 
and before it has become coloured by the juices of the body. 

86. Three years ago a nobleman consulted me. He seemed 
to suffer from hypochondriac colic, so violently as to look like a 
patient under ileus. The pain was intense; the vomiting ex- 
cessive. The disease had harassed him so long and so severely, 
that he well-nigh was sinking under it. Now I observed, 
throughout the disease, that just 1n proportion as he was worse 
his urine was clear, and just as he was better yellow. One day - 
I found him with the urine of three successive voidings, in three 
different chamber-pots, and all were yellow or lemon-coloured. 
He was 1n such good spirits, and his appetite was so good, that 
I allowed him, at his own request, some digestible food. At 
this point, however, some one coming in interrupted him. 
This so put him out that he called at once for a chamber-pot, 
which he almost filled with urine as clear as crystal. 

87. Perhaps the salivation of hysteria has the same cause. 


94 EPISTOLARY DISSERTATION. 


For weeks together patients spit a thin fluid, just as if they 
were under mercury. This may come from the disturbed state 
of the blood, when Nature, unable to carry on the proper method 
of excretion, reverses the movement of the serum, and instead 
of unloading it by the usual way of the kidneys, deposits it, 
through the extremities of the arteries, upon the glands; from 
whence, in the form of saliva, it escapes through the salivary 
ducts. 

The same applies to the profuse night-sweats of hysterical 
patients. The ataxy of the blood determines the serum to the 
surface. 

88. The cause of the cold chillsis clear as day. The animal 
spirits leave their proper station for some other. So also the 
cries and bursts of laughter. There is no ostensible reason for 
either ; only that the animal spirits fall with great violence upon 
the parts that are subservient to these functions. 

89. I may remark, by the way, that males—though rarely— 
are liable to this kind of crying. A gentleman, to whom I was 
called, equally favoured by nature and fortune, and who, under 
the direction of a previous attendant, had, but a few days be- 
fore, recovered from fever, after having been bled, been purged, 
and been forbidden animal food, was found by me out of bed, 
with his clothes on, and talking reasonably. Upon asking why 
I was sent for, I was told by one of his friends that I should 
soon see. So I sat down, and began to converse with him. In 
a short time, I observed that he pouted his lower lip, moved his 
head backwards and forwards—just like a froward child—and 
finally burst out in such a flood of tears, accompanied with sobs 
and groans almost convulsive, as I had never seen before. The 
torrent, however, soon subsided. 

Ilaid his complaint partly to the disorder of his spirits, 
partly to the length of the previous fever, partly to the evacua- 
tions that had been necessary to its treatment, and partly to the 
interdiction of animal food, by which his physician was guarding 
against a relapse. Hence, I pronounced him free of all fever ; 
and, laying his symptoms to the inanition only, recommended 
a roasted fowl for dinner, and allowed him a moderate share of 
wine. This he took; and went on afterwards with animal food 
in moderation. He never again so suffered. 

90. To finish (for I leave out at present all the other pheno- 


EPISTOLARY DISSERTATION. 95 


mena of this disease), it is from this irregularity of the spirits 
that the disturbance and inconsistency both of the mind and 
body, which are so prevalent with both the hysterical and the 
hypochondriacal, take birth. Both want that firmness of the 
animal spirits which, in the strong and in those whose faculties 
are actuated by a regular supply of fresh spirits, 1s never missing. 
Hence they cannot bear disagreeable impressions. Hence they 
are suddenly over-excited by either anger or pain ; so that they 
are just as irritable as those whose governing principle has either 
been made too unsteady and too weak by Nature originally, or 
else has been rendered so by a long series of troubles. Verily, 
the strength and constancy of the mind, so long as it les in 
this our bodily crust of clay, depends most especially upon the 
strength and constancy of the spirits that lodge along with it ; 
spirits which are at the top of the scale of matter, and on the 
very verge of the immaterial entity. Just, too, as the frame- 
work (so to say) of the mind is a structure far more skilful 
and delicate than that of the body, a structure consisting in the 
harmony of eminently excellent and almost divine faculties, so, 
whenever the constitution of the same shall, by any means, 
have become interrupted and broken down, the ruin will be great 
in proportion to the excellence and beauty of the workmanship 
during the period of its integrity. Now this is the state of 
those dejected miserables whom we have described; a state 
which the dogma of the most insolent Stoic will relieve just 
as much as a toothache is relieved by a resolution forbidding 
one’s jaws to give pain. , 

91. It is clear then, to me, that it is not any corruption 
of either the semen or the menstrual blood, to which, accord- 
ing to the statements of many writers, this disease is to be 
referred. It is rather the faulty disposition of the animal 
spirits. There is no malignant halitus towards the parts 
affected, no perverse depravation of the juices, no congestion 
of acrid humours. There is the cause I have assigned, and 
no other. <A single instance shows that the disease is not 
referable to any material source. A female (no matter how 
good her health), provided only she be of a delicate and tender 
habit of body, shall, from some error of diet, from an emetic, 
or from a strong purge, be so weakened as to suffer from one 
or more of the symptoms of the disease in question. Now if 


96 EPISTOLARY DISSERTATION. 


the cause of the disease were in the humours the evacuation 
(purge or vomit as the case might be) would have done good. 
The same applies to any immoderate loss of blood; whether 
from bleeding or in childbed. The same to inanition, or to pro- 
tracted abstinence from animal food; all which causes would 
guard against, rather than encourage hysteria; if its source 
were material. On the contrary, nothing brings it on more. 

92. However much it may be clear that the origin of hysteria 
is by no means lodged in the humours, it must, nevertheless, 
be admitted that that ataxia of the spirits, to which the disease 
is due, begets an accumulation of putrid humours, whereby the 
function of the parts whereon they are so violently borne, and 
the parts from which they are removed is wholly perverted. 
Such parts are chiefly organs of separation, designed for the 
recrementitious parts of the blood. Hence, if their functions 
be impaired, it follows, perforce, that a vast colluvies of im- 
purity must accumulate. Had the organs done their duty, this 
would have been eliminated, and the blood purified accordingly. 
To this cause, then, I attribute the cachexy, the anorexy, and 
the chlorosis (a truly hysterical complaint) of hysteria—a sea 
of troubles wherein such unfortunates as have long been 
afflicted have to struggle. In all such cases putrescent juices 
first accumulate in the blood, and then fall upon particular 
organs.  Dropsy of the testicles in females is of this sort. The 
hysteric affection has been of long standing. The depraved 
juices are thrown upon the organs. ‘The functions of these are 
impaired. The female becomes barren. The whole economy 
breaks down. Sanies and serum are produced. These gorge 
the nodules and the ova of the testicles. They work their way 
also between the interstices of their coverings. Vast swellings 
follow. All this is shown in the dissections of such as die of 
the disease. Meanwhile it is the hysterical diathesis which is 
the primary cause of all such and such like humours ; however 
much they may, in other respects, belong to a different family 
of maladies. 

93. A quartan ague is in the same predicament. A man 
with the health and strength of a wrestler, shall expose himself 
for no more than two or three days to a marshy atmosphere. 
At first it shall be a spirituous miasma which is impressed upon 
the blood. If, however, it continue the whole economy shall 


EPISTOLARY DISSERTATION. 97 


suffer, the juices of the body shall become tainted, the dispo- 
sition of the system shall change. The patient shall then—all 
the more if he be approaching the limits of old age— grow 
lable to cachexies of all sorts, and to all such other evils as 
supervene upon intermittents of long standing. Nevertheless, 
it is not the evacuations which best expel morbid humours that 
cure such an ague as this. It is the proper specific for the 
disease. 

94. All which shows that the chief curative indication is the 
restoration of blood—the fount and source of the spirits. 
These must keep that even tenor which best fits the economy 
of the different parts. Still, when this has been so long 
deranged that the ataxia of the spirits has had time to vitiate 
the humours, we may—providing the strength of the patient 
permit—diminish their amount by bleeding and purging before 
we gird up our loins for the great work of invigorating the 
blood; an end which we shall hardly gain as long as the fecu- 
lent colluvies of humours is in the way. At times, too, the 
intense pains, the diarrhoea, or the vomiting may be so great 
as to allow us no opportunity for beginning with our primary 
intention—the fortification of the blood. In such cases our first 
step must be, to administer an anodyne. This being done, the 
weak crasis of the spirits—the cause of the disease—may be 
dealt with, and the symptoms that they originate be treated. 
And here experience tells me that many drugs, by means of 
their fetid exhalations, are effectual in repelling the spirits 
which cause trouble, and in keeping them to their proper 
places. For this reason they are called hysterical remedies. 
As often then, as we meet the aforesaid symptoms, these are 
what we must have recourse to. 

95. With this view I bleed. Ithen purge for three or four 
mornings running. Meanwhile, the patient is so far from 
improving that she gets worse. Such is the disorder excited 
by the evacuations. Hence I warn her against being dispirited ; 
to which the nature of the disease leads her. Be this, however, 
as it may, the vicious humours which we suppose to have become 
accumulated during the disease must, in some degree, be drawn 
off, before we can well satisfy our primary intention. 

96. After these evacuations, I comfort the blood and the 
spirits belonging to it by giving a chalybeate thirty days 

II, f: 


98 EPISTOLARY DISSERTATION. 


running. This is sure to do good. To the worn-out and 
languid blood it gives a spur or fillip, whereby the animal 
spirits, which before lay prostrate and sunken under their own 
weight, are raised and excited. Clear proof of this is found in 
the effects of steel upon chlorosis. The pulse gains strength 
and frequency, the surface warmth, the face (no longer pale 
and deathlike) a fresh ruddy colour. Here, however, I must 
remark that with weak and worn-out patients the bleeding 
and purging may be omitted, and the steel be begun with at 
once. 

97. This is best given in substance; in which form I have 
neither seen nor heard of it doing mischief. Nay, the simple 
substance effects a cure both more surely and more quickly than 
any of the current preparations. With steel, as with other 
more famous medicines, the officious sedulity of the chemists 
has not only failed in adding to its activity, but has succeeded 
in diminishing it. I have heard a statement, which, if true, 
strongly sustains this assertion—namely, that the crude ore itself, 
as dug out of the bowels of the earth, operates more effectually 
in our victories over disease than steel which has been exposed 
to the fire and suffered fusion. For this, however, my in- 
formant is answerable. All that I know myself is that every 
choice and noble remedy, wherever found, receives its principal 
virtues from Nature. Hence, the gratitude of antiquity has 
well named the nobler medicines the hands of God, rather than 
of men. That native goodness is of more importance than 
artificial forms is shown by a noble pair of witnesses—opium 
and bark. Indeed, medical skill is less shown in the prepara- 
tion of remedies than in the appropriate selection of those which 
Nature elaborates single-handed, and supplies liberally. Our 
business is simply to reduce medicines to that form which is best 
for imparting to our bodies, if not their substance, at least, 
their force and efficacy. To this end our faculties are more 
than sufficient. 

Next to steel in substance, I prefer a syrup. This is made 
by steeping iron or steelfilings in cold Rhenish wine. When 
the wine is sufficiently impregnated, strain the liquor; add 
sugar; and boil to the consistency of a syrup. 

98. It is not my practice to exhibit at stated intervals, 
during the time that my patient is taking steel, any purgative. 


EPISTOLARY DISSERTATION. 99 


This, both in hysteria and hypochondriasis, weakens and inter. 
rupts the effect of the chalybeate. My chief object is to 
reduce the spirits to order, and to restore and strengthen their 
system. Now a single purge will undo in a day the work of a 
week ; so that to pull down what I have built up, and to build 
up what I have pulled down, is just to do the work of a mounte- 
bank, deceiving both myself and my patient. Purging under a 
course of mineral chalybeates, I look upon as equally detrimental; 
not that no one has been cured even when catharties, instead of 
being given at intervals, have been made a daily dose. I know 
all this; but I also know, that such cases say more for the 
virtue of the iron than for the skill of the doctor. Without 
the purge the cure would have been speedier. 

99. There are many diseases besides hysteria where the good 
effects of such repeating purging are doubtful; or rather, where 
their bad effects are visible. True, indeed, it is that they free the 
bowels from impurities. They also extract somewhat of such 
noxious matters as may lodge in the blood. On the other 
hand, it is equally sure that in many cases—those of weak 
constitutions, and tender infants—they do harm. They bring 
a vast colluvies of humours into the intestines. "These bring 
on unnatural ferments. Hence come swellings of the lower 
belly; and these increase just in proportion to the purging. 
Then it happens that the parts in question, in the want of their 
native heat, and under the overwhelming influence of the 
waters, become affected with wasting, and grow putrescent. 
This brings on those glandular swellings of the mesentery 
which are so truly the children of struma, and the vaunt- 
couriers of Death. Hence, in infants, I hold it safest, after 
a mere general purge—and that a mild one—to direct my 
treatment to the comfort of the blood. This may be done by 
means of sherry wine, either alone or with strengthening herbs 
steeped in it ; of which a few spoonfuls, according to the patient's 
age, may be given night and morning, and continued for some 
time. Again, as external applications easily penetrate the 
tender system of infants, it is useful in case of abdominal 
swellings, whether scrofulous or rachitic, to rub in such liniments 
as may fortify the blood and bowels, and such as may also have 
the effect of destroying any morbific taint. 


100 EPISTOLARY DISSERTATION, 


kK Leaves of common wormwood, 
— lesser centaury, 
— white horehound, 
—  germander, 
—  ground-pine, 
—  scordium, 
— common calamint, 
—  feverfew, 
—  meadow-saxifrage, 
— St. John’s wort, 
—  golden-rod, 
— wild thyme, 
— mint, 
— sage, 
— rue, 
— . St. Benedict’s thistle, 
— pennyroyal, 
— . southernwood, 
— chamomile, 
— tansy, 
— lily of the valley (all fresh gathered), of each a handful. 
Hog’s lard, tbiv; 
Mutton suet, 
Claret wine, aa tbij. 

Steep in an earthen pot over hot ashes for twelve hours. Boil to drive off 
the water. Strain, and make into an unguent. Rub with the same the 
belly and hypochondres, night and morning, for thirty or forty days 
running. Also the armpits on each side. 


100. As to rachitic tumours, however, it must be remarked, 
that, in the case of infants, where they have arisen after a long 
attack of intermittent fevers (im which case they put on the 
appearance of true rickets), repeated purging is altogether indi- 
cated ; inasmuch as, previous to the use of the Peruvian bark, 
the fevers had become protracted, and had, moreover, deposited 
a sediment, the cause of the tumour, which nothing short of 
catharsis can remove. In /rue rickets such catharsis has no 
place ; a purge, or two, previous to the use of alteratives being 
all that is admissible. During the time that the liniment is used, 
wine should be taken in the manner aforesaid, or, better still, 
the patient may drink small beer in which a sufficient quantity 
of the above-named herbs (some or all) have been laid to soak. 

This is important. I have known many infants and children 
killed by repeated purging in cases where the belly has been 


EPISTOLARY DISSERTATION. 101 


swollen —the swelling itself having been, perhaps, the effect of 
the catharsis. But this by the way. 

101. If any one object, that, without previous purging, iron 
filings in the intestines may do mischief, I answer that such 
mischief has yet to be observed by me. Indeed, it is much more 
likely that, by becoming invested with the mucus and the excre- 
mentitious matters of the alimentary canal,they should be got rid 
of at once, than that they should be moved about and dispersed 
by purgative medicines, without causing gripes and contortions. 
Nay more—the particles themselves may become impacted in the 
coats of intestines, and permanently fixed therein. 

102. During the administration of such chalybeates as are 
given for the sake of strengthening the blood and animal spirits, 
those remedies which are usually called hysterical should be 
given, not generally, but occasionally. And they should be 
given in the form which best suits the patient. When they can 
so be swallowed, the solid form is the best-—better than any 
decoction or infusion. So taken they better keep the spirits 
in their due place; inasmuch as the substance itself affects the 
stomach with its flavour, and penetrates the body more effectually. 

103. I will sum up by adding a few of the commoner formule. 
They profess but little. Still they generally do what is wanted. 

Bleed from the right arm to eight ounces. 


Fk Of galbanum dissolved (and strained) in the tincture of castor, Zii) ; 
Tacamahacca, 3ij. 
Make into a plaster, and apply to the navel. 


Next morning begin a course of the following pills: 


Be Pil. coch.. maj., 93: 
Castor (powdered), gr. ij ; 
Balsam of Peru, tjv. 
Make into four pills, to be taken at five a.m. Sleep after taking them. 
Repeat two or three times, either every or every other morning, ac- 
cording to their effect, and the way in which they are borne. 


ER Water of black cherries, 

Rue-water, 

Compound bryony-water, aa Zi) ; 

Castor (tied up in knot, and hung in the bottle), 3ss; 

Crystalline sugar, q. s. 

Make into a julep; of which four or five spoonfuls are to be taken 

every time a fainting fit comes on. In case the fit be severe, add 
to the first dose xx drops of hartshorn. 


102 EPISTOLARY DISSERTATION. 


104. After the purging pills aforesaid the following should 
be used— 
kK Iron-filings, gr. viij ; 
Extract of wormwood, q. s. 
Make into two pills, to be taken the first thing in the morning, and 
to be repeated at five p.m., for thirty days. Wash down with a 
draught of wormwood wine. 


Or for daily use— 
KR  Iron-filings, 
Extract of wormwood, aa Ziv. 
Mix, and keep for use. Take, at the same times as before, sixteen or 
twenty grains, in the form of three pills. 


Or, if the form of a bolus be preferable— 


ER Conserve of Roman wormwood, 
Conserve of orange-peel, aa 3); 
Candied angelica, 
Candied nutmeg, 
Venice treacle, aa Zss ; 
Candied ginger, 33); 
Syrup of oranges, q. s. 

Make into an electuary. 


RK Of the electuary as above, Siss ; 
Fine iron-filings, gr. viij; 
Syrup of oranges, q. s. 
Make into a bolus, to be taken in the morning and at five p.m. 
Wash down with wine of wormwood. 


IX Picked myrrh, 
Galbanum, aa 3iss ; 
Castor, gr. xv; 
Balsam of Peru, q. s. 

Make each drachm into twelve pills, of which three are to be 
taken every night. Wash down with three or four spoonfuls 
of the compound bryony-water; continuing to do so during 
the whole course. 


If, however, these pills purge, which, on account of the gum 
contained in them, is often the case with systems easily acted 
on, the following may be substituted : 

Ix Castor, 3); 
Volatile salts of amber, 3ss ; 
Extract of rue, q. s. 


Make into twenty-four small pills, of whlch three must be taken 
every night. 


EPISTOLARY DISSERTATION. 103 


105. Here I must observe that with many females, chaly- 
beates, whatever be their form, excite considerable disturbance; 
and that, not merely during the first days of their use, but 
throughout. In this case, we must not at once desist from 
employing them. By mixing a little laudanum in some hysterical 
water, giving it every night at bedtime, and continuing to do 
so, the system will be brought to bear them. 

106. In mild cases, where the cure can be effected without 
taking steel internally, I hold it sufficient to bleed, and then to 
open the bowels for three or fourdays. After this, the afore- 
said hysterical pills may be taken, night and morning, for ten 
days. In light cases this method rarely fails. Sometimes, 
indeed, the pills, without either bleeding or purging, will effect 
a cure. ! 

107. Another fact is of serious importance. Some females have 
so peculiar an idiosyncrasy, as to feel an absolute repugnance 
to all the so-called hysterical medicines—the true and usual 
modes of relief in such a complaint. In this case, then, they 
do harm instead of good. Omit them therefore entirely. What 
says the divine old man,—* With Nature against us, all is 
vain," So important is this idiosyncrasy, that if due respect be 
not paid to it, the patient may run a risk of dying ; a risk that 
occurs, under similar conditions, in other ailments besides 
hysteria. Of this I will give an instance. Certain females, 
suffering from the smallpox, are unable to take syrup of poppies 
without vertigo, vomiting, and other affections which, naturally, 
are the affections that syrup of poppies would allay. Even 
whilst I am writing this, a young lady of noble family, to whom 
on the sixth or seventh evening I gave syrup of poppies when 
she was ill of smallpox, exhibited the symptoms aforesaid ; the 
due inflammation of the pustules, meanwhile, being checked. 
Next day I gave laudanum instead ; when, to my great joy, the 
symptoms ceased, the face swelled properly, the mental and 
bodily anxiety departed, and the strength and spirits soon re- 
turned. This by the way. 

108. Thus are cured hysterical complaints. Thus also the 
so-called female obstructions ; especially chlorosis, or green- 
sickness, and retention of the menses. Still if the blood be so 


! óctog &vrvrpárrovonc Kéved mavra.—Hipp. Lex., t. i, p. 4.— [G.] 


104 EPISTOLARY DISSERTATION. 


effete, and the spirits so atactic that iron will not avail to cure 
them, strong chalybeate waters must be resorted to, like those 
of Tunbridge, or others more recently discovered. The great 
quantity in which these waters can be taken, and the extent 
to which they approach Nature, determine them to mix with 
the blood more readily, and to subdue disease more effectually 
than any of the so-called nodle preparations of art—whatever 
the would-be chemists may say to the contrary. 

109. This, however, must be observed. If, during drinking 
the waters, any ailment approaching the symptoms of hysteria 
supervene, they must be stopped, until its departure. As long 
as 1t lasts it checks the transit of the waters. Much as these 
same waters are less likely than even the mildest cathartics 
to agitate the humours and induce a disturbance of the animal 
spirits, they have still—i so far as they are diuretic — some- 
what of a tendency in that direction ; to say nothing about their 
liability to disturb the bowels. Now if even waters like these 
are sufficient, by agitating and disturbing the blood, to prevent 
their own proper transit through the system, how much more 
must purgatives be so! and how wrongly do those men practise 
who once or twice a week would give a cathartic along with a 
chalybeate ; nay, mix the two together. In chalybeates, then, 
as in other mineral waters, the operation is, by such means, 
checked rather than forwarded. 

110. I will now venture an opinion that, although in such 
waters iron in its soluble principles is present, so that what we 
drink is neither more nor less than iron in a liquid form, the 
waters themselves are merely simple waters, except so far as 
they are impregnated by the minerals through which they pass. 
This will be clear if we only throw some horseshoe nails in a 
few gallons of common water. By afterwards adding powder 
of galls, tea-leaves, or the like, we shall find that the colour is 
just that of mineral waters with the same mixture. Provided, 
too, that they be taken in summer and in a healthy atmosphere, 
the artificial waters will have the same effect with the inartifi- 
cial or natural—call them which you will. 

111. Be this as it may, if the affection be too strong for 
chalybeates, the patient must have recourse to the hot sul- 
phurous waters, like those at Bath. These she must take inter- 
nally for three days running ; the next morning bathe in them, 


EPISTOLARY DISSERTATION. 105 


and the day after that drink them again ; so going on, bathing 
and drinking, and drinking and bathing, for two whole months. 
In this, as in other matters, the cure must be continued not 
only until relief be felt, but until convalescence be complete. 
Otherwise a relapse will soon occur, and all the symptoms 
return. 

112. Venice treacle, by itself, if taken often enough, is a 
great remedy in this disease, and not only in this but in many 
others arising from a defect of heat; since for the purposes of 
concoction or digestion, it is the most potent remedy hitherto 
known—distasteful as it is to many. 

113. If the patient be not of a thin and bilious habit of body, 
sherry wine, in which there has been an infusion of gentian, 
angelica, wormwood, centaury, orange-peel, and other restora- 
tives, taken to the amount of some spoonfuls three times a day, 
promotes recovery. Indeed, a free draught of sherry at night 
has been very useful to many hysterical patients. The whole 
habit of the body has become more robust, and the females 
themselves have become fresh and lively, instead of pale and 
cachectic. 

114. Peruvian bark is discovered to have wonderful power 
in strengthening the blood and spirits; and I have, myself, 
observed, both in hysteria and hypochondriasis, that a scruple 
taken night and morning for some weeks restores the system 
to health and strength. In no form, however, of hysterics, 
does it succeed better than in those attacks of spasms where the 
patient beats her breast with strains and struggles beyond the 
strength of a female. Still it must be owned, that bark in 
hysteria is less of a remedy than bark in ague. Here it works 
wonders ; and, when occasion requires, we give it to our wives 
and children. Nevertheless, with many persons it 1s 1n disgrace 
at present for being so sure a cure, just as it was in disgrace at 
first for being so new a one—the common fate of both the best 
men and the best remedies. There is one touchstone by which 
we may try whether a man's disposition be good or bad. It is 
the one or the other in proportion as he shows joy or sorrow at 
any new benefit granted by the favour of the Deity. 

115. If any of the aforesaid remedies disagree (as they may 
do in delicate and bilious constitutions), a milk diet may be 
resorted to. Wonderful as it may seem to many, females who 


106 EPISTOLARY DISSERTATION. 


have long struggled against hysteria, and have mocked all the 
efforts of medicine, have taken to an exclusively milk diet, and 
recovered. In what is called hysterical colic this has been the 
most remarkable. Here opiates alone give ease; and when 
opiates have become habitual, the pain returns as the effect 
wears off. The strangest part of the milk cure is, that milk 
being such a cold and crude aliment, should still be strength- 
ening and restorative. Yet the mystery ceases, if we remember 
that milk, being the simplest of nutriments, gives Nature least 
trouble in digesting it ; being, in this respect, unlike the more 
composite meats and beverages. That an equable crasis of the 
blood and spirits should follow a perfect concoction is only 
natural and necessary. Again—the cause of hysteria is less 
the absolute debility of the spirits, than their debility in relation 
to the blood. The spirits of an mfant may suit an infant’s 
blood, but fall short of what are required for an adult. Weak 
and crude, then, as milk is, provided that the blood become 
tractable and tender also, all goes well. The spirits are equal 
to it. 

Nevertheless, there are those who, much as they would 
otherwise be benefited, can never get the full benefit from milk; 
so much does it, during the first days of its use, either coagu- 
late in the stomach, or depress the strength. 

116. Of all remedies that I know, nothing so cherishes and 
strengthens the blood and spirits, as riding on horseback, long 
distances, every day. Here all the exercise falls upon the lower 
belly, and, in the lower belly lie all the excretories which Nature 
keeps up for eliminating the feculent lodgements of the blood. 
Now what weakness, or what perversion of function can with- 
stand the innumerable succussions of a day’s riding—and that 
in the open air? Whose natural heat has so cooled down as not 
to boil afresh at such an excitement? What lurking substance 
can be so unnatural, what juice so depraved, as not, under such 
exercise, to either return to the state that Nature requires, or else 
to be eliminated, dissipated, dispersed? Surely, the blood thus 
continually shaken and tossed about, must needs take strength 
and vigour. Women, perhaps, who, from their sedentary life 
are liable (especially at first) to be injured, are the less fit of the 
two sexes for such regimen. For men it is pre-eminently 
healthy and restorative. 


EPISTOLARY DISSERTATION. 107 


117. A friend of mine, in holy orders, a man of great 
judgment and erudition, after a course of study so long and 
excessive as to overwork his naturally great abilities, fell into 
hypochondriasis ; which lasted so long as to vitiate all the 
ferments of the body, and wholly destroy his digestion. He 
had more than once gone through the trouble of a course of 
chalybeates. Of mineral waters he had nearly exhausted the 
list. Purgmg he had tried along with them. So he had 
antiscorbutics, powdered shells, and the like sweeteners of the 
blood. At last, partly through the disease, partly through the 
medicines, both of which had been continued for some years, 
he was seized with colliquative diarrhoea, which in a decline 
and in most other chronic diseases, where the digestive powers 
are wholly subverted, is the precursor of death. He consulted 
me ; when I saw at once that there was no room for medicines. 
These had been tried too long and too much in vain as well. 
I recommended riding on horseback; at first in short rides, 
such as his health would allow. Had he been a man of a less 
acute judgment, he would never have been induced to try it. 
However, I asked him to persist in it until recovery. He in- 
creased the length of his exercise every day, until at last he 
took a journey rather than a ride. Indeed, like a traveller, he 
took no care of regular meals, nor yet of the weather. He just 
took them as they fell out. So he went on, until he got to 
twenty or thirty miles a day; and finding himself, after a few 
days, much better, kept on for some months. Indeed, as he 
told me himself, he rode more than 1000 miles, by which time 
he had gained perfect health and vigour. 

118. Riding is as good in a decline or in phthisis as in 
hypochondriasis. It has cured patients whom many medicines 
would have benefited as much as many words—and no more. 
This, too, not only in mere cases of cough and weakness, but 
after wasting, night-sweats, and colliquative diarrhoea have sig- 
nified the approach of death. 


* Ultima linea rerum." 


Indeed, deadly as phthisis is, killmg two thirds of those who 
die of chronie diseases, it has a specific in riding, as truly as 
ague has in bark, or the venereal disease in mercury ; provided 
only that the journeys are long enough, and the beds at night 


108 EPISTOLARY DISSERTATION. 


are well aired. Those, too, who have passed middle age, must 
keep it up longer than those below it. Besides horse exercise, 
driving in a carriage has had wonderful effects. 

119. To return. This is the general method of cure for this 
disease, which arises from a weakened crasis of the blood. It 
finds place, however, only when the fit is not on. As often, 
however, as the paroxysm comes on, accompanied with one or 
more of those symptoms which, as aforesaid, will not brook 
delay and allow us to beat about the bush in restoring the 
blood and spirits, we must have recourse to those so-called 
hysterical medicines which are of strong and fetid odour, and 
which will remand back to their proper places the exorbitant 
and wandering spirits. These may be taken internally, snuffed 
up through the nose, or rubbed on the skin; and they are 
assafoetida, galbanum, castor, spirits of sal ammoniac, and other 
similar strong-smelling substances. 

120. .'This is what I mean to say. Whatever has a fetid 
odour, whether natural or artificial, has this effect; so that, 
unless I am mistaken, spirits of hartshorn, human blood, urine, 
bones, and the like, all agree in having contracted from the fire 
in which they were prepared a certain strong-scented empy- 
reumatic odour, which is, as it were, annexed to their most 
intimate essences. The same is the case with the smoke from 
burnt hides, feathers, and the lke animal substances. All 
agree in this. Whilst burning they emit a strong unpleasant 
smell; which, if the heat be increased, and proper vessels for 
condensing it be applied, is converted into those liquors which 
are called volatile spirits, and which have properties wholly 
different from those of the substances that supply them, being, 
instead, the productions of the fire alone. Provided, too, that 
they be of animal origin, the properties of all are the same. 

121. The next thing to be observed is, that if any intolerable 
pain in any part of the body, if any excessive vomiting, or any 
diarrhoea accompany the fit, laudanum must be resorted to. 
Laudanum alone can check these symptoms. 

Still, in allaymg either such pains or such vomiting, we must 
take care, that, unless the suffering exceed human patience, 
neither laudanum nor any other paregoric be used, except pre- 
ceded by the due evacuations. In the first place, there is often 
such a congestion of blood and humours (especially in females 


EPISTOLARY DISSERTATION. 109 


of a sanguine and masculine habit), as to check the operation of 
even the strongest and the most repeated narcotics. This makes 
a previous bloodletting and catharsis necessary. Without these 
a full dose will be useless. After them a small one will serve. 
Again—I have been taught by manifold experience, that a female 
who, without the previous necessary evacuations, has gradually 
accustomed herself to laudanum, shall so find that, after its 
effects have gone off, the pain returns, and she becomes forced 
to return to it, and to persist in the use of it so long as to have 
all her natural functions impaired, and her digestion spoiled. 
Yet, I do not perceive, that laudanum immediately hurts either 
the brain or nerves, nor yet the animal faculties. 

122. I judge then that evacuants should precede anodynes. 
Thus, with plethoric and masculine women a vein should be 
breathed, and the bowels opened, especially if it be some time 
since they last had a fit. If, however, the temperament be 
different (i. e. weak), and if there has been a fit frequently 
before, it is enough to wash out the stomach with a gallon (more 
or less) of milk and beer, followed by an emetic, and then to 
order a full dose of Venice treacle, or of the Orvietan electuary. 
This may be followed by a few spoonfuls of some pleasant- 
tasted spiritous liquor, with a few drops of liquid laudanum. 

123. If, before the physician is called in, the patient have been 
sick already, and there is a fear lest by an emetic the spirits 
should be so far excited as to depress the patient’s strength too 
much, laudanum must be given at once; and the dose must be 
large enough, and repeated enough to meet, and more than 
meet, the symptoms. It must subdue them. 

124. Two points must be noted. First——when, after the due 
evacuations, we use laudanum, the dose must be so large, and 
so often repeated, as to leave no symptom uiconquered ; and 
the space between each must be such as to allow us to tell the 
effects of a first before we administer a second ; a matter which 
I have treated more at large elsewhere.! 

Secondly—when the laudanum is fairly begun with, there 
must be no disturbance, no evacuation. A mere sugar and milk 
clyster may undo all that the paregoric has done; so that a 


relapse shall take place, and the pain and vomiting be brought 
back. 


! Epist i, §§ 8, 9. 


110 EPISTOLARY DISSERTATION. 


125. However much the preceding pains may demand an 
anodyne, there is another symptom which requires one still 
more. Sometimes the peristaltic motion is so reversed, and 
the ingesta which were meant for the lower bowels are so 
forced upwards, that, before any good can be done by the 
narcotic, it is thrown up by vomiting. In such a case, the 
opiate must be given, as occasion requires, after each vomit, 
and it must be given in a solid form; if in the liquid, in as 
little of the vehicle as possible, so as to be too shght in 
quantity to do more than just soak into the stomach, and not 
be brought up. Such a vehicle is a spoonful of strong cinnamon- 
water or the like. The patient, after the anodyne, must be 
advised to keep herself perfectly quiet, and, especially not to 
stir her head. The least movement of this part brings on 
vomiting, and does away with all the benefits of all the medi- 
cines that have been swallowed. Moreover, even when the 
vomiting has been so subdued as to cease, it is well to continue 
the anodyne, night and morning, for a few days; so to check 
it wholly, and to guard against a relapse. The same applies 
to a narcotic given after an hysterical attack of pain, or after 
diarrhoea. 

126. 'This cures pain, and vomiting when symptomatie ; 
phenomena, which so often wear the garb of other diseases 
that they deceive the practitioner oftener than anything that 
requires his judgment. For instance—in that sort of hysterical 
affection which has been described as simulating a nephritic 
attack, how close is the resemblance, and how much are the 
symptoms on a level! the same pains, in the same parts, and 
vomiting in both cases. Yet how different the treatment, and 
how little the parity of the methods! What helps in the one, 
hurts the other. For stone, or gravel, creating pain, wearing 
away the substance of the kidney, and causing vomiting from 
the consent of the parts, nothing is so beneficial as the full 
and frequent revulsion of the antecedent cause by means of 
bleeding ; whereby the passages through which the calculus 
is excluded are both enlarged and loosened—to which end 
emollient clysters, frequently repeated, are subservient. To 
these may be added diuretic and lithotriptic medicines. If, 
however, instead of a stone impacted in the kidney, there be 
but an overflow of the spirits to those organs, in that case it 


EPISTOLARY DISSERTATION. 111 


is paregorics only that are indicated; whilst it is enemata 
which, after the first evacuations, can never be given harm- 
lessly. To overlook this difference is to play with the health 
of your miserable patient, and to jeopardize her precarious 
existence. 

127. The same may be said of that hysteric affection which 
simulates bilious colic, or the iliac passion. Assuming that this 
latter be the disease (different as it is from hysteria), assuming, 
too, that it has arisen from an acrid humour excreted into the 
bowels through the mouths of the mesenteric arteries (a mis- 
take into which the intolerable pain as well as the green colour 
of the fecal and vomited matters might, equally, lead the in- 
experienced physician,) what method would be so suitable, as 
that wherein we strove to temper the acrimony of the humours 
by means of refrigerant and thickening remedies? And what 
would be more natural than to eliminate the humours from 
the intestines by the frequent use of enemata and catharties ? 
Amongst which last what would be more adapted to the complete 
eradication of the morbific matter than calomel and scammony? 
Yet how dangerous would all this be, if, instead of colic, the 
disease were hysteria or hypochondriasis? In each of these 
diseases, after the preliminary general evacuations, dedicated 
to the clearance of such putrescent masses as the ataxia afore- 
said had engendered, nothing remains but the assuagement of 
the tumultuous spirits, until, by the help of those anodynes 
for which the evacuations paved the way, the symptoms wholly 
disappear. These having gone, we may then order iron, or 
any other medicine which, by invigorating the blood, may 
wholly extirpate the malady. It is no wish of mine to recount 
the innumerable calamities which have befallen females when 
hysteria has been treated as bilious colic. All I say is that 
the evacuations fit for the latter complaint are hurtful rather 
than helpful in the former. They promote the irritation of 
the spirits; which is the true cause of the disease. Then the 
complaint becomes prolonged to a period of some months ; 
when a metastasis may take place to the brain, end in spasm, 
and kill the patient. This is most likely when, on the strength 
of the green colour of the faeces and vomitings, remaining un- 
altered by a repetition of purges, an emetic has been ordered. 
In one word—the greatest caution must be used in the diagnosis 


112 EPISTOLARY DISSERTATION. 


of hysteria, lest the symptoms be confounded with those of some 
other disease like it. 

128. Here I must add that, besides the errors enumerated 
which may endanger the lives of hysterical females, there are 
others which may become fatal from overlooking the extent to 
which a disease which, in and of itself, is not dangerous may, 
either from the time of its occurrence, or from the violence of 
its sequelee, become deadly. Thus—a female of a delicate 
frame may give birth to an infant, and all things go well; when 
the midwife (either from want of skill, or for the sake of display- 
ing her management) may persuade her to get up a few days 
after delivery, and to leave her bed for awhile. The patient 
obeys; and on the first movement of her body is seized with an 
hysterical affection. The lochia at first diminish, then cease ; 
and the series of symptoms that follows, unless checked by the 
interference of medical skill, soon proves fatal. Or a frenzy 
may set in, cause spasm, become day by day worse, and then 
cause death. Or a frenzy may be escaped; whilst a low kind 
of insanity, in its stead, may continue during the remainder of 
life. Sometimes this suppression of the lochia may bring on 
fever ; and this may become of the character of the prevailing 
epidemic, or at least be allied to it in origin. Lastly, the hys- 
terical affections that checked the lochia may grow worse ; even 
as if the suppressed lochia had caused the hysterical affections. 

129. I have long thought, that of all the deaths that occur 
in childbed, less than a tenth (speaking within bounds) origi- 
nate in either a deficiency of the necessary strength, or from 
the labour-pains. The most come from getting out of bed too 
soon, which produces hysteria and checks the lochia; a sup- 
pression which brings on a whole train of unavoidable bad 
symptoms. Hence, all that I can persuade, I recommend to 
keep the bed till the tenth day ; especially if they are, other- 
wise, subject to what is called the vapours, or are weak-bodied. 
Besides the degree to which the rest and quiet ensure them 
against the well-known perils of their condition, the uninter- 
rupted warmth refreshes the spirits which the previous pains, 
and the customary evacuations, have broken and depressed. 
Moreover, it helps Nature, and digests and clears off all those 
crudities which had accumulated during pregnancy. 

130. If, however, from any such error, any of the aforesaid 


EPISTOLARY DISSERTATION. 113 


symptoms arise, the curative indications are to allay the restless 
and unquiet movement of the spirits, and to bring on the 
lochia afresh, the suppression of these being the proximate and 
immediate cause of the mischief. Still we must not be over- 
pertinacious in our endeavours ; so that, if the remedies which 
are usually successful, fail, we should hold our hands. Strong 
remedies are out of place, whilst the broken and prostrate 
strength of women in childbirth forbids the continued use of 
the milder ones. For instance—when the lochia stop, the 
patient must be put back to bed forthwith, an hysterical plaster 
must be laid on her navel, and the following electuary must be 
given next morning : 


KR Conserve of Roman wormwood, 

Conserve of rue, aa 3); 

Myrrh lozenges, 31); 

Castor, 

English saffron, 

Sal volatile, 

Sal ammoniac 

Assafeetida, aa 388; 

Syrup of the five roots, q. s. 

Make into an electuary; of which take a portion about the size of a 

nutmeg, every three hours. Wash down with four or five spoonfuls 
of the following julep : 


Kk  Rue-water, 
Compound bryony-water, 
Sugarcandy, q. s. 
Mix, and make into a julep. 


These, if given immediately after the suppression, generally 
effect their purpose. If not, and if, when the whole quantity 
has been taken, it still continue, laudanum (for once at least) 
is to be resorted to: since laudanum, although, in and of itself, 
astringent, checks the perturbation of the spirits, this pertur- 
bation being the cause of the lochia ceasing. Hence, when 
emmenagogues have been ineffectual, laudanum has restored 
them. <A combination, however, is best, i. e. of narcotics with 
hysterical remedies, and with emmenagogues. — Thus, fourteen 
drops of liquid laudanum in the compound bryony-water, or, 
else, a grain and a half of the solid opium made up, with half 
a scruple of assafoetida, into two pills. 

131. If this fail, we must take an arrow from another 

I. 8 


114 EPISTOLARY DISSERTATION. 


quiver—not repeat the opium, as would and should be done in 
other cases; since repeated paregorics so effectually check the 
lochia that they can never be brought back again. Hence, 
after waiting awhile, in order to ascertain what has, or has not, 
been done, we should go back again to a conjunction of hyste- 
rical and emmenagogue medicines, and then to the sugar-and- 
milk clyster. To the last, however, the observation that applied 
to the opium applies also; viz. that failing the first, no good 
will come of a second. One gently solicits the humours, and 
cause the flow desired. More than one diverts them elsewhere. 

132. This being done (and it must be done gently), the 
physician should wait, looking to Time as his best ally. Each 
day puts matters more out of danger ; and, when the twentieth 
is past, all is safe. Then, when the disease (whatever it may 
have been) has given the patient a fair respite, and when she 
has regained a share of strength, that method will be borne 
which is best fitted for warding off the symptoms which are the 
sequele of the suppression of the lochia; since, the obstinate 
repetition of remedies, when no good whatever has been done 
by those that preceded, may increase not only the disease itself, 
but the perturbation of spirits upon which the disease depends. 
This I would have carefully noted. 

133. A married lady, of equal birth and manners, called me 
in immediately after delivery—hysteria had caused a total sup- 
pression of the lochia. Itried to bring them on again, by the 
aforesaid medicines—but in vain. The hysteria defied every- 
thing. Seeing, then, that I could only provide for her safety 
by leaving her to the prince and pattern of physicians—Time 
—I did nothing, a method that answered until the fourteenth 
day ; inasmuch as, although I saw her every day, I never saw 
her growing worse. Now, however, her female attendants, 
whom I had hardly restrained from effecting an injury under 
the guise of attention, persuaded her husband to lose no time 
in getting her bled from the right foot. This was no sooner 
done than the hysteria returned, which was followed, a few 
hours after, by spasms, which were followed in their turn by 
rehef—the relief of death. 

134. To speak the truth, I have long been one of those who 
think, that, not only in the aforesaid puerperal complaints, but 
in all acute diseases, whenever I find that, from the medicine 


EPISTOLARY DISSERTATION, 115 


which I have thought fit to use, Lam unable to give the patient 
reason to expect any definite benefit, I do no more than my 
duty as an honest and conscientious physician, when I just do 
nothing at all —simply visiting the patient from day to day, to 
see that he be no worse to-day than he was yesterday, nor yet 
likely to become worse by to-morrow. If, however, on the 
contrary, I try remedies whose efficacy 1s equivocal, there will 
be as much danger in the experiment as ever there was in the 
disease ; the perils being just double to what they would have 
been otherwise, and the chances of escaping them just half. 
However little, in the first instance, there be either sign or 
symptom of incipient convalescence, I am well assured that it is 
not in the nature of any acute disease to continue for any 
lengthened period. Hence, every day does one of two things— 
it either adds to the safety of the patient, or else gives the physi- 
cian an opportunity of discovermg what means he has more 
certain of destroying the disease than his previous ones. This, 
which applies to all acute diseases, applies particularly to the 
puerperal. Here slight errors create fatal dangers. Here, too, we 
have a natural evacuation which we cannot regulate, and which 
must not stop. 

135. Hysterical affections, due to causes other than the 
primary one of natural debility of the spirits, may occur. In- 
deed, the cause of vapours may be adventitious. Now of all such, 
the most frequent is an immoderate menstrual flux — whether 
during childbed or not. Of these, the former comes on during 
the first few days after delivery, especially if it have been of the 
laborious kind, and the train of hysterical symptoms which follow 
it is a long one. Just, however, as it comes on during such 
certain few days only, so, also, it departs speedily. Diet of the 
more thickening sort easily dispels it. To this may be added the 


following drink : 
Ix Plantain-water, 
Red wine, aa Oj. 
Mix, and boil down to two thirds. Sweeten with a sufficiency of the 
finest white sugar. Take of this, when cool, half a pint once or 
twice a day. 


In the meanwhile one of the milder hysterical juleps may be 
taken occasionally, and the following plug be applied to the 
nostrils :— 


116 EPISTOLARY DISSERTATION. 


Ik Galbanum, 
Assafoetida, aa 5i] ; 
Castor, 5iss ; 
Volatile salt of amber, 33s ; 


Or=—— 


kK Spirits of the ammonia, 5ij. 
To be smelt frequently. 


136. In respect to the second kind, that which is inde- 
pendent of childbed, it may occur at any time. It generally, 
however, comes on a little before the time when the menses 
would cease of themselves; i.e. about 45, when they began 
early, 50 when late. Just as acandle, before it goes out, emits a 
brighter flame than usual, so may the courses, before their final 
disappearance, break out over-abundantly, and by the loss of 
blood throw the unfortunate patients into paroxysms of hysteria. 
Here, although hysterical remedies, both external and internal, 
may occasionally be resorted to (provided always that they be 
not of a sort so strong as to provoke a fresh flow), the whole 
treatment turns upon checking the menstruation, which must 
be done after the following method. 

137. Bleed to eight ounces. Next morning give the common 
purgative potion. Repeat this every third day, twice. Every 
night, throughout the disease, give an ounce of syrup of poppy 
as a paregoric. 

EK Conserve of dried rose-leaves, 2ij ; 

Lozenges of terra Lemnia, 3iss ; 

Pomegranate rind, 

Prepared red coral, aa 9Dij ; 

Bloodstone, 

Dragon’s blood, 

Bole armeniac, aa 9j; 

Syrup of coral, q. s. 

Make into an electuary; of which take a portion, the size of a large 

nutmeg, every morning, and at five p.m. Wash down with six 
spoonfuls of the following julep : 


EK Water of oak-buds, 
Plantain-water, aa Ziij ; 
Cinnamon-water with barley, 
Syrup of dried roses, aa 3); 
Spirits of vitriol (to flavour), q. s. 
Mix. 
K  Plantain-leaves, 
Nettle-leaves, aa q. s. 
Bruise, together, in a marble mortar. Squeeze out and clarify the juice. 
Cool. Take six spoonfuls three or four times a day. 


EPISTOLARY DISSERTATION. I4 


After the first purge apply the following plaster to the lumbar 
region : | 
K Emplastrum diapalme, 
Emplastrum ad herniam (equal parts). 
Mix. Spread upon a leather, and make into a plaster. 


138. The diet must be cool and thickening. Once or twice 
aday a draught of claret is allowed. Although, as being likely 
to excite the ebullition, it may be prejudicial, it still has the 
good effect of restoring strength. This method, good for 
females affected as aforesaid, is also good for females likely to 
miscarry ; except that, here, the purges and juices are 
omitted. 

139. Another cause (though a rare one) of hysterical affections 
is this. After a laborious birth there may be a procidentia of 
the womb. This brings in its train a long catalogue of ills. 
Still it is easily and quickly cured. 

RK Oak-bark, 3ij. 


Boil in four pints of spring-water, down to two. Towards the end, 
add— 


Pomegranate-bark (bruised), 2j; 

Red roses, 

Pomegranate-flowers, aa two handfuls. | 

Add half a pint of red wine. Strain, and keep as a fomentation, to be 
applied to the parts affected, on a woollen rag, every morning two 
hours before getting out of bed, and every night at bedtime, until 
the symptoms have wholly gone. 
But more than enough has been said on these points. 

140. You have now, most courteous Sir, the sum of my 
observations hitherto made upon both the history and the cure 
of this disease. It only remains that, for any casual errors, in 
the way of imperfect description, I may express a hope to find 
your pardon ; also that you may take in good part a work which 
has been composed with the view of returning my best thanks 
for the approval with which you have not disdained to visit my 
other efforts—such as they were. Approval of this sort has so 
little been my lot, that, either I have done nothing to deserve 
it, or else, the men who have been sufficiently favoured by 
Nature to have sufficient candour to show gratitude, are— 

* yix totidem quot 
Thebarum porte, vel divitis ostia Nili"! 


! Juvenal, Sat. xiii, 26.—[G.] 


118 .. EPISTOLARY DISSERTATION. 


Notwithstanding this, I continue, and will continue, to learn 
and to promote, to the best of my powers, the methods for the 
treatment of diseases, and to instruct others (if such they be) 
who have less skill in practice than myself. Meanwhile, my 
fame is in the hands of others. I have weighed in a nice and 
scrupulous balance, whether it be better to serve men, or to be 
praised by them, and I prefer the former. It does more to 
tranquillize the mind ; whereas fame, and the breath of popular 
applause, is but a bubble, a feather, andadream. Such wealth 
as such fame gives, those who have scraped it together, and 
those who value it highly, are fully free to enjoy , only let them 
remember, that the mechanical arts (and sometimes the meanest 
of them) bring greater gains, and make richer heirs. 

For each to look to himself alone, is what the brute beast 
can do, and what they do to the best of their power ; without, 
however, having a nature capable of performing acts of virtue 
and rectitude of their own free will. And like to a brute beast 
is the man who has ends and aims other than the advantage of 
his fellow-creatures. | 

Commend me to our common excellent friend the learned 
and sagacious Dr. Kendrick. It is he whom I must thank for 
being informed of your friendly spirit towards me, and who 
first brought me the welcome news of your good opinion. I 
will do my best to requite his service, and to repay his good 
offices with others like them, remaining, most excellent Sir, 


Your bounden and most respectful servant, 
THOS. SYDENHAM. 


Lonpon ; Jan. 20, 1681-2. 


A TREATISE 


GOUT, AND DROPSY. 


TO THE MOST LEARNED 


Db. PIO MAS oS iLO: BP, vM, 


FELLOW OF THE COLLEGE OT PHYSICIANS, LONDON. 


Most COURTEOUS SIR,— 


Isend you a short tract upon Gout and Dropsy, instead 
of the thicker volume which, in my own mind, I had deter- 
mined on: viz. a history of such chronic diseases as my practice 
has most especially met with. By applying my mind, however, 
to its utmost, and by bringing all my powers of thought on 
the subject, I brought on a fit of gout such as I had never 
before suffered from; so that the fact itself warned me to lay 
aside, even against my own will, such lucubrations, and to take 
care of myself; well satisfied with having, in some measure, 
dealt with these two diseases. Whenever I returned to my 
studies the gout returned to me. Be pleased, then, to receive 
this little work, such as it is, which I dedicate to you for two 
more particular reasons; firstly, because, although others de- 
spised the observations which I previously published, you had 
no hesitation in attributing to them some utility— and that not 
only before my face but behind my back; secondly, because 
our mutual intercourse and our habits of consulting together 
for the benefit of our patients, have led me to discover that you 
possess a genius pre-eminently made for the practice of medi- 
cine, and that, illustrious as you are in learning of all sorts, 
your proper nature is to prefer the niceties which arise out of 
practice to vain and empty speculations ; matters which, except 
in the rare cases where they meet in the same person, are as 
far apart as the serious wisdom of men and the playthings of 
children. It is this sagacity of yours joined to the opportunity 
which a vast amount of cases for the confirmation of your ex- 
periments supplies, that has raised you to the height of our Art; 
a place which the courtesy of your manners will retain. If this 
dissertation escape blame both from you and those other few 
(but tried and honorable men) whom I call my friends, I shall 


122 ON GOUT. 


care little for the others. They are hostile to me, simply be- 
cause what / think of diseases and their cures differs from what 
they think. It could not be otherwise. It is my nature to 
think where others read; to ask less whether the world agrees 
with me than whether I agree with the truth; and to hold 
cheap the rumour and applause of the multitude. And what 
is it, indeed? is it any great thing for a man to do his duty as 
a good citizen, and to serve the publie to his own private loss, 
and to take no glory for doing so? If I take a right measure 
of the matter, I am now so old that to study my own glory is 
to study the glory of a nonentity. What will it help me, after 
my death, for the eight letters which make the name SvypENHAM 
to pass from mouth to mouth amongst men who can no more 
form an idea of what I was than I of what they will be; of 
men who will know none of those (then dead and gone) of the 
generation before them ; of men who, from the inconstancy and 
vicissitude of all things human, will be changed in manners and 
changed in language! Why should I be anxious about the 
judgment of others? If any exertion of mine in promoting 
the knowledge of diseases and their cure has deserved praise, 
it is praise that I shall not long enjoy. Onthe other hand, if 
there are those who disapprove of my writings, I am hardly 
likely to compose fresh ones. My health prevents me from 
troubling the world much more with medical treatises. In the 
one I am now publishing my hand trembles too much to hold 
the pen; and I gratefully thank Mr. John Drake, Bachelor of 
Medicine of Christ's College Cambridge, my good and kind 
friend, for the help he has lent me; à man whom the natural 
candour of his manners and the integrity of his life have made 
a valued friend, and whom Nature and education will equally 
render the benefactor of his kind, when he shall come to prac- 
tise that Art which he so well understands. 

As to the rest I entreat you, Most Illustrious Sir, to pardon 
me in case I have been troublesome to you in these my tokens 
of respect —referring them only, to what they really arise from, 
the well-deserved and sincere admiration of 


Your most devoted and humble servant, 
THOMAS SYDENHAM. 
LowpoN ; May 21, 1683. 


ON GOUT. 


1. ErrHER men will think that the nature of gout is wholly 
mysterious and incomprehensible, or that a man hke myself, 
who has suffered from it thirty-four years, must be of a slow and 
sluggish disposition not to have discovered something respecting 
the nature and treatment of a disease so peculiarly his own. 
Be this as it may, I will give a bona fide account of what I 
know. The difficulties and refinements relating to the disease 
itself, and the method of its cure, I will leave for Time, the 
guide to truth, to clear up and explain. 

2. Gout attacks such old men as, after passing the best part 
of their life in ease and comfort, indulging freely in high living, 
wine, and other generous drinks, at length, from inactivity, 
the usual attendant of advanced life, have left off altogether the 
bodily exercises of their youth. Such men have generally large 
heads, are of a full, humid, and lax habit, and possess a luxurious 
and vigorous constitution, with excellent vital stamina. 

3. Not that gout attacks these only. Sometimes it invades 
the spare andthin. Sometimes it will not wait for the advance 
of age. Sometimes even the prime of life is lable to it. This 
happens most where there is an unhappy hereditary tendency ; 
or, even where (without such being the case) the patient has over- 
indulged in premature venery. The omission, too, of any cus- 
tomary violent exercise bringsit on. So, also, does the sudden 
change from over-hearty diet in the way of meats and drinks, 
to a low regimen and thin potations. 

4. When it attacks a person worn out by old age, it is 
neither so severe as it is when it takes hold of a young man, nor 
has it such stated periods. They say it is because generally life 
passes away before it comes to a climax, and also because the 
native heat and vigour of the body being diminished, it breaks 
out upon the joints both less regularly and less vehemently. 


124 ON GOUT. 


But if it attacks any person late in life, although it neither fix 
upon its seat so regularly, nor handle him so severely, it still 
takes its ground by degrees, so as to lay down a law for itself and 
choose a type. This it does both in respect to the time of the 
year in which it intends to open the campaign, and in respect 
to the duration of the fit. Uncertain as are its periods, slight 
as may be the torture for a few days, irregular as may be its 
invasion and retreat, it is still gout, and its later attacks are 
worse than its earlier. 

5. Concerning this disease, in its most regular and typical 
state, I will first discourse ; afterwards I will note its more irre- 
gular and uncertain phenomena. These occur when the un- 
seasonable use of preposterous medicines has thrown it down 
from its original status. Also when the weakness and languor 
of the patient prevent it from rising to its proper and genuine 
symptoms. As often as gout is regular, it comes on thus. 
Towards the end of January or the beginning of February, sud- 
denly and without any premonitory feelings, the disease breaks 
out. Its only forerunner is indigestion and crudity of the 
stomach, of which the patient labours some weeks before. His 
body feels swollen, heavy, and windy— symptoms which increase 
until the fit breaks out. This is preceded a few days by torpor 
and a feeling of flatus along the legs and thighs. Besides this, 
there is a spasmodic affection, whilst the day before the fit the 
appetite is unnaturally hearty. The victim goes to bed and 
sleeps in good health. About two o’clock in the morning he is 
awakened by a severe pain in the great toe; more rarely in the 
heel, ankle, or instep. ‘This pain is like that of a dislocation, 
and yet the parts feel as if cold water were poured over them. 
Then follow chills and shivers, and a little fever. The pain, 
which was at first moderate, becomes more intense. With its 
intensity the chills and shivers increase. After a time this 
comes to its height, accommodating itself to the bones and 
ligaments of the tarsus and metatarsus. Now it is a violent 
stretching and tearing of the hgaments—now it is a gnawing 
pain, and now a pressure and tightning. So exquisite and 
lively meanwhile is the feeling of the part affected, that 1t can- 
not bear the weight of the bedclothes nor the jar of a person 
walking in the room. ‘The night is passed in torture, sleep- 
lessness, turning of the part affected, and perpetual change of 


ON GOUT. 125 


posture ; the tossing about of the body being as incessant as the 
pain of the tortured joint, and being worse as the fit comes on. 
Hence the vain efforts, by change of posture, both in the body 
and the limb affected, to obtain. au abatement of the pain. 
This comes only towards the morning of the next day, such 
time being necessary for the moderate digestion of the peccant 
matter. The patient has a sudden and slight respite, which he 
falsely attributes to the last change of position. A gentle perspi- 
ration is succeeded by sleep. He wakes freer from pain, and 
finds the part recently swollen. Up to this time, the only visible 
swelling had been that of the veins of the affected joint. Next 
day (perhaps for the next two or three days), if the generation 
of the gouty matter have been abundant, the part affected is 
painful, getting worse towards evening and better towards morn- 
ing. <A few days after, the other foot swells, and suffers the 
same pains. The pain in the foot second attacked regulates 
the state of the one first attacked. The more it is violent 
in the one, the more perfect is the abatement of suffering, and 
the return of strength in the other. Nevertheless, it brings 
on the same affliction here as it had brought on in the other 
foot, and that the same in duration and intensity. Sometimes, 
during the first days of the disease, the peccant matter is so 
exuberant, that one foot is insufficient for its discharge. It 
then attacks both, and that with equal violence. Generally, 
however, it takes the feet in succession. After it has attacked 
each foot, the fits become irregular, both as to the time of their 
accession and duration. One thing, however, is constant—the 
pain increases at night and remits in the morning. Nowa 
series of lesser fits hke these constitute a true attack of gout— 
long or short, according to the age of the patient. To suppose 
that an attack two or three months in length is all one fit is 
erroneous. It is rather a series of minor fits. Of these the 
latter is milder than the former, so that the peccant matter is 
discharged by degrees, and recovery follows. In strong con- 
stitutions, where the previous attacks have been few, a fortnight 
is the length of an attack. With age and impaired habits gout 
may last two months. With very advanced age, and in con- 
stitutions very much broken down by previous gout, the disease 
will hang on till the summer is far advanced. For the first 
fourteen days the urine is high-coloured, has a red sediment, 


126 ON GOUT. 


and is loaded with gravel. Its amount is less than a third of 
what the patient drinks. During the same period the bowels 
are confined. Want of appetite, general chills towards evening, 
heaviness, and a troublesome feeling at the parts affected, attend 
the fit throughout. As the fit goes off, the foot itches intole- 
rably, most between the toes ; the cuticle scales off, and the feet 
desquamate, as if venomed. The disease being disposed of, the 
vigour and appetite of the patient return, and this in proportion 
to the violence of the last fits. In the same proportion the next 
fit either comes on or keeps off. Where one attack has been 
sharp, the next will take place that time next year—not earlier. 

6. This is gout with its true and regular phenomena. When, 
however, either undue treatment or the prolonged delay of the 
disease has converted the whole body into a focus for the pec- 
cant matter, and when Nature is incompetent to its elimination, 
its course is different. The true seat of the disease is the foot— 
so much so, that when it appears elsewhere its character is 
changed, or else the constitution is weak. Then, however, it 
attacks the hands, wrists, elbows, knees, and other parts, the 
pains being as the pains of the feet. Sometimes it distorts the 
fingers, then they look like a bunch of parsnips, and become 
stiffened and immoveable. ‘This is from the deposit of chalk- 
stone concretions about the ligaments of the knuckles. The 
effect of these is to destroy the skin and cuticle. Then you 
have chalk-stones like crabs’ eyes exposed to view, and you may 
turn them out with a needle. Sometimes the morbific matter 
fixes on the elbows, and raises a whitish tumour almost as large 
as an egg, which gradually grows red and inflamed. Sometimes 
the thigh feels as if a weight were attached to it, without how- 
ever any notable pain. It descends however to the knee, and 
then the pain is intense. It checks all motion, nails the pa- 
tient down to his bed, and will hardly allow him to change his 
posture a hair’s breadth. Whenever, on account of the rest- 
lessness so usual in the disease, or from any urgent necessity, 
the patient has to be moved, the greatest caution is necessary. 
The least contrary movement causes pain, which is tolerable 
only in proportion as it is momentary. This movement is one 
of the great troubles in gout, since, with perfect quiet, the 
agony is just tolerable. 

7. Up to a certain time, the gout comes on towards the end 


ON GOUT. 127 


of winter, lasts for two or three months, and retires regularly. 
Afterwards, however, it lasts throughout the whole year— 
except only the hottest months of the summer. Furthermore, 
the longer the attack, in general the longer is each individual 
fit. Instead of a day or two, they last a fortnight. Instead 
of the feet, they attack any joint indifferently. Lastly, on the 
first or second day after, the patient, besides the pain, has loss 
of appetite and general discomfort. 

8. Until the disease has reached a certain degree of severity, 
the patient enjoys long intervals between the fits, and during 
these intervals, good health. Eventually, however, the limbs 
become drawn up and contracted, so that although a patient 
may just be able to stand, or even to walk, his walk is so lame 
and painful as to be little better than a stand-still. The more, 
too, the patient strives to walk, under the idea of strengthening 
his feet, and thereby rendering them less liable to the disease, 
the more likely is the peccant matter, which has never yet been 
fully discharged, to be thrown upon the inward parts. Herein 
is great danger. Nevertheless, although it cannot be freely 
discharged upon the feet, the feet are still painful—wmore or less. 

9. Other symptoms arise—piles amongst others. Also indi- 
gestion, with rancid tastes in the mouth, whenever anything 
indigestible has been swallowed. The appetite fails, so does 
the whole system. The patient has no enjoyment of life. The 
urine, no longer high-coloured, is pale and copious, like the 
urine of diabetes. The back and other parts itch,—most at 
bedtime. 

10. When the disease is confirmed, the ligaments of the 
ankle-bones feel as if wrenched or squeezed by a strong hand, 
when the patient stretches himself of a morning. At times, 
without any stretching at all, there is this pain, and just as the 
patient is going to sleep, he feels as if the ankle-bone were 
suddenly crushed by a heavy blow, and he awakes with a 
cry. The tendons of the muscles of the ankle are seized with 
a pain so intense, that if it were permanent it would wear 
out human patience. 

11. After many dreadful torments, when death is about to 
relieve the patient, the fits become milder. Partly because 
nature is oppressed by the peccant matter, and partly because 
old age is ill able to throw it vigorously and regularly upon the 


128 ON GOUT. 


extremities. Then instead of the usual pain, there is uneasiness, 
pain in the stomach, weariness, and sometimes a tendency to 
diarrhoea. These symptoms ease the pain. ‘The pain abates 
these symptoms. So that the pain and discomfort alternate, 
and the fit is prolonged. When gout has gone on for many 
years, the fits grow easier, and the patient is worn out by weak- 
ness rather than by pain. The worst pain he now suffers is not 
a tithe of what he suffered when in full health. Nevertheless, 
the severity of the earlier disease was made good by the length 
of the intermissions and the full recovery during the interval. 
The pain was the sharp remedy of Nature, and the worse the 
pain the shorter the fit. The shorter the fit the longer and 
more complete the intermission. 

12. Pain, lameness, and the long list of enumerated sym- 
ptoms are not all. Gout produces calculus in the kidney. This 
may arise from the patient lying so long on his back, or it may 
arise from the secreting organs having omitted their functions 
so long. Lastly, the calculus itself may be part and parcel of 
the morbific matter. Be this as it may, the patient has fre- 
quently to entertain the painful speculation as to whether gout 
or stone be the worst disease. Sometimes the stone, in passing 
from the kidneys to the pelvis, and from the pelvis through 
the ureters to the bladder, kills the patient, without is 
for the gout. 

13. The body is not the only sufferer, and the dependent con- 
dition of the patient is not his worst misfortune. The mind 
suffers with the body ; and which suffers most it is hard to say. 
So much do the mind and reason lose energy, as energy is lost by 
the body, so susceptible and vacillating is the temper, such a 
trouble is the patient to others as well as to himself, that a fit 
of gout is a fit of bad temper. To fear, to anxiety, and to other 
passions, the gouty patient is the continual victim, whilst as 
the disease departs the mind regains tranquillity. 

14; Lastly—and this is the sad catastrophe—the peccant 
matter lodges in the viscera, involves their structure, impairs 
the organs of secretion, leaves the blood stagnant, thick, and 
feculent, prevents the discharge of the gouty matter on the ex- 
tremities, makes life worse than death, and finally brings in 
death as a relief. 

15. For humble individuals like myself, there is one poor 


ON GOUT. 129 


comfort, which is this, viz. that gout, unlike any other disease, 
kills more rich men than poor, more wise men than simple. 
Great kings, emperors, generals, admirals, and philosophers 
have all died of gout. Hereby Nature shows her impartiality : 
since those whom she favours in one way she afflicts in another 
—a mixture of good and evil pre-eminently adapted to our frail 
mortality : 
* ,... nihil est ab omni 
Parte beatum." 


16. Gout attacks women but rarely, and then chiefly the 
aged and the masculine. Where you have the symptoms of 
gout in slender females, they are really the symptoms of 
hysteria, or else of rheumatism imperfectly eliminated. Neither 
have I seen gouty minors or gouty children. The most I have 
observed has been a slight foreshadowing of a future attack, and 
this has been in the younger branches of gouty families. Here 
ends the history of the disease. 

17. The more closely I have thought upon gout, the more I 
have referred it to indigestion, or to the impaired concoction of 
matters, both in the parts and the juices of the body. Gouty 
patients are, generally, either old men, or men who have so 
worn themselves out in youth as to have brought on a prema- 
ture old age—of such dissolute habits none being more common 
than the premature and excessive indulgence in venery, and 
the hike exhausting passions. Add to this the intermission or 
the sudden abandonment of those exercises to which from their 
youth upwards they had been accustomed. Whilst these were 
kept up the blood was invigorated, and the tone of the body 
rendered firm and steady. When however they were dropped, 
the animal spirits gave way, the frame lost tone, and the assi- 
milation became imperfect. Hence the recrementitious portion 
of the juices of the body, which had hitherto been cleared off 
by the exercise in question, accumulated im the vessels and sup- 
plied the germ of the disease. Sometimes also serious study 
and prolonged meditation have increased the evil. This they 
have done by diverting the volatile spirits from their proper 
function of assimilation, 

18. Add to this that great eaters are liable to gout ; and, of 
these, the costive more especially. Eating as they used to eat 


when in full exercise, their digestion is naturally impaired. 
Ft, 9 


130 ON GOUT. 


Even in these cases simple gluttony, and the free use of food, 
although common incentives, by no means so frequently pave 
the way for gout as reckless and mordinate drinking. This 
annihilates the ferments due to the different digestions, it 
throws down the digestions themselves, and through the over- 
abundance of adventitious vapours subdues and disperses the 
natural spirits. Then at one and the same time the energy 
of the spirits which are the instruments of digestion is dimi- 
nished. Then also a vast mass of humours oppresses the blood. 
Then, too, the different concoctions are imperfectly performed. 
Then the respective viscera are overworked, and then the spirits, 
which have long been giving way, are prostrated. If it were 
not so, if it were a simple weakness of the spirits, children and 
women, and the victims of long illnesses would be equally 
gouty. On the contrary, however, it is the hearty and robust. 
These it attacks only during the decline of their heat and natural 
spirits. When this takes place a congestion of the humours 
supervenes. From the two together the due concoctions are 
vitiated and perverted. 

19. Moreover, as all the aforesaid causes promote indigestion, 
so, also, do most of them promote a laxity of the habit and muscles, 
and this opens a gate to such erude and undigested humours as 
force their way towards the surface. When these have lurked 
so long in the blood as to have increased in bulk, and to have 
taken on a vicious disposition, they acquire a putrescent heat ; 
and when Nature can no longer regulate them, they break out, 
fall upon the joints, and excite exquisite pain, heat, and acridity 
in the ligaments and membranes which cover the bones. These 
being shaken and weakened by age or intemperance give way. 
Hence a fit of gout takes place sooner or later, according to 
circumstances. | 

20. In respect to the treatment, if we look to the humours 
themselves, and the indigestion from which they arise, it seems 
at first that we have to evacuate the aforesaid humours, and to 
guard against their increase by strengthening the concoctions; 
which is only what is to be done in all humoral complaints. In 
gout, however, it seems as if it were the prerogative of Nature 
to exterminate the peccant matter after her own fashion, to 
deposit it in the joints, and afterwards to void it by insensible 
perspiration. In gout, too, but three methods have been pro- 


ON GOUT. I9 


posed for the ejection of the causa continens—hleeding, purging, 
sweating. Now none of these succeed. 

31. In the first place bleeding, however much it may pro- 
mise great things, both in the evacuation of those humours which 
already have attacked the joints, and those which are ready to 
attack them, is still clearly contrary to that indication which is 
required by the antecedent cause. This is indigestion arising 
from the deprivation and defect of the spirits, —a deprivation and 
defect which bloodletting increases. Hence it is not to be ap- 
plied either to ease a fit, or to guard against one, especially with 
old people, not even though the blood be that of pleurisy and 
rheumatism, diseases wherein bleeding does so much good; 
inasmuch as, if blood be taken during an intermission, however 
long after a fit, there is danger lest the agitation of the blood 
and humours bring on a fresh one, worse than the one that 
went before it. This is because the strength and vigour of the 
blood, that might serve to get rid of the peccant matter that 
supplies the disease, are weakened. If, on the other hand, a vein 
be opened soon after a fit, there is great risk lest Nature, whilst 
the blood is still weak, be so broken down as to open the door 
for a dropsy. Nevertheless, if the patient be young and have 
drunk hard, blood may be drawn at the beginning of the fit. 
If, however, it be continued during the following fits, gout will 
take up its quarters even in a young subject, and its empire will 
be no government, but a tyranny. 

22. Then as to any catharsis either above or below, we must 
remember, that it is the inviolable rule of Nature, interwoven 
with the essence of the present disease, to throw the peccant 
matter upon the joints. If so, all that can be done by purges 
or vomits, is to throw what Nature would eject through the 
extremities into the blood. Hence it happens that what was 
meant for the joints, takes hold of one of the viscera. Then 
the patient's life is in danger. This is often observed in those 
who, either to ward off a fit, or what is worse, to allay one, 
have used themselves to purgatives. Nature diverted from her 
own good and safe method of depositing the peccant matter in 
the joints, as soon as the humours are solicited towards the in- 
testines, instead of acute pains with little danger, induces sick- 
ness, griping, fainting, and other irregular symptoms, which 
will nearly destroy the patient. 


132 ON GOUT. 


23. Sure am I that all purging, mild or sharp, intended to 
relieve the joints, is mostly injurious, whether it be during a fit, 
to diminish the peccant matter, at the end of one, to dissipate 
the remnants of the disease, or during an intermission, to guard 
against the occurrence of one. From myself and others I have 
learnt, that purges bring on what they were meant to keep off. 
In the first place, if given during the fit, they interrupt the work 
of Nature. Nature would separate the morbific matter, and 
deposit it on the joints. Purging excites a confusion of the 
animal spirits. Hence not only has the fit become worse, but 
the patient has become endangered. After a fit, a purge shall 
perhaps be given to work off the remains of the disease. It 
will just bring on a fresh one equally bad ; in which case the 
patient, mocked by a false hope, makes for himself troubles 
which would never have occurred had the humours been left 
alone. This I have found in my own person, when I have 
unreasonably looked to medicine for the extermination of the 
remains of the disease. Lastly, in respect to purging at certain 
intervals, and whilst the health is good, given with a view of 
warding off or ensuring against the fit, although the present 
danger of a fresh fit is less than before, it must still bring one 
on, and that for reasons already given. If it fail in doing this, 
it by no means carries off the disease. J have known some 
gouty persons who would purge every autumn and every spring, 
every month and every week, and yet remain gouty, their 
attacks bemg worse than if they had left themselves alone; inas- 
much as, although the catharsis may take off some of the pec- 
cant matter, it is so far from strengthening the digestion that 
it weakens it, weakening Nature also. Hence, as it does away 
with one cause only, it meets only half the disease. 

24. Add to this, that the same defect of strength which 
impairs the digestion of the gouty, lessens and weakens the 
whole system of the animal spirits, so that a concussion and 
agitation arise from the slightest cause that dejects or disturbs 
the mind or body. This often happens with the hysterical and 
hypochondriac. Gout follows the slightest evacuation, the tone 
of the body is loosened, the spirits which, whilst in vigour, kept 
it firm and steady, give way, the peccant matter breaks down 
all barriers, takes its own course, and inflicts a blow upon the 
system. The fit follows. 


ON GOUT. 133 


25. Nevertheless this method, bad and mischievous as it is, 
has made the reputation of many empirics, who nevertheless 
have made a secret of the purge they use. For it must be 
noted, that whilst the catharsis goes on, the patient suffers either 
not at all, or very slightly ; and provided that it can be kept 
on for a few days, if no fresh fit supervene, the original one will 
go off. Sooner, however, or later, he will pay a tremendous 
penalty, arising from the disorder into which Nature has been 
forced headlong by the aforesaid agitation of the humours. 

26. The evacuation of the peccant matter by sweats, although 
less mischievous than the other two forms, is still prejudicial. 
It does not throw the disease on the viscera. On the contrary, 
it throws them upon the surface. Still it is dangerous for the 
following reasons. 

lst. It takes the humours whilst they are yet crude, and 
not sufficiently tempered for due separation, forces them upon 
the limbs, and so solicits a fit before its due time, and in spite 
of Nature. 

2d. If it take place during a fit, it drives and forces the 
morbific matter too violently upon the joint affected, and so 
creates intolerable pain. Then if the amount of peccant 
matter be greater than the part affected can admit, it throws it 
upon other joints, so creating an ebullition and exeestuation 
both of the blood and of the other humours. Lastly, if the 
body be over full of the serous matter that generates gout, apo- 
plexy may come on. 

27. Hence in gout, as in all other diseases where the sweats 
intended for the expulsion of the morbifie matter are forced 
rather than natural, it 1s very dangerous to bring them on too 
violently, and to solicit them beyond that degree of concoction 
to which the humours requiring an elimination have arrived of 
their own accord. So teaches Hippocrates: “ Cocta, non cruda, 
sunt movenda et medicanda."! This applies to sweats and purges 
alike, as is clear from the sweats that end an ague-fit. Ifpro- 
portionate to the febrile matter concocted by the preceding 
paroxysms, they relieve the patient notably. If beyond the 
limits of Nature, and forced by bedclothes, fresh flame is lit, and 
continued fever sets in, just as the original fever was on the 
point of being extinguished. Similarly, the gentle moisture of 


! Aph. i, 22, tom. iii, p. 711—[G.] 


134 ON GOUT. 


the skin in gout, which generally arises towards morning after 
each of the slighter fits (which slighter fits I have shown in my fifth 
section to constitute the single full one), relieves the pain and 
restlessness which afflicted the patient during the whole night. 
Now, slight as is this perspiration, and fugacious as is its charac- 
ter, as soon as it becomes protracted, and as soon as it becomes 
disproportionate to the peccant matter concocted by the pre- 
vious fit, it exasperates the disease. Hence, in this as in all 
other diseases, the plague only excepted, it is no part of a phy- 
sician to force a sweat, since we have no means of ascertaining 
what proportion of the peccant matter is fit for separation, 
and consequently no rule for regulating the sweat we would 
provoke. 

28. If evacuants are out of place in gout, what are the in- 
dications of treatment? Two points are most particularly to 
be considered. The first is the causa antecedens, or the indi- 
gestion of the humours, arising from a defect of spirits. The 
other is the causa continens, or the heat and exestuation of the 
same, when, from their prolonged delay in the body (a delay 
arising from the aforesaid inconcoction), they have become putrid 
and acrid. These two are as far as the poles asunder. What 
helps one hurts the other. Hence the difficulty of treatment. 
If we strive by heating medicines to subdue the indigestion, we 
run the risk of inflaming the humours; whilst moderate diet 
and cooling medicines, which allay the heat and acridity, cause 
indigestion, and impair the natural warmth. 

Now that which I here call the causa continens is not only 
that which actually takes hold of the joints, and so forms a 
paroxysm, but also that which lurks in the blood, and is incom- 
petent to the due separation. Few fits are either so long or so 
severe as to eliminate in toto, by a single effort, the whole of 
the morbific matter, and to clear away from the system even 
the last remnants of it. Hence we must look to each of these 
causes, both during the fit and between fits. 

The elimination of the materia continens is the work of 
Nature ; and it must be done according to Nature’s own method. 
All that can be done in the way of help, is to keep clear of 
such medicines and modes of diet as are of a hot nature, and 
thereby likely to inflame the humours. Anything beyond, in 
the way of an attempt to assuage the hot and acrid humours, 


ON GOUT. 135 


is an injury to the digestion of them; the greatest and chief 
intention being their due concoction. This I shall now dis- 
cuss ; touching, however, during the course of my dissertation, 
as occasion may require, upon those remedies which have a 
value in either cooling the heat of the humours or abating 
their acridity. 

29. Whatever, therefore, helps Nature in the discharge of 
her functions, either by comforting the stomach, so that it shall 
rightly digest its aliments, or by strengthening the blood to 
the due assimilation of the chyle brought to it, or by restoring 
the solid parts in such a manner as to fit them for the con- 
version of the juices destined for their growth and increase into 
their own proper substance, are properly called digestives. So 
also is whatever preserves the different organs of excretion and 
the various emunctories of the body in their proper status, 
whereby in due time the recrements are voided in their due 
order. I say, that whatever fulfils these intentions, whether 
medicine, diet, exercise, or change in the non-naturals, is a 
digestive. 

30. Medicines of the kind in question are, to speak gene- 
rally, medicines which are moderately warming, and which, 
when tasted, act pungently on the tongue. Such are grateful 
to the stomach, curative to the blood, comfortable to the parts 
at large. Some of them, amongst many, are the roots of 
angelica, elecampane, wormwood-leaves, the lesser centaury, 
germander, ground-pine, &c. &c. To these may be added the 
so-called anti-scorbutics, as horseradish, garden scurvy-grass, 
watercress. These last, however, though warming to the 
stomach, and auxiliary to digestion, from their acridity and 
pungency, act as incentives to the disease. They increase the 
heat, and so stimulate. Hence they must be used more 
sparingly than the others. With them, the moderate heat and 
the mild bitterness restore the stomach, and render the mass 
of the blood more fresh and more lively. 

31. Different species of these herbs, in the form of a skilful 
mixture, do better than any particular ones alone. However 
much the rule of the simpler the better may apply to specifics, 
as often as we purpose to cure the patient by satisfying any 
particular intentions, a variety is best. Each ingredient takes 
a part in the cure. The more numerous the simples, the more 


136 ON GOUT. 


potent the medicine. Hence, out of a list like the preceding, 
various formule may be prepared. For my own part, I prefer 
an electuary of the complex character of Venice treacle, wherein 
the mutual fermentation of the simples heightens their virtue, 
producing a tertium quid, of which the virtue, as a whole, is 
greater than the virtue of the sum of its elements. I leave, 
however, both the choice and the formule to the skill of the 
physician; inasmuch as I have nowhere undertaken to write 
what they call recipes. All I undertake is the notification of 
those indications to which our curative endeavours must be 
directed. To overstep this limit is (as I have said elsewhere)! 
to give a handle to the empiric. For the sake, however, of 
beginners, I will publish the form which I most use. It is as 


follows : 
EK Root of angelica, 
—  sweet.flag, 
—  masterwort, 
—  elecampane, 
Leaves of mugwort, 
— lesser centaury, 
— white horehound, 
—  germander, 
—  ground-pine, 
—  Scordium, 
—  calamint, 
—  feverfew, 
—  meadow-saxifrage, 
— St. John's wort, 
—  golden-rod, 
— wild thyme, 
— mint, 
— sage, 
— rue, 
—  carduus Benedictus, 
— pennyroyal, 
— southernwood, 
Flowers of chamomile, 
—  tansey, 
‘—-  Hly of the valley, 
— English saffron, 
Seeds of pennycress, 
— garden scurvy-grass, 
— caraways, 
Juniper-berries, aa q. s. 

Collect the herbs, flowers, and roots at the season most favorable for 
their respective virtues. Dry, and keep in paper-bags until they 
fall into a fine powder. Take six ounces of each. Mix, and make 
up with a sufficient quantity of the best clarified honey, and Canary 
wine. Make into an electuary of the due consistence—secundum 


artem. "Two drachms to be taken night and morning. 


! Med. Observ., V, 6, 8.—[G.] 


ON GOUT. 137 
Or (if this cannot be had) use— 


Ix Conserve of garden scurvy-grass, Ziss ; 
Roman wormwood, 
Orange-peel, aa 2j; 
Candied angelica, 
Candied nutmeg, aa 3ss ; 
Venice treacle, 5iij ; 
Compound powder of cuckoo-pint, 5ij ;. 
Syrup of oranges, q. s. 
Make into an electuary. Two drachms to be taken twice a day. 
Wash down with five or six spoonfuls of— 
K Sliced horseradish, 3iij ; 
Garden scurvy-grass, xij handfuls ; 
Watercress, 
Brooklime, 
Sage, 
Mint, aa iv handfuls ; 
The peel of six oranges ; 
Bruised nutmegs, ij ; 
Brunswick mum, Oxij. 
Distil in a common still, until six pints are given off. 


32. Of the common medicines Venice treacle is the best. 
Still, as it contains so many spices, and opium as well, the 
foregoing is an improvement on it. Care, however, must be 
taken that, whatever the preparation be, it be palatable. It 
has to be continued so very long, that if distasteful it will be 
useless. Of simple medicines the Peruvian bark is the best. 
A few grains taken morning and evening restore and freshen 
the blood, | 

33. In gout, as in most other chronic complaints, those 
remedies which most comfort the blood do most good—pro- 
vided always, for reasons to be given below, that their warming 
properties are not due to vinous spirits. This is because, un- 
less I am mistaken, all the diseases in question are referable 
to one general cause, viz. the indigestion of the humours. 

34. Nothing proves this more than the difference between 
acute and chronic diseases ; a difference which I will ask leave 
of the reader to enlarge upon, although, in doing so, I must 
digress a little from my subject. Just as those diseases which 
quickly come and quickly go, being quickly brought to con- 
coction, are called acute, so are those which attain the same 
concoction, either very slowly or not at all, called chronic. This 
difference is shown by the nature of the thing itself, as well as 


138 ON GOUT. 


by the terms used. The cause of the difference, however, be- 
tween these two diseases lies deep, and is not easily discovered. 
We shall not waste our time in staying a little to examine it, 
since a clear and distinct knowledge upon these points is of 
great importance towards discovering the true indications of 
these diseases. 

35. Whether the inward bowels of the earth undergo various 
changes by the vapours which exhale therefrom, so that the air is 
tainted, or whether the atmosphere be changed by some altera- 
tions induced by some peculiar conjunction of any of the 
heavenly bodies, it is a truth, that at particular times the air is 
stuffed full of particles which are hostile to the economy of the 
human body, just as at other times it is impregnated with par- 
ticles which disagree with the bodies of different species of brute 
animals. At these times, whenever we draw in with our breath 
such noxious and unnatural miasmata, mix them with our blood, 
and fall into such epidemic diseases as they are apt to engender, 
Nature calls in fever as her usual instrument for expelling from 
the blood any hostile matters that may lurk in it. Such dis- 
eases are usually called epidemic. They are acute and brief, 
their movement being quick and violent. But besides these 
diseases excited by some external cause, there are others equally 
acute, arising from some particular inflammation of the blood, and 
this is produced by some anomaly or dyscrasis of particular 
bodies, rather than from any general atmospheric influence. 
These I call intercurrent or sporadic, inasmuch as they may 
occur during any year whatever. 

36. Chronic diseases have a different nature. However 
much an unhealthy atmosphere may favour their generation, 
they are not atmospheric in origin. The common cause of 
them all is the indigestion of the humours. When the prin- 
ciples of Nature, either from old age or from long and repeated 
errors concerning the six non-naturals (meat and drink most 
especially), have been weakened, or when the secretions have 
been so far impaired as to be wholly unequal to the elimination 
of the superfluities which it is their function to strain off from 
the blood ; 1n such cases the afflux of humours is too abundant 
and too much increased for the strength of the individual to 
bear up against. And now the aforesaid humours are kept 
prisoners, undergo fermentations, undergo putrefactions, and 


ON GOUT. 139 


finally break out in such a manner as to create different species 
of diseases, according to the different species of depravation. Just 
as these depraved juices vary in their disposition, so do they vary 
in the part to which they are determined, one part being more 
ready to receive them than another. The long series of sym- 
ptoms that then succeeds partially arises from the nature of 
such juices, partly from the ataxy of the parts. These two to- 
gether constitute that irregular condition of Nature which we 
term a chronic disease. 

97. That this inability of Nature to concoct the humours is 
the chief cause of most chronic diseases becomes clear, if we 
consider the cases of old men. Their digestions are weakened. 
The spirits instrumental thereto are wasted by the repeated 
functions of a long life, hence they are more liable to chronic 
diseases than young men. Here the flame of life burns brighter, 
and dissipates all recrementitious accumulations. Here the 
organs of secretion are supplied by a continual source of natural 
warmth. Here the function of depuration can always meet the 
amount of matter to be purified, excepting only those cases 
where there is absolutely an oppressive and suffocating excess of 
humours. Another argument towards the same conclusion is 
the fact, that winter causes chronic diseases more than summer. 
True it is, that chronic diseases in some cases do not show them- 
selves in act and deed until towards the end of winter. Never- 
theless the supply of humours upon which they depend has ac- 
cumulated during the winter, has been favoured by the cold, 
and has been increased by the languor of Nature, and the insuf- 
ficient administration of the animal economy. 

38. Hence men who are healthy during the summer, have 
gout, asthma, coughs, &c. &c., during the winter. Hence also 
warm climates cure the diseases that cold ones produce. Hence 
also the stupendous and incredible advantage derived in many 
chronic diseases, and in consumption most, from riding on 
horseback ; a kind of exercise which strengthens and invigorates 
the different digestions, lights up afresh the animal heat, acts 
upon the organs of secretion by a healthy succussion, and so 
promotes the depuration of the blood. From all this must 
needs arise a restoration of the lost digestion, and an excellent 
crasis of the whole body. 

39. It is now clear, that in other chronic diseases as well as 


140 |. ON GOUT. 


in gout, we may, when no manifest symptoms contra-indicate, 
expect great advantage from the use of warming herbs. These 
warm the blood even in the middle of winter, and are useful 
even in the summer as a preventive. Indeed, to wait for the 
winter before we use them, and to let the foul matters accumu- 
late, is to shut the stable-door after the steed 1s stolen. , 

40. I have stated already, that gout has this peculiarity : 
cathartics not only do no good, but are injurious to it. In 
most other chronic diseases, however, bleeding and purging 
must precede restoratives and digestives. When, however, the 
patient has once begun them, he must keep on and allow no 
evacuations to intervene. This a rule—whenever we rely upon 
restoratives, evacuations do harm. — Finally, I will not say that 
digestive medicines are the best medicines that exist. I will 
only say, that he who tries them will find them surpass his 
expectations. 

41. Now this must precede all that I have to say concern- 
ing the treatment of gout, viz. that be our digestive remedies 
what they may (medicines, diet, exercise), they must not be 
taken by the by, but must be steadily and diligently adhered 
to. In gout, as in other chronic diseases, the cause is a change 
and new nature of the system. Now, no sensible man can 
believe that any light and momentary change can remedy this. 
The system must be transformed. The man must be made 
anew. It is not as in acute disease, where a person in full 
health is smit with fever, and falls headlong into a dangerous 
disease. Gout is different. For years together a man has 
drunk and feasted—has omitted his usual exercise—has grown 
slow and sluggish—has been over-studious or over-anxious,— 
in short, has gone wrong in some important point of life. In 
this case he has, as it were, taken trouble to pervert the various 
ferments of the body, and to smother the animal spirits, which 
are the primary instruments of concoction. Hence the humours, 
preternaturally accumulated, break forth, after having become 
exalted in the highest degree. They destroy the system. The 
muscles are softened and the joints relaxed, so that the affluent 
humours are readily received. A new nature is now super- 
induced, the original and natural economy of the body being 
altogether broken up and destroyed. ‘The fits that seem so 
important in the eyes of the hasty, are nothing more than the 


ON GOUT. 141 


series and order of symptoms which Nature uses in the expulsion 
of the morbific matter. Hence, to use any medicine for a time 
isa waste of labour. The weakness of all the digestions, and the 
loss of natural strength in the several parts, are the essence of 
gout. Each must be dealt with. The strength of the diges- 
tion and the restoration of the parts must be gradual—propor- 
tionate to the original and natural economy of the body. To 
do this fully and perfectly is impossible. The system is slow to 
transform itself, and old age is the usual attendant of the dis- 
ease. Still what age and weakness allow must be done, and 
the more we can do the more we mitigate the tyranny of the 
disease. 

42. This must be noted—peptic or digestive remedies, whether 
medical or dietetic, must be given between the fits, and as long 
before the paroxysm that is expected as possible. "Time and 
patience only will suffice for the restoration of the concoctions, 
and for the renovation of the impaired ferments. The blood 
and viscera require strength: weakness, however, is the lot of 
old age. 

43. However much these and the like remedies may do good, 
they are insufficient single-handed. We must look beyond 
medicine. Wise men do this in gout, as in all other chronic 
diseases. 

In the first place, then, moderation in meat and drink must 
be observed, so that the stomach receive no more food than it 
can digest, and so that no fresh fuel be added to the disease. 
The other extreme, however, as I have found in my own person, 
is equally injurious. Abstinence weakens the parts, by with- 
holding from them their due proportion of that aliment which 
is necessary for supporting their strength and vigour. Again: 
although digestible food be better than indigestible, the palate 
of the patient must be consulted, since it is a matter of ob- 
servation, that indigestible matters which the stomach craves, 
are easier concocted than digestible matters which create dis- 
taste. Nevertheless, things essentially indigestible must be 
taken sparingly. I think, too, that one sort of food for each 
meal is best ; since a mixture of meats cause more trouble to 
the stomach than an equal quantity of one sort. Saving of 
meat, the patient may eat ad libitum (except that his food must 
not be sharp, nor salted nor spiced), without injuring the diges- 


142 ON GOUT. 


tion. Salt and spice supply fuel to the disease, and consequently 
are so far injurious. 

44. As to meal-times, it is best not to take supper ; as bed 
being properly dedicated to the digestion of the humours, is not 
to be devoted to the concoction of the food. Gouty men, then, 
may take a free draught of small-beer instead of a meal; the 
more so as the same subjects are liable to renal calculi, and 
small-beer at supper-time is an excellent preventive to these. 
It cools and washes out the kidneys. 

45. A milk diet (the milk being either raw or boiled), with 
nothing besides but a little bread, has prevailed for the last 
twenty years. It has done good as long as it has been rigidly 
attended to ; the moment, however, that the patient swerves 
from it a hair's breadth, and the moment he betakes himself to 
the diet of a healthy man (no matter how mild and simple), 
the gout returns worse than ever. ‘This is because the prin- 
ciples of Nature have been weakened, so that the disease be- 
comes more obstinate and dangerous in proportion as the patient 
is unable to resist it. 

Whoever, then, would put himself under a milk diet must 
seriously consider within himself whether he is likely to be able 
to persist in it all his life long. Resolute as he may be, he 
may fail in this. 

I once knew a nobleman who lived a whole year on milk 
alone, and liked it. During the year his bowels were moved 
once or oftener every day. Suddenly his habit of body changed ; 
he became costive, his stomach sickened at milk, and although 
his mind was as good as ever, he was obliged to leave off. 
Again: certain hypochondriaes, of a heavy habit of body, or 
who have long used themselves to spirituous liquors, cannot 
bear the use of milk. Meanwhile, the brief and fugacious benefit 
which those who bear milk derive from its use arises, not only 
from the fact of its being the simplest diet, but from its making 
the blood milder and sweeter ; tempering, as it does, the acri- 
mony of its particles. I have little doubt, but that if the 
stomach would bear it, barley-broth would do the same. Again: 
milk is a diet wholly insufficient for adults. Henceit represses 
that turgescence or virosity of blood to which gout is due; so 
that those few with whom it agrees are free from gout as long 
as they take it exclusively—no longer. To the primary and 


ON GOUT. 143 


original cause of gout, which is weakness of the ferments and 
the concoctions, it is wholly adverse ; hence, in this respect, it 
does as much harm on the one side as good on the other. This, 
however, has been overlooked, and many and deadly errors have 
arisen therefrom. The causa continens of the disease has been 
the heat and acridity of the humours. Those, however, who 
have treated this alone, have weakened the concoctions and 
prostrated the natural powers altogether. 

46. As to hquors, those are the best which neither sink to 
the weakness of water, nor rise to the generosity of wine. 
Such is the London small-beer, either hopped or without hops. 

First as to the wine. The old saw is that “if you drink 
wine you have the gout, and if you do not drink wine the gout 
will have you." The first part is true enough. It is proved by 
the experience of patients that wine is absolutely hurtful. 
Much as it may help in forwarding the concoctions—the weak- 
ness whereof has been mentioned before as the antecedent cause 
of the disease—the causa continens, the hot state of the humours, 
is increased by it. 

Here lies the force of the disease; and this we aggravate 
and inflame. Again: even for the promotion of the con- 
eoctions we are not in the habit of giving wine as an ordinary 
drink, except in cases where the use of it has been habitual ; 
inasmuch as, although it may in its passage impart a certain 
degree of warmth, it still, beyond doubt, weakens the ferments 
of the body, by diverting the natural spirits from their natural 
parts. This shows why hard-drinking and bad-living profligates 
are so often taken off by gout, dropsy, palsy, or similarly cold 
diseases. Add to this the effect of wine (habitually taken), in 
making the body soft and loose, like that of females ; whereas 
temperate liquors so give tone and strength to the constitution, 
that water-drinkers scarcely know what goutis. Another fact 
is this—amongst men, those are most hable to gout, who, from 
a certain luxuriance of the system, make blood too fast, and 
form flesh out of their aliments in an imperfect state of di- 
gestion. Now, such a habit is favoured by wine-drinking, 
which both increases the new mass of matters taken in, and 
applies (as it were) a torch to the smouldering accumulations, 
which break out into flame, and bring on the disease. Further- 
more, the blood of gout is the blood of pleurisy. It were 


144 ON GOUT. 


madness, then, to add fuel to flame in the shape of ardent spi- 
rituous liquors. Neither is the other extreme safe. Over-cooling 
draughts undermine the concoctions, extinguish the natural 
heat, and add to the mischief. They do not, indeed, cause pain, 
as wine does. They cause death. This is shown by old men, 
who, after drinking wine all their lifetimes, have suddenly gone 
from wine to water instead. In no long time they go from 
life to death. 

47. This is a rule for the gouty. They may take those 
liquors which neither chill the stomach nor intoxicate in any 
moderate quantity. Such is small beer in our own country, 
which in foreign countries may be replaced by weak wine and 
water. Water alone is bad and dangerous, as I know from 
personal experience. When taken, however, as the regular 
drink from youth upwards, it is beneficial. Indeed it is the 
natural drink of the greater part of mankind— more happy they 
in their poverty than we in our wealth and abundance! The 
vast host of diseases which afflict our bodies are standing wit- 
nesses to this—gout, stone, apoplexy, palsy, and others innu- 
merable. Then there are the bad effects upon the mind. This 
is warped from its right direction by wine-drinking. The 
spirits of the adventitious liquors, complicated with the spirits 
subservient to the formation of thought, disturb and volatilize the 
mind, filling it with vain and empty fancies instead of solid and 
serious thoughts. This makes awit a babbler. Nevertheless, 
shadow is not more different from substance, than a quick tongue 
from a wise brain. 

48. Now, although, during a moderate attack, the patient 
may take his choice between small beer and wine-and-water, 
whenever the whole substance of the body has become inflamed 
by gout, but little progress will be made towards curing it, 
unless there be a total and absolute abstinence from all (even 
the weakest) fermented liquors. Hach and all of these possess 
more or less of pungency and acridity ; and (what is worse) each 
and all, being fermented, impart their nature to the humours, 
and just like yeast in other mixtures, engender and keep up a 
perpetual fermentation. Diet-drinks, therefore, of the usual 
and appropriate sort, must form the ordinary beverage. This 
should not be strong; else it will act upon the humours and 
inflame them as much as wine. Nor yet too weak; else it will 


ON GOUT. 145 


chill and weaken the natural functions. A beverage of this 
sort, provided that it be made with ingredients which are not 
distasteful to the patient, although, for the first week or two it 
may, from being so continually taken, pall upon the palate, will, 
after that time, become as grateful as any other ordinary drink. 
Far from impairing the appetite, it will improve it; in such 
wise, too, that it shall be more natural and genuine than it 
would have been under the use of wine or beer. Another 
advantage will also accrue from it. Those who take a diet- 
drink instead of beer, may allow themselves greater latitude in 
the points of regimen. No man wholly avoids errors in diet. 
There is a way, however, of correcting and making up 
for them. 

Far more important, however, than any of these matters, is 
the extent to which a regimen like the preceding is a safeguard 
against that almost inseparable companion of gout—the stone ; 
an ailment which acrid and attenuating liquors seem made for 
the very purpose of engendering. 

The following formula gives a drink pleasant both to the eye 
and the palate : 


EK Sarsaparilla, vj ; 
Sassafras, 
China-root, 
Hartshorn-shavings, aa 3ij ; 
Liquorice-root, 2j. 

Boil for half an hour in two gallons of spring-water. Cover up, and 
leave to simmer for twelve hours. Boil down to two thirds. Remove 
from the fire, and add half au ounce of aniseed. Set by for two 
hours. Strain, and leave to settle. Bottle the clarified liquor for 
use. 


49. This drink is best begun with when the patient has just 
recovered from a fit, and it should be continued both during 
the fits and in the interval between them, throughout the re- 
mainder of the patients hfe. It is far from sufficient to just 
enter upon a change of system when the disease is at its height; 
since then it is, that, from the ataxia and inordinate motion 
of the humours, Nature least bears the substitution of inert 
and unfermented liquors for the more lively and spirituous 
ones. At the same time, the aforesaid electuary may be used. 
This is to be taken thenceforward, every day, both during the 
fits and between them. The heat of this will, to a certain 

II. 10 


146 ON GOUT. 


extent, make up for the watery character of the diet-drink. It 
will ensure a due degree of heat to the blood and bowels, and 
it will do this without that agitation which is usually excited by 
the turbulence of fermented liquors. 

50. If any one object that, with total abstinence from wine 
and other fermented liquors, life is not worth having, I answer 
that they must consider, on the other hand, the still greater 
and still more intolerable misery of being daily racked by the 
torments of inveterate gout—since in no other disease do I 
require a like abstinence. Besides this—wuse sweetens habit; 
and water is a drink as natural as universal. Surely, then, the 
patient who has once been gouty, provided that he be a man, 
and not a two-legged brute, will not doubt which way to go. 

51. Nevertheless, if the patient, from either too long and too 
excessive a use of intoxicating liquors, from being advanced in 
hfe, or from excessive debility, cannot digest his food without 
either wine or some other fermented liquor, it is dangerous to 
forbid him wine suddenly and abruptly,—an error which has been 
the death of many. Hence, in these cases, the dietetic apozen is 
to be deferred; and, if used at all, used after a gradual pre- 
paration for it. Meanwhile, until the patient become accus- 
tomed to it, he may take a little wine at meal-times, but that as 
a medicine rather than as a drink. In which case sherry is 
preferable either to Rhenish or French wines. These last, 
although agreeable to the stomach, favour the exacerbation of 
the humours, and increase the fomes of the disease. Besides 
which, being nearly as crude, and almost as httle concocted as 
English cider, they are not so cordial and warming as the 
wines of Spain. "Thus much concerning the meat and drink of 
gouty subjects. 

52. There is another matter also, which, although considered 
unimportant, is nevertheless of great moment, both in digesting 
the fomes of the disease during the fit, and in ensuring against 
the generation of the morbific matter when the fit is over ; and 
this is going to bed early, especially in winter. 

Next to bleeding and purging, nothing undermines the forces 
of Nature like late hours; a fact which every delicate person 
who has tried it will vouch, provided that he seriously consider 
how much more fresh and lively he is of a morning, after an 
early bedtime, than he is after sitting up late. He is then 


ON GOUT. 147 


languid and enervate. However much, too, it may seem to be 
all one whether we go to bed early or late, provided that we 
lie an equal time (that is, whether we go to bed at nine and 
get up at five, or get up at seven and go to bed at eleven), the 
real difference is great, and that for this reason: in the day 
time the spirits are dissipated by exercise, either bodily or 
mental, and these, with invalids, are so infirm and weak, that 
they need the refreshment of sleep early in the evening. Now, 
as the approach of night brings on a certain relaxation of the 
body, which, during the day, has been kept fresh by the in- 
fluence of the sun, the warmth of the bed (especially in the 
winter) must be substituted for that of the sun. In the morn- 
ing, however, the spirits being refreshed and invigorated, both 
by the rest of the previous night and the warmth of the bed, 
early rising, although it may rob the patient of an hour or two 
of his morning sleep, injures Nature less than an additional 
hour or two of watching over night; besides which, when day 
comes upon a person out of bed, it favours the strength and 
steadiness of the body. Hence I advise gouty patients, espe- 
cially in winter, to go to bed very early and to rise betimes, 
however much their shortened slumbers may induce them to 
seek a morning's sleep by lying in bed ; the more so, as every 
morning slumber subtracts so much from the next night's rest, 
and so does violence to Nature.  Perversely to turn day into 
night, and night into day, is to despise her prudent economy. 
53. Moreover, the tranquillity of the mind is to be established 
by all possible means; since all perturbations, if once they 
break their bounds, favour the dissolution of the systasis of 
the spirits, which are the instruments of the digestions, and so 
encourage gout. Wisely, then, will the patient act who well 
considers his liability to the common lot of mortality, and is not 
foolish enough to think himself free from the troubles that fol- 
low it. Whether from any fault of his own or others, he 
nourish a discontented spirit, he will not lay down the law 
for the world at large; which hitherto has never invariably 
humoured any one, however wise or powerful. Neither to any 
man have all things succeeded according to the promises of a 
vain imagination. On the contrary, many a one has died sud- 
denly amidst the stir of business, exhibiting an instance of the 
frailty of humanity, and unnecessarily depriving himself of the 


148 ON GOUT. 


brief enjoyment of life. The same mischief follows the over- 
application of the mind to serious matters and deep study. 
Melancholy, so called, is pre-eminently the mseparable com- 
panion of gout. Hence those who are liable to it are so wont 
to tire and overwhelm the animal spirits by long and deep 
thought, that excessive exertion of this sort, even without the 
artificial aid of reading, makes the proper preservation of the 
economy of the body an impossibility ; for which reason (as 
seems to me) gout rarely attacks fools. Those who choose may 
except the present writer. 

54. Far above everything else, however, as a check to the 
primary cause of gout—the indigestion of the humours—and, 
on the other hand, as an aid to the restoration of the blood, 
and as a strengthener to the parts, is bodily exercise. ‘To this, 
however, one remark applies, viz. that in gout, as in all chronic 
diseases, where the whole habit of the body requires change, 
unless daily, exercise will be useless. Exercise by fits and 
starts, whilst it does next to nothing towards changing the 
habit of the body, which from inertness and indulgence is be- 
come languid and effeminate, may, perchance, do absolute 
injury, by bringing on a fit when fits have begun to cease. 
Not that the exercise should be violent. On the other hand, 
it should be that which best suits old men, the usual subjects 
of gout. Undue movement of the body dissipates the spirits 
too much, and, consequently, hurts the concoctions ; whilst 
moderate and regular exercise strengthen them. Hard as this 
may seem to a man who, besides old age, inaptitude of body, 
and (more especially) the sluggishness which is so natural to 
the disease, suffers from pain besides, it is still true, that if 
neglected, nothing hitherto discovered will do good. Now, 
just as the interval between the fits can never be long, unless 
the body be regularly exercised, so also is sloth favorable to the 
generation of a calculus, a disease more dangerous and more 
painful than gout itself. 

55. Add to this a fact, which ought to have great weight ; 
namely, that by long rest the matter that forms chalk-stones is 
increased, these being deposited in the joints of the body, par- 
ticularly in those of the fingers; so that at length they are 
entirely deprived of motion. However confidently some may 
assert that the matter of these chalk-stones is nothing more 


ON GOUT. 149 


than the tartar of the blood transmitted to the joints, it will 
soon become clear, upon attentive reflection, that whilst the 
accumulation of the inconcocted matter which creates gout falls 
upon the joints and renders the parts about them permanently 
swollen, it must at length happen, partly that the assimilative 
power of these parts becomes checked, and partly that, from 
the smothering obstruction which the sluggish humour there 
engenders, the aforesaid matter is generated. This is converted 
into a substance of the kind in question by the heat and pain 
of the joint; and it increases day by day, converting into its 
own proper substance both the skin and flesh. The deposit 
now lies bare, and may be picked out. It has been compared 
to crabs’ eyes, chalk, and other similar matters. Now this 
may be guarded against by daily exercise, whereby we obtain 
the due diffusion over the whole body of the humours that 
generate gout, instead of their accumulation on any particular 
part of it by preference. I have found in my own person that 
long and daily exercise not only stops the generation of chalk- 
stones, but even dissolves old and hard ones already formed ; 
provided only that they have not gone so far as to have con- 
verted the outer skin into their own proper substance. 

56. In respect to the kind of exercise, riding on horseback, 
unless forbidden by either old age or a calculus, is by far the 
best. Indeed I have often thought within myself, that if any 
person knew a remedy of which he wished to make a secret 
equally efficacious in gout, as in most chronic diseases, with 
regular and steady riding on horseback he might make a 
fortune. Where this cannot be done, driving in a carriage 
comes to the same thing, which is a blessing to gouty people ; 
inasmuch as that very wealth which fostered the luxury which 
brought about the disease supplies the means of keeping a 
vehicle, whereby those can take the one sort of exercise when 
they could not take the other. 

Exercise and a healthy atmosphere is far better than exer- 
cise in an unhealthy one, and better in the country than in 
the town; where the air is full of the smoky exhalations from 
the different workshops, and where the streets are crowded 
with houses. Such is London, a city (as far as our certain 
knowledge goes) by far the largest in the world. The differ- 


150 ON GOUT. 


ence between exercise in the town and exercise in the country 
may be felt at once by any one who has the gout. 

57. As to venery, a gouty man, who is an old man as well, 
acts just as foolishly in indulging in fornication as a traveller 
would act who, at the beginning of a long journey, should 
consume all his viaticum at starting. The abundance of spirits 
which promoted the due concoctions has long ago been ex- 
hausted; so that, without any adventitious drains upon the 
system, the joints and the parts about them are already weak, 
and over-weak. Again—over and above the damage which he 
brings on himself, by neglecting to check the now languid 
desires of waning life, he denies himself the privilege of enjoy- 
ing that jubilee which by the special and kind gift of Nature 
is conceded to old men; of whom it is the natural and happy 
lot to be emancipated from the control of those lusts, which, 
during youth, attacked them, day and night, like so many ~ 
savage beasts ; especially as the satisfaction of such appetites can 
never outweigh the long train of troubles by which they are 
either followed or accompanied. 

58. Now, however much these rules (or rules like them) re- 
specting diet, and other points of regimen, provided that they 
be religiously observed, may preserve a gouty subject from the 
more violent onslaughts of the disease, and however much they 
may bring about that firmness of the blood and solid particles, 
which best ensures an immunity from that catalogue of ills, 
whereby the disease is rendered not only painful beyond the 
bounds of human endurance, but fatal as well, they will not 
prevent him from suffering occasional attacks, after certain 
intervals,— especially during the winter. Although in the 
summer season, whilst the tone and vigour of the blood are 
excited by the heat of the sun and preserved in their proper 
status, and whilst the due elimination of the humours through 
the pores of the skin proceeds favorably, it needs must be that 
the concoctions take place far better than in winter; never- 
theless, when the cold season sets in and the strength of the 
blood is impaired, and the perspiration through the pores of the 
skin is impeded, it follows of necessity that a vast heap of in- 
digested matter gets accumulated, that after a considerable 
delay it breaks out in specie, that it exhibits itself in its 


ON GOUT. 151 


proper symptoms, and, lastly, that it brings on a fit as soon as 
either the motion of the humours, the nearer approach of the 
sun, the drinking of wine, over-exercise, or any other evident 
cause, may supply an opportunity. 

59. From what has just been said it is clear, that the man 
who would cure himself of gout must change his whole habit 
of body, and restore it, as far as age and other circumstances 
will permit, to its original constitution; a point at which he 
must aim, both 2» the fits and between the fits; since, when 
the fomes of the disease is not only generated but has fixed 
itself in the joints, it is too late to attempt either its alteration 
or its elimimation by any other way. No other method will 
eject it but that which Nature points out; and it is to Nature 
alone that it can be intrusted. This is what we must do with 
intermittent fevers; where we abstain from remedies till the 
heat has been allayed. Indeed, it is just as absurd to exert 
our whole strength in easing the heat, thirst, and restlessness 
of agues, as it is to consider that we have cured the gout when we 
have merely checked its symptoms, a result which only renders 
the true cure more difficult ; since the more the pain is eased the 
more the concoction of the humours is obstructed, and the more 
the lameness is taken off, the more the expulsion of the morbific 
matter is hindered. Again, just as the fury and sharpness of 
the fit is beaten back, the longer will the fit become; and not 
only that, but the space between the fits will be shorter, as well 
as less free from every degree of those symptoms which give so 
much deadliness to this disease. No one who has well weighed 
what I have elsewhere exhibited in the history of the ailment 
in question will deny this. 

60. Now, although during the fit, nothing beyond the 
removal of those symptoms, which a false method of cure some- 
time occasions must be attempted, nevertheless, considering 
that every one allows that it is from an abundance and an 
exuberance of humours that gout proceeds, it may, perhaps, be 
convenient for the patient to abstain for a few days, after his 
first seizure, from meat, and take, in place of it, barley-broth, 
or some similarly light food ; a thin diet of the sort conducing 
much towards the lessening of the morbific matter, and giving 
Nature an opportunity of digesting it more speedily. Since, 
however, there is a vast difference between the body of one 


152 ON GOUT. 


person and that of another, some persons being so unable to bear 
abstinence from animal food, as to be seized with a confusion 
of the animal spirits, fainting, and other such symptoms as 
befall hysterical women, we shall, with a patient of this sort, 
do more harm than good if we keep them from flesh beyond the 
time that their stomach loathes it. This rarely exceeds the 
first or second day of those particular fits, which (as I have 
already hinted), all jomed together, make a whole one. Whether, 
however, he take it soon or late, he must, during the pressure 
of the disease, be seriously cautioned against taking more of 
it than is necessary for the support of Nature. And hke care 
must be taken as to its quality. In the intervals between the 
fits, and more especially during the fit itself, the patient must 
use the greatest caution lest he commit any error in the quan- 
tity or the quality of either his meat or drink. Nor is care to be 
taken in these matters alone. I have elsewhere shown more 
at large, that, between fits, every point of regimen is to be 
looked to with no common attention. 

Moreover, much as the pain and the great inaptitude for 
motion may seem to contraindicate that remedy which I have 
so extolled—exercise—it must still be undergone; since, 
although at the beginning of a fit it may appear impossible for the 
patient even to be carried to his carriage, much less to bear the 
motion of it, he will, nevertheless, provided that he make the 
attempt, in a short time feel as little pain when driven about in 
his coach, as when seated in an elbow-chair at home. Another 
advantage is this: to sit at home all day ensures a sleepless 
night ; whereas exercise in a carriage in the morning and at noon, 
will have the effect of driving off the pain for the greater part 
of the night by sleep ; since, when a person has the gout, a very 
little exercise is sufficiently tiring tó send him to sleep. Again, 
exercise guards against the stone ; which a sluggish life favours. 
More important, however, than all or any of these points is the 
extent to which steady and continued exercise obviates the 
tendency of the joints to that total impotence, which may 
arise after one or two protracted fits of gout, wherein the ten- 
dons of either the hams or knees become contracted. This 
happens because, wheu the pains of gout take hold of the knee 
the patient is unwilling to stretch his legs, indulges in the relief 
that is afforded by long rest, and remains ever afterwards 


ON GOUT. 153 


deprived of the use of his legs and feet, both in the intervals 
between the fits, and in the fits themselves—which last they, 
by no means, for this reason, escape. Moreover, in those old 
men whose concoctions are exceedingly vitiated, and who, from 
the prolonged afflictions of the disease, have, as it were, the 
whole substance of the body turned into gout, it is not to be 
hoped that, without exercise, the disease can ever be brought to 
a digestion. For when the disease is too strong for Nature, 
they often die of languor and sickness, which the abundance of 
the morbific fomes incapable of being digested produces; and 
by this inconcoctile matter, so wholly incapable of assimilation, 
they are destroyed as by poison. 

61. Nevertheless, notwithstanding what has been said con- 
cerning the utility of exercise in the fits of the gout, if, from the 
excessive violence of the paroxysm at its first onset, the patient be 
laid prostrate, we must, in case we confine him to the chamber, 
confine him to his bed also, at least for the first few days, until 
the vehemence of the pain shall have abated. Here the bed will 
in some degree make up for the want of exercise ; inasmuch as, 
by continually keeping it, the morbific matter will be more 
potently digested in a few days, than by merely keeping the 
bedroom for many ; especially at the beginning of the disease : 
provided always that the patient can abstain from flesh with- 
out faintness and other bad symptoms, remaining content with 
only oatmeal-gruel, small-beer, and the like. Now, the state 
of things that most frequently requires this treatment occurs 
with those in whom the gout has just come to its height, and 
has not yet been mitigated by a course of many years. 

But now we must not omit to notice, that if the gout be 
inveterate, and incline the patient to fainting, gripes, diarrhoea, 
and such-like symptoms, he will scarcely escape being destroyed 
by one of the fits, unless he take exercise, and that in a free 
and open air. ‘This is all the more important, from the cir- 
cumstance of a great many gouty people having died from these 
symptoms ; to which they have become liable by being confined 
to their chambers, and especiallyto their beds : whereas, had they 
been willing to put up with the fatigue of riding in a carriage 
for the greater part of the day, they would not have yielded to 
their fate so soon; since, though he that is troubled with only 
pain in the joints may shut himself up in his bedroom, if he 


154 ON GOUT. 


who, instead of violent pain, is afflicted with sickness and the 
other aforesaid symptoms, should imitate him by doing the 
same, he would throw himself in danger of his life. Well is it 
for us, that when the pain is so violent that the patient can 
least bear motion, he least wants it ; the pain itself, which is the 
bitterest remedy of Nature, securing his life. 

62. As to the symptoms of gout, it is to those whereby the 
life of the patient is endangered that we must first apply our- 
selves ; such being weakness and faintness of the stomach, with 
gripes, as if from wind. ‘These befall those who have either 
been subject to gout for many years, or else have brought it 
upon themselves by suddenly changing spirituous for thin and 
cooling liquors ; or, finally, have applied repellent plasters to the 
parts afflicted to assuage the pain. For any or all of these 
reasons, the material cause of the disease, which might have 
been put off upon the joints, is thrown upon the bowels. I 
have, during the fits of the last years, tried many things to 
lessen the symptoms. Nothing, however, effected my purpose 
so much as a small draught of Canary wine, taken now and 
then, when the faintness and sickness were most oppressive. 
Neither red French wine nor Venice treacle, nor yet any other 
cordial whatever, is (as far as my present knowledge goes) 
equally effectual. We must not, however, imagine, that either 
the wine m question or any other cordial can at all preserve the 
patient, if exercise be neglected. 

63. If, however, some grave symptom, requiring immediate 
attention, suddenly appear upon the retrocession of the gout, 
and threaten death to the patient, neither of the aforesaid 
remedies, wine or exercise, must be relied on. In such a case, 
provided that any of the natural and vital parts, other than the 
head, be attacked, we must have immediate recourse to lauda- 
num, i. e. twenty drops of the liquid laudanum, out of draughts 
of epidemic water, must be taken, and the patient must go to 
bed, and do his best to sleep. 

64. It may happen, that the matter occasioning the gout, 
from the fact of its not having been thrown out upon the joints, 
shall bring on diarrhoea. If this be not the crisis of a particular 
fit, and if, notwithstanding the laudanum and the exercise (the 
first remedy to which we must resort in diarrhoea), that have 
just been recommended, the bowels be still purged, and the 


ON GOUT. 155 


purging be accompanied by gripes, &c., the only remedy known 
to me is a sweat, brought on by the appropriate medicines. If 
this take place for two or three days running, and for two or 
three hours on each day, morning and evening, the diarrhea 
will generally be checked, and the fomes of the disease will be 
forced upon the limbs. In this way I cured myself, some years 
ago, after I had imprudently thrown myself in the way of 
danger, by having taken cold water as my ordinary drink ; and 
that after I had sought help from cordials and astringents in 
vain. 

65. I have seen another—though a rarer—symptom, viz. 
the metastasis of the peccant matter to the lobes of the lungs ; 
taking place when a winter cough, originating in a cold taken 
about the time of the fit, has gradually drawn off, in the way 
of translation, the morbific matter from the limbs to the lungs 
—leaving the latter either partially or wholly free from pain 
and swelling. In this case the curative intention is not to 
be directed to the gout itself, but to the pulmonary symptom ; 
and this is to be treated like an absolute peripneumony (viz. 
by frequent bleedings, and a cool and thickening diet and me- 
dicines) ; inasmuch as the blood which is drawn is altogether 
like the blood of pleurisy. Between the bleedings the patient 
should be purged by lenitive potions, whereby the filth that has 
fallen on the lungs may be got rid of. As far as encouraging 
a sweat, however powerful it may be in forcing the fomes of the 
disease upon the limbs, it now does more harm than good, since 
it hardens the matters impacted in the lungs. These generate 
small abscesses, and then the certain death of the patient 
follows. 

66. Moreover, it is to be noted, that all gouty subjects, when 
they have struggled a long time with the disease, are liable to 
stone in the kidneys, and are wont (sometimes in the status, 
but generally during the decline of a fit) to be afflicted with 
nephritic pains. This brings weakness as well as pain, although 
the strength was but too much wasted before. In this 
case, neglecting all other remedies, let him take a gallon of 
posset-drink at once, wherein have been boiled two ounces 
of marsh-mallow roots, and then let the following clyster be 
thrown up :— 


156 ON GOUT. 


RK Marshmallow-root, 
Lily-root, aa 3) ; 
Mallow-leaves, 
Pellitory, 
Bearsbreech, 
Chamomile-flowers, a handful of each ; 
Linseed. 
Fenugreek, aa 3ss ; 
Water, q. s. 
Boil down to half a pound. Dissolve in the strained liquor— 
Kitchen sugar, 
Syrup of marshmallows, 4a 33). 
Mix, and make into an enema. 

67. If any one require external remedies for easing the pain 
of gout, I know of none to give them. Except the refrigerants 
and repellents (the use of which I have shown to be dangerous), 
I have tried a great many —in my case as in those of others. 
Nay more—I confidently affirm that the greater part of those 
who are supposed to have died of gout, have died of the medicine 
rather than the disease—a statement in which I am supported 
by observation. If, however, any one will try the virtue of 
such external medicines as are reputed to be undoubted ano- 
dynes, let him guard against imposing on himself by applying 
them towards the decline of a particular fit, a time when the 
pain is about to cease of itself, but rather when a fit 1s coming 
on. He will then see the rottenness of his support, and the 
vanity of his expectations; since epithems, like those in ques- 
tion, are useless for good, although sometimes powerful for 
mischief. For this reason I have for many years wholly 
eschewed them. A poultice made with white bread, saffron, 
and a small quantity of the oil of roses, has done me more good 
than aught else. Nevertheless, at the onset of a fit it did 
nothing. Hence, if the pain be very violent, the patient will 
do better by lying in bed until it have somewhat remitted, than 
by using anodynes. Nevertheless, it will not be amiss to take 
a little laudanum in the evening, if the pain be above bearing. 
Otherwise, it will be better omitted. 

68. As, however, I am speaking of external remedies, I must 
say something of a certain Indian moss, called Moxa, which 
has, of late years, got a great name in the cure of gout, i.e. if 
it be used for singeing the part affected. Though this sort of 
remedy is referred to the East Indians, and is considered as 


ON GOUT. 157 


having been wholly unknown to Europeans, it is certain that, 
if we look into the writings which Hippocrates left us more 
than two thousand years ago, we shall find that it is still 
older with us. In his excellent treatise, De Affectionibus, when 
treating of sciatica, he says: Ei && sc tv rt ywotoy [Kkataornpiéy 
j 060vq Kal OTN, Kat TOLOL papmakotot un eCeXavynrat, Kavoat 
ka’ okotov ay tuvyavy zovca 5 odvyy.] i. e. * Quod si in uno 
aliquo loco firmiter constiterit dolor, neque medicamentis ex- 
pellatur, quocunque loco dolor forte extiterit, eum lino crudo 
inurito." And, shortly after, speaking of gout: Evudépet ce kat 
TAUTY [ra avTa a Kal TU apboirior, kat paKkon pev Kal avr " 
VOUGOC Kal £TLTOVOC, bewareone Of ov" nv O& Tole CaKTUAOLoW n 
oourn eykaraAstmerat, Kavoal Tac oAzBac TOU OaKkTUVAOV vmip TOU 
KovevAov oAtyov' Katew Gà opuoAtve.] i. e. * Huic eadem quae 
articulari morbo conferunt, et longus quidem hie morbus est et 
gravis, minime tamen lethalis: quod si in digitis dolor re- 
maneat, venas in digito paulo supra articulum inurito ; ustio 
autem per linum crudum fiat.”' I imagine that no one can 
think that the difference between the flame excited on common 
flax and the flame excited on this Indian moss is of a specific 
kind: so that the one should be a bit more useful in the cure 
of gout than the other. This would be like thinking that a fire 
made of oaken was different from one of ashen billets. 

This singeing of the parts affected does what it pretends to 
do in relieving the pain, since it calls forth the most subtle and 
the most spirituous part of the morbific forms deposited in the 
joints. Nevertheless, relief of this sort cannot but be transitory 
in its effects; since it leaves untouched the antecedent cause 
of gout—the indigestion. It is needless, too, to add that its 
use finds place only when the complaint isincipient. As soon 
as ever, either from the length of the disease, or from the 
unseasonable and undue use of medicines, the gout (as 1s some- 
times the case) is turned upon the inward parts, so that it is 
from gripes and similar symptoms, rather than from pain, that 
the patient suffers, it stands to reason that the use of fire is 
out of the question. 

69. You have now all that I have hitherto discovered in the 
treatment of this disease. If any one object that there are 
many specific remedies for gout, I am free to confess that they 

! Pp. 448-9. 


148 ON GOUT. 


lie beyond my knowledge, and I also fear that those who 
possess them are equally ignorant with myself. Indeed it isa 
sad thing, that a noble art like medicine should be thus dis- 
eraced by the nonsense which either the ignorance or wicked- 
ness of writers lays out before the credulous. In almost every 
kind of disease, such things are cried up by those who make a 
trade of trifles, as if they were divine; and, what is more won- 
derful still, this mad notion prevails not only in diseases which 
have a type, but in such also as are wholly unformed, proceed- 
ing from injury of the organs, or from some external accident. 
All this, which imposes upon men who are otherwise sensible, 
is well shown in those things which are commonly accounted 
specifies for contusions, such as spermaceti, houseleek, and 
the like ; the effect of which is only to divert the true method. 
This may be proved by any one who will only try how soon 
and safely such accidents may be cured by bleeding and purging, 
used alternately, until recovery ; those trifles, which are usually 
resorted to after the first bleeding, bemg wholly neglected ; 
and the sweatings also which go along with them being equally 
neglected as well. Of these, the only effect is to over-heat the 
parts before too inclined to inflammation, and so to endanger 
the life of the patient without reason. 

70, Now if, when all the remedies which I have brought 
forward have turned out useless, I appear either deficient in 
sagacity or niggardly in my list of medicines, I will lay before 
my reader a long and full catalogue, collected by Lucan in his 
Toayorodayea ; out of which he may choose, either for inward 
or outward use, such as he pleases ; little doubting that he will 
find them just as efficacious as the greater part of those which 
are so highly praised by many people. In the Play in ques- 
tion, Gout is one of the dramatis persone, and she addresses 
as follows the pretenders to some secret remedies, whereby they 
profess that she could be overcome. 


Tic ry àvíkgróv [pe 0soxórw zóvov 

Ovk olde Ilodaypay ray éxi x0ovóc Bporóv; 
"Hv obre M8ávov àrpic £&Xáckerat, 

Oire xv0£v aiya Doopíow rap’ ipzrópor, 
Ov vaóc OABov TEpiKpEUNC àyáXpaocuw. 

"Hv ovre Taudy pappacoe vuctv obéver, 
IIávrov tarpog rév £v otpavQ Veer, 

Ov raic ó PoiBov rordvpabye ’AokANT LOC. 


ON GOUT. 


"EE od yao égvn vpórov dvOpwroe yévoc, 
TodApa@or závrec robuóv ExBareiv obEvoc, 
Kvkóvrtc áti 9apuákeov rexví)uara. 
"AXXoc yàp dXXqQv ew éué weipaZer r&v: 
TpiBovow apydywooa, kai o&Xwá pot, 
Kai $9XXa OpiQákcv, kai vopaiay àvópáxvqv, 
» \ /, Ui * ^ 
AAXot 08 7rpáciov, ot 0& zrorauoysírova, 
" AXXot kvidac rpiBovow, dddot eÜuvrov, 
"AXXot dakode Pépover Tobe &k reNuárov, 
ZraóQvNivov é$00v, ot dé QÓAXa Ilepotkóv, 
‘Yooxvapor, ufjkova, BorBodc, ottta, 
VróXAtov, NiBavoy, piZayv EXAEBdpov, vírpov, 
TX per’ otvov, yvptvgv, kokMáuóako», 
Kurapisciyny kgkióa, y0pw kputvqv, 
Kpoáunc, àvéQ0ov oidXAa, ybbor £c yápov, 
Em vpáOovc ópsíac atyóc, avOpwrov kózpov, 
"AXevpa kváuov, avOoc’ Aciov A(0ov: 
"Evovot ópbvovc, uvyaXàc, caópac, yadac, 
, € , , 2 , 
Barpá&xovc, vaivac, rpaysNáQovc, àNoTEkac. 
n , ? , m 
IIoiov uéraXXov ob mEeTEparat Bporote ; 
, > \ , ~ > , / 
Tíc ovxt xvpóc; rotor o? 0£vOpov Oákpv ; 
Ziwov àzávrov dora, vedpa, Osopara, 
Eréap, aipa, pvedoc, obpov, àzóraroc, yada. 
Ilivovowy ot pév 70 Ova r£ccápov ákoc, 
Oi 0€ r0 Ov ókro, TO O& OU éxrà mAstovec. 
"AAXXoc 6? Tivwy THY iepay Kabaiperat, 
"AXXoc éxaowaic éniÜsrv ipmaiZerat, 
'"Iovóaioc £rtpov popóv i£dos Xa(fov: 
'O 6€ Oepazs(av thaBe Tapa rijc kotpávov. 
? ' A , ^ > L4 , 
Eyw 0 rovrotc maou oipwlev Ayo. 
Kai roic voit raUTa, kai zttpOocí pe, 
Etw? ázavrüv uàXXov opyrwrépa’ 
Totor 0€ ópovobct pydéy ávri£ovv épol 
"Haztov £yo voUv, süyusvijc Te yCyvouae. — v. 138 sq.] 


zt. e. ** Quis invictam me dominam dolorum 
Ignorat Podagram in terra mortalium ? 
Quam neque thuris vapor placat, 
Neque effusus sanguis aras ad incensas, 
Non templum divitiarum undique suspensis ornatum donariis. 
Quam neque Apollo medicamentis expugnare valet, 
Omnium medicus in coelo deorum, 
Non filius Apollinis doctissimus Aesculapius. 
Postquam enim enatum est primum hominibus genus, 
Conantur omnes meam elidere potentiam, 
Miscentes semper medicamentorum artificia. 
Alius aliam in me experitur artem : 
Terunt plantagines, et apia mihi, 
Et folia lactucarum, et silvestrem portulacam, 


160 ON GOUT. 


Alii marrubium, alii potamogeitonem, 

Alii urticas terunt, alii symphytum, 

Alii lentes afferunt ex palustribus lectas, 

Alii pastinacam coctam, alii folia Persicorum, 
Hyoscyamum, papaver, cepas agrestes, mali Punici cortices, 
Psyllium, thus, radicem ellebori, nitrum, 
Foenum Graecum cum vino, gyrinem, collamphacum, 
Cyperissinam gallam, pollinem hordeaceum, 
Brassicae decoctae folia, gypsum ex garo. 
Stercora montanae caprae, humanum oletum, 
Farinas fabarum, florem Asii lapidis ; 

Coquunt rubetas, mures-araneos, lacertas, feles, 
Ranas, hyaenas, tragelaphos, vulpeculas. 

Quale metallum non exploratum est mortalibus ? 
Quis non succus? qualis non arborum lachryma? 
Animalium quorumvis ossa, nervi, pelles, 

Adeps, sanguis, medulla, [urina,] stercus, lac. 
Bibunt alii numero quaterno pharmacum, 

Alii octono, sed septeno plures. 

Alius vero bibens hieram purgatur, 

Alius incantamentis impostorum deluditur, 
Judaeus alium stultum excantat nactus ; 

Alius vero remedium petit ab hirundinis nido. 
Ego autem his omnibus plorare impero. 

Et facientibus haec, atque irritantibus me, 

Soleo occurrere multo iracundior ; 

lis vero qui cogitant nihil adversum mihi 
Benignam adhibeo mentem, facilisque fio." 


I have no doubt but that the wisest of those who, after a long 
conflict with the disease, have given up all hopes of cure, will 
agree with the Chorus at the conclusion of the same drama. 


> 


"Hztov, à závónge, [pépore áXynpa, Ioó&ypa, 
Ko?9ov, éhadpdoy, &ópwuw, BoaxyvBraBic, eswouvor, 
Evgopov, evAnkTov, ddrvyodpavéc, evzepízarov. 

IIoAXai uopóai rov arvxotrTwy, 

MeAérat 0? mÓvov kai TO obynOEc 

Tove rodpaypovrac rapapvbeiabw, 

“Obey evOdpwc, 6 sbyKANpoL, 

AnoesOe zóvov, 

Ei rà OoxnGévr’ odK éredeoOn, 

Toic 0’ adoxnrote vópov tüpt Osóc. 

IIàc 0 àvex£c0o rOv vaoxóvrov 

"Euzeu£ópevoc kai OKWTTOMEVOC 

Totov yap épu rode mpadypa. v. 322 sq.] 


ON GOUT. 16] 


i.e. * Lenem, O ubique gentium celebrata, afferas nobis dolorem, O Podagra, 

Levem, facilem, non acutum, brevem, haud saevientem, 
Tolerabilem, facile desinentem, parum validum, ambulationes non impedientem. 
Multi sunt modi miserorum, 
Sed exercitia dolorum et consuetudo 
Podagricos solentur. 
Ideoque aequo animo, O complices, 

Obliviscimini dolorum : 
Si ea quae placet non fiunt, 
Tamen etiam praeter spem accidentibus viam invenire solet Deus. 
Quivis sustineat Podagra laborantium 
Deludi et derideri; 

Talis enim hujus morbi natura est." 


71. 'To conclude, the method which I here publish rests upon 
the evidence of the aforesaid phenomena; a method which I 
have followed both with myself and others, and experienced 
relief. As for a radical cure, one altogether perfect, and one 
whereby a patient might be freed from even the disposition to 
the disease—this lies, like Truth, a£ the bottom of a well; and 
so deep is it in the innermost recesses of Nature, that I know 
not when or by whom it will be brought forward into the light 
of day. Nevertheless, I hope that I have, in this treatise, con- 
: tributed something towards the benefit of the human kind; 
even if I have only faithfully pointed out those rocks upon 
which both I and many others have suffered shipwreck ; and 
also if I have exhibited the best method hitherto known. 
More than this I do not promise ; however much the long train 
of thought, which has been all but forced upon me, may have 
induced me to believe, that some such remedy may at some 
future time be discovered. If such ever take place, it will re- 
buke the ignorance of dogmatists, and will show the great 
extent to which they have hallucinated, both in distinguishing 
the essences of diseases, and in choosing the medicines for their 
cure. Of this we have a sufficiently clear instance in the dis- 
covery of that great specific for intermittent fevers—the Peru- 
vian bark. For how many years did sagacious men exercise 
their arts in investigating the causes of these fevers! and how 
readily did each adapt his practice to the theory which they 
had respectively worked out! Yet, how little such practices 
verified theories may be collected from what is fresh in the 


memory of all, viz. the habit of referring the different species 
IT, ll 


162 ON GOUT. 


of intermittents to the different redundant humours in different 
parts of the body, and of directing the treatment towards the 
alteration and evacuation of them. That all this was an unfor- 
tunate and fruitless attempt has been shown in nothing better 
than in the success which attended the use of the bark itself : 
by means of which we can, at the present time, regardless of 
all humours, and careless in the way of diet and regimen, carry 
our point, simply by observing the proper method in the exhi- 
bition of the powder ; failing only when, without any necessity, 
we confine the patient to his bed during the time that he is 
taking it; and even then, such is the power of the remedy, 
that, notwithstanding the inconvenience which is caused by the 
warmth of bed in encouraging the fever, the recovery will, 
generally, take place in spite of the obstacles that should pre- 
vent it. 

Meanwhile, until a discovery, which may fairly be expected 
to delight me above all other physicians, shall have been made, 
take the present little work in good part. If others do not, I 
know the temper of men too well to be much disappointed. I 
also feel too strong a principle of duty to despond. 

If the severe torment, the inability to move, and the other 
bodily evils which I have suffered for the greater part of my 
life (to say nothing of the pecuniary loss which my bad health, 
by so often preventing the exercise of my profession, has caused), 
shall have the effect of procuring for others ease and freedom 
from pain, I shall consider that I have reaped some advantage 
from the afflictions of this life, when the time comes for changing 
it for a better one. 


ON DROPSY. 


1. Every age, and each sex, is attacked, at times, by dropsy. 
Women, however, are more liable than men. Men it takes 
hold on as they decline in years; women when they get past 
child-bearing—-if they be barren, sooner. 

The first sign is that the ankles pit under the finger, more 
evidently at nightfall, less towards morning; a sign worth 
more with men than with women, inasmuch as the latter are 
hable to the same occurrence when they are with child, and 
when their courses are checked. However, even with men it 
is not absolute. An old man of a full habit, who has laboured 
many years under asthma, may be suddenly freed of the same,and 
that at winter time. Now in such a case the muscles of his 
lower leg shall become greatly swollen, and this swelling shall 
be a swelling like dropsy. ‘This shall be worse in winter than 
in summer, worse in moist weather than dry. Furthermore, it 
shall go on without any notable inconvenience, except that it 
shall continue till death. 

Laying this, however, out of the question, and speaking 
generally, we may say that, with men, swollen legs and puffy 
ankles are signs of the supervention of a dropsy: the more so 
in proportion as they cause a difficulty in breathing. | Such a 
swelling will day by day grow larger, so that the feet shall be 
unable to contain the water. Then the water will go to the 
legs and thighs, and lastly up into the belly itself. This will 
swell, and swell, under the gradual afflux of blood and serum, 
until its whole capacity is filled up. It shall so come to contain 


several gallons. 
“ Qua data porta ruunt." 


At times, they press upon the navel, and vent themselves by an 


umbilical rupture. 
2. In the meanwhile three symptoms accompany this disease 


164 ON DROPSY. 


—a difficulty of breathing, scantiness of urine, intensity of 
thirst. The difficulty of breathing arises from the pressure of 
the water on the diaphragm, and the check so put upon its 
natural motion. The urine is passed sparingly, because the 
serum of the blood, which in the ordinary course of Nature 
should be excreted by the urinary ducts, is diverted mto the 
cavity of the abdomen, and into such other parts of the body 
as are fit for its reception. The thirst comes from the putre- 
faction of the serous colluvies, which lies over its time in the 
body, contracts heat and acridity, and subjects the patient to 
fever and thirst as aforesaid. 

9. In proportion as the patient enlarges in the part which 
the disease has appropriated, he falls off elsewhere; and, at 
length, when the vast mass of water can no longer be contained 
within the cavity of the abdomen, an attack takes place upon 
the nobler parts, and the citadel of life, so that the sick man 
dies, as it were, under a cataclysm. 

4. The cause of the disease, generally speaking, is weakness 
of the blood.  Thisis not able to convert into its own substance 
the matters taken as aliments from without. Soit vents them 
upon the extremities and the pendulous parts of the body, and 
lastly into the abdomen itself. Here, as long as it is dispersed 
here and there in small quantities, Nature fabricates for it 
small vesicles to containit. At length it oversteps all bounds, 
and is limited by the peritoneum only. | 

5. Now the weakness of the blood is promoted by excessive 
bloodlettings, by evacuations of all sorts, by any long illness; 
and, most especially, by the terrible habit which we have amongst 
us of swilling spirituous liquors; whereby the natural ferments 
of the body are destroyed, and the spirits dissipated. Hence it 
is that tipplers and gluttons are most attacked by this ailment 
—although, for an ailment, it is a cold one. On the other 
hand, the use of water is equally mischievous in persons who 
have long been used to generous beverages. 

6. In women—a matter to bear in mind—there is a dropsy 
of a wholly different origin, arising from impurities or ob- 
structions collecting in one or other of the testicles, and so 
gradually subverting its crasis. Inthe said testicle, where the 
focus of the disease is to be found, the tunic enlarges in a won- 
derful manner ; and when this is all but bursten, Nature then 


Ew 


ON DROPSY. 165 


developes certain vesicles for the reception of the humours. Of 
these, one or more may give way; and then there is an out- 
break of water into the cavity of the abdomen, and the symptoms 
are the symptoms which we have already described. Concerning 
this, however, we have already written.’ 

7. Besides this, there are two sorts of tumours amongst 
women which take the form of dropsies. One is a preter- 
natural excrescence of the fleshy part within the belly, which 
will raise the abdomen just as truly as it is raised by water. 
The other arises from wind; and this last, in other matters as 
well as in the swelling which it causes, looks like pregnancy. 

This is commonest with widows, and with persons who become 
advanced in life before theyare married; and such persons, partly 
on their own judgment, but much more on that of their oracles—- 
the midwives—fancy the motion of a foetus, sicken like women 
in the family-way, swell about the nipples, have a show of 
milk, and, on the strength of all this, order baby-linen for the 
child that is to be, and prepare things for its reception into 
the world. The belly, however, decreases as it increased, and 
so undeceives them. 

It 1s neither of these ailments that I am treating of. 

8. The true and genuine indications of treatment, arising 
truly and naturally out of the aforesaid symptoms, consist in our 
attempts to evacuate the water lodged in the abdomen and 
elsewhere, and to restore the strength of the blood, so that 
fresh returns be guarded against. 

9. As to the evacuation of the water, it is of great im- 
portance to observe that all those cathartics which act either 
slowly or inefficiently, do more harm than good. — A4// cathartics 
that purge the body are, as such, inimical to Nature, and, to a 
certain degree, weaken and damage the blood. Hence, unless 
they pervade the body rapidly, and get carried off readily, they 
agitate the blood tumultuously, and swell the tumour. They 
disturb without eliminating things that, like Camarina of old,? 
were never meant to move. ‘This is shown by the legs and 
feet of such unfortunates as have in such manner been blandly 
and gently purged. Hence, in order to do good by means of 


! Dissertat. Epistolaris, § 92.—[G.] 


? , . . "fatis nunquam concessa moveri 
Apparet Camarina procul." AEn. iii, 700. 


166 ON DROPSY. 


-cathartics, we must ask whether the patient’s body be amenable 
to their action, or the contrary: On this the whole case 
hinges; making all the difference as to whether the cure is to 
be effected with great trouble, or with next to none. 

As often as hydragogues have to be used, we must carefully 
inquire how far the system is obedient to their action or not. 
This can only be got at by finding how far it has been amenable 
to catharsis at other times, When there is any particular 
idiosyncrasy in this respect, the life or death of a patient may 
depend upon it; and this may all turn upon the observation 
of the physician. To look only to the present sensible tem- 
perament and state of the body is wrong. Men who are 
perfect athletes often yield easily to purges. Men who are 
thin and spare often resist them. Hence comes a caution 
which applies not only to hydragogues, but to all other sorts 
of cathartics. I have seen hypercatharsis arise from mild 
medicines; and this because the doctor neglected his duty, 
and forgot to inquire as to the susceptibility or the non- 
susceptibility of the constitution to the action of purgatives. 
Now, above all other diseases, dropsy requires quick and sharp 
purging; so that catharsis per &mikpacw, which suits other 
diseases does not suit it—nay, does harm; since it increases 
rather than diminishes the swelling. Hence, an over-strong 
dose is better than one which is ever so little too weak; the 
more so, as we can always resort to laudanum, the surest check 
to over-purging. 

10. With all cathartics dedicated to the cure of dropsical 
patients, one thing above others must be looked to, viz. that 
the waters be drawn off at as rapid a rate as the patient’s 
strength will bear. Indeed, he should be purged every day, 
unless prevented by debility of body, or by the over-action of 
the previous doses. Then a day or two may be missed. If 
we purge only at long intervals, however great may have been 
the previous evacuations, we give the water time to accumulate. 
Of this time it will take advantage; and so that, like men 
who are unable to make use of a victory, we shall be beaten by 
the disease, and that shamefully. Again, there is danger lest 
the waters by being confined within the viscera turn foul, and 
so corrupt the parts that hold them. Finally,—and this is no 
light matter—there is a tendency in the previous purgations 


ON DROPSY. 167 


to excite, disturb, and predispose to mischief the waters that 
are left behind, so that these are all the more dangerous for 
not having been left quiet. For these and other reasons, the 
intention that we must first satisfy is the one in respect to the 
serous colluvies which is shut up within the system. This we 
must get off as speedily as possibly. And at this, without let 
or stop—except in some urgent case of necessity— must we 
strive and labour. ! 

11. It is a fact learned by practice, that hydragogues, from 
their own peculiar action, when exhibited alone, in cases where 
there is an indisposition to their action, fail to operate; and 
that this failure is not amended by increasing the dose. All 
that then ensues is no catharsis, but a disturbance of the blood, 
whereby the swellng enlarges rather than decreases. Hence, 
in such systems, the only advantage of hydragogues lies in the 
extent to which they will act as auxiliaries to milder medicines. 
Nevertheless, where they do act, they act very quickly and 
very effectively. 

12. Hence in those who yield easily to purgatives, syrup 
of buckthorn—even alone— will bring away an abundance of 
water; and it will bring away water alone ; abundantly, indeed, 
but without disturbing the blood, and without deepening the 
urine,—as other purgatives would do. All the inconvenience 
arising from the syrup of buckthorn is that it creates excessive 
thirst during its action. With those, however, who are acted 
on with diffieulty, it will bring away but few dejections, and 
those few anything but as watery as they should be. 

13. I well remember the first case of dropsy to which I was 
called in. It was twenty-seven years ago; to a respectable 
married woman, living at Westminster, named Saltmarsh. I 
never saw such a dropsy; and I could not believe in such a 
size of an abdomen. I gave her—as was then the practice— 
an ounce of the syrup before dinner. The quantity of water 
that this brought away in stools, and the little disturbance it 
excited, are incredible. The patient scarcely lost strength. 
This gave me confidence to continue it every day. This I did, 
missing a day occasionally when the patient seemed somewhat 
weakened. The waters were thus drawn off by degrees. The 
belly decreased, and the patient wholly recovered. 


168 ON DROPSY. 


14. In the confidence of youth and inexperience I fancied 
that I had now a sovereign remedy for dropsies: one that 
would subdue all alike. A few weeks undeceived me. I was 
then called into a female patient who laboured under a dropsy 
that had supervened on a quartan ague. I prescribed the 
syrup; repeated it; exasperated the disease. After a time, as 
the water remained the same, the purging continued, and the 
tumour increased, the lady changed my services for those of 
another physician, who— after my dismissal—gave her more 
appropriate remedies, and cured her accordingly. 

15. When it is clear that the patient is of that habit in 
which the milder purges will neither act quickly, nor without 
occasioning distress, the stronger ones must be tried.  Hereon 
I have already remarked that, though few of them, single- 
handed, wil answer our purposes, when added as adjuncts to 
the milder ones they are efficacious— acting, as it were, as a 
spur. For constitutions like the one in question the following 
potion has often been prescribed by me with success : 


EK Tamarinds, 3ss; 
Senna-leaves, 5ij ; 
Rhubarb, 55s. 
Boil, in spring-water, to Ziij. Strain, and dissolve in the liquor— 
Manna, 
Solutive syrup of roses, aa 5j ; 
Syrup of buckthorn, Zss ; 
Electuary of rose-juice, 5ij. 
Mix, and make into a potion, 


This is only fit for strong patients. These it will purge 
when other means have failed. Or 


K White wine, Ziv; 
Jalap (very finely powdered), 5j ; 
Ginger (in powder), gr. x ; 
Syrup of buckthorn, 3). 
Mix, and make into a potion; to be taken the first thing in the 
morning, and to be repeated each or every other day, according to 
the strength of the patient. 


16. The next formula is useful where the patient will not 
well bear repeated cathartics; inasmuch as it warms and 
strengthens him between the purges, 


ON DROPSY. 169 


Kk Jalap-root (bruised), 

Hermodactyle, aa ss ; 

Crude scammony, ii) ; 

Senna-leaves, 3i); 

Liquorice-root, 

Aniseed, 

Caraway-seeds, aa 3ss; 

Wormwood-tops, 

Sage-leaves, aa a handful. 

Steep in three pints of cold usquebaugh. Strain as wanted for use. 

Take one spoonful at bedtime, and two next morning ; increasing 
or diminishing the dose according to its action. 

17. Two medicines yet stand over; and they bear the bell 
from all that I have named or know—I mean elaterium and 
the crocus metallorum. They are eminently drastic. Elaterium, 
or the fecula of the wild cucumber, acts in very small doses, 
and acts powerfully —exciting the bowels, and bringing away 
serous and watery faeces ; so much so, that two grains (generally 
speaking) are sufficient for most constitutions. My own usual 
formula is—one scruple of the pilule e duobus, with. elaterium, 
made into three small pills, and taken early in the morning. 

18. As to the infusion of the crocus metallorum, an ounce 
and a half, or, where the system is very resistant, two ounces, 
given in a morning, and repeated according to the strength of 
the patient (although, at first, it only gives promise of 
clearing out the impurities of the intestines), at last, acts on 
the water. Of this, and of the pressure it exerts, it relieves the 
abdomen. Having acted as an emetic, it acts as a purge down- 
wards when the vomiting is over. No wonder—so great has 
been the agitation and concussion both of the stomach and 
bowels, arising from the afflux of waters hedged in all around 
them, that the ducts allotted by Nature for their evacuation 
require an inordinate effort for their thorough opening. How- 
ever, if the aforesaid vomit have not sufficiently unloaded the 
lower belly, I am in the habit of adding, after the third or 
fourth dose of the simple infusion, the syrup of buckthorn as 
well as the rose-juice electuary. I do not do this often; when 
I do, the form is thus: 

K Aqu cardui Benedicti, Ziij ; 
Infusion of the crocus metallorum, 3ss ; 
Syrup of buckthorn, 3ss ; 
Rose-juice electuary, 5ij. 
Mix, and make into a potion. 


170 ON DROPSY. 


19. That there exist small, blind passages, whereby the waters 
in the cavity of the abdomen become transferred to the sur- 
face of the intestine, is clear from the facts now noticed. Every 
day’s observation tells us that hydragogue medicines bring 
away, in the shape of stools, whole volumes of abdominal 
water, just as naturally as if they had belonged to the intes- 
tines themselves ; a knotty question of physic, concerning which 
I can only quote the best and wisest of physicians. “ Some say, 
both physicians and sophists, that it is not possible for a person 
to comprehend the art of healing, unless he know what man is, 
how he first existed, and in what way he was framed. But 
I think that, upon these matters, all that has been said by sophisis 
or physicians, as well as all that has been written about Nature, 
has less to do with the art of healing than with the art of painting." 

20. Lest, however, the divine old man who has thus written 
should become liable to the imputation of error, and lest em- 
pirics should find an excuse for their ignorance, I will state 
plainly, that, as far as I can discover by the most attentive 
thought, and from what I observe in practice—-the touch- 
stone of those who profess medicine—ait is very necessary for a 
physician to know well and thoroughly the structure of the 
human body; so that he form true ideas concerning Nature, 
and concerning the causes of certain diseases. How can one 
who knows not the structure of the kidneys, and the ducts 
that lead from them to the bladder, see his way to those sym- 
ptoms which arise from a calculus; impacted either in the 
pelvis or the ureters? A surgeon should know anatomy 
equally. Otherwise, how can he in operations avoid vessels 
and other parts which he should keep clear from; and which, 
if divided or injured, will kill the patient? Nay, he cannot 
even set a limb, or reduce a dislocated joint to its natural 
position, unless he have curiously inspected and well understood 
the bony framework of the body, which is called the skeleton. 

21. So necessary is this knowledge, that he who wants it is 
like a man fighting blindfold, and a mariner without a compass. 


! Aéyovot 0€ rwec kai 'Inrpoi kai cogiorai oc ok Evi Ovvaróv 'Igrpwv eidévat, 
Yoric ji) ot0ev 0 TL éorw &vOpwmroc, kai OWE &yévero TPWTOY, kai üz«c cvyezáys 
iyo 0i rovréov piv 0ca TiVi sipnTat aoduari) 3] InTPY  yeypaTTTaL epi Picewe, 
jocov vomicw Ty Inrpicy rexvij vposnksw 3) TY ypapury.—Lippocrates, De Prisca 
Medicina, tom. i, p. 49. 


is | So x 


eS Doe quce 


ON DROPSY. TII 


Moreover, the knowledge 1s easily attained ; and, in comparison 
with many other more difficult studies, may be reached by a 
short road. It may be learned well and thoroughly by dissec- 
tion—either of human bodies or the bodies of brute animals ; 
and that easily, and by men whose wit and judgment are 
limited. Nevertheless, in all acute diseases— and two thirds 
are acute—we must fairly own that there is in their nature 
Oziov ri— some specific property which no speculations deduced 
from the contemplation of the human frame will ever be enabled 
to discover and exhibit. Hence I think that all which was 
meant by Hippocrates was this—that men should not spend 
their labour in dissections only, but that they should rather 
promote the art of medicine by the diligent observation of 
natural phenomena, especially the juvantia and ledentia. I do 
not, for an mstant, believe that he undervalued or depreciated 
a general knowledge of the structure of the human frame. 

22. It could not possibly have escaped a thinker like 
Hippocrates, that all human investigation must necessarily be 
limited to a general investigation of such objects of knowledge. 
By diligent research during dissections, and by careful scrutiny, 
we may attain to the knowledge.of those larger organs by 
which Nature conducts her more visible operations. We may 
also detect certain passages whereby the different juices are 
transmitted to different parts of the body. What, however, 
neither human eye will see, nor microscope disclose, is the 
origin and primary cause of such movements. What micro- 
scope, however exquisitely elaborate, shall make visible those 
minute pores by which, for example, the chyle passes from the 
intestines to the chyliferous vessels? Or what microscope 
shall exhibit those ducts through which the blood, conducted 
by the arteries, is passed onwards to the orifices of the veins? 
These, and others innumerable, others more beautifully wrought, 
are but a small portion of the pores and passages of the won- 
drous fabric of the human body; a fabric which the wisest has 
not even seen as a dream. All our knowledge—lI speak re- 
spectfully—all our knowledge is gross and rough, dealing only 
with the outer husk of the things that we would know, ascer- 
taming only, at its highest level, how things are, but by no 
means guessing why they are so. Be this as it may, a little 
research teaches us how much knowledge is enough for the 


172 ON DROPSY. 


direction of those who claim for themselves the credit of being 
the healers of disease ; and as little serves to show us with what 
humility of spirit we should adore the Divine Artificer, ap- 
proving his stupendous skill and wisdom in those matters 
whereof we have an understanding, and admiring its still more 
wonderful excellence when it transcends our vision. 

23. Now, just as Hippocrates blamed those who, in their 
exceeding curiosity and officiousness, busied themselves more in 
speculations on the human frame than 1n practical observations 
upon the intentions of Nature, so may a prudent physician 
of the present time blame those who believe that medicine is 
to be promoted by the new chemical inventions of our day, 
more than by any other process whatsoever. To hesitate in 
our acknowledgments to chemistry for more than one valuable 
medicine, and for more than one method of satisfying the indi- 
cations of treatment, would be ungrateful. "The very emetic 
that I have just noticed is a chemical remedy, and a valuable 
one as well. The art is a useful one— but most useful when 
limited to the pharmacopoeia. Blame—or, if not blame, error— 
hes at the doors of those who have so tortured and overheated 
their brains as to believe, that the chief weakness of medicine is 
its want of great and efficacious remedies, which nothing but 
chemical preparation will supply. Viewing the matter closely, 
we shall find it otherwise. The chief weakness of medicine is 
not our ignorance as to the ways and means by which certain 
indications may be satisfied, but our ignorance of the particular 
indications that thus want satisfying. How I can make a 
patient vomit, and how I can purge or sweat him, are matters 
which a druggist’s shopboy can tell me off-hand. He can tell 
me too how to cool a man when heis heated. When, however, 
] must use one sort of medicine in preference to another, re- 
quires an informant of a different kind—a man who has no 
little practice in the arena of his profession. 

24. Now I am fully convinced that, for the formation of a 
right judgment in these matters, there is nothing so beneficial 
as the exact observation of the natural phenomena of the dis- 
eases themselves, then that of the effects of the jwvantia and 
ledentia as ascertained by practice, and lastly, that of the re- 
medies themselves, and of the method that we adopt in our 
exertions to drive off the disease. By diligently examining and 


ON DROPSY. 173 


comparing all these points, I learn the nature of the disease, I 
learn, too, from what quarter I am to take my indications of 
treatment, and I learn it all much better and much more 
surely, than if I took some speculation concerning the nature of 
this or that principle as my pole-star. The most exquisite 
dissertations on matters like these, are, at best, but beautiful 
metaphorical deductions, well set off. Lying, however, upon 
the fancy as a foundation, and not upon the solid basement of 
Nature, they will die and be destroyed. Opinionum commenta 
delet dies—The judgments of Nature will perish only with 
Nature itself. 

25. Nevertheless, however much hypotheses based upon the 
speculations of philosophy may be wholly futile—and futile 
they wil be until men become endued with such intuitive 
knowledge as shall enable them to find foundations for these 
superstructures—hypotheses directly derived from the facts 
themselves, and arising from those observations only which are 
suggested by practical and natural phenomena, are stable and 
permanent ; so much so that, although the practice of medicine, 
to one who looks at the arrangement of writers only, appears 
as 1f it arose out of hypotheses, the truer view is that the 
hypotheses themselves, so far as they are true and genuine, 
themselves originated in practice. 

For instance, in the hysterical affection I do not use chaly- 
beate medicines, and other invigorators of the blood, abstaining, 
in the meanwhile (except under certain particular circumstances) 
from evacuants, and using paregorics instead, because, in the 
first instance, I take it for granted that the disease depends 
from a weakening and breaking-up of the animal spirits. No. 
On the contrary, the steady observation of phenomena has been 
my instructor; since it was by this that I learned that cathartics 
aggravated, whilst sedatives allayed the disease. Hence it was 
from the phenomena that I took my hypothesis. In this way 
the philosopher and the empiric go hand-in-hand. Had I 
begun with my hypotheses, I should have shown the same want 
of wisdom that a builder would show who began with the roof 
and tiles, and ended with the basement and foundation. But 
it is only those who build castles in the air that may begin at 
either end indifferently. 

26. To return.—Whatever may be the pores and passages 


174 ON DROPSY. 


by which the water of the abdomen may find its way into the 
intestines, I am quite sure that vomiting is a way to get rid 
of it—and that not only by stools downwards, but by sickness 
upwards, and by the way of the mouth; since, after two or 
three vomitings, the waters appear to come forward—not in 
the way of secretions, and as if under the secernent power of 
the medicine, but fully and freely, and in full streams, as if all 
the bolts and bars that kept them close had been unloosened. 
This is shown by a fact of frequent occurrence, viz. that 
between the intervals of the vomiting they will thus break forth 
and come away. 

27. Last August a poor woman aged 55, asked my advice. 
She had had ague a long time, and was then in prison three 
years; where she suffered much from cold. I never saw so 
swollen a belly. I gave her an ounce and a half of the infusion 
of the croc. metal. every day for three days; then every other 
day, according to her strength, until she had taken six doses 
in all. At first, after the vomiting, the urine was suppressed ; 
then she made it occasionally, but very seldom. The oftener 
she took the emetic the more water she got rid of, and, towards 
the end, more by stools than vomits. However, after the third 
dose, the tumour began to diminish and subside, and at the end 
of a fortnight —for I had her body measured with a string— 
she was thinner by three feet, and had, from above and below, 
got rid of some gallons of water ; so that she could now lay her 
head on the pillow 1n a recumbent posture, and turn herself on 
either side. Before she had to have her shoulders raised, in 
order to breathe. 

The emetics acted so violently as to bring on what is called 
the vapours. When these had gone so far as to make it unsafe 
to attack the disease further by the same remedies, the water 
still remaining in sufficient quantity to swell the belly, to 
fluctuate when the patient moved, and to leave the marks of 
the finger on the ankles, I was then forced to treat the re- 
mainder of the disease by cathartics. Hence I gave either the 
purging potion of my 15th section, or some other hydragogue. 
This I gave often or seldom, as there was strength to bear it, 
and as the vapours ceased to trouble her. Such was the case 
at times; since cathartics in the action on the bowels will 
bring them on as well as emetics, only not so often. 


o m nea are 


Or 


ON DROPSY. 17 


In this way I went on until she had wholly recovered. 

38. Meanwhile I chiefly observed the following facts : 

Ist. On those days when the bowels had a holiday, she fre- 
quently excreted a vast mass of water from her bowels, and, 
at last, by the urinary passages, as much as a gallon; although 
the fluids I allowed her drink were under two pints per diem. 
From this I concluded that allthe ways and passages were 
well open. 

2dly. it was remarkable that, when the cure was nearly 
completed, as often as any vapours arose from the purges, and 
created trouble, the belly swelled most in its upper parts, as if 
filled by a fresh supply of water. This I thought could not 
be the case, since I allowed but very little to drink; so that 
I put it all to the flatus brought about by the disturbance or 
araÉta of the catharsis. The event proved me right. Even 
on the days when she got rid of a gallon of water, if it were 
also a day on which she was purged, the swelling took place 
soon after; and it continued without abatement, rising up 
towards the throat, and affecting the respiration, until the 
body, no longer harassed by the purges, returned to its natural 
state of rest. When this happened, the tumour and other 
symptoms went off; nor would they return until brought on 
by a fresh purgation. Finally, I must make this additional 
remark, viz. that the woman in question, being more than 
55 years old, had not had any menstrual discharge for some 
years. It now, however, broke out abundantly; and this 
loss of blood helped the previous evacuations in bringing about 
a vast number of hysterical symptoms; violent pains in the 
back, and in the region of the spleen, headache, and a terrible 
cough. Add to all this, that great as was the loss of water 
by vomiting, by stools, and by urine, instead of there being no 
appearance of any being left behind, the belly was just as 
swollen as it was before the evacuations began. Hence, to 
allay these movements, which lasted as long as a week after 
the last purge, and gave trouble, I was obliged to prescribe an 
ounce and a half of diacodium for four nights running; and, 
unless sleep followed within three hours, the dose was to be 
repeated. By these means all became quiet, and the tumour 
disappeared. 

29. This I have noticed, that imconsiderable tumours are 


176 ON DROPSY. 


less acted on by the crocus metallorum than large ones, when 
there is true ascites, and water in great abundance. The 
volume of fluid itself, shaken up and agitated by the action of 
the emetic, is a wonderful help towards its own evacuation. 
Hence, unless the belly be largely swollen, purging from below 
is the better form of evacuation. 

30. There is also another medicine, which, although very 
common, cures a dropsy on the principle we have just dealt 
with, viz. three handfuls of the inner bark of the elder, scraped 
from the wood, in two pints of milk and water, boiled down to 
a pint. Of this decoction take half in the morning and half 
in the evening, every day, till recovery takes place. This ex- 
cites both vomiting and purging, just like the crocus metall., 
and expels the disease upon the same principle; not by any 
specific action, since, if it do neither one nor the other, or 
either, or both, only sparingly, it is useless. On the other 
hand, when one of its two effects follow, it does much—when 
both, wonders. | 

31. At times the water is thrown down not only into the 
legs and ankles, but even into the cavity of the abdomen, and 
remains unimpregnably fixed, both under purging and vomit- 
ing—up or down. Now, when the swelling supervenes upon 
a continued phthisis, or arises from any taint or putridity of 
the viscera ; or is dependent upon a relaxation and destruction 
of the tone (so to say) of the blood; or is referable to an ex- 
haustion of the animal spirits ; or 1s attended with the sanious 
discharge of fistulas in the fleshy parts; or, finally, has been 
brought on by excessive debility, arising from evacuations— 
these being salivations, sweatings, purgings, low-living, and the 
over-strict regimen of venereal and of other lowering diseases, — 
in such cases the patient will be so far from bearing the ca- 
tharsis, that his blood will be impoverished, and he will him- 
self be the worse for it. When matters stand thus, the whole 
treatment will turn upon the improvement and restoration of 
the blood and viscera; and amongst the means of so doing, 
over and above the usual restoratives, change of air, or exercise 
in the open air, such as the patient can best take, is the best 
fitted to meet the indications. This breathes a new life into 
the jaded spirits, and recalls the excernent organs to their 
allotted duties. 


ON DROPSY. I5 


32. At times, independent of any such causes as these, neither 
purging nor vomiting will clear off the water. This happens 
when the patient is of a weakly frame, or when she is a female 
liable to vapours and disorders of the animal spirits. Here 
cathartics are out of place, and emetics still more so. Hence 
the work must be done by diuretics. Numerous as these are 
in medicine, I know no efficacious ones ; indeed, I know none 
of any sort, except the lixiviated salts; the vegetable that sup- 
ples them being unimportant. However, as no herb is 
easier got than the broom, and as the plant has a good name 
in dropsies, I soak a pound of the tops in four pints of Rhenish 
wine, cold; and throw in a handful or two of the leaves of 
wormwood. I then strain, and order four ounces to be taken 
in the morning, at five o'clock p.m. and at bedtime, every day, 
regularly, as long as the swelling lasts. By this remedy alone 
have I seen dropsies that were called incurable cured ; and that 
with patients whose crasis was too weak to bear purgatives. 

99. We have evacuated the water, the proximate cause of 
the disease. Let us now look to the second intention of our 
method: since, unless the fresh formation of fluid can be 
guarded against, by a long and continued use of restorative and 
corroborant medicines, whereby the primary cause of the com- 
plaint, the weakness of the blood, may be remedied, we have 
only done half our work. With young subjects, indeed, it may 
happen that, after the due evacuation of the waters, conva- 
lescence may follow without further treatment; when the pres- 
sure being removed, the natural heat of the body 1s sufficient, 
and when it does, single-handed, the work of the doctor. With 
patients, however, whose age 1s advanced, and whose strength 
is broken, it is quite necessary that, as soon as the water has 
been thoroughly cleared off, recourse should be had to such 
simples as warm and invigorate the blood. 

94. Amongst such means, but 1n addition to others hereafter 
to be mentioned, are the cautions noticed in my *Treatise on 
Gout,’ both in respect to remedies and in respect to the six non- 
naturals, with a single exception in the matter of wine. In 
gout this must be shunned. In dropsy it is so far from being 
hurtful, that it is sufficiently beneficial to be recommended as 


! See $ 29.—[G.] 
I I2 


178 ON DROPSY. 


an ordinary drink. However, the two diseases have so much 
in common, that the same restorative medicines are antidotes 
to the original cause of the disease. | Meanwhile it must be 
owned, both from the manifest phenomena of the disease, as 
well as from the juvantia and ledentia, that these, as well as 
other chronic diseases, originate in indigestion and weakness 
of blood; and also that our knowledge of them is limited. 
Indeed we only get to the rind of the matter. The essential 
differences, and the specific depravations of the humours arising 
from the particular forms of indigestion (all being shapes of 
non-digestion), are mysteries which we cannot unravel. Just 
so, also, are we unable, in acute diseases, to determine the va- 
rious specific forms which arise from one and the same cause— 
inflammation of the blood. Hence, in these diseases, and in 
chronic diseases as well, we are compelled, in the absence of 
specifie remedies, to direct our treatment towards some general 
cause of the particular ailment, rather than to the essential 
nature of the disease, varying our method, occasionally ; some- 
times following the clue that Nature gives us, when she shows 
the method that she herself uses in the elimination of disease, 
and sometimes following the evidence of experience in respect 
to the sorts of treatment that the different diseases yield to 
most readily. 

35. Now, towards the fulfilment of this intention, viz. the 
strengthening of blood—-whether it be by means of purging, 
diuresis, or vomiting, that the water have been evacuated, 
nothing is more necessary than that the patient should be 
allowed wine during the treatment, or, if not wine, good ale; 
all that need be guarded against being, that he be not put on 
his wine before the passages for the water have been set free— 


* Quà data porta ruat." 


Thin and cooling liquors best please the palate, and ease 
the thirst, which is almost always present: whilst, in the way 
of mischief, they create phlegm, and engender fluid. Allow 
them therefore but rarely. On the contrary, so potent are 
generous liquors—spirits being excepted—that, in many cases, 
they promote the recovery single-handed. This they do best 
at the beginning of the disease, aad before the belly has swollen 
very much; and they do it, all the more, if they have been 


ON DROPSY. 179 


impregnated with warm herbs. With those who suffer from the 
res angusta domi, and who can ill afford expensive drugs, strong 
beer, with horse-radish root, wormwood-leaves, garden scurvy- 
grass, sage, lesser centaury and broom-tops, steeped therein, 
has done the work of a whole drug-room. Rich men may take 
Canary wine, with the like herbs in soak; a draught being taken 
twice or thrice a day between the above-named remedies. If 
this is not liked, a little wormwood-wine may be taken instead. 
Of this the patient should swallow nine spoonfuls after two 
draehms of the digestive electuary, this last being taken three 
times a day, 1. e. in the morning, at four in the afternoon, and at 
night. This electuary far surpasses all other restoratives in 
satisfying the intention now under consideration. 

96. It is highly important that the patient drink as little of 
any weak liquor as possible. It only helps the water. Some 
have been cured by total abstinence from drink. At any rate, 
whatever is drunk, should be drunk sparingly. Still, on 
account of his thirst, the patient 1s allowed as follows :—-He 
may wash his mouth with cold water acidulated with the oilof 
vitriol. He may keep tamarinds in his mouth. He may suck 
alemon. But he must not swallow any of these, since their 
coldness favours the disease. 

37. First amongst the corroborants is iron. It invigorates 
and warms the blood. So does garlic. I have cured dropsies 
with garlic alone. 

38. A dropsy that has only swollen the feet, and deposited a 
little water in the belly, need not be cured by emetics and 
catharsis. The aforesaid restoratives will be enough. Whilst, 
however, we are attacking the disease by corroborants, or even 
by lixiviated salts, no purging, mild or sharp, must go on—at 
least so long as the strengthening of the bloodisin hand. The 
purge will pull down what the restorative has built up. A man 
may be convinced of this, even against his will, if he will only 
observe what often happens, viz. that a swelling which had 
decreased under restoratives increases under catharsis. Whilst 
we are evacuating the waters, restoratives may be given occa- 
sionally. Whilst we are restoring the blood, evacuants may be 
given in no case. 

39. We may, however, satisfy both indications without 
curing the patient; that is, we may clear off the water, and 


180 ON DROPSY. 


strengthen the blood against its reproduction. In vain. It 
often happens that ascites last many years. When such is the 
case, it so soaks and parboils the intestines, that it perverts 
their substance. It also wholly corrupts the bowels and the 
parts about them, generating preternatural glands, and vesicles 
turgid with sanies. In short, it converts all the contents of 
the abdomen into a mass of putrefaction. This is shown by 
dissection in the bodies of those who have died after an inve- 
terate dropsy. 

A disease thus advanced is beyond the aid of art. Never- 
theless, as the physician can never tell the exact amount of 
intestine mischief, he must do what he can with evacuants and 
corroborants, allowing neither himself nor his patient to despair. 
This he must not do; inasmuch as, in many affections, Nature, 
who day and night watches over our frame, and advises for us 
better than we advise for ourselves, after the fuel of the malady 
has been fully cleared away, has, in a manner wonderful to 
witness, so contrived for the comfort of the patient, as to guard 
him against the destructive remains of the disease. Hence, far 
as an ascites may have gone, and injuriously as it may have 
worked, all we can do is to treat it as it would have been tr ses 
in the first 1nstance. 

40. Topical or external remedies do no great good. Those in 
the form of cataplasms or discutient liniments are least hurtful. 
Still I fail to see their discutient action on the water. Other 
remedies (so-called) are not only useless, but mischievous. Such 
are all strong cathartie unguents applied to the belly. Such, 
too, are blisters on the thighs and legs, in such parts where the 
skin is tightest, and where it seems as if water wanted drawing 
off. Both methods are bad. The first determines the cathartic 
action of the simples to the muscles and membranes, and so 
hypercatharsis arises, which no remedy can check. ‘The blis- 
ters—a favorite application of the quacks—wholly extinguish 
the natural heat, sufficiently impaired already by the press of the 
water, and the deficiency of the animal spirits. This brings on gan- 
grene, an over-common occurrence. Nothing, indeed, is more 
incurable than a wound, however slight, in a dropsical leg, 
especially if it hang down; and that because the parts are so 
soaked with moisture, that the continual running stops the con- 
glutination of the wound. 


ON DROPSY. 181 


In my mind, too, tapping and acupuncture (famous as they 
are) are just as useless and just as dangerous as blisters. 

4l. To conclude—however much this disease, when turned 
into confirmed ascites, is hopeless, it is still clear, that, treated 
by the aforesaid method, provided that the viscera be uninjured, 
it is as manageable as many other ailments with a less bad 
name. 

42. As tothe man who accuses my remedies of being simple 
and inartificial, I may accuse his manners and honesty, in dis- 
liking that others should be so treated, when, for his own part, 
he would be glad that himself, his wife, or his children, might, 
in case of sickness, be cured by even the most contemptible 
means. Such a trifler deceives himself: 


* — equitans in arundine longa." 


The pomp and dignity of the medical art is less seen in neat 
and elegant formulz than in the cure of diseases. 

43. This is what I have had to say concerning these two 
diseases. Perhaps they are the last I shall deal with. As to 
what I have written, I shall be sorry if any man take them up 
to read once—and once only. Let him read and re-read 
them ; let them lie 


* — alta mente repósta." 


Then, and then only, will his advantage bear any proportion 
to my toil. Whether they be true or false, can only be known 
by him who tests them by the same practice which supplied 
them; and then, he must be as careful and as curious as I have 
been before him. If, in the little I have written, I have been 
no man's follower, but Nature's only, I am sure that the wise 
will give me their sanction: since such best know that there 
are two sorts of men who more especially are lets and hinderances 
to medical progress. 

44. First come those who, adding nothing to medicine of 
their own, are angry at the most trifling additions of another ; 
masking their sluggishness under the show of a reverence for 
the ancients; from whose practice they dare not swerve the 
breadth of a nail. Yet how can we argue that whilst other 
arts touching the interest and benefit of mankind have been 
advanced by moderns, without discrediting the ancients, medi- 
cine alone was perfected by them? Could the mariner's 


182 ON DROPSY. 


compass have been discovered, except by the neglect of those 
authorities whose best means of navigating were the constella- 
tions, and the coast-lines? Is not the naval architecture of 
western Europe better than that of the shipwrights who made 
the navies of Actium? And if these be so, are Antony and 
Augustus, therefore, bad captains? The improvements of 
moderns upon the ancients are innumerable. And those who 
take credit for them are no more supposed to violate the repu- 
tation of their ancestors, than the son who increases his paternal 
estate insults the father who left 1t. 

45. Another sort affects the title of uncommon wisdom, 
by overloading practice with impractical speculations. There 
are bird-witted men who do so; will-o’-the-wisps rather than 
true lights. Nature has given them just wit enough to tra- 
duce her with. Sense enough to show that she is only to 
be understood through the testimony of experience she has 
denied them. So much is human genius limited, by the limits of 
human nature, that we just know what our five senses teach. 
Prudent a man may be. A philosopher—in the most august 
sense of the term—no man can be. The whole philosophy of 
medicine consists in working out the histories of diseases, and 
applying the remedies which may dispel them; and Experience 
is the sole guide. This we attain by observing (as noted else- 
where!) the method that right reason dictates—the suggestions 
of common sense rather than of speculation. 


POSTSCRIPT. 


1. I trust that the reader will excuse me if I add an observa- 
tion of some importance both in the diagnosis and treatment of 
fevers, which, if it had not escaped my memory, would have 
appeared elsewhere. I have observed that, every year, from 
the beginning of winter to the middle of spring, a fever sets 
in; which, in respect both to its symptoms and treatment, is 
clearly different from the stationary fever, stationary meaning 


! Epist. Respon., i, § 16.—[G.] 


POSTSCRIPT. 183 


the epidemic of the generally prevalent constitution. Hence 
it must be classed amongst the in£ercurrents. 

2. It seems to originate from the coldness of the air, com- 
bined with its thickness and moisture. This closes the pores 
of the skin, which checks the transpiration, and so overloads 
the blood with a serous colluvies. Hence, it becomes putrescent 
from confinement ; and then is easily determined, either by cold 
or any slight occasion, to fever. If this colluvies be copious, 
the fever is of the nature of the bastard peripneumony already 
described.! If scanty, the symptoms are as follows— 

3. The patient, during the first day or two after the attack 
of the fever, is hot and cold by turns. He complains of head- 
ache ; also of pain in the limbs, and general discomfort. The 
tongue is white. The pulse is nearly the pulse of health ; the 
urine turbid, and deep red; the blood pleuritic. Cough is 
generally present ; whilst the difficulty of breathing, tightness 
of the chest, and splitting pain of the head during the fits of 
coughing, the true signs of bastard peripneumony, are absent. 
Hence as the fever, although in many points like a peripneu- 
mony, is not so altogether, it may be called the winter fever. 

4. This disease at first looks hike a simple cold: yet, if ill- 
treated, it brings on a long chain of evils, and lastly death itself. 
Keep the patient to his bed, heat him with cordials, sweat him 
for the sake of loosening the fever, in short, follow the com- 
mon line of practice, and delirium, lethargy, weak and irregular 
pulse, with a dry tongue, and red or even livid spots, will show 
themselves. Some call these signs of malignity. Truth calls 
them signs of bad treatment. The fever is inflammatory 
enough of itself. Bedclothes and cordials make it more so. 
Hence the animal spirits are forced into an inordinate disorder, 
the morbific matter drives to the brain, and all things go to 
wreck and ruin. 

5. In treating this fever, I lay down as my object, the re- 
vulsion by means of bloodletting, and repeated catharsis of 
those loads of phlegm which the winter has accumulated. ‘To 
do this, I bleed, at once, to nine or ten ounces. Next day, I 
order some such bland purgative potion as the following :— 


! Med. Obs., VI, 4. 


184 ON DROPSY. 


Ix Tamarinds, 3ss ; 
Senna-leaves, 33); 
Rhubarb, 3ss. 
Boil, in a sufficient quantity of water, to three ounces. Strain. Add 
to the strained liquor— 
Manna, 
Solutive syrup of roses, aa 3). 
Mix, and make into a potion. 


Afterwards I repeat this twice, with the interval of a day 
between each purge, provided that any symptoms remain. The 
night after I order an ounce of the syrup of poppies. The 
days when I do not purge I prescribe, in case the cough remain, 
the pectoral decoction, with the oil of sweet almonds, syrup of 
maiden-hair, and syrup of violets to be taken occasionally. If 
the fever be violent, I allay the blood by the emulsion of the 
cold seeds, and by the following julep : 

EK Water-lily water, 
Purslane-water, 
Lettuce-water, aa Ziv; 
Syrup of lemons, Zss; 
Syrup of violets, 3). 
Mix, and make into a julep; to be taken ad lib. 


6. Meanwhile I order the patient to keep out of bed during 
the bedtime, and to abstain from animalfood. "Then, after the 
second purge, I allow a little weak chicken-broth. This, how- 
ever, should be remarked, if any serious symptoms, such as 
difficulty of breathing, splitting headache while the patient 
coughs, or any other such symptoms, indicative of bastard peri- 
pneumony appear, we must then resort to bleeding and purging, 
repeated till the disappearance of the symptoms, according to 
my directions in the chapter on that disease. However this 
amount of fever is but rarely seen; one bleeding and three 
purges being in general all the evacuations required. 

But enough on this head. I have thought it right to say 
thus much, for the sake of separating this winter fever from 
the common stationary fever, epidemic to any particular con- 
stitution. From this distinction being either unknown or 
neglected, many men, to my certain knowledge, have died. 


SCHEDULA MONITORIA. 


“Non fingendum, aut excogitandum, sed inveniendum, 
quid Natura faciat, aut ferat."—Bacow. 


e Nu 
ii 
$ 
LI 
- 
Ve 
i 
h 
H 
Hn 
hd L] 
- 
Lr 
i 
- 


+ 
LN 
2 
EI 
E 
* 


TO EE 


MOST EXCELLENT AND LEARNED 


CHARLES GOODALL, M.D., 


FELLOW OF THE COLLEGE OF PHYSICIANS IN LONDON. 


Most LEARNED AND ILLUSTRIOUS SIR, 


When I determined upon publishing the observations 
which I had lately made concerning the fever of the present 
constitution, I selected you as one to whom I might dedicate 
my little work for two reasons—first, because you have always 
been my good friend, constantly by my side, and one whose 
patronage! has protected me against all who have opposed me. 
This you did not so much from any merit of mine, as from a 
feeling with which your spirit is deeply imbued : 


«X — jncoctum generoso pectori honestum.’’? 


Such is the greatness and probity of your disposition, that it 
has ever prompted you to adopt, without hesitation, all great 
and ascertained truths, and to treat my own individual doctrines 
as such, at a time when all the world were sharpening their 
tongues against me. In all this there was nothing at which I 
should be angry—nor am I angry— since so many wicked 
quacks, puffing off their fictions and crotchets, in order to spread 
abroad their fame, and imposing so often on the world, made it 
necessary that men of judgment and sagacity should not admit 
at once, and without examination, those things which I pub- 
lished ; repugnant as they were in many things to the received 
mode of practice. Nevertheless, my debt to you is the same, 
and I deem it my duty to show publicly the extent to which I 
am moved by gratitude ; a virtue that becomes human nature 
in its noblest form more than almost any other. Even as 
kings strive to illustrate by means of titles and honour those 


! Compare Dissertat. Epist., $ 55.—[G.] 
? Persius, Sat. 


188 SCHEDULA MONITORIA. 


whom they favour, so doth Nature, upon those whom she wishes 
to raise above the low and common herd of men, impress the sense 
of gratitude, as the mark and character of a loftier genius.’ 

Another reason why I particularly mscribe this work to you 
is this: the familiar and daily intercourse which has had place 
between us so many years, has informed you, more than any 
man living, of the amount of labour which I expended upon 
those notices respecting the history and cure of diseases which 
were the subjects of my previous dissertations—trifling as they 
were. These I published, not all together, and once for all, 
but with intervals of some years between, according as I could 
obtain my knowledge. Sothat I look upon these observations 
of mine as lame and imperfect, and am more likely to take 
shame than credit for them. Bethisasit may, one thing may 
be urged in my excuse. Although the period of thirty years, 
during which I worked diligently at the observation of disease, 
may to some seem a time wherein more progress could have 
been made than was made by me, I nevertheless venture to assert, 
that although such time was more than enough to confound the 
brain with theories, fancies, and fictions collected out of books— 
theories, fancies, and fictions, which have as much to do with 
treating sick men as the painting of pictures has to do with the 
sailing of ships—four times the space would not have been suf- 
ficient for accomplishing the whole circuit of the wide domain 
of medicine. Formy own part, I did my best, according to my 
humble abilities, to collect my observations as accurately as I 
could, and to print them at once; so that if there were any good 
in them, the public might have the advantage of it without 
delay. Having done my duty in this way as well as I could, my 
mind is at ease, and I am in nowise anxious as to what place my 
writings may take in the opinions of other men. ‘This only 
will I add, that just as the person who neglects them altogether 
will not injure me one jot, so will he who reads them no oftener 
than once get no great good for himself. 

However, waiving all these matters, I entreat you, in your 
singular humanity, to take my little treatise in good part, so 
that it may stand as a witness of the respect I pay you, a re- 
spect which others pay you also, though they know your good 


! Compare Dissert. Epist., § 40.—[G.] 


SCHEDULA MONITORIA. 189 


qualities less than I do. No one, I am sure, will think that 
in this I flatter you. I have no need to do so. I am only 
free to confess, openly, that just as you are second to none in 
the art you practise-——I speak within bounds— so also you are 
one whose equal l have never yet met for thorough honesty 
and integrity. Long may you live when I have ceased to be. 
High may you stand in medicine. May you show posterity 
how the difficulties under which the art of medicine groans 
and labours can be overcome—a higher aim than mere scraping 
together of money for your sons and sons’ sons, a low and sordid 
ambition, if contrasted with the noble one that I have just 
mentioned. 

Labour at this, and you erect a superstructure on the foun- 
dation that I have laid ; yet so labour, that when you are better 
taught by a more repeated and a more extended experience, 
you may freely and openly correct those errors in my own 
observations, whether of history or treatment, into which 
human imperfection may have led me. In doing this you will 
not hurt, after death, the memory of one who, during life, post- 
poned all things to the advancement of medical knowledge— 
no matter by whom : provided always that 1t was sought for in 
the sure and steady methods of treatment, and not 1n the erudite 
commentaries, with which we have long been filled and sick- 
ened, upon the nature of diseases. 

Health and long life to you, from your most respectful 
friend and servant, 


THOMAS SYDENHAM. 


September 29, 1686. 


SCHEDULA MONITORIA. 


ON THE APPEARANCE OF A NEW FEVER. 


1. ArrHovaH my advanced age, and weakened constitution, 
may fairly give me a title to spare myself the pain and labour 
of any intense thought and meditation, I am unable to resist 
the desire of serving the world at the expense of myself. This 
I do by notifying to my countrymen the appearance of a new 
form of fever, varying in many and material points from those 
which have been prevalent under any previous constitution. 

2. It must be remembered that, a.p. 1677, the intermittent 
fevers first showed themselves (and that 1n autumn) ; that they 
grew rife and common more and more each year (became indeed 
more epidemic), that, at length, they reached their climax, and 
lastly gradually disappeared ; so that during the latter years of 
the present constitution, they could hardly pass at all as epide- 
mics. It must also be remembered, that the last two years of 
the last constitution were years wherein the winter was most 
excessively severe—especially the last but one (1683), when the 
cold was more severe than it had ever been within the memory 
ofman. So cold was it that the noble river Thames was frozen 
up, so that carriages could pass upon it, and shops be opened, and 
business done just as in a street— so great was the number of 
persons who were on the river, walking on the solid ice as on a 
pavement.  Andit borethem easily. The next year (1684) was 
not so cold, either in respect to duration or intensity. It was 
not, however, much below it. Then, at the beginning of the 
year 1685, the frost broke up in February. And then was the 
time when the fever, which I am now prepared to treat upon, 
arose. I deem it a new species, and one quite different from those 
of the last eight years. 

3. Whether this change in the constitution be due to the 
manifest change in the properties of the atmosphere, which has 
taken place during the last two winters, is more than I know: 


NEW FEVER. 191 


inasmuch as I am certain that atmospheric alterations, so far as 
they can be determined by any sensible characters, may be very 
considerable, and yet no new species of epidemic originate. 
However much one year of a series may differ from another in 
this respect, the fever produced may be the same throughout. 
Seriously attending to this, it suggested itself to me (as I have 
notified elsewhere),! that changes in a constitution arose from 
some certain secret and hidden alterations taking place within 
the bowels of the earth and pervading the atmosphere ; or that, 
perhaps, it might chiefly depend upon some influence of the 
heavenly bodies. Nevertheless, I must remark, that when the 
depuratory fever of 1664 took leave, there was a remarkably 
sharp dry frost, which bound up all things, and never gave way 
until March was far advanced. Then, as soon as the ground 
began to thaw, the pestilential fever first, and the plague next 
set in. Bethis, however, as it may, the fever that I now speak 
of showed itself firstin February 1685, and, during the current 
year, is ravaging all parts of England, as a true epidemic; 
bad here in London, but worse in many other places. 

4, When I was first called in to this fever, I imagined that it 
belonged to the genus of intermittents, rather than to that of 
the stationary fevers; the intermitients being fevers which arise 
promiscuously, in one year as well as in another. Indeed, I 
looked upon it as nothing more than the bastard peripneumony 
which I have already described in my book on ‘Acute 
Diseases.” The only difference was this. In the present 
fever some of the more pathognomonic symptoms of fever did 
not always occur. By these, I mean the violent cough, the 
racking pain in the head during the fits of coughing, the gid- 
diness from every slight motion, and the excessive dyspnea, 
all of which generally attended the bastard peripneumony. 

On these grounds, when my publishers asked for a new 
edition of my “ Treatises,’ I thought it well to append my 
notions upon the present disease in the form of a Postscript. 
In this I now think I have been in error. The fever, as I 
then observed it, was the fever of the bastard peripneumony, 
which occurs in all winters alike. The swmmer following it re- 
appeared; but as the summer generally dispels all such 


! "Tract; TL, $ 35. ? See Med. Observ., VI, 4. 


192 SCHEDULA MONITORIA I. 


peripneumonies, whilst the fever continued, I have become aware 
of my error, and now accordingly I reduce the fever in question 
to the fever of a new constitution. 

9. The symptoms, as far as I can ascertain them by a dili- 
gent investigation, are, and have been, as follows: the patient 
has chills and flushes in turn; frequently complains of pain in 
his head and joints; has a pulse not unlike that of a healthy 
man; has blood, which, when drawn, is not unlike that of 
pleurisy ; has generally a cough. This cough goes off early 
or late, just in proportion as the attack of the disease has taken 
place a long or a short time after winter. What applies to 
the cough applies to all the other symptoms which the fever 
has in common with a favorable form of Peripneumony. There 
is pain also in the neck and fauces, less than in quinsy, but 
still pain; and it comes on when the disease first makes its 
attack. The fever is continued. Nevertheless it has exacerba- 
tions towards bedtime; just like a double tertian or a quo- 
tidian. "The patient is in danger if he always lie in bed —no 
matter how light his bedclothes be. So doing, he may deter- 
mine the fever to the brain, and convert it into a frenzy. 
So liable is this to be the case, that, of its own free will, with- 
out any encouragement whatever, the fever will so transform 
itself. Still the frenzy, when it does occur, is not of that in- 
tense and ardent kind that patients suffer from with smallpox 
and other fevers. It is rather a tranquil delirium, where the 
sick man mutters inconsistently and occasionally. If cordials 
be used unseasonably, and if the regimen be overheating, 
petechiz will show themselves; and with young and sanguine 
subjects there will be purple blotches. When these occur, we 
have the surest sign of a high state of inflammation, in all 
other acute diseases as well as in this particular one. Some- 
times, the so-called miliary eruptions are scattered over the 
body, not unlike measles, except that they are redder, and that, 
when they go off, they leave no such branny scales as may be 
seen after the departure of measles, If these come at all, they 
come oftener from being forced by hot bedclothes and cordials 
than of themselves, The tongue is dry or moist, according to 
the regimen enjoined. If it be dry, it will be brown in the 
middle, with a white fringe on each side; if moist, white 
altogether, with a rough pale fur. The regimen chiefly deter- 


NEW FEVER. 193 


mines this. If over-hot, the tongue will be brown and dry. 
If not, white and moist. The same applies to the sweat. It 
depends on the regimen. If the patient be heated, the per- 
spiration will be clammy, and will flow from the head most. 
Furthermore, however much it may flow, the relief will be 
little—2a proof that such sweats are not critical. During the 
first days of the fever, a forced sweat will throw the morbific 
matter, not indeed into the head, but on the limbs. If, how- 
ever, the head be seized, and frenzy have set in, the symptoms 
of fever disappear—all save the pulse, which is sometimes 
quick, sometimes slow. At length, however, when matters 
have been so mismanaged that the spirits are wholly thrown 
into confusion, an inordinate pulse sets in. With this there is 
jerking of the limbs, and then death takes place speedily. 

6. As to the treatment, I may say, that those signs of peri- 
pneumony which accompanied the fever of the February in 
which it appeared, induced me to venture to place the disease 
in that family. So I took to the treatment of peripneumony 
as described in my chapter on this disease, and in the aforesaid 
appendix. And, as this turned out well, both in those cases 
which my own ill health allowed me to visit, and in those 
where I recommended it to others, I thought well of it. 
Nevertheless, whatever might have been my motives for that 
practice, I now am satisfied that the fever 1n question 1s nothing 
more than a simple inflammation of the blood. This I infer, 
from the phenomena of the disease, and from the temperature 
of the year that followed the two cold winters. The winter, 
perhaps, of these years, has been no winter at all; since it has 
brought with it no notable degree of cold. 

The treatment now becomes the treatment of the aforesaid 
inflammation. 

7. On this principle, I bled from the arm to ten ounces; 
since, however much the blood may be the blood of pleurisy, 
repeated bleedings are badly borne: unless, indeed, dyspnea, 
and headache during the cough, connect the ailment more 
closely with peripneumony. Zhen, indeed, bleeding may be 
repeated, and purging resorted to, until the symptoms have 
wholly gone. This I have explained under the head of 
Peripneumony, and this I wish to be particularly noticed. 


8. In the evening, I apply an epispastic or blister to the 
II. 13 


194 SCHEDULA MONITORIA I. 


nape of the neck. The next morning I order the following 
lenitive draught : 
EK Tamarinds, Zss; 
Senna-leaves, 5ij ; 
Rhubarb, 3ss. 
Boil down to Ziij. Strain. Dissolve in the strained liquor— 
Manna, 
Solutive syrup of roses, aa 3). 
Mix, and make into a potion; to be taken the first thing in the 
morning. 

This cathartic I order to be taken every other day, until the 
third time. At bedtime, after the purging, I order the fol- 
lowing, or some similar, paregoric : 

EK Cowslip-flower water, 2); 
Syrup of white poppies, £j ; 
Lemon-juice (freshly squeezed), two spoonfuls. 
Mix, and make into a draught. 

To one point I always look most closely. I watch lest the 
tumult and agitation which purgative medicines create in the 
blood and humours of fever-patients bring the sick man to a 
state of coma—since such may arise from the confusion of the 
animal spirits. This symptom is best guarded against by an 
hypnotic. Hence in the comatose fevers of the year 1673, I 
never dared to prescribe a cathartic, but contented myself with 
clysters, well knowing that purgatives at such a time would 
bring on coma. Had I, however, at that time, thought of the 
counter-influence of narcotics, it might have been different. 

9. When there has been no purge, no hypnotic at bedtime 
should be allowed. It may check the operation of the purge 
of the next morning. This it often does; sometimes stopping 
it wholly, sometimes limiting its action. In this, as in all other 
epidemic fevers, I make it a rule not to disturb the bowels at 
the beginning or during the status of a fever, unless blood- 
letting have preceded. Violate this rule, and you will consign 
hundreds to the grave—infants more especially. This caution 
I have given elsewhere.! 

10. Now it must be remarked, that although, generally 
speaking, evacuations may be used in the treatment of this 
fever, there are many instances where the patient— especially 
if young or an infant—after a single bleeding and a full purge, 


! Observat. Medic., V, 2, 9, 11. 


NEW FEVER. 195 


recovers at once. The fever, in this case, is beaten off at the 
beginning, and the patient is no longer to be fretted by reme- 
dies. At times, and that often, after such a recovery, the fever 
may come back after a few days, and a relapse take place. 
Now a purge, repeated four times, will carry off this. When 
such relapses occur, they generally arise from aphthze, which 
beginning about the conclusion of the first attack, attain their 
height a few days afterwards, and then bring back the fever. So 
that this secondary fever is only symptomatic. It brings with 
it, however, an occasional hiccup, and this hiccup may last some 
days after the fever has gone. The hiccup, however, will go 
away too as the patient gains strength. This is to be noted; 
because from such hiccup, coming on as the fever wanes, no 
danger need be apprehended. The only danger is from the 
mischievous officiousness of the treatment. Overload the 
patient with remedies and death will ensue. Both hiccup and 
aphthe, one or both, if they show no signs of going off spon- 
taneously, but become protracted, are easily got rid of by the use 
of the Peruvian bark, i.e. of one ounce with syrup of red poppies 
sufficient to make an electuary, and given in the way that I have 
directed in my Letter to Dr. Brady,’ with a draught of skim- 
milk to follow. Or the bark may be given as pills. This 
remedy I have found from experience to hit the mark better 
than any other, however vaunted—always provided that the 
patient’s strength be not broken by lying in bed. 
11. On the days when no purge is given I prescribe— 
K Conserve of Lujula, 

Conserve of hips, aa 2j; 

Conserve of berberries, %ss ; 

Cream of tartar, 3); 


Syrup of lemons, q. s. 
Make into an electuary; to be taken in a bolus about the size of a 


nutmeg. 
Wash this down with six spoonfuls of the following: 


Purslane-water, 
Lettuce-water, 
Cowslip-flower water, aa 3iij ; 
Syrup of lemons, Zss; 
Syrup of violets, 3). 

Mix, and make into a julep. 


! 8 21. 


196 SCHEDULA MONITORIA I. 


Spring-water, Ib. ; 
Rose-water, 
Lemon-juice, 
Best white sugar, aa Ziv. 
Boil over a slow fire to clarify. Take three ounces at a time ad libitum. 


Spirits of vitriol, cooling as it is, I always avoid. It is so 
styptic as to be ill adapted for diseases that should be cured by 
evacuations, to say nothing of its mineral character. 

12. It often happens, especially towards the close of the 
fever, that under the method in question, the patient will occa- 
sionally melt away in spontaneous night-sweats. All the 
symptoms are much relieved by this. Nevertheless, we must 
not trust so much to the diaphoresis as to intermit the treat- 
ment ; since, if the patient give way too much, and too long to 
these same perspirations, the fever, which had been broken by 
the purging, will take fresh strength; and if the diaphoresis 
be protracted beyond the time necessary for the full dispersion 
of the febrile particles, previously prepared thereto by the due 
concoction, the subsequent sweats serve only to light up the 
inflammation afresh. Hence, although those sweats which 
might come of themselves were, perhaps, critical, and helped 
towards the expulsion of such of the febrile matters as were 
prepared for elimination, others that came after them were, 
perhaps, only symptomatic, and, as such, did more harm than 
good. In one word, when such sweats came at night, and come 
spontaneously, a moderate warmth of bed is best suited for them. 
For this reason, the blankets should be neither more nor fewer 
than are used in health; and no heating cordials should be 
given. All that the patient should do, is to lie in bed a little 
longer than usual next morning. After that let him be kept 
to the aforesaid method. 

13. The diet is oatmeal-gruel, barley-broth, and roasted ' 
apples now and then; and, after the second purge, a little 
chicken-broth. For the ordinary drink I order small beer (but 
not, by any means, warmed), and the white decoction (so-called) 
made out of an ounce of hartshorn shavings, boiled in three 
pounds of water, and then sweetened with the finest white sugar. 

14. After the second purge there is no necessity, as above 
stated,’ to forbid chicken or such like digestible meats. The 

! See § 6. 


NEW FEVER. 197 


plan of treatment by means of purges gives us a latitude here, 
which would not be allowed otherwise. Moreover, after the 
last purge (provided the fever have.burnt down, and that it do 
not take the type of an intermittent), three or four spoonfuls of 
Canary wine, night and morning, as well as after dinner, may 
be drunk. So doing, the strength comes back quicker, and 
fresh attacks of fever are kept off. 

15. Of all the fevers I have ever seen, this attacks the brain 
most, and cannot be detached from it without great trouble and 
danger. Hence I advise my patients not to undress for bed 
except for night. If ever they are so weakened by disease as to 
be unable to sit upright, I get them to lie on a bed or pallet 
with their clothes on and their head a little raised. And I 
allow no fire in the bedroom beyond what the patient is used to 
when well. 

16. This regimen must be kept to throughout in all cases 
of this fever, with the exception of lying-in women, during the 
first few days after delivery. With patients whom you attend, 
where from an over-heating regimen either petechiz or purple 
spots have appeared (or indeed any other signs of violent inflam- 
mation), it is absolutely a matter of necessity ; since, however 
much blood may be drawn, however cool the surface may be 
kept, however many cooling draughts may be thrown in, the 
fever will not be allayed before the patient has abstained from 
bed for a short time during the day. —In bed, the heat of the 
circumambient air confined beneath the blankets over-excites. 
Besides this, the position of the recumbent body drives the 
blood violently towards the head. Even when bad treatment 
has brought on a brain fever, and the brain fever has become 
so obstinate that it cannot be got rid of at once (it being 
unsafe to attempt to cure it by bleeding beyond the limits 
described, and by purges), it will at its own good time go away 
under the aforesaid regimen. "To promote this there is nothing 
like shaving the head. This I always order; neither do I lay 
on a plaster. I only recommend a little cap to make up for 
the hair that has been shaved off, and just to keep off the 
external cold. By these means the brain is much refreshed and 
restored, so that by slow degrees it overcomes those hot im- 
pressions that excite frenzies. 

17. What I have said about frenzies applies to coma, where 


198 SCHEDULA MONITORIA I. 


the mischief flies to the head, and wherein, except the white 
tongue, there are no signs of fever ; so that the patient appears 
to enjoy an apyrexy. In this affection as in the other, purges, 
sweats, blisters, and the lke, are not only useless but dan- 
gerous. Nay, such evacuations oftener bring death than 
relief. Hence, after the general evacuations of bleeding and 
purging, however much the symptoms may frighten the standers 
by, all may be left to Nature. Even though the patient lie a 
long time in a stupor, he will recover after a certain number of 
days, providing only that he do not tie himself down to his bed, 
but get up every day, and he a little on a pallet or sofa, with 
his clothes on. Meanwhile shave the head, and towards the 
end of the illness give three or four spoonfuls of Canary wine 
twice a day. But all this I have treated more at large in the 
fifth section and second chapter in my book upon Acute Diseases. 

18. In respect to fever, the physician must not be deterred 
from the aforesaid evacuations, even if by chance he feel a 
jerking of the limbs and convulsive movements while he feels 
the pulse; since in certain nervous affections bleeding and 
purging, even though often repeated, are not only harmless but 
necessary. Iwill mention an observation of this kind which I 
met with in a case of that sort of convulsions which is called 
Saint Vitus’s dance. I saw five ill at once, and I cured all by 
bleeding and purging at intervals. Concerning this disease I 
take this opportunity of saying a few words which may verify 
the truth of what I say. 

19. Saint Vitus’s dance is a sort of convulsion which attacks 
boys and girls from the tenth year until they have done 
growing. At first it shows itself by a halting, or rather an 
unsteady movement of one of the legs, which the patient drags. 
Then it is seen in the hand of the same side. The patient 
cannot keep it a moment in its place, whether he lay it upon 
his breast or any other part of his body. Do what he may, it 
will be jerked elsewhere convulsively. If any vessel filled with 
drink be put into his hand, before it reaches his mouth he will 
exhibit a thousand gesticulations like a mountebank. He holds 
the cup out straight, as if to move it to his mouth, but has his 
hand carried elsewhere by sudden jerks. Then, perhaps, he 
contrives to bring it to his mouth. If so, he will drink the 
liquid off at a gulp; just as if he were trying to amuse the 
spectators by his antics. 


NEW FEVER. 199 


Now this affection arises from some humour falling on the 
nerves; and such irritation causes the spasm. Hence the 
treatment is first to bleed and purge, and then to restore the 
strength. To this end I act thus: I bleed from the arms to 
seven ounces, more or less according to the patient’s age. Next 
day I order half (or more) of the previous purgative of tama- 
rinds, senna-leaves, &c.; the quantity being regulated by the 
age, habit, and aptitude for purgative medicines of the patient. 

In the evening I order as follow: 


kK Water of black cherries, 3); 
Aqua epileptica Langii, 5iij ; 
Venice treacle (old), 9j ; 
Liquid laudanum, mij. 
Make into a draught. 


20. This cathartic draught I repeat three times on alternate 
days, with a paregoric the same three nights. Then I bleed 
afresh ; then purge. So I bleed and purge, in turns, until a 
vein has been breathed three or four times, with purges pro- 
portionate—this being regulated by the strength of the patient. 
All the while, however, I look carefully, lest, between the alter- 
nate evacuations, any bad symptoms should arise. 

The days when there is no purging I order— 


EK Conserve of Roman wormwood, 
Conserve of orange-peel, aa 3) ; 
Conserve of rosemary, 3ss ; 
Venice treacle (old), 
Candied nutmeg, aa 5ii ; 
Candied ginger, 3); 
Syrup of lemon-juice, q. s. 
Make into an electuary ; of which take a part the size of a nutmeg, 
every morning at five p. m. Wash this down with— 
Poeony-root, 
Elecampane, 
Masterwort, 
Angelica, aa £j; 
Rue-leaves, 
Sage, 
Betony, 
Germander, 
White horehound, 
Tops of lesser centaury, of each a haudful ; 
Juniper-berries, 5vj ; 
The rind of two oranges. 
Slice and steep in six pints of Canary wine. Strain and set by for use. 


200 SCHEDULA MONITORIA I. 


Ix Rue-water, Ziv; 
Aqua epileptica Langii, 
Compound bryony-water, aa £j 
Syrup of poeonies, 5vj. 
Mix, and make into a julep. Take four spoonfuls, every night at bed- 
time, with eight drops of spirits of hartshorn. 

Apply to the feet the emplastrum a caranna. 

21. Just in proportion as the patient improves, he drags his 
leg less, keeps his hand steadier, and lifts a cup more readily 
to his mouth. These are the surest signs of recovery. To 
accomplish this I do not recommend bleeding beyond the third 
or fourth time. Cathartics and alteratives, however, may be 
kept on until the cure is complete. Since, too, the disease is 
liable to return again, I think it well for the patient to be bled 
and purged about the same time, or a little earlier, the follow- 
ing year. I even think that by this method the epilepsy of 
adults may be cured; provided that the remedies be rightly 
adapted to the age. However, as my cases have been very few, 
I have not tried it. But this by the way. 

22. In women liable to hysterics it has often happened, 
that when the cure has been aimed at by the method in ques- 
tion, the fever has lasted and increased, even after the bleedings 
and purgings. In this case it is plain that the cause hes in 
the commotion of animal spirits, created by the evacuations. 
Hence, the principle 1s to lay aside all other points, and, pro- 
vided that the signs of peripneumony, or any vital mischief, be 
absent, to direct our efforts towards the quieting of the spirits, 
and the allaying of the orgasm. Hence, every night a paregoric 
should be given. This mitigates the sleeplessness. Then 
follow the proper hysterical remedies, galbanum, asafoetida, 
and the like; as described in my chapter on the hysteric 
affection. Then, to restore strength and get rid of what are 
called the vapours, a diet 1s allowed according to the taste and 
appetite of the patient, both in the way of meat and drink. 

29. I have said that the fever, both of the last and current 
year, shows signs of exacerbation towards night, and so takes 
the guise of an intermittent. Hence those physicians who had 
observed that all fevers which even in the slightest degree, and 
sometimes those which in no degree, intermitted, were surely 


! Dissert. Epist., $ 103. 


NEW FEVER. 201 


cured throughout the whole series of years from ’77 to 785, 
by the Peruvian bark, attacked the present fever with that 
remedy. Now, reasonable as the practice was, experience has 
been more against it than in favour of it. As compared with 
previous years, it has failed. Ihave examined the facts closely, 
and the result at which I have arrived is, that even large doses 
have done little good. Hence, where recovery has really taken 
place, I have laid it to some piece of good fortune, rather than 
to the bark. So much has it fallen from its former influence. 

All this applies only to the fever that takes the guise of a 
quotidian. When it takes the type of a genuine tertian, the 
bark is as useful as ever. ‘This proves the difference between 
this and previous fevers. They areas far asthe poles asunder. 
Bark and wine do no good here. Bark and wine did good be- 
fore, with the fever as well as with the fits. 

24, This too must be noted. Whilst the present fever was 
raging during the summer (especially that of the present year), 
it showed its presence (in many cases) less by the true pathogno- 
monic signs of fever (heat, restlessness, &c.) than by gripings 
of the belly— sometimes dry, sometimes with stools. Neverthe- 
less, it was fever that lay hid under this mask ; fever wherein 
the inflammatory exhalations of the blood, instead of forcing 
their way, as usual, towards the external parts of the body, 
turned inwards, towards the bowels of the lower belly, by the 
way of the mesenteric arteries. Sometimes they took the way of 
the celiac arteries, and then they were deposited in the stomach. 
When this was the case, vomiting took place, especially after 
taking drink, or any solid food. 

Nevertheless, however much the fever may thus mask itself, 
the true and genuine method is the method that would apply 
to fever in its proper form; and that in respect both to the 
bleeding and repeated purgation, except only, that when the 
fever so harasses the stomach as to render the patient unable to 
retain what he drinks, there may be given, instead of the mild 
purgative potion, the pilule cochie majores, which, in doses of two 
scruples, never fail to find their passage out by the way of the 
intestines. These should be taken at four a. m., and the patient 
should sleep upon them. Then a somewhat full hypnotic 
should be allowed, e. g. one grain and a half of the solid 
London laudanum, with an equal part of gum-mastich, divided 


202 SCHEDULA MONITORIA I. 


into two pills, and taken the same night. Or else eighteen or 
twenty drops of liquid laudanum, in an ounce of barley-water, 
with cinnamon, or any other generous vehicle. From these 
the stomach takes strength. Besides which, it is less irritated 
from their lesser bulk. Hence it rises less against its medicines. 
Still, if, by any means whatever, the aforesaid purge and the 
diacodium can be kept upon the stomach, they are to be wholly 
preferred to the pills and laudanum. They do their work as 
well, and heat the body less. 

25. Speaking of gripings of the belly, I here caution my 
countrymen against the effects of mineral waters, in gripes, 
diarrhoea, vomiting, or any other complaint of the belly and 
bowels, originating in fever. True, they are prescribed; but 
they do harm, as frequent experience has taught me. So 
subtle and spirituous is the nature of fever, that such minerals 
serve only to disturb it. Hence, instead of the true symptoms 
that properly accompany fever, they bring in a series of ano- 
malous accidents, and these do nothing towards the extirpation 
of the disease. This I have often observed. | 

26. An observation that may save many from the grave is 
the following. Notwithstanding all that has been said, as often 
as the aforesaid gripings and purgings have taken the form of 
dysentery-—dysentery with blood and slime as well as gripes 
and stools—the method of attacking the disease, by first evacuat- 
ing and then tempering the acrid humours, is too protracted to 
be safe. The cure of the dysentery is to dispose of it at once 
and to check it quickly and surely, by means of laudanum. Of 
the various kinds of astringents, and the various forms in which 
they may be taken, of clysters abstergent, and of clysters con- 
solidating, thrown up at sundry times—of all this I say nothing. 
Dysentery is a sharp and formidable disease; and when it has 
once become confirmed, you cannot proceed to purging. Do 
so, and the ailment will take strength, bring on an incredible 
ferment, distress the patient thereby, and possibly kill him. 

27. When called im, therefore, I order about twenty-two 
drops of the liquid laudanum to be taken twice in the twenty- 
four hours out of plague-water, agua mirabilis, or some similar 
vehicle. If this, taken night and morning, be not enough to 
check both the gripes and the bloody stools, it must be taken 
oftener, and at regular intervals. 


NEW FEVER. 203 


When the motions have become more solid and consistent 
—the true sign of improvement—and when the symptoms have 
been dispelled, I still think it safe for the patient to go on as 
before, taking off a few drops of the laudanum every time, 
until there is no need of any at all. Furthermore, I keep him 
to bed more than usual; because, when paregorics are being 
taken, the slightest elevation disturbs the brain, unless the 
patient procure a good long sleep afterwards. 

28. As to diet, if the patient have been used to wine, I allow 
him some Canary wine, well diluted with toast and water. This 
is to keep cool in a pitcher ready for use. The white decoction 
(i. e. hartshorn shavings and water) may also be taken freely. 
For food, barley-broth, boiled chicken, a poached egg, or any- 
thing equally digestible, is admissible. To a better diet than 
this, and to more generous drinks, the patient must, however, 
ascend by degrees. At any rate, no excessive vacuity or inani- 
tion must bring on either the disease from which he is 
recovering, or any of the signs and symptoms peculiar to 
itself. This too must be noted—that, although under the 
present constitution laudanum will subdue a dysentery single- 
handed, in those years when dysenteries were epidemic, and 
when they took the lead of other ailments, it was necessary 
to have recourse to previous and preliminary evacuations, for 
which I refer my reader to my chapter on dysentery.’ 

29. Now, just as in the true and rooted dysentery it was 
impossible for the remedy, which was meant only for the fever 
out of which the dysentery arose, to clear off the dysentery at 
once, it is also impossible in the dysentery which I have just 
described. For instance, it sometimes happens that a person 
is seized with cold and shivers, succeeded by flushes of heat, 
and that these alternate with one another. Now thisis a true 
sign of impending fever. Then he is tormented by gripings 
of the bowels, arising from the attack and access of the febrile 
matter. He ought now to be bled and purged, to the extent 
already indicated. Instead of this he flies to some unknown 
cordials, takes them inwardly, and uses heating applications 
externally. He does this to dispel the wind, to which he 
attributes his discomfort. So he goes on, until the pain in- 


! Med. Observ., IV, 3, 8. 


204 SCHEDULA MONITORIA I. 


creases, and becomes, as it were, impacted in the bowels, from 
delay. Then the peristaltic motion becomes inverted and 
unnatural, so that their contents come upwards. Hence the 
torture becomes afflicting, vomiting becomes violent, and the 
disease proves tliaca passio. Hence, as far as the treatment of 
the fever, out of which all this originates, is concerned, the most 
that the physician can do is to proceed to the single prelimi- 
nary bleeding from the arm. As for the cathartics, however 
much you may administer them, they fail to act as such. They 
become emetics, and act upon the bowels the wrong way. So 
much are they thrown up by the mouth, that out of a great 
number of strong doses, the merest fraction will find its way to 
the bowels, and act upon them. 

30. Matters being thus, I think it best to bleed at first ; 
then, an hour or two after, to throw up one of the more active 
sorts of clyster. The best of this kind known to me is tobacco- 
smoke, strongly driven from a large bladder through a pipe. 
This may, after a time, be repeated ; unless, indeed, the previous 
one have acted, loosening the bowels, and unlocking the way 
downwards: failing this, difficult as it may be to work a way 
out, something more drastic must be tried : 


K Pilule e duobus, gr. xxxv; 
Calomel, 9j; 
Balsam of Peru, q. s. 
Make into four pills; to be taken out of a teaspoonful of syrup of 
violets, no other liquors being drunk afterwards, lest it be thrown 


up. 


Now if the patient reject this by the mouth, we must proceed 
as follows. ‘Take twenty-five drops of liquid laudanum out of 
half an ounce of strong cinnamon-water, and repeat the same a 
few hours after. When, from the effect of this, the tendency 
to vomit and the pains of the belly have remitted, the previous 
cathartic may be given. — By this time it will be retained and 
do its work—thanks to the laudanum. If, however, the effect 
of the anodynes be so broken as to allow the tendency to vomit 
and the pain to return, the cathartic meanwhile lying idle in 
the stomach, all present hope of dejections from below must be 
abandoned, and recourse must be had to the paregoric first 
mentioned. This we must repeat every fourth or sixth hour 
until the bowels keep quiet, and the proper movement down- 


NEW FEVER. 205 


wards be accomplished. During this time the cathartic, which 
has been kept in the bowel by the contrary motion of the in- 
testines, will have found time to effect a motion by the way of 
stools, however much the supposed opiates may have seemed 
to militate against such a result. At the very time that I am 
writing this, I have the case of a nobleman before me. He 
had severe ileus. The acrid humours that determined the 
disease and the retention of the sharp cathartics brought on 
aphthe. These were got rid of by the use of the Peruvian 
bark, and by washing the mouth with the following gargle: 
Kk Crab-apple juice, Ib.ss; 
Raspberry-juice, 3). 
Make into a juice. 

31. The natural ducts are now open, and so the patient may 
have a holiday from purging, resting a few days until the tumults 
of the bowels shall have wholly subsided. The time thus spared 
may properly be given up to the dilution and tempering of the 
heat and acrimony of the humour. This being done, the 
purging on alternate days may be taken up afresh, and kept 
on, as long as the least signs of fever remain. But enough 
upon these points. 

32. If the patient be an infant, two leeches should be applied 
behind the ears, then a blister to the nape of the neck, then a 
purge of rhubarb out of small-beer. If, after the purging, the 
fever take the appearance of an intermittent, a julep with 
Peruvian bark, as recommended for infants in my chapter on 
the Intermittent Fever,’ may be exhibited. 

33. This is a place for remarking that, although infants are 
equally liable to this disease with adults, and although their 
treatment is the same (excepting only such differences as are 
required by their tender age in the matters of bleeding and 
purging), it is still a matter of serious consideration whether 
the fever thus treated be really the fever of the present consti- 
tution, or one of another species. This is a matter to be deter- 
mined by a diligent study of the fevers of infants under all 
constitutions : since it is a well-known fact, that infants are 
often thrown into fever by teething, and that such fevers are 
not easily distinguished from those of another sort. As to the 


! Epistol. Respon., I, § 29. 


206 SCHEDULA MONITORIA I. 


treatment of these I have long been harassed in mind; so 
much so, that it is only within the last few years that I have 
made out whether such little patients as I had charge of reco- 
vered through my skill, or from happy accidents. — At length, 
however, I adopted a remedy of no great celebrity; indeed, one 
held cheap from its very commonness, but one wherein I was 
well-advised of its beneficial action. This met my wishes more 
than any medicine, however famous, with which I am ac- 
quainted. It is this: two, three, or four drops of spirits of 
hartshorn —the dose accommodated to the age—in one or two 
spoonfuls of black-cherry water. This, or some similar appro- 
priate julep, may be given every four hours, five or six times. 

94. There is another symptom in infantile complaints, very 
different both from the fevers of different constitutions, and 
from the present, and very troublesome. It is a sort of hectic. 
This afflicts infants a long time. Those who suffer from it fall 
off, but without any notable heat. The appetite fails, the 
limbs and body waste. The simplest form of treatment is as 
follows—two drachms of picked rhubarb, cut into squares, are 
put into a glass bottle holding two pounds of thin small beer, 
or any other liquid the infant may take of his ordinary drink. 
This is corked up, and kept to be drunk night-times and day- 
times, with food and without, as the case may be. When this 
is finished, two more pints of small beer are poured over the 
rhubarb, and when this is finished, the same is done a third 
time. The rhubarb has then lost its strength, and the child 
its malady. Now, lest the small beer of the first infusion be 
too strong of the rhubarb, and purge too much, the second pint 
may be added when the first is finished. Afterwards, how- 
ever, no fresh beer must be added until all that was first put 
in be drunk out. 

35. To return to the fever of the present constitution. In 
this sort of fever, as in rheumatism and the other numerous 
diseases that are caused by evacuations alone, if we keep on 
with the aforesaid purgings and bleedings so pertinaciously as 
to wait for the disappearance of a// the symptoms, we shall 
wait till the patient dies. | It is by no means rare for certain 
unimportant symptoms, the remnants of the expiring fever, to 
continue during the disappearance of the disease. They create, 
however, no danger of a relapse, and as the strength comes 


NEW FEVER. 207 


back, go off of themselves. What if these be only the true 
progeny of the repeated evacuations wherewith the physician 
attacks the disease? What if we may add to these the ina- 
nition arising from the denial of the accustomed food? When 
influences like these affect a system weakened and almost worn 
out by disease, you may have the vapours, as we call them, in 
men just as in women, and that for the same reason, viz. a 
weakened, broken, and dejected system of the animal spirits. 
Hence, after the evacuations that clear off the disease, the pru- 
dent physician will hold his hand, and wait a little, to see what 
Time, the best and most successful of doctors, may do with the 
lighter and less important symptoms. Generally, at the end 
of a disease of this sort they will give way to a paregoric, taken 
for two or three nights, at bedtime, with nothing besides, 
as I have ascertained by repeated observations. 

36. This method far surpasses all that I have tried. If it 
failin removing the fever, it makes it intermit. The work 
may then be done by Peruvian bark. "To some, the catharsis 
may seem prejudicial. I affirm, however, that, preceded—as 
it always should be—by bleeding, it restores the patient be- 
yond all otherremedies. The purge, it is true, on the day it is 
taken, may, by disturbing the blood, and giving intensity to the 
fever, at first seem mischievous. The good, however, that follows 
more than outweighs this. Experience bears witness that 
catharsis, after bleeding, is the quickest cure. It clears away 
that foul colluvies by which, as by an antecedent cause, the 
fever was lit up; or, if not, those humours which, without 
being absolutely peccant, were still so hot, concocted, and 
thickened, as to contribute much to its persistence. Besides 
these, it paves the way for a paregoric ; which always works 
better and more surely after the peccant humours, which 
would check its influence, have been eliminated. 

37. Then, on the other hand, the method of attempting the 
elimination of the febrile matter by means of sweats, through 
the pores of the skin, has so much of trouble and delay, that 
it often protracts the fever to some weeks; and brings the 
patient to the verge of the grave, if not to the grave itself. 
Besides this, it entails whole troops of remedies throughout all 
the stages of the ailment—remedies for the remedy rather than 
for the disease itself. How should it be otherwise? The 


208 SCHEDULA MONITORIA I. 


cure of the disease, which pre-eminently requires cooling mea- 
sures, is attempted by heating medicines and by a hot regimen. 
Nevertheless, the self-called professors of a misnamed art must 
needs make themselves free of all rules, despise the evidence of 
their senses, and tax their skill to transform a short and easy 
malady into one both long and difficult. Muctus in simpulo 
is their motto. They have, however, as much need to do so as 
the sailor, who, with an open sea before him, must 


* Sai] too near the sands to show his wit." 


All this may win him the credit of being a clever steersman, 
provided he save his vessel. Whether saved or not, he will 
not earn the name of a prudent man. 

38. Upon these reasons I am induced to speak with a well- 
grounded confidence upon the superiority of the aforesaid 
method of treatment by means of bleeding and purging, over 
all other ways of overcoming afever. Diaphoresis may, indeed, 
in a certain sense, be called Nature’s own method; a method 
whereby she expels the fever, and one which, for that reason, is 
pre-eminently genuine and appropriate. And so it is, as long as 
Nature does the work in her own way ; which is to digest the 
febrile matter in the first instance, and then to expel it gently, 
when thus duly concocted, by the surface of the body. As 
practical physicians have often seen cases where fevers are 
driven off by sweatings, they have come to dogmatise over- 
confidently, and to lay down, as a general rule, that all fevers 
can thus be dispelled—and that they ought to be so. This 
may be granted. Yet it by no means follows, that Art is so good 
an imitator of Nature as to follow her processes in this respect, 
and so expel fever by diaphoresis. In the first place, she 
knows not how the peccant matter is to be duly digested and 
concocted in the way of preparation for expulsion. In the 
next, even if this were known, there are no certain signs that 
give notice of the due preparation being complete. Hence the 
fittest time for exciting perspiration must needs remain un- 
known. That a rash forcing of sweats, before the concoction 
is complete, is of all things the most dangerous, no one but a 
wrangler will maintain. The crude matter presses on the 
brain, and to promote this is to add fuel to fire. Hippocrates’ 
maxim I have before noticed—-“ Cocta non cruda sunt medi- 


NEW FEVER. 209 


canda et movenda;"! a maxim which I believe applies to artificial 
diaphoresis rather than to catharsis. No one, however little may 
have been his practice, can have failed to see what numbers suffer, 
under the hands of old women and quacks, from this prepos- 
terous abuse of sudorifics ; whose plan is, to confine the patient 
to his bed, and force sweats, the moment he complains of 
shivers and pains in the limbs— the usual premonitory sym- 
ptoms of fever. Yet, so far is this from guarding against the 
fever, that it frequently makes it worse, and reduces it to a 
confirmed and rooted disease ; when, very likely, by the loss of 
afew ounces of blood it would have disappeared at once, and 
of its own accord. 

40. Leaving, however, the quacks and old women, it is well 
known, that just as those sweats which come of themselves at 
the beginning of a fever are symptomatic rather than critical, 
so also are those that are forced wholly unavailing towards the 
cure. The two sorts are in the same predicament, 1. e. both 
equally useless. Then, as Art knows nothing as to the fit time 
for eliciting them, she is equally ignorant as to the length of 
time they should last and be encouraged. Yet mischief will 
arise from prolonging it; inasmuch as if the matter which 
creates the disease be got rid of before the diaphoresis have 
ceased, there is a loss of those humid particles whereby the 
blood should be cooled and tempered; and thus the fever is 
both protracted and increased. It is clear, then, that all this 
is slippery ground. With bleeding and purging, however, the 
physician can use his judgment. Add to this, that in the latter 
treatment, even though the physician fail to cure, he incurs no 
danger to the patient; whereas, in the sweating method, there 
is always danger unless there is convalescence. In such cases, 
being kept to the bed—to say nothing about the effect of cor- 
dials—beyond his usual hours, confounds the economy of 
Nature, and brings on convulsive movements of the limbs and 
other anomalous symptoms. These I do not describe, because 
they do not fall within the history of the disease. They arise, 
however, from the additional tumult and confusion wherewith 
Nature is oppressed, whenever we thus attempt the cure of the 
complaint. The vulgar, however, put all this down to the 
score of malignity. 


' Tlézrova dappakevery kai kivéery, py wpa. Aph. i, 22, t. iii, p. 711.—[G.] 
HE. 14 


210 SCHEDULA MONITORIA I. 


41. Malignity.—W hether this be a name of a real thing, or 
a mere idea, it is the opinion of the present writer that it has 
killed more men than gunpowder. Those fevers are more 
especially called malignant wherein a greater degree of inflam- 
mation is observed. Hence physicians have betaken them- 
‘selves, at once, to cordials and alexipharmies; to expel, so to 
say, the venom through the pores of the skin—this being 
what they mean, if they mean anything. Hence they adopt 
the hottest regimen for a disease that calls for the coolest. 
Smallpox, the hottest of all diseases, as well as certain other 
fevers, proves this. ‘They fall into error, being, generally, misled 
by the sight of the petechiz and purple spots, and other like 
phenomena. All these are really referable, in most cases, to 
the intensity of the inflammation ingrafted on the overheated 
blood. Still they are rare phenomena when they break out 
spontaneously ; and they do so only in cases of plague, or of 
smallpox of the confluent kind, a kind partaking of the most 
intense sort of inflammation. Here, indeed, we have livid 
blotches appearing in different parts of the body along with 
the pustules themselves; whilst, at the same time, the patient 
is distressed by passing blood by the kidneys, and from the sur- 
face of the lungs; blood which has so been disturbed and 
excited by the orgasm of the inflammation that it breaks 
all holdings, and finds its way by force to the cavities of the 
body. 

Now although the purple spots of the fever in question may 
not arise from a heat of blood so intense as that of the hemor- 
rhage just noticed, they are still the products of inflammation 
of the same kind, although less in degree. And, as often as 
there is no incurable excretion of blood, they easily give way 
to the cooling regimen. 

49. Some persons may infer the malignity of a fever 
not so much from the purple spots, as from the fact of its 
having proved fatal in a manner disproportionate to the inten- 
sity of its symptoms, and the time of its duration. To these I 
would answer that the process has been as follows : on the first 
onset of the disease Nature was, as it were, so much dejected 
and oppressed, as to be incompetent to exhibit the natural and 
regular phenomena consonant to the disease; so that all the 
phenomena which have shown themselves were anomalous. The 


NEW FEVER. 211 


animal economy being disturbed and thrown down, the fever 
becomes depressed. Had Nature taken its own course, the 
fever would have been developed. 

A rare proof of this happened many years ago, in the case 
of a young man to whom I was called in. Although he seemed 
dying, the temperature in the external parts of the body was 
so natural to the touch, that, when I said that he was suffering 
from fever, his friends disbelieved me. However, he was so 
suffering ; the fever being unable to show itself visibly, from the 
great oppression of the blood, by which it was forbidden an 
exit, and so was smothered internally. I said that if he were 
bled, the fever would show itself. He was bled freely, and the 
fever did show itself. I never saw a worse. It yielded only 
to the third or fourth bleeding. 

43. Now if the present reasons be insufficient to prove ab- 
solutely that my view is the right one, I shall be contented 
with the evidence of experience... This says that fevers like 
the present yield very slowly to the sweating treatment; 
which is enough— since it is not reason but experience which 
teaches us what fevers are cured by diaphoresis, and what by 
other evacuations. As to speculative reasons, no wise man, 
who knows the nature of either men or things, will fail to see 
that there is no certain experiment by which they can be 
tested. He will, therefore, hesitate 


* jurare in verba magistri." 


He may also observe that matters of speculative reason are so 
varied and subtle, that a man may propound a theory, based 
upon sufficient arguments, or plausibly adapted to take the 
judgments of the lookers-on, and so extort their approval. After 
this, one more favoured by Nature than himself may take him 
up, pull down his fine and well-supported doctrine, and, by 
dint of a more cogent logie, prove that it is a mere brainworm 
—wherein all belongs to fancy, and nought to Nature. Then 
he will introduce a new hypothesis of his own, more plausible, 
and more neatly put together. And this will last until some 
third disputant as much more knowing than the second, as 
the second was wiser than the first, step in; and then it will 
die like its predecessor. So it will go on until it come to him 


212 SCHEDULA MONITORIA I. 


who is the climax of all earthly wisdom. Now to find such a 
person, and to distinguish him from all others, 1s a hard matter 
—unless, indeed, a person is mad enough to think that it is 
himself. But then there may be beings in those brighter orbs, 
which are scattered over the infinite expanse of the universe, 
whose intelligences far exceed those of finite man. Man, 
indeed, may so have his intellectual faculties shaped by Nature, 
as to be enabled to perceive not what is absolute truth, but 
only that which is necessary for him to know, and fitted to his 
nature. This applies to those whose medicine consists in vain 
speculations rather than in that solid experience which rests 
upon the basis of the senses. 

44. Should any one object and say—“ but do not facts and 
experience show that fever is often cured by means wholly 
different from those which you recommend?” — I answer, that 
a method by which the patient sometimes has his recovery 
ensured, and a method which generally cures, and wherein the 
practical phenomena incident to the disease are disposed of, 
differ from one another foto celo. Thus, in smallpox, many 
recover under the hot, many under the cool regimen. How 
shall we decide? | Even thus. By one method I find that the 
more I heat the patient, the more I increase and promote the 
fever, disquiet, and delirium; by the other, the more he is 
moderately cooled, the more is his temperament allayed, and 
the less is he vexed by fever and other symptoms. To this 
I add, that the more the due temperature of the flesh, best 
fitted for the augmentation and development of the pustules, 
is preserved, the larger is the pustule; the converse happening 
when the patient is suffocated in bed. Putting these two 
alternatives together, the true method becomes clear. 

45. Similarly, in the fever in question, I find that the more 
the patient is heated, the more he becomes liable to frenzy, 
purple spots, petechiz, &c. &c., and the more the fever itself 
becomes attended with all sorts of irregular and anomalous 
symptoms. ‘Take another patient, and treat him differently, 
and he escapes them. Reason now decides between the two 
methods, even when each cures. The simplest test, however, 
is the proportion of deaths, upon which I decline an opinion, 
from my unwillingness to make up a case for myself and my 
Own views. 


NEW FEVER. 213 


46. Thus much concerning this species of the fever. How 
long it will last I do not guess. It may be a spirituous and 
subtile beginning of somewhat else—the germ, perhaps, of the 
depuratory fever, now exploded, but which the plague followed. 
There are phenomena which lead me towards this belief. 
Intermittents, properly so called, quartans more especially, 
still hang about; whilst certain other fevers of the continuous 
kind have a tendency, especially during autumn, to take the 
intermittent type. I say little about the exacerbations of the 
present fever. In more cases than one they have looked like 
the paroxysms of intermittents, more especially in the tendency 
to vomit; hence I will give out nothing positive. How the 
depuratory fever began I know not. What I wrote upon it 
in my work on ‘ Acute Diseases’! was as follows: * How long 
a continued fever of this character had prevailed in the year 
1661 I am unable to state. Up to that time I had found 
enough to do in observing the general symptoms of fevers ; I 
had not become aware that they were distinguished from one 
another according to the different crases of different years, or 
according to the seasons of one and the same year." 


! Sect. T, Chap. III, $ 4. 


214 SCHEDULA MONITORIA II. 


ON THE PUTRID FEVER SUBSEQUENT TO THE 
CONFLUENT SMALLPOX. 


l. As my advanced age and waning years, as well as my im- 
paired health, may, perhaps, deny me an opportunity of laying 
before the world such observations as I have lately made—late 
indeed in my life—concerning a fever secondary to the con- 
fluent smallpox, the reader will, I trust, excuse me if I add a 
few words about it, different as it is from the disease just 
described. 

3. I have elsewhere demonstrated the difference between 
confluent and discrete smallpox; showing how the latter is 
generally got over, without much medical assistance, and how 
Nature does the work herself, excepting only where diaphoresis 
and lying a-bed have been continually indulged in: what I wrote 
being as follows :1—* In a case of discrete smallpox, the patient 
thinks that because he sweats freely, as (according to a previous 
statement) adults generally do sweat, allis going well; he 
believes that the virus of the disease is passing off through the 
pores of the skin; he keeps up this same sweat by taking cor- 
dials inwardly, and by heating diet; he does this all the more 
readily because he seems at first to mend upon it, and because 
it tallies with the unfounded judgments of his friends. Now 
that which is eliminated by this diaphoresis is, in reality, the 
particles which should supply the elevation of the pustules, and 
the swelling of the face; so that, on the eighth day, the face, 
which ought properly to begin to swell, and to become inflamed 
in the pustular interspaces, becomes flaccid ; whilst the inter- 
spaces become pale. Meanwhile the pustules themselves may 
keep their colour and elevation, but this they may do when the 
patient is dead. Moreover, the sweat, which up to this time 
had flowed freely, now suddenly and spontaneously checks 
itself: the warmest cordials being unable to bring it back. In 
the meanwhile the patient becomes delirious, anxious, restless, 
distressed. He passes his urine frequently, and in small quan- 


! Med. Obs., Sect. III, Chap. II, $ 20. 


PUTRID FEVER. 215 


tities. Within a few hours he disappoints the hopes of his 
friends, and expires.” 

Had he left matters to Nature, and taken to no regimen at 
all, he would have recovered, and that without danger to his life. 

3. In confluent smallpox it is different. They create little 
terror at first; unless, indeed, there be a loss of blood either 
from the lungs, or urinary passages during the first days of the 
complaint. Neither are they, at first, dangerous. It is when 
the disease draws to a close that the peril comes on. Then there 
is asudden change for the worse, and it is mere chance whether 
life or death be the result. 

4. Of the days thus dangerous the eleventh is the worst— 
counting from the accession of the disease. It is the worst in 
the least crude form of the disease. In the second or cruder 
form the worst day is the fourteenth ; in the crudest form of all, 
the seventeenth. In those rare cases where the patient lives 
on till the twentieth, the pustules become so dried, thickened, 
and incrusted, that to detach them from the surface— especially 
the face—is beyond the means of art. However, on the 
sixteenth day, the patient generally begins to be in danger. 
His fever is worse, inquietude increases, and other symptoms 
set in at the same time— symptoms which prognosticate death 
—and that not distant. Here, unless Art save him, the patient 
dies. If he escape the eleventh, the two other aforenamed 
days still stand over as days to be feared. Every evening, so 
long as he lives, from the eleventh to the seventeenth, as evening 
draws in, he is harassed by a paroxysm of severe unrest, and 
death attacks him v? et armis. 

5. I have given the reason for the difference of danger 
between the different sorts of smallpox. In the discrete kind, 
the phlegmonzs, or inflamed tumours, such as are all pustules 
at their commencement, are few. Hence there is but a small 
quantity of pus to be thrown upon the blood, according to the 
laws of the circulation, at the time when they begin to ripen. 
Hence there is no fear of the fever being excessive. The amount 
of pus is but small; so is the impression which it makes on the 
blood. Hence, too, Nature can regulate it. In the confluent 
smallpox, on the other hand, the whole body is covered with 
these phlegmon:e ; which afterwards become little abscesses: and 
so much pus on those days wherein, under the guidance of 


216 SCHEDULA MONITORIA II. 


Nature, the pustules attain either their height, or their due 
maturity is brought back through the veins into the blood, and 
so great a quantity of putrid exhalations from the whole surface 
of the body now under suppuration finds its way into the sys- 
tem, that the fever thereby excited beats down the powers of 
Nature, and then the patient dies partly by the fever, partly by 
the poison that has tainted the mass of the blood. 

6. Wherefore, when danger arises from the number of the 
pustules, whilst there is a chance of recovery in proportion as 
they decrease, common sense, as well as reason, suggests to the 
skilful physician the propriety of using all his efforts in repress- 
ing the subtile and inordinate inflammation, rather than, at the 
beginning of the disease, by propelling it violently by hot regi- 
men and cordials; means which assimilate the whole system to 
the morbific matter contained in the blood, and convert the 
whole substance of the body into a focus to the disease. Hence 
he first draws a little blood from the arm, in case he have any 
suspicions, from the youth of the patient, from his habit of 
heating himself with generous liquors, from sharp pains in 
any part of his body, or, lastly, from excessive vomiting, 
that the smallpox coming out is referable to the confluent 
species. He then gives an emetic, and aims at the same ob- 
ject. Now, as nothing so heats a patient, and so promotes the 
over-abundant assimilation of the variolous matter, as continued 
lying in bed, I forbid him to do so during the day for the first 
six days from the invasion of the disease, or for the first four 
from the breaking out of the pustules; by which time all the 
eruption has shown itself. After this I keep him to his bed 
to the end of the disease; but I do not allow him more or 
thicker blankets than he usually sleeps under, nor yet a fire in 
the room ; whilst I do allow him the liberal use of thin small 
beer, and of other cooling, grateful drinks. 

7. Since, however, even under the most moderate regimen, 
flushes, delirium, and troublesome disquiet will frequently occur, 
I order an opiate every night, to be taken a little earlier than 
usual, inasmuch as in this disease a paroxysm or aggravation of 
the heat and disquiet appears every evening. Now, this method is 
very fit both for guarding against any excessive crop of pustules 
(the chief cause of danger, as I have shown before), and for en- 
suring a due growth and proper maturation for those that doshow. 


PUTRID FEVER. 217 


8. It is a matter of regret, that the heyday of youth is most 
affected by this disease; hence both those remedies which I 
have just recommended, as well as all the other discoveries of 
medicine, are of no avail. Very often the patient, even when 
there has been no previous danger, on the eleventh day, or on 
one of the other days equally fatal, 1s seized with violent fever, 
suffocation, and tossing about, and to the astonishment and 
bewilderment of his friends, who up to this time had hoped for 
the best, dies suddenly — 


‘‘ quanta de spe decidit." 


In breaking the impetus of the accession, the physician must 
be as attentive as he had been in guarding against it. With 
this view he must steadily remember, that the adventitious fever, 
which on the eleventh day attacks subjects of the variole 
confluentes, is a disease wholly different both from the variole 
themselves, and from the fever which precedes the eruption, or 
which, a few days afterwards, arises from the inflammation of 
the phlegmone. It is just a putrid fever; due to the resorp- 
tion of the putrescent particles, and to the taint of the now 
matured abscesses. "These, in all their noxious qualities, afflict 
the patient, and the fever and the original poison afflict him 
also. 

9. Hence no wise man will look at any remedies other than 
those which allay the secondary and putrid fever. Nothing 
does this like free bloodletting, which eliminates from the 
blood the tainted particles. The state of the variole themselves 
in nowise opposes this practice. It is too late for the pustules to 
be driven in under any circumstances; so much so, that were the 
patient to die, and to be buried, the pustules would so thoroughly 
have attained their due consistency, that they would neither 
recede nor shrink. In short, our case is no case of smallpox, 
but one of putrid fever. 

10. This, then, is my method—one discovered since my work 
on the smallpox. Missing this, I know no other. 

When the diseased is so far gone that nothing but a miracle 
seems likely to save him, whether it be on the eleventh day, or 
on any day subsequent to it, I choose the arm where there are 
the fewest pustules, and the most room for my lancet, and bleed 
to ten or twelve ounces. However much, during the first days 


218 SCHEDULA MONITORIA II. 


of the disease, the orgasm or paroxysm that occurs towards 
night may be abated by opiates, or forestalled by the patient 
keeping out of bed during the daytime (and this without bleed- 
ing), the secondary fever can be treated by free bloodletting 
alone. Nothing but bloodletting subdues its violence. In 
the evening, a full anodyne, as before, should be given—this 
being our sheet-anchor. It should also be repeated mornings 
and evenings, or even oftener: since, very often, the orgasm 
is so violent, that a full dose of paregoric is insufficient to keep 
it in abeyance so long as twelve hours. Hence it must be re- 
peated at the end of eight, or even six. 

1l. But it often happens that, partly from the nature of 
the disease, and partly from the free use of the necessary ano- 
dynes, the patient's bowels are so confined as almost to create 
suffocation, and bring back the fever to its original intensity ; 
in which case it seems to be all over with the patient, and as we 
have a hard knot to cleave we want a hard wedge to cleave it 
with. However, of the two dangers, that arising from a 
mild purge, and that arising from the fever and constipation 
combined, the first is the lightest. The light purge generally 
consists of an ounce and a half of lenitive electuary, given in 
four ounces of some distilled water—chicory water, for instance, 
or the aqua lactis aleviteria. At first this may fail to act — 
partly from the constipation incident to the disease, partly 
from the effects of the opiates. Generally, however, if it be 
given in the morning, it will bring away stools before bedtime. 
If it fail, the paregoric must be given in the evening notwith- 
standing; provided that there be any great disquietude, or any 
other symptom indicative of danger, since, by waiting for a 
motion, we may wait till the patient dies. If the purge fail to 
act, no harm will arise. It may be repeated the next day. 
The second dose will then help the first. If, however, the 
first so far act as to clear the bowels to the extent required, 
the second may be put off for a few days. 

12. This alternation of bleeding and purging at intervals 
must be continued, as long as the disease requires it, and until 
the patient is out of danger. One thing, however, must be 
remarked in respect to catharsis, viz. that no purge should be 
given until the disease has taken a turn, e. g. on the thirteenth, 
or some subsequent day ; and not then, unless blood have been 
drawn. 


PUTRID FEVER. 219 


13. To put a finishing stroke to my notice of this disease, I 
will say a few words concerning the spitting of blood, and the 
passing of bloody urine, which sometimes supervene upon 
smallpox ; each of these hemorrhages, as aforesaid,! occurring 
at the beginning of the disease, before the pustules have ap- 
peared, or (if some have shown themselves on certain parts of 
the body), whilst the remainder are still lurking under the skin. 
In this case, unless the symptoms in question terminate the 
disease, the smallpox will be of the confluent kind.  Mean- 
while purple spots cover portions of the body, and these are 
fatal signs. Now, although the blood may so far regain its 
natural crasis as for the purple spots to disappear, the hzema- 
turia and the hemoptysis may remain, and remain as signs 
and tokens of a fatal crisis. Terrible as is this symptom, it 
may be overcome, and the patient be placed out of danger. 
It is due to the intense inflammation of the blood, and to its 
attenuated state. Hence, any remedy which tempers this 
condition, and which acts by thickening, or as an astringent 
upon the fluids, so rendering them less hable to fluxes, is the 
remedy for the hemorrhages in question. On this principle, 
after a single free and full bleeding, I order the following 
paregoric : 

IX Red-poppy water, 3ij; 
Liquid laudanum, nxiv ; 
Distilled vinegar, 5iij ; 
Syrup of poppies, 3ss. 
Mix, and make into a draught. 


Then the following, or something of the same kind is given, 
until the bleeding stop: 


IK Lozenges of terra Lemnia, 

Bole Armeniac, aa 3); 

Terra sigillata, 

Bloodstone, 

Dragon’s blood, 

Red coral (prepared), aa 3ss ; 

Mastich, 

Gum arabic, aa 9j. 

Mix, and make into a very fine powder. Take 5ss, out of a spoonful 

of syrup of comfrey, every three hours. Wash down with four or 
five spoonfuls of the following julep :— 


! Obs. Med., III, 2, §§ 25, 26.—[G. ] 


220 SCHEDULA MONITORIA II. 


K Plantain-water, 
Oak-bud water, aa zii) ; 
Barley-water, with cinnamon, 3ij; 
Syrup of dried roses, £j ; 
Spirits of vitriol, sufficient to give a slight acidity. 
Mix. 


Every night the paregoric as before. Emulsions of the four 
cold seeds, with poppy-seeds, do good. When the hemorrhage 
is over, the remaining treatment must be the treatment of my 
chapter on smallpox. 

14. I have now to remark that, when I speak of liquid 
laudanum, I mean the liquid laudanum described by me in my 
book on ‘ Acute Diseases.’ As for syrup of poppies, it is as 
follows: Fourteen ounces of the heads of the white poppy, 
well dried, soaked in eight pints of spring water for twenty- 
four hours, and then well boiled and strongly squeezed and 
strained, with twenty-four ounces of sugar, are made into a 
syrup. 

These two preparations are the most efficacious of their kind, 
especially the syrup. An ounce of this is as effective of two 
of the other sort, where the poppy-heads are not dried, and 
where the squeezing is less; where, also, instead of the heads 
of the true poppy, red-poppy heads, of very inferior virtue, are 
occasionally substituted. As often, then, as I am in doubt 
concerning the respective merits of these two paregorics, I 
prescribe in the place of both or either, a grain and a half of 
the solid London laudanum, sometimes two grains. "This is 
dissolved in some appropriate water. So doing, I avoid the 
chances of error, and do the best for my patient. 


! Med, Obs., 11, 2. 


BLOODY URINE. 291 


ON BLOODY URINE ARISING FROM A CALCULUS 
IMPACTED IN THE KIDNEYS. 


1. However little it may be the part of a wise and cautious 
man to scatter his observations abroad, when they rest only 
upon the experiences of his own proper person, I still think that 
no fair judges will be offended at a man, like myself, who has 
suffered long and severely from bloody urine arising from a 
calculus impacted in the kidney, being so far moved by com- 
passion towards his fellow-beings, who may also be fellow-suf- 
ferers, as to point out those remedies—common-place as they 
may be, and cheap as they may be held—which have in any 
degree assuaged his sufferings. 

2. A. D. 1660, I was attacked by gout ; and the fit was both 
far severer, and far more lasting than any one which has pre- 
viously afflicted me. On account of this, I lay, during the 
summer, either in or on a softish bed for two months con- 
tinuously. "Towards the end of the attack I began to feel a 
dull heavy pain, principally in the left, sometimes (though 
rarely) in the right kidney. As the gout went off, this pain in 
the kidneys stuck to me, warning me of the condition of 
those parts at intervals, as yet tolerably endurable, and by no 
means severe. That acute pain which follows the course of the 
ureters in the direction of the bladder, and that violent vomiting 
which is the attendant of a nephritic paroxysm, I had yet to 
experience. Still, however much such signs of a calculus in 
the kidney might be wanting, I still had good reason to believe 
that such was the case; and that, from being of a size too great 
to pass from the pelvis to the ureters, it caused the symptoms in 
question. That this was no vain fancy was shown many years 
afterwards. In the winter of 1676, after a long walk, imme- 
diately upon a thaw following a most excessive frost, I passed 
blood in my urine; and this became, afterwards, habitual, as 
often as I either went a long way on foot, or drove in a carriage 
(no matter how slowly) over the paved streets. On an wn- 
paved road, however, I might drive as far as I chose, and no 
such harm would occur. 


222 SCHEDULA MONITORIA III. 


3. The urine which I then excreted, although it took the ap- 
pearance of nearly pure blood, after a time, and when the bloody 
portions had settled at the bottom of the chamber-pot, became 
natural in appearance, and clear on the surface. In the way 
of treatment,—I took care to be freely bled from the arm, 
and, after some general purges, I resorted to the use of a variety 
of refrigerant and astringent medicines, Meanwhile my diet 
agreed with the treatment, and all acid, sharp, and attenuant 
liquors were avoided. 

Neither this nor any of my numerous resources did good ; so 
that fearmg to provoke the protrusion of the stone (which I 
thought was large) by the use of mineral waters, I lost all 
hopes ; the more so because I had observed that some aged men 
of my acquaintance had hastened their end by attempting in 
vain to cure the disease by such remedies. I therefore made 
up my mind to try no further ; and only guarded against the 
affection by avoiding, as much as I could, all motion of the 
body. 

4. Recollecting, however, at last (and that by accident), how 
wonderfully some sung the praises of the hthontriptie virtue 
of the seeds of the ash, I imagined that 1f the seed had all these 
virtues, it was no more than likely that the manna of the ash 
had them still more ; the manna of the shops being, as we are 
taught by that most excellent botanist Mr. Ray, as well as 
by other writers, no etherial honey, and no heavenly dew ; but 
rather a liquid exuding from both the leaves and trunk of the 
ash trees that grow in Calabria; of the truth of which Mr. Ray 
was assured by a very learned physician, whom he met during 
his travels in Italy, who had, himself, often gathered it from 
the leaves and twigs, after they had been carefully covered with 
linen ; the manna being the concrete juice. (See Ray's * Cata- 
logue of English Plants?) With the intention, therefore, of 
making the experiment, I drank two ounces and a half of 
manna, dissolved in a quart of whey, taking now and then, 
during the time of the purging, a little lemon-juice. By this 
means I quickened the purging, which is generally slow, and 
rendered the manna more pleasant to the stomach. It is impos- 
sible to say how much benefit I derived from the use of this 
medicine ; although the kidneys, instead of being in continual 
pain, as before, were simply affected with a dull, troublesome 


BLOODY URINE. 223 


feeling. Hence, as it had answered so well, I repeated it, at 
stated days, every week, and continued it for some months ; 
during which time I found myself so much better after each 
purge, that I could at last bear the rough shaking of a car- 
riage—so thoroughly was I liberated from the symptom. 
This lasted till last spring. When, however, that season drew 
nigh, having suffered from gout during the winter, and from 
the unusual inactivity of body consequent thereon, the bloody 
urine returned. Here I hesitated, doubting whether I should 
again betake myself to the purging, since, during the late years, 
the whole substance of my body had been so perverted into the 
seat and fomes of gout, that a cathartic, however mild, was 
certain of bringing on a long attack of the disease. At length 
it occurred to me, that if I were to take a paregoric every 
night after each purge, by which the tumult excited by the 
cathartic would be allayed, I could safely resume my original 
method of taking manna once in the week. I therefore took, 
in the morning, two ounces and a half of manna, dissolved in 
two pints of whey, and in the evening, upon going to bed, I 
added sixteen drops of liquid laudanum to some thin small beer ; 
and so I repeated the manna and the laudanum twice a week, 
six times, After that I used the manna only once in the week ; 
the mass of humours being so freely drawn off by the purge, 
that there was less danger from the gout. My reason then 
dictated, that if the manna were endowed with any dissolving 
or lithontriptic power, it needs must be, that a strongly astrin- 
gent medicine like laudanum, should, to a certain extent, im- 
pair its powers. Hence I thought it better to omit the 
hypnotic, since I was now taking a purge only once a week. 

5. In this method I continued some months, always dedi- 
cating the same day in the week to the catharsis ; and allowing 
myself, on no pretence whatever, to depart from it. Although 
from the first dose of this remedy the pain in the back remitted 
as before, nevertheless, within a short time after, the repeated 
purging brought on signs of gout, which threatened war, some- 
times in the limbs, sometimes in the bowels. "The laudanum, 
however, strongly repressed these attempts of the disease. 

Now as this method did good thus far, I determined to 
persevere in it, both for the sake of guarding against a recur- 
rence of the bloody urine, and of diminishing the fomes of the 


224 SCHEDULA MONITORIA III. 


calculus. This also proved successful. From the time when 
I first published this treatise the hemorrhage stopped, and I 
wholly laid aside the manna. 

6. As to purging—if, when there is bloody urine, nothing 
but a lenitive cathartic, such as the manna, be used, and if 
such be only given according to the method above delivered, 
I must now retract the opinion which I published in my treatise 
on Gout; viz. that it is unfit for gouty persons to be purged, 
either at the beginning, the declination, or during the intervals 
of a fit. 


—‘nec si miserum Fortuna Sinonem 
Finxit, vanum etiam mendacemque improba finxit."! 


It had not then come into my mind that the fit, which was 
occasioned by the disturbance of the purge, could be checked 
by giving an hypnotic towards night. Nevertheless, if we look 
to the gout only, all evacuations whatsoever do much harm, and, 
for that reason, are by no means to be admitted, unless the 
aforesaid symptom decidedly require the use of them. 

7. Concerning the regimen and manner of diet which seem 
suitable for those who labour under either of these diseases, I 
add the following remarks ; being unwilling to pass by anything 
which may be of use to such as are afflicted like myself. On 
getting out of bed, I drink a dish or two of tea, and ride in my 
coach till noon; when I return home, and moderately refresh 
myself (for moderation is all in all) with some sort of easily 
digestible meat that I like. Immediately after dinner, I drink 
somewhat more than a quarter of a pint of Canary wine, to pro- 
mote the concoction of the food in the stomach, and to drive 
away the gout from the bowels. After dinner I ride in my 
coach again, and (unless prevented by business) am driven out 
for two or three miles in the country, for change of air. A 
draught of thin small beer serves for supper, and I repeat this, 
even after I have gone to bed, and am about to compose myself 
to sleep. I hope by this julep to cool and dilute the hot and 
acrid juices lodged in the kidneys, whereby the stone is occa- 
sioned. Both at this time, and for dinner, I prefer the hopped 
small beer to that which is not; for, although the latter may, 


! Mn. ii, 79.— [G.] 


BLOODY URINE. 225 


from its greater smoothness and softness, be fitter to carry off 
the stone from the kidney, the former, on account of the styptic 
quality which the hops impart to it, is the less apt of the two 
to occasion sandy and stony matter; in unhopped beer the 
substance being more muddy and slimy. I take to going to bed 
early, especially in the winter ; nothing being better than early 
hours to accomplish a full and perfect concoction, and to pre- 
serve the order and tenor due to Nature. -On the other hand, 
late watchings lessen and corrupt all the concoctions of such 
old men as have been long suffering under some chronic disease, 
and inflict an all but incurable wound upon their vital principle. 
To prevent bloody urine, I take care, as often as I drive any 
distance over the stones (for on the common road I can take any 
journey without discomfort), to drink a free draught of thin small 
beer, upon getting into my coach, and also, if I am out long, 
before my return—a precaution which has always been sufficient. 

8. In respect, however, to gout, I will add this one ob- 
servation. During one of these later years, from some error 
in respect to the six non-naturals, a retrocession of the gouty 
matter befel me, the signs of which are great discomfort, a 
tendency to vomit, and some pain in the belly. The limbs, 
meanwhile, become of a sudden free from pain, and can be 
moved with more than the accustomed ease. In this case I 
drench myself with more than a gallon of posset, or else of 
thin small beer; and, as soon as I have got rid of the whole 
by vomiting, take a small draught of Canary wine, with eighteen 
drops of the liquid laudanum, and, going to bed, compose 
myself for sleep. By this method I have escaped imminent 
death more than once. 

9. Now, although it may scarcely be becoming for a man 
like me, concerning whom it matters little to any one whether 
he be alive or dead, to mention himself so often, I do so with 
the wish of being of service to others whose life is of greater 
weight and moment than my own. 

10. Lastly, I must notice that those who, either in stone or 
gout, are in the habit of incautiously taking their manna out 
of chalybeate waters, throw themselves into great danger, inas- 
much as, although, when thus exhibited, the manna acts both 
with greater rapidity and with less nausea, these benefits are 
more than counterbalanced by the disadvantages. 

II. 15 


226 SCHEDULA MONITORIA III. 


If the calculus be of such a size that it cannot be propelled 
through the ducts of the ureters into the bladder, chalybeate 
waters generally bring on a fit, which will continue, to the 
great pain and peril of the patient, until the calculus shall 
have gone back into the pelvis. Hence, chalybeate waters can 
only be taken safely when the patient is assured that the stone 
is small enough to either find or make a way along the ureters ; 
knowledge which, as far as I. know, is to be obtained by one 
means only, This is by considering whether the patient have 
at any time before suffered from a nephritic paroxysm, accom- 
panied with its usual severe pain in each kidney propagated 
along the ducts of the ureters, and with excessive vomiting. 
If so, it is certain that instead of a single large stone in the 
pelvis there is a mass of small ones, one of which, at a time, 
finds its way into the ureter, and causes a fit which lasts until 
the stone is pushed forward into the bladder. When this, 
however, is the case, nothing is more efficacious, both for 
guarding against the growth of the smaller calculi, and for 
favouring their protrusion into the bladder, than the use of 
chalybeate waters taken freely and regularly during each suc- 
cessive summer. 

1l. It may happen, however, that a patient may be seized 
by an attack without having the opportunity of flying to 
mineral waters, or at a time of year when their use is unsea- 
sonable. In such a case, the following compendious method 
must be applied, and that without any further apparatus of 
remedies. If the patient be of a sanguine temperament, and 
not in the decline of life, ten ounces of blood must be taken 
from the arm of the same side with the kidney affected. After 
this, a gallon of posset-drink, wherein two ounces of marsh- 
mallow root have been boiled, must be taken without loss of 
time, followed by the injection of the following enema : 


RK Marshmallow-roots, 
Lily-roots, aa 3); 
Mallow-leaves, 
Pellitory, 
Bearsbreech, 
Chamomile flowers, of each a handful ; 
Linseed, 
Fenugreek, aa 3ss ; 
Water, q. s. 
Boil down to half a pint. Strain. Dissolve in the clear liquor— 
Kitchen sugar, 
Syrup of marshmallows, àà Zij. 
Mix, and make into a clyster. 


BLOODY URINE. 227 


As soon as the patient has vomited up what he took by the 
mouth, and when the clyster has returned, a full dose of twenty 
drops of liquid laudanum must be given, or else fifteen or six- 
teen grains of Mathews’s pills. 

However, with aged men broken by any protracted disease, 
and with elderly women inclined to the (so-called) vapours 
(especially if at the beginning of the fit they have voided a 
dark gravelly urme), the bleeding must be omitted. In 
other matters, however, they must proceed exactly according 
to the method aforesaid. 

12. To return, however, to the matter in hand, viz. the 
single stone of large size. If, from the patient having pre- 
viously been free from an attack, we conclude that the calculus 
is too large to escape from the pelvis, we must consider mineral 
waters not only as useless, but (for the reasons already given) 
as exceedingly dangerous. Nor is the use of them better for 
gouty people; especially if, as is generally the case, they be 
stricken in years, and of a weak and phlegmatic habit of body. 
Here, the forces of Nature are so crippled, that it is much to be 
feared that a great quantity of water may so overwhelm them 
as for them to give way altogether. Whether or not this be 
the reason of such injuries as have befallen men of the consti- 
tution and habit in question, it is certain that very many so 
broken and worn out by gout have been killed by the use of 
chalybeates. 

14. And this is, in a manner, the sum of all that I have 
found out concerning the cure of diseases, up to the day on 
which I write, viz. the 29th of September, 1680. 


wisivdi Tutor ih Pur uir bi 
pe halter! "2 vu My it de qidiontged DE 
2 ditio ot sunm wuübsstd atr ah 
patio Fuss 9 nest ae etin i 
pes Ryne 
wii Jud oP Ott atio nee — | 
e innt oe mow ar esi deaf Tented RR, 
eufisLes » itt hilt shelnog ae Duca. He ano ai ios Vurdly 
inani iriehimes- tU ow "Ser dn uicit süsiues vi gud edat Y 
Tania efto vacas MY Lu fhd^ El an view. tour ett 
4qet Uitte drat W gal? CAF oh 30v: Anota id x clecibetnit ae) 
BER cua Pedi iP as M xlaPiequo" Miei 
npo *o ndn sfiérgstig bui Tene to Pa” ada Im 
Shae taint «o dul Jiloqus ak sur dunno NA et ie 
gi infodessyo al vate té TW vee SP a cil XE 
WP sil? tat vadisd ¥ — amdiogors quie: avy: ot-: vt eS nt 
dbason mE to quer Wathen ved ur ssh Mose 1 raft QUE 
oe xit pev odd tiated tie dinieliny «i ETT 
Sey gend Vater siad ut tu Que sian EU 
eres ES Oo 6m Ni he wate: 
Wen Fo veil he Wo mate di oat i at” zia BOR un a 
LR M iisih *o sus ddl aiios hia ee 


li isa sitos. 
di e dec "ox (Ou wuute vw uw 
ze ant, NA TECUM EU ME 
ie II of thn bien user 
|o MbabMe Wu | ^ 
bU anm Lab 34 
dics EN 
— : 
E w^ 


Nat 
E d 


PROCESSUS INTEGRI. 


D 


IX0sTZI SUBBHDOST Fe 


7 
vo 


PROCESSUS INTEGRI. 


CHAPTER I. 


ON THE AFFECTION CALLED HYSTERIA IN WOMEN; AND 
HYPOCHONDRIASIS IN MEN. 


1. WueEn, from some grave accident, the human system suffers 
any discomfiture, the animal spirits become atactic. The urine 
is excreted in abundance, and is limpid. All hope of getting 
better dies away. The patient anticipates all sorts of troubles. 
This ailment may attack any part of the body. Whatever part 
it does attack, it afflicts with symptoms coincident with the 
exciting cause. In the head there will be apoplexy, or hemi- 
plegia arising soon after deliveries. Spasms, too, like epilepsy, 
vulgarly called strangulation of the womb, wherein the belly and 
stomach, and parts towards the throat swell up, occur. Clavus 
hystericus, or a racking pain in the head, so limited as to be 
covered by your thumb, accompanied by the vomiting-up of 
green matter, like rancid bile, may also be one of the pains 
attendant. 

2. The fit may simulate palpitation of the heart, cough, the 
iliac passion, colic, nephritis, or suppression of the urine. It 
occasionally excites violent vomiting and diarrhea. Externally 
it brings on pains or swellngs in the muscular parts of the 
flesh, the ankles swelling as from dropsy. Even it attacks the 
teeth. The pain in the back is most severe. The extremities are 
so cold that the body becomes corpse-like. Tears and laughter 
succeed each other. Neither from any ostensible cause. Ptyalism 
may simulate the action of mercury. Hysterical pains attack 
all parts alike; leaving behind them a sensation of tenderness 
to the touch, just as if the parts had been beaten. 

3. Bleed to vij. Apply a galbanum plaster to the navel. 
Next morning give— ) 


232 PROCESSUS INTEGRI. 


KK Pil.coch, i8), 55 
Castor in powder, gr. ij ; 
Peruvian balsam, mii). 
Make into twelve pills. Take four every or every other morning, 
according to the strength, at four or five a. m. Sleep upon them. 


IX  Rue-water, Ziv; 
Compound bryony-water, £ij ; 
Castor tied in a knot, and hung in the glass, 38s ; 
Loaf-sugar, q. s. 
Make into a julep. Take four or five spoonfuls whenever the spirits 
are low. 


4. After the pill the following should be used : 


I Iron-filings, gr. viij ; 
Extract of wormwood, q. s. 
Make into three pills; to be taken at five p. m. for thirty days. Wash 
down with wine of wormwood. 


9. If the form of a bolus be preferable : 


EK Conserve of Roman wormwood, 
Conserve of orange-peel, aa 3); 
Candied angelica, 

Candied nutmeg, 
Venice treacle, aa $ss; 
Compound arum-powder, 5iij ; 
Candied ginger, 5ij ; 
Syrup of lemon-juice, 
or (failing this) | q.s 

Syrup of orange-juice, 

Make into an electuary. 


Kk Of the electuary as above, 5ij; 
Iron-filings, gr. viij; 
Syrup of oranges, q. s. 
Make into a bolus; to be taken night and morning. Wash down 
with wine of wormwood, or with six spoonfuls of the following 
infusion : 


Ix Root of angelica, 
Root of elecampane, 
Root of masterwort, aa 3); 
Leaves of common wormwood, 
Leaves of lesser centaury, 
Leaves of white horehound, 
Leaves of germander, àà a handful ; 
Peel of two oranges (sliced). 
Pour over it sherry wine so as to cover all to the depth of two fingers. 
Strain as wanted. 


HYSTERIA. 233 


6. With delicate persons the iron may be given as a powder: 


K Iron-filings (fine), 2j ; 
Compound arum-powder, 5vj ; 
Coriander-seeds (prepared), 
Aniseed, 

Fennel-seeds, aa Zss; 
Cinnamon, 

Red coral (prepared), aa 5iij ; 
Nutmeg, 5ij. 

Reduce to a very fine powder. Add as much white sugar as equals 
the weight of the other ingredients. Take, out of a spoon, 5ss, twice 
a day for four days; then 3j, twice a day for forty days. Wash 
down with six spoonfuls of the wine of wormwood, or of the fol- 
lowing julep : 


EK Aqua lactis alexiteria, 2xij ; 
Compound gentian-water, Ziv; 
Aqua absinthii magis comp., 3) ; 
Finest white sugar, q. s. 
Make into a julep. 


EK Rheinish wine, with wormwood, Oss ; 
Compound gentian-water, $ij ; 
Syrup of cloves, 5j. 
Make into a julep. 


Picked myrrh, 

Galbanum, 

Assafeetida, aa 3); 

Castor, 3s ; 

Balsam of Peru, q. s. 

Make into pills; twelve to each drachm. Three to be taken every 

night. Wash down with three or four spoonfuls of compound 
bryony-water. Continue to do this throughout. 


7. If the pills purge, use— 


KR Castor, 5j; 
Volatile salts of amber, 55s; 
Extract of rue, q. s. 
Make into twenty-four pills. Three to be taken every night. Washi 
down with three or four spoonfuls of the julep for hysteria. 


8. If the disease still continue obstinate : 


K Lozenges of powdered myrrh, 9j; 
Balsam of sulphur and turpentine, miv ; 
Gum ammoniac (dissolved), q. s. 
Make into four pills. To be taken morning and evening. Wash down 
with four or five spoonfuls of the julep for hysteria along with 
twelve drops of spirits of hartshorn. 


234 PROCESSUS INTEGRI. 


The anti-scorbutic electuary may be taken with the water 
described! in company with it, also the restorative electuary, 
with the addition of conserve of garden scurvy-grass, and six 
drachms of the compound powder of cuckoo-pint. Wash down 
with the aforesaid water. 

9. If the disease still continue, chalybeate waters must be 
tried. If these fail, sulphuric, such as those of Bath. 

10. During the drinking of chalybeate waters, this must be 
observed: If any grave symptom occur, referable to their use, 
they must be stopped, until it goes away. Six weeks or two 
months is the least time wherein benefit can be expected. 
Candied gingér, caraway seeds and sugar, may be taken occa- 
sionally, to warm the stomach. Also three pills for hysteria 
may be swallowed for the first ten nights ; washed down with 
four or five spoonfuls of the julep for hysteria. 

1l. As to the Bath water, this must be drunk for two days ; 
and, on the third, used as a bath; and so on, in turns, for six 
weeks or two months. 

12. If the chalybeates overheat, there may be taken, every 
fourth morning, four pints of purgative mineral waters. These, 
although they move the bowels, cause less disturbance than 
the purges of the shops. 

18. If the disturbance be excessive, a little laudanum may 
be taken, out of some anti-hysterical water, every night, for 
some time. 

14, When the strength and spirits are much dejected by 
the disease, bleeding and purging are not to precede the steel. 
It may be put on at once. 

15. When the symptoms are mild, bleeding and purging for 
a few days are sufficient. The pills for hysteria should then be 
given, night and morning, for ten days. 

16. When the pain is violent, as well as the vomiting and 
diarrhea, laudanum is to be given, and the spirits to be 
restored. If, however, the strength will bear, the laudanum 
should be preceded by a bleeding and purge, particularly in 
women of a masculine habit, and of a sanguine temperament. 
With weak subjects, and with subjects who have lately had the 
fit, it is sufficient to wash out the stomach with a gallon of 
posset. After this has been thrown up by vomiting, a large 

! Epistol. Dissert., 103. 


HYSTERIA. 235 


dose of Venice treacle, or of Orvietan electuary should be 
given ; which should be washed down with a few spoonfuls of 
some spirituous liquor, and with a few drops of laudanum. If 
the patient have all along vomited, so that the further action of 
an emetic may be dangerous, laudanum must be given in a dose 
sufficient to overcome the symptom. This must be repeated 
after each vomit, it being given in the solidest form possible. 
If liquid, in a very small quantity of the vehicle, e. g. a few 
drops of laudanum out of a spoonful of strong cinnamon-water, 
the patient, meanwhile, being perfectly quiet, and keeping her 
head quiet. Even when this symptom has been thoroughly 
subdued, the use of the laudanum may be continued for a few 
days. à 

17. These two points must be noted — Firstly, when we have 
once begun to use laudanum, it must be used in such doses, so 
often repeated, as to entirely subdue the symptom. A little 
space, however, may be allowed between each, just to let us 
know what one dose has done before we hurry on to another. 
Secondly, that whenever we treat by means of laudanum, 
nothing is to be moved, nothing to be disturbed,—not even 
by the mildest enema. 

18. Venice treacle, used long and often, is a sovereign 
remedy in this, as in all other diseases arising from a want of 
due heat and concoction. 

19, Sherry wine, medicated with gentian, angelica, worm- 
wood, centaury, orange-peel, and other restoratives, if taken, by 
three or four spoonfuls at a time, two or three times a-day, 
helps other remedies, provided only that the patient be not ofa 
lean or bilious habit. 

30. Peruvian bark, in simple doses, taken morning and 
evening, for some weeks, has great virtue—especially in hysteric 
spasms, 

21. With thin and bihous habits a milk diet may be 
adopted, especially in hysterical colic, provided that the dis- 
comfort of the first few days can be got over. During that 
time it coagulates in the stomach, and is, consequently, less fit 
for keeping up the status of the body. 

Nothing, however, keeps up the spirits, and warms the 
blood, like plenty of riding on horseback every day. Carriage 
journeys are also useful. 


236 PROCESSUS INTEGRI. 


CHAPTER II. 


OF THE DEPURATORY FEVER OF THE YEARS 1661, 1662, 1663, 1664. 


l. Ir the patient be young, bleed from the arm; and, a 
few hours after, or the next day, two hours after dinner, 
order an emetic of the croc. metall. Have ready six or 
eight pints of posset, so that he take a draught as often as he 
is sick or purged, After the operation of the emetic, give the 
following, or some similar paregoric : 


K  Black-cherry water, Ziss ; 
Plague-water, $ss ; 
Liquid laudanum, ntxvj ; 
Syrup of cloves, 5ij. 
Mix, and make into a draught. 


Emeties of the croc. metall., even in the smallest quantity, 
are not safe for children, or persons under the age of 
adolescence. 

2. After this, inject the following enema every morning, 
until the eleventh or twelfth day : 


RK Common decoction for clysters, Qi; 
Milk of the cow, j E 
Brown sugar, 
Syrup of violets, aa 3ij. 
Make into an enema. 


3. The bowels may now be allowed to remain confined, in 
order that the febrile matter may be all the more quickly 
concocted. To this end, even moderate cordials are conducive, 


EK  Gascoigne’s powder, gr. xiv; 
Egg-electuary, gr. x; 
Syrup of cloves, q. s. 
Make into a bolus; to be taken every eighth hour. Wash down with 
five or six spoonfuls of the following julep : 


K Aqua lactis alexiteria, 
Black-cherry water, aa ii); 
Plague-water, 
Syrup of cloves, aa &j. 
Mix, and make into a julep. 


PESTILENTIAL FEVER. 237 


4, After adhering strictly to this method, you will find, 
about the fifteenth day, both from the improved excretion of 
urine, and from the manifest remission of the symptoms, that 
it is seasonable to give the common purging potion. 

9. It happens, at times, especially with old men, that after 
the fever has been cured, and the body been purged, the patient 
remains very weak, and expectorates a vast quantity of viscid 
phlegm, sometimes with cough and spitting. In this case he 
may take some old Malaga wine with a toast in it. 

6. If passio iliaca supervene, a scruple of salts of wormwood 
may be prescribed out of a spoonful of lemon-juice morning 
and evening: in the intermediate times a few spoonfuls of dis- 
tilled mint-water without sugar may be taken. Meanwhile 
a live puppy should continually lie on the belly. When the 
pain and vomiting has ceased for two or three days, a drachm 
of the pil. coch. maj. dissolved in mint-water may be given. 
The puppy is not to be removed before the pills are used. 

7. To guard against a relapse, the patient must persist in 
the use of the aforesaid water for some time, and keep off the 
cold by doubling folds of flannel on his belly. 


——— 


CHAPTER III. 


ON THE PESTILENTIAL FEVER OF THE YEARS 1665, 1666. 


l. Bre» the patient in bed. Then cover him with bedclothes. 
Tie up his forehead with a linen rag. If vomiting do not 
commence, exhibit the following or some similar sudorific : 


K Venice treacle, 3s ; 
Egg-electuary, 9j; 
Gascoigne's powder, gr. xv; 
Cochineal, gr. viij ; 
Saffron, gr. iv; 
Kermes, q. s. 

Make into a bolus; to be taken every six hours. Wash down with 
six spoonfuls of the following julep: 


K Aqua cardui Benedicti, 
Aqua scordii comp., aa Ziv; 
Aqua theriacalis stillatitia, 3ij ; 
Syrup of cloves, 3}. 
Mix, and make into a julep. 


238 PROCESSUS INTEGRI. 


If vomiting be present, the sudorific may be put off until 
perspiration begins to flow from the mere weight of the bed- 
clothes, the face being kept under the blankets. 

When such sweating begins, it must be kept on for twenty- 
four hours by repeated draughts of sage-posset, or with small 
beer in which a little mace has been boiled. The strength of 
the patient may be kept up by means of restorative broths. 

When a tumour has begun to show itself do not dare to bleed. 
For twenty-four hours after the end of the sweats, the patient 
must keep to his bed, in order to avoid cold. His shirt must 
be allowed to dry on his back. All his drink must be luke- 
warm. ‘The sage-posset must be continued. Next morning 
a purgative potion should be given. 

The years 1667-8 produced a variolous fever, and variole. 

The years 1669-72 produced a dysenteric fever. 

The years 1673-5 produced a comatose fever. 

The treatment of these I do not now touch upon. I have 
done this in my description of the fever of 1685. 


CHAPTER IV. 


ON INTERMITTENT FEVER. 


1. Tue fit begins with chills and shivers, succeeded by heat. 
A sweat then follows, and an apyrexy succeeds. During, 
however, the first days of the disease, especially in autumn, 
there is a remission rather than an inéermission. During both 
the cold and hot fits the patient feels sick, is uneasy, and has 
thirst and a dry tongue. In children, a swelling of the belly ; 
in adults, a swelling of the legs indicate the breaking up of the 
fever. Pain of the tonsils, hoarseness, hollowness of the eyes, 
and the facies Hippocratica are signs of death. 
F Peruvian bark (finely powdered), 2j; 
Syrup of cloves, or 
Syrup of dried roses, q. s. 
Make into an electuary, to be divided into twelve doses. One to be 
taken every four hours. Wash down with a draught of wine, im- 
mediately after each fit. 
2. If this purge, give ten drops of liquid laudanum every 
or every other time the bolus is given. 


INTERMITTENT FEVER. 239 


To prevent a relapse, especially in quartans, repeat this 
process every week three times. 
If the form of a pill be preferred— 


EK Peruvian bark (finely powdered), 3}; 
Syrup of cloves, q. s. 
Make into moderate-sized pills. Take six every four hours. 
EK Bark in powder, Zij; 
Rhenish wine, Oij. 
Soak in a cool place, and strain through a jelly-bag. Take three 
ounces every three or four hours. 


4. If the vomiting be so continued as to prevent the bark 
being swallowed, a scruple of salts of wormwood, out of a spoon- 
ful of lemon-juice, should be taken six or eight times in two 
hours. Then sixteen drops of liquid laudanum, out of a 
spoonful of strong cinnamon-water. Soon after the vomiting 
has ceased begin with the bark. 

5. In spring intermittents, an emetic so given as to act 
before the access of the fit, does great good. Sometimes a 
clyster thrown up during the days between the fit, three or 
four times, has effected the cure. , 

This may also be attempted thus : 


K Virginian snake-root (finely powdered), gr. xv ; 
White wine, 3iij. 
To be taken two hours before the fit. The patient then must sweat 
under bedclothes for three or four hours. This he must do twice 
before the fit. 


6. If weakened by repeated paroxysms, the patient may 
take— 
Ix Conserve of borage-flowers, 
Conserve of bugloss-flowers, aa Ziss ; 
Conserve of rosemary, 3ss ; 
Candied lemon-peel, 
Candied nutmeg, 
Venice treacle, aa 5iij ; 
Kermes confection, 3ij. 
Mix. Take a portion the size of a hazel-nut night and morning. 
Wash down with a few spoonfuls of simple plague-water, sweetened. 
No clyster allowed. 


7. If, towards the end of the disease, dropsy set in, and that 
before the fever has departed, purgatives are not to be used, 
but instead thereof infusions of horse-radish, wormwood-tops, 


240 PROCESSUS INTEGRI. 


lesser centaury, juniper-berries, broom-ashes, &c. When the 
fever is over, cathartics may be given. 
8. For the ague of infants— 
I  Black-cherry water, 
Rhenish wine, aa Zij; 
Bark (finely powdered), 5iij ; 
Syrup of cloves, q. s. 

Mix, and make into a julep. Take one or two spoonfuls, according to 
the age of the patient, every four hours until the fits cease. In case 
of diarrhea, add, every other time, one or two drops of liquid 
laudanum. 


CHAPTER V. 
ON THE STATIONARY FEVER FROM 1685 TO 1690. 


l. FnvsnEs and chills in turns. Pain in the head and limbs. 
Pulse natural. Occasional cough. Pain about the neck and 
jaws. Increase of fever towards night.  Disquiet. Thirst. 
The tongue, either moist, or coated all over with a white rough 
fur; brown in the middle, with a white fringe at the edges. 
Coma and frenzy if the patient always keep his bed. Petechize, 
purple spots, miliary eruptions, redder than those of measles, 1f 
he be overheated as to regimen. Also—inordinate pulse, 
subsultus tendinum, and death. The sweats at the beginning 
are symptomatic. If forced, they come from the head most, 
and are clammy. ‘They also transfer the morbific matter to 
either the head or the limbs. 

3. Bleed from the arm to ten ounces. Repeat the bleeding 
in case of dyspnoea, racking headache during the cough, or any 
notable sign of bastard pleurisy. In which case, repeat the 
bleeding and purging until recovery. 

3. In the evening apply a blister. Next morning give a 
lenitive potion. Repeat this three times every other day. 
At bedtime, on those days when the purge has been given, 


prescribe— 
K Cowslip-flower water, 3iij ; 
Syrup of poppies, 5j; 
Freshly-squeezed lemon-juice, two spoonfuls. 
Mix, and make into a draught. 


4, Aphthe and hiccup, coming of their own accord after the 


STATIONARY FEVER. 24] 


cure of the fever, go off of their own accord. If they continue, 
an ounce of bark (with syrup of the red poppy, q. s.), made up 
in the form of an electuary or of pills, clears them off. Take, 
after the pill or electuary, a draught of skimmed milk. This 
is a sure cure, unless interfered with by lying in bed. 
5. On the days when there is no purging : 
Fe Conserve of lujula, 

Conserve of hips, 

Conserve of berberry, aa 33s ; 

Cream of tartar, 5) ; 

Syrup of lemons, q. s. 

Make into an electuary. Take a portion, the size of a nutmeg, three 
timesaday. Wash down with six spoonfuls of the following julep : 


KR  Purslane-water, 
Lettuce-water, 
Cowslip-flower water, aa Ziij ; 
Syrup of lemons, 3ss ; 
Syrup of violets, Zj. 
Mix, and make into a julep. 
Er E Spring-water, Oj; 
Rose-water, 
Lemon-juice, 
Best white sugar, aa Ziv. 
Boil over a slow fire, until allis clear. Take three ounces ad libitum. 
The following gargle may be prescribed :— 
kK Crab-juice, Oss; 
Raspberry-syrup, 3). 
Mix, and make into a gargle. 

6. If the fever be so bad that the patient cannot take a 
draught, two scruples of the pil. coch. mag. may be given instead. 
After this an opiate, e. g. a grain and a half of the solid London 
laudanum, with an equal quantity of gum mastich ; or eighteen 
drops of the liquid laudanum, out of an ounce of barley-water 
with cinnamon. 

7. For drink the white decoction and weak small beer, 
ad libitum. The white decoction is an ounce of burnt hartshorn, 
boiled in a pint of spring-water, and sweetened with the best 
white sugar. 

8. After the second purge the patient may eat a little chicken. 
After the last, he may take three or four spoonfuls of Canary 
wine (provided that the fever have abated) night and morning, 
and also after dinner. This he may do for some days. 

H. 16 


242 PROCESSUS INTEGRI. 


9. In frenzies and and coma there is nothing like shaving 
the head. No blister. Only a light cap. 

10. If—as is often the case with hysterical females—after 
the repetition of the bleeding and purging, the fever still con- 
tinue, provided that there be no signs of peripneumony, or of 
inflammation about the vital parts, a paregoric may be given 
every night, and anti-hysterical medicines two or three times 
a day. 


—À— 


CHAPTER VI. 
ON INFANTS SUFFERING UNDER THE STATIONARY FEVER. 


The Treatment.— Apply two leeches behind the ears, on each 
side. After this, lay a strong blister on the neck. Purge with 
the infusion of small beer and rhubarb. 

If, after the purging, the fever intermit, administer the julep 
with Peruvian bark, as directed for infants, in chapter iv. 


CHAPTER VII. 
ON THE SCARLET FEVER. 


Tuts attacks infants most, and that towards the end of 
summer.  Shivers and chills at the commencement ; but no 
great depression. The whole skin is marked with small, red spots, 
more frequent, more diffused, and more red than in measles. 
These last two or three days. They then disappear; leaving the 
skin covered with branny squamule, as if powdered with meal. 

kk Hartshorn, 
Gascoigne's powder, àà 388 ; 
Cochineal, gr. ij ; 
White sugar, 3). 
Mix, and make into a very fine powder. Divide into twelve papers. Take 
one every six hours. Wash down with two or three spoonfuls of— 


EK Black-cherry water, 
Aqua lactis alexeteria, aa Ziij ; 
Syrup of lemon-juice, £j. 
Mix, and make into a julep. 
Apply also a blister to the neck. Order, too, a paregoric of 
syrup of poppies to be taken every night. Purge when the 
svmptoms have ceased. 


PLEURISY. 243 


CHAPTER VIII. 


ON PLEURISY. 


Tuis is most prevalent between spring and autumn. It 
begins with chills and shivers. Thirst, heat, discomfort, and 
the other symptoms of fever follow. A few hours later, the 
patient is seized with a violent stabbing pain in the side, which 
spreads towards the shoulder-blades, the spine, or the front of 
the chest. The cough is frequent and afflicting. The matter 
spit up is at first scanty and thin. As the disease advances it 
becomes more copious, more concocted, and more mixed with 
bloody particles. As the cough, the spitting of blood, and the 
pain increase, and as the expectoration becomes freer, the fever 
abates. The bowels are sometimes loose, sometimes confined. 
The blood, when cooled, is like melted suet. 

2. Bleed from the arm of the side affected, to ten ounces. 


IX Red poppy-water, Ziv; 
Sal prunella, 5j ; 
Syrup of violets, 2j. 
Mix, and make into a draught, to be taken directly after the first 
bleeding. 


EK Sweet almonds (blanched), v; 
Melon-seeds, 
Gourd-seeds, aa 3ss; 
White poppy-seeds, 51i) ; 
Barley-water, Oss; 
Rose-water, 5i] ; 
Sugar-candy, q. s. 
Fiat emulsio secundum artem. Four ounces to be taken every four 
hours. 


Ix  Pectoral decoction, Oij ; 
Syrup of violets, 
Syrup of maidenhair, aa 3ss; 
Sugar-candy, q. s. 
Mix, and make into an apozem. Half a pint to be taken every day. 


Kk Oil of sweet almonds, 3ij ; 
Syrup of violets, - 
Syrup of maidenhair, aa 3); 
Sugar-candy, q. s. 
Mix, and make into a linctus. To be taken frequently. 


244 PROCESSUS INTEGRI. 


Oil of sweet almonds, or fresh linseed oil, may be taken 


alone. 
K Oil of sweet almonds, 
Oil of lilies, 
Ointment of marshmallows, aa 3). 
Mix, and make into a liniment; to be rubbed in on the affected side 
night and morning. Lay a cabbage-leaf over the part. 


3. Repeat the bleeding, in the same quantity, three times 
more, so as in all to make four days, as long as the pains and 
dyspnoea continue. 


CHAPTER IX. 


ON BASTARD PERIPNEUMONY. 


1. Tuis shows itself as winter approaches, often towards the 
end of it. At the first attack the patient is hot and cold by 
turns. The least movement makes him giddy. The cheeks 
and eyes are inflamed. He coughs, and during the act there 
is a racking pain of the head. He throws up what he drinks. 
The urine is thick and intensely red. His blood is the blood 
of pleurisy. He pants and gasps; the chest being, meanwhile, 
in pain. 

This disease differs from the dry asthma, in the latter being 
unaccompanied with fever. Such symptoms are always pre- 
sent here. Still they are always milder than in true 
peripneumony. 

. 2. Bleed to eleven ounces. Next day order— 


Ix Extract of cassia, 3); 
Liquorice, 5ij ; 
Four fat figs ; 
Senna-leaves, 3ijss ; 
Agaric lozenges, 5j. 
Boil in a sufficient quantity of water down to four ounces. Strain and 
add— 
Manna, $j ; 
Solutive syrup of roses, Zss. 
Mix, and make into a potion. 


If he cannot take this, let him take two scruples of the pil. 
coch. maj. instead, at 4 p.m. 


RHEUMATISM. 245 


Next day bleed again, to the same quantity. "The day after 
purge again. Repeat the purge every other day, or at longer 
intervals, according as there is strength to bear it. If the 
symptoms still continue, bleed; twice if necessary, only at an 
interval of some days, according to circumstances. Generally, 
however, two bleedings are enough. Meanwhile, during the 
days when no purgatives are given, the pectoral decoction, the 
linctus, and the oil of sweet almonds may be given according to 
the directions for pleurisy. 


CHAPTER X. 


ON RHEUMATISM. 


1. RnurvMartec patients suffer from chills and shivers, and 
from all the signs and symptoms of fever. After a day or two, 
sometimes sooner, a sharp pain, now in this, now in that joint, 
(but most in the wrists, shoulders, and knees) shifts about, leaving 
redness and swelling in the different parts as it takes them in 
turn. The fever gradually abates, whilst the pain remains; 
sometimes, indeed, it abates even whilst the pain increases. 

In rheumatic lumbago there 1s an intense pain in the lumbar 
regions, simulating nephritis, except that there is no sickness. 
The patient cannot lie down. He may spring from his bed; or 
he may sit erect upon it, moving his body backwards and for- 
wards painfully. The blood is the blood of pleurisy. 

2. Bleed from the arm of the side affected to ten ounces— 


I Water-lily water, 
Purslane-water, 
Lettuce-water, aa Ziv; 
Syrup of lemons, Zss; 
Syrup of violets, 3). 
Mix, and make into ajulep. To be taken ad libitum. 


3. Prescribe the emulsion of the four cold seeds. Apply to 
the part in pain a poultice of the finest white bread with milk 
and saffron. 

4. Next day bleed to the same amount as before. Bleed 
again a day or two after. Bleed as often as four times, oftener 


246 PROCESSUS INTEGRI. 


if necessary ; observing only that, after the second, the intervals 
between the venesections be prolonged. 

5. On the days when the bleeding is omitted, throw up an : 
occasional clyster of milk and sugar. 


Ix Common decoction for clysters, 1b. ; 
Syrup of violets, 
Brown sugar, aa Zij. 
Mix, and make into a clyster. 


6. If the weakness of the patient will not allow him to be 
repeatedly bled, the treatment after the second or third vene- 
section must be as follows. 

7. Every other day the common purgative potion, until he 
recovers, and on the evenings of the same the syrup-of-poppy 
paregoric must be given. 

8. If these fail, and the patient be too weak for further eva- 
cuations, let him have recourse to the electuary and to the 
aqua-antiscorbutica, as in scurvy; such treatment being good for 
scorbutic rheumatism also. 

9. With young persons, and those who have not over-in- 
dulged in wine, rheumatism may be dispelled simply by spare, 
and very cooling diet, provided that it be moderately nourishing. 
This will often do as well as repeated bleedings, which are but 
badly borne. E. g. 

10. Let the patient live on nothing but whey for four days ; 
afterwards taking, besides the whey, some fine wheaten bread 
once a day as his dinner, until he is thoroughly convalescent. 
During the last days he is allowed a little bread at supper. 
When the symptoms are giving way, he may take a little 
tender chicken boiled, or some similar digestible food. Every 
third day, however, he must be limited to the whey alone— 
and this until his strength has wholly returned. 


ERYSIPELATOUS FEVER. 247 


CHAPTER XI. 


ON ERYSIPELATOUS FEVER. 


Tur whole surface, especially the face, swells, becomes 
painful, and is deep red. Thick pustules, small, and becoming 
vesicular, then appear, and spread over the head and forehead. 
The eyes are closed by the swelling. Chills and shivers, and 
other signs of fever, are present. In another form of the 
fever, supervening upon the free use of attenuant liquors, slight 
fever is present, with pustules resembling nettle-stings, some- 
times rising into vesicles, sometimes receding, concealing them- 
selves under the skin like tubercles, itching exceedingly, and 
showing themselves most when scratched. 

There isathird form. This is generally on the breast ; where 
there is a broad blotch, scarcely rising above the skin, porri- 
ginous, with yellow squamule. Whilst this lasts the patient is 
well. As it goes off he sickens a little. The urine is yellow 
and turbid. It yields to the same remedies as the pocky itch. 
Wine and digestible meat should form the diet. 

2. Bleed to nine or ten ounces. Next day take the common 
purgative potion. 

ER Marshmallow-root, 
Lily-root, aa a handful ; 
Mallow-leaves, 
Elder-leaves, 
Mullein-leaves, 
Chamomile flowers, 
Melilot, 
St. John’s wort tops, 
Tops of lesser centaury, aa a handful ; 
Linseed, 
Fenugreek, aa 3ss ; 
Water, q. s. 
Boil to three pints. Strain. Add when used, 
Spirits of wine, 33}. 
Apply linen rags soaked in this lotion, and well squeezed out, hot, 
twice a day to the parts affected. Then anoint with 
Spirits of wine, Oss ; 
Venice-treacle, 3ij.; 
Long pepper (in powder), 
Cloves (in powder), aa 3ij. 
Make into a mixture. Soak a piece of blotting-paper in the same, and 
apply to the parts affected. 


248 PROCESSUS INTEGRI. 


If the disease do not yield to the first bloodletting, repeat 
it. If it still continue, bleed to even the fourth time, with one 
day’s interval between the bleedings. 

On the days when there is no bleeding, an enema of milk, 
with syrup of violets, a cooling emulsion, and a cooling julep 
are to be prescribed. 


CHAPTER XII. 


ON THE POCKY ITCH, AND SUCH OTHER INVETERATE ERUPTIONS OF 
THE SKIN, AS DO NOT YIELD TO VENESECTION AND CATHARSIS. 


kK Venice treacle, 3ss ; 
Egg-electuary, 9j; 
Virginian snakeroot (finely powdered), gr. xv.; 
Bezoar of the East, gr. v; 
Syrup of candied citron, q. s. 
Make into a bolus; to be taken every night for twenty-one days. 
Wash down with 


I Aqua cardui Benedicti, 
Plague-water, 
Aqua theriacalis stillatitia, aa 3ij ; 
Syrup of cloves, 5j. 
Mix, and make into a julep. 


Every morning a pint and a half of posset, so as for the 
patient to sweat afterwards for an hour. After this, if the 
pustules have not disappeared, the following ointment for 
the parts affected : 


K Ointment of the sharp-dock, 3ij; 
Pomade, 3j; 
Flowers of sulphur, 3 iij ; 
Oil of rhodium, m x. 
Make into a liniment. 


None of the aforesaid medicines should be used unless 
bleeding and purging have preceded. 


QUINSY. 249 


CHAPTER XIII. 


ON THE QUINSY. 


QuiNsYv comes on mostly between spring and summer. The 
access of the fever is followed by pain and inflammation of the 
fauces. Then follows swelling of the uvula, tonsils, and larynx, 
so that the patient can neither swallow nor breathe. 

Bleed freely from the arm. Touch the parts affected with 
honey of roses, with spirits of vitriol or spirits of sulphur added 
in such a proportion as to give the greatest possible sharpness. 
Or else touch with spirits of vitriol alone. Then use the follow- 
ing gargle; not in the usual manner, but by keeping it in the 
mouth, without any moving about, until it gets warm. Then 
spit it out, and repeat it again at various times. 

EK Plantain-water, 
Red-rose water, 
Frog-spawn water, àà Ziv; 
The white of three eggs beaten up with water ; 
Crystalline sugar, 5iij. 
Mix, and make into a gargle. 


The cooling emulsion prescribed for pleurisy (c. viii), may 
be taken every day. 

The next morning, unless the fever and pain in swallowing 
have remitted, the bleeding should be repeated, and the purge 
put off till the next day ; otherwise, a lenitive cathartic should 
be taken. If the disease still continue (which, however, it very 
rarely does), repeat the bleeding and purging, and apply a large 
and strong blister to the nape of the neck, after the first blood- 
letting. 

Every morning, except on the days for the purging, the 
cooling and emollient clyster is to be injected. The patient 
must live on low diet, and be out of his bed a few hours every day. 

In all these fevers, which I call intercurrent, as well as in 
those which are of the stationary kind, care must be taken that 
the patient keep out of bed a great part of the day, live upon 
barley-broth, oatmeal-gruel, and the like, taking well-hopped 
thin small beer, and milk and water for his ordinary drink. 


250 PROCESSUS INTEGRI. 


CHAPTER XIV. 


ON THE MEASLES. 


Tue measles generally attack children. On the first day 
they have chills and shivers, and are hot and cold in turns. 
On the second they have the fever in full—disquietude, thirst, 
want of appetite, a white (but not a dry) tongue, slight 
cough, heaviness of the head and eyes, and somnolence. The 
nose and eyes run continually; and this is the surest sign of 
measles. To this may be added sneezing, a swelling of the 
eyelids a little before the eruption, vomiting and diarrhcea with 
green stools. These appear more especially during teething- 
time. The symptoms increase till the fourth day. Then—or 
sometimes on the fifth—there appear on the face and forehead 
small red spots, very like the bites of fleas. These increase in 
number, and cluster together, so as to mark the face with large 
red blotches. They are formed by small papule, so slightly 
elevated above the skin, that their prominence can hardly be 
detected by the eye, but can just be felt by passing the fingers 
lightly along the skin. 

2. The spots take hold of the face first; from which they 
spread to the chest and belly, and afterwards to the legs and 
ankles. On these parts may be seen broad, red macule, on, 
but not above, the level of the skin. In measles the eruption 
does not so thoroughly allay the other symptoms as in small- 
pox. There is, however, no vomiting after its appearance ; 
nevertheless there is slight cough instead, which, with the fever 
and the difficulty of breathing, increases. There is also a running 
from the eyes, somnolence, and want of appetite. On the sixth 
day, or thereabouts, the forehead and face begin to grow rough, 
as the pustules die off, and as the skin breaks. Over the rest 
of the body the blotches are both very broad and very red. 
About the eighth day they disappear from the face, and scarcely 
show on the rest of the body. On the ninth, there are none 
anywhere. On the face, however, and on the extremities— 
sometimes over the trunk—they peel off in thin, mealy squa- 
mule; at which time the fever, the difficulty of breathing, and 


SMALLPOX. 251 


the cough are aggravated. In adults and patients who have 
been under a hot regimen, they grow livid, and afterwards 
black. 


K Pectoral decoction, Oiss ; 
Syrup of violets, 
Syrup of maidenhair, aa Ziss. 
Mix, and make into an apozem. Of this take three or four ounces 
three or four times a day. 


EK Oil of sweet almonds, 3ij ; 
Syrup of violets, 
Syrup of maidenhair, aa 3); 
Finest white sugar, q. s. 
Mix, and make into a linctus; to be taken often, especially when the 
cough is troublesome. 
KR Black-cherry water, ij ; 
Syrup of poppies, 3). 
“Mix, and make into a draught; to be taken every night, from the first 
onset of the disease, until the patient recovers: the dose being in- 
creased or diminished according to his age. 


3. The patient must keep his bed for two days after the 
first eruption. 

4. If, after the departure of the measles, fever, difficulty of 
breathing, and other symptoms like those of peripneumony 
supervene, blood is to be taken from the arm freely, once, twice, 
or thrice, as the case may require, with due intervals be- 
tween. The pectoral decoction and the linctus must also be 
continued ; or, instead of the latter, the oil of sweet almonds 
alone. About the twelfth day from the invasion the patient 
may be moderately purged. 

5. The diarrhea which follows measles is cured by bleed- 


ing. 


CHAPTER XV. 


ON SMALLPOX. 


1. SwarLLrox is either distinct or confluent. In the dis- 
tinet smallpox there are chills and shivers, intense heat, violent 
pain of the head and back, inclination to vomit, a great ten- 
dency to sweat (a sign which is commonest in adults, and one 
from which we may infer that the disease will not be confluent), 


252 PROCESSUS INTEGRI. 


pain at the pit of the stomach when pressed by the hand, stupor, 
drowsiness, and at times — especially in infants — epileptic 
fits. With these, a fit is so sure sign of smallpox, that if, after - 
teething, they have one, you may predict variola—so much so, 
that a fit over-night will be followed by the eruption next 
morning. This, however, will be generally mild, and in nowise 
confluent. 

2. On the fourth day (inclusive) from the attack (sometimes 
later, rarely earlier), the rash breaks out; at which time the 
other symptoms either abate or disappear. In the eruption 
itself the first thing that appears is reddish pustules, like the 
pricks of the finest needles, spread irregularly over the face, 
the neck, the breast, and the whole body. Then comes pain 
about the jaws, which increases as the pustules rise. 

3. About the eighth day from the first attack, the interspaces 
between the pustules, which were at first white, begin to look 
red, to swell, and to give a painful feeling of tension. The 
eyelids become puffed like a bladder, and close the eyes. Next 
to the face, the hands take on and swell, and the fingers become 
stretched. The pustules of the face, which were before smooth 
and red, now appear rough and whitish—the first sign of 
maturation. Besides this, they give out a yellowish juice, not 
unlike the colour of the honeycomb. The inflammation of the 
hands and feet, which is now at its height, exhibits between 
the pustules a florid colour, ike that of a damask rose, and the 
milder the disease, the more truly is this the exact colour, both 
of the pustules themselves, and of the interspaces between them. 
The pustules of the face become rougher and yellower, accord- 
ing to the degree of maturation ; those of the hands, and the 
rest of the body being less rough, and more white. 

4. On the eleventh day, the swelling and inflammation of 
the face go down, and the pustules, which have now attained 
the proper maturity and size (that of a largish pea), dry, and 
fall off, and, on the fourteenth or fifteenth day, go off altogether. 
On the hands, however, the eruption is more obstinate; the 
pustules remaining white and fresh, for a day or two longer than 
those of the rest of the body. At length, however, they break. 
Now those of all the other parts desquamate, whilst the desqua- 
mation of the face 1s succeeded by branny scales, and pitting. 

5. Throughout the disease the bowels are either wholly 


SMALLPOX. 253 


bound, or costive. ‘The majority of those who die, die on the 
eighth day of the discrete, and the eleventh of the confluent 
smallpox. In the former case, from the effects of the sweats 
which have been forced by a hot regimen and cordials, the 
face, on the day aforesaid, which ought properly to be swollen 
and inflamed in the interspaces between the pustules, becomes 
pale and flaccid, the pustules themselves being red and elevated, 
and remaining so even after the death of the patient. The 
sweat, too, which thus far had flowed freely, now stops suddenly. 
The patient, meanwhile, is taken with frenzy, anxiety, rest- 
lessness, and general disorder. He, then, passes his urine 
frequently and sparingly ; and, lastly, a very few hours after, 
dies. 

6. In the confluent sort the symptoms are the same, but 
worse. The fever, the anxiety, the disquiet, the tendency to 
vomit are all greater. The tendency to sweat, however, is less. 
Diarrhea sometimes precedes the eruption, and it may continue 
for a day or two after it. This is rare in the discrete sort. 
On the third day, or sooner (rarely later), the eruption breaks 
out; and the earlier it does so the more likely is it to be con- 
fluent. Attimes the eruption is delayed till the fourth or fifth 
day, on account of some severe symptom, such as (for instance) 
sharp pain in the loins, like that of nephritis, sharp pain in 
the side, like that of pleurisy, or sharp pain in the limbs, like 
that of rheumatism; along with which there may be great 
uneasiness at the stomach, and vomiting. 

In confluent smallpox the eruption has less effect upon the 
other symptoms than in the discrete. Instead of being allayed 
by it, the fever and the other ailments become worse for some 
days after its appearance; this being sometimes that of ery- 
sipelas, sometimes that of measles. From both these, however, 
it differs in point of time. As the disease goes on, the pustules 
do not so much rise to any notable height, as run together, 
especially in the face, which they cover as with one large red 
vesicle, and which they raise to a swelling earlier than is the 
case with the discrete sort. Afterwards, they become glued to 
the face, like a white pellicle; never, however, rising much 
above the level of the skin. 

7. After the eighth day the white pellicle grows rougher and 
rougher, darker and darker. The pain of the skin becomes 


254 PROCESSUS INTEGRI. 


more acute; and, in the more violent forms of the disease, the 
desquamation is delayed until the twentieth day. It then takes 
place in broad famine. The more the pustules approach a - 
brown hue the worse they are, and the slower they will go off ; 
whereas the yellower they are the better. They are also the 
more likely not to flux, as well as to disappear early. 

8. When the cuticle first falls off there is no roughness of 
the face. Soon afterwards, however, there appear branny 
squamule, of an exceedingly corrosive character, which leave 
pittings, and often scars. Sometimes, even the back and 
shoulders are peeled of their cuticle. The danger of the disease 
is to be calculated by the amount of pustules on the face. 
Those of the hands and feet are the largest. The farther you 
find them from the extremities the smaller they are. 

9. In adults salvation, in infants diarrhoea are the usual, 
though not the universal, coneomitants of confluent smallpox. 
The ptyalism sometimes begins as the eruption breaks out, 
sometimes two or three days after; when the patient spits up 
a thin matter, which, on the eleventh day, becomes viscid, and 
is hawked up with great difficulty. The patient is thirsty, 
hoarse, drowsy, and overpowered by stupor. He coughs when 
he drinks, and the liquid returns through his nostrils. The 
salivation now for the most part ceases ; and, unless the swelling 
of the face and hands (which, although it should, according to 
the nature of the disease, remit a little, will not wholly go down 
until a day or two later), by showing itself more notably or by 
continuing longer, make up for what is lost in the ptyalism, 
the patient will die. 

Now diarrhoea does not begin so early with infants as 
ptyalism does with adults. 

10. In each sort of smallpox there is fever from the first 
attack until the eruption. It then abates so as to allow of the 
ripening of the pustules. When this is over it ceases. From 
bad regimen anomalous symptoms supervene—symptoms such 
as flaccidity and sinking-in of the pustules, brain fever, coma, 
purple spots interspersed among the pustules, with smaller and 
sunken black spots in their centre, bloody urime, and bloody 
sputa at the beginning of the disease—lastly, suppression of 
the urine. 

11. The period of separation is the first three or four days, 


SMALLPOX. 295 


and it is accompanied with febrile ebullition. The period 
of expulsion is the remaining time of the disease. This takes 
place by means of small abscesses in the flesh. 

12. The day of the greatest danger is the eleventh, from the 
first attack. This is the case when the disease is not remark- 
ably crude, and when its violence is average. When it is very 
crude, the day of peril is the fourteenth ; when crude to the 
highest degree, the seventeenth. In some few cases the patient 
lives until the twenty-first. Moreover, during all the days be- 
tween the eleventh and seventeenth, there is an increase of 
fever as evening approaches. 

13. Bleed, on any of the first three days from the invasion, 
to nine or ten ounces, and afterwards give a vomit of an 
ounce or an ounce and a half of the infusion of the crocus 
metallorum. 

14, During these first few days the blood may be diluted by 
allowing the patient thin small beer, with a little spirits of 
vitriol, until the full eruption of the pustules. 

15. When the eruption is complete, which is generally the 
case on the sixth day from the mvasion, an ounce of syrup of 
poppies may be given in the afternoon; to be repeated every night 
until the tenth day. Then increase it (if the disease be con- 
fluent) to an ounce and a half. | Continue this (an ounce in 
a morning, and an ounce and a half in the evening), until 
convalescence. 

16. If the syrup of poppies disagree, the liquid laudanum 
may be substituted ; viz. eighteen drops for one ounce of the 
syrup, and twenty for an ounce and a half. 

Meanwhile this must be observed—if the paregoric, which is 
thus given twice every day, be unable to restrain the orgasm 
(a common occurrence in pox that is remarkably confluent), it 
must be given every eight hours, or oftener if need be. 

17. For the discrete smallpox a paregorie at night only, in 
a moderate dose, after the eruption has become complete, is 
sufficient. 

18. Be the smallpox of whatever sort it may, and be its 
stage what it may, if frenzy supervene, the inordinate move- 
ment of the spirits must be checked ; so that if one dose of the 
paregorie fail, another and another must be given, until the 
tumult be wholly allayed. Between each, however, there must 


256 PROCESSUS INTEGRI. 


be time enough allowed to let us see what one dose does, 
before another is given. 

19. For suppression of the urine the patient must get out of - 
bed, and walk about the room. 

20. If the saliva be too viscid to spit up, a gargle must be 
given through a syringe. It should be made of thin small 
beer, or barley-water, with the honey of roses, or— 

EK  Elm-bark, 5i); 
Liquorice-root, Ziss; 
Raisins (stoned), xx ; 
Red rose-leaves, two handfuls ; 
Water, q. s. 
Boil down to Oss. Strain. Dissolve in the strained liquor— 
Simple oxymel, 
Honey of roses, aa 3ij. 
Mix, and make into gargle. 

2]. Ifablister be needful, it should be large, and it should 
be laid on to the nape of the neck the night before the great 
erisis of the disease. Soon, too, after the exhibition of the 
paregoric an onion may be laid to the soles of the feet, which 
should be renewed every day, from the eighth day until the end 
of the disease. 

22. If an infant, who has got through teething, be suddenly 
seized with spasm, we must consider that this may possibly be 
an effort of Nature, whereby she attempts to throw out upon 
the surface, smallpox, measles, or scarlatina—as the case may 
be. In this case put the patient to bed at once; blister his 
neck, and give a cordial with a little paregoric, e. g. for a boy 
three years old, five drops of liquid laudanum in one spoonful 
of plague-water. 

33. If on the eleventh day, or on any day subsequent to the 
eleventh, the secondary fever, with its accompanying restless- 
ness, disquiet, and other symptoms be carried to such a degree, 
as not to be checked by paregories of any kind, and if, in con- 
sequence, death impend, blood must be drawn directly, and 
that to the amount required, i. e. to twelve ounces or there- 
abouts. This may be repeated once or twice during the fol- 
lowing days, if the symptoms demand it; but not otherwise. 
Moreover, a mild purge may be given on the thirteenth day 
(not before), or on any day after, provided that bleeding have 
preceded. 


ST. VITUS’S DANCE. 257 


The purge may be an ounce of lenitive electuary dissolved 
in four ounces of succory-water, or the aqua lactis alewiteria. 
However, neither bleeding nor purging forbids paregorics; which 
may be given to their full amount, and in their due frequency, 
notwithstanding the evacuations aforesaid. Paregorics are our 
sheet-anchors. 

24. When the pustules have completely dried up, the face 
may be anointed with equal parts of oil of sweet almonds and 
pomatum, for two days—not longer. 

25. On the twentieth day after the attack, bleed from the 
arm. The next day purge. Repeat this, every other day, until 
the third time. 

26. In respect to regimen, the patient must be kept owt of 
bed until the sixth day from the first attack. He must then 
keep in bed till the seventeenth. His bedclothes must be as 
usual. 

27. His diet must be oatmeal-gruel, barley-broth, roasted 
apples, and thin small beer; and after the eleventh day, four 
or five spoonfuls of sherry wine maybe given twice a day, pro- 
vided that the patient wish it. | 

38. If the swelling of thelegs do not abate under the afore- 
said evacuations, it 1s easily got rid of by means of a fomentation 
of mallow-leaves, mullein-leaves, elder-leaves, and laurel-leaves, 
with flowers of the chamomile and the melilot boiled in milk. 

39. If, during the first days, the patient suffer from spitting 
of blood, or if he pass bloody urine, the powder and tincture of 
c. 48 must be given, every six hours, until these symptoms 
wholly disappear. Zhen a full paregoric may be administered. 


CHAPTER XVI. 


ON ST. VITUS'S DANCE. 


Tuis is a kind of convulsion, which attacks boys and girls 
from the tenth year to the time of puberty. It first shows it- 
self by limping or unsteadiness in one of the legs, which the 
patient drags. The hand cannot be steady for a moment. It 
passes from one position to another by a convulsive movement, 
however much the patient may strive tothe contrary. Before 

HM, iy 


258 PROCESSUS INTEGRI. 


he can raise a cup to his lips, he makes as many gesticulations 
as a mountebank ; since he does not move it in a straight line, 


but has his hand drawn aside by spasms, until by some good. 


fortune he brings it at last to his mouth. He then gulps it off 
at once, so suddenly and so greedily as to look as if he were 
trying to amuse the lookers-on. 

2. Bleed from the arm to eight ounces, more or less accord- 
ing to age. 

3. The next day give half (more or less as the age of the 
patient requires it) of the common potion. At evening the fol. 
lowing should be taken : 


IX Black-cherry water, 2j; 
Aqua epileptica Langii, 51ij ; 
Venice treacle, 9j ; 
Liquid laudanum, mj viij. 
Make into a draught. 


Repeat the cathartic every other day three times, and the 
paregoric on the same nights. 

4. Blood must again be drawn the next day, and the 
catharsis repeated ; and so, bleeding and purging must alter- 
nate, until the third or fourth time, provided only that there 
be sufficient time between the alternate evacuations to ensure 
the patient against danger. 

9. On the days when there is no purging— 


ER Conserve of Roman wormwood, 
Conserve of orange-peel, aa 2j; 
Conserve of rosemary, Zss ; 
Venice treacle (old), 
Candied nutmeg, aa 3iij ; 
Candied ginger, 5j; 
Syrup of lemon-juice, q. s. 
Make into an electuary, of which a portion the size of a nutmeg is to 
be taken every morning and at five p. m. Wash down with five 
spoonfuls of the following wine: 


K Peony-root, 
Elecampane, 
Masterwort, 
Angelica, àà 3); 
Rue-leaves, 
Sage, 
Betony, 
Germander, 
White horehound, 
Tops of lesser centaury, of each a handful ; 
Juniper-berries, 3vj ; 
Peel of two oranges. 
Slice, and steep in six pints of cold Canary wine. Strain, and lay by 
for use. 


FI a oo 
bo, oe 


APOPLEXY. 259 


K Rue-water, Ziv; 
Aqua epileptica Langii, 
Compound bryony-water, aa £j; 
Syrup of peony, 5vj. 
Mix, and make into a julep; of which four spoonfuls may be taken 
every night at bedtime, with the addition of eight drops of spirits 
of hartshorn. 


6. Apply to the sole of the foot the emplastrum e caranna. 

7. To guard against a relapse, bleed and purge for a few 
days that time next year, or a little earlier. 

8. It is probable that this treatment may also cure the 
epilepsy of adults, but I have not tried. In adults, however, 
the bleeding and purging should be freer, since St. Vitus’s 
dance is a disease of tender years. 


CHAPTER XVII. 


OF APOPLEXY. 


1. Prorounp sleep, utter loss of sense and motion, with the 
exception of that necessary for respiration. This is laboured 
and stertorous. 

2. Bleed from the arm to twelve ounces, as soon as possible. 
Then from the jugular veins to eight ounces. Then give an 
emetic, consisting of an ounce and a half or two ounces of the 
croc. met, 

3. Apply a large and strong blister to the nape of the neck. 
Apply rectified spirits of sal ammoniac to the nostrils. 

Whilst this is done, the patient must sit upright in his bed, 
with but few bedclothes. 

4. When the vomiting is over give, at times, three or four 
spoonfuls of the following julep : 

Ix  Rue-water, Ziv; 
Compound bryony-water, 
Aqua epileptica Langii, aa 3); 
Spirits of hartshorn, xx ; 


Crystalline sugar, q. s. 
Make into a julep. 


Instead of this, a single spoonful of compound spirits of 


260 PROCESSUS INTEGRI. 


lavender may be given twice or thrice during the fit, at intervals 
of half an hour. | 

5. Care must be taken not to follow the usual custom of 
giving over-hot and over-frequent cordials. Whatever may be 
their specific virtues, they do more harm than good; since 
they are likely to draw forth the humours, and so to increase 
the disease. The same arises from too many bedclothes. 

6. When the fit is over, a relapse may be guarded against by— 


KR Pil coch. maj., 9ij. 
To be taken every third day, at four p. m. Sleep after taking them. 
Continue to the sixth time. 


Ix Conserve of sage-flowers, 
Conserve of rosemary, àà 3); 
Conserve of orange-peel, 5vj ; 
Candied nutmeg, 
Candied ginger, aa Ziss ; 
Venice treacle (old), 5ij ; 
Powder of the electuarium diambre, 
Powder of the electuarium diamoschi dulcis, aa 5]; 
Syrup of preserved citron, q. s. 

Make into an opiate. Take a portion the size of a chesnut night and 
morning. Wash down with two spoonfuls of the aqua epileptica 
Langii. : 

Kk Ambergris, 38s ; 
Distilled oil of aniseed, 
Oil of cinnamon, 
Oil of nutmeg, aa mij ; 
Oil of cloves, mJ; 
Sugar dissolved in four ounces of orange-flower water, Ziv. 
Make into lozenges secundum artem. To be taken ad libitum. 


7. All generous drinks are to be eschewed The diet must 
be oatmeal-gruel, barley- broth, chicken-broth, and, occasionally 
(especially between purging-times), the flesh of chickens, lamb, 
or other similarly digestible aliments. 


PROCIDENTIA UTERI. 261 


CHAPTER XVIII. 


OF OPHTHALMIA. 


Tuts is manifest from the inflammation of the eyes. 

Bleed to ten ounces. Next day order the common purga- 
tive potion. Repeat this twice, at intervals of two days. On 
the nights of the same give a paregoric, consisting of an ounce 
of syrup of poppies. 

On the days when there is no purging, the Tem must take, 
three or four times a day, four ounces of the emulsion of the 
greater cold seeds and white poppy. 

K  Plantain-water, 
Red-rose water, 
Frog-spawn water, aa 3); 
Prepared tutty, 3j. 
Make into an eye-wash, of which pour a few drops, twice a day, into 
the eye, but not previous to the first purge. 

If the disease do not yield to these remedies, repeat the 
venesection once or twice—especially if the blood be the blood 
of pleurisy—and also the catharsis. 

The patient must abstain from wine, and all generous bever- 
ages ; also from all indigestible and salt meats. On the days 
between the purges he must drink boiled whey. 

Observe—ophthalmia may often resist both bleeding and 
purging, however often repeated. In this case give a pare- 
goric of an ounce of syrup of poppies each night. This will 
effect a cure single-handed. 


CHAPTER XIX. 


ON PROCIDENTIA UTERI. 


kK Oak-bark, ij. 

Boil in four pints of spring-water down to two. Towards the end of 

the boiling, add— | 
Bruised pomegranate-bark, £j ; 
Red roses, 
Pomegranate-flowers, àà a handful. 

Add of red wine a pint. Strain, and keep as a fomentation, to be ap- 
plied to the part affected, on a linen rag, every morning, two hours 
before rising, and, at night, after going to bed, until the symptoms 
entirely go off. 


262 PROCESSUS INTEGRI. 


CHAPTER XX. 


ON A NEPHRITIC PAROXYSM. 


Here we find a fixed pain in the region of the loins, bloody 
urine, the excretion of small calculi or gravel, numbness of the 
leg on the side of the kidney affected, retraction of the testicle 
on the same side, nausea, and vomiting. The pain of colic is 
in many points the pain of nephritis. In many it differs, as 
may be seen below.! If the patient be of a sanguine tempera- 
ment, bleed on the side of the kidney affected to ten ounces; 
then order a gallon of posset, in which two ounces of marsh- 
mallows have been boiled, to be taken as quickly as possible. 
Follow this up with the following clyster : 


R  Marshmallow-root, 
Lily-root, aa £j; 
Mallow-leaves, 
Pellitory, 
Bearsbreech, 
Chamomile-flowers, aa a handful; 
Linseed, 
Fenugreek, aa Zss ; 
Water, q. s. 

Boil down to half a pint. Mix, and make into an enema. 


After the emetic and the clyster have been thrown up again, 
a full and sufficient dose of liquid laudanum should be given, 
or else fifteen or sixteen grains of Mathews’s pills. With old 
men, however, and with constitutions broken down by long 
disease, and with old women subject to the vapours (especially 
if, at the beginning of the disease, they have passed a black 
and sandy urine), the bleeding may be omitted. In respect, 
however, to the other matters, the method is the same in all 
cases alike. 


! Chapter XXIII.—[G.] 


DYSENTERY, DIARRH@GA, ETC. 263 


CHAPTER XXI. 


ON BLOODY URINE FROM A CALCULUS IMPACTED IN THE KIDNEY. 


Tue patient must take, on some stated day of the week, two 
ounces and a half of manna, dissolved in two pints of whey. 
Sometimes a free draught of small beer 1s advantageous. 

When the calculus is large the pain is dull and heavy, not 
easily increased, and sufficiently tolerable. Nor is it accom- 
panied by a nephritic paroxysm. 

The patient cannot freely take to mineral waters, unless he 
previously have ascertained whether or not the calculus is too 
large to pass through the ureters. This can be ascertained as 
a certainty by one means only, 1. e. by considering whether the 
patient have at any time before suffered from a nephritic 
paroxysm, accompanied with its usual severe pain in each 
kidney propagated along the ducts of the ureters, and excessive 
vomiting. If so, it is certain, that instead of a single large 
stone in the pelvis, there is a mass of small ones, one of which, 
at a time, finds its way into the ureter, and causes a fit which 
lasts until the stone is pushed forward into the bladder. 
When this is the case, nothing is more efficacious than the use 
of chalybeate waters. If, however, the patient have never been 
previously afflicted, and the stone be too large to pass along 
the ureters, chalybeates are to be avoided. 


CHAPTER XXII. 


ON DYSENTERY, DIARRH@A, AND GRIPES. 


CurLLs and shivers, followed by heat of the whole body. Soon 
afterwards, gripings of the belly, and frequent slimy (sometimes 
stercorous) stools. Great torture, and descent of the bowel, at 
every motion. Streaks of blood in stools— generally, but not 
always. Sometimes none throughout. As the disease ad- 
vances pure blood is passed, and the bowels are affected with 
incurable gangrene. If the patient be in the prime of life, or 
have heated himself with cordials, there is much fever. The 


264 PROCESSUS INTEGRI. 


tongue is whitish, with a thick fur, sometimes black and dry. 
The strength is exhausted, the spirits low, there are aphthz on 


the lining of the mouth and throat, especially when the peccant : 


matter has been kept in by the improper use of astringents, 
and the due evacuation by means of catharsis has not been 
completed. At times, though the fever be absent, the gripes 
lead the way, and the other symptoms follow. 

2. In diarrhea the excrementitious waters are voided with- 
out blood and without inflammation of the bowels. 

3. In tenesmus there is the constant wish to stool, when 
nothing but scanty bloody mucus, or even purulent matters are 
voided. 

4. Bleed at once, and give a paregoric the same night. 
Next morning the common purgative potion. Repeat the two, 
on alternate days, twice. A paregoric after each, when the 
catharsis is over. On days when there is no purging, the same 
both morning and evening. 

5. After the first bleeding and purge, the following must be 
given throughout the disease : 

ER Black-cherry water, 
Strawberry-water, aa 3iij; 
Plague-water, 

Aqua scordii comp., 

Barley-water, with cinnamon, àà 7%) 
Prepared pearls, 3iss ; 

Crystalline sugar, q. s. ; 

Damask rose-water, Zss (to taste). 


Mix, and make into a julep; of which four or five spoonfuls are to be 
taken when the patient feels weak, or ad libitum. 


6. The patient's drink must be boiled milk with three parts 
water, or the white decoction, as— 
E Calcined hartshorn, 
White bread-crumbs, aa 3ij. 
Boil in three pints of spring-water to two. Sweeten with white 
sugar q. s. 


7. If the weakness require it, two pints of spring-water 
boiled with half a pint of Canary wine, and cooled, may be 
taken as a drink. 

8. After the second or third purging, the cure has to be 
effected by laudanum taken twice or thrice a day ; except that, 
at times, an enema of milk from the cow (half a pint), and 


BILIOUS COLIC. 265 


Venice treacle (an ounce and a half), may be thrown up. This 
greatly improves the evacuations. 

9. When the flux rises only to the height of a diarrhoea, the 
bleeding and purging may be omitted, and the following bolus 
given every morning and evening: 

Ik Powdered rhnbarb 3ss (more or less, according to the 
strength of the patient) ; 


Diascordium, q. s. 
Make into a bolus. Add two drops of the essential oil of cinnamon. 


10. The next night a paregoric of fourteen drops of liquid 
laudanum, and of barley-water with cinnamon may be given. 

1l. When there are dry gripes without stools, the bowels 
must be washed out by whey, drunk cool, and thrown up as a 
clyster, warm. In cholera, the same must be done, with 
chicken-broth, or milk with beer. 

12. If this disease continue, and fix upon the rectum, so that 
there is constant desire to stool, a restorative diet and cordial 
drinks must be resorted to. As strength returns the tenesmus 
departs. 

13. If a dysentery have been imperfectly cured, the pains 
may stand over for many years. In this case bleeding will 
restore the patient to his former health. 

14. In constitutions that are unfavorable to the disease, the 
evacuations may be omitted, and the complaint be cured by 
laudanum alone. ‘This is to be given night and morning until 
all the symptoms have gone. It may be given, if needed, even 
three times in the twenty-four hours. 


a ——À 


CHAPTER XXIII. 


ON BILIOUS COLIC. 


1. TeRRiBLE pain in the bowels. The fever that ends in 
this disease distresses the patient for some hours. ‘The pain is 
either as if the body were drawn by a bandage, or else a boring 
pain as if pierced with an auger. ‘This, at times, remits, at 
times becomes exacerbated. At first, it is not so certainly fixed 
to a certain spot, nor yet is the vomiting so frequent, nor yet 
do the bowels so obstinately resist the effect of purgatives. 


266 PROCESSUS INTEGRI. 


However, as the pain increases, the more it fixes itself to a point, 
the more frequent is the tendency to vomit, the more obstinate 
the constipation. At length it becomes passio $liaca. 

It is distinguished from nephritis by the following signs: 

lst. Nephritis is felt in the region of the kidneys, along the 
line of the ureters, and in the testicle. Colic is either unfixed 
or else limited, like a girdle, to the middle belly. 

2d. Colic is increased by taking food, nephritis is rather 
relieved. 

3d. In colic, both stools and vomits relieve more than in 
nephritis. 

4th. In nephritis the urine 1s at first clear andthin. After- 
wards there is a settling. Lastly, gravel appears. In colic, 
the urine is thick from the beginning, 

Bleed freely, and three or four hours after give an anodyne. 
Next day purge with the lenitive electuary. Continue this every 
other day until the third time. 

If the disease have arisen from the over-free use of the 
fruits of the season, or from any other imprudence in food, 
the stomach must be washed out at once by a large draught 
of milk with beer. After this an anodyne must be given. 
The next day a vein must be opened, and the method afore- 
said be proceeded with. 

When this disease has been unskilfully treated, so as to con- 
tinue to distress the patient, and almost wear him out, the 
free use of either plague-water, aqua mirabilis, or some similar 
drink that he has hked during health, will do so much good 
as to surpass our most favorable expectations. 


CHAPTER XXIV. x 
ON CHOLERA MORBUS. 


l. Tuts is limited to the month of August, or to the first week 
or two of September. Another similar, but different disease, 
appears at any time of the year, originating in gluttony or 
over-drinking, and is cured in the same way. 

Violent vomiting, accompanied by the dejection of depraved 
humours, difficulty in passing them, vehement pain, inflation 


CHOLERA MORBUS. 267 


and distension of the bowels, heartburn, thirst, quick, frequent, 
small, and unequal pulse, heat and anxiety, nausea, sweat, 
cramps of the legs and arms, faintings, and coldness of the 
extremities, constitutes the true cholera—and it kills within 
twenty-four hours. 

2. Boil a tender chicken in three pints of spring-water, so 
that the liquor be but just flavoured by the meat. Of this 
decoction (or, if it cannot be procured, of posset-drink) the 
patient must take several cupfuls warm. He must use the 
same as a clyster as well. "To these—the draughts and clyster 
—an ounce of the syrups of lettuce, violets, purslane, water- 
hly, or some similar adjunct, may be added. 

3. This takes three or four hours. When finished, a pare- 
goric will complete the cure. 

4. If the physician be not called in before the patient has 
become so exhausted from the continued vomiting and purging, 
that his extremities have become cold, recourse must be had 
to liquid laudanum, and that in considerable doses; e. g. 
twenty-five drops to an ounce of cinnamon-water. Even when 
the symptoms have ceased, this must be repeated night and 
morning (though in a smaller dose) until the patient wholly 
recover his original strength. 

5. There is a sort of cholera morbus exceedingly fatal to 
infants. It arises either from overfeeding or from teething. 

6. Here, their tender age forbids the use of free diluent 
drinks, and, still more, the disturbance of the humours that 
would be effected by catharsis. Hence, the cure must be 
attempted by laudanum alone, i. e. with two, three, four, or 
more drops, according to the age of the child, taken out of a 
spoonful of small beer, or some other appropriate liquor, and 
repeated as the case requires. 


268 PROCESSUS INTEGRI. 


CHAPTER XXV. 


ON COLICA PICTONUM. 


Tuis is a sort of colic, which is wont to degenerate into 
palsy, depriving the patient of the use both of his hands and 
feet (a fact noted by Riverius! in his chapter on Palsy), and 
which is extremely common in the West Indies, where it 
destroys many persons. 

Dalsam of Peru, in large and frequent doses, 1s the cure for 
the pain. 

Twenty, thirty, or even forty minims dropped upon a lump 
of fine white sugar should be given twice or thrice a day. 
This, however, will not cure the palsy. 


€———— 


CHAPTER XXVI. 


ON THE ILIAC PASSION. 


1. Tue peristaltic motion of the intestines is reversed, so 
that purges and clysters are thrown up like emeties, and the 
feces of the bowel are passed through the mouth and throat. 

9. Bleed to nine or ten ounces from the right arm. After 
a few hours give— 


RK Scammony, gr. xij; 
(or if not to be had, jalap ;) 
Calomel, 3j. 
Mix, and make into à powder; to be taken out of a spoonful of milk 
from the cow. Wash down with a spoonful or two of the same. 


3. Or if the form of a pill be preferable— 


ER Pil e duobus, 3ss ; 
Calomel, 9j; 
Balsam of Peru, q. s. 
Make into four pills; to be taken out of a spoonful of syrup of violets. 


4. If, however, the patient reject this by the mouth, twenty- 
five drops of the liquid laudanum in half an ounce of strong 


! Praxis Medica, i, 5.—[G.] 


MENSTRUAL FLOW. 269 


cinnamon-water must be given directly. When this has 
allayed the vomiting and the pains of the belly, the aforesaid 
purge must be repeated. If, however, the virtue of the anodynes 
be wholly thrown away, so that the pain and vomiting return, 
and the cathartic remain in the body, we must return to the 
paregoric already described, which must be repeated every fourth 
or sixth hour, until the motion of the intestines be perfectly 
quieted. The purge will then act naturally, i. e., will produce 
stools. 

5. It will also be well, an hour or two after the bleeding, 
to throw up one of the stronger clysters, e. g., tobacco-smoke 
forced up the bowel through a pipe from a large bladder. This 
may be repeated after a few hours, unless the passage down- 
wards be properly opened. 

6. When the action of the purge has ceased the following 
must be taken: 

IX Strong cinnamon-water, 3); 
Liquid laudanum, pmixxv. 
Mix, and make into a draught. 


This is to be repeated, twice, thrice, or oftener during the 
day, until the pain and vomiting have wholly ceased. Even 
when these symptoms have departed, the cure will be confirmed 
by taking the same paregoric, in a smaller dose, at bedtime. 


CHAPTER XXVII. 


ON IMMODERATE MENSTRUAL FLOW. 


Tue natural flow of the menses would fill a vessel the size 
of a goose's egg. When inordinate, there is difficulty, weak- 
ness, anorexia, cachexia, cadaverous complexion, and swelling 
of the feet. 

Bleed from the arm to eight ounces. Next morning give 
the common purging potion. Repeat this twice every other 
day. Each night, after the purging, give a paregoric of the 
syrup of poppies. 

On the days when there is no purging, give— 


270 PROCESSUS INTEGRI. 


IX Conserve of red roses, ij; 
Lozenges of terra Lemnia, 3iss ; 
Pomegranate bark, 

Red coral (prepared), 
Bole armeniac, aa Dij; 
Bloodstone, 

Dragon's blood, aa Dj; 
Syrup of quinces, q. s. 

Make into an electuary, of which a portion, the size of alarge nutmeg, 
is to be taken every morning and every day at five p. m. Wash 
down with six spoonfuls of the following julep: 

kK Oak-bud water, 

Plantain-water, aa 3iij; 

Cinnamon-water with barley, 

Syrup of dried roses, aa £j; 

Spirits of vitriol, q. s., to give an agreeable acidity. 

Kk  Plantain-leaves, 

Nettle-leaves, aa q. s. 

Bruise, squeeze, and clarify. Of this take four or five spoonfuls fre- 

quently, ad libitum. 


After the first purging apply the following plaster to the 
lumbar region.: 
KR Emplastrum de minio, 
Emplastrum ad herniam, aa equal parts. 
Spread on a leather skin, and apply as a plaster to the loins. 


CHAPTER XXVIII. 


ON HYSTERICAL COLIC. 


Turs is a remarkable and common symptom of the hysterical 
affection as much as a separate disease. It consists of agonizing 
pain at the pit of the stomach, accompanied by the vomiting of 
green matters. 

2. First, in order that the mass of vicious humours within 
the stomach may not impede the efficacy of a paregoric, a 
great quantity of posset-drink should be taken first. This will 
be rejected by vomiting. As muchas a gallon and a half may 
be given. When the vomiting is over, twenty-five drops of 
liquid laudanum must be given in an ounce of strong cinnamon- 
water, of plague-water, or of any similar vehicle. 

3. This paregoric must be continued and repeated until 


HYSTERICAL COLIC. 271 


every symptom has departed; a due time between each dose 
being allowed, in order that the effects of one may be seen 
before we give another. 

4, If the patient be of a sanguine temperament, and it be 
the first attack, blood may be taken from the arm before the 
emetic is given. 

5. Clavus hystericus is similarly treated. If, however, the 
hysteric colic be obstinate, and come on in paroxysms, we 
must, then, in the intervals between, use the following : 


Ix Zedoary (very finely powdered), 3); 
Syrup of candied citron, q. s. 
Make into a bolus; to be taken morning and evening for thirty days. 
Wash down with— 


EK Sliced zedoary, Zss; 
Canary wine, Ziv. 
Steep for twelve hours in the cool infusion. Strain, and keep for use. 


Or the balsam of Peru, as in colica pictonum, may be used. 

6. What applies to hysterical colic applies also to the colic 
of hypochondriasis,—a fact to be noted. 

Each ailment requires us to try one medicine after another, 
until we hit upon the one to which the disease gives way. 
Generally, however, chalybeates do great good. 

7. Colic, both with hysteria and hypochondriasis, often ends 
in jaundice. This, however, goes off of itself. If not, give— 


EK Madder-root, 
Turmeric, àà £j; 
Greater celandine, 
Tops of the lesser centaury, àa a handful. 
Boil in equal parts of Rhenish wine and spring-water down to two 
pints. Dissolve in the strained liquor— 
Syrup of the five roots, Zij. 
Mix, and make into an apozem; of which half a pint is to be taken 
warm, morning and evening, until convalescence. 


272 PROCESSUS INTEGRI. 


CHAPTER XXIX. 
ON JAUNDICE NOT FOLLOWING COLIC. 


Tug whole body, especially the whites of the eyes, is yellow. 
Everything also seems yellow to the patient.  Itching, lassi- 
tude, and indisposition to move. A bitter taste in the mouth, 
bilious vomiting at times, hiccough, white stools, deep yellow 
urine, which stains linen, when dipped into it, of the same 
colour. 

Order the common purgative potion. Go on with the fol- 
lowing—giving, every fourth day, the purge aforesaid : 

kK Conserve of Roman wormwood, 
Conserve of orange-peel, aa £j; 
Candied angelica, 
Candied nutmeg, 
Compound powder of cuckoo-pint, 
Iron prepared with vinegar, aa Zss; 
Extract of the lesser centaury, 
Extract of gentian, 
Cream of tartar, aa 3i] ; 
Saffron (finely powdered), 3ss; 

. Syrup of the five roots, q. s. 

Make into an electuary. Of this take a portion the size of a large 
nutmeg every morning and every day at five p.m. Wash down the 
morning draught with four pints of purgative mineral waters; the 
evening one, with half a pint of the apozem ordered for hysterical 
colic. 


Instead of the electuary, the chalybeate and pills may be 
taken. 

If signs of dropsy appear, the apozem must be taken after 
each bolus—evenings and mornings as well. 

If the disease still continue, recourse must be had to chaly- 
beate waters drunk from the spring. 


CHAPTER XXX. 
TO PREVENT ABORTION. 


‘THE same treatment as for an immoderate flow of the menses, 
except that the purging and juices must be omitted. 


FLOW OF THE LOCHIA. 273 


CHAPTER XXXI. 


ON AN IMMODERATE FLOW OF THE LOCHIA. 


Tug natural lochial discharge consists of three elements : 

lst. Pure blood, which flows for the first three days. 

2d. A watery blood, like the washings of meat, lasting the 
next four days. 

9d. A viscid and mucilaginous discharge, mixed with but 
little or no blood, beginning about the fifth or seventh day, 
and lasting till the end of the month. 

That the flow is too great is ascertained from the following 
signs—loss of strength, fainting, a grumous character of the 
blood, dislike to food, pain in the hypochondres, tension of the 
belly, weak and frequent pulse, mistiness of vision, singing in 
the ears, and convulsions. 

The diet must be restorative, to which the following drink 
must be added : 


ER Plantain-water, 
Red wine, aa Oj. 
Boil down to two thirds. Sweeten with the finest sugar, q.s. Set to 
cool. Of this take half a pint twice or thrice a day. 


Meanwhile some hysterical] julep (which must, however, be 
of the mild sort) may be given occasionally, and the following 
plug applied to the nostrils : 


kK Galbanum, 
Assafcetida ; 
Castor, aa 3iss ; 
Volatile salts of amber, 3ss. 
Mix, and make into a plug. 


Ex Spirits of sal ammoniac, 5ij. 
To be frequently smelt. 


II. 18 


274 PROCESSUS INTEGRI. 


CHAPTER XXXII. 


SUPPRESSION OF THE LOCHIA. 


Tue belly swells. "There is a heavy bearing-down pain in 
the lower belly, the groins, and loins. The face becomes red, 
the respiration difficult, the eyes wild. There are chills, and 
fever, faintings, cold sweats, a sense of heat and throbbing in 
the womb, palsy of the lower limbs, and at times, epilepsy. 

Order the patient to bed at once, and apply to the navel an 
hysterical plaster. Give, then, the following electuary : 


K Conserve of Roman wormwood, 
Conserve of rue, aa £j; ; 
Myrrh lozenges, 5ij ; 

Castor, 

Saffron, 

Sal volatile, 

Sal ammoniac, 

Assafcetida, aa 585 ; 

Syrup of the five roots, q. s. 

Make into an electuary. Of this take a piece the size of a nutmeg 
every four hours. Wash down with four or five spoonfuls of the 
following julep : 

KR Rue-water, Ziv ; 

Compound bryony-water, 2ij ; 
Sugar-candy, q. 8. 
Make into a julep. 


Or take a scruple of the myrrh lozenges every four hours. 

If the whole of the aforesaid medicines have been taken, 
and the lochia still continue suppressed, laudanum must be 
given—once at least; either as fourteen drops of liquid lau- 
danum out of the compound bryony-water, or as a grain and a 
half of the solid laudanum, made into a pill with ten grains of 
assafoetida. ! 

If all these means fail, a clyster of sugar and milk must be 
thrown up once at least. 


DROPSY. 279 


CHAPTER XXXIII. 


ON DROPSY. 


l. Tue finger, if pressed upon the lower part of the legs, 
will leave a mark, especially towards evening. In the morning 
the impression is less distinct. This is the first sign of the 
disease, especially if there be difficulty of breathing besides. 
Not unfrequently, however, pregnant women, and women with 
whom the menstruation has ceased, as well as men suddenly 
freed from inveterate asthma, have swellings of the same sort. 

When the feet and legs are stretched to their utmost, the 
waters rush into the abdomen, and this they gradually distend 
to its full capacity. At length, they reach the nobler viscera, 
and the patient dies. 

In proportion as the parts occupied by the disease increase, 
the rest of the body loses flesh, whilst dyspnoea, scantiness of 
the urine, and intense thirst, supervene. 

Dropsy attacks men in the decline of life, women when they 
become past child-bearing. 

2. The curative indications are directed, first, to the eva- 
cuation of the waters, next, to the restoration of the strength 
of the blood, so as to guard against a fresh generation of 


the fluid. 
K White wine, Ziv; 

Jalap (finely powdered), 5j ; 

Ginger (powdered), gr. x ; 

Syrup of buckthorn, 3). 

Mix, and make into a potion ; to be taken the first thing in the morn- 

ing, and to be repeated every or every other day, according to the 
strength of thé patient, until the parts affected have gone down. 


EK  Tamarinds, Zss; 
Senna, 5ij ; 
Rhubarb, 5iss ; 
Water, q. s. 
Boil to three ounces. Strain, and dissolve in the strained liquor— 


Manna, 
Solutive syrup of roses, aa £j; 
Syrup of buckthorn, 3ss ; 
Rose-juice electuary, 3iij. 
Mix, and make into a potion. To be taken as above. 


276 PROCESSUS INTEGRI. 


EK Pilule e duobus, 9j; 
Elaterium, gr. iij ; 
Chemical oil of cloves, tij. 
Make into three pills. To be taken the first thing in the morning, 
and to be repeated if necessary. 


IX  Gamboge, gr. xv; 
White wine, 
Succory-water, aa Ziss ; 
Syrup of buckthorn, Zss. 
Mix, and make into a potion; to be taken as above. 


kK Inner bark of the elder (scraped from the wood), three 
handfuls. 
Boil in equal parts of milk and water from two pints to one. Strain. 
Take one half of the strained liquor every morning, and the other 
every evening, until recovery. 


But this remedy, except in bodies very easily moved, does 
but little good. 

3. Concerning the use of cathartics in this disease, these 
three points must be noted : 

4. First. Whether the patient's body is acted upon by 
eatharties easily or with difficulty. In the former case an 
ounce of the syrup of buckthorn will brmg away abundance of 
the waters. In the latter, the strongest of the above-named 
purgatives will scarcely succeed. ; 

5. Secondly. All purges which act but slowly, do more harm 
than good. Hence, a dose a little too strong is better than 
one a little too weak. 

6. Thirdly. The waters should be drawn off as quickly as 
the strength of the patient will bear; lest, by allowing over- 
long intervals between the purges, they accumulate afresh. 

7. There are, however, cases where all purgatives whatever 
are out of place. This is when the patient is weak, or a female 
subject to vapours. In such cases the cure is to be intrusted 
to diuretics alone ; of which the most potent are the lixiviated 
salts, as 


EK Broom ashes, Ib. j. 
Steep in a cold infusion of four pints of Rhenish wine. Strain through 
a filter. Three ounces to be taken every morning, evening, and at 
five p. m., until the liquor be finished. 


DROPSY. 277 


8. When the water is thoroughly evacuated, warm corro- 
borants are to be used, as— 


kK Radish root, 
Garden scurvy-grass, 
Common mugwort, 
Sage, 
Lesser centaury, 
Broom-tops. 
Steep in ale, and take as an ordinary drink. 


This may be used at the beginning of a dropsy, even without 
purging, and it will do good. 
Or as follows : 
EK Conserve of garden scurvy-grass, 
Conserve of Roman wormwood, àà 4j ; 
Extract of gentian, 
Extract of mugwort, 
Extract of lesser centaury, aa 3i) ; 
Syrup of citron, q. s. 
Make into an electuary ; of which a portion the size of a large nutmeg 
must be taken every morning, at five p. m., and at evening. Wash 
down with four ounces of the following infusion : 


K Gentian root, 
Broom-tops, 
Lesser centaury, 
Common mugwort, àà a handful ; 
Fennel-seed, 
Rock-parsley seed, aa 31). 
Cut up small, and add four pints of Rhenish wine. Steep in the cold 
infusion. Strain, as wanted for use. 


9. Note.—W hen the patient is under restorative treatment 
he must not be purged, at least whilst we are aiming at the 
strengthening of the blood. 

This must also be the rule whilst he is taking the lixiviated 
salts, at which time he must strengthen himself by taking 


Ix  Radish-roots, Ziij, 
Leaves of garden scurvy-grass, 
Leaves of common mugwort, 
Sage, 
Lesser centaury-tops, 
Broom-tops, aa three handfuls ; 
Three sliced oranges. 
Steep in six gallons of strong ale, not hopped during fermentation 
Take this as an ordinary drink. 


278 PROCESSUS INTEGRI. 


CHAPTER XXXIV. 


ON A VIRULENT GONORRHEA. 


1. An unusual pain in the parts of generation, and a rotation 
of the testicles; with those who have not been circumcised, 
a spot like that of the measles on the glans. As soon as this 
appears, there is a discharge from the urethra of a liquor like 
semen, which, every day losing its original colour and appear- 
ance, becomes at last like the yelk of an egg, except that it is 
paler. If the disease be virulent, it looks greenish, and is 
moreover mixed with a watery matter, or even tinged with 
blood. Meanwhile the aforesaid pustule becomes an ulcer. At 
first it resembles the aphthe in the mouths of infants. It 
spreads, however, day by day, becoming broader and deeper, 
whilst the edges grow hard and callous. The pustule is rarely 
attended by gonorrhea in patients who have been circumcised. 

2.Great pain during erections, just as if the penis was violently 
squeezed sideways, now occurs. This is worst at night, when 
the patient is warm in bed. The frenum being contracted, 
the penis is bent down. When this curve is straitened by 
erection the pain is most acute. Ardor urine now occurs. 
During the passage of the water it is not so sharp. When, 
however, the patient has finished making water, a burning 
pain is felt all along the urethra, and is worst in the parts 
within the glans. 

The presence of caruncles stops the passage of the urine, and 
pain and inflammation of the scrotum sometimes supervene. 


K Pil. coch. mag. 5iij ; 
Extract of rudium, 3j; 
Jalap, 

Scammony, aa 3ss; 
Opobalsam, q. s. 

Make six pills out of every drachm of the full mass. Four of these 
are to be swallowed every morning, until the ardor urine and the 
yellow colour of the discharge have materially decreased. If this 
take place, the pills may be taken every other day. This the 
patient does for another fortnight. After this, twice a week, until 
the discharge from the urethra has wholly ceased. 


VIRULENT GONORRHGA. 279 


3. In patients who are hard to move, an additional purge 
may be intercalated. This should be the common purgative 
potion, with two drachms of the syrup of buckthorn, and the 
rose-juice electuary. Or, if the cure be still imperfect, the 
turbith mineral may be given twice a day, in doses of eight 
grains, and at intervals of four days. 

Or, instead of the turbith mineral— 


Ix Pilule e duobus, 555; 
Calomel, 9j ; 
Opobalsam, q. s. 
Make into four pills; to be taken the first thing in the morning. 


4. If the patient be repugnant to the aforesaid catharsis, 
he must, after taking the pills in question three mornings run- 
ning, throw up the following clyster every morning and at 
five p.m., except once or twice a week, when the following 
purge may be substituted : 


I  Rose-juice electuary, 
Venice treacle, in yelk of egg, aa Zss ; 
Barley-water, Oj. 
Strain, and add— 
Syrup of violets, 3ij. 
Mix, and make into a clyster. 


5. Every night, 25 drops of opobalsam, or of the balsam of 
Mecca, on a lump of sugar. If this cannot be had, Cyprian 
turpentine (about as much as is the size of a hazel-nut) may 
be used instead. The drink must be whey, and small beer at 
meals. 


6. Or— 
ER Pilule e duobus, 3ss; 
Opobalsam, mij. 
Make into three pills. To be taken at four, a. m. Sleep after taking 
them. Repeat every other, or every third day. 


7. On the days where there is no purging, throw up the 
aforesaid clyster at five p. m., and in the morning. 

8. As the cure proceeds (no matter what be the method) 
blood must be drawn when the patient 1s about half way through 
the treatment ; and this once or twice. A cool and thickening 
diet, too, must be prescribed, as well as the medicines of like 
virtue, e. g. the whey, and the emulsions of the cool seeds, &c. 


280 PROCESSUS INTEGRI. 


9. If the penis swell, 

K  Marshmallow-root, 
Lily-root, aa Ziss ; 
Mallow-leaves, 
Mullein-leaves, 
Elder-leaves, 
Henbane-leaves, 
Chamomile-flowers, 
Melilot, 
Fenugreek, aa 3ss ; 
Water, q. S. 

Make into a fomentation, to be applied to the part affected, one hour, 
twice or thrice a day. 

When the fomentation is over, smear the penis with fresh- 
drawn linseed oil. Then apply the emplastrum e mucilaginibus, 
on a skin, to the tumid lips of the prepuce. 

10. If there be an ulcer in the lips of the prepuce, or in the 


gland itself, give 
K Basilicon, 5v); 
Tobacco ointment, 3i); 
Red precipitate (washed in rose-water and finely pul- 
verized), 3ss. 
Mix, and make into a liniment. Lay it on lint, and apply it to the 
ulcer immediately after each fomentation. 


11. If the serotum swell, bleed at once from the arm, and 
apply the aforesaid fomentation twice a day. Add with each 
application a spoonful or two of brandy, or a poultice of oxycrat 
and bean-meal. 

19. Meanwhile purges and refrigerants are to be taken 
internally. 


CHAPTER XXXV. 
ON THE LUES VENEREA. 


1. WHEN a gonorrhea has been protracted, or when, from the 
undue use of astringents, a taint has been imparted to the blood, 
lues arises. Buboes appear on the groins. ‘There is pain in 
the head, limbs, and joints, especially when the patient is warm 
in bed. There are crusts and scurves in various parts of the 
body, which are yellow, like honeycombs. The worse the 
scabies the easier the pains. On the pericranium, the shin- 
bones, and arms there are exostoses. There is inflammation 


LUES VENEREA. 281 


and caries of the bones. Phagedenic ulcers in various parts of 
the body, most in the fauces. ‘These spread gradually along 
the fauces and palate, and destroy the cartilage of the nose, 
which then falls in. The caries, ulceration, and pain increase. 
Limb by limb the patient drops off, and his lacerated body, 
a burthen on earth, falls into the grave. 
IX Hogs’ lard, 
Crude mercury, aa 3). 
Mix, and make into a liniment, to be divided into three equal parts, 


one of which is to be rubbed in on the arms, thighs, and calves, 
three nights running, by the patient with his own hands. 


2. If, three days after the last inunction, there be no saliva- 
tion, eight grains of turbith mineral must be given out of con- 
serve of red roses; in weakly bodies, a scruple of calomel. 
If the salivation set in, but fall off before the disappearance of 
the symptoms, it must be stimulated by an occasional dose of 
calomel. 

3. It ought so to be managed as to give about four pints of 
saliva in twenty-four hours. 

4. If it go too far, and be attended with excessive inflam- 
mation, and similar symptoms, it must be checked a little by 
means of cathartic medicines, until it attains its proper degree 
of intensity. 

5. As soon as the symptoms have ceased, change the shirt and 
sheets, and put as fresh ones those that have been used before. 

6. If diarrhoea supervene (as it does sometimes before the 
salivation has come out fully), it must be checked with liquid 
laudanum, given in increased doses until it has done its work. 

7. If the mouth be ulcerated, let it be washed with damask 
rose-water, or with milk and water, or with the following 


decoction : 
EK Marshmallow-root, 
Cleansed barley, aa 3); 
Quince-seeds, 3ss ; 
Water, q. s. 
Boil to two pints, Mix, and make into a gargle. To be used frequently. 


8. The diet and the rest of the regimen must be the same 
as whilst the patient purged ; except that for the first few days 
he may take barley-broth, oatmeal gruel, posset-drink, or thin 
small beer warmed, 


282 PROCESSUS INTEGRI. 


9. When all this has been done, and when the symptoms 
seem to have gone off, we must guard against a relapse, by 
giving a scruple of calomel once a week for three weeks or a - 
month, however well the patient may be, and although he may 
be able to go about in the open air. 


CHAPTER XXXVI. 


ON FLUOR ALBUS. 


1. Tue discharge is white, pale, yellow, green, or blackish. At 
times, acrid and corrosive; at times, foul and bad-smelling. 
The face is discoloured. The spine of the back isin pain. The 
appetite falls off. The eyelids and feet swell. 

2. Bleed from the arm to eight ounces. 


E Pil. coch. maj., Dij ; 
Castor, gr. ij; 
Balsam of Peru, mij. 
Make into four pills; to be taken at four a.m. Sleep afterwards. 
Repeat twice, leaving intervals of one or two days, according to the 
strength of the patient. 


EK Rue-water, Ziv; 
Compound bryony-water, 33) ; 
Crystalline sugar, q. s. 
Make into a julep; of which take three or four spoonfuls when faint 
and weak. 
Then— 
Ix Venice treacle, Ziss ; 
Conserve of orange-peel, 2j ; 
Diascordium, Zss ; 
Candied ginger, 
Candied nutmeg, àà 5i]; 
Gascoigne's powder, Ziss ; 
Pomegranate rind, 
Angelica, 
Red coral, 
Lozenges of terra Lemnia, àà 5]; 
Bole armeniac, Dij; 
Gum arabic, 3ss; 
Syrup of dried roses, q. s. 
Make into an electuary; of which a portion the size of a large nut- 
meg must be taken every morning at five p. m. and at night, for a 
whole month. Wash down with— 


DIABETES—PILES. 283 


IX  Elecampane, 
Masterwort, 
Angelica, 
Sweet-flag, aa Zss ; 
Roman wormwood, 
White horehound, 
Lesser centaury, 
Calamint, 
Sage (dried), àà a handful ; 
Juniper-berries, 2j. 
Slice small. Steep in four pints of Canary wine. Let them stand in 
the cold infusion. Strain when wanted. 


3. The diet must be digestible meats, without fruit and 
vegetables. Sherry wine at dinner. 


CHAPTER XXXVII. 


ON DIABETES. 


Tug juices of the blood make a way out through the 
urinary passages, in an unconcocted form. Hence the strength 
gradually lessens, and the body weakens, its substance being, 
asit were, pumped out through the common sink of the bladder. 
Then there are thirst, heat of the viscera, swelling of the legs 
and hips, and the frequent expectoration of a viscid and frothy 
saliva. The treatment is that of fluor albus, with the omission 
only of the bleeding and purging. 


——————— 


CHAPTER XXXVIII. 


ON PILES. 


INTENSE pain at stools, the stools being streaked with blood. 
At times, tumours like warts lurk under the sphincter, or 
appear on the margin of the anus. 

Bleed to ten ounces from the right arm. 

KR  Melon-seeds, 
Gourd-seeds, aa $ss; 
White poppy-seeds, 3ij ; 
Sweet almonds (peeled), v. 
Pound in a marble mortar, dropping in gradually— 


284 PROCESSUS INTEGRI. 


Barley-water, Oss ; 
Rose-water, 31); 
Best white sugar, q. s. 
Fiat emulsio secundum artem. Of this three ounces are to be taken 
frequently. 
Ix Flowers of sulphur, 
Liquorice, 
Sage (in powder), aa 5j ; 
Balsam of Lucatelli, q. s. 
Make six pills out of each drachm. Of these take three a day. Wash 
down with six spoonfuls of the emulsion : 
EK  Frog-spawn-water, Ziv ; 
Dissolve in this two drachms of litharge ; 
Opium, 3j. 
Make intoa mixture. Of this apply a little to the part affected on a 
linen rag; or if the tumour be internal, let three spoonfuls of the 
same be injected as a clyster. 


Milk, boiled with water, or barley-water, is the ordinary 
drink. No meat. Every night a dose of diacodium. 


CHAPTER XXXIX. 


ON IMMODERATE HEMORRHOIDAL DISCHARGES. 


THESE are made manifest by the prostration of the patient’s 
strength, by the abundance of the blood, by the duration of 
the hemorrhage, and by the unnatural hue of the body, which 
becomes lemon-coloured, approaching the hue of jaundice. 

Cachexy follows this, and dropsy the cachexy. 

Excepting only the catharsis, the treatment is the treatment 
of the immoderate menstrual flux. 


CHAPTER XL. 


ON THE EPILEPSY OF CHILDREN. 


l. Tuis may begin so early as the first month, from over- 
frequent alvine evacuations. In this case diascordium, (about 
as much as a grain of pepper) dissolved in saxifrage-water, or 
in the mother’s milk, is a most excellent remedy. 


RICKETS. 285 


Or it may come on during teething, between the seventh 
and nineteenth months, accompanied by cough, or by (what is 
much worse) green vomit (like that of hysteria), and diarrhea. 

2. At times the fit comes on without warning. The face 
becomes livid, the eyes and mouth distorted, the limbs con- 
vulsed. At times it is indicated beforehand by a contraction 
of the finger, or by a fixed and strange immobility of the eye- 
balls. Sometimes sooner, sometimes later, the fits break out ; 
at times at regular intervals, at times at vague and uncertain 
periods. In cases where they allow a truce, the infants are 
drowsy until a fresh attack resuscitates them. 

Apply a blister to the nape of the neck at once. 


ee t 


Liquid laudanum, mj; 
(ij or more according to age ;) 
Syrup of pceonies, 3). 
Mix, and make into a draught; to be taken as soon as possible. 
I  Rue-water, Ziij; 
Aqua epileptica Langii, 
Compound bryony-water, aa 2j ; 
Syrup of cloves, 3ss. 
Mix, and make into a julep; of which a spoonful is to be taken every 
hour, in case the draught last prescribed have not dispelled the fit. 


CHAPTER XLI. 
ON RICKETS. 


In rickets there is a softness and laxity of the parts, weak- 
ness and languor, sluggishness and torpor, and, besides this, 
unequal nutrition. Thus the head is over-sized, the face over- 
florid and over-full, whilst the parts below are emaciated. The 
joints project in nodes, the wrists somewhat more than the 
ankles. The ends of the ribs swell The bones become 
curved, especially the tibia and fibula. Sometimes this is the 
case with those of the ulna and radius, and even of the thigh 
and humerus. The teeth come late and painfully, are loose in 
their sockets, and fall out in bits. The chest is narrow at the 
sides, and pointed in front, the belly being full and the hypo- 
chondres tense. Cough and weakness of the lungs supervene. 
Inlying down, the patient sometimes favours his right, some- 
times his left side. 


286 PROCESSUS INTEGRI. 


Kk Leaves of common mugwort, 
— lesser centaury, 
— white horehound, 
—  germander, 
—  scordium, 
—  calamint, 
—  feverfew, 
— meadow-saxifrage, 
— St. John’s wort, 
—  golden-rod, 
— wild thyme, 
— mint, 
— sage, 
— rue, 
— St. Benedict’s thistle, 
—  pennyroyal, 
—  southernwood, 
— chamomile, 
—  tansey, 
—- lily of the valley (all fresh gathered and cut 
up small), aa a handful; 
Hog's lard, tb iv; 
Mutton suet, tb ij; 
Claret, Oij. 

Soak in an earthen jar over the hot ashes for twelve hours. Then 
boil until the liquor is consumed. Strain, and make into a liniment. 
Anoint the belly and hypochondres morning and evening, as well as 
the limbs affected, for thirty or forty days, or until convalescence. 


EK Of each of the aforesaid, two handfuls. 
Soak in four gallons of unhopped beer. Use the cold infusion as a 
drink. 

In tumours occupying the bellies of infants arising from 
excessive evacuations, the blood and viscera must be comforted 
by restorative herbs, just as in true rickets, except that, in this 
case, the armpits on each side must be anointed—but not the 
limbs. 


CHAPTER XLII. 


ON FEVER ARISING FROM DENTITION. 


THREE or four drops of spirits of hartshorn, according to the 
age of the patient, must be given every four or six hours, out 
of one or two spoonfuls of black cherry-water, or any other fit 
vehicle. 


HEMORRHAGE FROM THE NOSTRILS. 287 


CHAPTER XLIII. 


ON THE HECTIC FEVER OF INFANTS. 


THey pine away, without any notable heat. The appetite 
falls off. The limbs and trunk become emaciated. 

Steep two drachms of sliced rhubarb im a glass bottle holding 
a quart of beer, and give this as an ordinary drink. When 
this is drunk out, add another quart of beer to the same 
rhubarb. Afterwards, a third. 

If the beer become too soon saturated with the rhubarb, add 
a second pint, when only half the first bottle has been taken. 


es 


CHAPTER XLIV. 


ON THE CONVULSIVE COUGH OF CHILDREN. 


Tuts is only subdued by bleeding and repeated purges, and 
is a disease otherwise most obstinate and incurable. Still the 
cathartics must be mild, and given only in spoonfuls—according 
to the patient’s age. 


CHAPTER XLV. 


ON HEMORRHAGE FROM THE NOSTRILS. 


SuooriNca pain and heat in the fore part of the head. 

Bleed frequently. Let the diet be of the cooling and 
thickening sort. Let cooling and thickening juleps be given. 

Throw up a cooling clyster every morning. Every night 
give a paregoric of syrup of poppies. Purge with the common 
potion every day. 

Fold a linen rag in four folds. Soak it in a cold solution 
of sal prunella. Squeeze it out gently. Apply it to the head 
and back of the neck, several times a day. 

After the evacuation— 


288 PROCESSUS INTEGRI. 


K Hungarian vitriol, 
Alum, aa 2j; 
Phlegma vitriolicum, Oss. 
Boil until everything is dissolved. Filter the cooled liquor, and sepa- 
rate it from the crystals. To the remainder add a twelfth part of 
the oil of vitriol. 


Or, which is better, 
K  Plantain-water, Ziij; 
Bole armeniac (finely powdered), Zss. 
Mix thoroughly. Steep a plug of linen in the mixture and leave in 
the nostril from which the bleeding comes for two days. 


If this fail, dissolve some Roman vitriol in cold water. Plug 
the nostril with the same. 

Linen rags, steeped in this liquor, stop bleedings from the 
external parts as well. 


CHAPTER XLVI. 


ON THE GREEN-SICKNESS. 


Tug face and body lose colour, the face also swells ; so do 
the eyelids and ankles. The body feels heavy ; there is tension 
and lassitude in the legs and feet, dyspnoea, palpitation of the 
heart, headache, febrile pulse, somnolence, pica, and suppression 
of the menses. _ 

The patient must take the chalybeate pill, or else the chaly- 
beate powder described in the account of the hysterical affection. 
The dose must be regulated by her age. She may also take 
the restorative infusion, with angelica, described in chap.i. Un- 
less very weak, she may be purged before the use of the cor- 
roborants. 


CHAPTER XLVII. 


ON SUPPRESSION OF THE MENSES. 


DisrikE to food. Discoloration of the face. Heaviness of 
the whole body, pain in the fore part of the head, loins, legs, 
and lower belly. Swellings of the feet. 

The prescriptions are the same as in the hysterical affection, 


VOMITING AND SPITTING OF BLOOD. 289 


and in case they do not yield to these, the following must be 
prescribed. 

Every morning, and at four p. m., she must take five spoon- 
fuls of the hysterical julep, without the castor, with the addition 
of twelve drops of hartshorn. Every night, at bedtime, she 
must take a scruple of the myrrh lozenges, made into the form 
of pills, or a bolus with syrup of wormwood. 


CHAPTER XLVIII. 


ON VOMITING AND SPITTING OF BLOOD. 


1. In spitting of blood there is heat and pain in the chest, 
accompanied by weakness. 

2. Bleed from the right arm to ten ounces. Next morning 
give the common purgative potion, and, the same night, a 
paregoric of an ounce of syrup of poppies out of three of black- 
cherry-water. 

3. After this, order as follows: 


EK Bole armeniac, 3); 
Powder of comfrey-root, 5ij ; 
Terra sigillata, 
Bloodstone, 
Dragon's blood, aa 3); 
Finest white sugar, as much as all the rest. 
Mix, and make into a very fine powder. Of this take a drachm every 
morning, at five p.m., and at night. Wash down with four ounces 


of the following apozem : 
kK Plantain-leaves, 
Blackberry-leaves, 
Yarrow, aa a handful ; 
Water, q. s. 


Boil to half a pint. Dissolve in the strained liquor two ounces of syrup 
of comfrey. Mix, and make into an apozem. 


Or six spoonfuls of the following tincture : 


Ix Flowers of the red rose, 5vj ; 
Inner bark of the oak, Zss ; 
Plantain-seeds (but little bruised), 3iij ; 
Spring-water, Oij ; 
Spirits of vitriol, q.s. to give acidity. 
Put into a close vessel, and boil, at a gentle heat, for four hours. 
Strain, and add— 
Barley-water with cinnamon, Ziij ; 
Finest white sugar, q. s. 
Sweeten to taste. 


Il. 19 


290 PROCESSUS INTEGRI. 


4, If there be a repugnance to the powder, the electuary 
of Chap. xxvii may be given. 

5. A clyster every day, and diacodium at bedtime. 

6. Bleed as occasion requires, once, twice, or thrice, at the 
intervals of a few days. The purgative potion to be repeated 
frequently, if needful. 

7. A cool and thickening diet must be observed. 


CHAPTER XLIX. 
ON THE PUNCTURE OF A TENDON. 


Aw aqueous humour, or ichor, is continually oozing from the 
orifice of the vein. 


EK Lily-roots boiled in milk until soft, and then bruised, Ziv; 
Linseed-meal, 
Oatmeal, aa Ziij ; 
Boil to the consistency of a poultice in the same milk in which the 
roots were boiled. Apply to the parts night and morning. 


CHAPTER L. 
ON BURNS. 


Foment the parts with linen rags dipped in spirits of wine, 


until the pain departs. Dip the rag afresh, and apply it two or 
three times a day to the part affected. 


CHAPTER LI. 
ON COMMON MANIA. 


1, Tuts arises from too vivid and exalted a crasis of the blood. 
There is also another sort of mania, which succeeds long-con- 
tinued intermittent fevers, and at last degenerates into idiocy. 
This comes from weakness and vapidity of blood, brought on 
by over-long fermentation. 

2. Prescribe the warmer cordials, such as Venice treacle, egg- 
electuary, the Countess’ powder, Sir Walter Raleigh’s powders, 


BRUISES. 291 


out of plague-water, treacle-water, or other fit vehicles. Let 
the diet, moreover, be analeptic. 

3. In young patients bleed from the arm to eight or nine 
ounces, once or twice, with three days between each venesection. 
Then bleed from the jugular vein. After this, the treatment will 
consist wholly in the following purge, which must be given every 
third or fourth day, until convalescence; observing only, that 
after the patient has been purged eight or ten times, the 
exhibition of the cathartic may be omitted for a week or two. 

EK Root of the white bryony in powder, 5j ; 
Milk, Ziv. 
Or— 
EK Of the same, Zss or 5vj; 
White wine, Ziv. 
Steep for a whole night. Strain. Dissolve in the strained liquor— 
Syrup of violets, 3j; 
Mix, and make into a potion. 


K Gamboge, gr. xiv; 
Black-cherry-water, 3iij ; 
Syrup of cloves, 3ss. 
Make into a potion. 


CHAPTER LII. 


ON BRUISES. 


BrzEp from the side affected to ten ounces. Next morning 
give the common purging potion. "Then bleed and purge in 
turns till recovery. "Throughout the sickness, if the inward 
parts be hurt, give— 

KR Pectoral decoction, Oiss ; 
Syrup of violets, 
Syrup of maidenhair, aa Zij. 
Make into an apozem ; of which half a pint is to be taken three times 
a day. 
A spoonful of the oil of sweet almonds, freshly expressed, 
may be taken frequently. 
KR Oil of sweet almonds, 
Marshmallow ointment, 
Pomatum, aa £j. 
Mix, and make into a liniment; to be applied to the part affected 
morning and evening. Cover with a cabbage-leaf. 


292 PROCESSUS INTEGRI. 


CHAPTER LIII. 


ON A SCALDED HEAD. 


THE common purge twice. Then— 


kK Oil of bitter almonds, 
Oil of laurel, 
Ashes of the southernwood, aa 3). 
Mix well together, and make into a liniment. With this, rub the 


whole of the head every morning, carefully. Cover with a pig’s 
bladder. 


The head must be shaved as soon as possible, and the scales 


must be carefully rubbed away every morning, as they become 
likely to fall off. 


CHAPTER LIV. 


ON THE BITE OF A MAD DOG. 


Arter forty days or more melancholic symptoms appear,— 
thirst, fever, hydrophobia, and, at last, convulsions of the 
extremities, 

x Spirits of wine (rectified), Ziv ; 
Venice treacle, 3). 
Make into a mixture, to be rubbed on the part affected thrice a day. 
Cover with a linen rag steeped in the same. 


CHAPTER LV. 


ON AN ULCER OF THE BLADDER. 


FETID pus, or blood, and sometimes squamulz or membrana- 
ceous pellieles (like branny crusts), are passed along with the 
urine. If there be an ulcer in the kidneys, minute and some- 
times even large-sized pieces of flesh are voided. A continual 
dysuria and pain affect the urinary organs, although, if the 
mischief be in the kidney, there are clear and definite intervals 
of both; whilst the pus which is excreted is white, smooth, 
and scarcely at all fetid. The urine is like milk, and some time 


ASTHMA. 293 


after it has been passed the pus separates and settles at the 
bottom of the chamber-pot. 


Ix  Plaster of the flos unguentorum, 3iss. 
Make into nine pills. Of these three are to be taken at the usual 
hours. Wash down with six spoonfuls of— 


EK  Fennel-root, 
Bindweed, 
Birthwort, 
Clove-gill flower, aa Ziij ; 
Agrimony-leaves, 
St. John’s wort, 
Bugle, 
Sanicle, 
Plantain, 2a six handfuls. 
Cut small, and soak in 
White wine, 
Milk, aa Oiv. 
Distil to two pints. 
Root of the larger bindweed, 
Gum arabic, aa 2j ; 
Barley-sugar, 3ij. 
Make into a powder. Of which take a spoonful twice a day. 


CHAPTER LVI. 


ON INVETERATE ASTHMA IN PATIENTS OF A SANGUINE 
TEMPERAMENT. 


Tus is divided into three sorts—Il1st. Dyspnoea or difficult 
respiration, in which the breath is drawn heavily and frequently. 
This arises from infarction of the lungs, and is without stertor. 

2d. Asthma, in which the respiration is laborious and frequent, 
and in which the diaphragm and intercostal muscles, along 
with the muscles of the abdomen are violently moved, and 
where there is stertor and sibilus. In the first of these kinds 
the substance of the lungs, in the second the bronchi are 
stuffed up. 

3d. Orthopnoea.—This is the most extreme form of difficult 
respiration, where the patient can only breathe by having his 
head and shoulders raised. The muscles, too, of the chest 
and shoulder-blades are violently agitated. 


294 PROCESSUS INTEGRI. 


Bleed from the right arm to ten ounces. The next day 
take the common purgative potion, and repeat it every third 
day for two more times. 

On the days when there is no purging : 

EK  Aniseed (very finely powdered), 3ij ; 
Balsam of Locatelli, q. s. 
Make six pills to the drachm. Of these take three every morning, aud 
at five p.m. Wash down with four ounces of the bitter decoction, 


warm, and without its purging ingredients. If the symptoms con- 
tinue, repeat the whole process a second time. 


CHAPTER LVII. 
ON PALSY. 


SENSE and motion, one or both, are either wholly lost or 
impaired in the parts affected. 

Pil. coch. maj. in doses of two scruples, every other morning, 
for six times. Then two drachms of antiscorbutic electuary. 
Wash down with six spoonfuls of the aqua antiscorbutica. 

K Unguentum nervinum, 
Compound spirits of lavender, 
Spirits of garden scurvy-grass, aa Ziss. 
Mix, and rub in on the parts affected, e. g. the spine of the back, night 
and morning. 

Most of the prescriptions for scorbutus suit paralysis; since 
they pre-eminently dissipate and volatilize the crude and fixed 
humours. 


CHAPTER LVIII. 


ON COUGHS AND PHTHISIS. 


Tue cough betrays itself. The phthisis comes on between 
the eighteenth and thirty-fifth years. The whole body becomes 
emaciated. There is a troublesome hectic cough, which is 
increased by taking food, and which is distinguished by the 
quickness of the pulse and the redness of the cheeks. The 
matter spit up by the cough is bloody or purulent. When 
burnt, it smells fetid. — When thrown into water, it sinks. 
Night sweats supervene. At length the cheeks grow livid, the 


COUGH AND PHTHISIS. 295 


face pale, the nose sharp. The temples sink, the nails curve 
inwards, the hair falls off, and there is colliquative diarrhoea, 
the forerunner of death. 

2. If the cough be still recent, and if it have not yet 
brought on fever, bastard peripneumony, or any other proper 
phthisical sign, or if it have not arisen out of the remains 
of a pleurisy or a peripneumony, whereof, from insufficient 
bleeding, the cure was imperfect, it will be sufficient for the 
patient to abstain for a few days from wine and meat, and use 
ad libitum such remedies as the following : 

9. Of the balsam of sulphur with anise, ten drops out of a 
spoonful of crystalline sugar. 

The following tablets, which the patient should carry about 
with him, and take, one at a time, frequently. 

EK Sugar-candy, lb.iss; 
Spring-water, q. s. 
Boil until the sugar sticks to the ends of the fingers. Then add— 
Liquorice-root, 
Elecampane, 
Aniseed, 
Angelica (the seeds), aa $ss; 
Orris-root, 
Flowers of sulphur, aa 33); 
Essential oil of aniseed, 9ij. 
Make into tablets secundum artem. Label them as household medicines. 


4. In the meanwhile the following eclegma may be used : 


kK Oil of sweet almonds, 
Syrup of maidenhair, 
Syrup of violets, aa 2j; 
Sugar-candy, q. s. 
Make into a lohoch ; to be taken off a stick of liquorice, whenever the 


cough is troublesome. 

5. When the defluxion is of the thin sort, thickening 
eclegmata may be given. 

6. If the cough will not yield to these remedies, and when 
it has arisen from peripneumony, or from pleurisy, or is ac- 
companied by fever (and this is generally the case), it is folly to 
trust to pectorals. The disease must be attacked by bleeding 
and purging, as directed in the chapter on Bastard Peri- 
pneumony. 

7. If, notwithstanding the latter method, the cough not only 
continue, but so shake the lungs as to have paved the way for 
phthisis, the treatment must be as follows :— 


296 PROCESSUS INTEGRI. 


IX Balsam of Peru, mix. 


To be dropped into a spoonful of ground-ivy, or (if that be disagreeable 
to the taste) a spoonful of crystalline sugar. To be taken three 
times a day. To be washed down with four ounces of the bitter — 
decoction without its purging ingredients. If ever, when thus 
given, it move the bowels, three ounces only must be taken. 


9. But of all the remedies for phthisis, long and continued 
journeys on horseback bear the bell; in respect to which it must 
be noted, that if the patient be past the prime of life, more exer- 
cise of the sort in question must be taken than if he were a 
youth or boy. 

Dark is no surer a cure for ague, than riding for phthisis. 


CHAPTER LIX. 
ON SCORBUTUS. 


WEARINESS, independent of exertion, heaviness of the body, 
dyspnoea, especially upon moving about, putrefaction of the gums, 
foul breath, frequent loss of blood from the nostrils, difficulty 
in walking. ‘The legs sometimes swell, sometimes waste ; with 
livid, leaden-coloured, yellow, or violet-coloured spots. The 
face is generally of a sallow paleness. 

2. Bleed to six ounces, unless there be dropsy. Next morn- 
ing give the common purging potion, and repeat it every third 
day twice. 

3. On the days when there is no purging, and also a month 
or two after, the patient must take— 


K Conserve of garden scurvy-grass, 3ij ; 
Conserve of lujula, 3j ; 
Compound powder of cuckoo-pint, 5vj ; 
Syrup of oranges, q. s. 

Make into an electuary; of which a portion about the size of a large 
nutmeg is to be taken every morning at five p. m., and at night. 
Wash down with six spoonfuls of the aqua raphani composita, or 
else of— 


EK  Horseradish-root (rasped), 1b.ij ; 
Cuckoo-pint-root, 1b.j; 
Leaves of garden scurvy-grass. twelve handfuls ; 
Mint, 
Sage, 
Watercress, 
Brooklime, aa six handfuls ; 
Seeds of the garden scurvy-grass (slightly bruised), lb.ss ; 
Nutmeg, 3ss; 
White wine, Ib.xij. 
Distil in a common still, so as to give no more than six pints for use. 


DECLINE. 297 


4. Or, the leaves of fresh garden scurvy-grass alone may be 
distilled for the same purpose. Moreover, the following beer 
must constitute the ordinary drink : 


IX  Horseradish-root (newly sliced), 3ij ; 
Leaves of garden scurvy-grass, xi) ; 
Raisins (without the stones), vj ; 
Half an orange. 


Soak in a quart bottle of thin small beer, and cork closely. 


9. In this way should be prepared, in the first instance, six 
bottles, and, after a few days, six more, to be ready when the 
first are finished. 

6. Or, instead of this beer, three or four spoonfuls of the 
following mixture may be added to the patients ordinary drink : 


Rc. Horseradish-root, 
Seeds of the garden scurvy-grass, aa $88; 
Leaves of the same, two handfuls ; 
The pulp of one orange. 


Beat together in a marble mortar, and add gradually half a pint of 
white wine. Squeeze it moderately in the straining, and set by for 
use. 


7. The same remedies, with the omission of the bleeding 
and purging, are very efficacious in both scorbutic and hysterical 
rheumatism. 


CHAPTER LX. 
THE DESCRIPTION AND CURE OF A DECLINE.! 


1. TurnE are many kinds of tabes. The first arises from cold 
taken during winter. A little before the winter solstice many 
persons take it. When any of such have weak lungs, it is 
only natural that the continued effort of coughing should 
weaken them still more. Hence, from a faulty diathesis, they 
become incompetent to due assimilation of their proper aliment. 
Then a vast mass of crude phlegm accumulates, which, from 
continual coughing, and from the vehement efforts of the 
lungs, is rejected by the mouth. 

The lungs, replete with pus, disperse purulent miasmata 
over the whole of the body. Hence arises putrid fever, which 
is worst towards the evening, whilst, in the morning, it bathes 
the patient in copious and debilitating sweats. To crown all, 


! [n the Latin—fadbes. 


298 PROCESSUS INTEGRI. 


diarrhoea sets in, partly from putrid humours deposited and 
excreted by the mesenteric arteries in the intestines, partly from 
the weakened and depraved tone of the viscera. | 

Hence the patient dies during the following summer, the 
winter's cough having paved the way to his death. 

This is the chief sort of ¢abes or decline. 

2. The blood, at the season in question, is loaded with 
humid particles, and the perspiration through the pores of the 
skin being checked by their sudden contraction, the aforesaid 
particles become dispersed along the branches of the pulmonary 
artery, or else are deposited by the salivary ducts in the glands 
which occupy the fauces. The humour then finds its way from 
the trachea to the lungs, like a catarrh, and the frequency and 
vehemence of the cough produce the debility and the symptoms 
which have been already noticed. 

The lungs can now no longer retain their natural status and 
economy, so that glandules and tubercles arise. Hence, in 
patients who have died of this disease, we find, on inspection, 
that they are distended with a purulent sanies. 

9. When this disease has taken strong root, medicines are 
generally of no avail. Still treatment may be tried, e. g. 
bleeding from the arm, and mild catharsis for the sake of 
diminishing the defluxion with pectoral medicines, accommodated 
to the different stages of the disease; incrassant where the 
humour is of such subtlety and tenuity as to be incapable of 
expulsion, attenuant when it is thick, and brought up labo- 
riously. Then the hectic fever must be checked by cooling 
remedies. Of this sort are— asses?" milk, aqua lactis stillatitia, 
emulsion of sweet almonds, of melon-seeds, of gourd-seeds, of 
white poppy, of cowslip-flower-water, &c. Lastly an attempt 
must be made to cure the ulcer—for which purpose the liquid 
turpentine, called opobalsam, 1s particularly adapted. 

4. The treatment of the disease is, in my mind, as follows. 
Bleed in the first instance, then purge for three days running, 
either with the pil. coch. maj. or with the lenitive decoction 
already noticed. On the third night give half an ounce of the 
syrup of poppies. After an interval of two or three days, ac- 
cording to circumstances, repeat the purge, and do this as 
often as is necessary; 1. e. until the symptoms either wholly or 
partially disappear. After each purge give two drops of opo- 


Ld 


DECLINE. 299 


balsam on a large lump of sugar. Drink nothing after them. 
Take in their stead a pill of Chian turpentine with sugar-candy. 
The opobalsam is not to be taken except after previous eva- 
cuations. Instead of this an electuary of balsam of Lucatelli, 
liquorice powder, aniseed, and turpentine may be substituted. 
After the evacuations, great care must be taken to allay the 
cough, lest the lungs be harassed by the continual irritation. 
The aforesaid syrup does this. It may be given in the following 
formula : 
kk Pectoral decoction, Oj; 
Syrup of poppies, 
Syrup of maidenhair, aa 33). 
Take five spoonfuls three times a day. 


5. This will prevent the catarrh from falling on the lungs, and, 
unless the change has gone too far, will bring them to their 
previous state of health. It will also promote the concoction 
of the purulent matter. 

6. The palmary remedy, however, is daily riding on horse- 
back——which is all in all. Do this, and you may neglect the 
rules of diet, and deprive yourself of no sort of meat or drink. 
In some cases of recovery, thus brought about, there is a 
swelling of the neck, not unlike that of scrofula. 

7. There is another sort of decline, which arises from coughs 
beginning at avery different period of the year, viz. during the 
beginning of the summer. It occurs in young patients, whose 
system is weak, and whose humours are hot and acrid. If 
they have over-indulged in wine, such subjects will spit blood. 
They feel pain or discomfort in the chest. Unless such sym- 
ptoms be relieved by appropriate remedies, there will come from 
them—first soreness, next an ulcer, and lastly pus. 

8. This sort of decline is easily subdued, at least in the 
beginning, by bleeding and purging, alternately, twice repeated ; 
provided that the patient use a cooling and thickening diet, 
and wholly abstain from animal food. 

9. The three sorts of this disease originate in the matter of 
fever becoming deposited in the lungs, just as the fever itself is 
giving way. The patients being weakened are harassed by the 
aforesaid symptoms. 

10. Sometimes it arises from the purulent sanies, which in 
pleuritie patients has not been thoroughly expectorated. In 
such a case the treatment 1s that of an empyema. 


300 PROCESSUS INTEGRI. 


1l. Lastly, tabes may arise from the weakness consequent 
on inordinate evacuations. Here there are hectic flushes,— 
chiefly towards the evening, after meals. Here, too, aphthe 
are particularly common. 


CHAPTER LXI. 


ON GOUT. 


1. Towarps the end of January, or the beginning of February, 
about two o'clock in the morning, the patient is awakened by 
a severe pain in the great toe; sometimes in the heel, ankle, 
or instep. Then follow chills and shivers, and a little fever. 
The pain becomes more intense. With its intensity the chills 
and shivers increase. About midnight the agony is at its worst. 
Now it is a violent stretching and tearing of the ligaments— 
now it is a gnawing pain, like that of a dog, and now a pressure 
and tightening. So exquisite and lively meanwhile is the feeling 
of the part affected, that the sufferer cannot bear the weight of 
the bed-clothes nor the jar of a person walking in the room. 

The pain is not abated before two or three o’clock in the 
morning of the next day (twenty-four hours having elapsed 
from the first attack), when a gentle perspiration is succeeded 
by sleep, and the patient on awaking is freer from pain, and finds 
the part recently swollen. 

The next day, perhaps for two or three days after, the foot 
affected is painful, being worse towards the evening, but better 
towards the dawn of day. A few days after, the other foot 
swells, or suffers the same pain. After this has attacked each 
foot, the fits become irregular, both as to the time of their 
accession and duration. 

Now a series of lesser fits like these constitutes a true attack 
of gout—long or short, according to the age of the patient. 
In strong constitutions, where the previous attacks have been 
few, a fortnight is the length of one. With age and impaired 
habits, gout may last two months. With very advanced age, 
and in constitutions very much broken down by previous gout, 
the disease will hang on till the summer is far advanced. 

2. For the first fourteen days the urine is high-coloured, 


GOUT. 301 


has a red sediment, and is loaded with gravel. The bowels 
are confined. Want of appetite, general chills towards evening, 
heaviness, and a troublesome feeling at the parts affected, 
attend the fit throughout. As the fit goes off, the foot itches 
intolerably, most between the toes; the cuticle scales off, and 
the feet desquamate. 

3. Up to this time, the disease has attacked the feet only. 
When, however, either undue treatment or the prolonged 
delay of the disease has converted the whole body into a fomes 
for the peccant matter, it attacks the hands, wrists, elbows, 
knees, and other parts. Sometimes it distorts the fingers till 
they look like a bunch of parsnips, and become stiffened and 
immoveable from the deposits of chalkstone concretions about 
the ligaments of the knuckles, hke crab’s eyes. Sometimes 
the morbific matter fixes on the elbows, and raises a whitish 
tumour, almost as large as an egg, which gradually grows red 
and inflamed. Sometimes the thigh feels as if a weight were 
attached to it, without, however, any notable pain. 

The knee, which is next attacked, is more painful. The 
patient’s limbs are now wholly crippled and contracted, so that 
he can scarcely crawl about, and all motion is distressing. The 
urine has the hue of the urine of diabetes. ‘The back and 
other parts itch ; especially at bedtime. 

4. After many dreadful torments, the fits, as far as the pain 
is concerned, become milder ; partly because Nature is oppressed 
by the peccant matter, and partly from old age. Then, instead 
of the usual agony, there is uneasiness, pain in the stomach, 
weariness, and sometimes a tendency to diarrhcea. These 
symptoms disappear whenever the pain attacks the joints; so 
that, sometimes from the pain, sometimes from the weakness, 
alternately affecting the patient, the fits become protracted. 

5. Gout very often produces a calculus in the kidneys. It 
attacks women but rarely, and then chiefly the aged and mas- 
culine. Nor is it common with minors and children. 

6. The curative indication turns upon improving the con- 
coctions. This is done by removing the indigestions, either by 
medicines, by diet, by exercise, or by any change in the six 
non-naturals. , 

7. Bleeding, purging, and diaphoresis will not attain the 
object ; although with those who suffer from a calculus in the 


302 PROCESSUS INTEGRI. 


kidney, and from bloody urine, originating therein as well as 
from gout, it may not be inexpedient to open the bowels once 
a week with manna, and to give a paregoric at bedtime after 
each purging. 

8. The medicines which satisfy this indication are those 
which are moderately warming, and which, when tasted, act 
pungently on the tongue. Such are the roots of angelica, 
elecampane, wormwood-leaves, the lesser centaury, germander, 
ground-pine, &c. &c. ‘To these may be added the so-called 
antiscorbutics, as horseradish, garden scurvy-grass, watercress. 
These last, however, because they increase the heat (and so 
stimulate), must be used more sparingly than the others. With 
them, the moderate heat and the mild bitterness restore the 
stomach, 

The following electuary is useful : 


EK Conserve of garden scurvy-grass, Ziss ; 
Roman wormwood, . 
Orange-peel, aa £j; 
Candied angelica, 
Candied nutmeg, aa 3ss ; 
Venice treacle, 5ii) ; 
Compound powder of cuckoo-pint, 5j ; 
Syrup of oranges, q. s. 
Make into an electuary. Two drachms to be taken twice a day. 
Wash down with five or six spoonfuls of— 
K Sliced horseradish, Ziij; 
Garden scurvy-grass, xij handfuls ; 
Watercress, 
Brooklime, 
Sage, 
Mint, aa iv handfuls ; 
The peel of six oranges ; 
Bruised nutmegs, ij ; 
Brunswick mum, Oxij. 
Distil in a common still, until six pints are given off. 


9. These digestive remedies must be used constantly and 
with all diligence, and are chiefly to be applied during the 
intervals of the fits. 

10. Moderation in meat and drink must be observed, so that 
on one hand the stomach receive no more food than it can 
digest, and that, on the other, abstinence do not weaken the 
parts, by withholding from them their due proportion of that 


GOUT. 303 


aliment which is necessary for supporting their strength and 
vigour. Again, in the quality of the food, the palate of the 
patient must be consulted. One sort of food for each meal is 
best. Saving of meat, the patient may eat ad libitum, except 
that his food must not be sharp, nor salted nor spiced. 

It is best not to take supper, but to drink a free draught of 
small beer instead of a meal as a preventive to the concretion 
of a calculus. 

11. As to liquors, those are the best which neither sink to 
the weakness of water (so as to chill the stomach), nor rise to 
the generosity of wine. Such is the London smali beer, or 
weak wine-and-water. Water alone is dangerous. 

When the whole substance of the body has degenerated into 
the fomes of gout, all fermented liquors, however weak, must 
be abstained from, and the diet-drink of sarsaparilla must 
be used from the time that the patient recovers from the fit 
to the day of his death. 

12. Nevertheless, if the patient, from either too long and 
too excessive a use of intoxicating liquors, from being advanced 
in life, or from excessive debility, cannot digest his food without 
either wine or some other fermented liquor, he may leave off 
the diet-drink, and take a little sherry at meals. 

13. The patient must go to bed early, especially during the 
winter, must keep his mind quiet, and not be too intent upon 
serious matters. 

14. Far better, however, than anything else, is daily exercise, 
provided it be moderate, and that the patient persevere in it. 
As to the sort of exercise, riding on horseback is the best ; 
provided that neither extreme old age nor the presence of a 
calculus forbid it. It is best in the open air. Driving in a 
carriage is also useful. Gouty men must not indulge in venery. 
External applications are not to be applied. 

15. Although nothing of magnitude is to be attempted 
during the paroxysms, it may still be good for the patient to 
abstain from animal food for some days, and to take only 
oatmeal-gruel, or some similar aliment. If, however, there be 
any ataxia of the animal spirits, it is not well to abstain from 
meat longer than the stomach loathes it. Still there should 


be no errors in respect to the quantity of either the meat or 
drink. 


304 PROCESSUS INTEGRI. 


16. Those symptoms which threaten the life of a patient 
must be met. Of such, the commonest is languor of the stomach 
with gripes, as if from wind. Nothing suits this better than 
an occasional draught of Canary wine. Exercise, too, must be 
taken. If, however, any other symptom, graver still, and one 
which will not allow of delay, present itself, we must (provided 
always that the head be not affected) have recourse to laudanum. 
Of this the patient should take twenty-five drops out of plague- 
water, and compose himself to sleep. 

In this way did our most illustrious author himself escape 
imminent death, when, from some error conuected with the six 
non-naturals, the gout fell upon the stomach, and pain, with 
violent vomiting, was the effect; the limbs meanwhile being 
wholly free from pain, and even more free for movement than 
usual He thus treated himself:—he swallowed a gallon of 
posset, or of small beer, threw it up by vomiting, and took 
eighteen drops of liquid laudanum out of a moderate draught 
of Canary wine. If the symptoms do not yield to this remedy, 
a sweat must be brought on by the usual method, and medi- 
cines, and be continued, morning and evening, for two or three 
hours, until the third or fourth day. 

17. But if there be a metastasis to the lobes of the lungs, 
whilst the limbs are free from pain and swelling, the symptom 
is to be treated lke absolute peripneumony, i. e. by repeated 
bleeding, by cooling and thickening diet and remedies, and by 
lenitive purging potions between the bleedings. It is injurious, 
however, to force a sweat. 


APPENDICES. 


20 


LU 


kt 


n2 
^ 


" 


APPENDICES. 


APPENDIX A. 


Tur following is from a MS. in the Public Library of the 
University of Cambridge, to which the attention of the editor 
had been directed by a reference in the ‘ Biographia Britannica,’ 
under the title Sydenham. The MS. is in a more modern hand- 
writing than that of Sydenham’s time, and is headed ** Theologia 
Rationalis by Dr. Thomas Sydenham.” Beyond this, the Editor 
has not found either any illustration of its history, or evidence 
of its authenticity. According, however, to the usual rules of 
criticism a work must be considered to belong to the author 
to whom it is attributed, until reason be shown to the contrary. 


THEOLOGIA RATIONALIS. 


Tur question is, How far the light of Nature, if closely 
adverted to, may be extended toward the making good men? 
Towards the determining of which this is all that shall be 
taken for granted by me, viz. that he is a wise and thinking 
man, whoever he may he, that sets upon this inquiry. 

Such a man must needs think thus with himself. I see 
that there is a most perfect and exquisite order in the several 
natures of the world fully conducing to the preservation of 
their individual beings, and to the propagation of their kinds. 
In all which they contribute nothing themselves by their 
own counsell or contrivance, as not knowing how they are 
made or how continued in their beings. And therefore I am 
enforced to think that something w™ is partaker of admirable 
wisdom and power, is the contriver and maker of them. But 
further, considering not onley the artifice, by which those par- 
ticular bodies w“" I see and converse w are made with respect 


308 APPENDIX A. 


of each of them to its selfe; but likewise that artifice, by 
which each of them hath some subservience one to another for 
safeguard, food, and other convenience, I am still led into a 
greater certainty, that there was some Supreme Nature, which 
(without and differing from all these) did as he made them 
so, put them into this order in reference to one another. But 
extending my thoughts yet further, and considering those in- 
numerable and immense celestial bodies, which I can take in 
w? my natural eye, and those yet as many more w^ I can 
take in w? the help of glasses, and all these put and preserved 
in motion so swift and so regular, both for the convenience of 
each of themselves and for the convenience of the whole, as 
cannot enter into the heart of the wisest man to conceive, 
how can I less doubt the being of a Nature infinitely wise and 
infinitely powerful, by whose contrivance hath been performed . 
and is continued the exquisite order of the stupendous fabric 
of the universe, then I doubt my own being? And it may be 
well conceived that the utmost I can find out, by adverting to 
the great theatre, beares but a very inconsiderable share in 
the divine opifice, w“ is still more exquisite and more great 
then I (wholly groveling upon the dirt of this earth) have 
faculties to comprehend. And tho’ by the late discoveries 
not before known, and by the inventions of new arts (such as 
sailing w'? a needle touch'd w' a loadstone and others) w^? 
seem altogether impossible to have been lost and to have been 


found out again (w? 


yet in an infinite series of time they 
must have been), it is very probable that the world was made 
in time, and the same of no much ancienter date then is as- 
signed unto it; yet admitting the eternity of the world, never- 
theless the order thereof (tho’ from such eternity) doth no 
less demonstrate the being of an Infinite wisdom and power 
without it. In a word, there being such order in those parti- 
cular bodies, whether sublimary or celestial, both in reference 


to one another and to themselves, and not being the least foot- 


THEOLOGIA RATIONALIS. 309 


steps of councill or reason to be found in any of them, by 
w" they can contribute any thing toward the production of 
this admirable order which we call Nature: the same must be 
the contrivance of a wise powerfull being, both without them 
and in a condition above them, which we call God. 

But what am I, who thus think? and for what was I made? 
For being part of that universe, w^ the Supreme Artificer hath 
made, I am to conform to those eternal laws, under w^ He 
hath constituted my being; which (examined what it is) I find 
that I am a mixt animal, partly consisting of rational faculties, 
and partly of brutall. But forasmuch as, in the scale of 
beings, I find that the rational faculties are so much more 
excellent and superior than brutall ones, as these are above 
vegetables, my chiefest business and the employment for w?^' I 
were sent into the world is to exert acts that flow from reason 
and not from sense. And these are comprehended under the 
obligations, in which by the laws of my superior nature I 
stand to the Supreme Being, to humane society, and to myself, 
considered as an intellectual creature. For I can’t see how it 
can possibly be, that whilest inferior natures are put under 
laws, by which they are determined to such or such operations 
suitable to the ends of their several beings, intellectual natures 
only (tho’ the very top of Divine workmanship) should be put 
under no laws suitable to the ends of their most excellent 
beings; but should be left at random, and be, as it were, out- 
laws in the policie of the world. Wherefore as to the first 
obligation incumbent on me, as an intellectual creature, I con- 
sider that neither air, fire, water, nor earth, nor the more mixt 
bodies, as minerals and vegetables, nor yet the more advanced 
compositions of matter, brutes, are able to exhibit to the 
Supreme Being that profound adoration, which is due to him 
upon the score of his wisdom and power; and I being the 
only creature upon this globe of earth, w^ is my habitation 
that am able to doe it; it seems to me that I was put here on 


310 APPENDIX A. 


purpose to be a contemplator of this His admirable wisdom 
and power, and that therefore both for myself and for those 
other inferior beings, w™ are not endowed with faculties to do 
it, lam to yield and pay to Him, upon the score of his ad- 
mirable wisdom and power. 

But now, as from the consideration of what I see, I am 
naturally led up into the knowing that there was a Divine 
Architect or Maker of the World, w^? obliges me to pay my 
utmost adoration and thanks; so, from the same consideration, 
I am engaged to look up to him for all those things which my 
nature, whether intellectual or brutall, stands in need of, and 
for the diverting all those evils that are contrary to it. And 
looke how natural it is to me to believe that he gave me my 
being; so natural is it to believe that my well-being depends 
upon him: nor can I excuss out of my thoughts any more the 
opinion of the one, then of the other, in the way of thinking 
incident to me as I am a man. And tho’ the Supreme Being, 
w'? has so fix'd the naa! constitution of the universe, as that 
it may be unreasonable for me to expect, that for my sake, 
and at my request, this external establishm! should be put out 
of order, as that, being old, I should pray for the strength 
and vigor of youth, or such other things which, in the course 
of Nature, are put under a necessity of not being able to come 
to pass; yet it cannot be supposed, but that 1n all events, not 
crossing the establishment of the natural constitution, he hath 
preserved to himself the power and disposition of them; as 
tho’ it cannot be but if I shall be shipwrackt far at sea, I 
must needs be drowned, yet towards the preserving me from 
this mischief, he may be pleased so to dispose the previous 
circumstances of my will, and other things, as to prevent my 
going to sea, and so in this, and in other things, he may 
hinder the occasions leading to my destruction. 

Nor indeed can I entertain any thoughts more derogatory 
from the majesty of this Divine Being, then not supposing 


THEOLOGIA RATIONALIS. 811 


him to be a free agent ; but having once put all his works out 
of his own hands, to be concluded within the limits of his 
own establishm!, hath determined irrational beings to act in 
some uniform course, suitable to the good of themselves and 
the whole. And tho’ he hath set up certain hghts in intel- 
lectual natures, wh? may direct them to pursue ends suitable 
to their natures, yet having given these a liberty of will inci- 
dent to the very nature of reasonable beings, he retains his 
power of inclining or not inclining such intellectual natures 
to pursue courses leading to their welfare. And truly, in the 
natures of intellectual creatures seems to be the special domi- 
nion of the Divine Agent, wh*?? tho’ he doth not determine 
in their operations as he doth inferior beings, yet he doth, 
when he pleaseth, make their lights set up in their minds more 
illustrious, or else, by a peculiar incitem’ of thoughts, render 
them more disposed to comply w*" their own good, and to 
avoid their own unhappiness ; so laying in the mean time all 
the train of circumstances without them, as that they may 
conduce to this end. 

But now the footsteps of this moral providence of God in 
the world do not seem all together so visible as those of his 
natural; w is clearly discernable in everything that we be- 
hold. Yet neither are those totally hid from us, but may 
be often discovered beyond all reason of doubt, in several 
events, both relating to whole countries, and likewise to parti- 
cular men. As when God hath designed any great revolutions 
to be made in kingdoms and states, not only some person is 
raised up, that is fitted with peculiar endowments for this 
work; but an infinite number of opportunities likewise and 
circumstances have at the same time concurr’d to produce this 
alteration. Nor less may any particular man be able to trace 
out by most remarkable footsteps in Divine Providence, in the 
course of his own life, wherein he will find such and such 
events, w? could not be the effects of chance; so many cir- 


312 APPENDIX A. 


cumstances, and these of so different natures, having concurred 
toward the producing of them, as did shew that they conspired 
together in this work by some superior direction. For it is 
no less in these moral events then it is in the works either of 
nature or art, in which, if we see so great train of things all 
concurring to the same end, we reasonably believe they made 
not themselves, or come by chance, but were effected by some 
intelligent agent. But how certain soever we may be that 
such moral events in matters of fact did proceed from a su- 
perior direction ; yet we can't understand the final causes of 
them, they being hid in the mind of the Supreme Being, who 
hath preserved to himself the prerogative of overruling the 
moral establish* of the world as he pleaseth, and therefore are 
past all reach of humane wit, whilest many times we can't but 
perceive that all things happen indifferently, and the same 
things to fools as to wise, to good as to bad, wch. things yet 
are not the effect of chance, but of a superior direction. And 
tho’ all such events have had causes suitable to their produc- 
tion, yet have not causes their events always suited to them. As 
tho' riches, generally speaking, are acquired by industrie, and 
health by temperance, yet industrious men happen often to be 
poore, and intemperate to be healthy. 

Wherefore, to this eternal, infinitely good, wise, and power- 
full Being, as I am to pay all that adoration, thanks, and 
worship w^? I can raise up my mind unto; so to him, from 
the consideration of his providence, whereby he doth govern 
the world, myself, and all things in it, I am purá integrá et 
incorruptd mente to pray for all that good which is necessary 
for my mind and body, and for diverting all those evils which 
are contrary to their nature; above all, desiring that my mind 
may be endowed with all manner of vertue. But in request- 
ing things relating to my body and its concerns, having always 
a deference to the will of the Supreme Being, who knows 
what is best for me, better than I do myself. And tho’ my 


THEOLOGIA RATIONALIS. 313 


requests to these bodily concerns of mine are not answered, 
nevertheless, herein I worship him, by declaring my depend- 
ence upon him; and forasmuch as that, in many respects, I 
have transgressed his divine laws written upon my nature, I 
am humbly to implore his pardon, it being as natural for me 
to do it, as it is to implore the pardon of a man whom I know 
I have offended. In all w requests of mine, and all his 
creatures, how many soever they be in number, and how dis- 
tant soever they be in place, he being infinite, is as ready at 
hand to hear and to help as any man who is but finite, is at 
hand to administer food to his child that craves it. 

Next, considering myself to be part of the common nature 
of mankind, hewed, as it were, out of the same block, and 
hkewise, out of gratitude to the common father of us all, I find 
myself engaged not to hurt, but by all the means I can, to 
benefit, mankind. 

And forasmuch as I am so made that I cannot preserve 
myself in my being without the help and assistance of others, 
my condition being above that of brutes, who stand in need 
onely of those few things w™ the earth of its own accord doth 
yield to them; and forasmuch, also, as I am not able to de- 
fend myself from the injuries w^ those of my own kind, led 
by pride, anger, covetousness, and such like brutish passions, 
may do to me, I find myself engaged to comply with the laws 
of humane society, which is the bond by which the good of 
men is held together, and to fill up the several duties of my 
condition in reference to that society. 

Lastly, concerning the obligations under w I stand in re- 
ference to myself. I consider that in this conjunction of my 
intellectual and brutall nature, forasmuch as I find my soul 
to be a far more excellent being than my body, I am to pre- 
serve entire to my mind the dominion w™ is given to it over 
my body, in repressing the sensual appetitions thereof, which 
are against my reason. Nor less am I to preserve to it, in all 


314 APPENDIX A. 


other things, its own dignity, not permitting any /abes dedecoris 
to cleave to it, not suffering it to be dejected when things 
without me, and which are not in my power, go cross to me; 
nor to be vainly elated when things of the like nature succeede, 
in regard that neither adversity make me a worse man, nor 
prosperity a better. And tho’ because I consist likewise of a 
body whose appetitions I am not to contradict, when they are 
not against my reason, if I might have my choice, I am to 
desire a prosperous condition; yet when I am under circum- 


1 


stances of misery w^ seem vile and contemptible to fools, even 
in this I have an opportunity to exhibit a specimen of the 
excellency of my superior nature by suffering w'' patience 
those evils; there being not in the whole world a more glorious 
spectacle than the seeing a good man oppress'd with great and 
insuperable difficulties, and yet bearing them with patience, as 
things w^? happen promiscuously to good and bad men, in the 
frame and constitution under which the Supreme Being hath 
put all earthly things, and as being by no means hurtfull to 
any particular man, whilst they are good for the whole. 

And this contemplation of the excellence of my mind above 
my body, as it is productive of the vertues last mentioned, so 
itis of this also that I embrace verity in all my words, as 
discerning the comeliness there is in making my tongue to be 
the faithfull interpreter of my mind, and the turpitude that 
there is in causing it to belye the same. 

Also, from the same consideration 1t 1s that I am neither to 
thinke, speake, or act anything that is indecorous or disgrace- 
full to this divine inmate, whose excellency above my body, 
Nature hath tacitly pointed out, by impressing upon me a 
verecundia, or being ashamed of many actions of my body, 
w" therefore, I hide from those of my own species. But now, 
forasmuch as I consist likewise of a body w^" is submitted to 
the same conditions with other animals, of being nourished 
and propagating my kind, and, likewise, w^ wants many other 


THEOLOGIA RATIONALIS. 315 


conveniences of clothing, housing, and the like, which their 
nature requires not; all those likewise are to be respected by 
me, according to my several wants; but stil with a subser- 
vience to my reason, which is my superior part, and acts 
flowing from the same, my chiefest business; as an embassador 
who is sent into a foreign country, is not sent to eat and to 
drink, tho’ he is enforced to do both. 

This seems to be my nature, and these the laws imprinted 
on it, in obeying of which do consist acts of virtue, and in 
disobeying them those of vice. But now tho’ I must thus 
think or not think at all, yet forasmuch as I find myself to be 
strongly diverted from obeying those laws written upon my 
intellectual nature, by the suggestions of my sensual part, 
which are apt to corrupt my reason by their enticements, and 
seem to bid fairer in many important necessities of life, for 
acceptance, than the other; therefore I enquire, whether there 
be no assistance to be had for my mind; by w*' it may grapple 
with my body, and by w*?' it, and all the concernes thereof, may 
be subservient only to herself, and to her most excellent end, 
which is to obey those divine lawes: I find that to excite my 
mind, and to encourage it is this conflict. I have great reason 
to believe, that when I die, I shall not extinguish, but that 
there shall abide to my better part a condition of happiness or 
misery, suitable to my having lived in conformity to the lawes 
aforementioned, or having lived otherwise. 

How my soul (w?' I look upon to be an immortal being in 
me, that is, the principle of thinking) should extinguish with 
my body, I cannot in any reasonable way of thinking, conceive. 
But that it is immaterial, appears hence, viz., that the imme- 
diate actions, which are thinking, have not the least affinity 
with matter, nor often do those actions, when exerted, termi- 
nate init. As when I think of time, or when I think this 
present thought wis my present subject, viz., that my soul is 
immaterial. And indeed most of those ideas w the art of 
logic in the whole latitude thereof, furnishes me withall, are 


316 APPENDIX A. 


totally removed from matter, and yet are so necessary, that 
unless I have them either by nature or art, I cannot think true 
without them. If it shall be thought, that whatsoever is, must 
needs be material, and whatsoever is not so, must be nothing 
at all; I would enquire, whether by matter we do not under- 
stand that wis the object of some one or other of our senses? 
if so, whether there be not many things in the universe, that 
come not under any sense that we are endowed w?? For 
suppose an oyster had the faculty of reasoning, ought he then 
to conclude, because Nature hath endowed him with that one 
sense of tasting, and perhaps w*' that ether of touching, that 
therefore there were no other object in the world than those 
w^ answered to his two senses? so to think would be more like 
an oyster than a man, who must needs suppose, that it is not 
only possible, but likely also, that in the universe there are an 
infinite number of beings, w"Ü'by no means come under his 
five senses; but which nevertheless are the objects of other 
senses, w'' which other creatures may be endowed, amongst 
which beings more may be incorporeall than those w*" partake 
of matter; w things, tho’ I cannot know to be so, yet I can 
conceive better, than I can know all things in the universe can 
be one nature only, to wit, matter. And cannot I by an easy 
train of thoughts conceive immaterial beings? when I conceive 
how much finer air is than earth, and how much ether than 
air, till at length I rest in something w*" is removed altogether 
from matter, and yet no less a being than that? or is it more 
difficult for me to think that the 1mmense interspaces between 
the globes, whether suns or planets, scattered up and down in 
the expanse of the universe (w? bear no proportion to the 
globes themselves), are perfectly disjunct from matter, these 
being thrown down, and constituting the gross substance of 
such globes, and the substance of those exhalations which 
issue from them and proceed no great way above them? And 
that in such interspaces may reside infinite more species of 
immaterial natures, altogether free from any mortall filth, then 


THEOLOGIA RATIONALIS. 317 


there are material ones residing upon the globes themselves ? 
But however this be, I am sure it is difficult to conceive 
how so almost divine a thing as thinking, can proceed from 
matter, w' w*" it seems to have the least correspondence. And 
the brutes (whose being we constitute only under matter) seems 
to put forth actions flowing from thinking, yet whether those 
actions are not only the effects of their parts consisting of such 
matter, and so put together by the Divine Artificer, as that 
they are determined in the very principles of their mechanic, 
to such and such actions, knowing not what they do, is not 
altogether so impossible as may be thought, forasmuch as we 
find that a great many of those actions of theirs w^ being in 
order to certain ends, do look like the results of thinking, yet. 
are not so. As that the several species of birds should begin 
to build their nests for the repositing their young, just before 
the time wherein they are to bring forth ; and these nests so 
built, both in respect of place, and likewise of materials, as 
generally speaking is most convenient to the nature and safe- 
guard of their young: and that w'"" so much artifice, that the 
most cunning mechanick that can be found amongst mankind 
cannot imitate; this may be thought an effect flowing from 
ratiocination ; but yet, if we consider that those birds which 
were hatch’d but the last season, should the next year, without 
any instructions from the old ones, rude and unexperienced, 
build such nests with such curiosity of artifice, as did the old 
ones, we must needs think that these actions of theirs flow from 
the make of their bodies and nothing else. "That a hen should 
sit so long upon her eggs, seems to be an effect of some kind 
thoughts in her, by which she designs the hatching of them, 
and the bringing forth of her young, which act of incubation, 
nevertheless, she will exert at certain seasons, whether she have 
eggs under her or no. That a chick as soon as hatched should, 
at the sight of a kite, run into a hole or to the hen for its pro- 
tection, as if it had been long furnished with experience and 
knowledge of that bird being used to devour those of its 


318 APPENDIX A. 


species. That so despicable and low a creature as an earth- 
worm, who lives in and upon the earth, and is but little in its 
nature, advanced above it, should have such a contrivance for 
its safeguard and habitation as working holes in the earth, and 
should, with a wonderful sagacity, quit the same, crawling up 
upon the surface thereof, when at any time it feels the motion 
of the earth that is made either by the moles, that live upon 
their species, or any other motion made by digging with a 
spade, resembling the motion made by the moles, and according 
to its power shifting for itself, no less than a man would out of 
a house w^ is on fire. And how can we conceive that this 
acting, tho’ in order to so reasonable an end, in so vile and 
contemptible a creature, should proceed from thoughts, or that 
it should have any at all? were endless to mention, in flyes and 
other insects, such instincts. Now tho’ in dogs, foxes, and 
some other animals, we perceive acts w^" seem nearer to re- 
semble ratiocination, yet nevertheless we may reasonably think, 
that if a train of actions to an orderly end may flow onely from 
the mechanie of other animals, such higher operations which 
these exert do result likewise from the bodies consisting of such 
materials, and so contrived by the Divine Artificer, as that they 
shall produce actions suited to their nature ; they, in the mean 
time, neither knowing nor perceiving that they are doing 
relating to the end for w*" they do it, any more than my kid- 
neys, whilst they are separating ye serous part of my bloud. 
But, however, herein is to be perceived the stupendous wisdom 
of the Divine Artificer. That matter alone so put together 
should produce operations in those animals, so nearly resembling 
that of intelligent beings. 

If it be objected, that when such actions in brutes proceed 
from meer matter, and we know not the wltima potentia materie, 
why may not the action of thinking in men proceed from 
matter only? This I must confess I should be very inclinable 
to believe could I be assured that brutes did at all think. And 
tho' we do not know the utmost power of matter, yet we do 


THEOLOGIA RATIONALIS. 319 


the utmost power of what we can conceive, and we cannot con- 
ceive that matter should think. But tho’ it be more hard for 
the principles of natural science to draw conclusions that are 
demonstrative of the immortality of the soul, forasmuch as 
the soul it self can no more discern it self save by its operations, 
than the eye can do the eye ; and also forasmuch as this science, 
from whence it should derive its information, is either none at 
all or very little, shewing us onely things, as they consist in 
matter of fact, and not leading us up into the causes and 
efficiencies: yet there is another, and that in my opinion a 
more true way of thinking, grounded upon moral science (the 
principles of w*", tho’ not of the other, mankind is endowed 
with faculties to comprehend, w^ will make it not only easy 
to think that the soul is immortall, but hard to conceive how 
it should be otherwise. For when I consider that the infinite 
Governour of the universe hath so made me, that in my in- 
tellect I have some small glympses of his being, whilst I cann’t 
but apprehend that immensity of power and wisdom w^" is in 
him, and doth appear in whatsoever I see, and this I must 
apprehend, if I endeavour not to do it, it being closely riveted, 
and as it were coessential to my nature; or if I have gotten of 
it by hearsay onely, it being so fitted to my nature, that I 
must needs believe it, w^ two make up the same thing. Now 


how can I think that this Divine Being, that hath admitted me 
th 


to this little acquaintance w'"" him, will let the laying down of 
my body perfectly break of this acquaintance, and not rather 
that the throwing of this load of corruption will put my soul 
into a condition more suitable to its own nature, it being much 
more difficult to think how such a noble substance as the soul 
should be united to the body, then how it should subsist sepa- 
rately from it. But add to this, that I have not only faculties 
of knowing this Divine Being, but in complyance with him, I 
have adored him with ali the attention I could screw up my 
heavy mind unto, and have endeavoured to yield obedience to 
those lawes w™ he hath written upon my nature: that I who 


320 | APPENDIX A. 


have done this (supposing that I have done it) should ex. 
tinguish when my body dies, is yet more unlikely. Moreover 
I consider that this Maker of the universe hath brought his ends 
so together, that he hath implanted no affections upon the 
meanest animal, but hath made objects to answer them ; as he 
that hath made the eye hath made colours, and he that hath 
made the organs of hearing hath likewise made sounds, and so 
of an infinite number of other affections, not only in animals, 
but even in those natures inferior to them all, w^" have objects 
suited to them ; and if they had not, there would be a flaw even 
in the constitution of the universe, w^" can’t be charged upon 
the infinitely wise Creator. But now that there should be 
found in mankind a certain appetite or reaching out after a 
future happiness, and that there should be no such thing to 
answer to it, but that this cheat should be put upon the 
rational part of man, w is the highest nature in the globe 
where we live, is to me very improbable. And contemplating 
the perfection of the Divine wisdom and goodness seems alto- 
gether impossible. But ifit be objected that such an appetition 
in us may proceed from our pride, in thinking too well of our- 
selves, and that no footsteps thereof have been found in some 
nations where such appetition hath obtained, and therefore is 
not connatural and born with us: let it be considered, that tho’ 
there may be some such whole nations so immersed in immanity 
and brutishness (w™ yet I find not sufficiently proved), and admit 
that there are some particular men here and there in other 
civilized countries, who either by sensuality have immersed them- 
selves into the same brutishness, or else through pride have en- 
deavoured to sore above other men ; but through that weakness 
w^? is always incident to wit without wisdom, have lost their 
faculty of right reasoning : yet if the bulk of mankind, wi// no 
man will question, have the opinion of a future state reached 
out after it in the divers methods and wayes that their several 
religions and customs or reason did suggest unto them to be the 
best means of attaining the same, then it is a sign that if this 


THEOLOGIA RATIONALIS. 321 


notion be not connatural to man (which yet I think it to be), 
yet it carryes with it such a suitableness to our reason, that 
wherever it hath been started, it hath been complyed w'', which 
is all one, as if it had been connatural; and wis more, by how 
much whole countryes or particular men have been civilized, 
and endowed with greater endowm' of understanding, than 
other countryes, or other particular men, by so much have 
they indulged to this opinion, that there is a future estate sur- 
passing them, as in other parts of understanding, so likewise in 
this of true thinking. 

Furthermore, it is of no small weight towards proving the 
immortality of the soul, that there being not sufficient retribu- 
tion made for the greatest virtues or vices in this life, there 
must needs be a future state, wherein that just respect will be 
had to good and bad men weh. is fit. That there is no retri- 
bution in this world is manifest, when consulting historys of 
former ages or making use of our own observations, we find that 
bad men many times enjoy a great affluence of comforts, and 
good men are oppress'd w'" ali kinds of misery. And some- 
times these wicked men do owe all their enjoyments even to 
their wickedness, and those good their misery to their treading 
strictly in the paths of virtue. What shall we say to those 
great men, who, without any other motive than the getting of 
a great name in the world, have by fire and sword destroyed 
whole countries of innocent men, who could be no otherwise 
aggressors, than as they desired to breath in the common air, 
and to eat the fruits of the land, w™ w™ hard labor their own 
hands had cultivated? These great men nevertheless have 
lived like gods upon earth, everywhere honoured and swimming 
in all worldly pleasures, and at length dying on their beds, 
leave their illgotten possessions to their children. What shall 
we say likewise to private persons, who by violating the wills 
of the dead by betraying trusts, and by oppressing orphans 
and widdowes, and by sundry other frauds in their dealings, 

if. 21 


322 APPENDIX A. 


have heap’d up great estates, and have thereby exempted 
themselves from that misery and want which others have 
undergone that have not given themselves the liberty of being 
unjust, tho’ they have had opportunities, wch. might have en- 
titled them to the same getting? Nor can it be said, that my 
being well pleased and inwardly satisfyed with my self, with my 
doing well, is a sufficient reward for the good actions which I 
have done ag*’ my own interest; nor the consciousness of my 
own guilt a sufficient punishment for the wickedness I have 
committed toward the accommodating my pleasures. For I 
will demand of any man why (prescinding from the considera- 
tion of a future state), should I embrace vertue rather than 
vice, at all times, and in the whole latitude of them? Tho’ 
gnrally speaking, I will allow, that he who embraceth tem- 
perance, chastity, &c., shall more consult his own good as to 
his present being, then he that practiseth the contrary vice 
(reputation in the world, which is the foundation of riches and 
health, attending those, and dishonour, poverty, and sickness 
commonly attending these); yet this doth not always hold. 
What then? Isit for the fear of the lawes that men ought to 
forbear vice? What argum can that be, that a tyrant, who 
rules far and near, and abounding in power and wealth, is 
superior to all his neighbours, should not oppress when he 
pleaseth? Is it the torment of conscience that is said to vex 
bad men, that should keep men from flagitious acts? What 
then should deter men, who by a series of wicked actions have 
quite extinguish’d all such sense of evil? or else perhaps who, 
thro’ sottishness of nature, never had it. Is it according to 
the Stoicks, vice as vice, or the turpitude thereof, should 
keep men from wickedness? What turpitude is there in vice 
to him that thinks it not so, how much soever may be thereof 


in a man that takes other measures, by the rules of virtue ? 
Ta tear? toe eek 


323 


APPENDIX B. 


The Editor has been kindly favoured by Dr. Mrrriman with 
the following Letter and Extract, which are added to the present 
volume, less for the sake of confirming the view concerning 
Dr. Sydenham's Latinity, which is taken in the Life, than for 
that of stimulating inquiry respecting the correspondence 
alluded to. 


** 94, Brook Street, Grosvenor Square ; 
* March 13, 1849. 
* My dear Sir, 

“J, * * * * am tempted to send to you the following 
notice of Sydenham, which was published in the * Medical and 
Physieal Journal, for February 1812. The information which 
it contains I had immediately from my uncle, and father-in- 
law, Samuel Merriman, M. D., who lived in Queen street, 
Berkeley square, opposite to the house in which Mr. Hamey 
Palmer resided ; he was in the habit of attending the family 
professionally, and had seen and read many of the Latin 
letters alluded to. I gave the ‘scrap’ to my colleague 
Dr. Fothergill, who was then the Editor of the ‘ Medical and 
Physical Journal,’ hoping it might elicit some further informa- 
tion, but nothing arose. 


* | remain, dear Sir, yours truly, 


* SAMUEL MERRIMAN." 


EXTRACT. / 


* * Sydenham's knowledge of the Latin language. 

* * [t was the custom among Physicians, at the beginning of 
the seventeenth century, to correspond with each other in 
Latin. ‘The late Hamey Palmer, Esq., of Queen street, 
Berkeley square, was possessed of a large collection of Latin 
Letters, addressed to his maternal grandfather, Dr. Hamey, 


324 APPENDIX B. 


by the most eminent physicians, his cotemporaries. Among 
these were several, in very elegant Latinity, by the celebrated 
Sydenham,—an irrefragable proof of his competency to write 
in that language, which"some writers have much questioned. 

“It is to be feared that these Letters are irrecoverably lost. 
What a prize they would prove to a modern collector ! 

“ Since I wrote the letter over leaf, and copied the notice on 
the opposite page, I have referred to Wadd’s * Mems, Maxims, 
and Memoirs, 1827, where some account is given of Baldwyn 
Hamey, M.D., and I there found a MS. note, dated Dec. 16, 
1827, which I had forgotten. I copy this MS. note. 


* * Dr, Merriman, senior, used to attend Mr. Palmer's family, 
who lived in Queen street, Berkeley square, opposite Dr. M.’s. 
When the family left town the house was left in the care of 
some attendant, and Dr. M. was asked to occasionally see 
that proper care was taken of it. On several of these occasions 
his attention was given to a large cask, full of letters, many of 
which were notes between Dr. Hamey and other physicians of 
that period, among which were several, written, as Dr. M. said, 
in very elegant Latin by Sydenham, whose critical. know- 
ledge of that language has been questioned. My uncle told 
me that he had often thought of asking’ Mr. Palmer for these 
medical notes and letters, but his natural diffidence prevented 
it. S. M., Dec. 16, 1827. 


* My uncle died in August 1818, in the 87th year of his age. 


“JT remain, dear Sir, yours faithfully, 


* SAMUEL MERRIMAN." 


APPENDIX C. 


Soon after the publication of the Latin text of Sydenham, 
the researches of Dr. Greenhill, discovered amongst the MSS. 
of the Bodleian, bequeathed to the University of Oxford by 
Dr. Richard Rawlinson, the following “Extracts of Sydenham (s) 
Physick Books, and some good letters on Various Subjects.” 

This title, taken along with the internal evidence, satisfied 
Dr. Greenhill that not only did the writer truly profess to have 
been acquainted with Sydenham, but that he had written the 
notes partly from his (Sydenham’s) dictation, in the years 
1682-83, and partly from some of his MSS., which last were 
chiefly written in 1670. These notes he afterwards appears to 
have revised and written out correctly, some time between 
1670 and 1692. 

With his usual courtesy and liberality, Dr. Greenhill, who 
had lost no time after the discovery in giving the results to the 
public, has placed the text of his second edition at the disposal 
of the Society, an edition of which the text was, a second time, 
carefully collated throughout with the original MS. This re- 
moved some errors, which were, however, as might be expected 
from the well-known accuracy of the Editor, both few and 
unimportant. 

From the present reprint, the text of Dr. Greenhill differs 
only in retaining the somewhat archaic spelling, and the ab- 
breviations of the seventeenth century. These, necessary for 
a publication which partakes of the nature of a fac-simile, are 
considered as superfluous in the present volume. Hence the 
orthography is that of the present time, and the formule are 
given in a less abbreviated form than in the original text. 

Notes A and B show that two out of the first three chapters 
of the Anecdota are partially the same with portions of the MS. 
of the College of Physicians. —(See Life, p. li.) 


326 APPENDIX C. 


DE PHTHISI,! 1683. 


To this disease are most incident either men or women from 
puberty to the state of life, i.e. from fifteen to twenty-five ; 
after which the diseases which resemble consumptions are the 
effects of some other causes than those which produce these. 
By a peculiar infelicity of our air, none are more subject to it 
than the inhabitants of this country, and especially of London. 
The kinds of phthises differ altogether in their causes, and 
consequently require likewise different cures. 

The first, and most common sort of phthisis, is that which 
is laid in a cough taken in the winter season: for a little before 
the winter solstice, upon the first approach of some bitter cold, 
almost everybody coughs, viz. the transpiration being suddenly 
checked, and a plaga being inflicted upon Nature, it is no 
longer able to keep within compass those crude, and, as it were, 
winter particles (which were laid up in the blood from con- 
formity to that season), but discharges them on the lungs, 
either immediately by the branches of the vena arteriosa, or 
first by the arteries upon the spongy parts and glandules that 
constitute the fauces, and thence into the aspera arteria, and 
so into the lungs. Some by ill management, or having weak 
lungs, keep these coughs so long, that their lungs at length are 
much debilitated by the innumerable successions that are con- 
tinually made in the act of coughing; and so are rendered 
unfit to assimilate the blood that is brought to them for their 
nourishment, which therefore 1s laid up, and constitutes the 
greatest part of the matter which is expectorated by cough; 
besides that, in this case other indigested humours from other 
parts are sent into the lungs, as being the weakest part. Nor 
is this all the mischief, that the lungs are not able to digest 
their own nourishment by reason of their being thus weakened ; 
but hence also proceeds, in process of time, that extravasated 


! Compare Sydenham's Processus Integri, cap. Ix.—[G.] 


DE PHTHISI. 327 


matter is collected up and down in the vesicule of the lungs, 
which at length hath little bags or cystides growing about it, 
the matter contained in them turning by degrees into pus. 
Nor is it only usual in this case, but in other cases also, where 
there is any extravasation of a juice or humour long residing 
upon a part: as we see such bags are formed by Nature after 
long jaundice and dropsies; for Nature seeks to preserve the 
parts from the injury of the matter so long as it can. The 
lungs being thus repleted with pus, from them flow purulent 
streams into the blood, which cause a sort of putrid fever, whose 
access is towards night, and its solution towards the morning 
by a profuse and weakening sweat. Lastly, towards the com- 
pleting of this tragedy, comes on a diarrhoea colliquativa, which 
arises partly from the putrid matter discharged on the bowels 
by the mesaraic arteries, and partly from the tone of the bowels 
being lost and destroyed, and then death is at hand. When 
this cough hath continued long, then the patient begins to 
sweat at night, which is the first sign of a consumption coming 
on; and after this he begins to have a hectical heat, which 
withers his body, and leaves on his face, especially his cheeks, 
a light redness, and presently after he begins to spit up yellow 
matter, like pus, but not it. And when the mischief shall have 
so far advanced, that both nocturnal sweatings and the diarrhoea 
colliquativa meet together, the disease 1s consummate, and death 
at hand, though the patient all this while hath a serenity of 
mind, and flatters himself with an opinion of recovery, which 
is usual in this disease, even to the very last, as those who die 
upon the coming out of tokens in the plague. The frequency 
of consumptions in London is for that we live here in a per- 
petual mist, the sun not being powerful enough to dissipate the 
clouds: and with this mist are mixed the fumes that arise from 
the several trades managed here, but especially the sulphur and 
fumes of sea-coals with which the air is repleted, and these, 
being sucked into our lungs, and insinuating into the blood 


328 APPENDIX C. 


itself, give an occasion to a cough. What may be in coals 
which may contribute towards a consumption I know not, but 
sure I am, because I see it and smell it, that there is a good 
store of sulphur in them; which let them look to who extol 
sulphureal medicaments so much for the cure of consumptions : 
and in Newcastle (as I am credibly informed) there are more 
consumptions, in proportion to its inhabitants, than are almost 
any where else to be found. However it be, we see that people, 
upon the winter’s coming on, returning out of the country 
into London presently fall a coughing, and these coughs 
do as easily vanish the first day’s journey after they leave 
London. 

The second sort of consumptions is laid in a quite contrary 
season, viz. in the beginning of the summer ; for about that 
time a spitting of blood happens often to such young men whose 
blood is weak, but hot and sharp, after violent exercise or a 
debauch of drinking. ‘The patient feels a sense of heat, and 
soreness on his lungs, and if the vessel that is broken be not 
speedily consolidated, there breeds first a furredness, and after- 
wards an ulcer on the orifice of that vessel, from whence issues 
out true pus, and daily more and more, according as the ulcer 
increases. The symptoms are the same with those of the first 
kind; and this sort of phthisis also often kills not till many 
years after. 

A third sort of phthisis happens in the end of a fever, when 
the febrile matter is discharged upon the lungs, and so in the 
place of the essential fever there succeeds a hectic, according 
as the cough come on, from the discharge of the febrile matter 
upon the lungs, and, not long after, a diarrhcea lethalis: for 
they soon die of this sort of phthisis, because their blood is 
already weakened by the precedent fever. Nota, quod non 
solum. febres jam finientes tabem inferant, sed etiam sspe 
accidit ut febris, vel ab initio ac quamprimüm invadit, materiam 
in pulmones deturbet: quod crebro contingit juvenibus robustis, 


DE PHTHISI. 329 


ac sanguineo temperamento preeditis, cum ob incuriam adhuc 
calidi procubuerint humi, vel ex tenui nimis vestitu frigus cap- 
taverint. Nam in hoc casu tussis et alia symptomata ingruunt 
ipso fere momento quo febris invadit. Consumptions are also 
laid in children after measles and chin-coughs. 

These are the most common sort of phthises ; other phthises 
are the effects of other diseases, as of a pleurisy when it turns 
into an empyema, from the omissions of repeated evacuations 
by bleeding; or are the effects of coughs in children, and 
especially of those coughs which come on after long agues. 

There is also a sort of phthisis which comes on after long 
and repeated evacuations by salivation, sweating, purging, or 
the long and continued running of fistulas in any part of the 
body, or by a thin diet ; for these debilitate the blood, whence 
it cannot assimilate its nutriment, and consequently these par- 
ticles are burthensome to the mass of the blood, and thence 
arises a hectical fever, especially after meat; and sweats at 
night to discharge those unassimilable juices; and a cough from 
the discharge of them upon the lungs, and sometimes a 
diarrhea, and then the cough lessens according as the 
diarrhoea increases. In this sort of phthisis (above all others) 
happen the aphthe, though in all other sorts lhkewise, when 
they are come to a high degree, the aphthe and pain of the 
throat come on. 

Though all these several species of consumptions agree in 
some common symptoms, as a cough, a hectic fever, wasting of 
the flesh, prostration of appetite, nocturnal sweatings, pain of 
the throat, diarhoea, &c.; yet, forasmuch as they proceed from 
several causes, the curative indications must be directed to the 
obviating such causes, and herein no time must be lost, in 
regard that the beginning only of this disease is to be cured 
with ease; but when it is consummate, it is either with diffi- 
culty or not at all cured. As to the first sort of phthisis, the 
true and genuine indication is to be directed to the evacuating 


330 APPENDIX C. 


and subducting out of the blood those moist and rare particles 
with which it is surcharged ; for which intention I take blood off 
the arm to eight ounces or less, according to the age and temper 
of the patient. The next day I give the common lenient potion, 
repeating two continued mornings, and on the evening after the 
third purge, I give the patient syrup. de meconio &j 1n aq. lactis, 
or in dec. pectorali. Then pectoral remedies may be brought 
into use, but before this, though they may be used, yet no stress 
can be put upon them for a cure; for they have only a respect 
to the obviating the symptoms, but not the cause of the disease, 
viz. either to incrassate when the phlegm is so thin that it does 
eludere vim facultatis expultricis, or to attenuate the same when 
it is so thick that it cannot be expectorated. And I fear that 
the too long insisting upon pectorals only, without using eva- 
cuations at the beginning, hath been the loss of an infinite 
number, who might easily have been delivered of the disease 
(especially in the beginning), if the evacuations above mentioned 
had been timely and with despatch made; but so much time 
hath been spent in the insignificant use of pectorals, till at 
length the patient’s lungs are so weakened by the frequent 
succussions of the cough, that both these unnatural cystides or 
bags have been made, and the economy of the lungs totally 
subverted. For this cause I judge it necessary, as soon as the 
evacuations are over, immediately to buckle to the stopping of 
the cough, to prevent the too much weakening of the lungs, 
and I have not found anything that works more powerfully 
and kindly for that intent than syrup. de meconio. Y commonly 
use this formula : 


IK Dec. pector., lb.j; 
Syr. capill. Ven., 
— de mecon., aa Zij. 
M. et capiat eger cochl. j' ter in die. 


This so taken will lay so strong a bridle upon the defluxion 


! The printed edd. have cochi. v., which is probably correct.—[G.] 


DE PHTHISI. 331 


causing the cough, that the lungs will have opportunity, by 
their rest, to recover their strength in a few days (provided 
they are not weakened too much and beyond measure), and 
consequently to bring the matter already contained in them to 
a laudable concoction. Here is to be remarked, that in putting 
the stress of the cure upon diacodium three conditions are to 
be required. First, that a competent, at least, if not a sufficient 
gumber of universal evacuations have been first made. Second, 
that the blood be not so perfectly weakened, as it cannot keep 
what it hath gotten by the use of diacodium without constant 
repetition. Third, that there be no difficulty of breathing. 
By the above-mentioned method I have cured many, but if it 
hath failed at any time, I have not known that long and per- 
sisting riding in a good air (which refreshes both the lungs and 
the blood detained with hectical heat) hath ever failed, and 
though riding hath done well in hypochondrial and other dis- 
tempers, yet it does better in a phthisis than in any other case, 
for by such repeated succussions of the lower belly (in which 
are seated most of the separatory glandular organs) those 
are put upon the performing their several functions by having 
their natural heat excited, and the blood is by this means 
depurated, and (asit were) churned over anew. In his Journies 
he need observe no diet, but may eat and drink what best agrees 
with his appetite, only let him take care that the linen 1n which 
he lies be dry, for the dampness of it will quickly bring back 
all the mischief. In those who have been cured of a phthisis 
in this way, I have known more than once a great tumour, re- 
sembling the scrofula, to bappen in their neck when they have 
been recovered, which sometimes hath come to suppuration, and 
voided a great quantity of purulent matter, which tumour 
(I suppose) hath proceeded from some vicious particles in the 
blood which Nature could not totally master, but hath been, by 
the exercise of riding, enabled to discharge it upon this part, 
as most fit to receive it. I am sure that if any physician had 


332 APPENDIX C. 


a remedy for the curing of a phthisis of equal force with this 
of riding, he might easily get what wealth he pleased: in a 
word, I have put very many upon this exercise, in order to the 
cure of consumptions, and I can truly say I have missed the 
cure of very few; insomuch that I think how fatal soever this 
disease be above all others, and how common soever (for almost 
two thirds that die of chronical diseases die of a phthisis), yet 
it is this way more certainly cured than most diseases of less 
moment: provided always, that this travelling be long persisted 
in, according to the age of the patient and length of the disease. 
For a man, that is more ancient, and hath had the disease a 
great while, cannot expect to be cured so soon as he that is 
young, and hath had it a little while. And provided also, that 
besides his persisting in riding he go into new places; for the 
change of air and diet do as considerably add to the cure as the 
exercise itself And I doubt not but those, who travel into 
foreign parts to be cured of a phthisis, might save their labour 
and yet obtain their end, if they would ride a great way, and 
through several places of their own country. Women, or very 
weak men, that cannot ride on horseback, may ride in a coach, 
and yet attain the same end, as I have seen by often expe- 
rience. 

Examining deeply as I am able, both from the phenomena 
before delivered and from whatever I have observed, I find the 
whole business to be thus: viz. from the causes before men- 
tioned, whether natural or accidental, the mass of the blood is 
wholly corrupted, as it appears to the very eye in bloodletting. 
Whether this corruption hath been promoted by some original 
fault in the lungs, whilst purulent streams have been turned 
in upon the blood, either from an ulcer in them, or from the 
preternatural cystides replenished with pus; or whether it hath 
proceeded originally from the weakness of the blood, either 
native or occasioned by some of the causes before mentioned ; 
the curative indications are to be directed to this one single 


DE PHTHISI. 333 


point, to vindicate the blood from putrefaction, and to recover it 
(if it be possible) from that corruption into which it hath passed. 
But forasmuch as every degree of a consumption doth not infer 
a total corruption of the mass of blood, at which it doth not 
arrive but by degrees, the causes tending to the same are care- 
fully to be obviated; nam hic si ullibi 


** /Rgriüs ejicitur quam non admittitur hospes." 


Phthisis juniores, prz reliquis, adoritur qui rariori corporis 
textura, et pulmonibus imbecillibus prediti sunt: eger tussi, 
ut plurimum, vexatur; precipue vero sub Aurore ingressum ; 
et calorem in pectore sentit cum teneritudine quadam et levi 
doloris sensu. Illa est prima cujuslibet hyemis pars in qua 
primo ingruit frigus admodum intensum; quod nunc citius 
nunc serius accidit, sed, ut plurimum, paulo ante solstitium 
hyemale: et hoc tempore (precipue si frigus dictum exceperit 
hyemem paulo mitiorem), pori quasi abrupte constipantur; 
atque adeo vel per venam arteriosam in pulmones affatim 
exantlantur humiditates, vel per ductus salivales in eosdem 
dilabuntur, cum vesicule pulmonum inferciuntur pure, ut in 
cadaveribus cernere est. — Exinde emittuntur miasmata putrida 
in sanguinem. Nota, eos quos hic affectus hyeme primu invadit 
non mori nisi sub initium estatis sequentis . . . . Cetera 
desunt ... . Quia vero in supradictis deest cura phthiseos 
post febrem, et phthiseos ab hsemoptose; ideo lubet hic sub- 
nectere quedam ad hane rem attinentia que excerpta sunt 
fideliter ex Ore D.D. Sydenhami annis 1682 et 3. 

Phthiseos triplex est origo. Prima ejus species oritur a febre 
male curata, cum materia morbifica in pulmones, ipsius incursui 
obsistere non valentes, transferatur; unde mox suboritur tussis 
et dein reliqua in ordine symptomata multiplicia. Hec species 
curatur veneesectione in minore copia facta, et purgatione leni- 
tiva szepius repetita ; et item medicamentes digestivis, dicta con- 


334 APPENDIX C. 


veniente et remediis bechicis. Mr. Lawrence,’ Dr. Sydenham’s 
nephew, after a fever fell into a cough, and other signs of an 
incipient phthisis (the morbific matter being violently translated 
in upon his lungs), and at length the diarrhcea colliquativa came 
on ; then the Dr. sent him into the country on horseback (though 
he was so weak that he could hardly walk), and ordered him 
to ride six or seven miles the first day (which he did), and to 
increase daily his journey as he should be able, until he had 
rid 150 miles: when he had travelled half that way his diarrhoea 
stopped, and at last he came to the end of his journey, and was 
pretty well (at least somewhat better), and had a good appetite ; 
but when he had staid at his sister’s house some four or five 
days his diarrhoea came on again; the Dr. had ordered him 
not to stay above two days at most, for if they stay before they 
are recovered this spoils all again; and therefore he betook 
himself to his riding again, and in four days came up to London 
perfectly cured. The same course hath the Dr. put others 
upon, especially in pulmonic diseases, and with the like success, 
when all things eise had failed him; and he was not ashamed 
to own that he was fain to borrow a cure from this way now 
and then, when he found himself puzzled with some lingering 
distemper not reducible to a common and known disease. 
Secunda species phthiseos oritur a suscepto frigore tempore 
autumnali vel presertim hyemali, cum tusses maxime grassantur; 
et in hoc casu materia per diapnoen eliminanda in pulmones 
dilabitur: hsec species curatur V.S., purg. repet., et remed. 
pector. et deriv., ut fontanellis, et id genus alus. "Tertia 
species phthiseos oritur a ruptura seu apertione vasis sanguiferi 
in pulmonibus, quacunque de causa id fiat: et hoc sepius con- 
tingit juvenibus athleticis, et plethoricis, idque precipue verno 
tempore cum sanguis novum statum affectat, atque adeo ultra 
modum fermentescit, ebullitque. — Hec species curatur V.S. et 


! A case very similar to this is related by Sydenham in his Dissert. Epist., 
$ 117.—[G.] 


DE PHTHISI. 335 


catharsi repetitis; nam ad tertiam hanc speciem seu hemoptoen 
nihil valet nisi V.S. et purgatio successive celebrentur: viz. 
primo fiat V.S., et dein per unum diem aut biduum purgetur 
deger potione lenitiva, et die prox. iteretur V.S. (si res postulet), 
et diebus seq. repetatur purg., vel ad 20 vices si vires ferant 
aut non prius convaluerit eger; et singulis noctibus post purg. 
peractam capiat syr. de meconio 3j; interim sedulo observet 
dietam refrigerantem et incrassantem, vitando liquores calidos 
et spirituosos, et exercitia vehementiora. Post purgationes 
finitas capiat omnino incrassantia pectoralia. 


Ix Cons. ros. rubr., 2ij; 
Spec. diatragac. frig., Ziss ; 
Sem. papav. alb., 5j ; 
Sacc. penid., Zss ; 
Syr. papav. rh., s. q. 
Ut f. eclegma, de quo capiat quant. nuc. mosch. ter in die super- 
bibendo Ziv hujus decoct. 


EK Santal. rubr., Zss; 
Fol. tussilag., t1) ; 
Fl. ros. rubr., mss; 
Dactyl., n? vi; 
fict pig, nx; 
Rad. glycyrrh., 5ij. 
Coq. in aq. font lb.ij ad lb.jss, et in colat. dissolve syr. de 
meconio, Ziv aut vj. Nota vero diacodij dosin debere augeri, 
praesertim hora somni sing. noctibus. 


In phthiseos curatione primi generis predicti continget 
interdum ut (post evacuationes per V.S. et purgationes necessario 
celebrandas) egri vires eousque prosternantur, ut sub usu 
diacodii subsecuturo Natura se recolligere nequeat; quo in 
casu dizta analeptica cum modico vini omnino indulgenda est : 
sed tamen in tali copia ut ventriculus et sanguis ipsi conco- 
quends pares sint. Alla absinthites est etiam eximii usus in 
hoc imbecillitatis statu: et haud dubie multum valebit cerevisia 
medicata ex rad. lapathi, enule, chine, guai., sassafr., santal. 
&c. Experiri possis quid valeat crocus in magna dosi exhibitus. 


336 APPENDIX C. 


DE PAROXYSMO NEPHRITICO.! 


Tuts” disease observes no time of the year nor age of persons, 
though it invades most commonly men that are past their 
prime, who drink wine, especially those wines which are most 
attenuating, as French or Rhenish: as likewise those who, 
having used a sedentary life, do suddenly engage upon hard 
riding. They feel first of all a pain in one or both kidneys, 
upon which they fall into a great and troublesome vomiting 
attended with very great sickness; after some time the pain 
extends itself down the side of the belly towards the os 
pubis, following the ductus of the ureter belonging to the 
affected kidney in the whole length thereof, and sometimes 
fixes upon and remains in one small part of it. During this 
time the patient is very often troubled with the stoppage of his 
urine: but sometimes he is free therefrom till after the 
nephritical pain be gone; at what time upon a sudden his 
water totally stops until such time as he voids a stone. How 
great soever the pain is, and how alarming soever either : 
to the patient or bystanders the sickness, yet it very seldom 
kills or runs out into any great diuturnity provided fitting 
remedies are applied thereto. That which occasions these 
symptoms is oftentimes some gravel or stone grating upon the 
pelvis or ureter; and wherever it sticks, either at the top, 
middle or insertion of the ureter into the bladder, there it 
causes acute pains; and the bigger it is and the sharper and 
raggeder its corners are, the greater still is the pain, and the 
longer and more difficult is its passage through the ureter. 
Sometimes the stone being removed out of its place it grew in 
the kidney and lying upon the top of the ureter, after it hath 
for some time caused pain and stoppage of urine on that side, 
returns again into the place it was conveniently lodged in 


! Compare Processus Integri, cap. xx.—[G.] 
? See Note A. 


DE PAROXYSMO NEPHRITICO. 337 


before ; and there remains a long time without giving any more 
trouble or doing any harm, except it be a little sense of 
heaviness and heat about the affected kidney. But I conceive 
that a nephritical fit is not always occasioned by a stone in 
these parts, and much less by gravel: but sometimes by an 
inflammation only of the kidney, wherein the kidney, ureter 
and perhaps the bladder also (in consent with the other) may 
suffer the same effects as if a stone in the kidney had produced 
them ; which I am the rather induced to believe because I have 
observed these fits to go off frequently without voiding a stone, 
or the least appearance of any gravel coming from them: all 
the symptoms of the stone in the kidney have nevertheless 
attended the same. Which is evident farther in some 
hysterical fits, which, when seizing upon the kidneys, are 
followed with the whole train of symptoms accompanying a 
nephritical fit; and do by the similitude they have with the 
same impose even upon wary physicians; and furthermore are 
not to be cured by any other medicines than such as are 
suitable to the allaying fits of the mother: but to these duly 
administered they easily yield. (Vide Op. Syd. i, 227; 
ii, 1271.) And this argument also is of some moment, 
that the blood taken in this distemper is often found to be 
such as is taken in pleurisies and other distempers proceeding 
purely from inflammation. 

Till it shall please God Almighty to discover a remedy to 
dissolve the stone, the curative indications are to be directed 
first to the relaxing and mollifying those parts through which 
the stone is to have its passage; and in the next place to the 
allaying the inflammation, which is either the attendant, or 
sometimes (as hath been said) the cause of the pain; and 
lastly, to the promoting the expulsion of the stone. This there- 
fore I do. 

1 Viz. in ed. 1685, answering to Observ. Med., iv, 7, § 18; Dissert. Epist., § 67, 


pp. 201, 366, in ed, 1844.—[G.] 
i, 2 


338 APPENDIX C. 


First of all I let blood to 3 x, plus minus pro ratione virium 
et aliarum circumstantiarum. Then I give this clyster : 


KR Rad. alth., 
— lil. alb., aa 2j; 
Fol. malv., 
—- parietar., 
Branc. ursin., 
Verbasc., aa mJ; 
Fl. cham., 
—- melil., aa Pj; 
Sem. lini, 
— foenugr., aa $ss. 
Coq. in sufficienti q. aq., et in colat. dissolve— 
Sacc. culinar., 
Syr. dialth., aa Ziij. 
Misce. Fiat enema. 


After the voiding of this clyster I give the following : 


Ix OL Lilior., 
Chameem., aa lb. 8s; 
Ol. Rut., 3ij ; 
— scorp. Matth., 3). 
Misce. 


and so these two clysters I order to be alternately put up 
twice a piece, the one immediately after the rejection of the 
other. At the same time I order this ointment : 
Re Ol. amygd. dulc., 

Lil. albor., 

Ung. dialth., aa 3); 

Ol. scorp. Matth., Zss. 

M. et inung. partes dolentes mané et sero. 

When the clysters have done working, and the passages 
thereby sufficiently mollified, I attempt the expelling of the 
stone by ordering him to drink very large quantities of posset- 
drink, even to a gallon or two, in which also may be boiled 
some rad. alth., which liquor taken in so great a quantity not 
only distends and opens the passages ; but likewise by causing 
great retching to vomit, and thereby straining all the parts of 
the body, contributes much to the expelling the stone or the 
gravel, which also is propelled by the force of the liquor coming 


DE PAROXYSMO NEPHRITICO, 339 


in so great a quantity to the bladder. The next day (provided 
the symptoms still continue) I again let him blood in as large 
a quantity as the patient's strength will bear, which also I 
repeat once, nay twice more, if the severity of his pain and the 
continuance thereof require it, as for the most part it will, 
where the blood that is taken appears to be like that in pleu- 
risies, resembling on the top the colour of pus, or rather of 
lanthorn’s horn ; and a coat of the thickness of a crown-piece, 
and of a very tough consistence, may (when the blood is cold) 
be separated from the rest. Likewise the clysters before 
mentioned, whilst the pain lasts, though not so many as the 
first day. 

During all this time I order ol. amygd. dulce. recens to be 
frequently taken either alone or mixed with syr. alth. comp., 
and very strictly forbid the drinking of wine, ale, beer, or any 
other fermented liquor; instead whereof I order barley water, 
either alone, or cum rad. liquir. et alth. incoctis for his constant 
drink. And I enjoin him to keep to a fleshless diet and 
barley-broth, water-gruel, panado, &c. Likewise I order this 


emulsion : 
Ix Rad. ering. candefact., 2i) ; 
Amygd. dulc., n? vj; 


Sem. melon., 
— papa. alb., 
— pepon., 
— lact., aa 3ij; 
Aq. hord., lb. jss ; 
Saccar., 3]. 
Coletur et leniter coquatur, et f. emulsio; cujus Ziv capiat alternis 


horis. 


Also toward the forcing of the stone (after that the passages 
are sufficiently mollified by clysters and other things pre- 
scribed) I do now and then give this: 
Ix Aq. parietar., Ziv; 
Sp. salis gutt., xij ; 
Sal. prun., 3iss ; 
Syr. alth. comp., 3). 


Misce. 


340 APPENDIX C. 


Vel-— 
Ag. pariet., 
Vini Rhen., 
Alle tenuis, aa lb. ss. 
Affundanter Zij rad. petrosel. Contunde in mortar., et colat. 
adde— 
Syr. de 5 rad., 
Ol. amygd. dule., aa Ziss. 
M. f. haustus, quem capiat semel in die post clyster. operat. 
completam. 


Sometimes notwithstanding the use of these remedies, I am 
forced to use the following bath, especially when a stone is 
come down from the kidneys and stops in the bladder : 


Kk Rad. alth., Ib.j; 
Rad. symphyt., lb. ss ; 
Fol. verbasc., 
— malv., 
— alth., aa mvj; 
Sem. lini parum contus., 3ij. 

Incidantur et includantur sacculis duobus transversim intersertis, 
et incoquatur sacculi cong. 6 aq. ad consumptionem unius, 
addeudo sub finem lactis recentis cong. ij, et fiat semicup. 
quod ingrediatur zger, et unus sacculus sit loco pulvinaris in 
balnei insessu. 


When the pains and all other symptoms are perfectly gone, I 
order some lenient purge: but to purge the patient sooner, nay 
even to mix the least purgative ingredients with his clysters, 
do much harm, by irritating the parts already vexed with the 
disease, and causing in them and the humours a high tumult; 
besides that the purge (though very strong) given in the 
height of this disease will hardly work, or if [it] doth, increase 
the pain. 

Now although this disease managed as hath been said 
is wont to go off for the most part in three or four days, 
yet I think fit to intimate that-I have often cured it in a 
nearer and more easy way, viz. by the use of Northall, 


1 At Northaw (or North Hall), near Barnet in Hertfordshire, “is a fine saline 
spring, formerly much resorted to, but now almost neglected.” (Lewis’s Topograph. 
Dict. of England.)—[G. ] 


DE PAROXYSMO NEPHRITICO. 341 


Barnet, or Lusom? waters, enjoining the patient to drink 
three quarts in a morning for several days together, cold if in 
summer, and warm if winter, upon the taking of which the 
first time great ease ensued, and upon the persisting in the use 
of them for a longer time, a perfect cessation of all other 
symptoms, without the observation of any diet, regimen, or any 
more ado whatsoever; yet it being for the benefit of the whole, 
those that are wise and honest will hold me excused. Hee 
scripta sunt sub finem anni domini 1670. Ex altero MS. 
D. D. Syd. magis nupero. 

The nephritical pain is caused by some stone or gravel 
gotten out into the pelvis of the kidney, and by grating upon 
the membranes causing pain both upon the part and along the 
ductus of the ureter, and likewise enormous vomitings by the 
affinity there is between the stomach and the kidneys by the 
nerves. That which occasions the generation of calculous 
matter in the kidneys seems to be some choke or obstruction 
either in the emulgent vessels or in the parenchyma of the 
kidneys; whereby the blood in those parts being pent up, and 
wanting its due circulation, does administer occasion to the 
adustion which perhaps is the constituent cause of the stone. 
Therefore in the cure the indication must be directed to the 
delivering those parts from the antecedent obstruction, by 


! On Barnet-common, in Hertfordshire, a spring of mineral water was discovered 
about the year 1652, for the due care of which Alderman Owen in 1677 left one 
pound per annum. (Carlisle's Topograph. Dict. of England; Lewis's Topograph. 
Dict.—[G.] 

? Sydenham, which formerly consisted only of a few scattered dwellings in the 
parish of Lewisham (or Lusom), in Kent, was first brought into notice by the dis- 
covery in 1640 of a mineral spring, which, from its proximity to Dulwich, bears the 
name of * Dulwich Wells." The waters attracted for some time the notice of in- 
valids; but have now fallen almost into disuse. (Carlisle's Topograph. Dict. ; Lewis's 
Topograph. Dict.) 

The chemical composition of each of these waters, and their medicinal properties, 
are very similar; being purgative, and containing a calcareous Glauber salt, with a 
portion of sea salt. See Dr. Donald Monro's Treatise on Mineral Waters, vol. i, 
pp. 133, 138, 143; according to whom the Dulwich and Sydenham waters are not 
got from the same spring.—[G.] 


342 APPENDIX C. 


bleeding once or more according as the inflammation, or the 
continuance of the disease indicate ; and likewise to endeavour 
the same end by the frequent injection of emollient and 
discutient clysters two or three or more in a day. And if it 
does appear that there is a stone sticking in the ureter, it 
is convenient to give large quantities of posset drink with rad. 
alth. boiled therein, and likewise to give syr. alth. and ol. 
amygd. dulc. to make way for the coming down of the stone, 
to which the aforesaid clysters do also contribute. I have 
found that for diet nothing is more effectual than that 
of whey. 


EXCERFTA EX ORE SYD. 16838. 


Pro calculo renum sepe usus est D.D. Syd. sero lactis cum 
summo successu. viz. cong. j seri lactis exhibet ipsis ebibendum 
intra aliquot horas, et alterum cong. injicit per modum clys- 
teris: et hac methodo (sine suppetiis cujusvis alterius medi- 
camenti) varios curavit, et (quantum rescire potui) ne vel in 
uno fefellit. Interdum etiam modo sequenti procedebat. viz. 
primo injecit clyst. ex lact. vacc. pint. j, in qua dissoluta fuerat 


8 j theriac. androm., et post clysterem rejectum exhibebat dos. 
laud. liqu., et sic feliciter curabantur. 


DE APOPLEXIA.! 


To* this disease are apt men of fifty years and upwards, of 
full and gross habits of body, who have large heads and short 
necks, prominent belles, that drink much wine and live a 
sedentary life, especially if there hath been an interruption or 
suppression of any usual evacuations, such as a wonted 
hemorrhage of the nose, or the hemorrhoids, or a wonted 


! Compare Processus Integri, cap. xvii.—[G.] 
= See Note B. 


DE APOPLEXIA. 343 


periodical diarrhoea, or an ulcer that has been of long con- 
tinuance, or if there hath been the disuse of some long 
accustomed exercise.. It invades such persons at any time of 
the year; but especially between the winter solstice and vernal 
equinox, and the occasion of it is the having eat something 
that they cannot digest, or a high debauch, unwonted 
exercise, or any other thing that raises an unusual commo- 
tion in the blood. They fall down suddenly and are taken 
with a profound sleep joined with snorting; and they are 
deprived of all sense and voluntary motion, but their respiration 
is not much perverted: in the mean time their pulse is very 
good and full until they be near death. It comes upon them 
for the most part without any presention of it; but sometimes 
there is a presention of plenitude and straitness about the 
head, as if it were tied hard with a hgature; and hkewise 
a vertigo, which signs foretell an apoplexy to be near to 
such persons under the circumstances before described. 
Sometimes there is in the very fit a palsy of the one side of the 
body, which came on in the same moment with the apoplexy : 
but at other times this palsy succeeds to the apoplexy, and is 
a solution of it. Sometimes there is a resolution of the 
sphincter ani, so that clysters mjected do not stay, but are 
thrown out as fast as they are thrown in. 

This disease (I suppose) proceeds most ordinarily from a 
gross, thick, phlegmatic humour, which either obstructing the 
capillary arteries of the brain doth hinder the free access of 
the blood for the supply of animal spirits, or else being pro- 
truded out of the same arteries into the cortex of the brain, 
doth obstruct the passage of the animal spirits. Sometimes 
the apoplexy is caused by an extravasation of blood out of 
some of the capillary arteries, and an affusion thereof upon the 
brain, whereby the like obstruction of the animal spirits is pro- 
duced, whilst all the passages in the brain are stopped, partly 
by obstruction, and partly by pressure from the load of blood 


344 APPENDIX C. 


lying upon it; in the like manner as apoplexies are caused by 
contusions upon the brain by falls. This sort happens especially 
to ancient men, who are more than ordinarily sanguine, and is 
altogether deadly, there being no solution to be had of the 
morbific cause upon the nerves by a palsy, as in the phlegmatie 
sort. But besides all this, it must be supposed that the brain, 
weakened by age, doth contribute to the forementioned causes 
in bringing on the disease ; for the brain, being by age deprived 
of the firmitude and vegeteness which should resist the im- 
pression of the humours pressing in upon it, is not able, and 
is easily overwhelmed with the violence of such phlegmatic 
humours, and so the spirits are oppressed ; which is the reason 
why ancient men die apoplectic by drinking hot liquors to excess, 
whilst young men, committing the same intemperance, escape. 
But now the cause of such a proventus of phlegmatic humours 
(which by oppressing the brain bring on this mischief) is the 
weakness of the several digestions from the decay of natural 
heat, whereby too much humour is laid up in proportion to the 
economy of blood, which at length being out of the economy of 
Nature grows vicious, and thence is discharged upon this or 
that part which by reason of its weakness is more liable to 
receive it. This disease, of all others which attack mankind, 
is most deadly, as that which kills most of those that are taken 
with it; for whereas other diseases will admit of truce while 
proper remedies are attempted in order to their cure, this does, 
as it were, knock down dead at one blow, the scene wherein 
the tragedy is acted being the spring of life, and the principle 
of all sense and motion. And that which adds to the mortality 
of this disease as the continent cause thereof is very difficult to 
be removed by evacuating remedies, it lying so much out of the 
reach of them : and on the other hand, the patient cannot live 
till alterative medicines can perform their office. However, 
forasmuch as no danger can be so extreme wherein Nature will 
not suggest to us the attempting means to relieve ourselves, 


DE APOPLEXIA. 345 


and likewise in regard that sometimes by the use of means the 
life of the patient is retrieved, it is the office of a good physician 
to do what he can towards the cure. 

The curative indications are to be directed first to the 
evacuating the humour which oppressed the brain in the fit, 
and, secondly, after it is over, to the hindering the laying up 
a new proventus of humours in order to the preventing a re- 
lapse for the future. In the fit (forasmuch as nothing can be 
carried to the brain which can be the cause of this mischief 
but by the blood), therefore, the first thing that ought to be 
done is to take blood off the arm, and afterwards (if the patient 
begins not in some little time to wake out of his sleep) to take 
blood off the jugulars, which, as it derives immediately from 
the part, is of great use where bleeding at the arm hath not 
been effectual. But forasmuch as bleeding alone may not be 
effectual enough to remove the cause of this mischief, it is 
necessary to attempt remedies that evacuate by purging, which, 
though it does not immediately reach the morbific matter as 
bleeding, yet by emptying the humours of the blood into the 
bowels, it diverts the more plentiful recourse of humours to the 
brain; and, by turning the stream inward upon the bowels, 
doth much restrain their impetus upon that part which is the 
seat of this disease. Therefore, as soon as blood is taken, I use 
to give pil. coch. maj. 5}, dissolved in some spoonfuls of some 
distilled water with 51 syr. de spin. cerv., and in the mean 
time, before the purge work, I inject a sharp clyster, in which 
nothing is more prevalent than a spoonful or two of salt dis- 
solved in it. Now, forasmuch as a constant purgation continued 
is more effectual towards the turning the stream of the humours 
downwards, than to purge at certain periods of time, I have 
put in execution with great success a sort of circulatory purging, 
which I order thus: I take the common potion (without 
syr. de spina cerv., and putting 3 j cassiz instead of tamarinds), 
and of this I give two spoonfuls every fourth hour, beginning 


346 APPENDIX C. 


before the former eradicative purge hath quite done working ; 
and so the whole 3 iij of the potion is given in the space of a 
natural day: let the same potion be so reiterated from day to 
day, till the patient shall be out of his fit. By this course, a 
continual and uninterrupted purgation will be kept upon the 
wheel, and consequently the recourse of humours to the bowels 
constantly secured ; which the same medicine, or any other given 
altogether, will only do for the time it is working: and so in 
the interval before the next purge is given (all being quiet) the 
humours will have recourse again to the head, as before. Nor 
can a purge which v. g. taken at once gives twelve stools a day, 
give more in proportion than twelve, if it be given cochleatim 
at six times in twenty-four hours. If the blood that was taken 
from the arm be pleuritical, then the next day I take other 3 viij 
of blood from the arm. But now in case, upon inquiry made, 
it be found that the eating largely of something of hard diges- 
tion, which causes a surfeit, was the occasion of a fit, in this 
case, instead of the first purge of pil. coch. let à vomit of 
infus. croci metall. be given in somewhat a larger dose than 
ordinarily, as about 3 jss; for it is to be considered that the 
spirits being overwhelmed and oppressed, the ordinary dose of 
a medicine cannot exert its operation; which, for the same 
reason, is to be considered in giving a purge: but when the 
way has been made by the first purge that shall be somewhat 
stronger than ordinary, it will be an easy matter to keep on 
the operation with a lenient remedy, which in itself is more 
proper, as that which gives less tumult and heat in the opera- 
tion, and weakens less. Also towards the drawing from the 
head, a large blistering plaster applied to the neck may be 
profitable, and plasters ex pice Burgund. to the soles of the feet, 
for the same end. During all this time, great care must be 
had that the patient lie not so hot as that sweats be raised, in 
regard that those will be apt to divert the operation of the 
purges, upon which, next to bleeding, must be put the stress of 


DE APOPLEXIA. 347 


this cure. I do not see nor imagine what else can be done 
besides the forementioned things, except to apply to the patients 
nose now and then sp. salis armon. to smell to, and to anoint 
the nostrils now and then with a little ol. succini, and some- 
times to give him, for the keeping up of his spirits (provided 
he hath been a man given to the drinking of wine and strong 
liquors), a few spoonfuls of Rhenish wine, in which hath been 
infused cold sem. fl. tlie, and ll. convall., with a little sage. 
As to those hot apoplectic waters, spirits and balsams, which 
are usually given, instead of doing good they do much harm, 
for strong waters drunk do often bring on the apoplexy, as we 
see, and why, then, should we give the same thing to cure an 
apoplexy? And as I could never see any good effect by them, 
.80 my reason cannot suggest to me how they should do all that 
good that 1s expected from them ; for if they are given under 
the notion of things that are immediately specifical to the cure 
of the apoplexy (as the cortex Peruv. to the agues), I doubt it 
will be hard to produce such: but if we use them only as 
remedies that alter the morbific matter in the brain, the patient 
will be dead before such an alteration can be made. I doubt 
not but it may be proper to use remedies which comfort the 
brain, whereby it may be better able to resist the impressions 
made by the disease; but these ought to be very temperate, in 
regard that, if they are too hot they are apt to put the blood 
into too great a fusion, whereby the whole impetus of humours 
having a recourse to the brain, more matter may be thrown in 
upon it than before, and the apoplexy increased instead of being 
diminished: as we see some *ncient men put into an apoplexy 
upon this score by a debauch of wine, especially of strong 
waters. And I do not question but that many a man hath 
perished in a fit of an apoplexy who would have escaped if the 
physician’s great desire in so great an extremity to put relief, 
and the importunity of friends standing by to heap on remedies, 
had not caused the giving so many hot medicines. If it shall 


348 APPENDIX C. 


happen that the patient recover out of his fit, forasmuch as his 
body growing foul again through the weakness of his digestions 
(which I have said to be the original cause of this disease), he 
is very apt to fall back into the same disease, either shortly 
after he is recovered out of his former, or else at some time a 
great while after; which second fit is wont to prove more 
dangerous than the former. For this, great care must be had 
to hinder the proventus of such humours that cause the disease, 
both in the due evacuations and convenient diet. Therefore if 
a man be threatened with this great danger, either by having 
had this disease before, or else by his age and habit of body 
before described, together with an imprudent manner of living, 
he ought in the first place to bleed yearly, and that suddenly 
after the winter solstice (for it 1s dangerous to delay bleeding 
till the advance of the spring), and the next day let him take 
a lenient purge, repeating the same every third day, for three 
or four times. The reason why I would have bleeding precede 
purgation is, for that there would otherwise be danger that the 
purge given upon full veins should, upon the tumult it raises 
in its operation upon the blood and humours, hasten the mis- 
chief it was designed to prevent. These evacuations are not 
to be deferred to the advance of the spring (the same is to be 
said of the gout and other distempers, when the indigestion of 
the humours from the winter gives more advantage to the 
disease), because the humours that have been laid up this first 
winter quarter are apt erumpere in speciem, and to exert them- 
selves in this or that typed disease, long before the vernal 
equinox, which is properly the spring, which might have been 
prevented by such evacuations formerly made; besides which 
the turning of the sun doth sooner influence human bodies 
than plants; of which, nevertheless, several do by their early 
budding out declare the influence which the first turning of the 
sun hath upon bodies. Wherefore I judge, that in order to 
the absolute preventing of such diseases, the making of such 


DE APOPLEXIA. 349 


evacuations so soon after the winter solstice as that the course 
may be over by Christmas, is best ; and to defer it till the spring 
is to prevent that which in probability would not have happened 
after it had kept off so long. In order, likewise, to the pre- 
venting the return of this disease, the persons so inclined to it 
are to avoid the use of wine, or any strong liquors whatsoever, 
which, though at all times very hurtful to such persons, yet the 
ill effects they produce will be much increased by their drinking 
them in the morning: and for their diet it 1s necessary that 
they avoid multiplicity of dishes at the same meal, and forbear 
eating of flesh at supper. The reason why drinking of wine is 
so prejudicial to those that are inclinable to this and other 
diseases proceeding from indigestion, shall be delivered by me 
when I come to treat of the gout; and therefore in this place 
I shall content myself to say this, that if I held an estate upon 
the life of a man who is ancient, and of a gross habit of body, 
and not accustomed to constant exercise and labour, I would 
give the sum to him yearly to avoid altogether the drinking of 
wine and other strong liquors. But if a man hath used himself 
to them liberally all his life, it may not be fit for him totally 
to refrain them, but to drink them with moderation, and at 
his meals only ; yet if they can be totally forborne it is safest. 
Other things there are relating to the six res non-naturales, 
which are necessary to be observed ; as to go to bed early, and 
to use so much and so constant exercise as is consistent with 
the ability of an ancient man, v. g. walking, riding, &c. ; and 
nothing more contributes towards the due digestion of humours 
than to go to bed early, as nothing more contributes to the 
engendering them than sitting up late, or to sleep presently 
after meals. These things, if duly and exactly observed, 
especially as to the forbearing strong liquors, &c., wil prevent 
this disease, even without taking physic at the time before 
prescribed. But forasmuch as in such persons the concoctions 
are so much hurt, partly through age, and partly through former 


350 APPENDIX C. 


irregularities of life, it may be fit for them, especially in the 
winter, to take Venice treacle morning and evening, for several 
days together, and then, omitting awhile, to return afterwards 
to the taking it again; this will help the digestion of the 
humours. For preventing the apoplexy, it is likewise not amiss 
to put in two issues in the shoulders. 

But now it is to be considered that there are other 
symptoms nearly bordering upon an apoplexy, which yet are 
not true apoplexies but symptoms of fevers; such are those 
lethargies which happen in almost all sorts of fevers, of which 
we have seen various instances especially in the intermitting 
fevers of this present constitution.’ But in all those affects 
how nearly soever resembling an apoplexy, the evacuations 
before mentioned by bleeding and purging, will be so far from 
curing that they will kill; and therefore the method or medi- 
cine that is to be employed in the cure of the fever, is also 
to be employed in the cure of this spurious affect, and with the 
fever must it stand or fall (Vide Epist. Responsoriam, 
page 22.)? From another MS. of Dr. Sydenham, de Apoplexiá, 
written in the year 1670, I have excerpted these things as 
being somewhat different from what is above mentioned. To 
the causes above said may be added the ramifications of viscous 
coagulated matter in the arteries, which taking root in the 
heart, and growing like branches of coral in those vessels, do 
by degrees fill up the passage of the blood, and at last hinders 
its due and necessary afflux to the brain. Apoplexia a 
sanguine admits of no cure but by large bleeding in the very 
act of extravasation, if then, but is most certainly prevented 
by bleeding any little time before. The first time of the 
patient’s being attacked happens to be in the morning. In 
apoplexia a pituita V.S. is contra-indicated, and the indications 


! T, e. of the year 1678, &c. See Epist. Respons., i, $ 11, &c.—[G.] 
2 J, e. in ed. 1685, answering to Epist. Respons., i, § 34, pp. 288, 289; ed. 
1844.—[G.] 


DE APOPLEXIA. 351 


from evacuating the gross humour, to which purpose I take the 
following course: first I order a good strong clyster, viz. 


K Dec. comm. emoll., 
— carmin., aa lb. jss ; 
El. diaphoen. 3); 
Hieree picrze, 3ss ; 
Mell. anthos., 31); 
Sal. comun., 3iij. 
Misce. 
-Vel— Fol. salv., 
— origan., 
— rute, 
— calam., 
— cent. min., aa mJ; 
Fl. Stcechad., 
— lavend., aa mss; 
Sem. cartham, Zss ; 
Baccar. junip., 5iij ; 
Sem. fcenic., 
— carmin., aa 5ij. 
Agar. et pulp. colocynth. in eadem petia inclus., aa 3)ss, coq. in 
s. q. aq. ad Ib. jss; et add.— 
Diapheen., 3j; 
Hierz picre, $ss ; 
Bened. laxat., 5i] ; 


Pil. coeli, ST. 
Misce. 


If the clyster do not work (which may very often happen) 
then I give this suppository : 
IX Pulv. hierz picrz, 5ij ; 
Diagrid., Dij; 
Sal. gemm., 5j. 
Mel. anthos. ad debitam consist. coct. s. q. ut fiat suppos., quorum 
unum indatur. 


As soon as they have injected the clyster I give a purge. 


K Pil. coch. maj., 9ij; 
Pil. de agar., 9j; 
Troch. alkandal. [sic], 
Diagridii, 
Castor., aa gr. iij; 
et cum mel. anthos. fiat massa, qua dissolv. in aq.— 
Salv., Zijss ; 
Addendo syr. ros. cum agar., Zss. 
Misce et f. potio, qua ex cochleari infundatur in gulam. 


352 APPENDIX C. 


Vel— 
Ix Fol. senn., 3iij ; 

Agarici, 
Turbith., aa 5is$ ; 
Zinzib., 5ss. 

Coq. in s. q. aq. salv. ad Zijss; in quibus dissolv.— 
El. diacathol., 5ij ; 
Castor., 9ss; 
Oxymel. simpl., 3ss. 

Misce et fiat potio. 


When the purge is given (even before it work or whilst it is 
working,) I use revulsions of all sorts, as rubbing and binding 
the limbs, cucurbitule, scapulis, brachiis, and femoribus ; epis- 
pastics to the pole and shoulders: but amongst all things that 
awaken and recover them to their senses, the blowing tobacco 
into their mouths is of the greatest efficacy. The purging 
being over I endeavour to evacuate the head sensibly and 


insensibly. 
KR Rad. irid., 

Fol. anagallid., 
Betz, aa mij ; 
Fol. rutz, mJ; 
Castor., Dss; 

terantur in mortario affundendo sensim— 
Vini albi, Ziv; 
Aceti, 2ij; 

et exprimatur succus, cui adde 
Mel. Ros., iss. 

Misce et fiat errhin. naribus injiciendum bis aut ter cum syringa ; 

vel nicotianz fol. naribus immit. 
Vel— 
Ix Fol. major., 

— salv., 
— roris marin. sicc., àà $ss; 
Rad. Pyrethr., 
— helleb. albi, àà 9j; 
Castor., gr. vj. 

Pulverisentur et fiat sternutat. quod penná aut tubulo naribus 

insuffletur. 


But here it is to be cautioned that the use of sneezing medi- 
cines is very dangerous, where sufficient evacuations have not 
preceded, since by them the matter is driven more forcibly 


DE APOPLEXIA. 353 


upon the brain, To discuss the humour I order these following 
remedies : 
RK Bacc. laur., 
Junip., 2a Ziss ; 
Rad. angel., 
Zedoar., 
Imperat., àà £j; 
Fol. salv., 
— Roris marin., àà mj; 
— Rut, 
— Satur., 
— Major., 
Fl. lavend., aa mpss. 
Coq. s. q. aceti, et hoc dec. imbut. spongiz, linteum., aut stuphe 
applicenter capiti calide; et brachia quoq. ac manus eo abster- 
gantur, et crura ac pedes ipso fricentur. 


K Ol. castor., 
Euphorb., aa 2j; 
Pulv. sinap., 
Pulv. euphorb., aa 3) ; 
Aceti cochl., j; 
Cere, s. q. 
M. et f. ung. illinend. capiti calidé. 


The tongue, palate, and nostrils, I order to be rubbed with 
old theriac. dissolved in aq. coelest. or aq. antepil. Lang. Also 
the chemical oils of amber, lavend., rorism., cloves, &c., mixed 
with ol. nuc. mosch. expr., may be used for the same purpose. 
Aq. coelest. et aq. antepil may be given after general eva- 
cuations have been used before. If the fit be not removed by 
these remedies, the old remedy of a hot frying-pan held so 
close to the head that it may not burn the skin is very effectual, 
but still not to be attempted before evacuation. 

The fit ceasing I take great care to prevent the return 
thereof; for as to diet I enjoin a very spare one, and that 
too, drying: and I order the patient to forbear suppers and 
the use of wine totally, but yet some fermented liquor (if not 
strong) may be allowed them. Likewise I order this head- 
pill :— 

II. 23 


354 


APPENDIX C. 


K Pil. macr., 


Aloes ros., àà 3) 3 

Rudij, 38s; 

Ol. anis. chym., gutt. iv; 
Bals. Peruv., gutt. ij. 


M. et cap. 38s singulis matutinis per 6 dies; vel capiat pil. coch. 
maj. 9ij per totidem dies, 


And after that time I order him to take of either of the said 
pills the same quantity the day before every full moon for six 


times, 


Vel— 


'To comfort the stomach : 


kk Fl. salv., 


Rorism., aa 3); 

Zinzib. cond., 

Cort. citri cond., àà 5i); 

Nuc. mosch. cond., Zss; 
Myrobal. cond., n? j; 

Theriac. androm., 

Alcherm., àà 5iij ; 

Puly. diambr., 

Diamosch. dule., aa 2j; 

Syr. de condit. cort. citri, s. q. 


M. et cap. sing. matutinis q. nuc. moschatz aut castanesw, super- 
bibibendo aq. antepil. Lang. cochl. ij. 


EK Ambregrysize, 555; 


Ol. anis., 

Cinnam., 

Nuc. mosch., àa gutt. i) ; 

Ol. Caryophyll., gutt. j; 
Saccar. in aq. naph. solut., Ziv. 


M. et f. tab. quas capiat ad libitum. 


DE ABORTU. 355 


SEQUENTIA EXCERPTA SUNT EX ORE D.D. SYD. ANNIS 1682-8. 


DE ABORTU.' CAP. I. 


MvurriEREs que abortum pati consueverunt, certa quadam 
periodo ut plurimum abortiunt, et hujus affectus cura tota in 
preecautione versatur. Ideo quandocunque symptomata abor- 
tum minantia ingruunt, tunc ad precautionem V.S. imprimis 
celebranda; verum qusrendum est prius num egra naturalem 
aliquam antipathiam habeat ad V.S. et an ipsam jam 
abhorreat : 1n tali casu abstinendum est a V.S., alias enim post 
ipsam celebratam mox abortiet, Statim a V.S. propinatur 
Syr. de Mecon. ad 2j vel 2jss, qui repetatur hora somni si 
opus sit, et quotidie repetatur, ut hoc ipso freno coerceatur 
abortus. Applicari potest empl. astringens, et refriger. et 
corroborans lumbis, et prescribatur etiam elect. astring. et 
incrass. cujus basis sit cons. ros. rubr. vitriolat., addend. pulv. 
subtil. corall. rubr., bol. arm., mastich., ros. rubr., sem. papav. 
albi &c. Interdum abortiunt mulieres ratione imbecillitatis, 
quod facile dignosci potest, et a medico intelligi debet; et re 
sic se habente nihil z:eque proficuum est ac haustus liberalior 
vini clareti alicujus generosi exhibend. hora somni et mane, et 
inter prandendum. Interdum conqueruntur mulieres de posi- 
tione humili sive subsidentia foetus versus os uteri, quod est 
imbecillitatis signum et curatur etiam cum vino, uti jam 
dictum. Sed quandog. a contraria causa abortiunt, nempe a 
plethora et humorum plenitudine. Nota autem tales mulieres 
esse plethoricas ac robustas, et (quod sedulo ab ipsis quaerendum 
est) menstrua iis in magna copia profluere solere. Hic 
imprimis convenit V.S. cum diacodio &c. predictis. Apprimé 
etiam conveniet V.S. celebrare singulis mensibus usq. ad 6tum 
aut septimum ingravidationis mensem, idq. ante statum tempus 
quo menstrua ipsis fluere consueverunt. 


! Compare Processus Integri, cap. xxx.—[G. } 


Se) 
en 
c 


APPENDIX C. 


DE MANIA.! CAP. II. 


Dux sunt manix species, quarum prima (magis proprie sic 
dicta) oritur a principiis corporis nimis exaltatis, et hac specie 
seepius corripiuntur juvenes athletici: curatur autem V.S. semel, 
aut bis, vel (si eger admodum sanguineus fuerit) szepius repetita, 
et dein purgetur per 3 aut 4 dies, vel sepius pro re natá. Et 
» postea purgetur semel in septimana certo quodam die periodico, 
v. g. diebus lunz, idq. per 10 vel 12 septimanas, vel per 4 aut 
5 menses, Altera datur manize species que exinde oritur quod 
materia morbifica post morbum acutum fuerit in cerebrum 
translata: in ipsius cura respectus habendus est ad morbum 
primarium ; nam quod curabit febrem illud etiam seepe maniam 
curabit. Preemitti tamen possunt V.S. et purg. ut materia a 
capite derivetur, et inuratur etiam fontanella, &c. 

D. Lucy juvenis athleticus post febrem non bene curatam 
incidit tandem in maniam, pro qua omnibus fere remediis usus 
est sine ullo fructu, et laudani doses vel amplissime nihilum 
valebant, nam nec somnum nec quietem inducebant; tandem 
ab usu quotidiano fotus sequentis per aliquot hebdomadas suborta 
est salivatio, ita ut interdum spatio nycthemeri 1b j, salive ex- 
pueret, et salivatione perseverante ad septimanas aliquam-multas 
eger tandem rediit ad sanam mentem. Fotus erat hujusmodi. 

K Fol. major., 
— Beton., 
— Rorism., aa 188 ; 
— Ros. rubr., ij; 
Cinnam., 
Nuc. mosch., àà £j; | 
Sp. vini comm., 1b. iss. 

M. et f. s. a. tinctura cui add. aq. meliss. lb.ij, et ipsa foveatur 


caput tepide sing. noctibus, et hora somni bibet haustum 
liquoris possetici impreegn. rore marino. 


! Com are Processus Integri, cap. li.—[G.] 


Dh ARTHRITIDE. 357 


DE AMBUSTIS.' CAP. III. 


APPLICETUR quamprimum linteum in sp. vini immersum, 
sp. vini de novo affundendo subinde; et hoc continuetur per 
2 horas plus minus, donec dolor ac calor cessaverint. Si vero 
jam tempus aliquod elapsum fuerit, et suppurari incipiat pars 
(in hoc casu etiam locum habeat sp. vini) tune e re ent V.S. 
facere, et purgans dare, et dictam refrigerantem ac incras- 
sentem imperare. Continuetur applicatio sp. vini (superimpo- 
nendo lin teum rarum) per 2 aut 3 dies bis aut ter in die: et 
si oborte sint vesicule, ne rumpantur aut abscindantur (alias 
enim de novo excitabitur acutissimus dolor) sed sibi permit- 
tantur ut aqua intus contenta tranpiret insensibihter quod 
brevi fiet. 


DE ARTHRITIDE.? CAP. IV. 


ConsiLium sequens dedit D. Syd. arthritico cuidam. E £j 
theriacz nostre Anglican: singulis diebus partitis vicibus, super- 
bibendo liquorem appropriatum, viz. infus. these aut simile. 
Observes sedulo ut lecto te committas prima nocte 1. e. ante 
aut circa horam nonam; nam magni momenti est hsec in- 
junctio; ab excubiis enim atteruntur spiritus ac vires, et 
partes debilitantur, ac inferiores precipue partes materie mor- 
bificee appulsum recipiunt, uti in tumoribus hydropicis sub 
noctem videre est: sed in lecto partes omnes corroborantur, et 
coctiones cunctze felicissime absolvuntur. | Lectum ingressurus 
ebibas haustum liberationem cerevisize tenuis. Horz 2 aut 
3 temporis a.m. impendantur equitationi in curru, aut equo si 
tolerare id possis, et tantundem etiam temporis p.m. eidem 
usui destinetur: et in exercitio hocce improbe perseveres per 
aliquot septimanas, imo menses, alioquin nihil juvabit. Ne in 


1 Compare Processus Integri, cap. l.— [G.] 
? [bid., cap. Ixi.—[6G.] 


358 APPENDIX C. 


pastu misceas diversi generis carnes; hinc enim in coquendo 
nature minus facesses negotii: bubulam tamen et vitulinam, 
ut et ovinam et agninam comedere licet, et item ejusdem generis 
carnes licet vario paratas modo. A pomaceo et vinis in solidum 
abstineas. 


DE COLICA HYPOCHONDRIACA.! CAP. V. 


IN curatione colicz (prsesertim hypocondriace) post V.S. 
ac purgationem repetitas, et violentiam symptomatum dein per 
laudanum sedatam, aggrediatur zeger statim usum chalybis. Ad 
confirmandum tonum intestinorum, &c. usus assiduus cerevisice 
Brunswicensis est remedium non vulgare. 


DE PARTU DIFFICILI, ET ALIIS AD PARTUM ATTINENTIBUS. 
CAP. VI. 


Ap partum promovendum nihil pene valent medicamenta ad 
hanc rem a medicis vulgo destinata : sed prze omnibus queratur 
quo precipue liquore delectabatur egra tempore valetudinis, 
viz. pomaceo, cerevisia, aut vino, et quo genere vini. Et hujus 
liquoris, quicunque sit, detur haustus liberalior, nam sic 
erigentur vires ad fotum expellendum, quod est opus solius 
nature. Hac methodo D. Syd. olim comitisse salisburiensi 
suppetias attulit, exhibendo ipsi haustus cerevisie lupulatz 
(Anglice March-beer) post quem erectis viribus peperit intra 
octavam hore partem; nam partus difficilis vel oritur a pravo 
situ infantis (et tunc opus est obstetrice) vel ab imbecillitate 
matris aut infantis, et huic occurrendum per methodum jam 
dictam. 

Mulieres interdum (licet raro) corripiuntur apoplexia post 
partum laboriosum, *et huic occurrendum est per antihysterica 
omnino, viz. aq. bryon. comp., sp. castor., aq. pzeon. comp. &c. ; 


! Compare Processus Integri, cap. xxviii. —[6G.) 


DE PARTU DIFFICILI, ETC. 359 


interdum mox a partu immodice fluit sanguis, adeo ut subito 
de vita periclitetur puerpera ob lipothymias: in hoc casu 
exhibe haustum ex vini rubri parte una simul cocta cum aq. 
font. partibus tribus aut 4, et exhiberi etiam conveniet syr. de 
meconio.  Infanti recens nato detur imprimis cochl. j vini 
canarini. 

Mulieres a primo puerperio non omnino aut quam rarissime 
tentantur enixibus illis (vulgo the after-throwes dictis), uti 
in puerperiis sequentibus semper solent ipsis corripi, et hinc 
est quod in primo puerperio minus prompte ipsis descendant 
lochia ; nam ab unoquoque tali enixu egeritur portiuncula san- 
guinis grumosi: atque adeo quo plures sunt hujusmodi enixus 
eo melius. $i vero dolores nimis violenter urgeant ut tolerari 
vix queant, tune exhibe longos haustus posseti tepedioris 
impregn. chamzm., artemis. et puleg. ; vel admove hypogastrio 
calide panem tostum et respersum aceto, pulv. nuc. mosch. &c., 
quod est probatissimum remedium. 

Lochia Nimia.'—Copiose fluunt lochia ad 3 aut 4 dies et 
moderate per 14 dies, et aliquantulum per mensem, ab initio 
coloris sunt splendidioris, sed tandem colorem illum amittunt. 
Ad immodicum lochiorum fluxum f. V.S. brachii si vires 
ferant, et exhibe elect. incrass. ac astring. superbibendo vinum 
rubrum astring. coctum cum dupla parte aq. papav. rh. et aq. 
plantag. et de hoc bibat sepiuscule. | Maximam hie spem 
facere videntur opiata, caute tamen danda sunt. Verum 
predictis non proficientibus ad ipsa eonfugiendum : exhibe syr. 
de mecon. hora somni, et interdiu etiam si res postulaverit ; 
applicetur item regioni lumborum empl. ex mass. empl. ad 
herniam et de minio ana part. eq. 

De lochiorum suppressione abunde disseritur in epist. ad 
D. Cole, p. 169? Accidit autem aliquando ut puerpere 


! Compare Processus Integri, cap. xxxi.—[G. ] 
2 Viz. in ed. 1685, answering to Dissert. Epist., $ 130, pp. 397, 398, in ed. 
1844.—[G.] 


360 APPENDIX C. 


a loch. suppress. comatose fiant, idque non sine ingenti peri- 
culo; et in hoc casu miranda prestitit catharsis circulatoria, 
nempe exhibita potionis portiuncula tertia aut quarta quaque 
hora ad diem unum vel alterum, aut quousq. visum fuerit, nam 
sic continuo derivatur a capite. Eadem hsc methodus in 
apoplexia miranda prestitit, Interdum accidit ut nulla omnino 
ope moveri possint lochia ; et ideo aliquando V.S. brachii ssepius 
repetita eorum vicem feliciter subiit; alias tamen in muliere 
tenera ac hysterica, et potissimum si diutius decubuerit, V.S. 
lethalis fuit, mox enim convulsiones attulit, In his casibus 
non raro— 


i cunctando restitues rem." 


Nota, mulieres versandas esse in lecto per vices, et monendas 
ut crura dilatent interdum, alioquin sanguis in transitu per 
rugosum meatum cervicis uteri moras nectit, et in grumos 
concrescit. Et hocce consilio D.D. Syd. olim suppetias tulit 
comitisse salisburiensi cui lochia suppressa fuerant jam per 
octo horas, idq. primo a partu die; nam postquam situm 
corporis in lecto mutasset rediere lochia intra quadrantem 
horee. 


DE CONTUSIONIBUS.' CAP. VI. 


Pro contusione primo fiat V.S. ex eodem latere, idque ad S. 
q. exhibe medicamentum aliquod huic rei appropriatum ac 
specificum (quod nempe sanguinem contemperat refriger. et a ~ 
coagulatione ac extravasatione prxservat) quale vulgo perhibe- 
tur tegula hibernica, sp. ceti, et sal vulgare in aq. font. solutum 
pro haustu, vel potius syr. papav. rhoead. cum aq. ejusdem. 
Vitentur ante omnia sudores, qui nequaquam provocentur. 
Proximo mane cap. purg. lenitiv. quod repetatur die seq., et si 


' Compare Processus Integri, cap. lii.— [G.] 


DE PLEURITIDE. 361 


affectus vehemens fuerit, aut febris suboriatur, V.S. repetatur, 
et die etiam seq. purgans, donee eger convaluerit, et extra 
periculum empyematis, phthiseos, aut alterius affectus mali 
constitutus sit. Jam locum habeat paregoricum, quod ante 
evacuationes factas non ita conveniebat ; a calefacientibus et 
atten. sedulo caveatur. Pro affectus vehementia repetenda 
erunt V.S. et purg.; purgetur autem cum lenitivis ; nam forti- 
ora, ut scammoniata et similia, sanguinem nimis exagitarent ac 
in partem affectam preecipitarent. — Detur ergo potio communis, 
addend. insuper cassize 5j ut ad pleniorem catharsin assurgat. 
Primo f. V.S. et die seq. purg., et si post hec non cedant 
symptomata tum die prox. repetatur V.S., et dein per 2 aut 3 
dies vel ssepius purgetur eger pro re nata.  Interdiu a lecto 
abstineat, et reg. calidum, medicam. calida, et vinum sedulo 
vitet, hsc enim sanguinem exagitent, ac in partes affectas 
extravasari cogant.  lIllimatur pars affecta bis aut ter in die 
linim. ex ung. pector. aut dialth. cum 5S. q. ol. chamemel. ; 
incredibile dictu est quantum valeat hac methodus in abscessu 
pulmonum, empyemate et similibus. 


DE PLEURITIDE.! CAP. VII. 


IN pleuritide postquam V.S. bis celebrata fuerit, non abs re 
ent rem aliquatenus committere purgat. cum lenitivis: sed 
si adhue vehementius urgeat febris, conveniet V.S. reiterare: si 
vero (uti sepe accidit) magna humorum saburra in pulmones 
decumbat, et copiose expuat seger, tunc post V.S. eliminetur 
omnino, ac subducatur materia per purgat. cum aq. mineralibus 
purgant. aut lenitiva potione factam. In pleuritidibus hyema- 
libus plerisq. (ut et peripneumonicis) precipue si a suscepto 
frigore ortz fuerint et adsint signa indicantia humores 


prepollere inflammationi, purgetur eger post V.S., et, nisi 


! Compare Processus Integri, cap. viii.—[G.] 


362 APPENDIX C. 


febris vehementer urgeat, res tota purgationi committi poterit ; 
potissimum si ipsi cedat morbus ; nam ad juvantia et ledentia 
attendendum sedulo hic et ubiq. In pleuritide autem vere 
essentiali, et in qua vehement. urgent symptomata, nempe si 
V.S. tempestive facta fuerit et sspe ut debet repetita, tunc 
nulla omnino aut parca admodum succedat expectoratio, spes 
tota sita est in V.S. In hoc casu autem utendum est refriger. 
ac incrass. modice, cavendo tamen a narcoticis, et fugienda 
sunt ea que nimis attenuant, quia humores in pulmones 
prompte nimis conjiciunt. Si vero morbus aliter tractatus 
fuerit, adeo ut ulcuscula generentur in pulmonibus, et suborta 
est expectoratio, tunc nihil magis ad humores educendum 
confert quam ol. amygd. dulce, quod interea non multu 
attenuat, nec humores ad pulmones sollicitat: sed si pulmones 
magna humorum saburra onerentur, tunc precipua spes sita est 
in purg. lenitivis. Occurrit satis frequenter affectio quzdam, 
que non male NOTIOZIZ! venarum seu plethora appellari 
possit, et in ipsa urgent fere sympt. que sanguinis copiam 
indigitant, cum doloribus vagis, in latere (presertim) et circa 
pleuram: desunt autem sympt. que hystericum affectum esse 
suaderent. lh qui vitam sedentariam agunt laborant hoc 
morbo; curatur vero per V.S. semel celebratam, et dein per 
purg. bis aut ter repetitam pro re nata. 


DE ASTHMATE? CAP. VIII. 


Aw asthma is a difficulty of breathing, proceeding sometimes 
from some fault in the lungs themselves, as from preternatural 
glandules and the like: but for the most part it proceeds from 


! Probably a mistake for vavríecic. The expression vavoiworc gdeBay occurs 
in Hippocrates (De Fract., $ 11, tom. iii, p. 84, ed. Kuhn), and is explained by Galen 
(Comment. in Hippocr., De Fract., ii, 24, tom. xviii, pt. ii, p. 459; Glossar. Hippocr., 
tom. xix, p. 124) to signify effusion or extravasation of blood, the metaphor being 
taken from vomiting.—[G. | 

? Compare Processus Integri, cap. !vi.—[6G.) 


DE ASTHMATE. 363 


pituitous matter that is discharged by the branches of the vena 
arteriosa upon the substance of the lungs, and insinuates 
in upon the bronchia, causing a wheezing and difficulty of 
breathing. The cure of this is to be taken at evacuations of 
the antecedent cause, by bleeding at the arm, vesications to the 
neck, and fontanells in the arms (if it be an inveterate asthma), 
and by purging with the pil. cephal. and the pAlegmagoga, and 
as to alteratives, by giving attenuating pectorals, and now and 
then ol. amygd. dulc. et syr. dialth. by spoonfuls, to keep the 
breast open. Hee ex MS. D. Syd. exarato ante annos 12. 

Asthma duplex est, siccum et humorale. Asthma siccum 
videtur oriri ab ataxia spirituum in preecordiis; nam adsunt 
magne tum pulsus, tum respirationis inordinationes ac in- 
eequalitates sine ulla, aut saltem, cum paucissima interim ex- 
creta materia: viros habiliores corripit ac per paroxysmos invadit. 
In cura asthmatis hujus sicci cavendum est ab omni evac. per 
purg. in ipso morbi initio, nam vel enema zgrum in vite dis- 
crimen conjiciat : sed imprimis f. V.S. brachii, et tunc propina 
haustulum vini Canar. cum julap. hyster., et dein frequenti in 
usu sit dec. pector. ut cum linctu atten. qui preecordia dilatet, 
et respirationem faciliorem reddat; et in hunc finem adde ol. 
amygd. necnon ol. chym. anisi in satis magna copia; capiat 
item pil. ex sem. anisi pulv. factas, applic. vesicat. nuche, et 
die tertio tutum erit ac necessarium dare purg. ex pil. coch. 
maj. , et die seq. lenitiv. cum cassia, atq. item tertia vice. 
Asthma humorale sub hyemis adventum fere invadit, cum jam 
sanguis particulis aquosis ac crudis inferciri incipit, et in ipso 
V.S. et purg. sepius repetita locum habent. Decoctum tune 
sarsepar. et simil. utatur per tempus aliquod, et quotidie cum 
pastu sumat haustum vini, ut sang. interim roboretur et pul- 
mones contra humorum incursum muniantur. 


364 APPENDIX C. 


DE PARALYSI. CAP. IX. 


Tur solution of an apoplexy is often by a paralysis on one 
side, wherein the matter of the apoplexy is impacted into the 
nerves, and thence, by the impedition of the influx of the animal 
spirits, there is either a perfect abolition or else a diminution 
both of sense and motion. The cure of a paralysis (whether it 
proceeds from the solution of an apoplectic fit, or whether it 
comes alone, invading any part whatsoever) in the common 
method, is by purging with pil. coch. maj., aut min., or pil. 
fetid. &c., for many days together; as also by giving alteratives 
of sundry kinds, composed of cephalics, as beton., rorism., salv., 
lil. convall. &c., and by anointing the spine of the back with 
ol, succ. and ung. nerv., and by fomenting also the spine with 
ag. Regine Hungar., and by the use of fomentations with 
cephalic ingredients. But forasmuch as the palsy is for the 
most part caused by sharp matter falling in upon the nerves, 
I conceive that after the patient has been blooded once, and 
purged five or six times, it would be best to put him upon a 
milk diet. Ex MS. D. Syd. ante annos 12, 


DE CRAPULA. CAP. X. 


CRAPULA ortum suum debet potui aut cibo assumpto peccanti 
quantitate aut qualitate, unde ventriculus aggravatur admodum, 
et succus crudus egre domabilis illabitur in sanguinem, qua de 
causa febris ibidem accendi solet, que est machina solennis 
qua utitur Natura ad expellendum quiequid in suo sinu inimi- 
cum contineat. Ad curationem crapule, ut pars oneris detra- 
hatur, V.S. celebranda est, et dein (si ventriculus valde gravetur, 
et nausea aut vomit. infestetur eger) propinetur emeticum, et 
die prox. detur purg. lenitiv., repetend. per 2, 3, aut 4 vices 


! Compare Processus Integri, cap. lvii.—[G.] 


DE HA#MORRHOIDIBUS. 365 


pro re nata; nam V.S. et catharsis repetita fere sole rem ex- 
pediunt.  Dista sit tenuis et excarnis (precipue) si febris 
urgeat, et potus refrig. sit in usu. Crapula levis, que ex cibo 
incongruo aut crudo contingere solet, facile curatur per haust. 
mediocr. liquoris alicujus cardiaci, precipue si seger super- 
dormiat; nam somnus super omnia coctiones juvat et crudi- 
tates quascunq. subigit. 


——MMMÀ—MM— 


DE HAMORRHOIDIBUS APERTIS ET CACIS.' CAP. XI. 


Tue flux of the hemorrhoids proceeds from hot and sharp 
humours excreted out of the mass of the blood by the hemor- 
rhoidal veins upon the anus; and it is cured by making revul- 
sion by bleeding at the arm, and by derivation with lenient 
purges, and by cooling and incrassating medicines and diet, 
and by topics that are astringents ; amongst which a fomen- 
tation with a decoction of tapsus barbatus in aq. ferrata is com- 
mended, as also this : 

ER  Mastch., 
Bol. arm., 
Pil. lepor., àà 8. q.; 
and with whites of eggs make it up into a cataplasm. 

Heemorrhoides exces sive dolentes proceed from the said 
cause, and are cured by satisfying the same indications, ex- 
cepting that the topics in being astringent should be such as 
are proper for the taking away inflammations, and for the dis- 
cussion of the tumour, and easing of pain : such as are anointing 
with pomat. or popul. and fomenting with discut., as the dec. of 
fl. samb. in milk. I find that to sit upon a cloth dipped in 
rose-water, and gently wrung out, gives great ease. Ex MS. 
D. Syd. ante 12 annos exarato. Hee sunt excerpta ex ore 
Syd. pro heemorrhoidibus. 

F. V.S. brachii, et die prox. purgetur cum lenitiv., sed aloe 


! Compare Processus Integri, cap. xxxviii, xxxix.— [G.] 


366 APPENDIX C. 


et simil. evitentur: dista sit refrig. et incrass. omnino, et 
carnis expers: potus ordinarius sit aqua et lac simul coctz. 
Parti effect? applicetur linteum rarum in aq. ros. et ceter. 
intinctum. Vitet acria, salsa, et aromatizata, post V.S. et purg. 
semel aut bis pro re nata repetit. sedulo detur syr. de meconio, 
et hoc frzeno coerceatur ac sedetur tumultus ac orgasmus sang. 
qui ad partem affectam impetuosius quam par erat viam fecit, 
et hoc tam in dolore czeco, quam in fluxu locum habet. Chaly- 
beata in hoc morbo szpe suppetias ferunt. 


DE HYDROPE. CAP. XII. 


Nota—illos hydropes qui a compotatione nimia sp. vini 
oriuntur periculosissimos esse; quia tales liquores pessundant 
coctiones, dissipant calidum nativum, et fermenta omnia de- 
struunt. Et hi qui a tali prophasi incidunt in hydropem corri- 
piuntur primo tumore abdominis (quasi tympanitico) una cum 
pectoris inflatione et respirandi difficultate, cruribus interim a 
tumore immunibus. ‘Tales autem pro deploratis habendi sunt ; 
sed si curam aggrediaris incipiendum primo est a V.S., et 
sanguis eductus erit instar pleuriticorum, dein per anti-scor- 
butica oppugnetur morbus, et per ea que fermenta partium 
restituant, ac vigorem sanguini concilient: detur nempe cere- 
visia medic. cum absynth., cent. min., rad. raph. rustic., fol. 
cochl. hort., bacc. junip. &c. 


DE MENSIUM FLUXU IMMODICO, ET MENSIBUS CUM DOLORE 
FLUENTIBUS.? CAP. XIII. 


FLUxXUM mensium immodicum maxime patiuntur matrone 
eetate provectiores, idq. eo potissimum tempore quo fluxus hicce 
foeminis valedicit; in aliis temporius, in aliis vero serius, prout 


! Compare Processus Integri, cap. xxxiii.—[G.] 
? [bid,, cap. xxvii.—[G.] 


DE VARIOLIS CONFLUENTIBUS. 367 


temporius aut serius in juventute primo profluxerant ipsis 
menstrua. Morbus hic rarissime lethalis est, sed sua sponte 
sistetur: methodus autem curationis optima est illa que de- 
scribitur in libro D. Syd.’ Quibusdam feminis non sine dolore 
ingenti (qualis parturientibus familiaris est) fluunt menstrua, 
et talibus maximum juvamen afferunt aq. minerales cathartieze, 
si dentur per 8 aut 10 dies in intervallo inter menstruationis 
tempora. 


DE MENSIUM SUPPRESSIONE.? CAP. XIV. 


Mensium suppressio plerunq. ortum ducit a statu sanguinis 
depauperato, et quasi vappido; et hac de causa foemins que 
morbo quovis diuturno attrite sunt menstrua non habent, nec 
opus est ut proritentur. Ad menses ergo movendos conveniunt 
ea que sanguinem fermento vivido inspirant, et ipsum depau- 
peratum restituunt; unde motum circularem magis vegetum 
ipsi inducunt. Specifica que emmenagoga perhibentur, qualia 
sunt artemis., schomnanthus, &c. raro aut nunquam votis re. 
spondent, verum methodus sequens plerunq. aut semper rem 
facit. Nempe imprimis f. V.S. brachii potius quam pedis 
ad Ziv aut vi, et dein per 2 aut 3 vices purgetur pil. ruffi, aut 
alis aloeticis, et tunc aggrediatur usum chalybis per mensem 
aut diutius (nam interdum necessarium est ut sumatur per 
6 septimanas) donec effectum votis respondeat. Eodem modo 
curatur chlorosis. 


DE VARIOLIS CONFLUENTIBUS? CAP. XV. 


As to the cure of the flux-pox which happened in the year 
1670,* I found myself much puzzled, and at a great loss; for 
! Viz. Dissert. Epist., 8 135, &c.—[G.] 
? Compare Processus Integri, cap. xlvii.—[6G.] 


? [bid., cap. xv.—[G.] 
* See Observ. Med., iv, 6.—[G.] 


368 APPENDIX C. 


(observing that their rising out of bed, together with a mode- 
rate keeping and diet did not do the business) I began to ques- 
tion my whole practice in this disease, and was in some doubt 
whether the old and usual ways by cordials and hot regimen 
were not fit to be employed about the cure of this sort at least : 
but at last, finding the success even of this to be worse than 
the contrary regimen, I was inclined to believe that this pox 
was to be managed in a colder way than I ever yet had ordered 
any, and I found (though to my own reproach) that a down- 
right cooling regimen did deliver the patient not only from the 
danger but also from the sickness of the disease; therefore I 
very strictly commanded that he should be taken up every 
morning, and sit up all day during the whole time of his disease, 
even though his blindness and inexpressible soreness made his 
rising no less troublesome to him than scandalous to myself, 
only when upon sitting up he was apt to faint, I permitted him 
to lie all along upon his bed, or (which heats less) upon the 
couch, with his usual clothes on, and no more; and so neces- - 
sary was this to be done, that I observed almost in every patient 
with whom I had to do, that whilst he was out of bed he was 
very well, setting aside the soreness only; but as soon as the 
approach of the night called for his being put to his naked bed, 
then presently came on ill symptoms of feverishness, inquietude, 
yea and some degrees of a phrensy, insomuch that the nurses 
themselves (though at first wholly disallowing the practice) 
have at last taken up the patient in the morning much sooner 
than I appointed, and that with present relief as to the symp- 
toms mentioned. For his diet, I ordered him to drink nothing 
but cold whey, and that in as large quantities as he desired, 
and in the summer I set the bottles of whey into cold water; 
and I have known some to have drunk six quarts and more in 
twenty-four hours. Besides the allaying the inflammation of 
the blood, the ptyalism also was much promoted by the use of 
whey, and likewise made so easy, that sometimes this symptom, 


DE VARIOLIS CONFLUENTIBUS. 369 


which uses to be very pressing and viscous on the eleventh day, 
was scarce then discernible. Yea, I have often observed, that 
this way hath succeeded so well, that those pox that have 
come out with the highest and worst signs of fluxing, have, in 
the progress of the disease, become distinct even upon the face ; 
and likewise instead of turning up first red, afterwards black 
glare, have become perfectly shining yellow, and from a small, 
angry, pimpling, and depressed pox, they have come to be a 
large pox, and in all respects very well conditioning. If the 
patient were not content with whey only, I permitted him to 
eat buttermilk, with crumbs of bread therein, or raw milk with 
pulp of roasted apples bruised therein. I met with none that 
had an antipathy to whey, or whom drinking thereof was wont 
to purge in their health ; if I had (I suppose), mstead of whey, 
I should have ordered to such ag. hordei. When, notwith- 
standing my cooling regimen, the patient was still hot, and 
could not sleep, I ordered diacodii 3ss to be given once or 
twice hora somni, but seldom oftener, for fear of totally sup- 
pressing the ptyalism. 

In the year 1672 I found out a way of curing the smallpox 
less liable to scandal, and also more conducing to keeping up 
the pustules, especially in a flux-pox, viz. I ordered the patient 
to sit up till the pox appeared, as judging it not fit so early to 
force them out, and then to keep in bed with his arms in, till 
the disease was over. Yet I allowed him to remove from one 
side of the bed to the other for his refreshment, and to avoid 
sweating. Tull the smallpox appeared I allowed him to eat 
water-gruel, panado, roasted apples, or the like, and to drink 
small-beer lightly warmed with a toast; afterwards, instead of 
small-beer I ordered him dec. album, either cold or very lightly 
warmed; but in case he had any aversion to this drink, I per- 
mitted whey instead of it (provided I did find the same was 
not wont to purge him when in health), and three parts of 
water, boiled with one of milk, is a liquor not inferior to either 

II. 24 


370 APPENDIX C. 


of these, nay, perhaps better: it is to be drunk cold. Upon 
any great inquietude, delirium, or other alarm, I ordered 3 vj 
or 3j diacod., and how free soever he was from any accident, 
I gave the same diacod. on the seventh night, 1n order to pre- 
pare the face to swell; and judged it the safest course to con- 
tinue it every night after, till he was quite out of danger. This 
way I judged to be far the best and safest I ever yet met with, 
but yet when, through violently hot keeping and cordials, the 
patient is under so high a fever, phrensy, suppression of urine, 
or other importune accidents that there is no time to allay them 
by the regimen or medicine here mentioned, I know no remedy 
but taking the patient out of bed, upon the doing of which I 
have observed, by reiterated trials, all accidents to have been 
cured in a moment which depended upon the too high ebul- 
lition of the blood, and not upon the going away of the sali- 
vation in a flux-pox before the eleventh day, or of the swelling 
of the face before the thirteenth day ; in either of which cases 
not rising, but observing the method above mentioned, does 
best; especially if to the abatement of the swelling of the face 
there is added no rising, but, e contra, a withering of the pus- 
tules on the hands, which in the last days of this pox (but not 
before) should rise up high, grow big, and look fresh. 


DE METHODO MEDENDI MORBOS PER ACCUBITUM JUNIORIS.! 
CAP. XVI. 


May the 19th, 1662, I was called in the night to Mrs. 
Change, whom I found very ill of a cholera morbus; she had 
many ugly symptoms, as coldness of the extreme parts, talking 
a little idly, intolerable sickness, and felt a tingling in her 
fingers and flesh outwardly. I judge it dangerous to use 
dilutients, especially by clysters, in a woman so green (she 
having not lain in a month) and the disease pressing so hard 


! Compare Observ. Med., i, 4, $ 40.—[G.] 


DE METHODO MEDENDI, ETC. 371 


upon my heels; so I ordered her to take a warm cordial, and 
that a good draught of it, and her husband to lie close to her 
back naked, and her son of twelve years close to her belly, 
and to lay on more clothes, and to warm her legs and hands 
with hot cloths: she immediately fell into a moderate breathing, 
and all symptoms ceased; and after enjoining her to keep her 
bed the next day, and to eat and drink nothing save a small 
quantity of barley-broth a day for two days, she perfectly 
recovered. 

February, 1661, I was called to Mrs. Hulston, who, after a 
very chronical fever, was fallen into a very fatal-like diarrhoea ; 
I saw it was to no purpose to give astringents, seeing the dis- 
ease proceeded from a decay of natural heat, therefore I took 
this course, viz. I caused her son, a plump hot lad of thirteen 
years of age, and her nurse's son, of six or seven years, to go 
to bed to her naked, and to lie the one close to her belly, the 
other close to her back, which they did, and as long as they 
continued with her she had no stools; but the boys rising at 
any time, the looseness would immediately return. I com- 
manded that she should persist in the course til her cure 
should be complete (the boys relieving one another by turns 
in the daytime), and so she fully recovered, not only of her 
looseness, but also of her sickness in general. 

The very same course I took with one Mr. Little, who had 
a fever about seven weeks, and at that time, August 1662, so 
far spent that his doctors judged him a dead man; he was 
ancient, and having been much purged with violent medica- 
ments, he was as weak as ever I saw any that recovered ; I 
(having to no purpose made attempts to lay his fever by in- 
ward medicines, and to raise his strength by cordials) told his 
wife that nothing could preserve his life thebut putting a boy 
to bed to him ; so she procured a link-boy to lie very close to 
him all night, and the next morning I found his fever almost 
off, and his eye and countenance more lively, upon which I 


372 APPENDIX C. 


pronounced all danger to be over, yet afterwards upon my giving 
him a clyster, and upon the recess of the boy, he began to 
relapse; but the boy being got again, and I giving no more 
clysters, he perfectly recovered. 

The very same way had I cured before Bishop Monk's! lady, 
who was an aged woman of a very feeble and thin habit of 
body, and had an ague, which (though gone) had so weakened 
her that her physician, Dr. Ridgley,” looked upon her as dead ; 
when I was sent for she had also spitten some purulent matter 
and blood, which they showed me (in abundance) upon the 
napkin. I told the doctor that I apprehended that nothing 
could save her life but a speedy transplantation of some young 
spirits upon her, to which he readily agreed, and a girl of 
thirteen was put in close to her breast, upon this she recovered 
very speedily both of her unspiritedness and her coughing ; 
but the girl fell sick, which was attributed to her lying with 
the lady, though I was confident to the contrary, having never 
known any mischief that way ; however she had first coming 
out upon her petechie, and afterwards large ulcers upon her 
breech ; but Dr. Ridgley and I recovered her. 


—— 


MS. D.D. SYD. DE EPILEPSIA PUERORUM. 


Tuis disease, as it is more common to children than any 
disease whatsoever (the smallpox and measles excepted), so it 
is more dangerous than those and all others; for according to 
the most modest computation as many die thereof as escape, 
and it is too well known that all the children of some families, 
as fast as they are born, die thereof in some time or other of 


1 Probably Nicholas Monk, brother of the Duke of Albemarle, who was Bishop 
of Hereford for about a year in 1661.—[G.] 

? Dr. Ridgley's name does not appear in the Catalogue of Oxford and Cambridge 
Graduates in Medicine, published in 1695, nor in that of the London College of 
Physicians.—[G. ] 

3 Compare Processus Integri, cap. xl.—[G.] 


DE EPILEPSIA PUERORUM. 373 


their infancy. Sometimes it comes without any presension at 
all, suddenly distorting the mouth and eyes, and causing the 
face to look black, and convelling the several artus; at other 
times there is first a presension of the paroxysm by drawing 
up the fingers together, as one that wrings his feet, and by a 
certain steadiness in the ball of the eye, so that it moves not 
up and down as in the ordinary state of health ; which symptoms 
are succeeded with the other before mentioned. The fits con- 
tinue sometimes longer, and sometimes shorter, and sometimes 
they invade at no constant time, coming and going irregularly ; 
but at other times they observe a regular motion, as coming 
once in twenty-four hours, and sometimes every third and 
fourth hour, or at other times one fit comes on as fast as the 
other is gone, especially when the infant is almost worn out 
with that which is common to them all when there is any dis- 
tance between them, that as soon as the fit is off they fall 
asleep, and continue very drowsy, and sometimes do wake 
into another fit. 

The one and the same thing seems to me to be the general 
cause of convulsions which happen to children, viz. the pertur- 
bation and shatteredness of the systasis of animal spirits, yet 
this shatteredness is brought on from several occasions, the 
chiefest of which I shall here mention ; because from these are 
to be denominated the several species of epilepsies in infants, 
First, there 1s an epilepsy (which though more rarely happening) 
doth invade during the first month they are born. This 
happens to infants that are more than ordinarily weak, and that 
are of a less firm habit of body than usual, and that are not 
born of healthy parents, who use labour and converse in good 
air, for in these through too excessive softness, to which also 
weakness is joined, the systasis of the animal spirits is easily 
dissipated, and upon their dissipation they huddle in upon the 
origin of the nerves, and the brain in infants (being not strong 
enough to resist the impetus of the spirits in motion and the 


374 APPENDIX C. 


orgasmus of them), it yields to their impression, contrary to 
what is found in hypochondriacal persons that are adult, when 
the brain is not seized till the disease hath almost acted its 
tragedy, and the brain not able any longer to resist such 
huddling in of spirits. Secondly, another species of epilepsy, 
and that most common of all others, is that which uses to 
attack infants about the time of dentition, which is commonly 
about the eighth or tenth month; for it is to be observed that 
most children do breed their teeth in one of these three ways, 
viz. either by a cough, which is the best way of all; or by 
vomiting and looseness (and the vomit and stools are most 
commonly green, as in hysterical people), which is more dan- 
gerous; or by the epilepsy, which of all three is the most 
dangerous. And it is here to be noted, that for the most part 
it happens that all the children of the same father and mother 
breed their teeth after the same manner, in one of these ways 
only, and not in different ways. But in those who breed their 
teeth by epileptic fits, there are two times of putting forth 
their teeth which occasion paroxysms, as first when the tooth 
opens the bone of the jaw, and then when it cuts the outward 
flesh of the gingive; for it is frequently to be observed that a 
child, about the time of teething, goes into fits, and no tooth 
appears or is to be felt, but the fits going off the child is well 
for some weeks, after which come on other fits, which usher in 
the tooth’s piercing the outward skin of the gingive, and cease 
as soon as that skin is cut; and this double misery are some 
children enforced to undergo for every tooth they have. 

As to the cure it was wanting in this MS., only after a 
blank left follow these words. And my reason tells me, 
besides my experience, that this is the safest way of managing 
convulsion-fits in children. But to put the cure upon I know 
not how many sorts of specifical remedies I understand not the 
ground, nor do I find the success; such as the several parts of 
animals, and amongst them the cranium of a man, which I find 


DE EPILEPSIA PUERORUM. 375 


to be a main ingredient in many of the remedies which pretend 
to be specifical in the cure of this disease: but I see not why 
(if there be such specific virtue in a human skull) there should 
not be enough in the patients own, which is so closely applied 
to the brain, the part affected in this disease; but there must 
needs be recourse to a few grains of another man's skull, and 
the same dead. Pro cura epil. motuum puerorum vide MS. 
D.D. Syd. ad filium suum.! 

In another of his manuscripts written several years before 
the former are contained these following things. Convulsions 
take children sometimes within the month, but most often 
about the seventh or eighth month, which is the time of 
dentition, both which sorts are caused from an ataxy, or 
inanition. The first sort does for the most part proceed from 
an immoderate number of stools, and in this case give the 
infant a httle diascordium about the bigness of a pepper corn 
dissolved in saxifrage water or breast-milk ; but if it be of the 
second sort which proceeds from dentition, then the usual 
course is to apply a blistering plaster to the hinder part of the 
neck, and to anoint the temples and neck with ol. succin., and 
to give aq. antepil. lang., pulv. de gutt., rad. peon. and other 
antepil. medicines: and some likewise use revulsions by 
vomiting, purging, and cupping ; but I should suppose that a 
spoonful of the dec. of cort. peruv. would far excel any of 


these remedies. 


1682 er 1683 EXCERPTA Ex ORE D.D. Sv». 


Epilepticis motibus maxime corripiuntur infantes, et non 
raro vel recens nati: cujus causa videtur esse debilis ac infirma 
spirituum systasis a parentum labe ac miasmate sspe sepius 
oriunda.  Indicantur ergo hic corroborantia ac pacifica. Detur 
guttula minima vel gutt. ss laud. liquid., quod est experientia 


1 Perhaps what was afterwards published with the title ‘ Processus Integri,’ &c. 
—[G.] 


376 APPENDIX C. 


probatum : maxime vero omnium motibus convulsivis tentantur 
infantes circa 10 etatis mensem et dentitionis tempus, sive 
ocyus sive serius id fiat, idq. duobus precipue temporibus, 
nempe cum per maxillam perrumpit dens, et cum per carnem 
maxillam obtegentem ; circa hzc tempora corripi solet infans vel 
tussi, quod optimum, eaq. szepius convulsiva : vel diarrhoea, quod 
pejus; vel ipsis convulsionibus, quod pessimum. Hee omnia 
ortum suum debent insigni spirituum animalium ataxie, nec 
medicamenta ulla efficacius curationis scopum attingunt quam 
ea que spiritus demulcent ac confortent; cui intentioni nihil 
melius satisfacit quam laud. liqu., modo in justa dosi exhibeatur, 
v. g. infanti 6 aut 7 menses nato da gutt. ij. laud. liqu. ex cochl. 
j. vini canar., et capiat item vini canar. per se bis aut ter in 
die. Interdum corripiuntur infantes motibus convulsivis mox 
a partu, et seepe intra primum mensem, qui ortum suum debent 
natural debilitati infantis, et ideo nulle hic evacuationes 
instituendze sunt, (nisiforsan per vesicat.) sed e contra robo- 
rantia omnia imperanda, nempe vinum generosum, &c., et 
laud. liqu. si res postulet. ^ Epilepticis motibus etiam 
corripiuntur interdum infantes, tanquam prodromis vario- 
larum, morbillorum aut febris scarlatine, idq. cum dentitio 
peracta est. 

Sive igitur sit epilepsia ab imbecillitate staminum vite orta, 
quie infantes ante dentitionis tempus corripere solet; sive ea 
quie oritur ab ataxia spirituum quam invehit dentitio; sive ea 
que est conatus nature unam ex tribus predictis febribus 
foras propellere laborantis; hsec est methodus tutissima simul 
ac efficacissima, nempe applicetur vesicat. nuchs, et quam 
primum exhibe laud. liqu. in aq. epid. aut aq. peeon comp., et 
lecto committatur «ger, preecipue si unam ex febribus preedictis 
secuturam prevideas; in quo casu etiam indulgere possis 
medicam. aliquod cardiacum, ut et regimen moderate calidum, 
nempe ut nutrix juxta puerum in lecto accumbat, nam. sympt. 
periculosissimo primo occurrendum est, viz. epilepsie, que 


TINCTURA ALEXIPHARMACA. 377 


expellendo materiam morbificam curatur: nec multum hic 
imminet periculi a tam calido regimine; si enim subsequantur 
variole, erunt boni moris ac inter 24 horas se prodent. Si 
autem pro convulsivis motibus preecedentibus dictarum febrium 
quamlibet V.S. imperes; ut et enemata et purgantia (ut vulgo 
fieri solet), infans in manifestum vitz discrimen conjicietur ; 
quia talia materie peccantis separationem, et ad corporis 
habitum expulsionem prorsus impediunt : quinetiam ataxiam ac 
convulsiones promovent; imprimis ergo in paregorico et tunc 
in vesicatorio spes tota collocatur. 


TINCTURA ALEXIPHARMACA D.D. SYD. 


BR. Flor. sive summitat. florescentium absynth., acetos., 
agerati, agrim., alchymill., argent., artemis., auric. muris, 
becab., beton., bellidis maj. et min., bistortze, borrag., bugloss., 
bugule, calamenth., cardam., caryoph.,centaur. min., chameedr., 
chameepyteos, (viz. folia ejus, quia flores sunt adeo parvuli) 
chehd. maj., cichor., cochlear. hort., consolid. maj., cheiri, 
croci, cyani maj. et min., dentis leonis, echii, endiv., enulz, 
eryng. (viz. foha), erysimi, euphras., fumar., hed. terrestr., 
hyper, hyacinthi anglicani  lamii albi et rubri, levistici, 
liliorum alb. et convall., malve, marrhub. albi, matricari:z, 
melilot., meliss., menth. aquat., millefol., morsus diab., nasturt. 
aquat., nepete, nymphee, origani, papav. rhoead., paralys., 
pentaphyll, persicariz, pimpinelle, puleg., sanicule, saxifr. 
alb., scabiosee, scordii, serpilli, tanacet., tormentill., tussilag., 
valerianz, verbasci, verbene, veronice maris, violarie, virge 
aures, et ulmarie; fl. predict. in cucurbit. affundatur sp. 
vini anglicani s. q. ut humectet fl. hosce, sed non supernatet 
iisdem ; sic enim validior est tinctura, et elicitur quasi succus 
florum. Stent simul per 2 menses, et tum demum f. colat. 
ipsius. In cong. 9 hujus tincture dissolv. opii theb. % jss, i.e. 


378 APPENDIX C. 


Oss. ad pint. unam. Dosis est cochl. ij, vel ad summum 
eochl. 11j in die. | 

Vires. Optime valet pro debili, flatulento, aut frigido 
ventriculo; et egregie facit pro spleneticis, quorum paroxysmos 
subito tollit. | Eximiarum virium est etiam pro hystericis, 
precipue si adsit colica quaevis ventriculi aut intestinorum. 
Ipse in Scotia (?) consumpsi congium ipsius, nec unquam vidi 
provocasse somnum cuivis, nempe exhibemus in tam parva 
dosi ad cochl. j pro vice. 


TINCTURA EADEM EDITIONIS ULTIMA. 


R. Fol. sicc. absynth. vulg., agrim., alchym., alth., artemis., 
bugule, calamenth., caryophill, cent. min., cham:edr., cha- 
m:pit., chelidon., euphras. fumar., hed. terrestr, hyper., 
marrhub. alb., millefol., menth. aquat., ophiogloss., origan., 
pilosel., pimpanell., plantag., puleg., sanic., scabios., succis., 
serpill., tormentill., verbasci, verben:s, veronice, virge aurez, 
ana M. iv vel 5 iv. 

R Flor. siec. bellis maj. et min., borrag., bugloss., chamzem., 
croci, consolid. maj. cyani maj. lami, matricar., malv., 
melil, nymph, papav. rheead., paralys., primule veris, 
saxifr. alb., tussil., violarum, ulmarie, verbasci. ana M iv 
vel 5iv. 

Commisceantur hzc omnia et infundantur per mensis 
spatium in sp. vini anglicani seu hordei cong. ix. admiscendo 
simul opii theb. dissolut. in pauxillo sp. hordei (nam eo intimius 
commiscetur cum reliquis) 3 jss. M. Et postquam simul 


steterint per mensem f. colatura. 


NOTES. 379 


NOTE A. 


[From the MS. of the College of Physicians (see Life, p. Ixxvii.) ] 


PAROXYSMUS NEPHRITICUS. 


Tuts disease observes no time of the year, nor age of persons, though 
it invades most commonly men that are past their prime, who drink 
wine, especially those wines which are most attenuating, as French or 
Rhenish ; as likewise those who, having used a sedentary life, do sud- 
denly engage upon hard riding. ‘They feel, first of all, a great pain in 
one or both kidnies, upon which they fall into a great and troublesome 
vomiting, attended with very great sickness. After some time, the 
pain extends itself down the sides of the belly towards the os pubis, 
following the ductus of the ureter, belonging to the affected kidney, in 
the whole length thereof, and sometimes fixes upon and remains in one 
small part of it. During this time, the patient very often is troubled 
with stoppage of his urine, but sometimes he is free therefrom till after 
the nephritical pain begin, at what time, upon a sudden, his water 
totally stops, until such time as he voids a stone. How great soever 
the pain is, and how alarming soever either to the patient or by- 
standers the sickness, yet it very seldom kills, or runs out into any 
great diuturnity, provided fitting remedies are applied thereunto. 

That which occasions these symptoms, is oftentimes some gravel or 
stone, grating upon the pelvis or ureter, and wherever it strikes, either 
at the top, middle, or insertion of the ureter into the bladder, there it 
causes acute pains. The bigger it is, the sharper and more ragged its 
corners are, the greater still is the pain, and the longer and more diffi- 
cult its passage through the ureter. Sometimes the stone being re- 
moved out of the place it grew in the kidney, and lying upon the top 
of the ureter, after it hath for some time caused pain and stoppage of 
urine in that side, returns again to the place it was conveniently lodged 
in before, and there remains a long time without doing any harm, or 
giving any trouble, unless it be a little sense of heaviness and heat 
about the affected kidney. But I conceive that a nephritical fit is not 
always occasioned by a stone (much less by gravel) in those parts, but 
sometimes by an inflammation only of the kidney, wherein the kidney 
and ureter, and perhaps the bladder likewise, in consent with the 
other, may suffer the same effects as if a stone in the kidney or ureter 
had produced them; which I am induced to believe, for that I have 
frequently observed these fits to have gone off without voiding a stone, 


380 NOTES. 


or the least appearance of any gravel coming from them, all the symp- 
toms of the stone of the kidneys, nevertheless, having attended the 
same, which is evident, further, in some hysterical fits, which, when 
seizing upon the kidneys, are followed with the whole train of symptoms 
accompanying a nephritical fit, and do, by the similitude they have 
with the same, not seldom impose even upon wary physicians, and, 
furthermore, are not to be cured by any other medicines than such as 
are suitable to the allaying fits of the mother, but to these, duly ad- 
ministered, they easily yield; nor is it of no moment in this argument, 
that the blood taken in this distemper is oftentimes found to be such 
as is taken in pleurisies, and other diseases proceeding purely from 
inflammation. 

Till it shall please the infinitely great and wise God to discover a 
remedy to dissolve the stone, the curative indications are to be directed 
first to the relaxing and mollifying those parts through which the stone 
is to have its passage; and, in the next place, to the allaying the in- 
flammation which is either the attendant or sometimes, as hath been 
said, the cause of the pain; and lastly, to promote the expulsion ofthe stone. 

This, therefore, I do: I cause, first of all, blood to be taken, eight 
or ten ounces, more or less, according to the strength or other circum- 
stances of the patient. Then I order the following clyster : 


EK Rad. althee, 

— liliorum, àà 3); 

Fol. malvz, 

— parietar., 

— brane. urs. 

— verbasc. àà manip. j ; 

Flor. chamomel., 

— meliloti, aa P. j; 

Sem. lini, 

— foenugreci, aa Zss. 
Coq. s. q. aq. Colaturz, lb. j. dissolve— 

Sacchari culini, 

Syr. dialthzez, aa iij. 
F. clyster. 


After the voiding of this, I cause the following to be put: 


ROI. lilior., 
Chamomeli, aa lb. ss; 
Ol. rute, 3 ij; 
— scorpion. mathioli, 5j; 
M. f. clyster. 


And so these clysters I order alternately to be put up twice, or give 


the one immediately after the rejection of the other. I prescribe, at 
the same time, this ointment: 


EK Rad. lilior. 
Ol. amygd. dulc. 
Ung. dialthzz, aa £j; 
Ol. scorp. math., 3ss. 
M. f. liniment. quo inung. partes dolentes mane et sero. 


When the clysters have done working, and the passages thereby suffi- 
ciently mollified, I attempt the expelling the stone by enjoining the pa- 


NOTES. 381 


tient to drink very large quantities of posset drink, even to a gallon or 
two, in which likewise may be boiled some marsh-mallow roots, which 
liquor, taken in so great a quantity, not only distends and opens the 
passages, but, by causing great retching, to vomit, and thereby strain- 
ing of all parts of the body, contribute much to the expelling the stone 
or gravel, which also is propelled by the force of the liquor coming to 
the bladder in so great a quantity. The next day, provided the symp- 
toms still continue, I take blood again, in as large a quantity as the 
patient’s strength will bear, which likewise after I repeat once, nay, 
twice more, if the severity of his pain, and the continuance thereof, 
require it, as for the most part it will, where the blood that is taken 
appears to be like that which is drawn in pleurisies, viz., resembling 
on the top the colour of pus, or rather of lantern’s horn, and a coat of 
the thickness of a crown piece, and of a very tough consistence, may, 
when the blood is cold, be separated from the rest, and appear through- 
out of the said colour. By the way, I observe, that although in this 
disease often, in pleurisies and rheumatisms always, the blood, if rightly 
taken, is found to be of the colour before mentioned, yet if in bleeding 
the stream spouts not out forward, but runs downward, though in as 
large a stream as the other, the blood that is so taken will not be of 
the colour described, but very laudable and fresh; it is, therefore, my 
constant custom to order the chirurgeon to make another orifice, if he 
is not able so to manage the former as to make the blood spout out 
forward. But to return to my business: the clysters likewise before 
mentioned are frequently to be injected whilst the pain lasts, though 
not so many as the first day. During all this time, I prescribe oil of 
sweet almonds, fresh drawn, either alone or mixed with syr. althee 
comp. to be frequently taken, and very strictly forbid the drinking of 
wine, ale, beer, or any other fermented liquor, instead whereof I order 
barley-water, either alone or wherein hath been boiled a small quantity 
of liquorice and althzea roots, for his constant drink, and I enjoin him 
to keep to a fleshless diet, as barley-broth, water-gruel, panada, &c. 
I prescribe, likewise, the following emulsion: 


K Rad. eringii candefacti, 2ij ; 
Amygdalarum dulc. aa vj ; 
Sem. melonum, 
— Peponum, 
— Papav. albi, 
— Lactuce, aa 3i] ; 
Aq. hord. lb. jss. 
Sacchari cristall. 2j; 
Coletur et leniter coquatur. F. emulsio, cap. Ziv, alternis horis. 


Also towards forcing the stone, after that the passages are sufficiently 
mollified by clysters, and the other things prescribed, I do now and 
then give this medicine: 
EK Aq. parietariz, Ziv; 
Spir. salis, g. xij; 
Sal. prunelle, 3jss ; 
Syr. althzeze comp. 5]. 


382 NOTES. 


Or this : 
IX Aq. parietariz, 
Vini Rhenaris, 
Alle tenuis, aa lb. ss ; 
Affundant. rad. petroselini, Zi. 
Contundantur in mortar Colaturee adde— 
Syr. de 5 radicibus, 
Ol. amygd. dulce. aa 3 jss. 
M. f. haustus cap. semel in die post clysteris completam 
operationem. 


Sometimes, notwithstanding the use of these remedies, I am enforced 
to use the following bath, especially when a stone is come down from 
the kidney, and sticks in the bladder. 


kK Rad. althee, Ib. j; 
Rad. symphyti, lb. ss; 
Fol. verbasc., 
— malve, 
— althaz, aa manip. iv; 
Flor. chamomel., 
— Meliloti, 
— Hygiri, 
— Sambuci, 
— Ros. rubr., 4am) ; 
Furfuris mari, t vj ; 
Sem. lini parum contus. 3ij. 

Incidantur et includantur sacculis duobus qui transversim intersuantur. 
Incoquantur sacculis predictis in congiis 6 aq. ad consumptionem 
unius, sub finem adde lactis rem mulcti cong. 2 f. semicupium quod 
ingrediatur eger, et sit unus sacculus in loco pulvinaris in balnei 
in sessu. 


When the pains and all other symptoms are perfectly gone, I order 
some lenient purge, but to purge the patient sooner, nay, even to mix 
the least purgative ingredient with his clysters, doth much harm, by 
irritating the parts already vexed with the disease, and causing in them 
and the humours a high tumult, besides that a purging medicine, though 
very strong, given in the height of this disease, will hardly work, or, if 
it doth, will increase the pain. 

Now although this disease, managed as hath been here delivered, is 
wont for the most part to go off in three or four days at most, yet I 
think fit to intimate that oftentimes I have cured it in a nearer and 
more easy way, viz. by the use of Northall, Barnet, or Lusom waters, 
enjoining the patient to drink three quarts in a morning, for several 
days together, warmed if the season be winter, cold if summer: upon 
the taking of which the first time, great ease hath ensued, and upon 
the persisting in the use of them for a longer time, a perfect cessation 
of all other symptoms, without the observation of any diet, regimen, 
or any more ado whatsoever. And how prejudicial soever the signifying 
this may be to practitioners, yet, it being for the benefit of the whole, 
those that are wise and honest will hold me excused. 


NOTES, 383 


NOTE B. 


[From the MS. of the College of Physicians, p. lxii; in a different handwriting 
from the Extract of Nore A.] 


APOPLEXIA EX SANGUINE, 


To this disease are apt men from fifty upwards, of full and gross 
habits of body, and ruddy complexions, large bellies, that drink wine, 
and live sedentary lives. These men, between the winter solstice and 
the vernal equinox for the most part, but often also at other times of 
the year, from occasion of a high debauch, unwonted exercise, or any- 
thing else that gives an unusual and sudden motion to the blood, do 
(sometimes with a presenting of a fulness and giddiness in the head, 
but often without any warning at all) fall down, are taken with a deep 
sleep with snoring, are deprived of all sense and motion, respiration 
excepted. ‘The first time of their being attacked happens to be in the 
morning. This disease is for the most part deadly, and kills the first 
fit. 

This sort is caused by extravasation of blood upon the brain, as is 
often found by dissecting those that die thereof, and therefore admits 
not of cure but by large bleeding in the very act of extravasation, if 
then. But is most certainly and easily prevented by doing of the same 
any little time before. 

Those, therefore, whose age and habit of body, and imprudent manner 
of living threaten this great danger, ought in the first place to take a 
large quantity of blood from the right arm, suddenly after the winter 
solstice, every year, it being dangerous to delay the same till the ad- 
vance of the spring; and the next day | order a lenient purge to be 
taken. The reason why I would have the taking of blood to precede 
purgation is, for that there would be danger that the purge given upon 
full veins would, by the tumult that it raises in its operation upon the 
blood and humours, hasten the mischief which it was designed to pre- 
vent. When it has been done, I advise the patient wholly to abstain 
from the eating of flesh, or drinking any strong liquor, for the space 
of a week, entertaining himself in the mean time with panado, water- 
gruel, roasted apples, and such like, and after that time to repeat the 
same purge again, and from thenceforward to observe such a diet during 
his life as may secure him from this disease, which every day renders 
him more hable to than others. 

I order him, therefore, above all things to avoid the use of wine, or 
any other strong liquor whatsoever, which, though at all times very 
hurtful to such persons, yet the ill effects they produce will be much 
increased by taking them in the morning. In his diet I direct him to 
avoid multiplicity of dishes at the same meal, and at suppers to forbear 
the eating of flesh. 


384 NOTES. 


APOPLEXIA EX PITUITA. 


To this disease are inclined persons under the same circumstances 
with the other before mentioned, saving that they are not altogether 
so sanguine; and they are taken in the same manner, and upon the 
same occasions and seasons also. But the causes are different; in that 
the disease of these proceeds from a gross, thick, phlegmatic humour 
in the blood, which, either obstructing the capillary arteries in the 
brain, and so hindering the access of blood for the supply of animal 
spirits, or else being protruded out of the arteries into the cortex of the 
brain and the meatuses does there hinder both the generation and 
motion of the animal spirits, upon either of which accidents all the 
symptoms will be produced which are observable in this kind of apoplexy. 
To which may be added, those ramifications of viscous coagulated matter 
in the arteries, which, taking root in the heart, and growing like 
branches of coral in those vessels, do by degrees fill up the passage of 
the blood, and at last hinder its due and necessary afflux to the brain. 

Before the invasion of the fit there hath been, for the most part, a 
presention of a fulness and hoariness in the head, a more than ordinary 
disposition to sleep, and a decay of memory. 

This sort, though very dangerous, doth not yet so certainly infer 
death as the other; there happening, oftentimes, a solution thereof by 
way of a palsy, the matter of the disease being thrown upon the 
beginning of the spinal marrow, and these obstructing all or part of 
the fibres of it, makes the palsy more or less universal, though that for 
the most part it makes a deadness of one side. 

For the cure. In the first place, if, by the patient’s having indulged 
in the use of wine, especially if the late plentiful drinking thereof gave 
occasion to the fit, if he be not too far advanced in years, and be mode- 
rately sanguine, blood is to be taken, though yet I do it in a less 
quantity than in the other sort. But, for the most part, bloodletting 
is contraindicated, and the indications are to be taken from evacuating 
the gross humour, to which purpose I take the following course. First, 
I order a good strong clyster to be injected, e. g. 


K Decoct. com. pro clyst. lb. jss ; 
Diaphen., £j; 
Hier. picr., 3ss; 
Mel. anthos, 2ij ; 
Sal. com., 3ij. 
F. Clyst. statim injiciend. 


Or the following : 


EK Fol. salv., 
— Origan., 
— Rut., 
— Calaminth., 
Centaur, min., 4a manipul. j ; 
Fl. stacad., 
—- lavand., àà tss; 
Sem. carth., ss; 
Bacc. junip., Ziij; 
Sem. foenic., 


NOTES. 385 


Sem. cumin, àà 5i] ; 

Agaric., 

Pulp. colocynth., in eadem petia incluse, àà 3jss; 
Coq. in s. q. aq. ad Ib. jss; Colatura dissolve. 

Diapheenic., 3 j; 

Hier. picr., 38; 

Benedict. laxat., 5ij ; 

Pil. coch., mj. 
M. f. clyst. 


If the clyster does not work (which very often happens in this disease), 
then I appoint this following suppository to be put up: 
Fe Puly. hier. pier., 31); 
Pil. colocynth., 
— agar., aa 3ss; 
Diagrid., Dj; 
Sal. gem., 5j. 
Mel. anthos. ad debitam consistent coct. q. s., ut f. suppositoria, 
quorum unum indatur. 


As soon as they have injected the clyster, I give a purge of— 
ER Pil coch. maj,, 9i); 
Pil. de agar., Dj; 
Trochisc alkandal diagrid., 
Ol. castor., aa gr. iij. 
F. massa cum melle anthos. qua dissolvatur in aq. salv., Ziss ; 
Addendo syr. ros. cum agar., 3s. 
F. potio que in gulam ex coch. infundatur. 
Or this— 
K Fol. sen., 3iij ; 
Agar., 
Turbith. elect., aa 3jss ; 
Zinz, 38: 
Coq. s. q. aq. salv. ad Zijss; Colatura dissolve. 
Elect. diacathoL, 3i); 
Castor., 9ss; 
Oxymel. simpl., 3ss. 
F. potio. 

When the purging medicine is exhibited, even before the same doth 
work, or whilst it is in working, I use revulsions of all sorts; as rubbing 
and binding the limbs, cupping-glasses to the scapula, arms, and thighs, 
vesicatories to the poll and scapula. Amongst all things that awaken 
and recover them to their senses, the blowing tobacco in their mouths 
is of greatest efficacy. 


The purging being over, I endeavour to evacuate the head, sensibly 
and insensibly. As— 
kK Rad. irid, 
Fol. anagall., 
Bete, aa manip. ij ; 
Fol. rut., manip.) ; 
Castor., 9s. 
Terantur in mort. mar. sensim affundend. 
Vin. alb., Ziv ; 
Aceti, 3ij. 
Exprimatur succus, cui adde 
Mel. ros., 3js. 
F. errhin. naribus injiciend. bis vel ter cum syring. vel fol. nico- 
tiane naribus immittantur. 


fi 25 


Dd 


386 NOTES. 


K Fol. major., 
—- Salv., 
— Rosismarin. sicc., àà 3s ; 
Rad. pyreth., 
— Helleb. alb., aa 9j; 
Castor., gr. vj. 
M. f. sternutator. quod penna tubulo naribus insuffletur. 


But here it is to be cautioned, that the use of sneezing medicines is very 
dangerous, where sufficient evacuation hath not preceded, since by them 
the matter is more forcibly driven upon the brain. 
To discuss the humour, I order these following remedies : 
E  Baccar. lauri, 
— Junip., aa 5iss ; 
Rad. angel., 
Zedoar. imperator, aa $j; 
Fol. salv., 
— Rosismarin., aa 111 j ; 
— Rute, 
— Satur. maj. 
Fl. lavend., aa mss. 
Coq. s.q. acet. Hoc decocto spong. aut linteum imbuatur, et 
super. capiti calidi applic. Brachia quoq. et manus eo abster- 
gantur, et crura et pedes fricentur. 


E OL. castor., 
Euphorb., aa 3j; 
Pul. sinap., 
Euphorb., aa 5j. 
Aceti coch. Cere, q.s. M. f. ung. capiti calido illinend. 

The tongue, palate, and nostrils, I order to be rubbed with old Venice 
treacle, dissolved in aq. ceelest aut antepileptica Lang. 'The chemical 
oils, likewise, of amber, lavender, rosemary, cloves, &c., mixed with 
the expressed oil of nutmegs, may be used for the same purpose. 
Aq. celest. et antepileptica may be given, after general evacuations. 

If the fit be not removed by these remedies, the old remedy of a hot 
frying-pan, held so close to the head that it may not burn the skin, is 
very effectual, but still not to be attempted before evacuation. 

The fit ceasing, I take great care to prevent the return thereof, to 
which the patient will be very liable, and that is to be done partly by 
diet and partly by medicine. 

As to diet, I enjoin the patient a very spare one, and that, too, drying ; 
to forbear suppers, and the use of wine totally, at alltimes ; but yet, 
nevertheless, some fermented liquor, if less strong, may be allowed him. 
As to medicine I order the following head-pill : 

kk Pi.sasr; 
Aloes, aa 3) ; 
Extract. rud., 3); 
Ol. chym. sem. anis, gt. iv; 
Balsam. Peruv., gt. ij. 
M. f. pil. cap. 5j; singul. matut. per 6 dies, vel pil. coch. maj., 9ij; 
per totidem dies. 


And after that time, I appoint him to take of either of the said pills 
the prescribed quantity the day before every full moon, for six times. 
To comfort the stomach— 


NOTES. 387 


RK FI. salv., 
— Rosismarin., aa 3); 
Zinz. condit., 
Cortic. citri condit., aa 3v] ; 
Nuc. moscat. condit., 3s ; 
Mirob. condit., N° j ; 
Theriac. veter., 
Confect. alcherm., aa 3iij ; 
Pulv. elect., 
Diambr., 
Diamosc. d., aa 5j. 

Cum syr. conditura cortic. citr. f. opiata. Cap ad magnitudinem 


castanez singulis matutinis superbibendo coch. ij aq. antepilept. 
Lang. Vel— 


RK Ambr. gris., 55; 

Ol. delph., 

— anis. 

— cinnam. 

Nuc. mosc., aa gt. 1) ; 

CaryophyL., gt. j; i 

Sacchar. in aq. fl. aurant. solut., Ziv. 
F. tabellae, cap. i, ad libitum. 


INDEX. 


ABBREVIATIONS.—E. D. T. E. means Epistle Dedicatory to the Third Edition of the 
Medical Observations—E. D. F. E., ditto to the First Edition—P. F. E., Pre- 
face to the First Edition—P. T. E., Preface to the Third Edition—M. O., 
Medical Observations—Ep. I, First Epistle, i.e. to Dr. Brady—Ep. II, Second 
Epistle, i. e. to Dr. Paman—E. D., Epistolary Dissertation —'T. G., Treatise 
on Gout—T. D., Treatise on Dropsy—8. M., Schedula Monitoria —P. I, 


Processus Integri. 


Abortion, to prevent, P. L, 30. 

Abscess, M: 0.,21,2,21 5.143,93, 5; E. D., 
EE. 

Actium, T. D., 44. 

Acupuncture, useless in dropsy, T. D., 
40. 

Acute. See Diseases. 

Astuation. See Fermentation. 

Ague. See Intermittent. 

Air. See Constitution. 

Altomarus, M. O., ii, 2, 27. 

AMERICA, Ep. II, 5. 

Anatomy, its use to physicians and sur- 
geons; opinionof H rPPOCRATES; limits 
to our knowledge of it, T. D., 19-22. 

Ancients, undue admiration of the, T. D., 
44. 

Andernachus, M. O., ii, 2, 27. 

ANNESLEY, M. O., iv, 7, 9. 

Antidotes, M. O., ii, 2, 17. 

Antimonials, unsafe as emetics for chil- 
dren, M. O., i, 4, 19. 

Antony. See Augustus. 

Aphthz, in dysentery, signs of approach- 
ing death, M. O., iv, 3, 3; 4, 2: in 
the fever of '85, S. M. I, 10. 

Apoplectic symptoms in intermittents, 
Ep. I, 34. 

Apoplexy, in the fever of '78; Ep. I, 34; 
EE D.,021 1:16:26; P. I5 175 3; &o. 

Aposteme. See Abscess. 

ARISTOTLE, E. D., 75. 

Ascites. See Dropsy. 

Asthma, inveterate, of patients, with a 
sanguine temperament, three sorts, 
P. I.,.56. 

Astringents not safe in cholera, M. O., 
iv, 2, 2; in gonorrhea, Ep. II, 10,21. 

Atmosphere. See Constitution. 

Augustus. See Actium. 


Bacon, Lon», P. T. E., 4. 
BARRINGTON, M. O., iv, 5,9. 


II. 


Bark. See Peruvian Bark. 

Bastard peripneumony. See Peripneu- 
mony. 

Bath waters, E. D., 111. 

BELKE, Dr., his case, M. O., iv, 3, 12. 

Belvoir Castle. See Annesley. 

Bilious. See Colic. 

Bladder, ulcer of, P. I., 55. 

Boxrurvus, M. O,, i, 1, 2. 

BoTALLUS, ii, 2, 27, quoted 28. 

Bovrsz, E. D. F. E. 

Brapy, Dr., his letter to SYDENHAM, 
vol. ii, p. 4. SyDENHAM’s epistle to, 
vol. i, pp. 1-28, S. M. I, 10. 

Bruises, P. I., 52. 

Bubo in plague, M. O., ii, 2, passim. In 
lues, Ep. II, 11. 

Burns, P. 1, 50. 

Butter, M. O., iv, 3, 17. 


Calabria, S. M. III, 4. 

Calculus, simulated by hysteria, M. O., 
iv, 7, 18; E. D., 67 ; an effect of gout, 
T. G., 12; impacted in the kidney, 
S. M. III, e£ passim. 

Camarina, allusion to, T. D., 9. 

Carbuncles, M. O., iii, 3, 5. 

Caruncles in the urethra, Ep. IT, 10; 
B;L S34, 

Cato, E. D. F. T. 

Cause; causes of disease immediate and 
remote, P. T. E., 20. 

Chalk-stones, T. G., 55. 

Chalybeate pill, P. I., 1 and 46; chaly- 
beate powder, 1 and 46. 

Chalybeates, in hysteria, E. D. 96; iron 
in substance, in a syrup, 97 ; when un- 
necessary, 106; when injurious, 108 ; 
what they are, 110. 

Charon, M. ©. iv, 5, 7. 

Cuevut, Mr., E. D., 46. 

Childbed, causes of death in, E. D., 128. 

Chlorosis. See Green Sickness. 


26 


390 


Cholera morbus, the season of its appear- 
ance, M. O., i, 2, 12; of 1769, M. O., 
iv, 11, 1, &c.; its symptoms, 1 ; treat- 
ment, 2-6; the kind that may appear 
at any time ofthe year, 7. Cholera of 
1673-6, Ep. I, 5; its treatment, 8; 
P. I., 24, 1; the treatment, 25; of in- 
fants, 5. 

Chorea. See St. Vitus’s Dance. 

Chronic. See Diseases. 

Cicero, quoted, Ep. I, 2, E. D., 23, as the 
Roman orator, 75. 

Circumcision, how far preventive to go- 
norrhea, Ep. II, 3, P. I, 34. 

Clavus hystericus. See Hysteria. 

Cuenca, Mr., his case, M. O., v, 4, 12. 

Cors, Dr., his letter to SypENHAM, vol. 
i, pp. 53-55; SvpENHAM's to Dr. 
Corz, pp. 56-118. 

Colic, bilious, of, ’70-2, M. O., iv, 7, 1, 
&c.; description, 2; causes, 3; treat- 
ment, 4-8; case, 9; P.L, 23. 

Colic, hysterical, M. O., iv, 7, 16; de- 
scription of, 17; akin to the vapours, 
18; what treatment is prejudicial, 20; 
tendency to end in jaundice, 22; E. D., 
115; Bds.28, 1:-the: trealmenb, 25 
clavus hystericus, 5; affinity to hypo- 
chondriasis, 6; ends in jaundice, 7. 

Colica pictonum, P. I., 25. 

Corriws, Mr., M. O., iv, 6, 5. 

Coma, in smallpox, M. O., iii, 2, 23 ; 62; 
in the fever of 1773-4-5, v, 1,3; 17; 
the fever called febris comatosa, 26 ; 
in the confluent variole, E. D., 29; in 
the fever of 1786, S. M. I, 5. 

Commotion. See Fermentation. 

Concoction, in fevers, what, M. O., i, 4, 
Pike 

Constitutions, effect in producing speci- 
fically different diseases, M. O., i, 2, 5, 
&c. Epidemic constitution of 1661- 
62-3-4 in London, M. O,, i, 3, 1-7 
-——of '65-6, M. Os n, Ll, 1 of 
67-8 and part of '69, M. O., iii, 1, 1- 
4 —— of part of '69-70-1-2, M. O., 
iv, 1, 1-9 —— of ’73-4-5, M. O., v, 
1, L, &e. of '76, Ep. I, 5; mea- 
sles of, 6; cholera of, 7. Constitution 
of ’77, not observed by SYypENHAM, 1; 
——— of ’68, 11; the fevers of, 12, &c. 
Constitution of '79, 41; coughs, 41- 
54. Constitution of '80-5, 56. 

Continued. See Fevers. 

Convulsions. See Epilepsy. 

Convulsive cough of children, Ep. I, 47 ; 
P. I., 44. 

Conysby, a patient so named, M. O., v, 

+ 24. 


Cordials, strong, moderate, M. O., i, 4, 30. 


INDEX. 


Costzeus, M. O., ii, 2, 27. 
Coughs, P. I., 58. 
Coxe, Dr. E. D. T, E. 
Crasus, Ep. I, 2. 
Crosse, Mrs., E. D., 34. 


Dacrss, Lady, E. D., 46. 

Decline, P. 1., 60. 

Democritus, E. D., 77. 

Dentition, convulsions during, M. O., iv, 
5, 8; treatment of fevers from, S. M. I, 
33; fever, P. I., 42. 

Depuration by means of fermentation. 
See Fermentation. 

Depuratory. See Fever. 

Despumation. See Fermentation. 

Desquamation, of the measles of 1670, 
MO. ip,:D.,.dg Of 7746) Yon Soak Geet 
scarlatina, vi, 2, 1. 

Diabetes after ague, Ep. I, 35; P. L., 37. 

Diarrhoea in fever, how dangerous, how 
to be treated, M.O., 1, 4, 10, 11; 51, 
52; of the continued fevers of 1667, 
'69, iii, 3, 11-14; colliquative in tabes, 
P.I., 60. See Dysentery. 

D1EMERBROEK, M. O., ii, 2, 26, 44. 

Diseases, their history, P. T. E., 6 ; their 
description, 7-9 ; peculiar and constant 
phenomena, 10; effect of seasons on 
them, 11; deficiencies in their natural 
history, 13; dictum of HiPPocRATES, 
15; how the treatment can be im- 
proved, 17; Methodus medendi, 21; 
what it is, M. O., i, 1, 1; division into 
acute and chronic; fevers pre-emi- 
nently acute, 4; chronic, 5; acute and 
epidemic, 6 ; intercurrent and sporadic, 
7; species of diseases as well as of ani- 
mals, ii, 2,9; have periods for their 
disappearance and prevalence, v, 4, 16 ; 
diseases in fieri, where the type is not 
yet formed, vi, 5, 9; relation of fevers 
to other diseases—mode of observa- 
tion, Ep. I, 52, 53; difference between 
acute and chronie, T. G., 34 ; notto be 
ascertained by hypothesis, T. D., 24. 

Dissections in dropsy of the testes of 
females, E. D., 92; of dropsical sub- 
jects; T. D. 39. 

Diuretics in dropsy, T. D., 32; P. I.,33, 7. 

DRAKE, Dr. J., assists SYDENHAM ; 
Epistle dedicatory to the T. G. 

Dregs. See Flowers. 

Dropsy, T. D., passim ; whom it attacks ; 
symptoms, dyspnoea, scanty urine, 
thirst, 1-3 ; cause, 4, 5 ; of females, 6 ; 
tumours simulating dropsy, dropsy 
simulating pregnancy, 7; rules for 
purging, 9, 10, 11; case, 12; purging 


INDEX. 


Dropsy (continued). 
with elaterium and eroc. met., 17; 
syrup of buckthorn, 18; case, 27; 
elder-bark, 30; restoratives, 31; wine 
corroborants, 34-38 ; topical remedies, 
40, P. I., 33; its signs, 1; treatment, 
2; use of cathartics, 3-6. 

Drying woods, Ep. IT, 12. 

Dunster, ii, 2, 27. 

Duties of the physician, P. F. E., 1. 

Dysentery of 1669, '70, '71, and ’72, 
M. O,, iv, 3, 1, &e.; symptoms, 1; 
time of year, 2; description, treat- 
ment, complications, 3, 4 ; Irish dysen- 
tery, 5; how far a fever, 8 ; principles 
of treatment, 9; how cured in Mo- 
rocco, 17; case, 18; S. M. I, 26; 
diarrhoea and gripes, P. I., 22,1; with 
tenesmus, 2; the treatment, 4; dry 
gripes without stools, 11. 


Ebullition. See Fermentation. 

Elaterium, its great use in dropsy, T.D. 
T 

Errror, Mr., case of, M. O., v, 4, 11. 

Empirics, P. T. E., 29; M.0,, v, 6,8; 
their mischievous tendency to experi- 
ment, Ep. I, 505; T7 68: 25,31. 

Empyema, P. I., 60, 10. 

Epidemic diseases, M. O., i., 2, 1; differ 
with the constitution of the year, 5; 
irregular, 8; vernal or autumnal, 10; 
vernal, 11. Epidemic constitution of 
1661-2-3-4, 3, 1, &e. 

Epidemic constitution of 1665-6, M. O., 
ji, 1, 1, &c.—of 1667-8, and part of 
id, 2,1, &e. 

Epidemic coughs, of 75, M.O. v, 5, 1, &c. 


'Ezíkpacw, catharsis per izixoaouy, 


Epilepsy, forerunner of the eruption, 
smallpox, M. O., iij, 2, 2; during 
teething, iv, 5, 8; after scarlatina, vi, 
2,3; preceding confluent variole, D.E., 
28; can it be treated like St. Vitus’s 
dance, S; M. T, 21. 

Epilepsy of children, P. I., 40. 

Epistaxes, M. O., i, 4, 48. P. L., 45. 

Erysipelatous fever, vi, 6, 1, &c. 

EscurAPrUS, the Egyptian, P. T. E., 1. 

Etiology, M. O., i, 5, 5. 

Exfoliation, Ep. II, 35. 


Exostoses, Ep. II, 35. P. I., 35. 


Facies Hippocratica, M. O., i, 5, 52. 

Ferdinand. See Tuscany. 

Fermentation, M. O., i, 4; what best 
called— Ebullition, commotion, &c. 2; 
depuration by dregs, by flowers, 52. 


391 


Fevers, stationary, M. O., i, 2, 5 ; inter- 
current, 6; putrid, malignant, petechial, 
13; intermittents, s. v. ; continued of 
1661-2-3-4, 4, 1, &c., consist of a fer- 
mentation, ebullition, or commotion, 2; 
treatment, 5; the attendant diarrhea, 
9; emetics, when useful, 15; venesec- 
tion, 22; cordials, 25; malignity, so- 
called, 38 ; cough, epistaxis, &c. 46, 49; 
hiccup, 51 ; diarrhoea, 52 ; ileus, 53,57; 

of '67-8, and part of ’69, iii, 3; 
description, 1; connexion with small- 
pox, whence called variolous, 2; how 
different, 3-6; treatment, 7; of 
'69-70-1-2, iv, 4; akin to dysentery 
and dysenteria, 3;——of ’73-4-5, v, 
2, 1, &e.; of '76-8, Ep. I, 12, &c.; 
depuratory of '61-2-3-4, P. I., 11, 1-7; 
erysipelatous, P. I., 11 ; stationary, from 
1685-90, P. I., 5, 1-10; pestilential, 
see Plague; putrid, subsequent to the 
confluent smallpox, S. M. II, passim ; 
of children, arising from dentition, 
P. L, 42; hectic, 43, 

Fits. See Epilepsy, Hysteria. 

Flowers, in fermentation, i, 4, 52. 

Fluor albus, Ep. I, 36, P. I., 36. 

Fonseca, ii, 2, 27. 

Forestus, ii, 2, 27. 

France, why venereal patients go there, 
Ep. II, 38. 

French, T. G., 51, 62. 


GALEN, M. 0.; 1, 5, 39. 

Garlic in dropsies, T. D., 37. 

Goddard's Drops, P. T. E., 25. 

Gonorrhea, Ep. II, 10; how different 
from /ues, 12; to be cured by cathartics, 
13-15 ; clysters, where useful, 16 ; diet, 
18; bleeding in sanguine tempera- 
ments, 19; importance of cleanliness, 
20; when the prepuce cannot be 
drawn back, 22; swollen scrotum, 23; 
P. L., 34, its signs, 1; treatment, 3. 

Goopat, Dt. C., P. T, E., 25; Ep. 1,8; 
cases of, E. D., 49-54 ; praise of, 55; 
preface to the Schedule Monitorie. 

Gout, Treatise on, pp. 123-162; who it 
attacks, T. G., 2; its attack, 5; pro- 
gress, 6-11; precedes calculus, 12; 
effect on the mind, 13; affects the rich 
and wise, 15; hereditary, 16; its 
nature, origin in indigestion, 17-20; 
treatment, 20; bleeding not beneficial, 
21; nor catharsis, 22; sweats, 26; 
causa antecedens, continens, 28 ; action 
of digestives, 29; antiscorbutics, 30; 
restoratives, 33; exercise and diet, 41 ; 
milk diet case, 45; beer and wine, 46; 


392 


Gout (continued ). 
total abstinence, diet-drinks, 48; how 
far wine allowable, 51; late hours, 52; 
exercise, 54; riding, 56; continence, 
57; in the stomach, 62; external ap- 
plications, 67; Moxa, 68; gout per- 
sonified in the Tpayoroddypa, 2071. 
PR. I3:60 

Green scat: chlorosis, febris alba, 
predisposes to the clavus hystericus, 
E. D., 63; a sort of hysteria, 92; 
treatment, 108. P. I., 46. 

Gripes. See Dysentery. 

Guinea, coast of, Ep. II, 5. 


Heematuria. See Bloody Urine. 

Hemoptoe, P. I.,48; vomiting of blood, 
ibid. 

Hemoptysis. See Hemoptoe. 

Hemorrhoids. See Piles. 

Hemiplegia, E. D., 61. 

Hiccup, M. O., i, 4, 50. 

Hippocrates, P. T. E., 3, 13; recom- 
mends bellows in colic, 31; quoted, 
M. O., 1, 1, 3; quoted as the divine 
old man, v, 2, 16; v, 4, 15; his pro- 
gnosis in pleurisy, vi, 3,3; taught by 
experience, LT I, 51; quoted, E. D., 
26, 78, 1074735. Guy 27968); E. D. 19, 
21.22. 295 $; M. i 99. 

History ofa disease, its conditions, P. T. E., 
5-12; 

Hooping-cough, M. O., iv, 5, 8. 

HowaR»p, M. O., iv, 3, 17. 

Hydragogues, T. D., 9. 

Hydrophobia, P. I., 54. 

Hypercatharsis, best controlled by lau- 
danum, sometimes arising from mild 
purges, T. D., 9; from purging un- 
guents, &c., 40. 

Hypochondriasis, its affinity to hysteria, 
E. D., 73; mental symptoms, 75; 
P.115:28; 

Hypothesis, when legitimate, T. D., 25. 

Hysteria, E. D., 58, ad finem ; its fre- 
quency, 58, 59 ; its variety, 60; what 
it simulates, 61-70; green vomiting, 
66, 83; mental symptoms, 75; limpid 
urine, 86; case in a male, 86 ; saliva- 
tion, 87; chills, 88; crying, 89 ; ori- 
gin, 91; hysterical colie, 115 ; simu- 
lates nephritis and bilious colic, 126 ; 


P.L," 1, 1-21; eclavus:. hystericus, 
strangulation of the womb. 2; treat- 
ment, 3. 


Hysterical remedies: the fetid, E. D., 
94, 102, 103; when injurious, 107 ; 
taken as errhines, and externally, 119; 
their nature, 120. 


INDEX. 


Idiosyncrasy, to be particularly observed 
in hysteria, E. D., 107. 

Ignis sacer, M. O., ii, 2, 13, 14, 15. 

Iliac passion. See Ileus. 

Ileus in fever, M. O., i, 4, 53; its causes, 
obstruction, true and false ileus, 54; 
obstruction, treatment by leaden bul- 
lets, 55 ; true method, 56, 57 ; diet and 
regimen, 59. 

Ileus, simulated by hysteria, E. D., 66; 
in fever, S. M. 1L, 3,29 3 P. 115,20,.15 
the treatment, 2-6. 

Indian moss, or Moza, 68. 

Intermittent fever, P. T. E., 19; M. O.,i, 
2, 14; of the years 1661-4, 5, 1, &c.; 
the stages, 6 ; double fits, 7; kinds of, 
8; vernal, 10; autumnal, 13; quartans 
change their type, 14, 21; treatment 
of spring agues, 16; use of emetics, 17; 
bleeding, 18; autumnal agues more 
obstinate, 19; duration of fits collec- 
tively, 24; nature of the fermentation, 
26; use of bark, 33; sequele of au- 
tumnal, numerous, 41; dropsy, 46; 
swollen bellies of infants, 49; mania, 
56; tertians and quartans of 1678, 
Ep. I, 12; action of bark. See Peru- 
vian bark, P. L,4, 1-7. 

Inunction, mercurial in lues, Ep. II, 26. 

Irish. See Dysentery, 

Iron. See Chalybeates. 

lich, P. 1, 12. 


Jaundice, M. O., iv, 7, 21; arising from 
confinement to bed in the fever of 
1673.5,-M. O7; $, 2, I3; not follow- 
ing-colic, P. 4... 29. 

Jesuits’ bark. See Peruvian bark. 


King's evil. See Rickets. 
King’s Mews. See Conysby. 
Kenprick, Dr., 54; E. D., 140. 


Laudanum ; formula for the liquid, M. O., 
iv, 3, 14; its strength, B. D. 39. 
— London, id ac solid. —, the solid, 
when preferable to the liquid and to 
syrup of poppy, S. M. II, 14. 

Lixiviated salts, T. D., 32, 38 ; as diure- 
ties; P. Ly 93, 4c 

Lochia, excess of, P. I., 31; suppressed, 
E. D., 126); P. 1, 92. 

Lockr, E. D. T. E; his Latin verses to 
SYDENHAM, 25 

Aowpwdne, the constitutions of 1665 and 
1666 such, M. O., ii, 2, 3, 7. 

Lucian, T. G., 70. 

Lucretius, quoted E. D. T. E. 


INDEX. 


Lues, Ep. IT, passim ; how far the vene- 
real disease should be cured, 4; its 
origin, 5, 7; contagion, 8; progress 
and common symptoms, 9; complica- 
tions, exostoses, 11; nature, 12 ; when 
a confirmed pox, 24; treatment, 25; 
mercurial inunction, 26; ptyalism, 27 ; 
purging, 30; coexistent with gonor- 
rhoea, 33, 34 ; French treatment what, 
98; diet, 39? P. L, 35; sigus of,- E; 
treatment, 2-9, &c. 


Malignity, another name for ignorance, 
M. O., i, 4, 38, ii, 2, 1; considered, 
M-O. v; 5, 12-16, Ep: 1, 52; S. M. L,, 
40, 41. 

MarrHvs, Mr., Ep. I, 60. 

Manna, what is it, S. M. III, 4; its use 
in gout, gravel, calculus, and bloody 
urine, 5-8. 

MaPerETorT, Dr., E. D. T. E. 

Mania, of the intermittents of 1661.4, 
M:Oj1 5,535. cotamon, P. 1.51. 

Massa, ii, 2, 27. 

Mathew's pills, P. T, 20, 2. 

Maturation of pustules in smallpox, M. O., 
1003. 

Measles of 1670, M. O., iv, 5; time of 
year, 1; description, 2; evils of an over- 
hot regimen, 4; how far akin to small- 
pox, 5; of infants, 7; concomitants 
and sequele, 8-10; of 1674, M. O., 
v, 3; their anomalous character, 1; 
fever, 4; measles, P. I., 14. 

Measly fever, M. O., v, 3, 4. 

Melancholy, in hysteria, E. D., 75; in 
gout, T. G., 53. 

Menses, flow of, during smallpox, M. O., 
iv, 6, 11 ; in hysteria, E. D., 135; sup- 
pression of, P. I., 47 ; immoderate flow 
OF Dro 24. 

Mercatus, ii, 2, 27. 

Mercurialis, ii, 2, 27. 

Mercury, how far a specific in the vene- 
real disease, Ep. II, 12. 

Metellus, E. D. T. E. 

Method, or praxis, its conditions, P. T. E., 
16. 

Miasma, M. O., ii, 2, 4, 7. 

Milk diet, E. D., 115. 

MrrLiINGTON, Dr., M. O., iv, 6, 11. 

Morocco, M. O., iv, 3, 17. 

MonmnicE, Dr., iii, 3, 10. 

Moxa, use of, in gout, T. G., 68. 


Nature, quotation from HiPPocRATES 
concerning, P. T. E., 15; operation in 
chronic diseases, 23; her mode of 
eliminating deleterious influences, 
M. O., i, 1, 3; conceals the essences of 


393 


Nature (continued). 
diseases, ii, 2, 9; what is meant by the 
expression, ii, 2,48; how far myste- 
rious, E. D., 56, T. D., 22; her watch- 
fulness, 39. 

NEEDHAM, Dr., E. D. T. E. 

Negroes, Ep. II, 5. 

Nephritis, a nephritie paroxysm, P.L, 
20. 

Non-naturals, M. O., i, 2, 6; 4, 4; 5, 25, 
T. Di 34, P..I,-61. 

Not, Mrs., a patient of SvpENHAM's, 
v,2,21. 


Onion, applied to the soles of the feet in 
smallpox, E. D., 44. 

Ophthalmia, P. I., 18, 1, &c. 

Orthopneea, P. I., 56. 

Oxford, E. D. T. E. 

Oxyerat, P, L, 94, Ll. 


Palpitation of the heart in hysteria, E. D., 
64. 3 

Palsy, Peis 57: 

Paman, Dr., his letter to SypENHAM, 
vol. ii, 29; SypENHAM's to PAMAN, 
vol. ii, 31-50. 

PASCHALIUS, ii, 2, 27. 

Passio iliaca. See Ileus. 

Pereda, ii, 2, 27. 

Peripneumony of 1675, v, 5, 1; affinities 
with fever, postscript to T. D., 2; 
different from pleurisy in degree only, 
M. O., vi, 3, 5; bastard, vi, 4; time 
of year and constitutions attacked, 1 ; 
description, 2; treatment, 3— bastard, 
POR 9: 

Pertussis, iv, 5, 8. 

Peruvian bark, use in agues, M. O., i, 5, 
33-37; value in the fevers of 1676 'and 
'78, Ep. I, 13, 14 ; why distrusted, 15; 
its virtue not owing to its astringency, 
16; its date, 17; mode of adminis- 
tration, 19-31, and 37-40 ; in hysteria, 
E. D., 114; use in gout, T. G., 71; 
cautions, S. M. I, 10, 32-36. 

Pestilential fever. See Plague. 

PETwoRnTH. See Morrice. 

Phaeton, M. O., iv, 3, 5. 

Phagedenic ulcers, P. I., 35, 1. 

Phrenzy, M. O., i, 4, 42; in the fevers 
0f 1073-75, 95 2 225 of delivery, E. D., 
129 ; in the fever of 1685, S. M., 5. 

Phthisis kills two thirds of those who 
die of chronic disease; good effects of 
riding, E. D., 118; description, &c., 
P..1., 58. See Tabes. 

Piles, condition of hemorrhoidal veins in, 
T. G., 9; pain of, P. I., 38; immode- 
rate hemorrhage of, 39. 


394 


Plague, M.O., ii, 11, 1; of 1665 and '66, 
its cause, constitution, 3; its essence 
uuknown, 9; sui generis, 10; like the 
ignis sacer, 13. 

Pleurisy of 1675, v, 5, 1, &c. 

Pleurisy, vi, 3; time of year for invasion 
of, 1; temperaments attacked, 2; his- 
tory of disease, supervenes on fevers, 
3; blood of pleurisy, 4; treatment, 
6-12; dry pleurisies, prognosis of Hip- 
pocrates, 13; description and treat- 
ment, P. I., 8. 

Poisoning, case of, Ep. I, 62. 

PorrriAN, E. D. T. E. 

Porrigo. See Scald-head. 

Post-mortem appearances. 
tions. 

Praxis. See Method. 

Prepuce not to be retracted, Ep: II, 22. 

Procidentia uteri, P. I., 19. 

Purging, when injurious in hysteria, 
E. Dee 99: 

Putridity : on putrid fever following the 
confluent smallpox, S. M. Il; comes 
on on the eleventh day, 8; treatment, 
9; petechie and bloody urine, 13. 

Prdywore, M. O., ii, 2, 5. 


See Dissec- 


Quinsy, M. O., vi, 7, 1, &e, P. L, Bd. 


Ray, his account of manna, S. M. III, 4. 

Rheumatism, M. O. vi, 5; time of attack, 
history of, 1, arthritic, 2; lumbago, 3; 
treatment, 4; anodynes, when to be 
avoided, 6; purges, when useful, 7; 
scorbutie rheumatism, 9, 13; how far 
bleeding can be dispensed with, Ep. I, 
58, 64; description and treatment of, 
P. 1, 10. 

Rickets, true and false, E. D., 100; de- 
scription and treatment, P. I., 41. 

Riding, in hysteria and hypochondriasis, 
E. D., 116; in phthisis, 118. 

Riverius, P. I., 25. 

Rose, the. See Ignis sacer. 


Salisbury, M. O., i, 5, 56. 

SALisBuRY, Countess of, M. O., v, 3, 3. 

SALISBURY, Lord, M. O., iv, 4, 11. 

Salivation, how promoted in the variole 
of 1667-9, M. O., iii, 2, 51; becomes 
viscid and incomplete, 61; in the fever 
of '67-9, 3, 14; in the smallpox of 
74-5, v, 4, 11; in lues, Ep. II, 27, &c. 
P. 1, 95. 

SALTMARSH, case of Mrs., T. D., 13. 

Scald-head, P. I., 53. 

ScALIGER quoted, M. O., v, 5, 12. 


INDEX. 


Scarlet fever, vi, 2; time of year, 1; 
treatment, 2; convulsions, 3 ; descrip- 
tion and treatment, P. I., 7. 

Scorbutic rheumatism, M. O., vi, 5,9; 
its connexion with dropsy, 10; treat- 
ment, 11-13; description and treatment 
OF, P; 1, 59: 

Scrotum, when swollen in gonorrhea, 
Ep. II, 23. 

Séptahus, M..O,, 1, 2, 27. 

Seneca, E. D. T. E. 

Shanker, Ep. II, 6. 

SHorr, Dr., Syp—ENHAM’s dedication to 
him of the ‘ Treatise on Gout,’ vol. ii, 
pp» 121, 122. 

Smallpox of 1667,68, and part of ?69, 
M. O., iii, 2; regular in character, 
division intoconfluent and distinct, 1,2 ;. 
eruption, distinct sort, 3; confluent, 6; 
salivation, 13; critical days, 19; 
frenzy and coma, 23; purple spots, 
24; bloody urine, 25; period of sepa- 
ration and expulsion, 30; curative in- 
dications, 32; mischief of a hot regi- 
men, 34; treatment, 42; discrete 
smallpox not dangerous, 48; treat- 
ment of symptoms, 57-65; anomalous 
of, 1670-1-2, iv, 6, 1-8; treatment, 9; 
irregular, of 1674-75, v, 4, 1; exces- 
sive putridity, 2; different indications 
of cure, 5; cases, 11, 12; of 1680-81, 
E. D., 3, &c.; eruption, 4; confluent 
worse than distinct, 5; danger of, bed 
injurious, 8, 9; nature of smallpox, 11; 
mischief of cordials, 12; bleeding and 
purging, 16; theories and practice, 
23-27; coma, 29; use of anodynes, 
33-41; case of Mrs. Crosse, 34; re- 
vulsives, 44 ; critical days, 47; treat- 
ment and description, P. I., 15, 1-29. 

Somerset. See Dunster. 

Spawn. See Exostosis. 

Sparta, Ep. I, 3. 

Species of disease, P. T. E., 18. 

Starstruck, M. O., vi, 6, 1. 

Specifics, P. T. E., 21-24 ; in lues, Ep. II, 
12; none for gout, T. G., 69; bark in 
ague, 713 T. D., 34. 

Speculations, how uustable, E. D., 56; 
opposed to practice, S. M. I, 43. 

Stationary fevers, Postscript to T. D.; 
description of sort previously omitted, 
3, &c.; like bastard peripneumony, 3; 
a winter fever, 3; fevers of 1677, 
S. M. I, &c.; similar to but different 
from intermittents, 4; symptoms, 5. 

Strangulation of womb, E. D., 62, 81. 

St. Giles. See Collins. 

Struma, E. D., 99. 

St. Vitus's.dance, S. M.I, I9; P. L., 16; 1. 


INDEX. 


SYDENHAM, Dr., his family; Life, xiii; 
birth-place, xv ; enters at Oxford, par- 
liamentarian connexion, xvi ; notices of, 
by himself, by Sir R. Bhackmorg, by 
Dr. Lerrsom, xviii, e£ seg. ; fellow of 
All Souls, xxiii; at Montpellier, (?) 
xxiv; degree of B. A., xxv; licentiate 
of College of Physicians, xxvi; first 
publication, notice of, xxvii; letter of 
BovLz, xxxi; verses of Locks, xxxiii ; 
letter from his nephew, xxxv; literary 
history, xxxvii ; Vues of his treatise 
on Dropsy, xxxviii; not a raember of 
the College of Physicians, xliii ; death, 
tombstone, xliv ; family, xlv. ; portrait, 
xlvii ; authorship of the works in Latin, 
l—lxiv; growth of reputation, lxv; 
treatment of smallpox, Ixviii; letter to 
BovLEÉ, lxxii; his use of bark, claims 
of TaArson, view of Sir G. BAKER, 
Ixxiv—lxxxi ; medical logic, and effect 
on medicine, Ixxxi—lxxxix. 

SYDENHAM, W., Dr. SyDENHAM’s bro- 
ther, E. D. T. E. 

SvpENHAM, W., Dr. SYDENHAM’S son, 
MoO. dv, 6, 12. 

Syrup of poppy, compared with the quid 
and the so/id laudanum, S. M. II, 14. 


Tabes, or decline, P. I., 60. 

Tacitus, Titus, E. D. T. E. 

Tantalus, Ep. I, 2. 

Tapping, when useless, T. D., 40. 

Tendon, a punctured, P. I., 49. 

Testes of females, dropsy of, E. D., 92; 
a5 6. 

Thames, the, S. M., II. 

Tuomas, Dr., M. O., i, 5, 56. 

Topayorodaypa, T. G., 70, 71. 

TRINCAVELLIUS, ii, 2, 27. 

Tuscany, M. O,, ii, 2, 7. 


Urine, bloody, in confluent smallpox, 
M. O., iii, 2, 25; in the putrid fever 


consequent on confluent smalipox, 
S. M., 13; treatment, 14 ; arising from 


THE 


395 


Urine (continued). 
a caleulus impacted in the kidneys, 
S. M. III, passim ; SypENHAM’s own 
sufferings, 2; use of manna, 4; treat- 
ment, 5, 14. 


Vapours, M..O,, iv, 7,-17, E. D., 129- 
135; brought on by emetics, T. D., 27 ; 
described, S. M. I, 22. 

Variola. See Smallpox. 

Venereal disease. See Gonorrhcea and 
Lues. — 

Virulent gonorrhea. See Gonorrhea. 
Treatment, Ep. II, 13; prepuce inca- 
pable of being retracted in, 22; ulcers 
10. 29. 

Volatile spirits, their nature, E. D., 120. 


Waters, Bath or sulphuric, E. D., 111. 

Waters, chalybeates, effect and nature, 
E. D., 110; when to be used, and 
when not, in bloody urine, S. M. III, 
3510. 

Waters, Tunbridge, M. O., iv, 7, 23; 
E. D., 108, 109. 

Winpuam, Mr. THomas, 
Francis, M. O., v, 5, 10. 

Wine, Canary, M. O., iii, 2, 47 ; use in 
gout, T. G., 62; in dropsy, T. D., 35; 
S. N. L 14,17, 29; P. bey how X 
benefited SypENHAM, P. I, 61, 16. 

Wine, Falernian, M. O., i, 4, 30. 

Wine, Malaga, M. O., i., 4, 37; v,2, 26. 

Wine, muscatell, M. O., i, 4, 30. 

Wine, Rhenish, T. G., 51; T. D., 32. 

Wine, Spanish (sherry) Ep. I, 37; 
T. G., 51. 

Winter, winter fever, P., 3; cold of 1683 ; 
S. M., 2; 1684, ibid. 

WYNDHAM, Captain Francts, ii, 2, 27. 


and Sir 


Yaws, how different from the venereal 
disease, Ep. II, 5. 


Zacutus lusitanus, ii, 2, 27. 


END. 


PRINTED BY C. AND J. ADLARD, 
BARTHOLOMEW CLOSE. 


| VERI enn: 


ov Were 


E 


Lo PAP E 


Mu ey 34, —€— s 
cuu B (tb gres 

5 ras Jod ^! Sf AS gx, 

| n Misa ipa diii P! El 

M zn " "T AS 


n Hint 6 
stars TS TN Ho "a 1 Dod 
; ^: Wl “iif T2 Rae, 2 


dh ben ATT RD Mae Fava , 
Die Bhat T ipea 
b vo 


rn hi AE ut 
e ^" NA 


ets 


oe 


mn Qty i: 

iliac No Más Cee 

5 3» fff ». a Mt 
i rie pare C Rs 


ah 


Men Ré éclat : 


ib. o 
Ore. ids is 
i M gt De 7 A Di ] 
di rt ns D 6548 t 


m 


cenoA rod al Poy cadi 
^A: nah M des entes SL 
LL unn LI 
lyin Hal rali 
Uer santi m 
“hw ! M Lu 
Ver din 9 quise iei. i 
í "Pn 73 
s oerte 
"usd 


wey 
| epargiess 


"t 
"Ex. 


solent PV diet ae gi 
Rasoir Migs HS els b: 
- vie ae pr ee 


a ~ 


Bl. LI 
irmqudgls Vel - Md Km D LT. 


"x 


2 a d 


t 


mons 


iz Cn 

* 

. LEM +6 ui 
Mes .*. en 

ee [ p 


yt 


LN y 


2 
Fu on FS ob o ay 


[ , : / P" Ei MU je 
- ; US ; : : M : Pu Cer ^ 2 : "3 FS j AA HAE See 
NN et A I d : : CT. NU : E : 4 : ‘ : t 1 : : Tt s 7 

NGC E NONE : ‘6 ae NT ; A pde a ; of. eH ; fi . 4 ‘ EAR ; ; i or Tuy a p a 


[4 


IU OP nr er rir n 
Wu ERA Og 


C j 1 Ae je NU UNE EAT TP NI EA wi i 
D . j » ; XS ^ AC VIS : - =i ; : 
PEND X NIC : : yw n IA ó AN e D MEC oa i © 2 L Z 4 ; , po S s * TR psy 
: PN A c : De E a - OC T 4 * is 
! WP rp pop a . - PAP T 
CD ie Kees : é 
LGR GA EPS p z^ 
Do 
ior Tp ur Ay f 
e e AA do MPs RECS X. 
, tr 


Tons 
hae 
+03 


Matte, 


^ 
ex 
TOS. 


* 


Se 


MV SOR CIN S 
REVS N 

x ae 
22352 


"UU 


IST SN VN 
UN ER 


vow Ax 


<> 


ce kK 


e 


e 


Win 


het i. 


phe etch 
SIS 
beatae 


aS 
ss 
x 

<> 


* 


SNC 
M Ae CIC, 
NTA NPN ae A. 


Voie RN NER 
AP PA SERIE "i 
TuS NA 


TUM 
D. 


T. 


RENTS 


NUS 


Dr 
ratu phy 
tr rry 


; 


i 


IY VE ANS I E : : ee ^ : ; A s 


RIDES 


x 
cd 

i2 
^
