The Essays and Hymns of Synesius of Cyrene (Synesius of Cyrene (trans. Augustine Fitzgerald), 1930)
==========================================
Fitzgerald's 1930 translation (2 vols.) — includes De insomniis, the Neoplatonic theory of divination by dreams, the late-antique classic on the subject. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/the-essays-and-hymns-of-synesius-of-cyrene-vol-1).

The Essays and Hymns
of


Synesius of Cyrene


including the


ADDRESS TO THE EMPEROR ARCADIUS
AND THE POLITICAL SPEECHES


Translated into English with
Introduction and Notes
BY


AUGUSTINE FITZGERALD


Volume I


OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS
LONDON : HUMPHREY MILFORD
1930


Purchased from
the income of the
Eleanor & Walter H. Boyd
Book Fund


a


Stanford University Libraries


The Essays and Hymns
of


Synesius of Cyrene


including the


ADDRESS TO THE EMPEROR ARCADIUS
AND THE POLITICAL SPEECHES


Translated into English with
Introduction and Notes
BY


AUGUSTINE FITZGERALD


Volume I


OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS
LONDON : HUMPHREY MILFORD
1930


The Essays and Hymns
of


Synesius of Cyrene


OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS
AMEN HOUSE, E.C. 4
LONDON EBOIVBURGH GLASGOW
EESPsiG NEWYORK TORONTO
MELBOCANE CAPETOWN BOMBAY
CALCUTTA MADRAS SHANGHAS
HUMPHREY MILFORD
PUSLISEER TO THES
UNIVERSITY


Printed in Great Britain


PREFACE


THE Essays of Synesius, his address to the Emperor Arcadius,
and the speeches that he delivered in Libya on the political situa-
tion, during the struggle between the cities of Pentapolis and the
barbarian tribes of the desert, although not so celebrated in an-
tiquity as the letters, and perhaps less well known to scholars of
to-day, are none the less of great value as bearing upon the evolu-
tion of philosophic thought in the latter part of the fourth century
and the beginning of the fifth. The present volume is an attempt
to make them more familiar to English readers. The task is not an
easy one, owing to the style of Synesius, which, as I have attempted
to show in the Introduction, is apt to run into obscurity in places,
owing to frequent use of ellipsis, and to the encumbrances that he
made for himself in an attempt to follow certain latter-day rules
of formal rhetoric. The precise value of these rhetorical points is
apt to escape us to-day, and they fill his pages with various un-
translatable plays upon words and subtleties of rhythm. I have
attempted to follow the Greek idiom as much as possible, some-
times at the expense of a more fluent rendering into English, as the
only way open to me of conveying to the English reader the un-
deniable personality of the author’s style. In decisions concerning
doubtful passages, I have every acknowledgement to make to the
experience and scholarly co-operation of Professor Souter, of the
University of Aberdeen, who has helped me with his advice and
assistance, and who has kindly consented to read the proofs of the
work. I wish also to express my thanks and gratitude to Dr. W. S.
Crawford, whose work, Synesius the Hellene, has done much for
the study of this author, for his generosity in lending me an
Original translation of the works of Synesius, which he prepared
to assist him in his own investigations concerning the essays and
hymns, and from the examination of which I have greatly profited.


vi PREFACE
My debts to this work are too numerous to permit of my acknow-
ledging them in detail.

The text that I have used in translating the prose works of
Synesius is that published in Migne’s Patrologia Graeca. This isin
part a reprint from the folio of Petavius and elsewhere a text estab-
lished by Krabinger, the talented scholar whose valuable work was
cutshort byan untimely death. The best as well as the latest edition
of the Hymns is that published by Professor Terzaghi,! who has
appended to a new text founded upon a further collation of the
manuscripts an apparatus criticus, and references to passages in
Greek authors comparison with which throws some light on the
shades of meaning implied in the language of Synesius. I have
attempted in the introduction to emphasize the points in Greek
history and culture that seem to me to throw light on the
foundations of the character of this latter-day Lacedaemonian, and
to disentangle some of the confused threads of Neoplatonism for
the benefit of those who have not had time to unravel them. The
essays and addresses have not been presented before to English
readers, and there has been a tendency to regard them as interest-
ing only to specialists on the decay and extinction of Greek litera-
ture under the later Roman Empire, or to philologists pure and
simple. I hope that a perusal of them will convince many that,
so far from this being the case, they are broadly human documents,
as intelligible to our own age as to any other. The object of the
notes, beyond giving some historical explanations, is to attempt
to trace the influence of previous writers on the mind of Synesius.
At the same time I have appended extracts from such Neoplatonic
philosophers as Proclus, Olympiodorus, and Simplicius, with a
view of showing to what extent the same trend of thought persisted
in the following centuries. Nicephorus Gregoras and Michael
Psellus under the later Byzantine Empire have still much in
common with the culture of the fourth and fifth centuries as


3 Srymesti Cyvenensis Hymui Metrici, ... dal Prof. Nicola Terzaghi, Napoli, 1915.


PREFACE vii
evinced in these essays and hymns. It is only by kceping these
facts in view that we can trace a certain cohesion and unity in
Greek culture which, under outwardly varying forms and through
gradual transmutations, has come down to our own times, and is
interwoven with many currents of thought in the present day,
possibly with all of them.


A. F.
LONDON, 1929.


ADDENDA ET CORRIGENDA


page 7. note 2: for dddcyras read dgOlyxrois.


8s, line 10: read ‘Orcagna’s’,
90, line 3 from foot: read ‘works’,
103, line 5: for Synesus read Synesius.
eo (0) add: A Discourse on Dreams, by Synesius, with a preface and
paraphrase by Alex. C. Ionides, Jr. London and Aylesbury.
Privately printed [1929].
335, add reference: Od. xvii. 193.
137, note 1: cf. Plato, Crifo, p. 45 &.
146, note 3: for. Jb. read Ji.
193. line 3 from foot: for dxrois read dxrée.
199, line 4: read arSp«lay.
200, line 8: omit ‘Loeb Library, Fronfo, vol. i, p. 136, and’.
209, line 7: for“ W.’ read ‘tr.’
224, line 8 from foot: read ducfaywy§s.
272, line 4: read ‘ Pherecydes’.
o line 32: read °, this’.
291: the note refers to line 4, not to line 14.
321, lincs 6 and 7: read ‘took’ and ‘would’.
315, line 14: for °unbidden’, read ‘under no authority’.
308, line 9: the refcrence is Hes. Op. 98.
381, line 2: read ‘sustaincdst’,
437, line 33; omit the sccond ‘to’.
423, second line from foot: read ' Pharisaic’.
4$!, line 6: read ‘Simplicius’.
456, line 4: read ad{evet.


CONTENTS


VOL. I
Introduction . ° ‘ : ‘
Bibliography . ‘ : :
On Kingship (De Regno) . : ;
Dio ‘ , ; . : ;
Notes on Kingship . ,
Notes on Dio . ; : ‘

VOL. II
A Eulogy of Baldness. :
The Egyptian Tale (De Providentia) .
Concerning Dreams (De Insomniis)
Constitutio . ‘ ‘
Catastasis . ° , ‘
Homily I : ‘ ;
Homily II. ‘ ;
Hymn] a. ‘ >
Hymn II ‘ ‘ ‘


Hymn III ‘
HymnIV.. ‘ . ° ‘
Hymn V ; ; :

Hymn VI : : .
Hymn VII °
Hymn VIII . : : : ;
Hymn IX , : ‘ : :
Hymn X ° :


Notes on a Eulogy of Baldness ‘ ,
Notes on the Egyptian Tale . .


x
Notes on Dreams
Notes on Constitutio
Notes on Catastasis
Notes on Homily | .
Notes on Homily II
Noteson HymnI .
Notes on Hymn II .
Notes on Hymn III
Notes on Hymn IV.
Notes on Hymn V .
Notes on Hymn VI.
Note on Hymn VIII
Notes on Hymn IX
Index . . :


CONTENTS


INTRODUCTION
I


THE traveller who can find time, in these days of belated haste, to
return from Elcusis to Athens on foot, and to follow the road once worn
by the feet of pilgrims to the shrine of Demeter, may see at sunsct time
a sight which has, perhaps, no parallel in this modern world, either for
the perfect mirage that it presents to us of a past that is always present
in our traditional Western culture, or for the profound symbolism that
it conveys to the mind’s eye of the lasting, if transformed, vitality of
the spirit of Athens. Allof the great cities of antiquity have disappeared
so far as their outward semblance viewed from a distance is concerned.
Rome as we approach it through the wild beauty of the Campagna is
dominated by the great dome of Saint Peter’s, a monument of a later
period of civilization; the cattle graze to-day on meadows where once
stood the temples and marts of Carthage; but if we gaze at Athens from
the road to Eleusis, standing at a distance of some three miles from the
old town walls on an autumn evening, when the Acropolis, lit up by the
sun’s last rays, glows with incandescent splendour, and when Mount
Hymettus is turning rapidly to the deep blue of a distance painted by a
Titian or a Giorgione—at such a moment as this a living picture is con-
jured up by nature before our cyes, scarcely removed from that which
would have been displayed to their view in the days when Plato was
teaching at the Academy and Aristotle at the Lyceum, or when cight
centuries later Synesius visited Athens for the first time. This impres-
sion of the historic continuity of the city, when scen from a certain
distance, is due to the marvellous natural conf.zuration of the Acropolis,
which gives an unmistakable physiognomy to the town, and to the fact
that time has spared the outstanding features of the Parthenon, which,
illuminated by the decline of the sun, still glitters as it must have done
over two thousand years ago, however changed its hues may be, and
however maltreated its columns by the barbarities of war. As to
the town that has grown up, or lingered on beyond the Acropolis, it is
made up for the most part of white houses, probably indistinguishable
in their mass—when seen far away through the pines and olives that

28-1 B


2 INTRODUCTION


border the old road—from the walls and roofs that once sheltered
Athenian citizens; and such is the crown of wild olives that the ‘heir
of Time’, to quoté one of Synesius’ favourite phrases, has awarded to
these victors in games greater than the Olympian.

As we watch the last glow of the sun linger in golden warmth on the
Temple of the Virgin Goddess, we are insensibly reminded of the last
words in what is perhaps Plato's greatest work:

“Wherefore my counsel is, that we hold fast ever to the heavenly way,
and follow after justice and virtue always, considering that the soul is
immortal], and able to endure every sort of good and every sort of evil. Thus
shall we live dear to one another and to the Gods, both while remaining here,
and when like conquerors in the games who go round to gather gifts, we
receive our reward. And for ourselves, both in this life and in the pilgrimage
of a thousand years which we have been describing, may we fare well.’ !

The stream of time has taken us more than a thousand years beyond
the point that Plato foreshadowed as the goal of his pilgrimage, and
whether his successors have succeeded in keeping to the ‘Heavenly
Way’, I leave to the reader to determine; but he had one follower at
least who was worthy to make the pilgrimage which he adumbrates in
the great myth of Er, and that follower, always a Platonist at heart,
was Synesius of Cyrene, who flourished eight centuries after his death,
and most of whose works have come down to us. Looking at this still
beautiful shell of the city of the past with all the illusion of the sun ’s
last touch to vivify it, we are again irresistibly, if sadly, reminded of that
other sunset that was rapidly approaching Athens when Synesius
visited it for the first time at the end of the fourth century after Christ,
for its light which had so long illuminated the world was soon to be
extinguished in the earlier days of the sixth by the orders of the
Emperor Justinian.

The seat of the great University to which Greeks had flocked from
the ‘sprinkled isles’ of the Aegean, from Magna Graecia and Ionia, and
to whom, even in the fourth century B.c. as Isocrates? tells us, ‘all
other Greek cities were in comparison villages’, was sadly declining at
the time of Synesius’ visit to it. ‘It is nothing to be wondered at’, writes
Libanius to one of his friends some seven hundred years after Plato's


2 Plato, Rep. 621 c. ® Isoc. De Permutations 299.


EARLY GREEK HISTORY 3


death, ‘if any man has fallen in Jove with the land of Attica, for the spot
is most beloved alike by those who have seen it and by those who have
seen it not’, and adds that though in his day the masters of thought had
become weak through luxurious ease, young men were in duty bound
to complete their studies in this privileged spot, so as to return to their
homes with at least a semblance of greater learning.’ Thus Athens still
stood high in the esteem of the Roman Empire as late as the fourth
century, Athens where, in the words of Gibbon, ‘the philosophic student,
according to the temper of his mind, might doubt with the Sceptics or
decide with the Stoics; sublimely speculate with Plato; or severely
argue with Aristotle.’ ”

But already the great beacon was beginning to wane, and it continued
declining until, with the death of Proclus at the end of the fifth century,
we come—to quote the same historian again—‘to a deplorable picture
of the second childhood of human reason. Yet’, he continues, ‘the
golden chain,’ as it was fondly styled, of the Platonic succession con-
tinued for forty-four years from the death of Proclus to the Edict of
Justinian, one which imposed a perpetual silence on the School of
Athens, and excited the grief and indignation of the few remaining
votaries of Grecian science.’ The last throes of the Academy, the
Lyceum, and the Stoa must have taken place in the year 529, a date
which carries us on to a point about one hundred and thirty-four years
later than the year of Synesius’ short stay in Athens. The course of
events, even at that time, must have pointed to the extinction of the
schools of philosophy to any mind sufficiently clairvoyant to sce the
inevitable consequence of the forces both religious and political which
the rapid spreading of the Christian Churches had introduced. Did
Synesius foresee the doom that in a little more than a century must
overtake the last vestiges of the Academy of his beloved Plato? I think,
decidedly not. The Hellenic philosopher who was later to become

} Liban. Ep. 627 (Wolf = 735 Forster) ad Cclsum. 2 Gibbon, I, xJ, p. 280.

3 Marinus speaks of Hegias in his Life of Proclus (cap. xxvi) as follows: ‘From
his childhood he showed signs of all his ancestral virtues, of his legitimate descent
by the golden chain from Solon.’ Athcnaeus, writing about A.D. 200, reminds us
of the glorics of Athens: ... rv "AOywalue wdlus, 73 ris “ENddos poverior, fv. é ply


Tirbapor * 'EMABos Ipevope Ibn, Gounvd3ns 8°. . . * “EXddos ° * bk Tlsheos
* *Eorlay ual spuTantion raw "Er. Deipnosophists, v. 32.


4 INTRODUCTION


Bishop of Ptolemais, apparently saw no insuperable difficulty in
Christianity and Greek philosophy dwelling together harmoniously.
With buoyant optimism he imagined himself living, so far as religion
and thought were concerned, in that millennium where the lion and the
lamb shall lie down together. The world that he saw around him was
torn with strife and war; the Emperor Theodosius had died and had
left his great work of unification uncompleted; the Roman Empire in
the East and the West was trembling and uncertain, in the hands: of
young and worthless rulers; but in the precincts of the Temple, in the
aisles of the Christian Church, in the quiet chamber of the philosopher,
in the cell of the anchorite, here at least there must be peace.

The Bishop of Ptolemais calls on the Churches to pray for him in
several of his letters, in terms the sincerity of which I cannot doubt, and
the same Synesius, on the eve of his ordination, proclaims his belief in
the Platonic doctrine of the pre-existence of the soul. Was it not said
to Saint Jerome, ‘Thou art not a Christian but a Ciceronian’ ? Proclus,
half a century later, tells us that he regarded all religions as honourable
and as his own.' Had Synesius foreseen the death of the Schools of his
masters Plato and Aristotle, he could scarcely have written so heart-
lessly of Athens as he does in Letters 54 and 136, for his instinct would
have told him that the time was coming for her when

* as some green afternoon
Turns towards sunset, and is loth to die,’
the last life breathed in her by Proclus would struggle for its existence
in vain.

But when the sun of political freedom approached its decline at
Athens, thought, in the sense that thought was understood in the
golden days of the Academy or the Lyceum, was declining also, and the
twilight of mysticism was at hand; a change this, well expressed in
allegoric vein by Philo of Alexandria as follows: ‘What reasoning is in
us, that the sun is in the Universe. ... As long as our intellect shines and
pours itself into our whole soul, even as the effulgence of noon-tide, we

8 Marinus, Life of Proclus, c. xix: rd wap’ dxdovos wérpe Spa dvOdopers Beevdheoe . . .
ant yap uptyaper dative elyev alel cel Ocyer é GeoccBlorares drip, én rév ¢dboogor


apectan oS ysde reves wédews obbe raw wap’ die warplas elves Geparevriw cows 82 108


EARLY GREEK HISTORY 5


are self-contained and are not possessed. But when it declines towards
its sunset, then, as is natural, ecstasy falls on usand frenzy, for when the
divine light shines the human light sets.’ At the time when Synesius
made his first and only visit to Athens, a formidable rival to the more
ancient seat of learning had already reached its maturity. This was the
younger sister University of Alexandria, of whose tenets Philo was the
forerunner, and whose position in regard to the ultimate problems of
thought might be said to be enclosed in the one short sentence just
quoted. Thus a new star had arisen when that of Athens seemed paling
in the first century after Christ, a light which although at first only one
reflected from the original centre, had gradually increased in brilliancy
until, if we can credit Synesius, by the end of the fourth century it laid
claim to an even more dazzling intensity. Much had happened in the
world of thought and learning since the day when Philo of Alexandria
‘expressed the foundations of his faith in such lines as those above.
They point the way quite clearly to the growth of that Neoplatonism
which, two centuries later, was moulded in its definite form by the
Christian Ammonius Saccas, and his famous pupil the Hellenic Plotinus,
by whom it was carried to Antioch and finally to Rome, to receive there
an official acknowledgement at the hands of the Emperor Gallienus.
Why its direct founders did not come to Athens we do not know. They
looked to Plato as their Master, basing their doctrines on their own
mystical interpretation of -the Dialogues. It was even the dream of
Plotinus to establish a city which should be governed according to
Plato’s ‘Laws’. By the time, then, that Synesius had come to Athens
the Alexandrian School had in its turn imposed its way of thinking on
the Schools of the older city. Nestorius, the pupil of Iamblichus, is said
to have brought the later phase of Neoplatonism thither in the fourth
century, just as in the third Longinus, the pupil of Plotinus, had
brought the earlier. Neoplatonism had gone through three phases since
the days of Plotinus, but the current was in one direction; always to-
wards mysticism and away from rationalism; towards religion and
away from philosophy, a positivist might say. The first of these three
phases was that ushered in by Plotinus, who essayed to found in


3 Philo, Quis ver. div. heres, liii (vol. IIT, p. 60, ed. Cohn-Wendland).


6 INTRODUCTION


Alexandria a School of Metaphysics that should be at once rationalistic
and mystical. Porphyry and his other pupils, Amelius, Theodorus, and
Nestorius, continued his work without alteration. With minds of this
order, minds that alternately abandoned reason for faith and faith for
reason, the golden age of Ncoplatonism begins and ends. Iamblichus,
according to Jules Simon,’ marks the second period. With him theurgy
replaces ecstasy ; the evocation of spirits, demonology, and the mysteries
begin to supersede metaphysical speculation; the Schoo] assumes more
and more a sacerdotal character. Iamblichus and his circle, comprising
men such as Sopater, Edesius, and Chrysanthius, are more like the
hierophants of the mysteries than philosophical thinkers, for they were
men whose intellectual inspiration was being rapidly extinguished by
superstition. The third phase might almost be termed the political
phase. Neoplatonism, now struggling for its life, is at grips with Chris-
tianity,a force which had, after Julian’s unsuccessful] Hellenistic revival,
become openly hostile. Consider how strangely these forces had been
grouped in the third and fourth centuries and later. The great Hellenic
rhetorician Libanius was the master and intimate friend of such men as
St. Basil and St. John Chrysostom, and the founder of Neoplatonism,
Ammonius Saccas, had been born and bred in Christianity. All this is
matter of history, but at the moment when Synesius came to Athens
the exponent of the third phase of the doctrine was Plutarch, the son of
Nestorius, a native of Athens himself, and under his guidance the focus
of light seems to have passed from the younger city again to the older.
*Platarch the Great’, as his pupils insisted on calling him, eventually
passed on the torch to his disciple Syrianus, who in turn was succeeded
by Proclus. Such was the succession in ‘The Golden Chain’.

But alas for the glory of the great seat of learning at the end of the
fourth century! Synesius, fresh from the classes of his adored Hypatia
at the Schools of Alexandria, dismisses it with scant praise in a few
words written to his brother from Anagyrus. ‘In our day it is Egypt
which nourishes the offspring of philosophy which she has received
from Hypatia, whereas Athens, formerly the home of the wise, is now
only famous for its commerce in honey. And so that pair of Plutarchian


2 Juies Simon, Histoire de Ecole d’ Alesandrie, vol. 11. p. 190.


EARLY GREEK HISTORY 7


sophists attract the young men to the lecture-rooms not so much by
the fame of their discourses as by the pots of the honey of Hymettus.”
The Plutarchian sophists were probably Hierius and Archiades, the
former, Plutarch’s son, the latter the husband of his daughter Asclepi-
gencia, a woman whose fame as a teacher of philosophy was widespread
and who, according to Marinus, the successor of Proclus, communicated
to the latter a form of religion secretly evolved by her grandfather
Nestorius.” But although Athens, as well as Alexandria, had its great
priestess of philosophy, we hear nothing of her from Synesius. ‘In
future’, he writes ironically to his brother when about to set sail for the
great city, ‘I shall be relieved from the duties of bowing to the ground
when I meet men who come from Athens because of their Jearning.
They are, after all, only simple mortals like ourselves; they understand
Plato and Aristotle no whit better than we, and yet when they are in
our company they stalk about as demi-gods might amongst mules.”
These.carping remarks seem to betray an uneasy consciousness in the
mind of Synesius of some superior force in the more ancient seat of
learning, although he affects to throw it aside as an empty husk.
His studied avoidance of any allusion to the surpassing beauties of
architecture in Athens is also significant. He had an eye for works of
art, for he tells us that the Stoa had lost its famous pictures by Poly-
gnotus, but of the great temples and shrines he says nothing.’ This
paradoxical attitude in the case of a man whose mind was Greek to the
core, is only further evidence that in his own time,as in that of Libanius,
Athens was still supreme as the fountain-head of learning in the Roman
Empire, and that the student from Alexandria was somewhat jealous
of its prestige.

It would not be without profit here to inquire what were the deter-
mining forces which caused Athens to rise to this point of intellectual
supremacy, and to keep such a position in the civilized world for nearly
ten centuries. I must be forgiven for what mayat first seem adigression,

1 Ep. 136.

2 pe raw XaMaluw ovordoces xal dvrvyxiass wai rois Geicss wai ébOdyross evrpogdrng
dxdypnro. Kai yap ratra wapadiigas wel rac dugweious, xai riyw DUnv xpfow evra


era wept “Acadlymyeelas ris [Dovrégxov Ovyarpés. (Marinus, Life of Procius,
Cc. 25). '


3 Ep. 54. * Ep. 136.


8 INTRODUCTION


that I may place the facts and if possible some of the causcs before the
reader. We are so accustomcd to conceive of countries as large political
entities, whose populations are counted by tens of millions, that it is
difficult even to the most imaginative of us to-day, to conceive of the
outlook on life of a people to whom the city, a group of perhaps only a
scant ten or twenty thousand citizens, plus their slaves and retainers,?
was an autonomous unit, which could of itself decide for peace or war,
and for whom other Greek cities must have appeared as countless as
those leaves of the trees to which the Ionian poet Mimnermus likened
the generations of man.’ Scattered all through the country we call
Greece to-day, through Asia Minor, the islands of the Acgean, the
coasts of Italy and Africa, any one of these many independent and
sovereign democracies, oligarchies, or tyrannies, might easily be out of
the ken of another, and by the very vastness of Hellas lost to the
knowledge of its fellow, living in a retirement broken only by the
trader’s ship or the advent of some new stranger, driven perchance
from his own city by political exile or crime. If we could imagine that
some Icarus more successful] than the legendary one should have taken
his flight from Larissa or the vale of Tempe, and moving southward at
some inconceivable height should find a central point from which he
might embrace in a glance every spot where Greeks had built a temple
to their gods, he would behold more than a thousand glittering cities
scattered from the Euxine to the Pillars of Heracles, from far Macedonia
to the sands of the Libyan desert, and a map of Hellas would be
extended before him that would resemble one of the star charts of
our modern astronomers. But this chart would be ‘ull of intermittcat
stars also. Some, of the third magnitude only, might suddenly blaze out
and become stars of the first magnitude, or, again, disappear entirely.
How often when reading Greek history, have we shuddered at the inti-
mation that ‘the city walls were razed to the groundand the inhabitants
sold into slavery’!> The condition of life then in these cities was dynamic

3 Plato (Leges, p. 737 E) places the ideal number of citizen landholders at


5.040. Beloch estimates the population of Athens (a. D. 432) at 30,000 citizens, male
and female of all ages, 20,000 to 25,000 metics, and 60,000 slaves. (See Appendix


® Cf. Syn. Catastasis, 1570 (301) a: *I have long been listening to the Greek


EARLY GREEK HISTORY 9


rather than static. The city was in a chronic state, in many cases, of
giving birth to new cities, cithcer from over-population or from that ever-
lurking enemy in its heart, ‘Stasis’—the word is untranslatable—and it
would throw out, at a given moment,a colony, that is to say a new city,
bound to the parent city by filial ties and claiming its protection.
Others again might be extinguished or deserted from natural causes,
sometimes only temporarily. ‘Let us leave the city’, says the Spartan
Archidamus, in Isocrates’ monograph, ‘send our parents, wives and
children to our kindred cities; they will be glad to receive them out of
gratitude to us for past bencfits and ties of blood. We will abandon our
city, and occupying the best strategic positions will fight the enemy by
land as well as by sea.’* Notice that the city means the group of men to
him, not the walls and buildings. It can even be dispersed for awhile
if the fortunes of war call for such a course. Its cohesion is moral, not
material. Thus our star map will be in a state of continual flux and
change like Heraclitus’ river. One could not travel through the same
Hellas twice.

There may be some of us who will remember reading Macaulay's
Lays of Ancient Rome for the first time in their boyhood, and who have
not forgotten the thrill they felt at the verses recounting the envoy of
‘The Thirty Cities’ to Rome. There was some image evoked in the
phrase ‘The Thirty Citics’ which seemed to call up in our budding
imaginations a world that was far removed from ours in its organic
structure, and a decentralization of forces that is difficult to grasp to-
day. Rome steadily advanced in the path of centralization, but Hellas
was disunited to the end; and, futhermore, the strife was not only of
cities one with another, or one group of them with another group, but
each city itself was the theatre of an internal strife that was always
latent, one that frequently caused its form of government to change
from monarchy to oligarchy, from oligarchy to plutocracy, from thence
to democracy, and finally perhaps to tyranny. The history of many of


historians hew “‘the enemy left the women and children behind as a token of the
devastation wreaked during the war”.’ Cf. Thucydides (iii. 68), who describes the
fate meted out to the Platacans.

1 Isoc. Archidamus, 73,74. Soin Roman history ‘civitas’ mcans an aggregation
of cives, i.e., a ‘populus’. The Spanish derivative pueblo means a town.


abyss Cc


z0 INTRODUCTION


the cities, as we read in Aristotle’s Politics, ran continuously in some
such vicious circle. The chronic condition therefore of a Greek city was
war from without and war from within. Let it be remembered that, in
talking of Hellas, we are in the presence not of thirty cities, but of over
one thousand, if I may accept the estimate once given me by the late
Alfred Croiset, when speaking of the period of the Peloponnesian war.
Yet all these cities, politically independent though they were, except
to the extent that they had made for the moment shifting and ephemeral
alliances for greater security against each other,’ were linked together,
in a cultural sense, by their recognition of the same gods, by common
traditions of ancestry, by devotion to the shrine of the Delphic Oracle,
by their participation in the sacred games at Olympia, in which warring
Cities might take part under an inviolate covenant of peace, and lastly
im the possession of a language common to them all. There was a strong
bond of culture in religion and language, that made each one of these
thousand cities a participant in a larger community of racial sentiment,
and m an ever-present consciousness of a common ancestry, in the
remote past, an ancestry sprung from gods and heroes, and one that
made them all members of the great Hellenic race.? This consciousness
of an ancestry and destiny shared by all, under the gods, and sanctified
by the vatic utterances of the priestess at Delphi, is the golden thread
that runs through all Greek literature. It scintillates in Demosthenes as
brightly as in Homer or Pindar, and we have gleams of it in Synesius,
eight centuries later. It gave a wider horizon for the aspirations of the
Greek mind, but it never led the cities to permanent political cohesion.
Isocrates, it is true, made a determined effort to rally all the Greek
Cities in a combined movement against Persia. He dreamed of a great
Panhellenic policy which should make a new Hellas united against the


3 Cf. Thucyd. iii. 11: 1d 8¢ dyriwadow Bdos pdvow morey és fuppaylay.

2 Just as the citizen of a Greek town had in this sense two countries, the more
highly caltured might be said to have in a way two religions. There was in Greece
as weil as in Rome the religion of the masses, crude in its conceptions, of which
we bear much in the works of St. Clement of Alexandria, and the religion
of the high*y cultured which sought its goal in ‘philouophy’. Plato takes great
pains, for whatever reason, to show us that Socrates was pious in his attitude
to the gods, that he adhered to all the forms of the popular religion. His last
words in the Phaede are, ‘We owe a cock to Aesculapius; see that the debt is
paid.’ |


EARLY GREEK HISTORY 1r


rest of the world, but he was a voice crying in the wilderness, and the
Athenians, as well as the other Greek states, were deaf to his appeal.'

Every citizen then of a Greek town had, as it were, two countries, one
his own city which meant to him, in the language of our own forefathers,
‘King and Country’, and another, standing behind this and ‘but dimly
understood’, the precious Hellas, the country of his spirit in a plane
nearer perhaps to the shadowy world below, where there would be no
cities or founding of cities. How deeply this Hellenic tradition affected
the mind and character of Synesius, living under the Roman Empire,
centuries after every Greek town had ceased to exist as a sovereign state,
we shall have occasion to remark later in greater detail.? Suffice it to say
for the moment that he came from the town of Cyrene founded by the
Lacedaemonians a thousand years before his birth, and that Cyrene
held his heart to the end. But there is more than this. The Greek city
was bound together by its very political independence. It was a perfect
dynamo of forces generated in its own market-place if it were a demo-
cracy, or in the public banqueting halls of its oligarchical rulers if it
were a timocracy or an oligarchy. Of settled peace, of security, there
was none. Each of our thousand cities knew not the day nor the hour
when it might have to struggle for its very existence, or which one of
the others it might have to summon to its side as friend, or to meet in
the field as foe. There were always distant rumblings of thunder on
its horizon; the call to arms might sound at any moment and the appeal
to think first of national honour and afterwards of ‘safety was always
on the lips of its orators. The city is, perhaps, not strong enough to repel
the forces of the antagonist. A force sent out to meet them has already
been destroyed. The farmers are then torn from their vineyards by their
own countrymen and are collected within the city walls; even the
greatest city of them all, Athens in her prime, Athens under Pericles,
did not escape this fate. It does not take any great stretch of the
imagination to picture the scene to-day, if we stand on the Acropolis
and look around us. Here an Athenian citizen at a given moment of the
Peloponnesian war might have been moving restlessly about the ram-

1 Isoc. Panegyric, 173-4; Philippus, passim.


2 In Dio he uses the expression ele cewde veig “EUgow, p. 1144 ¢. “The Creek
public’, Crawford suggests.


12 INTRODUCTION


part sacred to the goddess of his own inviolate city, and anxiously
scanning the horizon. He would see the sun, perhaps, flash on the
helms of a distant mass of Spartan hoplites slowly threading their way
through his devastated farmlands. At night he would see the fire of
their bivouacs, or the dull red glare of some burning hamlet in the far
distance. He descends to his home in the city only to meet on the way
Vigilance parties of other citizens carrying to their last rest those who
have succumbed to the plague within the walls. There was war with
the enemy without, war with nature within. But the city is inflexible.
The city stands to arms to the end. It is not merely life and limb that
are at stake, nor even is it the honour of the city and that alone; it is the
tutelar divinities who protect the city that are indirectly challenged."
The sense of duty to the city that has bred and the deities that have
protected him was a matter of pride to the Greek; and so the flames
burn at the altars on the Acropolis, and the steam of victims ascends
even during pestilence and famine.”

Only a few months ago Pericles had pronounced the funeral oration
over the tombs of those fallen in the war, of which we have to-day
a magnificent transcript in the cold, restrained words of Thucydides.
We can see the Agora packed with its silent masses, its stern and reso-
late faces. The strongest city of all, the leader of the great confederacy


§ Macrobius (Saturnalia, Bk. 11, cap. ix) gives a curious formula of invocation
employed by the Romans in the case of the tutelary dcitics of Carthage during the
Punic wars:

“If there is a god, if there is a goddess who watches over the people and state of
Carthage, and that one most of all who has accepted the tutclage,—to thee I pray,
bow down to, and beg for mercy; that you may abandon the people and state of
Carthage and desert all the houses, templcs, sacred shrines and the city itself, and
leave them behind; that you may inspire this people and this city with fear, terror,
and forgetfulness, and that aftcr abandoning them you may come to Rome, to me,
and to mine. May our houses, temples, sacred objects, and city be more delightful
to you and more commendable, so that we may know and understand that in future
you will be the protectors of mysclf, of the Roman people, and soldiers. If you
will do this, I vow to found a temple to you, and to hold games in your honour.’

Dio Chrysostom (xxxiii. 47) reminds the citizens of Tarsus that gods have been
known to abandon their c.ties to others. Ti 8) elcoGe, at xabdwep elude dors xal dacs,
wees eiumoras pues § Geovs wolidus dmorpddcobas rds abraw wérdas roig EMois, Evras
dfarcis a ve Ovolag wal ries dopraig Snporetow; ...

2 This close interconnexion of the religious with the political was common to
ali the Greek states. Isocrates (De Bigis, 6) remarks that the city (i.e. Athens,


EARLY GREEK HISTORY 13


of Delos, is at grips with destiny; its military power is in eclipse for the -
moment, but its fleet is sweeping the seas. Standing on Sunium to-day
we can picture the outlook that was eternally on the watch for a sight
of the fleet; we can hear the anxious voices in the Peiracus asking
news of its position from some chance trading vessel. My only excuse
for touching for a moment on events so well known as these, is to
show how intense the life of the Greek city was, in time of war as in
time of peace, circumscribed as it was by the city walls; and if we com-
pare this picture with that drawn by Synesius in the Catastasis and the
letters that refer to those days of war in which he, the Bishop of
Ptolemais, was himself fighting for his native Cyrene, we shall be struck
by an extraordinary similarity to it in the life and fortunes of this other
ancient Greek city, eight hundred years later. Synesius moves behind
the battlements, he tells us, he sleeps on the ramparts, his eyes are
always on the far distance, he is making a sortie from the town wall in
pursuit of the invader. The one picture is written in large Ictters, to
use Plato’s simile in the Republic, the other in far smaller, but there
is no mistaking the likeness between the two. The outlook is the
same for Synesius as it was for Pericles. The latter-day Roman citizen
is still the lion-hearted Greek defending his Greek city. He has been
described by one carping critic as a Sophist of a later day. Possibly,
was most incensed of all things at any violation of the sacred mystcries on the one
hand, or at any attempt to upset its democratic form of government on the other.
The text is worth quoting here: Eidores 8 rhv wdduy rev pdv wept rots Beods pddor”
av épyiofcicay ef rug els 7a ppvoripia datvosr’ dfapaprarwy, ray 8° dw «8 ris tiv Snpyo-
xparlay roAuan xaradvew, audordpas ravras ovvbdvres ras airias ciotyyeMow cis Thy
Boudjy. ... Synesius is fully conscious of this tradition, though, as he clearly states
in his impeachment of Andronicus (i.e. Ep. 57), he is for separating the functions
of civil administration from those of the priesthood. As to the state of mind of the
Greek in regard to the city-state (wos or sarpis) in which he had been brought
up, no better example could be given than the passages in Plato’s Crifo (pp. §0 ff.)
in which Socrates in prison invokes the laws and the commonwealth (of rdpos «ai 7d
«owdy), and personifies them in an imaginary dialogue with himself to prove to his
friend Crito the unworthiness of his proposal to aid him to escape from the hands of
his judges and executioners. He represents them as going so far as to say that the
citizen is the property of the city even morc than the child of its parents. For ‘from
the moment that you were born’—this is, in substance, what thcy say tohim, ‘that
you were brought up, and received the education we gave you, could you possibly


deny that you were ours and ours only, our offspring and our slave, you yourself
and your forbears as well?’ (c.13). Cf. Aeschines, Contra Timarchum, § 322.


™%4 INTRODUCTION


but a very robust one. His admirers might with more justice compare
him to the ‘philosopher king’ of Plato's Republic.

Now all this tragic existence of the Greek city-states must have been
a strong element in the formation of personal character. But when in
the fullness of time the inevitable came to pass; when these states
running true to form to the end, met with the disaster that awaits all
polities which are incapable of durable alliance and cohesion against
their common enemy, when the Greek cities lost their independence
and, conquered in detail by the Macedonians, were finally administered
and governed by Roman prefects, or pro-consuls, a change must have
come over the whole aspect of life in a Greck town. Now at last there
was security and protection. The restless life of strife was at an end
under the reign of Augustus and, for many years following, the world,
and Greece with it, had peace. But alas for philosophic thought—


‘Peace amongst men and calm upon the sea,’ !


brought only stagnation to thought in the end.

‘In the first century of our era’, says Conybeare in his study of
Philo’s Contemplative Life, ‘the golden age of city life was already a
far-off memory. . . . The citizen of ancient Athens loved his city, because
he did so much for it by his own efforts; because he personally fought
and legislated for it. But for three hundred years before Philo was
born, the patriotism which can once more inspire the citizens of to-day,
had among the Greeks died out.. And as we turn over the pages of the
Ethics of Aristotle, we realize that man had already, even in his day,
not so much outgrown his surroundings, as discovered that the old all-
absorbing devotion to the city-state could not survive its independence.
For in them the life of contemplation is exalted above the life of action,
and a vague philanthropy is about to succeed to the intense and
passionate feelings of love or aversion which cemented together the
fellow-citizens of the preceding age.’? But although, as we shall see,
consciousness of the responsibilities and glories of civic life had become
extinguished in Philo’s time, in that of Synesius three centuries later,
the tradition, not all to the detriment of the vitality of thought,
still remained unclouded, and in the case of certain men was


4 Plato, Symp. 197. 2 p. 260.


EARLY GREEK HISTORY 1§


capable of bursting out with fiery intensity. Any one must have been
struck by this who has read the letters of Synesius, and has admired the
sturdy patriotism evinced in them. Philo tells us that, ‘Market-
places, council-chambers, courts of law, and great crowded assemblies;
above all a life in the open air, one that is full of the heat of debate, and
moreover of action, of deeds that concern war and peace; these are the
only things fitted to men. . . . There are two kinds of states, the smaller
is ealled the home, the larger the city.’* The Hebrew of Alexandria has
very well expressed the conception of the Greek of the golden age.

But to return to the problem of the supremacy of Athens in the
world of thought. Of so many widely dispersed cities connected only
by identical language, religion, and tradition, there was every reason to
expect that a certain individuality should develop in each, that, being
independent, their institutions should push in different directions,
always under Delphi, be it said, and that out of the vast number some
should become more pre-eminent than others. The same law secms to
exist in regard to national units that is true for an assemblage of indi-
viduals. When a large number of individuals are gathered together at
any great centre of learning or art, the probability is that some one
of these should completely outstrip the others in the race, that he should
‘be regarded as standing head and shoulders above his fellows. The
greater the number of those engaged in the contest, the greater the
likelihood, a priori, of the towering man appearing. Now in the field of
competition amongst states the case of Hellas is unique in history. At
no other time have there been so many independent polities in exis-
tence, and therefore at no time has there been such variety in a given
type simultaneously. Variation is at the root of all evolution, and the
chances of the surpassing state appearing were so much the greater as
the number and differentiation of the states was more extended. The
case then and now was far different. A dozen or more countries of
Christian culture for us, a thousand and more of Hellenic culture for the
Greeks. A few considerations on our own centralized forms of govern-
ment will make it clear how in our own case competition in political
forms is limited.


? Phil. De special. legibus, Lib. I1I, cap. 33, § 169 (Cobn), vol. iii, p. 197 (Yonge,
iii. 345). |


16 INTRODUCTION


We know how towns in our own countries of to-day are apt to develop
traits of character which separate them from other towns, and to differ
in their handling of the problems of political legislation, but the fuller
progress of their individualism is curbed by the central government of
the country in question. If this central authority were once removed,
there is every reason to suppose that the towns would rapidly diverge
in their institutions, as in the temper of their inhabitants. One town
might have a law of voluntaty military service, another of conscription,
one of state control in all that in another would be given to individual
enterprise, and so forth. This is not practicable or desirable to-day, but
it grew up quite naturally in Hellas where the state was the city and
the city the state. If we turn to the first books in Plato’s Laws, we shall
find a dialogue between an imaginary Athenian citizen, a Cretan, and a
Lacedaemonian, which is most informing on all this side of Hellenic
development.

It is of course as impossible to solve the enigma of the intellectual
pre-eminence of Athens over the surrounding states, as to decide why,
out of many who have absorbed the same general culture and doctrines,
any particular individual rises to a pinnacle of excellence far above the
others, and assumes in turn an acknowledged position of leadership
amongst them ; but if our analogy between men and states is a sound
one, it will make it clearer why it was inevitable that ore or more of the
Greek states should have become the mouthpiece of the thought, senti-
ment, and aspiration that were latent in the others; latent in all the
loosely connected mass of Hellenic culture. It was inevitable in the
first place that all this culture should find a perfected form of expres-
sion. It was inevitable again that one or more of the city-states should
rise higher than the others in such power of expression.

No doubt one reason for the intellectual supremacy of Athens was
the position of the city as a maritime state, and the throbbing, changing
life of the Peiraeus which brought the city into contact with other states
in Greece through trade on the high seas. Then again the cause must be
sought in the social virtues of the Athenian people which made life in
Athens attractive to Greeks from elsewhere. Isocrates tells us that
Greeks from other towns were unanimous in declaring that Athens was
the only real city, and that it ‘would be rightly described as the town


EARLY GREEK HISTORY 17


of Hellas, not only on account of its size and its facilities in other
respects, but most of all because of the manners of the inhabitants; for
no people are more gentle and more sociable, nor are there any with
whom one could pass one’s whole life in a greater degree of intimacy
as far as daily contact is concerned’.’ This point bears out the state-
ments made in the speech of Pericles already alluded to and may help
us to understand the causes of the intellectual supremacy of Athens.
The engaging manners of the citizens and their civility to foreigners
attracted many philosophers to the city, men such as Parmenides,
Gorgias, Protagoras, and countless others.

There was another fact also that must have been largely contributory
to the growth of philosophy in Athens. This was the great part that
the Law Courts played in the life of the city, for the Athenians spent
much of their time in these courts listening to the speeches for and
against any case that might be in course of pleading; to such an extent
were their minds inclined to listen to argument. The result of this was
to raise the general level of mental acuteness, for the discourses of the
Law Courts prepared them for the discourses in the Academy and the
Lyceum. Any one to-day who should by chance read a public speech
of Demosthenes for the first time would probably be struck by this. He
would be inclined to say, ‘What an exceptional audience.’ People in our
time would quite fail to follow the subtleties of the Olynthiacs or the
complex threads of the ‘Impeachment of the fraudulent embassy’? But
so it was in Athens. The orator, the sophist, are always with you. Such
is the burden of Socrates in Plato’s dialogues ; his complaint being not
that the citizens were devoid of ideas on cthics and politics, but that
their ideas were those of the agora, the dicasterium, and the Sophists’
circle, ergo very apt to be unsound. At the same time it was the very
force which he decried that had made his pupils capable of following


1 Isoc. De Permutatione, 299.

2 *For Grecce is the only country which really produces man, that heavenly
plant, that divine perfected offshoot, producing reason which is akin to know-
ledge; and the cause is this: it is the nature of the intellect to be rendered acute
by the lightness of the air; on which account Heraclitus said with great propricty,
‘Where the climate is dry, there the soul is most wise and good.” ’ Philo, quoted
by Eusebius, Preparation of the Gospel, Lib. VIII, c. 14, p. 399 M.; see Synes.
De Insom. p. 1291, note.

ab7e-s D


18 INTRODUCTION


him, and so strong were the chains fastened upon the Athenian mind
by these very teachers in question that eight centuries later we find
‘Synesms still influenced by them and still railing at the ‘philosophers
with long beards’ very much in the same spirit as that which we find in
Piato’s Sophist or Gorgias.

The Athenians thirsted for knowledge. So did the Alexandrians
many centuries later, but the latter were no longer in a position to
approach the matter in a dispassionate spirit. The ecclesiastic and the
dogmatist had clouded the finer air of research and speculation with
the fogs generated by the perpetual hurtling of their respective waves of
faith. But in Athens at a given moment, only too brief, we have the
picture of enthusiastic men, above all young men of fortune, ready to
spend their all; and their friends only eager to lend them their own
possessions also, for their purely personal advancement in learning. We
have eloquent evidence of all this in Plato’s Protagoras. But when the
range of eloquence displayed by the speakers in the market-place, or
the incisive pleadings in the Courts of Law had begun to pall on men
such as these, they then began to turn to the philosopher in some
form; the*one phase was the stepping-stone to the other. So these
Athenian citizens, ‘sons of Erechtheus, children of the blessed gods’, as
Euripides * calls them, came at last from the virtue

‘of their wholly impregnable land

To pasture upon the most far-famed wisdom.’ !

Smal] wonder was it if they
* Tripped lightly through the clearest air

Where once 'tis said golden-haired Harmonia

Gave birth to the Picrid Muses.’
But although in the case of Hellas the light of Athens was so blindingly
bright, and although this one state in a marvellously short space of
time brought to a head and perfected the external forms of all that was
working slowly towards the same ultimate end in hundreds of other
Greek cities, we must not forget that there were also those other centres
of Greek civilization, of thought, and of art. We must not forget that
Thales, the father of Greek speculation, flourished at Miletus, one of the
Ionian cities of Asia Minor, in the seventh century B.c., and Heraclitus

® Eur. Med. 824 4.


EARLY GREEK HISTORY 1g


in the sixth century in Ephesus; that Parmenides, the great pioneer of
metaphysical research, whose portrait Plato has so exquisitely drawn for
us, and to whom he alludes with obvious reverence—that Parmenides
passed his life in the Greek city of Elea, not far from the Temples of
Paestum, those inspiring relics of Hellenic art; that Empedocles of
Acragas, in Sicily, ended a life of thought and philosophic seeking in
the crater of Etna, as the story goes, in the middle of the fifth century.
So many hearths were there of thought in the world of Hellas before
Athens had collected their threads of philosophy and had crystallized
their conceptions in the monumental works of Plato and Anstotle.

It was in one of these famous cities of Greek literary tradition that
Synesius was born, the city of Cyrene founded by Battus, according to
the legend, on the coast of Libya. Cyrene was precisely one of those
cities that, far distant from Athens, had evolved a high degree of per-
fection in literature and art. The beautiful Aphrodite recently dis-
covered there and now in the Museo delle Terme, in Rome, is an illustra-
tion, as are many other exquisite fragments of sculpture. It was the
home of Aristippus and of the poet Callimachus. The latter migrated to
Alexandria in the third century and is said to have been the librarian
of the Bruchium. He founded a school of rhetoric in a suburb of the city
called Eleusis, a fitting symbol this name of the mystical philosophy
that was to unroll itself in Alexandria.


II


Tue history of the school of Alexandria has been written by very
able men in the earlier part of the nineteenth century, by Vacherot,
Jules Simon, and others, and has of course been touched upon more
recently by Harnack, but they are all apt to exaggerate one point, in
ascribing the presence of all mysticism in the Neoplatonism that de-
veloped later in Alexandria to direct contact with the East. I do not
mean to underestimate the influence of such direct contact, but only
to protest against tke assumption that everything of a purely rational-
istic form must necessarily come from the Greek intelligence, and every-
thing of a mvstical form from the nations of the Orient. The old road
between Athens and Eleusis might instruct us better than that. The
very words ‘mystery’ and ‘mystic’ are Greek, and the cult of the Eleu-
sinian mysteries was as national to the Greeks as that of Serapis or Isis
seemed to the Egyptians. Are we to conceive that the Greek mentality,
so rich in every gift of the gods, was barren in so much as a whole phase
of man’s psychical nature is concerned? We have only to read one of
the choruses of Aeschylus to disillusion us of any such ideas. We must
ask ourselves whether the countrymen of this poet, or of the enigmatic
Pindar, were so sterile of mystical lore that they must of necessity
have borrowed from the religions of the East. Teiresias, the figure so
persistent in what Greek tragedies have come down to us, is a continual
reminder that mysticism was ever before the Greek mind.

So let us return to Eleusis, to the Eleusis near Alexandria this time,
and we shall find there about the middle of the third century B.c.
Calliimachus amongst his pupils. He will be surrounded by Erato-
sthenes of Cyrene, Aristophanes of Byzantium, and Apollonius of
Rhodes. This schoul was no doubt a reflected light from the University
of Athens. Clearly the ‘mountain streams of philosophy’ which Synesius
speaks of as ‘flowing from his masters Plato and Aristotle’! had made
the Libvan desert to bloom and had crossed the sea to join with the
waters of the Nile, even as the fabled river-god Alpheus flowed through
the Iunian Sea from Arcadia to unite with his beloved Arethusa in her
fountain in Sicily. a

We thus find that the beginnings of Alexandria as the seat of learning

} De Regno, 106 a.


THE SCHOOL OF ALEXANDRIA 2z


were of purely Hellenic origin, and that it was the city founded by
Alexander, the apostle of Greek culture though not the defender of
Greek freedom, which was to become the rival of Athens in humane
letters. It is strange to think that the great blow which drove Isocrates
to despair and death, the final defeat of Athens in the battle of Chae-
ronea, was struck by Philip of Macedon, the father of the very man
who built and gave his name to a city destined to carry the Hellenism
of Athens to the gates of the East, and finally, after centuries, to impose
a new form of philosophy on Athens itself, a philosophy of which the
pristine Hellenic purity had been contaminated by the medley of Jews,
Syrians, and Persians that Alexandria was to swarm with later. It
was here that various forms of religious syncretism were to grow on
a soil originally prepared by such men as Callimachus, Zenodotus,
Lycophron,and Alexander, all in the reign of Ptolemaeus Philadelphus,
at the end of the third century B.c., and finally in the second century
by Aristarchus of Samothrace. It has been said that ‘the East and the
West shall never meet’, a very idle word this, for it takes no account
of the fact that they more than ‘met’ in Alexandria. The vitality of
each was fused into a new life there at a time when Athens was beginning
to decline, a life that we see reflected in the fresh youthful comments of
Synesius that I have already quoted.

Time had slowly brought the currents of Christian. Jewish, and
Hellenic forces to converge at Alexandria in the intervening centuries,
between the days when Aristarchus was teaching Greek rheturic and
those in which Synesius was following the lectures of his idol Hypatia,
the Platonic philosopher. But the Eastern current, in meeting the
Western in Alexandria, at first seems to have completely swa:nped i.
*Philo, Basilides (the Gnostic), Valentinus, St. Clement, Ongen, opened
up new vistas to thought, and revealed to it mysteries which the genius
of a Plato or an Aristotle had never sounded. . . . Closed in by their
dualistic conception, Aristotle and even Plato could not explain the
union of the soul with God. In the ortental thevlogy, on the contrary,
nothing was more simple, .. . it becomes a metaphysical necessity, and
the mysticism of the Orient may say with perfect truth, “In Deo
vivimus, novemur et sumus.”’’ So says Vacherot.' A rationalist mind,

§ De FEcoke 3B’ Alexundose, wl. L, 331-3.


22 INTRODUCTION

a positivist, living at this period, if such we could find, might have
objected that conceptions of this sort were the province of religion, not
of philosophy, but his attempts to get to ‘terra firma’ would have been
unavailing. The tide was running too strongly against all thought that
was not impregnated with mysticism. In Athens itself not so much had
been changed since the advent of Pyrrho and the Sceptics; the stereo-
typed forms of philosophy were still undisturbed. But in Alexandria
hybrid forms had been in process of alternate formation and disruption.

Philo, the Jewish forerunner of Neoplatonism, had loomed on the
horizon with a system of allegoric interpretation of the Hebrew scrip-
tures, which sought to reinforce their authority in the minds of his own’
co-religionaries on the one hand, and on the other, to present, through
the symbolism which he read into them, a form of Judaism that would
be attractive to the mind of a cultured Alexandrian Greek. Whether
Philo can be called a fully-fledged Neoplatonist, is beside the mark.
What is interesting is that he was the first thinker to strike the chord
which seems to resound through the whole symphony of Neoplatonism,
a way of thinking which has been described by one of its admirers as
a ‘higher mode of apprehending God by spiritual intuition, which under
certain conditions culminates in knowledge of Him’.’ Here we begin to
touch on that later mysticism of Plotinus. We are at the parting of the
ways. We are no longer to ascend to the heavenly path by the ladder
of dialectic asin the Republic; intuition has supplanted reason, and
ecstasy logic. We have passed the point whcre we can ‘sublimely
speculate with Plato, or severely argue with Aristotle’.

But Philo, notwithstanding, is always slipping into the carlicr
Platonic doctrines, and frequently speaks with the voice of the old
Academy. ‘Those things which amongst men are called truth and
justice’, he says, ‘are symbols only, but those which are so with God,
are prototypes or ideas.’ Without attempting to disentangle the
somewhat confused threads of the web that Philo spun in the earlier
half of the first century A.D., it may be said here that the work creates
an atmosphere which is charged with both Hellenism and Judaism,
and in which the Hellenic spirit struggles with the Hebraistic with very


® Dr. Inge, Hastings’ Encycl. Rel. and Eth., vol. i, p. 310.


THE SCHOOL OF ALEXANDRIA 23


doubtful success. While he seems to have failed in his attempt to
strengthen the position of his own religion, Philo paved the way to that
merging of religious conceptions which is so characteristic of Synesius;
and the question that we must ask ourselves here is, whether the
Cyrenean had read his works. He never mentions Philo, but there are
passages in his essays which seem reminiscent of him. The most
interesting point of all in regard to Philo is the part that he played in
Neoplatonism by pointing the way to symbolism, that symbolism which
pervaded all philosophic literature after him, and finally invaded Athens
itself, where it may be found in full vigour, if such an epithet may be
applied to decadence, at the end of the fifth century, with Proclus.
Philo will always remain a landmark in the history of the school of
Alexandria. I say a landmark, because it is he who most clearly makes
evident the change of attitude that had come over the world at this
time towards thought in general. This change is most obvious in the
tendency to substitute mysticism for legitimate philosophical specu-
lation.

‘Speculation’, says Barthélemy St. Hilaire, ‘disquiets and troubles,
mysticism calms and rests, . . . it is the solid shore of eternity. To
borrow a comparison from the Areopagite, “It is this alone that permits
the sailor to drop the anchor of hope which is attached to the ship of
faith. This immovable ground once reached, the soul gives itself up
entirely to the love which moves it, stirs its depths, satisfies and over-
whelms it.”’! It is true that here and there a current of mysticism runs
through Plato's dialogues. Plato's horizon was so vast that there is
scarcely anything pertaining to the knowledge of the mindor tothe desires
of the soul, that he has not touched upon; but we feel that speculation
was his goal, speculation which is troublous and disquieting to the mind
(numquam quietat, inquietat potius), but which, by means of that very
unrest, seeks to raise it step by step, to the perception of the truth. As
Synesius writes in his Dio—*What could be more closely allied to mind
than reasoning, and what harbour could be more perfectly its home?
For wherever mind is, there is reason also."* Evidently he was a Platonist
at heart, from first to last, though not in the sense in which Plotinus or


© L’Ecole J’ Alex., p. Ixv. 2 Dio, .p. 1134.


24 INTRODUCTION


even Philo would have understood the term. For with Plato the main
tide of philosophy set strongly towards the open harbour of reason.
“The immovable ground’ alluded to by the Areopagite is not Plato’s
paradise; the ‘ship of faith’ was not the vessel on which Plato had em-
barked, but rather the ship of reason; nor was ‘hope’ his anchor, but
rather demonstration. ‘Truth is militant’, said Mill, ‘and can only
establish itself by controversy’, and Plato’s dialectic is little else than
a model of controversy; one might almost say a monologue of contro-
versy, for it always seeks the counter-argument on the part of the
reader. It invites, to quote a French expression, the ‘retour sur soi-
méme’. The founder of the Academy, at all events in the works that
have come down to us, never drew up a formal philosophic system.
This was reserved for his great pupil Aristotle, in whom, in spite of his
divergences and his attacks on his master’s ‘theory of ideas’, we can
always recognize the mind first formed in Platonism.' Even his ‘uni-
versals’ have been identified by some commentators with Plato’s ‘ideas’.
Whatever traces of mysticism there may be in Plato, in Aristotle we
find that all tendency to mysticism has disappeared, and that the area
of speculative inquiry has shrunk ; he aims at finality; all human know-
ledge is to be not only demonstrable but demonstrated. A few more
such sledge-hammer blows, and pure speculation as well as mysticism
would have been extinct, but the followers of the Stagirite were not
strong enough to deal them. Thought for the moment had annihilated
thought. At this time the minds of men had found quiescence not as yet
by dropping ‘the anchor of hope from the ship of faith’, but by leaning
on the ‘ipse dixit’ of the master.

Now all this is important to our understanding of Synesius’ philo-
sophy. It is a far cry from Athens to Cyrene and Alexandria, but a
nearer one, it would seem, from the fourth century before to the fourth


4 The reconciliation of the divergences between Plato and Aristotle was a
favourite theme of the Neoplatonists for centuries. Augustine himself expressed
an opinion: "Quod autem ad eruditionem doctrinamquc adtinet, et mores quibus
consalitur animae, quia noo defuerunt acutissimi et sollcrtissimi viri, qui docerent

suis Aristotelem ac Platonem ita sibi concinere, ut imperitis
minusque adtentis dissentire videantur, multis quidem saeculis multisque conten-
tionibus, sed tamen eliquata est, ut opinor, una verissimas philosophias disciplina.
(Contra Academicos, iii. 19, § 42.)


THE SCHOOL OF ALEXANDRIA 25


century after Christ, and many schools of philosophy had flourished in
the intervening period. But the outstanding fact is that, then as now,
in that civilization as in this, the dominating figures in thought were
still Plato and Aristotle. Synesius states the case very clearly for him-
self in the passage from De Regno (1065 A) to which I have already
drawn attention. ‘My masters, Plato and Aristotle’ (these are his
words), ‘and as many torrents of philosophy as have run from them.’
It will be observed that he does not speak of the torrents as his masters,
but of their fountain heads. What derivatory currents of thought he
had in mind, it would be interesting to know. Plotinus he quotes from,
Carneades he mentions. Did he know of Epictetus? Had he read
Dionysius of Halicarnassus, Longinus, Julian, or Libanius? Had such
Christian writers come to his ken as Clement of Alexandria or St. Basil?
All this is unknown to us. He seems ignorant, and to his own regret, of
Christian theology, and of this again it is difficult to find an explanation.
That Plato is the foundation of his thought is obvious both from the
general trend of his works and numerous allusions to the dialogues, not
to speak of direct quotations. The references to Aristotle are rarer.
Crawford gives twenty-four extracts from the essays and letters which
he connects with certain passages in the Ethics of Aristotle and in the
Metaphysics, History of Animals, and The Sky. But Synesius speaks
more often with the voice of Plato than with that of Aristotle. Why
then does he speak of Aristotle as his master in the same breath as
Plato? It might be taken to indicate that he does not Ican upon the
purely transcendental and mystical vein in Plato’s work which was the
one part of it that seems to have inspired the Neoplatonists.

One might think that a man who recognized Aristotle as his master
had already nailed his colours to the mast of rationalism. He, if no
other, had insured his mind against the peril of abandoning reason in
philosophy for faith and hope, in a word, for mysticism pure and simple.
But although the Neoplatonists gave way precisely to this mysticism,
yet Plotinus himself is always drawing on Aristotle. His pupil Porphyry
tells us how he blended together subtly and secretively the doctrines of
the Stoa with those of the Lyceum in his great work;* he even goes

1 Porphyry, Life of Plotinus, cap. 14: ‘He followed his own path rather than
that of tradition, but in his writings both the Stoic and Peripatetic doctrincs
ste =


26 INTRODUCTION


so far as to say that he condensed in the Enneads the whole of Aristotle's
AM daphysics. This is the paradox that Neoplatonism offers us. Plotinus
gives us a mixture of Plato, Aristotle, Zeno, and Jast but not least him-
self, he who in long years of fasting and contemplation had several times
arrived at so intense a pitch of psychic exaltation that he was able to
lose all consciousness of the dimensions of space in which he lived, and
to blend with the Deity. So much we have from his pupil Porphyry.
We are here in the face of amazing statements. The rationalist philo-
sopher seeking vainly to thread a way through this veritable labyrinth
of mystical contradictions and false valuations, might pertinently ask,
“Whose reason then can be saved, if even the shield of Aristotle cannot
protect us?’ The sterile discussions in the schools of Athens on the
contradictions involved in the doctrines of Plato, Aristotle, and the
Stoics had, as Bouillet points out, brought philosophy into contempt:

“After the great Plotinus,’ says St.-Hilaire, ‘had displayed the powers
of a man of genius in establishing a harmony between the doctrines of Plato
and Aristotle, so far as their fundamental positions are concerned, his suc-
cessors applied themselves to completing and realizing in every detail the
work of conciliation. This was the constant tradition of the Neoplatonic
school from Porphyry and Iamblichus down to Simplicius and Priscianus
of Lydia, its last representative.’ !

This is only too characteristic of the Neoplatonists. First they build
on that more mystical side found occasionally in Plato’s dialogues;
then they seek to show that the rationalistic side of Plato was in accord
with Aristotle; finally on this basis they contrive to persuade them-


are sank; Aristotle's Mctaphysic, especially, is condensed in them all but entire.
-.. At the confcrences ho uscd to have treatiscs by various authors read aloud—
among the Platonists it might be Severus or Cronius, Numenius, Caius or Atticus;
and among the Peripatetics Aspasius, Alexander, Adrastus or some such writer, at
the call of the moment. But it was far from his way to follow any of these authors
blindly; he took a personal, original view, applying Ammonius’ method to the
investigation of every problem.’ (Sce Stephen Mac Kenna, Plotinus, vol. 1, pp. 13,14.)

4 ‘One must not stick to the letter on all the points where Aristotle contradicts
Piato,’ wrote Simplicius, ‘nor must we imagine that thcre was any real difference
of opinion between the two philosophers. Rather going to the bottom of their
thought, we should make it clear how in most cases they agree and reach con-
ciation.” (Commentaries on Aristotle.) Porphyry wrote a treatise to prove that .
the doctrine of Aristotle was eséentially the same as that of Plato. (Bouillet,
Pietinus, vol. ii. 611.)


THE SCHOOL OF ALEXANDRIA 27


selves that Aristotle also was a mystic. The doctrine did not in the
work of its first great exponent Plotinus seek to make a collection of
certain tenets of the different warring schools and then attempt to form
them into a new mosaic of systematic thought. Rather did it melt them
all down in a crucible of its own fashioning until, when quite past
recognition, it produced them in the mould of its own faith. The result
of this process of thought is, as might be expected, exaspcrating to
minds that seek logic and sustained force of deduction, attractive to
those to whom the transcendental vision is of more value than the cold
light of reason. St. Paul’s discovery in Athens of the altar dedicated
‘to the unknown god’ is interesting in this connexion. The theological
side of the Athenian mind which had been sct in motion in the first
instance by Plato’s Timaeus, and perhaps by oral teachings in the
Academy, of which we have no record, had crystallized in Aristotle’s
system into the foundation of a philosophic thcism; but the Deity was
aloof and distant. Neoplatonism was not slow to develop a doctrine of
the hypostases involving a trinity of its own, whether influenced at all,
or to what extent influenced, by contact with the doctrines of rising
Christianity is uncertain. Its attitude towards the polytheistic side of
paganism was one of indifference. It seems, in the minds of its chicf
exponents, to have peopled both heaven and earth with innumcrable
demons. Tf it influenced Christianity, it seems to have been influenced
by Christianity in turn, although this is a debatable point. When
the Emperor Julian came to the throne and made a bold attempt to.
re-establish Hellenism in the face of the great tide of the rising religion
and despite the official seal that had been set upon it by the Emperor
Constantine, he found that the forces of religious belicf in the old
divinities'had already been sapped. The rituals of the temples were no
longer, or ‘only occasionally, observed, and in spite of the energetic
propaganda which he made, in spite of the passionate appeals which
he addressed to Roman citizens, to remember the faith of their
ancestors and to honour it, there was only the feeblest response. Nor
was it Christianity alone which had effccted this. Neoplatonism, itself
a flower sprung out of the decay of past belicfs and the intellectual
aloofness of the philosophers, was in turn undermining those very
beliefs and establishing a new current of religious sentiment resting,


28 INTRODUCTION


as we have seen, upon a mystical interpretation of the old philosophic
systems which had reigned in Athens, and transforming them beyond
all recognition into a doctrine which would have been scarcely in-
telligible to the great minds in whose honour it was proclaimed.
"The political réle of paganism’, in a passage quoted by B. Saint-Hilaire,
‘ended with Julian. His partisans were neither sufficiently powerful nor
saficiently numerous to give importance to a spiritual force that no longer
possessed any of itself. Neoplatonism, which had made itself the champion
af the ideas of the past, was obliged to retire from the world’s stage, on
which it had no longer a part to play, and to devote itself to the cult of
reminiscences. It cloistered itself in the schools, in despair of a world that
was, from its own point of view, lost, and sought consolation in discussing
a past, brilliant indeed, but hopelessly extinct. Little by-little its memories
began to fade, its enthusiasm for Hellenism became less ardent, its devo-
tion toa proscribed religion less profound, until finally it passed over into
the enemy's camp, perhaps unconsciously to itself, and dissolved into


that very Christianity which it had at first so violently attacked.’ (L’Ecole
@ Alezandrie, p. 39.) °


It was in such a world as this that Synesius, the pupil of Hypatia,
was born in the last half of the fourth century. I have advanced else-
where’ the opinion that he was in no wise a mystic by nature. His mind,
so far as we can judge of it in his letters, was a distinctly reasoning and
inquiring one, his character open and direct, his heart warm and
passionate in devotion to family, country, and friends. Intellectually
he turned to the natural sciences, to physics and chemistry, as well as
to philosaphy. He loved hunting and manly sports. One can scarcely
find a trace of the mystic in the very clearly-cut image that rises before
our eyes as we read those letters of his which so charmed the later days
of the Roman Empire. The allusions to his native town Cyrene are
particularly fresh. We seem in them to look across the chasm of cen-
turies which divides them from the city where Callimachus wrote his
hymns or where Arcesilaus made ready his chariots for the Olympian
races. We seem to be taken back to the Greek city when he speaks of his
native town Cyrene or of his Lacedaemonian ancestors. We feel at once
outside the Roman Empire. The Greek city that we were considering
a moment ago, and which was the self-centred unit of Hellas, seems to

3 The Letters of Synesius (Oxford, 1926), Introduction.


THE SCHOOL OF ALEXANDRIA 29


us, as we read Synesius, to have been, in his case at least, a vital entity
still. Was it that its remoteness in far Libya had preserved it the more
freshly, as the desert sand keeps fragile ornaments of Egyptian princes
intact for thousands of years? Is it possible that its culture, its national
sentiment, had been less disturbed by the growth of the Roman Empire
than had been the case in towns that were scattered in the other con-
tinents? If any one thinks this idca fanciful, let him read the letters
of Julian or St. Basil, written a little earlier than the time in which
Synesius lived, or those of Apollinaris Sidonius a little later, all these
men of a similarly high degree of culture and crudition. He will at once
notice the difference between them. We no longer have that indescrib-
able feeling of intimacy that grew up in a Greek city, which any one must
have felt in reading the Attic orators and which we feel with a play
of Aristophanes before us. Synesius was a survival, he was born out
of due time, he had the same vein of patriotic feeling that animated
his Lacedaemonian ancestors. A man born and brought up in an old
Greek city, such an one as he hints at, might have been fortified against
the change of thought that had already driven the world of sensitive-
minded men of letters to mysticism, and was now imperceptibly driving
them towards monasticism, and ultimately to the days of the inquisi-
tion. I might even say, to put it imaginatively and at the risk of being
accused myself of falling into the slough of mysticism, that Synesius
was the incarnation of the soul of his own city in the past, a city of
Greek philosophers. ‘I mourn over the illustrious seat of Cyrene,’ he
exclaims in Letter 50, ‘the possession in the past of such men as Car-
neades and Aristippus, but now of the Joannes and the Julii.’ But
more to the point still is Letter 31. ‘If cities have souls, guardians
divine and of the nature of gods, be sure that they must be grateful
to you.’ Thus he writes to his friend Aurelian in Constantinople.
Aurelian and his party had saved the Eastern Empire from the Goths,
or so at least thought Synesius. We in our day would at once have
reflected on all that this meant for the Roman Empire. Yet there was no
more patriotic citizen than Synesius, as we shall sce presently when we
pass in review his great address to the Emperor Arcadius. When about
to take the field against the Ausurians he writes to his brother, ‘I
must certainly set out to meet these audacious men just as I am, and


30 INTRODUCTION |
make trial of them, what manner of men they are who pretend to laugh
Romans to scorn.’

We in our day have been schooled to ‘think incontinents’; but not so
Synesius. He thinks in cities. The old spell of the ‘thirty cities’ is still
upon him. When he writes to congratulate his friend Aurelian for the
great services he has rendered to the state, he instinctively thinks first,
not of the Empire which concerns himself more directly, for it includes
his beloved Cyrene, but of his friend's city, Constantinople, the guardian
spirits of which must needs rejoice. His outlook on life was still that
of the Greek city, his own city; * the foundations of his mind had been
laid in Cyrene where the traditions of the school of Aristippus were
probably not extinct. When he went later to study at Alexandria, it
was as one formed already in a more old-fashioned and secluded spot
and one which may easily have been Icss affected by the trend towards
mysticism that was now in the ascendant elsewhere.

There are some natures that, once fully developed in youth, are little
affected by stronger influences amongst which they are thrown later in
life. Synesius seems very little affected intellectually by his residence
at Constantinople. Most. commentators show surprise as well as regret
that he never makes mention in his letters of the great events in which
he must have more or less participated. In his cryptic history De Provt-
dentia he writes of them rather in the vein of one whose philosophic
serenity was quite undisturbed by the events he had witnessed. ‘Pytha-
goras of Samos’, he says in this work, ‘avers that the wise man is nothing
but a spectator of events that take place in the world, for he has been
invited to this universe As to a sacred contest to be such a spectator of
the proceedings therein.’ He speaks quite dispassionately about all that
concerns this awfyl time of trouble in Constantinople. Why so?
Obviously because it was not his own city. It was his friend Aurelian’s
city or any one else’s you please, but not his. He carries Cyrene about
with him as a tortoise its shell. He only puts his head out to watch
what is going on about him from time to time. But every Greek city was
an island, and Synesius was insular. The moment Cyrene is threatened

® Cf. Ep. 124. He writcs to Hypatia: ‘Why then doI suffer? Because... I was


born here, and it is here that I sce the honoured tombs of my ancestors. On your
account alone I think I should be capabie of overlooking my city.’


THE SCHOOL OF ALEXANDRIA 31


he is all passion, fire, even at times despair. Read in this connexion
the burning words of the Catastasis. Pythagoras of Samos has quite’
disappeared now that Cyrene is in danger; the calm aloof philosopher
has come back from the ‘islands of the blest’, as his master Plato had
warned him that he must. He buckles on his armour; not the breast-
plate of faith this time, or the helmet of Athene, but a rugged harness
for protection against Ausurian bowmen. The Bishop of Ptolemais is
on the walls. He is patrolling the battlements by night, he is scouring
the country by day in search of the raiders:

‘In my spear my bread is mixed, my wince is in my spear,

Ismarian wine I quaff e’en so, leaning against my spear.’


Thus he writes to his friend Simplicius, quoting Archilochus. Faith and
philosophy alike have gone to the winds now that the very existence of
the five cities (Pentapolis) is at stake. Synesius, still fairly young, but
old in his Spartan race, has been reabsorbed into the guardian soul
that broods over Cyrene, the city that was the offspring of the Isle of
Thera, of Lacedaemonian hearts, Thera which had remained faithful
to Sparta to the end. He tells his friend Anysius in a letter written
probably in the last years of his life how he trembles for Pentapolis, the
group of cities crowned by Cyrene. ‘My motherland, as the Cretans
would say,’ are his words.

Here at last is the real, the ‘historic’ Synesius, to borrow a phrase
from the current controversies on the Socratic problem. Here we have
the Lacedacmonian, the soldier, the man of action. We are two removes
away from the Neoplatonist now, or the mystic, for we have not
merely left far behind us the Alexandrians and their persistent cult of
the unknowable, but the ‘masters Plato and Aristotle’ as well. The
more we study this somewhat elusive charactcr, the more we shall
become convinced that its true province in life was to do rather than
to think, and that the mainspring is to be sought in the traditions of
his native Cyrene, in the heredity of his Lacedacmonian ancestors.
However baffling his personality may seem at first sight, it will be.
clearer if we take into consideration how it was conditioned first by
the growth of his Greek city in the past, secondly by the cult of his
ancestors—does he not exlaim, ‘O Cyrene, whose archives trace my


32 INTRODUCTION


ancestry to the Heraclidae. .. . Alas, Dorian tombs that I shall never
share’ ?—and, thirdly, by the natural bent of a mind which was positive
rather than mystical, and which was always demanding definite solu-
tions. Many instances of this might be cited. In the case of Andronicus
he urges the blasphemous prefect’s immediate excommunication from
the church. To his mind there was no half measure possible. His
colleagues overbore him. Synesius proved to be right in the end, and
the sentence had to be pronounced. His congregation seemed dissatis-
fied with him at this point. Here again he calls for a clear issue; he
tells them that he has no intention of resigning his office, but he reminds
them bluntly that it is always open to them to choose some one else in
his place. Again, there is the case of the Bishop of Bithynia, Alexander -
by name, who had left his own sce in a mysterious way and was seeking
refuge in Ptolemais, thereby placing Synesius in a difficult and delicate
position. No better example could be given of his clear and unequivocal
disposition of mind than this letter (66) addressed to the Primate
Theophilus whom he is pressing for explicit instructions on the subject.
The letter ends with the following words: ‘My question is precisely this,
and the authority of your ecclesiastical succession must answer it
simply, clearly, and in terms that I can understand,—am I to consider
Alexander a bishop or not?’ Illustrations from the letters might be
multiplied, but only to the same purpose, to show Synesius in his true
light as a man of strong common sense and determination. These
letters are also in many ways the best comment on the other prose
works that we have before us here. They show us that the rdle of
Synesius as a philosopher was rather one that he had imposed on himself
than one assigned to him by nature, and moreover show that it rested
upon a fragile foundation. He was neither a profound nor a very
original thinker. He was something of a dilettante, a man well versed in
the culture of his age, very much as was Apollinaris Sidonius in the
Western Empire forty years later. The charm of his works proceeds
from the intimate touch that he had the art of establishing with his
reader, and they are invaluable also in the indirect evidence that they
give us concerning the iritellectual movements of his time; for however
insular he may have been, however wedded to the past, his works must
unwittingly betray something of what was present at the moment when


THE SCHOOL OF ALEXANDRIA 33


he wrote. His character was too sensitive to fail in this. A single frag-
ment of a Ietter addressed to his revered Hypatia is eloquent on this
point. It contains these words: ‘I seem to perform the function of an
echo. Whatever sounds I take up I give back.’ (Letter 33.)

Why then, it may be asked, if we abandon Synesius as a thinker,
should we take all this trouble to analyse the sources of his philosophy ?
The answer to this question is that, though the works he has left us are
in themselves of the first interest, they can only be understood by con-
tinual reference to the milieu in which he lived. If we are to criticize
them, we must at all events take them as seriously as he takes them
himself. Let us not forget that he himself admits the lighter strain in
them. In wniting to Nicander, he tells us that he has ‘begotten literary
works’, ‘children of mine’ as he calls them. Quite Platonic this. We
think at once of Diotima in the Symposium, and her impassioned words,
how that no man has greater love than this, namely to bring forth in
beauty offspring of his soul. The phrase in the letter to Nicander is an
echo, but this time an echo of one of his mastcr’s most sublime moments.
Some of his works, Synesius goes on to say, are born of philosophy.
Orthodox Platonism again. What is conceived and born in beauty is
of the higher love, and poetry, philosophy, and the like participate in
the absolute idea of beauty, that beauty which is second only to those
ethical ideas which we are told in the Phacdrus it would be blinding
for us to contemplate. But our Cyrenaean does not allow us to linger
here. He proceeds to tell us that others of his works are born of the
common rhetoric of the market-place (rijs mavdyjpou pytopucis), ‘al-
though any one can see that they are all of the same father, a father
who leans at one moment to earnestness (ets exovdyv), at another to
joy (75ojv). .. . The work before you’, he says to his friend Nicander
‘shall tell you itself of which class it professes to be.’ He then hints that
it is of his illegitimate offspring, for all that he would like to claim
Philosophy as its mother. Is it perchance one of those false births that
Socrates deprecates in the maieutic dialogues? Be this as it may, he
admits that he has a particular affection for this work of his and that
he has tried to put into it much of the more serious side also. The
tone of the letter is one of delightful badinage, and its lesson is most
aha but quite clearly conveyed. He means to tell us that he

: F


34 INTRODUCTION


cannot remain too long on the heights. But more than this, he suggests
here the key to the more elusive side of his writings. ‘This essay (Adyos)
shall itself inform you to which class it belongs’, in othér words, whether
it is of the serenity of the heavenly way mentioned in the last words
of the Republic or of the rhetoric popular in the Forum. The work
referred to in the letter is understood to be the Eulogy of Baldness, an
essay full of laughter, but turning at times to philosophic speculation,
chiefly on the sphere as the form supreme in the universe. ‘If you agree
with my own estimate of the work,’—this is in substance what he says
to Ni —‘make it known to the Greeks.’ The last phrase is signi-
ficant. Greek was the literary language of the age as well as the
spoken language of at least the whole Eastern Empire, so that anybody
who cared to read at all must have read Greck. But we notice that he
asks his friend not to make his book known to the world, but to make it
known to the Greeks. That Greek town ofhis origin always possessed his
soul. The other races of the world were still only barbarians to him, and
this six hundred years after Zeno the Stoic had, first amongst the Greeks,
conceived of a more international outlook on life, and had written as if
the world were equally open to Greeks and to other races,' the loyal
Roman citizen, for this Synesius certainly was,remained always aGreek,
and it is for the Greeks alone that he writes; the others do not signify.
He seems never to have taken the trouble to acquire the Latin tongue.
We may learn then from our examination of this letter at Icast three
things. First, that the author of these essays was himself by his
thoughts and imagery a Platonist, second, that while he lays claim
to intimacy with the Muses of poetry and philosophy, he is conscious
of being at times only a popular writer, and feels uncertain about the
place of his works in literature, and finally that he writes for Greeks
and Greeks only. Would he have regarded even such men as Plotinus
or Ammonius Saccas as Greeks? I think it very doubtful, although, as
we shall see, in one of his works, On Dreams, he was palpably influenced
by the Exncads. We must therefore always attempt to approach his
work from the point of view of the Greek philosopher or rhetorician.
In trying to assign to his works their true place amongst those of his
century or of all time, we must not lose sight of the fact that they
® See Mayor on Tertullian, Apology, c. 38.


THE SCHOOL OF ALEXANDRIA 35


cover the field of oratory, literary criticism, his own conception of the
philosophy of history, divination, satire, poetry proper, and last but
not least, the epistolary style, in which latter form he has had few
equals. A writer who touches‘so many chords on the lyre of the Muses
must be criticized with the indulgence accorded toversatility. It would
be rather breaking a butterfly on the wheel to make a profound and
searching analysis of his philosophy. Such an attempt could only result
in the conclusion that it was a reflection of Plato with stray elements
that had floated in to him from the Gnostics, from the Neoplatonists,
from Philo and from the Stoics, and that these echoes are more or less
happy as the case may be. To ask what his place is in the general history
of thought would be as absurd as to put the same question in regard to
Montesquieu or Lord Chesterfield. It would be to court an answer in
the negative. Neither did he nor the writers just mentioned ever profess
tohave founded asystem of philosophy; but theinterest we take in them
as writers suffersin noway from this fact. We take delight in their works
notwithstanding; and they give us a marvellous sidelight on their epoch
and the current of thoughts by which they were surrounded. Now, if
we are to understand Synesius better, it will be well to go back a little
and trace the history of thought in the schools of Alexandria from the
point where we left it with Philo to the time when Hypatia the Platonist
was holding her courses of Iectures there, Hypatia, whose pupil and
devoted friend Synesius became.

All the time that Neoplatonism was in a process of crystallization,
Christianity was developing and was, as we have seen, pushing itself
in every direction as a political force. Though it was compelled to lay
the foundations of its own theology, it could not remain indifferent to
the influences of all that Neoplatonists were thinking and writing. The
hypostases of Plotinus approached the doctrine of the Trinity too
closely, even before it had received its final and definite form in the
Council of Nicea, for the Fathers of the Church to pass over such an
analogy altogether. And so it came about that the doctrinaires on
either side became, as we have seen, friends and enemies at the same
‘time. We have seen how this struggle finally ended in later days by
the gradual absorption of the Neoplatonists, one by one, in the Church.
But this process of absorption took place individually rather than


36 INTRODUCTION


collectively, and implied in no way a disavowal of the fundamental
conceptions of Neoplatonism amongst those that remained attached
toit. What rendered this easier was the fact that even if Christianity was
not directly imitating the theology of Plotinus or of Porphyry, never-
theless in its ultimate decision concerning the creed it was not so far
removed from the point of view of those philosophers as to render it
difficult of comprehension to any Neoplatonist, so much did the two
systems of theology resemble each other when viewed only externally.
This made it easier for a Neoplatonist to enter the Christian Church.
How then were matters progressing at the end of the second century ?
Vacherot, in speaking of the Christian school at Alexandria, says, ‘Under
the enlightened direction of St. Clement and of Origen it entered into
communication with all the great schools and the great doctrines of
Alexandria. Origen went himself to the lectures of the founder of Neo-
platonism, and on the other side, the Platonic philosophers came to
listen to Origen. Things had got to such a pitch that in this general
mélée doctrines became effaced and schools. were recognized only
with difficulty. We come across a number of teachers concerning whom
we know not whether they are Christians or pagan philosophers.”! As
to Origen, ‘he lived’, says Porphyry, ‘in the most intimate exchange of
ideas with Plato’, but Origen, that noble and enthusiastic character,
ends by making an enemy of his own bishop, Demetrius. He is expelled
from the Church, excommunicated, tortured, and dies an exile from the
City of light and learning. ‘If we wish to understand the Alexandrian
Fathers,’ continues Vacherot, ‘we must always think of the Gnostics, of
Philo, and of Platonism.’ ‘What need had they to look beyond?”
Gnosticism was the most dangerous enemy that Christianity had yet
encountered on its path. We are now well into the third century, and
nevertheless its influence is still making itself felt. Christianity carried
in its own bosom this germ of a possible disruption, but the origin of
the germ is quite obscure. St. Paul ptobably is speaking of it in the
first letter to Timothy when he alludes to ‘a false wisdom’ which had
begun to spread and which was a menace to the Church. It came from
Samaria in Syria in the form of legends of a miraculous personage
called Simon the Magus, who was—so the Gnostics in that country
3 Vacherot, L’Ecole £ Ales., vol. 1, p. 247-8. ® Vacherot, I, p. 248.


THE SCHOOL OF ALEXANDRIA 37


pretended—the incarnation of God Himself," that is to say, of the
Father. At the same time they admitted that Christ was the incar-
nation of the Son. Upon this foundation a whole theological structure
was built, and a fantastic mythology into which were woven Persian
ideas and other doctrines of the religions of the Orient. From the theo-
logical point of view their system was devoid of value. The chief interest
of Gnosticism to-day is the part that it played in history; and the extent
to which it influenced Christianity. Its great protagonists Saturninus,
Bardaisan, Basilides, Marcion, Valentinus, professed the Christian
faith; but they pretended to represent Christianity themselves, and
wished to draw the Church into an acceptance of their own doctrine.
The matter gradually became an open heresy.

Gnosticism as a doctrine signified a superior form of knowledge ac-
quired by an instantancous revelation, one that the Gnostics held to be
supernatural. Harnack defines it as ‘an acute Hellenization .. . of
Chris. .nity’. If this be the case, we can only say that the Hellenic
spirit had enormously changed since the days of the Academy and the
Stoa; but is it really the Hellenic spirit that was the mainspring of the
Gnosis? I should be inclined to doubt it. The Greck spirit has always
been more inclined to reasoning than to supernatural and sudden illu-
mination. I am aware that here I am touching upon controversial
ground and raising the whole question as to whether Plotinus and all
the school that followed him were or were not the legitimate successors
of Hellenic thought. Some authorities on Greek philosophy are entircly
of the opinion that they were, and one eminent critic of the Alex-
-andrian School goes so far as to assure us that Plato and Aristotle
were only a ‘kind of splendid digression’ from the normal current and
development of Greek thought.?

Those of us whose souls have been fired in our youth by the great
founders of thought in question, might well exclaim in despair: ‘


‘Even so my sun one early morn did shine
With all-triumphant splendour on my brow;


1 Cf. Acts viii. 9 ff. Tertullian, On the Prescription of Heretics, xxxiii, remarks on
this text that the system of Simonian sorcery, ‘serving of angels’, wasexprcssly
reckoned among idolatries, and condemned as such by the apostle Peter in the
person of Simon himself (ed. Bindley, p. 81).

2 Dr. Inge, Hastings’s Encycl. of Rel. and Eth., vol. ix, p. 307.


38 INTRODUCTION


Bat, out! alack! he was but one hour mine;
The region cloud hath mask’d him from me now.’!


There are still, as I mus. remind the apologists of Neoplatonism,
lovers of Plato and of his unapproachable works, who hold that he was
largely misunderstood by Philo and by all his successors, and that in
the words of F. C. Conybeare, ‘at the bottom he is a concrete thinker,
to whom the sensible and the ideal, or rational, are ultimately one and
not two.’

Be this as it may, Gnosticism seems to have been an exaggerated
development of a great force that existed everywhere in the world at
large at that moment and was particularly rife in Alexandria. It was
the culmination of that mania for religious syncretism which in the
beginning of the second century had become a veritable obsession, and
threatened at one moment to absorb Christianity and disperse it in its
own raging waters. The Church was forced to struggle for its own inte-
gtity, but at the moment which we have been describing, that interesting
moment in Alexandrian life when Origen was receiving the Hellenic
philosophers, it was strong enough in the consciousness of its own inde-
pendence of action and sufficiently confident in its ever-increasing
power to have no further fear of Gnosticism. If therefore Alexandria
was the whole world for the Fathers of the Church as well as for the
Hellenic philosophers at this time, and if the tradition of the great
University city constituted such an interdependence of intellectual
forces; if the great centre was coloured by Christianity, Gnosticism, and
Neoplatonism at the same time, not to speak of indigenous cults such as
those of Isis and Osiris, is it surprising that Synesius a century after-
wards should be in no way disconcerted at the metamorphosis of an
Hellenic philosopher into a priest of the Christian Church, precisely the
change which he made in his own life? There is nothing in all this to
excite so much surprise as it has awakened in the minds of his bio-
graphers. The thing which is really extraordinary is that Christianity
and Neoplatonism preserved so long their independent positions; that
Christianity succeeded in not being completely contaminated by
Gnosticism, and was able to escape the universal tendency towards


3 Shakespeare, Sonnet xxiii.


THE SCHOOL OF ALEXANDRIA 39


confusion of doctrines. Synesius the idealist, dreamer, and poet, the
dilettante in literature, though full of force and action as a man, was by
his very objective and contemplative nature quite prepared to make a
transition which seems to us, in our age, an extraordinary one, and which
carried him to the dignity of the see of Ptolemais. His biographers
are in despair as to what explanation to give of such a phenomenon, but
the matter will not be so difficult to understand if we once succeed
in placing ourselves in imagination among the streets and market-
places of the fourth-century Alexandria, amidst the religious and philo-
sophic currents which crossed each other everywhere, mingling and
sometimes clashing, and which formed a vast whirlpoo! in which friends
and foes alike were often incapable of distinguishing each other. As to
Synesius, his most devoted friends, his brother Euoptius, Herculian and_
Olympius, they who formed with him what he called ‘the sacred quartet
of friendship’ passed eventually, all of them, into the Christian Church.

Neoplatonism was more than a philosophic system: it had really
become a form of religion. Plotinus its great Apostle preached—there
is no other word for it—asceticism, fasting, the mortification of the
flesh, prayer, all these were preparations for a state of ecstasy in which
the soul might disengage itself from fleshly bonds and unite with God.
Concurrently with all this he gives us in the Enneads a sort of philo-
sophic criticism impregnated with the higher mysticism, at times poeti-
cal, frequently very obscure, and one in which a rationalist would soon
despair of finding the thread of sustained reasoning. The transcendent-
alist on the other hand will tell us at once that the important matter is
not reasoning at all, but intuition; that his High Priest can only give
us the voices that come to him from within. We shall be told that the
‘great inspired’ are more valuable than logicians. I am ready to agree,
if the field of philosophy is not the field of demonstration, or of specula-
tion, but is a matter of inspiration only. In that case,.obviously, all
philosophy will reduce itself to a purely personal formula, and that
formula can be no other than this: ‘Seek out your High Priest, the in-
spired oracle.’ It really seems as if, after all these centuries, we were
coming back with Plotinus to the Pythia at Delphi.

The admirers of Plotinus, however, will not be slow to assure us that
we are not to take the Enneads in the form in which they have come


40 INTRODUCTION


down to us, as giving adequate expression to his doctrine. We are
to understand that he kept his papers very carelessly, that the work
before us is a conscientious but rather desperate attempt on the part
of his pupil Porphyry to reassemble scattered documents, which at no
time were other than notes destined to be expanded into a more finished
‘production, and that the lack of logical cohesion which many complain
of in the Enneads is due to this fact. We seem, therefore, to be in need
of two anchors of Hope for our ship of Faith instead of one; the first
being the hope that Plotinus really was inspired, the second that the
pages before us are actually his inspirations and not merely garbled
notes. How much of the work before us represents Plotinus, and how
much Porphyry? Did Porphyry edit what Plotinus left behind him to
the extent of reconstructing the whole system, and if so, was he com-
petent to do so? Did he understand the doctrine himself? Who shall
resolve this double star of Plotinus and Porphyry? The more limited
mind of the rationalist might ask whether it is a double star or a double
obscurity, and might watch with consternation the spectacle of one
transcendental philosopher trying to set in order the house of another.

I must confess to some similar feeling in reading the De Insomnits
of Synesius, the one work of his that seems to have been written under
the influence of the Enneads and quite different in inspiration from that
which he describes in the letter to Nicander as being of his illegitimate
offspring. In this essay on dreams one feels three removes from the
source, whatever that may be. Plotinus has interpreted Plato, Porphyry
has interpreted Plotinus, and finally to make confusion worse con-
founded, Synesius has interpreted Porphyry. But the unkindest cut of
all comes when we discover in reading letter 154 that he seems to be in
some doubt as to whether it was he who wrotc it at all or yet another
personality. He solemnly informs Hypatia, at all events, the one being
whom he revered above all others, that he rose in the middle of the
night and transcribed the whole of it then and there; that parts of it
seemed to him to proceed not from his own mind; but that he was
moved by some force outside of himself. I think no comment could be
better. I can only return to my previous view, that he was not a mystic
by nature, as it seems to me was the case with Philo also. A real mystic
is never conscious of his mysticism. It is part of his being. But with


THE SCHOOL OF ALEXANDRIA 4t


Synesius, once that his sensitive mentality is moved by the currents of
mysticism about him, he expresses his own surprise quite frankly.
Could anything be more characteristic of the legacy that Plotinus left
to succeeding generations? If we scek to weigh his doctrines in the
scales that we employ generally in the history of philosophy, the result
will always be nugatory, and we shall encounter nothing but deceptions;
but at the same time no doctrines have found more enthusiastic ad-
mirers in successive centuries than precisely these. |

The Christian mystics, steeped in the ‘Platonic tradition’, would cer-
tainly have astonished Plato if he had lived to sce them, and the same
thing might be said of Philo, although in a less degree. Philo melted
down Judaism, and poured it into a Platonic mould. St. Clement melted
Stoicism and Platonism in the same way, and stamped them with the
image and superscription of Christianity; Origen carried on his work
and sought to destroy Gnosticism, but fell; Plotinus, the purely Hel-
lenic apostle, melted down all the Greck philosophers of the past,
stamped them this time with the image of Plato, as he conceived it,
and the coinage has been passing from hand to hand ever since, at least
in certain lands of the greater world of thought. The outstanding fact
is that this doctrine, philosophy or religion, whichever we choose to
call it, has given evidence of an extraordinary degree of vitality, and in
this day scems to be still making proselytes. That it has undeniable
points of resemblance with Christianity was only too obvious to the
early Fathers of the Church, however much this very fact at moments
aroused their displeasure. St. Cyril of Alexandria speaks of Neoplatonic
theology in these terms:

‘We find among the Greck philosophers themselves a knowledge of the
Holy Trinity. They say, in substance, that the three natures (i.e. the hypo-
stases) are closely united to each other, and without any intermediary; so
that Soul, which is in the third rank, has the same relation to Mind which is
in the second, that Mind, in turn, has to the One (the first cause). That
these philosophers establish between these natures the relation that exists
between that which generates and that which is generated, is proven by the
following words of Plotinus: ‘‘Whenever what engenders is perfect, of
necessity that which is engendered remains with it and is separated from it
Only to the extent of its own differentiation.” * You see how distinctly he


’ Pi. Eun. v. 1, 6.
ahyt-s G


42 INTRODUCTION


affirms that He Who is begotten is closely united to that One who has
engendered Him, that They are separated not by Their nature but only
by the distinction of the Generator and the Generated.’!


Again in another passage Cyril defends the superiority of the Christian
dogma as follows: ‘Plotinus calls the Word of God Mind, that which we
call Wisdom, only we do not admit that the Son is a whit less in glory
and majesty than the Father. For we do not say that He must con-
template the Father to attain perfection, as if He were not perfection
Himself... .’? | :

We notice then that he, one of the foremost Christian theologians of
the fourth century, accepts the Hypostases of Plotinus as evidences of
Christian doctrine, however misguided in his eyes the Hellenic philo-
sopher may have been. It might be asked here whether the Fathers of
the Church were steeped in that mystical reading of Platonism, so
much admired by certain modernists of to-day, through the influence
of Plotinus, or whether it was that both Plotinus and they had become
impregnated with precisely that spirit which had heen in the air men
breathed in Alexandria ever since the days of Philo, and which, fanned
. by Gnosticism, had pervaded all avenues of thought. Mysticism in
Alexandria had made great strides since the days of Plotinus with the
still more emotional exaltations of Iamblichus and his followers.
Gnosticism, in the sense of an intuitive knowledge, had left a permanent
influence behind it long after its disappearance as an ambitious form
of religious propaganda. ‘It is useless to seck whence comes the light’
says Plotinus: ‘we must not seck it at all but wait in repose until it
appears, and prepare ourselves to contemplate it, even as the eye
awaits the rising of the sun who comes up over the horizon, out of
Oceanus, the poets say, and gives himself to be beholden by our eyes.’>

Precisely so. We must not attempt to reach truth by the exertion of
the reasoning faculties, by either induction or deduction. The object of
intelligence and intelligence itself must be one thing and the same.
“The mind’, he tells us, ‘will remain motionless in contemplation, look-


3 Se. Cyril, Contra Iulianum, viii. p. 273 {.

2 Contva Inlianum., viii, p. 273.

® Eun. v. 5, 8. Cf. Olympiodorus, Com. in Phacdonem, G. ff’, p. 230, ed.
Nervin: .. . Ore ¥ piv ddfhua wal § yoiders dis dy pux§ ....


THE SCHOOL OF ALEXANDRIA 43


ing towards nothing else than beauty, turning itself to that and giving
itself in its entirety. It stands as one filled with strength, it sees itself
for the first time more beautiful and shining, in that it is near to it.’
But any one who seeks sustained reasoning in the Enneads will be dis-
appointed; he will find that whenever he thinks that he has at last
found a thread of connected argument it will snap before leading him
very far; for instead of what he expects he will sooner or later be
confronted with a eulogy of some form of passivity of the mind out of
which an inner illumination may arise. Heaven is above and sea under
with Plotinus, but earth is hopelessly out of sight. There are undeniably
passages full of poetic suggestion in the Enneads, but it is the poetry of
the twilight. Philo foreshadowed such a way of thinking in the words
quoted on a previous page, in which he tells us that truth is not visible
in the full light of the intellect, that it is only when the twilight comes
on, that we are possessed of the divine afflatus, that which is the only
knowledge. Plotinus sought to teach a ‘rationalistic doctrine’ accord-
ing to his pupil Porphyry, but however our Alexandrians begin,
they always end by uttering the same note—the note of mystic exal-
tation. It must be admitted that they have succeeded in carrying
with them minds of no mean order. Even so sound a thinker as
Barthélemy St.-Hilaire, the great French translator of Aristotle, one
who in knowledge of the Greek philosophers was second to none,
appears to have been fired at times to enthusiasm by the works of
Plotinus. In an address read before the Académie des Sciences in Paris
in 1844, while commenting upon Vachcrot’s work, he speaks in no
measurcd terms of praise and admiration of the beauty of the doctrine
set forth in the Enneads. ‘Plotinus lays it down’, he says, ‘as axiomatic
that there is no perfect knowledge . . . except that in which the being
which knows is commingled with the being which is known.' The senses,
the imagination, logic, even reason itself, can give us nothing like this.
It is only in pure intelligence that knowledge is absolute and simple....


3 This ‘axiom’ of Plotinus is nothing but what is found in Aristotle in the
Metaphysics, 1072 b 20: ‘And thought thinks itself because it shares the nature of
the object of thought; for it becomes an object of thought in coming into contact
with and thinking its objects, so that thought and object of thought are the
same.’ (Ross.)


44 INTRODUCTION


That alone has inner vision, the intelligible object is not beyond but
within; it has absolute knowledge of this object, knowledge infallibly
true, because it has a real cognition of it .. . because it bears it in its
own bosom, or rather because it is the intelligible itself. The intelligible
essences, the ideas . . . are the very foundations of pure intelligence; in
thinking of them intelligence thinks itself... . The soul is capable of
knowing every truth ... through pure intelligence it commingles with
the whole intelligible world, even with God Himself.’

***It follows from all this that the soul must withdraw within itself to
the point of self contemplation; it will then behold the light of intelli-
gence and hear the divine harmony which the voice of the passions
stifled before. Then the body will be separated from the soul, and
farther, the soul itself will be separated from that part of itself which
is contaminated by passions and desires.” It will thus become purified.
The soul, therefore, inasmuch as it carries within itself this world of
pure intelligence (ergo of the intelligible), has God within itself. Do
not seek God therefore in external things, where you will only find traces
of Him, but look within yourself, and there you will find Him in the
form of the One—God being One. The soul attains to the knowledge
of God through the sentiment of unity. “You have here’, continues
Barthélemy St.-Hilaire, ‘the fruitful seed from which the Alexandrian
mysticism drew all its grandeur, as also all] its extravagances, the
sublimity and the errors of its theology, the purity of its morality, the
dreams of its cosmology. . . . From ‘Godin ourselves”’ the author passes
with Plotinus to God the Creator, and shows how the One has produced


3 Basthélemy St.-Hilaire, L’Ecole d’Alexandrie, pp. 100-104. Bouillet in
his Commentary on Plotinus (vol. iii, p. 575) has the following analysis of this
: “Mind contains in itself the intelligible world which consists of the

entirety of the ideas (id¢az, ein, popgal, XSyos). The ideas are the acts of Mind,
its thoughts or intellections, in each of which that which is thought, that which
thinks, and the thought itself form one and the same act, defined as substantial
thought (osossdys vonos) (v. Enn. v. 3.5; Vv. 9, 6; vi. 6, 15.) From the fact that
intellection really exists it thinks the essences (odo‘a:) or real existences ({éyra), and
while thinking these it makes them exist in the state of intellectual living natures.
It follows from this that in thought (sdge:s), the form which is the object of the
thought (elZos, popgd) and the idea (i3¢a) are one thing and the same. Each essence
exists in Mind. “The intelligibilia are only in a potential state in the soul. They
become actual when the soul rises to Mind and dwells with it.” (En. vi. 6, 15.)


THE SCHOOL OF ALEXANDRIA 45


Intelligence. . . . ‘But Intelligence is too pure to touch the realm of
sense perception, ... therefore a third principle is necessary to link to-
gether the two worlds by transmitting the light of the intclligence to
the realities of sense perception. This principle is the soul. The One
engenders Intelligence, Intelligence in turn engenders the soul... .’*
The One, the Intelligence, the Soul—these are the three Ayposéases,
Plotinus’ own word this, of the Alexandrine Trinity, and such is the
pagan trinity which, according to Theodoret, the philesopher borrowed
of Christianity, but which is found also in Philo and which Plotinus
traces to Plato himself.’

I cannot share the admiration which the great commentator on
Aristotle expressed for the Alexandrian system. But I quite agree with
him that Vacherot is an excellent exponent of Plotinus’ form of religion.
‘The author’ (Vacherot), he says, ‘owes much to Plotinus, but in render-
ing in our own language and in a new form these sublime and admirable
theories of virtue, liberty, and beauty, of love and of the good, he has
scarcely diminished their greatness, and we feel in his work the strong
breath of inspiration that animated them in the beginning. We will
confine ourselves to quoting the following passages:


‘Let him advance boldly. Let him advance into the very Sanctuary, once
he has closed his eyes to the spectacle of the beauties of this earth. Let him
open them to contemplate true beauty, the original pattern of these pale
and impure images to which only opinion gives the name of beauty. These
fugitive beautiful things are like the moving images which are reflected in
the water, and the madman who desires to seize them will disappear whirled
down by the current... .

‘The soul which leaps up to seize them would only succeed in plunging
into the dark depths abhorred by the intellect, and in losing itself therein.
It is here that we must cry “Let us fly, let us fly, to our own dear country”?
‘But how shall we fly? How shall we escape?’ asks Ulysses, in that ad-
mirable allegory which represents him as fain of flight from the magic
empire of a Circe, or of a Calypso, undeterred by the pleasure of the eye or
by the sight of corporeal beauty that might have held him upon the en-
chanted shores. Our country, our own father, is in the spot that we have
left. To see this cherished country we only have to open the eyes of the
soul and close those of the body.


3 Ibid., pp. 102, 104, 106.
2 Plato, Thcacte(us,31764. ‘Wherefore we ought to fly away from easth to heaven.”


46 INTRODUCTION


“It is in this wise that the inner vision must come to us. The soul cannot
at once contemplate virtues that shine too brightly. It is only after detach-
ing itself from the vision of corporeal beauties that it may contemplate
first the sentiments and after them the virtues. But in order to discover
the real beauty of these sentiments and of their actions in the case of others,
our own soul must possess them itself. Retire therefore into yourself, and
if you find not beauty there as yet, do as would that artist who prunes
down, polishes, purifies unceasingly until he has adorned his statue with all
the gifts of beauty. Cut away from your soul all that is not upright; purify
and illuminate all that which is dark and impure, cease not to embellish,
to perfect your image, until the glittering light of virtue bursts upon your
eyes, and you shall then contemplate wisdom lasting and unshakable, in the
bosom of holy and incorruptible purity. . . . The soul that has become
intellect sees and contemplates; when it has become love it can only feel,
and either love or sentiment destroys contemplation. The soul through love
Genudes itself of every form that pertains to the intelligible. It behaves like
the imitiated in the mysteries, dropping all its garments and advancing
thus towards the sanctuary where God resides. In this supreme effort it
imposes si‘ence, not only upon the inferior faculties of its nature, but even
cpon pure thought, even upon contemplation. It no longer feels its body, it
no longer feels that it is enclosed in a body. .. . The soul loses everything,
even the consciousness of its own pure essence, and thus prepared unites
itself to the Good, purely by virtue of its presence. Out of this irresistible
attraction is born that love which disturbs the soul and urges it to the
bosom of the Good. The soul then melts away there and is absorbed so
completely that it has no longer even the consciousness of the presence of
God within itself. Once arrived at this height it can only now descend;
-hought itself is a fall when the soul has arrived at this point of love. The
moment that this divine fire penetrates it, riches, fortune, science, virtue,
beauty, intellect, all these leave it cold and indifferent, and this is ecstasy.
.-- But why cannot the soul remain without return in this ineffable union
with God, when it has once had the happiness of reaching that point?
The reason is that the body solicits it without ceasing and tears it away
from its divine intercourse that it may plunge it again in the life of the
senses. It is rot until after death that the union of the soul with God can
be constant and durable.’ !


: Ihave translated this long citation from Vacherot because it is quoted
with evident admiration by one who was himself profoundly read in the
Neoplatonist literature, and because it expresses in a more condensed


3 Barthélemy St.-Hilaire, De ['école d° Alexandrie, p. 111 8eq.: the passage quoted
above from Vacherot is largely a free translation of Plotinus.


THE SCHOOL OF ALEXANDRIA 47


form much that is scattered through the long work of Plotinus. I cannot
myself see much else in it than a more or less garbled reiteration of the
poetical flights of imagination that flash across the Symposium, the
Phaedrus, and other dialogues of Plato, flights of genius that are far
more inspiring in that they have never been fettered to a system or
passed to the world as the spse dixit of a master. The mania for allegori-
cal explanations of mythology that Philo had introduced was gaining
ground with the Neoplatonists and persisted with them to the end.
Proclus, in the fifth century, finds some mysterious meaning at every
turn of one of Plato’s dialogues. Whatever view we may take as to the
legitimate succession of the Neoplatonic school of thought, there can be
little doubt that its subsequent development in the works of such men
as Iamblichus, Aedesius, Maximus, Sallust, or Chrysanthius was the
inevitable consequence of the school of Plotinus. Mystery having
become the established divinity, the proselytes of Neoplatonism were
soon dissatisfied with the official form of worship. They betook them-
selves to the invocation of the host of demons and divinities that
Plotinus had never denied, but which he had always held aloof from as
one who sought to raise himself to the One, through the two lower
hypostases of Soul and Mind. Another element had now entered, in the
shape of theurgy. It was Iamblichus, the Syrian, who was the high-
priest of this second phase of Neoplatonism. Plotinus, while tolerating
_all the time-honoured beliefs of the Grecks, ‘had said to his disciple
Amclius, when urged by him to approach the gods: “It is for them
to draw near to me” (Porph. Vit. Plotin. c. 10)... What need had
he to invoke gods of an inferior order, he whom philosophy had already
elevated to the One’?* But this was not sufficient for Iamblichus. He
gave himself up to mysteries not merely in theory but in practice; his
disciples regarded him as endowed with supernatural powers.


3 Vacherot, Ecole d’Alexandrie, vol. 1, p. 363.


Ill


Porruyry, the great pupil of Plotinus, had been, in the words of
Jules Simon, ‘the last defender of philosophy and common sense’. With
Iamblichus began the reign of something akin to ‘spiritualism’ in the
modern sense of the word, but one in which the personages evoked were
gods and heroes, not ordinary mortals as in the séances of its acolytes
of to-day. But as the field of the mysterious increased in magnitude,
mysticism proper diminished, for, paradoxical as it may appear at first
sight, the spirit of mysticism is a contrary one to that of spiritualism.
The former comes of an exalted form of religious longing, a passionate
desire of the soul to penetrate things impenetrable, the nature of God,
the enigma of life, the problems of time and eternity. It comes, indeed,
from an extreme of passion, one that failing of a solution in measured
reason, breaks through its philosophic trammelsand seeks toattain itsend
through the inconceivable path, the direct and instantaneous separation
of the soul from the body through ecstasy. But of what use were the
ladders of dialectic or the occasional liberation of the soul by fasting
and contemplation to those who had found a still shorter road to
paradise, those who without the stern abnegations and labours of the
ascent to a phase of union with the One and the Infinite, could remain
on earth and summon the gods of Olympus to commune with them on
easier terms’ The one conception is obviously lofty and spiritual,
the latter is material, and conceived in a crudely anthropomorphic
sprit.’ Neoplatonism, in passing over so lightly the traditional and
polytheistic beliefs, in admitting them either directly or by implication,
had left the way open to the entrance of the very forces which were now
to destroy its own exalted inspiration. Was it not, to use its own
imagery, being pulled down by the demons to the darkly lowering abyss


3 Plotinus (Eun. ii. 9, 14) alluding to the Gnostics: In another manner these
persons infringe the purity of the Heaven-world. When they write incantations
and pretend to direct them to the Divine hierarchy, not only to the soul but to the
principles beyond soul, do not they declare the Divine subject to enchantments
and sorcerics and binding spells .. .? Out of ambition to make their own preten-
thoas appear more grand, they have unwittingly stripped Heaven of its grandeur.’


FROM PLOTINUS TO JULIAN 49


of matter? We are reminded of the lines from the Sibylline Oracles
quoted by Synesius in Dreams (1293 D):

‘Bend thou not down far below to the world mid obscurity gleaming:

Always spread out are its depths, a treacherous region where Hades

Lurks in the gloom and delighteth in phantoms, never in reason.’
The One, descending through the plane of the intellect and the world
soul to man, as the object of all meditation and aspiration, was giving
place to a countless host of gods, demigods, and heroes, shadowy
figures, not so much objects of devotion as objects to be directly com-
municated with by most palpably material forms, incantations and the
like. The theological systems of Iamblichus and his followers did fiot
differ, perhaps, so greatly from that of their predecessors, but the spirit
of Neoplatonism under them had changed from that of a transcendental
philosophy, mystical in its essence, to that of a mysterious cult, super-
Sstitious in its essence, and palpably necromantic in its practices. No
fall could be greater. |

But even with this poison sapping its vitality, Neoplatonism produced
minds of no mean order. Did it not,when at its last gasp over a century
later, present the world with the acute. Simplicius, with Olympiodorus,
with Damascius? At the moment, with Iamblichus and his followers,
it has passed to a second and an inferior phase. But these Neoplatonists
hoped for a polytheistic restoration. This restoration was destined to
take a political as well as a philosophical form. With the emperor
Julian a new force had now come into play, one that might well have put
a different face on history. In a time of dramatic changes at the Imperial
court of the Roman Empire, none of these could comparewith the advent
to the throne of this young acolyte of philosophy and learning, one who
had, a mere boy, discarded the mantle of the philosopher for the breast-
plate and lance of the soldier, who had risen almost at once to the com-
mand of an army, who had carried the Roman eagles anew through the
battlefields of Gaul; who had crossed the Rhine repeatedly with all his
forces, had defeated the seven kings of Germany in one great battle, and
had finally been proclaimed Emperor by his troops, literally borne aloft
to the throne on the shoulders of an enthusiastic and cheering soldiery.
Ammianus Marcellinus,onewhohad seen and known him, whohad served
under him in Gaul and Syria, tells us in sober and measured words of

2570s KO


50 INTRODUCTION


these stirring times when new blood and fresh zeal seemed to have re-
animated the spirit of the Roman legions. He tells us how the forces
of Julian, now not merely their General but their Emperor, swept like
a tidal wave eastward from Lutecia’ towards Rome, levelling every
obstacle in their path. The pennon of the young commander that
announced his person to his own troops and to the enemy alike, could
‘be seen by all men in the battlefields of Gaul, moving wherever the
fighting was heaviest. He seemed to his army to bear a charmed life.’

The magic of his personality was irresistible to all wha came in con-
tact with him. He fired the ardour of his troops, who would follow him
anywhere and dare anything for his sake, he lit up a flame of hope in
the hearts of the Hellenic philosophers who had long looked for that
“philosopher-king’, whose image is shadowed in Plato’s Republic; he
appealed to the imagination of the pagan Roman citizen, as one who,
withal living under an advancing and militant Christianity, still looked
back regretfully to his old gods. Here too was the dramatic image
before men’s eyes, of one born to the purple, only to be exposed to the
intrigues of an unscrupulous court. Here was one who had known
suffering and danger from his earliest childhood, whose iron will and
austere life had carried everything before them, who scorned dangers
and hardships, who courted learning, and practised philosophical abne-
gation of the material joys of life. His words were heard ringing out in
all parts of the Empire, from Antioch to Alexandria, from Alexandria
to Rome, calling upon all citizens to remember the forms of worship due
to the gods of their fathers, to return to their ancestral cults, and to
rekindle the fires on altars long extinct. Echoes of his voice must have
penetrated even to far Cyrene. But alas for the dreams of the philo-
_sophers of Alexandria, the poison of theurgy and superstition had

infected their protagonist, and instead of the philosopher-king, the
‘ high-priest of a dying cult stood before them; for despite the unmistak-
able litérary ability revealed in Julian’s letters and essays, the note of
fanaticism appears everywhere.

2 Julian in the Misopogon (ed. Wright, vol. ii, p. 429) alludes thus to his sojourn
ia Lutecia (Paris): ‘I happened to be in winter quarters at my beloved Lutecia—
for that is how the Celts call the capital of the Parisians. It is a small island lying in
the river; a wall entirely surrounds it,and wooden bridges lead to it on both sides.’

2 Ammianes Marcellinus, xvi, 12, 39: cf. Allard, Vie de Julien I, p. 423.


FROM PLOTINUS TO JULIAN st


The meteoric career of the last pagan Emperor had only lasted ascant
eight years. But what energy, what virility of mind and purpose Julian
displayed in these few years of his reign, one can judge by the unvar-
nished tale of a soldier who served in the ranks of his army. It is
difficult to conceive of so robust a mind and will falling into the hands
of soothsayers and necromancers, but such was the case, and the almost
incredible story of the Emperor's destruction of his own ficet on the
Euphrates, when advancing into Persia, is before us to attest the fact.
And this is one of the most interesting evidences concerning the very
change in the world of thought that we have been describing, the
change that came over Neoplatonism under Iamblichus and that
caused it to break away from a lofty mysticism, only to fall into the
mazcs of theurgy. We shall sce later how Syncsius himself was not
left untouched by all this, although his native good sense and per-
haps the scientific bent of his mind prevented his following in his life
the extravagances of the later Neoplatonists. He almost apologizes
for his belief in the prophetic nature of dreams, much as did Aristotle,
and seeks to convince the reader that he is only calling his attention
to something like a positive law in the universe. Synesius’ view is
more like that of Porphyry, who pronounced a stem sentence against
theurgy.’ ‘All this illuminism is nothing but an over-excitement of
the sensibility, a morbid condition of the mind... you submit your
prophets toa régime of fasting, of fumigation, of mysterious ceremonies
which bewilder their minds and weaken their fibre.’ ‘But’, replies the
pseudo-Iamblichus in the work known as De Mystersis, ‘the more feeble
their reason, the more the presence of God is made manifest.’? Again we
see one, as late as the fourth century, still harping on the words of
Philo of Alexandria, which we quoted in the beginning of this work, ‘As
Jong as our intellect shines we are self-possessed ; when it declines to its


2 At the samc time, howcver, Augustine accuses Porphyry of wavering and
tergiversation in the question of theurgy. Cf. De Civ. Det, x. 9: ‘Nunc enim hane
artem (i.¢. theurgian) tamquam fallacem et in ipsa actione periculosam et legibus
prohibitam cavendam monet; nunc autem velut cius laudatoribus cedens utilem
dicit esse mundandae partianimae...hanc enim dicit per quasdam consecrationes
theurgicas, quas teletas vocant, idoneam fieri atque aptam susceptioni spirituum
et angelorum et ad videndos deos.’ Porphyry, Epist. ad Aneboniem, 46 (Ritter and
Preller, ed. 6, p. 518). 3 Cf. sect. 3 ¢. 2.


52 INTRODUCTION


sunset, we are possessed by the Divine Power’. There is not so much
difference, then, between the follower of Iamblichus and the Jewish
Rabbi of Alexandria, who foreshadowed this phase of Neoplatonism
more than three centuries earlier. Intellect, as intellect had come to be
conceived of, was now the obstacle to knowledge, but how can we
reconcile this morbid sensibility of mind that awakened the anger of
Porphyry, with the active vigorous life of Julian? This is a paradox
worth considering, for it lies at the root of a good deal that is apt to
surprise us in the character of Synesius. How can the poet of the
Hymas, the writer of Dreams, be identified with the orator who ad-
dresses the Emperor Arcadius in language so free from the atmosphere
either of the mystical, the first phase of Neoplatonism, or of the
mysterious, the second? Synesius in all that is important rejects both
phases. In the most important crisis of conscience in his life, he seeks
to evcke no spirits or divinities, he addresses himself in an unmistakable
sprit of monotheism to One God and One only. In this he never wavers.
It is true that he attaches great importance to dreams, and even other
auguries of the future, but he defends them from the standpoint of the
natura] phenomena of the universe, and in a sense that Aristotle could
scarcely have taken exception to; whereas Julian was completely in the
hands of the charlatan Maximus, who professed to be a worker of
miracles, and amongst these to possess the power of animating marble
statues, like Pygmalion. He belonged rather to the last and most de-
cadent phase of Neoplatonism.

The life of Julian offers a very interesting comparison with that of
Synesius. They both lived in the same age; Julian died two or three
years later than the probable date of the birth of Synesius. Both were
men of a high degree of education and culture, men who had known the
university life of Alexandria and Athens. Both were past-masters of
the rhetoric of their day, and both have left a number of letters which
yield to no others in the history of literature, either in felicity of form,
or in the interest of the matter which they contain. Both seem to have
been born orators, both drew their inspiration from the works of the
Greek philosophers. Both were, in their different ways, extremely
original men. The one, Synesius, was brought up entirely outside the
Christian Church; the other nominally as a Christian, but in point of


FROM PLOTINUS TO JULIAN 53


fact as a pagan. The title of ‘Apostate’, with which Julian was sub-
sequently dubbed by the Christian writers, is rather misleading. He was
in reality entirely educated by his tutor, Mardonius, a philosopher who
was an ardent upholder of the old religion. His cousin Constantius,
who was responsible for his bringing-up, seems to have been entirely
devoid of all principle and capable of every crime; so that the un-
fortunate orphan lived in perpetual fear of assassination. In fact, it is
probable that it was only due to the goodness of the Empress Eusebia,*
who was very fond of the child, that he ever grew up at all. Mardonius,
his tutor, apparently instructed him secretly in the Greek religion, ex-
‘ horting him to stand by the faith of his ancestors. His words fell upon
a mind naturally disposed to the same end. Julian kept his religious
convictions to himself until he came of age, which was not surprising,
as he lived continually in the shadow of sinister court intrigues, and
to have taken any independent line of action might have been in his
case a fatal step. Although, therefore, brought up nominally within the
pale of the Church, he was precluded from coming under any influence
that might have inclined him to Christianity. The case of Synesius
was entirely different. ‘Brought up outside the pale of the Church’,
as he tells us himself, he began with paganism, and only later in
life was brought over to accepting the Christian faith, possibly
from motives which we should be inclined to describe as political. He
was pushed towards his conversion to Christianity by his friend
Theophilus, the Primate of Alexandria, who was determined that he
should be Bishop of Ptolemais; and after elaborately explaining to the
great prelate that he made every reservation of conscience on certain
points of Christian dogma, he consented to be ordained a Bishop. His
real position in regard to Christian doctrine seems to have been quite
identical with that of certain ‘Modernists’ of to-day, who apparently
regard Christianity as essentially the same as the Neoplatonic doctrine.

The character of Synesius, as it appears in his letters, is certainly a
“very winning one. You cannot read these without getting to like the
man for his qualities of heart, his charitable feelings, and his sparkling
wit; whereas the character of Julian is somewhat antagonistic. There
is in the Emperor a vein of bitterness which appears here and there,

3 Tul. ep. ad Ath. 2734.


54 INTRODUCTION


and a lack of power to get into intimate touch with the reader, in
spite cf his very considerable literary abilities. Both men might have
gone much further as writers, if they had lived. ‘Julian’, says Alfred
Croiset, ‘who died at the age of thirty-three, does not seem to have
reached his full development as a writer. He certainly had in him the
stuff of a thinker, an historian, a moralist, and a satirist, and above all
of a man, a man whose true nature is always breaking through the con-
ventional forms of the literature of his period. Even his prejudice and
his violence of sentiment might have contributed to make him still
moe original. He did not live long enough to disengage himself from
the influence of his masters, and to become entirely himself.’ Synesius
was more happy in this respect, his more malleable nature seems to have
developed quite easily and harmoniously both in his literary work, and
his life in general. He had the golden touch of an amiable and benevo-
lent nature, which is reflected in such works as the Praise of Baldness,
and in that singularly mysterious and fascinating essay On Dreams. But
his literary power is much more flexible than Julian's, for he is capable
also of very stern and very fiery invective, which comes out with quite
startling intensity in the tirades which he launched at his great enemy,
the Roman prefect, Andronicus.

Some of Synesius’ letters remind one irresistibly of those of Julian.
There is a certain aroma that emanates from them, which is reminiscent
of these. Take, for instance, the letter 153, in which Synesius writes to
his friend Pylaemenes as follows:

*A letter comes to us from you every year, as though the seasons them-
selves brought it with them, and this fruit is perchance sweeter to me than
that which the circling months and the husbandmen bring to maturity. You
would do me an injustice if you deprived me of the joy I find in this. Change
your mind, then, and send me, this year at least, an abundance of letters.’

Compare this with Julian’s letter to his great friend Maximus:

“I sleep with your letters as though they were healing drugs of some sort,
and I do not cease to read them constantly, as though they were newly
written, and had only just come into my hands. Therefore, if you are
willing to furnish me with intercourse in letters, as a semblance of your own
society, write, arid do not cease to do so continually. Or rather come, with
Heaven's help, and consider that while you are away I cannot be said to be


alive, except in so far as I am able to read what you have written.’
(Letter 12, ed. Wright.)


FROM PLOTINUS TO JULIAN 55
Here again is a letter from Synesius to Pylaemenes:


‘I have received the letter in which you again accuse Fortune of treating
you no better than in the past. You are wrong, dearest of friends, for it is
not mect to blame her, but rather to console yourself. In your difficulties


you can always come to me; you will be in the house of a brother... .’
(Letter 134.)


Here is another letter from Julian to Ecdicius (Letter 107 (9) 23,
ed. Wright):


‘Some men have a passion for horses, others for birds, others again for
wild beasts; but I from childhood have been penetrated by a passionate
longing to acquire books. It would therefore be absurd if I should suffer
these to be appropriated by men whose inordinate desire for wealth gold
alone cannot satiate, and who unscrupulously design to steal these also.’


The following letter from Synesius to his brother is somewhat of an
antithesis to the foregoing:


‘This one thing I will not dissimulate. I feel that I have a good deal of
inclination for amusements. Even as a child, I was charged with a mania
for arms and horses. I shall be grieved, indeed greatly shall I suffer, at


seeing my beloved dogs deprived of their hunting, and my bow eaten up by
worms.’ (Letter 105.)


Compare these last two letters. Julian seems to be on the defensive,
as if his passion for books and philosophy were a matter of reproach to
him, as indeed they were in the eyes of the citizens of Antioch, whom
he so bitterly satirized in the Misopogon. Synesius, on the other hand,
speaks as if his passion for dogs and horses and manly sports in general
were his venial sin, and as if he was beholden to learning alone.

Let us take two other examples. In Letter 30 (3*) (16, ed. Wright)
Julian writes to Theodorus as follows:


‘When I received your letter, I was delighted, of course. How could I feel
otherwise on learning that my comrade and dearest friend is safe? And
when I had removed the fastening from it and perused it many times, I
cannot convey to you in words my feelings and state of mind. I was filled
with serenity and felicity, and welcomed the letter as though I beheld in it
an image, so to speak, of your noble disposition.”!


’ Compare this last phrase with S., Ep. 137 (to Herculian): °... it seems to me
as if I still saw you, although now you are absent from me, for memory furnishes
me with the image that your disposition produces within me.’


56 INTRODUCTION
Synesius, in similar strain, writes to Pylaemenes thus:


‘Some letters, dated last spring, have just come to me from Thrace. I
turned the whole bundle upside down, to see whether it would contain one
upon which the illustrious name of Pylaemenes was written. It would
indeed have been unworthy of me to read apy other first, but there was
none anywhere. If you are really away from home, I wish you a quick and
happy return. But if you were still on the spot at the moment when all my
friends gave their letters to Zosimus, it really would be surprising if any one
were more mindful of me than Pylaemenes.” (Letter 88.)

In conclusion, here is an extract from another which Synesius writes
to Olympius, and which might well have been a letter from Julian
(Letter 98):

“How do you think I received your pleasant letters, I who was thirsting
to hear from you; and o’er what passages in them did not my heart melt?
They inspired many different feelings, and I look forward to seeing again
soon that Alexandria where there still lives a friend who is so dear to me.
- -~- Take care of your health, continue happy, give yourself up to philo-
sophy, as it befits one to do who has cleaved to her, led on by divine love.’


Any one comparing these passages will, I think, be struck by a certain
similarity in style, thought, and imagery. Many other instances might
be cited, both from the letters of Julian himself, and also from the
letters of the sophist, who was a correspondent of the philosopher
Iamblichus, and whose letters were formerly attributed to the Emperor
himself..Had Synesius ever read the letters of Julian? There is cer-
tainly no direct evidence of this. He never mentions Julian in any of
his works. This might seem surprising, except for the fact that he never
mentions Libanius, St. Basil, St. John Chrysostom, or Iamblichus, all
men whose works were so well known and read in his time. One might
argue, however, that all this touches upon a style of letter-writing which
was taught in the schools of rhetoric through which the two men had
passed.. I cannot, however, find anything at all like it in the letters of

St. Basil, although he was a fellow-student at Athens with Julian, and
like him, a pupil of Libanius. But it might be objected again, that St.
Basil was a Christian writer. None the less, if one reads his essay, or
sermon, Ox the Reading of Profane Authors, one cannot fail to be struck
by a flavour of the academic traditions of the school of Athens which
he had frequented; except for the contents of the work, it might have


FROM PLOTINUS TO JULIAN $7


been written by Libanius himself. Besides, it is in more than the form
that we feel this identity of impression in the two cascs. There is some-
thing that the two philosophers have in common decper than this.
Both were men who were leading conspicuous public lives, both express
a longing for their friends which could hardly have been due to dearth
of company. Each is conscious that he is really solitary, apart from the
companionship of his friend."

We have now, with the death of Julian, come to the probable date
of the birth of Synesius, for I quite agree with Crawford that he must
have been born not later than 360. By the time that he arrived at man-
hood, the last perturbations of the attempted Hellenistic revival of
Julian had subsided, and Neoplatonism, relinquishing any hopes of
becoming a world force politically, had, as we have seen, entrenched
itself behind the barriers of its own erudition and traditions. Again the
centre of gravity had shifted in the world of thought, this time from
Alexandria to Athens. Plutarch, the master of the great Syrianus, was
teaching at the Academy. We have seen with what scant respect
Synesius alludes to him and his disciples. And yet it was Plutarch whose
influence on the last hundred years of the school of Athens was most
important, as we gather from those of the Golden Chain who succecded
him, Syrianus, Proclus, Marinus, Isidore, Hegias, Damascius, not to
speak of others who followed, such as Olympiodorus, Simplicius, and
Philoponus, all of whom quote him. The fact that Synesius passes over
him so lightly is only another instance of his aloofness from Neoplaton-
ism as an established system. He remains a free lance to the end. He
plucks the flowers of philosophy wherever he finds them, and after
weaving some garland, as the fancy of the moment takes him, he lets it
fall lightly to earth. We should be wasting our time if we attempted to
seek an established system in his works, and herein lies much of their
charm. He was very proud of his capacity to speak with the voice of
another writer, as he tells us in Dto (p. 1161 A):

1 Marinus in his life of Proclus (17) speaks of a ‘Pythagorean friendship’, and


also of that of master and co-disciple. The passage is intcresting but somewhat
obscure: Ex wdyruy . » ron “Apyrdbay dpa... 8d riv Mbeyspewe pier fv apis rée


)
ae 8 Areas eh Heke penis , 068° Iuradsr obros, & ud wal ‘Apyites.
. I


58 INTRODUCTION


‘Ofttimes (when reading), I do not attempt to await the end of a story
for any good it may do me, but rather do I lift up my eyes from the book,
and proceed to compete with the narrative therein, myself... . I well
remember that once I was holding in my hands a volume of the grave and
classical order, and that when some men who were present asked me to read
something aloud that they might listcn to it, I continued in the way I have
just described. And as opportunity arose, I added something, and brought
it into the general harmony of the narrative. ... something that well
accorded with the sentiments and style of the writer. Straightway a great
murmur of applause burst forth . . . not least in regard to those passages
imserted by me. To such an extent ‘has God given me a divining spirit con-
cerning .. . literary form.’


This talent for improvising in the style of another writer is the more
interesting in his case, as his own work is most characteristic in point of
style, and it would not be difficult to identify as his anything by Syne-
sius that might come to light in a papyrus, or otherwise.

Let us hope thut we may some day recover the lost Cynegelica cither
in this or in some other way. It is not outside tho range of possibility
that a translation of it may turn up in an Arabic or Syriac manuscript.
This was probably his first work, and one written in verse, prized, as he
tells us, by the youth of his day for its Atticism. (Ep. 154.) For we are,
with Synesius, at a moment when a movement against the popular
tongue was in progress, a movement for writing in the pure Attic of
Plato or Demosthenes. These Cynegetica, apparently ballads of the
chase, were, as he tells us, spirited away from his house in some manner,
and joyfully read by the younger critics, who were enamoured of the
graces of Attic Greek. His enemies in the literary world, of whom,
according to his own account, he had many, dismissed them with dis-
dain as being the ‘work of an artist who reproduces the antique’,’ a
phrase which seems to have come from the sculptor’s studio. Evidently
Synesius was regarded as a classicist by his contemporaries. His essay
Dio, the one of all in which he has sought to take us most intimately
intc his confidence on matters of literary criticism, is largciy made up
of a siudy of the rhetorician Dio of Prusa, that ‘Horn of Amalthea’, as
Philostratus calls him, and the Praise of Baldness is a witty reply to
Dio's Praise of Hair. Why he attached so much importance to this


2 Ep. 154.


FROM PLOTINUS TO JULIAN 59


rather sophistical writer is not clear. Possibly the dramatic events of
Dio’s life appealed to his imagination, at all events he has chosen him
as a foil for the display of his own wit. ‘I have just sent you the treatise
written in Attic style and of finished workmanship’ (Ep. 74) he writes
tohis friend Pylaemenes concerning this essay. We are therefore entitled
to take it as a model of his own idcal of form in literature. This ‘Attic
style’ we should understand better if we possessed more of the current
literature of the period. We gather from various passages in Synesius’
works that so-called philosophers regarded with disfavour this move-
ment for restoring the Greek language to its pristine purity, and affected
to treat him with scorn as a trifler in philosophy because he aimed at
literary form; but unfortunately the writings, if such existed, of these
carping critics, have disappeared, and we only have the caustic com-
ments in his letter to Hypatia (Ep. 1§4) to enlighten us, ‘In the eyes
of such persons’, he says, ‘one must hate literature in order to be a
philosopher.’

Of all tragedics in the history of letters and thought, none ts more
poignant than the decay of a great tongue. ‘The Greck language was
itself a greater poem than any poem ever written in it’, a great Hellenic
scholar once said to me, and the opinion of Gibbon as to its philosophic
value is no less interesting. ‘In their lowest servitude and depression’,
he says, ‘the subjects of the Byzantine throne were still possessed of a
golden key that could unlock the treasures of antiquity—of a musical
and prolific language, that gives a soul to the objects of sense, and a
body to the abstractions of philosophy.’ But alas for the transient
nature of all things in this universe, the golden key became sadly tar-
nished and in process of time even disintegration set in; for as Horace


divined, in the first century B.c., language is not stationary, and of
words,


x


‘multa renascentur quae iam cecidere, cadentque
quae nunc sur.t.in honore vocabula, si volet usus.’!
It is strange that he should advise the coining of Latin words from the
‘Greek fount”, if new words must be coined, as though theGreek language
had some immortal stability denied to the others. One would have
thought that the signs of its decadence in his own time were obvious
’ Avs Poet. 70. 2 ibid. 53.


60 INTRODUCTION


enough. The scholars of our more immediate past were so impressed by
the changes in the Greek language after its golden age that they went
rather to the extreme in depreciation of all literature that succeeded it.
At present we seem to be undergoing a reaction against our traditions
of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. Greek that a century ago
‘was regarded as hopelessly debased in form is now having a better place
assigned to it in the estimation of scholars, and some later writers who
in the past were deemed entirely out of the race seem to be now receiv-
ing consolation prizes. How then does Synesius stand as a master of
Greek style? for that he aspired to be one we know from his own words.
The question is not an easy one to answer. Are we to compare him with
the Attic models of the golden age? Evidently this would be absurd;
his Atticism is purely relative. We can best compare him, perhaps, with
Julian, with Iamblichus, with other fourth- or fifth-century writers.

Dionysius of Halicarnassus analysed the canons of criticism in
hterary style as they existed in his own time, four centuries earlier,
and perhaps the most interesting passage in his celebrated work on
rhetoric is the following:

“The strongest style of all is that which has the most frequent pauses and
harmonious transitions, where one thing is said within, another without,
a period; where one sentence is made up of more, and another of less,
clauses; and where, of these very clauses, one is shorter, another longer, one
artiessly simple, another closely studied; where now one, now another
rhythm, predominates, where all manner of rhetorical figures occur, and
where also the pitches of the voice, termed accentuation, are diverse, and
conceal (what would otherwise produce) satiety.’!

In other words variety and antithesis were the qualities that he gave the »
first place to. All this comes under the head of what we should call
flexibility of style. But the rhetoricians of the first and second centuries
vefore Christ, ever since the days of Aristotle in fact, had multiplied the
classification of figures of speech and forms of logic employed in literary
style, until the canons of style had become complicated, and so rather
clipped the wings of the literary aspirant, somewhat as in French poetry
infinite subtleties enchain the freedom of metre together with rules of
prosody, frequently arbitrary, and complex rhythmical laws founded on
usage and precedent. All these limitations, while giving an unmistak-
® On Literary Composition, cap. xix.


FROM PLOTINUS TO JULIAN 6r


able distinction and perfection of form to poems written in the lan-
guage, at the same time tend to contract the possible field of expression.
One result of this is that at the present day in France ‘vers libres’
are gaining ground, and blank verse is increasing to the detriment of the
time-honoured rhymed metres. The elaborate edifice of rhetorical form
in metre that has been built up since the days of Clément Marot show
signs of crumbling, because it no longer inspires the poet to express
his thought. Forms of metre that were originally spurs to thought
become by their over-development and excessive complication drags
upon it, and there must then ensuc either a breaking away to completely
new forms of expression, or a decadence into lifeless formalism. There
seems to be a Jaw in the history of both literature and the plastic or
pictorial arts, in virtue of which the most perfect results are obtained
at a moment when the critical facultics are dormant, before the icy
finger of analysis has dissected the delicate fibres of the works of art,
and has rendered the artist conscious for the first time of the laws that
until then he was unconsciously obeying. The critical faculty in man
is the inverse of the creative, and we might parody an old proverb, with
sufficient justice, by saying that when criticism comes in at the door
creation goes out by the window.

The history of Greek rhetoric and oratory, not to speak of philosophy,
bears an unmistakable resemblance to that of Italian art in its great
days. First there is a slow and cautious development, but full of the
seeds of life, criticism or analysis at this period being completely in
abeyance; then at a given moment and with vertiginous rapidity. as
Athene leaped clad in full armour from the head of Zeus, the perfected
works are born; a golden efflorescence of art in Italy, the day of the
great masters of painting and sculpture, in Athens the day of Thucy-
dides, of Plato, of Aristotle and the Attic orators, all this in a mar-
vellously short space of time. The succeeding period is that of sterility
in creation and activity in criticism. Analysis of the great works has
taken the place of production of them. The master of rhetoric reigns
supreme in the university, the academician in the studio. The spon-
taneity of art has disappeared with the classification and explanation
of its methods, with the supremacy of the lecture-room in Athens, and
the activities of the Eclectics in painting in Italy. Even in the days


62 INTRODUCTION


of Socrates the sophists were preparing their fatal work in Athens and
elsewhere in Greece, and in Italy the Giulio Romanos, and Vasaris, the
Palladios and Berninis were devoting all their critical acumen to dis-
covering in the works of their predecessors the secret springs that were
to control the marionettes they were bringing upon the stage. We know
with what success their enterprises were crowned. The glorious living
dome of St. Peter's and its hfeless facade are eloquent on the subject.

But, it may be asked at this point, how does all this bear upon the
works of Synesius? Simply to this extent, that in considering the
literary style of any writer of his time or the centuries preceding or
immediately following it, we must remember that the writer was
oppressed by the schoolmaster. He was hemmed in on every side by
the rhetorician,the grammarian, and thesophist.' He wasnota freeman.
He was gazed upon by a thousand eyes, not of the starry vault of
heaven,as in Plato's verse, but by those of a very earth-born Argos, who
took human form clothed in the dark or the white mantle, as the case
might be. This was the atmosphere in which he lived, and this atmo-
sphere must have increased his difficulties very much as the refinements
of a rhetorical prosody, to return to the first illustration, must increase
the difficulties of the French poet of to-day. These limitations were
ever present before his mind, and it is perhaps due to this that the letters
of Synesius seem to us to surpass his purely literary works in point of
style. In the letters to his friends he was more emancipated, he did not
have the critic continually before his eyes. How could a man move
freely in his discourse when he could not make a step without encounter-
ing such formidable conceptions as the manifold schemata, ‘parisoses,
paromoeoses, paronomasiae, antitheses’ of Dionysius, or the ‘asyndeta,
anaphora, diatyposes, hyperbata and polyptota’ of ‘Longinus’,? not to
speak of the various enthymemes, all no doubt duly tabulated and
classified. Even Cicero in his own time tells us that ‘the schemata as
they are called by the Greeks are the principal ornaments of an able
speaker. They have a certain weight not merely for purposes of word


3 Thus in Letter 101, in speaking of Marcian, he says: ‘I should have liked to
<weite to him directly, but I have become stiff, that I may not expose myself to
corrections from the pedants who polish every syllable.’

® Longiaus, On the Sublime, ux, xxii, xxiii: v. Aclius Aristides, passin.


FROM PLOTINUS TO JULIAN 63


painting but in the clarifying of our thoughts.’* All this proceeded from
the study of the great masters. Rhythm was not merely discovered in
them, but rhythm must be analysed. The order of words must be
analysed, and all the time that the analysis of the past writers was
proceeding and crystallizing into definite formulae—all this time the
Greek language itself was changing, so that by the fourth century con-
fusion was becoming worse confounded. Rules were established for a
language that in the meantime had moved from the position it occupied
when the rules were made.”

Small wonder if an Attic reaction was needed such as Synesius was
engaged in. Even in the days of Cicero the same movement was in
progress. ‘These Atticizers, however, acquire with ease the paltry char-
acter they aim at; not once recollecting that... when De:aosthenes was
to speak in public, all Greece flocked in crowds to hear him. But when
our Attic orators venture to speak they are presently deserted, not only
by the little throng around them. . . but even by their associates and
fellow-advocates. If to speak, therefore, in a dry and lifeless manner,
is the true criterion of Atticism, they are heartily welcome to enjoy the
credit of it; but if they wish to put their abilities to the trial, Ict them
attend the Comitia or a judicial process of real importance.’ (Cic. Brut.
Ixxxiv.) History is repeating itself. First comes perfection in style, then
imitation of the great model of yesterday, then degeneracy, then, as a
consciousness of this begins to be felt, a reaction and a frantic attempt
to return to the lost positions. And all this time the language itself has

4 Cicero, Brutus, De Or. xxxvii, § 141.

2 Syncsius affects, however, to make light of the laws and refinements of
thetoric, He likes to call attention to what he calls his ‘ruaticity’ or untutored
bluntness of style and character. For instance, in Caluitii I-ncomium (1173 Cc) he
says: ‘I shall never disgrace my ancestral rusticity nor shall I come on the scene
rounding off little periods, forewords, precludes, or the like. I shall pursue what
I consider the best course and one well suited to a tiller of the soil by showing
the naked expressions of thought.’ Again, in De Providentia hc draws his own
portrait (p. 1253) as that of a man who had been brought up in a more rustic
mould (dypoucdrepow dicreOpayptvos) who wrote for those who understood ‘male
phrases’ (Adyww dppdérwv), who despised ‘frivolities of style’ (yapyeX{co8as). Ho was
encumbered according to his own account by the ruggedness in which he had


been brought up. All this is rather disconcerting as coming from one who was


always working at formal clausulae, as also rhymes, and other subtictics, ia his
prose.


64 INTRODUCTION


been changing and unconsciously slipping away beneath the feet of the
thetoricians who sought to stereotype its modes of expression, and
return is now impossible. For the followers of the plastic arts the
problem of return is at least conceivable. Marble does not change. A
Rodin may approach a Praxiteles; but a Demosthenes, speaking in the
Greek language, is unapproachable, for the language he spoke in exists
no more. We are getting nearer, then, to a knowledge of the aims of
Synesius, and to their impracticability. Like Julian, like Libanius, like
St. Basil, he aimed at the unattainable. The Muse of Greek oratory had
left the fount of Hippocrene for ever, and all the magic arts of an
Iamblichus or a Syrianus were unavailing to summon her back.

But although the beautiful language of Attica had become trans-
formed almost beyond recognition, and its delicate interplay of moods
and tenses had become lost, nevertheless the principle of rhythmic
cadence in prose had survived and had effected a new growth in the
transformed language of the third and fourth centuries. Dionysius,
who must still be our guide, although he lived in the first century, after
explaining the nature of rhythm in poetry proper, goes on to speak as
follows of rhythmical prose (c. 25): “On the other hand, that which con-
tains casual metres and irregular rhythms, and in these shows neither
sequence nor connexion nor correspondence of. stanza with stanza, is
rhythmical, since it is diversified by rhythms of a sort, but not tm
rhythm, since they are not the same nor incorresponding positions. This
is the character I attribute to all language which . . . shows markedly the
poetical or lyrical element. . . . But apart from the testimony of Aris-
totle, experience itself will show that some rhythms must be included
in prose-writing if there is to be upon it the bloom of poetical beauty.’

This tendency was developed at Alexandria still further as time went
on and, as in other matters of style, what had first been a free play of the
mind and ear of the writer.was reduced to rule and formula from the
very study of work that had once been conceived in liberty, and freedom
finally became a slavery in the hands of the rhetoricians and grammar-
ians. The writers had not learned the import of Menander’s apo-
phthegm, ‘Slave it in all freedom, and you shall not be a slave’.'

Anatole France was not so wide of the mark when he described

3 Dabigus Sevdherr Sebler ota fon. Men. Frag. 857 x, od. F. G. Allinson.


FROM PLOTINUS TO JULIAN 65


grammarians as ‘ushers who offer recipes for writing. . . . I consider it’,
he adds, ‘a public misfortune that French grammars exist at all. What
a contradiction in terms it is to study the living language as if it were a
dead one!’ Our language is our mother and our nurse; we must drink
of it from the source. The grammarians are nursing-bottles.’? But the
grammarians we always have with us, they are as eternal as the epic
or the chronicle, for creation, as we have seen, always begets analysis.
Let us take a page out of Dionysius, and let us see how he deals with the
father of Attic prose. ‘To indicate as many things as possible in as few
words as possible, to combine many ideas in one, and to leave the
listener expecting to hear something more’, this, he tells us was the
ideal of Thucydides—the artificial character of the vocabulary, the
variety of the constructions, the roughness of the harmony, the speed
of the narrative. ‘Its “colours’’ are solidity, pungency, condensation,
austerity, gravity,’ and so he proceeds to show us that the famous
‘obscurity’ of Thucydides is due to a too full equipment of the forces
of rhetoric rather than to any scant knowledge or archaic incomplete-
ness in style. ‘Too great dexterity’ is his verdict. The great historian is
like an athlete who has become ‘muscle-bound’ from his very over-
development. Whether this description of the style of Thucydides is a
just one or not is outside the scope of our present criticism. But one
thing is very clear to me, it might well do duty as an analysis of the
style of Synesius, and this is quite to our present purpose. We might
even follow him when he says that ‘Thucydides wrests the cases of
nouns or participles at times from the expression to the sense, at other
times from the sense to the expression’. The text of Synesius as pre-
sented to us by Petavius and Hercher, is not in the main such a bad
one, although much might be done, and certainly will be done some day,
3 Cf. Syn. Dio, 11524: Elev 8° dv foodduw PifNiay ypappereol rans dwodcdecypdros,
ras ovMafds «3 pdra ovyxplvovrds re nal Scaxplvovres- olxciov 82 ovdiy ev8dwore pasevod-


«vou.
ar Pierre. Nozidve, p. 146, cf. Syn., Dio, 1144 ¢: Kai éwafawdas otSfva raw ovvae
oorcyxévren els wowey rois “EXdnew, 6 nig xai elyey dyabdr, dydpacrov elves Bovopas, rs
waldds ve wapedafévres dyads erGyvicarre wai dabenis Svras Ens thw yruipqw drocond-
pyoay, roils ideripas dyxerayuywivres Hovopare. “Axpera ydp ecdcis dy rabra wepcddfare,
8d ve wai tiw rére Taw eiobfocaw énaléryte.
> Dion. Hal., Second letter to Ammacus, pp. 792-3 (== Usener-Radermacher I.
424).
a)é-s x


66 INTRODUCTION


to improve it by a collation of all the manuscripts of real value; but
any one who attempts to read such a work as the Dreams of Synesius
must be struck by the sudden drops into obscurity of a writer who has
been expressing himself with sufficient clearness up to a certain point.
It was a consciousness of such a discrepancy as this that led Rutherford
to attribute the difficult or obscure passages in Thucydides to corrup-
‘tions of the text. I am aware that the ingenious and interesting con-
jectures which he madc to restore the text, have not been confirmed by
papyri subsequently discovered, but what he writes is none the less
interesting as a criticism on the psychology of the great historian.
“Any one who thinks clearly and simply, writes clearly and simply, for
those at all events who have the mental range to comprehend his point
of view. It is hard to credit that one who of all men has shown himself
capable of great, and simple, and transparent thought, should fail just
in this faculty of great and simple and transparent thought, when he
comes to express himself in language; and... that his lapses should be
merely occasional, happening . .. at times when no reason can be seen
for them.’ Here again the analogy holds good, Synesius is precisely a
writer who is ‘capable of simple and transparent thought’. The same
cannot be said for Plotinus, whose style seems in so many places wilfully
and perversely distorted. Must we then look for the key to all this in
the corruptions of the text? I do not think so. I am more inclined to
accept Dionysius’ estimate of the causes that determine this sudden
involution of a writer’s style into obscurity, namely the desire to
indicate as many things as possible in as few words as possible, and the
consequent over-stepping of the limitations of language. In the case of
Thucydides this frequently takes the form of a change of construction
in the middle of a sentence, in the case of Synesius in the continual use
of ellipsis. We cannot say in the case of the latter that ‘brevity is the
soul of wit’, if by wit we mean the comprehensible.

But further than this, the position that a clear mind must express
itself clearly, in literary form, is scarcely tenable. Any one who has read
the letters of Robert Browning must acquit him of any obscurity or
confusion of thought as a man, but this did not prevent him from
writing much that is unintelligible to a reader who has not given up some
time to the study of his style. In the same way the late Henry James


FROM PLOTINUS TO JULIAN 67


wrote romances that are models of clearness and directness of style,
while other of his works belong clearly to the esoteric if not the unintel-
ligible school. Now it is of course true of poets, and prose writers alike,
that they may purposely adopt obscurity of style in order to create an
atmosphere suitable to the artistic effect at which they are aiming, but
we cannot suspect Thucydides, the first of historians, of playing such
notes on the lyre of Clio as this. The obscure passages in his work, as it
stands before us to-day, are certainly not artistic. They are, on the con-
trary, jarring, discordant notes, in an otherwise completely harmonious
narrative, the foundations of which have been profoundly considered
and consistently established. In his case, at all events, obscurity, from
whatever cause it proceeds, cannot have been intentional; but there are
cases in literature where this point is not so obvious, and where the
work of art has been left in an enigmatic condition so far as the inten-
tions of its author are concerned. We might quote Plotinus as a case in -
point, or in modem literature Browning's Sordello. It is not always easy
to separate difficulty of apprehension on the part of the reader from
deliberate mystification, or again from a failure in the power of expres-
sion on the part of the writer. There are therefore in the case of any
more or less obscure literary documents of antiquity three factors at
least to consider: the possible corruptions in the text, the possibility of
the obscurities having been intentionally introduced for artistic pur-
poses, as in the choruses in the Agamemnon of Aeschylus, and finally
- the possibility that the writer has failed in an attempt to express himself
clearly. There is also a disturbing factor in cases where technical terms
are employed. In the case of Aristotle the bulk of his works is so large
that we have been able, by a comparison of passages, to establish with
tolerable certitude the shades of meaning to be attached to such words.
But in the case of Synesius the works are so smal! in compass, that it is
not easy to proceed in this way, and we lack sufficient contemporary
evidence to help us. The work that I have chiefly in mind in making
these observations is the Dreams. Throughout this, in some respects
the most interesting that Synesius has left us, all the elements enumer-
ated come into play. The subject, as he viewed it, is a mysterious one,
for he was without the lights of modern psychology; the text certainly
seems corrupt in places, the tone of his inquiry into the subject, the


68 INTRODUCTION

decidedly poetic drift of his thought, and the imagery in which he has
clothed it, would admit of the supposition that he is purposely obscure;
and it is possible, alternatively, that his powers of expression were not
adequate, at given moments of his argument, to give us his thought
clearly. Finally he uses terms that may have had a technical meaning
lost to us since. How can we discriminate successfully, to take one
instance, between the ‘psychic spirit’ and the ‘spiritual psyche’
(fuxuxow avedpa, avevparum Yvy}) and what technical meaning was
attached in his day to either phrase? *

As far as texts are concerned, obscure and difficult expression of
thought is apt, obviously, to attract corruptions to the manuscripts |
owing to the misunderstandings of the copyists. The translator of the
choruses in the Agamemnon has to struggle with the confusion induced
by ignorant scribes, and also with the intentional obscurity that Aes-
chylus introduced into his lines, no doubt to give them a certain divine
afflatus, a prophetic grandeur. We have seen in the case of Robert
Browning's translation of the Agamemnon how well one master of ob-
scurity in poetic style has succeeded in rendering another. In the case
of the Dreams, it will be sufficient to indicate,at the opportune moment,
passages where it seems to me that intricacies in the thoughts to be
expressed have combined to obscure the meaning.

This difficulty of interpretation, it must not be forgotten, is super-
posed upon a style that is already a difficult one at best. Most Grecians,
examining it for the first time, would at once be impressed by the diffi-
culty of the prose of Synesius; even when the sentences are compara-
tively simple they do not seem to communicate with ease the burden
of their thought. This may be partly owing to.the artificial laws of
thythm by accent which he had imposed upon himself. For now we
come toa consideration of an important element in his style, namely the
construction of terminations to each sentence, the object of which was
- to present in the last two words as many unaccented syllables as possible.
If it is true that he was one of the first to work according to the rules of
rhythm by accent, and the specified forms of clausulae founded by The-

3 J have expressed elsewhere the opinion that svejua here means the envelope


of the soul. The words svevparurh pux§ might signify the soul enclosed in its cover-
ing, bet all such renderings are open to question.


FROM PLOTINUS TO JULIAN 69


mistius and Himerius, as Professor Dewing thinks, following Meyer; in
that case, pre-occupation with a complicated system for which he had
no precedents in the authors whom he most read and admired, might
have rendered a task difficult that would otherwise have been easy, and
with results that might have been anticipated; for the pioneer in a style
based on revolutionary principles can scarcely hope to attain to the ease
and facility of one established on a long series of precedents. But why
Synesius, of all men, with his conservative tastes and archaic procliv-
ities, should espouse a new form of prose rhythm that had not the
authority of the past ages behind it, this is an enigma that I do not
pretend to solve. It would have seemed to me most improbable that
he should have taken such a line. But the evidence that he did so is
clear enough if we accept Professor Dewing’s statistics.’ Professor
Terzaghi, who has made a most exhaustive study of the clausulae of
Synesius, finds 7-88 per cent. of irregular clausulae in Dreams, whereas
in the Praise of Baldness there are only 3-1 per cent.” This is the ne plus
ultra of paradox, for it is precisely this last essay which its author
describes as his chef d’aurre of Atticism, and for which the younger
literary men showed such enthusiasm. How is it that the one essay
which he exultantly proclaims as his piece of ‘finished workmanship
in the Attic manner’ is the one in which the new and modern system,
that which breaks with the traditions of the past, has been the most
closely observed? One would have thought that a return to quantitative
rhythm would have been one of his first steps in an attempt to approach
the Attic writers of the ‘golden age’. Nor are causes far to seek. As the


1 See Professor Dewing’s article, American Journal of Philology, xxxi (1910),
pp. 312 ff. The following forms of clausulae are given by Professor Dewing:
0. dvacois Sdypacw. 1. ais HOos reives. 2. evdaipovos Biov. 3. Prtropos arbpés. 4. Bias
é IIpovoaevs. §. pnder npooncpupyalépevs. 6. xivduvos war

2 There are, according to Professor Terzaghi, 2,853 clausulae in the prose works
of Synesius, of which only 262 do not correspond to the so-called law of Meyer;
in other words, slightly ovcr nincty per cent. of the clausulae in the five prose
pieces, the ‘Paeonius’ and the Catastasis, icaving the Letters out of account, con-
form to the laws of Meycr, ‘ Der accentuirte Satzschluss in der gricchischen
Prosa, vom IV. bis XVI. Jahrhundert’ (Géttingen, 1891) (== Gesammelie Abhand-
lungen, II (Berlin, 1905]) and of Maas, Byzantinische Zeitschrift XXII (1913),
P. 207, &c., laws that are not observable in authors earlier than Themistius aad

imerius.


90 INTRODUCTION


Greek language grew older, the element of quantity, that is to say the
Jength of time involved in enunciating a syllable, which had always
been the foundation of its rhythm in prose gs well as of its metre in
poetry, seems to have grown enfeebled, and the pitches of the voice
which the later grammarians attempted to stereotype by writing
accents over the vowel. sounds, apparently became intensified. There
must, therefore, have gradually arisen an ever increasing gap between
the spoken language and the language of literature. This language of
hterature was slipping little by little into the position of a dead lan-
guage, so far as its sounds were concerned, and it was inevitable that
sooner or later there should be a change in the rhythms of prose com-
position to accord with the change that had come over pronunciation.
As has already been said, Himerius, the rhetorician, and Themistius
were the first writers to introduce new laws of rhythm founded on the
accents and discarding the quantity, and more particularly to fix upon
certam recognized forms of terminating sentences, clausulae, as gram-
marians style them, the bases of which are the intervals of unaccented
syllables between the two last accented syllables in the sentence.
Synesius is almost enslaved by these artificial laws of clausulae, not to
speak of other modes of rhythm, a profound study of which will be
found in the works of Meyer, Maas, and Terzaghi. The most interesting
results obtained by the latter scholar is the discovery, for I can call it
nothing less, that Synesius became more and more under the domina-
thon of fixed Jaws in the clausulae as his literary experience ripened.
In his earlier works, Professor Terzaghi concludes, he shows a strong
tendency to follow the Jaws of accentual clausulae, but in the end this
tendency becomes a fixed law to him, as we see in his later works.
What is probably his earliest literary work, the letter to Paeonius,
contains 16 per cent. of clausulae that are violations of Meyer’s law;
his latest, the Praise of Baldness, contains only 3 per cent. The facts
speak for themselves. After the first work (to Paeonius), the others,
that is to say, Egyptian Tale, Dio, Dreams, Catastasis, and the Praise
of Baldness, taken in this their presumed historical order, show a contin-
ually decreasing percentage of violations of the law, or irregularities,
as we should call them. The percentages would then be as follows in
the order given: 16 per cent., 12°17 per cent., 11 per cent., 10°5 per cent.,


FROM PLOTINUS TO JULIAN ot


7°88 per cent., 3°17 per cent., 3° percent. But apart from the clausulae,
Terzaghi finds other figures of style, such as isotonism, parallelism,
rhyme, homoeoteleuton, &c. So we sce that the style of Synesius, which
seems Careless enough at first sight, is really vastly complicated by all
these considerations that he has in view, and all these points of rhetori-
cal rhythm that he is seeking to work up to. Of course, all the effects,
whatever they may be, attained by such means, must inevitably be
lost in a translation. The reasons given by Professor Dewing for con-
cluding that in all writers earlier than Himerius there is no approxima-
tion to this accentual scheme, are, of course, founded on exhaustive
statistics. He finds that no preference is shown in them for the set of
regular accentual forms made out by Meyer. While Himerius all this
time was using the accentual rhythm in his prose writings, Themistius
was at work on the accentual laws of clausulae, and was putting his
principles into practice. But the observance of such laws he can find
in no earlier writers. Synesius must therefore have been one of the
first to base his style upon this new system, which on the one hand
linked the literary style closer to the elements of popular speech, while
on the other hand it increased the artificiality of literature, and may
have made it more unintelligible to the ordinary layman. This last
point, however, it would be very difficult to determine. But all this
is quite in the tradition that we are beginning to establish concerning
all Synesiana. Whatever path we pursue in any attempt to analyse his
style or to trace his thoughts to their origins, we are faced by some
unexpected paradox and are as far from the solution as ever. He is
impalpable, and nowhere more so than in this fascinating and quite
untranslatable essay on Dreams. It moves in the finest, the most rare-
fied atmosphere of Athenian mentality, whatever reservations we may
make as to its Atticism in point of style. Joubert was certainly right
in saying that ‘even the dregs of Greek literature in its old age offer us a
delicate residue’. It is precisely this delicate residue that defies analysis.
‘The Greek’, Synesius says himself, ‘is on the whole superior to the
Barbarian’, and we quite believe him.’ The Barbarian takes up philo-
sophy or literature as an occupation or distraction, so he tells us, but
to the Greek it is his whole life, once he has passed the portals of the


8 Syn. Dio, pp. 1132-3, Migne.


92 INTRODUCTION


temple of the Muses. So we see in perusing the letters of Synesius, that
the obsession, for it was scarcely less than this, of philosophy,. was
ever-present in some chamber of the conscious or sub-conscious mind ;
and his mind must have wandered far in the field of whatever literature
was accessible to it, and must have been well stored with reminiscences
even of other authors than those from whom he quotes.

But the faculty of improvising so easily the style and thoughts of
other writers, which he describes so nalvely, and not without a touch of
vanity, in the passage quoted a moment ago, is proof of an imaginative
mind; and imagination, the author tells us in Dreams, is the most
important function in the intellect of man. However that may be as a
general principle in psychology, it is certainly true of Synesius. He is
under the spell of ‘phantasia’—I raiust be allowed the Greek word, for
it conveys a shade of meaning all its own. He arises in the middle of
the night, and pens.a work that is fantasy itself. His own identity
disappears in that of others who control his hand, as he tells us, and he
finds himself in a state of complete detachment. Even the history of
his own time, the events he witnessed in Constantinople, all these he can
only see, or at least describe, in a framework of some mythical past in
Egypt, where the actors on the stage are no longer Aurelian, Caesarius
or (perhaps) Arcadius, but Osiris, Typho, the High Priest; the whole
court of the Emperor is peopled with phantom courtiers. The world
past and present becomes a fanciful one when he, the man of action,
gives rein to the impulses that move him to a world of images crystal-
lized by his imagination ; that world in which as in a finer element of the
spirit we are entranced by the visions of others, so that, as in the words
of Browning's poem:
“Whatever they are we seem,
Imagine the thing they know;
All deeds they do we dream :
Can heaven be else but so?’2


3 Philo (De Alig. Abvakae, vii. 35) recounts a reared perience: ‘Sometimes
when I have come to my work empty, I have suddenly € full, ideas being,
im an invisible manner, showered upon me, and implanted in me from on high; so
that through the influence of divine inspiration, I have become greatly excited,
psf es lg rl reid i acta
mos myself, nos what I was saying, nor what I was writing. .

® Browning, Fifne af the Faiz.


FROM PLOTINUS TO JULIAN 73


This supreme power of the imaginative faculties linked to a warm-
hearted nature tends to a dreamy idealization of his friends, but also
to a very real and active consciousness of their necessity. in his actual
life. He essays in vain to cultivate philosophic self-sufficiency. After
reproaching his friend Herculian for pining after him too much: in his
absence, he ends by gracefully admitting his friend’s point of view:
‘Why do you lament and drench your letters with your tears’, he writes
at one moment (Ep.140) ... ‘it is womanish or childish to love those
things through which the demon is able to rob us of the fruits of our
plans.’ But later he confesses to him (Ep.146) that there has been for
long ‘such a flood of enchantments’ in his letters, that he has ended by
giving way to the same state of feeling himself. ‘You see me to-day’,
he continues, ‘such a man as I at one time reproached you for being.
Has the illustrious Herculian done me great benefit in thus making my
soul depend on himself, and in compelling it to descend from the heights
of philosophy?’ This passionate feeling for friendship is one of the
forms that his idealism in philosophy takes. It is Platonic in its essence.
The phrase ‘give yourself up to philosophy’, which persistently recurs
in those letters written to his dearest and most intimate friends, is more
than a mere formula. It is a burning appeal to them to seek to partici-
pate with him in the forces that he feels to be the illuminating principles
of his own life." Here there is no appeal to the degenerate phases of
Neoplatonism, to theurgy or necromancy. He does not exhort his
friends to invoke deities or communicate with spirits; neither, be it
remarked, does he ever speak of a state of ecstasy as the object of a
philosopher's life. This alone.would be-sufficient to separate him from
the Neoplatonist proper. He is eager that his friends should share with
him in the greater light that comes from abstract thought, and should
establish a still deeper community of friendship thereby. For him the
one great fellowship that he sought was in thought. The ‘sacred quar-
tette’ to which he half playfully alludes, and in which his brother
Euoptius was to share, is only a form of his one desire.


3 Isocrates (Euagoras, 81) speaks in the same strain: “Av yap dupivgs rg Grlooogig
aal rocosroy dmbidips Econ wep vov, raxlws yerqou Teves olev o¢ spordats.


IV


WHEX we turn from his Letters to the five prose pieces that have come
down to us, and to the address delivered before the Emperor Arcadius,
we are a little disconcerted at their lack of cohesion in thought ; they
are apt to appear to us as somewhat diffuse and capricious in their
sequence. They do not always show sustained power.’ A great deal
that we find in the Letters of Synesius might easily give us legitimately
founded hopes of greater things than we find in his other works. I say
hopes of greater things, for at times he rises to the power and force of
a great writer. It must have been at one of these moments that Bossuet
was so much impressed by him that he speaks of him as ‘le grand
Synésius’, using an epithet that he would have been chary of meting
out to any other than one whom he esteemed a writer of the highest
order. The opening passages of his address On Kingshtp leave very
httle to be desired. The speech is full of fire, recalling at times the
bolder flights of the Athenian orators, of Demosthenes or Lysias. It
is well constructed to lead up to its main object, to the plea for an army
that should be really national, and that should not bé weakened in
its fibre by the infiltration of barbarian hordes to whom the civilization
of the Roman citizen was unknown, and even his national dress a
matter for mockery. Whether the address was ever delivered in the
form in which we have it, is immaterial. The specch as it stands is a
model of sane thinking and happy form of expression. The time in
which it was delivered was a troublous one. If we are right in placing
it m the year 399, it immediately preceded the rebellion of the Gothic
leader Gainas, and the riots in Constantinople, which attended the
expulsion or flight of his soldiery, a history of tumult and insurrection,

3 And yet Synesius recognized the canons of rhetoric in regard to the con-
struction of an essay. In Letter 154 to Hypatia, we find the following : ‘If each
thing is in its proper place; and all things have been handled in season; . . if it
has been divided into a number of chapters in the manner of that divine work the


Phaedrus, in which Pilato discusses the various types of the beautiful; . . . if, more-
over, conviction has anywhere quietly come to the support of the flatness of the
narrative, and if out of conviction demonstration has resulted, as happens in such
casea,; and if one thing follows from another logically, these results must be gifts
of mature and art.’


CRITICAL APPRECIATIONS 75


of which Synesius has given a version in the Egyptian Tale. Nothing
more dramatic could be imagined than the events which followed the
ushering in of the reign of the young Emperor Arcadius. The great
Roman Empire was, with his accession to the ‘throne of massive gold’
in Constantinople, divided for the first time into an Eastem and
Western sphere, as if retreating, in a last attempt to prolong a life
already doomed, to the impregnable position of the city of the Bos-
phorus. Nor can the attempt be said to have been completely a failure,
from the point of view of the rulers of the Empire, for the succession of
this throne lasted, in however decadent a condition, over a thousand
years after that in which the weakling son of the statesman and soldier,
Theodosius, had ascended it for the first time. The new Emperor of the
East was placed in a setting of truly oriental magnificence, to judge
from the words of St. John Chrysostom, and those of Synesius himself.
Surrounded by a whole phalanx of guards and courtiers, he appeared
in public in a golden chariot drawn by white mules, the very animals
themselves glittering with the precious metal, and the whole panoply
resplendent with precious stones. ‘For you’, says Synesius, ‘even the
pavement is not to be endured, nor may you walk upon the earth in
its natural state, but gold dust must be sprinkled before you, which
your waggons and merchantmen bring you from all the ends of the
earth... for it is not kingly to halt in the enjoyment of luxury even
in the soles of the royal sandals.’ (p. r080 B-C.)

This exaggeration of the outward pomp and circumstance of royalty
was, by the irony of fate, coincident with the time when the pillars
which supported the imposing edifice were themselves crumbling. The
great Theodosius had scarcely been borne to his last rest, when the
Goths flamed up in the North, and before the end of the winter of 395,
the erstwhile auxiliaries of Rome were moving in the direction of
Greece. Their leader Alaric poured his barbarian hordes over the
harvest lands of Boeotia. His progress was a veritable column of smoke
by day and fire by night’, as village after village was lit up by the torch
of the savage soldiery, who massacred the male population and carried
off whatever they found of youth in the womanhood of Greece, to share
‘in their rough barbarian life. Even Athens escaped only by payment
of a ransom that impoverished the city. There is a grim contrast in


56 INTRODUCTION


this picture of a young, weak, and wavering Emperor passing his hours
in the depths and recesses of his palace and his gardens, if we may trust
the picture drawn by Synesius, dominated at one moment by the
ignoble Eutropius and after the fall of this evil counsellor by other
more obscure court flatterers; and the stern drama that was being
enacted elsewhere, where Alaric was ravaging the smiling plains of
Greece, and where Corinth, Argos, Sparta fell one after another, without
a struggle, into the hands of the barbarian. As news of these successive
disasters filtered through to the languid entourage of the Emperor, there
must have been consternation; and a great fear of worse to follow, this
time nearer home, must have been written on every face, a fear in
virtue of which the ignominious secret treaty was signed with Alaric
the Goth by the Court of Constantinople. The Roman general Stilicho,
on hearing of this, retired from Greece, faithful to the orders of his
Western master, before his campaign had been brought to a successful
conclusion. The trembling Emperor of the East had sacrificed the
honour of the Roman people to his terror of the Goth, nor was such a
sentiment unjustified. The danger of a Gothic revolt in the very city
of Constantine itself was looming on the horizon, and everywhere
within the far-flung frontiers of the Empire, the Western and Eastern
alike, a spirit of unrest amongst the barbarian tribes was evident.
The Franks and Burgundians in Gaul were in a state of ferment, as
were the Suevi, who finally in 409 invaded Spain, and the same was
true of the savage tribes of the desert in Libya. Everywhere the un-
‘wieldy machine of administration that had grown until it extended
over too vast an area, was showing its inability to grant the security
‘and protection that its vast maze of unwarlike cities had become
accustomed to expect from it. All were leaning on the central power
in vain, for the central power was itself in the hands of an army of
mercenaries, who were, in their turn, in a state of chronic revolt. It
was precisely due to an appeal for protection of this sort from his
mother-city Cyrene, that Synesius stood before the potentate of the
Eastern Empire, to deliver his memorable address On Kingship, in
which he makes an eloquent appeal, perhaps really directed to the
powers behind the throne, to institute a change in the manner of re-
cruiting in the Roman army. “The measures which Synesius recom-


CRITICAL APPRECIATIONS 77


mends,’ says Gibbon, ‘are the dictates of a bold and gencrous patriot.
He exhorts the Emperor to revive the courage of his subjects by the
example of manly virtue; to banish luxury from the court and from the
camp; to substitute in the place of the barbarian mercenaries, an army
of men interested in the defence of their laws and of their property; to
force, in such a moment of public danger, the mechanic from his shop
and the philosopher from his school; to rouse the indolent citizen from
his dreams of pleasure, and to arm, for the protection of agriculture,
the hands of the laborious husbandman . . . . The court of Arcadius
indulged the zeal, applauded the cloquence, and neglected the advice
of Syncsius. Perhaps the philosopher who addresses the Emperor of
the East in the language of reason and virtue, which he might have
used to a Spartan king, had not condescended to form a practicable
scheme, consistent with the temper and circumstances of a degenerate
age. ... While the oration of Synesius and the downfall of the Bar-
barians were the topics of popular conversation, an edict was published
at Constantinople which declared the promotion of Alaric to the rank
of master-general of the Eastern Ilyricum.’

Is it possible that the downfall of the Barbarians to which Gibbon
alludes was hastened by the address which Synesius scems to have
delivered a year before it occurred? The sudden panic which seized
upon the Goths in the imperial city, their attempted flight, their
clashing with the citizens within the walls; all these events which he
recounts in allegorical form in the Egyptian Tale, have never been
satisfactorily explained. Given the extraordinary tension of fecling
that had come to prevail in the city between the foreign mercenaries
and the citizens, it might well be that the words of Synesius fired the
train. All things considered, this address will always rank as the most
important of his works. A comparison of it with the indictment of
Andronicus and the Catastasis would suggest that he was an orator by
natural bent; he shows equal power whether in the line of invective or
in that of persuasion. It would seem to us that so brilliant an entrance
as this successful address must have given him to the life of the court
at Constantinople, might have tempted him to go farther in a political
career. But his heart was evidently in his own country. The one city
always claimed him, and despite the triumphal return to power of his


78 INTRODUCTION


friend Aurelian, he soon shook the dust of the imperial capital from his
feet. It would be interesting to know whether the strange story that
he has given us under the title of the Egyptian Tale, and which is so
dramatic a history of these years under a thin disguise, was written
when he was at the court of the Emperor, or later. The incident of the
literary passage of arms with Typho, whoever he may have been, has
certainly all the aspect of a real scene, one that was actually enacted.
But it is perhaps the essay on Dreams which is the most fertile in
those thoughts that form the keystone to the edifice of his views on
psychological problems, and certain passages are very significant as
seeming to give evidence of a dim perception of factors in the analysis
of the actions of the conscious mind which it has been reserved for
modern times to elucidate more completely. His distinction between
the imaginative power in man and the lower animals is particularly in-
teresting. His conception is that imagination is the collective sense-
perception in which all the local sense-perceptions are united, and
which in the lower animals serve the ends of reason. In man, as
associated with the intellect, it becomes the higher reasoning faculty;
for, he says, we cannot form thoughts at all without the imaginative
element coming into play. Given that imagination is the sense of senses,
it is this super-sensorial faculty that passes the percepts to the intellect
in a form intelligible to it, and the result of this union is the act of
reasoning in the brain. ‘Imagination is like a mirror’,’ as he puts it in
his metaphorical language, ‘in which things are reflected which have
their seat in the soul... . We have no consciousness of the acts of the
intelligence, unless the imagination reveals such consciousness to us.’
And it is by force of this faculty, therefore, that man becomes conscious
that he is a thinking being (cogsto; ergo sum). Synesius finds in dreams
his clearest evidence. In this state, which is purely psychical, we do
not actually see, for our eyes are closed, nor do we hear, touch, smell or
feel pain; but all these sensations we experience nevertheless. These
sensations then must come from the super-sensorial faculty that is
Conjoined with the brain, and this faculty is none other than what we
call imagination. To leave imagination behind and enter into pure


8 De Insom. 1288 B-c.


CRITICAL APPRECIATIONS 79


intellect, he evidently regards as well nigh impossible in this world.
‘It is difficult no less than happy,” are his words. But in the dream
state we are nearer to it, inasmuch as the divers local sensorial faculties
are in abeyance. Thought in dreams is therefore nearer to the ‘idea’
in its pyrity and divested of all matter. Here the current of Platonic
thought carries him away just at the moment when we scem to have
the quarry in sight and surrounded. But there is no mistaking his
meaning. He distinctly states that even the higher forms or processes
of the intellect can scarcely be attained without this faculty of imagina-
tion entering in. It will be noticed, on referring to the Greek, that he
uses the word vénots, not didvoa. Now the latter word is used by
Plato to describe a state midway between pure mind or knowledge of
real Being, and mere opinion. (Rep. 511 D.) The former is the word
that is farthest removed from either sense perception or opinion.’
From the choice therefore of the word vonois, in preference to Sidrvora,
by Synesius at this juncture, we are justified in assuming that he has
the highest powers of the mind in view. (cf. Pl. Tim. 28 a; Rep. §29 B,
511 A.)° But he then proceeds to qualify all this by adding ‘unless
some one for a brief moment of time succecds in grasping an idea that
is completely devoid of matter.”* This last state is the highest. It is the
one described by Plato in the Republic, the Sympossum, the Phaedrus,
and elsewhere. But it will be seen that the Cyrencan is less hopeful
of the practicability of its attainment than his master. I would again
point out here how widely separated his view is from that of Plotinus
and of the Neoplatonists proper. Like Plato he suggests as the ultimate
goal the possession by the mind of the absolute, in other words of the
immaterial, idea, there being many such in their degree, culminating
finally in the idea of the Good; and this goal might be attained when
the mind has succeeded in passing beyond the imagination that it rests


3 De Insom. 1292 D.

2 Cf. Aristot. De Anima, 427 b 14: davracia yap frepow wai aiePifocws wai Savcias.

> Petavius remarks: ‘Platonis et Aristotclis dogmata secutus, rodw et Sudroay
distinguit ... dixerat enim antea voby circa ra dyvwé0era versari, Skidyovay Vero NOB
circa rds dpxds, sed circa rag dwo8{ous, cujusmodi sunt mathematicae disciplinae.
vide Arist. I, De Anime. cap. 4.’ (Syn. 3142, Migne.)

* De Insom. 1292 D: vas ydp vofous eda dgeavrdéerevs wesevycbe, wii « 84 neg dv
dxapet wore drapiw loxey cious dédov,


80 INTRODUCTION
upon, and in leaving it behind (Swepxiva: gavraciav), an attainment
which he describes as enviable if it can be reached. He says nothing of
ecstasy, the great goal of the Neoplatonists, that state of exaltation in
virtue of which the soul succeeds in leaving its fleshly tenement alto-
gether and in effecting a direct union with God, thus transcending the
hypostases of the world-soul and of mind. The two conceptions are
essentially opposed. In the one case it is the mind that is seeking the
dematerialized idea, in the other it is the soul that is seeking its own
dematerialization in order to unite with the Deity.

It is interesting to observe how the Platonism of Synesius interprets
a tentative psychology founded on observation and reasoned hypo-
thesis. He begins, always in the language of poetic similes, to define
the imagination, that ‘perception of perceptions’, as the ‘first body of
the soul’, and speaks of it as ‘lurking there in its fastness and directing
the government of the living being ag from a citadel, for about it
Nature has constructed all the functions of the brain. Hearing and
sight are not senses, but only subservient organs of the common sense-
perception, like door-keepers of the living being, who announce to their
mistress (i. e. the super-sensorial imaginative element), the things per-
ceived outside, and from which the external organs of sense receive
knocks at the door. And this is the perfect sense-perception in all its
parts, for it hears and sees with its whole spirit and has power over all
the remaining (senses). It divides its powers, assigning one to one
place, and another to another. These powers stretch out from the
living being, each one separately, and, like straight lines radiating
from a centre, return to and meet in the centre again, all of them
one in their common root, though many in their outgoings. .. . But
the perception without an intermediary is more divine and nearest to
the soul.’ From all this it follows that the life in dreams, as being
one raised from a participation in the lower category of perception to
the imaginative faculty alone, by just this step stands so much nearer
to the life of mind, pure and unadulterated, and (for he pushed his
conclusions to this logical sequence also) approaches more closely to
the life of the soul after death. As our waking life is to our dreaming


8 De Insom. 1289 ¢.


- CRITICAL APPRECIATIONS 8x


life, so is our dreaming life, if I understand him aright, to our future
and, for he is always a Platonist, to our past existence.

This is the end of the all too short incursion that Synesius has made
into what might be termcd moder psychology. Like some psy-
chologists of the present day, he is attempting to cross the ditch
that separates mind and matter. His solution is the postulating of this
principle which he calls ‘phantasia’, and which makes the long sought
bridge. It belongs to neither mind nor matter, but is nearest to cach.
It is, in his own words, a ‘no man’s land’ (the term used is a military
one), that lies between the ‘unreasoning and reason, the bodiless and
the body, and is a boundary common to both, and through it the divine
elements (i.¢c. mind and soul), are brought into contact with those
furthest removed from them (matter). And for this reason’, he says,
‘it is apprehended by philosophy with difficulty, for it borrows any-
thing that is suitable to its purpose, taking it from cither of the
extremes, as it were, from neighbours, and so images in one nature
things that dwell far apart.”

Looking back at all this from the vantage ground, if it be such, of
over fifteen centuries, it is safe to say that we are no nearer the solution
of the problem than in the days of the philosopher of Cyrene. All
attempts to break down the dualism that exists between consciousness
and what lies outside it, have failed. Science again, in another field,
has, so far, been unable to bridge the chasm between living and lifeless
matter, between the organic and the inorganic. Olympiodorus, at a
later period than Synesius, feels the same diflicultics. He is not content
with the explanations of Aristotle. He cannot, he says, agree with the
Peripatetics, that sense-perception is the principle of knowledge. ‘The
inferior cannot be’ the cause of the superior. Sense-perception is like
a messenger or a herald,” he goes on to say, repeating here the words of
Plotinus, ‘its réle is to awaken the spirit to attain knowledge.’ But how
does it awaken the spirit, or through what agency? Through imagina-
tion, Synesius would answer, through this super-sensorial faculty that
he has described to us. The messenger is a messenger indccd, but not a

1 De Insom, 1292 ¢.

2 Olympiodorus, Commentary on Phacdo; Cousin, Fragments f the Grech Philo-
suphers, p. 432, quoted by Bouillet, iii, p- 36.

2878-3 a


8&2 INTRODUCTION


‘herald’. He cannot blow a blast on his trumpet before the mistréss
who rules in the acropolis of Mind. He can only penetrate to the border-
land common to both sides, and it is there that he must leave his
message. So one might carry out the metaphor of Olympiodorus, as
Synesius himself would have put it. All things considered, the solution
proposed by the latter in placing the pivot of psychical action on this
third principle of ‘phantasia’, this higher and inclusive organ of percep-
tion, seems as good a one as any one else’s. The point of view is that of
a concrete thinker. The universe, according to his conception, is con-
nected in all its parts, and one part affects another. There was no-
thing ‘unscientific’ to the mind of Synesius in the idea that dreams
portend coming events. It would only be the fulfilment of a natural
law, and the whole drift of Dreams is rather in the direction of a rational-
ization of all manners of divining the future, but pointing to the
inferiuvity of these to the law, as he conceived it to be, that operates in
dreams. So far as the conception of the universe, as an interdependent
body is concerned, even Leibnitz, writing as late as the seventeenth
century,expresses himself as follows: ‘Each bodyfeels everything which
happens in the universe, and to such an extent that he who sees the
whole can read in each thing that which is happening everywhere, and
even that which has been or will be, by noticing in the present that
which is separated by time and by distance."’ We must not therefore
suppose that Synesius was superstitious because he speaks of magic,
incantations, and spells, as the commonplaces of experience. On the
contrary he has rather the scientific mind, seeking a rational explana-
tion. We must remember that in the Roman Empire, from the days of
Horace’s Canidia down to the time of our story, the bewitching of
enemies played a part in popular imagination difficult for us in the
present day to realize. The works of Petronius and Apuleius are elo-
quent on this subject.

The imagination, then, once defined, Synesius proceeds with the
imagery, Platonic enough, of the descent of the soul to the earth, in
which it rests upon this faculty that supports it as a chariot might, in
which to make its earthly journey, at one moment guiding it and at
another guided by it. The imagination sometimes draws the soul down

3 Leibaitz, Monadology, cap. 61, quoted by Bouillet, vol. i, p. 176.


CRITICAL APPRECIATIONS 83


with it towards matter; and the soul at a moment such as this is capable
of parting company with its companion altogether, ascending again
‘to its home. The pleasures of the world that inflame the imagination
are a snare set by the demons who scck to drag the soul down to the
contamination of matter, and then it is only by divine assistance and
at the price of great struggles that it can gain the heights where matter
has no further hold on it. There are two destinics; in the higher one the
soul is illumined and dry; in the other, heavy, clogged with moisture
and dark. The imagination becomes obscured or clarified according to
the condition of the soul. What I have termed the supersensorial
faculty is affected by the ethical condition of the mind or soul, to
translate the allegory into rationalistic language, and when this condi-
tion is unhealthy it fulfils its functions ill, and ceases to register its
impressions of the future with any accuracy. The result of this is that
only the dreams of the virtuous are pregnant with knowledge of the
future. He who keeps his imagination pure and is therefore receiving
pure impressions, is at a psychical pitch that renders his soul, in the
dreaming state,open to the divine power and presence, which warnshim
of evil on the one hand, and inundatcs his life with hope on the other.

Synesius next proceeds to tell us what an important part the study
of dreams has played in his own life, and how it protected him in the.
troublous and dangerous days of his mission in Constantinople. There
is an interesting parallel in the third hymn, where he gives thanks to
God for sustaining him at that period of his life. He then, in the work
before us, passes on to the vindication of divination by dreams, as an
art which consists in the observation and interpretation of a positive
law, however obscure its phenomena may be. ‘Aristotle and reason’,
he says, ‘assert that sense-perception creates memory, memory experi-
ence, and experience art (or science).’ But the author of Dreams
maintains that this art is one purely personal to cach individual. He
laughs to scorn the innumerable books which profess to give rules for
interpreting dreams. These images, reflections, as he calls them, of the
future, differ with every person, and no gencral laws of interpretation
can be devised. They are part of the realm of positive law, but a law
that has infinite variations. Proficiency in reading these signals of the
future can only be attained by continual practice, observation and


Ss INTRODUCTION


memory ; by noting the dream and then observing by what events it is
succeeded. But quite apart from the utility of dreams in predicting the
future, this somnolent state, he tells us, has the highest value of all
for man in that it gives, as no other, the most perfect freedom for the
imagination, for the life untrammelled by time or by space, for the life
in which man may hold converse with the gods, without fear or envy,
may discover universes and explore the stars. It is with such reflections
as this that the poetic thinker lays aside his pen, and brings to a close
his study of the unsoundable depths of man’s psychical horizon as
revealed in sleep.

The same current of feeling that animates Dreams is apparent in
certain parts of the Egyptian Tale’ also. The gods in this narrative are
great dreamers, absorbed in contemplation. It is only the lesser gods,
the gods of a lower destiny, who are willing to descend to the wants and
‘ meeds of man, to exchange the ideal visions of the celestial heights for
the baser sphere of action. However his own destiny and his own powers
enchained him to the life of action, there can be little doubt that the
. dream of Synesius himself was the dream of a life of thought and of
philosophic calm.

‘Sweet is it, on the great sea, when winds disturb its expanses,

Far from a point on the land to watch the toil of another.’
*Spectare suave est’ was always the tempter’s word whispered in his
ear, and one that he always ended by rejecting, although with obvious
regret. But he portrays his gods in this Egyptian Tale as beings aloof
from this world. For them the world is a spectacle full of beauty and
charm, but there is a far greater one in the contemplation of the source
whence beauty comes. Beneath this supreme region of perfect con-
templation of the absolute essences come gods of a secondary order to
‘whom action is apportioned, and this lot they accept as their part, but
regretfully, for their desires turn towards contemplation, as do those
of the highest gods; and farther down in the descending scale are the
demons that we encountered in Dreams. These dwell in the dark

, eee to later by its secund title, On /’rovidence.

Suave, mari magno turbantibus aequora ventis,


E terra magnum alterius spectare laborem.
Lucretius, De Ierum Natura, ii. 1-2.


CRITICAL APPRECIATIONS 85


caverns of the earth, and draw down souls to be absorbed and destroyed
by the clogging of matter.

The picture of the universe in the story is an undeniably gloomy
one; man lives in a valley of fear, the carth scems peopled with the
demons of matter whose whole function is to destroy. This one con-
ception of the maleficent spirits that lurk in the dark places of the
earth and draw the soul of man down to its destruction, is as firmly
embedded in this paganistic imagery of the Providence, as it was in the
Christian imagery of the Middle Ages. There is a breath here such as
we catch in Orcagnas’ Triumph of Death, and in many works of art
before the Renaissance in both painting and sculpture. The same view
of man’s destiny is to be found in Dante, and has been passed on in
some form or other to modern times, a strange legacy that the poly-
theism of Greece and Rome has left us, and which was accepted in all.
its essentials by the early Christians. Even in building their church
whose tapering spire pointed to heaven, the architects of the Gothic
cathedrals could not escape giving their testimony to thiscult of demono-
logy, and the forms of grotesque spirits may still be seen mingled with
the soaring columns and pinnacles of living stone that carry aloft their
message of redemption, The grinning faces of the demons of matter
still look down from the towers of Notre-Dame on the island of the
Seine, on the very spot which the Emperor Julian knew as Lutecia,
and where the Imperial diadem was forced upon his brow; they still
brood over the city of Strasbourg, and rail at us from the heights of
Rouen cathedral. To what an extent this conception of the universe
was ever present to the mind of Synesius, appears in his letters in many
places, and in his other works also, nor could he refrain at times from
attempting to offer some explanation that might satisfy the cravings
of his soul to reconcile the powers of darkness with the powers of light.

‘The malevolent forces in the universe fulfil the designs of Providence
inasmuch as they punish those deserving of punishment, but never-
theless they are abhorred by God, and are to be shunned.’* It is in


' Cf. Tertullian, J’vaescrip. Hueret. xxx: 'Vur heresies must needs be. Yet it
does not follow that heresies are a good because they are needful. As if evil also
were not needful, For it was even needful for the Lord to be betrayed: yet “Woe
to the traitor’ was said, to prevent any one from upholding heresies on this same
ground of accessity.”


86 INTRODUCTION


these words that Synesius, now Bishop of Ptolemais, addresses his
congregation in the great invective that he hurls against his own enemy
and the enemy of the Church alike, the prefect Andronicus.’ The
same note of Divine Providence working towards its ends through the ~
very powers of darkness that it detests, is here also. But in the story
Ox Providence, the gods of a polytheistic heaven and earth are the
Cispensers of its inscrutable ends. Man is no longer the puppet of a fate
to which even the immortal gods must yield, as he is in the Greek
tragedies, but rather the puppet of beneficent deities who have given
him a certain impetus when launching him into the world; but one that
must inevitably become feebler as time goes on, until finally it would
die out altogether, were it not reinforced from the fountain-head.?
He compares man to a marionette moved by wires, which keeps on
moving by the momentum given it in the initial pull, even after the
master’s hand is at rest. In man, as in the marionette, all the force
comes from above; man of himself is nothing. The gods must therefore,
from time to time, visit their kingdom below to renew the forces that
have become exhausted.’ They come to the earth, he tells us, at certain
regular intervals, like engineers—this is the extraordinary phrase he
uses—‘in crder to set the springs of the state in order’, as Druon well
renders the implied conclusion of this simile; to begin a salutary move-
ment in it by bringing within its precincts god-like souls, more akin to
their own. After this they return to their inaccessible heights. All that
man can do is to defend the patrimony left him by the gods, to the best
of his ability, against the demons of matter who seek to invadc the less
wel] protected sides of his soul, who seck to fan into flame his dormant
passions, and to besiege the citadel itself of the mind. And this war
continues until one side or the other, the soul or the demons, acknow-
ledge defeat. This view of Providence is that it is rather man’s ally than
his protector. It comes ‘not to bring peace, but a sword’, It calls for
man’s exertions and co-operation. It rallics him to its banner. ‘It is
not like the mother of the new-born babe, whose one care is to protect


3 Ep. $7. ® De Prov. p. 1228 B.

3 ct. Isoc. staanandtead ace 150: OS yap ebréyepes (i.e. of Ocol) etre raw dyabiw obre raw
edrets, di)’ ee ae dwecev dumoielew, wore

3° ddgler dn dedvepe wepeylyveetea rosrus


CRITICAL APPRECIATIONS 87


it from whatever may assail it and give it pain, inasmuch as her infant is
undeveloped and helpless in itsclf. It resembles the mother who, having
brought her babe up and having armed him (for the battle of life), bids
him use-his weapons, and ward off the powers of evil.’ ‘Be sober, be
vigilant’, is the moral of the long exordium that the king in the story
delivers to his son Osiris, the heir to the throne, before he is translated
from the earth to his abode with the gods.

Obviously the proverb ‘God helps those who help themselves’ is
very much the view of Providence in general, shadowed in this allegory.
The strong common-sense of Synesius is always breaking through his
attempts at philosophic subtleties. The theological and metaphysical
problems involved in the notion of a Divine Providence, like the un-
solved mysteries of the origin and purpose of evil in the moral order of
things, have fascinated and baffled the most acute minds ever since
the dawn of religious and of speculative thought. In discussing such
a matter at all as Providence, the title of his allegorical story, Synesius
is touching upon all the most insoluble questions of his own time as of
ours. He is raising the issues of free-will versus predestination, of the
infinite goodness versus the inherent evil of the world, of the Omni-
potent Creator in the face of eternal sin.?, Whatever we may think of
the solutions which he seemingly points to in his myth, one thing we
must admit, namely that they are quite the reverse of the mystical,
for all the fantastic imagery of the hidden and the mysterious in which
his allegory is decked out. The study of character which runs through
it all, the assertion of the supreme force of individual and determined
action as the solution of the struggle between the good and evil elements
in the world’s history, of the incxtinguishable nature of inborn inherited
moral forces, all these matters bulk larger in his story than the disserta-
tions on gods and demons, or the suggestions thrown out on the abstract


3 Pe Prov, 1235 A.

2 PL. Leges, 8yb p, 904 a; Theat. 176; Tim. 48 a; Polit. 273 4; Viot. Ena. i. 8, 7.
Here again Synesius sceins to be more inspired by the imagery in Plato's Politicus
than by the later Neuplatonists. According to the Timucus, the Deity did not
create the primary matter as Plotinus makes the universal soul to do. Matcrial
things in Plato’s conception, as advanced in the Timacus and elsewhere, received
from tho Deity their order and beauty but not their existence. Sce Leibnitz,
Theodicée 1 20, quoted by Bouillet, i. 432.


88 INTRODUCTION


questions already alluded to. Syncsius, the man of action, is always
behind Synesius the philosopher, and in the work in question he may
be speaking in half-concealed form to personages in the background
who will have quite understood his message. For there is all too little
known about the inner history of the events he is here describing.

But his story is told gracefully enough. The scene is laid in a mythical
imaginary Thebes. We are introduced to the venerable King, to his
younger son, the amiable but too trusting and affectionate Osiris, and
to the elder son, the base and wicked Typho and his scheming, unscru-
pulous wife. We see how the disinterested, incorruptible, and generous
Osiris is circumvented by the evil machinations of his brother, how he
is driven from his kingdom, and how finally the gods themselves come
down from their blessed abode to bring him back in triumph. The
story concludes with some reflections on the philosophy of history, and
here again we discover a distinctly scientific trend of thought. Synesius,
despite all his-poetic vein of narrative, dismisses us in one of rationalism ;
he shows a clear conviction that the universe is governed by positive
law, in so far as the conception of positive law was possible in an age
in which experimental science was practically non-existent. He re-
minds us that we are all witnesses to the fact that in far distant coun-
tries, and in far distant ages, the same social and political phenomena
recur, the same general events in history are re-enacted. Why, he asks,
is this mevitable? Because, he replies, the same forces produce the
same consequences, wherever man has established himself; and this
again comes from the fact that all parts of the universe are inter-
dependent, and are therefore presumably under the same law. It
follows from this that heaven itself is not exempt, for heaven, the gods
included, is part of the universe. If celestial generation is the cause of
terrestrial, whatever happens in this sphere is the consequence of what
happens in that. The stars come back to their original points of depar-
ture after a cycle of years, as I understand him to imply in the last
chapter of Providence, and no one can doubt, he adds, that the same
forces which cause them to revolve in these vast orbits in a series of
endless repetition, produce likewise the same endless repetition in the
affairs of men. Now all] this is very interesting. It seems as if the
thinker was unconsciously stumbling upon a dim perception of the


CRITICAL APPRECIATIONS 89


universality of law in both the physical and social order in the universe,
that quite recent philosophers of our own day have secmed to us to be
evolving for the first time. It is difficult, of course, in reviewing the
comments of carlier philosophers, to avoid interpreting a great deal
said by them according to forms of thought which, founded upon
discoveries completely modern, have become so identified with our own
unconscious way of thinking, that we are apt unwittingly to attribute
to the early thinkers in question conclusions which were very far from
their minds and which they might have had some difficulty in under-
standing, even if by some miracle they could have been explained to
‘them. Be this as it may, the fact remains that Synesius whom we know
to have been a man devoted to the study of astronomy, as we see by
his letter to Paeonius, who apparently occupied himself with experi-
ments in the specific gravity of liquids, as we gather from the letter to
Hypatia concerning the hydroscopes, and who worked on the construc-
tion and invention of machines for siege warfare, seems to turn the
same bent of mind towards whatever appears otherwise inexplicable
to him in social, political, and even ethical phenomena. All this is
evidence of a robust intellect, of a mind that is not pronc to self-
mystification, of a nature that secks co-ordination in thought. He is
not satisfied to retire behind the shield of faith, and the only sword of
the spirit that he holds is a Greek one. Contemplation has its magni-
ficence for him, but it is ‘theoria’ in the sense in which the soul of any
explorer of the unknown might have been drawn to it. But the thinker
and inquirer is only too apt, in the case of Synesius, to fade into the
poet or the rhetorician at the very moment when he seems on the point
of revealing to us, once for all, more definitely worked out conclusions,
and when we think to hold him in our grasp, he turns like Protcus in
the great epic, to running water, to one of those rivulets possibly, which
descend, to use his own words, from his masters Plato and Aristotle.
‘I for my part’, he says in the Dio, ‘sing for myself alone: I sing to
these cypresscs before me, and this brook runs its course with waters
not measured out, not husbanded according to the clepsydra, nor
weighed out by the usher. If I have not come to the end of my song
as yet, I shall do so presently, and if not then, why, later... . but the


stream will run on long after I shall have ceased from my song; it will
abf-1 N


90 INTRODUCTION


ran by night and by day, until next year and for ever... . God at least
has given me this, to be without a master and free to range.’ (Dio,
1149, A-B.)

This passage illustrates very well the spirit in which he has written
his Dio. There is something very buoyant, something full of hope and
inspiration in this delightful essay on the value of literature and style,
and on their relation to the higher life of tte philosophic mind. Druon
and Crawford agree in placing the date of its composition in the year
403, not long, it would seem, after his marriage. His first son was soon
to be born, and we can easily imagine how the paternal heart, of which
he gives such touching, and even tragic evidence 1n his letters, must
have thrilled with the expectation that filled him at this period. “These
criticisms concerning Dio have occurred to me’, he writes, ‘in connexion
with this son of mine who is soon to be born; for it was at the moment
when I was perusing his works that the oracle prophesying the birth
of a son was revealed to me.’ This name Dio means very little to-day,
even to those fairly well-read in Greek literature, and is a case the more
to remind us of the uncertainty of the survival of any literary reputa-
tion. At the time in which Synesius wrote he seems to have been looked
upon as a great master of rhetoric, and it is this writer whom he has
selected as a guide for the budding talents of his son, when the time
should come for him to devote himself to literature. He seems to have
no doubt that he shall have a son to instruct worthy of his own powers.
And this is only another evidence that the vein of thought which we
encountered in Dreams was a reality to him, and a part of his nature;
the conception of a world in which the past and the future are indisting-
uishable, and where the presage of the future has the same authority
as the memory of the past. ‘Already’, he says, ‘I have the feelings of
a father; I long to live with my son, to have him by my side to instruct
him; he must know what I think of every writer and of every book; I
shall introduce my favourite authors to him, and criticize them one by
one. And among them Dio of Prusa shall have a foremost place, both.
for the style of his work and for their substance... . my son will learn
to love him, although without placing him in the same rank as the real
kings of philosophy.”


3 Dio, p. 1124.


CRITICAL APPRECIATIONS ot )


All this work was written in the spting-time of hope, and perhaps
owes some of its charm to this. He was, alas, destined to lose three
sons, one after another, and the last of his letters, if we may trust
Druon’s chronology, addressed to his beloved Hypatia, contains only
sorrowing words. ‘For me, bodily weakness has followed in the wake
of mental suffering. The remembrance of my departed children is
consuming my forces little by little. Only so long should Synesius have
lived as he was still without experience of the evils of life. It is as if a
torrent long pent up had burst upon mc in full volume, and as if the
sweetness of life had vanished. May I cither cease to live, or cease to
think of the tomb of my sons!" But in Dio we are in the full flood tide.
Nothing but vistas full of promise offer themselves to the mind’s eye
of the author who is approaching the cherished joy of the earth, and
before whom the portals of the great temple of the Muses seem to lic
open, as he approaches, ‘parched with thirst and fainting from the toil
of the arduous way.” It is here that Calliope receives him, he tells us
in the Dio, here that she gives him and all like him, rest, here that she
conducts her votary to the flowering meadows, and to a banquet of
the Athenian graces of speech, and thus prepares him for the ultimate
contest. ‘For to man the Divinity has given to be happy in the use of
his tongue, and (through specch) to be that one who shall attain the
goal of philosophy.’ But his gaiety of spirit is so great that he feels he
must ask for our indulgence. ‘The sallies of the playful’, he reminds
us, ‘know no bounds; they are like the smiling plains, like freedom
itself.’

Synesius, the gay and laughing philosopher, shines on us agz.in in the
pages of the Praise of Baldness. Here his predecessor, Dio oi Prusa,
is the foil of his wit. Dio had written a eulogy on Hair, in the rhetorical
taste of an age when any paradox in literature was prized, and when
the more absurd the subject, the greater honour the writer had in
displaying his ingenuity in handling it. Dio praises hair as the scat of
man’s might and intellect. Synesius, centurics later, reverses the
decision, and extols baldness. It will be noticed that he never loses an
opportunity in his letters and elsewhere, of deriding the sophists and
would-be philosophers by whom he is surrounded, for the ostentation

4 Ep. 16. ? Dio, p. 3345.


92 INTRODUCTION


which they make of their beards, and men who wear long hair are
always the objects of his anathemas. The blade of his wit seems to cut
both ways. The following are some of his images: The bald head
approaches the sphere, the most perfect shape known to us; it is there-
fore the form divine. The stars above us are the dwelling-places of
souls, and so, here below, the heads of men, and the most hairless heads
resemble most the stars. The comets, conversely, are the only astral
bodies adorned with hair, and these are stars of an inferior order, for
they shine out for a few brief months, and then disappear for ever.
And so he rings the changes on his theme, until even the heavenly
bodies can no more escape the shafts of his wit than the army of
Alexander, which he tells us was routed by the Persians, who pursued
their enemies, and caught them by their long flowing hair, until the
great Macedonian drew off his forces, and saved the fortunes of the day
by handing his troops over to the barbers. Thus he diverts his readers
by leading them through an amusing labyrinth of absurdities, not
without wit and a decidedly original vein of satire all his own. Like his
forerunner, Julian, he shows the powers of the satirist, but his satire
is more kindly than Julian’s. We miss the biting sardonic vein that
rans through the Afisopogon and the Caesars. Julian’s touch is heavier
than that of Synesius. He was everything but a poet.

That Synesius was a poet by temperament, there can be very little
doubt, but his Hymns fail to display this side of his nature to the best
advantage. One reason for this seems to be that he has tied himself
down to a metre that is scarcely fitted for conveying the mingling of
religious sentiment and philosophic or theological divagations that he
wishes to.express. The metres resembling those of the Anacreontea which
he employs were the form of verse used by the Gnostics, whose sect, or
rather sects, for there were innumerable forms of them, had long fallen
from the important position which, as we have seen, they had occupied
in the days of Valcntinus or Bardaisan. Nevertheless they had left
a certain literature behind them and they still perhaps continued to
write. The short lines of verse, then, were the official form so to speak
of Gnosticism.

Here we are faced with another problem. Why should Synesius have
adopted a manner of versification that would have stamped him in the


CRITICAL APPRECIATIONS 93


eyes of the world as a Gnostic? There is no allusion to Gnosticism in his
works, but this is not the only trace of the Gnostics that we find in them.
Inspeaking of Providence, Crawford makes the following very just obser-
vations (p. 80):


*‘Synesius extremcly complicates his psychology by maintaining that
souls spring from two different sources. Some, he says, come from above;
some from below. There are, therefore, those which are fundamentally
good, and those which are fundamentally bad. The destiny of souls is to
return to the region whence first they came. The bad lodge in suitable
hiding-places; the good, if they have preserved their character and kept
themselves free from pollution during the time of their earthly sojourn,
flow back along the same course as that by which they came, and are re-
absorbed into their proper source. .. . The origin of Typhos and his final
doom exhibit a belief in the baldest dualism. The Persian doctrine of an
almost equal Ormuzd and Ahrimazn, the Spirits of Light and Darkness ever
in conflict from the very first, is not more opposed to the Neoplatonic con-
viction of unity in all things than Synesius’ tale of Osiris and Typhos.’


He further very pertinently remarks in a foot-notc, ‘Is there here a trace
of Alexandrine Gnosticism? One is remindcd of two of the three classes
into which Valentine divided men—the material, who could not be
saved, and the spiritual, who could not perish. The third, the psyche,
made up an intermediate class. Their salvation or perdition depended
on their works. (Robertson, vol. i, p. 79.)’ After showing the contra-
dictions to the doctrines of Plotinus and his followers that this way of
thinking involves, he expresses the opinion that Synesius, both in this
work On Providence and elsewhere, ‘is generally displaying a view of
his own.’ In this I quite agree with him in so far as thinking that this
was undoubtedly his view, and one certainly not shared by Plotinus or
any of his followers. I have always maintained that the Cyrenean
philosopher was not a Neoplatonist in the common acceptation of the
word, but an eclectic who took his own line directly from Plato, and
simply gathered into his net whatever other. doctrines pleased him,
He is not at one with Plotinus in any way, although he sometimes
quotes him, and shows his influence in certain passages of Dreams.
But there seems to me to be more than a trace of Gnosticism in his
conception of the source of the souls. It is practically identical with
the doctrine of Valentinus set forth in Crawford’s note, and icads


94 INTRODUCTION


one to suppose that Synesius had woven views of the Gnostics into his
own system of philosophy. Now when one considers that he deliber-
ately chose a form of metre stamped with the seal of Gnosticism, to
express his religious aspirations, and, more than this, that he embodied
in his prayers, for such the Hymns really are, not merely the outward
literary form dear to the Gnostics, but a current of ideas that can come
from no other source, the case seems very strong for conceiving of him
to a certain extent as a Gnostic. That the Christians of his own time
would have regarded these sentiments in the Hymns as orthodox
expressions of their faith, is more than doubtful; that the Gnostics
would have found anything to cavil at in them is less so. To address
the Father in such terms as ‘Thou art the Male, Thou art the Female’,
might have seemed as blasphemous to the orthodox of his own time as
to the orthodox of to-day, but it is quite in a line with the amazing
theogony of Valentinus. The Hymns again are impregnated with a
spirit that is not Greek, and which suggests the oriental imagery that
one would expect from the sect who, though calling themselves Chris-
tians, were originally followers of. the shadowy figure of Simon the
Magus. There is a breath in them that is difficult to trace to its sources,
but that any one must have felt in reading them, and which marks them
off from the other works of the author as containing quite. another
inspiration than that which we are accustomed to meet in the letters and
essays, but which would be easily accounted for on the supposition
that he was deep in the litcrature of the Gnostics. Synesius so fre-
quently comes back to his view that the ‘secrets’ of the higher know-
ledge should not be divulged, that we ought to have no great difficulty
in admitting that some of this higher knowledge might have been
founded on Grrostic literature. These continual mysterious allusions
to philosophic truths that must be kept from the knowledge of the
profane, certainly need explanation, and I offer this one, though with
diffidence. The idea of this cryptic form of knowledge recurs persis-
tently in his works. He gently reproaches his dearest friend Herculian
for betraying to others some of these secrets that he has imparted to
him. (Ep. 143.) ‘You have not kept your promise, my dear friend’, he
- says, ‘that you would not reveal those things which ought to remain
hidden.’ In another letter to Herculian he writes of himself as one who


CRITICAL APPRECIATIONS 95


holds philosophy to be the most unutterable of unutterable things,
and further on he adds, a propos of some philosophic point which he
has in mind, ‘I cannot believe that it is a good thing to confide secrets
of this sort to paper, for it is not the business of a letter to hold its
peace ; its nature is to speak to the first comer. .. . The inspired voice
says that it is not right for the unpurificd to handle that which is pure.’
(Ep. 137.) It wil be noticed that there is no exaltation or spirit of
mysticism in his allusions to these fruits of philosophy that are not to
be plucked for the ignorant. He speaks of them in a rational. way
enough,as of things that are quite communicable to others than those of
the inner circle, but which, notwithstanding, should not be communi-
cated. The same voice is audible in the //ymns,as in the following lines:
*Peace, audacious lyre, I entreat, pause; reveal not the mystcries to the
people at large, mysterieswhich are celebrated without initiation; gothou
and tell of the things here below; silence covereth those above’ (H. 1.)

As we advance in the Hymns, the grim spectre of matter and its
demons overshadows us. He prays to the Unknowable, Unspeakable
Father to chase away from his soul the hound of the soil, the demon of
earth. ‘Let him flee, let him leave me, the demon of matter, the power
of sufferings, who builds his fortress-wall against the path that leadeth
above, who violateth the aspirations that seek God... . grant to my
soul oblivion of its passions to the end that I may complete the life that
comes with destiny after the chains that weigh us down to the carth,
a life purified of matter, even unto Thy halls and unto Thy bosom,
whence outwelleth the fountain of the soul.’ (H. IV.) But if Synesius
had been influenced by the example of Gnostic writers, it must always
be borne in mind that Gnosticism had an influence on the early Christian
Church itself. Its literature was rich in hymns, and once Synesius had
adopted this form of poetical expression, it was inevitable that he should
be attracted to these examples, even if for no other reason than that
of following a model which lay ready to his hand. To raise the question,
as has so often been done, of the orthodoxy of Syncsius, or to specu-
late as to whether he could be regarded as essentially a Christian
writer, is to involve oneself in contradiction, because the factors of
the problem are themselves uncertain. What I mean is that, agcord-
ing to the doctrine of the Neoplatonists, he was scarcely. one of them-


96 INTRODUCTION


selves, nor was he orthodox according to the doctrines of Christianity,
if we take the Hymns as expressing his real tenets. Whether he was
orthodox from the point of view of the Gnostics it would be impossible
tosay. There were such innumerable ramifications of Gnostic thought,
and so many sects of them, that the term ‘orthodoxy’ could have no
meaning in regard to them. They were like the ‘two and seventy
jarring sects’ mentioned in Omar Khayyam’s poem. But the followers
of Plotinus had a more clear-cut conception of their belicfs and aims, -
although it had considerably changed, as we have scen, since the
death of the founder of their system, and had sadly deteriorated. It
had become the opponent of Christianity, and its struggle to maintain
its life had tended to crystallize its conceptions into an unmistakable
form of religion (for I can see it in no other light), a form that has
captivated certain thinking religious minds to such an extent that
the formerly despaired-of reconciliation between Neoplatonism and
Christianity is again talked of to-day in certain quarters as the only
salvation for the Church. Such a thinker as Eucken has expressed him-
self to this effect very clearly, and a high authority to-day on the works
of Plotinus, not merely sees nothing irreconcilable between the doctrine
of the pagan philosopher and that of Christianity, but even goes so far
as to say that it is of the first importance to the religious life of
Christians. As to the soundness of all this, I express no opinion; I am
only pointing to facts which are significant of the trend of a certain
section of religious sentiment to-day. After an interval of sixtcen cen-
turies the same dream of a millenium has begun to be an obsession
again, and this to minds of a high order. Whatever may be said on
the merits of this conception, although syncretism in the precise sense
that it existed in the first centuries after Christ may not be operative
Bail callaiabs in an altered form is still living. It no longer
; to construct a mosaic of beliefs taken from different forms of
religion,but rather to discover an identity of belief in ascending to the
metaphysical root of each. The Timaeus of Plato, the Enneads of
Plotinus, the Gospel of St. John, would (there is no other explanation
of the statements made to us by the school in question), come under
a common source of inspiration. Could the position be better stated
than in the words of Ogniben, the Pope’s Legate, in Browning’s play,


CRITICAL APPRECIATIONS 97


A Soul's Tragedy: ‘New truths, old truths, Sirs, there is nothing new
possible to be revealed to us in the moral world: we know all we
shall ever know; and it is for simply reminding us, by their various
respective expedicnts, how we do know this and the other matter, that
men get called prophets, pocts, and the like. A philosopher's life is
spent in discovering that, of the half-dozen truths he knew when a
child, such an one ts a lie, as the world states it in set terms; and then,
after a weary lapse of years, and plenty of hard thinking, it becomes
a truth again after all, as he happens newly to consider it and view
it in a different relation with the others; and so he restates it, to the
confusion of somebody else in good time. As for adding to the original
stock of truths,—impossible.’ This seems to chime very well with
the reflection made by St. Augustine, to the effect that all the great
truths embodied in Christianity had always been known to man since
the very beginning of the world, and that the revelation of Christ
was only the Divine seal and endorsement of them."

There are two tendencies observable to-day amongst the modernists
in the Church, but they rather point in the same direction. The one is
towards this incorporation of the doctrines of the Neoplatonic philo-
sophers, the other towards the formal renunciation of the old-time
teleological explanation of the universe, and the adoption of the evolu-
tionary conception which has sprung from the discoveries of modern
science. The protagonists of this double movement again seem to show
a certain sympathy for each others’ views, so that a new coalition of
thought in regard to religious doctrines is a possibility of the future.
Such a movement would again attempt a reconciliation between the
rationalist point of view and the theological. Theology, which Huxley
in the nineteenth century described angrily as a ‘false science’, would
be rehabilitated in the eyes of the rationalists and evolutionists of the
twentieth. Christian and Hellenic theology would be consolidated on
some new basis which would admit also of the cardinal principles of
modern science, the principle of development, and the universal reign


4 ‘Neque tunc sane defucrunt iusti, qui deum pie quaererent et superbiam
diaboli vincerent, cives illius sanctae civitatis. .. cuius ecclesiae membra erant
etiam illi sancti, quamvis in hac vita fucrint ante quam secundum carnem Christus
dominus nasceretur.” Augustine, De Catechizandis Rudibus, xix. 33.


2878-3 re)


98 INTRODUCTION


of positive law in the forces of the universe. Again, we should be in
sight of the millennium in which strife has no part.

- Now all this contains a lesson in regard to our estimate of Synesius.
If the minds of churchmen and prelates in the present day can find
religious doctrines and beliefs so malleable, is it surprising that any onc
who was first a philosopher and finally an ecclesiastic in the fourth
century should show similar tendencies? Griitzmacher has described
him as a ‘religious phenomenon’, but I fail to sce that he was more so
in all essentials than the extreme modernists of to-day, or the Christian
scientists who resemble in many respects the gnostics. To ask whether
Synesius was orthodox, in the sense in which orthodoxy was understood
at his own time, is easily answered by referring to the letter in which
he informs the primate of Alexandria that he makes various reserva-
tions, and sufficiently important ones, concerning the dogmas of the
Church. Nothing could be clearer. He admits, like an honest man,
that he is not orthodox. This, however, did not prevent Theophilus
from insisting on his taking holy orders; nor was there anything in
these reservations as to the Platonic doctrines which he held, that
would compromise his position as a Christian in the eyes of the modern-
ist of to-day, or, from their point of view, render him unfit for a
bishopric. History is only repeating itself if we look a little below the
surface. In the work on Providence, as we have seen, he attempts to
reconcile Divine intervention with the laws of nature, and here again
he approaches currents of thought of the present day. He reduces the
‘action of Providence’ to an occasional intervention that takes the form
of the introduction into the world of souls kindred to the divine,—to
the ‘gods’ in the story—inspired men we should call them perhaps; but
the moral, as I have pointed out, is that man’s real Providence is in his
own hands, though he is, to a certain extent, predestined by his inheri-
tance, or as we should say, by heredity. If I am right in my reading of .
the allegory, nothing could be more rationalistic. He is evidently at
grips with the same problems that areoccupying us to-day, andalthough

® Certain scientists of the prescnt day considcr that there is a certain diminution
' of energy in the universe. ... It is like a force sct in motion by some initial impulse.
Synesius in the Egyptian Tele represents it as a machine whose mcchanism,


left to itsclf, deteriorates; the ‘gods’ have to revisit it at rare intcrvals to regu-
late it, &c.


CRITICAL APPRECIATIONS 99
he does not give us a definite solution, we can easily see in what direc-
tion his mind points.

I should be almost inclined, therefore, after weighing the somewhat
contradictory evidence that his works contain, to describe Synesius as
a fourth-century modernist, but one whose literary taste and imagina-
tive temperament are always Icading him into by-ways of imagery
derived from other religions than his professed one. This again we have
ample precedent for in more modern times. There is an unmistakable
pagan clement in Dante, who not only invokes the supreme deity of
paganism in a passage beginning ‘O susnmo Giove’, but continues ‘Che
fosti in terra per noi crucifisso’, and the Lusiad of Camoens is full of the
mingling of Christian and pagan imagery. Milton himself is not exempt
from this confusion of the imagination. ‘What is really disconcerting
to the student of Synesius is not so much his mingling of pagan imagery
with Christian, as his apparent ignorance, or studied neglect, of Chris-
tian theology, and his silence in reference to any of the works of the
Greek Fathers of the Church. It is difficult to imagine that he had
never seen any of the works of Clement of Alexandria, of St. Basil, or
of St. John Chrysostom, and it is difficult to understand why he seldom
makes any allusion to the gospels or the Pauline epistles, although, in
the impeachment of Andronicus and elsewhere, he not merely quotes
the Old Testament, but, what is more important, scems thoroughly
imbued with its spirit. In this work at.all events he speaks with the
voice of a Hebrew prophet. It is true, on the other hand, that his
silence regarding the Hellenic wniters of his own century, such as Julian,
Themistius, or Himerius, is equally unaccountable, particularly when
we consider that he adopted a system of clausulac that seems to have
been introduced by these two rhetoricians. If Synesius was some
apocryphal writer, whose date we were attempting to fix by internal
evidence derived from his works, and if these were not full of historical
allusions that would be conclusive in any case, we might, by following
the line of argument pursued by Rhys Roberts and other commentators
on the Pseudo-Longinus, very well decide that he could not have
belonged to the fourth century at all, for he quotes none of its writers.
This is only another instance of the baffling problems that beset us.

But as to the origin of his inspiration, nothing could be clearer. It


100 INTRODUCTION


rests upon Plato. This docs not preclude the influence at times of
Plotinus and of the Gnostics; but the main current seems to me plain
enough. Whatever his sources were, he tried to bring them into a closer
touch with his own age. However the matter may be regarded in our
own day, there is no doubt that the Greek Fathers of the Church were
conscious of some inspiration that distinguished Plato and his works
from other pagan literature. Later on, as the world approached the
Middle Ages, this influence was obscured by that of Aristotle, whom
the schoolmen, little imaginative and inclined to formalism, turned to
as their standard of knowledge. But the necessities of the Church,
struggling for the domination as well as the illumination of the souls
of men, had forced it into a war with friend as well as foe, and its con-
sciousness of an inspiration closely resembling its own, though not
identical, that runs through the works of Plato, had to be suppressed
in the polemics which the clashing with Neoplatonism gave rise to.
There had been also a side of the philosophy of Zeno and the Stoa,
which had long been preparing the ground for the fruition of the Chris-
tian ideal, in the perception that Zeno first gave voice to, of the equal
claims of all men to justice, whether Greek or Barbarian, and the
complete separation of religious from national or racial ideals; the first
conception of an affinity of all men on purely moral grounds that led
to the Christian conception of a brotherhood in Christ. An interesting
document concerning the international spirit of early Christianity may
be found in the letter to Diognetus, a work of uncertain authorship that
was erroneously ascribed to Justin, a writer of the second century, but
which is possibly of earlier date. Speaking of the Christian communities
he says:

“The Christians are separated from other men, neither by frontiers nor
language nor customs. . . . They have, each one of them, a country of their
own, but they are as it were sojourncrs in it... . Every foreign land is their
own country and every country is to them a foreign land. . . . They say
prayers on the earth, but they are citizens of the heavens; they are born in


the flesh, but they live not according to the flesh... . In a word, what the
soul is to the body, the Christians are to the world’ (c. 5).


Can any one reading this fail to be reminded of the last words in the
ninth book of the Republic (§92): |


CRITICAL APPRECIATIONS 1or


Glaucon, ‘I understand; you mean that he will be a ruler in the city of
which we are the founders, and which exists in idea only; for I do not believe
that there is such an one anywhere on carth.’

Socrates. ‘In heaven there is laid up a pattern of it, methinks, which he who
desires may behold, and beholding may take up his abode there. But
whether such an one exists, or ever will exist in fact, is no matter; for he
(i.e. the just man) will live after the manner of that city, and of no other.’


Again, could anything be clearer than the unity of inspiration to be
found in these two passages, the one by the Christian writer of the
second century, the other by Plato himself?

We have now madc the pilgrimage of a thousand years shadowed in
the last words of the Republic. We have passed through the portico
of the Stoa; aloof with Epicurus, we have looked down upon the ‘flam-
ing ramparts of the world’; we have dissolved ourselves with the
atomists, we have reconciled the Hebrew and the Hellenic inspiration
with Philo, we have accepted universal doubt with Pytrho, we have
railed with Clement, and floated on the waves of ecstasy with Plotinus;
we have been amazed at the fantastic dreams of Valentinus and Basil-
ides, we have stood by while Proclus was calmly blowing on the expiring
embers of Hellenic thought at Athens.


*So to save the sced of fire, that he might not perforce scek it elsewhere’ ;


we have marked his successors Damascius and Simplicius, still subtly
commenting on Aristotle, and then after the great blow, we have seen
the smouldering torch passed on to the theologians in Byzantium,
where, with Psellus, Platonism revived in the tenth century. Again the
words of the Republic surge up irresistibly: ‘Adeimantus added: *’Has
no one told you of the torch-race on horseback in honour of the goddess
which will take place in the evening?” ‘With horses?” I replied; “that
is a novelty. Will horsemen carry torches and pass them one to another
during the race?”’’

Even at the risk of being taken for disciples of Proclus, and of laying
ourselves open to the anathema that Gibbon hurled at one whose life
‘exhibits a deplorable picture of the second childhood of human reason’,
we shall, I think, read into these words something of a prophetic nature.
For in all the intricate web of the tangled skein that we have been
seeking to unravel, the golden thread woven by Plato is always present,


102 INTRODUCTION


hidden at one moment, at another glittering in the sun, that sun which
to him symbolized ‘the idea of good . . . parent of light and of the Lord
of light in the visible world, and the immediate source of reason and
troth in the world of mind’.

Ah, masters of theology, of metaphysics, whether in Athens or
Alexandria, in Antioch or Byzantium, you have explored the heights,
you have sounded the depths, you have peopled the chasms of the earth
with demons and have drawn down souls from the stars. Has anything
appeared on your horizon that was not first illumined by the lamp
lit by Plato in the city that was once the ‘eye of Greece’? We are again
on the old road, the road that leads from Eleusis to Athens, the road
that had always bridged the chasm which separated the East from the
West. Could Svnesius have made the pilgrimage of a thousand years,
not in the shadowy region spoken of by Plato, but upon this earth, he
would have found himself in the new springtime of the master he had
followed, at the first budding growth of the Renaissance of Hellenic
thought in Italy, in the world of Ficino, of Pico della Mirandola. The
drama that he speaks of in De Providentia is still moving towards an
unknown destination. Can we, in these later days, do better than to
take his advice, ‘to sit quietly and watch its different acts as they
develop successively before our eyes upon the stage’?

“Time, the incorruptible witncss,
Comes to enlighten us in the end.’


BIBLIOGRAPHY
A. SYNESIUS.


(a) Editions.


Synesii Epistolae. ... Venetiis, Aldus, 1499.

Synesus, Episcopus Cyrenensis: Opuscula. Parisiis, Adr. Turnebus, 1§$3.

Synesti Cyrenaci Episcopi Epistolae, Parisiis, apud Marcum Orry, 1605,

Synesii Episcopi Cvrenes Opera quae extant omnia... interprete Dionysiv
Petavio, Lutetiac Parisiorum, Drovart, 1631, ke.

Synesii Cyrenaci Orationes et Homilianiom Fragmenta, cd. Krabinger, Lands:
hut, 1850.

(Reprint of Petavius), Migne, Patrologia Graeca, tom. Ixvi. Paris, 1859
(1864).


Epistolographi Gracci: recensuit, recognov it... R. Hercher. Paris, Didot,
1873.


Hymni Metrici, ed. ill. J. Flach. Tubingen, 1875.
Synesii Cyrenensis hymni metrici....N. Terzaghi. Napoli, t915.


(6) Translations.

Synesius, Praise of Baldness, Englished by Abr. Fleming. London, J. H.
Denham, 1579.

Guvres de Syncsius, cvéque de Ptolémais dans la Cyrinaique au commencee
ment du V¢ siccle, traduitcs entiérement, pour la premiére fois, en fran-
gais et précédées d’une ctude biographique et littéeraire par H. Druon.

aris, Hachette, 1878.

Lettres de Synésius traduites pour la premiére fois et suivics d'études sur les
dernicrs moments de I'Hellénisme, par F. Lapatz. Paris, Didier, 1370.

Alan Stevenson, The ten Hymns of Svnesius, Bishop of Cyrene, in English
verse. Printed for private circulation, 1865.

The Letters of Synesius of Cyrene, translated into English with Introduction
and Notes by Augustine FitzGerald. Oxford, tg20,


(c) Monographs and Articles.
Anon, ‘Letters of Synesius’ (London Quarterly Review, vol. Ix (t883}, pp.


73)
@. 1. Badeiins, °O Luvdosos IT: Muriiger, 7 Wros } reps Ocov delovodiay Sduccaka rod Fi
émoxdnov [rod paidos ev 1H Kupnvaixg. «vy Kuworarrerovirdla, 1875.
J. BR. Asmus, Synesius und Div Chrysustomus. Byzantinische Zeitschrift, ix
(1900), pp. 85-151.
I. A. Boysen, Philosophumena Synesii Cyrenensis. Halae, 1714.
J. B. Bury, History of the Later Roman Empive, 1923, i. 128 seqq.


104 BIBLIOGRAPHY


Chiedenius, Theologumena Synesii Cyrenensis. Halae, 1714.

E. T. Clausen, Commentatio de Synesio philosopho, Libyae Pentapoleos
Metropolita, Copenhagen, 1833.

W. S. Crawford, Svnesius the licllene. London, Rivingtons, 1901.

H. Drvon, Etudes sur la vie et les wuvves de Synésius, évéque de Plolémals dans
la Cyvinaique au commencement du V¢ siecle. Paris, 1859.

N. Festa, ‘La Strategia di Giovanni’ (Synes. ep. 104) (Studi Italiani di
Fulologia Classica, 1893).

Flach, ‘Studien zu den Hymnen des Bischofs Synesius’ (Mus. 332, 1877).

W. Fritz, Die Briefe des Bischofs Synesios von Kyrene, ein Beitrag sur
Geschichte des Altizismus im 1V. und V. Jahrhundert. Leipzig, 1898.

——, ‘Die Handschriftliche Cberlicferung der Bricfe des Bischofs Synesios’
(Abk. d. philos-philol. Kt. dev hgl. bay. Akad. der Wiss., Bd. xxiii
@finchen, 1909), pp. 319-98).

——, ‘Unechte Synesiosbriefe’ (Byzantinische Zeitschrift, Bd. xiv (1905),
Pp. 75-86).

E. Gaiser, Des Synesius von Cyrene dgyptische Evsdhlungen oder tiber die
Vorsehung. Wolfenbiittel, 1886.

A. Gardner, Synesius of Cyrene, Philosopher and Bishop. London, S.P.C.K.,


1886.

Grégoire et Collombet, Hymmes de Synésius, évéque de Ptolémats. Paris,
1839.

G. Griitzmacher, Synesios von Kyrene, ein Charakterbild aus dem Untergang
des Hellenentums. Leipzig, Deichert, 1913.

T. R. Halcomb, Dictionary of Christian Biography. Art. Synesius.

A. Hauck, Welche griechischen Autoren dev klassischen Zeit kennt und
benul=t Synesius von Cyrene? Friedland in Mccklenburg, 1911.

J. L. Heiberg, Fra Hellas (pp. 9-122 [Synesios]}), Copenhagen, 1920.

A. J. Kiecfincr, Svnesius von Cyrene, der Philosoph und Dichter, und sein
angeblicher Vorlchalt bei seiner Wahl und Weihe sum Bischof von

. Ptolemais. Paderborn, 3903.

P. Klimek, Avitische Bemerkungen sum Texte der prosaischen Schriften des
Synesius. Breslau, 1891.

H. Koch, ‘Synesius von Cyrene bei seiner Wahl und Weihe zum Bischof’
(Histovisches Jahrbuch, Bd. xxiii [1902], pp. 751-74).

B. Kolbe, Der Bischof Synesius von Cyrene als Physiker und Astronom.

"Berlin, 1850.

-———, Der Bischof Synesius von Cyrene, oder Forschungen auf dem Gebietes
dey Erdkunde und Geschichte dey Libyschen Pentapolis, &c., 1. Teil,
Berlin, 1850.

F. X. Kraus, Obseruationes Criticas in Synesii Cyrenaei Epistolas, 1863.

——, ‘Studien iber Synesios von Cyrene’ (Theologische Quartalschrift, Bd.
xlvii (1865), pp. 381-448, 537-600; Bd. xlviii [1866], pp. 85-129).


BIBLIOGRAPHY 10§


W. Lang, Das Traumbuch von Synesius von Kyrene. Tibingen, 1926.

F, Lapatz (Revue Critique, t. vi (1878), pp. 241-3).

L. Malten, Ayvene: Sagengeschichtliche und historische Untersuchungen,
Berlin, 1gtt.

J. H. Mandoul, De Synesio Ptolemaensi Episcopo et Pentapolis Defensore.
Paris, 1899.

C. Martha, ‘Un évéque-pocte au V8 sidcle’ (Revue Européenne, t. xi [1860],
PP. 324-42).

F, Martroye, ‘L’Asile ct la Législation impériale du IV¢ au VI siécle.’
(Mémoires de la Socicté nationale des Antiquaives de France, e¢rie VIII.
tome v, Paris, 1918, pp. 159-246.)

Th. Momnisen, Historische Schriften, iii. 292, seq.

J. C. Naber, ‘Ad Synesii Epistulas’ (Afnemosyne, Bd. xxii (1894), pp. 93-
124).

A. Nieri, ‘La Cirenaica nel secolo quinto, giusta le Icttere di Sincsio’ (Ri-
vista di Filologia e d’Istruzione classica, xxi (1892), fasc. 4-6, pp. 220-97.)

K. Praechter, ‘Richtungen und Schulen in Neoplatonismus.’ (Gexethliakon
for Carl Robert, Berlin, 1910, pp. 144-5.)

C. Schmidt, Synesii philosophumena eclectica. Halle, 1889.

Schneider, De vila Synesii philosophi et episcopi. Grimmae, 1876.

O. Seeck, ‘Studicn zu Synesios’ (Philologus, Bd. lii (1894), pp. 442-83).

R. Sollert, Die Sprichworter bei Synesios von Kyrene, 2 Teile. Augsburg,
1909-10.

J. Stighmayr, Zeitschrift fiir katholische Theologie, xxxviii (1914), pp. 509-63.

N. Terzaghi, ‘Syncsios’ (Alene e Roma, Jan. 1907).

——, (Studi Italiani di Filologia Classica, vol. xii (t904), pp. 181-237;
vol. xviii [1910], pp. 32-40; vol. xix (1912)}).

-——, (Didaskalcion, vol. i (1912), pp. 11-29, 205-25, 314-360).

——, ‘Studi sugli inni di Sinesio’. (Rivista indu-greco-italica di filologia,
lingua, antichitd, 1921, pp. 11-25 of fasc. 1 and 2, pp. 1-35 of fasc. 3
and 4, vi. 1922, pp. 1-27.)

-——, ‘Synesii Cyrenensis Hymni metrici® Aiti d.v. Accademia di
ad rcheologia, Letteve ¢ Belle Arti, Naples, N.S., iv, 1916, Parte anda, pp.
63-12}.

——, L'Epistola 159 di Sinesio. Nota presentata dal Socio D. Com-
paretti. Reale Accademia dei Lincei.

-——, ‘Sincsio di Cirenc’. (Alene e Roma Anno xx [1917], n. 227, 218, 219.)

——, Synesiana. 3. Due codd. Ambrosiani degli Inni di Sinesio. Firenze,
191f.

——, Synesiana. 4. La tradizione manoscritta degli Inni di Sinesio.
Firenze, 1913.

——, Sul Commento di Niceforo Gregora al Sinesio. Firenze, 1904.

——, La Scelta della Vita. Firenze, 1921.


sats P


106 BIBLIOGRAPHY


C. Vellay, Etudes sur les Hymnes de Synésius de Cyvéne. Paris, Leroux, 1904.

R. Volkmann, Synesius von Cyrene. Berlin, 1869.

U. v. Wilamowitz-Mdllendorf, ‘Die Hymnen des Proklos und Synesios’
(Sitzungsberichte dey hgl. preuss. Ahad. dey Wiss., Jhrg. 1907, pp.
272-95).

Cw . Analecta sacra et profana’ (Festgabe far H. Grauert, Freiburg,
1910, pp. 2-4).

F. von Woess, Das Asylwesen Agyptens, &c., Munich 1924. (Appendix by
E. Schwartz.)

G. Rauschen, Grundrviss dey Patrologie, 89 Aufl. (Freiburg i. B., 1926),
§ 67, p. 297 f.

B.: GENERAL
(a) Anctent Authorities.

Claudii Claudiani Carmina: recogn. J. Koch. Leipzig, 1893.

Dionis Prusaensis, guem vocant Chrysostomum, quae extant omnia edidit
J- de Arnim. 2 vols. Berol. 1893-6.

Eunapius in Miiller’s Fragmenta Historicorum Graecorum, vol. iv, pp. 7-46.

Eusebius’ Kirchengeschichte, bearb. von E. Schwartz u. Th. Mommsen.
3 vols. Leipzig, 1903-9.

St. John Chrysostom, Opera Omnia, ed. B. de Montfaucon. Paris, 1718-38.

Philostorgius’ Kirchengeschichte, hrsg. von J. Bidez. Leipzig, 1913.

Socrates: Ecclesiastica Historia, ed. R. Hussey, Oxonii, 1853, or Migne,
Patrologia Graeca, vol. Ixvii (Paris, 1864).

Sozomenus: Ecclesiastica Historia, ed. H. de Valois, Paris, 1659-73, and
1677, ox Migne, Patrologia Graeca, vol. xvii (Paris, 1864).

Zosimus: Historia Nova, &c. Oxonii, 1679; ed. Lipsiae, 1784.


(b) Modern Authorstes.


S. Angus, The Environment of Early Christianity. London, 1914.
O. Bardenhewer, Geschichte dey althirchlichen Literatur, Bd. iv, § 48, pp.
810-22 (Freiburg i. B., 1924).

G. Barraconi, Nuora Antologia, Fasc. 986, 16 January 1913, pp. 288-96.

M. Berthelot, Collection des anciens alchimistes grecs. Paris, 1887-8.

Bouillet, Les Ennéades de Plotin, traduction, Paris, 1857.

J. Brucker, Histoive critique de la Philosophie. Paris, 1766 (vol. iii, pp.
507-21).

W. Cave, Scriptorum Ecclesiasticorum historia litevaria ... Basle, 1741-5.

W. von Christ, Griechische Litteraturgeschichte, 5 Aufl. Bd. ii (2) v. O. Stahlin
Qlanchen, 1914), pp. 1167-1171, also 6 Aufl. 1920.

F. M. Cornford, From Religion to Philosophy. London, 1912.


BIBLIOGRAPHY 107


A. and M. Croiset, Histoive de la Littérature grecque, t. v, pp. 1043-9. Paris,
1901,

F. Cumont, Les Religions Orientales dans le paganisme romain. Paris, 1906.

J. Darling, Cyclopacdia Bibliographica. London, 1854-9.

E. De Faye, De l’Originalité de la Philosophie Chrétienne de Clément
d’ Alexandrie.

L. Duchesne, Histoire ancienne de l’Eglise, tom. iii. Paris, 1908.

J. A. Fabricius, Bibliotheca Graeca, vol. viii, pp. 221-48. Hamburg, 1717.

T. R. Glover, Life and Letters in the Fourth Century. Cambridge, 1901.

H. Guyot, L’Infinité Divine depuis Philon le Juif jusqu'’d Plotin. Paris,
Alcan, 1906.

A. von Harnack, The Mission and Expansion of Christianity, 2 vols.
London, 1908.

W. R. Inge, The Philosophy of Plotinus, 2 vols. London, 1918.

S. MacKenna, Plotinus, The Ethical Treatises ... translated from Greek by

S. M. 4 vols. (London, 1917-26).

E. Miller, Eloge de la Chevelure, Discours inédit d’un auteur gree anonyme
en réfutation du discours de Synésius intitulé Eloge de la Calvitie,
publié d’aprés un manuscrit grec de la Bibliothéque Royale, par E.
Miller. Paris, 1840.

J. H. Moulton, The Christian Religion in the Study.and the Street, London.
1919.

G. Nicol, Synesius of Cyrene, His Life and Writings. Cambridge, 1887.

A. Nieri, La Civenaica. Turin, 1893.

F. Picavet, Hy postases Plotiniennes. Paris, 1917-18.

B. St.-Hilaire, L’Ecole d’Alexandrie ... Paris, 1845.

P. D. Scott-Moncrieff, Paganism and Christianity in Egypt. Cambridge.
1913.

J. Simon, Histoire de I’Ecole d’Alexandrie. Paris, 1844-5.

C. Sommervogel, Etudes veligicuses, historiques, &c. Paris, 1879.

Le N. de Tillemont, Mémoires pour servir d l'Histoive ecclésiastique des six
premiers sidcles, 16 tomes. Paris, 1693-1712.

J. Toutain, Les Cultes Patens dans l’Empire Romain. Paris, 1908-11.

V. Tscherikowcer, ‘Dic hellenistischen Stadtegrindungen von Alexander dem
Grosscn bis auf dic Romerzcit.’ Leipzig, 1927. (= PAilologus, Suppl.-
Bd. xix {1], pp. 9-12).

E. Vacherot, Histoire critique det’ Ecole d’ Alexandrie, 3 tomes. Paris, 1846-


51.
A. F. Villemain, Tableau de I’ ‘loquence chrctienne au 1V¢ siccle. Paris, 1829.
_U. V. Wilamowitz Méllendorff, Kyvene. Berlin, 1928.


PG. txvi.


ON KINGSHIP
(DE REGNO)


Migne, MUST a man abase his glance in entering here, if he carry not
1053 vt with him his city’s prestige, as though he had no freedom even


to open his mouth in a royal palace unless he has come from a
community great and wealthy, and bears with him majestic words,
ay, and proud ones also, even such offspring as rhetoric and poetry 5
bring forth, arts and products of the common herd as thcy are?
May he not, without the prestige of his fatherland, purvey the
pleasure of delightful and time-honoured specches of praise to
win over king and council? Nay, will you for once admit philo-
sophy to dwell with you and will any one not fail to recognize 10
her appearing hcre aftcr so long an intcrval, or to treat her as the
welcome guest and plainly speak some good of her in the presence

of those whom it befits? There is need, methinks, of all this, not
for her sake but for your own, lest perchance if despised she may
become of no value for you. She, however, shall furnish her dis- 15
courses, not those of a gay type calculated to allure the young,
nor such words as are dissolute of morality or bedecked with
phrases for a demonstration of false beauty; but in a different
way, one weighty and inspired for those able to attain it, she will
employ words virile and sacred, words which disdain to court the 20
bounty of the great by servile adulation. So then they stand
firmly, they are those that dare all things, strangers in a royal
palace to such a degree as to assert that it will not suffice them if
any one agrees to their passing over the king and all his possessions
without praise of every sort, but that they stand ready to wound if 25
opportunity be given and threaten to bite into the heart,’ not on


2056 the surface only, but to the very core, if so perchance any one may


be helped by suffering.
’ Aristoph. Achern. 1.


ON KINGSHIP 109


Freedom of speech ‘should be of great price in the ears of a
monarch. Praise at every step is seductive, but it is injurious. It
seems to me to resemble those poisons, coated with honcy, which
are offered to men condemned to death.’ Do you not know that

s the practice of cookery by its artful seasonings and by summoning
up false cravings, is injurious to our bodies, whcreas both gym-
nastics and the art of the physician are saving to them,’ although
they give us pain for the moment? As to you, I desire that you
should be of the saved, even if you have to suffer in the path of

10 Salvation. The very bitterness of salt forbids meat to be corrupted,
and truth in discourses preserves the mind of a young sovercign
from such paths as the licence of power might open to him.
Endure, therefore, the strangeness of my words. Let none among
you condemn them as uncouth, nor silence them off-hand for that

1s they are not servants of persuasion, pleasant playmates to the
young, but pedagogucs of a sort, actually their preceptors and
stern to encounter. May you be able to bear with intercourse of
this sort, and may your ears not be utterly corrupted by the
praises which you are wont to hear.

ae ‘Lo, I myself stand before you.’ ?


2. Cyrene sends me to you to crown your head with gold and
your spirit with philosophy; Cyrene, a Greek city of ancient and
holy name, sung in a thousand odes‘ by the wise men of the past,
but now poor and downcast, a vast ruin, and in necd of a king, if

25 perchance she is to do something that may be worthy of her
ancient history. This very need you can remedy whenever you so
desire, and it is for you to decide whether I shall bring back to you
a second crown from my great and then happy city. Words now
are not failing to a city wherewith it may have liberty of speech


3 Plato, Craft. 394 a.

2 Plato, Gorg. 464 B, 517 E, 500 B; Soph. 228 E, 229 A.

3 Odyssey, xxi. 207.

* Pind. Pyth. iv. 2, 62, 261, 279; Vv. 24. 62, 81; ix. 4; Callimachus, Hymn. ii. 73,
04; Epigrans, xxi. 2.


IIo DE REGNO


and may dare to address its sovereign boldly. Truth is the aris-
tocracy of language and no word was ever more shameful or more

zos7 honourable according to the place of its utterance. Let us advance
then in company with God, and let us attempt the fairest of
language or, to speak with more truth, the fairest of deeds. For he 5
who cares for one man and that one the king, devising how he
may be most virtuous; that man I say has made the shortest
step towards restoring all houses, all cities, and all nations,
whether great or small, near or far; for of necessity all of them
must profit by the condition of the soul of their king. Is it your 10
will then that we proceed in this wise at first, in order that you
may bear with my ‘discourse to the end? It were wise not to
affright the quarry beforehand.’ Let us enumerate then what
things a king should do and what things he should not do, contrast-
ing the base with the noble. Now attend to those things on cach 15
side and whenever you recognize that which is worthy, rejoice in it
then as your portion adjudged to you by Philosophy, but dismiss
the other and determine always to do the one thing and never
again the other.

But if in the course of this address some act of yours appears 20
one of those which we know to be wrong and which you so recog-
nize yourself; in that case you should show your anger with your-
self and blush because that has come to light which is not worthy
of you. Assuredly this colour promises that virtue which comes
from a change of mind, for this shame is divine and so seems to 25
Hesiod. But he who is obstinate in his faults, who is ashamed to
confess an error, does not gain knowledge from repentance nor
does he necd healing words;? nay, a wise man would say that he
should be punished. Thus, methinks, is philosophy from the begin-

_ ning rough and intractable. 30

3. Now, inasmuch as I perceive that some of you are already
disconcerted and take in dudgeon my freedom of speech, let such


5 Plato, Lysis, 206 a. 2 Aesch. Prom. 378.


ON KINGSHIP III


remember that I announced this as my intention beforehand, and
that it was rather their part, as men forewarned, to arm themselves
in defence, and to hold their ground against my attacks. None the
less you may rejoice in hearing these things that are to follow, for
s all men are proclaiming them. And I, too, agree with you, that so
great an empire has been accorded to no one man nor such an
agglomeration of wealth, beyond that of Darius of old, nor yet so
many myriads of horses, of archers and cuirassiers. Against such
men as these, if only they have the fortune to find a Icader, every
10 attack ‘is impotent. Moreover, cities defying computation bow
before you, the greater part of which have never beheld you, nor
have even hope of beholding a sight that is indced beyond their
aspirations. These truths must be stated to you by us rather than
by any onc else. What quality then do we possess that they do not
ss Share? While they, forsooth, weave praises for you for these very
things and proclaim you happy, I would never praise you in con- se60
sequence of things such as these. I should offer you my best congra-
tulations. But they are not of oneand the same nature, congratula-
tion and praise. Each of them differs from the other. For a man
20 1s congratulated on possessions external to himself, but he is praised
for his inward gifts, those’ upon which happiness has her throne.
The one is an uncertain gift of fortune, the other a personal virtue
of character.? In this way the latter is of itself trustworthy, but
good fortune is deceptive and often changes to that which is com-
25 pletely opposite. But God himsclf is necded for a guardian, mind
is needed, skill is needed, opportunity is needed, and in sooth
'- Many works, in many places and these of all sorts, of which onc
has no experience, nor is it easy for those who try to gain it. For
not so easily as a happy condition comes to men, is it preserved.
3o You have only to observe in what manner of lives the scenes of
tragedies arecast.’ They are not those in which private citizens and


4 Aristot. Eth. Nic. i. 12. 2 Philo, ad Gaium, 1.
3 Dio Chrys. Or. xiii. 20.


112 DE REGNO


the poor suffer, but rather the strong, the potentates, the monarchs.
For the modest house has no room for the greatness of disaster,
nor poverty for the burden of misfortune; but he who isa shining
object in his fortune is fated to become also conspicuous in perils
and in the other spheres of the demon’s activity. But ofttimes, too,
virtue has been the beginning of good fortune, and approbation
has been the leader of happiness to men,' as though Fortune were
ashamed not to bear witness to conspicuous virtue. Now if we are
required to make this truth convincing by examples, let us not
seek the proof elsewhere. We have but to ponder over your sire,
and you will see that his Empire was given him as a recompense
for his virtue. Fortune is not responsible’ for virtue, but some
virtuous deeds, perhaps, have ere now drawn even fortune with
them. With these deeds, my liege, may you be associated, that
philosophy may not speak here in vain! May rule be a sacred
possession to you in this, that it has trained your virtue and has
brought it forward in quest of material adcquate to its inborn
greatness, and not incapable of being contained in a principle of life
less than the kingly. You must therefore train yourself to keep up
a spirit worthy of a king and you must make a defence on behalf
of Fortune, that she may not be indicted for lack of reason on the
ground that life has not advanced from like beginnings for your
sire and for yourself. For him the soldicr’s art procured the control
of Empire, you that Empire enlists as a soldier and virtue is your
debt to Fortune. He acquired his possessions by his labours, but
you without labour have come into the heritage of these. There
is all need of labour to keep guard over them. This is what I have
long been speaking of, this the thing of difficulty which needs a
thousand eyes, lest, as is Fortune’s wont, she may turn back in the
midst of the way, like knavish fellow-companions of a journey, for
to such do the wise compare her inconstancy. You see in the
case of your own sire so clearly proclaimed in public by reason of


8 Ch Acschin. Fals. Leg. 133. * Vhilo, ad Gainm, cap. i.


20


30


ON KINGSHIP 113


his successes, that envy did not suffer even his old age to pass
without struggles, nor yet the Divinity without a crown. Alter
marching against two usurpers and overthrowing both, on erecting
the second trophy, he gave up his life, slain by the hand of noman,

s but yielding to Nature, against whom neither is weapon strong 106s
nor mind skilled, and leaving you the kingdom uncontested, he
has virtue as his epitaph. May virtue preserve it for you and may
God preserve it through virtue, for there is need of God everywhere
and not least amongst those who are not the contestants or

10 architects of their fortune, but who, like you, inhcrit it!

He whom the Divinity has most largely endowed with fortune,
and whom, when still a mere boy, He has made to be called a great
king, must-choose all labour and abandon all ease. He must share
little in sleep and much in anxieties, if he is to be a fitting person

15 to be crowned with the name of King. For well says the old
proverb, ‘it is not the number of subjects that makes a king any
more than a tyrant.’ In truth the tale of his sheep makes not the
shepherd more than the butcher who drives the sheep before him
to the slaughter, that he may himself take his fill of them and sell

20 them for a feast for others. Equally divided stand the king and the
tyrant,’ I assert, and yet Fortunc’s gifts are alike to each. Each
of the two rules over many men, but he that disposes himself for
the manifest good of the governed, and is willing to suffer that there
may be no suffering for them, and to encounter danger that they

25 may live without fear, and to keep night vigils, and to sup with
cares at his board, that day and night they may have rest from
anxieties, this is a shepherd amidst his sheep, a king amongst
men. But whoso exploits his leadership for luxury’s sake, whoso
squanders his resources in revelling, esteeming that he must needs

30 gratify all his desires, considering that what makes the subject
class suffer is the guerdon of his rule among many, and that the
pleasure of his soul is to be served by many, and in a word, he who


’ Aristot. Eth. Nic. viii. 32.
2876-8 Q


114 DE REGNO


does not fatten his flock, but himself desires to be fattened by it,
that man I call a butcher amongst his cattle, and I declare him to
be a tyrant whenever that which he rules over is a people endowed
with reason.

Now let this be the one principle of kingship for you, and do s.
you test yourself by it as by a touchstone. If you find yourself in
harmony with it, you may with every right enjoy the sacred title
of a sacred office; but if you are not in harmony with it, endeavour
to make straight what is distorted, and to cling to the rule. I do

. not despair of every progress coming from youth’ if only some one 10
may spur it on towards zeal for virtue. For youth is strong in its
tendency to one side or the other’ just as rivers in the first stretches
allotted them press on the more insatiably. In this way the young
king has need also of philosophy, either to take possession of him
beforehand or to restrain him from dispersing his force on either 15
side.

zoGq Some vices are near neighbours to certain virtues, and from each
of these last there is a slip, not into another virtue but into its
neighbouring vice. Tyranny dwells near kingship, even next door to
it, as foolhardiness near to courage, as licence to liberty. The high- 20
minded man, if he is not guarded by philosophy within the realm
of virtue, will trip and will become a braggart, and one feeble in
judgement instead of high-minded. Fear, therefore, tyranny as

- being nothing else than the disease of kingship, and learn todiscern
it by the distinctive marks presented in my discourse, and by the 25
greatest of them, that + hile the law is his conduct for the king,
his own conduct is law .or the tyrant. But power is a substance
that they have in common although their lives are antagonistic.
Every man treads the heights of good fortune and of happiness
when all follows according to his desire, in the course of nature; 30
but desire in turn attends upon prudence, and although she be the


3 Plato, Theact. 146 B.
2 Philo, Leg. ed Gaium, 29; Dio Chrys. Oral. ili. 43.


ON KINGSHIP 115


mistress of what is without, she yields a share of the kingdom
within to the stronger comrade and receives from her the watch-
words for necessary action. Power does not suffice for happiness,
nor has God placed happiness in strength, but prudence must be
5 present, nay, must be in the first rank, to use such strength in the
noblest way. Now that man I proclaim to be the most complete,
and this is true of his life also, who is perfect in both and not
halting in either, the man to whom has fallen the task of ruling,
knowing the while how to rule. Strength and wisdom when united
10 are irresistible,’ but separated from each other, untutored force
and prudence shorn of strength will be easily overcome. I have
always admired that creation of the wise Egyptians, their Hermes.
The Egyptians make the face of their deity double, placing a young
one next to an old one,? requiring thus of any one who is to keep:
15 good guard over them that he be both wise and strong, as the one
thing would be useless without the other. In the same way the
Sphinx is erected in their temple closes, a sacred symbol of the
coupling of the virtues, in strength a wild beast, in prudence
a man. And rightly, for strength destitute of prudent leadership
20 is carried capriciously along, mingling all matters together and
throwing them into confusion. On the other hand mind is useless
in action when unserved by hands. All virtues are a king’s
adornment, but prudence is the most kingly of them all. Take
to yourself this one, I counsel you, for an associate, for the three
as sisters will follow the eldest, and you will straightway have them
all as comrades in your tent, and on the battlefield as well.


4. I will now make a statement which sounds at first a paradox, 1065
but is nerchance impregnated with truth itself. Whenever I com-
pare weakness with force, poverty with wealth, and penury in all

jo things with abundance in all things, and if these might be adjudged
in regard to each other unmixed with, nay, even separated from,


3 Plato, Repub. 473 D. 3 Plutasch, Isis and Osiris, 354 B.


116 DE REGNO


prudence, then poverty, helplessness, and a private life, rather
than the greatest leadership, would seem more fortunate for those
who have least attained to intelligence and reason. Assuredly they
would fall into fewer errors, since the evil in their dispositions
would not find an outlet for its energy. For the exterior forms of
good things which my leaders Aristotle and Plato are accustomed
to call the instrumental, know how to serve' the vices no less than
the virtues. Consequently these two men and as many torrents
of philosophy as have run from them, neither esteemed them
worthy of the better title, nor did they relegate them to worse, but
call them instruments, at one moment for good and another for
evil, depicting them in various colours according to the disposition
of those who employed them. As it is therefore to be prayed
for that the ‘instruments’ be out of the evil man’s reach so that
he may keep his wickedness inactive, so it is that they may be
in the hands of one who will use them aright, one by whom all
cities and individuals as well may benefit, to the end that his vir-
tuous nature may not wither away without employ, without result,
and without recognition, but may spend its force for the wellbeing
of men. Use in this way, I entreat you, the good elements which
lie ready for you; it is only in this way that you may use things
that are good. Let houses, cities, peoples, races, and continents
have the benefit of earnest solicitude and forethought, a fore-
thought which God Himself who has placed Himself as the arche-
type amidst knowable things, offers you as an image of His own.

He wishes that everything here should be arranged in imitation
of the world above. Beloved, then, of the Great King is the one
named after Him here, if only he belie not that name. And he
does not so belie it if even one or other of these titles of the Div-
inity is present with him. Now, before speaking of this, it would
not be ill-timed to discuss first a certain matter concerning philo-
sophy so to make what follows clearer.


2 Aristot. Eth. Nic. 1099* 30, 1099” 27; Plato, Soph. 235 B (see p. 193).


10


20


30


ON KINGSHIP 117


5. No term has ever yet appeared in any place that grasps the
essence of God, but men once baffled in seeking an image of Him
desire to touch! Him through the things that proceed from Him.
Thus you may call Him anything you like, the Creative Father,”

s the Beginning, or the Cause. All these terms are His relations
towards what has proceeded from Him. And so in calling him
King, you have attempted to grasp His nature from those over
whom He rules, but not by direct touch with Him face to face.

Now then I come to the point when I must mention also, as I

to promised you, the remaining one of His names. I have kept it
back until this opportune moment. What is this thing bound up
with and belonging to the king here below, which I said confirmed
him and showed him lawfully established, and not falsely named ?
All men, everywhere, methinks, celebrate the goodness of God,
ts alike peoples that are wise and peoples that are foolish. In this at
least all agree with one another, and speak with the same voice,
however they may differ in all other respects in their notions of the
Divine element, and however they divide His pure and indivisible
nature with a great variety of opinions. But, in sooth, even this
20 undisputed good does not yet disclose to us the throne of God in
real existence. That is only gathered from events that follow;
for the Good does not come to our hearing as absolute, but as a
relative good to those for whom it is an efficacious force and by
whom it may be enjoyed. The very thought conveyed in His name
25 is an attcmpt to signify further that God is the cause of the good.
So also the sacred prayers of our fathers in the holy initiations,
calling out to the God who is over all, do not glorify His power,
but rather bow before His solicitude for us. Of the things that
pertain to God, therefore, God is the giver, such as life, being, mind,
30 and indeed anything of a secondary sort, if it be one not unworthy
to have come from the first. It would befit you accordingly not
to desert the rank in which you were enrolled nor to shame the


* Cf. s John i. 3. 2 Plato, Tim. 28 c.


118 DE REGNO
identical names, but rather to give yourself up to their imitation,
to flood the cities with all things that are good, and to pour all pos-
sible happiness on each one of those ruled over. Then onlyshall we
speak the truth in acclaiming you as a great king; not giving you
honour by custom merely, not consulting our own advantage, nor $
seeking to turn away your wrath, but consenting to the very judge
in our soul, using our tongue as a sincere interpreter of our thought.
Come then, let me describe for you the king in my discourse as if
I had set up a statue of him,’ and you shall show me this statue
moving and animated with the breath of life. I will take along to
with me for its fashioning, if it be needed, ideas that have come to
the minds of the happy men of bygone days. Do you rejoice not
the less in it than others, but the more, as unquestionably be-
fitting a king, as on these things the wise men of the past and
the present are agreed. 15


so6g-« «6. Now first let piety be its foundation, a secure pedestal this,
and the statue shall stand thereon unshaken; and never shall a
storm overturn it, if it remain clamped to its foundation:
nay, if shall rise up with it and appear in many places, and not
least upon the summit. Starting from thence, I say that with 20
God’s guidance the king ought first to be king of himself, and to
establish a monarchy in his soul.? For of this be well assured,
that man is not some simple object nor is he cast in one pattern,
but God has made to dwell in the constitution of a single creature
a host of forces mingled together and with full-toned voices. We 25
are, I think, a monstrous animal more extraordinary than the
‘hydra and still more many-headed.’ For not with the same part of
our nature, of course, do we think and desire, or feel pain and
suffer anger, nor is our fear from the same source as our pleasure.
Again you will observe how there is a male element in these organs, 30
and a female, and that there is courage and also cowardice. There
2 Plato, Repub. 420 C; Politicus, 277 A.
® Cf loc. Lid. ad Nicoclem, p. 20 (§ 26). * Plato, Repub. 88¢.; Phased. 230 4.


ON KINGSHIP 119


are in sooth all kinds of opposites within us and a certain medial
force of nature runs through them which we call mind. It is this
that I desire to reign in the king’s soul, destroying the mob rule
and democracy of the passions. So from his hearth would this man
s be a king using the natural beginning of authority, he who by
taming and domesticating the unreasoning parts of the soul, has
made them subservient to reason, marshalling their multitude
under one intelligent leadership. Such a man as this is godly,
whether he be a commoner or a king; but especially is the king
10 divine because he it is who shares his virtue with whole nations,
and because many men rejoice in the good deeds of such an one. It
is, moreover, in his case a necessity that his inner life should be
passed undisturbed and that a divine calm should extend even
to his countenance. And this is a sight to inspire not fear but the
15 deepest piety, to wit, his remaining in an unruffied state of dignity,
overwhelming his friends, that is to say good men, with admiration,
his enemies and wicked men with terror. Nor does change of will
invade his spirit, for whatever he does, this he effects by accom-
plishing those things which have been resolved upon by all the
20 parts of his soul. Thus all things are ordered subject to one rule,
and do not think it unworthy for each one of them both to exist
as parts and to converge in the One, the whole. Now whoso sepa-
rates the conjunctions of these parts, admitting the existence of
their numerous energies, and wishes to placate the creature one
25 part at a time, this man you shall sce now lifted up in his mind,
now fallen low, now disturbed by a forward impulse, and now by
retreat; again by griefs, by pleasures, by absurd desires, and that
man is never in agreement with himself.
‘Well I know what evil things I am to do,
3o For passion is stronger than my counsels.”*
So said some one who understood the divergence and disagreement 1072
of equal forces. What imports most for you therefore, and a very
1 Eurip. Med. 1078: Romans vii. 19, 20. seq.


120 | DE REGNO

kingly thing it is too, is the rule over yourself, setting mind to
dominate the beast that dwells with us,! and seeking not to rule
over many myriads of men while you are yourself a slave of the
most shameful mistresses, of pleasure, of pain, and as many beasts


' gelated to these as dwell within the human creature.


7. And now setting forth from his own self the king will mcet
his friends and neighbours first. With these at his side he will take
counsel concerning all matters; these he will greet as friends, with
no shade of irony in the word, nor like those who gloss over what
Is in point of fact rough and abrupt in their despotism with a
Gesignation more kindly than the truth. After all what possession
is so kingly to him as the friend at his side; what sweeter sharer in
his good fortune; who surer to endure an ill turn of fortune with
him; who more sincere in praise; who less apt to give pain by a
biting admonition? What clearer evidence can the masses have
that a king is well disposed than his manifest power to make those
about him always enviable? In this way he will gain the affection
of these also who dwell afar, and it will be the prayer of good men
to gain the friendship of their king. Exactly the reverse is the
experience of tyrants, whence the witty proverb:‘Far from Zeus
and his thunderbolt’, which means that because of such as treat
their associates with treachery, safety without office is less terrify-
ing than the dangers of public life. One has scarcely time to be
envied for friendship with a tyrant before one is an object of pity
by reason of his enmity. Now the king knows that in God is
sufficiency unto Himself, and that God, the original essence, is
above the ruled over; but that with a man governing many men
like himself, his own nature is not sufficient to itself for the subtlety
of every problem. To remedy therefore the imperfection of nature,
he holds close intercourse with his friends,’ and thereby multiplies

® Plato, Phaed. 97 C. * St. August. Confess. viii. 6.
3 Philo, Quis Rev. Div. Heres, 6.


10


20


35


30


ON KINGSHIP 122


his own power. And so he will see with the eyes of all, will hear
with the ears of all, and will take counsel from those opinions
of all which tend to one conclusion.’


8. Now we must keep guard over ourselves, and that with our
s whole understanding. .We must if possible employ all the weapons
in the court for the purpose that flattery may not secretly slip in
wearing the mask of friendship, for by this one thing is royalty
plundered, however vigilant the guards. For flattery enters, unless
the place be thoroughly defended, far within the treasure-chamber,
to and attacks the most lordly possession of kings, the soul itself;
and the more easily, that love of his comrades is not the least virtue
in a monarch. It was this quality, at all events, that made Cyrus
‘the pre-eminent’ and Agesilaus the most renowned of kings
amongst Greeks and foreigners.? He will then learn what course
1§ to pursue, and amongst his friends he will make his opinion prevail, 1073
but he stands in need of many hands that action may follow.


9. Now my specch must go on to lead the king from out his
palace, and, after his friends, to hand him over to his soldiers,
second friends these; and further to make him descend to the plain

zo and inspect his men, their arms, and their horses. There he will
ride with the cavalry, charge with the infantry, arm himself
heavily with the hoplites, manceuvre with the targetcers, and hurl
the javelin with the light-armed troops, enticing every man to
living comradeship by association in their operations; so that not
25 merely in semblance shall he call them fellow-soldiers. They will
come to know him when he addresses them on the field, and will
bear witness that the name is employed at the same time in virtue
of his actions. Perchance you take it ill that we entail labour upon
you, but be persuaded by me that toil attacks most lightly the
1 Dio Chrys. Oras. I de Reg., Ovat. III de Reg.
8 Xen. Anab. i. 9. 20.
aif-1 R


122 DE REGNO

body of a king, for toil vanquishes least of all a man who toils
openly. Now when a king exercises his body, keeps the field, and
spends his youth in armour, all the cities are his spectators. For he
draws the eyes of all present upon him, and no one can endure to
look elsewhere when a king does anything conspicuously; every act 5
of a king passing into a song rings in the ears of all men. And this
custom is capable of bringing goodwill towards him in that the
spectacle of a king is not a rare one to his soldiers, and his good-
will greatly strengthens the spirit of the troops. Now what royalty

is more solid than that which is fortified by love, and what indi- 10
vidual, however low his condition, is freer from fear or safer from
treachery than that king whom his subjects fear not, but for whom
they fear?! This soldierly race, however, is simple and noble, and

Is won over easily by sympathy. Even Plato calls his fighting race
‘guardians’, and likens them most to the dog,” a beast that dis- 15
tinguishes friend and foe by his knowledge and ignorance of them
as the case may be. What could be more shameful than to be a
king who is recognized only through the painters by the very
men who war in his defence?

The king will benefit by this close intercourse, not only because 20
the army will surround him as one unified organism, but also
because many of the incidents on these occasions are, some of
them, an exercise in warlike affairs, and at the same time will be
initiations, and preparations of a kind, for the functions of com-
mand and awaken his ambition for great and serious tasks. It is 25
no small advantage in active service that he can address by name,

a general, a commander of a legion, the commander of a squadron
or of a brigade, or a standard-bearer, as the case may be; that he
can call up and exhort any of the veterans from his knowledge of
them, those I mean who have rank in each infantry or cavalry 30
corps. Even Homer makes one of the gods take his station in the


2 Platarch, Aratus, 25. 2 Plato, Rep. 375 B, 376 A, B.


ON KINGSHIP 323
Achaean conflict and by a touch of his sceptre fill the young men 1076
‘With mighty force’
so that their spirit


‘Longed still more to fight and to battle’,


s and they are unable to keep either their feet or hands quiet. Again
the verse,


‘Their feet beneath, their hands above, alike quiver with impatience’,®


signifies that they are self-bidden to dart about in deeds of battle.
Now to my thinking a king might achieve this very result if he
xo were to call on his men by name, and would thus rouse to ardour
the man insensible to the trumpet’s call, and incite the warrior
yet more to the fray. For every man desires to toil under the
watchful eye of the king. And the poet likewise seems to think
that the king thus obtains an immense advantage both in war and
1g in peace, for, noticing this first, the fact that even the common
soldiers are known to the king has the greatest influence on the
courage of these men,* he has not only made Agamemnon call his
soldicrs by name, but even this leader, according to him, counsels
his brother,’ in addition to this form of address, to distinguish each
‘20 man by his patronymic and ancestral name, to honour all, and
not to be overweening. Now, honouring them is to speak to them
in fair words, whenever he himself knows either that any good deed
has been done by one of them, or that any success has fallen in
his path. Observe Homer. He makes the king the eulogist of a man
as of the people, and who would not be lavish with his blood when
the king has praised him? This benefit then will come to you from
frequent contact with your troops, and moreover you will know
their characters and their lives, and what post belongs to each in
every contingency. Observe this also. The king is a craftsman of
30 wars, just as the cobbler is a craftsman of shoes.* The latter is


1 Jliad, xiii. 60. 2 Ibid. 74. 3 Ibid. 75. * Ibid. iv. 23%.
5 Iliad, x. 67. © Cf. Aristot. Eth. Nic. 13029,


124 DE REGNO


langhable when he does not know the tools of his craft; how then
shall the king understand how to use his tools, namely soldiers,
when he does not know these tools?!


ro. Now that I have arrived at this point, if I bring down
what is the common ground of the discussion into the matter of 5
the present discourse, my shot will not fall, I fancy, off the
mark.
“Who knows if I shall arouse your soul with the aid of the god
When I speak? for the counsel of a true man is excellent.’?


I assert, in fact, that nothing has done the Romans more harm in 10
past days than the protection and attention given to the sove-
reign’s person, of which they make a secret as though they were
ptiests, and their public exposure in barbarian fashion of the
things that pertain to you. Truth and fantasy are not wont to
consort together. But do not be incensed, for the fault is not 15
yours, it is the fault rather of those who first created this mis-
chief and transmitted to Time’s heritage an evil now zealously
maintained. Accordingly, this majesty and the fear of being
brought to the level of man by becoming an accustomed sight,
causes you to be cloistered and besieged by your very self, seeing 30
3077 very little, hearing very little of those things by'which the wisdom
of action is accumulated. You rejoice only in the pleasures of the
body, and the most material of these, even as many as touch and
taste offer you;’ and so you live the life of a polyp of the sea.‘
As long as you deem man unworthy of you, you will not attain 25
man’s perfection. Those with whom you consort in your round of
life, and in other ways, and to whom access to the palace is safer
from fear than to generals and captains of divisions, those on
whom you bestow your royal approval are rather men with small
heads and petty minds whom nature by some error stamps amiss, 30


3 Xen. Cyrop. v. 3. 47. ; 2 Iliad, xv. 403.
® Asistot. Eth. Nic. 1118, 11484, 11504. * Plato, Philebus, 21 c.


ON KINGSHIP 125


even as dishonest bankers falsify coins." A dullard becomes a gift
for a king, and the duller he be the greater the gift. These men at
once ready to laugh and weep without measure, playing the
buffoon with gestures, noises,? and every means in their power,

s these men I say aid you to destroy your leisure, and encourage by
a greater evil that foggy blindness of mind which you have con-
tracted from living a life not in accord with nature. The half-baked
thoughts and conversation of these men suit your ears better than

a philosophical sentiment, clearly and tersely expressed. And how-

to ever much pleasure you have derived from this amazing inactivity,
distrusting the thinking part of your people, and giving yoursclf
solemn airs before them, while bringing the brainless clements
close to you, and stripping before them: you should clearly under-
stand that each thing increases by arts the same as those by
15 which it is welded togethcr. Review in your mind any kingdom
established anywhere you please in the world, whether of the
Parthians, or the Macedonians, or the ancient Medes, or that in
which we live now: men of the people who were soldicrs as well,
for the most part encamping together and sleeping on the ground
20 in their formations, neither sparing themselves labours nor giving
way excessively to pleasures, have carried each dominion far and
wide. Men like these who acquire such great things through their
devotion, and have become inflamed with zeal, would scarcely
maintain their ranks without prudence. For good fortune seems
2s to be a burden heavier than lead; at all events it overturns the
man who has shouldered it, unless he happens to be all-powerful.


1z. Now although nature promises us strength of soul it is

training which perfects it. To this, my liege, philosophy exhorts

you, she who is ever on her guard against those consequences

3o which arise from speech; for everything is destroyed by forces

which are the contraries of those which sustain it. And I do not
Dio Chrys. Orat. 11. De Reg. 18. * Philo, ad Gaium, vii.


126 DE REGNO


think that the ancient institutions of the Romans should be trans-
.gressed by the king. Consider as ancestral institutions of the
zo80 Romans not the things which yesterday or the day before came
into the commonwealth when it was already changed in its habits,
but those by which they won their empire. Come then, in the name 5
of the God who presides over kingship (and you must try to
bear with me, for my story bites into the soul) at what period do
you esteem the affairs of the Romans to have been in the most
flourishing condition? Is it from the time in which you have been
robed with purple, and bedecked with gold, when you wear gems 10
from foreign mountains and seas, placing them, now on your brow,
now on your feet, now round your waist, now suspended from
your person, now buckled on your garments, now used as a seat?
You have certainly in that way been made a variegated and multi-
coloured vision like the peacocks, drawing upon yourself the curse 15
of Homer, the ‘tunic of stone’.' But not even does this dress suffice
you, for you cannot go into the council-chamber of your peers
when you have to exercise the rule belonging to your title, either
when they are electing magistrates, or when they are seated in
counsel for the consideration of any other matter, unless you have 20
wrapped yourself up in such and such a robe. And now you are
looked upon by men who may lawfully behold you, and they
alone are happy among the senators, as alone of the senators
bearing the burden of government. Nay, you even exult in your
burden just like one chained with gold or rather bound by fetters 25
worth many talents, but should not feel the evil at all, nor think
that he was enduring terrible things ending in incarceration, for
he would be deceived by the very magnificence of his misfortune.
But no more will he have liberty to stir than those who are
bound in the ‘foot-plague’, the meanest of stocks. Again, for you 30
the pavement is insupportable, nor may you walk about on earth
in its natural state, but gold-dust must be sprinkled upon it,
- © Wiad, ili. $7.


ON KINGSHIP 127


which your wagons and merchantmen bring you from far-away
continents. And you have a host not to be despised who be-
sprinkle the mound: or you deem it not kingly, unless you exhibit
luxury even in the straps of your sandals. Do you now fare
s better since the time when this initiation, usual with emperors,
was instituted, and since you have taken to keeping your lairs
like lizards, scarcely peeping out at all to enjoy the sun’s warmth,
lest being men you should be detected as such by men? Or was it
then when men living in the throng, blackened by the sun, led
10 armies to battle, and bearing themselves in all other respects
simply and artlessly, instead of in a manner suggestive of the
dithyramb and the tragic stage, in Lacaedemonian caps, which
when seen in statues arouse the laughter of striplings, and not
even the old folk think that such kings are fortunate, but in 108:
1§ comparison with you, unfortunate in the extreme?

Now it was not by walling off their own house that they pre-
vented the barbarians either of Asia or of Europe from entering
in. Rather by their own acts did they admonish these men to wall
off their own by crossing the Euphrates repeatedly in pursuit of

20 the Parthians, and the Danube in pursuit of the Getae and the
Massagetae. But now do these nations spread terror amongst you,
crossing over in their turn, assuming other names, and some of
them falsifying by art even their countenances, so that another
race new and foreign may appear to have sprung from the soil,

25 and they dare to demand an indemnity as the price of peace,

‘unless thou arm thyself with valour’.


But let all comparisons of the past with the present be dismissed,
if you please, that we may not seem to censure you in the guise of
good counsel, by showing you that just to the extent that a mon-

30 arch’s régime inclines him to pompous display, to that extent is it
deprived of reality.


3 Iliad, ix. 231.


128 DE REGNO


12. But if, just as this discourse has long dallied over the
decoration of your lives, it were also to reserve some little space
for the life of kings in the past, whether we call it rusticity, or, if
you prefer it, simplicity, in that case prodigality and frugality
would fittingly be contrasted with one another; and once you had 5
seen these in their naked reality, you would be enamoured of the
true beauty of a king, dismissing that which is merely outward
appearance and sham. The one destiny we described in terms of
material things for the most part, the other it is not possible to
describe in these, and we must obtain it from other sources. Excess 10
of worldly goods does not belong to the second of these lives
because it is not striving for them. It would rather be represented
by its habits. And yet work advances at once along with the
progress of lives that are in conformity with the law of nature.

It is therefore worth while to make mention of the character 15
and achievements of a certain king, for any particular story will
suffice to draw all others along in its wake. It is told of one of
no great antiquity but such an one as even the grandfathers of
our own elders might have known if only they had not begotten
their children when young, and had not become grandparents 20
during the youth of their own children. It is said, then, that a
certain monarch of those days was leading an expedition against
the Parthians, who had behaved towards the Romans in an insult-
ing manner. Now when they had reached the mountain frontiers
of Armenia, before entering the enemy country, he was eager to 25
dine, and gave orders to the army to make use of the provisions in
the supply column, as they were now in a position to live off the
neighbouring country should it be necessary. Hewas then pointing
out to them the land of the Parthians. Now, while they were so
engaged, an embassy appeared from the enemy lines, thinking 30
on their arrival to have the first conversation with the influential
men who surrounded the king, and after these with some depen-
dants and gentlemen ushers, but supposing that only on a much


ON KINGSHIP 129


later day would the king himself give audience to the embassy. 1084
’ However, it turned out somehow that the king was dining at the
moment. Such a thing did not exist at that time as the Guards’
regiment, a sort of picked force detached from the army itself, of
s men all young, tall, fair-haired and superb,


‘Their heads ever anointed and their faces fair’,


equipped with golden shields and golden lances. At the sight of
these we are made aware beforehand of the king’s approach, much
as, I imagine, we recognize the sun by the rays that rise above
10 the horizon. Here, in contrast, every phalanx doing its duty, was
the guard of the king and the kingdom. And these kings held
’ themselves in simple fashion, for they were kings not in pomp
but in spirit, and it was only within that they differed from their
people. Externally they appeared in the likeness of the herd, and
1g it was in such guise, they say, that Carinus was seen by the em-
bassy. A tunic dyed with purple was lying on the grass, and for
repast he had a soup of yesterday’s peas, and in it some bits of
salted pork that had grown old in the service.
Now when he saw them, according to the story he did not spring
20 up, nor did he change anything; but callcd out to these men from
the very spot and said that he knew that they had come to see
him, for that he was Carinus; and he bade them tell the young
king that very day, that unless he conducted himself wisely, he
might expect that the whole of their forest and plain would be in
25 a single month barer than the head of Carinus. And as he spoke,
they say that he took off his cap, and showed his head, which was
no more hairy than the helmet lying at his side. And he gave them
leave if they were hungry to attack the stew-pot with him, but
if not in need, he ordered them to depart at once, and to leave
3o the Roman lines, as their mission was at an end. Now it is said
that when these messages were reported to the rank and file and to


3 Odyssey, xv. 332.
3878-5 s


130 DE REGNO


the leader of the enemy, namely all that had been seen and heard,
at once—as might have been expected—shuddering and fear fell
upon every one at the thought of fighting men such as these, whose
so8s very king was neither ashamed of being a king, nor of being bald,
and who, offering them a stew-pot, invited them to share his meal. 5
And their braggart king arrived in a state of terror and was ready


to yield in everything, he of the tiara and robes, to one in a simple
woollen tunic and cap.


13. And another story more recent than this I think you must
have heard, for it is improbable that any one has never heard of a 10
king who assigned himself the task of getting within the enemy’s
country for purposes of espionage, by imitating the appearance
of an embassy. For it was in those days a duty to the State to take
command of cities and armies, and many men foreswore such an
office; nay, a certain ruler among them, one who had spent his 15
youth in ruling, renouncing these labours, decided of his own free
will to grow old in private life. Further, this very title of king, I
will show to be recent; for it had become a dead letter to the

‘Romans from the time when the people drove out the Tarquins.
For it is from this source that while we call you kings, while we 20 _
deem you worthy of the title, and write you down as such, you,
whether you know it or not, yielding to established custom, seem
to evade the dignity of the title. And so, when you write toa city,
or to-an individual, to a viceroy or to a foreign ruler, you have
never shown pride in the title of king, but rather you make your- 25
selves absolute rulers.!

Now absolute ruler is the designation of a military chief who
undertakes to do all things, and Iphicrates and Pericles sailed
from Athens as generals with absolute power,? nor did the title
wound that people, free from tyrants though it was; for the people 30


8 edreapérap was tho official equivalent of the pracnomen Imperator.
® The phrase erparyyde abronpdrwp occurs in Thucyd. vi. 72.


ON KINGSHIP 131
itself made appointments to this generalship, as being constitu-
tional.

It is true that in Athens there was a certain individual called
king’ who occupied a petty post, and was accountable for his

s administration; the people, I suppose, having given him this name
in jest, for they were an uncompromisingly free people. Their
‘absolute ruler,’ however, was not a monarch, and both the title
and the office were respected. Is not this, then, clear evidence of
a wise policy in the Roman constitution, that although it has

10 manifestly developed into a monarchy, it is cautious in so asserting
itself by reason of its hatred of the cvils of tyranny, and employs
the title of king sparingly. For tyranny makes monarchy to be
detested, whereas kingship makes it to be loved; and Plato calls
this a divine good amongst men?. But this same man also asserts
1g that what shares in the divine destiny is in every case free from
vanity.? For God is not theatrical, nor a worker of wonders, but
*, .. Walking in a noiseless path according
To Justice, he directs mortal affairs.’*
And everywhere He is ready to reveal Himself to that one endowed
30 with a nature to receive Him.

In this sense I maintain that the king is a common source of
good and free from arrogance. But if tyrants are always doing
astounding things, concealing themselves from the public gaze,
and then appearing to the consternation of the beholders, we can-

25 not envy them, since in default of true majesty they take refuge 1088
in a pretence of it, for in the case of one who has no health in him
and is conscious of the fact, what means may there be for his
escape from contempt except that of escape from publicity? But
up to this day no one has ever despised the sun, although to what

yo spectacle are we more accustomed? And if a king has courage


4 Demosthen. Contra Androtioncm, 601. 25. 8 Plato, Politicus 302 &.
® Plato, Phaedrus, 247 A.


* Eurip. Troades, 887; Plutarch, Jsis, and Osiris, 383 B.


132 DE REGNO


to be a true one and shall not be disproved as such, let him be
the most common possession ; for he will not be the less admirable
able in this even if he be not the more.

Further, the lame king whom Xenophon praises throughout all
his history was not derided by those whom he led, nor by the 5
nations through whom he led them, nor by those against whom
he made his expedition; and yet he lodged in the most public
places of each city. Meanwhile he was most conspicuous in all his
actions to every one who desired to see the leader of Sparta. Nay,
this man crossed over to Asia with a small army and very nearly 10
sacceeded in driving from his kingdom a man receiving homage
from numberless peoples. At all events he drove him from the
stronghold of hisarrogance. And so it happened that when recalled
by the magistrates in his own city and compelled to give up his
military operations in Asia, he achieved many victories in Greece 15
and was defeated in battle by one man only, by the only man of
all who could possibly overcome Agesilaus, were the struggle for
frugality.! This was that Epaminondas whom cities crowned with
wreaths, and invited to banquets. But when he accepted such
invitations, for one could not do otherwise than accept without 20
incurring injury to his political reputation, he drank nothing but
rough wine, ‘in order’—so he said—‘that Epaminondas might
not forget his home diet.’ And when a young Athenian scoffed-at
the hilt of his sword because it was made of a cheap sort of wood
and uncarven, he replicd, ‘When we fight, you will not make trial 25
of the hilt, but I do not think you will be able to find fault with
the blade.’

Now if it is kingship to command, and to command with such
forces as do those who know upon what things power is based and
upon what sort of lives; we see that it is not from what is un- 30
natural and from luxury, but from moderation and wisdom that
all things are brought into order from every source. Arrogance

2 Plutarch, Agesilaus, 35.


ON KINGSHIP 133


and extravagance must be eliminated from kingship, for there is
no common ground between it and those things foreign to it; and
indeed my discourse started from this very point.


14. Let us now bring back the argument to its proper beginning,
sand do you bring back the king to his original function. It will
follow of necessity that once our lives have been corrected and
Prudence has returned, the glories of the past will accompany her, s089
and a complete change will take place in all the clements opposed
to her. And do you, my liege, rule over the return of good works,
10 and give us back the king who is a public-spirited servant of his
kingdom. In the present state of affairs we can no longer either
dally at our ease or make a step in advance, for at present all men
are standing on the edge of a razor. We stand in need of God for
our affairs and of a king who will avert that destiny of the Roman
1§ power which has been long in coming to birth; and while I am
abridging the rest of my argument, and at the same time moulding
an image of a king which I began to set up as a very beautiful
statue, I will at least show you clearly that ‘this destiny’ is immi- |
nent unless a wise and strong kingship prevents it in time, and I
20 shall assist you as far as I can in contriving this, to wit, that you
may be the one who shall prevent it. God is always and entirely
the.ally of the good, and is propitious to them. So then we have
left the common dutics of the king as modelled in this discourse
and have been brought round in opinion to the established order
2 of things. Philosophy demanded of the king that he should often
mix with the military, and not keep ¢o his palace, for it taught us
that goodwill towards him, his only real safeguard, was fortified
by this daily intercourse. This once admitted, in the company of
what race of soldiers should a philosopher devoted to his king
30 desire that he should train his body and dwell in the camps?
Evidently with such as the countryside and towns, in a word the -
land he rules over, gives him as fighting men and selects as guards


134 DE REGNO


for the State, and for the laws by which they were nurtured and
educated, for these are they whom Plato likened even to watch-
dogs.’ But the shepherd mtust not mix wolves with his dogs, even

if caught as whelps they may seem to be tamed, or in an evil hour
he will entrust his flock to them; for the moment that they notice 5
any weakness or slackness in the dogs, they will attack these and
the flock and the shepherds likewise. Nor must the legislator give
arms to those not born and brought up under his laws, for he
has no guarantee of their good conduct from such as these. Truly

it is the part of a foolhardy man or of a prophet to see and have 10
no fear of this mass of differently bred youth pursuing their own
customs, and at the same time practising the art of war in this
country. They must either think all these men to be wise as
philosophers; or if they rightly despair of this they must believe
that the rock of Tantalus’ is suspended over the State by fragile 15
cables. For these men will fall upon us the first moment they think
the attempt likely to succeed.

Even now some skirmishings of this sort are manifest and certain
parts of the Empire are becoming inflamed, as though it were a
human body in which alien portions are incapable of mingling in a 20
healthy state of harmony. Then in the case of cities as in that of
the body, we must separate the alien part as the sons of physicians

z092 and generals would say. But not to organize a force to cope with
these men, and to grant immunity from military service to many
who ask for it, and to allow those in the countryside to devote 25
themselves to other callings, as if that barbarian army were our
own native production, what is this but the act of men hastening
to their doom? Rather than allow the Scythians to be under arms
here, we ought to seek from the agriculture so dear to them the
men who would fight to defend it, and we ought to enrol all these 30
in a military force, to such a point as to summon the philosopher
from his study, the craftsman from his lowlier calling, and from


® Plato, Repub. 375 2. § Eurip. Ovest. §; Pind. Olymp. i. 56.


ON KINGSHIP 135


the shop its salesman. As to the crowd of drones who pass their
lives in the theatres by reason of their unlimited leisure, we should
beg of them to make haste for once in their lives, before they should
be turned to tears from their laughter; for there is no motive of
s either the better or the worse shame that shall stand in the way of
the Romans possessing a force of their own. The same organization
holds good in the State as in the family; the male element must
defend and the female occupy itself with the care of the houschold
within.! How then can you endure that the male element should
10 be foreign? Is it not disgraceful that the empire richest in men
should yield the crown of glory in war to alicns? For my own part,
however many victories such men might win for us, I should be
ashamed of the aid so received. This very thing,
‘Well I know, I do opine’


15 (for it is obvious to any sensible.man). that when the male and
female of which we speak do not happen to be brother and sister,
or in any other way related, the armed portion of them will need
but a slight excuse to demand mastery of the civilians, and then
the unwarlike will be pitted against those inured to the shock of

zo arms. Before matters have come to this pass, one to which they
are now tending, we should recover courage worthy of Romans,
and accustom ourselves to winning our own victories, admitting
no fellowship with these foreigners, but disowning their participa-
tion in any rank.


a5 15. But first let all be excluded from magistracies and kept
away from the privileges of the council who are ashamed of all
that has been sacred to the Romans from olden times, and has
been so esteemed. Of a truth both Themis, herself sacred to the
Senate, and the god of our battle-line must, I think, cover their
go faces when the man with leathern jerkin marches in command of
those that wear the general's cloak, and whenever such an one
| 3 Plato, Meno, gig.


1093


136 DE REGNO


divests himself of the sheepskin in which he was clad to assume
the toga, and enters the council-chamber to deliberate on matters.
of State with the Roman magistrates, having a prominent seat
perhaps next the consul, while the lawful men sit behind him.
Then again such as these, when they have gone a little way from 5
the assembly, are again attired in their sheepskins, and once in
company of their followers, laugh the toga to scorn, and aver that
they cannot even draw the sword in comfort with it. For my part
I wonder at many other things, but not least at this our absurd
conduct. All this is in the face of the fact that every house, how-
ever humble, has a Scythian for slave. The butler, the cook, the
water-carrier, all are Scythians, and as to retinue, the slaves who
bend under the burden of the low couches on their shoulders that
their masters may recline in the streets, these are all Scythians
also; for it has been proved of old that theirs is the most useful 15
race, and the fittest to serve the Romans. But that these fair-
haired men who arrange their locks like the Euboeans should be
slaves in private to the same men whom they govern in public,
this is strange, perhaps the most incredible feature of the spectacle,
and I know not what sort of a thing the so-called riddle may be, 20
if this is not one. In Gaul Crixus and Spartacus practised the
calling of arms in dishonour, in order to become the victims of
the Roman populace in the arena, but, when they escaped and
3096 bore a grudge against the laws, they engaged in the so-called
Servile War which became the most calamitous campaign of 3
those which the Romans of that time encountered. Against these
slaves they had every need of consuls, of praetors, and of the
happy fortune of Pompey, for their city was nearly ravaged off
the face of the earth. And yet those who revolted along with
Spartacus and Crixus were not of the same race as they, nor of the 30
same race as each other. Notwithstanding this, the fate which
they shared in common furnished them with a pretext and made
them of the same mind. It is, I suppose, in the nature of things


Oo


ON KINGSHIP 137


that every slave is the enemy of his master once he has hopes
of overcoming him. Is the case then the same with us also?
Are we nourishing on an altogether greater scale the germs of
untoward troubles? Remember that in our case there are not

s merely two men, and those dishonoured individuals heading a
rebellion, but great and pernicious armies who, kinsmen of our
own slaves, have by evil destiny poured into the Roman Empire,
and furnished generals of great repute both amongst themselves
and amongst us,

10 __ ‘By our own coward nature’."


Consider also that in addition to what forces they already possess,
they may, whenever they will, have the slaves as soldiers, nght
reckless and courageous ones too, who will perform the unholiest
deeds to glut themselves with independence. This fortress of
ts theirs you must pull down; you. must remove the foreign cause of
the disease before the festering abscess actually declares itself,
before the ill-will of these dwellers in our country is exposed. For
evils may be overcome in their infancy, but when they progress
they gain the upper hand. The army must be purified by the
20 Emperor, as is a heap of wheat from which we separate the coarse
grain and what other elements sprout side by side with it, ruinous
to the noble and legitimate secd. Now if I scem to you to give
counsel that is no longer easy to follow, have you not considered
to what sort of men and to what sort of race those belong of whom
2s I am speaking to you who are their king? It is a race whom the
Romans conquered, and from such conquest their name has been
renowned amongst men: further, they govern all men with whom
they come in contact, both by their strong arm and by thcir will,and
they have occupied the earth as do the gods, according to Homer,
39 ‘Encountering alike the insolence and goodwill of men’,


As to these Scythians, Herodotus says that they are all tainted


1 Whence? 8 Odyssey, xvil. 487.
ays T


138 DE REGNO


with a feminine malady,’ and we ourselves see this. These are
the men from whose ranks slaves are recruited everywhere, and
who have never owned any land. Hence the proverb ‘The Scythian
wilderness’, for they are always fleeing their own country. The old
historians tells us that the Cimmerians first drove them from their 5
settlements,” then others in turn did the same, then the women,’
then.our ancestors, and lastly the Macedonian. Forced by some of
2097 these they advanced towards inland nations, and by others to-
wards those without, nor do they stop until they are delivered
up by their pursuers in turn to other nations right ia front of 10
them. When indeed they fall suddenly upon those who are not
expecting them, they strike them with confusion for a time, as
they terrorized the Assyrians of old, and the Medes and the
Palestinians. But in these days they have come to us, not to
challenge us in battle, but as suppliants, for they have again been 15
driven from their country. Now that they have found, I do not say
the arms, but the dispositions of the Romans softer, as was perhaps
to be expected when dealing with suppliants, this untutored race
has made the natural repayment. It has become insolent and
has ignored our kindness. When, then, they paid the penalty for 20
this conduct to your father who took up arms against them, they
again became objects of compassion, and sat at his feet in suppliant
guise together with their women, and he who had been their con-
queror in war, was quite overcome by pity. He raised them up
from their prostrate position, made allies of them, and accounted 25
them worthy of citizenship. Moreover, he threw open public
offices to them, and made over some part of the Roman territory
to their bloodstainecd hands, expending the magnanimity and
nobility of his nature upon a work of clemency. Unfortunately the
barbarian does not understand chivalrous conduct. From the very 30
beginning till now these men have treated us with derision, know-
ing both what they deserved at our hands, and what they were


3 Herodot. i. 105. § Ibid. i. 15. ® Ibid. iv. 10,


ON KINGSHIP 139


assumed to deserve; and this reputation of ours has encouraged
their neighbours to make their way hither. Now hordes of foreign
mounted archers keep pouring forth seeking out our easy-going
people, begging for their indulgence and pointing out the case of
s these scoundrels as a precedent for it. The evil scems to be grow-
ing to the point of ‘persuasion by force’, as the popular phrase has
it. No matter for the phrase; for philosophy must not quarrel over
terminology when she is seeking something to serve her thought,
even if she has to help herself by picking a phrase out of the gutter,
10 SO long as it is perfectly clear and appropriate to the matter in
hand. Well then, how shall we find it other than a difficult task
to recover lost military prestige, and


‘To drive from hence these ill-omened dogs’?!


Only hear me, and this difficult matter will appear the easiest in
ts the world. Once our ranks are increased in numbers, and spirit
has gained in the ranks, once the battalions are home-born troops,
then do you infuse into the kingdom what is lacking to it now.
Homer, too, has sanctified this as the prerogative of chiefs in the
words:
20 ‘Great is the wrath of divine kings’.?


Wrath, therefore, is called for against these men, and they will
either till the soil in obedience to orders, even as the Messenians
long ago laid down their arms, and served the Lacedacmonians, or
they will take the same road in flight again, and announce to those

2s beyond the river that their former gentleness no longer survives
among the Romans, for that one young and nobly born is their
leader,

‘A terrible man, who might blame even the blameless’.? 3100


So be it. This assuredly is the nurture and training of a king as
3° warrior; we will next turn our full attention to the king in peace.


» Tiad, viii. 527. ® [did. ii. 196. > [did. xi. 654.


3140 DE REGNO


16. Now the warlike king may be above all a man of peace, for
to him alone who is able to inflict injury upon the evildoer is it
given to keep the peace. For my own part I should say that the
king has, all in all, gained most applause as a peacemaker who,
although desiring injustice to none, is nevertheless provided with 5
the power to escape injury at the hands of others; for if he does
not war, he will certainly be warred against. Peace is a happier
state than war, because the preparations of war are actually made
with a view to peace. The end in view would justly be preferred
to those things which exist on its account. Thus it is well that the 10
king give himself up to each half of his command in turn, that body
politic divided into two estates, that of the armed men and that of
the unarmed; and after consorting with his fighting men, he should
visit cities and country districts to which, by the use of the
military, we have granted fearless possession of their farms and 15
civic rights. He will visit again and again in his tours as many
races and as many cities as possible; and whatever portion of his
Empire he does not reach, even to that he will devote his atten-
tion in what is apparently an effective and excellent way.


17. The institution of embassies, sacred as it is in other respects, 20
is in this connexion of the highest value. Conferring with these,
the king will know that which is afar no less than that which is
near, nor will his foresight for his kingdom be bounded by the
sense of sight. He can even raise up that which is fallen, though
he see it not, can give largess to races in distress, and remit state 25
burdens to such persons as have long been groaning under them.
He -will break off a war that threatens, and will terminate a war
which has broken out, and will adjust everything else in time, for
by the agency of the embassies he will be able, like the god


‘To see and hear everything’. 30
® Jhiad, iii, 277.


ON KINGSHIP 141


To these let him be accessible, and ‘gentle as a father’," whether
they come from near or from afar, for so I have heard Homer
speaking once for all of the king that is at peace with himself.


18. First of all, let the soldiers be enjoined to show considera-
5 tion to the city populations, and to the rural also, and to be as
little as possible a burden to them, remembering the duties they
have undertaken on their account. For the king fights in their
defence, and enlists men to fight in order that the prosperity of the
town and the countryside may be preserved. Whosoever, there-.
10 fore, keeps the foreign enemy from me, but does not himself treat
me with justice, such a man as this seems to me in no wise to differ
from a dog who pursues wolves as far away as possible for no other
reason than that he may himself slaughter the flock at his leisure,
whereas in his fill of milk he has reccived the due reward of his
35 guardianship.? True peace, therefore, comes if the soldiers have
been trained to treat civilians as brothers, and only to take what
the regulations permit.


19. It is by no means a kingly trait to exhaust citics by levying
taxes, for to the good king of what use are great possessions? He sro
20 does not through vanity of disposition? descend to costly activities,
nor does he display a vainglorious prodigality in place of a prudent
use of his means. His is not the puerile character which would
sacrifice the sweat of the honest toilers to the amusements of the
stage. He will not have to face the necessity of frequent wars
25 which, as the Lacedaemonian says, ‘feed on more than their
rations’ ;* for my argument has shown that the good king may be
mastered neither by plot nor by attack. If the objects, therefore,
for which he needs taxes have been cut down by him, he stands in
no need of a surplus. He can become a most harmless collector of


® Odyssey, ii. 234. - 2 Plato, Repub. 416 8, 464 c.
® Plat. Thcact. 375 B; Aristot. Eth. Nic. 3323°. * Plutarch, Cleomenes, 27.


142 DE REGNO


these revenues by cancelling the inevitable deficits and by being
Satisfied with the imposition of such amounts as are commensurate
with the means of the taxpayers; but a king who is greedy of
money is more shameful than a huckster. The latter, at all events,
relieves the want in his own house; but the evil disposition of the
former is inexcusable. For my own part, when I review, as I often
do, each one of our passions and consider what sort of men they
present us with, men completely engrossed by them, I seem to my-
self to observe, even among private individuals, that this tribe of
business people is the most sordid, the most malicious, the most
downright niggardly of all men,’ and capable of finding a place, not
in all respects dishonourable, only in a decaying country. Nay,
they themselves are the first to suffer contempt in thcir own
conscicnces, inasmuch as they have made plans contrary to the
purpose of Nature in respect to what is first and what is last. For
she ordained the body to be in the service of the soul,? and the
things without to be for the use of the body, and to this last she


10


gave secondary things, but these men class both soul and body >


with the third element. Dishonouring themselves, therefore, and
reducing the ruling power within them to slavery,’ how could such
men either do or plan anything further that ts great and noble?
When I define them as more ignoble than ants, and more small-
minded, Iam not ashamed before Truth; for the ants measure their
provision by the necds of life, but these men think fit to measure
life by their need of provision. This dreadful plague must there-
fore be driven away from the king himself and his subjects alike,
that a good king may rule over good subjects; and zeal for virtue
must be introduced in its place. In this struggle for virtue let the
king himself become both the champion and the umpire.

It is shameful, as some one has said, that there should be public
javelin contests and competitions in boxing, and wreaths of


3 Plato, Repub. 581 v. 8 Aristot. Polit, 1254»,
® Demosth. De Corona, p. 324.


30


ON KINGSHIP 143


victory awarded to the victors in these contests, and that none
should enter competitions in self-control, none in virtue.' It is
probable, I think, nay, more than probable, it is quite certain that
the cities which followed such a policy on the part of their king as
§ this would lead the life of the fabled Golden Age of yore, having
no time for evil, but leisure for good and, in the first place, for
piety. The king himself will lead us to this virtue, seccking from a
divine source the direction of every deed, whether great or small.
More wondrous than all else is it, methinks, to hear or to behold
10 the king when, in the midst of his people, he holds up his hands and
bends his knee before that King who is at once his own and that
of his people. And it is reasonable to suppose that the Divinity 1204
will be rejoiced when glorified by devotion from a pious king, and
will make such an one His own in sacred union. Thus, in addition
15 to being a lover of God he becomes more than all a lover of man,
for he shows himself to his subjects in the image of the King by
whom he is ruled. In such a state as this what needful thing is
likely to be wanting? But my discourse must return to the subject
of a moment ago.


20 20. We made bencficence a stamp of kingship, passing in review
again ‘ the giver of good gifts’, ‘ the kindly one’, names belong-
ing also to God. Now let all these very properties and as many
as were mentioned in their company before I promised to model
the king in my discourse, be assigned to their right places, and

as let the image be completed. The chief of these ideas, perhaps, was
that being able to originate good works he will not tire in this
employment any more than does the sun when he gives his beams
to plants and animals, for it is no labour to him to shine, inasmuch
as he holds brightness in his being and is a fountain of light. And

jo so the king, once that he has placed himself in this category of
existence, will of himsclf order all, to whatever extent he reaches
that which is ruled over.
1 Eorip., Fragment 284, ed. Nauck.


144 DE REGNO


Moreover, as for those who are near the throne, who are second
to him alone and who are superior to the others, he will organize
them by the kingly harmony of the soul, namely such men as are
useful for each measure of the distributed power. From the very
beginning the care of men will thus make greater progress in pro- 5
portion as a greater number are engaged in the task.


21. Now you will have to send out governors also to foreign
parts, in so great an Empire as this. And the next step is to give
the preference in your choice to those who administer with justice,
for this kind of foresight is divine and magnificent. Now truly to 10
seek to know each place, man, and dispute would need much de-
tailed discourse, and not even Dionysius, who had established him-
self as ruler over a single island, and not even the whole of that,
would have been capable of this charge. But by the help of a few
agents it is possible to care for the many. This has always been 15
called a divine and universal solicitude which, though it is
grounded in a strong character and does not stoop to haphazard >
details, nevertheless does not escape from them.

God, in using this solicitude, does not Himself elaborate each of «
the details here below, but rather uses Nature as His right hand, 20
remaining true to His own character, and is the cause of good
works even to the last one of them, for He becomes the cause of
causes. It is in this way that a king must inquire into the adminis-
tration of the State. Let him distribute his rule as muchas possible
amongst the justest and best administrators. 25

There is a reason for this, for he will become more easily intimate
with a few than with many, and he will more easily notice the
failuresor successes ofa few. Let his choice of those who are to rule
be of the best, and not of the richest, as it now is. We submit

uzos our bodies not to the richest physicians, but to those who are most 30
skilful in their profession; and so the ruler shall be chosen who
4 Aristot. Polit. 1273 23.


ON KINGSHIP 145


has most knowledge of ruling, rather than the rich man, since
through him more things are likely to turn out for the worse than
for the better. How, indeed, is it right that he should rule who,
from the very evil of his nature, has accumulated wealth, and not
s the man who is poor, though he is just and law-abiding, and who,
through the very fact that he is just, is not ashamed to dwell with
poverty? But the other man who has become rich by hook or by
crook, and has thereby purchased his office, could never know what
manner of man a dispenser of justice might be. For it is evident,
10 for example, that such a one would not easily hate injustice, or
show a contempt for possessions, nor would he fail to make the
magistrate’s house a place of sale for decisions in the courts. It is
little likely that he should look gold in the face with stern eyes,
and pass on. On the contrary, he would regard it with veneration,
15 surrender to it, and in the end embrace it; for he feels only grati-
tude towards it, inasmuch as he has taken administration in cx-
change for a measure of wealth, and has hired cities like any other
commodity. He knows well that through this he is illustrious, and
sits in high places, looked up to by many other people, and by the
20 just whether they be prosperous or poor.

But achieve thou something to be envied for its virtue, even
if it live with poverty. Let not a man’s prudence and sense of
justice escape you, nor the rest of that swarm of the soul's virtues
which is concealed under a poor garb. Nay, drag him out in full

2§ view and demand that he make his virtue public, for it is not right
that it should stay at home, but rather should it be in the ficld and
engaged in battle. For know well that, whereas you will imme-

‘diately herald them, it is you yourself who shall be extolled
throughout, having furnished to succeeding time a pattern of a

30 happy kingdom. And if you do this, you will quickly see many
ashamed of the wealth their work has earned. and others taking
pride in self-chosen poverty. Moreover, men’s notions concern-
ing it will change, so that to seek out wealth will, be a reproach,

ai7t-s U


146 _ DE REGNO


and that the maintenance of poverty will be considered an
honour. Of many gifts which God has bestowed on kingship, gifts
enviable and happy, not the least,—nay, perhaps the greatest,—
is this, which all men should admire and praise, to wit, the
power that the king holds over the souls of his subjects, and which 5
enables him to change their opinion of his character, burnt in
though it was by old habits and early indulgence, by showing
that he honours its opposite and sets high value on it, for in
whatsoever the king rejoices, this must at once increase and be
adopted by the majority.' 10


22. Now that I have come to this part of my discourse, I have
some desire to offer up a prayer also in behalf of my own
darling.? May you, my liege, be enamoured of Philosophy and real
education. For it follows of necessity from what has been said,
that you have many rivals in love for whom there is also a certain 15

s108 use; Since now the danger is that her flame may be extinguished
through neglect, and that in a little time not even a spark will be
left for those who desire to kindle it. Is it then on account of
Philosophy that I have made this prayer, or is it true that she will
in no wise suffer, even if she dwells apart from men? For she has 20
her home with God, with whom, even when she is here below,
lies her chief concern. And what time this earthly dwelling-place
doth not admit her when she comes down to us, she dwells beside
the Father and is entitled to say to us,
‘I need not at all such honour as this, 25
I pride myself as honoured by the decree of Zeus.’?
Now the affairs of men become worse or better or altogether happy,
just as she is present or absent. For these things, therefore, as
well as for Philosophy, I have prayed; and may I have the fortune
to get an answer to the prayer which Plato offered up, but without 30
success. Would that I might see you take to yourself Philosophy
3 Asistot. Polit. 1273. 2 Plato, Gorgias, 482 A. 3 Ib. ix. 607 f.


ON KINGSHIP 147


in addition to Kingship. No longer shall any man henceforth hear
me saying anything concerning kingship. It is indeed time that

I were silent, since in this one word I have summed up all.
And, if this is the case, I have given you what I proposed in
§ the first instance, when I myself promised to show you the statue
of a king in Janguage. And since the word is in reality the shadow
of the deed,’ I sought, reversing the process, to makc it living and
moving through you. Now this I shall sce at no distant future, and
you will render unto me the reality of the king, if my words shall
10 not merely wait at the portals of your ears for admission, but shall
rush in and take their abode in the inmost parts of your soul. In
truth I am persuaded that Philosophy has not been aroused to the
exhortation without divine assistance; for God, as can be readily
conjectured, is eagerly zealous to advance your fortunes.. And I
15 should justly be the first to rejoice over the sapling sprung from
my seed, making trial of such a king as I am now moulding in you,
whensoever I give and receive speech concerning the requests of

the cities.


3 Diog. Laert. ix. 37.


DIO


a2 «1. Pattostratus of Lemnos, in composing the lives of the
sophists who had preceded him, divides them into two classes at
the beginning of his treatise; first the sophists in the exact sense,
and second those who, although really students of philosophy, had
nevertheless been classified as sophists on account of their reputa- 5
tion for beauty of language. He gives Dio his place amongst these,
as also Carneades the Athenian, and Leo of Byzantium, and
many others who passed their lives in the profession of philosophy,
but had accustomed themselves to a sophistical form of style; and
again he accounts amongst these Eudoxus of Cnidus, a man at first 10
known as one of Aristotle’s disciples, but also well versed in astro-
nomy, at least as much of the art as was cultivated in those days.
For our part let Dio through all his works be a sophist, even as he
is said to be, in virtue of the range of that ‘tongue of gold’ which
he possessed, if any one chooses to consider the cult of oratory an 15
achievement proper to the sophist. The nature of this, indeed, we

#113 shall examine a little later. If we consider his aims, Dio should
neither be placed alone nor with the men just mentioned, but
rather with Aristocles, although he is to be contrasted even with
him. Both of them changed their earlier attitude, but Aristocles 20
was a man who from being a philosopher and an earnest one at
that, and one whose brow was knit with thought, ended among
the sophists, and not only indulged in every luxury, but even
reached the culminating point.

After spending the bloom of his youth in the advocacy of the 25
Peripatetic views, and in publishing treatises for the Greeks with
all the philosopher’s enthusiasm, he fell a victim to sophistic
opinion to such an extent that he repented him when an old man
of the very seriousness of his youth, and in his contests shook the
lecture-rooms of Italy and Asia with his declamations. Moreover 30


DIO 149


he had given himself over to the cottabus and introduced flute
girls at dinner parties, and besides gave public banquets.
Dio, however, from being a senseless sophist ended his life as a
philosopher, and favoured in this rather by fortune than by his
gs own judgement, has himself given us an account of that good ::36
fortune. So it was the duty of one writing his biography to
describe the flaw in the man and not simply to reckon him thus
with Carneades and Eudoxus. Whichever of their subjects you
take, it is a philosophic.one handled in a sophistical way; that is to
10 say the style is wantonly, withal cunningly, set forth, and brings
in much of the element of grace. In this way also by men whom
they fascinated in speech by the beauty of their phrases, they were
deemed worthy of the title of sophist, but it seems to me that they
themselves would have repudiated this and would have declined
35 it if offered, since philosophy brings such an expression into con-
tempt, for Plato had just risen up against the name. But Dio
showed forth brilliantly in each of these two walks of hfe re-
spectively, and is at war with himself in his subjects, publishing
speeches setting forth these opposite ways of life. Now we should
zo not, methinks, pass over in silence the facts concerning this man,
least of all on account of the discrepancy found in his speeches.
As to what Philostratus says in the following passage, when he
absolves him from blame for composing a panegyric on a bird
called ‘a parrot’, on the ground that it is the part of a sophist not
as to scorn even such a subject, in all this he seems to confute himself,
for he announced to us before that this man is one of the slandered,
inasmuch as, though all the while a philosopher, he is dragged
into being a sophist; for he speaks as follows:
‘The ancients described as sophists, not only those of their
30 rhetoricians who made loud speeches and were brilliant men, but
also those of the philosophers who expounded their thoughts in a
fluent style. In behalf of these latter we ought to speak first, for
although they were not sophists but only seemed so, they have


150 DIO


passed under this designation.’ Then he distinctly enumerates the
men who are philosophers, amongst these Dio, and others after
Dio, and in taking leave of the last of them, says: ‘So much for the
philosophers who have the reputation of being sophists,’ only |
saying in another way the same thing, namely, that not being s
sophists they usurped that name. And yet in the meantime he
admits, it would seem, that he is in doubt in what rank of his
chorus to place this man, for he is really very expert.

What then did you say at first, and what afterwards? was it that
the one thing is, and the other only appears to be? For my part I 10
do not split hairs over these contradictions, and I am willing to
admit that Dio was really a philosopher and only played at
sophistry, as long as he shall be found gentle and compassionate to
philosophy, and has nowhere done her violence or marshalled
against her reckless and evil-minded words. But this man of all 15_
the sophists had behaved with the greatest effrontery to philo-
sophers and philosophy. The reason for this, I think, is that since
a nature full of power was allotted to him, even the practice of
oratory made him speak the truth, for he was persuaded that it
was better to live according to the views shared by the generality 20
of mankind than to live according to philosophy. It follows from
this that his works directed against the philosophers are carried
out with great attention to expression and shirk no brightness of
language. The work addressed to Musonius also was another of

3337 a similar nature. Dio was not merely exercising his powers in this 25
instance, but was writing from conviction; I affirm this with every
confidence and could easily convince another, given that he were
Clever at detecting truth and dissimulation of character in any
‘sort of speech.


2. Now when Dio betook himself to philosophy, then indeed and 30
' then most of all did the power of his nature become manifest. For
as though his natural bent of mind had recognized late in the day


DIO 151
its true sphere of action he was drawn away from his profession of
sophistry, not by degrees, but suddenly and with all sails set; and
then indeed he handled the rhetorical parts of his arguments no
longer with the powers of a rhetorician, but in the manner of a

s statesman. If any one is ignorant of the difference between the
statesman and the rhetorician in the same subject of discourse, let
him go over intelligently the funeral oration of Aspasia’ in Plato,
and that of Pericles in Thucydides.? Each one is far more beautiful
than the other if judged according to its own canons. Now Dio

so does not seem to have persevered with the systematic propositions
of philosophy, nor to have continucd to devotc his attention to
the tenets of natural science, for he had made the change late in
the day. But he profited, it seems, by the teachings of the Stoa in
so far as ethics are concerned, and showed virility of mind beyond
1s any of his contemporaries; he set himself to admonish mankind
whether kings or private citizens, speaking as well to the individual
as to the masses, and to this end he devoted his long reserved
training in oratory. On account of this it would be well, I think, to
* inscribe on each discourse of Dio whether it was written before his
20 exile or after it, as the case may be, not merely on those in which
there is some allusion to the exile, as some have already done, but
on all without exception. In this way we should be enabled to
separate those works which are philosophical from those which are
in essence sophistic, keeping them apart, and we shall not have to
2s encounter him as though engaged in a night battle, at onc moment
attacking Socrates and Zeno with Dionysiac jeers and demanding
that their disciples should depart from every land and sea, as being
the curse of towns and states; and at another crowning them with
wreaths and holding them up as examples of a noble and temperate
30 life. But Philostratus, without taking the trouble to think about
it, assumes that the ‘Eulogy on the parrot’ and the ‘Eubocan’
belong to the same line of thought, and then devotes himself im-


4 Plato, Menexenus, 236 E. 2 Thucydides, fi. 35-46.


152 DIO


partially, in behalf of both these works, to the defence of Dio, that
the latter may not appear to have devoted serious hours to trifles.
Now this is only to give the greater importance to one of the works
in question. For while proclaiming his place to be amongst those
who have passed their whole lives in philosophy, he not only admits,
as he develops his argument, that Dio has done some work of the
sophistic sort, but defrauds the man also of things that really exist
in virtue of the philosophical side of his nature, by assigning these to
the sophistic works. Now if any one denies that the ‘Euboean’ is a


3330 Serious work and has been written in defence of serious vicws, he


would not easily, I think, accept any one of Dio’s worksin such wise
at least as to call it philosophical. The treatise is an outline of a
happy life, and is one most worthy of perusal for the poorand the rich
alike, for it tends to repress the temperament swollen with riches
by showing that happiness lies in another direction, and it awakens
the nature beaten down by poverty and frees it from humiliation.
On the one hand this is a tale that would soothe the ears of all men
and might have persuaded Xerxes himself, even that Xerxes who
Jed the great expedition against the Greeks, that on his diet of mil-
let a huntsman in the mountains of Euboea was a happier man
than he. On the other hand it is in accord with the best precepts,
and in his own practice of these no one is ashamed of poverty,
even if he cannot escape it. For these reasons they are the better
judges who have placed this work next in order of excellence to his


5


last ‘On Kingship’, in which he presents four lives and their 25


demons, taking in turn the lover of possessions, the lover of enjoy-
ment, thirdly the lover of honours, and above them all the bene-
volent and industrious one. All these he describes and arranges in
their true proportion, then brings the book to an end after promis-


ing that he will at once give us the rest when he shall be permitted 30


by the gods to do so.


3. Now set aside the figures of Diogenes and Socrates, who


DIO 153


occur in so many works, and who scem exceptional in natural
genius. These two it is not in the power of every man to emulate,
but only such an one as has made promise from the first of a
certain preference for what pertains to philosophy. If, however,
s you are only secking a man, after our common humanity, one who
can turn his hand to everything, one just, pious, independent,
and benevolent according to his means; in that case no other
examples of such a happy life could be offered you in exchange
for those of the ‘Euboean’. Moreover, somewhere in this book he
10 praises the Essenes, a whole happy township in the midst of
Palestine, beside the Dead Sea, lying at some point not far from
Sodom itself.
From the moment, then, that Dio began to study philosophy
seriously and inclined to admonishing mankind, he actually pub-
15 lished not one unprofitable speech, but to him who reads in no
careless spirit it will be evident that the form of Dio’s exposition
is not one and the same, but varies according as his subjects are
sophistic or social. In the former he carries his head high and
gives himself airs like a peacock gazing about himself and as
20 though rejoicing in the splendour of his speech, as one turning his
eyes upon that alone, and making euphony his object. You may
take his description of Tempe as an example of this, and also his
‘Memnon’. In this his manner of expressing himself is somewhat
‘arrogant; but as to the books of his second period, in these you
2§ would least detect anything frivolous or presumptuous, (Nor is this
a matter for wonderment), inasmuch as philosophy drives luxury
even from the tongue,.dclighting rather in a beauty which is grave
and orderly, as is her old tradition, one in accord with nature and
in harmony with underlying principles. Now Dio also when he
30 threads his way through history falls in with this tradition, follow-
ing the most ancient authorities whether in oration or argument. 222%
Of his sound and dominant exposition take either.the *‘Parliament-
ary’ or the ‘Senatorial’ speech as an example. And if you like to
2878-1 x


154 DIO


take up any of his addresses to cities, delivered and published,
you may see each of the old-fashioned styles but nothing of the
more modern note which secks to overload the fairness of nature,
such as are the essays which we called to mind a moment ago,
namely the ‘Memnon’ and the ‘Tempe’. Of this last type is the's
*Attack on the philosophers’, for even if he does not so pretend, it
smacks of the auditorium and its grace, nor can you find a more
fascinating picce of rhetoric in Dio.

Again, I am lost in amazement at the destiny of philosophy if
it be true that no comedy is more famous than the ‘Clouds’, 10
Certainly Aristophanes has recited none with equal power. Take
this as a sign of terseness and fluency:

‘He dipt the insect’s feet in melted wax

Which hardening into sandals as it cooled

Gave him the space by rule infallible.’ ? 15
Moreover, his indictment of Plato, On behalf of the four, made
Aristides famous amongst the Greeks. This essay was devoid of
all finished art, nor could you give it a place in the catcgory of
thetoric at Icast with any justice to rhetorical laws; but it is com-
posed with an ineffable beauty of form and with an astonishing 20
grace, bringing as it were, a reckless delight by its use of names
and words. This Dio, moreover, was. at his very pinnacle in his
essay against the philosophers, above all in that quality which
the younger men of the present day call culmination. In a word,
he adapted himself to a style by far too pompous for a convincing 2$
speaker, and yet in such a genve he seemed quite to surpass himself.
Dio has not, however, so much betrayed the old rhetoric, even in
those passages where he clearly seems to recede from its native
traditions, to such an extent that it might even escape us that it is
Dio, since he has veered to the modern school. He handles 30
lawlessness rather cautiously, and like one diffident when he

uz2aq beings forward anything venturesome and insolent. He could
2 Aristoph. Nubes, 149. The translation is Mitchell's.


DIO 155


scarcely indeed escape a condemnation for cowardice if we
examined him in relation to the audacity which subsequently pre-
vailed amongst the orators. But in most of his works, in almost
all of them indeed, we may place him with the well-balanced

s orators of the past, beside any one of whom he was altogether
worthy to speak cither before the pcople or an individual; for the
rhythmical element in his language is restrained just as the depth
of the moral impression he makes is chastened, as befits a sort of
chastiser and moral guide of a whole city affected by folly.

10 ©6©But inasmuch as we said that Dio’s faculty of expression is
neither altogether uniform nor is it even open to doubt that both
styles belong to Dio, one being that of an orator and the other that
of a social reformer; so also as to the thoughts, whosoever, not
himself divorced from thought, will cast his cye over any of Dio’s

1§ books, will recognize that they are of his authorship, written in
one or the other of the two styles belonging to his subject matter;
and even if he takes the most trivial of all he will sce that Dio is
the most resourccful of men in finding words for everything by
his rhetorical power.

20 He stands out far beyond sophists in his enterprise and, even
granting that any other sophist has been resourceful, he is far
from being worthy to be compared with Dio in versatility. At the
same time a certain marvellous individuality characterizes the
thoughts of Dio. Let the ‘Rhodian’ and the ‘Trojan’ reveal this to

25 you, and also, if you like, the ‘Praise of the Mosquito’, for even

_trivialities become serious subjects with Dio, who followed his
natural bent everywhere, and you would not fail to recognize that
these works belonged to the same make and power.


4. It occurred to me to say this about Dio to my latest son who
3o is yet to be; for while I was going through Dio’s writings of every
description, in the midst of all this the oracle came to me.' Of a


’1 Damascius, Life of Isidove, c. 32, states that the Alexandrians even in his day
spoke of dreams as oracles.


156 DIO


truth I have come to feel the instincts of a father. Already I long
to be with my son, and teach him what I think about every prose
writer and every writing, introducing to him men who are dear to
me with the criticism that befits each. May Dio of Prusa’be
amongst these also, a man exceptional in speech and in know- 5
ledge. And after praising him thus, I hand Dio over to him that he
may commence to read his political works after the masters of
the noble philosophy, and may regard them as a border-land
between his own preparatory teaching and instruction in the
ultimate truths. 10
It would be well for you, my son, when you have continucd the
pursuit of intellectual demonstrations and when your mind is
congested or your understanding is overburdened with weighty
doctrines, it will be well for you, I say, not at once to rush to
comedy or any mere form of rhetoric when in need of a change of 15
occupation; for this would be to idle in a disorderly way, and
perchance far beyond what is reasonable. Rather should the
strained cord be relaxed by degrees until, if it seems good to you
(and may it so seem!) you have arrived even at the opposite
extreme, having gone through all things that have been dallied 20
3225 Over and played with by men who were comrades of the Muses,
until, I say, with increased zeal you again use these and certain
kindred writings as a means of moral ascent. This would be the
best conduct to pursue as you mun the length of this noble double
course,at one moment playing with your books, at another working 25
with them. For I think the philosopher must not be rude or evil in
any other way, but should be initiated in all gracious conduct and
should also be an unmistakable Greek; that is to say, should be
able to keep in touch with mankind by taking care not to neglect
any written work. It seems that the prelude to philosophy is 30
nothing else than a curiosity about knowledge,’ and in children
the disposition to love a story is the promise of a philosophical goal.
3 Cf Arist. Metaphysica, 980%, 982; Synesius, Egyptian Tale, 1213 B.


DIO 157


And yet of what art or knowledge could she (Philosophy) be an art
and a knowledge? It lies in her very essence that she is understood
to be borne on her way by all of these,’ if so be she has no pre-
dilection among them, so as to regard one from her point of.
s vantage, and to busy herself with another who is moving forward,
while she has them all for a bodyguard as befits a queen. Are not
the Muses all together, as their name indicates, whether it be that
the gods so named them, or that men employ a term divine? At
all events they make up a company by reason, I presume, of this
10 very union. No one of them is ever scparated from another, nor in
a banquet of the gods does she display her own work, neither docs
she get an altar or a shrinc amongst men.
And yet there are some who from want of nature’s endowment
are ever seeking to divide into small portions that which is in them
1§ indivisible, and so one man has attained proficiency in the art of
one Muse, and another in that of another. But philosophy domi-
nates them all. And this is what is doubtless set forth by the
immediate presence of Apollo in the harmony of the Muses.


5. Now this speech would define as an artist and an expert the

zo man who cuts off for himself any one branch of knowledge, one
such man belonging to one divinity (Muse), another to another;
but it would call philosopher that one who has been fitted to-
gether from the harmony of all, and has made the multitude of
arts into one. Or rather he has not attained this yet, for this must

25 be added to him also, namely, that he have a task of his own
superior to that of his company. Thus the story goes that Apollo
sings at one time with the Muses,? leading off himself, and giving
the time to the band, and at another sings by himself; but the first
would be the sacred and ineffable melody. So our philosopher will
30.commune, now with himself, and now with the god through philo-
sophy, but he will commune with men by the subordinate powers

3 j.e. the Muses. 2 Pausanias, v. 18. 4.


158 DIO


of speech. He will possess knowledge indeed as a lover of literature,
whereas he will pass judgement upon each and everything as a
philosopher. But these immovable men who despise rhetoric and
poetry’ do not seem to me to be what they are of their own free
will, and owing to the poverty of their natural gifts they are in- $
capable of even small achievements. You may more easily scesuch
228 men than see anything in their minds, and their tongues are unable
to interpret any thought. I, for one, even wish to distrust them,
nor would I say that they are concealing something hidden like
the Vestal Virgins, first because it is not even in the divine order 10
that a man should be wise about great things who is ignorant about
small ones, and further because, just as God has conceived clear
images of his secret powers, tangible bodies of the ideas, thus a soul
possessing beauty and fruitful of the noblest things, possesses the
force which is transmissible even to things outside, for no one of 15
the divine agencies is willing to be the last removed. If then the
man who refrains from talk in all sorts of ways is best suited to
conceal the inviolable doctrines, and also acquires the power of
dealing with assemblies of people at his will; of necessity must
that man fall short who has not been initiated in the inner circle 20
beforehand nor has celebrated the rites of the Muses. For one of
these two experiences overtakes him; either to be silent, or to say
what the law commands to be kept in silence. Thus he will either
take as subjects of his discourses the fortunes of the town, and
will associate with men on terms of vulgar familiarity, which no 25
freeborn man would deign to do, or if he desires to be a leader in
philosophy he will live in idleness. Now it is possible that this he
would not, even if he could, but certain that he could not if he
would. For my part I admire Proteus of Pharus also, for, being
wise in great things, he had thrown about himself a cloak of 30
wondrots sophistic discourse, and associated with chance comers
im evety way. For they departed in amazement at the display
4 Cf. Syn. Ep. 154.


DIO 159


surrounding him, without investigating the truth of the things
concerning which they were troubled. Now let there be some
vestibule of the temple for the uninitiated, but the man who
once gives himself solemn airs does not dissemble but rather irri-

$ tates and fans the flames of greediness in nature by which every one
busies himself overmuch with that which is sacred. If Ixion had
not grasped the cloud! instead of Hera,and if he had not been satis-
fied to embrace the mere image he would never willingly have
abandoned his mad chase.


10 6. Discourse therefore must be got ready in place of discourse,
in place of the greater the less. This indeed would be an excellent
one also and, when men encounter it before the other, the
one will be greatly gripped by it and will welcome it, and will even
think that no other could be better, while the other who has

1§ received a share of the divine nature will be thereby exalted and
will come to understand the former also. And whom the god stirs,
for him the temple also will be opened by us. Menelaus was in no
wise ignorant of the real Proteus; for he was a Greek hcro and a
son-in-law worthy of Zeus, to whom he was bound from the first by

20 no trivial bands. Clearly the fire and the tree? and the wild beast
were tales of animals and plants, but also concerned them- 1239
selves with the primary elements of which are composed things
coming into being. He cared not even for these but aspired to
penetrate still further into nature. It is really a gift divine to

2s suffice for all men in the degree to which cach person is able to
profit thereby. Let him whohasattained tothesummit keepin mind
also that he is a human being, and let him be able to associate
with every man, as much as in him lies. Why then should any
one banish the Muses, whomake it possible both to please mankind

yo and to keep divine things unsullicd, as by a veil cast o’er them?
3 Cf. Pindar, Pyth. il, 36.
2 Ci. Homer, Odyssey, iv. 458; Orph. Hymn, $6 (ed. Mullach).


160 DIO


If our human nature is a variable quality also, it will certainly
weary of a life of contemplation, to the point of forgoing its
greatness, and of descending; for we are not mind undefiled
but mind in the soul of a living creature; and for our own sakes
therefore we must seek after the more human forms of literature, 5
providing a home for our nature when it descends. One must be
content to have a neighbour somewhere towards whom to turn
and make atonement to the soul's constitution, which needs kindli-
ness so as not to fall farther, nor yet to pass its life in all the
diversity of nature. For God has made pleasure to be a fastening to
for the soul by which it supports the proximity of the body. Such
then is the beauty of literature. It does not go down towards
matter, nor docs it dip the mind in the lowest powers, but rather
gives it force to rise up in a moment and to hasten upwards to
real being, for even the low part of such a life is high. But for the 15
one who is incapable of tasting pleasure in its purity—and nature
needs the soothing element—what shall he do or whither shall he
turn? Will his course not tend towards that which is unworthy
even to relate? For obviously men of this sort will not despise
nature, though they will also profess an untiring zeal for contem- 20
plation, making themselves out to be passionless gods although
clothed in flesh. Nay, if they were to make such profession, let
them know that so far from being gods or wise and divine men,
they are empty-headed, and boasters into the bargain. They
would have been better if they had defined wisely what is fitting 25
to each manner of man. A condition untouched by passion is
by its very nature in God only, but men who change evil for
virtue succeed in moderating their passions: the very flight from
excess would be the achievement of the sage. |


7. I have ere now observed even men of foreign race, of both 30
these noble classes, men who professed a contemplative existence,
as32 and for that reason took no part in public life, and became un-


DIO 161


sociable in their haste to release themselves from nature. They

had sacred songs, holy symbols, and certain ordered approaches

to the Divinity. All these things cut the men off from turning

to matter, and they pass their lives apart from each other, so as
§ neither to see nor hear anything pleasant.


‘For bread they eat not at all, nor drink they the wine that is ruddy’.


In saying so much about the men in question one would not over-
shoot the mark. But not even these men who have made such a
brilliant struggle against nature, and who, as we might say, are
10 most worthy to share in the perfect life, not even do such as these
rejoice in it untiringly. For our perishable nature brings even
these back when they have only settled down.a short time in the
happy place of that real existence which is theirs. Nor can they,
I suppose, for all future time keep thcir mind on the surface and
15 take their fill of the beauty of the intelligible, not though this had
once been their fortune. I hear, indeed, that not to all of these does
such fortune come, not even to the majority, but only to less than
a few, those whose first impulse was divinely inspired ; and they
remain under its influence as far as the nature of man admits, nor
20 are they to be wheedled by any resistance on nature’s part.


‘For there are many that carry the thyrsus, but few are the Bacchi’.?


But even these men do not bear the Bacchic frenzy with sufficient
patience, but at one moment they rest in the god, at another in the
universe, and again in their bodies. They know that they are but
2s men, small fragments of the universe at that, having lesser lives
lying beneath them, and suspicious of these to the point of frus-
trating them, lest they should bestir themselves and rise against
them. What, after all, is the meaning of their baskets and of the
wickerwork objects which they handle, if not to signify first of
30 all that they were human beings at a given moment; in other words,
were paying attention to matters here below? For they are not


3 Il. v. 341. 2 Quoted by Plato, Phaedo, 69 c.
2876-3 Y


162 DIO


in a state of contemplation at the moment when they are dealing
craftily with the wicker objects. They further felt disdain for that
inactivity which our nature cannot support, inasmuch as nature
gives us many sources of motion. Accordingly, that they may not
do anything else, they have made it a law amongst them to occupy $
themselves therewith,and they impel their nature in this direction
and, what is more, they derive pleasure from bringing their work
to its perfection; a pleasure so much the greater as the works are
fairer and more numerous. A certain element in us ought indeed
to be oceupied with the things of this life, but the force must not 10
be a powerful one, lest it drag us down too far and take too great
possession of us. The foreign race, be it said, is more stubborn in
maintaining an enterprise than the Greek, for in whatever direc-
tion it has started out it is violent and unyielding. The latter is

ux33 refined and has more gentleness in his composition, and for this 5
reason would more quickly give way.

Now I should wish it to be a property of our nature to be always
lifted up toward contemplation; but as this is obviously im-
practicable, I should like in tum to cling to the best and again in
turn to descend to nature, there to cleave to merriment and anoint 20
life with cheerfulness. For I know that I am a man, and neither
a god that I should be adamant in face of every pleasure, nor a
brute that I should take delight in the pleasures of the body.
There remains, however, something to seek between these, and what
can surpass a life spent in literature and its concerns; what pleasure 25
is purer, what passionate attachment is more free from passion;
what has less to do with matter; what is more undefiled? Again, in
this respect I put the Greek before the foreigner and consider him
the wiser, because when forced to descend he has taken his first
stand in the neighbourhood, for he has taken his stand upon know- 30
ledge. Knowledge is an outlet for the mind and, when moved from
one argument to another, it has also made an advance thereby.

Now what could be more allied to mind than argument, or what


DIO 163


ferry is more suited to conduct us to mind? For wherever there is
argument, there also, I assume, is mind, and if not, at all events some
knowledge of inferior subjects which implies intellcctual perception.
For in this connexion-certain processes of ‘contemplation’ get their
§ name, as well as works of the Iesser mind, speculations rhetorical,
poetical, and those touching on physics and mathematics. None the
less all these brighten the eye within us and clear away the rheum,
thoroughly arouse it and accustom it by degrees to the objects of
vision, so that it may some day take courage to face a more august
10 spectacle still, and not blink at once when gazing upon the sun."
Thus the Greek trains his perceptions by his pleasures, and
even out of sport derives advantage for his most important object.
Further, to exercise the critical faculty, to compose a prose or
poetical work, is not outside of the province of mind. Again, to
1§ purify and polish one’s style, to find the main argument, to arrange
it in order, and to recognize it when arranged by another, how can
all these things be matters devoid of interest, and mere toys? But
as to those who tread the other path deemed to be of adamant,
even though, truth to say, some of them armive at the goal, they
20 seem to me scarcely to have travelled a path at all. Nay. how is
a path possible where there is no gradual progress apparent ; where
there is no first and second stage or any order of going!
But their procedure is like Bacchic frenzy—like the Icap of a
man mad, or possessed—the attainment of a goal without running
2s the race, a passing beyond reason without the previous exercise of
reasoning. For the sacred matter (contemplation) is not like atten-
tion belonging to knowledge, or an outlet of mind, nor is it like one
thing in one place and another in another. On the contrary—to
compare small and greater—it is like Aristotle’s view that men
30 being initiated have not a lesson to learn, but an experience to 1136
undergo and a condition into which they must be brought, while
they are becoming fit (for revelation).
3 Plato, Repub. vii. $16 B.


164 DIO

Now, the state of fitness for revelation (i.e. as well as the
process) also is irrational, and if reason play no part in preparing
it, much more so. Therefore also their direct descent to some
slight experience (as their ascent) is itself immediate (i.e. not an
intelligible process), and extends much farther. It is like a fall, just 5
as we liken the ascent to a leap. For reason did not speed them on
their way, neither did it receive them on their return. How can
these two conditions harmonize—a handling of primary reality
succeeded by a plunge into brushwood and withies?

Be this as it may, man is, and is called, rational, in virtue of the ro
intermediate and governing faculty, which these have never exer-
cised at any time—at least to judge from appearances. The end
then, the condition we wish to attain, is the same for both of us;
and if we attained it, there would be no difference between us.


8. But as regards the intervening process, our native philosopher 15
has shown himself the sounder thinker, for he has prepared him-
self a road; and ascends it as if it were a ladder, so that the ascent
is m some degree his own achievement, since as he advances he

will probably encounter somewhere his soul’s desire. And even if
he does not encounter it, at all events he has advanced on his road; 20
and this is no small matter; even thus he would differ from the bulk
of mankind as much as they do from the beasts of the field.

Those of our number who arrive in this way would be the more
numerous inasmuch as their attempt is a natural one, but it might
come about in another way, if there did not chance to be some 25
nobility of soul drawing the first inspiration from above; and an
exceptional type of mind, one that would be its own master and
would be moved by itself. Of such calibre was Amus' the Egyptian,
who did not discover the use of letters, but passed judgement upon
the discovery, so great was his superiority of mind. Such a man 30
3s quicker to solve the problem, even without philosophic method,

* Cf. Plato, Phasdrus, 274 D-E.


DIO 165


for the natural philosopher suffices and would, I suppose, much
more than suffice if some one stimulated him or appealed to
him, for he has a wonderful power of augmenting the. sced within
him, and of lighting a whole conflagration with the small spark of

s reason which he has received. The forces of Greek education will
therefore effect nothing disadvantageous to these men, even if
they do not effect something useful ; education which Icads on those
who are the less robust, fires them up anew and thoroughly warms
what is divine in them. In the other case, however, the consumma-

10 tion falls to the lot only of those who are happy in their own hearts;
albeit the race of such souls must be rarer than that of the phoenix,’
whose periodic appearances the Egyptians calculate. The major-
ity of men would labour in vain and exhaust themselves hunting
for the intelligible essence without intelligence, particularly those
1§ whom the first endowment of nature has not urged on to a life like
this. For these would indeed benefit by such an impulse, but I
regard the impulse itself as a token of a mind in motion. The most


3337


of them are neither moved by their inner natures, nor in the ,


‘second voyage’ ,? as the proverb says, are they stirred from sleep
so by leisure to turn towards mind. But they have striven after the
exalted choice as they would after any other thing that is highly
esteemed, people of all classes, each class of necessity combining.
Concerning these men, then, I stoutly maintain that they will
labour and wear themselves out in vain, inasmuch as they have
2§ neither inborn nor acquired intellect ; for it seems dangerously near
impiety to suggest that the Divinity will dwell in any other part
of us than in the mind, since that is God’s own temple.’ On this
account wise men, Greeks and foreigners alike, have handed down
the tradition of occupying themselves with the purificatory
30 virtues, walling off all preoccupations with nature that these may
not offer an impediment to their intellectual activities. This was


1 Cf. Aelian, Natural History, vi. 58. 2 Cf. Plato, Phaedo, 99 D.
> Cf. Philo, De Special. Leg. 255 « (ed. Cohn).


166 DIO


the thought of the first men who founded each of the two systems
of philosophy. But they (the forcigners) strengthen virtues rather
by habits than by reason, and they consider these virtues to be
three in number, for those who admit mere self-control do not
admit reasoning intelligence; that is to say, if we agree that the 5
quality they possess is self-control. In any case it is impossible
that the virtues should not enter in and be grouped through their
inevitable sequence. The men in question think that they ought
to be temperate without knowing why they ought to be temperate;
they only accept a rule of conduct as they would any unjustifiable 10
law, of which the lawgiver knows that it is for another reason,
namely for the processes of thinking, and that it is serviceable for
an ascent, in other words, for the avoidance of passion for anything
material. Again such men abstain from sexual commerce, paying

uugo reverence to this abstention for its own sake, thus making the 15
smallest thing of the greatest importance, for they imagine that
the preparation is the goal. But we, on the contrary, ‘admire the
virtues as elements only of the whole of philosophy.

We have learned from Plato that it is perhaps not lawful that
the mmpure should have contact with what is pure. Now virtues 20
purify by cleansing what is alien to them.’ If the soul had been the
good, it would have sufficed for its own purification, and it would
have been already an excellent thing that it came into being by
itself; but while it is clearly not a good thing (for if it were so it
would never have come into the sphere of evil), it has nevertheless 25
the form of good and by its nature holds a middle place.?, When it
inclined toward the evil side, virtue brought it up and washed it
of its stain, and again placed it midway; but an advance must be
made towards the good, and this now through reason; for mind is
the name which joins together intelligible things. Thus, if it were 30
our object to gaze upon the heavens, it would not suffice that we
were not looking on the ground, but that after we had passed the

® Plotinas, i. 2. 4. ® Cf. Plato, Repub. 509 a.


DIO 167


range of vision midway of the two, we should then turn our gaze on
high. In very truth we should gain benefit from the virtues in
becoming disentangled of a partiality for matter. But an uplifting
force is needed, for it is insufficient that a man be not evil, he must

s even be a god. And this state most resembles the turning away
from the body and as many things as are of the body, and the
turning, through the intellect, to God.


g. We therefore, while honouring the virtucs, know what rank
they hold, to wit, the place that the letters of the alphabet hold to-
10 wards the knowledge of a book, for the virtues are the carliest (steps)
of those ascending to mind. But we do not possess all in possessing
the virtucs; we have only removed the obstacle, and we have
prepared the while those things apart from which it is not even
holy to hope to attain the end. In this way far from despairing of
1§ this end, we are already in pursuit of it through mind with the
help of a procedure discovered by the happy men of old. Now, in
seeking, I do not know whether we shall ever find, but scarcely
would such fortune come to him who is not enamoured (with the
end) or knows not whether it is worthy to be sought. And yet
20 those escape from these difficulties in the best way who are stead-
fast to this and give themselves no further trouble, for once they
have purified themselves, they could not be evil. But there are
those who attempt to excel the multitude, learning perchance that
reason is the glory of.man, and yet have dishonoured all instruc-
25 tion by which the mind is strengthened. These men arc self-moved
in strange ways and put on solemn airs towards philosophy.
Whatever false notion came into their mind, this they made 114:
wicked and malicious by their own additions to it, bringing forth
blind offspring, not worthy to be called the offspring of thought,
30 still less that of mind, but the products of absurd assumption and
erring imagination. You would observe that they are in a laugh-
able situation, or rather in a very pitiable one; for inasmuch as we


168 DIO


are human, it is the better part not to laugh at human misfortunes
but rather to pity them. Alas for their arguments, alas for their
doctrines: if it occurred to rams to philosophize,' I do not know
what they would hold in honour rather than this. Let us say to
them, for it would be well worth it: ‘O boldest of all men, if we had s |
known that you had been so fortunate as to hold the estimate of
the soul which was that of Amus, or Zoroaster, or Hermes, or
Antonius, we should not have presumed to teach you or to conduct
you through a course of study, endowed as you would be witha
greatness of mind to which even conclusions are but premises. If 10
it should happen to us to meet such an one as this at any time, we
should be awe-struck before him and treat him with veneration.
But you we regard as less than our common human nature and no
readier of wit than dullards. We therefore think it right even to
admonish you, making common property of what we may find 15
best for us. Keep then the first principles, for men near unto the
god have handed them down, and by so doing you will be, accord-
ing to Plato,” holding the middle course; no longer without know-
ledge, but not yet wise; honouring right opinion, apart from
argument and demonstrations; for it is unholy to regard truth as 20
ignorant, nor will any reasoning admit that the unreasoned thing
is wise. Once satisfied with this ordering, you would have been
treated with moderation, and would be guiltless before God and
guiltless also before men. You will even have just praise as
your portion, for to a man of the common herd the fact is sufficient. 25
However, if you do not remain in your place, and if you still seek
for what is beyond and busy yourselves with the question
‘- Wherefore’, you would do well to love wisdom, that sacred
possession. "But do not conduct the quest by yourselves, for you
are untrained, and there is danger of your falling into some abyss 30
of folly and so perishing utterly; the catastrophe that even
Socrates feared he might suffer, and which he did not conceal from
3 See Mayor on Juv. 10. 50 (addenda). 2 Plato, Symposium, 202 A.


DIO 169


Parmenides and Zeno, those men so dear to him. And yct that
man was Socrates, and you,—precisely what you are. It is never-
theless dreadful rashness on your part to deem yourself worthy to
make an incursion into the sanctities of thought, and that too with

§ your vulgar form of diction. They say of a truth that the sowing of
Cadmus! produced on one and the same day a crop of heavy armed
men; but a crop of theologians,—no legend ever recounted such
an awful portent as this! For truth is not a commodity lying on
the ground, or deposited by the wayside, or a quarry to becaptured
10 in a hunt. What then? Let philosophy be summoned here as an
ally, and let those who are to endure all that outward journey,
prodigious in length, be prepared for it by education both early


and late. You must first get rid of your boorishness, and watch small _


mysteries before undertaking great ones; you must learn to step
1§ in the chorus before carrying a torch; and you must carry a torch
before becoming an initiating priest. Shall you be willing to endure
toils upon toils? But again great things are not achieved without
the dust of conflict, and yet if you had taken the affair in hand in
time, something even of pleasure would have been added to the
20 work, such as they who have pressed forward grasp for themselves.
But you are ashamed to learn so late in the day. Nay, this is no
disgrace at all; as to ignorance,—+# is a disgrace greater even than
that, and when you are in a state of ignorance you cannot put up
with it in its undiluted form; otherwise, you might, this long while,
25 have been living temperately, neither knowing nor pretending to
know, and this is half-knowledge. You would have known at Icast
this much, that you have knowledge of nothing, instead of dragging
after you a double ignorance with great display, filled with pride
instead of wisdom and undertaking to teach before you have
30 learnt. I will say again of you, ‘“‘Alas for your words, alas for your
opinions!’’ What monsters are born of you absolutely incoherent
and many-headed, such as they say once rose up against the gods!
3 Cf. Euripides, Phoenissae, 670.ff.
at-1 Zz


170 DIO


And what would any one say about this except that the whole
divine element is torn to pieces by your outrageous suppositions?
This would not have happened if you had properly studied the
average man; but success lay thereall the while in the golden mean.
Icarus, when he scorned to use his feet, very quickly missed both 5
air and earth, for he despised the latter and the former he could
not attain.


xo. All this has been directed not more against those of the
other school than against those amongst ourselves who are grandilo-
quent although illogical, the very men who have furnished the 10
present work with an occasion for coming to the rescue of pre-
liminary education. Whatever any one might be inclined to give
for these worthless and brainless fellows, they would be dear at
three for an obol. I give thanks both to skilful poets, good rhetori-
cians, and to any one who has constructed history in memorable 15
fashion, and in general I should like no one of those who have
helped to contribute the good in the possession of each, the com-
mon stock of Greeks, to go unrewarded. It is they who, taking us
to themselves at the period of infancy, nursed us when we were
2245 still weak in intellect, mingling for us the sweet with the beneficial,
for no one would have accepted these things unmixed, because of
their acidity and of the delicacy of his perceptive faculties at
the time. And in this way by strengthening us and passing us
on, one through one subject and another through another, they
gave us over to the sciences; and they prepared us for fitness to 25
aspire to the heights, and once there, whenever they perceive our
souls besprinkled with sweat, and our nature growing weary, they
call us gently back. And Calliope, receiving us as we had come,
parched with drought, gave us rest, conducting us to the flowery
meads, that we should not be consumed with our labour, and set 30
before us a complete banquet of her Athenian far-fetched phrases
and poetic piquancy, by which she first unmanned us, then spurred


Oo


DIO 17t
us on, ourselves thewhile unaware of this, and little by little brought
us round in some wise, and finally made us again strip for the
coming contest. Now he who does not regard the Muses mercly
as a preliminary ceremonial of initiation, but thinks that the

s actual force of wisdom is in them, and does not wish to understand
them, if perchance they speak enigmatically of something unusual
and only hint at their meaning; he, I say, who admires the beauty
that lies in them, and gapes at it, and is enthralled by this, such a
man, it is true, has accomplished nothing extraordinary. But

10 May Many good things still be his, if he be a man of culture and
graciousness!

In the same way, although we do not admire swans with the
amazement which we bestow upon eagles when their flight is aloft,
far above anything visible; nevertheless we take pleasure in

15 looking at them and delight in their song, and may none of them
through act of mine ever sing for the last time! Now though the
others are royal birds, and live beside the sceptre of Zeus,’ never-
theless a certain one of the gods, himself the offspring of Zeus,
was allotted these, and they are not deemed unworthy of his

20 tripod. To be an eagle and a swan at the same time, and to possess
the advantages of both, nature has not granted to birds. But to
man God has given it, granting to him both success with his
tongue and mastery over philosophy.


11. This battle has been fought by me, on behalf of the Muses,

25 against those who partake not of the Muses, namely those who
maliciously shun the exposure of their ignorance by taking refuge
in abusing the very things of which they are ignorant; and even if

I have spoken more seriously on the subject than my first promise
would warrant, something quite serious may come from those
30 who jest.? It is impossible to do anything not affected by one’s


* Cf. Pindar. Pyth, i. 6.
® Cf. Horace, Serm. 1 1, 24 ridentem dicere uerum quid*uctat?


172 DIO
entire state of mind, but even if we play with the greater part of
our nature, we are not deprived of the whole. For we give
ourselves up to a playful mood which, on the one hand, is
allowable, since Dio must find some testimony at my hands, to
the end that my destined son may become the heir of his teaching 5
2248 also, but a mood which, on the other hand, has run far afield and
over courses of all kinds; for the sallies of triflers know no bounds;
they are like the open country, like liberty itself, like writing of
words not to be declaimed with an eye on the water-clock.'

I once saw a judge of the ephetes measuring out the time for the 10
pleaders. He himself, during a portion of the allotted period, was
dozing, at another time wide awake to no purpose, and he was as
far away from the subject as possible. None the less the orator
continued, as one soon of necessity to be reduced to silence. But
I am free of such a time-limit, nor does it cramp me, inasmuch 15
as I have neither to prepare to address such a ridiculous judge,
nor yet need I enter a more senseless court of justice, having
battered at the audience in my lecture hall,? and having promised
to all the youngsters in the town a recitation deftly turned. How
dreadful is the réle of those who show off their eloquence before zo
audiences! Surely the man who has to please so many people of
ill-assorted temperaments is striving after the unattainable. Such
is the people’s orator, absolutely the slave of the mob, at the
mercy of all, and to do him an ill turn is open to all men. The
sophist, if laughed at, is a dead man, and he suspects the sullen 25
hearer as well. For he is always the sophist whatever subject he
treats of, borrowing appearance rather than truth. A man who
ts all attention troubles him, as one seeking a handle against him,

and none the less he who wags his head about in all directions, as
though he did not think the rhetorical display worth listening to. 30
And yet for no fault of his own does he encounter tyrants so bitter,
if he has endured many nights without sleep, and has been on the
2 CL Plato, Theactetus, 172 D. 2 See Mayor on Juv. 7. 8&4.


DIO 173
strain many days, and has come near to distilling away his soul by
hunger and anxieties, that he may compile something good. He
has come bringing a delightful and sweet recitation to his haughty
favourites, on account of whom he is in bad case, though he pre-

s tends to be in good health. He also has bathed himself before the
appointment and has gone to meet it with brilliant dress and
appearance in order that he too may be a noble spectacle. He
salutes the auditorium with a smile, and rejoices, but his soul is
on the rack; and further, he has been biting gum in order to speak

10 Clearly and tunefully. Not even the most worthy of these men
would pretend that this is a matter of complete indifference to him,
and that he has taken no trouble about his voice, since right in the
midst of the declamation he turms.and asks for his flask, which
the attendant, who has long had it ready, hands over to him.
15 Then he swallows and gargles some of it, that he may put a youth-
ful note into his melodies. Not even after all this trouble does the s249
unlucky fellow happen upon sympathetic auditors; rather would
they like him to sing himself out, for then they would have their
laugh.’ Again, they would like him merely to open his mouth and
20 gape with uplifted hand like a statue, and then become more
voiceless than a statue, for thus they could leave, as they have long
desired. But (my case is different), for I sing by myself; I sing to
these cypresses, and this rivulet of water before me rushes along
its course, not measured, nor husbanded according to the water-
25 clock or such a supply as some usher may dole out. If I am not
yet coming to the end of my song, I shall certainly do so presently,
and if not then, why after a good while, for surely I will not sing
into the night. The stream runs even after I have ceased, and will
run during the night, during the day, until the next year, and
30 for ever. Why then should I be the slave of a fixed period of time,
when I have the power to be completely independent and to
conduct my words where it seems to me that they should be led,


4 Cf. Pliny, Epistulae, i. 13.


174 DIO


not at the mercy of supercilious hearers’ judgement, but using
myself as a measure? For indeed God has accorded me this lot,
to be without a master and free to range; since I never acquired
for myself even two pupils, not to speak of three, for whose sake I
should have had to visit an appointed place whercin to lecture s
before them on subjects already agreed upon. I knew that I should

x52 Cut off a great part of my freedom if I had to make a minute study
of a book beforehand, a practice by which it comes to pass that
the faculty of memory is energetic, but the critical faculty un-
trained and sterile, that faculty which must needs be the judge of 10
books. It is through this above all that the philosopher exists; let
the other be presented to the grammarians.


12. And indeed some authors of philosophical books might be
represented as grammarians who combine and separate syllables
very well, but never succeed in bringing to birth anything of their 15
own. Whatsoever they have actually brought forth is blinded by
rashness and is empty; for a man cannot cherish the word within
him, who must perforce vomit it out every day. Negligence in
high seriousness, the employment of seriousness where it is uncalled
for, makes all in vain. Birth-pangs of souls’ take place to the 20
accompaniment of words just as happens in births of bodies; and
whosoever accustoms himself to the untimely births of souls, suffers
for the rest much as those who suffer in the body, and the state of
that man slipping to a premature delivery can bring to birth
nothing sound of limb or likely to live. Thence comes the one 25
ready to speak before the mob, incapable of establishing any
point, or when he takes up a question unable to carry it through
to its perfected end, as one would,finish a statue by polishing it.
Nor do I esteem it a happy existence to submit to giving accounts,
both to the pupils themselves and on behalf of the pupils them- 30
selves, to their relatives in regard to the daily lessons. The man

3 Plato, Theactetus, 149 ff.


DIO 175


who is their instructor would like to shine amongst his pupils and
to make these boys break out in applause at his words. This is
then another theatre much more unlucky than the first. As
matters are, I converse with as many as I please, on as many
s topics as I please; I choose the topics, the times, the places, and
the manner. My interlocutor confers a benefit but he also re-
ceives it; for my part I should prefer to listen to those who have
anything worth saying than to talk myself. To every man it is in
every way happier to fall in with his betters than his inferiors.


10 - 13. Now this is the life of the teacher. Let us first eliminate
from the discussion any one or two individuals who by their inborn
nature have become superior to the difficulties inherent in the
position. In every occupation this also would be apt to take place,
that some individuals should show themselves too strong to be

15 undone by the weaknesses that belong to it, and grow out of it.
Once the teacher has attached to him men to admire him,
he will accept nothing that any one else may say. Otherwise the
danger is that he should be despised and should have to submit to
the flight of his young pupils. If he does not make any resistance,

20 he is losing his own vocation, and he must be maintained in
the position of master. It is therefore fated that the instructor
must be jealous, and this is the greatest and the grossest of the
passions. Accordingly he will pray that no man in the city may
become wise and, if such an one appears, he will injure that man’s

25 reputation to the end that he alone may be looked up to. He
himself then will sit like a jar filled with wisdom even to the rim,
and one which could contain no more. At least there is no room
for anything good, for he is a mischievous fellow and a malignant
one. How then could any one escape in sorrier plight than a man

30 who cannot become better? Socrates gave himself up even to
Prodicus' on the chance that he could benefit him, and permitted

3 Plato, Protagoras, 315 D.


13¢3


156 DIO


Hippias to put in a word. In the same way he frequented Pro-
tagoras' and brought the richest young men into association with
such a tribe of sophists. For Socrates did not make himself out
to be wise, though wise indeed he was, and it was possible for
the young men to see, if they gave their attention to the matter, 5
what manner of master Protagoras was and what manner of pupil
Socrates. Nay, even Glaucon and Critias argued with him on an
equal footing. Not even Simon the cobbler could bring himself to
agree entirely with Socrates, but exacted an answer for every word
he uttered, and Cleitophon abused him in the house of Lysias the 10
1156 Sophist, and openly preferred the intimacy of Thrasymachus.
Socrates was not in the least nettled at this and Cleitophon is
wrong in thinking so. Nay, even Phaedrus sufficed him when he
encountered him by chance, and Socrates attended Phaedrus as he
led the way out of the city, listened patiently to a banal discourse, 15
and delivered another in return to please Phaedrus. So good-
tempered a man was he and not one to stand upon his dignity
before men. Witness Xanthippe herself. Alas for her slighting
attitude! How she treated Socrates! But nothing prevented
Socrates from being of good cheer, even when despised. No more 20
shall it prevent me, or any other man who has not given himself
over to the multiform wild beast,? notoriety, but who lives to please
himself and God, who wishes to live with men like a man, and knows
how to do so. Socrates dealing with the more absurd of these dis-
courses, that one attacking love affairs, is indeed able to adopt the 25
truer course and will straightway adopt it; he will sing the praises of
the chariot of Zeus’ and of the sacred chariot-driving of the other
eleven gods, for Hestia alone remains in the palace of the immor-
tals. He sings also of the souls who are followers of gods, and the
struggle they have in bending over the back of heaven. In that 30
other world, perchance he dares, on the other side of the river, to


3 Cf. Plato, Profagoras, 314 &. * Cf. Plato, Repub. 588 x.
3 CL Plato, Phacdrus, 246 5.


DIO 177


interpret his venturous speech to the boy’ by the same plane
tree, that speech in which he took up the role of a rhetorician, and
exercised himself in a contest with the sophist Lysias. It is the
same boy that he addresses each time: I do not of course mean
s Phaedrus, for he was a youth already grown to manhood, but a
young boy whom he has in his mind, in the bloom of youthful
beauty. It is this one whom he persuades and dissuades alter-
nately of what concerns love; and at one time he is playful with
him, while at another he speaks gravely. Why then should not I, in
to the case of my son, whom God has promised me next year, but who
is really present with me already, why, I say,.should not I claim
the right to play with him, and to speak gravely also, I who cer-
tainly desire him to be good in both directions,
‘To be gifted with speech in words and with knowledge in
1§ things’ ;?
and not to despise Socrates for failing to disdain his capacity
to adorn in speech even those interred publicly? Albeit he thought
this ‘too great a task for himself, and therefore attributed to
Aspasia his power, Aspasia whom he used to frequent for the
20 pleasure of her instruction on the subject of love. Now if you s257
understand the nature of these discussions on love between
Aspasia and Socrates, you will not doubt that philosophy, when
she has beheld the last degree of initiation, will recognize beauty
everywhere, will welcome it, will praise rhetoric, and will cling to
2s Aspasia and the art of poetry. For this art Socrates practised
without disguise, not as a boy or a young man, but when,
already past the prime of life, he was in prison; at a moment, too,
least of all opportune for light diversions to a man of his age,
a man who was in circumstances such as had not yet reached the
30 terrible (for what could be terrible to Socrates?), but which were
certainly not suitable for trifling. However, he tells us that he


1 Cf. Plato, Phaedrus, 237 A. 2 Homer, Iliad, ix. 443.
2876-1 Aa


178 DIO
was obeying the god.’ Do not let us disbelieve him, for the god
was making him fit for partnership in his work. Is not he a poet
who holds the oracle in Delphi, and, by Zeus, that one amongst
the Branchidae?? And yet he laid claim to the poetry of Homer
as his own.

*I sung it, indeed, but the divine Homer copied it out’.


It has escaped these enemies of fluency of speech therefore that
by reason of wisdom they are placing Apollo, Aspasia, and Socrates
in a second rank to themselves. Let us on the other hand summon
our son to the study of all literature, and we shall pray with him 10
that he may not encounter a rash man who is a potential enemy
to the Muses, before he has himself in some way or other become
filled with rhetoric and poetry, and is able to understand them,
and to come to their defence through his knowledge of them.
What use can he really make of his ancestral property? I have 15
diminished the extent of my estates, and many of my slaves have
become fellow-citizens of mine. I have gold neither in the form of
women’s trappings nor in coin; for whatever I once possessed
I spent entirely, like Pericles, for necessary purposes.’ But I have
added many times over to the books that I have inherited. All 20
these therefore you, my son, must be able to use.


14. Now if you are annoyed with (me), your father, because I
have not corrected for you the manuscripts of Dio, the author who
has led to so long a discussion, (notice that) neither have any other
works of a similar nature been corrected for you, nor will Dio need 25

1360 a defence in this respect. Here again there will be need of rhetoric,
. but I will take my rule from philosophy. The name of Pythagoras
of Samos, the son of Mnesarchus, has been inscribed upon the law,


§ Cf. Plato, Phaedo, 61 a.


DIO 179


that law which does not permit us to make additions in books. On
the contrary it demands that they should remain as first
written, just as they once held their place in fortune or skill. In
rhetorical speeches the law is that part which is not characterized
s by rhetoric, for it comes under the head of proofs that are not
susceptible of argument, inasmuch as its strength resides, not in the
persuasiveness of the speaker, but in the constitution of the state.
And yet some of us claim to be orators on such a ground as this,
though they are scribes pure and simple. Such men, even if
10 they bring up witnesses in whose testimony the whole case rcally
lies, will imagine that the favourable decision has been due to
themselves; they are at the same time so clever and headstrong.
Now, since it is not from the Twelve Tables of the Romans that
we have read out the law, so as to make it authoritative even over
t§ those unwilling to accept it, but the word comes only from an
ancient philosopher, some power of persuasion must needs be added
and the speech thus become law. But lest we again unknowingly
make a great statement about trifles (for in some way or other we
are carried back from the lightest subjects to quite serious ones),
20 we will then exercise all the precaution in our power, and if it is
really necessary, we will take up some of the things that we have
said, and if this is enough, it would be well to take no additional
trouble whatever about it.


15. Now Pythagoras, or any disciple and supporter of Pytha-

2§ goras, will say, since his utterances have the force of laws, that the
independent mind is best fitted by nature for any vocation, that

is to say, a mind which is by its energy actually a poctical and
rhetorical force, even if not the most highly endowed for every-
thing. Certain men of this calibre have come here in the past en-
30 dowed with greatness, or an intimate acquaintance with knowledge,
men who needed no teaching, for they were themselves examples
of proficiency. The great majority, however, have had no such


180 DIO


share in this good fortune; some of them are hopelessly deficient.
But possessing a certain power of understanding, some more, some
less, some near ta the end in view, and some far from it, they are
brought to this point by active minds, these minds being the crea-
tions of their own activity. Our whole devotion to litcrature 5
has this one aim in view, namely, the summoning of our forces to
activity. Let this employment from the beginning therefore invoke
everywhere the help of letters as our guide, and let it be fixed
steadily upon the perception of their meaning and, as it advances,
let it make trial of its own strength and not entirely cling to the 10
syllables.

For just as any other problem becomes a source of satisfaction
to us if our perplexity over it exercises our invention; thus also
the mind, compelled to weave that which is missing into the
sequence of what is read, and not resting entirely on vision, makes 15
practice in venturing upon a similar work by itself. At the same
time it accustoms itself not to belong to others but to itself, for
these books containing errors seem to seek out the mind that is


superior to mere eyesight.


16. The teachings of Pythagoras prescribed this to quite young 20
a363 Men, at one time making trial of the natural bent of each of them,
at another time esteeming this a preparatory exercise even more
suitable to boyhood than the assumptions of plane geometry, for
it is no great task to adapt a letter, a syllable, perchance a
phrase, or if you will a whole period, and again to employ conve- 3§
niently what is in the book. This is quite like what happens in the
case of the fledglings of eagles. The parents take the eaglets when
they are just ready to fly, and bearing them aloft let them go on
high, as if permitting them to use their own wings. Then in a
moment they take them up again, for they foresee the weakness 30
of their youth, and this trial they repeat frequently until the
young have learned thoroughly how to fly.


DIO 181

Now I shall never indulge in youthful boasting before any man,

but about these truths, at least, I will boast in your presence. Oft-
times I do not attempt to await the conclusion of a book for any
good it may do me, but rather‘do I lift up my eyes and procced to

s exercise mysclf in the narrative, not hesitating in the least but
yiclding to the opportune moment; and pretending that I am
reading straight on, I recite out of my own head whatever it seems
to me should follow, and I test what has been thus said in the
light of what has been written. Oft-times I find that I have
10 happened upon the same sense and even the same form of ex-
pression (as the author). On the other hand, I have occasionally
made a happy shot at a thought, although missing the phrasing
itself, and have produced what quite resembled the harmony of
the work. And even if the thought was different, it was at all events

1g Such as would befit the writer of the book, and one which he would
not have rejected if it had come into his mind. I know that on
one occasion I was holding in my hands a volume of the noble
and classical order, and when certain men who were present asked
me to read something aloud that they might listen to it, I pro-
20 ceeded on this wise. And as opportunity arose I would invent
something new and would add an explanation of it, not, by the
god of eloquence, that I had rehearsed it, but that, when I came
upon it’ in this way, I fell into harmony with the author’s
thought and language. Straightway a great: shout of applause
2s arose and there burst forth clapping of hands; they werc praising
the man who wrote the book and not least on the ground of the
additions themselves; to such an extent has the deity made my
soul a soft surface to bear the impress of the stamps of diction,”
and if I had directed my attention by this exercise to uncorrected
30 copies of books, nature would have conducted my mastery to this
point when I made the attempt. A certain sound} continues with


1 Reading dwe\bcw.
3 Cf. Plato, Theaet. 191 c. > Cf. Plato, Crito, 54 D.


182 DIO


those whose ears are wearied by the flute, even when its note has
ceased, and they remain for some time possessed by it. In this
way many times have I forced the note in reading tragedy, for its
music has often added a tragic note to dramas, and I rival
comedies in nonsense in response to the labour of each writer. You ,
would say I was the friend at one time of Cratinus and of Crates
and at another of Diphilus and Philemon. There is no form, in
fine, of metrical conceit or poetry in presence of which I am not
exalted, none whose practice I do not carry out, now making
ax64 whole works to compare with whole works, and now titbits with 10
titbits. And as many forms of literary style as exist, and however
diverse, in every one of my imitations of these my own personal
note must’ needs be added. It is thus that the highest string,
itself awaiting the rhythm, re-echoes it to the melody that is
being played. ts


NOTES
ON KINGSHIP


Page 108, 1.10. Philosophy to dwell with you. ‘Honour for proficiency
in letters, my Liege, has come back from exile in connexion with the
sacred rites, .. . by literature itself you have becn aroused to a reve-
rence for the gods’. (Lib., Or. xiii. 1, vol. ii, p. 63, ed. Foerster.) So
speaks Libanius in his address to the Emperor Julian at Antioch in the
year 362, about thirty-seven years before this speech was delivered by
Synesius. Dio Chrysostom, the orator so much admired by Synesius,
has also left four similar productions, addresses to the Emperor Trajan.


Page 108, ]. 11. appearing here after solong an interval. The city of
Byzantium was founded by the Megarians 658 B.c. As Euclides, the
disciple of Socrates, was the founder of the Eristic school of philosophy
in Megara, it might be inferred that his doctrines were cultivated at


some time in Byzantium but had lapsed into obscurity, and that it is
to this that Synesius alludes.


Page 108, 1. 26. bite into the heart. Dio Chrysostom uses the same ex-
pression (Or. xxxiii. 44 (ed. von Arnim, vol. 1, p. 310)) : ovxouv avjow mept
rovrou Adywy, mpiv av ofddpa SnxOijre. xairot navy dobevots dapyaxov
ruyxdvere Tov Adyou rovrou Kai ToAU eAdrrovos 7 xara THy afiav. Seneca (Ad
Helviam, iii.1) ‘Non summam cutem rupit; pectus et viscera ipsa divisit.’


Page 100, 1. 23. sung in a thousand odes. The fourth Pythian ode of
Pindar to Arcesilas of Cyrene, winner in the chariot-race 462 B.c., is
perhapsthemostcelebrated. He speaks in line 60, in addressing Arcesilas,
of ‘the oracle glorified by means of the unprompted utterance of the
Delphic Bee who, thrice, and that loudly, bade thee hail, and declared
thee the destined king of Cyrene.’ And in Pythian v, line 24, to the
same,‘when thou art hymned in song inCyrene’s sweet garden of Aphro-
dite, forget not to ascribe the cause of all to God’, and again, in line
80‘... we honour the nobly built city of Cyrene, which is held by
bronze-armed Trojans from a foreign shore, even by the descendants of


184 NOTES


Antenor.’ In Pythian ix. 4 he apostrophizes Telesicrates as ‘a happy
man and the crowning glory of chariot-driving Cyrene’. Callimachus,
himself born in Cyrene, alludes to his native town briefly in Hymn ii. 72
“Sparta, O Carnius, was thy first foundation; and next Thera; but third
the city of Cyrene.’ And again (bid. 93): ‘No other dance more divine
hath Apollo beheld, nor to any city hath he given so many blessings
as he hath given to Cyrene, remembering his rape of old.’ He mentions
it also in Epigram 21, slightly enough. One cannot help asking what
other poems Synesius could have had in mind, and which seem to be
lost to us.


Page 110, L 1. truth ts the aristocracy of language. Philo makes a
similar observation (Quod omnss probus liber sit,§ 99): ‘But without any
disguise and in an honest spirit of truth to speak with freedom what is
dictated by a clear conscience is a line of conduct suited to those who
are nobly born’: 7 yap ovri Owreia pév xai xodaxeia xai inoxpuns, év ols
Acyos yrapas Svapdyxovra:, Sovlorperdcrara, 76 5¢ avddws nai yvnoiws éx
xaBapos Tos auwedcros éXevbepocropeiv, evyevdow apporrov.


Page 111, 1.5. so great an empire, Kc. Philo (Leg. ad Gatum, §§ 9, 10),
speaking of the accession of Gaius to the Empire after the death of
Tiberius, comments upon the imperial power as follows: ‘For who...
could fail to marvel at and be amazed at his extraordinary and un-
speakable good fortune, since he had thus succeeded to a ready-made
inheritance . . . vast treasures of money, silver and gold both in bullion
and coined money, . . . and also countless hosts of troops, infantry and
cavalry, naval forces and revenues, in never-ending stream ... and
the sovereignty of the most numerous and most valuable portions of


the habitable world.”
<


Page 111, 1. 11. have never beheld you, &c. Cf. Dio Chrysostom, Or.
i, 24, vol. 1, p. 5, ed. von Arnim: Gy of pév iddvres xal ovyyevdpevos
ete cOovew dwoliweiy, of 5é dxovovres dxOupotow Beiv paov fj waides
eyvooupdvous wardpas dveupeiv.


Page 111, L. 30. You have only to observe in what manner of lives the
scenes of tragedies ave cast. Dio Chrysostom (07. xiii. 20, ed. von Arnim,


ON KINGSHIP 185
vol. i, p. 184, De Exilio) expressed the same thought: «aires rpaywdous


éxdorore pare trois Atovvoios wai cAecire 7a druynpara twy ¢y Tals Tpayw-
Siais avOpurrrwy: GX’ Gpws ovddzore eveGupnOntre Ore od wepi Tove dypap-
pdrous ovdé wepi rovs drddovras ovdé rovs ove cidoras maAaiaw yiyverat ta
xaxa Tabra, ovdsé ore evn Tis dat, OUdeis Evexa TOVTOU Tpaywoiay cdiSafev.
rovvavriov yap epi rous "Arpdas xai tovs "Ayapdprovas xai rovs Oidimodas
Sot Tig Gy wdoas Tas Tpaywhias, 08 wreioTa exdxrnvTo xprpara xpvcou xai
apyvpou Kai ys xai Booxnpdrwy.


Page 112, 1.12. Fortune is not responsible. Philo (Leg. ad Gatum, § 1)
has the following: ‘For like people playing draughts, we make changes,
altering the positions of actions and considering the things which are
the result of fortune as more durable than those which result from
nature, and the things which procced in accordance with nature as less
stable than those which are the result of chance.’


Page 112, 1.20. on behalf of fortune, &c. Dio Chrysostom in his three
essays on Fortune has a goad deal to say of the goddess that is interest-
ing as bearing upon this passage and the following. He speaks in defence
of Tyché as a divinity unjustly attacked by mankind in gencral for an
inconstancy that might be more justly ascribed to man himself. Cf.
Dio, De Fortuna (Or. \xv, 4, ed. von Arnim, vol. ii, p. 157): adinws
pos Soxovow of modo trav avOpurrew Tis TUXNS KaTHyopeiv, Ws Ovdév €xou-
ons BéBasov o0d€ morov,adAa raxu 87 pda, ols av raph, rovrous xaraXetov-
ons wai peOicrapdvys mpos érdpous. ef piv yap xadus Fv iSeiv ypwpudrous
tbs 76 TOAD Tois Rap’ avris dyaBois Tovs AauBavovras Kai py ToUvavTiov evOds
UBpews wai prcavOpwrias wai Opacurnros «umymAapdvous, ov« av opbdas
€xrotes pv) rois avrois wapapevovea: viv 5é, olpat, rpoatpeira: pdy evepyereiv
éxaoTov Ws xpnoroy xai ray map atris Swpewy afiov, dredav $¢ daiAov
aioGnrat wai ravewoy, xaTacxyivovTa THY eivotay THY Map avris, cixoTrws
Gdioraras wai (nret mddw aArov, dav dpa dmeuéorepoy cipeiy Suvnrat.
srovnpay 8¢ rev wAciatrww Urapyovtwy xai Tis avOpwrimns ducews orariws
twa gepovons édmrjnSeov eb mparrav, ¢£ avdyans ouvexeis mouiras Tas
peraBodAds, 7oAv 52 padrov d:a thy nyerdpay h thy avrijs duvow.

It is noticeable that in this passage overweening insolence (uBpis) is
spoken of as the coin in which man is apt to repay Fortune for her

adjt-s Bb


186 NOTES


gifts. For a study of this side of Greek religion and sentiment see
Cornford, Thucydides Mythistoricus, where a very subtle analysis will
be found of rvyn and vfs as they were conceived of in the Greek
mind, and the colour that they gave to events in history as seen by
the Greeks. Dio adds (ibid., p. 157): mapa yap trav srAovoiwy, cis per
Tous ovpPiovwras avOpurrous 7 UBpis €ari Aodopia, mpoTmAaKiopes, Kard-
yess, 76 wAyyiva wodddais, cis 5é rHy TUxHy abrqw Urepndavia, Bapirns,
puxpoloyia.

Dio is not content with defending Tyché from aspersions in literature,
but attacks sculptors and painters who have given the divinity the
symbols of instability. Cf. ibid., p. 159: mpos yap r@ moAda Praodnypeiv
da Acyesw xara Tis TUyNS Ere wai Adora: Kai ypadets avrnv Aowdopotow,
Of per ws pawopdévny wai Siappirrovoay ypadovres, of Sé emi odaipas
BeBnxviay . . . S€ow Huds adrovs rovovrous mAdrrew Kai ypadew rovs é4-
adyxrws Kai axis Wao. xpwpevous, Kai pa ia ye ovw emi ofaipas ad’
€x aroias €ornxoras, Kai pp} parny TH TUN peuderOar.

Lucian (Nigrinus, 20) describes Tyché as playing with the affairs of
men: . . . 70 Sewerarov €or, ore xairos paprupopeyns ris Tuyns railew
va. tae avOpurrwy mpaypata Kai ouodoyovons pndév alta elva: BéeBaov,
Gyws ... op€éyorrat wai wAovrou Kai Suvacteias . . . TA.

Again (Iuppiter confutatus, 3) he asks what Fate and Fortune may
really be . “H Expappévy roivw xai 4 Tixyn—modvbpidnro: yap wdvu xal
avrai—rives ror’ ciai xai ri Suvaras avr éxarépa; mérepov Ta toa Tals
Moipas 4 7: wai inép éxeivas; dxovw yoiv andvtwy AeyovTwy Kai pydev
elva: Toys wai Einappévns Suvarurepov. This question is put by Cyniscus
to Zeus, who replies, Ov O¢puss dravrd ce cidévas, cd Kuvioxe, and gives him
no satisfaction. In another dialogue (Deorum Concilium, 13) Momus
asks the same question of Zeus, insisting, moreover, that Tyché always
carries out the decrees of the Fates and that man is beginning to find
this out, to the detriment of sacrifices to Tyché herself and the other
gods, “H sod ydp corw % wodvOpuAnros dperh Kai duce xai epapydvn wai
TUX, Gvumoorara Kai neva Npayparwy cvopara Umo BAaxdv avOpwmwy tev
Proof €mwonfivra; Kai cuws adrocydka dyra otrw rods dvotrous
aéweuev, wore ovddcis Hyiv odd Odaw BovAcras, lduis, olas, xdy puplas
rap haere agg Thy TUxny apdfoveay rd peporpaydva wai & df
épriés dade drackicbn


ON KINGSHIP 187


By the first and second centuries A.D. the Greek mind had moved a
long way from the conception of Tyché in Thucydides or Pindar. Com-
pare in this connexion Aristotle, Rhetoric, lib. i, cap. v. 17.

The outrages of Fortuna are 2 favourite subject with Seneca. Cf. Ad
Polybium, xvi. 5 ‘Hoc fuit in rebus humanis fortuna, hoc erit: nihil
inausum sibi reliquit, nihil intactum relinquet; ibit violentior per
omnia, sicut solita est semper, eas quoque domos ausa iniuriae causa


intrare in quas per templa aditur, ct atram laureatis foribus induet
vestem.’


Page 112, 1. 31. #2 the case of your own sive. The admiring language
that Synesius uses in regard to Theodosius is amply sustained by the
judgement of Gibbon (Decline and Fall, cap. xxvi): ‘From the innocent
but humble labours of his farm Theodosius was transported, in less’
than four months, to the throne of the Eastern Empire; and the whole
period of the history of the world will not perhaps afford a similar
example of an elevation, at the same time, so pure and so honourable.
The princes who peaccably inherit the sceptre of their fathers claim
and enjoy a legal right, the more secure as it is absolutely distinct from
the merits of their personal characters. The subjects, who, in a monarchy
. . - acquire the possession of supreme power, may have raised them-
selves, by the superiority either of genius or virtuc, .. . but their virtue
is seldom exempt from ambition .... But the most suspicious malignity
cannot ascribe to Theodosius, in his obscure solitude of Caucha, the arts,
the desires, or even the hopes,.of an ambitious statesman. . . . in the
public distress his superior merit was universally felt and acknowledged.
... What expectations must have been formed of his abilities to en-
courage the hope that a single man could save, and restore, the empire
of the East! Theodosius was invested with the purple in the thirty-
third year of his age. The vulgar gazed with admiration on the manly
beauty of his face, and the graceful majesty of his person ....’

The battle of Hadrianople, in which forty thousand Romans fell, was
not, however, as Gibbon reminds us, avenged by any decisive victory
on the part of Theodosius, and the consequences of this defeat to the
Roman arms were even greater from a moral than a material point of
view. Gibbon finds a passage from St. John Chrysostom (tom. i, p. 344,


188 NOTES


ed. Montfaucon) containing an anecdote concerning a Gothic chief who
“was heard to declare . . . that he was astonished that a people who
fled before him like a flock of sheep could still presume to dispute the
possession of their treasures and provinces’. But although Theodosius
did not immediately reverse the fortunes of war, the prudence and
judgement with which he handled a difficult and even alarming situa-
tion have won the highest praise from the historian, in whose words
‘the great Theodosius, an epithet which he honourably deserved, con-
ducted himself as the firm and faithful guardian of the republic’.
Establishing a system of garrison fortifications, and probably what
we should describe in these days as chains of blockhouses, he contrived
to restore the confidence of his troops by making sporadic attacks on
the enemy at favourable moments and retiring to inexpugnable posi-
tions. ‘The deliverance and peace of the Roman provinces’, to quote the
same authority again, ‘was the work of prudence rather than of valour:
the prudence of Theodosius was seconded by fortune; and the emperor
never failed to seize, and to improve, every favourable circumstance.
..- An army of conquerors was broken into many disorderly bands of
savage robbers; and their blind and irregular fury was not less perni-
cious to themselves than to their enemies.’ What is most admirable in
Theodosius is that all this time he was in the grip of a long and relentless
malady to which he eventually succumbed in the year 380. But
perhaps the greatest piece of statesmanship in his life was the way in
which he enlisted on his side the power of the Gothic king, Athanaric,
who, when he finally was received by the Roman Emperor in Constan-
tinople, was made to exclaim, ‘Indeed, the emperor of the Romans is |
a god upon earth; and the presumptuous man, who dares to lift his hand
agaist him, is guilty of his own blood’ (‘Deus, inquit, est sine dubio
terrenus imperator, et quisquis adversus eum manum moverit, ipse sui
sanguinis reus existit.’ Quoted by Gibbon from Jornandes, c. xxviii.)
On the death of Athanaric, a short time after this, his followers and
army took service in a body under the Roman Emperor, and this
adhesion of the Visigoths saved for the moment an otherwise dangerous
situation. We see, however, that Synesius is against all traffic with the.
Goths and Scythians, in spite of the example of the Theodosius whom
he so highly lauds.


ON KINGSHIP 189


Page 113, 1.17. the tale of his sheep makes not the shepherd more than
the butcher. Cf. Dio Chrysostom, Or. iv, De Regno 44, vol. i, p. 63, ed.
von Amim: rod yap toipévos odx GAXo 7 Epyor F mpovoia Kai cwrnpia xat
durant mpoBdrwy. xairor éviore woANa mpofara éAalva payeipos «ls
Wynodpevos wore KaTaxonrew ... Kai ofarrew xai S¢pew. aa mAciorov
Scaddpes payerpixy te xai sroupevtay, oxedov Ooov Bacireia re mai Tuparvis.

Cf. Plato, Poltticus, 276 B:

Stranger. ‘But no other art or science will have a prior or better right
than the royal science, to care for human society and to rule over men
in general... .’

Stranger. ‘Our first duty, as we were saying, was to remodel the name,
so as to have the notion of care rather than of feeding, and then to
divide, for there may be still considerable divisions.’

Young Socrates. ‘How can they be made?’

Stranger. ‘First by separating the divine shepherd from the human
guardian or manager.’

Y. Soc. ‘True.’

Stranger. ‘And the art of management which is assigned to man
would again have to be subdivided.’

Y. Soc. ‘On what principle?’

Stranger. ‘On the principle of voluntary and compulsory.’

Y. Soe. ‘Why?’ |

Stranger. ‘Because, if I am not mistaken, there has been an error
here ; for our simplicity led us to rank king and tyrant together, wiereas
they are utterly distinct, like their modes of government... .°

Stranger. ‘And if we call the management of violent rulers tyranny,
and the voluntary management of herds of voluntary bipeds politics,
may we not further assert that he who has this latter art of manage-
ment is the true king and statesman ?’

Plato also in the Republic, Bk. I, makes a good deal of play of the
simile of the shepherd and the sheep in the long diatribe that Thrasy-
machus pours out to prove that justice is only the law of the stronger.
Cf. p. 343, where he says to Socrates, ‘You fancy that the shepherd
fattens the sheep with a view to their own good, and not to the good of
himself or his master; and you further imagine that the rulers of states,
if they are true rulers, never think of their subjects as sheep, and that


190 NOTES


they are not studying their own advantage day and night... . Consider
further, most foolish Socrates, that the just is always a loser in com-
parison with the unjust’, &c. Socrates, in replying to Thrasymachus,
comes back to the simile of the sheep in these terms: ‘For I must remark,
Thrasymachus, if you will recall what was previously said, that although
you began by defining the true physician in an exact sense, you did not
observe a like exactness when speaking of the shepherd; you thought
that the shepherd as a shepherd tends the sheep, not with a view to
their own good, but like a mere diner or banqueter with a view to the
pleasures of the table; or again, as a trader for sale in the market, and
not asa shepherd. Yet surely the art of the shepherd is concerned only
with the good of his subjects... and that was what I was saying just
now about the ruler.’ (/bid., p. 345.)

I have quoted these passages to show how completely Synesius
has incorporated the thought and at times even the words of
Pilato in this part of his address. Whether shepherds were the owners
of their flocks either in the time of Synesius or in that of Plato is
not so evident. Newman, Polistics of Artstotle, vol. iv, p. 517, in a note
to p. 1319 a, remarks, ‘Whether the vojzeis—a term including herdsmen
of all kinds and shepherds—were generally small owners of land like
the yewpyof, or owners of the herds and flocks tended by them, is not
clear, but they resembled the yewpyoi at any rate in this, that they were
too busy to attend the assembly often or to take an active part in
politics.’ The same simile of the shepherd is found in Psalm xxiii, q.v.


Page 113, 1. 20. Equally divided stand the king and the tyrant. The same
line of thought is touched upon in Olympiodorus (Comm. in Plat.
Phacd. B. A$’, p. 91, ed. Norvin): [Tas Seoméras judy of Geol, eivep 6
Scoxcrns ob 70 Tot Sovdou oxonet dyabdv, add rd davro6; ravrn yap
duadépes rod apyovros.


Page 113, 1. 23. ts willing to suffer. Cf. Dio Chrysostom (iii. 62, p. 44):
vO apyew ovdapws pabvpov, alia exizovoy, ovdé acovertoty avdcews xal
exorjs, da dpovriduy xai movwy. The same thought is expressed by
Seneca, Ad Polybium de Consolatione, vii. 2: ‘Caesari quoque ipsi, cui
omnia licent, propter hoc ipsum multa non licent: omnium somnos


ON KINGSHIP I9or


illius vigilia defendit, omnium otium illius labor, omnium delicias illius
industria, omnium vacationem illius occupatio.’ Dio Chrysostom, sbid.,
85, vol. i, p. 47: 6 5¢ orparnyos dypumvorepos dors trav ai uAarrovrwy.


Page 113, 1.28. whoso exploits his leadership for luxury's sake. Cf. Dio
Chrysostom, Or. iii, De Regno 40, 41, vol. i, p. 40, ed. von Arnim:
ai 82 firAjdovos xai diroypiparos nai UBpiorns Kai swapdvopos, avrov
oidpevos aifew povoy, ws av mAciora pév ypypara Kextnpdros, peyioras 5é
wai mAcioras Kaprovpevos ndovds, padupws 5¢ Sidywr nai drovws* tous 2
Unnxdous dravras Hyovpevos SovAous Kai Uanpéras ris avrot rpudijs, ovde
sroupvos émeaxots Exwv HOos . . . obx dv tore citroys TOY TOLOUTOY apyovTa
4] avroxpdropa 7 Baoda, rodv 5é paMov riparvvov nai Nevorijpa, ws wore
apoceiney 6 'AndMuw rév Lucuwvov tupavvov, « wai woMas pév ixos
ridpas, ola 8¢ oxirrpa Uraxovowey alry.


Page 114, 1. 11. youth is strong in its tendency, &c. Cf. Philo, Leg. ad
Gaium 29, § 190: ‘Youth combined with autocratic power and indulging
in unbridled passions is an invincible evil.’


Page 114, 1. 27. his own conduct is law for the tyrant. Cf. Dio Chryso-
stom, Or. iii, 43, vol. i, p. 41, ed. von Arnim: A€yera yap 4 pév dpxh
vopipos avOpwrwy Sioixnas Kat mpovoa avOpumwv Kata vopov, Baca
5¢ dvurevOuvos dpxi, 6 5é¢ vopos Bacdws Sdypza. This is only one of many
places in which Synesius is an echo of Dio in his addresses to the
Emperor Trajan.


Page 115, 1.16. In the same way the Sphinx ts erected,&c. The explana-
tions of St. Clement of Alexandria in regard to the meaning of the
Sphinxes and of Egyptian symbolism in general are interesting as
showing what was current abput them in the second century. Cud-
worth, vol. i, p. 532, ed. Harrison, gives two interesting quotations
from Clement: ‘“‘The Egyptians do not reveal their religious mysteries
promiscuously to all, nor communicate the knowledge of divine things
to the profane, but only to those who are to succeed in the kingdom,and
to such of the priests as are judged most fitly qualified for the same, upon
account both of their birth and education({Sér.v.7]. With which agreeth
also the testimony of Plutarch,he adding a further confirmation thereof


192 NOTES


from the Egyptian Sphinxes ... . Whereforethey placed Sphinxes before
their temples, to signify, that their theology contained a certain arcane,
and enigmatical wisdom in it’ (De Is. et Os. 354). And this meaning of the
Sphinxes in the Egyptian templesis confirmed likewise by Clemens Alex-
andrinus (Stromat., Lib. V, cap. 5, p. 664): ‘‘Therefore do the Egyptians
place Sphinxes before their temples, to declare thereby, that thedoctrine
concerning God is enigmatical and obscure.” Notwithstanding which,
we acknowledge, that the same Clemens gives another interpretation
also of these Sphinxes, or conjecture concerning them, which may not
be unworthy to be here read: .. . ‘‘but perhaps the meaning of those
Egyptian Sphinxes might be also to signify, that the Deity ought both
to be loved and feared ; to be loved as benign and propitious to the holy,
but to be feared as inexorably just to the impious, the Sphinx being
made up of the image both of a man and a lion.” ‘Moreover, besides
these Sphinxes, the Egyptians had also Harpocrates and Sigalions in
their temples, which are thus described by the poet :


Quique premunt vocem, digitoque silentia suadent [sic]


[Ovid, Afetamorph. ix, 693), they being the statues of young men,
pressing their lips with their fingers.’

When Synesius speaks of Hermes, can he be thinking of this Har-
pocrates described by Plutarch in Ists and Osiris, lxviii, p. 378C?:
ovre Bedv areAg Kai vipmov.... da Tob epi Oecdv ev avOpurrots Acyou veapod
wai atedots xai akapOpasrov mpoordryny xaiawdponariy’ 86 7 ordpart Tov
Sdscrvdow Exes mpooxeipevow dxcpvbias xai owns ovpBorov. Cf. ibid. lxv.


Page 116, L. 14. the ‘instruments.’ The word organon (spyavov, Latin
organum), which meant a tool, came to have a derived meaning in Plato
and Aristotle. The logical works of Aristotle were called collectively
égyarov. So Francis Bacon gave the title Novum Organum to his great
work, Le. a new instrument (viz. induction) with which to attack scien-
tific problems. I will give some of the most important passages in Plato
and Aristotle where the word is used. Plato in the Cratylus (388 a), when
discussing the function of names of things in language in general, speaks
of the name as an instrument used well or badly by the teacher, dpyavoy
dpa vi dors xai 76 Gvopa ; in 389C he says that this applies to other instru-


ON KINGSHIP 193


ments, wept ray dAAwv 8) dpydvwy 6 abrés zpém0s. For further use of
the word cf. Theactetus (185 p), where in attempting to answer the
question through what part of the body the soul perceives likeness
and unlikeness, sameness and difference, odd and even numbers, &c.,
Theaetetus says that these concepts have no such special organ of their
own as do the sense percepts. Speaking of these concepts, Socrates puts
the question beginning: (185 B) ratra 89 mdvra ba tivos mepi avroiyv
8cavoei; ovre yap d:° axons ovre 5s” Gfews xrA. Theaetetus replics: 57Aor
... apriov re kai mepirrov epwrds ... da rivos wore trav Tov owparos TH
Puy7 aicBavopeba. .. . Eywy’ ou ay Exouue cimeiv, mAnv y’ Ore pos Bonet Thy
dpx7v ovd" elvas rovotrov ovdev rovras Gpyavoy idiwv, worep éxeivors srA.

The sense of instruments for good and evil is found in Menexenus,
249A Opyava ris marpwas dperis S:S5ot0a. It is rather in this sense
that Synesius uses the word.

Of Aristotle we may compare Nicomachean Ethics (1099* 32—
1099° 26). It is clear that Synesius had these passages before his eye.
Krabinger calls attention in this connexion to the following in Plato:
Euthydemus, 281; \Jeno,87D; Leges,632 B (Hauck,p.57). The passages
from the Nic. Eth. are as follows:

(1) advvarov yap 7 ov pgdiov ra xada mpdrrawv axoprynroy ovra. soa
pev yap mpdrrera, xabdmep &’ cpydywy, &a dilwy xai wAovrov ai trols
vTucns Suvdpews.

(2) eipnra ydp Puyns cvépyaa war’ aperny tod ns. tav St ore
dyabav 7a ev Undpyew dvayxaiov, ra 5¢ ovvepya cai xpjowa mépucey
Opyavixds.

Topicorum, Lib. VIII, cap. 14, 163° 9: wpés re yrawow wai Thy xara
drrocogiay dpcvnow ro SWvacbas ouvopay Kai cvvewpaxdvas 7a ag” dxardpas
oupBaivovra ris Groldcews ov puxpov Gpyavoy.

Cf. Plato, Soph. 235 B: rit rev év rots Adyors Tepi ra THLAUTA Cpyduwy,
i.e. the devices (implements) we use in arguments. But the word may
be here used as in Plato, Rep. 508 B: rv repi ras aloPyoas dpydvwy.

Problemata, 955" 22: 84 +i smpecBurepos pév yrvdpevor parov voov
éxouev, vewrepos 52 ovres Oarrov pavOdvopev; 7 Ors 6 Beds Cpyava dv
davrois tyiv dd8axe Svo, dv ols ypnadpeBa rois cxrois opydvoss, owpare pep
xetpa, puyg 52 vobv; fors yap xai 6 vois raw dioa dv jyuiy dorep Spyavoy
tndpxywy.

abf.3 cc


194 NOTES

De Part. Animal. 694° 13: 7a 8 Spyava mpés 76 Epyov ) duos rove?,
XW’ ov 70 épyor mpds ta Spyava.

Topica, 105* 21. 18: ra 8¢ SGpyava, de dy Aone meee raw ovMoytopay


ani tan exaywyay, €ori rérrapa KrA.


Page 117,11. grasps the essence of God. Cf. Seneca, De Beneficiis,
iv. 7. 2. ‘Quaecumque voles illi nomina proprie aptabis . .. tot appella-
tioneseius possunt esse quot munera’ i.e.‘ You may give Him whatsoever
mames you please. There may be as many names of Him as there are
gifts and effects of His.’ See Cudworth, ii. 59.


Page 117s 1. 3. desive to touch Him. Cf. Olympiodorus (Ins Plat.

Phaed. B. ps ‘93. ed. Norvin): ore 80° cpowdrnros 4 cuvady: 8:0 db codds re

wai ayabcs, 6 dorw 6 prdoopos, dperfi xal dmoriuyn xexoopnudvos rf
eyabirqn nai TH copia ouvdrreras Ta Daw.


Page 117, L. 4. you may cull Him ... the Creative Father. Cf. Philo
quoted in Eusebius (Preparation), Bk. VIII, cap. 14 ‘There is no form
of address with which a king can more appropriately be saluted than the
name of father; for what, in human relationship, parcnts are to their
children, that also sovereigns are to their states, and God towards the
world, having adapted these two most beautiful thing: by the un-
changing laws of nature . . . namely, the authority of the leader with
the anxious care of the relation.’


Page 117, L. 6. calling Him King, &c. Cudworth, Intellectual System,
vol ii, p. 137, quotes Dio Chrysostom as using these epithets for the
Deity: ro» cower cower dvOpirruw xai Oecv Bacrrda re ai dpxovra, ai mpuravy,
wai tarépa... Tov xopupaioy mpocorwra tay GAwy ... Tov Tov fup-
wavros iyepova ovpayoi, KC.


Page 118, 1. 8. as if I had set up a statue. The simile of the statue is
used by Plato in reference to the ideal state described in the Republic,
420C: ‘Suppose that we were painting a statue and some one came up
to us and said, Why do you not put the most beautiful colours on the
most beautiful parts of the body—the eyes ought to be purple, but you
have made them black—to him we might-fairly answer, Sir, you would


ON KINGSHIP 195


not surely have us beautify the eyes to such a degree that they are no
longer eyes; consider rather whether, by giving this and the other
features their due proportion, we make the whole beautiful. And so I
say to you, do not compel us to assign to the guardians a sort of happi-
ness which will make them anything but guardians’, &c. Synesius,
evidently inspired by this passage, proceeds to describe the various
portions of the duties allotted to a king, and calls his representation a
statue that he is modelling. Plato returns to the same simile in the
Politicus, 277A: °...in my judgement the figure of the king is not yet
perfected; like statuaries who, in their too great hastc, having over-
done several parts of their works, lose time in cutting them down,so too
we, partly out of haste ...and also because we imagined that a
king required grand illustrations, have taken up a marvellous lump of
fable and have been obliged to use more than was necessary.’


Page 118, 1. 22. establish a monarchy in his soul. This phrase and the
thought underlying it are again obviously inspired by Plato’s Republic.
Cf. Rep. 576 E: ‘Tyranny is the wretchedest form of government, and
the rule of a king the happiest.’ On the same page he has already said
that ‘as state is to state in virtue and happiness, so is man in relation
to man’. The conception throughout in the Republic is that true king-
ship is the rule of the higher moral forces over the lower and the sub-
jection of the absolutely evil forces in the soul; that the soul of man is
a microcosm of the state. Cf. Shakespeare, Julius Caesar, Act II, Scene
i, line 67:


And the state of man,
Like to a little kingdome, suffers then
The nature of an insurrection.


The drift of the long argument in the Republic is to show that the state
is only the expansion of the self-government of the individual. The
conclusion is pithily expressed in p. 592 A, where Socrates, in answer to
Glaucon’s objection that the ‘just man’ such as he describes will never
be a statesman, replies: ‘By the dog he will! In the city which is his
own he certainly will, though in the city of his birth perhaps not,
unless he have a divine call.’ (See the Greek on page 197.)


196 NOTES


Page 118, 1.25. We ave, I think, a... animal more extraordinary than
thehydra. DioChrysostom tells a tale of a multiform monster that dwelt
in uninhabited parts of Libya (Or. v, De Regno, §, vol.i, p. 80, ed..von
Amim): Onpiwv . . . re yévos yaXerdv wai dypuov ... év rots dounjrots Tis
APins. _ Wde ydp } xwpa Kai viv érs Soxet rravrodaras Pépew (owv dices.
He describes. this race of animal as having the face of a beautiful
woman—ro pév mpoownor yuvaxeiov ederdois yuvaixds—the breast and
neck also, but the lower part of the body, he says, is hard and scaly and
terminates in a snake—vro 5¢ Actwev odpa oxAnpoy re Kai dppynxrov doXrict,
wai To xdros way Gdis. Unlike the sphinxes, they have no wings.
Synesius refers often to the compound nature of the sphinx, and per-
haps has some thought of this fabled beast of the Libyan desert. In
Horace’s time, as in his, Numidia seems to have !been the land of
porter.tous animals. Cf. Ode i. 22, 13 ‘quale portentum . . . nec Iubae
tellus generat’.


Page 119, 1. 3. destroying the mob rule ... Of the passions. Here again
he is following Plato’s Republic. He has just spoken, a few linés above,
of the hydra. This idea is found in the Republic, p. 588 ff., where, speak-
ing of the tyrant whom he always describes as the creation of mob rule,
Socrates says: ‘Let us make an image of the soul, that he may have his
own words presented before his eyes.’

‘Of what sort ?’

‘An ideal image of the soul, like the composite creations of ancient
mythology, such as the Chimera or Scylla or Cerberus .... Then do you
now model the form of a multitudinous, many-headed monster, having
a ring of heads of all manner of beasts, tame and wild, which he is able
to generate and metamorphose at will.’

Again, we find the simile of the beast in the Republic, 493 a: ‘I might
compare them (i.e. those mercenary individuals) to a man who should
study the tempers and desires of a mighty strong beast who is fed by
him—he would learn how to approach and handle him; also at what
times and ‘from what causes he is dangerous or the reverse; and what
is the meaning of his several cries; and by what sounds, when another
utters them, he is soothed or infuriated; and you may suppose further
that when, by continually attending upon him, he has become perfect


ON KINGSHIP 197


in all this, he calls his knowledge wisdom, and makes of it a system or
art, which he proceeds to teach, although he has no real notion of what
he means by the principles or passions of which he is speaking, but calls
this honourable and that dishonourable, or good or evil, or just or
unjust, all in accordance with the tastes and tempers of the great brute.
Good he pronounces to be that in which the beast delights and evil to be
that which he dislikes; and he can give no other account of them except
that the just and noble are the necessary, having never himself seen,
and having no power of explaining to others, the nature of either or the
difference between them, which is immense. By heaven, would not such
an one be an outrageous educator?’ In general the comparison of the
unrestrained passions in an individual to the turbulence and irresponsi-
bility of the mob is fairly common in Plato.


Page 119, 1. 24. wishes to placate the creature one part at a time. This
again is reminiscent of the long passage quoted above and the thought
that such a man is never in agreement with himself.


Page 119,1.29. Well I know,&c. Cf. Romans vii. 19, 20: ov yap 6 6éAw
wou» ayalov, aAAa 6 ob 0éAw xaxcy rotro mpdcow ....


Page 119, l. 32. a very kingly thing ... not to rule over many myriads
... while you are... a slave...of pleasure. Cf. Isocrates, Ad Nicoclen,
P. 20: dpxe cavrot pydév Frrov 7 rav dwy, nai rov8 wyot Bacwuxwraroy,
av pndeptd Sovrevns ray nSovav, aia xparis Taw emBupsow parov
Tay Toure.


Page 120, 1. 1. the rule over yourself, ctc. avrov €avrot Bacevew is the
phrase used by Synesius. Cf. Plato, Republic, §92 A: Ovx dpa, «$n, rd ye
mokirixa €eAjoce mpdrrev, édvmep rovroy xydnra. Ny rov Kiva, fv 8
ey, & ye TH €avrot modes Kai pda .... Dio Chrysostom (Or. xiii. 1,
ed. von Arnim, vol. ii, p. 142) touches the same note: xai pny «i rs dvds
avipos oby olds re apyew cari, xai rovrov ofcdpa éyyts ovros, @ &)
fwveorw, o052 ad piay puxyjnv xarevOivew rihv airot, mas av Suvaro
Baovtevew pupiddwy dvapBpyrtruv savraxot Suonappdvwy, wonep av, xai


x98 NOTES


wou ye oixowvrew éni mdpac yijs, dv odde dapaxe ros mAcicrous od"
dy Zee Tord ov52 THs ¢uvis fuvijon;


Page 120, 1. 8. friends, with no shade of trony. These passages in the
address remind one a little of Xenophon. In his portrait of Cyrus
(Anabasis, 1. 9, 20) he extols his power of making friends devoted to him
and his interests: gious ye pv Scous roujoacro, Kai edvous yvoin dvras Kai
ixavous xpivee ouvepyovs elvar & rt Tvyydvor BovAcpevos xarepydlecGas,
Opodoyeiras mpds wayrwy xpdrwros 51) yevdoGar Oepamevaw. nal yap adrd
Touro otnep aures evexa dilwy wero SeiaGat, ws cuvepyovs €xot, Kai avros
€zeiparo ouvepyos Trois Pidas xpdriatos elvas rovTov Grou aicJdvotro éxacrov
€zupovrra. . Again in Hiero he makes the tyrant of Syracuse deplore
the lot of the autocrat to his friend the. poet Simonides (ili. 1-6),
insisting on the difficulty of their ever enjoying the precious posses-
sion of friendship: ¢Aias 8° ad xarafdacas ws Kowwvovaw of tUpavvos.
Zpurov pey <i péya éyaber avOpurrrats 4 ftria, rotro dmonepeipeda. iy 4
roootroy Sd 71 dyabov xpivw eyurye To Gidciobas elvas, ore vopilw r@ Svrt
edropara réyaba Te Proupdry véyveobas Kai i mapa GeGav Kai mapa dvb parry.
wai TOUTOU TOWUY TOU KTTLATOS TOLOUTOU OvTOS pelovexTotaww ot TUpavvot


worrow

A few lines further down Synesius returns to his warning against
fattery (cf. c.1) in the phrase px) Ady wapecdica aoe to dpirias
Epocarsoy wepuceyevn.

Aristotle (Afagna Moralia, 1193* 20) defines friendship as being mid-
way between flattery and hatred: dria 8 dori peccrys KoAaxeias wai
€xOpas, éore Se wepi mpafas xat Acyous. 6 pév yap Kodak eoriv 6 mAciw Ta
Epoonxorrwy Kai ovrwy mpoorieis, 6 5¢ amexOnrixds €xOpos Kai tdv Urap-
Xorrum wepraipay. ovdérepos odv opOias enaswerds cori, 6 Se Pidos ava péoov
rovruw ovre yap tArciw THv Urapyovrwy mpooPyce, ovr’ drawveces Ta p27)
spooyjxovra, our’ ad mdAw eAdrrw woijoe, ovre wdvTws éevayTubceTas TAPG
70 Soxotw alta. 6 pév obv fidos rowsbros. Cf. Moralia Eud. 1233” 30.
In Politics we find (1314* 1): «ai yap 5:a rodro zrovnpddiAov 1) Tupay-
vis? moAaxevoperes yap xaipovow, Totro od’ ay «ls moujoee Ppovnpa Exwv
OAabepor, Ga drotow of draxeis 7 od Kodaxetdovow. Cf. Ethica Nico-
suachea, 1173 31: dudavilew 88 Soxet wat 5 dios, Erepos dy rod
mcdaxos. ota otcay ayaloy ri vSovny 7 Siaddpous «ide: & dv yap mpos


ON KINGSHIP 199
rayaboy opirciv Soxet, & 5é rpos 7Sovny, xai rp dv overdiLeras, row 8° dase
vodow ws mpos €repa GusAouvra.

Plato (Leges, 633 C, D) had already asked whether courage was not the
struggle against pleasure and flattery: thy avipiay 3¢, dpe, ti Odpev;
morepov anrAds ovrws elvac mpos doBous xai Avmas Siapdyny povoy, 7 «al
mpos mo0ous re Kai ndoras wai twas Sewas Owiaeias KnoAanxds, at xal
Ta Tepvedy olopéeveaw elvas Tovs Oupovs rorotow xnypivous.

In Aristotle’s conception of friendship as intermediary between
flattery and enmity one scems to detect an echo of the doctrine of
Empedocles, i.e. the struggle between love and discord as a creative
force in the universe, although Aristotle repudiates this theory (De
Gen. et Corrup. 334°5): dpa 5¢ xai roy xocpov cpoiws ¢xew dyeoiv (i.e.
*Epmedoxi\ns) €xt re rou veixous viv xai mporepoy cri ris giAias. ti odv
€ori 70 Kwotv mparov Kai alnioy Tijs Kuwjoews; ob yap 57 1) diXia Kai Td
veixos ... KTA.

But Aristotle seems to deny the possibility of truc friendship existing
for gods or kings, inasmuch as friendship is founded on equality, nor
could it exist between a master and slave ; cf. Eth. Nic. 1158 (cap. viii) :
Etoi & ovv ai eipnuévar durriaa &v icdrnre . . . (ibid. 1. 33)... dav odd
Scdornpa yevynrat dperis 7 Kaxias 7 edmopias 7 TWvos GAXou- ov yas érs firos
ciotv .. . eudavéararoy 5é roto ei thy Oecv> rActorov yap otros naa: TOs
ayabois imepdxovow. Sirov S€ wai éxi trav Bacrléwv’ ovde yap rovras
afvovow elvat diror of modu waradeéorepot, ovdé ToIs dpiorors 7] Gopwraras
of pndeves afcor.

Aristotle’s conclusions are obviously not favourable to the views ex-
pressed here by Synesius as to the king needing a friend to Ican upon.
This was not the opinion, however, of Dio Chrysostom, the writer whom
he admired most of the later-day Greek philosophers. Dio (De Cont.,Or.
xlviii. 22, ed. von Arnim; vol. ii, p. 86) speaks in terms of confidence
concerning his intimacy and friendship with the emperor Trajan: ovvy-
Oeias ovens por mpos Tov avroxpdropa, tows Sé Kai giAias, xai spds dMous
woAAous rovs Suvatwrdrous oxedov ts “Pwpaiwy.

Fronto also seems satisfied with his friendship for emperors. Writing
to Antoninus Pius, he exhorts the Emperor to join him in following
those things which are in accordance with the simplicity of their friend-
ship: ‘Res autem istas . ... veras et congruentes simplicitati nostrae


200 NOTES
amicitiae, semper adsequamur’ (Fronto, E~. Ambr. 345, ed. Loeb,
vel. i, p. 258).

Again, M. Caesar to Fronto (ibid., Ambr. 102, ed. Loeb vol. i, p. 136)

quotes these lines from Plautus (Colaz):

Qui data fide firmata fidentem fefellerunt,

Subdoli subsentatores, regi qui sunt proximi,

Qui aliter regi dictis dicunt, aliter in animo habent.
Cf. Loeb Library, Fronto, vol. i, p. 136, and Dio Chrysostom, Or. i, De
Regno, 25, vol. i, p. §, ed. von Arnim: rovs &¢ npoordvras xai cpavras od
exxAnfis ovdé fdBos, aAXX” aidas Trev, woAd xpeirrov Kai ioxupdérepoy
gofou- Tous pev yap foBoupévous avdynn piceiv nai amodpava: Jédew, rods
$é aidoupévous rapayevew xai Gavydlew.

Further, Dio (Or. iii, De Regno, 86, vol. i, p. 48) praises friendship as
follows: ¢Xiay ye pry amdyrwy vevopixe THY attot KTnudTwy Kddcrov
ans icpsrarov. ov yap ouTws aicypoy elvat . . . ovdé cmixivduvoy xpnudrwy
Exopeiy cs filwy, ov5’ ay ovrws TH xopnyia Kai Trois orparomddots Kai TH
Oy) Suvdper Scadurdrrew ri eddayoviay ws 7H micre trav dilwy. ...
sos 5¢ Bacuciow cow wrciw Te Kai peilw mpdrrew avayxn, tAcovwr Set
wai Taw CuvepyouvTuy Kai pet’ evvotas TrAciovos.

Page 120, 1.12. the friend at his side. In the fourth century, as in the
third and indeed in all the days $f the later Roman Empire, friendship
amongst men was made a cult of. One only has to read the letters of
the Emperor Julian, and many of those of Synesius himself, or of Liba-
nius, or of Procopius, and to compare them with such letters as we pos-
sess of the golden age of Greek literature—of Isocrates, Demosthenes,
or Aeschines, to see to what extent the sentimental conception of friend-
ship existed in the Roman Empire. It is perhaps in the letters of Cicero
that we notice the strain for the first time.


Page 120, 1. 20. ‘Far from Zeus and his thunderbolt.’ -‘Maiorne esse
poterit spes nostra in palatio, quam ut amici imperatoris simus? et ibi
quid non fragile plenumque periculis? et per quot pericula pervenitur
ad grandius periculum?’ (St. Augustine, Confesstones, viii. 6 § 15.)


Page 120, L 30. tnlercourse with his friends. Cf. Philo, Quis Rerum
Divinarum Heres, ed. Cohn-Wendland, cap. 6, 21 (p. 476 M) wappyola


ON KINGSHIP 20I


82 didias ovyyevds: drei pos riva av rg } mpos Tov €avrod diov rappyad-
caro; This is another of the instances in this address where Synesius
seems to echo Philo. Cf. notes on pp. 184 f., 204.


Page 121, 1. 6. that flattery may not secretly slip in. Dio Chryso-
stom, addressing the Emperor Trajan (Or. iii. 2, vol. i, p. 34, ed.
von Arnim), compliments him on regarding flattery with contempt:
éyw 5€, & yovate avbroxparop, mapayéyovd cot, xai ruxov ovdevds Frrov
Eurrepos eis THs ons Pvcews, Ore Tvyxydvets xaipwy aAnOcig Kai wappyaia
padov 4 Swreig wai andrn. Cf. ibid. 17-19, vol. i, p. 36, ed. von
Arnim: racdév ydp, ws Eos eineiv, rHv Kaxuv aicxiorny Tis av etpos
Thy KoAakeiav. mpa@rov piv yap To KaNccrov Kai Sixadrarov Siadeipes,
vov Erawov, wore pynxers Soxeiv murray pndé aGAnbas ysyvopevov, xai 76
ye mdvrwv Sewdrarov, ra ris aperis €rabda 7TH Kaxiqg Sidwow. .. rH
S¢ ddpom mavras vrepBéBAnney 6 xddAak. povos yap tav adan{ovrwy
Thy GAnBeav mpos éxeivous Oappet ra Yevdq Adyav trovs ydAwra «iddros
Ore Pavderat.


Page 121, 1. 8. flattery enters, unless the place be... defended. Here
again the simile isthat of the Republic. Compare p. 560B: ‘At length they
(i.e. his old associates and flatterers) seize upon the citadel of the young
man’s soul, which they perceive to be void of all accomplishments and
fair pursuits and true words, which make their abode in the minds of
men who are dear to the gods and are their best guardians and sentinels.
... And if any help be sent by his friends to the administrative part of
him, the aforesaid vain conceits shut the gate of the king’s fastness;
and they will not allow the embassy itself to enter... .’


Page 121,1.12. Cyrus ...and Agesilaus. These are Xcnophon’s heroes,
and probably of all the Athenian writers who, like Plato, show a vein
of admiration for the institutions of Persia and Sparta.


Page 121, 1. 18. his soldiers, second friends these,... &c. Cf. Dio
Chrysostom, Or. i, De Regno, 20-22, vol. i, p. 4: da yap avdynn tov
Hpepov Kai pirdvOpwrov Baoéa p17) pdvov dirciobas im’ avOpurwy, ara wat
dpictas, .. . obxotv pov eLeorw alr rovs dy orparubras oveTparusTras

abf.s pd


202 NOTES


apocaseiy, tous 5¢ ouvifas gious, 3) xarayeAavra rob dvdparos rijs
¢uias.


Page 122, 1.15. Plato... likens them most to the dog. This is taken
from Republic, p. 376: ‘And surely this instinct of the dog is very char-
ming—your dog is a true philosopher . . . because he distinguishes the
face of a friend and of an enemy only by the criterion of knowing and
not knowing.’ Speaking of the guardians, p. 375, he says: ‘Is not the
noble youth very like a well-bred dog, in respect of guarding and
watching?’ This follows upon his remarking that ‘it will be our duty
to select, if we can, natures which are fitted for the task of guarding the
city ... they ought to be dangerous to their enemies, and gentle to
their friends . . . . He will not be a good guardian who is wanting in
either of these two qualities.’


Page 122, 1.20. The king will benefit by this close intercourse. The
picture of all this side of the duties of the military king is drawn
in Xenophon’s Cyvopaedia, in which he makes a great point of the
intimacy that must be kept alive by the king with his soldiers. Synesius
here makes play with the authority of Homer, quoting lines from the
thirteenth book of the I/iad, although the case for an intimacy between
the Homeric king and the units that composed his force is not very
convincingly made out.


Page 122, 1.29. call up and exhort any of the veterans. Synesius is quite
in the Hellenic tradition here in placing a great importance on military


Onasander, writing in the first century A.D., gives a high place, in
analysing the qualities of a perfect general, to his faculty of speaking to
his troops (Zrparnyuds, 1. 13, Loeb Library, Aeneas Tacticus, &c., p.
379). ‘The general must be’, he says, ‘a ready speaker; for I believe that
the greatest benefit can accrue...only through this gift. For if a general
is drawing up his men before battle, the encouragement of his words
makes thetn despise the danger and covet the honour; and a trumpet-
call resounding in the ears does not so effectively awaken the soul
to the conflict of battle as a speech that urges to strenuous valour
rouses the martial spirit to confront danger. ... No city at all will put


ON KINGSHIP 203


an army in the field without generals nor choose a general who lacks
the ability to make an effective speech.’

But Synesius desires more than the making of speeches. He calls
upon the emperor to know his troops personally. In quoting from
Homer, as an example, he forgets that the army of the Iliad was a
mythical army of heroes, largely at least composed of nobles and chiefs
of tribes. whose ancestries would be known to Agamemnon and the
other leaders.

In this connexion Oldfather, in the interesting translation of Ona-
sander quoted above, calls attention to the passage in the ninth book
of the Iliad (ix. 442) where the aged Phoenix bursts into tears in his
despair at the fire which threatens to destroy the Greek ficet, and notes
the obstinacy of Achilles in refusing to come to the rescue. Phoenix
reminds the leader of the Myrmidons how that Peleus sent for him to
conduct his son to Agamemnon when a mere child and to make him
a speaker of words as well as a doer of deeds:

rovvena pe mpoenxe Sidacxepevas rade nadvra,
pvdwy re pyrijp’ euevas mpynxrijpa re épywv.

One might almost say after reading the Iliad that the rhetorician and
the orator had been first born in the camp or on the battle-field.
Phoenix reminds Achilles in the same speech (ibid. 496) that even the
gods can be turned from their purpose:


aM’, *Axircd, Sdpacov Oupov péyarv’ ovdd ri oe pn

ynrets Hrop cxew* orperrroi 5€ re wai Geoi avroi,

Trav wep Kal peilwy apery Tin re Bin re.
The speech of Phoenix is an admirable example of persuasive eloquence.
Onasander again (Zrparnyixds, xiii) observes that ‘. . . the gencral
should show himself to his soldiers, gay, cheerful, and undaunted.
For the appearance of the leaders brings about a corresponding change
in the minds of the subordinates, and if the general is cheerful and has a
joyful look, the army also takes heart, believing that there is no
danger. .. . On this account, the genera] must inspire cheerfulness in the
army, more by the strategy of his facial expression (r@ oxyjpars rod
napoowrov) than by his words ; ...it is an excellent thing to understand


204 NOTES


these two points, how to say the right word and how to show the
right expression.’


Page 124, 1. 8. ‘Who knows’ &c. These verses, taken from Iliad, xv.
403, are not accurately quoted. The lines should read:
ais 8° ofS” af xdv of ovv Salyom Bupdv dpivw
napanuv; dyaby 5¢ napaldaals deriv dralpov


Page 124, 1. 20. causes you to be cloistered. Page 127, 1.6. keeping your
lairs like lizards. To live behind a veil seems to have been a custom of
ithe kings of Persia, if we can trust Xenophon, who in his Agesslaus
(ix 1, 2) contrasts the way of life of the Spartan king with that of the
Persian: xai tow tpomov trearjoaro ti Tot I1dpoov araloveig. mpwrov
per yap 6 péy rep onaviws cpaobas cocpvivero, "Aynoiraos 8¢ rh dei eudpavi}s
_ lras yydMero, vopi{wy aicxpoupyia pty 76 agavilecBar mpérew, 7p Se els
| wdNos Pits 70 dais pa\ov xoopov rapdxew. erecta 5¢ 6 pév 7 Bvorpdao-
Sos elra: évepvivero, 6 82 rp maaw eirpdcosos elyas dxaipe. This is a good
illustration of the traditional view held by the Greeks of the institutions
of the Persian court. In the same passage (§ 3) in the Agesilaus we
have a reminder of Synesius’ words: ‘You deem it not kingly unless
you exhibit luxury.’ 7@ pév ydp Idpon rca yy mepulpyovras pacratiov-
ves Ti ay HSdws mics, pupios 8¢ rexviovras ri dv Abdwe ddyow Srws ye phy
warabddpGos, ov5’ ay cizos Tis Goa mpayparevovrat.


Page 125,11. dishonest bankers falsify coins. DioChrysostom employs
this metaphor in speaking of flatterers (Or. iii. 18, vol. i, p. 36, ed.
von Arnim): wore rodv xeipov Spwot trav S:adOeaipdvrwy 76 vépropa: of pev
yap vrorrov zoovet 76 vopiopa, of 5¢ riv aperhy amoaroy.


Page 125, L. 3. playing the buffoon with gestures. This is reminiscent
of Philo, ad Gatum, 7, §§ 43-4°... you ought rather to surpass all
other men in every action of your life as much as you surpass them in
your good fortune, for it is unreasonable for the ruler of earth and
sea to be subdued by a song, or by an exhibition of dancing, or by
any ridiculous jest or suchlike, ... and not on every occasion and in
every place to remember your position as emperor.’


ON KINGSHIP 205


Page 128, 1.16. a certain king. Druon (p.114) has already pointed out
that Synesius committed a historical blunder in attributing the events
he narrates toCarinus, who never made acampaign against the Parthians
and who was, moreover, an example of vice rather than of virtue. The
hero of the story in question was the emperor Marcus Aurclius Probus,
who reigned from A.D. 276-82 and who distinguished himself by his
military exploits and civic virtues alike.


Page 130, 1. 17. this very title of king. It is noticeable that Dio
Chrysostom (c.g. Or. iii. 2) addresses the Emperor Trajan as & yevvaie
adroxpdrop, whereas Synesius uses the less formal word Baouers.


Page 131, l. 3. @ certain individual called king. The ‘King Archon’
in Athens is spoken of by Demosthenes simply as ‘king’: rij¢ aoeBeias
xara taur’ €onw andyew, ypagecdat, SixdleoGar pos EvpoAnidas, dpdlew
apes tov Baoiréa (Contra Androtionem, Gor. 25). Hischief function was
concerned with crimes of sacrilege : cf. Andoc. My'st 77 f., Lys. And. 11.


Page 132, 1.17. were the struggle for frugality. This simplicity of life
of the Spartan king is extolled by Xenophon. Sce Agesilaus, cap. 9:
"Aynoiraog Sid 7d piAdrrovos alvar nav ply 70 mapév nddwe ime, wav 8d
76 ovvruxov nddws yohtevs «is 5é 7d dopdvws KoipnOivac mas réros ixavos
avr@. Crawford (p. 512) remarks that Synesius ‘is full of Nenophon
and Plutarch. . . . He laughs at the sophists for their academic dis-
courses on Miltiades and Cimon; well might they deride him on his
similar setting forth of Agesilaus and Epaminondas.’ Dio Chrysostom
(Or. xlix. 5, vol. ii, p. 95, ed. von Armim) speaks of Epaminondas as
a man who derived his political abilities from his philosophical training
under the Pythagorean Lysis. In another speech he compares him to
Aristides, Lycurgus, and Solon (Or. xxii,2, vol. ii, p.271, ed. von Arnim):
*Apworeidnv pév yap xai Avxotpyov nai LoAwva wai "Erapewwvday xal
ef reg Erepos ToLovTos, Piroaodgous ev wokiteia Derdov 7 pyropas Kara THY
yervaiay Te Kai adn pyropuy.


Page 134, 1. 19. inflamed, as though ét were a human body. Polybius
(i.8x § 5) makes use of the same simile: ‘Whoever makes reflection upon


206 NOTES


these horrid cruelties will easily be convinced that if the human body
is sometimes invaded by certain corrupt and ulcerous humours which
resist all remedy, the minds of men are also not less liable to some dis-
orders that prove as obstinate and fatal. And as in the former cases
the very medicines which are designed to effect a cure often serve only
to‘inflame and irritate the parts to which they are applied and even
quicken the progress of the evil, yet on the other hand if the disease be
totally neglected, the corruption soon spreads itself through all the
neighbouring parts, infecting everything within its reach till the whole
body becomes unsound. .. .’


Page 134, l. 22. the sons of physicians. Cf. Lucian, Anacharsts, 19:
ofa mola p Prrropew maides . . . pyyavwvrat. Plato, Leges, 769 B: 6 7 59
wore xadovow To Tovovrov of 1 Lerypdbeuv maides.


Page 135, 1. 3. from their laughter... turned to tears. Cf. Philo, The
Contemplative Life, 73: ‘I know well that some persons will laugh when
they hear this, but they who laugh will be those who do things worthy
of weeping and lamentation.’ Cf. Isoc. De Pace, p. 168: rocovrp Sé
Xeipous cope Taw mpoyovuw, od povov tay eddoxysnodvrwy ada Kal Tov
prorPevrom, Goov éxeivos prev ef Trodepeiy mpds tuds Yndicawro, pears odons
apyupiov xai ypvoioy Tis axpomrdAews, Opws Urép Trav Sofdvrwy trois abtav
Cwpacw wovro Sciv xwSvvevew, hysis 5° eis rooavrny azopiay €AnAvOores
«ai Tovouro: FO wADOS Ovres Worep Bacireds 6 péyas pcOwrois ypwyeba
Tos arparowedcs.


Page 135, 1. 26. ashamed of all that has been sacred to the Romans.
Page 136,17. laugh the toga to scorn. The account that Herodotus gives
of the Scythians (iv. 76-82) is interesting in this connexion as showing
the reputation they had in his time for their contempt of forcign institu-
tions: feurxoios ... odros alviis ypdoba: devyouos .. . “EMnuixotas 5¢ xal
gaore. He tells us legendary history to the point; how Anacharsis was
shot by the Scythian king Saulius, who surprised him secretly perform-
ing the rites of the Mother of the Gods; and how Scyles, the king of
Scythia, ‘was in no wise content with the Scythian manner of life, and
was much more inclined to Greek ways, from the bringing up which


ON KINGSHIP 207


he had received’. He accordingly, Herodotus tells us, was initiated
secretly into the mysteries of Dionysus, but, this being discovered, a
rising of the pcople against him took place; he fled to Thrace, where he
was finally betrayed and was beheaded’ by his brother Octamasades,
who had become king in his stead. ‘So closely do the Scythians guard
their usages’, says Herodotus, ‘and such penalties do they lay on those
who add foreign customs to their own’ (Godley’s translation, Loeb).

Synesius speaks of the young Scythians at Constantinople and the
Eastern Empire generally as veornra modAnv éreporpogoy, Heo dios
xpwpévny (p. 1089 c, Migne). It would seem as if the national character
of the Scythians had changed little since the days of Herodotus.
Synesius is pointing out that there is a double danger to the empire in
making them soldiers, first because they are inferior soldicrs in any
case, and secondly because they uncompromisingly cling to their own
customs and do not amalgamate with the Roman state.


Page 136, 1.24. the so-called Servile War. Synesius may be thinking also
of the difficulties that his own Lacedaemonian ancestors experienced
with the Helots, in regard to whom their attitude was one of apprchen-
sion not unlike that which their descendant in the fifth century feels
in the face of the Scythians. A passage in Thucydides is cloquent on this
subject (Lib. IV, lxxx): ‘Furthermore, the Lacedaemonians were glad
to have an excuse for sending out some of the Helots. . . . Indeed,
through fear of their youth and numbers—for in fact most of their
measures have been adopted by the Lacedaemonians with a view to
guarding against the Helots’—they had once even resorted to the
following device. This device was to offer freedom to those who had
rendered the greatest services in the war. ‘About two thousand of them
were selected, and these put crowns on their heads and made the rounds

‘of the temples, as though they were already free, but the Spartans not
long afterwards made away with them, and nobody ever knew in what
way each one perished. So on the present occasion the Spartans gladly
sent with Brasidas seven hundred Helots as hoplites. . . .” This was
during the Peloponnesian war, in the sixth year, when the Athenians
had surrounded a Spartan force at Pylos, i.e. 425. Long before this,
in the year 464, the Spartans had drifted into a conflict with the Helots


208 NOTES


who revolted and occupied Ithome, and the siege of this place lasted
ten years, after which the Helots were forced to surrender. (Cf. Thucyd.
lib. I, c. 101 seq.) The Athenians under Cimon came to the aid of the
Spartans, but were soon dismissed from motives of jealousy, and this,
according to Thucydides, was the first rift in the lute so far as the rela-
tions of Athens and Sparta were concerned. Synesius then had ample
precedent in history for regarding as a great danger the possibility of
a civil war fomentcd byalien slaves. The tigerish wrath displayed by the
fopulace of Constantinople when Gainas’ troops suddenly attempted to
leave the city showed that the masses were fully alive to the danger.

Athenaeus (Des pnosoph. vi. 87) alludes to the danger of foreign slaves,
speaking their own language, dwelling in a city: ov yap dyes ovdev puyxis
Sowlys . . . yaXewov obv To Krijpa éepyw moddns emdédeucrar wepi Te Tas
Meconviaw ovyvas aroordces xai wepi tas Taw ex pds dwvijs todAovs
Oixéras xrwpdvww modes Goa xaxa cupBaive. ... There follows in cap.
§3~g in the same work an interesting account of the revolt of the
Chian slaves under Drimacus. In cap. 103 Athenaeus estimates the
number of slaves in Attica at four hundred thousand, on the strength
of a census taken by Demetrius Phalereus in the 115th Olympiad and
recorded by Ctesicles, and (in cap. 104) adds that the greater part
worked the mines in chains; that at one time they put to death the
guards, and after seizing the acropolis at Sunium, devastated the fields
of Attica. He then speaks of the Servile War, and how Spartacus the
gladiator escaped from Capua and persuaded a great body of slaves to
join him in the revolt, &c.


Page 138, 1. 4. The old historians tell us that the Cimmerians ... drove
them from their settlements. It is not clear to what historians Synesius
alludes. Herodotus tells us that it was the Scythian who drove the
Cimmerian from his country. He refers to this three times. The
Scythians, according to a legend which he recounts (iv. rz seq.),
moved against the Cimmerians, but as the latter were not agreed
amongst themselves as to what policy to pursue, a civil war broke out,
resulting in the complete destruction of both armies engaged in it, and
after this the Cimmerians abandoned their country to the Scythians.
Again in vii, 20 he speaks of the magnitude of ‘the host of the Scythians


ON KINGSHIP 209


when, in pursuit of the Cimmerians, they broke into Media and subdued
and ruled well-nigh all the upper lands of Asia .. .’. In i. 15 also, in
narrating the events of the life of Ardys, the son of Gyges, he tells us
that ‘He took the country of Pricne and invaded Miletus; and it was
while he was monarch of Sardis that the Cimmerians, driven from their
homes by the nomad Scythians, came into Asia and took Sardis all |
but the citadel’ (W. Godlcy).

He states in iv. 12 that the Cimmerians ficd into Asia from the
Scythians and made a colony on the peninsula where the city of Sinope
stood in his time. As to the Amazons, Herodotus tells a fantastic story
of their landing by the cliffs near the Maeotian lake in the country of the
Scythians, and how the young Scythians approached them and made
wives of them, after which they eventually crossed the river Tanais and
founded the tribe of the Sauromatae (Herod. iv. 110-17). There is
nothing said here about their driving the Scythians from the country.


Page 138, 1. 29. the barbarian does not understand, &c. Dio Chryso-
stom seems to have had a better opinion of the Scythians of his own
time. Cf. Or. Lxix. 6 fed. von Arnim, vol. ii, p. 176}: ZavOas youw ovder
xwAvovras of vopddes unre oixias €xovres pyre yy oreipovres 7 Gurevovres
Stxaiws Kai KaTa vopous 7rouTeveoOas.


Page 141, I. 1. ‘gentle as a father.’ Philo, quoted in Eusebius (Pracp.
Evang., Bk. VIII, cap. 14) as follows: ‘And there is no form of. address
with which a king can more appropriately be saluted than the name of
father, for what in humanity parents are to their children, that also
sovereigns are to their states and God towards the world’ (Yonge,
trans. vol. iv, p. 223). See page 194, above.


Page 142,1.30 ff. shameful... that none should enter competitions, &c.
Dio Chrysostom, in the Isthmsaca (Or. ix. r0-13 [ed. von Arnim, vol. i,
p.105]), draws a picture of Diogenes at the Isthmian gamesand represents
him as asking why the crown of parsley should not be bestowed on the
winners in moralcontestsand the like: éwei5¢ xai coreparwoaro ris nirvos,
adupavres of Kopivties ray vrmperay rivas dxOcvoy dirubdoba: rov orddavov
xal pnddv wapdvopoy moreiv. 6 Sd ypero adrovs dd ri wapdvopdy dor adrov

abzbea Ee


210 NOTES ON KINGSHIP

é€sregarwabas ris wirvos, d\Aous 5¢ od rrapavopoy. «lrev ov Tis alrév,
“Ore 08 verixnxas, & Auyeves. 6 5d, TToMous ye, elnev, dvraywnaras Kai
peydovs, ody ola raid €or: 7a avipdroda 1a viv evraifa adaiovra Kai
‘Scoxevovra xai tptxovra, 1H tavri 5é yarerwrdpous, rreviay Kai duyjv
wai adofiay, érs 54 cpyyy re xai Avmmy Kai émBupiav Kai doBov Kai 16 rdvrwv
apayurrarow Or piov, . . . nSoviy: F ovdeis ovre ray ‘ EXArjvwy ovre rv BapBapwv

Bfwi payeo$ar nai mepreivar rH Yuyf Kparjoas, dAAa ndvres Frrnvrat Kal
Ereipyxan spos Tow dydva Tovrov ...mAnv cnod. mérepov tyiv dfros Soxad
Tis wiTvos, 7 AaBovres avrnv Swoere TH WAcioTwv Kpedv ydpovTt;


Page 145, L 30. you will gusckly see many ashamed of the wealth, &c.
Dio Chrysostom, in the Euboean, to which Synesius refers with admira-
tion in his Dso, touches somewhat the same note (07. vii. 103-4 [ed.
von Arnim, vol. i, p. 208]): yewpy:xod pev 37 wéps Kai Kuvyerixod re Kai
woyeruco Biov rade wreiw SiarpiPiv tows wapacydvra Tov jerpiou Acdé-
Ow, spoOvpouperwsy Hud aurnyern Sei£as wreviav ws ovK arropov xpipa Biov
ani lasis aperovons avipaow éAevOdpois avroupyeiy €Bédovow .. . elev 57,
Weps Taw ey Gores Kai Kata Tow TevyTWwY oxerrréov ay ein Tob Biov Kai ray
<pyacus, ras ay padora Sidyovres Kai moi’ drra peraxerpslopevor Suv7-
oovra: py xaxds Ci pndé gavrcrepov trav SaveLovrwy emi roxas ovyxvois.
Dio says that in this work he desires to give an example of how life
may be passed decorously and in accordance with nature in poverty
(a zyv weviay xpos ro [Civ evoxnpovws xal xara duow, ibid. 81,
Pp. 204).


Page 146, L 13. enamoured of Philosophy. Cf. Isocrates, Or. ii. ad
Nicoclem, p. 21: & 7 ay axpPioas Bovdnbijs dy éxicracbas wpoojxes Tovs
ee dusapig pri al dAoooglg: 76 ply ydp prooogeiv rds ddovs
ou Scifa....


NOTES ON DIO


PHILOSTRATUS of Lemnos, sometimes described in antiquity as
Philostratus of Tyre or of Athens, was not mercly the biographer
of the sophists, but their eulogist. Descended from a family of
sophists in the island of Lemnos and born during the last third of the
second century a.D., he wrote a work that might be described as a
panegyric of all men who had, like himself, become distinguished in the
rhetorician’s career, but he includes under the designation of sophist
such Athenian orators as Isocrates, Aeschines, and Antiphon. The
philosopher has less importance in his eyes than the rhetorician. He
was a protégé of the empress Julia Domna and her husband the
emperor Septimius Severus. The empress spent much of her time at
Antioch, where she surrounded herself with scientists and men of letters.
An excellent résumé of what can be gathered as to the facts of his life
will be found in Mrs. W. C. Wright’s introduction to Philostratus’ Lives
of the Sophtsts in the Loeb Series.

Dio Chrysostom of Prusa, the subject of this essay, had a vast repu-
tation in the second- and third-century days of the Roman Empire, and
we can see from the ternts in which Synesius speaks of him that this
reputation had not waned in the fourth. ‘As for Dio of Prusa,’ says
Philostratus, ‘I do not know what one ought to call him, such was his
excellence in all departments; for, as the proverb says, he was a “‘horn
of Amalthea’”, since in him is compounded the noblest of all that has
been most nobly expressed. His style has the ring of Demosthenes and
Plato, but Dio has besides a peculiar resonance of his own... and it was
combined with a scrious and direct simplicity of expression. ... That
he had also a talent for writing history is proved by his On the Getae; he
did in fact travel as far as the Getae during his wandering as an exile.’

He was born at Prusa, in Bithynia, about the middle of the first
century A.D. He travelled a great deal, going from one town to an-
other very much as did the sophists in the days of Plato. He visited
Rhodes, Ilium Novum, and Egypt, coming back from time to time to
his native city, where he married under the reign of Titus or Vespasian.


212 NOTES


Owing, however, to the execution of a great friend of his in Rome
(Flavius Sabinus, according to Emperius), he fell into disfavour at

‘court and was exiled. Philostratus says, ‘I cannot call his sojourn with
the Getic tribes an exile, for he had not been ordered to go into exile.’
Dio himself, in Ov. xlv, 1, however, uses the word ¢vyj,

This expatriation, whatever may have been its origin, lasted fourteen
years. He wandered about Greece, now no longer as the brilliant sophist
surrounded by admirers of his eloquence, but disguised as a vagabond
and unknown. In the school of adversity he had become a serious
thinker instead of a specious rhetorician. It is to this change in his
intellectual life that Synesius alludes. But after so many years of
wandering (rocovrov xpdvov mAavnbeis, as he expresses it in Or. xl. 2) the
death of his enemy Domitian befell in the year 96. And here, according
to Philostratus (Vist. Sophist. p. 488), a dramatic scene took place in one
of his journeys near the Danube, for when he saw the garrison beginning
to mutiny on receiving the news of the emperor’s assassination, he
stripped himself of his rags, like Odysseus at the climax of the Epic, and
beginning his harangue with the famous verse (Od. xxii. 1)

avrap 6 yupywOn paxdwy modvpntis ’Odvaceds,
‘he revealed’, says Philostratus, ‘that he was no beggar, nor what they
believed him to be, but Dio the sage: he delivered a spirited and ener-
getic indictment of the tyrant, and convinced the soldiers that they
would be wiser if they acted in accordance with the will of the Roman
people.’ After this he returned in triumph to Rome, where the new
emperor, Nerva, received him with every mark of affection. But Dio,
alas, fell ill at Rome, and Nerva died before accomplishing anything of
importance for his friend. Fortune, however, smiled upon him from
this time forth, and after returning to Prusa and taking up various
public works there, he again after a time felt the old unrest possess him,
and took again to travelling from one lecture hall to another, speaking
before enthusiastic audiences at Tarsus, Alexandria, and many other
places, not now as a sophist, but as a philosopher. Two of his speeches
“On Kingship’ (wept Bacweias) were delivered before the emperor
Trajan. His admirer Synesius was perhaps stirred by his example when
he wrote his address to the emperor Arcadius. It is to this latter part


ON DIO 213


of his life that his political speeches belong, and in these Dio appears
more as a statesman than as a philosopher. In them he trics, and it
would appear with a certain amount of success, to arrange difficulties
that had arisen between various cities in Bithynia and elsewhere. This
is only another evidence of the vitality of the Greek city, politically,
under the Roman Empire ; of the tradition of a former independence
that these once autonomous states could never forget, and upon which
I have insisted in the introduction to this volume as throwing light on
the mentality of Synesius. ‘These speeches,’ says Maurice Croisct
(Histotve de la Littévature grecque, v. 476), ‘although less well known
than the Moral Treatises, are greatly to his honour. In them he shows
himself at once an honest man and a clever one. . . . Like Plutarch, he
feels, and says with effect, that the best way for the Greeks of his time
to lighten the strain of the Roman domination is to give it no cause for
a harsh intervention in their affairs through useless political agitations.’
The orations show Dio in the light of a patriotic Greek in whom the
cultural elements of Hellenism had never become divorced from the
political. The passionate lover of Plato and Demosthenes, bred in a still
Greck city and speaking the language of the masters from his infancy,
could scarcely free himszlf from the aspirations of an indestructible
Hellas that is interwoven with all that they have written. It is easy to
see why Dio was such a favourite author of Synesius. The one writer in
the first and second centuries, and the other in the fourth and fifth, were
at heart and perhaps unconsciously, Greeks of the golden age. What is
admirable about them both is that, notwithstanding this, they showed
themselves most loyal supporters of the Roman Empire. |

Dio, like Synesius, was very frank and fearless when addressing an
assembly of citizens. He takes the part of a critic quite freely, somewhat
as his inspirer Demosthenes did before him. ‘I would praise you more’,
he says in speaking tothe people of Alexandria, ‘if you spoke deliberately,
if you could be silent, and if you thought rightly’ (Or. xxxii. 2, ed.
von Arnim, vol. i, p. 267). This faculty for telling his audiences blunt
home truths was, however, conjoined with such great charm of per-
sonality that he succeeded in winning their applause even in his most
caustic moments. “The persuasive charm of the man’, says Philostratus,
*was such as to captivate even men who were not versed in Greek


214 NOTES


letters. An instance of this is that the emperor Trajan in Rome set
him by his side on the golden chariot in which the Emperors ride in
procession when they celebrate their triumphs in war, and often he
would turn to Dio and say, “I do not understand what you are say-
ing, but I love you as I love myself ”’’ (Lives of the Sophists, p. 488).
‘This mcident’, says Prof. W. C. Wright, from whose edition of Philo-
stratus my quotations have been taken, ‘is improbable and is not else-
where recorded. That Trajan understood Greek is probable from
Cassius Dio, Ixviii.3 . . .; cf.also lxviii.7 and Pliny’s Panegyric, xlvii. 1.’
The story, however improbable, is worth quoting as showing what an
impression the charm of Dio’s manners made upon his contemporaries.

The 3foral Discourses, to which allusion has been made, were, perhaps,
the most famous of Dio’s works; some of them might be termed lay
sermons. These d:atdfecs were popular amongst the public and its
philosophers and mentors of the period, but as Maurice Croiset has
very pertinently pointed out (Hsst. Lt. Grec., v. 479), the discourses
of Dio are sharply distinguished from such work as was current in his
day by the fact that he addressed himself ‘not to pointing out the
errors of mankind in general, but those of the audience before whom he
was speaking, so that he discoursed to them of their present needs,
warned them of the dangers that they were incurring, and showed them
practical means of averting these’. In a word, his aims were those of
one who sought to educate the city populations in his day, and for many
years he seems to have had great success in this path, showing courage
as well as oratorical talent in his efforts to instruct. The moral principles
that he taught were chiefly those of the Stoa, as Synesius tells us here,
though Platonic and other influences enter into his work also, but the
Hellenic tradition is always presented in its purity and unclouded by
any Asiatic symbolism.

His works may be divided into three groups, the sophistical, written
m the first period of his life, the political, and finally the ethical or
moral. The last two belong to the period after his exile. A great part
of his works has been lost, although many of these existed in the time
of Synesius. We now possess a collection made after the fifth century,
containing eighty pieces, a certain number of which are incomplete.

Carneades, the founder of the New Academy, born at Cyrene in the


ON DIO 215


year 213 B.c., was, like Dio, both a philosopher and an orator. It was
he who, following upon Arcesilas, crystallized the floating conceptions of
the decadent Platonists and Atomists of his day into the doctrine of
‘probable opinions’. This was only the logical outcome of the rejection
of the absolute idea, the sheet anchor of the whole Platonic system.
Scepticism as to the existence of any absolute truth was the mainspring
of his views on philosophy. All approximations to truth were to be
regarded as tentative and relative. Philostratus dismisses him with a
few words as one who shouid be enrolled amongst the sophists, although
his mind had been formed in the philosophic mould, adding that his
power as an orator led him to the highest degree of proficiency. We see
in Philostratus how clear-cut, in his day, was the distinction between
philosopher and sophist, and Synesius seems to feel this also. ‘Study
philosophy’ is the advice that he is always giving his friends in his
letters, but he excludes rhetoric in general, at least such rhetoric as
leads to practice in the law courts. He would have his dearest friend
Pylaemencs attach himself ‘not to the rhetoricof the bar, but to that right
and noble rhetoric that even Plato himself . . . does not try to prohibit’
(Letter 103). ‘You yourself admit’, he saysa little later, ‘that philosophy
in itself is worth more than rhetoric.’ For Synesius there was evidently
rhetoric fair and foul. The rhetorician par excellence in his eyes was the
sophist, and the sophist was anathema to him, as we sce in the last
passages of De Insomniis and in the Letters passim. He had made the
old enemy of his master Plato his own. Dio and Carneades at least had
absolution from him, for they were philosophers as well. Of the last it
will be remembered that he was sent to Rome by the Athenians on a
political mission. Michael Psellus, writing in the eleventh century at
Byzantium, drawsan equally sharp distinction between the sophist and
the philosopher; cf. Chronogr. lib. vi, cap. 41: éwpaxws 5¢ crt Svo
pepides tTa&v Adywy cici, Kai TH pév 7 pyTopuch ovpmAnpoi, ri 52 diro-
cogia andrepe, xai 7 pev ovddv re tw&V CEeuvorépww eidvia xayAdlet
provoy 7 peydrw trav Adfewv pevpart .. . ai xoopet THy yAwrray ...
% 52 dirocodia .. . rds re dicas duxveves Tay CyTwY Kai Tas appryrous
Gewplas naplornos «ri.

Leo of Byzantium, again, was a pupil, in his youth, of Plato, if we
can trust Philostratus, and became identified with the sophists owing


216 NOTES


to his brilliant successes as an orator. Philostratus tells anecdotes
that turn upon his reputation for wit and his powers of persuasion.
Eudoxus of Cnidus was another product of the Academy, according to
the same authority, who became famous for his oratory and who was
also dubbed with the title of sophist. Diogenes Laertius speaks of him
as ‘astronomer, geometer, physician, and legislator’. He represents him
as a pupil of Archytas. ‘Sotion,’ he adds, ‘in his Successions of Philo-
sophers says that he was also a pupil of Plato.’ I do not know why
Synesius represcnts him as a Peripatetic.

Synesius has, again, presumably drawn his information as to the
life of Aristocles of Pergamos from Philostratus, who describes his
change of life m the following passage (Lives of the Sophtsts, p. 567): ‘So
long as he was a student of philosophy he was slovenly in appearance,
unkempt and squalid in his dress, but now he began to be fastidious,
discarded his slovenly ways, and admitted into his house all the
pleasures that are afforded by the lyre, the flute, and the singing voice,
as though they had come begging to his doors. For though hitherto he
had lived with such austerity, he now began to be immoderate in his
attendance at theatres and their loud racket. When he was beginning
to be famous at Pergamon, and all the Hellenes in that region hung on
his oratory, Herodes travelled to Pergamon and sent all his own pupils
to hear him, thereby exalting the reputation of Aristocles as though
Athene herself had cast her vote. His style of eloquence was lucid and
Attic, but it was more suited to formal discourse than to forensic argu-
ment, for his language is without acrimony or impulsive outbreaks on
the spur of the moment. And even his Atticism, tested by comparison
with the language of Herodes, will seem over-subtle and deficient in the
qualitics of magnificence and sonorousness.’ ‘Herodes Atticus’,as Philo-
stratus calls him, was a wealthy sophist who established himself in
Rome under the emperor Nerva (Phil. Vst. Soph. p. 548) and whose
lectures Aristocles attended there. It is evident that in the second
century, through which Synesius is for the moment threading his way,
the philosopher affected the ‘simple life’,and the sophist became the man
of the world, courted by. all and always in the limelight. But there was
more than this. The sophist became the statesman. Cities that had
grievances to settle with other cities would bring them up before the


ON DIO 217


emperor's council-chamber at Rome, and then each city would choose
an advocate (ovvduxos) to defend its case. What more likely than that
they should choose the famous sophist whom they knew so well, whose
words they had hung upon at the theatre, by whose arguments they
were spellbound, as their beloved Dio Chrysostom tells them reproach-
fully, and whose voice they greeted with thunders of applause. Just
as Horace tells us that in his day Roman citizens had gone mad over
‘belles-lettres’ and a dilettante mania for writing verses, so in the
second century the Greek-speaking world in the Roman Empire had
gone mad over rhetorical demonstrations of oratory and sophistical
casuistry. Here again we are only in face of the same tendencies that
Socrates, in the mouth of Plato, reproaches the Athenians for giving way
to in the golden age of literature in Greece. History is only repeating
itself. In thought, in philosophy, Carmeades is only another Protagoras.
*Man is the measure of all things’ for the one, and truth is only approxi-
mate probability for the other. The only difference that the lapse of
five hundred years had brought was that the rhetorician was more
supreme than ever, that the rhetorician was the sophist, and the sophist,
whom Plato in his great dialogue is so anxious to draw out of his lurking-
place, had become the statesman; as much at least as the statesman
could exist for Greek cities shorn of the golden fleece of their bygone
autonomy. .


Page 149, 1. 1. the cottabus. Athenacus (Detp. Lib. xv, cap. 2) de-
scribes the cottabus as a Sicilian sport and quotes these lines from a
certain Critias, son of Callaeschrus:

aorraBos ex Lixedjns ears yOoves exnpents Epyov,
év oxonov és Aardywy réfa xabiordpeBa,

According to Athenacus, the prize given for victory in drinking was
called cottabus, as also the vessel into which they threw the drops.
But he quotes the comic poet Plato as using it in the sense of a game,
as in his lines:

apos KoTraBoy maileyw, ws ay odw@y eyw
76 Scinvow éviov oxevdow .. .

$épe viv Ovisv, alp’ Sup, moripa
wapdbere, wallwyev 5d wepi diAnudrwy.

2878-5 Ff


218 NOTES


The precise nature of the game is not clear. It evidently turned on
drinking, in some form. See Casaubon, Petavius, &c.


Page 149, 1. 23. panegyric ona bird, called ‘a parrot.’ The passage in
Philostratus (p. 487) is as follows: ‘As for his Tale of Euboea, the Enco-
misem of a Parrot, and all those writings in which he handled themes of
nogreat importance, we must not regard them as mere trifles, but rather
as sophistic compositions; for it is characteristic of a sophist to devote
serious study to themes even so slight as these’: row 5¢ EvBoda xai rév
Toe gxrraxov Exawov xai roca ovr Urép peydAwy éorovdacora TH Aiwvr,
By puxpa wywpeba, aia cofiorixd, copiorod yap To Kai wirep TovovTwy
eoxovdalew (trans. Prof. W. C. Wright, ed. Loeb, p. 19).


Page 149, 1.29. The ancients described as sophists,&c. This passage is
on p. 484 of the Vit. Soph., the following, So much for the philosophers,
&e., on p. 492.


Page 150, 1. 9. What then did you say, &c. Synesius shows himself
something of a casuist here. His attempt to establish a hard and fast
line between the philosophic and the sophistic works of Dion is not
very convincing. |

The discourse to Musonius was a continuation of the same line of
thought that he developed in his treatise Against the Philosophers, an
essay in which he sought to show the futility of philosophy as a guide
in actual life.


Page 151,1.7. The funeral oration of Aspasta. This speech is recited in
Plato’s Menexenus (236 B) by Socrates, who tells his friend that he has
learned it from the lips of Aspasia. ‘Yesterday I heard Aspasia com-
posing a funeral oration . . . partly improvising and partly from previous
thought, putting together fragments of the funeral oration which
Pericles spoke, but which, as I believe, she composed.’ It will be seen
from this extract that Plato claims no originality for the speech, which
is one that in any case would have been scarcely worthy of him. It
belongs to the domain of rhetoric pure and simple, and it has always
puzzied the commentators on Plato that he should have written such
a dialogue. By some it has been regarded as apocryphal, although


ON DIO 219


Burnet and most scholars of to-day accept it. Jowett refers to Plat.
Menex. 235 D and a short quotation from Aristotle (Rhetoric, i. 9. 30) as
an evidence of its authenticity. Synesius’ example of the antithesis
between the style of the statesman and that of the rhetorician is happily
chosen.


Page 151, 1. 3x. ‘Esslogy on the parrot’ and the ‘Eubocan’. The Euboean
belongs to the latter part of Dio’s life, after his exile. It is one of the
Moral Discourses. The Eulogy of the Parrot is of his earlier period. The
Roman poet Statius (Silv. ii. 4) treated the same theme in a dirge for
a pet parrot that had died:


Psittace, dux volucrum, domini facunda voluptas,
Humanae sollers imitator, psittace, linguae,
Quis tua tam subito pracclusit murmura fato?


So begins the poem, perhaps suggested by Catullus’ lament over
Lesbia’s ‘sparrow’ ; cf. Ovid, Amores, ii. 6.


Page 152, |. 24. his last ‘On Kingship.’ The speeches on Kingship
were delivered by Dio at Rome before the emperor Trajan, who held
the philosopher in great esteem. There are four speeches which are so
named, of which two, probably the first and third, were spoken before
the imperial throne. The passage from Dio to which Synesius alludes
(Or.iv, 83-5 De Regno, vol.i, p.69,ed. von Amim) is the following: rpiav
5é émaparovvrwy . . . Biwy, eis ots pddora eurirrovow oi modo... . Ov
pera Aoytopod oxepdpyevos kai Soxiudoavres, aAcyw 5é oppp Kai rvxy
apocevexOdvres, Tocovrous garéov elvar xai Saipovas, ols ouvdmovras xai
Aarpevovow 6 modus Kai apabys opiros, dos aw, xabdrep tyepon
sovnp@ Kai pawoperw wovnpos Kai ageAyns Diagos. éors S¢ TovTwY dy
édnv Biwy 6 pev HSuTraOys Kai rpupepos srepi Tas TOU owparos HSovds, 6 8 ad
firoxprparos Kai firorAoutos, 6 5¢ rpiros dudorépwy empavicrepos Te xai
padrov rerapaypévos, 6 dilorysos xai girodofos .... ddpe ow xaldzep of
xouibot ray Snpsovpywy . . . ovKovv Kai Hucis py xelpous .. . daywpey 7
exeivos wepi tas atta réxvas, TH TAdTTEw Kai afopotoiv Tos TpozoUsS TOD
tpirrAou Saipovos trav rpusv Biwv. .. . Dio describes on the following page
the demon that attends the lover of possessions (§ 91, vol. i, p. 70,
ed. von Arnim): 6 péy 5) ¢roxpyparos Saipwe xpvoot nai apy’pou xal


220 NOTES


ris wai Pooxnpdrow Kai cuvoixusy Kai mdons xrijcews épacris.... adypnpos
wai puxew, ovre waidas jj yovdas ovre tratpida fiidv, } ovyydvecav dAdo 74
popiluw 7 Ta xpyjpara.

The lover of pleasures is then dealt with, and his attendant demon
(ibid. § 101): 6 5¢ 59 Sevrepos avijp re xai Salpwy exeivoy rod avipds,
67a Tis BSovAs avagaivwy opyta kal ryv Gedy ravrny Bavudlwv Kai sporiay,
Eres yovaxciay Gedy, woixidos Kai wodvedis acpi re dopas Kai yedces
axArjpuros. ...

The lover of honours comes next in order (ibid. 117 ff.): dépe 54 rotor
ve wAdrraper 76 Te axa Kai elSos Tod giroripou Satpoves; 4 SHAov OTs
wreparroyv Te Kai Uanvepiov Kara 70 HOos adrov . . . cmoious rovs Bopedéas
evrebuprOnoay re nai éypapay oi ypadeis. . . . ovdev ye pny mpocdoney
Gogareias evexev ore detois ovre yepdvois oure GMAw Twi rrnv@ yeves THY
gvow, ara. padroy ay ris atvrov mpocexdoee TH “Ixapiov Biaiw nai mapa
¢vcow dopa, ov Suvaroy réyyvnpua éemyepyoavros AaddAov rexvjoacba.
Toryapouw v0 vesTHITOS xai dAaloveias émiOupdv tmAcrepos ta aoTpwr
Fipeobas Xpovey per twa doglero Ppaxwv, xaAwpdvuy $¢ trav Seopdv
«ai TOU xnpow péovros, ¢ Exwvupiay amo rovde TH weddye mapdoyey, obmep
HparicOn meowv: Kaxeivos aolevdo. Kai Kovdois tQ@ dvre morevoas
wrepois, Acyw 5é rysais Te Kai éxaivas bro Tw avOpwrrwy THY TOAAGY ws
€ruye rerroperas . . . $épes Tov avdpa tov avrod (nAwryy re xai imnpérny,
vin pey ifAcv Kwai paxdprov woAAois Pauvdpevor, ndtv 5¢ ad ranewdv re

wai Gbdov rois re GAXots Kai purr Kai paAora atre Soxoivra.

The oration ends with an invocation of the good and temperate
demon and deity (ibid., § 139): GANG 34 peradaBdvres xaGapdy re Kat
aptittes THiS mpoTEepov Gppovias Tov ayaOoy Kai cwdpova vuvdpev Saipova
wai Gedy, ols ore éxeivoy Tuyxeiv exdxAwoay ayabai Moipas rasdelas dytois
mai AMyou peradafoia.


Page 153, L 8. in exchange for those of the ‘Euboean’, It is unfortunate
that four of the works of which Synesius speaks in terms of admiration
have not come down to us amongst the orations (so called) of Dio
Chrysostom. We have the ‘Euboean’ and the four orations, ‘On King-
ship’; but not the “Tempe’, the ‘Memnon’, the ‘Parrot’ or the
*Gnat’, nor, again, ‘The Attack on the Philosophers’. ‘The Euboean’
iS a very pretty story written to point the moral of the value of the


ON DIO 221
simple life in poverty and in rural surroundings in comparison with the
life of the city. The author describes a voyage that he took with some
fishermen in a small boat and tells us how he was shipwrecked on the
coast of Euboea. Going alone into the interior he meets a sturdy hunts-
man who befriends him and takes him to hishome in the hills, where he
comes into contact with a handful of people living a patriarchal life
with a few cattle to furnish them with the necessities of food, and
occupying themselves also with hunting wild game—a mixture, this, of
the primitive, agricultural, and venatorial phases of existence. The
huntsman narrates to him their history; how their fathers were the
shepherds of a wealthy man in the past, but one who fell into misfortune
and lost his lands, and whose flocks and herds of cattlewere driven away
and sold; howhis own father remained on the spot bivouacking with his
family in tents and managed to live off the country by his own industry.
At a given moment, however, the city which was near to them on the
sea-shore sunimoned them to renderan account of what they were doing
on land that properly belonged to the State. So he was compelled to go
down to the coast with the official who had been dispatched on this
errand and to explain his position. Then follows a very bright descrip-
tion of the town life that the rustic sees for the first time; of his astonish-
ment at the sight of the quays, the shipping in the harbour, the crowdcd
agora. A heated debate follows in the popular assembly. He is accused
of paying nothing to the state in taxes, and has only to say in his defence
that he has nothing to pay. Finally another orator takes his part and
succeeds in convincing the assembly that the city only owes gratitude
to a handful of people who occupy land that the city has never been
able to do anything with and who prevent it from becoming a total
desert. So all ends well, and he is finally dismissed with marks of
appreciation. There is a vein in this charmingly told story that reminds
one a little of Rousseau: the same notion that man left to himself and
outside of the corrupting forces of civic life is by nature good, that
civilization brings chiefly evil in its wake. The people in the hills of his
story represent poverty (zevia), but they have all the wealth of nature
as their portion and are filled with generosity and goodwill towards
men. The town-dwellers are torn with avarice and malice, despite their
possessions. The story ends with some general considerations on the


222 NOTES


evils of vice in towns and the moral that poverty is consistent with
happiness (epi wevias wpovlépeba cizeiv ws ovx dxopa alr} Ta mpaypara
éorw, frep Soxet Trois woMois adry re elvas fevicrov Kai xaxdv, GAAG pupias
Gdopyas apes 76 Civ wapdxe: trois avroupyeiy BovAopévois ovre aoxipovas
oure BAcBepds, Or. vii. 125, vol. i, p. 213, ed. von Arnim).

Synesius shows discrimination in selecting the Eubocan out of the
numerous essays by Dio that must have Leen known to him. Those
that have come down to us are very unequal in literary value, nor is it
easy for us to-day to understand the hard and fast line that he draws
here between the ‘sophistical’ and the ‘philosophical’ style of Dio.
Presumably the essay on hair quoted in the Calvitsi Encomtum would
come under the former head.

The Rhodian, of which he speaks a page or two later, is a long and
tedious diatribe on the impropriety of demolishing public statues, of
which there was a superfluity in his day.

The Trojan, mentioned in the same passage, is an attempt to show
that the Greeks never succeeded in taking Troy. It is full of amusing,
paradoxical arguments. -


Page 153, 1.9. he praises the Essenes. The Essenes were a sect of
Jewish ascetics in Palestine who practised a communistic form of life
and devoted themselves to agriculture and various forms of manual
labour. Pliny (Naturalis Historia, v.§ 73), after describing the Dead Sea,
continues as follows: ‘On the west side the Essenes avoid the baleful
shore line. They are a race by themselves, more remarkable than any
other in the wide world; they have no women, they abjure, sensual love,
they have no money, and they live among palm-trees. Still their
membership is steadily recruited from the large number of people who

resort to their mode of existence because they are wearied of life's
' Struggle with the waves of adversity. In this way the race has lasted,
strange to say, for thousands of ages, though no one is born within it;
so fruitful for them is the dissatisfaction for life which others feel.’

Philo, as quoted by Eusebius in his Preparation of the Gospel, draws a
somewhat similar picture of them (viii. 11); ‘Our lawgiver’, he says,
“trained an innumerable body of his pupils, who are called Essenes, to
partake in those things, being, as I imagine, honoured with this appella-


ON DIO 223.


tion because of their exceeding holiness. ... There are no children among
the Essenes, nor youths nor persons just entering upon manhood,
since the dispositions of all such persons are unstable. ... Noone among
them ventures to acquire any property of his own, neither house, nor
slave, nor farm, nor flocks ... but they bring them together into the .
middle as a common stock... . There are some of them who are devoted

to the practice of agriculture, being skilful in such things as pertain to

the sowing and cultivation of lands; others, again, are shepherds or cow-

herds and expcrienced in the management of every kind of animal;

some are cunning in what relates to swarms of bees; others, again, are

artisans and handy craftsmen. ... Again, perceiving ... what is alone or

at least above all things calculated to dissolve such associations, they

repudiate marriage; and at the same time they practise continence in

an eminent degree, for no one of the Essenes ever marries a wife’

(Yonge’s transl., vol. iv, p. 219). Philo again (Quod Omnis Probus liber

sit, 12, §§ 75 ff.,) mentions the Essenes as follows: ‘Syria Palaestina, too,

is not barren of exemplary wisdom and virtue.... There is a portion

of those people called Essenes in number something more than four

thousand. ... These men in the first place live in villages, avoiding all

cities on account of the habitual lawlessness of those who inhabit them,

... there is not aslave among them; they are all free... . Their ex-

penses are all in common, their garments belong to them all in common,

their food is common to them all, since they all cat in messes, . . . those

who are sick are not neglected because they are unable to contribute to

the common stock ...,’ &c. (ibid. vol. iii, p. §23, corrected).

Josephus speaks of the Essenes as having spread for the first time
in the second century B.c. (Jos. Ant. xiii. 5,9). Traces of Pytha-
goreanism, Orphism, even Buddhism, have been attributed to their.
cult by various scholars, but the exact nature of it remains obscure.
W. M. F. Petrie considered them identical with the Therapeutae, a sect
of Egyptian ascetics who inhabited the shores of lake Mareotis and
whom Synesius seems to allude to in chapter ten, but this view has not
found acceptance. I find no reference in the Eubocan to the Essences.


Page 153,1. 19. a peacock, &c.: see Mayor on Juvenal, 7. 30.
Page 154, 1.16. his indictment of Plato, On behalf of the four. Aelius


224 NOTES


Aristides, born in A.D.129, is the sophist and philosopher whom Synesius
has in mind here. His birthplace is Hadrianoi,in Mysia. He studied rhe-
toricat Pergamus under Aristoclesandafterwards at Athens. Hetravelled
when a young man and delivered his first oration in Alexandria. Suffer-
ing for many years from a seemingly incurable malady, he sojourned
chiefly between Smyrna and Pergamus. Inthe latter cityhe spent much
of his time at the temple of Aesculapius, and it was there that he used
to receive visits, when asleep, from the god of healing by the medium
of dreams. One only has to read Synesius’ On Dreams to realize the in-
terest that such works as Aristides’ Sacred Discourses must have had for
him, for these speeches (07. xIvii-lii) treat of his favourite subject,
the intercourse of man with the gods in dreams. ‘These discourses’,
Philostratus writes (Vst. Soph. ii. 9, trans. W. C. Wright), ‘served him
in some sort as a diary, and such diaries are excellent teachers on the
art of speaking well on any subject. And since his natural talent was
not in the line of extempore eloquence, he strove after extreme ac-
curacy, and turned his attention to the ancient writers; he was well
endowed with native ability, and purified his style of any empty
verbosity’. Synesius has this passage in mind in his essay On Dreams
(De Insom. 1316, Migne) when he says, ‘We shall therefore see fit to
add to what are called daybooks what are termed nightbooks’, in
other words the very diary that Aristides kept. Again in chapter
thirteen (p. 1317) he advises ‘every man of leisure’ to ‘proceed to write
a narrative of whatsoever happens in his waking and sleeping states’.
Philostratus’ text is: af 82 dénpepi8es dyabal 88denaros rob sept ravrds .
«8 d:adfyeoGas. Cf. Syn. De Insom. 1316 a: Loddv 8° dy etn nal ypddaw
vd ve Uap Kai Gvap cpdpara Kai ouprruipara ... drei tuets afusooper.
vais xadoupéras efnpepion ras ip’ hpdv cvopaloudvas emwuxridas ouvd-
wrovras, €xev Tis ev éxarépg (wi Sue Eaywyijs vropvypara.

Aristides may have had some influence on the style of Synesius. The
Defence of the Four was a speech in praise of Miltiades, Themistocles,
Cimon, and Pericles, whom he thought unjustly criticized in Plato’s
Gorgias. In his oration on rhctoric also he attacked the views on this
subject set forth in Plato’s Phaedrus and Gorgias. Later, in his letter
to Capiton, however, he defends himself from the charge of disrespect to
Plato. Aristides had as great a reputation in the fourth century as Dio


ON DIO 225


Chrysostom himself. Eunapius, speaking of Himerius, says that ‘some-
times, though rarely, he rises as high as the godlike Aristides’ (row Octo»
*Apworeidnv). (Eunapius, Vit. Philos., p. 494.)


Page 157,1. 26. Apollo sings at one time with the Muses. Petavius
calls attention to Themistius (Or. i): ravrp ros xai ai Moteat évdéa ovcas
ovyxopevovow aAArAais xai td "AroMwut, xai ovdepia avravayavaxret mpos
tas dAAas, ore p17) porn cody cont, pndé abr] pory mpocevxovras of mrowynTai.


Page 158, 1.3. these tmmovable men who despise rhetoric, &c. This
passage recalls Letter 154 (to Hypatia): ‘Some of those who wear the
white or dark mantle have maintained that I am faithless to philosophy,
apparently because I profess grace and harmony of style and because
I venture to say something concerning Homer and concerning the
figures of the rhetoricians. In the eyes of such persons one must hate
literature in order to be a philosopher.’

Michael Psellus makes precisely the same complaint against his
eleventh-century critics asdocs Synesius: cf.Chronogr.vi.41(ed.Renauld):
81a raGra, xai orep 75 prot oAAoi mpoowveisicav, kai pnropuxny Urdbeot
pedrcrav, éorw of Kal anddeafiw riva émornpova ovx axdppws ciodyw, kal
athis dirdcodev ts dzodeaxviwy Odua, xabwpat{w robtro tais rexnixais
xdpiow KA.


Page 158, l.10. Vestal Virgins. Syncsius, no doubt, alludes here to the
mysterious relics that were preserved in an adytum, a sacred crypt of
the temple of Vesta, and to which only the Vestales and the Pontifex
Maximus had access. It was supposed by some that the Pulladinm was
one of these relics, while others were of the opinion that they were the
Samothracian gods brought by Aencas from Troy, but the secret was
closely kept in antiquity. It might seem from the context that Synesius
is insinuating that there were actually no relics there at all. The
Vestales resided all together in a house in the south-east comer of the
Roman Forum. This house was occupied by them until the middle or
the end of the fourth century, when they were finally dispersed and the
order abolished, as we read in Zosimus (v. 38) ; it is therefore probable
that they were still in existence at the moment when Synesius wrote
this essay.

2858.3 Gg


226 NOTES


Page 158, 1.29. J.admire Proteus,seq. There is a similar allusion to
Proteus in Letter 137: ‘Now, when the being appeared to whom I
betrayed matters that were not to be found out by inquiry, until that
moment, I had quite forgotten the cunning art of Proteus; and this was
naught else than to live in the midst of men, not as a god, but as a
Citizen.’ Synesius evidently takes the myth to mean that mankind can
be put off from sincere answers to their questions on fundamental truths
by a specious display of eloquence which makes them mistake the
shadow for the substance, as in the myth of Ixion, to which he refers a
few lines further on. The Orphic Hymn xxv is addressed to Proteus
as a deity who showed the principles of nature by changing matter
into many shapes:

TIparrda xuxAjoxw wévrov xAniBas dxovra
spwroyevh}, mdons ducews dpxds Ss Ednvev,
iAny dddoowy lap Bdars roAupdpgors.


Page 159,1.6. Ixion,&c. DioChrysostom uses this image from the myth
in the fourth oration (Or. iv.123, De Regno, vol. i, p. 76, ed. von Amim):
et 3d rep 08 ov rrqvdv adbrdv S:avocioGas Kal rroteiv, 5 88 ddopovovrw atrdv
+m rou “Ifiovos xaXerj Kai Biaiw dopd re xai dvdyxy, Tpoxob Twos puun
avahis xwvoupévou Te kai fepopdvov. ([bid.,§ 130, p.77) wdAcv ody évOdde xev-
Suvetows 70 Savcrepow cis tov avrov receiv pov rov "Igiovos. Kai yap éxeivev
gacw émBuprjoarvra trav “Hpas paxapiwy yapwy veddAn ruil ovyyevopevov
oxoray]] xai dxAvwde. dxpnora xal ad0oxora yervijoa réxva, 76 TH Kev-
Talpuy yévos mouxidoy Kai cuprrepopnevoy.


Page 159, L. 20. the fire and the tree. Petavius attributes this explana-
tion of the myth of Proteus to Heraclitus of Miletus, who wrote on the
allegories of Homer in the first century A.D. (see Oelmann, Quaestiones
Homericae, Leipzig, 1910). It would seem as if Synesius had some other
legend in mind perhaps connected with one representing Proteus as a
king of Egypt.


Page.x6o, L. 5. the more human forms of literature, &c. Petavius quotes
Themistius (Or. vii): xai puyjy solvuy otrws oinbapev raw ply two
evanavovrew Aéyeu, Taw Sf rw émpcdoudvew wpoodeiobas.


ON DIO 227


Page 160, 1.30. men of foreign race,&c. It has been thought not quite
clear whether Synesius has in mind in this passage the Therapeutae
or the Essenes mentioned by him in chapter three, but probably he
refers to the latter, as he says nothing about agricultural labour. Again,
the phrase ‘pass their lives apart from each other’, would scem to
indicate the former, who lived each an ascetic in his separate hut (Philo,
De Vita Contemplativa, cap. 3). A great storm of controversy has raged
over the actual religion of the Therapeutae. Flinders Petrie regarded
the Therapeutae, who lived on the borders of Lake Mareotis, near Alex-
andria, as of the same persuasion as the Essenes, and us being in fact an
identical cult whose doctrine came from the Buddhists of India.
Eusebius introduced an element of confusion into the question by mis-
taking them for early Christian monks (cf. F. C. Conybeare, Philo
about the Contemplative Life). Asa legend existed in his day that St.
Mark the Evangelist preached the Gospel in Alexandria, he jumped to
the conclusion that the ascetics who lived near Alexandria must have
been descended from his converts. He even assumes that Philo Judaeus
had met the apostle Peter when in Rome and had become imbued with
the spirit of his teaching. Philo had written the Contemplative Life, in
which he makes a eulogy of the virtues of the Therapeutae and describes
their fasts, vigils, and mortification of the flesh, speaking of them by
implication at least as co-religionaries of his own. It was, nevertheless,
with this document as to their original history before his eyes that
Eusebius formed the opinion that they were from the beginning con-
verts and disciples of St. Mark. St. Jerome and others followed Eusebius
in this. The error so propagated continued until the days of the Re-
formation. Then controversy arose. Monasticism as an institution
began to be attacked. The Church pointed to the sanctity of the
cloistral life having been endorsed by the Evangelist Mark himself, as
witnessed by his converts, the Therapeutae. Baronius, at the end of
the sixteenth century, defended the Catholic point of view against
Scaliger, who had attacked the validity of the argument of Eusebius.
Bellarmine responded to the Protestant writers with arguments from
Dionysius the Areopagite, the pseudo-Dionysius already exposed by
Scaliger. Montfaucon, in the beginning of the eighteenth century,
again tried to prop up the crumbling fabric of Euscbius’ views in the


228 NOTES


matter, but was replied to with effect by Bouhier, and so the struggle
was continued. But now the controversy entered a new phase. The
deists, such as Bolingbroke and Voltaire, as Frederick Conybeare
pointed out in his excursus on the authorship of Philo’s Contemplative
Life, profited by the exposure of the unsoundness of the Eusebian
tradition to ask ‘what became of the claims of Christianity to be an
entirely new revelation? If men had already by their unaided efforts
made themselves so like the primitive Christians, that the fathers them-
selves could not distinguish them therefrom... what became of the
supposed necessity for an incarnation of God, and for the gift of the Holy
Spirit?’ (Philo about the Contemplative Life, F.C. Conybeare, p. 325 f.).
So the dispute went on, until towards the end of last century Gractz
and Lucius reopened the whole question on a new basis (v. Lucius, Dse
Therapeuten, Strasburg, 1880). In spite of the extravagance of the
views of the latter, he succeeded in converting to him, at least at first,
such distinguished scholars as Schiirer, Ad. Harnack, Hilgenfeld, Hatch,
Robertson Smith, and others. Lucius tried to show that Philo’s Con-
fem plative Life was a latter-day forgery. He proceeded on the gratuitous
assumption that the early monastic institutions were being attacked in
the third century and that the work in question had been forged by
some unknown hand with a view to their rehabilitation. All this line
of argument was finally shattered by the appearance of Frederick Cony-
beare’s scholarly and exhaustive work on the subject (Philo about the
Contem plative Life, Oxford, 1895), in which every thread of the intricate
maze of evidence that Graetz and Lucius had concocted to support their
theories was followed up and shown to be worthless. Dr. Paul Wend-
land’s work on Philo was also contributory to this result. Conybeare,
with his great knowledge of Armenian, was able to establish the gross
- improbability of the hypothesis of Lucius, that the forgery he assumes

had been intercalated in the text of Philo by the time when Eusebius
must have read it, that is to say, at the end of the third or beginning of
the fourth century ; and to this purpose he published the Armenian text
ts extenso, and showed what its derivation must have been. In the
“Armenian version’, to quote from his work (p. 331), ‘we have a witness
to the text of the De Vita Contemplativa not later than A.D. 420, and
very probably made from a text much older’ (the italics are mine). In the


ON DIO 229


Latin Version we have another witness of the same age.’ Conybeare
explains in a foot-note that he has put down the old Latin Version to
as late a date as possible. He then quotes Pitra’s Analecta Sacra to show
that there is presumptive evidence that the Latin Version of the De Vsta
Contem plativa belongs tothe age of Tertullian. ‘Inthe Eusebian extracts’,
he continues, ‘we have excerpts taken from it before the year 315. Now

. the Greck MSS. and the old Latin all flow from one archetype; the
Armenian and the Eusebian texts from another and independent arche-
type. But the Greek text was already an old and much-worn text when
the Latin version was made, for the Latin reflects many of the corrup-
tions characteristic of its congeneric Greek texts; andon the other hand,
some of the Greek texts, especially Cod. JLaurent. Plut. X,cod.xx,con-
tain a tradition which, in order of derivation, is much older than that
of the Greek text from which the Latin was translated. It follows that
the text of the Greck MSS. had already had a long history before the
year 400.’ After showing how the Armenian version fills up a lacuna
that occurs in all the Greck texts, he concludes this part of the argu-
ment by saying, ‘All this implies to a student of MSS. that the text
of the De Vita Contem plativa had, before the year 400, already had a long
history which cannot be crushed into the short period which Lucius’
theory would impose upon it. The Euscbian and Armenian texts, the
old Latin and existing Greek texts, can have converged only at a point
in time long anterior to A.D. 300.’

I have only touched here on one point of this long and exhaustive
disproof of the arguments advanced by Lucius and Graetz to destroy
the authenticity of this work of Philo. There are so many conclusive
arguments advanced in Conybcare’s excursus on the authorship that it
may safely be stated that the case for identifying the Therapcutae with
the Christian Monastic Orders has completely fallen to the ground, as
wellasany suspicion of the genuineness of the work of Philo in question.
The remarks of Synesius about these monastic Jews are interesting
inasmuch as they show that in the fourth century the same mode of
life ascribed to them by Philo was practised by them. Philo, in the first
sentence of his work (the De Vila Contemplativa), sharply contrasts the
Essenes with the Therapeutae, speaking of the former, whom elsewhere
he praises with equal warmth, as showing a zeal for the practical side of


230 NOTES


life, whereas the latter devote themselves to contemplation. The text is
as follows: “Eocuiwy zéps SiaXrex Seis of rov mparrixcy €fyAwoay xai drerovn-
eur Piov &y dzacu, ...aurixa Kai mepi twv Oewpiav aonacapéve ... AdEw.
- - -Synesius speaks of them as BapBadpous avOpuszrous éf apdoiv rav apiorwy
your, Gewpiay pew treoynpevous, Kai Kata TovTro amoXrevrous Te Kat
exowowrjrous avOpumous, Gre aifavras davrovs éxAicat ris ddcews. The
phrase <£ dudow ray dpicrwy yevay is obscure, unless he possibly
means to refer to the Essenes also, meaning the best races to be both
those whom Philo couples together as representing the practical and
the idealistic lives respectively. Druon translates: ‘des hommes qui
savaient concilier 4 merveille les deux genres de vie’, a rendering which
can only be got out of the Greek by implication. But even if we under-
stand the passage to refer to the Essenes as well as the Therapeutae,
about whom he is actually speaking, the description of these last con-
cords perfectly with what Philosaysof them. His last words are that they
rejoice in acontemplation of nature and of those things that exist in con-
templation and soul alone (486 mM, vol. iii, p. 70, ed. Cohn-Wendland):
Ccparevrdw pay 5 mepi tocatra Gewupiay dowacapdvw dvocws Kal rav dv
evry xai fuyH povn Buvedyrwy, ovpavoi pév Kai t xdopov wordy. As to the
sacred songs mentioned by Synesius—x«ai faa avrois oepuwal Te wdai—
Philo tells us that ‘they sing hymns’, qSovcs zezompdvous Spvous els rev
Bec» sroddois pérpors wai péAeot. Again, what Synesius says later asto their
not forever sustaining the Bacchic frenzy, (the passage ov¥5’ odros pév ros
drapaiss ar€xovras ris Baxyeias, d\Aa viv pév ev rH Ded xeivrat, viv Se
‘ & 1 xoopw) is reminiscent of Philo, where he compares the chorus
singers to Bacchantes drinking the pure wine of the Divine love—
— wabdsrep ev raic Baxyeiais axpdrov omdaavres rot GeogiAcis. - The word
ovpBora I take to mean the distinguishing marks of their ee as in
Dionysius of Halicarnassus (Antig. Rom. viii. 38): dyovras .. . Tay...
Cecw ra ovyfora. The phrase raxrai ries wpdéoodo: might then ‘signify
religious processions.

In the fourth century Christian monasticism under Pachomius was
rapidly growing in Egypt, and under Hilarion in Palestine. That
Synesius is speaking of some Christian order of monks would not there-
fore be « priori impossible. There seems little doubt, however, that he
is speaking of the Therapeutae in this passage, and that with the


ON DIO 231


evidence before us these cannot be identified with any Christian form
of monasticism. It will be noticed here that he does not confuse the
two sects, for he mentions the Essenes in an earlier part of the essay.


Page 163,1.7. brighten the eye within us. In Letter 139 he speaks
of a ‘luminous child of reason’. ‘Who will be so able’, he continues,
‘,.. to call forth a hidden spark which loves to conceal itself, to ignite
it, and reveal a brilliant flame?’ The Neoplatonists, as also the Christian
writers, followed Plato’s allegory in Republic, vii. $15. In Republic, vi.
508 D he carries out the metaphor of the soul's resemblance to the
eye: ovrw roiruy Kai To Tis YuxAs de voe Gray pev, od xaraddpres
dA7nOeva re Kai 70 Ov, eis ToUTO amepeianrat, eronady Te Kai Cyvw aUTO Kai
voiv €xew faiveras’ orav 5€ eis To TH oxoTw Kexpapevoy, TO ytyvopavoy T¢
wai atroAdvpevor, Sofdles .. . Kai Corxev av vouv OvK ExorTt.

The passage Synesius has in mind here may be Republic, vii. 533 C, D:
o +o  Starenrixy pébodos povn ravrn wropeveras, Tas UToOdces avaipovea, €’
aurny Thy apxny, wa BeBauwonrat, xai Tw vrs dv BopBopw BapBapuxy tun
76 Tis Yuxis Spa. xaropwpuvypdvoy jpéua Axes Kai dvdyet dvw ....


Page 163, 1. 7. clear away the rheum. There is an interesting parallel
to this expression Ayn, &c. in Olympiodorus, Commentary on the
Phaedo, A. 11.3 (ed. Norvin) : AnAn Se olov Ajj ns- bs yap7 Anpn eprodidv
dors Tis Opews ovTw Kai 7 AjAn olov Anun cor Tis Herépas yrwoews olov
ris opews,... wets yap Tis yuwoews 4 pvnyn. Sallustius, viii, uses the
metaphor of light also: gore 5€ vois Suvayis ovcias pév Seurdpa puyas
S¢ apwrn, €xovoa pev cx THs ovoias TO elvat, reAccovoa 52 thy Puxny
worep HAos ras opes. Again, in vii he describes God as universally good
in the same sense that light accompanies sun and fire. In the same way
in xiv he speaks of our sins (azaprypyara) not permitting the gods to
shed theirlight upon us (éAAdpew). Sce Nock’s Sallustius, Prolegomena,
p. xcvii. Julian, Ad Regem Solem (p. 133 a), quoting Republic, 508 B,
adds: éxet pev 1 70 dws atrot ravrnv olpas thy dvadoyiay mpos 76 cparoy,
qvrep mpos to vonrov dAnOaa. Philo, De Opificio Mundi, writes in the
same strain (cap. 17): «(dus re Gre raw Gvrwr aporoy To gws don, Opyavoy
avro rijs dpiarns ri aictjocwy cpdcqws axigawer rep yap vous éy pus,
Tour’ ofGaduos cv owpans


232 NOTES


Plotinus (Ens. v. 5. 7) uses this metaphor also: ovrw roivuy
ai % TOU vou Gyis Cpa pev wai avry 5° adMou dwros ra redwriopdva
éxcivn 7H Mpusrryn Puce: Kai €v exeivots OvTws OpG, vevouoa peévrot mpos THY THY
xararapropévwy dvow Frrov auto opa. « 5° adyoce: ra cpwpeva Kai &°
08 edey cis avre Prézer, dis av xai dwros apyny av Breros, i.e. the mind’s
eye (which is Plato’s fuyijs ozpa), or at ail events its power, does not
perceive this other light through which the intelligibilia are perceptible to
it, unless it dismisses the visibilia and contemplates that force through
which it sees—namely Mind. A little further on he continues: otrw
$7) xai rots atrov azo tay GMwy Kadiifpas Kai cuvayaywy eis TO clow pndev
Opaw Bedceras ove ado ev dw gids, a’ atte Kal’ abrd podvov, xaBapov
€¢ cavrou cLaidvns gavév. Light is in Plotinus identified with the first
principle, but the light is only perceptible by closing the eyes to those
objects which it illuminates. He carries out his analogy by alluding
to the fact that if we press our hand tightly over the eyes, we see
nothing of external things, but we seem to see a light in our darkened
field of vision (ibid.): sére yap ovy cpa op, kai pdAora Tore cpa: dis
Yep pg.

Page 164, L. 15. our native philosopher, &c. The word jpeSards seems
to refer to the comparison that Synesius was making on page 1132
between the Greek and the foreigner (BapBapos). The passages which
have just preceded this would imply a disagreement with the orthodox
Neoplatonists of the school of Ammonius Saccas, Plotinus in chief,
who placed the knowledge of God on hcights that could only be attained
by ecstasy and then only for a brief moment. The life of the philo-
sopher was a preparation for the coming of the great moment. Speaking
of the divine illumination, Plotinus (Enn. v. §. 8) tells.us that we must
not search for it, but wait for it quietly, as the eye awaits the rising of
the sun. The following passage (Enn. v. 3. 17) explains his view: aX’
épaci way voepins efapacbar, epaipdyevoy 5d, ore épdarrerat, wavTn pndev
pyre SWwac8a pire cxoAny dyew Aéyew, Gorepoy Sé mepi avrob auMoyiLeaGat.
sore Sé ypn ewpaxévas murrevew, Gray 4} ux efaiduyns dads AdBn. rovro

ap... wap avrou xai avrés’ (€or Should be understood here, i.e. He,
the One, is the light. Cf. ‘I am the Light of the world,’ John viii. 12)
mai TETe xp) vouilew wapeiva:, .. . Gray cis olxov Kadowvros Tivos dMOwy


ON DIO 233


durin, 7 pnd’ crAOay odk dpairicer. ... nai rovro rd rédos 7d GAnIivcv puyF,
dddyacbas dwros dxcivov xai atr@ atrd Oedcacbas, ode GMov guti aX’
adrd &° oS xai cpa.

In order to reconcile his doctrine of religious ecstasy with his pre-
tensions to form a reasoned system of philosophy, Plotinus is obliged
to divide the intellect by giving it two sets of powers, as in this passage
(Enn. vi. 7. 35): Kat tov voiv roivuy ry pev €xew Sivapw «is rd voeiv, § 74
év att@ Prdre, riv 5¢ § ra éréxewa avrov emPoryR tit wai wapadoyy, xaF
jv Kai 7pdrepov éwpa uovoy, Kai opwy Gorepov Kai vou axe Kai Ev core’ Kal
€orw éxein pev 4 Oda vou épdpovos, arn 5€ vois ¢pav. cray ddpwy
yevnras peOvobeis rot véxrapos, tore épwy yiveras amdw06cis ais eumdBecay
r@ xépw° Kal €orw atte peOvew BéAriov 7 cepvordpw alvat rovavrns pons.
It will be seen from this that the mind has the power first to think and
reason, while turned to what is within it, and second to see by a certain
perception and comparison (intuition?) what is above it, and so is one.
The first state is that of reason, the second that of this complete unity
ofthe mind, which comes from repudiating reason and submitting to the
passionate power that is within it. This last state prepares the way for
union with the One. In this wise Plotinus adumbrates the real nature
of his religion, for such indeed it is, the preparation of the mind for a
passionate flight to a union with the Eternal. One is inclined to ask,
taking the argument in these last passages, in conjunction with the
distinction between Greeks and Barbarians which Synesius introduces
here, whether he does not mean to imply that the philosophy of the
Egyptian Plotinus was not the philosophy of his Greck masters, Plato
and Aristotle. To ascend gradually to the conception of the first cause,
of the good, by training in dialectic they would have regarded as the
orthodox teaching of philosophy. It is true that unquestionable autho-
rities on Plotinus, Bouillet and Mackenna amongst others, have con-
sidered that this matter of ecstasy bulks too large in the prevalent
notions in regard to the author whom they have so ably commented
upon. But the passages I note seem to me to leave little doubt that
this absolute casting off of the trammels of reason is the goal of his
philosophy or religion. In Enn. vi. 9. 1x he is even more explicit in
describing the state of one carried aloft by ecstasy: od ydp rs dxweiro
wap’ adr@, od Ouyds, od dxupia dMov waphy adr dvafeinxdrs, dW’

attr Hh


234 NOTES


ovdé nis Acyos, ovdé ris vayOrs, ov5" dws abrés, sag worep dpracbeis
4 erPovoidoas . . . €arws avy Kai olov oraas al . After com-
paring this flight of the soul to the entrance into a shrine (Gozep Tis
€is 70 eiow Tod abvrov eiadis ... ), he describes its state as fows ...o¥
Ogapa, GANG Gos spdm0s rot eiv, exoracs Kai drdwois, xal éxidocrs
avrou, xai édecis apes adiv, xal ardais Kai mepwwonots mpos épappoyyy,
eizep 715 76 ey 7@ adUTw Bedcerar. «i 5° Gws Prdzos, ovdév adpeors.

Again in Enn. v. 1. 6 he speaks of the worshippers as obtaining
this union by transcending all things (éréxewa dmdvrwy), including
no doubt the ideas of reason, beauty, as in vi. 9. Ir (7d xaAcv
on wzepOdwr), and all infelligibilia. These they discard as those
who penetrate into the remotest shrine in the mysteries leave their
clothing behind them (drodvopdvors & xaraBaivovres judéeopefa Enn.
i. 6. 7). Bouillet (iii. 562) quotes a passage from Bossuet, Elévation
4 Dieu, that makes an interesting comparison with the Plotinian con-
ception: ‘Alors s’accomplira notre parfaite unité en nous-mémes, et
avec tout ce qui possédera Dieu avec nous; et ce qui nous fera tous
parfaitement un, c’est que nous serons, et nous verrons, ct nous aime-
rons; et tout cela sera en nous tous une seule et méme vie.’


Page 164, L 28. Amus the Egyptian. Crawford (pp. 471-3) has a long
note on this allusion. He refers to a passage in Socrates (iv. 23) where a
certain “Appoity is mentioned as one who extended and improved the
hermitages in Egypt and whose cell was on the Nitrian mountain, and to
Sozomen (1.14), who calls him "Apofy and "Ayots. He agrees, however,
with Krabinger in supposing that Amus here is really meant for Thamus,
the Egyptian king. In Plato’s Phaedrus, 274 ¢, E, it is said that the
Egyptian god Theuth—called Ammon by Socrates—invented letters
and taught them to Thamus (Qapofs), king of Egypt, who remarked to
him: “ANos péy rexeiv Suvares ra. rijs réxvns, Gos 52 xpivas. rh.

Petavius quotes a Scholion, ‘quod ex Med. margine transcribere
visum est’, concerning Amus (1136, Migne): ¢popévou Tivos avrov «i
évayxaia Ta ypdppata, éfn, «i 5 vots Eppwrat, tis xpeia ypappdrwv; rd
dé ova dLeipey . . . GN’ dxefivato tovrovs Seiabas ypappdrwy, ofrwes od
ptylos eorixnoay vou, iva ri rot vot évSaay évred0ev éxavopSavras.

Page 165, 1.11. phoenix. Herodotus (ii. 73) describes the phoenix in


ON DIO 235


the following words: ‘Another bird lso is sacred; it is called the phoenix,
I myself have never seen it, but only pictures of it; for the bird comes
but seldom into Egypt, once in five hundred years, as the pcople of
Heliopolis say. It is said that the phoenix comes when his father dies.
If the picture truly shows his size and appearance, his plumage is partly
golden and partly red. He is most like an eagle in shape and bigness.
The Egyptians tell a tale of this bird’s devices which I do not believe.
He comes, they say, from Arabia, bringing his father to the Sun’s temple
enclosed in myrrh, and there buries him. His manner of bringing is this:
first he moulds an egg of myrth as heavy as he can carry, and when he
has proved its weight by lifting it he then hollows out the egg and puts
‘his father in it, covering over with more myrrh the hollow in which the
body lies; so the egg being with his father in it of the same weight as
before, the phoenix, after enclosing him, carries him to the temple of
the Sun in Egypt. Such is the tale of what is done by this bird.’ (Trans-
lated by A. D. Godley, Loeb Library.)


Page 165, 1. 19. ‘second voyage.’ This expression is put into the mouth
of Socrates by Plato in the Phaedo (99b) at the point of his discourse
on the immortality of the soul where he tells of his disappointment
over the futility of the materialism of Anaxagoras and of his attempt
to seek the first cause of the universe in a ‘second voyage’. The text is:
vév Sevrepov tAoby éni thy Tis airias Cirnow 3 rempayparevpa:, Bovra
go... eriderkiv mornowpas «

Burnet i in his edition of the Phaedo (p. 99) quotes Eustathius #2 Od.
P- 1453, 20: Sevrepos mAovs A€yerat Sre drorvydy nis odpiou mebmats wAdy,
xara ITavoaviay.


Page 165, 1.23. Concerning these men. He seems to have in mind in
these pages the same class of pseudo-philosophcrs whom he attacks in
Letter 154, and of whom he speaks with bitter sarcasm. ‘No doubt’,
he says, ‘these men alone have become spectators of the know-
able. This privilege is unlawful for me... . A shadow would surpass
these men in uttering anything to the point; but their pretensions are
extraordinary’, &c. The following passage from St. Clement of
Alexandria is quoted by Bigg (Christian Platontsts of Alexanaria,
ed. 2, p. 120): ‘For he who merely abstains from wrong is not

2076.1 Hha


236 NOTES


righteous unless he adds well-doing and knowledge of the reason why
he ought to do some things and not do others’ (Stromata, vi. 12. 103).


Page 166,115. reverence to this abstention. Synesius may have in mind
here Christian extremists on the question of celibacy and procreation,
fanatical] ascetics such as Marcion and Tatian. Cf. Irenaeus, Adv. Haer.
i. 28. x. Sce Walter Scott, Hermetica, vol. iii, p. 141, for a quotation
from St. Clement of Alexandria (Stromata, iii. 3. 12).

Synesius, besides the fact that he rather leant upon the doctrines of
Plato himself and had never followed the extravagances of certain
Christians and Neoplatonists, was always affected also by the teachings
of the Stoa, which pointed in another direction than that of a struggle
a outrance with matter in the form of the complete separation of thesexes.


Page 168, 1. 7. Zoroaster, Hermes, Antonius. Synesius means Hermes
Trismegistus, the mythical author of the Hermetica, works written
by Egyptian Greeks in the second century, in all probability, con-
taining Neoplatonic doctrines and commonly believed to have come
down from great antiquity through the hands of Egyptian priests.
Druon thinks Antonius must be St. Antony of the Thebaid. In this
way reference is made to the wisdom of Persia, Egypt, and Christendom,
if the identification of Antonius is right.

Page 168, 1. 30. falling into some abyss, Kc. The text is: eis aBuvoadv
saa divapias ¢umeoovras. Cf. Plato, Parmenides, 130D: ‘Then again’,
Socrates says to Parmenides in the dialogue, ‘when I have taken up
this position, I run away, because I am afraid that I may fall into a
bottomless pit of nonsense (rwa Bufdv dAvapias) and perish... .’
‘ Socrates ’, represented here as a young and inquiring mind, comes to
Zeno and Parmenides for advice in the difficulties that his theory of
ideas present to him. After some discussion of the problem the aged
Parmenides says to him that he thinks his hesitation as to the road to
take comes from his attempt to define the ideas without sufficient
previous training. He then proceeds to give an example of how meta-
physical argument should proceed, and this forms the main part of the
dialogue. Synesius means to point out that even Socrates stood in
need of education.

Page 169, 1. 13. You must... watch small mysteries, &c. St: Clement


ON DIO 237


of Alexandria (S/romata, v. c. 11 p.689, ed. Potter) alludes to these small
mysteries in the following terms: ‘In the Hellenic Mysteries there are
first of all, and for good reasons, purifications analogous to those that
take place among the Barbarians. After these come the small mysteries,
which include the rudiments of teaching and of preparation for what
is to follow. As to the great mysteries, in all their tenor there is nothing
further to be learned; one only has to contemplate and to arrive at a
spiritual conception of nature and events’ (Cousin, Frag. Phil. Ane.
p. 448).

Olympiodorus, in his commentary on the Phaedo, speaks of the cere-
monies in these terms: ‘In the-holy initiations first came the public
cleansings, then the more secret purification. These were followed by
the reunions, after which came the initiations and last of all the intui-
tions. The moraland political virtuescorrespond to the publiccleansings,
the purificatory virtues which separate us from the outer world to the
secret purifications; while the same virtues directed towards unity
correspond to the initiations, and the pure intuition of the ideas to the
mystic intuition itself. The end is to bring souls to their final state,
i.e. their life in Zeus ... thus the subject of initiation dwells with
the gods according to the function of the divinities who preside over
the initiation. There are two sorts of initiations: the initiations of this
world, which are, so to speak, preparatory, and those of the other world,
which carry out the first.” See Bouillet, Plot. iii. 608. .


Page 170, 1. 13. dear at three for an obol. Petavius quotes Galen,
Protreplicos ad Artes (c. 6]: xairos ovx aicypoy rov oixdrny pev cviore
Spaypdv elvac pupiwy afiov, avrov 5¢ tov Scatrorny avrow pydd pds; xal ri
Adyw ds ; 005" ay rpoixd ts tov rovovrov AdBos.

Page 170, |. 28. Calliope, receiving us... parched with drought. Cf.
Propertius, iii. 3. 51:

talia Calliope, lymphisque a fonte petitis
ora Philctaea nostra rigavit aqua.

Page 17%, 1.29. something quite serious... from those who jest. This
is the same vein of thought as in Letter x (to Nicander), where he speaks
of his books as ‘all from the same father, who inclines now to the serious
and now to the lighter side’.


238 NOTES


Page 172, |. 10. the ephetes. The ephetae were judges in Athens first
created by Draco. They were Eupatridae and formed a board under
the King Archon whose function it was to try cases of homicide, but
after the creation of the senate of the Areopagos, which then took over
cases of wilful murder, the réle assigned to the ephetae was that of
trying cases of involuntary homicide.


Page 175, 1. 30. Socrates gave himself up even to Prodicus ... and
permitted Hippias to putin a word. Cf. Plato, Protagoras, 315 u
"I (i.e. Socrates) was very anxious to hear what Prodicus was saying,
for he seems to me to be an all-wise and inspired man; but his fine
deep voice made an echo in the room which rendered his words
maudible’. Hippias, in the dialogues that bear his name, certainly
does more than ‘put in a word’; he speaks to Socrates often con-
temptuously, and always as one possessed of superior knowledge.
“O Socrates,’ he exclaims, ‘you are always weaving the meshes of
an argument, selecting the most difficult point, and fastening upon
details, mstead of grappling with the matter in hand as a whole’
(Hsppias Minor, 369 B). Socrates argues with him in a vein of irony,
sometimes caustic, as in the next passage: ‘O Hippias, I do not
doubt that you are wiser than I am’, &c. Hippias is the type of
the ignorant, bombastic sophist, the favourite butt of Socrates’
sarcasms in the dialogues. Glaucon was Plato’s younger brother,
and is represented in the Republic as a rich young man who breeds
hounds and quails but is modest and an enthusiastic admirer of
Socrates. As to Critias, he is the chief interlocutor in the celebrated
dialogue of Plato that contains the story of the vanished continent
Atlantis, and of which the last portion is lost. It was to this Critias
that Socrates refused to yield, as Diogenes Laertius tells us (ii. 24),
when he and his colleagues ordered him to bring Leon of Salamis before
them for execution. ‘Simon was a citizen of Athens and a cobbler’,
says Diogenes Laertius. ‘When Socrates came to his workshop and
began to converse, he used to make notes of all that he could remember.
And this is why people apply the term ‘leathern’ to his dialogues...
thirty-three m number.’

Page 176, 1. ro. The allusion to Cleilophon abusing Socrates is


ON DIO 239


not quite accurate. In the Platonic dialogue that bears his name Cleito-
phon (410) defends himself against this charge, admitting to Socrates
that he had criticized him only as not being sufficiently definite in his
teachings as to how virtue might be acquired. ‘It is for this reason’, he
says, ‘that I shall doubtless go to Thrasymachus or anybody else from
whom I can gain instruction, unless you consent to put an end to (mere)
exhortations’. He ends the short discourse by saying to Socrates, ‘I beg
of you be no longer deaf to my questions, that I may be no longer come
pelied, as Iam just now, to praise you before Lysias, and many others,
on certain points and to blame you at the same time on others.’


Page 176, 1.13. Phaedrus sufficed him. Synesius means to show that
he regards it as an excellent trait in the character of Socrates that he
could condescend to intellectual intimacy with a naive and simple mind
like that of Phaedrus.

Of Xanthippe Diogenes Laertius recounts several anecdotes, for in-
stance, that when she scolded Socrates and then finally drenched him
with water, he only exclaimed: ‘Did I not say that Xanthippe’s thunder.
would end in rain?’ He said, according to the same biographer, that he
had chosen a violent woman to live with for the same reason that horse-
men choose high-spirited horses (Diog. Lacr. ii. 26-36).


Page 177, 1. 22 ff. philosophy ... will praise rhetoric. Synesius in these
preceding pages shows a vein of irritation against his traducers that is
easy tounderstand. Theattackson him came from the quarter not of the
rhetoricians but of the philosophers. In the letter to Hypatia already
quoted (E/.154) hesaysof them, with somecontempt, ‘they support their
beards with the hand’. But he is not attacked, it would seem, as was
the Emperor Julian, for being a philosopher, and for wearing the beard.
That would have been the bcau 7éle perhaps in the eyes of Synesius,
and it certainly gave Julian a magnificent opportunity of replying,
which he did with great effect in the Misopogon. The enemies of Syne-
slus, possibly instructed by this past history, were more subtle and
attacked him not as a philosopher, but as a rhetorician. Now as it was
evidently Synesius’ weakness to imagine himself nothing if not a philo-
sopher, and to fancy that he held aloof from the arts of the sophist,
that he was one ‘who through philosophy had been brought up in a


240 NOTES


more rustic mould’ (Egypiian, 1253 C), it must have been galling to
be assailed and criticized for being the very thing he had always been
affecting a disdain for, namcly the sophist. The same irritation is
noticeable in the last chapter in Dreams; there it takes the form of a
counter-attack on men whom he pillories as rhetoricians and sophists,
like the gargling and gum-chewing orator so eloquently described here.

Page 178, L 27. The name of Pythagoras of Samos ...has been
snscribed, &c. It would seem from all this that the Pythagorcans’
tradition. in regard to literature was to attach themselves not to the
letter of a book, but to the spirit; they were not to read the work but,
so to speak, meditate it. The Neo-Pythagoreans were still in existence
in the time of Synesius, and may obviously have had a certain influence
on him in other directions than this. Apollonius of Tyana is imbued
with the Neo-Pythagorean doctrine, as also Dio himself (see Nock’s
Sallustius, p. xxxvii).

Page 180, L. 26. This ts quite like, &c.: cf. Mayor on Juv. 14, 76.

Page 181, L 14. And even if the thought was different, &. A very good
example of the sort of talent which Synesius ascribes to himself may
be found in the translation of Boethius written by King Alfred the
Great in the ninth century. The King was not satisfied with trans-
lating the Latin text, but at certain moments would introduce a passage
of his own invention, writing in the style of the author he was trans-
lating, and, this terminated, he would pick up again the thread of the
translation proper. Some of the sallies of King Alfred introduced in
this way are doubly interesting, for they give a glimpse on the one hand
of his own sentiments and ideals, and on the other of his power of
Writing in the same style as his great model. An edition of this work in
- modernized English is published by the Clarendon Press (Oxford, 1900)
with King Alfred's intercalations in italics, so that the work which is
of his own creation can be compared with that of the Latin philosopher.


Page 182, 1. 6. Cratinus and of Crates. Both Cratinus and Crates are
mentioned in the parabasis of The Knights of Aristophanes, lines 526
seg. Cratinus was an old man when Aristophanes brought out this play,
in which he speaks of his elder rival as a man quite finished and in his
dotage, though one who was brilliant in his day:


ON DIO 242


Thus in glory was he seen, while his years as yet were green;
but now that his dotage is on him,

God help him! for no eyc, of all those who pass him by,
throws a Jook of compassion upon him.


A few lines further up he had introduced his name by saying:


Who Cratinus may forget or the storm of whim and wit -
which shook theatres under his guiding ?

When Panegyric’s song poured her flood of praise along
who but he on the top wave was riding ?


Poetical justice, however, came to the rescue of Cratinus, for in the
following year he wrested away the prize from Aristophanes, in spite of
the fact that the play presented to the judges by the latter was the most
famous of his works, The Clouds. A few lines further on in the parabasis
Aristophanes has a thrust at Crates also. Crates began life as an actor,
and took the foremost roles in the plays of Cratinus; he afterwards
became himself a writer of plays of the Old Comedy. Aristophanes
gibes at the actor who rivalled his own protégés, Callistratus and Philo-
nides, in the following lines:


I spare myself the toil to record the buffets vile,
the affronts and the contumcelics hateful,
Which on Crates frequent fell, yet I dare you, sirs, to tell,
where was Caterer morc pleasing or grateful ?
Who knew better how to lay soup piquant and entremets, . ..
or hash’d sentiment so to your wishes?


Diphilus was a contemporary of Menander, and a writer of plays much
admired in the days of the New Comedy. Only fragments have come
down to us. Philemon was twenty years younger than Menander and
seems to have been a brilliant example of the same school. Two at
least of his plays, and probably more, were imitated by Plautus. Syne-
sius apparently means to show us that he was equally versed in the
authors of the Old Comedy and the New.


CeaETSD te GASaY BRITAIN AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS, ORFORD
BY JORN JONSON, PRIKTER TO THE UNIVERSITY


===== [next volume/part] =====


The Essays and Hymns
of


Synesius of Cyrene


including the
ADDRESS TO THE EMPEROR ARCADIUS
AND THE POLITICAL SPEECHES


Translated into English with
Introduction and Notes
BY


AUGUSTINE FITZGERALD


Volume II


OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS
LONDON : HUMPHREY MILFORD
1930


The Essays and Hymns
of


Synesius of Cyrene


including the
ADDRESS TO THE EMPEROR ARCADIUS
AND THE POLITICAL SPEECHES


Translated into English with
Introduction and Notes
BY


AUGUSTINE FITZGERALD


Volume II


OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS
LONDON : HUMPHREY MILFORD
1930


OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS
AMEN HOUSE, E.C. 4
LONDON EDINBURGH GLASGOW
LEIPZIG NEWYORK TORONTO
MELBOURNE CAPETOWN BOMBAY
CALCUTTA MADRAS SHANGHAI
HUMPHREY MILFORD
PUBLISHER TO THE
UNIVERSITY


Printed in Great Britain


CONTENTS


VOL. II
A Eulogy of Baldness :
The Egyptian Tale (De Providentia) .
Concerning Dreams (De Insomniis)
Constitutio
Catastasis
Homily I
Homily II


Notes on a Eulogy of Baldness.
Notes on the Egyptian Tale
Notes on Dreams

Notes on Constitutio

Notes on Catastasis

Notes on Homily I .

Notes on Homily II

Notes on Hymn I

Notes on Hymn IT .


Viii CONTENTS
Notes on Hymn III

Notes on Hymn IV.

Notes on Hymn V .

Notes on Hymn VI.

Note on Hymn VIII

Notes on Hymn IX

Index ;


485
489
491
491
491
492
495


A EULOGY OF BALDNESS
(Calvitii Encomium)
A BOOK was written in praise of hair by Dio of the tongue of migne,


P.G. lxvi


gold, so brilliant a work that the bald man, in the face of its argu- 5-7;
ments, must be covered with shame. The argument, indeed, uses
nature to its own advantage, for by nature we all desire to be
5 beautiful,—to which end, in large measure, the tresses with which
Nature has rendered us familiar since our childhood, contribute.
For my own part, I was wounded to the heart ' when the terrible
thing began, and my hair began to fall off. When it proceeded
further, and one hair went after another,—then two at a time, and
10 finally several,—and the war became keenly contested, my head
being plundered, then indeed I esteemed myself to suffer more
harshly than did the Athenians at the hands of Archidamus when
their groves at Acharnae were destroyed,? and soon I appeared as
one of those benighted Euboeans who, according to the poem, made
15 the expedition to Troy with hair hanging from the back of their
heads.? Which one of the gods, which of the demons did I pass over
without accusation in this matter? I was even inclined to write
something eulogistic of Epicurus, not as one holding the same
opinions as he concerning the gods, but as one prepared to get my
20 teeth into them in turn as faras I could. And soI said, ‘Where is 1169
the action of Providence to be found in that which is contrary to
each man’s deserts? What wrongdoing have I committed that I
should appear more unsightly to the fair sex?’ No great matter
this, in the case of the women of theneighbourhood, for in what con-
25 cerns Aphrodite lam the most righteous of men, and I could dispute
the palm with Bellerophonincontinence.* But evena mother, even
sisters, they say, set some store on the beauty of the men of their
1 Plato, Symp. 218 a; Aristoph. Acharn. 1.
2 Thucyd. ii. 19. 3 Iliad, ii. 542. ¢ Ibid. vi. 160 8qq.
2878.2 B


244 CALVITII ENCOMIUM


household. And Parysatis made this clear, for she lost her love
for Artaxerxes the King, all on account of the handsome Cyrus.?


2. Thus then I lamented aloud, and thought my misfortune
no small matter. But when time had made me more accustomed
to it, reasoning entering in its turn struggled against my s
discomfiture, and it gradually retired. I thus became easier in
my mind and recovered. But this very Dio has now himself
retaliated with another torrent, and has resumed his attack on
me accompanied by a supporter. Against two adversaries, even
Heracles,? the proverb says, was of no avail, for he could not ro
resist the sons of Molione when they fell upon him from out
their ambush ; and also, when he fought the Hydra, for they were
engaged in single combat some time, but when the Crab came to
her rescue, he might have renounced the struggle had he not
invoked the alliance of Iolaus against her. 15

Of a truth it seems to me that I have suffered a similar experi-
ence at the hands of Dio, and—alas !—I have no Iolaus for nephew.
For long, now, forgetful of myself and of my arguments, I have
been writing elegies and dirges concerning my hair. Yet one might
say to me: ‘You then, since you are the noblest of the bald, and 20
seem to be a man of generous character—one, moreover, who
troubles not about the misfortune, but who even fancies himself
over it, as if in good fortune, when pea-squp Is laid on the table
and the scrutiny of brows begins—cannot you, I say, endure this
essay of Dio? Nay, keep your soul in calm, as the saying goes, 25
even as Odysseus remained undaunted in the face of the dissolute-
ness of women.? Make a struggle to suffer nothing at its hand.
What! You would not be able, you say? Nay, you will be quite
able. Only listen to this. You need not unroll the volume at all,


1 Xenophon, Anabasts, i. 1. 4.
2 Plato, Phaed. 89 c; Apollodorus, ii. 5, 2; Pind. Ol. x. 34.
3 Odyssey, xx. I-17.


A EULOGY OF BALDNESS 245


for I will myself hold forth. It is not multi-linear, it is withal
polished in style and its beauty abides in the memory, so that
I could not forget it even if I would.—


3. ‘After rising in the morning and praying to the gods, as is

§ my custom, I attended to my hair. I happened to be in poor

health at the time, and it had been too long uncared for. The most

of it had become knotted and entangled, as that which hangs about

a sheep’s legs, but much coarser than this, for it is tangled with

fine hairs. The hair was accordingly uncouth and heavy to behold.

ro And it was difficult to unravel; the most of it was torn out and
subjected to a strain.’

Thus the idea came to me of praising those who make a cult
of their hair, who love beauty, and give their hair great
importance, and who not merely give it serious attention

1s but even keep a sort of reed in the hair itself, with which they
comb it when they are at leisure. And this is the most difficult
thing ; they guard against touching the earth with it when sleeping
on the ground, for they have to place a small piece of wood under
the head that it may be separated from the earth as much as
20 possible; and they think much more of keeping their hair clean
than of sleeping agreeably, for it would seem to make them fine
looking and awe-inspiring, whereas sleep, however sweet, only
makes them sluggish and careless. The Lacedaemonians, too,
seem to me to be not neglectful of such a fact, as they came for-
25 ward before the great and terrible battle at the time! when they
alone of all the Greeks were to engage the king. At that moment
numbering only three hundred, they sate them down and dressed
their hair.2 Again, Homer seems to me to consider such a thing
worthy of the greatest care. It is not often that he praises hand-
30 some men for their eyes, nor does he think to make beauty evident
most of all therein. He makes no encomium on the eyes of any


1 Reading of rére with the Florence MS. 2 Herodot. vii. 208.


1172


246 CALVITII ENCOMIUM


of the heroes, except Agamemnon, and that only in praising the

rest of his body besides ;* and he not merely describes the Greeks

as men of quick-glancing eyes, though no less to Agamemnon

does he apply the epithet common to Greeks, but he praises them

all for their hair; in the first place Achilles: 5
‘and she seized the son of Peleus by his fair hair’.


Then Menelaus he calls blond because of his hair,’ and he mentions
Hector’s hair in these words :—

‘and round about his dark hair was dragged in the dust’.‘
So when Euphorbus, the fairest of the Trojans, had died, he de- 10
plored nothing else but this, saying

‘His hair like to the Graces was dyed with blood

And his tresses adorned with gold and silver’.°
And of Odysseus, whenever he wishes to show how beautiful he
had become at the hand of Athene, he says 15

‘his hair turned black’.®
And again about the same hero:
‘down from his head
She sent curling hair to grow like the flower of the hyacinth.”

Now adornment of hair seems to become men more than women 20
according to Homer, for when he discourses of the beauty of
women, he does not so often seem to have recalled to mind their
hair. He praises those amongst the deities who are female, in
other ways, for he makes Aphrodite ‘golden’; Hera ‘ox-eyed’; and
Thetis ‘silver-footed’: but in the case of Zeus he praises his hair 25
most of all ;—

‘The ambrosial locks of the king floated waving from his head.”


4. There you have the words of Dio. Nevertheless, as I am no
mean prophet, I knew that I should see Thrasymachus blush.?®


1 Iliad, ii. 478 ff. 2 Ibid., i. 197. 3 Ibid., iii. 284.
4 Ibid., xxii. 401. 402. 5 Ibid., xvii. 51-2. 6 Odyssey, xvi. 176.
7 Ibid., vi. 230. ® Iliad, i. 529. % Plato, Rep. 350 D.


A EULOGY OF BALDNESS 247


In my own case no such calamity has as yet happened. True,
I was at first vanquished by the argument, but I think now that
Dio was a man clever enough in speech, though one who had
nothing to say, and yet went on speaking through a superfluity
5 of power; and that he would have shown himself to far greater
advantage if he had chosen to praise the very opposite case,—
namely, that of my own head! For what might not a man
resourceful in difficulties have accomplished, if he had fallen in
with a subject suited to his powers? But now that he has both
ro hair and skill, he employs his skill on his hair. How roguishly
he has insinuated himself in this essay! For in this discourse of
his there is no other lover of hair who beautifies it with a reed
save only himself, and it is with this very reed that he has written
his discourse. But if I in turn am bald and withal able to speak,
15 and if the one subject is found more noble than the other, or if
I am inferior to Dio, why, then, should I not strip for the
contest and make trial both of myself and of my argument, to
see if after all I could transfer the reproach to the men adorned
with hair?
zo I will speak then, neither making a vigorous and trenchant
preface such as orators arm their fighting speeches with, as men
arm triremes with beaks, nor first sounding, like Dio, a clear
measured prelude to the speech like a harpist’s overture, such as
—‘ After rising in the morning and praying to the gods, as is my
25 custom, I attended to my hair; I happened to be unwell at the
time, and it had been too long uncared for.’ While he is thus
going through the evidences of carelessness, he is bringing us,
without our being conscious of it, to the point of praising him for
the care he takes of his hair. This is what the clever fabricators
30 of speeches do to us; at one moment they charm us, at another
they astound us. Now I can grasp facts as well as any other man,
but am not addicted to rhetoric. I have been practising two arts
all my life,—the culture of plants, and the training of dogs against


1173


248 CALVITII ENCOMIUM


the most fearless of wild beasts, and these fingers of mine have been
rubbed against shovels and hunting-spears rather than reeds;
unless by reed you should mean the reed that is an arrow, instead
of the author’s.

So now it is not to be wondered at if my fingers have clung to 5
that one. I shall never disgrace my ancestral rusticity, nor shall
I come on the scene rounding off little periods, forewords, and
preludes or the like. I shall pursue what I consider the best course,
even for the nature of a rustic, by setting the naked expressions
of thought in full view. I shall fight, with facts as weapons, only 10
by turning the pitch of my voice from argument to vehemence,
from the Dorian note, as they say, to the Phrygian. But I need
breath adequate to my undertakings, breath which, I prophesy,
my heart will render me in abundance.


5. My argument, then, will lay it down that of all men a man 15
who is bald has least reason to feel ashamed. For what matter
it if his head is bald, so long as his mind is shaggy, as was the
case with the descendant of Aeacus, whom poetry sang of? This
man cared little enough for his locks of hair, which, actually, he
presented to a corpse; they are indeed a sort of corpse, a life-

1176 less portion attached to living beings. Thus those animals
who are the more deprived of intelligence, are clothed with hair
all over their bodies, whereas man, inasmuch as his lot in life 1s
more brilliant, is the most bare of this natural burden. But that
he may not boast of having no taint of fellowship with what is 25
mortal, he is covered with hair in a few places. He, therefore,
who has no hair anywhere is to the normal man what man is to the
brute. And just as man is the most intelligent, and at the same
time the least hairy of earthly creatures, conversely it is admitted
that of all domestic animals the sheep is the stupidest, and that 3c
this is why he puts forth his hair with no discrimination, but


Oo


1 Iliad, xxiii. 141 ff.


A EULOGY OF BALDNESS 249


thickly bundled together. It would seem that there is a strife
going on between hair and brains, for in no one body do they
exist at the same time.
And huntsmen also must needs contribute something to the
s argument, for these men are dear to me as also the art they
pursue. The cleverest hounds are those whose ears and bellies
are bare; the hairy ones are stupid and rash and are better
kept away from the chase; and if Plato, the sage, speaks of
the unjust horse, attached to the chariot driven by the soul,
roas being deaf, and with ears covered with hair,! how can he
think any good of hair? Of course, even if Plato did not tell us
so, it would of necessity follow that he would be deaf who had hair
in that organ by which we hear, as one would also be blind who
had hair in the organ whereby we see. That would be a mon-

15 strosity, if it ever came to pass. Already cases have occurred of
the growth of a double row of eyelashes, and it seems the last of
calamities that hair hasmade its home close to the eye,and against
such hairs every violent means is set in motion lest they should
precipitate the undermining of the eye. Nature does not permit

20 the baser elements to grow with the nobler, and the noblest parts
of the animal are his perceptive faculties, for in these parts of the
body most of all resides the principle of life, and to these first the
soul has distributed its own powers. Now sight is the most divine
of all faculties 7 but at the same time the least hairy.

25 Again, as in an individual the noblest parts are the baldest, so
must the best elements of the race itself be related to the race
itself. This was shown a little while ago to be the case through-
out the whole human race, which is as far removed from the
brutes as it is from hairs. Now if man is really the most sacred of

3o all animals,* of men who have had the good fortune to lose their
hair, the bald man would be the most divine thing upon earth.


1 Plato, Phaedr. 253 E. 2 Ibid., 250 D.
5 Plato, Leg. 766 a.


250 CALVITII ENCOMIUM


6. You may look at the pictures in the Museum, I mean those
of Diogenes and Socrates, and whomsoever you please of those
who in their age were wise, and your survey would be an in-
spection of bald heads. Let not Apollonius confuse the argument,
or any one else who was a wizard and an adept in demoniac s
practices. For although such men are not really adorned with
hair, they are able to appear so by gaining a power over the
masses of mankind. But perhaps the faculty of these wizards is

1177 not knowledge, but some capacity to work miracles, and is not
any sort of science but rather a power. For thus it was that 10
while legislators regarded wisdom as one of the things most to
be honoured, they kept hangmen to deal with the wizards; so
that even if Apollonius did come bedecked with hair, this has no
bearing on my argument. Moreover, I am kindly disposed to this
man and would like to include him in my catalogue. But from rs
what has been said, the argument seems to admit of the converse
with soundness. If any one is wise he is also bald, and if he is not
bald neither is he wise. And thus it is with demons also, as he who
has seen the ceremonies of Bacchus will agree. As much of the
company as is shaggy is adorned, some with their own hair, and 20
others with borrowed locks, for nothing is so proper to Bacchus as
the goatskin; and some of them borrow hair even from pine trees.
One has seen them all shaking themselves and revelling, mayhap
overcome in their disorderly leaping dances by wine, whatever
wine enters at any time into the initiations; yet they seem to 25
have been reduced to the discordant phase of nature.

There too is the chair of Silenus and his lash. He has been
appointed the guardian slave of Dionysus. For I think that, being
bald, he must have been also aman of sense, to keep his self-control
in the midst of such aberrations. Yet I deem it no small matter that 30
he should be preferred by Zeus to all the demons, with a view of
attending upon and teaching his little son wisdom. For he
Dionysus) has also to taste the pure juice of the grape and to rave


A EULOGY OF BALDNESS 251


at times with natural desire and approach the point of madness,
until finally he joins the Bacchic women in dances. But Silenus
moderates his madness lest, oft-times unconsciously, he run wild
in both directions, lest he become too difficult for his father to
5 bring up. But we must speedily come back to our point, having
obtained adequate proof that brains are there whenever hair has
taken its departure, and that hair is there wherever brains have
taken their departure.
Socrates, the son of Sophroniscus, a moderate man in other
ro respects and beyond any one of his associates most chary of self-
praise, could not but feel this pride in his resemblance to Silenus ; '
for his whole desire was in this,—to prepare his head as a receptacle


of mind. But like many other of the thoughts of Socrates, this also


escaped the comprehension of the dull-witted, namely that he

15 prided himself overmuch on his likeness to Silenus. The fact that
the blossom of hair well befits youths at the moment of life when
we have not yet begun to reason, but flits away from age and does
not await maturity which manifestly makes mind and thought to
dwell with living creatures, this you must surely admit condemns

zo the nature of hair as bereft of reason. But if a man has hair even
although aged? you say. Well, some old men may also be devoid
of sense, nor perchance do all men attain the perfection of man-
hood. The case therefore stands thus, that mind and hair do not
await each other but yield place as darkness does to light. Now to

25 those seeking the cause of this the answer is somewhat cryptic.
We will attempt, however, to say what may be sufficient for the
present purpose, taking care to enshroud with purity all that is
inviolable.


7. The first of existing things are simple, but as nature descends
3oin the scale she becomes varied, and matter is last in order
of existing things and therefore the most varied. Matter itself


1 Plato, Symp. 215 a; Xenophon, Symp. 4, 19.
2878.2 Cc


1180


252 CALVITII ENCOMIUM


when it receives anything divine does not at once receive it to the
full extent, but only certain appearances and germs of it; with
these it becomes entwined and the greater part of it is centred in
them. Perhaps therefore it keeps these by welcoming them, per-
haps by overpowering the divine element through the inevitable
encounter at their first meeting, before the appearance has been
perfected. Each of these two states would be possible, nor are the
words at war although they might seem to be. But since our
discussion is not concerning these things, and since they have been
introduced only because of other considerations, let us proceed to
show in regard to the facts that nature grows stronger in the
immature and yields to those which are strengthened. Are not the
principles of the seeds which are cast into the earth something
divine, even if this is only the last stage of the divine? The fruit
is the consummation of these, but behold the pride of nature,
behold its beauties, before this stage has been arrived at. There
are roots, stem, bark, awns, husks, and other husks covering these
last, but the fruit itself is still unformed and hidden.

Now when once this has appeared, all the playthings of matter
are dried up and disappear, for the perfected work now needs
no adornment, and that already is perfected in which there is
another promise of seed. It is in memory of this that Eleusis
celebrates the revelations of Demeter. If then mind is the most
divine of the seeds that have come from above, and if it is settled
in the head, and if the material mind is the fruit of this principle,
as is the wheat of that, then nature is pursuing her accustomed
course. She works her wonders around the head, and adorns it
with the beauties of hair, as if with thorns or husks, or, by Zeus,
even as if with blossom, the like of that wherewith she graces
plants before the fruit appears. But there is no fruit on a plant
before the blossom fades, and so mind will not take its place
in the head before, brought to perfection, it has cast aside in
due course the superfluous elements, as if by the winnowing fan


5


I5


5


jo


A EULOGY OF BALDNESS 253


of time, and has discarded all the folly of nature; so that we might
regard all this as a sign that the head had already been shown
forth as a perfect fruit. If then you see one conspicuously denuded,
be sure that mind has pitched its tent there, and regard that head
sas a temple of God. Mysteries would therefore rightly be solem-
nized concerning the head, to be called perhaps, for the sake of
the profane, ‘Unveiling mysteries’ ; but the wise would understand
that they were festivals for the advent of the mind. And that
man who has just now arrived amongst the bald, is the one newly
ro initiated into the mysteries of the gods’ appearance among men.
Again, just as wheat, pomegranates, and nuts become bad and rot
in their shells and their pods, so heads may be evil, having no
share in the divine element and for the most part enveloped in
dead matter. I have myself observed that those who serve the
15 divinity in Egypt do not endure even the hair of the eye-lids.'
They were, it is true, laughable to behold, but they had a certain
wisdom in their minds as exceptional men and Egyptians; for it is
not befitting to approach with dead portions natures which are
eternal, and whose being is incorporated in life. If, therefore, the
zo man shaved by his own hand is pious, the bald by nature is by
that very nature more closely united to God; for perchance the
divinity itself is of such a nature. May it be propitious to my
discourse, for it will indeed be uttered in a pious spirit!


8. With regard to such part of the divine nature as is hidden,

25 why should any one trouble about it, since it is unwilling to be
revealed?? Be that as it may, all that 4s seen consists of exact
spheres, the sun, the moon, all the stars, both those that are
fixed and the planets. Whether they are greater or less, they are all
of like shape. Now, what could be balder than a sphere, and what
30 more divine?* There is a saying too, that the soul wishes to
imitate God. This is the third god, the soul of the world which


1 Herodot. ii. 36. 2 Plato, Leges, 821 A.
3 Proclus, tn Parm., Lib. VI.


1r81


254 CALVITII ENCOMIUM


its own father’ and demiurge of the bodily cosmos brought into
the cosmos, having completed it, perfect and whole, out of all
seeds and bodies, giving it on this account also a figure the most
comprehensive of figures. Of those figures that have equal peri-
meters, that which has the most angles is always the greater, and 5
the circle exceeds in superficies any angular figure, just as the
sphere exceeds amongst those which have solidity. This is known
to experts in geometry and mensuration of solids. Wherefore the
entire soul animates the whole cosmos, which is a sphere, and the
souls which pour out of the entire soul and have become fragments !°
of it, desire, each one of them, that which the entire soul wishes,
to wit, to control bodies and to be the moving spirits of universes,
the very thing which was the cause of their partition. In this wise
Nature stood in need of particular spheres; so then above were
moulded the stars, and below the heads, that these might be the !5
mansions of souls, small universes in the universe.?

For it was necessary, I think, that the cosmos should be a living
thing, should be composed of living creatures. To the simpler
souls it is a matter of indifference that they must take up their
abode in a hairy head, far removed from the clearly defined ?°
pattern, but each wise soul according to its own deserts has
received as its portion—one a star to dwell in, another a bald
head. For if nature here below is weak at producing perfect pre-
cision, nevertheless she does not tolerate the part of us which looks
upward and towards heaven to be formed otherwise than as 25
a universe in its shape.

Baldness, then, appears plainly to us as also a heaven, and as
many praises aS one might sing of a sphere, so many does one
relate of baldness also.


1184 9, And so let Homer write and let Phidias model, if he pleases, 3°
proofs in support of Dio, granting to Zeus his clustering locks,’


1 Plato, a ccadend 33 B, 34 B. 2 Ibid., 30 B, 44 D, 69 C.
53 Hesiod, Works and Days, 528 sqq.


A EULOGY OF BALDNESS 256


and thick hair at that, wherewith he may shake the heaven when
he desires. For as to the Zeus seen in heaven, we all know what
he is like; but supposing that there is some other Zeus, though
I know not whether there is some other bodily one, but granting
5 this, if anybody holds such an opinion, in any case he must be
either the first one, or the one subsequent to him. In that case
he is an image of this pattern. Whether one or the other, he is
such as that one who is evident to all men, as far as the condition
of his nature permits of resemblance. But the poetic and plastic
ro arts and indeed all mimetic arts’ seem, least of all, truth-loving,
but merely as plausible as may be, and such as seek to create
what they create according to appearances, not according to
truth.
By the ignorant hair is held in honour, for the opinion of the
15mob admires all external things, such as landed possessions,
carriages, houses, and groups of dwellings, all that are not part
of the nature of those possessing them, but, like hair, an alien
element to their nature. For the ignorant are far from mind and
from God, and in place of mind and God Nature and Fortune
20 direct them. Now this latter is still more alien: for the foolish
congratulate the recipients of Fortune’s and Nature’s gifts.
Whoever therefore writes and speaks to the masses, must of
necessity be plebeian in opinion, in order to model his style and
deliver his speech in a manner? pleasing to them. And inasmuch
25 as they are uninstructed, they are obstinate and are determined
champions of their absurd opinions, to such an extent that if
any one disturbs any point of their ancestral notions, he will before
long drink the hemlock. What penalty do you think Homer
would have suffered from the Greeks, if he had told the very
3° truth itself concerning Zeus,and had said nothing of those porten-
tous things with which children are terrified ?


1 Plato, Republic, 595 sqq.; Plutarch, Isis and Oswis, 358 E-F.
2 Plato, Gorgias, 502 D.


256 CALVITII ENCOMIUM


10. Now the Egyptians are wise in this way also, that amongst
them the race of prophets do not allow the vulgar and the artisans
to make images of the gods. This is in order that they may not
infringe the laws in any such matter, and while they mock at the
masses with those beaks of hawks and ibises, which they carve in 5
the precincts of their temples, they themselves, descending to
their sacred crypts, watch over whatever works they may have
completed, and they have at their reunions little chests, which
conceal, so they say, those spheres, which will enrage the mob
if it sees them, and the frivolous will laugh to scorn, for the mob 10
will have jugglery. How else can they behave, being a mob?

For this reason, I think, beaks of ibises have been placed on all
the statues. There is one deity, however, which they do not con-
ceal, but openly exhibit ; that is Aesculapius, and you may see him
much balder than a pestle. Yet this god at Epidaurus is adorned r¢
with hair ; the reason of this being that, amongst the Greeks, zeal
for truth is languid, and it is for that defect that a historian has
justly blamed our race. But the Egyptians see Aesculapius daily,
and converse with im, not merely the man whose hearth he fre-

1185 quents, nor in such manner nor as often as he may prefer. Now I 20
hear it said that the Egyptian man has an art for working upon the
gods, as also certain enchantments, and that by pronouncing a few
foreign words he can, when he pleases, draw all the divine nature
to follow such spells. From foreigners therefore, and not from
the Greeks we must obtain the truer images of the divine nature. 25
And yet, as I said a little while ago, the man who has examined
the sun and the stars is satisfied not to inquire curiously into
anything else: and admitting that there is any star with long hair,
yet it is no star at all (for the body carried around in a circle
marks the place of stars, in which nothing new ever takes place): 30
but the space underneath the moon is the very frontier of genera-
tion and contains the combustible matter? of the stars falsely so

1 Thucyd. i. 20. 2 Plato, Epinom. 981 v.


A EULOGY OF BALDNESS 257


called. In the one place they move together and are in succession
subject to the others, in the other, being inharmonious in
movement, they do not partake of the same nature. One had
come all the way from the Altar to the sign of the equinox, and
s from there it will be carried on to the North Pole if it is not
first destroyed. Of these you may see some of immense length,
and to-day, if chance favours, one extending over the length of
the zodiac ; on the third day it will be not even a third of that size
and on the tenth and the thirteenth it has nghtly disappeared,
ro dying out little by little, and becoming nothing at all. It is not
even pious, in my opinion, to call these stars, but if you wish to
call them so, this much at least is clear, that hair is an evil, inas-
much as even in a star it produces a perishable form. And when-
ever these comets appear, they are an evil portent, which the
15 diviners and the soothsayers appease. They assuredly foretell
public disasters, enslavements of nations, desolations of cities,
deaths of kings, nothing small or moderate, but everything that
exceeds the disastrous.
‘Nowise has perished as yet an unknown star from high heaven *
20 E’en from what time we were born and listened .. .’
Whatever it be that has perished, it is not a star, for all the happy
bodies are spherical. Let this good then be with me and mine,
one that maketh me like to the gods. For there are no other
forms except those of this sort like to the gods, nor any other
25 which it is more befitting to describe as divine in form and in
image, and to endow with all the other epithets of divine beauty.
And this is not that which should be, but which happens otherwise ;
nay, you may hear people using a nickname and calling bald men
‘little moons’ to their faces.


30 1. Now one thing had almost escaped me, the most fit of all
to mention, I refer to the moon and her phases, which the sons of
1 Aratus, Phaenom. 259-60.


258 CALVITII ENCOMIUM


the bald share in name, and in form. This moon, so dear to me,
begins in the form of a crescent, becomes a half moon, then again
is gibbous, and ends by being a full moon. And assuredly those
who have found their way to the summit of good fortune I call
the ‘full moons’: it is even lawful to call them ‘suns’. For they no 5
1188 longer return to phases, but continue with a perfect circle shining
in the face of those in heaven. As an instance: Odysseus is made
sport of by the suitors, striplings with long hair and waning with
dissipation, but soon to perish foully, more than a hundred in
number, all of them at the hands of one bald man.'' Him they ro
counsel, when he is torch-bearing and kindling a light produced
by man’s hand, to desist from his work for that his head suffices
to light the whole house. Now this very thing is the most divine,
and is not only like to the gods, but also akin to man, namely
to have light and to make it. Of his splendid glitter smoothness 15
is the cause, and smoothness in the head is nothing but the
total absence of hair; for at the same moment one leaves the
worse and approaches the better things, just as when we pointed
out that there is an antithesis between the corpse and the living
being. Now life and light, and all such things, belong to the 20
category of the good and are so esteemed to belong. And again,
if light is befitting to the bare surface, we must conclude that
hair befits darkness; for this perhaps is not logical, but in every
respect it is inevitable. Howbeit we must needs bring some per-
suasive force to the argument, and not dwell upon the mere 2s
cogency of our demonstration. In sooth all men think and say
that hair is a natural parasol, and the most noble of poets,
Archilochus, in praising it, praises it on the person of a courtezan.
These are his words:
‘and her hair 30
Overshadowed her shoulders and her waist.’
But a shadow is nothing else than darkness, for absence of light


1 Odyssey, xviii. 354-5.


A EULOGY OF BALDNESS 259


is indicated by each of these words; and to those who approach
nearer and investigate the matter, it is easy to see that the night
is the greatest shadow, the earth opposing, as it does, a barrier to
the beams of the sun. But even in the daytime dense forests have

5 no share in light, for they are excessively shaded and bearded with
hair.


12. So much then in behalf of the divine nature of this thing
and of its dedication to the most brilliant of the gods in the air.
And if health is also a fair thing, nay, the fairest of fair things,

ro It 1s for its sake that I see many men possessed of hair fleeing for
refuge to the razor, and to the pitch plaster, so as to be bald and
at the same time free of disease.! Moreover, if ophthalmia, catarrh,
and dullness of hearing and all other troubles that afflict the head
itself, were removed together with this burden, even this would be
15 a great result, and a much greater one still if both the feet and the
intestines were benefited. There are those who, unfortunate in this
respect, are compelled by the physicians to submit to so-called
circles, and of these the beginning, the middle, and end is the pitch
plaster, which attacks our hairs with more precision than iron.
20 Surely it is a reasonable idea that from a higher position, as from a
citadel,” namely from the head,’ the cables of disease and health
should be attached to the whole body. We, bald people, therefore,
have a share of health not equal to other men, but, if God permit,
be it said, even greater. And it would seem that those wooden
25 images of Aesculapius, denuded of hair, as the Egyptian manner
is, hint darkly of this very thing. There may be a lesson here for
us all, and the most salutary prescription in the realm of medicine,
and it seems almost to say that whoever desires to be in good
health, should imitate the discoverer and champion of medicine.
3o A cranium which is free from hair, that basks in the sun and is
1 Plato, Phaedrus, 244 E.
2 Cf. Juv. Sat. 10, 307, and Tert. Apol. 4, each with Mayor’s notes.
> Plato, Rep. 560 B.
2878.3 D


1189


260 CALVITIT ENCOMIUM


exposed to all the seasons, would not excite your wonder should

it be turned quickly from bone into iron. In this state it would
be most proof against the inroad of all diseases. Thus of spear-
handles those made of marsh-grown trees and trees of the plain,
are inferior, and the mountain-grown wood is stronger. Inquire ;
the cause of Homer,’ and you will hear him say that these
last are reared and trained by the wind. Again, do not imagine
that the wise Chiron * was acting to no purpose when he cut the
lance for Peleus from the neighbourhood of Tempe, not from any
hill slope or ravine where they grow smooth and tall, but from ro
the summit of Pelion, where it was exposed to the impact of the
winds. For these reasons the wood was good, and sufficient even to
his succeeding line. The same is true of these two heads, the shaggy
and the smooth. The one is of the marsh, for it is grown in the shade,
the other is of the mountain, where it is exposed to all winds, and 15
therefore the latter is strong, but the former is easily pliable.


13. Now they can test this argument who stand on the spot
where the forces of Cambyses and those of Psammitichus met in
deadly conflict in the attack on Egypt from Arabia. For these
two armies then making trial of one another, and each thinking 20
that the present moment was the decisive one of all, were at length
with difficulty separated. A great slaughter took place, and the
disaster was too severe to admit of the removal of their dead, and
so the survivors did nothing else for those who had perished but
to separate them from the enemy corpses, mingled together, just 25
as each one had happened to fall in the line of battle. So now
there are two heaps of bones, the one of the Egyptians, the other
of the Medes. Herodotus? (for it seems that this excellent man
approached the skulls) is indeed surprised at the thinness and
weakness of the latter, for he says that you might pierce them by 30
throwing a pebble against them, and at the thicknessand solidity of


1 Iliad, xi. 256. 2 Ibid. 830 ff. 5 Herod. iii. ro. 12.


A EULOGY OF BALDNESS 261


the former, for these met his assault as hard and rigid objects, and
even a whole sling stone would not be sufficient to break them,
nay, he would need a club for the purpose. And the cause, they
say, to which we invoked this experiment as a witness, was
5 the bonnet of the one race, and of the other constant exposure to
the sun. And even if it is difficult to decide upon a voyage beyond
the frontier passing through so manyraces of men, and granted that
it is an unholy thing to smash the skull of a corpse with a stone,
and admitting that you do not trust Herodotus, nevertheless, I,
ro and many other people in the town, have Scythian servants who
let their hair hang loose in the Scythian fashion. Now, if any one
should strike one of these men with his fist, he would kill him.
But there is a man at the theatre who furnishes a frequent and
diverting spectacle to the public, and whom you may see at the
15 holy period of each month if you seize the opportunity. This is
one of the artificially, not one of the naturally bald, for he goes to
his barber many times a day, and appears before the public for
the very purpose of showing the strength of his head, to which
no fearful thing is fearful, for he exposes it to seething pitch,
zo and butts with it against a trained ram, one that tosses his head
famously even when far away, and the Megarian vases collapse
broken on his noble cranium. This is cut and cut to pieces, and
not one of these exhibitions fails to make the beholders shiver, when
they see how leaps are taken on it with more precision than on an
25 Attic slipper. When I beheld this man, I congratulated myself
on my good fortune, for I too could do all these things, but he
certainly excels me in daring, and moreover in the poverty that
has brought him to this point of audacity. At all events I need
not make the trial, and may I never have to! But there is another
30 boon than this, a right great one, and which falls short of none of
those enumerated. For if it is our lot to attain what Pindar’ prayed
for, and we are able to live on our own means, we shall take a good


1 Olymp. v. 23 seq.


262 CALVITII ENCOMIUM


seat in the theatre, and become hearers and spectators of what is
being exhibited there ;* and if supplies be needed for the city, and
if the people ask for largesses, we shall employ our property
lavishly. But should the demon be adverse, and should our daily
bread be lacking—and may such a fate never befall one of the
divine race—at all events the last of evils, hunger, is far from us,
since we can all be wonder-workers ; we can improvise and present
on the stage, at the cost of a few blushes, an art well worth seeing.


14. Nowas to the man who thinks with Dio that hair is much
more fitting to men than to women, is he not taking up a position
quite opposed to the evident facts of the case?

For what sort of reason is there in allotting to the destiny of
the stronger what weakens its very possessors? Assuredly a dis-
tinction has been made both by nature and by custom. By
custom, inasmuch as hair is not esteemed beautiful in all males
nor in all places, nor at all times in the same males; for the
Lacedaemonians adopted long hair after Thyrea,? whereas the
Argives, before Thyrea, wore their hair long. There are plenty
of nations who have not adopted it in the past, nor do they to-day.
But always and in every place it has been thought a beautiful
thing for each woman to make the care of her hair a most serious
affair. The woman does not exist, nor has ever existed, who has
submitted her head to a razor, unless on account of some ill-
omened and horrible calamity, if so be that time has brought such
misfortune. For my part I have never seen or heard of such an one.
Then again nature is in harmony with custom: for no woman who
ever lived has shown herself as bald.? And do not tell me that
their hair-nets conceal this, for our comedies pierce all such subter-
fuges ; and if any woman has lost her hair, this is a result of some
illness, and with a little care she returns to her natural condition.
But of men worthy to be called men it is not easy to recall one


1 Aristoph. Plutus, 808. 2 Herod. i. 82. 5 Aristot. Hist. Nat. 518%,


5


ro


15


20


25


30


A EULOGY OF BALDNESS 263


who has not first reached this natural state. For this very thing 119;
seems to be the fulfilment of nature, even if it does not fall to the
lot of all. And just as the sons of husbandmen, understanding
from the vigorous growth of healthy saplings that it is their desire
sand nature to grow straight upward; just as these men, I say,
prop up with stakes and supports as many of them as are not
strong enough of themselves to accomplish this growth; so, since
all those whose nature is best appear to be in a condition (of
baldness) approaching my own, we must correct with the razor
10 those not in such a state and thus assist nature.


15. It is worth while calling to mind at this point how the Lace-
daemonians dressed their hair before the battle of Thermopylae,
that battle which Dio calls a great one for the very reason that
the Lacedaemonians combed their hair before it, though not a man

15 survived in the face of this evilomen. Now I say this not with any
wish to repeat what has already been said, namely that hair even
in the living is a dead body ; but because it grows from the dead.*
For this fact has been universally reported by the Therapeutae
in Egypt; how a certain man whose hair had been close shaven

20 died, and yet the year after displayed thick hair and beard. Those
then of the Greeks who perished most gloriously he has drawn into
his story, but he deliberately omits those who won the noblest
and greatest victories and who inflicted punishment upon the
barbarian king both on behalf of these very men and for the rest

25 of Greece. I allude to the Macedonians and to the Greeks who
went inland with Alexander, and whom the Lacedaemonians alone
did not join. These before the battle of Arbela, which we may
justly describe as a great battle, having learned by experience
that hair is a disadvantage to soldiers, made the whole host of

30 them shave, and with God, fortune, and valour to help them
combined in the struggle on behalf of all the Greeks. Now the

1 Aristot. Hist. Nat. 518°.


264 CALVITII ENCOMIUM


reason for the prejudice against hair was the following, as
Ptolemy son of Lagus' related in his history, one who knew, for
he was present at these events, and, because he was king at the
time when he wrote his history, did not lie.


16. A Macedonian with hair unusually long and a thick drooping 5
beard, was attacking a Persian,? but the Persian, although in
danger, with excellent judgement drops the well-known oblong
shield and spear from his hands, as insufficient for coping
with the Macedonian. He then charges him, and contriving to
slip in under his enemy’s guard, seizes him by the beard and hair, ro
and thus throws the soldier, who had not struck a blow, to the
ground, drawing him to himself by the hair like a fish, and once
fallen slays him with his drawn scimitar. Some other Persian also
saw this, and another and another, and soon they were all throwing
away their shields, and in full pursuit of the enemy through the plain,
where one would catch one man by his hair, and another, another ;
for it now passed through the Persian army like a signal that these
troops could be captured by their hair, and no one probably of
Alexander’s phalanx stood his ground except that portion which was

1196 bald. Meantime the king was in sore straits, exposed to unarmed 20
men, against whom when fully armed his force was irresistible.
As it was, Alexander might have been compelled to retreat to
Cilicia in disgrace, and to become the laughing-stock of the Greeks,
as one who had been defeated in a battle of the hair! But asmatters
were (for it was already destined that the Heraclidae should de- 25
prive the Achaemenides’ of their sceptres), speedily understanding
the danger, he orders the trumpets to sound the retreat, and when
he has led his army as far away as possible, and has placed it in
a good position, he lets loose the barbers upon it, and, induced by
the gifts of the king, they shaved the Macedonians en masse. 30


|


5


1 Arrian, Exp. Alex. i, prooem. 1. 2 Plutarch, Theseus, 5.
5 Arrian, Exp. Alex. iv. 10, 6.


A EULOGY OF BALDNESS 265


As to Darius and the Persians, the campaign no longer proceeded
according to their hopes, for as there was no longer anything to
hold on to, they were condemned to struggle in armour against
much superior adversaries.


s 17. Hair neither makes men terrible nor makes them seem so,
unless they be bogies to frighten children with; for we see soldiers,
at the moment when they desire to intimidate the enemy, cover
their heads with helmets. And the helmet, both in its name and
its function, is nothing else than a brazen cranium. And if these

ro are bedecked with horse-hair, any one who has ever put on a hel-
met must know what this is designed for. But we ought to teach
those who do not know that it is behind that they arrange it with
hair fixed in rows between the felt lining and the helmet proper,
nor could even Hephaestus himself manufacture the curved

15 exterior as a support for hair. Standing as it does, it presents the
clearest possible image of baldness, and in this way it is the most
terrible of all things that soldiers wear. Achilles, therefore, says
that the Trojans again plucked up courage, not because they no
longer saw his horsehair plumes floating in the wind, but,—how

20 does he put it >—


“Because they see not the front of my helmet
Flashing near them...;"?


Its shining surface, its smoothness, this precisely would be bald-
ness and a bugbear. And if Achilles had long hair (for this also he
as asserts) we must remember that he was young, at the age which
inclines to sudden anger, a time of life which has not yet reached
perfection either of soul or of body. And it is natural that a young
man’s head should surge with hair, and his heart with wrath.
But just as anger in the soul is not praised because of Achilles,
30 SO in the body hair is not to be commended as a marvel. None
the less I admit that, as he was born of Thetis, he was by nature
1 Iliad, xvi. 70, 71.


266 CALVITII ENCOMIUM


the best endowed for the development of every virtue, and I ex-
press my belief concerning Achilles that, had he survived, he would
not have been without his share both of baldness and of philosophy.
When he was young he was in some way versed in music and in
medicine, and moreover, he held in so light esteem whatever hair 5
he had, that he purified it and dedicated it to a sacred tomb.'
Then again, Aristoxenus says the very same thing about Socrates,
namely that he was rough by nature to the point of anger,? and
that when overcome by that passion he ran the gamut of all un-
seemliness. Socrates, however, was not yet bald at that time, for ro
he was only twenty-five years of age when Parmenides and Zeno
had come to Athens, according to Plato, to see the Panathenaic
1197 festival.* If any one later had spoken of Socrates as harsh or as
a long-haired man, I think that the speaker would have raised
a great laugh at his own expense amongst those who knew the 1s
man, for of all men who had pursued philosophy up to that time,
he was at once the baldest, and at the same time the gentlest.
Do not therefore condemn the hero to a head of hair, for at the
time to which you refer he was only a springal who, a short time
before, had not passed out of adolescence. Moreover, you could 20
instance nothing as a proof that Achilles’ hair would have remained
until his old age. But I have many things which prove that it
would not have so remained, namely the case of his father and
his grandfather, for I have actually seen their statues. He came
of the race of the gods, and what has once been said concerning 2s
the form of the gods is sufficient.


18. Why then, as if you had picked up a windfall, do you hold
fast these words:


‘She (Athene) seized the son of Peleus by his fair hair.’ *
Again, why do you call attention to a morsel of salt fish for your- 3°


1 Iiiad, xxiii. 141 ff. 2 Plutarch, De Herodoti Malignitate, p. 856 c-D.
5 Plato, Parmenides, 127 B. 4 Iliad, i. 197.


A EULOGY OF BALDNESS 267
self, instead of dragging the whole line into view? Well then, since
you will not do so, you make it necessary for us to produce it, as
thus:

‘She stood behind, and seized the son of Peleus by his fair hair.’


5 Well done, Dio, for it is not redundant syllables that you have
suppressed, but those which contain the direct opposite of your
argument. From this I divine that even at that moment of his
age Achilles was somewhat bald. The goddess, the poet says,
came behind him and caught him by the hair. Why any one could

1o catch hold of me, or of Socrates himself, nay even of the oldest
man of the Greeks from behind! For there the symbols of our
perishable nature are left us. It is a possession belonging to
neither man nor demon but clearly to a divine destiny and nature,
to be altogether removed from participation in the mortal element.


1s ‘She stood behind, and seized the son of Peleus by his fair hair’.


To catch him by his hairshe stood behind him: therefore there was
nothing in front wherewith to catch him.


1g. On the whole there is nothing good in Dio’s argument on
behalf of the growth of hair. And yet, if there had been any good

20 in the case, Dio would have found it out, and if it had been small,
would have represented it as great, for, even as matters are, he
has gone a long way to find an example in the Lacedaemonians,
an example quite valueless for his argument, at least as any one
else would think.

25 He seizes upon Homer as a sacred anchor and holds on to him to
the end of his book, but he employs argument with entire injustice
and rhetorically, as in the present instance, where he has cut out
a bit of the verse as if it were a statute, and elsewhere calls up as
witnesses parts of verses which do not exist, as though they existed.

30 For he flatly defames Hector or rather Homer, and perhaps both
Homer and Hector. Now the latter is represented to us as re-

2878.2 E


268 CALVITIT ENCOMIUM


sembling the wisest men in the matter of cutting off his hair, and
he who has written the truest things concerning the heroes makes
1200 this clear, inasmuch as, I think, he made the campaign with some
of these, and so served against the others, he who says these very
things about Hector. And if you go to Ilium, the moment you 5
enter there any Ilian will conduct you to the temple of Hector.?
His statue is easy to see, and those who See it are inclined to say
that it was constructed with the intent to represent him as he held
himself when he taunted his brother with his artificial beauty, to
wit the care which he took of his hair.2, As to what Dio wrote 10
down as said by Homer concerning Hector,
‘and round about him
His dark locks were dragged,’ ?


let any one show me where this occurs in the epic compositions of
Homer. I do not think Ion the rhapsode himself could find it. 15
Moreover, how could Homer have made a hairy man of the very
person whom he introduces into his poem as one who taunted
another with his foppishness? It is as if Phileas had accused
Andocides of sacrilege,* just as if he were not himself the man
who had filched the Gorgon’s head from the shield of the goddess 20
on the Acropolis. Such is your case in regard to this hero also.


20. Again, if Menelaus had a fair-haired head, he was not long-
haired, at least as far as we can learn from the narration, nor is
that an encomium on hair. The poet only shows things as they
existed, nor when Homer mentions a thing must this mention 2.
be regarded as of the nature of praise. But to Dio a mention of
hair and a eulogy of it are one and the same thing for the sake
of his own volubility. He proceeded on the one hand to attribute
to the poetry what is not there, and on the other to deprive it of
what is there, and this he has done with such boldness that in 30


1 Philostratus, Heroicus, p. 295 (c. 10). 2 Iliad, iii. 55.
5 bid. xxii. 401, 402. * Isocrates, ad Callimachum, § 57.


A EULOGY OF BALDNESS 269


order to convince us by his argument that hair is much more
becoming to men than to women, he says ‘of the deities Homer
has other ways of praising the females, as when, for instance,
he speaks of “‘ox-eyed”’ Hera, and ‘“‘silver-footed’’ Thetis, while
sin the case of Zeus he praises most of all his hair’. Perchance
his copy of Homer had been mutilated of many good lines such
as these,
‘Apollo king whom fair-haired Leto bore ’!
or,
10 ‘Place him at the fair-haired knees of Athene’.” (sic)


And concerning Hera’s plot to put Zeus to sleep’, he says that the
goddess beautified herself in all other ways, and that in this she
will have need also of her girdle, which, of its many powers,
possesses one, the greatest of all, namely, that of stealing away
1§ the mind from its possessors. Then in the same passage he says
that she anointed herself with sweet oil and that
‘... her hair,
She combed, and bound up with her hands her shining tresses
Fair, ambrosial ’.‘
zo This is worthy then of a host of praises. It would also be quite
worth while, now that the argument touches upon Zeus, if any one
would quote the many passages overlooked by Dio, and especially
those which he knew quite well but pretended not to know.
I too know these passages, and I do not drag in false ones for
25 the sake of my argument, nor could I admit that any one of the
dwellers in heaven is hairy. The argument is the same alike for
male and female. Zeus is not more clearly defined in his spherical
shape than is the Aphrodite who dwells among the stars. And
this has been said in like sense concerning Zeus also, whom Dio
30 has brought in as the finishing touch to his argument, namely,
that of the things Homer relates concerning the gods, the


1 Iliad, i. 36. 2 Ibid. vi. 273.
5 Ibid. xiv. 159. 4 Ibid. xiv. 175 f.


I2o!1


270 CALVITII ENCOMIUM


greatest part are in accordance with popular opinion, and few
in accord with truth. One single point is in accordance with
popular opinion, to wit, those hairs which gather strength from
the head of Zeus and together shake the very heaven, a conception
which has received the assent of the masses and the sculptors.
But apart from Homer and the Lacedaemonians there is not a shred
left of Dio’s argument. And even if they be present, he has not,
as I observed just now, found anything to say that is worth
while concerning the nature of hairs, either by discovery of his own
or by borrowing from them. He has not said of what sort they are,
he has not taught their nature, he has not shown how they are
beneficial to those who possess them, nor how they are evil to
those who do not possess them. The present argument, examining
into the real nature of the facts, has discovered that baldness is
divine and related to the divine, that it is the fulfilment of nature,
and a real shrine to the god through whom we have wisdom.
I pass in review other innumerable benefits which it brings to
body and soul, what their character is and their cause; and thus
our argument has brought forth nothing which is unsupported
by a luminous exposition. And it has become clear, moreover,
that hair has all the opposites of these things, lack of reason,
animal propensities, and all that is of the part opposed to God.
Locks have been shown to be as it were awns and pods of the
animal, the playthings of nature, mere excrescences of imperfect
matter.


21. Now I think it is befitting to divide all men according to
their races and pursuits, and to show which the one argument
praises, and which the other. The adulterers certainly come from
the men who care for their hair. Homer’ depicts the seducer as
one fingering his shining locks, in the sense that his hair was
adorned for the ruin of women. And assuredly this man is himself


1 Iliad, xi. 385.


5


a]


5


w


Oo


25


30


A EULOGY OF BALDNESS 271


an adulterer, the prince of adulterers, he against whom the re-
proach was uttered. This one race of men is the most treacherous
and the most hostile within the homes of his own countrymen.
And those in defence of whom we take the field in war, for whom
5 we incur danger, that they may not be outraged—I speak of our
daughters and wives—those very ones, if the occasion arises, some
fashionably dressed young man seizes upon and carries away to
whatever quarter of the sea or land he desires, and if not to the
sea or land far distant, to some dark corner or hiding place.
10 Yet the heart of a wife who has been made a prisoner in wartime
might remain true to the man who had married her. But the
adulterer is that very thing which has first plundered her good
will from the soul of him who is the partner of her life, and the
loss of his erring wife is not merely half a loss. With justice then
15 do the laws arm the executioner against these men, and the
gardeners grow Attic radishes with which the first punishinent is
meted out to them as soon as they are taken in the act. It is this
one class of men of the sort that has ruined many homes, and 1204
already certain cities also. And adultery became the pretext for
20 a Clash of two continents one against the other and for the crossing
of the Greeks against Priam’s realm.

There is another vice which is much worse than this, one which
exposed Alexander to our censure, and to which were addicted
people like Clisthenes,' the Timarchi, and all who dispose of their

25 beauty for money, or if not for money then for something else,
and if for no other end, simply for their abominable pleasure.
In a word, let it be said that these effeminate wretches all make
a cult of their hair. There are some who are to be found openly
in the brothels, and yet they think they are gaining their end, since

30 this is the best way to display fully the effeminacy of their
character. And whoever is secretly perverted, even if he should
swear the contrary in the market-place, and should present no

1 Aristophanes, Acharnians, 117 8qq.


272 CALVITII ENCOMIUM


other proof of being an acolyte of Cotys save only in a great
care of his hair, anointing it and arranging it in ringlets, he
might well be denounced to all as one who has celebrated orgies
to the Chian goddess and the Ithyphalli. For Pherycydes cover-
ing himself with his cloak, said, ‘It is evident from my skin’, and 5
showed the malady on his finger. But we can recognize by his
hair a young man under the influence of unnatural passion.


22. Now if the proverb also is a wise thing (and how can it fail
to be wise, when Aristotle says of it that proverbs have been
saved, owing to their conciseness and clearness, as remnants by ro
which to recall the old philosophy that perished in the great
destructive revolutions of humanity?).! This, too, is a proverb,
and it is also an aphorism which embodies a self-evident principle
in the antiquity of that philosophy from which it is derived, and so
we look at it intently. In every way the ancients were more skilled r5
in unravelling truth than we of to-day. What, for instance, is
the following aphorism, and what does it mean?

‘There is no man graced with hair who is not...’


The fag end you may yourself fit in to the rhythm of the trimeter ;
I will not utter that fearsome word, nor the thing signified by it. 25
Well done, you have fitted it carefully—, well, what think you
now?

‘Bless me! This the truth!’


The oracular utterance is before you. It is self-evident; but
how many witnesses does it drag into court, both those who are 2.
now using it and as many as have used it before! For what makes
proverbs immortal is the very fact that people are continually
using them, because the matters themselves with which they deal
are always calling them to memory. For things we observe in
what is continually happening call them to witness, and give 30
evidence (for them) by the examples themselves.

1 Plato, Critias, 109D; Leges, 677 8B; Aristotle, Metaph. ii. 8. 1074»,


A EULOGY OF BALDNESS 273


23. But although this is the case, it is wonderful what an argu-
ment Dio has brought forth in favour of hair. What further need
have we of a Plato to refute this, when the rhetorician! has made
it evident that rhetoric is merely a hair-dressers’ art? Or does

5 it seem likely to you that the hair-dyers would make locks of hair
lovelier, because a pure Greek praised such a possession before
a crowded house? I think that those who have been emasculated
in the rites of Cybele will give him abundant thanks for his dis-
course, and also the man who looks upon his neighbour’s wife
ro with unholy eyes. Assuredly he has drenched the head of every
one of these with his discourse, as though with perfumed oil. It is
inevitable that what is in popular esteem should be zealously
aimed at, and most of all when he who distributes praise happens
to be a man of distinguished reputation. And it follows from this,
15 that such a man is quite capable of augmenting in our city the
list of these most baleful creatures. But as to baldness, what types
of men does it oppose to these? What men have we praised in place
of adulterers? Those evidently from whom spring men who live
in hallowed precincts, priests, prophets, and acolytes; again in the
20 schools, schoolinasters and guardians of youth; and those in the
ranks of the army in prosperous circumstances, namely generals and
colonels; and those esteemed everywhere by the majority of men
to have superior intelligence. And I think that the bard also
whom Agamemnon left behind him as guardian of Clytemestra
25 was of our race.? For he would never have entrusted to a long-
haired man, a wife who came of a family already discredited.

Painters also furnish us with excellent testimony in favour of
our argument, when they do not paint from the original, but
also profess that they have found a model appropriate to the

3o task. For should one of them be given a commission to paint
an adulterer or effeminate wretch on a panel, if he selects a long-
haired man to pose for him, he has fulfilled his order. If you order


1 Plato, Gorgias, 465 B. 2 Od., iii. 267.


1205


274 CALVITII ENCOMIUM


of him a philosopher or acolyte, a rather dignified bald man will
certainly take his place on that panel, for this is the device on the
coin.


24. I have therefore made a present of this discourse to philo-
sophers, priests, and temperate men of every description. In it s
I have expressed all piety to the divine part, and have given good
counsel towards men. If my work when once published is well
thought of by the multitude, with the result that thereafter the
wearers of long hair are put to shame and that they adopt at least
a rather moderate and restrained cropping of their hair, and if it ro
inclines them to congratulate those who need not the barber, they
need not thank me for this. Let this only be the merit of my view
of the case, that through it the merest tyro in speech appears to
be somebody, although compared with the most brilliant man. If,
on the other hand, I do not succeed in convincing these people by rs
my discourse, then let them blame me, for actually failing, with
all the facts in my favour, to withstand the simple grace of Dio.
May it also profit the multitude to have taken up this essay in
their hands!


THE EGYPTIAN TALE
(DE PROVIDENTIA)
PREFACE


Tus has been written in the days of the sons of Taurus, and 1209


the first part here presented was read as far as the riddle of the
wolf, precisely at the moment when the inferior man was ruling,
after coming into power through a division in the state. The
§ ensuing part was woven into it after the return of the better men,
who begged that this history should not remain incomplete amidst
misfortunes; but that since those things which were foretold
according to God seemed to be in course of fulfilment, it were
better in dealing with the same subject to go on to more happy
10 fortunes than those already recounted. From the moment, there-
fore, in which the overthrow of the tyranny was already in
progress, the story followed the sequence of events. And it is
worthy of no ordinary wonderment in all this that the handling
suffices for many subjects. Many doctrines which up to this
15 moment remained undecided, have found room for investigation
in this story, and each has been examined in detail. Lives are
described therein which are to be taken as examples of vice and
virtue; the narrative contains a history of contemporary events;
and this story has been fashioned and embellished throughout
20 with a view to its utility.


PART ONE
1. The legend is Egyptian. The Egyptians are remarkable for
their wisdom. Perhaps, therefore, this, which is only a legend,
might signify, enigmatically, something more than a legend, for
the very reason that it is Egyptian. And if it is not a legend, but
25 sacred history, in that case it would be all the more worthy to
be set forth in writing.
2878.2 F


1212


276 DE PROVIDENTIA


Osiris and Typho were brothers, and came of the same parents.
Now the relationship of souls and that of bodies is not one thing
and the same. It does not belong to souls to be born on earth
from the same parents, but rather to flow from the same fountain.
And the nature of the universe furnishes two kinds, one luminous, 5
and the other indistinct, this last gushing forth from the ground,
since its source is somewhere below, and leaping out of the earth’s
Cavities, if perchance it might so compel the divine law. But
the former is suspended from the back of the Heavens;?* for it
is indeed sent down that it may order the earthly lot, but it is 10
enjoined upon it that when descending it should take great care

1213 lest, while it is arranging and ordering disarrangement and dis-
order, it should itself by its propinquity be infected with dishonour
and disorder. Now a law of Themis has been established which
announces to souls that, whichever one of them has been ac- 15
quainted with the furthest confines of existence and has withal
kept guard over its nature and remained inviolate, that such a
one, I say, should flow back again by way of the selfsame road,
and be commingled with its own source, just as it is a necessity
of nature that those who have in some way set out from the other 20
part, should be lodged in the abysses that are akin to them.

‘Envy and Anger there dwell, and there tribes of other misfortunes

Wander about through the gloom in the meadow of infatuation.’?


2. Of souls there are those which are well-born, and those
which are ill-born, in such wise that it might befall a Parthian 2s
to be related to a Libyan, and that those whom we call brothers
should be in no wise near to one another in kinship of soul,

a fact which was indicated in the case of the two Egyptian boys
from the moment of their birth, and when they were adult was
shown quite clearly. For the younger, born and brought up as by 30


1 Cf. Plato, Phaedrus, 247 C.
2 Empedocles, Fragment 121 (Diels, Die Fragmente der Vorsokratiker’, i. (Berl.
1922], p. 269.)


THE EGYPTIAN TALE 277


a divine destiny, even in childhood’s days was fond of listening,
and fond of fables, for the fable is the child’s treatise on philosophy;
and as he grew, he always desired training which was in advance
of his years. He gave ear to his father, and whatever wisdom was
§ known to each, all that he hungered after, eager to seize first upon
all knowledge at once, in puppy fashion, as, of course, all natures do
which promise great things. Such natures show impatience and
start before their time, already pledging themselves to the beloved
goal. Then again, long before his adolescence he was even more
10 sedate than a well-bred man of mature age, and he listened with
modesty, and when he himself had, on occasion, to speak, whether
to ask about what he had been listening to, or with some other
purpose, every one would have noticed him hesitating and blushing.
He always made way for the older Egyptians, and gave up his
15 Seat to them, and this although he was the son of the ruler of
the great kingdom ; and respect for those of his own age was ever
with him, for it was pre-eminently in his nature to care for the
feelings of men. It was indeed difficult at that period of his life
to find a man in Egypt for whom the boy had not obtained at
20 least one benefit from his father.
The elder brother, Typho, on the other hand, was, in a word,
a downright boor. All knowledge he hated with his whole heart,
both so much as was Egyptian, and also foreign learning,
teachers of which the king had placed at the disposal of his son
25 Osiris; and he laughed the whole business to scorn, as though it
were idle and calculated to enslave the mind. When he saw his
brother conducting himself in an orderly way, and leading
a modest life, he thought this cowardly, inasmuch as no one saw
him striking a man with his fists, attacking him with kicks, or
3orunning in a disorderly fashion, withal that he was nimble,
without any spare flesh, and with a body that was a ight burden
for the soul therein. Then again, Osiris did not gulp down drink,
or give way to peals of vulgar laughter, which shook the whole 1216


278 DE PROVIDENTIA


body, such as his brother indulged in every day, for Typho
deemed these the only acts worthy of a free man, namely to do
whatsoever one chanced to desire at a given moment. He was like
no one of his race in character, nor indeed like anything human,


and he did not, to put it in a nutshell, even resemble himself, for 5


he was a compound of every kind of evil. At one moment he
seemed to be stupid, and a mere cumberer of the ground,’ only
keeping from his sleep long enough to fill his belly and to take
other provisions for the route of slumber; at another he would
neglect the moderate necessities of nature to indulge in gross
horse-play, and to annoy his own equals in age and his elders.
He admired strength of body as being the ultimate good, but he
used it ill, wrenching off doors, throwing clods of earth, and re-
joicing if any one was hurt thereby, or if he had done any other
mischief, as though this bore witness to his prowess. He flamed
up with untimely lust, and was violent in seeking amorous
encounters. Further, envy of his brother smouldered within him,
and hatred of the Egyptians, because they, the people, gave
honour to Osiris, both in speech and in song, and at home in
their common religious rites, all, everywhere, prayed of the gods
that every sort of good thing might be his. Such was the man and
so regarded. Then again, Typho took to himself bands of senseless
boys, for no other reason (since it was not his nature to care for
any one in his heart) than that he might have some partisans who
did not hold the views of Osiris. It was easy enough for any one
to win this man’s good graces, and to get from Typho anything
that young men desire, by merely whispering something tending
to calumniate Osiris. So from childhood did the respective
characters of the two foretell the difference of their lives.


3. But just as of two roads the first cleft, diverging only a little,
as it advances, ever adds something to the gap, so that finally the


1 Iliad, xviii. 104.


30


THE EGYPTIAN TALE 279


two come to be a vast distance apart ; thus one may see in the case
of the young, how a small tendency to differ separates them
immensely as they advance in life. Now these lads turned in oppo-
site directions, not little by little, but all at once, each receiving

5 a separate lot, the one the perfection of good, the other the acme
of evil. As they grew up the antagonism of their choice grew
with them ; more manifest evidences of this were afforded, stamped
as they were on their deeds. Osiris from his earliest youth served
as a general with those duly gazetted, although the law did not
ro yet permit men so young to bear arms, but nevertheless he
governed the judgement of his fellow generals, as though he were
their intelligence, and made use of them as if they were merely his
hands. Then, his nature growing like a plant, he brought forth
fruit ever more perfect. He became a commander of the guard,
15 was entrusted with reports, was prefect of the city, president of
the council, and gave up each post in far greater repute than that
in which he had received it. But the other (Typho), when appointed
minister of finance (for his father had thought best to make trial
of his sons’ characters in lesser posts), brought shame upon himself,

20 and upon the man who had appointed him, for he was found guilty
of embezzling public money, accepting bribes, and of instability
in administration. When he was removed accordingly to another
position of authority on the chance that he might be fit for it, he
behaved still more disgracefully, and of the flourishing kingdom
25 that part over which Typho was placed passed a whole year in
unspeakable plight. He then betook himself to other men, and
straightway misfortune dogged them. Such was Typho as a leader
of men. In private life he danced the cordax, and collected about
him the most disorderly of Egyptians and strangers, those who were

30 ready to say and to hear anything, tosubmit to and to do anything,
so that his banqueting hall became a factory for every sort of
licentiousness. Even when awake he snored, and was delighted
when he heard others so doing, thinking this practice a wonderful


1217


280 DE PROVIDENTIA


sort of music; and there was praise and honour to that one who
should prolong the unruly sound, and should spin it out most
roundly. And a certain one of these men, the most heroic, was
quite lost to shame, and shrinking from none of the infamies,
gained many prizes, and certain posts in the government came 5
to him as a reward for his disgraceful effrontery. Such an one was
Typho at home.


4. Now when he took his seat in the guise of one who conducts
public affairs, he showed clearly that evil takes every form, for
it is at war both with virtue and with itself, and both the opposing 10
forces are parts of it. And this gaping idiot straightway became
downright mad, and barking more sharply thana Molossian hound,
he would bring disasters, one on a private individual, another on
a family, or again on a whole city, and he quite rejoiced in having
worked a greater evil, as if thinking to wash away the dishonour rs
of his indolence at home with the tears of men. One point a man
might gain from this evil plight, that oftentimes when on the brink
of doing a dreadful thing, or through perversion of judgement he
would degenerate into odd suspicions so as toresemble the fanatics,
and would bellow forth vigorously about the shadow at Delphi; 20
and meanwhile the person in danger would make his escape with-
out any further mention being made of him: or he would be over-
1220 come by lethargy, and his brain would be fuddled for some time,
to such an extent that his mind was far away from his surround-
ings. Then, when he had pulled himself together, even so all 25
memory of the recent incidents had escaped him, and he would
dispute with members of his administration about how many ears
of corn a medtmnus contains, or how many cyatht a chous, giving
evidence of a rare and amazing shrewdness. Many a time did
sleep save a man from misfortune, for it would overtake Typho 30
at a very opportune moment, and would even have pushed him
headlong from his throne, had not an attendant dropped his lamp


THE EGYPTIAN TALE 281


to support him. Thus oftentimes a tragic night-festival would end
in comedy, for he never transacted official business in the daytime,
inasmuch as his character was averse to the sun and the light,
and more akin to darkness. Though knowing well that every one
s who had even a small share of sense accused him of the most
complete ignorance, he did not blame himself for his eccentricity,
but rather on this very account did he become the common
enemy of those who had intelligence, as if they were wronging
him in knowing how to pass judgement. The man was without
10 resource in counsel, but most resourceful in plotting. Folly and
madness were ever with him, evil destinies of the soul which gain
strength from one another. Never have there been, nor shall there
ever be in nature other evils greater than these, and more calcu-
lated to extirpate the race of man.


15 5. Every one of these things his father beheld and understood,
and he watched over the Egyptians, for he was king, priest, and
philosopher. The Egyptian writings declare that he was even
a god. The Egyptians believe that myriads of gods reigned over
them, one at a time, before the land was ruled over by men, and

20 that the kings traced their descent, a Peiromis from a Peiromis.’
When, therefore, divine laws translated the king to the greater
gods, and the statutory meeting of the assembly was at hand, the
event having been announced in good time, there were gathered
for it all the tribes of priests and the territorial army from every

25 city of Egypt. All these came by the compulsion of law, but all
the rest of the people might be absent, nor was any one prevented
from attending. They were there to watch the voting, though not
to vote themselves. Swineherds, however, were forbidden the
spectacle, as also whosoever was either a foreigner, or a man of

30 foreign extraction carrying arms as a mercenary in the Egyptian
army. These two classes were forbidden to be present. Thus the

1 Cf. Herodotus, ii. 143.


1221


282 DE PROVIDENTIA


elder of the sons had by far the less number of votes; for Typho’s
faction was composed of swineherds and foreigners, a senseless
and withal a large crowd. But they submitted to the custom nor
attempted anything against the proceedings, deeming their dis-
franchisement nothing dreadful, but only befitting them, since 5
this decision had been given against them by law, and it was in
any case natural to their condition.


6. Now the king is appointed by the Egyptians in the following
way. There isa sacred mountain near the great city of Thebes, and
just opposite to it another. The Nile flows between the two. Of 10
these mountains the one described as opposite is the Libyan, and
on this it is the custom that the candidates for the royal dignity
should take their abode during the preparatory period, to the end
that they may perceive nothing of the choice. But the sacred
mountain is the Egyptian one. On the summit is a tent for the 15
king, and by him are collected as many of the priests as are versed
in the great wisdom. This arrangement extends to all that have
precedence, for it distributes the positions at the ceremonies
according to merit. A first circle is composed of these of which
the king is as it were the heart. The soldiers occupy another 20
circle next to this. These then still surround the peak, which on
the widely extending mountain is another mount; it is like a nipple
standing up, thus keeping the king in full view even of those
encircling him at the farthest distance. And they to whom it is
permitted to be present at the spectacle, surround him, taking 25
possession of the ground at the base of the nipple. These are they
who only applaud what they perceive; the others have authority
over the election. As soon as the king has been invoked, and those
also to whose office this belongs have moved the whole assembly
of priests, as if the divinity were present and were assisting in the 30
proceedings of the election, the name of one of the candidates
for the kingdom being then announced, the soldiers raise their


THE EGYPTIAN TALE 283


hands, while the priests, the acolytes of the temple, and the
interpreters of the oracles register their votes. This is a smaller
body of men, but it is far more powerful, for one interpreter’s
vote is equivalent to one hundred hands, one priest’s is equivalent
s to twenty hands, and the acolyte counts as ten. Then a second
name of the candidates for the kingship comes up, and hands and
votes are taken for him accordingly. Even if the number on each
side is nearly equal, the king, by supporting one side, gives it
a much greater majority, and if he throws his weight on
ro the losing side, he equalizes the vote. Hence the necessity arises
of suspending the election, and depending on the gods, both
by watching patiently a still longer time, and by performing
the sacred rites with greater precision, until such moment as not
through any veil nor by any of the usual signs, but face to face
15 they appoint the king himself, and the people hear the proclamation
from the gods themselves. The whole ceremony takes place at
one time in one of these ways, and at another time in another, as
the case may be. But in regard to Typho and Osiris, the gods
were Clearly seen from the first, without any action on the part
2o of the priests, and took part themselves, arranging their own proce-
dure; and each one marshalled his own votaries, so that it was
evident to all with what intent they were present. Even if they
had not been there, every hand and every vote would have
awaited the name of the younger of the king’s sons. But great
2s events here below are announced beforehand by greater preludes,
and the divine element is clearly shown in things that are to turn
out contrary to all probability, whether they be good or whether
they be evil.


7. Osiris therefore remained, as was right, on the spot to which

3o he had been conducted in the first instance. But the other was

in convulsions of impatience, was tormented to know the details

of the election, and finally could not restrain himself from an
2878.3 G


1224


284 DE PROVIDENTIA


attempt at aggression, and at destruction of the votes. Careless
of himself, therefore, and of the royal laws, and launching himself
in the stream, he was carried down by it, swimming with the
current, the while doing and suffering all manner of things, until
finally, derided by all, he lands on the other side of the river. He 5
thought that no one saw him, save only such as he met on the way,
and to whom he promised money; but every one recognized him,
and detested both him and his design. They did not, however,
think fit to expose his misguided nature.

But this was his most calamitous experience, that in his own 10
presence and in his own hearing he was rejected by the votes of all,
and by the hands of all; nay, even the gods cast their curse upon
him; and Osiris, the one who had not concerned himself about
the matter, had merely come when sent for. The gods, the priests,
all in a word, bedecked with sacred garlands, and accompanied 15
by the sound of the holy flutes, met him at the bank of the river
where the flat-bottomed boat from the Libyan shore, taking the
young king on board, must needs touch; and lo, there were great signs
from heaven and divine voices of good omen from the same place;
and every vision by which the future is sought, great and small, 20
announced a reign prosperous for the Egyptians. So far as the
demons of the more evil order appeared likely to be restive,
it seemed that they would not meekly endure the happiness of
mankind either, but would attack it and cause it to fester; and
a kind of plot was indicated. 25


8. Now as soon as he was initiated in the kingly office by the
gods and his father, they definitely announced to him, from
definite knowledge, besides all the rest, benefits in swarms, but
that his brother who had been born to bring ill-luck both upon
the Egyptians and on his father’s hearth, must be banished if he 30
were not to throw all things into confusion, to the end that he
might neither hear of nor see the success and prosperity of Egypt


THE EGYPTIAN TALE 285


that were due to the reign of Osiris himself. For Typho’s nature
could endure nothing good.
The priests have now transmitted to him (Osiris) knowledge of the
double essence of souls as well as the necessary opposition between
s those on the earth and those above. These then they begged him
to remove and to strip the evil element from its good and divine
parallelism, and to be in no wise ashamed before what is called
by men blood relationship. And when he showed weakness, they
told him that he, and the Egyptians, and their neighbours, and
10 all the country ruled over by the Egyptians must suffer ; for that
the evil in question was no slight one, nor would any ordinary care
be an adequate means of rebutting and weakening open and secret
attacks. The reason was that Typho had allies with him also, a
powerful company of those malignant demons to whom he was
15 next of kin, and by whom he had been brought into existence in
order that they might be able to make use of an implement of
their evil towards men. It was for the sake of this evil, that
as they advanced on their way, they engendered, nourished,
delivered his mother of, and brought up after their own fashion
20 to be a great boon to themselves,—Typho! One thing more they
thought necessary for complete possession, namely to endow
him with the power that rule brings with it, for then he would
be a perfect man of perfect ancestors, in that he would be both
able and willing to do great evils. ‘You, on the other hand,’ said
25 one of the priests, ‘they detest as being a blessing to men and a
retribution to themselves ; for the misfortunes of races of men are
a feast to the evil demons.’ Again then and very often the priests
gave him this warning advice, namely to conduct his brother beyond
the frontiers, and to let him go to his ruin in some distant place,
30 for they knew and saw the gentle character of Osiris; but they
were finally compelled by him to tell him that for a time he might
hold his ground, but that unknowingly he would surrender and
utterly betray himself and all men, exchanging in reality the


1225


286 DE PROVIDENTIA


greatest disasters for the benign name of brotherly affection.
‘Nay as long as you at all events are propitious and helpful,’
replied Osiris, ‘I shall not fear my brother remaining, and I shall be
exempt from the wrath of the demons, inasmuch as it is easy for
you, if you are willing, wholly to remedy oversights on my part.’ 5


g. But his father taking up the discussion, said: ‘You ill
comprehend this matter, my son, for the divine part in the
universe is given to things of a different order, acting upon most
of them through its primordial power, and filled with intelligible
beauty, which is mind. In that region of the universe there is 10
another and supercosmic race of gods, one which, while it holds all
existing things together even unto the last ones, is unswerving,
and is unrelenting towards matter. That race is a happy vision
to those who are gods by nature, but still happier is it to behold
its fountain head. And moreover that race is more than full of 15
good elements by force of its self-concentration, being more than
filled with itself, but for the others it is well to turn towards the
God whois there. The efficacy of these good things is not, however,
something simple or of one kind; it is to diverse parts of the uni-
verse that they (the gods) direct their care. They must bring 20

1228 down the action generated in their contemplation to the work
administered by them, so far as is possible. While therefore, their
unsullied element has been drawn up close beneath that great
first essence, they themselves marshal those next to them, and the
succession of orders descends methodically to the last of existing 25
things, and all things rejoice in the fatherly care of the first
element through the agency of the intermediate elements,’ but not,
however, to an equal extent, for in that case there would be no
degrees. The fact is that, as the existing things descend in degree
they become weaker, until finally they err and falsify the order, 30
and at that moment the existence of existing things terminates.


1 Plato, Symposium, 202 B.


THE EGYPTIAN TALE 287


Now something of this sort ensues here below. That which is
erring in nature gets as its part the last and most perishable
portion of nature in generation and of the bodily destiny, but
heaven, the highest, the most imperishable portion, has taken
5 possession of the shape of the soul conformable to it. ‘What the
gods do on high’, Osiris’ father said, pointing to them, ‘that does
the demon in these troublous elements, a nature unstable and
rash, and in proportion to the greatness of his distance from
there, he understands not the good ordering of divine things.
ro Since therefore the foundation of existing things does not suffice
to their own salvation (for it slips away itself from beneath them
and does not await real being, but merely imitates this by the
process of becoming), and since the demons are akin to this earthly
nature which has for portion a destructive type of being, it is
1§ necessary for the divine power to turn itself hither, and to implant
in us certain initial impulses which the world here follows with
profit as long as the impulses suffice.
‘And just as marionettes moved by strings are still agitated
even when the man who has given the impulse of motion to the
20 machinery has desisted, but are not agitated for ever (for they
hold not the source of motion within them, but move only so
long as the force communicated to them is strong and 1s not
dissipated by the continuance of the movement), in the same way,
my dear Osiris, you must consider that what is well done and divine
25 at once belongs and does not belong to this place, but is sent
down from elsewhere. And on this account good souls are hard to
find, although such might appear here, and the administrations of
the gods, whenever they effect this, are doing things that properly
belong to them, but not to the first life. For their happiness is
30 of another sort, inasmuch as the very enjoyment of the first
creation brings more happiness than the governance of the inferior,
for the one is to turn away from matter, the other to turn
towards it. Perchance you have been duly initiated, and have


288 DE PROVIDENTIA


seen the mystic effigy in the which there are two pairs of eyes,
and it must needs be that those below should be closed when those
which are above are gazing, and when these two are closed, the
former proceed to open in their turn. Now you may consider this
as a riddle of contemplation and action, and as signifying that the 5
intermediate deities display their energies in one of these fields
at a time, but that in the case of those of the more perfect orders,
they use the better most of the time, and are conversant with the
inferior only of necessity. These labours also belong to the gods,
who carry out the works necessary to the universe, but these are 1o
not the leading good things. So even men at one moment more
or less guard their possessions, at another give themselves up to
philosophy, and in that moment become more like to the divine.


1229 10. ‘Understand then, from this, what I mean.! Do not ask
the gods to be seated by you, for they have for their principal rs
work contemplation and the first parts of the universe, they who
are in heaven and are separated very far from us. Do not
imagine that their descent to us costs them no trouble or that it
is perpetual. Appointed intervals of time bring them down after
the manner of engineers, to give an impulse to a salutary move- 20
ment in a state. And this is the case when they bring harmony
into a kingdom, by bringing down here souls akin to their own.
This is providence divine and manifold indeed, caring as it does for
myriads of human beings through the agency of each single man.
Needs must therefore that the gods henceforth devote themselves 25
to their own affairs, while you who are set apart among strangers
must remember your origin, and that this is a public duty that
you are fulfilling for the universe. You should endeavour to
ascend yourself, rather than make the gods descend to you, and
you should exercise every foresight for yourself, as if you dwelt 30


1 The opening words in this chapter occur in Pindar, fragment 71 (Christ, ed. 2,
Pp. 284).


THE EGYPTIAN TALE 289


in a camp in an enemy country, a divine soul amongst demons,
who will, it is natural to suppose, being earth-born, attack you, in
their anger that any one should maintain foreign institutions
within their borders. You must be content therefore to keep
5 awake both by night and by day, having this care alone in your
mind, not to be taken by force, one by many, a foreigner by natives
of the country. It is true that there is a sacred race of heroes?
also in this country who care for the welfare of men, and are
able to render both minor services and the highest, a sort of heroic
10 settlement this, whose end is that the world about us may not
be bereft of the higher nature ; and theystretch out a helping hand
where they have the power; but whenever matter stirs its own
offshoots to warfare with the soul, the resistance from the other
side is feeble as long as the gods are absent. Each thing is strong
15 in 1ts own domain. Now the demons will desire, first of all, to
make the soul their own, and this is the way in which they make
the attempt.
‘Itis not possible that any one should exist on this earth without
having also a certain irrational part of his soul. This part the
20 Majority of men bring openly to the front, but the sage carries it at
his side. Albeit we all must needs possess it. Through this then, as
through a kindred force, demons come to the living being by the
path of betrayal. What takes place really resembles a siege; it is
what happens to coals from firebrands, for they more quickly catch
25 the flame owing to their fitness for fire. So the nature of a demon
(one of passions, or rather passion itself living and moving), when
it approaches the soul, excites the passion in it, and brings
this latent power into action, for it accomplishes each act by its
propinquity; and every agitated state comes quite to resemble
3o that which agitates it. In this way demons kindle lust, in this
way outbursts of passions and all evils akin to these, associating
with the soul through those elements therein which belong to
1 Cf. Hesiod, Works and Days, 122.


1232


290 DE PROVIDENTIA


them, and which naturally perceive their presence and are
thereby stirred, and grow in power to resist the mind because of
them, until they overpower the whole soul, or abandon the capture
of it. This is the greatest of struggles; for there is no opportunity,
no way of attack, no place that they will relinquish in their on- s
slaught, and from quarters where one would not deem it possible,
even from these they will make the attempt. Their snares are
everywhere, and everywhere their contrivances. All things stir
up their intestine warfare until either they take the position or
give up the attempt. And from above the gods are spectators of 10
these noble contests; in them you will bear away the crown of
victory, and may you gain it in the second contests also!
But there is ground for fear that you may win in the one and be
defeated in the other. For whenever the divine part of the soul
does not accompany the inferior element, but is ever and anon 15
beating it back, and turning towards itself, it is in the course of
nature for that element also to become at last hardened so as to
resist attacks, and once so armoured, no longer to admit the
influxes from the demons.

‘The living being, then, in this way really becomes divine, and 20
a single whole. And this is a heavenly plant growing upon the
earth,’ one that has not received any foreign graft, that it may
put forth fruit from such, but one that even changes a foreign
element to its own nature. So then the demons, giving it up in
despair, then and not till then enter whole-heartedly upon the 2;
second struggle, and this is to cut the tree down, and to tear it
root and branch from the soil, as if it stood in no relation to them.
For they are also ashamed of their defeat, if some one of foreign
race struts about in their precincts as a conqueror, a trophy of
victory real and visible. Such an one brings punishment upon 30
them, not merely in his own person, but also shares in turning
away Others from their dominion. Once virtue is zealously pur-

1 Cf. Plato, Timaeus, 90 A.


THE EGYPTIAN TALE 291


sued, the evil elements must perforce go to wrack and ruin. For
these reasons they plan the destruction of the private citizen and
of the ruler alike, in a word of every one who is rebellious to the
laws of matter. But you, for in that you are a king, may guard
5 yourself against this more easily than any private individual. They
attack by outside means when means within fail them, to wit by
war and by rebellion, and by whatever maltreats the body, forces
these by which a king will be less easily overcome, one at least
who has forethought for himself, since it is impossible to fight
ro an adversary in whom force and wisdom are combined, whereas,
separated from each other, untutored strength and infirm purpose
are easily overcome.


11. ‘You must have admired, my son, the purpose of our
fathers as expressed in the sacred images. In the case of Hermes?
1s we Egyptians make the image of the divinity a double one,
placing a young man beside an old one, signifying that if any one
is to watch over us worthily, he must be both wise and brave,
since either of these qualities is ineffectual for good without the
other. The same idea is expressed by the Sphinx which is set up
2oin the enclosures before our temples, in force a wild beast, in
judgement a man, a sacred symbol of the duality of good qualities.
And justly so, for force deprived of prudent leadership is carried
capriciously away, mingling and confusing everything ; and intel-

lect is useless for action when unserved by hands.
2s ‘Virtue and fortune scarcely come together except for great
purposes, as they have done in your case. Do not therefore impor-
tune the gods any longer, you who are able to save yourself by your
own resources, if you so desire. It is not well that the gods should
always be away from their own spheres, and haunt foreign and
30 inferior places. Take heed lest it be impious to use wrongfully
the foundations that have been implanted in us to the end that

1 Assuming d» dropped.
2878.2 H


1233


292 DE PROVIDENTIA


we should take care of the things upon earth with due order, and
in accordance with the cosmic scheme that has been given us.
For this is the course of men who make it necessary for the gods
to come again, before the appointed time, to busy themselves with
affairs here below. At that appointed time, however, when the 5
tuning which they have attuned is becoming unstrung and old,
they come back to tighten it again, and as it were to kindle it into
flame when it is growing cold. This they do joyfully, for they are
fulfilling this service, to use the expression, for the nature of the
universe. Otherwise they will only come when this harmony has 10
been destroyed and broken, through the iniquity of those who have
taken the charge over, and only when it is possible in no other
way to save these things below. A god is not at all disturbed about
small things, nor whenever a mistake has been made concerning this
or that detail; a tremendous fellow would he be,’ that single man 15
on whose account some member of the happy race should descend
here! But whenever the whole order, and the vast elements
therein are destroyed, then must the gods come to give the impulse
to another dispensation. Let not men be wroth, then, when they
suffer from self-inflicted evils, nor accuse the gods of not pro- 20
viding for them, for Providence demands that they in turn should
contribute their share. Of a truth, in the place for evils, it is not a
matter for wonder that evils should be, but it would be a matter for
wonder if anything of a different nature were there. For this last
is foreign and even alien, and this is the gift of Providence, which 2.
makes it possible for all of us men to be happy in all ways, if we
1236 Will but bestir ourselves and use the gifts which we have therefrom.
For Providence is not like the mother of the new-born babe, whose
one care it is to scare away what may fly at it and do it harm,
inasmuch as her infant is as yet undeveloped and helpless in 30
itself; but resembles that mother who having brought it up and
having armed it, bids it use its weapons and ward off evils. Study
1 Plato, Phaedo, 85 D.


THE EGYPTIAN TALE 293


this at all times, and consider it as of the highest importance for
men to know, for so they will believe in Providence, and will
take heed for themselves, and at the same time will be pious and
vigilant, nor will they imagine that an intervention of God is dis-
s cordant with the practice of virtue. Farewell! You will, if you are
wise, restrain your brother, removing beforehand the fate that over-
hangs you and the Egyptians, for this is in your power; but if you
give way and show weakness, await the gods when it is too late!’


12. When he had finished speaking, he departed, following the

ro Same road as the gods, but Osiris remained, a marvel ill-suited to
this earth, one whoat once began striving to banish the forces hostile
to the earth, without employing any violence at all. He actually
sacrificed to Persuasion, to the Muses and to the Graces, and made
all willingly fall in with the law. The gods gave in abundance
1g out of respect for this king, all things, as many as the air bears,
and as many as are the gifts of river and land, and all these
pleasures he gave up to his people for their joy. He himself left
all ease behind him, and preferred to undertake every toil, taking
small part in sleep but the greatest in cares; in a word, he took no
20 leisure that all might have leisure. These acts of his accordingly
filled all men, whether individuals, households, relations, cities,
or entire districts, with benefits, spiritual and material. For he
cultivated amongst them a zeal for virtue, making all knowledge
and every institution to be so cultivated for this one end, and he
as offered rewards to those who were best able to govern men, and
to make the governed like themselves. It needs must be that what

is honoured should increase, that what is neglected should come to
nought. A love for all education grew up with him,’ the part which
partakes of reflection as much as that which partakes of eloquence,

30 and the result of this was that men who excelled in knowledge of
this sort could no longer be seen mingled in the common herd, but

1 Plato, Repub. 498 B.


204 DE PROVIDENTIA


were shining with honours from their sovereign, for they brought
with them skill as the handmaiden of wisdom, inasmuch as intellect
progresses once it is arrayed in letters. And the better or the worse
clothing of the same intellect makes it appear, as in a man’s dress,
seemly or unseemly. Early education Osiris thought worthy of 5
honour, for he regarded all education as a fountain-head of virtue,
and indeed at this period of all others piety was in fashion among
the Egyptians. Such are the good things of the soul, and the Egyp-
tians under the reign of Osiris abounded in them, so that the
1237 country resembled a training school for virtue, a country in the ro
which youth looked to one leader, doing the one thing which they
saw, and saying the one thing that they heard. He himself was in-
different to wealth, but took every care that there should be enough
for all, receiving no gifts himself, but delighting in bestowing
them. He furthermore remitted taxes to cities, he gave to those rs
men who were in distress; he raised the fallen, and healed that
which was likely to fall; one city he enlarged, another he
trained to be beautiful; where another was lacking, he added
it, another that had been abandoned he helped to people. Of
necessity must each man individually profit by benefits which 20
are common to all, but it was no labour for him to condescend even
to anxiety for some one individual, and so it came about that no
man was seen to weep under his reign; nor was Osiris ignorant
of what each man wanted, and what obstacle there was to the
happiness of such and such a person. One coveted merited honour, 25
and he gave it to him, and when another, through persistence in
the study of books, had no time to gain his livelihood, he accorded
to him his meals at the town hall. Another was indifferent to
honour from men, and although his possessions gave him quite
enough to live on, he was perhaps too shy to take up public 30
functions. Osiris was not unaware of this, but exempted him from
public functions, not annoyed by him, but rather causing him
annoyance by offering something before he had been asked, and


THE EGYPTIAN TALE 295


he demanded out of respect for wisdom that such a man be inde-
pendent and freed from worldly business, as a sacred animal
dedicated to God. In a word no one failed of his deserts except
such an one as merited misfortune, and to that man he gave not
5 his expected reward. For he made it a point of honour to conquer
the most shameless man by the gentleness of his mind and by
kindly deeds. In this way he thought to overcome his brother and
his band of conspirators, changing their nature by the abundance
of his virtue. But in this one thing he was wanting in judgement,
10 for malignity not assuaged by virtue is rather inflamed by it. If to
cling to the good is natural, to the extent that good increases, the
grief occasioned by it increases also, and this is precisely what
the deeply groaning brother suffered over the reign of Osiris.


13. As soon as Osiris had taken over the rule, Typho narrowly

15 escaped death from dashing his wicked head on the ground, and
knocking it against columns. For whole days he got himself no
food, although a most gluttonous man; he rejected drink, although
very fond of wine; although he loved sleep, he continued without
sleeping, and he was afflicted with wakefulness, though many
20 attempts were made to conjure it away. And although he pur-
posely closed his eyes that his soul might be free from the stings of
memory, yet memory is most contentious to any one who desires
to set it aside, so that the image of his evils was with him even
when his eyes were closed, and if sleep ever by chance overtook
25 him, he would fare still more wretchedly in dreams, seeing that
hill before his eyes, those votes, all those hands raised for his
brother; and even when he would have been glad to arise for
hatred of the cruel sight, his ears would hum for long with the
din of the cheering throng. Nor could he endure to remain at rest,
30 for his soul was distressed, and if he looked out of his house,
a succession of misfortunes met him, showing themselves in the
words, behaviour, and songs of the multitude. It was always


1240


1241


296 DE PROVIDENTIA


‘Osiris, how fair to behold, how wise in speech is the young
king’, and of his high spirit that it was not boastful, and of his
gentleness that it was not abased. He would return home then and
lock himself in, not knowing what to do with his life; no more
did his wife, she, another immense evil, her own tirewoman, greedy 5
of the theatre and the market-place, believing, as she wished,
that the eyes of all were turned upon her. On this account she
deemed that her husband’s fall from the royal position was an
even greater misfortune for herself, thinking that in the alterna-
tive case she would confiscate the freedom of the state on a large 10
scale and waste its resources on luxury. Now Typho was already
of mature years when he fell a victim to her, like a youth in the
initial stages of passion, and the half of his misfortune lay in the
shame that he felt before the creature to whom he had expressed
his ambition to rule in the highest position, sharing the power 15
with her. And she, in her private life also was a most wonderful
being, seeking to shine in the most opposite ways, most feminine
of women, on the one hand, in seeking a fresh adornment, in
adding to her beauty, and in yielding to her nature ; most venture-
some, on the other hand, in tampering with men’s affairs and in 20
carrying them out, busying herself about a variety of things and
being an innovator besides. With these and other ends in view,
she had got ready both women of perverse morals and pimps, all
of like dispositions, to keep for the gratification of her own tastes
both at home and abroad. 25
But as for Osiris, only the fact that his son was seen by
men reminded the world that there were women’s apartments
in his house, and even his child Horus was seldom visible.
For the one virtue of a woman Osiris thought was that neither
her person nor her name should pass the door of the court- 30
yard. Accordingly, her rise to the pinnacle of fortune did not
avert this chaste wife of his from the even tenor of her way;
she was apt to be the more retiring owing to the greatness of


THE EGYPTIAN TALE 297


her rank. Nor did he himself rejoice as one more happy on
account of this elevation, for he knew that even had he not
attained it, he would not have been any the less happy, inasmuch
as each man, once that he wills to be virtuous, is himself steward
5 to himself of such happiness. Therefore of such as dwell with
virtue, whether private individuals or rulers, one may observe men
equally gay at heart. Every life indeed is material for virtue;
just as with the tragic actors whom we see on the stage,
whosoever has trained his voice well, will take the parts of
ro Creon and Telephus with equal skill, and in no way will robes
of purple be superior to rags, so far as the volume and beauty
of his declamation are concerned, or his success in bringing down
the house by the sound of his strains. He will portray the hand-
maiden and her mistress alike with the same power of cadence,
15 and whatever mask he puts on, the manager of the theatre
demands of him that he use it aright. In like manner God and
Fortune bestow upon us lives, as it were masks in the great drama
of the universe, and no better or worse is one life than another;
but each man makes such use of it as best he may. The earnest
zo Man can everywhere succeed in life, whether he act the pauper
or king. As to the mask, it makes no difference. Surely the tragic
actor would become ridiculous who shunned one mask and seized
upon another. Even in the réle of the old woman, if he shines in
his art, he is crowned and heralded abroad, while if he disgraces
25 himself in the réle of a king, he is hooted and hissed, and on
occasion is even stoned. For no life is really our own, rather are
we clad without with the lives of others, and we, the better and
the worse of us when we act and reveal the inner voice, are actors
of living drama. These lives, then, we have only to put on and
30 take off, as garments.


14. Osiris then (for he had been taught what the difference was
between meum and tuum), knew that the soul is the measure of


298 DE PROVIDENTIA


happiness. Undaunted therefore by outside forces, he succeeded
in making himself and those of his household of the same way of
thinking, both private individuals and rulers. But the others,—
because they lived by the senses, and were devoid of reason,—
were careless lovers of fortune, and considered the property of 5
others their own; they were impregnated with vanity, they
hankered after the kingdom, and, as it did not come to them,
despaired of themselves, and thought that nothing was worth
living for. Again and many a time the fact is worth repeating
to men, that it is a sign of ill-breeding not to await life patiently, 10
as a portion to be served at the dinner table, which in due course
comes to us, that we may help ourselves, but to be one’s self the
one to pounce upon it beforehand, and to filch it away. A man
who succeeds in this will be laughed at, for he is an unseemly
fellow-guest, and will be detested by the master of the feast, 15
inasmuch as he disturbs its decorum, as far as in him lies, by his
meanness. On the other hand, if he fails, he will go so far as to
weep in childhood’s way, himself clinging to the portion that has
been carried past and has gone to his neighbour. Such in all
respects was the experience that befell Typho, for he was hated by 20
the gods, he himself was lamenting, and the matter was the
laughing-stock of the people.

For not even the fact that he had taken to his bed for many
months, and was daily expected to die, not even did this arouse pity,
but stirred up anger amongst men of sterner, and laughter among 25
men of gentler judgement, to such a point that the matter was by
this time proverbial, and the question addressed to pale people was
this, ‘Has not your brother had a piece of good luck?’ He might
have perished justly by his own hand, so given up was he to evil.

1245 But at this point his execrable wife, very much a woman even 30
in the midst of dangers, retrieved both herself and him, always
managing him as one easy to control; she deterred him from
weeping by occupying him with herself, banishing passion by


THE EGYPTIAN TALE 299


passion and fencing off pain by pleasure. In this way he then re-
covered himself with an effort, yielding in a measure to evils the
most hostile. At one moment he would lament, at another he would
give way to anger. And licentious boys at such times, even in
s greater numbers, entered his house the more, bringing in their
train carousals and drinking bouts, all this that he might kill
time in their company and assuage his soul’s gloom.’ Other
things also they devised, that they might have as little leisure as
possible to remember the good fortune of Osiris. They con-
10 Structed swimming-ponds, in these ponds islands, and in the
islands artificial hot baths, that men might strip themselves one
after another amongst women and satisfy passion without restraint.


15. While they are engaged in these affairs, the idea of
seizing the kingdom comes into their minds, at the suggestion of
15 evil demons who show the way, and already they were for
openly administering everything else, being on the spot and
making tours together. It was intolerable to these demons to see
their own schemes going to ruin and dishonour, prudence exercised,
and piety gaining ground, injustice driven away, harmony estab-
20 lished, and all good things flourishing. To the Egyptians weeping
was now only a word. All things were propitious, all things in
order. The state, like a single living organism, had law for its soul,
and was moved by this, its parts the while harmonizing with the
whole. These things goad the demons to madness, to these they
25 Cleave, employing as their instruments men akin to them. The
evil is hatched in the women’s quarters in two houses. There was
indeed a hearth in the royal city belonging to the commander of
the foreign troops, one whom it seemed good to the Egyptians

to send upon a campaign, himself and his forces.
30 At the moment in fact they were waging an unsuccessful war
against a section of their own country which had revolted, and

1 Plato, Alcibiades, ii, 150 D f.
2878.2 I


300 DE PROVIDENTIA


several Egyptian villages had fared ill, for the demons had prepared
this trouble for their drama. Typho’s wife, that crafty ape-like
creature, visiting the wife of this very man day and night, con-
vinced without difficulty that old woman, a foreigner and unintelli-
gent, that she held her in great regard, and foresaw a misfortune 5
which would befall them if affairs turned out as Osiris wished. ‘For’,
said she, ‘he makes a charge of betrayal, and thinks it is a war
already arranged in which he is engaged, since the foreigners have
1248 divided their ariny, although their policy is unanimous. He has
therefore decided,’ she said, ‘to bring back the general by every 10
violence and contrivance, and as soon as he is away from the camp,
to ruin him completely, by relieving him of his command, as well
as you, and yourchildren. This noble offspring of yours, yes, these
most lovely nurselings, even these he has decided to slaughter, while
still in their youth.’ And meantime she would weep, touching the 15
young children lightly under the chin, and winning their goodwill
by the pity she showed. At this the old Scythian woman straight-
way wailed aloud, thinking to see these horrors before her eyes, and
to suffer them herself. But the other woman added still another
terror, and every day one more, announcing, forsooth, plans of 20
secret machination against themselves. The Scythians were to
be destroyed root and branch out of the land, and for this Osiris
was working every day ; he was secretly bringing the battalions up
to their strength, and was making all other arrangements for the
Egyptians to live by themselves, once they had either butchered 25
the foreigners or driven them out. This would be quite easy, as
soon as he had proclaimed their general a private citizen, by serving
him with a notification of his dismissal, and had brought him up for
impeachment by the law. And when the general had been thus
disposed of, he thinks that the others will involve little trouble. 30
‘Now,’ she continued, ‘Typho is weeping at home, for he has your
interest at heart, and he has always supported the foreigners
politically, albeit through them we actually lost the kingdom, for


THE EGYPTIAN TALE 301


they had not arrived on the scene at the moment when the result
was announced. Had they done so, it would have now been
possible for you to insult the Egyptians, to possess yourself of
their goods, and to treat these masters of yours as slaves. But
sas then we were not aided by you, so now we are powerless to
come to your rescue. None the less, when disasters approach our
friends, it is we who suffer misfortune.’
When she had thus outwitted the old woman by her maneu-
vres, and had driven her into the last degree of panic, in the belief
10 that there was no way of escape for them; now that she had
enough of this, she applied another device to recall the foreigner from
her terror, seeing that she had already learned to follow the one
who had caused her judgement to waver as she pleased. So, little
by little, she infused courage into her and filled her with hope.
15 ‘Great is the plan,’ she said, ‘and one that requires fresh courage,
to the end that we may not be under the power of Osiris, and live
or not live when he pleases.’ At first she hinted darkly at the
insurrection, then made insinuations about it, and at last re-
vealed it, gradually accustoming her to the story and the
2o enterprise, until finally she made the timid creature bold, by
showing her that the power of Osiris was as nothing if once
they were determined. ‘For the law,’ she said, ‘and the habit
of honour, and the ancient and ancestral tradition, enslave the
slothful of their own free will. But he who rebels is only making
25 trial of the weak, and that man is free who has strength, if he
is not dumbfounded before habit, and we shall never experience
that, as long as you are under arms, and Osiris does nothing else
but pray to the gods, at one time giving audiences to embassies, at
another stating judicial decisions, and at another engaging in some
3o other task of peace. For Osiris will never be an evil to any of the
Scythians, if we combine with you, and contribute, for our part,
the prestige of rank, for yours, the military strength. Nor will
you appear to be committing any great fraud, or to be disturbing


302 DE PROVIDENTIA


the peace of the Egyptians, or to be changing the constitution,
but rather to be establishing it, and making better arrangements
1249 for every one, if you secure the rule for Typho, born of the same
stock as Osiris, the eldest to boot, and a more legitimate sovereign
to govern Egypt. Thus in the first place it is not even likely that ;
the Egyptians would combine against you, inasmuch as the change
in regard to the hereditary constitution is not a great one. While
the outward form of the government will be ours, the benefits of it
will be yours, and youcan batten on the whole of Egypt as if it were
your own dinner table. Only promise to persuade your husband.’ 10
‘And you’, said the other, ‘will join in persuading him.’ This they
set about doing, and when the commander was announced to be
approaching on horseback, scouts suborned thereto spread rumours
secretly about the plot, and under a mask of discretion succeeded
in announcing what they were pretending to conceal, more clearly 15
than those who shout loudly, and mysterious letters troubled people
profoundly, letters enjoining them to secure their own safety.
Finally some one said quite openly that they must save themselves
from the ambush, and another would repeat this still more clearly,
and then another, and again another, all these partisans of Typho 20
and confederates of the women. The finishing touch now comes,
the women meet him, they the artificers of the plot, and Typho
himself, as if he had gone out of town on some other errand,
joins the commander secretly, and confers with him concerning
the kingdom. He persuades him to undertake this work imme- 25
diately, and if necessary to let the regal city perish with Osiris,
adding that the rest of Egypt was sufficient for him. ‘And at the
same time’, he says, ‘your soldiers may enrich themselves by
enslaving the prosperous city, the common hearth of all the con-
spicuous Egyptians, and by plundering its wealth.’ So our worthy 30
Typho sacrificed this city to his hatred of its inhabitants because
of their goodwill towards Osiris. This the Scythian refused to do,
for he felt in awe of the sacred senate, and of the well-disciplined


THE EGYPTIAN TALE 303


people, and of the privileges that the city conferred. He said that
he was marching against Osiris not of his own free will, but of
necessity, and that if he succeeded in overcoming him, consistently
with the safety of the city and the preservation of the country,

she would regard it as a point gained, that the necessity for
a greater evil had not arisen.


16. The story refuses to linger over the sorrows of Osiris, for
it is not in nature for a man to persist complacently in a harrowing
recital. From that time till now the days of the sacred tears are

ro accounted as ill-omened, and any who have the hallowed privilege
of beholding may see images of these personages moving miracu-
lously. But ’tis said this much is lawful for every one to hear, how
that Osiris for country, for temples, for laws, gave himself up to
men threatening to destroy all unless they capture him; that he
rs crossed the river in a cargo boat, and a guard was straightway put
over him wherever he might be on land or sea, and a foreign
assembly to decide what punishment he should suffer. Before this
assembly Typho demanded that he should die as quickly and as
brutally as possible. But the foreigners, although they considered
20 themselves wronged, were indignant at this, and showed respect
for virtue. They were for condemning him to exile; then they felt
shame at this solution, and decided that it should not be a case
of exile for him, but a voluntary withdrawal from the country.
They allowed him to keep his money and property, although
2s even these Typho had offered them for their own. They would no
more touch them than the treasures of the temples. So he was
sent on his way escorted by the god and goodly heroes, that he
might leave the country at an appointed time, for it was not fated
that the evil elements should triumph in Egypt, and that every-
30 thing should so quickly fall into disorder and shame, as long
as a holy soul dwelt there. That these evils might take place,
the demons to whom such works belonged had in the beginning


1252


304 DE PROVIDENTIA


combined against him, and their own servant whom they had first
brought into being, and quite recently into the position of tyrant,
was now regaling them with all sorts of misfortune. Taxes of
every sort, manifold in number, were at once imposed upon the
cities, obligations that had no existence were discovered, and debts
that had become a dead letter were dug up anew. The river-dweller
was compelled to take over some public work on the land, and
boats were demanded from the land-dweller, so that no human
being might have leisure in which to be happy. These were
the most public forms of abuses, and there was another more com-
mon still. Typho would send men under his own control to govern
tribes, corrupt wretches to whom he sold the cities openly. Now
as to those who purchased the right to govern any tribe: however
young a man might be, although the lease of the district was
signed for one year only, he counted on being able to acquire in
that year supplies for a dissolute old age. This is a specimen of
the sort of thing that happened in Typho’s reign. By written
contract he agreed upon the period of their rule for those who paid
him down the price.

Formerly a man was turned out of office for cause of misconduct,
whereas to another the reward of virtue was still a more distin-
guished honour, namely the rule over a greater number of men,
and a longer tenure of his post. But from this time on there was
wailing everywhere from all, every man having a personal
grievance to tell of, and throughout cities and town councils men
were harried with every kind of ill-treatment ; so that one cry
alone rose from Egypt to heaven, the sound of a universal dirge.
But the gods took pity on the race and prepared to come to its
rescue. It did not seem good to them, however, to do so, before
virtue and evil-doing had been still more clearly compared with
each other, to the end that even men who used their minds and
perceptions only a little might clearly distinguish the better from
the worse, might pursue the one and eschew the other.


5


15


30


THE EGYPTIAN TALE 305


17. Typho was even now setting himself to eradicate in every
way the memory of Osiris’ rule from the minds of men, and he
pursued this end in many other ways, not least in the following.
He caused cases already settled to be tried over again, and it was

§ inevitable that he who had been convicted should win the case.
Again, he gave supplementary instructions to embassies in which
he who had profited by the divine tongue of Osiris was an
enemy, and that man must needs dwell with misfortune, himself,
as also his city and his race. But, when in difficulties, there

1o were two ways of dealing with Typho. One was, for any man
to count out money to his wife. She was throning it con-
spicuously as on a housetop, employing dissolute courtesans
to attend to her person and business affairs, and made what
had of old been called by the Egyptians the court of justice,

15 into a sale-room for lawsuits. One who had been picked out in
this wise would always find Typho merciful, for he was not only
tame and amenable to the women’s side of the house, but more-
over he felt gratitude to them for having gained him his kingdom.
This then was one method in the face of difficulties for those who

20 found him difficult to manage, and there was another, namely to
approach any individual of the pernicious band of Typho’s boon-
companions. They were called the great and the happy, these
miserable and counterfeit specimens of humanity. The way then
was to approach them, and to launch some cunningly contrived

25 squib at Osiris’ head. The people who did this were those who
cared least for virtue, and who were not ashamed to make profit
from any source whatever. Thus they changed in fortune as they
changed in opinion, for the witticism would reach the tyrant’s
palace and would be famously received at his table. He was all

3o favour to those who favoured him. First one and then another
would do this, and they benefited by it. But they knew that they
were hated by the gods, and by men that were upright. The greater
number, however, suffered in silence.


12$3


306 DE PROVIDENTIA


18. Now it happened that there was one man who, though of
serious bent, had yet through philosophy been brought up in a more
rustic mould, and had nothing in common with the ways of the
city. This man had received, as all men had, very many kindnesses
from Osiris; for himself exemption from public services, and for s
his country lighter services to that man (Osiris). And while
innumerable men were making verses at that moment, writing
speeches in praise of Osiris, and rendering favours to him in
return for favours, he was quite as generously disposed as they,
and the more so in that he was more capable, and composed, wrote, 10
and sang to the lyre in the Dorian manner, which alone he thought
had room for depth of character and of expression. These poems
he did not give to the public, but if there was any listener in the
audience who could understand virile phrases, any one unable
to endure the tickling of pleasure, but of open mind, to that one 15
he would address his words. On the one hand he knew that
Osiris was an exceptionally acute critic of writings, whether ephe-
meral or lasting, and on the other hand he refrained from saying
anything about Osiris in his presence, partly because he did not
regard word as a fitting and equal return for deed, and partly 20
that owing to the rusticity in which he had been brought up, he
was ashamed to be thought a flatterer. But when Typho seized
Egypt by force and tyrannized over it, then this man became more
uncourtly still; then he published, then he disclosed his works,

1256 While all shuddered at the hearing; he thought it impious not to 2-5
declare openly his hatred of those who had done evil to their
benefactor. Then he invoked the most sanguinary curses upon
Typho both in speech and writing, and he who had always been
found fault with for his habit of silence became quite garrulous,
whether at home or in the forum. 30

Osiris was everywhere in his discourses, everywhere in social
gatherings at which he was present were the praises of Osiris sung,
and in the teeth of those who could not endure them he flung his


THE EGYPTIAN TALE 307


tales, nor did he pay any respect to his elders or friends, who ad-
monished him, nor again did fear of his impetuosity disturb him,
and he seemed like one mad with some noble madness. He did
not desist until he had stood as near as possible to Typho himself,

s when distinguished men from all parts were gathered about him,
and had pronounced a long speech of praises of his brother and
had counselled him to emulate a virtue, so closely becoming
him. Typho fired up and was manifestly stung to the quick, but
out of respect for the assembled company, he withheld his hands
10 and was prudent of necessity. It was possible, however, to fathom
his state of mind by his face, for this passed through various stages
of passion. Thus in a short space of time he turned all the colours
of the rainbow. He became forthwith more hateful, and went
further to the bad; the good conditions that existed under Osiris

15 had disappeared, and he worked other evils besides, harassing the
cities for which Osiris had pleaded, and devising some personal
evil against him, so that he might never be able to return home in
freedom, and would be forced to dwell bewailing his lot, and seeing
in prosperity those by whom he was hated. While the stranger is
20 in this plight a god gives him new strength, one clearly visible, and
bidding him to endure to the end. ‘For not in a period of years,
but only of months,’ he said, ‘is the sceptre of Egypt destined to
lift up the claws of the wild beasts, and to abase the crests of the
sacred birds.’ A cryptic allegory this; and while the stranger
2s recognized the picture as that engraved on obelisks and sacred
enclosures, the god imparted to him the understanding of the
hieroglyphics, and gave him a token of the time implied. ‘When-
ever’, he said, ‘those who are now in power shall attempt to
introduce innovations in our religious rites, then expect that in
3o a short time the Giants (by which he meant the foreigners) shall
be cast out, themselves pursued with furies, and if some discord
still remains, and if everything is not effaced at once, and if Typho
himself remain still in the royal palace, despair not even then of

2878.2 K


308 DE PROVIDENTIA


the gods. Here is another token for you,—whenever we shall
purify the air encircling the earth by water and fire, that air
tainted by the breath of the ungodly, then shall Justice come
even upon those who are left, and straightway expect then
the better dispensation after the removal of Typho. For porten- 5
tous things of this sort we disperse, burning them with lightning
and shattering them with thunder.’ Then indeed what had been
harsh in the past, seemed to the stranger of good augury, and he
was no longer distressed at his enforced stay, for through that alone
he was to be an eyewitness of the intervention of the gods. For ro
it was not even in the range of human conjecture that a compact
force under arms, and allowed by law in time of peace to carry
the sword, should be routed without even an opponent. These
1257 things he reasoned about, how they might be, but they seemed to
surpass reason. Now, when a short time had elapsed, there was 15
a question of a certain evil stamp of religious observance, and
a counterfeit of ritual as in the case of coinage, which an old law
banishes from the cities, shutting out the impiety beyond the
walls. Typho set himself to introduce this through the instrumen-
tality of the foreigners, for he did not dare to do so in person 20
through fear of the Egyptian populace, and sought to make a gift
of a temple in the city, breaking the laws of his ancestors. At this
moment the stranger began to think that this was what was meant
by that prophecy of the god, ‘and,’ he reflected, ‘I shall probably
now behold what is to follow.’ Having learned this then, he 2s
awaited on the one hand the immediate fortunes of Osiris, on
the other the years that had not yet come, when his son Horus
should think of choosing an alliance with the wolf instead of one
with the lion.’ Now who the wolf is, pertains to a story which
is sacred, and it would be an unholy act to declare it to the 30
world even in the dress of a fable.


1 Cf. Plutarch, Isis and Osiris, 358 c.


THE EGYPTIAN TALE 309


PART TWO


1. From this point the actions of the gods begin to be manifest,
for all things were now full of all manner of evils from every
quarter, and a belief in Providence had disappeared from the mind
of men, their impious conjectures being largely sustained by the

s events witnessed. On the one hand no human agency appeared
anywhere to assist them, for the foreigners were using the city as

a camp; on the other hand, the commander of these was stricken
with terror during the night, the Corybantes, I suppose, attacking
him, and by day panic uproars took possession of the troops. The
ro frequent occurrence of this reduces them to a state of frenzy and
causes them to lose their wits. They wandered about, alone or
in company, all as if possessed by the nymphs’ delirium, at one
moment attempting to draw their swords, and behaving as about
to deliver an immediate attack, at another, on the contrary,
1§ claiming pity and asking to be spared; or again, springing up, they
seemed alternately like pursuers and pursued, as though some
hostile force had been secretly conveyed into the town. But in
the city there was neither weapon, nor any man to use it; the
people were an easy prey offered up by Typho. So this also is very
20 Clear, that a god is needed even by those well prepared for war,
unless their preparations are to turn out useless, and that victory

is from no other source: at the same time one deprives the
victorious cause of its due in foolishly supposing it to be
probable that the better prepared man will win. For when our
25 plans turn out to be successful, a god seems to us superfluous,
and disputes the honour of a victory that was already prepared
by ourselves. But if no one intervenes to produce the result, and

if the unseen alone is responsible, we hold nothing short of a refuta-
tion, not stated in words, but in evident fact, of the views of those
30 who disbelieve that the gods care for mankind. Now something
of this actually took place on that occasion. Here were the bold,


1260


1261


310 DE PROVIDENTIA


the conquerors, the mail-clad, whose whole work and play alike
were a training for war and battle, the cavalry parading in the
market-place in order, or moving off in squadrons at the sound of
the trumpet. If any soldier was in need of a huckster, or a cobbler,
or wished to polish his sword, all kept guard over the need of 5
each, so that the phalanx might not be dispersed even in the streets.
Then lo! these men stampeded in mad flight from the lightly clad,
the unarmed, from men cast down in spirit, and not even praying
for victory. At a signal known to all of them, they retired from
the town suddenly, secretly taking their children, their wives, their 10
valuables, as though it were not quite possible for them openly
to enslave those of the Egyptians as well. When the population
saw them packing up this baggage, they did not even then
understand what was happening, they only despaired for them-
selves the more. And sosome of them shut themselves up in their 15
houses, there toawait the conflagration ; while others preferring the
sword to fire, purchased a lighter implement of death, not for any
use, but that they might offer themselves for slaughter when the
moment should come. Others attempted to take to their boats,
and their minds ran on islands, on villages, and on cities beyond 20
the frontiers ; for any spot at that time seemed more secure than
great Thebes, in which the Egyptian palaces had been constructed.
But how gradually and with difficulty the gods brought them
round to a state of confidence in events and of renewed courage
to prefer safety,—this very incredible story has come to our ears. 25


z. A poor woman and very old at that, plied a trade near one of
the side gates of the city, not a lucrative trade, but withal neces-
sary for her, namely that of stretching out her hands on the chance
that some one might put an obol therein. She had come very early
to her vagabond’s station, for life’s needs are skilled in cheat- 30
ing nature of its sleep. Once seated, she did the proper thing.
She speeded on their way with her blessings those who had roused


THE EGYPTIAN TALE 311


themselves to their work, she brought good news of the day,
she prayed, and promised that the god would be propitious. Now
when she saw from afar what was being done by the Scythians,
as soon as it was broad daylight, and how they did not cease

gs running out and in like thieves, all of them packing and removing
their belongings, she takes it to heart that this is the last sun that
Thebes will look upon, for she thought they were doing this that
the city might hold no pledge from them, so that when they had
once moved their camp, they might begin an assault, having no
ro fear about the prospect of further gain, since the wrongdoers
share the hearths of the wronged. So, upsetting the cup’ in which
she collected her coins, with many bitter lamentations and appeals
to heaven, ‘You’, she said, “when turned out of your own country,
and when wanderers, Egypt received as suppliants. Moreover she

rs treated you not merely as it were well to treat suppliants, but she
gave you the honour of citizenship, and made you share in its
privileges, and, to crown all, made you masters of the situation.
Now even native-born Egyptians are adopting Scythian man-
ners, their affectation of these being actually conducive to their
20 interests. Your very ways are held in greater honour than our
own. What then does all this mean? why are you moving your
camp, why are you packing up, and removing your possessions ?

I suppose the gods are not trying you for ingratitude on account
of your present conduct to your benefactors; yet they exist, and
25 will come on the scene even if it be after the downfall of Thebes.’
When she had finished, she threw herself face downwards on the
ground. Thereupon a Scythian made for her with drawn sword,
as though to strike off the poor creature’s head, for he surmised
that she was abusing them, and was making their night’s work
30 public, imagining that their action was still unobserved, since none
of those who had been spectators had dared to denounce them.


1 Notice that the cup is Spartan; the «ww» was a Lacedaemonian drinking
vessel used by the soldiers.


1264


312 DE PROVIDENTIA


She therefore would have become the victim of the sword. But
some one appears now, whether a god or a divine personage (at all
events he seemed a man), whowas evidently indignant, and turning
the Scythian against himself, he meets his onset, and anticipating
his blow, gathers him up and hurls him on the ground. Another
Scythian then attacked him, and quickly met with the same fate.
Then a hue and cry went up and men rushed to the spot. There
were many foreigners, on the one hand, who, leaving the baggage
animals, were caught by the incident at the gate. They were
either about to go or already had gone out, and returned to help
their own people as quickly as possible; on the other hand there
was a great concourse of the natives. One of them is struck down
and dies, another kills a Scythian, and again still another Scythian
the slayer; a man falls at every moment, and at every moment
a man kills another on either side. To the people anything at
hand was the arm needed ; they were able also by despoiling the
dead and by robbing the living to make use of their swords; they
were superior in numbers to the aliens, for part of these were
encamped as far as possible from the town, that they might have
less reason to fear an ambush, with which, though it did not really
exist, the god threatened them, that they might leave the city,
the heart of which they held in their hands; and another part of
them, inferior in number to the civil population, were busying
themselves over their goods and chattels to the end that nothing
should be left behind. Far more numerous therefore, as they were,
they were brought into collision with those less in number than
themselves who encountered them near the gates, and those
who were continually coming to the place to effect an exit. The
noise grew louder, and now the action of the gods could be clearly
distinguished there. For when a perception of the uproar broke
over the whole extent of the city, and had reached to the camp
of the aliens, since each faction had long been in fear of an attack
from the other, every man of the townsfolk, thinking that now


5


30


THE EGYPTIAN TALE 313


had come the decisive day for Egypt, one in which the foreigner
had agreed to throw aside all decency, every man of them deter-
mined to die in action, and to make a monument of his valour,
since not even a god would have seemed to them a trustworthy

5 guarantee that they should not suffer. All invariably, therefore,
broke through to the centre of disturbance, each man wishing
to distinguish himself, and esteeming that it would profit him if
he braved all dangers while witnesses were still alive. The foreigners
on the other hand had concealed their departure, and thinking
1o that they had been discovered, took little heed of those left
behind in the city, although they made up about a fifth part of
their army. Fearing only for themselves, lest their enemies
should make a sortie, they took to flight, and encamped farther
away, only too thankful that they had been saved with the greater

15 part of their force instead of having to confront danger with the
whole. But of the residue left behind, those in the houses, through
being for long divinely infatuated, and filled with suspicion that
the Scythians would suffer an intolerable disaster at the hands
of the Egyptians, supposed that an attack had been made upon
zo them, in their retreat, as on fugitives, and that soon their camp
would be plundered. They thought then that it would be to their
own advantage to remain on the spot and lay aside their arms,
taking the place of suppliants, since then it would seem that
they also had been the only ones left behind, because they had
25 done no evil to the Egyptians, whereas the others had left the town,
fearing to suffer for the acts they had committed. But those alone
who happened to be near the gates and around whom the panic was
in full blast, knew the truth, how that the Egyptians possessed
no powerful military organization, not a hoplite, not a weapon,
30 not a spearman, not a spear. And so these Scythians made up
their minds, at the present juncture, to get possession of the gates

if possible, and to call in those who had vainly given way to panic,
for the whole city was being harried like a bird’s nest. Now is


1265


314 DE PROVIDENTIA


a fierce fight waged about these gates, and in this the Egyptians
are victorious and sing a paean of victory. This was another terror
to the foreigners both those within the city and those without, for
the latter party thought the matter had been settled by the
Egyptians against the former, the former against the latter, and 5
thus each section lamented over the other. The victors do not
succeed in closing all the doors in all the gates (no small work this in
Thebes,’ whose hundred gates are celebrated in Greek song),
before a man who had shared in the struggle round the gates runs
through from the midst of the fighting for this very purpose, 10
announces the news to the Scythians, and promises them the
city. These then came to the spot in vain, and at once praised
and blamed their fortune: for a while they greatly congratulated
themselves on their escape from the net, but later they demanded
orders to burst through the wall for the purpose of again occupying 15
the town. Thus the wisdom of a god is an irresistible thing, and
neither is weapon strong nor mind devising, unless a god be present
with it, and so men have ere now conducted a campaign against
themselves. It seems to me to have been most happily said that
man is a plaything of a god, one who is always sporting and 20
playing a game of draughts with events.?, And I think that
Homer was the first of the Greeks to observe this, and sang of
a contest and of prizes offered for every sort of struggle over the
tomb of Patroclus, though in every respect those who are most
expected to win fall short. Teucer loses the first prize to an 25
insignificant bowman,’ and,

‘The best driver of whole-hoofed horses is last’ ;*


again in skill of foot a young man is defeated by a man in his

prime, and in the competition in heavy armour? Ajax is worsted—

and yet, Homer heralds Ajax as being by far the best of all 30
1 Cf. Homer, Iliad, ix. 381 ff. 2 Plato, Leges, 803 c.


3 Homer, Iliad, xxiii. 850-883. * Homer, Iliad, xxiii. 536.
5 Cf. Homer, Iliad, xxiii. 785 ff., 836 ff. 859 ff.


THE EGYPTIAN TALE 315


those assembled before Troy, with the exception of Achilles.’
He asserts that skill, training, youth, and superiority of constitu-
tion are all small things in comparison with the divine power.


3. The Egyptians then, when they had now brilliantly carried

5 the gates and had put the wall between themselves and the enemy,
turning upon those who were left within, alike stray individuals
and assembled masses, threw missiles, cast javelins, struck them,
and ran them through. Some of them who had found a fortified
shelter they smoked out as though they had been wasps, temples,
to priests and all, Typho, the while, thundering complaints, for
he had become Scythian even in his religious views, and de-
manded a treaty of peace with the barbarians, scheming again
to admit the enemy army, on the ground that no irremediable
evil had occurred. But they, the people, were all unbidden,
15 without generals, except that by the gift of the gods every indi-
vidual was himself general and soldier, captain and private.
What might not happen at a moment when the god is willing and
gives the initiative to men to save themselves by every means in
their power? Nor did they yet give over the gates to Typho, and
20 in other respects the despotic rule was lifeless, the moment that
the party which organized it had been banished from the city.
The first meeting was held at the house of the high-priest, a
sacred fire was kindled, prayers of thanksgiving were offered up
for what had been accomplished, and intercessions for what
25 should happen in the future. Then they called for Osiris on
the ground that there was no other salvation for their govern-
ment than he. Now the priest promised him to them, the gods
granting it, together with any men who had fallen with him
because they were accused of sharing his views. But they decided

30 to beguile Typho for some time still. He had not indeed suffered
immediately his due penalty (and the penalty was that the man


1 Homer, Iliad, ii. 768.
2878.2 L


316 DE PROVIDENTIA


most culpable for the sometime servile attitude of the Egyptians
towards the Scythians should become a victim and a preparatory
sacrifice for the war), and when Justice,’ who is wise and knows
well how to keep opportunities under her control, delayed his case,
the latter, I say, even then thought that all this would escape 5
the gods. And as he was still in the outward panoply of the
despotic power, he began levying taxes more keenly and shame-
fully than ever, and went so far as to extort contributions a second
time even from his servants.

At one moment he would threaten to do violent mischief ro
while he still had the power, at another again he was grovelling,
and speaking piteously, ‘that,’ quoth he, ‘I may not lose my
kingdom.’ So completely had he lost his head, and had actually
become so puffed up in mind as to expect to get round the priest
by flattery and bribes. But it was not right of him to place 15
money before the ordinances of his fathers. Nay, even when the
aliens had broken up their camp with all their might and were
already far from Thebes, he again brought them back, by envoys
and suppliants and presents. Every act and device of his was
a glaring announcement that he would again hand over Egyptian 20
interests to the foreigners. He himself was evidently quite with-
out anxiety on the score of his beloved Scythians, and even
if he had not been so, at all events he was glad that he would
not live to see Osiris returned from exile, and taking a place in
the government. Since, in any case, the foreigners now attacked 25
the country, obviously not, as they had done before, with a view

1269 to changing Egyptian institutions, but rather to tearing them up
by the roots, and to Scythianizing the government, and since,
in a word, the drama now being enacted held the most disastrous
elements of two evils—war and faction—: the evil of faction, 30
namely, the domestic cessions and betrayals which are attempted


1 Cf. Hesiod, Works and Days, 256, for the earliest conception of Dike.
(Crawford, p. 535.)


THE EGYPTIAN TALE 317


least of all in war-time; and of war, that danger which is the com-
mon lot of all: since these factions then, in an attempt to save the
commonwealth, sought the transference of the leadership from
its possessors to others, at that time, from both sides, the worst
s elements prevailed, and not one of the Egyptians, not even the
most utterly worthless, was left, to whom the tyrant did not seem
to be planning and doing things deserving of indignation: for
they were becoming chastened through fear. Now this was the
moment for which the gods had determined to wait, that no
ro smouldering ember of the opposite faction should be secretly kept
alive in the state, which might contain pretexts for evil, if not just,
at least plausible. So, although late in the day, there is a meeting
of gods and elders concerning Typho, and what has long been the
conimon talk of all in private, is disclosed. Women who spoke
15 both tongues for the benefit of the women who did not understand
each other’s views, translated the words of the foreign language
into the Egyptian, contrariwise the words of the Egyptian into
the foreign.
And there were, moreover, the effeminate men, and spies, and
20 all belonging to the company of those suborned by Typho and
his wife against Osiris, who themselves were to give the most
terrible evidence, namely that Osiris had surrendered the occupation
of key positions, and had all but brought on the siege himself,
that a reign of terror might envelop the sacred city: that he
25 was in all haste to make the Scythians pass to the other side of the
riveralso, that the Egyptian fortunes should not merely half suffer,
but that all things should be removed root and branch, and that
they should not have time to send for Osiris. When all this had
come out, the men, on the one hand, unanimously condemn Typho
30 to confinement, and decide to institute a second trial for him to
determine what punishment he should suffer, or what fine he should
pay. The gods, on the other, praised the assessors who took part, for
having condemned the man according to his deserts, but they them-


318 DE PROVIDENTIA


selves voted that when he had left this life, he should be given
up to the avenging deities, and should dwell in Cocytus, and should
finally become a pernicious and infernal demon, an object to be
classed with the Titans and Giants, and should never see Elysium
even in a dream, but would lift up his eyes with difficulty to get 5
a glimpse of that sacred light which is an object of contemplation
to virtuous souls and blessed gods.


1272 °4. So much for what concerns Typho, since all this may be


told; for what could be sacred and ineffable in an earthly
nature? But the life of Osiris is alluded to as a sacred thing, 10
and has been deified, so that it is dangerous to expose it
to the risk of narration. His birth, his upbringing, his early
and later education, his important posts of leadership, and how
the gods and inspired men elevated him to the highest rule, how
he ruled in this, how the plot was formed against him, to what 15
extent it succeeded, and how it ultimately failed, all this is not
unworthy of general consideration, and has been told; I will only
add that to this man, fortunate in all things, even his exile was
not without profit. For in that time he was initiated into the most
perfect mysteries of the gods above, and saw the sacred visions, 20
and waited patiently for the spectacle, once he had laid aside
state affairs. Let mention be made here also of his auspicious re-
turn, and of the crowds of men crowned with garlands conducting
him back amid the company of the gods, and pouring over the whole
land to escort him in turn ; and then the midnight revels, the torch- 25
light processions, the distributions of prizes, the year named after
him, and also his second act of pardon to his hostile brother,
mercy for whom he begged from a people boiling with indignation,
and how he prayed to the gods for his brother’s salvation, acting
in this case with more generosity than justice. 30


5. We may safely venture to say as much as this about Osiris;
but beyond this let only words of good augury be spoken, says


THE EGYPTIAN TALE 319


one who cautiously employs sacred language. As to those things
which lie far away, it would be the part of a foolhardy mind and
tongue to reveal them, and let them be kept in holy silence
untouched by written words, lest one should


5 ‘Cast an eye on anything not permitted,’


for he who reveals, as he who sees, such things incurs the wrath
of the divine nature. Boeotian legends tear to pieces those who
intrude and spy upon the secret rites of Dionysus. Ignorance in
the case of initiations is sanctity. On this account the night is
ro entrusted with the mysteries, andcaverns that may not be trodden
are hollowed out for this reason. Moments and places are chosen
that know how to conceal the inspired celebration of the mysteries.
Only so much perchance it is lawful to say, and cloaking the in-
violable to what extent we may, we say it, how that Osiris in his
15 old age was more glorious than in his youth. The gods gave him
as a reward to rule over the state with greater prestige, so as
to be shown as one superior to injury from men, and the pro-
sperity which he had given the Egyptians, but found obliterated
by Typho’s period, he not merely restored, but made by its
20 development incomparably superior to its former state. So the
former seemed to be merely a prelude to the latter, and nothing
but a promise once sung by the Greek poets, how that the virgin
who is now a constellation (and whom we call, I think, Justice),
‘on the earth dwelling aforetime,
25 Face to face met all men, nor ever of mortals disdained she
F’en in that far distant past the tribes or of men or of women.
With them she mingled and there took her seat, though a goddess
immortal.’?
how she stayed under the same roof with man,—
30 «= ‘For in that time men knew naught of bitter discord, of struggle
Of contestations that menace, of all the tumult of battle.


1 Aratus, Phaenomena, 101 ff.


1273


320 DE PROVIDENTIA

Thus their lifetime they passed, and the harsh sea was far away
from them,

Nor did ships come to bring them supplies from lands o’er the ocean ;

Theirs were the plough and the oxen, and theirs that queen of the
people. 5

Dike, ’tis she who dispenses by thousands her gifts of all justice.

So bloomed this age for a span when the golden race the earth
nourished.’ *


He says, then, that as long as men did not use the sea they were
golden and had dealings with gods, but when ships came to them 1o
for the service of a strenuous life, then Justice flitted so far away
from earth, that she could scarcely be seen on a clear night ; and
to be sure, when she is visible, she offers us an ear of corn instead
of a rudder. Probably she would come down to us now, and would
again speak to us face to face if we busied ourselves with agri- 15
culture, and despised seafaring. Now no other period has attained
to this that the poets sang of long ago concerning her, save only the
period of the glorious reign of Osiris. And if the gods, when bring-
ing him back from exile, did not at that very moment put every-
thing in his hands, let us not hold a contrary view on this score. 20
It is not in the nature of a state to change suddenly for the better,
in the way that it changes suddenly for the worse; for evil is a thing
self-taught,” whereas virtue is acquired only through toil. Needs
must that those who purify first should intervene, but that the
divinity should move leisurely and in order. But Osiris, before 35
he entered upon a life of action, had to see and hear many things,
for many a report is kept away from a king.


6. Enough, for we must now take care lest we parade anything
of the unutterable mysteries. First, may the sacred rites be pro-
pitious to us, next, to us who have long learned of past and present 30
happenings to a brother, it seems somewhat wonderful and worthy


1 Aratus, Phaenomena, 108 ff. 2 Cf. Hesiod, Works and Days, 287 f.


THE EGYPTIAN TALE 321


of inquiry, why it is that whensoever some nature is born distinctly
better or worse, not in a small degree but very greatly, as for
example a virtue unmixed with evil, or evil unmixed with virtue,
there grows up also near at hand, in some way, its undiluted op-

§ posite, in such wise that from one home proceed two completely
alien things, and at the same time there is one root for the two
growths. Let us inquire then of philosophy, what she will allege
as the cause of this incredible thing. She might reply, borrowing
a little from poetry,—


10 6‘ There are two casks that lie in the antechamber of Zeus,
One of gifts evil such as he gives, but the other of good ones.’?


He pours in and mingles from each, for the most part equally or
a little less, so that the equilibrium of nature may be well estab-
lished. But whenever by chance he pours in from one of the por-

1§ tions without reserve, and whenever in such a case some father
becomes entirely happy or most unfortunate in his first-born,
then what 1s left is inevitably employed for the other one, for the
god who is the distributor will compensate for what is lacking,
inasmuch as there must be an equal amount from each of the two

zo casks. Else in the beginning there are equal seeds from both
casks in the offspring, and both become one by reason of their
common nature. And whenever any one spends beforehand the
isolated contents of one cask in any way whatever, he has the
remaining portion quite unmixed.’

25 Saying these things philosophy might persuade us, for we see
that the fruit of the fig tree is most sweet, whereas the leaves, the
bark, the root and the trunk are only fit for curdling milk.

It would seem then that whatever of an inferior sort the nature
of the tree possesses, this it has entirely spent on the parts unfit for

30 food, but has left the best part uncontaminated in the fruit of
the tree. Thus, too, the husbandinen’s sons, for we must employ


2 Homer, Iliad, xxiv. 527 f. 2 Cf. Plutarch, Isis and Osiris, 369.


1276


322 DE PROVIDENTIA


homely illustrations if we are to do more towards the acceptance
of truth: thus these men, I say, taught so perhaps by nature,
plant evil-smelling flowers next to the fragrant, and sweet plants
next to bitter, in order that these last, drawing to themselves by
their kinship with it such amount of evil as the earth has 5
entangled with itself, may leave the better taste and odour in
the better roots, alone and cleansed. And this process purifies
a garden plot.


7. From this argument it follows, in the fashion of one geometri-
cal corollary emerging together with another, that the older sons 10
in families are born quite worthless. And this becomes a purifier of
seeds in relationship, when a god is preparing to generate virtue
pure and undefiled. And then it turns out in this way, that precisely
what seems to be most closely related, is the most alien of all things.
Now while this is not very apt to take place amongst those who !5
develop in the normal course of nature, namely those who are
half evil and half good, it is found among those who look down
upon nature, and occupy separate parts of it, parts which nature
keeps and bestows intertwined with each other, and herein it

1277 would have been extraordinary if this had not happened. 20

Enough has now been said about this, but another question
wrapt up in it seems to demand further consideration. That in
various places and in various periods of time thesame events should
have often taken place, that old men should have become spectators
of the very things which they heard about when they were boys, 25
either from books or from their grandfathers’ tales, this seems to
me the most incredible thing, and if it 1s not to remain incredible,
it is worth while that a cause should be found for it. Let us speak
then, when we have found the proper cause, for perhaps a philo-
sophic truth is neither small nor very easy. We must regard the 30
universe as a single whole completed in its parts; we shall then
think ofit asconfluent, and animated by the same breath, for in this


THE EGYPTIAN TALE 323


way only could it save its unity, and we shall not represent its parts
as devoid of fellow-feeling for one another, for how can they be
one unless they are knit together by nature? They will act on
each other, and be acted upon by each other; some parts will only

s act and others will only be acted upon. Proceeding therefore on
this hypothesis to the subject of our examination, we should
logically make the happy body moving in a circle, the cause of
what happens here below.’ Both are parts of it and they have some
relation with each other, and if generation functions in the things
1o about us, the cause of the generation is in those things above us,
and from thence the seeds of what takes place come here. Now

if any one were to advance this view, astronomy guiding his con-
victions, namely that there are recurrent orbits of stars and spheres,
the simple and the composite alike, that man would at one moment

15 Speak Egyptian and at another Greek, and would from both
languages attain to perfect wisdom, combining intelligence with
knowledge. Such a man would not fail to recognize that when the
same movements come again, effects return together with causes,
and lives now on the earth are the same as those of olden times,
20 also births, upbringings, opinions, and fortunes. We should not
therefore be surprised that we see quite ancient history renascent
now, and that indeed we have seen it, inasmuch as things that have
blossomed already, and blossomed for whole months at a time,
agree completely with those things which have been revealed
25to us in history, and inasmuch as the ideas hidden in matter
harmonize with the unutterable mysteries of story. Whatever
manner of things these are, it is not yet lawful, for me at least,
to divulge, though one man will make one guess, another man
another : and men eager for knowledge of the future, in whose ears

30 my story may have sounded a clarion note, will bend over this
Egyptian history, drawing from thence a likeness to the present
time enigmatically concealed in it. But in regard to truth, these

1 Cf. Plato, Timaeus, 40, and passim.
2878.2 M


324 DE PROVIDENTIA


things do not sound in unison; and let men know that they are
not even pious in their attempts, when they heap up before them
what should long have been kept buried,—


1280 ‘For the high gods hold the life of mortals but keep it close hidden.’


8. Pythagoras of Samos avers that the wise man is naught but s
a spectator of things that are, and of things that have come into
existence. For God has summoned him into the universe as to
a sacred contest, to be a spectator of the proceedings therein. Let
us inquire therefore what sort of spectator the appointed one
should be. Or must we say something that is definite and obvious, 10
namely that it should be he who awaits in his place the things
shown him, one by one, as they stoop forward in order from out
the curtain? And if any one forces his way on to the stage, and,
as the phrase goes, ‘looks at it like an impudent hound,’ usurping
a right to survey the whole preparation on the other side of the 15
proscenium, against such an one the Greek judges arm their beadles.
But even if he were to evade these, he would understand nothing
clearly, he would make out with difficulty blurred and indistin-
guishable images. However, it is the custom in the theatre to say
a foreword in advance, and it needs must be that some one come 20
forward to discourse to the audience on what they are to see in
another moment. Such a man is making no mistake, for he is in the
service of the president of the games, and gets from him his
knowledge, without playing the busybody to find out more, and
thereby moving things that should be immovable. When he has 25
learned his part, he must keep silent before hastening to publish
it, since as a matter of fact custom enjoins that even actors do not
always know at what moment of the performance they are to
appear, but must await the signal for their entrance on the stage
to be sent down to them. In the same way the man to whom God 30
communicates the preparations of those things which are stored
up in life by nature, out of respect for the honour granted him,


THE EGYPTIAN TALE 325


should hold his peace not less, but even more, than those who
have heard nothing. It is the unknown about which guesses
are made, but conjecture, if it goes too far, is most unstable, and
in that case words are superfluous; but there is a separation

5s between knowledge and truth, a separation between word and
truth also.

But even this will be hidden by the wise man, since God pledges
this loyalty of His, as it were, and men hate facile speakers. Let
not the man whom God deems unworthy of initiation, push

ro himself forward or be an eavesdropper, for, again, men hate busy-
bodies. In any case there is no reason for one to be distressed
who is certain soon to get his deserts. A short time apportions to
man what is his due, and in the end things become common
objects for sight and hearing.
15 ‘The future days
Are our wisest witnesses.’


1 Pindar, Olymp. i. 34 f.


CONCERNING DREAMS
DE INSOMNIIS
PREFACE


IT is an old tradition, I think, and quite in the manner of Plato,
to conceal the profound thoughts of philosophy behind the mask
of some lighter treatment, that thereby whatsoever has been
acquired with difficulty shall not be again lost to men, nor shall
such matters be contaminated by lying exposed to the approach 5
of the profane. This end accordingly has been most zealously
pursued in the present work, and whether it attains this end, and
whether in other respects it is wrought out with distinction after
the manner of the ancients, let those decide who shall approach
it in a spirit of loving labour. 10


1. If dreams are prophets, and if the visions seen in dreams are
riddles of their future fortunes to anxious men, they would in that
case be full of wisdom, though certainly not clear. In sooth their
lack of clearness is their wisdom.

1284 ‘For the gods keep man’s life concealed." 15


To obtain the greatest things without labour is a divine pre-
rogative, whereas for men, not merely ‘in front of virtue’ but of all
fair things,

‘The gods have set sweat.’?
Now divination must be the greatest of all good things, for it is in 20
knowledge and, in a word, in the cognitional part of his faculties
that God differs from man, as does man from the brute. But


1 Hesiod, Works and Days, 42; cf. p. 1234 A. 2 Ibid., 289.


CONCERNING DREAMS 327


whereas the nature of God is sufficient unto Himself for knowledge,
man through divination attains to much more than belongs to our
human nature. For the mass of mankind can know only the
present. Concerning that which has never been, it can only guess;

s and Calchas was the only one in the whole Greek assembly who
understood


‘The things which are, the things which shall be, and the things
which have been.’


And according to Homer, the affairs of the gods are dependent on
1o the judgement of Zeus, for this reason, that


‘he came into being before them and has the more knowledge,’


by the very fact, I suppose, that he is older. For I think that the
reference to age in these verses points to the conclusion that
to know more comes through time, and knowledge was, it seems,

15 the most precious thing. But if any one is persuaded on the
authority of other passages that the rule of Zeus rests in the
strong hand, as in the text


‘he was superior in force,’


that man’s acquaintance with poetry is that of the vulgar, and

zohe has never heard of the philosophy therein, which affirms
that the gods are nothing else but minds. It is in this sense that
to the words ‘he was superior in prowess’, he has fastened the
words ‘he is more ancient in days ’, meaning that Zeus is an elder-
born intelligence; for what else is strength of mind but intelli-

as gent thought? Whosoever, being a god, is deemed worthy to
rule over gods, rules in that he is mind by the superior force of
wisdom. Therefore the phrase,


‘he was superior in force,’


1 Tliad, i. 70. 2 Ikiad, xiii. 355.
3 Odyssey, xviii. 234.


328 DE INSOMNIIS


comes back to the same thing for us as
‘he has greater knowledge,’


and means this. For this reason also is the wise man akin to God,
because he strives to approach Him in knowledge, and occupies
himself with thought, in the which the divine essence has its being. 5


[ 2. Let the foregoing be proof that divinations are amongst the
best of the vocations of man; and if all things are signs appearing
through all things, inasmuch as they are brothers in a single living
creature, the cosmos, so also they are written characters of every
kind, just as of those in a book some are Phoenician, some 10
Egyptian, and others Assyrian.

The scholar reads these, and he is a scholar who learns by his
natural bent. One reads some of them and another reads others,
one reads more and another less. In the same way one reads them
by syllables, another reads the complete phrase, another the whole 15
story. In like manner do the learned see the future, some under-
Standing stars, and of these, one the fixed stars, another those
flames which shoot across the sky. Again, there are those who
readit from the entrails, and from the cries of birds, and from their
perches and flights. To others also what are termed omens are 20
manifest, written indications these of things to be, and again
voices and encounters otherwise intended, for all things have their
significance for every one. In the same way, if birds had had

1285 wisdom, they would have compiled an art of divining the future
from men, just as we have from them; for we are to them, just as 25
they are to us, alike young and old, very old and very fortunate.

It must needs be, I think, that the parts of this great whole, since
it all shares one feeling and one breath, belong to each other.
They are, in fact, limbs of one entire body, and may not
the spells of the magicians be even such as these? Obviously, 30
for charms are cast from one part of it to another, as signals
are given, and he is a sage who understands the relationship


CONCERNING DREAMS 329


of the parts of the universe. One thing he attracts to himself
through the agency of another thing, for he has present with him
pledges of things which are for the most part far away, to wit,
voices, substances, and figures. And as when the bowel is in pain,
s another part suffers also with it, so a pain in the finger settles in
the groin,' although there be many organs between these parts
which feel nothing.
This is because they are both portions of one living organism,
and there is that which binds them one to the other more than to
1o other things. Even to some god, of those who dwell within the
universe, a stone from hence and a herb is a befitting offering;
for in sympathizing with these he is yielding to nature and is
bewitched. Thus the harp-player who has sounded the highest
note does not sound the sesquioctavus next, but rather strikes
15 the epitrite and the nete, a heritage of to-day from a more
ancient state of harmony. But there is in the cosmos, even as in
human relationship, a certain discord also; for the universe is not
one homogeneous thing but a unity formed of many. There are
parts of it which agree and yet battle with other parts, and the
20 struggle of these only contributes to a harmonious unity of the
whole, just as the lyre is a system of responsive and harmonious
notes.* The unity resulting from opposites is the harmony both of
the lyre and of the cosmos.* Archimedes the Sicilian * asked for a
point of support outside of the earth wherefrom he might prop
25 himself against the whole earth, for he said that as long as he was
himself upon the earth he had no power over it. But the man,
howso great his knowledge of the nature of the universe may be,
once placed outside of it, could no longer make any use of his
wisdom. He uses the universe against itself ; accordingly his touch
30 with it once lost, he will watch it in vain, and lifeless symbols only


1 Plato, Republic, 462 c.

2 Plato, Timaeus, 36 a, B; Leges, 812 D.

3 Cf. Proclus, In Tim. ii. p.95 (quoted by Cudworth, i. 514).
* Plutarch, Marcus Marcellus, 14.


330 DE INSOMNIIS


would then be recorded. And small wonder, for whatever of the
divine element is outside the cosmos can in no wise be moved by
sorcery.

‘He sits apart and careth not

Nor taketh any thought thereof.” 5
It is the nature of pure reason not to be deflected; it is only the
emotional element which may be cajoled. Wherefore the multi-
tude of things in the universe and their relationship furnish the
bulk of the subject-matter in the initiations and prophecies.
There is a multitude of the discordant elements, but a relation- 10
ship in the unity of things existing. Now, as to initiations, let not
our law-abiding discourse noise them abroad; there is no offence,
however, in explaining divination. |


1288 3. The whole of this art has already been praised as much as
possible, but now it is time to appropriate the best part that is in 15
it, and to linger over its speculative side. We must regard a charac-
ter of obscurity as common to all its forms, nor must we consider
as disproof of any one of them what is observed in the whole cycle
of nature. Our words attempted to show that this element of
obscurity is sacred, just as in the initiations the unutterable is 20
sacred. In like manner oracles are uttered so as not to be intelligible
to all men, and for this was the oracle at Pytho called Loxias (the
ambiguous). Thus, when the god gave out that a wooden wall?
would be the salvation of the Athenians, the people meeting in
assembly would have heard the oracle in vain, had not Themis- 25
tocles read its meaning. Not for this reason, therefore, should
divination by dreams be dismissed, for it shares obscurity with
oracles as with other phenomena. We ought to seek this branch
of knowledge before all else ; for it comes from us, 1s within us, and
is the special possession of the soul of each one of us. ‘Mind holds 30
the shapes of things that be’, says the ancient philosophy, and we


1 Ihiad, xv. 106 f. 2 Herodotus, vii. 141, 143.


CONCERNING DREAMS 331


might add that those which come into being also have a soul,

since mind is to soul as real being is to becoming. Now, taking the

first term with the third, and the second with the fourth, and

stating them in this inverse order, we shall no less arrive at the
s truth, following the definitions of science.

In this way what we postulated will be demonstrated, namely
that the soul holds the forms of things that come into being.
It holds, indeed, all, but it produces only what is befitting, and
it reflects as in a mirror the image, by means of which the living

ro being grasps those things that remain there. Therefore, as we do
not understand the activities of the mind before the controlling
force has announced them to the multitude, and whatever has not
come to that controlling force is hidden from the living being; so
then we shall not have a perception even of the forms in the first
15 soul, before the impress of them comes to the imagination. And
this very imagination seems to be a sort of life in itself, a little
lower down in the scale, and having its basis in a peculiar property
of nature. It has even its own sense-perceptions, for we see colours
and we hear sounds, and we have an overpowering sense of touch,
20 at times when the organic parts of the body are at rest. Perhaps
this form of sense-perception is the more hallowed. In this way
we constantly enter into relationship with gods who give us
counsel and answer us in oracles, and take care of us in other
ways. So then, if any one, in his dreams, receives the present of
25 a treasure, I shall not be at all surprised; or if a man quite un-
cultured should fall asleep and, meeting the Muses in his dream
and exchanging question and answer with them, should become
a cunning bard. This has happened in our own time and does not
seem to me very astounding. I pass over plots that have been
30 revealed, and the number of people whom the dream in the guise
of a physician has cured of illness. But whenever a dream opens
up to the soul a path conducting it to the most perfect points from
which to view existing things, a soul that has never yet aspired, nor
2878.2 N


1289


332 DE INSOMNIIS


has given its mind to the ascent,’ it would be indeed the climax of
the occult force in existing things that this dream should override
nature and unite to the realm of mind the man who has wandered
so far from it that he knows not whence he has come. -

And if any one deems the way upward a great undertaking, but 5s
disbelieves in the imagination, for that even by its means the
happy union may ne’er be gained, let him listen to the sacred
oracles which tell of the diverging paths, after hearing, of course,
the whole list of the available resources for the ascent, in virtue
of which it is possible to make the seed within us grow: 10


‘To some’, it is written, ‘he gave the revelation of the light to be a lesson,
Others even in their dreams, He made fruitful with His courage.’ *


Do you see? He makes a distinction between the happy possession
of knowledge and its acquirement. One man learns, he means,
while awake, another while asleep. But in the waking state man 1s
is the teacher, whereas it is God who makes the dreamer fruitful
with His own courage, so that learning and attaining are one and
the same. Now to make fruitful is even more than to teach.

4. Let this be taken as presenting the worthiness of the imagina-
tive life, even in small matters, as against those who despair of it. 20
It is not to be wondered at that they understand it in this way,
owing to the exceptional nature of their knowledge, since they
adhere to what has been abjured by the oracles, for the
oracle says,

‘I reck not of sacrifices, or of entrails, 25
These be all baubles,’ *


and exhorts us to flee from them. But these men, as though they
were above the common herd, attempt to practise arts whose
province relates to the future, some taking up one, some another ;
they despise dreams as being too obvious, and as matters in which 30


1 Plato, Repub. 517 B.
2 Not in the Sibylline Oracles, ed. Geffcken (Leipzig, 1902).
3 Probably from the same source as the last.


CONCERNING DREAMS 333


honours come equally to the ignorant and to the wise. But is not
a man wise, precisely because he gains a greater share out of
a possession common to all? Surely the other good things, nay,
even the greatest are set before us as the most open to all. Amongst
s things visible there is nothing more august in splendour than the
sun, and at the same time nothing more universal. And if to look
upon a god with one’s own eye is a happy thing, the approach to
Him by the imagination comes of a gaze more magnificent still.
For this is the perception of perceptions,’ inasmuch as the imagina-
10 tive pneuma is the most widely shared organ of sensation, and the
first body of the soul. There it lurks in its fastness, and directs
the government of the living being as from a citadel,? for about
it nature has constructed all the functions of the brain. Hearing
and sight are not senses, but only subservient organs of the common
15 sense-perception, like doorkeepers of the living being who announce
to their mistress the things perceived outside, and from which
things these external organs of sense receive knocks at the door.
And this is the perfect sense-perception in all its parts, for it
hears and sees with its whole pnewma and has power over all the
20 remaining senses. It divides its powers, assigning one to one
place and another to another. These powers stretch out from
the living being, each one separately, and, like straight lines
radiating from a centre, return to and meet in the centre again,
all of them one in their common root though many in their out-
25 goings. Most animal in character, therefore, is perception through
the organs projected without, nor is it sense-perception at all
before it comes in contact with the chief perception (s.¢. imagina-
tion). But the more divine which cleaves to the soul is the direct
perception.
30 Now if we hold our bodily senses in esteem by reason of our
understanding, and because we know best what we have actually 1292


1 This rendering must not be understood to mean a xar’ dfoxfw perception.
2 See p. 259, n. 2.


feo


334 DE INSOMNIIS


seen, and spurn imagination as more faithless than sense-per-
ception, we seem to resemble those who forget that even the eye
does not reveal all things truthfully. One eye reveals nothing,
and another falsifies, both in a way contrary to the nature of the
things seen, and because of the medium through which they are
seen. For according to the distance of the observer, objects seem
greater or less. Those under the water appear larger, and an oar
blade once immersed strikes the eye as broken. And the eye,
through its own lack of power produces this effect, for when
bleared it represents everything in confusion and indistinctness,
nor may a man who is diseased in his imaginative pneuma expect
to have clear or well-defined images. What his disease is, by what
things the imagination becomes bleared and dulled, and by what
things it is purged and purified, so as to return to its natural
condition, all this you must learn of the cryptic philosophy,
through which the imagination becomes inspired when once
purified by the initiations. }

The extraneous bodies which have entered in, must make their
way out again before the god brings in the imagination. Whoever
keeps this purified by a life in accordance with nature has an in-
strument ready to his hand, and one that is thus again common
to all, for this neuma comprehends our spiritual disposition and is,
therefore, not without sympathy for it, like our oyster-shell which,
after all, is opposed to the better parts of the soul’s organization.
But its first and special vehicle’ becomes light and ethereal when
the soul is exalted, whereas when that is debased, it becomes heavy
and fallstotheearth. Nowthisis, ina word, the borderland between
unreason and reason, between the bodiless and the body, and is
a boundary common to both, and through this the divine elements
are brought into contact with those furthest removed from them.
For this reason it is difficult for philosophy to apprehend its nature,
for it borrows anything that is suitable to its purpose, taking it

1 Plato, Phaedo, 85 D.


5


20


jo


CONCERNING DREAMS 335


from either of the extremes, as it were from neighbours, and so
images in one nature things that dwell far apart.


5. Nature has poured the richness of the imaginative essence
into many parts of existing things ; it descends even to the animals
s which have as yet no understanding, and is no longer the vehicle
of the more divine soul, but itself rests upon the forces beneath,
being itself the reason of the animal ;? and many things this creature
thinks and does befittingly through its agency. Thus a cleansing
takes place even in creatures without reason, with the result that
ro a better force enters in. Whole races of demons also have their
existence in such a life as this. For whereas these throughout all
their being are phantasmic, making their appearance as images
in things that are coming into being, in the case of man most
things come by imagination and that alone, though in truth? a good
15 Many in company with another, for we do not form thought-
concepts without imagination, unless it so be that some man in

a rare moment of time grasps even an immaterial form.
To go beyond the imagination would be no less difficult than
happy to achieve. ‘For’, the master® says, ‘happy the man to
20 whom understanding and prudence come even in old age’, speaking
of prudence bereft of imagination. But the life in question (s.e.
dream life) is founded on imagination or on that intellect which
makes use of imagination. This envelope of soul-matter which the
happy have called the enveloping soul, is in turn god, demon of
25 every sort, and phantom, and in it the soul pays its penalties, for
the oracles are agreed about this, to wit, the similarity of the soul’s
way of life in another world to the imaginings of the dream con-
dition ; and philosophy concludes that our first lives are but the
preparation for second lives, and that the best conduct in the case
30 of souls lightens it (i.e. the pneuma), whereas the worst imparts
a stain to them. Through the attractive forces of nature, therefore,
1 Aristot. De An. iii.3.9. 7 Reading f instead of#. ° cf. Plato, Phtleb. 21 p-z.


1293


336 DE INSOMNIIS


the soul is drawn upwards by reason of its own warmth and dry-
ness. This is the winged flight of the soul, and we shall find that the
expression of Heraclitus, “The wise soul is dry’, signifies naught
else than this. On the other hand, when it becomes thick and moist,
it sinks into the hollows of the earth by its downward momentum, 5;
lurks in holes, and is finally pushed into the regions below the
earth; for this spot is the most suitable to the spirits clogged with
moisture, and there the life is ill-starred and full of vengeance.
But it is possible through labour and time and other lives that it
may become purified and rise to the surface, for becoming a thing ro
of dual nature, it runs in a double channel of life and partly con-
sorts with the worst, partly with the better. Now descending from
the spheres, the first soul takes a lease of this other one, embarking
in it as in a boat, and so associates with the world of body.

It enters upon this struggle, either to conduct that soul above rs
with it, or at least not to remain with it below. Difficult indeed
is this, and possibly it may leave the other behind, as incapable
of accompanying it, a thing scarcely permitted us to believe in
view of the revealed mysteries, for the ascent would be shameful
for souls who do not return property not their own, but leave upon 20
earth what they have borrowed from above. And this might happen
to one or two people as a gift of initiation and of God’s grace, but
it is in the course of nature that the soul which has once been
engrafted thereon, either bends to the oar with the other or draws
it away, or is drawn away by it, but in any case remains with it 25
until the soul’s ascent to the regions whence it came; or weighed
down by reason of its evil, it drags below with it the soul which
has already permitted it to grow too heavy. And it is this with
which ' the oracles menace the seed of mind within us, saying,
“Bend thou not down far below to the world mid obscurity gleaming, 30
Alway spread out are its depths, a treacherous region where Hades
Lurks in the gloom and delighteth in phantoms, never in reason.’

1 Reading instead of 6.


CONCERNING DREAMS 337


How can a life unstable and unintelligent be a thing of beauty
tothe mind? To the phantom, indeed, because of the nature of its
pneuma at that moment, the region below is befitting; for like
rejoices in like. But if one comes into existence from the con-

§ junction of both, the mind also would be swamped with sensual
pleasures. Yet it would be the very last of evils, not even to
perceive an evil that is present ; for this is the way of those who
seek not to rise above evil. And just as a hardened tumour, by
reason of its no more paining us, fails to remind us to cure our-

10 Selves, so repentance is an uplifting force. A man, finding his
situation intolerable, plans flight, and the will is the most im-
portant part of purification ; for thus his words and deeds alike
stretch out hands towards the goal. But when will is lacking,
every purificatory initiation is lifeless, severed as it is from the
1§ greatest covenant. And for this reason, here and there, the
minglings (of good and evil) furnish the greatest and the best
service to the order of the universe, when, for a change, they bring
grief to man and so purify his soul from frivolous enjoyment.
Even things unjustly called misfortunes contribute greatly in
20 loosening the hold that we keep on the lower elements. The first
providence is revealed to those who have intellect by the same
principles which cause distrust in it to those who lack intellect.
Nor is it possible that the soul should ever be turned away from
matter, if it does not fall foul of any misfortune in this world.
2s Therefore we must suppose that the much talked-of good
fortunes are an invention of the lords of the underworld for the
ambush of souls. Consequently, what Lethaean potion there
may be to the souls that have departed this life, let another
tell us, but to a soul entering life such a potion is certainly
30 Offered in that which is sweet and cloying here on earth. For,
descending into the first life voluntarily as a maid of service,
this soul, instead of serving, becomes enslaved. Its mission
was to fulfil a service to the constitution of the universe, for


1296


338 DE INSOMNIIS


the laws of Adrastea impose this upon it; but, bewitched by
the gifts of matter, it undergoes an experience very like that of
free men who have entered into a contract of service for an agreed-
upon period, but who, captivated by the beauty of some hand-
maiden, desire to remain in their employment at the price of s
slavery to the master of the beloved. We too, when at any time
from the depths of our hearts we take delight in what is of the
body and lies at its portals, deeming it good, seem to confess
to the nature of matter, that it is fair. Now matter receives our
assent as a secret contract, and even if we plan to depart as free 10
men, affirms that we are fugitive slaves. She tries to bring us
back and arrests us as runaways, reading over to us the while our
contract. Then, indeed, have we most of all need of strength and
the help of God for our souls, for it entails no light struggle to
take exception to, and perchance to violate, one’s own contract. 15
Then, indeed, are the penalties of matter stirred up even beyond
that which was predestined against those who have rebelled
against her laws. This is really the meaning of the so-called
labours which sacred legends tell us that Heracles endured, and
in general any other man who has attempted to gain his freedom 20
by force, until the day when they have transported the spirit to
the realm to which the hands of nature cannot attain.

But if the leap ends within the confines of matter, there is
a fall, and more severe contests become necessary, for matter
then treats souls mercilessly as aliens, and even if they renounce 25
the upward path, she exacts punishment for the attempt itself,
and keeps pouring out lives, but no longer from both those jars
which Homer’ darkly shadows forth as being two portions of
matter. According to that passage of his poem, Zeus is the god
ruling over matter, and the dispenser of the ambiguity of destiny, 30
and the good that comes from him has never been unmixed, though
ere now it has happened to a man to partake of the more evil

1 Homer, Iliad, xxiv. 527; Plato, Repub. 379 c.


CONCERNING DREAMS 339
portion unalloyed. Now, all lives go in an erring course, one which
has not risen after the first fall. But observe in how great an interval
of space this pneuma dwells. The argument said that, when the
soul fell below, it was weighed down and sank until it encountered

s the murky darkly-gleaming spot, but that when the soul rises the
pneuma accompanies it as far as it is able; and it is able to follow
until it has come to the farthest opposite point. Listen to the
oracles as they speak of this also :

“Refuse it will not consign to the chasm abysmal of matter;

10 ~— Leaves but a part in the clear-shining space given o’er to the image.’
This place is the opposite of the one encircled in gloom. And yet
one might be more sharp-sighted in this case. It does not seem to
bring up to the spheres the nature that has come from thence
unaccompanied, but to bring with it what it snatched from the

15 extremes of fire and air, when it came down to its phantom con-
dition here below, before donning its earthly shell, and this,
according to the oracle, it conducts above together with the
stronger part, for the divine body could not be the off-scourings
of matter. It would be logical that those things which have

20 2 common nature and are contributory to one end should not be
altogether ungovernable, particularly when their domains are
those of neighbours, just as fire is next to the surrounding body,
and is not, like earth, the farthest from it of all.

But if the better elements yield place to the worse and rejoice

25 in community with them, and if an uncontaminated body has
been contributory to the slime, as if appropriated by the element
admitted to be stronger in the conjunction of the two, possibly
the inferior ones also, not struggling against the soul’s energy, but
docile and reasonable, meeting it themselves half-way, and keeping

so the medial nature undistracted, would, under the leadership of the
first nature, become etherealized, and then would be borne aloft
with it so as to traverse, if not the whole of the way, at least the

1 Druon translates pneuma here as ‘ imagination’.
2878.2 re)


1297


340 DE INSOMNIIS


summit of the elements, and so taste of the world of light. ‘For it
has a certain portion in it,’ the oracles say: in a word, it takes
its place in some one division of the orb of the world.


6. Let what has been said suffice concerning the destiny which
the elements play. It is open to you to believe it or to disbelieve. 5
But as to the corporeal essence which has come from thence, there
is nothing to prevent it, when the soul ascends according to the
law of nature, from rising out of its fallen state, from ascending
with it and becoming linked with the spheres, that is to say, being
carried up as if to its own natural state of being. There are, then, 10
these two extreme lots, the one encircled by darkness and the
other encircled by light, which occupy the limits of good and evil
fortune. But in the hollow gulf of the universe how many inter-
mediate places do you think there are, partly obscure and partly
luminous, in all of which the soul has habitation, together with this 15
spirit envelope (pneuma), changing with it its ideas and morals and
life? When it hastens aloft to its native nobility, it is a store-
house of truth, for it is pure, brightly shining, and unmixed,
being a goddess and, if it so desires,a prophetess ; but when it falls,

1300 It becomes befogged, it lacks definiteness, it speaks falsely, for then 20
the misty element of the spirit envelope (pneuma) does not com-
prise the vitality of existing things.

And being in a medial position it would miss some truths
although it might reach others. You might thus discern to what
rank the demoniac nature belongs. To state the truth either 25
entirely or almost entirely, is divine, or near to the divine. Error
in predictions of the future is a never-ending experience; passion
and ambition belong to those who wallow in matter. It is in this
way that the new-boiled wine puts on the guise both of a god and
a superior demon and leaps in and takes possession of the country 3°
reserved for the greater nature. Now since man has a soul, we
might from that source discover what his position may be. If


CONCERNING DREAMS 34x


a man’s imaginative pneuma is pure and well-defined, and whether
he is waking or sleeping receives true impressions of things, it
promises him a better lot, so far as the soul’s formation is concerned.
Then again it is not least by the visions which it emits and around
s which it lives, when undisturbed by another outside force, that we
investigate what is the state of the spiritual pneuma, and philo-
sophy, the while, furnishes us with tests to this end, so that we
must of necessity cherish it and together see to it that we do not
at any time wander. Now the best nurture for us is that we should
10 become active by the force of application, anticipating the onsets
of weird and headlong visions, and that the emanation of life should
be, as far as possible, once for all intellectual: for this is to be
turned towards the best and delivered from the worst, and to hold
intercourse with (material) things only as necessity entails. In-
15 tellectual application is the most incisive weapon against those
things which combine to injure the pneuma, for this mysteriously
refines it and raises it towards God; and when it has become
adapted to it, draws the divine spirit-envelope (pneuma) by its
kindred nature to association with the soul. In like manner,
20 whenever it becomes compressed by reason of its density and
grows too small to fill the places assigned to it by that providence
which has moulded man, to wit, the cavities of the brain; then
since nature abhors a vacuum in existing things, an evil spirit-
envelope (pneuma) enters in; and what suffering for the soul with

25 such an ill-omened guest at its board!

For as to those places which have come to exist for this very
purpose of belonging to the pneuma, it is their nature to be occupied
by a worse or by a better one. In the one case there is a penalty
for the godless who have defiled the divine part in them, in the

30 other there is the goal of piety or whatsoever is near to that goal.


7. We, therefore, have set ourselves to speak of divination
through dreams, that men should not despise it, but rather culti-


1301


342 DE INSOMNITIS


vate it, seeing that it fulfils a service to life; and it is to this end
that we have so much occupied ourselves with the imaginative
nature. The immediate need of it here below has been perhaps
less clearly shown by our discourse, but a better fruit of a sane
spirit is the uplifting of the soul, a really sacred gain; so that
it becomes a sort of cult of piety to endeavour that this form of
divination should be ours. Nay, some men already through some
such motive, enticed by their passion for knowledge of the
future, have had set before them, instead of a groaning board
a sacred and modest one, and have hailed the joys of a couch pure
and undefiled. For as to the man who would consult his bed as
he does the tripod of the Pythian deity, far be it from him to make
the nights spent in it witnesses of unbridled passion. Rather does
he bow before God and pray to Him. What is collected little by
little becomes much in the end, and that which happens through
quite another cause terminates in a greater one. Thus those who
did not set out at first with this object have come, in their advance,
to love God and one day to be united to Him. We must not
therefore disregard a prophetic art which journeys to divine things,
and has, dependent on it, the most precious of all things which
are in the power of man. Nor indeed has the soul that is united
with God less need here because of the fact that it has been deemed
worthy to handle better things. Nor is it heedless of the animal
in us.

Nay, from its vantage ground it has a steady and much more
distinct view of things below than when it is with them and is
mingled with the inferior elements. Remaining unmoved, it will
give to the animal in us the appearances of things that come into
existence. This is, according to the proverb, ‘to descend without
descending’, where the better takes unchallenged mastery of the
worse. This art of divination I resolve to possess for myself and
to bequeath to my children. In order to enter upon this no man
need pack up for a long journey or voyage beyond the frontiers,


5


=<


5


25


39


CONCERNING DREAMS 343


as to Pytho or to Hammon. It is enough to wash one’s hands, to
keep a holy silence, and to sleep.
‘Then did she make all ablutions, and dressing in purified raiment
Prayed she long time to Athene.. .”?


5s 8. Weshall pray for a dream, even as Homer, perchance, prayed.
And if you are worthy, the god far away is present with you. Nay,
even what time the god sets little store on these matters, he comes
to your side if only you are asleep; and this is the whole system
of the initiation. In it no one has ever yet lamented his poverty,
zo on the ground that thus he had less possessions than the rich.
On the other hand, some of the ceremonies which deal with fore-
knowledge choose their priests from the most heavily assessed as
the Athenians chose their trierarchs. And great expense there
must needs be, and, no less, happy opportunity, if we are to obtain
13 a Cretan herb, an Egyptian feather, an Iberian bone, and, by
Zeus, some prodigy begotten and nourished in a hidden corner of
earth or sea,
‘Where that the sun god sinks neath the earth and where he arises.’ ?


For surely this and much like it is said of those who practise

20 external divination, and what ordinary person would be rich
enough for this out of his own resources? But the dream is visible
to the man who is worth five hundred medimn1, and equally to the
possessor of three hundred, to the teamster no less than to the
peasant who tills the boundary land for a livelihood, to the galley-

25 Slave and the common labourer alike, to the exempted and to the
payer of taxes.

It makes no difference to the god whether a man is an ¢édeo-
boutades or a newly-bought slave.* And this accessibility to all
makes divination very humane; for its simple and artless charac-

3o ter is worthy of a philosopher, and its freedom from violence gives


* Odyssey, iv. 750, 752 (739. 761); cf. xvii. 49 £.
2 Ibid. i. 24. 3 Demosthenes, p. 573. 10.


1304


344 DE INSOMNIIS


it sanctity. That it is present everywhere and does not employ
water or rock or a chasm in the earth, is its most divine quality,
and that through divination of this sort we do not become occupied
with one matter only, or lose opportunities through it, this also
is the first thing worthy to say of it. For surely no one ever
left any important matter he might have in hand, to go home to
sleep, to meet a dream by appointment. Time, however, which
the living being must spend on his nature, inasmuch as our being
in the waking state is insufficient to the support of its energy,
time, I say, has come to convey to men, as the proverb has it, ‘the
by-work which is greater than the work’, for it links the desirable
with the inevitable and well-being with being itself. As to these
forms of foreknowledge, on the other hand, which come to us
through all manner of instruments, we must be content if, having
occupied the greater part of life, they make some concession to
its remaining needs and activities. If you were to give yourself
up to any of these things, you would scarcely find divination of
use to you for your purpose, forit is not every place or every season
in which one can receive the equipment for the initiation, nor is
there every facility for carrying about with you the necessary
implements. To speak of nothing else but those things with which
the prisons were lately congested, they are loads for a wagon or
a ship’s hold. Combined with this there are other elements in the
initiation, namely registrars and witnesses.‘ For this would be
a more accurate statement, since our time has made many de-
nunciations through those who serve the laws, by whom once
betrayed, such initiations become matters for the gaze and the
hearing of an unholy mob.

Thus, in addition to the baseness of stooping to such practices,
it is, I am persuaded, a course hateful to the god. For not to
await voluntarily any one’s coming, but to set him moving by
pressure and leverage, this is like the employment of force,

1 Cf. De Prov. 1269, B. 7.


5


30


CONCERNING DREAMS 345


a thing which even when it has happened among men, the legis-
lator has not allowed to pass unpunished. In addition to all
these points, difficult enough to those who seek after the future
in this way, there is also the chance of interruption of their activity,
s and to those who go abroad, the abandonment of the art; for it
is no small matter, when moving everywhere, to pack and convey
the properties necessary for its practice.
Of divination by dreams, each one of us is perforce his own instru-
ment, so much so that it is not possible to desert our oracle there
ro even if we so desired. Nay, even if we remain at home, she dwells
with us; if we go abroad she accompanies us; she is with us on the
field of battle, she is at our side in the life of the city; she labours
with us in the fields and barters with us in the market place. The
laws of a malicious government do not forbid her, nor would they
15 have the power to do so, even if they wished it, for they have no
proof against those who invoke her. For how then? Should we be
violating the law by sleeping? A tyrant could never enjoin us not
to gaze into dreams, at least not unless he actually banished sleep
from his kingdom; and it would be the act of a fool to wish for
20 that which is impossible of fulfilment, and of an impious man to
make laws which should be contrary to nature and to God. To her
then we must go, woman and man of us, young and old, poor
and rich alike, the private citizen and the ruler, the town dweller
and the rustic, the artisan and the orator. She repudiates neither
25 race, nor age, nor condition, nor calling. She is present to every
one, everywhere, this zealous prophetess, this wise counsellor, who
holdeth her peace. She herself is alike initiator and initiated, to
announce to us good tidings ; in such wise as to prolong our pleasure
by seizing joy beforehand; to inform against the worst so as to
30 guard against and to repel it beforehand.
For whatsoever things of use and of sweetness those hopes,
which nourish the race of men,’ hold out to him, and as many


1 Sophocles, Fragment 862 (ed. Nauck?, Leipzig, 1889).


1305


346 DE INSOMNIIS


things as fear controls, things ominous and withal gainful, all
these things are found in dreams, nor by any other thing are
we so enticed towards hope. And the element of hope is so
abundant and so salutary in its nature that, as acute thinkers
maintain, men would not even be willing to continue life, if it
were only to be such as they had at the beginning. For
they would forswear life by reason of the terrible misfortunes
abounding therein, had not Prometheus? injected hopes into their
nature, that drug of constancy, under the influence of which they
esteem the anticipated to be more worthy of trust than that which
is before their eyes. And these hopes have such force that he who
is bound in fetters, whenever he permits the will of his heart to
hope, is straightway unbound. He enters the army, straightway
becomes a lieutenant, after a little, a captain. He then becomes
a general, makes conquests, and sacrifices to the gods; his head
crowned with garlands, he gives a banquet, a Sicilian or a Median,?
as he pleases; and in truth he is forgetful of his feet as long as he
dreams of being a general.

Now all this is the waking state of the dreamer, or the sleeping
state of the awakened,’ for both are concentrated upon the same
underlying state, to wit the imaginative nature, and whenever we
wish toconvert this into images, this one benefit is always at hand;
good cheer anoints our life and, flattering our soul with illusive
hopes, lifts it aloft from the perception of things ill to be borne.
And when it spontaneously presents hope to us, as happens in
our sleeping state, then we have in the promise of our dreams
a pledge from the divinity. Thus any one who has prepared his
mind to enjoy those greater things which the dream state held out
to him, has twice profited, for that first he had delighted in these
things beforehand, and that secondly he is in a position to use


1 Cf. Aesch. Prometheus, 252:
2 Cf. Thucyd. i. 130; Aristoph., frag. 216 (0.C.T.) ; Plat. Leges, 695 B.
5 Cf. Aelian, Varia Historia, xiii. 29.


5


30


CONCERNING DREAMS 347


them wisely, when they have come his way, because of his previous
examination of them, as things which befit his life.
Thus Pindar praised hope in song, when he said concerning
a happy man, that ‘with him liveth sweet hope, the nurse of youth,
5 the fosterer of his heart, hope who chiefly ruleth the changeful
mind of man’.! One would say that no allusion is made here to the
false hope which in a waking state we mould for ourselves, but all
the words of Pindar in this passage are praises of only a small
part of dreams. Now the divination of dreams which follows up
1o the phenomenon with scientific methods gives us a stronger hope,
and from this it seems not to belong to the slighter class. And so
the Penelope of Homer assumes that there are two gates of dreams,
and makes half of them deceptive dreams, only because she was
not instructed in the matter. For if she had been versed in their
15 science, She would have made them all pass out through the gate
of horn. As it is, she has been represented as guilty of ignorance
about her very sight, for she distrusted it without reason.


‘The geese are the wooers, and I that bird, the eagle,
I am Odysseus.’?


20 He was under the same roof as she, and it was to him that she was
babbling in the vision. I seem, therefore, to hear Homer say in
such words as these, that it is not right to despair of dreams, and
that we should not confuse the weakness of the interpreter with
the nature of the visions themselves, nor is Agamemnon in the

25 right when he brings a charge of deception against dreams, for he
erroneously interprets this prophecy concerning victory:

‘Bade thee call up then to arms the flowing-haired, the Achaeans,
Summoning all their force : thou mayst capture the wide-wayed city.”


He advances indeed to take the city without striking a blow,
30 because he has misinterpreted the phrase, ‘with all their forces’,


1 Pindar, Fragment 214, Schroeder. 2 Odyssey, xix. 548.
3 Iliad, ii, 11 f.
2878.2 P


348 DE INSOMNIIS


which means that he might take it, if he armed all the Greeks, even
to the last man, whereas Achilles and the Myrmidon phalanx were
out of the fighting, and they were the bravest of the army.

Let this suffice for my encomium on divination, and let us
dismiss the subject.


g. Yet I have narrowly missed incurring a charge of ingratitude ;
for while I explained just now that it (¢.e., divination by dreams) is
a good thing wherewith to journey or stay at home, to trade or
command troops, and that it helps all men and all things, yet Ihave
never made public what it has done for me personally. Certainly
no other thing is so well calculated to join in man’s pursuit of
wisdom ; and of many of the things which present difficulties to
us awake, some of these it makes completely clear while we are
asleep, and others it helps us to explain. And something of this
sort happens. At one moment one seems like a man asking
questions, at another the same man discovering and in process
of thought. It has frequently helped‘ me to write books, for it has
prepared the mind and made the diction appropriate to the
thought. Here it cuts out something, there it brings in new matter
instead. It has befallen me already to be admonished by it also
in respect of the whole style of my language, when it runs riot and
flames up with novel forms of diction, in emulation of the archaic
Attic, which is foreign to us, and this by the agency of a god who,
at one moment tells me something, and again what something
means, and at another shows me how to smooth down the ex-
crescences growing out of my language. Thus it has restored my
diction to a state of sobriety, and has castigated my inflated
style. Moreover when I am engaged in the chase, it has suggested
to me stratagems of the hunter’s art against those wild beasts who
show skill alike in running and hiding; and when in weariness I
have been on the point of abandoning the quest, the dream

1 An unregistered sense of the word ouvefepyd{oua:, demanded by the context.


~“


Oo


30


CONCERNING DREAMS 349


has enjoined upon me a blockade of the quarry, and has promised

me fortune on an appointed day, so that we have slept in the open

more happily and with confidence. And when the day appointed

has come and fortune is with us at last, it has shown us swarms of
s netted game and of wild beasts that have fallen to our spears.

My life has been one of books and of the chase, except what time
I spent as an ambassador. Would that I had not been compelled
to see three unspeakable years lost to my life! But even in them
I derived the greatest profit from divination, and that on many

zo occasions. For plots directed against me it made ineffective,
plots of ghost-raising sorcerers. It exposed these to me, saved me
from them all, and helped me in the management of public office
in the best interest of the cities, and it finally placed me, more
undaunted than was ever any Greek, on terms of intimacy with
15 the emperor.

One man may prefer one, another man another (system of
divination), but dream divination is present to all, the good genius
to every man, and one that contrives something for the minds of
the awakened also. In this way is a soul a wise possession, that it

201s free from a whole flood of vulgar sensations which attract to
it extraneous matter of every sort. Whatever ‘ideas it has, and
however many things it receives from the mind, all these, when left
to itself, it makes over to those who are inclined towards that
which is within, and it ferries across to them whatsoe’er comes

25 from the godhead. For as it is itself of such a character, a cosmic
god is also associated with it, from the fact that its nature comes
from the same source.


10. Such categories of dreams, then, are more divine, and are
either quite clear and obvious, or nearly so, and in no wise stand
30 in need of the diviner’s science. But they may come to the help
only of such men as live according to virtue, whether that be
acquired by wisdom or engrained by habit, and if at a given


350 DE INSOMNIIS


moment they should come to any other, it would be with difficulty,
though they might so come.

It is not for some trifling purpose that a dream of this higher
order will come to the chance recipient. Further, a frequent and
avery widely shared class will bethe enigmatic. To this the science
of divination must be applied, for its genesis was, so to speak,
strange and portentous, and as it has sprung from such sources,
its development is most obscure. Now its character is as follows.
From all that nature possesses, all things that are, that have come
into being and that shall be (since this too is a phase of existence),
from all these things, I say, images flow and rebound from their
substance. For if each perceptible thing is form coupled with
matter, and if we discover an escape of matter in the combination,
reasoning shows that the nature of the images also is canalized,
so that in both cases perceptible things renounce the dignity of
real being. Now the imaginative pneuma is a powerful reflecting
mirror of all the images that flow off in this way.’ For, wandering
in vain and slipping from their base, on account of the indefinite-
ness of their nature, and because they are recognized by no being
of real existence, whenever these fall in with psychical pneumata,
the which are images indeed, and have a seat fixed in nature, then
they lean upon them and take their rest as though at their own
hearthstone. Of those things, therefore, which have come into
being, inasmuch as they have already passed into the activity of
existence, the images sent forth are distinct, until in the fullness
of time they become faint and evanescent. Of existing things,
inasmuch as they are still standing, the images are more tenacious
of life and more distinct, but those of future events are more in-
definite and indistinguishable. For they are the advanced waves
of things not yet present, efflorescences of unfulfilled nature,


1312 aS it were, riddles of closely stored seeds, skipping away and


darting out.


1 Plutarch, Jsis and Osiris, pp. 383 F, 384 A.


5


=


Oo


30


CONCERNING DREAMS 351


Thus also art is needed with a view to coming events, for the
images which proceed from them are only shadowed, and the
symbols are not as clear as in the case of already existing things.
Nevertheless they are of a wonderful nature, even as they stand,

s wonderful in that they have come into existence from things that
have not yet existed.


11. But it is high time that we should say of this art how it may
help us. The best way is to prepare the divine pneuma in such
wise that it may be worthy of the direction of mind and of God,

1o and not be a recipient of obscure energies. And the best culture
is the one leading through philosophy, which brings a calm from
passions, for when once disturbed by these the pneuma is occupied,
as it were a territory; and through a wise and temperate life, one
that least maddens the animal nature and that has least tendency

15 to bring it into the last body. For turmoil would reach even to the
first body, but this ought to be kept unperturbed and unmoved.
But since this is an easy prayer for every one to join in, but is of
all things the most difficult to co-operate in attaining, then as we
wish sleep to be unprofitable to none, come now, let us seek

20a definition even for indefinable things; in a word, let us put
together an art of divining dream-images. Now it is something in
this wise. When mariners sailing the sea come suddenly upon
a rock, and presently disembarking see a city of men, as often as
they see the saine rock, they will take it as a sign of the city. And

2§ just as when, in the case of generals, we know from the scouts that
they themselves will appear, though we do not see them (for that
from the same indication they have always in the past appeared
on the scene); so on each occasion we obtain from the dream-
images a signal of the activity of coming events.

30 For these are forerunners of those same things, and like things
are forerunners of like. Therefore it is the skipper’s fault if, when
the same rock becomes visible, he fails to recognize it, or is unable


352 DE INSOMNIIS


to say to what land the ship is moving; and as such a man sails
without a chart, in the same way the man who has often
seen the same sight, if he fails to observe of what experience
or fortune or event it is prophetic, such a man makes as foolish
a use of his life as does the skipper in question of his ship. Thus 5
we predict storms in a time of perfect atmospheric peace, the
moment we see haloes about the moon, because on many occa-
sions when we have observed this appearance a tempest has


followed.

“When that a halo is single, then mayst thou foretell calm and wind- ro
storms;

Broken the halo, then know that ’tis wind; when it fadeth, calm
weather.


Once that the moon is surrounded by haloes twain, a storm cometh,


And should that ring grow to triple encirclement, storms rage the 15
greater ;


And ever greater, if darkened; yet greater, if broken the halo.’*


Aristotle and reason assert that in every case sense-perception
creates memory, Memory experience, experience in turn science.
So then let us tread the path to dreams. To this end many books 20
have already been collected by certain men, devoted to such
observation. But for my part, I laugh at all these books and
1313 think them of little use. For not like the last body, which is
a combination of associated elements, can it (divination) accept a
(system of) art and logic altogether conformable to its nature, 25
inasmuch as the body generally experiences the same results from
the same causes, because the difference between bodies of like
nature is small, and that one amongst them which is contrary to
nature is not diseased without our knowledge, nor do we adopt
such a standard as this.
This is not the case with the imaginative pneuma. In the first
nature also one thing differs from another, because one thing
1 Aratus, Phaenom. 812 ff. (Mair, p. 442).


Kit


CONCERNING DREAMS 353


belongs appropriately to one sphere, another to another, in pro-
portion to the extent of the mingling.

‘Happy are they of a truth, nay happiest are they of all those

Souls whosoever are poured adown upon earth from high heaven ;

5 And they are happy, they also, although no renown be their portion,
So many as from thyself, Oh Sovran, who shinest resplendent,
Spring into life e’en from Zeus and from mighty Necessity’s spindle.’ ?

Now this is what Timaeus set forth darkly, when he assigned
to each soul its proper star; but those souls which left their
1o proper nature, by loving to dwell in the region of matter, one
of them more, another less, each of these, for as much as it
has been unfortunate in its inclination, has sullied its pneuma.
In this plight such souls take up their abode in bodies, and their
whole life is passed in error, and in a disease of the pneuma,
15 a disease unnatural to the latter on account of its original nobility,
although natural to the animal being (for that itself was animated
through a pneuma of this sort) unless it be that its nature is the
grade in which it is enrolled of its own choice, through its practice
of good and evil; for nothing is so versatile as the pneuma.
zo How then in the case of things dissimilar by nature, law, and
experience, could the same things be revealed by the same images?
This is impossible; it could not be. How could troubled and
limpid waters, stagnant and moving water be alike affected by the
same shape? And if the difference of the troubled water at one
25 place and another be a difference of colour, and the movements
show themselves in various configurations, in this way alone
would it be one in character, namely in always diverging from the
clear-cut image. Now if such a difference exists, if accordingly
some Phemonoe,? or somebody’s Melampus,’ or any individual you
30 please, pretends to make some general definition and arrangement
concerning such phenomena, let us ascertain from such men
whether it is natural that the plane mirror, the distorted, and


1 Unidentified lines. 2 Strabo, ix. 3, 5. + Herodotus, ii. 49.


354 DE INSOMNIIS


that made from dissimilar materials, should reflect a like image
of the thing shown. Such men as these have not even done,
I think, any philosophical thinking at all on the nature of the
pneuma, although that which is proper to it, in whatsoever state
it may be, they consider to be a rule and standard for everything. 5
Now for my own part, I do not deny that there is an element of
likeness in dissimilar things; but I affirm that the obscure
becomes all the more obscure by dispersion. The image of the thing
which leaped out prematurely was, I presume, even in the beginning
difficult to find out. It is even more difficult in an individual ro
character to capture that which is like a general image.


12. For this reason we must dismiss the idea that all men are
1316 under the same laws; rather must each man hold himself as
material for the art. Let him inscribe on his memory the affairs
in which he has been involved, and the nature of the visions 15
which have preceded them.

Mastery in the art is acquired without difficulty where neces-
sity is involved in the practice. The need reminds one of the
practice, and especially on every occasion that it is well off for
material. For what could be more abundant than dreams, and 20
what more fascinating? These induce even fools to pay heed
to them. It would therefore be shameful for those who have
lived ten years beyond adolescence to stand in need of any
other diviner, shameful that they should not have accumulated
an abundant store of technical principles. It would be a wise 25
proceeding even to publish our waking and sleeping visions and
their attendant circumstances; the wise thing to do, I say, unless
the culture of the city is like to be too rustic for so novel an
enterprise. We shall therefore see fit to add to what are called
‘day books’ what we term ‘night books’, so as to have records to 30
remind us of the character of each of the two lives concerned ;
for our argument already laid it down that a certain life exists in


CONCERNING DREAMS 355


imagination, at one moment better, at another worse than the
intermediate, according to the relation of the pneuma to health
and disease. If in this way, therefore, we make profitable the
observation by which the art is developed, and if nothing slips

5 our memory, in other respects also the result will be a refined
pastime; it will be paying oneself the compliment of a history
of one’s waking and sleeping moments.

As to those who occupy themselves with public speaking, I do
not know any other foundation to replace this as a compre-

10 hensive basis for exercise in the power of speech ; for if the sophist
of Lemnos’ says that the day books are good teachers of effective
oratory on every subject, for that they do not overlook matters
of lesser importance, but compel one to go through the trivial and
the serious alike, is it not worth while to value night books as

15 a subject for oratory?

Any one can see how great the work is, on attempting to
fit language to visions, visions in which those things which are
united in nature are separated, and things separated in nature are
united, and he is obliged to show in speech what has not been

20 revealed. It is no mean achievement to pass on to another some-
thing of a strange nature that has stirred in one’s own soul,
for whenever by this phantasy (of dreaming) things which are
expelled from the order of being, and things which never in any
possible way existed, are brought instead into being—nay, even

25 things which have not a nature capable of existence, what con-
trivance is there for presenting a nameless nature to things which
are per se inconceivable? Again, it (the phantasy) neither makes
these forms appear numerous and all present at the same moment,
nor yet does it present them after an interval, but exactly as the

30 dream itself might have them and pass? them on to us; for we
believe whatever it wills us to believe. To survive at all and with-
out cutting a sorry figure amidst all this, would be proof of a

1 Philostratus. 2 Reading dpéyos rd.
sia Q


356 DE INSOMNIIS


masterly rhetoric. It conducts itself wantonly even against our
understanding itself, becoming the cause of something more than
thought. For we are not indeed insensible to the visions; rather
are our approbations and partialities strong, and not least our
detestations. And the many trickeries that are bound up with 5
this, attack us in our sleep. Pleasure is at that moment most of
all a thing full of charm, such as to impart to our souls loves or
hatreds even in the waking state. If any one were to utter no
lifeless words, but rather to accomplish that for the sake of which
the discourse was seriously undertaken, he would need stirring to
language to put his auditor into the same condition and amidst
1317 the same thoughts as himself.

Now in dreams one conquers, walks, or flies simultaneously,
and the imagination has room for it all; but how shall mere
speech find room for it? So a man sleeps and dreams; he sees 15
a dream, and arises from it still sleeping, as he thinks, and shakes
off his dream while still recumbent. He philosophizes a little on
the vision that has appeared to him, according to his knowledge ;
and this is a dream, but the other is a double dream. Accordingly
he believes it not, and thinks that now he is awake and that what 20
appears to him is really alive. Forthwith a fierce struggle ensues,
and a man dreams that an attack is made on himself, then that he
has left all behind and is waking up, again that he has made trial
of himself and has discovered the deception. In some such way
must the sons of Aloeus be suffering punishment for piling up the 25
mountains of Thessaly against the gods.‘ But there is no law of
Adrastea? in the way of the sleeper, to forbid him from rising from
earth more happily than Icarus, from soaring above the eagles,
or reaching a point above the loftiest spheres themselves. So one
looks steadily upon the earth from afar, and discovers a land not 30
visible even to the moon. It is also in his power to hold converse


1 Otus and Ephialtes, who attempted to pile Ossa on Olympus and Pelion on
Ossa. Odyssey, xi. 315. 2 Cf. Syn. Ep. 4, p. 85 of my translation.


CONCERNING DREAMS 357


with the stars and to meet the unseen gods of the universe. That
which is difficult to describe then takes place easily, namely that
the gods are visibly manifest, nor do the gods feel even a particle
of jealousy. The dreamer has not even descended to the earth
s after a short interval; he is already there. Nothing is so charac-
teristic of dreams as to steal space and to create without time.
Then the sleeper converses with sheep and fancies their bleating
to be speech, and he understands their talk. So new and so
extensive a wealth of subjects is there for one who has the
10 courage to let loose his language upon them.


13. I even think that myths take their authority from dreams,
as those in which peacock, fox, and sea hold converse. But these
are small things compared with the independence of dreams. And
although myths are a very small part of dreams, nevertheless they

1s were approved by the sophists as a preparation for the work of
eloquence. And for these men to whom the myth is the beginning
of their art, the dream ought to be its appropriate end. And there
is this in addition, that one has not worked the tongue in vain, as in
the case of myths, but that he has become wiser in judgement. Let
20 every man, then, with leisure and ease proceed to write a narrative
of whatsoe’er happens in his waking and sleeping states. Let him
spend some of his time on this. Of the time so spent the greatest
help will be found in his knowledge of letters. Let him put to-
gether the art of divination which we have extolled, than which
25 nothing could be of more varied service to him. Above all we must
not discard even the style, which follows in the wake of subject-
matter, for to the philosopher this would be mere child’s-play,
in which the tension of the string would be relaxed, even as
the Scythians deal with their bows. And let us recommend it to
30 the orator as the summit of his eloquence. Of a truth they do not
seem to me to employ their powers opportunely upon Miltiades
1 Cf. Plato, Phaedrus, 247 A.


358 DE INSOMNIIS


and Cimon,' and also on certain nameless persons; again, on rich
1320 and poor opposed to one another in politics, on which matters
I have seen even old men disputing with their colleagues in the
lecture-room. True, the two sat there with all the high seriousness
of philosophy, and each tugged at his beard, that as far as one could 5
guess weighed a talent. All this dignity did not prevent them
from indulging in abuse and anger, or from tossing their hands
about wildly, the while they delivered interminable speeches on
behalf of men, their intimate friends, as I supposed at the time,
but who, as the teachers of new branches were not slow to inform 1o
me, really neither existed, nor had ever been born; not to speak
of their being intimate friends, they had not even any existence
in nature. What state could anywhere exist of such a sort as to
accord to a chief the privilege of killing a political enemy, and if
at ninety years of age one is engaged in fighting a phantom, to 15
what season does one postpone truth of speech? In fact these
men do not seem to me to understand even the word ‘practice’,
because it professes to work with another end in view, but con-
sider the training to be an end in itself, and they are delighted
with the road, as if it were the goal to which they were proceeding, 20
for they have made the training a contest. It is just as if any one
who had sparred in the palaestra should demand that (his practice)
be heralded abroad as the pancration at Olympia.

So complete a drought of thought and such a deluge of words
have possessed these men that some of them who are able to 25
speak, have nothing worth saying; they must needs take delight
in themselves, like Archilochus and Alcaeus, each of whom spent
his eloquence on his own private life. Yet the course of time
preserves the memory both of their sorrows and their joys, for
they have not produced words hanging in the void on artificial 30
themes, like this young and wise generation. Nor have they
accorded their own proper virtue to others, as did Homer and

2 Plutarch, Cimon 18.


CONCERNING DREAMS 359


Stesichorus, who made the heroic race more glorious by their
poems (and we have profited by their zeal for virtue), but have
been so completely neglected in themselves that we are unable to
say anything about them except that they were great poets.

s Whosoever therefore aspires to be spoken of by man in the future,
and is conscious of the power to create immortal works on the
tablets, let him courageously follow our lawless style of composi-
tion. Then let him commend himself to time: it is a noble
guardian whenever anything divine is entrusted to it.


1573


CONSTITUTIO


INASMUCH as I have not chosen a philosophy that stands aloof
from public life, and inasmuch as the religion that most cherishes
humanity urges us to acquire a character devoted to the common


1576 weal, I have given ear to your summons, and I am glad to know


the reasons which have brought the two cities so speedily into
agreement. For I think it will be profitable totthem, both now
and in the future, that they are at once grateful and show their
gratitude towards those who initiated kind actions. I welcomed
therefore the united expressions of the people and at the same
time I extolled all individual speakers with praise. But I too
must needs be of the company of eulogists, and this also becomes
me more than all others. I even consider that I myself owe thanks
to those who have conferred any benefit, on behalf of every
one, whether an individual or a city. For how can the man whose
duty it is to pray for the common good, fail in gratitude to him
who has added to it by his military service and the rest of his
administration? How can I fail to treat with all honour the man
who has throughout laboured with the sweat of his brow, that
I may obtain the object of my prayers, that the accursed bar-
barians should perish evilly, in evil wise? It was I indeed that
prayed to God, but it was the hands of Anysius that carried out
God’s will. Of the cavalry who attacked us the other day, over
a thousand in number, not the fifth part survives, say those who
have suffered. They themselves yet live and have counted the
fallen. These results, too, have been attained with no great army
to lead the way; but the men who fought along with them
numbered forty. I will say nothing derogatory to the cavalry
and infantry we are supporting, but he, Anysius, thinks that we
ought to use the Unnigardae for everything. The rest of his


5


CONSTITUTIO 361


forces, numerous as they were, he did not even lead out to be
spectators of the prowess of others. These men can carry out
the military plans of this chief only. He is their comrade
in arms and captain; he is their fellow-soldier and general.
s With them as an armed guard he runs a course through the
country. He appears quickly everywhere, and he conquers where-
ever he appears. If there were more of these troops in addition to
the two hundred that we have, I boldly declare that with the help
of God this young leader would transfer the war to the enemy’s
ro country. We shall have to ask for two hundred Unnigardae, with
Anysius as general, if we are to bring back our kinsmen from the
land of the barbarians.
Would that I might live to see a division of spoils taken from
their bodies, and the erstwhile master of barbarian captives doing
15 his turn as a slave! It was easy enough to pray for this a day or
or two ago, but now we may even hope for it. Trustworthy facts
before our eyes have become pledges of our expectations. To
achieve this, therefore, Anysius must take the field at the head of
two hundred Unnigardae. This man has both the nature and the
20 training which fit him to handle the Unnigardae. He has the
faculty of equipping them completely and of keeping them in hand.
The Unnigardae with Anysius are the hands of Rome. The forty
we have with us I could praise for their strength quite apart from
him, but I would not answer for their judgement. Let an am-
25 bassadorial report be sent concerning him, requesting troops and
an extension of time for this noble fellow. And what a man, too,
in other respects! Was it not he who brought to an end the war
we had in time of peace, one almost more severe than the barbarian
war, proceeding as it did from the indiscipline of the soldiers and
30 the cupidity of the officers? To him alone of the many generals is
it due that a civilian who has been wronged can now raise his
voice louder than a soldier’s. Who can be described as incor-
ruptible? Is it not he who makes small case even of lawful gains


362 CONSTITUTIO

of his own? Who could be more religious than he who makes a

beginning with God in every word and deed? In return for all
1577 these gifts we may all of us here present pray that a long and

comfortable old age may be continued to him, and that his virtue

may increase as the years go by.


CATASTASIS


I FoR one do not know what I ought to say about the mis-
fortunes that are happening before our very eyes, for they who
must needs lament have no time for words, nor could words be
commensurate with the events. Nay, even the power of weeping

s has failed some men, so terrified are they by the magnitude of
the evils befalling them. But since God hath regard to those that
lament, and since they who wield the sceptre of the Romans ought,
themselves also, to know this, do you write to whomsoever you
may of those empowered to bring a statement before the council

10 of the emperor. Let some one announce to this body, in brief, that
until the other day Pentapolis was still a province valuable to an
emperor. If it is outdistanced in power by otherstates, none the less
it is more loyal than those greater in power. This is known to such
as have entered into public life with a mind turned upon adminis-

15 tration; and among these, as I hear and am persuaded, the great
Anthemius holds the first place. He has seen in how many
moments of crisis we have given ready support to our emperor,
and of these how many were moments of tyranny. Until the
other day the state of Pentapolis belonged to the Romans, who

20 have now, to the nation’s cost, passed her over in enumerating
their provinces. Pentapolis has now quite clearly vanished; she
has reached a state of extremity. Prolonging her agony to the
seventh year, as some animal tenacious of life, she was drawing in
and gathering together what breath remained to her.

25 The propitious memory of Anysius has made her time of life
a year longer; he it was who used the lances of all men and the
hands of the Unnigardae at the critical moment. There came, in
consequence, a certain postponement of disaster. For they (the
barbarians) were not poured over the country in a compact mass.

298.2 R


1565


1568


364 CATASTASIS


They changed their formation to that of marauding bands. They
kept retreating and advancing. But after changing their minds
when already three times drawn up for battle, the plains are
captured by their horse, while our own troops are shut up
within walled towns, scattered apart, some here, some there;—the 5
mistake this of Cerialis’ time—and are useless to each other because
they are not concentrated. The position of the enemy is therefore
brilliant. They who last year were on the alert and always ready

_ to retreat, are now besiegers, are now tearing down the walls of

' villages, are now investing cities with a large force at their disposal. 10
What indeed has not turned out to their advantage! The Ausu-
rians have put on the breastplates of the Thracian cavalry, not
of necessity, but to mock at the uniform. Besides these they
employed the shields of the Marcomani. The heavy-armed Roman
force has degenerated into light-infantry. They find their safety 1;
in the compassion of their enemies. I weep for these men, I do
not reproach them with the calamity.

What could the Unnigardae have done against a force so vastly
superior, and at moments when a small detachment of them en-
counters its serried masses? They are preserved on the one 20
hand by the grace of God, by their strength and by their training
in arins; on the other hand by generalship: for what great harm
could they have inflicted on an enemy, if dispatched against
them by unwilling leaders? As often as, like young hounds, they
got out of hand, these leaders would take them by the throat, and 25
call them in, even before they had sated themselves with their
charge and their wild-beast slaughter. And moreover the Unni-
gardae were in need of a rear-guard and of an army drawn up in
order of battle. We had need, I think, of a phalanx, as an efficient
sword, the more vigorous part to thrust out with and the stouter 30
to give the second blow. In this way the stroke becomes more dis-
ruptive. In any case, the number of these troops is a small one’
wherewith to finish the war, a war which could not be fought to


CATASTASIS 365


a finish in such a country as ours. But unless some one can trans-
port Unnigardae into the enemy’s country, we shall need a force
of four hundred to protect us against them. Nay, already had
we need of such a force and commander before we were so com-
5 pletely routed and before the resources of the enemy had increased
to such an extent.

For this final struggle even women joined in the campaign.
I have seen, yes I have often seen a woman carrying a sword
and suckling infants at the same time. Who does not desire the
10 war that is free from danger? I am full of shame at my fears for
myself, for the times and for the Empire. O for the spirit of the
Romans of old! Winners of all their battles everywhere, they who
united the continents by their victories, are now in danger of losing
through a wretched nomadic tribe the Libyan cities, as well as the
15 Greek, and Egyptian Alexandria also! The former loss is greater
from the point of view of wealth, the latter is not less so from
that of renown, if any one knows the meaning of shame and sets
any store on decency. Alas for the audacity with which they
have taken the land as if in a drag-net! No mountain is impassable
20 for them nor is any fort secure. They have traversed and explored
every country, and they have reduced young and old to slavery.

I have long been listening to Greek historians:


“THE ENEMY LEFT THE WOMEN AND CHILDREN BEHIND AS A TOKEN
OF THE DEVASTATION THEY HAD WREAKED IN THE WAR.’


25 Quite otherwise have matters turned out for Pentapolis. For
what possession is fairer to the Ausurian than wife and child, that
the former may bear him sons, and that the latter, when of age,
may serveinthearmy? For the children become fond of those who
have filled the place of parents in their upbringing. Alas for the ill-

30 fated colony that we are sending out! Our youth is being carried off
captive to augment the armies of our foe ; a people will come with
enmity against their native land. A young man will devastate the


366 CATASTASIS


land which when still a stripling he cultivated with his father.
Now he is on the march, now he is led away. Now the youth of
Pentapolis is still in chains. Not one comes to the rescue or is able
todoso. And yet they say that the general is full of zeal, but the
Alexandrians who direct the campaign there, with evil destiny for 5
Pentapolis, do not allow him to act.

After all, who would blame the guiltless, for whom the burden of
years and chronic attacks of disease have invoked our mercy?
It would have been easy, no doubt, if we had been fortunate
in our generals, to convict of impiety an army insolent and at ro
war with God. What sort of sacred or holy thing have they
spared? Have they not in many a place in the plain of Barca
destroyed newly-dug graves? Isit not by them that the churches
of our district of Ampelus have everywhere been burnt and
ruined? Did they not employ the sacred communion-tables for 15
the distribution of meat, as though they were profane? The holy
vessels, solemnly used for the public libation-ritual, they take
away now for the demons of the enemy country.

Which of these things could one permit to reach pious ears?
Any one who thinks the citadels which they have destroyed worth 20
remembering, and the utensils, furniture, cattle, and sheep that
have been hidden in the ravines, relics of the barbarian brigandage ;
such a man amidst so great disasters can scarcely escape the
charge of frivolity. And yet they loaded five thousand camels with
their booty, and retired with three times their number by the 2s
addition of captives, and their host was so much the greater.
Pentapolis is dead, extinguished; its end is come, it has been
assassinated, it has perished. It has passed entirely out of
existence, both for us and for its emperor. For a place from
which he will get no return, will be no possession for an emperor, 30

1572 and who shall collect fruit from the desert? As for me, I have no
longer a native place to desert. That I am not at sea and seeking
an island is, in my case, only from lack of a ship, for I distrust


CATASTASIS 367


Egypt. Even there a camel can cross with an Ausurian hoplite
on its back. I shall make an island my home, a poor instead
of a rich man, an alien less honoured than a citizen of Cythera,
for after many inquiries I have now ascertained that Cythera
sis opposite Pentapolis, and perhaps the south winds will carry
me thither. With their citizens I will live a stranger, a wanderer,
and if I attempt to say anything about my great ancestry, they
will not give it credence there.

Alas for Cyrene, whose public tablets trace the succession from
to Heracles down even to me! for Ishould not be accounteda simpleton
in my grief amongst men who know of the degradation of my noble
ancestry. Alas for the Dorian tombs wherein I shall find no place!
Unhappy Ptolemais, of which I was the last priest to be appointed!
The horror of it is ever with me. I can speak no longer, tears over-
1§ power my voice. ... I am full of the thought of what it will mean
to abandon the sacred objects. The crew ought already to have
put to sea, but when any one calls me to the ship I shall beg leave
to delay a little longer. I shall go first to the shrine of God, I shall
make the circuit of the altar. I shall drench the most precious
20 pavement with my tears; I shall not retreat from the spot before
I have said farewell to that portal and that throne. How many
times shall I call upon God and turn to Him, how often shall
I press my hands upon the railings! But necessity is a mighty
thing and all-powerful. I long to give to my eyes a sleep uninter-
25 rupted by the sound of the trumpet. How much longer shall
I stand upon the ramparts, how much longer shall I guard the
intervals between the turrets? I am weary of picketing the night
patrols, guarding others and guarded myself in turn, I who used
to hold many a vigil, waiting for the omens from the stars,
30 I am now worn out watching for the onsets of the enemy. We
sleep for a span measured by the water clock, and the alarm bell
often breaks in upon the portion allotted me for slumber. And if

I close my eyes for a moment, oh, what sombre dreams!


368 CATASTASIS


And to what sort of visions do our cares by day hurry us!

Cessation from troubles is the beginning of troubles. We are in

1573 flight, we are taken prisoners, we are wounded, we are bound in
chains, we are sold into slavery. How often have I arisen in joy
that I had escaped a master! How often have I arisen gasping 5
for breath and dripping with sweat, abandoning in the same
moment sleep and the race I was running with all my might, in
flight from an enemy hoplite! For us alone are the words of Hesiod
vain, to wit, that ‘Hope remains within the jar’. We are all with-
out courage and bereft of hope. The ‘unliveable’ life of the proverb, to
my men, is no other than the one which we are leading. What is
the delay? What are we coming to?

Pentapolis has incurred the hatred of God. Weare surrendered
to chastisement. There was the locust than which no evil is
more complete, there was the conflagration which consumed 15
the crops of three states even before the enemy came. What
is the limit to our evils? If the islands afford a respite from
these, I shall sail as soon as the sea abandons its evil passions.
But I fear that disaster may overtake me first. For the day
appointed for the attack is near at hand, with which 'tis said the 20
imperial courier, forerunner of the enemy force, menaced the city.
That moment most of all will warn the priests that they must
speedily rally to the precincts of God’s temple, if the danger reaches
the very walls of the city. I shall remain in my place at the church.

I shall place before me the vessels of holy water. I shall cling fast 25
to the sacred pillars which hold up the inviolate communion table
from the ground. There will I sit while I live, and lie when I am
dead. I am a minister of God, and perchance I must complete my
service by offering up my life. God will not in any case overlook
the altar, bloodless, though stained by the blood of a priest 30

“Supreme be thou in words, aye, and in deeds,

O Thalelaeus, whom all learning well befits.’


HOMILY I


I SHALL not make this festal assembly a silent one, nor again one 1561
of many speeches; for, although it is God whom I honour in my
speech, by bringing it to a speedy close I shall do what is pleasing
to the assembled company. But in order that you may be a partici-

s pant worthy of God in the festival, do not set your hearts on
the pleasures of the table, passing from fasting to drunkenness.
Offer to God a garlanded goblet of sober mixture. Our God is
wisdom and reason. A beaker that confuses reflection, that dis-
turbs the reasoning faculty, is quite alien to true reason. There is

10 a recreation that is befitting to God, and there is one that befits
evil spirits. ‘Exult ye in the Lord in fear’. When you feast, he
says, be you mindful of God, for it is then that most men slip into
sin. When the body is well nourished and grows fleshy, it deflects
the soul’s judgement. ‘In the hand of the Lord there is a cup

15 of unmixed wine filled with a mixture, and he pours from this
vessel into that, but the dregs of it have not been drained.’? Drink
thou of that cup, and thou hast become worthy of the banquet of
the bridegroom. That cup is beneficial, full of wine, and once
sought, 1s worthy to raise us to Mind. And indeed the passage is

20 quite clear, though many things fall a little short of compre-
hension. A drinking cup is full of a mixture in unmixed wine.
‘And he poured from this vessel into that’.? If it was of unmixed
wine, how is it full of a mixture, and if it is one, how did he pour it
from this to that? The words seem to be altogether nonsensical ;

25 not so, however, if really understood. God has no interest in
divinely inspired diction. The divine spirit disdains literary petti-
ness. Dost thou desire to behold the harmony of this discord? Con-
cerning what sort of cup is he speaking? It is the word which we
have from God, freely offered by God to men in the Old Testa-


1 Cf. Ps. ii. 11. 2 Ps. Ixxiv. 9.


370 HOMILY I


ment and the New, for by this drink is our soul watered. Inas-
much as it is a word, each of the two is unmixed, for even although
a double word it is mixed together, for what has been compounded
out of the two is one, a perfection of Gnosis. The Old Testament
contained the promise, and the New revealed the apostle, and the s
phrase ‘he poured from this into that’ shadows forth the succession
of the teachers of the law, that of Moses and that of the Lord, and
the cup is one, for one Spirit breathed both on the prophet and the
apostle, and like good painters, He sketched out, in days of old, and
thereafter exactly portrayed, the parts of the Gnosis, ‘but the 10
dregs of it have not been drained’.


HOMILY II


1564 IT is a holy night that brings light to those that are accursed,
a light greater than that wherewith any sun has ever illumined the
day. Lo, it is not holy that even the fairest thing upon the earth
should be compared to the Creator; but that light which illumines r¢
souls and lit up the perceptible sun is no piece of creation. It
exists through the harmony of its present blessedness, that will
bless us in the future. If you persevere in this way of thinking
you will maintain the soul ina more enviable state for the present,
if not for your whole life. At this moment each one of you goes 20
about the city as an announcing messenger. Now believe ye that
the words of scripture refer to you, that being on earth ye have
a citizenship in heaven.! Beware of missing your deserts, for hard
to wash out is the stain that comes after cleansing.

The people of Leontopolis adopted a resolution whose mildness 25
was out of keeping with their own nature. They let each other
alone, and indicted their neighbours for illegal action. Until the
the other day brothers were invoking the arm of the law against


1 Phil. iii. 20.


HOMILY II 371


brothers, son against father, and father against the family. Per-
haps the thing now taken in hand is not really the act of men
finally resorting to the ancestral course of mutual extermination ;
but while every private individual has his hand against his neigh-
s bour, the city is arrayed collectively against those who are unlucky
enough to live near to it. It would be unendurable to them if
the pattern of their constitution were not publicly that of an
informer, and if it did not slip into the position of a false accuser.
That we are in no way guilty, the very accusations furnish clear
ro proofs, when we have the good fortune to get the ear of a judge.
But we have learnt only to till the soil, not to address law courts.
Why then do these men think fit to overstep the limits that have
been assigned to them from time immemorial, and come against
us, who are more aflame than they. Why do they always sell the
rs Surplus to us, who are more parched than they and wronged by our
situation? Since there has been no profit this year, they insist that
our misfortunes should take its place. This is the object of the
writs recently issued, and their decrees have no other aim than
this. And they also make a second admission, which it is only just
20 that we should state first of all, and we alone; for it explains
their most unjust attempt. For having themselves long ago laid .
a foundation for their false accusations, to support their shameless
claims to make use of the water that does not belong to them,
they have now approached this most august court.


HYMN I


1588 Sounp forth, clear-tongued lyre, after the Teian cadence, after
the Lesbian movement ; sing to me in more time-honoured strains
a Dorian ode, not one for dainty love-laughing girls or for the
adolescence of flowering youths that compelleth desire; for it 1s
a sacred travail of divine wisdom and one unsullied that prompts 5
me to strike the strings of my lyre to a divine refrain, and bids me
flee from the honied infatuation of earthly loves. What is force
and what beauty, what is gold or renown, and what are royal
honours as compared with meditations upon God? Let one man be
apt in driving horses, another in bending the bow; let another 10
guard his treasure heaps, his golden joy. Another’s glory is the
hair that sweeps his neck. Let him be lauded on high for the
brightness of his countenance by youths and maidens in their
songs ; but may it be my lot to lead a life not noised abroad, a life
without display in what concerns other men, but that knows in 15
itself of what pertains to God. May wisdom be ever with me,
1589 wisdom the good guide of youth and of age, wisdom the just
mistress of wealth, she who smiling shall easily bear poverty,
impregnable to the bitter cares of life. May only so much be mine
as shall suffice to make me independent of my neighbour's hut,
sufficient that want may not bend me down to dark forebodings.
Listen now to the song of the cicada as she drinks the morning
dew. See how my lyre-strings cry out unbidden notes, how some
prophetic voice flutters about and around me. What melody shall
this divine parturition bear unto me? God, the Beginning created 25
of Himself, Guardian and Father of existing things, born without
birth, firmly enthroned above the pinnacles of heaven, proud in
glory unwaning, God sits steadfast, of unities the pure unity, and
the first monad of monads. He hath joined the elements of exalted
beings, bringing them to existence in supernatural acts of birth. 3°


~]


Oo


HYMN I 373


From out these the monad itself, rushing on through a first-

engendered form, diffused in unspeakable ways, holds the power

of three summits. But the fountain head which dominates, is

crowned with the beauty of children leaping from out the centre,
5 and again rushing towards the centre therein.

Pause, audacious lyre, I entreat ; pause, reveal not the mysteries
to the people at large, mysteries which are celebrated without
initiations; go thou and tell of the things here below; silence
covereth those above. And now mind is busy with mind’s created

ro universe, for out of this has the good beginning of man’s spirit
been divided beyond division. Mind that waneth not, though
descending to matter, is the seed of progenitors that reign in
right divine, a seed however feeble. But of these, this one whole
universal mind, this whole diffused into the whole, turns the vast
15 hollow of the heavens, and keeping guard upon this very whole
is ever present, parted into forms diverse. The one is in the con-
voying of the stars, another turns to the dances of angels, yet
another has found an earthly form by a bond descending, and is
severed from its parentage. Dark oblivion hath it drunk, and
20 wondereth, in its blind tormenting cares, at the joyless earth.
Albeit a God looking on mortal things is within it, there is still
a light in the veiled pupils of its eyes, there is some courage even
in those who have fallen here below, that summoneth them above,
what time that, fleeing from out the waves of mortal life, they enter
25 free from care on the sacred paths that lead to the palace of their
Parent. Happy he who fleeing the voracious cry of matter, and
rising from earth, urgeth with light bound his footsteps to God.
Happy he who after his allotted destiny, after troubles, after 1592
bitter earthly cares, enters on the pathways of mind and beholdeth
30 the deep profound that shineth with divine light. It isa labour to
take flight with the whole wings of those desires that lift upwards
to the universal Heart. Do thou only confirm thy flight by such
flights as transport to the ideal world, and the Father will appear


374 HYMN I


nigh unto thee and will hold out His Hands to thee. For some
shaft of light shall leap forth to illumine thy paths, and will unfold
to thee the field of mind, the beginning of beauty. Arise, my soul,
drink from the fountain that runs with gold. In worship of the
Creator ascend thou, and delay not; leave to the earth the things 5
of the earth, and in unison with the Father thou mayest perchance
move in harmony with God, thyself divine.


HYMN II


AGAIN light shines forth, again dawn, again day, after the dark-
ness that roams by night. Again make supplication to God, O my
heart, in songs of the morning, He who has given light to the ro
dawn, who has given stars to the night, the dancing company
that encircles the universe. Ether has enveloped the expanse of
billowy matter, mounting on the glory of flame, that the queenly
moon may divide her last phase. Above the eighth rotation of
star-borne whorls a stream bereft of stars drives onwards, hidden rs
within its bosom, layers (of matter) in contrary currents, and
circles about the great Mind, which bends with grey wings down
to the confines of the lordly universe. A blessed silence covers all
beyond, an indivisible division alike of the perceptive and the
perceived. One is the fountain-head, one the root. Lo, a thrice 20
resplendent shape has blazed forth, for where the profundity of
the Father is, there also is the august Son, offspring as it were of
the Heart. Wisdom, the Creator of the universe and the unified
flame of the Holy Spirit, has shone forth. One fountain-head, one
root, did raise up a rich plenty of good things, a progeny that 25
passeth all being, glowing with desire of generation, and the
wondrous flames of the blessed in existence burn brightly.
Whence there has now entered into the universe a choir of immortal
rulers, who sing in songs of the mind the renown of the Creator,
and the first conceived form. Near to their benign progenitors an 30


HYMN II 375


ageless army of angels, now looking upon Mind, plucks therefrom
the principle of beauty, and again, looking towards the spheres,
directeth the deep places of the universe, drawing the world that
is above even unto the extreme confines of matter, where nature
5 subsiding, giveth birth to a horde of demons turbulent and full of
guile. Thence a hero; thence now a spirit sown as seed through the
lands, has filled earthly destinies with life, with cunningly devised
forms.
All things hang upon Thy Will, and Thou art the root of things
ro present, past, future and within. Thou art Father, art Mother,
Thou Male, Thou Female, Thou Voice, Thou Silence, of nature
the fruitful Nature. All hail to Thee,O King, wherever it be lawful
to cry this aloud, Age of ages, Root of the universe. All hail to
Thee, Centre of existing things, Monad of numbers immortal, of
15 kings that existed not before thee. Mayest Thou rejoice greatly,
mayest Thou rejoice greatly, for it is with God that joy is found.
Lend a propitious ear to the hymns of my choirs. Open the light
of wisdom, pour down the glorious plenty of a calm life, pour
down its shining grace. Drive poverty from our midst, and the
zo earthly calamity of wealth. Drive illness from my limbs, the dis-
orderly urge of the passions from my life, and soul-gnawing cares,
to the end that the destiny of earth may not weigh down the
wings of my soul, but lifting a free pinion, may I dance in the
ineffable rites of Thy offspring.


HYMN III


2s AWAKE my soul; give thyself unto sacred songs, lay to rest the
stings that are born of matter. Arm thou the mighty impulses of
mind. For the King of gods we are weaving a crown, a bloodless
offering, libations of poesy. Thee I invoke in song, Thee in the
ocean, Thee over islands, on mainlands, in cities and on craggy
3o mountains, Thee when’er I rest the twain feet of my limbs on the


1593


376 HYMN III


far-famed plains, Thee blessed Creator of a universe. Night brings
me, Thy minstrel, to Thee, O King, and I lift up to Thee hymns
of the day-time, of the morning, of the evening. Thy witnesses
are the beams of glittering stars, the courses of the moon, and
that mighty witness, the sun, who presideth over the pure stars,

1594 the holy guardian of pious spirits. Lifting up my wing that turns
away from far-reaching matter, I have advanced and come to
Thy dwelling-place, Thy bosom, rejoicing. And now even unto
the sacred enclosure of the Holy Sacrifice am I come, a suppliant.
Now a suppliant I come to the crests of famous mountains, and 10
the great ravine of desert Libya, the southern border, which no
godless blast of wind sullieth, nor is the foot-print graven thereon
of men whose cares are of the town. There, purified of passions,
released from desires, ceasing to labour, ceasing to grieve, to rage
or to covet, may my soul casting off all these things that cause 15
death, render the hymn that is due unto Thee with a pure tongue
and a sanctified mind.

1595 Let earth and upper air be at peace. Let the sea be still, let air
be still. Be still, ye gusts of swift winds; be stilled, onslaughts of
curling waves, mouths of rivers, outwellings of springs. Let silence 20
hold the caverns of the universe, while these sacred hymns are
offered up.

Let the sinuous trend of serpents sink beneath the earth, and
that winged serpent also, the demon of matter, he who clouds the
soul, rejoicing in images and urging on his brood of whelps against
my supplications. Do Thou, O Father, O Blessed One, keep away
from my soul these soul-devouring hounds, from my prayer, from
my life, from my works. May our heart’s libation be a care to
Thy august messengers, wise bearers to Thee of holy hymns. Now
am I borne back to the starting-point of sacred poesy. Already 30
does the oracle echo in my mind. Be full of goodness unto me,
Blessed One, be full of goodness unto me, Father, if beyond what
is ordered, if beyond what is destined, I touch upon that which


Mm


we


5


HYNN III 377


is Thine. Whose eye is so wise, whose so availing, that it blinketh
not when checked by Thy shafts of light? Not even for gods is it
lawful to gaze steadfastly on Thy flaming torches, but Mind,
falling from Thy pinnacle, is fain to caress whatsoe’er is near to
5 Thee, seeking thus to attain the unattainable, to look upon the
light that glitters in Thy untiring profundity ; and so relinquishing
unapproachable ways, it fixes the strength of its eye upon the
image that first showed itself. Thence plucking flowers of light
to be hymns unto Thee, may it stay the blast of fitful winds and
ro give thee back Thine own. For what is there, O King, that is not
Thine, Father of all fathers, Father of Thyself, Fatherless Ancestor,
Son of Thyself, One prior to the One, Seed of existing things, Centre
of all things, Mind that wert without substance at the beginning ?
Root of the world, Thou the Light, everywhere visible, of primal
15 things, wise Certainty and wisdom’s Fountain, Mind hidden by
Thine own bright rays, Eye of Thyself, Master of the thunderbolt,
Father of the ages, Immortal, higher than the gods, higher than
intellects which thou turnest to one side and the other. Thou the
mind’s source of intelligence, the Creator of divine beings, Shaper of
20 the spirit, Nourisher of the soul, Fountain of fountains, Origin of
origins, Root of roots. Thou art the Unity of unities, Number of
numbers, at once Monad and Number, Mind and the Intelligent,
both the knowable and what precedes it, Oneand All, and the One of
All, and One before All, that is the seed of all things, the root and
25 the branch, and nature in whatsoe’er is endowed with intelligence,
the female element and the male.

The mind initiated in the mysteries says such and such things,
moving in harmony the while around Thy awful abysm. Thou art
the Generator, Thou the Generated; Thou the Light that shineth,

30 Thou the Illumined; Thou what is revealed, Thou that which is
hidden in Thine own beams; the Oneand All, the One Self-contained
and dispersed through all things. For Thou wert poured out, in-
effable Parent, that Thou mightst beget a child, to wit, far-famed


378 HYMN III


Wisdom, Creator of the world, but so outwelling, Thou dost remain
once delivered in the divisions undivided. I sing to Thee, Unity,
I sing to Thee, Trinity ; Thou art One being Three, art Three being
One; and the intelligible segment holds what has been divided
1597 still indivisible. Thou wert poured out on the Son in Thy wisdom’s 5
Will, and that Will Itself was then born, a nature unutterable,
the being pre-existent to matter. It is against divine law to say
that a second one has come from Thee, it is against it to say that
a third has come from the first. O holy Birth, O unspeakable
generation; Thou art the boundary of natural forces, of the ro
generating and the generated. I venerate the hidden ordering
of intellectual things, but there is some medial element that may
not be distributed. Ineffable Offspring of a Father Ineffable, the
birth-pang was through Thee, and through the birth-pang Thou
didst Thyself appear, showing Thyself together with the Father by 15
the Father’s Will. By the Will of the Father Thou, His Will, art ever
of Thyself beside the Father. Even deep-eddying Time knoweth
not the inevitable procreations, nor did long ages comprehend the
tedious birth. With the Father He was revealed, He that had been
for all eternity One that wastocomeinto being. Whohas controlled 20
rashness in regard to unspeakable things? Godless are the audaci-
ties of blind mortals with cunningly devised language, but Thou
art Giver of light, the light of intellect, and dost bear aloft the
minds of holy men away from crooked deceit, that they sink not
in the dark shades of matter. 25
Thee, Father of the Universe, Father of the ages, Creator of the
gods, it is an act of purity to praise. They who have knowledge
praise Thee, O King, and they who govern the world, they of the
glittering eyes, the starry intelligences sing Thy praises, Blessed
One, as the glorious mass moves rhythmically around them. The 30
whole race of the blessed sings to Thee, they who about the world,
1598 who in the world, within and without the zones guide in their wisdom
the fates of the cosmos, protectors they, side by side with the famous


HYMN III 379


pilots whom the chain angelic keeps pouring forth. And the illus-
trious race of heroes that goeth through the works of men, works
of mortal mould, by hidden pathways, (sing praises). And the
soul at once steadfast and bent down to the dark-gleaming corners
s of the earth (sings praises). Thee blessed Nature hymns aloud, and
the offspring of Nature which Thou, Blessed One, urgest on with
favouring breezes, drawn from Thy channels and rolling onwards ;
for Thou, Leader of immaculate universes, art the Nature of natures:
Thou cherishest Nature, birth of mortals, the image of the eternal
ro monad, that even the lowest portion of the universe may be
allotted an alternative lot. For it was not the divine law that the
lees of the universe should contend with the summits. That
which has been wholly ordained to the assemblage of real existences
shall never perish, but all find their happiness, one from another
15 and each through each. Of perishable things an eternal circle,
cherished by Thy breath, places choirs to Thee throughout all
things: so doth maternal Nature in her proper colours, in her
proper works, embellish them. And out of living things of varied
voices she creates one harmony in likeness of sound. All things
ao bring to Thee ageless praise, even the dawn and the night, the
lightnings, the snows, the firmament, the ether, and the roots of
the soil, water, air, all bodies, all spirits, seeds, fruits, the plants
and the grasses, roots, herbs, beasts and birds, and shoals of the
swimming finny creatures.
2s Behold now also in Thy Libya, in Thy august priesthood, a soul
feeble and exhausted, one given up to holy prayers to Thee,
but whom a cloud of matter besets. But Thine Eye, O Father,
pierces matter, and now my heart, made fruitful with hymns
to Thee, has excited my mind with fiery impulses. Do Thou,
300 King, kindle the uplifting beams, and grant, Father, that,
fleeing the body, (the soul) may ne’er again descend to an
earthly doom. But as long as I remain in the chains of a life that
has commerce with matter, may a gentle destiny, O Blessed One,
2878.3 T


1599


380 HYMN III


nourish me. May it not blow adversely, consuming my life with
grim cares of the mind, so that I may have no time for the
things of God, nor be involved in such cares; but rather fleeing
from these, by Thy gifts, may I weave for thee this garland from
the sacred meadows. I bring to Thee this praise, Leader of un- 5
sullied worlds, and to Thy wise Son, whom Thou has sent forth
from Thy sacred bosom together with wisdom itself. Springing forth
from Thee, He remains within Thee, that He may explore all things
with subtle breathings, that He may rule the profundities of hoary
ages, and direct the feet of a rugged world, even unto the last depth ro
of what belongeth to earthly destiny; his light shining in pious
hearts, that He may release living mortals from their labours, from
their cares, He the Accomplisher of good deeds, the Chaser away
of distresses. And why should it be a thing to wonder at, that the
Maker of the universe keeps evil destinies from His own works? 15
I come, O Ruler of the great universe, to acquit myself of
1600 a vow made to Thee, even from Thrace, where for three years
I dwelt in a way near to the king’s palace in that land. And
labours I endured, griefs I endured meet for many tears, bearing
on my shoulders my mother-city. The earth was watered with 20
the sweat of my limbs that toiled in the contest day by day,
and my couch was moistened with the dropping of tears from
my eyelids weeping from night to night. And as many temples
as were builded for Thy holy ceremonies, O King, to all these
I repaired. There prostrate, a suppliant, I prayed, watering 2.
the ground with the dew of my eyelids, that I might not
find my journey vain. I supplicated gods that labour, even
as many as hold the fruitful plain of Thrace, and those who
on the other side rule the Chalcedonian pastures, whom Thou,
O King, hast crowned with Thy annunciating beams, to be Thy 30
sacred ministers. The blessed ones have indeed taken to them
my supplications, they have engaged in many labours with me.
My life was not at that time dear to me because that my father-


HYMN III 38x


land was so tormented ; but Thou, O King, hast lifted it from out
itssorrows. O Ruler of the universe, Thou, the Ageless, sustaindest
the force of my limbs, when my soul was already failing and my
members already breaking up. Thou didst breathe strength into
s my wretched soul; a sweet ending to my labours didst Thou find
me, O King, and one according to my desire, granting to my works

a repose from long labours.
Do Thou, O Blessed One, preserve all these gains for the
Libyans for a long roll of time, for the sake of the memory of
10 Thy great goodness, and for the soul that has suffered grievous
things. Give moreover to Thy suppliant a life free from harm,
deliver me from sufferings, deliver me from diseases, deliver
me from cares that bring death; grant Thy servant a life of the
intellect. Adjudge me not earthly showers of gold, O King,
1g that may render me without leisure for the things divine, nor let
grim poverty attack my house and draw down to earth the medita-
tions of my heart, for both these weigh down the soul to the earth,
and both bring forgetfulness of mind, whensoe’er, O Blessed
One, Thou offerest not Thy help. O Father, Fountain of pure
20 wisdom, kindle in my mind a flame of intellect out of Thy bosom,
ilumine our heart out of Thy strength with a gleam of wisdom.
Give this as a symbol of the sacred way to Thee, even Thine
own seal. Chase from my life and from my prayer the deadly
demons of matter, preserve my body safe and sound from the
25 approach of spiteful violence, and guard in safety my spirit
unpolluted, O King. In sooth I carry on me already the darkling
stain of Matter, and I am held fast by desires, by earthly chains.
But Thou art my liberator, Thou my purifier. Release me from
evils, from illness, from fetters. I carry in me Thy seed, the spark of
30 high-born Mind, but a spark falling down to the depths of matter.
But Thou hast deposited soul in the cosmos, and through soul
hast sown mind in the body, O King. Take pity on thine hand-
maiden, O Blessed One. I descended from Thee to be a servant


1601


382 HYMN III


of earth, and instead of living as a hireling, I became a bondslave.
Matter fettered me with magic arts. For all that, there is still
some small strength in the ball of the eye hidden within me, it
has not yet extinguished all its might. But a great wave has
1602 broken over me from above, blinding the soul that seeth God. 5

Pity, O Father, Thy suppliant handmaiden, whom longing for
devouring matter strangles, when oftimes she strives to ascend
by the paths of mind to thee. But do Thou, O King, kindle the
lights that lead upwards, do Thou light the gleam and the beacon
by augmenting the scanty seed in the noblest part of my mind. ro
Enthrone me, O Father, in the strength of the life-bringing life,
where nature advanceth not her hand, whence nor-earth, nor the
fated spinning of Necessity yet makes me recoil.

May false generation leave Thy servant in flight! Let fire be
between me, O Father, and the tumult of the earth. Grant, O 1s
Creator, grant unto Thy minister now to spread his wings, the
wings of Mind. Now at last let the suppliant soul bear the seal of
the Father, a terror to hostile demons, who dart aloft from deep
lurking places of the earth to breathe godless impulses upon mor-
tals ; and let this be a sign to Thy pure ministers, who throughout 20
the depths of the august universe are keybearers to the fiery ascents,
that they should open wide to me the gates of light, and that while
still creeping upon the vain earth, I may not be of its soil. And
of the works written in fire give me, even here, fruit as a witness,
sure utterances, and as many tokens as cherish the hope immortal 25
in souls.

I repent me of this life of clay. Hence, eyesores of godless mortals,
dominations of cities! Hence all-sweetened destinies of perdition,

1603 and grace that is no grace, wherewith the beguiled soul is held
fast in bondage to earth, the soul which drank, in its great cowar- 30
dice, oblivion of its own good, until it fell upon envy as its portion
For debauched matter has twain parts, and whoso stretches out
his hand to the table, to touch the sweet viands, will in sooth


HYMN III 383


greatly lament his bitter lot, when the hostile elements drag him
down with them. Verily this law of earthly necessity pours out
a life to mortals from two sources, and the one is unmixed and is
pure good, a god or things divine. I have been inebriated with
5 the sweet cup, I have touched the lands of evil things, I have
fallen into the snare, I have known the fate of Epimetheus.’

So hate I inconstant laws; and I hasten to my Father's care-
free meadow. Thither I spread my wings in flight from the twin
gifts of matter.

10 Behold me, Thou who dost order the mind’s life. Behold Thy
suppliant, a soul upon the earth, striving towards the ascents by
mind, and do Thou kindle, O King, the lights that lead aloft, giving
unto me light wings. Cut Thou the knot, loose Thou the grip of
the twin desires by which artful Nature bends down souls to the

15 earth. Grant to me to escape the destiny of the body and to spring
swiftly even to Thy courts, to Thy bosom, whence floweth forth
the fountain of the soul. A heavenly drop I am shed upon the
earth. Do thou restore me to that fountain whence I was poured
forth, a wanderer who comes and goes. Grant me to mingle with

20 ancestral light. And grant that, cared for by Thee, the Father,
I may with the kingly choir bear aloft in sanctity the songs of
mind. Grant, O Father, that mingled with the light I sink not
again into an earthly destiny, but as long as I remain in the chains
of a material life, may a kindly fortune, O Blessed One, nurture me!


HYMN IV


25 To Thee I sing, when the sacred day beginneth, to Thee while
it waxeth, to Thee when it toucheth the meridian, to Thee when
it declineth, and when cometh wondrous night; to Thee, Creator,
Healer of souls, Healer of limbs, Giver of wisdom, Banisher of
diseases, Giver to souls of a life free from trouble, a life which


1 Brother of Prometheus and husband of Pandora.


1604


384 HYMN IV


earthly care, mother of griefs, mother of sufferings, trampleth
not under foot. May my life remain to me purified of these, that
in song I may tell of the hidden root of all things, nor be turned
away from God by delusions that lead astray!

Thee, Blessed One, I sing to, Lord of the universe, and let earth 5
be silent. Let all that the universe possesses keep sacred silence,
while hymns and prayers are addressed to Thee, for they are Thy
works, O Father. Let the whistling of the winds be still, the rustling
of trees, the song of birds; let the ether be at peace, let the air be
at peace, listening to the strain, and let the gushing of waters
be noiseless now throughout the earth. Let the demons now flee
from my pure prayer, they that delighting in the realms of dark-
ness and haunting the tombs, impede holy songs, but the good, the
happy servants of the all-understanding Creator, as many as
occupy the depths and heights of the universe, let those hear 15
benignly the hymns that are of the Father, and benignly let them
bear my prayers on high. Unit of units, Father of fathers, Begin-
ning of beginnings, Fountain of fountains, Root of roots, the Good

1605 of good things, Star of stars, Universe of universes, Idea of ideas,
profound Beauty, hidden Seed, Father of ages, Father of unspeak- 20
able worlds of Mind, whence a divine breath ever distilling,
floating over masses of body, it now kindleth a second universe.
Thee, Blessed One, I sing to with my voice, and I sing unto Thee
alike with silence, for as many things as Thou hearest of the voice,
Thou hearest also out of the silence of the mind. And I sing to 25
the Offspring, the First-born, the First-appearing.

Most glorious Offspring of the ineffable Father, Thee, Blessed
One, I hymn, together with the great Father, and the travail of
the Father over Thee, that Counsel of generation, the medial
Beginning, the Holy Spirit, Centre of the Creator, Centre again 30
of the Son, Mother, Sister and Daughter to Thyself, delivered of
the secret Root. For in order that the Father might be poured
out upon the Son, that very outpouring found a shoot, and stood


on]


Oo


HYMN IV 385


in the midst, God, descended from God, in a Son who was God,
and in the renowned outpouring of an immortal Father, the Son
found a shoot. Thou art Unity, Trinity withal, a Unity that dost
endure, and a Trinity in very truth Thou art. And the intellectual

§ division retains still undivided that which is partitioned, but the
Son, though he hath leaped forth, remains with the Father and
yet conducts, without, the Father’s business, bringing down to the
worlds the beatitude of life, whence the Word Himself has it.
This Word I hymn, in unison with the great Father. The Mind
ro of the ineffable Father brings Thee to birth, and Thou, so conceived,
art the Word of the Creator, first to leap forward from out the
primal Root, and the Root of all things that came after Thy
illustrious birth. An ineffable Unity, the Seed of all things, hath
begotten Thee, the Seed of all things; for Thou art in all things,
15 and through Thee the highest, the medial, and the lowest nature,
enjoy the good gifts of the generative life from God the Father.
For Thee an ageless sphere rolls its untroubled course. Under Thy
direction the seven planets dance in harmony in the powerful
revolutions of the great vault, and the many lights of the universe
20 adorn the one dome of sky by thy Will, most renowned Offspring ;
for Thou, running round about the heavenly deep, holdest
together unbroken the course of ages, and under thy sacred
ordinances, Blessed One, in the cavities of the unsoundable ether,
dwells the company of gleaming stars. Thou dost apportion their
25 tasks in the heavens and the air, on the earth and in the world
below, and Thou allottest unto them their life. Thou art the
Master of Mind, and to the gods their Ordainer, as to mortals also,
as many as have quaffed the showers of Mind’s destiny. Thou
art the Giver of Soul to those whose life is dependent on the soul,
30 and art tireless in nature. A blind offspring of soul hangs from
Thy chain, and as many things as are deprived of all breath pluck
from Thy bosom a bond of union, carried by Thy power from the
ineffable Fatherly Bosom, the hidden unity, whence the stream


1606


386 HYMN IV


of life flowing onward is carried by Thy power even unto earth,
through trackless worlds of mind. Thence the visible cosmos, the
form of the world of mind, receives it, a descending stream of
1607 blessings. This (visible cosmos) had a second sun, the progenitor
with shining eyes of a later shining light, the guardian of that 5
matter which comes into being and perishes, a Son who is the per-
ceptible impression of Mind, the purveyor of what good things are
born in the universe, born through thy will, most august Offspring,
Father unknowable, Father ineffable, Unknowable to Mind, Un-
utterable inspeech. Thou art the Mind of mind, the Soul of souls, the ro
Natureof natures. Lo, I bend the knee before Thee, a servant, I cast
myself upon the ground, a blind suppliant ; but do Thou, the Giver
of light, of the light of Mind, take pity, O Blessed One, on a suppli-
ant soul; chase away diseases, chase away cares that gnaw the
soul, and chase away the shameless hound of the nether world,
the demon of earth, from my soul, from my prayer, from my life,
from my works. Let that demon remain outside of my body, of
my spirit, and of all that is mine. Let him flee, let him leave me,
1608 the demon of matter, the power of sufferings, who builds his
fortress wall against the path that leadeth above, who violateth 20
the aspirations that seek God; and give me a companion, O King,
a partner, a sacred messenger of sacred power, a messenger of
prayer illumined by the divine light, a friend, a dispenser of noble
gifts, a guard of my soul, a guard of my life, a guard over prayers,
a guard over deeds, and one to save the body purified of disease, 2.5
to save the spirit purified of shame. And bring to my soul oblivion
of its passions, that the soul’s winged flight may also enrich the
earth-nourished life with hymns of Thee, to the end too that I may
complete the life that comes with destiny after the chains that
weigh us down to earth, a life purified of matter, even unto thy 30
courts and unto thy Bosom whence outwelleth the fountain of the
soul. And do Thou extend to me thy Hand; do Thou call, Blessed
One, do Thou lift up from matter a suppliant soul.


=


5


387


HYMN V


LET us sing to the Son of the Bride, the Bride not wedded for
destined wedlock with man. The ineffable designs of the Father
produced the birth of Christ. The sacred travail of a Bride
revealed the form of Man, who came bringing a fountain of

s light to mortals; and this ineffable Offspring knows the Root of
the ages. Thou Thyself art the Light from the Fountain-head,
the ray that hast shone along with the Father, that, having
broken through murky matter, dost shine in pious souls. ‘Tis
Thou Who art the Founder of the universe, the Fashioner of the

ro spheres of famous stars, the Founder of the centres of the earth,
and Thou art of Thyself the Saviour of men. For Thee the Titan
drives his horses, the unquenchable source of morning, for Thee
the horned moon dissipates the shades of night. For Thee also are
fruits begotten, and herds do graze. Sending out from Thy inef-

1§ fable source a life-giving splendour, Thou fillest with nourishment
the interlaced roots of the universe. Out of Thy profundities have
blossomed forth light and mind and soul. Take pity upon Thy
daughter imprisoned in mortal limbs and the material limits
of destiny. Preserve Thou the force of my limbs unscathed

20 from the ravage of disease. Grant persuasiveness to my words
and glory to my deeds, even such as may become the traditions
of Cyrene and Sparta; and may my soul, untrodden by grief, draw
to itself a gentle nourishing life, straining a pair of eyes upon Thy
Light, so that escaping from matter I may hasten on the unchang-

25 ing paths, a fugitive from the sufferings of earth, to mingle with the
Fountain-head of the soul. Mayst Thou achieve such an unstained
life to Thy minstrel, whensoe’er I send to Thee a song, and glorify
Thy Root, the greatest glory of the Father, and the Spirit that
shareth the throne midway between the Root and the Branch,

30 and in singing the might of the Father, I lull to rest, with hymns to
Thee, the glorious travail of my soul. Hail, Source of the Son,

2878.3 U


388 HYMN V


hail, Form of the Father, hail, Throne of the Son, hail, Seal of the
Father, hail, Strength of the Son, hail, Beauty of the Father, hail,
Breath undefiled, Centre of the Son and of the Father, mayst
Thou send to me with the Father the mistress of divine gifts, to
water the wings of my soul. 5


HYMN VI


IN unison with the Holy Self-engendered Fountain that sur-
passeth the unspeakable unities, I will crown with wise garlands
of hymns, God, the glorious Son of the eternal God, One Offspring
that leapt forth from One Father, Whom the indescribable birth-
pang of the Fatherly Will has made manifest, a Son out of His ro
unknowable Bosom, the birth-pang which has displayed the fruits
of the Father’s begetting, and, in bringing them to light, has been
revealed Mind, fixed in the medial. And so there remain in the
Fountain, poured round about, the wisdom of the Father’s Mind,
the splendour of His beauty. To Thee, the Engendered, the ts
Father has granted to engender. Thou art the hidden Seed
of the Father; for the Father gave Thee to universes as
their beginning, that forms might be brought down to material
bodies from the entities of Mind. Thou guidest the wise vault of
heaven, and ever leadest to their pasturage the flock of stars. 20
Thou rulest, O King, the choir angelic and the company of the
spirits, and Thou dost dance around perishable nature. Thou
dividest the indivisible Spirit (pnewma) throughout the earth, and
returnest to its fountain-head what has already been bestowed,
releasing mortals from the necessity of death. Be propitious to 25
these garlands of songs to Thee, and grant the calm of life to a poet
of hymns. Stay Thou the changing mouth of the channels, and
dry up the destructive billows of matter. Keep disease far from
my mind and limbs. Calm the fatal onslaught of passion, keep
off from me the dooms of poverty and of riches alike, give 30


HYMN VI 389


renowned glory to my deeds, spread abroad my good fame

amongs tthe peoples, adorn me with the fairest garland of gently-

worded persuasion, that my mind may calmly gather leisure,

and that I may not groan under earthly cares, but from Thy 1612
5 lofty channels through the birth-pangs of wisdom may I inundate

my mind.


HYMN VII


I was the first to find the measure established in new harmonies
wherewith to smite the strings of the lyre in praise of Thee,
Blessed One Immortal, illustrious Offspring of the Virgin, Jesus of

10 SOlyma. Be propitious, O King, and accept my strain of sacred
melody. We shall sing of the imperishable God, the great Son of
God, the world-creating Son of the Father, Who hath given birth
to the ages, the nature mingled of all things, the boundless
wisdom, a God to heavenly beings, a curse to those of the under-

15 world. What time Thou wert poured forth on the earth, even out
of a mortal womb, the inventive art of the Magus was helpless,
and he wondered from the rising of the star, what manner of infant
had been born, who might be this God concealed, God, or nether
shade or king. Come, bring Thy gifts, offerings of myrrh, presents

20 of gold, fine perfume of frankincense. God Thou art, receive
Thou the incense; I bring gold to my King, His grave will
befit the myrrh. Thou hast purified the land, the waves of
the sea, and the paths of the demons, the swift outflow of air,
and the recesses of the infernal regions. Thou wert sent, being

25 God, to Hades, to the assistance of the dead. But be propitious,
O King, and accept my strains of sacred songs.


390


HYMN VIII


In a somewhat Dorian cadence, I will lift up a clear song on my
ivory-inlaid lyre, in Thy honour, Blessed Immortal, Offspring
Illustrious of the Virgin ; and do Thou, O Ruler, save my harmless
life, granting me night and day alike inaccessible to griefs.
Make Thy light to shine in my heart from out Thy source of Mind. 5
Apportion to my youth the strength of sound limbs and to my
actions renown ; bring Thou a brilliant year even to the joy of my
old age, augmenting precious wisdom with health. And mayst
Thou preserve my brother to me, whom e’en now in his youth,

O Immortal One, Thou didst bring back, when already passing on ro
foot beyond the portals of this earth. Thou didst extinguish then
my cares, my griefs, my tears, and the burning fire of my heart.
Thou didst make even a dead body to live, O Father, for Thy
1613 Suppliant’s sake. Preserve Thou my sister, and pair of children.
All the house of the sons of Hesychius' do Thou hide under Thy hand, 5
and the partner of my marriage bed, O King, keep Thou from illness
and harm, united to me, of one mind with me; preserve my wife
in ignorance of clandestine associates. May she maintain a holy
couch, unsullied, pious, inaccessible to unlawful desires. Take
Thou my soul away from evils and from piteous anguish, freed 20
from the fetters of earthly life; and grant me to raise hymns with
the choirs of the holy, in honour of Thy Father, and to Thy
supreme power, O Blessed One, I will chant my hymns again,
I will sing a song to Thee again, and again, perchance, I shall
attune this unstained lyre to Thee. 25


1 This reading was discovered by Terzaghi, and refers to the family of
Hesychius, the friend to whom Letter 93 is addressed. See longer note.


391


HYMN IX


Most beloved august Offspring of the Virgin of Solyma, to
Thee, Blessed One, I sing. Thou hast expelled the serpent of the
earth, that fountain-head of treachery, from the great gardens of
the Father, even the serpent who offered the abjured fruit,

s nourisher of troublous destiny, to the primal youth. To Thee
I sing, Illustrious Father, that wearest the crown, Son of the Virgin
of Solyma. Thou didst descend even to the earth, sojourner of
a day, bearing a mortal body, and didst go down beneath to
Tartarus, where death reigned over nations of souls in thousands.

1o And then shuddered at Thee the aged ancient Hades, and his
hound, the devourer of man, drew back from the threshold ; and
Thou, delivering choirs of nghteous souls from their woes, dost
raise, with unpolluted bands, hymns to the Father. To Thee I sing,
Illustrious Father that wearest the crown, Son of the Virgin of
15 Solyma. The boundless races of demons throughout the air
trembled at Thy ascent, O King. The ambrosial choir of the stars
immaculate was seized with awe; and ether laughing, wise father
of harmony, blended upon the seven-stringed lyre a hymn of
victory to Thy might. The harbinger of dawn smiled, the messenger
20 of day, and golden Hesperus, the star of Cytherea. The moon
filling with a stream of fire its horned light, led the way, the
shepherd of the gods of night. Titan spread out his far-flaming
hair under the ineffable track, and recognized the Offspring of
God, Mind, the Artificer of all that is best, and the origin of his
25 own flame. But Thou, in winged flight, didst leap over the back
of the azure sky, and didst take Thy place amongst the inviolate
spheres of the Mind, wherein is the fountain of good things, the
heaven that is kept secret, where there is neither deep-flowing 1616
time that draggeth with untiring foot the offspring of earth, nor
30 the shameless destinies of matter’s billowy depths, but an age


392 HYMN IX


born of the far distant past, though ageless itself, old and yet


withal ever young, is to the gods the guardian of their eternal
mansion.


HYMN X


O CurisT, Son of God Who reigneth above, remember Thy
servant, by destiny a sinner, who writeth these words, and grant 5
me release from passions that bring death, which are implanted
in me, in a sullied soul. Grant me, O Saviour Jesus, to behold
Thy divine light, that appearing there I may sing a song to the
Healer of souls, the Healer of bodies, together with the mighty
Father and the Holy Spirit. 10


NOTES
A EULOGY OF BALDNESS


Page 243, 1.13. .. . one of those benighted Euboeans. Dio Chrysostom
alludes to the same incident in The Euboean (vii. 4, vol. i. p. 190,
ed. von Arnim), ra yéveca Sy] kopawra ...otous eri “Iuov “Ounpds dnow
€NOciv EvBodas, oxcirrrwy, soi Soxety, cai xatayeAdv, ort rev GAAwy ’ Axara
Karis éxdvrev of 52 ef Hyicous éxdpwv.

Page 243,1.16. Which of the gods .. . did I pass overwithout accusation?
Petavius quotes some verses of Petronius (c. 109) to the same purpose.


O fallax natura deum: quae prima dedisti
Aetati nostrae gaudia, prima rapis.


Page 243, 1. 18. eslogistsc of Epicurus. In allusion to the doctrine of
Epicurus that the gods did not trouble themselves with the affairs of
mankind. Krabinger quotes from Lucretius (ii. 646 ff.) the lines:


Omnis enim per se divom natura necesse est
Immortali aevo summa cum pace fruatur
Semota ab nostris rebus seiunctaque longe.


Page 244,1. 23. as sf tn good fortune. Petavius observes that it was the
custom at banquets and drinking bouts to pass jests at the expense of
the bald heads present—and refers to Petronius (c. ro9),

Iam Tryphaena Gitona extrema parte potionis spargebat, cum Eumol-
pus, et ipse vino solutus, dicta voluit in caluos stigmososque iaculari.


Page 245, 1.4. after risingin the morning &c. In regard to this chapter,
extending over about two pages, which Synesius quotes from the works
of Dio Chrysostom, I have to make the following observations. No work
of Dio concerning hair was known to Photius, nor has any such work
been noted by any other writer of antiquity. The chapter in question,
therefore, was, until the year 1839, always regarded as the introductory
part of a work by Dio, of which the rest has disappeared. In that year,
however, a distinguished Dutch scholar, J. Geel, the librarian of the Uni-


394 NOTES


versity of Leyden,and correspondent of the French Académie des Inscrip-
tions, who had been making a close study of the document in question,
published a letter on the subject, addressed to M. Hase, Conservateur
au Département des Manuscrits, at the Bibliothéque du Roi, Paris. In
this letter, which is full of very close and acute argument, he attempts
to establish, and it would seem with great success, the thesis that he
sets out to demonstrate, namely, that the two pages quoted here
from Dio are not a fragment of the lost essay, but the whole essay.
‘For my part’, he says, ‘I have come to the conclusion that Synesius in
saying at the beginning of his discourse that a work had been produced,
called a Eulogy on Hair, by Dio of the tongue of gold, has fabricated a
title that Dio himself had never thought of. This Eulogy of Hair,
which he pretends to offer us, is only an exercise in style, a study, one
such as I could point out in other of this author’s writings, as for
example, the nineteenth discourse, introduced in the same way by an
account of some event, and as little polished as the so-called “Eulogy”’.
The same thing may be said of the fifty-second discourse, one of the
most interesting bits in the collection of his works. They are nothing,
all of them, but thoughts jotted down on paper at the moment. At the
same time, I call your attention to the extraordinary resemblance be-
tween the commencement of this fifty-second discourse, and that of the
“Eulogy of Hair”... . If the Eulogy did not bear the marks of Dio’s
style even in its smallest details, one would be tempted to suspect
Synesius of bad faith, and to imagine that he had forged an imitation
in order to fight with a shadow’ (Leyde, Hazenberg, 1839). There is not
room here to go through all the points of this very interesting work of
Geel’s, which I recommend to any one desirous to form a definite opinion
on the question. The text is printed, with the readings of a Florence
manuscript of Synesius, in von Arnim’s edition of Dio (vol. ii [Berol.
1896], pp. 313-19).

Another interesting discovery in regard to this essay of Synesius was
made a little later. A French savant, E. Miller, published in Paris in
the year 1840 a Greek text entitled, ‘Eloge de la Chevelure, discours
inédit d’un auteur grec anonyme en réfutation du discours de Synésius
intitulé, Eloge de la Calvitie, publié d’aprés un manuscrit grec, &c.’
It seems that M. Miller came across this work of an anonymous Greek


A EULOGY OF BALDNESS 395


author in the Bibliothéque Nationale in Paris, where for some extra-
ordinary reason it had escaped the notice of other scholars. ‘The writer
whose work I publish to-day,’ says Miller in his Introduction,
“has struck a blow at Synesius’ reputation. . . . It is still more
extraordinary that this work has remained unnoticed until now,
when we observe that it is mentioned in the Greek catalogue (Art. 21,
no. 2953) with this notice, Anonymus de Encomtio Caluitss quod a
Synesio scriptum est. This title arrested my attention. .. . I commenced
reading it at once .. . and finally decided to publish it with a commen-
tary. I had hoped that the work itself would furnish me with indica-
tions that might be sufficient to decide its authorship. It is certainly
remarkable in many ways, but in this particular I was disappointed.
Not only does the author say nothing to throw any light on the question
of authorship, but he cites no poet of antiquity except Homer and
Hesiod.’ Miller means no doubt by this that we cannot assign a date
to him through the authors that he quotes; I have pointed out else-
where that there would be a similar difficulty in the case of Synesius, if
we were otherwise unaware of the exact time in which he lived. ‘Never-
theless,’ Miller continues, ‘there was abundance of opportunity for
quotations, and he could easily have brought upon the scene many
poets of antiquity. He contents himself, however, as a philosopher
with combating Synesius single-handed. In spite of this excessive
dearth of sources of information, I do not wish to leave the discussion of
this point of literary criticism without seeming to have arrived at some
sort of solution. I have therefore endeavoured to fix approximately
the period in which this champion of Dio must have written his essay,
and after a conscientious examination of his style, I have sought to
indicate to what class of writers he belonged.’ While admitting that a
decision upon this point must be more or less conjectural, Miller goes
on to point out that certain Greek writers of the fourteenth and fifteenth
centuries did succeed to a certain extent in rehabilitating their style in
Greek by a close study of the authors of the golden age. The anony-
mous work that he is criticizing he describes as showing considerable
purity of Attic style, an achievement which would have been quite
within the compass of such men as Demetrius Cydonius, Bessarion, or
Gemistus Plethon. And this alone is sufficient to make one hesitate.
2878.2 X


396 NOTES


From a palaeographical point of view the manuscript in question cannot,
he says, be more modern than the end of the thirteenth century, or the
beginning of the fourteenth. This seems to make it impossible, there-
fore, to attribute it to such fourteenth- or fifteenth-century writers as
those just named. After weighing all possibilities, therefore, the happy
discoverer of the manuscript has come to the conclusion that its author,
if he were not a contemporary of Synesius, which is quite possible,
must have lived in some part of the two centuries following. I shall
have occasion to refer to this anonymous work in the course of my notes
on this essay of Synesius. It is interesting to observe that the writer of
the pamphlet directed against Synesius does not seem at all to have
appreciated the irony and wit of the author he is criticizing. He shows
a tendency to take everything that Synesius says quite seriously and
literally, and answers him in like manner, training all the heavy artillery
of a philosopher upon him. He never seems to suspect that the essay
of Synesius is really a skit upon precisely such pompous people as him-
self, in other words, the sophists of his time. Muller describes his author
as a philosopher, but I should be more inclined to class him as a sophist,
who was trying to show his ingenuity at the expense of Synesius, just
as Synesius was trying to show his, although in a much lighter and more
jocose spirit, at the expense of Dio, whom, notwithstanding, he admired
so much. ‘Are you not ashamed, Synesius,’ says the anonymous author,
‘unless it is purely on account of your own baldness that you are
speaking, are you not ashamed, I say, to write an encomium upon the
work of a disease, and to leave out of consideration the praise of what is
becoming and healthy?’

He begins his essay, however, with an allusion to his own hair, as
follows (p. 27), xai pry Oep eri T@ Tob Aiwvos énendvOer Acyw Lvvéovos,
tor’ abros eri T@ tod Luveciou avrixpus’ Kat olov oSros Sucyepatvwv, ore
pr) éxdpa, Adyov éefjveyxe, towtrov 5) Kai avros Ore py yeyévnpas
gfadaxpos ...


Page 245,1.12. those who make a cultof their hair. Athenaeus (Detpno-
soph, Lib. XII, cap. 30), in speaking of the people of Samos, says that
according to the poet Asius they used to comb their hair over the back
of their heads and down their shoulders,


A EULOGY OF BALDNESS 397


a > » a @ o rd
ot S’avrws dotrecxov Orws mAoKdpous Krevicawro
ets “Hpas rénevos, rreruxacpévos etace Kadois,


xatras 5° jwpeivr’ dvéuw xpvodos evi Seopois.
Again (sbsd., cap. 31), he quotes some lines from Phylarchus showing a
tendency to regard the care of the hair as an effeminate and degenerate
phase of morals, which the Colophonians learned of the Lydians,


aBpoovvas S¢ pabdovres avwdeAdas rapa Avid


Tecav eis ayopiy ...
xairjow ayadopev” evrrperdéecow.


Speaking of the Athenians (Lib. x11. 5) he alludes to their cult of hair,
KopupBous 8° avadovpevor rHv tptxdv ypuoods rérruyas epi To pérwrov Kai
Tas Koppas éepdpouv.

It may be inferred from a passage in the Knights of Aristophanes that
the attention to hair was a mark of aristocratic tradition amongst the
Athenians (Eq. 578) :

Xop. .. . ovK atrotper ovdev srAxv rocovrovi povov'
qv ToT eipnvn yevnras Kal Trovwy travowpeia,
pt) POovetO” Hpiv nopdor pnd’ ameorrAeyyropevars.


Page 246,1.4. he pratses them all for thesy hasy. Dio in another of his
works (Orat. XXXVI, 17, vol. ii, p. 5, ed. von Arnim) praises the wearing of
long hair as a distinctly Greek trait and opposed to the Roman fashion.
Speaking of a Greek city on the borders of Thrace, and the manners of
the citizens, he observes: wdvv ody dv ris Hobn rH oer Pirdoodos avip,
ort drravres Hoay Tov apxatov Tporrov, ws drow “Opnpos rovs “EAAnvas, xopmv-
Tes Kal Ta yévera adexdres, els 5¢ ev avdrois povos e€upnpeévos, Kai TotTov
édoSdpouv re Kai €uicovy amavres. €Adyero 5é ovK dAAws roto emirndevery,
GMa Kodaxedwy ‘Pwpatous cal rHv mpos adrovs diAlav emiderevvpevos.


Page 248, 1. 6. I shall never disgrace my ancestral rusticity. It isa
favourite idea with Synesius that he is exempt from all the refinements
and overculture of town life, that his is a blunt and rustic type of mind,
&c. Cf. The Egyptsan Tale (I,cap. 18). ‘Now it happened that there was


398 NOTES


one man, who, though of serious bent, had through philosophy been
brought up in a more rustic mould, &c.’ See also his letter to Olympius
(Ep. 148), in which he takes to himself great credit for his devotion to the
simple life of the country, and his contempt for the ways of men of the
city. Cf. also Hymn IIT, 54: ‘...land of the Notus which no godless
blast of wind sullieth, nor is the foot-print graven thereon of men
whose cares are of the town.’


Page 252, 1.30. no fruit ona plant &c. The anonymouswriter uses the
simile of plants also, in his encomium on hair (p. 53): Etot yap ai rpixes, ws
Epnuev, nedparjs hurd, aicbjoewy dvbn, répyis Eurspuxos, xdpts Euduros, xaAAos
favopevov Kai tas des evOds Onpwpevov, fv mdvres emjvecayv Kai Aoyo-
ypado. Kai trownrai, Kai 6 ToUTwy mpoiordpevos “Opnpos. dadaxpov dé ris
TOLnTay 7} pytépwy péypt cov Koopjoa Adyo.s mpoetiiero ;

Page 253, 1. 14. ... those who serve the dsuinity in Egypt do not endure
haw etc. Cf. Plutarch, Isis and Osiris, p. 352.C,D: ‘... few there be who
know the cause of this ceremony . . . why the priests of Isis shave their
heads, and wear no hair upon them... . There is one cause alone, that
as Plato (= Phaedo 678) says, it is not lawful for the pure to touch what is
impure. Nowit is well known that all superfluities of our food are impure,
and of such is hair engendered.’ Philo (De Csrcumctstone 1, § 5) com-
pares the shaving of the Egyptian priests to the Jewish practice as
follows: ‘It [circumcision] secures the healthiness of the whole body in
a way that is suited to the people consecrated to God; with which
object the Egyptian priests, being extravagant in their case, shaved
the whole of their bodies. ’


Page 253, 1. 29. What could be balder than a sphere? Cf. Proclus on
the Parmenides of Plato (Lib. vi, pp. 106-15, ed. Cousin): ‘And on this
account Parmenides speculating in his poem on Being in very truth,
brings in the sphere also as well as the Whole, the Same, and the
Other; for he describes it [Being] as like a spherical mass every-
where equidistant from a centre with all its parts, and immovable; in
such sort that all things are first in mind, and secondly are as images in
the monad and in every perceptible thing, physically in this, but
mathematically in that. For the sphere is an intellectual concept as
is Mind, and the monad; this cosmos is the perceptible sphere carrying


A EULOGY OF BALDNESS 399


in itself the images of eternal gods.’ Cf.alsoOlympiodorus(In. Plat. Phaed.
D. c. pif’, p. 235, ed. Norvin.): “Ore opatpixov ro mav Seiferev dv Tis amd ris
reducis aitias. pupetras yap 7) opaipa 70 éy, ort pddora, Kpdriwrov otcoa
Tay oynpdtwv Kai adudAvroy, ws yovusy aanMaypévn, nai padora mdvrwv
xwpnruch dia rH avriy airiay. ért dro Tis rapaderyparuchs, ors ravTeAes Td
{Gov eis 6 BAdrwy 6 Beds eSnptovpye: Wore reXesraTov oxnpdrwy 7) odaipa.
én, amo Tis Towmntuchs airlas’ aidiov yap adro Kai adidAvrov 6 Snusoupyos
Trovet TOGOTo S¢ oxHpUA 6 TE KUKAOS Kai 7) ofaitpa.


Page 254, 1. 8. Wherefore the entsre-soul animates the whole cosmos,
which ss a sphere. This is the view that dominates Plato’s Timaeus ;
but the sphere became a sad stumbling-block in later Greek philosophy,
owing to the perpetual confusion of astronomical and psychological
images. It will be remembered how in the Republic Socrates reproves
the young and enthusiastic Glaucon for suggesting that astronomy
is an elevating pursuit because in studying the stars one gazes
upwards. But Plato in the Timaeus, as Taylor points out (Plato,
The Man and hts Work, p. 447), ‘never speaks of spheres, but
in the language originated by Anaximander of circles.’ The later
theory of Eudoxus of the revolving spheres of the universe was
unknown to him. For Anstotle’s view of Eudoxus’ system, see
Metaphysics, 1073>. Evdofos pev odv HXlov Kai ceArjvns Exarépov TH fopay
€v tpiow érifer’ elvar ofaipas, wv THY péev mMpwrnv THY Tav arAavav
dorpwy elvas, rnv 5€ Seurdpay xara tov dia. péeowy trav Cwdiwy, ryv 5 rpirny
Kata Tov Aedofwdvoyv ev TO trAdTE Tov Cwdiwy .... Tav Sé TrAavwWpEevwY
dorpwy ev rérrapow éxaorov ofaipas. .. . Kaddmrmos 5¢ rhy perv Odow trav
ofpaipay tiv avriy éeribero Evdcfw, robr’ €ort trav aroornpdrwv Thy rdw,
7d 5¢ 2ARGos TH ev rob Aws Kai r@ rob Kpodvov ro aro éxeivw amedidov,
t@ 8’ nrlov Kai t@ ceAjvns Sv0 wero Ere mpooberdas elvar odaipas . . ..
dvayxaiov Sé, et wéAAovor cuvrePeioat Maca 7a pavdpeva anodwoew, xa”
Exacrov Tay tAavwydvwy érépas ofaipas pid éAdrrovas elvas tas aveAct-
rovoas...

In the scholia to this passage (Bekker, vol. iv, p. 807) is the following:
tobro einwy evOvs ioropet ad te Evdofos repi trav ofaipdiv éXeye Kai Tob
mrAnGous adray nai KaAXrnos. nai Se€dpevos THv tpocOixny trav opaipav,
nv 6 Kddurrros rrpocdbynxev (6 yap Evdofos etxoot nai €€ ras wdoas ériBero,


400 NOTES
KaNursos 5¢ rpudxovra Kai tpeis) otrws avros rais rpidxovta Kai rpiolv
das eixoor kai Svo0 mpooriPnar ... «.7.A.

A long discussion follows as to the number of the ‘spheres’ necessary
to explain the movements of the heavenly bodies. Synesius was an
astronomer, as we see from the famous Leter to Paconsus, and the
science, as he tells us in the letter in question, had made great strides.
He reminds us that Hipparchus in his day was prophetic, and that his
vague anticipations were fulfilled by the work of Ptolemy and ‘the
divine band of his successors.’ ‘Every allowance must be made’, he
adds, ‘for these men, inasmuch as the more important problems were
still unsolved, and geometry was still at the nursing stage.’ It would
be very interesting to know what these ‘important problems’ were. But
the exact history of astronomy in the time that elapsed between
Ptolemy and Synesius is lost in obscurity. We naturally scan the
allusions in Synesius here and elsewhere, but find nothing to tell us
whether the conceptions of Eudoxus as to the plurality of spheres in
the universe was still accepted in the fourth century. In the meantime,
at all events, astrology had come in to occupy a large place in the
popular imagination, though of this we hear little in Synesius. But
throughout all his wit and playfulness about the sphere we can easily
detect the same underlying conception that we find in the passage from
Proclus quoted above, namely that the sphere, being the most perfect
form, is the expression of Mind, in other words the second hypostasis of
the Neoplatonists, but it is worthy of observation that Synesius never
endorses in so many words the doctrine of the Neoplatonic hypostases.
For him the sphere is the most perfect form, and therefore the idea of
the sphere must dominate the cosmos. Beyond that he does not go.
He remains with the Platonic doctrine of the idea. In this respect he is
pre-Aristotelian, notwithstanding the fact that he has, as I have tried to
show, so frequently drawn on the works of Aristotle.


Page 256, 1. 8. chests, whsch conceal .. . those spheres. The priests of
Egypt were reputed to be astronomers. It would seem probable, there-
fore, that the spheres to which Synesius alludes were models of the
celestial bodies, or at all events had some connexion with astronomy.
As to his statement about the priests mocking the populace, it was


A EULOGY OF BALDNESS 401


affirmed by Pseudo-Lucian that the Egyptians divided the heavens into
twelve areas, and symbolized each of these by a different animal, and
that it was from these symbols that the figures of gods were derived: éx
yap 51) rod raves jépos, Kai dordépwy Trav GAwy arAavéwy te Kai edorabdwy
Kai ovdaud Kiweopdvewy Suddexa poipas érdpovro ev Tots Kweopévowt, Kal
otxeta [ia ddvra Exacrov avriv és GAAnY popdiy peupéaras Ta pev evdda,
ta 8¢ avOpumwyv, ta 5¢ Onpav, ra Se rrnvdv, ra 5€ wrnvédwy. (De Astro-
logta, vi.)

It was maintained by certain materialist philosophers in the days of
Porphyry that the Egyptian priests worshipped the stars and heavenly
bodies generally, if we can draw such an inference from the letter which
he writes to the Egyptian priest Anebo. This letter is quoted by Cud-
worth, vol. i, p. 537, in the following passage: Xa:pijuwy pev ydp, Kai ot
Got, ovd’ do 71 1p0 THy cpwpdvwy Kdopwy yyobvrat, ev apyf Adywy rHepe-
vo Tovs Aiyurriwy, ovS’ GAAous Beovs wAnv trav mAaynrav Aeyopévwv, Kai
Ta&v cupmAnpovyrwy Tov Cwdiaxov, etc. (Euseb., Praep. Evang., ii. 4). The
full text is printed in Thomas Gale’s edition of Iamblichus, De Mystertts.
Porphyry, it would seem, rebukes the Egyptian priests for worshipping
material powers instead of spiritual. This is also the view that Sallustius,
the friend of the Emperor Julian, takes of them, writing in the middle
of the fourth century, although he accuses them of identifying their
gods, not with the stars, but with other elements of nature. ‘The
worst explanation, the material,’ he says, in regard to the stories of the
gods, ‘is that which the Egyptians because of their ignorance used
most; they regarded and described material things as gods, earth as
Isis, moisture as Osiris, heat as Typhon,’ &c. (Nock’s translation of
Sallustius, p. 7, cap. 4 of the text). bAm«ds S¢ ears Kai €oyaros, d pddvora
Aiydrrvo 8.” arradevoiay €xypjcavto, adra Ta owpara Beovs vopicavres Kai
xaddoavres [Kat] "Low pev rv viv, “Oorpw S€ ro bypov, Tédwva S¢ rhv
Oeppornra KrA.

The worship of animals by the masses in Egypt is mentioned with
reprobation by Plutarch in his Jsts and Ostrts (p.379E: Alyurriwv 8é ot
troAAot Geparrevovres avira 7a (Ga, Kai 7repiezrovres ws Deovs, ov yéAwros pdvov
ovde yAevacpot KatarenAyjKact Tas tepoupyias (aAAa Totro ris aBeATEpias
eAdyvorov €ort xaxdv): Sd€a 5° eudverar Sew, rods pev dobevets Kai dxdxous
eis dxparov wirepeirrovea, Thy SevarSaipoviav, rots Se Spivrépors Kai Opacure-


402 NOTES
pots ets aBéous exrimrovoa Kai Onpudders Aoyvopovs: # Kal sept rovTww 7a
eixdra SueAPety ovx dvdppoordy ott.)

The above description of the Egyptians in general as ignorant and
grossly superstitious is rather in accord with what Synesius says here,
speaking of them as a people who were hoodwinked by their priests. It is
always of the priests that he speaks when he is extolling the wisdom of
the Egyptians. We must not forget that he expresses himself frequently
in favour of not enlightening the masses as to the mysteries of religion.
In letter 105, notably when on the brink of accepting the bishopric, he
writes: ‘Thephilosophic mind . . . admits the employment of falsehood.
...I consider that the false may be beneficial to the populace, and the
truth injurious. . . . I can take over the holy office on condition that I
may prosecute philosophy at home, and spread legends abroad... .
Divine truth should remain hidden: the vulgar need a different
system.’ Is it possible that Synesius’ views on these matters were in-
fluenced by his admiration for the Egyptian priests? The tradition
amongst Greek philosophers is as old as the time of Plato, who ts always
endorsing their wisdom, without, however, throwing much light on
their theology. Plutarch, on the other hand, gives us so many explana-
tions of the origin and interpretation of the myths of their religion, that
we are forced to conclude that in his time either the priests themselves
had become very ignorant about their own doctrines, or saw fit to throw
dust in the eyes of inquiring Greeks. We find elsewhere in Synesius
allusion to the fact that they were not able to interpret their own hiero-
glyphics (De Prov., p. 1256 c). Plutarch, in Jsts and Ostris, c. 72 ff.,
tells us that some men account for the heads of animals in the images
of gods as coming from military standards or ensigns, carried into
battle in the past, and each sacred to some single tribe, which after-
wards endowed its protecting deity with the emblem, and that others
say that they were used in war as portentous signs to terrify the enemy
with; or again, that they were the areas marked out by the priests, in
the celestial vault, and referred to the astral nature of their gods, as does
Porphyry in the letter quoted above.

Diogenes Laertius speaks of the philosophy of the Egyptians in the
following terms (i. 10): “They say that matter was the first principle,
next the four elements were derived from matter, and thus living things


A EULOGY OF BALDNESS 403


of every species were produced. The sun and the moon are gods bear-
ing the names of Osiris and Isis respectively: they make use of the
beetle, the dragon, the hawk, and other creatures as symbols of divinity,
according to Manetho.. . and Hecataeus. . . . They also set up statues
and temples to these sacred animals because they do not know the true
form of the deity. They hold that the universe is created and perishable
and that it is spherical in shape. They say that the stars consist of fire,
and that, according as the fire in them is mixed, so events happen upon
earth ; that the moon is eclipsed when it falls into the earth’s shadow ;
that the soul survives death and passes into other bodies; that rain is
caused by change in the atmosphere ; of all other phenomena they give
physical explanations. . . . They also laid down laws on the subject of
justice, which they ascribed to Hermes; and they deified those animals
which are serviceable to men.’ (Diog. Laer., translation R. D. Hicks,
Loeb Library.) It must be remembered that Diogenes Laertius was
writing probably in the early part of the third century, and was nearer
to the time of Synesius than was Plutarch.


Page 256, 1. 10 . the Egyptians ...do not allow the vulgar .. . to
make images. The following two passages from St. Clement of
Alexandria and from Plutarch in regard to the Egyptian priests, are
quoted by Cudworth (vol. i, p. 532). I append the Greek text:


ot Aiydirriot od Tots émuruxobor Ta rapa odpiow daveriPevro puvorypia, ovde
piv BeBiirors Thy rav Oeiwv etdnow efépepov, add’ 7} udvots ye Tots pédAAov-
ow énl riv Baorelay mporévar, Kal rébv iepéwy Tots xpBetow elvar Soxypwrd-
tous, amd Te Tis Tpophs Kal ris 1asdelas Kai rob yévous (Strom. v, p. 503).


‘O ek paxipwr arodederypévos ebds eydvero rdaiv iepdwv, nai pereixe
Tis dirooodgias, émxexpuppérns ta toa pos Kai Adyos, dpvdpas
euddoes Tis dAnfelas nat Siaddoes exovow, worep ayéder Kai rrapady-
Aobow adroit mpd Tay lepGv ras odiyyas emends lordvres, ds ainyparddy
ooglay ris Jeodoyias abrav é€xovons (Plutarch, Isis e Ostrts, c. 9).


Page 256, 1. 16. amongst the Greeks zeal for truth is languid. Synesius
does not seem to see that the aspersions made by Thucydides on
the lack of any critical examination into legendary history in his

2878.3 Y


404 NOTES


time refer rather to the majority of mankind in general than to the
Greek race in particular. In the passage to which Synesius alludes he
says that most men are averse to taking pains in the quest of accurate
information, adducing erroneous accounts generally accepted by his
countrymen, and the rest of the Greeks (of dAAo. “EAAnves) concerning
contemporary as well as historic facts. The last words of this criticism
of human credulity (Thuc. i. 20) are the following: ovrws adraXainwpos rois
moAdois 4 Cntnas THs aAnOeias Kai émi ra €rotwa paAAov rpérovrat.


Page 260, 1. 18. forces of Cambyses. The passages that Synesius is
thinking of may be found in Herodotus, Bk. III, chap. 12: ‘I saw there
a strange thing, of which the people of the country had told me. The
bones of those slain on either side in this fight lying scattered separately
(for the Persian bones lay in one place and the Egyptian in another, where
the armies had first separately stood), the skulls of the Persians are so
brittle that if you throw no more than a pebble it will pierce them, but
the Egyptian skulls are so strong that the blow of a stone will hardly
break them. And this, people said (which for my own part I readily
believed), is the reason of it: the Egyptians shave their heads from
childhood and the bone thickens by exposure to the sun. This also
is the reason why they do not grow bald; for nowhere can one see so few
bald heads as tn Egypt. Their skulls then are strong for this reason ;
and the cause of the Persian skulls being weak is that they shelter their
heads through their lives with the felt hats (called tiaras) which they
wear. Such is the truth of this matter. I saw too the skulls of those
Persians at Papremis who were slain with Darius’s son Achaemenes by
Inaros the Libyan, and they were like the others’ (trans. Godley,
ed. Loeb). Wilkinson, in a note to Rawlinson’s Herodotus (ad loc.),
observes, ‘The thickness of the Egyptian skull is observable in the
mummies ;’ Druon remarks that in quoting this passage of Herodotus,
Synesius has taken pains to exclude the clause in which Herodotus
says that one sees fewer bald men in Egypt than anywhere else, and
that it is obvious from this that all his argument is to be taken as a pure
“jeu d'esprit,’ and a sophist’s piece of practice.


Page 261, 1.12. strike one of these men with ts fist: see Mayor on
Juvenal, 5. 171 (also on p. 436), for many parallels.


A EULOGY OF BALDNESS 405


Page 262, 1. 4. should the demon be adverse. He probably alludes to
that individual demon mentioned in Horace’s Epistle to Julius Florus
(Ep. II, 2, 187)

Scit Genius, natale comes qui temperat astrum,
naturae deus humanae, mortalis...


Page 262, 1. 5. one of the divine race. No doubt his Lacedaemonian
ancestors are alluded to here.


Page 262, 1.16. The Lacedaemonsans adopted long hair after Thyrea.
Here again Synesius has been taking a leaf out of Herodotus; the
allusion will be found in Bk. I, cap. 82, where he is describing how when
Croesus was besieged by Cyrus, he sent to the Lacedaemonians for help,
as well as to the rest of the allies. ‘Now at this very time the Spartans
themselves had a feud on hand with the Argives in respect of the country
called Thyrea; ... the Argives came out to save their territory from
being cut off; then after debate the two armies agreed that three hun-
dred of each side should fight, and whichever party won should possess
the land. The rest of each army was to go away to its own country....
Having thus agreed, the armies drew off, and picked men of each side
were left and fought. Neither could gain advantage in the battle; at
last of six hundred there were left only three, Alcenor and Chromios of
the Argives, Othryades of the Lacedaemonians: these three were left
alive at nightfall. Then the two Argives, deeming themselves victors, ran
to Argos; but Othryades, the Lacedaemonian, spoiled the Argive dead,
bore the armour to his own armies’ camp, and remained in his place.
On the next day both armies came to learn the issue; for awhile both
claimed the victory. .. . At last the dispute so ended that they joined
battle and fought ; many of both sides fell but the Lacedaemonians had
the victory. Ever after this the Argives, who before had worn their hair
long by fixed custom, shaved their heads, and made a law, with a curse
added thereto, that no Argive should grow his hair, and no Argive woman
should wear gold, till they should recover Thyrea; and the Lacedae-
monians made a contrary law, that ever after they should wear their hair
long ; for till now they had not so worn it ’ (trans. Godley, ed. Loeb).


Page 263, 1.12. dressed their hatr before the battle of Thermopylae. We
must go back to Herodotus again, Bk. VII, chap. 208 seq.: ‘ While this


406 NOTES


debate was going on, Xerxes sent a mounted spy to observe the Greeks,
and note how many they were, and see what they were doing. . . .The
horseman rode up to the camp and looked about him .. .. It chanced that
at this time the Lacedaemonians held the outer guard, and were seen by
the spy, some of them engaged in gymnastic exercises, others combing
their long hair. At this the spy greatly marvelled, but he counted their
number, and ... he returned and told Xerxes all that he had seen.
Xerxes apparently thought it a laughable matter that they should be
engaged in such employments as looking after their hair, but Demaratus,
whom he consulted on the subject, assured him that it was the custom
of the Spartans when they were about to hazard their lives, to adorn
their heads with care.’ Rawlinson, whose translation I have just been
quoting, observes that ‘the particular attention bestowed on the adorn-
ment of the hair in times of imminent danger, is witnessed to by
Plutarch (Lycurgus, chap. 22), and by Xenophon (Lacedaemonsan
Republic, xiii. 8) if we adopt in that place the reading xexrenopévy.’
The passage from Plutarch is as follows: ‘In time of war, too, they re-
laxed the severity of the young men’s discipline, and permitted them to
beautify their hair and omament their arms and clothing, rejoicing to
see them, like horses, prance and neigh for the contest. Therefore they
wore their hair long as soon as they ceased to be youths, and particu-
larly in times of danger they took pains to have it glossy and well-
combed, remembering a certain saying of Lycurgus, that a fine head of
hair made the handsome more comely still, and the ugly more terrible.’
(Trans. Perrin, Loeb Library, vol. i, p. 275.)


Page 264, 1.2. Ptolemy, son of Lagus. Arrian explains in his
preface to his Ltfe of Alexander, that since Ptolemy, son of Lagos, and
Aristoboulos had both written concerning his campaigns, he himself
has adopted the course of accepting for his work all statements in which
these two writers agreed, and in case they disagreed of adopting the
more plausible version of the two. He further states that they both
seem to him the more trustworthy inasmuch as they both accompanied
Alexander on his campaigns, and as to Ptolemy, he of all men was the
least likely to falsify the truth, for deception is more disgraceful
in a king than in any other man. From this phrase it may be inferred


A EULOGY OF BALDNESS 407


that Synesius had Arrian’s work in his mind when he wrote this passage.
Certainly he would have agreed with Arrian. Compare his remark
in the address to the Emperor Arcadius, ‘Truth is the aristocracy of
language.’ The passage which he refers to here, or possibly quotes in
places, is not in the few fragments we possess of Ptolemy, whom, how-
ever, Arrian frequently refers to. Ptolemy seems to have enjoyed the
reputation of telling amusing anecdotes. If the one that he recounts
of the dragons with human voices who conducted Alexander’s army to
Ammon be taken as an example of his critical powers as an historian, the
amusing war episode that Synesius tells us here will find little credence.
There is, perhaps, a vein of irony in the manner in which he observes
that Ptolemy must be truthful because he is a king. It reminds us of the
passage in Letter 44, where he says: ‘This is the story which Rumour
has recounted, and it is not ordained that a divinity should lie.’


Page 266, 1.7. Aristoxenus says. This must refer to Aristoxenus of
Tarentum, a pupil of Aristotle, and a contemporary of Theophrastus.
He wrote four hundred and fifty-three works, according to Suidas, and
was greatly admired in the succeeding centuries. In the days of Plu-
tarch he was considered already as a classic. The work cited here must
be his celebrated Lives of Men in which he wrote of Pythagoras,
Archytas, Socrates, and Plato. His description of the irascible side of
Socrates is certainly not confirmed by the works of Xenophon and
Plato.


Page 267, 1. 30. he... defames Hector. Druon refers us to
Philostratus, the Herotcus, where Hector is represented as a bald
man (iii. 21, xiv. I) per’ oddSepids Kopns.

Page 268, 1. 14. let anyone show me where this occurs in . . . Homer.
Synesius is quite wrong here. As Druon points out, the verse in question
occurs in the twenty-second book of the Ji:ad, lines 401-2, but the
reading that Synesius quotes is a bad one, he having substituted the
word mwedopnvro for the word zirvavro.


Page 268, 1.18. as tf Phileas had accused Andoctdes. The same phrase
appears in Suidas, who must have taken it from this passage in
Synesius. Druon thinks that the Andocides in question here is the
orator.


408 NOTES


Page 270,1].28. The adulterers... come frommenwho care for thetr hatr.
Seneca in one of his diatribes (De Brevitate Vitae, xii. 3) asks ironically,
“Who is not more sedulous about the adornment of his head than
about its safety,’ and desires to know which one of the idlers in Rome
would not rather the whole state be thrown into confusion than his
own hair. The passage is interesting as showing what a cult of hair
existed among men in the first century.

‘Quid? Illos otiosos vocas quibus apud tonsorem multae horae trans-
mittuntur, dum decerpitur, si quid proxima nocte succrevit, dum de
singulis capillis in consilium itur, dum aut disiecta coma restituitur aut
deficiens hinc atque illinc in frontem compellitur? Quomodo irascun-
tur, si tonsor paulo neglegentior fuit, tanquam virum tonderet! Quo-
modo excandescunt si quid ex iuba sua decisum est, si quid extra
ordinem iacuit, nisi omnia in anulos suos reciderunt! Quis est istorum
qui non malit rem publicam turbari quam comam suam? qui non
sollicitior sit de capitis sui decore quam de salute? ...’


Page 271, 1. 24. like Cletsthenes, the Timarchs, . . . dispose of thetr
beauty. These men were selected, no doubt, as examples of evil and
perverse morals from the fact that they played a conspicuous part, at
least the latter, in political life. Timarchus was a rich man, and a
supporter of Demosthenes. When Aeschines and Demosthenes returned
from the celebrated embassy to Philip of Macedon in which they were
colleagues, Demosthenes brought a formal charge of treason against
Aeschines. The latter, in order to disconcert his adversary, brought an
indictment against his friend and supporter, on the ground that he had
committed criminal offences by his debased conduct, according to the
laws of Athens which made certain offences penal. Aeschines won his
case against Timarchus, in the celebrated speech which bears his name,
and succeeded thereby in getting his enemy out of the way, and in
making the task of Demosthenes more difficult. Demosthenes, how-
ever, won his case against Aeschines in the end, and the latter retired
from public life. Both these men became the butt of the comic poets.
Aristophanes in the Clouds (346 ff.) has the following witty dialogue:

Socrates. Have you ever seen a Cloud like a centaur or a pard, or
wolf, or bull?


A EULOGY OF BALDNESS 409


Strepstades. Marry, I have, but what of that?

Socr. Learn that the Clouds assume whatever guise likes them best.
Therefore if they chance to see a long-haired fop—one of those hirsute
‘slips of wildness’ such as the son of Xenophantus, in mockery of his
lunes, they translate themselves into centaurs. .. . And just now
catching sight of Cleisthenes (pointing to a member of the audience),
—do you observe ?—they took the guise of women.

Streps. (ecstatically prostrating himself before the Chorus) All hail to
ye, then, Liege Ladies! : . . (Mitchell’s translation).


Page 272, 1. 4. Pherecydes. Diogenes Laertius tells us about this
philosopher (Bk. I, 116-20), who was a pupil of Pittacus. The allusion
here is to the story ‘that he died of a verminous disease, and that Pytha-
goras, who was present, came to see him and inquire how he was.
Pherecydes would not let him come in, however, but thrust his finger
through the doorway, and exclaimed, “ My skin tells its own tale,” a
phrase, says Diogenes, subsequently applied by the grammarians as
equivalent to “getting worse’’, although some wrongly understand it to
mean “all is going well’’.. . . Duris, in the second book of his Horae,
gives the inscription on his tomb as follows:

All knowledge that a man may have had I;
Yet tell Pythagoras, were more thereby,
That first of Greeks is he; I speak no lie.’


(Diog. Laert., trans. Hicks, Loeb Library, vol. i, p. 125).


THE EGYPTIAN TALE


Page 275,1.1. sons of Taurus. The phrase ‘written at the time’, or,as
Druon translates it, ‘under the reign of, the sons of Taurus,’ is obscure.
Petavius reminds us of a Taurus who was consul with Florentius under
the EmperorsConstantine, Constantius, andConstans. It is obvious that
Aurelian, ‘the better man’ mentioned in this passage, is the Osiris of the
story, and ‘the inferior man’ Typho. That Aurelian had a son Taurus
we know from Letter 31; he was consul in 428 (Socrates, vii. 29). He
comes into this story under the name of Horus. It seems not improbable,
as Crawford points out (Synessus the Hellene, p. 454), that the father of


410 NOTES


Aurelian, whose name is unknown, may also have been named ‘ Taurus’.
‘The Riddle of the Wolf’ marks the end of the first part of the story,
where it is alluded to as belonging to the mysteries that must not be re-
vealed, even in the disguise of a fable. Plutarch, in Ists and Ossrss, gives
all the information known to Greek antiquity as to the symbolism of
these names, which were identified by him in certain passages, as analo-
gous to Greek conceptions, as in cap. 78, where he speaks of the
Egyptian priests, hinting cautiously, and with the greatest reserve, at
the functions of Osiris in the under-world, as similar to those of Dis and
Pluto ("A:dov xai []Aovrwvos). In the same way Plutarch identifies Horus
with Apollo, and Bacchus with Osiris. Osiris was the son of Helios, and
Typho of Cronos, &c., &c. (cap. 12). Osiris, he tells us, was announced
by an oracular voice, as born to be a beneficent monarch (péyas
Baowreds evepyérns “Ootpis yéyove), and when he came to rule over the
Egyptians, he civilized them not by the use of arms, but by persuasion,
and by reason conjoined with song (er’ wos), and subdued them with
the charms of every form of musical art (dons povoucjs, ibid. 13). Thus
he seems to be to the Greeks identical with Dionysius. This account of
the rule of Osiris in Plutarch has an unmistakable likeness to the opening
passage in chapter twelve of this story, in which Synesius describes
Osiris as, ‘a marvel ill-suited to this earth, one who at once began
striving to banish the forces hostile to it, without employing any
violence at all,’ but who ‘sacrificed to Persuasion, to the Muses and to
the Graces, and made all willingly fall in with the law .. . he made it a
point of honour to conquer the most shameless man by the gentleness
of his mind, &c.’

It is difficult, in the face of this and other concordant passages, to
resist the conclusion that Synesius had Plutarch’s essay in mind when
he framed his story. Typho, in Plutarch’s version, is represented as
laying snares for Osiris, and compassing his destruction. The name
Typho, Plutarch tells us (cap. 62), signifies all that is perverse, preven-
tive, and contrary, in the light of the Egyptian words that are used to
designate him. But although Osiris and Typho are well and consistently
chosen by Synesius for the purpose of his allegory, in that they repre-
sented, in Egyptian mythology, the powers of light and darkness, we
cannot follow the historical side of the story at this distance of time with


THE EGYPTIAN TALE 4II


absolute certainty, for whom he meant to designate by Typho is still a
moot question. Otto Seeck made out a strong case for identifying him
with Caesarius, and this view, which has the endorsement of Bury, I am
inclined to accept, if it is necessary to fix upon a historical personage ;
but it is of course possible that Typho in this story is merely symbolic
of the evil political forces in general, which stood in the way of Aurelian,
the friend of Synesius, whom he so much admired, and whom he has
made the hero of his drama.

An analysis of the arguments advanced by Otto Seeck will be found
in the appendix 27 to Bury’s edition of Gibbon’s Decline and Fall,
vol. ili, p. 506. ‘It had long been recognized’, says Bury, ‘that Egypt
stood for the Empire, and Thebes for Constantinople; and the Prae-
torian Praefect Aurelian had been detected under the veil of Osiris. But
no likely conjecture had been made as to the identity of Typhos, the
wicked brother of Osiris. It was partly in consequence of this lacuna
that the able attempt of Giildenpenning to reconstruct the history of
the years A.D. 399 and 400, on the basis of the work of Synesius (com-
pare my Later Roman Empire, i, p. 79 sqq.) did not carry complete
conviction. But O. Seeck has recently made out a good case for the
identity of Typhos, and interpreted the allegory more fully (Phtlologus,
52, Pp. 442 sqq., 1894).’ Bury explains next that according to Seeck
there can be no doubt that Taurus, father of Osiris and Typho, is the
man who appears in the Consular Fasti of A.D. 361, who was quaestor
in 353, and Praetorian Praefect in 355. He held this office (the peyaAn
apx7 of Synes. De Prov.c. 2, p. 1213) till 361, and presided at the Council
of Ariminum (359). He then passes to Aurelian, whom Seeck describes
as having built a church in 383, having in 393 become Praefect of
Constantinople before Rufinus, and after the fall of Eutropius Prae-
torian Praefect of the East (399-400); and so on through his career,
which witnessed the revolt of Gainas in 400, and his recall to the office
of Praefect for the third time (402-404). Seeck has shown this by com-
paring Letters 31 and 38 of Synesius with the Cod. Th. 4, 2,1, and 5, 1, 5.
Now such being the history of Aurelian, Seeck explains the descrip-
tion of Osiris given on p. 1217 as émordrns Sopuddpwv yevopevos Kai
dxoas muorevfeis to stand for magister officiorum, and the word zoA-
apyyjoas to mean that he was subsequently Praefect of the city, &c.,

2878-3 Z


412 NOTES


showing that the account given by Synesius tallies with what we know
of the history of Aurelian. He observes also that what happened to
Osiris in the story after his fall corresponds even more strikingly to that
which happened to Aurelian, as we shall see in dealing with page 1252.
But the identification of Osiris with Aurelian was never in any doubt,
although Seeck and Giildenpenning have given corroborative evidence.
We now come to the Emperor Arcadius, who, it is natural to suppose,
would appear in the story. Seeck identifies him with the High Priest
(Crawford, however, rejects this identification, cf. Synestus the Hellene,
p.456. ‘The High Priest’, he says, ‘can be no other than S. Chrysostom’,
cp. Volkmann, p. 177, note). Is it not possible, on the other hand, that
in this bold political squib, as Bury describes it, Synesius wishes from
motives of policy to keep the Emperor entirely out of the narrative?
We next come to the identification of Typho. As this is the most im-
portant part of Seeck’s reconstruction, I will quote Bury’s account of it:
‘In the allegory, Typhos is in close alliance with the barbarian mer-
cenaries, and instigates their attack on Thebes in order to overthrow his
brother Osiris. When Osiris surrenders himself to the barbarian leader,
Typhos urges that he should be put to death. Typhos then receives the
kingdom and administers it tyrannically ; nor is his position shaken by
the fall of the barbarian leader. Before the first rise of Osiris to power
he had filled a post which gave him patronage in distributing offices, the
power of oppressing towns (p.1217),and the duty of regulating measures
in connexion with the payment of taxes in kind (p. 1219). These hints,
taken along with the mention of torch-bearing attendants, suggest
that the office was no less than that of Praetorian Prefect. It would
follow that Typhos was Praetorian Prefect before 399, and again in 400.

‘Eutropius had endeavoured to reduce the power of Praetorian Pre-
fect of the East by making it a collegial office; and Eutychianus ap-
pears as holding that office (1) along with Caesarius while Eutropius was
in power; (2) along with Aurelian 399-400; (3) along with Aurelian
when he was restored 402. It may be assumed that he also held it
between 400 and 402.

‘It would follow that Caesarius, whom we find Praetorian Prefect
from 396-8, and again in 400 and 4o1, was the prototype of Typhos, the
son of Taurus and the brother of Aurelian. Some other points may


THE EGYPTIAN TALE 413


confirm the conjecture. The tendency to Arianism, of which Typhos is
accused, is illustrated by C. Th. 16, 5, 25, and the passion of Typhos for
his wife by a notice in Sozomen, 9, 2. If Typhos is not meant for
Caesarius it would seem that he must be purely fictitious.’

It would be interesting to know what part the Empress Eudoxia
played in all this. Bury considers that there was a close political union
between Eudoxia and Aurelian, in which case an empress of German
origin must have allied herself with a statesman whose policy was anti-
German.

Volkmann held the opinion that Aurelian, as the result of some court
intrigue or in some other irregular way, had a brother who was the original
of the Typho in this story. This view is rejected by Crawford (p. 459), as
also by Miss Gardner, as resting purely on surmise. Quite apart from
the improbability of such a person escaping the notice of the historians
of the period, it seems an explanation too obviously derived from the
evidence of the story itself. This theory, however, was held by so
great an authority as Krabinger. (v. Volkmann, p. 72, note). If this
were the case it would make Synesius history perfectly consistent, but
on the evidence before us the view of Seeck seems to be the most
plausible one.

The point is an important one; for if Synesius did not adhere to
history in this case of the relationship of the two men in question,
there is no reason to suppose that he may not have recorded other
imaginary details in his story.


Page 277, 1. 2. the fable ss the child’s treatise on philosophy. Cf.
Olympiodorus (In. Plat. Phaed., D. pr’, 237, ed. Norvin): 4ia ri pvOors
xphras 6 ITAdrwv emi rais aodeifeow; 4 ort, dyoi, Prcopubos 7 Yvy7t ws
mpurn exw Kat Ew Tol ws dAnOas dvros yevonevy.

Plato, in the Republic, has a good deal to say concerning the influence
of legends upon the minds of children, as, for instance, the remarks of
Socrates (p. 3774). ‘You know, I said, that we begin by telling
children stories which, though not wholly destitute of truth, are in the
main fictitious. . . . You know also that the beginning is the most im-
portant part of any work, especially in the case of a young and tender
thing; for that is the time at which the character is being formed ...


414 NOTES


Let them (i.e. mothers and nurses) fashion the mind with such tales, even
more fondly than they mould the body with their hands.’ Plato is fre-
quently recurring to the value of first impressions on the mind of the
child, and insists that knowledge in the first stages should not come to
them through compulsion. In Republic, p.536D, he says that ‘Solon was
under a delusion when he said that a man, when he grows old, may learn
many things—for he can no more learn much than he can run much...
and, therefore, calculation and geometry. and all the other elements of
instruction which are a preparation for dialectic, should be presented to
the mind in childhood; not, however, under any notion of forcing our
system of education ... Then . . . do not use compulsion, but let early
education be a sort of amusement.’ All this is equally relevant to the
passage at the end of page 1236, where Synesius speaks of the value of
early education. It might be argued in this connexion that Plato
regarded all men as ‘children of an older growth’, for when he has
exhausted all the arguments that his dialectic method suggests, he
generally turns to the myth, and tells us some legend before abandoning
the subject.


Page 277, 1.21. The elder brother Typho. Plutarch, in his Ists and
Osiris, explains the symbolism of Typho in the following words: ‘In
the soul, reason and that understanding which is the guide and mistress
of all the best things is Osiris. . . in an opposing sense the passionate,
violent, unreasonable, brutish, rash and foolish part of the soul is
Typho ’ (Is. et Os. p.371 A-B). Again, he alludes to Osiris as representing
the beginning and principle, and Isis that which receives. Horus is the
compound of both. It would seem also, he says, that the poet Hesiod,
when he avers that all things in the first instance were Chaos, Earth,
Tartarus, and Love, has no other foundation than the significations of
these names, meaning by the Earth Isis, by Love Osiris, and by
Tartarus Typho (thtd. p. 374).


Page 282,1.9. There ts a sacred mountain, &c. The geography of the
valley of the Nile near Karnak, and the remains of the ancient city of
Thebes, does not help us much to reconstitute the picture that Synesius
draws here. The valley of the Nile is over six miles wide at Luxor, the
little town that has grown up on what was once the southern suburb of


THE EGYPTIAN TALE 415


the ancient city of Thebes, about 1,400 years B.c.; and the range of
mountains on one’s left hand when looking down stream is at least five
miles from the river. There cannot be said to be ‘a mountain’ near
Thebes, as Synesius puts it, for it is a high range of cliffs, a sort of
palisade that rises abruptly from the flat plain, and in which are the
celebrated ‘Tombs of the Kings’. On our right hand, still looking down
the river, and at a distance of some miles from it, there are ranges of
lower hills. What the ‘two opposite mountains’ are, it would be diffi-
cult to say; but the distance between any two elevations chosen on
different sides of the Nile in the neighbourhood of Thebes would be
some seven miles, and such a distance does not tally with the descrip-
tion here. The ancient town of Thebes, with its hundred gates, was said
to be about fourteen miles in circumference, and lay on both sides of the
river. The legend of its great magnitude has been rather confirmed by
archaeologists. Even in the days of Strabo, long after its decline, it seems
to have shown remains of outer walls of some eight miles in extent.
‘Vestiges of its magnitude still exist’, says Strabo (xvii. 1. 46), ‘which
extend to a length of eighty stadia. The site is at present given over to
villages. That part of it in which the city lies is in Arabia, another, in
which is the Memnoniun,, is on the other side of the river (i.e. the left
side, always looking down). Here are the two colossal figures near one
another, each consisting of a single stone.’ The Colossi which Strabo
mentions are still standing, although he speaks of one of them in his
time as having suffered from an earthquake, which threw down the
upper part.

Diodorus Siculus speaks of the city of Thebes as having been embel-
lished by the King Busiris and his eight sons. According to him it was
called by the Egyptians themselves the great city of Zeus (Aus wéAw
THv peydAnv), and only by the Greeks, Thebes. It is not clear what
Egyptian divinity he means to imply by Zeus. He goes on to speak of
the vast extent of the walls enclosing the city that extended to 140
stadia, and of the great palaces, and magnificent temples, and stately
shrines which adorned it in marvellous fashion. As to the hundred
gates of which Homer speaks, he tells us that some are of opinion that
these were not gates but vestibules of temples. All this, of course, was
legendary in his time. The great Thebes seems to have disappeared


416 NOTES


about the time of Cambyses. There seems to be little doubt that Syne-
sius had never visited the site, and the picture that he draws is a purely
imaginary one. It is interesting as showing how little known this part of
the valley of the Nile must have been, even at Alexandria, in the fourth
century. (See Diod. Sic., Lib. I, cap. xv.)


Page 286, 1. 9. filled with intelligible beauty which ts mind. This
Platonic conception, developed in the Phaedrus, is reflected by Plotinus,
(Enn. i. 6.9): ‘Newly awakened it is all too feeble to bear the ultimate
splendour. Therefore the Soul must be trained. . . . So, mounting, the
soul will come first to the Intellectual-Principle and survey all the
beautiful Ideas in the Supreme and will avow that this is Beauty... .
What is beyond the Intellectual-Principle we affirm to be the nature of
Good radiating Beauty before it.’ (Stephen Mackenna, i, pp. 88 f.)


Page 286, 1.11. another and super-cosmic race of gods. This same idea
of the super-cosmic gods Synesius touches on in Dreams (cap. i). Ps.-[am-
blichus in his tractate on the Myséertes, a work written in answer to
Porphyry’s letter to the Egyptian priest Anebo, and which is in some
sort a defence of the spirituality of the Egyptian religion against
Porphyry’s accusations of materialism, tries to show that the gods are
indeed classified according to higher and lower ranks, but at the same
time are spiritually one. In sect. 1, chap. 19 he says that ‘The intellectual
conversion of secondary to primary natures, and the gift of the same
essence and power imparted by the primary to the secondary Gods,
connects the synod of them in indissoluble union.’ (I quote Thomas
Taylor’s translation, p. 73.) ‘Since, however, the order of all the Gods
is profoundly united, and the first and second genera of them, . . . are
consubsistent in unity, and also every thing which is in them is one,
—hence the beginning, middles, and ends in them are consubsistent
according to the one itself... . From this cause, therefore, the perfectly
incorporeal Gods are united to the sensible Gods that have bodies (s5:d.,
Pp. 74, 75). From the sensible gods, Iamblichus passes to the demons.
He tells us that demons are far distant from both the visible and
intelligible gods from their very essence. The demons, it is true, are
invisible, and cannot be objects of sense perception, but they do not,
like the gods, transcend rational knowledge and concrete intelligence.


THE EGYPTIAN TALE 417


In Dreams also Synesius speaks of gods who are within the confines
of the universe, and who may therefore be propitiated by offerings
of herbs, stones, and so forth, as distinguished from gods who are
without the confines of the universe. Synesius, says Petavius, indi-
cates here three grades of gods: the lowest those to whom the manage-
ment of the lower world is attributed and who fulfil a double function,
one an active and busy one, when they have time to administer the
affairs of this world; the other a happy and quiet one, when they lift
themselves up to the contemplation of the sublime divinity. The second
grade contains the medial gods, to whom I understand the phrase ‘the
hypercosmic race of gods’ (yévos Bedv drepxcopiov) to refer to, who do
not participate in the management of affairs below; and these have a
third divinity above them whom he calls the Source (zyyjv), in other
words, the fountain of the divine essence.


Page 286,1.14. those who are gods bynature. To actually become a god
of some sort after death, seems to have been the Neoplatonic conception,
alluded to by Synesius in Dio (11408), although it is doubtful to what
extent the language may be figurative. In this passage he seems to use
the phrase in the more strictly Platonic sense of a nature beloved by the
gods, i.e. OeofeArjs as in Plato, Euthyphro, passim.


Page 286, 1. 15. fountain-head. This word (myy) is used first in
Aeschylus in the sense of the origin of good and beautiful things, &c.
v. Perstans, 743.


Page 286, 1. 16. self-concentratson. Plotinus is continually asserting the
power of the soul to turn itself within, as a spectator of its own concep-
tions and emotions, as for instance in En. v. 8. 10: ‘... no longer is
there a spectator outside gazing on an outside spectacle; the clear-eyed
hold the vision within themselves, though, for the most part, they have
no idea that it is within but look towards it as to something beyond
them. ... All that one sees as a spectacle is still external; one must
bring the vision within and see no longer in that mode of separation but
as we know ourselves . . . it is but finding the strength to see divinity
within.” (Mackenna, vol. iv, pp. 85 f.)


Page 286, 1. 21. action generated in their contemplation. Contemplation,


418 NOTES


in the case of the gods, was identified with action. It was by their con-
templative power, according to Synesius’ conception, that they gener-
ated the world, and kept successively regenerating it in their visits from
time to time, as he tells us a little farther on. The force that descended
in this way from one rank of deities to another, was a sort of emanation
from the fountain head which seems to have become feebler and
feebler, as it approached the realm of matter, and this necessitated the
actual descent from time to time of the beings who were nearer the
source.


Page 287, 1. 6. that does the demon. There is a good deal of confusion
in the conception of demons. The demon in the time of Plato is repre-
sented as an intermediate being between gods and men. Socrates, in the
Symposium, represents Eros as being, not a god but a demon, and as
therefore partaking of the nature of both god and man. The demon was
not understood asmaleficent. Even Ps.-[amblichusrepresents the demons
as ministers of the gods, as in the following passage from the Mystertes.
‘In short, that which is divine is of a ruling nature and presides over
the different orders of beings; but that which is daemoniacal is of a
ministrant nature, and receives whatever the Gods may announce,
promptly employing manual operation, as it were, in things which the
Gods intellectually perceive, wish,and command. The Gods, therefore,
are liberated from the powers which verge to generation ; but daemons
are not entirely purified from these’ (I. 20, Taylor, p.78). He appears to
give them functions somewhat resembling those of the demiurges in
Plato’s Timaeus, but in this story Synesius brings them in as purely
maleficent, and this conception grew in the fourth and fifth centuries,
and was no doubt strongly affected by Christianity, which in the Middle
Ages had come to recognize the existence of vast tribes of evil spirits.


Page 287,1.18. marionettes moved by strings. Puppet shows are alluded
to by Philo in his indictment against Flaccus (Yonge trans., iv. 68):
‘And at times they employed poets who composed farces, and managers
of puppet shows, displaying their natural aptitude for every kind of dis-
graceful employment, though they were very slow at learning anything
that was creditable, but very acute, and quick, and ready at learning
anything of an opposite nature.’ The passages describing the traits of


THE EGYPTIAN TALE 419


Typho’s character in this story are somewhat reminiscent of the
passage above.


Page 288, 1.14. The idea of divine beings coming down at intervals,
and when necessity urges them, is similar to that expressed in Synesius’
indictment of Andronicus (ep. 57): ‘I reserve to myself the right of
judging when times and seasons are opportune, so that when it is
possible I may come down, that I may do some great good when the
chance arises. Thus does God Himself govern His own kingdom.’

Cf. Aristotle in the following: wozep yap Gray xwyon m1 70 Udwp 7
Tov aépa, Tob0’ érepoy éxivnce, Kai mavoapévov éxeivov, ovpBaiver TH
Totavrny Kivnow mpoiévas péxpt Twos, Tob Kurjoavros od mrapdvTos, oUTWS
oddey KwAver xivnoly twa Kai alcfnow adixvetca: mpds tas yuxds Tas
evurvuafovoas. (De Divinatione per Somnum, 464".)

The simile of the marionettes occurs also in the pseudo-Aristotelian
De Mundo, 398° : ‘Opoiws 5¢ nai of vevpoomdoras piav unpwhov émonacd-
pevot rovovar Kai adyéva xivetobat Kai xetpa Tob Lou .... ovTws odv Kal
Gela pvats amd twos atrAns Kwicews Tob mpwrov Thy SUvapwy eis ta Luvexh
SiSwor ... péyps av dua rob mravros SueEEAGy.

Page 289, 1.7. a sacred race of heroes. Ps.-lamblichus (Myst. I. 3, p. 24,
T. Taylor): ‘I shall likewise say the same thing to you, concerning the
more excellent genera that follow the Gods, I mean daemons, heroes,
and undefiled souls. For it is necessary to understand respecting these,
that there is always in them one definite reason of essence,and to remove
from them the indefiniteness and instability of the human condition.’
It will be seen that Iamblichus speaks of demons as beneficent, placing
them before heroes, who in their turn are put before purified souls of
ordinary men. In this work of Synesius, notably in the passage before us,
the heroes are represented as a well-intentioned but feeble race, very
different from the conceptions of Theseus and Heracles that prevailed
in the golden days of Greek religion. On the other hand the demons are
here represented purely as maleficent. There seems to have been then a
time when the conception of ‘demon’ was used for good and evil spirits
side by side.


Page 290, 1. 4. Thts ts the greatest of struggles. All this account of the
besieging of the soul is taken from Plato’s Republic (Bk. VIII, p. 559);
2878-a Aa


420 NOTES


the idea of the demons is, however, that of Synesius. ‘And as in the city
like was helping like, and the change was affected by an alliance from
without assisting one division of the citizens, so too the young man is
changed by a class of desires coming from without to assist the desires
within him, that which is akin and alike again helping that which is akin
and alike.’ Again, on pages 572, 573, still speaking of the soul of the
young man, which he represents as in the state of siege, he continues:
‘As soon as these dire magicians and tyrant makers find that they are
losing hold on him, they contrive to implant in him a master passion...
and when his other lusts amid clouds of incense and perfumes and gar-
lands and wines, and all the pleasures of a dissolute life, now let loose,
come buzzing around him ... then at last this lord of the soul, having
Madness for the captain of his guard, breaks out into a frenzy ; and if he
finds in himself any good opinions. . . to these better principles he puts
an end.’


Page 290, l. 10. the gods are spectators of these noble contests. Here,
again, he is still following the Republsc, p. 580. ‘Come then, I say, and
as the general umpire in theatrical contests proclaims the result do you
also decide who in your opinion is first in the scale of happiness and
who second.’


Page 290, 1. 18. admat the tnfluxes from the demons. The following
passages from Olympiodorus (Comment. in Plat. Phaed.) are interesting
as showing how the functions of the demons had been classified in the
fifth century. The pages referred to are those of Norvin’s edition:

"Or. yévn Saipcvwy Suddopa. tmdorpwras yap Trois éyxoopiows Oeois ro
pev Satpovov yévos xara 70 év ray Oediv 6 Si) Kai KaXdetras éviaiov wai Oetov
Saiovwy yévos: 70 S¢ xara Tov votv tov é&nprnpévoy rob Deo’, 6 xadetras
voepov’ To 5é Kata THy yuynv, 6 KaAetras Aoyixdy’ To 5€ Kara Tiv dvouw,
Gmep ovopaterat puoixoy’ ro dé Kata 7O owya, 6 8) Kadeirar owpa-
toedds: 1o 5€ xara THY VAny, ToUTO Se UAatov emepypileras’ (p. 230).

"Ort wat dAAws of peév elow ovpanot, of S¢ aifépror, of 5é€ aéptor, of 5°
Udpator, of 5¢ xPovor, of Se dzr0xOdvi01, avry Se 2 Scaipects SnAovers ex THdv
Tou Travros eiAnmras pepidwy' amo 5é rév aepiwy dpyovra ourvvdicracbas
of ddoyo. Saipoves: 516 Kai To Adyrov dnow"


? e 9% 7 ~ o \ e “a
nepiwy eAdreipa Kuviv, xOoviwy re ai typav.


THE EGYPTIAN TALE 421

Au rotro xai of évvAo. Saipoves aap’ eavrois Karéxew ras yuyas
émyetpotow ... (p. 94).

... 08 Saipoves of amd roi Oeot mpowvres of wey xara ri Oedrynra
Getor yiyvovrat, of 5é xara Ti VAny Ans Efopor, Kal of pécor voepol, duatKoi,
cwpatixol ... émorioas Sé xp, OTs Kai Oedv yévn trocatra Siujpyras
xara tds avras tdSitdrnras (p. 139).

"Or. wai aAXov tpdrov ovvdijpnvras trois ayeAdpyas Beois of Saipoves,
ovpdviot, aifdpior, dépror, vdpaior, xGoviot, rox Odvior.

"On ovrwy &v Tm Kéopw tadv dAdore GAws exdvrwy Kal Tav Tals
Uiepovaias évdo. ovvnupdvwy, Set Kat pécov ri yévos elvas, rd ovre Geod
efnupeévoy ev ouvapripare ovre GAAore GAws Exov Kata 70 xetpov Kal 70
Kpetrrov, dAAa TéAeov det Kai Tis oixelas dperijs od adiordpevov, auerda-
BAnrov pev, od ovrvnppévoy 5€ 7@ trepovoiw: tobro Sé€ GAov ro yedvos
Satpormor (p. 230).


Page 291,1.5. They attack by outside means when means within fasl them.
Plato in the Republsc, p. 560, in describing the struggles in the young
man’s soul when besieged by the evil forces of old desires and associates,
puts a similar case, ‘At length they seize upon the citadel of the young
man’s soul which they perceive to be void of . . . fair pursuits and true
words, which make their abode in the minds of men who are dear to the
gods, and are their best guardians and sentinels. . . . False and boastful
conceits and phrases mount upwards and take their place. . . and if any
help be sent by his friends . . . shut the gate of the king’s fastness; and
they will neither allow the embassy itself to enter, nor if private ad-
visers offer the fatherly counsel of the aged will they listen to them or
receive them. There is a battle, and they gain the day... .’ It will be
observed that Plato speaks of evil forces only, although more or less
personifying them by representing a siege of the soul. Synesius, taking
up the same simile, has made the protagonists of evil the demons of
matter, compare Hymn III, where he prays to be saved from the ‘soul-
devouring hound of matter ’.


Page 291, 1.27. able to save yourself by your own resources. Cudworth
(Intellectual System, vol. i, p. 10) quotes Josephus (Anisg. Iudatcae,
Lib. XIII, cap. 5, sec. 9) as giving the doctrine of the pharasaic sect
amongst the Jews in this respect in the following words: ‘That some


422 NOTES


things, and not all, were the effects of fate, but some things were left in
men’s own power and liberty.’ He further quotes Plutarch (De Pla-
citis Philosoph., Lib. I. 27, p. 884): []Adruw éyxpives pev riv eipappevny
éi Trav avOpwrivwy yuyay Kal Biwy, ovveodye: 5¢ Kai THY Tap’ judas airiay.
‘Plato inserts something of fate into human lives and actions, and he
joins with it liberty of will also.’ ‘He doth indeed’, continues Cudworth,
‘suppose human souls to have within themselves the causes of their own
changes to a better or worse state, and everywhere declares God to be
blameless for their evils; and yet he somewhere makes the three fatal
sisters notwithstanding, Clotho, Lachesis, and Atropos, to be busy
about them also.’


Page 294, 1.5. Early education. The whole subject of early education
is gone into by Plato in detail in Laws, pp. 809-10. He says, for instance,
‘A fair time for a boy of ten years old to spend in letters is three years ;
the age of thirteen is the proper time for him to begin to handle the lyre.
... Hear, however, first of all what the young aught to learn in the early
years of life: . . . they ought to be occupied with their letters until they
are able to read and write; but the acquisition of perfect beauty and
quickness in writing, if nature has not stimulated them to acquire these
accomplishments in the given number of years, they should let alone.’
The ‘ Athenian Stranger’ in the Dialogue goes on to discuss the practice
of learning poets by heart, or making compendiums of their works, &c.
In page 819 of the same Dialogue he recurs to his favourite idea of
teaching children through their games: ‘All free men, I can see, should
learn as much of these branches of knowledge as every child in Egypt is
taught when he learns the alphabet. In that country arithmetical
games have been invented for the use of mere children, which they
learn as a pleasure and amusement. They have to distribute apples and
garlands for a larger and sometimes for a lesser number of persons. . . .
Another method of amusing them is to distribute vessels of gold, brass,
silver, and the like . . . and in this way make more intelligible to their
pupils the arrangement and movements of armies and expeditions .. .
and again in measurements of things . . . they free us from that natural
ignorance which is so ludicrous and disgraceful. . . . I, like yourself, my
dear Cleinias, have late in life heard of our ignorance in these matters ;


THE EGYPTIAN TALE 423


to me we appear to be more like pigs than men, and I am quite ashamed,
not only of myself, but of all Hellenes.’ It is possible that Synesius was
thinking of this passage in speaking of the attention that Osiris, his
Egyptian hero in the Tale, paid to early education. Another example
of Plato’s views on the subject may be found in the first book of the
Laws, p. 643: ‘The most important part of education is nght training
in the nursery. The soul of the child in his play should be guided to the
love of that sort of excellence in which, when he grows up to manhood,
he will have to be perfected. .. . We are not speaking of education in the
narrower sense, but of that other education in virtue from youth upwards,
which makes a man eagerly pursue the ideal perfection of citizenship,and
teaches him howrightly to rule and how to obey. This is the only educa-
tion which, upon our view, deserves the name.’ Again in Book IT, p.653.
“Now I mean by education that training which is given by suitable
habits to the first instincts of virtue in children; when pleasure, and
friendship, and pain, and hatred, are rightly implanted in souls not yet
capable of understanding the nature of them, and who find them, after
they have attained reason, to be in harmony with her. This harmony
of the soul, taken as a whole, is virtue; but the particular training
in respect of pleasure and pain which leads you always to hate what
you ought to hate, and love what you ought to love, from the beginning
of life to the end, may be separated off; and in my view will be rightly
called education.’

Turning now again to Book I, p. 641, we find the same note quite as
definitely expressed, ‘But if you ask what is the good of education in
general, the answer is easy—that education makes good men, and that
good men act nobly, and conquer their enemies in battle, because they
are good. Education certainly gives victory, although victory some-
times produces forgetfulness of education ; for many have grown inso-
lent from victory in war . . . and many a victory has been, and will be,
suicidal to the victors; but education is never suicidal.’ How much the
conception of education as a political end is in Plato’s mind may be
gathered from a passage in the Republsc, in Bk. VI, p. 498, where
Socrates, declaring that States should pursue philosophy, continues:
‘At present the students of philosophy are quite young, beginning when
they are hardly past childhood.’ (Cf. Synesius, supra, ‘the child’s philo-


424 NOTES

sophy’.] In childhood and youth their study, and what philosophy
they learn, should be suited to their tender years: during this period,
while they are growing up towards manhood, the chief and special care
should be given to their bodies, that they may have them to use in the
service of philosophy; as life advances and the intellect begins to
mature, let them increase the gymnastics of the soul; but when the
strength of our citizens fails and is past civil and military duties, then
let them range at will, and engage in no serious labour, as we intend
them to live happily here, and to crown this life with a similar happiness
in another.’ All this is interesting as showing the conception of Plato,
that the real object in education was a political one, and that the
developed mind of the philosopher was inseparable from the duties
towards the State. Synesius, however, although he was forced by his
destiny to become a shining example of the Platonic ideal, continually
complains of political necessity. But here again he is thoroughly in the
Platonic tradition, for elsewhere Plato admits that the true philosopher
will only take up the burden of government regretfully.


Page 294, 1.6. all education as a fountain-head of virtue. The ideas of
Synesius on education, as I have already pointed out, seem tohave come
from his reading of Plato, the intellectual side being inseparable from
the moral. Compare the passage in Timaeus, p. 87, when after repre-
senting madness and ignorance as diseases of the mind, due to a bad
condition of the body, he adds: ‘Further, when to this evil constitution
of body evil forms of government are added and evil discourses are
uttered in private as well as in public, and no sort of instruction is given
in youth to cure these evils, then all of us who are bad become bad
from two causes which are entirely beyond our control. In such cases
the planters are to blame rather than the plants, the educators rather
than the educated.’


Page 296, 1.29. the one virtue of a woman, &c. The conception of the
proper sphere and conduct of women would not seem to have changed
from the time of Homer to the time of Synesius, if we are to take
his statements as anything but a reflection of his favourite Greek
authors. Certainly here he is reminiscent of the famous passage in the
funeral oration of Pericles (Thuc. ii. 45): ‘And if I am to speak of


THE EGYPTIAN TALE 425


womanly virtue to those of you who will henceforth be widows, let me
sum them up in one short admonition: To a woman not to show more
weakness than is natural to her sex is a great glory, and not to be talked
about for good or for evil among men.’ Substantially the same point of
view may be found in Xenophon, as in Oeconomicus (cap. 7), where
Ischomachus describes how in the course of the conversations he had
with his young newly married wife, he took care to impress upon her
that her sphere was within the precincts of the house rather than out-
side, to be the steward of the possessions within doors, and to direct
the servants from there.

Plato is a decided cross-current to the conceptions of the sphere of
women that existed in Athens at his time, and this is perhaps the only
point in which Synesius does not seem to have followed his master.
Plato, as we see in the Republic and elsewhere, was what we should call
to-day an advanced feminist, and made an eloquent plea for the
equality of the sexes, both in education and in their occupying public
functions, and so forth (Rep. v. 451, 456; Laws, vii. 805). But even
Plato echoes the conservative tradition in the Meno, 71 E: ‘It isa man’s
virtue to be capable of managing the affairs of the city, and in managing
them to benefit his friends and injure his enemies. . .. The woman’s vir-
tue is to take good care of her house and to preserve the things within.’
This is the same language that Synesius employs in De Regno, cap. xiv,
q.v. Synesius would seem to have been anything but a feminist, in
spite of the fact that his mind had been largely formed by the great
Hypatia. Aristotle speaks in the purely conventional strain in the
Polstics, 1277 B, in which he alludes to the different spheres of the sexes
as follows: ‘For a man would be thought a coward if he had no more
courage than a courageous woman, and a woman would be thought
loquacious if she imposed no more restraint on her conversation than
the good man; and indeed their part of the management of a house-
hold is different, for the duty of the one is to acquire, and of the other
to preserve.’ It will be remembered how scandalized Synesius shows
himself in the third Letter at his niece driving in a mule-cart through
the crowded Forum, although she was both betrothed and in mourning.
Plutarch, on the other hand, commences his essay on The Virtues of
Women, with the following observations: ‘Concerning virtue in women,


426 NOTES


O Clea, I do not hold the same opinion as Thucydides, for he gives the
first praise to the woman concerning whom there is the least conversa-
tion amongst those without her doors, either in praise or in blame of her,
for he thinks that the repute of a good woman ought to be secluded in
her house with her person, and should not walk abroad. But Gorgias
seems to me to put the case more happily when he demands that the
good fame of the woman should be known to many, not her person.’
Coming down to the days of Philo, we find him expressing the classic con-
ception again, as in this passage in the Special Laws, III. 31,§ 171:
‘Let no woman busy herself about those things which are beyond the
province of household management, but let her cultivate solitude;
let her not be seen to be going about like one who walks the streets
in the sight of other men, except when it is necessary for her to go
to the temple, if she has any proper regard for herself; and even then
let her not go at noon when the market is full, but after the greater
part of the people have returned home; like a free-born woman, a real
and true citizen, performing her vows and her sacrifices in tranquillity
so as to avert evils and to receive blessings.’

Athenaeus in the Detpnosophtsts, Bk. XII, c. 20, tells an interesting
story concerning regulations that were made in one Greek town at least:
‘Phylarchus, in the twenty-fifth book of his history, tells us that there
was a law at Syracuse, that the women there should not wear gold
ornaments, nor garments embroidered with flowers, nor purple-bordered
robes, unless they chose to profess themselves outlaws to society;.. .
and also that a freewoman was not to walk abroad when the sun had set,

. . and even by day they were not allowed to go out without the
authority of the officials who supervised them and without one slave
following them.’ o7: wapa Lupaxociots vopos Hv tds yuvatxas 7 Koopet-
ofa: xpvod, 275° avOiva dopeiv, pnd’ eobjras Exew wopdupas, day py THs
adraév ovyywpf éraipa elvar ow}, . . . Kal Thy eAevOdpay jt) exmropeverOar
HAiov Seduxdros, €av 27) porxevOnoopévynv. exwAvero 5é Kat nyépas efcévar
dvev Twv yuvaxovopwy axodovBovons avrf pias Yeparrawidos. He next
proceeds to tell us how Phylarchus in describing the Sybarites, who
gave way to every sort of luxury, says that they forbid women to be
invited to banquets, and even that if they are invited to festivities
of a sacred nature, they must be asked a year before the event, in


THE EGYPTIAN TALE 427


order that they might have sufficient time to get ready their dresses
and other adornments that they should be worthy of the occasion.
When all these conditions had been fulfilled they might come to the
sacred banquet, to which alone they were eligible.


Page 298,1.10. awastltfe patiently, as a portion to be served at the dinner-
table. This very naive allusion to the manners that were in vogue at
banquets in the time of Synesius is interesting. One is reminded of the
symposium described by Lucian (q.v.), in which a torrent of chaff and
witticisms are mingled with angry arguments, and finally terminate in
blows and a free fight. He says at the end: ‘thus the banquet was broken
up, passing in the end out of tears again into laughter. The wounded
who were prostrate were carried away in sorry plight, and especially the
old man Zenothemis, with one hand holding on to his nose, and another
on to his eye, shouting out that he was dying with pain. . . . This, my
fair Philo, was the end of our banquet, concerning which it were well to
quote that passage from the tragedy:


The demons take many shapes,
And the gods bring many things unexpectedly to pass,
And stull the hoped-for is not fulfilled.


This much have I learned now, that it is not safe for the untutored to
dine with such wise men as these.’

Petronius, in the famous Saturae, 66, has a description of a banquet
in the house of Trimalchio, the rich freedman, which is worth reading if
only for the picture he gives of the manners of the time, which was that
of the Emperor Nero. One or two incidents at the feast are rather in the
same line of manners as that described here by Synesius. ‘I ate a lot of
the tarts,’ says one of the guests, in describing another banquet which
he has just come from, ‘and gave myself such a soaking of honey.
Pease and lupines were handed, a choice of nuts and an apple each. I
took two myself and I have got them here tied up in my napkin; for
if I do not bring some present back for my pet slave boy, there will be
trouble. Oh! yes, my wife reminds me.. . pickled olives were brought
round in a dish too, and some greedy creatures took three handfuls.
For we had let the ham go.’

2878.3 Bb


428 NOTES


Juvenal (Satire V) describes his master of the banquet, Virro, as
having all the best dishes served to himself, and the inferior ones to his
clients to whom he is giving a dinner. ‘Virro is served with a lamprey,
the finest that Sicilian waters can purvey,... for you is reserved
an eel, first cousin to a water-snake’ (lines 99-103). . . . ‘Before the
guests will be placed toadstools of a doubtful quality, before my lord, a
noble mushroom, such a one as Claudius ate before eating that mush-
room of his wife’s—after which he ate nothing more ’ (146-8).

The comparison of life to a banquet was already in the fourth century
an old literary tradition. Cf. Nock, Sallustius (p. xxviii), who regards it
as characteristic of the ‘diatribe’. He quotes the following:

‘cur non ut plenus vitae conviva recedis?’ Lucretius (iii. 938) :
Teles . . . himself says, ‘I leave life as if it were a banquet’ (p. 16. 2, ed.
Hense).

Athenaeus (Lib. X, cap. 18) quotes Aeschylus, in his ‘Phineus’ as


os Kai pevicderva rroMa papywons yvdbou


éppvaialov ordparos ev mpwrn xapG.
In cap. 17 he complains that those who give banquets in Alexandria
shout aloud and heap execrations on the cup-bearers and slaves:
xexpdyact, BAacdnpodar tov olvoxdov, Tov SidKxovov, Tov pdyeipov .. . Kal
ovy olov of KexAnpévor pera mdons andias Seurvotaww, addAd Kav Tuy Guoia
tis odca, trapaxaduydpevos 6 Decs oiyicerat KaTradimwy ov pdvov Tov olxov,
GAG, Kai TH 1dAw dracay.


Page 298,1.28. Has not your brother had a piece of good luck? Asimilar
witticism will be found in Macrobius, Saturnalia, Lib. II, cap. 2, § 8.
‘Eustathius deinde: Publius Mucium in primis malivolum cum vidisset
solito tristiorem, ‘‘ Aut Mucio”’, inquit, “‘ nescio quid incommodi accessit,
aut nescio cui aliquid boni.”’’


Page 303, 1.13. Ostris ... gave himself up, &c. Synesius speaks of
Aurelian’s (Osiris’) conduct as if it were a case of voluntary self-sacrifice.
Zosimus, Sozomen, and Socrates seem to know nothing of this. As to the
chivalrous conduct of Gainas, the Gothic general, Griitzmacher
(pp. 48-9) calls attention to the fact that it was only owing to the inter-
cession of St. John Chrysostom that Gainas was contented to exact no


THE EGYPTIAN TALE 429


more than the deposition and banishment from court of the three
statesmen, Aurelian the Consul, Saturninus the Magister militum, and
Johannes the Comes. ‘Synesius’, says Griitzmacher, ‘has certainly
stated the case incorrectly in describing Gainas as a philanthropic and
high-minded Barbarian, and in laying the whole blame on Caesarius.
All the other writers who give an account of these events make the bold
and ambitious Goth, the ally and fellow-worker with Tribigild, answer-
able for the menace to the capital, and we must accept their evidence.
Cf. Zosimus, v. 13 ff. p. 230; Socrates, vi. 6, Migne, P.G. 67. 676 ff. ;
Sozomen, viii, 4, Migne, P.G. 67. 1521; Philostorgius, xi, 8, Migne, P.G.
65. 601 ff.’ He furthermore tells us, on the authority of Socrates (vi. 6),
that Arcadius was obliged by Gainas to take an oath not to lay an
ambush against him, and that this promise was extorted from him by a
threat. He acceded to it in order to save the capital from being sacked
by the Gothic army. Gibbon describes the surrender of Aurelian, the
Osiris of the story, and Saturninus his colleague, who is not mentioned
in it, with his accustomed dramatic power (Decline and Fall, iii. 371,
ed. Bury). I cannot do better than to quote his words: ‘While this
domestic revolution was transacted, Gainas openly revolted from his
allegiance; united his forces, at Thyatira in Lydia, with those of
Tribigild; and still maintained his superior ascendant over the rebel-
lious leader of the Ostrogoths. The confederate armies advanced, with-
out resistance, to the streights of the Hellespont and the Bosphorus ;
and Arcadius was instructed to prevent the loss of his Asiatic dominions
by resigning his authority and his person to the faith of the Barbarians.
The church of the holy martyr Euphemia, situate on a lofty eminence
near Chalcedon, was chosen for the place of the interview. Gainas
bowed, with reverence, at the feet of the emperor, whilst he required the
sacrifice of Aurelian and Saturninus, two ministers of consular rank;
and their naked necks were exposed, by the haughty rebel, to the edge
of the sword, till he condescended to grant them a precarious and dis-
graceful respite. The Goths, according to the terms of the agreement,
were immediately transported from Asia into Europe; and their
victorious chief, who accepted the title of master-general of the Roman
armies, soon filled Constantinople with his troops, and distributed
among his dependants the honours and rewards of the empire. In his


430 NOTES


early youth, Gainas had passed the Danube as a suppliant and a fugi-
tive; his elevation had been the work of valour and fortune; and his
indiscreet, or perfidious, conduct was the cause of his rapid downfall.
Notwithstanding the vigorous opposition of the archbishop, he impor-
tunately claimed, for his Arian sectaries, the possession of a peculiar
church; and the pride of the Catholics was offended by the public
toleration of heresy. Every quarter of Constantinople was filled with
tumult and disorder; and the Barbarians gazed with such ardour on the
rich shops of the jewellers, and the tables of the bankers, which were
covered with gold and silver, that it was judged prudent to remove those
dangerous temptations from their sight. They resented the injurious
precaution; and some alarming attempts were made, during the night,
to attack and destroy with fire the Imperial palace. In this state of
mutual and suspicious hostility, the guards and the people of Constanti-
nople shut the gates, and rose in arms to prevent, or to punish, the
conspiracy of the Goths. During the absence of Gainas, his troops were
surprised and oppressed; seven thousand Barbarians perished in this
bloody massacre. In the fury of the pursuit, the catholics uncovered
the roof, and continued to throw down flaming logs of wood, till they
overwhelmed their adversaries, who had retreated to the church or con-
venticle of the Arians. Gainas was either innocent of the design or too
confident of his success; he was astonished by the intelligence that the
flower of his army had been ingloriously destroyed ; that he himself was
declared a public enemy; and that his countryman, Fravitta, a brave
and loyal confederate, had assumed the management of the war by sea
and land.’ It is ‘this conventicle’ that Synesius has in mind on p. 1257,
when he speaks of ‘a certain evil stamp of religious observances ’, and
describes how Typho ‘sought to make a gift of a temple in the city,
breaking the laws of his ancestors’. It is interesting to remark in what
way Synesius, who presumably had not yet become a Christian convert,
speaks of all this schism in the Church. No doubt he was influenced in
his views on the subject by his friend Aurelian.


Page 306,1.1. there was one man. The portrait that Synesius draws
of himself here is quite unmistakable, and, as Crawford says, the dis-
guise is of the thinnest description. We must infer from this that he


THE EGYPTIAN TALE 431


wished there to be no doubt as to whom it referred. There is a touch
of vanity here, and even a certain affectation. He seems to have rather
fancied himself on the idea that he was a person of too Spartan tastes,
and of too ‘rustic’ bringing up, to be confused in any way with the
super-refined literary men of the Panhellenion and the courtiers at the
Emperor’s palace. This idea of himself comes somewhat into collision
with the very great attention that he shows to rhetorical forms and
figures of speech both in his letters and his essays. There is nothing
that we possess of Synesius that shows any touch of this ‘rusticity’ that
he seems to be proud of. (See Introduction.)


Page 306, 1.11. sang to the lyre in the Dortan manner, Cf. Athenaeus
(Detpnosophtsts, xiv. 19, p. 624 d): 7 ev odv Awpros appovia rd avdpwdes
eudaiver Kal 70 peyadonpenes Kat od Staxexupévov od’ iAapov, dda oxvbpw-
mov Kal opodpov, ovre S¢ mrotxiAov ovre roAUrpomov.

Again (151d. xiv. 33) in speaking of the Lacedaemonian’s cult of music,
he observes, Sverjpnoav Sé padora trav “EN jvwv Aaxedaysdvior thy
povouciy, wAeloTn adr] xpupevor. . .. THpodow 5) Kai viv tas dpyaias
wdas empedias .... amd yap THs TOO Biov cwdpoovvns Kai avornpias
petéBatvov acpéevws eni Thy povouny, exovons TO KynAnTUuKoY Tis
EMLOTHLNS.

Page 308, 1. 9. no longer distressed at hts enforced stay. Synesius seems
to have really deeply suffered over his anxieties concerning the success of
his mission to the Emperor Arcadius, in behalf of his native town. The
note touched here seems to me to be a sincere one. In the De Insomnits,
chapter ix, he says of his life in general, that it had always been one of
books and of the chase, except that period which he spent in Con-
stantinople as an ambassador. ‘Would that I had not been compelled’,
he exclaims, ‘to see those three unspeakable years of my life.’ Again,
in Hymn III (p. 1599),,his description of what he suffered in this matter,
is still more poignant: ‘I come, O Ruler of the great universe, to acquit
myself of a vow made to Thee, even from Thrace, where for three years
I dwelt in a way near to the king’s palace in that land. And labours I
endured, griefs I endured, verily meet for many tears, bearing on my
shoulders my mother-city. The earth was watered with the sweat
of my limbs that toiled in the contest day by day, and my couch was


432 NOTES


moistened with the dropping of tears from my eyelids, weeping from
night to night. . . . Prostrate, a suppliant I prayed, watering the ground
with the dew of my eyelids, that I might not find my journey vain.
... My life was not at that time dear to me, because that my fatherland
was so tormented.’


Page 308, 1. 28. an allsance with the wolf instead of one with the lion.
This riddle of the wolf and the lion is still unsolved. Griitzmacher (p. 58)
remarks: ‘Aurelian’s son, who is spoken of here, bore the name of
Taurus, like Aurelian’s father. From Taurus Synesius expected that,
should he in later years attain to a leading position in the state, he would
call in to the assistance of the Empire, not the lion, by which we should
probably understand the Goths, but the wolf, probably meaning the
Huns. Synesius may have adopted this outlook, because the Huns
had just put the Goth Gainas to death, had sent his head to Arcadius,
and had thus shown themselves obliging towards the Eastern Roman
Empire.’

Olympiodorus (In. Plat. Phaed., I. 13, p. 8, ed. Norvin) ascribes
enigmatic language and silence on sacred subjects to the Pythagoreans:
os Sé Hv rots FIvOayopetots 5: aivtypdtwy Adyew: rovrwy yap Kat 4 ous)
evdexvupdvw Su. Tis ouwrijs TO amrdppytov Tob Deod, Sv pypetoGas Set Tov
dAdcodgor.


Page 315, 1. 29. they decided to beguile Typho, &c. All this part of
Synesius’ story appears fanciful. Historical facts are inextricably
mixed in with romance and allegory. The picture he paints in the
ensuing pages of political corruption is plausible enough, but we have
no detailed evidence from the historians of the period already cited to
confirm it. All that we know is that Caesarius returned as Praefectus
praetorio Orientis, and held the office until the return of Aurelian. All
this about deciding to deceive Typho might be taken to mean that there
was a conspiracy on foot amongst the partisans of Aurelian to oust
Caesarius when a suitable moment should arrive, and that this party of
conspiracy was conscious of its superior power. But on this supposition
what can be made of the statement that the High Priest was in con-
spiracy? If we were right in identifying the priest with Arcadius, it would
mean that the Emperor was a conspirator. If, on the other hand, we


THE EGYPTIAN TALE 433


take Crawford’s view that the priest in the story is meant to represent
St. John Chrysostom, this brings him into the party of the Empress
Eudoxia, his bitterest enemy, who finally secured his banishment. The
whole problem is beset with difficulties, for St. John Chrysostom was the
last man in the world to enter into secret machinations and plots.


Page 316, 1. 3. Justtce (Ain). Cf. Demosthenes, contra Artstogitonem
I (p. 772): rHv 7a Sixasa adyardcay Evvopiay epi micicrou rouncapévous,
7] waoas Kai méAets Kal xwpas ole’ Kai TH arapairnrov Kai cenviy Aikny,
qv... Opdeds zapa tov rot Aws Opdvov dnoi xabnpévny mdvra 7a THV
avipurrwy éepopav .. . Cf. Orphic hymns, 42, 61. Dike is first mentioned
in Hesiod, Theogony, gor, as the daughter of Themis, and sister of
Eunomia (Order), and Eirene (Peace), as also of the Hours and the
Fates, cf. Plutarch, Alexander 52, ovx olofa .. . ore ri Aixny exe
mapedpov 6 Levs kat Thy Oduy, iva wav To mpaxGév ino Tob Kparoivros
Oepirov # Kai Sixacov ;

Synesius speaks of Dike as a goddess in letter 44, very much in the
same sense as does Demosthenes: ‘none the less,’ he writes in this letter,
‘ Justice sees and knows the truth. The eye of the goddess, penetrating
everywhere, saw Libya, &c.’ This is only another instance of how imbued
Synesius was with the Hellenic tradition. Dike, Adrasteia, Tyche, and
similar personifications of the Greek religion are the terms in which he
still thinks.

Page 320, 1. 9. as long as men dtd not use the sea. The purpose for
which this attack against the seafaring spirit in States is inserted here is
obscure. It is certainly very little Hellenic. But we must remember
that Synesius was a Lacedaemonian by race and tradition. Can he be
thinking of the lines of Empedocles, in which the poet philosopher
describes the demons as chased into the sea to atone for their mis-
demeanours? These lines are quoted by Plutarch in Ists and Osirss,
p. 361. They are interesting as an early example of the conception of
demons as a maleficent force.

Plutarch (ti1d. 364 A) mentions that the Pythagoreans speak of the
sea as a ‘tear of Kronos’, by which they mean to signify in enigmatic
form, its impurity, and alien nature.


Page 321,1. 10. two casks ...in the antechamber of Zeus. Plutarch speaks


434 NOTES


contemptuously of this myth, Cf. Ists and Osirts, p. 369C: ‘To speak
plainly, there is nothing that nature produces here below unmixed;
nor is there a steward of two casks, who in the fashion of a huckster
doles out to us our things as if they were drinks, and mixes them for


us.


Page 322,1.22. Thatinvarsous places ...the same events have taken place.
The idea of humanity being destroyed by cataclysms, and new civiliza-
tions being evolved from the dust and ashes of the old, is recurred to
by Plato in several of his dialogues. It is evident that Synesius here,
as elsewhere, is saturated with the works of Plato, of which I will point
out a few passages:


Laws, p. 677.

Athentan Stranger. ‘Do you believe that there is any truth in ancient
traditions? ... the traditions about the many destructions of mankind
which have been occasioned by deluges and pestilences, and in many
other ways, and of the survival of the remnant. ... I mean to say that
those who then escaped would only be hill shepherds, small sparks of the
human race preserved on the tops of mountains. After the great de-
struction,... there was a fearful illimitable desert and a vast expanse of
land; a herd or two of oxen would be the only survivors of the animal
world; and there might be a few goats. . . . And out of this state of
things has there not sprung all that we now are and have: cities and
governments, and arts and laws, and a great deal of vice and a great
deal of virtue?’


Timaeus, p. 22.

Crittas. “There have been and will be again many destructions of
mankind arising out of many causes; the greatest have been brought
about by the agencies of fire and water, and other lesser ones by in-
numerable other causes.’

Critias, p. 109.

Critias. ‘In the days of old the gods had the whole earth distributed
among them by allotment. . . now different gods had their allotments
in different places. Hephaestus and Athene who were brother and sister
... both obtained as their common portion this land [1.e. Attica], which
was naturally adapted for wisdom and virtue; and there they im-


THE EGYPTIAN TALE 435


planted brave children of the soil, and put into their minds the order of
government; their names are preserved but their actions have dis-
appeared by reason of the destruction of those who received the tradi-
tion, and the lapse of ages. For when there were any survivors, . . . they
were men who dwelt in the mountains; and they were ignorant of the
art of writing, and had heard only the names of the chiefs of the land,
but very little about their actions. And this is the reason why the names
of the ancients have been preserved to us and not their actions.’


Politicus, pp. 269-70.

Stranger. ‘There is a time when God Himself guides and helps to roll
the world in its course; and there is a time . . . when He lets go, and the
world being a living creature, and having originally received intelligence
from its Author and Creator, turns about and by an inherent necessity
revolves in the opposite direction . . . and it may be supposed to result
in the greatest changes to the human beings who are the inhabitants of
the world at the time . . . there necessarily occurs a great destruction of
them [the lower animals] which extends also to the life of man; few
survivors of the race are left. . . .’

Passing down now to pp. 271-3, the Stranger describes how in those
days human life was produced spontaneously ; how God Himself was the
Shepherd of men and ruled over them ; and he paints a picture of the
golden age. Beginning then on p. 273 he represents the world as
‘turning round with a sudden shock, being impelled in an opposite
direction from beginning to end, shaken by a mighty earthquake,
which wrought a new destruction of all manner of animals. Afterwards
... the universal creature . . . settled down to his ordinary and accus-
tomed course . . . executing, as far as he remembered them, the instruc-
tions of his Father and Creator, more precisely at first but afterwards
with less exactness. The reason of the falling off was the admixture of
matter in him; this was inherent in the primal nature, which was full
of disorder until attaining to the present order’.

It will be noticed how this last sentence contains the same doctrine
that Synesius is impregnated with when he writes on p. 1228 (c. 9) about
‘that which is erring in nature’. To resume the quotation from the
Politicus—‘ But as time went on, there was more and more forgetting,
and the old discord again held sway . . . and there was a danger of

ab76-a cc


436 NOTES


universal ruin to the world. . . . Wherefore God, the Orderer of all, in
His tender care, seeing that the world was in great straits, . . . again
seated Himself at the helm; and bringing back the elements which had
fallen into dissolution and disorder . . . set them in order and restored
them, and made the world imperishable and immortal.’

The passages above, as will be seen, throw light upon several parts
of this story On Providence, as for instance Synesius’ description above
of the gods coming down after the manner of engineers to restore the
proper functioning of the machinery of the universe, and his simile of
the marionettes, whose power of motion eventually disappears when the
operator has ceased his activities.


Page 323, 1. 19. lives now on the earth are the same as those of olden
times. Tertullian (De Carnis Resurrectione, cap. 12) makes of the
repetition of natural events an argument for the resurrection of the
body: ‘Let me say it once for all: Every creation is subject to recur-
rence. Everything you meet had a previous existence: whatever you
have lost will come again. Everything comes a second time .. . all
things begin when they have ceased to be.’ (Souter’s translation.)


Page 325, 1.15. The future days ... wisest witnesses. The quotation
from Pindar with which Synesius ends his story (dpépas 8” erriAotrroe
paprupes codwirarot. Olymp. i. 33) is ironically alluded to by his so-
much-admired Dio Chrysostom in his Tvotana, 5, vol. i, p. 116, ed.
von Arnim): xaivor daot pév of modAol Tov xpdvoy Ta&Y mpaypdrwy Kal
Kpirnv aporov elvat, ore 8” dv axovwor pera Todd ypévov, Sua Tovro dmorrov
vopiCovar.


NOTES ON DREAMS


Nicephorus Gregoras, in the early part of the fourteenth century
in Constantinople, wrote a Commentary on this treatise of Synesius,
On Dreams. In a letter to Joannes Cantacuzenus (Ep. 23), the sub-
stance of which is repeated in one addressed to Demetrios Cavasilas
many years later (Ep. 155), he extols this work in the following terms:
‘You know, I think, that I wrote a book long ago inspired by my pro-
found gratitude towards the great Synesius. He wrote, as you are aware,
a most remarkable work on Dreams. Just as nature made every effort,


ON DREAMS 437


and with great success, to show in him a man of the highest order
among the Greeks, in like manner this work is the best of all that he has
written, and he made every effort that it should appear so. .. . He gives
us his own personal evidence in the matter. God inspired him, and he
had no recourse to his forces as a man, he tells us, in this work. He
simply lent his pen to it. God did all. Thus the work is the production,
so he writes, of a man possessed by a prophetic inspiration, and full of
the Divinity. For this reason the greater part of the book has been com-
posed in an obscure style, as were the oracles that the Delphic Tripod
gave forth, and that were, as you know, full of prophetic phrases
sedulously concealed and unintelligible to the ignorant, phrases which
screened them as if behind a curtain of heavy obscurity. Yielding to
numerous requests, we have sought to elucidate this work, to what
extent it was possible, by the help of a varied Commentary.’ (Nic.
Greg. Ep., ed. Guilland, Paris, 1927.)

There is nothing in this passage from the Letters of Nicephorus that
is not contained in the text of De Insomntis, and a Letter to Hypatia,
(Ep. 154), concerning the manner in which it was written. But it is in-
teresting as showing to what an extent the works of Synesius were
admired by the erudite of the fourteenth century, and also as indicating
that at this time the work on Dreams, which has been regarded by
modern commentators with less favour than the other essays, was
esteemed as the most important. One of the friends who urged Nice-
phorus to write a Commentary on it was Theodorus Metochites, the
Prime Minister of the Emperor Andronicus II, who was the most
learned man of the fourteenth century, and had instructed Nicephorus in
Greek philosophy as well as astronomy, and had become his patron at the
Court. Nicephorus, like Synesius, was an astronomer as well as a rhetori-
cian, and wrote a work on the construction of an astrolabe, which, he
tells his correspondent Cavasilas (Ep. 155), he laboured over with the
same ardour that he put into his study of Synesius. It seems that
Byzantium in the fourteenth century was not so far off in point of cul-
ture from Athens or Alexandria of the fourth and fifth.


Page 328, 1.8. .. . brothers 1n a single living creature, the cosmos.
The conception of the universe as an independent whole, and as forming


438 NOTES


a living creature, is an old conception in Greek philosophy. Plato has
touched upon it in the 7smaeus; there are allusions to it in the pre-
Socratic philosophers. Plotinus (En. 11. 3. 7) compares the stars and
other phenomena to letters, as Synesius does in this passage. He
continues:

‘It is thus that in a being animated by one unique principle we may
draw inferences as to one part from another . . .: just as our limbs are
parts of our body, so we ourselves are parts of the universe. .. . Every-
thing is full of omens, and any one is wise who learns one thing from
another, .. . and it is by reason of this that birds and other animals give
us prophecies. . . . One principle and one only there must be, to make this
multiple being one, to convert it into one universal animal. ... All
things proceed from one principle, each playing an allotted role and all
rendering mutual assistance. Each ts assisted or perchance hindered by
another, but their progress is not one of chance; they form a series of
which each is the effect of what precedes, because of what follows.’

Similarly Aristotle (Met. 1076*) blames those (the Pythagoreans ?)
who ‘make the substance of the universe a mere series of episodes (for
one substance has no influence on another by its existence or non-
existence), and they give us many governing principles; but the world
must not be governed badly.

‘The rule of many is not good; one is the ruler”’’ (tr. Ross).


Plotinus again in Enn. iv. 4. 35, states that ‘the universe is one
single animal suffering the same things throughout by reason of its
unity. Its course of life is regulated by its intelligence, it is in complete
accord with itself, has nothing of the nature of chance, and presents one
order, one harmony.’


Page 328, 1.16. some understanding stars. So Plotinus (Emm. iii. 1, 6)
says of the stars: ‘They are carried (in their orbits) for the benefit of the
whole universe, but they fulfil incidentally another function, namely,
that they who have knowledge of this sort of writing may, by looking
at them as written characters, read future events from their arrange-
ment and, according to their analogy, interpreting the thing an-
nounced; as if, seeing a bird flying high in the air, they were to
conclude that a lofty act were signified.’


‘ON DREAMS 439


The Chaldeans also regarded stars as letters written in the firma-
ment and the Cabala is full of the same imagery and belief. Plotinus,
while admitting the prophetic nature of the stars and auguries from
the flight of birds, attacks those who regard them as the causes of
events. For him they were simply symptoms. This seems to have
been the view of Synesius also.


Page 328, 1.22. encounters otherwise intended. Schiller is quoted by
Stendhal in his romance, Le Rouge et le Noir (at the head of chap. xiii
of vol. ii), as saying: ‘Des propos décousus, des rencontres par effet du
hasard, se transforment en preuves de la derniére évidence aux yeux de
homme a l’imagination, s’il a quelque feu dans le coeur.’ The resem-
blance here to the passage in Synesius is startling.


Page 328, 1. 28. s¢ all shares ... ome breath. The idea of a divine
afflatus (ovpmvora pla) throughout the universe is attributed by Diogenes
Laertius (vii. 140) to the Stoics: #vdcGar adrov [rov xdopov]: toiro yap
dvayxdlecfas riv Trav ovpavlwy wpos Ta ériyera aUpTVvoiay Kal ovvroviay.

Leibnitz, as Bouillet remarks (vol. i, p. 176), develops similar ideas in
his Monadology, cap. 61: ‘Each body is affected, not only by bodies
touching it ; but it is sensible in some way of all that happens to these,
and is also by their means sensible of other bodies in contact with the
first mentioned, namely, those immediately touching it. It follows then
that this communication extends indefinitely. Consequently each body
feels everything which happens in the universe, and to such an extent
that he who sees the whole can read in each thing that which is happen-
ing everywhere, and even that which has been or will be, by noticing in
the present that which is separated by time and by distance; this is
the ovpmvoa zdvra of Hippocrates.’

The following passage from Seneca (Quaestiones Naturales, li. 32, 4)
expresses the same thought: ‘Quidquid ratione fit, alicuius rei futurae
signum est: fortuita et sine ratione vaga divinationem non recipiunt:
Cuius rei ordo est, etiam praedictio est . .. nullum animal est quod non
motu et occursu suo praedicat aliquid. Non omnia scilicet, sed quaedam
notantur. Auspicium observantis est: ad eum itaque pertinet qui in ea
direxerit animum.’ The same conception of the interdependence of the
parts of the universe was turned to account to explain any sort of magic


440 NOTES


spells and witchcraft in general. Thus Plotinus (En. iv. 4. 26): ‘Magic
is founded upon the harmony of the universe; it acts through forces
linked one to the other by sympathy. ... As enchantments act on the
unreasoning side of the soul they can be destroyed by counter enchant-
ments (iv. 4. 53). . . . It is only the being concentrated within (upon the
world of reason) who cannot be bewitched’ (iv. 4. 54).

The idea of sympathy and strife in the universe that we first meet in
the pre-Socratic philosophers was never absent from the systems that
succeeded, and became a pivot for the explanations of magic in the
second and third phases of Neoplatonism, and magic was said to be
founded 77 ovpabela .. . Kai 7H THY Suvdpewv TeV TOMA Trommrig Eis Ev
{Gov ovvreAovvrwv, ‘by the sympathy and variety of diverse powers
conspiring together into one animal’ (Plot. Enn. iv. 4. 40 in Cudworth’s
Intellectual System, vol.i, p. 250). Plotinus continues: pydevos pnxavw-
peévov aAov mroAha EAKeras Kai yontreverat’ Kal 7 aAnOiw) payeia 7) ev TH
mravri piria Kai veixos. ‘The true magic is the friendship and discord
that is in the universe.’

Compare in this connexion the speech of Eryximachus in Plato,
Symposium, 187A, where the physician quotes Heraclitus as saying
that ‘The One at variance with itself is drawn together, like the har-
mony of bow or lyre.’ For the phrase ‘a single living creature’ see Plat.
Tim. 30 B.


Page 328, 1. 29. limbs of one entire body. The idea of the interpenetra-
tion of the parts of the universe is taken up by Proclus (On Parmentdes,
li, p. 774, ed. Cousin). He divides the forces or powers of the cosmos
into ranks or grades which have a varying power of participation with
each other as they go up or down the scale. We must admit, he says,
that the mingling takes place in more than one way; for things which
are situated in the same rank are mingled with each other in one manner,
whereas things of superior rank are mingled with those inferior in a
totally different manner; just as the inferior with those better than
themselves. For the one sort enter into the others and communicate
their own powers to the others; the others penetrate through those
things which are beneath them and communicate their own individual
character to them, and are within them by participation; others again


ON DREAMS 441


install themselves in the superior ranks, sit at their board, and rejoice
in the same intelligibilia as they, as being amongst them according to
the cause.

The text is as follows:

Myrore obv troAAaxas Thy pikw yiyveoBa pyrdov: d\Aws yap piyvvobas
Ta avaTotxa aAAnAots, dAAws Ta Kpeirrova Tots Udeyevors, dAAws Ta KaTa-
Sedorepa rots abrav dpeivoou 7a pev yap Kat dotrg Se’ ddAryAwy Kal peradi-
Swow aAAnAots THY otxeiwy Suvdewy: Ta 5é ywpet pev Sa THdv Uhepevwv,
peradidwoi te avrois ad’ davradv ris oixelas iSvornros, Kai €orw ev avrois
xara pebeEw: ra Sé evidpver pev adra tots xpeirroow, ouéoria Sé avrois
ylyverat Kal Tay adTady amoAaver vonTay, ws av év avrois Ovra Kar’ aitiay.


Kai ovy jets raira dvanAdrropev, dda Kal OeodrAdyot Taira aivirrovras
dca ray fepdv ydwy: anAds pev yap Thy opoduy avlevEw Kai THY Kowwviay
ToV Deiwy aitudy pvotixds ydpov mpocayopevover: TavTny 5é Ty Kowwviav

A ? a Ly ec a a “A 4 @ A 4
MOTE pev €v TOis avoToLxoLs dpwat, Kat Kadodor ydpov “Hpas xat Avds,
Ovpavod xai I's, Kpovov wai ‘Péas: wore 5¢ rv xatadeeorépwv mpos Ta

oe A a Ug } A 4a 4 \ #9 ~
Kpeitrw, Kat Kadovor yapov Aws Kai Anpntpos: more 5¢ kai eurradw Trav

U a A e€ a A ? a a a o

Kpetrrovwy mpos Ta Udepeva, Kat A€youot Atos nai Kopns ydpov. .. .


Page 329, 1.10. tosome god of those who dwell within the universe. This
distinction between cosmic and hypercosmic deities occurs in several
Neo-Platonic writers, Cf. Sallustius, vi: ‘Of the gods some are cosmic
some are hypercosmic,’ he says, and then goes on to explain how their
various spheres and functions are divided. Zeus, Poseidon, Hephaestos
are those who have created the universe (zrovoivres tov Kdopov), whereas
Demeter, Hera, and Artemis have breathed life into it (suyoivres)
and Apollo, Aphrodite and Hermes have brought it into a state of
harmony. It is then guarded (fJpovpotvres) by Hestia, Athene, and
Ares. Now he tells us that these gods possess the universe in the first
rank, and that we must believe that other gods are contained in them.
He gives as an example of this that Dionysos is included in Zeus,
Asklepios in Apollo, and in Aphrodite the Graces. As the passage
reads, all the deities above would be included amongst the cosmic or
mundane. This whole system, in the mind at least of Sallustius, as
probably in that of Iamblichus and others, had to be conceived of in


442 NOTES


some way as existing underneath the soul of the world, the third division
of the Neo-Platonic trinity, from which the religious aspirant ascended
through Mind, to the One, leaving aside, it would seem, the whole
Olympian theogony.

Page 329, 1. 17. a@ certatn discord also. The ancients, including Plato,
had two names for the world. They called it the world in the sense
of unity and harmony, and they called it also strife as contrariety
and opposition.

Page 331, 1. 2. mind ts to soul as real being ts to becoming. Similarly
Proclus (on Parmenides, lib. II, p. 744, Cousin) comments on Plato's
definition of time as the image of eternity: “Eort 5€ ws xpdvos mpos aiava
ovTw ux) pos vouv pétpov ydp. oO xpovos pev yuyixov, aiwy 5é voepov.
(Cf. Pl. Tim. 37 D).

Page 331, 1.9. reflects as in a mirror. Cf. Plot. Enn. iv. 3. 11. “The
olden sages . . . felt the All-Soul to be a Principle ever at our call; it is
but fitly preparing a place in which some phase of it may be received,
and a thing is always fit to receive the operation of the Soul when it is
brought to the condition of a mirror, apt to catch the image.’ (Stephen
Mackenna’s translation, vol. 1. 151.)


Page 331, 1.16. tmagination seems to be a sort of life... has sense
perceptions. Aristotle in De Insomniis attempts to show the place
occupied by dreams in sense perception (p. 459 a): “Ore pév odv ovdK Eore
rot dofdLlovros, ovdé rot Stavooupévou 70 maBos Tobro 6 KaAodpev evurrvudlew
davepov. ddd’ ovde 706 aicfavopévou dmdds’ cpav yap av Hv Kai axovew amdds.
.. . roKxeloOw 5’, orep €oti kai davepdy, Ort TOU aiaOnrixod 7d mdBos, etzrep
Kal 6 Umvos’ ... €ore pev 76 abro T@ alocOyrix@ 1o favracrixdy, 70 5° elvas
davraorix@ Kat alobyrine@ Erepov, €ort 5¢ davracia 7 v6 Tis Kar’ evépyevav
atoPjcews ywopevn Kivnots,to 5° évirrmov davracua re faiveras elvas (ro yap
ev Urvw davraopa evirrviov Adyopev, €10" adds, etre Tporrov Tia. ydpevov ),
davepov or. 706 alaOynrixod pév €or. ro evuTrvidlew, rovrou 5 f} ro pavracrixdy.

Von Arnim (Stoicorum Veterum Fragmenta, vol.1, p. 21 f.) quotes the
following definitions of the Stoa from Aetius in regard to the words
d¢avracia, fayracrov, pavracrixoy, Pavracpa. As all these occur frequently
in this essay on dreams, it may be worth while to give the text:

Xpvourmos Siaddpew adA7jAwv dnoi rérrapa ratra. davracia pev ody €ore


ON DREAMS 443
aos ev TH Puy yeyvopevoy, evdeucvipevoy ev avT@ Kal 7d tretrounKos* olov
exrerdav Se’ dews Oewpcipev 70 Aeuxdy, €ore ra0os TO eyyeyernucvoy Sia. Tijs
opdcews ev TH uyx7 ..

Pavracrov 5é 76 srovotv THv favraciav: olov 76 Aevxdy Kat 706 yvypov Kai
wav ore av Suvyras xwety rHv puyny, rovr’ Eort PayTacror.

Davraorixov Sé €orse Sudxevos éAxvopds, wabos ev TH uy am’ ovdevos
gavracrod y.wopevov Kabdrep ei Tob oxcapaxobvros Kai Kevois émtpépovros
Tas Xeipas* TH yap pavracia Umoxerai re faytacrov, TH dé Pavracrix@ ovdev.

Padvracpa 5€ ort ef’ 6 €Axopeba Kata Tov Payraotixoy Suaxevov eAxvopov:
tatra Se yiveras eri tdv pedayyodsvrwv Kal pepnvorwr’ 6 your TpayiKcds
"Opéorns orayv Aéyn (Eur. Or. 255 seq.)

&@ prep, ixerevw ce, py "miced por
Tas aiparurovs Kai Spaxovrwdeis Kdpas*
adra: ydp, adraz 7Anolov Opwoxovoi pov,


Adyet pev avdra Ws pennvars, opG 5é oddev, dAAa Soxet pdvov.


Page 333,1.9. For thists the perception of perceptions. The text reads:
Aiobynots yap atoPjcewy airy, ort ro favracrixoy veda Koworardy €orw
aicOynripiov ...

A passage in Aristotle is worth comparing (De Antma, 417°):
"Exe. 5° dzropiay, Sua ri xaitayv atobjoewyv adrav od yiveras atoPnors, at dua
vi dvev Tay é€w od Trovovow aicPnow, évovros trupes Kai yijs Kat Tay GAAwy
oTotxeiwy, wv €oTw 7 atobnais Kal’ adrd, 7 7a cupPePynxora TovrTors.


Page 333,1. 13. hearing and sight like door-keepers. Dr. W. S. Crawford
has called my attention to a passage in the Letters of St. Isidore of
Pelusium (Ep. ii. 107), in which, as here, the senses are described as
guarding the gates. In Isidore’s simile, however, as in that of Plotinus
quoted above, it is Mind (voés) which is the directing agency, not
imagination. xpi) tov vovv ola Bacrda avroxpdropa Aoytopovs poBepovs
Kal wdvrobev ondas merpaypevous [7reppaypevous ?] mpos Tas Tw aicOjcewy
KaTarréppas mrvAas mpoatrayrnaopeévous, Kai mpoAoxvoivras, kai etp£ovras TOUS
TroAepious, Kai £7) MPwrov cvyywprjocayvtas Tv elcodov, Uorepov audypiorov
avaddxeobas paynv .. . Philo uses somewhat the same expression. ‘God
breathed into the first man, the founder of our race, the breath of life;
breathing it into the principal part of his body, namely the face, where

2878-2 pd


444 NOTES


the outward senses are established, the bodyguards of the mind, as if it
were the great king’ (On Spectal Laws, ed. Cohn, vol.v, p. 237). Cf. Plot.
Enn. v. 3. 3 atoOnats 5€ ni dyyedos, Bactreus 5é apes jpas exetvos [vois].
‘Sensation is our messenger and intelligence our king.’

Olympiodorus commenting on the Phaedo makes the following state-
ment: ‘We do not agree with the Peripatetics that sense perception is
the principle of knowledge; for the inferior is never the cause of the
superior. . . . Sense perception is like a messenger or a herald, its role is
to awaken the spirit to attain knowledge.’ (Quoted by Bouillet, vol. iii,
36, from Cousin’s Fragments of the Philosophers, p. 404.)

Philo again, in a passage quoted by Eusebius, employs the same
metaphor. “Woman .. . is always studying deceitful speeches and all
other kinds of hypocrisy, like an actress on the stage. When she is
alluring the eyes and ears of her husband, she proceeds to cajole Ass
predominant mind after the servants have been deceived.’ (Eusebius,
Preparation of the Gospel, lib. VIII, cap. 11.)


Page 333, 1.18... .tthears and sees with tts whole pneuma. R.C. Kissling,
in the American Journal of Philology, vol. xliii (1922), pp. 318 seq., dis-
cusses at length the éynyua-mvedpa of the Neo-Platonists in connexion
with the De Insomntis of Synesius. This important study should be
read 3 extenso. I will, however, call attention to some of the most
interesting points.

The vehicle in question which brought the soul down from the
spheres joined the incorporeal soul with the body. Simplicius (in Phys.
v1. 4, p. 966) and Proclus (in Tim. 311 C) speak of the dyna as making
the soul éyxdopuos. Plato (Tim. 41 D) speaks of an dyna assigned to
each pre-existent soul, but this refers evidently to the star itself, not to
the Neo-Platonic chariot of the soul. Aristotle placed his incorporeal
soul in a certain substance transmitted in the act of procreation, and
which he speaks of as Oeppdv and as mveipa (De Gen. An. 736°, p. 29),
i.e. the aether, which he conceived of as the fifth body. The later
harmonizing commentators identified Plato’s ¢ynpa with Aristotle’s
srvedua. Philoponus and Hierocles followed suit, and both concep-
tions were comprehended under the appellation of rvevparixov oynpa ...
Mr. Kissling next points out how ‘from the Aristotelian mveipe


ON DREAMS 445


avpdurov the Platonic éynua took on the epithet oupduds, and from his
definition (in De Gen. An. 736°, p. 29) comes the epithet avyoedes, the
“luminosi corporis amictus’ of Macrob. Somn. Scip. i. 12. 13.’

Again, he quotes Themistius (1% De Anima, p.19; p. 32, Berlin, 1899
ed.) to the same effect, and Simplicius (in De Anima, p. 73). The
latter (tbid., p. 17) touches closely Synesius’ conception in the fol-
lowing passage—aic@yrixov yap Kai gavracrixov Kal To alSepw@des rijs
neeTépas yuyis oynpa. Syrianus (in Metaphys. 888 b.17) and Themistius
(sn De Anim., p. 86 seq.) as wellas Porphyry (Sent. c. 32) are in the same
vein.

He now comes to Synesius (p. 321) in the following passage: ‘Synesius
Says (1293) that philosophers called the zvedpua of which he is speaking
also avevparuch puyy. Now, the avevparuc) yuyy . . is the dyna
-mrvedpa, and identical with Augustine’s ‘anima spiritalis qua corpora-
lium rerum capiuntur imagines’. This identification of the terms of
Plato and Aristotle was, he thinks, posterior to Plotinus. Porphyry
(Sent., c. 32), Iamblichus, Syrianus, Hierocles, and Proclus all accept it,
and Boethius (De Phsl. Cons. iii. 9), alludes to it:


animas...
Provehis, et levibus sublimes curribus aptans.


Proclus, according to Mr. Kissling, recognizes three cyypara, of which
the third is dorpeddes odpa, the oyster-like body which Synesius
mentions. The second, mpoodvées oyna, came between the two, was
attached to the irrational soul and composed of the four elements. Cf.
Plat. T#m. 42,C D; Procl. i Tim. 330 C. That the dynpa-mredpua of the
Neo-Platonists is meant by Synesius, is evident, he concludes from the
passage (1292 C), where he describes it as descending to the lower
animals, and becoming their reason, and (1293 B), where farther on he
speaks of the first soul as embarking in the other one, éxetvys, which
means the zvevparuch yvx7}, in other words the mvedua. Synesius applies
a variety of names to the pneuma—d¢davraorixdy mvedpa, mvevpatint)
yuyy, edwrix) dvois, cwpatuch ovoia, axnpatov cdpa, Satovia dvois,
davraorixn duos, péon pvats, pecov ow@pa.

‘Synesius’, says Mr. Kissling (p. 327), ‘nowhere employs the term
avdyoedés with reference to it, yet it is indubitable that he means the


446 NOTES


first avetpa or dynpa-nvespa throughout’... Furthermore, this is
‘inseparable from the soul and indestructible’.

Page 333, 1. 23. radiating from a centre. The same simile of the circle
occurs in the pseudo-Dionysius (‘the Areopagite’) on ‘Divine Names’
(quoted by Bouillet (vol. ii, p. 225 n.) from the translation of the Abbé
Darboy, v. 412): ‘In the same way all the radii of a circle are united
in a common centre, and this indivisible centre brings together within
itself all the rays which are quite indistinguishable one from another
and from their common point of departure. Completely mingled in
this medial point, whenever they leave it for however short a distance,
they commence immediately to separate from each other; if they
go still farther they keep separating in the same ratio; in a word, in
proportion as they are near or far from the central point, their dis-
tance from each other increases or diminishes. . . . Likewise in the unity
of the soul numerous faculties are united which minister to the wants
of each part of the body.’

Plotinus also uses the simile in describing the first hypostasis, the
One(Enn. iii. 8,7). ‘The One (i.e. the first principle) becomes the second
just as a circle in course of development becomes a surface (i.e. develops
out of a point into a circular area), a figure in which the circumference,
the centre, and the radii are distinct things holding different positions.’
In this way also Mind, he goes on to say, permeates all things.

Page 333, l. 23. meet tn the centre. As Plato in the Republic points to
the conclusion that man is a sort of microcosm of the State, so Plotinus
represents him as the microcosm of the universe.


Page 334,1.6. objects . . . under the water appear larger. Macrobius in
the Saturnalia (lib. VIT, cap. xiv, 2) has an explanation to offer: ‘Aqua
densior est aeris tenuitate, et ideo eam cunctatior visus penetrat, cuius
offensa repercussa videndi acies scinditur, et in se recurrit. Scissa dum
redit, iam non directo ictu, sed undique versum incurrit liniamenta
simulacri: et sic fit ut videatur imago archetypo suo grandior. Nam et
solis orbis matutinus solito nobis maior apparet, quia interiacet inter
nos et ipsum aer adhuc de nocte roscidus: et grandescit imago eius,
tamquam in aquae speculo visatur.’

Page 334, 1.28. andss a boundary common to both. Simplicius (Comm.


ON DREAMS 447


in Arist. de Anim. 59r. p. 211, ll. 34 ff., ed. Hayduck) attempts to deal
with Aristotle’s and Plato’s conceptions of imagination (¢davragia) with
a view to reconciling them. His conclusions are that it is not an inter-
twining (ovpzrAoxy) of opinion and sense perception which constitutes
imagination (a definition which Aristotle himself rejects), nor yet a
mixture (pifis) of these two elements (the idea that he attributes to
Plato), but a medial between them (uéon yap 7 davracia atobyoews Te
xai ddfys). Synesius in this passage before us (dAws yap robro, «.7A)
(p. 1292 B) seems to me to be seeking an analogy between the nature of
the pneuma, which he describes as a medial between the psyche and the
body, taking anything suitable to its purpose from each of these
extremes (7 mpoojjKov, ws éx yerrovwy, ad’ éexarépov trav adxpwyv), as from
neighbours; and the functions of the imagination which he has been
describing above (p. 1289 Cc) as medial between mind and sensation
(xai 7 pev (i.e. davracia) ...alcPnais éorw evreAjs. Aw TE yap axovet
arvevpart ...mavra Sivarat.). Just as in this last passage he describes
imagination in the sense of a perfect, universal (dzact trois pépeor), sense
perception, and able to see with the eye, hear with the ear, and so on
through all the sensual organs by the power of the whole pneuma; so
in this passage (’Epavilera: yap ... xat dayrdferat), he speaks of the
pneuma as proceeding to the imaginative act. It is the pneuma
then, that medial element gathered by the soul in its descent through
the zones of air, water, and fire (Macrob., In. Somm. Scip., Bk. I, cap. xii),
which is the medialthat Simplicius postulates, and which, Synesius says,
‘images in one nature things that dwell far apart (i.e. mind and sensa-
tion, body and soul, &c.) This then is the conclusion of Synesius, that
the pneuma, which he tells us (p. 1297 B) has snatched (€ozace),
something from the extremes of air and fire (dxpornros), becomes the
force of imagination (favrdlerat).

To return to Simplicius: the passage of Aristotle he comments on is
the following (Arist. de Anim. 4287 24). ®avepov roivuv, tri ovre S5dfa
per’ aicOicews, ovte Se” aiobyoews, ovre avptAoK) Sdfns Kai atobycews
gavracia av etn.

Aristotle in the passage previous to this has been saying: ‘If
there is really that imagination in virtue of which we assert that a cer-
tain image is present with us, and if we are not merely speaking meta-


448 NOTES


phorically, there is some one force or habit concerning these things, such
as sense perception, opinion, knowledge, or mind, according to which
we form our judgements, rightly or wrongly as the case may be. That
it is not sense perception is evident from this, that sense perception is
a force of energy like sight and seeing, and something makes its appear-
ance even when neither of these comes into play, as for instance the
(images) in dreams. Again, sense perception is always present, but not
imagination. Now if it were the same thing as energy, imagination
would fall to the lot of all the lower animals, but this seems not to be
the case with the ant, the bee, or the worm. Then again, energies are
always true, but imaginings for the most part false. Accordingly we do
not say, when we are thoroughly aroused in the act of perception, that
it seems to us that this is a man, but it is rather at that moment when we
do not perceive clearly that the percepts may be true or false. And, as we
said before, there are percepts visible even to those whose eyes are closed.
But (imagination) is by no means one of those things such as knowledge
and mind that are always true, for there is also false imagination. Now
faith follows opinion (for it may not be that one who opines has no faith
in his opinions), and no one of the beasts has faith, though many have
imagination. All opinion implies faith, faith implies persuasion, and
persuasion reason; but while some of the beasts possess imagina-
tion they have not reason: it is evident therefore that imagination is
neither opinion together with sense perception, nor through sense
perception; nor could imagination be the intertwining of opinion
and sense perception.’ This brings us to the point of Simplicius’
commentary. He begins by referring to Plato as one who represented
imagination (favracia), as a mixture (pifts) of opinion and sense per-
ception in the Sophist and Philebus. (This word in most editions is
printed ovpprfis.) In the first of the two cases these are evidently the
passages he has in mind (Soph., pp. 263-4):

Stranger. ‘And therefore, thought, opinion, and imagination are now
proved to exist in our minds both as true and false. .. . When the
affirmation or denial takes place in silence and in the mind only, have
you any other name by which to call it but opinion?

Theaetetus. There can be no other name.

Sty. And when opinion is presented not simply, but in some form of


ON DREAMS 449


sense, would you not call it imagination? . . . And seeing that language
is true and false, and that thought is the conversation of the soul with
herself, and opinion is the end of thinking, and imagination or phantasy
is the union of sense and opinion, the inference is that some of them,
since they are akin to language, should have an element of falsehood
as well as of truth? . . . Do you perceive, then, that false opinion and
speech have been discovered sooner than we expected.’

The second is probably Philebus, p. 40:

Socrates. ‘And all men, as we were saying just now, are always filled
with hopes . . . and these hopes, as they are termed, are propositions
which exist in the minds of each of us; . . . and the fancies of hope are
also pictured in us ; a man may often have a vision of a heap of gold, and
pleasures ensuing, and in the picture there may be a likeness of himself
mightily rejoicing over his good fortune. . .. And may we not say that
the good, being friends of the gods, have generally true pictures pre-
sented to them, and the bad false pictures.’

Both opinions then, and visions (i.e. phantasies and dreams which
proceed from the imagination), may be true or false. Simplicius asks in
what sense Plato uses the word ‘mixture’ or ‘mingling’, and replies that
it is the common share that lies between the extremities. (Cf. Synesius’
phrase, peraiypov, De Insom. 1292 B. Cf. also Simplic. Comm. in Arist.
De Anima, p. 212, ed. Hayduck.)


Page 335, 1. 3. richness of the imaginative essence. The word ‘imagina-
tion’ has a somewhat different connotation for us than that which
¢avracia possessed for the Greeks. Thissentence of Synesius, as also the
passage in Aristotle (De Ansm. iii. 3. 9. 428°) from which it is obviously
copied, would be more intelligible to us if the word ‘instinct’ were used
instead of imagination. The passage in Aristotle affirms that ‘as sight
is the chief of our senses, imagination has received its name from the
image that light reveals to us (favracia-ddis), for it is not possible to
see without light ; and because it exists in the brain and is similar to the
sensations, animated beings often act by it and by the sensations ; some
like brute beasts because they have no intelligence to their share, and
others, as in the case of men, because their intelligence is clouded at
times by passion, illness, or sleep.’ We should be inclined to say that at


450 NOTES


such moments they act according to instinct rather than according to
imagination. Aristotle, then, defines imagination in this way. Plotinus
following him made two divisions of it, as Bouillet points out in his notes
to the Enneads of Plotinus (vol. i, p. 338). In Enn. 1. 8. 15 he speaks
of an smagination of the senses. This is the impression made by an
exterior object upon the irrational part of the soul (favracia S€ Any)
aAdyou e£wOev); or as Mackenna translates the passage, ‘the stroke of
something unreasonable outside the Soul.’ In Enn.i. 1. 9 he speaks
of the discursive reason as the second form, ‘for’, he says, ‘in giving
way to evil we are the dupes of an impure image; the reasoning of
things false which in the imagination does not await the judgement
of the discursive reason.’ (See also Stephen Mackenna’s translation.)
Pavracia here is dkavora rwv Wevdmv, but disappears before vo dtavon-


TLKOY.


Page 335,1.7. [Imagination] being the reason of the animal. Again Sim-
plicius (61', p. 217, ed. Hayduck) expands the same idea from Aristotle
De Antma, by the remark that imagination must be the ruling power in
animals, as they have nothing better, but that man uses it through the
fact that his impulse to actions is connected with his memory of sense-
percepts; and that when his active intelligence is in abeyance, he is
moved by the forces of phantasy which then assume the leadership over
him, as in dreams, in inordinate desires, in anger, pleasure, pain and
fear, and in diseases that cause the mind to wander. aAX’ & peév rots
dows Cots kai ro KaTdpxov Kai 7yyepovotv Tay mpdlewy 7) pavracia éoriv,
€rrevd7) pur) Exes TL Kpetrrov. ev Sé trois avOpwros TO péev apxov TeV
mpafewv 6 TpaKxTiKds €oTt voids, Grav Kata Adyov éevepyapev (ovK avev Se
gavracias: Kal yap avros xpyra: trais davracias, 5a TO mepi ra
aic@nra elvas ras mpdfes Kai Thy én’ abrds cpyny ov TH Trav aloOyTadv
ylvecOas prin) da 5€ 70 eviore émxadvrrecbas Tov mpaxrixov votv Kat
nets KaTa payracias wyyoupevas TOTE Kwovpeda ... Kal ev Tois TaDEow ws
€v rats apeérpots emOupiass Kai dpyats nSovais re Kat Avrais Kai PoBas
ov xpwperns TH Aoyw Tijs puyijs, Kal ev vocots Sé Tiow ws ev Tails trapadpo-
ovvais. Ibid. (p. 205), od yap 87 7 avi 77 Stavoig 7 davracia, éred7 Kai ev
adoyots Choos ) favracia, worep ovde TH alcPjce: 7 avrn. mpooribna yap
Kai ToUTO, eed) Kai rept pavracias avT@ 6 mpoKxeipevds €ort Adyos. Ibid.


ON DREAMS 451


(p. 207): "Adopomwpariucn yap 7 gavracia, Kai ws ra ev TH ypadf
érépwv eariv amedopara, oUrws €xet Kal 7a ev TH pavracig’ 5 ody
ws adnbéou ovvriferas 7 Yuyxy, va Kai Pappion 7 PoBnOj WSerai ye pHv 7
Avrretrat ody ws ev avrois ywopdvn rots mpaypacw, ws 5é ev TH éxeivwv
pq.

But Simplicus (1b:d., p. 267) makes the point that although Aristotle
says (and in this Synesius follows him) that the soul does not take cog-
nizance without imagination, he does not say that it has employed its
phantasies, but simply that the phantasmata lie beneath the rational
soul, just as the percepts lie beneath sense-perception. Here again he
is in accord with Synesius, who says in the passage at the beginning of
cap. v, that imagination ‘is no longer the chariot . . . but itself rests
upon the forces beneath.’

Aristotle (De Anim. 413°) attributes imagination even to insects.
ouTws Opapev Kai mepi érépas Svadopas rijs Yuytjs ovpBaivoyr éni rdv évropwy
ev rots Starepvopevors: Kal yap atoPnoww éxdrepoy Tay pepwy exer Kal Kivnow
ri xara rérov, i 8° alaOnow, xai gavraciay xai dpefw. Again (ibid. 414°):
viv 8 émi rowtroy eipjobw, ore trav Cwwy Tois Exovow adjnv Kal opetis
Undpyet. epi dé Pavracias adyAov, varepov 8 emuoxerrréov. (Ibid. 415°) ols
pév yap Urdpye Aoyiopos Trav POapray, rovTows Kai ra Aowra mdvta, ols
5” éxeivwy Exacrov, ov maar Aoytopds, aAAa Trois peév ovde davracia, ra Se
Taurn povn Cwow....

Synesius has evidently taken his lead here from Aristotle. His
expression, xaraBaive: yé roe péxpt Caswv, ols ode ert mdpeote vois, iS
interesting from the presence of the word é7z seeming to imply that
the lower animals are undergoing an evolution in the direction of a
higher mentality.

Dio Chrysostom (Or. xii. De Det Cognitsone, 34 f.,ed. Von Arnim, vol.i,
p. 164) gives the lower animals credit for honouring God: 4 roéro peév
ovK dvvatov... Kowf Sé fipmav to tov avOpwrwv yévos .. . TovTwY
fuprdvrwy prdeplay atobnow pydé vropiay AaPeiv . . . rod Kopudaiou
MpoeaTw@ros THY OAwY Kal KaTevOUvovTOS TOY aTravTa OUpavoy Kat KCO[LOV’...
ov yap emi trav avOpwrwv 76 Tovotroy yuyvopevov Baupdoat ris ay, woAd dé
padov onws Kal péexpt tov Onpiwv Suxvetras trav ddpovwy Kai ardyww,
Ws Kal Taira yeyvwoKew Kal TYysdy Tov Oedv Kal zpoOupetobat Civ Kara TOV
éxeivou Jeopov.

2878-3 Ee


452 NOTES


Page 335, 1.11. The phrase tm such a life as this probably alludes to
the unpurified life. The conception dear to the Gnostics was that
demons took up their abode in the soul, and had to be exorcized by
magic, or some form of purification. Only the soul that is concentrated
within itself on the world of Mind (the second hypostasis) can, according
to Plotinus, be proof against sorcery (Plot. Enn. iv. 4. 43). He tells us
that enchantments (é7wéai) act upon the irrational part of the soul
and could only be met bycounter enchantments (avr¢5wv xai avrerqdwv).
Magic could therefore be used for good or for evil. It could be offensive
or defensive ; it could cajole the demons to render them quiet, or expel
them from their stronghold in the soul, or again attack the soul directly
in an evil sense. Man with magic in his hand could become demoniac ;
but the sage was exempt. Bouillet (vol.i, p. 536) quotes St. Clement of
Alexandria as comparing man with the wooden horse of Troy, inasmuch
as he contains within his breast a whole army of maleficent spirits
(rocovTwy mveupdrwy Siaddpwv orpards), and he quotes Valentinus as
comparing the godless soul to a hostelry disordered, soiled, and pro-
faned by thieving intruders (Stromateis, 409).

Dr. W. S. Crawford refers me to a passage in the letters of St. Isidore
of Pelusium in which the word ¢avracia is palpably used in the sense of
‘instinct’. The letter (Ep. ii. 119), concerning viviparous and oviparous
animals, speaks of their nature as ‘imaginative’, not logical, if we use the
word ‘imaginative’ to translate ¢ayraoric). The text is as follows:
... Sore Oavpdlew pev yp 7a yryvdpeva és tov mdvoodov Anpoupyov
avadepew ro Oatpa. ratra yap eudatva, od tiv Trav Cawy rijs olxetas
Stapovijs mpévorav (favtracrixy ydp €orw adrav 4 dvois, od Aoyixy), dAA|a
Tijs Ta Oda Storxovons ducews. Ta pev yap ovdev epydleras Siavoig, % 5é...
Tas Oppas éexdotw evdidwow ...

It is noticeable that while he speaks of the dvots of the animal as
imaginative, he also describes it as giving the animal its impulses
(Cpyds). In the Stoic philosophy dpyj was used of blind instinct as
opposed to the reasoning side of man. The interesting fact in this
passage of St. Isidore is that he couples ¢avraoia with a word that can
only be taken in the sense of blind impulse or instinct.


ON DREAMS 453

Page 335, 1.15. We do not form thought concepts without imagination.
vonoets ...movetv, to form thoughts or conceptions.

The passage seems to mean that we cannot have thoughts without
some image or words or objects of sense perception being presented to
us by the imagination. Modern psychologists are endeavouring to
experiment on the possibility of thinking without language; of making
the mind play upon thoughts directly and without this unconscious
intermediary. It is something of this sort that I take Synesius to refer
to when he speaks of grasping a form bereft of matter, i.e. of the image
of language that is before the mind of the thinker (eous avAov).

As an example of the suggestion of the image of language by the
imagination, any one who is equally conversant with two modern
languages must have noticed that he is apt to think in one or other of
them at a given moment, and that his thought is deflected to a certain
extent by the language in the channel of which the mind is running at
that moment, for a language influences thought just as thought in-
fluences a language. But to think without the agency of this imaginative
presentation of language is practically impossible or, as Synesius says,
a rare experience. Therefore, he would say, we imagine when we think.
Aristotle states in De Ansma (402°) his position in regard to imagina-
tion as follows: ‘The function that seems to belong most particularly
to mind is thought, but thought itself, whether it is a sort of
imagination, or whether #¢ cannot exsst without tmagination, could
never take place without the body. . . . The soul if it has nothing that
belongs exclusively to itself cannot be separated from the body.’ We
infer from this passage that in Aristotle’s conception the mind and soul
(‘the rational soul’ of Plotinus) could not work without the body. It is
true that in another passage (De Anima, 413°) he is less affirmative.
‘It is not clear whether the soul is the actuality of the body (évreAdxera)
as the passenger is the soul of a ship.’ Plotinus rejects the simile of
Aristotle. For him the soul pervades the body but is not enclosed in it
(Enn. iv. 3. 21-2). He distinctly says (Enn. ii. 3. 9) that ‘the rational
soul is not in the body, it is raised to the things intellective to the
beautiful, the divine, &c. The soul is present in the body as light
is present in the air.’ Synesius, in invoking the imagination as a
condition of the action of mind, seems to incline rather to the view of


454 NOTES


Aristotle. Bossuet (De la Connaissance de Dieu et de sot-méme, cap. 111,
20) observes that the body is not a mere instrument controlled from
without, nor a ship which the soul directs after the fashion of a
pilot. It would be such if it were intellectual and intellectual only, but
because it is in touch with the senses it is compelled to turn its attention
more especially to that which touches it and to direct this not as an
extraneous thing but as one naturally and intimately united with it.


Page 335, 1. 21. The life in question . . .1s founded on imagination.
Lang, (Das Traumbuch des Synesius von Kyrene, pp. 45-8), explains the
passages in this part of the work in the following way: ‘Imagination is
the organ which first brings to a man’s consciousness the contents of
his soul (134 B). . .. Imagination 1s “life in a somewhat reduced form,
and exists according to a natural law of its own’’. As such it has also
its own organs of sense, which are perhaps of higher value than the
purely physical ones. It is, further, ...an imperative condition to the
formation of thought. In this way we might describe our life here as
one of imagination. . . . The “‘imaginative pneuma”’ is the most all-
embracing organ of sense and “‘the first embodiment of the soul” (135D).
It has its seat in the head of the living creature from which it governs
as from a citadel, surrounded by its ‘‘servants ”’, the respective senses.
In 137A... the pneuma is the border region between the material
and the immaterial or between the reasonable and the unreasonable...
it is subject to deceptions and disorders, but it may be cured by the
“ministrations’’ of philosophy. It isin immediate dependence on the soul,
and when this is in good health it is light and rises, whereas an evi) soul
overweights it and pulls it down to earth... when it descends to living
beings without understanding it is no longer the chariot of the soul but
thelogosofthe animal. In 137 D the pneuma is endowed with additional
qualities. Ina graduated scale it may be ‘‘a god, a multiform demon,
ora phantom”... . The first soul enters the pneuma as intoa ship, and in
that way gets into touch with the material world. It isinseparably linked
with it until its return to the spheres. When the soul sinks it sinks
with it, ... when the soul rises it follows. ... when the pneuma becomes
heavy it collapses and cannot occupy any longer the space it filled, and
as there is no vacuum in the universe, an evil pneuma takes its place.’


ON DREAMS 485


‘I have attempted in this review’, says Lang, ‘to reconstruct Synesius’
line of thought, which is confused by interpolations or repetitions. It
is clear that the expression davracrixy Pvots (143 A) includes two ideas,
different, but closely related. In.the one case the phrase is taken
in the sense of imagination, in the other that of pneuma in its various
shades of meaning. Imagination is in its essence entirely immaterial ;
according to its definition as the “‘ sense of senses’”’ it can be nothing but
a function. This is made especially clear in 137 C, where it is stated that
imagination is generally essential to the formation of thought. On the
other hand there is a pneuma which describes something material; it
consists of the material and the immaterial.’


Page 336, 1.3. The wise soul is dry. Cf. Matt. xii. 43. ‘When the un-
clean spirit is gone out of a man, it walketh through dry places, seeking
rest, and findeth none.’

A passage from Philo quoted by Eusebius (Praep. Evang. VIII. 14)
shows in what way the aphorism was understood by the Jewish
Alexandrine. ‘It is the nature of the intellect’, he says, ‘to be rendered
acute by the lightness of the air; on which account Heracleitus said
with great propriety, ‘where the soil is dry there the soul is most wise
and most excellent.’ Diels attributes to Heracleitus himself the words
Kat wvxai S€ dro trav bypav dvabvupudvra, which are found in Areios
Didymos after fragment 42 (Burnet, Early Greek Philosophy (ed. 3),
p. 151).


Page 336, 1. 6. lurks in holes. ‘We are become dwellers in the Place of
Unlikeness, where, fallen from all our resemblance to the Divine, we
lie in gloom and mud: for if the Soul abandons itself unreservedly to the
extreme of viciousness, it is no longer a vicious Soul merely, for mere
vice is still human, still carries some trace of good: it has taken to
itself another nature, the Evil, and as far as Soul can die it is dead.
And the death of Soul is twofold: while still sunk in body to lie
down in Matter and drench itself with it; when it has left the body,
to lie in the other world until, somehow, it stirs again and lifts its
sight from the mud: and this is our ‘“‘ going down to Hades and
slumbering there’’.’ (Plot. Enn. i. 8. 10: translated by Stephen
Mackenna.)


456 NOTES


Michael Psellus is haunted with visions of the same sort in the
eleventh century. Cf. Epistolae, 13, p. 251, Satha. ‘92s Acav 5é Oupijpes
Tovrots Kai TO KAnTWwpLov. woTEp yap ev oTEV@® Tit ywpiw Kai py Twa
SiéLodov Eexovre ovynAewpevoi tws Kal ovodiyyopevor, méLovoi mws
aAAnAous . . . émt mAeupais Keipevot. xT A.

Page 336, l. 19, shameful for souls who do not return property not thetr
own, G&c. The text is aloypa 8 dy éndvodos yévorro, p17 amodiovoas To
aAAdrprov, GAAG srepi yijv dmoATovaats Orrep avwhev npavicayro.

Olympiodorus in his commentary on Plato’s Phaedo makes use of
similar language (A. rr. 3, ed. Norvin): ore of véoe Oeoi Seopevover pev
tas yuyas ev Trois odpaot, Gray Ta (a ovvudrvwow emir Seva. mrpos Yuywow,
SaverLduevor popia amd Tay oroyeiwv. Grav 5é amodidovres Ta Savelopara
dtadvower 7a Ca, rére AVovar Tas Yuyas Tav Seopa.


Page 336,1. 23. the soul which has once been engrafted. Lang (Das Traum-
buch des Synestus von Kryene, p. 59) quotes a passage from Iamblichus
ITepi Yuyijs in Stobaeus (Ecl. i. 49) ‘which’, he says, ‘conducts us within
the very circle of those ideas that we are familiar with in Synesius.
Here we are told that the views of the Platonists relating to the union of
the soul and the body are divided. The majority admitted an immediate
union, the others assumed intermediate links. For some make the soul
come into immediate contact with the material body, as do most of the
Platonists. The others maintain that between the immaterial and the
material soul, ethereal, heavenly, and pneumatic envelopes are inserted,
which contain the rational life and which are the protectors of the soul.
These are the chariots of the soul, and they bring it into contact with
the solid material world, connecting the two by intermediate links.’
Whereas already the above quotation shows a distinct relationship to
our text, this is particularly clear in the last part. Here is expressed
briefly what Synesius describes as the ‘borderland between the rational
and the irrational’ (Dreams, c. 4). We must not be surprised if Iam-
blichus talks of two souls, corporeal and incorporeal. From Proclus
(In T1m. 214 A, f.) we know that in his view two souls emanate from the
creative soul. But, as Lang points out, here Iamblichus further com-
plicates the matter by assuming ethereal envelopes between the soul
(i.e. the immaterial soul) and the pneuma (i.e. the material soul), so that


ON DREAMS 457


there is not one chariot (pneuma) of the soul, as Synesius states, but
two. This is only carrying the principle further. It might be carried ad
infinitum.


Page 336,1.25. remasns withit. Hierocles, quoted by Cudworth (vol. iii,
P. 275), Says: nAoytn? ovcia cupdues Exovoa oda, ovrw rapa Tob Snuovp-
yot els 70 elvas rrapnAber, ws pyre 76 o@pa elvas avryy, pyre avev cwparos*
GAN’ auriy yey dowparov, atoreparoboba: 8é eis ada To GAov avrijs eldos.
The same author speaks of man as yYuyx7 Aoyuch) pera cupduois alavdrov
owparos, i.e. a rational soul with a cognate immortal body. He con-
cluded therefore, Cudworth goes on to say, that this enlivened terrestrial
body, or mortal man, is nothing but etwAov avOpebrou . . . wherefore a
demon or angel .. . is also defined by him, after the same manner,
puy7 Aoyin pera wrewob cwparos. Again, Proclus on Plato’s Timaeus
(v. p. 430) has the following: [Idvra Saipova radv nperépwv xpeirrova
Yuxyav, Kal voepay éxew Yuyny, Kal Oynpa aidprov.


Page 336, 1.27. drags below with st the soul ...tooheavy. Itisnoticeable
that a few lines earlier (1293 b2) he uses the word svevpact where we
might expect puyais. Evidently then the pneuma is what becomes
heavy with moisture, i.e. the part of the soul which seems to be under-
stood as partaking of star-matter (see note on mvedpa, c. 6), not the
ethereal or immaterial soul. This division of the soul into mvejpa and
yuyy must not be confounded with the rational and irrational soul
of Plotinus, Puyt Aoyuc) and yuyn dAoyos. The soul is dragged down by
the more material part being clogged with moisture. It is then in a con-
dition when the zpusrn vy (immaterial soul) can make use of it as
a mvedpa, and this is what is meant by its associating with the world
of Body (owpartx@ xéopw). This image of the oxd¢os is intelligible enough
if we translate mvedua by ‘envelope’, accepting the definition of it given
by Proclus (see note to c. 6) as a sort of sheath which added layers to
itself as it descended. But on this supposition it is not clear in what way
the immaterial soul descends without a pneuma of its own. The doctrine
of Plato as found in the Phaedrus that the soul was divided from matter,
inasmuch as it is not moved by material forces but by its own imma-
terial agency, is not that of Aristotle. ‘Physics’, he affirms, ‘must bea
theoretical science, but it will theorize about such being as admits of


458 NOTES


being moved, and only about that kind of substance which . . . is not
separable from matter.’ (Metaphysics, 1025, Ross.) He pointedly
excludes being that generates its own motion, irrespective of the forces
of matter; in other words that being which Plato finds in the soul. On
the next page (1026*, Ross) he goes on to say that, ‘it is clear... why it
belongs to the student of nature to study soul to some extent, i.e. so
much of it as is not independent of matter.’ The inference is clear. He
regards the soul as partly dependent on matter and partly independent
of it. We are far from Plato’s conception of the soul as the absolute,
metaphysical entity, self-moving and independent of material forces, as
explained in the Phaedrus. A little later, he continues, ‘physics deals
with things which are inseparable from matter but not immovable,
and some parts of mathematics deal with things which are immovable,
but probably not separable but embodied in matter; while the first
science deals with things which are both separable and immovable.’
Aristotle finally puts the case which concerns the uy as follows: ‘If
there is no substance other than those which are formed by nature,
natural science will be the first science; but if there is an immovable
substance, the science of this must be prior and be first philosophy, and
universal in this way because it is first.’

Plato then is conclusive as to the nature of the yvy7 coming under the
scope of the ‘first philosophy’. Aristotle assigns it partly to the physical
and partly to the metaphysical sciences. The atomists and Epicurus in
chief carried the material side of the fuy7 a step farther. The immaterial
side for them had ceased to exist. The Scholiast on Epicurus’ Letter to
Herodotus (c. 66, edition Von der Miihll), in commenting on the philo-
sophers’ statement that the soul cannot have the same sensations as
before, once separated from the body, because tts protecting envelope ts
not the same, remarks: ‘He says elsewhere that the soul is composed of
very smooth and round atoms quite distinguishable from those of which
fire is constituted. .. .” Epicurus himself goes on to say (c. 67) that ‘what
we call incorporeal . . . is that which cannot be self-conceived, but apart
from a vacuum it is impossible to conceive of the incorporeal. Vacancy
can be neither active nor passive; it only allows bodies to follow their
motion. Those therefore who say that the soul is incorporeal speak
senselessly.’


ON DREAMS 459


At this moment of Greek philosophy the sense of the dualism between
spirit the incorporeal and matter had become unintelligible, and the
metaphysical point of view defined by Aristotle in the passage above
was in eclipse. It seems to foreshadow the mavevparuc) yuy7 of
Synesius and the conception of Proclus.


Page 337, l. 27. Lethaean potion, &c. Synesius compares the well-
known image in poetry of death as the drinking of a lethal draught with
the drink that a soul was said to take in the astral zone of the universe,
before passing through the zones of fire, air, and water, in its descent to in-
habit a body upon this earth. Macrobius, in his commentary on Cicero’s
Dream of Scipio, describes at length (Bk. I, chap. xii, §§ 1 ff.), the route
that the soul takes in this voyage. The principal points are the following:
he tells us that the Milky Way cuts the Zodiac in two points, at Cancer
and at Capricorn, and that these two signs of the Zodiac are called the
Gates of the Sun. It is by these gates that the souls descend from
heaven to earth, and rise again from earth to heaven (‘per has portas
animae de caelo in terras meare et de terris in caelum remeare credun-
tur’). One of these doors, he tells us, is the gate of man, the other the
gate of the gods. The souls of men pass through the gate of Cancer, but
they come back through that of Capricorn, which is the gate of the gods,
and through this they attain the seat of the immortality which belongs
to them, and pass into the rank of the gods (‘in deorum numerum
revertuntur’). As long as the souls have not left the gate of Cancer they
are still in the rank of gods (‘adhuc in numero sunt deorum’). But when
they have passed down as far as the Lion they begin to make trial of the
condition before them. It is at this point that the soul descending from
the boundary of the Zodiac and the Milky Way leaves its spherical form,
that which alone is divine, and is attenuated into a conical form
(‘in conum defluendo producitur’). He next tells us that Plato in the
Phaedo means to make allusion to the soul first entering the zone of
matter, when he represents it as stumbling with intoxication (‘animam
in corpus trahi nova ebrietate trepidantem’), and that we have a symbol
of this in the so-called Cup of Bacchus, placed between the Lion and
Cancer. This represents that forgetfulness which is the companion of
intoxication, and all souls in descending drink of this cup of oblivion

2878-2 F f


460 NOTES


(‘sed oblivionem quidem omnes descendendo hauriunt ; aliae vero magis
minus aliae’). It is evidently to this potion that Synesius alludes.
Macrobius goes on to say that the doctrine of reminiscence is used
among the Greeks to explain the greater or less forgetfulness in man
of the truths that were part of his knowledge before he had descended ;
but there is also the drink of the gods. This is no other than Hyle
(vAn), or matter, which stamped with forms, moulds the whole body
of the world (‘Hyle, quae omne corpus mundi, quod ubicumque cernimus,
ideis impressa formavit’). It is called nectar, and believed to be the
drink of the gods. But the drink of the souls is of a lower order, and it is
this that the ancients called the Lethean stream (‘inferior vero atque
turbidior, potus animarum’). The soul then, drawn down by the weight
of this drink, has next to pass through seven Zones. In its descent it takes
on a luminous body (by this no doubt he means the pneuma), and also
receives certain faculties for use in the life below, from the divinities to
whom the seven zones are respectively dedicated. Taking them in their
order, from top to bottom, it is from the zone of Saturn that they receive
reasoning power (‘quod Aoyiorixdy et Oewpnrixov uocant’), from that of
Jupiter the power of action (‘quod zpaxrixdy dicitur’), from that of
Mars the spirited element (‘quod @uy:«dy nuncupatur’), in that of the
Sun the faculty of feeling and thinking (‘quod aio@yrixcy et davracrixdy
appellant’), in that of Venus the movement of desires (émOupyrexov
vocatur’), in that of Mercury the faculty of expression (€ppnveurixdv
dicitur’), in that of the Moon the forces necessary for increase (‘durixdv’).


Page 337,1. 31. descending into the first life... this soul,instead of serving,
becomes enslaved. The Greek is @ij0ca yap xarwica (i.e. puyy) rov mpwrov
Biov €Bedovris dvri rob Oyrevoat SovAever. Nicephorus Gregoras, the
Byzantine commentator, remarks on this passage: mp@rov Blov dyoiv
avridvacré\wy mpes robs Sevrépous Kal tptrous obs facw “EdAnves yiveobas
dia rds pereupvyadoes. Terzaghi (‘Sul Commento del Niceforo Gregoro...’
Studs ttaliant di Filologia classtca, vol. xii), points out an error here on
the part of the commentator. ‘Synesius’, says Terzaghi, ‘affirms that
the soul descending into this earthly life is a slave, and he compares
with this condition the heavenly life of the pure soul .. .. Synesius had
contrasted the first earthly life with that which follows in heaven.


ON DREAMS 461


Nicephorus then has misinterpreted him, all the more so that just before
this the philosopher of Cyrene, to bring out the contrast between matter
and spirit, had written ov« €orw onws zor’ ay atootpadein TH VAnv yuy?
pndevi xax@ wept 7a THe mpooxKdrrovea.’


Page 339, 1. 7. Listen to the oracles, &c. Macrobius, in his commentary
upon The Dream of Scipio, Book I, chap. 3, § 2, divides the various sorts
of dreams into five categories (‘omnium, quae videre sibi dormientes
videntur, quinque sunt principales et diversitates et nomina’). This
classification he has taken from the work of Artemidorus on Dreams
(‘Ovetpoxpirixa). The five divisions of which he speaks are: the pro-
phetic dream, the vision, the oracle, the dream properly so called, and
lastly the phantom. ‘Aut enim est dvecpos secundum Graecos quod
Latini somnium vocant, aut est cpaza quod visio recte appellatur,
aut est xypnpariopos quod ovaculum nuncupatur, aut est évimov quod
insomnium dicitur, aut est ¢dvracpza quod Cicero, quotiens opus hoc
nomine fuit, visum vocavit.’ It will be seen from this classification
which Macrobius has passed down to us from Artemidorus that the
oracle was identified in some form with a dream.


Page 339,1.14. snatched from the extremes of fire and atr. Sallustius(c. vi)
speaks of the four elements, fire, air, water, and earth, as forming zones
in the order indicated, in a descending scale, from the six spheres of the
planets which are above them, and to each of these lower zones he assigns
a deity: Hephaestus to fire, Hera to air, Poseidon to water, and Hestia
toearth. (Cf. Plato’s Phaedrus, where Hestia remains at home, and does
not drive a chariot over the back of heaven, with the other gods.) The
soul therefore, in ascending to its source on leaving the body, must pass
through these zones. See Nock’s Sallustius, prolegomena, p. lix. I find in
Olympiodorus (B. pA§, p. 112, ed. Norvin) the following passage which
is interesting in this connexion: “Ort ws ro zip eis ev 76 xdrw Bpide
Braorepov Kai Sid twos pnyavijs avropudis S€ eis TO dvw ywpet, Gre dyw av7@
Kal % OAdTNS, ovTW Kal 4 puxy MdoxEL Mpds TE THY Eis TO Opa KdBoSov Kal
THY Eis TO Ov Emdvodoy, éetd7) Kal AUTIS 7) Ywpior? GAdTns Exel.

The tendency of a flame to rise seems to have suggested the placing of
fire as the outer zone (odatpa), as also the comparison of the Psyche to
a flame, which may be found in medieval imagery.


462 NOTES


Page 339, 1.16. donning sts earthly shell. The expression ro yywov
dudiécacba xéAudos is reminiscent of Porphyry, De Antro Nympharum
(259) xerdv ye 76 cpa TH S Hudieora. Psellus, quoted by Cudworth
(vol. iii, p. 268), speaks of the Chaldeans as recognizing two envelopes
of the soul, the one ‘pneumatic’, the other ‘luciform’: 4¥o x:rdvas
€revdvover Thy puxry of XaASaiot. nai Tov pév mvevparixoy wropacay, amo
Tob aicbyrod efupavidyra atrp- tov 5é avyoed4, Aerrov Kai dvadij, ovirep


erritredov.


Page 339, 1.17. together with the stronger part. Joannes Philoponus, the
Christian writer of uncertain date, is also quoted by Cudworth to show
that he also conceived of these two different bodies of the soul. Just as
the soul in descending to the realms of matter took on envelopes, so,
once purified, 1t dropped the pneumatic body and took to itself the
astral or luciform. These are his words concerning the mvetua which
remains in the earthly body until, having purified itself, it is borne
aloft, freed from (the world of) generation: rére roivuv nai rov Oupov Kal
Thy enBupiay amoriBerat pera Tovrou Tot oxnpaTos, Tov mvevparos A€yw.
elvar Sé re eat pera rotro dXo 7. aidiws adrijs éEnupévov, c@pa ovpdviov,
cai dua rotro aidiov 6 dacw avyoedés 7 adorpoedés. Again, Hierocles
(Commentania in Aurea Carmina, No. 222), in the opinion of Mosheim,
brings back the envelope which he calls the mvevxparixdy 6ynpa rijs Aoyucijs
yuy7js to one envelope. St. Paul uses the expression cdpa puyixdv


(r Cor. 15. 44).


Page 340, 1.15. 1n... whitch the soul has habitation... .wsth this pneuma.
amvetua probably signifies an etherealized covering of the soul which
becomes thicker as the soul descends from its sidereal region towards
earthly matter. Passages to this effect may be found as late as Proclus
and even later. The most important text in Aristotle bearing on the
meaning of the word is perhaps this: Aeisera: 5¢ tov vobv povov Ovpabev
érrevovévat, Kai Getov elvar povov: ovdé yap avro’ 77} évepyeia Kowwvel cwpa-
TUK} evepyera. maons prev ovv buys SUvapis erépou owparos Eoixe KexOWWwYN-
xévas xat Qevorépou ray KaAoupevwwy orotyeiwy’ ... avr ...€ TH oTréppart
évurrdpxet, Orrep Trove’ yovea elvar Ta onréppara, 70 KaAoUpEvoy Oeppov. rotro
5é ov sip, ovd€ rotavrn Stvapis €orw, aAdd ro éuzreptAapBavdpevoy ev TO


ON DREAMS 463
ordppart, Kal €v T@ adpwode mveipa, Kaiy év7@ mvevpars pvors, avdAcyov
odca 7@ THY dotpwyv aroxeiw. (De Gen. An. 736°.)

This passage is somewhat obscure. Mosheim, in his commentary on
Cudworth (vol. iii. 472), q.v., considers it to mean that the pneuma is
not the body of the soul but a sidereal element derived from the stars
or analogous to them, and inherent in the seed that produces the sen-
tient soul. But that Aristotle recognized a division of the soul into a
material and immaterial part would seem to be indicated in a passage
in Metaphysics (p. 1070* 24), in which he says that just as ‘the
shape of a bronze sphere exists at the same time as the bronze sphere,
we must examine whether any form also survives afterwards. For in
some cases this may be so, e. g., the soul may be of this sort—not all the
soul but the reason ; for doubtless it is impossible that al/ soul should
survive’ (Ross). Iamblichus, on the other hand, calls attention to the
difference of opinion that existed in his day on the nature of the pneuma.
The greater number of Platonists, he says, introduce the soul directly
into the body, while others consider that between the material body
and the incorporeal soul there are coverings of an ethereal, celestial, and
spiritual nature (the puyicov rvedua of Synesius) which, enveloping the
rational soul, are formed to hold it in place and to act as vehicles for
it in its journey down to the realms of matter, and once descended there,
to attach it to the material body by common intermediary links. This,
at least, is the sense in which I understand the passage quoted by
Bouillet (Plotinus, vol. ii, p. 656). It seems essentially to concord with
a citation from Proclus on the same page. ‘Every soul’, says Proclus,
‘has a vehicle immaterial, indivisible, and unmoved in its essence. . . .
The vehicle of every soul descends by the addition of envelopes more
and more material. It rises with the soul when it is purified of matter
and has returned to its own shape, as in the same degree the soul makes
use of it. In point of fact the soul descends in an irrational manner,
taking to itself irrational powers, and it rises by stripping itself of all
the functions that are the province of generation.’ (Elements of Theology,
CCVill.)


Page 340,1.21. mssty element of the spirit envelope. Lang (Das Traum-
buch des Synesius von Kyrene, pp. 62-3) quotes an interesting passage


464 NOTES


from Porphyry (De Antr. Nymph. 11, Nauck, 64. 9): ‘Those souls which
draw a body towards themselves, whether they are corporeal or the
reverse, and above all those which are on the point of attaching them-
selves to blood and moist bodies, must needs plunge into the moisture,
and, once moistened, themselves become corporeal. Therefore we must
help the souls of the dead by libations of gall and blood. Of necessity
the body-loving souls at least which drag the pneuma behind them
in a state of moisture will condense the latter into a cloud. . . and so
these become visible. From these ranks are derived those souls that
owing to their imagination leave behind them in the pneuma im-
pressions of shadowy beings. . . . The pure souls, on the other hand, are
turned away from the world of creation. “The wisest soul is dry
lustre,’ as Heraclitus says. ‘Therefore the pneuma will become moist in
proportion to the soul’s desire to join itself to matter, for the soul draws
the pneuma with it in the form of steam owing to its desire for this
creation.’

Lang remarks again, p. 81, that ‘The considerable influence of
Porphyry on the philosophic trend of Synesius’ thought is obvious,
and we do not have to look for it, as Volkmann supposed, in the teaching
of the Oracles handed down by Iamblichus. ... Plotinus was an even
more remote figure to him than Porphyry. Apart from the foundations
common to every Neo-Platonic mind, there is little influence in the
details to be traced to him. To the image of the uxddos already
mentioned we should add the no less happy comparison of the Pneuma
with an “amphibium”’.’ Syn. 138%.


Page 342, 1. 31. This art of divination I resolve... to bequeath.
Synesius may have had his own ancestral Lacedaemon in mind.
Cicero (De Divinatione, I. xliii. 96) speaks of the Spartan Ephors as
practising divination by dreams. ‘Moreover the Spartan magistrates,
not content with the careful superintendence of the state affairs, went
occasionally to spend a night in the temple of Pasiphae, which is in the
country in the neighbourhood of their city, for the sake of dreaming
there, because they considered the oracles received in sleep to be true.’


Page 344,1.27, For the gaze and the hearing ofan unholy mob. Tertullian,
in his treatise on Baptism (cap. ii), expresses a somewhat similar train


ON DREAMS 465


of thought. ‘There is really nothing that so blinds men’s minds as the
simplicity of divine works. . . since with so great simplicity, without any
parade or novel equipment, without any expense even, a man is lowered
into water. ... Iam mistaken, if the appointed ritual or hidden mysteries
of idol-worship do not, on the contrary, build up for themselves the
belief and influence they have, from the splendour and cost of their
elaborate preparations. (See translation by A. Souter, p. 47.)


Page 346, 1. 3. the element of hope is so abundant. Cicero (De Divina-
tione II. Ixxii. 150) takes a less optimistic view of the influence of dreams.
‘Sleep seems to be the refuge from all labours and anxieties. And yet
even from this many cares and perturbations spring forth, which indeed
would of themselves have no influence and would rather be despised, if
certain philosophers had not taken dreams under their special patron-
age, and those not philosophers of the lowest order... . Nay, if Carneades
had not resisted their extravagance, I rather fancy they would by this
time be reckoned the only philosophers worthy of the name.’ Synesius
mentions Carneades more than once, but not in connexion with divina-
tion. The philosophers mentioned as believers in dreams here are no
doubt the Stoics.


Page 346, 1.19. waking state of the dreamer, or the sleeping state of the
awakened. Macrobius has it that it is the phantom (¢dvracya), the last
of his five divisions of dreams (vide supra, p. 461), which comes to us when
we are neither quite awake nor quite asleep. He again (Comm. Somn.
Scip. I. 3. §§ 6 f.) quotes Virgil (Aen. iv. 9):

‘Anna soror, quae me suspensam insomnia terrent!’
and then continues: ‘¢dvracpa vero, hoc est visum, cum inter vigiliam
et adultam quietem in quadam, ut aiunt, prima somni nebula adhuc se
vigilare aestimans, qui dormire vix coepit, aspicere videtur irruentes in
se vel passim vagantes formas a natura seu magnitudine seu specie
discrepantes, variasque tempestates rerum vel laetas vel turbulentas.’
(Iamblichus] (on the Mystertes, sect. 3, chap. ii, p. 115, T. Taylor) throws
some light upon the meaning of this passage. ‘It is usual...in human
dreams, and in dreams which are excited by the soul, or by some of our
conceptions, or by reason, or by tmaginations, or certain diurnal cares.’
He distinguishes here between dreams which are purely ‘human’, and


466 NOTES


those which are sent by God. Of the human, he says, ‘these indeed are
sometimes true, and sometimes false . . . but the dreams which are
denominated theopemptoi or sent from God ... take place either when
sleep is leaving us, and we are beginning to awake, and then we... hear
a certain voice, which concisely tells us what is to be done ; or voices are
heard by us, between sleeping and waking, or when we are perfectly
awake....

‘But wakefulness (p. 116, Taylor reads dumvos for Urvos),a detention of
the eyes, a similar oppression of the head, a condition between sleeping
and waking, ... are all of them divine indications, and are adapted to
the reception of the Gods. . . . Some therefore, not knowing these indica-
tions of prophetic dreams, and conceiving that they have something in
common with human dreams, rarely and casually obtain a foreknowledge
of futurity.’ Again, in chapter three, the view of Iamblichus seems to
accord with that of Synesius as expressed in this work: ‘When we are
asleep, we are perfectly liberated, as it were, from certain surrounding
bonds, and use a life separated from generation. Hence, this form of life,
whether it be intellectual or divine, and whether these two are the same
thing, or whether each is peculiarly of itself one thing, is then excited
in us... .’ Cf. Bossuet, Sermon sur la Mort, ‘Je ne sais si ce que j’appelle
veiller n’est peut-étre pas une partie un peu plus excitée d’un sommeil
profond ; et si je vois des choses réelles, ou si je suis seulement troublé
par des fantaisies et par des vaines simulacres.’


Page 347, 1.12. Penelope ... assumes that there are two gates of
dreams, &c. Macrobius quotes the following line from Virgil @ propos
of false dreams: ‘Sed falsa ad caelum mittunt insomnia manes.’
(Aen. vi. 896.) He then goes on to say a little later that those who
were desirous to know why the ivory gate should be reserved for false
dreams may consult Porphyry, who comments upon the passage in
Homer that relates to the two gates as follows: ‘Latet, inquit, omne
verum. Hoc tamen anima, cum ab officiis corporis somno eius paululum
libera est, interdum aspicit, non numquam tendit aciem, nec tamen
pervenit, et cum aspicit tamen non libero et directo lumine videt sed
interiecto velamine quod nexus naturae caligantis obducit.’ (Macrob.
Comm. in Somn. Scip., I. iii. 6, 17, 18.) Macrobius speaks of the


ON DREAMS 467


mysterious veil that hangs over nature and that is only to be removed
for those initiated into the mysteries, and even to them by the indirect
path of allegory only. See his Commentary on The Dream of Sctpio, I. ii.
17: ‘De dis autem, ut dixi, ceteris et de anima non frustra se, nec ut
oblectent, ad fabulosa convertunt, sed quia sciunt inimicam esse
naturae apertam nudamque expositionem sui, quae sicut vulgaribus
hominum sensibus intellectum sui vario rerum tegmine operimentoque
subtraxit, ita a prudentibus arcana sua voluit per fabulosa tractari. sic
ipsa mysteria figurarum cuniculis operiuntur, ne vel haec adeptis nudam
rerum talium se natura praebeat sed summatibus tantum uiris sapientia
interprete veri arcani consciis contenti sint reliqui ad venerationem
figuris defendentibus a vilitate secretum.’ Julian (Ep. 4, ed. Wright
=14 Bidez), an obvious believer in divination by dreams, in writing to
Oribasius, clings to the Homeric tradition as to the respective values of
the two gates: rdév dvetpdtwy Svo mudas elvai now 6 Oeios “Opnpos, Kai
Seddopov elvat adrois Kai THy Uxép THv aroPnoopdévwy miorw. All this con-
ception of a veil hung over nature affected the whole question of dreams,
for he asserts that it is sleep which permits the mind’seye to penetrate this
veil, which is made of horn, since the nature of horn admits of its being
so thin as to be penetrable by the sight, whereas that which befogs and
repels the light is ivory, the body of which is more opaque by its nature:
‘Hoc velamen cum in quiete ad verum usque aciem animae introspi-
cientis admittit, de cornu creditur, cuius ista natura est, ut tenuatum
visui pervium sit, cum autem a vero hebetat ac repellit optutum, ebur
putatur, cuius corpus ita densatum est, ut ad quamvis extremitatem
tenuitatis erasum nullo visu ad ulteriora tendente penetretur’ (§ 20).

As for the Iliad passage alluded to, we find in Macrobius, 1. vii. 6,
comment upon this also: ‘Habuit enim praeceptio, ut universus pro-
duceretur exercitus, at ille sola pugnandi hortatione contentus non
vidit, quid de producenda universitate praeceptum sit, praetermissoque
Achille, qui tunc recenti lacessitus iniuria ab armis cum suo milite
feriabatur, &c.’


Page 348,]. 10. what st has done for me personally. In the same way
Philo tells us (De Migratione Abrahae, vii. 35) how divine powers visited
him in day dreams. (Cf. Synesius, swpra, ‘now all this is the waking

2878.4 Gg


468 NOTES


state of the dreamer, &c.’) ‘Sometimes when I have come to my work
empty I have suddenly become full, ideas being in an invisible manner
showered upon me and implanted in me from on high, so that through
the influence of divine inspiration I have become greatly excited and
have known neither the place in which I was, nor those who were
present, nor myself, nor what I was saying, nor what I was wniting.’
These words of Philo are similar to those of Synesius in Letter 154 in
which he describes the state of mind in which he wrote this treatise
on Dreams.


Page 348, 1.22. 1 emulation of the archatc Attic. Proclus (De forma
epistolart, Hercher, Epist. Graec., p. 7=Libanius, ed. Forster, vol. 1x,
Pp. 33) counsels moderation in ‘ Atticizing’ when writing letters, quoting
Philostratus of Lemnos: Set yap rv ris émorodns dpdow ris pev
ouvneias arrixwrépay elvas, rod 5é drrixtopot ournBeorépay Kat pyre Aiay
dymAnv pyre Tarrewny adyav, adda peony Twa.

Page 349, 1.10. ineffective, plots of ghost-ratsing sorcerers. The fear
that Synesius shows of sorcery is scarcely worthy of a philosopher,
if we may credit Plotinus (Enn. iv. 4. 43): ‘Every being who has
relations with another being can become the victim of sorcery. . . . It is
only the being who is concentrated within himself (1. e. the philosopher)
who is proof against sorcery.’ To the same effect, Celsus (The True
Discourse, 74): ‘The musician Dionysius of Egypt, whom I knew
personally, told me that magical practices have no power except on
the ignorant and the debauched, and that they have no effect on
philosophers, and on those who know how to remain their own masters
and order their lives wisely.’ Again, Plotinus (sbid.) has the following:
‘How can the sage escape the action of enchantment and the philters
used in magic? His soul escapes from them completely . . . the sage
can only suffer from the unreasonable portion that he receives from the
universe . . . but he will not suffer from the loves inspired by philtres.’


Page 352,1.18. Artstotle and reasonassert ... perception creates memory.
Aristotle, Metaphysics, 980° 27, Dice pév obv aloPnow exovra yiveras
ra (wa, ex 5é ris atobjoews Tois péev alta ovK eyyiyverat pv7npn, Tots

 éyytyverar. Ibid. 980° 28, Diyveras 8” x ris penpns eumrerpia rots avOpe-
mots. K.T.A, Q8I* 2, "AroBaiver 8° émornpn Kat réxvy, Sia Tis €urerpias rots


ON DREAMS 469


avOpwroas. ‘By nature animals are born with the faculty of sensation,
and from sensation memory is produced in some of them though not in
others ... and from memory experience is produced in men... science
and art come to men through experience.’ (Ross.)


Page 352, 1.20. many books have... been collected. Mayor on Pliny,
Epist. ui. 5.4, enumerates various writers on this subject: Artemidorus,
Astrampsychus, Macrobius, Philo, Aristides, Valerius Maximus.


Page 353,1.22. troubled and limpsd waters. Synesius seems to have
in mind here a passage of Aristotle’s Divination by Dreams (xepi rijs
nal? Srvov pavruxfs, 464°), in which he concludes that the best diviner
is he who can detect obscure resemblances in the dream-images to
actual things, and compares these blurred images to disturbed reflections
of objects in troubled water. Teyuixwratos § dori xpir)s evuTrviwy ootis
Svvarat Tas cpowrntas Oewpety: Tas yap evOvoverpias Kpiveww mayvrds €or"
héyw 5é ras cpouryras, ort wapandAyjova oupPaive ra pavrdopata Tots ev
Tois voaow eldwros, xaldzep Kati mpdrepov elropev. exet S5é, €f sr0AA))
yiveras 7 xinots, ovdév Cpota yivera: 7 Eudacis Kal Ta €SwAa Tois dAnOivois.
Sewos 57 Tas euddces xpivew etn ay 6 Suvdpevos tayv SiarcPdvecba: Kat
ouvvopay 7a. Sarredopnpéva Kai Sveotpappéva tay eldwAwy, ore éoriv avOpui-
trou, 7) trou, 7 orovdnmore. Kaxet 57) dpoiws Te SUvaras TO evirrMLOV TOTO:
9 yap Kimmas éxxomre THY evOvoverpiay. Aristotle is not very con-
clusive in his short essay on divination as to whether dreams foretell
the future or not. In the passage just quoted he seems to imply the
possibility of their being prophetic. How can a man be an expert
diviner of them if there is nothing to divine? He dismisses as
absurd the idea that they are sent by God (76 ve yap Oeov elvar rov
wéunovra, mpos Th GAAn aAcyia, Kai Td 7 Tots BeATioTaLs Kai pportpwrd-
Tots, GAAG Tois Tuxote. méuTEW dromoy, p. 462°), on the ground that they
not merely do not occur chiefly to the best and wisest, but most
frequently to the vulgar, ye0” qyudpav re yap éyiver’ dv Kai trois cogois,
ec Oeos Fv 6 réunwv- ovrw 5° eixds Tovs TUXdvTas mpoopay: 7) yap Sudvow. THY
TovovTwy ov dpovriorixi GAA” womep Epniios Kai Kev) mavTwv (464°)... .
But although Aristotle rejects the idea that dreams are sent by God,
he admits the possibility of their being controlled by demons. The
fact that the lower animals dream would of itself be proof that dreams


470 NOTES


are not sent by the Divinity, but the demon is a possible source as
being a part of nature (dvors). Thus (p. 463°) he cautiously suggests
this agency: “Odws 5° ézel cal rev dMwv Caw oveipirre twa, Jeoreurra
pev ovdK av etn Ta, evra, odd€ yéyove TovTou xdpw, Saysdvia pévros 7 yap
dvos Saysovia, add” ov Geta. The phrase rovrov ydpw I take to mean
‘for the purpose of divining the future’. But Aristotle begins his essay
by admitting that it is not easy either to hold aloof from a belief in
divination or to accept it. ITepi 5¢ ris pavriucis rijs év rots vmvos
ywopdvns Kat Aeyopévns oupBalvew amo Tav éevurrviwy, ovre Karadpovijoas
pdd.ov, ore wevoPjvas (462°).


Page 353, 1.29. somebody’s Melampus. This usage of rw in a con-
temptuous sense may be compared to the use of alsqguts in Tertullian,
‘For they are initiated into certain sacred rites by a bath, those of
some Isis or Mithras,’ A. Souter’s translation of Tertulltan concerning
Baptism, Note, p. 51.


Page 355, 1. 22. phantasy ... things, which are . . . inconcesvable.
This is the last time that Imagination is spoken of in this treatise.
Plutarch, ‘the great’, is quoted by Johannes Philoponus in his com-
mentary on Arsitotle, De Antma (p. 515, ed. Hayduck), as follows: ‘Once
sense-perception has addressed itself to the perceptible object and
has registered its form, it preserves it. It is to this form then that
Imagination addresses itself, to form a representation of it, as Plutarch
asserts. He also defines Imagination as the movement of the soul which
takes its origin from active sense-perception. . .. According to Plutarch
Imagination is double. At one extremity it touches the higher faculty,
it ends where discursive reason begins. At the other extremity it touches
upon the senses, of which it forms the summit. Imagination gives
nothing to Mind and discursive reason, but it is purified and perfected
by them, inasmuch as under their guidance it reaches the possession of
truth, as far as its nature is capable of so doing.’ In the same vein of
thought Iamblichus (xxi) speaks of Imagination as giving to Opinion
the intuition of forms which proceed from the senses, and at the same
time the conceptions that come from Mind. ‘It receives itself’, he goes
on to say, ‘the images which the various powers of the soul furnish it
with, and its name well expresses its function in assimilating and


ON DREAMS 471


reflecting back all the phenomena of the intellectual faculties, whether
the vegetative or the intermediary. It transmits to the other powers
throughout the body the impressions which it received from Mind.’
Simplicius has the following (Commentary on Aristotle, De Antma,
p. 214 Hayduck): ‘Although Imagination, as Iamblichus says, repre-
sents all our rational operations, nevertheless it resembles the forms
of sensation which are divisible and have extension. It is for this
reason that it touches upon sense-perception.’ It will be seen that the
psychologists who preceded Synesius or were his contemporaries, as well
as Simplicius, who wrote at a later period, did not give imagination the
preponderant place in the organization of the human intellect that is
accorded to it by the Cyrenean philosopher. (See Introduction, p. 78.)
Plotinus also asserts (Enn. iii. 6. 16) that ‘Imagination has the same
relation to soul that form has to matter’. Plotinus in Ean. iv. 3. 29,
makes imagination responsible for memory. ‘We are free to admit that
a sense percept (atc@nyua) produces an image (¢dyracpa) in the memory,
and that imagination . .. has the power of keeping these images ...,
so when sensation is no longer present, imagination preserves the
thing represented (dpapya). . . . It is therefore to imagination that the
memory of things perceptible belongs.’ Plotinus in recognizing the two
souls, the rational (Acy.«7) and the irrational (dAoyos), is bound to divide
imagination into two categories, sentient imagination, and intellectual
imagination. ‘When there is peace in that within us which is capable
of reflecting the images of the Rational and Intellectual-Principles,
these images appear... . When, on the contrary, the mirror within us is
shattered through some disturbance of the harmony of the body, Reason
and the Intellectual-Principle act unpictured: intellection is unattended
by imagination. In sum we maysafely gather that while the Intellective
Act may be attended by the Imaging-Principle, it is not to be con-
founded with it.’ (Plotinus, Enn. i. 4. 10, Stephen Mackenna’s trans-
lation.) Again, in Enn. iv. 3. 30 he asks whether intellectual concepts
can also be preserved by the imagination. ‘If imagination’, he says,
“accompanies each thought (vénors), and if perchance it preserves an
image of it, it will thus have a memory of the object of the thought in
question. . . . Reason (Adyos), whose action accompanies thought, has
perhaps the office of receiving it and transmitting it to the imagination.


472 NOTES


... Reason unfolds it and, making it pass from the state of a thought
to that of an image, displays it in our imagination as it were in a mirror.
It is in this way that a thought is perceived, in this way that it remains
and becomes a memory.’ As to the souls and the two imaginations
which belong to them, Plotinus tells us (sbsd. 31) that when they are in
harmony their images are confounded in one, that when they are in strife
the one or other of them imposes its image on us and we are unconscious
of the image of the alternative; ‘just as we are unconscious of having
two souls, for the two souls are confounded in one, and the one serves
as a vehicle for the other.’

Aristotle had said (De Antma 431°, 17) that we cannot think without
images ; he adds that memory of thoughts cannot exist without images,
and that it is only indirectly that memory can grasp thoughts; of itself
it can only reach percepts of the senses.


Page 356, 1.13. i dreams one conquers, walks, or flses. Cf. Cicero (De
Divinatione, 1. xxx. 64). ‘There are... three ways in which men dream
under the immediate impulse of the gods: one when the mind intuitively
foresees things by the relation which it bears to the gods; the second
arising from the fact of the air being full of immortal spirits in whom
all the signs of truth are as it were stamped and visible; the third when
the gods themselves converse with sleepers.’


Page 356, l.21. Forthwith a fierce struggle ensues. All this passage
and what follows is, perhaps, reminiscent of one in Dio Chrysostom’s
Trotana, xi. 129 (vol. i, 148, ed. von Arnim). The editor has enclosed the
page in brackets. Dio is accusing Homer of making a confused jumble
of events and images in the latter part of the Jisad, and proceeds to
say: taira ovx évumviots €otxora T@ dvri Kal amBdvos Pevopaow; ev yap
Tots Opw yeypaupeévois ovelpacww of avOpwirot Tovavras cers Cpw@ot, viv pev
Soxobvres . . . paxeoPar yupvot ovtes, eviote 5é oldpevor SudKetv Kai Tots Geots
SiardyeoOar . . . Kat ovrws, ef TUyoe Tord, wérecOa Kai Badilew emi rijs
Gararrns. wore Kai Thy ‘Opypov motnow dpOds dv riva eirety evirrov, Kal
Toro axpitov Kat doadeés.


473


NOTES ON CONSTITUTIO


This speech, called by Petavius Conststutio, was delivered, as Druon
thinks, in 411, just after the final disgrace of Synesius’ great enemy,
the roman praefect Andronicus, and recall of his friend Anysius,
the general who achieved several victories over the Ausurian tribes
of the Libyan desert who were attempting to besiege the cities of
Pentapolis. When Synesius returned to Cyrenaica, probably in the
vear 405, the guerilla warfare was dragging on under the incompetent
and corrupt general Cerialis, ‘a venal fellow and cheap at that’, as
Synesius describes him in a letter (ep. 130) to his friend Simplicius.
‘May the wretched Cerialis perish wretchedly ’, he says in the same letter,
‘he who. . . for once in his life lost faith in earth itself . . . embarked his
gold on double-sailed merchant-vessels and is now tossing about on
the high seas.’ From this position of vantage he sent all sorts of orders to
Synesius and his friends who were defending the city. ‘Instead of being
on the ramparts like me, the philosopher’, writes Synesius (#b1d.), ‘the
general keeps himself close to the oar-blade.’ In the same year, perhaps,
he writes to his brother (ep. 125): ‘the enemy has occupied Battia, he has
attacked Aprosylis, he has burnt the threshing-floors, ravaged the fields,
sold the women into slavery . . .; when shall we have done with our
useless chatter? when shall we act seriously? Let us collect our peasants
... to advance upon the enemy... .’ The philosopher, who in De Regno
urges upon the emperor Arcadius the creation of a citizen army, native
to the soil, is now putting his precepts into practice, and takes the first
part in the defence of Pentapolis.


Page 360, 1. 21. the hands of Anystus ... carried out God’s will. For
Anysius Synesius had the greatest admiration. We first hear of him in
the indictment of Andronicus (ep. 57): ‘And as against this pestilence
God has arrayed the south wind, so now has a leader been chosen by
Him against the Ausurians. Oh, may it prove that he is the holiest
and most just of all His generals!’ Events must have moved very
fast if the chronology of Druon (p. 605), approved by Crawford (p. 492),
placing this speech in the year 411, is accepted. Andronicus only
arrived at Cyrene, Druon thinks, in 410. Then we must allow time for


474 NOTES


the awful scenes of maladministration and carnage that Synesius re-
counts in his indictment pronounced in 411. Synesius attacks him in
this great Philippic—the so-called Letter 57—and excommunicates
him in the encyclical addressed to the bishops (ep. 58), all in the
same year (411) as that in which he wrote the document before us.
But in 411 he speaks of Anysius as if quite recently appointed to his
post as commander. Writing to Anysius (ep. 78) in the same year he
congratulates him on his brilliant successes. ‘The Unnigardae,’ he says,
‘in two or three engagements. . . assisted by God and led by you have
gained the greatest and most glorious victories.’ But, still following the
same attempts at chronology, in the same year (411) Anysius is re-
called. So he was nominated at the end of 410 and left the country in
411, during which brief period he conducted a campaign in the desert of
Libya, and transformed the whole situation. In Letter 59, which Druon
dates in the year 412, Synesius writes to Anysius that Pentapolis only
existed while he (the general) remained there. ‘The times since your
departure have betrayed us to our enemies.’ There are seven letters of
Synesius in all addressed to Anysius; in ep. 94 he seems to be watching
a long campaign, in ep. 78 he is begging his friend to write personally
to the emperor for one hundred and sixty more Unnigardae. In those
days of slow communication all this meant time. Again in epp.6 and 14
Synesius writes to him about a certain Carnas, some trivial affair con-
cerning the stealing of a horse, and rather as if Anysius was not on active
service. These two letters contain no allusion to the war. These diffi-
culties in chronology I call attention to without being able to offer a
solution.


Page 361,1.22. The Unnigardae with Anysius are the hands of Rome.
These Unnigardae were a sort of corps d’élite to whom Synesius attri-
butes the successes of Anysius, and which, to judge from ep. 78, were to
be had in Constantinople. The absurdity of the numbers quoted, ‘The
Forty &c.’, I have discussed in the introduction to The Letters of Synesius


(p. 51).


475


NOTES ON CATASTASIS


Page 363, 1.1. I, for one, do not know what I ought to say. This speech
Druon places in 412, about a year later than the last. Anysius had gone,
and the situation had again become gloomy. The passionate outpouring
of this oration led Lapatz, in his delightful commentaries on the letters
of Synesius (p. 266) to emit the opinion that the document is a private
letter which was mistaken in aftertime for a speech. He speaks of it as
‘si pathétique qu’on I’a prise 4 tort pour un discours.’ The suggestion is
certainly an interesting one. The phrase (line 8, Migne) ypade ov is one
such as he would use to a correspondent, and is inexplicable as a phrase
addressed to an audience, Again ayyeAdrw ts avrots seems to mean:
“Let some one of your circle of influential friends announce to the council
&c.’ In other words: ‘if you write to every one you know, some one of
them is sure to do it.’ The first sentence of the speech: ’Eyw pev ovx
x.r.A. is Clearly not an oratorical opening, but rather an epistolary one.
Of the 15g actual letters of Synesius to correspondents, the following six
commence with the first personal pronoun, ep. 25 eo pdv, ep. 30 €yw Kai
god, ep. 67 éyw nai BovAopat, ep. 80 eyw pev olos Fv, ep. 96 eyw pdprupa
mrovodpat, ep. 108 eoi Adyyac. This way of beginning a letter was not
so uncommon in other fourth-century writers. Taking at random the
first 157 letters of Libanius, I find seven which begin with the first
personal pronoun, viz. epp. 22, 45, 50, 52, 58, 76, 125 (ed. Foerster).
Julian, writing to Hecebolius, begins: ’Eyw pev xéypnpas tots aAAalos
...™pdws ... wore pndeva pndapod Biav dropévew, the famous defence
of his policy towards the Christians (115 Bidez-Cumont, 43 Hertlein,
40 Wright), again to Atarbius we find ’Eyw . . . ovre «retveo8at rovs
TadsAaious . . . BovAopa: (83 Bidez-Cumont, 71 Hert, 37 Wright) the first
sentence in his letter. Other instances might be given, e.g. epp. I,
30, 71 (Wright).

Now when we turn from the epistolographoi to the orators, we observe
that it seems to have been an unwritten law with these that a speech
must not begin with éyw ... orpoéi... This is true of the speeches, about
160 in number, of the ten great orators and those few which we possess of
Gorgias, Lesbonax, Herodes, Alcidamas, and Hyperides. The only
exception I know of is the second oration against Alcibiades by Lysias,

2878-3 Hh


476 NOTES


the authenticity of which is more than doubtful (ed. C. Hude, Or. xv).
Antiphon, in the fourth speech of his tetralogia, desiring evidently to
begin with the first personal pronoun, precedes it by the word ‘dou,
thus, iSovU, éyd rij re adruyig «.7.A., evidently to avoid a violation of the
rule. In like manner Hyperides begins two of his speeches (iv, v. ed.
Kenyon) dAX’ éywye and GAN’ eyes & avdpes Sixacrai ... seemingly for the
same reason, i.e. not to begin with eyw. To come to the fourth cen-
tury A.D., Libanius, in the one hundred and fifteen speeches that have
come down to us (60 orations, 55 declamations, ed. Foerster), has not
been guilty of beginning a single one with ey or poi. The same is true of
the few orationswe have of Julian. Out of seventy-three letters of Julian,
classified as authentic in the edition of Professor Wright (Loeb), five
commence with the first personal pronoun. The case therefore on this
count seems a strong one for the inclusion of the Catastasis among the
letters.

On the other hand, the lack of any personal allusion to his correspon-
dent, if such there be, is unusual to Synesius in a letter of such a length,
and the tone is rather one of impassioned oratory. A third supposition
might be made, namely that the letter was written to some friend,
possibly in Alexandria or Constantinople, to be read by him at a public
meeting or a private group there, in an attempt to rouse public opinion
on the awful danger that threatened Pentapolis, with a view to bringing
pressure to bear on the court. It does not seem the sort of speech to
deliver at an acute moment of crisis, when the morale of the population
required sustaining.


Page 363, 1. 15. the great Anthemius. Anthemius is mentioned in
several of the letters (epp. 47, 49, 73, 75, 79, 118). Synesius seems to
admire the great Roman praefect’s abilities, but he criticizes him
sharply for not doing more to save Pentapolis. Anthemius was appointed
consul and praetorian praefect of the East in the year 405 (v. Gibbon,
ed. Bury, iui, p. 383n.), andas heretained this office some ten years, he was
responsible for the administration of Libya during the later and most
troublous years of Synesius’ life. In letter 49 Synesius, writing to his
friend Theotimus the poet, playfully compares him to Simonides, and
his admirer Anthemius to Hiero I, the tyrant of Syracuse. ‘You re-


CATASTASIS 477


semble him (i.e. Simonides) in this’, he writes, ‘that it was Simonides
who handed down the fame of Hiero to all posterity, and that, through
the poems of Theotimus, Anthemius will be famous in letters as long as
Greeks shall exist.’ In letter 73 he writes to Troilus, the famous sophist :
“you have a double motive for lifting her (Cyrene) up from her down-
fall, and you are able to do so because Anthemius has the character that
can save cities, and moreover he has fortune and statecraft. ...I pray
that it may not come to pass in the time of the great Anthemius that
Roman rule shall perish. . . . Say to him, in the name of reason, say to
him: Is it not you yourself who have caused a new law to be dispatched
to supplant the old one? . . . Why does not your wrath then fall upon
those who glory in breaking your administrative acts ? . .. we only beg
Anthemius to enforce the laws of which he is the guardian.’


Page 363,1.22. Prolonging her agony to the seventh year. If we are right
in supposing that this document was written in 412, the disastrous
nature of the war must have been accentuated about the year 404, when
we assume, with Druon, that Synesius was in Alexandria. Already in
the year 399 he paints a gloomy picture of Cyrene in his speech before
the emperor, speaking of it as ‘now a heap of ruins, &c.’ Accepting the
same chronology, we can gather glimpses of the war in the letters from
the year 405, and after. In Letter 132 to his brother he writes: ‘at the
moment of dawn Iam off on horseback, [amscouting as far out as possible.
... We need archery in defence of our wells . . . we must either conquer
now by fighting, or perish in hand-to-hand struggle with the enemy... .’
And this is only the first of the six years of ‘agony’! Again in Letter
130 toSimplicius he writes: ‘ Alas for the young men we have lost!. . .we
have planted our fields for the fires lit by our enemies . . . our cattle, our
herds of camels . . . all are lost, all have been driven away.’ Passing to
the year 406 (?) we find him in Letter 119 writing to his friend Trypho, the
former governor of Pentapolis, that Cyrene owes its continued existence
to him alone. In the year 407 a letter to his brother (ep. 108) begins:
‘I have already three hundred lances. . . . To-morrow, I think, the battle
will take place. ... I hope that. .. by the aid of God I may vanquish the
enemy. ...I commend my children to you.’ Letter 107, to his brother,
contains the words: ‘Theenemy is holding the country, plundering every-


478 NOTES

thing, and slaughtering whole populations.’ Again, still in the year 407,
he tells his brother (ep. 122) of a victory gained by a priest of Axomis,
Faustus by name, who led a force of peasants against the enemy. Now
it is strange that after this letter, if we follow Druon’s sequence, we find no
reference to the war until wecome to Letter 94, addressed to Anysius him-
self this time, and written in 411. In the thirty-seven intervening letters
covering the years 408-g-10, one of which (67) is extremely long, he is
writing in a most peaceful strain, nor could any one imagine on reading
them that a war or any sort of disturbance was going on. Are we to
conclude from this that a lull in the barbarian inroads had taken place in
these three years, or that many letters have been lost, or again, that
Druon’s conjectural order is fundamentally wrong? I have always been
inclined to think that a great number of Synesius’ letters have been lost,
and the facts we are considering are the best evidence of this. How-
ever you may rearrange the chronology of the letters, there are not
enough letters alluding to the war to cover the seven years, 405-12.
It seems inconceivable that so ardent a patriot and one with the power
of dramatic expression evidenced in this Catastasis and letters quoted,
should write thirty-seven letters without a single allusion to what was
evidently nearest to his heart. But to proceed with year 411—the
hypothetical date—at this juncture he writes to Anysius: ‘As soon as I
learned the bad news from Cyrene the other day (that the enemy were
approaching) I thought of sending to you. . . but a messenger came to
inform us that the general had already occupied the high ground, &c.;
send back the two brothers to Cyrene,—they will fight for their country.’
Here is another to Anysius (ep. 78) of the same year, speaking of the
Unnigardae : ‘The barbarians had scarcely shown themselves when some
were killed. . . and others put to flight. They (the Unnigardae) still patrol
the heights, ever on the watch . . .: who would not admit . .. that they
would suffice, when commanded by you, to bring the Ausurian war to an
end...?’ Coming now to the year 412, we have a lurid picture of the
war in a letter to Theophilus, the Patriarch of. Alexandria, his oldest
friend (ep. 69): ‘He (the messenger) was sent to solicit military co-opera-
tion... but the enemy did not wait . . . they have already spread en
masse over the country. All is lost, all is destroyed ... there is nothing left
but the cities, nothing! What may befall to-morrow, God alone knows.’


CATASTASIS 479


This is the last letter in Druon’s order which speaks of the war; it might
well have been the last Synesius was to write.


Page 363, 1.29. not poured over the country in a compact mass. We
have just noted that in Letter 69 he describes the barbarians as having
done precisely this. I think the sense is, ‘ things were going better in
the days of Anysius, for he broke the barbarians up, but now they have
poured over the country.’ Letter 69 was written before the Catastasis,
evidently, but probably in the same year.


Page 364, 1. 13. shtelds of the Marcomant. As the Marcomani (v.
Gibbon, i, p. 235 n.) were a colony who from the banks of the Rhine occu-
pied Bohemia and Moravia, one can only conclude that they had been
sent at some time to Libya, possibly under Anysius himself. They are
mentioned in Strabo, vii. 290, and Tacitus, Ann. ii. 62, &c.


Page 367,1.4ff. Cythera ts opposite Pentapolis ... Dorian tombs, &c.
The island of Cythera is almost due north of Cyrene, but at a distance of
about 280 miles. It is off the southern extremity of Laconia to the east
of Cape Matapan. No doubt this means that he wishes to be near his
Lacedaemon. The idea of the Dorian tombs of his ancestors was always
haunting Synesius. In his indictment of Andronicus (ep. 57) he reminds
his hearers that he is descended from Eurysthenes, who settled the
Dorians in Sparta, and how all this has been engraved on public monu-
ments.


NOTES ON HOMILIES


These two homilies must have been pronounced after the consecration
of Synesius, or after the year 410. They seem to be merely fragments,
and it is difficult to recognize his style in them.


HoMILY 1


Page 369, 1.14. In the hand of the Lord there ts a cup, &c. Crawford
(Synessus the Hellene, p. 494) speaks of the part of the discourse begin-
ning here as a ‘ mystical interpretation, quite in the manner of Alexandria,
of Ps. lxxv. 8 (xxiv. 9 in the LXX), in which Synesius makes exceeding
light of the value of the letter, and declares that it is the spirit alone


480 NOTES


which is of consequence . . . the cup is one, for it was One Spirit Who
inspired both Prophet and Apostle’. He adds in a foot-note that there is
something a little like this in Isidore, epp. 5. 281.


HOMILY 2


This so-called homily is obviously two fragments joined together,
and they have no connexion with each other. The first fragment of the
two Morellus, the translator, thinks is from a sermon on Easter Eve,
and addressed to those newly baptized. The second ‘seems to belong’,
says Crawford (p. 496), ‘to some forensic speech, and denounces the
iniquities of the people of Leontopolis, a city in the Delta of the Nile’.
The city is mentioned by Strabo, xvii. 802.


HYMN I
Page 372,1.22. song of the cicada. Philo in The Contemplate Ltfe,
cap. 4, in describing the life of the Therapeutae, the anchorites who lived
in a community of their own, near Lake Mareotis, compares their absti-
nence in regard to food to that of the grasshoppers, which insects, he
says, are reputed to ‘feed on air, their song, it would seem, making
their scarcity (of nourishment) tolerable to them’.


Page 372, 1. 26. born without birth : ddéyevros. This word is used by
Coluthus, an epic poet of the end of the fifth century, line 180, in
describing the birth of Athene.


Page 373, 1. 4. leaping from out the centre, &c. Cf. Plotinus, v. i. 11:
“This Highest cannot be divided and allotted, must remain intangible
but not bound to space, it may be present at many points, where-
soever there is anything capable of accepting one of its manifesta-
tions: thus a centre is an independent unity; everything within the
circle has its term at the centre; and to the centre the radu bring each
their own. Within our nature is such a centre by which we grasp and
are linked and held; and those of us are firmly in the Supreme whose
collective tendency is There.’ (Trans. Mackenna, vol. iv, p.15.) See also
the note on Dreams, p. 446.


Page 373, 1. 6. reveal not the mysteries. Here we have a trace of Gnosti-


HYMN I 481


cism. Compare the passage in the book of Jedi, quoted in Hastings’s
Encyc. Relig. Eth. vi, p. 231: ‘This is the book of the yudces of the
invisible God, contained in the hidden mysteries which show the way to
the elect generation.’ In the same way the magical papyn contain
what they define as Gnosis. It was the privilege of the one initiated in
the mysteries of the Gnostics to have a knowledge of watchwords and
magical formulae that would enable his soul after death to pass through
the sentinels of the planetary zones. Cf. Hippol. v. 5, Hymn of the
Naassenes: ‘Then said Jesus: ... send me, O Father. With the seal will I
descend, travel through all Aeons, disclose all mysteries, show the forms
of the gods: the secrets of the holy path which are called ‘‘Gnosis”’ I will
impart.’ It will be seen from this to what an extent Gnosis was a super-
natural revelation of a mystical character, in the eyes of its earlier
exponents. The later Gnostics endeavoured to clothe their tenets in a
metaphysical and philosophic dress. Synesius is perpetually referring,
in his letters and elsewhere, to the danger of revealing the secrets shared
by the initiated to the world outside. Of these initiations and mysteries
there were many. The Gnostics derived them from Babylonia, from
Persia, from Egypt, and through the Greeks, from Phrygia. To which
cult of Gnosticism Synesius alludes is not clear, but it certainly seems
that he had the Gnostics in mind, probably Basilides and Valentinus,
their chief exponents. Bardesanes, the disciple of the latter, according
to Eusebius, flourished in the last part of the second century and the
first part of the third, and was the last great teacher of Gnosticism.
Both he and Marcion sought to envelop their doctrines in the beliefs of
the Christian Church, and seem to have largely adopted its ritual. In this
way a new syncretic type of Christianity was formed, and the forces of
Gnosticism, which had come into collision with the Orthodox Church,
continued to survive in certain heretical sects.


Page 374, 1. 2. light shall leap forth. There is a trace here of the cult of
Mithra. Wisdom, the creator and the unified flame mentioned below,
is the directing mind of the world. The religion of Mithra, as Cumont
has pointed out (cf. Les Mystéres de Mithra, p. 201, note), was anything
but Hellenic in its inspiration ; it opposed the culture of Iran to that of
Hellas.


482


HYMN II


Page 374, 1. 18. a blessed stlence. Here again is an expression which may
have a Gnostic derivation. The Valentinians regarded Sige (silence),
as co-existent with Bythos, the invisible, eternal, the not-begotten.
Bythos placed in the bosom of Sige the germ of production which he had
produced from Ennoia (thought). Sige, made fruitful by this germ,
bore Nous, like to his father, and equal to him, and alone capable of
understanding Greatness. The Valentinians give to Nous the name
Monogenes, i.e. the one son of the father and of the principle of all
things. With Nous was also born Aletheia (truth). Bythos, Ennoia,
Nous, and Aletheia form the Tetrad of the Pythagoreans, and this the
Valentinians called in addition the root of all things. This is the account
of the Valentinian doctrine as given by St. Irenaeus, to whom we owe
most of our information on the subject (cf. St. Iren.i. 1.) It will be seen
to what an extent the Gnostics had assimilated Pythagorean doctrines.

Nous, according to St. Irenaeus’ statement of the doctrine, under-
standing for what motive he had been engendered, produced by his
union with Aletheia, Logos (the Word), and Zoe (life), so that Logos
should be the father of all the Aeons that were to be born after him. He
was thus the principle and the artificer of what the Gnostics described
as the Pleroma (fullness or completion, vid. St. Paul, Rom. xi. 12).
From the union of Logos and Zoe were born Anthropos (man) and
Ecclesia (the Church). This is the primitive Ogdoad, the root and sub-
stance of all things. Synesius, it will be observed, is always returning
in the Hymns to this phrase, The Root.


Page 375, 1.11. Thou Male, Thou Female. St. Epiphanius cites a frag-
ment from one of the Valentinians in his work on the Heresies (xxxi,
cap.5) as follows: ‘In the beginning all things were contained as unknown
in Autopator, (the Father Himself), whom some call the Aeon, who is
exempt from age, who is always young, who is male and female, and
includes all things everywhere, without being contained in any of them.
In him was Ennoia (thought); this is the name that some give her, but
others call her by her own name, Charis (grace), because grace makes
part of the treasures of Greatness to those who were born to greatness ;


HYMN II 483


indeed those who make use of her real name call her Sige (silence) because
Greatness has made all things by conception and without a word.
Ennoia, the incorruptible female Aeon, desiring to break her chains,
seduced Greatness by the attraction of pleasure. Once united to him she
bore the Father. . . . By the will of Bythos, who contains everything,
Anthropos and Ecclesia, remembering the words of the Father, became
united and engendered the Dodecad. . . . Thereafter Logos and Zoe desir-
ing also to glorify Bythos, became united, that is to say had one will
in common, and by this union engendered the Decad, of which the male
Aeons Bythios, Ageratos, Autophyes, Monogenes, Akinetos, received
the names which they bear for the glory of that One Who contains all
things. The female Aeons, Mixis, Henosis, Syncrasis, Henotes, Hedone,
in like manner received their name from it for the glory of Sige.’

St. Irenaeus (I. iii. 1) remarks: ‘The Valentinians declare that the
things they tell concerning the Pleroma have not been clearly revealed,
because all men are not capable of understanding the Gnosis, but that
the Saviour indicated mysteriously in parables these things to those
capable of understanding their meaning. . .. (I. ili. 5) “This is what they
all say concerning the Pleroma’, he adds, ‘that they have imagined ;
they deflect from their obvious sense the most beautiful passages in
their attempt to render their ideas in them conformable to their
wretched invention.’

The union of Bythos and Ennoia reminds one somewhat of a passage
in Philo, as Bouillet points out (vol. 1, p. 505): ‘The author of this uni- -
verse ought to be called the Father of His works. We will give the name
of Mother to supreme Wisdom. It is to her that God united Himself in a
mystic manner, to bring about the generation of all things; it is she who,
made fruitful by the divine germ, gave birth at the time foretold, and
with sore travail, to that one dearly-beloved son whom we call the
World.’ (Philo, De Ebrietate, 8, § 30.) As to the part that Christ played in
the conception of the Gnostics (for it must not be forgotten that they
claimed to be Christians and the true representatives of the Christian
faith), St. Irenaeus (I. 11.6) describes it as follows: ‘Full of thankfulness to
Propator, the Aeons with one accord placed in common whatever each
one of them possessed that was most beautiful and perfect, the star and
the goodly fruit of the Pleroma, in a word, Jesus, or the Saviour, to

28782 li


484 NOTES


Whom they give His patronymic names of Christ, the Word, and the All.
With Him were born in honour of the Aeons themselves, the angels, des-
tined to serve Him as attendants.’

Bouillet again remarks (vol. i, p. 510) that the Valentinians pre-
tended that their doctrine about Jesus was indicated in various passages
in St. Paul. ‘In ipso habitat omnis plenitudo divinitatis corporaliter.’
But the Valentinians cut out the last word from the text (Col. ii. 9).
He also quotes the Epistle to the Romans xi. 36, ‘Omnia ex ipso et in
ipsum omnia.’ St. Irenaeus and Tertullian also say with some reason
that, in the Gnostic system, Jesus is a sort of Pandora: ‘The myth
in fact of the birth of Jesus, and of the angels who accompany Him, is
very like the myth of Pandora in the sense in which the Neoplatonist
understood it. Plotinus, for instance, expresses himself in this way:
‘Prometheus having formed a woman, the other gods adorned her,
and hence she was called Pandora. ... This myth evidently indicates
the gifts that the world has received.’ (Emm. lib. IV, iii. 14.)

‘In the Gnostic myth’, continues Bouillet, ‘the intelligible gods are
the Aeons; the intelligences, which are the givers of souls, are the angels
who accompany Jesus, or, again according to St. Irenaeus, the lights
which surround Him.’ We may compare in this connexion the phrase
‘ plucking flowers of light to be hymns unto Thee’ (Hymn III. 138 ff.),
and in this Hymn (45 ff.) the passage ‘an ageless army of angels, now
looking upon Mind, plucks therefrom the principle of beauty’, which
last is very much like the conception of the Valentinians as presented
to us by St. Irenaeus.

This hymn may be compared with the Orphic verses quoted by the
pseudo-Aristotle, De Mundo, 401*», and translated by E. S. Forster:

Zeus of the flashing bolt was the first to be born and the latest,

Zeus is the head and the middle; of Zeus were all things created ;

Zeus is the stay of the earth and the stay of the star-spangled heaven ;

Zeus is male and female of sex, the bride everlasting.

De Mundo was probably written as late as the beginning of the second
century A.D.


485


HYMN III


Page 375, 1. 27. weaving a crown. Pindar, in the eighth Isthmian Ode,
68 (148), speaks of presenting to Cleander, the victor in the pancratium,
a crown of myrtle. In the same way Hippolytus in Euripides’ drama (73)
offers a crown to Artemis from ‘the undefiled meadows’.


Page 376, 1.5. that mighty witness, the sun. Here again is a touch of
Mithraism.

Page 376, 1.24. the demon of matter .. . soul-devouring hounds, &c. It is
very interesting to trace the different functions that Synesius assigns to
demons in his various works. The terrors that came from demonology
were ever present to the minds of the fourth and fifth centuries and after.
They passed into the conceptions of the Middle Ages, and we find them
in full force in Byzantium in the eleventh and fourteenth centuries, if
we turn to the works of Michael Psellus, or Nicephoras Gregoras, or of
Anna Comnena. In the Egyptian Tale we find a more ambitious and
lofty réle assigned to the demons (1228¢). They remind us of the Titans
in Hesiod (Theog., 392, 648, 668, &c.) who storm Olympus and fight with
the immortal gods. They display in the Egyptian Tale malice, cunning,
and resource. As in Hesiod they were finally imprisoned in Tartarus,
so here the demon of matter is represented as sinking beneath the earth,
cf. Theogony, 729 ff., where the poet says: ‘There by the counsel of
Zeus who drives the clouds the Titan gods are hidden under mystic
gloom, in a dank place where are the ends of the huge earth. And they
may not go out; for Poseidon fixed gates of bronze upon it. .. .’ (trans-
lation Evelyn White). All this is very like the view of the demons pre-
sented in the Essay on Dreams. The allusions to the demon or demons
of matter in the Hymns point rather to a vaguely destructive agency.
The prayers that Synesius is always sending up rest upon a haunting
fear of their power to do him harm, not merely to the soul but to the
body, a fear which was present to the Christian mind at this period, as
well as to the pagan. Both the neo-Platonists and the Christian writers
agreed in this point at all events, in their terror of the demons. We find
it in Proclus as well. Lang (Das Traumbuch des Synesius von Kyrene,


486 NOTES


p. 85) traces the influence of Porphyry (De Abs. ii. 40) upon Synesius
in the following quotation: ‘This and similar things they (the demons)
do to turn us away from the true knowledge of God, and to direct our
glance towards themselves. For they derive their pleasure from all
contradictory and unreasonable occurrences, and advantage from our
indecision, and in this way they hide themselves behind the masks
of the other gods. They approach the great mass of people and inflame
ambition in men. They suggest to them especially a love and longing for
riches, power, and fleshly gratification, and imbue them with love for
fame, from which arise insurrections, wars, and the like.’ Above all (13d.
42), hesays: ‘they wish to be gods, and to arouse the impression of being
the power which rules these, that is to say the highest god himself.’
Lang further remarks that this “wallowing in matter”’ as a charac-
teristic of the demons, may also be found in the commentaries on
the Chaldean Oracles. “The beasts of the earth’’ spoken of in the
Oracles are interpreted by Psellus (1140*) to mean the demons which
thus wallow on the earth. ‘These animals’, says Psellus, ‘exist in our
own life, which is full of passions, for they are present abundantly
in the passions, and their dwelling-place is that of matter, as is their
rank and degree. For this reason they are also subject to passions and
fettered to them... .’ Again in 1140c.: ‘the Oracles call them demons of
the earth because they have been thrown down from heaven and sprawl
upon the ground.’ It is certainly interesting in regard to the unity and
tradition of Greek sentiment to see how the same conception may be
traced from the days of Hesiod to the days of Synesius and Michael
Psellus, little disturbed practically by the waves of the Persian, Jewish,
and Christian religions that had come into contact with it.


Page 377,1. 11. Father of Thyself... Son of Thyself. Here Synesius
uses the phraseology dear to the Valentinians, who affirmed that there
exists on the unseen heights an eternal Aeon of all perfection, which
was pre-existent to everything. This they called Proarche, the first
principle, or as Synesius in this passage, Propator, i.e. the first father or
Bythos, the abyss. He is invisible and incomprehensible. The mytho-
logy of the Valentinians turned largely upon this invisibility and in-
comprehensibility of the Almighty.


HYMN III 487


Page 378,1. 29. starry intelligences. Plotinusattempted to take up some
of the ideas from Plato’s Tsmaeus regarding Mind, the rational soul, and
heavenly bodies (Enn. ii. 3. 9): ‘In the Timaeus, the creating God
bestows the essential of the Soul, but it is the divinities moving in the
kosmos (the stars) that infuse the powerful affections holding from
Necessity—our impulse and our desire, our sense of pleasure and of pain
—and that lower phase of the Soul in which such experiences originate.
By this statement our personality is bound up with the stars, whence
our Soul (as total of Principle and affections) takes shape; and we are
set under necessity at our very entrance into the world: our tempera-
ment will be of the stars’ ordering, and so, therefore, the actions which
derive from temperament, and all the experiences of a nature shaped to
impressions.

‘What, after all this, remains to stand for the ‘‘ We’?

‘The “We” is the actual resultant of a Being whose nature includes,
with certain sensibilities, the power of governing them. Cut off as we
are by the nature of the body, God has yet given us, in the midst of all
this evil, virtue the unconquerable, meaningless in a state of tranquil
safety, but everything where its absence would be peril of fall..... ;
(Stephen Mackenna, vol. ii, p. 167-8.)

Plotinus, according to Bouillet, doesnot admit, as one might be inclined
to think at first on reading this passage, that we actually receive our
souls from the stars. All that the soul receives from the stars is the
pneuma, that is to say the aerial or fiery body that it puts on before
descending to the world of sense. The ‘starry intelligences’ mentioned
by Synesius here seem to be the ‘divinities moving in the kosmos’
mentioned by Plotinus. These gods who add to the immortal principle
of the soul the passions of the irrational soul are, according to Synesius,
the protectors of man also.


Page 379, 1.19. All things bring to Thee ageless praise,&c. Here we
seem to have an echo from The Song of the Three Holy Children in the
Apocrypha.

Page 380, 1.17. from Thrace, where for three years I dwelt... near to the


king's palace. Synesius refers to this episode in the Essay on Dreams at
the end of chapter ix: ‘My life has been one of books and of the chase,


488 NOTES


except what time I spent as an ambassador. Would that I had not been
compelled to see those three unspeakable years of my life, &c.’

Page 380, 1.22. my couch was motstened with the dropping of tears.
Here Synesius seems to have the sixth Psalm in mind, v. 7: ‘I am
weary with my groaning; every night make I my bed to swim;
I water my couch with my tears.’

Page 380, 1.23. as many temples as were builded for Thy holy ceremontes,
O King,...I supplicated gods that labour, &c. Here is another curious
instance of the polytheistic tendencies of Synesius. The temples in
question it would not be easy to identify, but from his description of
them they seem to allude to tutelar divinities that protected Thrace
and Chalcedon. This passage is the more interesting, in view of the
syncretism that appears in so much of his writings, because here at
least one cannot explain the polytheistic note as a piece of imaginative
or poetical imagery. This appears to be a statement of something that
he actually did. So we might infer that at this period of his life he was
adopting more than aconventional form of paganism. On the other hand
the address to the emperor Arcadius reflects purely monotheistic con-
ceptions. It will be noticed at the same time that he speaks of the
temples in question as having been specially appointed by the One
God whom he is addressing in this Hymn, and whom he regards as
having inspired the minor gods in question.

Page 382,1. 4. Buta great wave has broken over me. Cf. Psalm xl.
8, ‘All Thy waves and Thy billows are gone over me.’


Page 383, 1. 15. to escape the destiny of the body. Villemain, as Druon
reminds us, p. 182, observed that there are many similarities between
the Méditations of Lamartine and the Hymns of Synesius. Druon
quotes several passages to this effect, from which I have selected one
which seems to echo the thoughts of line 706 et seq.:

Je te cherche partout, j’aspire a toi, je t’aime!
Mon Ame est un rayon de lumiére et d’amour,
Qui, du foyer divin détaché pour un jour,

De désirs dévorants loin de toi consumée,
Brile de remonter a sa source enflammée.


(Prem. Médit., ‘La Priére’.)


489


HYMN IV

Page 384, 1.23. I sing unto Thee... with silence. Sige (silence) was, as
we have seen, one of the principal personages in Valentinian theogony.
Here and there in these hymns, Synesius seems to emphasize silence,
as in Hymn III, 1. 82, ‘Let silence hold the caverns of the universe while
these sacred hymns are offered up.’ Whether he attaches the meaning
to Sige that was dear to the Valentinians is not clear.

Page 384, 1. 31. Mother, Sister,and Daughter to Thyself. This might seem
to refer to the Holy Virgin, although where she is mentioned in the other
hymns, as in Hymn V and Hymn VII, he uses a direct and unmistak-
able phrase, as ‘the sacred travail of a Bride’, or, ‘Offspring of the
Virgin, Jesus of Solyma’. ‘The Secret Root’, on the other hand, could
scarcely be taken to refer to Christ, for Synesius is always using
the expression ‘Root’ as an attribute of the Father. A few lines
above he addresses Him as ‘Root of Roots’, and again in this
passage he speaks of ‘a Shoot’, which might be taken to refer to ‘the
Root’ as its origin. It is impossible to reconcile these extraordinary
contradictions. Farther down, p. 385, I. 12, he speaks of the ‘Root of all
things that came after Thy illustrious Birth,’ presumably then after
the Nativity. ‘

If we could omit lines 12 f. (p. 383, 29, ‘Giver’ &c.), which after all
might be an interpolation, the sentence would be quite consistent. After
this passage he seems to go on addressing the Son, until we get to p. 386,
1. 4, where he speaks of a second great Luminary, or Sun, the perceptible
impression of Mind. If we take this to mean the Holy Ghost, as I suggest,
we can explain this Hymn as a Jaudation of the Christian Trinity. It
might, however, be explained in another way, and the continual allusions
tothesunand light andso forth might beregardedas touches of Mithraism.

Page 385, 1.9. This Word I hymn, in unison, Gc. This whole hymn
seems to be addressed tothe Holy Trinity. He begins in the first lines by
addressing the Father, and so continues, as for instance in line 60, where
he uses the expression ‘Unit of units, Father of fathers’, and so on to
line 87, where he addresses the Son: ‘I sing to the Offspring,’ and so on.
In line 98 he mentions for the first time the Holy Spirit, described as the
‘Centreof theCreator, Centre again of the Son’. The phrase which follows


490 NOTES


‘Mother, Sister, and Daughter ’, as I have just said, is somewhat obscure.
We now come to line 130 (p. 385, 9), where he speaks of ‘the Word’.
This passage again might be taken in several senses, according as we con-
ceive the metaphysical or theological basis of Synesius’ thought. The
text as it stands seems to place the ‘Word’ in opposition to Mind. As
the Greek reads, it is then the Word which has begotten (ce) ‘Thee,’
presumably the Son. It is also the Mind of the ineffable Father which
has effected this parturition, and continuing to speak of the same person
(the Son?), he addresses Him as the ‘Word of the Father’. All this
involves either a contradiction or an attempt to place the existence of
the Persons of the Godhead on a metaphysical plane.


Page 385, 1. 18. seven planets dance in harmony. He may be
alluding here to the conception of the planetary zone which is found
in Gnostic literature, each of these zones having a guardian divinity.
To allow the soul to pass by these without danger, the initiated in the
Gnostic mysteries were supplied with magical formulae and pass-words.


Page 385, l. 31 seq. and as many things as are deprived of all breath,
&c. Druon compares this passage with the following lines from
Lamartine:

Tout l’univers subsiste a l’ombre de sa main;
L’étre a flots éternels découlant de son sein,
Comme un fleuve nourri par cette source immense,
S’en échappe, et revient finir ou tout commence.
(Prem, Médit., ‘ Dieu’.)

It would be interesting to know whether Lamartine had ever read the
Hymns of Synesius. It is possible that Villemain, who was his con-
temporary, and like him had occupied important posts in the French
government, had called his attention to them.

If we return to the first lines of Hymn II, and compare them with
a passage selected by Druon from the Harmonies, ‘Encore un Hymne’,
the metrical form is quite strikingly alike:

Encore un hymne, 6 ma lyre,
Un hymne pour le Seigneur ;
Un hymne dans mon délire,
Un hymne dans mon bonheur.


491


HYMN V


Page 387, 1.22. The patriotic vein in Synesius, that always couples
Cyrene and Sparta, is present even here.


HYMN VI

Page 388, 1.22. Thou dividest the indivisible Spirit (pneuma) throughout
the earth. We have seen already, in commenting upon the Essay on
Dreams, how important a place the conception of the Pneuma occupied
in the philosophy of Synesius. He does not, however, seem to make
much play on it in the Hymns. Wolfram Lang, in his commentary
on the Essay on Dreams (Das Traumbuch des Synesius von Kyrene,
Tubingen, 1926), p. 57, makes the following remark on the part that
the term played in later Greek philosophy: ‘The idea of the Pneuma
is one of the most many-sided in the whole of Greek philosophy,
although it only began to play an important part when the climax
of Greek culture had already been passed. The Stoics considered
the Pneuma to be the material substance of the soul, and an emanation
of the all-penetrating divine power. In their view the soul of man was
an €vOeppov mveipa. The various powers of the soul were located in
Pneumata proper to each. Thus there was one that perceived, one that
represented, another that thought, and so on. . . . The sense in which
Synesius understands Pneuma is not this of the Stoics, or of Philo. ...
To the Greeks in pre-Christian days Pneuma meant the prophetic
substance which enters into man. To this conception the Delphic
Oracle had accustomed all Greeks. The Pneuma is a combination of
material and immaterial elements. It has, as Synesius explains in
140B, absorbed a part of the elements.’


HYMN VIII


Date of Hymn VIII. Druon considers that this Hymn was written in
the year 405 or 406; his reason for this is that Synesius speaks of only
having two children. Crawford (p. 505 n.) points out the fact that,
as the children are mentioned immediately after his sister, it is not
clear if they are not her children, although it is more natural to suppose
that they are his own. He goes on to say: ‘the second son does seem

2878.2 Kk


492 NOTES


to have been born about 405 or 406, and we have a shrewd suspicion
that the second and third were twins .. . if they were not twins, what
is there to show that the third was born before 408 or thereabouts?
Again, there is noclear evidence that the hymn may not have been written
after the death of one of the children. If there were twins, it seems almost
certain that the composition must be placed at a time when one of the
three boys had died, and consequently during our author’s episcopate.
In that case, one passage in the hymn would provide a strong argument
in favour of the theory that he retained his wife. . . .". Crawford points
to the fact that the hymn is entirely Christian in thought, and doubts,
for this reason, whether it could be placed as early as 405. Wilamo-
witz-Moellendorf, however, on the ground that the hymn was written
when Synesius had two sons, and consequently before the birth of the
third, considers that it was written long before he was made a bishop.
But he warns us in another place that, although a Christian of to-day
would scarcely recognize Synesius as a brother in the faith, the opposi-
tion between monotheism and polytheism was rather an inheritance of
the arrogance of the Jews, and was void of any meaning in the eyes
of the fourth century when applied to Christianity and Hellenism. In
Hymn III, where I pointed out the discrepancy in the prayers that
Synesius offered to the gods who watch over the lands of Thrace, &c.,
Wilamowitz is inclined to see temples to Christian saints rather than
to Hellenic deities.


P. 390, 1.15. the house of the sons of Hesychius. (‘Hovydav Sdpov.)
This precious reading has been recovered by Terzaghi. Hesychius was
the name of a dear friend of Synesius, to whom Letter 93 is addressed.
In his honour Synesius gave the name Hesychius to his eldest son
(cf. Letter 53, with my note).


HYMN IX


This hymn opens with a direct invocation to Christ, unmistakable
this time, as the offspring of the Holy Virgin. Druon supposes it to
have been written in the year 407 or 408, in other words shortly before
he was consecrated, if we agree with Druon in placing that event in the
year 410. It is replete with pagan imagery, although Christian in form.


HYMN IX 493


Wilamowitz-Moellendorf considers this one of the finest. ‘Hymn IX,’ he
says, ‘dealing with Christ’s descent to Hades, is more successful (than
Hymn VII). The description of his leading back to the Father the souls
He has delivered, and all the elements praising the victor who returns
to His kingdom, is not without grandeur; one must do justice to the
language which borrows so much from a foreign mythology, and the
syncretism of the philosophical ideas.’ He goes on tosuggest an interest-
ing comparison to the imagery of this Hymn in Correggio’s great paint-
ing of the Assumption of the Virgin in the Duomo of Parma, where the
central figure is borne up bycountlessangels. ‘Itis not difficult’, hecon-
tinues, ‘to find from an artist’s point of view, a sort of mood that would
respond to this sort of mingling of the clerical and the worldly, as also
of the Christian and the pagan. Is it too much to ask the same licence
for Synesius as for the painter? Is not this transcendental picture in the
province of real poetry, this in which he describes how the Son of God
descends to the material world, and how after His victory He wings His
way across the outmost spheres of the Cosmos into the transcendent, His
home; from the sea of light and from the harmonies of the spheres into
eternity, where there is neither time, motion, nor intercourse?’ This
hymn, says Wilamowitz, has been mutilated in most editions, and he
suggests a certain rearrangement of the lines (Die Hymnen des Proklos
und Synestos, Preussische Akademie der Wissenschaften, 14. Marz 1907,
Berlin). In Professor Terzaghi’s text six lines are introduced, lines 7-12
inclusive, which are not in Migne’s edition. Again, after the eighth line
in Migne he inserts a line (numbered by him 15); after the fourteenth
line in Migne, Terzaghihas inserted another, the twenty-second, accord-
ing to his numeration, and after the nineteenth line in Migne, he intro-
duces three more. This brings the total number of lines in the Hymn
to seventy-one.


Page 391, 1.10. hts hound, the devourer of man. It would almost seem
as if Synesius identified Cerberus with the demon of matter mentioned
in the fourth hymn, lines 245 ff., ‘the shameless hound of the nether
world, the demon of earth.’


INDEX OF PROPER NAMES


Achaean, Achaeans 123, 347 Assyrian 328

Achaemenides 264 (Astraea) 319 see Dike

Acharnae 243 Athene 246, 269, 343

Achilles 246, 265 tery, 266 tery, 267 tev, | Athenian, Athenians 132, 148, 170,
315, 348 243, 339, 343

Acropolis 268 Athens, 130, 131, 266

Adrastea 338, 356 Attic 261, 271

Aeacus 248 Ausurian, Ausurians 364, 365, 367


Aesculapius 256 bis, 259
Agamemnon 123, 246 bis, 273, 347. | Bacchi 161


Agesilaus 121, 132 Bacchic 161, 163, 251
Ajax 314 Bacchus 250 bts, see Dionysus
Alcaeus 358, (372) Barca 366
Alexander 263, 264 bis, 271 Bellerophon 243
Alexandria 365 Boeotian 319
Alexandrians 366 Branchidae 178
Aloeus 356 Byzantium 148
Ammon, see Hammon

Ampelus 366 Cadmus 169
Amus 164, 168 Calchas 327
(Anacreon) 372 Calliope 170
Andocides 268 Cambyses 260
Anthemius 363 Carinus 129 ter
Antonius 168 Carneades 148, 149
Anysius 360 bts, 361 ter, 363 Cerialis 364
Aphrodite 243, 246, 269 Chalcedonian 380
Apollo 157 bis, 178, 269 Chian 272
Apollonius 250 bis Chiron 260
Arabia 260 Christ 387, 392
Arbela 263 Cilicia 264
Archidamus 243 Cimmerians 138
Archilochus 258, 358 Cimon 358
Archimedes 243, 329 Clisthenes 271
Argives 262 Clitopho 176 bts
Aristides 154 Clytaemestra 273
Aristocles 148 bis Cnidus 148
Aristophanes 154 Cocytus 318
Aristotle 116, 148, 163, 272, 352 Corybantes 309
Aristoxenus 266 Cotys 272
Armenia 128 Crab 244
Artaxerxes 244 Crates 182

Asia 127, 132 bis, 148 Cratinus 182


Aspasia 151, 177 quater, 178 Creon 297


496


Cretan 343

Critias 176

Crixus 136 bis

Cybele 273

Cyrene rog bis, 367, 387
Cyrus 121, 244

Cythera 367 bis
Cytherea 391


Danube 127, 265

Darius r11

Dead Sea 153

Delphi 178, 280

Demeter 252

Dike 316, (319), 320 bis, see Astraea

Dio (Chrysostom) 148 ff., 178 bis,
243 ff.

Diogenes 152, 250

Dionysiac 151, see Bacchic

Dionysius 144

Dionysus 250, 319, see Bacchus

Diphilus 182

Dorian 248, 306, 367, 372, 390


Egypt 253, 260, 263, 281 ff., 367

Egyptian, Egyptians 115 bis, 164 f.,
253, 256 ter, 259f., 275 ff., 365

Eleusis 252

Elysium 318

Epaminondas 132 bis

Epicurus 243

Epidaurus 256

Epimetheus 383

Essenes 153

Euboea 152

Euboeans 136, 243

Eudoxus 148 f.

Euphorbus 246

Euphrates 127

Europe 127


Gaul 136
Getae 127
Giants 307, 318
Glaucon 176
Gorgon 268
Graces 246, 293
Greece 132, 263


INDEX OF PROPER NAMES


Greek, Greeks 121, 148, 152, 154’
156, 159, 162 bis, 163, 165 bss, 170,
245, 246 bts, 256 bis, 263 ter, 264,
267, 271, 273, 314 ler, 319, 323 1f.,
348 f£., 365 bis


Hades 336, 389

Hammon 343

Hector 246, 267 bis, 268 ter

Hephaestus 265

Hera 159, 246, 269 bis

Heracles 244, 338, 367 bis

Heraclidae 264

Heraclitus 336

Hermes 115, 168, 291

Herodotus 137, 260f.

Hesiod r1o, 368

Hesperus 391

Hestia 176

Hesychius 390

Hippias 176

Homer 122f., 126, 137, 139, 141,
178, 245f., 254f., 260, 267 ter,
268 quater, 269 tery, 270 bis, 314,
327, 338, 343, 347 bts, 358

Horus 296, 308

Hydra 244


Iberian 343

Icarus 170

Ilian 268

Ilium 268, see Troy
Iolaus 244

Ion 268

Iphicrates 130
Italy 148
Ithyphalli 272
Ixion 159


Jerusalem, see Solyma
Jesus 389, 392


Lacedaemonian, Lacedaemonians
127, 139, I41, 245, 262, 263 ter,
267, 270, see Sparta

Lagos 264

Lemnos 148, 355

Leo of Byzantium 148


INDEX OF PROPER NAMES


Leontopolis 370

Lesbian 372

Lethaean 337

Leto 269

Libya 376, 379

Libyan, Libyans 276, 282, 284, 365,
381

Loxias 330

Lysias 176f.


Macedonian, Macedonians 125, 138,
263, 264 ler

Magus 389

Marcomani 364

Massagetae 127

Medes 125, 138, 260

Median 346

Megarian 261

Melampus 353

Menelaus 159, 246, 268

Messenians 139

Miltiades 357

Mnesarchus 178

Molione 244

Molossian 280

Moses 370

Muse, Muses 156, 157 quater, 158 f.,
171 tery, 178, 293, 331

Museum 250

Musonius 150


Myrmidon 348


Necessity 353, 382
Nile 282


Odysseus 244, 246, 258, 347
Olympia 358
Osiris 276 ff.


Palestine 193

Palestinians 138

Panathenaic 266

Parmenides 169, 266

Parthian Parthians 125, 127, 128
bis, 276

Parysatis 244

Patroclus 314

Peiromis 281 bis


497

Peleus 246, 260, 266, 267 bis

Pelion 260

Penelope 347

Pentapolis 363 ter, 365, 366 ter, 367 f.

Pericles 130, 151, 178

Peripatetic 148

Persian, Persians 264 quater, 265

Persuasion 293

Phaedrus 176 fey, 177

Pharus 158

Phemonoe 353

Pherecydes 272

Phidias 254

Phileas 268

Philemon 182

Philostratus 148 f., 151, (355)

Phoenician 328

Phrygian 248

Pindar 261, 347 bts

Plato 116, 122, 131, 134, 146, 149,
151, 154, 166, 168, 249 bts, 266
273, 326

Pompey 136

Priam 271

Prodicus 175

Prometheus 346

Protagoras 176 bis

Proteus 158 f.

Prusa 156

Psammitichus 260

Ptolemais 367

Ptolemy 264

Pythagoras 178, 179 bis, 180, 324

Pythian 342

Pytho 330, 343


Roman, Romans 124, 126 #ey, 128-
31, 133, 135 ter, 136 quater, 137
bis, 138 bis, 139, 179, 363 bts, 364 f.


Samos 178, 324

Scythian, Scythians 134, 136 éer,
137f., 261 bis, 300 bis, 301, 302,
311 ter, 312 quater, 313 bts, 314,
315, 316 fey, 317, 357

Servile Way 136

Sicilian 329, 346

(Sicily 144)


498


Silenus 250, 251 fer

Simon the Cobbler 176

Socrates 151f., 168f., 175, 176
septiens, 177 quater, 178, 250, 251,
bis, 266 ter, 267

Sodom 153

Solyma 389, 391 bis

Sophroniscus 251

Sparta 132, 387, see Lacedaemonian

Spartacus 136 bis

Sphinx 115, 291

Stesichorus 359

Stoa 151


Tantalus 134
Tarquins 130
Taurus 275

Teian 372

Telephus 297
Tempe 153 f., 260
Testament, New 370
Testament, Old 369
Thalelaeus 368
Thebes 282, 310f., 314, 316
Themis 135, 276
Themistocles 330
Therapeutae 263
Thermopylae 263
Thessaly 356


INDEX OF PROPER NAMES


Thetis 246, 265, 269
Thrace 380 bis
Thracian 364
Thrasymachus 176, 246
Thucydides 151
Thyrea 262 bis
Timaeus 353
Timarchus 271

Titan, Titans 318, 387
Trojans 246, 265

Troy 243, 315 see Ilium
Typho 276 ff.


Unnigardae 360, 361 quater, 363,
364 bts, 365


Vestal Virgins 158
Virgin, the 390, 391 bis


Xanthippe 176
Xenophon 132
Xerxes 152 bis


Zeno 151, 169, 266

Zeus 120, 159, 171 bis, 176, 178, 246,
250, 252, 254, 255 ler, 269 quin-
quiens, 270, 321, 327 ler, 338, 343,


353
Zoroaster 168


PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS, OXFORD
BY JOHN JOHNSON, PRINTER TO THE UNIVERSITY
