TABAiaT-I-NASIRl

Exclusittely Di^liibuletl bji

MUNSHUAM MANOHARLAL

ORIENTAL rUlUfHERS. A ROOKSELLERl
54, RANI JHANSl ROAD, NEW DELHI-S3
Sales-ttunler : 4416, NAI SARAK, DELHI-6

TABAig\T-I -NASIRI:

A GENERAL HISTORY

OF THE

MUHAMMADAN DYNASTIES OF ASIA,
INCLUDING HINDUSTAN;
from A.H. 194 (810 A.D.) to A.H. 658 (1260 A.D.)
and the

Irruption of the Infidel Mughals into Islam

by

MAULANA, MINHAJ-UD-DIN, ABU-’UMAR-I-’USMAN

Translated from Original Persian Manuscripts
by

MAJOR H. G. RAVERTY
VOL. I

ORIENTAL REPRINT

1

1

1

1

Oriental Books Reprint Corporation

Book Publishers, 54 Rani Jbansi Road, .bfew Delhi-55

Reprinted February 1970

FIRST PUBLISHED 1811 IN THE
BIBLIOTHECA INDICA SERIES BV
ASIATIC SOCIETY OF BENGAL

Pas nsJ ,4 R Corporation,

Mr KL «nd prinUd by

Mr. K. L. Sachadeva at Skylark Printers, Idgah Road, New Delhi-k

PREFACE.

Iw 1865 I was led to read the printed text of the Taba^St-
i-Na^iri, published at Calcutta in 1864, in search of materials
towards a history of the Afghans and their country, which
is very much mixed up with that of India.

Having gone through a great portion of it, and finding
it defective in many places, and full of errors, I thought it
advisable to examine the India Office Library MS., No.
1952, from which the printed text was said to have been
taken, went through the whole of that work, and found that
it also was defective, and contained numerous errors. I
found nothing, however, respecting the Afghans, except In
one place, and there they were briefly mentioned in a few
lines, but very characteristically.

I had already discovered, when in search of other mate¬
rials, what, lamentable errors the available Histories of
India, so called, in the English language contained, and I
now found how they had arisen. With a view of correct¬
ing them, I made a translation of those portions of the
Taba]^at-i-Na$ir! which related to India, and the History
of the Ghaznawl and Ghurt dynasties : and, when I offered
a translation to the Bengal Asiatic Society some twelve
years ago, my intention was, as stated in my letter on the
subject, merely to have made a fair copy of the translation
of those identical portions.

Soon after, I obtained a very old copy of the work; and,
on comparing it with the I. O. L. MS. No. 1952, I found
such considerable and important differences to exist, that
I determined to begin anew, and translate the whole work.

The Society having accepted my offer, and the defective

VJ PREFACE.

State of the printed text being well known, Mr. Arthur
Grote, to whom I am very greatly indebted for assistance
in many ways, advised that, in making this translation, I
should avail myself of any other copies of the text that
might be procurable in Europe. On instituting inquiry the
following were found, and have been already referred to in
my report to the Society, published in the “Proceedings ’*
for February, 1873, and have been used by me in my task.

I must here give a brief description of them, and notice
and number them according to their apparent age and
value, which arrangement, however, will bo somewhat
different from that in the notes to pages 68 and 77 of the
translated text

1. A AfS. belonging to the St Petersburg Imperial
Public Library.

This, probably, is the most ancient of the copies col¬
lated. It is not written in an elegant hand, by any
means, although plainly and correctly, but in the style in
which MullSs usually write* The da/s are marked with
diacritical points, and other letters are written in a peculiar
manner, denoting considerable antiquity. It is, however,
imperfect, and does not comprise much mcxe than half the
work.

2. The British Museum AfS. No. Add. 26, 189.

This copy is considered by Doctor Rieu, whose expe^
rience is sufficiently great, and authority undoubted, to be
a AfS. of the fourteenth century. It is clearly written and
correct, and has been of the utmost use to me. It wants a
few pages at the end, hence the date on which it was com¬
pleted, and by whom written, which generally are inserted
at the end, cannot be discovered.

3. The old AfS. in my possession.

To judge from the writing and paper, I should suppose
it to be alx>ut the same age as No. 2. It is clearly written,
but wants several pciges at the end, consequently, the date
of its completion likewise cannot be discovered. One
pretty good proof of its age, however, is that the whole, from
beginning to end, has been cut close to the illuminated
borders of each leaf, and inlaid on other paper, which also
appears to be of considerable age. Whoever did this
turned a number of leaves the wrong way, and misplaced

PREFACE.

vii

several pages> which took me some time to put in their
places again.

I imagine that there is very little difference, in point of
antiquity, between these three copies.

4. A AfS. belonging to the Imperial Academy of Sciences
at St. Petersburg.

This is a well and correctly written ATS., which has also
been of the greatest use to me in my work. It wants about
two leaves at the end, and, consequently, the date on which
it was copied does not appear. I should say, comparing it
with the others above described, that it is a MS. of
the sixteenth century, possibly, still earlier. It has an
unreadable name on the last leaf, with 1218 H. [1803 A.D.]
upon it.

5. The India Office Library MS., No. 1952.

This is also a plainly written copy, and, apparently, of
considerable age, nearly as old, possibly, as the three copies
first named, but it is incorrect in scores of places : one place
in particular, where three complete pages of the history of
Sul|an Mas’ud of Gh aznin occur in the middle of the ac¬
count of the Saljul^s. This is important, although an error,
because it shows us how many other copies have been taken
from it, or that it, and the other copies hereafter to be
named, were all copied from another, still earlier, MS.
imperfect in that identical place.

This MS. is, in all probability, that referred to by
Stewart, as belonging to Tipu’s library, and said to have
been “copied by the author himself.” The reason why
this, too, has been erroneously considered “ an autograph of
the authot^s" is simply this—whoever copied it, as in the
case of other copies, neither recorded his own name, nor the
place where, or date when, it was completed, and so it ter¬
minates in the author’s own words, hence some people have
run away with the idea—and it only sho^s upon what a
shadow they often found their theories—that the author
himself must have written it. It ends thus :—“ The book
of Al-Minhaj bin Saraj, the 5th of Rabi’-ul-Awwal—the
third month—in the year fifty and six hundred.” The eight,
which should have preceded the fifty, has been left out.
On the first leaf the following is written : “ The Taba^at-
i-Na9irl, in the city of ^j[aidar-abad, in the month of Rab!’-

tm

PREFACE.

ul-Awwal, I IS 7 H. f 1744 A.D.], was bought of the booksellen
in that place.”

6 and 7. Two MSS. in the Paris National Library.

These may be classed, at least the best of the two, with
the preceding MS.,iJo. 5# in point of date, and want of correct¬
ness ; and I believe that they are either copies of No. 5, or,
like it and two others—the Bodleian MS., and the Ro!
Asiatic Soc. MS.—copies of the same identical MS. They
all agree as to errors,* and they all end in the same way,
without the name of the scribe, the date, or place where
copied, with the single exception of the Bodleian copy,
which has the word “ eight” written over the words “ fifty
and six hundred.” For the reasons above-mentioned, both
Paris MSS .—not one only, I find—were fondly considered
•'autographs of the author's;” but M. H. Zotenberg, whose
opinion I asked, very justly says,«this is impossible, because
the two MS. are not in the same handwriting.” He, how-
evCT, adds, “ but to judge from the paper and the writing,
I-should suppose that they are both MSS. of the fifteenth
century. They were, both brought from India.” They
came from the Dakhan, in all probability.

8 and 9. The other copy of the text in the British
Museum, No. Add. 25,785, which Doctor Rieu considers
inay be of the sixteenth century, and another belonging to
the Imperial Academy of Sciences of St. Petersbui^. These
are, comparatively, modem copies, of the first half of the
seventeenth centuiy in all likelihood. They are plainly
written, but are neither of them very correct. The former
IS defective to the extent of seven or eight 8vo. pages at
the end, and the other also wants a few leaves. They are
neither of them of much value.

ColSgt" formerly in the Library of Haileybury

This is the most complete MS. of the text that I have
met wrth, although it is of comparatively recent date. It
IS written in a plain, but not elegant hand. It is generallv
correct, and closely agrees with Nos. 2, 3, and f- and I
have found it exceedingly useful. Indeed without it, and

PREFACE.

lx

Nos. 2, 3, and 4, I never could have completed my
task satisfactorily. In a few places it supplied what
was defective in two of the others. The date of copying
is not given, but, from its appearance, I should say it was
a MS. of the last half of the seventeenth century. After
the author's concluding words the following is written :—
“ The owner of this MS., in the port [Bandar] of Surat,
[is] the Hajl, Muhammad Sharif, son of Mulla Muhammad
Sharif, son of Mulla Muhammad Tahir after which follow
some words not quite intelligible, “ on the 8th of Sha'ban—
the eighth month —1113 H. [1701-1702, A.D.], was recorded.”
The two last words appear to refer rather to the date the
owner wrote his name, than to the date the MS. was com¬
pleted. It subsequently belonged to some Grandee of the
Mu gha l empire, from the titles given under the above
record, namely, “ The Mumtaz-ud-Daulah, Mufa khkh ar ul-
Mulk, Husam-i-Jang.” Who he was I am unable to say.

II. The copy of the text formerly belongihg to the late
Colonel G. W. Hamilton, C.B,, in the collection of the late
Earl of Crawfurd and Balcarres. This is, upon the whole^ the
worst copy I have collated, and contains very numerous
errors, although, in point of age, it may be older than Nos. 8,9,
and 10. It terminates abruptly at page 462 of the Printed
Text, and is thus defective to the extent of about twenty-
six pages, but it has the closing page, and when and where
written. Before I saw it, I was informed that it was a very
valuable copy, and that it had belonged to “ the Emperor
Shah Jahan, because his seal was stamped on the margin
of one of the pages.” On examination, I found that the
MS. was completed ** on Thursday, the 6th of Rajab—the
seventh month—of the year 1059 H. [July, 1649], in the
reign of the Second Sabib-i -Kiran, Abu-l-Muzaffar, Shihab-
ud-Din, MubS'mmad, Shah-i-Tahan. Badshah-i- Ghaz t, in
the city of Burhanpur [in Kandes], at the time when hosti¬
lities broke out between that monarch and Shah ’Abbas
the Second [the Safawi ruler of I-ran], respecting Kanda¬
har [the Kizil-bashis were then actually investing that
stronghold],” and that the copyist was the Khanah-zad-i-
Dargah [the born slave of the Court or Household], Mu’in-
ud-Din, Kh wajah-i-Tahan.the Jahan-giri,” [of the Household
of Jahangir Badghah], Shah-i-Tahan BadshSh’s father.

X

PREFACE.

Beneath this again is the name of a Maulawt, the son of
some ** Kha n.” partly obliterated, with the date 1255 H.
[1839 A.D.]. A seal underneath bears the date 1233 H.
[1818 A.D.]. The largest seal, supposed to be that of
Shah-i-Tahan Bads^ah, bears the following inscription :—
" Mu’in-ud-Din, Muhammad [the same person as referred
to above], ghulam-i-Shah-i-Tahan.'* with the figures 24,
referring to the year of that monarch’s reign, and the year
1061 H. [it began Dec. 14th, 1650, A.D.]. A smaller seal,
with an inscription—“ Ya Mu’in "—“ O Helper 1 ”—bears
date 1058 H. [1648 A.D.]. I could discover nothing to show
that the MS. had ever belonged to S^ah-i-Jahan Badshah.

12. The MS. belonging to the Royal Asiatic Society.
This, as previously mentioned, is a modern copy, of the
latter part of the seventeenth century possibly, and is
either a copy of No. 5, or copied from the same MS. that
that was copied from. It is pretty plainly but carelessly
written, in, by no means, a good hand ; but, like the others
referred to, is very defective, and the proper names of
persons and places are often without any points.

I have already noticed how incorrect the Printed Text
is. In the Preface to it, Colonel W. N. Lees, LL.D., says ;

" When I commenced the work, we had three copies, one
belonging to the Ro. Asiastic Soc., one in the India House
Library, and one belonging to the High Priest of the Pdrsfs
at Bombay. A little while afterwards. Colonel Hamilton,
in reply to a circular of the Society, forwarded a copy from
Dehli. These MSS. are all apparently good old copies,
and are written in very different hands. It was supposed,
then, that we had four distinct copies to collate ; but, before
long, it became apparent that the four had been copied
from two MSS.,* so, in reality, we had only two. . . . The
Society had issued hundreds of circulars to all parts of
India, and had failed to draw out more than two copies;
and the fact, that the four old copies I had had been copied

* In tlm case, if the Ro. As. Soc’s MS. is a copy of the India 0 £Sce MS.,
the Hamilton MS., and the High Priest’s, must be copies one of the other, or
copies from another MS.

Sir Henry Elliot mentions that he found one in the Royal Library at
Lakhn£o, but most of the MSS. in that collection were, I believe, destroyed
during the rebellion M 1857.

PREFACE.

xi

from two MSS., seemed to indicate so clearly the great
scarcity of MSS. of this work, that I decided to go on.”

From these remarks its defectiveness is not to be won¬
dered at, but, at the same time, as I have shown in my
notes, there are numerous errors in it which are not to be
found in these MSS., and a little historical and geographi¬
cal discrimination on the part of the editors might have
corrected many of them.

The time and labour required for simply translating a
book, especially if but one or two copies be used for colla¬
tion, is not very great; and this translation could have been
accomplished in a tithe of the time I have devoted to it.
But, as this History is one of the four most important
works with respect to the early rulers of India, and that
part of Central Asia upon which all eyes have been lately
turned, and are likely to be turned in the future, I thought
it advisable not to spare any pains on it, although it has
occupied some years longer than I anticipated. I have
collated nine copies of the text word for word ; and all
doubtful passages have been collated for me from the other
three. Although this has occupied a great deal of time,
and entailed much labour, a still greater amount of both has
been expended on the notes, which 1 deemed necessary to
illustrate our author’s often brief, sometimes erroneous, but
generally valuable, statements, to point out the errors which
he has sometimes fallen into, and to point out some of the
legion of lamentable mistakes, and misleading statements,
contained in compilations purporting to be *' Histories of
India,” “ Histories of Afghdnistdn from the Earliest Times,”
and similar Histories of other Eastern states and peoples ;
and to show the exact value of the compilations, turned
out by the yard by raw hands, for the Public of the news¬
papers and reviews, and the general reader.

These errors in Indiail History are solely attributable to
the miscalled translations of the comparatively modem
chronicle,' known as the Tarikh-i-Eirishtah by Dow and
Briggs, the first of whom could not possibly have under¬
stood the words of the writer in scores, of places, and in
such cases appears to have recorded his own ideas instead
of the author’s statements. Firisfetah’s work, too, is not
difficult, and the style is simple ; and it is one of a few books

xii

PREFACE.

well adapted for the Lower Standard of Examination in
the Persian language. Firishtah’s materials were chiefly
taken from the TabaVat-i-Akbart, also known as the
Tabaipat-i-Akbar Shahi. of the ghwajah, Ni*am-ud-Dtn,
Ahmad, who obtained his materials, up to the reign of
Ghiyag-ud-Dtn, Balban, from the work of our author ; and
not a single event is recorded in Firigljtah that is not
recorded in the Tabalfat-i-Akbari. This will be quite clear
to any one who will take the trouble to compare them.
Firishtah, indeed, follows it so closely that, not only are the
poetical quotations appropriated, but the errors also, as I
have pointed out in my notes, have been faithfully copied
by the Dakhani author ; where the one errs the other is
sure to follow.*

The English version of Briggs, " the admirable version,"
as a writer, who did not know the contents of Firishtah,
calls it, is clearly based upon Dow’s, with very slight altera¬
tions, and they are chiefly of a verbal kind. I should be
sorry to be unjust to any author, but I submit that, where
great, misleading, and glaring, historical errors, are as clear
as the light of day, it is a duty towards the public, and in
the interests of science, that they should be pointed out,
even at the risk of hurting the susceptibilities ” of the
authors of them or their friends, especially when such per¬
nicious compilations as I have referred to, under the name
of history, continue to be used in our colleges and schools,
without the nature of them being known in its true light.
The writers of them have much to answer for, but those
who have adopted them in our public institutions a vast deal
more. See, for example, note *, page 312, and note, page

323-

One of the most glaring of the misstatements I refer to is
that wherein the Turk sovereigns of Gha znln. as well as
the Tajztk rulers of Ghur, are turned into “ Pathdns ”
or “ Afghdns,” which words are synonymous, and " Pa¬
thdns ” or “Afghdns” into Turks and Tajztk Ghurls.
Dow, in the first place, is to blame for this, but Briggs
blindly followed him * I say this advisedly. The proof is

* A few examples of which may be seen in Note *, page 441; and *, page
653 ; last para, of Note •, page 665 ; •, page 697; and page 711.

* Examples of this will be found in Notes *, page 204 ; *, page 312 ; *,

PRBPACE.

xiH

easy from any MS. of Firightah’s work, but with MSS.
alone we need not rest content. We have only to compare
Briggs’s version with that lithographed edition printed at
Bombay, to which Briggs put his name as editor and
reviser, to prove my words.

Det us, for example, take any passage in Briggs’ account
of the GhurtSf or the history of the Turkish slave Sultans
of Dibit—those, .say, referred to at page 508 of this work
—and in the Persian text which, according to the title-
page, had the benefit of his editing and revision, not one
word will be found respecting tlteir being AfgAdns, as con*
tained in his ** admirable translation : ” all comes from
Dow.

If this Translation of the TabakAt-i-NAsirI, the
original of which was published just six hundred and twenty-
one years ago, and the notes accompanying it, disperse
to the winds this error-bubble alone, 1 shall deem my time
not lost, and the labour of years not thrown away, because,
even since the publication of Sir H. Elliot’s extracts from
various Histories, which also showed how incorrect this
“Pathdn ” theory was, Turks, Tajslk Ghuris.Turkish Slaves,
Jats, Sayyids, and others, continue to figure under the ridi¬
culous name of “ Pathdn dynasties,” up to this present day.*

I have already remarked that our author has mentioned
the Afghans but once in his History, and that very briefly,
but, at the same time, most graphically [page 852], a body
of them being in the pay of the Ulugh Khan-i-A’sam.
The Afghans were by no means unfamiliar to our author,
and he certainly knew the GJiurts better than any other
author known to us, and he shows on that very page that
they were a totally different race. In his account of the
Sh^uisabanis of Ghur, and their dynasties, he simply stands
unrivalled, and also in his accounts of the first Mughal inva¬
sions of the territories between Hirat and Multan. The Af¬
ghans appear at this time to have begun to take service under
the Muhammadan feudatories of the western border pro¬
vinces of the Dihll kingdom. They may have been in the

page 320 ; note », para. 4, page 321; note •, page 404; page 431 ; note
», page 441 ; note *, page 514; and *, para. 5, page 794.

* See the “Journal of the Bengal Asiatic Society," Part I., No. II., pr.
1S80, page l&

xiv

PREFACE.

habit of taking such service previously, but to no great ex¬
tent I imagine, but, about this period, there was a particular
reason forit—the confusion and convulsions caused through¬
out the vast tracts of country which formed the kingdom
of the Ghaznawis and their subverters the Ghuns, styled
Afghanistan by Europeans chiefly, through the irruptions,
devastations, massacres, and final subversion of the Musal-
man rule by the hordes of infidel Mughals, by whom the
country of the Afghans was completely surrounded on the
north, south, and west, while the only territory still held by
a Musalman sovereign lay on the east—the Panj-ab—the
western part of which also subsequently fell under the
Mu gha l yoke. The limits of the true Afghanistan were pre¬
scribed by the mountains bounding the Kurma’h valley and
the territory of Kabul on the north, the Koh-i-Surkh on the
south, the territories of Ghaznin and I^andahar on the west,
and the Sulimani mountains or Koh-i-Siyah on the east.

It will be observed-that I have really commenced the
Translation from Section VII.; and from that point it em¬
braces the whole work. The first six, with the exception
of the History of the early kings of I-ran, are not of much
importance by reason of their brevity. The account of the
I-rant dynasties, which would require a volume to illustrate
them, I have treated as a separate work, which, ere long,
may see the light. To make the Translation in effect
complete, however, I have given an abstract of the first six
Sections.

The adulations addressed to, and constant prayers offered
up for, the Sultan to whom the author dedicated, and affer
whom he named, his History, have been omitted or greatly
reduced, and some of the introductions to the Sections
also, which are of a similar style, have been cut short, but,
in all other cases, I have not “compressed" the Trans¬
lation in the least degree; and I may say that I have
weighed every word and sentence, and have omitted
nothing, not even the poetical quotations, having only
rejected some of the longer portions when they have
been of no interest, not necessary to the text, or of no
particular merit. I have endeavoured to render the trans¬
lation as nearly as possible in the author’s own words,
without being slavishly literal. It is however sufficiently

PREFACH.

»r

literal to assist a student, and yet readable by the English
reader, though keeping much of a foreign complexion for
various reasons. It is possible that in so long a work,
published at intervals as completed, and not in a com*
plete form at once, slight inconsistencies in punctuation
and English (though not Persian, save through printers’
errors) orthography may be here and there observable.
Most English punctuation is haphazard, and left to the
compositors, who, apparently, sometimes use it to denote
breathing pauses; sometimes to help out the grammar.
One may point sentences very much or very little, but
whatever is done should be upon one system. Accordingly
here, for the most part, the minute plan of what may
seem to some over-much stopping is adopted, though not
always, but no such absurdity is allowed to appear as a
divorce of the verb from its subject by a single comma,
and other errors of that sort, which come of printers attend*
ing entirely to pause and forgetting grammar.

Scholars will understand that there may be much to be
said for more ways than one of spelling the same word in
such a language as English.

This book, the text and notes together, will be found to be
a very thesaurus of the most varied and often recondite his¬
torical material for the periods of which it treats, and many
time-honoured historical errors have been pointed out and
rectified. It wants but one thing to make it still more accept*
able to the Student, and that is an Index. The Reviewers
are tolerably sure to point this out for fear nobody else
should see it. So the Translator begs to say, once for all,
that he is too weary, and his time too valuable, to take
up any such work. Meanwhile, The Index Society will
have here a capital tough subject for their charitable
exertions.

Besides the standard Histories mentioned in note*,
page 869, the following, among which are many rare, cele¬
brated, and excellent, works, have been also used ; and some
of them have been extensively drawn upon. The majority,
but not all, have been mentioned in the notes taken from
them. From “the labours of” these authors “my prede¬
cessors ” I have derived the utmost “ assistance,” and
acknowledge it accordingly.

PREFACE.

*yl

Kitab-i-Yamini,
Kitab-i-Masalik-wa-Mama-

lik,

Tartkh-i-Abu-UFafl-i-Bai-

haki>

Zain-ul-Akhbar.
Ni'gam-ut-Tawarikh of the
Ka?t, Abu-Sa 1 d-i-’Abd¬
ullah of Bai^a,
Taj-ul-Ma’agir,
Kamil-ut-Tawarikh of the
Shaikh. Abu-l-Hasan-i-
’Ali.surnamed Ibn-ul-Agir,
Khulasat - ut - Tawarikb of
Sujan Rae,.
ghulayat-ul-Akhbar.
Mir’at-ul-’Alam,
Mir’at-i-Jahan-Numa,
Tarikh-i-Firuz-SMhi of Zi-
ya-ud-Din, Baranl,
Tlrlkh-i-Mubarak-Shahl.
Tarikh-i-Firuz-Shahi of
Shatns-i-Siraj.
Zaffar-Natnah,

T uzuk-i-Babari,
Tarikh-i-Rashtdi of the Mtr-
za, Muhammad Haidar,
the Doghlati Mughal,
Memoirs of Humayun Bad-
Shah by Bayaztd the Byat,
A’in-i-Akbart,

1 ' abakat-i-Akbari,
Muntakhab-ut-Tawarikh of
the Buda’uni,

Akbar Namah of Faift the
Sarhind},

Tazkirat-ul-Abrar of the
Akhund, Darwezah,
Makhzan-i-Afghanl.
Tarikh-i'Sh^-Wahan, the
Ludl,

Z ubdat-ut-T awartkh.
Raufat-ut-Tahiiln,

Sair - ul - Bilad — a Persian
Translation of the AgSr-
ul-Bilad,

Bahr-ul-Asrar,

Tuhfat-ul-Kiram,

Chachh Namah,
Tarlkh-us-Sind of Mir Ma-
’sOm, the Bakhart,
Tarikh-i'Haft-Iklim.

Ikbal Namah-i-Jah 5 n-glil,
Ma’adan - i - Akhbar- i- Ah-
madt,

Tazkirat-ul-Muluk of YahyS
Khan.

Jami*-ut-Tawarlkh of Fakir
Muhammad,

Tarlkh-i-Rajahahe JammQ,
History of Gauf or Lakhan-
awatl of Shlam Paish^t
and a few others.

The following Pu^to or Afghan Chronicles have also
been used :—The History of the Kha shl sept of the Afghan
nation, and their conquests beyond the river of Kabul, by
Khwaiu. the Matlzl; the Tar}kh"i*Nisbat-i*Afaghinah, by
the Shaikh . ’Abd-ur-Razzak, Matlzl; and the Tartkh-i'
Murassa’ by Muhammad Af^al Sh&tak.

I cannot close these remarks without tendering my
sincere thanks to Doctor C. Rieu, Keeper of the Oriental

PREFACE.

XTU

Manuscripts of the British Museum, for his kind and
efficient assistance at all times, also to Professor Alois
Sprenger of Wabem near Bern, and to Monsieur H. Zoten*
berg of the French National Library, who very kindly
collated numerous passages for me.

The system of transliteration, adopted in the following
pages, is that known as the system of Sir William Jones,
which, after some thirty years’ experience, the Translator
conceives to be the easiest, as well as the most natural, and
as easy of pronunciation [except, perhaps, the purely ’Arabic
gutturals] as the original letters of the ’Arabic alphabet.

The vo\yels are three short —a, i, u, equivalent to —

— and — ; and three long —a, i, u, equivalent to 1 — \s —j

All consonants, except the following, are pronounced
precisely the same as in English : — s, as ,in thing, or
lisped ^: K — eh. as ch in church ; ^ — h, strongly aspi¬
rated, which occurs only in purely ’Arabic words ; ^— kh.
as ch in loch, and as German ch; % — di pronounced by
applying the tip of the tongue inverted to the palate ; i —
2, as th in thine, by ’Arabs, dth; j — r» as r uttered by
striking the point of the tongue on the palate ; J —ja, as s
in pleasure, or soft French j \ — sh, as sh in shell \ — 9,

as ss in dissolve ; — ?, as dwd; 1» — t, as / with a slight

aspiration; U — 2, as English z with a slight aspiration;
^— ’, a deep guttural without any audible aspiration,
and, when initial to a word, the ’ is placed before its vowel,
as in ’All, and, when not initial, after its preceding vowel,
as in Ja’far and Rah’; ^ gh. a guttural sound like that
produced in gargling, or Northumbrian r, and something
similar to gk in ghost; ^ — ki another peculiar 'Arabic
sound, produced by pressing back the root of the tongue
to the throat, and partaking of the sound of k and q; >— h,
slightly aspirated; at the end of a word it is often un¬
aspirated. When e occurs at the end of a word preceded
by dy the former is almost quiescent. The only diphthongs
are ai and au.

From the above system the scholar can at once tell the
original letters in the names of persons and places. Unless
the peculiar letters are marked there is no knowing what
they are meant for. For example; if the equivalent of ^

a

xviii PREFACE.

is not marked, we cannot tell whether the original was ^ or
the two letters id’ and *; and if the roman equivalents^ of
Ci, and ^ are all rendered by simple " s,” how are we to
know which is the letter meant ?

As the work is rather more bulky than was anticipated
at the outset, and may be perhaps more convenient in two
volumes than in one, I have provided for binding it up into
two volumes by giving two separate title-pages, as it can
be conveniently divided at the commencement of Section
XXII., page 719.

Rock House,

Milverton, Somenet,

I 2 th January, 1881 A.D. lath $a&r, 1398 h.

MEMOIR OF THE AUTHOR.

Few materials exist for a notice of our author, and these
are chiefly furnished by himself.

The first mention he makes of his family is to the effect
that “ the Imam, *Abd-ul-Khalik. the Jurjant. having, in his
early manhood, dreamt a dream on three successive occa¬
sions, urging him to proceed to Qiaznin and seek a wife,
set out thither ; and, subsequently, obtained, in marriage,
one of the forty daughters of Suljan Ibrahim of Ghaznln.”
who was in the habit of bestowing his daughters, in mar¬
riage, upon reverend and pious Sayyids and ’Ulama, like
other Musalman rulers have continued to do, down to recent
times.

By this wife, *Abd-ul-Khalik had a son, whom he named
Ibrahim, after his maternal grandfather, the Sultan; and
he was our author’s great-grandfather. He was the father
of the Maulana, Minhaj-ud-Din, ’Ugman, who was the father
of the Maulana, Saraj-ud-Din, Muhammad—who is called
Ibrahim by some—who was known by the title of ’Ujubat-
uz-Zaman—The Wonder of the Age. He was the father
of the Maulana, Minhaj-ud-Din,* Abu-’Umar-i-’Ugman,the
author of the following History, who thence often brings in
his father’s and grandfather’s name, styling himself Minhaj-
i-Saraj-i-Minhaj, the two izafats being used to signify son
of in place of the Arabic bin.

Our author’s ancestors, on both sides, for several gene-
ration% appear to have been ecclesiastics of repute, and men

1 The title, Sarilj-ud.Dtn, means “ The Lamp, or the Luminary of the
Faith,” and Minh&j>ud-Dfn, “ The High-road, or the Way of the Faith." See
note *, page 1295.

XX

MEMOIR OF THE AUTHOR.

distinguished for learning. He states that he possessed,
among the misdl or diplomas granted to his maternal
ancestors by the Kha lifahs. one from the Kh alifah. Musta^l
B’illah, conferring the Kazi-ship of the fortress, or rather,
fortified town, of Tulak, described in the following pages,
together with that over the ]^uhistan, and the Jibal—
Highlands—of Hirat, upon his maternal grandfather, in
conformity with the diploma previously held by the latter’s
father before him. His paternal grandfather also received
an honorary dress from the same Pontiff; and our author
says that he himself possessed the diploma which was sent
along with it.

In the oldest copies of the text, and in several of the
more recent, our author almost invariably styles himself* the
Jurjani'——as I have from the outset rendered it ; but
those MSS. previously referred to, which appear to have
been copied from the same source as that from which
the I.O.L. MS, was taken, or from that copy itself, gene¬
rally have —Juzani—and sometimes Jurjani as above.

If the point of j — z—be left out, as is very liable to be
the case, like the points of other letters, by copyists, it is
but simple j — r. Words containing long u —•— are often
written with the short vowel zamntah or pe^ — ■’ —instead
of j — and hence, in some few copies, it is —^Jurjani,

while sometimes it is written both ways in the same AIS.

Since writing note^ at page 321, giving an account of
the Amir, Mas’ud’s inroad into the northern parts of Ghur.
when on his way from Ghaznin to Hirat, I have considered
that the word given by our author referred to the tract of
country described in that note as tiie Guzganan, or the
Guzgans, by Tajziks, but which 'Arabs, and people of ’Arab
descent, who use j — ^— for the Tajzik g — ^— turn into
Juzjanan, and that the word he uses in connexion with his
own name refers to one of the Guzgans, and that he should
be styled * the Guzgant' or ‘ Juzjani.’ As the most trust¬
worthy copies of the text, the best and most correctly
written, had Jurjani, I considered it necessary to follow
them as I had begun, and to mention the matter more in
detail here in the Memoir of the Author’s life.

Guzgan, as the native inhabitants styled it, or Juzjan,
is not the name of a single town, village, or fortress.

MEMOIR OF THE AUTHOR.

xxi

but one of the small districts or tracts of country among
the mountains, on the north-west frontier of the country
of Ghur, and north of Hirat, beyond the Murgh-Ab—the
Jibal of Hirst, as he himself styles it—but its exact posi¬
tion, and the localities of most of the great fortresses
mentioned by our author in the last Section of his
work, are at present unknown to us. The Guzganan,or
Guzgans were the appanage of the Amfr, Muhammad,
brother of Mas’ud; and it was from thence that he was
brought when he assumed the throne of Ghaznin after the
death of his father. Notwithstanding the details which our
author gives respecting the great fortresses of Ghur, Ghar-
jistan, and other parts, including the fortress of Tulak,
which appears to have been his own place of residence at
the time, and also the home of his maternal relatives (see
page 1066 and note®), which he helped to defend against
the Muglial invaders, and which must have been situated
in one of the Guzgans, he never once, throughout his whole
work, refers to Guzgan or Juzjan, except in connexion with
his own name. See also notes to pages 186 and 232.

After the Ghuris obtained possession of Labor in 582 H.,
and they had seized the Sultan.Khusrau Malik, the last of
the Sultans of Ghaznin. our author’s father was made Kazi
of the Ghtirian army stationed at Labor, under the Sipah-
Salar, ’Ali-i-Kar-maJch ; and twelve camels were assigned
him for the conveyance of the establishment of his office,
his tribunal, etc., on the line of march.

Our author was born after this, in the year 589 H., the
very year in which Dihli,of which, and of which Musalman
kingdom, he was subsequently to become the chief Kazi and
Sadr, was made the seat of the Musalman government in
Hindustan by the Turk Mamluk, IKutb-ud-Din, I-bak, who
was, in after-years, to become its first Muhammadan Sultan.
That our author was born at Labor, as the Daghistani, re¬
ferred to farther on, asserts, cannot be correct; for, from
what he himself states respecting his arrival at O chch ah in
624 H. [see pages 541 and 722], that was the first time he
set foot in Hind. Had he been born at Labor, he would,
doubtless, have mentioned it, and he would probably have
been styled and known as the Labor! in consequence.

The next mention he makes of his father is, that, when

nfl MEMOIR OF THE AUTHOR.

Sultan BahS-ud-Din, Sam, ruler of Bamian and Xukbaris-
tan, succeeded his fkther on the throne, he desired that
our author’s father, the Mauliina, Saraj-ud>Dln, Mufiam-
mad, should take up his residence in his kingdom, and
enter his service. With the sanction of his own sove¬
reign and patron, and BahiUud-Dln, Sam’s suzerain,
namely, the Sultan of Gh ur, Ghiyas-ud-Dln, Mufiammad-i-
Sam, the Maulana proceeded to the Court of Baha-ud-Din,
Sam, and was made Kazi of the kingdom of Bamian and
•jT nkhar istan. with the judicial administration over its
forces, was made censor, with full powers as regards eccle¬
siastical law, and intrusted with the charge of two colleges,
and their funds. This happened in 591 H., when our
author was in his third year. He states that the diploma
conferring these offices upon his father, in the handwriting
of the Wazlt of the Bamian state, was still contained in the
kJiarttah [a bag of embroidered silk for holding documents]
containing his own diplomas, his banner, and turban of
honour.

The mother of our author was the foster-sister and
school-mate of the Princess, Mah Malik, the daughter of
Suljtan Ghiyas-ud-Din. Muliammad-i-Sam, mention of
which lady will be found in several places in the follow¬
ing pages; and his mother appears to have continued in
her service after her marriage. Our author distinctly states
that his early years were passed in the Haram of the
Princess, until the period of his entering upon adolescence,
when, according to Musalman usages, he had to be sent
elsewhere. He speaks in terms of much gratitude of the
fostering kindness and protection he received while dwell¬
ing in that Princess’s household. Under these circum¬
stances, Labor can scarcely have been the place of his
birth.

When Sultan Takish, Kh warazm Shah, withdrew his
allegiance from the Kjialifah, Un-Na§ir-ud-Dtn-Ullah, and
the latter’s troops had been defeated by him, Ibn-ur-Rabbi’,
and lbn-ul-|^a{ib, on two different occasions, came as
envoys to the Courts of the Suljtans of Gh ur and Gha znin. to
demand aid from these monarchs against Sult;an Takish.
In consequence, the Imam, Shams-ud-Din. the Turk, and
the Maulana, Saraj-ud-Dln, Muhammad, the Taj^ik, our

MEMOIR OF THE AUTHOR.

author's father, were directed to proceed to Baghdad, to
the Sballfah’s Court, along vdth the envoys.* They set
out for Baghdad by way of Mukran ; and, in some affray
into which they fell on the road, they were attacked by a
band of robbers, and our author's father waakilled. Intima¬
tion of his death was received in a communication from the
l^llfah to the Sultan, ^iyag-ud-Dtn, Muhammad-i-Sam,
in these words: " Furthermore, Saraj-i-Minhaj perished in
an affray on the road. The Almighty recompense him 1 ”

Another of our author's relatives, his mother's brother's
son. was Ziya-ud-Dln, Muhammad, son of 'Abd-us-Sallam,
]^a?} of Tulak, who was left in command of the fortress of
Tabarhindah, with a force of 1200 Tulakts, by the Sultan,
Mu’izz-ud-DIn, Muhammad-i-SSm, when that Sultan was
about to retire from Hind before the hot season of 587 H.,
intending to return after it was over and relieve him. The
Ka^! of Tulak was to hold the place for seven months;
but, as the Sultan, just after this arrangement was made,
was defeated by Rae Pithori, and severely wounded in the
battle, and an expedition into Khurasan soon after inter¬
vened, he was totally unable to come to the Kami’s relief,
as agreed upon, in the following season, and, consequently,
after having held out over thirteen months, the ^a;}, ?iya-
ud-Din, Muhammad, had to capitulate.

At the time Sul$an Ghiyas-ud-Dln, Mahmud, son of
Ghiyas-ud-Din, Muhammad-i-Sam, was assassinated by
the Khwarazmt refugees, in Safar, 607 H,, our author was
dwelling at Ffruz-koh, and was then in his eighteenth
year.

In 61 1 H., the year preceding the surrender of his capital,
Ffruz-koh, b^ the last of the Sulfans of the Qhurf dynasty.

* He xras despatched on this mission by Gh iyas-ud-Dtn. Muhammad-i-
Sam, Sultan of Gh ur. the elder brother and suzerain of Mn’izz-ud-Din,
Muhammad, Sultan of Ghazntn, who, in a paper in the "youmai of tke
Asiatic Sociefy of Bengal,” Part I., No. I, for 1880, page 28, by Mr. C. R.
Stupnagel, is styled Mu'az-ud-din. The writer is at a loss to know why the
elder brother’s name appears on his younger brother’s coins, and informs us
that ** of Sultan Ghiis-ud-din scarcely anything is knovun.” 1 b^ to recom¬
mend him to study the twenty-three pages respecting him in the following
translation, and to refer to note *, page 472, and *, page 489. Here again
'* Mtias” is turned into “ the first Pathdn king of Dehll ! ” See also Part
I., No. II., page 84, of the “ yournal."

MEMOIR OF THE AUTHOR.

ndT

our author proceeded thither. Two years after we find
him in Sijistin, at Zaranj, the capital, where he remained
some time. At this period the whole of the territories
which had formed the empire of the Qhurls, including the
dominions of Ghaznln. and extending east of the Indus
into the upper part of the Sind-Sagar Do-abah of the
Panj-ab as far as the Jhilam, had fallen under the sway of
the Khwarazmis. These events must, in some way, have
been the cause of his sojourn in Sijistan for seven months,
but he is quite silent on the causes which led him there.
See page 195.

In 617 H., during the first inroad of the Mughals into
Ghur and Kh urasan, before the Qhingiz Khan himself
crossed the Oxus with his main army, our author was
living at Tulak ; and, shortly after, in the same year, took
part in the defence of that fortified town against the
invaders, who kept prowling about it for about eight
months. During a period of four years, from the above
mentioned year up to the close of 620 H., during which the
Mughals made several attempts upon it, he helped to
defend it.

In 618'H., the year in which he says the Chingiz Khan
crossed the Jihun into ^^urasan, and he was in his thir¬
tieth year, he married the daughter of a kinsman of his
own; and, in 620 H., he determined, as soon as circum¬
stances permitted, to leave his native country, and proceed
into Hindustan, not liking, apparently, to dwell in a coun¬
try overrun by the Mughal infidels. In 621 H. he was des¬
patched from Tulak, where he was then living, and in the
defence of which against the Mughals he had just taken
part, by Malik Taj-ud-Din, Hasan-i- Kh ar-post. to Isflzar,
after Khurasan had become clear of Mughals. and from
thence into the Kuhistan—the Chingiz Kha n had, at that
time, returned homewards—to endeavour to arrange for
the re-opening of the karwdn routes, which, during the
Mughal invasion, had been closed, and the traffic
suspended.

On a second occasion, in 622 H., he again proceeded
from Tulak into the Kuhistan for the same purpose, at
the request of Malik Rukn-ud-Din, Muhammad, son of
’Usman, the Maraghani, of Khaesar of Ghur, the father of

MEMOIR OF THE AUTHOR.

XXV

Malik S]|ams-ud>Dtn, Muhammad, the first of the Kurat
dynasty, as the Tajzik—not Afghan. I beg leave to say—
rulers of the fiefs of Hirat and Gh ur and their depen>
dencies, who were the vassals of the Mughals. were styled.
The following year he again set out on a journey into
the l^uhistan, on the part of Malik Rukn-ud-Din, Mu-
Jtiammad, that the k&rwdn route might be re-opened.
From Kh aesar he first went to Farah, and from thence
proceeded by way of Sijistan into the territory referred to,
and returned to Kha esar again.

In 623 H., our author, who appears to have left Tulak and
was residing at Kha esar. with the permission of Malik Rukn-
ud-Dln, Muhammad, went to Farah in order to purchase a
little silk required by him for his journey into Hindustan.
Having arrived in the neighbourhood of Farah, Malik Taj-
ud-Dln, Binal-Tigin, the Kh warazmi. who then ruled over
Sijistan, and was engaged in war with the Mulahidah of
the Kuhistan, induced him to undertake a journey into the
latter territory, to endeavour to bring about an accommo¬
dation between himself and the Mulahidah governor of that
part, the Muhtashim. Shams-ud-Din. Our author was
accompanied by the son of Malik Rukn-ud-Din, Mu¬
hammad, whose name is not mentioned,' but, in all pro¬
bability, it was the identical Shams-ud-Dtn. Muhammad,
the founder of the Kurat dynasty. Our author succeeded
in effecting an accommodation, but it does not appear to
have been on terms acceptable to Malik Taj-ud-Din, Binal-
Tigin, for he wished him to return to the Muhtashim’s pre¬
sence and declare war again. This he declined to do, as
he had several times put off his journey into Hind, and was
now desirous of departing without further delay, and before
the Mughals should again appear. Malik Taj-ud-Din,
Binal-Tigin, was wroth at this refusal, and shut him up
within the walls of the fortress of Safhed of Sijistan. There
he was detained for a period of forty-three days, but, Malik
Rukn-ud-Din, Muhammad, having interfered in his behalf,
he was set at liberty.

He did not allow the gra.ss to grow under his feet after
this ; and in the fifth month of the following year—^Jamadi-
ul-Awwal, 624 II., [in another pjace he says it was Rajab,
the seventh month, while in another place—page <612—he

xxvi

MEMOIR OF THE AUTHOR.

says it was in 625 H.], by way of ^Jjaznln and Bantan, he
reached P chch ah by boat; and, in the following 2 i-Hijjah,
Sultan Na^ir-ud-Din, IKaba-jah, ruler of CT chch ah and
Multan, placed him in charge of the Firuzl College at
O chch ah. and made him l^a^t of the forces of his son,
’Ala-ud-Din, Bahram Shah.

Our author could distinguish the winning side, and pre¬
ferred it; for, no sooner had Sultan Shams-ud-Din. I-yal-
timish, ruler of Dihli, Kaba-jah’s rival, appeared before
O chch ah. than he deserted Kaba-jah and the Firuz! Col¬
lege, and went over to his rival. Ih the first place, our
author presented himself before Malik Taj-ud-Din, Sanjar-i-
Gajz-lak Kh an, who was in command of the van of I-yal-
timish’s forces ; and, a few days after, I-yal-timish himself
having arrived, he waited on him. He was favourably
received, and was appointed to officiate, in his priestly
capacity, within that Sultan’s camp. After the fall of
O chch ah. he accompanied I-yal-timish to Dihli ; and
reached it in Ramazan, 625 H.

He subsequently accompanied the Sulftan, in his priestly
capacity, to Gwaliyur in 639 H. ; and, in the following year,
after that stronghold was taken possession of, was made
Kazf, Kh atib. and Imam of Gwaliyur and its dependencies,
under the governor, Rashid-ud-Din. ’All, In the early
part of Sultan Raziyyat’s reign he returned to Dihli, but
he was not removed from office, neither was he a “ for¬
given rebel ; ”* and, during his absence from Gwaliyur, his
Deputies acted for him. On reaching the capital, in 635 H.,
that sovereign added to his offices that of Superinten¬
dent of the Na§iriah College at Dihli.

In the year 639 H., in the reign of Sultan Mu’izz-ud-Din,
Bahram Shah, our author was made Chief Kazi of the Dihli
kingdom, and of the capital as well. In the disturbances
which arose between that Sultan and his Amirs, our
author, and other ecclesiastics, endeavoured to bring
about a peaceful accommodation, but without effect.
In Zi-Ka’dah of the same year, the Khwaiah. Muhazzab-
ud-Din, the Wazir, bribed a number of villains to murder
him ; and, after the conclusion of the Friday’s prayers, on

•• See page 1285, and Thomas’s “ PatlnUt Kings of Dehli,” page 105.

MEMOIR OF THE AUTHOR.

sxtU

the 7th of that month, they actually attacked him in the
Jami' Masjid, but he escap^ without hurt.

Soon alter, on the accession of Sultan ’Ala-ud-Din,
Mas’ud Shah, on the Kh wajah. Muhazzab-ud-Din, being
re-appointed Wazir, our author, in 640 H., resigned the
Chief ^azi-shlp, and in Rajab of that year left Dihll in
order to proceed into the territory of Lakhanawatl. There
he remained about two years, and there he acquired his
information respecting it and its rulers. While residing in
that country, he accompanied Malik Tughril-i-Tughan
TniS n in his expedition against the Rae of Jaj-Nagar,
and was present at the attack on the frontier post of
Kat^in, in Shawwal. 641 H. On the removal of that
Malik from the government of Lakhanawatl in 643 H., our
author accompanied him on his return to Dihll, and, in
Safar of that year, presented himself at Court. Muhazzab-
ud-Din had in the meantime been put to death by the
Amirs ; and, through the interest and efforts of his subse¬
quent munificent patron, Malik Ghiyas-ud-Dln. Balban
(afterwards Ulug]bi Khan-i-A*zam. and subsequently Sulpn
of Dihli), who held the office of Amir-i-Hajib, three days
after his return, he was put in charge of the Na$iriah
College once more, and entrusted with the administration
of its endowments, the lecture-ship of the Jami’ Masjid,
and the Kazi-ship of Gwaliyur, according to the previous
grant. Subsequently, in the same year, he accompanied
the army which advanced to the banks of the river
Blah for the relief of O chch ah when invested by the
Mughals.

In 644 H., at Jalhandar [in the Panj-ab], on the return of
the army, on the occasion of performing the services pre¬
scribed for the’Id-i-Azha in the hall of the College there, the
new Sultan, Na^ir-ud-Din, Mahmud Shah, to whom this
History is dedicated, presented our author with a cloak, a
turban, and a richly caparisoned horse. In 645 H., he wrote
a description, in verse, of the expedition against Talsandah,
entitled the “ Na^irl Namah.” The Sultan rewarded him
for this with a yearly stipend, and Malik Gliiyas-ud-Din,
Balban, the hero of the poenT, and commander of the ex¬
pedition, gave him the revenues of a village in the Hansl
province, which was that Malik’s fief at that period. In

xxviii

MEMOIR OF THE AUTHOR.

649 H., for the second time, the Chief ]^azt-ship of the Dihli
kingdom, with jurisdiction over the capital as well, was
conferred upon him ; but, when, two years after, in 65 1 H.,
the eunuch, ’Imad-ud-Din-i-Rayhan. succeeded in his con¬
spiracy for the removal from office of our author’s patron,
who had been raised to the title of Ulugh Kha n-i-A*zam in
647 H., and he was banished the Court, our author, like
others of the Ulug^ Kh an’s clients and supporters, was
removed from the office of Chief Kazt, and it was conferred
upon one of the Rayhani’s creatures^ notwithstanding our
author stood so high in the estimation of the weak and
puppet Sultan. In 652 H., matters improved a little : a
new Wazir succeeded; and, while in the Kol district, whither
our author appears to have accompanied the Sultan’s Court,
the title of Sadr-i-Jahan * was conferred upon him.

At the close of the following year the Rayhant was ousted
from office, the Ulugh Kh an-i-A’zam again assumed the
direction of affairs, and our author, who, for months past,
had been unable, for fear of his life, to leave his dwelling,
even to attend the Friday’s service in the Jami’ Masjid, was,
in Rabi’-ul-Awwal, 653 H., for the third time, made Chief
Kaz! of the Dihli kingdom, with jurisdiction over the
capital as before.

With the exception of his remark at page 715, in winding
up the events of the year 658 H., that if his life should be
spared—he was then in his seventieth year—and aptitude
should remain, whatever events might subsequently occur
would be recorded, our author henceforward disappears
from the scene, and we hear no more of him. At the end
of his account of the Ulugh Kh an-i-A’zam farther on, he
does not renew that promise, nor does he do so when finally
closing his History. The munificent rewards he received
on presenting copies of his work to the Sultan and to the
latter’s father-in-law, the Ulugh Kh an-i-A’zam. are men¬
tioned at page 1294. He refers to his family casually,
now and then, in the following pages, but, with a single ex¬
ception, enters into no particulars whatever. At page 820
he says, with reference to the Malik-ul-Hujjab [Head of
the Chamberlains],’Ala-ud-Din, the Zinjani, that he is “his
son, and the light of his eyes but he could not have been
* See page 698, and note •.

MEMOIR OF THE AUTHOfe.

his son from the fact of his being styled “ the Zinjani,” that
is to say, a native of Zinjan in Khurasan. He may have
been his son-in-law, or an adopted son.

When the emissaries from Khurasan were received by
the Sultan, Na§ir-ud-D!n, Mahmud Shah, as related at
page 857, our author composed a poem befitting the occa¬
sion, and this, he says, was read before the throne by one
of his sons. He also, in one place, refers to a brother.

Between the time when our author closes this History in
658 H., and the Ulugh Khan-i-A’zam succeeded to the
throne of Dihli under the title of Sultan Ghiyas-ud-Din.
in 664 H. —the date generally accepted, although Fagih-t
says it was in 662 H. —is a period of about six years ; and,
as no other writer that we know of Has recorded the events
of that period, it is a complete blank in Indian History,
which, I fear, cannot be filled up. Ziya-ud-Din, Barani, in
his Tarikh-i-Firuz-Shahi. which is not much to be depended
on, says he takes up the relation of events from the time
our author left off, but this is not correct, for he begins
with the reign of Sultan Ghiya§-ud-Din, Balban.

Our author died in his reign, but when cannot be dis¬
covered, neither can the place of his burial. Possibly some
inscription may hereafter turn up which may tell us, but
there is no record available in any of the works I have
waded through in search of the information. Whether his
health failed him ; whether he grew out of favour with his
old patron, the new Sultan ; or whether circumstances
arose which, as regards the Ulugh Kh an’s conduct towards
the weak-minded, but amiable, Sultan, Nagir-ud-Din, Mah¬
mud ^ah, would not bear the light of day—for there are
vague statements of foul play on the part of the Ulugh
Kh an, but no proofs—who shall say ? Some writers state
that the Suljtan died a natural death, which is most pro¬
bable, and some further add that he, having neither off¬
spring nor heir, nominated his father-in-law, the Ulugh
Kh an-i-A*zam. his successor, which was but natural, seeing
that, for nearly twenty years, he had virtually ruled the
state. That the Ulugh Kha n-i-A*zam poisoned him ap¬
pears unworthy of credence, since, had he desired to sup¬
plant him, or get rid of him, he might have effected cither
object years before. See note*, page 716.

MEMOIR OF THE AUTHOR.

The only mention I can find, after much search, respect¬
ing these years, between the closing of our author’s History
and the accession of the new Suftan, is the following from
Fasih- 1 > “Sultan Na§ir-ud-Din, Maihmud Shah, died in
this year, 662 H., and great anarchy and disorder arose
throughout the territory of Hindustan. At last, since
among the great Amirs of Hind, for prudence, counsel,
wisdom, munificence, dignity, magnificence, and power, the
Amir, Ghivas-ud-Din [the Ulugh Khan-i-A*zam 1 was pre¬
eminently distinguished,and as he hati obtained his freedom
previously—a matter never alluded to by our author—he,
with the unanimous accord of the great nobles and gran¬
dees of the kingdom, ascended the throne of Dihli in the
beginning of this year, 662 H.”

The Daghistani, previously referred to, in his Tazkirah,
under the letter y- — s — has the following :—Saraj-ud-
Din-i-Minhaj is the author of the Taba^fat-i-Na§iri, which
he completed in the name of the Malik of Hind, Na$ir-ud-
Din. His birthplace was Labor, and his origin was from
Samr-Jpand.”

This last sentence of the Dag^istant’s is sufficient to
show that he is not entirely to be depended upon, in this
instance at least. Our author’s family was not from Samr-
Vand. The Daghistan! also gives the following as a
quatrain of our author’s :—

“ That heart which, through separation, thou madest sad ;

From every joy that was, which thou madest bare of;

From thy disposition I am aware that, suddenly and unexpectedly.

The rumour may arise that thou hast broken it.”

In the “ Akhbar-ul-A khy ar **—a Biographical Collection
of Notices of Saints—of ’Abd-ul-Haj^lf: [he died 1052 H.
= 1642 A.D.], the following will be found respecting our
author:—“The Shaikh, ^a;! Minhaj, the Jurjant, the
author of the Tabakat-i-Na$irt, was a saint, and one of the
most learned and excellent of his time, and one of those
who would become filled with religious ecstasies on hearing
the singing at Zikrs or Tazkirs. When he became H^azI of
Hindustan that office assumed int^rity and rectitude. The
Sl|aikb> Nizam-ud-DJn,* states :—“ I used, every Monday,

* This, probably, is nu other than the celebrated saint of Dibit.

MEMOIR OF THE AUTHOR.

yxiti

to go to his Tazkirs, until, one day, when I was present at
one of them, he delivered this quatrain

' The lip, in the ruby lips of heart<ravishers delighting,

And to ruffle the dishevelled tresses essaying,

To>day is delightful, but to-morrow it is not—

To make one's self like as straw, fuel for the fire.’

“‘When I heard this verse,’ says the Shaikh, Nigam-ud-
Dln, ‘ I became as one beside myself; and it was some time
before I came to my senses again.’ ”

Our author appears to have been deeply imbued with
the tenets of Sufi-ism, for a brief essay on which, see the
Introduction to my “ Poetry of the Afghans.” Professor
Sprenger tells me that he was a notorious Suft. A good
account of these Zikrs, or Tagkirs, will be found in the
notes to the Third Chapter of Lane’s “Thousand and One
Nights.”

Before closing this brief memoir of our author, it will be
necessary to mention the reasons which led him to write
this History. These he gives in the Preface dedicating the
work to the Sultan, Na§ir*ud-Din, Mahmud Shzdi, and this
divested of much of its fulsome adulation and redundant
expressions, may well appear as the Preface to this
translation of his Histoty.

THE AUTHOR’S PREFACE • AND
DEDICATION.

In the name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate!

Thus sayeth Abu-’Umar-i-’Usman, son of Muhammad-
al-Minhaj-al-Jurjani, that, when, through the blessing of
Almighty God, the diadem and throne of the dominion of
Hindustan became graced by [encircling] the blessed head,
and adorned by [being pressed by] the august foot of that
Lord of the World, Na§ir-ud-Dunya wa ud-Din, Abu-1-
Muzaffar-i-Mahmud Shah, son of the Sultan, I-yal-timisli
—May his reign long continue I—and the khutbah and
coin became embellished with his titles and his name, and,
during the reign of which august sovereign, the justice-seat
of the Kazi-ship of the empire of Hindustan was con¬
signed to this loyal servant, on a certain occasion, in the
tribunal of law and justice, a book came under his obser¬
vation which the learned and worthy of former times had
compiled '^ for the edification of the select and distinguished
of posterity. This had been taken from the annals of the
Prophct.s and Khalifahs—On whom be peace I—together
with their genealogies, and tho histories of the reigns of
great Maliks [kings] of bygone times—The splendour of
the Almighty illumine their tombs !—and had been written
down in tabulated forms, and abbreviated after the manner

' This Preface varies in some copies, particularly at the commencement,,
to the extent of a page or more.

® I do not find any trace in the Preface to cither ol the copies collated, of the
“ tabular chronicle compiled by the Imam Mohammad Ali Abu 1 -Kdsim
Imadi, in the time of Nasir ol-di'n Soboktikin,” mentioned by Col. Lees,
LL.D., in the English Preface to the Calcutta Printed Text, nor is it to be

found in its Persian Preface. I'he words are ^.kJL JibI

tif The Imam’s “ T.arikh-i-Majdfil ” is mentioned in Section XL

THE AUTHOR’S PREFACE AND DEDICATION.

xxxiii

of an epitome, in the time of the Sultans of the dynasty
of Na§ir-ud-Din, Sabuk-Tigm—The Almighty guard their
last resting-place!—from every flower-garden a flower ;
from every sea a drop, they had brought together [in this
book]. After mentioning the Prophets, and giving their
genealogies, and that of the Kh alifahs of the Bani-Um-
miyah and Bani-Abbas, the Maliks of ’Ajam, and the
Akasirah, they rested content with an account of the
family of the aUgust Sultan, Mahmud-i-Sabuk-Tigin-i-
Ghazi—On whom be peace!—and'abstained from any
mention of other great Maliks, or the dynasties or annals
of the Sultans of the past.

This frail one desired, therefore, that this meagre History
should be filled up from first to last, from beginning to end,
with an account of the whole of the Maliks and Sultans of
Islam, both of ’Arab and of ’Ajam, and that a candle out
of every dynasty should be enkindled in this assembly,
and that, to the head of every race, a cap might be stitched,
by the relation of events and occurrences and illustrious
actions. Therefore, an account is recorded here, of the
Tubba-yawa’ of Yaman, and the Himyar Maliks ; and,
after mention of the Khalifahs. an account of the Tahiris,
SuflTaris, Samanis, the dynasty of Buwiah, the Salju^s, Ru-
mis, Sh ansabanis.and the Sultans of that family who were
sovereigns of Ghur, Gh aznin. and Hind, the Khwarazm-
Shahis, the Kurd Maliks who are Sultans of ^am,
and the Mu’izziah Maliks and Sultans, who became
Badshahs on the thrones of Gh aznin and of Hind, up to
the present time, which is the reign of the heir to the
diadem and throne of the dominions of the I-yal-timishi
dynasty and house,

Sultan-ul-Mu’azzam, Sultan-us-Salatin P'l-l-’Alamln,
NASIR-UD-DUNYA WA-UD-DIN.
abU-l’muzaffar-i-mahmOd ^hah,

Yamin-i-Klialifah U’llah, Kasim-i-Amir-ul-Muminin
—Khuld U’llah Saltanatahu !*

» Signifying, The Supreme SuUan, The Sultan of the Sultans of the World.
The Defender of the World and of the Faith, The Victorious (or^ Accustomed
to Conquer), Mahmud Shah, The Right Hand of God’s Khaliffth. The Co-
Sharer with the Lord of the Faithful—The Almighty penjetiiate his Reign ! .

b

xixiv THE AUTHOR'S PREFACE AND DEDICATION.

and this History is reduced to writing, and adorned with
his august titles and name,' and is entitled the

Tabakat-i-NAsirI.

It is his implicit hope, through the perfect grace of the

Shall be honoured by the blessed sight of this Badshah
he Asylum of the World, it may meet with the felicity of
h.s approbation • and that from the zenith of the firL-
ment of benefaction, and the summit of the sphere of
favoui, a ray of the royal grace may shine upon this
rail one and, after his removal from this temporary

® invocation endure
and, should they become cognizant of any error or omis¬
sion, may they veil it with the skirt of the robe of for¬
giveness, since whatever was to be found in trustworthy
chronicles is herein recorded. ^

ofNislra-ddtnwouJd induce the belief that

ottha, S.Itin,.nd thefactl. pLrft h

ej,«.l.tot, pntye, foe the eo.tL.™. of h?, “J ",

the same work, in a foot-note we are

Sultin (may God prolong his rcicni •’ f ‘

wofk [the notice of Ulugh Khan—the’ text at^ * ***'

referred to] was written in the reign of Balban ^ Translation U

the"r!:3,Tth“t'ei.“Lt';:i* 'i'* ^

/eeefe that thi* worh was neUher ‘ ritS[ m"/ ‘""d’t'ffttf

at. neitner ritten, nor appeared, in Balban’s reign.

ADDITIONAL NOTES AND EMENDATIONS.

There is some disadvantage in publishing an extensive History of this
kind in parts after each portion is completed, because any extra information
obtained during the progress of the work cannot be inserted in its proper place.
To remedy this, as much as possible, I have embodied here such further infor.
mation in the form of Additional Notes and Emendations.

Page 34.—Further research shows that Arg or Ark—^ 1 —is an error of the
copyists for Ck — eljl—the j having been mistaken for j as suggested in
note •. The word is correctly given in the last Section. See pages 1120, •
1124, and note, page 1122, para. 5. It was a celebrated fortress of Sijistan,
and was still an importapt place when Amfr Timur took it.

Page 36.—“ Sanjaris,” in note *, taken from Fa;ib-t is an error for Sijizts
or Sigizts, that is to say Sijistants or Sigistanis. See note •, page 34. This
error is frequently made by oriental authors as well as scribes.

Page 52, note •.—Alt the copies of the text are wrong with respect to this
word, and have e) for J Oz-^and of Turkistan is meant, not Urgpnj the
capital of Khwarazm. See note page 1097.

Page 68, line 5.—There is no doubt whatever as to the meaning of the text
here respecting Sabuk-Tigin's nickname ; ahd that one man could possibly be
nicknamed " black troop'' or “ black uproar is very improbable. See note
page 852, and Elliot’s India, vol. viii., pagexiL, where,, if not "gkaugkd,"
there is, at least, "giubar-angezi." I have not followed the printed text in
this 'translation, because it is very incorrect as well defective.

The Turk Amir-ul-Umara of Baghdad, who was accidentally killed by
some Kurds in' 329 H., bore the name of Buj-kum as written with the

voy'el points, which is the same word as I supposed that applied to Sabuk-
Tigtn to be from the way it was written in one copy of the text, which
Turkish word pieans, in the Tajzik language, ghajz*^ao [jliji]. See the
last para, of note *, and the Bodleian copy of the Kitab-ul-Kamil of ’Izz-ud-
Dtn-i-Ibn-ul-Agtr, under the year 329 H. It is therefore quite clear that Ju|[
[notljluVlJjk), which is the same word less the vowel point of left out by
the copyists : a similar name occurs at page 477], entitled Sabuk*Tigin, was,
by his 'Turkish comrades, nicknamed “the ^Tara Buj-kum,” the Tajjfk trans¬
lation of which is “the Siyah Ghajz-Ghao.” which is the KutSs of Mtrza
^aidar, the Doghlatl Mughal, who gives a description of that immense and
formidable animal. The English translation thereof is “The Black Wild
Yak,” tiyak here signifying furious as well as black, and the Turkish iard
will bear the same construction. See note at page 922, and at 948, para. 2.

Page 77, note *, para. i.—There is no doubt whatever as to the point of
junction of the rivers of Nur and ?Iirat at Darunthah, now a well-known place.
The words in the original are k>\J j but the printer has carelessly let

ADDITIONAL NOTES AND EMENDATIONS.

xlvi

the drop out after the type was set up, and the proof passed for press. 1
have described the Darah of Nur, as well as Darunthah, in my “ Notes on
Afghanistan,” page 108, and there they will be found. Mr. Dowson nj)-
pears to have forgotten what is contiuned in his second vol., page 465. Sec
also vol. L page 394, which is certainly amusing.

Page 95.—The fortress of Gtrt here mentioned, I believe, refers to the
fortress of Gibar Kot in Bajawr. See “ Notes on Afgl^hiistan,*’ page 117.

The word "Tahkrt” in para. 5 should be “Tigh^rt.”

Page 101.—The singular of the word murgidn which I have

rendered "carrier pigeons,” "signifies a bird absoluiely" and

not a fowl only, as Mr. Dowson imagined; and as fonvU do not carry news,
and carrier pigeons are referred to by the same word as is here used in note *,
page 1280, para. 4, I had no hesitation in adopting the rendering I have.
Another proof that carrier pigeons were meant is the fact that otu day was not
sufficient to convey the news from Gh asntn to the fortress of Baz>Glirind, after¬
wards known as Kushk-i-SultAn. for that was at Firuz-Koh, a distance of about
240 miles as the crow flies, and a very difficult tract of country to traverse.

Pages 104, 105.—There is an error here respecting our author’s ancestors,
caused by some confusion in most copies of the text, which have "great-great¬
grandfather,” whereas, from his statements elsewhere, his third ancestor, or
great-grandfather is meant. It should stand " great-grandfather ” at page 104,
and "That princess bore him a son, whom he named Ibrahtm, and he was
the father of the Maulana, MinhAj-iid-Dtn, ’Usman-i-lbriihim, upon whom be
the mercy of the Almighty ! The Maulanfi, Minhaj-ud-Dtn, was the father of
the MaulAnS, Sarij-ud-Dtn,” etc., etc.

Page 106.—The text is not j o'* —" chand barah wa ^a$bah”—as
Mr. Dowson imagined ; and even if it were, although hdrah means "walls,”
it does not mean "ofortification,” much less foi'tific.ations,” but the text has
tfi — /draJk —not "barah,” and no j—and the .signification, of the sentence,
in the idiom of the East, is as rendered in the Translation. The very same
word occurs at page 821—n* of the printed text—but that .Mr. Dowson
leaves untranslated. See also printed text, page ■‘•r and page 1294 of this
Translation.

Mr. Dowson (Elliot’s India, vol. viii., p. xi.) is very wroth with me about
my criticisms, to one of the errors in which work the alwve refers, and says
he has " noticed them, and examined them seriatim,” but this is a mistake,
and the " Cradle of Irik,” in note •, page 107, is one of very many bthers to
which, very wisely, he has not referred.

Page 107.—The words of the text are not sUIm j jc—'X 3

Dowson assumed, except in the printed text, in which, two xoords have been
left otU before jtr^X ^"<1 3 ^ redundant. The reason why Anuilan

assumed the throne in the Garmsir, instead of waiting until he reached
Ghazntn. the capital, is elsewhere explained.

I’age 112, note *, para. 2.—There seems to be an eiTor of ten years here.
The writer doubtless meant the year of the Rib'at, instead of the Ilijrat,
which would make a difference of ten years. Our author distinctly states, at
page III, that Bahram Sha h was succeeded by hi.s son, Kh usrau Shah, in
552 H. See note *, .and note *, page 347.

Page 115.—Our author has made a mistake here, or lather. his copyists for
him, of ten years, for, as rel.ated at pages 378, 457, and in other places, the
campai.gn against Sullan Shah in Khura-.an iH.cuned in 587 11. .Sec also
Appendix page li.

ADDITIONAL NOTES AND EMENDATIONS. xlvii

.T ^ "*“« of this Chief ore Amfr

ImJd-ud-Daulah, ^M-i-Ja^ar Beg. or Jagtart Beg,” son of Mflca’Il
[F^ih-I wn of TagharJ Beg], son of AbQ-Suitman, son of Salju^. The
word Mtk& 11 has been left out accidentally after Jaghar Beg.

IS 4 , line 6 irfter poetry.—The word ?ab 51 iV. writteit in the text jll^
jll^the I was made i by the’ copyists. For the
details r^p^lng it see page 900, and note ». ^:ara.Khita-t in the same
I^ragraph should be ¥ara-21itae, the latter word, or yara- mil ts, being
the proper name, the substantive, applied to the country, and the former,
e acljectivcp applied to the people, as correctly given a few lines under, and
farther on.

P^es 159, 160.— 5 izil is the more correct mode of writing this Turkish
word, signifying “ red,” and so it should be read in all eii se s.

P^e 162, note '.—The Nu-tn or Nu-yan. Taju, is the same leader as is
mentioned at page 1237, and is the Tanju of the Pro-Mughal writers. See
note at page 1191, line la

Pa^ 163. note », line 9—“ AbgJ^ » Hlin cannot be correct, for the period
mdicated was the mterregnum which occurred between the death of KyQk
* u 1 accession of Mangu ^a’an in 648 H. Ab-gfe, Ab-Va, AbS^

appears to be referred to here, and he ^y
succeeded his father in 661 h. See note at page 1287, para. 2.

Page 164, line 15. The Nu-tn, Aljakta, here mentioned, b the Aljaktde
or, more <»rrectly, Iljidae, Ildiikdae, or Ilchiklae, as it is variously y^itten,’
toe desolatpr of Hiidt. Much about the latter Sultans of Rum will be found
in nole,^ page 1261.

campaign^inst KhitS mentioned here refers to toe war
wito the Gur £h 3 n of ^ark-Khipe, mentioned at pages 261 and 934.

A Ststan." This refers, as previously mentioned, to Ok.

According to the Pro-Mughal writers, the investment took place in 627 h
but It wtu^ly commenced in 625 h., and terminated in 627 H., the plaa
having held out nineteen months. See page 1120.

Page 224 and note ■.—The chroniclers of the Crusades say that “it was
proposed that Joan of Sicily, sister of Richard Coeur de Lion, should be given
in mamage to Saphaddin,” as they write the title, Saif-ud-Dfn, “and that
Jenisalem should be yielded to the parties in this strange alliance.” The

Princess, however, refused to give her consent, and so the affair came to
nothing. —10

* 33 > line 6-—After Muhammad there should be an itdfitt namelv
• Muhammad-i-'Usman,” because ’Usman was his father. See pag^ iiqS.
Page 233, line 12, and note *.—$uharf is the same place as is referred to
at page 227, and again at page 237, where it is said to he in Turkistan

P^ea35, line 12 —This well-knownplace is called GuzarwSn, and j'uzarwan

by Arate, and people of ’Arab descent. Its correct name, aepoi dinp to the
pronunciation of the people inhabiting it, was Gujsarwan, as mentioned in the
note below. See note *, pages 257 and 258, and pages 376 and 475.

.. "T *•—’*'**®'* “ “ i‘ should be sixteen, not

eight years, for, from 551 h., os mentioned in the preceding note •, to
507 H-, IS a penod of sixteen years. *

IkSf Ahran or

Ilpto This was his Turkish name, and ^adr, which is ’Arabic— Kadr Kh5n

—his Musalman title only. Our author, to avoid confusion, ought to^ve
given both. **

xlYiil

ADDITIONAL NOTES AND EMENDATIONS.

Page 857, note *, line 7.—Shlhab was his first titles by which some ImUan
Muhammad writers, who knew not the fact of the change^ neariy, if not
always, incorrectly style him. His eider brother and sovereign assumed a
new title on ascending the throne, and a new one was also -assigned to Shibhb-
ud-Dtn, his brother. See page 370.

Page 260^ and note 7 , para. 5.—Eillfin cannot refer to the GQr
for his Ehitii-t name, which is very different, is given at page 928, and ^ultj
is again mentioned distinct from the Gur Kh Sn.

Page 263, note *.—The frontiers of Jimd are referred to here; and the
correct name of the territory referred to in the following para, is Sa(2]lnl^c, as
confirmed by other writers.

Page 267.—The Eh aii. son of Yiisu^ here mentioned, is the same

person as is referred to at page 1097, os son of Safaktan-i*Yamak. It
appears, therefore, that, in this instance also, Yusuf is his Musalman name,
and Safaktan his Turkish name. The Yighur, or I-ghur. here, mentioned,
and at page 270, is written .Sa^tar at page 960, which see, also note ‘ to
that page.

Page 267, note •, to “this very year ” should have been added “according
to some,” for, as given farther on, the first month of 617 it. was the year of
the Sultan’s flight. See note *, para. 2, page 972, and page 274.

Page 268, note •*, line 5.—^Takrit is an error of the writer from whose work
the extract w.as taken. It should be Makrft, a well-known tribe ; and lEfaia-
E^uram is an error, oflen made, for E^ra-]^um. These errors have been
rectified at page 1097.

Page 270, para. 3, line 6.—“Tingit.” The name of this country is written
Tingkut by the Pro-Mughal writers.

Page 270, and note —The Sayyid, Baha-ud-Din, is a totally different
person from the Badr-ud-Din of Guzidah, and Ahmad, the Khujandi. The
Sayyid was a man of high position and dignity, and is again referred to at
page 963, where the subject is more fully detailed.

Page 280, and note ®.—The movements of the Chingiz Kh iln and his sons
are given in greater detail at p.-rge 968. Tult was not sent into Khw.lrazm.
but, when the two eldest sons of the Chingiz Kh an began to quarrel at the
siege of Gurganj, or Organj, its capital, Uktae, the youngest of the three
there present, was directed to assume the chief command. See note at
page 1099, para. 2.

Page 288, note *, line 5.—Wamian or Bamian, and Walian, inentionerl
below, are neither of them correct. Our author, in the text .above, did not
give the name of the place, but he does so farther on. It should be Wiilishtiin
—Some careless copyist of an early copy, prob.ably, wiiting the
long, thus——left out the three points of the letter, and thus led
others who followed to read the word bjIJIj—W alian—omitting the MS.
form ofi.r>—which ^ is without the points, putting two points under instead of
over, and thus turning : into «—and causing great confusion and error.
Walislitan is the same place as is mentioned at i^age 319, but, in the same
way as in Guzgan and Guzganan, the singular form of the word, and also its
plural, as if there was more than one place or district so called. The same
mode of expression is used with regard to the Lartighan district, which is also
known as the Lamghanat or the Lamghans.

The Chingiz ^lan, moreover, was not investing Tae-Vfin, twenty miles east
from fundus, as mentioned in the fifth line from the bottom in the same note,
but Tal-kan, about three hundred miles west of l^undus, and much the same

ADDXTXONAL KOTBS AtfU

^•taaee firani t&e Panvfin Ptsi. Hid iiuiiaannirw«kenatinpedataB 4 «Kiniid
the Paa 2 itah>i>Nu’inSn, near by> It is a common enor for writtn to mistakO
7 Kl*kSn> which is in Sh<irfls 9 n, for X 3 e-|cln, which is in ToUliristibi; and
these erron are contained in the 'nrtkh.i-JahSn-Kua&Be, and other works
consulted by me, which led me to suppose that our author's statement at
page 290 might possibly be wrong, but he was perfectly correct, and the others
wrong. At page 1016, likewise, our author mentiobs Wali^htln as the iden¬
tical place invested by the Mughals which Sultan JaUU-ud-Din marched to
relieve, and there the details will be found.

Page 290, note —Tal-kan had fallen after a long siege, and befor* the
Chingiz Khan set out in pursuit of the Sultan. The writers, who mistake that
place for X^'Van, make the Chingiz l^ an move towards Chazntn by way of
Andar-ab, Bamtan, and Kabul, thus making the geography suit their state¬
ments. He reached Gh azntn by a much more direct route ; and such a place
as Bamian is not once referred to. See page 1016, and note *.

Page 318, line i.—“ Aytkln-abad.” From the way in which the first part
of this word is written elsewhere, and what is stated at pages 350 and 448,
and in note *, this might be more correctly written Ai-Ti^n-abad, and might
refer to Tigtn-abad, about which so much is said, but the site of which, unless
old Bnndahar stood on it—which I am sometimes inclined to think, because
the latter name b^ns to be mentioned when the other disappears—has been
altogether lost.

Page 319, line I.—“Tajtr-Koh.” This I believe to be the VaIrhjtr of
Baihakf, or in some way connected with it.

Page 319, line II.—It was not my MSS. which **enabltd” me "to comeet'*
the words "the fifth motintain is Faj Hanisir" in Elliot (see voL viii.,
p. xviii.), but the knowledge that faj is a common term for a defile or pass, in
the same way that I was aware what r 3 st 3 t meant, and that "the mouHtains
of FAsldt" was, and is, an impossible translation, whether “worthy of
consideration " or not. I was also aware that '* Sarha-sang '* was not a
proper name, as supposed, and rendered in Elliot, which Mr. Dowson wisely
passes over in his seriatim examination,” but two very simple, every¬
day words.

Page 341, note —See note at page 348, last para. BahrSm Sha h is said
to have died in 543 H., the year previous to Baha-ud-Dtn, S 3 m, the Ghurt.
but our author distmctly states at page in that Bahr 3 m Shah was succeeded
by his son nine years later, namely, in 552 11. The former date may refer to
the Rihlat.

Page 370, line 4 from the bottom.—The meaning usually assigned to Sar-1-
Jan-dar, as here given, is not correct, but, at page 603, I have mentioned its
correct signification. See also pages 410 and 447.

Page 378, line 8.—Ktlaf, or Ktlif, is probably the town on the Oxus of that
name, only, in our maps, it is placed on the farther (north) bank.

Page 379, note •.—See page 469, and Appendix A., page ii.

Page 391, note *.—As subsequently shown, Tghr 3 k was the name of a
Turk-m 3 n tribe, and the territory held by those people was sometimes called
after them. See pages 1015 and 1043.

Page 392, last line.—The 0 ig 3 n here mentioned may possibly refer to Urgun
of Ghaznin. See my “ Notes on AfghSnUtSn,” page 85.

Page 427, last para, of note *.—“R39if.” The name of this place is also
svritten Ar^uf——>» several histories, the first letter being placed second.

Page 429^ line 4, and note *. ~K 3 r is the name of a phace near Sahzwar,

C

ADDITIONAL NOTES AND EMENDATIONS.

bnt the Imtm was probably styled RSst, not os being a native of that place but
of Rai, the inhabitants of which are styled RSzt.

Page433.—The Becjia, referred to here, and in note •, also written BeghOn,
with the '*n ” nasal, is the name by which the ]^&ria)cs or Rgrinybs are also
known, an account of whom is given in the notice of the Aftfisiyibt rulers at
page 909. In JtfS., the letters^ and « are vety liable to be mistaken one for
the other, as the point of the latter is often omitted.

Page 435, line 13.—The Haz£r-DarakIltZn here mentioned is not that north¬
east of Qhaznin, but more to the west, on the way from that city towards
the Bamian district. There are several places so called.

Page 477, note *.—1 think it probable that all the errors that have been
written as to the gates of Qhaznin having been shut against the Sultui by his
most trusted slave, and his successor to the throne of Qhazntn, have arisen
from the act and name of the slave, mentioned in the text above, Ayyah, JuVl
(Sabuk-Tigin’s Turkish name was JuV. .See ante), who seized the bridle of the
.Sultan’s charger, and dragged him out of the fight. The "king of Multan ”
is no other than the Khokbar Rae.

Page 482, note, line 18 from bottom.—Amfr Muhammad, son of Abf ’Alt,
was the Sultan’s kinsman, and also son-in-law to the lute Sultan, Ghiyas.ud.
Din. He was entitled Ziya-ud-Din before he succeeded to the throne of
Firuz-koh after the death of his father-in-law, upon which he was styled
Sultan 'Ala-ud-Dtn.

Page 488, note *,—** The year 4 of his rule,” mentioned in the second para.,
cannot refer to his rule in Hind, because 589 H. was the year in which Dihll
was made the capital, as mentioned at page 469. LUior was acquired as early
as 582 H., but some say in 583 H.

Page 495, line 9.—It is probable that the name Aetktn would be more
correctly Ai-Tigtn, for both may be written as one word thus—and as
two

Page 499, note This requires a little explanation. The lower road did
not lead by the Dara’h of Karm&n, but the northern or higher routes did; one
leading by KohSt to Pe&Swar, and the other through Bannu. The route by
Kabul, and Nangrahar,or Nek-NihSr, or Nek-AnhSr, through the Kbai'Har ^aj
or defile, was rarely used at the period in question. The flourishing province
of Karndn, so called after the small Dara’h of that name, in those days was
of considerable extent, and vety populous. In after years, at the period of
Akbar BidshMi’s reign, it constituted the SarkSr of Bangaah, but its con¬
dition had greatly changed for the worse. The " lower toad ” into Hind was
by the Gnmul. See "Notes on Af^iiilnistAn,” etc., previously referred to.
Section Second.

Page 503, note •.—The JalSl-nd-Dtn, referred to in line 7, cannot, from the
date% refer to the gallant Sulfln <rf Shwkiazm, but to JaUl-ud-Din, ’Alt, son
of Sultan Babfi-ud-Dtn, Skm, fibOrt, of Bamtin. Sea page 493, and note at
P««e 5 * 7 -

_ P“g« 5 > 3 i *» last line, should be I-bak-i-Sbil, as repeated in the second

lipe over leaf, or the nickname would not be complete, for Irbak, alone, does
not convey the meaning ascribed to It, from the simple fact that at least half-a-
dozen I-baks are mentioned in this vork^ and the whole of them could not
have each had a fiactured finger.

P*8f 5 *S> ii*** s.—It must not be supposed from our author’s mode of
narrating events that Malik ^uftvud-Dfn set out from Lkhor for the presence
o( Sultan Mabmfid, the late Sultta's nephew. It is only bis wy of relating

ADDITIONAI. NOTES AND EMENDATIONS.

H

eye nt» whidi happened nibseqnently, before others which happened previontly.
Malik i^ntb-ud'Dtn had gone to join the late Sultfin in the expedition against
the Khokhars, as related at page 604, under the reign of I-yaUtimiah. and had
not left the Panj-ib. SultSn Mu’izz-ud-Din, Muhammad, was assassinated
on the 3rd of Sha’ban. the eighth month of 602 H., and Malik ]^utb-ud-Dtn,
according to our author, assumed sovereignty at Labor in 2 t-Ea’dah, which is
the eleventh month. But there is, I think, no doubt that the correct date of his
assuming sovereignty was 605 H., as stated at page 398, for it was only in that
year that he received his manumission from Sultan Mahmud; and it is very
certain that an unmanumitted slave could not assume sovereignty. It is very
possible, hotvever, that Sultan 'Ala-ud-Din, Muhammad, who had been made
Sult&n of Qh Or on the death of Sultan Gh ivas-ud-Din. Muhammad, may
have sent ^Cutb-ud-Dtn the investiture of Hindustan when Sultan Mu’izz-ud-
Dfn was assassinated, and before he was himself ousted by his rival, Mahmud,
to whom ^utb'Ud-Din, as statM at page 398, sent soliciting his manumission.
See also note to page 525, para. 2.

Page 529, note *.—It is barely possible that the words EIutb-ud-Dln*s
'* brother's son ”—jj 1 /»—may have been intended by Abu-l-Fa^l and
others, and that in some copies the word ulj may have been left out by the
scribes, but, whether Abu-l-Fa^l sa3fs so or not, it is clearly stated that Eatb-
ud-Dtn had son : still, on the other hand, we are not told that be had a
brother. An adopted son is by far the most probable.

Page 531, last line.—This word, like Ai-Tigin, may be, more correctly,
Ai-TtmOr, as no diacritical points are given in the text.

Page 539.—The IChalj. not “ Khilj,” are by no means “hypothetical,”
but a well-known tribe, as may be seen from these pages. See Elliot;,
vol. viii., p. xviii. There was no “army of KhllJ,’’ but a contingent from
the Shalj tribe served in the army of the Sultan of KhwHrazm. A Turk
tribe, or part of a tribe, all the males being armed, was a las^^kar in itself j
and who and what the Shalj were who sought refuge in Sind is explained in
the note. That these few formed “n// the forces of Khwirizm” is a blunder
pure and simple. What the forces of Khwarazm were composed of is men¬
tioned in many places in this work.

Page 551, text, para. 2.—Two or three copies of the Persian text have these
additional words at the beginning of the para. : "For one or two jfears, in Ms
wanner, he used,” etc.

Page SS3, note », line 7.—559 H. is a printer’s error for 590 K., as the
context plainly shows.

Page 562, note, last para., line 4, where “ Dtnja-pur ” occurs, is also a mere
press error, unobserved by the printer’s reader, for DIii 5 j-pur. It is correctly
given in the preceding note *, pages 558— 559 i Dinaj-pur should be read

in all places.

Page 567, line II.—“Nunfs” is incorrect : it is an error in the text of I
fori The Tunts are descritied farther on, page ii 57 - The Kar-battan of our
author may be Sbigatzc of the latest maps, or where gjiigatze now stands ; and
the great river in which the Musalnian troops perished is, doubtless, the Sanpo.
They must have penetrated to within a few marches of LhasA. Names of
places beoome changed in the course of six or seven centuries, especially when
old dynasties, one after the other, have been overturned, and others have
arisen.

Page 581.—See Elliot’s India, vol. viii., p. xx. The Editor, Mr.
Dowson, docs not see the least necessity for my criticism of the incorrect

C 2

lii

ADDITIONAL NOTES AND EMENDATIONS.

tnuulatioo of this sentence In vol. iL of that work, nnd sajra that the words
are (in the text) “Nin-i khurish -1 saftijr^ma," and that "bread for trarelling
food ” is its literal translation, explain^ in dictionaries as “ travelling
provisions," ahd adds that mine is a paraphrase, not a translation."

certainly means “journey," “ travelling,” etc., but " serfr" does not.
The printed text, which Mr. Dowson says he so implicitly followed, has the
words before the “ travelling food.” What has become of them in the
“literal translation"? The words for the food are not “nfin-i-khurish-i
safriyan.'i,”—there should be no iaafat after nda —but natt-fihf*rish~i-safaridnah,
nan-khurish l>eing a well-known compound word, signifying some dainty or
savoury morsel to eat along with bread, such as meat, fish, cheese, pickles,
or the like, and is equivalent to the ’Arabic word which word, as well os
nan-khuriah, he will probably find in his dictionary if he refers to it.

Page 582.—There is no necessity to “ venture upon any explanation of the
position ” of Basan-kof, as suggested by Mr. Dowson, because it is sufficiently
well known ; but, in Elliot, the proper name has been left out entirely.

Page 583, note *.—“To better his means.” The next page shows how he
bettered them. He came, as others still come from the very same parts, to
better his means, and the word in the Translation is correct as render^. He
was an eminent ecclesiastic and good preacher, and was, therefore, invited to
deliver “’a discourse ” before the pious and orthodox SultUn and his Court, os
I have translated the sentence, and as any one else would do who knew what
he was translating.

Mr. Dowson, however (vol. viii., p. xxi.), "cannot admit Major Kaverty't
improved rendering of thevtords," although he is himself "not satisfied with
the Munshi’s rendering in Elliot * 4 m nasne was mentioned at Court,* ” and
considers “ Having recited a eofniHtmorative {speech or ode) he came to Court,"
would be much better, or, he think«, “the author’s meaning would have been
more clearly rendered [mark the words] by He came to Court and delivered
an eulogistic speech."

In other places he can admit " preach,’’ “sermon,” and even “discourses,”
which is the same in signification as “ discourse” used by me.

At page 615 of this Translation, our author—himself a good preacher and
ecclesiastic of repute—says he was called upon, on first entering Hind, to
deliver discourses within the audience tent of Sultan I-yal-timisk when »h<ir
Sultan was investing O chch ah. The corresponding place in Elliot is page
326 of vol. ii., but the whole passage has been left out, and so we have no
“commemorative speech or ode," nor an “eulogistic speech.”

At page 619, our author relates, that, during the time the same SultSn was
investing Gwaliyur, he “ was commanded to deliver discourses at the private
pavilion of the Sultan that “three times in each week discourses were
fixed that “in Rama{ 4 n—the fast month—a discourse used to be delivered
daily and that “ nmety-five tiiaea congregations were convened at the entrance
of the Sultan’s pavilion.” The words of our author here, as elsewhere, I have
rendered literally ; and the printed Persian text agrees with the MSS. I u.<ied.
See also page 745.

fhe corresponding place in Elliot is page 379, and there it is stated that
the autho? “was ordered to preach in turns [sic, but not in the original] at the
door of the royal tent;” that "Discourses were appointed to be delivered
three times every week j” and winds up with “ Ninety-five times religious
assemblies were convened at the ro^al tent.”

At page 651, our author says “a discourse was delivered" by him in the

ADDITIONAL NOTES AND EMENDATIONS. UU

named Safed [White Castle], and the some word is again used two
lines under.

The corresponding place in Elliot is page 338, and it is rendered, "there
was a termoH in the Palace of the Whlte-rm^” and two lines under
** sermon ” is again used.

At page 656, our author again says, on the news of the Labor disaster, that
—and the rendering is literal—" to the writer of these lines the Sultan gave
command to deliver a tUseourte, and the people pledged their fealty [anew]
to the SultAn.*' In a note I say, '* Compare Elliot, voL iL, p. 340, for, at
that page, the corresponding passage of the text is thus rendered, “The
Sultdn assembled the people of the city at the White Palace [there is no
White.r-o^ hare], and the writer of this book received orders to preach and
induce the people to support the Sultin.* ” This too is literal possibly.

Again, at page 845, our author says—and the translation is literal—that he,
on the occasion of the invasion of Sind by the Mughal infidels, "by com¬
mand, delivered an exhortation with the object of stimulating to holy warfare,
and the merit of fighting against infidels,” etc.

The corresponding place in Elliot is page 379, which is there rendered "the
author received orders in the royal tent to compose an ode, to stir up the
feelings of the Muhammadans and to excite them to warlike fervour for the
defence of their religion and the throne.” This is certainly very far from
literal, even without the " ode. **

Which is the most probable, the delivery of an exhortation, lectuse, sermon,
or discourse, by an eminent preacher and one of the highest ecclesiastics in
the kingdom, on such an occasion, or " the composition of ossode" t and would
" odes ” be delivered three times a week, and " religious assemblies convened '*
ninety-five times to "compose” or listen to “odes” or " eulogistic speeches ” ?
The very idea of such a thing is absurd.

Now I must mention that in every instance here referred to in which I have
used "discourse "or " exhortation," the very same vuord is used in eve^ copy
of the Persian text, the printed text included, and that word is jpis and
it was ignorance of the correct signification of this simple word, the idiom of
the languitge, and the usages of the Musalmans, which has given rise to all
these blunders, and yet they must not be noticed I

There are several other instances in our author's work of the delivery of
discourses, lectures, or exhortations. At page 190 it is stated that his grand¬
father, an eminent ecclesiastic and preacher, was called upon to deliver a
disco$erse—jif^—before the ruler of Sijistan ; and the subject he chose for his
discourse or lecture was "on defiling emissions." Mr. Dowson "cannot
admit” my "improved rendering” of the word “discourse” for^,^ Does
he think the author^s meaning,’' in this instance, " roould have been, more dearly
rendered" by "'He came to Court and delivered a eulogistic speech ou defilii^
emissions,” or that he " composed an ode ” on the subject ?

Because, in the course of my work, I have had to point out such like errors
as these—but this last " is a gem of its kind”—Mr. Dowson, in the Preface
tovoL viii. of'Elliot's India, must call it “ hostile criticism and has been
so foolish as to dig up "the late Lord Strangford,” who, to suit certain
purposes, had the assurance to write a criticism on my Pu^to works, without
knowing a single word of the language, except " what he read up for the pur¬
poses,” in the course of a few days, as 1 was informed on undoubted authority.
I could say much more on this subject, but I will only remark here that the
writer’s object was not attained, and that I hope he possessed a more practical

liv ADDITIONAL NOTES AND EMENDATIONS.

knowledge on the other subjects upon which he is said to have written. Better
Mr. Dowson had admitted the errors, and eschewed “ghaughd.” It seenu
that a writer must shut his eyes upon, and conceal the most palpable errors In
Oriental history and geography for fear of ** hurting the susceptibilities of those
who made them," and must refrain from correcting them lest he be declared
"hostile”and “offensive." But I undertook this "Translation," and have
devoted years to it, to correct errors.

Page 587, note 4.—Mr. Dowson is not altogether disingenuous in his
"Examination” of my criticisms, and in this one, xxxiii. of his replies, he
would make it appear that 1 objected to his rendering of the words "territories
of Lakhnauti,” at page 319 of the volume referred to, but what I say is, that
there is nothing, even in the printed text, to warrant such a statement as "that
ydj-nagar ever formed part of the Lakkanauoati territory.” They were totally
different : one was a Muhammadan state, the other Hindu.

Page 600, note —Mr. Dowson appears to have assumed that, because herds
or droves of horses are mentioned in the same page with merchants, the latter
may be turned into " a dealer.” There is nothing in the original to show that
the merchants were horse-dealers, but the contrary ; and the herds of horses—
not " a drove,” for the plural form is used—evidently belonged to the Ilbart
tribe because the pastures are also mentioned. 1 contend that the bdtargdftdn
—here too the plural form is used—were not necessarily horse-dealers any
more than orr-dealers, r^-dealers, or any other dealers. The word bdzargdn
signifies a merchant, but, in the translation in Elliot, the words, "into the
pastures ” have been left out.

Mr. Dowson considers this last criticism "a gem of its kind;” and, at the
beginning of his "Examination” of my criticisms, says he has noticed and
examined them seriatim.” He is mistaken: a great many "gems" are
passed over unnoticed by him, and not with reference to the T^tbaVat-i-Nafirt
only ; for example, at pages 311, 557, 579, 580, 664, 686, 687, 853, 1023, and
several other places.

Page 623, and note *.—For the identification of Banian see my "Notes on
Afghanistan,” page 281.

Page 633, note ^—Further research has shown that this Turkish title
should be read Tai- sht. See reference to page 732 farther on.

Page 644, note para. 2.—Balka Shan is referred to at length at page
1283. The name of this monarch is generally written with "r” —Barka—as
our author writes it, but in Turkish words “ 1 " and “ r ” are often interchange¬
able. See page 617 and note *.

Page 645.—The Turkish name of Malik Ikhtiyar-ud-Dtn is sometimes
written ^ara-ICash, and sometimes ^ra-^ush, and l^ara-Kush, which last two
forms are the most correct ones, and signify, literally, "a large black bird,"
Vush or Vnsh signifying a bird in general, but the term Kara-yCish is the name
by which the Golden Eagle is known in Turkistan. Such names often occur,
as for examjilc E^tfa-SunVar, a species of black or dark falcon. Eara-lKush
was also the name of the celebrated engineer from Egypt, who built the citadel
of Al-I^ahirah, and had fortified Acre, and took part in its defence when
besieged by the Christians in 1189 A.D., which was considered “one of the
mightiest events of the middle ages.”

Page 677, note ®.—I have previously referred to the identification of Bantan.
Instead of “hilly tract west of” read “hilly tract west of the Jhilam,” etc.
The year 644 refers to the Ki^lat, which is equivalent to 654 H. The details
will be found at page 1201.

ADDITIONAL NOTES AND EMENDATIONS.

Page Jl 6 . — At the Uln^ Shin’s *<>»• Whose Turkish title was hnglirii
Shin, and hb MnsalrnSn title NSfir-ud-Dtn, MahmQd—and eTidently so
named after hb father's sovereign and son-in-law—married a daughter of
Sultin Nftsir-ud-Dtn, MahmQd Shlh, it b very evident that the idle tales
about the latter having only one wife must be incorrect He must have had
more than one, or a concubine at least, since the Bughrl Shin could not pos¬
sibly have married a dauj^ter of hb own sister, even though she b the only
wife mentioned. As thb daughter of the Sult&n had children by the Bughrl
Shin, and a son of hers, Kai-Subld, succeeded her father, Sultln Ghiias-
ud-Dtn, Balban, Sul^ln Nl;ir-ud-Dln, MahmQd Shlh, can scarcely be said to
have left no oflbpring or heir, unless she died shortly before her father, but
even then an heir survived.

Page 717, note para *. The Malik of KSbul is an error on the part of
the writer from whom thb extract was taken, or the scribe who copied
it possibly, for the Malik-i-KSmil, an account of whom b given at
page 1274.

Page 732, and note *.—^The title of Malik Nufrat-ud-Dln is, correctly,
Tlt-sht. not 'Di-yasa’t. It b a Turkbh title. The scribes appear to have
read the three dbcritical points of £ as s See Additional Note, page 866,
para. 7.

Page 901, note, para. 4.—Gardes is not really itt Kapnin, but, at the period
in question, it was included in the province of Kaymln. See " Notes on
Afgj^istln,” page 75.

Page 932, note, para. 4.—The word I-llslt> in the original Jilli ta possibly
an error for Tallah. which would be written the two points above instead
of below malti ng all the difference. I-laab and Illmiali are both plainly
written, however, in several works. Tails, also written'TalSsb. b the name
of a city of Turkbtln. There b also a little dbtrict so called immedbtely
north of Lower Suwlt. .

Page 987, note, para, i, line 6.~**Darah of the SlrlgSi-Kol ” [JjTJ—the
latter a Tajjik word—is, literally, Valley of the Yellow Lake, a mbtake con¬
stantly made. The correct name is “ The Lake in, or of, the SlrtgSi E^ol ”
[JyJ—the last a Turkish word—or Yellow Valley.

Page 1043, note,!.—The most correct mode of writing this word is Gibart
or Gtbari, and not “ Gabsu^.” The fort referred to near the Indus b known
to the At^gnQ , and other inhabitants of the locality, as Garf Kapura’h. See
** Notes on AfgbQnbtan,” page 247.

Page 1201, note, para. 5, line 2 from end.—Can the Chingb Shin here
me n tio n s*! be the person referred to whose coin is given by Thomas, in hb
“ Path&n Kings of Dehli,” page 91 ? See also pages 711, 784, 792, and 884.

Page 1216, note, para. 3.—J 5 ng, in Turkt, signifies “cold,” and, if the
word be read Clding, it means “dust” in the same language. We have a
tract called EarQ-Kum, or Black Sand, and another called EuS-¥*>ram, or
Black Shale, etc., and, therefore, a Eara-Jang, or Black Cold, or a EarS-
r-hsng . or Black Dust, is not improbable after all.

Page 1220, note, last line.—The great river Eli’lbr-Ling here referred to
b evidently “the Kyan-lin” of the Chines^ mentioned six paragraphs

farther on.

Page 1229, note ■.—The “ Ibn ” prefixed to the word would rather indicate
that “the ’Alttaml" is the father’s name.

ERRATA.

ft

ti.

It It

19. ti

**t t>
ft It

22, note

33. .. ’

34 t •• *

It 11 *1

Page 9, note /or ^Q-l'Yamanain re<ui Zu-l-Yamanain in all places.

10, line 6, „ A’yan „ A’yun, also at page 30, line il.

„ „ 20, „ Ahwiz „ Alj^waz in all cases.

„ 19, „ ’IraV „ 'IraV.

ti 3t II II Talbah.

„ 13, should be Mawaia-un>Nahr in all places where otherwise, not
MSLwar, the last syllable of the word having escaped notice for
some time. It is correctly written subsequently.

14, line i7,y£>r AbMutajim read AbMu’ta^im.

ISt It 3t ti ?u.l.9ijjah „ Zu-l.^ijjah always.

16, „ Mutiammad't-Tahir read Mutiammad-i-jShir.

3, „ There should be a comma after Saraj.

7 from bottom. After Lais should be a semicolon.

20, /or Lais read Lai§,

Shap ur. and Ya’^nb read Shapur. and Ya’qub in all cases.
Bad^tus read Badghais.

Jatnt’.iit.Tawarikh read JEmi’>ut-Tawart^.

Na^ib It NaVib.

251 line 7, „ Mul^aminad Bashir „ Muhammadd.Bashir, thatis,son

of Bashir, which he was.

„ note *, „ Ibrahamt ,, Ibiilhimt.

27, line 15, „ Khaddat „ Khaddat.

29i It St It ^SShar is writen in other places KSshChar.

Iran read I-ran always.

^al: „ ?aVl|:.

?akria read Zakaria, also at page 37, note ».

Haft AVlim read Haft I^lim.

Dowati and doaidt ret^ Dawati and dawat.

,, „ , .. Ibrahamt ,, Ibrahtml.

36, line 9, and page 38, line i6,/>rNayab«ia/Na'tb, and in other places.

38, note *, for MS. n M!iS.

39, line 4, also page 63, /or Jibal read the Jil»l, and where otherwise.

40, last line, and note <, „ Alb-Tagin read Alb-Tigin, as in other places.

44, line 3 from bottom „ ^isam ,, ^usam in all cases.

45. It 2S,foriASk .. i-lak.

^5^ I j._Abi’Alt is often written Abu’Alt, and both are of the same

meaning, and sometimes Bu is written for Abu.
note *, third line from bottom, should be ‘‘from Kaghghar to Chin,
not, the Jihun.”

52, lines 3 and 10, and note *,/or ^l-^Ia’dah read Zt-^a’dah.

„ note *, y&r Ibrahim n Ibrahxm.

•, line 13 from bottom,/»r AbQ Isma’tl read Abu Ibrahim.

53, last line of text, i. Uyas ,, Ilyas.

If

,1 ,, 7i It

32, note •, „

33, line i8, „

34, note •, ,,
35* III *> "

hriii

ERRATA.

Page 58k line a, the comma after " he ” is rednodant.

„ „ a from bottom /or “ ” rawf T*^bart.

59^ „ lo^ /or '* Mu^il ” raui Mau^U, as correctly written in other places.
61, „ 18, ,, “ diffe-rent" rtaJ difier-ent, the printer has incorrectly
divided the word.

64, note \ para. 2, for BurhSn R&tt rrmf BurhSn-i-ESt^' always.

70^ >> '.y&r "Giart ” „ Ghazt.

7^1 ti *1 para. 3, line a, should be *'Amtr ManfOr, son of Nu]^, son of
Na?r.’

77, ,, , first line after the Persian,y&r ** TawarfUi ” ma/ “ TawSrtJdi.’*

80, ,, *, line 2, /or “ Mahmud ” ror<f " Mahmud.”

ti ■■ *. If *i i> “overcome” „ "overcame.”

81, fi ■*, It 4i If “different place to ” r«a/“ different place from.”

S6, ,, I I, 28, ,1 “ Al.Zawzani ” raeu/ “ Az- 2 ^wzant ” in all plax:es.

87, If , para. I, „ “’Amid” „ “’Amid.”

If If I tf 2, lined.—The words “works of” have been left out
after “ in.”

88, „ *,/or “ Jalal-ul-Millal ” read “ Jamal-ul-Millat.”

„ „ •, line 6 , for “Mamluks” read “Mamliiks,” and next linei after

“ contrary to ” a comma is required.

89 f If *f line f),for “ lyaz ” read “ Ayaz,” also at page 102, note *.

9O1 line 14, “ Mawdfld ” should be “ MaudQd ” in all cases.

97 i If “ Suliipan ” read “ SttlimAn.”

101, ,1 23i the date should be 443 H., as in note *1 page I02| not 344 h.

If ,1 3i and note for Bar-{^und and Buz-Ghund read Baz-Ghand.

102, „ to,/or Raffl-ud-Dtn read Ra;;^l-ud*Din.

107, note *1 line $,/or Baihakt ,, Baihah^.

I09i line I5f there should be a comma after “ the Mart3rr.”

I, note *1 last line,y&r “Taimur” read “Ttmur.”
rrOf If ^1 first line.—The year 548 H. 'js an error for 514 H.| as the
context shows, and as given immediately under.

112, „ line 6 ,/or “ western " read “ eastern,” the present Panj-ab is

referred to.

ti 3 i f, I line 13, „ “BadaOnl” ,, “ Buda’anf.”

I, I, I para. 4, line II,y&r “ Seyr ” rennf “Siyar;” and after “others”
there should be a comma.

„ I, I first line, “Sanharan” read “ Sanhur 3 n ;” also on page
115, note *, as at pages 450 and 498.

** 7 f If I para. 3, line 2 ,/or “ Tu^ril” read “ Taghart.”

123, II , line 6 from bottom,.^r “ SaljuVs ” read Saljuhs ” as before.

128, ,, I „ 2, after “ p. 142 ” there should be a full stop.

* 34 f If *1 If 3 t/or “ Gur Shan ” read “ the Gur Kh an.”

,, ,1 *, ,, last,/or “early ” yearly,” the letter **y” has been

allowed to fall out.

140, ,, *, line 3 from bottom,y&r “ Khata*! ” read “ Khijae.”

* 4 Sf If *> 4 f. If “Almut” „ “ Alamut,” as at page

363 and other places.

151, „ •, line II from bottom,y 5 >r “ Ibn-i-KhalkSn” read “ Ibn KhalH-

kan,” as in note, page 1278.

,, ,, •, last line,/or ” Mu^is” read** Mu^ts.”

152, line 4 of the poetry.—There should be a colon after the word “field,”

instead of a comma.

ERRATA. ^

Pag* 154, line 6 of the poetr^.'^The note refers to "white steed’s," and aot to
girths, therefore, the figure 9 should be over the former.

„ line a of text under poetry,,^ “ ShatS-t” rtaJ "miulXs<” sod in
all other plac^ Shiti or Sltipie is the luune of the country, and
£hila>t is the adjective derived from it

161, note, line 14 from bottom, “ fifth ” read “ fourth.”

i 67 > i> *> line S,/or “ Yafa’i ” read “ Yafa’t,” as in other places.

170, ,, •, ,, TO from bottom. Ay ** Shtrwan” read ** Shinvan.**

171, ft “Muhammad, Jahan Pahlawto,” "JahSn PahlavrSn,

Muhammad,” os in the note above.

172, ,, , line 14,/ar “ Buwiah ’’ read “ Buwtah.”

180, „ *,/(>r “ Chanjjiz ” read “ Chingiz.” as in other places.

183, line 9, after “ himself seen ” there should be a comma

185, note, line J, para. 2, and para. 3, line 4, /or “ ^usain ’Alt ’’ read
“ ^usain-i-’Ali,” with an ifa/dt, for ^usain was ’Alt’s son accord*
ing to other writers who have 6in.

190, line 10 from bottom, after “ learning” a comma is required.

199, note t, last line.—“ Kurt.” This name is more correctly written

“ Kurat.” See note •, page 1198.

200, line (iifor " Mangabarnt ” read “ Mang-bami.”

202, note *, ,, “.Sufed” ,, “Safed.”

,, „ ’f fi “walls of his fortress,” “walls of this fortress the

printer, after revision, let the “ t ” drop out.

204, line 4, />r “Lakhnauti” read “ Lakhanawaft,” also in note > of
preening page.

aoS, note ♦, /or “ Ibn-i-Khalkan.” read “ Ibn Sljallikkn,” as in note,
page 1278.

208, „ *.—After “ Zangi ” there should be a comma.

211, line 3.—There should be a comma after “Rum,” and another after
“other” in line 10.

217, note, line 5 from bottom.—There should be a comma after “Vertot.”

220, „ *.—After “ force ” in line 2, after “ Jerusalem ” and “ Nov.” in

the next line, and after “knights” in the next, there should be
commas.

221, „ », line 5,/w “different to” rarrf “different from.”

222, line II, ,, ’‘Aziz” ,, “Afjal.

225, note next to last line of para, i, also at page 226, note *,/or “Mfe-
ifoki" ” “ Miyya-firikin,” as at page 1268 , and note *.

329, ,, *, last para., line /or “ Manjurah ” read “ Manfuriyah; and
“ Kaif or Kayif” appears to be meant for “ Katif.”

235._There should be no comma between “ Abi ” and “ Muhammad ” in

lines 16 and 19; and /or “ ^utlagh ” in the latter read “ l^utlug^,”
and in all cases.

243, note *, para. t,/or “ Dajlah ” read “ Dijlah,” as in other places.

346, ,, 7 , three lines from the bottom, instead of “that man,” the

sense requires “that that man,” etc., the other that has been
left out.

247, ,, , para. 2, line 10 from bottom, after “ his brother ” a comma is

required.

250. fi *» 1 *"® 4 >/^ “ Sultan Shah ” read “ M.'ilik Sb^h,” as above.

252, II *1 II 3, after “ brother ” should be a comma.

253, para. 4, line T,/or “Garmsir" read'*the Garmsir.”

lx

ERRATA.

Page 271, note, para, i, line 2 from bottom,y&r ** TatSr ” rtad ** Mngbal.”

272, fourth line from bottom of text, and next page, line 8, and in first

line of note *, add Silbt after Cllingls, for alone, without the
KbS n. the word Chingiz, which only means **the great,” etc.« is
meaningless.

273, note *, line 5, the number should be 5060, as at page 970, not 5o,oocx

lE^arajoh and Ij^arafibah are often written the one for the other.

*7®* >i t line 20, for “ Ehlat " read “

277, line 12,/or “Tamtahah,” read “ Timmtshiah.”

282, note *, line 10,/or “Tatar” read “Mugh<tli'’ <tlso in note *, line 3

from bottom, page 283.

283, „ •, line II from bottom,,/&r “Jtrfat” read “Jtraft," as in other

places :” the letters have been misplaced.

283, line 2 from bottom,“ Karpn 9 .n ” read “ KanuSn.”

286, „ 2, an it^at is required between Muhammad and ’Alt—Muham-

mod-i-’AIt—for ’Alt was Muhammad’s father’s name, as mentioned
elsewhere.

t» i> 3 t/or “ Changiz ” read “ Chingiz,” as before.

287, note I, last line, /or “ Amtn-ul-Mulk,” the more correct name is

“ Yamin-ul-Mulk.“ See note *, para. *, page 1014. He is
sometimes called Yamin Malik.

2S8, ,, *, see under Emendations.

apo, ,, *, para, a, line 4 from bottom, there should be a bracket after
“ Gh art.” ^us “Ghurt].”

292, „ , line S,/or “ Ehurdabih ” read “ Ehurdadbih, ” as in other

places.

a95» •> > para. 1, line 3, para. 2, line S,/or “]|^uhal ” read “ ]^auVal,”

as correctly rendered in other places.

298, ,, , para. 2, line 2, read “ ’Ala-ud>Dfn, Kai-](^ubad,” not “ son of

Kai-]g:ub&d.”

301, ,, *, last line, not "Saiyid” but “ Sayyid,” as before.

305, line 4 from bottom, “ Dimawand ” j-ead “ Damawand.”

319, „ 11. ^>r Kba esar ” read Khapaar-"

322, note, para. 5, line 7 from bottom, there should be a bracket before
“ This seems,” etc.

332, line 2, for “ Raf^t ” read “ Raff,” as corectly rendered in other places.

341, note •, line 8, and note 1 , last line,,^w “ ’Utba ” read “ ’Ulba’.”

342, line 7 from bottom,_/<v “ If^azil ” read “ IgCizil.”

346, note *, for “ Pathoia,” read “ Pithora,” as correctly rendered at
page 458. The reference, “page 125,” is incorrect: it should
be 391.

383, line 7, for “ Saiaj-ud-Dtn, son of MinhIj-i-Saraj,” raid “ SaiSj>ud-
Dtn, son of Minhaj-ud-Dtn.”

405, note 4, line next to last,,^r “ different place to ” read “ different place
from.”

40S, line 17, for “ Iran ” read “ I-ran,” and for “ Maltk ” in the following
line read “Malik.”

4 *3i »* XZt for cholie" read " coMq."

415. note *, the reference should be “ page 489,” not “ 205.”

420, line \2, for “ ’Arifain” read “ ’Ariftn.”

423, note*, para, ‘i, for “Nugherwan” read “ Nflahlrwan.” or, as it is
also written, “ Noghtrwan.”

ERRATA.

ijd

Page 426, note*, line i 6 ,^/ 5 ir “X^l-Van” read '* Tae-VSn,*'and see note *, looS.

43 S» tf *t line last,yi>r “ See his reign,” mx/, “ See his brother’s reign,”
etc., and see pages 495, 496.

4641 » *, next to iast line, for “ pears ” read “ spears,” and in the fol¬

lowing line for “ loir” read “ awir the “s” in the first line
and the ■“ a ” in the latter, were carelessly allowed to fall out, and
were not detected by the printer’s reader.

470» »» » pstra. i, last line, for “ Changiz ” read “the dlingiz,” and

/or “ tJng ” read “ the Awang,” as in note at page 940.

484, ,, , para. 4, “ possession ” is the printer’s devil’s mode of spelling

“ possession,” and passed by the printer’s reader.

4S9, last line of text and under, for “ Lakhanawati ” read always “ Lak-
hanawatt ” if “n ” and “ t ” are not marked ccTectly,

491, line 3 from bottom, y&r “ Janabad ” read “Junabad.” It is also called
Guna 1 >ad by TajzTks, and is in the l^uhistaii.

496, note*, line “ firs” read “first;” line for “mounta” read

“mountain;” line 16, for “wi” read “with;” in the next for
“o” “ orand in the next note, line l, for “ tha”'read

“that;” and in next line from bottom,y 5 >r “ othe ” read “other.”
The printer has very carelessly allowed six letters to fall out from
the ends of as many lines.

499 t It « para. 2, line T,for “ Torts ” re<xd “ Turts.”

504, „ •, last line,ylw “etrms” rtW “terms.” Through some mystery

connected with the printer’s art, proofs after being read over and
corrected time after time, get changed again, and the printer’s
reader passes them as “ read for press.”

521, ,, , para. 3, line 10, after Taj-ul-Ma’asir there should be a bracket

and a comma, not a full stop, for the sentence is unfinished. It
should stand thus “ Taj-ul-Ma’asir],” etc.

530, last line of text,/br “ Malik ” read “ Malik.”

note, line 2, the ’Arabic Jl has, through the printer’s error, been
turned into 7 =) a mist.ake liable to occur, but the signification
is evident from the interpretation.

53*1 tt “ Inda-khud ” read “ Indda-Jdiud.”

S 35 » »» f para. $, line 2, and page 540, note, para. 3, line next to last,

for “ Changiz” read “ ^lingiz.”

543 - tf > sixth line from the bottom. Here again, through carelessness
in printing, three letters have been let drop out, and have been
unnoticed—“ n e "for “ on the.”

548, ,, *, line 4,yS>r “ wati ” and “wati” read “waft" and “wliti”

with “ t,” as in the word immediately above.

550, ,, *, line 4, for “ Karmah-nasah ” read Kamm-Nasah, or Karam-

Nasa.

SSt, •• *, next to last line, for “ Hizabar” read “Hizabr,” as at page
S49, line 11 of text.

556, line 9, after “ kingdom ” there should be a comma.

559, note *, line 3, for “ Nudia” read “ Nudia.”
ft >t *> para. 2, line 6, the comma after “ Lakhanawatt ” is redundant.

564, ,, *, line 7 from bottom, should be “ CJiingiz ” not “ Changiz.”

585, It ^t t, I, and line S.yiw “ Uarinda ” rrtif/“ Barindah.”

586, ,, *, ,, 4,fof ” Dhakali ” read “ DhSkah."

594, >• *, the rtiercnce “page 219,” should 1« 319.

ERRATA.

Ui

Page 595, note *, line 5, fir Nagif-ud'DlD, 'Iway,'* read ** Mafv-nd-Dtn-i-
'Iwaf,” with an i*d/a/, that is, son of ’Iway, for Gh iyaf-ud-Dfnr
’Iwaf, was his father.

597, „ *• line 3, fir “ very diflTerent to " read “ very different from.”

602, „ », „ 2, „ “Najir” „ ‘‘Na*tr.”

610, „ , para. 2, line i,fir “ D'Ahsson ” read “ D’Ohsson.”

615, last para, of note *, next to last line, fir “page 389 ” reeid " page

398.”

621, note •, line XT., fir “ minarah " read “ manSrah ” as before.

622, ,, , >■ 5 from bottom of last para., “ Aia^iinah ” read

” Afaghinah.”

627, line 9, after “ Yal-duz ” there should be a comma.

„ ,, “ Oujah” and “ Kujah ” read “ Cujah ” and “ KujSh,” as

at j-Kige 750.

^37, >> 11, after “ justice " there should be a comma.

642, ,, 12, “ Aet-kin.” See ** Additions,” reference to page 318.

650, note *, “line 2, fir “and to the office” read “and refers to the
office,” etc.

6St, „ para. 2, line 3, for “ different statement to” read ** different
statement from.”

662, ,, y, line 3tfir “ ’Abbasis ” read “ ’Abbasts.”

680, ,, •, para. 3, line 3, fir “ ^innanj ’* read “ Ig^nnauj.”

690, end of note *,fir “ page 694” read “ page 695.”

,, note *, end of para, i, the printer has again carelessly let the letter „
fall out.

694, „ *, para. 2, line 3, fir “ NSyab ” read “ Na’ib.”

705, ,* ’’f », S« »« 3, », “»«nOiix” „ ••mdTms.**

706, line 3 under the Twelfth Year, fir “ Ban ” read “Bat. Bat Rha n is

No. xvi. among the Maliks of Hind.

712, text, last line, fir “ Balaram ” read Balaram,” and also in note *,
three lines from the bottom.

716, note *, para. 2,.line ia,fir “ ?tya” read “ ?l^.”

720, text, line \\,fir “ ft ul-’Alamtn ” read “ fi’l-’Alamtn.”

726, note the printer has put “See the reign under” instead of “See
under the reign,” and the printer’s reader has passed it over.

749, line \3,fir “ Awwal ” read “ Awwal.”

759, note *,fir “ Shart-badar ” read “ Slxitrt*barda.r.”

751, ,, * from bottom, after “which” there should be a comma.

752, «, *>fi'' “ee” read “ See.” Here also a letter has fallen out.

761, line lltfir “ Shiihnagi ” reeui “ Shahnagi.”

764, „ 16, fir " 1 Ji khap aw^Ui ” read “ Lakhapawatt,” os in tenth line
above.

775, note, para. 4, line next to lost, fir “ stated above ” read “as stated
above.”

778, ,, , para. 5, line first, fir “as far it goes” raid “as far as if

goes.”

780, ,, ‘,fir “ page 650” reatf “ 660."

784, line 12, “Kurt.” .See page 1198.

809. note *, line 3, fir “ Tukharistan ” reeut “ Eliurilsan.”

810, ,, ■*, ,, 2, “664 H.” is on error fir “ 646 H.”

820^ line 6 from the botttom, “-i-,” after Ka shlt Kha n is a printer’s
blunder: it diould be “ Ka.ohlt.Kban, l.bak^us-Sultilnt.”

ERRATA.

IxUi

Page82a, line 10, jS>r “^NKa'-dSh ” ««/

« 24 . „ 16, and next page, line 9, as before noticed, instead of *' TS.-
yasa’t,’’ the correct title is “ Tai-ahJ.” See note, page 866.
i» ’S* *fter “ Kasmandah ’’ there should be a comma.

867, note, line 13 from bottom, ytir “ B<ilttt>an " read “ Balbau.”

87*1 ft t para, i, line 8 , for “ Sa^labs ” read “ Sal^lfibs.”
tt ti > ft 8, ,, next to last, yifr “ diflTereut to ” ‘ different

from.”

87 St

877 t

890,

89 *f

899 f

900,

908,

9»3f

920f

936 f

956 t

9S7t

968,

969 f

973f

979f

980,

981,

983 f

9 ^ 5 f

tt t ft 8, ,, ,, , after the words “vowel points,”

the comma is redundant.

tt f para. 3, third line from bottom. “^fafchat:,” etc,, may be
also written “ (^ifchaif: ” and “ Ehifcll^,” as at pages 354, 796, and
914: with “ i ” in the first syllable is, perhaps, the most correct.

,, , line 3, “ Irdish” is also written with “a ”—Ardtsh. as in note

at page 950. para. 3.

tt f para, i, line 5 from bottom, y&r “ Kol or Lake Bae-Kol,” read
“ Kol or Lake, the Dae-Kol,” etc.

,, , para. 6, line S,for “ ocasion ” read “ occasion.’

ft t tt a, ,, 4, ff “ Taljiut ” ,,

Mughuls ” ,,

Itsiz” „

“Tava-ghO” ,,

t ft a, ,, 4f

t ft *f ft 7f

t ft 3> tt 5f

, last linein page, ,, “Muran”

«, para. 3, line 3, „ “ Timur-chi,”

t ft a, „ 5, ,,

“ Tanijut,” as at page938.
“ Murals.”

“Itsuz.”

“ TAya-GHO.”

“ Mur-&n.”

“Tamur-chf.”

“ Jabah.

“Jabbah”

I, t „ 3f ft next to last, y&r “Ja’fir ” rra«f “Ja’far.”

text, line 2, after “ sovereignty ” there should be a comma,
note *,for *‘sArd6" read “lAarad."

,, , line 27,_/&r “ Jujf ” r«nf Jujt”
line 3, for "jazbi ” read

note f, para. 2, line 2, for “ Ghu-Baltgii” reetd “ Ghn-Baitgh.

ff f ff 4

ff f ^f 5 t

ff f ff a, ,, r 1

3 f ft

“Guzidah ”

„ “Guzfdah.”

a. ff

“ Gur Khun ”

,, “ Gur Khan.'

Ilf ff

" shuja"

ff " sAufd’.’'

2f ff

“ /Ca$tkidV'

„ "Kankuti.”

986,

ff

988,

ff

989 f

991.

1002,

1010,

toil,

1014,

lots.

,, , ,, 1, ,, 6 from bottom, after the bracket and before

“ gave bim ” there should be a comma.

„ last, line 3, for “ Mughal ” read “ Mughal ”

„ , para. Ixst, line next to last,y&r “ Jihun ” reeui “Jthun.”

,, , „ 2, line 13, for “ Bafsut" read “ Baisut,” as at i>age 1094.

„ , ff *f f, I 4 f ft “Tuhajar” „ “ Tsqtadiar, ns in the

preceding page.

„ , para. 4, line 3, „ "Fushang” ,, “Fuahanj."

,, ^,\\ne 3, forto^edal" read "to-yedal," part of the “y” has
been broken in printing.

a, *, line 2, for “ was styled ” read “ was also styled.”

,, , para. 2, line i, for “ Ibn-Khalkdn " read “ Ibn Khallikan,”

a.s at I'lagc 1278.

,, , para. 3, line 7 from bottom, for “ Tal-kau ” read “ Tal-tan,”

and the comma after the word is redundant.

„ •, para. 4, line 7, /or “ Umra” read “ Umara.”

tt f tt 3 ft i^f tt “Aghrah tt “ Ighrah,” as in other places.

ERRATA.

Ixiv

Page 1020, note, para. 4, line 9, the full stop after 30,000 men is a printer's
error, and is redundant.

1025, ,, , para. 4, line !,/<>/• "MamsUtk” “ Mamalik.”

1027, ,, *, para 2, next to last line,y^>r “‘JPagliachar” read “JagiiacllSr.”

also in para. 3, line 3.

1029, note, para. 4, line i,for “ Bahi-ud-Mulk ” read Baha-ul-Mulk."

1032, ,, , „ a. ,, 5, after “ Jahan ”■ the comma is redundant.

1046, „ ®, line ft, for “ Al-BirOni " read “ Au-BiRONi.”

104S, text, last line, „ “ Hirat ” „ “ Hirat ” as in other places.

1073, note •*, para. 4, line ,for “ Turan " read “ Turan.”

1074, „ , five lines from bottom of page, for “ g^twstan ” read

“ Shiwistan.”

1095, ,, , line 3,/i’r' “ Mughal ” read “ Mughal ” as in line 2 above.

1099, „ , para. 2, line IT, for “ the two” read “the other two.”

1116, „ , „ 3. .. 4. .. “Itmas." „ “ Itimas."

1119, text, line 7 from bottom, “ Ta-ir ” may also be written “ Ti’ir ” as in
note *, para. 3, next page. -

1126, note •, para. 2, lines 2 and 3, for “ Mukanu” and “Mukatu” read
“ Mukanu ” and “ Mukatu,” and also in next two paragraphs.

II I para. 2, line 2, before “ Humayun ” there is an empty space
for the word “to,” which, through carelessness, the printer has
allowed to fall out after revise, and a letter in the next to get out of
its place.

I t35i II *1 para. 2, next to last \ixie,for “ eve ” read “ even,” a letter has
fallen out here too.

H37i II , para. 4, line 3,/or “ tumans ” rrarf “ toniSns.”

1161, line IS, after the words “ inclined to it” there should be a comma.

1164, „ 6 , for “ Chingiz ” read “ Chingiz,” as it has been printed scores
of times before.

1166, note, para. 2, line 3, for “ Baahghtrd” read “ Uashghird.” •

iilio, I. I II ii I. 4 . 11 “Ughiil” I. “Cgbfd.”

,, ,, , „ last, next to last line,/>r “2t-ICadah” rra</“ Zt-¥a’dali.”

1183, „ I para. 2, line 2, for “ Shiramun ” read “ ghtramun.”

n88, end of note ^,/>r “ hat” read “that,” a letter has been allowed to
fall out again.

1194, note, para. 2, line ft, for “ Jamt’ ” read “ Jami’ ” as in fourth line above.

1196, ,, *, line 1, here again, through carelessness, the “g” of excepting

has fallen out unnoticed.

1197, text, line 14, and 1198, line \T,for “Isfirar” rtW “ Isfizar.”

..>5, ” ^^-in” may also be written “^fa’in.”

1201, ,, ,, \, for " kanvaits" readkat'wans.”

t 203 i II II 3, the “b” in Tabas ” should be doubled thus—“ Xabbas.”

1220, note, second line from bottom, and next page, line 7 note, for
“ Taghachar ” read “ Taghachar.”

1234, ,, *, line i\,for “ 'Usmault ” read “ 'Uginanli.”

1239, „ para. 3, line T,for “ llkae, or Ilka, or llkan,” read “I-yalkae,

or 1-yalka, or l-yalkan,”

1255, II I para. 1, la.sl iini:, for “ Ibn ’Umrdn” read “ Ibn ’Amrw.”

1260, ,, •, line 3, for “ Ilka” read “ I-yalka,” ^

1267, „ •, para. 3, line ^,for “ Kurdiah” read “ Kurdtah.”

1276, ,, , ,, i, „ 2 from cndj/ir “ Umra ” rmof “ Umata.”

II I, I II 3i II 10,/ir “ Ifatiniri ” rrwi/“ I^aimtrt.”

tSF The present portion of this translation commences with Section VII.
of the original.

The first six Sections are meagre, and the first eight pages will contain a
r^suttU of their contents, which will be given on the completion of the
work, with TitlC'page, and Table of Contents.

SYSTEM OF PRONUNCIATION.

The system of transliteration adopted in the following pages, is that known as
the system of Sir William Jones, which, after some thirty years’ experience, the
translator conceives to be the easiest, as well os the most natural, and as easy
of pronunciation [except, perhaps, the purely Arabic gutturals] as the original
letters of the 'Arabic alphabet. Some of the new systems proposed are difficult
and complicated, and, in the translator’s opinion [as far as he can understand
them], in many instances entirely incorrect.

The vowels are three short— i, u^ equivalent to-and —; and three

long—1, 1, 0, equivalent to f—u—j

All consonants, except the following, are pronounced precisely the same as
in English as th in thing, or lisped s ; fib* u oh in chutfeh;

strongly aspirated, and occurs only in purely ’Arabic words; kb*
eh in loch, and as German eA ; ^—4* pronounced by applying the tip bf the
tongue inverted to the palate; i—§, as thin thine, by ’Arabs, dth ; J—f, as r
uttered by striking the point of the tongue on the palate; j—jt, as r in plea¬
sure^ or soft French j ; lA— sh, as sh in shell; f, as rr in dissolve; i>—'T* A*
iwdi k—ti AS / with a slight aspiration; b—(, as English t with slight
aspiration; a deep guttural without any audible aspiration, and when
initial to a word the ’ is placed before its vowel, as in ’Alt, and when not
initial, after its preceding vowel, as in Mas’Qd and Rifi’; ^gb* A guttural
sound like that produced in gargling, or Northumbrian r, and something similar
to gh in ghost; J—fc, another peculiar 'Arabic sound, produced by pressing
back the root of the tongue to the throat, and partaking of the sound of i
and q ; i—h, slightly aspirated; at the end of a word it is often- uruispitated.
When e occurs at the end of a word preceded Iqr i, the former is almost
quiescent. The only diphthongs are at and an.

From the above system the scholar can at once tell the original letters in
the names of persons and places.

H. G. R.

TYPOGRAPHICAL ERRORS REQUIRING
CORRECTION.

Page II, note “^for Jal]^, readjilljah.

„ 21,/or lAii, read Lais.

» /of" AI-MawaRi^, raid ANMnwafiV*

,, 23, note l,for Bad^ais, read Badyhais.

„ 25, note 2, and notes 4 and 5, page 35, for Ibrahiimt, read Ibi^mi.

„ „ for read pddr in all cases; and for Nijam, read Nijam,

„ 36, note ’iifor Sanjarts, read Sijizts.

„ 40, last line, and note Tagtn, read Tigln,

„ 41, note St/w Fanakatt, nad Fanikatt
„ 58, next to last line, for T^^brl, read Jabart.

„ 59, line 10^ and in all cases, for Mujil, read Maujil.

„ 69, paragraph 2 of note 4, line \3,for ij^j^read fS'jf
„ 75, line V),for SULTAN-UL-’AZAM, read SULTAN-UL-’AZAV.

„ 80^ note 2, for overcome, read overcame.

„ 86, note, line 2%, for AbZawzant, read Az>Zawzani, and in all cases.

„ 90^ line 14, and notes 4 and %,for Mawdiid, r^n^fMaudltd in all cases.

„ 97, line iZtfor SQlImin, read SultmSn.

„ loi, line *3, for 344 H., read 443 H.

„ 109, line 13, for the martyr Sultan, Sic., read the martyr, .SnlJEn, &c.

„ no, note I, line i,for 548 H., read 514 H., and note ^,for 521 H., and
522 H., read 541 H., and 542 H.

„ 112, note I, for year 523 H., read 543 h.

,, 113, note,, line il from bottom, Seyr, rttn/Siyar.

,,. 115, line I, and line I2, for Muhammad, S&m, read hfubammad-i-Sam
and in all cases.

„ 137, note i,for 555 H., row/455 H.

■„ 14OV note S,for Kha ta-l^ rMd Shita-i, and in all cases.

•> * 45 . n te 4, line 4 from bottom, Almut, rW Alamut.

,, 146, line i,for rWA^AM.

„ 167, note 8, line i,for Yafil’-i, read Y 3 fa>I.

„ 172, note 3, paragraph 2, line 15, for up to this time, even, read up to
this time even, &c., See.

„ 176, note I, line 6,/w* Iftakliur, read lsta]dinr.

,, 177, note 6, for 603 H., read 613 H.

,, 184, note, line 4 from bottom,B.imni, r/ad Bam.

CONTENTS.

Preface . .

Memoir of the Author.

Author’s Preface and Dedication.

Contents.

Additional Notes and Emendations ....
Errata.

Introductory, being an Epitome of the First Six Sections

rAGi
. V

. xix
. xxxi

. XXXV
xlv
. Ivii

I

SECTION I.

Adam, the Patriarchs and Prophets, and the ancestors of Mu]^mmad ib.

SECTION II.

The Four orthodox Khaltfahs, the descendants of 'Alt, and the Com¬
panions pf the Prophet.ib

SECTION III.

The Ehalifabs of the house of Ummiyah

SECTION IV.

'fhe Khaltfahs of the house of ’Abbas .

SECTION V

The Maliks of ’Ajam to the rise of Islam
I. The Bastaniah or Peah*Dadan .

II. The ...

III. The Ashkantan. 4

IV. The Sasanian.'*’•

V. The .. 5

SECTION VI.

The TubbS-yawa'i and Maliks of Yaman

b 2

6

XXXVl

CONTENTS.

SECTION VII.

ITje Dynasty of the Muhammadan Maliks In *Ajam

I. Tahir-i- 2 n-l-Yamanain - . . . .

II. Talhah, son of Tahir .....

III. ’Abd-ullah, son of Tahir .....

IV. TMiir, son of ’ Abd-iillah, son of TShlr

V. Muhamm.ad, son of Tahir, son of ’Abd-ullah

SECTION VIII.

The $uf{arfun Dynasty .....

I. Ya’hub, son of Lais, §uffart
II. ’Umro, son of Lais, guflarl

SECTION IX.

The Dynasty of the SHmanis ....

A^d, son of Saman-i- lCh «dHn t . .

I. Ahmad, son of Asad, son of SSman

II. Nasr, son of Ahmad, $amanf .

HI. Isma'il, son of Ahmad, SamSni

IV. Abu Nasr-i-Ahmad, son of Isma’tl .

V. Na?r, son of Ahma^, son of Isma’tl

VI. Nuh, son of Nafr, .son of Ahmad .

VII. ’Abd-ul-Malik, son of Nuh

VIII. Man$ur, son of Nuh ....

IX. Nfih, son of Mansur, son of Nuh

X. Mansur, son of Nuh, son of Mansur

XI. Abu-l-Fawaris-i-’Abd-ul-Malik, son of Nuh

rAOB

9

11

12
*3
*4
«S

*9

20

*3

26

27

28
29

3 *

33

35

38

40

4 *

44

48

SO

SECTION X.

The Dynasty of the Dialamah Maliks at the Dar-ul-Khilafat of Bachdad
and in ’Iral^ • . . , , • *

I. Abu-l-Hasan, sonofBuwiah, Ud-Dilamt .

II. Al-Hasan, son of Buwiah, U'd-Dilami ....

‘’f Al-Hasan, son of Buwiah, Ud-Dilamt .
Si"®™"* son of Al-Hasan, sonofBuwiah, Ud-Dtlamt .
j • Al-^iarzaban, son of Fana Khusrau, Ud-Dilami
\ 1 . Abu-l-Fawaris-i-Makan, son of Fana ffiiusniu, Ud-Dilamt !

55

58

59

60

61

64

65

The Dyna^y of the Yamtnfah, Al-MahmSdiah Sovereigns of the race of
Sabuk-Tigin ...

I Amir ul-Gia*i, Najir-ud-Dtn-U’llah, Sabuk-Tigfn .’ .' !

■ «am, Yamm-ud-Daulah, NigSm-ud-Din, Alni-l-

TiT son of Sabuk-Tigin

HI. Amir Muhammad, son of Mahmud.

CONTENTS.

xuvli

IV. SultSn N^ir>ud*Dtn-U’Ilah, Mas'ud, the Martyr

V. SliihSb-ud-Daulah, Maudud, Sbn of Mas’ud . , . .

VI. 'Alt, son of Mas’ud, and Mu^iammad, son of Maudud, in
Association ..........

VII. 'Abd-ur.Raahtdf son of Ma^imud ......

VIII. Al-Mal’un, or The Execrated .....

IX. Farrukb-Zad, son of Mas’ud .......

X. Sultan Ibi^htm, Sayyid-us-Salattn.

XI. ’AlS-ud-Dtn, Mas’ud-al-Karim,. or the Beneficent, son of
Ibrahim .......

XII. Malik Arsalan, son of Mas’ud ......

XIII. Mu’izZ'ud-Daulah wa ud-Din, Bahram Sha h .

XIV. Shusrau Shnh, son of Baliiam Shah ....

XV. lUkusrau Malik, son of Shusrau Shah, the Last of the Mafimudi

ah Dynasty .........

rACB

91

95

97

98

99
too

103

106

107
109
III

114

SECTION Xll.

The Dynasty of the SaljuVtah.116

I. Tugfaril, son of Mika’il.. .123

’II. Malik Da’ud-i-Jaghar Beg, son of Mika’il.126

III. Sultan Alb-Arsalan-i- Gh aztf son of Da’ud-i-Jaghar Beg . . 132

IV. Sultan Talal-ud-Dtn. Malik Shah, son of Alb-Ar.sal 5 n . . 137

V. Muhammad, son of Malik Shuh.143

VI. Sultan-ul'A’cam, Mu’izz-ud>Dunya wa ud-Din, Sanjar, sou of

Malik Shah.146

Account of the Sultans of Rum of the Saljuhiah Dynasty . . .157

I. Mahmud, son' of Malik Sha h . . . . . , <159

II. Mas’ud, son of Mahmud Sha h ....... ib.

III. ^izil-Arsalan,, son of Mas’ud, son of Mahmud, son of Malik

Shah ........... 160

IV. j^ulij-Arsalari, son of l^izil-Arsalan ...... ib.

V. 'Izz-ud-Din,'Kai-Ka-us, son of ](jlizil-Arsalan .... 161

VI. Kai-]j^ubad, son of Kai-Ka-us ....... ib.

VII. Kai-KJiusrau, son of Kai-lj^ubad ...... 162

Vlll. ’Izz-ud-Dtn,'son of Kai-Shusrau ...... 163

IX. ^utb-ud-Dfn, ^ulij-Arsalan.164

X. ^ughril, son of Tugiiril ........ 165

SECTION XIII.

Account of the Sanjariyah Rulers........ 168

First Dynasty.

The Sanjariyah Maliks of ’Irah and Ajarbaijan :—

I. The AtS-Bak, Ilatt-Giz, Us-Sanjart ...... 170

II. The Ata-Bak, Muhammad, son of llatt-Giz .... 171

III. Tire Ata-Bak, Yuz-Bak, son of Muhammad, Us-Sonjari . 172

IV. The Ata-Bak, Abu-Bikr, son of Muhammad . 173

xxxTiii

CONTENTS.

Second Dynasty.

The Sanjariyah Maliks of FZrs :—

I. The Ata-Bak SunVar, Us-Sanjart
If. The AtS-Bak, Zangt, son of Sunfcar .
in. The Ata-Bak, Duklah, son of Sunfcar

IV. The Ata-Bak, Sa’d, son of Zangi

V. The Ata-Bak, Abu-Bikr, son of Sa’d

Third Dynasty.

The Sanjariyah Maliks of Niahapur :—

I. Malik Mu-ayyid, Us-Sanjart

II. Malik Tugban Shah, son of Mu-a3ryid

III. Sanjar son of Tugban SllAh

SECTION XIV.

The Maliks of Sijistan and Ntmroz .......

I. T^hir, son of Mubammad .......

II. Malik Taj-ud-Dtn, Abd-l-Patb, son of Tahir . . . .

III. Malik-us-Sa’is, Sbams-ud-Dtn, Mubammad, son of Taj-ud-Din

IV. Malik-us-Sa’id, Taj-ud-Dtn-i-Harab, son of Mubammad .

V. Malik Najir-ud-Ejin, ’UsmSn-i-^arab, son of Taj-ud.Dtn

VI. Malik nl-Qbkzt, Yamita-ud-Daulah wa ud-Dtn, Bahrain Sha h.

son of Taj-ud-Din-i.^arab.

VII. Malik Nutirat.ad>Dtn, son of Malik Yaoitn-ad-Dtn, Bahrain

SbSh.

VIII. Malik Rnkn-nd-Dtn, MabmQd, son of Yamtn-ud-Dtn, Bahrain

Stfh

IX. Malik SbiUb-nd-Dtii, MabmOd, son of Qarab....

SECTION XV.

The Knrdtah Malika of Sbim.

I. Sultan Nar-ud-Dtii, MabmUd-i-Zaiigt .....

II. Malik-u9-$alib, ’Alt, son of Mabmikl-l-Zangt ....

III. Malik Aiyab, son of Sbadt.

IV. Malik Asad-ud-Dta, son of SlUdt, in Mifr ....

V. Sultan ^aiab-nd-Dtn, YSsuf, son of AiyUb-al-Kurdt

VI. Malik-ul-Af||aI, ’Alt, son of $alab*nd-Dtn, YBsnf

VII. Malik-ul-’Asti^ ’Uanan, son of $iaiab-ud-Dtn, Yasnf

VIII. Malik-ul-’Adil, Ab&-Bikr, son of Aiyfib al-Kurdt

IX. Malik-ul-Mn’accam, *!sa, son of Aba-Bikr, son of Aiyab-al-

Kurdt.

X. Malik.ul-Kamil, son of Aba-Bikr; son of Ai3rab-al-Kurdt.

XI. Malik-uf-^libt •«» of Al-Kamil, son of AbB-Bikr, son of AiyBb.
al-Kurdt

SECTION XVI.

The Maliks of the Khwarasm.Sliahtah Dynasty .

1 . t^utb-ud-Dunya wa nd>Dtn, I-bak, the Turk .

PACE

"73

"75

ib.

176

"79

180

181
183

"83

184

"87

"89

" 9 "

"93

"94

196

"97

198

*>3

ib.

20s

207

208
214

222

223

224

227

228

229

23"

ib.

CONTENTS.

noclx

PAC*

II. Malik T 3 j-ud-Dtn, Muliammad, son of 1 -bak .... 334

III. Malik JalSl-ud-Dtn, Utsnz. Kh wartom Shah, son of TSi-ud-Dtn.

Mul^mmad .. 336

IV. Malik I-yal-Arsalan, son of Jalal-ud-Din, Utsuz . 338

V. .Sultan Takiall, son of I-yal-Arsalan.*39

VI. Sultan Jalal-ud-Dtn, Mafunud, son of I-yal>Arsal£n. . • 345

VII. V'unas Shiin, son of Takiabi Khwarazm Shah.... 349

VIII. Malik Khan, son of Takish. Khwanutm S])ah . . . 350

IX. ’Alt Shah, son of Takish. Khw arazm Sha h .... 353

X. Sultan ’Al 3 .-ud-Din, Mul^mmadj son of Takigh, Shwirazm

Shih.. . aS3

XI. ]^utb-ud-Dtn, Arzalil Shah, son of Muhammad, son of Takigh,

Khw ararm Shah ......... 379

XII. Sultan Rukn-ud-Din, Ghiirt Shanastt. son of Muhammad, Sih^gT

razm Sha h.381

XIII. Malik Ghiyag-ud-Dtn, Ah Sultan, son of Muhammad, Sihwg-

razm Shah.383

XIV. Sultan Jalal-ud-Dtn, Madg-Barnt, son of Sultan Muhammad,

Kh waraam ghgh .. 385

SECTION XVII.

The Shansabantah SultXns, and the Maliks of Gh<l>’ .... 300

Account of the First [Ancestors] of the Family, their Genealogy, and

their Progenitors, up to 2 uhMc, sumamed Tist . . 303

Account of Bustlm, Malik of Hind and Sind .... 305

I. Amtr POlgd [or FOlid], Qhhtt. Sbansabt . . . . 3^1

II. Amtr Banjt, son of NahSian, Shansabt.ib.

III. Surt, son of Muhammad. 3 i^

IV. Malik Muhammad, son of SQrt.330

V. Malik Abfi-’Alt, son of Muhammad, son of Siirl . . . 335

VI. Malik 'Abbiis, son of Muhammad, son of SQrt . . . 330

VII. Amtr Muhammad, son of ’ Abbgs. 33 ^

VIII. Malik Ij^utb-ud-Dtn, Al-^asan, son of Mu h a mm a d , son of

'Abbis .. 333

IX. Malik 'Izz-ud>Dtn, Al-l^^usain, AbQ-us.SaUtta, son of

ud-Dtn, Al-^asan. 335

X. Malik-ul-Jibal, l^utb-ud-Dto, Muhammad, son of flu-ud-Dln]

Al-^usain. 33 S

XI. Sult&n Bahg-ud-Dtn, Sim, son of 'Izs-ud-Dtn, Al-^nsain . 341

XII. Malik Sbihib-ud-Dtn, Muhammad [XQiamak], son of Al-

I^usain, Malik of Mkdtn of Qhhr .... 343

Xlli. Malik Sbujg'-ud-Dtn. Abt-’Alt, son of Al-^usain [son of SSm],

son of'Al.^asan, Shansabt. 34 S

XIV. Sultan 'Ala ud-Dtn, Al-^usain, son of *Iss-nd-DllB, Al-

Ilusain, son of Skm, son of AI> 9 asan. 347

XV. Malik Nggir-ud-Dtn, Al-^usain, son of Muhammad, Mldfnt . 364

XVI. Sultan Saif-ud-Dtn, Muhammad, son of S^t^n 'Ait-nd<Dtn,

Al-^usain. 3 ^S

XVII. Sulign-ul-A’gam, OhiySg-nd-Dunyk wa ud-Dtn, Abk-l-Fath,
Muhammad, son of Bahl-ud-Dtn, SAm, ^putm-l-Amtr-nl-
MOmintn. 3 ®*

rAQB

xl CONTENTS.

XVIII. Malik-ul Haji, 'Ala-ud-Dtn, Mutuimmad, son of Malik Shuja’-
ual.Dtn, Abt-’Ali, son of ’Izz-iid-Din, Al-^usain, son of Al-

:^a$nn, Sliansabt. 39 *

XIX. Sultan Ghivas-ucl-Diii. Matimud, son of Ghiyas-ud-Dfn,

Miitiammad, son of Baha-ud-Din, Sam, Shaosabt . 396

XX. Sultan Baha-ud-Diii, Sam, son of Qhiyag-ud-Din, Mahmud,
son- of Ghiyas-ud-lMn, Mui^animad, son of liaha-ud-Dtn,

Sam, Shansabi . . . . . .... . 408

XXI, Sultan ’Ala-iid-Din, Utsuz, son of Sultan 'Ala-ud-Djn, Al-

Husain, Jahan-sor ........ 4*3

XXII. Sultan ’Ala-ud-Din, Muliamntad, son of Shuja*-ud-Dln. Abu-

’Alt, the Last of the Sultans of Gh ilr . . .417

SECTION XVIII.

'Die Shansabant Sultans of Tukharistan and Bamian . . .431

I. Malik Fakhr-ud-Din, MasTid, son of ’Izz-ud-Dtn, Al-I^usain,

Shansabi .......... 422

II. Sultin Shams-ud-Din. Muhammad, son of Mas’ud, son of Al-

Husain, Shansabi ...... . . 425

III. Sultan Baha-ud-Oin, Sam, son of Sultiin Shams-ud-Dth.

Muhammad .......... 428

IV. Sultan Jalal-ud-Din, 'All, son of Baha*ud-Din, Sain, Bamiant . 433

SECTION XIX.

The Sultans of Ghaznin of the Shansabantah Dynasty . . . 438

I. Sultan Saif-ud-Din, .SOri, son of’Izz-ud-Din, Al-Qusain . . ib.

II. Sultan.ul-A’gam, Mu’izz.ud-DunyH wa ud-Dtn, Abu.l-Mugadar,

Muhammad, son of Baha-ud-Din, Sam, IS^asim-i-Amir-ul-
Muminin .......... 446

III. Sultan ’Ala-ud-Din, Muhammad, son of Baha-ud-Din, Muham-

mad-i-Sam, of Bamian ....... 492

IV. Sultan Taj-ud-Din, Yal-duz, al-Mu’izzi, us-Sultani . . . 496

V. Sultan-ul-Karim, ]^utb-ud-Din, I-bak, al-Mu’izzi, us-Sultani . ' 506

SECTION XX.

Account of the Mu’izziah Sultans of Hind .... 508

I. Sultan ^utb-ud-Din, I-bak, al-Mu’izzt, us-Sultant . . .512

II . Sultan Aram Shah, son of Sultan ]^utb-ud-Din, I-bak . . 528

III. Malik [Sultan] Na?ir-ud-Dln, ^aba-jah, al-Mu’izzi, us-SuItani. 531

IV. Malik [Sultan] Baha-ud-Din, Tughril, al-Mu’izzi, us-Sultani . 544

V. Malik-ul- Gh azf. Ikhtiyar-ud-Din, Muhammad, son of Bakhr-

yar, Kh alji. in Lakhaiiawati548

VI. Malik ’Izz-ud-Din, Muhammad, son of Sheran. Kha lji . . 573

VII. Malik’Ala-ud-Din, ’Alt, son of Marxian, Khalji . . 576

VIII. Malik [Sultan] I^usam-ud-Din,’Iwa?, son of ^lusain, Khalji . 580

SECTION XXI.

The Shamsi Sultans of 1 find ......... 59 ^

I. Sultan ul.Mu’agjain, Shams-ud-Dunyawa ud-Din.Abu-l-Mujaf-

far, I-yal-timish, the Sultan .597

CONTENTS. xli

ID

Malik-us'Sa'td,

Nafir-ud-Dtn, Mahmud Shih. son of SultUn

Sliams'tid-Din

I-yal-timish .

• • •

628

III.

SuII&n Rukn-ud'Din,

Firuz ShMi. son

of the Sultan [I-yal-

timiah]

•

•

•

• •

630

IV.

Sultan Rafiyyat-ud Dunya wa ud-Din, daughter of Sul^Sn I-yal-

timish .

.

• • •

• • •

• •

637

V.

Sultan Mu’izz-ud-Dunya wa ud-Din, Bahiftm Sh&h,

son of

Sultan I-val-timiah

■ • •

• • •

• •

649

VI.

SultUn 'Ala-ud-DunyH wa ud-Din, Mas’ud Shah, son of Sultan

Rukn-ud-Din,

Firuz Shah .

, *

660

VII.

Us-Sultan-uI-A’eam ul-Mu'aeeam, Na^ir-ud-Dunya wa ud-Din,

Abu-l-Mueaifar-i*Mahniud Shah, son
timish]. Kaaiiu-i'Amir-ul-Muminin

of the Sult^

[I-yal-

669

Events of the First

Year

: 644 H.

67s

99

Second

99

64s H.

679

99

Third

99

646 H.

683

tt

Fourth

99

647 H.

68s

9 9

Fifth

99

648 H.

687

99

Sixth

99

649 H.

689

99

Seventh

tt

650 H.

692

9 f

Eighth

99

651 H.

693

f »

Ninth

99

652 H.

696

tf

Tenth

9 9

653 11.

701

99

Eleventh

99

65411. . ,

704

99

Twelfth

99

655 H.

706

99

Thirteenth

99

656 H.

711

99

Fourteenth

99

657 H.

712

99

Fifteenth

99

658 H.

7>4

SECTION XXII.

Account of the Shamsiah Maliks in Hind ...... 719

I. Taj-ud-Dirv, Sanjar-i-Gajz-lak £hun ..... 722

II. Malik Tzz-nd'Din, Kakir £hun, Ayaz i-Haz^-Mardah, ul>

Mu’izzt .......... 724

III. Malik Na9ir-ud-Dtn, Ai-Yitim-ul-Uaha-t . . . 727

IV. Malik Saif-ud-Din, I-bak-i-U chch ah ..... 729

V. Malik Raif-uJ-Din, I-bak-i-Yu^an-Tat .... 731

VI. Malik Nu^rat-ud-Din Ta-yasa’i [Taf-shi] .... 732

VII. Malik *Izz ud-Din, Tuphril-i-Tughan Kh an .... 736

VIII. Malik ^famar-ud-Din, Kt-ran-i-Tamur Khan, u<5-SulJant . 742

IX. Malik Hindu Khan, Mu-ayyid-ud-Din, Mihtar-i-Mubarak, ul-

Kh azin. us-SulIant ........ 744

X. Malik Ikhtiyar-ud-DIn, K^ra-Kuah Hian-i-Aet-kin 746

XI. Malik IkhtiySr-ud-Din, Altuniah, of Tabarhindah . . . 74S

XII. Malik Ikhtiyar-ud-Din, Aet-kln. 749

XIII. Malik Badr-ud-Din, SunVar-i.Rumi.752

XIV. Malik 'raj-ud-Din, Sanjar-i-Kth-iuV.754

XV. Malik Taj-ud-Din, Sanjar-i-Kuret mxan .... 756

XVI. Malik .Saif-ud-Din. Bat Kh an, f-bak-i-Khita-j 757

XVII. Malik Taj-ud-Din, Sanjar-i-Tez Khan.759

XVIII. Malik Ikhtiyar-uJ-Din. Yuz-bak-i-Tughril Khan , . 761

xlii

CONTENTS.

PACE

XIX. Malik lllj-ud.Dtti, ArsalSn Khan. Sanjar-i-Cliast . . 766

XX. Malik’Izz-ud-Dtn, Balban-i'KathluShSn, U 8 -Sult 2 nt, Sltainst 775

XXI. Malik Nufrat Shan, Badr-ud-Din, SunVar.i-$uft, RGmt . 787

XXII. Az-KuIIi Dad-Bak, Malik Saif-ud-Din, l-bak-i-Shamst. ’Ajanf 788
XXIII. Malik Nu^rat-ud-Din, Sber Slian, Sun^^ar-i-Sacjialsus . . 791

XXIV. Malik Saif-ud-Din, i-bak-i.Kaablt ShS°f us-Su]{ant . 795

XXV. Ul-ShaVan-uI-Mu’aitam-ul.A’cam, Bahk-uU^aVV wa ud-Dtn,

Ulugb Eh2n-i-Balban, us-Sultant.799

SECTION XXIII.

The ARairs of Islam, and Irruption of the Infidels .... 869

First inroad of the Turks of E^arah ...... 900

I. Account of the Outbreak of the Chingiz Shan, the Mughal . 935
History of the events which happened in Islam . . . 968

Account of the crossing of the river by the troops of the

Chingiz Khan towards Shurasan.1001

Account of the passage of the river JfhQn by the Chingiz Khan, 1008
Account of the coming of Sultan JaUl-ud-Din, Mang-Bamt, son
of Sultan Muhammad, Kh warazm Sh 5 h|. to Ghaznln, and the

events that befell him there.1013

Account of the taking of Walkb of TnkhSHstan , , , 1033

Account of the capture of the cities of Khurasan, and the mar¬
tyrdom of their inhabitants. 1036

Account of the calamities which befell this territory of KhurSsIn

the second time ... *.1043

Account of the capture of the Forts of Kkl-yun and FiwSr. . 1051
Account of the events which happened in QbilZt (xhaijistSn, and

Flruz-Koh.1055

Account of the events which took place before the fort of Saif-

RSd of QhQi'.1063

Fall of the fort of Ashiyar of Qliaijistkn, and other fortresses . 1071
Account of the return of the Chingiz KhS" towards TurkisUbt,

and his departure to hell.1077

II. Tasht, son of the Chingiz KhSn.10^

III. Uktie, son of the Chingiz Khun . ... . . 1104

Account of the nomination of armies from Turkistln to proceed

into the territory of ’Irah.11 >5

Account of the despatching of Mughal armies to proceed towards

Ghazntn and Luhkwar.1126

Account of the death of Uktie, son of the Chingiz Kl|Su , .1136

IV, Chaghatae, son of the Chingiz KhSn—May Cod’s curse be

upon him I . . . .1144

V. Kyuk, son of UktZe, son of the Chingiz Khan . , .1148

Account of a Musalman miracle . . . . . .1157

The decease of Kyuk, the Accursed.1160

VI. BktQ, son of Tush 1 , son of the Chingiz Khii I .... 1164
An astonishing anecdote . . . . . . . 1173

VII. Mangu'Khun, son of Tult Kha n, son of the Chingiz Khan . 1176
Account of the fall of the Mulahidahs—on the whole of whom
be God’s curse I.

1187

CONTENTS,

zliii

FACS

An account of the misfortune which happened to the Muhtaabim,

Shams-ud-Dtn.laia

VIII. Hulakii. son of Tfllt, son of the Chingiz KhSn . . . . 1235

Account of the fall of the capital of the Sbilniht . . . 1228

Account of the martyrdom of the Lord of the Faithful, Al-Musta’-
fim B’illah—the Almighty reward him ! . . . . 1252

Account of the march of Hulakii towards lialab and . 1262

Account of the miracle [which happened in behalf] of the Muaal*

mans of Mayya-fariVin.<270

Another miracle [wrought in behalf] of the Musalmans . . 1379

Account of the Conversion of Uarka Khan, son of Tiiglit Shin,

son of the Chingiz Khan, the Mughal.1283

Anecdote respecting Barks Khan’s zeal in the Musalmin faith . 1288

First statement.1287

Second statement.1290

Conclusion.1293

Appendix A.i

Appendix B.vii

Appendix C.xiii

Appendix D.. . . xxiii

SECTION XXI.

ACCOUNT OF THE SHAMSIAH SULTANS IN HIND.

The frailest of the servants of the Divine threshold,
Minhaj-i-Saraj, Jutjant—God grant him the attainment of
his wishes I states that, when the eternal will of God, the
Most High and Holy, has willed to imprint on the forehead
of a servant the signs of dominion and the light of power,
and the mother of time becomes pregnant with an embryo
of such a character, the gleam [characteristic] of such a
burden will shine upon her brow

When the time of her delivery arrives, and that lord of
felicity becomes enveloped in the swaddling of his birth¬
place *, joy, at the sight of that birth, becomes manifest in all
things; and, from the period of his nativity to the time of his
removal from this abode of service to the mansion of bliss,
whether in activity or in repose, all his actions will be a
source of gladness unto mankind, and of honour to botfi
high and low. If his neck should be placed in the collar
of servitude, his master becomes the possessor of affluence;
and, if his footsteps venture upon journeys and in travelling
stages, he will cause his companions to become the masters
of prosperity, as in the case of the Patriarch Yusuf.
When Yusuf was sold to Malik the son of Du’ar, at his

* Onr Mithor here follows the life of men destined for sovereignty from the
conception, and applies to them, somewhat blasphemously, the theory of the
mar Qig^t, Ac.] of Muhammad. The theologians assert tbit the first thing
created was the light of Muhammad. It shone forth from Adam’s forehead
until Eve became pr^rumt by him of a son, when it was transferred to her.
When she gave bi^ to the son [which? Cab or Abel ?], it, of course^ dwelt
in him, and thus it was transferred, as the theologians aver, from the foreheads
of the lathers to the wombs of the mothers, until it assumed flesh in Muham¬
mad. Our author has altered the theory in applying it to kings, in as ^ as
the ray of light, which emanates from the child *hines forth from the

bsow of the mother of time.”

Id otlwr words, when the child is bom.

THE SHAMSIAH sultans OF HIND.

S 97

invocation, tvventy [sons like] pearls * befitting a king were
strung upon the thread of his line ; and, notwithstanding
he came [as a slave] into the dwelling of ’Aziz, he made, in
the end, his [’Azfz’s] spouse Queen of Mi^r; and, foras¬
much as the infant in the cradle bore testimony to the
purity of his garment’s skirt—“a witness of the family bore
testimony **—at length, in his [’Aziz’s] service, Yusuf became
the Waztr of that kingdom.

1 . SULTAN-UL-MU’A?SAM, SHAMS-UD-DUNYA wa ud-dIn,
ABO-L-MU^AFFAR, I-YAL-TIMI SH «. THE SULJAN.

Since the Most High and Holy God, from all eternity,
had predestined that the states of Hindustan should come
under the shadow of the guardianship of the great Sultan,
the supreme monarch, Shams-ud-Dunva wa ud-Din, the
shadow of God in the worlds, Abu-l-Mujaffar, I-yal-timish.
the Sultan, the right arm of the Vicegerent of God, the aider
of the lx>rd of the Faithful *—God illumine his convictions
and weight the balance with the effects of his equity and
beneficence, and preserve the dynasty of his descendants,
on whom, of those who have passed away, be peace 1 and
may the NSsirtah Mahmudiah sovereignty* perpetually con¬
tinue in security and safety from the troubles of the end of
time, and from the accidents and vicissitudes of the
world!—that just and munificent Sultan, upright, benefi-

* I do not know what account of Yusuf our author may have read, but this

is different to what is contained in T^tbari and other writers of authority, and
very different to the account given in the [Chap, xit], and to his

own account of YQsuf in the first Section of this work. Yusuf was sold for
twenty pieces of silver.

4 'Written in some few copies of the text and by some other historians —

l*yal>timtab, und —I-yal-titmiab in some works , but the above appears
the correct mode of spelling. My oldest MS. gives the diacritical points. The
first part of this compound word, which it evidently is, is the same as in I-yal-
ArsaUn, I-yal-dttz,'&c. ; and the latter part of it is .the same as occurs in Kal*
timiob and the like. See note*, page 133. Buda’fint says he was so called
from having been bom on a night during an eclipse of the moon, and that the
Turks enll a child bora on such an occasion I-yal-timish. T doubt this, how.
ever, for the reasons just mentioned in the beginning of this note.

s Vamfn-i. lOial tfgh U’llah, Nasir-i-Amlr-ul-Muminta See pages 617 and
634.

* The sovereignty of his son, our author’s patron—Nll^ir-ud-Dtn, Mahmud

SUUt.

598 THB 7 ABA 8 :AT.I.NA$IRL

cent, a zealous and steadfast warrior against infidels, the
patronizer of the learned, the dispenser of justice, in pomp
like Faridun, in disposition like ^ubSd, in fame like K 3 >us,
in empire like Sikandar, and in majesty like Bahrlm, \iras,
Yusuf like, from out of the Ilbaii [or Albari] trills of
Turkistan, delivered over to merchants, until, from one
degree to another, he was raised to the throne of empire
and seat of dominion, so that the back of the Muhammadan
religion, through his sovereignty, waxed strong, and the
development of the Ahmadi faith, through his valour,
acquired pre-eminence. In intrepidity he turned out
another impetuous *A 11 , and, in liberality, a second Hatim-
i-Ta- 1 . Although the beneficent Sul^An, ^utb-ud-Dln—on
whom be peace! displayed to the world the bestowal of
hundreds of thousands, the august and beneficent Sultan,
Shams-ud-Dunva wa ud-Din—may he rest in peace!—in
place of every hundred thousand of his, used to bestow a
hundred [times a] hundred thousand, both in capacity and
in computation, as, both in this world and in the next, may
be accounted [in his favour].

Towards men of various sorts and degrees, ]l^a?is. Imams,
Muftis, and the like, and to darweshes and monks, land-
owners and farmers, traders, strangers and travellers from
great cities, his benefactions were universal. From the very
outset of his reign, and the dawn of the morning of his sove¬
reignty, in the congregating of eminent doctors of religion
and law, venerable Sayyids, Maliks, Amirs, Sadrs, and
[other] great men, the Sultan used, j’-early, to expend about
ten millions’'; and people from various parts of the world
he gathered together at the capital city of Dihl! *, which is

* 'What coin, whether tattgah or jitaJ, is not stated—there is a vast difference
between them.

■ An author, describing Dihlt,* states that, in the year 440 of BikrSmajtt,
R2jah Ana^>^ Tfin or TiMr—the n is nasal [This is the word which,
written in some works, instead of and and jjfy, has been mis¬

taken for and pura^Ji^ See note*, page 84, para. 2; and EiXlOT,
voL iL, pages 47, 426, and 437; and Thomas : Pathan Kings of Dehu,
page 57 )-~found^ the city of Dihlt, near to lodra-prastha. Subsequently,
in the year laoo^ or a little later, of the same era, RSe Pithorii founded a dty
and rnrtmiM whiclr awe named after himself. Outside this fort, to the east, he
raised a lofty structure which is stiU styled the Mahatt of RSe PithoriL In the
fortress TiiUpii i^utb-ud-Dtn, I-bak, and Sultkn S]iams>nd-Dtn, I-yal-tiinialb
dwelt. The 8Iiehr-i-Zaglian [ 7 ] or Qhiyas-pilr was founded in 6M K. ; wid
Gtlft-Khari [iji/ff'‘'^KUa Garhi," as Cunningham calls it] in 686 H. j

599

THE SUAMSIAH SULTANS OF HIND.

the seat of government of HindOstan, and the centre of
the circle of Islam, the sanctuary of the mandates and in¬
hibitions of the law, the kernel of the MuhS'nimadt religion,
the marrow of the Aliunadl belief, and the tabernacle of the
eastern parts of the universe—Guard it, O God, from
calamities, and molestation I This city, through the number
of the g^rants, and unbounded munificence of that pious
monarch, became the retreat and resting-place for the
learned, the virtuous, and the excellent of the various parts
of the worid ; and those who, by the mercy of God, the
most High, escaped from the toils of the calamities sus¬
tained by the provinces and cities of 'Ajam, and the mis¬
fortunes caused by the [irruption of the] infidel Mughals.
made the capital—the asylum of the universe—of that sove¬
reign their asylum, refuge, resting-place, and point of safety ;
and, up to the present day, those same rules are observed
and remain unchanged, and such may they ever continue !

From a number of credible persons* it has been heard
narrated after this manner, that, when the beneficent
Sultan, Shams-ud-Din. was young in years, and was called,
by command of the Most High, from- the territory of
Turkistan and the families of the Ilbar! [tribe] to the
empire of Islam and dominion of Hindustan, it so hap¬
pened that his father, who was named I-lam Khan had
numerous kindred, relations, dependents, and followers;
and [that] this [future] sovereign, from his earliest years,
was endowed with comeliness, intelligence, and goodness
of disposition to a great degree, so much so that his
brothers began to grow envious of these endowments.
They therefore brought him away from his mother and
father -under the pretence that he should get sight of a
herd of horses'. Like as in the case of Yusuf, they said,

bat it must have been begun or have been a suburb long before, as it is men¬
tioned certainly over fifty years before by our author. the

Knsllk-i-La’l, and Ftruz-fibad, now called the JCotUeth of Ftruz Shah, were
founded subsequently, besides many other additions of minor extent made. I
have not space to say more.

* Often referred to, but their names never mentioned.

** Others say his lather was the head or chief of a small community among
the divisioos or clans of the llbad tribe in -TurkistSn. Mia name is written
Yilam—^— Xban by some writers, and I-3ral——Slian by others.

I Some say he was taken by his brothers to some garden, under pretence of
going thither for recreation and diversion.

6oo

THE TABA^T-I-NA^IRI.

* Why, O father, dost thou not intrust Yusuf to us, seeing
that we are true friends of his ? Send him along urith us
to-morrow into the pastures that he may divert himself,
and we will be his protectors*;' and, when they brought
him where the herds of horses were, they sold him to
certain merchants; and some say that his uncle's sons
were among the party that sold him*. The merchants
brought him towards Bukhara, and sold him to one of the
kinsmen of the i^adr-i-Jahan* [the chief ecclesiastic] of
Bulchara, and, for some time, in that family of eminence
and sanctity, he remained. The most beneficent of that
family used to nourish him in the hall of his kindness, like
his own children in infancy.

One of the trustworthy has related*, saying: “*I heard
from the blessed lips of that monarch himself^ who said,
“ On a certain occasion, one of the [above-mentioned] family
gave me a small piece of money, saying: ‘Go into the market
and buy some grapes and bring them.’ When I set out
for the market, I lost by the way that bit of money ; and
through my youthful age, out of fear at what had hap¬
pened, I fell a crying. . Whilst thus lamenting, I was joined
by a good Darwesh who took me by the hand, and pur-
c^sed for me some grapes which he gave me; and he
made me promise [saying]: ‘When thou attainest unto
power and dominion thou wilt ever regard devotees and
ascetics with reverence, and watch over their weak’ 1
gave him my promise ; and all the prosperity and bluings,
which I acquired, I acquired through the compassionate
regard of that Darwesh.' ” The probabili^ is that never

■ B^ur’An, Chap. xii.

* Others say that bis brothers and brothers* sons were concerned In this
affair, and UiRt the merchants were of BuUlirS.

* See Dowson, in Elliot: India, voL iL page 320-1, who says—‘'When
they brought him to the drove of horses they sold him to the dealer. . . . The
horse-dealers took him to Bukhird, and sold him to one of the relations of the
thirfjudge of that city ” &c. The printed text here is perfectly correct and as
rendered above, with the exception of merchant for merchants in the first
sentence. The word bdeargau does not mean " horse-dealer *’ any more than
ast-dealer, for it signifies a merchant or trader.

$adr also does not mean judge only: it has other metuungs.

* Being himself in this SultSn's service, our author might have nwde himself
fl 5 -.^i^ainraH with the events of his early days, instead of trusting to "one
of the trustworthy,” and particularly as he stood so high in the monarch’s
favour.

THE SHAMSIAH SULTANS OF HIND.

6oi

was a sovereign of such exemplary faith, and of such kind-
heartedness* and reverence towards recluses, devotees,
divines, and doctors of religion and law, from the mother
of creation ever enwrapped in the swaddling bands of
dominion ^

From that priestly and saintly family a merchant, whom
they used to call the; BuJ^ara Hajl, purchased Shams-ud-
Dtn*. Subsequently, another merchant, whom they were
wont to style Jamal-ud-Din, Mubammad, of the TightTunic,
purchased him of the Bukhara Hajt, and brought him to
the city of Ghaznin. At that period, no Turk superior to
him in comeliness, commendable qualities, agreeable
manners, and of such indications of intelligence and saga¬
city, had they brought to that capital. He was mentioned
in terms of commendation to the Sultan-i- Gh azl. Mu’izz-
ud-Din, Muhammad, son of Sam, and command was given
[by the Sultan] that they should name his price. He, along
with another Turk, was in one team, and the latter Turk
they were in the habit of calling I-bak. The sum of a thou¬
sand dinars of pure Rukni gold was specified for the two*.

* The following curious anecdote is related of Sul{Sn Sb<uns-ud>Dtn,
l-yal'tuniah, by some authors. SuItSn I-yal-timi|li was greatly enamoured
of a Turkish slave.girl in his heram, whom he had purchased, and sought
her caresses, but was always tuiable, from some latent cause, to effect his object.
This happened upon several occasions. One day he was seated, having his
head anointed with some perfiuned oil by the hands of that same slave>girl,
when he felt some tears fall on his he^d from above. On looking up, be
found that she was weeping. He inquired of her the cause. She replied ** Once
1 had a brother who h^ just such a bald place on his head as you have, and
it reminds me of him.” On making further inquiries it was found that the
slave-girl was his own sister. They had both been sold as slaves, in their*
early childhood, by their inhuman half-brothers; and thus had Almighty
God saved him from committing a great crime. Budk’unt states in his
work, **I heard this story myself, from the Emperor Akbar's o'Wn lips, and
the monarch stated that this anecdote had been orally traced to Sul^Sn
Gh iygs-nd-Din. Balban himself.”

7 Compare Eliott, vol. ii. page 321. Our author must certainly have
had a recent birth in his family about the tipie he penned this account, or have
been expecting one, since he uses so many “ swaddling bands.”

* The Miinht lrhs h-iit.Tftwgrtlch states that, by some accounts, the kinsman
of the $adr-i-Jahan of BuJdiara sold Shams-ud-Dtn to SultSn Mu’izz-ud-Dln,
and that some say l^utb-ud-Dtn purchased him, and took him to HincL

* A few copies have two thousand, but one seems to be correct. Another
autlior says the sum was 1000 ICabkl dinars, a second that it was 1000 for
each, and Budk'iint says i lak of Uutgahs. It is not to be supposed that the
Sultan fixed the price> There were brokers whose business it was to value

Q q

6m the

The Khwaiah [merchant or masterj, jamSl-u^rDIdi^ Mtiham.
mad, of the Tight Tunic, declined selling him fShama-nrf.ntti j
for that amount; and the Sul$an commanded that no one
should purchase him, and that [the sale] should be prohibited.

The Khwajah, Jamal-ud-Din, Muhammad, after that he
had stayed at Ghaznm a year, determined to proceed to
Bu|chara, and he took Shams-ud-Din along with him
thither, and, for another three years, he remained in
Buldjara. After that he was brought to ^aznin a second
time, and continued there for the period of another year,
because it was not permitted that any one should purchase
him, until Sultan * Kutb-ud-Din, I-bak, after the holy war
of Nahrwalah and the conquest* of Gujarat, along with
Malik Na§ir-ud.Din, Husain-i-Khar-Mil». proceeded to
Ghaznm, and heard his story. Kutb-ud-Din solicited per¬
mission from Sultan Mu’izz-ud-Din, Muhammad, to pur¬
chase him. The Suftan replied : “ Since a command has
been issued that he should not be purchased at Ghaznin,
let them take him to the city of Dihli and there he can
be purchased

Kutb-ud-Dtn gave directions to Nigam-ud-Dtn, Mu¬
hammad *, to remain behind at Gh aznin, for the purpose
of transacting some affairs of his, and, after his own deter¬
mination of returning to Hindustan, requested him, on his
return, to bring along with him to Dihli, Jamal-ud-Dm
of the Tight Tunic, in order that the purchase of Shams-
ud-Din might be there effected. According to ]^utb-ud-
Din s command, Nigam-ud-Din, Muhammad, on his return,
brought them [the two slaves] along with him to the
capital, Dihli ; and Malik Kutb-ud-Din purchased both

slaves, and another writer says '• the brokers fixed the price of the two os our
author states.”

** .Malik ^utb-ud-Dtn then, and still a mamluk or slave.

• For the events of this .so called conquest, see the notes to the account of
^utb.ud-Din, f.hak. The word used signifies victory, taking a city, &c., as
well as conquest. The Mir’at-i-Jahan-Nuina more coirectly. says, after taking
Nahrwalah and chastisement of Bhtm Diw. See notes * and *, p. 516.

• Izz-ud-Dtb, ^usain, son of Khar-mil probably, although he may have

had a brother named Nasir-ud-Dln. See page 516. '

* The idiom varies considerably here in the different sets of copies of the
text. Another writer says “buying or selling him in ftharntn is not proper,
after commands to the contrary: let them take him ipto the Dibit territory
and there .sell him.”

* See note *, page 5 * 6 . paragraphs 6 and 7.

603

tHS SHiAMSlAXt OF HIND.

tlie Tories for the sum of a hundred thousand jitals *. The
other Turk, named I-bak, received the name of *jram-ghSj.
and was made Amir of Tabarhindah ; and. subsequently,
in the engagement which took place between Sultan Taj-
ud-Dfn, Yal-duz, and that beneficent of his time—Sultan
]^utb-ud-Din, I-bak, he was killed. Shams-ud-Din. I-yal-
timish. was made Sar-i-Jan-dar [chief of the Jan-dars or
Guards'] to ]l^utb-ud-Din, who styled him son, and
retained him near himself, and he continued to rise in
office and in dignity daily; and Kutb-ud-Din, discerning
within him proofs of rectitude and integrity, both in move¬
ment and at rest, outwardly as well as inwardly, by the
light thereof, advanced him from one position to another
until he raised him to the office of Amir-i-Shikar [Chief-

• This sum is mentioned by several authors, but they probably copy our
author’s words. Respecting the jUai see note page 584. If this is correct
it is evident that the jital must have been of a far higher value than there
mentioned, and much more than that assigned to it by Thomas in his
“ PathXn Kings of Delhi," page 160 =: of a silver tangah—ahcfaX. 2j.
or a riipt, or 100,000 jitals — 1562J rupfs. As his Khwajah had refused the
sum of xooo ruktu dinars for the two slaves, it is natural to suppose that he
would not have sold them for less than that to Igiiutb-ud-Dtn, yet, at the value
assigned to the jUat by the Haft-IVllm —1280 to the rupf—?!utb-ud-Dtn
would have purchased them for little over 78 rupls and 8 anahs, an impossible
sum. Another work, the Ta*karat-ul*Muliik, says 50 laks of jitals, but even
this would be but little over 3900 rupis. The sum mentioned by Buda’unf is
far more probable, namely a lak of tangahs. I have given elsewhere the
meaning of rukni. See Blochmann’s translation of the A-In, page 31.

The name of the other Mamluk, I-bak, is turned into Taghakh, instead of
Xarngt^j, in the revised text of Firightah, and instead of Tabarhindali it has
Patlundah—Firightah also asserts that Malik Kutb-ud-Din, I-bak,
gave the other slave, who bore another name, that of l-yal-timigh, but the
opposite is the fact. The same writer also states that I-yal-timigh accom¬
panied his master in the expedition against Kalinjar in 599 H. 'fu^Sbaj must
have been superior in every way, at that time, to have been, at once, made
Amir of Tabarhindah.

r The signification assigned by lexicographers to this word is armour-
bearer, but JSn-ddr also signifies a guardian, custodian, conservator, and the
like. Under the Sultans of Egypt it was the title of a class of officers, whose
duty was to guard the door of the Sultan, to convey and enforce his orders
with respect to Amtrs, and guard the prison styled the Zardah- kh a n ah [Zard
or Zarild in which persons of rank were confined. The Amlr-i-Jan-dar—
equivalent to Sar-l-Jan-dar here—was the chief of these officers. This is the
title, which, in Elliot, is turned into Sirj&nd&r Turkt referred to in note •,
page 608. See also Lane’s Arabian Nights, note ** to Chap. ^ Firigbtxh
says the jandars were the Jdt which means slaves ; but such cannot be cor-
iect,for Sultan Mu’ira-ud-Din hhnself was Sar-i -Jan-darto his brother C^iyag-
ud-Din. The jan-dars were getterally slaves, as most trustworthy, no doubL

Q q 2

6q4 the XABA?AT-IJIA$1RI

Huntsman]. Subsequently, when Gwaiiyfir was taken*,
he became Amir of Gwaliyur; and, after that, he acquired
the fief of the town of Baran and its dependencies. Some
time after this, as proofs of tact, enei^y, valour, and hig^h-
mindedness were unmistakeably displayed by him, and
the beneficent Sul(^, ^utb-ud-Din, I-bak, noticed and
marked all these [accomplishments] in him, he conferred
upon Shams-ud-Din the fief of the territory of Buda’un *.

When the SultSn-i- Gh azi, Mu’izz-ud-Din, Muhammad,
son of Sam, returned from his campaign against I^warazm,
and when, in the engagement at And-]s^ud, a reverse
befell the troops of Kh ita *, and the Khokhar * tribes had
begun to rebel and manifest contumacy, he moved from
Gh aznin for the purpose of making war on that unbelieving
people *. Malik KuJb-ud-Din, I-bak, in conformity with
the Sultan’s orders, led the [available] forces of Hindustan
to the scene of action*; and Shams-ud-Dm. with the con¬
tingent troops of Buda’un, accompanied him *.

During the engagement [which ensued], in the height of
the conflict, Shams-ud-Din. in all his panoply, rode right
into the water of the river Jilam [Jhilam] in which those
active rascals* had made their place of shelter, and dis¬
played great valour, and by the wounds inflicted by [his
men’s ? T arrows discomfited them; and his warlike feats,

* After it was surrendered rather. See page 546. Another writer sUtes
that Baran and its dependencies were added to his fief of Gwaliyur.

* At this time, and for some time after, the fief of the territory of Budfi’un
was the highest in the Dihlf kingdom.

I Our author in all the copies of the text, and the printed text likewise^ both
here, as well as under the reign of Sultkn Mu’izz-ud-Dtn, makes the fidse
statement, which his own words prove untrue, that the forces of ShitH were
defeated, when Mu’izz.ud-Dtn was so utterly overthrown with the loss of his
whole army before AndJdiud [Inddakhud], and would have been taken
captive but for the intervention of Sul^Sn ’Usman of SamrVand. Compare
£lliot, voL ii. page 322.

* See note >, page 481.

* These people were converted to Mul^ammadanism, according to liliishtah,
who perhaps had no authority for so stating previous to this. See same note,
last para., page 484.

* See note ‘, page 481, para. 4.

* Shams-ud- Din, according to another writer, havii^ assembled together a
considerable force from Buda’un and the Koh-pSyah, joined his master, Malik
l^utb-ud'Din.

* In some copies “ rabble rout” or '*set of vagabonds,” &c. They appear
to have taken shelter in one of the islands of the Jhilam.

1 The origiiud merely mentions that "by arrow wounds he caused those

THE ^ABSSIAH SOLTANS OF HIND.

60s

v^NUst in that water, reached such a pitch, that he was
despatching those infidels from the height of the waters to
the lowest depths" of Hell:—“They were drowned, and
cast into the fire [of hell]

During that feat of agility and gallant exploit, the eye
sf the Sultan-i- Gha zir Mu’izz-ud-Din, Muhammad, son of
SSLm, fell on these proofs of boldness and valour, and he
directed inquiry to be made respecting his quality. When
the royal mind became enlightened on the subject of who
he was, he sent fdr Shams-ud-Din. and distinguished him
by conferring a special dress of honour upon him ; and
commanded Malik Kutb-ud-Din, I-bak, saying: “Treat
I-val-timish well, for he will distinguish himself.” . The
Sultan further directed that they should draw up the deed
of his freedom, and regarded him with his royal counte¬
nance, and conferred upon him the felicity of the free.

When Sultan Kutb-ud-Din, I-bak, died at Lohor, the
Sipah-Salax' [Commander of Troops] ’Ali-i-Isma’il, who
was the Aihir-i-Dad [Lord Justice] of the capital city, Dihll,
in concert with other Amtrs and high officials, wrote letters

infidels discomfiture,” but it can scarcely refer to the arrows he alone may have
distpiatged. Firiglitah asserts that “he defeated the Khokhars, and killed
[his followers did?] 10,oqo or 12,000 of them, and was subsequently made
Amtr.ul'Umra but, unfortunately for this statement of the Dakhant historian,
no such office or title existed in those days.

* Two different vrords of the same signification are here used in the two sets
of copies which agree with each other, some have^ and the others

The different copyists could scarcely have been the cause of these differences in
the idiom which are very numerous throughout our author’s work.

* chap. bcxi. verse 25.

* There was no such Europeanized term in those days as “ comnuinder-in>
chief,” and, if there were, there would have been a great number of commanders,
for the term Sipah-Salfir is applied to several persons often at one and the

time. One of the oldest copies of the text calls ’Alt-i-Isma’tl [ 1 . e. ’Alt,
son of IsmS’tl] “ Amtr-Zadah,” an Amir’s son. The best Paris copy leaves
out the word Sipah-SiUar altogether, and'that reading would remove all
difficulty, but it is a solitary instance, for all the others have Amir-i-Dad. Dad
certainly means justice, equity, &c., and perhaps the person in question may
have heard complaints and disposed of them with the aid of Muftis and
l^ftfts; but the command of troops seems incompatible with the office of
judge. Some other authors say the Sipah>SSlar ’Alt-i-Isma’il, and the Amir-
i-D 2 d, and other grandees and offioals, invited him to come to Dibit and
assume the a6veTeignty, and some say ’Alt-i-Ismi’tl was governor of Dihlt,
and they style the other Amtr Dk’ud. Another writer says “ Amir of Dihlt,”
which is more probable. Firishtsh, according to the rtvised text, has ** Amtr
Dft’fid, the DtUmi” The latter word is absurd here. See note «, page 529.

6a6

THE TABA^AT-I-NASIRL

to Shams-ud-D!n, 1 -yal-timish. at Bud^’un, aiad beseught
him [to come thither and assume authority]^ Having'
come, he ascended the throne of the kingdom of Dihll in
the year 607 H., and took possession of it;' As the Turks
and Kutbl Amirs from different parts had gathered to*
gether before Dihll, and some of the Turks and Mu’izzt
Amirs had also united with them, and were intent upon
resistance * [to this usurpation of authority on the part of
I-yal-timish], they left Dihli, and came out, and they [all]
combined in the immediate neighbourhood, and broke out
into sedition and rebellion*. The august Sultan, Shams-ud-
Din, with the cavalry of the centre [contingents forming the
centre division of the Dibit troops] and his own immediate
followers, issued from the city of Dibit, and, in front of the
plain of Jud, overthrew them, and put most of the leaders
[of the party] to the sword *.

* Compare Elliot, vol. ii., page 32^3.

■ TTie Taj-ul-Ma’ajir says, in its usnal xnAated style, that ‘'the Sar-l-Jan-
dar, who was a Turk [he was not named ‘ Sirjdnddr TurU,’ as in
Elliot, voL ii., page 237 —for Sar-i>J 3 n-dar is the office this Turk held, see
note 1 , page 603], who was the head of all sedition, and who put forth his
arm to shed Musalm 3 n blood, with a body of sanguinary Turks [the Turks in
the service of the Ghurian Sultans were MusalmEns], broke out into rebellion.
Although the Sultan had been often urged to repress their outbreak, he
refrained, for some time, from doing so. At length he resolved to reduce
them, and with a considerable army,” &c.

This is no other than the affair mentioned under the account of Sultan
Aram gljSh, which see. What our author here means to say is, that those
Turks and Mu’izr.t and'E^utbt Amirs, and men of note, then in Dihll, did
not join the Sliamsi party, and they left the city and joined the partizans
of the late Sultan’s son, or, rather, adopted son, Aram Shah. The
Amirs and Turks, however, were not finally reduced till some time after.
See next page.

Another writer states that most of the ^utbt Amirs submitted, but that
some of them, in concert with several Mu’izzl Amirs who were in Dihll and
parts around, rose, collected together, and came to an engagement 'with
Skams-ud-Din and his party ; but their efforts were without avail, and they
were defeated and put to the sword.

The Taj-ul-Ma’agir states that the battle was fought close to the Bagh-i-Jun
[Jud 7 ] near the capital, but other authors I have been quoting from time to
time agree with the more modem copies of the text, and say it occurred in the
Jfin plain waste plain, &c.]; but all the oldest copies have as above.
The Bagh-i-Jud, not Jun, is often mentioned by our author.

The Zubdat-ut-TawarlJclt says the defeated Amirs were put to death at
different times. See page 529, and note *.

* Some few modem copies and the printed text have “ and directed that
their heads should be brought under .the sword,” but there is not a word about
their "horsemen:" Firishtah says two of the principal Amirs, Ak-Sunkar

6o7

THE SSAMSIAH SUL 7 ANS OF HIND.

j^ibsequentiy to this, Sultin Taj-ud-Din, Yal-duz, from
Lohoir and fihaznln entered into a compact with him, and
sent him a canopy of state and a Dur-bash *. Between
Sultan Shams-ud-Dtn and Malik [Sultan] Na$ir-ud-Din,
^aba-jah, contention used continually to arise for the
possession of Lohor, Tabarhindah, and Kuh|-am ; and, in
the year 614 H., the former inflicted a defeat upon Na^ir-
ud-Din, ]^ab 3 -jah.

Upon several other occasions, in different parts of the
territories of Hindustan*, hostilities arose between him
[Sh ams-ud-Dln] and the Amirs and Turks; but, as the
favour of the Most High was his aider and defender. He
used to award victory to him, and all those who used to
revolt against him, or rebel against his authority, used to be
reduced. The Divine assistance and protection having, for
a considerable time, been extended towards him, Sul$an

and Famikh Shah, were killed, and that the Sar-i-Jan-dar fled with some
others. The some author also states, contrary to his predecessors, that in
608 H. I-yal>timisll-marched against the rttler of the J^asbah [I] of Jalor—
—who bore the name of Odtsah [Odt Sah ?], reduced him and extorted
tribute I His authority for this is not given. At this period I-yal-timisb was
scarcely master of the Dihlt kingdom.

‘ This passage is thus rendered in Elliot, voL ii. page 323. “Sultdn
Tiju-d din made a treaty with him from Lahore and Ghazni and sent him
some insignia of royalty.”

The Dflr-lAsh here referred to, which literally signifies "stand aside!”
and does not mean " baton,” was a kind of spear with two horns or branches,
the wood of the staff of which used to be studded with jewels and ornamented
with gold and silver. This used to be carried before the sovereign when he
issued forth, in order that people, perceiving it from a distance, might know
that the king was coming, and that they might make way for him by standing
on one sid& In battle also it was carried, so that, bi case any due should ca.st
a lasso—which was made of leather, and continued in use down to nearly
recent times—in the direction of the king, it might, by the Dur-lnsli, be
turned aside. Some others say, a canopy of state and other emblems of
royalty were sent to I-yal-timigb.

Firiahtah states that I-yal-timisll accepted a canopy of state and a standard
from the Hakim of GTmzn fn for the latter’s honour’s sake 1 The Daklianl
historian truly is a very great authority!

Taj-jid-Dtn, 1-yal-duz, was strong and powerful at this time, and the
probability is that Shams-ud-Dtn. I-yal-tImisll> sought to lie recognized by
him as ruler of f^hnzn tn in succession to Sullan Mu'izz-ud-Dtn, thinking that
such recognition would tend to make the Mu’izzt chiefs and 1 iirks more
compliant to his rule. fihiyaj-ud-Dtn, Mahmud, Mu’izz-ud-Dtn s nephew,
at this time was either dead—for there is great discrepancy as to dales—or
he was powerless. See note •, p.Tge 526, para. 5. ^

• Hindustan refers here to the country immedi.rtely east, of Dihli,
the Do- 3 b of Antarbed, &c.

6 o8 THE TABA^T.I.NA$IRI.

Shams-ud-Dln brought under his jurisdiction all the diflfe-
rent parts of the kingdom, and the dependencies of the
capital, Dihli, together with Buda'un, Awadh, Banaras, and
the Siwalikh.

Sul(an Taj-ud-D!n, Yal-duz, being obliged to evacuate
[his territory] before the Kh warazml army, retired towards
Lohor ^; and between him and Sultan Shams-ud-Din. hos¬
tilities arose about the boundaries [of their dominions], and
an engagement took place between their respective armies
at Tara’in *, in the year 612 H., and Sultan Shams-ud-Din
was victorious. Sultan Taj-ud-Dln, Yal-duz, was taken
prisoner, and, in accordance with his [Shams-ud-Din’s] com¬
mand, they brought Yal-duz to Dihli, and sent him [from
thence] to Buda’un, and there he was buried *.

• ^ Taj-ud-Din, I-yal-duz, came into the Lahor province and took possession
of it and iu capital, and ousted the followers of Eaha-jah. See page 505.

• This engagement took place in the ncighbourho^ of Tara’tn, the scene
of Sultan Mu’izz-ud-Din’s defeat and subsequent victory over Rae PithorS.
The Taj.ul-Ma’ajir says, at this time, Shoms-ud-Dln, I-yal-timiah, was about
to undertake an expedition against some part of the Hindu territories as yet
unsubdued, or some HindQ chief, who, during the late disturbances consequent
on the death of ^futb-ud-Din, I.bak, and the dethronement of his son [adopted
son], by Shams-ud-Din. had freed himself from the MusalmSn yoke. Sec
ELI.tOT, vol. ii. page 239, note >, where these Turks—Turkish slaves or
'I'urkish chiefs, such as are referred to under Atfim Shah’s reign—are turned
into unconverted [for which there is not a shadow of a.uthority] Turks, and
are made out to have caused a revival of HindO power, because, in the
flatulent words of the Taj-ul-Ma’aglr, one, who is styled [tiot in the original
however] SiijandAr Turki, “opened his hand to shed the blood of Musalm^ns.”
In the meantime, Suljan TUj-ud-Dtn, I-yal'^uz, in 611 H., made some
demands upon gJ^ams-ud-Dln, who, from the fact of his accepting the dur-id^
and canopy of state, had acknowledged his superiority. Sliams-ud-Dln, being
unwilling to accept these demands, whatever they were—for they are not
specified in any author— 1 -yal.diiz, who had possessed himself of the Panjab,
advanced as far as Thantsar, resolved to enforce them, and was moving upon
Dihli, when Sboms-ud-Dln, now suflSciently powerful to resist them, resolved
to oppose him, and advanced to SSmand [SamanahT], and the troops of the
two kingdoms encountered near Taia’tn on the 3rd of gkawwll, 612 H,
I-yal-duz’s troops fell suddenly upon the left wing of the Dihli troops during
the engagement [they did so probably at the outsetl, but I-yal-dOz was
wounded by an arrow aimed at him by the Mu-ayyid-ul-Mulk [this is his title
only—the name is wanting. l-yal-dOz’s own Waztr bore that title, which is
one given to Warlrs], and I-yal'diu’s forces were defeated, and he was
himself taken prisoner.

• Taj-ud-Dtn, I-yal-duz, was taken to Dihli to be paraded, and was sent
away to the fortress of Buda’un. Why he was sent there—the fief of Bud&’un
had been so long Sbams.ud-Dln’s—is obvious enough. Our author tcx>

THE SQAMSIAH sultans OF HIND. 609

Subsequently, in the year 614 H., Shams-ud-Dln fought
an engagement with Malik [Sultan] Na$ir-ud-Din, ^abA-
jah *, and the latter was overthrown ; and, when the cala*
mities, consequent upon the appearance of Qhingiz Kha n,
the Mughal; fell upon Khurasan, in the year 618 H.*, Sultan
Jalal-ud-Din, Khwarazm Shah, defeated by the army
of infidels, retired in the direction of HindustAn. The
sedition of the Khwarazm Shahls reached the limits of [the
province of] Lohor *; and Sultan Shams-ud-Dln marched
from Dihli towards Lohor * with the forces of HindustAn, and
Sultan JalAl-ud-Din, Khwarazm ^Ah, having turned aside *

bones him silently without mentioning his death. The T<^bail^t-i-Akbait and
a few others say that he was at Buda’un until he died, but others state
that he was put to death there in the same year. The T 3 j-ul-Ma’afir which
was written at that period, at Dihlt, of course, is silent on this part of the
subject. See page 505, note •, and page 506.

> Bud&’Gnt makes a great blunder about this aflair: he says this was the
tJiirJ time Stiams-ud-ntn had marched against ^bil-jah, in 614 H., and that
the latter was drowned in the Panj-ab [the five rivere] in 615 H. I The
Taikaiat* jl-MulQk says the first notice Eiaba-jah had of Sbams-nd-Dtn’s
hostility was his appearance on the frontier of his province of Ochchah in
614 H. See note •, page 534.

■■ Fafili-t says in 617 H., but that some say 618 H. The best St.
Petersbuig copy of the text has 620 H.

* At this period, and for sometime aAer, the frontier of the Dihll kingdom
only extended to the Makhtklah Hills or.Salt Range. See note *, page 534.

* In his account pf Sultan JalSl-ud-Din, page 293, our author says, gjiams*

ud-Dln “ despatched a force from his armies ” against him. In the former
place the words used are —^here ^

» The words used here in all the copies, and in the printed text also, are
. < "■ jiL. which mean “turned aside,” and "jied before" is incorrect, and the text
says nothing whatever about “some fighting followed on the frontiers of La¬
hore the words are '*«* Compare Elliot, vol. ii. page 324.

SulISn Jalal-ud-Din had only about 10,000 men with him : otherwise, from
the easy way in which he overthrew l^aba-jah, there is great probability that,
being of Turkish lineage himself, on his mother’s side, the Turks in HindOsOn
might have gone over to him, and he would have overturned the kingdom of
Dibit. All that the “august” Sultan appear^ to have dope was to have
Jalal-ud-Din’s envoy put to death—some say he had him ^isoned—under
pretence that he was plotting against him, then, in order to gain time, sending
an emissary with rich presenU to moliify the SultSn, and, in order to try and
get him into his power, offering him an asylum near Dibit—an asylum possibly
like I-yal-dur met with at Buda’iin—a tomb. No doubt Sliams-ud-Dtn grt
troops ready, and no doubt despatched some towards the PanjSb, but he did
not go himself to face Jal&l-ud-Dtn. See note *, page 293. The BinBfat-
ut-Tawkrtfch states that Jalal-ud-Dln did acflially invest lAhor for a dme.

The Taxkarat of Daulat Sbih. quoted by Elliot, says SnltSn JaUl-ud>Dtn
was joined udiilst in the Sind-Sigar Do-ftbab by the LaUib Hatbabs,

6io THE TABA1;|:AT.I.NA$IRL

from the host of Hindustan, marched away towards Sind
and Slwastan *.

After these events, in the year 622 H., Sultan Shams-ud-
Din marched an army towards the terintory of Lakhana-
wad, and [Sultan] Gliiya§-ud-Din, ’Iwa;, ]^alj! ^ placed the
neck of service within the yoke of subjection, and presented
thirty elephants and eighty laks of treasure *, and read the
Kh utbah. and stamped the coin, in the sacred name of the
august Sultan, Shams-ud-Din.

In the year 623 H., the Sultan determined to take the
fortof Rantabhur, which, for its exceeding strength, solidity,
and impregnability, is famous and notorious throughout all

numbering 700 men, from the neighbourhood of BalliJt, and that the ruler of
Mult^ [B^b^'jah] made peace with Jalal-ud-Din; and, what is more
astonishing, that ’AlS-ud-Dln, Kai-B^ubad, the son of the king of Mind, gave
JalSl-ud-Dth his daughter in marriage, and the latter maintained power in
Hind for three years and seven months. Here is a perfect jumble of events,
and the Khokhar chief has been mutakcn for the “ King of Hind.”

A European writer however [D’Ahsson] makes still greater blunders. He
says that, when Jalal-ud-Dtn heard that Shams-ud-Dtn, I-yal-timigli, was
moving "to the astittaneeot Kubacha,” he went to meet him, but, instead of
fighting, I-yal-timish proposed peace and the hand of his daughter, which
were both accepted by the Sul{an! See note *, para. 2, page 293. Here
BnrSki fhe ^kjib, governor of Kirman, is mistaken for I-yal-timish 1

* One would scarcely conceive, from this, that SultUn Jalal-ud*Dtn annexed
great part of the Panjab and Sind, and that he remained nearly three years
in those parts, and only left them, on the despatch of a great army of
Mughals against him, and the fact of hLs presence l>eing much required in
’Irak- See the reign of Jalal-ud-Dln, pages 285—299.

1 Elphinstone, led astray by some translation probably, for no History
makes such a statement, makes several terrible errors here. He has: "In
the same year with this expedition to Sind [it took place two years after the
Lakhanawatt affiiir, in 624-5 ’^-li Altamsh marched against BakhtiAr Kiiii.JI
[Muhammad, son of BaUht-yHr, who is here referred to, had been i^mdeadtwenty
years'], who looked upon BehAr and Bengal as his own conquest; and, though
he professed obedience to Kutbu din {to whose daughter he was married), openly
dis^imed all dependence on his successor. [It was I-yol-timiall—his Altamsh
— not Muhanunad, son of BaUit-yar, who married Rutb-ud-Dln’s daughter.]
Altamsh was successful in this undertaking; he deprived BakhtiAr of BehAr,
(the government of which he conferred on his own son,) arid obliged him to
hold Bengal under the crown of Dehli. BakhtiAr made a subsequent
attempt to retrieve his losses, wias defeated by the prince who governed
BehAr, and lost his life in the conflict.” Thus Muhammad, son of Bakht-yAr,
Muhammad, son of Sheran. ’Alt, son of Mardan, and G]|iyA§-ud-Dtn, ’Iway—
four different rulers are made ONE. Tills truly is pretty history " to teach the
young idea” 1 See pages 574 and 594, and note *.

* There is not a word about "current coin ” in the text, but the TabaVat-i-
Akbait and some authors who copy from it say, 80,000 silver tangahs. Sec
note », page 584.

THE SHAMSIAH sultans OF HIND. 6 ii

Hindustan. They have narrated in the Chronicles of the
people of Hind after this manner, that seventy kings and
more had appeared [at various times] at the foot of its
walls, and not one of them had been able to reduce it *.
After some time however, in the year 623 H., it was taken
by the hands of the Sultan’s servants through the favour
of the Creator. A year subsequent to this, in 624 H., he
inarched against the fort of Man^awar * within the limits of
the Siwalikh [territory], and its capture, likewise, the Al¬
mighty God facilitated for him, and he came back, and much
booty fell into the hands of the servants of his dynasty.

Subsequently, in 625 H., the august Sulj^n Shams-ud-
Dln, I-yal-timigh, came with an army from the capital city,
Dihlt, into the territories of C chch ah and Multan ; and the
writer of these words, the Maulima Minhaj-i-Saraj, in the

• Accoitting to the Taj-ul-Ma’ajir, Rantabhur was in the possession of the
Musalmans in the time of Sullen Mu’iM-ud-Dtn. See Elliot : voL ii page
219, and note*, page 516^ para. 4.

I Months in some copies of the text.

• This remark shows that he was not himself present there.

• The oldest copies are as above——but some others have —
MandOd. and j**-—MandG. The Tab;^t-i-Akbar! has Mandawar; while
Budfi’Qnt, who copies from it, has Mandu in some copies, and Mandawar in
others ; and adds that T-yal-timiah annexed, with that stror^hold, the Koh-i-
SiwSJikh. Mir'ai-i-Jahan-Numa says, “Mandawar with all the forts and

of the Siw*likh.” Zubdat-ut-Tasmrtkh has “ Mandiwar—jjU:-”
FirjsJitah has “MandO—•J.i* [which is totally incorrect]—and all Siw 41 ikh.”

Our author, at page 468, mentions “ the seat of government, Ajmlr, with
the whole of the Siwalikh [territory], such as HSnsi, Suisutt,” &a ; and in-
eludes the whole tract of country south of the Himalayah, betwcCT the Ganga
and the Sutlaj, and extending as far south as Hknst in the Siw&likh or Koh-i-
Siwklikh ; and at page 200 he states that NSg-awr is in the SiwUikh also.
Some writers state that the Siwalikh extends as far west as the borders of
Kaahmtr. See notepage 468; and Elliot, voL ii. page 325, note*.
Tod says “ Mundorc [Mandawar] was the capital of the Purihars,” and capital
of Marwar, “ five miles N. of Jodyiur.” There is no doubt but that this is the
place, the ruins of which indicate what its immense strength must have been at
the time in question. ,It is described in Tod, vol. i. page 721; and in another
place he says it was taken from “Mokul,” the Purihar prince, by “ Rahup,
who “obtained Chectore in s. 125? (a d. »«>»). shortly after sustained the
attack of Shemsutliii [.Sullan ghams-ud-Din is referred to], whom he [Kahupj
met and twercamt in battle at Nagore.” Of course 1 who ro«r/./defeat Rajputs?
Shams-ud-Dtn did not come to the throne for mtu yean after the above dale.
Tlicre is a Mandawar-,,^—even now. a large with extensive budd¬

ings of burnt brick, and several great tMosjids, the remains of fonner da^ on
the route between Dslra-nagar and Saharan-pur, included m the Siwalikh as
above mentioned, but not the place heie refciTifd to.

6i3

THE TABA?AT.I.NA5IRI.

month of Rajab, in the year 624 H*, had reached the
territories of Sind, Ochch^h, and Multan, from the side
of G 2 iur and Khurasan *. On the ist of Rabi-ul-Awwal,
635 H.*, the august Sultan, Shams-ud-Dtn. I-val-timish.
reached the foot of the walls of the fort of O chch ah. Malik
[Sultan] Na$ir-ud-Din, Kaba-jah, had his camp pitched
before the gate of the l^a^bah [town] of Ahrawat ^ and the
whole of his fleet and boats, on board of which the baggage
and followers of his army were embarked, were moored in
the river in front* of the camp, when, on a Friday, after
[noon-day] prayers, swift messengers arrived from the
direction of Multan and gave information that Malik Na$ir-
ud-Din, Ai-yitim *, the feudatory of Lohor, had appeared
before the walls of Multan

The august Sultan, Shams-ud-Din, having set out by
way of Tabarhindah towards C chch ah. the capital of
Malik [Sultan] Na^ir-ud-Din, Kaba-jah, he fled to his fleet,
and, taking along with him all his forces, retired towards

* See note*, page 544, where he contradicts this statement,,and mentions
other dates. Chingiz Kha n died in 624 n. Several authors, including that of
the TabaVUt'i-Akbart and his protig^, Biida’unt, leave out this expedition of
I-yal-timigh against ^aba-jah ; but drown the latter in 614 H. ,having confounded
the first hostilities between them with the lost. See note *, page 532.

* At page 541 he says be came "from Khurasan by way of Ghazntn and
Baniln.”

* In his notice of Malik Naffr-ud-Dln, Ai-yitim, in Section XXII., our

author also says 625 H., but at page 541 he says 624 H. Under the account of
Malik Taj-ud-Dtn, Sanjar-i-GAZLAK Khan, in the same Section, our author
contradicts his statement here made, and says that this was tht first of

the nobles of the Dihlt dynasty with whom he came into contact, and that he
arrived before Ochchah with troops fifteen days before Sultan Sham3.ud.r)tn>«
arrival, and that he—the author—came out of Ochchah and went to his camp
to obtain an interview with Malik Taj-ud-Din on the i6th of $afar, 625 H,
At the bottom of the same page, however, he makes another statement, and
gives 628 H. as the date, and, over leaf, a different statement.

t This place is not now known, and the correct pronunciation may be Ihriiwat.
In some copies it is written Ahrawat, in others Ahurat, and in one Harfiwat;
but it is evidently the same word, with the first letter left out by the copyist.
The courses of the rivers in this tract have greatly altered since these days.

* This is the meaning of the word here used, but faeing or opposite
would be more appropriate ; as, wherever the camp might have been pitched,
it would have its front, not its rear, to the land.

* In the account given of this chiefs in the next Section, the vowel points
are given with the word ^1 Some few copies have what appears likc,.^l—
but what is supposed to be^ is but the end of the letter ^ carelessly written.

' He succeeded in getting possession of that stronghold by capitulation, and
the dependencies at once followed.

THE SHAVSIAH SUI.TANS OF HIND. 613

Bhakar, with orders to his Wazlr»the ’Ain>ul-Mulk, i^usain-
i-Aaha’rl •, to convey the treasure contained within the fort
of Cchchah towards the fort of Bhakar. Suljan Shams-
ud.Din pushed forward the van of his forces to the foot of the
walls of Cfibchah, under the [two] great Maliks at the head
of those troops, one [of whom] was Malik 'Izz-ud-Din, Mu-
hammad-i-Salari, who was the Amir-i-Hajib [Lord Cham-
berlmn] of the Court, and the other, Malik Taj-ud-Din,
Sanjar-i> Gazlak ^^n* ** , Sultant Shamsl *, who was the
Malik of Tabarhindah. Four days after this, the Sultan
himself, with the rest of the army, the elephants, baggage,
and followers, arrived before tlie wails of Oghchah, and the
camp was pitched *. The Wazir of his kingdom, the Nigam-
ul-Mulk, Muhammad, Junaidi) and other Maliks, weie then
despatched towards the fort of Bhakar in pursuit of Malik
[Sultan] Nafir-ud-Dln, l^aba-jah.

For a period of three months, hostilities went on at the
foot of the fortress of O chch ah ; and, on Tuesday, the
28th • of the sacred month, Jamadi-ul-Awwal, in the year
625 H.', that fort surrendered on terms of capitulation.
Malik [Sultan] Na$ir-ud.Dtn, l^aba-jah, in that same month,

* The 'ndJdl-i-Ma’f&in} of Mtr Ma’fum-i-Bhakhart [of Bhakar or Bhakhar t

it is written both ways] incorrectly styles him the Nifam-ul-Mulk, Muhammad,
son of As’ad. ’Ain-ul-lifulk, signifying the Eye of the State—like Nizam-ul-
Mulk—is not a name, hwt a title given to Wazirs. Asha*r is the name of an
’Arab tribe of the tribes of SabS, of which came the celebrated MusalmSn
doctors Abu Musa and Abu Their followers are styled Asha’rtrm.

The Wastr came doubtless of that family. “Ashghari” is not correct.
Compare Elliot here, voL iL page 32$.

** Or Gajzlak : it is written both vrays.

* “ Sultanl Sliamd” signifies that he was the Mamluk of Sultan Sbams-ud*
Din, I-yal-timiib, and rose to rank in his service. A notice ol him and others
will be found in Section XXII.

* The arrival of the Sul^ upon the scene has been already mentioned
above.

* Some copies of the text have *' one month,” but it is, no doubt, incorrect;
and in some the date is the 27th of the month; but in no copy is it the 29th,
although some modem copies have Jamldl-ul-Akhir.

r The 7 ahaVSt-{*Akbor}, Buda’uni, MuntaUiab-ut-TawarlUl, and some
others, all mention these events as taking place in 614 H. ; and they are all
wrong. In this case it is hardly probat)ie that the copyists of all these works
could have written 614 for 624, although otie might have done so.

The Tafkarat-ul-MttlQk states that Ifpitn-jah’s s<m, Malik ’Ala-ud-Dln,
BabrSm had concluded a peace on behalf of his father with I-yal-timiih,

and, after some days, ]^b2>jah himself left Bhakhar to return to Cfibsbab,
when he was [acddentally] drowned.

6i4

THE TABA^T.I-NA$IR].

of Jamadt-ul-AMTwal, in the same year, threw himself from
the walls of the fortress of Bhakar into the Panj-ab, and
drowned himself. Some time previous to this, he had
despatched his son, Malik ’Ala-ud-Dtn, BahrSm Shah, to
the presence of Sultan Shams-ud-Dln. I-yal-timish; and,
subsequently to that, the treasures and the remainder of
the followers of Malik [Sultan] Na$ir-ud-Dtn, l^abS-jah,
reached the presence of the Court, the Asylum of the
World.

That country [Sind], as far as the . shore of the ocean, was
acquired, and Malik Sinan-ud-Dln, Chatt-sar [or Jatl-sar],*

* The three oldest and best copies of the text have Qiatisar j ,■% "and
Jattsar——respectively. Of the other copies, taking the best in rota*
tion, one has —^which is evidently intended for one of the two former,
because the three points, which l<x>k like that of yi—are intended to mark —
thus distinction to ),P~and to prevent it being mistaken for the latter

letter ; another —•• third the rest —which has been read

as H^bash. which means an Abyssinian. The Sumrahs were, however, not
Africans, but of Raj-put descent AUt has —but not very distinct, and
Jami’-ut-Tawirtkll without points.

The historians of Sind state that that territory, up to the year 583 H.,
acknowledged the sway of the Ghaznawtds. and that, on the downiall of the
last of that dynasty, his dominions fell to SultSn (z]liyiil*ud-Dtn, Mut^ammad,
fihuri [Mu’izz-ud-Din’$ elder brother^ and Sind was then included in the
MulUin province; but all Sind cannot be meant here—not what we under¬
stand by Sind. SultSn Mu’izz-ud-Dtn, brother of QhiySS'Ud-Dfn, as early as
578 H. [see note *, page 452^ had reduced the territory of Dfwal or DibaL
Mtr Ma’sum says that, after SultSn Mu’izz-ud-Dfn’s assassination, IjjCutb-ud-
Dln, 1 -bak, possessed himself of Hind and Sind, and held sway over them,
and the Khutbah was read for him, fourteen years [four, no doubt, is meant],
after which his son, ArBm Sha h, succeeded him, but he was dethroned from
incapacity, and Shams-ud-Din. I-yal-timisb, raised to the sovereignty. ** At
this pericxl,” he continues, “the territory of Hindustan was divided into fojpr
states [that portion of Hindustan under MusalmEn sway rather]—Dihlt, which
pertained to Shams-ud-Din ; Multiln, O chch ah. and Sind, to Eubi-jah ;
Labor, to the officers of I-yal-duz, Sultan of Ghaznin ; and Lakhanawati, to
the Kh alj.” He then passes on to the Shalj in Siwastan, and Shams-ud-
Dln’s invasion of ^ba-jah’s dominions. See note *, page 542, para. 6.

Previous to this time, however, Dibal, or Lower Sind [Thathah was not even
founded at this period], had fallen into the hands of the Sumrah tribe, which
paid, nominally at least, allegiance to the Ghaznawtds. Before the downfall
of that dynasty, Mu’izz-ud-Dtn, Ghurf. subdued that territory; but still the
Gh urian hold upon it was nominal almost.

Of the Sumrah dynasty no less than seventeen chiefs ruled in Lower Sind,
according to the Muntakhab-ut-TawSrikh of Muhammad YQsuf; and, as near
as can be computed, from the years they are said to have reigned, the eleventh
of that dynasty, who lived at the time Shams-ud-Din ruled at Dihlt, was named
Chani.sar—v—o-’t—but this might be, and m all probability is meant for
there being but the difference of the dot of o between them. It Ls,

THE £[liAMSlAH SULJANS OF HIND.

6is

who was Walt [ruler] of Dtwal, presented himself at the
Shamst Court; and, when the blessed mind of that
monarch became disengaged through the successes [gained]
in that territory, he turned his face towards the sublime
seat of government, the city of Dihlt.

The author of this book, and writer of these pages, gained
the presence of the sublime Court of that monarch of the
orthodox, on the first day that the royal camp was pitched
before the walls of the fort of O chch ah* ; and, having
found favour in his sacred sight, when the royal camp
moved back again from before the walls of O chch ah. the
author was directed to deliver discourses within the enclo¬
sure of the sublime tents ; and, in association with the
victorious retinue of that beneficent sovereign, he arrived at
the city of Dihli in the month of Ramadan, 625 H.*

therefore, perfectly clear, that the name given by our author refers to the
eleventh of the Sumrah rulers, but the fourteenth according to the Tu^fat-uU
KirSm. Ifabash. of course, is totally out of the question. See also Elliot,
voL L page 485 j and voL ii. note *, page 389 j and Thomas ; Patii^n Kings,
page 99, note *.

• To pay court to the winning side, and, afterwards, as far as our piotLs
author was concerned, the son of Jl^bS-jah, and the Flruzf College too, might
follow ]^aba-jah to the bottom of the Indus.

•' It has already been mentioned [note •, para. 6, page S 4 *l H'at on* reason—
or, at least, the plea—why I-yal-timiglt attacked ]^ba-jah again, and marched
against Ofiheha^ was, that the Khalj fugitives, after their defeat by ^bh-jah,
and their chief had fallen in the battle, threw themselves upon his protection.
This happened towards the end of 633 H., and, early in 635 H., I-yal-timi|li
appeared before Kal>a-jah’s capital.

If our author is correct as to. the Sultan’s leaving O chch ah for Dlhll, the
laj-ul-Ma’asir [and Raufat-u^-^ala, which copies it probably] is very much
out ; for that work states that I-yal-timiah left the Wazir to carry on the ope¬
rations, and reached Dihlt again on the 14th of Rabt’-ul-Awwal [the third
month] of 624 il. ; whilst our author says he reached the capital in Ramadan
[the ninth month] of 625 H., a difference of eighteen months. One of the
oldest copies of the text, however, has 62611., while the other two oldest leave
out the rest of the sentence after the word “ Dihlt,” thus giving no date.

Mir Ma’suin, in his History, says:—“ I-yal-timish left his Waztr to carry
on operations against Uchchah, and returned to his capital, thus agreeing with
Taj-ul-Ma’agir, and that it capitulated, and was taken possession of on the
38th of Jamadi-ul-Awwal [6fth month] of 625 H.” It was the Waztr who
advanced against Bhakar and penetrated into Lower Sind, and, therefore, it is
impossible that Sinan-ud-Dfn, Chattsar or Jattsar, the Sumrah chief of Dibal,
could have presented himself at the Shamst Court, when the Sultan did not go
farther south than Ochchah. He did so to the Waztr probably, or to the
subsequent governor of the new conquest.

The I’aj-ul-Ma’asir further states that, at this time [of the Waztr’s invasion
of I.owcr Sind], twelve celebrated forts, which had never liefore been acquired.

6 i6

THE TABA]S^AT.I.NA$IRI.

At this time, emissaries from the Kha llfah's Court, bear¬
ing honours rich and ample, had reached the limits of
Nag-awr; and, on Monday, the 22nd of the month of
Rabi’-ul-Awwal, 626 H., they reached the Capital *. The city
was decorated [for the occasion] * and this sovereign, and
the Maliks, his sons—may they rest in peace!—and other
Maliks, his suite, and Slaves likewise, were honoured through
this act of policy [on the part] of the Khalifah*s Court.

After so much festivity and rejoicing, in the month of
Jamadl-ul-Awwal, of the before-mentioned year [626 H.] ^

were taken possession of with SlwastSn and Lflk, as far as the shores at the
ocean ; and that the Khuthah was read for the SnltSn, and the coin was
stamp>ed with his titles and name through a// the countries of Hindustfin [t], and
in the territories of En^dSr and MukrSn I The Wazfr, according to Mtr
Ma’f&m, was left in charge of the government of Sind, and remained in that
country up to the year 630 H., when he returned to Court, leaving Nur-ud>
Dtn, Muhammad, in charge of Sind.

Our author, however, in his notice of Malik Taj-ud-Dfn, Sanjar>i>Gazlak
Shin, who accompanied the Wazfr in his advance upon Bhakar, states that
he, not the Wazfr, was left in charge of the newly-acquired territory ; and he
is, doubtless, correct. The Wazfr had other duties to perform, and Mtr
Ma’^Qm has evidently mistaken the one for the other.

No doubt the new governor extended the Shamst authority in those parts,
but it was very temporary, and ceased almost with the reign of I-yal-timiah.
L&k is the place referred to at i>age 200, and has no connexion either with the
town, district, or mountains of Liakkf in Sind. There is, I think, some con¬
nexion between the Lak tribe of Kurds, at that time, and subsequently, located
in the southern part of SijistSn, and Kirmln, mentioned at page 317, note *.

s BudS’unf, who differs from all other writers, here, and contrary to the
work of his patron, says these were 'Arab envoys from Mifr, bearing with them
a dress of honour and honorary titles [a diploma conveying them], but the
'Abbast TOialffah of Bai^dld, not of Mifi^ was the sender—the Shaltfah,
Ab& Ja’far-i-Man^iir, entitled Al-Mustan^ir B’illah, the 36th 'AbbSsf—the
Ubaidf Isml’tlf Shi^at of Mi;r terminated in 567 H.

* When the inhabitants of eastern cities are ordered to decorate their houses

on the occasion of rejoicings such as above indicated, the tradespeople, in
particular, deck out their shops by hanging out rich shawls, broc^es, fine
dresses, all kinds of costly articles of merchandize, and even the ornaments
and trinkets of their women. Lamps and flags, attached to cords, are drawn
across the streets, and the doors and lower parts of private dwellings painted
in the gayest colours procurable. The Xabakat-i-Akbarf, followed by
Firiahtah and others, says domes^ &c.—were erected on this

joyful occasion.

According to the translaflon of this passage in oiur author in Elliot, vol. ii.
page 326^ the city was only "ador$ud with their presence but the printed
text, in this instance^ is quite correct, and, like the other copies of the text, has
which means " to prepare,” “ to adorn,” and the like.

* Several copies of the text, including the printed text, with but two excep¬
tions, have m ■!« ■ ■ dress of honour—for ie.-jA — service, also action, pro-

THE SBAMSIAH SULXANS OF HIND. 617

infonnation arrived of the decease of the august Malik,
N^ir-ud-Dln, Mahmud Shah, [the eldest son of SultSn
§hams-ud-Dm] ; and Balka Malik-i-Husam-ud-Din, ’Iway*.

policy, &C. It is ridiculous to imagine that honorary dresses would
Kh^ifah for all the Princes, Maliks, the Sultan’s suite,
ana nis ol^es. Conferring such honours broadcast would have lessened the
honour. Dres^ might have been sent for the Sultan’s sons, but even thU was
unusual. The Taj-ul-Ma’asir’s statement about this event is the most reliable.
It says that the Imam, Mustanjir B’illah, sent I-yal-timigh a drai of honour,
confirming him in the sovereignty of Hindustan, with the title
*** _i Sultan, which was received with much veneration. Next day,

^bl’-ul-Awwal, 626 H., was fixed for a general reception, at which
the Mialtfah’s diploma was read in the presence of the Sultan, his sons, and
great nobles. In this diploma it was declared that I-yal-timish was thereby
TOnfinned in the possession of all the territory which he had subdued. Great
joy was manifested on this auspicious occasion, and the Stiltan conferred robes
of honour upon the Shalifah’s envoys, and his own chiefs and nobles.”

What led to the arrival of these agents is not stated by historians, but it is
probable that I-yal-timiah sought this investiture from the Khalifah, and a
title, considering his dynasty sufficiently established to warrant it, when he,
some years before, despatched an agent to the Court of Baghdad, or that the
Shalifah had some policy of his own to serve in sending it. We may presume
that the title bestowed was that mentioned by our author at page 624 ; but
that is the same as bestowed by Mustan^iris predecessor, Un-Nfifir, upon
Sultan Mu’izz-ud-Dtn, Muhammad-i-Sam. Towards the end of the reign
of I-yal-timiah, the Waztr-ship is said to have been conferred upon the Fakhr-
ul-Mulk, Tjamt, who for thirty years had been Waztr of Baghdad. He
became irritated through some cause or other, left the ^altfah’s court, and
came to Dibit, which was not quite such an Ultima Thule as one modem
writer supposes, the Shutbah being read weekly for the Kbaltfah.

• That is to say, Balka Malik, of Ilusam-ud-Dtn, ’Iwa* rSultan Ghi ySj.
*Iwaa], the Sha^. In some copies of the text the date is 627 h., but,
in the oldest, and, in the majority, it is 628 H.

The hold, acquired over the territory of Lakhonawatt by I.yal-timish,
appears to have been of a very partial and temporary character ; and the events.
Which happened subsequently to his accommodation with Sultan Ghiy Sff.iid .Dtn,
’Iwaf, after he extorted tribute, as mentioned on a previous page, are involved in
much obscurity for many years subsequently. In the first place, there is some
discrepancy with respect to the year of GkiyUs-ud-Dln, ’Iwa^’s, death, which,
according to some accounts, including that of the Gaur MS., took pi«^ as
early as 617 h., after a reign of twelve years, namely, from 606 h. to 6x7 h.

I had better first mention, very briefly, what our author states, in his account
of the different Maliks, with reference to the occurrences following the defeat of
fihiyfig ud-Dtn, Twog, by Malik Nagir-ud-Din, Mahmud Shah . I-yal-timiah’s
son, and QliijAs-ud-Dtn’s being put to death by that prince, and then give (he
accounts of others, as our author has either suppressed some things, or his ideas
of them were confused ; and he does not [like other writers] even mention
tohtrt Nagir-ud-Dtn, Mahmud Shah, died, and we must suppose it was in
Awadh, not in Lakhanawatt.

Our author says, in his account of Malik Saif-ud-Dtn, I-bak-i-Ochcliah, but
without giving any dates, that, when Sultan I-yal-timish led his forces into the
territory of Lakhanawatt, and they had overthrown Balktl the TCh itlj—who, in

R r

6i8 THE TADA 9 :AT.I.NA$IRL

the Khali. rebelled in the territory of Lakhanawad. Sultan
§|iams-ud-Din led the contingents of Hindustan into that
country ; and, in the year 628 H., that rebel was secured.
The Sultan conferred the throne of Lakhanawati upon Malik
'Ala-ud-Din, Jani,—on whom be peace I —and, in the month

the list at the end of this reign, is styled Malik I]dltiySr-ud>Dtn, Daulat SI)"***
i-Bnlka, Afalik of Lakhanawati—he set out on his return to the capital, Dihlt,
and, on the way, received intimation that, through the decease of Malik T&j*
ud-Dtn, Sanjar-i-GAZ-LAK £liiin,at Ochcliah, that province and its dependencies
had been conferred upon him. llicn he says, that, after the decease of the son
of I.yal-timish, and that sovereign’s proceeding himself into Lakhanawati to
suppress the outbreak of Balka, the Khalj, he conferred the throne of
Lakhanawati upon'Malik ’Ala-ud-Din, Janl [the same who is styled, in the
list at the end of this reign, ** Shah-zadah of Turkistan”], and that, on his
removal from or loss of that dignity—but no date is given—Malik Saif-ud-
Din, i-bak'i-Yughan-Tat, got it. He greatly distinguished himself in those
parts, and, on one occasion, captured a number of elephants in the territory of
Bang, which be despatched to Dihll. For this affair he received the title of
Yughan-Tat. He held the government until 631 H., when he died in Lakhana*
watt. On his death, Malik ’Izz-ud>Dln, XuChnl'i'TuCb^ Kh an, was mside
governor of Lakhaimwatt, and there he was at the time of I-val-timish’s death,
after which events arose which 1 shall have to refer to subsequently ; but, I
may mention that, up to this time, the territory on both sides the Gang was
not under his authority, and that he only held the Barindah side.

I will now state what other writers say on this subject After Sultin
Ghivas-ud-Dln. 'Iwas, was put to death Na^ir-ud'Dln, MahmQd
son of I-yal>timiah, the former’s son, styled Nasir-ud>Dln-i>’Iwas, by some,
and ^usam-ud-Dlnd.’Iwas, by others, but these latter no doubt mean Balka
Malik, the son of ^usam-ud-Dln, ’Iwas, which was the fiither’s name before he
took the title of Sultan Ghiy^j'Ud-Dln [see page 580], assumed the sovereignty
over his father’s dominions, and held it some time; and, after the death of
Na;ir.ud-Dtn, Mahmud Shah, who held mere nominal authority over
Lakhaiiawati for one year, and, according to the Gaur MS., and jami’>ut-
Tawartkh [not Rashid-ud-Din’s], from 618 H. to 619 H., although both those
works state that he died in 626 h., affairs assumed such an aspect that I-3raLl-
timiab had to march into that country with the forces of Hindustan *' to quell
the sedition. ” No particulars are given respecting these operations, nor is the
fate of Balka Malik mentioned ; but, as most writers suite that he fell into the
power of I-yal>timiab< his fate may well be supposed.

ZuIxlat-ut-Tawarikh, in one place, says I-yal-tiniish entered the Lakhapawatt
territory in 627 H., and, in another place, that, in 628 H., he succeeded in taking
the son of ^usam-ud-Din, ’Iwap, after which he gave the throne to ’Icz*
ul'Muluk, Malik ’Ala-ud-Din, Jant; and, in this, other writers agree.

The Jami’-ut-Tawartkh, as well as Zubdat, says that ’Ala-ud-Dtn, JXnt,
reigned for three years and some months, but the former and the Gauf MS.
have “from 620 H. to 623 H.” Saif-ud-Din, !-bak-i-Yug 2 )u-Tat, succeeded,
on the removal of ’Ala-ud-Din, Jant, and ruled up. to (he time of his death,
which happened in 631 H. ; but the Gauf MS. says he ruled nine years—from
624 H. to 632.-H.—till he died. Malik ’Izz-ud-Dtn, ‘fughril-i-'yugjign Elian,
succeeded, and held the government for nearly fourteen years. Farther
mention of the feudatories of this province will be found in the next Section.

THE SHAMSIAH SUI.TANS OF HIND. 619

of Rajab of the same year, he returned again to the illus¬
trious capital, Dihli.

In the year 629 H., the Sultan came to the determination
of undertaking the reduction of the fort of Gwaliyur® ; and,
when the pavilion of his dominion was set up at the foot of
that stronghold, Mangal Diw ^ the accursed, the son of the
accursed Mai Diw, commenced hostilities. The Sultan
continued before that fortress for a period of eleven
months; and the writer of these words, in the month of
Sha’ban of the same year, set out from Dihlt, and turned
his face towards the threshold of sovereignty, and attained
that felicity. The author, at certain stated .periods, was
commanded to deliver discourses at the private pavilion.
Three times in each week discourses were fixed ; and,
when the month of Ramayan came round, a discourse used
to be delivered daily. During the whole ten days of Zi-
Hijjah, and ten days of Muharram, discourses were
delivered daily; but, during the other months, those same
three stated periods were observed weekly, so that ninety-
five times congregations were convened at the entrance of
the sublime pavilion*. On both days of the respective
festivals, Fitr and Uzha*. in three different places, the

* Alter the decease of 1^utb>Ud‘Dfn, I*balc, during the convulsion that then
ensued, the Hindus recovered this fortress, which had been surrendered to ^utb*
nd'Dfn, after Baha>ud-Dfn,TughriI, had reduced it to extremity, as mentioned
at page 546. Up to this time the Musalm&ns had no opportunity of recovering it.

1 The name of this Rae is very plainly written in several copies of the text,
including two of the three oldest and best copies, but the third—the best St.
Petersburg copy—^has—jia JiC*—Migal [evidently intended for JJd.— Mangal]
Bhawa Diw—^being thus different to all the other copies of the text. The
other.copies have and J f, ■ ■ Mtlag or Milalc, and Migal or Mfkal.

There*is equal, if not more, discrepancy with respect to the father’s name
also; bat, while the St. Petersburg ATS. has Mai Diw plainly written, the
other two oldest copies have ,4a J—a and which may be Ba.sil Diw.

The ranaining copies of the text collated have what appear to be
[I think this may be meant for MahS-pala and the like, which

are unintelligible.

The Zubdat'Ut-TawSrilch has Mangal Diw, son of Birbnl or Barbal Diw,
7 abal;at-i-Akkart jta «!.>.•« Mir’at-i-Jahan-Num& yi the Ta^karat-ul'*
Muluk J- olL. and FifiShfah Jt All these latter works, however,

do not mention the father’s name. At page 545, note*, the ntlcr of Gwaliyur
is styled RSe Sol 3 nk Pal, according to the Taj-ul>Ma’.’i.;ir.

■ In his notice of Malik HindQ Khan, in Section XXIT., our author relates
these matters in quite a different manner, conti^ioting a good deal of what he
here mentions.

* The festival, on breaking fast after the Muhammadan fast mouth, is called

R r 2

6 m the TABA^T*I.NA$IRL

prayers, prescribed for the festivals, were said, in which
number of places, on the greater festival of this

servant of the state, who is Minhaj-i-Saraj, was com¬
manded to read the< Kh utbah for the festival, and

the appointed prayers, at a spot opposite the northern face
of the fortress of Gwaliyur*, on which side the town is ; and
he was honoured with the presentation of a valuable dress
of honour.

The fortress was kept under investment, until Tuesday,
the 26th of the month Safar, 630 II., when the stronghold
of Gwaliyur was acquired. During the night, the accursed
Mangal Diw evacuated the fort and fled ; and about seven
hundred Gabrs* were directed to be brought to public exe¬
cution before the entrance of the sublime pavilion. After
that, Amirs and eminent men were appointed [to different
offices]. To the Majd-ul-Unva, Ziya-ud-Din, Junaidi, the
Sultan gave the office of Amir-i-Dad, the Sipah-Salar
[Commander of Troops], Rashid-ud-Din. 'Alt, was directed
to assume the office of Seneschal, and the Maulana, the
writer of this book, Minhaj-i-Saraj, was nominated to the
offices of ]^a?i, Khatib. and Imam, and appointed to pre¬
side over all matters of the law, and a rich dress of honour,
and an ample present, were conferred upon him*. May the
Most High God become the sustainer of the purified soul and
fragrant body of that victorious, beneficent, and just sove¬
reign, and patron of the enlightened! On the 2nd of the
month, Rabi’-ul-Akhir. of this same year the Sultan with¬
drew from before the fortress of Gwaliyur, and placed the
camp at about the distance of a league from the foot of
the walls in the direction of Dihli, the capital; and, at that

’Id-i-Fitr ; and the is on the tenth day of the last month of the Mutiam*

madan year, in commemoration of Ibmiilm’s offering up his son Isma’il, who,
according to their creed, was offered and not Isha)^.

> Coihpare Elliot, vol. ii. page 327. Our author, os there stated, could
scarcely have repeated prayers "at the fort of Gwalior on the northern side"
before the fort was taken. The town is situated to the N, W. of the fortress.

• The word used is Gabrs, not "persons and does not necessarily refer to
Tarsis, but is here applied to infidels or pagans, smd, therefore, an essay on
** Fire-Worship ” in these parts is wholly unnecessary. Some writers say 300
Gabrs, but the printed text has 800.

s Compare Elliot.

In this year, 630 H., I-yal-timisli purchased £c])iySs-ud-Dfn, Bal b a n , who,
subsequently, in the year 6^ H., succeeded this SultSn’s son on the throne of
Dihli.

THE SHAMSiAH SULTANS OF HIND. 6at

halting ground, the unper al naubat * five times daily was
assumed.

After he returned to the capital, in the year 632 * H., the

* The imperial naubat, which has been already explained at page 383, note*,
is turned into “a halt of five days” in Elliot, which see.

* In some copies the date is left out altogether, and, in others, the year
631 H. is given, and, in this, several other writers agree, but Alfi has 630 H.
BhilsSn, also, is not mentioned at all in some works ; and, moreover, our
author has confused matters here. There were not two great idol temples
destroyed, and it was the great temple dedicated to Maha-kal at Ujjain which
was three hundred years in building, not at BhilsSn—the town and fortress of
that name was destroyed. It is amusing to hear a Hindu relate that “the idol
was carried off to Dihlf, and cast down before the gateway of the jdmC masjid
[not the present one, which was built by Shah-i-Jahani for people to kick and
trample upon.”

It may interest the archaeologist to know that the idol is stated, by several
writers, to have been buried just beneath the surface ” close to the minarah of
red sandstone, whiqh is of great height and solidity, one of the many buildings
founded by Sultan Shams-ud-Din. I-val-timish. as is mentioned in two
inscriptions in the second and third stories,” but the numerous titles given to
that Sullan are the mere fancy of the artist. Another writer who wrote in
Jahangir’s time states that “ in old Dihli is the great Masjid, outside ofi which
is a minarah of immmense height, to ascend to the top of which is impossible.
Those who have measured it say it is 80 paces round at the base, and its height
130 [?] cubits A third author, who wrote an account of Dihlf from a

personal survey nearly a century since, confirms the above statements generally,
and gives some further particulars. He says :—“ In the mahall of R 5 e
Pithorii are two min^rahs, one of red sandstone, which consisted of seven;
[eight?] stories or divisions, and abput 200 yards [cubits] in height, and 15 in
thickness [sic in J/.S.S.]. Two of the stories have fallen from the effects of
lightning, and, from the building, thousands of mans of lead have been taken.
The erection of this minarah is, among many other buildings, attributed to Suljan
Shams-ud-Din. I-yal-timish, inscribed thereon in two or three places, and
close to it, on the west side, is the sepulchre of that great man. This minarah
is known by the name of the LAth of ^utb $ahib ”— neither the minar nor
the lath of Eu£b-ud-Din, I-bak, sovereign of Dihli, the authority for assigning
it to whom it would be curious to trace. “ On the north side is an obelisk of
brass [^y] about 10 cubits in height and 3 thick, of very great antiquity ;
and upon it is a vast deal of writing, both in the Hindu-i and Persian character.
In the Kotilah of Firuz Shah is another minarah of considerable height. It
is said to have been constructed of corundum stone \kurand\, ground, and
mixed with lac,” &fc The other work previously quoted says with respect to
this second minarah ; “ Within a structure called the Shikar-pah of SultAn

Ftriu Shah is a column in height about 30 cubits [^j.>], and about 3 in
thickness, which is supposed to be of one piece of stone, and that an equal
length lies buried among the bricks and rubbish around it. This would make
it, in all, a single stone of 60 cubits in total length, which it would have been
imposrible to have set upright,” &c.

The ¥u£b minArah is supposed by Europtean writers and archseologists—
misled, probably, by some incorrect translation of Persian works—to have
been not only named after Sullan lg[uj;b.u&-Din, f-bak, the first Turic Snlt&n

62^

THE TABA^AT-I-NA^IRL

Sultan led the hosts of Islam towards Malwah, and took
the fortress and town [or city] of Bhtlsan, and demolished
the idol-temple which took three hundred yeai^ in building,
and which, in altitude, was about one hundred ells. From
thence he advanced to Ujjain-Nagarf, and destroyed the
idol-temple of Maha-kal Diw. The effigy of Bikramajtt
who was sovereign of Ujjain-Nagari, and from whose reign
to the present time one thousand, three hundred % and
sixteen years have elapsed, and from whose reign they date
the Hindu-1 era, together with other effigies besides his,

of Dihli, but to have been founded by him also. The word ^utb was quite
sufficient proof in their imaginations ; but it is totally incorrect. The minarah
is styled the Lath of ^utb $Ahih, after a celebrated Muhammadan saint,
Kh wajah ]^utb-ud'Din,Bakllt-yar, Kaki,the Uslli [native of U sh near Baghdad^,
whom the Afghans claim as their peculiar saint by the title of “thtf Afghan
]|j^utb or Pole, ” the reason for which does not appear, but he probably resided
for a time in the Afghan country. He came into Hind, and, first, proceeded
to Multan during the reign of Suljan Na^ir-ud-Din, ]glaba~jah. Subsequently,
he went to DihlT. Such was his sanctity and the veneration in which he Mras
held, that Sultan Shams-ud-Pin. l-yal-timis 2 l, himself, came forth from the
city to receive him and do him reverence, and accompanied him into Dibit.
The Khwajah, however, took up his residence at Gilu-khait on account of the
scarcity of water in the city. '>^en Shaikh Jalabud-Dtn, the Bustamt, who
was the Shaikh-ul-Islam. died, I-yabtimigh wished him to take that office^
but the Kitb'i-Afghan declined it. He died on the 24th of the month of
Rabi’-ul-Awwal, 633 H. See the Mir’at-uUAfagh>i>Ah, M akhz an Afghani
and Tart]Eh*i‘Mura$;a’ [Pushto] of Af^al Khan, Khatak. Dom, in his
translation of Ni’mat-Ullah’s work [Part II., pages 2—57], gives 603 H. as the
date of his death, but, in a note, says he thinks the number ten has been left
out, but it was thirty, not ten. The correct date is 633 H.

It may be asked. How is it that the name of Kt>!|b-ud-Din, 1 -bak, is inscribed
on the minarah, and certain dates recorded ? to which the very natural reply
may be given, that gratitude led I-yal-timish to record, on the monument of
his erection, the name of his own master, benefactor, and father-in-law. The
first date, 589 H. refers to the occupation of Dibit as the Muhammadan capital,
the second, 592 h., to the foundation, probably, of the Kutbi masjiti, the third
date, 594 H., to its completion, and the fourth, 629 H., evidently refers to the
year in which I-yal-timish founded the Minarah of $ahib.

The insertion of the name of Sultan Qtiiyag-ud-Din, Muhammad-i-Sam, as
the Sultan-us-Salatin or Lord Paramount at the time of the conquest, is also
natural,’but it is passing strange— if the copy of the inscription as given by
Thomas [PathAn Kings, pages 21-22] is correct—that the name of his
brother—Mu’izz-ud-Dtn—the conqueror of Kae PithoiS, and establisher of the
Muhammadan rule at Dihli, should be left out. I cannot but think that the
inscription is not correctly given. See also APPENDIX A., pages iv. and v.

A writer in the Bengal Asiatic Journal, vol. xx., page 353, many years
back, endeavoured to correct the great error I have referred to. He says :—
“The Qotb Minfir has not its name from Qotb(ald)m) Aybak as Ritter
supposes, but from the Saint —Qotb aldyn Baktyar Kfiky who is buried not far
from it. ” See also note *, page 658..

7 In some copies two hundred.

THE SH AMSIAH sultans OP HIND. 6a3

which were formed of molten brass, together with the stone
[idol] of Maha-k§l, were carried away to Dihll, the capital.

In the year 633 H., the Sultan led the forces of Hindu¬
stan towards Bantan [or Banyan*], and, during that
march, weakness subdued his blessed person; and, when,
through bodily affliction, he came back from thence, on
Wednesday, the first of the month, ^a’ban, early in the
forenoon, the time chosen by the Astrologers, seated in a
covered litt^ *, he entered the capital of his kingdom, the
illustrious city of Dihll. After nineteen days, his illness
having increased, on Monday, the 20th of Sha’ban *, in the
year 633 H., he was removed from the abode of mortality
to the everlasting mansion*. His reign extended to a period
of twenty-six years. God enlighten his understanding I

* Tim is precisely the same tract that is mentioned at page 541, and which
has been turned inco "MitAan" in Elliot, voL ii. page 303, and is referred to
in several places in connexion with coming from Qliaznin, KafmSn and Nan^
danah into Sind and Multan. In all.the best copies it is written ,3!,^—Bantan
—generally, but sometimes —BanMn. Further research may tend to throw
some light upon its exact situation, but it evidently lies in the hill tmcts of the
Sind-SSgar Do-Sbah, or the opposite side of the Sind adjoining that part of the
Do-&bah in question—the country immediately west of the Salt Range. It
will be referred to again farther oil Nijam-ud-Din, A^mad, and Buda’unf,
and Firishtah—the two latter copy the former—all have Multan, and are totally
incorrect in this instance.

* Turned into “a htrwda oti the baek of an elephant" in Ei.LIOT, but there is
not a word about an elephant in the original Or in the printed text either.

Elphinstonk [page 323] makes very short work of the events of the last
eight years of this reign. After incorrectly stating that ^Caba-jah was drowned in
622 H. and “Bakkar” taken, he saj^ “Altamsh” was occupied for upwards
of six years in “ reducing the part of Hindostan which had remained inde¬
pendent. He began by taking Rintambdr. . . . He next took Mandu [see

page 611] in Malwa ; Gwdlidr, which had revolted, was recovered ; Bilsa w.as
likewise taken; and the occupation_of the ancient capital UJdn, with the
destruction of its celebrated temple, completed the conquest of Malwa. ” All
this is supposed to have taken place between 623 H., and 630 H., and yet
Ujjain-Nagari was not taken till two years after this 1

* There is some discrepancy respecting the date of I-yal-timish’s death.

The oldest copy of the text says the 26th, and, in this, two other copies
agree, but some have Saturday, the 20th. Zubdat-ut-Tawarikh has Monday,
the 26th of Sfea’ban, Tabakat-i-Akbarl, the 20th, Taakarat-ul-Muluk, the 8th
of Sh a’ban. and so has the Muntakiab-ut-Tawarikli. Mtr Ma’$um in one
AfS. says tlie 23rd, and, in two others, the 26th ; and Fasib'i sa3rs the 21st
of 634 H., and that he was buried in the old fami’ fnasjid.

Piriobtab follows the Tabakat-I-Akbari ; but neither Buda’flnf, the Haft
I^hn, Ebuia^at-ut-Tawarikb, Raufat-uj.§afa, nor Enbb-nt-Tawarlkb-i-
Hind, gjve the day of the month, and some merely mention the year 633 H.

1 Omr author having given an account of the attack by the Mul 3 .hklah

634

THE xabai:At.i«nA 51 RI.

Titles and names of the Sultan.

heretics on the congregation in the great masjid in the year 634 H. under the
reign of Ra;iyyat, it is strange that he is silent about the attack by the same
heretics on Sultan I-yaI>timtsht which is related by other writers. I-yal»
timish. who was considered a pattern of orthodoxy, and a most pious and
God-fearing ruler, was in the habit of going, without any ostentation, to the
gteat masjid on the Musalmw sabbath to say his prayers along with the
congregation, and to listen to the Imam’s discourse. The Mulhids of Dihli,
aware of his custom, plotted to take his life; and a body of them armed,
whilst the people of the congregation were occupied in their own devotions,
flocked into the masjid, drew their swords, and attempted to reach the place
where the ^nltan was, and martyred several persons in so doing. The Sultan,
however, succeeded in getting safely away, although the Mulhids endeavoured
to follow him. The people now crowded the roofs and walls and gate-ways
of the masjid, and with arrows, bricks, and stones, annihilated the heretics,
l-yal-timish is said to have afterwards put a number of this sect to the sword
in revenge for this attempt upon his life.

* In the work I have before referred to the following is said to have been
the inscription on one of I-yal-timish's early coins,

Reverse—Ztlj^ j jia hJI Jha IJ*

Obverse —J*.l wrA- 0 lkl.< <(XJ1 j jSfidl ^

according to which 6la H. was theyirr/ of his reign. The inscriptions may
be thus rendered:—Reverse:—“This Dtnar [was] struck in the capital [city]
Oihli, in the year 612.” ObverseThe Destroyer of paganism and error,
Sul|| 3 n Shams-ud-Din, in the first [year] of his reign. ” BudS’unt says his title
was Yamin-i-Amtr-ul-Muminin, but this is only one of the many titles given
him by our author. See note *, page- 597, and note *, page 614.

THE SHAMSIAH sultans OF HIND.

6as

Offspring,

SultSln Raisiyyat.

Sultan Mu’izz-ud-D!n, Bahram Shah.

[Malik] ]^utb-ud-Dm, Muhammad.

Malik Jalal-ud-Din, Mas'Gd Shah.

Malik Shihab-ud-Dln. Muhammad.

Sultan Na$ir-ud-Din, MahmGd Shah of Lakhnawatf.
Sult 3 n Rukn-ud-Din, Firuz Shah.

Sultan Na^tr-ud-Din, Mahmud Shah.

Malik [Sultan] Ghiyag-ud-DIn, Muhammad Shah.

Sultan 'Ala-ud-Din, Mas’ud Shah, son of Rukn-ud-Dtn,
Ftruz Shah.

Length of his reign :—

Twenty-six years.

/Casts of his Court.

Sa'd-ud-Dln, Gardaizt.

^a^t Jalal-ud-Dln, Gh aznawl.

]^a;i Na$ir-ud-Din, Kasill.

]^a|!i Kabir-ud-Dtn, l^a^t of the Army.

IVasTr of the Kingdom.

The Ni;am-ul-Mulk, Kamal-ud-Din, [Muhammad .>]
-i-Abu-Sa’id, Junaidt.

Standards.

On the right. Black: On the left. Red.

Motto on his august sigttet.

“ Greatness appertaineth unto God alone V

Capital of his Kingdom.

The city of Dihli.

His Maliks'.

Malik FirGz, I-yal-timish. the Salar, Shah-zadah [Prince]
of Kh warazm *.

* Or ** Greatness tielongs to God ’* [is exclusively Hb attribute]. J^ur’iin:
chap. 45, verse 36.

* These names are only contained in a few copies of the text, and do not
agree in all points. *nie above are contained in the two oldest copies, .and
thd others agree except where otherwbe mentioned.

* Thb b the person mentioned at page 199, but he should be more correctly
styled Malik'tSdah as he was not a Prince, but merely connected, on the
mother’s side> with the Kh waraxmt Sultan, Muhammad, father of JalU-ud-

6 M THE fAEAfAT^I-NAflRt

MalOc 'Ala>ud-Dtn, jSnt, ^^gh-aadah [Frince] of Tur-
kistSn.

Malik ]&utb-ud-Dtn, j^usain, son of 'Alt, son of Ab!
'Alf, Malik of Gh ur ^

Malik ’Izz-ud-Din, Kabir TCban-i-Aygy- *.

Malik Ikhtiyar-ud-Din. Husain.

Malik Taj-ud-Din, Sanjar-i-Gajz-lak ybS n.

Malik Ikhtiyar-ud-Din. Daulat Shah-i-Balka. son of
Husam-ud-Dtn, ’Iwa;, Kh alji. Malik of Lakhnawafi *.

'Malik-ul-Umra, Iftikhar-ud-Dm. Amir of Kafah.

Malik Rukn-ud-Din, Hamzah-i-'Abd-ul-Malik.

Malik BahaAid-Din, Bulad [Pulad]-i-Nasiri.

The Malik of Ghur, Nasir-ud-Din, Madini, Shansabanl.

Malik Na§ir-ud-Dtn, Mardan Shah. Muhammad-i- Ch a-
ush [the Pursuivant *].

Malik Nasir-ud-Din of Bindar [or Pindar], the Ch a-ush.

Malik Nasir-ud-Din-i-Tughan. Feoffee of Buda’un*.

Malik Tzz-ud-Din, Tughril, ]^utbi [Baha-i].

Malik Tzz-ud-Din, Bajcht-yar, the Khalj *.

Din. After the GhOris took NfahapCr in 596 H. [see page 380], he came
into Hindustan with his cousin, Taj>ud>Din, Binal-Tigin, afterwards ruler of
Nimroz of Sijistan.. See pages 199—202.

7 The same who commanded the right wing of SulJ&n *Al 3 -ud-Dtn, Utsuz’s,
army when that ruler of Qhur lost his life. See page 416. He is called
liasan in some copies of the text in this place. He was not Malik of Gh ur
but one of the Gh urian Maliks. He is mentioned many times in this work.

The best Paris copy and the I. O. L. MS. No. 1952, which generally agree,
have, after the above, Malik ’Izz-ud-Din, Muhammad, S&l&r'i-^arabt Mihdi,
which name is again mentioned in the List preceding the reign of N£sir-ud<
Din, Mahmud Shah, farther on.

* Instead of this name, in the Paris copy, comes Malik Tzz-ud-Dtn-i-’Abd-
ul-Jalil, brother’s son of Malik Ikhtiyar ud-Dtn, Amtr>i-Koh [Kafah T], while
the I. O. L. MS. has Malik Ikhtiyar-ud-Dtn, Muhammad, brother’s son of
the Malik-ul-Umra, Iftikhar-ud-Din, Amir-i-Koh.

* In two copies styled I-ran Shg. h-i-Balka- the Ehalj.

^ In one copy, Nn^tr-ud-Din, Muhammad, ^artg-i-Mardan SLah, and
Miran, Shall, and, in another, as two different persons. Gh iS.-u.qh has probably
been read by the copyist as ^arfsi but, in another, Na^ir-ud-Din, Mliin Shah,
tan of Muhammad-i-Cha-ush, SJialjt.

* This must be meant for Malik ’Izz-ud-Din, Tug]iril-i- 7 <*Cii?» TChgu, who
held the fief of Buda’un in 630 h.

* This is a specimen of the dependence we can place on our author’s tmik—
and statements. If he refers here to the conqueror of Bih&r and Lakha^awati,
he was dead Jivoyeart before I-yal-timiBh was raised to the throne^ in Act, bcgOM
I-yal-timigb’s funner master received his manumisuon. The word
oceafa in every copy containing these names, with the eaeeptkm of one^ sriddi

637

THE SBAMSiiH sultans OP HIND.

Malik l^larSl Sunkstr-i>NS^rf.

Malik Nastr-ud-Dtn, Ai-yitJm-i-Baha-t *.

Malik Asad-ud-Dln, Tez Sl^n-i-^utbt.

Malik HusAm-ud-Din, Aghul-Bak. Malik of Awadh *
Malik izt-ud-Din, 'Alt, Nagawrt, Siwalikhi.

Victories and Conquests.

Buda’un, Banaras and defeat of Rae Man*, fortress of
RantabhGr [or Ranthabhur], Jalor, victory over Taj-ud-
Din, Yal-duz and taking him prisoner, occupation of
Lohor, victory over the hostile Amtrs in front of the
Bagh-i-Jud [the Jud Garden], Tabarhindcih, Sursutt,
Kuhfam, victory over Na§ir-ud-Dtn, ]^aba-jcih^, subju¬
gation of Lakhanawatt and its territory, taking of glinnauj-
i-Sher-garh, Lalehr or Alehr*[?], Tirhut, Gw5liyur, Nan-
danah, GOjah [or Kujah], and* Sial-kot, Janjer[?], and
Mundudah or Mudah'[?], Ajmtr, Bihar, occupation of the
fortress of Lakhaiiawatt a second time, fortress of Man^awar,

bas CTiftA If this last name be correct, of course, the conqueror of Lakh¬
anawatt is not referred to.

’The’I, O. L. MS. has Malik Sheitb), the Khaljf after this; but he was no
more one of I-yal-timiall’s Maliks than Muhammad, son of BaUtt-yar, was.

• So styled from having been, at first, the slave of Malik Baha-ud-Dtn,
Tughril. Sultan Mu’Uz-nd-Dtn, Muhammad-i-Sam’s slave. ^

» These two last-named personages were Maliks of Sultan Mu’izz-ud-DIn’s
reign, and were but nominally dependent on f-bak, whilst he

was the Sultan’s Deputy in Hind. They are the same as those referred to at page
and were the entertwners and patrons of Muhammad, son of BaUt-yftr,
the Shalj, after he had been refused service at Ghazntn, and also at DihU.

Of the twenty-five Maliks most of whom were the slaves of I-yal-timioh,
separate accounts of whom are given in the next Section, but three can be re¬
cognized among the twenty-one here recorded; but several are rnentioned here,
as well as in the account of his reign, who are not mentioned in that Section;
while some others mentioned under his reign, are not mentioned here.

• In one copy for ^ ^ another^Ujlf—another J*'

The last three are wholly unintelligible.

1 Two of the oldest copies have—” and faking him prisoner,” but he was

not taken. , , j n t>

• This is wholly Unintelligible. It is written^ and^l and *<11 Iro-

bably or jJSKi-Kathehr or Kather—is meant.

• This place or tract is constantly mentioned In eotmexion with Nandanah,

and lies in that direction, without the shadow of doubL In two «>pies of the
text however—one the best Paris copy—it is and respectively.

It cannot be intended for '.jI=^Koh-i.Jud, for it Is clearly written several

in the text. In one place—in one of the oldest copies—it is written
4 «^but in several places it is as above,
t and and

633

THE xaba¥At.i-nA$ir!.

fort of Bhakar, O chch ah and Multan, Stwastan, Dibal,
fort of Thankir, fort of Bhilsan, Mllwah and the expe¬
dition against the unbelievers and extortion of tribute,
fort of Ujjain-Nagari and bringing away of the idol
of Maha-kal, which they have planted before the gateway
of the yamf Masjid at the capital city of Dihli in order
that all true believers might tread upon it *.

II. MALIK-US-SA'iD, NA§IR.UD-DiN. MAHMOf> SHAH, S(m
OF SULTAN SHAMS-UD-DIN, I-YAL-TIMISH.

Malik Na§ir-ud-Dln, Mabmud Shah, was the eldest son
of Sultan Shams-ud-Din ; and he was a beneficent, intelli¬
gent, sensible, and sagacious Prince*, and was endowed
with great energy and gallantry, and was munificent, and
benevolent.

The first fief which the Suljtan conferred upon him was
the district of Hans! *; and, after a considerable time, in
the year 623 H., the territory of Awadh was entrusted to
his charge. In that country that Prince performed nume¬
rous commendable actions, and carried on holy war, as by
the tenets of the faith enjoined, so that his praise for man¬
liness and boldness became diffused tliroughout the area of
Hindustan.

The accursed Bartu [or Britu], beneath whose sword
above a hundred and twenty thousand Musalmans had

* One copy of the text, not one of the oldest three, but a good copy, has
JSj-nagar here'entered as one of the victories or conquests ]

The greater number of the above so>calIed victories and conquests are not
even mentiotied in the reign of X-yal-timisll, und several of those that are were
effected by his Maliks ; but neither these nor the remainder arc all mentioned
in the account given of their lives. What our author often c.alls a tdclory may
be judged of from the mention of Kuhtam, Buda’un [which I-yal-timiah held
the fief of], ^innauj, and several other places, which were taken in Sul^^
Mu izz-ud>Din’s reign either by himself, or Malik ]Kutb-ud-Dtn, l-bak.

* Our author styles him “BSdshah.” which signifies a prince, as well as a
king. If he had any claims to be accounted a “sovereign,” beyond the
assignment to him of a canopy of state by his father, be should have been
included amoifg the kings of Lakhanawalt, or styled sovereign of Awadh;
for he never reigned at the capital, Dihli. His “ reigning ” over Lttkhana-
watt may be judged of from note page 617. He never coined money in his
own name.

* The TBj-ul-Ma’asir says Labor was his first fief. Sec also note *,
page 533.

629

THE SSAMSIAH sultans OF HIND.

attained martyrdom *, he overthrew and sent to Hell; and
the refractory infidels, who were in different parts of the
country of Awadh, he reduced and overcame, and brought
a considerable number under obedience.

From Awadh he resolved to march into Lakhanawati,
and the forces of Hindustan *, by command of the Sultan,
his father, were nominated to serve under him, and Maliks
of renown, such as Pulan and Malik 'Ala-ud-Dtn, Jam,
all of them proceeded towards Lakhanawati in attendance
on him. Sultan Gh ivas-ud-Dln. ’Iwaz, the Kh ali, had
inarched forces from Lakhanawati with the intention of [en¬
tering] the territory of Bang, and had left his head-quarters
empty [of defenders]. When the august Malik, Na§ir-ud-
Dtn, Mahmud Shah, reached that territory with his forces,
the fortress of Basan-koJ and the city of Lakhanawati fell
into his hands.

When the news reached Suljan Qhiyas-ud-Din, ’Iwaz,
the Shalj, he set out for Lakhanawati from the place where
he then was. Malik Nagir-ud-Din, Mafemud Shah, with
his forces, proceeded against him and defeated him, and
captured Sultan i^ya§-ud-Dln, 'Iwa?, with all his kins¬
men and the Khali Amirs, his treasures, and elephants".
He had Sultan Ghiyas-ud-Din, 'Iwaz, put to death, and
appropriated his treasures. From Lakhanawati Malik
Nagir-ud-Din, Ma^imud gjiah, sent sums of money in the
shape of presents to all the 'Ulama, the Say^ids, devotees,
recluses, and pious men of the capital, Dihli, and other
cities and towns. When the dresses of distinction from
Baghdad, the capital of the Siilafat, reached the presence

• Who this Hindu chief was we have no means of discovering, I fear, m
other subsequent writers do not notice these events at all. He is styled in
some of the best copies as above, which is probably meant for Prithu—

but, in others, the word is written —which may be Bartuh, liirtuh, or

Bart&ah, &C., but ia often written for v by copyists. , . , ,

• Bv the “forces of Hindustan” are meant the contingents of the feuda¬
tories east of the Jun and Gang. The word Hindustan is used by our author
with reference to the Antarbed Do 4 ibah generally, but, sometimes, to the

tracts east of the Gang as welL „ _ ,

7 In some copies of the text and The best copies “above

but no such person is mentiohed anjrwhere in the whole work, and I think it
may be the nick-name of some chief, who might be recognized under his
right name, unless it refers to the tenth in the List, page 6a6. , , .

• These events, and tliose which followed, have been detailed at length in

note *, page 617.

630

THE TABA^T-I-NA$IRL

r

of Sultan Shams-ud-Dtn. from among them he selected one
dress of great value and despatched it to Lakhanawatl
along with a red canopy of state ; and Malik Nasir-ud-Dtn,
Mahmud Shah, became exalted by [the bestowal of] that
canopy of state, the dress of honour, and great distinction.

All the Maliks and grandees of the kingdom of Hind
had their eyes upon him, that he would be the heir to the
Shamsi dominions, but the decree of destiny, according to
[the saying]—“ Man proposes, but God disp>oses " *—har¬
monizes not with human conceptions I A year and a half
afterwards, his sacred person became afflicted with disease
and weakness, ahd he died *. When the news of his
decease reached the capital [city of] Dihlt, all the people
manifested great grief thereat. May Almighty God make
the Sulpan of Islam, Na^ir-ud-Dln, Mahmud Shah, as he
is the heir to his name and title, the heir, during his life¬
time, of the whole of the Maliks and Sultans of that
dynasty, for the sake of His prophet and the whole of his
posterity I

III. SULTAN RUKN.UD.DlN, FIrOZ SHAH*. SON OF THE
SULTAN [J-yAL-TIMIfiH].

Sultan Rukn-ud-Din, Ftruz Shah, was a beneficent
.sovereign, of handsome exterior, was endowed with gentle¬
ness and humanity to perfection, and in bountifulness and
liberality he was a second Hatim.

His mother, Shah Turkan *, was a Turkish hand-maid,
and the head [woman] of all the Sultan’s haram, and

• “I.’homme propose, mais Dieu dispose.”

* He died in 626 H. Our author, subsequently, refers to him as the “ mar.

tyred ” Malik, cdl* an error, probably, for dU—august Malik], at

least such are the words in the various copies of the text, but u/Ajf he does not
say, neither does be state how or where he died. Subsequent writers who
depended upon our author for information dismiss this Prince in a few words ;
but Firishtah states that he died in or at Lakhanawatf, but this, like a good
many more of his statements, requires confirmation.

In the work I have previously referred to, the following is given as the
inscription on the first coins of this monarch :—

Reverse—^ I, ujS

Obverse—'"•r Jjlk. Oa.! Sir*

which may be thus rendered:—Reverse:—“The throne wbra left by Shams.
ud-Dfn, his foot thereon placed Rukn.ud.Dfn.” Obverse:—“ Coined at Dibit
in the first year of his reign with prosperity associated, 633 H.”

» In some copies styled “ Shudawandah.i-Jahan, Shah Turkan.”

THE SHAMSIAH sultans OF HIND. 631

great was the bounty, benevolence, and charity, of that
Malikah^, towards 'Ulama, Sayyids, priests, and recluses.

In the year 625 H.‘, Sultan Rukn-ud-Din, Firuz Shah,
obtained the fief of Buda’un, and a green canopy of state,
and the 'Ain-ul-Mulk, Husain-i-Ash’ari. who was [had
been Wazir of Malik [Sultan] Na§ir-ud-Din, I^aba-jah,
at this time, became the Wazir * of Sultan Rukn-ud-Din,
Firuz Shah.

When Sultan Shams-ud-Din returned to the capital,
Dihli, from Gwaliyur, after the capture of that fortress and
country, the territory of Lohor, which had been the seat of
government of the Kh usrau Maliki^ [dynasty], was con¬
ferred upon Sultan Rukn-ud-Din, Firuz Shah; and, on
Sultan Shams-ud-Din’s return from his last expedition,
from the river Sind and Banian”, he brought along with
him, to the capital, his son Rukn-ud-Din, Firuz Shah, for
the people had their eyes upon him, since, after [the late]
Malik Na$ir-ud-Din, Mahmud Shah, he was the eldest of
Sultan Shams-ud-Din’s sons*.

When that august Sultan passed from the kingdom of
this world to the throne of the world to come, the Maliks
and gp-andees of the kingdom, by j^reement, seated Rukn-

* At page 638, OUT author himself states that the mother of Raf iyyat was
the chief of all the ladies—head wife —of the late Sultan’s haram.

The word here used signifies that she was the first concubine the
late Sultan possessed, not the chief ttrife of his haram, nor is she entitled to
be styled Malikah, for the married women are the first in rank, and, of these,
one was Sultan ^utb-ud-Dli^ I-bak’s, daughter.

* TabaVat-i-Akbarl, and several others, have, like our author, who was
their chief authority for these events, 625 H., but Firisbtah has 626 H. His
authority, however, is of no importance whatever for the events of this early
period—even less than I was inclined to give him credit for—for I find, on
examination of his history for this and the five following reigns, that he has
bodily appropriated the text, in many places verbatim, of the Tabatat-i-Akbart,
even to the poetical quotations. The only difference is occasional verbal
alterations, and that, in most instances in which the former disposes of an
event in a few words, Firishtah, by exaggeration and hyperbole, manages to
lengthen out his own account.

* Or, in other words, his governor or tutor. Our author, however, does
not mean to say that he was styled Sultan at this period. See page 613.

1 The last of the fihazntn dynasty—Suljan Shusrau Malik.

* The Taba^t-i-Akbart [and Firishtah, of course] has SlwastSn, which is a
mistake for BaniSn, which is never mentioned in the former.

* The people may have had their eyes upon him, but I-yal-timisll had
already named his talented daughter, Ra*iyyat EJiMun, as his successor. See
pages 638, 639.

63 s

THE TABA](f;AT-I.NA$IRL

ud-Din upon the throne, on Tuesday, the 21st of the month
Sha’ban. 633 H.’, and the diadem and throne acquired
beauty and splendour from his dignity *, and excellence, and
elegance; and all rejoiced at his accession, and donned
honorary dresses [to testify their joy].

When the different Maliks returned * from the capital
[to their various posts], Sultan Rukn-ud-Dtn, Firuz Sh ah,
opened the door of his treasuries, and gave himself up to
pleasure, and began to expend, in the most profuse fashion,
the funds of the Bait-ul-Mal * in an improper manner.
Such was his excessive appetite for pleasure and sensual
enjoyments, that the business of the country, the concerns
of the state, and the regulation of the affairs of the king¬
dom fell into a state of disorder and confusion ; and his
mother, Shah Turkan, began to assume the decision and
disposal of state affairs, and used to issue [her] commands.
Perhaps it was by reason of this, that, during the lifetime
of the augu.st Sultan, Shams-ud-Din. she had experienced
envy and jealousy on the part of [some of the] other ladies
of the harain *, that she [now] brought misfortune upon
that party among the inmates of the haratn, and, by tyranny
and cruelty, destroyed several of them. The minds of
men in authority became troubled at their [the mother’s

* Two copies of the text, one an old one, have Tuestlay, the 29th of
Slia’ban. Taba^at-i-Akbari has Saturtlay, 633 H., without date or month,
and, of course, Firishtah has the same.

• Their joy was soon turned into grief. His dignified behaviour, and the
“adornment and splendour” the crown and throne derived from him is related
farther on.

» When they “ returned home" Elliot : vp]^. iu page 33a The original
is JJ 1—^ 1^^—there is not a word of home —a word unknown in the East.

* See note •, page 62.

• She, on the contrary, envied and was jealous of the others through their

having taken her place. No sooner did she obtain an opportunity than she
had the noble women—free-bom women—who had been married to the late
Sullan, put to death with much degradation, and the other Turkish concubines
.—women held in esteem by I-yal-timiah—she treated with great ignominy,
and wreaked upon them retribution for many years of envy and jealousy
which she had nourished towards them. Our author’s own words respecting
her, farther on, contradict this statement as to her benevolence, unless charity
towards recluses and the like—in his opinion—covered the multitude of her
sins. _

There is no authority whatever bejrond what our author 8a3rs here for styling
this concubine “Queen Mother,” and, at page 638, he himself says, Rafiyyat’s
mother u'as the ehiif wife of l-yal-timisli* See Thomas : PathXn Kings,
page 105, ajtd Elliot : India, vOI. ii. page 330.

THE SQAMSlAH SULTANS OF HIND. 633

and son’s3 conduct; and, in the face of all these acts, they
caused a son of the [late] Sultan, who was styled Kutb-ud-
Din *, and a youth of great worth and promise, by their direc¬
tions, to be deprived of the sight of both eyes, and afterwards
had him put to death. From these causes, the hostility of
the Maliks, in different parts, began to be manifested.

Malik Qhiyas-ud-Din, Muhammad Sh ah son of Sultan
Sl^ams-ud-Din, who was younger in years than Rukn-ud-
Din, FirQz Sh ah, displayed his hostility in Awadh, and
took possession of the whole of the trca.sure of Lakhana-
wati which was being conveyed to the capital, and, after
that, sacked and plundered several of the towns of Hindu¬
stan. Malik ’Izz-ud-Dtn, Muhammad, Salari, who was the
feudatory of Buda’un, broke out into rebellion ; and, in
another direction, Malik ’Izz-ud-Din, Kabir Khan-i-Ayaz %
feoffee of Multan, Malik Saif-ud-Dln, Kuji, who was feu-

• The youngest of Shams-ud-Din, I-yal-timigJi’s sons, quite a child, by
another concubine. Malik Saif-ud-Dtn, I-bak-i-U chch ah^ was feudatory of
Ochchah when Suljan I-yal-tiinish died, and, soon after, whilst Sultan Kukn*
ud-Dtn, Flruz Shah, and his Maliks were squabbling together, Malik Saif-
ud-Dtn, ^asan, the !^arlugh, from the direction of liantan, advanced into the
Panjab, and appeared before Multan. .Saif-ud-Din, I-bak, marched out of
O chch ah with his forces, anil gave him battle, and overthrew him. This was
a great success, as, since the death of l-yal-timish, enemies had sprung up on
all sides. Our author does not give the date of this success ; but it must have
been about the end of 633 H., or early in 634 li. In the former year Malik
^asan, the If^arlugh, coined money: he then held Gh azinn, Karman, and
Bantan,

What became of him is not known. He was probably put to death.
Malik Nu^rat-ud-Din, TS-yasa’i, was put in charge of the fief of Awadh by
Sultan Rafiyyat.

At this period likewise, the feudatories of Lakhanawatl and Lakhan-or were
contending together, and the latter was defeated and slain by the former,
and his fief seized. See next Section.

* In the account of him, in next Section, our author says he was removed
from MultSn by SultSn Rukn-ud-Dln, Firuz Shah, and the fief of SunSm was
oonferred upion him instead of MultHn.

Firtshtah.according to the ** revised te.xt ” by Briggs, and "MunshiMirKhelnU
Ali Khan,” makes a terrible mess of the names of persons here [Dow, of course^
is sufficiently ridiculous ih this mattq)’, and makes them totally unintelligible],
although he had the TabaV^t-i-Akbart, in which they are pretty correct, to
copy from. He could not have taken them from our author’s work. For
example ; Salart is turned into Salar, ’Al^-ud-Dln, JSnf, is turned into Sher
Ehibit, and Kabtr ShSn into Kabir Kh ant—with ^—the yd-i-nisbat, signi¬
fying ''of, ot relating to 9. Shiin,” 'S^'a-ship, &c., as if they were merdy
ofiScers or slaves xif a ShSn and a Kabtr Kh an, instead of the words

being their own titles ; and, in the same work, ihe word j* as in ’Izz-ud-Dfn,
is invariably turned into l i

S S

S34 the TABA^T-I.NA9IRI.

datory of HUnst, and Malik ’Ala-ud-Dtn, jSuit, who held the
fief of Lohor, united together, and began to act with hos¬
tility and contumacy •. Sultan Kukn-ud-Dfn, Flruz Shah,
with the determination of coercing them, moved an army
from the capital. The Waztr of the kingdom, the Ni^am-
ul-Mulk, Muhammad, Junaidi', became frightened, and
fled from Gilu-khari*, and retired towards Kol, and from
thence joined Malik‘'Izz-ud-Din, Muhammad, Salart; and
both of them joined Malik Jant and Malik Kujl.

Sultan Rukn-ud-Din, Firuz Shah, led his army towards
Kuhram. The Turk Amirs and the slaves of the house¬
hold, who were serving with the centre [the contingents
forming the centre] *, followed the example; and, in the

• Another writer says, that ’Izz>ud-Dfn, Kabtr Sh^-l-AySz, feudatory of
Multan, was incited to usurp the sovereignty of Dihll, and was trancing for the
purpose, but, before he could reach Kuhram, the other nobles seized Rukn-ud*
r>in, and set up his sister. Malik IkhtiySr-ud-Dln, Yliz-Bak-i.*fughril ITViSw -
who then held the office of Amlr-i-Majlis, was also concerned in this outbreak,
but the ringleader appears to have been Malik ’Izz-ud-Dfn, Balban-i-Kaahlu
Shan, whose contumacy was continual.

' Styled Karaal-ud-Dfn, [Mubammad]-i-Abu-Sa’td, Junaidt, in the list at
the end of Sultan ghams-ud-DinS reign, page 625.

* Firishtah’s text makes him "advance” to Gll&>khart, as if it were a
place many miles away, instead of being a suburb of the capital, Dihll.

One of the many new “cities,” so called, adjoining and included
in the name of Dihli, but more correctly a new suburb. It hag been generally
stated by Muiiamitiadan writers, that it was founded by Sultan Mu’izz-ud>Dtn
Kai'E^bad, in 686 H., but that cannot be correct from what our author says
in his account of Ulugh Shan farther on, where he styles it " the Shahr -i.
Nau of Gilu-kharJ.” When it was founded "the river Jun or Jaman flowed
close under its walls ; but now the river is some two kuroh to Ae east of it.
The tomb of the venerated Musalman saint, Sha h Nii;am>ud-Din, the
Buda’unt, is situated in Gilu-kharl.”

■ Compare Elliot ; vol. ii. page 331. We have so little Information
respecting the organization of the Dihli armies before the time of the Mughal
emperors that it is difficult to understand what is really meant here, as
as in several other places, by the mere word " ^b." All the MusalmSn
armies appear to have been arranged in the field, alter one and the same
fashion—a centre, which was the king’s post, a right and left wing, an advance
guard or van, supports, &c. The ’Arabic word kcUb signifies “ heart, soul,
kernel, marrow, middle,” &c., and, with respect to an army, the “centre,”
which, according to the arrangement above-mentioned, would be perfectly in¬
telligible with regard to an army in the field, but here might be understood,
by the reader, as if the centre division of a corps d'arm/e, under a regular
military organization, was stationed at Dihll, whidi is not the case ; but, from
what I gather from the Tartkh-i-Firuz Shaht. and other works, it evidently
refers to the corUirtgents which formed the kalb or centre of the Dihli forces
when in the field. These contingents were furnished by numerous feudatories.

THE SHAMSIAH SULTANS OF HIND.

vicinity of Man^Qr-pQr and Tara’in ^ they mart3rred the '
T 3 j-ul 'Mulk, Msd^mud, the Dabir [Secretary] *, the son
of the Mushrif-i-Mamalih *, and Baha-ud-Din, J^asan
[jHusain ?]-i-Ash*arl. Karim-ud-Din-i-Zahid [the Recluse],
!^iy 3 -ul-Mulk [ud-Din?], the son of the Nizam-ul-Mulk, Mu¬
hammad, Junaidi, Ni;am-ud-Din, ^afurhant^ the Khw ajah
Ra shi d-udi-Din. Maikant*, Amir Fakhr-ud-Din. the Dabir
[Secretary], and a number of other Tajzik officials* ; and,
in the month of Rabi’-ul-Awwal, in the year 634 H., Sultan
Ra^iyyat, who was the eldest daughter * of Sultan Shams-
ud-Din, entered upon open hostility with the mother of
Sultan Rukn-ud-Din, Firuz ^ah, at Dihli, and he, as
a matter of necessity, returned again towards the capital.
His mother had conspired against Sukan Ra^iyyat to put

great and small, whose fiefs lay in the immediate vicinity of the capital, and
whose contingents could be summoned to the king’s standard at a very short
notice. The Turk ghulams also formed part of the kalb, and they served
wherever the Sultan happened to be.

* Tara’tn, the place of Rae Pithora’s overthrow, so oflen mentioned, the
modem Talawart* There would be some difficulty in finding “ Ndrifn ” I
expect.

* This is the person who wrote a congratulatory poem on the debauchee’s
accession.

* A number of titles and names of offices occur in the following pages, many
of which, being pure old Turkish, it is impossible to fix exactly without a know¬
ledge of the Turkish language ; and, although, as far as similar names go, some
few of the offices in question existed in Akbar’s time, still there is much doubt
whether such offices under the Mughal dynasty were equivalent to those of a
similar designation during the reigns of the Turkish Slave dynasty, and would
require some years of study fully to elucidate. See the note on this subject
under the eighth year of Na;ir-ud-Dtn, Mahmud Shah’s reign farther on.

f ShafurkSnt or Shaburghant—a native of Shafurkan or Shabiirghan. In
some copies, SharkSni and Sarh^nt. See note >, page 127.

* In the best copies of the text this word is written as above, but in some
others it is MdlkSni, Batk^t, and Mankanf or Manganf.

* The ‘J'^baVat-i-Akbaii makes a terrible blunder here, and Firishtah, as a
matter of course, follows, as well as Buda’unt. The former work states that
all these persons, who were put to death, “separated from the Suljan’s army,
went off to Dihlt, and pledged their alliance to Rafiyyat Kh atun, eldest
daughter of the late Sultan, and raised her to the throne ’’11 Several other
authors who copy from the former work all fall into the same error without
mentioning the names. Compare Elliot, vol. ii. page 331, where this very
plain and easy passage, which is perfectly correct in the printed text, is
oonstnied so os to make all these TEJik officials, who were killed, the kilUra
of “ the T&zfk,” and Firishtah [Briggs,?] is quoted to prove that they deserted
Rnkn-nd-Dtn, Ftrflz S]^h.

t l-yal-timitth hnd, himself; declared her his heir and succesaor, as wnSiyt
fiSitheron. Shervasaothuonly daughter it is said.

S S 2

636 THE TABA?:AT.r-NA 5 IRL

her to death. The people of the city, upon this, rose, and
attacked the royal Ka$r [Castle], and seized the mother of
Rukn-ud-Din, Firuz Shah.

When Rukn-ud-Dtn, Firuz Shah, reached the city*,
insurrection had [already] broken out therein, and his
mother had been made prisoner. The centre contingents
[of the Dihli forces] and the Turk Amirs all entered
Dihli and joined Sultan Rayiyyat, pledged their allegiance
to her, and placed her on the throne. Having ascended
the throne, she despatched a force consisting of the
Turkish slaves and Amirs to Gilu-khari, so that they made
prisoner of Sultan Rukn-ud-Din, Firuz Shah, and brought
him into the city*. He was imprisoned and confined,
and, in that prison, he was received into the Almighty’s
mercy. This circumstance of his seizure, imprisonment,
and death* occurred on Sunday, the i8th of the month
Rabi’-ul-Awwal, in the year 634 H. ; and his reign was six
months and twenty-six days *.

Sultan Rukn-ud-Din, Firuz Shah, in munificence and
liberality, was a second ]^atim, and what he did, in expend¬
ing wealth, in conferring so many honorary dresses, and
the superfluity of presents, no king, at any time, or in any
reign, had done the like of; but his misfortune was this,
that his inclinations were wholly towards buffoonery, sen¬
suality, and diversion, and that he was entirely enslaved by
dissipation and debauchery; and most of his honorary
dresses and his presents were made to such people as
musicians and singers, buffoons and Ganymedes*. His
excessive waste of money was to such degree, that, while

* Two modern copies of the text have Gilu-khart.

* Whilst all this was going on at Dihlt, the feudatories of Lakhapawatt
and Laklian-or were having a private war of their own. See account of
Malik No. VII., in the next Section.

* If all this happened in one day, it is very certain that he must have been
put to death. Some copies have Jsi instead of

* Some copies have “ twenty-eight daysfrom the 20th of 633 H.,

the date of I-yal-timigh’s decease, to the l8th of Kabt’-ul-Awwal, 634 H., is
exactly six months and twenty-seven days.

* This b the person from whose dignity and el^ance “'the crown and throne
acquired adornment nnd splendour” I One author states, that, during the
short time he reigned, he and his mother managed to empty the treasury, and
to spend all the wealth accumulated during the reign of |^utb-ud-Dtn, {-bak,
and S]luo***>d-Dtn, I-yal-timiab.

THE ^AMSIAH SULJANS OF HIND.

*37

in a state of intoxication, seated on the back of an ele¬
phant, he would drive through the bazar of the city, scat¬
tering tangaJis of red gold which the people in the street
used to pick up, and gain advantage by. He had a passion
for frolic, and for riding elephants and the whole class of
elephant drivers derived immense benefit from his riches
and good-nature. It was not in his nature and disposi¬
tion to injure a human being, and this fact was the cause
of the wane of his dominion.

It is essential above all things, that sovereigns should
have justice in order that their subjects sho'uld dwell in
tranquillity and repose, and that they possess beneficence
so that their followers maybe satisfied and contented ; and
revelry and merriment, and companionship with the base
and ignoble, becomes the means of an empire’s ruin. The
Almighty pardon him 1

IV. sultan » ra?:ivvat.ud.dunvA wa uu-dIn, daughter
OF suljAn i.yal-timtsh.

Sultan Ra?iyyat—may she rest in peace!—was a great
sovereign, and sagacious, just, beneficent, the patron of the
learned, a dispenser of justice, the cherisher of her subjects,
and of warlike talent*, and was endowed with all the
admirable attributes and qualifications necessary for kings ;

» Elliot: vol. it. page 332—"He was very fond of playing W\i\\ and
riding upon elephants. ” Rather rough play.

“ Raf iyyat has a meaning, but " Raiiya ” and “ Rhiah ” mean nothing.
SullSn, from U-, signifies to have or possess power, to rule, &c.—a sovereign
—and is therefore as equally applicable to a female as a male, and does not
appear to have had anything to do with "affectation of the superior sex,”
nor her assumption, subsequently, of male attire when she rode forth. Her
name or title, like that of most other Muhammadans in these pages, is pure
’Arabic, the feminine form of the by no means uncommon name of RazI-ud-
Din. See Thomas: PathXn Kings, page io8.

The following is said to have been the inscription on the first coins of this
queen tenant, in which she is styled ' Umdat-un-Niswan —the great, or
illustrious among women :—

Obverse—*s*^ *«^ silkL, 'iiAi
Reverse—’ri"

whidt may be translate:—Reverse:—"The illustrious among women, the
Queen of the Age, Suljan Rafiyyat, daughter of gJjams-ud-Dtn, I-yal-timiah*”
Obverse:— "Coined at the city of Dihlf, 643 H., the first of the reign.”

• Compare Eluot : voL ii. page 332.

THE XABA^T. 1 .NA$IE!.

but, as she did not attain the destiny, in her creation,
of being computed among men, of what advantage were all
these excellent qualifications unto her ?

During the lifetime of the aug^ust Sultan, her father, she
exercised authority, and possessed great grandeur, on this
account, that her mother, Turkan Kh atun. was the greatest
[of the ladies] of the sublime haram *, and her place of
residence was the royal palace, the Ku^k-i-Firuzt [Ftruzl
Castle] *. As the august Sultan Shams-ud-Din used to
notice in her indications of sovereignty and high spirit,
although she was a daughter, and [consequently] veiled
from public gaze, when he returned after acquiring pos¬
session of Gwaliyur, he commanded the Taj-ul-Mulk,
Mahmud, the secretary—on whom be peace I—who was the
Mushrif-i-Mamalik * [Secretary of the State], to write out
a decree, naming his daughter as his heir-apparent, and she
was made his heir [accordingly] .

Whilst this decree was being written out, those servants
of the state, who had access to the presence of the Sultan,
made representation, saying: “ Inasmuch as he has grown¬
up sons who are eligible for the sovereignty, what .scheme
and what object has the Sultan of Islam in view in making
a daughter sovereign and heir-apparent-? Be pleased to

* This proves what our author meant by the word with respect to Rukn-
ud-Dtn, Flruz Shah’s mother, namely, that, in point of time or age, she was
the oldest of I-yal-timisb’s concubines. Rayiyyat Kh iitiin was his eldest
child and, in all probability, her mother was ^utb-ud-Din, I-bak’s daughter.

Our author is about the only authority available for the events of this period
—all other works, since written, merely copy from him and add from their
own fertile imaginations—and there is no authority for stating [Thomas:
PATHilN Kings, page 104] that Rafiyyat was “brought up undera^Ai/er
degree of freedom from the seclusion enjoined for females by the more severe
custom of ordering Muslim households,” for our author here states she was
"veiled from public gaze;" and it was only just before the end of her reign
that she assumed the dress of a male, which, really, is not very different from
that of a female—the addition of a head dress and tunic —as our author states.
Dow, as usual, misinterpreting Firightah, who copies from the X^ba^kt-i-
Akbarf, which copies our author, inco:rectly states that '*on her aeeestion,
changing her apparel, she assumed the imperial robes.” The “ imperial robes ”
equally with the rest are all his ou-n.

* In Elliot, it is made ** the chief royal palace in the Kushk-ffrozl 1 ”

* TiyaUMulh signifies the crown of the state : "Tiju-l-Afa/ih” nothing.

The word signifies an examiner or authenticator of records

and other writings, but not a teazir certainly, — dabir —a Tctaiy, a cleric,

a scribe. — mudabbir —an administrator, director, counsellor, &c. Ccnw

pare Elliot : voL ii. page 333.

THE SSAMSIAH sultans OF HIND. 639

remove this difficulty from our minds, as this deed does not
seem advisable to your humble servants.” The SultAn
replied : " My sons are engrossed in the pleasures of youth,
and none of them possesses the capability of managing the
affairs of the country, and by them the government of the
kingdom will not be carried out. After my death it will
be seen that not one of them will be found to be more
worthy of the heir-apparentship ^ than she, my daughter.”
The case turned out as that august monarch had pre¬
dicted.

When Sul$an Ra^iyyat ascended the throne of the king¬
dom, all things returned to their usual rules and customs;
but the Waztr of the kingdom, the Ni^am-ul-Mulk, Mu¬
hammad, Junaidi*, did not acknowledge her; and Malik
’Ala-ud-Din, Jani, Malik Saif-ud-Din, Kuji, Malik ’Izz-ud-
Dtn, Kabtr Kh an-i-Ayaz. Malik ’Izz-ud-Din, Muhammad,
Salart, and the Nizatfi-ul-Mulk, Muhammad, Junaidt*,
assembled from different parts before the gate of the city of
Dihlt, and commenced hostilities against Suljtan Ra^iyyat,
and this opposition continued for a considerable time. At
this period Malik Nugrat-ud-Din, Ta-yasa’P, the Mu’izzi,
who was feoffee of Awadh, marched with his forces from
that province, for the purpose of rendering aid to Sultan
Rafiyyat, in conformity with [her] commands, towards
Dihlt, the capital *. After he had crossed the river Gang,

* The Tafkarat-uI-MulGk says “one reason why I-yal-timish named her
as his successor was, that his son, Na^ir-ud-Din, Mahmud Shah—the second
son of that name—was so young in years ; and the Sultan remarked to his
minister, at the time, that, although in the form of a woman, she was in
reality a man.”

* He is styled, by some more modem writers, flba ndtrf, as if he were a
native of Chandirt or that that was a by-name of his, but it is incorrect. He
had been I-yal-timigll’s wazir for a considerable time.

* These are tbe Same who, as stated in Elliot, killed "the Tizflc.”

f He had been made feudatory of Awadh by Rafiyyat after Qhi^j-ud-Dfn,
Muhammad Shah’s rebellion. See page 633.

* Previous to these events, the feudatory of Ij^innauj, Malik Tamur Kh an-i-
E^fran, was despatched by Sultan Rafiyyat into the Gwaliyur territory and
Malwah in command of a force, and the expedition was successful, but no
particulars are given. The same Malik, when feudatory of Awadh, penetrated
as far as the Tirhut territory, and compelled the Raes and Ran.ahs, and
independent Hindu tribes in that part to pay tribute. He plundered the
territory of Bhatt-gfaun [anglicised Bhatgong] in NipSl on several occasions,
but neither particulars nor dates are given, but they all hapjx:ned before
this period.

THE TABA¥AT-|.NA9IKL

640

the hostile Maliks* who were before the city of Dibit
unexpectedly advanced to meet him, axrd took him
prisoner, and affliction overcame him, and he died *. The
stay of the hostile Maliks before the gate of Dihlt was
prolonged for a considerable time; but, as the good
fortune of Sultan Ra^iyyat was at the point of ascendancy,
the Sultan issued from the city, and directed her sublime
tent to be pitched at a place on the bank of the river J On ;
and, between the Turk Amirs who served at the stirrup of
sovereignty, and the hostile Maliks, conflicts took place
upon s veral occasions. At la.st, an accommodation was
arranged, but in a deceptive manner, and by the subtile
contrivance of Malik ’Izz-ud-Din, Mubammad, Salart*,
and Malik ’Izz-ud-Din, Kabir* Kh an-i-Ayaz. who, secretly,
went over to the Sulttan’s side, and, one night, met before
the entrance to the royal tent, with this stipulation, that
Malik Jani, Malik Saif-ud-Din, Kuji, and the Ni^am-ul-
Mulk, Muhammad, Junaidi, should be summoned, and be
taken into custody and imprisoned, in order that the sedi¬
tion might be quelled.

When these Maliks became aware that the state of
affairs was on this wise, they left their camp and fled.
The Sultan’s horsemen followed in pursuit, and Malik
Saif-ud-Din, Kuji, and his brother, Fakhr-ud-Din. fell into
their hands, and, subsequently to that, they were put to
death in prison. Malik ’Ala-ud-Din, Jani, was killed within
the limits of Payal *, at a village named Nakawan *, and his

* There is nothing about “ hostile gettem/s ” in the whole passage.

t He appears to have been suffering from illness when Sultan Rafiyyat
summoned him to her aid.

Malik 'Izz'ud-Dfn, Balban-i-Ka|]ilu ICkan- who was so ambitious^ and,
afterwards, gave so much trouble, was taken prisoner by the hostile Maliks
upon this occasion, but was subsequently released by them. He was treated
with great honour by SulJSn Raf iyyat. Compare Elliot here also.

* The 7 sbak 2 t*i-Akbait, which copies so much from our author, asserts,
however, that it was Sultan Rayiyyat, who, by her able ^contrivance, succeeded
in upsetting and confounding the disaffected Amirs. Firi ^tah, of course, agrees.

* Elliot, B&bul; Briggs, from Flrlshtah. Babool, Firishtah. text, Bftbol
——and Dow, omitted altogether. Pftyal, or Pftyil, is the name of a
very old place, giving name to the district, with a very Ic^y brick fort
visible from a great distance—I mention it as it appeared about a century
since—on one of the routes from Dihlt to LOdtanih. The X^^AA^T-I-
AkbarI gives the name of the district correctly, but leaves out the name of
the place. It is in Long. 76° 5', Lat. 30° 40^.

* In some copies NaUlwZn or NagSwin but the majority of the best

THE SHAMSIAH sultans OF HIND. 641

head was brought to the capital; and the Ni;FSni>ul>Mulk,
Muhammad, Junaidt, retired to the hills of Sir>mur BardSr*,
and there, after some time, he died.

Now that the affairs of Sultan Ra^iyyat’s government
became arranged, she gave the office of Wazir to the
Khwajah, Muhazzab*, who was the deputy of the Nizam-
ul-Mulk, and he likewise received the title of Nizam-ul-
Mulk. The charge of the army, as her lieutenant, was con¬
ferred upon Malik Saif-ud-Din, I-bak-i-Bihah^ who received
the title of ^utlugh, Kha n ; and Malik ’Izz-ud-Dtn, Kablr
Khan-i-Ayaz. received the fief of Lohor, and the kingdom
became pacified, and the power of the state widely
extended. From the territory of Lakhanawatt to Diwal
and Damtilah, all the Maliks and Amtrs manifested their
obedience and submission*. Suddenly, Malik Saif-ud-
Dln, I-bak-i-Bihal^, died, and the charge of the army was

copiet of the text are as above. The I. O. L. JIfS. No. r952 and that of the
R. A. S. A/'S. have both cxlW

■ See farther on, under the reign of Niflr-nd-Dfn, respecting this tract of
country.

* He is turned into Muhassab, Gkatnowu by Firiahtah, and by his trans*
lators, Dow and Briggs, respectively, ** Chaja Ghiznavi '* and “ Mihdy
Ghimivy.”

Mufaaiiab, but not Afahaab —which is meaningless—certainly does mean
**good, sincere,” &c., but in Elliot, vol. ii. page 334, this passage is
rendered sh« conferred the office of wazir on an upright officer who had been
the deputy of Nizdmu-l-Mulk, and he likewise received the title of Nizimu-U
Mulk;” but SbwSjah does not mean officer, and Muhazzab—1. e. Muhazjab.
ud'Dfn—is a proper name. Why not translate k always, and also translate
Nizam-ul-Mulk, which means regulator of the state, &c., and all other proper
names in the book after the same fashion 7 They all have meanings, the same
as Muhanab has. The amusing part of it is that four pages farther on, page
338, he is styled "the wazir Atahaabu-d din AfukamTuad 'Aua Alustaufl, and
so on until that "upright officer,” than whom no greater rascal is mentioned
in this work, met his reward in the "plain Hauz-r&ni.” See pages 651—653,
658, and 662, for the doings of that " upright officer.”

^ This word is written j*' and and is doubtful.

* The T^bak&t’i-Akbari here copies our author nearly word for word, and
Fiiiihtah copies the former in the same way. The Tazkarat-ul-Muliik says,
" through G^’s assistance she reduced the disaflTected Maliks to submission
and even the Malik of Lakhanawatt became obedient to her authority. ”

Malik *Izz>ud>Dtn, SllSn, on her accession, despatched

emissaries to the capital, and, to testify his homage, was continually sending
oflerings of great value from Lakhanawatt. On this account Suljan Razfyyat
conferred upon him a canopy of state, and standards, and great honour. At
this period Malik Mu-ayyid-nd>Dtn, Hindu Sban, held the fief of O chehaii,
which was conferred upon him by Sultfin Ra^iyyat.

643

THE TABA]S:AT.I.NA$IRt

bestowed upon Malik ]^utb-ud-Dtn, Husain, son of ’All,
Gh url *, and he was appointed to [march and relieve] the
fortress of Rantabhur, because the Hindus, after the
decease of the august Sultan, Shams-ud-Dln. I-val-timish.
had, for a considerable time, invested that preserved town
and stronghold Malik Kutb-ud-Dln, Husain, conducted
the forces to that part, withdrew the Musalman Amirs
[and their troops ?] out of that fortification, destroyed
the works, and retired, and returned to the capital
ag^in.

At this time, the Malik-i-Kablr [Great Malik] Ikhtiyar-
ud-Din, Aet-kin *, became Amlr^i-Hajib, and Malik Jamal-
ud-Din, Ya-lirut; the Habashl [Abyssinian or Ethiopian],
who was Lord of the Stables, acquired favour * in attend¬
ance upon the Suljan, so that the Turk Amirs and

* This great noble, whose name will be found in the list at the end of

I-yal-timiah's reign, ia styled as well as ^asan in several copies

indiscriminately, but the first appears correct. Much more about him will
be found in the last Section. He was forced to leave Ghdr through the
power of the Mughula.

* After he had raised the investment and relieved the place, the garrison
was withdrawn, and no effort made to hold the place. The reason does not
appear, and their giving up a strong place like this which had defied the efforts
of the Hindus so long seems strange. It was soon restored, however, by the
Hindus. Whal a flourish might have been made of this afialr in the RSjpQt
annals 1 It is mentioned in several places farther on.

* Firiglitah has not copied the. TabaV&t-i'Akbarl correctly here, and turns
him into Alb-Tigtn in the “revised text,” and JamSl-ud-Dln, Y&-kut, is turned
into a Arntr-ul-Umrii, which, although such a title did exist from Akbar’s
time downwards, was entirely unknown in these days.

* I think the character of this Princess has been assailed without just cause.
Thomas says [PathIn Kings, page 106} :—“ It was not that a virgin Queen
was forbidden to love—she might have indulged herself in a submissive Prince
Consort, or revelled almost unchecked In the dark recesses of the Palace
Harem—but wayward fancy pointed in a wrong direction, and led her to prefer
a perwn employed about her Court [he was Amir-i-Akhur, or Lord of the
Stables—Master of the Horse—a high ofHce only conferred upon distinguished
persons], an Abyssinian moreover, the favours extended to whom the Turkf
nobles resented with one accord.”

Elphinstone, who draws his inspiration from Briggs, is more correct in his
estimation of her character [and bofh Dow and Briggs are more correct than
usual in their rendering of Firishtah’s words here] and says [page 324,
Third ed. J:—■“ But her talents and virtues were insufficient to protect her from
a single weakness. It was shown in the extraordinary [?] marks of favour
which she showered [?] on her Master of the Horse ; who, to make her
partiality more degrading, was an Abyssinian slave [Who says he was a
slave? If be was, he was only a slave like most of her other Maliks and
Amin]. It does not appear that her fondness {?] was criminal, since ikt

643

THE fiHAMSiAH SULJ.ANS OF HIND,

Maliks began to be envious tliereat; and it so chanced to
happen that Sultan Ra^i^^yat laid aside the female dress
and issued from [her] seclusion, and donned the tunic, and
assumed the head-dress [of a man], and appeared among
the people; and, when she rode out on an elephant, at the
time of mounting it, all people used, openly, to see her.

At this period she issued commands for her troops to pro¬
ceed to Gwaliyur, and bestowed rich and valuable presents.
As disobedience was out of the question ^ this servant

greatest breach of decorum alleged against her is her allowing the Abyssinian to
lift her on her horse la horse she never rode—always an elephant].”

Here is a proc^ of what a deal may be made out of a little. Our author
is the sole authority for these statements in the Taba^at-i-Akbart, Firishtah.
and Bud£’uni, each of whom, in rotation, enlarge upon, and exaggerate our
author’s words—the last reverses them by saying that when she mounted an
elephant or horse she leant upon him, Jamal-ud-Din, Ya-l|cut, the Abyssinian.
He was Amir-i-Akhur before she came to the throne apparently, for she does
not seem to have raised him to that office ; and it was only in the last year of
her reign that she assumed male attire, vthen she appeared in public. Our
author does not say so, but all the T<^i>i 43 i-i*Akbari mentions is, that Jamal-
ud-D!n, Y&-lf:Qt, was treated with favour, a mere transliteration of our author’s
words—ah*' —the same term as he uses with respect to Suljan Mu’usz-ud-

Din’s favour towards his slave, !|^utb-ud-Dtn, 1 -bak—and that the Turk
Maliks and Amfrs were envious in consequence. All that that work states, in
addition to our author’s words— he does not say so —is, that when she
mounted to ride forth, the Master of the Horse, who had become Amtr-ul-UmrS
[such an office did not exist in those days, and our author never mentions
such an office], used to aid her to mount by taking her under the arm-pit [J^ j—
but leaning on his arm or shoulder, in mounting, would seem to be nearer
the intended meaning. Now it is very possible that it was part of the duty of
the Lord of the Stables, or his privilege, to assist his sovereign to mount when
he or she rode forth, and that such an act might not have been occasioned
through any undue familiarity ; only what was applicable to a male sovereign,
according to Musalm£n ideas, was not so to a female. However, the Lord of
the Stables being an Abyssinian, this was, with her assumption of male attire,
plea sufficient to the rel>eliious Turk Maliks—the remainder of the ** Ch ihil-
gant Mamluks,” of whom more hereafter—to rebel against a sovereign too
energetic for them in their ambitious designs. The Zubdat-ut-TawartUi
makes no reference to the Abyssinian whatever.

* I cannot conceive Why our author should be styled a rebel —“a forgiven
rebel ”—because of this' sentence in the text. Gwaliyur had a governor or
seneschal placed therein by Sull&n Rafiyyat’s father in 630 h., and our author
Was there. Wlien Rafiyyat came to the throne, she sent a force

under Malik Taj-ud-Din, Sanjar [No. XIV, in the next Section], and re¬
lieved the garrison,‘and, as the governor—Raah^d-ud-Dtn, ’Alt—from our
author’s invocation respecting him, appears to have died there, a new
feudatory was despatch^, at the same time probably, although he is not
mentioned, as, after the death of Rasbtd-ud-Dtn, ’Alt, the next official in
authority was the Amtr-i-Dad, ^iyk-ud-Dtn, Junaidt, who, being a kinsman of

*44

THB TABA9AT.I-NA${RL

of the victorious kingdom, Minhlj>i-Sar 3 j, in conjunction
with the Malik *-ul-Umr 3 [the chief of Amtrs] ?iy5-ud-
Din, Junaidi, who was the Amlr>i-Dad [chief magistratej
of Gwaliyur, and with other persons of note, came out of
the preserved fortress of Gwaliyur on the 1st of the
month Sha’ban, 635 H., and returned to Dibit, the capital ;
and, in this same month, Sultan Rafiyyat committed
to the charge of this servant [the author] the Na$iriah
College at the capital, to which was added the ]^aft-ship of
Gwaliyur*.

In the year 637 H. Malik ’Izz-ud-Dtn, Kabtr Khan -i-
Ayaz, who was the feudatory of Lohor, began to show a
rebellious spirit Sultan Ra^iyyat led an army towards

the rebel Waztr, who refuted to acknowledge SultSn Ra^iyyat, may have been
suspected of disaffection. No cause for rebellion appears, neither is any
rebellion mentioned ; and, on our author’s arrival at Dihlt, another office was
bestowed upon him, in addition to his ^P&sl-ship of Gwaliyur, which he still
held. See Thomas : PathXn Kings, page 105.

** In 631 H. some emissaries from Bolka Khan, son of Tu^t [Juji], son bf
Chingiz Shkn, arrived at the Court of Sultan I-yal-timigh from ]g[ifch&h«
bringing presents for him, but, as that Sulpu had refi|iined from holding any
intercourse whatever with the^Mughal lUi&ns, and was wont to send their
agents out of his territory when they came, he would not put thete emissaries
to death, and desired to dismiss them kindly. They were sent to Gwaliyiir,
however, [this was one way of dismissing them kindly], and the party, being
all MusalrnSns, rued to present themselves in the Masjid there every Friday,
and said their prayers behind the author of this book [he acting as Imam],
until the reign of Sultan Rafiyyat, when the author, after six years’ absence,
returned to Dihlt from Gwaliyur, and was promoted, by the favour of that
sovereign. At this time directions were given for these emissaries of Balka
Kh an to be removed to ^imauj, and there detained; and there they were kept
until they died.”

* In some copies, Majd-ubUmtH, but the above seems the Correct title,
Majd signifies glory, grandeur—the glory or grandeur of Amtrs does not sound
very correct. It was an honorary title merely.

* In this case he—“the pardoned ” rebel—must have performed one of these
two offices by deputy.

’ In the account of this Malik our author states that Kabfr Kba n.i. Ayg«
began to act contumaciously in 636 H., in which year Sultan Ka^iyyat advanced
at the head of her troops into the Fanjab against him. He retired before her
towards the Indus, until he reached the neighbourhood of the SQijharah [he
could not go much farther, for immediately to the west he would have fallen
into hostile hands]. When the royal troops crossed the Kawt, Kabtr Kh Sn-i.
AylU made his submission, but he was removed from the hef of Labor, and
Multan was placed in his charge, and the feudatory of the latter—Malik
^pu-a-ICush Khin—sent to Lkhor.

In this year, 636 H., 'Malik Saif-ud-Dtn, ^asan, the I^arlugji, hard pressed
by the Mughals, had to abandon his territories, and he retired towards the
territory of Multan and Sind, in hopic, probably, of lieing more successsful on

THE SHAMSIAH sultans OF HIND. < 4 $

that part from Dibit, and followed in pursuit of him. At
last an accommodation took place, and he presented him>
self; and the province of Multan, which Malik IkhtiySr-
ud-Din, l^ara-^ush Khan-i-Aet-kin, held, was made over
to the charge of Malik ’Izz-ud-Dln, Kabtr Khan -i-AySz.
Sultan Rafiyyat returned again to the capital on Thurs¬
day, the 19th of the month of Sha’ban *, 637 H.

Malik Ikhtiyar-ud-Dtn, Altuniah, who held the fief of
Tabarhindah *, broke out into rebellion, and, secretly, some
of the Amirs of the Court abetted him in this treason.
Sultan Ra^iiyyat, on Wednesday, the 9th of the sacred
month Ramadan of this same year [637 H.], set out from
the capital, with numerous forces’, for the purpose of
putting down Malik AltOniah’s rebellion. When she
reached that place [Tabarhindah] *, through circumstances
which supervened, the Turk Amirs rose against her, and
put to death * Amir Jamal-ud-Dln,. Ya-kQt, the Habashl*
seized Sultan Ra^iyyat and put her in durance, and sent
her to the fortress of Tabarhindah *.

this than on the fonlier occasion. H^isan’s eldest son, whose name has not
transpired, taking advantage of Rafiyyat’s presence in the Panja.b, presented
himself before her, was well received, and the fief of Baran, east of Dibit,
was conferred upon him. Soon after, however, he left, without leave and
without the cause being known, and rejoined his father, who still was able to
hold BantSn, and, soon after, the Iptrlutfis gained possession of Multan.
At this period Malik Mu-ayyid>ud-Dtn, Hindu Sh2n, held the fief of
Uchchah.

* RamafSn, in some copies of the text.

* Altuntah was only lately made feudatory of Tabarhindah, for, when
Rafiyyat came to the throne, she gave him his first fief, that of Baran. Briggs
stylet him "of the Toorky /riie of Ckelgfmy "—a nice blunder, but Dow
leaves this part of the sentence out. See last para, of note ■, page 643, and
the meaning of Chihil-gant in next Section.

t In some copies of the text, "with the forces composing the l^alb” or
centre, the signification of which has been given in note *, page 634.

* But not " on the aray ” thither as in TeboV&t-i-Akbarf and FiriBht|di.

* Our author says "ipartyred,” here equivalent to his being put to death
unjustly. Rau(at-uf-$af& says Vk-^ut commanded her troops a very unlikely
thing, when the Turk Maliks and Amtrs hated him so greatly. He may Aave
commanded Rafiyyal’s own personal followers. Raafat-uy-$afs indeed, says
so. For the detail of these events sec the account of Malik AltOntah in the
next Section.

« TaboVSt-l-Akbart and Buda’Qnt have Tarhindah—wirajl—in all cases
and Firiahtah ["revised text”]. Wherever this place is mentioned, under
whatever reign it may be, has Pathindoh—Pathadah—toiri and
Bathindah—I

646

THB TABA^T.1.NA$;IRI.

Among the events which happened in the beginning of
Sultan Rayi3ryat’s reign, the greatest was that the Ki-
ramitah and Mulahidah heretics of Hindustan, incited by
a person, a sort of learned man, named Nur-ud-Din, a
Turk*, whom they used to style Nur, the Turk, collected
together at Dihli, from different parts of the territory of
Hind, such as Gujarat, and the country of Sind, and the
parts round about the capital, Dihli, and the banks of the
rivers Jun and Gang. In secret they pledged themselves
to be faithful to each other, and, at the instigation of Nur,
the Turk, they conspired against Islam. This Nur, the
Turk, used to harangue, and the mob would collect around
him. He used to call the ’Ulama of the orthodox people*
Ndsibi [setters-up}, and to style them MitrjV [procrasti¬
nators], and used to incite the common people to animosity
against the orders of 'Ulama of the sects of Abu-Hantfah
and Sha f’i until a day was fixed upon. The whole of the
fraternities of the Mulahidah and Kirami^ah entered the
ydmi' Masjid of the city of Dihli, on Friday, the 6th of the
month of Rajab, in the year 634 H., to the number of about
one thousand persons, armed with .swords and shields.
Having divided into two bodies, one body, from the side of
the Higar-i-Nau [the new Citadel], entered the gateway of
the ydmi' Masjid on the northern side, and the second
body, passing through the Bazar-i-Bazazan [the Bazar of
the Cloth-Merchants], entered the gateway of the Mu’izzi
College under the supposition that it was the ydmi' Masjid,
and, on both sides, fell upon the Musalmans with [their]
swords. A great number of people, some by the swords of
those heretics, and some [trodden] under people’s feet,
attained martyrdom.

On an outcry having arisen from the city on account of

* was not called **Nur Turk,’’ but he was a TUrk, and his ftaf/wwas
KOr-ud-Din.

• That is the Sunnis, in contradistinction to the S/tfas and other schismatics.
Neither Taba)c 3 .t-i*Akbari, fiuda’unt, nor Firiaktah, refer to this “outbreak,”
but other writers do. The fact of Firiabtah’s being a Sht’a may account for
his eschewing the matter.

i The name of one of the heretical sects among the Muhammadans, who
procrastinate, and consider good works unnecessary, and faith sufficient, and
that ail Musalmans will be saved, as hell is only reserved for infidels. See
Sale: Bur’an, Preliminary Discourse, for an account of these different sects
of schismatics, pages 122, 130, and 131.

THE SHAMSIAH SULJANS OF HIND. 647

this outbreak, the warriors of the city, such as Na^lr-ud-
Din, Ai-yitim, the Balarami, and Amir, Imam-i-Na§iri, the
Poet, and other armed men, from different directions, rode
fully equipped [as they were] with cuirass, and other
defensive armour, steel cap, spear, and shield, into the
y&tni' Masjtd,\iY itiinarah entrance*, and plied their
swords upon the Mul^idah and Kiramitah heretics ; and
the Musalmans, who were on the roof of the Jdmt Masjid,
poured down stones and bricks upon them, and sent the
whole of the Mulahidahs and Kiramitahs to hell, and
quelled that outbreak. Thanks be to God for the blessing
of safety and the honour of religion !

When they imprisoned Sultan Raziyyat within the
stronghold of Tabarhindah, Malik Ilditiyar-ud-Din, Al-
tunlah, entered into a matrimonial contract with her, and
espoused her®, and marched an army towards Dihli, in
order to take possession of the kingdom a second time.
Malik 'Izz-ud-Din, Muhammad, Salari, and Malik Kara-
IKush rebelled-and quitted the capital, Dihli, and went and
joined them.

Sultan Mu’izz-ud-Din, Bahram Shah [Ra?iyyat’s bro¬
ther’], was [at this time] seated on the throne ; and Ikhti-

* Compare Elliot, vol. ii. page 336.

* The Tazkarat-uI-Muluk and some other works state that Malik IkhtiySr-
ud'Din, Altunlah, contracted marriage with SuI^Sin Raziyyat, nolens volens.
He then took up her cause. He was no longer a rebel, because he imagined
he would get the upper hand of his brother rebels ; and Ra?iyyat now managed
to raise a considerable force consisting of Khokhars [this large tribe appear to
have extended, at that period, a considerable distance east of the Blah, and the
good horses to be obtained in the Talwandhis of the Khokhars are often
mentioned], Jats, and others of the tribes about Tabarhindah, and some Amfrs
likewise, from the adjoining fiefs, went over to her. The TabaVat-i-Akbart,
and Zubdat-ut-Tawarikli, also mention Khokhars, but Firightah, here, as well
as elsewhere, not knowing the difference between andturns the former
into Ghakais, a people, in his time, in some repute, and when a chief or two
of the tribe were serving the Mug^l emperors.

Elphinstone. states that “.ffrs/ii”—he refers to Rajiyyat—“ when force
failed her had recourse to art, and she so far gained over Altunia 6 y the
influence of l<rve or ambition, that he agreed to marry her,” &c. I wonder
what "authentic history" that is recorded in, or how proved ? The reason of
the change in Malik Altuniah’s policy is apparent, as shown by a Muhammadan
writer in a following note. Others had obtained power at Dilhl and he had
been left out in the cold after being made a tool of, and now, therefore, he
who formerly rebelled against Sultan Ragiyyat became, out of revenge, her
champion.

* Half-brother apparently.

64 * THE TABA^AT-I-NA$IRL

yar-ud-Dtn, Aet-kin, the Amlr-i-J^ajib, having^ been assas¬
sinated, Badr-ud-DIn, Sun^ar, the Rumt, had become
Amir-i>Hajib. In the month of Rabi’-ul-Awwal, in the
year 638 ll., Suljan Mu’izz-ud-Din, Bahram Shah, led * an
army out of Dihli for the purpose of resisting Sultan Raf iy-
yat and Malik IJcJitiyar-ud-Din, Altuniah, and they were
routed, and, having reached Kaithal, the troops along with
them all abandoned them *, and Sul{an Ra^iyyat and
Malik Altuniah fell captive into the hands of Hindus, and
attained martyrdom.

Their defeat took place on the 24th of the month, Rabi’-
ul-Awwal; and the martyrdom of Sultan Raziyyat took
place on Tuesday, the 25th of Rabi’-ul-AwwaP, in the
year 638 11. Her reign extended over a period of three
years, six months, and six days *.

• The author of the Tabal^at-i-Akbart, who seems to know—without
naming any authority — better than those persons who were eye-witnesses of
what they relate, and other authors who preened him, asserts that SnltSn
Mu’izz-ud-Dtn, Bahram Slh>h, sent an army against Rafiyyat under Malik
’Izz-ud-Dtn, Balban [in some copies Tigin], who afterwards attained the title of
Ulugh ShSn, and Firishtah, of course, follows. The amusing part of it is
that our author's patron was neither styled ’Irz-ud-Dtn, at this time, nor at any
other ; and he had not attained such a high position at that period as to be
put in tlie command of an army, as may be gathered from the account of him
in the next Section. He was, at first, ShssSh-dar to Sul^Sn Rafiyyat,
and, afterwards, during her feign, became Amlr-i-Shikar. The above-
mentioned work also places this defeat and death of Rafiyyat in 637 H,—a
year too soon.

• The Zubdat-ut-Tawarlkh, as well as the TabakSt-i-Akbart, makes two
aflairs of this, and says that it was after the first defeat, but gives no date for
it, that Rafiyyat raised a force of Khokhars and other tribes, and that the
second defeat took place near Kaithal, on the 4th of Rabf’-ul-Awwal, 638 H.,
after which the Khokhars and others abandoned her, »nd she and her husband
fell into the hands of the Hindus, who put them to death on the a5th of the
same month. See further details of these transactions in .the account of
Malik Altunfah in the next Section.

• In come copies, Saturday, the 29th of Rab!’-al-Akbir, but the date cannot
be correct. See also the account of Malik Altuniah in thC next Section, where
the 25th of Rabi’-ul-Akhir is'given as the date.

• Ibn-BatOtah, who is sometimes quoted as an authority on Indian
history, says [Lee’s translation] that Raf iyyat’s brother, having “ polluted bis
reign by killing his brothers, was, therefore, kUUd himself. Upon this, the
army agreed to pl4ce his sister, El Malika Razia, upon the throne, who reigned
four years. This woman usually rode about among the krmy, just as men do.
She, however, gave up the government, on account of some circumstances that
presented themselves. After this, her younger brother, Nasir Oddin, became
posiiessed of the government, which he held for twenty years” !I So much
for Ibn-Batuj;ah’s authority on Indian history.

THE SiiAMSiAH sultans OF HIND.

649

V. SULJAN MUTZZ-UD-DUNYA wa ud-dIn. bahram shah «.

SON OF THE sultan H-YAL-TIMISHI.

Sultan Mu’izz-ud-Dtn, Bahram Shah—on whom be
peace!—was a conquering monarch, fearless and full of
courage, and sanguinary ; but he was endowed with some
laudable attributes and excellent qualities. He was in
nature unassuming and frank , and never had about his
person jewelry and finery after the custom of the kings of
this world, nor did he ever evince any desire for girdles,
silken garments, decoration, banners, or displaj'.

When they imprisoned Sultan Raziyyat in the preserved
city of Tabarhindah, the Maliks and Amirs, in accord,
despatched letters to the capital city of Dihli, and Mu’izz-
ud-Din, Bahram Shah, on Monday, the 28th of the month
Rama;zan, in the year 637 H., they raised to the throne of
sovereignty. When, on Sunday, the nth of the month of
Shawwal of that same year, the Maliks and Amirs and the
rest of the forces returned to the city again, they publicly
pledged their allegiance to his sovereignty within the Daulat
Khanah [Royal residence] on the stipulation of the Deputy,
ship being conferred upon Malik IJchtiyar-ud-Din, Aet-kin*^;
and, on that day, .after [pledging] allegiance, the writer of
these words,.by way of benediction, in order to congratulate
him [on his acce.ssion], recited this strophe:—

“ Well done, on thy account, the upvearing of the emblems of sovereignty !

Bravo to thy good fortune, heaped up, the ensigns of dominion !

Mu’i*z-ud-Dun.ya wa ud-Dtn, Mughi$-ul-KhulV hi’l

Of dignity like Sultman: under thy command are both jinn [genii] and
mankind.

Though the sovereignty of Hind l>e the heritage of the Shams! family.

Praise be to God, a second I-yal-timish, of its sons art tliou.

When the whole world saw thee, that, by right, thou art the kingdom’s
heir.

They made thy diadem their kiltlah-gah, foi thou art all-powerful and
wise.

• The inscription given as that of his first coining is as follows:—
Obverse—ItUi- , j (...b

Reverse—' . », ,■

which may be thus translated Obverse—“The name of .‘Multan Mu i7.z-ud-
Din, Bahram Shah, conferreth glory on dinar and dirain. Year 637.” Re¬
verse—" Struck at the seat of empire, Dihli, in the first year [of the reign].’

1 He was to act as Deputy or Regent for one year. See the account of this
Malik in the next Section. Firishtah turns this name into “ Alp-'l'igin,” but
Dow leaves out the titles altogether, and make'- 'J'iggi of him.

T t

650

THE TABA^fAT-I-NA§IRl.

Like as MinhSj>i-Sai^j’Si for thee the creation’s prayer is this :—

‘ O God I mayest thou on the kingdom’s throne to eternity continue :
Straight like the spear may the universe during thy reign become.

So that, save in the hair-tuft of thy standard, no one may disorder
^hold

When Malik IkJjtiyar-ud-Din, Aet-kin, became Deputy*,
by virtue of his deputy-ship, he took the affairs of the
kingdom into his own hands, and, in conjunction with the
Wazir, the Nizam-ul-Mulk, the Khwajah, Muha^^ab-ud-
Din, Muhammad-i-’Iwaz, the Mustaufiassumed control
over the disposal of state affairs*.

After a month or two had passed away, this fact began
to press heavily upon the noble mind of Sultan Mu’izz-ud-
Din ; and a sister of the Sultan, who had been married to
the son of the Kazi, Na§ir-ud-Din *, and had, at her own
request, been repudiated * by him, the Deputy [Ikhtiyar-
ud-Din, Aet-kin], having taken to wife, assumed the triple
naubat, and stationed an elephant at the entrance of his
own residence* [out of parade], and the grandeur of his

* I have translated and inserted this strophe here, not for any particular
merit it possesses, but to show the style of our aiithor’s unctuous and flatulent
poetical effusions. Although his work was completed twenty-one years after
this event, and the true character of the Prince he composed those lines upon
was then known to him, whatever good opinion he may have had of him at the
time of his accession, he did not think it necessary to omit this piece of fulsome
adulation to this “ Suliman in dignity,” this “second I-yal-timigh.” This
translation will not be again burdened with any more of our author’s own poetry.

® On account of Mu’iza-ud-Din, Bahram Shah’s youth, as was determined
when the Maliks agreed to raise him to the throne. He was to act as Deputy
one year.

> Mustaurt is not a proper name. It signifies the head clerk of a depart¬
ment, an auditor, &c., and to the office previously held by “the upright
officer," as Muhazzab has been translated, or by his father or ancestors. See
Blochmann’s translation of the A’in for the'meanings of such words, and
compare Elliot: India, vol. ii. page 338.

» That is, he, in concert with the \V.azir, ruled the country, whilst the
“Suliman,” whose commands swayed “the jinn and mankind,” was king in
name merely.

• Turned into Ikbtiyar-ud-Din by Firightah —in the “revised text ”—who
turns the Malik of that name into Alb-Tigin !

* She had been repudiated by her own desire from aversion to her husband.
In such cases the wife resigns the dowry and all presents made to her, &c.

• In the account of this Malik in the next Section, our author states that he
applied for permission to use the naubat —already described in note *, page 383
—on becoming Deputy. At this period kings only were allowed to have elephants
in this way, unless specially granted, as in Malik ’Jzz-ud-Dtn, Balban-i-KaablO
ShSn’s case, mentioned in the accotmt of him in the next .Section.

THE SHAMSIAH sultans OF HIND.

651

affairs and the execution df his mandates lasted until the
month of Mutiarram of the year 638 H., when, unex-
pectedly, on Monday, the 8th of that month, by command ‘
of the Sulpn, a discourse was delivered within the Ka$r
named Safed * [the White Castle]. After the termination
of the discourse, Sultan Mu’izz-ud-Din, Bahram Shah, from
the upper part of the palace, despatched two reckless
Turks, after the manner of Fidd-is, so that, in front of the
dais, in the royal Audience Hall of the Ka§r-i-Safed, they
martyred Malik Ikhtiyar-ud-Din, Aet-kln, by the wound
of a knife ^ They inflicted on the Waztr, the Nizam-ul-
Mulk, Muhazzab-ud-Din, two wounds m the side; but, as
his appointed time was not come, he got away from them
and escaped outside. Malik Badr-ud-Din, Sunkar, the
Rumi, became Amir-i-Hajib. and assumed the direction of

* The printed text has instead of ^li as above, and so

the former is rendered in Elliot, voI. ii. page 338, “ the Palace of the
White-ro^" I hope the Arcliseologists will not search for it under the latter
name. The ’Arabic word l^agr, and its Persian equivalent kughk, does not
mean a palace exactly, but, more strictly spealdng.a castle—a fortitied residence.
Windsor Castle, for example^ in the feudal times, was aTfa^r. See also note *,
page 331.

r Our author makes a totally different statement in his account of this Malik
in the next Section. There he says that the Salar, the late A^mad-i-Sa'd,
came secretly to the SultSn and instigated him to this act.

The TabaVat-i'Akbari cuts this matter very short, and Buda’unt perpetrates
the blunder of killing Aet-kln and the Wazlr both at one time. Firishtah
here makes an altogether different statement to our author’s, but does not quote
his authority, and, as our author is about the only one for the reigns of the
Shamsi dynasty, the Dakhanl historian’s statement may be valued accordingly.
He says Sultan Mu’izz-ud-Dln, Bahram Skah, instigated two Turks among his
conBdants to feign drunkenness, and to assassinate Alb-Tigtn [Aet-kln] and
the Wazlr. They entered the royal Audience Hall of the ]^a$r-i-Safed for
this purpose, and Alb-Tigln [Aet-kin], who was standing up in the row of
Amirs before the Sultan—who is made out to have been present by Firishtah
—moved to stop them and prohibit their approach [seeing the condition they
pretended to be in, as if the guards were not enough for the purpose], when,
having the opportunity they wanted, they slew him with their “life-taking
daggers,’’ and then attacked the Wazir, Muhajzab-ud-Dln, and inflicted two
wounds on him. The other nobles present now making a rush, Muhazzab-ud-
Dtn managed to escape. The Sultan, that day, ordered the two Turks to be
imprisoned for their act, but very soon released them. The Lubb-i-TawarliJi
i-Hind gives a similar account, but the names are correctly given.

Fidd-i is the name applied to the agents of the Chief of the As-sassins, or
Shaikh-ul-Tibal. who carried out his decrees against people’s lives. Fida
means a sacrifice, one who is devoted to carry out any deed.

It was Malik IkhtiySr-ud-Dln, Aet-kin, who incited Malik Altunlah to
revolt against Sultan Rajiyyat, and so he met bis deserts.

r t 2

65 a THE TABAipAT-I-NA^IRl.

State affairs ; and, when Sultan Ra^tyyat, along with Malik
Ikhtiyar-ud-Din, Altuniah, from Tabarhindah, determined
to move towards Dihli, and revoked that intention, and
withdrew, and Sul$an Ra^iyyat and ‘Altuniah attained
martyrdom at the hands of the Hindus, as has previously
been recorded, the affairs of Malik Badr-ud-Dtn, Sunkar*,
took a new turn. Moreover, because, in the execution of
his owd mandates, and the administration of the affairs of
the kingdom, he did not possess the authority of the
Sultan of IslSm, and used to seek to acquire superiority
over the Wazir, the Nizam-ul-Mulk, Muhazzab-ud-Din, and
used to issue his own orders, the Wazir, secretly, was in
the habit of influencing the Sultan’s disposition against
Malik Badr-ud-Din, Sunkar, to such degree, that the
Sultan’s temper became quite changed towards him.

When Malik Badr-ud-Din, Sunlcar, discovered this fact,
he grew apprehensive of the Sultan. He was desirous by
some suitable means of removing the Sultan and placing
one of the latter’s brothers upon the throne. On Monday,
the 17th * of the month of Safar, 639 H., at the residence of
the Sadr-ul-Mulk *, the Sayyid, Taj-ud-Din, ’All, Musawt,
who was .the Mugl^rif-i-Mamalik [Secretary of the King¬
dom], Badr-ud-Din, Sunkar, convened a party of the Sadrs
and chief men of the capital, such as the Kazi-i-Mamalik
[Kazi of the Kingdom], Jalal-ud-Din, the Kasani*, IKa^i
Kabir-ud-Din, Shaikh Muhammad-i-Shami [the Syrian],
and other Amirs * and important personages. When
they had assembled, and deliberated respecting the change
of government, they despatched the Sadr-ul-Mulk [Sadr
of the State—Chief Sadr] to the presence of the Wazir,
the Nizam-ul-Mulk, Muhazzab-ud-Din, in order that he

* This Malik was the patron of Gh iyS^-ud-Din. Balkan, subsequently,
Ulueh Kh an-i-A*zain ; and, when the former became Amir-i-^ajib, throui^h
his patronage, Gh iyas-ud-Din. Balkan, who, up to this time, had not attained
a higher office than that of Chief Huntsman, was promoted to the dignity of
Amir i-Akbur [Lord of the Stables].

* In other places, the date of this event, in some copies, is the Z4th, and in
others the loth.

‘ $adr-ul-Mulk signifies Judge or Administrator of the State, but here it is
only bis title or degree as his office is Mushrif-i-Mamalik.

* A native of KasSn.—Kazan of modem maps.

* The word Amir here, it will be seen, is applied to ][Ciifls and eccle¬
siastics.

TH£ SHAMSIAH SULJANS OF HIND. 653

might be present [with them], and that, in accord with
him, they might carry out their object effectively.

One of the Sultan’s favourites and confidants was at
the Waztr’s side when the ^adr-ul-Mulk reached his
residence; and when the Wazir, the Nigam-ul-Mulk, Mu-
hazzab-ud-Din, heard the announcement of the Sadr-ul>
Mulk’s coming, he concealed that confidential person of
the Sul{an in a place where he might hear their conver¬
sation. The Sadr-ul-Mulk entered, and stated to him
all about the [proposed] change in the state of the
highest personages of the sublime Court, and craved
the lOiwajah, Muhazzab-ud-Dtn, the Wazir’s attendance.
The lOiwaJah, Muhaz^ab-ud-Din, replied: “ It behoveth
that you should return again, so that I may perform
afresh the ablution of purification, and follow [you] to
the presence of the grandees.” When the Sadr-ul-Mulk
retired, Muhazzab-ud-Dm brought forth the Sultan’s con¬
fidant, and said to him : “ Didst thou hear what the Sadr-
ul-Mulk said * ? Proceed quickly to the royal presence
and represent that it is advisable that the Sultan should
mount and come upon that seditious party so that they
may not have dispersed”*.

* The ilifTerence of icliums in the text, so often mentioned, is considerable
here also.

• The Dakhanf historian—who has made "suck conscientious and exctllent

use 0/his predecesssors” and whose works he has " so entirely exhausted of all
prominent facts nuntioned i 5 v ” as to have rendered their works “almost

useless”— Firishtah, by his wholesale appropriations of the text of the
TabaV^t-i-Akbarf—in many places verbatim, although he pretends, now and
then, to differ from it, whilst copying the identical statement at the same time
—has,in this instance, "exhausted” that work so faithfully and conscientiously
that he betrays himself, and endorses the same great blunder that the author
of the TabaVSt-i-A^bari perpetrates here, even to the incorrect name given to
one of the parties, which is totally contrary to our author’s account, and which
the other’s own words subsequently contradict, and then his statement agrees with
our author, from whose work he took it, for there is no other contemporary
writer to recur to. The TabaVat-i-Akbari says, after Aet-kin had been
assassinated and Muhaazab wounded, that “ Malik Badr-ud-Dfn, SunVar,
the R&mf, became Amfr-i-^ajib, and he administered the affairs according to
the old laws and usages. It so happened, that, at the instigation of a clique
of the seditious, he took counsel with the $adrs and conspicuous persons
respecting a change of sovereignty. On Monday, the 18th of $a(ar, all the
chief men assembled at the abode of the $adr*ul-Mulk, Taj-ud-Din, who was
the Muahrif-i-MamSlik, and there held counsel respecting the proposed change
in the government They despatched the $adr-uI>Mulk [Taj-ud-Din] to the
presence of the Ni{im-ul*Mulk, Muhassab-ud-Din, the Wazir, in order that

654 the TABA^T-T-NA$IRL

When they stated this matter to the Sul(an, he, at once,
mounted, and that disafTected party became struck with
amazement, and Badr-ud-Dln, Sunkar, joined the Sultan,
who returned, and held a council in his own royal resi¬
dence, and forthwith a mandate was issued that Badr-ud-
Din, Sunkar, should proceed to Buda’un, and that district
was made his fief. Kazi Jalal-ud-Din, Kasani, was re¬
moved from the chief !^azi-ship, and Ka^i Kabir-ud-Dtn,
and Shaikh Muhammad-i-Shami. together with him, became
apprehensive, and left the city.

After a period of four months, Malik Badr-ud-Din,
Sunkar, returned to the capital*, and^ as the.Sultan was
incensed against him, he ordered him to be imprisoned ;
and the Sayyid, Taj-ud-t)in, ’All, Musaw^^ was also
ordered to be imprisoned, and, at last, both of them were
martyred ®. This occurrence totally changed the disposi¬
tion of the Amirs, and all of them became frightened and
apprehensive of the Sultan, and not one among them

he also might attend the meeting and take part in the consultation. At once,
the ^dr-ut-Mnlk gave intimation to Sult 3 n Mu’izz-ud-Dfn, BahrSm Shah,
and, having placed a confidential follower of the Sulfan’s in a place of eon-
eealment, [where ? in another man’s house to betray himself V\ vient to the
Ni;am-ud'Mulk’s [Muhazzab, the Waztr’s] abode and informed him of the
presence [at his cwtt house of Kasani, !l^azi l^abir-

ud-Din, Shaikh Muhammad, arid other personages there assembled [and
asked him to come along with him], but Muhazzab-ud-Din put off hLs coming
to the time of afternoon prayers. The $adr.ul-Mulk represented what was
doing by means of the Sultan’s servant, whom he hetd concealed, and apprised
that monarch of the state of affairs, who, that very hour, set out, and came
upon them,” &c. &c. The $adr.ul-Mulk, Taj>ud-Din, as mentioned in the
next page, was imprisoned and put to death for his share in this affair. Some
others of the smaller fry of historians copy this blunder from the 7 ^baV 3 t-i-
Akbart as well as Firishtah, and, from the fact of the latter making the very
same blunder as the former—he, indeed, uses his very words—I am much
inclined to doubt whether Firigljtah ever serw our author’s work, and I think
that nothing will be found in Firishtah, taken from our author’s history, but
such as Is contained in the TabaVat-i.Akbarf. Compare ELliot here also.

* He took up his residence in the dwelling of Malik E^utb.ud-Din. This is
the illustrious Gh uri chief, Malik ^utb-ud-Din, Husain, son of ’All, whose
execution is recorded at page 702. He is again mentioned in the lost Section.

’ See note *, preceding page.

* Whether in prison or out is not said. Compare Elliot here. In the
next Section it is said to have taken place on Wednesday, the 14th of Jamadj.
ul-Awwal, 639 H., but in some copies Rabi’-ul.Awwal is stated to have been
the month, but this is impossible as Rabi’-ul-Awwal follows next to the
month $afar, and Jamadi-ul-Awwal is only the third month after $afar, and
from what is stated just before Jamadi-ul-Akhir would be most correct.

THE SHAMSIAH SUEJANS OF HIND. 65$.

placed any further confidence, in him. The Waztr, too,
in order to avenge the wounds he had received, desired
that all the Amirs, the Maliks, and the Turks should
rebel against the Sul$an *. He continued to raise the
SulpLn’s apprehensions against the Amirs and Turks, and
was exciting the fears of the Amirs against the Sultan,
until, at last, this fact spread abroad like a pestilent, and
was the cause of the dethronement of the Sultan, and
rebellion among the people.

Among the calamities which happened during the reign
of Sultan Mu’izz-ud-Din, Bahram Shah, was the matter of
the city of Lohor, when an army of the infidel Mughals
from the direction of Kh urasan and Ghaznin appeared
before that city, and, for a considerable time, carried on
hostilities. The feudatory of Lohor was Malik Ikhtivar-
ud-Din, ^ara-Kash *. and he, by nature, was very warlike,
eneigetic, intrepid, and fearless, but the inhabitants of
Lohor did not act as the conditions of union demanded,
and in fighting, and in keeping guard at night, showed
much neglect. When that disposition became evident to
Malik Kara-Kash. he put his retainers in motion, and, at
night, evacuated the city, and set out towards the capital,
Hihlt. The infidel Mughals pursued him, but the Most
High God preserved him under His own guardianship, and
he escaped in safety from them^ As no ruler remained
within the city of Lohor, on Monday, the i6th of the
month of Jamadi-ul-AjcJiir, 639 H., the infidel Mughals
obtained possession of that city*, martyred the Musalmans,
and made captive their dependents.

* Compare Eluot, vol. ii. page 339.

* Dow turns him into “ Malleek," as if that was his name, and Briggs always
into AfuUik JCurragoou "t t

* As usual with our author, instead of giving the details of this al&ir here,
he postpones* it, gives a few additional particulars in his account of Malik
Ttrhtiygr.iid.nfn- E<^ril-Eash Kha n, in the next Section in his account of
the various Maliks, but leaves the details for the last Section. Alft says it
was in 638 h.

The Mu^lials, at first, intended to attack Mult£n—^which was stilf held by
Malik Kabtr Kban -i-Avax—^but, finding they were likely to meet with a
warm reception, turned their faces toward^ lAhor, at that time, totally unpre¬
pared to offer an efficient defence, being without stores of provisions or
munitions of war. Many of the principal inhabitants of LShor at this period
were merchants, who had travelled into Upper ShurSsan and Turkistan with

656

THE xabai3:At.i.na$irI.

When the dreadful intelligence of this calamity reached
the capital, Sultan Mu’izz-ud-Din, Bahram Shah, assembled
the people of the city of Dihl! in the Kasr-i-Safed [White
Castle], and to the author, the writer of these lines, he gave
command to deliver a discourse, and the i>eople pledged
their fealty [anew] to the Sultan *.

their mercHantJize, and had provided themselves with letters of protection
from the Mu^al rulers, and they seenieel not to care what happened, and the
•remainder of the chief inhabitants were also remiss. Seeing this Malik j^art-
J^asll determinerl to leave them, more particularly a,s there was but little
chance of being succoured from Dthli. The Turk and frh urt Maliks, being
disaffected towards SultSn Mu’izs-nd-Din, Bahram Shah, were not very
active in obeying his summon^ to assemble their followers, and the "upright
offieer” —the arch rebel [referred to in note page 641], Muhauab-ud-Uln,
the Wazir—even after the army had reached the Biah, instead of pushing
on to Labor, was occupied in plotting the destruction of his master. Finding
resistance hopeless, Malik ](^ara-^ab, under pretence of making a night
attack upon the Mughal camp, assembled his family and followers, cut his
way out, and made towards Dihli. After he had left, when too late, the
inhabitants made some effort to defend the place, under the guidance of the
Kot-wM [Seneschal], AV-SunVar, and a few others. During the fighting that
went on in" the streets of the city, after the Mughals effected a lodgment,
the BahAdur, Xa-iR, the Mughal commander, according to our author, was
encountered, lance to fance, by A^-SunVar, and each wounded the other so
severely that both died of their wounds.

There is considerable discrepancy here between our author and Fafih-'l and
others which will be noticed in the last Section, and as to the Bahadur, X^-ir,
being killed, according to Fa$ih*i and others, he was alive in 644 H., and,
moreover, the Nu-yin, Mangutah, was the commander of the Mughals, and
the Bahadur, Ta-ir, was under him. After the departure of the Mugjials,
the Khokhars, and other HindB Gabrs, seized upon LShor •, and, aher this,
we no more hear of a feudatory of Labor in the whole work.

Briggs, in his version of Firishtah’s history, but not on his antkority, assures
us that the Mughal in question was “a famous Tborky leader named 7oor-
mooshreen [sic], Khan ” I ! Dow, however, turns Malik yart-yash into

A/alleeh, the viceroy,” but leaves out this "famous leader.”

Labor was sacked, numbers of its people were massacred and carried away
into captivity.

At the time of this invasion, ^pibtr EhAn-i-Ayaz, whom Sul[Sn Rafiyyat hod
removed from the fief of LAhor to that of Multan, assumed a canopy of state
and independence, and took possession of fT chcha h and its dependencies.
He however died shortly after this act of disloyalty, in 639 H. His son,
T 3 .j>ad-Din, AbQ-Bikr, brpught Sind under his authority, and several times
attacked the E>arlughs before the gate of Multan. More respecting these
events Will be found in the next two Sections.

* Compare Elliot, ii. 340.

Elliot —" He had Kved for some time quietly im the SultAn’s tuater
palace." The Jfa^ or castle here mentioned had beeir erected on the edge, or,
more probably, in the midst of -the I/auf which I-yal-timiah made, which was
named the I^u;-i-Sultan, and Haua-i-Shamst. It is often mentioned ; and,

THE SHAMSIAH SULTANS OF HIND.

«57

There was a Darwes]^, a Turk-raan, who was named
Aiyub» a hermit clothed in garb of hair-cloth, who, for
some time, dwelt, engaged in his devotions, at the Hauy
[reservoir] of the Ka$r-i-Sultan [the Suljan’s Castle],* and
there he acquired intimacy with Sultan Mu’izz-ud-Dln,
BahrSm §liah, and the Sul^Sn manifested a partiality for
him. This Darwesh began to interfere in state affairs.
Before this the Darwesh in question had dwelt at the town
of Mihir, and had been persecuted by ]Ka;i Shams-ud-Dtn
of Mihir. At this time, that the Darwesh’s words were
revered by, and he had acquired ascendancy over, Sultan
Mu’izz-ud-Din, Bahram Shah, he used his endeavours until
the Sultan had JKa^t Shams-ud-Din of Mihir thrown before
tlie feet of an elephant^.

As soon as this catastrophe became known, the people
again became wholly afraid of the Sultan. In order to
repel the infidel Mughals who were then before the gates
of the city of Lohor, the SuUan nominated Malik ^utb-
ud-Dtn, Husain, son of 'Alt*, the Ghuri, along with the
Waztr* [the Khwajah. Muha«*ab-ud-Din], and several
Amirs and Maliks, with the forces of Hindustan, to advance
towards Lohor, for the purpose of guarding the frontiers^.
At this period, Sultan Mu'izz-ud-Dli:^ Bahram Shah, on

in after times, Sultan Firfiz Sha h repaired it, as well as many other buildings,
masjids, tombs, &c.

Darweahes of this kind, however, do not live in palaces, they would not be
Darweshes if they did : this one took up his residence near the building, in
some smsdl ntasjid or other religious building.

* Here likewise, because the TabaVat-i-Akbarf makes a mistake in in¬

cluding Ipift Shams-ud-DTn among those connected with the plot mentioned
in note pAge 653, and throws him at the elephant’s feet lAen, FirisJitah, of
course, does precisely the same ; but this Darwesh is not mentioned in either
work. The death does not appear to have been connected. In any way,

with the plot in question.

* The “ Student’s Manual of Indian Histoay,” however, assures us
contrary to the Muhammadan historians that his name was “ Yekhtar ood
Deen, the vizier,” whilst Dow, on the other hand, is more correct, according
to Firishtah, and calls him " Hassen Ghori,” but puts an additional piece
upon it, and says he was “ chief secretary of the empire ” !

* ^utb-ud-Din, ^usain, commanded this force, the Waztr merely accom-
pani^ him in acivil capacity. Compare Thomas: “Pathan Kinds,” page 118.

t Above, our author states it was to repel the Mughals, but here, from
what he says the relief of Labor was not the object, but merely tlie guarding
of the frontiers. The Mu|^ls took the city on the i6th of Jamadi-ul-Akhir,
639 H.

658

THE TABA¥AT.I-NA$IRI.

Saturday, the loth of JamEdt>ul-Awwal, in the year 639 H.,
entrusted this author with the l^ajii-ship of the empire,
together with the Kazt-ship of the capital, and conferred
upon him a robe of honour and liberal presents. After
this, the troops received orders [to move].

When the forces assembled on the bank of the Biah*,the
Shwajah, Muhazzab-ud-Din, the Wazir, in order to take
vengeance upon the Sultan, so that, by some means or
other, he might oust him from the throne, indited a repre¬
sentation secretly to the Sultan from the camp, saying:
“These Amtrs* and Turks will never become obedient. It
is advisable that an edict should be issued by His Majesty*,
that I, and ]^utb-ud-Din, Husain, should destroy all the
Amirs and Turks, by such means as may be attainable, in
order that the country may be clear [of them].” When that
representation reached the Sukan, he, according to the
wky of precipitancy and youthfulqess, did not take this
order into consideration nor deliberate upon it, and com¬
manded so that an edict of the desired form was written
out and despatched to the camp.

As soon as the edict reached the camp, Muhazzab-ud-
Din showed the very edict itself to the Amirs and Turks,
saying: "The Sultan writes and commands respecting you
on this subject.” All of them became excessively incensed
against the Sultan, and, at the suggestion of the Kliwajah.
Muhazzab-ud-Din, the Wazir, they pledged themselves to
effect the expulsion and dethronement of the Sultan.
When the news of this disaffection on the part of those
Amirs and troops reached the capital, the Shaikh-ul-Islam*

• J'abal^t-i-Akbart says “ when the anny reached the banks of the river
Bfah, near which, at this period, the town of Sult&n-pur has been founded.”
Fitightah has precisely the same words.

• Compare Elliot. “ Amtrs ’’ does not mean "generals."

* says that Muhajzab—the "upright officer” of Elliot
[vol. ii page 334]—r^uested the Sultiin to come himself, or permit him,” &c.
Firiahtah follows. "The Raugat-ug-^afa says, contrary to others, that Mu>
hajxab ud-Dfn included Malik ]{^uib-ud-Din, H^^an [Husain], among the
number he asked leave to put to death, but this is not correcL

* The TabaVat-i-Akbart says the Sultan despatched Shaikh Hutb-ud-Dtn,

Bakbt-ykr, Osht [i*e. of Cs]| near Baghdad] to the insurgents, and Firishtah
adds a little and makes him the Shailth-ul-IslSm besides. Dow, translating
Firithtah, calls him [vol. i. page 177] " Islaam, a venerable and learned
Onuiih ”. 1 wonder what " Omrah ” can mean. I have heard of Umra, but

that is the plural ai Amir. This first statement, however, is an error, and he is

THE SUAMSIAH SULTANS OF HIND.

659

[the Muhammadan Patriarch] of the capital was Sayyid
]^utb-ud-Din, and him the Sultan despatched to the army
for the purpose of allaying that sedition. He proceeded
to the camp, and used his endeavours in stirring up and
augmenting that sedition, and came back again, and the
army followed after him, and arrived before the gates of
Dihli, and fighting was commenced.

This servant of the state, Minhaj-i-Saraj, and [several]
priests of eminence of the city, used the utmost endeavours
to make peace and allay the disaffection, but in no manner
could an agreement be effected. The arrival of the forces
before the gate of the city of Dihli happened on Saturday*,
the 19th of the month of Sha’ban. 639 H., and, until the
month of -Zi-l^a’dah, hostilities were carried on against the
fortress, and, on both sides, a great number of people
perished and others were disabled^. All the environs of
the city Were destroyed ; and the cause of the prolongation
of this sedition was this. There was a head Farrash* in the
Sultan’s service whom they used to style Fakhr-ud-Din.
Mubarak ^ah, Farrukhi, who, in the employ of the
Sultan, had found favour, and had acquired complete
ascendancy over his mind, and whatever he said to the
Sultan that the Sultan would do, and this Farrash would,
in no way, assent to an accommodation*.

On Friday, the yth' of the month Zi-?^a’dah,. the depen-

k different penOo from the Sayyid ^utb-ud-Dln here referred to by our author.
The former, udtoae ihU names are, Shwljah —ttot Sayyid — E^utb-ud-Din,
Ba]clit>yir, Kikt, after whom the E^utb minZrah at Dibit is named.

He died tixyean prtiffoms to this time. See note *, page 621, para. ^

'* In some copies, Monday.

* Among those of the great Maliks who supported SultSn Mu’izz-ud>Dtn^
Bahiftm Sha h, was Malik y*'*-y****i feudatory of Bhtdnah, and Malik
IkhtiyiT’Ud-Dtn, Y 3 z*Bak-i> 7 nghriI Shin. They were both imprisoned
however, on the 9th of Ramaa^, at the instigation of the FanSab, Fakbr-ud-
Dtn, Mublrak Sblh, and only obtained their release when Dihli was 'taken
Ey the confederate Maliks.

* FanHshts are servants of the houses of great men who spread the carpets,
snake the beds, and pitch the tents on journeys. This head Farrisb >s styled
Mihtar MubSrak in the next Section.

* Nothing cff this affair of the head farrdsh is mentioned in Rau(at>u9-$afd,
or in the' Tabi^t-i-Akbarl, and, consequently, not in Firigbtah either; but
the Zubdat-ut-TawSrlkb and some others refer to It. See the account of
Malik YOs-Bakd.Tughril Sbihi in the next Section. Our author was so
intent upon his own tale here that he has left out most of the particulars.

1 In some copies the 17th of 21 *^pt’dah.

THE TABA^T-I.NA$IR 1 .

«6o

dents of the Khwaiah. Muhas^ab-ud-Dtn, gave 3000 fttcUs to
a body of stupid fellows, and stirred up some of the same
cloth as the author, who were persons of position at the
capital, and, after the conclusion of the Friday prayers, they
rose in the y&mV Alasjid, and drew swords upon the
author. By the favour of the Most High God, he had with
him a staff containing a knife, and drew it, and was accom¬
panied by a few armed slaves, and succeeded in getting out
of the tumult. On the following night the Amirs and the
Turks took the fortress, and, next day, Saturday*, the 8th
of 2 i-Ka’dah, 639 H., they gained possession of the whole
city, and imprisoned the Sultan. Mubarak Shah, the
Farrash. who used to endeavour to stimulate the rebellion,
they made a public example of and executed ; and, on the
night of Tuesday, the 13th of the month before-mentioned,
Sultan Mu’izz-ud-Din, Bahram Shah, attained martyrdom
—may he rest in peace!—and the period of his reign was
two years, one month, and a half.

VI. SULJAN 'ALA-UD-DUNVA WA UD-DiN, MAS’OD shah*,
SON OF SULf AN RUKN-UD-DIN, FIROZ ^AH.

Sultan ’Ala-ud-Din, Mas’ud Shah, was the son of Sultan
Rukn-ud-Din, Firuz Shah, and was a beneficent Prince and
of good disposition, and was endowed with all noble
qualities.

On Saturday, the 8th of 2 i-Ka’dah, 639 H., when the
city of Dihli passed out of the possession of Sultan Mu'izz-
ud-Din, Bahram Shah, the Maliks and Amirs, with one
consent, brought forth, from confinement ^ all three Princes

* In another place, in the next Section, it is said, Tuesday, tite 8th, but
neither of these days can be correct, if the 13th was Tuesday. In this case,
the 8th would be Thursday ; and, if Saturday was the 8th, the 13th would be
Friday. A few lines farther down Saturday is again said to be the 8th.

• The following is given, in the work previously quoted, as the inscription
on the coins first struck in 'Ala-ud-Dln's reign r

Obverse —^Ikl—

Reverse—SfUi- j

which may be thus rendered :—Obverse—** The prosperity of the government
of the state through Cod. Sultan ’Aia>ud>Din, Mas’Qd Sb&h.” Reverse —
“ Struck at the city of Dibit [in the] year six hundred and forty, the first of the
reign,”

> Malik ’Izr-ud.Din, Balban-i-Ka^lu KhSn, was also one of the ring¬
leaders in this outbreak i^inst Mu’izz-ud-Dtm Early in the day on which

66 i

THE SHAMSIAH sultans OF HIND.

[the sons and grandsons of Sultan Shams-ud-Din, I-3ral-
timisb], namely, Sultan [subsequently] Nasir ud-Dln, Malik
Jalal-ud-Dtn, and Sultan ’Ala-ud-Din, Mas'ud Sh ah, and
conducted them from the Kasr-i-Safed [White Castle] to
the ^asr-i-Firuzi-i-Daulat- Kh anah [the Firuzi Castle, the
royal residence], and agreed to the sovereignty of ’Ala-ud-
Dhi, Mas’ud Shah, after that Malik 'Izz-ud-Din, Balban-i-
ICashlu IQ^an, had assumed the throne within the royal
residence, and after he had been proclaimed outside the
l^Sr, and a proclamation, in his name, respecting his
[assumption] of the, sovereignty, had been once published
about the city. In that matter the other Maliks, not
having agreed, placed Sultan ’Ala-ud-Din, Mas’ud Shah,
upon the throne, and administered a public pledge of fealty
to the people. Malik Kutb-ud-Din, Husain, son of ’AIi, the
Ghurt, became Deputy of the kingdom, the Khwaiah. Mu-
hazza.b-ud-Dtn, the Nigam-ul-Mulk, was [again] made Wazir,
and Malik IJcJitiyar-ud-Din, Kara-Kash. became Amir-i-
Hajib [Lord Chamberlain]. The provinces of Nag-awr,
Man^aur, and Ajmir®, were made over to Malik ’Izz-ud-

the Turk Amtrs took the city—our author says in another place—Malik
Balban entered it, and proceeded to the royal ^a^r, and issued a proclamation
intimating his assumption of the sovereignty ; but, immediately on this be¬
coming known, Malik Ikhtiyar-ud-Dln, Aet-kln, and Malik Taj-ud Din, San-
jar-i-^i^-luV. and others, assembled at the mausoleum of Sultan I-yal-timiab.
and repudiated that proclamation, and, in concert, went, and brought forth
from their confinement in the Jj^a^r-i-Safed, which appears to have been used
as a state prison, the princes in durance there, the suns and grandson of I-yal-
timishi and set up *.\la-ud-Din, Mas’ud Shah. When Malik Balban became
aware of this, he joined them, and acted in concert with them. This can
scarcely be called “tAg glmialiou of tiuo kings in one day " [Thomas : PathXn
Kings, page 120]. The new Sultan conferred tlie fief of Niig-awr upon Malik
Balban-i-Kashlu Kh an, together with pcrmis'.ion to have an elcjikant, which
was equivalent to his being considered as belonging to the royal family, and
the first Malik of the kingdom ; and it is he who must have been I.yal-timish’!'
son-in-law—if either of the two Ballians were—or the husband of his
sister —for jU'a mcahs both—and not Gh iyas-ud-Din. Balban, afterwards
Ulii ph Kh an, which latter, the Tabakat-i-Akbafi—and FIVi.shtah likewise, as
a matter of course—invariably confuse with ’Ir-z-ud-liin, Balban-i-Kasblii
Kha n. In neither pf these works is he called by his correct name. The first
calls him ’Isz-ud-l)tn, 7fi'/«-i-Bu7arg, and gives the same title of ’/<z.ud-Dtn
'to B-albnn-i. Kh urd [i. e. Ulugh Ehiin] whose title was QhiyaS-ud-Din, and
never’ ’Izz-ud-Dtn. The TabaV 5 t-i-Akbart confuses one with the other.
Firlahtah [revised text hbwever], as previously mentioned, uses the word
j»l for j* in both their titles.

* ‘ 2 'abaViit-i-.\k 1 >ari says Nag-awr, Sind, and Ajmir, and Firightah copies

66 a

THE 7aba]!|:At-i.nA$ir!.

Din, Balban-i-Kashlu Khan, and the territory of Buda’un
was given to Malik Taj-ud-Din, Sanjar>i-Kili:-luli:. The
writer of these words, on the fourth day from the capture
of Dihlt, requested permission to resign the Kazi-ship, and,
for a period of twenty-six days, the office was in abeyance
until the 4th of the month of Zi-Hijjah, when the office of
Kazi was entrusted to Kaz! ’Imad-ud-Din, Muhammad,
the Shafurkani*.

The Kh wajah. Muhaggab-ud-Din, the Nizam-ul-Mulk,
acquired complete power over the kingdom, and appro¬
priated [the district of] Kol as his own fief. Previous to
this he had established the naubat*, and stationed an
elephant at the gate of his own residence. He took all
functions out of the hands of the Turk Amirs, so that their
hearts became greatly irritated [against him], and those
Amirs, in concert together, put him to death, within the
camp before the city [of Dihli], in the plain of the Rani’s
Reservoir*, on Wednesday, the 2nd of the month of
Jamadi-ul-Awwal, 640 H.*

At this period, the author determined to undertake a
proposed journey to Lakha^awati, and, on Friday, the 9th
of the month of Rajab’’, 640 H., he quitted Dihli. In
the territory of Buda un, Malik Taj-ud-Din, Sanjar-i-
Kik-lulj:, and, in Awadh, Malik Kamr-ud-Din, i^ir-an-i-
Tamur Kh an, showed him abundant kindness—Almighty
God immerse the both of them in forgiveness! At this time,
Malik ’Izz-ud-Din, Tughril-i-Tughan Kh an, the feudatory

its text verbatim here, as in most other places, with but very slight verbal
alterations.

* See note at foot of page 128.

* Described in note *, page 383. See Elliot also: India, vol. ii. page
343—'* Previous to this he had caused mutic to play,” &c. The translator
I trow never heard such music himself—music not capable of “charming the
savage breast,” but of making any breast, however charming, savage.

* 1 wonder what. “//izMz-rd/</” may lie, but ^auf-i-Rani signifies the
Reservoir of the Kknl or. Queen—Rant being the feminine form of Ran^ and
Rijah. See Elliot, ibid. A little before, the ^ajr-i ^auf-i-.SultSn is
tendered “ the Sultiin’s water palace."

* See the account of Malik T 2 j-ud>Din, Sanjar-U!f|[l^-luV, and Malik
Badr.ud'Dtn, SunVar, the Rum% in the next Section.

* The month previous to this, in Jamkdi-ul-AJdlir, 640 H., the Shalt&h
Abfrja’iiu’d-Manfur, styled Al-Mustanjir B’illoh, died, and was succeeded by
Us son, the last of the ’AbULsis of Ba^dSd—AbO-Atimad*!-’Abdullah,
ctthled Al'Musta’fim B’illah.

THE SHAMSIAH SULXANS OF HIND. 663

of Lakhanawatt, advanced to the frontiers of ICafah with
troops and vessels, and the author joined him from Awadh*.
Malik 'Izz-ud-Din . returned again to Lakhanawatt, and
the writer went along with him thither, and, on Sunday, the
17th of the month of Zi-Hijjah, reached the Lakhanawatt
territory. The writer left all his children, family, and
dependents, in Awadh, and, subsequently, confidential per¬
sons were sent, and his family [and children] were removed
to Lakhanawatt. Prom Malik Tughril-i-Tughan Kh an the
author experienced the utmost generosity, and received innu-
tperable gifts—the Almighty reward him !—and he remained
in the territory of Lakhanawatt for a period of two years.

. During those two years Sultan ’Ala-ud-Dtn, Mas’ud
Shah, effected, in different parts of the kingdom, many
victories*; and, after the Kh wajah. Muhazzab-ud-Dtn, was
put to death*, the office of Waztr passed to the Sadr-ul-

* It was at this time that Malik Tughril-i-Tughan Shan, the feudatory of
Lakhatiawatt, instigated by his adviser, Baha-ud-Dtn, ^ilal, attempted to
take possession of the territories of Awadh, Karah, and Manikp&r, and Upper
An-des. See next Section.

* It is strange that these “ many victories ” are not named by our author.
They must refer to some minor affairs which he refers to in the next Section,
and which may be summed up in a few words. In 640 H. Malik Taj-ud-Dfn,
Sanjard-^iV-luV, the feudatory of BudS’un, overthrew the infidels of Kathehr,
and a namesake of his, Malik Taj-nd-Dfn, Sanjar-i-Gurait Shan, gained
some successes over the Hindus in Awadh, and, subsequently, is said to have

entered BihSr and plundered that territory, and was killed before the fortified
city of Bih&r.” In this case it is evident that the Hindus had regained
possession of it from the Musalmans immediately after the death of Ij^utb-
ud-Din, i'bak, or, possibly, only alter the decease of I>yal-timiali> See note *,
page 633.

About the same period, the son of Malik ’Izz-ud-Din, Kabir Sban-i-AySz,
feudatory of MukSn, who had thrown off his allegiance on the invasion of 4 he
Panjab by the Mughals in 639 H. —Malik Taj-ud-Din, Abu-Bikr—who remained
ii\ possession of his father’s fief alter his decease, several times attacked and de¬
feated the ^arlughs who had Jidvanced to the very gates of Multan. In 642 H.
the infidels of JSj-nagar were defeated, and the author was present. This is the
idTair which the I. O. L. copy of the text. No. I 95 ^> and the R. A. S. JUS.,
through the carelessness or ignorance of their copyists, turn into “ Mughals of
diangis Khan,” referred to farther on.

In the account of Ulugji Khan, in the next Section, some successes are said
to have been gained over the independent tribes in the Do-ab in 642 h.

These are the only successes which appear to have been gained during this
period, as a set off to so many disasters and disturbances.

* One of the best and oldest copies of the text, as well as the more modem

have ••two years after the Sk'vSjah, Muhazzab-ud-Dtn, was put to
death,” but this can scarcely be correct, as, in such case, the Waztr-ship must
have been in abeyance.

664 the TABA]^T.1 .NA$IR!.

Mulk, Najm-ud-Dtn, Abu-Bikr, and the office of Amtr-i-
Hajib of the capital was entrusted to Ulugh KhanM-
Mu’a^^am :—may his good fortune continue*!—^and the fief
of Hans! was assigned to him ; and, at this time, many holy
expeditions, as by creed enjoined, were undertaken, and
much wealth came in from all parts.

When Malik 'Izz-ud-Din, Tughril-i-Tughan Kh an, re¬
turned from Karah towards Lakhanawati, he despatched
the Sharf-ul-Mulk. the Asha’ri*, to the capital to the pre¬
sence of Sultan ’Ala-ud-Din, Mas’ud Shah ; and, from the
capital, Kazi Jalal-ud-Dtn, the Kasant, who was the Ka^i* of
Awadh at this period, was nominated to proceed to Lakh-
anawati with a red canopy of state, and an honorary robe.
On Sunday, the iith of the month of Rabi'-ul-Akhir.
641 H.*, the envoy’s party reached Lakhanawati, and Malik
Tughril-i-Tughan Kh an was honoured by being invested
with that honorary robe.

At this time, among the praiseworthy incidents which

* In Elliot, voI. ii. page 343, he is turned into Dini -1 Mulk Bdligh
Kh&n I Dar-ul'Mulk signifies “the seat of government,” “capital,” &c.
Ulugh in Turkf signifies “great,” “the greater,” &&, what “Biligh” may
be intended for who knows ?

* In some of the more modern copies of the text, the invocation, here used

for Ulugh Shan’s prosperity or good fortune, varies, through carelessness or
ignorance on the part of copyists, and in place of they have and

occasionally and, in consequence of this last blunder, some modem

writers on Oriental subjects jump at the conclusion that the whole work “ mutt
have been written ” aAer Ulugh E^an ascended the throne ; but, had those
writers gone a little farther on, they would have found, *in several places, both
at the end of this Sectioni and in the next, that our author distinctly states
that N&(ir-ud-Dtn, Mahmud Shah, was reigning when he finished his work ;
and he continued to reign for nearly six years more. See Elliot : India :
vol. ii. note *, page 362.

The Taba^t-i-Akbart gives this name, as it does most 'names, correctly—
Aaha’ri—but Firishtah turns it into SanVurl, Dow leaves it out and a great
deal more of the reign, and Briggs turns it into ghunkry, thus making a
Hindu of him, and he invariably turns Tzz-ud-Uin into Eiz-oo<l-Deen.

» The "TabaVat-i-Akbai-i quotes our author very correctly here, with the
exception of turning the into a I^kim, but the Xabakat-i-Akbart’s

shadenu —Firishtah — although using nearly the same words, makes a terrible
hash of the names.

* See the .account of Tughril.i-Tughgn Kh Sn in the next Section. There

it is stated' tliat he despatched his agent, the gi|arf-ul-Mulk, to the Court for
aid, a/ier having been repulsed before Katasin, the frontier post of Jgj-nagar,
and that happened on the 6th of —^ 1 *^ eleventh month—of 641 H.,

whilst Kabt’-uNAwwal is the third month. 642 H. mu.st be meant.

66 s

THE SHAMSIAH SULJANS OF HIND.

happily occurred during Sultan ’Ala-ud-Dln, Mas’ud ShSh’s
reign was this, that, in concurrence with the Maliks and
Amirs of the Court, he commanded both his uncles to be
released, and they were brought forth accordingly. Malik
Jalal-ud-Din was given the province of Kinnauj, and the
preserved city of Bhara’ij with its dependencies was con¬
ferred upon Suljan^ Nagir-ud-Din, Mahmud; after which,
both of them, in their respective districts, in carrying
on holy war, as by creed enjoined, and in [attending to]
the prosperity of the peasants, exhibited commendable
examples.

In the year 642 H. the infidels of Jaj-nagar appeared
before the gate of Lakhanawati*; and, on the ist of the

r Sabsequently, when he succeeded to the throne. Tliis uncle had then
attained the mature age of fifteen, the other was younger still.

* Most authors, with tlie exception of the one who was living at the time,
and even ttayiuf' iu the Lakhanawad territory, and along with the Musahnan
army—our author—and a few others, such as the authors of Tarikh-i-Mubarak-
Shaht. Raut^at-u?-$afa, and Zubdat-ut-TawSrlkh, who could discriminate, and
did so, before- they entered events in their writings, .and did not jump at con¬
clusions—have perj^aetrated a ridiculous blunder here, which has been handed
dotvn by those Musahnan writers who copied the events in their histories from
the ‘ 3 f=tl>*>V 3 t-i-Akbart, like Buda’unt, and Firishtah in particulaa From the
version of tliis last-named wiitcr the blunder, like the “ Pathan Dynast}’,'' has
been made over to English writers by its translators, and, in all the Histories
of India, and Manuals of Indian History, up to this hour, the blunder is duly
recorded. '

There was no invasion of Bangalah nor of Lakhanawa,! by the Mugbals of
Ch ingiz Kh an— who died eighteen years before —in fact, no invasion of the kind
ever occurred.

Some careless copyist of the identical copy of the text of our author’s work
[such an imperfect copy for example as the I. O. L. MS. 1952, or the R. A. S.
MS., on which first-mentioned copy the Calcutta printed text is chiefly based]
which fell under the notice of Ni^Sm-ud-Dln, Ahmad, the author of the
TabahM-i-Akbart, when compiling his work—instead of copying our author’s
words which occur in every other copy of the text, which are as follow :—
oja-i —did not think it fit or advisable to read it the right

way but in the wrong—like the editvrs of the Calcutta printed text, although
the right reading iaas bfore them, in at least one MS. copy they had to refer to,
namely \ —aia-j jyUyC»^'if^leavingjCt.V*.for a note 1

It is hardly correct to say that Nigam-ud-Din, Ahmad “ reproduces
it," for It will not be found in any prior history; still, if the author
of the Tabak&t-i-Akbar}, Abu- 1 -Fagl, and the rest of tltose who copy the
blunder, and if the editors of the Calcutta printed text likewise, had
used a little diseriminatiou, they might have seen that, in the two se^xirate
accounts of Malik Tughril-i-Tugl:^ JBJh^n, and Malik ^ff-ran-i-Tamur Khiln,
the correct reading is given, as both the I. O. L. MS., the R. A. S. MS., and
the Calcutta printed text also have it in the accounts of those Maliks. T)ie

U u

666

THE TABA^AT-I-NA^IRI.

month of 21 -Hijjah, Malik ]^amar-ud-Din, IjUl-ran-i-Tamur
Kh an*, with troops and Amirs, in conformity witli^ the
commands of Sultan ’Ala-ud-Din, Mas’ud Sh ah, arrived at

Mutiammaclaii writers who lighted upon this incorrect passage also speculate
upon the roiite by which Chingiz [his ghost ?] came ; and they—one following
the other : the blind leading the blind—come to the conclusion that it must
have been by the same route as that by which Mut^immad, son of BaUlt-ySr,
the Khnlj, penetrated into Tibbat I I Firishtah also enters upon—or rather
copiet —the same speculations ; and this fact tends to confirm me in my sus¬
picions that he never saw our author’s work, but merely "exhasssts" him from
his predecessors, including the Tabahat-i-Akbarl.

Stewart, in his History of Bengal, noticed (page 97] that Firishtah was
wrong, but did not know that the TaboVat-i-Akbarl was his source of informa¬
tion, and Thomas [PathXn Kings, page 121], very properly, totally discredits
the statement as rendered from the printed text, in Elliot [India, voL IL pages
264 and 344]. This invasion, 1 expect, toc^ place much about the same time
that Cliangiz struck that very rare coin given in Thomas [page 91], styling
himself by an Arabic title, and acknowledging the TCbal tfah of Baghdad—
" Plasir-ud-Z>in Ullah, Amir-ul-MSminin" I More on this head in last
Section.

Elphinstone, however, boldly asserts on the faith of the translations of
Firiahtah—for there is no doubt expressed about it—that the Mughals pene¬
trated "through Tibet into Bengal.”

The facts are that the Roe of jaj-nagar, in 641 H., b^;an to molest the
Lakhanawatt territory, and, in Shawwal of that year, M^ik 'ynghril-i-Tiig^an
marched towards JSj-nagar to avenge this hostility, and our author
accompanied him. An engagement took place pn the frontier of the Jaj-nagor
state, in the following monthr After the infidels were routed they i^lied on
finding the Musalmans off their guard, and victory was turned into a reverse.
Malik Tugliril sent to Dihlt for aid, and Sultan ’Ala-ud-Dtn, Mas’ud
sent it, but, with the object of ousting Malik ‘yughril. who, it appears, was too
strong to be ousted except by treachery: so, immediately after defeating the
infidels of JiJ-nagor [the Mughals of diingiz Slian of the Calcutta text, and
I. O. L. MS., No. 1952, and R. A. S. MS., and Elliot], who had advanced
opposite to the city of Lakhanawatt itseli^ luui fled on the approatdi of the
forces under Tamur Ehan-i-^t.ran fi-Om Awadh, he po«wssed himself of
I.akhanawait, by treachery, and Malik Tughril had to rdinquish the city and
territory and retium to the capital. This last event happened in the last month
of 642 H. See next Section. Malik shortly after, was appointed to

the fief of Awadh and proceeded into that territory, but died in SbawwSl,
644 H. HLs rival, Tamur Shan, died the very same night in Lakhanawatt.
See Maliks VII. and VIII. in next Section.

* The X^baVat-i-Akbart turns him into ’Izz-ud-DIn, Tq^tSn TtmQr Khi n
l^rS-Beg, and makes him quarrel with himself under the name of Malik
^i-tan, by confusing and incorrectly cx>pying his names and titles; but Flriah-
tah, copying from that work, adds from his imagination, and states that the
Suljan despatched Malik l^iii-Beg, Timur Shan, who was one of the
Kh wajah-Tash slaves [sec note page 665], and that between him and

[Ja 1] ud-Iltn, Tughiin, and Malik Kaid-Beg hostilities arose : he does not
mention the name E^r-Sn at all! 1 The correct details will be found in the
account of Malik 7 >* 8 kril-i-Tughan Kha n in the next .Section.

667

THE SHAMSIaH SULTAijrS OF HIND.

Lakha^awat!. Between him and Malik Tughril-i-Tughan
Kh an distrust showed itself, and, on Wednesday, the 6th
of the month of ^i-l^a’dah of the same year, an accommo¬
dation took place, and he [Malik Tughril-i-Tughan Kha n]
relinquished Lakhanawati to Malik Ki-ran-i-Tamur Kh an,
and determined to proceed to Dihlt. The writer of this
book, in his company, reached the capital on Monday, the
14th of the month of Safar, 643 H., and permission to pay
homage at the sublime Court was obtained. On Thursday,
the jyth of the month of Safar, through the patronage of
UlugJx Kha n-i-Mu*azzam *—the Almighty perpetuate his
vicegerency 1 —the Na$ariah College, together with the
superintendence of its endowments, the KA?i'Ship of
Gwaliyuf, and the lecture-ship of the ydmi' Masjid, all
these, were confirmed to the author, according to former
grant, and that Malik [Ulugh Kh an-i-Mu*azzam] conferred
upon the author a special honorary robe, and a caparisoned
horse, such as no other among his brethren of the same
profession* had ever obtained. God reward him for it I

In the month of Rajab* of this same year, news was
received, from the upper provinces, of an army of infidel
Mughals which had advanced towards Uchchah, and of
which force the accursed Mangutah was the leader. Sultan
’Ala-ud-Din, Mas’ud Shah, for the purpose of repelling the
Mughal forces, assembled the troops of Islam from various
parts\ On their arrival on the banks of the Biah, the

‘ In the year 643 H., Gh ivas -ud-Din. Balban, who, up to that time, was
Amtr-i-Akhur, became Amlr-i-^ajib. The 'J'^baVat-i-Akbait, however,
assures us that Malik Balban [in some MSS, Tigtn]-i- 2 ]iurd, who then hfld
the title of Ulush Shan, became Amtr-i-^^jib. Ghiyas-ud>Dtn, Balban,
did not obtain that title until five years after this, in 647 H. Our author does
not mean that he was styled Ulugh Shan at this tinu, although he calls him
so c he was Ulugh ShSn vihtM our author turoU his book.

* The word here used does not zaeuap^'/amify.” Elliot: vol. iL page 344.

* Previous to this the royal forcM.went on an expedition in the Do-ab of the
Jun and Gang, the particulars of which, or rather some meagre particulars,
will be found in the account t>f Ulugh ^h an in the next Section.

* The porticulast of .these events which happened in 643 h. —not 643 H.—
will be found in the last Section of this work, and referred to in the nexL
Maog&tah, the Na*ytn—whom the translator of this passage of our author’s
work, in Elliot [page 344], has been pleased to turn into Mangu Kh&n here,
but leaves him under the name of Manksitl farther on [page 364], not being
awxue, seemingly, that they were one and the same person—was one of
£l2ilagiz Eh&n's own imm^iate followers and confidants, now grown old.
He was very thin, tall, and blind of an eye. Mangu l[jia’an, the grandson of

U U 2

668

THE TABAJFAT.1-NA$1RI.

infidels withdrew from before O chch ah. and that success
was gained. The writer of this work was in attendance on
the sublime Court on that expedition, and persons of
understanding and men of judgment agreed, that no one
could point out to view anything of an army like that host
and gathering in years gone by. When information of the
number and efficiency of the victorious forces of Islam
reached the infidels, they decamped and retired towards
Kh urasan again*.

A number of very worthless persons in that army had
clandestinely gained access to the presence of Sultan
’Ala-ud-Dhi, Mas’ud Shah, and used to influence him in
tlie committal of unworthy acts and habits, so much so that

Chingiz, dul not succeed to his father’s sovereignty until some time aAer this
event, and was never east of the Indus in kis life. It is strange howi people
will jump at impossible conclusions ; and, because one of the Mu^al sovereigns
was called •C.* immediately they see they at once assume that the

former must be meant, just in the same way as the Shalj Turks have been
turned into Ghalzt Afgt^ns.

Cchchah was invested for some time, and therefore the Mnghnis did not
retire without fighting as in Thomas [PathXn Kinks, page I 3 l], and they
made several unsuccessful attempts to storm it after they had reached the walls,
ill the last of which, at night, the greatest champion of the Mughal army, in
attempting to descend from the breach into the interior of the place, fell into a
ditch filled with mud, which the defenders had made in rear of the breach,
and was smothered. Soon after this unsucces.sful attempt, hearing of the flank
m vement of the Dihli army, and its advance along the banks of the Bl&h, the
Mughais raised the investment and retired ; andi subsequently, the Dibit army
advanced as far as the banks of the Sudhorah. In the account of Ghiy&S-ud-
Dtn, Balban, afterwards Ulugh Shan-i-A’^am, and in the last Section, the
prompt .advance of the Dibit army is ascribed entirely to the energy of that
Malik ; but, under this reign, in which these events happened, our author does
not mention even his name ! See the notice of him in next Section, under
this date.

Taj-ud-Dtn, Abu-Bikr, the son of Malik Kabtr Khan-i-Ayaz. was now dead,
and ff eheh ah was in the hands of a slave of his father’s, an eunuch named
Mukhlit'Ud-Dtn, and gallantly he defended it. Malik ’Izz-ud-Dtn, Balban-i-
KashlQ Kh an, at this time, held the fief of Nag-awr, and he joined the
SultSn’s army, with his contingent, upon this occasion.

At this period. Labor was in ruins, and Malik Saif-ud-Din, the

Varliigh. who, on account of the pressure of the Mughais, had been obliged to
leave his own territories, was in possession of Multan ; and^ on the Mug^l
invaders approaching the Indus, by our author’s account, he embarked, with
his family, dependents, and effects, on board of boats and dropped down the
river towards Stwastan and Dfwal. See also next Section, Malik, No. XX.,'
and the last Section, where a different statement is made.

* The Tabah&td-Akbarf copies our author verbatim here, and Firishtah, of
course, agrees.

THE SHAMSiAH SULTANS OF HIND. 669

(the custom of] killings and seizing his Maliks was gaining
a place in his nature, and he was steadfast in resolve [in
that habit]. All his good qualities turned away from
the laudable path and inclined towards sensuality, pleasure,
drinking, and the chase, to such a degree of excess, that
disaffection began to spread through the country, and the
affairs of the kingdom to be neglected. The Maliks and
Amirs agreed together, and despatched letters secretly to
Sultan Na^r-ud-Din—the Almighty perpetuate his king¬
dom and sovereignty !—and prayed for the appearance of
his auspicious retinue, as will, subsequently, be recorded,
please God ! On Sunday, the 23rd of the month of Mu-
hArram *, 644 ll., Sultan ’Ala-ud-Din, Mas’ud Sh ah, was
imprisoned, and during that confinement lie was received
into the Almighty’s mercy.

His reign extended to a period of four years, one month,
and one day.

VII. US.SULXAN-UL-A’gAM UL-MU’AZZAM, NA 5 IR-UD-DUNYA
VVA UD-DlN, AUO-L-MUZAFFAR.r-MA^MOD SIlAlI, SON
OF THE sultAn, ¥:AS 1 M.I-AM 1 R-UL-MCM 1 NIN 7 .

The birth of the Sultan-i-Mu*a^zam, Na§ir-ud-Din,
Mahmud Shah", took place at the Kagr-Bagh [the Garden
Castle •] of Dihli, in the year 626 II., and, as his birth took

* Zubdat-ut-Tawaiifch states that he died on the 23rd of the month of Mu-
tmjram, and, if this be correct, he must have been put to death on the same,
day as he was imprisoned, but no other writer gives tlie precise date of his
death. A single copy of our author’s text, not a very old one, has—“after a
month he was received,” &c.

^ In the following pages, a totally different title is given to him. This is a
title given to his father at page 624. According to the Ehula^at-ul-A&hbar,
SulIUn Barkfarul^ the SaljuV [see note page 143] also held the title of
Eastm>i-Amtr-ul-Mumintn previous to the Shan.sabani Sultans. Sec page 316,
and page 368, note *.

* Elphinstonb turns hhn into a, grandson of Altamsh and Marsh-
MAN, following him in that also, turns his SSme into A’ac/r-ood-Deeru These
are some of “the facts ” in his “ History ’’ probably, of which he is " prepared
to vouch for the accuracy.”

Ihn Batatah, who is quoted by some as an authority on the history of India,
and, makes I-yal-timish ^utb-ud-Dtn, I-bak’s son, says N 5 sir-ud-Dtn suc-
ceerlcd his sister Rafiyyat. He is the ninth of Thomas’s PathXn Kings.

* The garden with the IfoiT or Castle in it. .

6/0 THE JABA?AT-I-NA 51 RI.

place after the decease of the august Malik, Na$ir-ud-Din,
Ma^mOd ’—on whom be peace!—at the seat of

government of the august Sultan Shams-ud-Dunva wa ud-
Din, I-yal-timish—The Almighty illumine his tomb !—
this sovereign [Na§ir-ud-Dtn, Mabmud Shahl—May his
sovereignty long continue!—was distinguished by the title
and name of the [late] eldest son [of the Sultan]. His
mother [with her infant] was sent to the l^asr [Castle] at
the town of Lunt *, so that there he was brought up in the
hall of dominion and the lap of sovereignty, and, thank
God ! the foster-mother of the Most High Creator’s grace
nourished him in such wise that he became' endowed with
all laudable qualities, and from the breasts of humanity he
imbibed the milk of benevolence to such degree that al> his
affairs and all his deeds became the means of the stability
of his kingdom, and the glory of his sovereignty *.

In every matter which becomes unfolded to illustrious
monarchs in their old age, after the experiences and in¬
cidents of time, all such matters—indeed, twice as much—
became realized and conceived in the auspicious constitu¬
tion and august soul of this monarch of blooming pro¬
spects, of Saturn [-like] throne*, in excellence a Jupiter, in
sternness a Mars, in mien a Sun, in beauty a Venus, in
intelligence a Mercury, in majesty a Moon in the outset
of its youth and the morning of its existence, in firmness,
steadfastness, and sedateness, like Bu-l^ais and Hira *, and
■in liberality and beneficence [he] became the envied of
’Um man’s [pearl-giving] sea j and the most excellent service
is that of that sublime Court—May it never experience
wane, and may its grandeur ever increase I

Every one of the learned [personages] of the realm, and
eminent men of the kingdom, have composed benedictions
and panegyrics [in his praise], and particles of those odours
they have threaded on the string of recital and writing ; and

* Firislitah asserts that "Na^ir-ud-Dtn, MahmGd Shah.” was the youngest
son^of I-yal-timiab : he was the youngest of that name and title, but Ijj^ujlb-ud-
Din, the child put to death by Shah TurkSn, mother of Rukn-ud-Dtn, Firuz
Shah, was the youngest of all the sons.

* A well-known place a few miles north of Dihlt. It is sometimes called
LiOpt.

* Compare Eli.iot ; vol. ii. page 345.

* That is, in the seventh heaven.

‘ In Arabia.

THS afiLAM^lAH SUIJTANS OF HIND. «fl

this frail one, who is die servant of this court of glory and
altar of felicity, by way of felicitation, has composed scnne
poetry and prose. Of these poetical [compositions], one^
after the manner of a Jfafidak*, and the other, in the
manner or a mulatnmot'' strophe, have been inscribed in
these pages, in order that, when the notice of observers may
glance over them, they may utter a prayer for the sovereign
of IsUlm, and invoke a blessing on the author of them*.

[These fulsome poems may be judged of from what is
foregoing, and still more so from what follows, and need
scarcely be inserted here *].

Titles and Nanus of tiu Sultan.

us-sultAn-ul-a’zam-
UL.MU'A? 5 ZAM,
NA§IR-UD-DUNYA WA UD-DlN,
ABO-L-MUZAFFAR-I-MAHMOD shah
SON OF THE sultan, I-YAL-TIMISH,
V A MtN.T.XH ALlFAH ULLAH,
NASIR-I-AMIR-UL-MOMININ >.

• A poem, a eulogium, a long ode.

r UMamnul means “of dififerent colours,” but, in poetry. It is appluxl to
verses alternately 'Arabic and Persian, but our author’s strophe is not exactly
in accord with that description.

• The text Taries here, and, in some copies, there is a longer prayer for the

^'•^anything were wanting to convince me that Firi^tah’s knoi^edge of
«mr autho^Twork was derived solely bom what he co^ out Ta^V-t-

i Akbait it would be found with respect to these poems. The T*bakai.i-
Al^ wpies the first four lines of the lfa?tdah, and has precisely

the same and no more; and this plainly shows whence he obtaumd them.

» ITie I. O. L. AfS. No. 195 *, instead of this last titles has flCastm-i-Amir-

ul-MOmintn.. See note *, page 310.

67*

TH% TABAKAT-1^A$IR1.

Offspring :

Malik Rukn-ud-Dtn, FtrCiz Sha h, the late *.

Malik Taj-ud-Dln, Ibrahtm Sha ^ the late.

Malik Mu’izz-ud-Dtn, Bahrain Shah, the late;

Malik Shihab-ud-Dln. Mubatmnad ' Shah , the late.

Length of his reign:

Twenty-two years.

Motto on the Royal Signet:

** Greatness belongeth unto God alone*l”

Standards :

On the right. Black. On the left, Red.

The following is pven as the inscription on two of hif first eoins^ a dirkam
stnd dinar;-—

Obverse—igiUL. if afmm Id*

Reverse—’>■'* **- J*j

which may be thus translated t —Obverse—** This dinun [is] stamped with
the name of the Just and Beneficent Snllfin, NSfir-nd-Dtn, MatonOd Sha h.”
Reverse—** Struck at the city of Dibit, in the year 644 H., the fint of the

..MM. »»

reign.

The other runs thus : —

Obverse—I usAI Jri

Reverse—Sti*- j 3 **- d** jbtol' Id*

jrhich may be rendered thus Obverse—**The defeiuler of the ordinances of
the Law for the sake of the true [faithSnltin Nk4ir.ad-Dtn. The'first 3rear
of the reign." Reverse—*‘This coin, a dtnir, [was struck] at the capital,
Dihlt, in the year six hundred and forty*four.”

* The oldest copies have jVjl-T-ofl&pring—and not v/ioll—kinsmen, kindred,
rdations—as in some modem copies of the text, mid Ae fninted text. After
each name the invocation—**on whom be mercy or compassion”—equivalent
to **the late"—occurs^ thus showing that thqr srere dmul when our author
wrote, but this is left out in the best Paris MS. In the account of the SultZn’s
reign, the birth of a son is recorded in the fburteenth year, bat no more.
Two of the above names are certainly similar to those of Ana of his broth e rs
the first and third—^but the other two are not the names of any ot bis -other
brothers, who, in all, were six. Had six been mentioitcd here, ■n'l alj the
tuunes agreed, we might suppose that the brothers were referred to, but, such
not being the case, we can only suppose that these are the names of sons bora
to Sultan Naiir-nd-Dln, and that they died young; but it is remarkable

our author is silent as to their Ixrths after mentioning their «*,«*«

* In one copy of the text, Mabmud.

* Just the same as his father’a

THE S&AMSIAH sultans OF HniTD.

•W

His MaliksK
On the right:—

Malik-al-Kablr, Jalal-ud-Dtn, l^ulish * Khan, son of [the
lat.] Malik ’Ala-ud-Dtn, jSni-i-Ghazi. Malik of Lakhana-
watt and Karah.

Malik-al-Kabfr, Nu^rat-ud-Dtn, Sher Kha n. Sunkar-
i-Saghalsus, Malik of Sind and of Hind^

Malik Saif-ud-Dln, Bat* Man-i-I-bak, the Mita- 1 ,
Malik of Kuhram.

Malik Ikhtivar-ud-Dtn. Buktam-I-Aor Kha n.

Malik N 3 sir-ud-Dfn [Taj-ud-Dtn ?], Arsalan Khan.
Sanjar-i- Cha st *, Malik of Awadh.

Malik Saif-ud-Dtn, I-bak-i-BalkA Khan. Sanal'.

Malik Tamur ]Man-i-Sunkar, the ’Ajamt, Malik of
Kuhram.

Malik 1 khtivar-ud-Dln. YOz-Bak-i-Tugliril Kha n, the
late, Malik of Lakhaiiawatt.

Malik Nasir-ud-Dtn, Mabmud*, Tughril-i-Alb l^ian.

On the left:—

Malik-al-Kabir-ul-Mu’ajgam, ]^utb<ud-D!n, Husain, son
of 'Alt, the Ghuri.

Malik ’Izz-ud-Din, Muhammad-i-Salari, Mahdt

Malik *Izz-ud-Dln, 'yughril-i-Tughan KhAn, Malik of
Lakhanawatt

Maliic-al-karim, ^amar-ud-'Dln, Tamur Man-i-^l-ran,
Malik of Awadh and Lakhanawatt.

■ This list Is evidentljr defective. No Wastrs or given, and

several eminent Maliks, mentioned in the following account of the reign, such
as No. XXI. in the next Section—Malik Nnfiat S 2 i 2 n, Badr-ud-Dtn, Sonkar-
the Riimt; No. XXII.—Malik Soif-ud-Dfn, !-bak, the Sliomsl, the
chief DSd-Bak ; the son of Kashll EfaBn, Ulugll ShSn's-nephew; and several
others, and no list of victories is given in any copy of the texU All this sbowa^
I think, that our author intended to continue his work as he afterwards statcat

* In some copies, T*>C 3 >tii and Ebalj, but these can scarcely be comet,

•nd is most likely the name of the third Malik below, which, from the

names being sometimes copied in a drcl^ or-one after the other; have got
mixed up one with the other.

T In nearly every copy of the text containing this List.

• This word is doubIfuL See Malik No. XVI. in the next Section.

• This word is doubtful also. See Malik No. XIX.

1 ^ut—Sank’t—doubtful; in one copy and in another JjXm

* In one or two copies; Nofr-ud-Diu, Muhammad, &c.

*74

THB TABA¥AT-I-NA$IRI.

Malik-al-Kabtr, ’Izz-ud-Dtn, Balban-i-Kashlu TCha n.
Malik of Sind and of Hind *.

Malik ^Cara-]^ush Khan-i-Aet-kln. Malik of Lohor.

Malik>al-Kabtr-ul-Mu’a;;am, Baha-ul-J^akk wa ud-Dtn,
^^iyag-ud-Din, Balban-i-Ulu^ Kha n Malik of the
Siwalikh and Hansi.

Malik Saif-ud-Din, I-bak-i-Kashll Khan. Mubarak-i-Bar-
Bak, the late.

Malik Taj-ud-D!n, Sanjar>i-Kuret Malik of

Awadh.

Malik Taj-ud-D!n, Sanjar-i-Tez Kha n^ Malik of Awadh.

Such attributes of the saints, and endowments of the
prophets, which the Most High God hath implanted in
the great soul of this monarch and son of a monarch,
and instilled into his august nature—piety, faith, probity,
abstinence, compassion, clemency, mercy, beneficence, im¬
partiality, bounty, generosity, humility, purity, constancy,
steadfastness, fasting and prayer, the perusal of the Holy
Word, forbearance, gentleness, benevolence, harmlessness,
justness, the love of the learned and of learning, regard for
ecclesiastics, along with other admirable principles and
inestimable qualities which are the requirements of
sovereignty and principles of government, such as vigour,
dignity, manliness, ardour, spirit, impartiality, kindness,
liberality, and the conferring of obligations, with the con¬
currence of the people of the time—will not be found
united in the person of any of the monarchs among the
Sultans of by-gone days, or of the Maliks of past ages—The
Almighty sanctify their tombs I—and the purity of the
garment, and [other] admirable qualities, both external
and internal, of this Sultan, and son of the Sultan—The
Almighty exalt his dignity and enlighten his understand¬
ing!—are so abundant ^at they cannot be comprised

* Nuirat-ud-Dln, Sher ShSn-i-Stti^ar, as well as Balban-i-Kashlu KhSn, is
called Malik of Sind and Hind. This may be in some way connected with the
terms applied to the country east of the Sind or Indus, in the map of Sind in
the MasAlik wa MamAlik, in which the country S.E. of Manfurah is called
BilOd-ns-Sind, and that immediately north of it, Bilad-ul-Hind.

* The best Paris AfS. —the “ autograph ” probably—and two or three others
which ate also comparatively modem, invariably make the great blunder of
styling Ulngb 'KhSn—" Ulu Khan »—1

THE S&AMSIaH SULTAHS OF HIND. 67$

within record or recital. The Almighty God preserve him
on the throne oi his dominion continual and perpetual * i
Inasmuch as the accession of this Suljtan, ^e son of the
Sultan, to the throne of dominion took place in the be¬
ginning of the year 644 H.,— the Almighty perpetuate his
sovereignty!—and that up to the period of this Qironicle
will be fifteen years, each year thereof h^s been separated,
in order that the events may be more accessible to the un¬
derstanding.

First Year: 644 h.

The Sultan-i-Mu’a^^am, Na$ir-ud-Dunya wa ud-Din,
Matimud Shah, under a happy conjunction of the olanets,
with auspicious fortune, at a propitious time, and, with
daily-increasing prosperity, ascended the throne of sove¬
reignty within the Kagr-i-Sabz [Grden Castle] in the capital
city of Dihll, on Sunday, the 23rd of the month of Mu-
harram *, in the year 644 ll.; and the Maliks and Amirs,
the §adrs and Grandees, and the Sayyids and 'Ulatma,
hastened to present themselves' at the sublime Court—
may its sublimity never decrease!—and performed the
ceremony of kissing the blessed hands of this king of kings

• Sevornl of the Ironl* naed by our author to express all these perfections,

the like of whidi no other son of Adam ever possessed, are of the same signi*
fication; and, therefore, I have not repeated thor meanings again; but the
context shows, that, however amiable and harmless he may have been, he was
by no means-fitted for his position, and was a mere tool or puppet Our
author's account of him must have been intended for NMir-nd.ptn,

Ma^fid Sbfifi’* wn perusaL Compare Eluot here.

The TabaVU-i-Akbart states that he copied ]iPnr’ 2 ns^ and completed two in
year_^not excessive work—whidi were sold, and the procee^ he sub¬

sisted on. The anthor then goes on to say that he had but one wife, and no
servant or slave girl, and that she used to cook his victuals and do all the
work. Thiastoiy, however, is veryindeed—as stale as the days of one of
the early It is not likely ths-t Ulugb ShSo would have flowed

his to be treated after that fashion; but the account of the brilliancy

of the Court of NMir-ttd-Dtn, MahmOd Sl]^ which may be gathered from
the account given by our anthor at the end of the next Section, behes such a
The SulpUi was God-fearing and pious—in the MusalmZn sense
of the word—and no doubt copied Eur’Si'N 1>“* **** P”**

they and that he could not afford to purchase a slave woman to

do the household duties is absurd, when he could present /or^ htad oftiavts
to our author to send to his “dear sister” in See page 686, and

the of Ulu^b Sbkn in the next Section.

* The first month of the Muhammadan year.

r Compare Eluot : vuL iL page 346.

« 7 « THE TAJ 3 A¥AT.I.NA$Ild.

of august footetcp j and all of them^ each tn a manner
befitting his own position^ tendered the homage of con¬
gratulation on his accession to the throne. On Tuesday,
the 25th of this same month, the Sultan held a public
rec^tion in the audience-hall of the KOghk-i-Flruzl [the
Ftruzt Castle]—the royal residence; and all the people *
made public pledge of alliance to Ae sovereignty and of
submission to the mandates, of the beneficent monarch of
excellent disposition and kingly countenance^ All were
rejoiced at the reconstitution of this dynasty, and ail parts
of the territoiy of HindGstan were pleased at this pro-
^rous • reign; and may it be prolonged to the utmost
limits of possibility 1

When the SultSn of Islam, Na^ir-ud-Dln, Mahmud
set out from Dibit towards BharGlj on that fief
being assigned to him [by his nephew, Suljan ’Al5-ud-Dtn,
Mas’ud Shah ‘], his mother, the Malikah-i-Jahan, Jalal-ud-
Dunya wa ud-Din—may her prosperity endure*]—accom¬
panied him. He undertook many expeditions against the
infidels * in that territory and the mountains [adjacent];
and the province of Bhara’tj, through his auspicious arrival
there, assumed a most flourishing condition.

When, on account of those holy expeditions, and the
flourishing condition [of the province], the fame of his
government became diflused through the different parts of
Hindustan, the Maliks and Amirs of the kingdom, having
become apprehensive of Sultan ’Ala-ud-Din, Mas’ud
secretly despatched, to his presence, a written petition [to
the effect] that, if the sacred footstep should turn towards
the capital, Dihli, it would be a source of congratulation *.

* The “approvid” of “the pec^le” was neither adeed nor reqidied } in
those days there was not so mnch fuss made about ‘'the fto^” as at present.

* This prosperous reign maybe judged of from the foilowing pages—oanstant
outbreaks, and oondnaal inroads on the part of the Mui^ials, and Sind, MultSn,
and Ldhor lost, or sexy nearly so^ and not recovered for a long period.

* See page 665.

* Who his mother was is not known, but it does not follow rhat- she was a
“princess” as in Elliot: in all probability she was a ennmhin- she
caused trouble enough afterwards.

* This maker of holy war upon the infidels was then fifteen 3reais old—a
very experienced warrior doubtless.

A few copies have “ and soUc'ted his auspidoua departure towards the
capitaL”

THE SBAMSlAH SULTANs" OF HIND. 677

The Malikah-i-Jahan, his mother, adopting a good expe>
dient, represented to the people to the effect that her son
was going to the city of Dihlt for the purpose of obtaining
medicine and remedy for sickness; and she placed the
SultAn in a litter ; and the Malikah, his mother, taking
him along with her, and, attended by a great number of
domestics on foot and on horseback, set out from Bhara’ij
towards the capital. Dibit. When night came on, they
covered the blessed face of the Sultan with a woman’s veil
and placed him on horseback, and, proceeding with the
utmost expedition, in a short space of time they reached
Dibit on such wise that not a living being had information
of the arrival of the august cavalcade of this monarch of
felicitous reign until the day that he ascended the throne.

After the seat of dominion became beautified and orna¬
mented by the grace and splendour of his person, in the
month of Rajab, in the year 644 H., he raised his imperial
standards and brought out his forces for the purpose of
marching to the banks of the river Sind, and Banian *, and
the destruction of the infidels of Ch in [the Mug 2 ia^is]> and
moved by successive marches*. On Sunday, the 1st of

• The I. O. L. MS.t No. 1952, and R. A. S. MS. have MultSn 1

* This passage plainly indicates that Bantan must be the hilly tract west of
the upper part of the, Sind-SZgar Do-Sbah. It is not known by that name
now. For the events.of the glpunst dynasty, after I-jral-timigll himself^ as I
have before stated, the only coutemforwy authority then living in the kingdom
of Dihlt was our author ; but, for reasons we are not cognizant of, scarcely
from want of information, he has itot given many details respecting the
different Mnffbal invasions and other events which took place in these reigns,
and above we have a specimen of his concealment of facts. He gives some
details, however, in the last Section in his account of the Mughals, for which
place 1 shall reserve my remarks, merely mentioning here that, in the harming
of this year, 644 H., the MnghaU extorted 100,000 dirams from MultaI^ then
moved on to LKhor, and extorted 30^000 dirams, 30 IdiarwSrs' of soft goods
[cloths], and 100 head of captives. Onr author must have passed all this over,
as well as much more, to feed the vanity of his patrons. See also his account
of Ulugb ShUn for a few more detmls. In Elliot’s India, all the imirartant
events in our author's work concerning the Mugbal raids on the frontiers of
India have been ignored.

The nir tlrli .8-irtrn». Sh»lif . copied In the Tabalptt-i-Akbart, and its
followers, would make us believe, contrary to our author, that, at the very
outset of his reign, SultSn N&vir-ud-Ofn, Ma^Od Sbkh. assigned k canoj^
of a dar~ 6 d^^. and the dignity of Eihffn to Ulu^ Kh^n, hut this is

inoonect. Had the two former been allowed him, our author was not one to
conceal such honour towards his great patron.

In this part of Na*ir-ud.Dtn’s rwgn, the Dakhunt historian, in Us

^ THE TAB^yiATaJfA^mL

I 3 ie month of Zt-^’dah, 644 IL, he crossed the river of
I.ohol‘{Rilw) 7 , nnd issued commands to the forces of Islam
to ravage the Jud Hills and around Nandanah'. Ulugh
Tnian-i-A'gain *—may his good fortune* continue I—^who
held the office of Amtr-i Hajib, was-nominated to the head
of that army, and the Sultan with the camp, the followers,
heavy material, and the elephants, encamped on the bank
of the Sudharah

Ulugh Khan-i-A*jipatn took that army, andr by the
favour and aid of the Creator, he ravaged the JOd Hills
and Jilam [JhUam], and the Khokhars, and other con-

endeavours ta spin out his tale, inserts the nonsense abont the removal
of the feudatories of the PanjSb, and with it quotes the stale stoiy about
Alexander's message to Aristotle for 'advic», which is related in Cnztdah and
others long before Firiahtah wrote, respecting a king of Skvrirazm.

^ See Elliot here also [India : voL ii. page 346I where the editor, in a
note, says '* the text [printed text ?] has nandna, bat it is evidently a
mistake for '^Sindk,” or the river Indus, which agrees with what follows,
and with FtrUhtds statement.” When Nandanah, in some places, is turned
into **Ndrdin,” in one place is made “a fortified village.near Kananj,*’
we can scarcely ^pect to find it in its right place. The Akluiil

copies our author quite correctly and has Nandimah likewise, and Firialitah—*•
the MSS. copies of the work—^follows the former likewise, with some
additions of 1 ^ own concoction; but in the “revised text” of Briggs
Nandanah is turned into MultSn, and that text has neither ** Nandiut ” nor
“ Sindh,” and both Dow and Briggs, in thw verrioos of Firiilitah, have
“territories near the Indus,” and “provinces on the Indus^” respectively.
The words in our author’s text are '>U j See alw

the account of Ulugh Shfin in the next Section for further particulars.

■ Mu’asfam signifies great ^ —A’fam is the comparative of p h * ■ -
’Aflm, and signifies ^rro/cr/, and Ulugh >s Turkish, and ngnifies great, being
equivalent to the Persian bnturg. Dow, referring to his appointment as
Waidr—as Firishtah styles him Balban-i-Eh&rd, copying the
Akbari, to distinguish him from Balban-i>Buzuig; as ’Iss-ud>Dln, Balban-i-
Kathlfi is styled in the 'HUtUi-i-FtrCks-Sl^Uit—calls him "youssg

Balin ” ! Ulugh Shfin, or Balban the Lesser or Minor, as the term sipoifies,
was then only past forty J This however is not so absurd as Zjue, who, in his
translation of Ibn Batdta [Ibn Batutah], [page 114] quoting the
i-Akbart, to prove Dow wrong in calling him Balin, says that he eras called
JBalahan the Diuarf, and actually gives the words ^ to prove his words,
being a dwarf in his vocabulary ! I

* The printed text has x^kU. here for uJjj and constantly makes the same
mistake.

* Or SOiJharS——“is a town two and a half itwruA to the north-west
of WasftftMd. In former times, the river Chinftb—which, at this place, is
also called the SGiJhara—flowed close to the place, on the northern ride, but
now it 13 a hmroh to the north of it. There is no river “dbrimr.” See the
account of Ulu^ Khan in the next Section.

THE SHAMSfAH SULTANS OF HIND. 679

tumadous infidels* in great numbers he sent to heM. Ke
pushed on as far as the bank of the river Sind and ravaged
and plundered those parts, and returned again from thence
on account of the difficulty of obtaining subsistence and
necessaries for his troops. When he presented himself at
the sublime Court after such success, and such a great
renown, on Thursday, the 25th of Zi-^a’dah of this same
year, the auspicious standards moved from the bank of the
rivet Su^harah, and the force set out on its return towards
the Illustrious capital, the city of Dihli. The prayers for
the Td-i-Aftiia were said in the karah* [the hall of a
Karwan Sarae or of a College] of Jalandar [Jalhandar],
and from thence, stage by stage, the capital was reached.

On this day, likewise, this servant of the state, Minhaj-i-
Saraj, who is the writer of this [work], was presented [by
order of the Sulfan] with a cloak *, a turban, and a horse,
with ornamented stirrups and bridle befitting a king \

Second Year: 645 h.

The capi^ city Dihlt was reached on the 2nd of Mu-
tiarram, 645 H., and the Sultan remained at Dihlt on
account of the abundance of rain and severity of the rainy
season. In the month of Jamadt-ul-Ajgliir of this same
year, the camp and the royal pavilion were pitched in the
direction of Pani-pat, and, in ^a’ban, [the Sultan] returned
again [to Dihlt] ; and the sublime standards moved to¬
wards the part of Hindustan situated in the Do-ab. WitAiin
the limits of [the district] of l^innauj there was a fortified
place and strong fort, the name of which was Talsandah *,

* And yet the Dakhont historian, Firiahtah, in his account of Mu’lsz-nd.Dfn,
GhBif's reign, says the Khokhars were converted to Islam at that time.

» The text has i^f^mountain, range of hills or mo unt ai n s, instead of

.jTas aboviv •"*» consequently, in Eixior, the Snltln “offered up Sprayers
OH the kilb of Jilandar,” which lies in a perfectly level tract of country, with no
hill whatever within some forty miles of it. JCarak and liujrak are of very
nearljr the same significatioiie

^ Sm^ u and Darwcfihas wear.

• In ]rear Malik Ikhti)rftr-ud-Dtn, ^Lara-^uah Kh^n-i-Act-kin, the
fendatoiyafKarah, waskiUedinthat territory, but how, or 1^ whom, U not said.

% This pl ait* which is plainly written •aiJj—Talsandah in all the copies of
the teat—with two exceptions, where it is •.nb — Talandah and -

Talbandah_is turned into Nandasta in the printed teat and in ElXlor, and

Thomas follows the incorrect reading [PATHiM Kings, page 125], and although

Nandauah, which is not only impossible, but does not occur in any copy of

Oo

THE TABA4:AT*I^A$IR1.

which was repotted to be as stout as the wall^f Sikandar^
In that fort a body of infidel Hindus sought a place of
security, and washed their hands of their lives. For a
period of ten days, the troops of Islam in attendance at
the august stirrup carried on the conflict against that place
with the Hindus until they despatched the whole of those
rebels to hell, and the place was taken.

[An account of] this holy war, as by the fiuth prescribed,
this servant of the realm has composed in poetry on five
or six sheets” of paper; and all that happened on this
expedition—the ravages by the way, the onslaughts and
the slaughtering of the contumacious infidels, and taking
of that stronghold, the successes which attended Ulugh
Kha n-i-A’zam in the slaying [of infidels] and taking
Dalki and Malki”, are, in those sections [of paper], fully

the text, Gen. Cminliigham [see Thomas: iUt/.J idenHfitt it **as Dm-kaii or
No-Po-Ti-Po-KVN-Lo of Huen Thsang, i. e. Nava deva. kala, dose to Rijgir,
the fort of Alha and Udal, abont four miles S,£. of Kanaiij.” I, howerer,
fail to And the latter places even in the Indian Atlas,

The X^baVAt'i-Akbart does not mention tlw name of this place;, but
Firislitah [Briggs ** revised Uxt"} has vhi^ may be anything almost;
but Dow, in this instance, is much more correct here, and hw TiUmdak, thus
showing .that the MSS. of Firialitah used bv him, although not “ revised,”
were correct; whilst Briggs, in his version of Flriahtah, styles it " Bitunda ”
and identifies it with Bulandaliahr [Anglicized into Bo<dcondskukstt\, the former
name of which was Baran. The latter place is some forty miles S. E. of Dihlt,
while Bithan^ah is about aoo miles to the N.W. of it 1

There is TTlsurra —what the vernacular form of it is I do not know—
about twelve miles S.S.W. of Eionauj, but off the present high road, and
Tkuttea, about eight miles S., and Tisvoa abont ten miles S. W. of yiniianj .
The first mentioned place if written in the vernacular with S ss E—which, in
all probability, it is, might, by a foreigner, be written lOi—U for <a-li See
also the account of Ulugji IP'S" in the next -Section.

f The Sadd-i-Sikandar, Sadd>i-Yajilj MZjfij [wall of Gog and Magog], or
Bab-ul>Abw 3 .b, the bulwark built to restrain the incursions of the northern
barbarians into the Persian' empire, and attributed to an ancient king,
Alexander, not Alexander of Macedon.

* A sheet of paper folded to make a ju* or eight pages.

* Every copy of the text here has j between t^ words and

which seems meant for the copulative conjunction; but, fiuther on, under
this reign, and also in the account of Ulng^ Shdn, there is no j If j
is correct, and is intended for and, "DaOct and Mallei” cormot possibly
be the name of one person, and we ate [daiiily told that a RSnah 'is
referred to. Without the j the passage could be read Dalkt ^ Malkt,
the latter would them refer to his stronghold or territory, the former being
the most probable, or Valkl the Malkl, and the last word would then refer
to some office or title of the Rilnah in question. The best St. Petersburg

THE SHAMSlAH SULJANS OF HIND. «8i

and completely described in verse, and, after the name of
the Sultan, it was entitled the NAsirI NAmah. In satisr
faction thereof the author received from his Majesty the
SultAn-i-Mu’a223'm—may his sovereignty continue I—a per¬
manent grant which should be received yearly ; and, from
the Ehg^An-i-Mu’a^samUlugh ^lan-i-A’gam — the
Almighty prolong his power!—he obtained the grant of a
village within the Hanst province—may the Most High
God preserve and continue the both of them on the seat of
sovereignty and cushion of vicegerency ! I now return to
my Chronicle again.

On Thursday, the 24th of the month of Shawwal. 645 H.,
that fort, after much fighting and great slaughter, was
capturedand, after that, on Tuesday*, the 12th of the
month of 2^-l^a’dah of the same year, the territory of
Karah was reached. Thirty* days previous to that, Ulugh
TChan-i-A ’gam, with the whole of the Maliks and Amirs
and forces appointed to serve under him, had been
despatched on an expedition; and that lion-hearted
KhA n. of Rustam-like nature, like Suhrab in battle, and of
elephant-like person\ during that movement, showed such
proofs of spirit and skill, as cannot be sufficiently prais^,
in important battles, the capture of strongholds and forts,^

MS., however, has only the following words here: *‘tAe slaughtering of the
eentumeuums, and the taimg ^ DalU and Media," respecting which passage
see note *, page 683.

1 * Becanse our author, in his usual fulsome manner, styles him KhiiVSn~i~
Mu’axfam, signifying great king or emperor, it does not follow, nor does it
mean, that he was Ung when il'ia was wriUen. Our author generally uses the
word laJjJ with respect to Ulugh which has many significations ; and,

as be ruled Na?ir-ud-Dtn as well as the country, it would not be a matter of sur¬
prise to find “ rule” or “ power ” used here, without its being turned into a proof
that he must have been on the throne when the identical passage was written.

> In the account of Ulugh Ehifin it is stated that he rejoined the Sultfin,
with his force, on his return from this expedition, on the last day—the a9th—
of the month ShawwU, and that, after the festival of the Afhli—loth of Zf-
yijj.hj the last month of the year—the forces set out towards the capital,
which was reached on the 34th of the first month ed the following year—
646 H. See page 683.

* Some copies of the text have Monday, ^aba^^t-i-Akban says the SultSn
moved towards Kapah on the loth of that month.

• In some copies of the text three days, but that is evidently too short a
time, 05 the context proves.

s Strong like an elephant he probably means. See Ibn Batutah’s account
of Ulugh Shfin in a note to the account of that Malik in the next Section.

X X

68a

THE TABA]^AT-l.NA$IRt

making way tlirough forests and wilds, the slaughter of
obdurate infidels, the acquirement of booty and captives,
together with making prisoners of the dependents of great
Raes and Ranahs such as cannot be fully contained in the
writing of the scribe nor the narrative of the detailer: a
little has been rendered into verse in the book [entitled]
the NA^IRI NAMah.

There was a Ranah in those mountains and that tract [of
countiy] which they were wont to call Dalki and Malki

* Here, contrary to the preceding passage just noticed, no j is nsed In the
majority of the copies of the text, including the oldest and best ones; and in
the account of Ulugh also, in the next Section, no j is used. TheK our

author says that was a RSnah in the vicinity of the river JBn whuh

is between KSHnjar andKoftiM,” and evidently referring to the country, not the
Rinah. He then says th^: ** this stronghold was taken, together arith the
whole of the Riiudt’s fiunily, kinsmen, and children, Ac.” Ropes and ladders
bad to be used in gaining access "iu the ftace." It is scarcely probable that
our author would arrite two or three different versions of this aii^—he wrote
one in verse, as mentioned above—arithout referring to the name of the
coantry or the place taken, and this tends to prove that one of these names-at
least, if not both, refers to the RSrtah’s country or fortress. They cannot
possibly both refer to the name of one man : tlpit is simply impossible, as
Rbiah ” is plsunly indicated both here and fiurther on. Without the j the
words would form a very improbable Hindu proper name, but they might then
be read Dalkt e/ Malkt, the last word being the name of his stronghold or
country, which is possible, er Dalkf the Malkf, when the last word would refer
to some title or office, which seems improbable. As no vowel points are given,
and as al may stand for g as well as for k, the words may be Dnlkt, Dalakt,
Mnlkt, and Malkt, or Italgt and Molgt or Dal^ and Malagt, and the like.
The more correct spelling nwy be —Dhalkt or Dhnlkt, and —

Mhalkt or Mahalkt, as foreigners are very apt to leave, out the /»—k —^in
Hindi words, and to write — d —for 3 - 4 - There is a place amilariy
named in the Antarbed Do-kbah, thus lowing that it is not uncommon.

See the note to this passage in the account of Ulngb Sliibi in the following
Section.

In the best St. Petersburg copy of the text, which I have found particularly
correct in most instances where others have been most defective, and also in
the best British Museum copy, this passage is different from that in all the other
cofnes of the text collated, and throws quite a different light upon the matter by
the mere difference of the pronoun, they having —that instead of y'— ke, &a,
and I have, consequently, taking the reasons above stated with this rendering
of the passage in those two first-muned copies, np hesitation in adopting this
solution of this very tedious passage, which is as follows>

or] I, Am. y JW j

and as I have rendered it above The only doubt remaining is, whether the
word may refer to the RZnah or not, as with, or without the j both
words might refer to the country.

The T*hahkt>i>Akbart copies fran our author here, but merely says that
' the Rknah’s [district, place, town, &e] of jOd, j was taken.”

THE fiHAMSiAH SULTANS OF HIND.- 683

with numerous dependents, and fighting men beyond com¬
pute, and possessing dominions and wealth unlimited, and
strong places, and defiles and passes of excessive strength,
the whole of which he fUlugh Kha n] devastated, and
captured ail the dependents, together with the women and
children of that accursed one, and obtained great booty.
Of one description of horses alone, fifteen hundred head
fell into the hands of the IVlusalman forces, and, from this,
one may infer the extent of other booty. After he [Ulugh
ShAn] thus felicitously had rejoined the sublime Court, all
expressed exultation at these successes; and the imperial
standards, on Thursday, the 12th of the month of Zt-
^ijjah, 645 H., returned from that territory [Karah *].

On this march, Malik Jalal-ud-Din, Mas’ud Sh ah, who
was the feudatory of Kinnauj, and the Sultan’s brother,
presented himself at the Court. He accomplished [the
ceremony of] kissing the sublime hand, and returned ; and
the army of Islam and the imperial standards, by regular
marches, continued moving towards the illustrious capital.
Dibit, until the

Third Year : 646 h..

When, on Wednesday, the 24th of the month of Mu-
harram, 646 H., the Sultan [with his forces] reached the
seat of empire again on his return from this expedition.
The city was decorated for the occasion, and with felicity
and majesty he took his place in the seat of sovereignty ^
At this period, Malik Jalal-nd-Din, Mas’ud Shah [the

Firightah copies ffxnn it in the same manner nearly, with some additions of his
own ; but he does not mention anything whatever of two raj.ihs, as rendered
by Briggs, tAe Rajahs Dul!^ and Mutky," but, on the other hand, "a
rajah.”

The situation of this Ranah’s country is plainly indicated in the passage in
the account of Ulugh Rha n. and refers to the tract immediately west of the
S.W. Tons river. I think “ Garwa near Sheor&jpur [Shiw-raj-pur ?] in
Parganah Biiah of Allahabad,” referred to by Mr. T. E. Atkinson in the
proceedings of the Asiatic Society of Bkncai. for June, 1874, pages
123-4, is too far east to have been one of the places destroyed by
Uluc^ Khan.

* Compare Elliot here.

1 In Elliot this sentence is rendered, “On Wednesday, &c., the Sult.ln
reached Dehli, and took his seat upon the throne with great state.” I have
already mentioned how oriental cities are decorated, note *, page 616.

X X 2

«84

THB TABA«AT-I-NA$IRL

SultSn's brother], who, when he presented himself to the
Sultan [on his march back from Karah], had been nomi¬
nated to the fiefs of Sanbhal and Buda’un, became suddenly
filled with fear and terror, and from Sanbhal and Buda’un
proceeded towards Lohor *, by way of the hills of Sihnur.

The Sultan-i-Mu’aj^^am continued at the capital for a
period of seven months, until the month of Sha ’ban. 646

H. , when the sublime standards moved out of Dihll, and
[the Sultan] gave directions for undertaking expeditions
against the infidels in different parts of the hills and plains,
and, having nominated Amtrs to proceed to different parts,
he returned to the capital; and, on this expedition, the
Sult^ did not happen to proceed a greater distance. On
Wednesday, the 9th of the sacred month of Zl-Hijjah, in
felicity and power, he reached the capital *.

The forces of Islam pushed on towards the Koh-payah
[skirts of the hills—of Mewat] and Rantabhur. On this

* Rendered in Eluot, “When MaKk Jalald-d-din waited npon the king os
he was returning, he was appointed governor of Sambal and Badddn, but he
all at once took alarm about tktH two districts astd came to tic capital” yhe

I . O. L. JUS., the R. A. S. JUS., the best Paris JUS, and the Calcutta printed
text, are mimtt one line or more here. There was no cause of ahum about
those districts, and the capital was the place, above all others, that he would
avoid. Our author makes a mystery of this afiair. In his account of Ulngh

he says, the Dihll troops marched to the banks td the 'Blkh and back
again in 646 H., but no reason is given; and this movement was evidently
connected, in some way, with the Prince’s flight In the account of ’Izz-ud-
Dln, Balban-i-Kaolllu Sban, and Nugrat-ud-Dln, Sher Eihan-i-Sunkar, in
the next Section, and in the last Section, some &rther references will be found
to this matter. It is said he fled to the Muglials.

* Compare ELUOT, vol. ii. page 349. This passage is certainly imperfect

for, on turning to the corresponding month and year, in the account of ITlugh
WtiSn- it is in a manner explained. It was in Sba’b&n, 646 H., that Nifir-nd*
Din, Mahmfld moved towards the upper provinces, referred to in the

preceding note, whidh evidently was connected with the flight of his brother to
Uluw. The paragraph mentioning thb circumstance might almost be inserted
above, and it would ^udre the matter clear. It is as follows:—“ In the month
of Slia’bSn, 646 h., the royal standards moved tosrards the upper provinces^ as
fer as the extreme feonrien, and the bank of the river Blali, and from thmee
returned to the capitaL” It was after this that Amirs were sent on the
expeditions against the infidels, it not being considered advisable^ seemingly,
to pass beymd the Btih, and therefore Nfifir^ud-Dln, Mahmfid retained
to the capital again, after appointing some of his Amirs to move against some
of his contumacioas Hinda subjects.

It is remarkable that, since the year.639 H., after the aadk of Uhor by the
Mn^hala, we do not find it again mentioned as a province of the Debit
kiqgdom, and this passage confinns it.

THE SHAMSIAH sultans OF HIND. 68$

expedition, and during the stay of the SultSn at tiie
capital, two events occurred. The one was this, that
JamAl-ud-Dtn, the ShafurkSnt [Le. Shaburghanll was
accused, and, from Friday, the 9th of the month of 21 -
Hijjah, in the Ka$r-i-Safed [the White Castle], was re¬
moved from h{s Ka?i-ship, and, by command, left the city
and departed towards Buda’un; and, on the 12th of 21-
IHijjah, by the endeavour, of ’Imad-ud-Dln-i-Rayban, he
was put to death': the other was that Malik Baha-ud-Dln,
T-bak, the Khw ajah. in the vicinity of the fortress of Ran-
tabhur*, attained martydom at the hands of the infidel
Hindus, on Sunday, the i ith of the month of
may he receive gprace and forgiveness!

Fourth Year: 647 h.

On Monday, the 3rd of the month of Safar, 647 H.,
Ulugh Khanri-A*sam. with the forces of Islam, and the
sublime standards, returned in triumph to the capital
again *. As Ulugh Khan-i-A*zam was the asylum of the
Sultan’s dynasty, the prop of the army, and the strength
of the kingdom, with the concurrence of all the Grandees
and Maliks of the realm, it was his daughter’s good fortune
to become the Malikah-i-Jahan * [Queen of the Universe
—^the Royal consort], and this marriage took place on

* Omipare £l.UOT, vol* iL page 349. 'Imad-ud-Dtn did not kill him.

» For further paiticolois of this expedition, meagre as they ax^ see the
account of TTlngfa JU^n in the next Section.

» This is the first occasion that the “sublime standards" are said to have

accuinpanled UIu^ ETh^- - _ .

* This passage is inverted altogether in Eluot [page 349]. The printed

text is perfectly correct here, and has, Uke the JtfSS. copies of the work, the
words—,aW —^which have been rendered totally con¬

trary to their meaning vix.the Sultan "guve Mis daughter to the sou of the
Khdn ”1 NMir-nd'^lth Mahmud Shah, was, at this time, in the 21st year of
his age. Thomas [PathIn Kings, page 125], led astray by the above trans.

lation probaUy, fiUls into the same error. ^ .

Our has forgotten to state here, although he has remembered it m ^

of him, that it was shortly after this event that Malik Qlpyas-nd-Dtn.
Balban, was digmfied with the title of Ulu* Kbto, the Depnty-^p of t^
ktngdmn, and leadership of the troops, and that his brother, Malik Saif-^-
Dtn, 1 -bak-i-Kaahlt Ebkn, was made Amtr-i-^jib, and, on NSg-awr being
fiam Malik Balban-i-Raflliia Ehkn. that fief was made over to the new
Awifr .i.'g q nx See the account of him in next Section.

686

THE taba]8:at.i-na$ikI.

Monday, the 20th of Rabt-ul-AJshir *> ^7 H. May the
Most High God preserve all three, the protection and prop
of the Muhammadan faith, in sovereignty, honour, and
prosperity !

In this year likewise, on the lOth of JamSdt-ul-A]dlir,
Jalal-ud-Din, K£s&nt, arrived from Awadh, and
became l^a^i of the realm. On Monday, the 22nd of the
month of Sha*ban *, the imperial standards moved out of
the capital, Dihli, and, on Sunday, the 4th of the month
of Shawwal of this same year, crossed the Jun, for the
purpose of undertaking a holy expedition against the
Hindus; and forces were told off to operate in that tract.

Letters from the sister of this frail individual [the author]
arrived from Kh urasan, and they were represented to the
sublime consideration, and the Sultan—Long may his
Kh ilafat continue! through the recommendation of Ulugh
Kh an-i-A*zam—may Almighty God long preserve and
prolong both their lives !—conferred an honorary robe, a
tttisal [royal grant] for forty head of captives^, and a
hundred khar-wdrs weight of gifts.

* Some copies have the 6lh of JamSdt>ul>A]dl<r, but the date aad month
above la confirmed in the account of Ulugh EhAn.

* Farther on, in the next Section, our author says that Ulugh ShSn moved
from the capital on Monday, the 9th of Shtt’bSn, and the camp was pitched at
the ford over the Jun, and hostilities at once commenced agaiiut the infidels.

r The translator of this passage in Elliot [vol. ii. page 350] turns
40 captives into 100 beasts of burden / The words in the text, the Calcutta
printed text included, arc perfectly plain, and to make it unmistakeably so, the
word Jt — nafar, applied solely to human beings, is used. The passage is
thus rendered in Elliot:— '^he [the Sulthn] v/as pleased to gnsfoxa. onehunstred
BKAST8 OF BURDEN, and osfe hundred ass-loasls tf presestts.” In afoot note,
the Editor states “ the word used is ise for which the dictionaries give the
meaning [it is an every-day word almost in the Persian of the £ast] of
‘captive, slave, servant.' It can hardly bear this meaning here, and in other
places it is connected with [?] asp (horse) so I have translated it * beast of
burden,’ from the verb burdan to carry ” 1!

If bartiah cannot bear this meaning here, how is it that, at page 371 of the
same work, the Editor does not translate the same word, printed in italics,
beast of burden? Why cannot it bear this meaning? Was it too shocking to
think that captives should thus be sent away to be sold ? It was a cx>mmon
practice nevertheless, and the meaning is captmes who had been made slaves of.
Our author, in the' next Section, gives the particniars of his proceeding to
MultSn with hit slaves, to des^MUch them to his “dear sister ” in EhurftsSn,
and there he uses the word — gkuldm£n, an 'Arabic word, whilst %Sji —
bardah is pure Persian; and, in his account of Ulugli EhSn. in the next
Section, but which identical part has been omitted in Elliot [page 368] as

the shamsIah suljAns of hind. <$7

On Wednesday, the 24th of the month of Zt-]^ijjah, the
august standards returned to the capital; and, on Monday,
the 29th of the same month, the author set out from Dibit
for the purpose of proceeding to Multan, in order to
despatch the captives to Kh urasan. When he reached the
H 3 nsi district, by the sublime'command of the 1 Chan -i-
ajEjam, Ulugh Kfaan-i-A’gam, the author took posses¬
sion of the village conferred on him by Ulugh KtiSn », and
opportunity offered of proceeding to Multan by way of
Abuhar • ; and, in the

Fifth Year; 648 ii..

On Sunday, the i ith of the month of Safar, 648 H., an
interview was obtained with Malik Sher Khan -i-Snnlfar
on the bank of the Biah ‘, and from thence, proceeding

“ matters personal of the author," —but not more so than a vast deal more In
this work,, and a.s personal here as there—our author again mentions forty head
of captives, &c. Shar-wSr, although literally an ass-load, is here used to
signify the weight <rf an ass-load, but it does not follow that the loads were
carried by asses.

* Further details respecting these ntatters will be found in the account
of Ulugk Kh. =tn in the next Section.

* Ibn Ratulah, who proceeded “from Multin, the principal city of Sind,”
towards Dihli, .says, “the first city [town?] we reached appertaining to Hin¬
dustan, and the first in this direction, was Ab&har. It is of small siae and
closely built, and has much water and cultivation.”

This statement of our author respecting this interview proves beyond
a doubt, that, at this period, the Blah flowed in its old bed, between the
present Sutlaj and the diinab, as k would have been impossible, in proceeding
direct from Abiihar to Multan, to have otherwise met Sher RKSn on the Btlh.
See remarks on “The Lost River” in last Section.

t The L O. L. MS. No. 1952, and R. A. S. MS., and Calcutta printed
text, here have (Vr , mI s-l— tbe banh of the water [river] Sindh and

1 iiah— 9 X>A the words are thus translated in Elliot [vol. ii. page 350] “on
the banks of the river Sind and Biydh,” but for two persons to hold an inter¬
view on these two rivets at the same time is rather difficult from three other
rivers and vast tracts of country—in fact the whole Panjib—intervening between
them. Our author’s words are perfectly clear and intelligible, but the words

. _ ••Sindh and" —are not contained in the text. One modem copy has

or. hrJ—the bank of the Sind-i-Btdh [i.e. the river cf BtShl which
probably the editors oi the Calcutta text took for the Indus, as the tdrm is
used—in a proper sense of coarse—both to signify the Indus, and also any
river, its proper Sanskrit meaning.

In a note to the above passage in Elliot, the Editor says^ with reference
to the words—“mulX|Mit-L^er Shibi hftfilghud”—“our text has no nomd-
meUioe in this seiltencer” and, that “ the words show that the person who had
he interview was tut superior in ranh to Sher Khdn.” As the sobjecC.

688

THE TABA|^T- 1 -NA$IR 1 .

on^rards towards MultSn, the author, on Wednesday, the
6th of Rab!'-ul-Awwal of that year, reached it. Malik
’Izz-ud-DIn, Balban-i-KashlQ * KhSn. arrived that same
day from O chch ah for the purpose of taking Multan, and
there was an opportunity of an interview -with him. The
author continued to remain there up to the 26th of the
month of Rab!*-ul-Akhir. and the capture of Multan, which
was in the hands of a retainer of Malik Sher Kha n, was
not effected. The author set out to return to the capital,
and Malik ’Izz-ud-Dtn, Balban-i-Kashlu Kh an, retired
towards O chch ah. The author returned by the route of
the fort of Marut* to Sursutf and Hansi, and reached
Dihlf again on the 22nd of Jamadt-ul- Akh ir.

In the month of Shawwal of this same year, Ikhtiyar-
ud-Din>i-Kurez, from Multan, made a great number of
Mughals captive, and sent them to the capital; and the
city of Dihll'was decorated for this success of the Na$iri
dynasty*. In this year likewise, on Friday, the 17th of

• mere continiwtion of the sentence above there can be no dbubt as to who is
referred to, and, as the nominative to a passive verb is never expressed in the
Persian language^ it is not astonishing that our author does not use it here
The words above are “the interview with Sher IChin [lit. ^Sber Shin] was
attained or acquired,” not “had an interview;” but what /rvaer—except the
previous sentence, which is clear enough—the superiority or inferiority of the
two persons, I am at a loss to discern.

It is the Tsbai^&td-Akbart, t%ot FiriiEtah—for he is a mere copyist of the
former woric, as I have often shown here already—^who takes the S^t&n, who
never left Dihlt that year, to the Bfdh, and says that Sher Shin joined him
there, but does not mention anything about ao,ooo horse. The same work
takes the SnlfSn to Multan and Dthfihah, the former of which places he is
therein stated to have reached on the 6th of Rabf*-ul-AwwIl, 648 H. In this
esoe cur author hat oniy beem mistaken for the SuUSn t See the account of
Malik ’laz-nd'Dtn, Balban-i-Kaihlh Shin, in the neat Section.

* The printed text turns KaablG Shln*i-Balban into Laghkar Shin, and in
Eluot [vol. ii. page 350] it is so translated, and Thomas [PathIn KMgs,
page 135] turns Sher Shin into the brother of Ulu^ Shin ! He was his
uncles son >—his cousin merely.

* Marut is a well known place on the route from Dihlt to fl bhcha h.
**Mirat" is utterly impossible. One is W. of Dihlt, and the other £. A
person would go a- little out of his way to go to MultSn from Dihlt by way of
“Aflraf.” See the account of Ulu^ Shin, and Elliot, vol. ii. page 330.
Our author went as far as the river Jhil’am to see the captives off.

e It u strange that no particulars are given respecting the capture of these
Mnidul prisoners by Ikhtlyir.ud-Dtnd-Kurez from, not at, MulUln, which
caused Dihlt to be decorated. It is not even referred to in fly: aoxnint
of Ulugh It was quite time to gain some success—although this is a

very doubtful one—over the Mughals, for they were continually encroaching

689

THE fiQAMSiAH SULTANS OF HIND.

the month of 2 ^-]^a*dah, Ka;t Jal 3 . 1 -ud-Dtn, KSsSnt, re¬
signed his existence to the most sublime dynasty—the im¬
maculate Ruler of the Universe.

Sixth Year: 649 h.

Malik 'Izz-ud-Dln, Balban-i-Kaslilu ^Lan, having com¬
menced to a^ in a refractory manner at Nag-awr, in this
year the august standards moved towards that place, upon
which Malik 'Izz-ud-Din, Balban-i-Kashlu Khan, presented
himself and made his submission, and the sublime stand¬
ards returned [to the capital *].

Subsequently to this, Malik Sher Kh an marched from
Multan* against C chch ah. and Malik 'Izz-ud-Din, Bal¬
ban-i-Kashlu Kha n, pressed on from Nag-awr towards
Uchclish, and went to Malik Sher Kha n [in his camp] and
was detained, and relinquished the fort of O chch ah to
him ^ and, leaving it, turned his face towards the capital.

upota the Papjab, and by and by we shall find them permanently located on
the of the Btah. This is the afl&ir out of which Firiflhtah, but not the

Jaba^t-i-Akbait, makes Sher TCha n take Ghazntn from the Mushals referred
in note •, page 690, and in the account of Sher Shan in the next Section.

Some time previous to this, in 647 H., Malik Saif-ud-Dtn, ^asan, the
Y —who was able to hold his territory of Banian notwithstanding the
Mu^aals, advanced from that tnCct to attack Multan, which fief Malik
Balban-i-Ka«]ilQ then held, together with Cchchah. He advanced

from Cchchah to drive away the ]^lu^ army. An engagement ensued near
Mhltan, the ^arlnsi, was slain, but his people kept his death secret—

although a party of horsemen, in Malik Balban’s army, devoted themselves to
kill the E^rlugh chief-and Malik Balban was under the necessity of dclivenng.
up MulOn, which he had entered after the engagement. We must supposer
that Hasan’s eldest son—the Malik Na?ir.ud-Dtn, Muhammad—hercaft« to-
be took the command of the ^farl^ army, to whom Malik Balban

had to suirendet Multin, which Malik Sher ^n shortly after rewve^from
th f". when he instaUed there hU own retainer—Ikhtiyar-ud-Mn-i-Kures,
above alluded to. See the account of Sher Ehhn In the next Section,

I have already mentioned how eastern cities are decorated. Compare

Elliot also here.

* Ulu A XTian ’s brother was put in charge of Nag-awr.

• In his account of Malik Balban, in the next Section, wr author says Sh«

5 h»n advanced firoiA Tabarhindah wd Lihor upon Uchifrah. __ _

7 In Elliot, voL U. page 35 *. this is
tncoutUtr wUk Sher KhAn and quietly surrendered the fort. No
^^ever took place between them, ahd the event happ^ precisely at oar
ri?ior^aT« Shove. The details of it wUl be found in the ^

Sd^^-ScaahW Khfin and of Sher Khin in the next Section, which

690 THE TABA^AT- 1 -NA$ 1 RI.

On Sunday, the r7th of the month of Rabt’-ul-Alshir,
649 H., he presented himself at the sublime Court, and the
fief of the district and city of Buda’un * was assigned to
him.

In this year, likewise, on Sunday, the loth of the month
of Jamadtul-Awwal, for the second time, the l^af 1 -ship of
the realm, together with the jurisdiction of the capital”,
was entrusted to this servant of the state, Minhaj-i-SaraJ,
by the sublime command ; and, on Tuesday, the 2Sth of
the month of Sha*ban. the sublime standards moved
towards Gwaliyur, Ch andlrt. NurwuP [Nurwur], and

The TabaVat-i-Akbarl places this event immediately ajter the taking of the
stronghold of Nurwfur, instead of before, although our author says that the
Sultan set out for Chandlrt and MSlmdi in Sha’b&n, which is the eighth
month of the year.

■ One of the two most important fieb of the kingdom of Dihll in those
days.

That exceedingly trustUKrthy historian, Firishtoh, perpetrates a nice blunder
here. He states immediately after the Nurwur afi^, that “ Sher 'EhS" took
Ghazntn from the Mughals, and, for some time, read the Shut bah and coined
the money there in the name of Sultftn Ntlgir-ud-Dln ” 11 All this ridiculous
nonsense is concocted from the aihdr of Ikhtiytr.ud-Dtn-i>Kurez and the
Mughals mentioned previously by our author. Elphinstone is also led
away by this nonsense, through the translations of that writer’s work, and
Marshman and some Others of the compilers of Indian history follow suit of
course. The lastmamed writer adds that it is the only irruption recorded from
that quarter during the period of **asUhtnlic history" So much for the
authentic history. See page 694, and account of Sher Shfin in the next
Section.

e This refers to his duties as no doubt, but the word used in the text is
—jurisdiction, authority, sway, &c., and does not mean mogistrate,
although it might, in a proper place, mean magistracy,

* There is no doubt respecting thename of this place: Kurwul and Nurwur,
or Nirwul and Nirwur, are one and the same things the letters j and J in
Hindi being interchangeable. It is no doubtful place, and lies some 40 miles
east of BhupSl, in Lab 33" I S’, Long. 78”. • The other places mentioned with
it indicate its whereabouts. The-majority of the best copies of the text have
^*.1 Ch^har-i-Ajar, and one but in MSS. j and 4 are often con¬
founded. It is probably the manner in which a MusalmZn, and a foreigner,
would write —Cllhha4ah—^by putting j to represent the sound

of Sanskrit E The word here written —ajdr or achdr, in one copy of
the text, in the account of Nusrat-ud-Din, Ta-yasa’l, in the next Section, has
— ajdmah, which may be meant for — ack&ryak,j standing for .

This Rajah is, probably, **f!hghatja Clwa,” as referred to by Thomas
[PathXn Kings : pages 69-70], but it seems very doubtful whether he was
ever tributary to I>yal-timi|]|. The second word is, probably, noeant for
—Acharya—spiritual guide, or teacher, &c., only, in other places
farther on, he is styled /U-' '*•'>—Rtnah of Ajar, and el.jj* ,, 1 —that

Hindu fellow, the Ajarl, or, of Ajarl, and Rknab of Ajlrt, and

THE SBAMStAH SUETANS OF HIND. 691

M&lwah, and, on this expedition, they reached near unto
MiLlwah. Qh^har, the Ajar, who was the greatest of all
the R&es of that tract of country, who had about 5000
horsemen well trained to arms, and 200,000 footmen, was
routed; and the fortress which had been constructed by
him, among defiles and passes, was taken and plundered,
and booty and captives fell into the hands of the Musal-
man army. During this expedition the Khan-i-Mu’az.tam.
Ulugh Kha n-i-A*zam. displayed proofs of much energy
and skill; and, in safety, and under the protection of God,

and fihal iir and J&hir tAt AjSri, who was a Ranah, &c., all of
which various designations make the identification difficult.

In Sanskrit, Achgrt means strict in the observance of religions ceremonies,
and A ehfi raj and Achgjva mean a spiritual guide or preceptor. Hodgson, in
his "SJketcA tf BuddAUm" contained in Part I., Vol. and, of the “Tuansac-
TIONS OP THE Ro. As. Soc. for 1829,” pages 231 and 245, mentions the
Vajra AcAdryas. He says “ The Bandyat axe divided into two classes ; those
who follow the VdAya-cAarya, and those who adopt the AbAyatitara-tAarya —
words equivalent to the GriAastAa isram and Vdirigi iiram of the BrdAnfnas.
The first class is denominated BAiAtAu} the second, Vajra AchXrya,”
This last term Is evidently similar in some way to the same name applied
to this great “Rie.” See also the account of this affisir, in the notice of
Ulugh TCban in the next Section, and compare Elliot, vol. ii. page 351.

The TarfUl-i-Mubarak-SItfht styles him jiJ HaiJI Dtw, and the

Tafkaiat-ul-Muluk ye — ^ 2 hir Diw—but in all probability the ^ is
merely --or - with the points omitted, as no Hindu name would have the
peculiar'^’At^ic r —and says he had 60,000 horse and 200,000 foot, but these
latter would be mere rabble in aity case, that he was one of the Rajahs- of
Chaodlrt and MSlwah, and that, on the way back from this expedition, tho
fortress of Nurwur or-Nirwur was taken.

The TabaVit-i-Akbarf states that the Sultan marched ^inst yo
Ac hSr Diw, with a large army, on the 6th of Shn’ban of this year, mentions
the number of the hostile troops as given by our author, and that a great battle
took place in which Adtfr Dtw was overthrown, after which his stronghold
was taken by assault, and the Sultan returned to Dibit. ^

Firialltah copies the above, but styles hto pA -jy I** ^

however appears to have had yo -Sihir Dtw] and ad* t^t he had

very recenUr^lt this stronghold of Nurwur or Nirwur, which, in Briggs
reread text, is turned into.y-TirUr, which, of course, is totally i^rr^.

According to Tod [vol. i. page 89], this stronghold wm er^
of the CnsAwoAa [he probably means the /-*

«id sras “a celebrated fortress” and “ the abode of the

whose descendants continued to Aeld possession tXrougAaut aU tAe McUstOu^ 0/
tAe TJimr andldoghal dominion, when deprived of it by the M^irattas, Ac,
Of course; who- wt heard of RijpUts being overcome by MusalrnSns
W^ident or mistake or «>me black treachery, “jP®*

romances? Our author, consequently, must be wrong, and the “iP^*
It^STstf^ that such a great Rfinah as thU was 1. not mentioned by the

RajpOt annalists.

69 * the TABAVAT-I-NA$IRL

the sublime standards moved back again towards the
capitaL

Seventh Year : 650 h.

The sublime standards returned to Dihll on Monday,
the 23rd of the month of Rabt’-ul-Awwal, 650 H., after
which, for a period of seven months, attended by auspicious'
fortuhe and increasing felicity*, the SultSn continued at
the illustrious seat of government, and, during this period,
was engaged in the diffusion of goodness and establishing
usages of justice and equity.

On Monday, the 22nd of the month of ShawwSl of this
year, the Sultan departed in the direction of Lohor with
the intention of marching to Ochch ah and Multan *, and
at the time of bidding farewell, in the vicinity of Kaithal,
the Suljtan bdstowed upon the author a special honorary
robe, together with a horse with complete furniture and
trappings ornamented with gold and a saddle.

During this march all the EJil ns. Maliks, and Amirs of
the adjacent parts, assembled and attended the sublime
stirrup; and Kutlugh Khan from the territory of Bhtanah*,

* Rendered fai Ei.liot, “in great eomfort axsA. splendour.” The original
Is ; —ksJ* i|

* The I. O. L. MS., R. A. S. MS., the best Paris MS., and prin^ text here,
have “ the Sulpn departed towards Lx>hor and GhaznIn by the way of

and Multan” 11 The Editors of the printed text must have had
peculiar ideas of their own on geographical matters not to have detected this
blunder of the copyists. Where Ghamtn? where Lohor? The word
m the original text has been turned into by the copyists of the three
former, but a very little discrimination would have convinced any one of the
utter impossibility of its being correct. The Calcutta text, however, is huthfiilly
followed in EluoT. See voL it page 352.

What was the object of proceeding in the direction of LShor with the inten¬
tion of marching to MultSh and O chcha h does not appear, unless it was
to deprive Sher KTiSWr Ulug 2 l Slian’s kinsman, of those places and their
dependencies^ and restore them to Malik Balban-i-Kasblu Eban [which was
done], m>d that this was the first move in the Raybant plot, which the latter
Malik supported against UIuc^ Kha n; for, as yet, Malik Sher Khan had not
left the country, and Malik Balban was feudatory of Bud&’an. The Mughal
' raids may possibly have been the cause ; but, whatever it may have been, the
Bbb was the farthest point reached upon this occasion. See the account of
Balban-i-Kaihlft Khan in next Section.

* Turned into “Sihwan” and “SihwJln” respectively in the 7 ababat-i-
Akboit and Firightah, and the latter has the impossible for ^ in the
title of 'Izs-ud-Dtn, Balban-i-Kaahlii Sl^n.

THE SHAMSlAH SULTAMS OF HIND. C93

and ’Izz-ud-Din, Balban-i-Kaalilu • from Buda’un,

with their respective followings, accompanied the sublime
standards to the boundaiy of the river Biah. ’Imad-ud-
Din-i>Rayhan [at this time] secretly subverted the mind
of the Sultan and the Maliks towards Ulugh TChs^ -t-
A’lfam, and their minds were greatly changed.

Eighth Year; 651 h.

When the new year came round, on Tuesday, the 1st * of
the n[]onth of Muharram, 65 x H., command was given to
Ulugh IQian-i-A’gam, from the encampment at Hastrah ^
to proceed to his fiefs*, the territory of Siwalikh and Hansl
When the l^^n-i-Mu’a^^am, in conformity with that
command, reached Hans!, the Sultan, with his forces, in
the beginning of the month of Rab!'-ul-Awwal of this same
year, returned to the capital, and changed the feelings of
the grandees [as well as] the offices [they held*].

In the month of JamSdt-ul-Awwal, the masnad of the
Waztr-ship was transferred to the *Ayn-ul>Mulk ‘, the
Ni^am-ul-Mulk, Muhammad, Junaid!*, and to Malik

* The Calcutta text tnnis him into Laskittr IChSn ^ but such a name does not
occur throughout the whole of our author’s work.

* In the next Section, the last day of Muharram.

1 This name is doubtful, and I fail to rec<^;nize the place. It is scarcely
written twice exactly alike in any of the copies of the text collated, but it
certainly is not Rohtak.” In the different copies of the text it is
■ " j, t—^or and oMI or and the like.

* Both here and in the account of Ulu^ XHian in the next Section, in
Elliot [voL ii. pages 353 and 370], this is translated “ his estates in the
SiwAUk kills but th^ were exceedingly extensive estates. Ulugb irhsn held
the pravime of Hanst and the Siwilikh in fief, which then appears to have
been the pecnliu' appanage of the Am}r-i-Hij>b.

* In Elliot, “directed his attention to the nobles and public affiurs,” but
the context plainly shows what is meant, and it is to be presumed that the SnltSn,
during Ulugb Sbim’s tenure of office, directed his attention to public affairs
and to the great also.

t This title, signifying the eye of the state, like the following, signifying the
regulator of the country, &c.. Is a mere title peculiar to Waxtra. Muha mma d
was the name of the person in question.

* Firislitah asserts that ’Imad-ud-Dfn-i-RayhXn was a protigd of Ulu^
Elian's, but, as this is not contained in the yabakat-i-Akbart, and is not

to by our author, 1 am inclined to doubt its correctness. The
Dakhant also refers to the ’Ayn-nl-Molk, as if he were a forngncr

whom had brought to Dihlt.

«94

THE JABAJgikr-l-iik^lKL

Sai£>ud>Dtn, I-bak-i-Kashll EhSn, the Amtr-i-^ajib and
mu£b BSr-Bak [the Lord Chamberlain and Chief Master
4af the Ceremonies*], who was the brother of the
Jfu’kff^m, Ulugh S^n-i-A'ffam, the fief of Karah was
given, and he was sent thither. In Jam 3 dl-ul-Awwal like-
vHse, 'Im 5 d-ud-Dtn-i-RayhSn became Waktl-i-Dar* [Re¬
presentative in Dar-bar], and the SultSn [and his forces],
with the object of removing Ulugh Shd^n-i-A’^am—may
his power endure!—moved from the capital towards H2nst*.
'ImSd-ud-Din-i-Rayhan brought Shams-ud- Dtn. of

Bhar 3 l*ij [to the capital], and on the 27th of the month of
Rajab, 651 H., transferred to him the ^a^i-ship of the
realm *. Ulugh Sl^n-i-A’^am moved from Hansl and

* Cowipartt Elliot here, -where Malik Kishll is divided into /tew, and

one half of him is made ** lord chamberlain,” instead of his being deprived of
.tbs olBoe because of his relationship to Ulugli SbSn, and &is other half, as

Ulagh MufaarAk Aibak,” is sent to Karra!! BSrtBak it an officer,
eqoivalcBt to the B&r-Begt ai the Persian Court.

* Baroos is perfectly correct in reading Wakil>i-Dar, since **VMikUdar" is
meaningless ; but he is wrong in translating it "officer of the door," one " who
p apei i ntends the ceremonies of presentatiem,” for the meaning assigned to the
words by VdLLKRS is correct—procurator palatii regii, L e. vicarim. Wndr no
doubt means Prime Minister from the'time of the first Shaltfahs do-wn to the
present time, as in Turkey and Persia at this moment. Blochmann, in hjs
translation of the A'tn-i>Akbart [vrd. i. page 527], translates '* VaJdi" [Waktl]
as ''prime minister,” and “ Vattlr" [Wazfr] as "miruster of finances.” t
refer to the pre-Mu^hal period ; but even as regards the reign of Akbar, who,
h^ing half a HindG, and not half a Mnsalmtn, and who, bating the very name
of Muhammad and Abmad, delighted in making irmovations contrary to
Muhammadan usages, this rendering would fumidr matter for much argument;
but what 1 refer to in this place is WakIl-i-Dar, or WakIl-i-Dar-bAr —for
the two are equivalent—to which the Musalman -writers assign the foUo-wing
significations :—j-*

A Waktl is, essentially, a person entrusted to act in the abtence of another^
a sabstitnte, a/ter eg^o, locum tenens; but, at the same time, it must be
remembered, that the office of Waktl-i-Dar is different from that of Nkyab-i*
Mamlikat—Deputy or Lieutenant of the kingdom—as shown distinctly at
page 70a. Ulugh KbSn was made NSyab-i-Mamlikat in 647 u., and not
Waktl-i-Dar, which office ’Imad-ud-Dtn-i-Rayhun obtained after Ulugh Khan
was sent to bis fief; but ’ImGd-ud-Dtn did not become Waztr, for the first liije
of this paragraph of the text above shows, that Muhammad, Junaidt, was the
Waztr. The term, RayhSn, is applied to a slave or eunuch generally. See
also note *, page 635.

'rhis is related differently in the account of Ulugh Khan in the next
Section, which see.

* Our author's own office. See also the account of Ulu^ Kha n farther
on. It was in this year, 651 H., that he gained great successes over the
Rajp&ts.

THE S£LAMSiAH SULTANS OF HIND. 695

r^red to Nag-awr. and the fief of Hanst, together with
the office of Amlr-i-Hajib, was entrusted to Prince Rukn-
ud-Dtn [Ftriiz Shah*],-and in the month of Sha’ban [on
the 17th] the Sul^n [with his forces] returned to the capital.

In the b^inning of Shawwal of this year, the Sultan
marched from Dihll for the purpose of securing * O chch ah
and Multan. On arriving in the vicinity of the river Blah,
a force was despatched towards Tabarhindah.

Previous to this, Malik Sher Shan-i-Sun^ar had with¬
drawn from an engagement on the banks of the Sind ', and
had retired towards Turkistan ; and Ochehah, Multan, and
Tabarhindah, had been left in the hands of his dependents.
On Monday, the 26th of the month of Z»-Hijjah of this
year, they were gained possession of, and were made over
to the charge of Arsalan Khan. Sanjar-i-Qbast *, and the

^ The word here uced—does not mean "interest."

* Among the names of Nafir-ud-Dtn’s offspring in the list, at page 67a, this
name is given, together with' the names of three others. These must have
been mete children, as N&^ir-ud-Dtn, Mahmud Shah, himself, was only bom
in 626 H., and now only in his twenty-sixth year. The fief as well as the
office of Amtr-i-HSjib must have been held by Deputy in this case, by some
creature of ’ImUd-ud-Dtn-i-RaybSn’s clique, but only for a very short time.
The mention of Nifir-ud-Dln, Mahmud Shah ’s offspring fully disproves the
statement of the Tabahat-i-Akbarl, and some other works,* as to his having
had but one wife—he may have had only one at a time—for, as yet, Ulugh
Khin's daughter had borne him no offipring. See page 714.

* The word ^ is here used, which has different metmings. "Subduistg"
is rather too strong, as the object was merely to obtain possession of those
places from Malik Sher Shan’s dependents, and to place them under the
charge of Malik Taj-ud-Dtn, Arsalan Sl^n-i-Sanjar, as will be detailed in the
account of him farther oil Malik Kurez, She>' Iran’s deputy at Multfin, had,
only two or three years before [in 648 h.], sent Mughal captives to Dihlt,
which caused such rejoicing.

The Tabah2t>i-Akbarl says *' Sher ShSn sustained a defeat at the hands of
the Sindbn,” and Firiihtah copies with some blunders of his own; but, as
the first mentioned work agrees in every other respect -with our author’s
statements here, " the hanks of the Sind ” have, evidently, been mistaken for
Sindiin.

* A few copies of the text, but of the more modem Ones, including the best
Faria MS., have ** Sher TO«»n had retired from an engagement with the

of Sind AS- jUfL_but those words appear to be a mistake for at. /jf
M in the translation above.

* Our author, in the next Section, says nothing about this movement towards

Cebebah and Multkn, merely that the fief of Tabarhindah was assigned to
him, that previously [subsequently ?] he held the office of Waktl-i-Dar.
He Uluidt from Tabarhindah, when the latter marched from

bflg-awr to oust ’ImJid-ud-Dtn-i-Raybfin from piower.

la thr rfr»""> of Malik Balban it is stated that he, having been ousted firom

696

THE TABA¥AT. 1 .NA 9 IRL

Sultan [with his forces] retired from the banks of the
Biih and, in the same manner, returned to the capital.

Ninth Year: 652 h.

When the year 652 H. commenced, the river Jun was
passed, and, in thfe vicinity of the Koh-pSyah [skirt of the
mountains] of Bardar and Bijnor * many successes were
gained, and vast booty acquired.

Ochfihah by Sber irhgii| who had ptmously obtained possesaon of Multln,
went to Court and was made feudatory of BndS>’iin, and that, subsequent to
this, hostility having arisen between Sher Kban and the Malilu ot the Court,
Sber Rhan left the country and retired into Tuildstan, but wn Austin whatever is
referred to. Subsequently—previous to the year 655 h., in 653 h. or 654 H.
—Malik Balban had been again put in charge of Ofihfibah and MultSn, and
had made overtures to Hulaka TThan, the Mugbal, who ruled over 1 -iln on
the part of his brother, the Great fk’an, Mangfi, and had asked for a Mn^ial
Sb^t"**^! or Commissioner.

In the accou n t of Malik She r Sblbi on the other hand, our author
that the reason, why Sb^ SbSn retired towards Upper TurkisOn to proceed
to the ttrdu of Mangu Igla’an, was, that, when his cousin, Ulu|^ IGiSn^ was
banished from the Court through ’In^-ud'Din.i.Raytkn’s intrigues, and
proceeded to N 9 g>awr, strife went on between the cousins on the h»nlf«
of the Sind.

In the account of Ulugb Rhan, the march towards the upper provinces in
650 H. is mentioned when the RayliSnt plot took place, but no reference
whatever is made to Sber SbSn’s retirement, nor to any lighting. Under any
circumstances Sber Rhan could not have remained long absent from Hind, as
he joined the Sultan’s brother, Malik Jalal-ud-Dln, Mas’iid Sha h, in 653 h.,
at Lahor, which territory, a fact to which I have before drawn attention,
appears to have been then severed from the sovereignty <rf Dihlt. There b a
great deal of mystery about JalSl>ud-D!n, Mas’ud Sb^h’s movements, but
farther mention of him, with reference to the Mugbals, in the last.Section, will
throw some more light upon them.

* It must be borne in mind that all the references in these pages to the Btah,
and the banks pf the Btah, refer to that river when it flowed in its own bed
which ran about midway through the Bart Dd-ab, and Sbamalt Kafihht Dd-ab,
and joined the other rivers of the Panjab ten miles north of Cfibcbah; other¬
wise, to advance to the Btah as it now flows, to operate against Multan and
O chch ah. would be of no more effect than advancing to the Gang or Jdn for
the purpose. I shall have to refer to its change of bed farther on.

* As in all the copies of the text—Bijnor and —Btjnor [the Bijnour
of the Indian Atlas]. It is a place of considerable antiquity, with many ruins
still to be seen.

The very ** candid ” writer, our author, makes no other mention of this
affair in the account of Ulugb Shan—in fact, it is not even alluded to. The
Tababkt.i-Akbart, however, refers to it, but is evidently quite at sea as to the
geography, as I shall clearly prove. That work states, that, in 652 H., the
Sultan marched an army into the boundaries of the Kob-payah [skirt oS the

THfe SHAMSIAH SULJAns OF HIND. 697

On Thui^ay, the 13th of the month of Muharram of
tois year, the river Gang was crossed [by the Sultan and
his troops] m front of Mia-pur, and in the same manner,
keeping along the skirt of the mountains, the force pro-
ceeded as far as the banks of the river Rahab. During
these holy expeditions, on Sunday, the 15th of the month
Safar, at Tlklah-Bani», Malik Ra?l.ul-Mulk, 'Izz-ud-
Dfn, Durmashi* [Durmagljant ?], attained martyrdom. On

moant^u] of Bijnor, and, Am’iusr obtained great booty, crossed the river G.'ing
M the MlK-pur [another JtfS. Maha-purJ ferry, and, keeping along the skirt of
the mountains, reached the rivet Bihat [which is the Jhilam];” and that, •• at
Talkah-mBnt—JU —[another MS. JC], on Sunday, the 15th of $afar,
of that year [652 h.], Malik ’Izz-ud-Din, Rajt-ul-Mulk, whilst in a Hate of
htUxUation [/] was martyred by the Zamlndars of Kaithal and Kuhram. The
Sultan, to avenge hU blood, having gone to Kaithal and Kuhiilm, inflicted
chastisement upon the contumacious of that part, and then proceeded towards
Buda’un,’' &C. If any one will take the trouble to look at a map, it will be
at once seen what utter absurdity this is, and what ignorance it displays. Tlie
author of that work evidently wrote without attending to the geography, and
has mistaken Kklheher for Kaithal—had he not added KuhrSm by way of
riveting his blunder, I should have imagined Kaithal an error of the copyist—
and so made a precious hash of the two expeditions, and made one of them, as
well as mistaking a place situated in Lmt. 29“ 49, Long. 76® a8', for another—n
tract of country—more than three degrees farther east. Firiahtah follows,
implicitly, thus proving that, in this instance certainly, he did not see our
author’s work. He, however, leaves out the name of Tfklah.B^I
altogether. The simple mention of Buda’un should have been sufficient'to
have guided the author of the first work to —Katheher, or

—^Katheher, as it is also written.'

* In the original ijlt rUCS In some copies Tiklah-Mani [jL. dCj], Tilkah
or Talkah.Bant [tib dCi'l, Tiklah-Bamt [,_f.b Tanklah-Bani [jk rlC;-!],
Tanklah-Pant [Jb dCti], and also Sakah-Mant [jl* The first men¬

tioned is contained in the majority of the best copies. The identification of
places is very difficult in the Indian Atlas sheets, as well as in other less
valuable maps, from the manner in which the names of places are-written.
F'or example, in Sheet No. 67, the word Ttlak, in the name Ttlak-pur, is
written 7 ¥Ai>i-poor, 7 I/a(-poor, 7 Y//ocA-poor, and the like, just according to
the fancy of the different surveyors or engravers. In my humble opinion, in
the case of survey maps, at least, the local name, written in the vernacular,
should be first obtained, and then, after transliteiation, inserted in the map, the
long and short vowels being properly marked, as well as guttural, nasal, as¬
pirated, and other peculiar, letters, and then the public would not be at the
mercy of Gazetteer writers and their crude theories. A recent article in the
Bengal Atiatk Jbnrnal, No. iv. of 1874, by .Mr. F. L. Growse, is very much
to the point.

There is a place called Tigrec Bareknre in the sheet referred to in Lat 29®,
Long. 79® 40*; what the vernacular may be 1 cannot tell.

s That most absurd blunder, whereby an innocent man is turned into a
elruetkarel, occurs in the above passage. The author of the Tabakat-i-Akharl
read the word DnrmaaJli [which signifies that he was a native of

V y

THE TABA^AT-I-NA$IR1.

«9«

the following day, the i6th of Safar, the Sulf^^n of IslStn,
in order to avenge that act, inflicted such a chastisement
upon the infldels of K^thehcr as [the people of] that
territory will remember for the r6st of their lifetime, and
[afterwards] departed towards Buda’un ; and, on Thursday,
the 19th of the month of Safar, the district of Buda’un
became adorned with the magpiificence and dignity of his
auspicious canopy of state and sublime standards. The
Sul(an halted there for nine days, and, after that, decided
upon a return to the capital.

On Sunday, the 6th of the month of Rabi’-ul-Awwal, the
Wazarat-i-Mamalik ' [Waztr-ship of the realm] fell to the
charge, for the second time, of the Sadr-ul-Mulk, Najm-ud-
Din, Abu-Bikr; and, bn Sunday, the 20th of Rabi’-ul-
Awwal, within the limits of Kol, the Suftan honoured this
vassal of the dynasty [the author] with the title of Sadr-i-
Jahan *—the Almighty long preserve him in the sove¬
reignty !—and, on Saturday *, the 26th of Rabi’-ul-Awwal,
the capital, Dihli, was reached.

The Sultan continued at Dihli for a period of flve

—Darmash. or that his family, originally, came from a place so called. The
same name has already occurred. See page 4S9, and note as

in- intoxication’' Firishtah. byway of clenching the absurdity, and

showing plainly whence he obtained kit information, puts an additional word
taJU. i. e. uJia. ji —" in a state of intoxication ”! 1

1 had some &ith in the T<tbalMit-i-Akbarl before I compared its statements
with respect to this ghmnJ dynasty. I found it a mere transcript, with verbal
alterations, of our author’s statements, plus the geographical and other
blunders referred to. All this shows what ertors may be made even by native
Muhnmmadan compilers of Indian history; what then may we not expect
from European compilers who are wholly dependent on translations for their
materials ?

3 At page 352 of Elliot, voL ii., “mosfr” is not translated at all, and, a
few lines under, ** isHskUdar" is translated " prime minitter,” but here Waatr-i>
MamSlik is rendered "minister." Now it is clear, from our author’s state*
ments, that Wakil-i-Dar and Wazfr are totally distinct offices, and, therefore,
the former office, as described by the Muhammadan authors, is no doubt
correct ’Ipsad*ud*I>tn-i-Rayhfin was still Walctl-i-Dar at this period.

No mention of AbQ-Bikr’s [“Abd Bakr" must be **Tunud”] obtaining
the Waztr-ship is made in the account of Ulugh although it enters into

much more detail of these events.

* Compare Elliot : vol. ii, page 353. In Akbar’s reign, the $adr*i-Jahin
was the Chief Justice and Administrator of the Empire. See Blochmann’s
translation of the A’iN-I-AKBARi.

• Saturday, not Tuesday, is correct, for, if Sunday is the Both, how is it
(Hjasiblc for the 26th to be Tuesday?

THE SHAMSIAH sultans OF HIND.

699

months *, when information arrived respecting the assem¬
blage of the Maliks who had gathered about Malik JalSl-
ud-Dtn, Mas’ud gl^h [the Sultan’s brother] *. The sublime
standards ^accordingly], in the month of SJia’ban, moved
towards Sunam and Tabarhindah, and the ’Id-i-Fitr [the
festival at the end of the Fast Month—Ramadan] was cele¬
brated at Sunam. The forces of the Maliks, namely, Malik
Taj-ud-Dtn, Arsalan Sian, Sanjar-i-Chast», of Tabwhin-
dah, Malik Saif-ud-Dtn, Bat Shian*, I-bak, the Khita-i, and
Vlugh Khan -i-A’zam from Nag-aWr, were along with
Malik Jalal-ud-Din, Mas’ud §hah, in the neighbourhooil
of Tabarhindah. The Sulten [with the forces of his party]
left Sunam and retired to Hansi, and those Maliks mov^d
towards Kuhram and Kaithal*. The Sultan [on this]
marched from Hansi [8th of gliawwal] in the same dircc-

» The inscripUon over the entrance of the mimirah at ’A)I-garh [.\nglici7.c<l.
AUvCMh] is dated toth of Rajah of this same year, and in it is Kvid to occur
thei^eof Malik-ul.Kabtr.ul-Mu’assam, Eutlugh Man, Balban-ugh-Shamsi,
which has been ascribed, by Thomas [PathAn Kings,

UluBh Man. but " the amiable king ” never bestowed upon Uhi^ ^n the
title M?n according te the records in this work. Our author says

thb ^ which Na?ir-«<l.Dtn-s step-father was known, and by no

oAer^LnTis he motioned in these pages, and he W that title for a long
tim after. See under the events of the next year The n^e probably refers
tn fhi> nerson who held the fief when the minarak was erected.

details of this outbieak will be found in the

t ^rhr"go™'fo s:

S^’l^S'^n ul^Tmt. son but our author makes a mysteor of

it. More brother Into Malik Jaial-

Fingbtah, m ^ . ~feired to this plunder of turning Khin into

ud-DtnMJnt ««» the ••Tnrkln-i.

IQiaat, at “te 1 ana ^

Shw^ah-Tl^ te was the SulpUi’s own brother.

“revlaed’*lwrtof Brlggsll

1 ». ™. a.,, o,

to mistake Kaithal, take place, and the greatest confusion

page 354- A slight skirmish afWi will be found in the

Sr«« in the Snljan’s camp. The pamo^ Firiahtah, but not

«:count of Ulugh Man gfeer

TCh»n does not appear to have nau j a
account of him in next Section.

V y 2

TOO THE TABA 1 ^AT.I.NA$IRL

tion. A party of Amirs now interposed between the two
personages* [the Sultan and Jalal-ud-Dln, Mas’ud Shahl^
and spoke words of peace, and *Imad-ud-Din-i-Rayh 3 n
was the cause of discord on both sides, until, on Saturday^
the 22nd of Shawwal of this same year, the Sultan of IslSnt
commanded that ' Imad-ud-Din-i-Rayhan should be sent
to Buda’un, and that that territory should be his fief; and
that accommodation was effected.

On Tuesday, the 17th of the month of 2 i-Ka’dah, after
vows, pledges, and stipulations, Malik Jalal>ud-Dtn, Mas’ud
Shah, and the whole of the Amirs and Maliks presented
themselves, and [the province of} Lohor became the fief of
Malik Jalal-ud-Din, Mas’ud Shall*; and, attended by security
and felicity, the Sultan and his forces entered the capital
city of Dihli, under a fortunate star, on Tuesday, the 9th of
the month of 2 i-Hijjah —May Almighty God ever adorn the

• The original—„,> _/» s-** al’ove. The persons referred to are the

Sultan and his brother, but Ulugh Sh$n was also concerned. Compare
Elmot also here.

7 “ WecIneKlay ” is utterly impossible, if Tuesday is the 17th of
Tn the account of Ulugh Khan it is said the SSiul of Shaww^ was Saturday.

* niiis is the first time Labor has been referred to as a fief since it was taken
by the Mughals in 639 H. It was still in ruins, and was not rebuilt until some
time after. Some authors state that Jal&l-ud>Dtn, Mas’Qd &h&h, held
I .ahor indepcfuient of the Dihlf kingdom, and that he was countenanced by the
Mughals. More on this subject will be found in the last Section. Even
above it is not said that Labor laar conferred upon him; merely that it
became his fief.

In the account of Sher Khan in the next Sectimt, it is stated that, on his
return with honour from the urdU of the Great Manga Kll^n, in TQrkn

[this shows the state of the Dihlt kingdom, when even Ulugji Sbkn’s own
cousin went to the Mugfaal Court], he^ Slier KhSn. joined Malik JalM-ud-Otn ;
but there it is stated that contention arose between the latter and Sber Khiw
at last, that Jalai-ud*Dtn retired in disappointment, and that his dependents
and followers fell into the hands of Sher KhSn’s followers. This however, it
mast be borne in mind, had nothing whatever to do with these events, and
happened a year or two afterwards. Sher Khan then endeavoured to recover
Tabarhindah from the feudatory, Malik 'nj-ud-Dhi, ArsalSn Kb£n, but he,
having sallied out to encounter him, Sher Khan had to withdraw. Swift
messengers were sent after him from Dihlt, and pledges were entered into [to
inrluce him not to retire to the Mugfaals prolMbly], and he was induced to
proceed to Dihlt, whither the feudatory of Tabarhindah was also summoned.
The latter was sent to govern the fief of Awadh, and Sher Khg« received back
all the frontier fiefs he had previously held. Contention, however, again went
on between him and Malik Balban-i-KathKi Khln as before, Tabarhindah and
its dependencies were conferred upon another Malik, Nufrat-SUhi, Badr>ud>
Dtn-i-SunVar, and Slier Kha n obtained another fief, as stated in note *,
page 713, and note *, page 714, which see.

THE SUAMSfAH SULJANS OF HIND.

JfOl

^blime »Undards of a.e SultSo with tho emblems of victory
for the sake of hjs illustrious Prophet!

Tenth Year : 653 h.

. year of 653 h. came round, an uncommon

t ing happened, and it was on this wise, that the decrees of
destiny suffered the blessed heart of the Sultan to change
towards bis mother, the Malikah-i-Jahan ; and, as she was
married [a second time] • to Kutlugh Khan, command was
given to both of them that Awadh should be their fief, and
that they should proceed to it*. In conformity with this
command, they repaired to their fief ; and this circumstance
happened on Tuesday, the 6th of the month of Muharram
of this year.

^Vhen the month of Rabi’-ul-Awwal came round, on
Sunday, the 23rd of the same month, the Sultan of Islam,
—May his sovereignty continue!—entrusted to the chaige
of this servant of the state, Minhaj-i-Saraj, under the same
covenant as on a previous occasion, the K^?i-ship of the
realm and jurisdiction over the capital city. Dibit.

* There appears to liave been some secrecy with respect to this match, and
it is on account of the proceedings of the Sultan’s mother and her second
husband that he is excluded from: the account of the great Maliks. Compare
Elliot here also.

' Some time previous to this period, but when or in what year is not stated
—more than between the beginning of Najir-ud-Dtn, Mafimud Sb&h’s reign,
and the putting to death of Malik ^utb-ud-DTn, Husain, the fih flrt. in the
middle of 653 H. —Malik Ik]ltildhr>ud>Dtn, Yfis-Bak-i-ynghril Khg n, who
had previously held the fief of having showed a rebellious spirit,

MalHt Ht't^-ud-Dtn, Ghurt, was sent against him, and he

succeeded in bringing Malik Yuz-Bak to the capitaL The latter was then
appointed to the charge of the fief of Awadh, and, subsequently, that of
I.Akhanawatt was conferred upon him. Hostility arose between him and the
infidels of Jaj-nagar who renewed their attempts against the Lakhapawatt
territory. Malik Yuz-Bak was at first unsucces^ul against them, but, at last,
he penetrated into their country, and appeared before its capital. After this
success, Malik Yuz-Bak, who was continually acting contumaciously towards
the Court, assumed tKree canopies of state, invaded Awadh, and assumed the
title of Sult&it MughiS-ud-Din. The kingdom of Dihli appears to have'
been in such a'state of disorder that its ruler was powerless to oust him from
Lakhanawa^t; and, subsequently, Malik Yuz-Bak invaded Klm-rQd, but was
defeated and taken prisoner, and died. Further particulars will be found in.
the next .Seetioii, but our author gives not a single dale, and hLs accounts differ
considerably.

•m THB 74 BASAT.I.NA^RT

In the month of Kat^’-ul-Aisliir, they conveyed to the
hearing of the SultSn a remark from Malik ]l^utb-ud<^Dtn,
Husain, son of ’Alt, the Qhurt, who was NSyab [Lieutenant^
of the kingdom, which was contrary to the sublime opinion,
and, on Tuesday, the 23rd of Rabt’-ul-Aljilir, he cited Malik
Kutb-ud-Din, Husain *, and ordered him to be arrested
and imprisoned ; and that Malik obtained martyrdom *—
Almighty God long preserve the monarch of Islam 1

On Monday, the 7th of JamS^<ul-Awwal, the fief
of Mirath was assigned to Malik Kashlt gJian, Saif-
ud-Din, I-bak, the Sultan! Shamsi. Ulugli Kutlugh-i-
A’zam, the Bar-Bak [the full brother of Ulugh Kha n-i-
A’gam], after he had presented himself at court ^ subsequent
to his return from Karah—The Almighty’s mercy be upon
him*! OnTuesday, the 13th of the sacred month of Rajab
of this same year, the office of Shaikh-ul-Islam [patriarch]
of the capital was consigned to that Bayiztd of the age, the
Shaikh-ul-Islam. Jamal-ud-Din, the Bustamt*; and, in this

* See the I.in at page 673 for his full titles.

* This is another of our niUhor’s inystcrie.s and suppressions of facts. In his

account of Ulugh £han in the next .Section, he says Ulugh Kha n was uaade
Nayab or Deputy of the. kingdom, in 647 ii., soon after his daughter was
espoused by the .Sultan. On the banishment of Ulugh Khan to his fief of
Ngg-awr in 650-51 H., through ’ImSd-ud-Utn-i-Kaytian’s machinations, he
was, of course, deprived of his office ; but, neither under this reign, nor in the
account of Uhigh Khan, is it stated whom Ulugh Kha n succeeded in »haf
office, or who succeeded him ; but, from the statement above, it is evident that
Malik 9 usain, was made Nayab when Ulugh Khan was sent

to NSg-awr, and that he held the office up to this time. From s^hat is
mentioned about Malik Ku|b-ud-Dln, ^nsain, in the account of Ulu|^ ShSn,
where the latter’s return to Court is detailed, and ’ImId-ud-Dtn-i-RayhSn’s
banishment, at the end of the year 652 H., it is also evident that the fomier—
he was no slave either, but a free-bom Qhuii noble of royal descent—^held 2
high position in the state, second only to the SulpUi himself. His late
evidently was connected, in some way, with the K^tlu^ or Rayhint factions,
from what is mentioned respecting the occurrences of this year, in the account
of Ulugh Sh^n : or, he may have merely been in the way Ulu^ Kha n’*
ambition, for, immediately after he was got rid of, his extensive fief of
Mirath was given to Ulu^ Khan’s brother.

* “ Upon his coming from Karra toto the Sultin.” Elmot':
vol. IL page 354.

* He died in 657 H.

* Buspim is the name of a celebrated town in Shuifriin, of which Jamil-
ud-Dtn was a native, hence he is styled Bnspbnt, and Shailrh AbS.-Yaxfd or
Blyaztd is the name of the saint who has made BustSm so fiunuus among
Miualmans. Some write the word Bastlm. See page 419.

flSAMSlAH SULTANS OF HIND. 703

aioixtti !tikj^ir4SCf Malik Taj-ud-Dtn-i-Sanjar, the Sihwastani
managed ^ get out of Awadh, and ousted ’Imad-ud-Din-i-
Ray^in from Bhara’lj, and he departed on a journey from
this world In the month of Shawwal of this year likewise,
me Sultan with his forces departed from the capital towards
Hindustan [i. e. east'of the Jun] ; and, on Sunday, the 17th
of the month of Zi-^a’dah. Ulugh Kl^n-i-A'*am set out
for the purpose of organizing the affairs of the
Siwalikh contingent, and, having got those troops ready,
returned to the capital, Dihli, with them *; and, on Wed¬
nesday, the 19th of the month of Zi-Hijjah, at the close of
this year, he joined the royal camp [with his con¬
tingent].

Previous to this a peremptoiy command had been issued
that Malik IKutlugh Kh an [the Sultan’s stejvfather] should
leave the province of Awadh, and proceed to the fief of Bha-
ra’ij, and he had not obeyed that mandate ; and Malik Bak-
Tamur®, the Rukni, was directed to proceed from the capital
with a force and expel him [from Awadh]. The forces on
either side came in contact in the neighbourhood of Buda’-
un and Malik Bak-Tamur was martyred. On this, the
Sultan with his forces set out towards Awadh for the pur¬
pose of remedying this mishap ; and, on his arrival in that
part, Malik Kutlugh Kh an retired before him, and the

^ There are Ihree* Maliks mentioned in the next Section bearing a similar
name and title, one Taj-ud-Din, Sanjar-i-Kiiret Ttban. another, TSj-ud-Dtn,
Sanjar-i-Tez 'Kbgn- who lived in this reign, and, at this period, held the fief of
Buda’un, and a third, Taj-ud-Dtn, Arsalan £han-i-Snnjar, but the laj-ud-
Dln-i-Sanjar, here referred to, must be a totally different person, and is not
mentioned among those in the next Section. See also note page 704.

In the account of Uluf^ E]^n he is styled TSj-ud-Dtn, Sanjar-i>Mah-
peahfint [of the moon-like brow]. “Out of the trify of Awadh”—^the ancient
capital—is here meant, where he was confined. Further particulars will I>e
found under Ulu^ Kh an, which see. Firishtah, who certainly did not obtain
the names of persons from our author, turns him into Taj-ud-Din, the Turk.

■ On the 3rd of the month, Zt'Hijjah. In Muharram, the first month of
the year 654 H., the .army reached the frontier of Awadh.

* In some copies this name appears Bak-tam— fsii —but it is an error.
What appears the long stroke of is merely the way in which some writers,
writing quickly, would write —Bak-Tamur ; but the I. H. L. AfS.,
R. A. S. AfS., and Paris MB., have or Ruknt refers to Sultan

Rukn-ud-Dtn, Firfiz Sl^> in whose reign this Malik was raised to that
dignity, prbbablyu He is styled Malik Bak-Tamur-i-Aor Kl^in in the next
Section.

> It is fid, in the next Section, that they met at Samra-mu.

704 THE TABA¥AT-I-NA$IRL

SultEn moved towards KAlair*. Ulugh ^han-i-A’^am
[with a part of the army] followed in pursuit of Malik
^utlugh but did not meet with him, and, with great

Ixxjty, he rejoined the SultAn’s [camp] *.

Eleventh Year ; 654 h.

When the new year, 654 H., came round, the Sultan’s
forces, in the month of Mutuirram, 654 H., having achieved
that success *, attended with felicity and victory, and aided
by the protection of the Creator Most High, the Sultan
turned his face towards Dihlt, and, on Tuesday, the 4th of
Rabi'-ul-Akhir. 654 H., the capital was reached.

When Malik Kutlugh Kh an became aware that the Sul¬
tan’s forces had retired towards the capital, he began to appro¬
priate the territories of Kafah and Manikpur, and between
him and [the feudatory] Arsalan Khan. Sanjar-i-Qhast, a
conflict took place, but the victory remained with Arsalan
I^an*. As it became impracticable for Malik Kutlugh
Khan to make further resistance in Hindustan, he deter¬
mined to move upwards [towards the Biah and Labor]
through the border tracts, and proceeded in the direction of

* The name of this place is doubtful in all copies of the text, but is written
Kaler or Kalair^jjr—in the most trustworthy copies. The probability is
that it refers to —jX Kaliyar—a few miles north-east of Rurkf, It is the
remains of an ancient city. In some copies of the text the word is —
Kalinjar, but, of course, the celebrated stronghold of that name is not, and
cannot be, referred to. In the account of Ulugh Sl^n, in the next Section,
the scene of these events is said to have been near the frontier of Tirhut.

* Near Kasmandah, or Kasmandi, for it is written in both ways, on the
l6th of Rabi’-ul-Awwal.

♦It was a great success, certainly, not to catch a rebeL

* Two Maliks living at this time, whose names and titles are somewhat similar,
and are thereby liable to be mistaken one for the other—one, Taj-ud-Dtn,
Sanjar-i-Tez Khan ; the other, Taj-ud-Dtn, Arsalan Kha n. Sanjar-i-Chast.
The first-mentioned became-Waktl-i-Dar and feudatoiy of fiuda’iin in 654 h.
He was, subsequently, sent against Kutlugh RTian. but had to repeat; and,
some time after, the fief of Awadh was conferred upon him. The latter had
married the daughter of Sultan Baha-ud-Din, Tughril, the Mu’izzt [see
pug« 544I. and Itad great interest. When Malik Shcr Khan retired from
Sindh and I'abarhindah, ArsalSn Khan was sent to Tabarhindah. He was
afterwards sent against Kutlugh Khan, when feudatory of Awndli. and was
more successful, and compelled Kuilugh Khan’s faction to disperse. 'iVis is
what is referred to above. See Maliks, Nos. XVII. and XIX., next Section.

THE SHAMSIAH SULJANS OF HIND. 90 $

SantGr *, and sought shelter among the independent [HindQ]
tribes ^ The Sultan with his forces moved from the
capital, Dihlt, on Monday, the 20th of Zt^-Hijjah, to quell
this sedition of his; and, as the new year, 655 H.*, came
round, the army, in that year, marched towards Santur,

* iiee the acconnt of Ulu^ SlUto, in the-next Section, respectinj; Santilr.

1 There is not a word about “ the highlands ” here, as given in Elliot
[voL ii. page SSSl* The word is made a tract of courUry in that work i
The words are— u-'t* as above.

The editor of the above-mentioned work adds, in a foot-note, that *' These
two names are written s/-l>>.and (var. The former is probably

MewAr, smd the hills the Atavallf mountains. Briggs says there is a town
called Santpdr, near Abu. Thornton has a “Santoo, eighty-four miles S.S. W.
from Jodhpur ” 1 ! Where will they lead us next t They are entirely out,
however, toth in their latitude and longitude here, only about five degrees too
far W. and S.S! Where "Mewdrt" where the Hlmalayah mountains?
Perhaps " BahrUeh" is near "Jodhpur” also. Firishtah turns into

Jftur — and — Jtt-pur—or, rather, the revised \.eM." of Briggs

does. Dow has Sitnoor, as in the TabaVat-i-Akbari, which proves that the
MS. of Firiahtah used by him was correct, for jys-. in a MS. might be read, fay
a person not knowing what place was referred to, jfis-. The "revised” text of
Firiflitah m^ht be revised from other MSS. of that work with much
advantage.

There is some difficulty with respect to the exact meaning which our author
desired to convey by the word — mdwd's —here, and — mcneasSt

used elsewhere. The latter word seems as if intended for the plural form of it,
according to ’Arabic ideas or, otherwise, for the ’Arabic word signifying
"society," "neighbourhood,” " fellowship,” &c. There is also a Hindi
word written in the same way—i_f'“—-meaning " refuge^” “ protection,”
" retreat,” "asylum,” and the like, which might be used here : but, from the
way in which the second form of the word,, viz. is used in the account

of Ulugh Kh an- and in other places farther on, respecting these events, both
words evidently refer to neighbouring independent Hirulu tribes and the tracts
they dwelt in, adjoining the Dihlf territory, but not under the sway of the
J>ihll kings, and as such I .shall use the word here.

The country of the Mews or MewySs is certainly not meant, for Mew at is
too far south-west. The events here recorded happened in and around the
Upper Do-ab, in and near the lower ranges of the IlimaLayah mountains, as
far east as the district of Tirh&t, and as far as the Biah on the wesL

I have in my possession detailed geographical accounts of these tracts, but
neither of the words used in the text is mentioned. There is a po.s.sibility
that the name tnatvas is local, but, at the same time, there seems but little
doubt of their being the same, or one among the aboriginal llindfi tribes,
referred to in Dalton’s Ethnology [pages 154, 221, 230, 231, 2S0], and in the
Bom. Geogr. Journal, II. of 1855, under the name of Muasis, which is used
like (he term jlS^—garvar —I,*" »ji^ll.—by some native writers,
applied to a nomad people of Hindustan.

* These are the events of the next ye-ir, not of 654-H. In the account of
Ulugb KhRn it is stated that the Sultan’s troops only beeatv their nvuch in the
(Aird months 655 H.

hostilities were commenced between the forces ot IsUUn
and the Hindfis of the Koh-pSyah [skirt of the hills]*,
l^utlugh was among that people; and a party

among the MusalmSn Amirs» who were apprehensive,
through being falsely accused, joined him \ but, as they
had not the power to withstand [the Sultan’s troops], they
consequently turned -their backs [and retired], and Ulugh
gbSn-i-A’^ain, by stroke of sword, turned that mountain
tract upside down, and pu^ed on through passes and
defiles to SilmQr [i. e. SirmOr], and devastated the Koh ‘-i-
Silmur [the hill tract of Sirmur], and waged holy war as
by the faith enj'oined, over which tract no sovereign had
acquired power, and which no Musalman army had ever
before reached,’ and caused such a number of villainous
Hindu rebels to be slain as cannot be’defined nor numbered,
nor be contained in record nor in narration *.

Twelfth Year: 655 h.

After withdrawing from thence [the hill tract of Silmur],on
Sunday, the 6th of Rabt’-ul-Awwal, 655 H., Malik Saif-ud-
Dln, Ban ]^an, I-bak, the I^ijta-f, sustained a fall from his
horse and died from the effects of the inj'uries he sustained,
and the Suftan’s forces turned their faces towards the
capital, and, on Sunday, the 26th * of the month of Rabt-
ul-Akhir, he reached the illustrious seat of government
Dihll.

* The Sub-HimHayah is here meant, not the hills of Mewat.

» This is rendered in Elliot [vol. ii. page 356] “a party of nobles m /JU
royal army, &c., went and joined them,” as if they deserted from the Sultftn’s
army. The text, however, will not admit of this rendering, and the words are
^» Th« Musalman Ambs were not with the royal
forces at this time. See under Ulugb RbSn .

* In a few of the more modem copies of the text fCa^bah —town is used
of A04— mountain, hill-tract, &c. Silmur and Sirmfir is one and the
thing. The chief town bore that name, as well as the tract of country. For
further particulars respecting this part, see the account of Ulugh Kha., in the
n^t Section. There the X^ifar—fortress, or fortified town—of Silmur is
mentioned.

* It was on the last day of Shawwal of this year, although some say the

foUoviring day—the ist of of Zi-^a’dah—that Rnkn-ud-Dln, Khur the

last of the Mulahidah rulers of'Alamut, came down from Iris stronghold of
Mahn&n-Dujz and presented himself before Hulaku ShAn, the Mughal.

* It was the 35th according to the statement in the account of Ulush TtT.5..

which tee. ’

THE aSAMSlAH SULTAnS OP HIND. fVf

On the rettmi of the victorious forces Malik ’Isz-ud-Dfit.

Sh^, who, with the troops of Cchchah
and MtUtan, was [then] in the neighbourhood of the banks

[north-eastwards],

and Malik, ^utiugh Kban, and those Amirs who were in
combmation with him. joined Malik Balban-i-Kagblu
f«ru ^ 7 “*®**^ limits of Mansur-pur and Samanah \

When information of the movement of this faction came to
the sublime hearing, Ulugh Khan-i-A’gam with the troops
was appointed [to march against them], and, on Thursday,
the isth of Jamad!-ul-Awwal, 655 H., he moved from the
capital

When Ulugh tPian *-i-A’gam, with the forces under him,
arrived near unto the army of the faction, so that between
the two armies about ten kuroh [about 18 miles] distance
remained, a party at the capital, such as the Shaikh-ul-
Islam [patriarch], Jamal-ud-Din, the Sayyid, ]^utb-ud-
Utn, and ^a;i §hanis-ud-Din, the Bhara’iji, wrote letters
secretly, and despatched them to Malik ^Jlutlugh Khan and
Malik Tzz-ud-Dtn, Balban-i-Kashlu KhSn [urging them] to
come to the capital, and that they would give up the gates
[of the city] to them ; and every one within the city they
were getting to pledge their support to this movement.

* This advance was made with an object, as will appear in the account of

Ulu* in.a«

* Eufiogjt KMn and his fiurtion, skirting the lower range of the Himalayah,
advanced towards the BlSh, keeping north of Sirhind, and Balbon-i-Kaahlil
jShkn moved up liom the MultSn district to meet him, along the banks of the
Bhh—which, at that period, from our author’s remark in his account of
Balhan-i-Kaaftlu Khjln, was the boundary of the Dihli kingdom. It flowed
in its old bed at this period. See remarks on the “ Lost River ” in last
Section.

r Our author’s account here difieia considerably from that given in his notice
of Ulugfa SllZn,-and that again differs, in a great measure, from the other two
in his notice of Biilbfln .S.T Cfl g || lfi ici|SH Under Ulugh jQxSn, our author
states that, when he, with his troops, drew near to the rebels in the vicinity of
Kaithal, on tkt 15M <rf JamUt-nl-Awwal, certain persons at the capital wrote
letters, &c.

* He is Again tamed into his namesake, Balban, by Firishtah, who styles
him i^ull The title of his namesake, however, was ’Izz[^c]-ud-Din, Balban-
i-Ka| 2 |lil WhSn Ulugji WhSn never went by the title of ’laz-ud-Dfn. The
TabaMt-i-Akbarl. which copies from our author, is perfectly correct, but
Firiohtah imagines that “Kaihia [not KaahltJ Stan, ^akim of Sind” and
’Izs>ud>Dtn, Balban, was another person altogether, and makes two persons of
him in nearly every instance throughout his account of this reign.

THE TABA]^AT.I.NA$1RL

JqS

Ofui were entering into compacts, and making stipulations
with them. Certain loyal informants [however] wrote in-
tunation of this sedition to Ulugh Kh 5 n-i-A*zam who, in
consequence of this treason, from his camp, imparted infor¬
mation to the sublime Court respecting the fact of this
disaffection on the part of a party of turban-wearers *
[priest-hood], and requested, in the event of its being expe¬
dient in the sublime opinion, that a royal mandate should
be issued by his Majesty unto them to the effect that
those [among them] who held fiefs in the neighbourhood of
the capital should repair to their respective fiefs, and that
their return to the city again should be prohibited, by
his Majesty’s command, until that sedition should be
quelled.

On Sunday, the 2nd of Jamadt-ul-Alshir, 655 H., the man¬
date was issued that the Sa)^id Kutb-ub-Din, the Shaikh-
ul-Islam, Jamal-ud-Dtn, and l^azt Sl|ams-ud-Din, Bhara’-
iji, should proceed to their fiefs.

On their letters from the capital having reached Malik
^utlugh Khan and Malik ’Izz-ud-Dln, Balban-i-Kashlu
K ^an. they, at once, without the least delay, marched
from their position, with the whole of their forces, and
pushed on towards Dihll. This forced march of theirs
upon the capital, from their camp near Samanah, was
beg^n on Monday, the 3rd of the month of Jamadi-ul-
A kh ir *, and they pushed on with such celerity that they
marched a distance of one hundred kttroh [about 180
miles] in two days and a half; and, on Thursday, the 6th
of Jamadi-ul-Akhir» they alighted at the Bagh-i-JGd [the
J ud Garden] *. The next morning, at dawn, after morning

• Compare Elliot [vol. ii. pages 356, 357] here does not mean

“nobles.”

I How is it possible that the hostile Maliks could have started on the 3rd of
Jam&di>uI'A]tliir, even if the information sent by the loyal party arrived the
same day as that in which the letters of the turban-wearers reached tlie
hostile camp ? Ulu(^ lUian had to. despiatch the news to the Sult&n, at
Dihll, and he had to issue his mandate to expel them ; and this, our author
says, he did on the 2nd of Jamadt-ul-A]cl|ir —the day brfore the letters from the
different jiartLsans reached the respective camps ! These two dates cannot both
be correct.

■ The printed text here has a typographical error of sy. ^kfor which

is immediately after printed correctly, and the name occurs in a number of
places in this Section and the next. In consequence of this slight mistake,
this sentence is rendered in Elliot [vol. ii. page 35.7]—“they aliglited at their

THE SZlAMSlAH SULJANS OF HIND. 709

prayers, they made for the city gate, and made a‘circuit
in the vicinity of the capital*, and, at night, pitched their
camp in the suburbs of Dibit, between the Bagh-i-Tud. and
Gilu-khart. and the city.

When those Maliks and [their] forces, in expectation of
the fulfilment of the promise [contained] in those letters,
reached the Bagh-i-Jud, the favour of Almighty God was
such that, two days previous to their arrival, the party
disaffected had been sent away from the city ; and, when
those [hostile] Maliks became aware of their story, their
proceedings became suspended *, and a command had
issued from the Sultan’s court, so that they [the authorities]
secured the city gates; and, as the [royal] troops were
absent from it, they made dispositions for defence. The
Amir-ul-Hujjab [Lord or Head of the Chamberlains] ’Ala-
ud-Din, son of Ayaz the Zinjani, and the Deputy Amtr-
i-Hajib, and the Ulu^ Kotwal-Bak [the great Lord, the
Seneschal], Jamal-ud-Din, the Nighapuri, with the Diwan-
i-’Ari?-i-Mamalik [Muster-Master of the Kingdom], that
same night, in organizing the fighting men for the defence
of the city *, greatly distinguished themselves, and Amirs,
heads of families, and respectable persons, were appointed
to the ramparts.

gardens [plural] (outside the dty),” &c. Immediately under, the same is
repeated in the text, but printed correctly— ^ —but, in Elliot, BSgb-i-
Jud is discarded altogether, sind the words “gardens on the Jamna” are
substituted, and the editor sidds, in a note “the text has 'Jdd,' which I take
to be a mistake for,ydn = Jumna ! " When our author is perfectly correct
he Ls in this manner, made out to be wrong.

From its situation, the Jud BSgk is probably that which now goes by the
name of ♦L.»~'RSg 1 >-i.Sh 3 limar. some distance W. of the old city of Dibit.

This aflSiir will be found much more detailed in the account of Malik Balban-
i-Kasljlu TThan, and of Ulufik Shan, farther on, and the Jud Garden is again
referred to.

» There is nothing about walls in this part of the sentence.

In Elliot [vol. ii. page 357]— “they became very cautious in their pro¬
ceedings,” &c. The original word o'** here signifies delaying, suspending,
retarding, &c.

* He had succeeded, as Deputy of Ulugh Khkn’s brother, Malik Saif-ud-
Dtn, I-bak-i-Kaahlt Sh^> who had been sent to the fief of Mtrath aAer Malik
]^utb-ud-Dtn, ^nsain, the fihurt. had been got rid of.

• Malik Badr-ad.Dtn-i-Sun^ar, the Rfimi, feudatory of Bhtanah, also
reached the capital with a body of troops, tmd this timely aid tended to the,
security of the city. As usual with our author, he gives part of the details
here, but retains the greater part of the particulars for his account of Balban-
i-Kashlfi Khan, and Uluidl Sh^n. which see.

710

THE TABAJB:AT-I-NA$IRL

When the morning of Friday [the 7th of Jamadl>ul-
AJs^ir] dawned, God Almighty prepared a pleasure [for
them], and Malik ’I2z>ud-Dtn, Balban-i-Kashlu Kha n,
proposed to retire. The other Maliks along with the
Sultan’s mother, the Malikah-i-Ja^n, when they perceived
that his intention was to be abandoned, all concurred in
retiring. The greater portion of their following [how’ever]
did not accompany them at the time of their withdrawal,
and took up their quarters in the vicinity of the city, and
many of the great and notable persons among them sought
to be admitted to terms, and presented themselves beford
the sublime court' ; and those [disaffected] Maliks retired
towards the Siwaiikh * [territory] foiled in their objects.

When information of their intention [to march against
Dihli, previously related] reached Ulugh £han-i-A’^am,
and the [other] Maliks and Amtrs of the royal army, they
moved from the position they were then in, and pressed
forward towards the capital, until, when they arrived near
unto it, the state of affairs became manifest to Ulugh
Khan-i-A’zam. and he reached the capital again, safely,
prosperously, victoriously, and triumphantly, on the 14th *
of Jamadi-ul-Akhir—May Almighty God perpetuate the
sovereignty of this dynasty, and make lasting the fortune
and power of this Kha n-^ip. and preserve the people of
Islam, through His illustrious Prophet Muhammad '!

Subsequently to these events, on Wednesday, the 8th
of the blessed month of Ramadan of this year, the tnasnad
of the Wazir-ship was entrusted to the Ziya-ul-Mulk, Taj-
ud-Din, with the title of Ni;am-ul-Mulk, and the mastt^
of the [office of] Ashraf-i-Mamalik * was committed to the

* That is, they presented themselves to make their submission, after terms
were entered into, and do homage to the Sultan. In the account of Malik
Balhan-i-KashlB Khan, in the next Section, It is said that only 200 or 300
followers accom])anied him on his retreat.

* The Siwaiikh has been previously described.

* Without even a skirtnish having taken placei>etween them I So much for
our “candid and conscientious narrator.'’

In the account of Ulugh Khan the date is the loth of Jamadl-uI-Akhir.

> No further notice of and his wife, the SultSn’s mother,

occurs throughout this work, although our author, no doubt, was well aware
of their fate ; and it is nut recorded anywhere else. They probably retired
within the Mughal dominions, or remained with Kashlii KhAn in Sin^

» See note •, page 631;. respecting these titles.

THE SHAMSiAH SULTANS OF HIND.

7”

$adr-ul-^ulk ; and, at the end of this year *, an army of
infidel Mughals from Kh urSsan reached the territoty of
O chch ah and Multan, and Malik 'Izz-ud-Dtn, Balban-i-
Kaslilu Sban, entered into a compact with them, and
joined the camp of their leader, the Nu-yin, Saltn *, the
Mughal.

Thirteenth Year : 656 h.

When the new year came round, and the month of Mu-
harram, 656 H., was entered upon, on Sunday, the 6th of
Muharram, the sublime standards moved from the capital
for the purpose of making holy war upon and repelling the
Mughal infidels, and a camp was formed in sight of the
city of Dihlt.

Trustworthy persons have related on this wise, that
on Wednesday, the 9th of this same month, Hulau [or
Hulaku], who was the head of the Mughal infidels [in
’IraV:], fled discomfited before the troops of the Lord of the
Faithful, Musta*$im B’illah, from the gate of Baghdad *.

* In 2t-9ijjah, the last month of the year.

* Elliot [voL iL page 35 S]—'* at the camp of SdUH-nawln ” I This
leader is styled SSrt by our author in the account of Ulugh ShSn, and Sfill—
r and / being intercha^igeable—in oth« places, and by other authors.

The T<^bahat>i-Akbart dismisses this invasion in a few words, and has:
“At the end of this year an army of Mughals came into the territories of
Ofihchah and Mult&n, and the Sultan marched to repel them, and the Mughal
army retired without lighting, and the Sulfin also returned.”

The “ revised "text of Firishtah has j tA'r* J »1 j** which,

j^oonect, shows that writer knew not what he was writing about, forit can only
be rendered—“an army of Mughals camte to Sdrt and the territories of
fl ohehah and Multan.” The name of the leader has been mistaken for a
place, and his rank seemingly for a territory also. He adds, what is neither
contained in our author nor in the T<tbahat-i-Akbart—“ the Sultdn brought
forth his red tent [pavilion] and pitclied it, and after four monthe, when his
farces had assembled, he set out by continuous marches, and, as the Mughals
retired without fighting, the Sultan also retired,” all of which is totally
inconect, and his own concoction. The SultSn never moved from his capital,
nor did the troops either, and there they remained. The Mughals did
just what thty liked, and ravaged the fientiers the Dihlt kingdom; and
’lu'ud'Dtn, Balband-Kaghlfi who was independent, all but in

name, eA the Dibit government, had lately returned from a visit to HulSQ [or
HniakO, both being correct] Shin’s camp, and was saddled with the presence
of a Mu^Vtl intendant tw commissioner in his territory. See the account of
Balban-i-KalhKl and Uluifli Shfin farther on.

* The editors of the Calcutta text add a note here to the effect that this

7ia the TABA5AT-I-NA5IRL

When the Sultan's troops issued forth for the purpose
of carrying on war against the infidels, Maliks and Amirs,
with bodies of troops, were appointed to all parts •; and
the centre [division] of the Sultan’s [own] troops returned
to the capital on the ist of the month of Ramadan, where
the Suljtan continued for a period of five [seven ?] ^ months.
On the 18th of the month of ^t-Hijjah * of this same year,
the kingdom of Lakhanawatt was conferred upon. Jalal-ud-
Din, Mas’ud*, son of [the late] Malik ’Ala-ud-Din, Jant

Fourteenth Year ; 657 h.

The new year having come round, on Thursday, the
13th of Muhai'ram, 657 H.*, the Sultan’s forces moved for
the purpose of carrying on war against the infidels ; and, on
Sunday, the 2ist of the month of Safar, the territories of
Bhianah, Kol, Balaram, and Gwaliyur were placed in Malik

statement is contained “ in all four MSS. used by them,” and that it is
“ contrary to the truth. ” I can assure them that it is contained in e/eveM MSS.,
and more, that, wherever a MS, of the text is found, therein will this
statement be found also, and still more, that the statement is perfectly tnte tluit
the Mugbals—the van of Hulau’s army, amounting to 30,000 horse—on
approaching the gates of Bagjidad on the west side of the Dijlah, were
encountered by the Rhaltfah's troops under hb general Suliman ^ba h. and
other leaders, and repulsed. This was but a temporary success however.
Al-Musta’aim B’illah,Abu Ahmad-i-’Abd-ullah, was martyred by the Mughids,
together with four of his sons and other members of his family, on the
6th of ^afar, 656 H.

* Where these bodies of troops were sent may be seen in the account of
Ulugh Shan, and may partly account for the forces of Dihlf, concentrated at
the capital, being unable to move against the Mortals.

t All the copies of the text have five months, but, from the 6th of Muharram
—the 61st month of the year—mentioned above, to the Ist of Ramadan,
is exactly eight months less five days.

* In some copies 2 t-B^'dah.

* Heisstyled *‘.Shah” insomeof the best copies of the text, which is certainly

redundant, for we nowhere meet with it except for the princes of this dynasty.
In the List at the cominencenient of this reign he is ^lled JaUl-ud-lrfn, Ij^ulicb
TCba n- ton of the late Malik ’AlS-ud-Dln, jSnt, who is certainly, at page 635,
styled TurkisUln, In other places the son is called Malik !^nt*

high- Mas’fid, son of J 3 nt, and also ^ulij and ^ulij, Mas’ud, son of Jant.
See the account of Ulu^ Rhan for notice of other discrepancies respecting
Lakhapawaft and its governors.

> No movement was made, according to this, for a period of four months
and twelve days, from the 1st of Raroapan, 656 H. to the 13th of Mu^arram,
657 H. The infidels referred to were Hindus, as will appear.

THE SH AMSfAH SULTANS OF HIND.

7»3

Nusrat-ud-Din. Sher Kha n-i-Sunkar'scharge^andtheMalilc-
un-Nawwab, I-bak, was nominated .to proceed with a force
against the infidels of Rantabhur, and the Sul^n’s forces re¬
turned to the illustifious seat of the kingdom's glory again.

On Wedne^ay, the 4th of the month of Jamadi-ul-
Akh ir of this year, two elephants and some treasure from
the territory of Lakhanawatt reached the sublime Court * ;
and, on the 6th [26th .^] of the aforesaid month, the Shaikh-
ul-Islam [Patriarch] of the capital, Jamal-ud-Din, the
Bustami died, and on the 24th of the month Ra^i Kabir-
ud-Din departed this life—the Almighty's mercy be upon
them!—and their offices were conferred, with king-like
benevolence, upon their sons. In the month of Rajab of
this same year, Malik Saif-ud-Din, I-bak, Kashll Kha n *-i-
A’^am, the Bar-Bak, passed to the eternal mansion of the
Most Compassionate, and the office of Amtr-i-Hajib was
assigned to his son, Malik 'Ala-ud-Din, Muhammad *. On
the 1st of Rama?an, the Imam, Hamid-ud-Din of Mart-
galah •, died likewise, and his grants, by the royal favour,
were confirmed to his sons.

* In the account of Malik Sher Khan, and of Ulugh Kb^n, besides these
fiefs, Baltarah, Baltadah, or Paltarah—for the word is written thus in the best
copies of the text—and Mihir and Mahawan, are also said to have been
conferred upon him. See note », i.'ist para, page 714.

Firishtah, who, of course, knows more than any one else, and is alwftys so
correct as I have shown, says immediately after mentioning the “Sultan’s
return from marching against the Mughals ”—which wjis not correct, as shown
in the previous note ^—that the Panjab was entrusted to Sher KhSn’s charge,
and that K^ahli Khan. Ulugh Kh^’s brother, got Bhianah, Kol, Jalisar, and
Gwaliyur, which is equally fallacious. The Sultan did not possess the Panjilb
to give him : the Mughal' had overran that part, as will be found farther on.
The frontier territory possessed by the Sultan at this period—657 H. [when all
Indian Histories suddefify cease from giving any further accounts of the reign,
because dependent on our author for them]—was made over to the chatge of
Malik Nusrat TGia n- Badr-ud-Dln, SunVar, the Rumi, ns mentioned in a
following note, and he was still stationed in that part, with a considerable body
of forces, when our author ended his history.

» See the account of Malik Taj-ud-Din, ArsaUn Khan, in next Section.

« Firiohtah, of course, kills the wrong person. He records the death of
Malik j#' [for j.]-ud-Din, KasUu Khan, who was still Uving when our author

finished his work.

» This nephew of Ulugh Kha n rose to high rank in his reign, and held the
offices his father had held; and his title was 'Ali-ud-Dln, Ka.shlt Kh^n,
Ulu|^ *e Bar-Bak. He was very munificent, a great

archer and hunter, and very skilful in the game of Chaugan.

• Of Mar-galah in the PanjSb.

Z Z

7*4

THE TABA^T-I-NA$IR1.

After such turmoil, when the prosperity of the state, and
the dominion of the g^eat Sultan’s kingdom, had its face
turned to extension, and all fractures were set and all
wounds were alleviated, on the branch of continuity on the
stately tree of monarchy, a new flower bloomed, and a
tender bud opened, and the ripening fruit grew; and, on
the 29th of the month of RamafAn, the abundant gprace of
the Creator of the Sultanl [imperial] stem, from the illus^-
trious shell of ^^ant [the daughter of Ulugh Kha n],
bestowed a son^; and such an amount of favours and
benefaction? reached both gentle and simple—^noble and
plebeian—[in gratitude] for these blessings, as the pen of
the record'Writer cannot record, nor the breath of the
narrator be sufficiently capable of narrating*—May the
Almighty God ever keep the parterre of sovereignty and
garden of dominion adorned with the trees and fruits
of continuation I

At the end of the month of Shawwal of this same year,
Malik Taj-ud-Din, Sanjar-i-Tez Kb^**# with a force duly
organized and equipped, in accordance with the sublime
mandate, reached * the capital.

Fifteenth Year : 658 h.

✓

When the new year of 658 H. came in, the sun of
sovereignty rose from the horizon of prosperity, and the

* This son was by Ulngh ShZn’s daughter, bat he did iiot live long.

* Our "author’s flourishes’* s^em to hav4 been "greatly compressed” here^
in Eixiot, as well as in the account of the following year.

* The word here used rignifies—reached, arrived—not rtfurned. He
came from Awadh in order to acc<Hnpany UlngJi in his expedition into
the Koh-piyah; but, in the account of him in the next Section, it is said he
arrived at the capital in 658 H., when our author finished his history.

In this year " when all firactures were set,” and the Mu^ials harassing the
frontier, Malik Badr-nd.Dtn, Sun^ar, the Rfimt, on account of the implicit
faith placed in him by the Court, and on account of the continual hortility
between Malik Shcr Ehfiri, who held Tabarhindah and its dcpendendea^ and
Malik Balband-Kaahlfi *riign of MultSn and Ofihriiah, was made feudiuory
of Tabarhindah, SunSm, Jhajhar, Lakhwftl, and as fiur as th^ ferries of the
Btib, and desp^ched there with a large force. On this occasion, the title of
Nuyrmt ***»»" was conferred upon him. Sher 10»*n received the fiefs of Kol
and BhISnah, Bilaifim, Jaltsar, Baltfirah, Mihar, and MahSrtan, and the
fortress of GwSliyGr—a very considerable tract of territory. Both Maliks held
these fiefs when our author closed his history.

THE SHAMSiAH SULTANS OF HIND. 715

moon of dominion shone forth from the zodiac of hap¬
piness.

On the 13th of the month of Safar, the Khan-i-Mu*-
a;;am, Ulugh Kh an-i-A’zam. marched towards the Koh-
payah of Dihlt, to put down the violence of the contu¬
macious Mew of whom a demon w'ould be horrihed, and
about 10,000 horsemen in defensive armour, warlike and
relentless warriors, followed his august stirrup *. The next
day vast booty, and cattle in great numbers, arrived. He
[the Kha n] plundered and devastated difficult passes, and
attacked strong mountain tracts*, and Hindus beyond
computation fell beneath the unsparing swords of the
holy-warriors *.

Since the accomplishment of this History has reached
this plac^ with this holy-warfare, and victory and success
conferred by God, it is concluded. Should life be pro¬
longed, and eternity extend the time, and aptitude remain,
whatever events may hereafter occur will be recorded.

The hope and reliance [of the author] on such persons
as may look into this Jaba^iAt and into these Annals,
and take into consideration these Chronicles and Nar¬
rations, or if an atom of these accounts or a hint of these
statements should come to their hearing, is, that, if an
error, mistake, inadvertency, or omission should enter their

* Mew, Mew^, or Mewrali, or MewStls, a most contumacious race down
even to modem times. In AkbaHs time they were employed as spies, and
pak runners. The words Mew and Mewja or Mewjah are both singular and
plural.

* There is nothing whatever in the text about “their Deo,” nor about “and
a large army,” as in ELtlOT [vol. ii. page 359], which compare here. The
force consisted of about lo,ooo cavalry only.

* The words — kohah 5 -i-l>a?tn — do not signify “strong

forts,”

* The details of these operations, but related in quite a different manner,
will be found in the account of Ulugh Shan, in the next Section, together with
the account of the reception of the emissaries from Khurasan, and the circum¬
stances which led to their coming, 'fhese persons certainly came from —or
rather retqmed from—the camp of Hulaku Shan, but tfuy suere tiot envoys
from him, nor from the Mughals. Ulugh El^n returned from this expedition
<Mi the 24th of RabF-ul-Au’wal, 658 ll., the emissaries from Shurasan were
received in the middle of the follouing month, Rabi’-ul-Akhk, and, on the
24th of Rajab, the seventh month of the year, Ulugh Shan again moved
towards the hill tracts—Koh-p 5 yah. His return is not mentioned, but he had
returned again, no doubt, when our author finally ended his history, in
the tenth month of the year—Shawwill—658 ii.

Z z 2

7*6

THE TABA?AT.I-NA§IRL

generous minds or reach their recipient ears, they will veil
it with the garment of forgiveness, and endeavour to correct
and rectify it, since whatever had been read in previous
histories from the narrations and chronicles of Prophets,
Maliks, and Sultans, has been copied, and whatever the
eye has beheld has been recorded *.

* It is remarkable, but nevertheless true, and I do not think the fact
has been particularly noticed before, that all the Mul^ammadan Indian histories
of this dynasty suddenly end where our author terminates his account of it, and
that no farther account of N&fir-ud-Dtn, Mahmud gj^’s, reign is contained
in any of them.

The 7 ^ba^t-i-Akbart relates but two events in the year 657 H., and then
suddenly comes to a conclusion with a short account of that Sultan’s mode of
life, and his death, and no other event is mentioned. Buda’uni goes on a little
farther, and gives a few lines more, but only as far as our author goes in his
account of Ulugb Khan in the next Section, and then gives several ^aftdahs,
of many pages, by way of lengthening the account. Firiabtah also manages
to spin out his tale to the same date, but relates nothing farther than is
cantained in Buda’unt and our author, whose last date here mentioned is
13th of gafar—the second month of the year 65S h. ; and, in the account of
UlugL £3^n, the last date given b Shawnu.!—the tenth month of that year,
and all after is a perfect blank in Indian history, until the reign of Ulugh
Khan,—Sultan Gbiy&S'ud'Dtn, Balban—with which ;^yS-i-Baranf commences
his history, the Tarlkh-i-Firtb-Shahl; but he relates nothing respecting the
events of the period in question, although he says he commenced hb hbtoiy
where “the gadr-i>Jah 5 n, MinhSj-i-Sataj, Jiirjanl, left off.”

Most writers agree that NS^ir-ud'Dln, Mahmud Sh^h, was taken ill in
663 H., and died on the nth of Jamadi-ul-Awwal, 664 11. His reign was
exactly twenty years, three months, and seventeen days, and.yet, with the
dates before them, the authors of the Tarikh-i-Firuz- Sha ht, the Tarikh-i-
MubSrak-Shahi. Zubdat-ut-Tawarikh, Tabah 3 t-i-Akbari, and several others,
make it one year less I

One reason of this significant silence on the part of our author [who died in
the next reign] for a period of nearly six years, b, probably, that the Mughals,
being so powerful in the Panjab, harassed the western frontier of the Dihll
territory, and occasioned considerable confusion therein ; and, not being able
to chronicle victories, he refrained from continuing his history. Our author’s
health does not seem to have hindered him, as he continued for some time in
employment in Balban’s reign. There may have been another reason for liis
silence, as some authors attribute the death of Na^ir-ud-Dfn to poison
administered by Ulugh Khan, although this is extremely doubtful, and some
say he was starved to death whibt confined by Balban’s orders. Be this as it
may, the silence is ominous.

Na;b-ud-Dln, Mahmud S^h, left neither offspring nor heir, but, before
hb death, he had nominated Ulugh Khkn as his successor. This was natural, as
Ulugh Kh^n was hb own father-in-bw; that the latter was son-in-law to Najir’s
father, I-val-timish. is a mbtake of the 7>thaVSt-i-Akbart and ib copyisb who
confound him with Balban-i-Kashlf> Khan; but I know of no proof that he
even was son-in-law of thatSultSn. Ulugh Khkn’s own son, N 2 ;ir-ud-Dtn, Mah¬
mud, sumamed Bu^ii Kh^n> had married a daughter of Sultan Na$ir-nd-

7<7

THE SHAMSlAH SULfANS OF HIND.

May the Most High God preserve and continue the
dynasty of the Sultan-i-Mu'aggam, the great king of
kings, NAsir-UD-DunyA wa ud-DIn, AbO-l-Muzaffar-
1-MahmOd Shah, son of the Sultan I-yal-tiraisL on the
throne of sovereignty and the couch of dominion to
the utmost bounds of possibility, and may He grant Hxs
forgiveness to the compiler of this TabakAt, for the sake
of the illustrious Prophet Muhammad!

Dtn, Mahmud Shah, who was tlie mother of UIu^ EhSn's [SultSn GhiySs-
ud-Din, Balban’s] successor, Kai-I^ubad; and, therefore, it is not surprising
that, on the death of Sitl{in Nifir-ud-Din, Mahmud Shah. Ulugh £h 3 n,
who had, in reality, governed the kingdom since the fall of ’Imid-ud-Din-i-
Rayhan, with the accord of all the great Maliks, was raised to the throne.

Sultan Firliz ghSh, whenever he had occasion to mention the name of
Sultan Ni;ir-ud-Dfn, Mahmud SJjah, used, always, to style him, in a con>
temptiiniis manner, by the name of “the Eh^'^juh-Taslt slave"—Khwtjah-
Tash signifying one of a number of slaves of one master, surd, also, servants of'
one lord.

It is related that Nasir’s humility was so great that he requested, that, when he
died, his face should be blackened, a rope tied to his feet, and his body drawn
along the ground and thrown into a cavern. When his death took place, and
consultation was held as to the carrying out of his wishes, “ some wise persons
amnpg the Maliks and 'Ulama advised that the face of the corpse should be
covered with a piece of the [old] drapery of the mosque at Makkah, which is
black, his bier so constructed with long legs that it might be drawn along the
ground by a rope to a cavern prepared for it. This was done, and over that
cavern his sepulchre still stands, which since that time has become a place of
pilgrimage.”

Among some of the events of the year 658 H., the Malik of Kabul, n-hose
name is not mentioned, after he had carried oh war against the Mughals for
nearly two years, was taken by Prince Yush-mSt and I-yal-ka, the Nuyin.
He was brought to the presence of Halaku Khan, who ordered his flesh to be
cut from his body, and he was compelled to eat it until he died.

In the year 603 ii., on the 9th of Rabi’-ul-Awwal, Hulakii died in Ajar-
batjan, aged forty-eight, after ruling, over Iran, nine years and three months.

In 664 It., the Imam, Balia-ud-Din, Zakariya, the Multani, died, leaving
seven sons.

Fa$ih-i—like Ziya-ud-Dtn, BaranI—says Qhiyat-ud-Din, Balban-i-Ulugh
Shan, ascended the throne of Dihli in 662 H.

718

THE TABA5AT.I.NA§IR!.

Aoutional Notk. —At page 535, where I have given what Is said to
have been the inscription on the coins of Snittn E^atb-nd-Dtn, I-bak, I have
stated, as will be obwrved, that the inscription is given as "contained in a
work in my possession, and which the coins are said to have borne." I did
not vouch for its accuracy; and this refers equally to the inscriptions snbse*
quently given up to the reign just concluded.

I am under the necessity of burdening this translation .with these additional
remarks because Mr. H. Blochhann, M.A., imagines he has made an
important discovery. He says [' ‘ Contributhns to the History and Gtography of
Bengal" No. III., page 136, last para.], “I, too, have a work in my pos¬
session on the ‘Coins of the SaUtin i Hind,’ a modem demi-quarto Dihli
lithograph, based on Sayyid Ahmad’s Asir uffanidld, and I dare say I have
discovered the source of Major Raverty’s information.” In this, as in some
other matters, however, he is totally mistaken. I do not know of, nor have I
seen, any Agar-uf-^anadid, by Sayyid Ahmad—although I dare say anything
from the Sayyid’s pen is valuable. The work I refer to is a AJS., of which I
had a copy taken by my Afg]^ Maulawt of Ijpindahar—a real Patan—some
ten years since, and, from what I can discover, it had been used by, or belonged
to, the late W. Marsden. 1 can put Mr. Blochmann in the way of finding the
MS., should he ever come to England.

SECTION XX.

ACCOUNT OF THE MUTZZlAH SULTANS OF HIND.

Thus saith the feeble servant of the Almighty, Abfl
’Umr-i-’Usman, Minhaj-i-Saraj, Jurjani—the Almighty God
preserve him from indiscretion !—that this TabakAt is de¬
voted to the mention of those Sultans, who were the Slaves
of the Court, and servants of the Sultan-i-Ghazi, Mu’izz-ud-
Din, Muliammad, son of Sam *— on whom be peace!—and

* English writers on Indian History, with scarcely an exception, begin,
from this point, their —I say their, because no native historian does so for
obvious reasons— “Afghan or Patan Dynasty of Dehli," with the first
Turkish slave king, Kutb>ud-Din, of the Powerless Finger,—although one or
two of them commence wnth hiS Tajik master, Sultan Mu’izz-ud-Dtn,
Muhammad, son of S.^m, Ghurf.—as its founder.

This monstrous error, which has been handed down from one writer to
another for more than a century, no doubt, originated with Dow, who, in
1768, published a version of Firi^I'Ah’s History, the commonest Persian
historical work that is to be met with in India, and the one which is generally
known to most educated Musalmans. The work, in itself, which is a com¬
pilation from other works, and largely copies the histories composed in the
reign of Akbar, is not very often incorrect; but, consequently, Firiabtah
is not a very great authority, and, as regards non-Indian history, no authority
at all.

Dow professes, in his Preface [which teems with monstrous errors, but
which I must pass over here, as I have referred to it in another place. See
Journal of the Bengal Asiatic Society for the present year, 1875],
to have entered into ''more detail" —to have " elipfed the wings of Firishta's
turgid expressions, and rendered his metaphors itito common langna^f' and
further states [p. ix] that he has “ given as few as possible of the faults [!]
of the author ; but has been cautious enough, not wittingly at least, to
stitute any of his own in their place” [1!],

Notwithstanding all this, the work was so translated, that Gibbon suspected
“that, through some odd fatality, the style of Firishtah had been improved
by that of Ossianand, as it caused the late Sir H. Elliot, in his Biogkaphical
Index [p. 317], to sjiy “his [Dow’s] own remarks are so interwoven as to
convey an entirely different meaning from that which Firishtah intended," and
" some of the commonest sentences are misunderstood, and tire florid diction
was occasionally used to gloss and embellish an imperfect comprehettsiott of the
original."

This is, by no mc.ans, an exaggerated picture of the translation, but, on the

THE MU'IZZlAH SULJANS OF HIND. 509

who, in the empire of Hindustan, sat upon the throne of
sovereignty; to whom the throne of the kingdom of that

contraiy, a very sober one, as I shall show in as brief a manner as possible,
with regard to those passages only which have led some conscientious writers
to^ turn Turkish slaves, Khalj Turks, the descendants of Jats, low caste
Hindus, and Sayyids, into Afghans or PatSns.

Passing over the numerous errors in the Preface of Dew’s translation to
save space, I begin with his Introduction, which is taken from Firightah’s, but
a vast deal of the original is left out, for obvious reasons, and what has been
retained is full of ridiculous mistakes. In the account of a Hindu king styled
Kid Raj [page 8], he has : “ The mountaineers of Cabul and Candahar, loho
are called Afgans [sic] or Patans, advanced against Keda-raja.” The words in
italics are not in Firishtah.

At page SO, vol. i. Dow has : " In the following year, Mamood [Malimud
Ghariiin is meant, but the translator ignores the letter ^ —h—in his
name] led his army towards Ghor. One native prince of "that country,
Mahommed 0/ the Socr tribe of Afgans [sic], a prituipality in the mountains
famous for giving birth to the Ghorian dynasty,'" &c. Uriggs, too, follows
Dow closely, and often verbatim, in his version of Firishtah. This identical
passage in his translation (vol. I. page 49) runs thus “ In the following
year Mahmoud led an army into Ghoor. The native prince of that country,
Mahomed of the Afghan tribe of Soar (the same race loliich gave birth to the
dynasty that eventually succeeded in subverting the family of Suboobtugecn)," &c.

There is not a word in Firishtah alxjut "the Afgli-n tribe of Soor
the whole of the passages in italics, in both translations, are NOT in Firishtah.
Prom this particular passage it ds, I suspect, that the monstrous error of
making Patans or Afghans of all the rulers of Dihli, Turk, Khalj, Jat, or
Sayyid, has arisen. Coinpilci-s of Indian History, no doubt, felt assured that
this statement, from its being repeated by both translators, must be in
Firi^tah, and, being in Fiiishtah, that it must be true ; but it is NOT in
P irightah, neither is such a statement correct, nor is such to be found in any
Afuliammadan history.

A few lines under the passage in question, thus incorrectly translated, added
to, and altered from the original, p'irightah refers to the Kilab-i-Yamfnf, and
quotes our author's work as his authority with reference to the conversion of the
Ghurtans to Islam, and .says : " but the author of the TabaVat-i-NasirJ, and
Pakhr-ud-Diii, Mubarak Sh^h, A/ana-ar-A'iii/i —i. c. of the town of Marw-ar-
Rtid—who composed a history,” &c. [which Firishtah never saw, but Icanit
of it from our author. Sec page 300]. Dow lanrs this passage out entirely:
but Briggs, who appears to have been equally smitten with “ Afgan or P.-ilau”
monomania, translates [page 50], the last part of the sentence, “Faklir-oo«l

Deen Muljarick /A\ly who wrote a history,” iLe. He read _

'Marw-ar-Rudt—as J.o<ly [l.rulij, and so made a “ Patan ” of liini loo ! !

At page 132, Dow has: "The generality of the kings of tlhor, according
to the most authentic historians, could be traced up, by the names, for three-
and-twenty, and downwards nine generations, from An to MaMood, the
son of Subuctagi," See.

There is not one word of this in Firiablali. He gives the names of their
ancestors os our author [from whose work he copied them] and a few others
give them, name by name, down to 2 ubak the Tazi ; but not understanding,
apporeiilly, what followed in the original, Dow concoilcd —drew on Ins own

Sio THE TABA^T-T-NA$IRL

monarch passed—in the same manner as his own august

fertile imagination—the * * nine generations down TO Mamood ** of Qliaentn,
to whom ,the Gh Orts were no more related than they were to Dow himself.

I have not- a copy of Bri^s’s version by me now, that I might compare it
with Dow's, but I should not be surprised if, in this instance also, he had
dmwn his inspiration from Dow. It was from this identical passage, probably,
that the author of a ''Student's Manual of Indian History'* was led to
imagine that Mahmud of Ghaznfn was "the great ancestor of Shahab-ood-
Heen."

As SHm was the name of Rustam's family, the Taztk Ghilrts might have
been, with equal plausibility, made descendants of Rustam, son of ZAI, the
Sigizt, and moreover Sigistan or Sijistan is dose to Qbur, and several of the
Gh tirf chiefs were called Sam.

I now pass from the "Chuzni Patans”and the Turkish slave "Patans”
to the Tughlah dynasty or "Tuglick Patans.”

Dow has, at page 295, vol. 1 . : “ We have no true account of the pedigree
of Tugliel:. It is generally believed that his father, whose name was Tuglick,
had been, in his youth, brought up as an imperial slave, by Bolin, His
mother was one of the tribe of Jits. But indeed the pe^^S’’^ 9 f Hings of
the Potan empire make stteh a xvretchedfigure in history," &c.

Not onk of the words in italics is in Firishtoh : the whole sentence is his
own concoction. Compare Briggs also.

Under the reign of the Afghan ruler whom Dow styles ** Shere ” [voL i.
page 159], being more correct in his translation, he consequently contradicts
some of his former assertions. He then describes Roh from Firightah [" The
Student's Manual of Indian History" h/y/rtyKt assures us that it is only "a
town, in the province of Peshawur’Ml!], but makes several mistakes in
doing so ; but Firishtah himself blundered greatly when he said that the
son of the Gh urt chief who took up his abode among the Afghans was called
Muhammad*i-Surf, and that his posterity nre known as the Sfir Af^ians.
The Afghan tradition is very different. According to it, the chiePs son was
named Shah Ilusain, he was said to have been descended from the younger
branch of the Gh urlan race, while Mubammad-i-Surt, said to be the great-great
grandfather of the two Sultans, Gh iyas-ud-Dfn and Mu’izz-ud-Dfn, was
descenderl from the elder branch with whom the sovereignty lay. This Sl^h
^usain, by one of his Afghan wives, had three sons, Ghalzt, Ibrahtm, surnamed
Lodi and Ludl—but properly, Loc-daey—and Sarw&nt. Ludt had two
sons, one of whom was named Slant, who had two sons, PrSnkt and IsmS'll.
Prankl is the ancestor in the eighth degree of the first Af^^n or Pafin
that attained the sovereignty of Dihlt, namely, SulJ^ Bah-lQl, of the SlMihO
Kh el triire of Ludl, and founder of the I.iidlah dynasty. He is the thirtieth
ruler of Dihlt counting from Rlutb-ud-Dtrt, the Turkish sla' c of Sult 3 n
Mii’izz-ud-]>in, Muhainmad-i-Sain, Gh urt; but; according to Mr. E. Thomas :
" Chronicles of the Pathan Hings of Dehli, ' he, under the name of "Buhldl
Lodi," is the thirty-second PatAn ruler.

The other sons, of whom Shah Husain is said to have been the father,
fomicrl separate tribes, one of which, the Qhalzls, I shall have to moke a few
remarks aiwut, shortly.

Isma’tl. brother of I’rankt, and son of Stiint, son of LiUti, had two sons, one
of whom was named Sur, who is the founder,— not Muhammad, son of Siiri,
the Gh firian—of the Af^an tribe, not of Siirt, which here is a proper name^
but of SC'K. Siir, great grandson of Ludl, had four sons, from one of whom.

THB WnzZtAH SULJANS OP HIND. SH

words had pronounced, and which have been previously

in the ninth degree sprung Faitd. afterwards Sher Sh&b, and therefore^
according to the Afgltfn mode of describii^ their peoples' descent, he would
be styled, Shcf' KlSn, of the Shcl, of the S&r snbdivision of the

LaBdt tribe of the Bataal AfghSTig or Panins. The name of Sftrt occurring
among the {zhBri Tutks, and SSr among the A fghgn« ^ immediately struck
Firiahtah probably, and te, at once, jumped at the conclusion that they were
one and the same, and that the Ghuris were Affijl^ns, and Afghans Ghn rtn.
Bnt, although Firiditah made this mistake—for he is the first who made it—
he saver turns Turkish slaves, iKhalj Turks, Sayyids, and others into Pa'^Ans,
for, a^rding to Firishtah’s statements also, Bah-lul, LOdf, is the first PaxAn
tcvertign of IXhli, as stated by other authors who preceded him.

Under the reign of Salim [IslAm] Sbab, SOr, Dow has [at page 191,
toL iL]^ when mentioning bis death, “In this same year, Mahmood, the
JPatass King of Guzeiat, and the NifAra of the Decan, who was of the sashe
station, died.”

Here we have the descendant of a converted RSJpat of the 'Dik sept, on
the one hand, and the descendant of a Brahman of Ulja-iiagar [Bi-jayA>
nagarl on the other, turned into AfqjjAns ; but T need scarcely add that
the words in italics Ann not contained in Firishtah. Compare Briggs also
here.

One example more and I have done with these monstrous blunders; but there
arc scores unnoticed still. At page 197, vol. ii. Dow, under the reign of
IbrAhtm, SQr, has: “ In the meantime, Mahommed ^ the Afghan family of
Chor, govemour of Bengal, rebelled against Mahommed.” The words in
italics ARE NOT contained in Firishtah’s text ; and what that author does
state is perfectly correct. What Briggs has 1 am not aware.

The last of the eight Afghan or Patan sovereigns of Dihll, as Bah-lul was
the first, was Ahraad Khan- who, on ascending the tlirone, adopted the
title of Sulfan Sikandar.

The renowned Afghan chief, the warrior and poet, Khush-hal Khan of
the Kha tak tribe, who was well versed in the history of his people, mentions
the only two Patan dynasties—Ludiah and Sur, in one of his poems [See my
1 * Poetry of the Af^^ans,” page 197] in these words :—

“ The whole of the deeds of the Pa^ns are better than those of the Mughals ;

But they have no unity among them, and a great pity it is.

The fame of BaH-lOl, and ^ER ShAh too, resoundeth in my cars —

Afgl^hi emperors of India who swayed the sceptre effectually and well.

For six or seven gesteratiosss did they govern so wisely.

That all their people were fUled with admiration of them.”

He does not claim theTSzfk Gh iirts. Turks, Pamnehahs, and .Sayyids however.

I must mention before finishing this, I fear, tiresome note, that Elphin-
STONS does not perpetrate the monstrous blunder I have been dilating on.
He very fwoperly calls the Turkish slaves, the “ Slave Dynastyand the
others under their proper designations. I do not say .slaves in a contemptuous
sense, far from it, for they were most able rulers, and many of them were of
as good descent as their master ; but they were not Pagans nor did they
belong to a Pt^an dynasty. It was however left for the I’rcsident of the
Arclueological Section, at the late Oriental Congress [on the authority
of Major-Gen. A. Cunningham probably] to crown this edifice of errors
with“GhoriPathans,’' “Khilji Patlians,” “Tughlak Pathans,”<jMff “Afghans”

$t« THE TABA9AT.I.NA$1RL

recorded who became the heirs of his dominioiit and the
august brows of whom became encircled with the imperial
diadem of that sovereign; and through whose sway the
signs of the lights of the Muhammadan faith remained on
the records of the different parts and tracts of the territories
of Hindustan : and may such evermore continue! The
Almighty’s mercy be on those passed away, and may He
prolong the empire of the remainder !

I. sultan IfUTB-UD.DlN, I.BAK, AL-MU’IZZl US-SULTANI*.

The beneficent Sultan ]^utb-ud-Din, T-bak, the second
JHatim, was a high>spirited and open-handed monarch.
The Almighty God had endowed him with intrepidity and
beneficence, the like of which, in his day, no sovereign of
the world, either in the east or west, possessed ; and, when
the Most High God desireth to make manifest a servant of
His in magnificence and glory in the hearts of mankindi
He endows him with these attributes of intrepidity and
beneficence, and makes him especially distinguished, both
by friend and foe, for bounteousness of generosity and the
display of martial prowess, like as this beneficent and vic¬
torious monarch was, so that, by the liberality and the
enterprise of him, the region of Hindustan became full of
friends and empty of enemies. His gifts were bestowed
by hundreds of thousands *, and his slaughters likewise
were by hundreds of thousands, like as that master of elo¬
quence, the Imam, Baha-ud-Din, Osl^t *, observes in praise
of this beneficent sovereign

** Truly, the bestowal of laks thou in the world didst bring t
Thy hand brought the mine’s afliurs to a desperate state.

The blood-filled mine’s heart, through envy of thy hand.

Therefore produced the ruby as a pretext [within it]

[Afghans are not “Pnthans” here I], “Bengali Pathans,” and “Juanpuri
Pathans.” After this we may shortly expect Hindu Pathans and Pathans,

or even English, Irish, and Scotch Pathans.

* See page 497.

* That is the slave of Sultan.Mu'lzz-ud>Dfn.

* Hence he is also called “ Lak Tin lrhab ’’—the giver of /ais. See page
555, where Rae Lakhmaniah, his contemporary, is also said to have been a
Lak BaJdiSh-

* He passed the greater part of his life in Hindustan, and was one of the
most distinguished men of If^uIb-ud-Dtn’s assembly.

* The liberality of ^utb-ud-Din became a proverb in- Hindustan, and still

THE MU'IZZIAH SULTANS OP HIND. 513

At the outset of his career, when they brought him from
Turkistan, ^utb-ud-D!n reached the city of Nlshapur.

^pa?t-ul.?:u?5t [Chief ^Ca?i;). Fakhr-ud-Dfn, 'Abd-ul-
’Aztz-i-Kuf!, who was a descendant of the Imam-i-A’*am,
Abu H^ifah of Kufa^ the governor of the province of
Ntshapui' and its dependencies, purchased him; and, in
attendance on, and along with his sons, he read the Word
of G(^, and acquired instruction in horsemanship, and
shooting with the bow and arrow, so that, in a short time,
he became commended and favourably spoken of for his
manly bearing. When he attained unto the period of
adolescence *, certain merchants brought him to the Court
of Q2iazntn; and the Sultan-i-Ghazi, Mu'izz-ud-Dtn, Mu¬
hammad, son of Sam, purchased him from those traders.
He was endowed with all laudable qualities and admirable
impressions, but he possessed no outward comeliness ; and
the little finger [of one hand ?] had a fracture*, and on that
account he used to be styled I-bak-i-ghU [The powerless¬
fingered] *.

conttnuca to be so. “The people of Hind, when they praise any one for
liberality and generosjty, say he is the ‘ ^utb-tid-Dtn-i-kal,' thaf is, the
h^utb-ud*Dfn of the age, kal signifying the age, the time, &c.” Blood is a play
on the ruby’s colour.

' See page 384, and note *.

* Some say the sold Eutb-ud-Dtn to a merchant, but others, that,

after the f^t’s death, a merchant purchased Eutb-ud-Din from his sons,
and took him, as something choice, to Gha znin, hearing of Mu’izz-ud-Dtii’s
\tMeH styled Shihab-ud-Dfn] predilection for the purchase of slaves, and that
he purchased i^ulb-ud-Dtn of the merchant at a very high price. Another
work states, that the merchant presented him to Mu’izz-ud-Din as an offering,
but received a large Sum of money in return.

Firiihtah quotes from our author here correctly, but his translators man.ige
to distort his statements, and Eutb>ud-Dtn is made out a proficient in Arabic
and Persian, indeed, a ripe scholar. “ He made a wonderful progress in the
Persian and Arabic languages, arid all the poliie arts and sciences ” says Dow ;
and Briggs repeats it ; but Firishtah’s statement was respecting his talent for
government, and his accomplishments in the art of war. Elphinstone and
others, led astray by the translators, copy their incorrect statements.

* The printed text here has the words j\ which are not correct,
and spoil the sense.

* i-bak—al,{l— alone is clearly not the real name of ^utb-ud-din, for,

if it were, then the word added to it would make it I-bak of

the withered or paralyzed hatul or limb; and, even if the word sMl were
used for shMl, it would make no material difference. Now we know that
Eutb-ud-din was a very active and energetic man, and not at all paralyzed
in his limbs; but, in every work in which he is mentioned, it is distinctly
stated that he was called 1-bak because one of his little fingers was broken or

514

TH£ TABA£:AT.I-NA$IRL

At &at period, Sultan Mu*izz-ud-D!h, now and then was
wont to give himself up to pleasure and jollity. ' One night
he had given directions for an entertainment and con>
viviality, and, during the entertainment, he commanded a
gift to be bestowed upon each of the slaves present, con¬
sisting of sums of ready money, and gold and silver, both
wrought and unwrought. As to the portion of these gifts
which came to l&utb-ub-Dm*s share, he came forth [with]
from the jovial party, and bestowed the whole of the wealth
upon the Turks*, and janitors, and other attendants, so
that nothing whatever, little or much, remained to him.

Next day, this story was conveyed to the royal hearing,
and the Sultan distinguished l&utb-ud-Dtn by his favour
and intimacy, and assigned to him an honourable post
among the important ofhees before the throne and the
royal audience hall *, and he became the leader of a body
of men, and a great official. Every day his affairs attained
a high degree of imp>ortance, and, under the shadow of the
patronage of the Sultan, used to go on increasing, until he
became Amir-i-Akhur [Lord of the Stables]. In that
office, when the Sultans of ^lur, @b,aznin, and Bamian,
advanced towards Kh urasan to repel and contend against
Sultan Shah, the Kh warazmt. Kutb-ud-Dtn was at the
head of the escort of the foragers of the stable [depart¬
ment], and used, every day, to move out in quest of forage *.

injured, and one author distinctly states that on this account the nicV>name
of T-bak-i-Shil was given to him. Some even state that Sult&n Mu’izz-nd*
Din gave him the name of BIatb-ud>dfn, while another author states that it
was the Sultan who gave him the by-name of I-bak-i-Shil. It may also be
reinarked that there are a great many others mentioned in this work who
are also styled 1 -bak. Fanakatf, and the author of the JSmi’-ut-TawSrtkh,
both style him 1-bak-i-Lang—and lang means maimed, injured, defective,
&c., as well as lanu,

i-bak, in the Turkish language, means finger only, and according to
the vowel points, may be ’Arabic or Persian ; but the ’Arabic fjfll, which
means having the hand (or part) withered, is not meant here, but Persian shil,
signifying, “ soft, limp, weak, ptowerlcss, impotent, paralyzed,” thus I-bak-i-
Shil —tlit weak fingered. See Thomas : Pathan Kings OF DKHli, page 33.

* Turkish guards, the slaves of the household.

* The text is defective here in nearly every copy, but comparison makes
the passage correct. The idiom also varies considerably for several lines, as
in numerous other places, already referred to.

'* Others say I^utb-ud-Dtn, with the patrol under his command, had pushed
up the river bank of the Murgh-ab. towards Marw, when he unexpectedly fell
in with the army of Sullan Shah. All his endeavours to effect his retreat.

THE MU’IZZtAH SULJANS OF HIND. 519

Unexpectedly [upon one occasion], the horsemen of SultStt
ShSh came upon them and attacked them •. l^utb-ud-
Dtn displayed great energy; but, as the horsemen [with
him] were few in numbers, he was taken prisoner; and, by
Sultan ^ah’s commands, was put under restraint.

When a battle took place between Sultan Sh ah and the
Suites of Qhur and GJiazntn, and the former was put to
the rout, the Sultan Mu’izz-ud-Din’s men brought ]l^utt>-
ud-Dtn, placed on a camel, in gyves of iron, as they found
him, into the victorious Sultan’s presence. The Sultan
commended and encouraged him *; and, after he returned
to the seat of government, Ghaznin, the fief of Kuhram
was committed to Kutb-ud-Din’s charge From thence
he advanced towards Mirath, and took possession of that
place in the year 587 H *. From Mirath likewise he issued
forth in the year 588 H. and captured Dihlt ; and, in the

and all the intrepidity he displayed, were futile, as his party was smalL He
was taken prisoner, and conducted to Sultan ShSh’s presence, and, by that
prince’s orders, was put in durance. Firishtah, copying from our author, and
from others who also agree, states, that, when Mu’izz-ud-Din’s men found
^utb-ud-Dln, in his place of confinement in Sultan Shah’s camp, they placed
him on a camel, with his feet still in fetters [as they had no means then of
unfastening them], just as he was, and conducted him to the presence of his
master, the Sultan. Dow and Briggs however improve upon it, and assert
that ** £ibuk was discovered sttting on a camel on the field," and carried to his
"old master" See, Such is not contained in Firishtah. Both translators
fall into the same error of calling Sultan Shah-^this is his name, not his
title ; [see page 24$]—" hi/tg of Charizm and Khwaruzm,” and into this error
£i.fhinston£ likewise falls. Seepage 248, and note *, page 4561

* As a specimen of difference of idiom in the different copies of the text col¬
lated I may mention that one set—the oldest—has al-*-

whilst the more modem set has ^

This important expedition, in which three sovereigns were engaged, is what
Elphinstone [page 319, third edition] refers to as “some border warfare with
the Kharizmians,” in-which “he was taken prisoner.”

* He was treated with great honour and much favour, and gifts were
conferred upon him.

f As the Sudan’s deputy or lieutenant: but this, by his own account;
could not have been immediately on returning from that campaign, for as
yet the battle of Tara’tn was not gained. See page 4C9. Both Dow and
Briggs state that, at this time, the title of Ijfutb-ud-Dfn—which the former
correctly translates “the pole-star of religion,” and the latter incorrectly,

“ pole-star of the faith/M/,” was conferred upon him ; but Firishtah does not
say so, Aor any other writer that I am aware of. He had been so named
long before this period.

* This is the year in which 'Q^utb-udlDln, as Lord of the Stables only, was
taken prisoner in EhuiiteSn, and is impossible. Our author constantly coning
diets his own dates. See pages 379 and 469.

5i6

THE TABA^AT.I>NA$IRI.

year 590 H., l^utb-ud-Din proceeded, at the august stirrup
of the victorious Sulj^n, along with the Sipah-Salar, 'Izz-
ud-Dln, Husain, son of Kh ar-mil. both of them being the
leaders of the van of the ahny, and fell upon the Riie of
Banaras, Jai-Chand. on the confines of Chand-w 5 l * and
overthrew him.

Subsequently, in the year $91 ll., Thankir was taken;
and, in 593 H., ^ujtb-ud-Din marched towards Nahrwalah,
and attacked Rae Bhim Diwand took vengeance upon
that tribe [of people] for the Sultan-i-Ghazl[’s previous
defeat]. He likewise subdued other territories of Hindu¬
stan *, as far [south ?] east as the frontier of the territory of

* See following note *, last para., page 518.

* The best St. Petersburgh AfS. has Thtnur Dlw [ liere;

but the majority, including the two other oldest copies of the text, are as
above.

* Our author omits mentioning many important events which are not touched
upon in Mu’izZ'Ud'Dfn’s reign, although, at page 507, he says he intends
giving a detailed account of the ^u^bt victories under ^utb-ud-Din’s reign.
As this is one of the most important periods of Indian history, I am obliged,
in order to give some connexion to the events of the Mu\^mmadan conquest,
to burden this translation with an abstract of them, more particularly as they
are not given, in any detail, except in two histories, and, even in them, the
chronological order of events has not been strictly observed. The T£j-ul*
Ma’ajir states that, after taking Ajinir, subsequent to the .overthrow and death
of Rae Pithora and the installation of his son as tributary ruler of that state,
Suljjan Mu’izz-ud-Dtn proceeded towards Dihlt, which was then held by a
kinsman of Khandi [Gobind of our author] Rae, tbc brother of RSe Pithora ;
but, on his tendering submission, and payment of a iarge sum as tribute, he
was left unmolested, under the same terms as Ajmtr had been left in possession
of Rae Pithora’s son, but some say his brother. Kuhfam and Samanah were
left in ^utb-ud-Din’s charge, and he was left at the former place as the Sul¬
tan’s deputy or lieutenant, am] Mu’izz-ud-I)in himself returned to Ghaznin.
ElphinstoNE says, page 314, on the authority of Firiahtah’s translators, 1
suppose, that, when “ Shahab u din ” returned to Gh azntn. he left '* Ais former
stave, Kutb u din Eibak,” as his representative in India; and yet “ his former
slave ” did not get his manumission until upwards of twelve years afterwards, as
all native authors, including FirisJitah himself, state : and such is history 1

Another account is, that, after being installed at Kuhfam, ^ulb-ud-Dtn
marched from thence against Mlrath, and gained possession of it, after which
he moved against Dihlt and invested it. The kinsman of Khandt Rae appealed
to his Rajput countrymen for aid, and an. army of Rajputs, in concert with the
garrison, endeavoured to raise the investment by attacking Malik ^uj;b-ud.Din
and his forces in the plain before the city. The Hindus, however, were over¬
thrown, and the defenders, being reduced to straits, called for quarter, and
surrendered the place.

In RamafSn, 588 11., according to the Taj-ul-Ma’ajir [Firightah, who often
quotes it, says Ramadan, 589 h.], news reached ]^utb-ud-Din that an army of
|ats [Firisbttthsays "under a leader named Jatwiln, a dependent of the Rae of

THE MUTZZlAH SULTANS OF HIND.

5*7

Ujjain*; and Malik ’Izz-ud-Din Muhammad, son of Ba]cbt>

* Ujjain is as plainly written as it is possible to write, and the ^ has thie

taghdfd njftfh over it in the two oldest and best copies of the text. Other
copies have >t evidextly owing, in the first place, to a copyist or

copyists dropping the 1 that the error arose—thus gfdt' and for Ujjain
is the more probable, and certainly the more correct, if the map of India be
consulted, and the account of hi^ campaigns, in the abstract 1 have given, read.
It is confirmed also by some other authors; but the generality of histories,
which are comparatively modem, with the exception of Mir’at.i-jahan.Nvma,
which has Ujjain, have Chin. The only reason that will account for such an
idea having wsen respecting Chin must have been the raid of Muhammad,
sou of Bakbt-yar, the Ehalj, into Tibbat, mentioned at page 564, which ended
so disastrously.

* Ikhtiyar-ud-Dln, Muhammad, is his correct name, as our author himself
states in his account of him. See page 548.

Nahrwalah ”] had appeared before Hanst. The governor of that tract, Nuf-
rat-ud>Din, Salarl, had been obliged to shut himself up within the walls, and
to send to ]^utb>ud-Din for aid. He flew to his assistance, marching the same
night the news reached him twelve leagues. The enemy, hearing of his
approach, decamped ; but, being closely pursued, faced about, and were over¬
thrown. Their leader was slain [Firijshtah says he retired to NahrwSlah
Gujarat], and IJiutb-ud-Dtn, having again placed Hanst in an efficient state,
returned to Kuhfam, and soon after made Dihlt his head-quarters and the seat
of government; but some authors state that he did not make it the capital until
the following year, after taking Kol.

^u|b>ud.Dtn had soon to take the field again to support the son of RSe
Pithora, who had been installed tributary ruler of Ajmtr. The $adr-i>’AIl,
]^iwam-ul-Mulk, Rukn-ud-Dtn, Hamzah, who held the fief of Rantabhur. sent
information that Bhiraj also written Bhuraj who is called

Hiriij in some imperfect copies of the Taj-ul-Ma’agir, HemrSj by

Firishtah, and Hamtr by some others, brother of the late RSe Pithorii, had
broken out into rebellion; that the son of R 3 e Pithora, who is sometimes called
[the?] Golah, but generally styled merely “the son,” was in great danger; and
that the rebel was advancing against Rantabhur itself. I^utb-ud-Din marched
from Dihlt against him: but Bhiraj [or Hamfr], on hearing of his coming,
made off and took to the hills. Rae Pithora’s son [see Tod, who says his only
son, Rainsi, did not survive him I He further st.ates that Dow. mistaking the
appellation of Pirt’hwiraja’s natural brother for a proper name, calls him
Golah. The error is Firishtah’s, however, not Dow’s, in this instance], ruler
of Ajmtr, was, upon this occasion, invested with an honorary robe ; in return
he presented valuable offerings, among which were three golden melons [kettle¬
drums, in the shape of melons], and, in all probability, the very same as
mentioned at page 404.

About this time, also, while I^utb-ud-Dtn was still absent from Dihlt. its
former Rae raised an army to make an effort against the Musalmans. He was
pursued and defeated by ][frutb-ud-Dtn, taken prisoner, and his head struck off
and sent to Dihlt.

According to the Taj-ul.Ma’asir, l^iitb-ud-Dtn, at this time, sent an account
of his proceedings to his master, and'was summoned to Gh azntn. As it was
then the hot season, he waited until the beginning of the rains to set out for the
capital. IT.aving reached Qhaznin, and Tiaving been received with great honour

5i8 the TABA^T-I.NA$1RI.

yar, the Kha lj. in his [Malik l^utb-ud-Dtn’s] time, and

and favour by the Sult&n, he fell dangerously sick; but subsequently recovered,
and “waspsrmitUd to return to Hindustan again, and the government was
again conferred upon him."

Our author, under the reign of I>yal>timia]i [see next Section], also refers to
this journey, but he says it took place after the expedition against Nahrwalah.
It must have occupied some months; but, in the meantime, who acted as the
Sultan’s lieutenant at Dihli? It would almost seem as though ]$utb-ud>Dtn
had been suspected of being too powerful, and that this summons to Qbaznin
was to test his obedience and loyalty. One thing, however, is certain, from
the account of Malik Baha-ud-Din, ^ttShril [page 544 L the mention of
Malik IIusam-ud-Dtn, Aj^vd-Bak, and others [page 549], that there were
powerful chiefs left by the Huljan in Hindustan who held fiefs independent of
^utb-ud-Dim It was on this occasion, on his return to Dibit by way of Gar-
daiz and Karmaii [which "Dow, translating Firiahtah, who is perfectly correct,
renders “ Persian Kirman,” and adds, in a note, that it is “ the ancient Car*
mania ”!], that Jiutb-ud-Din espoused the daughter of TaJ-ud-Dtn, I-yal-dCz.
This journey Firiahtah, who constantly quotes tlie Taj-ul-Mk’agir, mentions
as taking place in 592 H.

After remaining a short time at Dibit, ^utb-ud-Dtn marched from it in
590 H., crossed the Jun, and took the strong fortress of Kol after an obstinate
resistance, and acquired great booty. It was after this,, according to some
histories, including the TabaVat-i-Akbart,—a work compiled from the best
authorities,—that ^futb-ud-Dtn made Dibit the seat of his government; but
the Taj-ul-Ma’agir seems to imply, but not exMtIy expressing it, that Dibit was
made the seat of government in 588 H., although, by its own account, the
Hindu ruler "was allowed [in that year] to hold it upon the same terms as
Ajmtr was held,” already mentioned.

Ifutb-ud-Din now [590 II., but same say in 589 H., the same year in which
Dibit was made the seat of government] received intimation of the Sultan
Idu’izz-ud-Dtn’s having marched from Gbazntn on an expedition agmnstjai
CJtand [Jai Ch.mdra]. Rajah of IKinnauj and Banaras, his former ally, against
Rae Pithora, according to the Hindu Chroniclers, who, it is said, meditated
an attack upon ^utb-ud-Dtn. On hearing of the Sultan’s having crossed the
Sutlaj, ]j^utb-ud-Din proceeded some stages in advanoe to receive him and do
him honour, bearing ^ong with him rich offerings. [Flrisbtah, who gives an
account of this matter, uses the word peshwa’I — — which signifies

meeting astd conducting a superior or a guest; but his translaton^ Dow and
Briggs, mistaking, say respectively that ¥utb-ud*Dtn "proceeded as far as
Peskawir" and “Pishawur" to meet him 11 Where Dihli ? where Peil| 2 warT
where ^innauj T Fancy his marching from Dihli with horse at his

heels, and crossing the five great rivers of the Panjab, merely to meet his master
marching to J^nnauj ! I]

I^utb*ud*Din’s following, upon this occasion, amounted to 50^000 horse [the
Muhammadan forces of Hindustan]; and, having joined the Sultan’s army, he,
in concert with 'Izz-ud-Dln, ^usain, son of Shar-mll [the same who after*
wards turned traitor, and played such a false part towards Sultan Muhammad,
Shwarazm Sha h, mentioned in note *, page 257], led the vanguard [the prin¬
cipal division unencumbered with heavy baggage, not "a small detachment cA
1000 horse”] of the Sultan’s army. The Musalmans came in contact with Jai
QJiand’s forces in the environs of flhand.wSr and It&wah [another author says
Chanda*war. It is probably Cliand*w 81 of Itawah, a place a few miles S.K

THE MUTZZlAH SULTANS OF HIND. 519

during his government, subdued the cities of Bih£r and

of thtf latter town. See page 470], and compelled them to give way. Jai
Chand, in person, then led on his forces to renew the action, in the Iieat of
which an arrow struck him in one of his eyes, and he fell dead from his ele¬
phant $ee also note *, page 470^ and compare the absurd statement of the
Klmil.nt-Tawarfkll in Elliot : INDIA, voL ii., page 250-351.

It is truly amusing to compare Firlshtah’s account of this affair with the
versions of his translators. He, quoting the TSj-ul-Ma’Hgir, says—I give his
own words—“ At last Jai Chand, in person, appeared in the field against
Eutb-ud-Dtn, and, during the very heat of the fight, a life-taking arrow
entered the pupil of the RSjah’s eye, and he fell from his ele¬
phant into the dust of contempt.” Dow renders this : “ BtU Cnttub, who
excdled in archery, sunk am arrow in the ball of his eye and Briggs has :

JCaotb ood Deen, who excelled in archery, came in contact with Raja Jye
Chund, and will his own hand shot the arrow which, piercing his eye, cost the
Rajah his life "lit

The Mu^mlu troops, having overthrown Jai Chand’s army, and taken
possession of the fortress of Asf, where his treasures were kept, pushed on to
Banaras, “one of the most central and considerable cities of Hind;” and
scores of idol temples were destroyed, and a vast amount of booty acquired,
including a large number of elephants, among which was a white one.
[Firishtah says this white elephant, a most rare animal, was presented by the
Sultan to l^utb-ud-Dtn, who used to ride it up to the time of his death, and
that it died of grief the day after. This, however, is mere supposition, for it
appears that this same white elephant was taken to Gharntn, and frorn
thence to Ghur, to SultSln Ghiyas-ud-Din, Mu’izz-ud-Din’s elder brother and
sovereign; and it was afterwards presented by Ma);mud, the former’s son, to
Sul{an Muliainmad, E^warazm Shah, when he became subject to that
monarch. See note *, para. 9, page 402]. Elphinstone says this victory over
Jai-Chand “extended the Mussulman dominion unto Behfir 1 ” but this is not
correct. Muhammad, son of Bakht-yar, it was who, shortly aAer these events,
took the city of that name by surprise.

After these successes Sultan Mu’izz-ud Din returned to diazntn, and Malik
IJusam-ud-Dtn, Aghid-Bak [the same who took Muhammad, son of Bakht-
yar, the Shalj, into his service, see page 549L was installed at Kol.
[Firishtah, in his work, gives his account of the expedition against Bhii 3 j
—para. 4 of this note—in this place, ]

Eutb-nd-Dtn spon had to take the field again against BhiiSj [or Hamtr],
who had issued from the hills of Alwur, whither he hod fled, first fought an
engagement with his nephew of AJmfr, defeated him, compelled him to fly for
shelter to Rantabhfir, and took possession of Ajmir, and despatched a force
under a leader named Jhat Rae towards Dihlt; but Eutb-ud-Dtn, having
speedily selected a force of 20,oco horse, inarched td encounter him. Jhat
R&e faced about, and was pursued by the Musalmans to Ajmtr. Bhiraj [or
HamtrJ then drew out his forces to give battle, but he was defeated, and
retired within the walls; and then, finding resistance fruitless, ascended a
funeral pyre end perished. After this a Muhammadan governor was left in
charge of Ajmtr, but what became of Rae PithoiS’r.son has not transpired.

After this, on disposing of the affairs of Ajmtr, Eutb-ud-Dtn is said to have
led his forces, in 591 h., towards Nahrwalah of Gujarat, and encountered the
general of Bhtm Dtw [according to Tod, Komar-p&l was his name], Rfie of
NahnriUah, who is styled by the name of JatwSn, and who was encamped with

530 THE TABA¥AT.I.NA 9 IRL

Nudiah, and that country [Bihar], as will be hereafter
recorded.

his army tmder the walls of the place. On the appearance of Eutb-ud-Dtn he
retired, but was pursued, and, being liard pressed, faced about, made a stand,
was defeated and slain. Bhlin Diw fled from his capital to the farthest quarter
of his dominions; and, ]^utb-ud-Dfn, having acquired enormous booty in that
territory, returned by way of Hanst to Dibit.

In the year 592 H., the Jaroi’ Masjid [jujw known as the IKuIbiMasjid] at Dihlt,
which lyCutb-ud-Din is xau/ to have founded in 589 H., and on which the most
skilful Musalinan artizans had been emifloycd [not Hindus solely, Mr. Grant
Duff and General Cunningham notwithstanding], and no expense spared, is.
said to have been completed. [.See note on the Minar, styled the Minar of
Eutb Sahib, under the reign of I-yal-timisht-] The dale of its foundation, as
given by Thomas, “ Pathan Kings of DEiiLf,” p.age 22, c, note >, is
erroneous, as Debit was not acquired, as I have shown [note ®, page 469],
until subsequent to that date, in 589 It is evident that — seven —has
been read instead of — nine, the two words, without the points, on which
all depends, being exactly alike; and, in writing such as the inscription is in,
may be easily mistaken.

In this same year, 592 H., according to the Taj-ul-Ma’agir, but 591 h.,
aecording to our author, and 590 H., according to Alfi, l^utb-ud-Diii was
preparing an expedition against Thankir or Thangir—also written Thanktr or
Thangtr—the modem Bhiannh [a further notice of which will be found at page
545], when intimation reached him of Sultan Mu’izz-ud-Din’s moving from
Gh azntn for the same purpose. He went as far as Hansi to meet his sovereign,
and they marched in concert thither; and Ijl^u|b-ud'Din brought about the
surrender of that stronghold, which was made over to Malik Baha-ud-Din,
Tpnghril. Alter this the royal forces advanced to Gwaliyur, the Rajah of which
agreed to pay tribute, and he was left unmolested, k'or further particulars,
see page 546, and note After this event, Sulfjn Mu’izz-ud-Diii returned
again to Gh aznln.

While Hj^uib-ud-Dtn was at Ajmir, according to the Taj-ul-Ma’a§ir fFirish-
tah has, at Dihli, in 592 H. The former work has 591 h., which cannot be
correct, from the date it subsequently gives], information was brought to him
that a body of rebel Mers or Mairs [not Mhers, for there is no h in the word.
F'iriahtah says—e,'>u —probably “the Tuiiur Riijahs”—and adds,

"that is to say, Rajputs.” Dow translates the passage, “many Indian
independent princes,” which is pretty near Firishtah’s meaning ; but Briggs
has : “The Raja of I^agoor and many other Hindoo Rajas ”], having gathered
together, sent emissaries to the Rae of Nahrwalah, asking him to aid them in
attacking the Musalmans, who were but few in number. On becoming aware
of this intention, resolved to be beforehand with them ; and,

although it was the height of the hot season, early one- morning fell upon the
rebels, and kept up a conflict with them the whole of that day. Next morning
the army of Nahrwalah appealed upon the scene, and handled the Musalmans
very roughly. horse received a wound which brought it to the

ground, and his troops, greatly disheartened, with much difficulty managed to
mount him upon another horse, and carried him off to Ajmir,

Tod, referring to this affair, in his R.ajasthan, vol. i., page 259, remarks,
that “ Samarsi [Prince of Cheetorc] had several sons; but Kurna was his heir,
and, during his minority, his mother, Korumdevi, a princess of Putun, nobly

THE MUTZZlAH SULJANS OF HIND. 5at

When the Sultln-i-^iazl, Mu’izz-ud-Dln, Muhammad-i*

maintained what his father left. She headed her Rajpoots, and gave battle to
Kootub*o-din, near Amber, where the viceroy was ivotinded," In a note he
adds: “ This mntt b* [of course 1 ] the battle referred to by Ferishta. See
Dow, p. 169, voL ii.” The "ivoujtd or wounds" must also hSve come from
Dow or Briggs, for it is not in I'lrisluan, This statement of the translators,
not Firishtah’s, most have led ErPHlNsiONE astray, when he says [page 315
of third ed ]: “Kutb u Din was overpowered on this occasion, and had diffi-
culty in making his way, covered with wounds, to Ajmfr,” &c. The statement
of Firiihtah’s is this;—“ But his horse, having received a Toound, came to the
ground. The army of Islam became "heart-broken, and they, having by main
y!>rco—[J^ placed him on attother horse, took him to Ajmtr." This is

all; but his translators certainly display much fertility of imagination in their
rendering of Firishtah’s words. Dow has: “ But he was defcate< 1 , received
six wounds, and was often dismounted; yet he fought like a man who had made
death his companion. Forced, at last, by his own friends, to abandon the field,
he was carried in a litter to Ajmere.” Briggs has : •• But he was defeated.
After hcmgfreguently dismounted in the action, and having received six wounds,
he still fought with his wonted courage, till, being forced at length by his
attendants off the field, he was carried in a litter to Ajmeer.” !!!

Emboldened by this success, the rebel Hindus [the of Firishtah], with
the troops of Nahrwalah, followed ICuIb-ud-Din and his force, pursued them
to AJinir, and took up a position a short distance from it; and for several
months they shut up :^utb-ud-Dtn within the walls, and carried on hostilities
against the place. On intimation of the state of affairs having reached Sulpn
Mu’izz-ud-Dtn, he despatched a large force from Gh aznin, under several of the
great Amfrs, to succour ]^uj;b-ud-Dtn; but the infidels thought fit to retire
before it arrived.

From 591 n. the Taj-ul-Ma’asir jumps at once to 593 n., vA\X\cix\.^ immediately
brfore giving an account of the expedition ag.ainst Thankir or Thangtr and
Gwaliyur in 592 H., thus showing that 591 11. cannot be correct. The correct
date of this reverse must be the ninth or tenth month of 592 ii., as Firishtah
states. To return, however, to the narrative. Kulb-ud-L)in, finding himself
thus supported, resolved upon taking vengeance on the Riie of Gujarat, and,
in the middle of §afar—the second month of the year—593 ii-., which year is
confirmed by our author and several others, he began his march towards Nahr¬
walah. When he reached the bounds of Pali and Nadul [these names are not
certain, but such they appear in the Taj-ul-Ma’asir. In proceeding from Ajmlr
to Nahrwalah, ^utb-ud-Din had the choice of two routes, that on theeastem
slopes of the Arawali mountains, by Udipur and Idur, or that on the western
or Marwax side, clear of the mountains ; and this last he would in all pro¬
bability have chosen by the direct route of Pali ami Sirhoi, keeping Abu on
his left. Nadul, where, as at Pall, are the remains of ancient forts, lies about
twenty-five miles or more south of Pali, but off the direct line of route by Sir¬
hoi ; but it must also be mentioned that there arc pl.aces nameil Palrt and
Birgoni close to the hills nearer to Sirhoi, and a Kuira still nearer Abu.
Firislitah docs' not appear to have taken his account from the Taj-ul-Ma’asir
in this instance, as the two names he gives may be cither Ilutali or DhCitali
and Bazul or Barul, or Rahi and Bartuki and Nuziil or Nadul, as above] he
found those places abandoned—thus tending to show that they were in the
lower and less tenable parts—and the enemy under two leaders, one of whonr
is styled Rac Karan [Knmah, probably] in the Taj-ul-Ma’.asir, and Urs! [yj J

L I

583 THE TABA1^T-I-NA$IRI.

Sam, attained martyrdom*, Sultan Ghiyag-ud-Dtn, Mati>

* Fanakatt makes a nice hash of this event. He says *‘ after Shiha.h-iiH-
Dtn, his slave, Riutb-ud-Din, 1-bak, became the great Sultin [^iUL* and
paid homage to Shihab-ud-Din’s sott, Malimud by name, who was Walt of
Gh ozntn.” and that writer makes out that Sultan Gh ivas-ud-Dm was the
younger [yif] brother, and Shi hab-ud-Dtn the elder. He bos substituted
Shihab for Gh iviis ; and the same is stated in several copies of his work.

Th6 Taj-ul-Ma’a^ir states, “when the mournful news reache<l ^u^b ud-Ditt,
and the i'>criod of mourning had expired, he sent out notifications to all parts
of Hind and Sind, intimating his assumption of the sovereigstty, which notifica¬
tions were attended to by the chief rulers [feudatories?] in those territories;
and, after the defeat of 1 -yaI-duz, the whole tract, from Gh azntn [he should
have added, as far as concerns Ghaznin and its territory, for forty days and
nights only\ to the extremity of Hindustan, come under his jurisdiction,” and a
great deal of such like exaggeration.

With respect to this matter, and the date, there is very great discrepancy

ill Firishtah ; and the other, Karabars or Darabars in the former, and Walan
LuP'*] latter, were posted at the base of the hills of Abu-ga^h [this

word is written without points [tof ^11], and may be either Aiu-ga(]h [•ifjl'J
or Abu-gaijh [•ST y']. EU'UINSTone has: “Two great feu^tories of
Guzerdt strongly posted on the mountain of A'bu.” If he had ever seen AbS,
he would have understood that they might ns well have been posted on the
Himfilayah os there, since the Musalmans would not pass oeter or through it.
Firishtah says : “ At the fixit of the fort of Abfi or Alu-ga 4 h ”], ^t the
entrance to a pass where the Musalmans did not dare to attack them, os it was
the very spot where Sul[iln Mu[iammad-i-Sdm, Gh urt. had been previously
wounded, and it was deemed iinpropitious to bring on an action there lest the
same might happen. [Sultan Mu’izz-ud-Din is here referred to, and this
statement does not tend to increase our confidence in what the Taj-ul-Ma’agir
says, and it is quite certain that Mu’izz-ud-Dln was never wounded but once,
and then not near Ajmtr. TOD asserts [voL i., page 696], upon Rdjput
authority, no doubt, and therefore we must make every allowance, that it was
at this very place [Nadole] that Mahmoud's [Mahmud’s?] arms were dis¬
graced, the invader wounded, and forced to relinquish his enterpHse." But in
another place [page 249] he says “Nadole is mentioned in Ferislltah as fall¬
ing a prey to one of Mahmood’s invasions, who destroyed its ancient‘temples.”
Both the statements are much of a piece.] “ Seeing their hesitation,” says the
Taj-ul-Ma’asir, “ the Hindus advanced to encounter them [Firisjhtah, on the
other hand, says “ l^u$b-ud'DIn entered those defiles, and broken ground, and
defeated them ”] ; and, after facing them for some time, on Sunday, 13th of
Rabi’-ul-Awwal, 593 li. [about the 5th of Janu.ary, 1197 A.D., the year 593 ll.
having commenced on the 23rd of Novcmlx;r, 1196], a battle took place, which
was obstinately contested from dawn to mid-day, and ended in the complete
overthrow of the infidels, who are said to have lost nearly 5o,ooo[!] killed.
[Firishtah savs “nearly 15,000 killed and 20,000 captives, thus avenging his
former defeat. ”] Kac Karan escaped, leaving twenty elephants, and 20,000
captives, besides booty to a great amount. Nahrwalah was taken possession
of, and a Musalman Amtr was located there [f], after which i^u[b-ud-Dfn
returned to Dihli by way ofAjmir; and olTerings of jewels, and handsome male
and female captives, were despatched to Ghur [to Sulffin Qbiyuff-ud-Dtn] and
to (ohazntn. [Gujarat could not have been retained for any time, as it was not

THE MU IZZlAH SULTANS OF HIND, 593

mod, son of [QhiySft-ud-Dtn] Mu^tammad, son of SAm,

ajnong hutorians. In the first place, however, I must mention, that our wuthof
himself states, at page 398, that, "when Eutb'od-Dtn came to fiJtaxntn [for
forty days after which he ran away. Sm note *, page 503], he despatched
Nif&m-ud-Dtn, Muhammad, to Ftruz-koh to the presence of Sultto Mahmiid;”
and in 605 H. [much the most probable date, for reasons to be mentioned sub*
aequently] he, Mahmud, sent him a canopy of state, &c., thus contradicting his
own statement here. See also i>age 398, and note *, page 500^ para. 3.

Several histories and authors, including Tarikh-i-lbr&htmi, 7 abaVSt-i-Akbart,
Lubb*ut>Taw 2 rt]c]i-i-Hind, Taskirat-ul-Muluk, Buda’unt, &c., state that
E^utb-ud-I^n assumed sovereignty, at Labor, on Tuesday [one has Sunday, the
17th, another Wednesday], the 18th of Zt-E^’dah, 602 h., which is much the
same as our author says here, and just two months and a half from the date of
the Sultan’s decease. One of these works states that “ Eull^'ud-Dtn had gone
to Labor in order to receive the canopy of state, a standard, the deed of manu¬
mission, the title of Suljan—as he was styled Malik mostly up to this time and

pomanently acquired by the Musalmans until long after. ] Promotions and
favours were conferred upon the Muhammadan chiefs, and even the poor and
needy [Musalmans] of Dibit shared in Eutb-ud-Din’s ^unty and munificence.

No other operation is mentioned from this time to the year 599 H., a period
of nearly six yeais ; and it is somewhat surprising to find the Musalmibs in
India so quiet for such a length of time. It may be partly accounted for,
especially the last three years, through the Sulpns—Ghiyi^-ud-Ptn and Mu’us*
ud-Dtn—being occupi^ with the aftairs of Shuiasan since the accession of
their powerful rival, Sul|an Muhammad, Shwarozm the events of whose
reign will throw some light upon this period.

In the year 599 H., the same in which Sultan Ghit^s-ud-Dfn died, and his
brother, Mu’izz-ud-Dtn, became supreme sovereign, Eutb-ud-Dtn undertook
an expedition against Ksllinjar. The Rae of Kalinjar of the FramSrab race
made a desperate resistance in the field, according to the Taj-ul-Ma’agir,
before retiring within the walls ; but Firightah asserts that, in "the twinkling
of an eye, he faced about and fled for shelter to the fortress.” He was invested
therein, and shortly after be made terms, and agreed to submit to ^utb-ud-Dtn
on terms the some as those upon which his ancestors had paid obedience to
Sultan Mahmud, Ghaznawtd ; and stipulated for the presentation of a large
amount in jewels and other precious things, and a number of horses and ele¬
phants. It so happened that, next day, while' engaged in collecting together
this tribute, he was cut off by the hand of death. His Wakil or minister, Ajah
I^w [in Firiahtah, Jodah Dtw],‘bethinking himself of a never-failing spring of
water in the upper jxirt of the place, determined to resist the Musalmans instead
of agreeing to the terms; but, as fortune hod turned its face from him, and
adversity had come, the spring within a few days dried up, and the people
within the walls, being helpless, were compelled to call for quarter ; and they
came out, and gave up the place. Vast booty in jewels, arms, elephants, and
other property fell into the hands of the Musalmans, who became rich from the
spoils ; and 50,cxx> captives, mole and female, were taken, and were, accord¬
ing to Firishtah, "exalted to the excellence of Islatn,” and the idol temples
were converted into masjids.

It is amusing here also to find how Firightah, whose account is substantially
the same ns the preceding, has been translated. Dow says ; “ In the year
599 he mu.stered his forces, .and marched to the siege of Calingcr, where he was

L 1 2

SM THE TABAlgJ^T.I.NA^lRl.

who was Sultan Mu'izz-ud>Dtn's brother’s son, despatched

WAS still a slave—and the government of Hind&stSn, which Ma^rmfid had con¬
ferred upon him, or rather, confirmed him in, and was greatly exalted and
honoured thereby.” Our author, and some who copy him, state, that ^ujb-
nd-Dtn returned to Dihlt after the expedition against the Khokhais ; but it
must be remembered that Eu{b-ud-Dtn accompanied his master, Mu’izz-ud-
Dtn, to Labor after that affair, and, as only two months and sixteen days
elapsed between the assassination of the Sultan and ^utb-ud-Dtn's assumption
of the sovereignty at Labor, it is therefore probable that, on hearing of the
assassination of the Sult 3 .n, which took place only fifteen dayt after the latter
left Labor, he retunicd to it at once, and possibly had not even 1 ^ it when the
news reached him. After a time, he returned to Dihlt again. The Taj-ul-
Ma’agir says he made Luhawar his capital, “ the place where the throne of
Sultans had been established,” but the reason, why be eventually returned to
Labor, and continued there to the day of bis death, has been stated already in
another place. See note *, page 503.

It is stated in another work, the Kb ula^at-ut-Tawarfkh, that E^tb-ud-Din

met by Cola, the tributary prince of that country, whom he defeated ; and,
dismounting his cavalry [X\, began to besiege him_ in the fort.” Alt this is pure
invention: there is nothing of the kind In Firishtah. Bkiggs has : “ In the
year 599 be mustered his forces, and inarched against Kalunjur, where he was
opposed by the Hdja of that country, whom he defeated ; then, dismounting
his cavalry, he laid siege to the fort." A siege and an investment are far different
things. All about "the Hindoo fiag being again hoisted on the fort" is also
purely imaginary, and is not contained in Firishtnh’s text.

Here is another choice specimen of how Indian history is written. Its source,
of course, is Dow and Briggs, not Firi&htah., In Makshman’s "History of
India,” vol. L, page 197, is the following : “In the year 599 he mustered his
forces, and marched against Kulunjur, where he was opposed by the Raja of
that country, whom he defeated ; then, dismouiiting his cavalry, he laid siege
to the fort. The Raja, seeing himself hard pressed, olfered Kootb-ood-Deen
Eibuk the same tribute and presents which his ancestors had formerly paid to
Soolton Mahmood. The proposal was accepted ; but the Raja’s minister, who
resolved to hold out without coming to terms, caused his master to be assassi¬
nated, while the presents were preparing. The Hindoo flag was again hoisted
on the fort, the siege recommenced, but the place was eventually reduced,
owing to the drying up of a spring upon the hill which supplied the garrison
with water.”

From Kalinjar E“lh-ud-Din marched to the city of Mahobah, the capital of
the territory of Kalbt, which he took possession of, and returned to Dihlt by
way of Buda’un, one of the chief cities of Hind, which he also occupied.
[It is not Firishtah who places “Bada’Cin between the Ganges and the Jamna”
(see Elliot, India, vol. ii., page 232, note >), but Dow and Briggs, who mis¬
interpret him.] It was whilst in this part that Muhammad, son of Bakht-
yar, the Kh alj, is said to have presented himself in Ifulb-ud-Din’s presence,
— not from Awadh and Bihar, but from A-dioand-Jiihdr, noticed in the
account of that chief farther on—bearing rich presents in jewels and coin of
various descriptions ; but this certainly took place ten years before 599 H.
He was received with great distinction, as his fame had extended over Hind
and Sind. When he was admitted to an audience to take leave, he received a
robe of honour, a standard, and other insignia, as will be found mentioned in
the account of him at page 348.

THE MUTZZJAH SULTANS OF HIND.

S»5

a canopy of state to Malik l^utb-ud-Dtn, and conferred on
him the title of Sultan *; and, in the year 602 H., he
determined to proceed from Dihli to the royal presence in
Lohor ^; and, on Tuesday, the 17th of the month, Zt-

ascenJed the throne, at I-ahor, on the nth of Rabt’-ul-Awwal, 603 H., and
that he read the Kh ii^bah for himself, and coined money in Air ewH name, and
yat, although the coins of others are, comparatively, so plentiful, it is stated
that not one bearing the name of ^utb*ud-Din has ever been found. A work
in my iXissession, however, which contains specimens of the different coins of
the Sultuas of Hind, vdth the inscriptions they are said to have borne, gives
the following as a specimen of ^u^b ud-Dtn’s coins :—

1 .r j •«£-

I u'*'*

which may be thus rendered :—'* Coin of the inheritor of the kingdom and
signet of Sul{an, ]Ktitb-ud-Dtn, I-bak, in the year 603 H.,” and on the
reverse :—“Struck at the Dar-ul- Kh ilafat, Dihll, in the first [year] of [his]
accession.”

1 rather doubt the possibility of Malik [which was his only title up to his
ascending the throne at Labor] Ifutb-ud-Din’s having received the title of
Sulian and the investiture of the sovereignty of Hindustan as early as 2 t*^’dah,
602 H., because Gbiyag-ud-Din, Malt^mad, did not at once obtain the supreme
[nominal only] authority after the assassination of his uncle. His kinsman,
’Ala>ud-Dfn, Muhammad, previously called by the name of 2 >y£*ud>Dfii [See
page 394] was, at that time, ruler of Qhtir and Ftruz-koh, and Mahmud was
at Bust, and it must have taken him some few months, at the very least, to
disjxjssess’Ala-ud'Dln, Muhammad, and acquire possession of the sovereignty;
and this would bring us to 603 H., as on the coin given above. One author, in
fact, states, and it is not improbable, that 'AlA-ud-DIn, Mui^AMMAD, who
then held £hur, after the Suljan’s assassination—in which case, 602 h. would
be correct—sent ^u{b-ud-Din a canopy of state, and conferred on him the
sovereignty of Hind, and that MahmOd, subsequently, did the same ; and one
of the authors previously referred to says Iglutb-ud-Dln was at Purshor. when
Mahmud’s communication, conferring this dignity, reached him, and further
states that he had gone there to guard the route into India.

Another thing to be remembered Ls, that, by our author’s account, the state¬
ments of the Taj-ul-Ma’asir, and the greater number of other histories, ]l^utb-
ud-Dtn died in 607—although some say in 609, and 610 H. —in what month is
not stated, after a reign of little over /our years; but, if we consider a little,
four years from Zi-I$^a’dah, 602 II., only brings us to the same month of 606 h.
Strange to say, F.asih-i, although mentioning the assassination of Suljan
Mu'izz-ud-Din in 602 H., does not mention ]j^utb-ud-Dfn’s acquirement of
power as Sul[an until CoS H.—“when the title of Sultan was conferred and
he was manumitted ”—one year before Mahmud’s assassination, which he says
occurred in 609 ii., and states that IjCutb-ud-Din was killed by a fall from his
horse in 610 ll. See note *, page 528.

• See note *, page 500.

^ The text in most copies, including the printed text, is slightly defective
here, causing a meaning contrary to what our author would convey. It is evi¬
dent, from various events, that ^u{b-ud-Din did not “determine to go to the

THE TABA¥AT.1>NA$IRT.

*•5*6

1 ^’dah, of that same year, he ascended the throne in the
royal ]^a$r of Lohor.

After some time, hostility arose between him and Sultan
Taj-ud-D!n, Yal-duz, respecting Lohor, so much so, that
that hostility led to an engagement; and, in that affair, the
victory was with Sultan Kutb-ud-Din. Sultan Taj-ud-Din,
Yal-duz, was defeated, and retreated before him ; ” and

capital, Lohor,” as the words uMtjs alone mean ; and, farther,

Lilhor was not the capital. The correct reading is as above, namely—
jijf* c<r*“ and this refers, not to his going to the c/(y of Labor

merely, but into the lAhor territory to join his master the Sultan against the
Khokhars ; he only relates it in the wrong place. After their overthrow, the
Sul|an came to Lahor, accompanied by ^u^b-ud-Dln ; and, subsequently,
after the Suljan’s assassination, the latter assumed sovereignty there. Zt-
^a’dah is the eleventh month. This is evidently our author’s meaning.
^u{b-ud-Din had no reason to "attack Lohor,” as in Llliot, India : vol. ii.
page 300, and the imperfect passage in the printed text eVen will nut bear such
a rendering.

• 1 have, in a prrevious place [see page $02, note *], referred to the proceed¬
ings of Taj-nd-Dtn, I-yal-duz, towards Gbiya-s-ud-Din, Mahmud, and ^fujb-
ud-Dtn's jealousy ot 1 -yal-duz, and his offer of aid to Abt-Dakur against him.

In the year 603 H, shortly after l^u{b-ud-ptn is said, by some, to have
received his freedom, and the title of SulJSn from Sultan MahmCid, I-yal-ilQz,
who considered the Panjkb part of the dominion of Ghaznin to which he had
succeeded, and which had neither been assigned, by Mahmud, to !l^utb-ud-
Dln, nor to the other slave, I^abh-jah, ]^ulb-ud-Din’s son-in-law, despatched
the Shwajah, the Mu-ayyid-ul-Mulk, Sanjarl, the Wazlr of Gh aznln. against
Labor [but a few authors say he went himself], and ousted ^aba-jah, who
held it, nominally, for ^ulb-ud-Din. ^ulb-ud-Dln, soon after, marched
against I-yal-duz with all the available troops of Hindustan, and a battle took
place between them, in the Panjab, and I-yal-duz was worsted, and retreated
into the strong country of KaimSn and Shaluzan. ETulb-ud-Din now pushed
on to Ghaznln. which having obtained possession of, he gave himself up to
wine and riot; and this, according to our author, at page 398, happened in
605 H., which is a more probable date than 603 H.

There are great discrepancies, however, in several works of authority, which
are difficult to reconcile with the above in many respects, in Alfl, Yafa- 1 , and
the Jami’-nt-Tawartkh, which must be briefly alluded to.

It is said in the first-mentioned work that, soon after the death of Mu’izz-
ud-Dln, 1 -yal-duz had to abandon the Ghaznln territory, because, through the
treachery of ^utlagh-Tigln, a former slave of the late Sultan [can this be the
slave who shut the gates upon his master mentioned in note *, page 475 T],
and who, since his death, had been in Sultan Mahmud’s service, but was now
one of I-yal-duz’s principal Amirs and held Gh aznln for him, during a short
absence, seized this opportunity of instigating Sultan Muhammad, IQjwamzm
Shah, to seize it. I-yal-duz, previous to this, had agreed to acknowledge the
suzerainty of that monarch, and had despatched befitting presents ; but the
Sultan at once acted on the su{^estion of Ifutlajdi-Tigin, and seized Ghaznln.

This event, according to Alfl, took place in 603 of the Rihlat, and Yafa- 1 ,
Innii’.iiI-Tawai 1 kh. and some others savin 611 H., and, according to those

THE MUTZZIAH SULTANS OF HIND.

s»r

Sultan ^utb-ud-Dtn proceeded towards the seat of govern¬
ment, the city of Ghaznin. and possessed himself of that
kingdom likewise ; and, during a period of forty days that
he sat upon the throne of Gh aznin. he bestowed upon God’s

works, Sultan Matimud did not die until 609 H. [see also last para, of note *,
page 400], and Fa^ib-i states that I^utb>ud-Dtn ^obtained sovereignty over
Hindflbtan in 608 H., and places his death as late as 610 H. These dates do
not agree with those given by the Muhammadan Historians of India, but tA/y
are not the most reliable authorities for events which happened out of that
country.

In the state of affairs in which I-yal-duz found himself, for Sultan MahmSd
was now but a mere vassal of the Kh w.Trazmts [See note ’, page 400], he was
under the necessity of retiring towards Hind [the Panjab], which he considered
a portion of his own dominions. He reached Labor, encountered l[^aba-jah,
and took possession of that capital and the whole Panjab. See our author’s
account of IjTaba-jah, page 531, and early part of the reign of I-yal-thnish.

On Sultan Muhammad, Kh warazm Shah, getting po$.session of Gh azntn. he
put to death several of the Gh urian Amirs, and made over his new acquisition
to his son, Jalal-ud-Dtn, Mang-baml; and a Klx\vfirazml noble was installed
at Gh aznTn as his deputy [This accounts, no doubt, for the reference made by
Jalal-ud-Dln, when soliciting a temporary asylum from I-yal-timish some years
subsequently, to their having been “good neighbours previously.” See note *,
para. 7, page 290], and the Sulpn returned to Kh warazm. l^utb-ud-Dln now
inarched into the Panjab against I-yal-duz [603 Ri/flat, 6X2 H.], who was
defeated by him, and retired into Kaxman and Shalfizan. l^utb-ud-Dtn
marched to Gh azntn. drovt out the governor on yalSl-ud-Din's part, and gave
himself up to wine and pleasure.

Now we come to that part of the subject in which all agree.; but it is
amusing to notice how our author slurs over these doings. I<Iulb-ud-Dtn now
giving himself up to amusement and debauchery, the people of Gh aznin. dis¬
gusted with his remissness and laxity, and the disordered state of affairs, sent a
person, secretly, to I-yal-d&z, to whom they seem to have been much attached,
and solicited him to return to the capital. He did so with promptness ; and,
as his appearance on the scene was quite unexpected by IjkUjtb-ud-Utn, he was
unable to resist him, and he abandoned Gh azntn precipitately, and fled by
way of Sang-i-Surakh [one of the routes between Qhazntn and the Panjab,
for he did not dare to take that through Kapnan], to Labor. Th's was the
occasion of his “filling the throne ofGJiazntn for forty tlays,” for which our
author considered it to be necessary to mention him [page 506], not only among
the Sultans of Hindustan, but, separately, of Ghaznin likewise.

I cannot refrain from inserting here a specimen of history-writing, which will
only be found in the-writer’s imagination. Mr. Marshman, in his " History of
India,” written for the University of Calcutt.a, states at page 47, vol. i., that
” Kootub followed up the victory [over “Eldoze”] and rkcovkrrh G/mzni
[which he never before possessed], where he assumed the crown [not at I ..ahor
then?], but wa-s soon after expelled by his rival, and driven back to Iiuiia. . . .
The establishment of the Mahoinedan empire in India is, therefore, considered
to date from this event,” &c. This is rich indeed.

^utb-ud-Dtn does not appear to have returned to Dihlii .any more ; and,
through fear of I-yal-duz, continued at Labor until he met with the accident
which ended his days.

THE taba9:At-i-nA$irL

5»»

people abundant benefactions, and innumerable favours, and
returned again to Hindustan, the account of which has been
previously related. As the decree of fate supervened, in the
year 607 H., he fell from his horse whilst engaged in playing
bail* on the course, and the horse came down upon him, in
such wise that the prominent part ‘ of the front of the saddle
came upon his blessed breast, and he died *.

The period of his rule, from the first taking of Dihlt up
to this time, was twenty years; and the stretch of his
sovereignty, with a canopy of state, the Kh utbah. and coin
[in his own name and titles], was four years and a little
over *.

II. SULTAN ARAM SHAH. SON OF SULTAN ^UTB-UD-DIN,

i-BAK.

When Sultan Kutb-ud-Din, I-bak, died, the Amirs and
Maliks of Hindustan at once considered it advisable for

* Chaugan. something similar to modem Polo.

* The eaj>tern saddle is vastly diilerent from ours, and those who have seen
it in use in the Fast will easily conceive the effect of the high-pointed front
coming in contact with the breast.

* The generality of authors place his death in the year 607 H., but the

month and date is not mentioned, and some place his death much later. One
work, the Tarildl i-lbrahimi, however, gives a little more detail than others,
and enables us to fix the month, at least, tolerably correctly. It is stated in
that work that, having ascended the throne at Labor, in 2 l*l^a’dah, 602 H.,
he died in 607 H., having ruled nineteen fourteen as the Sultan’s [Mu'izz-

ud-Din’s] lieutenant, and five and a half years as absolute sovereign. From
588 H., the year ip which he was first made the Sultan’s lieutenant, to the 2nd
of Sha’ban. Co2H,, the date of the Sultan’s death, is fourteen.years and a
month, calculating from about the middle of the former year, if Mu’izz-ud-Dtn
returned to Gha zntn before the rainy season of 588 u., which, in all probability,
he did ; and five years and six months from the middle of 2 l-l!^u’dah, 602 H.,
would bring us to the middle of Jamadt-uI-Awwal, the fifth month of 607 h.,
which will therefore be about the period at which ^utb-ud-Dtn is said to have died,
and a little more than three vaonths, by this calculation, after the death of Sultan
Mahmud, iffsorj H. be the correct year of the latter’s assassination. Fa?ih-t
says ^futb-ud-Din died in 610 H., and the Mir’at-i-Jahan-Numi and Lubb-ut-
Tawarlkb suy in 609 H. He was buried at Labor, and, for centpries after, his
tomb continued to be a place of pilgrimage. It may now possibly be turned
into a reading-room, a residence, or even a place of Christian worship, pur¬
poses for which many buildings of this kind are now used at LShqr, without its
being known whose dust they were built to cover.

* It seems strange that our author should give detailed lists of the offspring,
kinsmen, ll^afis, nobles, and victories of his former slave and son-in-law,
Shams-ud-Utn. I-yal-timish, and not of Sultan l^^utb-ud-Dtn, l-bak, himself,
the pseudo-iemaAnti of the ‘ ‘ Patdn or Afghdn ” dynasty.

THE MU’IZZlAH SULJANS OF HIND. 539

the sake of restraining tumult, for the tranquillity of the
commonalty, and the content of the hearts of the soldiery,
to place Aram Shah upon the throne *.

Sultan ]^utb-ud-Dtn had three daughters, of whom two.

* Although a number of authors agree in the statement that Aram Shah
was I^utb-ud-Dln’s son, it nevertheless appears, from the statements of others,
that I^utb-ud-Otn Aaii no son ; and it is stated, more than once, by our author
likewise, that three daughters were his only offspring. Some of these authors,
moreover, who call Aram Sliah his son, afterwards add, ‘ * than whom he had
no other heir but, if he was really his son, what better heir could be desired 7
Abu- 1 -Fafl makes the astonishing statement that Aram Shah was I^utb-ud-
Dln’s brother !

On the sudden removal of I^utb>ud-Oln from the scene, at Labor, the nobles
and cliief men, who were with him there, in order to preserve tranquillity, set
up, at Labor, Aram Baklish, the adopted son of if^utb-ud-Dln, and hailed him
by the title of Sultan Aram Shah. What his r£al pedigree was is not men¬
tioned, and he may have been a Turk. Mandates and decrees were now
issued in his name, and the good news of justice and glad tidings of
impartiality tow'ards the people reached them. This was, it is said, in
607 H.

At this juncture, Amir ’All-i-Isma’ll, the Sipah-Salar, and governor of the
city and province of Dihll, the Amtr-i-Oad [called Amir Da’ud, by some], and
other chief men in that part, conspired together, and sent off to Budtl’un and
invited Malik l-yal-timiab> the feoffee of that part, I^utb-ud-Dln’s former
slave and son-in-law, and invited him to come thither and assume the sove¬
reignty. He came with all his followers, and possessed himself of the
city and fort and country round. At the same time, Nasir-ud-Dln, Ipiba-jah,
who had married two, daughters of I^utb-ud-Dln [in succession], appropriated
Sind and Multan, Bhakar and Siwastan, and, subsequently, the territory to
the N. E., as far as Sursutl and Kuhram ; the Shalj chiefs in Btuigalah
assumed independency there, and the Rajahs and Kaes on the frontiers [of
the Musabnan dominions] began to show a rebellious and contumacious
spirit.

Aram Shah, on first becoming aware of these acts of l-yal-timi|h, at the
advice of his supporters, summoned to his aid the old Amirs and soldiers of
his adopted father, and they, having rallied round him in considerable numbers
from Amrohah, and other parts, and he having inspirited them, advanced
with a strong force towards Dihll. Malik 1 -yal-timish, having gained posses¬
sion of the capital, issued from it with his forces ; and, in the plain of Jud
before Dihll, the rival forces encountered each other. After a feeble effort on
the part of Aram Shah’s troops, he was defeated and disappeared, and wliat
became of him is not quite certain ; but our author is probably correct in
saying that he was put to death by his rival. After this, Malik 1 -yal-timiall
became independent ruler of Dihll, and the other great chiefs were left, for
a while, in the possession of the territories they before held or had since
appropriated. The reign of Aram Shah, if such can be properly so called,
is said by some to have terminated within the year ; but others contend that
it continued for three years. The work I have before alluded to gives the
following inscriptions on a coin of Ariim Shah, and the date on another, given
as I-yal-timisk’-S corroborates the statement of those who say Aram Shah’s
reign extended over three years.

S30 THE TABA]^AT.I.NA$IRI.

one after the [death of the] other, were wedded to Malik
Nagir-ud-Din, Kaba-jah, and the third was married * to
Sultan Shams-ud-Din. I-val-timish. At this time that
Sultan Kutb-ud-Din died, and Aram ^ah was raised to
the throne, Malik Na§ir-ud-Din, Kaba-jah proceeded* to
O chch ah and Multan. Kutb-ud-Din had contemplated
Sultan Shams-ud-Din’s acquiring dominion, and he had
called him son, and had conferred upon him the fief of
Buda’un. The Maliks, in concert, brought him from
Buda’un, and raised him to the throne of Dihli ; and the
daughter of Sultan Kutb-ud-Din was espoused by him ;
and they martyred Aram Shah

Hindustan became subdivided into four portions : the
territory of Sind Malik [Sukan] Na§ir-ud-Din, Kaba-jah
took possession of, the dominion of Dihli pertained to
Sukan Shams-ud-Din. I-yal-timish, the territory of Lakh-
anawati was appropriated by the Khalj Maliks and Sul¬
tans, and the state of Lohor, according to alteration of
circumstances, used to be seized upon, sometimes by Malik
[^ultan] Taj-ud-Din, Yal-duz, sometimes by Malik [Sulpn]

The following are the inscriptions on this coin ;—

xjJlt

which may be thus rendered :—“ This diram [is] stamped with the name
of the Malik, the shadow of the Almighty, Aram Shah, in the year 607,” and
on the reverse :—"Struck in the Dar-us>Saltanat, the city of Labor.’’ The
date given on the coin of I-yal-timish, which see farther on. Section XXI.,
is "612, the first of his reign.”

Those authors, who say Aram Shah was Kutb-ud-Dfn’s son, for the most
part make a gpreat blunder in stating that he was raised to the throne at JDiAli,
and that those, who had set him up, repenting of having done so, through
his incapacity—his Incapacity seems to have been his incapacity to enforee
obodienee —invited l-yal-timish to assume authority, and that Arkm Sllifa,
becoming aware of their sedition, came out of Dihli, and called on his Other’s
old followers to aid him, after which I-yal-timiah secured it, and subsequently
defeated Aram S^h.

* From what our author states, a few lines under, it would appear that
l-yal-timish only espoused ][^utb-ud-Din’s da'ughter when he assumed the
throne, at-Dibit.

■ In other words, he appropriated those places and their dep>endencies in the
confusion consequent on I-yal-timish*s usurpation, and assumed the title of
Sultan.

i The idiom varies here. All the' modem copies of the text, and one of the
oldest also, have, instead of this sentence the words—"and the decree of
destiny reached Aram Shah. ” and the sentence ends. Compare Elliot: India,
vol. ii. page 301.

THE MUTZZlAH SULTANS OF HIND.

S3*

Na$ir-ud-Dtn, Kaba-jah, and sometimes by Stilt 9 .n Shams-
ud-Dtn, I-val-timish. as will, subsequently, be recorded,
please God 1 in the account of each of those personages.

III. MALIK [SULTAN] NAglR-UD-DlN, ¥ABA-JAH.

AL-MU'IZZl-US-SULTANi ».

Malik [Sultan] Na$ir-ud-Din,' Kaba-jah, was a great
monarch, and the slave of the Sultan-i-Ghazl. Mu’izz-ud-
D!n, Muhammad-i-Sam.

He was endowed with very great intellect, sagacity, dis¬
cretion, skill, wisdom, and experience, and had served Sultan
Mu’izz-ud-Din many years in various departments of every
sort of political employment, both important and subordi¬
nate, about the Court, in military affairs, and the adminis¬
tration of civil duties, and had acquired great influence.

Malik Nagir-ud-Din-i-Aetamur, the feudatory of Och-

■ Sultan, on his coins, the title he assumed, and to which he was equally
as much entitled as the “august" Sultan I-yal-timiall.

Some authors—but they are Inostly those either natives of or resident in
India, and of comparatively modem days—write this name ^ub&-cihah,
with fih. The Rau«at.u$-$af 3 writes it I^abaj merely. Our author, however,
invariably writes it lyTaba-jcih, and I have therefore followed him. The letter
^ in writing, is constantly used for ^ sometimes from ignorance, sometimes
by mistake, and the two letters are very often interchangable, and j J and lA
are substituted for them ; but, in this particular case, the name of this
ruler occurs time after time in the same line with Ufihdiah, but the j of
l^at»-j^ fib of O chch ah are distinctly marked in the oldest copies

of the text, and, in one, the vowel points are also given. OdlChah will be
found constantly written with j which is intended for ch, in several copies of
the text as well as in many other works, but we never find KnU-jah written
with cb in the text.

The idea appears to have prevailed that this probable nickiuune is derived
from 1 , 1 —k^bk, an 'Arabic word signifying a quilted jacket with short
sleeves, or a tunic open in front, and that —^ah is the Persian affixed
particle of diminution ]pab 5 *chah. a short jacket or tunic, and thus his name
would be Na?ir-ud-Din of the short tunic or jacket; but, in this case, I^uba-
ch ah with u is impossible, because there is no u in the ^Arabic word fyiba^

The letter j never occurs in a purely Persian word, nor does it ever
occur in Hindi; and ^ is often substituted for it, and vice versa. There are
other meanings attached to a precisely similar word used in Persian, which is
probably Turkish, like the nick-names,’ I-bak, I-yal-duz, I-yal-timiab, and
the like. This kaba means, rending, tearing, cutting, paring, Kraping,
shaving, &c., while, in another form of it, the b is doubled = kabba signifying
slender about the middle. To this last the Persian diminutive particle, fihah.
is of course applicable ; but, besides this, chah signifies, much, great, abnnd-
ance, and the like, and also fifteen, or, literally, three fives. Under th^
circumstances this nickname might mean “very slender waisted.” See also
Elliot : IKOIA, vol i, page 131.

53*

THE TABA^T.I.NA$IR1.

chah. in the engagement at Andlshud *—^which took place
between the Sultan-i-Ghazt. Mu’izz-ud-Dtn, and the forces
of Khi' ta- and the Maliks of Turkistan—displayed great
valour before the stirrup of the Sultan, and fought against
the infidels as by orthodox law enjoined, and despatched
great numbers of them to hell. The Maliks of the army
of Kh ita became dejected through the amount of slaughter
inflicted [upon them] by Na§ir-ud-Dtn-i-Aetamur, and they
simultaneously came upon him, and he attained martyrdom.
The Sultan-i- Gh azt reached his capital and the throne of
Gh azntn in safety,from that disaster; and the government of
O chch ah*was entrusted to Malik Na$ir-ud-Din, Kaba-jah.

He was son-in-law to Sultan ^u(b-ud-Dtn, I-bak,
through two daughters * ; and, by the elder daughter, he
had a son—Malik ’Ala-ud-Din, Bahram Shah. He [Bah-
ram Shah] was of handsome exterior and of good disposi¬
tion, but addicted to pleasure; and, according to the way
of youth, he had an excessive predilection for vice.

In short, when Malik Na$ir-ud-Din, ]l^aba-jah, after
the catastrophe of Sultan Kutb-ud-Dln, I-bak, pro¬
ceeded to O chch ah. he possessed himself of the city of
Multan, and Sindustan and Diwal, as far as the sea-coast.
The whole he brought under his sway, and subjected the
fortresses, cities, and towns of the territory of Sind, as¬
sumed two canopies of state, and annexed [the country to
the eastward] as far as the limits of Tabarhindah, Kuh]-am,
and Sursuti He also took Lohor several times ; and

* This word is written, in one of the oldest copies of the text, with the
vowel points. Inda-Uiud——and, from further research, I find it is
the proper mode of spelling the name of this place. In the present day the
people of that part call ir. Ind-kkud ami Ind-kku. 1 have retained the
modem mode of spelling.

' The printed text and two AfS. copies of the text have O chcha h a/i</
Multan, but the ten best copies omit Multan.

' One having previously died. ]^aba-jah Was likewise son-in-law of T 3 j-
ud-Din, 1 -yal-duz, and, consequently, by the alliance with l^utb-ud-Oln’s
daughters, he married the daughters of his wife’s sister’s husband.

I'he Taj-uI-Ma’asir calls him ’Ala-ud-Din, Muhammad, but I look upon
our author as a better authority than the Taj-ul-Ma’agir for the events of this
reign. What became of ^aba-jah’s son our author and others do not state.

* That is, Siwastan, also called Shiw-astan. by some Hindu writers. The
remarks which follow seem to indicate that all these were separate provinces
or territories. Siwastan is turned into IIindustd$i in Elliot’s INDIA, page 302.

* Yafa-i says each of the slaves seized upon the territory he held the govern-

533

THE MUIZZlAH SULTANS OF HIND.

fought an eng^agement with the troops of Gh aznln which
used to come [into the Panjab] on the part of Sultan T3j-

ment of at the time of Sultan Mu’izz-ud-Dfn’s assassination, and that E>bl-
jah appropriated Cchchah, MulUin, Luhawar, and Puratiawar, which ter*
ritories, for the most part, Sul^n JalaUud-Din afterwards subjected.

Immediately after the decease of Eutb-ud-Dtn, the so-called establisher of
“ the Path&n or AfghAn dynasty,” Na$ir-ud-Din, ]^aba-jah, foreseeing a struggle
for power, or, at least, a weak government, appropriated all the forts and towns
'in the territories of Labor, Tabarhindah [some authors say Bathin<}ah, some
Siriiind], and Kuhfam as far as Sursutl, he holding, at the time of Entb-ud*
Din’s death, the fiefs of O chch ah and Multan, having previously held Labor
for him. He was subsequently ousted from lAhor, Multan, and Ochchah by
the forces of Sultan Taj-ud-Din, I-yal-duz, as our author mentions ; but, after
the defeat of l-yal-duz, and he had been put to death in captivity by I-yal-
timish, Ifaba-Jah got possession of these teiritories again, and apparently as a
tributary of I-yal-timish, or in some way subject.

Our author leaves out here, but mentions in two lines, and under a wrong
date, the first hostilities which arose between IF^aba-jah and I-yal-timigh under
the latter’s reign. These hostilities arose in 613 11., many years before the
defeat of Sultan Jalill-ud-Din, Kh warazm ghah, by the Muj^als. According
to the Taj-uI-Ma’ajir, ^aba-jah was tributary to I-yal-timish, and the tribute
was in arrears. At the advice ■of his Wazir, I-yal timish marched from Dibit
towards Labor to enforce payment ; others say, and more probably, that it was
for the possession of the province of Labor—in Jamadt-ul-Awwal, 613 H. [The
TabalcSt-i-Akbart, Vuda’unt, and some others, make a great blunder here.
T hfey state correctly enough that war arose between these two rulers about
Labor, and that Shams-ud-Dtn. I-yaI-timisb> was always victorious; but add
that, on the last occasion, in 614 H., Shams-ud-Din moved against him in
person, and invested O chch ah. and then proceed to mention Euba-jah’s death,
which happened ten years or more after, thus confounding or mixing up the two
events. Firishtah is completely at sea about these events in E^ha-jah’s life.]
Eaba-jah with his forces was encamped on the Utah [the Bias of Europeans]
to defend its passage. Arrived on its banks, I-yal-timish, on the 14th of
Shawwal. began to cross with his army,- without the aid of boats [this in
Elliot, vol. ii. page 571, is called crossing the Indus !], at the ford near a
village named Chambah [?] ; but we must remember that the present course of
the Bfah is not lohat it was then. In those days it separated into two branches
at a village named Lo%vah-waI, one branch flowing by j^ufur, E^hulah, IQ|a-e,
and Hujrah-i-Shah Mu^it"* passed about a mile and a half N.W. of the fort of
Dfb 31 -pur, and fell into the river Ghaia. This- branch was called Bfah and
Nalah-i-Bi&h ; whilst the other branch, flowing southwards, fell into the Sutlaj,
as' the Gharsl, above' its present confluence with the Biah, is called. One
author, copied by Firishtah, states that this affiiir between and^ I-3ral-

thnish took place between Man$ur}ah and the banks of the ChinAb, Which
seems very unlikely, being too far west. E<tl>a-jah, on witnes.sing this daring
deed, according to the Taj-ul-Ma’agir, abandoned his position and fled towards
“Luhawar,” whither he was pursued. His standard, kettle-drums, war
material, and other lx>oty to a vast amount, fell into the hands of his rival.
After this disaster, ^Cabii-jali fled towards Ochchah, whither I-yal-timiah
appears not to have been then prepared to follow him.

I-yal-timiah remained some lime at Labor to arrange its affairs ; and, having
published the news of his success in all parts, conferred the government of that

534

THE TABA¥AT-1-NA$IRI.

ud-D)n, Yal-duz, and was overthrown by the l^^wajah, the
Mu>ayyid-ul-Mulk, Mu^ammad-i-’Abd-ullah, the Sanjart,
who was the Waztr of the kingdom of Gha znin *.

When [Sultan] Na$ir-ud-Din, Kaba-jah, became quietly
established in the territory of Sind ", during the calamities
[attending the inroads] of the inhdels of Ch in, a great
number of the chief men of Kh urasan. Ghur. and Ghaznin-
presented themselves before him, and he bestowed upon
the whole of them ample presents, and provided liberally
for them^. There used to be constant contention* between
him and the august * Sultan, Shams-ud-Din. I-yal-timi sh.
up to the time of the battle on the banks of the Sind, which
was fought between Sultan Jalal-ud-Din, son of Sultan
Muhammad, Kh warazm Shah, and Chingiz Kha n, after
which, Jalal-ud-Din, Khw arazm Shah, came into the land
of Sind, and proceeded towards Diwal and Mukran.

After the taking of Nandanah' by the forces of the infidel

territory upon his eldest son, N3l9ir<ud>Din, Mafimud Shah, and then returned
to Dihlt. It was after these events that E^aba*jah’s territory was invaded by
Sultan Jalil-ud-Iftn, £hw§mzm Shah, as already mentioned in note*, page
293. The extent of the province of Labor may be judged of from what is
mentioned in that note, and note *, below.

* This happened in 612 H., according to the Taj-ul-Ma’agir, but it cannot
be correct. That is the year in which I-yal-diiz in person overthrew him : the
Waztr of Gha zntn defeated l^aba-jah soon after the death of l^utb-ud-Dtn.
The Mir’at-i-Jahan-Numa states that engagements were fought between I-yal.
duz and E^ba-jah several times in the neighbourhood of Labor for the posses¬
sion of that province. See under the reign of I-yal-duz, pages 496—506.

• Having been deprived of the province of Labor, I$^aba-jah retired into
Sind, and, devoting his energies to the consolidation of his rule therein,
acquired great power.

f See page 200.

• Truly ; and at page 294 he says that l^ba-jah was defeated by I-val-timish
in person in 614 H. , which refers to the same events as related in the TaJ-ul-
Ma’agir in note page 532.

* Sa’id here means august, and not that his name was “Sa’id,” which it was
not, nor was it “ Sultan Sa’id Shams.”

Sultan Jalal-ud-Din’s defeat happ>ened in the seventh month of the year
618 H. Compare Elliot’s India here, and throughout this Section, as the
Calcutta printed text happens to be pretty correct in this identical portion of it.
In the translation in Elliot, vol. ii., page 303, this passage is thus rendered : —
“ When the battle between Jalalu din Khwirizm Shih and Changfz KhAn was
fought on the banks of the Indus, jalilu din came into Sind, and went towards
Dewal and Makr&n. j 1 /ler the victory of Nandua-tari the Moghal prince
came with a large army, &c.” Here it will be perceived that Nandanah, the
name of the fort which was taken and the district in which it lay, and TurtI,
the name of the Mughal who led the troops engaged in it, have been very

THE MUTZZlAH SUL7ANS OF HIND.

535

Mugh^ls, Turtl, the Mughal Nu-!n, with a large army,
appeared at the foot [of the walls] of the city of MultSn,

cleverljr made into ont name, and Chingiz 'Shan is brought to Mult&n, who
was never east of the Indus in his life I

This psissage cannot fail to be unintelligible to the reader without giving
some explanation, and some details respecting the events to which it refers.
Our author, no doubt, could have given more particulars, but here, as else¬
where, he has, for reasons pf his own, concealed a great deaL

There are many discrepancies likewise in the generality of Muhamnsadan
authors about the investment of Multan. Some works, including Jahftn-Kuahk,
and Jami'-ut-Tawart]|ht agree with our author, and some others state that
Multan luas taken by the Mugjials, while Fafih-l, and othc.s, which give such
detailed accounts of the Mughal invasions and Sultan Jalal-ud-Dtn’s career,
say nothing about NandaNAH, and do not refer to this expedition against
Multftn ; and Fa;it-t farther states, what is rather improbable, that Cltingis
Shan himself gave Sultan JalM-ud-Dtn to understand, that, “as long as be
did not re-cross the Sind, he would not interfere with him.” The A’tn-i-
Akbart says the Mughals subdued Multan, and that Saba-jah again repulsed
them, but the 6rst statement is not correct.

European writers also differ considerably—I need not quote the absurd non¬
sense contained in D’Ohsson [iii. p. 4] and in Rampoldi, in his “Anna/i
Musalmani” —in their accounts, extracted from the Muhammadan writers,
respecting the advance of the Mughals upon Multan. In the "History of the
Tartars," translated from the work of Ahu-l-dhazt. Bahadur Khkn, it is
stated that Chingiz “despatched Dubay, Noyan, and Bala, Hoyan, in pursuit
of the Sulpn, but they, having followed him in vain as far as the frontiers of
India, were obliged to return without being able to give any tidings respecting
him.” Petit de la Croix, on the other hand, quoting Fafl-ullah, says, "Bela,
Noyau, with 20,000 nrien,” was sent “to resist” the Sultan, “if he appeared
in the country of Multan,” and again, quoting Abu-l-Fida, says “ Mult&n fell
into the hands of the Mughals.” Jahan-Kush&, Jami’-ut-Tawartkh and Allt
are, however, greater authorities than those quoted by Petit de la Croix for
these events.

After his defeat of Sultan Jalal-ud-Din on the west bank of the Sind or
Indus, Ch anpiz Kh an, with the main body of his forces, halted in the country
ne'ar the Kabul river and the Sind—in the plain of Peshawar, or the Hasht-
ragcr Do-abah, probably—pending negotiations with Sul^i I-yal-timish—as
stated by our author also farther on, only the negotiations of Chingiz were
usually conducted upon quite a dift'erent plan : with the sword, not the pen—
for permission to pass through upper Ilindustan and enter Ch>u by way of
Lakhanawati and Kamrud. Whilst there encamped, Chingiz, hearing of the
progress of Sultan Jalal-ud-Dtn, and the strength he was acquiring, detached
the Nu-In, Turti or Turtae—both names are correct, and he is by some writers
called Turmati [not “TuH,” as stated in Thomas, “PathXn Kings of DehU ”
—Tult was the son of Changiz, and was elsewhere employed at this time. Firigh-
tah, on the other hand, says it was ChaghatSe, another of the sons, which is
equally incorrect]—with two tumans —20,000 men—in pursuit of him.

Sultan Jalal-ud-Din, then in the western part of the Sind-Sagar Do-&bah,
being much too weak in point of numbers to face this Mughal army sent after
him, retired farther into the Panjab, after he had, with 150 men, attacked and
routed some 2000 or 3000 of the troops of Ilindustan stationed in that part,
beyond the river Biliat, Wihat, or Jhilam, into 'the Cilinhatah Do-abah [The

536 ThE TABA]e:AT-I.NA$IR!.

and, for a period of forty-two days, closely invested that
strong fortress.

name of this Do-abah is derived by combining the two first letters of the
word —Chinab—with the three last letters of —Bihatah or *akj—

Wihatah, i and zo being interchangable—the Do-fibah of Chinhatah lying
between those two rivers], where there were numbers of Khokhais at that
period ; and one writer states that the Sultan did actually invest Labor Itself.

Turtt, having crossed the Sind, “pushed on until he reached the boundary
of the district or tract of country belonging to Hindustan which E^mr-ud'Dln,
Karmani, had held, but had been dispossessed of it by one of the Sultan’s
[Jalal-ud-Dtn’s] Amirs. This evidently refers to the tract of country which
will be subsequently referred to in several places—Banban or BaniSn. In it
was the strong fort of Nandanah [iiAii—in two copies of Alfi it is written
• •m and clerical errors probably, but the locality cannot be mistaken,
and Nandanah is evidently meant] which he took, and inflicted great slaughter
upon its inhabitants.” From whom this fort was taken is not mentioned, but it
could scarcely have been then in the possession of Jalal-ud-Din’s vassals. After
this feat, Turtf set out towards Multan, keeping along the western bank of the
Jhilain. “ On arriving op[K>site Multan he found the river unfordable, and
directed his followers to construct a bridge, which they did by means of rafts
of wood—a floating bridge.” He then crossed, and invested the place ; but,
after he had placed his catapults, and had discharged them a great number of
times with much effect, and the fortress was about to fall, he had to abandon
the siege on account of the excessive heat [It was the height of the hot season,
and the heat of Multan is truly excessive]. He plundered the provinces of
Multim and Lohawar, re-crossed the Sind, and proceeded towards Ghaxntn.”
Jami’-ut-Tawarikli and AUt say he plundered thej,y eiU—the country of Furor
Poms—which is the same probably as the Malik-pur and Malka-pur of
other writers, the meaning of the former not having been recognized, perhaps,
from the two words being written as one- and See also Elliot,

India: vol. ii.,page 559.

Our author, however, makes the matter of the investment of Multan by
Turtt very confused, for, in a previous page [ 297 ], he states that “Turti, the
Mughal, who had invested Multan, left £hing» Kh an, and came attd johted
Sultan JalM-ud-Din, and became converted to the Muhammadan faith.”

To return, however, to Nandanah. This fiame is first mentioned in the
reign of Mahmud of Gh aznin by ’Utba’ in the Kitab-i-Yamint, and then by
Abu-Sa’id, son of ^aiyah, a native of Gardaiz in the Gh aznin territory [pro¬
bably an earlier writer even than Abu-l-Fafl-i.BaihaVi, though not much], in
his Zain-ul-Akhbar, who says that Mahmud, towards the end of 404 H., deter¬
mined to attack that fort, and that Naro Jai-pal, on becoming aware of it,
placed a strong garrison therein and retired himself towards the valley of
Kashmir. Mines were spmng, and the Turks kept up such a fire of arrows
against those who showed themselves upon the walls that the place surrendered
in 405 H. This very rare and important work I have commenced translating.

The next mention of Nandanah occurs in Abu-l-Fafl-i-BaihaVi’s work,
wherein it is said it was “ impos-sible to leave that ga^tar——a narrow
pass between hills bordering upon a hostile country—where was the fort of
Nandanah, without being properly taken care of.” Our author also men¬
tions it in several places, and it is mentioned in some other works, including
the TabaVat-i-Akbart [It apjtcars to have been copied from Zain-ul Alchbar],

THE MU’IZZlAH SULJANS OF HIND.

S37

During that contest Malik [Sul(an] Na$ir-ud-Dtn, ^aba-
jah, opened the door of his treasury, and conferred nume-

SlluUlfat-ut-TawSrtkh, and Firiahtah. both under Ma^nrud’s reign, and in
many other places, as well as by 'Ablms, Sarwarnt, the Afghan historian, and
other writers; yet, by some means or other, it has been turned into "NArMu ’*
by a Jim Muhammadan writers—or rather copyists—and by almost all Eu¬
ropean translators, after the same fashion as Tara’in—the present Talawaft—
has been turned into “AlArJUn.” No such places as “N&rd(n”,and “NarsUn”
ever existed. See also Elliot, India : vol. ii., pages 448 to 450. Firishtah’s
mode of spelling it is Nandunah, and, in this instance, Dow spells it tolerably
correct, and is followed by Briggs.

Although it is declared [Elliot, India : vol. ii. page 451] that “the name
of NindutM cannot be restored,” I shall make an effort to restore that of Nan.
DANAH, and, I think, not unsuccessfully.

Nandanah, as late as the latter part of the last century at least, was the
name of a district, and formerly of a considerable tract of country, and a
fortress, in the Sind-Sagar Do-abah of the Panjab—but the name, to judge
from the Panjab Survey Maps, appears to have been dropped in recent times—
lying on the west bank of the Bihat, Wihat, or Jhilam. It contained within it
part of the hill country, including the talla/i or hill of the Jogt, Bala-nath, a
sacred place of the Hindus, which hill country was known to the Muhammadan
writers as the Koh-i-Jud, Koh-i-Bala-nath, and to the people dwelling therein
os the MakhiMah, Janjhut, or Jud ^Iountains, which we style the Salt Range,
from the number of mines of rock salt contained within them, and lay between
PimJ-i-DSidan KhS n [so called after n former Khokhar chief named D 3 dan
Kha nj and Kh ush-ab. and mno composes part of the Shah-pur [Pur or Fur. i. e.
Poms] District of the present Kawal Pintjt Division under the Panjab Govern¬
ment. There was also another separate and smaller district named Alandati-
pur, a little farther north, and there is a small river named Nautianah in the
present district of Fath-ijang, in the Rawal Find} District, also to the north.
There is also, in this district, a Malik-pur, in ancient days, the residence of
the provincial governors, which lies in the direct line of route from the Nan¬
danah district on the Jhilam to the locality in which Chingiz Shan had
pitched his camp, previously alluded to.

It is not impossible that the name of Nandanah was, previous to the reign
of Akbar, applied to the eastern half of the hill tract between Khugh-Sb,
Rawal-Pindl, and the Jhilam, including the northern part of the Chul-i-Jalalt
—so called after Jalal-ud-Din—in the midst of the Sind-Sagar Do-abah, which
formed, during the rale of the Chvirfs and the Turkish Slave Kings of Dihl},
the north-western province of Hind and Sind. The authority of the last-named
ralers does not seem to have extended to the eastern bank of the Sind, except
on the advance of an army to enforce it, nor northwards over the mountain
tracts ; and the Khokhais, along with the Awan-kars, Kathars, Gbakars, and
other less numerous trib^ and, like them, still Inhabiting that strong country

_the ancient Gindharah of the HindOs—were not reduced to the subjection .of

the rulers of Hindustan till the time of Akbar.

In the reign of Sultan Mu’izz ud-Din, Mubammad-i-Sam, his rule, which
extended from Gbaznin to Lanor and Dihli, did not extend, save very nomi¬
nally, over this hilly country ; and it was because the Khokhars, and others,
in alliance with them, closed the route between Qhazntn and Uihor, ns referred
to in note >, page 481, that he had to march into this very frontier district of
Nandanah to coerce them. The fortress of that name seems to have been

M m

538 THE TABA^AT-I-NASIRL

rous benefits upon the people, and showed such proofs of
boldness, ability, expertness, and courage that the nien-

for the same object as that for which Sher Sl^^t founded the fort of

Ruhtas in after years. Whether it was founded on the site of the fort of Nan-
DANAH it is difficult to say, but is more than probable, for AbQ-1-Fafl does not
mention it in the list of forts in that tarkar, which may account for the name
being less used in later times, but, at a place on the route between Xb ush-tb
and Makhai} on the Sind, named at present Pakka-kot, there are the remains
of a very strong fortress of ancient times, which may be those of Nandanah.

In the tract south of the Makht&lidi hlountains or Koh-i-Jud, as far as
the Sind, and to the north among the hills likewise, and beyond the Sind
towards Kapnan and Qhazntn, are the remains of several large towns or cities,
and substantial buildings, including the ruins of a considerable city, on the east
side of the river, named Kahlur [jvff'l which were noticed in the latter part
of the last century, built in the strongest and most substantial manner, and
still to be seen, and which would be delightfully interesting to explore. The
country between the Jhilam and the Sind, in the direction I have been referring
to, teems with ruins of this kind, and the remains of numerous great wells,
with stone steps to descend into them, named wan —the present termination of
many village names—in the Panjabi dialect, baott in Hindi, and sardSbah in
Persian. There are also the extensive ruins of the ancient city of Akarrah, and
some others, in the Banu district, the whole of which give undoubted evidence
of this tract south of the Makhlalah or Jud Mountains having been the chief
route between Hind and Gh aznln by KarmSn and Gardaiz. The more
northern route by Jhilam, Rawal Pinijt, Atak, and Peabawar was seldom, if
ever used, for the Kha ihar route was not under the control of the Dibit kings,
nor was it so good and practicable as the other. [1 notice that the periodical
ravings about the " only tioo routes ” from Afghanistan into India have not yet
ceased.] This may be gathered from the account of SuljtSn Nafir-ud-Dtn,
Mahmud’s reign farther on, where he marches his forces as far as the
and then sends Ulugb Rha n with his best tropps to endeavour to expel the
Mughals from this very tract, and also from the account of Ulu^ Rh«n in the
following Section. The country on the west of the Sind and on the Kabul
river nearest to it, on the decline of the Gh urlstn. Sbwarazml, and Mughal
powers, was occupied by confederacies of powerful tribes, among whom were
Afghans, and on the east side, in the hills, by the tribes before alluded to,
some of whom, the Awan-kars and a few others, also held lands on the west
side near the river Sind, and some even farther west.

It was from this frontier province of Nandakaii that Sultan JalSl-ud-Dln
sent an envoy to I-yal-timish—who was made away with by him—with whom
Chingiz is said by our author to have been at the same time negotiating [!].
T.yal.timish^iad. at this time. Ousted his rival Knba-jah from this portion of
the Labor territory, and had compelled him to content himself with Multan,
fl fibeb nh- and Sind, although, from what subsequently occurred, the hold of
either of the rivals upon the frontier district of Nandanah could not have
been very firm or very secure. At page 293 , our author says, that I-yal-
tindth, on hearing of Sultan Jalal-ud-Dtn’s overthrow by the Mugfaals on the
Sind and retreat towards the frontiers of the Dibit kingdom, “ despatched "—
to his account of I-yal-timigh farther on, he says he " marched "—“the troops
of Dihtt towards Labor [into the province of Labor ?] against the Sultan, who
thereupon “turned aside, and proceeded towards Sind and StwastSn.” They
were in great terror of the Kh warazmts’ at Dibit; but SiiltSn JalSl-ud-Dtn,

THE HUTZZlAH SULTANS OF HIND.

539

tion thereof will endure upon the pages of time until the
judgment day.

This affair of the fortress [of Multan] happened in the
year 621 H. ; and, one year and a half subsequently, the
Maliks of Ghur*, through the ravages of the Mughal
infidels, joined Malik [Sultan] Nagir-ud-Dln, Kaba-jah ;
and, in the latter part of the year 623 H,, a body of [the
tribe of] Khalj, a part * of the Khw arazmi forces, acquired
supremacy over the district of Man^Qrah *, which is [one]
of the cities of Siwastan, and their head was Malik Khan,
the Shalj •.

who had no more than about 10,000 men with him, was unable to face the
immense forces of the Dihlf kingdom, and therefore he contented himself, for
the time, with the Sind-S 3 gar Do-abah and part of Sind. Had he apf>eared
on the scene a few years earlier, before the Turk chiefs of the Mu’izsf and
E^utbt dynasties had been overpowered and slaughtered by I-yabtimigh, he
might easily have maintained a permanent footing in India.

From the fact of Nandanah being contained in the List of I-yal-timlsh’s
victories, although no mention even of such an expedition is given under his
reign, he may have endeavoured to gain possession of it; and he certainly was
advancing towards that part when attacked by the illness which compelled him
to return, and which shortly after caused his d^th. This frontier tract must
have been held by the Mughals after taking the fort of Nandanah, for the
very first act of his son N9.9tr-ud-Dln, MahmOd, when he came to the throne,
eleven years after, was to march into the PanjUb and despatch Ulugh Sh&n
from the banks of the Su 4 harah with his forces “ to ravage the Koh-i-Jud and
the parts about Nandanah,” and to check the inroads of the Mughals, who,
in the preceding reign of Mu’izz-ud-Din, Bahram Shah, had taken lAhor and
attacked C chch ah.

• Who the “Maliks” of Clh ur were at this period will be found in the
account of the Mu ghal invasion in the last Section. The ravages of the
Mughal here referred to have nothing whatever to do with “ this invasion ” or
irruption of Turtt the Mughal. See Elliot, vol. ii. page 303.

• Not even the printed text will admit of this sentence being rendered : “ The
army of Khalj, consisting of ALL the forces of /Chwarismt," &c. Elliot,
vol. ii. page 303.

■* The word used is of Mansurah, and signifies literally depressed or
low land ; also a portion of land, country, region, tract, Ac. With Siwastan
the word is used, which is the plural of al;—a dbtrict, province, country,
os well as town, city, inhabited place.

• It is possible that this may be our author’s version of Sultan Jalal-ud-Din’s
operations against EabS-jah ; but it is evident, from the fact that neither here
nor in his account of Jalftl-ud-Dtn, Mang-bamt, does our author, any more
than ^jUtsaa, Nisamt, the author of the Taj-ul-Ma’ftgir, give a correct account
of Sult&n Jalal-ud-Din’s subjugation of the Khokhars, and the defeat and
reduction of l^f^lM-jah, and occupation of Siwast&n, that both writers studiously
conceal as much as possible what must have been perfectly well known to both
of them. Other Indian writers who came after them, probably considering
that contemporary writers might be depended upon, have been led into the

Mm2

540

THE TABA¥AT-I-NA$1RI.

Malik [Sultan] Na(ftr-ud-Dtn, ^aba-jah, moved on to
repel them, and a battle took place, between the two

error of not mentioning those matters, if they were aware of them. The
Kh warazmt Sultans were very obnoxious to the Gh urts and their parasites ,
and, as the Kh warazmt sovereigns were not on good terms with the Kh altfahs
of that day, our author’s bigotry doubtless led him, as well as Hasan, Nifamt,'
to conceal all that might tend to the honour and glory of those whom our
author and his sect considered no l>etter than heretics, as well as to pander to
the vanity of his patrons. See page 609.

Eighteen months after the appearance of the Mngbals on the Sind or Indus,
and the investment of Multan by Turti or Turtae some time in 623 H., a chief,
named Malik Kh an by several writers, and styled “of Hirat,” with his followers
and the Kh alj tribe, or rather the remnant of the Kh alj tribe [a portion of this
great tribe was settled in Garmstr, and some held lands in ^angrahar, north of
the Karman district, centuries before the Afghans came into it. It is included
by some in Shanuzau or SanVuran. or mther the latter is included in Nang*
rahar], the remnant of the Kh warazmt forces in these parts, pressed by the
Mughal invaders, arrived on the N.w. frontier of Sind. This person, however,
cannot be the great chief re.'erred to at pages 287, 409, &c.—nor does our
author say he is, but styles him “the Kh aljbut some other writers endeavour
to make out that he is—for, according to Yafa-t, Jatian-Kusha, and other
works, he was slain when endeavouring to reach Parshor or Bargh^war, when
the right wing of Sultan Jalal-ud-Dtn’s small force which he commanded was
defeated on the banks of the Ii^dus. He was the son of Jalal-nd-Din’s mater*
nal uncle, and is styled by different names and titles in different histories. In
Alft he is called, Yamtn Malik, in Jami’-ut-Tawarikb, Amin Malik, and in
Raufat-ug-$afa, and Habtb-us-Siyar, Yamtn-ul-Mulk. It is apparent, however,
that his correct name and titles were Malik Kh an. Yamfn*ul*Mulk. See page
287.

Abii-l- Gh azt. Bahadur Kh an, in his history styles the person last referred
to Kh an Malik, Saif-ud-Din, ’IghraV, Malik of the hills of Kayman—the
SanVuran or Shanuzan hills. This however is not correct, for that chief,
together with others, ’Azam Malik and Nuh, the Jan-dar, after their desertion
of Sullan Jalal-ud-Din, began to fall out and fight among themselves, so that
within three months of their desertion all three were killed, and their followers
dispersed j and, what with tho.se killed by each other and those slain by Changiz
Shan’s forces, after a short time no traces of them were left.

A Malik Kha n commanded the left wing of Jalal-ud-Dtn’s force In the
battle on the Indus, and his fate is not recorded. He probably is the person
meant by our author, and the remains of the deserters from Jalil-ud-Dln's
army after the victory at Barwan may have been his followers.

Our author does not appear to have known much more about the situation of
Manfurah and the district of which it was the chief place than Abu- 1 -Fa*l did.
It was on the east side of the I ndus, and nearly fifty miles from the present
main stream, and was situated between forty-five and fifty miles N. x. of ^aidar-
fibfid. The Khalj fugitives appeared on the N.W. frontier of Sind, of which
Stwastan [which gave name to the province] or SadusZn, the present Si^wfin,
was the chief city, and included that district and what we at present call Upper
Sind. Kaba-jah moved against them and defeated them, and Malik Shfin is
said to have been killed in the engagement. The remaining Khalj and others
of his followers sought the protection of Sbams-ud-Dtn, I-yal-timish, Kahfi-

THE MU’IZZiAH SULTANS OF HIND.

54»

armies, and the Khalj force was overthrown, and the Khan
[Chief] of the Kha lj was slain ; and Malik [Sul(an] Na^ir
ud-Din, ]j^aba-jah, returned again to O chch ah and Multan.

In this same year likewise, the writer of this work,
Minhaj-i-Saraj, reached the city of O chch ah * from Kh ura-
san by way of Gh aznin and Banian^ by boat, on Tuesday,
the 27th of the month Jamadi-ul-Awwal, in the year 624 H.
In the month pf 2 i-Hijjah of the same year, the Firuzi
College of O chch ah was committed to the charge of the
author, together with the office of l^a^t of the forces * of

jah’s rival and enemy, who took them under his protection, and subsequently
inarched against ^laba-jah, supported by these fugitives.

Firishtah. copying some other modern author, places this event in 615 H.,
but it is totally incorrect. He says they came from the outskirts of
Gh amtn. The X^t>^V^i'i*'^kbarf copies from our author.

• Ochchah, also called O chch ali-i-Jalalt. the Europeanized Uch, Ooch, and
Ouche, on the Ghara, consisted—I refer to it as it a century ago—of seven

villages of large size. That in which is the tomb of Sayyid Jamal, Bukhart, is
called Ochchali-i Sharif, or the Holy; and that in which another Muham¬
madan saint—Ma kh diim-i-Jahanan-i-JahSn—is buried is styled Ochchuh-l-
Makhdum. The part in which the Mughal governors used to dwell is named
O chch ah-i-Mughalf and so on, all seven villages having separate names; but
they may be considered as portions, although somewhat apart from each other,
of one large town. Six or seven kurok [each kurok 1000 paces] to the north¬
ward of Ochchah, the rivers Gliara, Chinab, and their tributaries fall into the
Sind, Ab-i-Sind, or Sind-Sagar.

t The Calcutta text has Mathan or Mithan——here, but there is no

suck Tjuord in any copy of the text collated. The editor or editors, knowing
probably that there was a place somewhere on the Indus called Mithan-kot
not MithSn with long d —jumped at the conclusion that that must be the place
referred to. The name contained in every copy of the text is written generally
—Banfan, but occasionally —Banban. See note *, page $36, and
note •, page 623. The same name occurs in the reign of I-yal-timish, and
in many other places ; and, in the printed text, the name is, pnerally, c^rectly
written. In a note, however, it is turned into but in two of the most

modem copies of the text it is turned into and respectively 1 In
Elliot’s India the printed text is implicitly followed. There is no doulrt what¬
ever that Multan Is not meant, and that it refers to some place ieiuuen (^aznln,
Kann£n, and the tract north or west of the Salt Range, perhaps Banu or
near it; and further mention of it in the following i^es of this woA
confirm this supposition, but ite precise position is difficult to fix. Mithan-h <4
is a long distance keloro Ochchah, and would have taken our author much
out of his way in coming from Qhazntn to that city. r

• Compare KUiot, India, vol. ii. page 304, where the¥a»t-sh^, or ffice of
KSxt. is turned into "provocation" ! The passage is thus rendered In tte
month of Zi -1 hijja of the same year the Ffrozf college at
to the care of the author. On tke provocation of tke

BahrAm Sh^ »« the month of Rabi’u-l awwal, A.H. 624, Sultin Said
Shamsu-d din encamped in sight of Uch” 1

54*

THE TABA¥AT-1-NA$1RL

’Ala-ud-D!n, Bahr&m Shah [the son of SultS^n Na^ir-ud-
Dtn, ]^aba-jah] ; and, in the month of Rabt’-ul-Awwal of
the same year *, 624 H., the august Sultan, §hams-ud-

• There are numerous discrepancies among authors with respect to these
events ; and our author himself^ who was present at O chch ah. maWes a different
statement here from that given by him under the reign of I-yal-timiih, l>age
611 ; and there says these events happened in 625 H.

The 'n.j-ul-Ma’asir, after stating that the fortress of ** O chch ah-i-Multtn **
was "taken,”—i. e. n chcha h of Multan, or belonging to Multkn, not " Och
Mullin,”—and without mentioning that I-yal-timish was at O chch ah in
person, says that I-yal>timisb, hearing of E^abS-jah’s pride and arrogance, and
that he had strongly fortified himself within the fort of Bhakar, despatched
his Waztr against him with a large army. See also Elliot, India, vol. U.
page 242.

Other writers again state that, on the flight of ^bS-jah from Ochchah.
T-ynl-timish “left his Waztr to carry on the investment of O chch ah. and
returned himself to Dibit;” and that "the Waztr took that place alter two
months, and then marched against Bhakar.”

Another work has that “ I-yal-timish’s Waztr marched an army against
]|^b&-jah, and invested him within the walls of Ocbcbah in 624 H.” that "it
was taken after two months, on the 22nd of Jamadi-uI-Akhir,” and that,
‘'after it was taken, E^abSl-jah got on board a,boat—not what we call boats in
this country, but vessels of considerable size, with flat bottoms—in order to get
to Bhakar, and was drowned.”

The favourite author of Indian History writers [because translated probably],
Firishtah [not his translators], places this event "between 618 H. and 623 H.
but, as he gives no authority for so doing, and no dates between, there is no
knowing what year he means. He places it before the expedition agaiast
Rantabhur, whereas it took place and in the lithographed text "revised”

by Bkiggs, and also in the Calcutta text of our author, Bhakar is turned into
"ITjanktr, which is Bhtanah. The Taba^at-i-Akbarl also places these events
in 614 H. some ten years too soon : that was ^ba-jah’s first defeat by I-yal-
timigli. See page 294.

The real events appear to be as follow. Soon after the Shnlj snd
SbwSrazmf fugitives threw themselves on the protection of I-yal-timigb, he,
jealous of the power of ^ba-jah, and his overthrow of that remnant of the
Elxwarazmf forces, moved with an army from Dihlt, by way of Tabarhindah
towards O chch ah. whilst the governor of the Labor province, with another
force, to create a diversion, marched against Multan. I>yal-tintiall reached
O chch ah on the ist of Rabt’-ul-Awwal, 625 H. [February, 1227 A.D.], having
sent on the principal part of his army, under the Waztr, the NifUm-tll-MuIk,
the Shwajah, Mu[iammad, son of Abu-Sa’td, Junaidt, a few days in advance.
He, I-yal-timigh, sat down before the place and invested it, and detached his
Waztr, with a large force, against the fortress of Bhakar, whither E^ab^-jah,
on becoming aware of I-yal-timish’s coming against him, had withdrawn with
most of his forces and hia treasures. These events happened during the hot
season of 625 h., and part of the Waztr’s force dropped down to Bhakar by
water, and part went by land, and had ro march through dense jangal.

It is remarkable that neither Lhurt [now often pronounced Roh^t] nor
Sokar are mentioned here where we might naturally have expected to have
heard something about t^hem, especially of Luh^f, for on the plain immediately
north of it the troops of I-yal-timigh probably encami>ed. T say probably.

THE MUTZZlAH SULJANS OF HIND, S 4 l

DunyS wa ud-Din ri-val-timish') pitched his camp in sight

because there can be no doubt but that the coarse of the Indus, at this port,
has greatly altered during the lapse of upward of six centuries, and with
respect to the fortress of Bhakar in particular, and its connexion u^th Sakar.

To return to O chch ah however : some say it held out vigorously for a
period of two months and twenty days ; but, os it capitulated—some say it
was taken—on Tuesday, the 29th —one author says the 22nd—of JamSdt-ul-
Akhir —this must be incorrect, as, between the two dates given for the arrival
of I-yal-timish and the fall of Ochchali, is a period of exactly four months.
Our author, although present, can scarcely be depended upon, for here he
says H occurred in 624 h., and under 1 -val-timish’s reign says 625 H.

The author of the TSrikll-i-Sind, Mtr Ma’fum, says that T.yal.timish
marched an army against I$^ba-jah in 624 H., but that the Waztr was left to
carry out the investment, and I-yal-timish returned to Dibit; and that the
place capitulated 28th of Jamadt-ul-Awwal, 625 H.

On becoming aware of the fall of O chch ah. Enba-jah despatched his son,
’Ala-ud-Dtn, Muhammad, Bahram Shah, to treat for an accommodation } but,
although he was received with all outward marks of kindness, and matters had
been discussed, he was not permitted to depart. As the Waztr was dose at
hand to invest Bhakar, Ifaba-jah was alarmed ; and, with the fate of Taj -ud-
Dtn, I-yal-duz, before his eyes, threw himself oh board a boat in order to
escape, and was drowned by the sinking of the vessel on the 22nd of Jamadt*
ul-Akbir, 625 H.

According to the TaJ-ul-Ma’a§ir, IjCaba-jah, having been invested in Bhakar
by the Wozfr, and the place reduced to extremity, then despatched his son to
I-yal-limish) with an offering of 100 Inks of Dihlt-wals [a coin so called], and
1000 dresses of different kinds ; but, being alarmed at the detention of his
son, shortly after, died of grief 1 He left treasures to the amount of 500 /<*Ar
of Dihli-wals, 1000 large river boats, Jewels and valuable pearls, inlaid
vessels of silver and gold, costly garments and other valuable property,
the whole of which was appropriated by I-yal-timish- What became of
Muhammad, Bahram Shah. Ifaba-jah’s son, is not known.

The Jami’-ul-Hikayat, a book of anecdotes, written about this period, and •
dedicated to the Wazir of I-yal-timi.sh, states—but the statements contained
in such works must be received with due caution—that “ I-yal-timish tent an
army to repress the encroachments of Ifaba-Jah,” but does not mention
Ochchah expressly, and adds, that “he, being unable to cope with this
army, sent his forces to IMi.ikar in boats. Fhe troops of Dibit reached
Bhakar on the loth of Rabt’-ul-Awwal, 625 11., and preparations for attack
were made. It was, however, not made untjl hear seven weeks after, on ist
of Jamadt-nl-Awwal; but Ifaba-jah, driven from the outer walls, lost the
town and had to retire to the fort.” This description, however, is not appli-
cable to the island of Bhakar in its present extent. Ifabi-jah is then said to
have offered to capitulate, if he were allowed to send away his »ns and his
toenture. This was refused; and he, placing no faith in his conqiysror
(rienlT], preferring death to surrender and captivity, cast him^lf f^m the
iHdIC into the water, n e night of Thurstlay, the 19th of Jamadi-ul-Akliir—
one month and nineteen days after the first investment of the place.

As a specimen of the random manner in which history is often written,
Budd’Ont says that the Mughals invested Muliaii in On ii_, and t^, iM
634 H., ^aM-jah was made captive by Sultan S]iams-ud-Din, “and took
the road of the other world-”

S44 the TABA]g^T.I-NA$IRl.

of n^^ah. Malik [Sultan] Na^r-ud>Dtn, ^ab 3 -jah, dis¬
comfited, embarked on boats [with his troops and fol¬
lowers ?] and retired towards Bhakar; and [a body of ?] the
Sultan’s forces, along with the Wazir of the State, the
Ni;am-ul-Mulk, set out in pursuit of him, and invested him
within the fortress of Bhakar

Sultan Shams-ud-Dln. I-val-timish. remained encamped
before the gate of the fortress of Ogligliah for a period of
two months and twenty-seven days. On Saturday; the
27th of the month, Jamadi ul-Awwal *, the citadel of Cch-
Chcih was given up. When the news of the capture of the
place reached Malik [Sultan] Na^r-ud-Din, Kaba-jah, he
sent his son, ’AlS-ud-Dm, Bahram Shah, to the pre.sence of
the Sultan. Subsequent to his reaching the camp of the
Sultan, on the 22nd of the month, Tamadi-ul-Akhir. in¬
formation arrived of the taking of Bhakar ; and that Malik
[Sultan] Na§ir-ud-Dtn, Kaba-jah, had drowned himself in
the river Sind, and the term of his existence was severed *.

The period pf his rule in the land of Sind, and O chch ah.
and Multan, was twenty-two years.

IV. MALIK BAHA-UD-DIN, TUGHRIL^, UL-MU’IZZi-US-

SULTANI.

Malik Baha-ud-Din, Tughril, was a Malik of excellent
disposition, scrupulously impartial, just, kind to the poor
and strangers, and adorned with humility. He was one
of the slaves of the early part of the reign of the Sulfan-i-
Gh azi. Mu’izz-ud-Dtn, Mu|;iammad-i-Sam, and the latter
had raised him likewise to a high degree of rank; and,

' Tile printed text [and Firishtah in his work] turns this name into Thanktr,
which is Bhtinah, although Bhakar is mentioned correctly immediately
after I

* Impossible, considering that the last month of the year, and

Rabt’-ul-A.ww'al the third. He must either mean that he reached ft chch ah
-in 623 H., or that it was surrendered in 625 H. See page 296, where he con¬
tradicts both the date of his own arrival at Dchchah and also the year in which
it was taken.

* Compare Elliot here, vol. ii. page 304.

* with short u before the final I, is the name of a bird ; but the
name of this chief, like that of several of the SaljQljc rulers, is spelt 'ywghril-
All writers agree that Bali 3 .-ud-Dtn, Tughril, was one of the greatest, most
amiable, and most accomplished of Siiltan Mu’izx-ud-Dtn’s mamliiks.

THE MUTZZlAH SUEJANS OF HIND,

541

when the fortress of Thangtr*, [or Thanktr], which is [in ?]
the territory of Bhtanah, with the Rae of which warfare
was being carried on, was taken, it was made over to Baha-
ud-Dtn, Tughril’s charge, and that part became flourishing
and prosperous through his means. From different parts
of Hindustan and Kh urasan merchants and men of repute
had joined him, and to the whole of them he was in the
habit of presenting houses and goods which used to become
their property, so that, on this account, they would dwell
near him.

As the fortress of Thanktr was not suitable as a place of
residence for him and his following, Malik Baha-ud-Dtn,
Tughril, founded, in the territory of Bhtanah, the city of
Sultan-kot, and therein took up his abode, and used con¬
tinually to despatch [bodies of] cavalry towards Gwaliyur.
When thp Sultan-i-Ghazt [Mu’izz-ud-Dtn] retired from the
foot [of the walls] of the fort of Gwaliyur, he said to Baha-

• The discrepancies of authors with regard to the taking of this fortress, and
the operations against Gwaliyur are great.

Our author himself, under the reign of Sultan Mu’izz-ud*Dtn, sUtes that'
Eutb-ud-Dtn subdued Nahrwalah, Thangfr, Gwaliyur, and Buda’un, and here
contradicts himself.

The Taj-ul-Ma’agir says Thangfr was taken in 592 h., and that E^tb-ud-
Dln, having joined the Sultan’s forces, the royal army moved against Gwaliyur,
and invested it in that same year. Rae Solankh Pal sued for peace, became
tributary, and was allowed to retain his possessions.

The 'Tabaiat-i-Akbart says Sultan Mu’izz-ud-Dtn made the expedition to
Einnauj and Banaras in 589 H., and, leaving Eutb-ud-Dtn as his repre¬
sentative in Hind, returned to Qhazntn. Immediately after, that work states,
“Eutb-ud-Din Thangtr, Gwaliyur, and Buda’un, and then invaded

Nahrwalah,” but gives no dates ; and then adds, without mentioning any other
event between, that, “ when between Tus and Sarakks, Sultan Mu’izz-ud-Dtn
heard of the death of his brother,” which happened in 599 11., according to our
author.

I'he Mir’at-i-JahSn-Numa also says that Sult 3 n Mn’izz-nd-Dtn, after the
conquest of Banaras, left Eutb-ud-Dfn, as hU deputy in India,

and that the latter toai Gwaliyur, Buda’iin, and other places, but Thai^r is
not mentioned, and, in this statement. Haft Hfltm and Buda’unt agree.

AKt, which is the most correct apparently, has, “Sullan Mu izz-ud-Dtn,
Muhamroad-i-Sam, again entered Hind in 590 h., and took Thangtr [or
Thanktr], which was an exceedingly strong place, and then marched against
Gwiliyflr,” about which more will be mentioned in the following note.

It is amusing to compare Firightah here—the text I mean—his account of
these events, first, under the reign of Sultan Mu’izz-ud-Dfn, and, subsequently,
in his account of E«tb.ud-Dtn, l-bak„and BahS-ud-Dtn, TughriL They are
related in three different ways, and neither in details nor in dates do they
agree 1

546

THE TABA^fAT.|-NA5lRi.

-ud-Din, Tughril; “I must leave this stronghold to thee
[to take].” In concurrence with this hint, Malik Baha-ud-
Dtn, Tugliril» stationed a body of forces from his own
troops at the foot'of the fort of Gwaliytir, and near by, at
the distance of one league, he erected a fortification, in order
that the Musalman horsemen might remain within il at
night, and, when the day should break, push on to the
foot of the fort* [walls].

They were occupied in this manner for the period of a
year ; and, when the defenders of Gwaliyur became reduced
to straits, they sent emissaries to the Sultan- [Malik at that
period] i-Karim, Kutb-ud-Din, I-bak, and gave up the fort
to him'; and [consequently] between Malik Baha-ud-Dtn,

• The more recent copies of the text differ somewhat from this ; but tlie
oldest and best copies are as above.

r Neither here, nor under the reign of Sultan Mu’izz-nd-Dtn, does our
author pve us the details in consecutive order, his constant failing. The
Sultan, having gained possession of Thangir, moved" against Gwaliyur.
Arrived there, he found it would be impossible to take it by a rc/iir/ de tiiaiti,
and that the only ,way to reduce it would be by a rcgvtlar investment, and
reduction of the defenders to straits, which would occupy a considerable time.
The Rae of Gwaliyur, becoming aware of the Sultan’s deliberations on the
matter, hastened to present himself before him, with rich presents and
offerings, and conciliated him, and, for a time, he was enabled to preserve
his territory.

Elphinstone, led away by the translations of Firishtah—Briggs’s version
of which he constantly quotes—and other histories probably, easily, but
incorrectly, disposes of these affaire. He says, p.age 315, “next year, Shabi.b
u din came back to India, took Biana, west of Agra, and laid siege [!] to the
strong fort of Gwalior, in Bundelkand. It is probable [!] that he was recalled
by some attack or alarm in KhordsAn, for he left tAe conduct of the siege of
Ctodliir to his generals, and returned, without having performed anything of
consequence [!], to Ghazni.”

At the time of withtlrawing from before the fort, the Sullan remarked to
'Tughril. that, if the fort should be taken [hereafter by his means], it should be
made over to him. On this account, after the Sultan’s departure, Tughril
founded the strong fortress of Sull^n-kot in the Bhianah territory and there
took up his residence, and from thence made constant raids into the Gwaliyur
territory ; but, finding this of no avail, he founded a strong fortification within
two leagues [some say much nearer] of it, and made it his headquarters,
and virtually blockaded Gwaliyur. By making incessant raids upon the
country round, he sought to reduce the place to extremity. After about a
year, the defenders, being reduced to great straits, sent agents, with presents
and rarities, not to Tughril, but to his rival, Malik ^uj;b>ad-Dtn, I>bak,
and delivered up the fortress of Gwaliyur to him. ^utb-ud-Dtn’s having
accepted this offer was the cause of enmity between the two Turk matnlnira,
and,* had not Tughril been suddenly removed from the scene by the hand
of death, hostilities would have arisen Itetween them. The 'Taikirat-ul-
Mulfik says Tughril died whilst the operations were being carried on.

547

THE MUTZZlAH SULTANS OF HIND,

Xug^ril, and [Malik] Kutb>ud-Dtn, I-bak, there used to
exist a little of the leaven of vexation.

Malik Baha-ud-Din, Tughril. was a man of exemplary
faith, and, in the district of Bhianah, numerous proofs of
his goodness remained; and he died, and was received into
the Almighty’s mercy.

After this, an account will likewise be given in this
TaBAkAT of the Khalj Maliks who were [among] those of
the reign of the beneficent Sultan* Kutb-ud-Din, and
accounted among the servants of the Sultan-i-Ghazi. Mu’izz-
ud-Din, Muhammad-i-Sam, in order that, when the readers
[of this work] acquire knowledge respecting all the Maliks
and Amirs of Hindustan, they may utter a benediction
upon the author, and pray unto the Omnipotent for the
eternal dominion and perpetual sovereignty of Sultan
NAsir-ud-DunyA wa ud-DIn, AbO-l-Muzaffar-i-
MahmOd, the son of the Sulpn, the Kasim [co-sharer] of
the Lord of the Faithful*: and may Almighty God per¬
petuate the dynasty, Amin I

There is no date given of the surrender of Gu^yur to ^utb'Ud-Dtn, but,
from what our author states about the *'leaven of vexation’* between
li^utb-ud'Dfn and Tughril. and what other writers say respecting '{'‘■Shnrs
determination of appealing to arms on account of E’lIb-ud-Dln’s interference
with respect to this fortress, we may conclude that its surrender must have
taken place just before or immediately after the death of Sultan Mu’izz-ud-
Din, who would probably, had he lived longer, have interfered in this
matter out of his great regard for "TudlriJ. ancient slave. lg^ulb-ud>
Din, ofter the Sultan’s death, would scatrely have kept himself entirely at
Labor out of fear of Taj-ud-Din, I-yal-duz, with another rival like Baha-ud-
Dtn, Tugjiril, in his rear, lest they might act in concert.

Firiabtah mentions these events in his account of Tugkril as though they
had happened in 607 H. I See also note *, page 516.

Giniliyur did not long remain in Musalman possession however, and it
was recovered shortly after by the Hindus, during the confusion which
arose on the death of l^uIb-ud-Dln, i-bak, and the accession of his adopted
son; and, it was. not until many years after—in 630 H.— that I-yal-timigli
could gain possession of it. See under his reign farther on.

• Not so: Maiik ^ilutb-ud-Dfn was a slave at this time, and continued a
slave till after Sultan Mu’izz-ud-Dfn’s assassination ; and the first of the
TOi ftlj rulers of Lakhanawati died before fiufb-ud-Diit received his manu¬
mission.

* See note *, pages 3i<^ 315, and 388, and note On his later coins
the title is Najir-i-Amfr-ul-Mumintn, and as our author himself states in his
account of Nilfir-ud-Dtn Mahmud’s reign farther on.

S48

THE taba¥At-i.nA$irI.

V. MALIK-UL-GHAzI. HLHTIYAR-UD-DIN, MUHAMMAD, SON
OF B AKH T-YARi. ItHALjI, IN THE TERRITORY OF
LAKH AN AW ATI •.

Trustworthy persons have related on this wise, that this
Muhammad, son of Bakht-var.belonged to the Khalj [tribe]
of Ghur, and the territory of Garmsir*; and that he was a
man impetuous, enterprising, intrepid, bold, sagacious, and
expert. He came from his tribes to the court of Ghaznin.
and [to] the Audience Hall of dominion of the Suljan
Mu’izz-ud-Din, Muhammad-i-Sam. In the Diwan-i-’Ari?

* In the more recent copies of the text, the word ^—“son of” has been
left out, but the i^Sfat —the kasrah or i, governing the genitive, even in them
is understood, if not written ; and thus, with European and some local Indian
Muhammadan writers, the father has hod the credit for what the son per¬
formed. The same error, of omitting the kasrah or not understanding the
grammatical structure, has caused the ancestor of the Ghurian Sultans,
Muhnmmad, son of Surt, noticed at page 320, to be made Muhammad
Siirt— one person—instead of tioo. The fatlier’s name it appears was Bakhl*
ySr [i. e. the Fortunate or Lucky], the son of Mahmud.

At page 517, in every copy of the text, our author styles him ’Izz-ud-Dfn,
instead of IkbtiySr-ud-Dln.

* My oldest copy of the text gives the vowel points as above. There is no
doubt but that the correct name is LAKHMAtiA-WAl'i, or Lakshma^a-wati
ffom Lakhmana or Lakshmana, the son of Dasarata, and half-brother of
Ram Chandra, and watt, the contraction of wati—habitation, dwelling,
home—the country of Lakhmana.

■ The most absurd statements have been made with respect to the people
named Slialj, the plural of which, according to the ’Arab mode of writing,
is AJdklkj. It is also written, but rarely, iKhalaj; but some few Muham¬
madan Indian authors write it Eliilj and Shiljl, ttnd most European writers
have followed them [Dow, however, makes “ ChilligUs ” of them, although
Firishtah writes the word ^ like other Muhammadan authors] ; but, accord¬
ing to the fertile imaginations of Europeans, the Siialj—^—tribe and Ghalr.t
——tribe are one people—in fact, some roundly ass^ that the Shalj are
one and the same race as the Afghan tribe of Qlinlzi, without there being
a shadow of authority for such an assertion in any Muhammadan writer
whatever. Because the Shnlj happened, in the days of the Gh urtan Sultana
[and long prior], to have been located in that part of EhutSsan now included
in what in the present day is styled by the general name of Afgh&nistin—a
comparatively modem designation*—such writers, in their innocence, jumped at
the conclusion that they were Afghans, and, more than that, that the Shalj
and Ghalst must be one and the same people.

The Shalj are a Turkish tribe, an account of whom will be found in all
the histories of that race—the Shajirah-ul-Atrak, jami’-ut-Tawartkh, Intro¬
duction to the 2afar Namah, &c.; and a portion of them had settled in Garmstr
long prior to the period under discussion, from whence they came into HindfistXn
and entered the service of Sultihi Mu’ixz-ud-Dbi. See also note *, page 550.

S49

THE MiriZZlAII SULTANS OF HIND.

[department of the Muster-Master], because, in the sight
of the head of that office, his outward appearance was
humble and unprepossessing, but a small stipend was
assigned him. This he rejected, and he left Ghaznin and
came into Hindustan. Arrived at the capital, Dihli [there
likewise], by reason of his humble condition, not finding
favour in the sight of the [head of the] Muster-Master’s
department, he was also rejected.

Muhammad-i-Bajsht-yar then left Dihli and proceeded
to BudS’un, to the presence of the holder of that fief, the
Sipah-Salar [Commander or Leader of troops], Hizabr-ud-
Din, Hasan-i-Adib, and he fixed a certain salary for him.

The paternal uncle of Muhammad-i-Bakht-yar—Muham¬
mad, son of Mahmud—was in \the army of\ Gh aznin \and
his nephew joined hitn \; and, when the battle was fought at
Tara’in in which the Golah [Rae Pithora] was defeated,
’All, (styled] Nag-awri, entertained Muhammad-i-Mahmud
\the uncle"] in his own service. When he [’Alt] became
feudatory of Nag-awr, he stood up among his brethren \sic],
and conferred a kettle-drum and banner upon Muhammad-
i-MahmOd, and made over to him the fief of Kashmandi
[or Kashtmandi]; and, after his [Muhammad-i-Mahmud’s]
death, M uham mad-i-Bakht-yar became feudatory in his
place*.

After some time he proceeded into Awadh to the pre¬
sence of Malik Husam-ud-Din, Aghul-Bak. As he had
acquired a horse and efficient arms, and in- several places
had shown activity and gallantry, Bhag^at or Bhugwat

< This passage is defective more or less in every copy of the text collated,
and most of them are—the most modem copies—hopelessly so. To make
sense of it I have been obliged to add a few words, but they are those only
which are in italics within brackets. The greater part of what is stated there,
however, is corroborated by others ; and the only parts which are doubtful
are those respecting the nephew joining the uncle, and ’All, NSg-awrf’s
“ suniHing up among his brethren.” The latter was probably a Shalj.

The three chiefs here mentioned appear to have been quite independent,
or very nearly so, of Malik Ifutb-ud-Dtn, I*bak*s authority i and this,
seemingly, was why Muhammad, son of BaJdlt.yfir, entered their service. The
very fact of these Kha li rulers being put in the same .Section laith Ewtb-ud-
Dtn, l-bak, Nksir-ud-Din, ¥aba-jah, and Bahi-ud-Dtn, T“«lldl, and
numbered consecutively, shoa-s that Muhammad, son of Bakht-yar, was not an
officer of IJIutb-ud-Dfn, but only partially dependent on him as the Sultan’s
representative at Dihli; and. In the same manner, his successors were to all
int^ntv independent until the last was overcome by l-yal-timigh.

5)0 THE TABA¥AT-I-NA$IR1.

[cySi^], and Bhtulf or Bhfwalt were conferred

tipon him in fief; and, being a man of valour and intre¬
pidity, he was in the habit of making incursions into the
territory of Muner and Bihar®, and used to obtain booty

* These names are thus written in the oldest copies and are confirmed by

the best of the modem copies of the text, and, as they are important, I give
the original Persian. These fiefs were situated between the Ganges and the
Kaimah-nasah, to the eastward of and adjoining ChOnar-garh, and two/<*r-
ganahs still bear the same names. The town of Bhiuli [anglicized Bhoelee\ is
still the chief town of the latter, but there is a difficulty with respect to the
name of the principal place of the Bhagwat or Bhugwat parganah in those
days, and-it is most probable that the hill and fortress of Chunar-garh was
included in it. See Indian Atlas, sheet 88. That the places mentioned in the
text were in the part named is singularly corroborated by what others say
were the names of Muhammad, son of Baldlt-yar’s fiefs, mentioned in the
following note ; for the places referred to are evidently the modem anglicized
Pateetak and Kuntil [Kuntilah ?], the former being only two miles north and
nine west, and the latter one mile north; and twenty-eight miles west of
Bhutlt. All these three places moreover are immediately west of the Karmah-
nasah, which river was the boundary of the Bihar territory. In the printed
text these places are turned into Sahlat or Sahlajt and

Sahilt [J.4-] or Sihwalt [ in feet, anything but what is correct. Sec

Elliot: India, vol. ii., page 305.

• There is considerable difference between our author and some other
writers here, and also in other places; and, as I proceed I will give a short
abstract of what they say.

Ikhtiyar-ud-Din, Mubammad-i-Bakht-yar—as I shall in future style
him—that is son of Bakht-yar, the Ehalj, who was never a sleeve [the
“History of India” written for the Calcutta University notwithstanding],
was one of the headmen of the Ekalj tribe dwelling in and on the
south-west border of Ghur. He was endowed with great valour, wis¬
dom, and liberality, was of robust and powerful form, with immensely
long arms—as described by our author. During the reign of Sultan
Mu’izz-nd-Dtn he came to Qkazntn in search of service during those
stirring times, and, subsequently, not obtaining employment such as he
desired, he came into Hind, and proceeded to Labor. There he did not
get on with ^utb-ud-Dln, it is said, so he proceeded farther eastward, and
joined the Malik-ul-Mu’aj*am [the great Malik], l^osam-ud-Dtn, O^ul-
tuir [see note *, page 516, para. 11], who held in fief a considerable tract of
country in the Do-ab, and on the east side of the river Gang, independent of
] 5 !utb-ud-D!n’s authority. According to another author, Sultan Mu’izz-ud-
Dtn conferred on flghul-Bak the fortress of Kol and its dependencies, which
Ls in the Do-ab. Muhammad-i-Bakllt-yar was taken into that Malik’s service,
and, soon after, was despatched virith some forces into Awadh [Compare
Thomas, “ PathXn Kings of DehlI,” page no, who makes him " Sipak-
sdldr of Oude” and note I, page 558, farther on] ; and, on several occasions,
he gave proofs of his valour and prowess against his Hindii opponents.

After this ^usam-ud-Dtn, Ogl^-Bak, conferred upon him the fiefii of
PatItah— [IJit. 2S“, Long. 82* 54'], and Kuntilah-— iUJ' [Lat. 25® 7',
Long. 82® 3SQ, the Kuntil of the Indian Atlas.

[From a similarity in the names sonie comparatively modem Muhammadan

THE MUTZZlAH SULTANS OF HIND. SSI

from it, until he acquired ample resources in the shape of
horses, arms, and men; and the fame of his alertness and
bravery, and the booty [he had acquired], became noised
abroad. Bodies of AIchlaj^ from different parts of Hin¬
dustan, turned their faces towards him ; and his reputation
reached Sultan [Malik] Kutb-ud-Din, who despatched a
robe of distinction to him, and showed him honour. Having
been honoured with such notice and favour, he led a force
towards Bihar, and ravaged that territory.

He used to carry his depredations into those parts and
that country until he organized an attack upon the fortified
city of Bihar. Trustworthy persons have related on this
wise, that he advanced to the gateway of the fortress of Bihar

authors of Akbar’s time, and some European translators and writers, have been
led to suppose that these places referretl to Patldli —[Lat. 27*41', Long.
79®'4on, and KanpUah Lat. 27° 37', Long. 79“ 21', lying on the

southern bank of the Ganges a few miles N. N. W. of Buda’un, but no less
than t^ree degrees west, and about the same distance north, of the places referred
to by our author above ; whilst PatItah and Kuntilah are within a few
miles ^Bhugwat and BhiOlI, and situated in the same tract of country
immediately west of the Karmah-nasah. They are equally convenient for
Muner—a very old place at the confluence of the Soane [Son] with the Ganges,
on the right bank of the former—and BihSr, as well as Awadh. The town of
Patitah lies about five miles south of the fort of Chunar-garh, and had a lim-
part and a fort when Cliait Singh, the rebel Zamindar of Banaras, garrisoned
it in 1781; but it is not entered in the Indian Atlas, and may have since gone
to comparative decay.]

Mubammad-i-Bakllt-yar now liegan to carry his depredations into Bihar and
Muner as well as into Awadh, on his own account, and acquired great booty.
Hearing of his valour and prowess, I^uIb-ud-Dln, I-bak, sent him [from Labor
according to Buda’unt] a dress of honour of great value, for, at this period,
^usSm-ud-Dtn, 0 ghuLBak, is no more mentioned.

It will be seen from these statements, as well as from the statement of our
author, that Mu^mmad-i-Bakbt*yar was never Sipah-Salar in Awadh. Tlie
mistake appears to have arisen from his having entered the service of ^usam-
nd-Dtn, O ghul-Bak. who was a Sipah-Salar and held the fief of Awadh, or
by confounding MuIiammad-i-Bakht-yar’s name with that of the Sipah-Salor,
Hizabar-ud-Dfn, mentioned above by our author. See Thomas : “ PathXn
Kings of DehlI,” page no.

t This favour, on the part of l^utb-ud-Dtn, as well as Muliammad-i-
Bakbt-ySr’s valour and generosity becoming noised abroad, bodies of Akhlaj
from the Sultan’s forces in HindusUln from all parts began to flock around
him, and he became very powerful. He subdued the ten'itory of Bihar, after
making great slaughter among the infidels of that part, and booty to a vast
amount fell into his hands. Alter these successes he presented himself
before ^utb-ud-Dtn, who had, at that time, taken up his residence at Dibit,
but he was not “ Sultan ” U^utb-ud-Din, for his master was still alive and he
himself was still a slave.

THE 7ABA]^AT.1-NA$1RI.

SSa

with two hundred horsemen in defensive armour, and sud¬
denly attacked the place. There were two brothers of
Farghanah. men of learning, one Nijcam-ud-Dfn, the other
Sam$am-ud-Dfn [by name], in the service of Mu^ammad-
i-Bakht-yar; and the author of this book met with* Sam-
$am-ud Din at Lakhanawati in the year 641 H.. and this
account is-from him. These two wise brothers were soldiers*
among that band of holy warriors when they reached the
gateway of the fortress and began the attack, at which
time Muhammad-i-Bakht-yar. by the force of his intre¬
pidity, threw himself into the postern of the gateway of the
place, and they captured the fortress, and acquired great
booty. The greater number of the inhabitants of that place
were Brahmans, and the whole of those Brahmans had
their heads shaven ; and they were all slain. There were
a great number of books* there ; and, when all these books
came under the observation of the Musalmans, they sum¬
moned a number of Hindus that they might give them
information respecting the import of those books; but the
whole of the Hindus had been killed®. On becoming ac¬
quainted [with the contents of those books], it was found
that the whole of that fortress and city was a college, and
in the Hindu! tongue, they call a college [*-^j.--] Bihar*.

When that victory was effected, Muhammad-i-Bakht-
yar returned with great booty, and came to the presence
of the beneficent Sultan*, Kutb-ud-Din, I-bak, and re¬
ceived great honour and distinction. A party of Amirs at
the capital [Dihli], through the noising abroad of Muham-

* A few modern copies say, “he, $am;am-ud>Dfii, discovered the
author,” &c.

* Jan-baz, which does not mean "active."

* Books on the religion of the Hindus.

* The Zubdat-ut-Tawartkb, which quotes our author verbatim on most
occasions, says they sent for a number of Hindus, who made them acquainted
with the contents of the books, and in tium if was wriUe$i that that fortress
and city was called a college, but, correctly, a Budhist monastery.

* In Persian words derived or borrowed from the Sanskrit the letter b is
often substituted for Nagart H— su —thus, Bihar or Wihir, but there is no
e in the word : hence Behir is impossible.

* He was not then Sultan, and his master, Sultan Mu’izz-ud-Dtn, was
still alive, and was assassinated thirteen years afterwards, and, some time even
after that event, Malik ^utb-ud-Dtn received his manumission and the title
of Sultan from the nephew of Mu’izz-ud-Dtn. Our author does jiot mean
that ^Cutb-ud-Dtn was Suipin at that very time. He was not Sult&n, in iact,
during the lifetime of Mu^mmad-i-Bakht-yar.

THE KHALJ MALIKS IN LAKHAI^AWATL 553

inad-i-Bakht-yar*s praises*, and, at beholding the honour

* AAer having gained possession of BihSr, Muhammad-i*Bakllt'^r, taking
along with him valuable presents, part of the spoils, proceeded to wait upon
M|tlik Kutb-ud-Din, at this time the representative of Sultan Mu’izz-ud-Dfn
in Hindustan. By the generality of authors he is said, more probably, to
have gone to Dihlt for the purpose; but, as previously stated in next to last
para, of note*, page 516, it was whilst K^tb-ud-Dln was at Mahobah, in the
Kalbt territory, in 599 H. —^which should be 589 H. —after taking K&linjar,
that Muhammad-i-Balcllt-y 5 .r presented himself, for it was in 589 H. that he
moved from Bihar to invade LAkhanawatf. See note 7 , page 558. He was
received with such distinction, and so many marks of favour were shown him,
that the chiefs and ministers of Kt>th-ud-Dtn’s vice-regal court became filled
with envy and hatred of Muhammad-i-Bakht-yar, and they began to calum¬
niate him to Kt>th-ud-Dfn, and to report expressions of a scornful nature
towards himself on the part of Muhammad-i-Bakht-yar which he had never
used. It happened, upon the occasion of K“tb-ud-Din’s holding a public
audience in the Ipi$r-i-Safed [White Castle], that a rampant elephant was
brought forward for inspection, and these envious persons began saying, in a
disdainful and contemptuous manner, that there was no one who would venture
to stand before that elephant, the like of which was not to be found in Hind.
K“lh-ud-Din, in whose mind they had succeeded in creating an unfriendly
feeling towards Muhammad-i-Bakht-yar, proposed to him an encounter with
the elephant. He agreed at once, and, with the mace he held in his ham],
dealt it one blow, but that blow was so eifectual that the elephant made off.

This anecdote is somewhat differently related by another writer, who says
that these malignants stated to ICutb-ud-lJin that Muhammad i-Bakht-yar was
desirous of encountering an elephant, and that ^ttid a white one,

which was rampant, and so violent that the drivers were afraid of it, and whi^h
he directed should be brought on the course for Muhammad-i-Bakht-yar to
encounter. He approached it near enough to deal it such a blow on the trunk
with his mace as at once put it to flight.

After his performing this feat, K“Jh-ud-Din distinguished him with still
greater favour. He conferred upon him a special dress of honour of great value
and a large sum of money ; and Muhammad-i-Bakht-yar, having donned the
robe, added money of his own to K“|h-ud-Din’s gift, and distributed the whole
among those present, and left the assembly with increased renown and honour.
Kutb-ud-Dtn further distinguished him by giving him a standard and other
insignia, and confirmed him, on the part of his master, the Sultan, in the govern¬
ment of the tracts he had subdued, and such further conquests as he might make
in the I-akhapawatt territory; and MuIiammad-i-Bakllt-yar returned to Bihar.

Here is a rich specimen of the history taught at present, at least, in the Uni-
versity of Calcutta, as it is from the “ History of India” by Mr. Marshman :—
“Kootub lost no time in despatching otu of his slaves, Bukhtiyar Ghii jif.,
who had risen to command, by his native genius, to conquer Behar. The
capital was sacked, and the country subdued, and the army returned within two
years to Delhi, bending beneath the weight of plunder. An attempt was soon
aftrer made to supplant Bukhtiyar in his master's favour, but it was defeated by
the prowess he exhibited in a single combat with a lion, which his enemies at
court had forced on him. This event established him still more firmly in the
confidence of Kootub, who sent him, in 1203, to rednee Bengal.”

Now, in the whole of this statement, there is not otu atom of truth, and in no
author, Mu^uunmadan or Hindu, will suCh a statement l>c found.

N n

S54

THE TADA^L&T-I-NA^IRI.

he received, and the gifts bestowed upon him by Sultan
Kutb-ud-Dln, became envious of Muhammad-i-Bakht-var.
and, at a convivial banquet, they treated him in a reproach¬
ful and supercilious manner, and were deriding him and
uttering inuendoes ; and matters reached such a pitch that
he was directed to combat with an elephant at the Ka§r-i-
Safed [White Castle]. With one blow, which he dealt the
elephant on the trunk with his mace *, the elephant fled
discomfited.

When Muhammad-i-Bakht-yar gained that distinction,
Sultan Kutb-ud-Din ordered him a rich robe of honour
from his own special wardrobe, and conferred considerable
presents upon him. The Sultan [likewise] commanded the
Amirs to make him presents, and he received such a
number of gifts as could not be contained within the limits
of writing. Muhammad-i-Bakht-yar moreover, in that
same assembly, dispersed the whole of those presents and
bestowed them upon the people ; and, with the special
imperial ’’ honorary robe, he departed, and set out towards
Bihar.

Fear of him * operated exceedingly in the hearts of the
unbelievers of the different parts of the territories of Lakh-
anawati and Bihar, and the countries of Bang and Kam-
rud. Trustworthy persons have related after this manner,
that the fame of the intrepidity, gallantry, and victories of
Muhammad-i-Bakht-yar had [also] reached Rae Lakhman-
lah *, whose seat of government was the city of Nudiah, and
who was a very great Rae, and had been on the throne for
a period of eighty years.

At this place, an Anecdote respecting the circum¬
stances of that Rae, which had been heard [by the writer],
is here recorded; and it is this, that, when his father was

* See Elliot: India, vol. ii. page 306. Gur% signifies a mace, not a “battle-
axe.” In some modern copies of the text the words “fled discomfited” are
left out, and we have instead “ Mu^ammad-i-Bakht-ySr pursued the ele¬
phant no more.

7 One of the robes probably which E^utb-ud-Dtn bad himMlf received from
his master, hence it is called a “ Sultant ” robe.

* His intrepidity and valour.

* Another writer styles him RSe Lakhmtah intended, no doubt,

for the Sanskrit son of RSe Lakbman See list of kings of

Ban^Iah in Abti-l-Fafl’s A’ln-i-Akbart, and Dr. Blochmann’s translation, and
note *, page 559.

sss

THE KBALJ MALIKS IN LAKIIAIJAWATi.

removed from this world, Rae Lakhmantah was in his
mother’s womb. The crown was placed on the belly of
his mother, and all girded up their loins in her service.
The Raes of Hind used to hold their family in great
importance, and were wont to consider them in the position
of Kha lifah' by descent.

When the birth of Lakhmantah drew near, and the signs
of giving birth became manifest to his mother, she assem¬
bled the astrologers together*, and they made observation
whether the horoscope was auspicious. With one accord
they represented : “ If this child should be born at this
hour, it will be unfortunate exceedingly, and will never
attain unto sovereignty ; but, if it should be born two hours
subsequent to this time, it will reign for eighty years.”
When his mother heard this conclusion from the astro¬
logers, she commanded that she should be suspended with
her head downwards, with her two legs bound together ;
and the astrologers were placed in order that they might
continue to observe the horoscope. When the time came,
they agreed that the [auspicious] hour of birth was now
arrived. She directed that she should be taken down, and
forthwith Lakhmantah was born ®. On reaching the ground,
his mother, unable any longer to endure the agony of
labour, died, and Lakhmantah was placed upon the throne

He reigned for a period of eighty years, and trustworthy
persons have related to this effect, that, little or much,
never did any tyranny proceed from his hand ; and whoso¬
ever preferred a request to him for anything, other than
one lak [one hundred thousand] he did not bestow, after
the manner of the beneficent Sultan, Kutb-ud-Din, the
Hatim of his time. It has been narrated on this wise, that,

* The words "Ehalifah by descent” [Al- here used by our

author, and Peshwa, by others, plainly indicate that his family was looked
upon in the light of heads or supreme leaders in spiritual, not temporal matters,
and Rae Lakhma^ah, not as a “ powerful monarch” and ‘’lord paramount,”
for power of that kind he evidently did not possess. Compare Elliot: India,
vol. ii. page 307.

* There is not a word about “ BiShmans” in the best copies of the text.

* Here is a specimen of the difference in idiom in the text, which 1 have

before referred to. The oldest set of MSS. have as, olji and the more

modem Jui 1

* His-nobles, or rather the chief men of his kingdom—his late father’s
ministers probably—carried on the government until such time as Rae'Lakh-
mantah was able to assume the direrition of afhiirs.

N n 2

SS6 THE TABA«:AT.I.NA$IRI.

as in that country, the kauH [shell] is current in place of
silver the least gift he used to bestow was a lak of kauris.
The Almighty mitigate his punishment [in hell]!

I now return to the history of Muhammad-i-BaJjlit-ySr.
When he returned from the presence of Sultan IKutb-ud-
Din, and subdued Bih^r*, his fame had reached the hearing
of Rae Lakhmaniah, and the different parts of his dominions
likewise. A number of astrologers, wise men, and coun¬
sellors of his kingdom presented themselves before the Rae,
and represented, saying : “ In our books of the ancient
Brahmans they have foretold that this country will fall
into the hands of the Turks ^ and the time of its fulfilment
has drawn near. The Turks have subjugated Bihar ", and
next year they will surely come into this country. It is
expedient for us that the Rae should consent * so that he,
along with the whole people, should be removed from the
country in order that we may be safe from the molestation
of the Turks.”

The Rae replied, saying: “ Is there any token given in
your books with respect to this man who is to subdue our
country?” They replied : “The indication of him is this,
that, when he stands upright on his two feet, and lets down
his two hands, his hands will reach beyond the point of his
knees in such wise that the fingers will touch the calves of
his legs The Rae answered: “ It is advisable that

* In every copy of the text collated, with the exception of hoo, which have
jital, the word silver is used. In 1845 the rupt was equivalent to 6590 kaurts,
and a/a/fr would be equal to a fraction over fifteen lupts. In ancient times
they may have been estimated at a higher rate, but a lak of kaupfs could not
have been a very desirable present to obtain, or a very convenient one. See
note *, psige 583.

* Our author must mean when Mu^ttunmad-i*Bakht-]dir returned from the
presence of Malik ](j^utb-ud-Din, whither he had gone afUr he subdued Bihar,
because he did not go to ^futb-ud-Dtn brfore, even by his own account. All
the copies of the text, however, are as above.

“> But their predictions did not go so far as to foretell that the Calcutta
University “History of India” would turn the Turks into (xhtdzt Afghans.

* “ Have this year subjugated Bihar, and next year will come into this
country,” according to the Zubdat-ut-Tawartkll.

* Compare Elliot: India, voI. ii. page 308, where this sentence is translated:

** It was therefore advisable that the R&i should make peesce wtlA theps**I

does not signify to make peace with the Turks, but to consent,
approve, agrie to, judge expedient, &C., tMeir proposaL

* Lit. “legs,” i.e. the leg in its true sense, the part below the knee. In
Eli.iot the tvords ^# 1 * jL. have been translated '‘ skins ." .

THE SHALJ MAUKS IN LAKHAI^AWAJI.

557

trustworthy persons should be despatched in order that
they may, in a proper manner, investigate those peculiar
characteristics.” In accordance with the Rae’s command,
they sent trustworthy persons, and they made investigation
respecting this matter, and, in the external form and
figure of Muhammad-i-Bakht-yar, those characteristics they
found.

When they became assured of these peculiarities, most of
the Brahmans and inhabitants* of that place left, and
- retired into the province of Sankanat *, the cities and towns
of Bang, and towards Kamrud ; but to begin to abandon
his country was not agreeable to Rae Lakhmaniah. The
following year after that, Muhammad-i-Bakht-yar caused a
force to be prepared, pressed on from Bihar, and suddenly
appeared before the city of N Qdiah *, in such wise that no
more than eighteen horsemen could keep up with him, and
the other troops followed after him. On reaching the gate
of the city, Mubammad-i-Bakht-yar did not molest any
one, and proceeded onwards steadily and sedately, in such
manner that the people of the place imagined that mayhap
his party were merchants and had brought horses for sale *,
and did not imagine that it was Muhammad-i-Bakht-yar.
until he reached the entrance to the palace of Rae Lakh-
maniah, when he drew his sword, and commenced an on¬
slaught on the unbelievers.

At this time Rae Lakhmaniah was seated at the head of
his table ‘, and dishes of gold and silver, full of victuals,
were placed according to his accustomed routine, when a
cry arose from the gateway of the Rae’s palace and the
interior of the city. By the time he became certain what

• All but the two oldest copies have Sahan [from which signifies

merchants, shopkeepers, and the like—inoffensive people, not ‘ ‘ chiefs. ”

• In the best and oldest copies of the text, Sanknat——is plainly
written, with the exception of two, which have Saknat—The Zubtlat-
ut-Tawaiikh also has Saknat; but other works, including the Taba|fat-i-
Akbart and the Ta*kaiat-ul-Muluk, say Jagnath. The part meant by our
author more probably refers to a province of eastern Bang.

• The more modem copies of the text have —one even has^l|.>y—

instead of and

s The text varies in different copies here. It appears from the above remark,
that traders were in the habit of bringing horses from Bihar into the Rae’s
territory, and such is stated by some other more modem writers.

• Not at dinner ” necessarily : it might have been the morning meal.

THE TABA^T-I-NA$IR!.

SS8

was the state of affairs, Muhammad-i-Bakht-yar had
dashed forwards through the gateway into the palace, and
had put several persons to the sword. The Rae fled bare¬
footed by the back part of his palace; and the whole of his
treasures, his wives, and [other] females, his domestics and
servants, his particular attendants, were taken, and the
Musalmans captured a number of elephants, and such a
vast amount of booty fell to their lot, as cannot be
recorded When the whole of Muhammad-i-Bakht-yar’s
army arrived, and the city and round about had been taken
possession of, he there took up his quarters; and Rae
Lakhmaniah got away towards Sankanat * and Bang, and
there the period of his reign ® shortly afterwards came to a
termination. His descendants, up to this time, are rulers
in the country of Bang '.

r The Rae, on hearing of the arrival of Muhammad-i-Bakbt-ySr, was
(UimbfouncJcd. He fled alone and unattended, and succeeded in reaching a
boat, and escai>ed. His boundless treasures, the accumulations of eighty
years, fell into the possession of the Musalmans ; and a large portion of them,
the greatest rarities, were transmitted to Malik l|j^utb-ud-Din, for the Sultan.

According to Munahi Shiani Parshad, who wrote an account of Gauf
[Gaudah —‘“^1 for Major William Franklin [In referring to this work I shall
call it the Gaur MS.], Rae Lakhmaniah ruled from 510 to 590 h., which is
correct. It was in the early part of the last-mentioned year that Muhammad-
i-Bakht-yar took Nutliah.

His rule extended over a period of twelve years, and he was assassinated in
the middle of the year 602 H.

Mr. Thomas, however, in his " PATH an Kings OF DEHLr,” page 1 10,
says Muhammad-i-Bakht-yar, whom he erroneously makes “ Sipah sdidr"
of Awadh, “in a.h. 599, pushed his forces southward, and expelled, with
but little effort, the ancient Hindu dynasty of Ntuideah." Here is an error of
ten years: Muhammad-i-Bakht-yar moved from Bihar in 589 H. , and in the
following year look Nudtah by surjirise. Were 599 H. correct, his sway over
Lakhanawati would have been less than t/tree years, as he was assassinate
about the middle of 602 H. See note *, page 516, para, next to last, and
note », page 572.

* Here, as previously, some copies have Saknat, and the other authors,
previously referred to, Jagnath and K2mrud.

• In some copies, the period of his life, &C.

' The R.ajah, it is said, escaped in a boat to Biktam-pur or WiktSm-pQr.
We shall also And that SunSrgiinw, near BikrSm-pur, continued to be a place
of refuge for those who were discontented at Gaur, and was not finally
rcducc<l for a long time after the overthrow of RSe La khm a p tah, who had *
son, Madhob Sen, who had a son, Su Sen, who by HindOa is considered the
last ruler. BikrSm-pur is about eight miles south-east, from Dhikah, and is
said to have been the principal residence of Bal&l Sen, the predecessor of
Adisur, who precerled Lakhman Sen, the predecessor of our author’s
Lokhmaptah, but he sometimes resided at Gaur, which did not beoome the

THE SHALJ MALIKS IN LAKHAI^AWATI.

5S9

After Muhammad-i-Bakht-var possessed himself of that
territory [Rae Lakhmantah’s], he left the city of Nudtah in
desolation, and the place which is [now] Lakhanawatt * he
made the seat of government. He brought the different
parts of that territory under his sway, and instituted
therein, in every part, the reading of the Khutbah. and the
coining of money *; and, through his praiseworthy endea-

capiUil of Bangalah until immediately before the Muhammadan conquest.
NQdloh was called Nobo-dw!p. See ''Account of Zila Dinajpur" Cal¬
cutta: 183a.

WUford says the conquest of Bengal took place in 1207 A.D., which is
equivalent to 603-604 H., the latter year having commenced 27th July,
1207 A.D.; and according to = this theory Bengal was conquered a year or
more after its conqueror’s death I Suljan Mu’izz-ud-Din was assassinated in
Sha’ban 602 H. = March 1206 A.D., in which same year Muhammad-i-
Bakht-yar died or was assassinated, and which, from 590 ii. = 1194 A. D., is
just twelve years.

* The name of Rae Lakhmanfah’s capital was spelt Nudiah until the time
of Aurangzeb, when words ending in 1—ha-i-mukhtaft—were ordered to be
written with 1 —as Nudta.

Muhammad-i'Bakht-yar destroyed Nudtah, and, leaving it in desolation,
passed onwards [Raujat-uj-gafa says “he passed beyond the territory of the
Rae ”], and, in place of that capital, foundeti another city [or town] at the
place, according to the 7 ^bakat-i-Akbari, where Lakhaijawatt has been
and which, at this time [reign of Akbar], they call Gauf. The
Gaur MS. says he made the mouza’ [place, village, district] of Lakhapawatt,
his capital, now twelve miles from the Gang. The Mir’at-i-Jahan-Numa
says “he founded a city as his capital /it the territory of Lakhanawatt,”
which signifies Gauf of Bangalah, “at the place where Lakhanawatt was."
Buda’unt says Mubammad-i-Bakht-yar “destroyed the idol temples of the
infidels and erected masjids-and other buildings, and built a capital in his
own name [!] which is now called Gaur.” Gauf or Gaiujah was the name
of a division of the present country or tract styled Bangalah as well as of its
ancient capital, and its inhabitants were Gaufiya or Gaudhiya. According
to Abu-l-Fajl, the fort of Gauf was founded by Balal Sen, the second of
the Sen dynasty, one of eight [in some copies, seveni kings who reigned 106
years, out of which Balal Sen reigned fifty years. According to the same
author, the last of this dynasty was Rajah [or to.^]. It would seem,
from this, that the most ancient name of the city was Gaur, afterwards
changed to Lakhanawatl, and subsequently styled Gaur again. The emperor
Ilumayun named it Bakkt-abad. Bangalah itself is sometimes styled Jannat-
ul-Bilad. See note *, page 584.

• There is not a word in the text about causing "his name to be read in the
Khutbah and struck on the coins." See note », page 572. According to the
Zubdat-ut-Tawarikk he established “the Khutbah and money of Islam," and
its author copies our author almost verbatim. Other writers, on the contrary,
state that , having brought all the surrounding territory under his sway after
the capture of Nudiah, he assumed a canopy of state, read the Skutbah for
himself, and issued coin in his own name, which is not correct He would
naturally have issued coin in the name of the Sultan, Mu’izz-ud-Din, Mu^^am-

THE tABA^AT-I-NA^IRl.

560

vours, and those of his Amirs, ntasjids, colleges, and mo¬
nasteries [for Darweshes]. were founded in those parts. Of
the booty and wealth [taken] he despatched a large por¬
tion to the presence of Sultan ]^utb-ud-Dtn, I-bak.

After some years had passed away *, and he had ascer¬
tained the state of the different mountain tracts of Turkis-
tan and Tibbat to the eastward of Lakhanawati *, the
ambition of seizing the country of Turkistan and Tibbat
began to torment his brain ; and he hac^ an army got ready,
and about io,ocx5 horse were ot^anized. In the different
parts of those mountains which lie between Tibbat and the
country of Lakhanawati are three races of people, one
called the Kunch *. the second the Mej [Meg], and the third
the Tiharu ; and all have Turk countenances. They have
a different idiom too, between the language of Hind and
Turk^ On© of the chiefs of the tribes of Kunoli and Mej,
whom they were wont to call ’Ali, the Mej, fell into the
hands of Muhammad-i-Bakht-yar, the Kh alj. and, at his
hand also, the former adopted the Mul;iammadan faith.

mad.i’SSm, to whom he appears to have been most loyal [see page 571].
He had no occasion whatever to issue money in the name of Malik ^utb-ud-
Dtn, who was still a slave ; and Muhammad-i>Bakllt*y 2 r only died the same
year in which Sult 3 .n Mu’izz-ud*Dtn was himself assassinated. See Thomas:
"PathXn Kings of Dehu,” page 110, and note and Elliot: India, vol.

u- p«ee 309-

* This expedition must have been undertaken towards the dose of the
year 601 H. After Muhammad.i*Balclit-y&r had acquired great power and
grandeur, he turned his thoughts to the acquirement of further territory in
Tibbat and TurkistSn without probably being aware of the distance to be
traversed, and the difficulties to be surmounted. He set out with a force of
about 13,000 horse according to the generality of accounts, but the Raufat-ua>
$afll has ** 10,000 horse, and 30,<x>0 footl” which is certainly incorrect.

Tibbat was a well-known name in our author’s time even, and yet
Hamilton in his “Description of Hindostan,” vol. ii. page 566, makes the
rash statement that it does not appear that the name Tibet is anywhere in
general use to designate the province according to the European acc^tation
of the word I This may be true as to Tibet, for the country here referr^ to is
written and called Tibbat.

The ** Tharoo ” [TiharQ] caste .according to Buchanan, composes the
greatest portion of the population that are dwellers in the plain of “Saptari,”
in MakwKnpQr adjoining the Murang on the north-west; and the inhabitants of
the Marang to the east of Bijaipur [Wijay&pur] are chiefly Konfib, and on the
lower hills are many of the Megh, Mej, or Mech tribe.

* Our author’s ideas of east and west are rather obscure, as may be noticed
at page 431. In this instance he means to the north and north-east.

* In some copies the nasal n is left out—Kuch-

1 In some of the more modem copies of the text, “ Hind and Tibbat'*

THE KHALJ MALIKS IN LAKHA^AWATi- 56 I

He agreed to conduct Muhammad-i-B akh t-ySr into those
hills, and act as guide ; and he brought the latter to a place
where there is a city, the name of which is Burdhan [kot]*.
They relate, after this manner, that, in ancient times,
Gushtasib* returned from the country of Ch in, and
came towards Kamrud, and, by that route, got into Hin¬
dustan, and founded that city [Burdhan-kot]. A river
flows in front of that place, of vast magnitude, the name of
which is Beg-mati*; and, when it enters the country of
Hindustan, they style it, in the Hindu! dialect, Samund *
[ocean] ; and, in magnitude, breadth, and depth, it is three
times more than the river Gang.

To the banks of this river Muhammad-i-Ba kh t-yar came •
and ’All, the Mej, joined the army of Islam ; and, for a
period of ten days, he took the army up the river among
the mountains, until he brought it to a place where, from
remote times, they had built a bridge of hewn stone, and
consisting of upwards of twenty arches*. After the army

* The oldest and best copies generally have as above, but two add kot,
and one copy gives the vowel points. The Zubdat-ut-Taw&rlkh also has
Burdhan twice. The other copies collated have Murdhan and Murdhan-kot,
and the printed text, in a note, has Durdhan [Wurdhan ?] as well as Burdhan.

* Some copies have Gusht^ib and some Gargh^ib, and one has GGdarz.
In the itanifin records Garshasifa. son of Zau, is not mentioned as having
had aught to do with Hind or Chin. The wars of Gughtlisib with ArjSsib,
son of AfrSsiySb,. King of Tuian, are narrated, but there is no mention of
Gushtasib’s going into Turan or Ghtn ; but his son, Isfandiy^, according to
the tradition, reduced the sovereign of Hind to submission, and also invaded
Chtn. In the account of the reign of Kai-Shusrau, Gudarz, with Rustam
and Gtw, invaded Turkistiln to revenge a previous defeat sustained from
Aftasiyab who was aided on this occasion by the troops of SuVlab and Chin,
and Shankal. sovereign of Hind, was slain by the hand of Rustam. Our
author, in another place, states that Guahtasib, who had gone into Chtn by
that route, returned into Hind by way of the ciiy of Kamrud, and that up to
the period of the invasion of K&mrud by Ikbti^r-ud-Din, Yiu-Bak-i-Tugbril
Shan, governor of Lakhanawatt—some years after Muhammad-i>Bakht-yar’s
expedition—twelve hundr^ “hoards” of treasure, all still sealed as when left
there by GughtSsib, fell into the hands of the Musalm^ns I

* The name of this river in the best and oldest copies is as above, but some
others, the next best copies, have Beg>hatl, Bak-matt, or Bag-matt, and
others have Bang-matt, Mag-madt, and Nang-matt, or Nag-matt. Bag-matt
is not an uncommon name for a river, and is applied to more than one. The
river of Nti^, which lower down is called the Grandhak,_is called Bag-matt.

* Ssunaund or Samudr or Samudra, the ocean. One of the best copies of
the text has “when it enters the ocean or ita of Hindu-sUn,” &c.

* The reader cannot fail to notice that considerable discrepancy exists here
in our author’s statements respecting this river and bridge. From what he

THE TABA^AT.I.NA$I& 1 .

S6a

of IslSLm passed over that bridge, he [Muhammad-i-Bakht-
yar] installed there, at the head of the bridge, two of his

says about the size we are led to conclude that this river, B^-matf or Bek-
matt, must be the BrahmK-putr; but vahat part o/ it the question to be
solved. When he adds that it is more than three times broader and deeper
than the Gang—and, of course, equally liable to inundation—the idea of its
being spanned by a stone bridge of above twenty e. between twenty and
twenty-five] arches^ shows that the narrator, or his informant, must have
grossly exaggerated. We may 'suppose our author’s idea of the size of the
Gang was derived from what he had seen of that river on his journey from
Dihlt to Lakhanawaft; but, if we only take its average breadth at BanSras
during the height of the hot season, viz. 1500 feet, our author’s river will be a
mile or more in breadth ; and, if we believe that this bridge consisted of even
twenty-five arches, each 0/them would be above seventy yards in the span. Is
this at all probable 7

At page 561, our author says ’Alt, the Mej, brought them to a place where
stood the town of Burdhan or Aburdhan-kol, in front of which flows the
mighty river Beg-matt, which, ott entering Hindustan, they call the Samund,
but the great bridge is not mentioned in connexion with it. He then says
that ’Alt, the Mej, joined the Musalman forces on the banks of this river, and
then conducted them the river for a period of ten journey" [some
200 miles or more, even at the low compulation of twenty miles a day for
cavalry without incumbrance, would have brought them near to the Sanpu or
upper part of the Brahmi-putr in Tibhat], and then, not before, they reached
this great bridge, but no river is mentioned. At page 565, it is said that after
passing this great river the forces pushed on for a further period of fifteen days
[200 or 250 miles, even allowing for the extra difficulty of the country] when
thb open country of Tibbat was reached. Here it would appear that 'Alt, the
Mej, joined them, beyond the territory of the Rajah of Kamrud, and the latter’s
message to Muhammad, son of Bakht-yar, confirms it ; but, farther on [page
569], this great bridge is said to be in [but probably adjoining] the Kamrud
territory, or words to that effect.

The boundaries of Kamrud are very loosely described by Musalman authors,
and they apply the name to all the country between the northern frontiers of
Muhammadan Bangalah and the hills of Bhutan, its southern boundary being
where the Lakhiyah river separates from the Brahma-putr.

From the distinct mention of Tibbat and TStrkistdn, by others as well as
by our author, together with other observations made by him, it is evident that
Muhammad, son of Bakht-yar—and his forces—marched froth Dtw-kot, or
Dib-kot, in Dfnja-pur district, the most important post on the northern frontier
of his territory, keeping the country of the Rajah of KSmrud on his right
hand, and proceeding along the bank of the river Tistah, through Sikhim,
the tracts inhabited by the Kunch, Mej, and Tiharu, to Burdhan-kot. They
were not in the territory of the Rajah of Kamrud, as his message shows ; yet,
when the retreat is mentioned, the Musohnans were, invested in the Idol-
temple by his people, but no reference is made to this temple's being near the
bridge in the account of their advance. Pushing onwards from Burdhan-kot,
which may have been situated on a river, on the tenth day the Musalm&ns
reached the bank of the great river where was the bridge of stone “of above
twenty arches.” If the town of Burdhan or Aburdhan-kot was situated on the
farther side of the great bridge, it is strange Muhammad, son of BaJeht-yAr,

THE SHAtj MALIKS IN LAKHA^^AWATL 563

own Amtrs, one a Turk slave, and the other a with

troops, in order to g^ard it until his return. Then Mukam-

did not occupyat, when he left a detachment behind to guard the bridge, and
atUl mpte strange that, when he, on his retreat, reached the bridge and found
two arches broken, he did not occupy that town, and compel its inhabitants to
repair it or furnish him with all he required, and the means of crossing. If its
gates had been closed against him, we can easily imagine why he would have
hod to take shelter in the great idol-temple, or that even with the town open
to him, why he would prefer a strong post such as this was ; but the town is
ntver again mentioned by our author, aldiough we might suppose this the place
for obtaining boats or wood and other materials for rafts, and people to construct
them. If the distance between this river and Dlw-kot was only ten days’
journey, it was not impossible to have obtained aid from thence. All the
Muhammadan histories with which I am acquainted state that the Musalmans
entered Tibbat. In my humble opinion, therefore, this great river here
referred to is no other than the Tfstah, which contains a vast body of water,
and, in Sikhim, has a bed of some 800 yards in breadth, containing, at all
seasons, a good deal of water, with a swift stream broken by stones and rapids.
The territory of the RSes of Kamrud, in ancient times, extended as far east as
this; and the fact of the Rae of K&mrQd having promised Muhammad-i-
BaUit-yar to precede the Musalman forces the following year, shows that the
country indicated was to the north. The route taken by the MusalmSns, there¬
fore, was, I am inclined to think, much the same as that followed by Turner and
Pemberton for part the way, and that the Musalmiin army then turned more to
the cast, in the direction token by Pemberton, for it is plainly indicated by our
author, at page 568, that the tract entered lay between Kamrud add Tirhut.
The Sanpu, as the crow flies, is not more than 160 or 170 miles from DtnJa-pQr,
and it may have been reached; but it is rather doubtful perhaps, whether
cavalry could reach that river from the frontier of Bengal in ten days.

In the Twentieth Volume of the Bengal Asiatic Journal, page 291, is a
drawing by Dalton of the bridge of SiL HAko, described by Hannay. “ It is
situated,” he says “ on the high alley [one of Gbiyas-ud-Din, ’Iwaf’s cause¬
ways probably] which, no doubt, formed at one time the principal line of land
<!bmmunication with ancient GowahAtty (Pragjyotisha) in Western Kamrup
[Kamrud].” He also considers that “it is not improbable that this is the
stone bridge over which BactyAr Khilji [Muhammad, son of Bakht-yAr] and
his Tartar cavalry passed previous to entering the outworks of the ancient city
of GowahAtty, the bridge being but a short distance from the line of hills
bounding GowahAtty on the N.N.W. and W., on which are still visible its
line of defences extending for many miles on each side from the N. W. gate of
entrance or pass through the hills. The Mohammedan general is said to have
been obliged to retreat from an advanced position (perhaps ChArdoAr), hear¬
ing [?] that the Raja of Kamrup had dismantled the stone bridge in Ids rear ;
now it is quite evident from the marks on the stones of the platform, that they
had been token off and replaced somewhat irr^larly.”

The fact of the existence of this stone bridge U certainly curious,' but I think
it utterly impossible that it can be the bridge our author refers to. In all pro¬
bability it is one of the bridges connecting “ the high aUey ” or cauMway above
referred to, and there must have been very many of a similar description .at one
riiw#. It is but 140 feet long and 8 feet broad, and has no tegular arches—this
last fact, however, is not material, as the partitions or divisions might be so

5*4

THE taba9;At«i-nA$irI.

mad-i- Bakht-vSr. with the whole of the rest of his forces,
passed over that bridge ; and, when the Rae of Kamrud
became aware of the passage [over the bridge] by the
conquering troops, he despatched trustworthy persons [say-
ing] :—" It is not proper, at this time, to march into the
country of Tibbat, and it is necessary to return, and to
make ample preparations, when, in the coming year, I, who
am the Rae of Kamrud, agree that 1 will embody my own
forces, and will precede the Muhammadan troops, and will
cause that territory to be acquired.” Muhammad-i-Bakht-
yar did not, in any way, accept this counsel, and he turned
his face towards the mountains of Tibbat.

described by a person who had never seen the bridge—and consists of slabs of
stone only 6 feet 9 inches long, and built, not over a mighty river three times
broader and deeper than the Ganges, but across “ what may have been a
.former bed of the Bar Nadi, or at one particular season a branch of the
Brahipaputra, now indicating a well defined water-course through which,
judging from the marks at the bridge, a considerable body of water must pass
in the rains, and, at that season, from native accounts, the waters of the
Brahmaputra still find access to it.”

The chief reasons why the bridge of SiL HXko could not have been that
over which Muhammad, son of Baldit-^, crossed with his army may be
summed up as follow :—

li Muhammad.i-Balclit-ySr marched through the tract between KSmriid and
Tirhut into Tibbat in a totally different direction to GowShatt, through defiles
and passes over lofty mountains, while between Gauf, Dtw-kot, and CowShatt
not a single pass or hill of any consequence is to be found.

II. In no place is it stated in this history, which is, I believe, the sole
authority for the account of this expedition, that the MusalmSns entered " the
outworks ” of any city, much less those of Gowahatl.

III. If the great river in question was the Brahm£-putr, and the small
branch of it which the Sil Hako bridge spanned were too deep to be crossed
by the Musalman cavalry, how could they have crossed the mighty Brahm£-
putr itself! They would not have been able to do so even had this bridge
been intact.

IV. Our author states, that, after passing the great river and bridge, they
pushed on for fifteen days—some aoo or 300 miles at least—and that, from the
farthest point they reached, the great city, garrisoned by Titrhs, was five Uagnes
distant. This description will not suit the situation of Gowahatt, which is
quite close to the Brahma-putr.

V. The table-land of Tibbat is distinctly stated as the point reached, and it
is subsequently mentioned that Changiz Shan wished to proceed from the
vicinity of the Kabul river, through northern India, and get into China by the
same route through Tibbat as Muhammad, son of Bakht-yar, took, but Gowahatt
would have led him much away from the part of China, he wished to reach.

VI. The disaster which befell the Musalmkns was owing, not only Xo two arches
of the great bridge being destroyed, but to some of the horsemen of the force
riding into the river and succeeding in fording it for the distance of a bew-shot.

THE SHALJ MALIKS IN LAKHAI^AWATl. 565

One night, in the year 642 HI*, the author was sojourning,
as a guest, at the dwelling of the Mu’tamad-ud-Daulah, a
trusted vassal of Muhammad-i-Bakht-var. at a place, in the
territory of Lakhanawatt, between Diw-kot and Bekanwah*,
at which place his host was residing, and heard from him
the whole of this account. He related on this wise, that,
after passing that river, for a period of fifteen days, the
troops wended their way, stages and journeys, through de¬
files and passes, ascending and descending among lofty
mountains. On the sixteenth day the open country of
Tibbat was reached. The whole of that tract was under
cultivation, garnished with tribes of people and populous
villages. They reached a place where there was a fort of

which alone would be at least as mtxiy yards as the bridge is fett broad, and
even then thejr had gone but a small part of the distance ; and rafts and floats
were being constructed to enable the army to cross.

VII. We are not told that this disaster took place in the rainy season, and
few would attempt an expedition into Asham at that period of the year. At all
other times the water-course in question would have been fordable to cavalry.

VIII. And lastly, can any one imagine that two gaps of 6 feet 9 inches each-
equal to 13 feet and 6 inches in all, would have deterred the MusalmSn cavalry
from crossing T The very bambus, or brushwood, growing near would have
eiurbled them to have, at once, repaired two such gaps, even if a tree or two
could not have been found, A door from the idol temple would have been
sufhcient to have spanned the gap, of 13 feet 6 inches, or rather two gaps of 6
feet 9 inches, even if the materials which they hod obtained to make rafts and
floats had not been available for that pdrpose.

One reason why it might seem that GowShatt is referred to is, the fact of
there being a famous idol temple near it, or close to the Brahma-putr; but
there is no mention whatever that such was the case with regard to the great
idol temple near the bridge and scene of Muhammad-i-Bakht-yar’s disaster.
Moreover, the city of Gowahat! is close by the river, while the Musalmaiis
after reaching Buidhanpiot] marched upwards 10 days until the great bridge
was reached, and their pushed on from this bridge for 15 days more before they
reached the fort, which even ther\ was 5 leagues distant from the city of Kar-
—the march from Burdhan[kot] to the fort 5 leagues from Kar-battan
occupying in all ad days. Can any argument be more conclusive than this ?

♦ In a few copies 641 h. Mu’tamad-ud-Paulah is but a title. In Elliot,
instead of our author, Mubammad-i-Bakht-yar, who had been dead forty years,
is made to halt at the place in question,

• The oldest copies have Bekanwah or Be^nwah and one Bekawan or
Be^iwan—as plainly written as it is possible to write, while two more modem
eo^es have Satgawn [Satgawp »]. The remainder have Bangawn and Sagawn.
See Blochmann’s “ Contributions to the Geography and History of
Bengal,” note ti to page 9. It is somewhat remarkable that this place also
should be confounded with Satgawn ; but in the copies of the A’in-i-AkbarI
I have examined I find Baklanah——instead of Bakla—but this can
scarcely be the place referred to by our author.

S THE TABA^AT-I-NASIRI.

'eat strength, and the Musalman army commenced plun-
jring the country around*. The people of that fort and
)wn and the parts adjacent advanced to repel the Muham-
ladan army, and they came to a battle^ From day-
reak to the time of evening prayer a fierce encounter was
irried on, and a great number of the Musalman army were
illed and wounded. The whole of the defensive arms of
lat host were of pieces of the spear bambu", namely, their
lirasses and body armour, shields and helmets, which were
1 slips of it, crudely fastened and stitched, overlapping
;ach other] ; and all the people were Turks, archers, and
‘urnished with] long bows*.

When night came, and the Musalman force encamped,
number [of the enemy], who had been made prisoners,
fere brought forward, and they [the Musalmans] made
iquiry of them. They stated on this wise, that, five leagues’
istance from that place, there was a city which they called

• The text varies considerably here.

r Zubdat-ut-TawIrikh says the Musalmans began to attack the fort.

• There is nothing here, even in the printed text, which is correct [with the
xception of —i. e. ^ «—being altered to but ,Ali not (Jy is ni/i], which
warrants the reading of this passage as in Elliot [India : vol. ii. page 311]—
‘The only weapons of the enemy were bamboo spears, and their armour,
hields, and helnuts, consisted only of raw silk strongly fastened and .sewed
ogelher.” A “shield” and “helmet” of raw j» 7>6 would be curiosities certainly.

The l»mbu referred to in the text is the male bambu—the young shoots, pro-
>ably, used for spear shafts—for which the hollow bambu is not adapted. Had
he spear bambu not been so plainly indicated in the text, we might suppose the
irmour to have been something after the manner of that worn by the Dufflahs,
md to have been formed of sections of the holltna bambu laid overlapping each
}ther as the rings of a coat of mail, but the male bambu could not be used in
.his manner, and, therefore, their armour, shields, &c., must have been of
pieces of the male bambu overlapping each other, as in the literal translation
tbove. An officer with the Dufflah expedition, writing on December 8, 1874,
says: “ Each man has over his forehead a top-knot of his own hair, and now and
then a bit of bear’s fur in addition. Through this he runs a skewer of metal—
silver if he can afford it—and by means of the top-knot and skewer he fastens
on his cane-work helmet, a sort of close-fitting skull-cap worn on the back of
the head. This helmet is usually ornamented with the upper portion of the
hornbill’s beak to save the head from sword cuts. Round his loins over the
hips ha wears a number of thin bambii or cane rings, unattached to one
another,'' See also Dalton: Ethnology of Bengal, page 32.

• Buda’uni says the people of this place were of the lineage [!] of OuahtSsib
[Gurshasib ?], and that the fortress had been founded by him. That author docs
not give his authority for this statement. Our author says, at page 561, that
Gushtasib founded Burdhan[ko(]. The Kha lj were a Turkish tribe certainly,
but they had emigrated from northern Turkistan ages before this pcriotl.

567

THE KHALJ MALIKS IN LAKHAlJAWATl.

Kar-battan [or Kar-pattan*, or Karar-pattan], and [that] in
that place would be about 50,000 valiant Turk horsemen,
archers’; and that, immediately upon the arrival of the
Musalman cavalry before the fort, messengers with a
complaint had gone off to the city to give information, and
that, at dawn next morning, those horsemen would arrive.

The author, when he was in the territory of Lakh-
a^awatt, made inquiry respecting that [before] mentioned
city. It is a city of great size, and the whole of its walls
are of bewn stone, and [its inhabitants] are an assemblage
of Brahmans and Nunis*, and that city is under the autho¬
rity of their Mihtar [chief or lord], and they hold the pagan
faith'*; and every day, at daybreak, in the cattle-market®
of that city, about one thousand five hundred horses are
sold ; and all the iangahan* horses which reach the Lakh-

' The text varies considerably here, and great discrepancy exists with respect
to the name of this important place. The oldest copy has —Kar-battan,

possibly Kar-pattan, the next two oldest and best have ^ j^^Karar-battan
or pattan, but what seems the second^ in this word may be —thus Karan-
pattan. All the other copies have ftjT- —Karam-battan or Karam-pattan.
Zubdat-ut-Taw&rtklt has which might be read Karahtn, or Karan-tan ;
and some other histories have ^ fX— Karam-sln.

Bhatl-ghun, the Banaras of the Gfirkah dominions, and once a large place,
in Makwanpiir, in which part the inhabitants are chiefly Tiharus, was anciently
called —Dharam-pattan, and another place, once the principal city in

the Ntpal valley, and, like the former, in ancient times, the seal of an
independent ruler, is named Lalitah-pattan, and lies near the Bag-madi river ;
but both these places are too far south and west for either to be the city here
indicated, for Muhammad, son of Bakht-yar, must have penetrated much farther
to the north, as already noticed.

* The best Paris copy—fondly imagined to be an "autograph " of our author's,
but containing as many errors as the most modern copies generally, has 350,000 !

* In the oldest copies Nunian, and in the more modern ones Timtan.
One copy of the text however has ‘ ‘ but-parastan ” idol-worshippers.

* The original is " din-i-tarsa-i.” The word tarsa is very widely applied,
to signify a Christian, also a worshipper of fire or gabr, a pagan, an infidel,
and an unbeliever, and not to “any established religion ” other than that of
Isl&m. Here our author, I think, refers to Christians—Manicbxans—the
whole of Tartary and other northern parts of Asia contained a vast number of
Christians. See Travels of Father Ayril and others in Tartary. Christians
are constantly referred to in the annals of the Mughals.

* The word used is “n akhkhas ,” which signifies a seller of captives, cattle,
or booty of any kind, and is used to signify a place where cattle and slaves are
bought and sold.

* The printed text, and that only, has » abj »^-<l— asp-i-tang bastah. Where
the editor or editors got this from it would be difficult to conceive, but they
could scarcely have intended to convey the meaning of horses brought down
with saddles on their baeks ready to l>e mounted. The words in the copies of

568

THE TABA^AT.I-NA$IRI.

anawati country they bring from that place. The route
by which they come is the Mahamha-i [or Mahanmha-i]
Darah^ [Pass], and this road in that country is well known;
for example, from,the territory of Kamrud to that of Tir-
hut are thirty-five mountain passes, by which they bring
the tangahan horses into the territory of Lakhanawatt.

In short, when Muhammad-i-Bakht-yar found out the
nature of that tract—the Musalman troops being fatigued
and knocked up by the march, and a large number
having been martyred and disabled on the first day—he
held consultation with his Amtrs. They came to the con¬
clusion that it was necessary to retreat, in order that, next
year, after making ample arrangements, they might return
again into that country". When they retreated, through¬
out the whole route, not a blade of grass nor a stick of fire¬
wood remained, as they [the inhabitants] had set fire to
the whole of it, and burnt it; and all the inhabitants of
those defiles and passes had moved off from the line of
route. During these fifteen days" not a pound of food nor
a blade of grass did the cattle and horses obtain '; and all

our author’s texture —<^>3 — asp-i tanf^anak —they are still well known.
Stewart, who had no printed text to go by, read the name pretty correctly—
“Tanghan.” Hamilton says these horses are called Tauyan or Tangun
“ from Tangusthaii the general appellation of that assemblage of mountains
which constitutes the territory of Bootan,” &c. He must mean Tangistkn, the
region of tangs or defiles. Abu-l-Faf 1 also mentions these horses in his A’In-
i-AkbarI —“ Ill the lower parts [ck'-t] of Bangalah near unto Kuj [Kufihl, n
[species] of horse between the gut [gunth] and the Turk [breed] is produced,
called Tangahan,” which is also written Tanganan, and gives the spelling of
the word, but they are not bom “ ready saddled.” Compart Elliott: India,
vol. ii. page 311, and note *, and see Dr. Blochmann’s translation of the A’lN.

^ Some copies—the more moderti—and the best Paris copy, leave out the
name of this pass, and make —piasses—of it j and; whiie all the oldest copies
[and Zubdat] have Tirhut, the more modem ones have Tibbat.

• Although the Musalman troops were, at length, victorious, their victory
cost them so many lives, and so many men were disabled, that, on hearing of
a force of 50,000 valiant Turks being stationed so near at hand, Muhammad,
son of Baldit-yar, held counsel with his chiefs, and it was determined to retreat
next day. Our author appears totally unable to tell the trath respecting a
Musalman reverse, even though such reverse may be far from dishonour, and
may have beeh sustained under great difficulties or through their being greatly
outnumbered.

• The fifteen days which the retreat occupied he seems to mean, as the
same route in going took that number of days. Zubdat-ut-Taw 5 rikb says
that the inhabitants also destroyed the roads—obstmetexi them, cut them up in
some way.

1 They must have brought some provisions and forage along with them, or

THE KHAIJ MALIKS IN LAKHANAWATL

569

[the men] 'were killing their horses and eating them, until
they issued from the mountains into the country of Kam-
rQd, and reached the head of that bridge. They found two
arches of the bridge destroyed*, on this account, that
enmity had arisen between both those Amtrs [left to g^ard
it], and, in their discor^, they had neglected to secure the
bridge and protect the road, and had gone oflf*, and the
Hindus of the Kamrud country had come * and destroyed
the bridge.

On the arrival at that place of Muhammad-i-Bakht-var
with his forces he found no way of crossing, and boats were
not procurable. He was lost in surprise and bewilderment*.
They agreed that it was necessary to halt in some place*,
and contrive [about constructing] boats and floats, in order
that they might be enabled to pass over the river. They
pointed out an idol temple in the vicinity of that place
[where they then were] of exceeding height, .strength, and
sublimity, and very handsome, and in it numerous idols
both of gold and silver were deposited, and one great idol
so [large] that its weight was by conjecture upwards of two
or three thousand tttaus^ of beaten gold. Mu^iammad-i-
Bakht-yar and the remainder of his followers sought shelter
within that idol-temple*, and began to devise means for

obt&ined food, or must huve eaten eacli other. Perhaps our author means
that many perished for want of sufficient food.

» Two arches of any possible span—but not over seventy yards—would not
have been such a difficult matter to repair, so near primeval forests, and with
a town or city, as previously stated, close to the bridge. The town, however,
is not once mentioned on tlieir return.

* The Zubdat-ut-Tawarlkk states that the two Amirs, to spite each other,
abandoned guarding the bridge, and each went his own way. Buda’unt says
they first fought, and afterwards abandoned the bridge.

•* ThU remark, and what follows at page 571 again, tends to show that the
bridge in question was beyond the Kamriid territory, although, a line or two
licfore, it is stated that they came into Kamrud .and re.ached the head of the
bridge. See also page 561 and note®.

» Where was ’Alt, the Mej, all this time ? He U not again mentioned ;
but his kinsmen are ; and the country people are not even referi^l to, although

the Hindus of Kamrfid are, sec page S 7 t*

® Zubdat-ut-Tawartkh says “necessary to occupy some place tmtil boats

and floats could be constructed.”

J The more modem copies have misVals.

» According to other authors, when the Mustilmans reached the bridge,
they were filled with amarement and horror at finding two of its arches
broken. The two Amirs, who had liecii Icfi to guard it, had not been on
good lenns for some lime prioi to being slationeil there ; and, as soon as llieir

^ 00

570

THE TABA¥AT.I-NA$1RL

obtaining wood and rope for the construction of rafts and
crossing the river, in such wise that the Rae of Kamrud
became aware of the reverses and helplessness of the Musal-
man army. He issued commands to the whole of the
Hindus of the country, so that they came pouring in in
crowds, and round about the idol-temple were planting
spiked bambus in the ground, and were weaving them to¬
gether, so that it [their work] was appearing like unto walls*.

When the Musalman troops beheld that state of affairs,
they represented to Muhammad-i-Bakht-yarf [saying] :—
“If we remain like this, we shall all have fallen into the
trap of these infidels: it behoveth to adopt some means

chief had left, their hostility broke out afresh, and such was their enmity that,
rather than not prosecute their own designs against each other, they abandoned
it. After they had departed, the RSe of Kamrud, on becoming aware of it,
sent his men, and destroyed the two arches. It is strange the names of these
two Amtis are. not given by our author, as his informant, previously mentioned,
must have known who they were.

Finding the bridge thus impassable, Mu]tiammad>i-Bakbt-ySr determined to
occupy some strong place until such time as materials could be obtained to
enable them to effect the passage of the river. Here also we might expect to
hear something of the town and its people, but, as I have mentioned in
note *, page 561, it is doubtful whether our author meant it to be under-
stood that Burdhan-kot was on the banks of the Bag-madt river, where this
bridge was.

Spies brought information that there was an immense and exceedingly
strong idol-temple near by, and that was occupied by the Musalm&ns accord¬
ingly. Another writer states that they were ignorant, when they advanced,
of the existence of this temple.

Buda’uni states that the MusalmSns only passed the night in the idol-
temple, but this statement is absurd. Where were materials to be obtained
from, during the night, to make rafts ?

• Tialiii Lambu or Digarshah, the seat of a Lama in Lat. 29® 7' N., Long.
89® 2' E., a great monastery only 180 miles from Rang-pur of Bengal [said
to have been founded by Muhammad, son of Bakht-yar], answers nearly to the
description of the idol-temple referred to, but it is on the southern not the
northern bank of the Sanpu river, and a few miles distant, and our author
says it was a Uhtdii temple. Perhaps, in his ideas, Hindus and Buddhists
were much the same. From this point are roads leading into Bhutan and
Bengal.

As soon as the Rae of Kamrud became aware of the helpless state of
the Musalmans, and that they had sought shelter in the great idol temple,
he gave orders for his people to as.semble. They came in hosts, and bq^n to
form a stockade all round it, by planting, at a certain distance, not their
"bamboo spears’’ as in Elliot [IN’DIA, vol ii. page 317], but bambOs spiked
at both ends [the mode of making stockades in that country], and afterwards
woven strongly together, which forms a strong defence. Ralph Fitch says,
respecting Kuch “all the country is set with bamboos or canes made sharp at
both ends and stuck into the earth,” &c.

THE KHALJ MALIKS IN LAKHAIJAWATL

57 *

whereby to effect extrication.” With one accord they
made a rush, and all at once issued from the idol-temple,
attacked one point [in the stockade], and made a way for
themselves, and reached the open plain, and the Hindus
after them When they reached the river bank the Musal-
mans halted*, and each one, to the best of his ability,
sought means of crossing over. Suddenly some few of the
soldiers* urged their horses into the river, and, for the dis¬
tance of about an arrow flight, the water was fordable. A
cry arose in the force that they had found a ford, and the
whole threw themselves into the water, and the Hindus
following them occupied the river’s bank. When the Musal-
mans reached mid-stream, [where] was deep water, they
all perished, [with the exception of] Mubammad-i-Bakht-
yar, who, with a few horsemen, a hundred more or less,
succeeded, by great artifice, in effecting the passage of
the river; and all the rest were drowned.

After Muhammad-i-Bakht-yar emerged from the water,
information reached a body of the Kunch and Mej. The
guide, ’All, the Mej, had kinsmen at the passage, and they

' Multiammad, son of Baldlt-yar, seeing through the object of the HindQs,
issued from the idol-temple at the head of his troops, and, with considerable
difficulty, made a road for himself and followers. Having done this, he took
up a position and halted on the bank of the river Bag-madi. Here he appears
to have remained some days, while efforts were then made to construct rafts,
the Hindus not venturing to attack them in the open.

* This is related differently by others. The Musiilmins were occupied In
crossing, it is said, or, perhaps, more correctly, about to make the attempt
with such means as they had procured, when a trooper [some say, a few
trooptrs] rode his horse into the river to try the depth probably, and he
succeeded in fording it for the distance of a bow-shot. Seeing this, the troops
imagined that the river, after all, was fordable, and, anxious to escape the
privations they had endured, and the danger they were in, as with the means
at hand great time would have been occupied in crossing, without more ado,
rushed in ; but, as the greater part of the river was unfordable, they were
carried out of their depth, and were drowned.

After his troops had been overwhelmed in the Bag-madi or Bak-matf,
Muhammad, son of Bakht-yar, with the few followers remaining with him,
by means of what they had prepared [a raft or two probably], succeeded, with
considerable difficulty, in reaching the opposite bank in safety, and, ultimately
reached Dtw-kot again. Apparently, this river was close to the Mej frontier.

Buda’unt states that those who remained behind [on the river bank] fell
martyrs to the infidels ; and, that of the whole of that army but 300 or 400
reached Dtw-kot. He does not give his authority however, and generally
copies verbatim from the work of hii patron —the TabaVat-i-Akbart—but such
is not stated therein.

* In some copies of the text, “one of the soldiers."

0 0 2

57*

THE XAI)A^AT<1-NA$IR!.

came forward to receive him [Muhammad-i-Bakht-yar], and
rendered him great succour until he reached Diw-kot.

Through excessive grief sickness now overcame him, and
mostly out of shame at the women and children of those of
the I^alj who had perished ; and whenever he rode forth
all the people, from the house-tops and the streets, [consist-
ing] of women and children, would wail and utter impre¬
cations against him and revile him, so that from henceforth
he did not ride forth again*. During that adversity he
would be constantly saying: " Can any calamity have
befallen the Sultan-i-Ghazi that my good fortune hath
deserted me *! ” and such was the case, for at that time
the Sultan-i-Ghazi. Mu’izz-ud-Din, Muhammad-i-Sam, had
attained martyrdom. In that state of anguish Muhammad-
i-Bakht-yar became ill, and took to his bed, and died.

Some have related that there was an Amir* of his, ’All
i-Mardan, a Kh ali of great intrepidity and temerity, to
whose charge the fief of Naran-go-e [or Naran-ko-e ^] was
made over. When he obtained information of this disas¬
ter he came to Diw-kot, and Muhammad-i-Bakht-yclr was
confined to his bed through sickness, and three days had
passed since any person was able to see him’Ali-i-
Mardan in some way went‘in unto him, drew tlje sheet

* Zubdat-ut-Tawarikh says “by the time he reached Dlw-koJ, through ex¬
cessive grief and vexation, illness overcame him ; and, whenever he rode forth,
the women of those Kh ali who had perished stood on the house-tops and
reviled him as he passed. This dishonour and reproach added to his illness,” &c.

Raufat-uf-$aia says his mind gave way under his misfortunes, and the
sense of the disaster he had brought about resulted in hopeless melancholy.

* This was certainly just about the time of that Sultan’s assassination.

* Zubdat-ut-Tawarlkb has “ one of the great Amtrs,” &c. The ifdfat, in
’Ali-i-Mardan, signifies ’Alt, son of Mardan. See page 576.

r The name of this fief or district is mentioned twice or three times, and tl^e
three oldest copies, and one of the best copies next in age, and the most perfect
of all the MSS., have as above in all cases ; and one —the Ijest Peters¬

burg copy—has a jaznt over the last letter in addition, but all four have the
hamzah. The Zubdat-ut-Tawartldi also has urjOfl —Naran-goe or NSran-
koe. The next best copies of the text have which, in all pro¬

bability, the 5 has been mistaken for i The I. O. L. MS. 1952, the R. A. S.
MS., and the printed text, have —whilst the best Paris copy has this

latter word, in one place, and •" other pkices; and another copy has

In Elliot, vol. ii. page 314, it is turned into “ Kunf” in one place,
and, sixteen lines under, into “Narkotf.”

■ Zubdat-ut-Tawarikh say.s “no one used to g«) near him ”—the way of the
world to desert one in misfortune.

THE SHALJ MALIKS IN LAKHA^IAWATl.

573

from his face, and with a dagger assassinated him. These
events and calamities happened in the year 602 H.*

VI. MALIK 'IZZ-UD-DIN, MUHAMMAD, SON OF SHERAN »,
KHALjI, IN LAKHANAWATL

Trustworthy persons have related after this manner,
that Muhammad-i-Sheran and Ahmad-i-Sheran were two
brothers, two among the Kh ali Amirs in the service of
Mubammad-i-Bakht-yar; and, when the latter led his
troops towards the mountains of KamrQd and Tibbat, he
[Muhammad-i-Bakht-var] had despatched Mubammad-i-
Sheran. and his brother, with a portion of his forces, tovyards
Lakhan-or and Jaj-nagar®. When the news of these events
[related above] reached Muhammad-i-Sheran. he came

• This date shows that the territory of Lakhaijawaft was taken possession
of in 590 H., the year in which Malik Entb-ud-Din, i-bak, took up his quarters
at Dihlt. The conquest of Lakhanawa(f i^ accounted among the victories of
Sultan Mu’iza-ud-Din, because it took place in his reign. ^utb-ud-Dtn, Lbak,
was at this time still a slave, and neither attained hil^ manumission nor the title
of Sultan until some tif/u after the death of Mu^iammad, son of Bakbt-yar.
See note ?, page 558.

Some authors consider him an independent sovereign, and say that he
“reigned” for twelve years. He certainly in ^uasi independence for

that period ; but, from the expressions made use of by him in his last sickness,
he evidently was loyal to Sultan Mu’izz-ud-Din, and he probably paid some
nominal obedience to Malik Kutb-ud-Din, I-bak, as the Sultan’s Deputy at
Dihli. It is not to be wondered at that Muhammad, son of Bakht-j^r, neither
issued coin in his own name, nor in the name of his sovereign’s slave : whilst
that sovereign was alive —the latter would have been an impossible act. See
Thomas, PathXn Kings, note ', page iii ; and note*, page 559.

• Also styled, by some other authors, Sher-wah. Sker-an, the plural of
shjtr, lion, tiger, like Mard-an, the plural of mard, man, is intended to express
the superlative degree. The ifafat here— Muhammad-i-Skeran—signifies son
o/’Skeran, as proved beyond a doubt by what follows, as two brothers would
not be so entitled.

• Compare Elliot, vol. ii. page 314. The Paris copy of the text, the
I. O. L. MS., the R. A. S. MS., and the printed text, have “to Lakhaijawati
mid Jaj-nagar j” but the rest have Lakhan-or or Lakh-or, and Jaj-nagar, No
doubt Lakhan-or is meant in the copies tet mentioned, and probably ^ sub¬
stituted for j by ignorant copyists.

Some writers state that Muhammad-i-Skeran was of Jaj-nagar” on

the part of Muhammad-i-Bakht-^r, but such cannot be. J 5 j-nagar was an
independent Hindu territory [see note *, page 587]; but most authors agree
with ours that Mu^iammad-i- Sh eran was despatched against —or probably to
hold in check—Jaj-nagar during Muhammad-i-Bakkt-yar’s absence on the
ex|iedition into Tibbat ; and he was, doubtless, feudatory of Lakhan or [see
note •, page 584], which lay in the direction of (he Jaj-nagar territory.

574 the TiVEA^AT-l-NASIRl.

back from that quarter, and returned again to D!w-kot,
performed the mourning ceremonies [for Muhammad-i-
Bakht-var]. and from thence [Diw-kot] proceeded towards
Naran-go-e*, which was ’Ali-i-Mardan’s fief, seized ’Alt-i-
Mardan, and, in retaliation for the act he had committed,
imprisoned him, and made him over to the charge of the
Kot-wal [Seneschal] of that place, whose name was Baba^,
Kot-wal, the Safahani [Isfahan!]. He then returned to
Diw-kot again, and assembled the Amirs together.

This Muhammad-i-Sheran was a man of great intrepidity
and energy, and of exemplary conduct and qualities*; and,
at the time when Muhammad-i-Bakht-var sacked the city
of Nudiah, and Rae Lakhmaniah took to flight, and his
followers, servants, and elephants became scattered, and
the Musalman forces proceeded in pursuit of spoil, this
Muhammad-i-Sheran. for the space of three days, was
absent from the army, so that all the Amirs became
anxious on his account. After three days they brought
information that Muhammad-i-Sheran had taken eighteen
elephants along with their drivers in a certain jangal
[forest], and was retaining them there, and that he was
alone*. Horsemen were told off, and the whole of these
elephants were brought before Muhammad-i-Bakht-var.
In fact, Muhammad-i- Sh eran was a man of energy [com¬
bined] with sagacity^.

* Other writers state that Muhammad-i-Shetan. on hearing of the fate of
their chief, MuhAmmad-i-BaJcht-yar, returned at once from Jaj-nagar [from
Jaj-nagar towards Lakhan-or] with his force, proceeded to Diw-kot, and per¬
formed the funeral ceremonies ; and then marched from Diw-kot to Bar-sul—

— and secured the assassin, ’Ali-i-Mardan, and threw him into prison.
After performing this act, he returned to Diw-kot again. See notenext
page. In Elliot this is turned into “they returned from their stations, and
came dutifully to Deokotbut 'je as in the printed text, does not mean
"dutifully," but “mourning ceremonies.”

* Familiarly so styled perhaps.

* The Jahan-Ara, which does not mention 'Ali, son of Mardan, at all, calls
Muhammad-i-Slieran bloodthirsty, and greatly wanting in understanding, thus
confounding him with ’Alt-i-Mardan.

* He had managed to take these elephants and their drivers on the day of
the surprise of Nudiah, but, being quite alone, he was unable to secure them,
and had to remain to guard them until such time as aid should reach him.
Information of his whereabouts having reached Muhammad, son of BaUit-yar,
he sent out a detachment of horse to bring him in with his spoil.

^ Muhammad, son of Sheran. was an intrepid, high-minded, and energetic
man, and, being the chief of the Kha li Amirs, on their return to Diw-kot, the

THE SHAIJ MALIKS IN J^KHANAW'aH 575

When he imprisoned 'Alt-i-Mardln, and again departed
[from Dtw-kot], being the head of the Kha lj Amtrs, they
all paid him homage*, and each Amtr continued in his own
fief. ’Alt-i-Mardan, however, adopted some means and
entered into a compact with the Kot-wal [before men¬
tioned], got out of prison, and went off to the Court of
Dihlt*. He preferred a petition to Sultan Kutb-ud-Din, I-
bak, that ]^ae-maz, the Rumt* [native of Rumtlia], should
be commanded to proceed from Awadh towards the terri¬
tory of Lakhanawatt, and, in conformity with that com¬
mand, [suitably] locate the Kh ali Amirs.

Malik ^usam-ud-Din, *Iwa;, the Kha lj. at the hand of
Muhammad-i-Bakht-vSr. was the feudatory of Gangurt
[or Kankuri ?] *, and he went forth to receive Kae-majs the

principal Amtis were assembled in council together, and they chose Muham*
mad-i-Sheran as their ruler and sovereign ; and they continued to pay homage
to him. It seems strange that the city of Lakhanawatl is seldom mentioned,
while Dtw-kot is constantly referred to by various authors j and, from what
onr author himself says at page 578, it would appear to have been the capital
at this period.

• Some copies have “they all paid him homage," &c., and, after the word
fief, insert “untiL"

• 'Alt-i-Mardan managed to gain over the Kot-wal, and was allowed to
escape. He succeeded in reaching Dihlt, and presented himself before, [the
then] Sultan Kutb-ud-Din, I-bak, who received the ingrate and assassin with
favour. Both our author and other writers, in mentioning his escape in their
account of Muhammad-i-SliCian's reign, make it appear that 'Alt, son of
Mardan, at d>ice succeeded in inciting K'^tl^*'^d-Dtn, l-bak, against Mu^am-
mad-i-Sberan, and inducing him to despatch Iple-nuiz to Lakhanawatt; but
this is not correct. 'Alt, son of Mardan, accompanied K“tl>-“d-Dtn to
Qhazntn [where he reigned—in riot—forty days], and was taken captive by the
troops of I-yal-duz, and released or escaped again before these events happened,
as will be mentioned farther on.

» The text differs here. Some copies have : “ So that K®*-**'^ Rami,
received orders, on which he proceeded from Awadh to Lakhanawattbut the
majority are as above. The Zubdat-ut-TawiriJdl, however, clears up the
meaning 6f the last clause of the sentence “ That he, should pro-

ceed into Lakhanawatt, in order that each of the EJbtalj Amirs, vvho were in
that part, might be located in a suitable place, and to make certain districts t^ir
fiefs." That work, however, immediately after, states that the ^alj Amirs,
having shown hostility towards him [I^e-mdz], opposed him in battle, and
were and that, in that engagement, Muhammad, son of Sko^

uun. Compare Elliot, too, here.

• Of the four best and oldest copies of the text, two have GangQii or Kan-
kflrf—and two, Gasgurt or KaskWt— but diis lattw
very doubtful Five other good copies agree with the first two, but thw
have respeedvely ^^^u.jtT-and Some other worits, ‘“clu^

the Tabi^t-i-Akbart, state that ^usim-ud-Din, Iwan, was the feudatoty

576 TH£ TABA^AT-I-NAS1RI.

RQmt, and, along with him, proceeded to Dtw*kot; and,
at the suggestion of l^ae-maz, the Rumt, he became the
feoffee of Diw-kot. l^ae-maz, the Rumi, set out on his
return [into Awadh], and Muhammad-i-Sheran. and other
Kha lj Amirs, assembled together, and determined upon
marching to Diw-kot*. Kae-maz, whilst on his way back
[hearing of this], returned again, and an encounter took
place between the Kh ali Amirs and him, and Muhammad-
i^Sheran and the Kh alj Amirs were defeated. Subse¬
quently, disagreement arose among themselves, in the
direction of Maksadah and Sanj^us^ and Muhammad-i-
gheran was slain*; and there his tomb is.

VII. MALIK 'ALA-UD-DIN, ’ALI, SON OF MARDAN, KHALJI.

’Ali-i-Mardan*, the Kh alj. was a man of vast energy,
vehement, intrepid, and daring. Having obtained release

of KalwSl-t or Galwa-t—Kalwa-fn or GalwS-tn—the n of the
latter word is probably nasab

* No sooner had Rae-maz turned his back upon the scene than Muhammad,

son of Sheran. and the rest of the Khalj Amfrs, determined to recover Dtw-
kot out of the hands of ^usara-ud-Dtn, ’Iwaf. »

* These two names are most plainly and clearly writen in four of the best

and oldest copies of the text, with a slight variation in one of Maksidah for
Maksidah [the Maxadabad probably of the old maps and old travellers]—ii < . t Sm,
and »■ and for Of the remaining copies collated, one has

1 jitfM I and two others »j, - and and the rest cHjku and

The Tabahat-i-Akbari has only.

* The Gau( MS. says he was killed in action after a reign of eight months,
and, in this latter statement, the Zubdat-ut-TawartkIl and some other works
agree ; but the period seems much too short from the assassination of Muham¬
mad, son of Bakht-yar, to his death for reasons mentioned in the following
note, or the country must have remained some time without a ruler before
’All-i-Mardan succeeded. Kaufat-u^-^afti makes a grand mistake here. It
says that Muhammad-i-Sheran. after having ruled for a short period, became
involved in hostilities with a Hindu ruler in that part, and was killed in pne of
the conflicts which took place between them.

« 'Alt-i-Mardan, that is to say, ’Alt,. /Ae son of MardSn, was energetic and
impetuous ; but he was not endowed with sense or judgment, and was
notorious for boldness and audacity, for self-importance, haughtiness, excessive
vanity and gasconade, and was cruel and sanguinary. After he escaped from
confinement for assassinating his benefactor, Muhammad, son of BaJdit-yar,
when lying helpless on his death-bed, he proceeded to Dihlt and presented
himself before Kutb-ud-Dtn, I-bak, who, at that time, had acquired the
sovereignty of Dihlf, and was well received. He accompanied Kt>tb ud-Dtn
to filntzntn at the time that he filled the throne of Gharntn. as our author
wys, “for a period of forty days,” ih carousal and debauchery. There 'Al!

THE SHALJ MALIKS IN LAKHA^I AWATl.

577

from imprisonment at Naran-go-e [or NSran-ko-e], he
came to the presence of Sultan Kutb-ud-Din, I-bak, and
accompanied him towards Gh aznin; and he became a captive
in the hands of the Turks of Gh aznin. A chronicler has re¬
lated in this manner^ that one day, when he was out hunting
along with Sultan Taj-tid-Din, Yal-duz, he began saying to
one of the Khalj Amirs, whom they used to style Salar
[a leader, chief] Zaffir®: “ What sayest thou iO with one
arrow, I should slay Taj-ud-Din, Yal-duz, within this
s/iikdr~£^dk [chase] and make thee a sovereign ? ” The
Salar, Kaffir, the Kha li, was a very sagacious person, and
he was shocked at this speech, and prohibited him from

fell a captive into the hands of the Turks of Gh^ntn, the partisans of Sultan
Taj-ud-Din, I-yal-duz, at the time of ^fuIb-ud-Din’s precipitate retreat pro¬
bably. Some authors; however, state, and among them the authors of the
Jaba^at-i-Akbari, and Zubdat-ut-Tawarikh, that in one of the conflicts of
that time he was taken prisoner by the Turks—Tabakat-i-Akbart says, the
Turk-mans—and was carried off into Kaahsh^r, where he remained some
time, he, at length, managed to reach Hindustan again, and proceeded to
Dihlt, and presented himself at the Court of E^uJb-ud-Dtn, who received him
with great favour and distinction. The fact' of his having been a captive in
the hands of his rival’s—I-yal-duz’s—partisans was enough to insure him a
favourable reception. ^futb-ud-Dtn conferred upon him the territory of
Lakhanawatt in fief, and he proceeded thither and assumed the government.
It must have been just prior to this, and not immediately after the escape of
’Alt-i-Mardan, that Eae-maz was sent from Awadh to Lakhanawatt, or, other¬
wise, between the defeat of Muhammad, son of Sheran, by the latter, and
Sheran’s death, and the nomination of ’Ali-i-Mardan by ^utb-ud-Dtn,
Lakhanawatt would have been without a ruler during the time that ^fujb-ud-
Dtn took to proceed from Dihlt to Qhazntn, where he remained forty days,
and back to Dihlt again, and eight montits, which is said to have been the
extent of Mu^iammad-i-Rerun’s reign, seems much too short a space of time
for this expedition, and ’Alt-i-Mardan’s captivity in Kaahcliar and his escape
and return. The accounts of this period are not satisfactorily given in any
work. [See page 526, and para, two of note * for the year in which ^fujb-ud-
Din had to make such a precipitous retreat from Qkazntn] ; and, moreover, it
appears that ¥“tl>-ud-Dtn did not return to Dihlt again, but continued at
Labor up to the time of his death.

t Here is another specimen of diflerence of idiom, though not so great as in
some places, occurring in diflerent copies of the text. This sentence is thus
expressed in one set of copies :——in another ■sS'

—in another—J S'.*-.’jj t'tj and, in another ail valt;

■ Compare Elliot, vol. ii. page 315. If we are to translate the name
of the Salar, Zaffir [not Za/ar, which signifies vietosyt], why not trans¬
late the name of Husam-ud-Dtn, ’Iwaf, in fact, all the ’Arabic names in
the book 7 It does not follow that this person was a " vieioriotts general,"
but he was a chief whose name was Zaffir, signifying, in ’Arabic, overcoming
all difficulties, successful, triumphant, victorious, &c.

57$

TUB TABAlUkT'l-NA^IRt

[the committal ofj such a deed. When ’Alt^i-MardSn
returned from thence, the SiUSr, ^fhr, presented him with
two horses and sent him away*.

When ’All>i-Mardan came back-again into HindQstSn, he
priosented himself before Sultan l^utb-ud-Dln, I-bak, and
received an honorary robe, and was treated with great
favour, and the territory of Lakhanawatt was assigned to
him. proceeded towards Lakhanawatt, and, when he

passed the river Kons', JHusam-ud-Dtn, ’Iwar, the Khalj.
[feudatory] of Dlw-kot, went forth to receive him, and
*Aii>i>MwrdAn proceeded to Diw-kot* and assumed the
government, and brought the whole of the country of
T .akhiMtawatl under his sway.

When SultSn ^utb-ud-D!n, I-bak, p^sed to the Al¬
mighty’s mercy, 'All-UMardan assumed a canopy of state,
and read the Kh utbah in his own name*; and they styled
him by the title of Sultan Ala-ud-Din. He was a blood¬
thirsty and sanguinary man. He sent armies in different
directions, and put the greater number of the Khalj Amirs
to death. The Raes of the adjacent parts became awed of
him, and sent him wealth and tribute. He began granting
investitures of different parts of the realm of Hindustan,
and the [most] futile bombast began to escape his lips.
Both in the assembly, and in the audience-hall, he would
declaim about the country of Kh urasan, of ’Irak, of Gha z-
ntn, and of Gh ur. and idle nonsense he began to give
toi^^e to, to such degree, that they used [in jest] to solicit
from him grants of investiture of Ghazntn and of Kh urasan.

* Another writer relates this somewhat differently. He says that 'Alt-i>
Mard&n, one day, accompanied the stiite of Sultiiit, T^)-ud>Dtn, I-yal.dSz,
when he went to the chase—but this is scarcely compatible with his being a
captive—on which occasion he said to the SBlSr J^affir : “ What sayest thou to
my finialiing the career of the Sultan with one thrust of a spear, and making
thee a sovereign?” Zaffir, however, was a man of prudence and integrity,
and had no ambition of gaining a throne by assassinating his benefactor. He
therefore gave him a couple of horses and dismissed him, and he returned to
HindOaOn.

* In aosne copies Koiu as above, and In others Kos. without the nasal tt ,
Sflote ether writers call thia river the Koij^and Kost.

* In some copies "from Dtw-kot.” HusSm-ud-Dii^ ’Iwa*, appears to
hero been a kind of Vicar of Bray, from what is stated previously, and here.

3 He also coined in his own name, according to the ThbaVlt-i-Akbart and
Mk’Qnt

S79

THE KHALJ UAUKS IN LAKHA^AWAtl

and he would isaoe commands accordingly [as though they
were his own]*.

Trustworthy persons have narrated after this manner,
that there was, in that territory [Lakhanawatt], a merchant
who had become indigent, and his estate was dissipated.
He solicited from ’Ali-i-Mardan some favour. ’Alt-i-
Mardan inquired [from those around]: “From whence is
that man?” They replied: “From J^afahSn [l9fahS.n].”
He commanded, saying “Write out the investiture* of
Safahan as his fiefi” and no one could dare, on account
of his great ferocity and unscrupulousness, to saj-: “ Sa¬
fahan is not in our possession.” Whatever investitures
he conferred in this way, if they would represent: " It
is not under our control,” he would reply: " I will reduce
it.”

So that investiture was ordered to be given to the
merchant of Safahan—that indigent wretch, who lacked
even a morsel and a garment of rags. The chief per¬
sonages and intelligent men, there present, in behalf of
that destitute man, represented* sajdng: " The feudatory
of Safahan is in want of resources for the expenses of the
road, and for the preparation of equipage, to enable him to
take possession of that city and territory;” and he [’Ali-i-
Mardin] commanded a large sum of money to be given
to that person for his necessary expenses*. The nature
of ’All-i-Mardan’s presumption, cruelty, and hypocrisy

* Our author’s mode of relation is not over plain. “ His vanity wd bom¬
bast,” says another writer, “ was such that he fancied IrSn and TQr&n belonged
to him, and he b^an to assign their different kingd<ms and provinces amongst
his Amtrs.” The fact is that he was mad ; and it is somewhat remarkable
that a subse<|uent Sul{An of Dihlt, who was mad alter the same fashion,
should also have been of the 'Kbalj tribe. Compare Elliot, vol. ii. page 316.
The author of the Gaur AfS. in his innoceni^. says that alter his [Eutb-ud-Dtn,
I-bak’s} death, for twa years and some months, tie fway of this same ’AlS-ud-
dtn VKU aeknerwleged as far as KhuiSsXn and IffahSn, &c. I ! i Where
Lakhanavmtt T where IQiuiSsZn and IffabSn ?

-• The word used in the text is mifU [Jo-] : such a term as “ jigir ” is not
used once in the whole work, because it is a compara t ively modem term.

s Our author relates thu anecdote differently from others. The desbtute
merchant, who aronted yoiri Mhing that would furnish him with food and
raiment, refused to accept the investituie of IffahSn; and the Wastrs, who out
of terror of'Alt were afraid to tell him so, represented that the H * ^ ^ *** *
lyfahbi was in want of funds for the expoises of his journey thither, and to
enable him' to assemble troops in order to secure possosion of his lief. This
had the desired effect.

S8o THE TABA^PAT-I-NA5IRI.

amounted to this degree; and, together with such conduct,
he was [moreover] a tyrant and a homicide. The weak
and indigent [people] and his own followers were reduced
to a [perfect] state of misery through his oppression,
tyranny, and bloodthirstiness; and they found no other
means of escape save in rising against him. A party of the
Kha lj Amirs conspired together, and slew ’Ali-i-Mardan,
and placed Malik Husam-ud-Din, Twaz, upon the throne.

The reign of ’Ali-i-Mard^ was two years, or more or
less than that^

VIII.—MALIK [SULTAN] ?^USAM-UD-DIN, TWA?» SON OF
HUSAIN, KHALJL

Malik [Sultan] Husam-ud-Din, Twaz, the Khalj, was a
man of exemplary disposition, and came of the of

Garmsir of Gh ur.

They have narrated on this wise, that, upon a certain
occasion, he was conducting a laden ass towards the emi¬
nence which they call Pushtah Afroz* [the Burning Mound],

f Two years and some months was the extent of his reign, but most authors
say two years. I do not know whether all the copies of Buda’unt’s work are
alike, but in two copies now before me he says plainly, that ’Alt-i-Mardfin
reig:ned two and thirty years. Perhaps he meant two or three years, but it is
not usual to write three before two in such cases. The Gaur MS. states that
he reigned from the beginning of the year 604 H. to 605 H., and yet says that
][^utb-ud-Dtn, l.bak, died in his reign I

• Compare Thomas, “PathiCn Kings of Dehli,” pages 8 and 112, and

Elliot, India, vol. ii., page 317. The Arabic word ’Iwa» has a

meaning, but "’Aux” and •'Aivx" none whatever. One or two other authors
state that he was the son ; but this is doubtful : there is no doubt,

however, of his father’s name being ^usain. His correct title is Shltan
Ghi yas-ud-Dtn. Malik ^usam-ud>Dtn was his name before he was raised to
the sovereignty.

• Two of the oldest copies of the text, and some of the more modem ones,
are as above, and some other works confirm this reading; but one of the
oldest and best copies, and the Zubdat.ut-Tawfirtkh, have Pught for Pushtah.
Both words are much the same in signification, however, as explained in the
text itself, namely, “ an ascent, a bluff, steep, eminence, hill, hummock,
mound,” &c. ; but Paghah [See Elliot: India, vol. ii. page 317] signifying
a flea, a gnat, &c., is impossible. Pusht is the name of a dependency of Bftd>
ghais. and is very probably the tract here meant. Afroz is the active participle,
used as an adjective, of ^ to inflame, to set on fire, to bum, to light up,
to enkindle, &c., the literal translation of which is* “the burning hill, or
mound,” and may refer to a volcano even at that time extinguished.

THE SHALJ ftALIKS IN LAKH ANA WATl, 581

to a place within the limits of Walishtan on the borders of
the mountain tracts of Ghur. Two Darweshes *, clothed in
ragged cloaks, joined him ; and said to him : “ Hast thou
any victuals with thee?” ’Iwa?, the Khalj. replied: “I
have.” He had, along with him on the ass, a few cakes of
bread, with some [little] dainty*, by way of provision for
the journey, after the manner of travellers. He removed
the load frolSi the ass, spread his garments [on the ground],
and set those provisions before the Darweshes. After
they had eaten, he took water, which he had among -his
baggage, in his hand, and stood up in attendance on them.
After those Darweshes had made use of the victuals and
the drink, thus hastily produced, they remarked to each
other, saying: “This excellent man has ministered unto us:
it behoveth his act should not be thrown away." They
then turned their faces towards ’Iwa?, the Khalj. and said :

Husam-tid-Din! go thou to Hindustan, for that place,
which is the extreme [point] of Muhammadanism, we have
given unto thee*.” In accord with the intimation of those
two Darweshes, he returned again from that place [where
he then was], and, placing his family ‘ on the ass, came
towards Hindustan. He joined Muhammad-i-Bakht-yar,
and his affairs reached such a point that the coin of the
territory of Lakhanawatt was stamped, and the I^utbah
thereof read, in his name, and they styled him by the title
of Sultan Ghivas-ud-Din*. He made the city of Lakhana-

Walishtan is evidently the same tract as Is referred to at page 319, which
see. - The oldest and best copies of the text, and some modem copies, are as
above, but some of the- latter have and and three others,

including the best Paris copy, have

* They are thus styled in the original : there is not a word about fakirs

in any copy of the text.

* Meat, fish, vegetables, or the like, eaten with bread to give it a savour:
In Elliot : India, vol. ii., page 317, it is styled "travdla>s bread” and the

ass is turned into a mule 1 . . . • , . v .

» In some copies, and in some- other works, Khwajah, equivalent here to
“Master,” in others. Salar—head-man, leader or chief. Another author says
the Darweshes said : “ Go thou, O Khwajah, into Hind, for they have

assigned unto thee one of the kuigdoms of the region of Hind.”.

< The text varies a Tittle here. The oldest copy has “ his family « a^ve,
whilst, of the other copies, some have “his children,” some “his wife, and

some “his wife and children.” ^ .u

• After the chief men had put the tyrant, ’All, son of Mardan, to death,
they, with one accord, set up HusSm-ud-Dtn, ’Iwa?, son of
originally, was one of the petty chiefs of the Khalj country on the borde«! of

58 a

THE TABA$AT-I-NA$IRI.

watl the seat of government, and founded the fortress of
Basan-ko^, and people from all directions turned their faces
towards him*.

Gh flr. a man of virtuous mind and high principles, and endowed with many
excellent qualities both of mind and body. He is said, by several authors, to
have been very handsome, and they confirm all our Author says about him in
this respect.

* In Elliot, vol. ii. page 317, “ He made the city of Lakhnauti the seat
of his government, and iuM a fort for hit residetice /” The printed text has
tsijCLr —fortress of Bas-kof.

From our author’s remark here, it would appear as though Sul^hn Qliiyhs*
ud'Dtn, ’IwSf, had been the first to niake the city of Gaur or Lakhapawatt
his capital. Akdalah can scarcely have been built at this period or it would
no doubt have been mentioned from its importance.

Aba-l-Fafl states, in the A’in-i-AkbarI, that Lakhanawatt, which some
style Cauf, is named Jamiat-abad, but this is an error from what is stated below
by others, and was the name applied to the SarkS.r or district, not to the
city. He continues : “ To the east of it is a great kol-ab [lake] in which is an
island. To the north, at the distance of a kuroh, is a building and a reservoir,
the monument of ancient times, which is called Sarahae-mart
Criminals used to be confined in the building, and a good many died from the
effects of the water which is very noxious,”

The Haff'IVllm, says Gauf, in the olden time, was the capital of BangSlah,
and that the fortress of Gaur was amongst the most reliable strongholds of
HindOstiuL “The river Gang lies to the west of it; and, on the N.E.
W. and S. sides, it has seven [sic in MS.] ditches, and a citadel on the side
of the Gang. The distance between [each] two ditches is half a kttroh, each
ditch being about three tan&b [= 120 gau or ells] broad, and so deep that an
elephant would be unable to cross it. Jannat*Ab^O is the name of the
tumdn [district] in which Gauf is situated.” /

The ShalMat-ut-TawSrI]cIi states that Lakhanawatl or Gauf is a very
ancient city and the first capital of the country. To the east of it is a iol-Si
[lake] of great size, and, should the dyke [confining it f] burst, the city
would be overwhelmed. The emperor HumSyiin, when in that part, took a
great liking to Lakhanawatt, and gave it the name of Bakht-AbAp.

Many fine buildings were erected in and around the city by SnltAn FtrOk
SbAh-i-Aba-l-Mufaffar, Shah-i-Tahan. the ^piabaglit [Abyssinian, yet he is
included among the so-called “ Pathins ”], one of which was the CbXnd
gateway of the citadel near the palace, a hauf [reservoir], and the famous
lot or mandrcsh. MusalmAns do not erect “Jaya Sthambas.” The fjfhswH
gateway was still standing some fifty years since, but hidden by the dense
jangcU, and is probably standing still. There were several masjids, one of
which was founded by Sultfin Yusuf Sl^h.

According to the Portuguese writers who “aided Mohammed [Mahmud]
against Sher Khan a Mogol general [!] then in rebellion,” .... the capital
city Gouro extended three leagues in length along the Ganges and contained
one million, two hundred thousand families [one million of people or two
hundred thousand families, probably]. " Voyages and Transactions of
THE Portuguese : Cattantuda, dt Barros, de Faryia y Sanaa, AHtomio da
Silva Metuses, &c.”

The TArlkh-i-Ftrllz-Stoht sajrs “Lakhanawatt acquired the by-name of
Bulghl|t-pBr—ptaceof great sedition—from j'V- signifying much noise, tumult.

THE SHA.LJ MAUKS IN LAKHANAWATL 583

He was a man of pleasing mien, of exceeding handsome
appearance, and both his exterior and interior were [adorned]
by the perfection of mercy; and he was magnanimous,
just, and munificent. During his reign the troops and
inhabitants of that country enjoyed comfort and tran¬
quillity ; and, through his liberality and favour, all' ac¬
quired great benefits and reaped numerous blessings. In
that country many marks of his goodness remained. He
founded jdmt [general] and other masjids, and conferred
salaries and stipends upon good men among theologians,
the priesthood, and descendants of the Prophet; and other
f>eople acquired, from his bounty and munificence, much
riches. For example, there was an Imam-zadah* of
the capital city, FlrOz-koh, whom they used to style
Jalal-ud-Din, the son of Jamal-ud-Dln, the Ghaznawt.
who, to better his means *, left his native country and came
into the territory of Hindustan in the year 608 H. After
some years, he returned again to the capital city, Firuz-koh,
and brought back with him abundant wealth and riches.
Inquiry was made of him respecting the means of his
acquisition of wealth. He related that, after he had come
into Hindustan, and determined to proceed from DihIt
to Lakhanawatt, when he reached that capital. Almighty
God predisposed things so that he [the Imam, and Imam's
son] was called upon to deliver a discourse in the audience-
hall of Sultan Ghiyas-ud-Din. 'Iway, the lOjalj'. That

sedition, &c.—because, from ancient times, from the period that SuUSn
Mu’izz ud-Din, Mu^uimmad-i-Sam, of Dihli, conquer^ it [Ziya-ud-Dtn,
Barant, is rather incorrect here however], almost every Wall to whom the
sovereigns of Dihlt gave the government of Lakhanawatt, because of its
distance from Dihlt, its extent, and the number of passes intervening, if he
had not rebelled himself, others have rebelled against him, and killed or
dethroned him.”

7 There is not a word about “his nobles.”

• An not “ the” Imam.zSdah : there were scores of ImSm.zadahs probably
at FtrOz-koh. ImSm signifies a leader in religion, a prelate, a priest.

• Some copies have -collection, amount, &c., and the more modem
copies and the printed'^'text py '—signifying family, followers, dependenU,
&C., instead of p'v?"'— seeking benefit, and the like. In Eixior, vol. iL
page 318, it-is rendered a body of nun—" He came with a body of men from
his native country,” Jtc. ! 1 He was merely a priest, and did not travel
attended by “ a b^y of men.”

• Compare Elliot, vol. il. page 318; where this passage is translated :
••the Almighty so favoured him that his name was mentioned in the Court of
Ghi} 4 m-d.din” !!

584

THE TABA^AT-I-NA^IRL

sovereign, of benevolent disposition, brought forth from
his treasury a large chalice full of gold and silver tangahs,
and bestowed upon him a present of about two thousand
tangahs*', and gave commands to his own Maliks and
Amirs, Grandees and Ministers of State, so that each one
presented, on his behalf, liberal presents. About three
thousand gold and silver tangahs more were obtained. At
the period of his return home [from Lakhanawatl] an
additional five thousand tangahs were acquired in gifts, so
that the sum of ten thousand tangahs was amassed by that
Imam, and Imam’s son, through the exemplary piety of
that renowned monarch of benevolent disposition. When
the writer of these words, in the year 641 H.®, reached the
territory of Lakhanawatl, the good works of that sovereign,
in different parts of that territory, w6re beheld [by him].

The territory of Lakhanawatl^ has two wings on either

* The states that the money of Bangalah was confined to the

jUal [always written with j —Jsc^] according to the following table :—

4 yftab I Candnh, 20 Cundahs 1 AttaA, 16 Anahs 1 Riipi.

“ Whatever the nipt might be, whether 10 tangahs or 100 tangahs, it was
reckoned as 16 anahs, and there was no change whatever in the jUal and the
gandah." From what our author has stated in several places in this work,
however, it is evident that the jital was current in the kingdom of Dihll, and
Muhammadan India, as weH as in Bangalah. See page 603.

Firishtah [copying the Tartth-i-Ftruz-Shahtl states with respect to the
tangah that “it is the name given to a tolah of gold stamped, and that a
tangah of silver was 50 pdils, each pul [i. e. a piece of anything orbicular] of
copper [bronze ?] was called a jital, the weight of which is not known exactly,
but I have heard that it was one tolah and three-quarters of copper [bronze ?].”
Another writer states that there were 25 jftals to 1 dam.

The word tanaah —with g not with k —signifies a thin plate, leaf, or slice
of gold or silver, and appears to be an old Persian word. See Thomas :
PathXn Kings ok Dehli, pages 37, 49, 115, 219, and 230.

According to some other writers, however, the following table is [also]
used :—

4 yuals 1 Gattdah, 20 Gattdah 1 Pan, 16 Pan 1 Kahdwan, 16 Kahaman
[some call 20 a Rtddha Kaha/wan\ 1 Riipt.

According to the same account, 20 kandls made a. jital.

Price, in his “ Retrospect of Mahommedan History,” in reference to
the revenue of Hindustan, says the “Tungah,” as far as he recollects, was
considerably higher than the “ Daum,” and “ conceives it was the fifth of a

_ IS ■ “f

rupee !

* Two copies have 644 H., which can scarcely be correct, and the renmin^ie^
641 H. Farther on he says he was in that part in 642 H. Our author'
.apiicars to have set out from Dihlf for Lakhanawatl in 640 H., reached it in
641 u., and returned to Dihit again in the second month of 643 H.

Of course Bang is not included, and our author mentions it separately.

THE SHALJ MAX:.IKS IN LAKHANAWATl.

$85

side of the river Gang. The western side they call Ral
[Rftfh*], and the city of Lakhan-or* lies on that side ; and
the eastern side they call Barind’^ [Barindah], and the city

* 1 ram easily fancy a foreigner writing Ral—J’j—or Rad— j'j— from hear¬
ing a Hinds pronounce the Sanskrit T 1 V——Rafh, containing, as it does,
the letter which few but natives of the country can properly utter.

s The printed text followed in Elliot has “Lakhnautf,” but that is totally
impossible, since it lay eas/, not west of the Ganges ; its right pronunciation is,
no doubt, I<akhap-or.

Most of the best copies of the text have Lakhan-or, both here and in other
places where the same town or city is referred- to ; but two of the oldest and
best copies have both Lakhai}-or and Lakh-or both here as well as elsewhere. It

appears

evident to me that the ft in the first word is nasal, and that its deriva¬

tion is similar to that of Lakhanawatt, from the name of Dasarata’s son, Lakh-
mana, with the Hindi word — or, affixed, signifying limit, boundary, side,

&c." = Lakhmana’s limit or frontier. In this case it is not surprising that some
copyists left out the nasal n, and wrote Lakh-or, having probably the name read
out to them. From the description of the dykes farther on in Section XXII.,
in the account of the different Maliks of the dynasty where the invasion of Jaj-
nagar by the Musalmans is mentioned, and the invasion of the M\isalman
territory’by the Rae of Jaj-nagar, Lakhan-or lay in the direct route between
Lakhanawatt and KaUisin, the nearest frontier town or post of the J5j-n^r
territory; and therefore 1 think Stewart was tolerably correct in his supp<»ition,
that What he called and considered “Nagor,"instead of Lakhap-or, was situated
in, or ferther south even than BtrbhOm. It is by no means impossible that
Dr. Blochmann’s supposition may be correct, that Lakarkundhah [the ljuara.
eoonda of Reimell] is the place in question. It is in the right direction, but
seems not far enough south ; and, if any indication of the great dyke or cause¬
way can be traced in that direction, it will tend to clear up the point. Lakar-
kOndhah lies about eighty-five miles as the crow flies from Gaur or Lakhana-
^att, “right away from the river,’' but this Mr. Dowson, in Elliot, appears to
think a pfwoftX its being the wrong way, and he probably fancies that it should
follow the Ganges. “ Right away from the river,” too, in the opposite direc¬
tion, distant about eighty miles, lay Dtw-kot—Diw and Dtb are the same in
Sanskrit and Hindu-t—^the total length from place to place, allowing for devia
tlons, being a very moderate “ten dasrs’ journey.” There is no doubt what¬
ever as to the correct direction of jaj-nagar and its situation with regard to
L«khan-or and Lakhanawatt, as mentioned in note *, page 587.

T In some copies but Barind or Barinda is correct. In one copy

of the text the vowel points are given. I do not know the derivation of the
Sanskrit word—THr Rarh, but Brind or Wrind, signifies a heap [high?],

■nd it is possible that the former may signify low, depressed, being subject to
inundation ; and Brinda [the Barinda and Barind of the Musalmkn wntere],
high, devoted, not being subject to inundation. Hamilton says the part liable
to inundation, is caUed Bang, and the other Barendra. See also the account of
M.ltv Tamur Shfin-i-^-rSn in Section XXII., where Lakhan-or is styled

Lakhanawatt Lakhan-or. _

Bartad, under the name of “the Burin,” is weU known to sportsme^ I am
told, in the present day, who apply it to the high tract of country N.W. of
R&m-pOr, in the RSi-Shaht district.

Terry says, alluding to the “two wings," “Bengala, a mojt spacious and

586 the TABA9AT-I-NA$IR!.

of Dfw-kot; is on that side. From Lakhanawa^ to the
gate of the city of Lakha^-or, on the one side, a^, as fiur
as Diw-kot, on the other side, he, Sultan Ghiyas-ud-Dln,.
'Iwaz, [caused] an embankment [to be] constructed, ex¬
tending about ten days’ journey, for this reason, that, in
the rainy season, the whole of that tract becomes inundated,
and that route is filled with mud-swamps and morass*; and,
if it were not for these dykes, it would be impossible [for
people] to carry out their intentions, or reach various
structures and inhabited places except by means of boats.
From his time, through the construction of those embank¬
ments, the route was opened up to the people at large*.

It was heard [by the author] on this wise, that, when the
august Sulj^an, Sh ams-ud-Din [l-yal-timish], after the
decease of Malik Na$ir-ud-Dln, Mahmud Sh ^ [his eldest
son], came into the territory of Lakhanawatt to suppress
the sedition of Malik Ikhtivar-ud-Dtn-i -Balka. the
and beheld the good works of Ghiyas-ud-Din. ’’Iwaj, the

fruitful Province, but more properly to be called a Kingdom, which hath two
very large Provinces within it, Purb [Purab] and Patan [Pachsham] ; the one
lying on the East, the other on the West side of the River Gongts. • • • The
chief Cities are Rangamahat and Dekaka."

• Compare Elliot, vol. iL page 319.

* These embankments, according to other writers likewise, were constructed
through the perseverance and forethought of SulJSn Q]|iy&g-nd-Dtn, 'Iwag.
Another author states that the “ former ancient rulers of Bang, the present
capital of which is Dhakah, on account of the vast quantity of water whidl
accumulates throughout the province in the rainy season, caused causeways to
be constructed twenty cubits wide and ten high, termed Si [J'l and, from the
proximity of these Sis, the people styled the province Bamg^Ai.. Rain falls
without ceasing during one-half of the year in .^e rainy season, and, at this
pericxl, these. Sis appear above the flooded country.”

A European writer, writing on the provinca ‘■'as at present constituted,” saysi
*• There are several remarkable military causeways whic:h' intersecst the whole
country, and must have been constructed with great labour; but it Is not known
at what period. One of these extends from Ccx>ch Bahar [Kucb Bih 2 r] throng^
Rangamatty [Rangamatf] to the extreme limits of Assam [AshAm], and was
found when the Mahommedans first penetrated into that remote quarter.” He^
of course, must mean the Muhammadans of Aurangzeb’s reign.

Hamilton states that one of these causeways extended from the Dtwah to the
BrahmS-putr.

‘ In the list of Maliks at the end of Shams-ud-Dtn, I-yal-timifll|’s reign,
farther on, he is styled Malik lUitiyar-ud-Din, Daulat Shah-i-BalkA. and, by
some, is said to be the son of Sul^n ^^iyflg-ud-Otn, ’Iwag, and, by others, a
kinsman. Another author distinctly states that the son of SultAn filiiySg-ud-
Dtn, 'Iwag, was named Najir-ud-Din-i-’Iwag, and that he reigned for a short
time. See also page 617.

THE CBAIJ MAUES in LAKHA^IAWAXL 587

S^J, whenever mention of fi^yas-ud-Din, ’Iwaj’s name
chanced to arise, he would style him by the title of “ Sultan
jaJ|i3r3(hud>Dtn, Shaljl,” and from his sacred lips he would
pronounce that there could be no reluctance in styling
a man SultSn who had done so much good*. The Al-
mightj^s mercy be upon them ! In short, Ghivaa-ud-Dtn,
*Iwaf, the m^alj, was a monarch worthy, just, and bene¬
volent. The parts around about the state of Lakhanawatl*,
such as J 5 j-nagar*, the countries of Bang, Kamrud, and

* What extreme m ag n a ni mity 1 Reluctance or not. SultSn GhiySs-ud-Dtn,
*Iwaf, had aa good a title to be called SolpUi as Shanis-ud-Dtn, I-yal-timiah,
or any other who preceded or followed him; and, moreover, he had never been
a slave, nor die slave of a slave. I-yal-timiah was not his suzerain until he
gained the upper hand. It was only ’Alt-i-Mardaa who was subject to E^tb-
nd-Dtn, I-bak.

* Compare Dowson’s Rluot, voL ii. page 319, where jaj-nagar is made to
•appear as beinj; part of the Lakhanawad territory : there is nothing even in the
printed text to warrant such a statement.

* Dr. Blochmann’s surmises [Contributions to the Geography and
History of Bbngai., page 19] are quite correct with respect to JSj-nagar.
It appears to have been named after a town or city of that name, subsequently
changed in more recent times to JSj-piir, the meaning of nagar and pur being
the same; and in the days when our author wrote, and for many years sub¬
sequently, it continued to be a kingdom of considerable power.

Before attempting to describe the boundaries of Jaj-nagar, and generally to
elucidate the subject, it will be well to describe the territory of Kadhah-Katan-
kah, or Gadhah-Katankah—for it is written both ways—which lay between it
and the Muhammadan provinces to the north.

The best account of it I find in the Ma’dan-i-Akllbar-i-Ahmadt, of which
the following is an abstract :—"The country of Kadhah-Katankah they call
Gondwfinah, because the Gonds, a countless race, dwell in the jangals of it.
On the E., by Ratan-pQr, it reaches the territory of dihar Kund : on the W.
it adjoins the fort of Rasta of Malwah. It is 150 kuroh in leng^, and 80 in
breadth. On the N. it is close to the Bhatah territory [the Bhatt of the A’lN-
I-AKBARXj, and S. is close to the Dakhan; and this tract of country they call
Kadha -I^tankah. It is very mountainous, and has many difficult passes and
defiles, but is exceedingly fruitful, and yields a large revenue. It has forts and
iasbaJks ^wns], so much so that trustworthy nxurators say that it has 70,000
[the MS. 7000 in figures and seventy thousand in words] inhabited iaryahs
ImJ —lit. a concourse of people, a village. It does not mean a cifyj. Kad-
hah or Gadhah is a great city, and Katankah is the name of a f/toufa* [district,
place, village], and by these two names this territory is known. [Katankah,
however, mast have been rensarkable for something or other for the country to
be called after it.] The seat of government of this region is Chura-garh, and
there are several Rajahs and Raes in it.”

Fa 4 t Surhindt* in. History, calls thfc country JhaT-K.un<Jah instead of
• and both, he and the K h iiisaat -ut-Taw 3 .rikh say that it had
7<\ooo or 80,000 inhabited ^ryaks^ and they both agree generally Mrith the
above as far as they go; bat they state that Amudah [Amu^ah 7 ] is the name

P p 2

588

THE TABA]^T.I-NA$IRL

Tirhut, all sent tribute to him j and the whole of that ter¬
ritory named Gauf passed under his control*. He acquired

> In Elliot, vol, iL page 319, this passage is translated from the printed
text :—“The district of LakhnaUr submitted to himbut the text is as above.

one of the principnl towns of Kabbah Katankah, and the first of importance
reached by Afif Ehan when he invaded it in Akbai’s reign. The Rlnt, Dur*
gawatl, issued firom her capital, diura-garh, to meet the MusalmSns, who had
never before ventured into those parts. They halted at Damvih Lat. 33 °

50' N., Long. 79° 30' E., between the capital and Amudah.

From the above statements, as given in the works just quoted, the tract of
country adjoining Bihar on the S. and Ban^lah on the W. is Bh^lah or BhSd,
which probably included Palamao, Chhotah Nag>piir, and Gang-pur, on the W. ;
and the tract adjoining Bhalah on the W., and immediately joining the district of
RuhtSs-garh on the N., was Chhar-Kunj or Jhar-Kun^ah, lying on the right
bank and upper part of the Son, and stretching towards Ratan-pur. Still
farther W., between Ratan-pur and the Narbadah, but running in. a S.W.
direction, and stretching from the left bank of the Son, on the one side, to
Rastn of Malwah, on the other, and S. to the hills, the northern boundary of
Birar, was Katjhah-Katankah.

Terry, in his Voyage, says that the chief city of ICanduana [GondwSnah] is
called Karhakatenka tji ], and that the river Sersily parts it [Kanduana]
from Pitan. More respecting the capital of Jaj-nagar will be found farther on.

Jaj-nagar appears, therefore, to have been bounded on the £. by the range
of hills forming the present W. boundary of O^l^hh-Jag-n^thh, Kat 3 sin, on
the Maha-nadi, being the nearest frontier town or post towards tlie Lakban-or
portion of the Lakhanawatt territory. Farther N. it was bounded towards the
£, by the river called the Braminy by some English writers, and Soank by
Rennell [I always adopt the native mode of spelling if I can find it, the fanciful
transliteration of Gazetteer writers ignorant of the vernacular spelling notwith¬
standing], running to the W. of Gang-pur. Its northern boundary is not very
clearly indicated [but see Sultan Firuz Shah’s excursion farther on], but it evi.
dently included Ratan-pur and Sanbhal-pur. On the W. it does not teem to
have extended beyond the Wnna-Ganga, and its feeder the Kahan; but its
southern boundary was the Gudawuri, and S.W. lay Talinganah.

I am surprised to find that there is any difficulty with r^ard to the identi¬
fication of Katasin, also called, and more correctly, Katasinghah. Our author,
farther on, says he himself went thither along with the Musalm 3 n forces, and
distinctly states that, “a/ Katasin, the Jrontier of the JAj-nagar territory
commences. ” This place is situated on the northern or left bank of the Mahfi>
nadi, which river may tiave altered its course in some degree during the lapse
of nearly seven centuries, some thirty miles E. of Boada, in about LaL 20° 33',
Long. 50'; and some extensive ruins are to be found in its neighbourhood.
The capital of the Jaj-nagar state, our author distinctly states, was named
Umurdan or Umardan ——according to the oldest and best copies of
the text; and Urmurdan or Armardan——and Uzmurdan or Azmurdan
—in the more modem copies ; and, in one, Uzmurdan or AzmardSn—
The wilayat—country or district—of Umurdan or Umardfin is men¬
tioned, as well as the capital, town, or city of that name. There is a place
named Amar-kantak, or Amar-kantaka——in LaL 2a°40', Long. 81“ 56^,
where are the remains of a famous temple of BhawSnf or P&rwatf, which
may be the site of our author’s

THE SSALJ MALIKS IN LAKHA^AWAJL 589

possession of elephants, wealth, and treasures, to a g^eat
amount.

It aeenu most strange that those who have run away with the idea that jSj*
nagar lay east of the Ganges and the Megnah, in south-eastern Bengal—in
‘Tlparah of all places—never considered how it was possible for Ulugh Kh an.
son of SultSn TiigMay —not that monarch hifnsel/—to invade

Toling [Talinggnah] and Tiptarah, if the latter wpre Jaj-nagar, in one and the
same short campaign, or that Hoshang. Sultan of Malwah, during a short ex¬
pedition or raid rather, could have reached south-eastern Bengal in search of
elephants. To have done so, he would have had to pass right through, and
return again through, the extensive territory of an independent sovereign equally
powerful with himself [he had only 1000 horse with him on the occasion in ques¬
tion], and to have crossed and recrossed two or three mighty rivers, besides
mimy others of considerable size, or he forded the Bay of Bengal perhaps to
reach the supposed JSj-nagar.

Elfhinstonx, too, on the authority of Hamilton [Hindostan, vol. i. page
178], who says that ** Tiperah” by S/fahosttmedan historians, is called ‘‘^ge-
nagur,” has fallen into the same error ; and, not content with this, even the
map accompanying his History has “JfLjnagur" in large letters in a part of
India where no such territory ever existed ! Hamilton would have had some
difficulty, I think, in naming the "Mahommedan Historians'* who made such
assertions. The name of one would much surprise me.

The way in which JSj-nagar is mentioned in different places, by different
writers, and under different reigns, clearly indicates its situation. Ulugh KhSn,
son of Sulpn Ghivas-ud-Dtn, TughlaV. on his second campaign into the Dak-
han, having reached Dtw-gtr [Dharagarh], advanced into Taling [Talinganah],
took Bidr, and invested Arangul now Warangul. Having captured

it, and given it the name of Suljan-pur, before returning to Dibit, he went for
amusement or dmersion [^] into JAj-nagar. He merely crossed the frontier
of Taling^uiah.

Hoshang, Sul^n of Malwah, taking with him 1000 picked horsemen dis¬
guised as horse-dealers, set out from MSndhu or Mandhun, and entered the
JAJ'NAOAR territory in quest of elephants. He managed to seize the Rae of
Jaj-nagar by stratagem, obtained a number of elephants, and brought him along
with him, partly for his own security, on his way back to Malwah ; and, on
reaching the frontier of the Jaj-nagar state [on the side of Malwah], he set the
RSe at liberty.

The Lubb-ut-TawSrthh'i'Hind states that Jaj-nagar is a month’s journey
from Malwah, but from what part of Malwah is not said.

The first ruler of the Shark! dynasty of Junpur—the eunuch who is turned
into a * * Pathdn ” by the archaeologists— extended his sway as far as the territory
of Kol to the south ; and, on the east, as far os Bihar ; and compelled the rulers
of LakhaijawatI and Jaj-nagar to pay him tribute.

In 680 H. SultSn Gh ivas-ud-Din. Balban, set out towards Lakhanawat! to
reduce Tugihril, his rebellious governor of Bangalab, who had defeated two
armies sent against him. On the approach of the Suljan and his army, Tughril,
who had been TwaUng preparations for retreat, retired towards the territory of
JAj-naoar. On the Sult&n’s arrival at Lakhanawatt, no trace of the rebel
could be found i but, discovering subsequently whither he had gone, he set out
in pursuit in the direction of JAj-nagar, until he arrived at a place some
seventy hot from that territory, when a patrol from the advanced guard of his

THE TABA¥AT-I-NA9IRL

5«o

The augfust SultSn, Shams-ud-Dtn wa ud-Duny3 {1-}^-
timish]> on several occasion^ sent forces from the catutal.

army, having gained infonnation of his whexeaboat% su rp rise d en*

camped with his forces ou the banks of a river, at and around a large stooe
reservoir, and sl^ him. The next march wo^d have bious^t him to the
Jitj-NAOAK territory. The river, no doubt, was the boundary.

The Tilrtkll*i-Ftruz>S 2 l 2 ht of ;^i3ra>ud-D}n, Baran^ diflSnsfrom this account
and aaiys—fuscording to the Calcutta printed text—that Tntfbril fled to
naga r — ^iT .t —and, in some places, Jajl-naga r — jCf m but there is no (.s in
}Aj-nagar, and, if SyS-ud-Dtn’s text is correct, it is adifierent place altogether.
'* The Sultan, following in pursuit by successive marches, in a certain number
of days, arrived on the frontier of Sunar>g^w [or kingdom of Bang], the Rke
of whirii—DinwSj by name [sic]—paid homage to the SnlfSii, and stipulated
that, in case Tu^iril evinced a desire to fly towards the sea [l^iS also means
river], he should prevent his doing so. Proceeding by successive marches, the
SultSn had reached within 6o or 70 ios of JAj.nagar, when information of
yughril’s whereabouts was obtained,” &c. From this statement it wosild seem
that the place in question, whether Q!ajl-nagar or Jajt-nagar, was beyond
Sunar-ganw ; but it is not said whether any great river was crossed, neither is
it stated that the Sultan marched eastwards, and he might —and, in case JAj*
NAGAR is correct, as stated in the extract above, he must — ^have turned to the
south-west on reaching the frosttier of Sunar-ganw. I am inclined, however,
to think that Sangarah, mentioned in the fourth para, below, is correct, and
not Sun&r-g$nw. Where the Sunfir-g^pw frontier commenced we know not ;
but it must have been a territory of some extent, as it was ruled, subsequently,
by a “ SultSn.” A district of this name is also mentioned by ^i^-ud-Dtn as
lying near Talinganah,

Be this as it may, however, the following extract, taken from the TSilUl-i*
FlrQz-SbUit of Sljams-i-Saiaj, Alfl, ‘J’O’bafpat-i-Akbart, and others, will, I
think, tend to settle the question respecting the situation of the JAj-nagak
[*nw ’fprc] territory:—

In 754 H. [Alft, 755 H.] Sul^ Firuz SbSh set out for Bang^ah to reduce
its ruler, Ilyas, [Sultan gbs^us-ud-Dln], to subjection. On Sulfan Ftruz

Sigh’s reaching the vicinity of Pantjuah, Il^s evacuated it, and threw himself
into Akdalah [also written Akdalah], “a moufa”* near Pan^uah, on one side
of wliich is the water [a river ?], and on the other an impenetrable jangal, and
considered one of the strongest fortifications of BangUah [Westmacott, in
the Calcutta Review for July, 1874, places Ekdala [Akdalah] some forty-two
miles on the Maldah side of the river Tangan, and north of Gaur or Lakhapa-
watt —“ the later city of Gour,” as he styles it], and so situated that, in the
rainy season, the whole country would become flooded, and not a piece of
elevated ground would be left for the Sultan even to pitch his tent on. Another
writer calls it an island or insular fortress. He came and encamped, accord¬
ing to one of these works, on the bank on the other side of the yraXtx/acistg it;
but the others state that he encamped his forces near the place on the sasne side.
As he had to change the position of his encampment after a short time, this move¬
ment led IlySs to imagine that the SultAn was about to retire ; and he sallied
forth with his troops and attacked the forces of Ftrilz SHl^h, but sustained a
complete overthrow, and had to retire into his stronghold again. The rains
having commenced, Ffruz S 2 xah had to abandon the investment, came to terms
with Il^is, and i^ired towards his own dominions by the MSnik pQr fenjr.

59 »

THE SBALJ ICAUKS IN LAKHAHAWATL

Dihll, towMxls and acquired possession of

Bihar, and installed ovm Amtrs therein. In the year

On Kvenl oocastom Ilyfc wnt presents to the ShltSn, and others were for-
warded to him in retail), inthe year'759 H., when, IlySs having despatched
his ofiferings, Snltln FhrOs Sl^ Um presents in return ; but. Information
having rduAed him from Silitr pf ItySs's death, and of his son, Sikandar’s
succession, FtrOa Shifr ordered hk presents to be stopped; and, in 760 h., he
set out for Bangpiah with an army of 80,000 horse and 470 elephants. The
nuns coming on, he passed the rainy seasim at Zafiur^lbtA and founded the
city of JGn-pQr. Sikandar, on his approach, retired to the fortress of AkdSlah,
before whi^ Sulfftn FtrQs S2|2U> sat doarn ; but, after a few days, an accom¬
modation was ooane to, and the territory of SunXr-gkiiw was given up to Sikan¬
dar, and FtrOs SbdH retired towards Jdn-pQr. On the Sultln’s reaching
Pan^Oah [this shows that Akddlah was northward or eastward of it, and
beyond it^ seven elephants and other valuable prope^, sent by Sikandar as
part of his tribute, reached his camp.

I notice in the Indian Atlas, sheet No. 119^ in the paiganah of Debekote,”
as it is styled—of course Dtw-kot or Dtb-kol is meant—between I-akha^awatt
and Dtnjt-pQr a place named Damduma, and near it an old fort, and, to the
east of it, three large tanks. The name is evidently a corruption of damJamaA —
a cavalier, a mound, &c. ; and It strikes me, since the name of AkdXlah k not
mentioned in history for some" time after the Shalj dynasty passed away, that
the name of Dtw-kot was changed to Akd&lah in after years. Dr. Blochmann;
I believe, identifies Dtw-kot—^probably on good grounds—with Gungitifim-ptir,
which I do not find in the Atlas sheet referred to ; but, I should think, from
the description given of the great causeway, at the northernmost extremity of
which Dtw-kol k said, at page 586, to have been situated, that Dfw-kot must
have lain north instead of south of DtnjI-pQr.

[Since thk note was written, I find the last number of the Bengal Asiatic
Journal, No. III. 1874, contains an account Of the site of Akdalah and a map
showing its situation, as promised by Westmacott, in a previous number; and,

I believe, the situation to be very nearly identical with the “ Damduma'’ I have
referred to, but have not examined the map in question. ]

On his reaching Jun-pur the rains again set in [760 H.], and he stayed there
during the rainy season, and, in Zt-I^ijjah of that year, srt out by way 0/Sihdr
towards JAj-nagar, which was at the extremity of the territory of Gadhah-
Katankah jtjf] When the Sultkn reached Kafah [i^—opposite Manik-
puf f], Malik Euth-ud-Dtn, brother of ^uffir Shan, was left behind with the
troops and the heavy equipage, and he advanced with cele 7 -ity through BihAr
towards JAj-NAGAR. On his reaching Sangarah or Sankrah —[Buda’Ont,
who copies wholesale from the T<ttodFat'i'Akbari, has, in my copy of the text,
—meant probably for *jCi>—but Firishtah. who also copies from the
former, has >;Ci. Sre Blochmann, page 30. Can it be the present Sir-
goojah, so called?], Rie Saras—Firishtah RSjah of Sankarah,

fled, and his daughter fell into the Sultan’s hands, and he called her daughter
[adopted her ?], and protected her. Firishtah styles her Shakar Shatun, an
impossible name for a HindO, unless she became a convert to Islam, and was
afieswardsi' so named. [I do not know what Briggs’s version may contain,
tet Dow has left out a great deal here.] Ahmad Khan, who had fled from
Lakhaijawatf, and had reached the fort of Rantabhur—[Ratan.pur in
JhZr-kun 4 ah ?— Lat.” 22 14', Long. 82° 8'—is probably meant, not the cele¬
brated stronghold of Rantabhur] on the way, presented himself before Snlt&n

59*

THE TABA]9L\T.I.NA$IRI.

622 H. he [I-yal-timish] resolved upon marchii^ into Lakh-
anawatt; and Sultan Ghiyaa<ud-Dtn. 'Iwaf, moved his

Ftriiz Sha h. Having passed the river Mah&Hiadrt, MahZn-darf, or MabSn-
i^drt -sic in MSS,—BudS’unl ^ i, the river

which falls into the Son doubtless is meant], he reached the dtjr or town of
Banarst —Shams-i-Sarai and Alfl have BanSras——and BwU'*

Cnt B&iani—which is the capital and abode of the KSe of J^-naoak
[S lpuns-i-Saraj has Rae of jaj-nagar-O^tsah]. The RIe fled towards Taling
[TalingSnah], and, the SullKn pursuing him [Firiahtah sajrs pursuing], pro*
ceeded to hunt elephants in the vicinity rShams-l-Saia] says the Sulthn remained
some time at BanSras, and the Rie took shelter in one of the islands of /Ar,
or a, river], [See the Asiatic Journal, vol. xiv., July to December tSaa,
page 438, in which is a good account of this tract 'of country, entitled
"Notes on Birar”], during which time the R&e despatched emi ssaries and
sought for peace, sending at the same time three elephants, besides rarities and
precious things [SUams-i-Sar&j says after his return from PadmSwatl], Hunt¬
ing as he went along, the Sult 2 n reached the territory of RSe Bh&nu Dfw
[SJ^ams-i-Sar&i, Btr-bhan Dtw——Alfl, Plr-m 2 hl Dtw—^L,4—
perhaps Blr-Mahl], who sent him some elephants. He then returned
from thetue with the object of hunting, came to Padmhwatl—South Bihar pro*
bably—which b a part abounding with elephants, captured thirty-three, and
killed two which could not be secured.

The faba^icat-i-Akbarl, Firiabtah, and Buda’unt, quote a verse composed on .
the occasion by Malik ^ya*ud-Din, thus showing to what extent the two latter
—particularly Firightah—copied from the former; but Firiabtah appears some¬
what confused in the latter part of his account, or has made considerable verbal
alterations for some purpose; whilst Buda’Gnt [MS.] says the Sult&n left
Bltanl [libb—Banarsl TJ, and proceeded from thence to Kidwatl—tJjair—
[Padmawatl] and Bram-Tala to hunt elephants.

From Padmawatl Sultan Ffruz Sha h returned to Kapth in Rajab, 763 H.

JAj-nagar is mentioned on several other occasions in the history of the
Dakhan, and its whereabouts distinctly indicated. Sultan Flruz, B a hm anl,
entered it in 815 h., and carried off a nuniber of elephants. In the account of
NiaSm Shah, of the same dynasty, JAj-nacar and (JpIsAH are mentioned as
totally separate territories. In the reign of Muhammad Shah , son of HumS*
yun, a famine having arisen in his dominions, people migrated in order to
obtain food into Malwah, Jaj-nagar, and GujarAt ; and, shortly after, the
Rae of Otjlsah, aided by the Rae of Jaj-nagar; invaded Talinganah voay
of the Raj-mandri district.

Now, if any one will look at the map, and take what has been mentioned
into consideration, where else can Jaj-nagar possibly lie than in the tract I have
indicated 7 Certainly not on the east side of the Bay of BengaL

It may not be amiss here to say a few words respecting the ancient boundaries .
of BangAlah as described by different authors, although little remains to be said
after Dr. Blochmann’s elaborate paper on the subject before referred to.

The Jami'-ut-TawariJeb of Fahlr Muhammad says that the territory which
in after times was styled Ban^lah, according to such writers as have written
about it, consisted of Bihar, Gau^ha or Gauy or Lakhanawatl, Bang, and JAj-
NAGAR. During the campaign in BangSlah, in Aurangzeb’s time, against his
brother gbah Sbuja’, the Afyhan Zamindar of Blrbhum and ydt-mtgar is said
to have joined him. According to the A’ln-i-Akbart, the gQbah of Bang^Uah
from Ga 4 hl to the port of Cbatganw [Chittagong] is 400 kuroh in breadth ; and,
from tha mountains bounding it on the north to the uncultivated tract [i^hhf]

593

THE KHAIJ IIAXIICS IN LAKHANAWATL

vessels [war-boats ?] up the river*. A treaty of peace was
concluded between them, and the Sultan [I-yal-timigh]
extorted thirty-eight elephants and eighty laks of treasure,
and the Shutbah was read for him, and the coin stamped
in his name^ When the Sultan [I-val-timi sh] withdrew,

* Another writer says he had all the boats on the river lemoved and secured,
in order to prevent Slvuns-ud-Dln, I-yal-timish, from crossing with his forces
to the Lakhanawatt side of the Gang.

^ Some histories, including the TB'haVat-i-Akbart, say the two SultSns did
encounter each other in battle in 633 H. ; but, as no details are given, it could
have been but a skirmish. A peace was entered into, and Sultan Gh iySs-ud-
Dtn, 'Iwaf, gave, as an acknowledgment of suzerainty, for the sake of peace
which he himself soon after broke, 38 elephants and 80 /aAr of silver tangahs.
Another writer sa)'S QbiySs-ud-Dtn, *Iwaf, despatched forces upon several
occasions to caxrj on war against Sbsms-ud-Din, I-yal-timish [the latter’s
officers or his governors of Awadh probably]; but at length peace was con¬
cluded on the terms above stated.

The Taskarat-ul-MulSk states that this sum was in silver tangahs; and

of sarkar Mad£ran [also written Mad 3 ran—f" breadth; but, as
the country of C4tsah was annexed to it on the settlement of the province in
Akbor’s reign, and its formation into a $ubah, its length became increased 43
huroh, and its breadth 30 . The tract ^ country to the W. of Bangalah is
named BbZtah or Bhitt, which is accounted ^ belonging to this country [Ban-
gidah], and MSnik is the surname of its oders. To the north is a territory
called Kuj [K&cll ?] and KSmrud, also called Kanwru. At the side of this is
the territory of the Rajah of AshSm. and adjoining it is Tibbat, and to the
left of it lOiH a, To the E. and S. of Bang 31 ah is an extensive country named
Arkhnak [turned iqto Arracan by Europeans], and the port of Chdtgtnw
belongs to it. In the sarkar of Mangtr, from the river Gang to the Koh-i-
Sangin [the Stony Mountains], they have drawn [j>>I a wall, and account

it the boundary of Bangalah.

The Haft-Ikltm sa)rs BangSlah is 300 knrok in length and 370 in breadth,
each kurok being one mil [I]. On the E. it is bounded by the sea, on the
W. it has the parganah of Suraj-garh, which adjoins the $ubah of Bihar, on
the N. it is bounded by KBch. and on the S. by the parganah of Jasu^ah
[turned into Jessore by Europeans], which lies between Otjllsah and Bangflah.

The SJlufafat-ut-Tavdbrflcb agrees ge n erally with the other two works, but
states that Ban^^lah is 400 knrok from E. to W.—from Chatganw to Gaijhl—
and 300 from N. to S. ; that it has the $ubah of BihSr on the W., on the S.
the high hills of sarkSr MBn^hu— [in two other MSS. • 3 >b and jsailf],
and the sea on the E.

The A’ln says it was divided [in Akbar’s reign] into 34 sarkdrs, and yielded
a revenue of 53 kurors, 4 laks, and 59,319 dams.

The Haft.IVlim states that it was divided fin Jahangir’s reign] into 32
tOsstans [or sarkdrs'\, and its revenue amounted to 5 laks, 97 . 57 ° rupJs. which,
at 40 ddsns the rQp^ are equivalent to 33 kurors, 9 laks, and 3S00 Jams.
There must be a mistake somewhere, as this amount of Jahangir’s revenue is
not half that of Aurangztb’s time, while Akbar’s revenue greatly exceeds
Aurangztb’s.

According to the ShulZfat-ut-TawSrlkb, it was divided [in Aurangzlb’s
reign] into 37 sarkdrs, and )rielded 46 kurors and 39 laks of dams.

594 the TABA¥AT<X-NA$IR1.

he conferred BihSr upon Malik *lzz-ud-Dtn, jSnt; and
Sultan Ghiyas-ud-Dln. *Iwaqt. marched into BihSr fromLakh-
anawat!, and [again] took possession of it, and treated it
with severity, until, in the year 624 H., the august* Malik,
Na^ir-ud-Din, Mahmud Shah, son of Sultan Shams-ud-
Dln [I-yal-timi sh ]. at the instigation* of Malik ’Izz-ud-Dtn,
Jant', assembled the forces of Hindustan, and marched
from Awadh and proceeded into Lakhapawatt. At this ^ime
Sultan Ghivas-ud-Dln. *Iwaf-i>j|^usain, the Sba-lji had led
an army from Lakhanawa^l towards the territoiy of
Kamrud and ^ang, and had left the city of Lakha^watt

further—^in which the T^ba^t-i>Akbart and some others agree—that I-3ral>
tlmiih conferred a canopy of state and a dur-bSsh [see note *, page 607] upon
his eldest son, Nifir-ud-Din, Mahmud declared him heir-apparent,

bestowed Lakhaiuiwatt upon him, and left him in Awadh with jurisdiction
over those parts. Mahmud Shah may have been left in Awadh with charge
of that part, but not of Lakhaiiawad c ert ai nl y; for Qh>]^-ad-Dtn, ’Iwaf, ruled
over his own territory up to the time of his death. The son of I-yal-timioli
was probably left in Awadh to watch for a favourable time for invading or
seizing the Skalj dominions, which he soon found an opportunity of doing.

■ He is styled in several copies, but it cannot be correct, considering,
he died a luitural death, according to our author’s own account, as given at page
630. The word no doubt, is an error for —august, Ac.

* Compare Elliot, India, xoL ii. page 219.

* In the account of Malik N2f ir-ud-Dfn, Mahmud page 62^, and here

also, in some copies of the text, and in some other works, he is styled ’Al2-ud-
Dln, Jani. He is, no doubt, the personage referred to in the list of relatives
and chiefs at the end of Sbams-ud-Dtn, I-yal-timiflJt’s reign, under the title of
Shah-zadah. or Prince of Turkistan ; but he only served I-yal-timish : he was
no relative. Soon after Sultan Shams-ud-Dtn, I-yal-timish. returned to Dihll,
Sultan Gh ivas-ud-Dln. 'Iwa;, marched into Bib 2 r, and r^[ained possession of
it, compelling Malik Janl to fly into Awadh. The Ehslj ruler held possession
of it for some time, until the year 624 H., when Malik NSyir-ud-Dln, MahmGd
Shah. T-yal-timish’s eldest son, who held the government of Awadh, incited
by Malik J 2 nl and some other chiefs, and taking advantage of Sultiln GhiySy-
ud-Din, ’Iwaf’s absence on an expedition against the infidels on his eastern
frontier in Bang and Kamrud, with the greater part of his forces, suddenly and
without any previous intimation, invaded his dominions with a great army, in¬
cluding forces sent by his father for the same purpose. As soon as Ghi yaff-ud-
Dfn, ’Iwaf, received information of it, he made all haste back to defend his
kingdom ; but whether part of or all his army returned with him is doubtful, and
no aid from without could reach him, except through Hindustan. The enemy
had already taken the capital, and, in a great battle subsequently fought between
him and the invaders, Sultan Gbiyag-ud-Dfn, 'Iwaf, with most of his chiefs
were taken captive and afterwards put to death. Some state that he was slain
in the battle. A son of his [by some accounts a Idnsmsm]—Malik I]|^tiyar-ud-
Din, Daulat Shah-i-Balka—subsequently regained and held sway over the
territory for a time, and Sbams-ud-Din, 1 -yal-timisb, had to proceed in person
against him with a great army.

inis KHALJ MALIKS

i^ais-HAJJIAWATI.

MatniOd gljah. took

Sch *-eturned from that force

Lwiiich he had led into K5mrud and Bang and fouphr

aSErot r Mitcmod aS

^ y § ud-Din, Iwaf-i-Husain, and the whole of the Khali
Amirs, were taken prisoners, and Sultan Ghiyag-udlDin

iShTy ^endedlvL'a

ELPHiNSTVNEhasbeen bl mir l^^^ ™

ukS™t““s ” "■' Kh-iidwof

Bengal; but I venture to hooe thi^^tl! ^ *“* acquainted with

in further research The daSeSSr "n ?’ "<1

with facility. ^ ‘° follo'v up the inquiry

SECTION XIX.

ACCOUNT OF THE SULJANS OF GHAZNIN OF THE SHANSAB-

ANiAH DYNASTY.

The frail and humble authcM* [of these pages], Minhaj-i-
Saraj-i-Dtn>i-Minhaj ‘—the Almighty shield his deformity!
—^thus states, that this Section is confined to the mention
of the Shansabani Sultans from whose majesty the throne
of the court of Ghaznin acquired splendour and mag¬
nificence, and from whose sovereignty the countries of
Hind and Khurasan became glorious, the first of whom, of
the Shansabi race, was Sultan Saif-ud-Din, Suri, and, after
that, Sultan’ Ala-ud-D!n, Al-Husain took Ghaznin. but did
not rule there. After that, Sultan Mu’izz-ud-Dtn, Mu¬
hammad, son of Sam, captured it ’; and, when he attained
martyrdom, he devised that throne to his own slave,
Sultan Taj-ud-Din, Yal-duz, and with him that sovereignty
terminated. The mercy and pardon of the Almighty be
on the whole of them !

I. SULTAN SAIF-UD-DIN, SORI, son of 'IZZ-UD-DiN, AL-

9 USAIN.

Sultan Saif-ud-Dtn, Suri, was a great monarch, and was
greatly endowed with valour, vigour, clemency, decision,

* A title he sometimes gives himself which will be expltined in the Preietoiy
Remerics. The Mefonnitjr’ was not bodily.

* I fear our author had a veir bad memory. At page 377, and 449^ he says
his elder brother, GhiyKff-wl-Din, took it, and conferred the government of it
on Mu’iss-ud'Din, as his lieutenant Here it is contradicted, and the copies
of the text agree as to this name. Here too he says that Mn’isz-nd-Dlh
“devised” the throne of Ciliazntn to his slavey Tlj-ud^Dln, Yal-dns, and, in
his account of the latter, that be desired to bequeath it to hinu The idiom of the
text here again differs, but only the idiom, in the two different sets of copies.

THE SBANSABAn!AH dynasty of CHAZNIN. 439

justice, beneficence, a graceful presence, and kingly
grandeur. He was the first person of this race to whom
they accorded the title of Sultan *.

When the news of the misfortune which had befallen his
eider brother, the Malik-ui-Jibal^, was brought to his [Saif-
ud-Din, Suri’s] hearing, he set about taking revenge upon
Sultan Bahram Shah, and caused a numerous army to be
got in readiness from the different tracts of Ghur, and set
out towards Ghaznin, overthrew Bahram Shah, and took
Ghaznln. Bahram Shah fled from before him, and retired

■ This personage should have been mentioned first after the death of his
father, whose successor he was, and when the dominions were divided, and
separate petty dynasties formed. Who “they" were who accorded him the
title of Sultan the chronicler does not say.

^ ^utb-ud-Din, Muhammad, Malik-ul-Jil»L Jibal signifies mountain^:
“yaUdi” nothing. At page 339 our author states that Saif-ud>Dtn, Suit, in
succession to his father, ascended the throne of Ghur, and divided the territoiy
among his brothers.

Alft says that BahiSm Shiih put ^utb-ud-Dtn, Ghnrt, the Malik-ul-Jibil,
to death in 536 of the Ri^lat [547 H.], on which 'Ald-»d-Dtn, Al-Htuain,
[Guztdah and Khuia^t-ul-Alchtar, and ^abtb-us-Siyar also agree] advanc^
against Ghasntn for the purpose of avenging him. BahrSm Shah fled'to
Kafman, situated in a strong country surrounded by hills, where cavaliy could
not act, and made it his residence: having gained possession of

Gbasntn, left his brother, Saif-ud-Dtn, Suit, there, and returned himself to
Ghur. SGrt, placing dependence on the Amtrs and troops of Ghazntn to
support him, remained there with but a few of the Ghurlan troops. When
winter arrived, Bahram Shah advanced from Kapnan with an army of Afghans
and Shaljts, which he had raised, on which the Amtrs seized Sfirt. This
took place in Muharram 537 of the Rihlat [548 h.], but Guzidah and Jami’-
ut-Taw 2 rt]ch say in 544 H., and both Gu^dah, ^abib-us-Siyar, and FanGkatt
state, that Bahram Shah was dead before ’A 12 -ud-Dtn [who is said to have
been known as A’baj, or the lame from birth] reached Ghazntn the sfcomd
time.

Since writing note *, page 347, I find that, in 543 h., some time after
Sulfin Sanjar’s defeat by the ^la-Shita-ts [authors disagree as to the date
of his overthrow. See note *, page 154], imd when he had retired into
’Irftkf Sulpin BahrSm Shah, his sister’s son, sent him a despatch intimating
his recovery of Ghazntn, and the death of Sdm and .SBr^'the Gh Orts [lumely,
Bah&>nd-Dtn, Sim, and Saif-ud>Dtn, Suit. See pages 340—343,] who had
previously acquired power over that territory, on which Fakhr-ud-Dtn, Shilid,
FOahnnjt, a poet of the Court of Sanjar, composed the following lines :—

“ They, who in thy service falsehood brought.

The capital'Stock of their heads in jeopardy placed.

Far remote from thee, Sim’s head, in frenzy sank.

And now the head of SGrt they’ve to ’Irih brou^t.”

This tends to confirm the .date mentioned by Guztdah and others, and to
show that the Ghurts had been guilty of hypocrisy, as .many authors state,
towards Bahrim Shalt, as well as Suljan Sanjar. .See pige 343.

440 THE TABAf:AT.I-NA$IRl.

towards Hind, and Saif-ud-Din, Surf, ascended the throne
of Ghaznln. and made over the dominions of Qitur to his
brother, Baha-ud-Dfn, Sam, the father of [the Sulfans]
Gh ivas-ud-Din. and Mu’izz-ud-Din.

Having brought Gh aznln under his sway, the whole of
the Amirs * and soldiery, the notables and great men of
Ghaznln and of the adjacent parts submitted to him ; and
he bestowed upon those classes ample gifts and favours, so
much so, that the soldiery and Amirs of Bahram Shah
became overwhelmed in the benefits he bestowed upon them.

When the winter season came round, he commanded
that the forces of Gh ur should have permission granted
them to return to their own country, and entertained the
followers, soldiery, and petty officials of Bahram Shah in
his own service, and placed confidence in them. The
Sulfan and his Wazlr, Sayyid Majd-ud-Dln, Musawl, along
with a small number of persons from among his old
retainers, were all that remained with him, and the rest
[both] at the court, and [stationed] in the Qhaznln territory,
were all the soldiery of Ghaznln.

When storms of snow and excessive cold set in, and the
roads and passes of Gh ur became closed from the excessive
snow, and the people of Ghaznln became aware that it was
impossible that troops or succour could reach Gh aznln from
the side of Gh ur. they despatched letters, secretly, to the pre¬
sence of Bahram Shah, saying, “ throughout the entire city
and parts around, only a small number of persons have re¬
mained with Sultan Surl of the forces of Ghur, the whole
of the remainder are the servants of the Mahmudl dynasty.
It behoveth [the Sultan] not to let the opportunity slip
through his hands, and he should repair to Ghaznln with
all possible haste.” In accordance with those letters and
solicitations, Bahram Shah, from the side of Hindustan,
advanced unexpectedly and reached Gh aznln. and made a
night attack upon Sultan Surf. He came out of Ghaznln
with his own particular followers who were from Ghur, and
along with his Wazlr, Sayyid Majd-ud-Dln, Musawl, took
the road to Gh ur *.

» Some copies have, ri'ayd, —the people, the peasantry, &c.

* It would have been just as diflficult for him to reach Qliur from Qbarntn,
as it was impracticable for troops from {ahuf joining him at Gharnfn.

44*

THE SHANSABAnIAH DYNASTY OF GHA ZNfN.

Bahrain grab’s horsemen set out in pursuit of him, until
t^ey discovered him in the precincts of Sang-i-Sur 5 .kh ^ [the
Ferfoltited Rock or Stone]. SultAn Surf, with the few
followers that were along with him, joined battle with
BahrSm Shah’s cavalry, and fought and opposed them as
long as it was possible so to do ; and, when compelled,to
fight on foot, they took shelter on the hill [side]. It was
impossible to surround the Sultan, his Waztr, and his own
followers, whilst an arrow remained in their quivers. When
not an arrow remained in their quivers, Bahram Shah’s
troops, by [entering into] stipulation, and pledging the
right hand, seized them, and secured them

When they reached the gate [one of the gates.?] of the
city [of Gh aznln]. two camels * were brought, and Sultan

* There are three or four places bearing this name, the correctness of which
there is'no doubt of. It is the name of a kotal or pass near the Halmand river,
about N.N.W. of Qkazntn, on the route from that city, and also from KSbul
into Ghu r j but **Sang-i-Surkh, a strong fort in Ghor, probably near the Hari
Truer,” is as impossible as “ the mountains of Faj Hanls&r ” and " the R&siat
mountains.’*

* If a little liberty were taken with the text, then it might be ** by promise
[of safety], and their [BahrSm’s officers] pledging their right hands, they were
captured and secured," &c.; but, seeing that they were at the mercy of
BahrSm’s troops, I do not see what stipulations were necessary. Our author,
as usual, wishes to soften it down.

* According to others, he was not so much honoured as to be placed on a
camel, but was seated, with his face blackened, on an emaciated bullock, and
paraded through the capital. From statements noticed in Dow’s and Briggs’
translations of Firishtah’s History, to which all modem compilers of
Histories of India resort, as authorities not to be doubted, but which state¬
ments, I was convinced, could not be correct, I have taken the trouble to
examine Firisbtah’s text, more particularly, because that writer quotes our
author as one of his principal authorities, and often quotes him verbatim. I
have also used in this examination the lithographed text which Briggs himself
edited, or, rather, which was edited under his superintendence ; and, as I
expected, particularly in the passages now to be pointed out, I have found
Firitlitah generally correct, and his translators wholly wrong. I am not the
first, however, who has noticed them, and I beg leave to observe that I have
no desire whatever to take, from Dow or Briggs, any credit that may be due
to them, although I dare say there are some who will view what I have done
in quite another light; but if truth in history be desirable, and correct transla¬
tions of native historians wanted, it is time that these grave errors were pointed
out and corrected, however distasteful it may be to those who have written
their histories, fancying these versions reliable, and disgusting to those who,
not even knowing a letter of any Oriental alphabet themselves, have presumed
to declare such Histories compiletl from such incon-ect translations, " •zvorks of
undoubted authority.” To exjwse and correct such errors is a duty, when it
is taken into consideration that such incorrect statements, .which are not con-

F f

44 »

THE TABA¥AT.I-NA$IRI.

SQiI was seated upon one, and his Waztr, Sayyid Majd'Ud>
Dtn, Musawt, was placed on the other, and they were both

taitud in tht.original w&rk, have been, and are still being taught in our colle^'cs
and schools. A careful writer like Elfhinstone, by the translations above
referred to, has been betrayed into terrible errors, and others have repeated and
re-echoed them down to the present day.

To those conversant with the Persian language and who can read for them¬
selves, I say: do not £ul to see for yourselves, for the lithographed text of
Firishtah is as easy as possible. It does not matter if, in translating, the
literal words are not given; but FACTS must not be distorted, or made to

appear what they are not.

Dow.

He \Byram, which is the name
he gives to BahrSm] soon after pub¬
licly executed Makommed Prince of
Char, who was son-in-law to the rebel
Balin. . . . Sei/ ul dien, sur-

named Souri, Prince of Char, brother
to the deceased, raised a great army
to revenge his death. . . . The

Prince of Char, without further oppo¬
sition, entered the capital, where he
establbhed himself, by the consent of
the people, sending Alla, his brother,
to rule his native principality of Ghor.

. . . . It was now winter, and

most of the followers of the Prince of
Ghor had returned, upon leave, to
their families, when Byram, unex¬
pectedly, appeared before Ghizni,
with a great army. Seiful dien being
then in no condition to engage him
with his own troops, and having little
dependence upon those of Chitui,
was preparing to retreat to Ghor,
when the Ghitnians entreated him to
engage By ram, asul that they would
exert themsdves to the utmost in his
service. This was only a trick for an
opportunity to put their design in
execution. As the unfortunate prinm
was advancing to engage Byram he
was surrounded by the troops of
Ghixni, and taken prisoner, while
Byram in person put the forces of
Ghor to flight. The unhappy captive
was inhumanly ordered to have his
forehead made black, and then to be
put astride a sorry bullock, with his
face turtud towards the tail.

When this news was carried to the

Briggs.

“He \Beirani\ soon after publicly
executed Kootb-ood-Dien Mahomed
Ghoory Affghan [this last word is
not contained in Firishtah at all, and
is the traiulator’s own. Malcolm
too, Persia: Vol. i., note*, page 344,
quotes Prick —Vol. ii. page 309 —
as an authority for “ Syfudeen Souri ’*
[Saif-ud-Dtn, Sftrt 7 ] being ** an Af¬
ghan prince ef Ghour." I felt con¬
vinced^ that Price would never have
said %), and, on reference to the page,
find he makes no such statement It
must be Briggs to whom Malcolm
referred], to whom he had given his
daughter in marriage. . . . Seif-

ood-Deen-Soory, Prince of Ghoor,
brother of the deceased, raised a great
army to revenge bis death. . . .

Seif-ood-Deen Ghoory, without further
opposition, entered Ghitny, where,
having established himself with the
consent of the people, he sent his
brother, Alla-o^-Deen Soar {sic) to
ride his native principality of Ghoor.

. . . It was now winter, and

most of the followers of the Prince of
Ghoor had returned to their families,
when Sooltan Beiram nnexpeciedly
appeared before Ghimt^ with a con-
riderable army. Seifood-Deen being
in no condition to oppose him yrith
his own troops, and placing little
reliance on those of Ghitny, was
preparing-to retreat to Ghoor, when
the Ghitnevides entreated him to engage
Beiram, promising to exert themselves
to the utmost. This was done only to
enable them to put their design of

443

THE SHANSABAnIAH DYNASTY OF OHAZN iN.

publicly exposed about the streets of Qhazntn, and, from
the house-tops, dust, ashes, and excrement were launched

seizing him into execution. The
Clwory Prince advanced, but was
instantly surrounded by the troops of
Gkimtiy, and taken prisoner, lokiU
Bttrank in ptrton put th* finxes of
Gkoor to flight. The unhappy captive
bad his forthead blackened, and was
seated astride on a bullock, vfith his
face tosoards ths tail. . . . 'When

this news reached the ears of his
brother Atta-ood-Deen, he burnt with
fuiy, and, having determined to take
revenge, invaded Ghizny.”—VoL i.
pages 151-2.

But what says Firishtah ?—"In the latter part of his [Bahram’s] sovereignty,
^utb-ud-Dtn, Muhammad, Gh urt. Surt [this is incorrect: he was not named
Surf, Soif-ud-Dln was so named. I also beg to remark that this is the name of
a man, not of a race or tribe\, who was his son-in-law, was put to death at
Chnsntn by command of Bahmm Shah. Saif-ud-Dln, Surt, in order to avenge
his brother’s blood, set out towards Ghazntn. . . . Saif-ud-Dtn, having

entered Ghozntn and become possessed of it, and, placing faith in the Ghazna.
wjts, was there located. He sent back his brother, ’Ali-ud-Dln, along with
the whole of the old Amtrs, to Ohut > notwithstanding that Saif-ud-
Dtn, sort, used to treat the people of Ghaznln with lenience, and that the
Qhurl&ns did not dare to oppress them, the Ghaznawis wished for Bahrilm
Steih ; and, although they used, outwardly, to show amity towards Saif-ud-
Din. Surt, secretly, they useil to carry on a correspondence with Bahiam Shah,
until the winter set in, and the roads into Ghur were closed by snow, and
people were unable to pass to and fro. At this time Bahiiin\ Shah unex¬
pectedly reached Ghazntn with a large army of Afghans [he does not say they
were Suils or Gh urtsl- Khalj . and other dwellers in the wilds. At this time
when not more than ten leagues intervened between them, Saif-ud-Dln, Surt,
having received information of it, held consultation with the Gh aznawis—who
had been talking of their friendship and attachment—as to fighting, or retreating
towards Gh ur. They, making hypocrisy their garment, did not give him just
counsel, and excited and stimulated him to fight. Saif-ud-Dln, Surl, placing
faith in the counsel given by them, issued from the city with a body of the men of
Qliaznln,and a few of the men of Gh ur. and marshalled his ranks opposite [those
of] Bahi£m Sha h. As yet the preparations for battle were not completed, when
the Gha znawis seized Saif-ud-Dln, Surl, and, in high spirits, delivered him over
to Bahiam Sha h. He commanded that theface of Saif-ud-Dln, Surl, should be
blackened; and,having placed him on an emaciated and weak bullock, which put
one foot before the other with a hundred thousand shakings, they paraded him
throughout the whole city. [There is not a word about raith his face to the tail —
which is an Indian bazar term. ] . . . When this terror-striking news came

to the hearing of’Ala-ud-Din, the fervour of his nature burst out, and, with the
determination of avenging his brother, with a furious and relentless ariiiy, lie
set out towards Gh azntn.” This is a literal translation of Firiahtah’s words.

Then follow, in the two translations, things respecting ’Ala-ud-Dln and his

F f 2

ears of his brother Alla, he burnt
with mge^ and, resolving upon re¬
venge, with all his united powers,
invaded GhUny,” — Vol. i. pages
134-S-

444 the taba?:At.i-nA$irL

upon their sacred heads until they reached the head of t^e

doings, still more absurd and incorrect, which had better have been noticed in
the account of ’AIa-ucl- 1 ~)tn, but, at that time, I had not the least conception
that Briggs and Dow were so much alike, and hod not compared their state¬
ments with tltc original. Both transl.ators leave out Firishtah’a statement,
that, “before the arrival of ’Ala-ud-Din,<'Bahram Shah had died, and his son,
Kh iisraii ^hah, had succeeded to the tirronc, and was made captive by means of
treachery,’’and they merely give wliat iMrightah says was the common tradition
that Bahram encountered ’Aia-ud-Dln, a.s our author states. “ Alla ” is
supirosed by the translators to have replied to “o letter" written by Bahrain
Shah, in these terms:—

Dow. Briggs.

“Alla replietl, ‘ 77 iat his threats “Alla-ood-Deen replied, ‘ That
ii<ere as impotent as his arms. That it his threats soere as imjpotent as his

was no new thing for kings to make arsns; that it was no new thing for

war u|x>n their neighbours; but that kings to make war on their neigh-

barbarity like .his was unknown to hours, but that barbarity like his was

the. brave, and what he liad never unknown to the brave, and sueh os he

heard to have been exercised upon had never heard of being exercised

princes. 'i'hat he might be assured towards princes ; that he might be

that God had fonsaken liyram, and assured that God had forsaken him,

ordained Alla to be the instrument of and had ordained that he {Alla-ootl-

ihat just vengeance which was de- JHeen) should be the instrument of

noiiiiccd against him for putting to that just revenge denounced ngaiiist

death the representative of the long- him for putting to death the represen-

imiepemlent anti fery ancietit family tative of the intiependent and very

ef Ghor.'" —Page 126. ancient family of Glsoor,'" —Page 152.

There is nothing of this kind in the original. Firi^htak says: “Bahram
Shah despatched an emissary with <i message. ’Ala-ud-Dfn replied: ‘ This
act which Bahram Shah has perpetrated is a sign of the wane of the dominion
of the Gh aznawts. because, although sovereigns are used to lead armies against
the dominions of each other, and, having overcome each other, are in the habit
of dcjjriving each other of their precious lives, still not with this disgrace and
ignominy; and it is certain that heaven wilt take vengeance upon thee a.s a
retribution and exemplary punishment, and will give me triumph oi'er thee ! ’’
'I'liere is nothing more than this in the original. Compare these passages in
Prick’s Mahommnian Ilisto/y, vol. ii. pages 309—311. He translates it
from Firightah correctly although he docs not profess to do so literally.

One more specimen here and I have done with this reign:—

Dow. Briggs.

“At first the troops of Ghizni, by “At first the troops of Ghizuy, by
their superior numbers, bore down their superior numbers, bore down

those of Ghor; till Alla, seeing his those of Ghoor; till Alla-ood-Deen,

aflfairs almost desperate, called out to seeing his affairs desperate, called out

two gigantic brothers, whose name to two gigantic brothers, denominated

was Chirmil, the greater and the less, the greater or lesser Khus-mil [In a

whom he saw in the front, like Hoo note, he says, he doubts whether this

rocks bearing against the torrent. . , word should not be Fimtil, and sayp

fiyram fled, with the scattered remains there is a tribe so called 1 I ! Ellipt;

of hU army, towards//indostan ; but Index, page 157, note, writes their

he was overwhelmed with his mis- name Sirfil, and says Briggs [who

THE SHANSABANIAH DYNASTY OF GHAZN!N.

445

Pul-i-Yak * [the One-arch Bridge] of the city. When
they reached that place, Sultan Surt, and his Wazir, Sayyid
Majd-ud-Dtn, Musawt, were gibbeted, and. they were both
hung from the bridge. Such was the cruelty and ignominy
with which they treated that handsome, just, intrepid, and
laudable monarch. The Almighty bestowed victory upon
Sultan ’Ala-ud-Din, Husain, Jahan-soz, the brother of
Sultan Suri, so that he took revenge for this barbarous
deed and this dishonour, as has been previously recorded *.

read it correctly, but spoilt it after] “ is
wrong” 1 1 Sec pages 350 and 351],
whom he saw in the front standing
like tioo rocks, and bearing ike brunt 0/
the action, to support him,

Beiratu fled wit]i the scattered remains
of his army towards f/indiutan, but
overwhelmed with his misfortunes,
sunk under the hand of death in the
year A. ll. 547, after a reign of thirty-
five years.”

The alxrve is copied by Mauricf., and by Elpiiinstone, although not quite
in the same jvords; and is re-echoed by Marshman in his IIistory_of IttuiA,
“written at the request of the University of Calcutta;” and Meadows Taylor,
in the Student’s Manual of Indian History, who improves it, by inserting
in the margin of page 89—“ Ghusny plundered by Alla oc^ Deen, Seljuk ” ! I!
Firishtah’s account is as follows:—

“ When the two armies came in contact, and the noise of the clashing of
swords, and the whiz of arrows reached the vengeance-pursuing heavens, Kha r-
mil the greater [older], and Kha r-mil the lesser [younger], entered the field
like unto two rampant elephants. Kh ar-mtl the greater with a poniard ripped
up the belly of a famous elephant,” &c. [There is not a word about “ rocks,”
“torrents,” or anything approaching it.] . . . “ Bahram Shah, being with-

out heart or strength in every way, fled towards the country of Hind, and, in
a very short time, through grief rind affliction at the loss of his son, and other
matters, fell sick, and was removed from this hostel of mortality to the gardens
of eternity. According to the authentic account, his death took place in
547 H., after thirty-five years’ reign.”

Firightah himself is not an author on whom implicit reliance can be placed,
even though he quotes from the works of others, for he often mis-quotes them.
This is particularly apparent from his account of these events under the reign
of Bahrftm Shah, and that of the some events in the chapter on the Ghurls,
which is very different, and utterly contradictory, in many things, of his
previous statements given above.

' See page 355, and note *.

* Everything is barbarous, cruel, savage, and the like that others do to Qkurls;
but inducing a sovereign to come out of and abandon his capital and surrender
after pledging to him the most solemn oaths, and then imprisoning him, and
afterwards murdering him, and the rest of his raee ; inducing a noble to turn
his back before shooting him in a cowardly manner; inviting his brother to

fortunes, and sunk under the luind of
death, in the year five hundred and
forty-seven, after a reign of ihiity-five
years.”—Page 127.

44*

THE TABA]^T-I-NA$IR!.

II. SULJAN-UL-A’ZAM », MU*IZZ-UD-DUNYA WA UD-DIN,
ABO-L-MUZAFFAR, MU 9 AMMAD, SON OF BAHA-UD-DIN,
sAm, ^asIm-i-amIr-ul mOminIn.

Trustworthy narrators have related after this manner,
that, when Sultan 'Ala-ud-D!n, Husain, Jahan-soz, was
removed from the habitation of the world, and Sultan
Saif-ud-Din, Muhammad, his son, ascended the throne of
Gh ur. he commanded, that both the Sultans *, Gh ivas-ud-
Din, Muhammad, and Mu’izz-ud-Din*, Muhammad, sons

an audience, and having him baiely assassinated; flaying a minister alive;
digging up the bones of the dead; massacring women and children, and
burning a city in a drunken fit, and mixing the blood of Sayyids with earth to
make mortar, ali these, on the part of a Gh urt, are mildness, amiabiiity,
beneficence, greatness, and the like. Fanakati says no less tlian 70,000 persons
were massacred, on this occasion, in Qliaznln alone.

* Some copies of the text, the idiom of which differs considerably here, have
Sultan-t- Gha zt; and most copies leave out the ^astin, &c. His titles given
at the end of his reign [which see] are altogether different.

Between the putting to death of Snif-ud>Dln, SCirf, and the establishment of
Mu’izz-ud'Dln at Ghaznin as his elder brother and sovereign's lieutenant, a
period of no less than twenty-six years elapsed , but, as our author gives no
dates, the uninitiated reader would imagine that Mu’izz-ud-Dfn succeeded
close upon Saif-ud-Dfn, Surt. In reality, Mu’izz-ud-Dln is the first of the
Gh Srfan dynasty of Qhaziitn.

* Sultans subsequently.

* This personage is incorrectly styled by the impossible title of Shakdbn~d-
din, Shahab-ood-Detn, and even Shabudin^ Shihab-ud-Dtn. which is Arabic,
was certainly his title before his brother succeeded to the sovereignty of Gh Or.
and his brother’s was Shams-ud-Dtn; but soon after the accession of the
latter both their titles were changed, as mentioned at page 370. Many
authors, either not noticing this fact, or ignorant of it, continued to style the
former by bis first title of Shihab-ud-Din. and some have reversed the order
of things, and appear to have imagined that Mu’izz-ud-Dln was his. first title,
which was changed to Shihab-ud-Din: but no such title will be found on his coins.
I have, myself, been led into the error of occasionally styling him Shihab-ud- Dtn
in my notes to the Kh warazint dynasty, page 255-260, an oversight I now
correct. Firiahtah calls him sometimes Shihab-ud-Dtn. Muhammad, the
Gh firt. and at others Mu’izz-ud-Dtn, Muhammad, the Gh urt. Dow, in his
translation of Firiahtah, chose to style him Mahosnnted Chori, as though the
last word was part of his proper name, iirstead of that of his country, and
overlooked the fact of the at the end of Gh urt [ijjjb'J, being the yfi-i-
nbbat, expressing relation or coimexion, as Hind and Hindt, Kfibul, Kfibult,
&C., and so compilers of Histories of India have re-echoed the name of
Mahoiruned Ghori down to the present day, although some follow Briggs, who
sometimes styles him by the impossible titles of Shahab-ood-Deen, and Moyiss-
ood-Deett ; but he too generally follows Dow, and calls him Mihomed Ghocry.
See also Elliot, India : vol a, page 292.

THE SHANIabANIAH dynasty OP OBAZNIN. 447

of Sam, wh9 were'iiftprisoiied within the fortress of Wajtr-
istan, shpuld be released, as has been stated previously in
the account of Sultan Ghiyas-ud-ntn •.

Sultan Ghiyas-ud-Dln abode at the court of F!raz-koh
in the servite of Sultan Saif-ud-Dln [his cousin], and
Sultan Mu|izz-ud-Dtn proceeded to the court of Bamtan
to the presence of his uncle, Malik Fa]chr-ud-Dtn, Mas’ud-
i-^usain Bamtant

When Sultan ^iya^-ud-Dln ascended [the throne of]
the dominion of Qhur, after the catastrophe * of Suftan
Saif-ud-Dln, Muhammad, and the news of it reached
Bamtan, Malik FaJshr-ud-Dtn, Mas’ud, turned his face
towards Mu’izz-ud-Dtn and said : “ Thy brother hath dis¬
tinguished himself; when wilt thou do* the like, and
bestir thyself?” Mu’izz-ud-Dln hung his head in the
presence of his uncle, and left the audience hall, and set
out then and there for the Court of Ftruz-koh. When he
reached the presence of Ghiya^ud-Dln [his brother], he
became Sar-i-Jandar [Chief Armour-Bearer], and he con¬
tinued to serve his brother, and served him with assiduity,
as has been previously recorded.

He continued in his brother’s service for the period of
one year, when some cause of umbrage’ arose in his august
mind, and he proceeded towards Sijistan, to [the Court of]
Malik Shams-ud-Dln. Sijistan! *, and there he remained one
cold season. Sultan Qhiyas-ud-Dln despatched a distin-

* Guzfdah, and some other works, mention that ’AUl-nd*Din, H’***^»>

made Hart his capital, and conferred the sovereignty of fihaznin upon his
nephew, QhijdiS-ud-Dtn, as his deputy [The othm say “his nephews,
GbiyuS'ud-Dfn, and Mu’izz-ud-Dtn ”], and that he [others “they”] succeeded,
by treachery, in securing the person of Shusruu Sll***> 555 H. ; but from

this statement, and what those writers immediately after state, it is evident,
beyond a doubt, that they have confused QJiiyag wkb Mu’izz, and Shusrau
SbSh with IQiusrau Malik his son.

7 Eldest son of ’Izz-ud-Dfo, AbHusain, and first of the Qllfirfiln rulers of
BSmhbt.

* He was mortally wounded and Idt for dead in the action with the

by Abg-l-*Abbas-i-Shls. brother of the noble be had so treacherously
shot with an arrow when his back was turned. See page 367.

■ The words if in Persia, and in the Persian of the East, signify
“ svilt thou dos” not *'thau art doing”

> Because bis brother GhiySs-ud-Dln had not conferred a separate appanage
on him.

* The Molik-uS'Sil’fs [the Sangi|inary], Sboms.ud-Dln, Muhammad, who
succeeded his Iktber Taj-ud-Dfn, AbC-l-Fat^ in 559 u. See page 1891

448 THE TABA 9 ;AT.I.NA$IRI.

gulshed person and brought him bade again, and com¬
mitted to his charge the territory of I^a^r-i-Kajuran and
Istlah. After he had brought the whole of the district of
Garmstr under his authority, Sultan Ghiyag-ud-Dln en¬
trusted to him the city of Tigjn-abad, which was one of
the largest cities of Garmsir*. This Tigin-abad is the
place about which, and the possession of it by the Sultans
of Qliur, the downfall of the dynasty of Mahmud-i-Ghazl.
son of Sabuk-Tigin, has been caused, and about which
Sultan ’Ala-ud'D!n, l^usain, had improvised and sent to
Khusrau Shah, son of Bahram Shah, the quatrain, which is
as follows :—

*'Thy father first laid the foundation of enmity.

Hence the world’s people all under oppression fell.

Have a care, lest for one Tigtn-atS.d * thou dost not give.

From end to end, the kingdom of Mal^ud’s dynasty to the wind.”

The Almighty’s mercy be upon the Sultans of both
dynasties !

When Sultan* Mu’izz-ud-Din acquired the territory of
Tig!n-abad, the Ghuzz tribe', and the chieftains of that
sept, who, retiring defeated from before the forces of Khita*,
had moved towards Ghazntn. during a period of twelve

* Dow says, in his translation of Ftrishtah : “ Mahommed Ghori was left
by his brother [Yeas ul dien I] when he acceded {sic) to the throne of Ghor, in
command at Tunganabad, in the province of Chorassan,” Briogs has :
“ On the accession of Gheias-ood-Deen to the throne of Ghitny and Ghor, he
appointed his brother, Moyit-ood-Deen Mahomed [not called " Mahomed
Ghoory” here], governor of Tukeeabad"ll Firishtah, who quotes our author,
sajrs: "Gliijns-ud-Dtn, Muhammad-i-Sam, on attaining the sovereignty of
( 22 |ur, left his full brother, Mu’lzz-ud-Dtn, who is renowned as Shihab-ud-Din.
at Tigtn-aldd, which belongs to the territory of Garmstr.” He was only
“ renowned as Shihftb»ud-Dtn ” by Firishtah, and a few other comparatively
modem writers who, perhaps, knew not of the passage in our author where he
memions the change of title by both brothers. The Taj>ul>Ma’aair written,
or, at least, begun before the Sultan’s death, does not mention the word
Sbihab any more than our author.

* The citadel of this place is situated on the Koh-.USber, and is sometimes
called the fortress of Koh-i-Sber, and is mentioned by Baiha]tt; but, in the MS.
copies of Baiha^t, is called Aytktn-abSd. This remark above would indicate
that Shusiau SbS'h, not Bahiftm, was ’Ala*nd'Din’s antagonist. See note *,
page 347 -

* Not Sultan then but Malik. The title was conferred after this.

* The word used signifies an army [not “armies”], but, as all the able
men of the tribe carried arms, I have not used the word in its literal sense.

^ Before the ^rlugblah Turkomans. Sec note *, paia. i, page 374.

THE fiHANSABANlAH DYNASTY OF GHAZNIN. 449

years had taken the Ghaanin territory out of the hands of
Kh usrau Shah and of Khusrau Malik; and had brought it
under their own sway. Mu’izz-ud-Din was in the constant
habit of making raids upon the Ghuzz from Tigin-abad,
and assailing them, and continued to harass that territory
until the year 569 H. when Sultan Gh iyas-ud-Din sut^
dued Gha znin. and placed Sul^n Mu’izz-ud-Din upon the
throne [of that territory] and returned to Qhur again, as
has been previously recorded.

The second year after this, [namely] in 570 H., Sult^
Mu’izz-ud-Din brought the districts of Ghaznin under his
sway, and acquired Gardaiz * ; and, in the third year [$71 H.]',
he marched an army towards Multan and delivered it from
the hands of the Karamitah and, in this year, 571 H., the

* There is some discrepancy among authors with respect to the date of the

capture of Gh aznin. Jahan-Aril, and Haft I]|^ltm say, Gh iyap-ud-Dln acquired
possession of Gh aznin in 570 H., after which he conferred the government of
it upon his brother, Mu’izz-ud-Dtn, as Walt [Haft I[^llm says, deputy or
lieutenant] ; Fa$i];t-t says Ghaznin was taken in 569 ; the Zubdat-ut'TawSrtkbt
which copies our author, also says 569; Tabaf^t-i-Akbart agrees with
Rau«at-uti-$afSl, an^ MuntaJdtab'Ut-Tawarlldl, that Gh>y&$*ud-Dtn took
Ghaznin from the Ghuzz. in 569, and conferred it on his brother, Mu'izz*ud-
Din, in 570 ; the TazVizat>ul>MuIuk of YabySr Shan, Mir’St-i-Jah£n-NumS,
and the Shi^SaNut-Tawarlhh say 569; the Lubb-ut-Taw&rtich'i-Hind says
Ghaz nin was given to Mu’izz-ud-Din in 567 ; and states that, the MahmQdts
had regained possession of it, and that Gh ivSs-ud-Dtn took it -from the Amirs
of Shusrau Malik (sic /). Buda’Sht states that some say GhiySs-ud-Dln took
it from the Ghuzz in 5^ H., and others, that he took it from Khusrau Malik
who had re-taken it from the Ghuzz. Alft states that Khusrau Shah himself’
returned to Ghaznin after the withdrawal of 'Al&-ud-Dln, but the Qhuzz,
who had defeated SultUn Sanjar [his great unde], were perpetually making
raids upon the Ghaznin territory, and he, Khusrau Sh^** ^ ^ott,

Khusrau Malik], again returned to Uhor, and the Ghuzz, taking possession
of Gliaznth, retained possession of it for ten years. Firiihtah, who does not
always copy his authorities correctly, says. Ghaznin was taken by Ghiy^’ud-
Din in 567 H., and that the Ghuzz only held it iwo years I

* Gaidais is the name of a large daraJk of the Tljlks, or TSzfks, for both
are correct [The Ghurls were themsdves T 9 .jlks]. with lofty hills on either
side, well watered, and once very populous and well cultivated. To the east
and south-east are Afghans. In Akbar's reign there was a strong castle here
named Gardaiz al.so. See note page 498.

* Three of the works just quoted state that Multan was taken in gjo H. ;
but Firiahtah. who is evidently wrong, has 572 H.

* Who had regained possession of it some years previously. He does not
mention the capture of Pchchah. which immediately followed that of Multan.
All account of the capture of O chch ah and the conduct .of Mu’izz-ud-Din has
bera given by Firiahtah, which has not been correctly rendered by his trans¬
lators, and makes the conduct of Mu’izz-ud-Din appear in a light contrary to

450

THE TABA9:AT.1.NA$1RL

San^uran tribe * broke out into rebellion, and committed
great violence, until, in the year 572 H., he marched an

* is the only work, among those previously quoted, which mentions

this aiiair. Therein it is stated that the SanVunin wen a tribe of the Ghusa.
They are referred to in the second paragraph of the note at the foot of page 290.
This name, in some copies of the text, is written Sonkurhln and SuhSn ; and,
in one of the oldest copies, Shanihzan. ShaluzSn appears to be the present
name of the locale of this tribe, which is also mentioned in the history of TtmOr.
See note', page 498. Some call it Sk<uiuz^.

facts ; and these mis-statements, to which I draw attention, have been n-echoed
by all the Indian History writers.

Dow, voL i. page 136.

“The prince of that place \Adja,
this is intended to represent OiJifJlidi]
shut himself up in a strong fort.
Alahommed b^;an to besiege the
place ; but, finding it would be a
difficult task to reduce it, he sent a
private message to the Jtajah's sm/e,
promising to marry her if she would
make away with her husband.

“The base woman returned for
answer that she was rather too old
herself to think of matrimony, but
that she had a beautiful young (hiugh*
ter, whom, if he would promise to
espouse, and leave her *// free pos¬
session of the eountry and its wealth,
she would, in a few days, remove the
Rajah. Mahomnted basely accepted of
the proposal, and the wicked woman
accordingly, in a few days, found
means to assassinate her husband, and
to open the gates to the enemy.
Mahommed confirm^ his promise by
marrying the daughter u[>on acknow¬
ledging the true faith, but made no
scruple to deviate from what respected
the mother ; for, instead of trusting
her with the country, he sent her off
to Ghnni, where she soon died of
grief and resentment. Nor did her
daughter relish her situation better;
for, in the space of two years, she
also fell a victim to grief.”

Briggs, voL i. page 169.

“ The Raja was besi^ed in his
fort (of Oocha); but Mahomed Ghoory,
finding it would be diffictdt to reduce
the place, sent a frivcUe message to the
Raja’s wife, promising to many her
if she would deliver up her husband.

“The base woman returned for
answer that she was rather too old
herself to think of matrimony, but
that she bad a beautful and youn^
daughter, whom, if he would promise
to espouse, and leave her in free pos¬
session of her viealth, she would, in a
fesv days, remove the Raja. Ma¬
homed Ghoory accepted the proposal;
and this Princess, in a few days, found
means to assassinate her huslMuid, and
open the gates to the enemy.

"VlrAiamtA.onlypasrtly performed his
promise, by marrying the daughter,
upon her embracing the true faith
[he could not marry her legally unless
she did so]; but he made no scruple
to depart from his engagements with
the mother ; for, instead of trusting
her with tXe country, he sent her to
Chiwny, where she afterwards died of
sorrow and disappointment. Nor did
the daughter long survive, for in the
space of two years she also fell a
victim to grief”

Firishtah’s account is as follows ;—

“The Rlijah of that country took refuge therein [in Ochdiali], and Sultin
Shihab-ud-Dtn pitched his tents and pavilion around the fort, and set about
preparations for investing it. As he knew thar to overcome that R&jah in
battle and capture the fort would be arduous, he despatched a person to the

451

THE SHANSABANIAH DYNASTV OF QHAZNIN.

army against them, and fell upon that people, and put the
greater number of them to the sword. They have related
that most of the San^uran tribe were manifestly confessors
of the Kur’an creed *, who, on this occasion, obtained mar¬
tyrdom ; but, as they had stirred up rebellion, they were
put to death, as a matter of exigency, according to sovereign
prerogative.

In the following year ® after this event, Sultan Mu’izz-
ud-Dtn marched an army towards Nahrwalah by way of
O^eJxah and Multan. The Rae of Nahrwalah, Bh!m
Diw *, was young in years, but he had numerous forces and
many elephants ; and, when a battle took place, the army
of Islam was defeated and put to the rout, and the Sultan-

wife of the Rajah, who wwj despotic aver her husband, and cajoled her, and
promised, saying : ‘ If, by your endeavours, this city shall be taken, having
contracted marriage with you, I will make you the Malikah-i-Jahan [Queen of
the Universe, i.e. his consort; but there is not a word about "making away
with,” or “delivering up her husband the offer is her own]. The Rajah’s
wife, frightened of or at the power and grandeur of the Suljan, and knowing
that he would be victorious [over her husband, and capture the pla9c], sent a
reply, saying ; * No worthiness remains to me, but I have a daughter possessed
of t^auty to perfection, and grace. If the Malik consents, he may take her
into the bonds of marriage ; but, after taking the city, if he will not evince any
avarice tovrards my own peculiar property and e£fects [not a word about entrust¬
ing the country to her], I will remove the R§jah.’ The Sultan agreed, and in
a short time that woman caused her husband to be put to death, and delivered up
the city. SultSn Shihab-ud-Dln. having fulfilled his promise, made the Riijah’s
daughter a Musalmiln according to the rites of the sublime law of Muhammad,
contracted marriage with her, and both of them, mother, and daughter, were
sent to Qhaznln, that th^ might learn the duties respecting fasting attd prayer
and to read the sacred p^es [the ^fur’anj. The mother, whom her daughter
held in abhorrence on account of her abominable act, and placed no iaith in,
shortly after died ; and the daughter herself, after two years, yium siot having
obtained the ettjoyment of the Sultan's society [the marriage was never consum-
noated], through grief and mortification, followed her mother.”

The Rajah above referred to, according to the Mir’at-i-Jahan-Numa, was
chief of the Bhatt tribe, which previously held a large part of Sind. The some
work states that U chch ah was taken by assault. The name is differently
written by different authors—and u#,'—while some have and
Compare Abu-Rtbiln-al-Birunt, and see translation in Elliot’s India,
vol. i. page 6i, and page 154.

* If so, it is somewhat strange that such an orthodox champion of the faith
should have massacred them.

* “ The following” year after 572 H. is 573 H. ; but, just under, our author
says 574 H., which is the year which most authors mention, but FafiJi-t has

575 H-

* This is the correct name, confirmed by several other writers ; but some
copies of the text differ. One ha-s ys j,ei —another ys j—«—and three

The Raufat-ut-Xaliirtn styles him Bhoj [^y^j-ntw.

45*

THE TABA¥AT-1.NA$IRL

i-Gha^l returned again without having accomplished his
designs. This event took place in the year 574 H.*'

In the year 575 H., Mu’izz-ud Din led an army to
Furshor *, and subdued it; and, in another two years sub¬
sequent to that, he marched an army towards Lohor. As
the affairs of the Mahmudi empire had now approached
their termination, and the administration of that govern¬
ment had grown weak, Khusrau Malik, by way of compro¬
mise, despatched one of his sons, and one elephant*, to the
presence of the Sultan-i-Ghazi. This circumstance hap¬
pened in the year 577 H.*

The following year, 578 H., the Sultan led an army
towards Diwal * [or Dlbal] and possessed himself of the

1 Out author slurs over this affair because it was a reverse, but it was not
dishonour. Mu’izr-ud-Din’s forces were completely worn out with their long
march, the latter portion of it through the sandy desert, and suffering from
thirst and want of forage for their cattle. The forces of Bhim-Dtw were
numerous, fresh, and well supplied. Numbers of the Musalman forces perished
in the obstinate battle which took place, and the retreat was effected with-great
difficulty,

8 Previously spelt Purahbr and Burshor, and in some copies of the text
here Burshor likewise—the letters p and yj and b and vt are interchange¬
able. In the passage at page 76, where mention is made of the idol temple
which fell on the night of Mahmud’s birth, the place supposed to be
Peshawar is written in every copy of the text with an extra letter. Nearly
every author I. have quoted mentions that, in ancient books, this place was
known as Bagram. See my account of it in Journal of Bombay Geographical
Society, vol. x.

* Our author should have added, "a renowned elephant, and the finest
that Khusrau Malik posssessed.” His son is called Malik Shah by some
writers, including Firishtah; but one of his translators turns it into Mullik.

t As to this date there is considerable discrepancy. Of the different works
previously quoted, the majority state that the first expedition against Labor
took place in 577 H., as our author has it; but two others mention 576 as the
year, and three others that it took place in 575. Buda’unf says 580 H. ; but
he has omitted the first expedition, and mistaken the second for it. 1 do not
quote Baifawt or Guzidah, for they are both at sea with respect to the two
last Mahmudt sovereigns, and make one of them.

* In the same manner, there is much discrepancy with regard to the invasion
of Dtwal. Five authors give 577 H. as the year, one 578, 000576, one 575,
and Buda’unt 581 ! Of these, some say the expedition against Pursbor and
Dtwal took place in the same year ; others that it took place the year after
Purshor was annexed, and the year before the first expedition against Labor;
whilst others state that Dtwal was taken the year after; and some omit all
mention of it. A^mad, son of Muttammad, ^puwtnt, the author of the Jah 3 n-
ArS, which I have often quoted, on his way to visit Hindustan, died, at this
place in 975 h. —1567 a.d. It is not the same place as Ttiathoh, but in the
Thathah province between Thathah and Karafiht. See note *, p. 295.

THE SHANSABAnIAH DYNASTY OF ^AZNlN. 453

whole of that territory [lyirig] on the sea-coast, and ac¬
quired much wealth, and returned.

In the year 581 H., he [again] led an army towards
Lohor*, and ravaged and pillaged the whole of the dis¬
tricts of that territory; and, on his return homewards,
directed that the Hi§ar [fortress] of Sial-kot should be re¬
stored^. Husain son of Kha r-mil was installed therein, and

• The name of this city—which is a veiy ancient one—is also written L5h-
nor as well as Loha-war

The TBl>^_^t-i-Akbarf, Mii’at-i-Jahan-Numa, and Firiahtah say that this
second expedition took place in 580 H., and the KhulSsat-ut-Tawar tlrh says
it was in 579; but the others agree with our author as above. The astonishing
thing, however, is, that our author himself, in his account of Kb iisrnu Malik’s
reign, at page 115, which see, only mentions /rev cxi>editions to L.ahor—one in
577 > 1 ., and the other, when it was taken, in 583 1

Most authors, including Firightah, make a great error in asserting that
Mu’izz-ud-Dtn fotindai the fortress of Sfal-kot. Such is not the case, and
some of the authors I have been quoting very correctly state that it is a very
ancient place, founded by one of the early Hindu rulers. Mu’izz-ud-Dtn found
it in a dilapidated condition on the occasion of his retirement from the Panjab,
and unsuccessful attempt to take Labor; and, considering its situation a good
one for his purposes, he put it in a state of efficiency, and garrisoned it at the
suggestion of the Rajah of Jamun. I extract this statement from a History of
the Rajhis of Jamun [the n is nasal], which the author states to be composed
from Hindu annals; and In no other writer have I seen the same details,
although another confirms a portion of it, which I shall subsequently refer to.

** In the year tl^l of Rikramaditya, Rajah Jakr [or Ch akr] Dfw succeeded
his father as ruler of Jamun ; and, in the middle of his reign, in 555 h., Ttb««-
rau Malik, the descendant of Mahmud, Ghaznawt, abandoned Qhazntn, Ad
assumed the throne of Lah-nor. The Jamun Rajahs contirruef^to entertain their
natural hatred towards his dynasty, but without effect; and Khusraii Malik, by
degrees, brought under his rule the northern parts of the Panjab, as far os the
foot of the mountains [the Alpine Panjab]. The tribe of Khokhar, who dwelt
round about Manglan [Makhialah ?], at the foot of the hills who were subject to
the Jamun-wal [the Jamun dynasty], having received encouragement from the
Lah-nor ruler, and sure of his support, refused any longer to pay tax and
tribute to Jamun, and threw off its yoke.

“ At this time, the year 579 H. , Sultan Mu’izz-nd-Dfn, the flhnrt, who had
token possession of Qbnzntn, raised the standard of conquest; and Rajah Jakr
[Chakr] Dfw despatched his full brother. Ram Dfw, with presents to the
Sultan’s presence, representiiig to him the state of affairs, and inciting him to
invade Ktusrau’s terrifory, assuring him that, on his appearance, the territory
of Lah-nor would pass from his grasp. The Sultan, who received the emis¬
sary arith favour, repli^ in writing to the Rajah, that * his Mfan-jf [agent] had
made known the Rajah's object, and that the time was at hand for the appear¬
ance of his standards in that part ;’ and in that same year the Sultan made a
raid on, and possessed himself o^ the Purahor territory and MultSn, and
invested Lah-nor, which Khuaran Malik-defended.

" The Sultan, finding he could not gain possession of it easily, devastated
and ravaged the country about Lah-nor, and, retired by the northern part of the

454 the TABA^AT.I.NA^IRI.

the SultSn again retired. After his departure, Khusrau

Fanj&b; and, at the raggestion and lepresentatlon of the Rtjah of JomQp,
repaired aneU) the fort of StSl-kot [Stal is the name of a tribe of Jats, since
displaced, and dwelling much farther south, at and around Jang-i-StSl], which
was then in a ruinous and dilapidated state, and left there Hnaahri.i. lOiiir .mti
[turned into Ifussein Ckurmili by Dow, and Ifoosseiu FtrmuUy by Briggs 1 ]
as governor, with a garrison. The Mbhi-jt, of JamOp, was then dismissed,
with a request to inform the Rsjah that next year his wishes would be ful¬
filled.

“Khusrau Malilc, after the SultSn’s departure, aided by the tribe of Khok-
har, invested SflHkot; but, as Rftjah Jakr [Chakr] Dtw, assisted and sup¬
ported the defenders, Khusrau Malik was unable to take it. At this period
the Rsjah, who had attained to nearly his eightieth year, died, and was suc¬
ceeded by his son, Rfijah Bq, who is also called Bijayt [ftflflft] Dtw, in
1221 of 3 ikrSmaditya ; and in that year, which corresponds with 582 H., the
Suljan [Mu’izz-ud-Dtn] crossed the Sind at the NtlSb ferry, where the RSjah’s
Mtan-jt went to receive him ; and on the banks of the Blhat [the Jhilam] the
RSjah’s son, Nar-singh Dtw, joined him with a considerable force. He was
presented to the SultSa through ^usain-i-Khar-mtl, and received with honour.
He accompanied the SultSn to LSh-nor, which was taken, and made over to
the charge of Kar-mSkll [’Alt-i-Kar-mIkli, who is turned into AUy Xirmat^
by Briggs 1 ], governor of MultSn. The RSjah’s son and his agent were
dismissed with honorary robes, and the town of StSl-ko^ together with the
fort, was entrusted to the care of the RSjah. Khnsrau was taken to Ghajutn^
and was subsequently put to death. Prom the circumstance of the SultSn, in
his communications, styling the RSjah’s agents by the term MtSn-jt, according
to the Custom of IrStr, instead of Waktl, the whole family of the JamQn-wal
[not the present dyuaify}, considering this title great honour, adopted it; and
from it the abridged term MtSn, used-by their descendants, is derived.”

Dow, in his translation of Firifllitah, states, under the reign of Khusrau
Malik [page 129], that “the Xmperor Chusero [Khusrau would not have,
known his own name thus written], in alliance with the Ghickers, besieged the
fort of SaUot, but, their endeavours proving unsueeessjul, they were obliged
to desist.” Briggs, in his version, repeats this in the same words, with the
exception of styling Khusrau, Khooircw Mullik; and the Khokhars, Gukkurs;
and that Khusrau had to abandon the investment ; but under the reign of
Mu’iu-ud-t^n, Dow [page 137] states: “ This fort [Sa/eotJ, as we have
before related, •woaejfeetually besieged by Chusero, in the absence olMahommed;"
and Briggs also [page 176] says > “This fort, as we have before related,
being sneeessfuUy besi^;M and taken by Xhoosrow Mullik," &c.; and thus
both translators totally contradict their own previous statements. Firishtah,
whom they translate, of course, states, as other writers do, that Khusrau Malik
was Unable to take it. Led away, I imagine, by this statement, and placing
reliance on its correctness, Elphinstone has repeated [page 311] this ab¬
surdity. He says “Khusni Malik, taking courage from despair, made an
alli a nce with the Gakkars [Dow, Gichers; Briggs, Gukkurs; Flphinstone,
Cakiartl /], captured one of Shahiib u-din’s strongest forts, and obliged him
to call in the aid of stratagem,” &c. Thus a totally incorrect translation of a
native historian’s words, and a statement respecting which the translators
themselves contradict their own previous translation, is handed down from one
writer to the other. This is writing history with a vengeance.

The stratagem referred to above is related in Firishtah. which see but it

THE SHANSABANIAH DYNASTY OF GHAZNfN. 455

Malik assembled the forces of Hindustan *, and a levy of
the [different] Khokhar tribes, and appeared before the
gates of Sial-kot, and sat down before it for a considerable
time, and again retired without being able to effect his
object. After that, in the year 582 H., the Suftan-i*
Ghazl [Mu’izz-ud-Din] appeared [again] before the gates
of Lohor. As the Mahmud! sovereignty had reached its
termination, and the sun of the empire of Sabuk-Tigln had
reached its setting, and the Recorder of Destiny had in¬
scribed the decree of Kh usrau Malik’s dethronement, that
monarch was not possessed of the power to resist, and he
entered into negotiations for peace ; and, for the purpose of
having an interviewwiththe Sultan rMu*izz-ud-Din]. I^ usrau
Malik came out [of Lohor] *. He was seized, and imprisoned,
and Lohor passed into the possession of the Sultan-i-Ghazl.
and the kingdom of HindQstan ' came tinder his sway.

is not related by any of the authors I have quoted, from some of whom he
derived his own information.

The account contained in the Hindu history of JamQq previously quoted, of
Kh imrsn Malik’s attempt to take SfKl-ko^ which was a standing menace to his
rule, agrees with the account given by our author and some others, with the
exception that other tribes of unbelievers besides the Khokhars were engaged in
it; and, although Kh nsnui Malik had got together a large following, he was un¬
able to keep the field against the superior and more efficient forces of the Ghurfs.

The Khokhars are a totally distinct race from the Cakhais

The name of the former is sometimes written Khukhar, but

the first mode is the most correct. AbG- 1 -Fafl, in the A’-ln-i-Akbart,
constantly mentions them, and he writes the two names very differently.
There are still numbers of Khokhars in the PanjGb, some ao,ooo families, and
I have met with them constantly in the MultSn district, and districts further to
the north-west, towards the Indus, in the Sind-Sigar Do-abah. Their chief
hcaU is about Barih, Ahmad-GbSd, and Khusb-ab. They still style their chief
SultAn as well as RAe, and will not give their daughters in marriage to
other tribes, or, at least, used not to. The Chakars are still further north¬
wards. Our author does not mention a word about these transactions with the
Khokhars in his account of Khusrau Malik’s reign, and only mentions two
expeditions against LShor, and therein states that Khusrau Malik delivered it
up to Mu’izz-ud-Dtn in 583 H. ; but here he says in 582 H. Some of the works
I have been quoting say Mu’izz-ud-Dtn obtained possession of Labor in 582 H.,
While others say it happened in 583 H.

■ This is the same person who subsequently gave his adherence to Sult&n
Muhammad, KhwSrazm Sl^h, and then act^ treacherously, and was ousted
from HiiAt, and put to death. See i>ote >, page 257. His correct name is
’Iss-nd-Din, ^usain. His father’s name was Khar-mh.

* See page 115, where our author states that Khusrau Malik, under the faith
of a treaty, was induced to come out.

1 That portion only over which Khusrau Malik ruled; but subsequently he
fxmquercd more.

4S6

THE TABA?AT-I.NA§IRi.

The Sipah-Salar, 'Ali-i-Kar-malsh, who was the Walt
[Governor] of Multan, was located at Lohor, and the father
of the author of this work, Maulana Saraj-ud'-Dtn-i-Minhaj,
the Wonder of his Age, and Most Eloquent of ’Ajam,
became the Kazi of the forces of Hindustan, and, dressed
in an honorary robe, conferred upon him by Sultan Mu'izz-
ud-Din, in the audience hall [or tent] of the camp * he
established his Court of Judicature. Twelve camels were
assigned to convey his tribunal * [on the march]. The
mercy of the Almighty be upon him, and upon the
orthodox Sultans of the past, and the Musalman Maliks of
the present!

After these events the Sultan-i- Gh azi set out on his
return to Gh aznin. taking along with him Kh usrau Malik ;
and from the court of Ghaznin sent him to the court of
Firuz-koh, to the presence of the Sultan-ul-A’^am, Gh iyas-
ud-Din. From thence Kh usrau Malik was sent into
Gharjistan and imprisoned within the castle of Balarwan,
and it was commanded that his son, Bahram Shah* [by
name], should be detained within the walls of the fortress
of Saif>rud of Ghur ; and, when the outbreak and sedition
of Sultan Shah *, Khwarazm-Shahi. arose in the year

^ Where public business was usually transacted.

* For himself <ind the Muftis. He did not continue at Bamfan long then.
See pages 431 and 433.

’ This, probably, is the son*who had been given up as a hostage to Mu’izz*
ud-Din. Firiahtah, but on whose authority he does not mention, styles him
Malik Shah. There is not the slightest doubt as to who put them to death,
and the text very plainly indicates who did, both here and at page 115.
Compare Elliot: India, vol. ii., note *, page 295.

* Not “ Kh warazm Sha h ” but his brother. He was not a Sultan ; this
is part of his title merely. See page 245. The error of calling him SultSn or
King of Khwarar.m is of common occurrence. Elphinstone, misled by trans¬
lators or translations, calls him “ King of Khirizm.” His name was Mal^ud,
and his title, Sultan Sha h-i-Jalal-ud-Dfn. At page I15, our author says
Kh usrau Malik and his son, Bahram Shah, were put to death when the affair
of Sultan ghah occurred in 598 H., and here says, 587 H., while twice, in his
account of Qiiiyag-ud-Din’s reign [see pages 378 and 379], he distinctly states
that the engagement with SuItSn Shah, in which ^utb-ud-Dln, l-ba^, then
only Lord of the Stables, was taken prisoner, took place in 588 H. [Jahkn-
ArS, 588 H.]. The year 587 H. is that in which the firat battle took place
with RSe PithorS, according to the whole of the authors I have been quoting,
as well as several others, including our author himself, and the second battle,
in which R£e Pithor^ was defeated and [according to MusalmSn accounts]
slain, took place beyond a doubt [sec page 468], in 588 H There is no doubt
yrhatever as to the dates our author gives, for they are as plainly written as it

THE SHANSABANIAH DYNASTY OF CiHAZNlN.

457

537 they martyred jy^usrau Malik and his son [Bahram
The mercy of the Almighty be upon them all !
Subsequent to these events, the Sultan-i- Gh azf caused
the forces of Islam to be organized, and advanced against
the fortress of Tabarhindah*, and took that stronghold, and

is possible to write, and all the copies of the text collated agree; but
neither of thete three dates can be corrrect. The campaign against Sulj|Sn
Sh&i>t Shwirazmt, which lasted over six months, took place in 586 H., or
early in 587 h., and in 589 ii. he died. What tends to prove this to l>e
correct, even from our author’s own statements, is the fact, that, between the
acquirement of Labor, and, the first battle of Tara’tii, no operations were
undertaken east of the Indus by Mu’izz-ud-Din, because occupied elsewhere.
See al.so next page where it' is said that the ^af i of Tulak was to hold Tabar¬
hindah for the period of eight months, thus showing that the Sultan intended
to,come again the next cold season and relieve it. The however held

out for five months longer, and, the Sultan not having arrived, .was obliged to
capitulate. Here is further proof. Alfi and Tami’-ut-Tawartlch say Sultan
Shah sent a message to Qbiyus-ud-Dtn [after Sultan Shah revolted against his
brother’s authority. See also page 246 and note ^J, after he had gained
possession of several places in Kh urasan with the aid of the if^ara-Shita’is,
that he, Gh iya^-ud-Dln. should give up to him the places belonging to his
[Sultan father, otherwise to prepare for hostilities. Ghivas-ud.Dtn

summoned bis brother, Mu’izz-ud-Dtn, frbm Hind to join him. Some writers
affirm that up to this time the latter was styled Malik only, and that after that
campaign the title of Sultan was conferred upon him, as well as on his cousin,
Shams-ud-Dtn of Bamt 3 n, from which period, and not before, the name and
title will be found on his coins. In the neighbourhood of the Murgh- 3 b, in the
valley of Marw-ar-Rud, the two brothers, Ghiyas-ud-Din, and Mu’izz-ud Dtn,
Sha ms.ud-Dtn of Bamt 3 n, ‘and TaJ-ud-Dtn, ruler of Sijistan, being also
present, after several months, encountered .Sultan Shah, who was defeated,
and reached Marw with only forty followers. This is said to have taken place
in 586 H. Sultan Takish. Kh warazm Sh 3 h. hearing of this reverse his
rebellious- brother had sustained, advanced from Kbwarozm against him by
forced marches; and SultSn Sha h again sought protection, from the Qburts,
who, some time after, aided him with a numerous force, and despatched him
towards Kh warazm. This was in 588 H., for, his brother Takish having
marched into ’Irak at the request of l^^utlagb Inanaj [see page 167, note*] in that
year, Sultan Sha h made a dash against Kh warazm, the capital of his brother.

Alft further states, but it is somewhat contrary to other accounts, that, on
the way, Sultan Shah was taken ill, and died at the end of Ramadan, 589 H.
When the news of this event reached CbiyUs-ud-Dtii, he despatched orders
for his troops to march back again.

Another reason why I consider 586 H. correct is, that all authors of any
authority, as well as our author himself, say that the second battle of Tarii’tn
took place in 588 h., aAer which ](^utb-ud-Dtn, 1 -bak, was left to 'carry on
operations in HipdOstan, and, if the campaign against Sultan gJiah took place
in that year, and the two armies were six months in sight of each other, ^ufo-
ud-Dtn, I-l^, could not have been present there to be taken prisoner, and be
at Kuhram in Hindustan at the same time. See page 515.

P All the copies of the text collated, both here, and elsewhere in the work,
as well as many other authors, say Tabarhindah [or Tabarhindh]. The

G g

45*

tup: jaba^cAt-i-nA^irI.

made it over [to the charge of] Malik Ziya>ud-D}n, the
Muliammad-i-’Abd>us-Sallam, Nisawt, Tulakt*. This
i^iya-ud-Din, was the son of the uncle of the maternal
grandfather of the writer of this History, [namely]
Majd-ud-Din, Tulaki. At his [Ka;} ZiyS-ud-Dln’s] * re¬
quest, they selected twelve hundred horse from the forces
of Hindustan and of Ghaznln, all men of Tulak, and the
whole of them were ordered to join his Khavl [band or
division], and were located within that fortress, under the
stipulation that they should hold it for the period of eight
months, until the Sultan-i- Ghazi should return again from
Qh^znin ; but the Rae Kolah * Pithora, however, had arrived

printed text has Sirhind, and many authors of comparatively modem date,
including the X^^baV^t-i-Alcbarf, Mir’at-i-Jahan-Numil, and ShulSfat-ut-Ta*
wftrtkhi also have Sirhind. The Tarikb-i-Alft, and Zubdat-ut-Tawirlkb say
Tarhindah,Buda’unt also has the same in one copy, and Tarhindah [the Persian i
might have been left out by the copyist] in another; and, in another place, says
it was Jai-pal’s capital. The Lubb-ut'TawartJJi-i-Hind says Tabarhindah how
knoum by the name of Bit/iandah. Firisbtah has Pathindah in the

latest lithographed copy of the Persian text which was so carefully collated, it
is said, with several copies of the original, by Briggs himself, and Bathindah
in other MS. copies I have examined, but, in his translation,
Briggs has Bituhnda, and Dow calls it "The capital of Tiberhind.” I may
mention that Bathindah, which is the place Briggs probably means, is some
hundred miles west of ThSnl-sar. See also note % page 76, next to last para.

^ That is to say, he or his family came originally from Nisi, and he was
Tulak, which was a considerable place mentioned by our author in
several places. We might as weU say Chief fustiee Supreme Court, as " Kisi
Tolak.” Instead of Nisawt, some copies of the text have BBshSrt. and
Bashat. but the majority of the best copies have Nisawt. Briggs turns
him into “ Mullik Zeea-ood-Deen Tooxuky," and Dow into "Malleek Zea" 1

* Compare Elliot: India, vol. ii. page 295.

• The right word may be Golah, as both Would be written In

Sanskrit signifies the offspring by ill^timate connexion with

a widow; but we hear nothing of such a connexion on the part of Pritht Rlj’s
father. Tod, in his usual highly imaginative way, however, considers Goba
[Golah] to mean a slave :—" In Persian Gholam, literally * a slave,’ evidently a
word of the same origin as the Hindu goto ” In another place, he asserts that
Golah refers to the Mo/Mro/of Pritht R 3 j. Vol i. page 179. Had Pritht
Raj been a golak, I do not think he would have been eligible to succeed his
grandfather. The 'nj.ul-Ma’asir, referring to the second battle between the
Hindus and Muhammadans, calls Kolah [or the Kolah] the epn of the RIe of
Ajmtr; and all authors with whom I am acquainted state, that Kolah or Golah,
the son of PithorS or Pritht R 2 j, after his father was put to death, was made
tributary ruler of Ajmtr by Mu’izz-ud-Dtn, as do all the authon I have been
quoting; and no other writer that I know of pretendsthat Pithoit was a natural
son of his father or adds Kolah or Golah to his name. Our author haa
apparently confused the two names, and this seems the more likely, because he

459

THE SHANSABANIAH DYNASTY OF OHA7NfKr

nwr at hand, and th^ Sultan marched to Tara’tn ^ to meet
him. The whole of the RSn^ • of Hind were alone with
the Rae Kolah.

When the ranks were duly marshalled, the Sultan seized
a lance and attacked the elephant on which Gobind Rae *,

has not laid a lingle word about PithorK’s son having been set up by the Musal-
mini, although they had to support him subsequently by force of arms.

» Thi* name is plainly and correctly written, in the different copies of our
author^ text, and all the authors I have quoted previously, as well as many
others, call this place by the same name. Compilers of Histories of India,
led astray by the tramlations of Firishtah [not by Firisbtah himselQ which
supplied them with their materials, have turned this name into Narain. Dow
has " upon the banks of the Sirsutty,” and Briggs, "Narain, now

called Tiranty, on the banks of the Saorsutfy." Elphinstone, following
Briggs, no doubt, calls it “ Tiroury, between Tanisar and Camdl," and
Dowson [Elliot; India, vol. ii. page 295], in the translation of this passage
of our author’s text, evidently trusting to Briggs’s translation rather than to
the original text, is led to believe our author wrong; but acknowledges, in
a foot note^ that “the text [our author’s] has Tariin,” and adds “ but Firiahta
gives the name as N^fn, and says it was afterwaids called Tirauri. Ho
places it on the banks of the Sarsuti fourteen miles from Th&nisar and eighty
from Dehli.’’ Now all this is incorrect as far as Firishtah is concerned, even
to the lithographed text of Briggs’s own rtvition, for the former has Tari’tn
[crU.] like other authors, not NarS’-tn [^>* 1 / 1 ]. MItxa Mughal Beg, who,
about eighty years since, made a personal survey of these parts, and the
territories fiiither west, says that "on the Shah-Rah [Royal Route] from
Kasnal to Thknl-sar is A’(im>abad- 1 -Talawart [i^Jr^], where thwe is a large
and lofty Rabat of great strength and solidity which can be seen for miles
round. Seven miles from this place, to the north, is Amtn-ghar, a large
village with a large and lofty Rabat likewise. About two miles from the
village of Chatang is a small river, filled in the rainy season only, running
from right to left, which joins the river Sursutt. Six miles from Amtn-ghar,
still going northerly, is the city of Thant-sar.”

This is within a mile or two of the distance given by many other writers as
well as Firishtah. There areseveral placescalled Talwan 4 t,and one,on theroad
from Dibit to Bhatnir, called Talwarah but no other TaUwart. For an

account of the engagement, as given in the Jamun History, see next page.

* In some copies RSes : other writers say, a number of RSjpQt princes.

* Thus styled [J^ji] and also Gobindah in the oldest copies of the

text. Some have and both of which modes of writing the name
confirm the correctness of the above, which is a common Hindu name ; but
some more modem copies of the text have Kand [a,S], Kh£nd [a'I^], and
KbSndt Most other authors, including Firishtah, have this latter

name also ; but the Hindu bard, Chsnd, calls him RSe Gobind, like our
author in the oldest copies. He led the van of the Hindus on an elephant.
Translators of Firishtah make him commander of the whole ; but RSe PithorA
was himself an experienced leader: the other led the van. Tod (vol. L p.
II9), says Chaond Rae, which the historians of "Shabudin" style “ Khan-
dlnd, wat not brotMor of Pirt’hwir&ji ’’ I I He states that he was of the
Dahima race of RajpOts, one of three brothers, the eldest of whom, Kaimaa,
sras lord of Biana [BtSnah], and minister of Piit’hwirijfi; the second aras

G g 2

460

THE TABAE'AT-I-NA5IRI.

R 5 e [Rajah] of Dihlf, was mounted, and on which elephant
he moved about in front of the battle. The Sultan«i-
Ghazi, who was the Haidar of the time, and a second
Rustam, charged and struck Gobind Rae on the mouth
with his lance with such effect that two of that accursed
one’s teeth fell into his mouth. He launched a javelin at
the Sultan of Islam and struck him in the upper part of
the arm and inflicted a very severe wound '. The Sultan
turned his charger’s head round and receded, and from the
agony of the wound he was unable to continue on horse¬
back any longer. Defeat befell the army of Islam so that
it was irretrievably routed, and the Sultan was very nearly
falling from his horse. Seeing which, a lion [hearted]
warrior, a Kh ali * stripling, recognized the Sultan, and
sprang up behind him, and, supporting him in his arms,
urged the horse with his voice, and brought him out of the
field of battle ®.’

“ Poondir, who commanded the frontier at Lahore ” [the utter absurdity of
this assertion I have already shown, 1 think, in note ', page 466] ; and the
third brother, Chaond Kae, was the principal leader in the last battle in which
Pirt’hwirdja fell.” All the Mufiammadan historians and three Hindu chrpni*
clers agree in the statement that this person, stylcil Gobind by some, and
Khandi by others, was Pithord’s brother, and that he was present in both
battles, and was killed in the last.

' These are the author’s exact words : there is nothing in the text about "on
the other hand, returned the blmo, &c. ” The or signifies not a bhno here,
but a small spear or javelin, an Indian weapon, the point of which is some¬
times barbed,and sometimes made with three barbs. From five to ten were taken
in the hand [the left] at once, and launched at an enemy singly with the right.

* Not a Gh aUi Afghan. I beg leave to notice, but a Turk.

3 Vai-ious are the different accounts given by authors respecting the incidents
of this battle, ami very erroneous and incorrect are the versions translated
from Firishtah which, as anthentie statements are to be desired in all matters o_f
history, ought to be corrected, and more particularly respecting this important
))criod of Indian history.

The History of the Rajahs of Janiui] states that " Sul{an Mu’izz-ud-Dfn,
ill 587 »., determined to undertake an expedition against the fortress of
Tabarhind, which Was the strongest place belonging to the great Rajahs of
Hind. Kae Pithora, tlic Qliohan, sovereign [Farman-raw 2 ] of Hindustdn,
and eighth in descent from Bal-HTw, Ch ohan, advanced to give battle to the
Sultan. They met at Tara’tn-ghar, fourteen miles from Thant-sar. During
the engagement, Kae Khani [sir in MS.] Rae, ruler of Dihlt on the part of
his brother, from the back of an elephant on which he was mounted, with a
long spear wounded the Sultan in the upper part of the arm. He would
have fallen from his horse from the agony of the wound, had not some of his
slaves come to him at the moment, and borne him out of the fight. The
Sultan, having sustained this defeat, retired towards Qihazntn, and, near the
banks of thcRawt, a deputation from the R.ajah of Jainun presented them.selves.”

THE SHANSABANIAH DYNASTY OF CHAZNlN. 461

On the Musalman forces not seeing^ the Sultin, lamenta¬
tion broke from them, until they reached a place where

Another history, written by a Hindu, says [^>■V"l commanded his
brother’s army, and that, after the Sultan had wounded him in the mouth, he
wounded the SultSn in the head with his spear, and the Sul^Sn received
another wound in the side [by whom inflicted is not said], and he fell from his
horse, when a Shalj youth took him on his orvn horse, and, placing him before
him, carried him safely out of the flght. Bud&’unl also says the Sul^in
fell from his horse, and agrees with the above in the last clause of the sentence.

Other authors, including the T^tl’^V^t-i-Akbarl, and Tazkarat>ul-Muluk,
state that Khant Kae commanded the van, and was leading on the enemy
when the Sultan attacked him. They state that the Kh alj youth was on foot
at the time, and, seeing the .state of the Sultan, he sprang up behind him,
and carried him out of the miUe to his own camp, whither his own troops had
retired ; and that the panic and anxiety wliich had arisen on its being found
that the SultSn had not come out of the fight with the rc.sl of his army
subsided.

One of the oldest copies of our author’s text here differs from the others
collated to a considerable degree. It says that “the Khalj youth recognized
the Sultan [in the melra and confusion], joined him, and replaced him on the
horse’s back [thus implying that he had fallen or had to dismount], cried out
with his voice to urge the horse, and brought the Sul{dn out of the battle.’’
This'is the literal translation of the passage in that co])y ; and, in it, there is
no mention of the youth having mounted the horse also.

The Suljan remained at Labor until his wound was healed before he
returned to Gh aznin.

But what say Fikishi'AH and his translators on this subject ?

Dow, vol. 1. page 138-9. Brigus, voI. i. p. I 7 * —* 73 -

“In the year 587, he [A/aliomnteif\ “In the year S^ 7 » [Mahomed
marched again towards Hindostan, Ghoory\ marched again to Hindustan,
and, proceeding to Ajmcre, took the and, proceeding towards Ajmere, he
capital of Ttberhind, where he left took the tmou of Bituhnda, where he
Malleek Zia, with above a Ihottsaitd XcilMtillikZeea-ood-Deen'J'oozukvwiih
chosen horse, and somefoot, to garrison above a thousand chosen horse, and
the place. He himself was upon his some foot to form its garrison. While
way back, when he heard that JHttu on his return, he heard that Pithow
Pa, the prince of Ajmire, with his Pae, Paja of Ajmeer, with his brother
brother Candi Pa, king of Delhi, in Chawatid Pae, the Raja of Dchly, in
alliance with some other Indian alliance with other Indian princes,
princes, were marching towards Pi- were marching towards with

berhind, with two hundred thousand 700,000 horse, and 3000 elephants,
horse, and three thousand elephants. Mahomed Ghoory marched to the
Mahommed determined to return to relief of his garrison ; but, passing
the relief of the garrison. He met the beyond Bituhnda, he encountered the
enemy at the village of Sirauri, upon enemy at the village of Narain, now
the banks of the SirsuUi, fourteen called Tirowry, on the banks of the
miles from Tannassar, and eighty from Soorsutty, fourteen miles from Thaqi.
Delhi, and gave them battle. Upon sar, and seventy from Delhy. At the

the first onset his right and left first onset his right and left wings,

wings retired, being outflanked by the being outflanked, fell back, till, join-

enemy, till, joining in the rear, his ing in the rear, his army formed a

46a THE TABAJj^AT-IvNA^IRf.

the defeated army was safe from pursuit by the infidels.

army was formed into a circle. Ma> circle. Mahomed Ghoory was in par-

hommed, who was in person in the son in the centre of his line, and,

center {sic) of the line when first being informed that both wings were

formed, was told that his right and defeated, was advised to provide for

left anngs were defeated, and advised his own safety. JEftraged at this conn*

to provide for his own safety. JSti- sel, hb cut down thb mbssenoer,

raged at this counsel, he smote the and, rushing on towards the enemy,

imprudent adviser, and rushed on with a few followers, committed terrible

towards the enemy, among whom he slaughter. TTie eyes of Chawand

commenced, with a few foUmoers, a Roe falling on him, he drove his

great slaughter. The eyes of Candi elephant directly against Mahomed

Ra, king of Delhi, fell upon him. Ghoory, who, perceiving his inten*

Ife drove the elephant, upon which he tion, charged and delivered his lance

was mounted, directly against him. full into the Raja's mouth, by which

Mahommed, rising from his horse, many of his teeth were knocked out.

threw his lance with such force at the In the meantime, the Raja of Dehly

elephant, that he drove out three of his pierced the king through the right

back teeth [the elephant’s ! !]. In the arm, with an arrow [ I I]. He had

meantime the J^ing of Delhi, from almost fallen, when some of his chiefs

above, pierced the Sultan through advanced to his rescue. This effort

the right arm, and had almost thrown to save him gave an opportunity to

him to the ground ; when some of his one of his faithful servants to leap up

chieft advanced to his rescue. This behind Mahomed Ghoory, who, faint

gave an opportunity, to one of his from loss of blood, had nearly fallen

faithful servants, to leap behind him from his hoise, but was carried

as he was sinking from his horse, triumphantly off the field, although

and, supporting him in his arms, he almost wholly deserted by his army,

carried him from the field, which, by which was purssted by the ettemy nearly

this time, was deserted almost by his forty miles," &c.

whole army. The enemy pursued
them near forty miles."

Maurice, Murray, Elphinstone, Marshman, and Meadows Taylor,
and probably others, such as Mill and Thornton, take their accounts from
the above versions of Dow and Briggs. Marshman adds, Me was pursue^
for forty miles by the victorious Hindoos, and was hap^ to escape across the
Indus," perhaps unaware that he remained at Labor till his wound was healed
[as Dow states] and that there was no pursuit at all.

Firishtah, from the revised text of Briggs has as follows:

"In 587 H., he [Siihab-ud-Dtn] determined to enter HindQstan, and he
took the fort of Rathindah [i.. > : «n but the MSS. I have examined have
W flt liin Hfth .Oi#:], which, in that day, had become the capital of R 4 jahs of
grwt dignity, out of the hands of the men of the RSjah of Ajmtr. He left
Malik Zi^-ud-Dtn, Tulakt, in that fortress, with laoo horsemen, each and
every one of whom was selected and a picked man $ and was desirous of
returning. Suddenly, information reached him, that Pitho RSe, Will [a
ruler, a prince, the governor of a province] of Ajmtr, in concert with his
brother, KhSn^ Rae, Walt of Dibit, and bringing along with them several
Rajput Rajahs, were advancing, by regular marches, with an army of soofioo
hone, and 3000 elephants, with the determination of reUking the fort of
Patbindah [Bathindah ?]. Suljan Sbihab-ud-Dtn, abandoning his intention
of returning [to Gliazntn], advanced to meet them, and at the moufa’ [place,

THE SHANSABAnIAH DYNASTY OF fiHAZNiN. 463

Suddenly the Sultan arrived. A number of Amtrs ^

district, village] of TarS'tn, on the banks of the Sursutf, seven kuroh [a
dbtance of rather less than fourteen miles] from Th£nt-sar, now known as
TaiSwarf [but in sevetal MSS. of Firislltah, which I have seen, it is
not cg>yy]> (tnd forty kurok from Dihlt, an encounter and conflict took place.
The right and left wings of Sult&n Sll>hSb-ud-Dtn having broke and faced
about [it does not say that they were actually broken by the HindQs, and it
appears to mean that they declined the onset, or recoiled], and no( a great num¬
ber remained in the centre either. [There is not a word about his army
forming «>r/#.”] At this juncture one of the Sultan’s confidential attc-n-
dants represented [saying] '* the Amtrs of the right and left [wings] who were
nourished by the beneficence and favours of your Court [or dynasty] not
keeping their ground resolutely, have taken to flight, and the AfghSn [Firi^-
tah does not appear to have had authority for introducing Afghans here, from
the statements of the contemporary writers of these times] and Shalj Amtrs,
who were the commanders of the advance, who continually boasted of their
valour and prowess, are not to be found [seen], and, should you promptly
[I give the exact words, except adopting the second person plural for the
third] turn the reins of retrocession towards Labor, it seems expedient [so to
do].” Tkis speech not agreeing with the Sultan's temperament, he drew his
sword from its sheath, and, with the troops [remaining^ of the centre, charged the
tnetny's forces and commettced the conflict. [Firishtah then quotes some lines
to the effect that both friend and foe lauded his prowess.] Suddenly the eye
of Khandl Rae, the Slpah-ssalar [commander of the army] of Dihlt, falling on
the Sultan, he urged the mountain-like elephant on which he was mounted
towards the Sultan, who at once seized his spear and made towards him, and
smote him in the mouth with such eflect, that many of his teeth fell out [lU.l.^].
Khfindt Rae likewise —which Briggs has read lor j^—arraw\ showed

the greatest audacity and agility, and, from the top of his elephant, inflicted
such a wound [with what weapon not said] on the upper part of the arm [til»]
of the Sultan that he was nearly falling from" his horse. A ShalJ youth on
foot [there is not a word about his chiefs coining to his rescue] discovered it,
jumped up behind him on the horse, and, taking the Sultan in his arms, bore
him out of the batUe-field, and conveyed him to the forces of the runaway
nobles which were twenty kuroh off; and the tumult and disquiet which had
arisen, consequent on the defeat of the army of Islam, and not finding the
Sultan, subsided.” . . . There is not a word about

According to the Zain-ul-Ma’agir, quoted by Firialttuh immediately after
the above, “ Sultan Mu’izz-ud-Din, having become faint from the effects of the
wound, fell from his horse. This not being noticed [in the tntl^^ no one came
to his aid. Night intervened, and, when one watch of the night had passed,
a party of his Turkish slaves came to seek him, and went into the battle-field
and began searching among the slain. ”1 he Sultan [who appears to have
revived], recognizing the voices of his faithful slaves, acquainted^ them with
his situation. His slaves gave thanks for his safety, and, taking him on their
shoulders, in turns, proceeded along throughout the night, and by day-dawn
reached their own people.” ^ ^

This battle is said to have taken place in the fifteenth year of the reign of
Rle Pithori, and the HindQ writers state that this was the seventh time the
had invaded Hind, in all of which he had been defeated I
* The Malik-ul-^ijt, ?iya-ud-Dtn [subsequently ’AU-ud-DIn], Muham¬
mad, the Snltfln’s niece’s husband, was present in this battle. See page 393.

464

THE XABA?AT.l-NA§IftI.

Qhurl youths, and other distinguished men, had noticed
the Sultan, along with that lion-like Khalji. had recognized
him, and had. gathered round him, and broke spears and
made a litter and a stretcher, and had borne him to that
halting-place. The people [now] became composed, and
once more, through [the safety of] his life, the true faith
acquired vigour, and the dispersed army, on the strength
of the safety of the life of that Sultan-i- Gh azi. again came
together and retired, and turned their faces towards the
Musalman dominions.

The Ka^i of Tulak * was left [in charge of] the fortress
of Tabarhindah, and Rae Pithora appeared before the walls
of that stronghold, and fighting commenced. For a period
of thirteen months and a little over the place was defended.
The following year the Sultan-i-Ghazi assembled the
troops of Islam, and commenced his march towards Hin¬
dustan, to avenge the [disaster of the] previous year ^

* The idiom varies considerably here in nearly every copy. Some have—
“On the strength of the safety of that Badahah-i- Gha zf. the anny came
together again [or ntllied],” &c.

• The same as mentioned at page 458.

^ I have here also to notice^ and enter my protest against, a statement
respecting the character of Sultan Mu’izr-ud-Din, which Firi^tah’s trans-
lators have incorrectly given, and which neither Firiahtah nor any other
author asserts. In this instance the character of this Prince has been unjustly
assailed, held up in a wrong light, and things are asserted which never
happened at all.

Dow, vol. i. page 139.

"Mahommed remained a few months
with his brother at Ghor, who still
kept the imperial title, and then, re¬
turning to Ghizni, spent the ensuing
yiar in indolence and festivity. But,
ambition again fermenting in his
mind, he recruited a noble army,” &c.

Briggs, vol. i. page 173.

"Mahomed remained a few months
with his brother at Ghoor, who sUll
retained the title of King [he never lost
the title of Sul^Sn], and then, return¬
ing to Ghizny, spettt the ensuing year
in pleasure and festivity. At length,
having recruited an army,” &c.

Firightah says : “ Sultan Shihab-nd-Dfn. having taken leave of his brother
[at Flruz-koh], proceeded to Gh azntn ; and, with the determination of taking
revenge [on Pithora], having made sleep and rest unlawful to himself [1 give
the words literally], in a short time assembled troops, brave and ruthless,” &c.
This is a specimen of "pleasure andfestivity," certainly !

Here is another specimen of the same kind, and it is repeated by one writer
after another as undoubtedly true and correct.

Dow, page 140. Briggs, page 174.

“When hisvictorious “ When he had advanced as far os
pears had advanced as far as Ptsh- Pishamur, an old sage of Ghoor,
*wir, an old sage of Ghor, prostrating prostrating himself before him, said.

THE SHANSABAnIaH DYNASTY OF GHAZNIN 465

The author heard from a trustworthy person, a distin¬
guished man of the highland district of Tulak, whom they
used to style by the title of Mu’in-ud-Dtn, Csbf, who
said : » I was in that army along with the Sultan-i-^azt,
and the number of cavalry composing the army of Islam
that year was one hundred and twenty thousand arrayed

himself before him, said, ‘ O King,
we trust to thy conduct and wisdom ;
but as yet thy design has been a
subject of much dispute and specu¬
lation among us. ’ Mahommed replied,
‘ Know, old man, that since the time
of my defeat in Hindostan, notwith¬
standing external appearances, I have
never slumbered in ease, or waked
but in sorrow and anxiety. I have
therefore determined, with this army,
to recover my lost honour from those
idolaters, or die in the noble attempt,’ ”
&c.

‘ O King, we trust in thy conduct and
wisdom ; but as yet thy design has
been subject of much speculation
among us. ’ Mahomed Ghoory replied,
‘ Know, old man, that since the time
of my defeat in Hindusian, notwith¬
standing external appearances, I have
never slumbered in ease, or waked
but in sorrow and anxiety. I have
therefore determined, with this army,
to recover my lost honour from those
idolaters, or die in the attempt,” &c.

Here, again, Elphinstone has been deceived, and, quoting Briggs, further
disseminates a wrong translation. Marshman says [voL i. p. 44] that "he
[Shahab] stated" this “ in one of his letters;" but, unfortunately, Firiahtah
himself says nothing oj the hind! His words are :—“When his [the Sultan’s]
standards, the emblems of victoi-y, reached the Peshawar territory, one of the
Ptrs [a holy man, a saint] of Gh«r» who was [sufficiently] bold, bowing his
forehead to the ground [only Plrs are not wont to do so], represented [saying],

‘ It Is not understood at all whither the Sultan goeth, nor what his object is.’
Sultan Shlhab-ud-Din replied : ‘ O such an one [" 3 b] 1 know for certain
that, from the time I have been defeated by the Rajahs of Hind, I have
abstained from my wife’s bed [1 do not give the literal words to this part of the
sentence, but it lends to show that he had but one wife, and his having but
one child appears to prove it], and have not changed the cldthes on my body;
and, having passed this year in grief, sorrow, and sadness, I have not per¬
mitted the Amtrs of Qbur, of the JOialj, and of ShurSsan, who, notwithstand¬
ing their ancient servitude, abandoned me in the battle aRd fled, to present
themselves in my presence, nor have I seen their faces during this period.
Now, placing dependence on the goodness of God, I am proceeding towards
the country of Hind ; and I have no expectation of the services of those old
[ancient] Amtrs, who, from their cradles to this time, have been nourished by
the favours of this [my] family.’ The Ptr, hearing this statement, kissed the
ground of service, and said, ‘ Victory and success attend the followers at the
sovereign’s stirrup,’” &c. This is rather different to the statemenl.s above.

** The name of a town of Fargi^nah, and also of a place near Baghdad.
The person here referred to is no other than the celebrated Mu’jn-ud-Dfn,
dlistt, whose tomb is at Ajmtr, and so much frequented. I'lic Kin]rcror
Akbar paid several visits to it. Some writers say that he only came into India
towards the close of Sult&n Mu’izz-ud-Dtn’s career, and stayed to propagate
the MusalmSn faith.

466

THE TABA¥AT.I-NA$IRI.

in defensive armourWhen the Sultan-i- Gh 5 zi with such¬
like organization and such a force arrived near unto RSe
Kolah Pithora, he had gained possession of the fortress of
Tabarhindah by capitulation, and had pitched his camp in
the neighbourhood of Tara’in *. The Sultan [now] made

• It does not appear to have been steel armour. The meaning of the word
used is, “a covering, a garment, vestment worn in battle, and also put on
horses —defensive armour of some sort, some of steel, perhaps, and some of
leather. This is what Firiabtah appears to have turned into “helmets inlaid
with jewels, and armour inlaid with silver and gold.”

t See note ', page 459. Hasan Ni;ami, in the T 3 j-ul-Ma’agir, a contem¬
porary writer, who began his work the year before Suljan Mu’izz-ud-Dtn’s
assassination, and who begins luith this expedition, does not mention where this
battle took place, but mentions that Sultan Mu’izz-ud-Dtn, on reaching LAhor,
despatched the Sadr-i-]^abtr, ]^iwam-ul-Mulk [these are his titles, not his
name], Rukn [Ruhu is a mistake]-ud-Din, Hamzah, to Ajmfr to offer his ulti¬
matum to Pithora Kae ; but his inflated style greatly obscures the details.
Some writers state that two emissaries were sent. The Sul^n called upon
Pithora Rae to embrace the Musalman faith and acknowledge his supremacy.
The Chohan prince sent an indignant reply ; and, having received aid from
most of the Rajahs of Hind, with 300,000 horse—-Rajputs, and some Afghans,
one author says-^advanced to meet him, and they again met on the former
battle-field. Pithora Rae sent a message to the SultAn, saying, “It is advisable
thou sbouldst retire to thine own territory, and we will not follow thee.” The
Sult£n, in order to deceive him, and throw him off his guard, replied : “ It is
by command of my brother, my sovereign, that I come here and endure trouble
and pain : give me sufficient time that I may despatch cm intelligent person to
my brother, to represent to him an account of thy power, and that I may obtain
his permission to conclude a peace with thee under the terms that Tarhind
[Tabarhindah], the Panjab, and Multan shall be ours, and the rest of the
country of Hind thine. ” The leaders of the infidel forces, from this reply,
accounted the army of Islam as of little consequence, and, without any care or
concern, fell into the slumber of remissness. That same night the Sultkn made
his preparations for battle, and, after the dawn of the morning, when the RSj-
pQts had left their camp for the purpose of obeying the calls of nature, and for
the purpose of performing their ablutions, he entered the plain with his ranks
marshalled. Although the unbelievers were amazed and confounded, still, in
the best manner they could, they stood to fight, and sustained a complete over¬
throw. Khandt Rae [the Gobind Rae of our author], and a great number
besides of the Raes of Hind, were killed, and PithorA RAe was taken prisoner
within the limits of Sursutf, and put to death.”

There are, however, other versions of these events which, although partly
traditionary, bear some measure of truths and it will be well to notice them.
The History of JamQn, which agrees in some measure with the RAjpQt tra¬
ditions, states that PithorA Rae, having been apprised by certain informers of
the part the RAjah Bij, or Bijayt Dtw, had taken in aiding the MusalmAns,
proposed to march against him, and cha.stise him. At this j 'ncture, hostility
arose between PithorA RAe and RAjah Jai Cliandra, ruler of ^nnauj [the
details of which are too long for insertion here], respecting his daughter. In
588 H.. SultAn StkihAb-ud-Dln, having learned the state of Pithori RAC’s
aflitirs, prepared to avenge his previous defeat; and Bijayt Dtw, RAjah of

THE SHANSABANfAH DYNASTY OF GHAZNIN, 467

disposition of his forces. The centre division of the army,
t e baggage, the standards and banners, his canopy of

» body of hi, force, to join
e who had been in communication with

^ “r “‘‘*® “d P"‘"" ‘"vited SJMuJiH

[SAin^ud-DIn ?] to aid Iheir design, of huniiliating the Chohan [Rae PithoiSl
’ f Chand Poondir, the vassal thief of Lahore, and guardian

of that . speedily joined hi, camp with his available forces ” I vol. i.

page 2p.] Perhaps the writer was unaWare that Labor had been in the
piMs^lon of the Ghaznawtds for mare than a century, and that Shabudin, ao
calle^ had only taken it from the last of that dynastyyfw or six years before,
and since that time his own governor had held it. The Suljan came in con-
^ with Rae Pithora on that same field of Talawart, and formed his forces
mto two divisions. The troops of Jamup and E>nnauj were to oppose Khandt
RSe of Dihli, while the Suljan, with his own forces, encountered Rfie Pithoii.
The battle was obstinately maintained, and it is related that KhSndt Rae fell
by the sword of Nar-singh Dtw of Jamfin, and the Suljan himself slew several
of the enemy. Rae Pithora was captured alive and taken to Qhazntn, where
he WM deprived of his sight. For further detail, on this subject, see page 485,

Allt gives another version of this battle, which is certainly curious. It
stotes that the^ SultSn, having taken the route by Purahor, arrived within the
limits of Dihli [the territory of Tj. Pitho Rae and Kandt [sic] RSe prepared
to oppose him, on which Mu’izz-ud-Dtn made a precipitate retreat. Ra* Pitho
was following in pursuit of him until they had passed beyond Lihor, and had
reached the moufa’ [village or district] called Shihab-ud-Dfn [Shih5b-ud-Dtn-
pflr ?], when the SuliSn came to a stand. His object in retiring had been to
separate Rae Pitho from his own territory; and, at the place above mentioned,
a battle took place, in which Rae Pitho was defeated and taken prisoner.
After this the Sultan advanced upon Ajmir. He subdued that territory, and
put Rae Pitho to death ; after which he made Eutb-ud-Dfn, I-bak, governor
of it, and returned to Ghazntn.

Another writer states that “ Pithora Rae was killed in the battle, and
Khandt Rae, the leader, escaped in safety;” whilst another says that “both
were captured and slain. ”

Th 4 statements of both Dow and Briggs are equally imaginary with respect
to the battle, where they say:—

Dow, vol. i. page 143.

“ The Mussulmata troops, as if now
only wrious in fight, made such dread¬
ful slaughter, that this prodigious
army, once shaken, like a great build¬
ing was lost in its own ruins."

Briggs, vol. i. page 177.

“ The Moslems, as if they now had
only began to be in earnest, com¬
mitted such havoc, that this pro¬
digious army, once shaken, like a
great building tottered to its fall, and
was lost in its orvn ruins"

This last sentence is quoted by several writers, including Maurice,
Elphinstone and Marshman ; and Meadows Taylor says [“The Student’s
Manual of Indian History,” page 92], “ 'Like a great building,’ writesFerishtah,
'it tottered to its fall,’ ” &c.; but, unfortunately, Firightah never wrote anything
of the kind. His language here is particularly simple. Referring to the final
chai^ by the Sultin, he says: “ The dust of the battle-field was drenched with
the blood of the brave ; and, in the twinkling of an eye, he threw the ranks of

468 THE TABA¥AT.I-NA§lRi.

state, and the elephants, were left several miles in the rear.
He marshalled his ranks, and was advancing leisurely.
The light-armed and unincumbered horsemen he had
directed should be divided into four divisions, and had
appointed them to act against the infidels on four sides;
and the Sultan had commanded, saying : “ It is necesssary
that, on the right and left, and front and rear, io,ocx5
mounted archers should keep the infidel host in play; and,
when their elephants, horsemen, and foot advance to the
attack, you are to face about and keep the distance of a
horse’s course in front of them’.” The Musalman troops
acted according to these instructions, and, having ex¬
hausted and wearied the unbelievers, Almighty God gave
the victory to Islam, and the infidel host was overthrown.

Rae Pithora, who was riding an elephant, dismounted
and got upon a horse and fled [from the field], until, in the
neighbourhood of [the] Sursuti ®, he was taken prisoner,
and they despatched him to hell ; and Gobind Rae of
Dihli was slain in the engagement. The Sultan recognized
his head through those two teeth which had been broken.
The seat of government, Ajmir, with the whole of the
SiwS.likh * [territory], such as Hansi, Sursuti, and other

the enemy into commotion. At this crisis Khar.mfl [’Izz-ud*Dfn, ^usain, son
^Shnr-mtl] and other Amirs, from different directions, charged, and over¬
threw the Hindu troops.” This is all: he then mentions the fall of Khandf
Rae and other chiefs.

* The object was to harass, and to induce them to break their order. The
Sultan’s tactics, from our author’s description, as well as that of others, are not
very clear. One writer, however, throws a little more light upon the matter ;
and from that it appears that the Sultan, leaving the central portion of his
army— about half his entire force—some miles in the rear, with the baggage and
other nuUMel, divided the remainder into five divisions, four of which, each of
10,000 light-armed horse—mounted archers—were to attack the enemy right
and left, and front and rear, and retire, pretending flight. This mode of
fighting having been carried on from about 9 A. M. to the time of aAemoon
prayer, the SultZn, considering that the enemy had been sufficiently wearied,
with the remainder—his fifth division, the flower of his troops, consisting of
some 12,000 horse—made a final charge, and put the Hindu army to a
complete rout.

* The ancient Saraswatt. Probably our author means in the tract near the

Sursuti : the word is Ibn-i-Batutah calls Sursuti a gpreat city. In

Akbar’s time Sursuti was one of the Matialls of Sirkar Sanbhal.

* Like some other historians, our author calls that tract of country, lying
south of the HimSlayah, between the Sutlaj and the Ganges, and extending as
far south as Hanst, by the name of Siwalikh ; but some other native writers,
including the aulhoi of the Ilistoiy of JamCin, include the whole of the Alpine

THE SHANSABANIAH DYNASTY OF GHAZKfN. 4^9

tracts, were subjugated. These events took place, and this
victory was achieved, in the year 588 H.* ; and the Sultan
placed Malik Kutb-ud-Din, I-bak *, in the fort of Kuhram%
and returned [home again]*.

Malik Kujtb-ud-Din advanced from Kuhfam to Mirath,
and took that city and fortress, and, in the following year,
he possessed himself of the capital city, Dihlt *. In this same

tracts below the higher range, from the Ganges to Kaslltntr, that is to say,
the extreme northern boundary of India—under the name of ICoh-i-Siwalikh.
Another writer says Siwalikh is the ancient name of the territory of Nag-awr.
See page 200 also. ITie Sultan returned to Ghaznin along the skirts of the
hills of -the northern Panjab.

* Authors generally agree respecting this date ; but, as already noticed, our
author, in another place, states this was the year in which the campaign against
Sultan Sh ah took place. See note ®, page 456.

• For the meaning of T-bak, see under his reign, next Section.

^ As written with the vowel points—not Kahrain.

* Our author leaves out entirely all mention of the son of Rae PithorS having
been set up at Ajmtr as a subject an<l tributary ruler, as mentioned in the
Taj-ul-Ma’asir and subsequent histories ; and hence his name, together with
the Sultan’s also, was impressed on the coins issued by him during the short
period he ruled at Ajmir.

• Mr. E. Thomas [Coins of the Patiian Kings of DEHi.f], page 22,
note *, says “The historical evidence as to the capture of Dehli by the Moslems,
in 587 H., is complete and consistent with the best authorities,” &c. He is
mistaken, however, even on his own authorities, ^asan Nijamt, in the Taj-
ul-Ma’asir [Elliot, vol. ii. page 216], gives no date at all; but, in the following
page, says, " in the month 0//tamasdn [which is the ninth month], 588 H.,”
B^uJb-ud-Uin "marched against yatwdn" to relieve Hanst. After this he
marched against Mirath and took it ; and, after that again, marched towards
Dihlt, and invested-and took it [page 219] I have comjrared the text of the
Taj-ul-Ma’asir, and find the above date quite correct. Our author, Minhaj-i-
Saraj [the version" given at page 300 of E1.1.10T, which is evidently translated
from the printed text, is incorrect and imperfect], who often contradicts his
own statements and dates, after saying here that the ovcTthrow of Rae Pithora
took place in '588 H., in his account of ^Cutb-ud-Dtn, farther on, says that
l[putb'Ud-Dtn took possession of Mtrath in 587 H. ; but immediately endeavours
to correct himself, and says : “From Mtrath he issued forth, in the year $88 H.,
and captured Dihlt; and, in the year 590 H.,” accompanied the Sulian against
Jai. fllinn d. &c. The fact is that the Hindus, having been overthrown in
588 H., in the battle of Tara’tn, ^utb-ud-Dtn was left at KuhrSm, from which,
towards the close of the same year, he moved against Jatwan, and relieved
HZnst, and then proceeded against Mtrath. These movements must have
occupied some three months, and, in the last days of 588 H., or early in 589 H.,
he invested Dihlt, and gained possession of it. Some works, however, such
as the TabaVat-i-Akbart, Haft-Hfltm, Shula^at-ut-Tawartkb, and Firishtah,
say Dihlt was taken in 588 H. The Lubb-ut-Taw 5 rtkh-i*Hind says, “Mu’izi-
nd-Dtn advanced against Dihlt, after taking Ajmtr, and, on the kinsman of
Rae Pithora and Khandt [Gobind ?] Rae, who then held possession of it,
tendering tribute and submission, he was allowed to retain it;'and the next

470

THE T^BA^T-I.NA$IR!.

year likewise—589-H.—he [Kutb-ud-Dtn] took the fort of
Kol. In the year 590 H., the Sultan [again] marched from
Ghazntn and advanced towards Kinnauj and Banaras,and,in
the vicinity of Ch andwar *. he overthrew Rae Tai- Ch and ■,
and by that victory three hundred and odd elephants fell
into his hands.

Under the shadow of the ascendancy and auspices' of
that victorious and just monarch, victory was conferred
upon his slave, the Malik-i-Karim [the Beneficent Malik],
Kutb-ud-Dtn, I-bak, so that he continued to subdue the
territory of Hindustan and parts adjacent, namely, the
state of Nahrwalah, and Thankir*, the fo'rt of Gwaliyur,

year, 589 H., ^u{b-ud-Dtn, who had been left at Kuhfiiin, took it, and made
it the seat of government and, in this, the works quoted above agree. The
statement of our author, backed by the statement of Fayih-'f. and the Taj-ul-
Ma’agir, and some others, is to be depended upon ; but 587 H. is out of the
question altogether, although that year is g^ven in the TCh nlasat-iil.Akhbgr'. and
one or two others. If 587 H. is correct, in what year was Kae Fithora defeated
the first time ? See also note *, page 456. The year 589 H. is a somewhat
remarkable one:—Dibit was made the capital of Mutiammadan India; Richard
Coeur de Lion fought in Palestine; ^alati-ud-Dtn, Yusuf, Sultan of Mi^r, died;
and dhangiz Kha n entered into friendly relations with 0 ng KbSn.

' In some copies Chandwal and Jandwal, and in some other authors CJiand-
war and Cha nda war. The only place bearing a similar name at this time, and
in the direction indicated, is what is styled Ch andpur and Cha ndanpHr, in the
district of FarruJdiabad, on the route from Bareilt to Fath-skni't Lat. 27" 27',
Long. 79* 42'.

* That is, he turned his arms against l^innauj and Banfiras. The RSjah of

Ij^innauj and Banaras, his former ally, according to the Hindu accounts,
against Rae PithorS, had assembled numerous forces, in consequence of ]^u{b-
nd-Dtn, I-bak’s, aggressive policy, and was about to march against him. It
was to support ^ulb-ud-Dtn that the Sultfin again came into India, and an
encounter [the Hindu writers say “several” encounters] took place between
them on the Jun [Jamna], in which the Rajah [Jai Chandra] was slain. Some
say as many as 600 and 640 elephants, one of which was a white one, were
captured, besides a vast amount of other booty. The white elephant is pro¬
bably the same as was presented subsequently by Gh iySs-ud-Ptn. Mahmud,
the Sultan’s nephew, to SultSn Muhammad, Kh warmim Shah. Firiahtah says
the white elephant, which was taken on this occasion, soon after died. Jai-
Chandia was killed in this action, and his body could not be recognized. At
leng.h, after much search, a body was found, but was so disfigured with wounds
that it could not be distinguished for certain by his people ; but, on examining
the mouth. It was found to be the body of the Rajah, from the fact of his teeth
being fastened in with of gold [^-signifies a peg, pin, &c.,nota p/ale],

he being an old man. The probability'' is they were false teeth, or a set not
his own, fastened by gold pins or wires. His stronghold, Asnt, was also
taken.

* Here our author seems- confused. In his account of l^utb-ud-Dtn, he
does not say that l[j-uIb'Ud-Dtn took Thanktr, quite the contrary; and, in hit

THE SHANSABAnIaH DYNASTY OF QHAZNfN. 471

and BudS’un, the whole of which he took, the dates of
which will, please God, be -subsequently
recorded in the [account of the] Kutbi victories

august Suljan, fihiyas-ud-Din, Muhammad,
TOn of [Baha-ud-Din] Sam, departed this life in the city of
Hirat, the victorious Sultan, Mu'izz-ud-Din, Muhammad,
^n of Sam, was on the frontiers of Tus, and Sarakhs, of
Khurasan , and, with the purpose of performing the

amimt of Baha-ud-Dfn, Tughril fSeclion XX.], says that Sul{an Mu’izs-uH-
IWn hi^lf took it, and afterwards ma le it over to Tiigbril, which i.s correct.
There U great discrepancy here, too, among authors. I'he Taj-ul-Ma*agir,
Alfl, and others, say the Sultan marched against it, and then marched on
GwfiliyOr, the RSjah of which agreed to pay tribute, and paid a large sum
down. He was allowed to retain his territory, on these terms, for a time ; and
tl» Sultin returned to Qhazntn. Alft says he took Thankfr, the present
Blanah, in 59 ® U. ; Buda’unf says 59* w* > ttnd Taj-ul-Ma’agir says in 592 H.
See account of ]^utb-ud-Din, next Section.

* That is to say, the victories gained by ^fuJb-ud-Dtn, I-bak.

• We now come to “ Proceedings West of the Indus” [See Elliot, India,
vob ii. page 297], and very important proceedings they are; and most of the
proceedings hitherto related by our author have occurred west of the Indus.
Qhamtn, as well as GJxGr, is west of the Indus. Our author takes good care
to trum^t the successes of the GhGrfs, but conceals their reverses. He appears
to have forgotten that, when Sulf&n Mu’izz-ud>Dtn left TOs, and abandoned
the expedition against Khurasan, on receiving intimation of the death of his
elder brother at HirSt, he left, in command of a large force at and parts
around, Muhammad-i-Shar-nak, the chief of the Amtrs of Qh^r, and of the
Gh Orfen champions, a second Rustam in valour. He began carrying his
depredations as far as Abtward, made some of the Kh waraz.mi nobles captiy^
and slew a great number of men. Subsequently, he pushed on as far as Tr&V
against Taj-ud-Din, Slialj, a Kh warazmt officer. The latter sent his son to
Muhammad-i-Khar-nak as a hostage for himself; and, on the return of the
latter towards 7^ again, the Amir of Maraghah sent his son to him also.
Muhammad-i-Khar-nak, becoming arrogant at this success, turned his face
towards Marw. New's now reached him that a force from Kh warar.m had
arrived near Marw by way of the desert. He advanced to meet it by way of
Rue. When the two armies came in contact, good fortune smiled upon the
ShwSrazmt forces ; and, although Muhammad-i-Khar-nak’s troops were twice
as numerous, the Kh warazmis charged them, and overthrew them. Mu[iam>
mad-t-Khar-nalf. by a thousand contrivances, succeeded in throwing himself
into 7 ^- The Kh warazml troops followed, made breaches in the walls, and
took him captive ; and, fearing his fury likewise, one of the Amtrs—Amtn
Malik [styled, by our author, Malik Kh an, of Hir%t, the Amtn-i-Hajtb, at
page 415, and see page 287, note*]—struck off his head, and despatched it to
Khwararm to the Sultln. He greatly disapproved of this act, but it filled
Sult 2 n Mu’izz-ud-Dtn with amazement and anxiety, for Muhammad-i-Khar.
nak was the most valiant of his champions, and the pillar of his army. Such
was his intrepidity, and the strength of his arm, that the Sultans frequently
pitted him in combat against the lion and the elephant, and he could overcome
both, and could break the leg of a three-year old horse with his hands. This

472

THE XABA?AT.I.NA5IRi.

mourning ceremonies for his brother, he came to Bad g^ais
of Hirat. Having performed the mourning rites, he nomi¬
nated different Maliks to the several fiefs of the kingdom
of Ghur *. He gave the city of Bust, and the districts of
Farah and Isfizar to his late brother’s son, Sultan Ghiya^
ud-Din, Mahmud, son of Ghiyas-ud-Din, Muhammad-i-
Sam, and to Malik Ziya-ud-Din \ the Pearl of Ghur, who
was uncle’s son of both the Sultans, and the son-in-law of
Sultan Ghiyas-ud-Din, Muhammad-i-Sam, the territory of
Ghur and Garmsir, namely, the throne of Firuz-koh, and
the town and territory of Dawar *, and also presented him
with two elephants. To Malik Na§ir-ud-Din, Alb-[Ar-
salan]-i-Ghazi. son of Kazil Arsalan, Saljuki, who was the
son of a sister* of the two Sultans, Sultan Mu’izz-ud-Din
gave the city of Hirat [and its dependencies], after which

is the person styled Mahomed Zeeruk, Prince of Murv, by Briggs j and Zireek,
Prince of Murve, by Dow. In the revised text of F'irislttah, his name is
turned into [Shair Beg] !

It was after this defeat of Mutiamniad-i-Khar-nak that Suljan Mubammad,
Khwirazm Shall, was urged by his ministers .and nobles to advance against
Hirat, as the sons [son and son-in-law] ofTlhe late Sultan Ghivaff-ud-Dtn,
Mutiamraad-i-Sam, were quarrelling about the inheritance, and their nobles
were inclined to join his service. Consequentfly, in Jamadi-ul-Awival, 600 H.,
the Sulljan marched towards Hirat for the second time, and Alb-i-Ghazt. the
sister’s son of the two .Sultan brothers, surrendered that stronghold to him, as
already related in note *, page 257. Muhammad-i-Khar-nak must be the same
person as is referred to at page 344, the son of Malik Saif-ud-Dtn, Surt, son
of Malik Sh'hab-ud-Din, ]^ar-nak [son of ’Izz-ud-Dtn, Al-^usain], the uncle
of the Sultans Ghiyag-ud-Din and Mu’izz-ud-Din; and the former’s full name
would be Shihab-ud-Din, Muhammad 'Alf-i-Khar-nak, and he was second
cousin of Ma’izz-ud-Dtn and his brother.

My note *, psige 257, will show why and with what object the Sultan was
between Tus and Sarakhs, where he heard of his brother’s death.

* He divided the ancestral dominions amongst the family of Sam. His
brother had died in the fifth month of 599 H., and, from this date only, authors
state, “he assumed the title of Sultan but this must mean, that from that
date he assumed the title of Sultan-ul-A’jam— greatest Sultan—which had
been his brother and sovereign’s title; his own, previous to his brother’s death,
ijcing only Sultan-ul-Mu’afjam —the great Sultan—as shown by his coins.

t This is the Malik-ul-^jlajt, who, after he received the investiture of Ghur
and Firuz-koh, received the title of Sultan ’Ala-ud-Dtn. See pages 391, 397,
and 417.

* Here, too, the idiom differs in the copies of the text in the same manner
as previously alluded to.

* One sister, the elder, married Shams-ud-Dtn. Muhammad, of Btmhin;
another married Alb-Arsalan-i-Ghazt. son of ]{|jizil Arsalftn, SaljGht } and the
third was the mother of TSj-ud-Dfn, Zangt; but the father is not mentioned.
See page 342, and note *, page 425.

THE SHANSABAnIaH DYNASTY OF GH AZNfN. 473

he returned apin to Ghaznin, and brought along with
him to that city some of the Amirs and Maliks of Ghur
to serve under him, and commenced his preparations for
an expedition against Khwarazm •.

In the year 601 H, he marched his forces into the
^warazm territory ; and Sultan Muhammad, IQiwarazm
Shah, fell back discomfited® before the Gh aznin forces and

* expedition was undertaken to recover what had been lost, and avenge
the defeat and death of Mutammad-i-Siar-nak. See note », page 257.

• Sultan Mutiammad’s “falling backdiscomfitted ” appears from the sequel,
^e Sultan’s object was to defend his capital. No action whatever took place
between them until the Gburis appeared in the neighbourhood of the city, and
took up a position east of the Shatt mentioned under.

Sultan Muliammad, Khwarazm gljah, having become aware of Mu’izz-ud-
Din s designs of carrying war into his enemy’s country, and his vast pre¬
parations, hastened back from Khurasan, by w.ay of the desert, to Khwarazm ;
and his people prepared to give the Ghuris a warm reception. The Sultan
asked for aid from Khur^n, both in shape of horse and foot, and Gur Khan
of K^rS'Khita was also asked for assistance. Sultan - ^luhammad’s camp
was fixed on the western bank of the Shatt-i-Nudwar or Nudawar

our author’s Kam*Su, no doubt, but another work says the bank of the
Nfir—and, in a short space of time, 7o,oqo men assembled. “The Ghurtan
forces were vast in numbers, and contained so many elephants,” says Yafa-t,
“that, had they desired, they might have drained the Jihun.” But, seUing
aside all exaggeration, the number is said to have been 140,000 men, and
about 300 or 400 great elephants. The Jami’-ut-Tawarikll, which constantly
copies Yafa-t, says 70,000 warriors, and elephants [besides followers ?].
Arrived on the banks of the Jihun, Mu’izz-ud-Din, Gh nrt, took up a
position on the east side of the Shatjl, and pitched his camp, and gave
orders to search for a ferry in order to cross over next day, and attack the
Kh warazmi forces.

Sultan Mu’izz-ud-Dtn was engaged in arranging his elephants, and making
his preparations for crossing next morning at dawn, when news, suddenly and
unexpectedly, reached him that Sulj|an Muhammad had arrived, and along
with.him Sul[iln ’Usman of SamrVand [his son-in-law subsequently] and that
the Khita-i forces were pushing on. Mu’izz-ud-Din, finding that he was much
in the same position as the “ Lords of the Elephant”—“ Hast thou not beheld
how the Lord of Lords dealt with the Lords of the Elephant ? Did He not
make their evil design the means of drawing them into error, and sent
against them flocks of birds, which cast upon them lumps of burnt clay which
rendered the perfidious like unto the corn that has been reaped 1” [Kur’an ;
Chap. c. S]—and that destruction awaited him if he remained, resolved to
retire. He directed that the whole of the heavy material should be burnt
during the night, and his army began to retire aloVig the banks of the Jihiin,
but they were pursued by the Kh'varazmis next day at dawn, and, at Hazar-
Asp [afterwards destroyed by the Mughals. Guzidah and Jami'-ut-Tawarikh
call it Hazar-$at], the Ghuris faced about and came to a stand, and drew up to
fight. SulS&n Muhammad, with his forces, fell upon the right wing of the
Ghur is, and overthrew it, and the rest gave way, pursued by the Khwarazmts.
In this affair several of the Amtrs of fihur, and a great number of men were

H h

474

THE taba]S:At.i-na$ir!.

retired to Kh warazm. When the Sultan-i- Gh azi appeared
before the gates of Kh warazm. and carried on hostilities
for some days, the people of Kh warazm commenced en¬
gaging the l^uris on the bank * of the aqueduct which
had been drawn from the river Jihun towards the east of
the city, and the name of which place and water is Kara-
Su * [the Black Water], and of the Amirs of Gh ur several
persons were slain and taken prisoners in that engage¬
ment

As the capture of [the city of] Kh warazm was not accom¬
plished on account of the scarcity of the appliances of the
Ghaznin forces, the length of the campaign, and the lack
of forage, the Sultan withdrew his troops from the gates of
Kh warazm * and retired along the banks of the Jihun, and
towards Balkh. The forces of Kh ita. and the Maliks and
Amirs of Turkistan had arrived on the banks of the Jihun,
and had possessed themselves of the route of the army of
Islam. When the Sultan-i-Ghazi reached AndJ^ud ®, on
a Tuesday, at the time of evening prayer ^ the van of the
infidels of Turkistan reached the Sultan’s position, and set to
to fight. The commander of the van of the army of Islam
was the Salar [chief, leader, &c.], Husain-i- Kha r-mil. and he
put the infidels to the rout. He was one of the Maliks of

taken prisoners. After a time the Eh^'^arazmls gave up the pursuit, and SuIfSn
Mutiammad returned to Kh warazm. where he ^ve a great banquet, and made
great rejoieing.

In this action the Gh urts lost still more of their war material and elephants,
and they continued their retreat towards Andkhud [Guzfdah says, within
the limits of Tal-^an] and, on reaching it, found that the troops of Gur Kh 3 n
of yara- Kh ita. under Banjko of Taraz, were there posted to bar their retreat,
and appeared on all sides of them. The Qhurfs fought with great bravery
from dawn to the setting of the sun, and darkness put an end to the fray, in
which, according to Yafa-t, the Gh iiris lost 50,000 men. Jami’-ut-Taw£rf]cb
says the Ghuris were broken on the first charge of the Khifii'b. See following
page for a specimen of our author’s exaggeration.

* Some copies have “on the hither side or bank of the aqueduct ” I

* The ^ara-Su is some eight or nine miles from the city—or rather the
city here referred to.

* Almost as absurd a reason as our Central Asian oracles pronounced would
‘render the success of the Russians against the same territory “ utterly impos¬
sible,” a few months ago. Mu’izz-ud-Din was only five days before the place.
The preceding note * shows why the Gh urfs had to retire.

* Not Andkhod. See note on this in the account of Raba-jah farther on.

1 He is particular about the day of the week and time of day, but not the
day of the month.

THE S&ANSABANIAH dynasty OF QHAZNlN. 475

Juzarwan •. He at once represented to the Sultan-i-Ghazl
the fact of the success of the Islami forces and the repulse [!]
of the infidel troops. “It is advisable,” he said, “that the
sovereign of Islam should command that the army of
Islam should mount at once and pursue the routed infidels,
and fall upon them unexpectedly, whereby a great victory
may be achieved*.”

The Sultan-i-GIjazi replied: “ For years past I have
been seeking such an encounter as this, I shall not he
found to hold back : to-morrow, at dawn, by the guidance
of the NIost High, we will do battle face to face, and see
unto whom Almighty God will bestow the victory. I shall
at least have acquired the merit of having fought for the
faith as by creed enjoined.” Malik ’Izz-ud-Din, Husain,
son of Khar-mil *, perceiving that the mind of the Sultan-i-
Gl^azi was imbued with this intention, was convinced that
the Sul$an gave vent to these words by virtue of unbounded
reliance in the true faith, and the ardour of piety; [for
regard had to be given to the fact] on the other hand, that
the host of the infidels which had come upon them was
countless, and all fresh and calm, while the Musalman
army was wearied by the march from Khwarazm, and the
horses were emaciated, and would not be strong enough to
withstand the enemy ; and he withdrew from the service
of the Sultan, and, with the whole of his retinue and fol¬
lowers. to the number of five thousand horse, set out, at
night, towards Juzarwan*, and almost all the troops [also]
whose horses were weak and emaciated departed.

* This place-lias been often mentioned as Guzamdln and as above : g- and /
are interchangeable.

* In the next paragraph our author contradicts this absurd statement.

* The same who after this was Wall of Hirat. His conduct here was in
keeping with his doings there. See note *, page 257.

* One copy only has “the iawti of Juzarwan,” but it is a comparatively
modem copy. There was a town, probably, as well as a district so called.

This desertion of the Sultan by ’Izz-ud-Din, 2 £har-mil, ap¬

pears to have given rise to the improbable story related by Firiihtah and some
others, and repeated by Briggs in his translation of Firishtah, but Dow does
not give the whole. This story is repeated and re-echoed by Briggs’ copyists,
and people are led to imagine that Sultan Mu’izz-ud-Dtn’s most trusted, most
devoted, and loyal slave, whom he delighted to honour, and whom he intended
as his successor, had refused to admit his master and sovereign into Ghazntn.
of which he is styled governor, after the Sultan’s defeat and accommodation with
the allied forces of Kbits and Suipin ’UsmSa. We know that Taj-ud-Din,

H h 2

476

THE taba?:At.i-nA$irI.

In the morning', notwithstanding that only a few horse¬
men of the centre division and his own slaves remained

I-yal-dfiz, held the government of Kaymnn, but where is it stated that he held
Cliaznin at all at that time ? It ajjpears that he had not been removed from
Kayman up to the period of the Sultan’s death, and the honour shown to him
by Mu’izz-ud-Dtn, only a few months after his return from Kh waraziii. when
marching against the Khokhars, precludes the possibility of I-yal-duz’s having
acted in the way asserted by FirisJitah ; and it was only when Gh iya^-ud-
Uin, Mahmud, conferred on him the investiture of Gh aziiin. with a deed of
manumission, and the title of Suljan, that he proceeded thither from his
government of Karman. See page 500, note It is also stated that another
of Sultan Mu’izz-ud-DIn’s chiefs '' tjcnt straight" from the field of battle at
Andkhud to “ Mooltan,” and .seized it. Where Andkhud ? Where Multan ?
This story, absurd though it seems, a]^pears to have emanated from the
Taj-i'l-Ma’asir, and something similar is related in GuzTdah, the Janii’-ut-
Tawarikll, and in Alfi, noticed farther on ; but no mention -ohati'Z'er is made
in these works about closing the gates of Gh aznin by I-yal-duz [Iladd-giz, in
Guzidah] or any other person ; and it appears to have received great ampli<
fication from Firishtah himself, for the Tabalcat-i-Akbari, a work of authority,
written a few years before, says not one word about anything of the kind.
See also note *, page 481. The Taj-ul-Ma’asir has the name of this rebel
written in four different way.s, in as many copies of the text, namely, I-bak'-i-
Bak i-bak-i-Na-pak [ and the unintelligible names of

JU SLt' or but in a fourth Jb iJJ without points. [It is evidently the
same name as occurs in Jami’-ut-Tawarikh.—I.ik-Tal [Jh olj. Guzidah styles
him i-bak, Badshah of Multan 1 !J “a Turk! slave—one of the most trusted
servants of the kingdom fled from the field of battle with the Kh warazmis,
thinking that the Sultan had been killed, and some calamity had befallen the
state, and made for Multan with all possible despatch. Arrived there, he
stated to the Amir-i-Dad [chief justice], Hasan, that he had important matters
to communicate to him in private within the ^;r, by the royal command,
and which it was by no means advisable should become known to others.”
Having succeeded in getting a private audience, he gave a sign " to a mean
Turk ” who assassinated the Amir-i-Dad, who appears to have held the chief
authority there under the governor of the province of Labor and Multan,
Amir Muhammad, son of Abi ’Ali. For some time this affair'remained
secret, and it was thought that Hasan had been imprisoned by the Sultan’s
commands ; but, at length, it became noised abroad, far and near, through
Hind and Sind. See note ', page 481. The Taj-ul-Ma’a-jir then passes,
at once, to the outbreak of the Kokars [Khokhais—natives of Kh iirilsan and
Europeans generally leave out the h in pronunciation of the Hindi 9 ],
while Firishtah gives a long account of the slave’s reduction and punishment.
He says, “the Sultan, unable to enter Gha znin. proceeded towards Multan,
encountered I-bak-i-Na-pak [otherwise Yal-bur, &c.], took him captive, and
marched towards Gh aznin with the frontier troops of Hind.” At Gh aznin.
the Sultan, through the intercession of the great men of that city, overlooked
the conduct of iladd-giz [this is the name Guzidah and Firishtah use for
this personage, and Yal-duz, for Taj-ud-Din, I-yal-duz], and, having disposed
of that matter, entered into a treaty of peace with Sultan Muhammad,
Kh warazm ghah, and, after that, made preparations for his expedition
against the Khokhars. Firishtah, like some other more mddem writers.

THE SHANSABANIAH DYNASTY OF OHAZNtN.

477

with him, the Sultan drew out his ranks and commenced
the engagement The army of the unbelievers, having
formed a circle round about the troops of Islam, came on,
and, in despite of the remonstrance his slaves were using
that of the army of Islam only a small number of men
remained, and that it was advisable to retreat, the Sultan-i-
Ghazi still continued to maintain his position, until, of cavalry
and his own personal slaves*, only about one hundred horse¬
men remained, who, with a few elephants, the Turkish slaves,
and the Gh urian leaders, who were the Sultan’s grandees,
in front of his charger’s head, were hurling back the infidels,
devoting their lives, and obtaining martyrdom.

Trustworthy persons have related on this wise, that the
Sultan-i-Ghazi stood his ground so persistently that his
august state canopy, from the wounds of the arrows of the
infidel Mughals * [and the arrows remaining sticking fast],
became like unto a porcupine, and he would not turn his
head round in any direction, until one of his Turkish slaves,
whose name was Ayyah *, J uki, came up, seized the Sultan’s
bridle, and dragged him away towards the fortress of And-

Btyles them Ghakars—/J^but he could scarcely have been expected to
know the difference, and even Elliot, in his Index [page i6o, note*], after
writing the word properly, supposes Gakhar and Khokhar [.-^ 4 ^}

one and the same race, but there is as much difference between them as
between an Afghan, and a Khaj-’l Jat, as those who have served in the
PanjSb well know. The Taba^at-i-Akbari, a work of greater authority than
Firlshtah [whom I do not consider an authority in these matters any more
than respecting the presence of cannonitrs at the battle of Tara in],

says nothing of the kind ; and, had I-yal-dui, I-bak-i-Na-pak, Lik-Tal, or
any other person, been guilty of the acts mentioned, there is no doubt our
authqr would, at least, have referred to them. He might smooth or slur over
a defeat, but not circumstances of this kind. See Alfi’s account of the
expedition against the Khokhars in note *, page 481, which I think tends to
disprove much of the improbable story under discussion, more particularly
when the Taj-ul-Ma’ajir says npt one word about either Iladd-giz or Yal-duz,
nor about the Suljan’s coming to Multan against 1 -bak-i-Na-pak, whose name
is not again mentioned in the entire volume. The account given by our
author farther on in his account of ’Ala-ud-Din, Muhammad, at page 492,
and of Taj-ud-Din, I-yal-duz, page 496, also tends to disprove this stoiy.

* This description of troops has already been mentioned, in note , page

i68^

* The b« means. . ,.

* In two of the best copies, I-bah or Ai-bah, and in one good old copy
Abfah or Abiyah, but in the oldest the name is plainly written as above.
Juki In all probability is the name of his tribe. Some other authors style
him a Ehalj> but it is one and the same tiling—Turk and Klialj.

478

THE TABA¥At.I.NA$1RX.

Ishud, and conducted him thither, and brought him within
the walls of that fortress *.

* Siiltnn Mu’izz-iid-Dtn, with the few men remaining of the centre division
of his army, as soon as the sun nv^e, succeeded, by stratagem, in throwing
himself within the walls of the Hi^ar of Andkhud [Guzidah says, 7 ^ 1 -
Van] ; but the E>jita-i troops invested it, perforated the walls, and Mu’i/z-ud-
iJIii woiihl have been captured, when Sultan ’Ujinaii of Samr\cand, who was
now with the JChita-i forces, sent him a message saying: “For the honour
of the true failli 1 do not < 1 csirc that a Sultan of Islam should fall into tl.e
hands of those of another belief, and be put to death by them : therefore it
is advisable that yoti should agree to sacrifice for your own safety what
remains of your elephants and other animals, your valuables, treasures, arms
and armour, and other war material, that 1 may make these things the means,
with these peo]ilc, of obtaining your cscai>c in safety.” This he agreed to do,
and .Sultan 'U.smiin, by a thousand efforts and contrivances, succeeded, in
securing the Sultan’s escape, and he reached his own territory in safety.
There can be no doubt whatever as to the Suljan’s gallantry, but our author’s
statements arc rather highly coloured. The Taba\cat-i-Akbart, contrary to
others, states that the Sultan defended Andkbud for some time, and then
surrendered on terms, but it is not correct.

The following is another specimen of the translations from which Indian
history is written, referring to this campaign :—

Duw, vol. i. page 145. liRiuGS, vol. L page i8o>i8l.

“ News was then brought to him “'On hearing of the death of his
IMahommed] of the death of his brother, he \_Mahomed Ghoory\ now

brother yeas ul dien, toho retaineti returned towards Ghizny, by the route

nothing of the empire but the name of Budghees, ami, subduing part of

[this is totally incorrect, and is the the country of Kinoaruzm, reeot>cred it

translator’s own]. APahommed, upon out of the hands of the Suljooks. Me

this, succeeded to the empire. He divided this ne^o comjuest \\ 1 !] among

turned by the way of Budyeish, and several members of his erwn family

subdued the country of Chorassan, re- [see our author, page 472], giving the

covering it out of the hand of the government of Feroozkooh and Ghoor

Siljoki, and he divided it among the [Are these in Khwaruzm recovered

family of JVi///, giving the government from the Suljooks to his nephew

of Ferose Mo a.ni Ghor lo Afalleik Zea, Zeea-ood-Been, son-in-law of his late

who was son-in-law to his brother, brother, Gheias-ood-Deen. He also

Yeas ul dien, the deceased Emjieror, gave Boost, Furrih, and Isfurar [All

Bust, Ferra, and Isphorar he gave to in Khwaruzm perhaps T] to the Prince

Mamootl, his brother’s son ; and the Alahomed, his brother’s son, and the

government of Herat and its districts government of Hirat and its depend-

to Nasir, his nephew by a sister. encies to Nasir-ood-Deen, hit nephew

Alahommed, after these transac- by a sister,
tions, returned to Ghizni, where, ar- “ On his arrival at Chiany, accord-
cording to the will of the deceased ing to the will of his deceased brother,

Fmperor, he was crcaoned in form ; he was crowtied in form [STUDENT’S

and mounted the imperial throne. Manual OF INDIAN HiSTOEY-—“ he

In the same year, he heard ul the was crowned SultSn without opposU

death of Zireek, prince of Afnn'e, and, tion ”] ; and ascended the throne;

in the Ircginning of the next, marched In the same year he heard td tho

to the lonquest of that country, ad- death of Afahomtd Zeeruh, Prince Of

THE SBANSABANIAH DYNASTY OF GH AZNiN. 479

The following day, Sultan ’Ugman of Samr^and, who

vaneing by way of Charizm [: 1 !],
and Taeash, the King of that country,
not able to oppose him in the field,
shut himself up in the city. The King
pitched bis camp on the banks of the
great canal, which the ChilUgies had
formerly dug to the westward of that
city. He forthwith attacked the place,
and in a few days lost many brave
nobles in the pursuit of glory. In
the mean-time, news arrived, that
Aibeek, the general of the King of
Chitta, in Tartary, and Osman, King
of Samarcaud, were advancing with
great armies, to the relief of Charizm.
Mahommed was so unwilling to
abandon his hopes of taking the
city, that he delayed till the allied
armies advanced so near, that he
was under the necessity of burning all
bis baggage, and to retreat with the
utmost expedition to Chorassan [1 !].
But an army from the city pressed so
close upon his heels, that he was
obliged to give them battle. He was
totally defeated, losing all his ele¬
phants and treasure.

“ In the meantime the confederate
Kings, who had taken a circuit, to
cut off Mdhommed’s retreat, met him
full in the face, as he was flying from
the King of Charizm,"

Murv, and in the beginning of the
next year marched to compute the
conquest of Khwarvem [III] [This is
what is styled “ his western campaign
against the King of Kharlzm” in
THE Student’s Manuai., but I
think Kh warazm lies north of Qhaz-
ninj. Mahomed Ghoory, having en¬
camped on the banks of the great
canal, which hod formerly been dug
to the westsoard of the city, forthwith
attacked the place, but lost msmy
brave' officers and men in an at-
TEMIT TO ESCALADE IT [1 1 !]. Mean¬
while news arrived that Kurra Beg,
the general of Ghoorkkan, King of
Khutta, and Othman Khan Samar-
kandy, were advancing with armies
to the relief of Khwaruzm Shah. Ma¬
homed Ghoory, unwilling to abandon
his hopes of taking the city, delayed
his retreat till the allied armies ad¬
vanced so near, that he was compelled
to burn his baggage, and to retire
with the utmost precipitation towards
Khorassan. His army was pressed
so clos’ely by troops from that province,
that he was compelled to give battle,
and was wholly defeated, losing all
his elephants and treasure, while the
conjederate Kings [see page 473, and
note *J who had taken a circuit to
cut off his retreat towards Ghuzny,
intercepted him.”

This may truly be called the Romance of .History. Deceived, apparently,
by this translation, Elphinstone [page 316] has fallen into great error.
He says : "He [ShdhAb u din] gained a great victory over the king of that
country [Khirizm], besieged him in his capital, and soon reduced him to such

straUs as to constrain him to sueV:\ for aid to the Khitan Tailars, Sen. Never

was a statement more erroneous. Marshman too, possibly quoting from the
same, says “ Mahomed led his troops against Takash, as he styles Sultan
’Aia-ud-Din, Mutammad, the son of Sultan Takish- _

The following is Firishtah’s account:— “ Sultan Sllih 5 b-ud-Dtn was
between Tus and SarakHs when the account of the dccc.ase of his brother,
Ghiyas-ud-Dtn, reached him, and in whose name the kingdom was[,. .e. in whom
Sr sovereignty rested. This is the passage misinterpreted by Dow--
retained nothing of the empire but the mime." The original is r r.’l-

F^tTth^ce he set ouf for Barigh-tis, performed the mourning ceremonies
S S in thU yeS. he divi^ the whole of the st.at« of Kbur*s 5 „
[Firijlitah here shows that he is himself no aulUotily as to the geography of

480

THE TABA?AT-I.NA$IRL

was a second Yusuf [in beauty], and the Afr^siyabl Maliks
of Turkistan, who were Musalmans ^ interposed and

these parts, any more than he is an authority as to the history] among the
family of Sam [i. e. the descendants of Sam, his father, only ;^iy&-ud-Dtn
now to be mentioned was not of the family of Sam except as a son-in-law—
the revised text of BRIGGS has—Al-i-Saman—J'] in this manner. He
gave the throne of FTruz-koh and Gh ur to his uncle’s son, Malik ^iya-ud-
Din, who was Suljan Ghiya-S-ud-Dtn’s son-in-law ; Bust, Farah, and Isfara’in
[Isfizar?] to Sul{an Mahmud, son of Sultan Gh lvas-ud-Din ; and HiiSt and
its dependencies to his sister’s son, Na^ir-ud-Din. He himself returned from
Badghais to Gh aznin. and, in accordance with the will of his brother, having
placed the crown of empire upon his head, he became established on the
exalted throne of sovereignty. [This is the literal translation of the sentence
which has been twisted into crowned in form, &c.] At this time intimation
reached him of the slaying of Muhaminad-i- Kh ar-nak [in the revised text
Kh air Beg—el,-* j^], governor of Marw ; and, in the year 600 H., he set
out, with numerous forces to subdue Kh warazm. Kh. wa.razm Shah, unable
to oppose him [in the field], entered the fortress of Kh warazm.

When the Sultan reached Kh warazm. he took up a position on the water
[canal, river, and the like] which they have (sic) dug and set flowing from the
Jihun to the east of the city [the word ^ here used with reference to this
water-cut has been mistaken by Dow for'^ the Turkish tribe, Ehalj, which he
styles CAiiiigies}. For some days fighting went on, and several of the
Gh firtaLn Amfrs were killed. At this juncture news arrived that Ig^oril Beg,
the general of Gur KhSn, Badshah of Ehita [this is enough to show of what
value Firislttah’s authority is ior these matters. See page 261, for the name
of the general of the Khita-t forces on this occasion. Hitherto, Firishtah
has copied our author, whom he quotes as one of his authorities, tolerably
correct], and Sultan ’Ugman, sovereign of Samr^and, were marching to the
aid of Kh warazfn Shah. On receiving this information, such alarm was felt
by the Sultan that he set fire to the surplus baggage and equipage, and set
out towards Kh urasSn [he means Gha zntn]. Kh warazm Sha h followed in
pursuit, and Sultan Sbihab-ud-Din faced about and gave battle, and was
defeated, and lost his treasure, his horses, and elephants. Having proceeded
on his way, unexpectedly, the army of ^ara Beg, EbitU'lf und Sultan
’Ugman seized the route in advance,” &c. The rest agrees with our author ;
and there is not a word, in the whole account, about escalade or anything
approaching it, and, moreover, the canal, which he had not crossed, was some
miles from the city. Sultan Muhammad, Kh warazm Shah, in order to
celebrate the flight of Sultan Mu’izz-ud-Din, bestowed the nick-name
*‘ Gh uri Breaker” up>on a son bom to him the night before the enemy retired.
See page 281.

The Tiij-ul-Ma’asir, which potirs out page after page of rhapsodical nonsense
upon the most trivial matters, merely mentions, with respect to this disaster, that
the Sultan sustained "a slight misfortune and reverse [^^s-Xa j rfai'],”

gives the year 600 It. as the date, and does not mention [in the three MSS.
I have read] anything whatever about the Sultan having been wounded. The
word mentionerl above may have been mistaken fur such meaning. I

should be sorry to place implicit faith on any statements in the above work,
unless corroborated by some other work by a contemporary writer.

t fiur author calls the whole of those opposed to Mu’izz-ud-Din, “infidels "

THE SHANSABANlAH DYNASTY OF QHAZNlN. 481

brought about an accommodation, and the infidel forces
drew back again, and the Sultan returned to Ghazntn.
and commanded that forces should be organized for a three
years’ campaign in Turkistan, and determined to march
into Kh ita *.

At that period, an assemblage of contumacious persons,
[consisting] of Khokhars, and other rebels of the tribes of
the hills of Lohor * and J ud hills had broken out into revolt *,

several times before this ; but the fact is all are infidels who are opposed to
Gh urts. Mu’izz-ud-Dtn was saved from captivity or death through the good
offices of Suit&n ’Usman, a Musalmw like himself.

• When Sultan Mu’izz-ud-Din, overcome with grief and chagrin, reached
his own territory in safety, Suljan Muhammad despatched one of his Chamber¬
lains to him, saying : “ You are dware that you yourself are the cause of this
hostility and distrust. Perhaps you may now be inclined to give up your
hostile intentions against my dominions and be desirous of peace.” Sultan
Mu’izz-ud-Din was agreeable, and he bound himself by the most solemn
promises to abide by the terms, and, further, to aid and assist Sul^n Muhammad
whenever requested. Perhaps the latter may, in doing this, have had a
foreboding, that he might want support against Chingiz Shan, who had
acquired vast power at that time, and whose doings caused anxiety to the
Kh warazmt Sultan.

After this accommodation had been concluded, a body of insurgents assembled
together at T^l-Van, and Taj-ud-Din, Zangl [brother of Shams-ud.Ptn.
Muhammad, of Tnkliaristan], who was Walt of Balkh at that time, was the
chief mover in this outbreak. He made a raid upon Marw-ar-Rfid, and slew
the intendant stationed there, and sought to plunder the place. Sult 3 n
Muhammad, on becoming aware of this raid, nominated Badr-ud-Din-i-Khisr
—probably Shazr—from Marw, and T 3 j-ud-Dtn, ’Alt, from Abt-
watd, with their troops, to march against him. After coming up with them,
Zang^, together with ten Amtrs, were taken in the encounter which ensued,
and were sent off prisoners to Shiwarazm, where they met with their deserts,
and their heads were struck off. Notwithstanding this afiair, the peace was
faithfully observed between the two Sultans and their Amtrs. Still, the
remembrance of past ^ents rankled in the hOtrt of Mulzz-ud-Dtn ; and, in
order to prepare for any eventuality that might offer to enable him to avenge
his defeat, ‘ ‘ under pretence of holy war, he was in the habit of organizing his
troops, and manufactured arms in great quantities, until, in 602 H., he became
bent on undertaking kh erqiedition into Hindustan against the infidels, in order
to improve the finances of himself and officers, and also of his men, all of
whom, during the last few years, and, in the Shwaiazm expedition, had
sustained great losses.”

* -“Of the hills of Lohor” is contained in two copies only. The hills to the
north of Labor, of course, ate meant.

* The following is the description of this affair contained in the Tlirflilt-i-
AUt, which compare with Elliot’s extract from the original in his Index,
page and his translation, pages 158—160:—

Transactions of the year 593 of the Riblat.

" In trustworthy histories it is stated, that, at the time that Slliltah-ud-DIn

48 a

THE XABA?AT-I-NA5IRI.

and, in the cold season of that year, the Sultan came into
Hindustan, and sent that refractory race to hell, and

[see remarks as to his correct title and name, as shown by his coins, note *,
page 446] was defeated by the Turks and Khit 3 .-ts. as already noticed, it
became noised abroad throughout his territories that the Sul$an, Shihab-ud-
Uln, had disappeared in that battle, and it was unknown what had happened
to him—whether he had been killed, or whether he was still living, and had
gone into any foreign part. Consequently, the seditious in his territory—in all
parts—raised their heads, and each stretched forth his hand towards some
tract of the territory. Among the seditious was one, Rae Sal by name, who was
[dwelling] in the hilly country, between the city of Luhawar [ ,^ W] and Gh aznah ;
and, in concert with a body of Kokars, in the [same] tract [of country], and
who always used to pay revenue to the treasury of Shihab-ud-Din. having
revolted from authority.and obedience, he commenced plundering and harrying
that distri,.t, and completely closed the route between LuhSwar and Gh aznah
[ Gh azntn]. and in such wise that not a soul could pass along it.,” [ He is called
" Re-Hl" [Jl,*^] and Ran-bal" [JWo] in J 5 mi’-ut-Tawariklx; but both
names are doubtful, and are, probably, meant for Rae-Sal, "the ruler of the
Koh-i-Jud [the Salt Range], at which the frontier of Hind commences, who
ba 4 turned Musalman, and subsequently relapsed ; and the Khokhars, who
also \ised to pay tribute to the Sultan, in consequence of these reports, also
TOM.” Taj-ul-Ma’agir, after stating that the proceedings of Ltk-Tal [J'J el,!],
and the rumoured dpath of the Sulpn, was the cause of great confusion and
disturbance, says, "the Kokar tribe, rising in rebellion, entertained the idea
of becoming independent, and obtaining dominion. The sons of Kokar,
Bakan and Sarkak [Piri^tah has but one, whom he calls ' the chief of the
Khokhars, who bore the name of Sartah'^, also entertained the desire of
acquiring sovereign power.” Then there is an account of their taking Loh'or,
and of their defeating the feudatories of the Multan province, Baha-ud-Din
and his brother, and others, and that tlie Sipah-Salar, Suliman; had to fly
before them.] Alfi continues:—"When Shihab-ud-Din reached Gh aznah
in safety, in the manner previously described, and this matter came to his
knowledge, he determined to proceed into Hindustan, and thoroughly chastise
the rebels of that part. Therefore he first directed Amir Muhammad,
son of Abi ’Alt [this must be his kinsman, the son-in-law of Gh iyas-ud-
Dtn, the late Sultan], who was his lieutenant over Luhawar and Multan
[the Amir-i-Dad, Hasan, was, probably sulxirdinate to him], to remit with
all possible celerity the revenue of the year 601 11. [and yet the Taj-uU
Ma’a^ir gives the year 600 H. as that of his return from Kh warazm. and
his expedition against the Khokhars], as it was required in the preparations
making for the invasion of Kh ifa. [Jami’-ut-Tawlrikh says, "after the
Sullen had taken his slave Lek-Tal [or Lik-Tal], who had taken possession of
Multan, and had put him to death, and disposed of that affair, he despatched
Muhammad, son of Abi ’Alt, to Labor and Multan as governor, in order that
he should send the tribute of those territories, which for the last two years
were in arrears, to provide him with funds for his campaign against Ehita. ]
Amir Muhammad wrote, in reply, that the revenue of the years (r<r) mentioned
was ready, but that the Kokars [Khokhars], and Rae Sal, the chief of the
Jibal-i-Judi [the Jud Hills] [Taj-ul-Ma’&Sir does not make the distinction
between two different tribes, but says the sons of Kokar, Bakan and Sarkah—
in another MS. had so closed the lenuer route to filtaznab [neither the

THE SHANSABANIaH DYNASTY OF QHAZNIN. 483

carried on holy war as prescribed by the canons of IslSm,
and set a river of the blood of those people flowing. When

BoUn nor the Shdibar, the two by some tupposed toU routes into Afi^hffnistSn,
ue referred to], that not a person could proceed by it.

“ On hearing this, Sh>h&b.ud*Dln wrote [he sent the Amfr-i-^^jib, Sarftj-ud-
Din-i>Abt Bikr] to his slave, ^utb-ud-DIn, who was the commander of the
forces of Hind, [to the effect] that * having despatched a person to the Kokars to
forbid them against committing these odious acts, he should call upon them to
repent of their doings and return to obedience, on which he would pass over
their misconduct.’ ^utb-nd-Dtn despatched a person to them, in conformity
with this command, and urged them to submit. The son of Kokar [not
mentioned before] replied : * This is not your affair: it was necessary for
Sulpm Sh>hab-nd-Din to send a person of to own, if he were alive ; where*
fore, then, did he not send to us, that we also might have sent the taxes for
him 7 ’ That emissary, in reply, said: ' Consider this great regard towards
you, that he hath sent me, who am to slave, to you.’ Again, the son of
Kokar said, in answer : ‘ All this is mere talk ; Sh>fdih-ud-Din is not forth¬
coming.’ The emissary replied: ’The verification of this matter is easy:
send one of your own confidential people to Gh aznah. that he may, with to
own eyes, see, and c»me and say whether Shlhab-ud-Din is living or not.’
In short, the son of Kokar did not give ear to the emissary’s words, and still
continued firm, as before, in bis sedition and rebellion ; and, when the person
sent by jg^utb-ud-Din related to him the state of affiiirs, he represented it to the
Court of Sbil^b-ud.Dtn. The SulfSn directed ]^utb-ud-Dtn to assemble the
[available] troops of HindustZn and march against the Kokars, and to anni¬
hilate and eradicate, beyond ought that could be conceived, that seditious and
contumacious race.

” When the command reached ^utb-ud-Dtn, he assembled and made ready^
his forces, and was about to move against that tribe, when Sultan Shihab-ud-
Dfn himself was on the point of marching his troops towards Slutk, but, suc¬
cessive <x>mplaint8 of the violence aiul outrages committed by the Kokars
reached him, and his people represented to that Sultkn such numbers of things
[respecting them], that it became incumbent on him to quell them and restrain
their sedition first; and then to proceed in the other direction. Consequent
upon this he gave up his determination of invading Shitk, and pitched bis
[advanced] tent in the direction of LuhHwar, and, on the 5th of Rabt’-ul-Awwal,
of this same year [602 h.], he set out from fihaznah towards Hindustan.
When Shihab-ud-Dtn reached Purshfiwar. he found that the Kokars, in large
numbers, had taken up a position between the Jilam [Jhilam] and the Sudaiah
[SQrJharS]. On hearing this news, Sllih&b-ud-Dtn made a forced march from
Purshkwar on Thursday, the 35th of the same month, and fell upon them
unawares [Jami’-ut-Taad^kh says he attacked them on the ssth] ; and from
break of day till the time of afternoon prayers he kept up the flame of battle
and conflict; and the Kokars fought in such wise that, with all that grandeur
and power, the Sultan had nearly been forced bade from his position, when,
unexpectedly, at that juncture, ]f|^utb-ud-Dtn, 1 -balc, with the forces of Hiii-
dOstSn, arrived [upon the scene], and commenced slaughtering the Kokars.
As Kt>th-ud-Dtn’s troops were fresh and vigorous, the Kokars were unable to
resist them, aiul they took to flight. The soldiers of Isl 3 m, pursuing (hem,
inflicted such havoc upon them as cannot be conceived. Those that escaped
the sword fled to the dense depths of the jangal and the Musalmlns set fire to

4*4

THE TABA19:AT.I.MA$IRL

he set out on his return towards Gha^zntn, in the year
602 H., at the halting-place of Dam-yak, he attained mar-

it on all sides. [j 2 mi’-ut-Taw£rtk]| states that the HindGs {the Khokhars]
fled to the highest ranges of the Koh*i-J{id, and, on being pursued, lighted a
great fire, and threw themselves into it, and perished. Great plunder was
taken and many captives, so that five Hindu [Khokhar] captives could be
bought for a dfNdr. The son of Re-b&l, chief of the Koh-i-Jud, sought the
protection of l^uth-ud.Dtn, I-bak, and made great supplication to him.
^utb-nd-Otn made intercession for him with the Sultan, who pardoned him,
while the Taj-ul-Ma’i§ir says one of Kokar’s sons was among the slain [Sar-
kah], and the other, Bakan, made for a fortress in the Jud Hills, in which he
was invested ; and, after holding out some time, being hard pressed, made
intercession through Rlutb-ud-Dtn, and surrendered the place, and was for¬
given.] At that time those infidels agreed together not to surrender to-the
Musalmans, and they threw diemselves into the jangal, and were consumed.

“ The Sult 3 .n, having disposed of that affair to his satisfaction, advanced to
I,nha\vaT [Jami’-ut-Tawarikb says he arrived there on the 15th of Rajab], and
gave his troops permission to return to their own homes [quarters T], where,
having rested some days[some time], they might set out on their invasion of Shit^- ”

The authors of the TartUi-i-Alft availed themselves of the best authorities
in the compilation of their great work, and there is scarcely any celebrated
work, whether Arabic or Persian, that they did not use and quote ^m. They
also appear to have often used such HindQ historical works as were available ;
and yet there is no mention of the story ofthe Yal-dQzor Iladd-giz rebellion, nor
of Lek-Tll, nor of {-bak-i-Nfi-pik, nor {-bak-i-Bik. It seems rather rignifieant
that the author or authors of this story should have selected names similar to
thbse of the two most trusted, loyal, and favourite slaves of the Sultan, and
who succeeded him in the sovereignty of Qhazntn and HindustSn respectively—
l-yaKduz and I-bak—for their story ; but it is certain that the Tfij-ul-Ma’agir
is accountable for the latter pert of it, in which I-bak-i-N 3 .-p 2 k is mentioned.

The Khokhars were not anrrihilated in this affair by any means, and gave
great trouble in after years, and gained possession of Labor.

Briggs says, page 201, yol. i. : " In the latter end of the King’s reign
[Mu’izz-ud-Din’s], their chieftain [of the 'Gukkurs\ was converted to the true
faith •when a captive. After becoming a proselyte he procured his release from
the King, who endeavoured to persuade him to convert his followers,” &c.
This is totally contrary to the or^nal. A Musalm&n became captive to the
Kltokhars, and whilst among them he explained to theih the tenets and
usag^ of the Muhammadan faith. The chieftain asked the Musalrnkn how
the SulS&n would treat him if he should embrace the Muhamntadan faith, to
which the Musalmkn replied that he would undertake to say that the Sultan
would treat him with royal favour, and would confer on him the authority over
those mountain tracts. This circumstance was duly represented to the SultSn
in writing by the captive MusalmHn, and the SultSn at once despatched a rich
dress of honour for the chief of the Khokhars; and he came and presented
himself before the Sultfin, was treated with great honour, was made a Musal-
man, returned home with a farmSn investing him with the government of those
parts, and he made most of the Khokhars converts. Dow, in this instance,
has translated the passage correctly; but, unfortunately for Firiglitah’s
authority, this tale does not tally with the last events in the Sultan’s life, and
It, in a measure, contradicts his own statements respecting them.

THE SHANSABANIAH DYNASTY OF GH AZNfN. 485

tyrdom* at the hand of a disciple of the Mula^idah, and
died *. One of the learned men of that period has com-

* The idiom difTere here in one of the oldest copies, which has, “ he was
killed,” &C.

* Y&fa-t says that one successful expedition gained in Hindustan at this time
was sufficient to repair the Sultan’s finances, and to set. right the affairs of his
troops ; and, on his return to his capital, after having crossed the Jilt [,^]
ferry—the ferry over the Jhilam probably—Jami’-ut-Tawarikh has Hanit—

—[Ben. As. Soc. MS. and Jahan-Kusha-t J,»] ford, and says he crossed over

on the 1st of Sha’ban—his royal tent was pitched on the banks of the Jthun
[of Hind?], i. e. the Sind or Indus, so that one-half of it reached near to the
water, and hence it was not deemed necessary to guard that side; and that, at
the time of taking his ttoon-day nap, two or three Fidd-ts [disciples] suddenly
issued from the water and assassinated him, and in this most authors agree.
Guztdah, however, says he was then on his way to Turkistan to wreak ven¬
geance on Sultan ’Usman of Samr^and ! The terra Fida-t is particularly
applied to the disciples of the chief of the Mulahidah heretics, and our author
plainly States that it was from the daggers of the disciples of this sect that
Mu’izz-nd-Dtn met his death, and not from the Khokhar tribe ; and, when we
consider that he had undertaken an exp^ition against them only two or three
years before [see note *, page 381], it is by no means improbable that they
caused him to be assassinated. The JS.mi’-ut-Tawartldl says the assas-sins were
Khokhars, but almost immediately contradicts the statement, and says that
Imam Fakbr*ud-Dth was suspected of having brought it about. “ Some ma¬
lignant Mu^ammadah ’UlamS, on account of the great friendship that existed
between the Sultan of Kh warazm and the eminent Imam Fakhr-ud-Dtn, R 3 zt
[see page 429, and page 492], accused him of having conspired against the
life of SuItSn Mu’izz-ud-Din, and asserted that Sultan Muhanunad, Kh warazm
Sha h, had sent some person, who, alter consultation with the Imam, had
assassinated the Sultan; but it is considered by some writers that these very
people who had accused the ImSm had themselves caused the deed to be done.
The Imim, as the late SultSn’s slaves were bent upon avenging him, threw
himself on the protection of the Waztr, Mu-ayyid-ul-Mulk, until such time as
the Waztr contrived to secure him from their vengeance, and sent him to a
place of safety. Imkm FaUir-ud-Dtn used to accompany Sultan Mu’izz-ud-
Dtn in his expeditioits, and he states that Sultan Mu’izz-ud-Din invaded India
nine times : twice he was defeated, and seven times victorious.” The statement
above mentioned is confirmed, with but slight variation, by the author of the
T3j-ul-Ma’asir, a contemporary writer, and corroborated by our author’s very
meagre account. Taj-ul-Ma’asir says, that the .SuItHn’s tents were pitched in .a
delightfully verdant mead on the bank of a clear stream [water]. At this time
some heretics [Muli^idahs—who had been following him for some
time, awaiting an opportunity to assassinate him, at the time of evening prayer,
and whilst the Sultan was in the act of bowing his head to the ground in prayer,
and was uttering the praises of his Creator, the impure and obscene sect chose
for the execution of their design. They slew a Sal 3 .b-<iiii' [armour-bearer] .and
two Fartiahes [carpet-spreaders] in attendance, and then went round towards
the Sult&n’s Khargah [pavilion or tent], and occupied it [to "surround" it
would have required a large number. The words used are uJ/*—seized, took
possession. Compare Elliot, India, voL ii. page 236] ; and one or two among
those three or four assassins rushed upon the Sultan, and inflicted five or six

486

THE taba||:at.i.na$irL

posed a verse on this occurrence. It is here recorded tfiat
it may come under the observation of the sovereign of the
Musalmans, and that verse is as follows :—

“The martyrdom of the sovereign of sea and land, Mu’izz>ud-Dfn,

From the beginning of the world the like of whom no monarch arose,

On the third * of the month Sha’bSn in the year six hundreil and two.
Happened on the road to Gh azntn at the halting-place of Dam-yak

deep wounds, of which he Immediately died.” I have merely given an abstract
of the author’s rhapsodical narration.

Airt says they were Khokhars who had lost relatives killed in the late ope¬
rations:—“ One man among them came upon a door-keeper, and wounded him,
on which the wounded man began to cry out. On this, the rest of the people
about rushed up to the wounded man to see what was the matter, and were
collected around him. The Khokhars seized this opportunity, and succeeded
in reaching the Suljan, whom they despatched with many severe wounds.”

Some other authors say it was one Khokhar only who murdered the Sultan,
and that he had attached himself to him, and followed him for the purpose.

The Hindus give a different account, which is also related by Abii-l-Fafl
and in the Jamun History with a slight difference :—“ Although the Persian
Chroniclers state that Rae PithorS fell on the held of Talawafi [Tar&’tn],and that
Mu’izz-ud-Dtn fell at Dam-yak by the hand of a Khokhar who had devoted
himself to the deed, and that such statement has been followed by the author
of the Jabaf^iit-i-Akbari and by Firigbtah, nevertheless, from the mouth of the
Hindi bards, the depositaries of the traditions of every celebrated event, and
which is handed down orally from generation to generation, it is stated that,
after Kae Pithora was made captive and taken to Gha znin, one Chanda, some
write Chanda, the confidential follower and eulogist of Rke PithorS, styled by
some authors his Court poet, proceeded to Qhaznln to endeavour to gain informa¬
tion respecting his unfortunate master. By his good contrivances he managed to
get entertained in Sultan Mu’izz-ud-Din’s service, and succeeded in holding
communication with Rae Pithora in his prison. They agreed together on a
mode of procedure, and one day Chanda succeeded by his c unning in awaken¬
ing the Sultan’s curiosity about Rae Pithora’s skill in archery, which Chanda
extolled to such a degree that the Sultan could not restrain his desire to witness
it, and the captive Rajah was brought out and requested to show his skilL A
bow and arrows were put into his hands, and, as agreed upon, instead of dis¬
charging his arrow at the mark, he transfixed the Sultan, and he died on the
spot, and Rae Pithora and Chanda were cut to pieces then and there by the
Sultan’s attendants.

The Jamun History states that Rae Pithora had been blinded [see note ’,
page 466], and that, when brought forth, and his own bow and arrows given
him, notwithstanding his blindness, having fitted an arrow, and tried the
temper of the bow, guided by the sound of the Sultan’s voice, and the indi¬
cations of Chanda, he discharged the arrow in the right direction, and trans¬
fixed him. The rest agrees.

* Jahan-Ara and some others say the ist of Sha ’hSn. 602 H.

* As the second line of this quatrain ends in ^aJt, it is wholly impossible that
the last u'ork can be Damik. Dam-yak is the correct name of the place.
Authors differ considerably about its situation : some say it was a little west
of the Jhilam, some on the Ntl-ab, and others that it was a village beyond the
Indus, on the route to Qhazntn; but the first seems most probable. To prove

THE a&ANSABANlAH DYNASTY OF GHAZNlN. 4S7

Way the Most High King encompass that Sultan-i-GhSzl
with his mercy and forgiveness, and preserve the sovereign
of the age 1

With respect to the equity and justice of this monarch
in the world, the mention of them could not be contained
in the capacity of writing ; and the observance of the law
of the chosen One, and the preservation of the system of
holy warfare likewise, according to the tenets of the Mu¬
hammadan faith, was accomplished in that sovereign*.
According to the traditions which they have related con¬
cerning the Prophet—on whom be peace!—they say, that
he, having been asked respecting the general resurrection,
afhrmed that it would take place six hundred and odd years
after him ; ajid the martyrdom of this sovereign occurred
in the year 602 H., and, in this same year, likewise, indica¬
tions of the last judgment appeared, and they were the ir¬
ruption of Chingiz Khan, the Mughal, and Jthe outbreak of
the Turk. Therefore it is evident that that monarch was the
strong barrier of Islam in the world, and, when he attained
martyrdom, the gate of the final judgment opened ^

The amount of wealth acquired in holy wars, accumulated
in the treasury at Ghaznin, was so great that the indication
of the like has not been noticed with regard to the treasury
of any sovereign, and Khwajah Isma’il, the Treasurer,
stated at the Court of Firuz-koh, at the time of bringing
an honorary robe to the Malikah-i-Jalali, the daughter of
the august Sult^ Gh ivas-ud-Din. Muhammad-i-Sam

how little trust is to be placed in Firishtah’s statements, as shown in Briggs’s
“ Revised Text,” the Persian scholar will there find this place styled Ramhek—

^_in the prose ; and a few lines under, in his version of the same

quatrain quoted by our author, translated above, it is turned into Rhutak—

_and Briggs translates it Rohtuk, which mistake is re-echoed by bis

copyists ; and so the blunder gets handed down.

• Other authors, too, fully appreciate the character of Suljan Mu’izz-ud-Dtn,
and say that "he was a God-fearing and just sovereign, compassionate towards
his people, liberal to his servants, honoured and reverenced learned and g^
and treated them with distinction.” His deeds prove that he was laith-
fiil to his brother; but if his "exploits” are not more substantial than the
mythical relationship to his "great ancestor Sooltan Mahmood 1 .” [who has
Yrm lately declared illegitimate in the “.Student’s Manual of Indian
History ”], they need not have been ever recorded.

» Notwithstonding which, our author, who appears to have had as keen an
appreciation of the mammon of unrighteousness as others who croak about
the end of the world, took care to accept villages and money presents, and even
slaves to send to his " dear sister” to sell in KhurasSn, not long after.

488

THE taba?:At.i.nA5irL

[Mu'izz-ud-Din’s niece and Ziya-ud-Dm’s betrothed wife],
that of jewels contained in the Gh aznin treasury, of dia¬
monds alone, which are the most precious of gems, there
were actually fifteen hundred mans''. The amount of other
jewels and money may be judged of accordingly.

Titles and names of the Sultan.

• It depends upon what man is meant. Our author must refer to the man

of Tabriz, which is much smaller than that of Hindustan, the former being
somewhat less than a lbs., whilst the latter varies from 40 to 8o lbs. The
Tabriz man is thus described 6 ^abbak [4abbak signifies, a seed, a graip
&c., and is equal to a barley-corn] = i 6 ddmgs = i mis/idi U misw's

= I astar, 40 astdrs — 1 man.

I fear the Khwajah was as great an eza^rator as our author himself.
Other authors however mention the quantity as 500 mans. Even the latter
number is too incredible almost for belief.

• After his brother’s death, on becoming supreme ruler, he took the title of
SultHn-ul-A’zam.

« How he obtained the title of Nasir-i-Arntr-ul-Mumimn, and when, the
chronicler does not say. It may have been conferred upon him by the
Khallfah of Baghdad for being with his brother, Ghiyaj-ud-Din, a tool in
the Khallfah’s hands against the Sultan of Khwarazm. I imagine it is this
title on his coins which Mr. E, Thomas rcatls as the name of the Shallfah.
Un-Na?ir.ud.I)tn ’Ullah w.-is certainly Ig^lifah at this period. See CllRol

NICLES of PaTIiXn K.1NGS of i>lClIL£, 12.

The Sultan is styled “ Us-Sultan Na?ir-ud-Dunya wa ud-Dtn, Abu-1
Mujaflar,” &c., on a coin said to h-nve been struck at Dibit, 589 h., in the
year 4 [of his rule in Himl 7 ]

THE SHANSABANIAH DYNASTY OF GHAZNiN.

489

Length of his reign: Thirty-two years and eight months*.

Seat of government in the summer season:— Gh aznln
and Khu rasan.

Seat of government in the winter season :—Lohor and
Hind.

Kdzis of his Court.

l^a^t of the kingdom, the Sadr-i-Sliah!d, l^utb-ud-Din,
Abu Bikr, subsequently, the Sadr-i-Sa’id, Sharaf-ud-Dln.
Abu Bikr, son of the $adr-i-Shahid. Nizam [ud-Din ?] at
Gha znin.

Ka^i of the army* and other territory—Shams-ud-Dln.
Balkhl. and his son.

Wazirs.

Ziya-ul-Mulk, Durmasham *: Mu-ayyid-ul-Mulk, Mu-
^mmad-i-’Abd-ullah, Sanjari ; Shams-ul-Mulk. 'Abd-ul-
Jabblr, Ktdanl.

Standards.

On the right, Black, with the Turk Maliks and Amirs.

On the left, Red, with the Maliks and Amirs of Ghur.

T/ie Sultdn's attgust motto.

“ Victory through God*.”

The Suitan's Dependents who attained unto Sovereignty.

Sultan Taj-ud-Din, Yal-duz, at Gh aznin.

Sultan Na^ir-ud-Din, Kaba-jah in Multan and O chch ah.

Sultan ]^utb-ud-Din, I-bak, at Lohor*.

Sultan Gh iyas-ud-Dln. Twaf, the Kha li, over the territory
of Lakhanawatl'.

* Three jwars and three months exactly as an independent sovereifpi, from
the ayth of JamSdt-ul'Awwal, 599 K., to 3rd of Ska’bSn, 602 h. He was
subordinate to his elder brother as shown by his coins ; but as a dependent
ruler he of course ruled over Gha xnin from the time that sovereignty was
bestowed upon him.

* Our author’s lather does not figure here among the ^^is. See page
4^6, nor b mention made of the $adr-i-l^btr, ^iwam-ul-Mulk, Rukn-ud-Din,
l^amzah, who was sent to oiler terms to Rae Pithora.

* In one copy Durmasbl, in n second Durmansht, and in a third Dursht or
DursL See page 392, note *.

* One good copy of the text has, simply J.»* Justice, or Rectitude.

* Not Dihlt I See the reign of |$^utb-ud-Din, next Section.

r Fourth Ehalj ruler of Lakhanawati. It is strange that neither Muham¬
mad, son of Bakht-yar, nor his two immediate successors in the government of
l.ak 1 ianawatt, arc mentioned here. It was Muhammad, son of Bakht-yar, the
Kb nljj who jreducetl Bihar and Lakhanawati during Sulliin Mu’i77.-uil-Din's own
lifetime, and their reduction is mentioned among the victories and successes of

490

THB TABA^T-I-NA$IR1.

The SultHt^s Kinsmen and his Maliks,

Malik ZiySl-ud-Dln, Muliammad*, Durr-i- Gh ur [The Pearl
of Ghur], in Ghur.

Sultan Baha-ud-Dln, Sam, in Bamian.

Sultan Ghi vas-ud-Dln. Mahmud, in Flruz-koh.

Malik Badr-ud-Dln, of Kld 3 n*.

Malik Kutb-ud-Dln, Timranl.

Malik Na^if'Ud-Dln, Alb-i-Ghazl. son of l^azil Arsalan
Saljukt*

Malik Taj-ud-Dln-i-]Harab, of Sijistan.

Malik Taj-ud-Dln, Zangl *, of Bamian.

Malik Mubariz-ud-Dln, Muhammad ’All-i-Utsuz.

Malik Na$ir-ud-Dln, [JHusain], Madlnt.

Malik Na$ir-ud-Dln, of Timran.

Malik Mu-ayyid-ud-Dtn, Mas’ud.

Malik Shihab*-ud-Dln. Madlni*

Malik Shams-ud-Dln. Ktdanl.

Malik Taj-ud-Dln, [of] Mukran.

Malik Shah, of Wakhih-

Malik ’Ala-ud-Dtn, Utsuz-i-J^usain.

Malik Husam-ud-D!n, *All-i-Kar-mikh.

Malik ^ahtr-ud-Dtn, Muhammad-i-Kar-makh.

Malik Zahtr-ud-Din, Fath-i-Kar-makh.

Malik 'Izz-ud-D!n, Husain, son of Kha r-mll.

Malik Husam-ud-Din, son of Kh ar-mil.

Malik Na^tr^-ud-Dtn, ^usain, Amlr-i-Shikar [Chief
Huntsman].

tbe Sultan at page 491. 9 «uSm-ud>Dtn, ’Iwaf, does not appear to have ever
been in the immediate service of Mu’izz ud-Din, and did not acquire sove¬
reignty nntil nearly ten years after Mu’izz-ud-Din’s death, whilst Mu^iammad,
son of Balcht.yar, was assassinated towards the end of the same year in which the
Snlt&n was hiftiself assassinated. See the account of the Khalj rulers farther on.

Strange to say, some of the copies have Shams-ud-Din. I-yal-timisll in
this list also ; but such is not correct He was the slave of the Sultin’s slave,
]j^utb-ud-Dtn, 1 -bak, and did not acquire sovereignty until after 1 -bak’s death,
and long after the Sultan’s decease.

a Here again the author puzzles his readers. After ^i^-ud-Dtn became
ruler of Gh flr. as our author himself says at page 393, his name was changed
to ’Al&-ud-Din.

* Maternal grandfather of the two Sulj|fins.

> This is the person referred to in note *, page 425, and note *, page 481.

' See pages 344 and 497.

* He is the father of Malik Nafir-ud-Din, MSdtnt, and was sumamed
Kh ar-nak.

* In some copies Nafr.

THE SBANSABANIAH DYNASTY OF (£QAZNlN. 49 $

Malik Ikhtivar-ud-Dtn. TCV>ar*-war.

Malik Asad-ud'Dln, Sher Malik. Waiirl* [of Wajlristan ?].

Malik Rukn-ud'Dtn, Siir, of Ktdan^

Amtr SullmSn-i-Shi8. Amtr-i-Dad [Chief Justice?].

Amlr-i-Hajib, Muhammad ’Alt, Ghazt.

Amlr-i-^ajib, Kh an Malik [?].

Amtr-i-Hajib, Husain-i-Muhammad Hasan [.^]*.

Malik Mu-ayyid-ud-Din, Mas’ud.

Amtr-i>^ajib, Husain-i-Surkh*.

Victories, Successes, attd Holy-wars.

Gardaiz, Sant^uran [now ^aluzan], holy-war against the
IKaramitah of Multan and O chch ah. holy-war of Nahr-
walah, Burshor [or Purshor], Sial-kot, Lohor, Tabar-
hindah*, Pithora [at] Tara’in, Ajmir, Hanst, Sursutt,
Kuhram, Mirath, Kol, Dihli, Thankir, holy-war of Buda’un,
Gwaliyur, Bhirah *, Jai Ch and of Banaras, Banaras,
Kinnauj, Kalinjar, territory of Awadh, Malwah, A-dwand*
Bihar, Lakhanawatt, Marw'‘-ar-Rud, Ntshapur. Tus, Marw,
Baward, Nisa, Sharistanah. Sabzwar, Janabad, Kh wamzm.
Andlchud, holy-war of l^ita. and Koh-i-Jud [and] the
Khokhars*.

* This name is doubtful. It might be Haz-war, but the above is most
probable, and may be a nick-name. In modem copies of the text it is written

and

* In two copies, A^madt, and in one copy A^imart.

t Very doubtful. The best and oldest copy has which is un¬

intelligible.

* In some und in others Husaint.

• In one SurJjJii or Sarkht. and in another Sarjt or Surjt, but these are
doubtful. Only five copies of the text contain these names at all, and three
of these are very defective. The Amtr-i-I^jib, Saraj-ud-Din, Abt Bikr, and
Baha-ud-Din, Mufiammad, are likewise mentioned in Alft.

' One copy has Bathindah.

• Very doubtful. It is written • J^.——and even *** best Paris copy.

• Probably ^ j ^ quiet, tranquil. See. See reign of Eutb-ud-Dtn, next Section.

* Mashrik-ar-R.ud in one copy.

• It will be remarked that there is no reference made here to the expedition
against Diwal or Dtbal, and the sea-coast of Sind. I have endeavoured to put
these ** victories, conquests, and holy-wars ** in chronological order as near as
possible ; but many are mentioned with which Mu’izz-ud-Din, personally, had
nothing to do, three in which he was defeated, one a complete overthrow,^the
loss of everything, and a narrow escape from captivity, and the “ holy-war ” of
Kh iyt vtas never undertaken. The successes in Awadh were gained by others,
and A-dwand Bih&r and Lakhanawatt were acquired by IJclltij^r-ud-Dtn, Mu¬
hammad, the Slxalj.

I 1 2

49*

THE TABA^T-I-NA9IRI.

ill. SUI.TAN 'ALA-UD-DIN, MUHAMMAD, SON OF BAHA-UD-
OiN, MUHAMMAD, SAM, OF BAMIAN.

When the Sultan-i- Gh azl. Mu’izz-ud-Din, Muhammad-i-
Sam, was martyred at Dam-yak, and Sultan Baha-ud-Dtn,
Muhammad, Sam, son of Shams-ud-Din. Muhammad,
died on his way to Gh azntn as has been previously
recorded, the competitors for the dominion of Gh ur.
Gliazntn, Bamian, and Hind, of the race of the Shan-
sabanis, consisted of two lines—one, the [descendants
of the] Sultans of Gh ur. and the other, of the Sultans of
Bamian.

When they despatched the bier of Sultan Mu’izz-ud-Dln
from the halting-place of Dam-yak towards Gh azntn, the
Turk Maliks and Amirs, who were the slaves of that
Sultan-i- Gh azl. deprived the Amirs and Maliks of Gh ur.
by force, of the bier of the late Sultan, together with
precious treasures, and took possession of them^ When

* Within two days* journey of the capital. See page 433.

t One author says, that "the Maliks and Chiefs, on finding the Suljan
lifeless, tallied round the Waztr, Mu-a3ryid-ul>Mulk, and pledged themselves to
defend the treasure and dominions until such time as a successor should be
nominated to succeed him. The Sultan’s wounds were s£wn up [after his
death], and the body was placed in a sort of covered litter, and, pretending
that he was ill, they escorted it to Gh aznah. and the fact of his death was kept
a profound secret. The treasures, amounting to 2txx> kltar-wars [lit. ass-loads,
one kbarwkr = about 100 mans of Tabriz] were conveyed to the capital at the
same time.”

The bier of the late Sultan having been taken up, and being conveyed
towards Gh azntn. on the way quarrels ensued between Mu-ayyid-ul-Mulk,
the Waztr, and the Gh urtaii Amtrs. The Wazir wished to proceed by way
of Kapnan, in order that, through the assistsince of T^j-ud-Dtn, I-yal-dQz,
who held the government of that district, the. '^ale Sultan’s treasures might be
conveyed to Gh iyas-ud-T)tn. Mahmud, his r^rphew, who held the government
of Bust and Zamtn-i-T>awar, to whose succession he was inclined, while the
Amtrs of Gh ur desired to proceed by the route of Gum-rahan [ci'v^l which
was nearer to Bamtan, in order that the sister’s son of the late monarch,
Baha-ud-Dtn, Sam, SultSn of Bamtan [who was advancing towards Gh azntn
when death overtook him] should obtain possession of these treasures. As
the Waztr was supported by the Slaves of the late Siiljan, he was more power¬
ful, and he separaterl from the Gburtan Amtrs, and, taking along with him
the bier of the late Sultan and his treasures, proceeded by way of ShalBzSn
[In those days called Sankuran, and, subsequently, ShanuzSn. See note
p. 408] towards Gh azntn. When they reached Karman, FSj-ud-Dtn, I-yal-duz,
came forth to receive them, and, when he beheld the bier, he dismounted from
his horse, and received it with the utmost veneration, and he wept to such
degree, that the others were quite overcome and wept also. The bier was

THE fiSANiyABANiAH DYNASTY OF QHAZNiN. 493

they reached Karman, the Wazir, Mu-ayyid-ul-Mulk,
MuhAmmad-i- Abd-ullah, the Sanjar}, with several other
persons distinguished among the Turk Amirs, were
appointed to escort the late Sultan’s bier to Ghazntn, in
company with other Turk Maliks ; and Malik Taj-ud-Din,
Yal-duz, who was the Mihtar [or chief] of the Turk Maliks,
and the greatest and most distinguished of the Sultan's
Slaves, held post in Karman.

When the Sultan’s bier reached Ghaznin, two days after,
the Sultans of BSmian, ’Ala-ud-Din, Muhammad, and
Jalal-ud-Din, ’All, ^ns of Baha-ud-Din, Sam, of Bamian,
in conformity with the solicitations of the Ghuri Amirs,
siuch as the Sipah-salar the [Commander of Troops], Suli-
man-i-§hi§“, and the Sipah-salar, Kharoshi, and other

then conveyed to GJiaznin, and the corpse of the Sultan was interred in the
Madrasah [college] which he had founded in the name of his daughter, and
hii only child. Firisiittdi’s account of this affair has not been correctly
rendered by his translators.

After the funeral, Sultan Baha-ud-Din, Sam, set out from Bamiln for
Qhazntn, and oit the road was seized with a violent headache which was the
messenger of his death. There being no hopes of his recovery, he made his
last request to his two sons, ’AUl-ud-Din, Muhammad, and Jalal-ud-Dtn, 'Ali,
that they should proceed to Qliazntn, and endeavour, by conciliation, to gain
over the Waztr, Mu-ayyid-ul-Mulk, the Slaves, and the Amirs of Qhur, and
take possession of Qhttzntn, alter which, ’Ala-ud-Dtn, who was the eldest son,
was to be sovereign of Qhaznln, and JalM-ud-Dln, foe younger, sovereign of
BSmlati.

The Jami’-4it-Tawart][li confirms this generally, but states that Bah 2 -ud-Dln
requested them to come to an accommodation with Ohiy^s-ud-Din, Mahmud,
if he would agree to content himself with Ghiir and Sburfisan, and leave
CJiaznah and Hind to ’Ala-ud-Dfn, Muhammad, foe eldest son.

They came to QLaznin accordingly, and, although foe GburlSn nobles were
inclined to offer opposition to this, the Wazir. persuaded them that as Ghi^a.
ud-Dln, Mahmfld, was then wholly occupied in SburSsan, and had proceeded,
at the head of an army, towards HirSt against Tzz-ud-Dln, Husain, son of
Shar-mll, to oppose ’AUi-ud-Din’s intentions would be useless and uncalled
for, since they required a ruler over them, and, that, whenever Mahmud should
have gained possession of Hirat and subdued Kh urasan, it would be easy to
get rid of ’AU-ud-Din. So he was allowed to assume foe throne.

When Tij-ud-Dln, I-yal-duz, became aware of this in Karmdn, in compli¬
ance with the request of Ghivas-ud-Dln. Mahmud, conveyed to him from
Zamln-i-Dawar, he marched firum Kayman with a large army upon Qhaznln,
wrested it by force of arms from 'Ali-ud-Dtn and his brother, Jalal-ud-Din,
’All, who retired to Bamian. Taj-ud-Din, I-yal-duz, however proceeded to
read the H^tutbah for himself and to coin money in his own name ; and, after
some time, ’Alil-ud-Dln, and his brother, Jaldl-ud-Dln, invaded Kaim&n and
Slialfizfin, and devastated the whole of those districts. See page 398.

* Styled Amir-i-Dsid in the list of Maliks.

494

THE TABA^T-I-NA^IRL

distinguished personages of the capital city of Shaznln,
arrived there from Bamtan, and entered the city. ’Ala-ud-
Din, Muhammad, Bamtant, who was the eldest of the sons
of [Sul(an] Baha-ud-Din, Sam, ascended the throne, and
brought the Amirs present there, both Shuri and Turk,
under fealty to him; and the Qhazntn treasury, which,
from the immensity of its wealth and precious treasures,
would have [so to speak] considered the hoard of Karua
but a tithe, was all divided into two equal portions.
Trustworthy persons have related that the portion of
Sultan Jalal-ud-Dtn, 'All, Bamtani, who was the youngest
of the two brothers, amounted to two hundred and fifty
camel loads of pure red gold, jewehstudded articles, and
vessels of gold and silver, which was removed to Bamian.

After a period of some days had elapsed, Mu-ayyid-ul-
Mulk, the Wazir, and the Turk Amirs, who were at the
capital, Ghaznin. wrote letters to Malik Taj-ud-Din, Yal-
duz, soliciting him to come thither, and despatched them
to Karman, He determined to proceed from Karman to
Ghaznin ; and, when he arrived in the vicinity of the city,
Suljan 'Ala-ud-Din, Muhammad, made ready to fight, and
marched out to encounter him ; and Jalal-ud-Din [his
brother], who also came out of the city, retired in the
direction of Bamian.

When the ranks of 'Ala-ud-Din were marshalled against
Taj-ud-Din, Yal-duz, the Turk Amirs on either side united
together, and Malik" 'Ala-ud-Din was vanquished, and he,
along with all the Shansabam Maliks who sided with him,
was taken prisoner. Malik Taj-ud-Din, Yal-duz, entered
Ghaznin, and gave permission to the Shansabani- Maliks,
so that they returned to Bamian again.

A second time Sultan Jalal-ud-Din, in order to aid his
brother, 'Ala-ud-Din, Muhammad, assembled the forces of
the territory of Bamian*, and bodies of the troops of [the]
Beghu* from Wa khsh and Badakhihan, and brought them,

• .Styled Malik and Sultan indiscriminately.

• Two copies of the text have ‘ ‘ the forces of the kingdom of Chur and of
Djimfan,” but I do not think such can possibly have been meant. The whole
of the Shansabant Maliks were not subjects of the Bamian state. Chty^'Ud-
Din, Mahmud, the direct heir to the empire of his father and uncle, was still
ruling over Chur, and ke appears to have favoured Taj-ud-Din, I-yal-diu, and
not to have been particularly friendly towards his kinsmen of Bamtin.

• One copy of the text, and also the printed text, havc^'j*. instead of

49S

THE SHANSABANIAH PVNASTY OF OBAZNlN.

and again appeared before Ghazntn. and possessed himself
of the Ghaznln territory, and re-placed ’AlS-ud-Dln, Mu¬
hammad, upon the throne, after which^ Jalal-ud-Dln
returned again towards BamlSn.

Malik Taj-ud-Din, Yal-duz, a second time, advanced
with his troops from Karman towards Ghaznln ; and 'Ala-
ud-Dln deputed the Gh uri Maliks and Amirs from Qhaznln
to repel them. On the part of Malik Taj-ud-Dln, Yal-duz,
Aetkln, the Tatar, was nominated to proceed in advance
to meet them. He came upon them at the RibaJ* of
Sanhuran, and seized the whole of them drunk and out of
their senses, and the Gh uri Maliks and the great Amirs
were there put to death. From thence Malik Taj-ud-Din,
Yal-duz, appeared before the walls of ^hazfiin, and ’AlE-
ud-Din, Muhammad, was invested within the citadel. For
a period of four months Taj-ud-Din, Yal-duz, continued to
invest it, until Jalal-ud-Din, 'All, arrived from the territory
of Bamian to the assistance of his brother, Sultan ’Ala-ud-
Din, Muhammad, and to drive away the Turk forces.^

When he reached the neighbourhood of fihaznin, the
Turk Amirs moved out to encounter him, and Jalal-ud-
Din, 'All, was overthrown, and was taken prisoner, lie
was brought to the foot of the walls of the fortress of
Ghaznln*, and that fort was taken. When the two brothers
fell into his hands, after a short time, Malik Taj-ud-Din,
Yal-duz, entered into a stipulation* with them, and caused
them to return to Bamian. After a little while, difference
of interests arosfe between the two brothers*. Jalal-ud-Din,
’All, was a lion-hearted monarch, an ascetic, and a firm
ruler; and ’Ala-ud-Din, Muhammad, did not agree with
him, and he left Bamian, and proceeded to the presence of
Sultan Muhammad, Khw arazm §hah. The assistance it ivas
his object there to obtain was not advanced, and his good
fortune did not again favour him, and luck did not aid

j*ri in eleven other copies. The latter is evidently the name of one of the

Ghnsz tribes. ,

• A Karwan Saiae, also a station on an enemy s frontier.

• This was done to induce ’Aia-ud-Dtn, Muhammad, to give up Ghazntn.

» This evidently refers to the occasion when I-yal-duz gave one of his
daughter in marriage to Jalal-ud-Dtn, ’Alt. See para, second, note', page

• Our author says nothing of these disagreements in his account of Jalil-ud-
Dtn, ’Alt, at page 432.

496

THE XABA^AT.I.NA§IRI.

him ; and, after Suftan Muhammad, KhwSrazm ShSh. took
possession of the territory of Bamtan, ’Ala-ud>Dtn,
Muhammad, died^

He had the daughter of ’Ala-ud-Dln, Utsuz, son of 'Ala-
ud-Dtn, Husain [Jahan-soz], to wife*, and by that Princess
he had a son. When the writer of these words, Minhaj-i-
Saraj, in the year 621 H., had to undertake a journey into
the Kuhistan from the territory of Qliur, on an embassy,
it was intimated to him that that Princess and her son were
then in the district of Kh ush-ab. on the borders of Tabas,
into which part they had come during the misfortunes
attending the irruption of the accursed ones of Chtn.

IV. SULTAN TAj-UD-DiN, YAL-DUZ, AL-MUTZZI US-SULTANI*.

Sulpn Mu’izz-ud-Din, Muhammad, son of Sam, was a
mighty monarch, just, a champion of the Faith, lion-
hearted, and in valour a second ’All-i-Abu-Talib—may
God reward him!—but he was wanting in children', and
one daughter was all he had by [his wife] the daughter of

t See page 266 —267.

* Sec page 414.

* So c^led from having been one of the Slaves of Sultan Mu’izz-ud-Dtn, and
who, if the latter had been so " renowned in history” as “ Shahab-ood-Dcen
Mahomed Ghoory,” we might have expected to have been styled Shihabt
instead. li^utb-ud-Dtn, Idxik, and others are called Mu’izzt for the same
reason. It would be difficult to decide what is the real meaning here of the
word Yal-duz. In the different copies of the text it is written as above, and in
the three oldest copies the vowel points are also given ; but in other works, in¬
cluding Yafa-t and FajH-l, the word is written more correctly 1 -yal-duz, the firs
word of which is the same as occurs in I-yal-Arsalan, I-yal-timis]i, &c. In one
lexicographical work jJJi without any vowels being mentioned, is said to be
'I'urki [of which there is no doubt], and to be the name of a man and a star,
not a star only. I-yal [Ji'], among other meanings, signifies a mounta
bull ; i-1 [J-^], which is not the word here meant, means friendly, obedient,
tame, familiar; and Yal [Jt], brave, valiant, intrepid. Duz [;jj] means flat,
level, smooth, even; and [j.>] di]s and diz [,.>] mean a fort, a hill, and aUo
rough, austere ; anger, fury, rage, and the like. Among the Turks, as wi
other Oriental people, the name of a child is often derived from some object o
incident, trifling or otherwise, which may have struck the mother’s fancy, or
that of any of the women present at the child’s birth ; and the name 1-yaI-duz,
Yal-duz, or Yal-duz is doubtless something of the same kind.

* From the accounts given by some other authors, it would appear tha
SnltSn Mu’izz-ud-I>tn had had several children bom to him, but only one
daughter survived him. - The others may have died in childhood. At page 344,
which see, he is said to have married the daughter of Malik Sai(-ud-Dtn, Surt
son of his ])atemal uncle, Sb<liab-ud-Din, Mul.iammad, Sliar-nak, whose othe
■on was named NS?ir-ud-Dfn, Muhammad [Husain].

4»7

THE SBANSABAnUH dynasty OF OHA 7 .wtw.

his unde, Malik NSfir-ud-Dtn, Muhammad, M&dlnt; and
he had a gp'eat fancy for purchasing Turkish slaves, and
he tx>ught a great number of slaves of that race. Every
one of diem acquired renown throughout the whole of the
countries of the East for activity, warlike accomplishments,
and expertness; and the names of his slaves became
published in the four quarters of the world, and during the
SultSn’s lifetime every one of them became famous.

Trustworthy persons have related on this wise, that one
of the confidential favourites of the Sultan’s Court made
bold to represent to him, saying ; “ To a monarch like
unto thee, the like of whom in height of dignity and
grandeur the whole expanse of the empire of Islam does
not contain, sons were necessary to thy empire, in order
that every one of them might be the inheritor of a kingdom
of the empire of the universe, so that, after the expiration
of the period of this [present] reign, the sovereignty might
continue permanent in this family.” That victorious
Sultan [in reply] uttered these august words:—“Other
monarchs may have one son, or two sons : I have so
many thousand sons, namely, my Turk slaves*, who will
be the heirs of my dominions, and who, after me, will take
care to preserve my name in the Khutbah throughout those
territories*." And so it happened as declared in the

• And jret the very first Turk slave who acquired the sovereignty after the
Sultan’s death is trimed into a Pathin, i. e. an Afghan, and even the Sul^n
himself, and without any authority for such a statement

* This may explain [for our author’s statements, in different places, make
the above one very doubtful] why Taj-ud-Dfn, I-yal-duz, is supposed to have
issued coins in the sole name of his deceased master and sovereign, and why
he styles himself “the servant and slave’’ of the “martyred Sultfin, Muhammad*
i-Slm.” See the noticeof his coins in Thomas, “PathXn Kincsof Dkhli,’’
pages 35—31. It is quite a mistake to suppose that I-yal-duz ever styM
himself “SultSn-i-Mu’accam’*—he is styled at the head of this Chapter,
Afu’iat —and it is probable the titles on the different coins, especially those
bearing “ Sultgn-ul-Maahrifc." from our author’s statement here, apply to the
late SultAn, or, more probably, to his successor, Mahmud, who is styled b
authors SultSn-i-Madirihain wa Shahanshah-t- Maghrabain ;—

J(^utb-ud-Dtn probably did the same, although we have no .proof; but, what¬
ever may have been done in our author’s time, Shams-ud-Dfn, I-yal-timiib,
the E^utbt slave and son-in-law, does not appear to have followed the same
example, from the evidence on the coins given by Thomas at pages 52 iind 78.
See however our author’s statement at page 398, where he says the Khufhah

498

THE TABA^T-I-NA$IR!.

hallowed words of that victorious Sultan—on whom be the
Almighty’s mercy !—which, throughout the whole dominion
of Hindustan^ up to the period when this book was written,
namely, the year 657* H., they observed, and are still
observing ; and it is to be sincerely implored that, by the
grace of Almighty God, these dominions may continue, in
this same manner, under their sway to the uttermost end
of the existence of the race of Adam.

I now reach my own discourse, which is the account of
Sultan Taj-ud-Din, Yal-duz.

He was a great monarch, of excellent faith, mild, bene¬
ficent, of good disposition, and very handsome. The
Sultan-i-Ghazi. Mu’izz-ud-Din, purchased him when he
was young in years, and, from the outset of his career,
appointed him to an office, and subsequently, step by step,
advanced him to a high position, and made him head and
chief over the other Turkish slaves*. When he grew up
he attained authority and power, and the Sultan conferred
up>on him the government of the district of Sankuran and
Karman' in feudal fief; and every year that the Sul$an

was read for Sultan MahmOd, and that the coin was stamped with hit name
throughout the lohole of the territories of Gh ur, Gl^azntn. and HindQst&n.

* That portion of Hindustan which our author's patron ruled over probably.

* In three copic"! 5^8 H.

* Jahaii-Ara, Miinta lcha b.ut.Ta\v 5 rikh, and others, state that the Sul^Sn
used to treat these Turkish Mamluks like sons, and bestowed the government
of provinces and countries upon them. He esteemed the most, and placed
the greatest confidence in, Taj-ud-Din, I-yal-duz, and showed him the greatest
honour; and the Suljan’s followers used to pay him great homage, and
attention, and go in his train. During the lifetime of the Sultan, TSj-ud-
Din became Walt of Kalman ; and, from the great honour and respect in
which he was held, he subsequently acquired dominion over the kingdom of
Gha ziiin. Compare this with Firishtah’s idle tales, both in his text and
in Dow and Urigus.

t The province which Taj-ud-Dtn, I-yal-duz, held, included the tract of
country, containing several darahs —long valleys with hills on two sides, and
rivers running through them—extending from the southern slopes of Spin-
ghar. the White Mountain, in PuUito, and the south-westerly slopes of the
Salt Range, on the north ; towards the Guinal on the south ; from the range
of hills separating the district of Gardaiz on the west ; and to the Sind-Sagar
or Sind or Indus on the east;—a large tract of country watered by the Kiutnah
[vulg. Kurram] river and its tributaries, which province, in ancient times,
must have been exceedingly populous and flourishing, to judge from the
remains of several cities still to be seen in it, and which Is still very fruitful.
The upper portion of this tract is called the darah of Kurmah, and, lower
down, towards the Sind, are BanQ and Marwat.

The Kurmah darah is about 40 kuroh in length [each hntvh, in this part.

THE SHANSABANIAH DYNASTY OF QHAZNtN. 499

would make a halt in Karman, on his expeditions into
Hindustan*, Taj-ud-Dtn, Yal-duz, used to feast the whole

being 2000 paces], and having little level ground. On cither side of this
great darah are smaller ones, running in nearly transverse directions; but
those I would more particularly refer to here,,as forming an important portion
of I>yal>duz’s fief, and giving name to the province, are those springing, so to
speak, from Sptn-ghar.

One of these is the darah of SUALtJZAN [also written in the account of
Ainir Timur, ^anuzati\, and which our author refers to [see page 450]
as San {tu RAN, which name appears to have been derived from a tribe of the
Qhuzz, so named, who held it Ijefore, and in the time of Sultan GhiySs-ud.
Din, and his brother, Sul|an Mu’izz-ud-Din. It Is seven kuroh in length
from north to south, and through it flows a stream which issues from Spin-
gltar, and joins the river from the Paiway valley. Its inhabitants are Xods,
who arc reckoned among the Afg]ians, but they claim other descent, and
some Awan-kars, a tribe of Jats, which appears to have been, for the most
part, displaced by the easterly migrations of the Afghan tribes, and are now
chiefly located on the other side of the .Sind-Sagar or Indus.

Karman is another darah somewhat smaller, with a stream running through
it which also joins the Shaliizan and other streams which fall into the Kurmah.
I find no mention, in any author, of any ancient town of Kayman, but the
governor of the province was located in the darah, and there may have been
a considerable town so called, or, at least, a permanent encampment.

East of Shalu^n is the Ze^an darah, running in a south-westerly
direction from Sptn-ghar, and eight kuroh in length. A stream issuing
from Sptn-ghar flows through it, which, having joined the Shaluziln river,
enters the Kurmah west of the town or large village of Cjt Khel. The
people are Dzazts [turned into jajees by travellers], who also are reckoned
among the Afghans but claim other descent, and some Awan-kars.

Another large darah, and the most westerly one, is !rI-ab [vulg. Harriab],
iytexAy kuroh in length, running south-west from Sptn-ghar. very mountainous,
but very fruitful. Out of this darah likewise a stream issues, which, flowing
e-nst of Baghzan, the ckief town of the Dzazts, enters the Kurmah district, and
ivccives the name of Khrmah.

Another darah is Paiwar [not Phuar], which also has its river, which joint
the others before mentioned, flowing from the northwards.

The chief towns and large villages of this tract, at present, are Astiya
[this is not the place referred to at page 339], Paiwar, Balut, Zumiaht, Saida,
Ojt Shei« Buland Shel, Baltmtn [vulg. Balaraeen], irt-al>, Baghzan, and the
cluster of villages called by the name of the darah, Shaliizan. with many of
smaller size. Kurmah, called by travellers Kurram, where is a fort, and the
residence of the local governor, is not situated in the Kayinan darah, so is
not to be confounded with any place of that name. This name, KarmSn, which
is spelt as the natives spell it, has caused some absurd blunders among writers
and translators, who have supposed it referred to the Persian province of Kirman.

The daraht south of the Kurmah darah include those of Khost, Dawar,
MaidSn, andBakr Kh el, each with its stream which falls into the Kuminh; but
the whole of those mentioned, in the summer, decrease very much in volume.

• It was through this province of Karman—the government of which was a
most important post—that the leaver route from Ghazntn to l.ahor lay, which
is referred to in note *, page 481. The route by Karmen was the “lower
route ” referred to in Alft in the same note.

500 THE TABA]^AT-I-NA$IRL

of the Amirs, the Maliks, and the suite, and was in the
habit of presenting a thousand honorary head-dresses and
quilted tunics, and would command liberal largess to be
given to the whole retinue.

By command of the Sultan-i-Ghazl. a daughter of Taj-
ud-Dm, Yal-duz, was given in marriage to SultSn l^^utb-ud-
Din, I-bak; and another daughter* was married to Malik
Na^ir-ud-Din, Kaba-jah*. Sultan* Taj-ud-Dln, Yal-du^
had likewise two sons, one of whom he had placed with
a preceptor. One day that preceptor, by way of chastise¬
ment and discipline, struck the boy over the head with an
earthen water-flask*. The decree of destiny had come,
and the water-flask struck him in a mortal place, and the
boy died. Information was conveyed to Sult^ Taj-ud-
Dln, Yal-duz, who forthwith, out of his excessive clemency
and exemplary piety, sent funds to the preceptor for his
expenses, with directions that "he should get out of the
way, and undertake a journey, before the boy’s mother
became aware of her son’s fate, lest she might cause any
injury to be done him, in anguish for the loss of her son.”
This anecdote is a proof of the goodness of disposition and
the purity of faith of that amiable Sultan.

In the last year of the reign of Sultan Mu’izz-ud-Dln, when
that monarch [on his last expedition into Hind] came into
Karman and halted there, Taj-ud-Dln, Yal-duz, presented
those yearly, stipulated thousand tunics and head-dresses.
The Sultan, out of the whole of them, selected one tunic
and one head-dress, and honoured his slave by presenting
him with his own princely robe ; and the Sultan conferred
upon him a black banner, and it was the desire of his
august mind that Taj-ud-Dln, Yal-duz, after himself,
should succeed to the throne of Gha zntn* When the

* One daughter was given in marriage to Jalal-ud-Dln, *All, of BSmlSn,
hence there must have been three, or more daughters. See note r, page 433.

* Our author styles him Malik and Sultan indiscriminately.

* Firiahtah has ['“jTlt ^ whip ; but ail the copies of our author's
text have •jjS~ The TabaVat>i-Akbart too says: “ he took up a gugglet
and struck him over the head with it,” &c. A whipping was not likely to
catise death, but the other mode of chastisement was.

* Here again is a specimen of the manner in which Firiahtah ha« been
translated, and whose translated work hitherto lias furnished the sole materials
for writers of Indian Histories for our Colleges and Schools:—

Dow says that “ Mahommcd, in his last exijcdilion, favoured Eldoze so

THE fiHANSABANlAH DYNASTY OF jSHAZNIN. sot

Sultan-i-GhSzi attained martyrdom, it was the desire and
disposition of the Turk Maliks and Amirs that Sultan
Ghivas-ud-Din. MahmOd, son of [Gliiya§-ud-Din] Muham¬
mad, son of Sam, should come from the confines of Garmsir
to Ghaznln. and ascend his uncle’s throne, and that they
all should gird up their loins in his service. To this effect
they wrote to the Court of Firuz-lcoh, and represented,
saying : “ The Sultans* of Bamian are acting oppressively,
and are ambitious of obtaining possession of Gh aznin.
Thou art the heir to the dominion, and we are thy slaves*.”

inu<A that he bestowed upon him /Ae black standard of the kingdom of
Ghizai, by this intimating his will, that he should succeed to the throne,”
&C. Briggs has “Mahomed Ghoory, in his last expedition to India, con¬
ferred on Taj-ood-Deen the privilege of carrying the black standard of Ghizny,
an honour which was usually confined to the heir-apparent.” Any one reading
this last version could only conclude that Taj-ud-Dfn carried this “black
standard ” in the last expedition, but such was not the case. Firightah copies
almost the very words of our author : these are his words—“Sul{an Mii’izz-
ud-Dtn [he calls him Mu’izz and Shihab indiscriminately] in the latter )iart
of his reign, when he came into Karman, dignified him by presenting him
with one of his own dresses, and specially conferred upon him a black banner
[for his owm use that is], and it was the Sultan’s desire that, after his own
decease, the Ghtuntn territory should be his.”

* He refers to Baha-ud-Dtn, Sam’s, sons here.

* Our author contradicts himself twice, and makes three different statements
on this subjecL At page 431 he says the general desire, both of the Turk and
Ghgrt Amtrs, was that Baha-ud-Dtn, .Sam, of Bamtan, should succeed to the
sovereignty; and at page 432 he contradicts himself, and states that they were
all inclined to his sons obtaining it. Taj-lid-Dfn, I-yal-duz, was the chief of
them, and the principal mover in this matter. From this statement of our
author, and his accounts given elsewhere, as well as from the statements of
other authors, it is clear that Taj-ud-Din, I-yal-duz, up to this time, h.ad not
been removed from the government of this province, and therefore did not shut
his sovereign and master out of Gha zntn after his defeat at Aiidkhud ; and,
further, that it was not until he and the other Mamluks of the late Sultan had
called upon his nephew, Ghiyas-ud-Dtn. Mahmud, to assume the sovereignty
over Qhaznln and Hind that he, 1 -yal-duz, left Kalman, on being nominated
to the sovereignty of the kingdom of Ghazrtn. and receiving his freedom from
Mahmud himself. .

Alft says, however, that, “when Taj-ud-DJn, I-yal-duz, gained a firm hohl
of the authority at Ghaznfn. GJliyag-ud-Din, Mahmud, sent him a message
from FtrQz-koh, requesting him to coin the money in his name, and rc.-id the
23 iutbah for him. Taj-ud-Dfn sent a reply, saying, that, when Mahmud
should send him a deed of manumission, he would do so ; otherwise he would
give his allegiance to whomsoever he chose. As Mahmud was not safe from
being assailed by 2 ^wamzm Shah, and fearing lest Taj-ud-Dfn should go over
to him [as 'Izz-ud-Dfn, IHusain, son of Kha r.mfl. had done], he sent the
required deed of manumission to Taj-ud-Dfn, and another to ^utb-ud-Dfn,
!-bnk, together with deeds of investiture for the governments of fihaznfn and
HlndOstan respectively. ^:utb-ud-Dfn, !-bak, at this time was at Purshor.

THE TABA¥AT<I-NJL$IR!.

Soa

Sultan GhiySs-ud-Ptn. Mal^mQd, replied, saying: ** To me
the throne of my father, which is the capital, Ftruz-koh,
and the kingdom of ^hur, is the most desirable. I confer
the territory [of Qhazntn] on you and he despatched a
robe of honour to Sultan Taj-ud-Dtn, Yal-duz, and pre¬
sented him with a letter of manumission, and assigned the
throne of Ghazntn unto him.

By virtue of this mandate Sultan Taj-ud-Din, Yal-duz,
came to Ghaznin. and seized the Maliks of Bamlan*, and
ascended the throne of Gh aznin. and brought that territory
under his jurisdiction. After a time he was excluded from
Ghaznin. and again returned to it, and ag^in brought it

whither h'* had come to guard one of the routes into Hind, and was well pleased
with what was conferred upon him.”

Other writers state that I-yal-duz sent an agent to Malimhd and tendered his
allegiance, and confirm what our author states ; but they probably copied their
account from his.

* Called “Suljans” in the preceding paragraph, and in his previous account
of them. Alft ss^ I-yal-dGz, subsequent to sending Jalal-ud-Dtn, ’Alt, back
to BamtUn, as stated in note r, page 433, assembled his forces, and carried his
inroads as far as Bust; and that, when Abt-Dakur [Zakur ?] reached K&bul,
after his desertion of Jalal-ud-Dtn, ’Alt, an emissary reached him on the part
of ^utb-ud-Dtn, 1 -bak, which emissary he had first despatched to T 3 .j-ud-Dtn,
I-yal-duz, reproaching him for his conduct towards his benefactor, Suljkn
Gh'yfiS-ud-Dtn, Mahmud, and exhorting him to discontinue it. This emissary
was directed to ask Abt-Dakur to co-operate with him [I-bak] ; and, in case
I-yal-dtiz did not hold his hand and repent of his acts, that Abt-Dakur should
assemble his troops and assail Ghazntn. and wrest it from I-yal-duz, who
appears to have been then absent In Bust; and, in case he [Abt-Dakur] did
not find himself powerful enough for the purpose of taking it, not to be
deterred, as he was following to support him. Abt-Dakur complied with the
request, and invested Mu-ayyid-ul-Mulk, the Waztr, whom I-yal-duz had left
there as his lieutenant, and a portion of the suburbs of Ghazntn was taken and
occupicxl by his men. On becoming aware of this movement, I-yal-daz
returned from Bust by forced marches, and reached Ghazntn, on whiph Abt-
Dakur precipitately withdrew, and joined Sultan Ghiy^-ud-Dtn, Mahmud,
who gave him his manumission, and conferred upon him the title of Malik-nl-
Umva [Chief of Nobles].

At this time Sultfln Muhammad, Eh^razm Shkh, advanced from HMt [on
his way to Hirkt?], and took the town and fortress of Tal-h^ from the
Gh urts, and then marched to KSl-yush [Kal-yun T] and FtwSr, and encountered
several times Amtr l^usam-ud-Dtn, the governor of those parts, for MahmGd ;
but he did not succeed in bis design, as they were very strong places, and
Sultan Muhammad retired to Hirat again. Arrived there, he acquainted the
ruler of Sijistan of it, and Malik TSj-ud-Dtn-i-Harab acknowledged his
stizerainty, and read the Shutbah and coined money in EhwSrazm Sh”****
name. These are the events of the year 594 from the Prophet’s death
[604 H.]. The difference between the two eras H. and Rihlat is ten years
less twenty or twenty-one days.

THB SUANSABANIAH DYNASTY OF fiBAZNlN. $<>3

under his sway. A second time the same thing happened,
until, after some time, a battle took place between him and
SultSn ^u^b-ud-Dln, I-bak, on the coniines of the Panj-ab^;
and Taj-ud-Dtn, Yal-duz, was defeated, and Sultan Kutb-
ud-Dtn advanced to Gh aznin*, and remained there for a
period of forty days, during which time he gave himself up
to pleasure and revelry. A third time Sultan Taj-ud Din,
Yal-duz, marched from Karman towards Ghaznin. and
Sultan ]^utb-ud-Din, I-bak, retired again towards Hin¬
dustan by the route of Sang-i-Surakh. and once more Taj-
ud-Dtn, Yal-duz, brought Gh aznin under his rule*.

He sent armies upon several occasions towards Ghur,
Khu rasan, and Sijistan, and nominated Maliks [to com¬
mand them]. On one occasion he despatched a force to
aid Sultan Ghiyas-ud-Din. Mahmud, as far as the gates of
Hirat, on account of the treason of ’Izz-ud-Din, Husain,
son of Kha r-mil. who was the Malik of Hirat, and who had
conspired with Sultan Muhammad, Kh warazm Shah, and
had gone over to him, and who fled before the forces of
Ghflr and Ghaznin*.

On another occasion Sultan Taj-ud-Dtn, Yal-duz, led an
army towards Sijistan, and remained away on that ex¬
pedition for a considerable time, and advanced as far as

r Some copies tuive “on the confines of the Panj-Sb-i-Sind”—the five rivers
of Sind. .

^ ** I-3ral-diiz having sent the Mr^azir of Gh azntn against l^^ha-jah and ousted
him from Lahor [see reign of ^faba-jah, next Section], ^futb-ud-Dtn, I-bak,
advanced into the Panj-ab against I-yal-duz in 603 H., and, I-yal-duz having
encountered him, was defeated, and retreated to Kapn^ and which

districts had been his charge in Mu’izz-ud-Dtn’s reign. ^utb-ud-Din, 1 -bak,
pushed on to Qhasntn [by another route], and drove out the governor, on the
part of Jalal-ud-Dtn, Sult&n Muhammad, Khwarazm Shah’s son, and then
gave himself up to wine and debauchery. The people of Qhazntn sent to I-yal-
dOz and solicited him to return ; and, when he arrived in the neighbourhood,
at the head of a numerous force, I-bak, was quite unprepared

to resist him, and he made the best of hU way towards Hind by the route of
Sang-i-SGiaU> and reached Lohor." On this occasion Tzz-ud-Dtn, ’Alt-i-
MardZn, the Kbalj, who assassinated Muhammad, son of Bakht-yir, ruler of
Lakhanawatt, and afterwards obtained from Kutb-ud-Dtn, I-bak, the government
of that territory, was taken prisoner. See his reign, next Section. “ As ^utb-
nd-Dtn did not consider himself safe from the designs of I-yal-duz, he continued
at Lohor until 607 H., when he met with the accident which caused his death.”

• On the death of K“tb-ud-Dtn, and dethronement of Aram Sh^h, his
adopted son, T5j-ud-Dtn, I-yal-dOz, sent a canopy of sUte and other inrignia
of royalty to Sliams-ud-Din, I-yal-timiah- See his reign. Section XXI.

• See note », page 2S7 ; and note*, page 400.

THE TABAKAT-I.NA§IRI

SP4

the grates of the city of Sistan*. At length peace was con¬
cluded between him and Malik Taj-ud-Din-i-Harab, who
was the king of Sijistan. When Taj-ud-Dln, Yal-du?, set out
on his return [to Ghaznln], on his way thither, Malik Na^tr*-
ud-Din, Husain, the Amir-i-Shikar [Chief Huntsman]
showed disaffection towards him, and engagements took
place between them. Malik Nasir-ud-Din was overthrown,
and retired towards Khwarazm [the Khwarazm territory?],
and.after a time returned, until, on the expedition [of Taj*
ud-Dln] into Hindustan*, the Turkish Maliks and Amirs of

* Other authors do not mention any cause why I-yal-duz should have inarched
against Sistan, and do not give any details respecting this affair. It may have
been caused through the ruler of Sijistan proposing to acknowledge the suze¬
rainty of Sultan Mu^mmad, Khwarazm Shah ; but our author does not say a
word about any expedition of this kind in his account of the rulers of SijistSn.

Here, again, is a specimen of history-writing. Dow says : " Eldoze, in con¬
junction with the Emperor Mamooti of Ghor, sent an army to Hirat, which
they conquered, as also a great part of Seistan ; but, making a peace with the
prince of that country, they returned.” Then Brigos says: “At length, in
conjunction with the King, Mahmood of Ghoor, he ( Yeldooz) sent an army to
Herat, which he reduced, as also great part of Seestan," &c. Firishttdi, how¬
ever, says : “ Once, to support Sultan Mahmud,'he despatched an army against
Hirat, and overcame the Malik of Hirat, ’Izz-ud Dtn, 9 *i^*>i‘i'S]lhr-m}l. On
another occasion he marched an army against Sistan, and invested it, and [then]
made a peace with the Malik of Sistan, and returned.” Firiahtah, however,
is no authority whatever for Western affairs; and as to overcoming Tzz-ud*
Dtn, son of ^usain-i-Khar-mtl. see last para to note*, page 258. For
further details respecting the reign of I-yal-duz not mentioned here, see pages
417 and 420.

* Nafir-ud-Dtn in two copies, and Na$r in another. He held the office of
Chief Huntsman under the late Sultan.

* Among the events of the year Ri]ilai 603, faccording to Alit [ll^ijrah 613],

Sultan Muliammad, Khwarazm Shah, acquired possession of Qhazntn. After
that monarch had possessed himself of the territory of Bamtan and Khurasan
from the Gh urfan nobles, he despatched an agent to Taj-ud-Dtn, I-yal duz,
intimating that if he, Taj-ud-Dln, would acknowledge his suzerainty, and
stamp the coin with his name, and pay him a yearly tribute, he should be left
in quiet possession of Ghaznln; otherwise he must be prepared to sec his
troops speedily appear before it. Taj-ud-Dln, I-yal-duz, called a council of
his Amirs ; and Tigln, his Amlr-ul-Umia Uami’-ut-Tawailkh says

his Nayab or Lieutenant at Ghaznlnl. who was another of the late Sullibi
Mu’izz-ud-Dtn’s slaves, advised that the Sultan’s demands should be acceded
to, as it was impossible for them to resist Khwarazm Shah. T 3 j-ud-Dln,
I-yal-duz, complied, and despatched befitting offerings and presents, and
accepted the Sultin’s etrms.

Not long after these events, Taj ud-Dln went out on a hunting excursion,
and Katlagh Tigln sent information to the Sultan [who was then on the
northern frontier of I-yal-duz’s territory], saying, that Qhaznln was now freed
from Taj-ud-Dln’s presence, and urged him to come thither that he might
deliver up the place to him. Khwarazm Sh^lt accetled to the request, and

505

THE SHANSABAnIAH DYNASTY OF OHAZNtN.

SfaAzntn conspired tc^ether and put to death the TOiw ajah.
Mu-ayyid-ul-Mulk, Muhammad-i-’Abd-ullah, Sanjari, who
held the office of Wazir, and likewise Malik Na$ir-ud-Dtn,
ii^usain, the Amtr-i-Shikar.

After a period of forty days Sultan Muhammad,
^iwarazm Shah, marched an army from the side of
TuJsharistan, and advanced towards Ghaznin; and his
troops suddenly and unexpectedly seized the frontier route
leading into Hindustan, towards Gardaizand the Karahah*
Darah [Pass]. Sultan Taj-ud-Din, Yal-duz, took the. route
towards Hindustan, by way of Sang-i-Surakh*. and reached
Lohor. An engagement took place between him [Sultan
Taj-ud-Din, Yal-duz] and the august Sultan Shams-ud-
Dtn, I-val-timish^ in the vicinity of Tara’in*, and Sultan

obtained possession of Gh azntn ; and T%j-ud-Din, finding what had happened
[T&j-nl-Ma’agir says in 613 H.], retired towards Hind. The Jami'-nt.Tawartkh
states that this took place in 611 H., and that all the dominions of the Gh urts
fell under his sway.

SultSn Mul^ammad, Ehwarazm ShSh. having obtained possession of Ghai.
nln, as above related, Taj-ud-Din, l.yal-duz, continued his retreat towards
Hind. On reaching the neighbourho^ of Labor, he fought a battle with
NS$ir-ud-Dtn, E^ba-jah, who was governor of that province on the part of
Et*tl>*ud-Dtn, I-bak, defeated him, took possession of Lahor for himself, and
soon appropriated the whole of the Panjab, [See the account of Na^ir-ud-Din,
EaM-jah, page 532.]

XTugararm phl h^ according to the statement of Alfl, on taking possession
of Gh aznin. put to death all the Gh utlan nobles and chiefs [which is very
improbable], made over the city and territory to his son, Jalal-ud-Dln [he
nominated him to the rulership of those parts, but left an officer there as his
son’s deputy], and returned to Kh warazm.

• In some copies Kar^ah [ ], but the best have *»'jf*as above. It is

one of the Passes on the route from Ghaznin towards Lahor, the name of which
has been changed with the change in the inhabitants of those parta

• There are three or four places so called, signifying the “ Perforated Stone.”
The route here seems to refer to a more southerly route than that by the Pass
above mentioned. It is a totally different route to that mentioned at page
44 *-

f Four good copies, two of which are old ones, write this name here, and in
some other places, with two ts—I-yal-titmish, and some other writers do the
some.

• The engagement between Sultan Taj-ud-Dln, I-3ral-duz, and this “august

Sultan”—the slave of the slave, i-bak, his own son-in-law —

took place, by some Accounts, on Saturday, the 20th of Shawwal. 611 it., and,
according to others, on Monday, the 3^ Sh awwal. 612 H., at Tara’fn,
now Talawart, near Panlpa}, in the neighlrourhootl of which the fate of India
has so often been decided. Taj-ud-Dln was put to death soon after, in the
citadel of Buda’un, by his rival, I-yal-timish, on w'hom he hatl himself con¬
ferred the insignia of royally after I-yal-tiiniSh’s usurpation of the sovereignty

5o6

THE TA.BA$AT.I.NA$IRI.

Taj-ud-Dtn, Yal>duz, was [defeated and] taken prisoner,
and sent to the district of Buda’un ; and there he was
martyred, and there his mausoleum is situated, and has
become a place of pilgrimage, and is visited by suppliants.

His reign extended over a period of nine years. The
Almighty’s mercy be upon him! God alone is immortal
and eternal 1

V. SULTAN-UL-KARIM [THE BENEFICENT], ^fUTB-UD-DlN,

I BAK, AL-MUTZZi US-SULTAnL

The beneficent and just Sultan, Kutb-ud-Din, I-bak,
who was a second Hatim, .seized the throne of Gh aznin.
and took it out of the hands of Taj-ud-Dtn, Yal-duz, who
was his father-in-law. He occupied the throne for a period
of forty days, and, during this space of time, he was wholly
engaged in revelry, and in bestowing largess; and the
affairs of the country through this constant festivity were
neglected. The Turks of Ghaznin. and the Maliks of the
Mu’izzt [dynasty], wrote letters secretly to Sultan Taj-ud-
Din, Yal-duz, and entreated him to return. Sultan Taj-
ud-Dtn determined to march thither from Karman, and, as
the distance was short, he reached Gh aznin unexpectedly.
Sultan Kutb-ud-Din, when he became aware of this, retired
from Ghaznin towards Hindustan again, by the way of
Sang-i-Surakh*; and, as both of them, in the position of
father-in-law and son-in-law, were in the relation of father
and son, they did not cause any injury to be done to each
other. Subsequently to that, the territory of Gh aznin came
into the possession of Sul(an Muhammad, Khwarazm Shah,
and under the authority of the Khwarazmi Maliks, as has
been previously recorded.

This Section, on the Shansabanis and their Slaves, is

of Dihlf, and dethronement of ^futb-ud-Dfn’s son [according to our author,
but his adopted son, according to others], and putting him to death.

• A very stable government, certainly—forty days! Our author has made
]^utb-ud-Dtn, I-bak, one of the'Sultans of Ghaznin, as though he want^ to
make up the number as much as possible, and he is introduced here without
any cause whatever. Tij-ud-Uin,' 1 -yal-duz, took Lahor, and ousted its
governor, and held it a much longer time, and he, under the same s]rstem,
should have been entered among the SulSans of HindOstan.

THE SilANSABANiAH DYNASTY OF GHA ZNlN. 507

concluded ; and, after this, I come to the Section on the
Sultans of Hindustan, the first of whom to be mentioned
is Sultan ^utb-ud-Din, 1-bak. and his illustrious actions',
which, please God, will be recorded as fully as the limits
of this book will permit.

* The more modem copies of the text differ here somewhat.

K k 2

SECTION XVIII.

THE SHANSABAnIAH SULTANS OF TUKHARTSTAN AND

bamiAn.

MinhAj-i-SarAj, JOrjAnI, the humblest of the servants of
the Almighty’s threshold, thus states, that, as Almighty
God raised up great and powerful Suljans from the race of
the Shansabanis. who were Maliks over the mountain
tracts of Gljur, and brought within the grasp of their juris¬
diction, and under their subjection, sundry territories of
the countries of ’Ajam and of Hind, one of those territories
was Tulcharistan and the mountain tracts of Bamian, the
rulers of which part have been famous and celebrated upon
all occasions, from the most remote ages, for the grandeur
of their station, the abundance of their riches, the vastness
of their treasures, the number of their mines, and their
buried wealth; and, on sundry occasions, the sovereigns of
'Ajam, such as l^ubad and Firuz', these rulers have van¬
quished and overcome. That tract of country has also
been famed and celebrated, to the uttermost parts of the
countries of the world, for its mine^ of gold, silver, rubies,
and crystal, beja'dah* [jade], and other [precious] things.

When the sun of the prosperity of the Maliks and
Sultans of Ghur ascended from the eastern parts of
eminence, and Sultan ’Ala-ud-Din, Husain, Jahan-soz, had
wreaked vengeance upon the people of Ghaznin. he had
leisure to turn his attention to the subjugation of that
territory. After having subdued it, he installed therein his
eldest brother, Malik Fa kh r-ud-Din. Mas’ud, and from him
descended an illustrious posterity, and Maliks of grandeur
and dignity, the marks of whose equity and beneficence.

> See note •, page 423.

* The name of a gem, by some said to be a species of ruby, and by others a
species of sapphire; but ja</e is no doubt meant. Gncz refers to a specie^ nf
jasper found in these parts.

4**

THE 7ABA^T.I.NA$IRi.

and the fame of whose munificence and obligations con>
ferredi, became published throughout the four quarters of
the world*. The mercy of the Almighty be upon the
whole of them!

I. MALIK FAKHR-UD-DiN, MAS’-OD, SON OF TZZ-UD-DIN,
AL HUSAIN, SHANSABI.

Malik Fakhr-ud-Dtn. Mas’ud, son of Al-Husain, was
older than his other six brothers; and his mother was a
Turkiah *. He was a sufficiently great monarch ; but, as
he was not by the same mother as [his brothers] the
Sultans *, they did not permit him to occupy the throne of
the dominions of Gh ur. for this reason, that five other
brothers *, both on the side of the father and mother, were
Shansabants. while the Malik-ul-Jibal, Muhammad, who
attained martyrdom at Ghaznin, was by another mother,
who was the attendant of the mother of the Sultans, and
Malik Fakhr-ud-Din. Mas’ud, was by a Turkish bond-
woman, as has been previously stated.

After Sultan ’Aia-ud-Din, Husain [Jahan-soz], became
disengaged from taking revenge upon the inhabitants of
Ghaznin. and had demolished the Ka$rs of Bust, which
was the place of residence of the house of Mahmud, he
caused an army to be got ready from the capital of Gh ur,
and marched towards Tukharistan. and, in the subjugation
of that territory, and the strongholds thereof, manifested
great alertness and dexterity; and the Amirs of Gh ur. in
that army, displayed such valour and martial heroism,
that, if Rustam-i-Dastan' had been present, he would have
recited the story of their valour.

When those tracts were taken possession of, ’Ala-ud -Din,
Husain, placed Malik Fakhr-ud-Din. Mas’ud [his brother],
upon the throne of Bamian, and that territory was com-

* A term oonstantljr quoted by Eastern authors before the time of Columbus.

* The feinimne of Turk.

* They only assumed the title of Sultan some time subsequent to this period,
and, of OMuae, were not all Sultans at once.

* Here oar author refers over again to the ’’Sul^his” just mentioned. There
is no iutfooving his style without taking great liberty with the original.

^ Dasfin, a name of ZZl-i-Zar [Z&l of the Golden Locks], the Cstber of
Rustam.

THE SHANRABANIAH dynasty OF TUKHARISTAN. 4^3

mitted to his chaise *. Malik FaJ^br-ud-Din, Mas’ud,
having ascended the throne, the adjacent hill territories,
[namely] the mountain tract of Shaknan *, Tubb^ristan, as
far as Dar-gun *, and Bilaur, and the tracts towards Turkistan

* Here, again, our author contradicts his own previous statements. At page
339 he says that, on the death of Malik ’lez-ud-Dtn, l^usain [the father <if
Fakhr-ud-Dtn, Mas’ud, ’AU-ud-Dfn, ^usain, and others], Saif-ud-Dtn, SGrt,
the eldest legitimate son, who succeeded to his father’s authority, divideJ the
dominions among his six brothers and himself, and that, in that division,
BSmian 7 oas assigned to the eldest brother, Fal[lir-ud>Din, Mas’Qd. Now he
states that ’AlS-ud>Din, ^usain, conquered this territory several years sub¬
sequently, after he had destroyed the city of Gh aintn. Jahan-Anl also states
that, in the division of the father’s hereditary patrimony among the brothers,
Bami&n went to the eldest son by a Turkish bond-woman, Faklir-ud-Dtn,
Mas’ud.

The older Chroniclers contain a great deal respecting the affairs of Tukllliris-
Uln and the Hayatilah, whatever “the clay-stamped annals of Senatcherib"
[Sennacherib ?] may say. Ibn-i-£tiurdad-bih, in his account of the Turks, also
refers to them. Haytal [Jb^], according to the ancient dialect of Dukliarfi,
is said to signify a man of great strength and size ; the rArabs made it Hayt&l
[Jik,a}^the plural form of the word, applied to the people generally, being
Hayatilah One writer states that Haytal was the name of the ter¬

ritory of Kh utian. a dependency of Bad akhsh an. also called Kol-fib [Kol-i-
Ab, which signifies a lake] ; but this is contrary to the MasAlik wa
MamAlik, and to our author’s account.

Ftruz, son of Yazdijurd, son of Bahram-i-Gur, when his brother Hurmuz
ascended the throne, fled from his fief of Sijistan, by way of Gh arjistAn and
TuJcbaristan, and sought shelter and aid from Khnsh-nawa?.. the king of the
HayAtilah. According to the Rauf at-u{-Tahirtn,' the name of the ruler he
sought aid from was Fagl^ni, the Cha gbani. or Shah of the ChaghAnians.
He espoused the cause of Ftruz, and agreed to aid him with 30,000 men if
Ftruz would cede to him Tirmid and Wesah. Another author calls the people
of T'UcllAristan itself Hayatilah likewise. By Faghant’s aid Ftruz gained
the throne of Iran ; and for many years subsequent to this, and during several
succeeding reigns, there was alternate peace and war between the sovereigns of
IiSn and the Hayatilah rulers. In the time of NusherwAn, the HayatiUh,
being u'ithout a ruler, are said to have chosen Faghant [this would seem, from
what was stated above from another author, to be the name of the family, not
the person’s name], the Ckagl^nian ruler of Tukliaristan. I have neither
space nor time to say more at present ; but will merely observe, that, by some
modem writers, Tukharistan and Turkistan are often confused, one for the
other.

* Sha ghnSn and Shaknan are synonymous: “Shighnan” is not correct,
but such as one would adopt who could not read the original for himself^ and
depended entirely on the statements and translations of others.

* Considerable discrepancy exists here, in some copies of the text, with respect
to these names. The best copies have as above, although the oldest leaves
out the and, which makes it Dar-gGn of Bilaur. The next best has Dar-gGt [or
Dar-kot or kGt], which, if the of the original MS. was written rather long
drawn out, as is often done, might be mistaken for <u The next best copies,
which are comparatively modem, have Dar-gQr [or Dar-gor], and one Dar-bur

424

THE TABA^fAT.I.NA§IRi.

to the boundary of Wa khsh * and Bada khsh an. the whole
came under his jurisdiction

Malik FaJshr-ud-Dtn, Mas’ud, had able and accomplished
sons; and, when Kimaj from BalJ^h. and Taj-ud-Din.
Yal-duz *, from Hirat, who were slaves of the Sanjari
dynasty, conspired to eject Sulj^n Gh iya^-ud-Din. Mu-
hammad-i-Sam, in order to take possession [of the country]
as far as Firuz-koh, and the Ghiyasiah sovereignty was, as
yet, in the morning of its ascendancy, Malik Fakhr-ud-Din.
Mas’ud, rendered assistance to them, under the stipulation
that whatever pertained to Kh urasan should go to them,
and what belonged to Gh ur to [him] Malik Fakhr-ud-Din.
Mas’ud*.

When Almighty God bestowed victory upon Sultan
Gh iyas-ud-Din. and Malik Taj-ud-Dih, Yal-duz, of Hirat,
was slain, he despatched the head of Yal-duz ^ to his uncle,
Malik FaJchr-ud-Din, Mas’ud, whose forces had arrived
near at hand. Sultan Gh iyas-ud-Din followed in pursuit
of them, and Malik Fakhr-ud-Din was put to the rout.
Sultan Gh iyas-ud-Din discerned him, and caused him to
turn back again, and conducted him to his camp, and
there placed him on the throne * ; and Sultan Ghiyas-ud-
Din, and Mu’izz-ud-Din, both of them, stood before the

[or Dar-bor]. The printed text, and one of the most recent copies, have Dar-
kufah ; and the foimer, in a note, Bur-Bilaur ; and, in brackets, as the pro¬
bable reading, “ £)anod* and BUaur but the different copies of the text
collated do not show that this is at all the correct reading.

* Also called Kh utlan.

2 The dominions of the Sultans of Bamtan and Tukharistan, according to
Jah&n Ara and several other works, extended north to the territory of Kash-
ghar ; south as far as Gh arjistan and Gh ur ; east to Kashmir ; and west as far
as Tirmid. See note*, page 426.

* This appears to be the same Amtr ^imaj referred to in note *, page 358 ;
and he is probably the same as mentioned in note *, page 374 ; and this
Yal-dttz [ 1 -yal-duz] must be the same who is mentioned in the same note,
which see.

* See pages 371-4.

* Mr. E. Thomas, in his paper on the “ Coins of the Kings of Ghazni,”
Ro. As. Journal, vol. xviL, in a note, page 199, erroneously stales that, “On
the first rise of Ghias-ud-din, Fakr[Fakhr?]-ud-din n/rfr him, under the con-
dition that all the conquests in Khorasan should pertain to the former, while
the acquisitions in Ghor should fall to his own share.” The conditions were
between iff^imaj and Val-duz and Fakhr-ud-Din, nol Ghiyas-ud-Din.

7 See the account given in Ghiyag-ud-Din’s reign, where our author says
that ^imdj’s head was sent, page 373, and note *.

* A ronnd-alwut way of stating lliat they look him prisoner.

THE SHANSABANiAH DYNASTY OF XUKHARISTAN. 425

throne in attendance on him. Chroniclers state that Malik
FaljJir-ud-Dtn, Mas’ud, became enraged [at this], and that
he reproached both of them unjustly, saying that they
mocked him. His words were these : “You two rascally
boys laugh at me!” The Almighty’s mercy be upon
them !

This exclamation of his has been mentioned here for this
reason, that the beholders and readers of these pages may
know the laudable qualities of these two nionarchs, the
extent of their compassion and clemency, to what degree
they guarded the honour and respect [due] towards their
uncle, and to what extremity they bore his injustice *.

When the two Sultans' became diseaigaged from this
audience, they caused complete arrangement to be made
for the return of their uncle, and conferred honorary dresses
upon the whole of his Amirs and Slaves, and caused them
to return. Malik Fakhr-ud-Dtn, Mas’ud, retired towards
Bamtan again ; and there he acquired great power, and
the Sultans and Maliks of Gh Cir used constantly to pay
him homage.

His career came to an end in [the enjoyment of]
sovereignty and he ruled for a long period and died.
He had several worthy and deserving sons. Sultan Shams-
ud-,Din was the eldest, and Malik Taj-ud-Din, Zangi *, and
Malik Husam-ud-Dm, ’Alt.

II. SULTAN SHAMS-UD-DIN, MUHAMMAD, SON OF MAS’UD.

SON OF AL-HUSAIN, SHANSABI.

When Malik Fakhr-ud -Dtn. Mas’ud, of Bamian, was

• Wc have ample proofs of their amiability and long-.suflering, from our
author’s point of view, in the fate of Sultan Kh usrau Malik and his family, and
*Ahhas-i-ShTs.

* Mu’izz-u<l-Din, the younger brother, only received the title of Sultan
some time after this occurrence.

* Such are the words in the original : it seems a truism if the passage is not
corrupt.

• This is the Taj-ud-Dtn, Zangi, who had his head struck off at Shwarazm,
mentioned in note *, page 481. He can scarcely be the same person as men¬
tioned at page 342, because the latter’s mother was one of the sisters of the
two Sultans, Gh iyas-nd-Din. and Mu’izi-ud-Dtn. If he is, his father, FaUir-
ud-Dtn, Mas’ud, must have married his own niece ; while his son,

Din, Muhammad, must have married her sister, a most unlikely alliance,
illegal according to Muhammadan law. There must have therefore been two
|>ersons named Taj-ud-Din, Zangi, but of the same race.

E C

4*6

THE TABAKAT-I-NASIRl.

taken to the Almighty’s mercy, his eldest son was Sultan
Shams-ud-Din. Muh<inimad *, and they raised him to the
throne of Bamian ; and the sister of the Sultans Gh iyas-
ud-Din and Mu’izz-ud-Dtn was married to him, which
princess’s title was Hurrah-i-Jalali. She was older than
either of the Sultans, and was the mother of Sultan Baha-
ud-Din, Sam, the son of [Shams- ud-Din] Muhammad.

when Sultan Shams-ud-Dtn. Muhammad, ascended the
throne of Bamian, in accordance with the last will of his
father, and with the concurrence of the Amirs, Sultan
Gh ivas-ud-Din spnt him a robe of honour, and paid him
abundant deference and respect. He brought the whole
of the territory of Tukharistan under his sway, and, subse¬
quently, the city of Baljch, Ch aghanian *. Wa khsh . Jarum,
Bada khsh an. and the-hill tracts of Shaknan ®, came under

"* This is the Malik’s son, gljams-ud-Din, Muhammad, who was taken
prisoner by the Sipah-salar, BaranVash, along with ’Ala-ud-l)in, Hu''ain
[Jahan-soz], and ’All, Jatri, in the engagement with Sultan Sanjar Ijcforc
Aobali in 547 H, Shams-ud-Din. Muho-niniad, obtained 50,000 dinars from
BSmf 3 n for his ransom, which sum wa;, paid over to Baranhash. Our author,
had he known this, is not likely to have related'it.

‘ The best Paris copy, the I. O. L. MS., and the Ro. As. Soc. MS., h.avc
Isfahan !!

* Others say Balkh, Bughlan or BuVlan [ 1 x>th are correct], Ch aghanian.
and some part of Bada khsh an. According to our author, his father, Fakkr-
ud-Din, Mas’ud, held sway over some of these very tracts, now mentioned as
“ subsequently” coming under the sway of the son. However, it is clear,
whatever "Hioen Thsang" may say to the contrary, that Tukharistan was but
a district or province of Balkh, and not a vast tract of country " rearhittgfrom
(he frontiers of Persia" [wherever that might mean in those days] “to the
Thsuttg-ling or Mountains of Pamir and that *‘the great Po-chu or Oxus"
did not “ ritn through the middle ” of the Tukharistan here referred to, for the
very good reason that it lies south of the Jihun, Amu, or Oxus. The MasAlik
WA MamAlik plainly states, that of Balkh there are a number of divisions and
districts, such as Tukharistan, Ehulum, Samnagan, Bughlan, Zawalin [this,
in all prob.ability, is Mr. Thomas’s “ Warwilin” [y,J<jj}]—the fir-st j is the
copulative conjunction, and the j wants the point to make it,.] ; and Baihakts,
Walwalij — gJ'rJ—may be traced to the same source. Of this Tukharistan,
was the chief and largest town. Had such a place as Walwalij been
capital of TttkhAristAn, our author would, without doubt, have known of it,
and have mentioned it here. Chnghanign and W akhsh lie to the northward
of this Tukharistan. and are accounted in Mawar-un-Nahr, as this latter term
signifies, vie. beyond the river. “ The W akhah -Ab—river of Wakhsh —
issues out of Turkistkn into the territory of W akhsh. runs onward towards
Balkh, and falls into the Jthun, near Tirmid.” In his account of the Mumbai
invasion, onr author mentions Balkh [^] and Waikh sometimes as dne
and the same place, and, at others, as separate places.

While on this subject, I must now mention another matter. In the MAsalik

THE SHANSABANIAH DYNASTY OF TUKHARISTAN. 4*7

his jurisdiction. He marched forces in every direction,
and throughout the whole of those parts his mandates were
obeyed.

In the year in which the Sul1;ans of Gh ur and Gh azntn
led an army into the territory of Rud-bar of Marw, to
repel Sultan Shah, the Khw arazmlSultan Shams-ud-
Din, Mu^mmad, by command of the Sultans, brought the
forces of Bamian and Tul^aristan and joined them. On
the occasion of Sultan Shah’s overthrow, Malik Baha-ud-
Din, TugJjril, of Hirat, who had been a slave of Sultan
Sanjar, and who, obliged to evacuate Hirat, had joined
Sultan Shah, in this engagement fell into the hands of the
troops of Bamian. They slew him, and brought his head
to the presence of Sukan Gh iyas-ud-Din. The Sukan [in
consequence] became very cordial towards Shams-ud-Din.
Muhammad, and upon this very occasion his advance¬
ment* took place, and he received the title of Sukan
Shams-ud-Din. and a black canopy of state was assigned
to him.

Previous to this, neither Malik Fakhr-ud-Din. Mas’ud,
nor he had any canopy of state, and his designation was
Malik Shams-ud-Din ; but, when he acquired a canopy of
state, he obtained the title of Sultan ®; and by Sultan
Ghiyas-ud-Din, and Mu’izz-ud-Din, who were hi.s uncle’s
sons, he wzus treated with great honour and reverence.

WA Mamalik, Bamian is described ns “.1 town about half the extent of
Balkh [in those days Balkh was a very extensive city], situated on a hill, and
in front of it flows the river which runs through Gh arjistan.” The Tari]di-i-
Alrt, ,a work of great authority, Jahan-Ara, the Muntakhab-ut-Tawaiikll,
and some others, distinctly aver that there was no ttnun 7 vhatever tailed Bamian,
which is the name of the country, and that Rasif [>_/Ut,], Kasif
was the name of its chief town, which place was totally destroyed
by Ch ingjy. Kh an on his advance towards Gh aznin. The Muntakbab-
ut-Tawarikb says Bamian is also called Tukbaristan ! Ka^if is probably
the place called “Gulgulih” by Masson, but such name is not to be found in
any Persian history that I know of. The Mughals styled it Maubalig —the
unfortunate city—after its ruin.

^ See pages 249, 378, and note*, page 379.

• The printed text and I. O. L. MS. 1952, and two others, have — to
repulse, dr^e away; and, in the R. A. Soc. MS. — repulsing, driving
enuay !

* The text here exhibits considerable variations, and great differences ot
idiom express the same signification. Some authors state that, on this occa¬
sion, Mu’izz-ud-Din also received the title of Sul[an, and that before his title
was only Malik.

E e 2

i8 THE TABA¥:jAT.r-NA$TEI.

The Almighty bestowed upon him worthy and excellent
iffspring, and blessed him with six sons '; and for a con-
iderable time the country of Tukharistan continued under
he jurisdiction of his officers. He patronized learned men
if distinction, and they took up their residence in his
lominions ; and acted with equity and beneficence towards
lis subject-s, and died renowned and popular; and, after
lim, the .sovereignty came to Sultan Baha-ud-Din, Sam.

[I. .SULTAN BAn.'V-UD-niN, .sAm, sox oe sultan shams-
UD-niX, MUHAMMAD.

Sultiin Baha-ud-Din, Sam, was a very grcjit .and august
lonarch, and was just and enlightened. He was the
i.atronizcr of learned men, and the dispenser of equity ;
nd, in his day, the whole of the learned ’Ulama were
nanimous, that there was no Musalman sovereign who
/as a greater chcrisher of learned men, for this reason, that
lis intercourse, his communion, and his converse, were
xclusively with ’Ulama of judgment and di.scrimination.

He was, on both sides, a Shan.sabani ®, and his mother
/as the Hurr.ah-i-Jalali, the daughter of Sult.an Bah.a-ud-
Din, Sam, the sister of the two Sultans, and older than
ithcr of them. Kazi Taj-ud-Din, Zawzani, who was the
nost eloquent man of his day, [upon one occasion] w.as
Iclivering a di.scourse within his [Baha-ud-Din’.s] pal.acc,
nd, during the invocation, the Sultiin said : “ What adorn
nent can I give to the bride of the realm upon the face of
/hose empire two such moles exist, one Ghiyas^ud-Din,
nd the other Mu’izz-ud-Din ®! ” The Almighty’s mercy
le upon them all !

* Our author, like others, does not even give the names of these sons.
laha-ud-Din, Sam, however, wxs not the eldest of the sons of Shains-ud-I)fii,
[utiammad. When the latter died, the liamian nobles raised his eldest son,
tbbas, by a Turkish M'ifc, to the throne. The two brothel's, Gbiya§-u<l-Din
id Mu’izz-ud-Din, were angry at this, and they deposed ’Abbas, and set up
leir sister’s son, Sam, and he received the title of Baha-ud-Din. ’Abbas
light have been here entered among the rulers of Tukharistan and Bamian as
ell as ^fuJb-ud-Din, I-bak, among the .sovereigns of Gh aznin.

» Tlie mother of his grandfather, Failir-ud-Dtn, Mas’ud, was a Turkish
>nd-maid.

• These are our author’s exact words, but what the “invocation” was our
ironicler does not say ; but it is a way he has of mystifying his own state-
ents. The fact is as related by another author, that the l^pift, mentioned

THE SUANSABANIAH DYNASTY OF X^JIUIARISTAN. 429

In short, the admirable benevolence of that monarch
towards the 'Ulama of Islam was more than can be con¬
tained within the compass of writing. That Miracle of the
World, Fakhr-ud-Din. Muhammad, Ra^t ■*, composed the
Risalah-i-Bahaiah in that Sultan’s name; and for a con¬
siderable period he continued under the shadow of that
sovereign’s favour and protection. That Chief of learned
Doctors, Jalal-ud-Dtn, Warsak *, during the Sultan’s reign,
attained the office of Shaikh-ul-Islam of the district of
Balkh ; and Maulana Saraj-i-Minhaj *, that Most Eloquent
of 'Ajam, and the Wonder of his Age, was sent for, secretly,
by Sult&n Baha-ud-Din, Sam, from the Court of Firuz-koh,
who despatched a seal-ring of turquoise stone with the
name of Sam engraved upon it, and with great respect and
reverence invited the Maulana to his Court. When this
circumstance occurred, the writer of this History, Minhaj-i-
Saraj, was in the third year of his age.

The requests and solicitations of Sultan Baha-ud-Din,
Sam, were continuous and unremitting. The reason of
this was, that, during the time of [his father] Malik ^
Shams-ud-Din. Muhammad, the Maulana proceeded from
Gh aznin towards Bamian, and, at that period, Baha-ud-
Din, Sam, held charge of the district of Balarwan *. He
paid his respects to fhe Maulana, and sought to retain-

above, be(^n one clay from the pulpit to eulogize 15 aha-ucl-l)in, and was
extolling the flouiishing state his dominions were in, when that monarch ex¬
claimed : “ What adornment can I give unto the kiiigdc^ni’s liride, when on
the cheek of her sovereignly are alreaciy two such moles?” 'fhe word khal
signjiics a mole, and also a maleninl nnrU ; and the moles here refcrrtxl to are
his two maternal uncles, Qhiyas-ud-Din and Mu’izz-ud-Din.

Jalian-Ara and Muntakhab-ut-Tawarikh say th.at Uaha-ud-DTn, Sam,
was a learned monarch, and a friend of learncxl men ; as an example of which
he entertained, near his person, the Imam l-'.akhr-ud-Din, cjf Raz, and treated
him with great favour and eonsideration. They do not, however, mention
“that Most Kloquent of ’Ajam, and the Wonder of his Age,” our author’s
father; in fact, I have never noticed his name mentioned in any other work.
This same Imam was subsequently accused, by some parlies, of having brought
about the assassination of Sultan Mu’izz-ud-Din. See note ®, page 485, and
note •, page 385.

• In some copies Warsal and Ijlsadsak. The above seems the most correct.

• Our author’s father.

' Sultan Shams-ud-Din. whose reign has just Ijcen given.

• The majority of the best copies are as above, but two others have “Bal-
wan,” and three others “Barwan,” and one “Balarwan of Bamiimbut at
page 113 our antliur says Balarwan is in Gharjistan.

430

THE TABA^T-I.NA$IRI.

him, and showed him great respect and veneration ; and
he had. both seen and heard his soul-inspiring discourse,
and his heart-expanding conversation, and the pleasure he
had derived therefrom remained impressed upon his royal
mind, and he was desirous of enjoying all the delicacies of
the benefits of the Maulana’s conversation *. Whe;i Baha-
ud-Din, Sam, reached the throne of soveteignty of Bamian,
he sent for the Maulana repeatedly, and charged him with
the .administration of all the offices connected with the
law, and sent him his private signet-ring.

The Maulana proceeded to the Court of Bamian from
the Court of Flruz-koh without the permission of Sultan
Ghiyas-ud-Dln ; and, when he arrived in that part, he was
treated with great respect and honour, and the whole of
the [legal] functions of that kingdom, such as the Chief
Kazt-ship of the realm and other parts, the judicial ad¬
ministration of the triumphant forces, the chaplaincy of the
State ‘, together with the office of censor *, with full power
of the ecclesiastical law, the charge of two colleges, with
assigned lands and benefactions abundant, all these offices
the Maulana was entrusted with. The diploma conferring
the whole of these offices, in the handwriting of the Sahib*,
who was the Wazir of the kingdom of Bamian, Up to the
present time that this TABAKAT was put in writing in the
sublime name of the great Sultan, Na§ir-ud-Dunya wa ud-
Din, Abu-l-Muzaffar-i-Mahmud, son of Sultan I-yal-timish.
Kasim-i-Amir-ul-Mumminin'*—whose monarchy may the
Almighty perpetuate !—still exists in the Kharitah [a bag of
embroidered silk] containing the author’s diplomas; along
with his banner and his turban of honour. The mercy of

* Allowance must be made for a little family blarney.

* Here, too, the text varies much. One set of copies—the oldest—has as

a1 x>ve—j jCU j jCj j'Jrfl j eUU.. — whilst the other—
comprising the more modern copies —^ jy^ ^ dilU- tXji

—“the Chief ^^i-ship of the country, and settlement of the requests of the
triumphant forces or retinue.”

* An official who examines the weights and measures, and has a supervision
over merchants and .shop-keepers, superintends the markets, and Axes the
price of grain, &c. He can whip those found wine-bibbing, and interfere in
other matters relating to public morality.

* The title given to a minister.

* This title is totally incorrect. Sec reign of Sharjas-ud-lliii. l-yai-Limiab«
Section XXL

THE SHANSADAnIaH DYNASTY OF TUKHARISTAN.

the Almighty be upon them f This fact is recorded in
the narrative to show the admirable faith of that pious
ruler.

In short, he was a great monarch; and his dominions
assumed great amplitude and expansion, and comprised
the whole of the country of Tukharistan and its depend¬
encies, together with other territories, namely, in the east
as far as the frontier of Kashmir, and, in the west, as far as
the boundary of Tirmid and Balkh; north, as far as the
bounds of Ka^ghar; and south, as far as Gh ur and Ghar -
jistan, in the whole of which the Khutbah was read for him
and the money impressed with his name *. The. whole of
the Maliks and Amirs of each of the three kingdoms,
namely, Ghur, Ghaznin. and Bamlan, after [the decease of]
both the Sultans [^hiyas-ud-Din, and Mu’izz-ud-Din],
turned their eyes on him ; and, when Sultan Mu’izz-ud-
Din, Muhammad-i-Sam, was martyred, the Maliks and
Amirs of Ghaznin, both Ghuris and Turks, with one con¬
sent, requested him to come [and assume the sovereignty] \
Sultan Baha-ud-Din, Sam, accordingly, determined to pro¬
ceed from Bamian to Ghaznin. and set out in that direction
with a numerous army.

* At this period there were powerAil sovereigns ruling over Kaahmtr and its
dependencies, also the Jahangtriah rulers of SuwSt, who held sway over a
large portion of the mountain districts to the west, and the Sultans of Ptch. of
whom more anon.

* How much of this tract never yet heard the Khutbah 7

r Firishtah's History, or rather the translation of Firiihtah’s History, which
supplies the chief materials for the Histories of India, so called, here says [that
is the text] :—“ The incliruition of the Sbwajah, Mu-ayyid-ul-Mulk [a title giveh
to Waztrs], and the Turk Amtrs, wa$ towards the sovereignty of Gh iva.s-ii«l-
Dfn, Mahmud ; and the Ghurt Amirs, in secret, entertained the idea of the
sovereignty of Bah&-ud-Din, S^.” This is nearly in the words of our author,
whom he quotes; but Dow, vol. i. pp. l4q'5o, translates this passage thus:
"The Omrahs of Ghor, insisting upon Baha*ul-dien, the King’s cousin.
Governor of Bamio, and one of the seven sons of Husseiis; and the Vitier [Chaja*
ul-Muluck !!], attd the offiters of the Tnrkishiimercenatries, on Mamood, son of
the former Emperor, the brother of Mahommed Uhori.” Briggs, vol. i., ]Kige
186, renders it ; “The chiefs of Ghoor claimed it for Baha-ood>Dcen, the
King’s cousin, Gooerttor of Batnyan, and one of the seven sons of Eh-ooA-
Deen Hoossein ; while the Viziqr and the officers of the Toorky mercenaries
espoused the canse of Mahmood,” &c.

llils is faithfully rendering the text, certainly ; but it so happens that Bah 3 -
ud-Din, S 3 m, was neither Governor of Bamyan, nor was he one of A'/s-ooil-
ITcen Hoobsein’s [’Iz;-ud-Din, ^usain’.s] sons hut cevUMy bin g>-aui(fiither,
Fakhr •ud-Dtn, Mas’ud, was ’Izz-ud-Dln, AI«][^usain's, son.

43 S THE TABA^T-I-NA$IRI.

When he reached the district of KtdUn* he was attacked
with diarrhoea, and, only nineteen days after the martyr¬
dom of the victorious Sul(an Mu’izz-ud-Dtn, Muhammad-i-
Sam, Sultan Baha-ud-Dtn, Sam, died. His reign was
fourteen years *.

iv. SULTAN JALAL-UD-DIN, ’ALI ». SON OF BAHA-UD-DjN,

SAM, BAmIANI.

When the victorious Sultan Mu’izz-ud-Din, Muhammad-
i-Sam, obtained martyrdom, and Sultan Baha-ud-Din,
Sam, departed this life on the way [to Ghaznin]. the heirs
to the sovereignty, then remaining, were of two branches
of the Shansabaniah race—one, the family of the Sultans
of Bamian, and the second, the family of the Sultans of
Gh Or. When they conveyed the bier of the victorious
Sultan from Dam-yak *, the Turkish Slaves of the [late]
Sultan, the great Maliks and Amirs, took the Sultan’s bier,
together with vast treasures, and the magazines of military
stores, from the Amirs of Qljur, Those G^urian Amirs,
who were in the army of Hindustan, were inclined towards
the sons of Sultan Baha-ud-Dtn, Sam, and the Turk Amirs
were inclined to Sultan Ghiya§-ud-Dtn, Mahmud, son of
[ Gh ivas-ud-Din.] Muhammad-i-Sam, the [late] Sultan’s
nephew *.

* It seems somewhat remarkable that Kidan proved fatal, according to our
author, to so numy of the Shansabant chiefs. Muhammad, son of Surt, and
Baha-ud-Dtn, Sam, son of ’Izz-ud-Dtn, AI-]^usain, also both died at Ktdan.
See pages 321 and 343.

* He died in Sha’ban. 602 H., and reigned fourteen years. He must there¬
fore have succeeded to the throne about the middle of the year $88 H., which
was the year in which Sultln Mu’lzs-ud-Dtn defeated Rae Pithora at I'arS’tn.

1 Nearly every copy of th«-text is incorrect here in giving the name of ’Ala-
ud Dtn, Muhammad, instead of his brother's, Jalal-ud-Dtn, 'Alt; and 'Ala-
ud-Dtn is again mentioned in them as the last of the Shansabt rulers of
Gh asntn. and he never ruled over TukhiristSn. The best Paris copy, how¬
ever, <ontrary to all the othtrs examined, has both brothers here. Jahan-Aia and
some others have the same; but, in them, the brothers are not mentioned again,
and the dynasty of T^illkiirist&n terminates with them. Rau^at u9-$aft agrees
with the above, and mentions 'Ala-ud-Dtn among the Gh azntn rulers, his
proper place.

* See note *, page 486.

* Our author here contradicts the statement made in the preceding page.
The fact was that all the Amirs, both Turks and Ghiirls. seemed desirous that
Bahft-ud-Dtn, SSm, should succeed to the supreme authority ; but after his
death they became divided, when the choice lay between his son, 'Ala.ud-Dtn,

THE SilAN£»ABA»rlAH DYNASTY OF TOS&ARISTAN. 433

The {^Qrtan Amtrs, such as were at Ghasntn. namely,
the Sipah-Sal3.r [the Commander of Troops] ^harnshti *,
Sullm5.n-i-Shfs. and others besides them, wrote letters to
'Ala-^ud-Din, and Jalal«ud-Din [sons of Baha-ud-Din, Sam],
and prayed them to come to Ghaznin, and they came
thither, as will be subsequently recorded, please God, in
the Section on the Sul$ans of pha znin.

When Jalal-ud-Dln had seatecThis brother on the throne
of Gh aznin^ he returned himself, and ascended the throne
of Bamfan. A trustworthy chronicler* related that they
[the brothers] divided the treasures at Ghaznin. and that
the share of Jalal-ud-Din amounted to two hundred and
fifty camel-loads of pure gold and of jewel-studded articles of
gold and silver, which he conveyed along with him to Bamian.

A second time he assembled an army against Gh aznin.
and drew together forces from every part of his dominions,
consisting of Gljuris, Ghuzz, and Beghu *, and proceeded
to Gh aznin. and was taken prisoner and was subsequently

Mutianimad, and Gh iyaa.ud.Ptn, Matiraud, the late Sultan's brother’s son ;
notwithstanding that Bahil-ud-Dtn, Sam, at the time of his death, had ex¬
pressed a wish that his two sons should proceed to Q^aznfn, and endeavour,
by conciliation, to gain over the Wazir, the Turkish Slaves, and the Qhnrian
Amtrs, and take possession of (rh azntn ; after which 'Ala-ud-Din, Muham¬
mad, the eldest, was to have Gh aznin. and Jalal-ud-Din, 'Alt, the youngest,
Bamtan. Sec the reign of the III. ruler, Sultan 'Ala-ud-Dtn, Muhammad,
farther on. Several authors consider the dynasty to have ended with Balia-
ud-Dtn, Sam.

There is some doubt with regard to this probably by-name : some have
SharOSh, Eh aroshni. ^aroahtt and ^aroab, and i^arostt and l^arost. The
majority of the most generally correct copies are as above. See Section xxiiL

* Nameless, of course.

• This name is uncertain. The majority of copies have Beghu, as above ;

whilst the oldest copy has Beghfir [not I-ghur] ; whilst the best Paris copy,
and the three which generally agree—the I. O. L. copy, the Ro. As. .Soc. MS.,
and the Bodleian copy—have Sahiar There is a tribe of the Ghuzz

mentioned at page 377, note •, under the name of Sankuran. Pcrhajis Beghu
may be another tribe of the Gh uzz also, and the SanVuriin may also have been
included in this levy of troops. See under the reign of I-yal-duz.

J After Sultan Muhammad, Shwarazm Shah, reached Iliriit [in Jamadi-ul-
Awwal, 60s H.], he sent agents to Sultan Crhiyllg-ud-I>in, MahmCul (sec
note*, page 400]; and, among other matters, interceded for Malik T/z-ud-
Dln, W nsain , son of Kha r-mil. Mohmud accciMcd the terms offered by
Snlt^n Muhammad, and an accommodation took place between them. This
evidently refers to the acknowledgment of Sultan Muhammad’s siizcraiuly by
M ahv» «Td, mentioned in the note just referred to. Another author, however,
states, that, after disposing of the affairs of Balkh, Sultftn Muhammad pro¬
ceeded to Cuzarwan, which was the ancient fief of 'Izz-ud-Dln, ^usain, son of

434

THE TABA^AT-I-NASIRI.

released, and returned to Bamian again. During his ab¬
sence, his uncle, Sultan ’Ala-ud-Din*, Mas’Qd, had seized
the throne of Bamian. Jalal-ud-Din came back with but a
few men, and one morning, at dawn, attacked his uncle
unawares, took him prisoner, and put him to death, and
the Sa^iib who had been his father’s Wazir he caused to
be flayed alive; and he brought the country [again] under
his jurisdiction.

He reigned for a period of seven years, when Sultan
Muhammad, Khwarazm ^ah, made a forced march
against him from the banks of the river Jadarah, and sud¬
denly fell upon him*, and took him prisoner; and the
whole of that treasure which he had brought from Ghaznin.
together with the treasures of Bamian, Sultan Muhammad
appropriated, put Jalal-ud-Din to death, and retired ’.

lOia r-ititl [see pages 474, 475], and was then being invested by Abu-*Alt [an
oRicer and probably a kinsman of Sult&n GhiTOS-ud-Dtn, Mahmud], and that
this same Abu-’Alt was made the means of communication, in behalf of the
son of Shar-mtl, with Mahmud.

Be this, however, as it may, when T 3 .j-ud-Dtn, I-yal-dus, became aware of
the accommodation between Matimud and Sultin Mu^iammad, he demanded
of Mafiniud why he had made friends with the enemy of the Gl^arts. Me
received, in reply, the answer, that his, I-yal-duz’s, bad conduct had been the
cause of it. When this message was delivered to him, I-yal-duz released
Jalal-ud-Din, ’Alt, brother of ’Ala-ud-Dtn, Muhammad, gave him one of his
own daughters in marriage, and sent him, with a considerable army, to
BSmtan, where Jalal-ud-Dtn’s uncle, ’Abbas by name, had assumed the
sovereignty after the imprisonment of himself and brother. One of 1 -yal-duz’s
chiefs, Abt-Dakur [Zakur?] by name, then accompanying him, advised Jalal-
ud-Dtn, ’Alt, to face about, and march back against Qhazntn itself, ^ that
they might put an end to the career of that slave, referring to 1-yal-duz, whose
servant he was. This Jalal-ud-Dtn, ’Alt, declined to do ; upon which Abt-
Dakur separated from him, and retired to Kabul, which was his fief. JaJal-
ud-Dtn, ’Alt, continued his march to BSmtan, the capital of which was Rajit
[or Rafif], and recovered the sovereignty from his uncle ’Ablds. See next
page, and latter part of note p^e 426, and account of the III. ruler, ’AIS-
ud-Dtn, Muhammad, and I-yal-duz, IV. ruler, farther on.

■ One of the oldest copies has Sul^ Fakhr-ud-Dtn, Mas’iid, son of Shom s-
udrDtn, Muhammad ; but all the others have ’Ala-ud-Dtn, Mas’ud. See
n( 4 e *, page 436. Alft, Jahan-Aia, and Muntakliab-ut-TaudUtkll, call him
’Abbis. Raofat-uf-$af^ Mas’ud.

* This is the drcumstance refe rr e d to at page 267. There the name of'the
river, in the majority of the best copies, was Jaz^r ; but it appears that

Jad&rah or Jad 2 r [,W] is the correct name. See page 267. Some

copies of the text make a great hash of this name, and have :iA~

j'.ji .—and even ,3^

> Raufat-uf-$aBl says, but follows our author generally, ■" when Sbwbazm
Shah came into Mawar-un-Nahr [the southern part of it], he mode a fotreed

THE SHANSABAn!AH DYNASTY OF TUKHARISTAN. 435

Jalal'ud'Dtn was a very great monarch, and of great
intrepidity, alertness, and gallantry, an ascetic, devout and
continent, so that during the whole of his lifetime no
inebriating liquor had ever passed his blessed lips, and the
cincture of his garment had never been undone to any un¬
lawfulness. Manliness he possessed to that degree, that no
prince of the Shansabanian race came up to him in vigour,
in valour, and in arms. He was wont, in battle, to dis¬
charge two arrows at one aim, and neither of his arrows
would miss the mark, and neither animal of the chase nor
antagonist ever rose again from the wound of his arrow.
At the time when the Turks of Ghaznin followed in pursuit
of him, at the Hazar Darakhtan *' [place of the Thousand
Trees] of Ghaznin. he had struck the trunk of a tree with
an arrow, and had overturned it [!] ; and every Turkish
warrior who reached the tree would make obeisance to the
arrow, and would turn back again ; and [the tree of] this
arrow became [subsequently] a place of pilgrimage.

With all this strength and valourJalal-ud-Dinwas mild*
and beneficent; but manliness availeth nothing against
destiny, and, as his time was come, he died *.

V. SUl/l’AN ’ALA-UD-DIN, MASIOD, .SON OF SULTAN SHAMS.

UD.DlN, MUHAMMAD.

At the time that the sons of Suljtan Baha-ud-Din, Sam,
namely, ’Ala-ud-Din, Mubammad, and Jalal-ud-Din, ’All,
were both made prisoners at Ghaznin, 'Ala-ud-Din,

march, and, quite unexpectedly and unawares, appeared before Bamt&n [Ril^if?]
iieized JalM-ud-Din, 'All, killed him, gained po.ssession of his treasures and
carried them off. llie Afghans will have to keep a sharp look out now, or
they may be served in the same fashion, and find a foreign force from " tkt
intermudiate lotu ” {xmnee suddenly on Baint&n some fine moniing.

• In some modem copies of the text HazSr.Daraldlt. There are several
places of this name. It tnay be that on the route between Ghaxntn and
Gardaiz.

• The flaying alive of the Wazfr, for example. See page 437.

« Other authors state that, after a nominal reign of seven years, JalSl.ud.Dtn,
’Alt, fell into the hands of the Shwarazmj,s, and that he was the last of the
race that attained power ; but what his subsequent fate was is not stated. Our
author says he was put to death 1>y the ShwSipzmts, but when or where is not
mentioned. See his reign, farther on.

436

THE taba¥At.i.nA$irL

Mas’ud *, son of g^^ams-ud-Dtn, ascended the throne of
Bamtan, and took to wife the daughter of Malik Shah of
Wa khsh . who had been married to [and left a widow by]
his brother, Sultan Baha-ud-Din, Sam. He conferred the
Wazir-ship upon the Sahib, the Wazir of Bamian, and
assumed sway over the dominions of Tukharistan.

When Jalal-ud-Din was released from Gh aznin. he
turned his face towards Bamian. In the fortress of Kawik*
was a person, one of the godly ecclesiastics, a holy man,
whom they called Imam Shams-ud-Din-i-Arshad [the
most upright]. Jalal-ud-Din came to pay him a visit of
reverence, to obtain a good omen from his words, and his
benediction. This personage was a holy sage, who, after
the acquirement of all the knowledge and science pertain¬
ing to the [written] law, had withdrawn from the world,
and devoted himself to the worship of Almighty God, and
who, having turned his face towards the Court of the Most
H igh, had became a worker of miracles and the foreteller
of the future.

When Jalal-ud-Din paid him a visit, and sought the
assistance of this Imam’s blessed spirit, he enjoined him,
saying: “ Certainly, repossess thyself of the throne of
Bamian ; but take care that thou slayest not thine uncle,
for, if thou slayest him, they will also slay thee.”

Having performed his visit to the holy man, Jalal-ud-
Din retired and went away; and, when he had turned his
back, that holy Imam predicted, saying: “ The hapless
Jalal-ud-Din will kill his uncle, and they will kill him
also and, in the end, so it turned out, as that unique one
of the world had foretold. Jalal-ud-Din moved onward
from that place where he then was, with his followers, and,

* The Rauf at-uf-^a/S, which appears to have blindly followed our author,
here calls this ruler Mas’ud only, and, of course, agrees with our author’s
statement respecting his usurpation of the government and his subsequent fate.
Other writers, however, including Jahan-Ara, Muntakbab ut-Tawarilth, and
Tarikll'i-Alfi, state that the news of the defeat of the two brothers, and their
having fallen prisoners into the hands of I-yal-duz, having suddenly reached
Bamian, there being no one else to undertake the government, their uncle,
’Ablja^ whose mother was a Turkish bond>maid, naturally assumed it; but
when they, having been set at liberty, returned in safety, he gave up to them
the authority again. See note ', page 438, and page 433, and note 7 .

* 'I'hc name of a pass ami fortress, now in ruins, in the range of Hindu-kuali,
called Kawak by modern Tavellcrs. Some of the copies of the text have

and

TH£ SM AIMSABAWIAH UYnASlY Ur I’D AM AXIS TAJJ. 437

at the dawn of the morning, fell upon his uncle, took him
prisoner, and put him to death, and flayed alive the |5&hih,
his Wazir, as has been previously recorded ^

r Our author has not yet finished his account of Jal 5 l>ud-Dtn, ’Alt; he
merely leaves it for another dynasty, and relates his farther proceedings, in the
account of his brother, ’Al&-ud>Dtn, Muhammad, which see.

SECTION XVII.

THE SHANSABANiAH SULTANS, AND THE MALIKS OF

QHUR.

Minhaj-i-Saraj, Jurjani, the servant hopeful of the Divine
mercy—the Almighty guard him from negligence and
inadvertency !—says, with respect to this account of the
Shansabaniah Maliks of Ghur, after this manner:—That
the following pages are illumined with the sun of the illus¬
trious race of the Sultans of Ghur, together with that of the
offset of the fragrant tree of the Maliks of Ghur—may the
Almighty God render their dust fragrant, and assign to
them a habitation in Paradise!—in the manner of a record,
from the dawn of the morning of their dominion, and the
noon-day splendour of their sovereignty, together with the
genealogy of their family, until the expiration of the
empire of that princely house, and the last of the Maliks of
that kingly dynasty—the mercy of the Almighty be upon
those among them who have passed awayM—in such
wise as masters have, in histories, made mention of them,
in order that the robe of this chronicle may be adorned
with an account of them, and also, in order that this [their]
servant, and his priestly family, may acquit themselves of
some portion of the debt of gratitude for benefits received,
due unto those Sultans—the light of the Almighty illu¬
mine their tombs !—and, in order that such as may inspect
these pages may, please God, derive profit and instruction.

Be it known, that that master of eloquence, Maulana
Fakhr-ud-Din. Mubarak Shah, of Marw-ar-rud—the light
of the Almighty illumine his tomb !—has strung the genea¬
logical pearls of the Sultans of this dynasty on the thread
of poetry, and, having arranged those pearls in perfect

’ When this flourish was penned they had ceased to hold any territory for
nearly half a century.

THE SBANSABANLA.H DYNASTY OF QHOR. 3Pt

order, has aflixed the head pearl of that string to the
oyster-shell of the illustrious dynasty of ^ul^k, the Tazl;
and, from the time of those Sultans up to the first com¬
mencement of the sovereignty of ZuifSik, he has mentioned
the whole of them, father by father.

This book* their servant, Minhaj-i-Saraj, inspected in
the year 602 H., before the exalted throne in the sacred
/taratn [private dwelling] of that lady, the Princess of the
Universe, and the most excellent of her day and of the age,
the glory of the world and of the faith, the sovereign of all
good qualities among the race of mankind, Mah Malik,
daughter of the august Sultan, Gh iya^-ud-Dunya wa ud-
Din, Abi-ul-Fath, Muhammad, son of Sam, Kasim-i-
Amir-ul-Mumintn—may the light of the Almighty illumine
them! This Queen of the Universe used to bestow her
fostering care and protection upon this frail creature [Min-
haj-i-Saraj], and, in her own princely hall, as though he
had been a child of her own, he was brought up ; and, in
his younger years, he used, day and night, to dwell within
her haram, and, under her blessed sight, he used to receive
instruction.

That princess was possessed of many virtues and endow¬
ments. First: she departed from this transitgry sphere,
and passed to the eternal mansion, within the veil of
maidenhood. Second : she knew the whole of God’s word
[the Kur’an] by heart. Third : she was a depository of all
the traditions of martyrdom. Fourth: she used, once
a year, to devote a certain period to religious exercises,
and would repeat the whole Kur’an in two genuflexions of
prayer. Fifth : when her father, Sultan Gh iyas-ud-Din.
Muliammad-i-Sam, went to the mercy of the Almighty, fora
period of seven years the light of the sun and of day never
shone upon her, and she continued in constant and solitary
prayer. The mercy of the Almighty be upon her, and may
her happiness and her reward be ample in heaven !

In short, that master of eloquence, Maulana Fakhr-ud-
Din, Mubarak Shah, has composed that genealogical list
in verse, in the name of Sultan ’Ala-ud-Dtn, Husain, Jahan-
soz ; and, at the outset, I heard from the sacred lips of that

* One historian quotes a portion of FalElir>ud>Dfn’s work, but it is too long
for insertion here. He was a Saiyid, hence he is styled

302 THE TABA¥AT-I-NA$IRi.

most excellent of her time, and Khadijah* of the age, the
Malikah-i-Jalali'*, that, when some portion of the book and
chronicle in question had been composed in verse, through
a change which had showed itself in the temperament of
FaJAr-ud-Din, Mubarak Shah, this poem was neglected
by him until the time when the throne of the kingdom
became adorned and beautified with the majesty and
august splendour of Sultan Ghiyas-ud-Din*, Muhammad-i-
Sam, when this chronicle became graced with his name
and titles, and was brought to completion.

The Chronicler relates after this manner;—The Almighty
knoweth the truth !—that this dynasty are called Shansa-
banian with reference to their paternal ancestoV [Shansab
by name], who, after the removal of the sons of Zuhak, grew
up in the country of Ghur, and attained great authority,
poAver, and superiority, and acquired a name. The great
probability is, that this personage lived in the time of the
Kh ilafat of the Lord of the Faithful, 'All—may God re¬
ward him !—and that he received conversion to the faith
at the hand of ’Ali himself®, and that he took, from that
K^ltfah, a mandate and a standard ; and to every one
of that family, who used to sit upon the throne, that cove¬
nant which the Lord of the Faithful, ’Ali, had written,
used to be presented to him, and he would agree to abide
by it, after which he would become [legally] king. The
family likewise were among the clients of the Khalifah
’All; and affection towards the High Priests of the family
of the Chosen One used to be a firm tenet in their creed.

ACCOUNT OF THE FIRST [ANCESTOR.S] OF THE FAMILY,

tHEIR GENEALOGY, AND THEIR PROGENITORS, UP TO
ZU^AK, SURNAMED TAZL

^ul^ak has been mentioned in the section on the ancient
kings of Iran ; and the duration of his reign was a thou¬
sand years less one day and a half.

* Muhammad’s first wife.

* The same lady he previously referred to under the name of Mah-Malik.

* One af the oldest MSS. has Mu’izz-ud-Dtn, the younger of the two brothers.

* JahSn-Ara, and some other histories distinctly slate that Shansab, son of
Shamak, wa.s contemporary with the Shaltfah ’Alt, and that he was converted
to the Muhammadan fiiith by him. Compare our author’s statement above
with that at page 312.

THE fiBANSABANlAH DYNASTY 07 GHOR.

¥>3

The learned in chronology differ considerably with respect
to his ancestry and his forefathers, from Mihtar Adam
down to Mihtar Niih> on account of the great lapse of time'
The fraternity, who account 2uhak among the descendants
of S^, son of Mihtar Ntih, relate as follows:—2uh^'> son
of ’Anwin [’UlwAn], son of ’Amlalp [’Amlat and ’Alah], son
of 'Ad, son of ’Af [’Awaa and ’Awa;], son of I ram, son of
SSm, son of Nuh, son of Lamak ; while others again have
related that his [2uhAk’s] name was B!war-asp, son of
Arwand-asp, son of [Tsrhji son of Kabah

[Kayah ?], son of Nutu

Some, on the other hand, have stated:—B!war>asp, or
Btwar-asp, son of Arwand-asp*, son of Zankaba [Ranbaka],
son of Tazlo-barsed [Tazto-barsid, Tazlo-barghed, Tazto-

r The Mu^mmadan historians are at variance respecting the descent of
2 uh 3 k. Our author, in his account of him in Section V., says he was called
lStwar- 2 sp, and that God sent Nu^ to him to exhort him to repent of his
misdeeds, and that continued for ages to do so. He would not repent,
and the Flood followed. Our author then copies Jabart [tolerably correct],
and says that that author [the most trustarorthy perhapts of any] states that
Btwar-Ssp lived before the Flood, in which he perished ; and, one thousand
years after the death of NQ^i [compere with his statement here and at page 31 2],
a king arose of the seed of S&m, son of N&[^, named Zutiak, who was a
sorcerer.

Immediately after quoting Tabart, our author again says that Pe8li>dild, son
of Hoahang, had a son, T&zto by name, who is the father of all the ’Arabs.
He had a son Zankal^ who had a son Arwand-asp, who was father of Zuhkk.
The Tgrthh-i-Mukaddast. there quoted by him, says Zubak’s name is Bfwar-
Isp, son of Arwand-Ssp>, son of son of Kayah, son of Nuh-

The J&mi*-ut-Taw&rt][l|, TSrt]cb-i-Ibrahimi, and .some others, say the
’Ajamts call Zubkk, Bfwar-Ssp, and that the ratri.irch Ibrahim lived during
his reign ; but further state that great discrepancy exi.Nts among authors as to
his descent. The ’Arabs say he was brother’s son of Shadad-i-’Ad. and trace
his descent to Iram, son of Sam, brother of Arfalih.shad, while the Iranis say
his name is Arwand-asp, son of Rinkawor [Zankaba ?], .son of SShirah, son of
Tfljs, son of Forawal, and that T'ujs was lloabang’s brother. Guzidah and
others trace his descent from Jamahed, and say he was his sister’s son ; but the
greater number of chroniclers agree that he was sixth in descent from Kaiumaxt,
dso written Kaiflmurf. The pKoplc of Vainnn, again, say Zubak was Of
Yaman, of the tribe of Tubha’ [the royal tribe of Arabia Felix, of whom
Balbis, Queen of Sheba [Salu], wa-s one], and that he was the first of the
Fir’awna of Mifr.

* It will be well to mention here that the /irs/ name given in the following
piages is the one considered most trustworthy from comparison, and in which
the greater number and best copies of the text agree; and that those within
brackets are less so according to piosiiion.

* Alwand-Ssp and Arwand-asp are also the names of the father of Luhr-ilsp,
also called Arwand S]|&h.

304 THE TABAt:AT-I-NA$lRL

narsad, Tabur, Tazbu, and Tazbur], son of Farawwal
[Farawal, Ij^arawal?], son of Sta-mak, son of Mubshi
[Mushbi], .son of Kaiu-murg, son of Adam—peace be
unto him !—while others again say :—Kaiu-murg, son of
La wad, son of Sam, son of Nub-

The writers of chronicles [other than those above ?] relate
after this manner, that Arwand-asp was the father of
Zubak*, and son of the son of Tazio-barsed [Tazto, Tazbu,
and Tazbur]; and, with the concurrence of historians,
Tazto-barsed, likewise, was the father of all the 'Arabs,
and brother of Hoshang Malik*; and the'Arabs are called
Tazl* through affinity to him. He held dominion and
sovereignty over the nomad tribes of 'Arabs, as did his
descendants after him. From him the authority passed to
his son, Zartbaka [Zankaba ?], and from him to the latter’s
son, Arwand-asp [Arwan-asp],who was a just, wise,and God¬
fearing man. He had a son, Zub^k by name, who was
exceedingly malicious and factious, a blood-shedder, and
a great tyrant, and a cruel man, whom Shaitan [Satan]
had led astray from the right way^. He dug a well in the

* According to Jabart he [ 2 uhiik] was a descendant of H£m, son of Nah<
and after the Flood there was no king upon the earth for a thousand years,
until ZuhSk, the sorcerer, arose ; but there are different accounts of him, and
great discrepancies exist among authors concerning him. There are the
remains of an immense fortress near BamiUn, still known as the castle of
Zub&k-i-Mar 2 n, or Zn^k of the Snakes.

* Hoabang is considered the fourth in descent from Adam, and was the son
of sta-mak, who was son of Kaiumurt. Some consider him to be Arfakbshud,
son of Sam, who composed the Jawtdan-Khfrad. He is said to have founded
Istakbur—Istakhur is the 'Arab form of writing it—of Fars, Babal, and Sus.

* Called also Tajt by 'Ajamts, and hence the name Tajik added to
'Ajumt names forms a diminutive], by which the descendants of 'Arabs were
styled who were bom in and had grown up in 'Ajam. At' present the term is
used with respect to Persian-speaking people who are neither Turks nor
'Arabs, and of which race the inhabitants generally of towns and cities in
Afgh^istSn, and several districts likewise under Afghan sway, and also of
several independent states to the north, consist. The Afghans often style
them “Tajik-Majik." Numbers of'Arab tribes, or parts of tribes settled in
different parts of 'Ajam, after its conquest by the first Musalman invaders, and
several tribes dwelling among the Afghans, and often confounded with them,
claim 'Arab descent. In my proposed history of the Afghan tribes, I shall
be able to enter into more detail on this subject. Modem philosophers, how¬
ever, ate, as a matter of course, divided in Opinion about the derivation of the
namc^ and also as to the descent of the people ; but why should we begrudge
them the infinite pleasure of still speculating upon the matter, and trying to
make every other account fit that of certain Greeks ? See page 309,.

A few copies have " from the right way, so that he dug a well," &c.

THE SHANSABANIAH DYNASTY OF fiBOR. 305

path which his father was wont to pass^ and Arwand-
Ssp, who had become old and infirm, fell into it, and was
killed*.

Zuhak now became sovereign over the ’Arabs, and, after
Jamshed fTamshed’s time ?] conquered the whole world,
and by sorcery and tyranny brought the whole of it under
his sway. The author of the TartJsh-i-Mukaddast states,
that Zuh^k possessed a cylinder, made of gol,d, in which
were seven apertures, each of which was named after one
of the seven climes of the four quarters of the earth. When
the inhabitants of either of these climates happened to
rebel against his authority, he would raise incantations
in the aperture named after such climate, and breathe
into it, and famine, pestilence, and calamity would arise
in it.

After a thousand years of his sovereignty passed away*.
Almighty God was pleased to release the world from his
tyranny and oppression, and the kingdom came to Faridun.
He seized Zuh^k, and confined him in a pit on mount
Dimawand, in 'Irak*

ACCOUNT OF BUSTAM, MALIK OF HIND AND OF SIND L

This Bustam Malik held the dominion of Hindustan* at
the hand of Zuh^k, and he was one of Zub^k’s descendants,

* According to trustworthy authorities, this Bfwar-^sp became styled 2 utiSlc,

from the old Persian words idl u dak-Sk, signifying “ten vices and defects
and the 'Arabs, in copying the name, used for i or j and transformed it
into by changing the « also into ^ With this change of letters, the

original meaning of the word became changed, for alW* [ZuhSh] signifies
“ a mocker,” “laughing.”

His vices and defects were hideousness, dwarfishness, excessive arrogance
and pride, shamelessness, audacity, gluttony and voracity, a foul tongue,
recklessness, lying, injitstice, ferocity and tyranny, depravity of heart, and
stolidity. TTiese are rather more than /S?w however. Raufat-uj-$afS says Bf war
is from the Pahlawt, and in Dart means ten thousand ;.and, therefore, Dah-ak
received the name of Blwar-ftsp because he had always ten thousand 'Arab
horses in his stables.

* Tabart says his age w'as a thousand years, while other writers state that
he reigned for that period of time.

^ Nine copies of the text have "Malik of Hind and of Sind,” and others
have " Hind and fihOr.” In the map, if such may be so called, accompanying
the account of Sijistftn and adjacent jiarts, in the " Mas.Ii.ik-wa-Ma.m.\i.ik,
the river of Hind and Sind adjoins Qbiir on the north-east.

* Sic in all copies of the text.

306

THE XABA¥AT-I.KA$IRL

namely*:—BustSm, son of MlhsllSd [Mial^hSd, Mamg^Sdi
fih a.m 5d. Shad, Shihad, and gh'hSdan], son of Nartm&n
[also called Nadlman], son of Afridun [or Fartdun], son of
^ahind [Samind and SSLmid], son of Sifand-asp [or Isfand-
asp], son of ^uhak, son of Suhrab', son of Shaid-asp. son
pf StS-mak, son of Marnlas [Marsas and Mamas], son of
^ub^lk the Malik.

When Zuliiak was made captive, Afrtdun despatched
an army to take possession of Hindustan; and Bustam,
who did not possess the power to oppose the forces of
Afrtdun, retired towards the mountain tracts of Shaknan*
[ fih a gh' nan] and Bamtan, and therein took up his residence.
On a second occasion the forces of Afridun were directed
to proceed in search of him ; and Bustam had several times,
for the purpose of hunting and in his rambles, come from
the 'mountains of Shaknan and Tulcharistan* into the
mountain tracts of Ghur. That district was called Hazar-
Chashmah [the thousand springs] on account of the num¬
ber of rivulets in it; and Bustam, at this time, retiring
before the army of Afridun, came into Ghur, and at the
foot of the mountain of Z5r-i-Margli^ [the place where
Margh grows] he fixed his residence*.

* Other writeis say that BustSm was one of the descendants, not soas of
2 u^ak, and that his progeny increased in Qhur up to the time of Shansab,
who was contemporary with the Shaltfah, ’Alt. Shansab was the son of
Kha mak. and from him descended Bustam, as well as Pulad. See page 311.

1 Jah 3 n-Aia has Shahrin.

* The letters If and gh are interchangeable. A few copies have for

* Not Hwen Thsang's “Tokhiristin,” extending “ten days’ journey by
thirty,” but a much smaller Jukharist^n is meant here.

* Zir signifies a place of growth, and “ margh” is the name of a species of
verdure called also faret, which any brovrsing animals feed on with great
avidity. It is odoriferous, the reed tcoenanthemum.

* Other authorities state that when Fartdun overcame ZnhSlc, a number of
his dtsctndanb fled, and took shelter in the mountains of Ghur ; and that
Bus^bn, who was one of his progeny, and who held Hindustin, being unable
to cope with the forces of Fartdiin, he [Bust 2 m] cUto took shelter in Ghflr.
The place he took up his residence at was, from the number of its springs and
rivulets, called llaztr-Chashmah, and was an exceedingly pleasant and strong
spot, and therefore he chose it, saying to himself "baro; ma-andeth!" —“ Go
to; don’t be concerned 1” and that spot was subsequently called Mandesh.
Bustam prospered there, and his descendants multiplied, and they were rulers,
one generation after the other. Other writers say ^ first fled for shelter “to
the mountain tracts of Bami&n, which lie between Balkb and Kabul, and from
thence entered the difficult country of Ghur, in which he founded several stropg
fortresses. He had wandered about in several parts previously before readiinqg

THE fiHANSABANlAH DYNASTY OF GHOR.

307

At this point in the account of Bustam, the masters of
history have two traditions, 6ne of which is that just related.
The other tradition is from the Muntakhab-i-Tartkh-i-
NSfirt, which one of the great men of Ghazntn composed in
the time of the Sultan i- Gh azt. Mu’izz-ud-Dtn, Muhammad,
son of Sam—^the Almighty illumine his tomb!—which is
as follows:—

" When AfridQn overcame 2[uhak, and took the do¬
minion from him, two brothers, his sons, reached Nihawand.
The elder brother bore the name of Suz*, and the younger
was called Sam. The elder brother, Suz, became Amir
[chief or ruler], and the younger, who was named Sam,
became the Sipah-sSlSr [leader or commander of his forces] ^

**Amtr SGz had a daughter, and the Sipah-salar, Sam, a
son; and these two cousins had, in early childhood, been
betrothed to each other, and they had fixed their hearts
upon each other. The Sipah-salar, Sam, died; and his
son had become valiant and a great warrior, so much
so, that in that day he had no equal in manliness and
valour. After the decease of his father, certain envious and
malicious persons arose, who slandered him to his uncle,
Amir SGz, in consequence of which his uncle became
irritated against him, and he determined to bestow his
daughter upon the son of some one of the Maliks of the
parts round about.

When his daughter became aware of this, she made her
cousin acquainted with it, so that, one night, he came and
unfastened the gate of the fortress, and, having loosed and
broi^ht out ten chosen horses* from the stables of Amir

GhBr ; and, u soon as Fartdiin beoune aware of his whereabouts, he despatched
large forces against him; but, after protracted hostilities, the forces of Fartdun
were glad to accept terms, on account of the difficult nature of the country, and
the strength of Bus^Sm’s castles. Tribute and taxes were imposed upon him
[Bustlm], and he had to content himself with Gh Or. and not to molest other
parts of the country. His descendants increased and multiplied up to the
time of Slisosab, who is said to have been converted by ’Ali. The Jimi’-ut-
Ta^s^rtJth states that the Gh Prfs are styled Ban! R^ib, otheiwise famous
under the luune of Uz-ZnlAk*

* Some copies have Sur, hut the oldest have as above. One has Saw 3 r I

T Such being the case, wherefore any cause of dispute afterwards, and
appeal to the Kh altfah. as to who should be ruler and who commander of the
troops? See page 313.

* Two copies of the text, which are reliable, have ** ten clio'sen horses of his
father, from the stables of Amir SQz.”

3o8

-THE TABA^T.I.NA$IRI.

SQz, he set the damsel and her servants upon them and
made off, taking away as much coin as he was able to
remove. With all diligence possible he made for the foot
of the mountains-of Ghur. and there he took up his quar¬
ters. The girl and her cousin said [to each other], ‘ Za-o
[*, e, Az-o] ma-andesh’—be not afraid of him—and the
name of that place became Mandesh*; and there their
affairs assumed stability'.”

According to the first tradition, however, when Amir
Bust3.m, with his followers, took up his residence in that
locality, information was conveyed to Afridun. He was
desirous of sending forces, for the third time, for the pur¬
pose of destroying and exterminating Bustam and his
followers, or to take him [alive] if possible. The sons of
Afridun, Tujz and Salm, by means of treachery, killed
their brother, I-raj, who was on the throne of Iran*; and,

• “ Lamandealx ” in most copies of the-text, but Impos-sible from-what he
has just stated. Some copies are very different here, in style as well as words,
and have, “ Thty said that the name of that place was Du-mandeab, and at this
time, on account of that great personage’s coming thither, the name became
Bulandeah-” The I. O. L. MS,, and R. A. S. MS., Ixjth agree that the
name was “ Roz-mandesh, and the name became Bulandeah,” but omit the
first clause of the last sentence. Mandeah is mentioned by some old writers
as the name of a stronghold in Khurasan. Deah must not be confounded -with
the Sanskrit word Dei —a country, &c. See note *, page 306.

• I. e. There they settled down permanently.

• In his account of Faridunin Section V., our author says I-raj, the youngest
son, held the countries of ’IraV-i-’Arab, and ’IiHV-i-’Ajam, and Hind and
Sind. Salm signifies peace^ Tujg [also Tuj], Mtinesi, daring, and 1 -raj,
wisdom with tact. The Kaufat-uI-Tahirtn states that he held Khuramn, and
only a portion of Hind and Sind.

The Raufat-ua-$afa and some others say that a sept of the descendants of
Zuhfik, not the sons of Zubak, finaliy took up their residence in the mountain
tracts of Ghur, and that they were hard pressed for some time by the forces of
Fartdun, and became as desirous of accommodation as Fartdun’s general was
of granting it; and the Zubakts agreed to pay taxes and tribute, and not to
encroach on other territory. See note *, page 306-7.

In the account of the ancient kings of Asia, contained in the Raufat-ut-
Tahirtn, taken from the work compiled from ancient records in the Pahlawt
language in 259 H., and which work, subsequently, was partly put into verse
by the poet, DaVtbli in IsmS’tl SSmant's reign, and afterwards resumed by
An^art, and completed by Firdausi, in Mabmud of Ghazntn’s time, but of
course greatly embellished by the poets ; and also in X^barl, and JSmi’-ut-
Tawartkh, there are detailed accounts of the reign of Fartdun; but although
the death of I-raj is given therein, and agrees with what our author says [he
doubtless took his short notice from X^bart], of course, nothing whatever is
mentioned about Bustam. Karsli-lUtp, ancestor of Rustam, held KSbal,

THE SBANSABAnIAH DYNASTY OF Q£[ 0 R. 309

on that account, AfrldOn was greatly afflicted in

heart, and distressed in mind, and he did not obtain* his
revenge upon Bustam. The latter, having found time and
opportunity, turned his attention to peopling and render-
' ing habitable the mountain districts of Ghur. and parts
adjacent.

He despatched trustworthy agents to the presence of
Afrtdun, and sought for peace. Afrtdun complied
with the request of Bus^am, and, as he had now obtained
security and safety, the followers, dependents, and parti¬
sans, and the ’Arab tribes akin or related to ^uh^k, from
all parts around, turned their faces towards the mountain
district of Shur, and took up their residence in that country,
and the number of those tribes became very great.

As Almighty God had willed that from that race pious
kings and potent sovereigns should arise. He prospered and
blessed those tribes so that they attained unto the faith
and covenant of Islam ; and from the mine of the seed of

Zftbul, and SijistSn for FarldOn, and any petty chief would naturally have been
tribnUry to ihe former. The nephew of Kargh-asp, NartmSn, had a son
named S 2 m, who was father of Zft], father of Rustam. .Sam is said to have
held Zibul, and KSbnl, as fiur as Hind, in feudal sovereignty from the rulers of
iiSn. What 1 wish here to draw attention to, however, is the following:
“ 2 al, having succeeded to his father’s fief, went to Kilbul [ZSbul?] from
Zaranj [founded by Kargh-Ssp], and MihrXr ShAh, of the race of ZuhAk, the
TSzl, the tributary ruler, came forth to receive him, and acknowledged his
supremacy. Mihrilb phAh gave his daughter to ZSl, and she was Rustam’s
mother.” Subsequently, this same Mihrab Shah is said to have led the right
wing of the army of Kai-EubAd, the first of tne KaiAnian dynasty, in the expe¬
dition against AftSsly&b, the Turk. The Jami’-ut-Tawartkh also states that,
when AfiAsiyAb crossed the Jthun into Khurasan, he detached a force to
intercept-SAm, or keep him in check ; and, when the force reached the Htr-
mand, Mihiftb 3hAh, who held the city and fortress of ZAbul, as deputy of
Zal, sent a message, as a ruse only, to its commander, saying, " I am neither
ZAbull nor liftnt, but of the race of ZubAk ; and am loyally inclined to AfrA-
sijdlb..” These accounts are, at least, equally as trustworthy as the legends of
Greeks about themselves, and perhaps more so. I hope very shortly to give
them in detail. I am one of those [weak-minded persons jrerhaps] who con¬
sider the historians of a country best qualified to write its history—its early
history at least—and prefer the accounts of ancient Persia, given by the old
IrAnt and ’Arab writers after the time of its conquest, to those of Greeks who
do not even know the names correctly, just as I should esteem the history of
England, from the pen of a Hume or a Lingard, superior to one written by a
native of India who had sojourned three months in London, or by a Chiiuunan
who hod never visited it.

* One copy has, “and he did not give his mind to taking revenge on
BuStAm.”

310

THE TABA^T.I-NA$IR!.

them the grems of sovereig'nty were arranged upon the
thread of dominion. Some thousands of mosques were
founded in place of ancient idol-temples ; and the laws and
canons of Islam were promulgated to the very extremity
of the region of Hindustan which adjoins that of Chi n—
the mercy of the Almighty be upon them 1 These SultSLns
likewise acquired slaves, every one of whom spread the
carpet of justice upon the surface of the world, and raised
palaces of beneficence and munificence ; and, up to this
present time, the heir of that sovereignty and successor to
the functions of that empire, is the pearl of the oyster-
shell of ascendency, out of the ocean of dominion, the Great
Sultan, Na^tr-ud-DunyS wa ud-Dln, Abt-l-Muj^affar, Mal;i-
mOd, son of the Sullen, ^pisim-i-Amtr-ul-Mumintn*—the
Almighty perpetuate his sovereignty and dominion, and
may he long reign !

The Sultans of the Shansabl dynasty have been divided
into four groups:—I., that class, the mention of which will
now be recorded, of which Sultans Firiiz-koh was the seat
of government; II., the dynasty of the SultSns of Bimtan,
who were a branch from this great tree of sovereignty ;
III., the dynasty of the Sultans of Gha znin. which was the
capital of Sultan Mu’izz-ud-Dtn, Muhammad-i- Gha zi. son
of Sam, and his own particular slaves, every one of whom,
after him, ascended the throne ; and IV., the dynasty of
the Sultans of Hindustan, the heritage of which dominion,
and the sovereignty of which monarchy passed to them,
and after whom the race of Shams! * became established
upon the throne of royalty. May the Almighty purify the
tombs of those who have passed away, and prolong the
sovereignty of those remaining to the judgment day !

As much as was discoverable respecting this race in
chronicles has been recorded [here], although, in the com-

* Some of the best copies of the text hxve^ “ son of the Sulpm of SultSns,”
and omit the yhstm altogether. ^ the gJiansaUnt SultSns had any right to
assume such a title [explained farther on], neither the slave, nor the slave’s son,
this “pearl of the oyster-shell of ascendency,” the poor puppet to whom our
author dedicated his work, had the most remote right to nMnimx it.

* Only a single copy has this passage correct. The slaves here referred to
were not relatives nor kinsmen of each other. Sbams-ud-Dtn, I-yal-timi|b,
however, married a daughter of l^utb-ud-Dtn, I-bak, his owner, who ruled in
HindOstSn ; and the dynasty of the former, from his name, Sllhms-ud.Dtn, is
styled the Slinnul or Slvunstah dynasty.

THE SHANSABANIAH DYNASTY OF QHORi* 311

pilfttion of. it, there was not nn uninterrupted succession to
be set forth*.

I. AMlR POlAD [OR FpLAD], i 2 H 0 rI, SHANSABL

Amir Pulad, $^urt, was one of the sons of Malik Shan-
sab^ son of ly^amak; and he brought* under his jurisdic¬
tion the districts of the mountain tracts of Qbur. He
rendered the names of his fathers immortal; and, when the
advocate* [of the cause] of the house of ’Abbas, Abu-Mus-
lim-i-Marwazi*, arose, and considered it expedient to oust
and to expel the Amir of the family of 'Ummiah from the
territory of Shurasan, Amir Pulad led the forces of Ghur
to the aid of Abu-Muslim-i-Marwazi*, and greatly distin¬
guished himself in supporting and assisting the house of
’Abbas and the family of the Prophet.

For a long period the dominion over Mandesli*, and the
authority over the mountain tracts of ^ur was exercised
by him. He died ; and his dominions remained in the
possession of the sons of his brother*, and, subsequently,
their affairs [and proceedings] were not to be discovered,
up to the time of Amtr Banjt, the son of Naharan.

II. AMiR BANJI, SON OF NAHARAN, SHA MS A Bf

Amir Banjt, son of Naharan, was a great lord, and, in
^bur, his memory is undying; and he is accounted among
the greatest and most famous of the Maliks of that country.

* At this place, in some copies, a totally distinct idiom is used to express the
same sense.

^ See note *, page 306.

* Some copies have “came” under his jurisdiction, and others “were”
under, &c.

* It is something new, certainly, to find that “ $ihib-i>Da’wat ” means
“oyhswnAr."

* That is, a native of Marw.

* In the accounts of AbG-Muslim, the quondam “ founder " of this house of
’AbbSs, and in the accounts of those transactions in the history of the Kh alt-
fahs^ there is no mention, of course, of the great support they received from
POUd the Gkiirf. Some writers say that the fief of Gh ar was conferred upon
Amtr PfUSd and his descendants on account of the services rendered by him,
and that he added to it by annexing other tracts of country.

* All the copies of the text here, with few exceptions, write this name
differently as well as Incorrectly. There is no doubt that Mai^deib is the
correct luune. See note *, page 306, and note *, page 308.

* Which brother is, of course, nameless.

THE TABA]^AT-I-NA$IRI.

31a

The whole of the Sul^lns were descended from his sons*;
and his genealogy has been thus made out:—Banjt, son of
Naharan, son of War-mesh*, son of War-meshan [War-
masan, Dar-manshan. War-mashan. and War-heshan]. son
of Parwez, son of Parwez*, son of Sl^ansab, son of TCha malf *.
son of Bain or Bayyin, son of Munshi*. son of Waj^an
[Wazn, Wazan, and Warat, or Darrat, or Dirat?], son of
Hain [Hin, or Hunain ?], son of Bahram, son of Haiash. or
Kbajasli, [Ja^is, or TaJish ?], son of Ibrahim, son of Mu’ddil
[Ma'add, or Ma'id], son of Asad [NiLsad ?], son of Shadad.
son of Zuhak.

Amir Banji was excessively handsome, and of excellent
disposition, and endowed with all good qualities and natural
gifts. When the dominion of the house of ’Abb^ acquired
stability \ and the empire of Islam came under the sway of
the Kha llfahs of that family, he presented himself at the
Court of the 'Abbast Kha lifahs ; and the first person of the
Ghurlan race who proceeded to the Khalifah’s Court*, and
brought [back] a covenant and a standard, was Amtr Banji,
son of Naharan.

The cause of his proceeding to the presence of the Lord
of the Faithful, Harun-ar-Rashid, was this :—In the terri¬
tory of Ghur there was a tribe who are called Shisanian *.

* And from him, too, we may suppose.

* Jahftn Aril has NahSwUn [and NahSdSn], son of Wtr-megh [and War-
mesli], son of War-manshgn ; and Muntaldlab-ut-TawSrtlcll has NahSwSn,
son of War-mesb, son of War-ma slia n. Firisbtah [Muhammad ^asim, not
'* Briggs,” who turns Shsnsabl in^o Shisty /], to judge from three or four
copies of the text, has made a terrible hash of these qames; and, of course,
Dow scarcely ventures to meddle with them, but those he does interfere with
he succeeds, as with others in every place in his volumes, in making so ridi¬
culous that their own mothers could not distinguish them. But what can be
expected of a translator who does not appear to have known what
[mu’arrikl^n, signifying “annalists, historians”] meant, which he, in his
innocence, styles “Mon Cha.n', tht historian ” [vol. L p. 131],‘and yet his work
is the great cabbage-garden for modem historians of India for the million !

7 One copy alone of the text has “ Parwez, son of Parwez,” but it is one of
the best copies I have.

* Respecting this name there is not the least doubt : “ ^^mak ” is not correct.

* Another name for UtSrid [Mercury] is Munsht.

’ Harun-ar-Rashid, to whose court Amtr Banji went, was the fifth ’Abb 3 sl
Shallfah.

* See page 302, where Shansab is said to have been converted by the Shalt-
fah, ’All, and to have brought back with him a covenant and a standard.

* That is to say, the name of the tribe was Shis, and, when speaking of its
people, ShtgSii or Sbtfknl&n.

THE SHANSABANIAH DYNASTY OF CHOR.

313

and they assert that, in the first place, their ancestor em¬
braced the true faith, and then the ^ansabaniSn did ; and
Muhammad, in the dialect of Ghur, they call Hamad
[Ahmad ?], and, after they had embraced Islam, they
became styled Hamadi [Ahmadi ?], that is to say, Mu-
hammad}\ In the time of Amir Banji, the Mihtar [chief]
of the tribe of Shlsanian was an Amir named Shts.
son of Bahrilm ; and, in the language of the Gh uris^ Shis
they call Shis*, and this tribe they call Shisanian. after
the name of this Amir. Now between Amir Shis and
Amir Banji, son of Naharan, dissension arose about the
lordship of Gh ur; and [in consequence] disturbance ensued
among the people of that territory. The whole agreed
together, on either side, that both the Amirs, Banji and
Shis, should proceed to the presence of the Kh alifah. and
whichever should bring back from the Court of the Kh ilafat
a covenant and a standard should be accounted Amir.
Both disputants made their arrangements with the deter¬
mination of undertaking their journey, and setting out
towards the Dar-ul- Kh ilafat. The throne of the Hhilafat,
at this time, was adorned by the radiance of the Lord of
the Faithful, Harun-ar-Rashid.

The chronicler relates that, in that country [Qhur] there
was a merchant, a YahOdi [Jew], [a follower] of the religion

* By nearly every other writer of authority they are said not to have em¬
braced IsUim up to the time of Sam, son of l^Jbisan, who was

made ruler of Gh ur by Mas’ud-i-Kartm, Sul{an of Gh azntn. See page 321
and note

I have several times mentioned that the various copies of the text collated
may be divided into two sets, which, in many places, differ considerably
in idiom. At this place, the oldest and best copies have
Shemadt and A^inadt ]. and also at page 369, whilst the more

modem copies have ^amad, an(} with the exception of the I. O. L.

MS. No. 1952, which, at page 3^, has Shamad! also. The points of letters are
often omitted in writing, and ^ might be written for f, but that ^ should be
written for although possilne, is not so probable. Still I do not consider
myself quite justified in adopting the reading of the older copies, although the
Ghnrfan trit^ may have given ^ the harsher sound of jfc. I certainly have
never met with a similar instance of the kind. We may suppose, with some
certainty, that the Gh ilrfans merely adopted the other name of Mu h a mm ad,
derived from the same root, namely Atmriad, by which the prophet is men¬
tioned in the Qur’an [a matter which has been much discussed], and hence they
used A^madt in preference to Mubammadt. See page 369.

* That is to say, the Ghflrts did not correctly pronounce the t£i g, lisped /
of the ’Arabs, but pronounced it as common j.

X

314

THE TABA^T-I.NA$IRI.

of Mihtar Musa [Moses], on whom be peace! This mer¬
chant entertained a friendship for Amir Banjl. He had
travelled a great deal, and had acquired great experience
in the ways of the world, and had frequented the capitals
of the rulers of the countries around, and had become
acquainted with the usages and forms of etiquette of the
Courts of Sultans and Princes ; and he set out in com¬
pany with Amir Banji.

He was acquainted with the objects and intentions of
Amir Banji, and he said to him :—“ If I should instruct
thee in etiquette, and make thee acquainted with the usages
of decorum and politeness, and g^ve thee proper knowledge
of the forms and ceremonies observed at the Court of the
l^lafat, and in the presence of sovereigns, so that on that
account the authority and government of the territory of
^^ur shall be conferred upon thee, do thou enter into a
covenant with me, that, in every tract that I may desire,
throughout the whole of thy territory, thou shalt assign a
locality to, and cause to settle therein, a number of the
Bant-Isra’tl [children of Israel], followers of the faith of
Mihtar MQsa, in order that under the shadow of thy pro¬
tection, and beneath the guardianship of thy Maliks and
thy offspring, they may dwell in peace and tranquillity*.”
Amir Banji, son of N^aran, entered into a covenant with
that merchant of the Bant-Isra’tl, and said :—When thou
teachest me the usages of politeness, and insttvctest me in
the rules of conduct and demeanour necessary to be ob¬
served before princes, and in paying homage at the Court
of the Kh ilafat. I will fulfil the whole of thy requests, and
fully satisfy thy desires.”

This covenant having been duly settled on both sides,
the merchant of the Bani-Isra’tl commenced to instruct
Amir Banji in the polite usages necessary to be observed
before princes, and at the Courts of sovereigns, and the
requisite forms of respect and reverence needed at the

* I would here call the reader’s particular attention to the universal tradition
of the AfgJiSns, recorded in all histories of them, respecting their claim to
Israelitish descent. But they consider it an insult to be called Yahudts or
Jews, and declare that they are Bant-Isra’fl. Many European writers declare
most energetically that such a descent is impossible. Perhaps if it had been
recorded in Greek or merely mentioned by one of that nation, they would
have been equally energetic in the other way.

3*5

THE SSANSABAnIAH DYNASTY OF GHOr.

SbAltiah’s Court. The merchant likewise began to put in
order and make ready a dress for him, consisting of a tunic,
a cap, boots, and breeches, and to perfect him in riding and
in the mode of wearing his arms, in such wise, that his
rival. Shift sonofBahram, knew nothing whatever of all this
[preparation] until they arrived at the Khal tfah’s capitaL
Shis, son of BahrSLm, proceeded thither just as he was,
in the short Qhurtan garments which he was accustomed
to wear at home, whilst Amir Banji, son of Naharan,
entered the Khalifah*s capital in a dress befitting an Amir,
and becoming a great personage.

After they had been permitted to make their obeisances
before the Kha lifah's Court, when a convenient opportunity
arose, each of the disputants represented what were his
objects and wishes, in a respectful manner, and with many
expressions of his devotion and loyalty, and stated to the
Wazir and the Ustad-ur-R^-ban' the matter of the dis¬
pute between them, and made fully known what were
their desires and requirements. The Lord of the Faithful,
Harun-ar-Rashid, after he had been pleased to peruse
their statements, and his august consideration and atten¬
tion had been drawn to their case, was pleased to regard
Amir Banji, son of Naharan, with favour.

As Amir Banji was blessed with great good fortune,
combined with a most felicitous destiny, and his good
nature was adorned with gracefulness of manners, the Lord
of the Faithful was pleased to remark :—" Ha^a ^aslm,”
that is to say, " This Banji is good looking, has a noble
bearing, and appears endowed with the necessary qualifi¬
cations of government and sovereignty, combined with
good looks and artlessness of nature. Let the whole of
the territory of GJjur be made over to him, and let the
championship of the forces of the country of Ghur be
entrusted to Shis, son of Bahram.” Both of them were
invested with a robe of honour of the Dar-ul- Kh ilafat. and
these titles were bestowed upon them, and they took their
departure, and returned to Gh ur again, according to the
command of the lyjalifah’s Court*.

* The Ustad-i-Raz-l»n was an officer who represented to sovereigns the
statements of .persons who desired that their cases should 1>e investigated by
the monarch himself.

• Another author, who says nothing whatever about any Jew merchant,

X 2

3i6 the TABA]^T-I.NA$IRL

From that time forward, the title of the §|iansabint£n
Sultans, according to the august words of the Lord of the
Faithful, Harun-ar-Rashid*. became Kasim-i-Amtr-ul-Mu-
minin—the Lord of the Faithful’s handsome [one].

When these two personages returned to Ghur again, the
government of the territory [was assumed] by the Shansab-
ants, and the championship of the forces by the Shtsanis.
and that arrangement continued up to the present age
according to this settlement. The Sultans were all glian-
sabanis, and the Champions, such as Mu-ayyid-ud-Din,
Fath-i-Karmajkh', Abu-l-’Abbas-i-Shts. and Sultman-i-
Shis. were all Shtganis—the mercy of the Almighty be
upon the whole of them !

III. SCrI, son of MUHAMMAD.

From the time of the government of Amir Banjt up to
the present period* [of Suri's rule], nothing was found in

relates that Amir Banjt, having added considerably to his previous territory
by seizing other tracts, became one of the most powerful of the Maliks around.
He was famed for his noble qualities and disposition ; and, during the Khili-
fat of Harun-ar-Raaild, he proceeded to the Dar-ubKhilafat. He was treated
with great favour on account of the successes which had been gained, by his
efforts, in the arrangement of the important affiurs of the house of ’Abbas; and,
on beholdittg him, the Khal tfah uttered these words : " Hail-l^sim,” which
is to say "good looking;” and, consequently, he obtained the title of ^|^tm-i-
Amlr-ul-Muminln. He returned to Gh ur again, with a robe of honour and a
patent of investiture. The dominion over those parts continued in the posses*
sion of himself and his descendants until the time of Surf, the son of Muham¬
mad, who was on* of Banji's dtscendanis, and lived in the time of Mahmud of
Ghaailn.

* No other Kha llfah confirmed it, I fancy, if HarUn besto^p|d it. By our
author’s own account, they did not even assume the title of Sultan up to Saif*
ud'Dln, Surf’s time. He was seventh after this SQrf.

1 Some copies have M and one has ^ but KamUikh is correct.

* Jahin-Arii and Mantakhab-ut-Tawarlkll differ from our author ^cait>.
siderably here [he certainly acknowledges his want of materials] :—Surt, son of
Mqha T"™**^ , was the grandson [farzand*zSdali] of Amir Banji, and he flourished,
noi in the time of Mahmad of {^aznln, but in the time of the ^nfOilSn.
sort’s son, Muhammad, was a contemporary of MahmOd’s. The Raufat*ny-

Fasih'l, and others also, state that Muhamtnad, son of SOrt, was a con*
temporary of MahmGd; but that, when Sultin Mahmud got rid of Mu¬
hammad, son of sort, ruler of Qhur, his grandson, Q^uan by name, throqg^'
fear of the Sult&n, retired into HindusUUi, With bis family, and took up Us
reffdence in that country. What reason there could have been for tUs, when
the father could stay, is not given. Some others, again, say that sometimes
Mnhammad, son of Siirf, wonid be obedient to Snltin MahmGd, and, at
others, in open revolt, as circnftkstances permitted, until, after some years.

THE SBANSABANIAH DYNASTY OF GHOR.

3>7

chronicles respecting the state of the country of Gh ur that
could be particularly enlarged upon; and, as the compilation
of this X'A-BAICAt was completed at the sublime capital,
Dihli—may its pre-eminence never decline !—and the king¬
doms of IslSm were thrown into convulsion through the
irruption of the Mughal infidels—the Almighty confuse
them !—and the country had become isolated, and the
extreme parts disturbed and unsettled, it was impossible to
copy from the history which the author had examined in
the territory of Gh ur*. As a matter of necessity that
which has been obtained from the Tarikli-i-Na§iri, and the
Tarikh of Ibn-Hai^am-i-Sani, together with some tradi¬
tions from the priesthood of Gh ur. have been [therefore]
recorded; and the author hopes that he may be forgiven
by those who look into the work [for any errors or short¬
coming that may be found in it].

They thus state, that Amir Suri was a great Malik, and
that most part of the territory of Gh ur was under his juris¬
diction ; and, as in some parts of that country, such as
Zawulistan*, the people, both high and low, noble and
ignoble, were not [yet] exalted to the excellence of Islam,
they were, at that time, at continual feud one with another.
When the Sufifarian came out of the territory of Nimroz,
and advanced to Bust and the district of Dawar, and
Ya’lfub, son of Lai§, attacked Lakan the Lak*, Amir of

partly by stratagem and partly by peaceful means, the Suljan succeeded in
securing Mu^mmad, son of Sud, whom he took along with him towards
Gh azntn. but that he died by the way, at Ktdan. The TSrikh-i*Ibrfthtmt
gives a more trusiMbrthy account, and which, if dates are examined, certainly
seemh correct. For further particulars see note page 321.

* The history in verse composed by Falchr-ud-Din, MubSrak Sh&hi
mentipned at page 300.

* Great discrepancy exists in most of the copies of the text with respect to
this name. Some have WSlishtSn, Wgeshan. and Walahtan ; but two good
copies have ZSwulistfin very plainly written, and that may be considered the
correct reading.

* Ya’Vflb-i'Laig reduced Bust, Zainfn-i-Dawar, Qhaznfn, TukharisUn, and
other tracts in 256 H., and, in the previous year, fought on action with TuV,
son of Mulrios, in Kirni&n; but who Lakan the Lak [some copies have Lak-
Lak] was it is difficult to ray. There is no mention of this matter in any
author with whom I am acquainted ; but Lak is the name of a sept of nomad
Kurds, of which people there seems to have been a considerable number ii\
those parts at that time. Tliere are some tribes dwelling among the Afghans
to this day, erroneously supposed by Englishmen to be Afghans, who claim to
be Kurd^

3*8

THE taba]b:At>i-nA$irI.

Aytkln-Sbad*, which is the district of Rulcha^. the tribes
of the Ghuris fortified themselves on the summits of the
rocks, and remained in safety; but they used to be at
constant enmity with each other—the followers of Islam
and the unbelievers^—so that they were in the habit of
keeping up a war from kushk to kushk*. and lived in a
constant state of contention and strife.

Through the natural impregnability of the strong moun¬
tains which are in Ghur*. others [foreigners] used not to
subject them to their power; and the head of the whole
of the Shansabants of Mandesh was Amtr Suri

There are five great and lofty mountains* in Gh ur. re¬
specting which the people of Ghur are agreed that they
are the strongest mountains in the world. One of these
is Zar-i-Margh of Mandesh. at the foot of which mountain
is the kushk and capital of the Shansabants. and they
[the people of Gh ur] contend that the Simurgh nourished
Zal-i-Zar [Zal, the ruddy-faced], who was the father of
Rustam, in that mountain. Some of the dwellers at the
skirt thereof maintain, that it was in one of the years be¬
tween 500 H. and 600 H., when the sound of lamentation
and regret issued from that mountain, “ Zal-i-Zar hath
passed away.” The second mountain [range] has the name
of Surkh- Gh ar*. and that also is In the Mandesh district,

* Some copies have latktn-abad, but the above is the correct reading ; but
Rnkhaj——which is said to have been a district of the territory of Bust,
might ^ read Zaranj——and I am almost inclined to consider the last
reading correct. All the copies of the text are more or less imperfect here.
One copy also says plainly that “ the tribes of Qbuiis sought shelter on the
borders of Sind,” and this seems the preferable reading, but the majority of
copies are as above.

* That is, those not yet converted to the Muhammadan faith, and, probably,
some of the Bant-Isra’tl before referred to, and such tribes as have since retired
northwards towards Hindu-Kusll, or have now nearly disappeared.

■ A Icudllc here means a fortified village, and also a castle, &c. See note *,
page 331.

* There would be considerable difficulty in finding “ the mountains of
Rfisiit, which are in Ghor,” for a very good reason—that they do not exist.
The word “rastfit ” is not a proper name, but the plural of “ rastah,” which
means ** strong mountains.” See Elliot’s India, vol. ii, p. 284.

> From this statement it is plain, as in Baihohi’s account farther on, that
Ghur was under several petty chiefs. Surf was chief of Mandesh only.

^ The word koh, here used, may signify a mountain range, or a single
mountain.

* It is impossible to fix the names of two of these five ranges with any
degree of certainly, for there oie scaicely two copies alike out of the twelve

THE S£LAN 3 ABAnIaH DYNASTY OF GHOR.

3*9

in the limits of Tajtr-Koh*. The third mountain is Ashuk.
in the district of Timran, the size and altitude of which
is greater than that of any other part of the territory
of Ghur; and the district of Timr^ is [situated] in its
hollows and [on] its sides. The fourth is the mountain
range of Warant, in the valleys and on the skirts of which
are the territories of Dawar and Walisht*, and tlie l!:a9r*
of Kajuran. The fifth is the mountain of Ro’en, in the
central part of Ghur. of immense strength and altitude;
and they have stated^ that the fifth mountain [range] is
the Faj [defile, pass] of Kj^esar*, the length, extent, and
loftiness of which is beyond the bounds of conjecture,
conception, and understanding. In the year 590 H., one
half * of the trunk of an ebony tree was found at the sum>
mit of it, more than one thousand mans^ in weight; and no
one was able to conceive how, or in what manner, it could
have been brought, or have fallen there.

collated. One, the very old copy I have often referred to, has —
Siirlfli.Ghnr. as above, which means th^ red mountain, and the next oldest
copy between which two words there is but a very slight dilference.
The remaining copies have —y—y-—

like.

* As many other copies have —ji —— cj'V

* It is impossible to fix some of these names satisfactorily. Some copies of

the text have j Dawar and Waliaht, while others again leave

out the and altogether. The very old copy I luive often referred to has
os written above ; but another very old copy, one of the St. Petersburg MSS.,
has j jV* “Ghur and Waliaht.” This is somewhat remarkable, as

Baiha^f mentions a is-tii, Gur-i-Waliaht, as lying in the route between
Ghaznfn and the fortress of Mandeah, in which stronghold Mas’ud of Ghnzntn
confined his brother Muhammad ; and he also mentions W.alislrin,

in connexion with Bust and Ifusdar. One of the Paris copies here has “ the
district of Zartstan,” and leaves out Dawar. Although so many

copies have Waliaht, I am half inclined to read this part of the sentence thus—
IS_,!,!j j jU, S' “which arc the tenitorics of DSwar and Zawul."

• Easr and Kuahk have both one meaning : the first is ’Arabic and the last
Persian. See note *, page 331.

* From this remark it is evident our author does not describe these mountain
ranges from his o 7 tm knowledge.

• Faj is not a proper name : it means a wide and ojien route or road
between two mountain ranges ; a pass. Caesar is a well-known jdacc, an<l
is mentioned in a number of places throughout the work, .and thercfoie the
“Faj Hanisir" is as much a myth as the “mountains of Keisiat."

» The printed text, the I. O. L. M.S. and the R. A. S. M.S., h.ave “a ka?r
[see meanuig of[fa?r, note », page 331] of the trunk of an ebony tree ”!!

• The man varies from forty to cfghty pounds in different pans. The
former probably is meant here.

THE -JABA^AT-I-NASIRI.

3»

IV. MALIK MU^^MMAD, SON OF SOrL

Abu-l-Hasan-ul-Hai$am, son of Mu^iammad-i-Nabi®, the
historian, relates in this wise :—that, after the sovereignty
of Kh urasan and Zawulistan passed from the Samanis and
Suflaris, and devolved upon Amir Sabuk-Tigin*, he had,
upon several occasions, marched forces from Bust towards
the mountain [tracts] of Gh ur. and had put numbers to the
sword ; and, when the throne fell to Amir Mabmud-i-
Sabuk-Tigin, the sovereignty of Gh ur had passed into the
hands of Amir Muhammad, son of Suri*, and he, having
brought the territories of Gh ur under his sway, sometimes
would pay obedience to the Court of Sultan Mahmud-i-
Gh azi. and at other times would act in a rebellious manner,
and manifest a refractory spirit, and would withhold the
amount of tribute and arms* stipulated ; and, relying on
the- faith of his strong fortresses, his power, and the
ample number [of his people], he used continually to show
hostility.

The heart of Sultan Mahmud, for this reason, was ever

• Every copy of the text, with one exception, says “ Nabt ” here, instead of
SSnt, and therefore, as I previously conjectured, the correct name of the
history so often quoted must be the TartkJl of Ibn Hai^am-i-Nabt, entitled
the Bii9a9-i-Sant.

* See page 74, where our author says that Sabuk-Tigfn took possession of
Gh ur. together with Bust, Zamin-i-Dawar, Bamtan, and all TuUiaristan.
Here we might have expected to have heard something of Alb.Tigtn, Balka-
Tigin, Abu ’All-i-Lawik, and Ptrey. See note *, page 71.

♦ Our author is quite correct here [and Ara and some others agree] with
regard to Muhammad, son of Surt, having been contemporary with Mahmud.
The reason why the great blunder has arisen that it was Surf who lived in
Mahmud’s time, is, that some authors and translators, in their simplicity,
thought the words “ Muhammad-i-Surt ” signified one man, instead of which
they mean Muhammad, son of Surt. Another matter I would also remark
upon:—Sultan Mahmud made raids upon the Afghans in 411 H., and again
in 416 H., but they are never mentioned in connexion with the Q])uris by
BaihaVt and such like trustworthy authors, a pretty good proof, were any
wanting, that, although the Afghans are Patans, the Gh urts are not, and never
were so accounted by any historian, nor by the Afghans nor Ghuris themselves.
It does not follow that, because a Tajik is called Surt, he should be of the
Afghan clan Of Sur, of the tribe of Ludt, so styled from their progenitor
named Sur, but not Surt. It is a curious fact that the Afghans are not men¬
tioned by our author but once, towards the end of the woilc.

* Gh ur appears to have been famous in those days for the manufacture of
warlike weapons.

THE SHANSABANIaH DYNASTY OF QHOR. 331

on the watch, and, on account of his [Muhammad’s, son of
Suri,] numbers, hts power and dignity, and the fact of the
great [natural] streng^ and altitude of the mountains of
Gh ur. the Sultan usqd well to consider in his mind, until,
with a large army; he came into Gh ur. and he [Muham¬
mad, son of Suil,] was invested within the fortress of
Ahangaran*. Muhammad, §on of Suri, held out the for¬
tress for a considerable period, and defended it energeti¬
cally ; but, after some time, the stronghold was gained
possession of by his descending from it, on terms of
accommodation, and presenting himself before Sultan
Mahmud.

The Sultan took him, together with his youngest son,
who was named Shts. away to Gh aznin. because Amir
Muhammad-i-Suri entertained the greatest affection for
his youngest son, Shis. When they reached the precincts
of Kidan, Amir Muhammad-i-Suri died. Some relate
after this manner:—that, when he became a prisoner,
through the proud spirit within him, he was unable to
brook disgrace. He had a signet-ring, beneath the stone
of which some poison had been set; and, at this time, he
availed himself of it, and died^.

• Not mentioned in his account of the strong fortresses of Gh ur. but there
was a place called Dih [village] of Ahangaran [Ahangaran is the plural of
Ahangar, a blacksmith], near Gh azn tn. and the river of Ahang, which flowed
past that city. ’Utba’ also mentions it. See following note.

7 Before giving the accounts of other authors, I will first give an extract
from the Kitab>i*Yamini of ’Utba’, as he was a contemporary of Maj^mud, but
he seldom mentions dates.

He says, Ma^kmud became greatly incensed against the tribes of Ghur, who
were unbelievers, on account of their waylaying caravans and levying black¬
mail, thinking their hills and defiles impregnable. An army, consisting of
horse and foot, was assembled to punish them, and Altun-Taah, the
and Arsalan-i-Jazib [called a Multan], but it appears he had only held the
government of Multan] were appointed to the command. They set out, but
had such hard fighting with the Gh uris that Ma[imud, finding they made little
progress, resolved to proceed in person, attended by a body of his Gh ulams.
He succeeded in defeating them, and, after penetrating narrow p.asses and
defiles, made a road which enabled him to reach Ahangaran, the stronghold of
their Malik, who was called Ibn-i-Suri [i. e. '* Surt’s son ” and thus he agrees
vrith our author, and others I have quoted, to the eflect that the correct name
of this chief is Mu]^ammad, son of Surt, son of Muhammad. See also Jlai-
hahfs account farther on]. Surfs son, with a force of 10,000 men, came out
of his stronghold, and, being intrenched behind walls [breastworks ?], and
availing hiihself of the ravines, hills, and broken ground, succeeded for half a
day in resisting all efforts to dislodge him. MahmOd had recourse to a

3 as THE TABA^T^I-NASIRL

Sultan Maliimud sent his [Mutiammad’s] son, Shts. back

stratagem. He directed his troops to face about, as though about to give up
the contest and retire. This had the desired effect; and Surfs son, the Hind&
[as ’Utba’ calls him], came forth from his strong position to follow in pursuit.
The Sultan faced about, and defeated him. Surfs son was taken, together
with great booty, consisting of arms and other war material. Surt’s son
subsequently poisoned himself by means of his ring, which contained poison.

’Utba’ also makes a difference, as do all writers of any knowledge of their
subject, between Gh urts and Afg^ns, and never confound them.

Other writers contend that Mubammad and his son, ^asan by name, not
Shis, were made captive by Mabmud, and imprisoned. Their place of con¬
finement was the upper story of a tower, thirty ells from the ground, an aperture
of which faced the open country. Mubammad gave himself up for lost, but,
not wishing that his family should be ruined, desired ^asan to make for
phur. He contrived to effect the escape of his son by tearing up the blanket
given him to lie upon, to make it into a rope, by means of which he lowered
l^jlasan to the ground, who escaped to Gh ur. As soon as the Sul$an became
aware of ^asan’s escape, he put Mubammad, the father, to death, ^jhisan
obtained tlie rule over Gh ur. and had a son, ^usain by name, who had seven
sons. This is the ’Izz-ud-Din, ^usain, the IXth chief of our author.

Jahan ArH, MiiTit alfh ah.ut.Tawl.rikh. and some others agree as to Mubam.
mad. Surfs son, having been made captive by Mabmud, but, like our author,
contend that he [Mubammad] was succeeded by his son Abu-’Alt, who had
always been obedient to Mabmud, and that he was appointed to the chieftain,
ship of Qhiir by that Suljan ; and that afterwards Abu-’Alt was ousted by his
nephew, 'Abbas, son of Shts [who had been taken captive vnth his father].
The chieftainship then passed into the hands of Mubammad, son of 'Abbas,
then to Rutb-ud-Din, Hasan, his son, and then to the latter’s son, ^usain, the
'Izz-ud-Din, Husain of our author. He, as well as other writers, does not
make any remark whatever upon Abu-’Alt’s having been deprived of the chief¬
tainship by 'Abbas, son of Sbt§. In this case the line terminated in Abu-’Alt’s
family, and passed to the younger branch, and thus the Gh urtan Sultans are
not descendedfrom him at all, but from Shts.

The Raufat-u^-^afa considers this statement weak, and quotes, as does also
the ^abib-us-Siyar and the Mir’at-i-Jahan-Nuxna, another tradition to the
effect that when Mabuiud marched an army into Gh ur. and took Surt
[Mubammad, son of Surt—Raufat-u^-^ala makes this blunder here, after
having previously called him by his correct mune] captive, and put him to
death, his grandson [if such be correct, what became of the son ?] ^asan, with
his family, through fear of Mabmud, fled into Hind ; and, as they had not yet
beett converted to the Muhammadan faith, they took up their residence in an
idol temple [in a Dharm-sala perhaps]. This ^asan had a son named Sim,
who, after his father’s decease, was converted to Islam. He proceeded to
Dihli, and followed the occupation of a trader [and, according to the Rauf at-
uf-^afl only, used to carry goods from Hindustan to Gh ur. and bring other
commodities back from thence. This seems strange however, since, if he could
have gone back to Qhur in this way, his father surely need not have left it,
unless he liked]. He had a son named Husain, who was endowed with many
excellent qualities. After some years had passed away, and Sam had acquired
considerable wealth, the desire of returning to his native mountains induced
him to set out for Gh ur. Me embarked an one of the seas [the word used also
signifies a large river, which is probably meant here] of Hind, together with his

THE SSANSABAnIaH DYNASTY OF QHOR. 3*3
to ag^in. He had [already] conferred the govem-

&mily and effecta, on board a vessel which met with a contrary wind, which
«ised a violent storm. The vessel and all on board, with the exception of
son of S&nip went to the bottom, j^usainf when the ship was siwicing ^
succeeded In getting upon a plank or log of wood, and, at the very same time,
a lion [Dow calls the lion hii father,” mistaking for or j,<], which was
being conveyed upon the vessel’s deck, also sprang upon it, and for three days
and nights H*>^ain and his strange companion remained in this state upon the
logi at the end of which period they were wafted to the shore. The lion made
for a neighbouring forest, and lE^usain for a town near by. Being a stranger
and not knowing any one, and the time night, he went and lay down upon one
Ihe benches or platforms, which are to be found in front of almost all shops
in India, and fell last asleep. The watch on going their rounds perceiving
him there, and, not knowing who he was, took him for a thie( and dragged
him away to prison, where he remained for about seven years. The governor
of that place having been attacked with a dangerous disorder, by way of atone¬
ment, ordered all the prisoners to be set at liberty. son of Sam, by

thu means obtained his freedom, and set out for Grb aznln. On the road
thither he -fell in with a band of robbers, who, finding him a powerful and
intelligent youth, induced him to join them, and he was provided with a horse
and arms. It so happened, however, not long after, that a band of troops in
the service of Sultan Ibrahim of GJiaznln, which had been for some time on
the look out for the robbers, came upon them unawares, and made the whole
gang captive. They were brought bound into the presence of Sultan Ibrahim,
who directed that they should sufler death. One after the other several under¬
went their sentence, until it came to the turn of Husain, son of Sam. Whije
the executioner was blindfolding him, he exclaimed, ‘‘O God 1 I know that
error is not agreeable to Thee, why then is it that I, although innocent, am
thus to sutler death ?” These words affected the executioner, and the matter
was represented, through one of the Court, to the Sult^, who directed that
Husain should be brought before him. He stated his pitiful case to Ibrahim,
who, on hearing it, took compassion on him, pardoned him, and enrolled him,
in a subordinate office at first, among his chamberlains. When Sultan Mas’ud,
sumamed the Beneficent, succeeded 'his father, Ibr^lm, he conferred upon
Husain, son of Sam, son of Mubammad, [g^and(?)]son of Surl, the government
of the district of Gh iir. and the title of ’Izz-ud-Uln. Some say Ibrahim gave
Husain a kinswoman of his own in marriage [our author states, at page 105,
that one of his own ancestors married a daughter of Sultan Ibrahim]. After
Husain’s death, enmity arose between his descendants and Bahram Shah.
Mas’ud’s son, as mentioned by our author farther on, and as will be hereafter
noticed. Many authors very properly consider ’Ala-ud-Dln to be the first of
the dynasty, and the dynasty to consist of five persons only, whose dominion
lasted sixty-four years, the others being merely accounted petty chieftains.

There can be no doubt whatever that the Gh iiris were merely petty
mountain-chiefs up to the time of Sultan Mahmud of Qhnznln, and the extent
of country they dwelt in proves it; but, as the Gh aznawid dynasty declined,
the Gh iirts waxed stronger and more independent after the decease of Mas’ud-
i-Karlm [the Beneficent]^ who gave the government of his native t^untry to
Husain, son of S2m, when the Gh aznawid empire began rapidly to decay.
Our author’s desire at all times appears to be to glorify the Gh urt.s. and, there¬
fore, the fitet of their having been merely petty tributary chiefs did not chime
in with his wishes. We find Mahmud and his son Mas’ud continually passing

3*4

THE tabajs:At.i-nA$irI.

ment of Gh ur upon Mu^ammad-i-Surt’s eldest son, Amtr
Abu-’All, as will, subsequently, be recorded.

from Gh azntn to BalUl tuid Kabul, Gh azntn to Hindustan, Gh azntn to
SijistSn, and from Gh azntn to Hirat, and thence up the valley of the Muryh-
ab ; and Mas’ud appears to have passed through Gh ur to Gh azntn. when he
had to fly, after his defeat by the Salju^s, and yet we hear not a word about
these powerful rulers of our author, although the Sul{ans must have passed
through the mountain tracts of Gh ur constantly—in fact the Sultans of Gh azntn
held several fortresses in Gh ur ; and Tigtn-at»d was in that very part, and
Muhammad, brother Of Mas’ud, was confined in the fortress of Nae in
Wajtristin, one of the very districts mentioned by our author as forming part
of the Gh urtan dominions. I think ’U{ba’ and Baiha^ti were more than likely
to have had thorough knowledge of these potent Maliks and sovereigns so
called, yet Baihal^l and ’U{ba’ treat them as very petty chieftains, although
they held some strong fortresses. Our author quotes Baiha^t constantly about
other matters, but ytot here in regard to what happened under his [Baiha^t’s]
own observation as it were ; and this looks suspicious. I will now give an
abridged account of what he does say respecting Sultan Mahmud’s proceedings
with respect to Gh ur. and of the expedition undertaken by his gallant son,
Mas’ud, against some of its petty chiefs, during the time he held, the govern¬
ment o fKh iimian- before he succeeded to the throne of Gh azntn.

"In the year 401 H., Sultan Mahmud went on an expedition into Ghur
against the infidels of that part, by way of Zamin-i-Dawar, taking along with
him his two sons, Mas’ud and Muhammad, both at that time in their fourteenth
year [they were not twins], and also their uncle [Mahmud’s youngest brother],
YQsuf, then seventeen.

“These three young Princes were left in Zamtn-i-Dawar, with the heavy
materiel and baggage, and Mahmud left them there because he considered that
district auspicious, it having been the first territory entrusted to him by his
father, Amfr Sabuk-Tigfn. The narrator of the preceding and following events,
’Abd-ul- Gh affar. says, ‘ my grandfather, who related this, was at that time in
the service of Battktn, the Zamtn-Dawart [i. e. of Zamin-i-Dawar], who was
governor of.that district on the part of Sultan Mahmud, and he [my grand¬
father] was directed to remain in attendance on the Princes.’ [There is not the
slightest allusion either to Surf or his son here, although it is the year in which
his son Muhammad is said to have been made captive by Mahmud] * * • •
In 405 n., Mahmud began to make raids upon Kh awamn. which is a tract of
Gh ur, adjoining Bust and Zamtn-i-Dawar, in which were infidels exceedingly
tall and strong, and they held many passes and strong fortresses. On this
occasion the Sulj;an had taken along with him his son Mas’ud, and he then
greatly distinguished himself, and showed many proofs of his manhood and
valour. When a body of them [the infidels] retired for refuge to their strong¬
hold, one of their chiefs was standing on a tower of the fort, and was acting
with great insolence and audacity, and galling the Musalmans, when Mas’ud,
who was fighting rm horseback, hit him in the throat with an arrow, and he
fell dead from the tower. The chief’s companions became heart-broken at
this, and surrendered the fortress ; and all this was accomplished by one

3- 6ca.vc tzofl. (Imtr Mahmud was delighted with his Vion-like

son, an<l, \^hiKt he was yet in his youtli, made him his heir, for he knew that
after his oh n death there was no one aljle to maintain the dynasty but he, [See
note •, page 92.] » « * • [n 411 ir., MasTid [he had been declared heir-

apparent, and appCMiiterl gtncinoi of Khui.l^ati, with Ilirilt as the seat of

THE SI 1 ANSABAN!AH DYNASTY OF GHOr

3*5

V. MALIK ABtJ.’ALl, SON OF MUJ^jlAMMAD, SON OF SCrI.

Amir Abu-’Alt, son of Mutammad-i-Suri. was a man of

to Hirat, and determined to undertake an expedition

. H JamSdi-ul-Awwal, with a strong force of horse

and foot and_ five l.ght elephants. T],e first march was to Badshan [one MS. -
has Badjha^n], and the next to Khusan [one MS. Ciaahan or Chujhan : but
cannot be considered certain, although all available
MSS. have been compared, and the printed text of Morley, which has been
carefully edited], an^d then to Barfan [MS. Parayan], There a halt took
place to allow an the troops to come up, after which Prince Mas’ud marched

M Nakhshab [MS.

NaJ^ab or N.^sliab], and then to Bagh-i-WazIr, outside; and that Ribat
public edifice, a karwSnsarae] is the commencement of the frontier of
Cin ur.

When the Churls became aware of this movement of Amir Mas’ud they
retired to their strongholds and deliberated about making resistance. Before
he set out on this expedition, Mas’ud had conciliated Bii-l-Hasan-i- Khal af [Bn
or Abu-l-yasan-i-Kbalaf would signify the father of Hasan, and son of Khalaf.
According to some authors already quoted the son of Muhammad, son of SOri,
was named ^asan. See para, a, page 321], one of the most notable of the chief-
ta,m of Char, and had induced him [Bii-l.yasan] to submit to his authority ;
Md It had been agreed, that, on the Amir’s troops reaching that Ribat, Bii-l-
Hasan should present himself there with his forces fully equipped. On the
day Mas’ud reached that place, Bii-l-Hasan joined him with a considerable
force, amounting to 3000 horse and foot, and brought along with him nume¬
rous offerings and contributions in the shape of shields, armour, and whatever
was most esteemed of the produce of Chur. Mas’ud treated him with favour,
and he was followed by gher-wan. This was another of the chiefs on the
frontier of Chur and Guzganan [pronounced and written Juzjanan by ’Arabs],
and he too came attended by numerous forces, horse and foot. He likewise
had been conciliated by Amir Mas’ud, and he brought along wi(h him offerings
beyond compute. Amir Muhammad [Mas’ud’s brother] had used the utmost
endeavours and contrivances to induce this chieftain to come and attach himself
to him, because his territory adjoined Muhammad’s appanage, which was Guz-
ganln, but he had declined because people were more inclined towards
Mas’ud.

“ Having been joined by these chiefs, Mas’ud resumed his march, but went
on in advance himself, slightly attended by about fifty or sixty ^ulams, and
200 foot, selected from each dastah or band. He reached a fortress which
they called Bar-tar, an exceedingly strong place, and garrisoned by a nume¬
rous and well-armed force. He prepared to attack it, his party not being
patient enough to wait for the arrival of the army. He led the way himself,
followed by his ghulams and the foot, and they shouted the takhir, on which
the accursed unbelievers [these Qhuris were not Muhammadans] of this for¬
tress of Ghur sprung up infuriated, and set up a yell sufficient to rend the
ground. Mas’ud ordered his gbulams to take to their bows; and they kept
up such an effectual fire of arrows, that not a Ghurt dared show his head above
the walls, and this enabled the foot, by means of lassos [used up to a recent

3*6

THE XABAyAT-t-NAglRl.

good disposition and excellent qualities, and was highly
commended for the excellency of his faith.

period] to assault one of the bastions. They effected an entrance, and drove
the Gburts befo're them, and, being joined by the ^ulSms, completely cleared
the walls and bastions, making great slaughter among the unbelievers, and
taking a great number of captives and a considerable amount of booty of all
descriptions. After the fortress had been captured, the main body of the
trocps arrived, <md many were their praises and congratulations, that such a
strong fortress had been taken by such a mere handful of men.

“ From thence Mas’ud marched towards the tract of Zaran [in one copy
of the original, Rariin, but the first is the most probable], the people of which
agreed to pay taxes and tribute, and presented contributions in gold, silver,
and arms. From that part to the district called Jarus [also ShhrQs and
^ariis] where War-mesh-i-Bat dwelt, was a distance of ten farsakhs [leagues].
The Amtr did not commence hostilities against this chief, War-mesh-i-Bat,
because he had sent an agent to the young Amir tendering submission and
allegiance, and had promised that, when Mas’ud should return to HiiSt, he
would present himself before him, and enter Into stipulations respecting tribute.
That district, .and the place where this chieftain dwelt, were excessively strong,
and the most difficult portion of the whole territory of Ghur, its ];>eople the
most warlike and the strongest men in that part. /t had been the capital of the
ChSrit in bygone times ; and, whatever ruler held that tract, the whole of the
rest of the territory us^ to submit to him, up to the time that Amtr Mas’ud
marched into that part of the country.”

[There can be no doubt but that Baiha^i, who was a native of the Ghasntn
district, and who wrote his work at Ghazntn upwards of a century before our
author composed his history, must have had a much greater knowledge of Gh Sr
and its people ; yet this extract makes the accounts of Gh ur and of the Gh flrts
more puzzling than ever. That the latter were not all converted—^if any
were—^to the Muhammadan faith is clear, and it is also clear that up to this
time they were under several petty chiefs independent of each other, though
perhaps nominally acknowledging the supremacy of the chief of ZatAn, whose
place of residence had been the capital bygone times. But the name

of this chief is the most perplexing. In Morley’s edition of the text of Baihaht
he is called Ra’ts-i-Bat, or Tab [v^ or nnd, in a note, Ramtali

fj^pLti/ 1 , and in another place A MS. in my possession has War-mesll

but, the passage being so important, I sent it to Professor Rieu, of
the British Museum, who h«« been so very kind as to compare my translation
with another copy of BaihaVt in the British Museum, and, from what the
Professor says, there is no doubt that the first name is War-meaha aitd this is
remarkable, because this very name occurs among the names of the ancestors
of Amtr Banjt [see page 31a], and occurs again at pnge 366. What Bat or Tab
may mean it is impossible to say. It might be part of but-parast [>c~^ to]
idol'Worahipper, infidel; but that all the known copies of the original should
have left p^ of the name out [Morley collated his edition of the text
'WHh fear or five copies] is improbable. The word is not Pp^hto, and
there is no Af^lSn tribe or clan of this name. Had the Gh urts been
Hind&s instead of Tiijiks, we might suppose it was a corruption of Sanskrit
Bhat, a hero, a warrior. I dare say, however, that some one will be able to
account for the name, and perhaps show to his own satisfaction that this ^ef
must have been one of the Bhatt tribe of Jats now in the Panjfib. We might
as well have Bhatts in Ghur as '* a fugitive band of Crusaders” from Palestine

THE SHANSABANIAH DYNASTY OF CKOR. 337

At the tifne when his father held the sovereignty of

in the army of Ghg rfa who conquered the upper provinces of India, according to
the interpreters of the poem of the Bard Chand—but I have forgotten myself
Sat might be Sat, and that will be surely founded upon and shown to be part
of the word Patan, and can be made “ Pathan,” “ Patan,” or ** Pahtan,” with
the greatest ease. If it were not a dangerous practice to tamper with proper
names, I should be inclined to read, Shts.l

“ Tile Amtr now despatdied an intelligent person to this chief, and two
men of Gh ur of the followers of Bu-l-^asan-i-Elxalaf and Sher-v^n were sent
along with him to act as interprettrt, with a message combining threats and
hopes, as is usual on such occasions. The agent departed, and the Amir
followed in his steps. The former, and the others with him, reached the place
in question, and he delivered his message to those arrogant fellows [sic], who
manifested great fierceness and defiance, and said that the Amir had made a
great mistake in imagining that either the people of that part or that district
were similar to those he had met with and had passed through ; that he had
better come there, and he would find sword, spear, and stone [rock] ready for
him. This insolent message roused the ire of Mas’ud. He halted his troops
for the night at tlie foot of the mountain, arms were distributed, and, at dawn,
the force moved forward. The drums and trumpets sounded, and the soldiers
began to ascend the heights, on which the Gh urls showed themselves like so
many ants or locusts on the tracts above them, horse and foot, all well armed,
and occupying all the paths and defiles leading to it, who raised shouts and
yells, and began casting stones with their slings, at Mas’Gd’s force.

“The best of it was, that that mountain was somewhat depressed, and partly
composed of earth [not very rocky t] and accessible in every direction. The
troops were told off in parties, to advance by the different practicable paths,
and Mas’ud himself kept parallel to them, for the fighting Aeie was likely to
be severe. Bu-l-I^asan-i-Elialaf, and his men, were sent to the right, and
Sfc er-wSn. with his contingent, to the left. The accursed ones eviiiced the
utmost daring, and pressed forward with impetuosity, particularly in front of
the Amtr, and they disputed the greater part of the ground with determination.
The troops were hard pressed, and the enemy crowded towards the standards
of the Amtr, and the fighting became desperate. [This reads something like
an Umbeyxah expedition.] Three mounted warriors of the enemy succeeded
in getting close up to the Andr, who, perceiving them, smote one of them full
on the breast with his mace of twenty mans in weight [the man varies from
forty to eighty pounds], which laid him sprawling on his back, and prevented
his rising again ; and the gbnlgm * attacked the other two, and hurled them
from their horses. This was enough for the Gh urts. who gave way ; but they
continued, now and again, to face about and dispute the ground, until a village
[town] was reached at the foot of the mountain [on the other side], and, on the
way thither, numbers were slain and made captive. The fugitives threw
themselves into this place, which was of vast strength, and contained
numerous kS sbk s [here kGshk seems to mean a castle or fortified house],
after the manner of the Gh urts. and sent away to a stronghold, at a
distance in the rear, their women, children, and everything they could remove.
The unbelievers resisted obstinately up to the time of evening prayer, and
great numbers of them were killed, and numbers of MusalmSns were martyred
[Mas’ud’s troops are referred to here]. 'When the night closed in, the un>
believers decamped, and the village [or town] was taken possession of by the
troops, who occupied themselves, throughout the night, in plundering It.

[“ At

3^8 THE TABA¥A.T-I.NA$iRL

Q&ur, and the mountain tracts of Mandegh** the whole of

* This tends to show that GhBr and Mandeah were separate tracts.

“At dawn next day, the Amfr again moved forward towards their [other]
stronghold, two leagues distant. He had to pass through a constant succes*
sion of defiles and pa.sses, and did not reach it till the time of afternoon prayer.
They found a fortress, as they had been informed, stronger than any other in the
whole of Ghur, and no one recollected hearing that it had ever been taken by force
of arms. Mas’ud, having reached it, disposed his forces around this stronghold,
and, during the whole night, preparations were made for attacking it, and the
battering rams were placed in favourable positions.”

1 must here still further curtail this interesting account of the expedition for
want of space. Suffice it to say that breaches were made and bravely assaulted
and as bravely defended, the Amfr being ever in front, and thereby inspiring
his men with strong hearts. After four days’ very severe fighting, each day
increasing in severity, it was carried, at last, sword in hand, the Ghurts
defending every inch of the breach. Great numbers of them were slain and
taken prisoners, but the latter were protected on making their submission,
while slaves and booty to a vast amount were captured. Mas’ud had it pro¬
claimed that he gave up all gold, silver, slaves, and other booty to the troops,
but that all arms and war materiel taken was to be brought to him. A great
quantity was accordingly brought and laid before his tent, and such as was
most valuable or rare he selected, and divided the rest am'ong his soldiers.
Of the prisoners, one half was made over to Bii-l-Hasan-i-Khalaf, and the
other half to Sher-wan. for them to take to their own territories. Orders were
also given to raze that stronghold, so that, from thenceforth, no rebel might
take shelter therein. When the rest of the Gburfs found what had happened
to the iortihed towm and the other stronghold, they began to fear, and became
submissive and willing to pay tribute and obedience ; and even War-mesh-l-
Bat began to quake. He made intercession through Bu-l-Hasan-i-Shalaf
and Sher-wan. and sent an envoy, tendered his submission, and increased the
amount of tribute and contributions. His offers were accepted on the stipula¬
tion that every castle he [War-mesh] had taken on the side of Gharjistan
should be given up. Although War-meah ground his teeth at this, he could
do nothing else than agree, and those fortresses were given up to governors of
the Amfr. Whilst the latter was still in Qhur, that chief sent in his contribu¬
tions and offerings ; and, subsequently, when Mas’ud reached Hirat, War-
mesh-i-Bat presented himself at the Court, was well received, had a dress of
honour conferred upon him, and returned to his country along with the two
other friendly chieftains.

After the capture and destruction of the fortress above referred to, Amtr
Mas’ud advanced against another, a famous place, and of vast strength, named
Tur [this name is doubtful, the variants are Bur and Nur]. It was carried by
storm after a week’s fighting and great slaughter, and the two friendly chiefs
took part in it. Mas’nd placed a governor of his own in the place, after which
he set out on his return to Hirat. At Mar-abad, ten farsakhs [leagues] from
that city, large quantities of arms and war materiel, as stipulated for by others
of the Ghurts to avert molestation, were found already collected, together
writh what War-mesh-i-Bat had despatched.

The narrator, ’Abd-ul-Ghaflar. then adds, that “ no sovereign ever acquired
such power over Ghur as the martyr, Mas’ftd, did ; for, although the first

THE SHANSABANIAH DYNASTY OF OKOR.

3*9

the people had their eyes upon him, and affection towards
him was instilled into their minds. Notwithstanding that
his father used to act in a rebellious and contumacious
manner towards Amir Sabuk-Tigin, and his son, Sultan
Mahmud, Amir Abu-’Alt at all times used to manifest his
fidelity and allegiance towards the Suljtan ; and he was in
the habit of writing letters containing the expression of
his fealty and his affection, and despatching them to
Ghaznin, the capital.

When the contumacy and defection of his father went
beyond the bounds of forbearance, Sultan Mahmud
brought an army against him from Gh aznin ; and, after
considerable effort, the Sultan succeeded in securing the
person of Amir Muhammad-i Suri; and took him away
along with him towards Gh aznin. and bestowed the
government of Gh ur upon Amir Abu-’Ali, his son.

As soon as Amir Abu-’Ali became installed in the
government of Gh ur. he conferred great benefits upon the
people, and directed the erection of many buildings of
public utility. Masjids and colleges were founded in Ghur,
and he also built a Jami’ Masjid, and liberally endowed
the whole of them. He held priests and ecclesiastics in
great respect, and considered it incumbent on himself to
venerate hermits and recluses.

During his time, the people of the territories of
Gh ur dwelt in tranquillity and repose, and his brother,
Shis, son of Muhammad, passed his days under his pro¬
tection.

When the appointed period of Amir Abu-’Ali’s dominion
came to an end, and the empire of Gh aznin [also] reverted
from Mahmud to his son, [Sultan] Mas’ud, a son of Amir
Shis. ’Abbas by name, having attained great dignity and
power, broke out into rebellion, seized his uncle, Amir
Abu-’All, and reduced the whole of the country of Gh Gr
under his own sway ; and the reign of Amir Abu-’Ali
came to a termination, and he died.

Musalmans [the ’Arabs] conquered ’Ajam and Khurasan, they Tound it impos¬
sible to enter Gh ur : and, although Sultan Mahmud, on t/iree sefiarat/;occasions,
by the same route of Zamtn-i-Dawar, attacked different frontier tracts of Gh ur.
yet he did not penetrate into the defiles and more difficult parts ; still, it was
aot through inability to do so, for his designs and objects were different to
those of his successor.”

33 ®

THE TABA^T-I.NA$IRL

VI. MALIK* 'ABBAS, son OF SHlS. SON OF MUHAMMAD,

SON OF SCRL

Amir 'Abbas was a warlike, intrepid, and pitiless man,
and endowed with great manliness, strength, and activity.
When he attained the full vigour of youth, and his whole
strength, he entered secretly into a compact with a party
of adherents and young men, and gained them over to his
own rebellious views. He then suddenly rose, and seized
his uncle, Amir Abu-’Ali, ruler of Ghur, and imprisoned
him, and appropriated the whole of his uncle’s property,
his treasures and his hoards, to himself. He was exceed¬
ingly determined, cruel, and tyrannical; and lawlessness
and injustice were, engrafted in his nature.

He commenced to act illegally, and began to seize
people’s possessions a’nd property, so much so that the
commonalty, and his own immediate followers, were quite
miserable, and became perfectly helpless in his hands, and
to such degree, that, for a period of seven years during
his reign, no animal—such as the horse, camel, cow, or
sheep—brought forth young, and the-rain from the heavens
ceased to fall ; and, according to one story, women also
did not bear children, through the ill-luck consequent on
his tyranny.

The chronicler thus states, that he possessed two fine
[and powerful] dogs, which were constantly kept fastened
by heavy chains, and iron collars round their necks. One
of these dogs had been named Ibrahim of Ghaznin. and
the other, ’Abbas of Ghur. These animals used constantly
to be brought before him, and the chains to be removed
from them, and they were set to fight together. Whenever
the dog bearing his own name overcame the other, that day
Amir ’Abbas would make great rejoicings, and bestow
liberal presents; but, on days when the dog named
Ibrahim of Gh aznin gained the advantage [over his an¬
tagonist], he would become infuriated, and greatly ill-treat
and torment people, and not a single person among his
favourites and attendants dared to say anything to him.

With all this tyranny and oppression, however, he was

* Two copies of the text style him Arntr-ul-Kamil—the perfect or thorough
Amtr.

33 *

THE SHAMSABAKIAH DYNASTY OF CQOR.

gifted with a profound knowledge of astrology. He had
taken great pains with respect to that science, and had
shbwn vast perseverance and assiduity in its acquirement,
and had gained a deep knowledge of it In the country
of Mandesh. in the Khittah [district] of Sangah, the origi¬
nal fortress which Bustam-i-^uhak had founded, he [Amtr
’Abbas] directed should be entirely reconstructed; and
skilful artisans were obtained from parts around [for the
purpose]. The walls, after the manner of a parapet, were
carried from that castle, on two sides, to the strong ground
on the summit of the mountain of Zar-i-Margh ; and, at
the foot of that mountain, on a knoll, a lofty l^asr [castle]
was directed to be raised, with twelve towers ; and in every
tower, in likeness to the zodiacal circles in the firmament,
there were thirty openings—there were six towers towards
the east and north, and six others towards the west and
south—marked out ; and these were so arranged that,
every day, the sun would shine through one of those open¬
ings approximate to the position of its risc^. By this
means he used to know in what degree of what sign of the
zodiac the sun was on that particular day ; and this per¬
formance indicates the proficiency and knowledge which
Amir ’Abbas had attained in the science of astrology.

During his reign, likewise, the Kasrs of Gh ur were con¬
structed*, and plenty reigned throughout the country; but,
as people now abominated him for his excessive tyranny,

* See the view of the Castle of Zufiak in Sale’s “ Defence of Jalalabad,”
and also in Hart’s “Character and Costume of Afghanistan.” The view
in the first-mentioned work answers tolerably well to this description. It is
much to be regretted that no effort was made to explore Ghur, even l>y means
of natives, or gain some information about it, during our occupation of Afghan-
istan. What a field it must be for archxological research 1

* The Persian word “kushk.” and its’Arabic equivalent, “Va?r,” signify
a palace, a large and lofty stone or brick building, a castle ; but here “ka?r ”
means one of those fort-like villages, many of which, though on a smaller
scale than in past ages, probably, may still be seen in scores in the tracts west
of EuudahSr and Qh aznin. as well as in other parts of Afghanistan. Our
author says above, that these structures “were constructed” in the time of
’Abbas, but of course many must have existed before, and his own statements
confirm it. He must mean that many more were constructed during the chief¬
tainship of ’Abbas. Sometimes he uses the ’Arabic, at others the Persian
word. There are several places which were once fortified after the above
fashion still remaining in AfghSnistSn, such as Kushk-i-Safed, Kushk-i-Na-
Uiud, and others, but not “Khushk,” as written by recent travellers. Khuslik
signifies “dry.”

Y 2

33*

THE TABA^T-I-NA$IR1.

oppression, and 'injustice, and the empire of Ghaznln. and
throne of sovereignty, had passed to Sult^ Ra;ft-ud-Din,
Ibrahim, son of Mas’ud, a party of the most powerful and
eminent men, and the nobles of Gh ur. despatched letters to
Gh azntn. imploring the Sultan’s assistance.

In conformity with these solicitations, Sultan Ibr^im
marched a large army into Gliur; and, when he reached
it, the whole of the forces of Gh ur went over to that
monarch, and they delivered Amir ’Abbas into the Suljtan's
hands*. He commanded that Amir ’Abbas should be
placed in confinement, and he took him away to Gha znin.
and conferred the territory of Gh ur upon his [Amir’Abbas’]
son, Amir Muhammad*.

VII. AMiR MU^JAMMAD, SON OF ’ABBAS.

When Sultan Ibrahim, son of Mas’ud, seized Amir
’Abbas, and sent him away to Ghaznin. at the solicitations
of the chief personages and eminent men of Gh ur, he made
over the country to Amir Muhammad-i-’Abbas*.

He was endowed with great good nature, was of ex¬
ceeding amiability of heart, and of excellent disposition,
most just, conscientious, and merciful, a patron of the
learned, an impartial judge, and a cherisher of the weak
and helpless. In the place of every one of the odious and
hateful proclivities towards inhumanity and tyranny which
were in his father, the disposition of the son was implanted
with a thousand amiable and admirable qualities.

* These operations are not mentioned by other authors ; but a few notice,
very briefly, that Amir ’Abbas carried on hostilities with Sultan Ibiahim.

* This too is pretty good proof, by our author’s own account, that the Gh urfs
were subject to the Sultans of Gh azntn; but, as the power of the latter
declined, consequent on the rise of the Salju^s, and after Mas’ud-i-Karim’s
death, the Gh urts acquired more power. See top of next page.

* Which is impossible, if what other writers state as to Husain, son ot Sam,
having been saved from shipwreck, and Ibrahim’s son, Mas’ud-i-Kartm,
having conferred the chieftainship on him, be taken into consideration. Mu¬
hammad, son of Surt, was taken prisoner in 400 H., or, according to some
accounts, in 401 H. From that time, up to 493 H., when Mas’ud-i-Karim
conferred the fief of the tributary province of Ghur upon Husain, son of Sam,
son of Htt^tin, son of Muhammad, son of Surt, none of this family held inde¬
pendent sway over Gh ur. As already shown from the account of Mas’ud the
Martyr’s expedition into it, it was held by several petty chiefs independent of
each other. See note f, page 321.

THE SHANSABANIAH DYNASTY OF GHOR.

333

When the territory of Gh ur was assigned to Amtr Mu¬
hammad, the whole of the grandees, the chiefs, and most
distinguished personages of the country, submitted to his
authority ; and, to the best of his ability and power, he
began to labour and study to revive and restore the ob¬
servances of goodness and utility, and the laws and usages
of benevolence, beneficence, and justice. He used to ren¬
der homage to the Sultans of Gh aznin with heartiness and
loyalty, and pay them submission and vassalage, and used
to despatch the fixed tribute regularly.

During his reign the gates of repose and tranquillity were
opened to the people of Gh ur. and they all passed their
days in the enjoyment of peace and security ; happiness
and plenty reigned ; and his country, his people, and his
retainers dwelt for a long while in the enjoyment of compe¬
tency and affluence, up to the period when he passed away
and was received into the mercy of God.

VIII. MALIK ^fUTB-UU-DlN, AL-IJASAN, SON OF
MUHAMMAD, SON OF ’ABBAS.

Malik ]^utb-ud-D!nr Hasan, the grandfather of the great
Sultans of Gh Gr *. was a just Amir, high-principled, and of
handsome countenance. The proofs of his goodness, equity,
clemency, and beneficence were sufficiently obvious and
manifest to the inhabitants of Gh ur.

Such factions as were in the habit of acting contuma¬
ciously he used to occupy himself in chastizing and
overthrowing, and considered it incumbent on himself to
punish severely the disaffected and seditious. The tribes
of the territory of Gh ur. having sprung from families of
’Arabs and having been nurtured, and grown up, in a

* According to the statements of other authors given in note r, page 321, the
grandfather of the Sultans of Gh ur. that is to say, of Sultan ’Ala-ud-Dtn, and
his brothers, was Hasan, son of Mu^iammad, son of Suri, who was let down
from the tower by his father, and who had a son, Husain, the IXth chief
mentioned by our author. But, according to the other tradition quoted by
Raufat-u;-$afa, H^^fb'^s-Siyar, and other histories, in the same note, their
grandfather would be Sam, son of Hasan, grandson of Surf, who was drowned.
See note'*, page 335, in which it is stated that “ S£m, of the

race of Surf,” was taken captive by Sultan Sanjar in 501 H.

^ See note *, page 320. The Afgbans have, certainly, ds well as other
mountain tribes, behaved at all times in the manner mentioned here, but so

334

THE TABA¥AT.I.NA$IRL

mountainous tract of country, obstinacy, turbulence, and
contumacy were implanted in the constitutions and cha¬
racters of the whole of the Ghurian tribes. Feuds and
contentions would continually arise of one tribe against
another, and conflicts constantly ensue. Fvery year one
district or another of the territory of Ghur would manifest
antagonism [to the constituted authority] and withhold the
payment of the regulated amount of revenue; and up to
[near] this present time, when the dominion of the Gh urlan
Sultans came to its termination, the state of these peoples
continued to be seen and witnessed [after the same fashion].

Upon one occasion, during the time of Malik Kutb-ud-
Din, Hasan, a tribe who dwelt in Tak-ab * of the territory of
Wajiristan, rose in rebellion. Malik Kutb-ud-Din, with his
followers and the chiefs of Ghur, appeared at the foot of
that Kushk and the stronghold of that faction, and sum¬
moned them to surrender. They refused to submit, and
commenced hostilities. Unexpectedly, by destiny’s decree,
an arrow from the bow of fate came from the rebels and
struck Malik Ku^b-ud-Din in the eye, and, as it had
wounded a mortal part, he died from the injury. His
retainers and followers, immediately on seeing the effect of
that arrow’s wound, with the utmost daring, and putting
forth all their energy, attacked and carried the Kushk and
stronghold by storm, and put the whole of the rebels to
the sword, and that place was completely destroyed. Up

have the people styled Kohistanis, who inhabit the valleys immediately north
of Kabul, and also the Baluchis, and they [the latter] have not yet, I believe,
been quite made I’atans of, although some progress has been made towards it.
Such conduct seems inherent in all motmtain races, whether in the east or in
the west.

• There is a river and valley of Tag-ao, or Tag-ab, in Afghanistan, but to
them cannot possibly be referred the locality indicated here, for they are some
sixty miles to the eastward of Kabul. I think the translation of this compound
word may throw .some light on its whereabouts. The word “Tak-ab,” or
“Tag-ab,” both of which forms are correct, also the forms in u.se among natives of
those parts—Tak-ao and Tag-ao, and Ab-i-Tang—arc described by an old author
as “ground furrowed by water [a ravine or series of ravines], a defile, a valley
between two mountains, and ground, whether in a valley or not, in which,
here and there, water collects and remains, and in some places flow*, and in
which there is pasture and much verdure. They are also used for the name
of a territory, and there is a small district so named.” I think the place
alluded to by our author is not far from Ab-fstiidah, but more to the west.
Wajiristan has been often mentioned in the account of the fih aznawtds.

THE SHANSABANIAH DYNASTY OF £^0R.

335

to the time of the last of the Sultans of Ghurp and the
termination of the sovereignty of the Shansabanls. no king
would grant permission for the restoration of that Kushh,
its equipments, and the suburbs of that place, with the
exception of the Kushk of Amir Kharnak. which was
in that Ab-i-Tang, for his ancestors had* always been
obedient *.

When ^utb-ud-Din, Hasan, departed this life, his son,
Amir Husain, succeeded him.

IX. MALIK ’IZZ-UD-DiN, AL-^USAIN, AB 0 -U§-§ALATAIN »,
SON OF EUTB-UD-DIN AL-^ASAN.

Malik ’Izz-ud-Din, Husain, was a sovereign ® upright, of
handsome countenance, devout, and endowed with all good
qualities, and distinguished for his many virtues. During
the period of his rule, the territory of Gh ur and the Bilad-i-
Jibal* [movmtain country] were populous and prosperous;
and the tribes and inhabitants of those tracts enjoyed ease
and content, and, under his protection, lived in safety and
security. Priests, recluses^ and holy men, and the whole of
the people, without interruption, attained the fulfilment of
their requirements and desires in an abundant degree.

The Almighty God blessed his devoutness and good dis¬
position by bestowing upon him seven sons, the fame of
whose sovereignty and dominion became published through¬
out the seven climates of the world. Of these sons four
attained unto empire and dominion; and from them
descended sons of renown in the world, who became

* Discrepancy more or less exists among all the copies of the original here.
The oldest and most trustworthy are as above. The Paris copies too are
defective, and in one copy the last part of this sentence runs :—"No savereigH
set about the restoration of that Kushk, except A-rntr Ehamak, who was in
the neighbourhood of that Ab-i-Tang, and those parts were obedienc to
him.”

* One of the oldest copies has " Abu-l-MulGk” here, instead of AbC-ai*
- ^alatain.

* See note *, page 320, and note *, page 332. ’Izz-ud-Dtn, the title, signifies

"Glory, Ac., <rf the Faith,” but nothing, for it is meaning¬

less. 9usain also is his correct name, confirmed by numerous other authors,
and I^a^n was his father’s name, as our author states.

* £UiQr is mountainous enough, surely, as well as the Bilad-i-JiUL From
our author's statement, however, they are separate tracts of country.

336 THE TABA^T-I>NA91RL

sovereign princes, as will be subsequently narrate and
recorded.

This Malik Tzz-ud-Dtn, Husain, was firmly attached to
and in amity * with, the Sanjan dynasty and the Saljul^i
sovereignty ; and every year he used to despatch to the
court of Sul^n Sanjar such things as had been customary
and established, such as armour, coats of mail, steel caps,
and other equipments, and war material *. There is also

* His "attachment to the Sanjart dynasty” may also easily be accotmted
for. In SOI H., Sultan Sanjar, whilst in charge of Shuiasan, nine years before
he became supreme ruler of the Salju^ empire, fought a battle with the
Maliks [here a further proof that there were several petty chiefs] of Ghur,
were of the race of Suri, and ^usain [’Izz-ud-Dln, of our author], son

of Sam, was made prisoner. Sultan Sanjar ordered him to be put to death ;
but, at the intercession of the celebrated Shaikh Ahmad, Ghaef^l, the Sultan
of Maaha’ikh, as he is styled, he was spared, and set free. For two years he
uaed to light the fires of the cooks of the Sultan’s army, until, one day, the
Amtr of the trdops of Shuras&n, ’Imid-ud-Daulah, El°>aj, chanced to meet
with him. He took compassion on H'^^ain, and represented his case to the
Sul'tin, who directed that Husain should be brought to his presence. When
he was admitted, he kissed the ground of the Sultan’s court. Sanjar said to

liiiw :_" I understand that thou hast neither wealth nor power left to thee,

notwithstanding thou wast a chief and leader. Has neither kindliness nor
sympathy been left to thee?” Husain replied :—"When this head was my
own head, I had the good fortune to be attended by a thousand slants, but
now that it belongs to thee, thou keepest me thus wretched and abject.”

Rashld-ud-Dln, who also relates this anecdote [but, strange to say, under the
of his son, ’Ala-ud-Din, although he calls him H'>^^ too*
oift all mention of the first part of the name, ’Ala-ud-Dtn], says that Husain
wandered about the Sultan’s camp for two years as a mendicant [our author
would scorn to relate this, as it did not tend to the glorification of the Qkurts,
and their slaves, his patrons], when “ one day Amir H^uaj passing the
shop of a cook, he chanced to notice Husain, who was attending the fire, and
watching the cook’s pot.” When admitted to the presence of the Sultfin,
Raakid-ud-Din says the Sultan thus addressed Husain:—"I gatherthat thou hast
neither wealth nor power left to thee ; hast thou not the means and the power
Qf keeping one head and face clean ? ” The rest of the anecdote agrees with
Fa9ih-i> related above.

Sultan Sanjar was touched, took pity on him, pardoned him, and sent him
back to his native country attended by a large following ; and to the end of
his days Husain paid obedience to that monarch.

Fa?iti-i further states that "Husain, son of Sam, Who escaped drowning,
and the sword of the executioner,” only died in 545 H. He ruled that terri-
tory justly ; and, up to his time even, great numbers of the inhabitants of the
mountain tracts of Ghur had not bMn converted to Islam, but were made
ermverts of by him. This Husain, the same chronicler states, was succeeded
by his son, ’Ala-ud-Din, Husain, in that same year. For further particulars,
see under ’Ala-ud-Dtn, iu)te *, pages 347 to 350.

* GbB r. and mountain tracts around, appear to have been famous for the
manufacture of arms and armour •, and iron mines must have been worked therein.

THE SHANSABANIAH DYNASTY OF (^OR.

337

a remarkably fine breed of dogs in Gh flr. so powerful that,
in frame and strength, every one of them is a match for a
lion*. A number of this breed of dc^s, with valuable
collars round their necks, Malik 'Izz-ud-Dtn, Husain, was
in the habit of sending to the Sultan’s [Sanjar’s] presence ;
and he used to receive in return dresses of honour and
many valuable presents.

Malik ’Izz-ud<Din likewise was wont to keep on terms of
amity and friendship with the Sultans of Ghaznin ’’; and
for a considerable length of time the government of the
territory of Gh ur was held by him up to the period when
he died.

He had [as before stated] seven sons, the eldest of whom
was Malik Fakhr-ud-Din. Mas’ud, of Bamian, but an ac¬
count of whom will be contained in another chapter on the
Sultans of Bamian, which will commence with a mention of
him, and be therein recorded.

The names of his sons are as follow :—Malik Fakhr-ud-
Din, Mas’Od, Amir of Bamian and Tukharistan; Sult^
Baha-ud-Din, Sam, Amir of Ghflr and Firuz-koh; Malik-
ul-Jibal, :^utb-ud-Din, Mu^iammad, Amir of ^ur, and
Firflz-koh ; Sultan Saif-ud-Din, Sflri, sovereign of QJiQr
and Gha znin ; Sultan ’Ala-ud>Din, Husain *, sovereign
of Gh flr. Gha znin. and Bamian; Malik Shihab-ud-Din.

* This fine breed of dogs, or rather one very similar, still exists among the
fi'fyaht tribe of Afgli2ns, who trace their descent on tke father^s side onJy from
the son of a chief of Gh ur. whom their traditions style Shah Husain ; but he
fled from Gh ur. and took shelter among the Afghans at a much earlier period,
in the time of the Shaltfah, ’Abd-ul-Malik, son of Mirwan, who reigned from
66 H. to 86 H. He was adopted by an Afghan Shaikh ; but the names of his
ancestry, as mentioned by the A fghan historians, do not agree with those
mentioned by our author. This Shah ^usain’s grandfather, according to
them, was forty-ninth in descent from 2uh^. Had not the names and the
dates been so very different, I should have been inclined to consider Shah
ll^usain of the Gi^alzts, and the Husain of others, who was saved from ship*
wreck, and received the fief of Gh ur from Mas’ud-i-Kartm, as one and the
same person.

1 SultXn Mas’ud conferred the sovereignty upon [’Izz-ud-Dtn] Htuoin in
H., the year after the decease of his own father, Sultan Ibriihtm. It is
no wonder he kept on good terms with his suzerains. Fa;itt-t sa 3 rs he died in
545 H., and that this was the same IJ^usain, son of Sim, and one of tk*
kimdrtd of son of S&rt See preceding page, note *. It is straiq^

but several of the best copies of the text have “Sultins ofQ]iar and{z]Mvntn”
here.

* In two copies he is here styled Sulgbi ’ Ali-nd-Dtn-i-Siin.

338 THE TABA^AT-I.NA^IRI.

Mul^ammad, TOia maW. Malik of Madtn of Ghur ; and MRlik
Sh^uja*-ud-Din. ’Alt, Amtr of Jarmas* of Ghur.

X. MALIK-UL-JIBAL, BIUTB-UD-DIN, MUHAMMAD, SON OF
[•IZZ-UD-DlN] AL.^USAIN.

Of the seven sons of Malik 'Izz-ud-Dtn, Husain, the
eldest among them all was Malik Fakhr-ud-Din, Mas’ud,
of Bamtan, mention of whom will be made in the other
chapter [referred to previously], the foundation of the dynasty
of the Sultans of Bamian dating from the rise of his power
His mother was a Turk! handmaid; and after him, in suc¬
cession [in age], came the Malik-ul-Jibal [the Lord of the
Mountains], Kutb-ud-Din, Muhammad^ His mother was
a woman who was of no high descent, and was the Hajibah
[Chamberlain] and attendant of the mother of the other

* Some copies have ^armfis, and some Bormas.

1 This ■was the proper place to have separated these dynasties, as this chief
was the first of the rulers of Qhur and Ftruz-koh after the patrimony had been
divided. This has been done by other writers, but they make :^u(b-ud-Dtn
the first of the dynasty of Ghur and Qliazntn, and his brother, Saif-ud-Dtn,
Surt, second. Had our author given an account of Saif-ud>Dtn second, as in
the order of the events, instead of last, he would have saved his readers some
perplexity and trouble.

» So far, other writers agree prrtty well with our author, but here consider¬
able difference arises. The Muntakhab-ut-Tawarfkll, quoting other authors,
says, that Jfutb-ud-Dtn, Muhammad, who is known as the Malik-ul-Jibal
[lx>rd of the Mountains], uuas sent for by Bahram Shah of Gh aznin— after he
had made an accommodation with the sons of ’Izz-ud-Din, Husain—and that
he made him his son-in-law ; but, through his having been suspected of a
crime, he was removed by poison. This is said to have been the first enmity
that arose between the Gh aznawtds and the Gh urts. but such is not correct, as
already shown. Jahan-Ara agrees with the above, however, with this excep¬
tion, that, in the latter, it is stated that he, the Malik-ul-Jibal, came from
Ols ur and presented himself at the Court of Bahram Sha h. The Tar* kh -i-
Ibr&htmt, and some others, however, agree more with our author’s statement,
and say, that Malik Saif-ud-Dtn, Sur}, on the death of his father, ’Izz-ud-Dtn,
Husain, succeeded to the dominion of Gl)ur, and divided the patrimony among
his brothers, one of whom [l^utb-ud-Din, Muhammad] became irritated with
his brothers, and went to the Court of Bahribn S^ah, who put him to death
for some reason ; and this caused enmity between the two houses. The
Ratt(at-u9-$afa and some others, however, consider thir statement very weak,
and quote the tradition which I have already given at page 321, note and
state, that, alter the death of Husain, enmity arose between his descendants
a»>d BahrSm Sba b of Qhuntn, and hostilities took place between them upon
aevenl occasions, which will be subsequently lefened to.

THE SHANSABANIAH DYNASTY OF CffiOR. 339

sons, the SultSns, namely, Sultan SOii ; Sultan * Baha-ud*
Din, S3m ; Sultan ’Ali-ud-Dtn; Husain; Amir [Sh ihab-
ud-Dln] Mu|;iammad; and Amir [Sh uia*-ud-Dln] ’All \
the other sons of Malik ’Izz-ud^Dln, Al-Husain.

When Malik ’Izz-ud-Dln, Husain, who was the father of
the Sultans, departed this life, Sultan [Saif-ud-Dln] Suri, in
succession to his father, ascended the throne * and divided
his father’s dominions among his brothers. An account of
Sultan Surl will, please God, be given in the chapter on the
Sultans of Gh aznin.

In this division, the territory of Warshadah * was assigned
to the Malik-ul-Jibal, ]Kutb-ud-Din, Muhammad, and there
he fixed his seat of government. Subsequently, it so hap¬
pened, that he had to seek for a [suitable] place in which to
found a strong fortress and a handsome city, such as would
be suitable to his dignity. He despatched persons on
whom he could depend into the parts adjacent, until [at
length] his opinion led him to fix upon the position of Firuz-
koh, and he founded the fortress and city of Firuz-koh

Sultan Suri made the fortress and town of Istlah * his
capital, and to Malik Na§ir •-ud-Dln, Muhammad, Madin

» Styled Sultan without reason : Malik is his correct title, os given at the
head of this notice in the copies of the text.

* These two last, here styled Amirs, are the sixth and seventh sons men¬
tioned over leaf, viz. Malik Shihah-ud-Din [called Nasir-ud-UIn subsequently],
Muhnmmad, and Malik Shuia*-ud-Din. ’Alt, the Xllth and Xlllthof the family.

* .See note *, page 336.

* Some few copies have Waraiad, and Warshar.

r In several other places our author mentions “the territory of Gh ur and
the Bilad-ul-Jibal,” thus indicating that they were separate ; and yet Firuz-koh
was the capital of the Bilad-ul-Jibal, and in his account of the division of their
father, ’Izz-ud-Din, Al-IIusain’s, territory, and the names of the districts, the
whole appear included in C]iur, of which Firuz-koh was the capital ! The
mention of the places shows the extent of the territory held by these chiefs—the
mighty monarchs of our author. It is a curious fact, and a very important
one, that the name of Rlandahar never once occurs in our author’s work. It is
not strange, however, because Eandahar is a comparatively modem place, .and
is not mentioned by contemporary writers, under that name at least, until very
many years after our author’s time. Tradition says that ^andahar stands a
few miles east of an ancient city named Waihind ; and Masson also refers to
it, but calls it Vaihund. Can this be the place tlie idol-temple of. which fell
on the night of Mahmud of CJiaznin's birth ?

* Other old writers call this place “Istia, which is the name of one of the
mountains of the range between Ghuznin and Iliiat,” and give the vowel
points. The Burhan-i-¥fiti’ also confirms it.

* There is no son of this name among those previously mentioned. Pro-

340 THE TABA]^T-I-NA$IRt.

was given. Baha-ud-Din, Sam^ had the district of Sangah,
which was the capital of Mandesh. assigned to him ; and
the district and castle of Wajiah * were made over to Sultan
’Ala-ud-Dtn ; .and the probability is that the territory of
Kashi [or Kasha] was fixed upon for Malik Fakhr-ud-Din.

By heaven’s decree, however, contention arose between
the Malik-ul-Jibal [Kutb-ud-Din, Muhammad], who was at
Firuz-koh, and the other brothers; and the Malik-ul-Jibal
became indignant with his brothers, and withdrew to
Ghaznin ; and it was [at this time] the reign of Bahram
Shah. This Malik-ul-Jibal was endowed with great beauty
and comeliness, and urbanity to perfection. When he
reached Gh aznin he opened the hand of munificence and
liberality; and affection for him, according to the saying,
“ Man is the servant of kindliness,” began to take root in
people’s hearts, and became firmly established. The in¬
habitants of Gh aznin entertained a great liking for him,
but a number of envious persons set upon him, and had it
represented to Bahram Shah that he [the Malik-ul-Jibal]
was, with treacherous eyeS, regarding that sovereign’s haram
[some female or females of his family], and was expending
his property liberally, with the object of rising against him
[Bahram Shah], The latter issued commands to administer
to him, secretly, poisoned sharbat [which was done], and he
died; and they, moreover, buried him at Gha znin. On
this account, enmity and hatred arose between the Mahmudt
family *, and the family of Shansabi. and the race of ^uhak *.

When the account of what had befallen ]^utb-ud-Dtn
reached ^ Sultan Suri’s hearing, he marched an army to
Obarnin and took that country, as will be hereafter re¬
corded, since, although this was the place for mentioning

bably, Shihab-ud-Din is meant, or, otherwise, Shi hab is a mistake for NSfir ;
but there is a Malik Na^ir-iid-Dfn, ^u-sain, son of Mubammad, mentioned
immediately after Baha-ud-Dln, Sam, at page 343, which see.

* One of the Paris copies has ’ tAi — the Maiden’s Castle—but the

majority, including the oldest copies, have and some have which
a copyist may have read One copy has

* 'fheir enmity, according to other authors, appears to have had a different
origin. Sec under ’Ali-ud-Dtn, ^usain, page 347.

* All thecopies collated agree with regard to this part of the sentence—“the
race of Shansaht an,/the race of 2 ub&k.”

* Four different verbs are used in the different copies of the text in this
sentence, although the signification conveyed is much the same.

THE SHANSABAKIAH DYNASTY OF GHOr.

341

and recording the proceedings of Sultan Sur!, still, as
Sult^ SOri was the first person of this family who assumed
the name of Sultan, and the first to ascend the throne of
Qhazntn, an account of him will, please God, he given in
another chapter, at the beginning of the Kistdry of the-
Sultans of Ghaznln.

XI. SULfAN BAHA-UD-DIN, SAM, SON OF ’IZZ-UD-DIN,
AL-^lUS AIN ».

When the Malik-ul-Jibal retired to Gh aznin [as pre¬
viously related], and left the buildings of the city of Flruz-
koh in an unfinished state, Sultan Baha-ud-D!n, Sam, came
from [the territory of] Sangah to Firuz-koh, and went on
with the building of the city and fortification, and brought
to completion those edifices and the royal palaces. He
also commanded the erection of the fortresses of Ghur.
and contracted alliance and entered into amity with the
Shars of Gharjistan *. He ascended the throne of Firuz-koh
in the year 544 H.^ When the construction of the capital of
Firuz-koh was completed through his propitious auspices,
he gave directions for the construction of four strong for¬
tresses on the confines of the territory of Ghur, Garmsir,
Gha rjistan: and the mountain tract of Hirat, and the ]^a$r

* In some copies the names of his children follow immediately after his
name and title.

* The SMra of Gh ariisttn. who had for many years acknowledged the

suzerainty of the SSmSnts, had submitted to the suzerainty of Sultin Mahmud
as early as 389 h: The Sha r. Abu Na$r, son of the Sbar, Rashid, and Ab 3 -
Nafi’s son, the ShS r. Abu Muhammad, acknowledged the Sultan’s suzerainty
in that year, and read the khutbah for him, and impressed his name and titles
upon their coin. In 405 H. the Abu Na;r, who had become disaffected,

was seized and imprisoned by Mahmud’s command—his father, Rashid, is
said to have solicited protection some time before, and it was granted [’Utba’
agrees, and says * ‘ he went into retirement ”] ; and he had presented himself at
Court. The Sultan purchased from him [the Shkrl his possessions in Ghar-
jisOn, and had made over the price in motuy to him. This was one hundred and
forty-six years before the time our author says Baha ud-Dln, Sam, became
ruler. Tlie SfaUrr Abu Najr, died in prison, at Hirat, in 406 H., after which
the Sha rs are not mentioned by other writers.

' Baha-ud-Dfn died in 544 H., the same year in which he succeeded. His
brother, S 3 rt, had been put to death, and Bahiam Sh.ah of diazntn had died
the previous year. Our author’s mode of arrangement here causes confusion.
Baha ud-Dtn is the third of the dynasty of Gh ur and Ghaziitn, and only
succeeded after Saif-ud-Dln had been put to deatlu Sec also the Kitab-al-
Yamintof Al-’Utba’.

34*

THE TABA]B:AT-I<NA$IR1.

of KajurSn in the district of Garmstr and Q^ur, the fortress
of Sher-San^ in the mountains of Hirat, and that of Btndar
[or Pindar], in the hills of Gh arjistan. and Ft war, between
Gha rjistan and F^ras [or Baras],

After the martyrdom of [Saif-ud-Din], Sur! [yet to be
> mentioned], as Sultan Baha-ud-Din was the eldest of the
five brothers [styled Sultans], the sovereignty of the king¬
dom of Ghur devolved upon him. The Malikah of Kidan,
who was also of Shansabani lineage, the daughter of Malik
Badr-ud-Din of Kidan, was married to him, and Almighty
God blessed him with two sons and three daughters by that
Malikah of high descent. The sons were Sultan Gh ivas-
ud-Din, Muhammad-i-Sam ®, and Sulpn Mu’izz-ud-Din,
Muhammad-i-Sam—the Almighty illumine them !—the
amplitude of whose dominions comprehended the eastern
quarter of the world, and the fame of whose expeditions
against infidels, whose holy wars, the energy and vigour of
whose rule, justice, and beneficence will continue imperish¬
able and manifest on the outspread world until the latest
revolutions of time. Some of those glorious actions and
annals in the account of each of them, by way of ensample,
will, please God, be subsequently recorded.

Of the daughters, one was the Malikah-i-Jahan *, mother of
Malik Taj-ud-Din, Zangi; the second, the Hurrah-i-Jalali,
mother of Sultan Baha-ud-Din, Sam, son of Sultan Shams-
ud-Din, Muhammad, son of Malik FaJchr-ud-Din, Mas’ud, of
Bamian; and the third daughter was the Malikah-i- Kh u-
msan, the mother of Alb-Arsalan-i- Gh azi', son of Malik
l^azil-Arsalan, Saljuki, the brother’s son of Sultan Sanjar.

When the account of the affliction and degradation
which had befallen Sultan Suri at Gh azntn. through the
hostility and perfidy of the retainers of the Mahmud!
dynasty, reached the hearing of Sultan Baha-ud-Din, Sam,
he came to the determination of wreaking vengeance upon
the inhabitants of Ghaznin. and, without occupying himself

* Sam was not his name, nor the name of his brother; neither does our
author mean that such should be supposed ; but some translators have sup¬
posed it was the son’s name instead of the father’s.

* Malikah-i-Jibal in nearly every copy, but the above is correct.

t Other authors style him Alb-i. Gh azt only. He held the fief of Hirat
subject to the Ghuri Sultan upon one of the occasions when SultSn Mututmmad,
ShwArazm invested it. See note *, page 257.

THE SQANSABAnIAH DYNASTY OF QOOlt. 343

in mourning ceremonies for his brothers *, he assembled the
forces of Ghur, and of the parts and tracts around, and on
the confines of it, and of the hill-tracts of Jarum and Gliar
jistan ; and, having arranged and ordered them, he turned
his face towards Gh aznin in order to accomplish that
important matter. After great preparation, and being
fully equipped, he moved forward, and a large army
marched under his standards. When he reached the dis¬
trict of Kidan, excessive anxiety and grief for the death of
his brothers, and the strength of his feelings, brought on an
attack of illness, and there [at Kidan] he died *.

In the same manner as Sultan Suri, at the time of his
proceeding against and capturing Ghaznin, had entrusted
the capital of the kingdom of Ghur, and had made over the
government of that territory to him, Sultan Baha-ud-Din,
Sam, the latter, at this time, when about to march an army
himself against Gh aznin. assigned the capital of Ghur, and
the rule over the territory of the Jibal [mountain tracts] to
Sultan ’Ala-ud-Din, Husain-i-Jahan-soz [his brother], and
consigned to him his children, dependents, Amirs, property,
and effects.

When Baha-ud-Din died at Kidan, and that circumstance
came to the hearing of Sultan ’Ala-ud-Din, Hu$atn, he,
likewise, without occupying himself in mourning cere¬
monies, assembled * together the forces with all celerity, and
set out towards Gh aznin.

XII. MALIK SHIHAB-UD-DIN®, MUHAMMAD, [KHARNAK,]
SON OF AL-HUSAIN, MALIK OF MADIN OF fiHOR.

Malik Shihab-ud-Din, Muhammad, Kharnak. was the
brother of the Sultans ; and the district of Madin, which

• His two brothers, ^utb-ud-Din, Muliammad, and Saif-ud-Din, Surt.

• He is said to have died of small-pox, but the wonl used also signifies a
tumour, and the like. Raufat-u9-§afa and some others say Baha-iid-Dtn,
Sam, died of phrcnsy, or inflammation of the brain, on the way back to Ghur,
ayitr the taking of Gh aznin by ’Ala-ud-Dtn, and his brother, Saif-ud-Dtn,
Surt, who was left there as ruler ! See note ®, p.agc 347.

® Here again some copies of the text use different verbs to express the
same meaning.

• He is called Nasir-iid-Dtn repeatedly in most of the copies of the text,
and in'Some, although the heading is ivritten Shikab-ud-Dfn, he is styled

344

THE TABA|^T.I.HA$IRL

was his territory, and is a tract of country on one of the
confines of ^^ur, had been assigned to him by the mutual
consent of his brothers, after the decease of their father.

He had two sons, one of whom was Malik Na$ir-ud-D!n,
Husain, whom they placed upon the throne, at the capital,
Rruz-koh, during the absence of Sultan ’Ala-ud-Din, j^u-
sain, in I^urasan, and his attendance* at the Court of
Sultan Sanjar, an account of whom will be hereafter re¬
corded. The second son was Malik Saif-ud-Din, Suri^
who, after his father’s death, succeeded him in the posses¬
sion of the district of Madin. This Malik Saif-ud-Din,
Suri, had three children, one a daughter, and two sons, and
the daughter was older than the sons. She was married
to the holy warrior and martyr, Sultan Mu’izz-ud-Din,
Muliammad-i-Sam ; and by her that conquering Sultan
likewise had a daughter who died a maid*, and whose
tomb is at the capital city, Gh aznin.

Of those two ^ons of Malik Saif-ud-Din, Surt, one was
Malik Shihab-ud-Din, 'Alt, of Madin, who was martyred
by the Turks of Khwarazm* during the period of their
domination. The second son was Malik Na$ir-ud-Din,
Abu-Bikr; and the writer of this book, in the year 618 H.,
waited upon him in the territory of Kaziw [or Gaziw] * and
Timran, and witnessed numerous marks of urbanity and
generosity from him. At that period the author had
espoused* a daughter of one of the g^eat men and a kins¬
man of his own. That was in the period of his first man¬
hood, and in that same year in which Qxingi^ Khan, the

Nifir-ud-Din in the account of him. As ’Izz-ud-Dtn, Al>Husain, had no son
of this name, and as all the copies agree in the list of the seven sons, as to
SllihSb, 1 have adopted that reading here, which is certainly correct. This
Shihab-ud-Dtn had a son named NSf ir-ud-Dtn. and hence the mistake may
have arisen.

* His captivity in fact, but this our author did not consider necessary to
mention. See note *, page 358 .

7 Not to be confounded with ’Ala-ud-Dtn, Jahin-soz’s son, nor ’Att>ud-
Dtn’s brother. There are three of his title in all.

* Several copies have "died in her infancy.” This can scarcely be correct,
as it may be doubted whether the tomb of am infant would have been
mentioned.

* See note *, page 274 .

* A few copies have •jjf* [Karlw or Gariw], and others yf and yifT

* “ Was about to espouse ” in a few copies ; but if he had not espoused
this wife he would not probably have required a horse.

THE SBANSABAnIAH DYNASTY OF GHOR.

34S

accursed, CTossed the JUiun into KhurasSn. and was bent
upon marching to Ghaznln. In short, the author memo¬
rialized Malik NS^ir-ud-Dtn, Abu-Bikr, for a horse, and,
in verse, represented the matter of his marriage with one
of his own kinswomen for that Malik’s information. In
reply to that versified narrative, he composed this quatrain,
and with his own august hand wrote it on the back of the
story, and put it into the author’s hands :—

God willing, affliction will have departed from thy heart.

And that pearl of great price will have been by thee bored *.

The horse thou hast solicited of me requires no apology.

With the horse, much more apol<^ nright be made '*.**

Malik Na$ir-ud-Din, Abu-Bikrj sent his humble servant a
dun-coloured horse of three years’ old, ready saddled and
caparisoned—the Almighty reward him for it!

That Malik-zadah, after the calamities which befell Ghaz-
ntn and Ghur*. came to the city of Dibit,' and presented
himself at the Court of the august Sultan, Shams-ud-
Dunya wa ud-Din [I-val-timi sh] . and was received by him
with honour and kindness, and, from the Maliks and other
nobles, he received deference and respect.

Malik Na$ir-ud-Dtn, Abu*Bikr, died at the city of Dihlt
in the year 620 H.

XIII. MALIK SHUJA'-UD-DIN, ABI ’ALI. SON OF AL-ffUSAIN.

[SON OF SAMt SON OF AL-^ASAN, SHANSABI.

Malik Shuia’-ud-Dln. Abi-’Alt, son of Al-Husain, son of
Al-Hasan, was removed from this world in his early manhood,
and his -existence terminated whilst he was yet in the flower
of his youth*. A son survived him, Malik ’Ala-ud-Dtn,

* A virgin i* styled an unbtwed pearl.”

* This somewhat obscure line imply that the donor might have made

apologies because the present was not more valuable.

* At the hands of the Muglials.

* From the heading the reader would suppose this article to have contained
an account of Shuia*-ud-Dtn ; but he is finished in two or three lines, and the
artide contains an account of his son and grandson. Neither cf these two
brothers, Shihfib-ud-Dtn, nor Shuja*-ud-Dtn. can be considered as belonging
to the dynasty any more than tte whole of the race, as they never held

overeign power. They are not named even, separately, by other writers.

Z

346 THE TABA^T>I-NA$IRt.

Abfl-’Alt ; and the brothers [of Shuia*-ud-Dln. Abt 'All^
with one accord, when dividing the dominions of GhOr.
had invested him [Shuia*-ud-Din 1 with l^e district of
Jarmas. When he died, they conferred the district of
Jarmas upon his son, 'Ala-ud-Dtn, Abu-’Alt.

The Malik-ul-Jibal, Kujtb-ud-Dtn, Muhammad, who had
been martyred at Ghaznin, had left a daughter, and she
was given to ’Ala-ud-Din, Abu-’Alt, in marriage* ; and,
after that noble lady was espoused by him, the Almighty
blessed them with a son, who had the good fortune of be¬
coming both a Haji [a pilgrim] and a holy warrior*, namely,
Malik Ziya-ud-Din, Muhammad, the Pearl of Ghur', and
it happened in this wise:—When [his father] Malik ’Ala-
ud-Dtn, Abu-’All, died, and his son grew up, Ae Almighty
bestowed such grace’ upon his mother that she decided
upon undertaking a journey to the ^iblah, and up to that
period not one of the Maliks of Ghur had attained that
felicity.

Malik Ziya-ud-Din, in attendance upon his mother, was
proceeding on the journey to the holy places by way of
Hirat, Khurasan, and Ntshapur. At that time Suljan
Taki§h, Kh warazm Shah, was at NishapQr, and Malik
Ziya-ud-Din, in the habit of a Sayyid, with his hair twisted
into two long ringlets, presented himself at the Court of
that Sultan, aifd had the happiness of being permitted to
kiss Sultan Takish’s hand.

Malik Ziya-ud-Din [in the company of his mother] had
the happiness of performing the orthodox pilgrimage with
great reverence, and with the observance of all the rites
and ceremonies. He gave directions to build a Kha n-kah
[chapel] at Makkah, and provided all the necessary funds
for raising the structure, and left trustworthy persons of his
own to see it carried out.

He also returned, along with his mother, to the territory

f Abu, or Abt*’Alt: either is correct.

* Our author’s mode of narration tends to confuse. This ’AlS-ud-Dtn,
Ab&-’Alt, is the father of ^iya-ud-Dtn, afterwards styled ’Ala-ud-Dtn. See
note *, page 391, and note •, page 394.

• He accompanied his second cousin, Suljan Mu’izz-ud-Dtn, on his campaign
against RAe Pathoiii of Ajmtr. See page 135.

> These words Durr-i-Qhilt, occur again in the list of Maliks at the

end of SultSn {i]|iyliS'ti<l’Dtit’s reign, and in some other places.

THE SHANSABANIAH dynasty of 341

of Gh Qr; and she acquired the name of the Malikah-i-
J^ajt [the Pilgrim Princess], and founded a great number
of masjids, pulpits, and colleges in the Ghurtan country.
May they both become acceptable in the sight of Almighty
Godl

XIV. SULJAN ’ALA-UD-DlN, AL.^JUSAIN, SON OF [TZZ-UD-
DiN.l AL-^JUSAIN, SON OF SAM, SON OF AL-^JASAN».

When Sultan Baha-ud-Din, Sam, son of [’Izz-ud-Dtn,]
Al-J^usain, who was marching an army against Qhazntn,

* Of all the persons mentioned in Oriental history, greater discrepancy
occurs with respect to ’Al 3 -ud-Dfn, Jahan-soz’s name and proceedings, pro¬
bably, than regarding any other man.

Some authors call him ^asan, son of ^usain ; some [but these authors are
but tw 6 \ ^usain, son of ^asan ; some, ^usoin, son of ^usain, son of ^asan,
son of Sam ; others copy our author, while others again, and they seem most
correct—they certainly are as to his own and his father’s name—style him
'Ala-ud-Dtn, ][^usain, son of [’Irz-ud-Dtn], Al-^usain, son of Sam, son of
^asan [Surfs grandson], son of Muhammad, son of SQrf.

With respect to his rise to power, the different accounts [I quote here from
Hxtem authors] may be classed under no less than five heads.

The first is, that, after Sultan Bahiam of JSiaznin had been put in posses¬
sion of the throne by his maternal uncle, Sultan Sanjar, distrust arose between
them [Sanjar marched to Ghazntn to bring Bahram to submission in 530 H.,
according to Fa^ih-t], and, on this, Bahram began to enter into friendly nego¬
tiations with the sons of ’Izz-ud-Dtn, Al-^usain, and invited one of them to
his capital, and expressed a wish to take him into his service, in order to
strengthen the bonds of friendship between the two families. Eatb-ud-Dtn,
Muhammad [the Malik-ul-Jib 5 l of our author], the eldest of the sons, proceeded
to Qhazntn, and for some time he was treated with great distinction, but was
subsequently guilty [or suspected T] of some crime, and was put to death by
BohAm Sbab ’s orders.

Enmity now arose between Bahram and the sons of Al-^fusain, and they
begop to attack each other’s territory, and several encounters took place between
them [Fa*ih -1 say® they fought about Tigtn-abad as early as 521 H., but this
Moy be an error for 541 H.], and our author himself in his account of Sanjar’s
reign, page 149, says that hostilities arose in that reign “ between the Sultans
of fihazntn and the Maliks of Qbur, and the latter were overcome," and,
subsequently, refers to the time when “ the territory of Qh&r came under the
rule of ’AUi-ud-Dtn, ^fusain,” and, on the death of Al-][^usain, their father [in
545 H., according to Fa«it-t, but it must have been five years earlier, at least],
hostility, which hitherto had been concealed, was openly shown by ’All-ud-
Dfn, 3 ^usain, and his brothers, and they rose against Bahiim SbiUi, and he set
out on an expedition against Qhuntn, accompanied by Saif-ud-Dtn, SOrf,
and BalriUnd-D!n, Sim fAUi’s full brothers]. They were opposed by B a hi g m
who was defeated, and retired into Hind.

Having obtained possession of fihaanln, ’Alg-ud- Dtn , ^usain, left his
brother, Sfiit, as ruler there, and returned to fiber. {Ihis event is said to

Z 2

348

THE TABA^T-I-NA$IRX.

in order to take' revenge for [the slaying of his brothers],
SultAn Suil and the Malik-ul-Jibal, died on the way thither,

have occanred in the fifth month of the year 543 H. [October, 1053 A.D.], and
by in 543 H. [October, 1051 A.D.],.but, as the father only died it i

said in 545 H., both cannot be correct.l On the way back his brother, S 2 m,
died of inflammation of the brain [phrensy, according to some, a tumour, or
small-pox, according to others].

In the following winter BaBrftm returned from Hind with a numerous army
and several elephants, and appeared before Ghazntn. SQrt came out with
300 Charts and 1000 Qbuzz Turks, and endeavoured to reach GhQr, but the
Qbozz deserted to BahrSm, and Surt was taken, paraded on a bullock through
the city, and hung along with his Waztr. This occurred in 543 H. according
to Fa;ih-t, but in 544 H. according to several other trustworthy authors.
’Aia-ud-Dtn, Husain, again marched to Gha zntn to avenge Sfirt, again took
the city, plundered, and fired it, then abandoned it, and returned to FtrQz-koh,
destroying all the buildings raised by the Mahmudt family, on his way back.
This is said to have taken place in 547 h., but such cannot have been the case :
it must have been towards the end of 544 H., or early in 545 H., at the latest.
Alfi says in 547 of the Rihlat ” \fleatk of Muhammad, not the Hijrah],
which would make it as late as 558 H. I

Most of the authors from which the above is taken contend that ’Al 3 -ud-
Din, ^usain, was the firet of the family who attained to independent sovereignty,
that the dynasty consisted of five sovereigns, and continued for a period of
sixty>four years. It terminated in 607 H., so must have commenced in 543 h.

'All, Jatrf, and ’Al&>ud-Dtn, ^^usain, were defeated by Sultin Sanjar in
545 H. [some say in 544 H.], but Fa^ih-t says in 547 H., just before he [Sanjar]
marched against the GJiuzz, in 548 H., which will be referred to farther on.

FanSkatl says, and somewhat astonishing it is, that Hnsain, brother of Sfim,
was put to death by Bahiiim Sha h's orders, and he [^usain] went to Suljan
Sanjar and solUited aid. Sanjar assisted kirn with an army t and he then
fought a battle with Bahiam Shah, who was defeated and retreated into
Hindustan. After this, the same author states—and the Jami’-ut-Tawarlldi
agrees—that Hnsain [’Ala-ud-Dlh] left his brother Sftm in charge of G])azntn,
and returned himself to Qhur. He then agrees with the statements of other
writers as to the hanging of 'Alfi-ud-Dln’s brother, but says it was SAm [Baha-
ud-Dtn], not SQrl, that BahrSm Sbah took and hung after his rAum ftx>m
HindiistAn. Qusain returned, made a general massacre, and devastated the
place, and 70^000 persons were slain. On this Sultan Sanjar resolved to proceed
against him, and, in a battle, Qusain was taken prisoner. For further
particulars regarding this see page 357, and notes * and ■ page 358.

The second account is, that Husain [’Izz-ud-Dln], the father of the seven
sons, raised to the rulership of Gh ur by Mas’Qd-i-Karlm, having died in
545 H. [540 H. ?] was succeeded by the most prominent of his sons, 'AlA-ud-Dln,
Husain, who rebelled against BahtAm rnarched against Ghaznln, took

it, during Bakram's absence, and set his brother, Surt, upon the throne of the
Malymudt’s. Soon after BahrAm returned, and hung Surt. The remainder
of the account agrees pretty well adth the first.

The third is, that BahtAm Sbah a-as dead before 'AlA-ud-Dln reached
Cbazntn the second time, and in this statement a number of the most trust-
wortliy authorities agree, and further that Kbusrau ghah, his son, bad succeeded
just before 'Ala-ud-Din’s advance, and, on his approach, Shuarau S]^Ui

THE SHA WSABAKIaH DYNASTY OF QBOR. $4»

at KtdSn, Sulj^ ’AUUud-Dln ascended the throne of the
dominion of Ghu r. and assembled the forces of Gliur, of

abandaned Gliaznln and fled to Uhor [Baiyawl states that it happened in
550 H. ; but this is the only authority for that date^ which cannot be
correct; and if SOrt, according to the other statement, was put to death in
544 H., ’AlS'Ud'Dln would scarcely allow six years to elapse before avenging
him^ On ’AUl-nd-Dtn’s departure, Shnsrau Shah returtud to Aii drvastatmi
and ruittid capital, ami eotUimud there until the Oh"™ Turks, who had
defeated and made captive Sultftn Sanjar, Shusran’s maternal great uncle,
invaded ShurSsSn, and appeared before Hirftt, and from thence advanced
towards Qhazntn.

Sanjar had marched against the flhim in 548 H. —some few authors say in
547 H. —and was taken prisoner in the first month of the former year [March,
1056 A.D.]; they had invested Hir&t in 549 h., and gave up the attempt early
in 550^ and thm appear to have advanced towards Gh amtn. and this must
have been the year in which IChnarnii gfagh finally abandoned Qliazntn, and
not that in whi^ ’AU-nd-Dln, ^usain, devastated it

Some writers, who agree generally with this last account, say that Shnsrau
SbSh had tmgned about a year when *Alii-ud-Din arrived in the neighbour¬
hood of his capital, and that he [Shnsrau Shfthi was taken, and confined
within the walls of the citadel, and 'Alfi-ud-Dm set up his two nephews,
fihiyfij-ud-Dtn, and Mu‘ixs-ud-Dtn, at Ghaznin. Most authors say Shusrau
Sh«h died in 555 K., but others again state that his death took place in 544 H.,
and according to our author, who says he succeeded in ssa h,, and reigned
seven years, it would be in 559 H. See note *, page 112.'

The fomdh account'is, that, on the death of the father, [Tzz-ud-Dln],
Al-^usain, Saif-ud-Dtn, Surt, succeeded him, and that he seized upon
Qhazntn, while his other brother, ’AlS-ud-Din, Husain, seized upon Qh ur.
This is said to have taken place in 543 h., and it is further said that, after
S&rt had been hanged, Bah&-ud-Dtn, Sam, set out to avenge him, and died
on the way [in 544 H.].

The fifth account agrees pretty well with bur author, and may have been
partly copied from his work, although such a fact is not mentioned. It is to
the eflect, that Surt took Gbarntn to avenge the death of his brother, Eutb-
nd-Dtn, Muhammad, put to death by Bahriun ^ih, and that, after Surt’s
death along with his Waztr, Baha-ud-Dtn, Sam, set out to avenge him, and
died on the road. ’Ala-ud-Dtn, Husain, followed, on which Bahr^ Sb 3 h
fled, aitd the city was taken. The date of the first capture of Qbazntn is said
to have been 542 H., or 543 H. [Our author says that Baha-ud-Din, Sam,
succeeded to the sovereignty of Ftruz-koh and Ghur, when Saif-ud-Din, Surt,
his brother, set out on his expedition against Ghazntn, in 544 h. —the first
date he gives in the whole Section—and tends to show that Gbaznin must
have been taken in 543 H.]

It is absurd to suppose that Gh azntn was taken by 'Ala-ud-Dtn in 55 *^
and still more so to suppose that 547 uf the Ri^lat could be the possible date ;
and, although the exact date is not to be found in authors generally, it is quite
that Saif-ud-Dtn, S&rt, took it first in the fifth month of 543 h. [middle
of October, 1051 A.D.]. Bahiam returned in the depth of winter [probably in
January, 1052 A.D.], and hung him. Bolui-ud-Din, Sam, his brother, succeeded
him as ruler ofGhar in 544 H., and died soon after, in the same year ', on which
'Ala-ud-Dtn, ^ elapse, at

350 'THE 7ABAig:4t41.NA$IRL

the capital, Ftriiz-koh, and of QfaarjistSn, and determined
to mardi agmnst Ghaznln.

When Sultan Yam!n-ud-Dln*, Bahram Shah, became
aware of this matter, and bf his [’Ala-ud-Dtn’s] intention,
he caused the troops of Ghaznin and of Hindustan to be
got ready and organized, and led them from Rukhaj * and
Tigln-abad, in the district of Garmsir, towards Zamtn-i-
Dawar. As Sultan ’Ala-ud-Din, with his forces, had
[already] reached Zamtn-i-Dawar, Sultan Bahram Shah
despatched envoys to him, saying, “ Return again to Ghur.
and in thy ancestral possession remain in quietness, 'for
thou wilt not be able to resist my forces, for I bring
elephants [along with me].” The envoys having delivered
the message with which they were entrusted to Sultan ’Ala-
ud-D!n, he replied, saying, “ If thou bringest elephants*, I
will bring the Kh armil; but, God knows, indeed, thou fallest
into error, that thou hast put my brothers to death, and I
have not slain any person belonging to thee. But hast
thou not heard what Almighty God says* ?—“ Whosoever is

once marched agtdnst Ghaznln, and took it towards the close of the same
year, 544 H,, the same in which Guzldah and a few others say Bahr 3 m died.
What tends to prove all this is, that in 545 H. *Ala>ud-Dln was taken captive
by Sultan Sanjar, <^fer the former had sacked Ghaznln. and was detained
in captivity some two years, during which time another ruler was set up in
Gh ur. and ’Ala-ud*Dln only obtained his release just before Sultan Sanjar set
out on his unfortunate expedition against the Ghuzz. which was in 547 H., for
Sanjar was defeated by them and taken prisoner, on the first day of the first
month, Muharram, 548 H. [20th March, 1056 a.d.]. See also page 358, and
notes * and *.

'AUl-ud-Dln, ^usain, made no attempt to retain possession of Ghaznln.
and he abandoned it, and retired into Gh fir, but destroyed every building
pertaining to the Ma^mudl sovereigns, on his way back. The reason why
he abandoned it must have been his fear of Sultan Sanjar, or of BahrUm’s or
Ehusrau’s return, as the case may be, and of meeting a fate similar to Iris
brother S&rl’s.

* In three copies of the text at this place he is called Yamin-ud>/>a(< 4 > 4 .
In his account of Bahiftm Sha h's reign our author styles him Mu’izz-Ud-I>tn,
BahiSm Sl^di, and says Khiisran ShaV s title was Mu’ayyan-ud-Dln. ■ See
pages 109 and III, and note

'* A small tract of country in the district of Bust.

* The word J4 an elephant, is used in most copies of the text, but to moke

sense of the p>assage I have been obliged to make it a plural. The context
shows there must have been more than one elephant. Some other authors
have ^ whidi certainly agrees better with and might be translated

the or leader of the elephants, alluding to some iiunous war-

elephant he may have had.

* On the l[Fur’Sn’s authority only. It Is rather strange that in Iris acogont

THE £^H^SABANti||yDyNASTY OF CffiLOR )$>

slain unjustly, we have given heir, or next of kin, power
[to avenge him] ; but let him not exceed bounds in putting
the slayer to death, because he likewise will be assisted
and avenged'.”

When the envoys returned, both armies were marshalled
in ranks and made ready for the conflict. Sultan 'A 12 >
ud-Din called unto him two Pahlawluis [champions] of his
own, who were the leaders of the army, and famous war¬
riors of the kingdom of Qhur, and both of them were
named. Kha rmll. One was Kharmll-i-Sam. ]^usain, father
of •NSsir-ud-Dtn, Husa.in-i- Kha. rmll ; and the other £2i9r>
mil-i-Sam, Banji*; and both of them were famed in their
day for their valour and prowess. He said unto them:—
“ Bahram Shah has sent a message, saying, ‘ I bring ele¬
phants [against thee] and I have sent a reply, * If thou
bringest elephants, I bring the Kha rmll.* This day it
behoveth that each one of you champions should over¬
throw and bring an elephant to the ground.” They both
kissed the ground and retired [to their posts] ; and, at a
place which they call Kotah-baz*, the two armies came to
an encounter. When the battle commenced, both these
champions dismounted, fastened up the skirts of their coats
of mail®, and entered the fight. When the elephants of
Bahram Shah made a charge*, each of those champions
attacked an elephant, and got beneath the armour of the
animals, and, with their poniards, ripped open the bellies
of the elephants. Kharmtl-i-Sam, Banji, remained under
his elephant, and it fell upon him, and he and the elephant
perished together. Kh armil-i-Sam. Husain, brought his

of Bahram Shah’s reign, pages 109—ill, our author does not even mention
sort’s name, although he refers to ’Ala-ud-Dtn, ^usoin, the brother, and the
capture of Qhazntn. ‘

r ^fu’ran : S. 17, 35.

“ One copy has Kunah[or Gunah]-waz, and two copies have Kotah-bir-bib.
This last appears incorrect, and bab seems merely bOs repeated in error by the
copyist. Katah-waz cannot be meant, although w and b are interchangeable :
Katah-w^ is much too far to the east. One copy has Gojhah-i-nab, A place
of this name, or Sih Goahah-i-nab, has been mentioned at page 149, but this
again is too far to the west. Sec also page 358.

• The word used signifies to fasten up or back. “ Thrcfttfit^ 0ff thetr eo^tts

would scarcely have been likely at a time like this, and the text
contains the word “skirts” moreover. See Elliot, India, vol. ii. page *87.

• Both the British Museum copies have, “when the elephants of B ahrtM
SblUi chargtdthe tUphatUs, eadi of the champions,” &c.

3S9 TKS TABA9JIT-X-NA$1RL

elephant to the ground, and got away in safety, and
mounted [his horse] again.

When the battle was duly ordered, SultSn ’Ala-ud-D!n,
after he had arrayed himself in all his panoply, commanded
that a surcoat of crimson-coloured satin should be brought
to him, and he put it on over all his armour. His kinsfolk
and his intimates inquired :—“ What device is this of the
king’s, that he covers his armour with a crimson surcoat ?”

-He answered:—“For this reason, that, in case my body
should be wounded by arrow, lance, or sword, the redness
of my blood, by means of the crimson siu'coat, will not
^ow upon my armour, so that the hearts of my followers
may not become dejected.” The mercy of the Almighty
be upon him!

The troops of Ghur have a method, in the practise of
fighting on foot, of making a certain article of one fold of
raw bullock-hide, over both sides of which they lay cotton,
and over all draw figured coarse cotton clo^*, after
the form of a screen [or breast-work], and the name of
that article of defence is kdrwah. When the foot-soldiers
of Gliur place this [screen] upon their shoulders, they are
completely covered from head to foot by it; and, when
they close their ranks, they appear like unto a wall, and no
missile or arms can take any effect on it, on account of the
quantity of cotton with which it is stuffed*.

When the engagement was fairly beg^n, Daulat Shah,
son of Bahram Shah, with a body of cavalry and an

* Called karbSa.

* Our author haa described this instrument of defence tolerabljr well, but
not exactly. The word k&parah is contained in Pus*hto. and this means of
protection was used by some of the Af^ibis in former times, before fire-arms
came into use. The kSrwah was made from a raw bullock, cow, or bni&lo
hide stufied with straw or hay [cotton would be too expensivel and tvUed
along brfort troops on foot, when advancing, to defend them from the arrows
of their opponents. In the battles between the YQsufrl and Diladk tribes
of Afgjhfins, in the fifteenth century, of which before long I hope to be able to
ipve an account, the UtmSn Shcl, one of the lesser and of the many still
independent Af^lfin tribes [who never paid allegiance to DunSnb or
BKrakds] who accompanied the Yfisufrts when the latter first appeared east
cf the Skalbar Pass, on one occasion formed the advance of the allied forces,
and used these stuffed hidesabove described. They are said to have been very
•s^ert In their construction ; but I do not think this mode of fitting will be
•Mffcient to prove that the Gh urts were ** Patdns,*’ or Paffins Qhfirfs- Com*
para ElUot, India, vol. IL pages 287*8. See my Afi^bfin Dictionaiy, second
•jUtton, p. 1151. London: 1867.

THE SBANSABAHIAH dynasty OF GHOR. $53

elephattt\ made a chaise. Sultan ’Ala-ud-Dtn 'ditected
that the foot-soldiers should open their rank of kapvahs,
in order to allow Daulat Shah to enter with his whole
division. They opened their ranks accordingly. When
Daulat ^Ih, with his body of horse and the elephant
entered, the infantry closed the breach in their ranks again,
and completely surrounded that Prince on all sides; and he,
with the whole of that body of horse, were martyred, and
the elephant was brought to the ground, and also killed

When the troops of Bahram g^ah witnessed that disaster
and slaughter, th^ fell into disorder and gave way. SultSn
'Ala-ud-Dln followed in pursuit, from stage to stage, as far
as a place which they call Tosh-i-Ab-i-Garm [the jet of hot-
water], near to Tigin-abSd, where Sul$Sn Bahram
faced about, and a second time prepared to renew the
engagement; and the whole of the forces then assembled
under him again gave battle, but were defeated and put to
the rout, and only stopped at the g^te of Ghaznln. SultSn
’Ala-ud-Din followed in fierce pursuit so that BahrSm Sh^r
for the third time, assembled the troops of Ghazutn,. the
men of the city, and a large levy of footmen, and gave
battle for the third time ; but he was unable to overcome
[the enemy], and was again defeated. ’Ala-ud-Dtn took the
city of Shaznln by storm, and, during seven nights and days,
fired the place, and burnt it with obstinacy and wantonness*.

The chronicler states that, during these seven days, the
air, from the blackness of the smoke, continued as black as
night; and those nights, from the flames ra^ng in the
burning city, were lighted up as light as day. During
these seven days, likewise, rapine, plunder, and masMcre
were carried on with die utmost pertinacity and vindictive¬
ness. All the men that were found were killed, and the
women and children were made capdve. 'AlS-ud-IMn

* One elephant rally is mentioned, and it is not stated that Danlat Sllib was
tmounitd on it. It appears to have been intended to break the task of
kiieras with it.

* Our author himself says that Saif-ud-Dtn, SOrl, was the JhrH of the
brothers who come into contact with Bahilm Sbkh, and ’Ali>nd-Irfki,

the last; but he has so arranged his work that his account of SOrt cooties last.
The reader will perhaps find it less perplexing if he should read the account
of Sort, at Section XIX., first, then that tA Baht>ud-Dtn, Sim, at page 341,
and this notice of 'Alk<nd-Dtn last.

3S4

THE TABA][P\T-I.NA$IRL

commanded that the whole of the [remains of the] Mah-*
mudt Sultans should be exhumed from their g^ves and
burnt, except those of Sultan Mahmud, the Gha,zt. Sultan
Mas’ud, and Sultan Ibrahim*; and, during the whole of
these seven days, 'Ala-ud-Dtn gave himself up to wine and
carousal within the palaces of the SultAns of Gha zntn.
During this time he gave directions so that the tomb of
Sultan Saif-ud-Din, Suri, and the mausoleum of the Malik-
ul-Jibal [Kutb-ud'Dtn, Muhammad], were sought out, and
coffins prepared; and caused preparations to be made
for putting his whole army into mourning'. When the
eighth night came round, and the city had become entirely
desolated and consumed, and its inhabitants massacred,
Sultan ’Ala-ud-Din, on that night, improvised* several
strophes eulogistic of himself, and gave them to the
minstrels, with directions to sing them accompanied by
their changs and chighanahs* before him ; and the lines,
which are appropriate, are as follows :—

•* The world knoweth that I of the universe am king*.

The lamp of the family of the ’Abbists am I.

*Ala-ud-Dth, l^lusain, son of l^usain, am I,

Whose house’s sovereignty be ever enduring 1
When on the bright bay steed of my dominion I sit.

One, to me, will be both the heavens and the earth.

Death sports around the point of my spear :

Hope follows [as goad] the dust of my troops*.

I should roam the world through, like unto Sikandar :

1 should in every city another sovereign place.

I was determined on this, that of the vagabonds of Ghaziitii
I would set a river of blood running like unto the Nil.

But they are maudlin old dotards and infants.

And my blooming fortune maketb intercession for them.

For their own sakes I have granted them their lives.

That the granting of their lives may of mine be the bond*.”

* Other writers state that the bones of the whole of the Mahmudt. sovereigns
were eahnmed and burnt, with the sole exception of those of Sul^Sn Mahmud.

^ The greater number of copies of the original leave out the words
— mourning—entirely; whilst the Bodleian MS., the R. A. S. MS., and one
of the Paris copies have food I The other Paris copy has —^fightin^

m a k i n g war, &c. 11

* He was gifted with a poetical genius.

* The first is a kind of guitar, or harp, and the latter, a kind of violin.

* * A ll-u d -Dtn had evidently an exalted opinion of himself or hsd imbibed
more strong drink than was good for him.

* Several other works which give thb poem leave out these two lines.

* As far as can be judged from all the exaggeration contained in these

THE SKANSABAJCIAH DYNASTY OF {^BOR.

35S

He tfaed commanded, saying, "I have spared the
remainder of the people of Qltazntn," and he arose from
the assembly, and went to the hot-bath; and, on the eighth
day of these proceeding^, he got up at day-dawn, and,
accompanied by the whole of the troops of ^^ur, and the
Maliks [chiefs], came to the mausoleum of his brothers.
He then donned mourning garments, together with his
whole army, and, for [another] seven nights and days, he
remained at the mausoleum observing funeral ceremonies.

During this period ^e whole IjluriSn was read through
several times, and alms were there distributed ; and the
coffins of his brothers were placed on biers*, and he [*AUU
ud-Din] marched from Gha znln towards the districts of
Dawar and Bust. On reaching the city of Bust, he entirely
destroyed the palaces and other edifices* the Mahinudl
dynasty, the like of which were not to be found in the
regions of the world *; and the whole territory, which
appertained to the Mahmudl sovereigns, he directed should
be ravaged and desolated ^

He returned to Ghur, and, by his command, the corpses*
of his brothers were deposited by the side of their ancestors.
He had ordered that several Sayyids of Gha znln should
be seized, according to the law of retaliation, in the place
of Sayyid Majd-ud-Din, Musawl, who was Sult^ Surf’s
Waztr, and who, along with Sult^ Surf, they had hung
up from one of the arches* [of the bridge ?] of Gh aznln,

boastful efiusions‘of ’AUl.ud'Dfn, ]^asain, he seems to have imagined that his
own life might be lengthened in proportion to the lives he spared, he had
caused almost the whole of the inhabitants of Gh amln to be massacred 1

The word has other meonii^ besides "cradle." Elliot: India,
Tol. iL p. 289 .

* Su^ as mosques, colleges, fortifications, &c.

* Some ruins of those edifices still remain. An intelligent man, a native of
EjuidohAr, and an AfgbSn, says these ruins are of immense size and height,
particularly one arch, which was standing some few years since, said to have
been one of the great mosque. There was also a stone bridge across the river
Htrmand, near this arch, called the Pnl-i-’Aslipwn—the Lovers’ Bridge-
remains of which may still be seen.

7 The whole of the district of Zam{n-i-D2war, I presume. The •territory of
the MahmQd! sovereigns, even at that time, was of great extent, and filiar
formed only a very small portion of it.

* The word used by our author ngniSes tombs, sepulchre;, and the like,
which, of course^ would scarcely be interred. The coffins and their cemtents
were interred.

* The word used here is signifying an ardi, among other meanings

3SC THB TA^A¥AT.X-NA$IR!.

and they were brought before the Sult&n. Bags were filled
witii the earth* of Ghazntn. and placed upon their backs,
and [they were] brought along with him to FtrGz-koh, the
capital; and, on reaching that city, the Sayjrids were put
to death, and their blood was mixed with the earth
which had been brought from CBiaznln. and from it several
towers* were erected on the hills of Ftruz-koh, which
towers, moreover, were still remaining up to this present
time. The Almighty pardon him 1

After he had wreaked such vengeance as this, and
returned to the capital again, *Ala-ud-Dtn desired to
devote himself to pleasure and revelry; and he gathered
around him minstrels and boon companions, betook himself
to conviviality and carousal, and improvised lines which
he directed the minstrels to sing, and accompany on their
harps and violins*. These are the lines:—

*• I am [he] in whose justice the world hath exultation;

And I am [he] through whose munificence the treasury sustidneth injustice.
The finger of his hand, to his teeth, the enemy placeth*,

When, to the string of the bow, I the thimble apply*.

and it is also a proper name ; hu no word signifying a bs^ge is used in any
eopy of the text collated, but some other writers say it was the TUV Bridge—the
bridge leading to 7^ ™ ZabulistSn, probably. Another writer, however,
says, Surt and his Wa^r were hung at the head of “the Bridge of Two
Arches”——^nd this is probably correct In his account of SQrt,
&rther on, our author says it was the Bridge of One Arch. See the first of the
Gh axntn dynasty. Section XIX.

I signifies earth, not “ dirt.” The context shows what this earth was

intended for, but dirt would scarcely have answered for making mortar.

* Another author states that it was the remaissder of the people of Ghazntn —
not Sayyids only—that ’AUl-ud-Dtn removed, and that they were laden with
sacks of earth from that city, and on their arrival at Firuz-koh they were
slaughtered, and a building was raised from the earth which was mixed with
their blood. The word used by our author signifies a tower, bastion, &c. The
probability is that they were small towers, such as are raised for landmarks,
and that the earth brought from Gh azntn. mixed with the blood of the Sayyids,
and amalgamated with the mortar, was used for these buildings.

* Here again the idiom of the different copies of the original varies
so much that it would lead one to imagine that the work of our author must,
originally, have been written in a different language. One set of copies has

j oiAy *iU«. j Ij syf* li o'iA* trhilst another set of copies has

j jt'lr* J** j* ^ b ciV. 1 ^ J throughout the work the
two sets agree word for word almost. The latter set is the least trustworthy.

* In token of astonishment.

* A sort of thimble used by archcis to protect the left thumb from the bow.
string.

3S7

THE SHANSABAHIAH DYNASTY OF

When mjr linjr steed leaped n sqnnre within the rank%

The edvenery no longer knew ball from square*.

When, out of hatred towards me, Bahilm Ql^h^ bent the bow,

I pluck'd, with my lance, the quiver from his waist.

The support of my foe, although they were all RIes [and] RXnahs,

I reduced, with my mace, to atoms, both Rfte’s and Rinah’s head*.

To draw forth vengeance by the sword, I have indeed taught
The sovereigns of the time, and the kings of the age.

Ah, ravishing Minstrel! since I am released from war.

Sing that strain indeed, and that melody enkindle.

When fortune hath been grasp’d, it is not right to renounce
The singers’ melody, nor the fire-worshippers’ pure wine.”

Trustworthy persons have related after this wise, that,
when Sultan ’Ala-ud-Din ascended the throne of Firuz-
koh, he ordered his nephews, Gljiyag-ud-Din, Muhammad-
i-Sam*, and Mu’izz-ud-Din, Muhammad-i-Sam, sons of
Sultan Baha-ud-Din, Muhammad Sam, to be imprisoned,
and they were confined in the fortress of Wajiristan*, and
an allowance was fixed for their support.

He [’Ala-ud-Din] also began to show a contumacious
spirit towards Sultan Sanjar, and manifested open hostility

* These two lines evidently refer to the game of Cliaug^n, from which the
lately introduced game of Pola is derived. The text of these lines varies con¬
siderably in different copies of the original, but I have rendered the translation
as close as possible; still the meaning is not clear. Probably horse and rider
bore everything before them, and spread terror among the foe, and struck
BahrKm Shah with amazement.

y From this line, if correctly quoted, it was Bahriim gliah who encountered
’Aia-ud-Dtn, Husain ; but other authors, as already noticed in note *, page 347,
distinctly state that he was dead before the second expedition against Qhaznfn ;
but whether Bahriim or Skusrau Shah—the measure would not be lost if
“ Ehusrau ” were substituted for Bahriim—it would appear that RljpQt and
other Hindu princes and chiefs were in the Ghaznawfd army on this occasion.
£ee account of Sullibi Mu’izz-ud-Dtn. Muhammad, the second of the Chazntn
dynasty. In his account of Bahmm Sigh’s reign, pages 109 to in, our
author says that he returned to Qkaznin after ’Ala-ud-Din, Husain, withdrew,
and died there. Those authors who contend that Bahram Sl^h had died.a
short time before ’Ala-ud-Dfn, Husain, appeared before Qbaznin, state that it
was his son, TChiismu Shith . who left it on his approach, and who returned to
it after the departure of the Ghartans. and finally relinquished it on the
advance of the Ghnzz Turks, in 548 or 549 H., after the defeat of Sulj^
Sanjar, and his falling a captive into their hands in that year, two years only
before the death of ’Ali-ud-Dtn.

* The word is used in all but one copy of the text, which has
signifying “ a ball,” and may even be the most applicable meaning after all.

* Sftm [BahS-ud-Dtn] was the name of the father only.

I qqie fortress of Nfie probably, which stronghold was used ns a state prison
by the (jhawiaudd SultbU.

35> 'THB tABA]6:AT*I-NA$Xia

towards him*. What the SultSns of Ghur had stipulated
for, and which used to reach the Sanjart Court every year,
such as arms and armour, rarities, and offerings, 'AUi-ud-
Din withheld; and matters readied such a pass, that
Sult3n Sanjar assembled a numerousarmy, and determined
to march into the territory of Ghur.

SultSn ’Ala>ud-Din collected the forces of G3iu>*>
advanced to meet the Sultan as far as the limits of the
town of Nab, between Ftruz-koh and Hirat, in the valley
of the Haiiw-ar-Rud. There is water there, and a delight¬
ful and extensive plain*, which they call Sih-gos]iah-i-Nab;

* This seems to confirm the statement of Fayiti-t [note page 336], that
^usain [’Izs-ud-Dtn], son of Sam, ’Ala-ud-Dti), ^nsain's father, hod also
been made capdve hy Salman Sanjar, some years before, and made tributary.
Under the reign of Sanjar also, our author states, page 149, “The Maliks of
GhBr and Sult&ns of the Jilnl were all subject to Sultan Sanjar. It is probable
that, as SuItSn Sanjar had dethroned Sultan Arsalan, and had set up BahiSm
ShUi on the throne of QJxazntn, he [Sanjar] received, as lord-paramoimt over
Qhamtn also, the tribute formerly paid by the chiefs of G])ur to the Sul^ns
of the Ma^iidt djmasty. When Bahram executed Saif-ud-Dln, Surt, 'Ala>
ndoDtn’s brother, he sent his head to his uncle, Sultiin Sanjar. See also
Fan&katt’s statement, para. 10 to note *, page 348.

• Two copies have, ** There there is a delightful river and on extensive
plain but of course the Hartw or Ilart-riid, as the river of HirSt is named,
was there, and the extra river appears redundant.

Fafibif states that the battle took place before Aobah, near Hirftt [Aobah is
Pus’hto for "water ”], and in this JahUn-Ara agrees, but theTSrlUi-i-rbtfthtm}
says it took place at Markn-zad, but both places are in the Hirat district, and
not far from each other.

In the year 544 h. [Fa^ib-t says as early as 54a H.], ’All, Jatrl, [called
f.jiatrt by our author] who held the fief of Hir&t, during Sull&n Sonjar’s
absence, had become disaffected towards the Sullan, in what way is not men¬
tioned, for but little is said about him in history. [See note *, page 337.]
He concerted with ’Al£-ud-Dln, ^usain, “ Malik of Qbfir,” in thus hostility,
and Sanjar marched against them. They were defeated and overthrown in
545 H.—some say in 544 H., and Fafib*! 547 H. —and ’All, Jatrl, ’AlS-ud-Dln,
^osain, GbGrt, and the Malik-ddah, Shams-ud-Ptn. Mubammad [son ofF aIrh r.
nd-Dtn, Mas’Gd, of KhntSn, elder brother of'AlZ-ud-Ptn], were taken prisoners,
the last by the hand of the Sipah-sGUir, Baranbaab- Orders were given to
put *Ali, Jatrt, to death at once, and 'AUl-nd-Dtn was thrown into prison; but
Sliams-ad-Dln, Mubammad, having obtained 50,000 dtnSn from EHUnten, the
sum demanded for his- ransom, that sum was paid to Baranbaab, and he was
set free. After some time, SulpUi Sanjar took compassion on ’AlA-ud-Ptn,
set him at liberty, and made him one of his boon companions.

FanSkatt Mere relates the story respecting [*AU-nd-Dtn] ^usain, which
Fayib't, and some others relate of his father, ^nsain, already recorded in
note *, page 336; but, although Foaib-t relates matters entirely different here
respecting 'Ala-ud-Dtn, ^usain, and gives such circumstantial detalk, I still
cannot but consider Raabtd-ud-Dtn’s account correct notwithstanding, who,

359

THE SHANSABAnIAH DYNASTY OF fiHUR.

and at that place an engagement took place between the
two armies. SultSn ’Al5-ud-Dtn, a day before the battle
was fought, had directed so that the ground in rear of the
forces of (ahur had been entirely laid under water; and he
had caused it to be proclaimed that the ground in the
rear had become quite flooded, and that whoever should
attempt to fly to the rear would get into the mud, and stick
there.

When the battle was arranged, and the two armies came
in contact, a body of about 6000 Ghuzz, Turk, and Khalj
horse, which was stationed on the right of the army of
Qlur, deserted, and went over to Sultan Sanjar, and sub¬
mitted to him, and the troops of Gh ur were defeated and
overthrown. The whole of the Amirs and warriors, and

however, styles both of them Husain, without giving theic titles. The anecdote
is much the same in both authors.

Fsfih-t says, “When Ht>sain [Tzz-ud-Dtn, Husain, of our author], son
of Sam, was taken prisoner, ;the Sultan commanded that he should be put
to death, but, at the intercession of ShaiJUl Ahmad [the Imam-i-Rabbant of
Rasbld-ud-Dln], {xhazzAlt, he was spared, and set at liberty. This was in the
year 54$ H. For two years he used to light the fires of the cooks of the Sul^’a
anny [our author would scorn to relate this, as it did not tend to the gloiifica*
tion of his patrons], until one day, the Amir [commander] of the troops of
ShurSsSn, ’Imfid-ud-Daulah, chanced to meet with him.'* FuiSkatl

says, for two years [’Alfi-ud-Dln] Hnsain wandered about the bSaus of Sanjar’s
camp [or capital] as a mendicant, when one day fis Hl»dU passing thCL^op
of a cook be noticed Husain, who was attending the fire and watching the
cook’s pot.

HlnAj took compassion on Hos<tin and made known his case to the Snlj[Sn,
who directed that he should be brought to his presence. When admitted, he
kissed the ground before the Sultan, who said to him :—“ I understand thou
hast neither wealth nor effects left unto thee. Hast thou no sense of cleanliness
left thee either?” [Raahld-ud-Dln says, “ Hast thou not the means and power
of keeping one head and face clean ?”] H”^" replied :—“ In the days when
this head was mine own head I had the good fortune to be attended by a
thousand servants, but, now that it belongs to thee, thou keepest it thus
wretched and abject.” The Sultan was touched ; he pardoned him, treated
him with honour, and sent him back to his native country attended by
a large retinue; and to the end of his days Pttid obedience to that

monarch.

’AU-nd>Dtn, restored to the sovereignty of Ghflr in 547 h.,

just before Sultan Sanjar moved against the Ghuzz. He was defeated and
made captive in the first month of 548 H., and, when released in 551 h., no
power was left to him. 'AlS-ud-Dln ditd a month btfort Sanjar*! rdrate.
Several authors mention Sanjar’s having bestowed a casket of gems, one night
at a convivial meeting; upon ’Ali-ud-Dln, but treasury flock^ and

herds are not refe r red to. See page 238, and note

360

THE TABA]e:ilT.I-NA$IRL

distinguished men of the GhOrtan army, got ehiangled in
that swanipy g^und and morass. Some of them obtained
martyrdom, and some were made captive, and Sultan ’AUl-
ud-Dtn himself was taken prisoner.

Sultan Sanjar commanded that he should be put in con¬
finement, and they brought gyves. of iron to place on his
1^^. He utged that it was requisite they should make a
representation [from him] to the Sultan, saying:—“Do unto
me as I intended to have done unto thee, for I obtained
gyves of gold, in order that, thereby, reverence for thy
sovereignty might be so much the more preserved.” When
this request was made known, those identical gyves were
called for, and, when they were obtained, those very same
gyves were placed upon 'Ala-ud-Dtn's legs, and they
mounted him upon a camel, and Sultan Sanjar returned
[to his own territory].

As the report of ’Ala-ud-Din’s wittiness of temperament,
and quickness of intellect, was much talked about at that
period, and had become famous, and Sultan Sanjar had
heard a great deal about it, either the next day, or a few
days after, he sent for him, treated him with honour, and
set him at liberty [from his gyves]. A salver of precious
gems had been placed near the masnad of the imperial
throne, and that was bestowed upon ’Ala-ud-Din, who arose
and made his obeisance, and spoke these lines, befitting
the circumstance. The following is the quatrain :—

“In the rank of battle the Shah took me, but did not kill.
Notwithstanding, of a verity, I was full worthy of being slain.

A casket of precious gems he bestow’d upon me :

In such wise his mercy [was], and his bounty such*.”

Sultan Sanjar made him one of his associates and boon
companions, and there was no pleasure-party without the
presence of ’Ala-ud-Din, until one day, during a banquet,
the sight of ’Ala-ud-Din fell upon the sole of Sultan San-
jar’s foot, who, seated on his throne, had extended one of
his legs, upon the sole of the foot of which there was a
large mole. He arose, kissed the mole, and improvised
the following lines :—

* Some other authors quote these lines differently, particularly the two last.

THE SHANSABAnIAH DYNASTY OF fiHOR. 361

** Vcrlljr the duet et the gate of thy palace is [my] diadem*,

And [this], the collar of thy service, is my adornment.

In the same manner as I kiss the mole on the tele of thy foot,

' Even to good fortnne [iikewise] salutes my head.”

This anecdote has been already related in the account of
Sultan Sanjar’s reign. The latter gave him back again
the throne of Stiur*» and he commanded that stores,
treasure, all his herds of horses and camels and cattle, and
flocks of sheep, his own personal property, should be made
over to ’Ala-ud-Din ; and Sul(an Sanjar said :—“ ’Al5-
ud-Din, thou art in the condition of a brother to me.
Return, and take all these things—cattle and treasure—
along with thee, and remove them to the country of Ghur.
If the divine decree should in such wise will, that this
host of Ghuzz should be overcome, and we should
obtain the victory, when these things shall be demanded
of thee, send them back to me; but otherwise, if it should
turn out that my dominion shall have come to an end,
and the thread of the empire's regularity shall have been
severed, it is far better that these things should remain
with thee than that they should fall into the hands of the
GhuzzV*

During this period of Sul(an 'Ala-ud-Dln’s absence*
from the capital of the kingdom of Gh ur. a number of the
Amirs, Maliks, and the great men and judges* of the Jibal
[mountain tracts] and of the territory of Gh ur. had agreed
together to bring Malik Na$ir-ud-Din, Husain*, son of
Muhammad, of Madln, who was the brother’s son of 'Ala-
ud-Din, and place him upon the throne of Flruz-koh. A
body of disobedient persons of the territory of Kashi*, who
excel all the rest of the people of Ghur in arrogance and
obstinacy, had committed great violence, and by their
turbulence and clamour, under pretence of grants, gifts,

* The first line liere is slightly difTerent in some few copies, and varies a
littlQ from what was given at page 150, and reads, “ Verily the dust of tky
steaCs hoof Vi my diadem,” but the rest agrees with the former verrion. Other
authors quote the line as given in the text above.

* The Tartkh-i'IhrShtmt says “both Gh ur and Gh asntn.”

r Another author says that SultUn Sanjar bestowed a standard and kettle
drums upon ’AUl-ud-Dtn, and restored him to the rulership of Ghgr.

* Captivity did not sound well in Minh&j-i'Sariij’s ears apparently.

* Some have 9asan.

* This word is written “ Kast ” in several copies.

A a

36a

THE XABAlp;iT.I-NA91Rl.

alms, and robes of distinction, had appropriated the royal
treasure and property.

When Sultan 'Ala-ud-Dtn came towards Qihui’ from
Khu rSsan with all that treasure, cattle, and wealth [con¬
ferred upon 'him by Sultan Sanjar], he first proceeded in
the direction of the territory of Kashi, destroyed the whole
of their [fortified villages], which exceeded a

thousand l^agrs in number, and every one of which, in
strength and height, was such, that the decision of conjec¬
ture and conception could not admit a plan of it.

After having taken vengeance upon the rebels of the
Kashi territory and other mountain tracts, he [’Ala-ud-Dln]
returned to the capital Flruz-koh, and, before his reaching
it, they had killed Malik Nagir-ud-Dln-i-Muhammad, as
will, subsequently, be recorded. When Sultan ’Ala-ud-Din
arrived at Flruz-koh, and [again] seated himself on the
throne of his ancestors, he turned his attention to the
making of fresh conquests. He brought under his sway
the districts of Bamlan and Tukharistan*, and seized the
districts of Dawar, Jarum, and Bust also; and» of Khura-
san, took the fortress of Tulak, which is situated in the
mountains in the vicinity of Hir3t, after a period of six
years*.

There was a poet within the forttess of Tulak, whom
thqy called by the name of’Umr-i-Saraj ; and, when hosti¬
lities were about to come to an end, and the fortress of
Tulak was about to be gained possession of by terms of
accommodation, he composed some verses, two lines of
which, which were deserving [of insertion], are here brought
in:—

“ Seated on horseback, galloping np.hill and down,

Thy object is Tulak : lo I there is Tulak.”

In their language, galloping up-hill and down-dale is
called “ Wurlak-Fulak'*.” " The mercy of God be upon
them!”

* See the dynasty fiuther on.

* According to this statement, ’Ala-ud-Dtn must have been investing this
place during the whole of his reign, for he only ruled six years.

These words, vary in most of the copies of the text, but the best copies
have as above written. Some have “ Orlak-Fulak,” *' Warlak-TQlak,” and
“ Wurkal-Tulud.” The words arc unintelligible, and are certainly not
Pus’hto.

THE SHANSABANIAH DYNASTY OF GfiCR. 363

From that place *Ala-ud-Din turned his face to th,e
conquest of Gharjistan; and took to wife the lady ^ur
Malikah, who was the daughter of the Shar. Shah [by
name], son of Ibrahim, Shar. son of Ardgliir, one of the
Maliks of Gh arjistan* ; and the valley of the Murghab
river and [its] fortresses came into his possession. The
fortress of Sabekji* [or Sabegji], however, held out, and
carried on hostilities [against him] for six years^; and of
this time, for a period of three years, he sat down con¬
tinually before it, until it was given up to him.

Towards the end of Sultan ’Ala-ud-Din’s life, Mula-
hidah emissaries came to him from Alamut*, and he
treated them with great reverence; and in every place
in Ghur they sought, secretly, to make proselytes. The
Mulahidah [heretic] of Alamut had set his ambition on
subjecting the people of Gh ur [to his heresy], and making
them submissive. This fact became dehlemeiit which
adhered to the train of the ’Ala-i robe of sovereignty. Of
his life, however, but a short period remained, and he
died, and they buried him by the side of his ancestors
and his brethren*. The Almighty foi^ive him 1

* See note *, page 341.

* The name of this place is doubtful. The majority of copies have as

writtenabove but other copies have

and Of Gh ur we have no knowledge whatever, and the Politicals,

who were stationed in Afghanistan previous to the outbreak in 1841, although
they did gain a little knowledge of the eastern parts of AfgJi^iistan, appear
almost to have neglected the western parts.

t See note •, preceding page.

* Alamut, from 4II and —the eagle’s [not vulture’s] nest—the name
of the stronghold of Httsan-i'$abbah, the Shaykli-ul-Jibal, or the Old Man of
the Mountain, or Chief of the Assassins, as the chief of this sect used to
be called. The person here referred to, however, is MUI^AMMAD, son of
BUZURG-UMID, the third of the Alamuttahs, who died in 557 H. In
Elliot, India, vol. U. pages 289-90, he is turned into “ the Mulahi-datu- 1 -
maut” 1 See page 365, and note *.

’Ala-ud-Din, ^usain, died at Hirat in 551 H., the same year in which
Sult&n Sanjar escaped from the Gh uzz. and Itsiz, Shwarazm Sha h, died,
according to Fafih-t, Lubb-ut-TawartlJl, Hiihtb-us-Siyar, Haft-I]Fltm,
Mir’at-i-Jah&n Numa, and several others, but, according to Jaban Aia and
Muntakbab-ut-TawariUi, in 556 H., but this is incorrect. Jannabt says in
566 H. 1 Our author, although brought up in the residence of his niece, and
the gloriiier of all things Chiirtan, appears neither to have known the
year of 'Al£-ud-Dtn’s death nor the extent of his reign. He reigned six
years.

* How many sons he had our author did not appear to consider necessary

A a 2

36 *

THE TABA¥AT-I-NA$IRI.

XV. MALIK NA$ 1 R-UD.DIN. AL-^USAIN, SON OF MUHAMMAD,

MAdInI.

When Sult^ ’Ala>ud-Dtn, Husain, was made captive
in the engagement with Sultan Sanjar, the [affairs of the]
teiritories of Gh ur and the Jibal [mountain tracts] became
weak and disordered. The refractory and disobedient of
Gh ur b^an to show contumacy, and each tribe fortified
itself in the hills and defiles in which it dwelt, and com¬
menced carrying on strife and hostility one against the
other.

A party of the great Amirs who still remained [for a
great number had been slain or made captive in the battle
against Sultan Sanjar] brought Malik Na$ir-ud-Din,
Husain, son of Muhammad, Madini, from Madin, and
placed him on the throne of Firuz-koh*. The treasures of
Sultan 'Ala-ud-Din, and the treasures of his son, Sultan
Saif-ud-Din, he took into his own possession ; and the
whole of the precious things, treasures, and valuable pro¬
perty, and other effects stored up, he expended upon those
Amirs, and great men, and on mean persons, and seized
upon the dominions of Ghur. His strength lay in the
support of the rebels of the Kashi country.

This Malik, Na^ir-ud-Din, had a great passion for women
and vit^ins, and he had taken a number of the handmaids
and slave girls of the harant of Sultan ’Ala-ud-Din under
his own control, and used to have recourse to them.
When Sultan ’Ala-ud-Din, having been dismissed with
great honour and re.spect from the presence of Sultan San¬
jar, set out towards the dominions of GJiuf, and reached the
hill country of Hirat, and the news of the advent of his ex¬
alted banners was brought to Firuz-koh, terror, and fright,
and the fear of retribution, threw all hearts into dread.

A party, who were loyally devoted to the ’Ala-i dynasty,
secretly instigated and incited those slave girls of ’Ala-ud-
Din’s harant, who had been taken into Malik Na^ir-ud-
Din’s haratn, so that they sought an opportunity; and, at

to Btate here ; but we shall find that he had two at least, both of whom
succeeded to the sovereignty.

* He is not mentioned as a ruler by other authors, who pass at once from
'AUl-nd-Dln, ^usain, to his son ; but there b no doubt about NKfir-nd-Dtn,
Hyusniib having seised the sovereignty and held it during the former’s captivity.

THE SBANSABANIAH DYNASTY OF GHOR.

365

a time when Malik NS 9 ir>ud-Dln was lying asleep on his
couch, they placed the pillow of the couch over his face,
and, with all their force, held down the four comers of the
pillow until they suffocated him, and he died.

XVI. SULJAN* SAIF-UD-DiN, MUHAMMAD, SON OF SULTAN
'ALA-UD-DIN, AL-HUSAIN.

When Sultan ’Ala-ud-Din departed from this world, his
son, Sultan Saif-ud-Din, Muhammad, with the concur¬
rence of the whole of the Maliks, Amirs, and chief men of
Ghur. ascended the throne of Firuz-koh.

He was a youthful and good-looking sovereign, and was
beneficent in disposition, just, the cherisher of his subjects,
and patronizer of his servants, bountiful, munificent, open-
hearted, and liberal, humble, conciliating, pious, orthodox,
and steadfast in the faith of Islam, When he ascended the
throne, he, at the outset, repudiated acts of tyranny and
injustice ; and for all the injustice, oppression, and violence
which his father had committed, he commanded that resti¬
tution should be made; and he carried out his purpose
according to the institutes of justice, and the ways of
rectitude.

Those emissaries who had come from the Mulahidah
[heretic] of Alamut [towards the close of his father’s
reign], and who, secretly, had exhorted every person to the
vanities of heresy and schism, he directed should be brought
to task, and the whole of them, by his orders, were put to
the sword. In every place wherein the odour of their
impure usages was perceived, throughout the territory of
Ghur. slaughter of all heretics was commanded. The
whole of them were sent to Hell, and the area of the
country of Gh ur. which was a mine of religion and ortho¬
doxy, was purified from the infernal impurity of IKaramiJah*
depravity by the sword. By this orthodox war upon in¬
fidels, love for him became rooted in the hearts of the
people of Gh ur and of the territory of the JibSl ; and the

* Stjded Malik by several authors.

* Our SMthof mokes no differenc e between Mulfthklabs and E * * * *** ^t*^

but they ore diflermt sects. See Sole, Preliminary Discourse,

pages 130-31-

366

THE TABA¥AT.I.NA§IRI.

whole of them bound the girdle of his service round their
loins, and placed the collar of obedience to him about the
neck of sincerity.

One of the proofs of his equity, and of the goodness of
his rule, was this, that he gave orders for the release from
the fortress of Wajiristan of both his uncle’s sons, Ghiyas-
ud-Din, Muhammad, and Mu’izz-ud-Din, Muhammad, the
sons of Sam, and he cherished and caressed them, and
allowed them perfect liberty of action.

During his reign people, both comers and goers, enjoyed
plenty, repose, and security beyond compute ; but that
youthful monarch of excellent disposition had but a short
life, and his reign only extended to the space of one year
and little more. The mercy of God be upon him 1

The cause of his loss of life was this :—One day, seated
in his pavilion, he was discharging arrows at a butt; and
the Amirs of Ghur had been directed to be present, and
were in attendance. The Sipah-salar [commander of the
troops]. War-mesh, son of Shis, who was the brother of
Abu-1-’Abbas, son of Slit§, and the brother of Sultman, son
of Shis, was also in attendance on him. It was the custom
with the Amirs of Ghur, and the Maliks of the Jibal, at
that period, that upon whomsoever they would confer
honour, him they should present with a golden gauntlet
studded with jewels, after the same manner as, in these
days, they bestow a girdle ; and on the hand[s] of this
commander. War-mesh, son of Shis, were two gem-studded
gauntlets^ which Malik Na$ir-ud-Din, Husain, Madini,
had honoured him with; and both those gauntlets were
from the treasury of Sultan Saif-ud-Din’s own Iiaraitt.
When he perceived those two gauntlets belonging to his
own harani upon the hand of War-mesh, the honour of
manhood, and the dignity of sovereignty, began to flame
up within his heart, and the fire of wrath burst forth, and
he said:—“ Run, War-mesh, and bring back my arrow from
the butt.” When War-mesh turned his face towards the

< The word used is a glove or gauntlet; a bracelet may have

been what our author intended, as it is difficult, I should imagine, to wear two
gauntlets on oiu hand, but he says " on the band,” not the handt. The word
for bracelet, however, is Other writers say, a bracelet, wbieh Nt^ir-

nd-Dtn, ^nsain, had taken from one of ’Al&-ud-Dtn’s wives, aitd presented to
War-mesh. It is the father’s ^aram at page 364.

THE SHANSABANIAH DYNASTY OF OHOr.

3«7

butt, in order to carry out this command, and his back
was turned toward 9 the Sultan, he, Sult&n Saif-ud-Dfnf
fitted a broad steel-headed arrow* to his bow, and drew
the bow-string to his ear, and discharged the arrow with
such force into the back of War-me shI that the feathers of
the arrow passed out through his breast, and he fell down
dead on the spot*.

As the empire of the Sanjart dynasty had come to an
end, the Amtrs of the tribe of Gh uzz had acquired power,
and had taken possession of the different parts of the
territory of Kh ur^an, and their violence and depredations
'had extended in all directions; and the disquietude and
affliction consequent upon these depredations used to reach
the frontier districts of the kingdom of Ghur, ahd the
borders of the hill tracts of Gharjistan.

When Sultan Saif-ud-Dtn brought the dominions of his
father under his jurisdiction, he assembled his forces, and
set out for the purpose of restraining the aggressions of
the Gh uzz. and readied the confines of Gh arjistan^ and the
district of Madin^ From thence he advanced to RGd-
bar” of Marw, and passed beyond Daji^aV, which is a large
city [town ?], and came to a battle with the Ghuzz.

The Sipah-salar, Abu-l-’Abbas, son of Shis, who was
the champion of Qhur, of the family of the Shisanis. and
who nourished revenge in his heart on account of War-mesh,
son of Shis [his own brother], and waited his opportunity,
on the day of the encounter with the Ghuzz, came behind
the back of the .Sul^n, Saif-ud-Dtn, and thrust his spear
into his side, and hurled him from his horse, and exclaimed
[at the same time], “ Men are not killed with their faces
to the butt, as thou didst kill my brother, otherwise they
[themselves] get killed at such a place as this*.”

* The arrow-head called bet-ak, formed in the shape of a shovel; hence its
name—a little shoveL It is also called the ** huntsman’s arrow-head," and a
double-pointed arrow-head also.

* The " meek, conciliating, and pious " youth did not hesitate to shoot an
enemy in the back !

7 Some copies of the text have F&rus, which is sometimes written IJ^us,
instead of MUtn. See page 374, and note *.

* Kud-bftr also means "a river in a valley," but here refers to a place co
called.

* Some writers' mentioB that he was ** killed in battle with the fibuzz of
Balldl," end that it happened in 558 H. ; but he is said to have reigned some-

$68

THE TABA^AT-I-NA^IRL

When the SultAn fell, the troops of Ghdr were defeated
and routed, and they likewise left the [wounded] Sultan on
the field. A ^^uzz [soldier] came upon him, and, as yet,
the Sultan was still alive. The Qhuzz, when he noticed
the princely vest and girdle, was desirous of despoiling
him of them. The fastening of the Sultan’s girdle would
not come open quickly, on which the Gh uzz applied his
knife to the fastening, and divided it. The point of the
knife entered the stomach of Sultan Saif-ud-Dtn with force,
and from that wound he obtained martyrdom.

XVII. SULTAN'-UL-A’ZAM, £aiIYA§.UD-DUNYA WA UD-DiN,

ABtJ-L-FAT^, MUHAMMAD, SON OF BAHA-UD-DIN, SAM,
^ASIM-I-AMIR-UL-MOMININ *.

Trustworthy persons have stated, after the following
manner, that Sultan Gh ivas-ud-Din. and his brother,
SultAn Mu’izz-Ud-Din, were both born of one mother ; and
that Ghiyas-ud-Din was the elder of Mu’izz-ud-Din by
three years and a little more. Their mother was the
daughter of Malik Badr-ud-Dtn, Ktdani, both of the lineage
of Banjt, son of Naharan, and also of the seed of the
Shansabanis. The Malikah, their mother, used to call
Gh ivas-ud-Din [by the name of] Habashi ; and Mu’izz-ud-
Din, Zangi*; but, originally, the august name of Gh ivas-ud-
Din was Muhammad, and the name of Mu’izz-ud-Din was

thing less than two years, and, in this case, if his father died in 551 H., there
are three or fonr years unaccounted for, and, if the former date is correct, ’ Ali
must have died in 556 H., or his son must have reigned about sez-gn years ;
but, as our author says that fi]xiyii9*nd-Dtn, who succeeded him, ^ed in
599 H., after a reign of forty-three years, Saif-ud-Dtn, ’Ala’s son, must have
been killed in $56 H. Some other authors, however, say Gh iyay-ud■ Dfn
only reigned forty-one years, which would make 558 h. as the year of Saif-ud-
Dtn's death correct. The Mir’at-i-Jah&n NumK says that his father died in
551 H., and Saif-ud-Dtn reigned one year and a half, and hy some accounts
seven years, and that he was killed in a battle with the Ghuzz of Baljck. In
all probability he was killed in 558 H.

* Styled " Malik” by many authors, like the whole dynasty.

* The l^iendary etymology of this assumed title has alrei^y been given at
page 315; but its real me a nin g was, probably, co-sharer, or the like, firom

a diare, portion, Ac. See also page 316, and note *.

* Why their mother called them by these “pet ” names does not appear.
We must suppose thst they were both very dark indeed, as both words signify
Abyadidan, Ethiop, negro, &c.

THE fiBAMSABANlAH DYNASTY OF fiHOR. 369

also Mutamma^. In the dialect of Ghfir they call Mul^am-
mad, A|^nad^

When Malik BahS-ud-Dtn, Sam, died within the limits
of Ktdan, and Sultan *Ala-ud-Dln, Husain, ascended the
throne of Firuz-koh, he commanded that his two nephews,
ShiySg-ud-Dln and Mu’izz-ud-Din, should be imprisoned
in the fortress of Wajtristan*, and Axed but a small
allowance for the supply of their wants*. When Sultan
'Ala-ud-Dtn departed from this world, Sultan Saif-ud-Din
directed that they should be released from that fortress,
ahd he allowed them entire liberty of action. Ghiyas-ud-
Din took up his residence at the Court of Firuz-koh in
amity with Sultan Saif-ud-Din, and Mu’izz-ud-Dtn, his
brother, proceeded to Bamian to the presence of his pater¬
nal uncle, Malik Fakhr-ud-Din, Mas’ud.

Ghiyas-ud-Din accompanied Sultan Saif-ud-Din, serving
along with the army, on the expedition against the Ghuzz
tribe; but he had, however, but a small following through
want of means and scantiness of resources ; but every one,
among the old servants of his father and of his mother,
used clandestinely to afford him some little help.

Gliiya§-ud-Dtn continued always in the service of Suljan
Saif-ud-Din up to the time when the heavenly decree
arrived, and Sultan Saif-ud-Din was removed from the
throne of life imperial to the bier of premature death ^;
and the army of Ghur, discomfited, came out of the district
of Rud-bar and the borders of Dajzak towards Gharjistan
by way of Asir Darah and La-wir [or Lu-ir.?], and passed
beyond Af^in, which was the capital of the Shars of
Gharjistan ; and, when they reached the town of Wada-
wajzd*, the Sipah-salar, Abu-l-’Abbas, son of Shis, who

* |see iioie *, page 313.

* A few authors have stated that the two brothers were placed in charge of

diazntn [not a province of. Qliur] by their uncle, ’Ala-iid-Din, b“t

such is not correct, and our author’s statements here and at ])ages 357 and 366
are quite correct, and are confirmed by many authors of undoubted authority.
See also Thomas : The Patiian Kings of Dehli, page 10.

* See paragraph 14, note *, page 347.

^ For shooting the greatest of his chiefs in the back, in a cowardly manner,
in a fit of jealousy.

* The text here in all the copies is more or less exceedingly defective, an<l
it would be almost impossible to make anything of this passage without col¬
lating the number of copies I have seen. As it is there is some doubt almut
two or three of the proper names. Some copies have Abar and Asir

370 •

THE TABA:^T.I.NA§I,kj.

had unhorsed Sul^n Saif-ud-Dtn wtjdi^J^s spear, there
presented himself in the presence of Ghiyas-ud-Dtn ; and
such of the most powerful and illustrious personages, and
the Amirs and Maliks of the troops of Gh ur and Gh arjistan
as were present, he assembled and brought together,
and they all gave their allegiance to the sovereignty and
dominion of Gh iyas-ud-Din. and they raised him to the
throne, and congratulated him on his accession to the
supreme power. Command was given to erect a castle
there [where this occurred], and up to this time, wherein
the calamity of the infidel Mughals arose, that town and
castle was inhabited. From thence they conducted him to
the city of Firuz-koh, and, when they reached the city,
they placed Gh ivas-ud-Din on the throne.

Previously to this, his title was Shams-ud-Din ; and his
brother’s, Sljihab-ud-Dtn ; but, after he had been on the
throne some time, his own title was changed to Sultan
G^iyag-ud-Din ; and, after the successes in Kh urasan,
his brother Malik Shihab-ud-Dtn’s title became Sultan
Mu’izz-ud-Din *.

When his brother, Mu’izz-ud-Din*, became cognizant
of his brother Ghiyas-ud-Din’s situation, he proceeded to
the presence of his uncle, Malik Fakhr-ud-Din. Mas’ud,
and asked his permission, and came to Firuz-koh, and
he was invested with the office of Sar-i-Jandar [or
chief armour-bearer], and he used to be always in attend¬
ance on his brother, Sultan Gh iyas-ud-Din. The territory
of Istiah* and Kajuran were entrusted to his charge.

ty»’] for Astr smd Waji^ward for Wad&wajsd Some

copies may be read any way, and have no diacritical points. The name pf
the capital of Gha rjistan. which is also called Qliarchistan, is also written in
varioos ways, and, in some copies, is unintelligible ; but the above reading is
confirmed by Yafa-t, who pves a detailed account of the Sllfin i but Fayil^*!
calls the town Afihtnah. Ibn-^afFal says, the two [chirf] towns of Gl^nr.
jistan are not and ** evidently an error of the

copyist for and so confirms YS&-t's statement,

* Several years after his brother’s access i oiu Modem writers of Indian
history genctidly, and European writers, English in particular, put the cart
before the horse in this respect, but the latest version of his name, in this way,
occurs in Thb Student’s Manual of Indian Histokt, where he
appears as Shaht^ ood Makm«od Ghcory”l Shihsh hat a aoeaning,

but “ Shakab ” none : moreover his name was not MahmOd.

‘ The writer docs not mean that he was thtn Mu’iaz-ud'Dtn, but subsequently.

■ Written by some other authors, IstiyX. It is the name of a small district
and range of hillB between Gibaznln and Hirfit

’37t

THE SHANSABAnIAH DYNASTY OF OHnn.

When the [Sul^n's] pavilion was brought out of the
city of FtrGz-k)^,'-and conveyed towards Gh ur*. the con¬
tumacious of Gh flr began to manifest opposition. The
Sipah-salar, Abu-1-’Abb^, son of Shis, who had raised
him to the throng possessed great authority and influence,
and the refractory of Gh ur used to shelter themselves
under his protection. Both the brothers continued to
nourish revenge in their hearts against him [Abu-1-’Abbas],
on account of his having killed their cousin, Sultan Saif-ud-
Dtn, and they both concerted a design [against him]. It
was determined between them, that one of their own imme¬
diate Turkish followers should carry it out [in the following
manner] :—When Abu-1-’Abbas should enter the audience-
hall, and should stand up in the assembly to make his
obeisance, and Sultan Mu’izz-ud-Din should raise his hand
to his cap*, the Turk should strike off Abu-1-’Abbas’ head;
and such was done.

After Abu-1-’Abbas had been put to death, Ghiyas-ud-
Dtn acquired strengfth, and the grandeur of the realm
increased. The uncle of the brothers, Malik Fakhr-ud-
Din, Mas’ud, of BamiSn, being the eldest of the seven
Sultan brothers*, and there being neither one of them
remaining [but himself], he became ambitious of acquiring
the territory of Gh ur and the throne of Firuz-koh. Malik
’Ala-ud-Dtn, Kimaj [a noble] of the Sanjart dynasty, who
was Malik [ruler] of Bal]ch> he sought aid from, and
despatched envoys to Malik Taj-ud-Din, Yal-duz*, ofHirat,
and asked assistance from him also. Subsequently, the

* From the manner in which our author here expresses himself [and the
sentence is the same in all the copies collated], Ghur must have been the
name of a town Vis well as of the whole country. From many of his expres¬
sions, however, in other places, Ffruz-koh would seem to refer to one district
or territory, fihur to another, and the JibSl to a third.

* The word here used signifies not a cap exactly, but a head-dress made from
the fur or skin of an animal, of cloth or other texture, or of cloth of gold, and
the like, made into a head-dress, a tiara, diadem, &c., but not a turban.
Gh iyks-ud-Dtn. the elder brother, engaged Abu- 1 -’Ablds in conversation,
whilst the other brother gave the sign for his assassination. Abu-l-’Abb2s
appears to have suspected treachery, for he had half drawn his dagger from
its sheath when he was cut dovim. This is a specimen of the noble qualities of
those amiable and pious sovereigns of our author, and is quite in keeping with
their treachery, or at least with Mu’izz-ud-Dtn’s towards Khusrau Malik. See
note *, pages iia-13.

* They were not all styled “ Sultan,” even by bb own account.

* I-yal-duz of others.

THE TABA1|^AT.I.NA$IRL

SJ»

troops of BSmtSn and the forces of Bal^i and of HirSt
advanced from different directions towards JPtrQz-koh.

Malik F akh r-ud-Dtn. Mas’ud, of BamlAn, being the
uncle of the Sultans, and there being a great number of
the Amirs of Ghu r in his service, and he claiming the ter¬
ritory of Gh ur by right of heritage, set out at first, and
Malik 'Ala-ud-Din, Kimaj, the Amir [ruler] of Balkh.
began to follow after him, at the distance of some leagues,
by the route of Upper Gharjistan, while Malik Taj-ud-Din,
Yal-duz, marched to Flruz-koh with his army from Hirat,
it being the nearest route by way of the Hariw-ar-Rud % or
valley of the Harl river.

Sultan Ghiya§-ud-Din and Mu’izz-ud-Dln. came out of
Flruz-koh, and proceeded to a place which is called Ragh-
i-Zarir* [the Zartr plain] and the forces of Ghur there
assembled around them. Taj-ud-Dln, Yal-duz, of Hirat,
used the utmost expedition, being ambitious of this, that
perhaps the capture of Flruz-koh and the destruction of
the Ghurian army might be achieved by him.

When he arrived near to the position of the Ghurian
forces, and both armies confronted each other, and prepa¬
rations were being made for coming to action, so that only
about the distance of half-a-league intervened between
them, and the ranks of either army could be seen by the
other, two Ghurian warriors from the midst of the army
formed a compact, and came to the front of the [mar¬
shalled] ranks, and presented themselves before the Sultan,
dismounted from their horses, and, bowing their faces to
the ground, said, " We two your servants will disperse the
army of Hiratso by command they mounted, and,
rousing both their horses, they drew their swords, and, like
the fierce blast, and the flying cloud, they approached
towards the ranks of the Turks of Hirat, crying out, “ Where
is Malik Yal-duz We seek Malik Yal-duz!”

Malik Taj-ud-Dln, Yal-duz, was standing beneath his
canopy, and his troops all pointed towards him, so that
those Gh urian warriors knew which was Yal-duz ; and both

7 This clause of the sentence is only contained in the best copies of the text.

* In some copies " Ragh-i-Zar,” which is much the same, *ar signifying
golden or yellow, and Zartr the name of a grass yielding a yellow dyC. One
old copy has Wejs. which signifies pure.

THE SHANSABANIAH DYNASTY OF GHOR.

373

of them like hungry lions and rampant elephants fell upon
Yal-duz, and brought him from his horse to the ground by
the wounds inflicted by their swords. When the troops of
Hirat beheld this heroism, boldness, and intrepidity, they
gave way and took to flight. As Almighty God had
brought those two Sultans, Ghiyas-ud-Din and Mu’izz-ud*
Din, beneath the shadow of His kindness, He made such
a victory and triumph as this a miracle of theirs*.

The next day a body of horselightly equipped and
ruthless, was nominated to proceed against the force of
Kimaj of Balkh. They fell upon his army unawares, put
it to flight, took Kimaj, and slew him, and brought his
head to the presence of the Sultans together with his
standard. Then the head of Kimaj was placed in a bag,
and entrusted to, a horseman’s charge, and they sent him to
meet their uncle, Malik Fakhr-ud-Din. Mas’ud. The latter
had arrived near at hand ; and, when they [the Sultans]
had despatched the head of Kimaj, they put their forces
in motion to follow, and pushed on towards their uncle,
Malik Fakhr-ud-Din.

When that horseman brought the head of l^imaj to the
presence of Malik Fakhr-ud-Din he determined upon re¬
turning, and made his troops mount; and, by the time they
had become ready prepared to begin their retreat, the two
Suljtans had come up [with their forces] and had occupied
all the parts around. On reaching the place where their
uncle was, Sultan Ghiyas-ud-Din and Mu’izz-ud-Din at
once dismounted from their horses, and proceeded to
receive him, and paid him great attention and considera¬
tion, and said, “ It is necessary that your lordship should
return and they conducted him to their camp and seated

• This “miracle” is not mentioned by other authors, with the exception of
a very few who copy from our author. The Raufat-u§-§afi says tliat the
brothers despatched two bodies of troops to oppose the advance of two of the
confederates, the ruler of Iliriit, whose name is not given, and Ebnij of Dalkb ;
and that the Gh urtan forces slew both of them, and returned triumphant to the
presence of Gh ivas-ud-Otn. who despatched the head of the son of ^imaj of
TtalVh to his uncle, who repented of his expedition, and sought to retire.
Troops had been despratched, however, to surround him, and the brothers
followed p and, when they found Faldir-ud-Dtn, Mas ud, their uncle, had been
intercepted, they went to hint. Then follows much copied almost word for
word from our author.

* Three copies of the text have “several thousand horse,” &c.

374

THE TABA^AT.I.NA^IRI.

him on a throne, and both those sovereigns ’ stood up
before him with their hands stuck in their girdles [in token
of servitude]. From this Malik Fakhr-ud-Din became
filled with shame and compunction, and, overcome with
humiliation, he spoke to them some words of rebuke, arose,
and said, “ You mock me ! ” They mollified him by many
apologies and excuses, and accompanied him one stage, and
sent him on his return back to Bamian ; and the territory
of Ghur was left vacant to Suljtan Ghiyas-ud-Dln.

After that event he proceeded into Garmsir and Zam!n-
i-Dawar, and that tract was liberated *; and, as Malik Taj-
ud-D!n, Yal-duz, of Hirat, had been slain, and the army of
HirSt had returned thither discomfited, Badr-ud^Din,
Tughril, who was one of [Sultan] Sanjar’s slaves *, took
Hirat into his own jurisdiction, and held possession of it
for a considerable time, until, the inhabitants of Hirat
despatched petitions to Sultan Gh ivas-ud-Din inviting him
[thither], and that success * was also achieved.

* Mu’ixz-ud-Dtn was not then a sovereign prince, and did not become so
nominally until after the taking of Ghaznfn from the Ghuzz.

* He obtained possession of Badghais at the same period, and is said to have
entered into a connexion with the chiefs of Ghnijistan, and established his sway
also over that tract of country. From whose possession Garmstr and Zamtn>i>
Dawar were “ Uberated ” our author does not state. Fa^ih-f, however,
mentions that in the same year in which he succeeded bis cousin, 558 h.,
Gh iyag-ud-Dtn fought an engagement with the Ghuzz. vanquished them, and
imposed tribute on them. The Qhuzz were doubtless in possession of the
districts mentioned above.

•* See note », page 379.

* This “success” could have been but' a very temporary one, for, by our
author’s own account, Tughril'was in possession of Hirat up to the year when
Sult&n Shnh, Shwarazmt, was defeated by the Qhuris, which event took place
in 588 H. In another place, our author, referring to this “ taking ” of Hirat,
says it happened in 571 H., yet seventeen years after Tughril still, by bis own
account, held Hirat. See page 249, and note *, page^379.

During the Kh ilafat of the ’Abbasf Ehullfah, Mil^t, the Gh uzz entered
M&war-un-Nabr from the north, and became converts to Islam ; but Mukanna’-
i-Mitt [the ** great Mokanna ” of Moore’s poem of Lalla Rookh ”], the false
prophet, reduced them under his sway. When the ’Abbasls set about putting
down Mukanna’, the Gh uzz deserted him, and retired to the more southern
parts'of MSwar-nn-Nahr. They were constantly engaged in hostilities with the
Elirlughtah Turk-mans, who were generally victorious over them. Thp fib””-
were in the habit of paying tribute to the sovereign of the period, and, when
Sulfin Sanjar ascend^ the'throne of the SaljQks, 40,000 G]|iimii families entered
the territory of SkutUn and Ghaghantan, and paid a tribute of 24,000 sheep
to the roy^ kitchen. In 545 H., according to Alft, when Amtr ^jm&j [the
l^imSj mentioned above, and in note \ page 336, also probably] was Witt of

THE SHANSAEANZAH DYNASTY OF QHOR.

375

After some years FSras and the territory of Kaliyun [or
Kal-yfln], and Flw^ and Ba ghsh or*. came into his posses-

BalUk the Gh im became dfsafiected about the collection of the tribute.
If^imaj was at enmity with Aratr Zangt, son of Ehaltfah,, gJxaibint, the WUt
^uJdliristSn [this was a short time before Fa]dir-ud>Dtn, Mas’ad, Cihilrt,
.became ruler of TuJchlristSn and B 2 mf 3 n 3 , who, seizing the oppbrtunity of
EClm&j’s absence at the court of SultSn Sanjar, and fearing lest the GJiuzz, who
had lately been worsted by the E^rluglis, and had abandoned MSwar-un-Nahr,
and contemplated migration into SlumsSn, might be induced to join his
enemy, Amtr ^imSj, he invited them to take up their quarters in TukhSristSn,
wherein he assigned them lands. In a dispute about the revenue, brought
about by otit of enmity to 2 Sangt, the GJiuzz slew him and one of his

sons, and, at lut, SultSn Sanjar moved against them, and he fell captive into
their hands. Sanjar returned from captivity in 551 h., having effected his
escape by the aid of Ahmad, son of Ei>n^ji governor of Tirmid [see page 155,
and note *, and note *, page 156], and died in 552 H. In 553 H. the Glinzz
poured forth from Balkh [the province of?], and moved towards SaraUls.
Mu’ayyid-i>’A-[nah-dar, the slave of Mahmud, Sanjar’s nephew, and, after¬
wards, ruler o[ Ntshilpiir [see note ?, page 180], and other parts of Upper
EJlorSsXn, made a night attack upon them, and overthrew them with great
slaughter. He encountered them again, two months after, in sight of Marw,
whither they had moved, when the GJiuzz were victorious, and they carried
on great depredations in Kb nrasan. Other events followed, which are too
long to be related here ; but, subsequently, Mu.'ayyid became independent, and
Eu;quited power over greater part of GTh uzz were in posses¬

sion, however, of Marw, Sarakhs, Balkh, and some other tracts; and some
parts were under the sway of the Ehwarazmts. Hirat was held by a chief
named Malik Aetktn, who, in 559 H., marched into GJlur with a considerable
army ; but, the Gh iii^A being prepared to receive him, Aetktn was slain in. the
battle which ensued. This in all probability is the T 5 j-ud-Dtn, Yal-duz, of our
author. He was succeeded at Hirat by one of his own officers, styled Babar-ud-
Dtn in Alft, and he must be our author’s Baha-ud-Dtn, T’^Stvii- This chief, not
considering himself safe from the power of Amtr Mu’ayyid, and having some pre¬
vious acquaintance with the Gh uzz chiefs, called upon them to help him, intend¬
ing to give up Hirat to them. On the appearance of the GJiuzz, however, the
people of Hirfit rose against Babar-ud-Dtn, and put him to d^th in the same
year. [See note ®, page 239.] Mu’ayyid was himself put to death in 569 H.
Saif-ud-Dtn, Muh^mad of GJlur, was slain when engaging the Ghuzz of BalJdi
in 558 H., and in the same year his successor, Glliyag-ud-Dfn, defeated them
with great slaughter, and imposed tribute on [some portion ?] of them, and
in 571 H. his brother, Mu’izz-ud-Dtn, encountered a tribe of them, as will be
mentioned under his reign. GJliyag-nd-Dtn, GJkurt, gained possession of Hirit
[temporarily?] in 571 H. These events appear to be identical with what our
author relates above. See also second paragraph to note at page 349, page 367,
and note *, page 379.

• With respect to these proper names there is great discrepancy in the
different copies of the text. The majority of the best and oldest copies are as
above I 'but in place of FSras, some have F&das and Ekdas, and one E^dusbi
which place is mentioned, in several places, written in the same manner. In-
place of BagJuhqr, contained in one set of copies, Saif-rOd is contained in the
get, I have before alluded to this curious fact that the twelve copies
appear, in several places, to be two distinct sets of the originaL In

376 THE TABA 9 :AT.I-NA$IRI.

sion ; and, when these parts came under his jurisdiction, he
took to wife the daughter of his uncle, the Malikah, Taj-ud-
Dunya wa ud-Dtn, Gohar Malik [Malikah ?] the daughter of
Sult^ ’Ala-ud-Din, Husain. The whole of Gharjlstan. and
Tal-l^an ^ and Juzarwan *, devolved upon him ; and Tigin-
abad, out of the district of Jarum *, Gh iyas-ud-Dln niade
over to his brother, Mu’izz-ud-Din, after he had returned
from Sijistan *. He [now] began to despatch [bodies of]
horse towards Ghaznin. and the district of Zabul, and parts
adjacent thereunto ; and, at that period, the territory of
Kabul, Z&bul, and Gh aznin were in the hands of the tribes
of the Gh uzz. who had wrested them out of the possession
of Kh iisrati Shah ®. The reign of Kh usrau SJjah had ter¬
minated, and his son, Kh usrau Malik, had made Lohor his
capital.

The Amirs of the- Ghuzz [tribe] who were in Ghaznin.
not being able to oppose the forces of Ghur [in the held]
threw up intrenchments, and, from the excessive firmness
of the Ghuzz, the Gljurian army very nearly sustained an
overthrow. Sultan GJiiya§-ud-Din retired, and despatched
a body of Ghurians to the aid of Sul^^n Mu'izz-ud-Din *.
Suddenly a body of Ghuzz warriors attacked [the army
of Ghur], and captured the royal Standard of the Ghurians.
and carried it away within their own intrenchments. The
Gh urian forces in the right and left wings imagined that

the list of places and territories acquired at the end of GhiySs-ud-Din’s
reign farther on, the name of Baglislior is not mentioned. It is probable
that Ft war and Ba ghsh or are correct, and that one has been omitted by
different copyists.

* A different place to Tae-Van.

* This is the place referred to fifth paragraph of note *■, pages 257-8.

* In a few copies “and the district of Jarum and Tigtn-abSd,” &c.

* See page 184.

* This remark confirms the statements of those authors who state that
SJlusrau Shah returned to his sacked and devastated capital after ’AUL-ud-Din,
^usain, had abandoned it, and also tends to show that it must have been the
same monarch, and not his father, who fled from Gh azntn when 'Ala-ud-Din,
l^usain, appeared before it. See para. 10 to note *, p. 347, and note •, p. 350.

* The whole of this sentence, and the first word of the next, are neither
contained in either of the Paris copies, nor in the Bodleian MS., the 1 . 0 .L.
MS., 1952, or the K. A. S. M S. ; and, certainly, the passage is somewhat obscure.
It would appear that GhiySs-ud-Din retired to obtain reinforcements, and tdso
that he subsequently returned [as mentioned a few sentences after], which
latter statement is contained in those very copies which omit the former. The
Sultin, however, could not have retired to any very great distance, otherwise
he would not have been in time to take part in the closing scene of the battle.

THE SHANSABANlAH DYNASTY OF CHOR. 377

the royal standard ‘had accompanied their own centre into
the intrenchments of the enemy, and they advanced to the
attack in all directions, broke through the intrenchments of
the Ghuzz, and carried them, and put the Gh uzz to the
rout: The news reached Sultan Ghiyas-ud-Din, who

returned ; and the troops of Ghur commenced slaughter¬
ing the Ghuzz, and laid the greater number of that race on
the earth, and Ghaznin was left in the possession of the
Ghuris. This victory was gained in the year 569 H.*

When Ghazntn was conquered, Sultan Ghivas-ud-Dtn
placed his brother, Sultan Mu’izz-ud-Dm, upon the throne
of the Mahmudts *, and returned himself to Firuz-koh.

After two years, he [Suljan Ghiyas-ud-Din] summoned
his troops [again], and the armies of Gh ur and Gh aznin
were got ready, and he advanced to the gates of the city
of Hirat. The people of that place had been manifesting
signs of duty and desire [to place themselves under his
rule]. When Baha-ud-Dtn, Tughril. became aware of this
[latter] fact, he evacuated the city of Hiraf, and retired to
the Kh warazm-Shahis *; and, in the year 671 H. the city
of Hirat was taken possession of. Two years subsequent
to this, Fushani was taken; and, after these successes, the

* This is the second date given by our author throughout the whole of this
Section. At page 112 he says the Gh uzz held possession of Ghazntn twelve
years, and here says Gh iyag-ud-Dtn took it from them in 569 H., by which
account they must have got possession of it in 557 H. Khusrau Sh&h died in
555 H. ; so, if the above dates are correct, they could not have wrested
Ghazntn out of his hands. 1 think our author is pretty correct as to the
period the Ghu zz held Gha zntn. and they ap|>ear to have obtained possession
of it in 557 H., or 558 h., probably after the death of Saif-ud-Dtn, Surt, ’Ala.
ud-Dtn, H'tizain’s son, and defeat of the Ghurtans by the Ghuzz.

* From which time only he is entitled to be styled Sulfan. Fa^il^-I says
that as early as 566 H. the Maliks of Ghur had acquired power in the Gha zntn
territory and in part of Hind, and the Shwarozm ShShts in ’IiaV and ShurS.
san ; but agrees with our author as to the date of the acquirement of the city of
Ghazntn, but some other authors state that it was taken in 568 H. It was in
569 H. that Malik Mu-ayyid i-A’tnah-dar, in concert with Sultan Shah, fought
an engagement with Sul^Sn ’Imad-ud.Dtn, Takish* See note page 180,
and note page 245.

* Fafih-t does not mention the acquirement of Hirat among the events of
571 but states that in that year Mu’izz-ud-Dtii, Walt of Ghazntn, en¬
countered the SanVuribi, a sept of the Ghuzz tribe, and slew many of them.
Some other authors, who say that Ghaz ntn was taken in 5 ^ state that
Hirat was acquired two years after—in 570 H. The particulars of Jughril’s
death will be found at page 379.

J See note *, page 379.

li b

378

THE TABA|^AT-I.NA$IRI.

Malik of !NlmroZ'and Sijistan despatched envoys, and he
enrolled himself among the vassals of that Sultan.

Subsequently to these events, the Qhuzz Maliks who
were in Kirman” paid submission to him j and different
parts of the territory of Khu rasan, which were dependent
upon Hirat and Balkh, such as Andkhud.

Maimand* Faryab, Panj-dlh, Marw-ar-Rud, D ajz ak.
KtlaP, the whole of those towns came into the possession
of the Ghiyagl officers, and the Khutbah and the
coin became adorned by the august name of Sultan
Glityag-ud-Dtn.

After some time, Sultan Shah. Jalal-ud-Din, Mahmud,
son of I-yal-Arsalan, Kh warazm Shah, was ousted by his
brother, Takish, Khw arazm ^ah, and presented himself at
the Court of Sultan Gh iya^-ud-Din *. After a time he became
seditious, as has been previously recorded, and departed
for lUiita, and from .thence brought aid, and took Marw,
and began to ravage the frontier districts of the territories
of Ghur, and commenced harrying and plundering them,
until, in the year 588 H., Sultan GIjiyas-ud-Dtn commanded,
so that Sultan Mu’izz-ud<Din from Ghaznin, Malik Shams-
ud-Dtn* of Bamtan, and Malik Taj-ud-Dtn-i-Harab, from
Sijistan, with their forces, assembled at Rudbar of Marw,
and they came and confronted the forces of SultSn Shah,
who, with his troops, marched out of Marw, and proceeded
up [the river]; and, in opposing the Sultan, used to make
irregular and sudden attacks, and to continually harass the
foragers of the Sultan's army. For a period of six months

* Malik Tmad-ud-Din, Dinar, the Gh mz chief, driven out of the territory
of Saralchs by Suljan Shah. Kh wararmt [see note *, page 246], retired
towards Kirman in 581 H. ; and, taking advantage of the distracted state of
that kingdom, succeeded in establishing himself therein in Rajab, 583 H., and
reigned over it for a j>eriod of eight years, and his son succeeded him. The
Subjection of the Gh uzz rulers of Kirman to Gh iya^-ud-Dtn is not confirmed
by other authors.

• Called also Maihand by some other writers. “ Meemuna” and "Meimuna ”
are mere Anglicised forms, according to the rule of writing Oriental names
contrary to the mode of the inhabitants of places, and also contrary to the way
in which they 4re sj>elt.

' This name is somewhat doubtful. Some have Kaihlf, bat the majority of
copies have wSif' the probably of Ibn-i-^ut:^

• See page 239 and note *.

* The same that was taken prisoner in the battle with SultSn Sanjar, along
with ’Alii-ud-Dfn, ^usain, and ’All, Jatrl, and ransomed for 50^000 dlnfirs.
See note *, p. 358.

THE SBANSABANIAH DYNASTY OF GHOR.

379

this harassing warfare went on ; and the two armies con*
tinned in proximity to each other until Sultan Mu’izz-ud-
Dtn commanded that a ferry over the river Miirgh-ab
should be sought for, and he crossed it [with his own
forces], and the other troops crossed over after him ; and
Sult^ Shah was defeated and put to the rout.

This success was gained in the year 588 H.'* ; and Malik
Bah3-ud-Dtn, Tughril. the Sanjari, in that encounter, fell
into the hands of the Bamian troops, and they brought his
head to the presence of Sultan Gh iyas-ud-Din *. On that
day, likewise, Malik Shams-ud-Din of Bamian, son of
M^ik Fakhiwud-Din. Mas’ud, who was the Sultans’ uncle,
obtained [the honour of] a canopy of state, and they gave
him the title of Sultan.

In this same year likewise, previous to the time that
the forces of Gh ur. Gh aznln. and Bamian were about to
assemble at Rudbar of Marw, for the purpose of restraining
Sultan Shah, commands had been issued for the martyr¬
dom of the gentle and beneficent Sultan, Kh usrau Malik*.
The mercy of the Almighty be upon him !

Every year fresh successes were taking place in different
directions of the territories of ^lur’’, until, in the year

* This was the year in which, according to most writers, and also our author
himself, Mu*-izz-ud-Dtn of Qh^zntn defeated the Rae of Dihli.

* Our author, in another place, page 377, says Qbnrnin w’as taken in 569 H.
[others say, in 568 H.], and that in 571 H. Hirat was taken, and Baha-ud-Dtn,
Tilghril- evacuated the city on the approach of the Ghiirls, and joined the
iOlwarozmts. The Ghfirts could not have held Hirat very long, for this affair
with SultSn Shah - in which Tugbril was taken, took place, by our author’s
own account, in 588 H., seventeen years after that evacuation of Hirit by
Tughril- and he is even then styled “ Tudvil of HirSt ” by our author, and
so he styles him in his account of Jughril and his death, at page 249. From
this it is obvious that the Ghfirls could only have held Hirat for a very short
time after 569 h., and Tughril must have regained possession of it soon after,
and only finally left it, on the advance of the Ghutis against Sultan Shah, in
this year, 588 H., or, more correctly, in 587 H. See note •, page 374.

* One of these pious brothers and model Sultdns of our author, Mu izz-ud-
Dtn, having deceitfully inveigled this amiable monaron into his power, broke
his promises, and sent him and his family away into Ghur to his other worthy
brother whp immured him in a fortress. At the time in question, finding
Shusrau Malik an obstacle in their way, they had him put to death, and also
his son, Uahram Shah- Here our author says it took place in 588 H., and
587 H., iit his account of Mn’ias-ud-Dfn, but, in his account of Khusrau Malik,
he says it happened in 598 H.t See pages 114 and 115, and note » to page 112,
paim. 10,

* Sie in all the copies.

B b 2

38 o

THE XABA|pAT-l-NA§IRi.

596 H„ Sultan ’Ala-ud-Din'-i-Takisli, Shwarazntv gh; 5 h,
died. Sultan Ghivas-ud-Dln and Mu’izz-ud-Din moved
into Khurasan with the armies of Qhur and Qhazmn, and
advanced to the gate of Ntshapur. While the forces ^cu-
pied a position in the vicinity of Nishapur, and hostilities
commenced, trustworthy persons have, among the miracles
of the victorious Sultan Oiiyag-ud-Din, related on this
wise, that one day he mounted, in order to reconnoitre a
place from which to attack the city, and rode round the
edge of the ditch, and reached a spot from whence, in his
august opinion, he determined to make the attack, as beirig
the point where the capture of that city was likely to be
effected*. He made a sign with his whip, saying “ It is
necessary that the battering-rams should be planted fron
this tower to that tower, in order to make a breach, anc
enable a general assault to be made, so that the capture o
this city may be effected, and this victory achieved. A
the very time that he made this indication [with his whip
towards those towers, the very portion of the walls of the
city which he had pointed out, and the [two] towers, with
everything near them, gave way, and the whole fell down,
and became destroyed in such wise that not one
remained upon another, and Nishapur was taken Malik
'All Shah’, son of Sultan ’Imad-ud-Din, Takish, I^warazm

8 At oaee 2«. in our author’s account of hU succession, he says, “’Ala-
ud.Dtn,^bammad, son of Takish, brought his father’s dominions under his

if to L”'guided by what English and some other

writers of Histories of India say, on the authority of translatiOTS of
tah’s work, from which their inspirations are drawn, We'*’ "

. imbecile or a puppet, for he is said by several of them to have re-

tained nothing of the empire but the name," whilst others, including Elphinstone,
?f whom I eCp^ted something better, rush into the ^ost opp^ite extreme
and say, that ^e appears to have resumed his rtrftz/rfr before his death, and to
have l^n present in person in alt the campaigns in AThordsdn ‘h* .

tartlvjforget, or. more likely, are unable to, mention, when «// these ^m-
took place, and against whom. The fact is that none of these state¬
s'are correct. Ghiyas-ud-Dtn reigned in glory to the end of his days,
brother, Mu’izz-irf.t»tn, held the sovereignty of Qhazntn subject to
Wm and undertook the conquest of Upper India by his comman^ Hts
S^’campaSb iLording to vk-i. was in 597-8 only a few months^fore
STd^r^ee the sj^imens of tramUtions under hU brother’s reign. Section

XIX and note page-355, and note *, next page.

1 He U styled “Sultin 'Alt SWHi,” and “a very great and illustrious

prince.” at page 253 , and also “ Malik ” in some places.

THE SHA NSABAnIAH DYNASTY OF QHOR.

381

Shih,^t9g~ether with the Khwarazm! Maliks.who were there,
and chiefs, and other persons of distinction, such as Sur>
tash and (jraz-lak Kh 5 n. and a considerable body of others,
fell into their hands*.

To Malik ^iya>ud-Dtn, Mutiammad, son of Abu *Alt,
Shansab!. who was the uncle’s son* of both the [(^urtan]
Sultans, and the son-in-law of Sultan Ghiyas-ud-Dln. they
gave the government and throne* of Nis^apur, and returned
[to their own dominions] that same year. The next year
[597 H.] they advanced to Marw-i-Shah-i- Tahan. and took
it; and Malik Na^ir-ud-Din, Muliammad-i-Khar-nak. they
installed at Marw; and conferred the government of
Sar akh s upon their uncle’s son, Malik Taj-ud-Din, Zangt,
who was the son of Malik Fakhr-ud-Din. Mas’Qd,
Bamiani. Malik Taj-ud-Din acquired jurisdiction over
the whole of that territory, and Kh urasan became clear*.

Malik* ’Ala-ud-Din, Muhammad, Khwarazm ^ah, used
great endeavours that they [the Sultans] might perhaps

* Y5fa-t gives the following account of this “ miracle ” which our author

makes so much of. “In the month of Rajah, 597 H., the Qliurts with an
immense army, and ninety great elephants, each of which was like a mountain
in sire, advanced against Shad-yakh [of NlghapQr] where was, at that time^
’Alt Shah. Sultan Muhammad’s brother, who had very recently arrived there
on his return from ’Irah, and several men of distinction in the service of his
other brothers. The Gh firtan Sultans [the two brothers], in order to recon>
noitre the place, were making a circuit around it, and came to a stand opposite
the city [Ntshapur]. A vast crowd of people, from within Sbad-yakb, in
order to gaze upon the Gh flrfan army, flocked to one of the towers fiicing it.
Suddenly the tower gave way, from the crowd within it [the fortifications at
the time wefe not in good repair], and fell down. This the Qburts took as a
good omen, and, during the same day [through this accident], took possession of
the place.” Another author states that the place was at once assaulted, cap¬
tured, and plundered, and the date given is Rajab, 597 59^ as our

author states. NtsJxapur was retaken from the Cliuris five months after. See
page 393. note *. ...

* This is incorrect. See page 346, and note and note page 391.

* Malik ^iyS-ud-Dln was merely left in charge as governor. The ♦‘throne
of Nt sha pOr. ” is one of our author’s absurdities.

* After getting possession of Nishfipur Sulfan Gtijmg-ud-Dln returned to
Hirftt. and hU brother, Mu’izz-ud-Dtn, marched into l^uhistSn for the purpose
of destroying the strongholds of the Mulah'dah heretics of that part, and, after
several [minor] encounters with them, an accommodation was brought about,
and JmSbid was occupied, and the ¥5*1. of Tfilak [the same who was pre¬
viously left as governor of Tabarhindah. See the reign of Mu izz-ud-Din.
Section XIX.] was left there in charge.

* Sultfin, by his own account, and a much greater one than either rf the
Ght irfa in many respects, and the ruler of a far greater extent of territory.

38a

THE TABA^T.I-NA$IRI.

consent to accept his services [as their vassal], and relin>
quish KhurasSn to him again ; but it was not given up to
him. Trustworthy persons^ have related after this manner,
that, when Talcish, Khwarazm Shah [the father], died,
Muhammad, Khw arazm Shah [the son], sent envoys to
the presence of Sultan ffliiya§-ud-Dtn, the purport of their
embassy being to the effect, that, between the Sultans of
Gh ur and his father, a compact of friendship and unanimity
was firmly established. He, their servant, desired that,
according to that same compact, he might be [accounted]
in the series of their other servants. If his exalted opinion
thought well of it, the Sultan-i-Ghazi, Mu’izz-ucl-Din, should
take his [servant’s] mother to wife, and consider him, his
very humble servant, as a son ; that from the Ghi yasiah
Court he, his [Suljan Gh iyas-ud-Din’s] servant, might
receive an honorary robe, and a patent of investiture for
Kh urasan and Khw arazm and his servant would set free
all the territory of ’Irak and Mawar-un-Nahr from the hands
of enemies.

When they [the envoys] had discharged the purport of
their mission, Sultan Mu’izz-ud-Din did not become agree¬
able to the proposed union, and hostility arose. As the
Almighty God had ordained that the whole of the domi¬
nions of Iran should fall under the sway of Muhammad,
Khw arazm Shah *. he, upon several occasions, towards the
close of Ghiyas-ud-Din’s life, retired discomfited before the
forces of Ghur and Ghaznin, and, at last, those Siiltahs died
before him.

Upon several occasions rich dresses of honour from the
Court of the Khilafat. from the Lord of the Faithful, Al-

Here again our author brings forward his absurd statement as to this mighty
monarch’s seeking to become the vassal and servant of the Gh nrts, which is
not worthy of the least credit whatever.

r Who, as usual, arc nameless.

* Very probable, SMing that his ancestors niled over it for more than a cen>
tury previously, and over all ShurSsan and greater piait of’Ira^, by our author's
own accounts, for many years. See the reign of Mahmud, son of Ghiyap-ud-
Dtn, Muhammad, farther on, where a treaty with the Sbwarazmts is mentioned.

* Sultan Muhammad, Kh wlrazm recovered most of his Shuradha

possessions, which the Qlturts had overrun the previous year, in 598 H. See
previous note, and our author’s own account of Sultan TaUiah’s conquests
at pages 341 - 2 , and note *, page 393 , and his account of the Sliw9iasinl
Sultans generally.

THE SHANSABANIAH DYNASTY OF CHOR. 383

Mustafit B'illahS and from the Lord of the Faithful, Un-
Na9ir-ud-Din Ullah, reached the Court of Sultan Ghiyas»
ud-Dtn. On the first occasion, Ibn-ur-Rabbt’ came ; and
the l^a^t, Majd-ud-Dtn, [styled] the Model, went along
with him to the Court of the Kh ilafat. and, on the second
occasion, Ibn-ul- Kha ttb came ; and the father of this their
servant, Maulana Saraj-ud-D!n, son of Minhaj-i-Saraj, he
[the Sultan] nominated to proceed along with him to the
Court of the Khilafat*. On the arrival of the honorary
dress from the Court of Un-Nagir-ud-Dtn Ullah, the im¬
perial • five times a day was assumed by the Sultan.

His dominions became wide and extended, and from the
east [eastern extremity] of HindQstan, from the frontier of
Ch in and Ma-Chtn. as far as ’Iralj:, and from the river
Jthun and Kh urasan to the sea-shore of Hurmuz, the
Kh utbah was adorned by his auspicious name. He reigned
for a period of forty-three years.

His bounty and benefactions, bestowed upon the meri¬
torious, the learned, the recluse, and the devout, reached
to the extremes of the empire of Islam, from the east to the
west, to ’Arab and to ’Ajam, to Turkistan and to Hind ;
and the names of all those meriting his bounty and charity
were recorded in his civil courts and record offices. His
life extended to a period of sixty-three years; and the
removal of this great monarch from this transitory sphere
to the eternal habitation took place at the city of Hirat, on
Wednesday, the 27th of the sacred month of Jamadl-ul-
AwwaP, 599 H. His mausoleum was raised by the side
of the Jami’ Masjid of Hirat. The mercy of the Almighty
be upon him I

The Most High God had adorned the incomparable
nature of the wetorious Sultan, Ghiyag-ud-Din, Muham-

• The Ebalhhh’s proper name and title is Al-Mustajt Bi-Nur Ullah. He
died 57 S H.

• The Ebaltfah was stimulating the Gh urtan Sult&ns to hostility against
Sult&n Muhammad’s father, Sultan Takigh, and afterwards did the some with
respect to himself. See page 243, and note

■ Kettledrums and other instruments sounded, at stated periods, before the
gate of sovereigns and great men.

• Some copies have the 7th, but the 27th of the month is confirmed by
other authors. His tomb was on the north side of the Janii’ Masjid which he
had himself founded. Some authors state that 597 H. was the year of his
decease, and others again, 598 li.

3*4

THE TAnA¥AT.I.NA,51Ri.

mad-i-Sam, with divers virtues and endowments, both out*
ward and inward ; and his Court was graced with learned
doctors of religion and law ecclesiastical, accomplished
scholars, illustrious philosophers, and the celebrated in'
eloquence; and his magnificent Court had become the
asylum of the world, and the retreat of the worthy and
laudable persons of the earth. Chiefs of the [holders of]
religious tenets of every sect were there gathered together,
incomparable poets were there present, and masters in the
art of poetry and prose were entertained in the service of
his sublime Court.

At the outset of the career of those sovereigns [Sultan
Gh iyas-ud-Din and Mu’izz-ud-Din], both the brothers fol¬
lowed the tenets of the Kiramt sect*, in imitation of their
ancestors and [the people of] their dominions; but Sultan
Mu’izz-ud-Din, Muhammad-i-Sam, the younger brpther,
when he ascended the Ghaznin throne, the people of that
city and territory being followers of the tenets of the Great
Imam, Abu IHanifah of Kufa, in conformity with them,
adopted the doctrines of Abu ^anifah. Sul$an Gh iyas-ud-
Din, however, 'saw, whilst in a dream, that he was used to
be in the same masjid along with the illustrious Kagii,
Waljid-ud-Din, Marwazt, who followed the religious doc¬
trines of the Traditionists", and who was one of the leaders
of the Sliaf'i sect. Unexpectedly, Imam Shaft himself
enters, and proceeds to the Mihrab^, and begins to repeat
the prayers ; and Sultan Ghiyas-ud-Din,and Kazi Wahid-
ud-Din, both of them follow Imam Shaft in so doing.

On awakening from his dream, the Sultan commanded,
so that, at break of day, Kazt Wahtd-ud-Dtn was requested
to deliver a discourse. When he occupied the seat of
the pulpit, he remarked, during the discourse*, saying,

^ The Kiramts, also called Muja.ss.'imfan—Coiporealists—the followers of
Mutianunad, son of Kiram, are one of the subdivisions of the $ifatt sect who
follow the tenets of Muhammad, son of Idris, U sh-Shaf’i. Qliiyas ud-Dtn
being of that sect, the offices of Imam and Kh atfb of the great masjid of
Hirat, and other minor offices, were conferred on its ecclesiastics.

* The four orthodox sects of Multammadans are Traditionists.

1 The chief place in a masjid where the priest prays with his face turned
towards Makkah.

• The different copies of the text express this clause of the sentence in three
different ways, and use thice different verbs although their meanings are
similar.

THE SHANSABANIAH DYNASTY OF (iiBOR. 385

Sovereign of Islam! this your servant hath during the
past night dremnt a dream,” and he related the very same
dream that the Sultan had himself dreamt, for he had had
one like it; whereupon, when the I^aft descended from the
chair, and went up to make his obeisance to the Sultan, the
latter seized the blessed hand of l^a^t, Wa^id-ud-Dtn, and
adopted the tenets of Imam Shari*.

When the withdrawal of the Sultan to the sect of the
Traditionists became divulged, a load came upon the hearts
of the ’Ulama of the sect of Muhammad-i-Kiram [the
Kiranils]. Of this body, the great ecclesiastics were nume¬
rous ; but, at that time, the most eloquent among them all
was Imam, Sadr-ud-Din, ’Alt, Hai^am, the Nishapuri. who
was resident at, and the head of the college of the city of
Afshin of Qh^rjistan. He composed a strophe on the
Sultan, and in it censured his withdrawal from the sect ;
and, when that strophe came to the Sultan’s knowledge, his
sacred mind became much irritated with him, and Imam
^adr-ud-Din found it impossible to continue to dwell
within the dominions of Ghur. The strophe is this :—

[This polemical squib is of some length, and varies more
or less in almost every copy, is of no particular interest, and
need scarcely be translated.]

Imam Sadr-ud-Dln, on this account, removed out of
the territory of Gh ur. and proceeded to Nishapur. and
there he remained for the space of a year; after which
he despatched [another] strophe to the presence of the
Sultan, so that he was sent for to come back again, and a
robe of honour was despatched ; and he returned to the
Court from Nishapur again. Strophe :—

[These lines- have also been left out for the reasons
previously given. As may be imagined, they are as full of
fulsome adulation as the first were of aspersion.]

Trustworthy persons have thus related, that Sultan
Gh iyay-ud-Din. in his early youth, was greatly addicted to
conviviality, and fond of the sports of the field ; and from

* The Ajar-ul-nilad states that Qhtyas-ud-Dfn used to copy ](^ur'MS with
his own hand, and sell them, and give the money they were sold for in alms to
the poor. The celebrated Imam, Fa]thr-ud-Din, Muhammad, son of’Umr of
Ra^, wrote and de«licated to him a work cntitlcfl Lutaif-i-Gliiyaai. See
under the reign of Mu’izz-ud-Dfn, Section XIX.

386

THE TABA5AT.I.NA5IRt.

the capital city, Ftruz-koh, which was the seat of govern¬
ment, as far as the Zanitn [district] and town of Dawar,
which was the winter capital, not a human being dared to
pursue the chase. Between these two cities [towns] is a
distance of forty leagues, and he [the Sul^n] had com¬
manded that a pillar should be erected at each league of
distance ; and in Zamtn-i-Dawar he had laid out a garden,
and he had given it the name of Garden of Iram‘, and
certainly, for pleasantness and freshness, no such garden
had ever been seen in the whole world, nor did any monarch
possess the like of it. The length of this garden was more
than sufficient for two courses of a horse, and the whole of
its glades were adorned with pine and juniper-trees, and
various sorts of shrubs and odoriferous herbs ; and the
Sul(an had commanded, so that, adjoining the wall of that
garden, a plain had been cleared corresponding in length
and breadth with the garden itself.

Once every year he used to give directions, so that for a
distance of fifty or sixty leagues or more, a nargah* [semi¬
circle] of huntsmen would be drawn out; and it would
require the space of a whole month for the two extremities
of this semicircle of huntsmen to close up. More than ten
thousand wild beasts and animals of the chase, of all species
and descriptions, used to be driven into that plain ; and, on
the days of chase*, the Sultan was in the habit of coming
out on the pavilion of the garden, and holding a convivial
entertainment; and his slaves, his Maliks, and the servants
of the Court, one by one, with the royal permission, would
mount on horseback and enter the plain, and chase and kill
the game in the Sultan’s august sight

Upon one occasion he was desirous of entepng the plain
and enjoying the sport, upon which Fakhr-ud-Dtn. Muba¬
rak Shah*, got upon his feet, and repeated a quatrain.
The Sultan retracted his intention, and devoted himself

> The famous garden of SQiadSd, son of 'Ad, described by the eastern poets
as a perfect model of the promised Muhammadan Paradise.

* One set of copies df the original use the word t'Cj and the other
They are both of much the same signification.

* If such can be called " the chase.”

* The same who composed the History of the Slvuisaldnts in verse, referred
to by our author at page 300. Other writers state that he was one of the most
learned of his time in the science of astrology.

THE SHANSABANIAH DYNASTY OF fitiOR. 387

to enjoyment. The following is the quatrain in ques¬
tion :—

To follow the wine, the beloved, and enjoyment.

Will be better than that thou shonldst pursue the chase.

When the gazelle of paradise is within thy net.

Of what use that thou shouldst follow the mountain goat ? ”

Trustworthy persons have related that, when Sultan
Q]liyas-ud-D!n forswore wine, and devoted himself to
rectitude and goodness, at the period that Sultan Shah.
Kh warazm Shah*, brought the forces of Kh ita. against
ly^ur^an, and made Marw his capital, the latter began to
hariy the border-tracts of the territory of Ghur, and brought
his troops to the Dahanah-i-Sher—the Lion’s Jaws—[Pass]
of Sarakhs. and despatched an emissary to the presence of
the Sul(an, Q^iy^S-ud-Din, and preferred certain requests
of his own to him. The Sultan commanded that an enter¬
tainment should be prepared to do honour to the envoy,
and a gay party was brought together. Wine was cir¬
culated among the Maliks and Amirs of Ghur, and the
envoy was treated with great honour; and he was plied
with wine, in order that, when in a state of inebriety, the
disposition of Sultan Shah might be discovered from his
emissary.

For the Sultan’s own drinking, sweet pomegranate juice
was poured into a flask, and, when it came to the Sul(an’s
turn to pledge, they would fill his goblet with that pome¬
granate juice, and would present it to him. When the
envoy of Sultan Shah became excited from the effects of
the wine, he rose to his knees, and requested a minstrel to
sing the following quatrain, which he accordingly did :—

** Of that lion whose abode is within the Lion’s Jaws,*

The Hons of the universe are in great affright

Thou shouldst, O lion, from * The Jaws ’ show thy teeth.

Since these are [as though] in ‘The Lion’s Jaws ’ from tenor.”

When the envoy called for this verse, and the rhinstrel
sang it, Sultan Ghiyas-ud-Din’s colour changed, and the

* See page 346 and note *.

* The point these lines depends uprai the play on the word Dahanah.
It signifies the jaws, the mouth of a pass, yawning, and the like.

3*8

THE taba?:At-i nA$irI.

Maliks of Ghur became much agitated. KhwSjah Saft-ud-
Din, Mahmud, one of the most distinguished of the Wazirs
of his Court, and who was a miracle of wit and address,
and endowed with a forcible poetic genius, and composed
excellent poetry, arose to his feet, and, looking; on the
ground, in reply to the envoy, called on the minstrel for
this verse:—

“On that day when we shall raise the standard of hostility,

And shall take in hand the enemy of the territory of the world,
Should any lion from ‘ The Jaws ’ [date] show his teeth,

We, with our mace, will crush his teeth within ‘The Jaws.’ ”

Sul(an G^iyas-ud-Din was greatly pleased at this, and
bestowed a liberal present upon the Khwajah. and honoured
him with honorary dresses of great value ; and the whole
of the Maliks commended him. The Almighty have
mercy upon the whole of them ! and may He keep the
Sultan of Islam, the sovereign of the seven climes, the
great king of kings, the lord over all the rulers of Turk,
’Arab, and 'Ajam, the defender of the world and of the
faith, the glory of Islam and of the Faithful, the aider of
kings and emperors, the protector of the dominions of the
Almighty, the pastor of the servants of God, the aided by
Heaven, the victorious over the greatest of all species, the
place of safety to the orthodox, the heir of the dominions
of Suliman, AbO-l-Muzaffar-i-MahmOd, son of the
Sultan [ 1 -yal-timish]. the l^astm [the co-sharer] of the
Lord of the Faithful, in sovereignty and dominion for years
unending, permanent and lasting, for the sake of His
Prophet Muhammad, on whom be peace abundantly
abundant ^

r 1 have generally abstained from giving our author’s fulsome and unctuous
prayers for his patron, the puppet and recluse, who nominally ruled at lyhlt;
but this was such a curious specimen that I could not leave it out. It shows
that our author did not stick at any exaggeration—and the above contains
many—and is a convincing proof that he “rarely indulges in high-flown
eulogy, but relates his facts in a plain straightforward manner,” &c. We
must not imagine that all the epithets bestowed upon these rulers by their
parasites were the titles they assumed.

THE SHANSABANIAII DYNASTY OF OHOr,

389

Titles and Names of 'the Sultan *:—

Sultan-ul-A’j;am, Gljiyas-ud-Dtn, Mahmud.
Malikah-uUMu’ajj^amah, Jalal-ud-Dunya wa-ud-Din.

Length of his reign •—Forty-three' years.

Summer capital;—The City of Firuz-koh of Ghur.
Winter capital:—The district of Dawar.

Kdzts of his Court.

Ka^i-ul-Kuzat [Chief Ka;t], Mu’izz-ud-Din, Harawi.
Ka^i Shihab-ud-Din. Harmawadi^

Wazirs of the Kingdom.

Sh ams-ul-Mulk^ ’Abd-ul-Jabbar, Kidani.

Falthr-ul-Mulk, Sharaf-ud-Din *. Wadari *.

* From the way in which his titles and names are here written in the very
old copy of the text, within a circular area, it is evident that this was the
inscription on his coins.

* A few copies have “ Mu’affam,” but it is incorrect.

’ Forty-one in a few copies.

* Also written ^^rmab&dt in one or two copies ; probably Jarmabadt or
Jarmavi^dt may be more correct.

* Sharaf-ul-Ashrfif.

* Tn one copy Fardait.

39»

THE TABA?AT-I-NA$IR!.

’Ain-ul-Mulk, Suranl [or Surtant].

Zahtr-ul-Mulk, ’Abd-ullah, Sanjart.

jalal-ud-Din, Diw-Sharl [or Diw-Shahi],

Majd-ul-Mulk, Khwajah §afi-‘ud-Din.

Standards.

On the right. Black ; on the left. Red.

Motto on his august Signet.

“ For me God alone is sufficient.”

His Sultdns and Maliks.

Sultan Mu’izz-ud-Din, Muhammad-i-Sam, his brother,
ruler over Ghaznin.

Sultan Shams-ud-Dln. Muhammad, son of Mas’ud,
Bamtani.

Sultan Baha-ud>Din, Muhammad Sam, Bamianl

Malik Taj-ud-Dtn, Muhammad-i-Harab, Sijistam.

Malik Na^ir-ud-Dtn, Alb-i-Ghazl. son of Kazil Arsalan.

Malik Taj-ud-Din, Muhammad, Timrant.

Malik Taj-ud-Din, Zangi, son of Mas’ud, Bamtani.

Malik Kutb-ud-Dtn, Yusuf, Timrani.

Malik Ziya-ud-Din, Muhammad, Durr-i- Gh ur [the Pearl
of Ghur]*.

Malik Na§ir-ud-Din, son of Surj, Madint.

Malik Badr-ud-Din, ’Alt, Kidant.

Malik Shah. Wa khsht [of Wa khsh of Bada khsh an].

Malik Na§ir-ud-Din, Timrani.

Malik Taj-ud-Din of Mukran.

Malik Mu-ayyid-ud-Din, Mas’ud, Timrant

Victories and Conquests *.

The territory of Hirat, [defeat of] Kimaj, Dawar, Faras*
Kaliyun, Ftwar, Saif-rud, Gharjistan, Tal-kan, Juzarwan,

* See page 346, and next page.

* The list of these victories and conquests is only contained in three copies
of the original. Even if a place was evacuated before the arrival of the
Charts, it is styled a “ conquest ” on their reaching it. What the “ conquest "
of Ntmroz and Sijistan was may be seen from what our author himself
says at page 378. The Malik of Sijistln merely acknowledged his
suzerainty.

r Also written Blras. See page 37 S and note *.

THE SHA NSAbAn!aH DYNASTY OF GHOR.

39 *

Jarum, Tigln-SbSd, Kabul, ’Ighrajf*, victory over Baha-ud-
pin, Tughril. of HirSt, Ghaznln. Fush^nj, Sijistan, Ntmroz,
Mainland [or Maihand], Faryab, Panj-dih, Marw-ar-ROd,
victory over Sultan Shah. Lohor* and Maro Malkah[.>]'
NlghapQr, and Nisa.

xvin. malik.ul.^[AjI, ’alA-ud-dIn, mui?ammad, son of

MALIK SHUJA’-UD-DIN, ABI-’ALi, SON OF [’IZZ-UD-DlN],
AL-^JtUSAIN, SON OF AL-^IASAN, SHANSABi.

Malik 'Ala-ud-Dln, Muhammad, was the son of Malik
Shuia*-ud-Dln. Ab!-’Ali*, and he was the uncle’s son of
both the Sultans, Ghiyas-ud-Din and Mu’izz-ud-Din, and
was older than either of the brothers. He had performed
the pilgrimage, as well as fought against infidels; and, in
addressing him, they [the Sultans] used to style him
Khudawand [my Lord]. The daughter of Sultan Ghiyas-
ud-Din, who was named Mah Malik [Malikah], and styled
by the title of Jalal-ud-Dunya wa-ud-Dln, whose mother
was the daughter of Sultan ’Ala-ud-Dtn, Jahan-soz, was
married to Malik ’Ala-ud-Dtn*.

That daughter was a highly dignified princess, and knew
the sacred l^ur’an by heart, and she had also committed to
memory the A kh bar-i-Shihabi [the g^ihabi traditions*],

■ In some copies but it is evidently the tract from whence Saif-ud-
Dtn, who joined Sultan Jalal-ud-Dtn, Shwarazm Shah, at Ghazntn [see
note *, page 287,] against the Mughals, took his name.

* Lohor will, of course, be repeated as one of Mu’i*i-ud-Dtn’s victories, as
Ghivas-ud-Dtn never passed the Indus.

> This name is doubtful, and is not very plain in either copy of the text.
It might be. Mar and Malkah. No such place is mentioned in the account of
his reign, and some of the places here recorded as conquests were derived by
marriage, or their rulers, as in the cases of Sijistan and Ntmroz, merely acknow¬
ledged his suzerainty.

* See page 346, para, second. This Malik-ul-Hajf, or the Pilgrim Malik,
was, by our author’s own account, the son of Abu-’Alt, son of Shuja’-ud-Dtn,
Abt-’Alt, and therefore he was not the uncle’s son of the two Sultan brothers,
but tkt son of thsir unel/s son —a second cousin.

To save perplexity to the reader, I must mention that this personage is the
same as was mentioned at page 346 by the name of :^iy 3 -ud-Dtn, Muhammad,
the Pearl of fihOr. See also page 393, and note ».

» She was first betrothed to Sanjar ghMi, son of.Xughan S&Sh, son of
Mu-ayyid-i-A’fnah-dar, Malik of Nljhapur i and, alter his, Sanjar 21 iah s,
captivity, betrothed to ^iya-ud-Dtn, Muhammad. See page 182.

* At page 301, our author states that this princess was the depositary of the
traditions of martyrdom [ojl« 4 ]; but, it is evident, from what he says here.

39*

THE TAnA^fAT.I.NA5IRl.

and her handwriting was as pearls befitting a king. Once
every year she was in the habit of performing a prayer of
two genuflexions, during which she would repeat the whole
Kur’an from beginning to end. The cause of her passing
from the world a maid was this, that, before he was joined
in wedlock to her, Malik ’Ala-ud-Din, Muhammad, pos¬
sessed a Turkish hand-maid, who was the mother of his
son [Rukn-ud-Dtn] ; but he had contracted marriage with
her, and was not capable of consummating his marriage
with this princess. In beauty, purity, and self-restraint,
she had no equal in the whole world.

The mother of the writer of these pages was the foster-
sister and school-companion of this princess; and this
devotee [himself] was brought up in the princess’s own hall
of favour and her haram of chastity, up to the period of his
entering upon the bounds of adolescence, in the service of
her royal dwelling, and her private apartments. The
maternal uncles* of this devotee, and his maternal ances¬
tors, were all attached to the service of that princess’s
Court, and to the Court of her father; and this poor indi¬
vidual [himself] received many proofs of that lady’s favour
and bounty : God reward her! At last her martyrdom
and death took place in the territory of ’Irak during the
calamities which arose on the irruption of the infidels [the
Mughals]. The mercy of the Almighty be upon her !

During the lifetime of Sultan Ghiya§-ud-Dtn, Malik
’Ala-ud-Din held in fief, belonging to Q^ur, the district of
Bust, and'Wajiah [or Wejah] of the territory of Garmstr [of
Ghur], and Organ [or Urkan] of Ghaznin *. In the battle

and from what other writers state, that the book in question was the work
entitled ** Akhbar-i-Shihaht” the Shihabt Traditions, so called from

the author’s name, or the person to whom he dedicated his work.

• A few copies have —brothers, instead of J^'—maternal uncles.

• The text is hopelessly defective here, and of the whole of the twelve copies
collated no two agree, except the I, O. L- copy and the Ro. As. Soc. copy,
but they agree in leaving out several words. The two oldest copies agree as
above given, with the exception that one has WurmashSn ^.*1 or DurmagliSn

which last word also occurs in the defective passage in the two first-
nam^ copies. Wajtah [*!*•,•]» which here, in several copiq^ seems written
and was referred to at page 340. Some copies have and j and

even place of Organ of Gh aznin. whilst the third bestcoj^ of the

text omits these two words and altogether. It is tiresome not to be

able to fix this passage of the text for certain.

THE SHAHSABAn!aH DYNASTY OF GHOR.

393

' which the SultSn-i- Gh azl. Mu’izz-ud-Dtn, fought against
Pithora RSe of Ajmlr^ and in which the Sultan was
defeated,'Ala-ud-Din, Muhammad, accompanied the Sul^an-
i-Ghazl. and, during that expedition, did good service.
When the Sultans of Gh ur proceeded into Kh urasan, and
Ntshapur was taken, ’Ala ud-Dtn was installed in the ter¬
ritory of Nlshapur. and, for a considerable period", he
remained at the city of Nishapur. and acted towards its
people with justice and beneficence.

When Sultan Muhammad, Kh warazm Shah, arrived
from Khw arazm before the gate of Nishapur. ’Ala-ud-Din
defended the place for some time. At last he entered into
a convention, and surrendered the city to Sultan Muham¬
mad, Kh warazm Shah, and returned again into Gh ur.

When Sul(an Gh ivas-ud-Din was removed to the Al¬
mighty’s mercy, the Sultan-i- Gh azi. Mu’izz-ud-Din, con¬
ferred the throne of Firuz-koh, and the territories of Ghur,
Ghaijistan, and Zamin-i-Dawar, upon him ; and, in the
Kh utbah. his title became Malik ’Ala-ud-Din, Muhammad.
Previous to this they used to style him Malik Ziya-ud-Din",
the Pearl of Ghur.

f The I. O. L. copy, and also the Ro. As. Soc. MS., and one of the others,
have—“ In the battle which Sultan Gh iyas and Mu’izz-ud-Dfn fought,” &c.
See under Mu’izz-ud-Dtn, Section XIX.

* Nishapur fShad-valdil was taken in Rajab 597 H. Five months after¬

wards—in 2 i*i^’dah—Sultan Muhnntmad, Shwarazm Sha h, appeared before
it. Malik been left there, in command, at the head of a

large force ; and the walls [which, like the walls of Jericho, had fallen when
Sultan Gh ivay-ud-Dtn performed the miracle of pointing his riding whip at
them, as related by our author at page 380] had been put into thorough
repair. The Gh iiris came out to fight, but, finding what the Sultan’s army
was, “they retired,” says Yafa-t, “like so many mice into their holes.” The
walls were pounded to dust and the ditch filled, when Malik ^iya-ud-Dtn sent
out the chiefs of the’Ulama to solicit quarter, for himself and troops. The
Sultan acceded to his request, and ho and his troops were treated with honour,
and sent back to Ghiir. So the Qburls only held Nfah 3 pur about five months.
It must have been on this occasion that ^iya-ud-Dtn stipulated never again to
draw his sword against the Sultan, referred to at page 418. After retaking
Ntahiipur, the Sultan advanced to Marw and Sarakhs, which latter place was
held by his own nephew, HindQ Rban [see page 352], on the part of the
Gh firta. He fled to Gh ur on the approach of his uncle, but, the officer he left
in charge not presenting himself, SultXn Muhammad left a force to invest it,
and set out, vi& Marw, for Kh v^rasm to prepare for an advance upon Hirat.

• Our author has a peculiar way of his own for distracting his rekders very

oftetu After giving an account of Malik ^iya-ud-Dtn, under the heading of
his grandfather, -ud-Dtn, at page 345-6. and calling him there by the

title of ZiyS-ud-Dtn, he is here introduced again under a totally different

394

THE TABA^T-1-NA§1RI.

He held possession of Firuz-koh and the territortes of
Ghur and Gharjistan for a period of four years; and in the
year 6oi H., when the Sultan-i- Gh azi. Mu’izz-ud-Dtn, pro¬
ceeded towards Kh warazm. and took [with him] the armies
of Gh ur and Gh azmn. Malik ’Ala-ud-Din, the Pearl of
Gh ur. conducted sundry of the troops of Gh ur into Mul-
hidistan ‘ and Kuhistan, and advanced to the gate of the
city of ]^a-in, and [from thence] pushed on to Junabad of
Kuhistan^ and captured the castle of Kakh of Junabad ;
and, after having performed numerous feats of arms and
holy warfare, he returned into Gh ur again.

When the Sultan-i- Gh azi. Mu’izz-ud-D!n, attained mar¬
tyrdom, Sul(an Ghiyag-ud-Din, Mahmud, son of [Suljan
Gh ivas-ud-Din] Muhammad, son of Sam, advanced out of
Bust, which was one of his fiefs, into Zamin-i-Dawar; and
the Maliks and Amirs of Gh ur joined Sultan Mahmud, and
he set out towards the capital city, FirQz-koh.

Malik ’Ala-ud-Din came from Firuz-koh into Gh arjistan.
and, when he reached the head of the bridge over the
Murgh-ab river, the Sipah-salar,- J^asan-i-Abd-ul-Malik,
came up after him, and caused him to turn back ; and, by
command of Mahmud, he was confined in the castle of
Ashivar of Gh arjistan*.

name ; and it is only now, after three or four pages, that he tells us that ’Ala-
ud-Din is the same person as figured before, in another place, under the title
of Ziya-ud-Dfn. The fact Ls, that his correct title, to this time, was ?iya-
nd-Dtn ; and, when Suljjan Mu’izz-ud-Dtn conferred the throne of Firuz-koh
and other tracts upon him, ^tis title was then changed to ’Ala-ud-Dtn. Sultan
Mu’izz-ud-Dtn held him in great estimation, and he appears to have deserved
it ; and this fact, taken in connexion with Ohiyag-ud-Din, Mahmud’s real
character, noticed farther on, will account for the Sullan’s making him
sovereign over Gh ur in preference to Ma^imud, and also for Matpnud’s enmity
towards him, and the murder of his son, Mahmud-i-Iran ShSh.

* Not the name of a territory. It is derived from mnlt^id—heretic, &c.
The ly^uhistan of Kh urasSn was full of these schismatics. All the copies of
the text have the conjimction and between Mul^idistan and IKuhistan ; but it
rends redundant, and " the heretical country of ^uhistan” appears to be the
more correct rendering.

* Junabad, also called Gunabad, is situated between T^bas and ^irilt.
li^kh itself means a castle, -a lofty building, and the like ; but here refers to a
small town of that name, a dependency of Junilb&d,—the “Goonabad” of
Frazer and the maps.

* Our author takes a most round-about way of relating ordinary events, and
seems desirous of making a mystery of them. Malik ’A l&-ud-Dtn, Muhammad,
unable to resist the combination against him, retired from Firuz-koh, was
pursued, and imprisoned.

THE SHANSABANIAH DYNASTY OF QHCR. 395

When Sultan Mahmud was assassinated, and the sove¬
reignty of Gh ur fell to Sultan ’Ala-ud-Din, Utsuz-i-Husain^
he caused Malik 'Ala-ud-Dtn, Muhammad, to be released
from the fortress of Ashivar. brought him to Firuz-koh,
and treated him with honour and respect, until he slew the
Sipah-salar, ’Umr-i-Shalmat!, for murdering his son, Malik
Rukn-ud-Din, Mahmud-i-Tran Shah. The cause of it was
this, that, when Malik 'Ala-ud-Din, in the reign of Sultan
[Gh iyas-ud-Din], Mahmud, son of Muhammad-i-Sam*, was
seized [as just previously related], his son, Malik Rukn-ud-
Din, Mahmud-i-Iran Shah, retired to Gh aznin. He was a
prince of sufficient greatness, and endowed with perfect
wisdom, knowledge, and understanding, and famed for his
lofty-mindedness and activity From Gh aznin he pro¬
ceeded into Garmsir, and from thence came into Gh ur;
and the Kashi people, who were the [most] refractory of
Gh ur. to the number of about 50,000 men®, joined him.
Sultan Gh ivas-ud-Din. Mahmud, son of Muhammad-i-Sam,
with about 500 horse, of the main portion of his army, and
some 2000 or 3000 foot, came forth from Firuz-koh, and
a fight took place between them, and defeat befelf the
Qhhrtans^: and Malik Rukn-ud-Din, Mahmud-i-Iran Shah,
discomfited, retired to Gh aznin. and again came into
Garmsir. He was seized by the Kh udawand-zadah Saif-
ud-Din, Timrani, and he brought him to the presence of
Sultan Gh iya^ud-Din. Mahmud, who directed that he
should be imprisoned in the residence of the Amir-i-Hajib,
Umr-i-Shalmati.

On the day that Sultan Ghiyag-ud-Din,- Mahmud, was
assassinated, the Turkish slaves of Mahmud raised a
:umult, and despatched one, who was named Amir Mang-
baras-i-Zard*, to put Malik Rukn-ud-Din, Mahmud-i-

* Another son of Sultan ’Ala-ud-Dtn, Husain, Jahan-soz. He was named
U tsuz after the third monarch of the ShwSrazmt dynasty. See page 238.

* That Is to say, flh ivas-ud-Din. Mahmud, son of QhiyiiS'Ud-Din,
duhammad, son of Baha-ud-Dtn, Sam.

* Five thousand more likely. Our author grossly exaggerates the numbers
lere. See page 399.

f From this it is evident that the Kagllts were Gh flrtans.

■ The son of a lord or great man.

* There is some discrepancy with regard to this person’s name. Some copies

if the text have the second word, Zard, signifying

tale, sallow, and the like, is written in some copies Zud, swift, quick; and in one

C C 2

39*

THE TABA¥:AT.I.NA§l'Ri.

IrSn S^h, to death. The writer of these words, Sara.j>i>
Minhaj, states on this wise :—I was in my eighteenth year
in the year 607 H.’, and was present at the entrance [gate¬
way] of the Sultan’s palace, in the capital city of Firuz-
koh; standing looking on, as is the custom among youths,
when this Amir Mangbaras-i-Zard came riding up with a
wallet, with blood dropping from it, hanging from his arm.
The head of Malik Rukn-ud-Din, Ma];)mud-i-Iran Shah—
may he rest in peace !—he had placed in that wallet, and he
entered into the Sultan’s palace’ with it.

I now return to my relation again :—In the reign of
Sultan 'Ala-ud-Diri, Utsuz-i-Husain, when Malik ’Ala-ud-
Din, Mu^iammad, obtained an opportunity, he seized Amtr
’Umr-i-§halmati, saying, "Thou hast used thy endeavours
in bringing about the murder of my son and at night he
slew him. Early the next morning, when [Sukan] 'Ala-ud-
Din, Utsuz, became aware of it, and the Amirs of GhOr
demanded redress, *Ala-ud-Din, Utsuz, issued commands
for Malik ’Ala-ud-Din, Muhammad, to be imprisoned the
second time in the fortress of Balarwan of Gharjistan.
The remaining account of him, respecting what befell him
when he ascended the throne of Firuz-koh the second time,
will be related at the end of this Section.

XIX. SULTAN GHIYAS-UD-DiN, MAI^MOD, SON OF OHIVA§.

UD-DiN, MU^IAMMAD, SON OF UAHA-UD-DIN, SAM, SHAN.

SABI.

Sukan ^iiya§-ud-Din, Mahmud, son of Sultan Gh iyas-
ud-Din, Muhammad-i-Sam, was a sovereign of good quali¬
ties, and conviviality, pleasure, and jollity were dominant
in his disposition*.

When Sukan Ghiyas-ud-Din, Muhammad-i-Sam, his
father, died'*, Mahmud was desirous that his uncle, the
Sultan-i-Ghazi, Mu’izz-ud-Din, should assign to him the

Zal, which means old, decrepit, &c. One copy has Manguras-i-Zud suwar,
which would signify Manguras, the swift or quick horseman.

* Our author, being in his eighteenth year in 607 H., would have been in
his sixty-ninth year when he composed this work.

* The palace or residence of the Sultans.

* See note para. 3, page 400, and p.ige 405.

* TTte L CX MS., 5 z. is minus a leaf here.

THE SBANSABANIAH DYNASTY OF QHOR.

397

throne of his father. But that expectation was not fulfilled,
and the throne of Ftruz-koh was conferred upon Malik
*Ala-ud-Dtn, Muhammad*, the Pearl of Gh ur. to whom the
daughter of Sultan Gh ivas-ud- Din ^ Muhammad-i-Sam,
was betrothed*; and the territory of Bust, Isfizar^ and
Farah, were given to Sultan Mahmud*.

In the year in which [his uncle] the Sultan-i- Gh azt led
an army into Khw arazm. Ghiyas-ud-Dinr Mahmud, marched
the troops of Bust, Farah, and Isfizar, into Kh urasan, and
proceeded to the gate of Marw-i-Shah-i- Tahan ; and in that
expedition he manifested many marks of skill and activity*.
When the Sultan-i- Gh azl. Mu’izz-ud-Din, was assassinated,
Mahmud determined to proceed from Bust to Firuz-koh,
and, when he reached Zamin-i-Dawar, the Kh ali' Amirs
of Garmsir, with a numerous following, joined him. The
Amirs and Maliks of Gh ur all came forth to receive him ;
and, in the year 602 H.®, he reached Firuz-koh, and the
throne of Gh ur came into his possession, and he brought
the territories of his father under his jurisdiction*.

M^lih *Ala-ud-Dtn, Muhammad, retired from Firuz-koh
into ^arjistan, and therein he was taken prisoner,* and

* Styled ;^iya-ud-Dfii before he was raised to the throne of FirQz-koh.

* She was either the full or half-sister of Mahmud.

r In some copies written Isffrar—the present SabzM^r.

* Not styled Sultan until he gained the throne after the death of his uncle.
His title had been Malik hitherto.

* The compact which our author states to have existed previously between
Mahmud and Sultan ’Ala-ud-Dfn, Muhammad, Shwarazm S 2 )iih, at page 400,
may have been entered into at this f>eriod. See also note •, page 400. The
object he had in marching to Marw-i-Shah-i-Tah 5 n does not appear, neither in
the account of his uncle’s reign is it referred to.

I The Kh alj tribe, I beg to remark, are neither Afghans nor Patans, although
some persons have made such an absurd assertion. I shall have more to say
about them as I proceed.

* In this same year Fakhr-ud-Din. Mubarak Shah, the author of the history
of the fjh urts in verse, referred to at page 300, died.

* When information reached Mahmud of the assassination of his uncle,
Sulpin Mu’izz-ud-Dtn, he, in the first place, sent intimation to his brother-in-
law, ’Ala-ud-Dtn, Muhammad [the Pearl of Qhiir], son of Abt-’Ali, and called
Upon him to acknowledge his authority. Mahntud also communicated the
tidings to ’Izz-ud-Dtn, Husain, son of Khar-mtl- Wall of llirat. - Both of them,
however, declined to acknowledge his authority, on which Mahmud advanced
to Ftruz-koh with a large army. On this the generality of the Qhiirtan Amirs
deserted the cause of ’Ala-ud-Dtn, Muhammad, .and went over to Mahmiid,
and he gained possession of Ftruz-koh, and threw ’Ala-ud-Din, Muhammad
•into confinement. See also note *, p.age 400.

398

THE TxVBA¥AT*l-NA51Ui.

was confined in the castle of Ashiyar, as has been previously
recorded ; and when the whole of the various parts of the
dominions of Gh ur. and Gh arjistan. Tal-lcan, and Guzar-
wan ^ and the district of Faras®, and Garmsir, came under
the sway and jurisdiction of his Slaves, such as Sultan Taj-
ud-Din, Yal-duz, and Sultan Kutb-ud-Dtn I-bak, and other
Turk* Maliks and Amirs, who were Slaves of Sultan Mu’izz-
ud-Din, each of them despatched a person of rank to the
presence of his Court, and solicited from Sultan Mabmud
letters of manumission, and the investitures of the territories
of Gh aznin and of Hindustan respectively^.

He despatched a deed of investiture of the territory of
Ghaznin and a canopy of state to Sultan Taj-ud-Din, Yal-
duz® ; and, when Sultan Kutb-ud-Din, I-bak, advanced to
Ghaznin, he despatched Nizam-ud-Din, Muhammad, to
Firuz-koh, in the year 605 II.®; and Sultan Mahmud directed
that a scarlet canopy of state and a deed of investiture of
the government of the dominion of Hindustan should be
sent to him.

Throughout the whole of the territories of Gh ur, Ghaznin,
and Hindustan, the Kh utbah was read for Sultan Mahmud,
and the coin was stamped with his name *; and, as he was

* Also with j, as at page 376; and in the same way as Sijistan for Sigistan,
the one being the Arab inode of writing the word, and the latter the local.

* This name also is written Baras ; and in some few copies ^adus. See
page 342.

* All these Slarcs were of Turkish parentage. Hatimud having succeeded
to the sovereignty of the dominions of his late uncle, the latter’s slaves became
his slaves also, according to Miitiammadan law, by succession. It is not to be
supposed that either Yal-dua [I-yal-duz] or I-bak were then styled Sultans, or
that our author means it to be so understood. They were styled so ultimately.
See note •, page 496, and page 502.

r Just above he says, “ Yal-duz, I-bak, and other Turk Maliks and Amtrs;”
but all could not have demanded the investitures of Gh aznin and Hindustan.
Yal-duz [I-yal-duz] and i-bak sent agents to Sultan Mabmud expressing their
loyalty, submission, and obedience to him ; and in the whole of the empire the
Khutbah was read for him and the money stamj^ed with his name and titles.

* Two copies of the text add here, “ in order that he might assume juris¬
diction over the Gbnzufn territories.”

® See the reign of l^utb-ud-Din, i-bak, beginning of next Section. There
our author contradicts this statement entirely, and says ^utb-ud-Din received
the investiture in 602 u., and that he went to l.ohor to receive it.

* These events occurred, as our author here states, in 605 ir. ; but Taj-ud-
Dtn, I-yal-duz, appears to have received the investiture of Gh aznin some time
previous to this, and it is somewhat strange that he should have continued to
coin money in the name of the late ruler, Mu’izz-ud-Din, after what our author

THE SSANSAUANiAH DYNASTY OF OHOR.

399

the heir of the kingdom of his father and his uncle, all the
Maliks and Sultans paid reverence to his dignity, and
showed the obedience of vassals unto him*.

When one year of his sovereignty had passed, Malik
Rukn-ud-Din, Mahmud-i-Iran Shah, son of Malik ’Ala-ud-
Din*, Muhammad, advanced from Ghazntn towards FtrQz-
koh, as has been previously recorded*, and Sultan Gh ivas-
ud-Din, Mahmud, marched from Ftruz-koh, and put him
to the rout, and about 5000 Ghuris [in that affair] bit the
dust.

After a period of two years and a half, Sultan* ’Ala-ud-
Dtn, Utsuz, son of [’Ala-ud-Din] Husain, who was his
[Mahmud’s] father’s uncle’s son, proceeded from the country
of Bamtan into Khw arazm. and sought assistance from
Sultan Muhammad, Khw arazm Shah, to enable him to
seize the dominions of Gh ur. The Malik-ul-Jibal, Ulugh
yhan -i-Abt-Muhammad*. and Malik Shams-ud-Dtn. Utsuz,
the ^ajib, who were two of the greatest of the Turkish
Maliks of the KhwSrazm gh^hs, with the troops of Marw
and Ba lkh. Sarakhs and Rudbar, were nominated to give
him assistance, and he [’Ala-ud-Din, Utsuz] proceeded by
way of towards Gh ur.

Sultan Ghiyas-ud-Dln. Mahmud, brought out his forces
from Firuz-koh, and on the limits of Maimand and Far-yab*,

here itates, and even after SultUn Mahmud, the former’s successor, had given
Ttj'Ud'Dfn his freedom with the investiture of Ghazntn. much more up to the
year 610 H., when even Mahmud had been killed in 607 H. But see page
497, and 500—505 ; and Thomas : Coins of the PatiiAn Kings of Delhi,
page 30.

* He was heir certainly in name at least ; but the two favourite slaves of
Sul|^ Mu’izz-ud-Dtn already possessed the greater portion of their master’s
dominions, from which Mahmud would have, in all probability, been unable
to oust them. Mu’izz-ud-Din had, on more than one occasion, expressed a
desire that these slaves, especially I-yal-duz, should succeed to his dominions.
See page 500.

* Styled ^iya-ud-Dtn, the Pearl of Ghur. before he came to the throne
from which Mahmud deposed him. See page 393, and note •, and page 40&

* Page 395.

» Our author styles him “Sultan,” as well as many others, ie/(>re their
attaining sovereignty.

* Referred to in the account of the Khwlrazm Shkhis. He subsequently

the fether-ln-law of Rukn-ud-Dtn, son of Sultan Muhammad,
Khwarazm SllSh- See page 235.

f Also called Far-ab, Far-kw, Bar-ab, and Bar-yab. This biittle and victory
of MahmOd is not mentioned by other authors. Sec also pages .tog and 414

400

THE TABA^AT-I-NA$1RL

at a place which they call [by the name of] SalQrah*, a
battle took place between the two armies. The Almighty
bestowed the victory upon Sultan Ma];imud, and ’Ala-ud-
Dtn, Utsuz, and the Khw arazm Shahl Maliks, and the
troops of Kh urasan were overthrown*.

When four years of Sultan Ghivas-ud-Dtn. Mahmud’s
reign had expired, Malik ’Ala-ud-Dtn, *Ali Shah *, son of,
Sultan Takish^ Kh warazm Shah, sought refuge from his
brother’s [Sultan ’Ala-ud-Dln, Mul)iammad, Khw arazm
Shah] presence with Sultan Ma^imud. On the Kh warazml
Sultan* becoming aware of this, he despatched distinguished
personages [as envoys] to Firuz-koh. During the life¬
time of the Sultan-i- Gh azi. Mu’izz-ud-Din, Muhammad,
a firm compact existed between Sultan Gh ivas-ud-Din.
Ma]^mud*, son of [Ghiya§-ud-Din], Mu]iammad-i-Sam, and

• A few copies have Aslurah.

• See note ■, below.

• His title was Taj-ird-Dtn, not *Aia-ud-Dtn. See the account of him,
page 252-3. He had been a prisoner in Gh uT some few years previously, and
was known to the Qhurfan Princes.

• The I. O. L. MS. No. 195^1 *tnd R- A. Soc. MS. both have—“when
Suipn Takiab became aware of it.” Takish had been dead many years. The
printed text, of course, is the same.

• By this statement our author entirely contradicts that made at pages 256
and 382, and the present statement is certainly one more likely to ^ correct.
It tends to confirm what YHfa-t and some other works say, and which I shall
presently refer to.

Gh iTOs-ud-Dtn. Mahmud, after the death of his father, expected that hia
uncle, Sultan Mu’izz-ud-Din, would have placed him, the son, on his late
father’s throne of Flruz-koh and the kingdom of Gh ur ; instead of which,
knowing Mahmud’s love of wine and other sensual pleasures, he bestowed it
upon the son-in-law of the late Sultan, Malik Ziya-ud-Dtn, the Pearl of Gh ur.
and gave the western districts of the empire to Mahmud as his appanage, as
stated I>y our author at page 472. On this account Mahmud entertained no
very good feeling towards his uncle, and he may have entered into communi¬
cation secretly with the Sultan of lUxwarazm, who was naturally hostile to
Mu’izz-ud-Dfn ; and such an understanding as our author mentions may have
been entered into at the time Mahmud went on the expedition to Marw,
mentioned at page 397, when Mu’izz-ud-Din invaded Kh waraam.

I rather expect, however, that our author, who rarely indulges in dates, has
confused tlte events of this period, as Mahmud, previous to the assassination
of his uncle, was not in a position to enter into “a firm compact” with
Sultin Muhammad, unless secretly. Yafii-t says [and Jami’-ut-TawartUi
agreesl that when MahmQd seized the throne of Ghur. shortly after his uncle’s
death, “he gave himself up to drinking and riotous pleasures,' as was the
habit of the Amirs of Ghur, and attended to singing and jollity, whilst he
neglected the affairs of the kingdom, and could not endure the fatigues of war.
His great thief'i and nobles, perceiving his weakness of character, began to

THE S&ANSABANIAH DYNASTY OF GHOR.

401

Muhammad-i-Takish^. Khwarazm Shah, that frieodship
and concord should exi^t between them, and that the

* Su]{Sn ’AU-ud-Dln, Mutiammad, s6n of TakiBh* Before he succeeded
his father, his title was ¥t>th-ud>Dtn: See note page 353.

grow disaffected; and ’Jzz>ud-Dtn, ^usain, son of Khar.mtl. the WBlt of
Ilirilt, who was the greatest prop of the Gh artan empire, took precedence of
all the other chiefs in tendering allegiance to the SultBn of ShwSrazm, and
despatched agents repeatedly soliciting that' the Sultin would annex HirBt.
Although that monarch had other important matters to attend to, still, fearing
lest a portion of the Ghurtan dominions, such as Balkb and districts around,
might offer allegiance to the ruler of E^i^'Sllita, and that that city might fall
into his hands, he determined to move towards BalJth.”

“ The 'Walt of that part, styled ’ImSd-udtDtn, the chief of the NBmtZn
[BaintanJAmtrs [called by our author, at page36o^’Iinad-ud-Dtn,’Umr,FtwBrt],
at first was most warm in his professions of lojralty and fidelity, and Ballcb
was made -over to the Sul{an, who continued the government, as heretofore, in
the Walt’s hands'; but, being afterwards detected in acts of treachery, and an
intercepted letter having been placed in his hands, he threw himself at the
Sultan’s feet. His life was spared, but he was sent away to ShwBrazm, after
being allowed to take what treasure and other valuables he desired with him.
His son [name not given] was also removed from the charge of the fortress of
Tirmid, and that important post was made oyer to the guardianship of SultBn
’Uginiin ofSamr^and.”

The Tartkh-i-Alft.differs considerably on these matters. It is stated thenein,
that, on the death of Sul{an Mu’izz>ud-Dtn becoming known to SuljSn Mut^m*
mad, he assembled a large army for the purpose of attacking Balkh, then held
by the officers and troops of Malik 'AlB-ud-Dtn, Mu^mmad, son of the late
Sultan Baha-ud-Din, Sam, of Baditan and JuUUtistBn, and invested that
stronghold. At this crisis, Malik *Ala-ud-Dtn, Muhammad, had led an army
against Taj-ud-Hin, I-yal'duz, ruler of fiJtaa nf n. On this account SultBn
Qiliyas-ud-Dfii, Mahmud, who had intended to march his forces against HiiBt,
to reduce ’Izs-ud-Dtn, ^usain, son of TOiar-mtl. to obedience, paused in order
to see what the upshot of the other two affairs would be.

Taj-ud-Dtn, ’Alt Shah [SultBn Muhammad’s brother, who subsequently
took refuge with Mahmud], who commanded the forces investing Bal kh, being
unable to take it, Sulpin Muhammad proceeded thither in person, and sum¬
moned the governor to submit. All was of no avail, and the Sul^Bn deter¬
mined to proceed without further loss of time to HiiSt, when news reached
him that Malik ’Ala-ud-Dtn, Muhammad, and his brother, Jalal-nd-Dtn, ’Alt,
had been defeated by 'nj-ud-Dtn, I-yal-dus, Uken prisoners, and thrown into
confinement. This happened, according to Fafih-t, in 605 H. On tills,
’Imld-ud-Din [’Umr], Governor of Ball^ hopeless of succom, sundered
the place. He was treated with honour and kindness, and continued in chaige
of Balkh, as before. After this, Sul^ Muhammad advanced to BBkhurz,
got possession of that places then proceeded to Tirmid, and obtained possession
of that stronghold likewise, and then he retttmed to Shwarazm.

Thb latter statement is incorrrect. The Sul{an proceeded to Hirit before
returning to ShwBrazm, as will be presently stated.

The GhurlSn Amfrs and Chiefs, who were in .accord with Amfr Mahmud,
were prepoiing forces, s.ays Yafa-t, to attack Sulian Muhammad s forces then

THE TABA^T-I-NA$IRI.

4M

enemy of one should be the enemy of the other ; and, on
this occasion, Sulfan Muhammad, KhwSrazm Shah, sent

before UnlVh ; but the Sultan’s troops made a swoop upon them, like a fidcon
on a covey of partridges, and routed and dispersed them before they had had
time to complete their preparations. This must have been the affair called a
victory of Mahmud’s by our author. The territory of Balkh was now entrusted
to the charge of Badr-ud-Din, Ja’Ilgh [?], with a strong force to support him ;
and, after having disposed of the affairs of BalEb, the Sultan proceeded by way
of Juzarwan [or Guzarwan] to Hirat, which he entered in the middle of Jamadt*
ul'Awwal, 605 H., to the great joy of its people. [Yafa-t is, as well as other
writers, somewhat confused as to the dates here, and says this took place in 607
H., and so it is stated in note *, page 257-358, taken from that work ; but it is
evidently an error for 605 H., as it was only in the third month of 607 h.—
some say in 606 h. —that the Sultan first defeated the forces of ^Para-Shitii
mider Bantko of * month after Mahmud Gh uri’s death, ^ he died

in $afar 607 H., as our author and some others say, and not in 609 h.]

Rulers and chieftains from the tuljacent parts now hastened to tender sub*
mission and all^;iance to the Sultan, and to present themselves ; and among
these was the Malik of Sijistan [Yamtn-ud-Dtn, Bahram Shah?!, who was
received with great honour. ’Izz-ud-Dtn, of Ehar-mtl, was con¬

tinued in the government of Hirat and its dependencies, as previously related ;
and the Sultan, having disposed of these matters, despatched several eccle¬
siastics of the Kiramt sect [Yafa>i says in 606 H.] with proposals to Amir
Mahmiid, ruler qf Flrhz-koh and Ghur. MahmQd accepted those proposals,
which were, that he sliould acknowledge the suzerainty of Sultin Muhammad.
He despatched valuable presents to the Sulttn from the hoards accumulated by
his ancestors and his uncle, and, among other rarities, a white d^hant. [A
white elephant is said to have been captured in the battle in which Jai Chandra,
Rajah of ^pnnauj, was defeated by Mu’izz-ud-Dlrt. See page 470.] Amir
Mahm&d was named Nayab or Deputy of the Sultan, for whom he read the
Khiithah- and stamped the coin with his name. This must be the treaty our
author refers to, but he has confused the events. This acknowledgment of the
superiority of the Sultan is evidently what Taj-ud-Dtn, I-yal-dGz, took um¬
brage at, as mentioned in Alft, in note page 433, when he set at liberty
Jalal-ud-Dtn, ’Alt, of Bamtan, who, in 605 h., along with his brother, was
taken prisoner in a battle against him [I-yal-duz], and sent him back to recover
the throne of Bamtan, which probably was early in 606 H.

Sultan Muhammad, leaving 'Izz-ud-Dtn, of Khar-mtl, as

Wfilt of Hirat, returned to ShwSrazm, and subsequently entered on the
campaign against Gur Rban of f^rii-KhitS. ’Izz-ud-Dtri, Husain, son of
Sbar-mtl, hearing the report of the Sultan having been killed or taken cap.
live in the second engagement with GQr lCban*« troops [see page 358, and last
para, of note *], began to pave the way to moke his peace with his former
sovereign, and he again read the Shutbah forthe ruler of Gh ur, and substituted
bis name on the coin. This must refer to Mahmud, as his young son, three
months after his father’s death, was taken away to Shwirazm, and ’Al£-ud-
Dtn, Utsuz, bad been set up by the Shw&tazml Suljtan as ruler of GhCir ; and,
such bang the case, MahmQd could not have been assassinated in $afar, 607 H.,
for this reason, that these events took place in the latter part of that year, or
even in 608 h. ; but if $afar, 607 h., is correct, then MahmQd was dead 'one
meath before the first battle brtween the SulfQn and Bantko of

'Izz-ud-Dtn, H**^'**# son of lUiar-mtl, finding almost immediately after that

THET AHANSABANIAH DYNASTY OF GHOr.

403

Matimud a copy of that treaty, with a request, saying, "As
’All Shah is the enemy of my dominion, it is necessary
that he should be seized.” In compliance with the terms
of that compact, Sultan Mahmud seized ’Alt Shah, and
imprisoned him in the ]^a$r, which they call the Baz*
Ku^k'i-Sultan, at Firuz-koh.

That ^a^r” is an edifice the like of which is not to be
found in any coun'.ry or in any capital—a I^a$r in height
and area, and with buttresses, balconies, and turrets, and of

the Sultan was safe, to get himself out of this scrape, sent a requisition to the
Kh warar-mt nobles located in Eastern ShnrSsan for aid against the Gh&ds
who, on accoimt of ’Izz-ud-Dfn, l^usain’s perfidy, were marching against him.
This evidently is the matter referred to by our author at page 503, where he
says I-yal-duz aided Mabmud against ’Izz-ud-Dfn, l^usain, son of Shw-mft,
but distorts the facts to suit his own purposes and inclinations, about the SulfXn
of Kh warazm "flying before the forces of Ghur and Glfnznfn;” and what
Alff refers to, namely, that Amfr Isma’fl, Mahmud’s general, sent against
'Izz-ud-Dfn, was defeated and taken prisoner, and the remnant of his army
returned to Ffruz-koh. See note *, page 504.

With the aid of the Kh warazmt nobles of Shnrasan the Ghurfs were over¬
thrown, and this affair broke their power entirely, and their party dispersed ;
and ’Izz-ud-Dfn, l^usain, was also seized and put to death, as related at page
358, last para., note*.

The IHabfb-us-Siyar states that Sulfan Muhammad demanded that Mahmfld,
Gh iirf, should seize the former’s brother, Taj-ud-Dfn, ’Alf Sb^h, and send
him back in conformity with the temts of treaty previously existing “ between
himself and theSuljan, Mu’izz-ud-Dfn” [see note*, page 481], but says
nothing about a previous treaty between him and Mahmud. This event, our
author says, happened in the fourth year of Mahmud’s reign, which, by his
own account, would be towards the close of 606 H. The treaty thus referretl
to is doubtless the treaty mentioned by Fasih-f and others, which took place
between Sulfan Muhammad and Sultan Mu’izz-ud-Dfn, after the latter’s
disastrous campaign against Kh warazm.

I have burthened the text with this lengthy note in order to show what dis¬
crepancy exists with regard to the events in the history of the Gh urfs about this
time, and to show the _ impossibility of the correctness of the dates given by
several authors. YSfa.-f and Fa^ih-f and several others [see note *, page 407]
also say that Mahmud was assassinated in 609 H., and the Mir’at-i-JahSn-
Nilma confirms it. It is also certain, from our author’s statements, as well as
from the statements of others, that Mahmud was assassinated in the same year
as laj-ud-Dfn, ’Alf Shah was; and that event, even our author says, happened
in 609 H. See also page 353.

I I Ls moreover proved beyond a doubt, that, soon after the decease of SultSn
Mu’izz-ud-Dfn, the Ghurfan rulcis became mere vassals of the Khwarazmt
sovereigns, who, at last, annexed the whole of their extensive territory as far
as the Indus, or even to the Jihlam.

* The word Ais [^t], which is doubtless correct, signifies a mound, the
spur of a mountain or hill, high ground. Some of the more modem copies
have abaz [>>'1, and some leave out the word altogether.

• The signification of Kuahk and Ka.'jr has been given in note *,-at page 331

THE TABA]^T.I-NA$IRL

I

such configuration as no geometrician hath made manifest.
Over that ^a$r are placed five pinnacles inlaid with gold,
each of them three ells and a little over in height, and in
breadth two ells ; and also two gold kumde^, each of about
the size of a large camel. Those golden pinnacles and
those Aumds, the Sultan-i- Gh azi. Mu’izz-ud-Dln, MuhS’inmad,
after the capture of Ajmlr”, had sent in token of service,
and as valuable presents, to [his brother] Sultan Ghiyas-
ud-Din, Muhammad-i-Sam, with many other articles of
rarity, such as a ring of gold, with a chain of gold attached,
the dimension of which was five ells by five ells, and two
great Jkos [kettle-drums] of gold, which were carried on
carriages. Sultan Ghiyas-ud-Din directed that the ring
and chain, and those kharb&zah * [kettle-drums], should be
suspended before the portico of the Jami’ Masjid at Ftruz-
koh; and, when the Jami’ Masjid was destroyed by a flood,
the ring, chain, and those kharbuzah [kettle-drums], the
Sultan sent to the city of Hirat, so that after the Jami’
Masjid of that city had been destroyed by fire, they rebuilt
it by means of those gifts’.

Sultan Ghiyas-ud-Din. Mahmud, son of [Gh iyas-ud-Din].
Muhammad-i-Sam, was a sovereign very great, beneficent,

7 A fabulous bird peculiar to the Ejist. It is considered to be a bird of
happy omen, and that every head it overshadows will, in time, wear a crown.
See also G. P. R. James’s Attila, chap. vi.

■ The word used is ui>U,A signifying small turrets in the wall, and also some¬
times used for battlements, cornices, pinnacles, &c. The last is the most
probable meaning here, or possibly small open domes, such as we see in some
old Hindu buildings.

• The text here again is very defective in all but the three oldest copies.
Some of the more m^em copies have “one kos" and state that the ring was
“five A\s by five ells,” and instead of Kharbuzah have jaztrah, which signifiesaa
island. The same word occurs in Firiahtah—the original text I mean—who says
two were presented to Katl>*ud-Dtn by the ruler of Ajmtr, which Dow, very
correctly, translates " two melons of gold,” without apparently knowing what
they were ; but Briggs, by way of improving on Dow, turns them into "two
tents of gold tissue" 11 See his translation, vol. I, p. 194-$. The word
or which signifies a musk melon, suggests the shape of these drums.

> I do not find any notice of this fire in other works, not even in Fa^ib-t
which generally contains minute particulars of every eVent occurring at Hirit,
as the author was a native of that city. Rau;at-u;-$afa merely mentions that
Mabmud finished the Masjid of Hirfit which had been left unfinished at his
father’s death, and this statement is confirmed by the TCbulasat-iil- AIrlil-ar and
some other histories. I do not find any account of a flood. Amtr 'Alt Sber,
the celebrated Wazlr of SuftSn Bahadur subsequently rebuilt

this masjklin 905 H., just a year before his' death.

THE SHAMSABANIAH DYNASTY OF 40$

humane, munificent, and just. ^Vhen he ascended the
throne he opened the door of the treasury of his father.
That treasury remained untouched as before, and Suljan
Mu izz-ud-Dtn had not appropriated any portion of it;
and they have related, that of pure gold there were four
hundred camel loads, which are eight hundred chests—but
God knows best—and rich garments, vessels, pearls, and
jewels in proportion, tt^ether with other valuable property
of evepr description, the whole of which he disposed of.

During his reign gold, apparel, perfumed leather*, and
other things, through his munificence and his presents,
became very cheap. He also purchased a number of
Turkish slaves, and greatly valued them all, and raised
them to competence and wealth : and his presents, gifts,
and donations were constantly reaching people, until one
day, during the second year of his sovereignty, the son of
his aunt, the sister’s son of the SulJJans [Gh iyas-ud-Din,
Muhammad, and Mu’izz-ud-Din, Muhammad], Malik Taj-
ud-Din, died *, and no heir survived him, and his efiects
and treasures, consisting of ready money, gold and silver
vessels, a vast quantity of wealth, were brought to the
presence of Sulj^n Mahmud. He commanded that a
banquet and festal entertainment should be arranged
beneath [the walls] of the Kushk, which is situated in the
middle of [the city of] Firuz-koh *.

He spread the carpet of pleasure, and directed that
festivity and gaiety should be the order of the day ; and,
from the time of meridian prayer to the period of evening
prayer, the whole of that money, consisting of darltams
and dlndrs, contained in leathern bags and in scrips, was
poured out of the windows of the Ka$r. As it was a

* Perfumed leather must have been extremely valuable in those days.

* Malik TSj-ud-Dtn; ‘ Zangf, son of Sultan Shams-ud-Dtn. Muhammad,
sovereign of BSmlan and Xukharistan. He was taken prisoner in battle with
a body of Shw&razmt troops in the vicinity of Marw-ar-Rud, at a time when
peace existed between the Sultan of KhwSrazm and Sultan Mu’izz-ud-Dln,.of
filgizntn, and sent to 23 iwarazm with other chiefs taken at the same time, and
their heads were struck off. See page 425, and page 481, note *.

* The text varies here again. The oldest copies are plainly written as above ;
but, according to some, the sentence may be read : “ in the IJptfr of Nar Kfiahk
which is [situated] in the midst of [the city of] Ftruz-koh,” and, according to
others, merely “ in the fTa^r which is [situated] in ” &c. It is quite a different
place to the l^afrof Baz KQibk. The Europeanized kiosk is derived from this
latter word.

406

THE TABA15:AT.I.NA5IRI.

public banquet and a largess to both high and low, great
and small, every description of the different classes of the
people of the city of Firuz-koh were arriving in crowds at
the foot of the Kushk. and kept themselves under the
Sultan’s observation. To each class of persons he was
gfiving a liberal share of dishes, long-necked flasks, lamps,
ewers, cups, platters, bowls, goblets, and other vessels of
different descriptions, all of gold and of silver, and, among
other presents, above a thousand slaves of his own, both
male and female, which he repurchased again from their
[new] owners. The whole city, from those largesses,
became [so to speak] filled with gold.

Sultan Mahmud was a overeign of very great good quali¬
ties, and his alms, donations, and honorary robes, to a large
amount, were received by all classes of the people ; but, as
the decree of fate had [now] come, the motives of its advent
began to appear. Having, at the request of Sultan Muham¬
mad, Khw arazm Shah, seized the latter’s brother, 'Alt Shah,
and imprisoned him, ’All Shah’s servants, followers, and
dependents, con.sisting of ’Irahts, Khurasanls. Khwarazmis.
and Turks, in great numbers, together with his mother, his
son, and his women, along with him, the whole of them
agreed together with one accord, and several times, by means
of each of the most notable among them, sent messages,
secretly, to Sultan Mahmud, saying: “ The reliance we
have in the Sultan is, that as we have all come and sought
refuge with his Highness, in the service of our master, ’Alt
Sbah, and have thrown ourselves under the shadow of the
Sultan’s power and protection, it behoveth he should not
deliver us up into the hands of the enemy, for to seize and
make captive of those who have sought one’s protection will
not turn out fortunate, otherwise we will make sacrifice of
ourselves, and let it not be that the Sultiui should be in
dread of his life from us.”

As the decree of destiny had gone forth, this communi¬
cation, which they continued to represent to the Sultan,
was without any effect whatever, and a party of ’Alt Shah’s
dependents used, at night, to ascend to the summit of the
hill, called Koh-i-Azad, which was facing the Ka$r, and
the sleeping apartment of Sultan Mahmud, and there they
sat concealed, and examined the l^a^r and noticed the
Sultan’s .sleeping apartment, and marked the way to the

THE SHANSABANIAH DYNASTY OF GHOr.

407

place. All this they had done, until on the night of
Tuesday, the 7th of the month of Safar, in the year 607 H.*,
four individuals of the party referred to climbed up on the
roof of the Sultan’s l^a^r, and assassinated him, and got
away again by the same road as they had got up. They then
crossed the river of Firuz-koh*, which flows in front of the
'l^a^r, and also climbed to the top of that high hill [the
Koh-i-Azad], and cried out with a loud voice : “ O foes of
our Malik! we have killed the Sulj;an ; arise, and search
for your Malik ^! ” When the day broke, the whole city
became agitated ; and they buried the Suljtan in the l^a^r
itself, and subsequently the body was removed to Hirat,
and Anally interredin the Gazar-gah ” [catacombs] of Hirat.

The eldest son of the Suljtan, namely Baha-ud-Dtn, Sam,
was raised to the throne.

* There is considerable discrepancy among authors respecting the year of
Ma^unud’s assassination. Y^a-T, Jami’-ut-Tawarlkll, Fa$ih-f, Alft, L.ubb-ut-
Tawartkh, Guztdah, Mir’at-i>Jahan-Numa [which says “ after reigning nearly
eight years”], and some others say it happened in 609 ii., white Jahan-Ar^
Raufat-u9-$af^, Muntakhab-ut-Tawarfkll, and a few others agree with our
author’s statement here as to the year 607 H. The former says it took place on the
7th of $afar, whilst the latter, l^u;at-u;-$nfa, and some others say, on the 3rd
of $afar. Habib-us-Siyar, on the other hand, affirms that it happened in 6o6 H.,
ShuUisal-ul'Akhbar, 607 H., and the TarlJlll-t-lbrahimt, that it happened on
the 3rd Safar, 597, but this must mean the year of the Rihlat [death of
Mu^mmad], not the Hijrah [Flight], between which two eras a period of
about eleven years intervenes ; and 597 of the former is about equal to 608 of the
latter. There is no doubt but that Mahmud was assassinated in the same year
in which Ftrtiz-koh was taken by the Ehwarazmts, and Taj-ud-Dln, ’Alt Sl^ah,
put to death ; and this last event our author himself states, at page 253, took
place in 609 h. The words and without the diacritical points, may
be easily mistaken by a copyist. See note *, page 410.

* A feeder of the Hart Rud probably, if not the main stream, which rises in
Gh ur.

1 It is not certain who killed Mahmud; and authors are at variance on this
point. Raufat-u9-$a{a agrees with our author, but merely copies his state¬
ments. Habtb-us-Siyar of course agrees with Raufat-uf-^ala. Y&fa-t, Fafih-t,
TartUi-i-Ibrahtmt, and a few others, state that he was found dead on the roof
of bis palace, and that his slayer was not known, and Jalian-ArS, and Mun-
takhab-ut-Tawartkh, agree with our author. Another writer says ’Alt Shah
slew him with his own hand.

* Sometimes written G&zar-gah as above, and also Gazar-g^h. It signifies
the place of caves or hollows, a grave yard, catacombs. There is one at
ShtiSz in which the Poet Sa’dt was buried, and the one near Hiriit in which
the venerated Khw ajah ’Abd-ullah, An^Urt, was buried. The meaning of
gazar is certainly a bleacher or washer, and gah a place, but the above term
does not refer to any "bleaching ground,” as a modem writer terms it, except
that it is the bleaching ground for dead men’s bones.

THE TABA?:AT.I.NA§IRI.

XX. sultan BAHA-UD-DIN, SAM, son of OHTYAS.Iin.rtfK,

MA^MOD, son of GHIYAS-UD.DiN, MUHAMMAD, SON OF

BAIIA-UD-DIN, sAm, shansabl

Sultan Baha-ud-Dtn^ Sam, son of Sultan Malhimud [at
this time] was about fourteen years of age, and his brother,
Malik Shams-ud-Dtn. Muhammad, about ten. Their
mother was the daughter of Malik Taj-ud-Din, of Timran ;
and in the ^ram likewise were two daughters by this
Malikah.

When Sukan Ma|imOd was martyred, the next morning,
all the Amirs of Ghur and the Turk Amirs assembled
together, and raised Baha-ud-Din, Sam, to the throne of
Firuz-koh; and the Malikah-i-Mu’izziah*, who was the
mother of Baha-ud-Din, and the other children of Ghiyag-
ud-Din, Mahmud, incited the Turkish slaves* to slay the
competitors for the sovereignty*. Of that party one was
Malik Rukn-ud-Din, Mahmud-i-Iran Shah, the son of
Malik ’Ala-ud-Din, Muhammad-i-Abi-’Ali, and they
martyred him, as has been previously recorded.* Malik
]^utb-ud-Din, Timrani, was imprisoned, as was Malik
Shihab-ud-Din. 'All, Madini, likewise, who was ther son of
the uncle of the Sultans [Gh'iyag-ud-Din, and Mu’izz-ud-
Din] ; and the Ghuri'and Turk Amirs, in concert, stood
around the throne with girded loins.

The followers of ’Ali Shah, after five days, when they
found the city had become tranquil, and that ’Ali Shah
still remained in durance, contrived to get up another
tumult. They placed a number of men in chests, and
pretended that they were going to bring treasure * into the
city from without, such was the plan they chose to enable
them to enter the city and create another disturbance ; but,
unexpectedly, one among them who had conceived the idea
of this wicked action came and gave information about

* Her title, not her name.

t In some of the more modem copies this is reversed, and they have "the
Turkish slaves incited her,” &c.

■ Several P'rinces of the family who were supposed likely to cause trouble,
and interfere with this arrangement, were put to death by his supporters.

* See pages 394, and 396. At page 399 this is differently related.

* Other writers say, "cases of merchandize;” and that forty-five persona
were made to come out of these chests, and were; at once, put to the sword.

THE SHANSABANiAH DYNASTY OF GHOR.

4 P 9

it. The chests were seized at the gate of the city, and
about eighty men came out of the chests, of whom three
were of those who had killed Sultan Mahmud*. All three
were made a public example of and put to death, two
others were cast headlong from the hill [of Azad] and
seventy-hve were thrown at the feet of the elephants and
killed, amid the clamours and reprobation of the crowd.

Subsequent to this, Malik Husam-ud-D!n, Muhammad-
i-Abt-’Ali, Jahan ]^ahlawan, from Fiwar and Kal-yun
presented himself [at the court] ; and, when three months
of the sovereignty of Sultan Baha-ud-D!n, Sam, had passed
away, Malik ’Ala-ud-Din, Utsuz [son of ’Ala-ud-Dtn],
Husain [Jahan-soz], who was in attendance on Sultan
Muhammad, Kh warazm Shah, solicited aid from that
monarch to enable him to possess himself of the dominions
of Ghur. Malik Kh an [governor] of Hirat, who at the
commencement of the reign of the Khw arazmt Sultan bore
the title of Amtr-i-Hajib, and who was an ’Ajami Turk*
of gfreat intrepidity, and the slayer of Muhammad>i-
Kha r-nak ^ was nominated to proceed from Kh urasan to
render assistance to ’Ala-ud-DJn, Utsuz, son of [’Ala-ud-
Dtn], Husain.

Malik Kha n, with the forces of Khurasan, set out
accordingly to assist Sultan “ ’Ala-ud-Dtn, Utsuz-i-Husain,
in possessing himself of Ftruz-koh. When they arrived in
the vicinity of Ftruz-koh, the Maliks and Amirs of Ghur
took Counsel together, and came to the conclusion * that it
was advisable to release Malik ’Alt Shah from confine-

* If it was so well known that ’Alt Shah’s followers had done the deed, it
seems strange that they should have been allowed even to approach the gate,
and that they should have come near the place and thus thrust their heads
into danger.

* That is a Turk bom in ’Ajam. This personage is mentioned in a number

of places. He is the chief who joined Sultan Jalal-ud-Dtn, lUlwarazmt, in after
yearn, with 50,000 men, was present in the battle of Barwan, and was the
unfortunate cause of Saif-ud Din, IcjiiiiV’s desertion. Our author styles him
Malik irTiSn Amtn>i-^ 3 .jib, at page 287, but more correctly, Amtr-i-yajlb,
at pages 415, 416, and the last Section on the invasion of the Mughals. His
correct appears to be Malik Sbkn, entitled Amin-ul-Mulk, the Amir-l-

Hi jth See notes to pages 287-291. The jami’-ut-Tawartkh styles him
“ Amin Malik of Hiiit.”

r See note*, page 287, and note*, page 471.

* Subsequently peihaps styled Sult&n, alter he had been set up as a vassal
of the Shwftrazmts, but Malik is more correct.

* Some copies are much more curt with the following passage.

D d

410

I HE JABA^AT-I-NASIki.

ment, and treat him with great honour and reverence,
so that, on his account, some of the Kh urasani forces
might evince an inclination towards that Prince, and, as
he was also the adversary of his brother [Suljtan iMu-
^ammad, Khw arazm Shah], he might, in concert with this
sovereigntJ^ oppose in battle the forces of JQiurasan.
Malik ’Alt Shah thej' accordingly set at liberty, and they
appointed Amirs to the [defence of] different sides around
the city*.

Malik Kutb-ud-Din, Husain, son of ’Alt, son of ’Abi-
’Ali, and Amir ’Ugmiin-i-Khar-fasJi*, and other Amtrs, with
troops, were appointed to occupy the summit of the Koh-
i-Maidan, and Amir ’Usman-i-Maraghani. who was the
Sar-i-Jandar [the Chief Armour-Bearer], with a body of
forces, was named to occupy the upper part of the Koh-i-
Azad *. Other Amirs, such as Muhammad-i-’Abd-ulIah,
andGhuri, Shalmati. and 'Umr, Shalmati *' were nominated
to the Zar-Margh gate ‘; and on a Thursday, during the
whole day, round about the city and on the hills constant
fighting went on. On a Friday, in the middle of the
month of Jamadt-ul-Awwal, in the year 607 H.*, the city [of

' After strengthening the defences as well as they were able.

* This is evidently a nickname or byname [like Kh ar-mil. Kb ar-nak^ &c.l

of no very complimentary nature—Ass-like. " Fash ” has, however, other
significations, which see. Two good copies have and respectively,

but no doubt is intended.

* This was the hill the followers of 'Alt Sha h used to climb to reconnoitre
the palace of Sultan Mahmud.

* Some copies have " Salmanf ” and " .Sultman,” but the above is correct.

* Some few copies of the text, the best Paris copy included, name it the
Tarii’fn gate. It is possible a gate might .subsequently have been so named in
remembrance of the victory over Pithora Rae, but the other best and oldest
copies are as above.

* Sult^ Muhammad, Kh warazm Shah, having delivered Hiriit from
Tzz-ud-Dtn, Husain, son of Kha r-mtl, did not interfere in any way with
Sultan Mahmiid, Gh urt. who had previously acknowledged his suzerainty,
as already stated in note *, para lo, fiage 402. White, however, Sultin
Muhammad was engaged in a campaign beyond the Jfhun, his brother,
'n.j-ud-Dtn, ’Alt Shah, having become di&satisfied with his brother, the
Sult&n, left his dominions and sought the Court of Mahmud, who received
him honourably and with distinction, and supplied all his requirements.
After some time had passed ’All Sh^h [and some of his adherents probably],
managed to eftect an entrance, secretly, into the Saiae-i-Horam [private
apartments] in the middle of the day, where he found Mahmud asleep on the
throne, and slew him, and no one knew who had done the deed. It however
became noised abroad, that Taj-ud-Dfn, ’Alt Sh8h. had conspired against
him, in order to obtain the throne of Ghur for himself.

THE SHANSABANIAH DYNASTY OF OHOR. 411

FlrUz-koh] was taken [by the Khw arazmt forces], and the
dominion of the family of [Gh iyas-ud-Din] Muhammad,
son of Baha-ud -D!n, Sam, passed away.

I have already pointed out [note *, page 407] wliat discrepancy exists
between authors as to the year of Mal^mQd’s assassination, and that, in all
probability, 609 H. is the correct date, and not 607 H. Our author himself
says, in his account of Ttlj-ud-Dln, ’Alt Shah [page 253], that he was put to
death in 609 h. and every copy of the text available agrees, and YSfa-t, and
Fa;ih-t, and J&mi’-ut-Taw&rtkli confirm it; and, from the various accounts
of these events, it is beyond a doubt, that both Mahmiid and TSj-ud-Dtn,
’Alt Sb&h, were put to death in the same year, probably within a few months
of each other, and before ’AIa-ud>Dtn, Utsuz, ascended the throne, subject to
the Sbwaraxmts.

Our author here says it happened in the fourth year of Mahmud’s reign,
and, as he ascended the throne about the middle of 602 11., this would make
it before the middle of the year 606 H. ; and, in this case, the date given by
most authors for the battle between Sul{&n Muhammad, Kbw Sratm Sha h,
and Bftniko of TarSz, namely Kabt’-ul-Awwal 607 H., cannot be 'correct, as
it is certain that the Sulpin entered Hirat, after ’lzz-ud>Dtn, Husain, son of
Khar.mti. had 1 >een put to death, in Janddt-ul-Awwal, 607 H., three months
after the date of Mahmud’s assassination given by our author and several others.
See note 7 , pages 260-261.

Fa^ih-t distinctly states, that, after Mahmhd had been killed in 609 H., as no
one remained of the descendants of the SultSns of GrhSr worthy of the wand
of sovereignty, the chief personages of FlrQz-koh concerted together [our
author’s osvn statement above tends to confirm this, although probably he did
not like to acknowledge that the Oh Orfan Amtrs had set up a Kh ararasmt as
ruler], and raised Taj-ud-Dtn, ’Alt Shah, to the throne. They then despatched
an emissary to the pressence of Sultan Muhammad, to represent to him the facts
of the case, and to solicit him to confirm ’Alt Sha h in the soyereignty. The
Sultan [seemingly] acceded to their request, and despatched Muhammad-i-
Baahtr [one of his chamberlains] with a robe of honour for ’Alt Shah. After
Muhammad-i-Baahtr arrived and began to congratulate ’Alt Shah with the
usual ceremonies, ’Alt SM h proceeded towards an inner apartment and com¬
menced arraying himself in the robe, when Muhammad-i-Baab^r drew his
sword, and with one blow struck off his head ; and congratulation was turned
into condolement.

After this event no other could be found capable of the sovereignty, and
Ftrfic-koh and Gh Br. and parts adjacent, were left in the possession of the
Shwfirazmt Sul^fin.

Habtb-us-Siyar says that Kh wararm Sblih, unable to secure his brother's
person, advanc^ upon GhBr with a numerous army. The GhBrtan nobles
released ’Alt Sha h to create a diversion, but it was of no avail, and FtrQz-koh
was taken in 607 H. Rau(at'u;-$ala states, that, after two or three dajrs
fighting ip the hills and around the city, it was taken, as our author mentions,
in the middle of Jamadt-ul-Awwal, 607 H., and in this Jahan-Ara, Muntaltbab-
ut-Tawartkb, and others agree, the latter givir^ the i Sth of that month as the
exact date, which was just three months and seven days after the death of
MahmOd, if he died in that year.

The statement of YSfa-t is different from those of other authors, who proboUy
copied from our author's work, but as the former work gives far more details

D d 2

412

THE taba^At-i-nA^irI.

The Amirs, who had been despatched to occupy the
hill-tops around, all escaped in safety, and 'AH Shih. and
Malik Husam-ud-Dtn, Muhammad-i-Abt-’Ali ^ of Kal-yun,
went out by the gate of the Reg Pul of Bust *, and each and
every one of them betook himself to some part or other.
Malik Husam-ud-Dln betook himself to Kal-yun, and
’All Shah set out towards Gh aznin. Sultan A’la-ud-Dln,
Utsuz, was placed on the throne, and Malik Kh an of Hirat
returned thither.

Sultan Baha-ud-Din, Sam, with his brother [Malik
Shams-ud-Din. Muhammad], his sisters, and his mother,
together with the treasure then ready at hand, and their
aunt the Malikah-i-Jalali, the daughter of Sultan Ghiyas-
ud-Din, Muhammad-i-Sam, who was betrothed to Malik
’Ala-ud-Dln, Muhammad, and the whole, with the bier of
Sultan Gh iyas-ud-Din. Mzihniud, were conducted towards
Kh urasan. The bier of Sultan Mahmud was deposited in
the Gazar-gah [catacombs] of Hirat. The dependents, the
married and the younger ladies of the family, and their
property were removed to Khwarazm ; and, up to the time
of the troubles caused by the irruption of the infidels of
Chin, they continued in l^warazm. and were treated with
esteem and honour.

Chroniclers have related in this wise, that, when the
Mughal troubles arose, the mother of Sultan Muhammad,
Kh warazm Shah, had those two Princes [Baha-ud-Din,
Sam, and Malik Shams-ud-Din. Muhammad] drowned in
the Jihun of Khw arazm *—the Almighty have mercy upon
them and forgive them !

Two daughters of Sultan Ghiyas-ud-Din. Mahmud, up
to the date of the compiosition of this History [are still
living]—one is at Bukhara, and the other is at Balkh.

respectiag the TOi-a^rar.mt* than any other writer with whom I am acquainted,
its statement, taken in consideration of what our author mentions, apipears
worthy of credit. JahSn-AiS, another good authority, states that it was ’AU>
nd-Dbi, Utsuz, with an army sent along with him by Shwhrazm who

invested FtrGz-koh, and took the city in the year and date above-mentioned,
when Baht-ud-Din, S&m, and his brother were sent away to Sliwhrasm and met
the fate mentioned by our author, at the time of the irruption of the Mu^ials.

r Styled Jahin Pahlawfin at page 409.

* The *‘sand.’' or “gravel gate” leading to Bust. The text is very
defective here, in nearly every copy.

• See page 280

THE SHANSABAkIAH DYKASTY OF QQOR. 413

married to the Malik-zadah of Bal kh. the son of Al-mSs,
the J^ajib.

XXL sultAn ’alA-ud-din, utsuz, son of sultAn ’ALA-
UD-DlN, AL-^USAIN, JAHAN-SOZ.

Sulj^an ’Ala-ud-Din, Utsuz*, was the son of Sultan 'Ala-
ud-Din, Husain, Jahan-soz, and was left by his father [at
his death] very young in years ; and he had grown up in
the service of the two Sultans, Ghiya§-ud-Din, and Mli’izz-
ud-Dtn, but served the greater portion of his service at the
court of Ghaznin with Sultan Mu’izz-ud-Din.

The chronicler relates after this manner, that, upon one
occasion, Sultan Mu’izz-ud-Din was attacked by the
cholic, to such degree that people had given up all hope
of his recovery. The Amirs of Gh ur agreed together, in
secret, on this matter, that, if the Sukan should unfortu¬
nately die, they would raise Sukan* ’Ala-ud-Din, Utsuz, to
the throne of Gh aznin. Almighty God sent the draught
of health from that dispensary, whence “ indeed, when 1 am
sick He healetk me*" to Sultan Mu*izz-ud-Din, and he
recovered.

Certain informers^ made the Sultan acquainted with
this circumstance, and this compact; and he commanded
that it was necessary that ’Ala-ud-Din should be removed
from the court of Gh aznin .lest, through the wrath of
humanity, odium might chance to touch him. ’Ala-ud-Dln
proceeded to the court of Bamian to his uncle’s sons; and
[at that time] the throne of Bamian had psissed to Sultan
Baha-ud-Din, Sam ‘, son of Sultan Shams-ud-Din. son of
Malik Fakfer-ud-Din, Mas’ud. After he [Utsuz] had pro-

* ^abtb-us-Siyar, and some others likewise agree with our author, and say

that ’Ala>ud>Dtn, UUuz, was set up by Shwarazm g^h after the dethroite-
ment of Bah&-ud-Dtn, Sam ; and that ’Alt fled to Cch<izntn after the

capture of Ftruz-koh. The reason why this Khwarazmt, or rather Turkish
name, was given to ’Ala-ud-Dtn is mentioned at page 238. He was, no
doubt, set aside by Abu- 1 -’Abb 3 s-i>Shtg who slew Utsuz’s brother, Saif-ud-
Dtn, Muhammad, for killing his brother, War-mesbt otherwise he was the
next heir to the throne after his brother Sult&n Saif-ud-Dtn, Muhammad.

* Not Sultan at that time, for he had not then come to the Uirone.

* Qur’an : chap. 26, verse 80.

* It appears that all rulers had these news-givers or informers in their employ.

* See page 428 for the account of him.

414

THE TAUA^IAT-I-NA^IKI.

cceded thither, they treated him with reverence, and the
district of Nae* of Bamtan was assigned to his charge.

After some time his [Utsuz’s] daughter was given [in
marriage] to his [Suljtan, Baha-ud-Dln’s] eldest son, Malik
'Ala-ud-Dtn, Muliammad', as will subsequently be, please
God, recorded in the Section on the Maliks of Bamtan.

The course of the days allotted to the extent of the
dominion of the Sultans, Ghivas-ud- Din and Mu’izz-ud-
Din, having run their course, and Suljtan Baha-ud-Din,
Sam, having likewise died *, Malik ’Ala-ud-Din, Utsuz,
proceeded from the court of Bamtan to the presence of
Sultan Mubammad, Kh warazm Shah *. to solicit assistance
to enable him to obtain possession of the dominion of
Gh ur and the throne of Ftruz-koh. He was treated with
great honour there, and received the most princely usage,
and the Amtrs of Kh urasan, such as UlugJi Kha ,n-i-*Abt-
Mubammad', Malik Shams-ud-Dtn. Utsuz [the ^ajib],
and the Majd>ul-Mulk, VVazir of Marw, with the whole of
the troops of Upper Kh urasan were directed to afford
assistance to Malik ’Ala-ud-Dtn, Utsuz, in possessing him¬
self of the territories of GhOr*.

Sultan Mabmud advanced out of Ftruz-koh to meet
them and overthrow their forces, as has been previously
recorded*; and they [the Khw arazm! nobles] retired, and
again resumed their duties in the service of Sultan
Mubammad, Khw arazm Shah.

* This place is often mentioned in BaihaVl.

' Sec account of him. No. III. of Section XIX.

* BahS-ud-Utn of BSmt&n must be meant. Matunild’s son, Bah&-ud-Dtn,
S2m, only reigned three months, but he did not die until cast into the Jthhn
between ten and eleven years after these events, and after the slaves of Sulpin
Mn’izz-ud-Din had succeeded to the whole of his dominions. See page 409.

* The reader will not fail to observe that this mighty sovereign to whom
the latter f»h urts appealed when they wanted help, and whose suzerainty the
nephew of Mu’izz-ud-Dln acknowledged, is the same that our author would
make us believe sent such abject petitions to Q]|iyi9>ud-Dtn and his brother,
Mu’izz-ud'Dln, mentioned at page 381-3.

* Styled Malik-ul-Jib&l at page 399.

* Scarcely probable, even by our author’s own account, if the ** firm com¬
pact ” mentioned at page 400 is correct; but, as mentioned in note *, page
400, the ** treaty ” must, really, mean MabmHd’s acknowledgment of Snltftn
Muliammad’s supremacy, which took place after the affitir here alluded to.
The defeat of the Khw 5 razmt troops is not mentioned by the various authors
1 have quoted, but quite the contrary.

* At page 400.

THE SUANSABAnIAH DYNASTY. OF fiHOR. 41S

Matters continued in this wise until after the assassination
of Sultan Mahmud, when Malik Kha n of Hirat, the Amtr-i*
Hajib, and [Malik] ’Ala-ud-Dln, Utsuz, from Bust, and the
forces of l^urasan, advanced towards Ftruz-koh*; and they
placed ’Ala-ud-Dln, Utsuz, on the throne of And

Malik Kh an of Hirat ag^ain retired.

The Maliks and Amirs of GhOr submitted to Sultan
’Ala-ud-Din, Utsuz; but hostility showed itself between
him and the Turk Amirs of Gh aznin. and Malik Taj-ud-
Din, Yal-duz, and Mu’ayyid-ul-Mulk, Muhammad-i-’Abd¬
ullah, Sistani*, who was the Waztr of Ghaznin, and in
pomp like a sovereign, encountered Suljban ’Ala-ud-Din,
Utsuz, in the limits of Kidan and the Margh-i-NQlah. in
battle, and the army of Gha znin was defeated and
overthrown.

Sultan 'Ala-ud-Dln, Utsuz, was a just monarch, learned,
and a patron of learned men ; and the Kitab-i-Mas’udl, on
ecclesiastical jurisprudence, he knew by heart. In the
promotion of ’Ulama [theologians], and the bringing up of
the families of men of learning, he used to do his utmost,
and every one among the sons of ’Ulama, whom he con¬
tinued to find diligent and persevering, he was accustomed
to honour with his benevolent regard.

When, he ascended the throne he set at liberty Malik *
’Ala-ud-Dln, Muhammad, from the fortress of A^iyar of
Gh ariistan ; but, on account of his killing’Umr-i-Shalmatl,
the Sultan again shut him up within the walls of the
fortress of Balarwan.

Sultan ’Ala-ud-Dln, Utsuz, reigned^ for a period of four
years, until Malik Na§lr-ud-Dln, Husain, the Amlr-i-
Shikar [Chief-Huntsman], brought an army from Gh aznin
against him *, and a battle took place between them in the

• Compare the account at page 409, and on the preceding page. In a few
copies of the text the words “and [MalikJ ’Ala-ud-Din, Utsu*,” are left out.

» Styled Sanjart in the list of Mu’iz/-ud-Dtn’s ministers and nobles, at
page *05

• Sultan ’Ala-ud-Din, Mutiammad, the last of the dynasty. See p.agc 417.

J Subject to Sultan Muhammad, Khwarazin Sfiah.

• Any one reading this would imagine ih.at this Naftr ud-Din, liiLsain, was
some independent chief who had made war upon ’Al.=i-ud-Dtn, Utsuz. He
was sent by Taj-ud-Din, I-yal-duz, against ’Ala-ud-Din, who, being a vas-sal
of the Ehwarazmts, was naturally inimical to I-yal-duz, the trusted Slave of
the late 'ultan Mu’izz-ud-Din, and on whose side most if not all, of the

4*6

THE TABA^AT-I-NASIRL

centre of Ghur. within the limits of Jarmas. The right
wing of Sultan 'Ala-ud-Dln, Utsuz’s, army was commanded
by Malik ]^utb-ud-Din, Husain, son of ’Alt, son of Abt-
'Ali *, who attacked the left wing of Malik Na$lr-ud-D!n,
Husain’s, troops, and overthrew and routed [that portion
of] the Gh^zntn forces, and pursued the fugitives [off the
held]. Malik Na$ir-ud-Dtn, Husain, [with his centre]
charged the centre of the Sultan’s army, and wounded him
with his spear, and a Turk among the troops of Ghaznin
smote the Sultan on the head with his mace in such wise
that both his august eyes exuded from their sockets *, and
he fell down from his horse. Malik Na$ir-ud-Dtn, Husain,
remained on horseback over the head of the Sultan, when
Malik Kutb-ud-Dtn, Husain, returned from the pursuit of
the routed left wing of the Ghaznin army, and charged
Malik Na$ir-ud-Din, Husain, and again recovered the
[wounded] Sultan, and conveyed him towards the district
of Sangah, and on the way the SuUan was received into
the Almighty’s mercy ®. They buried him by the side of
his kindred, the Maliks of the family of the Shansabanls.

Sultan ’Ala*ud-Din, Utsuz, reigned for a period of four
years and a little over; and, after his death, his sons became
dispersed. One of them, Malik Fakhr-ud-Dln. Mas’ud,
went into Gharjistan to the castle of Siva- Kh anah *, and

Turkish Amtrs were ranged, whilst the Qhurt Amt s were on the opposite
side.

* This chief is again mentioned by our author in his account of the Mughal
invasion of these parts. Malik ](Putb-ud-Dfn was directed by Sult&n Muham¬
mad, Shwarazm Sl^h, under whose rule the Ghurtan empire west of the
Indus had fallen, to put all the fortresses of Ghur into a state of efficiency for
defence against the Mughahv Malik ]^utb-ud-Dtn, at last, succeeded in
reaching Hindustan after a narrow escape of falling into the hands of those
infidels.

* The idiom here, as in many other places, differs conaderably, for example one

set of copies has jk»i ^ su'd *Be other set

* This event happened, near Ghazntn. in 6ii H. ’Ala-ud-Dtn, Utsuz,
ruled over Ghur for about four years; and most authors state that he was the
last of Ihe race of Shansabant who held sovereign power, and, with him, the
dynasty terminated. This must have happened very shortly before the death
of I-yal-duz, who was put to death in the tenth month of this year, according
to some, and in 613 H. according to others ; but it is very probable that I-yal-duz
did set up the favourite and trusted kinsman of his late master. See page 418.

* Several of the more modem copies of the text have Satt-Kkanah for Si^-
Shinah. This fortress is again referred to in the last Section containing the
account of the Mughal invasioit.

THE SHANSABAnIAH DYNASTY OF QHOR. 417

there ■fte remained for some time ; another, Malik Na$!r-ud-
Din, Muhammad, weht to the fortress of Bindar [or
Pindar], in Upper G 2 |arjistan, and long continued there.
The youngest son, Tamshed by name, during the troubles
of the infidel Mughals. entered into the district of Hariw-
ar-Rud, and, in the Darah of Kh i sh t-Ab \ he was martyred
[by Mughals]. Those two elder sons of the Sultan, through
the calumny of Malik Kh an of Hirat, received martyfdom
at the hands of the slaves of Sultan Muhammad,
Kh warazm Shah. They strove greatly, and strained every
nerve ; but, as it was not the Divine will, neither one of
them attained unto sovereignty.

XXII. SULJAN ’ALA-UD-DIN, MUHAMMAD, SON OF SHUJA’-

UD-DiN-I-ABC-’ALi*, THE LAST OF THE SULXANS OF

GH 0 R«.

Previous to this, in several places, ’Ala-ud-Din, Muham*
mad, has been made mention of, that, at the outset of his
career, he used to be styled Malik Ziya-ud-Din, the Pearl
of Gh ur. and when, after Sultan Ghiyas-ud-Din, Muham¬
mad, son of [Baha-ud-Dtn] Sam, he ascended the throne of
Ftruz-koh, his title became Malik [Suljan] ’Ala-ud-Dtn ^
Since Malik Na§tr-ud-Dtn, Husain *, at this time
martyred Sultan ’Ala-ud-Dtn, Utsuz, Ftruz-koh, and the
dominion of Gh ur came under the control of the Amtrs
and troops of Gh azntn. and of Gh ur. They, in concert, set
up Malik Husam-ud-Dtn, Husain-i-’Abd-ul-Malik, Sar-i-
Zarrad *, over Ftruz-koh, and they repaired the fort of
Ftruz-koh, and, in the midst of the city, and on the hill of

• Kh i sh t and Kh nsht, in Pu’chto, signify damp, vet, humid, dank, soaked,
&c., and ab is Persian for water. The I’ushto etjuivalent for water is
ao-Ixih.

• Our author makes the same blunder here as at page 391. Shuia’-ud-Diii,
Abu-’Ali, was ’Ala-ud-Dfn, Muhammad’s gmiul/iUher. See page 346.

• This should be, Sultan ’Ala-ud-Dln, Muhammad, rcslor,\i. Sec page 391-

r See note ’, page 393.

• Previously mentioned as Amir-i-Shikar, or Chief Huntsman. The idiom
here varies considerably.

• One copy of the text has “ Sih-Zarrad,” and anotlicr Si-Z.id. He was
set up as temporary ruler perhaps. He is, no doubt, the same person who is
referred to by our author in his account of the Mughal invasion, and who, at
that time, held the fortress of .Saugah of Ghvir for Suljtan Muhamm.id
Khwarazm Shah, and his son Sultan Jalal-ud-fUn.

4i8

THE TABA¥AT.I.NA§IRL

the fortress of Baz Kushk, they placed a barrier of iron,
and raised a rampart, and commenced hostilities *. They
brought Malik ’Ala-ud-Din, Muhammad, out of the castle
of Ashivar [of Gharjistan] and carried him away to
Ghaznin. These events happened in the year 6lo or
6ii II*

When Sultan ’Ala-ud-Din, Muhammad, reached Ghazntn,
Sultan Taj-ud-Din, Yal-duz, treated him with great honour
and reverence, and commanded so that they took the
canopy of State of Sultan Mu’izz-ud-Dm from the head of
that monarch’s mausoleum, and they raised it over the
head of Sultan ’Ala-ud-Din, and he [Taj-ud-Din, Yal-duz]
gave him the title of Sultan, and sent him to the capital,
Firuz-koh.

He returned to Gh ur again ; and, when he had ruled for
a period of one year and a little more, and the Kh utbah was
read, and the money was coined in his name *, and his title
of Sultan wais made universally [public] in the I^utbah,
Sultan Muhammad, Khwarazm Shah, sent him the treaty
which the Sultan had, at Nishapur, taken from him, to the
effect that he [’Ala-ud-Din*, Muhammad] should never,
at any time soever, draw sword against him [SuUan
Muhammad]. Accordingly, in the year 612 H., Suffan
’Ala-ud-Din, Muhammad, delivered up the city of Firuz-
koh to the trusty officers of Sultan Muhammad, Khw arazm

> The text here is very defective in most copies, and varies considerably
both in words and idiom. Whom hostilities were carried on with does not appear.

* Sultan Mahmud was killed, according to our author and some other
writers [see note *, page 407 and 410], in the second month of the year 607 H. ;
and ’Ala-ud-Din, Utsuz, was killed after a reign, by our author’s account, of
four years and a little over, which, supposing the “little over” to have been
one month only, would bring us to the third month of the year 611 H. ; and,
according to several authors, on the 3rd of the tenth month of that same year,
Taj-ud-Din, I-yal-duz, was himself put to death at Buda’Cm by I-bak’s son-in-law,
SJpuns-ud-Din, I-yal-timiah, who then ruled at Dihli. If these dates be cor¬
rect, ’Ala-ud-Din, Muhammad, could not have reigned more than six months,

• which is evidently incorrect. Jahan-Ara says he vacated the throne, and
retired to the court of Sult 3 .n Muhammad, Eliwlirazm Shah, leaving him to
take possession of the country, alter he had reigned one year and a little aver.
This would bring us to about the fourth month of 612 H. ; and the MuntaUiab-
ut-TawiurtUl states that I-yal-d&z was defeated and put to death in this year,
not in 61 1 H. The period assigned for Utsuz’s reign is probably too great.
See under Taj-ud-Din, Yal-duz, No. IV., Section XIX.

* I do not think any of his coins have been found.

♦ At that time styled ^iya-ud-Dtn, Muhammad. See note”, page 393.

THE SHAKSABANIAH DYNASTY OF C.HOR,

419

Shah, and was himself conducted to Khw arazm. and was
treated with great honour and veneration *.

He took up his residence near to the Malikah-i-Jalali,
the daughter of Sultan Ghiyas-ud-Din, Muhammad-i-Sam,
who was joined in wedlock to him. They dwelt together*
in the Kh warazm! dominions for a considerable time, and
[at length] death’s decree arrived, and he was received into
the Almighty’s mercy. During the period of his own
dominion and sovereignty, he had despatched trusty and
confidential persons, and had acquired a place adjacent to
[the tomb of] Shaikh Abu-Yazid, Bustami, and had caused
the position of his tomb to be fixed upon ; and, at the
time of his decease, he had made it his last request that
his body should be removed from Kh warazm to Bus^am.

* Taj-ud-l)in, 1 yal-duz, being dea<l at this time, Sultan ’Ala-ud-Din,
Mubammad, was deprived of hi% su]>pc>rt; and this may have been another
reason for his abdicating. Several other authors agree with respect to this
year, hut others again distinctly st.ate that Stiljan Muhammad obtained pos¬
session of Firuz-koh and Ghhr, and aisp of Qha/nin, in 611 H. Ghfir, as
previously stated, had been subject to him in the time of Utsuz. Yifa-t says s
“ After these events [before related], in 611 ir., (the jami’-ut-Tawarildx agrees,]
news reached the Sul|an [Khwarazm Shah] that Taj-ud-lJin, l-yal-dur, had
died at Ghazntn [our author and several others state that he was put to death
at Buda’un], leaving no heir who was capable of succeeding him [he left no
son], and that one of his slaves had assumed his place, 'litis determined the
Sultan to tlevote his energies to the annexation of that territory, together with
other extensive provinces. Having effected his purpose, Hirat, QKur, Gbarjis-
tan, and Sijistan, and the territory as far as the frontier of Hind, an extensive
empire, and containhig many flourishing cities and towns, prc\ iously ruled by
Sultan Mahmfid-i-.'sabuk-Tigin and his d^cendants, up to the period of the
•rise of the Sultans of Gh ur. fell under his sway, and he nominated his eldest
son, Jalal-u«l-Din, to the government of it,” and a Khwarazmt Amir [see page
2S7] was appointed to rule it as his deputy or lieutenant. See the reign of
Yal-duz further on.

In the trea-sury, at Gh aznin. where Sultan Mu’izz-ud-Dtn had placed them,
were found, at this time that Sultan Muhammad obtained possession of Gbaa-
nin, several documents from the Kh alifah’s Court to the Ghurtan Sult&ns,
inciting them to hostility against him, and vilifying and maligning him and his
acts. The finding of these documents proved to him that the hostility of the
Gh iiris towards him proceetled from the instigation contained in them. He
did not make known the contents of these documents at this time, intending to
do so after sufficient time had elapsed for him to free the countries of the East.
Sec note *, page 265.

• How was it possible for them to have r/iiv/r together, when, aS our author
himself states at pages 301 and 392, the marriage w.as never consummated, and
the princess died a maid ? They may have resided near each other. She had
been betrothed to 7*11 ghan Shah, grandson of Malik .Mu-ayyid-i-A-tnah-dar.
before she was betrothed to ?iya-ud Dfii. Sec iiagc 1S2.

^ THE TABA^AT-I-NAglRi.

When in accordance with his last will, they conveyed his
remains’to Bustam, the attendant at the KJanlrah [m^
nastervl of Bustam, the night previously, saw Shaikli Abu-
Yaztd in a dream, who said to him, “To-morrow a
traveller and guest arrives ; it behoveth that thou s^oulds
perform the rite of going forth to r^^ive h.m^ At the
dawn of the morning the attendant of the K^anljah set out
from Bustam -nd, at about the first watch of the day,
the bier of SulfSn ’Ala-ud-Din, Muhammad, arrived from
the direction of IChwarazm. It was conducted with all
reverence and veneration into Bustam and
him likewise adjoining the Shaikh-ul- Arifain, Abu-Yazid
-the mercy of the Almighty be upon them '.-and the
Maliks of Shur, and the Sultans of the Shansabi race, by
the extinction of his dominion, came to a termination.

THE TABAKAT-I-NASIRI;

INTRODUCTORY,

BEING AN EPITOME OF THE FIRST SIX SECTIONS.

The following is a brief summary of the contents of the
first six Sections of the work as an Introduction to the
Seventh with which my translation begins.

Section I. Account of Adam, the Patriarchs and
Prophets, the ancestors of Muhammad, and the latter’s
history to the date of his decease.

Section II. The four orthodox Khaltfahs, the descend¬
ants of'All, and the ’Asharah-i-Mubashirah, or Ten Com¬
panions or Apostles of Muhammad.

Section III. and IV. The Khalifahs of the house of
Ummiyah and ’Abbas, to the downfall of the latter.

Section V. The Maliks [Kings] of ’Ajam to the rise of
Islam, consisting of five dynasties:—I. The Ba.stanialj or
Pesh-Dadan. II. The Kai-aman. III. The Ashkanian,
IV. The Sasanian. V. The Akasirah.

The author, quoting the Tawarjkh-i-*Ajam from which
he says the Shah-Namah of Firdausi was taken, and the
statements of the Fire-Worshippers, and other authentic in¬
formation, states that, when Kabil slew his brother Habil,
Adam had another son born to him who was named
Shis, which signifies “given by God.” He was inspired,
and became ruler over Adam’s descendants. The Persians
say this [Shis] was Gaiu-mart, son of Adam; but the Musal-
mans say that it is Unnu^, son of ^Is, who is here referred
to. In Unnush’s time a son of Adam named Nabati, with his
children, retired to the mountains of Jarmun, and devoted
themselves to religion, and many others joined them. From
the death of Adam to this period, according to Abu-l-
Ma’sljar-i-Munajjim, in the Kanun-i-Mas’udi, was 432
years. After some time elapsed, Nabaf 1 and his descend¬
ants came down from the mountains and joined the

9

THE TABAIFAT-MSTA^IRL

descendants of l^abll, who had taken possession of the, hills
of Sham, and parts around, and who had increased beyond
computation. Iblis [the Devil] had taught them the worship
of hre; and drunkenness, and all sorts of other grievous
sins prevailed among them. A. thousand years had
elapsed since Adam’s death, and the rebellious sons of
liCabil and Nabati began to act tyrannically. They chose
one of their number to rule over them, who was named
Samiarush ; and between them and the other descendants
of Adam, who were just persons, hostility and enmity
arose.

The sons of Shis, and others of Adam’s descendants who
acknowledged Shig’ authority, assembled, and chose one of
the Karanian Maliks, who are styled the Bastanian Maliks,
to defend them from the wickedness of the sons of ^abtl
and Nabatt! ; and this, the first person among the upright
and just kings whom they set up, is styled Ilu-rOs in the
Yunani language ; and the Yunanis say, that he is the same
as he whom the 'Ajamis call by the name of Gaiu-mart.
He was entitled Gil-Shah. and was the first king of the
Gil-wanian dynasty, which is also named the Pesj^-Dadian,
and Bastanian dynasty. When this Ilu-rus became king,
1024 years had passed from the fall of Adam, and the land
of Babil became the seat of his government, and the just
sons of Shis, and other just descendants of Adam obeyed
him. When 1162 years had passed away, the countries of
’Arab, ’Ajam, S^am, and MagJirab became settled ; and,
according to the ^anun-i-Mas’udi, previous to Nuk’s flood,
eleven kings of the Gil-wanian dynasty had reigned.

FIRST DYNASTY ; THE BASTANIAH.

I. GaiO-mart, or Gil-Shah. surnamed Pesh-Dad. or
I-ran Shah. Reigned 30 years. II. Hoshang. who was
born 223 years after Gaiu-mart’s death, reigned, according
to different accounts. 1400, or 400, or 40 years. III. Tha-
mOras-i-DIw-Band, great grandson of the preceding.
Reigned 30 years ; some say 1030. IV. Jamshed, grand¬
son of Hc^^ang, but says brother of Thamuras.

Reigned 700 years. V. BIWAR-asp, the inhdel, who
dethroned Jamshed, and was swallowed up in the Flood.
For 1000 years after the death of Nuk there was no king

INTRODUCTORY.

3

on earth, but, after that, one arose of the seed of HSm, son
of NGh> named Zuhak VI. ZuhAK, THE TAZI £i. e.
’Arab]. He was a gjeat sorcerer, and reigned looo years.
VII. AfrIdUN, entitled Mihr-gan. Ibrahim, the Patriarch,
Tabari says, lived in his reign, which was $00 years, but
Ibrahim lived in ^uhak’s reign, when Ntmrud reigned over
Babil. VIII. I-RAJ, son of AfridOn, reigned 40 years.

IX. NimrOd, the Tyrant. He was great grandson of
Nub, and the first to assume sovereignty after the Flood.
He perished after reigning 400 years. A son of his, l^ubt,
an idol-worshipper, succeeded, and reigned 100 years.
After him, a son of his reigned 80 years, when the sove¬
reignty again passed to the former kings of 'Ajam.

X. ManO-CHIHR, son of I-raj. Reigned 120 years, in the
60th year of which the Patriarch Musa appeared. XI.
AfrAsiyAb, the Turk, who invaded I-ran and overthrew
the dynasty. XII. Zau, son of Thamasib, son of Manu-
cllihr, who reigned 30 years.

SECOND DYNASTY ; THE KAI-AN!AH.

I. Kai-]KubAd, sixteenth in descent from Manu-chihr.
Reigned 100 or 120 years. II. Kai-KA-Os, his son, reigned
150 years. Mihtar Suliman lived at this period. III. Kai-
Khusrau, grandson of Kai-Ka-Qs. Died aged 150, but
the years of his reign are not given. One of his champions
was Rustam. IV. Kai-LuhrAsib, THE Tyrant. Reigned
120 years and abdicated. The Prophet Asha’va [Isaiah]
lived at this time, and Bukht-urt-Nassar was leader of the
forces of Sanjarib, Malik of Babil. V. GushtAsib, son of
Luhrasib. Zartusht arose in this reign, Rustam died,
Bukht-un-Nassar became Malik of Babil, and Jerusalem
was sacked. Reigned 120 years. VI. Baiiman, son of
Isfandiyar, son of Gushtasib. surnamed Arda-Sher-i-
DirAz-Dast [Artaxerxes Longimanus of the Greeks].
The Banl-Isra’ll carried into captivity. Bahman marries
an Isra’ilt woman, who bore him a son. The Bani-Isra'il
set free. Reign 22 years. VII. HumA-I [also Humac],
daughter of Bahman. Married by her father and bore him
Dara. She abdicated after reigning 30 years. VIII. DArA
[or DArAb]-I-Akbar [Great or Elder]. He made captive
the king of RGm, and imposed tribute of 100,000 eggs of

d 2 ,

4 THK T j^BA:VAT>ii^A9ES.l

{Told, each as lai^e as an ostrich 'egg. FaiIa|r 1 iSy Islcandaris
hither, was king of YQnan. DSrSL reigned 12 yean*
IX. DArA-i-Asghar [Less ot Younger]. Iskandaf, son
of Failakus, brought all Rum under subjection. Invaded
and subdued I-ran. Length of reign not given. X.
KANDAR, son of Failakus, who is said to have been the son
of Dara's sister married to Failakus. Iskandar died in
I-ran after 12 years’ reign.

THIRD DYNASTY ; THE ASHKANIAN.

I. Ashk [Ushk = Hushka ?]. styled Arfa'wA, ninth in
descent from Dara-i-Akbar. Ashk reigned 10 years.

II. AshkAn, his son, reigned 10 years. III. ShApOR. his
son, who totally destroyed Jerusalem. In his reign Mihtar
'IsA [Jesus Christ] was bom. Shapur reigned 60 years.

IV. Gudarz-i-Akbar, son of Shapur. Reigned 10 years.

V. ■ Gudarz-i-Asghar. his son, reigned 21 years. VI.
NarsI-UL-A shgh AnI. who reigned 40 years. VII. KisrA-
»UL-A SHGH ANl/son of Narsi. He is styled also, ArdawAN-
1-Akbar, and reigned 44 years. VIII. BalAs-UL-Ash-
GHANl, who reigned 24 years. IX. AkDAWAN-l-AsGHAR,
who reigned 13 years.

FOURTH DYNASTY s THE SAsAnIAN.

I. Arda-Sher-UL-JAmi’ or BAbakAn, son of Babak,
son of Sasan, descended from Kai-Luhr^ib. He rose to
power 266 years after Iskandar, some say 270, but the
Christians, 550 years after. He reigned 14 [40.^] years
and 6 months. II. SHAPUR, his son, reigned 30 years.

III. Hurmuz [HurmAz or Aormazd], who reigned i
year and 10 months. IV. BahrAM, his son, reigned 3
years. V. BahrAm, son of Bahram, who assumed the title
of Shah-an-Shah [King of Kings]. He reigned 4 months :
Tabari says, 4 years. VI. NarsI, son of the elder Bahram,
succeeded his brother, and reigned 9 years. VII. Hurmuz,
son of Narsi, who reigned 7 years and 5 months. He left
one ot his wives pregnant, whp, after six months, gave
birth to ShapGr. VIII. ShApOr-1-ZO-L-AktAF. so called
because, when at war with the ’Arate, he had the shoulder-
blades of all those who fell into his liands removed. He
defeated and took prisoner the ^ai^ar of Rum. Shapur

:3near8. IX. Akda^Sher. wn of Hunnuj;
S|[Spfir*s brother, a g^eat tyrant; and after 4 years he was
dethroned. X. ShApOr. son of Shapflr»i-Za- 1 -Akt^. who
was put to dbath by his troops after reigning 5 years and
2 months. XI. BahrAM, son of Shapur. styled Kirman>
befcB'e his accession. He was slain by his troops
after reigning ii jrears, but Tabart says 15 years.
XII. YazOajird-UL-Asim [Evil-doer], also styled KAw-
KH ASH [morose]. Killed, after reigning 21 years, by the
kick of a mysterious horse, which suddenly appeared,
and as quickly vanished again. XIII. BahrAM, his son,
styled BahrAm-I-Gor, so called from having, when hunt¬
ing, discharged an arrow at a lion which was about to tear
a wild ass, and pierced both through. He reigned 60
years. XIV. Yazdajird, his son, who reigned 18 years, 4
months, and 18 days. XV. FIrOZ, son of Yazdajird, who
reigned 27 years. XVI. BalAsh, son of Ftruz, reigned 4
years. XVII. KubAd, his son, was dethroned by his
brother, Jamasib, but recovered the sovereignty again.
Reigned 42 years.

FIFTH dynasty : THE AKASIRAH.

I. NOSHIrwAn. son of Kubad, famous for his justice and
equity. Reigned 47 years, in the 40th year of which the
Prophet, Muhammad, was born. II. HURMUZ, his son,
reigned li years and 7 months, and was deposed.
III. Kh usrau ParwIz, son of Hurmuz, was one of the
most magnificent monarchs of I-ran, and reigned 38 years,
when, he was put to death by his son. In the 2oth year of
his reign, Muhammad began to propagate his religion, and,
in the 30th, fled from Makkah to Madlnah, which year is
called the Hijrah or Flight. IV. Sherwajah. son of
Kh iismn Parwiz, who died of poison 6 months after putting
his father to death. V. Arda-Sher, his son, a mere child,
succeeded, who was put to death by his Wazir, Shahr-arae.
after he had been i year and 6 months on the throne.
VI. ShaHR-ArAE [or Shahr-yar] usurped the throne, but
was assassinated after i month. VII. 'TurAn-Dukht.
daughter of Khusrau Parwtz, was raised to the throne.
She sent back to Rum the Cross, which her father had

6

THE TABA^AT.I.NASIRI.

carried away. She died after reigning i year and 6
months. VIII. ArzCmand-Dukht, another daughter of
Kh usrau Parwiz,-succeeded, but was cruelly murdered after
reigning 6 months. IX. KisrA, son of Mihr-TAISH. a
descendant of Arda-Sher. Babakan, was then set up, but
was soon after dethroned and put to death. X. Junaid,
a descendant of NOshIrwAn’s. was then raised to the
throne, but immediately after dethroned. XI. Farrukh-
zAD, son of Kh usrau Parwiz, who was deposed and put
to death after 6 months’ reign. XII. Yazdajird-I-Shahr-
yAr, son of Kh usrau Parwiz, who, after a nominal reign of
20 years, was assassinated by a peasant of Marw, in the
21st year of the Hijrah [a.D. 642]. In his reign the
Musalmans Qverthrew the I-rani empire, and with Yazdajird
the dynasty terminated.

SECTION VI.

THE TUBBA-YAWA’, AND MALIKS OF YAMAN.

The author states that he copies the account of the kings
contained in this Section from the Tarikh-i-Mukaddasi.
and from Tabari.

After Kaftan, son of ’Abir, son of Shalikh. son of Ar-
fa khsh ad. son of Sam, son of Nuh, came into Yaman,
Y’rab, his son, became king ; and he was the first who
used the ’Arabic language. Fifteen kings are said to have
reigned for a great number of years, up to the time of
Haris-ur-Ravi sh, who is the first of the Tubba-yawa’
dynasty.

I. HArIS-UR-RAYI^. He was contemporary with
Manu-ehihr, sovereign of ’Ajam, and was subject to him.
He reigned 120 years.

II. Abrahah-I- 2 C-I--ManAR, son of Hirig. He was
subject to Manu-chihr. and reigned 180 years.

III. AfrIkIS, son of Abrahah. He also was subject
to Manu-ohihr, and reigned 164 years.

IV. Mundaz, styled ZO-L-Ad gh Ar. son of Abrahah.
He was subject to Manu-chihr, and reigned 25 years.

V. H ailAd, son of Sarakhil. grandson of Harig. He was
cousin of Mundaz, and son of Balkis [Queen of Saba], but

INTRODUCTORY.

7

by sonse he is said to have espoused the daughter of the
king of the Jinn, and that Balkts was their daughter.

VI. BalkIs, daughter of Hailad, became sovereign of
Yaman and Maghrab. She reigned 40 years.

VII. Un-NAshir-UN-Na’am, son of‘Umaro, son of Sara-
khii. He reigned 75 years.

VIII. Shamak, son of Afrikis, son of Abrahah, styled
Ra’asl)—the Palsied. He was a great king, contemporary
with Gught^ib and Bahman. He reigned 137 years.

IX. AkrAn, son of He reigned 53 years.

X. Tubba’, son of Akran, or Tubba’-i-Akbar. He
reigned 160 years.

XI. MalkIrab, son of Tubba*. He reigned 35 years.

XII. Tubba’-UL-Ausat [the Medium]. He was put to
death by his soldiery after reigning 160 years.

XIII. JHaSSAn, son of Tubba,’ surnamed Zu-Hassan.
He was put to death by his brother ’Umaro after a reign of
5 years.

XIV. ’Umaro, son of Tubba’. He reigned 23 years.

XV. ’Abd-UL-KulAL, son of Margad. In his reign ’IsA
[Jesus Christ] lived, and ’Abd-ul-Kulal believed in him.
He reigned 74 years.

XVI. Tubba’-UL-Asghar [the Younger], son of Hassan.
He made great- slaughter among the Bani-Isra’il of Ma-
dinah on account of their crimes, and slew fifty of their
Mihtars. He reigned 78 years.

XVII. Marsad, son of ’Abd-ul-Kulal. He reigned 41
years; and, after him, the dominions of Himyar and the
Tubba-yawa’ became restricted to Yaman.

XVIII. Walta’ab, son of Margad. He reigned 37
years.

XIX. !^ASSAn, son of !^assan. He reigned justly for
70 years.

XX. ZO-ShanAtar. He did not belong to the family
of the Tubba-yawa’. How long he reigned is unknown.

XXI. ZO-L-NawAsh.* son of Hassan, sop of Hassan.
Tabari calls him Zar’ab. With him the Tubbd-yawa’
dynasty ended, which from the time of Harig up to this
period lasted 1360 years.

XXII. Abrahah-UL-Ashram [The Scarred in the Lip],

* calls him Zu*i*Nsw^. He was a Jew.

8 THE TABA?:AT.I.NA5IRI.

Sahib-ul-FiI, son of Hasan-u^Sabbalj. He endeavoured to
destroy the ka'bah of Makkah, but perished with his whole
army. The period of his reign and the reigns of his two
sons, Yagsum [Bagsum] and Masruk, when this Habashah
dynasty terminated, was 73 years, and in the last year the
Prophet, Muhammad, was born.

XXIII. YagsOm, son of Abrahah, who reigned 4 years.

XXIV. MasrOK, son of Abrahah. He was dethroned
by Saif, the son of his mother by an ’Arab husband, aided
by some criminals set at liberty for the purpose by com¬
mand of Nushirwan, to whom Saif had complained.

XXV. Saif, son of Zi-Yazan. He reigned a consider¬
able time, and was subsequently slain by a Habashi left
behind, who had entered his service.

XXVI. HARlz[or Dahriz], the’Ajami, who had accom¬
panied Saif,-son of Zi-Yazan, from ’Ajam, by command of
Nushirwan, became ruler. He reigned 4 years.

XXVII. The Marzaban, son of Hariz [or Dahriz], the
'Ajami. He succeeded his father by Nushirwan’s com¬
mand, and reigned over Yaman a long time. At his death
his son, Sajan [Abu-Shajan ?], succeeded, and, at his death,
Khur-Khusrau became king of Yaman. The reign of
Nushirwan had terminated, and Hurmuz had succeeded ;
and- Khur- Kh usrau. having rebelled, was removed.

XXVIII. BAzan, the Muslim Malik. He became king
and ruled over Yaman up to the rise of Muhammad, the
Prophet. He embraced the new faith, and Yaman passed
under the rule of the Musalmans.

THE TABAKAT-I-NASIRI.

• •

SECTION VII.

THE DYNASTY OF THE TAHIRI MUHAMMADAN
MALIKS IN 'AJAM.

MinhAJ-I-SarAj, JOrjAnI, the humblest of the servants
of the Almighty’s Court, gives, in the following pages, an
account of the Tahiri Maliks [kings], whose descent, in
some histories, is traced to Manuchihr Al-Malik, sovereign
of ’Ajam ; and, according to which, the first of them who
rose to power, was Tahir *, son of Al-Husain, son of Mu§-’ab,
son of Zarnili:, son of As’ad, son of Badan, son of Mae
KhuSrau, son of Bahram. Mae Kh usrau was the first who
embraced the faith of Islam, having been converted by
'Alt—May God reward him!—and received the name of
As’ad. This Bahram was son of Razan Murit, son of
Rustam, son of As-Saddtd, son of Dostan, son of Barsan,
son of Jurak, son of Gusht-asp. son of AshraJ, son of Is-
ham, son of Turak, son of Anshar, son of Shaid-asp, son of
Azar-sab, son of Tub, son of Ru-shed. son of Manuchihr
Al-Malik.

' The Tahiri Maliks were remarkable for their virtues
and equity; and they first rose to power in Khurasan,
in the time of the Amir-ul-Muminin [Commander
of the Faithful], Mamun, and in the following manner.
Between the Khalifah. Mubammad Amin, who was at

> The Tartkh-i-Yafa’t, which is a rare and most valuable work, and highly
esteemed by the early chroniclers, gives a different account According to it
the following is the genealogy of the family ;—“ Abu-Jaiyib-i-plhir, called
^u-l-Yamanain, son of Husnin, son of Ruzailt [giving the vowel points], son
of Mahin-i-Khaza’t. son of As’ad, son of Rfidwtah ; and, according to
another tradition, As’ad, son of RadSn ; and, according to another, Muf’ab,
son of Jaltiah. Taliir’s ancestor, RuzaiV, was-a servant of Taltiah*i-Talal)it,
who was renowned for his generosity and beneficence.”

B

»■; -rm

l^giiiad. and his brother MSaiOn, wlio was ia SllurSsaa;
ill* feeling arose. Upon this, Amtn despatched ’Alt 'Mr
i-Mahan * from Baghdad into Khurasan to reduce MamQtt
to obedience ; and, in one of the months of the year 195
of the Hijrah, he reached Hamadan with a warlike army.
Mamun appointed Hargamah*; son of A’yan,.to the com¬
mand of a force to oppose 'Alt 'Isa; and
Husain, was nominated to command the van of Harga-
mah’s army.

By the advice of Fagl \ son of Sabi, who was Mamun's
Waztr, Mamun bestowed a standard upon Tahir, saying,
unto him at the same time, that he had bent for him a
standard which for thirty years should lead to victory;
and so it turned out, for the sway of the Tahirts lasted for
upwards of thirty odd years *. Within two leagues of
Rai, with 14 or 15,000 horse*, he encountered 'Alt, son
of 'Isa, son of Mahan, who had brought 50,000 horse with
him, defeated, and slew him and sent his head to Mamun.
He then subdued the whole of the mountain tracts of’Irak,
and took Wasijt and Ahwaz, and appeared before the gates
of Baghdad.

After carrying on hostilities for the space of a
year, Tahir captured Muhammad Amin, put him to
death *, and despatched his head to Mamun, his brother,

* His right name is Abu YabyS-i-’All, son of ’Isfi, son of Mah&n. His two
sons were also sent to serve under him j and his army amounted to 50,000
men.

* Tabart says T2hir was alone appointed, but, subsequently, when he asked
for reinforcements, on marching from the l^ulwan Pass to Baghdad. then
Hargamah was sent with another army.

* Other chroniclers of undoubted authority state that ’All, son of Abl Sh&lid,
was the minister in question.

* Most writers give a greater mfmber of years than - this. Their dynasty is
•said to have continued nearly fifty-four years. One of the poets has brought
together the names of the Tahirtan rulers in these two couplets :—

“ In Shuriisan, of the race of Mug’ab Shs h^

Were T^hir, and ‘J'^lhah, and ’A 1 >d-ullah:

Then a second T^hir, and a Muhammad, who.

Cave up unto Ya’h&b, the throne and crown.”

* fi^bart says 20^000 men.

f ’Alt, son of ’Isa, was slain. It is said, by Da’Qd-i-Siyftfa, or the Black. Most
writers state that T^hir himself slew him.

* The author of the Mujmal-i-Fagih-t states, that a slave of Tahir’s, Firdaus
by name, slew Muhammad Amtn on the 5th of Muharram, 198 H. The
author of the X^rtkh-i-Yafa't gives the 6th* of $afar as the date.

TTHis TAnzRX

’ -i' • '■>

^ojgpsi^ei^Wit^ li& mantle, his rod of office, aiid his seat, by till
liahd of his uncle’s son, Muhammad, son of Al-J^jUi^tt, son
of Muf’ab. This event happened, and this victoiy was gained,
on the 95th of the month Muharram, in the year 198 H.

1 . tahir-i.?0-l-yamanain«.

Ibn Haisam.the chronicler, and author of the work entitled
** ]^a9a9ri-Sant,’* whose patronymic appellation was Abu- 1 -
j^asan, and his name Hai^am, son of Muhammad, Al-Bakt
[Nabt ?} states, that, when the Commander of the Faithful,
MamOn, removed Gh assan *, son of ’Ubbad, from the
government of Kh urasan, he conferred it, together with
the government of 'Ajam, upon Amir Tahir; and that
As’ad, the grandfather ® of Tahir, before his conversion to
the Muhammadan religion, bore the name of Farrukh.
He was converted to the faith by Talhah *, who gave him
the name of As’ad ; and he had a son whom he named
Mus’ab ; and he, Mus’ab, became resident at Fushanj

When the claims of the family of ’Abbas to the Khilafat
were put forward, this same Mu$’ab became one of the
principal men and partisan leaders of that dynasty.
Mus’ab had a son, Husain by name, which Husain, for a
considerable time, administered the affairs of Fushanj,
and was its Wall [governor] *; and Tahir [Zu-l-Yamanain]
was his son ; and these successes, which have been men¬
tioned, were gained by this same Tahir.

When Mamun came to Baghdad, to assume the Kh ilafat.

* Of the two right hands. Tahir had also lost an eye, which our author
does not seetn to have known. The reasons why he obtained the name of
^u-l-Yamanain are differently related. One is, that, when engaged in battle
against ’Alf, son of ’Isa, he struck another antagonist with his left hand, with
the other sword he carried, with such force as to cleave him in twain. The
other, that, when about to give his hand in token of allegiance to the ImSm
Rifa, at Mamun’s command, he gave the left. Ri;a asked the reason. Xahir
replied, “I swore fealty to Mamun with my right hand.” Rif a replied
“Your left will do just the same.”

* Only one copy of the different MSS. collated contains this name correctly.

* ^ means ancestor also. According to the genealogical tree previously
given, Tahir was third in descent from As’ad.

* son of ’Abd-ullah, one of the Prophet’s companions.

* According to the Tarfkh-i-Yafa’f, above quoted, the grandfather of Xkhir
held the government of Fushanj and Hirat. Fushanj or Bushanj (it is written
both ways) “ is the name of a city of Shutfisan near Hir^t. ”

* As considerable difference exists in sonle of these terms, 1 have thought it
best to adB, occasionally, the signification which the author means to convey.

B 2

19

THE XABA¥AT-1-NA§IRL

he despatched Tahir to Ral^l^'ah *, to cany on hostilities
against Nasr-i-Shis ^ Subsequently to this he came into
Kh urasan ; and, in 207 H.*, he died, having nominated his
son Talhah, son of Tahir, his Khalifah or successor.

The chronicler relates, that on the Friday he read the
Kh utbah*. and either forgot to mention the name of
Manlun, or omitted it purposely. After he had returned
to his residence at night, and had retired to rest, at day¬
break of Saturday morning he was found in his bed asleep
in death ; and it was never known how *, or from what, his
death originated *.

II. TALHAH, SON OE TAHIR-I-ZO-L-YAMANAIN.

When the Khalifah, Mamun, became aware of the death
of Tahir, he sent letters patent to Talhah, confirming him
in the government of Kh urasan, together with a robe of
honour*. He held the government until 213 H.*; and,
when the end of his life drew near, he bequeathed the
government of Kh urasan to Muhammad, son of Al-Hasan,
son of Mu^’ab, Aj-Tahiri, who was Talhah’s paternal uncle,
and soon after died.

During his [Talhah’^ lifetime, the Kharijt or heretic,
Hamzah, broke out into rebellion in Sijistan *, and Talhah

* In two MSS. written RnUnh, M'hich is not correct. Tahir’s father,
Husain, son of Muf’ab, son of KusaiV, died at Hirat of Khurasan in 199 h.
At this time Tahir was at KaW'^i^, ^ud the IChn l tfali, Mamun, M-as present at
his funeral, and prayed over him, and the Wasir I'a^l, son of Sahl, placed tlie
body in the grave.

* Abu Nasr-i-Shts. son of Rabt’t the Kh arijt. or Schismatic.

* He died at Marw, according to Yafa’t, 23rd of Jninadt-ul-Akhir, 207 H.,
or, according to the computation of the Musalmans, tlie night being, reckoned
before the day, on the night of the 24tlu

* As the worxl Khu tbah will occur frequently in these pages, it will be well
to explain, that it is an oration delivered after the service on the Muhammadan
Sabl>ath, in which the deliverer of it—the ruler or governor of the province
properly—blesses Muhammad, his successors, and the reigning Kh altCih or
the Sovereign. In ancient times, the Kh alifah, or his heir apparent, pro¬
nounced h, at the capital, in the principal Mosque.

* He is said to have been poisoned. The account is to be found in detail in
several histories.

* His death took place m the month of Jamadt-ul-Awwal.

* The Mujmal-i-Fa^ih-t states, that, in 210 H., the ^ Kha ltfah- Mftmiin,
despatched ’Abd-ullah, son of X^hir, to the assistance of his brother Xalhs^h,
that, in concert, they might proceed into M 2 w^-un-Nahr to carry on hojitilitie*
against Rail’, son of Ha^am.

* He died at the end of 212 H.

* Also called Ntm-ros,

THE TAHIRI dynasty.

>3

carried on hostilities against him for a considerable period ;
and what he did in Khurasan, during the Khilafat of
Mamun, was the cause of his name being remembered
with gratitude in that country, where numerous proofs of
his goodness remained.

HI. 'ABD-ULLAH, SON OF JAHIR.

On the decease of Talhah, the Commander of the
Faithful, Mamun, summoned to his presence Abd¬
ullah, the son of Tahir, who had become Amir
[governor] of Mi?r*. 'Abd-ullah had been brought up
at the Court of the Kh ilafat. and under the patronage,
and under the eye, of the Kh alifah himself, and had
become greatly accomplished. In his seventeenth year,
Mamun had entrusted him with the command of his forces;
and he had so conducted himself, that, in his twenty-
seventh year^, 'Abd-ullah had become renowned among
men for his manliness, his vigour, his intrepidity, and his
virtues and talents. At this period the Kh alifah appointed
him to the government of Kh urasan, and directed that
'Ali*, son of Tahir, brother of'Abd-ullah, should act as his
brother’s Khalifah. or Lieutenant, in the command of the
troops of the Dar-ul- Kh ilafat [the capital], in repressing
the seditious and rebellious, and in the extermination of
heretic Kha rips. and, likewise, in carrying out the affairs of
state, and all such other duties as appertained unto 'Abd¬
ullah to perform and attend to.

At the time the Kh alifah's mandate to proceed into
Kh urasan and assume the government reached him, 'Abd¬
ullah * was at' Dinawr engaged in suppressing Babak-i-
Khi frramt. When he reached Nishapur. rain, which had
not fallen for a considerable time, began to descend and

* Any large city : Eg>’pt, and its capital.

7 Some copies of the original mention ** his twentieth year,” but' I prefer
the other reading.

* Other writers state, that ’All succeeded his father in the government of
IChi iTgidn- and that he was killed in battle fighting against the Ehjlrijts, in the
vicinity of Nishapur ; and, that ’Abd-ullah was at Abtward when he received
the intelligence of bis brother’s death.

* fabant makes no mention of ’Abd-ullah, son of T^hir, as having been
employed against Babak, but says that Is-haV, son of IbrShtm, son of Mu’fab
—who would be thus cousin of ’Abd-ullah’s father—was. That author states,
that ’Abd-ullah seized Babak’s brother in ShurSsSn, and, that he sent that
heretic to Is-h^, at Baghdad, to be dealt with as B&bak had already been.

14

THE TABA:e:AT-X>NA$!El.

to refresh the parched ground on the very same day, and
the people took it as a good omen. . He founded palaces
for himself, and his followers and dependents, at Shad-
yaJsb' of Nishapur. He suppressed the Kha rijls. and
punished them with severity ; and ruled with the utmost
equity and justice, and introduced many good and wise
regulations.

He was also a great patron of learning, and to such a
degree, that he requested the Imam ’Abd-ul-Kasim *, son
of Sallam, to write a commentary for him on the work
entitled “ Gh artb-ul-Hadis.” and, in recompense for so
doing, sent him a present of 1 CX),CXX> silver dirains, and a
valuable dress of honour.

The Lord of the Faithful, Al-Mamun, had entrusted
’Abd-ullah with the government of the whole of the
territory of 'Ajam * ; and, when that Kha lifah died, his
successor, Al-Muta§im B’illah, confirmed him, as his father
had done before, in the government of the whole of the
territory of ’Ajam, which ’Abd-ullah retained until the year
230 H., in the reign of Al-Wagilj: B’illah, when he died. He
had exercised sovereignty over the territories of ’Ajam for a
period of seventeen years ; and, when he died, he had
attained the age of forty-eight, the same age as his father.
When his death drew near, he nominated his son X^hir as
his successor over Kh urasan *.

IV. TAHIR, SON OF 'ABD-ULLAH.

When the account of the decease of ’Abd-ullah reached
the Kha lifah. Al-Wa§ik, he despatched, from Jhe Dar-ul-
Kh ilafat of Baghdad, letters patent and a standard, con¬
firming him as his father’s successor.

His brothers* solicited from Tahir the grant of the pro-

* In the Persian translation of the Arabic work entitled AjSr-uI-BilSd, by
Muhanunad Muiad, son of 'Abd-ur-Rahman, Shad-vakh is described as “a
city of Khurasan near unto NfahupQr but it appears to have been a fortified
suburb, where the royal palace, arsenal, and gardens were situated. The
X^abtb-us-Siyar states that the capital of the T 3 .|^irfB was called Kar- abairh |

* Some copies have Abu-l-Kasim. * 'Ajam—countries not Arabian : Persia.

* 'Abd-ullah, son of ^^hir, had a son called 'Abd-ullah, who was bom
223 H. i and another son, Muhammad, who was his father's deputy at Baghdad,
died in 226 h.

* In all the copies of the original the word brothtrt is used, but only one
brother is mentioned afterwards.

THE TAHIRI dynasty. 15

vince of ^lurasan, and its government; and he bestowed
on his brother, Amir Mus’ab, the government" of NlshapOr*.
The IQialtfah, AUWagilf, died in the month Zu- 1 -Hijjah«
232 H., and Al-Mutawakkil assumed the Khilafat.

He confirmed TShir in the government of ’Ajam, After
a period of fourteen years and nine months, at which time
the Kh alifah. Al-Mutawakkil, was martyred ^ by the
Turks, he was succeeded by Al-Mustan^ir.

Six months subsequently to that event, in the year
248 H.*, Al-Musta’in succeeded him. He sent letters
patent and a standard, and confirmed Tahir, son of ’Abd¬
ullah, in his government, as before ; and, in that same year,
Amir Tahir died, having previously nominated his son
Muhammad as his successor over Kh urasan *.

V. MUHAMMAD, SON OF TAHIR.

Amir Muhammad-i-Tahir * was endowed with good
breeding, the gift of poetry, and many other accom¬
plishments ; but was greatly addicted to pleasure and
amusement.

He had entrusted the government of Tabaristan
to his uncle Suliman, son of 'Abd-ullahii-Tahir; but,
in 251 H., Amir Hasan, son of Zaid-ul-’Alawl, broke
out into rebellion in that country. He was a Sayyid,
and a well-bred and learned person, and a poet. He
subdued the territories of Dilam, and Gllan, which
were in the possession of infidels ; and the people of
those parts were converted to the Muhammadan faith
by him. From thence he entered Tabaristan with a
large army ; and Suliman, son of ’Abd-ullah-i-Tahir, uncle
of Amir Muhammad, was defeated by him, and retreated

• In 231 H., Ha.san, son of Al-Husain, brother of Tahir-i-Zu-l-Vumanain,
died in Tabaristan ; and, in 235 H. Is-tiak, son of Ibrahim, son of Zu-l-Ya-
manain's brother, H^tsan, died atlSaf^dad. He had held the SllJ'rJ, or district
of Baghdad, under three Kh alffahs.

f Middle of the month of Shawwal. 247 H.

• According to our author, in his account of the Khalffahs, on the 4th of.
-Rabt’.ul-Awwal, 248 H.

• Succession to the government of Kh urasan seems to have been considered
hereditary, but to that of 'Ajam, at the pleasure of the Kh alifah.

‘ His name is given differently by H‘'''*>d-nIIah-i-Mustauft in his history.
He styles him Muhammad, son of Ahmad, son of Tahir, son of ’Aljd-ullah,
son of ^hir-i-Zu-l-Yamanain. In the MuJinal-i-Fasih-f he Ls called Muhani*
mad, son of T5hir-i-?u-l-Yamanain.

i6 THE TABA^T-I-NA^IRL

to Rai*, and subsequently retired to Baghdad. On his
arrival at the latter place, he was made l^a’id [governor]
of the district of Baghdad.

At this period, Ya’lfub, son of Lais, had risen in rebellion
in Sistan, and had subdued some portion of Jarum*, and
of Zawulistan, and had acquired considerable power in
Khurasan. In 259 H., Ya’^pub determined to attack Amir
Muhammad. The reason of this was, that his enemies,
Ahmad and Fa^l, the brothers of ’Abd-ullah-i-Salih, Sijizi,
had fled from the territory of Nim-roz, and had sought the
protection of Muhammad, son of Tahir. Ya’kub continued
repeatedly to demand them at the hands of Amir Muham-
mad-i-Tahir, but he had always refused to give them up. On
this Ya’kub determined to march against Nishapur*; and,
when he had arrived within a short distance of it, Ahmad
and Fazl came to the entrance of the palace, where Amir
Muhammad was at the time, to acquaint him with the
news of Ya’kub’s approach. The Hajib [chamberlain] of
■ the Amir told them that his master was asleep, and that
he had no leisure to receive them. They observed to
each other that it was nece.ssary that some one should
awaken the Amir ; and, thus saying, they retired and went
to their brother ’Abd-ullah-i-Salih, Sijizi, and told him what
had occurred. He was well aware that Amir Muhammad
was entirely sunk in carelessness, and that his dynasty
was near its fall; so he retired to Rai, and sent his
brothers, Ahmad and Fa?l, to the Wall [governor] of
Rai, but went himself into Tabaristan to Amir Hasan, son
of Zaid-ul-’Alawi.

When Ya’kub, son of Laig, reached a place called Farhad-
gurd*, a short distance from Nishapur, Amir Muhammad
despatched an agent to Ya’kub, named Ibrahim-i-Salih,

* Re is not the correct pronunciation for the name of this city, but Rai.
It is written thus in the original Persian—

* Jarum is described as being; the district of Garmstr, which latter word
is written in various ways by those who fancy that Oriental proper names,
as well as other words, may be written according to their fancy, such as
Gurmsehl, Gurmseer, and the like.

* The capital of ShutilsSn. .As stated, previously, the ^hiii rulers held
their court at Shad-yakh, a short distance from that city.

» The name of this place is not quite certain : it is written— j/jU,! J>ru,.l
and even a/' in the different copies of the MSS. collated. The above name
is the most probable one.

17

THK TAHIRI dynasty.

Marwazt [or native of Marw], with a message demanding
whither he was going without ^e command of the Lord of
the Faithful, and that, in case he had a commission, he
should show it, in order that he, Muhammad, might obey
it, and observe its provisions. When the agent reached
Ya’hub’s presence, and delivered his message, Ya’hQb put
his hand under his. prayer-carpet and drew forth his sword,
and, placing it before the envoy, said: “ This is my pass
and authority.”

When the envoy, Ibrahlm-i-Salih, returned with this
reply, all the people of Nlshapur entered -into communica¬
tion with Ya’hub; and they delivered Muhammad-i-Tahir
into his hands, and the dynasty of the Tahiris came to an
end*. This event, happened on Sunday, the 3rd of the
month of Shawwal. 259 H. Respecting the generosity and
munificence of Muhamniad-i-Tahir, one of the learned, whose
statement may be depended on, relates the following

ANECDOTE.

There was a person dwelling at Nlshapur, one of the most
excellent men of his day, named Mah(tlud-i-Warrak^ He
possessed a female slave, who played exceedingly well upon
the barbat —a kind of lute—^and of such grace and beauty
as cannot be described.

The fame of the loveliness of this slave-girl, and of her
amiability and accomplishments, having reached the car of
Muhammad-i-X^hir, to the effect that she improvised
ghazals. or odes, sang them, and accompanied them on
the barbat, the heart of Muhammad-i-Tahir desired,
beyond measure, to obtain possession of her. He had
repeatedly asked Mahmud-i-Warrak to part with her, and
had offered to give a very high price for her; but all
his offers were rejected, and he could not obtain posses¬
sion of her, for her master himself was deeply enamoured
of his beautiful slave, Ratibah, as she was named.

After some time had elapsed, however, and Mahmud-i-
Warrah had expended all his property and possessions in
pleasure and expense on her account, and nothing remained
to him, he despatched a person with a message to the

* These events are fuUy detailed in the Jami’-ut-Taw&rtkll, and sei’eral oilier
histories. See note 1 , page aa.

7 Warri^ means a writer, a cutter and folder of paper, also a monied man.

i8 THE XABA^T-I-NA$IRI.

presence of Muliaj;nmad-i-Tahir soliciting that the Amtr
would honour him with a visit, in order that he might
dispose of his beautiful slave to him.

When Muhammad-i-TahIr received this message he was
delighted beyond measure, and directed that four badrahs*
of silver should be brought and handed over to the
domestic who brought the message, while the Arnir
arose, and proceeded, by way of his own private residence
to that of Mahmud-i-Warrak. When the Amir had sat
down, and the silver was placed before the eyes of Mah-
mud-i-Warrak, he, seeing the state of affairs, went out, and
directed Ratibah, saying: “ Don your best apparel,

Ratibah, and prepare to present yourself before the Amir,
as I am going to’sell you to him.” When the slave-girl
heard these words she burst into a flood of tears, and, such
was the paroxysm of her grief, that the sounds reached the
ears of the Amir, who was in another apartment. He
heard Mahmud say to her: “ Wherefore all this grief and
lamentation,© Ratibah to which she replied: “O my
master! is this the end of our connexion, that at last you
separate me from you?” Mahmud replied: "All this I
do out of love and affection for you, now that I possess
nothing, and am a beggar; and, that you may continue to
live in ease and affluence for the rest of your life, I send
you to the haram of the Amir.” R.atibah replied: “ If
you merely act thus on my account, refrain from doing so,
for I undertake to work for the rest of my days, and, by
industry befitting a woman, by weaving coifs and mantles,
earn sufficient means for your subsistence and my own,
but do not separate ipe from you.” Mahmud-i-Warrak
rejoined : “If such be the case, O Ratibah, I now pro¬
nounce you free, and fix your dowry at nineteen dinars
and a half, and make you my wife.”

Muhammad-i-Tahir, hearing this loving and affectionate
dialogue between Mahmud-i-Warrah and his slave, arose,
and, gathering his garments about him, said to Mahmud :
“ The whole of the four badrahs of silver are thine ; I make
thee a present of it: pass the rest of thy life in ease and
affluence ! ” Thus saying, he went his way ; and the fame
of his generosity still remains.

* A weight equal to \o,ooo diratns, also a bag made of leather or lamb’s-skin.

SECTION VIII.

THE §UFFARiUN DYNASTY.

The author, Minhaj>i-Saraj Jurjani, makes a short extract
from the Tarlkh or chronicle of Ibn Hai^am-i-Silni, respect¬
ing the dynasty of the Sufifariun, That chronicler and
annalist relates, that Ya’kub-i-Lais, and 'Umro, ’All, and
Mu’addil-i-Lais, were four brothers, sons of Lais, the Suffar
or worker in brass, who was head of the braziers of Sijis-
tan*. [At this time] Ibrahtm, son of Al-Husain*, was the
Wall [governor] of Sijistan on the part of Muhammad,
son of Tahir, the last of the Tahirls, who was the Amtr of
Khurasan. This Ibrahim had appointed a deputy or
lieutenant of his own to govern in Sijistan in his name,
who was called Salih, son of Un-Na§r. This Lais the
brazier was a restless and refractory fellow, and had a
great number of assistants, servants, and followers.

• Other historians greatly differ here, as to the origin and rise of the
^uffirian. One says that Laig, the brazier, was in the service of $alih, son of
Nagr, Kananf; and another, quoting the History of iShurasan of MoulSnS
Mu’tn-ud-Din, Sabawilrf, states, that the latter author had traced the descent of
this family to Nus&irwan the Just, the celebrated ruler of Iran. Again, another
author states, that Ya’qub, son of Laig, after the death of Darhim [sic], son of
Un-Nagr, revolted against his sons $ali[^ and Nagr, in 237 H., and managed
to gain possession of some portion of the territory of Sijistan. His affairs
prospered, and, .the principal men among the partisans of Darhim’s family
having combined with him from time to time, in 253 it., he acquired the whole
of Sijistan. Darhim’s sons fled to the king of Kabul.

’ In three copies of the MSS. compared, and also in the Tarlkh-i-Fana]^atI,
this name is written “Hagin,” [er"] which signifies a fortification. A
few words, respecting the Tarikh-i-Fanakatl, may not be amiss here. Abu
Sultman-i-Da’ud, the author of that work, sumamed Fakhr-ud-dtn, was a
native of Fanakat—also written Banakat, according to the rule by which
’Arabs change Persian f into b —in Mawar-un-Nahr ; hence he is known as
Al-Fanakatt, and Al-Banakati, and his work as the TariJth-i-Fanakatt or
Banakatt; but not by the absurd name that some persons have bestowed
upon it, apparently through ignorance of the existence of this place, such as
“ Bina-Gety,” and “Bina-i-Geti.” They probably supposed the meaning to
be a “History of the Foundation of the World,” which Dina-i-Gctl would
signify.

20 THE TABA^T.I.NA$IRI.

I. ya’?:Ob, son of lai§, $uffArI.

The author of these pages, in the year 613 H.,
arrived in Sijistan, during the rule of the Malik of Ntm-
roz, Shah-i-Ghazi. Yamm-ud-din, Bahram Shah, son of
Malik-i-Kabtr, Taj-ud-din, Harab, son of I’zz-ul-Muluk,
Muhammad. There 1 noticed a place*, on the south
of the city of Sijistan, which they call by the name
of Dar-i-Ta’am, outside the city, at a spot called Reg-
i-Gunjan. In the vicinity of this latter place, on a height
or rising ground, there is a palace in ruins ; and a nuihber
of trustworthy persons informed me, that Ya’hub, son of
Lai§, and his brothers, with their dependents and servants,
were in the habit of coming thither one day in each week,
as is the custom among young men, to divert themselves
by sports and fun.

They used on these occasions to choose an Amtr, or
king of the sports, and a Wazir, or minister. One day,
according to their usual custom, they had come to the
wonted place of meeting, and Ya’l^ub had been chosen
Amtr for the day’s sports; and, to each and every one of
his brothers, his kinsmen, and dependents, he had assigned

* “There I noticed a place,” &c. This sudden change to the first person
is found in the original, and is not unusual in Oriental works. The whole of
the MSS. compared here appear hopelessly corrupt, the place to the south
of Sijistan having, apparently, two names, and yet either of them is named,
as though it were a principal distinguishing designation. But, as the Bodleum
and some other MSS. omit the relative in the last clause, it has been adopted
in the text of the translation. Since the above has been in type I find, from
“Masalik wa Mamalik” —the original MS., not a translation—that Dar-i
Xa’lm was the^name of one of the thirteen gates of the suburbs of the then
extensive city of Zaranj, the capital of Sijist&n, founded after the city of
'R&m Sbahr became uninhabitable. The city was surrounded by a high wall
and a ditch, and had five gates, which were of iron. The walls of the suburbs
were probably not so strong, and the gates seem to have been of wood. The
author says : “The palace of Ya'j^ub, son of Lais, is situated between the
gates called r>ar>i-Ta’am, and Darwazah-i>Bars [Pars] ; and the palace of
'LTmro, son of Laij, is the residence of the ruler.” The copy of the above
work which I have used is, from the style of writing, very ancient; and, from
various events mentioned in it, appeafllJM**^* been compiled previous to the
time of Mahmud of Gh azntn. I have translated a considerable portion of it.
Our author’s journey to SijisUn took place some centuries after this work Was
written, at which period, from his remarks, the extensive suburbs had almost
disappeared, and the names only of some of the gates appear to have survived.
From the mention of the Reg Isaitd] of GunjSn, the suburbs had evidently been
partially, if not altogether, buried in the sands, which, in after-times, reduced a
once well-cultivated tract into 2 desert. See Section XIV. on the Kings of
Ntm-roz and Sijistan.

THE SUFFArION dynasty. at

the name of some one of the nobles and grandees of the
country. Unexpectedly, the deputy of the Amir of Sijis>
tan, Salih, son of Nasr, himself, on his return home from
the chase, arrived at this place, attended by his usual small
suite. Perceiving this assemblage of people collected on
the mound in question, he directed one of his attendants
to go and make inquiry who they were.

When the man sent reached the party, and noticed what
was going on, he was much astonished; and, a bevy of youths
having come forward to receive him, the messenger was
forced to dismount from his horse, because it was necessary
to present himself before the Amir of the sports on foot.
The servant of $alih, accordingly, was under the necessity
of complying; and he made his obeisance, and returned,
and related to his master, Salih, son of Na§r, what had
passed and what he had seen.

$alih, whose disposition was inclined to pleasantry, said,
" We will go and see what this party of youths are about,”
and rode up and came to the spot Where they were.
Ya’hub-i-Lai§ never moved from his seat, and he directed,
that Amtr §alih should be brought forward to pay his
obeisance. The youths, as commanded, advanced to meet
him, and they made Salih dismount from his horse, and
compelled him to make his obeisance to Ya’lfub.

As the day of his fortune and the period of his age had
reached the evening of their termination, and the morning of
the prosperity of the Suffariun had dawned, Ya’lcub made a
sign to the effect that it was necessary to put an end to
Amtr Salih’s career, and forthwith they put him to death.
Ya’hub, without delay, mounted a horse, and the party
with him armed themselves, and, with the utmost expedi¬
tion, they set out for the city, and proceeded to the palace
of the ruler, and there Ya’hub took up his quarters.

This event took place at the time of early forenoon, and
by the time of meridian prayer the territory of Sijistan was
in the hands of Ya’hub 4 <l 4 M 8 , and all the people submitted
to his rule, like as if the Almighty God had pre-ordained
that he should foHow his own way. Ya’kub directed that
the Khutbah should be read for him ; and these events,
and this success, took place in the year 251 H.

After this, Ya’lfub led an army to^vards Bust and
ZAwulistan, and the territory of Dawar [ 2 iamln-i-Dawar]

sa the taba]BL\t-i-nA$irl

and diazntn, and subdued the whole of them. From
thence he advanced into Tujgharistan * and Baljgbi and
subdued them ; and then returned and marched towards
Kabul*. This success took place in 256 H., and, subse¬
quently, he returned to Sijistan, and- afterwards advanced
to Hirat, which, after much fightings, he gained possession
of. After this he took Badghais, Bushanj for FushanjJ,
Jam, and Bakhurz. and returned to Sijistan again.

After a short time Ya'Iptib again put his forces in motion,
and marched against Nishapur. which he gained possession
of without opposition in 259 H., and seized upon Muhammad-
i-Xahir, son of Husain®, together with his treasures, and his
dependents, and followers. He then marched towards
'Gurgan and Tabaristan, and, after having extorted tribute,
again retired. He made his brother, U’mro-i-Lai§, Wall
[governor] of Hirat: and, in 261 H., a person—one of the
Amirs of Muhammad-i-Tahir—revolted, and set Muham-
mad-i-Tahir at liberty who retired to the Court of the
Kha lifah. Al-Wasi]j: B’illah. Ya’feub-i-Lais again marched
an army into Tralj:, and, on his return from thence, he
reached a place which was called Khandah-i-ShSpur", and
there he departed this life, in the year 265 H., of colic, after
a reign of fourteen years.

♦ The ancient name of one of the districts of the territory of BaJkb, and of

-which —‘J’S-l'Van by modems, but not correct, I think—is the largest

town, the authority of “Hwen [Houen ?] Thsang,” and its extent of
eUiys journey by thirty days,” and " twenty-seveti states," notwithstanding. See
J. Ro. As. Soc., voL vi. p. 94.

* As stated in a former note, the sons of Darhim, Na;r and $alih, had
fled to Kabul, and had sought shelter with the “ Sbah," as he is styled, of
that territory, whose name was Ratbel or Rantbel ; but this seems to have been
a surname merely, for the opponent of the first Mussulmans bore this very title.

* The name here is not correct: the last of the 'J'ahirts is Muhammad, son
of "jrahir, son of ’Abd-ullah, son of ' 3 rahir-i-;Zu-l-Yaraanain. See page 15.

t The author says not one word respecting Ya’qub’s overthrow near H^lwan
by MuwaffiVt brother of the Kha ltfah Mu’tamid, in 262 H. On that
occasion the baggage and effects of Ya’qub fell into the hands of the victors,
among which were the chests containing his treasures, clothes, &c. On
opening one of the chests, they fotind reclining therein the Arafr Muham¬
mad,- son of Ut-Tahir, whom Ya’Vub had made captive, when he gained pos¬
session of Njshapur, and overthrew the T^iirt dynasty. Muwaifih set him at
liberty, and sent him to Baghdad. He died there in 266 11.,and, at that time,
and with him, other authors consider the Tahirf dynasty to have ended.

• The Milnfnkhaii-ut-Tawaitlch calls thi.s place by the name of “Jand-i-
Shapur. a town of Ahwaz,” and slates that the date of his death was the 14th
of Shawwal. 265 H. It is also called “ Jande-Shapfir. ” Ya’Vub was buried there.

THE SUFFARION dynasty.

»3

II. ‘UMRO, SON OF LA 1 §, ^UFFArL

When Ya’^ub-i-Laig was removed from this transitory life,
his brother, ’Umro, Suflfarl.sent a written petition to the Lord
of the'Faithful, the Kh alifah. Al-Muwaffik B’illah*, tendering
his obedience and submission, and soliciting that he should
be confirmed in the possession of the greater part of Fars,
Gurgan, Sijistan, and Kh urasan. His request was acceded
to by the Kha lifah. and 'Umro retired from the mountain
tracts of 'Iraif with his own forces and those of his brother,
and returned towards Sijistan again. From thence he
moved towards Hirat, and arrived there in the year 266 H.
From Hirat he marched to Nishapur ; and Khujistan', who
was one of the Amirs of Muhammad, son of Tahir [the last
of the Tahiri dynasty], who had released his master from
the hands of the Suflfaris, and who was at this period in
Gurgan, marched to Nishapur against ’Umro, and there he
was joined by Rafi’, son of Hargamah, from Marw.

They fought a battle with ’Umro before thegate of N ishapur.
and ’Umro was defeated and put to the rout. He retreated
to Hirat, and the Kh alifah. Al>Mawafiik B’illah®, deposed

* There was no TCh gltfah of this name. The author must refer to the TThaUfah
Mu’tamid's brother, MuwafliV, who was made Walt over the eastern parts
of Islam, and declared heir, after the death of Mu’tamid’s son Ja’far, but he did
not succeed to the Kh ilafat. Mu’tafid, son of MuwafTitc, who died before his
brother, Mu’tamid, succeeded his father, Al-MuwafliV, in his capacity as ruler of
the eastern parts of the Kh ilafat ; and he conferred the investiture of Kh urasan^
Fars, Isfahan, Sijistan, Kirman, and Sintf, upon’Umro in 265 il., after the death
of Ya’^fub ; and, in 266 H., 'Umro appointed ’Ubaid-ullah, the son of Tahir, to
the district of Baghdad, as his deputy. Mu’tamid was the Eh^illfah who excom¬
municated 'Umro, son of Lais, from the pulpit, at Baghdad, in 265 H. ’Umro
had. despatched an agent to offer his submission' and obedience, which the
l^ha ltfah refused to accept, and he cursed him.

Under the events of the year 278 H., the Mujmal-i-Fasih*! niso mentions,
that " Amtr Isma’fl, SSmSni, overcame ’Umro, son of Lai;, the ^uffar and,
under the events of the following year, 279 H., I find the Khalifah, Al-Mu’tafid,
presenting a standard to ’Umro, with the government of Khurasan^ at ’Umro’s
request, and that “ Umro hoisted the standard over his Sarae or palace, and
kept it flying there for three days. The Khalifah also conferred upon ’Umro’s
envoy, who brought th« request for a standard, a dress of honour, and a pre¬
sent.” Our author sadly confounds the dates of events, and jumbles them
into a very short space.

* This is an error, although seven copies of the text give the same name.
Other authors state, that Ya'lcub was defeated by A^imad, son of ’Abd-iillah,
Khujistant. i.e. a native of Khujistan. which, the author of the Mujmal-i-
F.a?iti-t says, is a dependency of Badghais, in the highlands of Hirat.

* See preceding note®, on this subject.

<4 THB

’Umro-i-Laig from the government of KhurgsSn in the year
271 H., and the whole of the territories eind places which had
been annexed by him were given [back] to Mubnmmad, son
of Tahir, son of 'Abd-ullah.

Muhammad was, at that time, at the Dar-ul-Khilafat of
Baghdad, and Rah’, son of Hargamah, was directed to act
as his deputy and lieutenant in the government of
Khurasan. The government of Mawar-un-Nahr — the
territory trans Jihun—was conferred upon Ahmad, Samant,
as the deputy likewise of Muhammad, son of Tahir.
Between ’Umro-i-Lai§ and Rafi’, son of Hargamah, many
battles and conflicts took place up to the period that Rafi’-
i-Harsamah himself rebelled against the authority of the
Khalifah.

In the year 284 H., in an encounter which took place
between him and ’Umro-i-Lais, R 5 fi' was slain *. 'Umro
sent the head of Rafi’ to the Court of Baghdad, at which
time the masnad [throne] of the Khilafat had devolved
upon Al-Mu’tazid B’illah, and ’Umro-i-Lais made a request
to him that the government of Mawar-un-Nahr, Khurasan,
Nim-roz*, Fars, Kirman, and Ahwaz, together with the
Nakabat *, or guardianship of the entrance to the palace of
the J^ialffah, and of the district of Baghdad, should be
made over to him. More than this, he solicited that the
name ’Umro should be inscribed on the canopies * which
every chief had in his residence [which would signify that
he was above them all], and that his name should be men¬
tioned in the ^^utbah, and on the coins of Makkah and
Madinah and of Hijaz. All his demands were acceded to
by the Kh alifah’s Court, and were duly carried out, and
numerous dresses of honour, and countless marks of favour
and distinction, were conferred upon him.

The letters patent, acceding to his demands, having
reached ’Umro from his Majesty the Khal ifah, he made

• Other authors state that Rafi’ was taken prisoner by ’Umro, and sent to
Baghd 3 d, where he died in confinement, which former proceeding so pleased th^
Khnltfah that he restoretl 'Umro to the government of Khurgsan. M 3 war-un-
Nahr, Kirman, &c., again. The- Jami’-ut-Tawirildi, and T3rtkb-i-Guzldah,
however, state that Rafi’ sought shelter with the ruler of EhwSrazm, who put
him to death, and sent his head to ’Umro. The latter’s report to the Shaltfah,
in the Mujmal-i-Fa;ih-t, confirms this,

• SijistSn, s NaVabat, the office of a NaVib, a leader, &c.,

• The word is rather doubtful—One MS. has another

THE ?UFFAiaOM DYMAm. »$

prefttration for proceeding and taking possession of
MSwar>un>Nahr; and Mui^ammad Basktr, who was his
][^Sjib [chamberlain], was despatched wiUi a force from
’Umro’s army in advance.

Amtr IsmS 1 i-i-Ahmad^ Samanl, inarched from BukhSrtl
towards Khurasan, crossed the river Jihun *, and defeated
the [advanced] force of 'Umro under Muhammad Bashir,
who was slain in the engagement, together with a great
number of his troops. Upon this ’Umro>i>Lais proceeded
towards M 3 war-un-Nahr with a numerous army, for it
included 70,000 horsemen armed with spears, besides other
troops. Amir Isma’il-i-Ahmad crossed* the Jihun, and
fought a battle with 'Umro-i-Lais before the walls of
Balkh. defeated him, and took him prisoner, and sent him
to the court of Baghdad', and then Isma’il returned to
Bukhara. In the year 288 H., the Khalifah. Al-Mu’ta;id,
directed that ’Umro should be cast into prison, and in it he
died ; and the dynasty of the Sufiariun terminated *

r Isma’fl’s army is said to have consisted of 12,000 horse, but the accountf
of other writers difler considerably in their statements from this one.

* The Oxus, also called Bakhtrus, and Amutah. ,

* According to the author’s own statement above, Isma>il with his army was
already across.

* See note *, page 31, for a full account of ’Umro’s fate.

* The TarfkIl-i-IbrahImf, ondothers, state, that after the downfall of’Umro
his descendants contented themselves with the sovereignty of SijistSn, subject,
however, to the Samints. This is also proved from the subsequent accounts
given by our author himself. When the people of SijistSn became aware of
’Umro’s capture they set up Taliir, who, according to the Tai^kll'i-Guzldah,
NifSm-ut-TawSrikll) Muntajchab-ut-TawSrikh, and other works, vras not
’Umro’s brother, but his grandson, Jfttiir, son of Muhammad, son of’Umro.
Isma’ll, Sim^nt, overcame him; but after a time conferred the government of
SijistSn upon Nafr, son of Ahmad, 7 Eh>>r’^ soil His descendants continued
to possess it until the year 643 H. ’Umro, son of Laig, founded the ’Atih
Masjid at Shirts.

SECTION IX.

THE DYNASTY OF THE SAmAnIS.

The humblest of the servants of the Almighty, Minhaj-i-
Saraj, Jurjani, states that, after the mention of the Maliks
of Yaman, and the Suflfartun Amirs, he has considered it
preferable to insert here the section in which it is proposed
to give an account of the race of Saman, and the Maliks
of that dynasty, and therefore this portion of the work was
made, in its arrangements, antecedent to that treating of the
genealogy of the Mahmudf, and Na§iri Maliks*. Although
the history of the Maliks of Yaman ought, properly, to
have been first in the arrangement of the book, still, a.s
they were not among the number of Maliks of Islam, he did
not consider it right ^to place them before the Khalifahs.
and therefore they have received this much precedence*.

This section has been taken from the Tarijch or Chronicle
of Ibn Hai^m, in order that those under whose inspection
it falls may place perfect confidence in its correctness.

The chronicler relates that the ancestor of the Samanis
was named Saman; but, according to some others, his
name was different from this ; and, moreover, that Saman
is the name of one of the districts of the Sughd of Samr-
kand, and that the ancestor of the Samanis was the Ra’is
[chief] of that place, and that he used to be styled Saman-
i-Khaddat*; but, for sake of brevity, the name of Saman was

* The Ghaznawt dynasty, and the Turkish .Slave dynasty (not Patdns), of
which Na^ir-ud-dln, the ruler of Dibit, to whom the author dedicated his work,
was one.

* These remarks would have been better prefixed to the notice of the kings
of Yaman, or the ^hirts, and are rather out of place here.

* The 'HriUl-i-Jahan'Aia states that he was chiefly known by the name
of Saman-i-Khadah. which signifies the master or possessor of saman or effects,
chattels, &c. Saman likewise, quoting the “ Muajjam-ul-Baladan,” is the name
of a village of Mawar-un-Nahr, but others consider it to be the name of a place
in the territory of Balkll. The MuntalsIiab-ut-Tawari][]) also agrees with this
statement.

THE SAmAMI dynasty.

*7

adopted^ and it became the name by which he was generally
known. He was of the posterity of Bahram Shubin*.

This Saman-i- Kh addat had a son who was named Asad,
who had four sons—named, respectively, Nuh# Yahya,
Ilyas, and Ahmad. They became Princes and Lords of
great dignity and power, able, and experienced, and en¬
dowed with considerable promptness and vigour. At
length, when their family had attained the pinnacle of
greatness and power, Alb-Tigin*, the Amir of Gh aznin.
and Sabuk-Tigtn, were ampng the slaves and servants of
their descendants. All the Samanis left numerous proofs
of their goodness in Kh urasan and Mawar un-Nahr; and
may the Almighty reward them by bestowing upon them
exalted stations in the courts of Paradise.

ASAD, SON OF SAMAN-I-KHADDAT.

He had four sons, Yahya, who held the territory of
Shash and Isfanjab, and their dependencies ; Ilyas, who
held the government of the province of Hirat and parts
adjacent; Ahmad, the third son, who held Samrhand and
Farghandh. and their dependencies; and Nuh, the fourth,
who at first held the government of Samrlcand, which,
however, was subsequently conferred upon Ahmad.

The Lord of the Faithful, Mamun, when he came to Marw,
remarked the talents and capabilities, bravery, and innate
nobility of mind of the sons of Asad, son of Saman, and
he treated them with great distinction, and conferred great
favours upon them, and raised them to high rank and position.

When the Khalifah. Mamun, returned to Baghdad,
his capital, he directed Ghassan*. the son of 'Ubbad, to

* The noble, who, in the reign of Hurmui, son of Nushtrwan, overthrew
the son of the Eh^kin of Turkistto, with an immense army, before the t^Ila of
Balldlfbut was insulted by Hurmur, and he rebelled and dethroned him, andsetup
another in his stead. The word is sometimes written Cliubtn, sometimes Shuhtn.

* See note *, page 37..

* In the year 204 H„ Ghassan. son of ’Ubbad, was appointed to the govern¬
ment of Kb iii-aagn. He conferred Samr^and upon Nuh, of Asad, Samant.
Ahmad, Ilyas, and Yahya, the other sons of Asad, received, respectively, the
investiture of Farghanah. Shash. Isrughtah,' or Sinishtah, and Hirat. Soon
after, Tahir-i-?u-l-Yamanain became Walt of Ehuras&n, Nuh died, and the
former bestowed the territory held by Nuh on his brothers, Yahya and Ahmad.
When Ilyas, another brother, died, Tahir gave his territory of Hirat to his own
son, ’Abd-ullah. After this the family of the Samanis rose to great power In
EhurSsiUi and MSwar-un-Nahr. See note *, page 1 1 ; note ®, page 28.

C 2

38

THE TABA¥AT.I-NA$IRI.

assume the government of Hfaurasan, and added thereunto
the whole of it as far as Mawar-un-Nahr. Ghassan. son of
'Ubbad, made each of the sons of Asad the Amir [ruler]
of a territory, and conferred certain cities upon them, as
the table given at the end of this Section shows. These
governments were first conferred upton them in the year
204 II. ; and, when his Majesty, the Kh alifah. nominated
Amir Tahir-i-Zu-l-Yamanain, son of Al-Husain, to the
government of Kh urasan, the whole four Saman! Amirs,
who [as already stated] were four brothers, were confirmed
by him in the territories and cities they were then holding.

When the sovereignty passed from Amir Tahir to his
son, ’Abd-ullah-i-Tahir^ he confirmed the Samanis in their
governments as his father had done, and made no change
with respect to them.

I. AHMAD, SON OF ASAD, SON OF SAMAN.

Each of the sons of Saman-i- Kh addat rose to great rank
and power, and they each held a tract of territory in
Mawar-un-Nahr, Farghanah. or Khurasan, as will be men¬
tioned in the succeeding pages.

Nuh, son of Asad, who was a person of excellent qualities
and disposition, and of great energy and high courage, was
invested with the government of the territory of Samrl^and.
Yahya, another son, held the territory of Shash. and
Isfanjab*, and their dependencies. He was a man of
undaunted spirit and energy, and possessed great talent for
government, and left many proofs of his goodness in those
parts. Ilyas held the government of the province of HirSt
and its dependencies, and the parts adjacent. He also was
a person of energy and great experience; but Ahmad was
the greatest, the most intrepid, energetic, and sagacious of

t It passed to his son, Tal^h, first, and afterwards to 'Abd-ullah, and also
by the author’s own account.

* Shlsh is the name of a territory, river, and city of MSwar-un-Nahr, on the
Sthn» or Jaxartes, on the frontier of tfte Turks. It was also called FanSkat,
and is now known as Tashkand. According to the Asar-ul-BilXo, and
Masalik wa MaMalik, it was also called CLaj and J 9 j. Ibn j^ul^al [the
translation] first states that Satf/ is the capital, and immediately after says
ChS] is. Its inhabitants ivere Musalmlins of the tribes of Gh uza and Ehalj.
Isfanjlb, also written Sfanjab, is a town or city of Mawar-un-Nahr, towards
Turkistkn. These names are generally carelessly written in the variolas copies
of the text.

THE SAmAnI dynasty. *9

the whole of the brothers, and held chaise of the territoiy
of Samrhand.

Nuhi at first, was placed in charge of the affairs of Far-
ghanah. but, subsequently, it came into the hands of Ahmad,
with the whole of ^asghar. and Turkistan, to the frontier
of Chin. He was renowned for his courage, and valour,
and experience, which were celebrated throughout Iran and
TQran ; and his descendants, one after the other, occupied
the throne, and governed God’s people liberally and bene¬
ficently. Of those of his descendants who attained to
sovereignty, one of the learned men has spoken, in verse, in
the following quatrain :—

" Nine persons there were of the race of Saman, renowned.

Who as mlers became famous in Khurasan,

A Isma’tl, a Ahmad, and a Na^r,

Two Nuhs, two ’Abd-ul-Maliks, two Man$urs.”

Amir Ahmad had nine sons: Na^r, Isma’il, Is-haht
Mansur, Asad, Ya’kub, Hamid, Yahya, and Ibrahim.
The mention of their descent was found, as has been
entered herein—Saman, son of Jashman, son of Tamghan,
son of Nosher. son of Noshed, son of Bahram, son of Shubin
[Qhubin].

II. NA§R, SON OF AI^MAD, SAmANI.

When Ahmad, son of Asad, son of Saman, died at
Samrhand, he nominated his son, Na$r*, as his successor;
and, during the sway of the Tahiris, the territory, which
Naur's father had held, was confirmed to him, and his
brother Isma’il served under him, and acknowledged in
him, as his suzerain, his superiority.

In %6i H. Na^r conferred the government of the territory
of BuIsb^fA upon Isma’il, who established himself therein.
Na$r pterformed great deeds, and was endowed with many
virtues. He governed with strict regard to the rules of
equity and justice until the end of his days, when death
overtook him in the month of Tamadi-ul- Akh ir. in the
year *79 H.‘

* The TSrtkh-i'Guztdah and others states that, after the death of Ahmad
in 361 H., the Xlialtfati- Al*Mu’tamid B’illah, placed the whole of those terri¬
tories under the government of one person—Na^r, son of Ahmad, the most
upright and best prince of the SSmSnt dynasty.

* According to the I, O. L. MS., No. 1952, and the K.A.S. M.S., which

3© TJIE TABA^PAT.I.NA 51 RI.

When his brother, Isma’tl, had become established in
the government of the BuJdjara territory, several designing
and evil-intentioncd persons managed to come between
him and his brother Na§r, his sovereign, and began to
resort to calumny and falsehood [to effect their designs],
until the disposition of Na$r became completely changed
towards his brother, and he determined to reduce Isma’il
by force, and overthrow him entirely.

Amir Nasr accordingly moved from Samrkand towards
Bujehara with a large army. Amir Isma’il despatched a
trusty agent to Rafi’, son of Harsamah, son of A'yan, who
was Amir of Khurasan®, and acquainted him with the state
of affairs between himself and his brother, Amir Na§r, and
solicited assistance from that ruler.

Rafi’, son of Harsamah assembled a warlike army,
numerous and well-equipped in every way, and marched
towards the scene of expected hostility; but he, out of
benevolence, kindness, and humanity, interposed between
the brothers, and brought about an accommodation be¬
tween them, and retired into his own territory again.

Amir Na^r returned to Samrkand, and Amir Isma’il
proceeded to Bukhara. As soon as Na$r heard of this,
still nourishing that antagonism against his brother which
had taken possession of his heart, he advanced towards
Bukhara with a warlike army. Isma’il came out of the
city to encounter him ; and a fierce and obstinate battle
took place between them, attended with great carnage,
in the year 275 H. Isma’il was victorious over his
brother, whose forces were defeated and put to the rout,
and Amir Na§r was himself taken prisoner. He was
taken to the presence of Isma’il, who, seeing that he was
being brought forward, immediately dismounted from his
horse, and rendered homage to his captive brother, and
kissed him on the breast, and paid him the utmost.honour
and respect. He then induced Amir Na^r to return to
Samrkand, and returned himself to Bukhara, which he conr
tinned to retain as the lieutenant of his brother. Na$r, son
of Abmad, ruled for a period of eighteen years.

of course at^rees, Na^r assumed the government in 369 H., and reigned eighteen
years. I'his is quite wrong. The correct date is 361 H., as in the other MSS.,
which date other histories cunrirm.

* .Subordinate to the Kha lifaha.

THE SABCAn! dynasty.

3*

III. ISMA’IL* son of A9MAD, SAMANI.

On the death of Amir Na$r, the Kha llfah. Al-Mu’tafid
B’illah, conferred upon Am!r Isma’il the government of
the territory of Mawar-un-Nahr, and also all the territoiy
which his brother, Na$r, had held, and sent him a commis¬
sion and a standard. He became a great and powerful
ruler, and the whole of those territories submitted to his
sway^; and all men, chiefs, and grandees, and the common
people, became obedient to his authority.

He was a just man, and endowed with wisdom , and many
great deeds were performed by him, for when ’Umro, son of
Lais, determined to make war upon Isma’il, and set out with
a vast army to attack him—according to the author of the
Tarikh of Ibn Hai$am—on the day that ’Umro, son of
Lai§, set out to enter upon hostilities with Amir Isma’il, he
had seventy thousand horsemen armed with spears under
his standard, without counting archers, swordsmen, and
other armed men besides. Amir Isma’il crossed the river
Jihun, and encountered ’Umro, son of Laig, at Balkh ; and
the Almighty bestowed the victory upon Isma’il. The
army of 'Umro was defeated and put to the rout, and
^Urnro was himself taken prisoner, Isma’il sent his captive
to the Lord of the Faithful, Al-Mu’ta;id-B’illah, to dispose
of as he might deem fit*.

* Abu SuUman-UDa’ud, author of the Tarlkll'i-FanEkatt, considers Ismi’tl,
SiUnSnt, very properly, as the first of the dynasty who is entitled to be con¬
sidered a sovereign prince. The Tarildl-i'Ibrrihtmi, Jahan-Ara, and several
other histories, also confirm it, as does Ibn-^auVal likewise. The Mujnial-
i-Fafi^-l also agrees in this. Under the events of the year 287 h. it is
stated, that from that year commetued the sovereignty of the SSLmantln,
who were nine persons, who reigned 103 years, 9 months, and 11 days; and,
that Isma’il, Sam^t, had risen, and had subdued, during that same year, M 3 war-
un-Nahr, Kh urasan. Fars, Kirman, TraV, Sijistan, and some parts of Hindfi.
Stan. At this period, it must be remembered, the territory of Kabul was
considered a part of “ Hind and this, doubtless, is what is referred to here.
In the same year, the Kh alifah. Al-Mu’tajid B’illah, sent Isma’ll the investi¬
ture of Khurasan, Tabaristan, and Jurjan, together with a rich dress of honour,
and the sum of “ten times a thousand thousand dirams" \\cvi millions oF
dirams.l • and the affairs of Isma’il began to prosper greatly.

* In 280 H., Ism&’il made an expedition into the territory of the Turks, and
made holy war upon them. The chief town was taken, and booty and captives
beyond compute carried off, together with their Malik [king] and his wife.
Each horseman present on this expedition received a thousand diranis-(<M his
share of the booty.

* Respecting the subsequent fate of ’Umro, son of Lais, >t appears, on

3 a TH£ TABA^T.X'-KA91R1.

The K haltfah bestowed a commission on Amir IsmStl,
with the investiture of the territoiy of Khurasan« together
with the whole of ’Ajam; and Amir IsmS’ll’s power and
grandeur increased accordingly.

Subsequently, the Lord of the Faithful, Al-Mu’tajpid,
despatched a commission to him, with directions to free
the countries of <uid Gurgtn from the sway of

Amir Mubammadd-Zaid-ul-*Alawt *, who had possessed
himself of them. Amir IsmSL’U appointed Ahmad-i-Harun'
to the command of the van of his army, and sent him on
in advance with that portion of his forces; and, between
Amir Mubammad-i-Zaid>ub’AIawl and Amir Isma’ll, very
severe fighting took place, and the Amir Muh^mmad-i-
Zaid was slain. His son, Zaid, also, was taken prisoner
and brought before Amir Ismail, who sent him to Bukhara,
with orders that, on the way thither, due respect should
be paid to him, and that he should be provided with
suitable accommodation; and he treated him with such
honour and attention as kindness and magnanimity could
devise.

trustworthy withority, thin Amtr Ismft'tl sent ’Umro to Baghd&d nt his
[*Uinre’s] own request. Arrived there, he was, by the Shnltfah’s orders,
paraded on a camel’s bade through the streets of Baghdad, and afterwards
thrown into prison. Thb waS in 287 H. In the year 289 ’Umro died in con¬
finement. It is said that the Shaltfah, Mu’taf id. Whilst in his last struggles,
expressed a desire that 'Umro dtould be put to death ; but, that he was entirely
forgotten in his prison, and neither food nor drink was brought to him, and he
died of starvation and thirst Another account is, that Mu’tafid gave orders
to $ift to put him to death, and that he delayed carrying the sentence into exe¬
cution. When AI-Muktaft succeeded to the ShiUUat, he inquired of $aft
respecting ’Umro, whether he was still aKve. He replied that he was.
Milk tart said : " I vrill act generously towards him } tor, during the time of
Mu’tafid, he continually sent me presents, and was always very attentive to
me.” RStim, son of ’Abd-ullah, however, feared 'Umro ; and, when he heard
rills speech of the Eballfah’s, he gave directions to put ’Umro to death in his
prison. More respecting the ^uflSrts arlll be found at page 183. I hope, very
shortly, however, to give a detailed account of the rise of the different Muham¬
madan dynasties to the public.

* In the Mir’fit.uI-’Alam smd other works, he is styled Muhammad, son of
2 Ud-ulr’AIawt. who bore the surname of Ud-Dfit’-alS-l-Hah-” In the T&rUrii-
i-Guztdah, he is styled “ Al-B&hirt,” instead of'Alawt; but the meaning of
thcM two titles is much the same. He was a descendant of the Shaltfah, ’All,
and B&hir was the surname of Abfi Ja’far-i-Mnhammad, son of ’Alt, son of
XXuaain, son of ’Alt, the fourth

' Muhammad, son of HfirOi^ seems to be the correct name of this officer.
He had been deputy to Rfifi’, and bad eoterad the aerrioe of Amtr lamfi’lL

THE SAmAnI dynasty.

33

At this time, the Khallfah Al-Mu’ta^id B'illah died,
and his son, Al-Muktafl B’illah, succeeded to the throne
of the KllilAfat. He despatched a commission and a
standard to Amtr Isma*!!, and conferred upon him tl^
territories of ’Ira^, Rai, and Safahan*, and ^e provinces
of Tabaristan, and Gurgan, the whole of which were
incorporated with Kh urasan. Amir IsmA’il gave the
government of Rai to his nephew, named Abu Sali^, son
of Man$ur, son of Is-hal):*, Samant, and to his own son,
Ahmad by name, that of Gurgan.

On the night of Tuesday, the 14th of the month Safar,
in the year 295 H., he died, and his title became Amtr-i-
Mazj, or the Past or Late Amir': He had reigned for a
period of eight years®.

IV. ABO NA§R-I-A 9 MAD», SON OF ISMA’IL.

This ruler had four sons, named Na$r, Man$ur, Ibrahim,
and Yahya, whose surnames were, respectively, Abu Salih,
Abu Muhammad, Abu Is-hah, and Abu Valeria.

Abu Na^r-i-Ahmad was a severe and energetic ruler, and
put to death several of his slaves for some misconduct.
The rest of the slaves, who were their comrades, sought
opportunity to revenge them, and to assassinate Amtr
Ahmad; but he had a lion*, which had been trained, and
he was in the habit of securing the animal near his sleeping-
apartment, in the night-time, in order that, through fear of
this creature, no one should approach his place of repose.

This animal used to keep guard over his master at night,
until, on one occasion, when the Amir had gone on a hunting
excursion, and set out, on his return from thence, at an
untimely hour. The halting-place was at a considerable
distance, and he was unable to reach the station Axed upon,
afid had to stop at another place for the night. The slaves

* Iffahan. * A son of Al^mod is so named. See page 39.

* Amtr IsmS’tl made the celebrated Abu-l-Fajl, Al>Bal’amt> his. Wastr.
He continued to act in that office up to the time of Amtr Nuti, son of Man^Or,
by whose command he trauslated the T2rt](]i-i-X&bart from ’Arabic into
Persian.

* Computing from the commencement of his reign in aSy H.

* Abu Nafr-i-Abmad signifies Ahmad, theyitMer of Na^r.

* The wotdj^ is used both for lion and tiger.

34

THE TABA]?AT-I.NA§IRI.

now found the opportunity they had been seeking, and they
assassinated Amir Abmad. This event happened on the
night of Thursday, the 23rd of the month Tamadi-ul-Akhir.
301 H.* They then took his body, and conveyed it to
Hiilchara ; and, after this occurrence, Amir Abmad was
designated the Amir-i-Shahid. or the Martyred Amir.

In the outset of his career, after his father had departed
this life, and an assemblage of the heads of the army, the
grandees, and principal men of the country had pledged
their allegiance to him, Abu Na§r-i-Abmad, son of Isma’il,
he sent a distinguished person, as envoy to the Court of
the Kh alifah. and from thence, the Lord of the Faithful,
Al-Muktafi B’illah, sent him a commission and. a standard ;
and his reign gave regularity and order to the affairs of the
Empire. In Sijistan*, however, Mu’addil, son of’Ali, son
of Lai$, Suffari, brother’s son of Ya’lfub and 'Umro, had
broken out into rebellion, and caused great disturbance and
disorder. An army had been appointed to proceed into
that quarter, and Mu’addil had been reduced, and rendered
powerless; and he was made captive, and put in durance.

The government of Sijistan was then conferred by Amir
AJtunad upon his uncle’s son^ in whom he placed confidence,
Abu Saliti*i-Man§ur, son of Is-ba^^, son of A^mad, Samant.
Subsequently the people of Sijistan revolted, and seized
the person of Abu S^ib> and confined him in the fortress of
Ark", and gave their allegiance to ’Umro, son of Ya’ifub-

* 'nrfJch'i'Guzfdah, KTiiiiaaat.iil.AlrlihiSr- Mujmal-l-Fafi^-f, and other
works, say this event occurred 23rd Jamldt-ul-Aldlir, 300 H. Fa^ih-f gives
his reign as 5 years and 3 months.

* Our author seems to have had a very imperfect and confused idea of the

state of Sijistan at this period. He makes no mention of the doings of Sijizf,
the slave —tAe Sigizf of Sijlzf slave probably—of ^Umro,

■on of Lais i Itis having, at last, taken to the fortress of Bam, in Kirman, and
his subsequent flight into the desert of JSJturasan ; nor of ^hir and Ya’j^ub,
'Umio’s sons, nor of Lais, son of ’Alt, of the same family, all three of whom
were, at different times, taken captive and sent to Baghdid. In 297 H.
Muhammad, son of ’Alt, brother of Ya’Vub and ’Untro, sons of Lais, $uffkrt,
was made prisoner along with Sigizt, by Amtr A^^mad, SamSnt, who subdued
Sijistan. He sent them to Baghdad, at the Shsltfah’s request. In 299 H.,
Lais, son of ’Alt, died in Fars; and Mu’addil, his son, died the same year.

^ The same Abu-$alih, who was son of Maiifur, son of Is*hklF> mentioned
towards the close of the last reign, which see.

■ All the copies of the MSS. compared, except one, which has eljl 'mU have
the words eiji “fortress of Ark orAig;” but I thinkit m/^'A/be «il>l [Ok],
which is the name of a buried town of Sijistan, and, from its ruins, Afg^ns and

THE SAmAnI dynasty.

35

i-Lai§ *. On this, Amir Abu Na$r-i-Alimad, son of Isma’ll,
nominated a well appointed army [well equipped in all
things] to march into Sijistan for the second time, and
Husain ’Alt Marw-ar-Rudi *, was made Amir [com¬
mander] of that force. This army had entered Sijistan in
the year 300 H.,and had invested’Umro [son of Muhammad],
son of Ya’hub, for a period of seven months *, when he
begged for quarter, and came out and surrendered. Sijistan
was then made over to the charge of Simjur-i-Dowati*.

It was at this period that the Amir, having been unable to
reach his appointed place of rest before nightfall, as already
related, was assassinated, after having reigned for a period
of six years and three months.

y. NA5R*, SON OF A^MAD, SON OF ISMA’IL.

On the decease of the Amtr-i- ^ahid, Ahmad, son of
Isma’tl, the whole of the Amirs, and commanders of the
troops, and the principal men of the country, in concert
with the ’Ulama—the learned in law and religion—of that
period, set up his son, Na^r, as his successor *.

Amir Na^r at this time was but eight years of age, and
according to the statement of the chronicler, at the very

Hindus of havebioiight me coins. The fact of mU being given as well

beems to throw a doubt upon it, for both Arg and Ettla’ are just the same in
meaning, and would have to be read “the fort or castle of [the] citadel,’’ unless
Arh be a proper name—“ the castle ot Ark.” Perhaps has been written by
mistake for y The .TSrtkh-i-Halt Al^ltm says there is “a place called

in Syistan, near which is a Reg-i-Rawan [running or flowing sand]
situated near Kala**i-K&h, or Gah, in which vicinity are several holy tombs.”

* ’Umro, son of Muhammad, son of Ya’hub-i-Laig, is correct.

* Other writers say ^usain, son of ’All.

* That is, he was a native of Marw-ar-Rud.

* Others give nine months as the period.

* Tarlkh-i'Ibraluiml says Ahmad-i-Simjur—also written Slmjur-i-Dowatf.
Dowatl is from dowat, a p>en-case, or ink-holder.

* His proper designation, according to the Mujmal-i-Fafih- 1 , Tartkh-i-
JahSn>Ai^ the TariJdl-i-Ibrahaml, and TariJch-i-Fanakati, is Abu- 1 -][^asan-i-
Na^r, &a

* Among the events of the year 301 u., the Mujnial-i-Faslh-t mentioii.s,
the “ arrival of the news at Baghdad, that the slaves uf Amir Ahmad, son of
Isma’ll, son of Ahmad, Samiuil, had put him to death, on the banks of the
Jthun of Balkh, [referring to what was mentioned under 300 h. ] and that his
son, Abu-l-^asan-i-Na;r, had succeeded him. Upon this, the Kh.alifah.
Muhtadir, despatched to him a commission confirming hiin in the government
of Mawar-un*Nahr, and added thereunto that of Kh urasan.”

36

THE TABA]S:AT-I-NA$lRt

time that they brought him forth from the J^aram to place
him upon the throne, being of such tender years, he was
completely overcome with fear and began to cty, and was
saying, Where are you taking me to ? Do you desire to
put me to death, in the same way as you put my father ? •
Let me alone, I beg of you ! ”

After they had placed him on the throne, Abu ’Abd-ullah
Muhammad, son of Ahmad, Al-Jthant, was appointed his
Nayab [lieutenant]. He was a man of sagacity, and
wise in counsel, and he entered upon the administration of
the government in accordance with the rules of strict justice,
and with a firm hand, but based upon moderation and bene¬
ficence ; but, as the Amir was himself so young in years,
the governors and gjeat nobles on the confines showed a
refractory spirit.

The first to revolt against his authority was his father’s
uncle, Is-h^k, son of Ahmad, Samant, and his son Ilyas,
at Samrkand. They made ready their forces, and
marched towards Bukhara. Hamzah, son of 'Alt, who
was one of the chiefs of Amtr Na9r’s forces, pushed forward
to meet them with a large following, put them to the rout,
and pursued them as far as the gates of Samrkand. Amtr
Is-hak sought for mercy, and became ashamed of his con¬
duct, and he was forgiven.

Subsequently to this, Amtr Naur’s uncle’s son, Man9ur,
son of Is-hak, revolted against him in 302 H. in Kh iir5«t5n
and Ntshapur: and Husain ’Alt^, who was W^t [go¬
vernor] of Hirat, joined him in his rebellion. The
Sipah-salar, [general-in-chief] of Amtr Na9r’s forces,
Hamawiyah *, marched against them from Bukhara, but,
before he came up with them, Man9ur had died at Ntsha-
pur, and Husain ’Alt returned to Hirat, but still continued
in a state of revolt. He engaged in many conflicts, and
gave battle on several occasions, until, at length, he was
taken prisoner *. He likewise, being clothed in a dress of

f ^usKin, son of 'Alt. *

* In 309 H. AbS. Man(ilr>i*JihSnt, was appointed to the government of
Hirftt, Fualianj, and BSdghais, and arrived at the former city to take up his
appointment. Injil H. Sbkh-Malik, son of Ya’l^Qb, son of Lai?, the ^uiArt,
and a body of Sanjarts appeared before Hii 2 t. Stmjiir was at Hirfit at this
time; and Slk^'^slik and his party invested Hiriit four months, but could
effect nothing, and had to retire. Changes continually took place there for

THE SAMANI PVNASTT.

37

pardonwas forgiven, throug’h the intercession of Muham¬
mad, son of Ahmad, Ai-/lhant, the Nayab of the Empire;
indeed, during the reign of Amir ^fa^r, whoever revolted
against his authority, was either put to death, or, on
expressing penitence for his conduct, was pardoned.

His sovereignty continued during the reigns of the Khali-
fahs, Al-Muhtadir B’illah, Al-:^ahir B’illah, Ar-Ra?i B’illah,
up to that of Al-Muttahi B’illah, and he continued to pay
fealty to them, and to render them submission and obedi¬
ence ; and, from each of those Khalifahg likewise, he re¬
ceived a commission and a standard. He continued to
reign, until the month of Rajab, in the year 331 H.*, when
he died*. He was spoken of by the title, or surname,
of the Am!r-i-Sa’id, or the August Amir, and his reign
extended to a period of thirty years. He had three sons,

some years. In 319 h. AbQ ^UcrlS-i-Yab^ son of A^mad, son of IsmS’tl,
S&mant, appeared before HirSt, ousted ShabSst, who had seized the govern¬
ment, burnt some of the gates, and threw down part of the walls, and left
Ear&>Tigtn, a slave of AbQ Ibrahtm, S&mSnt, in possession. He then departed
towards Samr^and, buf, the following day, Amtr Na^r himself reached HiiSt,
stayed one day, and set out by way of Kardkh, after AbQ leaving

StmjOr again governor of the province. In 331 H. , MangOr, son of 'Alt, was
appointed. He died there in 324 H., having been Walt [governor] for three
years. The appointment was then conferred upon Muhammad, son of Hasan,
son of Is-hah. Soon after, in the same year, Abu- 1 -’Abbis, Muhanunad,
son of Al-Janah, mardied against Hiiat, took Muhammad, son of Hasan,
captive, apd sent him, in bonds, to Juijan to Balka-Tigtn. In 336 H. the
office of Waztr was conferred upon Muhammad, son of Muhammad, Al-jthfint,
by Amtr Nafr.

Our author genoally leaves out the principal events, or most of them, so
does not say anything of MfikSn, son of K&kt, Dilamt, his attempt on
Sihurfisan, or the events which led to his death. He was slain by Amtr ’All,
son of Ilyfis, who was one of the Umrg-i-Juyush [Commanders of the Forces]
of Amtr Nasr. Amtr Na^r sent a Dablr [Secretary] along with Amtr ’Alt,
with directions to transmit him a brief account of w^t took place, and send
it by a carrier-pigeon. He did so in the following words—UI
containing a play upon the first part of his name, M^kfin [^lifcL.] “ was not,”
which interpreted is—“ * fVas not' has bttome like his name."

In tbb some 3rear, 329 H., Balkk-Tigtn was removed from the government
of Hirftt, and it was a^in conferred upon Abu Manjur-i-HarS-TigtiL

* A winding-sheet, with a sword hung round his neck, probably, as was the
custom imtil very lately.

* It was in Amtr Naur’s reign that Alb-Tigtn is first mentioned as being
one of his masnluks or daves, but it was only in the subsequent reign that he
rose to the tank of Amtr [lord]. See page 40, and note *.

* The TSrlJch'i-Guztdah, Tfirt]ch*i'Fafih*t, T&rtkh-i-Ibrfihtmt, and other
histories^ state that Amtr-Nafr was slain by his own slaves, 12th of RamafSa,
330 It., but some say it took place ip 331 H.

38 THE TABA¥AT-I-NA$IRI.

Nu^ Ismatl, and Mu|^inimad, and the hrst succeeded
him.

VI. NOft SON OF NA$R, SON OF A^MAD, SAMANL

Amtr Nuh> son of the Amir-i-Sa’id, ascended the throne
of the dominion of ’Ajam, on the 5th of the month of
Sha’ban. in the year 331 H.'*, and he reigned for a period
of twelve years and three months. He had two sons,
'Abd-ul-Malik and Mansur.- The Lord of the Faithful,
Al-Mutta^i B’illah, sent Amtr Nuh a standard, with the
deed of investiture, confirming him in the government of
the whole of the territories of ’Ajam and Kh urasan, which
had been held by hi's father. He appointed the Imam,
Shams-ul-A*immah. Abt-ul-Fafl, Muhammad, son of Al-
J^akim, Sarakhsl. the author of the work entitled “ Mukh-
tasar-i-Kafl,” to the office of Waztr, and made him his
Nayab, and entrusted to him the administration of his
aflfairs*.

Having entered upon his office, the Imam, began to
conduct the affairs of the country according to the pre¬
cepts of wisdom and knowledge, the rules of justice,
and the canons of the orthodox law and usage, and, in
such a manner, that he left not the least thing neglected.
Matters went on in this way until Amtr Nuh, through the
rebellion of ’Abd-ullah, son of Ashkan *. Khw arazm Shah,
proceeded to Marw' in 332 H., and brought that impor¬
tant matter to a successful issue. In the year 335 H., his

* In 330 H., according to others, as stated previously.

* N&h first appointed JjJUUcim Abu-l-Faf 1 , Ahnuul, son of Muhammad, to the
office of Waztr in 330 H., when he succeeded his father. lit the same year
I find Amtr Nuh giving orders to put the Waztr AbQ>l'Fafl, Al-Bal’amt, to
death. This is not the Waztr, Al-Bal’amt, who translated the TSrtkli-i-
Tabait, but of the same family.

* The Mujmal-i-Fagih-t mentions among the events of the year 332 h., that
'Abd-ullah, son of Ashkam, manifested hostility towards Amtr Nu^ but where,
is not stated. The Khwarazm ghahts are not mentioned by our author imtil
a long period after this time. The name of this person is written Ashkan.
AlihkSb, and Askab, in as nuuiy different copies of the MS. In 331 H. lifara-
Tigtn had been removed from the government of Hiiftt, and it was conferred
upon Ibrahtm, son of Simjur, who, in the following year, sent thither AbO-l-
Fa^l-i-’Aztz, son of Muhammad, the Sijizt, to act as his deputy, until he came
himself, and directed that the gateways should be destroyed and the walls of
the city thrown down.

f Neither “ Meru” nor "Merve” is the correct pronunciation.

THE SAMANl DYNASTY.

39

uncle, who had fled to Baghdad, had managed to

obtain from the Khalifah. Al-Muktafl B'illah, the investi¬
ture of Khurasan, He, accordingly, entered those parts,
and sei2ed upon the territory of Jibal* and Kh urasan.

Amtr Nub bad proceeded to Marw to expel him, but
the whole of his nobles, his retinue, and the soldiery were
disaffected. They had become annoyed and irritated at
the enlightenment displayed, and the just administration of
Shams-ul-A*immah. and had become quite sated with his
ministry, because he had entirely fettered the hands of
t}rrants and oppressors, and restrained their extortionate
demands and exactions, so that that party were unable to
succeed in acquiring what their ambition and tyranny sug¬
gested.

Amtr Nub, was in urgent need of his army’s ser¬
vices, to enable him to oppose his uncle, Amtr Is-bab,
whilst the troops began to show a rebellious spirit
towards him, and an inclination to take the side of his
uncle. A party of the officers of his army, tyrants and
enemies to progress and good government, proceeded to
the presence of Amtr Nub, and stated that all the dissatis¬
faction and discontent among his retinue and troops, the
confusion in the country, and division in the state, was caused
by the Waztr, Shams-ul-A'immah *. “ Give him,” they

demanded, ** over into our hands, or otherwise we will all
join your uncle.” Amtr Nub was constrained by necessity
to deliver the Imam into the hands of those tyrants, and
they brought him forth. At the entrance of the royal
residence there stood two tall white poplar-trees. These
they bent downwards, and, fastening each of that unfor¬
tunate minister’s feet to a branch of either tree which was
nearest it, let the trees spring back again into their upright

* Other authors mention hostilities between Amtr NQ^ and his uncle
IbrKhtm.

* Jit^, or the Highlands of ’IraV, is meant here.

> Fa^ih-t, under the events of the year 335 H., mentions that Abfi ’Ait-i-
Stmjur became hostile towards Amtr Noh, son of Nafr, and that the troops
demiuided of him the Waztr, l^kim Abu-I-Fafl, son of Muhammad, and that
the Amtr had to comply, whether he iiked it or not, and that they put the
Waztr to death, after he had held that office four years. 4 fter his being thus
put to death, Amtr Nuh conferred the office of Waztr upon glpuns-ul*
A’immah ; so it seems from this, that our author has confused the two
ministers into one.

40 THE TABA9:AT.I.NA$IRI.

position, and that great man was thus tom asunder. This
occurrence took place in the year 335 H.

Amtr Nub, son of Nasr, died in 343 H., and he was styled
by the title of Amir-i-^amld, or the Laudable Amtr.

VII, ’ABD’-UL-MALIK, SON OF NtJ?; SAmAnL

On the decease of Amtr Nub, the son of Nasr, the whole
of the great nobles and principal commanders of the troops
agreed together to give their allegiance to his son, Abu- 1 -
Fawaris-i-’Abd-ul-Malik, and they accordingly placed him
on the throne. The Waztr’s office was given to Abu
Man$ur, Mubammad, son of Al-’Aztz*, and the commander
over the Amir’s troops was Abu Sa’id-i-Bakir, son of Al-
Malik, Al-Farghanl.

Amtr ’Abd-ul-Malik based the administration of the
government of his dominions upon the rules of justice
and rigour, and placed Walts [governors] in different'
parts, while others of the great nobles were retained
by him in authority near his own person. An arrange¬
ment was entered into with Abu-l-Hasan, son of Buwtah
respecting his territory, for the 'sum of aoo,ooo rukni
dtrams *. This treaty was concluded, in accordance
with the mandate of the Amtr ’Abd-ul-Malik, by Abu
Sa’id-i-Bakir, son of Al-Malik, Al-Farghani. before men¬
tioned, who was the general of his troops; but Abu
Sa*id being suspected of partiality in this matter towards
the Ditaman and the family of Buwiah, Amtr ’Abd-ul-
Malik put him to death. He also imprisoned the Waztr,
and subsequently put him to death likewise, as both he
and Abu Sa’id had become tainted with the doctrine of the
j^aramitah sect of heretics. The command of his troops
was entrusted to Alb-Tagtn *, the Hajib [chamberlain].

* Amtr 'Abd-ul-Malik made Ab 3 Ja’far, ul-’UtM^ his Waztr, according to
other authors.

* See the dynasty of the Dtalamab, page 55.

* fn Faf t^-t, Alb-Tagtn is first mentioned in the year 267 H. in the following

words :—" Birth of Alb-Tagtn, the lireedman of Nafr, son of A^mad,

Samftnt." According to the same excellent authority in 346 H. , AbQ Man^tlr, son
of ’Abd-ur-RazzSlF, who had been made Wfilt [ruler] of HirSt [which appears
to have always formed a province of itself, from its constant separate mention],
that same year left it, and retired to thus throwing up his command.

THE SAmANI dynasty.

41

until the year 350 H.*, when Amir 'Abd-ul-Malik, having
'one one evening to the Maidan or Course to amuse him>
self in playing Chaugan *, fell from his horse and was
killed after having reigned for a period of little over
seven years,

VIII. man§Or, son of SAMAnL

On the decease of Amir ’Abd-ul-Malik, the commanders
>f the troops, and the heads and elders of the religious
x>dies and the law, at the capital [Bul£hara]i niet tc^ether.

3 reat agitation and oommotion took place at Hirat in consequence, and the
jovenunent was bestowed upon the Hajib, or chamberlain, Alb-Tigtn. The
atter sent his deputy, AbQ Is>^^-i-Tahiri, thither ; but in the same year Ab&
s<hSV was seized and bound and removed, and l^usain, son of Rtbal, came to
di^ as Alb-Tigtn’s deputy. • • • In 350 H. Hiiilt was given to AbQ.l'JHasan-
•Stmjur. This Alb>Ti^n is the Turkish slave who was master of Sabuk-
Pigtn, who was also a Turkish slave, and father of Ma^imud of Gh azntn.
iome persons^ who appear to have been unable to read Persian for themselves,
lave called him by all sorts of names in their so-called “ Histories of India«”
ind in professed tnkislations, such as “ Alputtekein,” “ Abistageen,”
*Abistagy," “Abistagi," “ Alepteggin,” and the like, from Dow down to
Ifarshman, and his “Samanides” and *' Aluptugeen," who “rose through the
jiUdations of office to the government of Candahar [which is never once men-
ioned by any writer of that period] or* Gh uzni ”—he is not quite sure which.

* AbQ SultmSn-i-IMl’ud, Al-FanakQtt, says in 351 H. Manjur sucoeeded in
49 H.

* Cltang^n is a game somewhat resembling tennis, but played on horseback,
nd with a stick with one end bent, instead of a bat. The Turks were
lassionately fond of it. Amir ’Abd-ul-Malik, Samant, was riding at full
peed after the ball, when he fell from his horse, and was so injured thereby
bat be died. ^utb‘ud-dtn, I-bak, the first of the Turkish slave-kings of Dibit
ras also killed from a fall while playing at this same game.

1 Fafib-t says, “ This occurred in the year 348 H., although some say in
,51 H.,” and, that “it happened either whilst playing at Ch augan, 01 whilst
lunting.” He had reigned seven years, six months, and eleven days.

* There is great discrepancy here between our author and others. The
'Srtkli-i-Guztdah, NusakU-i-Jahan-Ara, Lubb-ut-Tawarikh, TariJdt-i-lbrfi-
tmt, Muntakliab-ut-TawQrtkli, Kh ulasat-iil-Akhbilr- Tartldi-i-Yafa’f, and
1st, and not the least trustworthy history, the Mujmal-i-Fafib-t, all say that
kba-$Uib, son of ’Abd-ul-Malik, son of Nub, sumamed Us-Sadid, the son,
ot the brother of the late Amtr ’Abd-ul-Malik, succeeded his father. The
list event mentioned in the latter work, under the year 349 h., is “Accession
a the throne of Mansur, son of ’Abd-ul-Malik, son of Nub, son of Na$r, son
f Abmad, son of Isma’tl, SQmSni.” What is most strange in our author’s
tatement is that he only mentions one name of the two ; and therefore I
aspect he has confused them. All the copies of the MS., however, are alike
a this point.

D

4*

THE TABA^T-I.NA$IR!.

and held consultation whether they should raise to the
throne Abu Salih-i-Mangur, son of Nuhf the late Amtr’s
brother, or the latter’s son.

At this juncture Alb-Tigtn, the Amir-i-Hajib [Lord-
Chamberlain], was absent in Kh urasan, and the Wazir of
the late Amir was ’Alt Al-Bal’amt *, between whom and the
Amir-i-Hajib great unanimity and concord existed. The
Wazir wrote to Alb-Tigin to consult with him on this matter,
and have his advice, to which Amir Alb-Tigin wrote in reply
that the son’s right to succeed his father to the throne was
greater than that of the father’s brother’ ; but; before Alb-
Tigin’s reply had time to arrive, the whcleof the soldiery, the
great nobles, and the heads of religion and law, had agreed
to place Amir Man$ur, son of Nuh, on the throne, and
had already installed him thereon. When the news reached
Alb-Tigin respecting Amir Mansur’s elevation to the
sovereignty, he despatched messengers and agents in
order to stop by the way, those bearing his letter of reply,
and to bring it back, but they did not succeed in finding
the V^$ids, or couriers, who bore it.

Amir Alb-Tigin [at this period] held the government
of the province of Nishapur from the Samant Court *,
but it was [now] conferred upon Ibn ’Abd-ur-Razzak *•

* His name is not correctly given by our author. His right name is Abu
’Alt, son of ’Abd-ullah, Muhammad, Al-Bal’amt ; and on the authority of the
Asar-ul-NuxariU TSrtkll-i-Vafa’i, and other works, Abu ’Alt was the translator
of the Tartkh of Imam Muhammad Jarfr-ut-Tabart, as stated in the preface to
that translation. See note *, page 44.

* Other writers state quite contrary to this, and say that Alb-Tigtn, having
risen so os to be considered one of the greatest Amtrs, was written to, and
asked which of the two named he preferred being raised to the throne. He
wrote in reply that the uncle was the best of the two ; but, before his reply
came, the nobles and great men had raised Mahfur, son of the late ’Abd-ul-
Malik, to the throne. On this account Manfur cherished enmity towards
him, or at least Alb-Tigtn thought so. Fa^ih-t says nothing whatever
respecting the letter to the Waifr, or his advice as to the succession. Had
Alb-Tigtn written what our author states he did, it was entirely in favour of
the son, and therefore if Manjur was the son he could have no cause to
entertain enmity against him ; but, if the uncle, the case would be diSerent.

I have been very careful to give the exact words here.

* See note *, page 40.

* It was conferred upon Abu-l-^Jasan-i-Slmjflr in 351 H., he having become
$abib-ul-jai0ill, or commander of the troo]>s, and proceeded to NtahSphr ( and
the government of Hirat was conferred upon Abil-l- 15 ^*san, son of ’Umro
Al-FSry%bt. After four months it was bestowed upon Talbah, son of Mu-
tamma.', Un-NisS’l. In 353 H. Alb-Tigtn died.

THE SAmAnI dynasty.

43

Alb-Tigtn was filled with wonder and astonishment, and
he determined to proceed from Ntshapur to the court of
BuJ^ara *; but, when he had reached Balkh, on the way
thither, having been informed respecting the change in the
heart of Amir Mangur towards him, on account of the letter
he had despatched [which had fallen into Mansur’s hands],
on reaching Balkji, he turned aside, and proceeded towards
Gliaznin. Amir Mansur despatched a commission after
him, and pacified his mind * [by assuring him of his favour].
In this reign, Hasan, son of Buwiah, died * ; and his son,
Fana Kh usrau. removed his father’s treasures, and pro¬
ceeded to Baghdad, overcame his uncle, Bakhtvar, and pos¬
sessed himself of’’Irak, The ’Ulama and the Kazls he
now put fonvard, and solicited an accommodation from
Amir Mangur, under the agreement that he, Fana Kh usrau.
should retain possession of the territories of Trak, Rai,
Gurgan, and Tabaristan, in fief, on payment of a tribute,
at the rate of one thousand gold dinars daily ^

During the reign of Amir Mansur, in Farghanah, Sijistan,
and ’Irak* the whole of the great nobles were continually
revolting from his authority ; but the Almighty was
pleased to bestow victory upon the Amir’s nobles and

• TTiis too Is quite contrary to other writers, who give much greater details
of these matters. An army was sent by Mansur ag.iinst Alb-Tigin, who
defeated it, and then marched against Gh aznin. and gained possession of it.
Upon this Man;ur proposed to more against him in person, but instead, he sent
a still larger force than before against him, but did not succeed in reducing
him. The details of these events are far too long for insertion here. I may
mention, however, that “when Alb-Tigtn appeared before Qhazntn, the $Shib,
or IorI of Gh azntn. refused to admit him, on which he invested it until it was
reduced to such straits that the city was surrendered to him, and /teput the
Bddshah of GhatuTn to death." On this Amtr Manjur sent 30,000 horse
against him, but he suddenly fell upon them with a force of 6000, and defeated
them. On this Manfur gave up the contest. Our author says nothing more
respecting Alb-Tigtn until the middle of the next reign, and then, that he
“had died at Ghazntn." The Mujmal-i-ra?ih-t, which is quite silent on the
hostility between Manftir and his slave, and the cause of it, states, under the
year 332 H., that “Alb Tigtn, Turk, died at Ghazntn in this year,” and that
“ Is-haV, son of Alb-Tigtn, assumed the government.” .See note on this
subject at page 71. Onr author is entirely silent on the affaii's of Shalaf, son
of Ahmad, in Sijistan, and of his proceeding to the court of Bu]fhara to
obtain aid from Man$ur. See notes to Section XIV.

• The investiture of Ghazntn he mc.ms, no doubt.

• See account of the Buwtahs farther on, and note * Ip page 63.

f The,I. O. L. MS., the Bod. MS., and the R. A. S. MS., say “three
thousand gold dinars but the other MSS. give the amount as above.

D 2

44 THE TABA$AT-I.NA$1RL

troops, until the whole of the rebels were reduced to sub¬
mission.

Amtr Man$ur died on Tuesday, the iithof the month of
Shawwal, 365 H.*, after a reign of seventeen years, six
months, and eleven days. He went by the surname of
the Amir-i-Sadid, or the Steadfast Amir.

IX. nC 9 , son of mansCr, son of nOi?, sAmAnI.

His.sons were Man§ur, ’Abd-ul-Malik, and Muhammad*.

On the departure from this world of Amir Manpur, son
of Nuh, they [the people] gave their allegiance to his son,
Amir Abu-l-Kasim-i-Nuh, and raised him to his father’s
throne. The Lord of the Faithful, Ut-Ta’i’u-L’illah, sent
him a patent of investiture and a standard.

The new ruler directed Fayih"i-Kha§ah *, and Tash *,
the Hajib [chamberlain], to assume the command of his
troops and the direction of military affairs. Abu-l-Hasan-i-
Simjar, who was the son of a slave of this dynasty, and
ruled, in tlie name of Amtr Nuh, over parts of Khurasan,
such as Hirat and Nishapur, and over the territory of
Mawar-un-Nahr *, received the title of Nagir-ud-Daulah
from the Amir, and the territory of Tus was added to the
territories already held by him.

The office of Wazir was conferred upon Abl-ul-Hasan-
i-’Abd-ullah, son of Ahmad Al-’Utba^ and Tash, the
Hajib, was made head of the army, or commander-in¬
chief, with the title of Hisam-ud-Daulah. ^^abus, son
of Washm-gir, was made Walt [ governor] of ‘Gurgan,

• Five years previous to this event, in 3®® Ma^miid, son of Sabuk-
Tigtn, was bom.

• The author’s 'arrangement of his work is by no means uniform ; he some¬
times mentions the sons of rulers, and at times leaves them out alt<«cther.
This too Ls often the case with respect to their titles. The title of Nu^ was
Ar-Rifa, and other authors style him Nu^ son of Manjur, son of 'Abd-ul-
Malik, son of Nuh, son of Na^r, &c.

1 From one meaning of this word, FiyiV appears to have been a
secretary. The Tarlkh-i-Ibrahtmt calls him Fayi|f-i-Bak.Tu2un.

» His right nam,- is Aba- 1 -’Abbas-l-'niall. * So in all copies of the text.

< The author of the 'niitkh-i-Yamtnt was of this family. The name has
been sometimes written ’Utbt. Guildah, and other most tmstworthy works
state that Abu *Alt, son of 'Abd-ullah-i-Mutaromad, son of Barami, trans-
tator of the Tarlkh-i-Iabart, was hU Wastr. In the preface to that translation
ManfOr is styled son of Nuh.

HE SAMAnI dynasty.

45

and he and other nobles were despatched along with Tash
into 'Ira^ in order to carry on hostilities against Buwiah *,
son of Al-Hasan, son of Buwiah. They fought a battle
before the gate of Gurgan and were defeated, and Tash.
the Hajib, was overthrown and had to retreat.

After some time Tash and Aba- 1 -Hasan-i-Simjur, both
of them, revolted ; but, after some struggles, and victory •
over the Dtalamah of the family of Buwiah, they both
returned to their allegiance ' ; and the command of Amir
Nub’s forces, after some time, fell to Abi 'Alt, son of
Simjur, and NishapGr was made over to him, and he re¬
ceived the title of ’Imad-ud-Daulah.

In this reign likewise, Amir Abu Musa-i-Ifarun, I-lak *
Kha n, determined to attack Bukhara, and Amir Nub tied to
Amul *, and kept in retirement. Abi 'Ali, son of Simjur,
now began to act in a rebellious manner. I-lak Kh an, after
having succeeded in gaining possession of the country
[BuJsharaj and overthrowing the government, became greatly
afflicted with haemorrhoids, and determined to retire into his
own territory again. He sent for Amir 'Abd-ul-’Aziz, son of
Nub, son of Nagr, who was an uncle of Amir Nub’s, and pre¬
sented him with a robe of honour, and made over the ter¬
ritory to him, after which he retired towards Turkistan. Amir
Nub, son of Man$ur, brought assistance from the Turk¬
mans, and set out in pursuit of I-lak Kh an until he came
up with him ; but I’lak Kh an faced about, and inflicted a
defeat upon his pursuers before the gate of Samrband;
and on his way back to Turkistan the Kh an died.

Amir Nub returned again to Bujchara, and once more

* So in the original; but it was against the forces of’U(d-ud-Daulah, Abu
Shuja'-l-Fana Khusrau, the Dtlamt, that Amir Nufs forces were sent. The
details are very long.

* Our author’s account here is very confused. The details would occupy
more space than I can spare.

f Abu- 1 -’Abb 5 s-i-Tashf sumamed ^lisam-ud-lJaulah, died in 379 **., at
JurjSn. Some copies of the text have cU, for l»j.

* This is incorrect; it was Bugbia TCha n. ruler of Turkistan, no/ I-lak, whb
was his son and successor, as mentioned farther on by our author himself.
According to Guzidah and other histories, Abu ’Alt-i-Simjur contemplated
assuming independent sovereignty, and sought support from Bughra Shan
to aid him in doing so. Rughia Khan’s coming was after Nub and Sabuk-
Tigtn proceeded to liiriit to attack Abu 'Ali-i-Simjur. Sec note ♦ to
page 46.

* In Mfaandaritn.

4ft THE TAifA^A'T.l.NA^ltti

acquired strength ; but, through the rebellion of AbO ’Al!-
i-Simjur, the affairs of KfaurSsjln had fallen into great
disorder, and [to make matters worse] Amtr Alb-Tigin
had likewise died at Ghaznln. and Sabuk-Tigin' had suc¬
ceeded him ’ there, and become very powerful.

The people of Balkh, on account of the weak state of
the Samani ruler’s power, implored aid from Amtr Sabuk-
Tigin from the tyranny of Favik-i- Kha sah. and he had
marched thither. Amtr Nu^ sent a sagacious person
to him, and great graciousness and courtesy passed between
them, and compacts were entered into. Amir Sabuk-
Tigin came to Kash* and Na khsh ab. and Amir Nuti
came out of Bukhara [to meet him], and they united
[their forces], and afterwards marched into Kh urasan
to crush Abt ’Alt-i-Sfmjur \ When they reached the
confines of Tal-lcan, the agents and instigators of the
Karamitah and Mulahidah schismatics had arrived in that
territory, and a great number of the people of those parts
had listened to and accepted their doctrine. Amtr Sabuk-
Tigin laid hands upon the whole of them, and made holy
war, as by orthodox institutes prescribed, [upon them],
and obtained the title of Na§ir-ud-din.

When Bu ’Ali-i-Simjur became aware that Amtr Nuh
and Sabuk-Tigin had set out towards Hirat) he left Nisha-

* The only correct way of spelling his name as given with the vowel points—
s fi>llowe<l by the short vowel rt, silent fi followed by the short vowel «, and
silent = Sa/’uJk ; t with the short vowel <, and silent g, the long vowel », and
silent tiTijiTit —— (Sit/ntA~ 77 giti). Neither “ Sebektekein,” nor
“ Saljak 'fagin,” “ Subuktugeen,” “Sebekteghin,” “Subuktagi,” &c.

^ Sabuk-Tigin had certainly succeeded ; but between his accession and Alb-
Tigin’s death sixteen years had intervened, and three other persons had ad¬
ministered the government.

* “ Kesh,” as this place has been styled in some works, is an impossible
word. The Persian is and by any change of the vowel points it cannot
be made Ke.^. It must be cither Kash> Kisb, or Kuab ; but the first is correct.

■* >’asil.i-j says, under 382 H., “ Amir Nub, Son of Manfur, 8 am 3 nt, and
Amir Nasir-ud-din, Sabuk-Tigin along with him, came to Hirat, and fought
a battle with Abu ’Ali-i-Simjur, and overthrew him.” It was in the following
year, 383 11., that Hughra Khan advanced against Bukhara. Our author has
put this eventto Nub and Sabuk-Tigin joining against Abu ’Ali-i-
Siinjur. not only confiusing the order of events, but also giving Biighra Kh an
a wrong name. His title and name was Shihab-ud-Daulah, Harun, son of
Stibnian, son of I-lak Khan, stirnnnied Uughra Kh an, the Turk, and he held
the tract of territory from KashSh^r to the Jibun. His son, j-lak Kha n, suc¬
ceeded him. In 384 u. Amtr Niib gave the government of Kh urasan to
Sabuk-Tigin.

TOE SAMAnI dynasty. 4y

pQr and proceeded thither. Amtr Nub, on the day of
the engaf^ement between the two armies, gave up the com»
mand of the troops to Amir Sabuk-Tig^n. When their
forces encountered each other before the gate of Hirat, and,
during the engagement, Dara, son of ]^abus, son of
Washm-glr, who was on the side of Abu ’Alt, deserted*,
and went over to the other side ; and Abti ’All was over¬
thrown, through the misfortune of his having acceded, as well
as most of the chief men of that territory, and his army also,
to the exhortations of the Karamitahs, and having become
contaminated with that heresy. He had founded a Masjid-i-
Jami’*, or great masjid, at Nishapur, intending, when it
should be completely finished, that the Khutbah should be
read there for Mustansif-i-Migri^. This victory was gained
by Amir Nuh, son of Mansur, in the middle of the month
of Ramadan, in the year 384 H.* ; and, after this success, the
affairs of the province of Hirat were arranged by Amir
Nuh, and he proceeded to the territory of Nishapur.

Abu’Ali-i-Simjurnowsoughtfor peace; but, on his request
not being acceded to, he left Nishapur, and set out towards
Rai, and sent his son to Abu-l-Hasan, son of Buwiah.
Amir Nuh was now left to return [to his capital]; and
Sabuk-Tigin and his son, Ami’r* Mahmud, were stationed
at NighapOr; but, as Amir Nuh paused at Tus, Sabuk-
Tigin despatched his son, Amir Mahmud, to the Court;
and he was nominated to the command of the troops, and the
title of Saif-ud-Daulah was conferred upon him, together
with the government of Nishapur. Subsequently to this, Amir
Nuh, son of Mansur, returned to Bukhara, leaving Balkh.
Hirat, Nishapur, and the territory of Kh urasan ^ under the
care of Amir Sabuk-Tigin and his son, Amir MahmQd,
the latter of whom took up his quarters at Nishapur.

* With a body of troops.

* great masjid, in which the Kh utbah Is read on Fridays, is called by
this name.

^ Tile rival Kh altfah, whose seat was in Mi^r, and who was head of the
E^rainijah sect at this period, was Ul-’Adz B’illah, Man$ur-i-Nizar, who died
in 386 H.

* Fafilt-i says Nu It defeated Abu 'Alf-i-Sfmjur at Nlghapur, and that Abu
’Alt fled.

* Me was not Amtr” Mahmud then, and the author’s intention hero is
merely to call him by the title he subsequently acquired.

' So in the original.

48 THE .TAEAE; 1 T. 1 .NA 9 IR!.

In thtt month of Rabt’>ul-awMmt, 3S5 H., AbO, *AU 4 >
Stmjar came out of Gurgan» attd advanced to NlshapOff
with the intention of compelling Maluntid to relinquish it,
and the people of the city espoused his cause. MahmQd,
after much opposition and hard fighting, was defeated, for
he had but a 8mall force with him, and retired agmn to HirSt.
Abu’Al!-i-Stmjur£^in gained possession of Ntshaphi. and.
continued there until Sabuk-Tigtn, 'with a laige army, ad¬
vanced towards that place. Abil ’Alt moved forward towards
Xus to oppose his advance, and there they encountered each
other, and a severe and sanguinary battle ensued. Amtr
MahtnQd made an attack upon the rear of Abil ’Alt’s army,
and broke through his ranks, and overthrew FayiV, who
was with him, and completed the d^eat of Abu ’Alt’s army.
F 3 yik retired to Bukhara, and there was thrown into con¬
finement. and died*, Amtr Sabuk-Tigtn proceeded to
Balkhf and took up his quarters there*; and Amtr Mahmud
returned ag^in. to Ntshapur.

At length, on Friday- the xjth of the month of Rajab,
387 H,, A.mtr Nilh, son of Mansur, depaitcd this life*. His
reign extended over a period of twenty-one years and nine
months; and in this same year Amtr Sabuk-Tigtn also died.

X, MAN 80 R, SON OF NUH, SON OF MANSOR.

The late Amtr Nuh had nominated his son, Amtr
Mansur, as his heir and successor; and, when the former
died, his son ascended his father’s throne. He entrusted
the command of his forces to Fayik-i- Kha sah ; and AbO
Man§ar-i-’Aztz*, who, through fear of Amtr Mahmud, son

• Other writeni iay that FayHt, after this defeat, separated from Abd 'Alt,

and feared to retnm to Amtr Nuh, although he had permission to do so. He
went, therefore, and joined l-lak Shan, son of Bughifi and obtained

hij'h rank in his service.

» Hostility arose between Amtr Niih dnd Sabuk-Tigin in 386 H.

• Some state that Al>d 'Alt and Fayih sent a force of slaves and had him put
to death ; others, that it was supposed he was assassinated at the instigation of
the 8ahib, IbnTi>’Ubb 3 d, the Wazfr of Fakhr-ad-Daulah, Abtl-1-Ha9an.i<
Buwtab, by the ^rdmitoh schismatics. Fa^ih-t says, “Amtr Ar-RSft-i'NQh,
died at Nt^apQr, 13th of Rajab 387 h. ; and, in the same year, Sabuk-Tigtn,
the slave of the houM of SSmafat, also di^.”

• He has not been mentioned before, and who or what he was, the anthor
does not say ; but Faaih't mentions that the Waztr, AbQ Manfur-i-'Aziz, was
removed from that office ip 388 H., on account of disagreement with FftyiV, the
Hdjib.

THE SAMAN! dynasty.

of Sabuk-Tig!n, had fled, and retired to Isfanjab^ was
brought back again. At the time of returning he had
implored help from I-lak Khan, soliciting that he would
take vengeance upon the enemies and opponents of Atnlr
Mansur. When Abu Man^Qr, son of 'Aztz, reached the
gate of Samrkand he seized him ; and at this period Fayik-
i>]^9ah was at Samrkand. I-lak Khan summoned Fa3dk
to hLs presence, and despatched him to Bukhara with an
army ; and, on Amir Mansur becoming aware of it, he left
BuJ^ara, and retired to Am.ul.

When Fayik reached Bukhara, and approached the gate of
the palace of the Samlnt princes, he showed great emotion,
and became greatly agitated, and went and joined Mangur
[Amir Mangur, son of NQkI.and asked of him why he had
left the government, and abandoned the capital. Mangur, on
this, returned to Bukhara again, and left the office of com¬
mander of the troops [there, as previously stated,] to Fayik,
and in Khurasan the command over the troops was given
to Bak-Xuzun^, as Amtr Mahniud had proceeded to
Ghazntn, in order to take possession of the territory of his
father, Sabuk Tigtn [who was now dead], and he left Bak-
TuzOn the command over the forces in Khurasan*.

At this period Bak-TOzun slew Abu-l-K^im-i-Stmjur, and
took up his residence at Nishapur ; and, on this, Amir Mah¬
mud marched an army from G^aznin towards Khurastn*.

* Ako written Sifanjab,

f In every copy of onr author which I have compared, except one, the fint
letter of tlw word is m, and the other letters also differ; but from other
bislories it is fully proved that the name of this personage is Bak-Tuzun. A
similar name occurs in the history of the Dfaiamah : and sometimes the hak
is om itted, as in the jami’-ut-Tawartlcb. Guztdah also has Bak-TuzOn. The
wwd, Bak, (al,) is quite a distinct word from Beg (c^^). The Shams-
uI-Ln^iat describes it as written with Arabic leaf [i. e. not gdf], and short a
~Bak, signifying “a lord,” “a great man.” It is a title or surname, like Bak
i*i Bak-Taghdt, Alb in Alb-Tigfn, and Balka in Balk&*Tigtn, Ac; The
T 9 rtkb-i*IbrAhtmt calls him Fayik-i.Bak-Tuzun.

* The command of the troops, and the government which he had held, when
the late Amtr died. Other authors state that Man$ur would not confirm
MahmOd in that appointment, and that he became hostile in consequence.

* A great deal of detail is wanted here to elucidate these transactions. In
the month of Rabt’-ul-Awwal, 388 H., Abfl.l.^asim, the commander of the
StbijQxt forces, was defieated by Bak-TOzQn, on which he retired to Fuahanj.
Bak-Tiiailn again assembled a force, and advanced to Fughanj against AbQ-l-
^sini; but an agreement was arrived at between them, I have not space to
give further details.

50 THE TABAE:AT-I.NA$IR!.

Bak-Tuzun, being aware that he could not cope with
MahniOd, evacuated Nishapur. and set ofT for the pre¬
sence of Amir Mansur. The latter had left Bukhara,
and had arrived at Marw, and Fayi^ was with him ; but,
when Bak-Tuzun joined him, Amir Mansur had reached
Sarakhs. Fayik-i- Kh asah and Bak-Tuzun now con¬
spired together to dethrone Amir Mansur; and, on the
night of the I2th of the month of Safar*, 389 H., they
removed him from the sovereignty, after which they left
Sarakhs. and went back to Marw again. There they agreed
together to place Abu-l-Fawaris-i-’Abd-ul-Malik, son of
Nuh, on his brother’s thi'one. This they carriefd out, and
they deprived Amir Abu-l-Hir§*-i-Mansur, son of Nuh, of
his sight, after he had reigned one year and eight months.

XI. abO-l-fawAris-i-’abd-ul-malik, son of NO^jl.

By the time that Favik-i- Kha sah and Bak-Tuzun had
placed Amir ’Abd-ul-Malik upon the throne, Amir Ma^imud*
had arrived at Balkh ; and, on being made acquainted with
this occurrence, he advanced to the gates of Marw in order
to revenge the treatment which Amir Mansur had suffered
at their hands*. They, however, sent an agent to negotiate
with Mahmud; and an arrangement was entered into
between them and him, whereby it was agreed that Hirat
and Balkh should be held by Mahmud, and Marw and
NishapQr by them. Amir Mahmud, after this arrangement,
again retired, and this was on Tuesday, the adth of the
month of Jamadi-ul-awwal, in the year 389 H.

* Fafi^-t says, on the 8th of $afa.r, and that they then deprived Amtr
Manf ur of his sight. His reign, according to the same authority, was one year
and nine months.

* According to some, AbQ-l-Hiirig was his title, but Abh-I-^irf is correct.
The whole of the S&man{ rulers had titles of this kind, but the author does not
always give them. I have supplied them.

* H6 had dethroned hi^ own brother IsmS’fl, and had assumed the
Ghazntn throne, a short time previous to the accession of Abfi-l-FawSris>i>’Abd-
ul-Malik.

* Mabmud fought a battle against ’Abd-ul-Mallk, son of Nfibi who fled,
along with F 3 .yiV and Bak-Tuzun; the two former retired to BuUi&ra, and the
latter to Niabapiir. Abu-l-|j^asim-i-Stmjur retired to RuhistSn, and£ 3 iurSsSn
was left in Mabmud’s possession. About tliis time, Mabmud gave the com¬
mand of his troops to his brother Na^r, and made Balkh the capital of his
dominions. Sec notes to Mabmud’s reign.

THE SAMAnI dynasty.

5*

At this period,'Dara, son of Kabus-i-Washm-glr, was
Wall [governor]of Gurgan,and incited a party of theslaves *,
of the Sainant kings [who appear to have taken refuge
with him], to follow the forces of Amir Mahmud, with the
object of plundering his retinue; and they set out in
pursuit of them*.' Amir Na§r, son of Sabuk-Tigm, the
brother of Mahmud, had charge of the rear [column]
of his brother’s forces, and joined battle with the body
of pursuers, and also despatched a messenger to Mahmud
to inform him of the state of affairs. Amir Mahmud
turned back, and proceeded to the scene of action ; but,
previously to his reaching it, Amir Na§r had already
defeated the assailants, and put them to the rout.

When the party of nobles, at Marw, became aware that
Mahmud had made a retrograde movement in that direc¬
tion, they evacuated it, and retired to Bujchara. Fayik,
shortly after these events took place, died in the month of
Sha’ban. of this same year. He had deeply regretted,
and heartily repented of the acts he had committed, but
all was now of no avail, and his contrition came too late ;
and all the adherents of the Samani dynasty became
separated and dispersed.

After the death of Fayih, Amir Abu-l-Hasan, I-lak'-i-

• Styled nobles in following paragraph, and refer to slaves such os Alb-
Tigfh and Sabuk-Tigin, who were some of the chief men in the state.

• Mahmud having succeeded his father in 389 H., by the dethronement of

his brother Isma’fl, -appointed his brother Na?r commander of his army in
Khurasan, and made Balkk the capital of his dominions. At this period,
Amir Abu Ibrahtm-i-Isma’il, son of Nub, the last of the Samanis, was strug¬
gling to recover the dominions of his ancestors, after having escaped from
Bukhara when i-lak-i-Na?r, son of Bughra entered it, and had, just

before this psricid, succeeded in reaching Shwarazm. At this time he had
come to Bukhara again, from whence he went to Abfward, and from thence to
Ntshapur. Nasr, brother of Mabmud, on this, evacuated Nishapur with all
despatch, and retreated precipitately towards llirat. Subsequently, Mabmud
advaqced to Nishapur, upon which Abu Ibrahim fled therefrom, and took
shelter with Shams-uI-Ma’Sll, ^abus, son of Washm-gfr. This must have been
the time, when, according to our author, Amir Na^r had charge of the rear
[column] of his brother’s army, but he has related these events in his usual
confused manner, and has not mentioned even the name of Abu Ibrfihtm-i-
Ismft’ll. See note \ page 5a.

7 Other authors state that Amir MabmQd, son of Sabuk-Tigtn, marched
against Bak-TuzOn and F&yjk, who had conspired against their sovereign,
dethroned him, and deprived him of his sight, drove them out of Khi irg«it>,
and possessed himself of that territory ; and that Bak-TuzQn and P'iyik fled

THE TABA]frAT.I.NA$IRl.

5»

Na^r, son of 'All, brother of the Khan-i-Buzurg. or the
Great Kha n, advanced from Farghanah. and appeared
before the gates of BuJsh^ra, in the month of Zi-^a’dah,
in the year 389 H. He pretended to the people that he
had come to render afd to Amir Abu-l-Fawaris-i-’Abd-ul-
Mak'k, son of Nuh* Amir ’Abd-ul-Malik despatched the
nobles and principal officers still remaining in his service to
receive him ; but, as soon as they approached, he gave
orders to seize the whole of them ; and, on the loth of
;Zi-jKa’dah of that same year, he entered Bulchar^ Amir
*Abd-ul-Malik concealed himself; but I-lak-i-Na$r asked
him to return, and succeeded in getting the Samani prince
into his power*; after which he sent him to Orjand*, and
the dominion of the Samanis terminated*. The dynasty.

into MSwar-nn-Nahr, and once more conspired with I>Iak Khan- who, nnder
pretence of liiding Amir *Abd-uI-Malik, whom they had set up, marched out of
K&shchar, and appeared before Bnlrhara.

* 1 -Iak, son of Bughrii Kha n, took Bulcharil, loth of ^h^^’dah, 389 H.
The blind Amir Man^Qr, ’Abd'UbMalik, Ibrahim, and Ya’ku^ the four sons
of Nabi were made captive at the same time.

* One copy has Ozjand, but other writers give Dzgand, and the fortress of
Ozgand; and state that there he was confined till his death, which took place
in 389 H. It was the capital of Sbwarazm, and the name of a province: the
’Arabs called it Jurjantah. It is the present Crganj.

* Other most trustworthy historians, some of whose works I have been
quoting from, give an account of the reign, or rather struggles, of another
prince of this dynasty, brother of Manfur and ’Abd-ul-Malik, which, in a con¬
densed form, is as follows

“abO ibrAhim-i-ismA’il, son of NO^

“ He was known by the title of Muntajir, one of the significations of wltich
word is * extricating one’s self from any calamity or misfortune, ’ which may have
reference to the following circumstances. During the uproar and confusion
Which ensued upon the seizure of ’Abd-ul-Malik by l-lak'd-Na^r, AbQ
IsmS’ll, having covered himself with the mantle of a slave-girl, succeeded, by
means of that-disguise, in getting out of the throng. For three days he lay
concealed in the dwelling of an old woman, after which time he managed to
effect his escape from the place in the dress of a common soldier, and reached
the territory of Kh warazm. Some of the nobles and soldiery of the S%mSnI
dynasty, on becoming aware of hiS escape, hastened there to join him.
Munta^ir by this means acquired some strength ; and he began to prepare his
followers to make an effort to regain the territory of his ancestors. For several
years he carried on a desultory warfare on the confines of SbnrSsftn and
MSwar-un-Nahr. He encountered the troops of I-lak Khan [I-lak-i-Nagr],
and the governor of J^urasSn, on several occasions, with various success. At
length, in the month of-Rabt’-ul-Awwal 395 H., while in the encampment of a

THE SAmAnI dynasty. $3

from the commenbement of the reign of IsmI’ll up to this
time, had continued for a period of one hundred and eight
years*.

The following table gives the genealogical tree of the
race and dynasty of the Samanis* ;—

MI-dAD father of

KAR-KlN^ vy^^Cy^and ^^S^and father of

bahrAM jash-nash and and>»],

father Of

BAHrAm Qjt)BlN f,\^ father of

NOSHAD and and .xly»], father of

NtJ^lR*>ix and J^x], father of
TAM GH An and and father of

JA^mAN oUAfc [u^ and and father of

sA mAn-i.khaddAt * i\^ JLL. father of

ASAD, who had four sons, Nuh> Ahmad, Yahya, Ilyas,

nomad tribe, in whose, tents he had sought shelter, In the neighbourhood of
BukhSril, he was put to death by Mah-Kue [moon-faced], the chief of the
tribe. The Mujmal-i-Fafih-t states that Mah-Rue was ’Amil or subordinate
governor of the ^district in the vicinity of Ozgand, on the part of Suljan
Mahmud, and that Mahmud' put Mah-Rue to death for his treatment of Amir
AbQ Ibrahim; Thus ended the dynasty of the Samants, none of the race
being left, after havi^ lasted one hundred and three years, nine months, and
eleven days.” The account given by Abi)-Suliman-i-Da’Gd, Al-Fanalcatt, is
slightly different from this.

> The 1 . O. L. MS., No. 1952, and its prototype the R. A. S. MS., for
they seem, as far as errors go, to be copies of each other, give one hundred and
/fgAfy years as the period during which this dynasty continuod. Guzidah says
one hundred and two years, six months, and twenty days.

* To make it more intelligible I have reversed it, as the author b^ins with
the /ast ruler. It must be also borne in mind that, as such great difference
exists in all the MSS. as to the names before S 3 man, and that no vowel points
are given, they caimot be absolutely depended upon. I give the variations within
brackets, and also mention the result of my comparison with other writerSL

* This word of course may possibly be read Gaigtn, &c., as in Peraiaii, rf
may k ox g.

* No doubt NCshir is correct.

* Fayib'l gives the following names:—Samlin-i-K&udd 3 t, son of

son of i±»iA son of son of Bahiam CLfibtn, son of BahiGm Haflhnutli,
who b said to have been stationed at Rai and Ahwaz, as Walt of Afart«tjan
on the part of Hurmuz, son of Nuihtrwan.

54

THE XABA?AT-I NA?IRL

NAMBS or svutas.

- 1

PBRIOD OF RBIGN. |

SONS.

AQMAD, son of Asad,

Eighteen years.

Na$r, Isma’il, Is-bab,

NA$R, son of A^M^ad,

Eighteen years.

Man;ur, Asad, Ya’*
Vhb, Hamid, Yabyi,
IbrShtm.

Abmad, Nub, Ilyas,

ISMA’IL, son of At-

Eight years

Yab)^.

Na$r, Man;ur, Ibrahim,

mad,

Yabya.

ABO NA§R-I-AH.

Six years and three

YaTfub, Asad.

MAD, son of Isma’fl,

months.

NA$R, son of Atiraad,

Thirty years.

Nub, Isma’il, Mansur.

NO^, son of Na$r,

Twelve years and three

’Abd-ul-Malik, Abu §a-

months*.

lib-i-Man;ur.

•ABD-UL-MALIK, son

Little over eight years *.

ofNQ^

ABO §ALI 9 . 1 .MAN-

Seventeen years, six

$ 0 R, son of Nub,

months, and eleven

NOHi son of Abu $alib-

days

Twenty-one years and

Mansur, ’Abd-ul-Malik,

i'Manjur,

nine months.

Mubammad*.

MAN^OR, son of Nub.

One year and six months.

’ABD-UL-MALIK, son

Between nine and ten

ofN&b,

months.

1

1 - --

1 From the period he acquired sole rule. Tlrikll'i'Guzfdah gives seven
years and ten months.

* One MS. gives twelve years and nine months, another eleven years and
nine months.

• Two copies have eight years.

• One MS. has seventeen years; another seventeen years, six months, and
eleven days ; two others, eighteen; but, as he assumed power in 350 h., and
died in Shawwil, 365 H., the above is correct.

* There were othor sons besides these. See note * page 52.

SECTION X.

THE DYNASTY OF THE DIALAMAH MALIKS AT THE DAR-
UL-igilLAFAT OF BAGHDAD, AND IN 'IRA?.

The first person of the family of the Dtalamah, who
rose to power, was Makan, son of Kaki, Dtlaml *, who was

‘ MSkin, son of Kakt, was certainly a native of Dflam, but be was not of
the same family as the Buwtahs, and belonged to an entirely different dynasty,
called the Al-i-Ziyar.

According to the most trustworthy writers, the first of the family of Buwtahi
who attained to sovereign power, was ’Imad-ud-Daulah, Abu*l> 9 asan-i>’All,
who afterwards received the title of’Imad-ud-Daulah, the son ofBuwtah, son of
Fana Shusrau, Dilamt. ’Imad'U^-Daulah’s father is said to have been a
fisherman. Abu -1 I^asan-i-’Alt was an officer in the service of Mardawanj,
as he had previously been in that of Makan, son of Kaki, whom Mardiwanj
had succeeded, when Makan retired, and entered the service of the S&mintans.
Mardawanj had conferred some territory upon AbQ-l-Qasan, who, in 321 H.,
considered himself sufficiently powerful to endeavour to gajn possession of
Isfahan and the territory of ’Irak for himself. Abu-l-^asan accordingly
marched against Isfahan, and defeated Mufaffar, son of YSik^t, a slave of the
'Abt^i dynasty, who was governor of Fixs for the Kl^lifah. Mucaffar was
defeated, and retired to Shiraz, which was his Other’s head-quarters. Mardi<
wanj did not approve of this movement on the part of Abu -1 ^asan, and he
determined to march to Isfahan and oust him. Abu-l-Qasan was not suffi¬
ciently strong to oppose Mardawanj, and was advised to turn his arms against
Fars. This he acted upon; and Yakut, who came out of the capital

of Firs, to oppose him, was overthrown. Abu-l-^asan took possession
of it, and made it his capital. This was in 321 H. ; and he now
assumed sovereignty, and read the Klrutbah for himself, and coined
money. In 323 h., on the death of Mardiwanj, at Iffahin,
he determined to extend his conquests; and he gained possession of
I;fahin, Rai, I^ulwan, and other territories. He now made his eldest
brother, Abu ’Ali-i-^asan, afterwards entitled Rukn-ud-Daulah, ruler of
’Irak, sent the youngest, Abu-l-Husain-i-Akmad, afterwards Mu’izz-ud-
Daulah, to Kirman. In 326 h., 'Imad-ud-Daulah, Abu-l-^asan-i-All, sent
an envoy to Bagh da d to the Khalffah-Ar-Rizi B'illah, and asked to be con¬
firmed in the possession of his territory, which was granted ; and, in the same
year, ’Imid-ud-Daulah left his brother, Mu’iz^-ud-Daulah, as his representa¬
tive at Baghdad. In 330 H. ’Imad-ud-Daulah died, after a reign of nearly
seventeen years, leaving no sons. Rukn-ud-Daulah, his eldest brother,
succeeded him at Shiraz, while Mu’izz-ud-Daulah, the youngest, remained at
Baghdad as previously ; but, in the course of that same year, Mu’izz-ud-
Daulah set out on an expedition towards Mifr and Sfeam. In 333 H. the
K^litah , Al-Multakt B’illah, was blinded by TQzun, son of Abii-l-Wafa,

«« THE TABA^LAT.I.NA$IRL

Walt [sovertign] of Gurgan until the reign of AbQ 'Alt *,
Samant, who succeeded in wresting Gurgan from him, after
considerable fighting. Makan retired towards Rai, and
sought shelter from Sham^gtr [Washm-gtr], son of Ay^.
Abu 'All went in pursuit of him, and fought an engage*
ment with both of them, slew Makan, son of Kakt, and
became powerful in that part.

Amir Buwiah, Dilami, was with Makan’s force ; and he
had a great number of followers and dependents, and
grown-up sons, who were endowed with wisdom and valour,
and great talent and ability. All of them rose to great¬
ness and renown, and became sovereign princes ; and for a
considerable time they held the supreme authority and
dominion at the Dar-nl- Kh ilafat of Baghdad.

Notwithstanding tlje author made much search for infor¬
mation on this subject in the Tarikh-i-Ibn Haigam-i-Sant *.
but little was to be found respecting them and their actions
in those chronicles, on account of some confusion as to which
preceded, which followed the other. The author, therefore,
has written a short account of them, somewhat based on
supposition and conjecture *. If any errors have been made,
he hopes he may be excused, since it is known that no
mention is made of them in the histories of 'Ajam and
IQlurasan, except very briefly.

a Turk, the Amtr-uhUmra [see note •, page $8], who set up his son, Al-
Mustakft. We now come to the first' ruler mentioned b7 our author, who,
certainly appears to have had a very superficial knowledge of this dynasty. He
takes little or no notice of the other two dynasties of Fars and T^, and con.
fines his account to those who ruled at Baghdad. It is the most meagre and
incorrect notice of these princes, that I am acquainted with ; and, although
the dynasty only terminated in 459 h., he ends .his history of them in 388 H.
Ample materials for a history of this dynasty are available ; and I have been
obliged to burden the translation with this long note to make the author’s
account intelligible.

* So stated in all the copies of the work examined, but erroneously; for it
refers to AbQ ’All, son of IlyQs, Sipah-sQlSr, or general of the forces of Amtr
Nayr, son of Ahinad, SanUnf, who overthrew Makfin, son of KSk^ as
subsequently shown. See latter part of note *, pages 36, 37.

* The I. O. L,. MS., No. 1953, and of course the R. A S. MS., have
“and in Yamtnt” after the word $ant, but not the other MSS. The
word ^Inl at this place, in four of them, is doubtful; and, in two, another
word follows. I think “ Ibn Haiyam-i-FSrySbf ” [native of FaryZb] is the
correct name of this author.

* A novel way of writing history, and our author's account of this and other
dynasties shows what such history is.

TREE OF THE DIALAMAH PRINCES OF THE DYNASTY OF BUWIAH. DILAMl*.

THE DiAt.AMAM DYNASTY

57

5*

THE TABA^j:AT.I.NA§IRl.

I. ABO-L-^^ASAN, SON OF BUWIAH, UD-DlLAMf.

He bore the title of Fakhr-ud-Daulah *; and he, first rose
to power and dominion, from the time that he was Amtr
[lordj of Ahwaz, wh^n the Turks of Baghdad, whose chief
and commander was Tuzun, seized the person of the Lord
of the Faithful, AI-Muttaki B’illah, and deprived him of
his sight, set him aside, and fixed a stipend for bis support.
Having done this, Tuzun set up the dethroned Khalifah’s
son, AI-Mustakfi B’illah, in his stead, while Tuzun himself
became Aniir-ul-Uinra *, and assumed the direction of the
whole of the affairs of the Khilafat.

Abu-l-Hasan, son of Buwiah, assembled the troops of
Dilam, and marched towards Baghdad ; and for a period
of four months carried on hostilities with the Turks, at the
expiration of which time the Turks were defeated, and put
to flight. Abu-I-Hasan took possession of Baghdad, and
his commands were obeyed in all matters respecting the
government of the territory, and the Khilafat. A party of
spies informed him, however, that the Khaltfah. Al-Mus-
takfi, meditated treachery towards him„in order to get him
into his. power, and intended to pUt him to death if he suc¬
ceeded in doing so. Abu-l-Hasan, however, determined to
be beforehand and to anticipate his intention, and seized
the person of the Lord of the Faithful, Al-Mustakfl
B’illah, blinded him, and set up the Khaltfah. Al-Mutt’u-
L’illah', in his stead. According to the historian Ut-
Tabrt *, he gave himself the title of Mu’izz-ud-Daulah, and
took the whole power in the State into his own hands, .so

* He bore no such title : it was Mu’izz-ud-DauIah. His name also, as given
by our author, is not correct. It was Abu-l-^usain-i-Ahrnad. For his first
rise to power see note ', page 55. His elder brother, ’ImSd-ud-Daulah, ought
to have been the first mentioned here.

> Lord of Lords: a title adopted by the ministers, or rather tyrants, of the
Shaltfahs, in the decline of their power. This title was also often conferred upon
the chief commander of an army—a captain-general.

* Fa^ih-^. among the events of the year 334 H., mentions the succession of
Al-Mutt’u-L’illah, and that he had no territory, and was agreeable to a stipend
being allowed him.

* As these events occurred in 334 h., and Muhammad, son of J^rfr-ut*
Tabari, died at Bagjidad, in 310 H., although some say in 311'H., our author
must refer to the continuation of Tabari’s Chronicle by the Wazlr, AL
Bal’amt.

THE DIAEAMAH DYNASTY.

59

that Al-Muti’u-L’illah was Kha lifah only in name, while
he ruled the country, issued his mandates, and exercised
the supreme authority over the Kh ilafat.

Abu-l-Hasan, son of Buwiah, instituted many excellent
regulations which he carried out ; and he caused the whole
of the depopulated and dilapidated parts of Baghdad to be
restored and rendered habitable. He also aboli.shed a
custom whereby each quarter of the city possessed a sepa¬
rate prison of its own, and had them all demolished. On
the son of Abu-l-Hayjil * he conferred the fief of Mu^il,
and to his brother, 'Alt, son of Buwiah, he gave the title
of ’Imad-ud-Daulah, and to another brother, Hasan, that
of Rukn-ud-Daulah ; and day by day the sovereignty of
the family of Buwiah began to prosper uninterruptedly.

II. AL-HASAN*, SON r>F BUWIAH, UD-nlUAMf.

He was Amir of Hamadan and Rai, and was a person of
great manliness and generosity ; and he entertained a large
number of troops in his pay, and possessed great military
resources. The whole of the men of Dilam, both high and
low, were obedient to his authority. He had several *
talented and warlike sons grown up, the name of one of
whom was Fakhr-ud-.Daulah. ’Ali, son of Al-Ha.san, and of
the second, Muayyid-ud-Daulah, Buwiah. Fakhr-ud-Dau-
lah, ’All, was Amir of 'Irak, to whom Shams-ul-Ma’alt,
Kabus-i-Washm-gir, went for protection, and .sought his
assistance, and Fakhr-ud-Daulah accordingly marched to
Nishapur for that purpose, and Muayyid-ud-Daulah had

* Only two copies of the M.SS. collated are altogether free from a great
blunder, contained in the text here. ’imad-ud-Daulah whom our author
styles PaJtlir-ud-Daulah, the first sovereign prince of the dynasty, had no off¬
spring, hence he could not have conferred the government of Mfi^il on " Ais”
son, Abu- 1 -Hayj&,” as the R. A. S. MS. and I. O. L. MS. No. 1952 have.
Other writers, very properly, state that these titles were conferred by the Kh nlt-
fahs. AbQ-l-Hayja is a totally distinct person.

* His correct name is Abu-l-Husain-i-Ahmad, and his title was Mu’izz-ud-
Daulah. His elder brother was called Abu-l-!^asan-i-’All, as previously stated.

* Only two sons are mentioned by our author. The 1 . O. L. MS. No. 1952,
and the R. A. S. MS. also, contains but one name. ’Ufd-ud-Daulah, Ab&
Shuig.’-i-Fana Kh iisrau. the eldest of the sons, who was accounted “ the
cream ” of the Buwiah family, is not mentioned here. An account of bU
reign, however, is given at page fir.

E a

6o

THE TABA¥AT-I.NA§IRI.

several engagements with them, the events of which $abt'
has mentioned in his History.

111 . BAiyiTYAR, SON OF AL-^ASAN*, SON OF BUWlAH,

DILAML

On the death of his father he took possession of Baghdad,
and directed the affairs of government after the manner of
his father, and acquired great power and dominion.

As soon as he had become firmly established in his
authority, the Kha lifah. Al-Mutti*u-L’illah, preferred a re¬
quest to him respecting the sedition and discord caused by
the Karamitah sect of schismatics, which had assumed
great proportions throughout the empire of Islam, and
urged him to assemble forces and suppress them, and
uproot them utterly. Bakhtyar, however, did not pay
attention to the solicitations of the Kha lifah. and, conse¬
quently, enmity arose between them. Matters assumed
such an aspect that Bakhtyar was not safe from the designs
of Al-Muti’u-L’illah ; and the informers of Bakhtyar
warned him that the Khalifah meditated treachery towards
him. Bakhtyar Sought his opportunity, according to the
statement contained in the History of Ibn-Hai^am, and
assembled together all the ^azis and ’Ulama—judges,

r The oldest MS. has Zb-yt; but one of the others has $Ibt, and another
which is one and the same thing, and I also find Guztdah quotes, as one
of its authorities, the Kit&b-i-NAjt of ^bt-i-Dabtr, or $Sbt, the secretary ; and,
among-the events recorded in Fafi^-t in the year 365 H., is the death of Silrit,
ton of SinSn, son of § 2 bit, son of l^urrah, sumamed Abu J^^urrah, ui-SSM, in
the month of ^l-]^’dah, the of the $annafah>ut-T&rtkb, containing a

history of events between the years 195 H., and 343 H. This, no doubt, is the
author referred to by the TaiijEb-i-Gustdah, and our author.

* As before stated, the father of BaJchtjrSr was named Abu-l-J^usain-i-A^mod,
son of Buwtah, and his title was Mu’izz-ud-Daulah. Bakllty2r’s title was ’Izt-
ud-Daulah, Abu Man;Qr>i-BaklltySr. Mu’Uz-ud-Daulah, the father of BaUlt-
ySr, died at Baghd&d, of which he was ruler on the part of his nephew,
Amir 'Uyd-ud-Daulah, the head of the dynasty, on the 1st of Rabt’>ul>
Awwal, 356 H., but, according to other writers, on the i6th of that month. He
was known by the name of Iktil’, having lost his left hand, and the fingers of
his rigtht. in an affiur with the Kurds of KirmSn according to the Tkrt](li>i>
YSfa’t, but other writers say, with the KQch and Balucb, a nomad tribe [two
tribes] then inhabiting a portion of KirmSn, according to the BurhSn
and firom whom the present Ballichts are descended. KGfib in Persian, among
other meanings, signifies a nomad, and in the Afghan language, Kofihaey,
which some persons, who know no better, imagine to be the name of an Afg^jan
tribe, signifies “pastoral” or “nomad.”

THE DIALAMAH DYNASTV. 6|

lawyers, and ecclesiastics—and transferred the office of
yhal tfah * to tlie son of Ai-Mutt’u-L'illah whose name
was Abu-Bikr-i-’Abd-ul-l^rlm, and gave him the title
of soon as he was installed in the

TChilafat. he gave his daughter' in marriage to BaJ^tyar,
Buwtah, and he became the chamberlain and lieutenant
of the Shilafat.

Soon after this dignity was conferred upon Bakhtvar.
he set out for Ahwaz in order to levy the revenues and
taxes. Sabuk-Tigtn, Chashnt-gir. [cup-bearer or taster]
who was Bakhtyar’s deputy, began to act insubordinately
towards his master, and took the power out of his hands

IV. FANA KHUSRAU *, SON OF AL-^ASAN, SON OF BUWlAH,

DlLAMi.

The title borne by Fana Khu srau was 'U^d-ud-Daulah
and he was a proud and haughty prince, but was, at the
same time, endowed with great intellect and valour.

The direction of the affairs of the country, and the diffe¬
rent forces were left under hjs control; and the whole of
the property and treasure of the dependencies of the DSr-

* The author himself states, in his account of the Shaltfahs, Section IV.,
that Al-Mutt’u-L’illah abdicated in favour of his son, in 363 H., on account of
his infirmities. Other historisms confirm it; but, in Fa$ih-t, it is said that he
abdicated at the end of Muharram, 364 H., having previously been stricken
with palsy, and died two months afterwards. It must also be remembered
that the Buwtah rulers were Sht*ahs. hence probably their severity towards
the Shaltfahs.

> Her name was SblUt-i-Zaman, and she had a dowry of 1001,000 dtoftra.

* Sm note *, at page 63.

* Al-FanSkatt considers Fan 2 Shusrau third prince of the dynasty.

* In 366 H., Rukn-ud-Daulah, AbQ ’Alt-i-]Hb»an, son of Buwtah, brother
of ’Im&d-ud-Daulah, the founder of the dynasty, died. Some say he died in
365 H. He had succeeded his elder brother, 'Imftd-ud Danish, who died
without issue, in the sovereignty of Fbs, the sovereign of which was, in that
family, considered suzerain over the other two branches, who ruled in

and at Ba^did. Rukn-ud-Daulah bequeathed his dominions in the following
mannerTo his youngest brother, Mu’izz-ud-Daulah, A^mad, he left KirmSn.
He afterwards became Arntr-ul-Umril at Baghdad. He was the &ther of
Bakbtyftr ; and our author calls him Al-^asan, and says he was the second
prince of the dynasty. To ’Usd-ud-DanlaK AbQ Shuja-’i-Fank Shusrau, his
eldest sob, he left the sovereignty of Fkrs } and he became the head of the
fiunily, and suzerain over all. To his second son, Muayyid-ud-Daulah, AbQ
Nafr, he left TrSh snd its dependencies; and to his youngest son, FaJtlir-ud-
Daulah, ’Alt, he bequeathed Rat, Hamadin, S<tswfn, and other territory in
AaarUltjSn.

6 a THE XABA¥AT-I-NA$ 1 RL

ul- Khi lafat came into his possession. The reason of this
was, that, when Bakhtyar set out for Ahwaz, to collect the
revenue due to the Bait-ul-Mal, or Kha lifah's treasury *,
Sabuk-Tigin, the Ch ashni-glr [cup-bearer], who was his
deputy at Baghdad, assembled the Turks together, and
opposed the authority of Bakhtyar. drove out the Dilamis,
broke out into open revolt, and began to act in an over¬
bearing and tyrannical manner. They [the Turks and
Sabuk-Tigin] commenced shedding the blood of Musal-
mans, and carrying off their females. 'Izz-ud-Daulah,
Bakhtyar. sent to acquaint his uncle Abu-l-Hasan *, son of
Buwiah, who was ruler of Rai, with what had occurred ;
and to his first cousin, Fana Kh usrau-i-Abu ^tija’, who
held the government of Pars, he also gave information ;
and solicited assistance from both of them. A large army
was assembled, and Fana Kh usrau came to his aid with
the troops of Pars ; and Abu-l-Hasan, his uncle, despatched
his forces to co-operate with them.

The combined troops marched towards Baghdad ; and
Sabuk-Tigin, with the Turks and other forces, moved out
of Baghdad, and advanced to meet them. When Sabuk-
Tigin and his adherents reached the village of ’Akul ^ he
was taken ill, and died after four days. The Turks were
defeated ; and they took along with them from Baghdad,
the Lord of the Faithful, Ut-Ta-i’u-L’illah, and marched
towards Nahrwan, in order again to encounter Fana Kh us-
rau. They were defeated a second time, however, and
retired towards Mu$il.

Fana Kh usrau entered Baghdad, and found with respect
to the a^airs of his cousin, Bakhtyar. that he was in the
habit of passing his time in gaiety and pleasure, and that
he was no longer fit for and capable of directing the affairs
of government. He therefore seized Bakhtyar, and put
him in durance. The latter sent a letter of complaint to
his uncle, Abu-l-Hasan, son of Buwiah, the father of Fana
Kh usrau. ruler of Rai. saving: “ Your son, Fana Kh usrau. has
seized me without cause or reason, and has imprisoned me.”

* Intended, according to the ]^ur’an, “ For God, His Apostle, his kindred,
the orphan, the poor, and travellers.”

■ As before stated, the name of Rukn-nd-Danlah, the unde of Baldttj^r,
was AbQ 'Alf-i-^asan.

7 A small town or village in the Mu^il [not Mosal] territory.

THE DUXJIMAH DYNASTY.

The father of FanS iChuarau issued a mandate to his son,
directing him to set B akht ySr at liberty, l^is he did, and
he [Fanh Khusraul returned to Fars; but, when his father
died, FanSL Khusrau proceeded to Baghdad, ag^in seized
R alch tySr. and put him to death, after which he took pos--
session of the territory of Baghdad, and the control of the
affairs of the KhilSfat *.

He entered into a compact with the SSmSnt Amtrs for
the mountain tracts, or Highlands of 'Iral^, as far as
istan, of which he received the tenure from them, at the
rate of one thousand dinSrs per day.

Fana Khusrau ruled with vigour and energy; and, as
before stated, was excessively proud, but of great spirit and
resolution. He had, however, great dread of death, so
much so that not a soul dared to mention before his throne,
in any way, the name of the Gor-i-Dashtl. or Wild Ass,
because Gor also signifies a grave ; and it is stated that
he commanded that all graveyards should be enclosed with
lofty walls, so that his eyes might not behold a grave. Of
his pride and grandeur the following is a specimen. After
his decease, eight thousand napkins and handkerchiefs, of
great price and fineness of fabric, befitting a king, were
found, belonging to him, of brocade, linen, and Egyptian
fiijsl*, threaded and embroidered with gold, and orna¬
mented with jewels, with which he was wont to wipe his
mouth and nose, and which fetched the price of 50,000
dinSLrs of gold.

When his end drew near, he afBxed his seal to nfiandates
and decrees, which he gave into the hands of his secretary,
directing him to fill them up according to the best of his
own ability and judgment, and to issue, and carry them
into execution, and not to let people know of his death.
For a period of four months his decease was kept con-

• Tzz-nd'Daulah, Aba MansOr-i-Bakllt^r, issaid,by the authorofthe Mujmal-
i-Fa$ib-t, to have ended his days at Baghdad, in 367 H., having been put to
death by his nephew, 'Ufd-ud.DauIah, Aba Sb>>ja-’i-Fana Shusrau, after he
had ruled there for a period of eleven years and some months, at the age of
thirty-six. and BahB ud-DauIah, Shtisrau FtrOz, son of ’U«d-ud-DauIah, his
nephew, succeeded him as ruler of Baghdad.

• The name of an expensive and fine fabric so called from being the peculiar
manufrctnre of a town or city of that name, now in ruina It is said to have
been manufrctured from flax ; but ASs is also the name of the baric of a tree
IDce the papyrus.

94 TR& TA»AKAT.»«A$1R!.

oealec^ and they continued to place his corpse upon the
throng so that people, from a distance could see him, as
they supposed, as usual When his end drew near, he
directed that ashes should be spread upon the floor, in
which he rolled about exclaiming*, " What advantageth all
my wealth and my sovereignty, since death has overcome
me 1 " until he ceased to be.

His death took place in the month of Ramadan, in the
year 373 ll.' The Almighty alone is eternal

V. AL-MARZABAN, son of FA'nA KHUSRAU. DlLAMl.

On the decease of his father 'U;d>ud-Paulah, the
Kha llfah. Ut-Ta-l’u-L*illah, conferred upon him the title
of l^am$am-ud-Daulah, and raised him to his father’s
office *.

The Kha lifah treated him with great esteem and distinc¬
tion. He embarked on board a vessel on the river Dijlah
[Tigris] and proceeded to the palace of Fana Khusrau, and
paid a visit of consolation and condolence to his son, hfar-
zaban, and conferred considerable honours and dignities
upon him. The Khallfah left the administration of affairs
in his hands, and showed great respect and honour towards

* ’Ufd-ad-DauIah died, it U said, at ^h trSs. his capital, although Goztdah
says, at Bagdad, which is not probable, istb of Ramadan, 373 H. He was
buried in the Mashad. or sepulchre, [especially for those killed tightlng for
their religion] of the Shaltfah 'Alt, and his son InAm Rusain, whid> was
ohe of the buildings founded by him. The same illustrioua prince also founded
the great hospital at Baghdad, and liberally endowed it ; and the great
embankment over [as the historian from whom I quote says] the river Kur, the
like of which there is not in the world, called the Band-i>Amtr. This is the
same structme that Mac D. Kinneir refers to in his “ Geographical Memoir of
the Persian Empire.” He sa3rs, “The rioer Bund-Emeer [sic] takes its name
from a dyke [in Persian a dumf] erected by the celebrated Ameer Asad-a>
Xlaulidi, Dclemi”[!].

Among other great works carried out by him were a town founded opposite
Shlia^ named Suft-i-Amfr [plural of SS]^ a nrarket, &c.], the walls of
M ad fn a h , and a splendid SaiSe or palace, at BaghdXd, called the Saifte-i*
Snltin. He was succeeded, in the government of Baghd&d, by his son,
(InmfSm-nd'Danlah, Al*MarzabSn, which latter word is derived from marx, a
teundaiy, border, &c., and signifies the governor of a frontier, and the like.
He is also called AbO-KMinjar, and sometimes Kinjir, the meaning or deri¬
vation of which, the Burhfin 'f die Farang-i-JahSngtrt, and other worlu,
do not give. Kfiljfir, in Persian, signifies war, battle, Ac.

* This is absurd, for the had long before been stripped of all

power, 'and were mere shadows of sovereignty.

THE DIALAMAH dynasty. «5

him. He [MarzabSn] exercised the authority at Baghdad
until his brother, AbQ-l-Fawari^ rose against him *.

VI, ABO-L-FAWARIS, MAkAN *, SON OF fanA khusrau.

dIlamI.

He was ruler of Kirman; and, when he became aware of
the death of his father, and heard of the exalted position of
his brother at the Dar-ul-Khilafat. he assembled troops in
Kirman, and entered Pars, and seized upon that territory.
He then advanced to Ahwaz, and possessed himself of that
likewise, having expelled from thence his brother Abt-ul-
]^asan-i-Abt Shuia*. son of Fana Khusrau. and then he
pushed on to Basrah. Having gained possession of that
place he marched towards Baghdad.

When the news of his approach, and his designs, reached
Baghdad, his brother, Sam^am-ud-Daulah, Marzabiln, son
of Fana Kh usrau. came out and waited on him, in order to
show his submission and pay him homage. Abu-l-Fawaris-
i-Makan seized his brother, and deprived him of his sight *.

Fnmity and hostility now arose between the Turks and
Dtlamis; and the Turks of Baghdad overcame their oppo¬
nents, and of the Dilamis about 4000 men were slain by
them. After a short time, however, Abu-l-Fawaris over¬
threw them, and entered Baghdad, and assumed the
administration of the affairs of the Dar-ul- Kh ilafat. The
ly^altfah, Ut-Ta-t’u-L’illah, conferred upon him the title of
Sl}araf-ud-Daulah *.

After him, the author has not found any annals respect¬
ing the Dialamah such as he could write down. What

• in the year 375 H.

• His correct titles and name are, Sharaf-ud-Daulah, Aba-l-Faw£ris-i-Slltr

son of ’U#d-ud-DauIah. All the copies of the work have " MakSn,"
but it is not mentioned by any other writer that I am acquainted with.

• He was imprisoned in the fortress of ’Ummin after being blinded in 375 H.;

and on the death of S^araf-ud-Daulah, who had dethroned him. he was again
brought forth, blind as he was, and reinstated. After about nine months, Shams-
nd-Danlah, ’All, son of Slianif-ud-Daulah, rose against him, whom he defeated
in 379 : but BahS-ud-Daulah now rose against him, and civil contention

continued for somc time, till, in 380 h., the sons of ’Izz-ud-Daulah, BakhtySr,
put him to death.

• Zain-ul-Millat, in 377 H. He died in the xaonth
of JamSdl-ul-AUlir, 379 H., after reigning seven years over Kirmin, and six
months at Bntftd«d.

66

THE TABAt:AT-I-NA$IRL

was contained in histories, and what came to his hearing,
has been entered herein, so that this work may not 1^
without mention of those princes; and he hopes that those
who may peruse it will extend pardon and indulgence to
the author for any shortcomings

r The dynastjr of the Buwtahs did not tenninate until 459 H., or eighty two
yean after the date of our author’s account of them, when it fell before the
power of the SaljOf ts. His great mistake throughout has been in not keeping
the rulen of FSrs, ’IraV, and KirmSn, separate from those who ruled at
Bagdad. Al-Fanakatt gives a more accurate account of this dynasty,
although a very abridged one. The last of the family was Abli ’AlJ-l-
Kai-kliusrau, son of ’lu-ul-Muluk, who died in 487 h., and who submitted to
Alb-Arsalin, and had a small tract of territory assigned to him.

SECTION XL

THE DYNASTY OF THE YAMInIAH AL-MA^MOdIAH
SOVEREIGNS OF THE RACE OF SABUK-TIGiN.

The pages of this section * are devoted to the mention of
the Maliks and Sultans of the dynasty of Na9ir-ud-Dtn,
Sabuk-Tigtn, and of Sultan Yamln-ud-Daulah, NijSm-ud-
Dtn, Abu-l-Kasim, Mahmud, the Conqueror, and to the
description of the events in their lives ; to an account of
their lineage; to the record of their justice and equity,
and the incidents in their reigns;.to the vicissitudes and
changes in the fortunes, and the dominion of the sovereigns
of that family of exalted power and might, from the outset
of the career of the Amlr-i-Ghazi. Sabuk-Tigln, to the end
of the reign of Khusrau Malik, the last of that dynasty of
kings, in an abridged and concise form, in order that this
Xaba]f:at of kings and nobles may be illumined by the
mention of their lineage and their titles, and the pages of
this history be adorned and ennobled by the relation of
the deeds of those sovereigns of IslSm, whom may the
light of Almighty God illumine I

Imam Abu*l-Fafl, Al-Hasan-i'Baihal^t *, in his chronicle

* So called from Ma^Od’s title of Yamtn-ud-Daulah.

* The printed edition of the TABA^AT-I-NA$IR 1 , edited by Lieat.-
Colonel W. N. Lees,.LL.D., and his Maulawts, commences from this Section.
It forms No. 42—50 of the Bibliotheca Indica, New Series. I have been
unable to make any use of it for a very cogent reason, that not a page of it is
correct. Whole sentences are often wanting, and, at times, much more ; and
the names of persohs and places are frequently wrongly spdt. The work,
however, appears, to have bran printed from the text of the MS. Na 1952 of
the India Office Library, and the Royal Asiatic Society’s MS., to which 1 have
before alluded, both of which are the most defective and incorrect (rf any I have
collated. The same errors occur in each, in nearly every instance. To
restore the text would be impossible without entirely reprinting the work. I
may say, however, that the state of most of the MSS. I have collated is such
that it would be impossible to give any thing like a correct veisimi without
examining the number of copies which I have been so fortunate as to find in
different Libraries, and others which have been placed at my dis po s a l throng^ the
kindiiwM of their owners, and of the Imperial Russian Government in particular.

* So called from Baiha^t, the name of his native town, which is also called
Mukir, in ZiwnlistSn. His correct name will be found in note *, page 87.
The passage above quoted may have been contained in the first portion of hia
work ; but is not to be found in what has been preserved, as far as we know.

68

THE tabae:At-i-nA$irI.

entitled ” Taiikh-i-Nasiii.” relates the following tradition
told him by the august Sultan Maljimad himself, which the
latter had heard from his father, the Amir Sabuk-Tigln,
[namely] that his [Sabuk-Tigln’s] father used to be called
by the nameof ^araBab-kam; and that his [proper] name was
J^uIf ; and that Qhar-ghaii in the Turkish language is called
Bah-kam; and that the meaning of J^ara Bah-kam would
be the Black Tatar Bull * ; and every where that the

* In eight copies of the text the words ffk. occur, and of this number
one MS. says, that these TUrkish 'words mean yt* it,, but all the other
copies differ. In the very old MS. previously referred to, which copy I shall
here call No. i MS., the passage stands as follows:—

ft s s

a n

• ^

S .1
d -S

*3

.:2n

\

4 % 4 •§ = 4 4 I !f

» .

1" ®
M

S> - '

.:2n

OK.-acdS.w

'1>.

a

ft ft

M
J
1
. i

-!• -J*

I

^ *

•a -a ;z;

Os if g

“-^1

i j' j

ft ft ft

J-

i

4

S R S

4 4 ' 4 ' 4

■% •», •«».

-rv

.a' : 9 ’ ji

•> •>

O

2 1-
:i %•

t ^
•8,1
•g.s|

*3 s

is s r

4

\

4 *

%

S!

1

r

.9

CO

s

.d

£

2
S

i"

I

I

C/a

.o

<

CO

s

•a

(S

CO

:b

•§

^ *5 6 — ^

THE YAMlNlAH DYNASTV. <9

Turks, in TurkistSn, heard his name mentioned, they fled
before him on account of his enerf^ and valour.

ImSm Mubammad 'Alt, AbQ-l-l^plsim, 'Im2dt*, in his
work, the “ Tartkh-i-Majdfll.**' states, that Amtr Sabuk-

It will be noticed that four copiea say his name was or 9ar|i],

which might possibly be read o' in the two best ooinea,

whilst in two other copies the word is jjr. [JG^f or JauV], and in another
IJGn]. Then comes the signification of the Turkish woid, as it is called, fCi
In five copies, it is said to mean in one in another in a third

jU j» in three others jla jt* and in one y* tjta The printed text has The
Arabic words ySi jty contained iu two copies of the tekt—in one of the best
and one of the most modem—would be intelligible enough, but we are told that
the words, whether ^ 1,1 or ySi [y are Turkish, and that they signify jUy—^Uy—
jU jt, i - -Uy [of the printed text], jU —a'* J* whichever wo

choose to select, and we must presume that these words are intended for the
Persian equivalents of the Turkish. The word mmt be —Qbajs-gjlgo—

also written —Ghajz-yhfL and, at times, jUj*—Ghai-ghao; and as ^in

the Persian larigua^ is pennutable to eJ the words are, and may be respectively
written, or ^ signifying a —fh* Yfik [Bos Gmn-

niens], found in the vast mountain tracts of Central Asia, north of Hindustin, the
tail of which is fastened td the manes and necks of horses, and as an ornament to
Tartar and Turkish standards [hence “a Pachah” of so many " tails”]. The
author from whom I take this says, “ Its real luune is Gfto>i-I^tfi’li
Sbitft’t bull, and is called eqro* by the RGmts [Greeks], who say it is a * jnoi-
Jkorse.' It is also called the 'Silk Bull,’asJS andjTalso signify silk.” The
word \/ or, more correctly, »Jt is, of course, the Turkish for black, in
Persian In Elliott's India, vol. ii., p. 266, the passage in question

is thus translated: "His [Subuktigln’s] father was called yauk [troop],
and in Turki they call te troop bahkam [on whose authority, I wonder ?] so that
the meaning of the name Kari-bakkam is black-troop.”

From this it will be seen that the translator has discarded altogether, Ix^
jla yu of MSS. 10 and 11, and Uy of the printed text, and has given the per¬
son’s Turkish res/name as the equivalent [the Persian equivalent, it must be sup¬
posed] of his Turkuh ttiek-Ttame •, so according to this theory means troop,
and ffA also means troop, but what becomes of the Persian translation Uy
&c., the translator sayeth not! Jau^, however, is Arabic for a party, a troop,
&c., but what ffa. may mean, remains to be proved. I have an idea,
however, from the manner in which the word is written. In one place, in ona of
the MSS., via —Baj-kam, that jiGa —Bab-kam—is an error of some early

copyist [but '^ and ^ are interchangeable] for Begh-kam, “a toolf,"

which word is used, but not commonly, in Persian, and probably is Turkish ;
and it is not impossible that the author quoted may have been under the
Impression that a Kh ita’l bull was the same beast assir- Gurg, a svolff and,
therefore, I am inclined to think that the correct interpretation is, that Sabuk-
Tigtn’s father was called in Turkish, the Black Wolf meaning a soldier
of [black being expressive of excess, &c.] excessive fierceness and daring.
This reading, as I have said before, is not certain ; but I do not think any thing
more intelligible can be made of it without BaihaVtV work to refer to ; but
that portion does not appear to be in existence.

* A few copies have [flamidi], which is incorrect.

fo THE TABAVAT*I*Vi|$IRL

T^n was a descendant of Yazdiiurd-i-Shahryar—^the last
of the sovereigns of Persia—and, that, at the time that Yaz-
dijurd was murdered in the mill in the territory of Marw,
which was during the Tdiilafat of the Lord of the Faithful,
'Usmln, the family and dependents of Yazdijurd fled before
the troops of Islam into Turkistan, and reached the frontier
district of NakhistSn * in that territory, and there took up
their residence, and intermarried with the people. After
two or three generations had passed away, they ' became
Turks; and their palaces are still standing in that coun¬
try*-

The pedigree of Sabuk-T/gin is given in the above
history after the manner in which it is here entered, in
order that it may come under the notice of the king of
the world *—May the Almighty perpetuate his sovereignty I
—and of such others, as may peruse this work, viz. :—Sabuk-
Tigtn, son of Huk-i-^ara Bah-kam, son of I^arah [l^ara?]
Arsal^, son of Karah [Kara .^] Mallat [or Millat], son of
^arS. Na’man, son of Ftruz-i-Bam-sinjan [.^], or Barsin-
jan [?]*, son of Yazdijurd-i-Shahryar. or Yazdijurd^ the king.

1 . AMlR-UL-GHAZl ». NA$IR>UD-DIN.UXXAH, SABUK-TIGIN.

Imam Abu-l-Fa;l-i-Baihakt states that, during the reign
of Abd-ul-Malik-i-Nuh, the Samanl, there was a merchant
named Na^r, the ^ajt [pilgrim], who purchased Sabuk-

* but in three copies and in one I a™ not satisfied that

this name is correct, still fire copies of the work agree in the reading above.
Both the I. O. L. MS. No. 1953, the R. A. S. MS., and the Petersburg
copy 57ar Abb. are minus another ni/ie words here, and the printed text is the
same. The place is not mentioned in Madlik wa Mamftlik or Astr-ul-BilSd.

r Their descendants doubtless.

* Another writer states (hat Rarii Ffrvkz, the fifth ancestor of Sabuk-Tigtn,
who was son of Yazdijurd, became ruined during the ShiU^t of ’UgmKn, left
his country, and retired into Turkistfin; and there his descendants continued
to dwell until 335 M., when Alb-Tigtn made an incursion into that country.
He carried off from thence three thousand captives, and among them was
Sabuk'Tigtn. Another author states that Alb-Tigtn purchased Sabuk-Tigtn
at Ntd^pQr, when stationed there in command of the SSmSnt forces. __

* “The king of the world,” here referred to by the author, is that shadow of
a monarch to whom he dedicated his work. It is a very slight specimen of his
slavish flattery of him, and of others.

> This name occurs in eight MSS., but none of them are very distinct: one
has Bar-sinjI, son of Parwtz, son of Yazdijurd.

* Q)}**t signifies a conqueror, ime who makes war upon infidels.

THE YAMiNtAH U¥ NASTY.

Tigln and brought him to Bukhara. Perceiving in his
countenance evident signs of capacity and energy, the
Amlr-i-]^ajib [Lord Chamberlain], Alb-Tigtn, purchased
him *. He accompanied his master into X'^hharistan, when
the government of that territory was entrusted to him;
and subsequently, when the government of Kh urasan * was
made over to Amir Alb-Tigin, Sabuk-Tigin attended him
thither also. After some time had passed away, Alb-Tigin,
through the vicissitudes of fortune, retired towards Ghaz nin,
and subdued the territory of Zawulistan, and wrested
Ghaznin out of the hands of Amir Abu-Bikr-i-Lawik *.

Eight years subsequently to these events Amir Alb-
Tigin died, and his son, Is-hak, succeeded to his father’s
authority. He entered into hostilities against Lawik, but
was defeated, and retired to Bukhara, to the court of Amir
Mansur, son of Nuh, Samani, and there continued until

* See note •, page 7a

* See under the reign of Man^Or, son of NQh> the eighth sovereign of the
SSmfot dynasty.

* “In the year 333 H., Alb-Tigin, the Turk, the slave of the Sftcptnt
dynasty, took Ghaznin. and Lawik, the Will [the word here signifies a
chief or sovereign, as he does not appear to have been subject to the S&minls]
of that territory, fled.” Nothingmore is mentioned respecting Alb-Tigin, in the
work from which I have extracted these occurrences, until 346 H. There had been
repeated changes in the government of Hirftt for some time past, and considerable
disorder had arisen therein. “ In 346 H.,” I find that “ Abfi ManfQr, so^ of
'Abd-ur-Razz£h> the Wall of Hiriit and its dependencies, gave up his appoint¬
ment, and withdrew to again, in consequence of which great agitation and
commotion arose at Hiriit.” On this becoming known to the SKmSnl court,
the 9 &jib, Alb-Tigtn, who appears from this to have administered the affairs
of Gh aznin since 333 H., was entrusted with the government. He sent to
Hirftt, as his deputy, Is-hftk*i*Tfthirl.: but he was very shortly removed, and
^asan, son of Rlbal, was sent to replace him. In 350 H. Abii-l-^asan-i-
Stmjlir was sent to govern Hiriit ; and, in the following year, having been
promoted to the rank of $&hib-ul-Jaisb [Commander-in-Chief of an army],
he proceeded to Nlshftpur. and was succeeded, at Hirftt, by Abtt-l-Hasan,
son of *Umro, Fftryftbl. -After he had held it four months the government
was bestowed upon fi^lhah, son of Muhammad, Nisft’i. In the following
year, “353 H., Alb-Tigin, the Turk-, died at Qkaznlit, and was succeeded in
the government by his son, Is-hftVi” subordinate, of course, to the Sftmftnt
sovereigns, although Mr. E. Thomas, in his paper “ On the Coins of the
Kings of Ghazni,” in Ro. As. Soc. Journal for 1859, styles them /h'ngj and
speaks of their reigns, when they were merely subordinate governors. The
most astonishing thing, however, is, how our author makes out that Alb-Tigin
died eigAt years after his seizure of Qbaznln. From 333 to 353 h. is a period
of fAirty years; but then he generally eschews dates. According to Fafih-t
and others, Alb-Tigin was bom in 367 11., and died in the year above-mentioned.

7a THE TABA¥AT-I.NA$IRL

that ruler directed that aid should be afibrded to hifZ4
when Is-ttalF came back again to fihaznln, and rq^ained
possession of it. After a year Is-ltl^^F died *> when Balk&>

* IS'tJUc sncceeded hi* £ulier in the government in 353 h., and died in 355 H.,
and so ruled for about four yeaia. Among the events ^ the year 353 H.,
Fa^ih-l mentions that “Amtr Is>hSlF> aon of Alb-Tigtn. attended Sabuk-
Tigtn, his father’s slave—who is mentioned for the first time in work—

fled lirom filvunntn, and jnoceeded to BuUlfirS, and obtiuned the investiture of
the government of that province from the Sfimfinl sovereign.” In the follow¬
ing year, 354 H., the same work states that “ Is-hSlF> *on of Alb-Tigtn, thd
Turk, the slave of the house of SfimSnt, returned to C^azntn again, and fou^t
against Lawtk [this name is also confirmed by other writers, and there is no
doubt of its correctness], who, previously, had been Wfill [sovereign or cbief]^
of Qltazntn, and had been ousted by Alb-Tigtn. When Is-hfilt retired to
Samr^and, Lawtk returned to j^azntn, but now that Is-^i)c had come back
again, Lawtk again fled.”

Mr. Thomas, in his paper just referred to^ trusting implicitly, it would seem,
to the I. O. L. MS. No. 1953, and the R. A. S. copy of our author’s work,
calls Amir, Abu Bikr-i-Lai^k, "tAt AmuM" In tnose two MSS. Amir, Abfi
Bikr, is left out altogether, but occurs in the other MSS., although some
have alyl al^rl and eiyi instead of al(y yet in a note Mr. Thomas says,—
*’/propou with but slight hesitation a rectification of the orthography to aiyi
or 'Lumghdn,' the Lampagte of classical writers," from a personal to a loea!
name! Into what mazes of error do not the “classical writers” draw their
disciples as regards Oriental history 1 See note E., Elliott’s India, voL ii.,
last par, which is quite to the point

On the death of Is-hSlt. BidkS-Tigtn, the slave of Alb-Tig^n, sncceeded to the
government of Qliazntn, by order of Amtr N&h> son of Nafr, the SXmfiiit
sovereign. Balkk-Tigln di^ in 362 H., after being governor eight yean. Mr.
Thomas, on this passage in our author, in which the latter says Balkfi-Tigtn
ruled ten yean, remarks: “Two copies [of the work], out of the three I have
at this moment the opportunity of consulting, give ten instead of two [yean];
the former, however, is a palpable error.” I wonder on which side the error
lies really t This is not all. In his remarks on the “ coin of ManfOr, son of
NSh. with the name of BalkS-Tigln under the symbol, on the obuersef Mr.
Thomas gives a translation of his Excellency, State Counsellor Von Dorn’s
description, and a woodcut of it, contained in the St. Petenbuig JoumaL
If the translation is correct, of which there can be but little doubt,
bis Excellency must have been somewhat in the dark respecting the
SSmants, and their connexion with Gh azntn. which formed part of their
dominions. What I refer to is this: “History mentions only the conquest
of Alp-Tigtn, but is silent in regard to the rule of the Sdmdnis in GhoMna,
We see from our coin that Balkd, or Bulki-Tagtn, in the year A.H. 359 was
chitf of the SdmJni party in this city. HL imme appears already on the
Balkh coins of A.H. 324. Subsequently he passed over to Alptegin's easueli}
became chamberlain under Abu Ish^k, and is said to have ascended the throne
after.the death of the latter in A.H. 365.” This is absurd. What sort of
history can it be that is silent in regard to the rule of “ the Shmhnts In Gh ax-
ntn,” when it formed an integral part of their empire ? Balkk-Tigfn, .in
3*4 H., was governor of the province of which BalUt was the seat of govern¬
ment, hence his name on the coin referred to.

THE VAMlNlAH DYNASTY.

73

TIgtn, who was the chief or commander of the Turkish
troops, was raised to the government. He was a just
and pious man, and one of the greatest warriors of his time.
He exercised the authority for a period of ten years, and
died, Sabuk-Tigin was in his service.

After the death of Amir Balka-Tig^n, Ptrey succeeded to
the authority He was a g^eat villain ; and a body of people
wrote from C^ aznln to Abu ’Ali-i-Lawtk, and invited him
to come there. Abu *Alt-i-Law!k acceded to their request,
ahd brought along with him the son of the Shah, or king,
of Kabul to assist him. When they reached the vicinity
of Charkh *. Sabuk-Tigin, with a body of live hundred
Turics, suddenly fell upon them, and defeated them, killed
a great number of their followers, took them captive also, and
slew them. He also captured ten elephants, and brought
them to Ghazntn-

Such a great success having been gained by Sabuk-
Tigtn, and all having become quite sated with the
villainies and misdeeds of Ptrey, with one accord, they
raised Sabuk-Tigin to the direction of affairs. On
Friday, the a7th of the month of Sha'ban. 366 H.*, Amtr

^ Our author is quite correct as to Ptrey, but gives no details or dates. I will
furnish them. "On the death of BalkS-Tigtn, in 363 h., Ptrey, the slave of
AlI>>Tigtn [as was his predecessor and successor also], obtained the govern*
ment. In the follovriiig year, 363 H., Ptrey, the Wilt of Gho-mtii, with the
help of SabidcTigtn, fought a battle with a body of infidels who had advanced
out of Hind for the purpose of seizing ftha^tn, overthrew them, and despoiled
them. This event is confirmed from other aniuds. In the year 367 H. Ptrey
was deposed firom the government [as our author records], and the government
passed to Sabuk-TIgtn.” He was ctmfirmed by the S i m i n t ruler, but soon
after, on the decline of their power, became independent in all things, except,
perhaps, in name.

The "Kitib,” or '"nrtUl-i'Yamtnt,’* which is considered to be a very
trustworthy and authentic history, contains, judging from Reynold’s version,
not one word about Sabuk'Tigtn having been Alb-Tigtn’s siavc, although
probably transferred as such to Balki-Tigln, atxl his son Is-^ik i ind makes
no mention of the government of Amtr Ptrey, although mlot over the
province of Ghazntn for just five years.

* A well known place situated a f^v miles from the right or east bank of
the Lohgar river on one of the routes between Kibul and fihazntn. AbQ4-
Fafl, the secretary, mentions in the A’tn-t-Akbart, that Charkh is so called
after a pious man, one Maulini-i-fiharkht.

• Fafih-t says this took place in 367 H., the same year that ’Izz-ud*
Daulah, Abft ManfOr-i-BakhtsdU^, Buwtah, was put to death at Baghdid.
See page 63. In the same year Sabuk-Tigtn appointed Ab&*l*’Abbls, Al-
Faf 1-i-Ahmad,' aon of Muhammad, Al-Isfarfitnl, his Wadr. He had acted

F

74

THE TABA9:AT.I.NA$IRL

Sabuk-Tigtn, with a scarlet canopy held over him, and
attended by a large following with standards, came down
from the citadel, and proceeded to the Jaml’ Masjid, or
Great Mosque, and the administration of the government
and the sovereignty of that province was Settled upon him.

Soon after, he put his forces in motion and marched
from Ghaznln towards the adjacent parts, and took posses¬
sion of the districts of Bust, Zamtn [district] of DSwar, the
Zamtn of l^usdar, and BSmtan, all X^kh^nstan, and QkGr '•

On the side of Hind, he overthrew Jai-p 3 l*, with numerous
elephants and a host of troops, and he rid the SSmant
family of Bugkra IQa^n of KSskghar, and marched to
Balkh, and sent back the Amir of Bu kh ara, to take re¬
possession of his throne.

During the time that Amir Sabuk-Tigtn held the
government, great deeds were performed; and he com¬
pletely put an end to the iniquitous heresy of the Ba^inlah
schismatics in Khurasan *.

in the uune office to Flyik-i-EhMah, end. after the letter’s defeat, Amir
Sebnk-Tigtn took him under his patronage. Wastr does not n e c es sa r ily mean
the minister of a tovertign prince onfy; and Sahuk.Tigln was not yet inde.
pendent

> The mode of spelling the word by its people, and on the authority of the
BurhIn-i'EStt’ snd other works.

* “ In 369 H., Jai-pSl, ’BldahSh’of Hmd, as he is termed, inarched an army
towards Gltasnln to attack Amir NZf >r*nd.Dtn, Sabuk-Tlgln ; but an accom¬
modation was come to, and Jai.pCl again retired.” This is quite a different affiUr
fiom that in which Sabuk-Tigln assisted Amir Plrey, mentioned in a previous
note. It must be remembered too, thatat this time, the country west of the Indns^
be t we en Safid-Koh west, and the Salt-Range on the east, and Hindii-Knili,
extending as far west as Ktbul, was still under Hinda rule. The AfgWns
had not exterkied northward of the river Kurmah [erroneously cal l ed the
Xumm and Koorum] at this time.

* Our author says nothing about the affidr of Bust in 370 H., or of Sabnk-

Tigtn’s raid <m the frontier districts of Hind in 376 B., when he carried off
many captives and much booty. In the same year he took posseasiao of the
territory of Knfdgr. In 378 H., Sabuk-Tigln again encountered Jai-pSl, king
of Hind, who was routed, and pursued by him. A peace was afterwards con¬
cluded, the terms being ^t ” Jai-jAl should cede unto Sabuk-Tigln feur of
the fvrfrestts of Jfind oh the side if Ghamidn. and one hundred elephants.” In
380 H., an occurrence took place, which few writers have noticed, namely,
the imprisonment of MahmM in the fortress of Ghasnln. by his fiuher’s orden^
where he renutined until the following year. In 38a h. Amir NQh, son of
Manfilr, SKmZnt, reached Hirlt, attended by Sabuk-Tigln, and m a r c hed
against Abh ’Alt-i-Stmjilr, whom they defeated. See page 48^ and note. In
384 H. Amir NOh conferred the government of upot Sabuk-Tigto 1

and in the same year Amir Nub defeated Aba-’Atfd-Stmjffir at NtlhkpQr. In

THB YAMlNlAH DYNASTY. 75

In the month of ShawwSl. 384 H., his son, Amtr
MalMnQd, was made captain-f^eneral of the forces of Khu rS.
sSn, and received the title of Saif-ud-Daulah, while Amtr
Sabuk-Tigtn himself received that of NS9ir-ud-Dln-ulI^ *.
Abu-l-Hasan-i-Stmjfir they defeated and repulsed, and
Shuras^ became cleared of their enemies.

Amtr Sabuk-Tigtn was a man of great valour and intre¬
pidity, just and pious, faithful, true to his word, not
avaricious of other men’s goods, kind and compassionate to
his people, and a discemer between right and wrong; and,
in fact, every sign and indication of all such virtues and
accomplishments as are desirable in kings and nobles, the
Almighty had amply endowed him with. He ruled for a
period of twenty years ; and was fifty-six years old when
he died. His decease took place on the frontier of Bal kh.
at the village of Madra-mQe *, in the year 387 H.

His sons were Ismail *, Na^r, MahmQd, ^usain, jj^asan,
and Yusuf.

IL SULTAN-UL-A'^AM, yamIn-ud-daulah, ni^Am-ud-dIn,

AB0-L-8L&SIM, MAHM0D.I.GHAZL SON OF SABUK-TIGlN ».

Sultan Mahmud-i-Ohazt was a great monarch, and was
the first among the sovereigns of Islam, who was styled

385 H. Sabiik^Hgln defeated AbQ ’Alt-i-Stmjar, and FZyift at Among

the erents of the year 387 h. recorded in Fafih-t, are the deaths of Amtr NOt^
son of Manf Or, Sfantot, and NSf ii’-nd.dtn, Sabnk.Tigtn, the MawU, or manu¬
mitted slave of the house of SSmant.

^ From the SSmSnt sovereigns, see page 47. Abh ’Alt, the ton of AbQ
^^asan-i-StmjOr was the person who was defeated : Abtt-l-^asan, the &ther,
had died picvionsly. See pages 45 and 48.

• This name is written in various ways Barmal-Madifie, MadrOe, Madrtart,
and, in one MS., Tinnas. In the trairslation of Yamtnt, p. 201, it is said that
a palace [I] was erected at the place where he died, and that it was named
Sahl-ibAd. says his tomb is at AfgbiKn-Silil, a place m en t i oned by

BIbar.

s IsmE’tl s ucc e e d e d his fidher ; but our author ignores him os a sovereipi,
whi^ is not correct, for Ism&’tl was only dethroned in 389 h., two years alter
the decease of his father, by Mahmad, who sent him to the fortress of Kalinjar,
"now krown as Taludbah,” according to Fofi^t. The same authority
states 1 " some say IstrA’b was confined in the fo rtr e ss of JOrjlrdn.’* Font-
katt states that Mo^nrOd succeeded in 388 H., and tibud IsaaftH was sent to a
fortress in 389 H.

’ Baifswt oonsiden MalpnOd to be die &st soveie i ga, of this dynasty.

F a

76 THE TABA«;AT-I.NA$1RL

Sultan * by the Court of the KhaUftha of Baglidad. He
was bora on the night of ’Astiura, the loth of the month
Muliarram, in the year 361 H.*, in the seventh year of the
government of Amtr Balka>Tigtn, at Qhaznln.

About one hour before his being ushered into the world,
Sabuk-Tigtn, his father, saw in a dream, that there began to
issue from the chafing-dish [used in those countries instead
of having fire-places in the wall, and placed in the centre of
the apartment] in his room, a tree, which began to grow to
such a height that the whole world began to be over¬
shadowed by it. When he awoke from his sleep, he began
to ponder in his mind what the interpretation of this
dream could be, when a bearer of good news presented
himself, bringing intelligence that the Almighty had been
pleased to give him a son. At this joyful announcement
Sabuk-Tigtn became overjoyed, and said to the mes¬
senger ! “ I have given him the name of Mahmud

The same night also upon which Mahmud was born, the
idol-temple of Wahand or Bihand [it may also be read
Wahind, or Bahind], which was situated on the confines of
BarshSlbur*, on the bank of the river Sind, split asunder.

* There is a diflTerent version given as to how and when Ma^mQd became

styled Sultan. When MahmOd took the fortress of Sijistan, by assault,

and was brought before him, the latter address^ Mahmiid by the title

of Sultan. This pleased MahmQd so mn<di that he gave Shalaf his life. The
titles bestowed upon MahmQd by the Shaltfah, and also bestowed, according
to Baiha^t, upon Mas’fld, were as follow : “ The right hand of the empire,
defender of orAodoxy, the guardian of the true religion and of the true believetB,
the regulator of the faith, the friend of the Lord of the Faithful.” See note*,
page 8a

* Fayih-f says he was bom cm that date in 360 h.

* The post. part, of the Arabic verb jim used as an adjective, signifying—
laudable, praised, worthy, &c.

* Out of the thirteen MSS. collated, four agree respecting the word
Bargliftbfir, and tkre* have Parilillwar. These are meant, probably, for the
present PeahSwar. Six cc^ies have Niahgbflr; and tix copies say that the
idol-temple in question was situated on the bank of the Sudarah [Sndhanh

is an old name of the Clungb, see the Sa^hatg—farther cm],
Aid a /fih copy has, the bank of the Ab-i-Shudah [caa]. ’Utbf PUtU]
quoted in Elliot’s India, vol. U. pp. 27 and 41, makes the ’*Slhdn” the Indus;
and in Reynolds’ versicm of the same work, the Indus is called the " Jlhdn I”
I need scarcely mention that the first is the Jaxartes, and the last the Ozus.
In the last named versicm, alsc), we have “ Wdmund ” for ” Waihind.” The
name of the idol-temple is written in three different ways in the various copies
of the original collated : —^which may be either Wabhind or Wabhand.

In six MSS. ; aifc—Bahind, or Bahand, or Bihand, in ttao; and —

THE YAMlNlAR DYNASTY.

T7

He was endowed with great virtues and vast abili>

Wahand, or Wahind, in twa. In mww oc^iea, the relative iS fonowa this
name, in tJkrw others we have instead ^ £" wbidr 1 have certainly
seen used for bnt very rarely. The foUoarina will show at a gjanoe what I
meaa^ ' The original sarteace^ in the very old MSS. in my possession [which
1 call Na i.l stands thus i—

I.

SJm«

(sic) Xiftj

aiUle

a.

$f

Aim

If

SAiftf

•1

3-

n

•r>-

..

ft

n

II

4*

$f

•jXn

ff t9

II

II

H

5-

tf

•A-

»»

If

II

II

6w

n

n

If

II

7.

ff

•Aim

»»

If

II

8.

»>

Aim

»•

II

>1

9-

»»

II

II

lOb

If

•JM

y.

ft

II

It.

ft

vJ ^ jy^j

If

If

la.

n

11

^Ai^P

II

*3-

n

ft

$9 n

II

tf

II

The author of the Jami’>ut-Tawartfcll, in his account of the river of Kabul and
its tributaries, taken from AbS Rihan, Al-BirOnt, says, that, having passed
T-»«"gh*", the united streams "join near the fort of DturQnah, or DarSntah [the
only place that can possibly l>e meant here is DarOntha— and fall

into the river of ITn-Nar and KhSt, or ['"I/* » I after whidi the

united waters meet together oppatU* the town [city] of Bsr sba wnr [<me MS.
compared has or and become a mighty river called by the name

of La’lr-add. The village of Manharab [|;lf^] lies on the tatt bank of the

united waters [another MS. has. Instead of this senteiKe^ the following :_

* eaOtd ty tkt name of Afa’bar, sigmfidng a ford or crossing p/ace,*] which fall
into'the Al>>i>Sind \Xk. front of [or near] the fort of YitQr, or YatGr [one MS.
has Slietab—belonging to the town [or city] of Gandhab [how
Gandhar—jUjuf can ever be mistaken fOT Eandahar—is inexplicable
to me], which place [^>*] is called Wahihd [or may be Dahind]."

This place—WahinS, or Dahind, or whatever it may be proved to be_is

that which our author refers to, no doubt, and is the same place, probably, as
mentiMied by Baiha%t in one or two places in his History, although he does
not mention it as being on the bank of the river Sindh. I have never seen it
written oo The printed text, edited by Morley, has Atnj and a MS. in
my possession has Some three years rince 1 carefully compared the

whole passage in the jSmi'-nt>TawSrt]Ej|, with the work of Al-FanJUcatt, the
Arabic ci^ of a portion of the former work, in the R. A. S.’s Library,
other wocb ; and I am unable to agree either with Sir H. Elliot's first reading
of 14 in Us Apvbndix p. ya, or Mr. Dowson’s new reading, in ElUct’s

78 THE TABA:t:AT.I.NA$IRl.

ties: and the same predominant star was in the as-

History or India, edited by him, voL L pp. 47 and 48; b<Nh of whidi differ^
widely from each other. Neither do I agree in t^ theory that Ohand
not Okind\ so many miles above the junction of the Nb>tb, or river of
KSbul with the Abil-Sind, or Indus, is the placx indicated, in fime of the
statement of Aba Rth2n, which is perfectly pldn in the passage referred to,
namely, that the river in question falls into the AbS-Sind, “ in Jrvnt of" or
opposite the fort of YitOr or Wahind.

If the western bank of the Indus vuere the right place to seardi for this spot,
so difficult to trace, there is Mah&ban —not mudi unlike JAft and

to look at] together with Oong, Behoh, and RSm>takiit, mentioned by Abbott
—although, from his mode of rendering Oriental words, it is impossible to tell
what the originals may be—in his '* Gradus ad Aomon,” in the Ben. As.
Journal for 1854, and ^jah Horsey’s castle, as well as ‘*Ohind.” There are
also extensive ruins of a temple on a hill called Takllt-i*Biht, about fifteen
miles north-east of the Kabul river’s junction with the Lan4aey Sind, and
some thirty miles north-east of Peshgu^. which I visited in 1849 [see my
account of PeshSwar, Bom. Geogr. Journal, vol. x., for 1851-2]. Can thb
be the idol-temple whidi fell when Mabmud was ushered into the world 7 In
the same vicinity, and within a few miles of each other, are “ Kgpir di Girt ”—
the Infidel’s Mount, and “Pratah Mingrah”—the Fallen Mingr, in Pushto,
which names bear a striking resemblance to Baihabt’s fortress of "Girl” or
" Girt,” and " Man-Minlrah but both the places I have mentioned are on
the western, not the eastern bank, and the last lies above Chand, which latter
name, in all probability, is not andent, but one of the many new designations
given to places in that vicinity by the Yusufzt Afghans, when they first con¬
quered those tracts on the Indus. I have made the early history of the Afg^ns
my especial study for a particular purpose, and I have never met with the
name of Wabhand, Wahind, Bahind, or Wahband in the histories containing
the account of thdr conquests in those parts.

Since the above was written, I have looked over voL il. of Elliot’s India,
and find that the author, at page 465, when referring to MabmOd’s fourteenth
expedition into India, says that Farig]|tah in his work, as well as the " T^'ba-
Vgt-i-Akbarl,” and " Kanzu-l-Mahpfir,” which latter I have not ex a mine d,
mention **the waters of Mir and KirSt" as falling into the' Kabul river, pre¬
cisely as I hswl read the same words in the passage ftom Al-BlrOnl; but the
editor, Mr. Dowson, still persists, as he says in a note to the same page, in
reading them "Nurokir&t.” Did he not condder that the seccmd j in the
words might be andt The desrah of NOr is mentioned by Bgbar,

and is w^ known stilL

To return to the subject of Wahind. From the passage in the Jgmi’-ut-
TaidUllji, and our author, "the fort belonging to the town or city of Gand-
hgr, which place is called Wahind or Bahind, on the banks of the Sind,
faring the junctu^ of the Ntl-Ab with the AU-Sind,” must be looked for
east of the Indus, near Attak-Bangras, in the vicinity of whitdi extensive
ruins of an ancient city are mentioned in the account of the building of the
former fortress in Akbar’s reign. Apollonius of Tyana, in his "Travels,” men¬
tions a lofty temple as situated outside the walls of Taxilas, a. few miles of the
Indus. [See Jour. R. A. S., voL xviii p. 76.] These mins were again
noticed in the writings of a Mubammadan traveller towards the dose of the
last century. However, under any drcumstances^ and in whatever m a nner we
may tcad these names, whidi want the vDwel-point% and are probably tncor.

THE YAMlNlAH DYNASTY. 79

Cendant'at his birth as appeared at the dawn of Isliun

Tcctly copied, tbe aitnetioii of the rivers, and the number mentioned, will not
agree with aritual facts. The Muha mm adan traveller I refer to, states, from
actual observation : “ The Kabul river, after flowing through the darah of
Mandror—called by the same name as the chief torvn of Larngih^—is joined,
to the north of that place, by the Tahkrt [ijLrQi], generally known as the river
of Lamgl^n ; and near the Imh or mountain of DurQntha those streams

are joined by the SurklL*rQd [Red-River], which then flow past Jal&labSd on
the east, and near the town of Kamah are joined by the Chiti^r or Cht tigl
[also called the Kamah], and thus united flow on towards Peshawar. On issuing
from the Knaihar mountains at Micbanf [not Michnt], the united streams
again separate into three branches, and thus \tiot united\ pass by Pegli&war—
which is some distance from the nearest branch—for some miles, and do not
unite again until just after receiving the Lan(}aey Sind and its tributaries at
Nisatah, after which the united waters fall into the Indus a little above, and
opposite Attak. ” The courses of rivers may alter in the lapse of centuries, in
a flat country, as they have in the Punjab, in some instances, but not in such a
mountainous tract as the Kabul and its tributaries flow through, on their way
to the Indus. I cannot but coincide with AbQ-1-Fafl, the secretary [but never
“minister*’] of Akbar, in his remarks upon the accounts of India, written by
early travellers, such as Al-Btrunt and others. He says, in the A’tn-i-
Aktort [I give the pith of his remarks merely], that " Fanakafi^ HSji%-Abrii,
attd others, ■wrote down all the nonsense that teas palmed off upon them;
and, therefore, what th^ state is contrary to facts, and not to be depended upon,
while other •writers have wilfully perverted thent. How cotdd it be.otkerwise,
when such persons hnew nothing of the languages of India, or of its people, or
their customst They could neither make investigations themsdves, nor could they
obtain efficient interpreters, or reliable information." See R. A. S.'s Journal,
voL iv. p. 356.

Farther investigation, since the above remarks were written, has, I think,
enabled me to throw some light upon the situation of what is Wahind

and Bahind, and as to its correct mime. The TSrtkll-i-Mir’at-i-JahSn Nnmk,
a general history hy Muhammad Bah&, contains the following respecting
Mahmihi’s two first expeditions against HindustSn. “ In 390 h., Mahmad
set out for Hindustan and captured the fortress of Baijantd or Baijuntd .

possibly Xovjt but this word is not quite certain], and again retired. In
Shawwai, 391 K., he again set out towards Hindiistan, and reached Pe sha war
with 10^000 horse, and defeated JiU'pai, who, with fifteen brothers and sons,
was taken captive. This took place on Saturday, 8th Muharram, 393 H.
Fivm thence, Mahmtld advanced to the fortress of [Bohindah], which
wiu the residence of Jai-pai; and he subdued that territory.’’ In a history of
the Rajahs of JamQ, said by its author, a Hindu, to have been compiled from
Hindfi annals, [Bathuujah] is said to have been Jai-pU’s capital and

place of residence, which MahmQd captured. Mtrza Mu ghal Beg, who, about
eighty-three years since, made a survey of great part of the Narth-West
Provinces between Dibit and the Sutlaj, the Punjab, and great part of Afghan,
istan, and the countries on the northern slopes of Hindu-Kush, in his account
of the Lakht jungle, says: “Bhatin^ah [iXaitl which is also called Whaj-
inijah [adua.] is the name of s territory, with a very ancient stronghold
bearing the same name, which was the capital of the dtahil [Jai^] tribe.
Lakht, son oh Jiindharab, of the Bhajt tribe, having been converted to tbe
Muhammadan faith, during an invasion Snitfin Mahmfid of filiazntn.

to THE TABA¥AT>-I.NA$IRI

itself*. Inthe year 387 IL\ Ma(tmud proceeded to BatU}*,and

aeceived the title <rf’ RlnS Lakbt, and he aad his tribe were removed thither.
Thejr found there some three hundred and fifty orsixty towns and vUlad^of oOn>
siderable sise^ some^th huge and fine bnildings} and began to make tnrosuis
intp the tracts adjacent, 'agaijist the infidels.” According to traditions quoted
by this author, which are also to be found in other works, there were formerly
two or three consideiable rivers in this jxow sandy tract of country. In ancient
tunes the Ghaghar flowed past Bhi^nir, and “fell into the Sind [Indus} on
the confines bf Jasalmtr. Ofte of th^ rivers is called the Sa 4 hilifi [see the
various readings of the original at the beguming of this note], which fidls into
the Ghaghar, and in its niiighbniirhnnil, at about five miles west^ is a sacred
pond or small lake, -risited by hundreds of thousands of persons, and there is
no other place accounted like unto It in sanctity.” There is a great deal more
about this dlstriot, but I have no space for it here. I think it very probable
that.what has beem called Wahind or Behind is no other than Bhatin 4 ah or
MHiatin^ah, which, written without the points—iJu.f< or fOJtj are much
the Same in appearance as the words in the various MSS. of‘«ur author’s text
and

As to some confusUm in the arrangement of Elliot’s IMdia, tending to dis¬
tract, which I have referred to above, I would mention, with respect to the
naipe “ Wahind,” that at p. 63, vol. i., Wahind ” is srid to be the capital of
K a ind a h g r [ri stands for ^ as well as k, and ^ndahfir in Af^tanistSn is always
with ill; in a note at p. 397, the *• river of Wahand or Wahind-Sigar ” is
mentian^; in vol. ,ii. p. 38, in the extract from Yamlnl, ” Waihind ” is said
to be « emtsiryi at pw 33, and other places, it is again called “the river of
Wahind; find at p. 444, “the river of Waihind or the Indm.*' Notwith¬
standing .all this, this identical passage in our author, after having been

revised and sundry long gaps filled up by the Editor,” is thus translated
[voL U. p. 369] :—“ On the same night that he [MalimQd] was bom, an
idol-temple in India, in the vicinity of Parshdwar, on the banks of the Sind,
fell down 11 ” There is nothing like giving a bold translation.

*. This last sentence is somewhat obscure in all the copies. It may be nuder-
also to mean that his appearance was propitious to the as cend a n cy of
Tsttm : does not mean “the greatest champion:”

* See note *, page 75, for date of accession.

* ^1** has been asentioned by more than one author, as the capital of
Sabuk-Tigtn’s and Mahmud’s dominions. In the same year wherein he over¬
come his brother (389 H.), Mahm&d, according to Fafih-t, fought a battle
against ’Abd-nl-Midik, son Nfih> Simfint, and the S&mint d}masty termi¬
nated. See page $3. His independency may be dated from that time.
In the same year, ArsaUn-i-Jifib fought an engagement with AbQ-l- y g sIm -i-
StmjOr, and compelled him to retire to Xnbas ; and Mahmiid made his brotherj
Amtr Nafr, the commander- of Us army [see page 51, npte *). In that same
yesur, likewise, he made BalUi the capital of his dominions ; and the fihaltfah,
Al-ljjllidlr B’iUab^ sent a robe of honour, with the titles of Yamtn-ud-
Danlali, and Amfn-nl-Millat Mahmiid also received the submission of the
Shir, as was the style of die rulers of CUm^istin [called by some

AbQ Nafr, son of the SUkV RKfillid, and of his sem, Sbfir, 'Aba Muhammad ;
•fwi riu. jjjiutbah was read for Mahmiid in that territory, and the coin im¬
pressed with his' name and titlea In 390 r. M ah mOd made a dash upon
NtflblipOr, which he took p oas es si on ot, and Bak-TOriln, the riave of the
Simint dynasty, fled; and in the same year Batfbuftjshr the uncle of Mahmiid,

THE YAMlNlAH DYNASTY. 8l

ascended the throne of sovereignty, and donned the robe
of honour which had been sent to him from the Dar-ul-
2 Q|ilafat. At this time the throne of the yha ltfahs was
adorned by the Lord of the Faithful, Al-I$^ir-B’illah.

When Sultan Mahmud ascended the throne of sove¬
reignty, his illustKous deeds became manifest unto all man-

was slain by pUiir, ■ son of Shalaf, son of Abmad, at Fuihanj. MabmSd
ntarched into Sijistfin afainst ^Qjalaf, who fled before him, and took shdter
within the walls of the fortress of which Mabm&d directed should be

invested. This is a different place to Oj:. For farther particulars respecting
Shalaf, whose doings appear so obscure [Jour. R. A. S., vol. xvii p. 147J,
see notes to Section XIV. Habmud does not appear to have established his
power in Ehur<«£n, for in 391 h., Amfr Abu Ibrihim Al-MunUfir—the last
of the SSmSnts, who is not'even mentioned by our author—aided by Shams*
ul-Ma’ilt i^^bQs, son of Waahtngh, who sent his sons Darfl [see page 51] and
Manufihihr, ddvanced with an army to recover Rai; but, having altered his
plans, Abil Ibrahim, and his.adherents, faced about, and marched on Nt sha .
pur, from which Na^r, Mahmud’s brother, again fled, and AbG Ibr&htm once
more gained possession of Nishapur. Na^r, who had retired to Hiifit, again
moved to recover it, aided by Arsalan-i-Ji^ib from ^us. .Abu Ibrahim
despatched his forces under Arsalan*i*BGIu and Abu-l-E^im-i-Stmjur to oppose
them ; but they were overthrown, and Abu Ibrihlm again retired from Ntahfl-
pGr, and took refiige, in JurjSn, with l^bfls. Eventually he reached Sarakhs,
and Amir Na$r marched against him and dtifcated him ; and he fled for refuge
to the tribe of Qhuzs. Na$r made prisoners of Abu-l-ESsim-i-StmjQr, and
YGz-Taah, the Hajib of AbG Ibrahim, who had previously put ArsaUin>UBSlG
to death for flying from Amir Nafr. In the following year, 392 H., Jai-i»l,
[which appears to be the title, not the actual name, of two or more princes], Bid-
ahsh of Hind, as he is called, was made captive by Mahitiud. “ He was'sold
for,” as the chronicler states, whose words I quote, or rather his ransom was fixed
at "200,000 gulden dinars, and 150 elephants ; and the necklace ti^en flnam
Jai-pfil was valued at another 200,000 golden dlnSrs. This battle took place
on Thursday, 8th of Muharram, 392 H., in sight of Bursbor of Hind.” Here
we might have expect^ to find " Wahind" or " fVaiand" mentioned.
Whether this is what is now called PeihGwar is somewhat doubtful, for up to the
time of Babar and Akbar, the latter city was called generally BagtSm, and is
seldom menliot>ed, except by more modem writers of the Farishtah cltiss. The
chronicler adds : " Jai-fAl, the Hindu, subsequently shaved his head, and
mounted a funeral pyre, and died ; for it is customary with Hindus, that any
BadshSh of theirs, wbo becomes a captive to 'Musalmans, should abdicate in
favour of another ruler. His son Tand-Pal [MS. but probably Jitaiil—

Anand'pKl—is meant], succeeded him as ruler of Hind.” In 393 H. the Shut»
bah was read for MahmGd in Sijistan, by EhalaTs own nobles, and bis titles
were impressed upon the coins. In the following year the fortress of
captured, and Tthalnf was made prisoner. The SulfSn kept the territory of
SiJistSn entirely for himself, but gave the district of JGzJSnSn to Ebalaf, who,
taking his family with him, left Sijistan altogether. Afterwards, however,
Sult&n MabmGd gave the government of SiJisOn to his own brother, Nafr ;
and the government ot that province was joined to the appointment of com*
mander of the forces [of EbutSsan],

8 a THE TABA^T.I.NA$ 1 RI.

kind within the pale of IslSm, when he converted so many
thousands [!] of idol-temples into masjids, and captured so
many of the cities of Hindustan, and overthrew and sub¬
dued its Raes« Jai-pal, who was the greatest of the Raes of
Hind, he made captive, and kept him [a prisoner] at Man-
Yaztd*, in ly^urasan, and commanded that he might be
ransomed for the sum of eighty dirams’. He led an army
to Nahrwalah of Gujarat, and brought away Manat*, the
idol, from Somnath, and had it broken into four parts, one
of which was cast before the entrance of the great masjid
at Ghazntn, the second before the gateway of the Sulj^an’s
palace*, and the third and fourth were sent to Makkah and
Madinah respectively.

Concerning this victorious expedition the poet ’Unfurl
composed a ]^a$idah*, or poem, two couplets of which are
here inserted:—

“ When the potent sovereign made the expedition to Somnath,
lie made the working of miracles his occupation.

He staked the Chess of dominion with a thousand kings :

Each king he check>mated, in a separate game.”

Out of the different occasions in which the Sultan’s
greatness showed itself pre-eminent, one occurred during
this expedition. When he retired from Somnath, and de¬
sired to lead back the army of Islam by way of the desert *,
to Sindh and Man^urah, out of Gujarat, he directed that
guides should be procured. A Hindu presented himself,

* Nearly every copy agrees in the name Man-Yaztd c-]. " Yazd ” is
not meant. One copy has ^

- 1 Sic in MSS., but I fancy (he word *' thousand ” must have been left out.
If not, Mahmud did not sA much value on his captive. See amount men¬
tioned in note*, preceding page.

^ One of three chief idols of the pagans of Makkah was named Maiflt.

* Some fragments of idols might still have been seen lying near the
entrance to the Suljan’s tomb a few years ago, and probably they are StiH
there.

* The first two lines are corrected from ’Abd-nl-l^dir-l-Budfiiinf. The
point of these lines lies principally on the play upon the terms in chess, lost in
translation.

* The Rinn or desert of Ka(^h. An author, quoting from the TaitUl-l*

Nafirt of BaihaVt, relates a remarkable circumstance, which occurred upon this
occasion : "On the Sultan’s return from.Somnath, one of his huntsmen killed
an enormoiis serpent or bqa-constrictor, which was skiimed, and found to be thirty
ells <gaz) in length and four in breadth. Baiha^t adds, ‘ Whoever doubts the
correctness of this statement, let him go 'to the citadel of Gharntn,. and see for
himself the skin in questioh, which is hung up like a canopy.’ ” ^

THE YAMlNlAH DYNASTY.

83

and offered to act as guide, and that sovereign, with the
army of Islam, proceeded on his way. After the army had
marched all night and next day, and the time had come
round for the troops to halt, although search was made for
water, none was any where to be found. The Sultan
directed that the Hindu guide should be brought before
him, and inquiries made from him. This was done, when
the Hindu g^ide replied to the Sultan, saying: “ I have
devoted my life for the idol Somnath, and I have led you
and your army into this desert, in any part of which water
is not to be found, in order that you may all perish.” The
Sultan commanded that the Hindu should be despatched
to hell, and that the troops should halt and take up their
quarters for the night. He then waited until night had set
in, after which he left the camp, and proceeded to some
distance from it, aside. Then, kneeling down, and with his
forehead to the ground, he prayed devoutly and fervently
unto the Most High for deliverance. After a watch* of
the night had passed, a mysterious light appeared in the
horizon, and the Sultan gave orders for the troops to be
put in motion, and to follow him in the" direction of the
light. When the day broke, the Almighty God had con¬
ducted the army of Islam to a place where there was water,
and all the Mu.salmans were delivered safely out of this
impending danger.

The Almighty had endowed that ruler with great power
of performing many miraculous and wondrous acts, such as
He has not bestowed since upon another sovereign, nor such
vast military resources, so large a number of troops, and un¬
bounded wealth. Sultan MahmOd possessed two thousand
five hundred elephants ; and his court was guarded by four
thousand Turkish slave-youths*, who, on days of public
audience, were stationed on the right and left of the throne,
—^two thousand of them with caps* ornamented with four
feathers, bearing golden maces, on the right hand, and the

* A period of three hours.

* The words used are WashaV signifies a good-looking

slave, and a beardless youth ; and has sometimes been u.sed to signify a slave-
girl. As these youths attained unto man’s estate and their beards began to grow,
they were attached to a separate corps, and placed occasionally under the
command of rulers of provinces.

» slirsignifying a Tartar cap'; a sort of mitre or tiara made from leather or
cloth or Such like fabric, and covered with brocade or cloth of gold.

84

THE 7ABA]^AT-I-NA$IR1.

Other two thousand, with caps adorned with two feathers,
bearing silver maces, on the left.

This monarch, by his manliness, his bravery and intre¬
pidity, his wisdom and foresight, and his prudent counsels
and wise measures, considerably extended the Muham¬
madan conquests in the east, and greatly increased the
dominion of Islam in that quarter. The whole of ’Ajam*,
Kh urasan and Khw arazm. Tabaristan, ’Irak, the territory
of Nimroz, Fars, the mountain districts of TuJdiar-

istan—all came under the control of his officers. The
Maliks, or rulers, of Turkistan paid him obedience and
acknowledged his superiority*. He threw a bridge over
the Jihiln, and marched his forces into Turin, and l^dr
Kha n had an interview with him, as had the Kha ns of the
Turks likewise ; and the Khakans of Turkistan came and
presented themselves before him, and tendered him their
allegiance*.

* That MahmQd niled '‘the whole*’ of *Ajam, and TabaristSn, is an exag¬
geration. Not one word is mentioned, by other writers of any authority, as
to his holding any part of Pars, and in ’IrSlf his sway was but partial over a
Ix>rtion.

1 The only notice of this contained in Fafih-t, during the whole period of
Mahmud’s reign, is in the following words:—“400H. Death of the son of
Surf, Malik of Qhur, who was taken prisoner in an encounter fought by SultSn
Mahmud, in Gbur. He sucked poison from a ring he had, and destroyed
himself. Some say it occurred in 401 H.”

■ In the year 387 H., the same in which Sabuk-Tigtn died, and two years
before Mahmud became ruler, Mamun, son of Muhammad Al-Fart^unf, the
■Walt, or ruler, of JurjEntah [also written GuigSnt:di], of SLwSrazm died, and
\ras succeeded by his son ’Alt; and, in this same year, ’Alt was married to a
daughter of Mahmud. ’Alt, Jiowever, died in 390 H., and was succeeded by
his brother, Abu- 1 -’AbUs, son of Miimun. He, in the following year, sent an
envoy—supposed to be the author so much depended upon by Sir H. EUiot,
end others, for his geographical knowledge of India—Abu RthSn, Al-BtrGnt,
to Mahmud, asking permission to marry the lady, his brother’s widow. This
was sanctioned by Mahmud, and Abu- 1 -’Abb&s married her.

* In 396 H., Sultan Mahmud sent an envoy to I-lak Shan, the Turk, son

of BufhrS TCba n [for now the last of the Samants had been put to death, as
alKady related], proposing that they should enter into an alliance, and that all
the territory this side [on the left bank] of the AmOtah [Oxus] should belong
to him, Mahmud, together with Shadirazm, and that all on the other side
tdiould appertain to i-lak Shibr, and that they should not interfere with or
molest each other’s territories. Baihaht says, writing in 451 h., that ^pulr
Xti4n at that p>eriod was called Bughrii Sih8n. It was in this stune yew that
MahmQd undertook the expiedition into HindfistSn, against Bht^ Rfte [alao
written \j ^.—Bajtril in Fafih-t« Bihr&e MirSt-l-JaUbi-nnint, \jn

—^Bihri by VahyK Rhan in his History, and RSjah Bahtiie by

THE VAmInIAH DYHASTY.

«S

At their request the son of S'aljuh> through who^ activity^
and boldness, too, the ^ole of the ShSi^Sns of the Turks
were reduced to a state of helplessness, was permitted to

Sanjan Rae in his woik. He was doubtless chief of the trlb» of Bttftr—

See also Elliot, Appendix to vol. ii., pages 34 and 439, wherein great con¬
fusion appedn to exist]. Bht^ Rae was slun, and the fortress of Bhftttah
near p. e. not far distant firom] MultZn was 4 aken. After this, the' Sultin
returned to Qhszntn, hut in tlve same year he undertook an expedition against
the Wftlt ot MultSn, Abu-l-Fath, who fled from that territory. Whilst Ma^'^
mOd was aboent in HindQstZh, in 397 H., t-lak Rban broke- the newly made
treaty of ail ian c e, and invaded ShurisSn. This made MahmOd return to
Qliamtn to make arrangements for marching against him, for i-lak SUUs had
penetrated as far-as Hiriit, which he took ; but, in the following year, Ma^nd
encountered him at Balkh, and compelled him to retire. Shalaf, the
ruler of SijtstSn, It was found, had been intriguing with him daring MahnaOd’s
absence, and had advised this invasion. On this account TChalttf was immured
in the fortress of Juzdez of yuhistan. In 401 h., MahmQd again advanced
into Hindtlst&n agtunst the fortress of Bhtm [also called Bhtm-nagar], the chief
of which wasiBhtm Narayan. There is no mention of any expedition under¬
taken in that qtiarter in Fafih-t, as contained in the Jami’-ut-TawartUi,
against NSrdtn ; but, in some works, an expedition against Nandanah, in
404 H., is mentioned In 407 h., Mahmud’s son-in-law, AbQ-l-’Abl^-i-
MSmOn, Fartghunt, ruler pf Juij&ntah of Khwarazm, was murdered by some
of his troops. Mahmfld went in person into ]^w 3 .razm, defeated the insur¬
gents, and put Ntil-Tigfn [called Alb-Tigln by Baiha|it], the ringleader, and
the murderers, to the sword, reduced that territory under his sway, and AltUn-
T%a]|, the great chamberlain, was entrusted with its government. 1-lak Rhsn
had died in Ma 4 ar-un-Nahr, in 403 H.; and in 408 H. Mahmud sought from
her uncle, TAchihr Sh^, who had succeeded him, the hand of I-lak’s daughter in
marriage for his son Mas’ud, whom he nominated as his heir and successor.
Tflfldil&n Rba n- himself diinl in the same yeaq and was succe^ed by his
brother, Bughra. Tigtn, entitled Arsal&n Shan. On that lady’sarrival shortly after
at Balkb, the capital was illuminated ; and soon after Mahm&d made over the
^vemment .of SkutSsKn to Mas’Sd, with Hirit as the seat of government,
having previously assethbled the whole of his Ulu^ or tribe, together, to take
oath erf* fealty to his son. [According to Baihaht, however, this lady had been
betrothed to Muhammad, Mas’ud’s brother, but the former, having been
iminured in a fortress by the latter, when he ascended the throne, Muhammad
could not iparry her, and Mas’ud did, with the consent of her brother; but
this was several years subsequent to the events above-mentiooed.]

After having disposed of these aflairs, MahmQd had leisure again to turn
bis attention to HindOstSn ; and I will here mention, as' briefly as possiUe,
his next expedition into that country, because the ruurative will greaHy differ
firoin the accounts of other writers. In the year 409 h. [see Elliot, voL u.
p. 4)60], Sult&n MahmQd undertook another expedition agupst the infidels of
Hind, and' overcame Hardab [vsy*—the “ Hardat ” of 'Abd-ut-^fidir-l-
Budfifint, the Htrdat of Matharah” of the Jlmi’-ut-Tawartkh] in that
region, at which /Aire—[my anthority So styles Hardab, but must mean his
capital, Mathnrah]—there were nearly a thousa nd palace^ of sUme, and an
idol-temple ot such extent and size^ that “if a thousand times a thoiuand
thousand dhnirx should be expended, and builders and woriunen of the greatest

86

THE TABAl[pAT-I.NA$IRi.

pass the Jihun with all his kindred and dependents, and
cross over into Khu rasan. The wisest and most sagacious
men of that time considered the granting of this permission

activity and enetgy should be employed for two hundred years, they could not com*
plete the like.” Within this great temple were five idols of gold, five^iur orellsin
height, and the eyes of one of them were formed of two rubles [J&mi’-ut-Tawk*
rtldl—“ of a dark red colour ”], which were valued at 50,000 dindrt of gold.
The eyes of another were formed of two sapphires, of the weight of four
hundred miskah ! [600 mutdlx^ 1 ter'zsi lb. 13 oz.] the immense value of
which could not be computed. From the lower extremities of one of the
idols, pure gold of the weight of 4400 miskSls was obtained. Besides these
great idols, there were two hundred others of silver, in the temple^ the whole
of which were broken up ; and the temple itself was overthrown, and set on
fire. [Compare with Elliot, vol. ii. pp. 44, 45.] After this finnan) on the Gan^
and other places, were captured, the detaib of which events are too long for inser¬
tion here ; but among them is mentioned NSrdtn, the fortress of Bibnah” [per¬
haps the place called Bhiwan or Bahiwan by some authors] called Manj, Ast,
and other places. From the idol-temple of the first named, a stone tablet
was brought, on which was written that the temple hsul been founded forty
thousand years before. Jai-pSl of ^nnauj fled across the Gang, on the bank of
which were ten thousand idol-temples in seven fortresses. At the capture of Ast,
Chand-pSl Bhud, the sovereign of that part, was slain. In 410 H. Ma^m&d
again entered Hindustan, *' and was engaged [detained] therein for a period of
four yeart ” [J 4 during which time many conquests were

made. In 411 H. MatimQd became greatly incensed against his brother Amtr
Nasr, who had been acting improperly and carelessly in his duty in com¬
mand of his troops, being constantly engaged in wine-bibbing and pleasure,
and, by his conduct, causing relaxation in discipline, “ for, when the forces were
about to march, his followers were generally found to be in the IdzSrs, instead
of present at their posts ; and great excesses were committed by them.” Ma]^-
mud sent Ehwajah-i-’Amid, Abu Na^r-i-MislikSn, Al-Zawzant, to him about
this misconduct. Nafr’s reply was so becoming that MahmGd passed' it over,
at the same time saying to the Khwajah : “ My brother Nafr is a very prudent
and sagacious man.” In 412 H., Tasdar yJuJ [Naro xtl J^-pal, ruler of
Hind [see Elliot, vol. iL p. 12], was slain, and Bhtm-pal, his son, succeeded
to his sovereignity. In 414 H., SultSn Mahmud came to an accommodation,
in a distant part [^'] of Hind with Bedi- [Nanda, in other works], on the
latter’s presenting 150 elephants, after which he returned to Gh aaitn, and in
the same )reaT made a raid into the mountains inhabited by the AfgbaniHn
[sic in MS.], plundered them, and carried off much booty. This is the first
time they are mentioned in the history from which I have taken these accounts.
In 416 H. Mahmud made another raid upon them from Bal]|lt, and fell upon
them at night. In this same year, Jaghar Beg-i-Abu SuUmin-i-£Kl’&d, son of
Tughril Beg, son of Mtka’il, the Saljuk, rose, and entered Kh warazm; and Bhtm-
pal also died. In 417 H. the expedition against Somnath was undertaken, and
a farther portion of Hind was subdued ; some by treaty and agreement to pay
the jaziah or capitation tax, some by force of arms and plunder of the
country, and making captives of the people, and some by the people becoming
' converts to Islam. In 419 H. MahmBd proceeded into Miwar-un-Nahr, and
bad an interview with ^^adr Kha n, sovereign of TurkistSn, and the treaty for¬
merly existing between them was renewed and confirmed, on the agreement

THE YAMlNlAH DYNASTY.

87

a grave error in the Suite’s policy; for they perceived
therein danger to the empire of his sons and descendants.

Sultan Mat^mud entered ’Ira^f: and subdued that terri¬
tory, and purposed proceeding to the Court of Baghdad
to pay his respects *; but, on the receipt of a mandate to
the contrary from the Lord of the Faithful, he retired, and

that a portion of M 9 .war-un-Nahr should be held by Malun&d, and some be
incorporated with ]^adr Shan’s dominions ; and a fresh treaty was written oat
upon these terms, and duly signed. On his way back, MahmOd granted an
audience unto IsrS’ll, son of Beghu, son of SaljulF, son of LulpnSn, and
brought him along with him. After a time Isia’ll was immured within the
fortress of KZlinjar, also called Talwarah, where he died. In 420 H. Mahn^d
slew [slain in battle with Mahmud] Majd-ud-Daulah, Buwtah, and acquired
sway over ’Ii 3 h [a portion], and overthrew that branch of the Buwtah dynasty ;
and was added to the dominions previously conferred upon Mas’ud. “ On
Thursday, the 14th of Rabt’-uj'S^li 431 H. [a.d. 1030, about the middle of
April], Sultan Mahmud died, and was buried in the Ftruzt BSg^i, or garden, of
Gh axntn. aft^ he had reigned thirty-three years. Some say he died in
420 H.” These extracts were taken originally from the work entitled
“ Mahamat of the’Amid Abu Najr,” written by the ’Amtd [>»■»—nar Ahmad]
AbO-l-Tafl, Al-Baihahl, so called from Baihah his birth-place, a small town in
ZawulistSn, also called Muhir.

There are ipany materials for a-complete history of this reign which, as
regards India, is the most important one. Our author’s account is, to use the
words of Sir H. Elliot, "too curt;” and I have been compelled to nudce
these notes much longer than I liked. Another reason, for my comparative
minuteness, was, that the accounts of this reign, in most authors, are confused
and erroneous, particularly in writers of modem times. As in other cases, the
“classical” writers, and the old geographers, referred to by Ahu-I-Fafl, appear
to have led their votaries astray ; and the names of persons and places are as
diverse and difierent as the authors and translators themselves. Elliot’s work
contains a large amount of most valuable materials,-but the mode of arrange¬
ment tends rather to confuse, as I have previously pointed out. Names of
persons aitd places have been introduced from modem translations of works,
instead of from the originals, where possible. Who would think of appealing
to Dow or the like for the correct reading i>f proper names ? For example :
in note at page 19, vol. ii., wherein S, de Sacy is quoted, who says that Dow
has “Abistagi, and Subuktagi for Alpt^hin and Sibekteghin^' his oam
blunder is far worse than Dow’s, for neither of the words contains any g]x in
it. See note page 58. In the extract from ’U];bi, page 20, where men¬
tion is made of the ** fountain in one of the ravines i>f a very lofty mountain
called the 'Ukba Ghuzak ['U];bah——means a pass\, into which if any
filth is thrown storms arise," which is quite correct, Dow, in his “ Hindostan,”
page 27, interprets it, “ if a small quantity of a certain ifn/^should be thrown,”
&C. Reynolds, in his version of the Kit 3 .b-i-Yamtnt, has made terrible work
of the proper names, which are written all sorts of wa}rs. . He has Simjouri,
Sinjdr, and Simjdr for one person ; Basti and Bosti ; Muudd-Addowlat and
Muwayyad-Addowlat, and the like, in scores of places.

* Not mentioned in other authors, and very doubtful.

88 tHE 7ABA^AT-1-NA$IRL

returned to Ghazntn, where he died at the age of sixty-one,
after a reign of thirty-three years, in 4*1 H.*

His sons were Muhammad, Na^r, Mas’ud, Sultman*,
Isma’il, 'Abd-ur-Rashid, styled ’Izz-ud-DauIah, Amtr of
^azntn, and Ibrahim, which latter had a son named
Sultman,

III. AMIR MUHAMMAD*, SON OF MAHMOD.

JalM-ud-Daulah wa-ud-Din*, Muhammad, was a learned
and virtuous-minded prince ; and they recite [upon his
authority a great number of poems in the Arabic lan¬
guage.

When his father, Sultan Mahmud, died, his brother,
Mas’ud, was in ’Irah and the great nobles and chiefs of

* For the precise date of his-decease, see note*, preceding page. Among the
different coins struck in Matimud’s reign one bore the following inscription :—
“The right hand of the empire, Matunud Sultan, son of Na^ir-ud-Dtn, Sabuk>
Tigtn, Breaker of Idols.” This coin appears to have been struck at Lahor,
in the seventh year of his reign. The following territories are said to have
been included in his empire :—Qliazntn, Zf bulistan, KhurSsan, Khwara^m,
fUigghaiiian 7 abaristan, Sipahan [Isfahan], Kabul as far as Euuuiuj [sic in
MSS.], the country around Kalinjar, Mult&n as far as Nahrwalah of Gujarat,
Somnath, the territory lying on the sea-coast of ’Umman, Kufdar, Sind as far
as StwastSn bordering on Kirman, Kij, and MakrSn. His authority in a good
many of these must have been very nominaL

* In two MSS. the name of Mabmud occurs in place of SulfmSn, but the
latter seems to be correct.

* Most authors place Mas’ud before his brother Muhammad, and only con¬
sider the latter’s reign to have commenced after Mas’ud had been dethron^ and
imprisoned in 432 H.

* Other writers state that his title was Jalal-ud-Daulah and Jalal-ul-Millat.
Guctdah says ’Im 2 d-ud-Daulah vras his title. His coins have Jalal-ud-Daulah,
and JamSl-^-Millat.

* He was an authority with respect to the text of several Arabic poems. In
poems like the Mu’allahS.t, for example, the texts furnished by various
philologists differ considerably from each other. The original words are
aid'll,-,

J***' UJ J*

* Mas’ad was, of course, in ’Ir 3 h, as he held the government of all the
western parts of his father’s empire. He appears to have been at HamadSn—-
but one author, at least, says at I^fahfin—when his fathers death took place.
See note * at page 87. Immediately on the decease of Malhnbd, the HOjib,
’Alt Shweal^wand, who was a relative the late SultBn, and the ^jib,
Bak-Tag]idt, who was commander of the M&mlQks of the palace, entered into
a compact ** that they would act in concert with, and do nothing contrary to
each other, but act in harmony in whatever might occur, and carefully hold the
dargah or palace-untU such tliM as one of the late Snltin’s sons should ascend

THE YAMlNlAH DYNASTY.

89

the late Sultcln’s court, by mutual accord, raised Sultan
Muhammad to the throne of Ghaznln in the year 4*1 H.
He was, however, a man of mild and unaspiring tempera¬
ment, and possessed neither sufficient resolution of heart,
nor decision of character, to govern the kingdom. A party,
who were favourably inclined towards Mas’ud, sent com¬
munications to him in ’Irah ”, upon which he assembled the
troops of ’Irah and Kh urasan, with the determination of
proceeding to Gh aznin ; and he marched from ’Irah in that
direction.

When the news of his coming, and his intentions, reached
Gh azntn. Muhammad caused his forces to be got in readi¬
ness, and set out with the purpose of resisting his brother;
and 'All l^urbat* was the Hajib-i-Buzurg [Great Cham¬
berlain], and the commander of his army.

When the forces reached Tigtn-abad, information of the
advance of Mas’ud having reached the camp of Muhammad,

the throne, when they would deliver it up, with the country [sic], into his
hands.” This compact was entered into by those officers, in the presence of,
and with the advice, approval, and concurrence of the ’Amid [mt “ Ahmad'T
Aba Nafr-i-MiahkSn, the minuter of the late Sultin.

0 Fa^ih-l says, that in the same year. 421 H., through the endeavours and
efforts of the lUjib, ’AH Kb weshawand. and Yusuf, son of Sabuk>Tigtn, brother
of'the late Sullen, Muhammad was confined within the walls of the citadel of
Tigtn-abad, and they awaited the arrival of Suljan Mas’ud, The Ta^pkirat-ul-
Muluk calls the first mentioned person ’Alt, son of I-yal-Arsalan, a relative of
the late Sultan Mahmud ; and says that Muhammad made his uncle [cousin 7 ]
Ya’hub, son of Yusuf, commander of his forces, and Sh^jah AbU Sahl [not
“ Suhal ”], his minister ; but, that a strong party were inclined to his brother
Mas’ud. Accordingly, Amtr lySz, with the GhuHims, or slaves—the regular
troops or guards as they may be termed—combined to espouse bis cause,
entered the rqyal stables, mounted the best horses therein, and set out to join
Mas’ad, who was then at Isfahan. They joined him at NtlhSpar on his
advance towards Gha zntn by way of Hlrit. On this Muhammad, with all his
followers, set out towards Hiriit in order to submit to his brother. Other
writers differ greatly from our author, on very good grounds, in their accounts
of his reign. Mas’ad is said to have written to his brother to say that he had
no intention or desire to interfere with his sovereignty over the dominions—the
eastern parts of the empire—left him by their father’s will, but that it was
absolutely necessary that his, Mas’ud’s, name should be first in the Shutbah.
Muhammad replied in a surly manner. Mas’ad’s partisans then seized Mu¬
hammad, as above related ; and it is farther asserted that Muhammad had not,
as yet, been blinded by them, but that he was deprived of his sight by order of
Mas’Od.

* ’Alt h^urbat and ’Alt EhweshZwand refer to one and the same person.
h:urbat “kindred,” “afltoity,” and ShweahSwand, “a kinsman,*

“ a relative.” This is the ’Alt Igraztb of BaihaVt.

G

90

THE TABA?AT.I.NA§IRI.

they seized his person, deprived him of his sight, and placed
him in confinement. After this act 'Alt ^urbat marched
the troops towards Hirat, in order to meet Sultan Mas’ud ;
and, having arrived within one stage of that place, he pro¬
ceeded to present himself before the Sulj^. Mas’ud gave
’ orders to seize him, and Muhammad’s whole army was
plundered' and despoiled.

On this occasion his reign extended to a period of seven
months. Subsequently, when Sultan Mas’ud, the Martyr,
became the victim of misfortune at Marigalah *, Sultan
Muhammad, although he had been deprived of his sight,
was brought forth and placed upon the throne, and he
brought the army from thence back towards Ghaznin.

Sultan Mawdud, the son of Mas’ud, marched out of
Ghaznin *, with the determination to take revenge upon his
uncle for his father’s death, overthrew him in the battle
[which ensued], and put to death his uncle Muhammad with
all his offspring*. Muhammad, on the second occasion,
exercised sovereignty for a period of four months. His
martyrdom* took place in the year 432 ii.; and his age
was forty-five years.

* In Elliot’s “ History of India,” edited by Professor Dowson of the Staff

College, the latter is rather bitter [vol. il., pref. ix], against the bad translation
of extracts from our author, mode for Sir H. Elliot, for his Work, and, in
several places, cries out against this kind of assistance. I doubt very much,
however, whether any "officer,” with even a prcutical smattering of Persian or
’UrdO, would have translated dtjiJT I, , 1 ^—"Ordered his whole

foxK/t to be destroyed." does not mean "to destroy.” Mr. Dowson

also translates this passage jS cUd-—" When

Mas’fid was killed aX Mirikala but, as in the case aiMve, uilj does not
mean "killed." His own words disprove his own translation, for, two pages
ivther on, comes the passage, " but in Mirfkala his Turk! and Hindi slaves
revolted, took kimprisoner," &c.

* See note * at page 95.

* See note • at page 96.

* The Tafkirat-ul-Muluk states that all were put to death by Mawdud,
except one son, ’Abd-ur>Rabfni by name. " Amtr Mawdad forbade that he
should be injured, because he had been informed that, at the time of the
murder of hb father, Mas’ud, one of ’Abd-ur-Rahtm’s brothers, out of inso>
lence, had plucked the diadem which Mas’ud wore from that gallant prince’s
head, blit ’Abd-ur-Rahfm took it from his brother, and replaced it on the brow
of Mas’Qd again, and severely rebuked hb brother for what he had done. ”

* For particulars see reign of Mawdud, and notes. Hb reign is said to have
extended over a period of nine monthsL The word signifying martyr,
also means one who dies for a cause which he thinks just; and any Muham¬
madan killed in battle b so called.

THE YAMlNlAH DYNASTY. 91

riis sons were 'Abd-ur-Ratiman, ’Abd-ur>Ratitin, and
Abmad.

IV. SULJAN NA§lR.OD.DiN U’LLAH*, MAS’OD, THE MARTYR.

Sul(an Mas'ud, the Martyr, bore the title of Nasir-ud-Dtn
U’llah, and his 'surname was Abu Mas’ud. His birth, and
that of his brother, Sultan Muhammad, took place on the
same day 7 . Sultan Mas’ud assumed the sovereigfnty in
the year 422 H.® He was generous and munificent to so
great a degree that they called him a second Kha llfah ’Alt
—may God reward him!—and in valour and prowess he
was a second Rusta{n. No man could lift his mace * with
one hand from the ground ; and no iron tai^et used to stay
his arrow*. His father, the Sultan, used to be envious of him,
and constantly treated him with harshness and severity*, to
such degree that he preferred a request to the court of
Baghdad, that the name and title of Muhammad should
have precedence in the Kh utbah over those of his brother
Mas’ud.

• Other writers style him N59ir-ud-Daulah, and Najir-ud-Dtn. The Jimi’-
ut'TawiUfkll gives him the title of Najir-ud-dln U’llah, wa Mu’tn'i>Shaltfah
U’llah} but Baiha^f, his biographer, styles him “Shihib-ud-Daulah, and
]^utb-ul-Millat Abt Sa’td-i-Mas’ud.”

1 It does not follow that they were twins.

* He ascended the throne of Gh aznfn. at Hii^t, on the 1st of Jam 3 dt-ul-
Awwal, 422 H., soon after which he gave orders to put the ^ajib, ’All
Rhweshawand. and his brother Mangtrak, to death, and confiscated all their
property. The Muntakhab-ut-Tawarlkh agrees in this statement, and adds
farther, that.’Alt Shweabawand, the H&jib, had taken an active part in raisii^
Mubanunad to the throne, and had subsequenUy acted poAdiously towards
him.

* Mr. E. Thomas, in his numismatic “ Chroiucles of the Pathiln kings of

Delhi,” asserts[p. 79I with reflect to a ctan of the Turkish slave-king, I-yal-
timiih, that the mace is “the special weapon of the great MahmAd.” The
statement is erroneous, as-shown in the text. The mace was, by no means,
an iiiifnmmon weapon in those days. Sec also under reign of Sul^ Tugjiril,
son of Arsal&n last reign of Section Xll.

» Mr. Dowson translates this passage [in the original—^ > j' J

*>]_“ and even an elephant could not stand before him. ” The word here

used ngnifies a plate of iron placed on a post used for tilting at, and as a butt
fur arrows.

• Mas’Gd, on one occasion, when writing to his envoy in Turkist&n, men*
tions his father’s having once ordered him back from Hirat, when ther e as
governor, and sent him to MultSn, where he was kept in durance, but that he
was never consdered in any other light than his father’s heir.

G 2

9*

THE TABA¥AT-I-NA$IRL

Khwaiah Abu Nasr-i-Mishlcan * says: " When the [Kha-
tifah’s] letters patent were being read out in the audience
hall of Sulj^n Mabmud, a weight came over the hearts of
the great nobles and chiefs, as well as my own, because the
marks of majesty and nobility of mind were more promi¬
nently impressed upon the brow of Mas'ud. When Suljtan
Mas’ud came out from his father’s presence, I, Abu Na^r-i-
Mishkan, went out after him, and I said: ' O Prince, a
heavy load has overcome the hearts of us, your servants, on
account of the reversal of your august title in the mandate
of the Kha lifah/ Mas’ud replied : ‘ Do not you be grieved.
Have you not heard that “ the sword is a truer authority
than any writing ? ” ’ and commanded me to go back again.

By the time that I returned to the audience-chamber
informants had already, without loss of time, acquainted the
Sul$an of this obsequiousness of mine, and he summoned
me before him. When I came into the presence of Sultan
Mahmud, he demanded, saying, ‘ Wherefore didst thou go
out after Mas’ud, and what wast thou speaking about ?’

I related all that occurred without withholding any thing,
for, had I concealed any thing, my life would have been in
danger. The Sultan said : ‘ I am aware that, in every
respect, Mas’Od excels Muhammad, and that after my time
the sovereignty will fall into the possession of Mas’ud
and I use so much ceremony now that this poor Muhammad
may, during my lifetime, experience a little honour and

* Ivlas’ud, as soon as he assumed the sovereignty, appointed this same
person—whose proper name is ShwSjah-i-’Amfd, Abu Najr-i-MiglihSn, Al-
Zawzfuit—his confidant and secretary, which was the same office as he had
held under the late Sultan Mahmud ; and TUir, the Dabtr [secretary], who
bad previously held that office, was removed. In 423 H., Hasnak, who bore
the title of Sh^iJdl-ul-Shatfr [great, honourable, &c.], who had been Waztr
to Sultfin Matuniid, and had also held the same office under Muhammad, was
gibbet^ by order of Mas’ud, because he had been the most active in depriving
him of the throne. He had, in all probability, influenced Mahmud in his
harsh treatment of Mas’ud. In 426 h. Mas’ud ordered Shwajah.i-FSfil,
Ahmad, son of ^^asan, Al>Maimandl [from his native place, Maimand, a
small town of G-ha zntnT. who had been long kept in prison by his late father,
to be set at liberty, after which Mas’Qd made him his 'Waztr. It was on this
occasion that be drew up his celebrated Mua;afat, or stipulations on his duties,
to be observed between his sovereign and himself, and which each of them
swore to observe.

4 Our author does not appear to have known that MahmQd, his father, had
declared Mas’Qd his heir, and made the whole of his u/tlr or tribe swear
all^liance to him in 408 h. See note *, p. 85.

THE VAMINLA.H DYNASTY.

93

g^rati/ication, which, after I am gone, will not be left to
him.' The mercy of God be upon them ! "

The l^wajah, Abu Nasr-i-Mishkan. says, " In this occur¬
rence two things astonished me: one was the answer of
Mas’ud to me, spoken with such wisdom and discern¬
ment, and the second, the greatness of mind, and the
perfect supervision of Mahmud, that such a trivial act of
attachment could not escape him.”

When Mahmud subdued Trah he bestowed the throne of
that territory upon Mas’ud ; and, previous to that event, the
city of Hirat, and Kh urasan, had been ruled in Mas’ud’s
name*. When he ascended the throne of Safahan*, he
seized the territory of Rai, Kazwin, and Hamadan, and the
country of Taram^, all which he conquered, and he likewise
overcame the Dilaman*. On several occasions he donned
robes of honour conferred upon him by the Court of the
Kh alifahs. After the decease of his father, Mahmud, he
came to Ghaznin. and took the government of his father’s
dominions into his own hands. Several times he led armies
into Hindustan*, and carried on holy wars as by law en¬
joined. On another occasion* he marched into Tabaristan

* See note •, p. 85.

* IffatiSn or $af*han.

7 lUram is in Lar, or Laristan, a province of Persia.

* Mas'iitl, in 424 H., wrested Kinnan from the Buwiah dynasty, who had
long since declined ; and sent Ahmad, son of ’Alt, son of Nush-Tigtn, thither
as governor. This, however, could have been temporary on^y, for in 433 h.,
aAer Mas’Qd’s death, Eara-Arsalan Beg, son of Jaghar Beg, wrested lUrman
out of the hands of Bahram, son of 'Alt, the governor on the part of the
Dtalamah sovereign, Abu Kalinjar, son of SuItan-ud-Daulah, son of B&hZ-ud*
J 3 aulah, son of ’Izz-ud-Daulah, son of Rukn-ud-Daulah. See note ' to page
66. After this, eleven princes of the race of Saljuh reigned in KinnSn.

* In the year 772 H., Sulj^n Firfiz, Tughluh, was encainp>ed near a place

named Zafar-abad, on his return from Bang^. This was before he gave orders
to found Junpftr [vuL Jounpoor]. ** At this place were the ruins of several
idol-temples, destroyed by Sultan Mas’ud, the Victorious, during one of his
campaigns in HindGstan. A fort there still retains [i. e. when the author, from '
whom the extract is taken, wrote] the name of Karar-kot, from Kar&r-Blr, a
demon killed by RSjah RSm Chand, in the TreUi Jug.” If it had not been
stated that Mas’Gd destroyed these temples, I shoultT be inclined to think this-
must refer to MuS’Gd-i-Kartm, only he sent his and did not make a

campaign in India in person, that I am aware of. ' Baiha]^! mentions nothing
more than the expedition against HSnst, in his work. Our author does not
mention his authority for the statement that Mas’ud led armies into India
upon several occasions.

* Not “twice."

94

THE 7ABA^T-I.NA$IRI.

and Mazandaran; and, at the end of his reign, the SaljQl^s
rose against him*. On three several occasions he overthrew
them in battle within the confines of Marw and Sar akh s; but,
in the end, since it was the Divine will that the country
of Khurasan should pass unto the race of Salju^, he
encountered them in battle in Dae-^an [Tal-^an]*, and for

* IsrS’tl-i-Beghu, son of Sultman, son of SaljuV, who had been immured

within the walls of the fortress of Kalinjar, died there in 426 H. In the same
year, Jocjiar Beg, or Jagbart B^, as he is also called [si^ —a name

which most oriental writers, and all English writers but one, have, most
erroneously, supposed to be ‘'Ja’far” Beg—son of Abu Sulimiln-i-DS'ud, son
of Mik&’il, son of Saljulp, son of Lul^man, rose, and took up his quarters at
Marw. In the following year, Mas’ud made all those persons who had
received grants or presents from his brother, Muhammad/ refund them. This
was done quite against the urgent remonstrances of his Waztr. The sum pro*
duced is said to have amounted to eighty times a thousand thousand of diravis.
In 429 H., Beg, son of Mfka’il, son of SaljuV, assumed sovereignty at

Nfghapur, and from that date their dynasty commenced.

* This battle was fought in 431 H., but some writers differ as to 430, 431,
and 432 H. The scene of the encounter is said to have been “the desert tract
between Marw and Sarakhs, three marches from the former, near the fort of
DSndankid of Marw,” which name is sometimes written IHndanVan, Dfdan*
kan, and in other ways. It occurs, wilh a slight variation, in the Masilik wa
Mamalik in one place, but it is correctly called Tal-kSn in another ; and also
occurs in Ibn ^aukal, in Baibakt, Y^fa’t, Guztdah, Jami’-ut-Tawdrtkh, Lubb*
ut'Tawaiikh, and the works of some other writers who copy from them, the
only difference in writing the words being iglUaia——aUioita—jUoib—

—and the like. It is the ** Dandanekan ” of Abu*l*Fida [Geo. Reiske.
P> 345 ]i who describes it as a small town of Khu^san celebrated for its cotton
manufactures.

These names are however mere errors for which famous place,

and T^-kan of Tukharistkn, are commonly mistaken the one for the other, as
done by our author in the text above^ or rather some scribe for him, because,
at page 46, and other places, and in the last Section, the name is correctly
given, and also an account of the siege of Na$ir Koh of TU-k^n by the Chingiz
Kha n. In carelessly written MSS^ scribes make very little difference between
the letter i [e here] without the points, and 1 —/—thus and The

way in which the error of Dae-kan arose can thus be accotmted for. Some
early scribe read the letter !•—(—as the two letters la— dd —and the I was
mistaken for > [{]. The other words mentioned above evidently arose in the
same way, through some scribe, writing carelessly or quickly, prefixing two
letters—>a—one without points, which was subsequently read by some for i—
t —and by others for J— n —or through writing da —the first syllable of
twice over, or putting one letter before the other.

Mr. Dowson [Elliot’s INDIA, Vol. II,, page 273], who appears to have
implicitly followed the printed text, has “Tfilikin." This incorrect name,
sometimes varied to “ Talikh&n," is generally applied by European writers to
73 e-kw of TukharisUln, without being aware of the existence of Tal-kSn of
Shur^n, or at least, without being aware of the difference between the names
of the two places.

THE YAMlNiAH DYKASTY.

95

three successive days he assailed s^nd struggled with them ;
and on the third day, which was Friday, the Sult&n was
defeated, and retreated to Gha zntn by the way of Gh arjistan.

Through the great dread which had now overcome him,
he collected his treasures together, and came towards Hin¬
dustan ; and at Marlgalah *, his Turkish and Hindu slaves
revolted against him, seized his person, and [again] set
up his brother, Muhammad, upon the throne, and sent
Mas’ud to the fortress of Girl * ; and, in 43a H., he was
martyred*. His age was forty-five years ; and the period
of his reign was nine years, and a little over. His sons
were Maudud, Majdud^ Muhammad, Ibrahim, Izid-yar,
Farrukh-zad. Shuia*. Mardan Shah, and ’All.

V. shihAb-ud-daulah, maudOd, son of MAS’OD.

Shihab-ud-Daulah. Abu Sa’d-i-Maudud *, son of Nagir-
ud-din U’llah, Mas’ud, when the tidings of his father’s
murder reached him *, ascended the throne of his father’s
dominions.

* A pass, in ancient times somewhat difficult, situated between RSwal Pindf

and Attak, a few miles east of Abdal. Tlie hills around used to be

infested with robbers, who generally chose this pass for attacking travellers
and karwans of traders, hence the name “ Mari-galah.” The emperor Akbar
had a good road carried through the pass for about two miles. I have
noticed it in my paper—“ Diary of a March with the -Bombay Column of the
Army of the Panjab,”—contained in the Transactions of the Bombay Geogra¬
phical Society for 1850-51-

* Baihakt writes it Gtrt and others write it Girl and Glri

[Ir^l-

* He was not murdered until the i ith of Jamadl-ul-Awwal of the following
year, 433 H., -at which time, his nephew, Ahmad, son of the blind Muhammad,
pretending it was his father’s command, put Mas’ud to death, alter a reign of
a few days over eleven years, not nine as our author states, because he
ascended the throne on the 1st of Jamadi-ul-Awwal, 4^2 H. , and was mur¬
dered in the very same month of the year 433 H. ; but he had certainly been
in conlinement since the previous year. Muhammad is said to have lamented
this act, and greatly reproached the murderers.

^ Appointed governor of the territory east of the Indus, with his head¬
quarters at Labor, in ?t-Ea’dah, 427 H. Baihajfl mentions two others, but
merely gives the title of one—Amtr-l-Sa’td—to whom Mas’Qd was much
attached, and whom he proposed to make his heir, but he died at Cihazntn in
429 II. The other-was named Abd-ur-Razzah-

* Styled by some authors Shihab-ud-Daulah, and l^utb-ul-Millat, ’Abd-ul-
Fath-i-Maudud, and Maudud-i-Ghkzl. According to BaihaVl, Mas’ad’s title
was Shi h&h-nd-Daulah and 5 -ntb-ul-Millat.

* Maudud was at Balkb, when the tidings of his father’s imprisonment and
murder reached him. He set out for Gh^tn without delay. See note *, p. 96.

96

THE TABA¥AT.I-KA$IRI.

At the period that SultSn Mas’Od was about to proceed
into Hindustan, he had established Maudud as his lieu¬
tenant over the territory of Gh aznln. and its dependencies^
Maudud assumed the throne in 433 H., and assembled an
army, in order to revenge his father, and commenced his
march towards Hindustan

Sultan Muhammad, son of MahmOd, who was Maudud’s
uncle, had been brought forth from his place of confine¬
ment, by the rebellious retinue [of Ma^’ud], and had been
raised to the throne by them, who, with their loins girded,
stood before him [to do his behests]. The great nobles of
Hindustan submitted to him ; and the Turkish slaves of
Mahmud and of Mas’ud, who had acted so perfidiously and
with such hostility towards the latter, all had gone over to
Muhammad, and espoused his cause. After he had been
made sovereign by them four months, an encounter took
place between Maudud and his uncle ; and, by the will of
the Most High, the victory was bestowed upon Maudud,
within the limits of Nagrahar [Nangrahar *], and Muham-

I Gnztdah diffen in the account of this affoir. “ When hostilities arose
between Mas’fid, and the SaljGhs, and Mas’ud hhd been defeated, he had to
retreat to Qltaznln. He then determined to retire into HindGstan [which in
nearly every case should be understood to mean the Panjab, except in the case
of occasional expeditions beyond]. After Mas’ud had pass^ the Jtlam [^]
his troops mutinied against him, and carried away the blind Muhammad from
him, after which they placed a throne upon the back of an elephsuit, and
seated Muhammad thereon. They then conducted him through the whole
army ; and Mas’ud was seized and brought before his sightless brother.” The
'nrtkIl-i-IbrShtmf, while confirming this, with the exception of mentioning
the A.b-i-Sind, instead of the Jflam, adds that Muhammad gave up the direction
of the affairs of government to his son, Ahmad, and that Muhammad only im¬
prisoned his brother Mas’ud ; but Ahmad directed that he should be. put to
death. This statement is confirmed 1 ^ most other historians, Mas’Gd’s object
in proceeding into India, or rather his territory on the Indus and in the Panjftb,
was to raise a fresh army in order to take vengeance upon the SaljOhs.

* MandOd, on hearing of his father’s murder, advanced with his troops
towards Qbaznln to secure the capital; and Muhammad, who was on the con¬
fines of Sind [i. e. on the Indus, in the Sind SSgar Do-Sb], also
towards Ghazntn for a similar purpose. -Every copy of the work I have seen
has the name NagrahSr as plainly written aa it is possible to write, yet Mr.
Dowson translates it by the impossible name of “ Takarhdrtid," and makes
the error worse, by addings in a note [Elliot, vol. ii. p. 274]—" or * Bakarhfi,’
peifai^is BakbriUa [Firishta’s text says ^D^fir,’ not 'Dnntoor,' as in Briggs’-
translation].” Why " Bakhrfili ” is fixed upon thus at hap-hazard, 'it would
be hi^y interesting to know. .Was it because there is a place mut of
the Mirgalah Pass called dW—^Bak«||]idi, which happened to be not far off

THB YAMlNlAH DYNASTY.

97

mad was taken prisoner, tpg:ether with his children and
dependents. SultSn Maudud wreaked vengeance upon
him for his father's fall; and the murderers of his father,
both Turk and Taztk, he put to death, and thereby gained
fame and great distinction. Whoever were implicated in
the shedding of his father’s blood, the whole of them he
put to death.

He returned again to flhazntn, and took possession of
the different parts of his father’s dominions. He reigned
for a period of nine years, and died ; and his age was thirty^
nine years *.

His sons were Mansur, Muhammad, and Mahmud; and
the latter had a son named Suliman.

VI. 'ALt SON OF MAS’OD, AND MUl^AMMAD. SON OF
maudOd, in association «

These two princes, uncle and nephew, were raised to the

towards th« Jihlaxn ^ Which is the most natural—one force inarching
from Gha mtn. and another mardhing towards it from the MSrgalah Pass—
that they should meet about half-way, or at Bak-iSlah ? A glance at a map
would show at once where those places lie. Maudfid founded a KU&r or
emporium, at the place where he gained this victory, which Bailu^d calls
DtnQr, and named it Fath-hb£d, which, in the advance to KSbul, in 1S42,
was occupied by the troops under the command of Gen. Sir R. Sale, G.C.B.
The name has been incorrectly spelt, as usual, Futtehabad. MaudSd ghined
this battle 434 H.

* Our author has omitted to mention some of the chief events of his reign,
as well as the date of his death. Both Guztdah and Fa;ih'f, as well as several
other writers, state that MaudQd died in the month of Rajab, 441 h., of colic,
when on his way to meet Jaghar Beg, his lather’s old foe, whose daughter he
had married. The capital of Jagliar Beg, at this time, was Marw.

* A very unlikely arrangement, to say the least of it. Our author, here, is
at variance with all works of undoubted authority. YSfa’t, Fafih-f, the
NigBm-ttt-TawartUi of Baiyawt, Guztdah, rJatian-Aia, Lubb-ut-Tawiitkb,
Fan&katt,' and several others state, generally, that on the death of Mau-
dad, his son Mas’ud, in accordance with his father’s will, was rused to
the throne, and that his mother, the daughter of Jagjiar Beg, SaljO^t, b^an
to administer the government in his name, he being a child of three years of
age. After he had been one month on the throne—some say ten days—^witb
his mother’s consent and approbation, the great nobles and grandees, by
mutual agreement, set tli** child aside, and raised his uncle, BahS-od-Dtn,
'Alt, to the throne. No writer that I am acquainted with says one word about
mv rulers in joint occupation of the throne, except our author, who alto
makes a great blunder in calling Maudud’s infant son, Mas’Qd. by the name of
“ Mntjammad.*’ A very good reas<m is given in Gusldah for the diild^ balag
set aside. Bahft-ud-Daulah, 'Alt, married bis brother M a udlhP a widour, oa
which she, probably, did not mnrdi mind her infuit son being set aride fee tier
new h h sbarwL

9 S THE TABA^T-hNA$lRL

throne by the Turks and the chief men of the kingdom.
Each and every person took possession of some office or
other. As the two princes possessed neither-capacity nor
ability, and neither authority nor control, the utmost dis¬
order and detriment continued to arise in the affairs of the
country, the condition of the soldiery, and of the people in
general. After two months* they raised Sultan 'Abd-ur-
Rashid to the throne, and sent die two princes back to a
fortress again.

VII. *ABD.UR-RA^lD, SON OF MAQMOD.

Sultan *lzz-ud-Daulah-i-*Abd-ur-Rashld ascended the
throne in 441 H. *. He' was an enlightened and intelligent
man, and was a depository of the oral traditions, which he
was wont to narrate'; but he did not possess much
strength of mind or intrepidity.

Seeing the repeated and successive changes and revolu¬
tions in the sovereignty, the Saljuks on the side of Khora-
sln coveted the throne of Shazntn *. The sovereignty of

>* Faidkati and Tarfkll'i-Ibiahiint say ’Alt reigned two years, after which,
on ’Abd-ur-Rashid rebelling, he fled from Gha zntn. Guztdab agrees as to
the number of years that ’Alt reigned, but says that his reign terminated -in
443 H. , and calls ’Abd-ur-Rashtd Ait uneU.

• Under the events of the year 443 h., Fa;ih-t notices — “a battle between
Majd-ud-DauIah, Abu Mansur-i-* Abd-ur-Rashtd. son of Mahmud-i-Qh 3 ^> and
BaU-ud-Daulah, ’Alt, son of Mas’ud, and the overthrow of 'Alt after a reign,
at Qhazntn, of one year, and the accession of Majd-ud-Daulah before men¬
tioned.” Other authors also call him Majd-ud-Daulah. Yafat says that ’Abd-
ur-Rashtd, who had for years been imprisoned in a fortress, escaped, raised
forces, overthrew ’Alt, and ascended the throne.

^ Translated by Mr. Dowson— "uted to listen to chronUles and torite his¬
tory!" The original is j

* A much more probable cause is given for the advance of the Saljlihs in
other histories, which is as follows :—“ After ’Abd-nr-Rashtd had reigned one
year, the daughter of Ja^iar Be& in order to revenge the loss of her second
hus^nd, ’Alt, brouj^t an army of Saljuhs against him.” It is farther stated
that among the slaves of the Mahmudt dynasty was one named fugfariL who
was Amtr-ul-Umra, who went and joined the SaljOj^s, conspired with them,
fought a battle against ’Abd-ur-Rashtd. and took him prisoner. The daughter
of Jagihar Beg, widow of Maudud and ’Alt, made ’Abd-ur-Rashtd over to
-fn^vil, and returned herself to TThiitgiJii. fughril imprisoned b»m in a
fortress in the district of MaidSn [near Kflbul]. ’Abd-ur-Rashtd was of such
weak intellect that on one occasion, when jfughril was playing at Clwmgfln
thdre, ’Abd-ur-Rashtd caipe forth tp see the sport, and applauded Tnghril.
Afler a time 'Abd-ur Rashtd was put to death, at which period nine of the

THE YAMlNlAH DYNASTY.

99

Khurasan had passed to Da’ud ; and Alb-Arsalan; his son,
having become the commander of his forces, they deter¬
mined to advance against Gh aznln. Alb-Arsalan entered
[the country] by way of X^kharistan, with a numerous
army ; and his father, Da’iid, advanced upon Bust, by way
of Ststan.

Sultan *Abd-ur-Rashid caused his forces to be got ready,
and made X^Shril, who was one of the slaves of MahmQd,
and a.man of consummate valour, general over them, and
sent him against Alb-Arsalan. In front of the daroAt * of
Kl^umar he inflicted a defeat upon Alb-Arsalan, and from
thence pushed on towards Bust, and arrived there with the
utmost expedition. When he came up with Da’Gd, the
latter retired before him, and pursued him into

Ststan, and overthrew BeghO. the uncle of Da’Od.

Tughril having gained two or three such like successes,
returned to Qhaznin, seized Sultan *Abd-ur-Rashtd. and
put him to death, after which he ascended the throne
himself.

*Abd-ur-Rashid*s reign was two years and a half, and
his age was-thirty years \

VIII, TUGHRIL. AL-MAL’CN, OR THE EXECRATED*.

Xughril was one of Mabmud’s slaves, and was endowed

grandsons of Ma]^nud were still living. Yafa’t states that ’Abd -ur- Rash td
reigned nearly seven years, and died 450 ii. No mention of Tughril is made ;

- and the author passes immediately on to Ibrahim, without any notice of Far-
ruUx-zSd ; but that work only contains a brief notice of the Gh asnawt rulers
after Mas’ud the Martyr. The Tafkirat-ul-Muluk states tliat be reigned four
years. Fafi^-t states, and the Muntakhab-ut-Tawarlkli agrees, that ’Abd-ur-
Rashtd succeeded in 443 H., was imprisoned in 444 h., by Tughril, who was
put to death the same year, and that Farrukh-zSd succeeded ; but makes no
mention of ’Abd-ur-Raghld’s death. Fanakatl says he died 450 h., and then
makes a sudden jump from *Abd-ur-Rashid to Sultan Ibnihtm. Baifawt, in
the NifSm-ut-Tawartkll, makes no mention of Tughril or the reign of Far*
mkh-skd, smd says that *Abd-ur-Raahtd reigned seven years, and died in
445 H., and yet states that his successor, Ibrahim, reigned from 450 H. to
402 H.

* A Daiah signifies a vall^ between two hills, through which a stream
flows, and a past between two mountains.

. * *Abd-ur-Rashtd was present with bis brother Mas’ud at th^'battle of Dan-
^finkld, or Dfie*kin..

* Authors of any authority do not give Xofllxril a place among the sove-'
reigns, because )ie uras an usurper of forty days.

lOO

THE TABA^T.I-NA9IKL

with great intrepidity and valour. During the reign of
SultSn Maudud, he left (IxhAzntn, and went into KhurSsSn.
and entered the service of the Salju^s. He remained there
for a considerable time, and made himself acquainted with
their mode of warfare; and returned to Gha znin again in
the reign of *Abd-ur-Rashld. He seized ’Abd-ur-Rash^d*
and slew him, along with eleven other princes, and usurped
the throne of Ghaznln. and reigned over the country for a
period of forty days, during which he practised great in¬
justice and tyranny.

They inquired of him, saying: “ Whence didst thou
acquire ambition to reign He replied : " At the time
that *Abd-ur-Rashid was sending me forth to do battle
against Alb-Arsalan and Da'ud, and was giving me my
instructions, and had placed his hand in mine *, terror had
overcome him to that degree; that 1 could hear his very
bones rattling from the state of trembling he was in. I
knew that this pusillanimous man was incapable of sove¬
reignty, and the ambition of reigning entered my heart.”

After forty days of his rule had expired, a Turk named
Nush-Tigin. a Silah'dar, or armour-bearer, who happened
to be standing behind Tughril, entered into an agreement
with another, his friend, and they slew Tughril upon the
throne itself; after which they brought out his head, and
fixed it upon a pole, and had it paraded round the city;
so that the people became free from anxiety and care ^

IX. farrukh-zAd. son of mas’Cd*.

At the time that Almighty God brought down upon
' reward of his crimes, and delivered the

* The mode of making a compact—giving one's band.

* After Tu ^ril had put all the princes he coold lay his hands on to death,
he compelled a daughter of the late Sultin Mas*ild to become his wile. Soon
after he made a great entertainment, when a number of dampions, filled with
loyalty to the Mahmudl dynasty, attacked him, and cut him to pieces.

* Guatdah, Fafih-f,.and TSrt]^-i-lbrShtmt, strange to my, call FatinUl-sid
son of 'Abd-ur-Rashtd. His title was JamU-nd-Danlah, but. In the MnntaJdl-
ab-ut-TanAitldl, he is' styled ’Imfid-ud-Danlab, son of Ma^Qd. WaihaVt, in
commencing one of the chapters of his work, states that he “ bqgan it in ft-
^jjah, 450 H., in the reign of the Sulflnd-Mnaf lam, Abfi 82 l«>jfi’-i-Faira]di>
ifid.”

THE YAMlNlAH DYNASTY.

lOI

people from his unbearable tyranny, and unlimited oppres*
sion, two* princes of the Mas’udt family remained alive
immured within the fortress of Bar-ghund *—one IbrShtm,
the other Famikh-zad.

The accursed 'yughril had despatched a party to that
fortress for the purpose of putting them to death ; but the
seneschal, who was stationed therein, had taken one day to
consider the matter, and had kept the party in question
without the gates, under the agreement that they should
be admitted on the following day, to carry out that wicked
mandate. Suddenly, carrier pigeons” arrived there, bearing
the news of Tughril the Accursed having been killed.

Afler that execrable [man] was slain at Ghaznin. by the
hand of Nush-Tigln. the chief men of the empire, and the
Maliks, and Hajibs, sought for a sovereign. It was found
that two princes still remained, immured within the walls
of the fortress of Bar-ghund; so all of them set out to^yards
that fortress, and desired to raise Ibrahim to the throne:
but his august frame had become overpowered by infirmity,
and, as delay was impossible, they brought forth Farrulsh-
zad, and congratulated him on his accession to the sove¬
reignty, on Saturday, the 9th of the month Zi-l-Ka’dah,
344 H.

Sultan Farrukh-zad was a man of mild and amiable dis¬
position, and just. As soon as he ascended the throne, he

* Gazfdah says three—IbiShtm, Farruldi-zad, and Shuja’.

r The same fortresa b mentioned in Baiha^. Guztdah says {zh&nd
Bar [/] in the Afyhan language signifies "on,” "upon,” &c., and gbuntj
[jj*] "round,” "circular,” and the like, as "a mound, a blufi^ a detached
hill,” &C. A few copies have Buz-Qbund.

• £z>ery rfj^oftjie work collated has [with two exceptions, which have,;,!*^,]

the word signifying "birds,” &c., as plainly written as it b possible to
write; but in the printed text has ^n substituted, and Mr. Dowson,

of course, folloiys the printtd text That carrier pigeons, or rather doves, were
in use long before, for transmitting news speedily, see note • at p 37. When
the Crusaders under Godfrey were passing through the narrow defiles of Judea,
0 wkUt dove, with a letter tied under its wing, from one Musalndn Amir to
hitt superior, gave information to the Crusaders of the foe’s designs. This was
but a short time previous to Famikli-sad’s reign. §alih"ud-Dtn, subsequently
to thb, also establbhed “/igmnposts" for the conveyance of news ; and, in
the latter part of a.d. 1179, when defeated by the Crusaders under Baldwin
IV., the Count of Tripoli, the Grand Master^ the Hospitallers, and the
Templars, near Jerusalem, "a victory was proclaimed at Cairo [^hirah], and
pigtosu spread the triumphant news over Egypt, to quiet the spirits of the
public,” by desire.

103

TH£ TABA^T-I.NA$IRL

remitted the revenue of the territory of ZawulistSn, which
had become ruined through [the levying of] heavy contri¬
butions in taxes and supplies*, so that it became pros¬
perous again He brought under his control the frontier
provinces of the empire, and governed his people with
benevolence. He reigned seven years *, when, suddenly, he
was carried off by colic *, in the year 451 H., at the age of
thirty-four years *.

X. SULTAN IBRAHlM, SAYYID-US-SALAJIN ».

Sultan Zahtr-ud-Daulah, Na$tr-ul-Millat, Ra^^t-nd-Dln,

* The original text is uuUy* j 'Aivariz-wa^mUndt [not “miitin”!

which Mr. Dowson renders —and murrain,” anA adds. In a note—
** AwdrtM-o-mtltdn. The former words [sic] mean literally diseases, but It [sic]
is also used for those diseases of the body politic, extraordinary imposts.”
Does “ munat” also mean murrain” in the body politic?

t The Ta«lurat-ul-Muluk mentions that, soon alter the accession of Far mhh .
xid, the Salju^s advanced towards Qhttznfn in great force, and were
encountered by Farrukh-zad and his forces. The SaljOVs were defeated and
numbers slain, and some made prisoners. Subsequently, Alb-Arsalin advanced
against Ghaxntn, fought a battle, and gained a victory, in which most of the
MahmQdt chiefs were made captive, and carried away into Kfi nrgsitn- At
last an accommodation was come to, and some of the captives were set free.

* FaaruUl-zSd, according to Guztdah, reigned six years, in which several
other authors agree ; but the former gives the year 450 h., as that of hia death,
and says he bequeathed his sovereignty to his cousin, Ibrahtm. Fagih-t agrees
in this, and also as to the year ; but states that he reigned seven years, which
is apparently correct, he having ascended the throne in the eleventh month of
the year 443 h., and died in 450 H. According to Baihaht, just quoted, we
find he was alive in the last month of 450 h., but, as he died .suddenly, he
might have died in that same month. The Muntakhab-ut-Tawartlrh^ however,
says he b^[an to reign Saturday, 9th of ^f>^’dah, 444 h., and died, in $afar,
451 H. YSla’t agrees with Fayih-f, and states that Ibrahim succeeded in
450 H. In the latter part of the year preceding Farru](]t>z&d’s death, Alb-
ArsalSn, who had succeeded his father, Jagihar Beg, over the territory of
ShiUrfiaSn, ousted his great uncle; Be^S, from Hir&t, and had the Ehutbah
read there for himself.

* The word used for colic is and described as a pain in the bowels
and in the side, but I suspect it must be some type of cholera or inflammation,
as it seems to have carried off several -of this d3rnasty.

* Among the Waztrs or Ministers of Farrukh-z^d was lOi wajah Abu Bikr-
i-$alih> who had previously held the goverrunent of Hindustan. Among the
celebrated personages who died during his reign was Abu-NaJm-i-Iy&z, Ut-
mBh or l-m&k, the ^lave of Sult&n Mahmud, famous under the tuune of lyXx.
He died in the month of Rabt’.ul.Awwal, 449 H.

* Sayyid here means “lord,” “prince,” “ chief oli” &c.» His correct title,
as given by most authors, is Zahlr>ud.Daalab, Abfl Mn^afEv-i-lbrShlm. The

THE YAMlNlAH DYNASTY.

103

IbrShtm, son of Mas’ud, the Martyr, was a great and illus¬
trious monarch, learned and accomplished, just and God¬
fearing, benevolent and compassionate, the friend of the
learned; and supporter of religion.

After Farrukh-zad had ascended the throne, Ibrahim
had been removed from the fortress of Bar-ghund to the
fortress of Nae*; and, when Farrukh-zad died, all hearts
decided upon the sovereignty of Ibrahim. The Sarhang %
Hasan, proceeded to his presence, and, accompanied by the
chief persons in the state, conducted him from the fortress;
and, on a Monday, at an auspicious conjunction of the
planets in the high vault above, he ascended the throne.
The day after he performed the customary mourning cere-
ifionies for the Amlr-i-Hamld—^the Laudable Amir—Far-
rukh-zad. his brother, and paid a visit to his tomb, and to
the tombs of his ancestors; and all the great nobles,
ministers, and most distinguished personages accompanied
him on foot, for he did not show [particular] -favour or
familiarity towards any person soever, and, on this account,
awe of his authority was implanted in the hearts of all
people’*.

When the intelligence of his accession to the throne
reached Da’ud, the Saljul^*, he sent an embassy into Khu -
rasan ; and entered into a treaty of peace with him. After
Da’ud [died] his son, Alb-Arsalan, continued to abide by
it; and Ibrahim brought under his entire control the

other titles;, given by our author, are not mentioned by other writers. He was
abstemious and continent, and renowned for his tact and excellent judgment.
Tie wrote a beautiful hand, and every year sent a copy oi the written

by himself, to Makkah, with other valuable offerings. Guzfdah says the
Saljiil;! monarchs used to style him “father;” and, when they addrnsed a
comipunication to him, used to write his titles at the top of it.

■ This fortress was situated in the district of WajtristSn.

f The meaning assigned to this word generally is—“A commissary, a'iier.
jeant, a commander, a superior officer,” &c. ; but, in the Burhan-Eiltl’i .snd
other works of authority in these matters, it seems, more correctly, an fMcer
who marched in front of the troops bearing the standard—equivalent to the
Italian gonfalonier.

* Mr. Dowson'translates this : “ He bestowed no favours upon any one, and

hence apprehensions about his rule took possession of the heasrts tf thepeeple."
The original is os. s-r->

* DS’ud died, according to most authorities, in Rajab, 451 H., though one
' says it took place in 452 H., and another in 453 H. Fafi^-t says; “ In the

year succeeding that in whidi Ibrahim ascended the throne, Jaguar Beg died.”
At «dl events he died a considerable time before his brother.

104

THE TABA]B:AT-I-NA$IRL

dominions of his ancestors The troubles and disorders
which had fallen upon that empire, through the vicissi¬
tudes of the times, and continual warfare, were all, during
his reign, remedied and rectified, and the affairs of the
empire of the great Mahmud assumed fresh vigour. The
ruinous places in the country were again repaired and
restored, and he founded several towns *, such as Jatr-
abad (?) Kha.i r-abad. Aimin-abad, and others in different
parts.

During his reign many astonishing and uncommon occur¬
rences took place ; and Da’ud, the SaljuV, whose ravages,
inroads, conflicts, and conquests might vie with the flashing
lightning, died.

The birth of Ibrahim took place in the year of the con¬
quest of Gutgan, in 424 H., in the province of Hirat, and
that monarch had forty daughters and thirty-six sons. All
the daughters were given in marriage to illustrious Sayyids,
and dignified ’Ulama * ; and one of those princesses was
married to the great-great-gfrandfather of [the author] Min-
haj-i-Saraj, and this was the cause of the removal of the
writer’s ancestors from Jurjan. Imam ’Abd-ul-Khali)^,
Jurjant, who lies asleep within the Sarae of Tahir-abad of
Gh aznin. saw in a dream, whilst dwelling in Jurjan, in his
youthful years, that an angel said unto him in the vision :
“Arise, and proceed to Gha zntn. ahd seek a wife.” When
he awoke, he imagined that this dream might have been
prompted by the devil; but, having dreamt the same dream
three times successively, as therein commanded, he came to
Ghaznin,andoneofthosedaughterswas bestowed in marriage
upon him *. That princess bore him a son, whom he named

i This is not conrect, because the Saljul^s held a very considerable portion
of them.

* In Elliot’s India, vol. ii. p. *77, this passage is translated—“ Several

fortified places and towns were founded,” &c., but kasbah does not mean for*
tified places; and, even were read for it by mistalce, it would not

mean “fortified places.” All authors agree that IbrShlm, during his reign,
founded naught but masjids, colleges, buildings for the accommodation of
travellers, and works of public utility ; and that he built nothing for himself.

* Here Sayyid is the title of the chiefs of the fiunily of Muhammad, de¬
scended from ’Alt, and his daughter F&timah. 'Ulam% signifies the learned—
theologians, ecclesiastics, doctors of law. Mr. Dowson translates the sentence,
“ nobles or learned men of repute.”

* Our author is so much taken up with his ancestor’s grand alliance that be
leaves out most of the priiKipai events of the reign of Ibifthtm. After he

THB YAMfNlAH DYNASTY.

lOS

IbrShtm —> MaulSnS, MinhSj-ud-Dln, 'U^mSa-i-Ibridilm—
upon whom be the mercy of the Almighty I He was the
father of MatiUUiS, Minh 3 j-ud-Dln, who was the father of
MauUmS SarSj-ud-Dtn, ’UjQbah-uz-zamSn [the Wonder of
his Age!]. and he was the father of [the author] Minh 3 j-i-
Sar 3 j.

SuItSn IbrShtmwas a monarch of felicitous and prosperous
career, and his reig^ extended over a period of forty-two
years, and his age [at his death] was sixty years. He died in
the year 493 H.*

His sons were Mahmud*, Is-hah, Yusuf, Na$r, ’Alt,
BihzSd, Khu rshed Malik Kh ub-chihr. AzSd Malik,
Malik-Chihr *. fugh^n Shah. Azad-Mihr, Daulat Shah.
AzcLd-Chihr, Amtr Shah. Nih-Flruzah * Tahamtan Shah.
Turin Sh^. Malik-Zad, Malik-Dad, Shams-ul-Mulk.
Malik Sher. Sher Malik, Mas’ud, Iran-Malik, Kaihan Shah.

•rmlged matter* witk the hf marryiiig his son, Mas’Qd, to a SaljO^F

princess, daughter of Malik SUih, and sUter of Sul^n Sanjar, and had no
cause for farther anxiety respecting them, be carried his arms into Hind upon
seversl occasions, and reduced many strongholds, and other places, among
which is said to have been a populous tity, inhabited by.ElvuTSsainia, whose
ancestors had been expelled from their native country by AfiSsiySb. There
was a large b*iwf, or reservoir, there, said to have been half a league in
diameter; 100^000 persons were madh captive^ and taken away to Gh aanln.
and booty, in proportion, was captured. During the reign of Ibiuhtm,' in
470 H., AbQ-Fafl-i-Muhammad, son of ^usain [not Hasain], Al-Baihakt, who
hiul bera secretary in the “Dtwln-i-lnalia^” of Sultan MahmQd, son of Ssbuk-
Tlgtn, but, as the Deputy of the Shwajabd-’Amld, AbQ Nafr-i-Mislxk&n, Al-
Zawzant, and a pupil and disciple of that great man, died. Abh-l-Fafl was
the author of the work entitled the " Ma^amSt-ub’Amtd-i-AbQ Naar- 1 -Mia 1 i.
kSn,” and the "Tartkl'i-Al-i-Sabuk-Ti^n,” in twelve books or volumes,
[called by our author the 'nrlkh-i.N&flrt], entitled Tartkh.i-Yamlnt. The
first portion of the work, containing the reigns of Sabuk.Tigtn and MahmGd,
does not exist, and appears to have been lost for some centnrlea

s On the Sth of the month of SbswwpL One author says in Rajab, but gives
no date. Fa^ih-t mentions the taking of Jerusa l e m by the CHiristians [August
15th, but some say 15th July, A.D. 1099] in this same year, and the slaughter
of 80^000 Musaltnfina The year 493 H. b^an 37th of November, A.D.
1098.

■ In 471 H. Sulj^n IbrShtm was apprized that his son, Saif.ud-Daulah,
Mabiufid, meditated flying to SulpUi Malik Sll?*'i the Salju]^ : and accordingly
confined him witlun the mtadel of Qliazntn, and his partisans were sent to
other fortresses.

1 One MS. has Munawwar SbMt.

• Malik Mihr.

* So in two MSS., but donbtfuL The whole number forty. I expect the
text ^ould be, ** He had forty sons and thirty-six daughters.”

H

THE TABA^T-I-NA$IRL

W6

JahSn Shih. Ftruz §h 3 h, Miran ShSh. YaghSn * ShSh.
Turkan Sh 5 h. Arsalan Shah. X^ghril Shah, l^utlugh Shah.
Muayyid Shah. Sultan Shah. Malik Shah. IQi usrau ShSh.
Famikh Shah, and Bahram Shah.

XI. 'ALA-UD-DIN » MAS’OD, AL-KARlM, OR THE BENEFICENT,

SON OF IBRAHIM.

Mas’ud, son of Ibrahim, who bore the title of Kartm, or
the Beneficent, was a monarch of excellent disposition [and
temperament], blessed with many virtues, just and equi¬
table, and of auspicious reign.

He ascended the throne during the Khi lafat of the Lord
of the Faithful, Al-Musta^har B’illah [AbQ- 1 -’Abbas], i-Ah-
mad, son of Al-Mu]^tadi * Bi-amr-ullah. He was endowed
with humility and beneficence to an extraordinary degree,
and he suppressed all the oppressive usages which, before
his time, had been established. The contingent taxes,
which were exorbitant, he abolished throughout the Mati-
mudi dominions and in Zawulistan ; and likewise remitted
all tolls and imposts throughout the whole empire.

All the great chiefs and nobles and grandees of the
country were left in undisturbed possession of the [offices and
possessions] which they had held during the reign of Sultan
Ibrahim *; and he adopted the most beneficial regulations
for the government of his dominions. Amir ’U?d-ud-Daulah
wa ud-Din* was continued in the government of Hindustan

> Tuvian, in one copy.

* The proper title of this monarch appeals to be ’Ala-ud-Daulah.

* Every copy of the work [and the printed text also], with one exception,
perpetrates the great blunder of calling this RbaltfaK “son of Mu^tadir,”
instead Muktadi. In Section IV., on the Skalf^ihs, our author gives
the correct name.

Under the occurrences of the year 493 h;, Fa;ib>t mentions an Important
^onatter, from which it would appear that the/chiefs of Qliur were not, at the
time in question, such great or powerful personages as Minhaj-i-Satij would
lead us to believe. It says : “Husain, son of Sam, by cotnmand of ’All.ud*
Daulah, Mas'ud, son of Ibrjihtm, obtained the government of Gh ur.” I shall
have more remarks to offer on this subject when I reach Section XVII.

* h$r. Dowsott renders this passage in the following manner; “ He restored
to the princes, nobles, and grandees, their possessions,” &c. They must have
been dispossessed of them in order to have them restored s but uwaJlKT —Pjt
does not happen to mean "restored''

* From the word “Amir” I should imagine this personage must have been
either a brother or uncle of Mas’Od’s. .

THE YAMlNlAH DYNASTY.

107

[as before] ; and, during Mas’ud’s reig^, the ]^Sjib-i-Buzarg
[Great Chamberlain] died, and the Hajib, *y“gha-Tigtn.
crossed the river Gang, in order to carry on holy war in
Hindustan, and penetrated to a place where, except Sultan
Mahmud, no one had reached so far with an army before.

During the sovereignty of Mas’ud all the affairs of the state
were conducted with perfect order and regularity, and no
heart had any cause of care from any quarter. He was
born at Gha znin in 453 H., reigned seventeen years, and
died in 509 H., at the age of fifty-seven. The sister of
Sultan Sanjar, Saljuhi, who was styled the Mahd-i-Tr 3 .h *
[or the Trahi spouse], was wedded to him.

His sons were Baha-ud-Din, Muhammad, who had a son
named Kha tir-ud-Din. Muhammad ; Sher-zad^. Malik Arsa-
lan, Farrukh-zad. who had three sons, ’Alt, Iran Malik,
and Shah-zad ; 'Ali,Bahram Shah. Malik-Cljihr, Malik-zad,
Mahmud, Sultan Malik, who had three sons, Arsalan
Malik, Al-Hasan, and Mir-Nuk ; and Tamshed Malik, who
had two sons, Kh urshed. and Turan Malik.

XII. MALIK ARSALAN, SON OF MAS’OD.

Malik Arsalan-i-’Abd-ul-Muluk ®, son of Sultan Mas’ud,
ascended the throne in the year 509 H. at Garmsir itself*,

* In Elliot’s India, vol. il. p. 278, “Mahd-I-’Irak” is translated “Cradle
of Irak.” One of the meanings of mahd [jf-.] is certainly a cradle, and also a
seat for the back of an elephant or camel; but another is “ making a bed," and
here mahd has the metaphorical meaning of a wife, hence the meaning is the
’Iraki wife. Baihakt, in his History, makes constant use of the word in this
sense.

7 Our author, like some others, has left out one sovereign. Fa;ik-t says that
’Al&.ud-Daulah, Mas’ud, son of Ibrahim, died in 508 h. , after a reign of sixteen
years; and that he was succeeded by KAMAL-UD-DAULAH, SHER-ZAD.
his son, in the same year ; and in the following year Sherrad died, after reigning
about one year, when Arsalan Shah succeeded. Guztdah confirms this succes.
sion of KamSl-ud-Daulah, Sherzad. but says that he succeeded to the throne
according to his father’s will, and ruled for about a year, when his brother,
Arsalan Shah, rose against him, and put him to death, in 509 h. Other writers
of authority likewise confirm the accession of Sherzad. who was the second
son of Mas’ud, while Arsalan was the third. Yafa’i and Fanakatt also state
that Mas’ud reigned sixteen years, and Baifawt confirms it.

* His correct title is Sullen ud Daulah, Arsal&n Shah, son of Mas’ud, son
of Ibrahim ; and, according to the Tarilth-i-YSfa’i, he succeeded to the throne
in accordance with his father’s will. Some call him Abu-l-Muluk.

* The original is ji The passage is translated in Elliot’s India,

vol, ii. p. 278, thus: ‘'Malik ArsUin Abu-l-malik [sic] ascended the throne

H 3

loS THE TABA^T-X.NA9IRL

and assumed the sovereignty of the empire of Gha snin.
Bahram Shah, his brotherfled from him, and proceeded
into Khurasan, to the court of Sultan Sanjar.

During the reign of Malik Arsalan some remarkable
events occurred, one of which was that fire, accompanied by
a thunderbolt, fell from the heavens, so that by that fire all
the bazars of Gh aznln were consumed *. Other untoward
events and occurrences likewise took place during his
sovereignty, so that people held his rule in detestation *.
He was possessed of great nobility of mind, energy, courage,
and valour.

When he came to the throne he treated his step-mother *,
who was [styled] Mahd-i-’IraV, with indignity*, and on that

A.H. 509 [a.D. 1115], atul brought Garmstr and the hingdom of Ghazni under
his rule," I wonder what throne he ascended if it was not that of the kingdom
of Gh asntn?

> Some copies say “his uncle,” but this is an error, for BahrSin was his
brother, as the names of the sons of Mas’Sd confirm.

* The I. H. L. MS., No. 195a, and R. A. S. MS. are both very defective
with regard to this reign. In those copies Bahriim is said to be uncle of
ArsalSn; and in the sentence referring to the destruction of the bazSi^ of Gh ax-
ntn they have the word jU.—people—which is totally meaningless.

* These matters are not alluded to in the works I have been quoting and
seem to have been taken from our author by more modem writers.

* means a step-mother.

* He is said to have requested her to dance before him, for his amusement.
This may have been one reason why Sultiui Sanjar took up the insult to his
sister, and the cause of his nephew, Bahrani. When Arsalan came to the throne,
he imprisoned the whole of his brothers except Bahram, who succeeded in
reaching his uncle’s court. Fanakatt makes a mistake in this matter. He
says Sanjar was the son of Bahram’s maternal uncle: but, as Mas’ud, Bah-
rfim’s father, married the daughter of Malik Shah, she was Sanjar’s sLster [as
our author also states], he being Malik Shah’s son. According to Guddah,
Fofih'l, and others, in 509 h., Sultan Sanjar, finding Arsalan Sha h deaf to all
the expostulations which he had made in behalf of Bahrfim, set out along with the
latter for Gh azntn. attended by a numerous army. ArsalSn came forth to meet
them with 30,000 horse, but, after on obstinate engagement, was defeated and
retired to Labor. Having placed Bahtfim on the throne, and fixed a yearly
tribute, Sanjar returned to his own dominions; but, in the same year [509 h.],
Arsalan returned with an army, and defeated Bahtfim, who again took shelter
in Sanjar’s dominions. It was only in the following year that Sanjar becanfe
sole monarch of the SoljriVs, after the death of his brother Muhammad, and
had only a few months before acquired sway over 'IrfiV and Xb nrgsnn. his
dominions before that having been but a portion of the latter territory. It was
only in 511 H., that Babr&m, having obtained the aid of |ui army from his
uncle, who did not accompany him the second time, was able to move against
his brother ArsaUtn again. In the encounter which ensued, Araalin was taken
prisoner, and thrown into confinemenL BahrSm’s reign r^ly commenced in

THE YAMlNlAH HYNASTY.

S 09

account Sanjar became his foe, and gave assistance to
Bahr 3 .m Sanjar came against Gharntn. and Malik

Arsal&n fought a battle with him, and was defeated, and
retired towards Hindustan, where he fell into misery and
wretchedness. He died * in the year 511 H., after a reign of
two years, at the age of thirty-five years.

XIII. MU'IZZ-UD-OAULAH WA UD-DINr, BAHRAM SHAH.

Mu’izz>ud-Daulah, Bahram ^ah, was a person of hand¬
some exterior, manly, munificent, just, and the sustainer and
protector of his subjects. At the outset of his career, when
Malik Arsalan ascended the throne, after the decease of
their father, Sultan Mas’ud, the Beneficent, Bahram Shah
proceeded into Kh urasan, the throne of which country was
adorned by the great and inestimable sovereign, the august*,
the martyr Sultan Sanjar; and Bahram Shah resided at
his court for a considerable time. Sultan Sanjar led an
army towards Ghaznln. and Malik Arsalan, after an
engagement, was defeated, and BahrAm Shah ascended the
throne. Sanjar treated him with great honour, and Sayyid
Hasan, a celebrated poet of Qhazntn, recited this ode [on that
occasion] in the Audience Hall,inthe presence of Sultan San¬
jar, on whom be the mercy and the pardon of the Almighty 1
One quatrain * of the ode in question is here inserted :—

* * Of the eloquent of the world what is the strain.

That shall ever on earth be proclaimed 7 —

* A shout emanated from the seven heavens.

That Bahr&m Shah is of the universe king.’ ”

511 H. In the following year ArsaUn was released, but, being again found
plotting, was put to death.

* At ShKh-abad, in Slviwwal, 511 H.

r Faflh-t states that his title was Yamtn-ud-Daulah, in which Guztdah and
other writers agree ; but there ore others also, but chiedy modern authors, who
agree with the title in the text

* The word Sa’td—august—is not a proper name here. As Sanjar died a
natural death it is difficult to conceive how he was a ** martyr.”

* It is the commencement of the poem. As Bahtfim was a patron of learning
literature, a number of authors flourished in his reign, and numerous works,

both poetry and prase, were written. The celebrated work, known as ** Kalt-
lah and Damnah,” was translated from the Arabic [.a^] itito Persian by
Hafr-ullah, son of Muhammad, son of'Abd-ul>Majtd, [called ’t]^amtd” by
Eostwick], in his reign, and was dedicated to Bahifim Sll***- Sabaequently,
the same work was translated in the reign of Sul^Sn ^usain, of the race of
TaimOr, by Mulla ^asan-i-Wfi’U-ul-Kiallift, and entitled Ansrfir>I>Suhailt.

no

THE TABAJ^T-1<NA$IR1.

Sultan Sanjar returned to I^ura^ln again, and Bahram
Shah assumed the government of the. country He carried
on holy wars in the direction of Hindustan; and, on the 38th
of Ramayan, in the year 513 H., he took Muhammad Bahlim
prisoner, and put him into confinement; but at last released
him, and made over the whole of Hindustan to him. Again
he rebelled, and founded the fortress of Naghawr, in the
territory of Siwalikh, in the neighbourhood of Btrah ; and
he had likewise numerous sons and followers and depen¬
dents. Bahram Shah, with the determination of extir¬
pating him, advanced into Hindustan against his strong¬
hold, and Bahlim * moved forward towards the confines
of Multan, and fought an engagement with Bahram
Shah. The Almighty rewarded Muhammad Bahlim for
his base ingratitude, and he, with his ten sons *, together
with their horses and arms, on the day of the battle, -sank
in a morass *, so that no trace of him and them remained.

Bahram Shah returned to Ghaznin again, and between
him and the Maliks, or chiefs of Ghur, hostilities arose ; and
an engagement took place between them, in which Daulat
Shah, a son of Bahram, was slain *. During that one cam¬
paign Bahram Shah sustained three defeats from Sultan

^ O*'® of Bahram s coins struck at Lahor in 54 ^ n,, contained in a work on
the subject, bears the following inscription. Obverse—“ Coin of the Dar-us-
Sul{anat-i-Lahor, in the fifth year of his prosperous ami happy reign.”
Reverse—“ ‘ A proclamation issued from the .seven heavens, that Bahram SJjah
is of the universe king.’ Anno 514.” This inscription, it will be noticed,
constitutes the two last lines of the quatrain given by our author, who. In
another place, states that the coin of Bahram was stamped in Sanjar’s name.
See under his reign, next Section.

* Two MS.S. have ^I-Uand in place of but either of them is a
strange name for a Musalman.

* A few copies have “two” sons; but, as he is said before to have had
“numerous ” sons, ten is the more probable number.

* Mr. IJowson, Elliot’s India, vol. ii. p. 280, says, with reference to this

passage, “ The te.\t has some unititclligible words, which vary in diflferent
MSS.,” and then ciuotes “ Briggs.” The words are or jj

and are quite plain and intelligible, which is also sometimes written

toy signifies a ditch, a marsh, a place where water stagnates ; and is the
adjective derived from it.

* Among the events of .521 n. Fa^ifi.f mentions that “ a battle took place
^tween the troops, of Gharnln, and ’Ala-ud-Din, ^usain, son of Hasah,
Churl, at J igin-abad. Hostility had arisen between them on account of that
place, which was a city situated between Ghaznfn and Chur. The city was
taken, and Bahram fled. In 522 H. ’Ala-ud-Dln took Gharnin, and made it
over to his brother. See Section XVII.

nx

THE YAMlNlAH DYNASTY.

*Ala-ud-Dtn, Gh urt. and Gha znln fell into the hands of the
Gh firlans. They set Are to it, and destroyed the whole [I]
city. Bahram ^ah retired into Hindustan at this time,
but, on the withdrawal of the Gh url forces, he returned
to Gha znin again, and there died after a reign of forty-
one years *.

His sons were Jalal-ud-Daulah, Daulat Shah, slain in
battle with the Gh urians ; *Ala-ud-Daulah, Da’ud ^ Shah ;
Bah^ud-Daulah, Sultan ^ah; FaJg 2 ii‘-ud-Daulali, *Alt
Shah ; Tzz-ud-I>aulah, Muhammad Shah ; Sama-ud>
Daulah, Mas’ud ^ah ; Shihab-ud-Daulah, Mansur ^ah ;
Mu*ayyan-ud-Daulah, Shahan-Shah ; Mu’izz-ud-Daulah,
Kh usrau Shah; and Sayyid-ud-Daulah, Farrulsh Shah.

XIV. I^USRAU SHAH, son OF BAHRAM SHAH.

Sultan Mu’ayyan-ud-Daulah-wa ud-Dln ", but, according
to some statements, Taj-ud-Daulah,Khusrau ghah,ascended
the throne in the year 552 H.

As the Maliks and Sultans * of ^lur had shaken the
empire of the house of Mahmud to its very foundations, and
had wrested Ghaznin. Bust, Zamln-i-Dawar, and Tigtn-
abad out of their hands, and had ravaged and desolated
them, feebleness had come upon its government, and its
glory and splendour had passed away. When Khusrau gh^
ascended the throne he was weak and powerless, and was
unable to maintain his rule over the country.

A horde of the tribe of Gh uzz *, who had acquired
dominion and power in Khur^an, in the reign of the august
Sultan, Sanjar, who had now passed away *, marched an
army against Gh aznin. Kh usrau Shah was unable to resist

* Great discrepancy exists with respect tn the dates of Bahiftm
death, and the accession and death of his son Shusrau Sltflhf <utd also of
Ehusiau Malik, the last of the dynasty. For farther notice of this, se« note *,
next page.

r In one copy Zawul

* In a few copies he is styled "Yamtn-ud>Daulah** only; b&t the title
above agrees with the statements of several other, authors.

t That is, "who were Maliks aHdatso Sultans” from the text.

* Some lexicographers spell the word Ghazz, and some Gbuz.

* Sult 2 n Sanjar died on the. 16th of Rabt’-nl-awwul, 55a H., but a few
writers say in 553 H. The former is correct.

tl2

THE TABAKAT-J-NA$IRL

them, and he accordingly retired into HindustSn , and
Qhaznin waa lost to him, and fell into the hands of the
Ghuzz. They retained possession of that territory for a
period of twelve years, until the august Sultan, QJiiyas-ud-
Din Muhammad, Sam, led an army from Gh ur to Ghaznin.
overthrew Burah *, the G^uzz chief, retook Ghaznin, and
established [his brother] Sultan Mu'izz-ud-Din Muhammad,
Sam, the martyr, upon the Gh aznin throne. Kh usrau
Shah had retired to Labor, of Hindustan. His reign
extended to a period of seven years, after whiph he died *.

* The Tafkirat-uI-Muluk contains a veiy good account of the reign of

Sliusrau which I here make an extract from. " He succeeded his

father, and as 'Ala-ud-Din, ^usaln, son of i^^iasan, G'h urf. was in full march
upon Gh aznin. he, being unable to resist him with hopes of success, retired
into Hindustan [here signifying the Panj&b] and took up his residence at
Labor. He turned, his attention to the government of the western portion of
his father’s dominions, which were now left to him ; but, when ’Ala-ud>Dln
retired, after the plunder of Gh aznin, Kh usrau Shah returned to Ghaznin, and
again took up his quarters there. Soon after, when the Qhuzz tribe took
Sultan Sanjar, his great uncle, captive, and were advancing towards Ghaznin,
Shusrau Shah, who, probably, while Sultan Sanjar was in power, might have
expected lud from him in some shape or other, now that he was a prisoner,
was totally unable to resist them, and he again retired to LShor, and died there
in 555 H., after reigning eight years.”

* In one copy Tura^.

* Great discrepancy prevails among authors respecting the latter part of
Bahr^m Shah’s reign, and the reigns of Khusrau Shah, and Khusrau Malik,
which I will notice as briefly as possible.

The flrsl events noticed in Fafih-l, under the year 523 H., are, ” the return
of BahrSm Shah to Gh aznin. his encountering Saif-ud-dln, Gh url. and the
capture of the latter.”- He was pdaced upon a .bullock—not “a cow "—
and paraded through the streets of that city, and afterwards put to death.
’Ala-ud-Dln, his brother, determined to revenge him, and marched towards
Ghaznlh with a numerous army ; but Bahram died before his arrival, in that
same year [523 H.].” An account of the plunder of the city, and massacre of
the people then follows ; and it is farther stated therein, that ’Ala-ud-Dln,
Jahan-soz, made over the sovereignty of Gh aznin to his nephews, the brothers
Ghiyas-ud-Din, and Mu’izz-ud-Dln, and that ’* Khusrau who succeeded

his father. Bahr&m, was inveigled by them, that same year, and immured
within the citadel of Ghuzulu, and the dynasty of the nace of Mahmud, son of
Sabuk-Tigtn, ended:”—that is, terminated over the Gh aznin territory.

Y&fa’l, Baifawl, Guzldah, TSrt]th-i-Alfl, and some others agree with
the above statement, except as to the year of Bahi£m’s death, and the termina¬
tion of the dynasty. These four works also mention ’ Al&-ud-Din as the JSrst of
the Maliks—here, doubtless, signifying incUpendeHt rulers —of Gh ur ; and
they, correctly, it appears to me, account those previous tp him to have been
mere subordinate chieftains, for, if we consider the small extent of territory
th^ could only have possibly possessed, their statements are to be relied
upon.

THE YAMlNlAH DYNASTY. Its

His sons were Matimud, Kh usrau Malik, and Kai-
Khusrau.

Gucfdah utys BahrSm died in 544 H. after a jeign of thiitjr-two yean, while
FanXkatt asserts that he reigned twenty years, and died in 532 H. The Mun>
takliab'nt'TawSrtkll, which is generally most particular and correct as regards
dates, agrees with Guztdah as to the year, but confirms the statement of Yaia’t,
Fa$ih t, and the NieSm-ut-Ta'^rtkb, as to Khnsran Shah having reigned but
MW year, after which the tribe of Qliuzz came against Gh arnfn. and he, being
unable to cope with them, retired into Hind, and took up his residence at
L&hor, where he died in 545 K. The Muntakhab-ut-Tawarlkh however adds,
that, in the Raufat-uf-^aili, the year 555 H, is given. Guztdah also says this
event occurred in 555 H., and in this Baifawt agrees. Among more

modem works, the Ta«kirat-ul-MulGk and Tartkh-i-Alft state that Bahrfim
died in 547 H., after reigning thirty-five years, and Khusrau Shah in 555 H.,
and in this the Xuba^at-i-Akbart, Badaunf, and Firishtah, and other modem
writers agree.

Our author states that Bahrlm ascended the throne in 511 H., and died in
552 H. after a reign of forty-one years ; and that Kh usrau ghah, his son, suc¬
ceeded, and reigned seven years, but does not give- the date of his decease ; but,
by his statement, it would have been in 559 H., after which date his son,
Kh usrau Malik, succeeded. Their coins, mentioned farther on, tend to show
the contrary.

As to ’Ala-ud-Din’s making over the government of Ghaznin to his nephews,
there is not so much discrepancy in the earlier writers, with the exception of
our author, who expressly states that they were detained within the walls of a
fortress by him, and were only set at liberty by his son and successor, as men*
tioned in Section XVII., which see. This was the year after Saif-ud-Din’s
death, who, according to Fa;ih'i, was slain in a battle with the Gh uzz near
Balkh, in which same year his nephew, Qbiyas-ud-Din, succeeded him, and
inflicted a defeat upon the Qhuzz, with considerable slaughter, and imposed
tribute on them.

After Kh usrau Shah comes his son Kh usrau Malik, or Malik Khusrau, as
he is Also styled. Yafa’I, Baifawt, Guzidah, and Fanakatt say the dynasty
terminated with Khusrau Shah, and make no mention of his son, as his
successor. Perhaps they - considered him as ruler of the Panjab only. The
Ta^kirat-ul-Muluk states that Khusrau Malik succeeded his father as ruler of
the Panjab in 555 H., and was put to death in 583. H., after reigning twenty-
eight years, while the Muntakhab-ut-Tawarikh, which agrees in the 'date of
his accession, says that he was immured in a fortress in Gh arjistSn in 583 H.,
and in 588 h. was murdered along with his son Bahram Shah, and the whole
of the remainder of the Ghaznawi family then left. Kau{at-u$-$ala, ^abtb-us-
Seyr, Firishtah, and others say this occurred in 582 H., and Budaunt, who
merely gives this ruler a place “because the author of the Xabo^t-i-Akbart
does so,” as he remarks, says 583 h. Our author states that the Ghurts first
appeared before LShor in 577 11., and gained possession of it in 583 H., thus
agreeing with some of the above statements, but mentions the year 598 h., as
the ymr in which Kh usrau Malik and all his family were mhrdeied.

Fafih't mentions the Qhu^^us as powerful in Gh azntn and Hind in 566 Ii.,
tha t Q]pyfig-nd-Dtn took that capital from the Ghuzz tribe [What an excellent
opportunity this would be, to the “ comparative ” or rather superlative “ philo¬
logists,” to have derived the name of Ghaznfn from the Ghuzz tribe 1] in
569 H., and made It over to his brother, Mu’izz, as WUf. After referrii^ to

114

THE TABA^PAT-I-NA5IRL

XV. KHUSRAU MAWK, SON OF KHUSRAU SHAH, THE EAST
OF THE MA^^MOdI dynasty.

Taj-ud-Daulah, SuItan-i-Halim, or the Mild Sultaa,
Kh usrau Malik, ascended the throne at Labor.

He was a monarch of excessive mildness and benefi¬
cence, unassuming, and endowed with many good qualities,
but addicted to pleasure. As he came at the close of the
sovereignty of his family, no prepossessing memento of him
has survived, and the sovereignty of that dynasty termi¬
nated in him. Anarchy and disorder at last showed itself
in the affairs of his government, and all the Amirs and lesser
officials of the country, both the Turks and the free-born
[natives], all became too powerful for him to deal with, and
the servants of the state and governors of provinces and
districts exercised independent power, whilst their sovereign
abandoned himself Wholly to plesisure.

the defeat, by him, of a horde of the Sanlj^ran, a sept of the Qhuza tribe [not
"a mountain" or '“a town"] in 571 H., and his expedition against Nahr*
wSlah in 57$ H., the same work states, under the occurrences of the year

581 H. —“ In this year an engagement took place between Sultw Mu’izz-ud>
Dtn Muhammad, son of Sam, son ofHusain, son of Sam, the Wall of Ghaznfn,
and Kh usrau Malik, at Lohot, in Hind. Khusrau was taken captive by
stratagem ; and the Sipah-salar, ’Alt Karmakh, who was WSlt of MultSn
previously, was left at Lohor as WMt, but some writers say this took place in

582 H.”

In Mr. Thomas’s paper on the Qliaznt Coins there is, unfortunately, no
notice of the last two monarchs of the house of Sabuk-Tig^n, and there are no
coins of theirs, or the dates above referred* to might have been tested ; but a
work I have by me supplies some information on the subject, and confirms the
statements of Fa;ih- 1 , and the older writers. A coin of Khm tran Shah’s
therein noticed, contains the following inscription, which 1 translate literally

Obverse—“Stamped coin in the imivetse, with magnificence and grandeur,
the great Badabah Khusrau Sfha h.”

Reverse—“Struck in the city of Lohor, A.H. 552, the first of his reign.’’

Another coin of his son, Khusrau Malik, also struck in the Panjab, contains
the following inscription :—

Obverse—“ ^htr-ud-Daulah wa ud-Dln, Sul^Sn Kbnsrini Malik.”

Reverse—“ Struck in the city of Lohor, a. h. 555, the first of the reigii.”

All writers agree as to the deceitful and treacherous conduct of Mu’ize>ud>
Dtn, Ghurt, toarards Khusrau Malik. After he had inveigled that unfortunate
prince by his oaths and promises, he broke them, and sent him and the whole
of the family then remaining to his brother QhiySg-ud'Dtn, to be immured in a
fortress in Qhur. Subsequently, when these very pious and model SultSna,
as our author considers them, found those unfortunates in the way, they
massacred the whole of them:

THE YAMlNlAH DYNASTY. 115

Sultan Mu’izz-ud-Dtn Mul^mmad, Sam, used to advance
every year from Ghazntn, and to possess himself of por¬
tions of Hind and Sind, until in the year 577 H., when he
appeared before the gate of Labor, and extorted a son
and an elephant from Khusrau Malik, and then retired.
Thus matters went on until the year 583 H., when he brought
an army against Lahor and reduced it. Khusrau Malik
was induced, under the faith of a treaty, to come out, upon
which he was taken and sent off to Ghaznin. and from
thence was removed to the capital, FirOz-koh, which was
the seat of government of the elder Sultan, Ghiya^ud-Dln
Mul^mmad, Sam. That sovereign gave orders that
Khusrau Malik should be immured within the fortress of
Balarwin *, in Gharjistan.

When the affair ’ of Sultan SJtah occurred in Khurasan,
and the two Sultans turned their attention to that important
enterprize, they put Sultan Khusrau Malik to death in the
year 598 H., and the latter’s son, Bahram Shah, who was
confined within the fortress of Saifrud of Ghur, was also
murdered, and the dominion and dynasty of Na^ir-ud-Din,
Sabuk-Tigin, became obliterated, and the sovereignty of
Ir^, the throne of Hindustan, and the territory of ^u-
r^an came under the sway of the Maliks and Sultans of
the house of Shansabani.

Khusrau Malik’s sons were Bahram Shah. Mabmud
Shah. Jahan Shah. Mas’ud Shah. Malik Shah, and Khusrau
Shah.

* In the grester number of places where this name occnrs in the different
MSS., is given; but it is also written Yalarwin, Badw2n, and in

various other wa]^. SaifrQd is also written Sahjfaiin in some copies. Sec
note to MnWud'Dfn’s reign, Section XIX.

f See under Section XVII.

SECTION XII.

THE DYNASTY OF THE SALjO^lAH.

The author of the TariJclj-i-Sanl \ who was Ibn Hai^am,
has thus related : that when the victorious Sultan, Ma^mud-
i-Sabuk-Tigin, crossed the Ji^un, and the territory of
Mawar-un-Nahr was left clear in his hands, l^adr Khan,
who was the brother of the late I-lak [Kha n], and of the
Afrasiyabi dynasty, entered into negotiation with the Sultan.
Between the two potentates treaties of alliance and amity
were entered into, and confirmed and cemented, and an
interview took place between them ®.

After Kadr Khan had been received by the Sukan, the
latter commanded, after the public reception, that the privy
apartment should be cleared ; and they held private con¬
ference together, and consulted confidentially on all the
affairs of Iran and Turin, l^adr Khan preferred many
requests to the Suljan, one of which was that he would
remove the son of Salju]|:*, the Turkman, with his followers

‘ At Section VII. page ii, the author calls the work ^^a^.i-Sanf, but the
signification is the same. See also note *, page 56.

* This interview took place in 419 H. They entered into a treaty of friend*
sliip and alliance, the principal stipulation in which was, that a portion of
Mawar-un*Nahr should remain in the possession of the Sulfan, and that some
should belong to ]^adr Khan, who is styled Bfidg]|&h of Mawar un*Nahr.
The Khwajah-i-’Amfd, Abu Nafr i-Mighkan, Al-Zawzanf, relates that at that
time the forces along with Sultan Mahmud were so numerous, that no
monarch had ever so many under his standard before.

* With respect to the Salj&hs and their rise to power. Oriental historians
differ considerably ; but space will not permit my noticing their discrepancies,
except very briefly. Several authors altogether deny that Sultan MahmOd
suffered the Saljuks to enter Slxuiiisan, and assigned them lands therein—among
whom is the author of the Rau^at-ug-^aik—and contend that the two brothers,
Di’ud-i-Jaghar Beg and Tugjxril Beg [but our author states they were altogether
separate from those under Yagh-mu or Yagh*niur; still his statement is so con*
fused as to be scarcely reliable], with their dependents, did not Cross the Jt^iun
into Khurasan, until the reign of Mas’ud, when they appropriated Nis 2 and
Abiward, but, at the s&me time, sent to tender their allegiance to that monarch.
Sec note *, p. 120. In the TariJtlx of Abu*l-’AlS*i'Aliwal, or the “Squinter,”

THE SALjCylAH DYNASTY.

117

and dependents, from the country of MSwar-un-Nahr and
Turkistan into KhurSsSn. These followers and dependents

SaljOV is said to have been a descendant of AfriUiytb, and had four sons—
Isr&’tl, MtkS’tl, MQsfi-i-Beshii [i> son of Beghu], and Y&nas. The Jftmi’-
ttt'Tawartlcb says he had fivt; and that the name of the fourth son was YQsuf,
and the fifth Yunas. Finding the lands they occupied too circumscribed, they
were compelled, in 375 K., to leave their native pastures in TurkistSn—one
author says the Dasht-i-Skurz—and entered Mawar-un-Nahr, and took up
their quarters in the NOr of BukbSia, and the Su^d of Samr|pnd, making
the former their winter, and the latter their summer quarters. Mahmud,
according to the '* Squinter,” was on friendly terms with them [see under his
reign], and Isra’tl came and waited upon him, when that monarch entered
M&war-un-Nahr, smd was treated with great distinction. This was the occa¬
sion when IsiS’fi told the Sult&n the effect which the sending of his two
arrows and his bow would have, so well known as not to require relation here.
[Gibbon incorrectly calls him Ismatl /] The Sul[iln, it is stated, became sus¬
picious of the SaljGhs on this, and had Isra’il seized, when in a state of
Intoxication, and sent to the fortress of Kalinjar in Hind ; but a few authors,
including our own, say “ to the fortress of Multan.” The former statement
I think the most reliable. IsA’il remained in durance till his decease seven
years after ; but, previous to his death, he sent messengers to his brothers,
sons, and kinsmen, and incited them to rebel. They sent to ask Mabm'dd’s
leave to cross over the Jl^un into Eliuiiis 3 ln ; but Arsalan the ^ajib, who was
governor of that province, refused to grant it, and strongly advised the Sultkn
to refuse permission. Contrary to Arsalan’s advice, he gave them ftermission ;
and they passed the Jttl&n, and took up.their quarters*in the pasture-lands
al>out Nisa and Ablward. Mtk&’tl had two sons, Tughril, and Da’ud-i-
Jayhar Beg, who, from their talents and superior accomplishments, becathe the
leaders of the tribe.

Other writers, however, say that Salju]^ had four sons, Isra’tl, Mtka’tl, MQsi,
and Yunas.; and that Beghu was the son of Musa. Mika’tl having been slain in
one of the battles of that period, 'leaving two sons, SaljuV named those two
grandsons, Da’ud-i Jaghar Beg and Tughril B^ rulers of the tribe after his
decease. When Mahmud of Ghazntn subdued the territories of Mkwar-un-
Nahr, among other chiefs, Da’ud and Tughril, who had fought several battles
with the rulers of Turkistan, and had acquired fame for valour, waited on
Mahmud, and solicited that some portion of territory should be assigned to
their tribe, as grazingrgrounds for their flocks and herds.

Fa;ih-t states that; previous to Mahmud’s crossing the Jthun and. entering
Mawar-un-Nahr, as early as 41.6 h., Da’ud-i Jaghar Beg, son of Tu^rtl Beg,
son of Mtka’tl, son of Saljuh—by this account Da’ud-i-Ja^r Beg was
Mtk&'tl’s grandson—had risen and entered into the ShwSrazm territory,
thus, in a measure, confirming a part of our author’s statement The-same
authority mentions that it was in 419 H., on the Sullin’s return from Mawar-
un-Nahr, that Isra’tl, son of Be^u, son of SaljOh, son of Luhman, had the
interview with the SultSn, who brought him along with him ; but soon after,
on some account or other, Isr&’tl was seized and sent to the fortress of Kalinjar.
For Fanakatt’s statement on this subject, see note *, p. 126.

The above notice of the SaljCV* hu heen taken from the TUrtkh-i-AbQ-l-
’Ala, Guztdah, the Lubb-ut-Tawartkh, jami’-ut-Tawartkh, Abu-l-Fafl-i-
Baiha^t,'ilrtl^-i-Alft, Mujami’-ul-Hlijiir, Jahan-Ara, and the Muntakhab-
ut Tawartkb, and others. Yifa’t differs considerably from these works and

Ii8 THE TABA]5:AT-I-NA5IRI.

of Saljul): and his son were a tribe whose dwelling-place
was the Nur * of Bulshara, and they were all subject and
obedient to the Samani dynasty.

At the period in question the son of Salju]^ had attained
to man’s estate, and, on account of his prowess and valour,
his arrow and his sword, all the Maliks of Turkistan and
the Afr^iyabf rulers were continually in fear. Not a bird
in the air nor a deer of the plain escaped his arrow ; and,
like a whirlwind and a thunder-cloud, he was wont to enter
the chase or the conflict, and used to vanquish every man
who entered into a personal contest with him. Upon this
occasion when Kadr Kha n joined and accompanied Sultan
Mahmud, and all were in attendance at his stirrup, and pro¬
ceeding towards the Sultan’s own tents,the sonofSaljuh con¬
tinued to ride on before them all, a Turkman cap placed jaun¬
tily on one side of his head, and bestriding a horse like the
spur of a mountain, galloping about like a roaring Uon, or
the flickering lightning, in such wise that the forces of Turan
and Iran were amazed at his agility and horsemanship.

As ^adr Khan had requested of the Sultan, so it was
carried out; and, at the very time that l^adr Kh an set out
on his return [to his own territory], they brought a man¬
date [from the Sultan] to the son of Saljuh to remain in
his tent,and gave orders that his followers, with his and
their effects, should cross the river Jihun into the conflnes
of Kh urasan in company with the Mahmudt forces. Agents
were directed to take care of them, and look after them ;
and, when they reached the bank of the Jthun, they crossed
the river along with servants of the Sultan.

At the time the command was issued that the son of
Salju]^, along with his followers and dependents, should
embark on boats, and pass over the Ji^iun with their pro¬
perty and effects, the Hajib, Arsalan Kha n*, who was

authors, but least from Guztdah. I have not completed the translation of that
portion of YSfa’t as yet, therefore cannot make much use of it at present.

It will be noticed that our author repeatedly quotes " the son of SaljuV,”but
gives no name ; and, moreuver, Isril’tl, to whom be must refer, was, by some
accounts, SaljOV’s son, and 1 ^ others, his grandson.

* A district of the territory of Bukh&A so called.

* His correct name is Atsal&n Khan . JSfib seems to have been an

error on the part of some early copyist for ^fijib and copied accord¬

ingly by Firishtah, and other modem authors.

THE SALjC^lAH DYNASTY. 119

the Amtr [Governor] of Khurasan, and the greatest of the
retainers of Sul{an Mahmud, made a representation to that
monarch, saying: " This which your Majesty has com¬
manded is far from the cautious counsel of your servant,
for, with your own hand, you have placed power in the
hands of the enemies of your country, over the dominion
of your descendants; and, in the end, by this tribe, disorder
and tumult will be brought upon the empire.” The Sul(an,
in reply, said: “What is your opinion in this matter The
^ajib, Arsalan, answered: “My advice is this, that the
whole of them be commanded to re-embark on board the
boats, and then to sink them in the river; or otherwise to
have their thumbs cut off*, so as to render them incapable
of discharging arrows in future.” Suljtan Mahmud answered:
“Arsalan, thou art a hard-hearted man, indeed ! To break
one’s promise, and slay the helpless, are not acts becoming
a sovereign who possesses any feelings of honour, or a man
who has any magnanimity in his nature ; and, moreover,
destiny cannot be averted by perfidy any more than by
valour.” However, after the son of Salju)^ had been con¬
veyed across the Jthun, it was commanded that he should
be brought to Multan, while his kinsmen, and his other fol¬
lowers and dependents were assigned pasture-lands for their
flocks and cattle in the territory of Kh urasan, such as Nisa,
Nishapiir. Baward^ and other tracts in Upper Kh urasan.

As the Almighty had willed that, subsequently, this race
should become great and powerful, and that from their
posterity should spring puissant and mighty monarchs and
rulers, notwithstanding Suljtan Mahmud afterwards re¬
gretted what he had done, still regret was of no avail, for
regret cannot avert destiny.

Imam Abu-l-Fafl-i-Baihahi states in his Tarikh-i-Nayirt*,

* So in the text; but it must be presumed that the author meant the thumb
of the A/ iinW of all the males.

f Also called Abtward ; but, correctly speaking, Ablward is the name of
the town, and BSward the name of the district. Cuzfdah states that the people
of Shur&sin, in the parts where the SaljOVs were located, became attached to
the brothers fushril and Jagbar Beg.

* This portion of Baiha^t's work has not come down to us. He mentions
the names of these chiefs in one or two places in the part relating to the life of
Mas’Od, and says that the people who entered Shuiftsan under Vagh-mur and
other chiefs were Turkmans ; and he always makes a differenoe between them
aitd the-Saljal^s.

120 THE TABA^AT-Z-NA^IRI.

that, at the time that Sultan MatimOd carried across the
Jitiun four thousand Salju|^ families, their Mihtars, or chiefs,
were four persons, Yagh-mur *, Bu]|j:ah, KOk-tash. and ^azil,
and in different parts of Kh urasan pasture-lands were
assigned to them, and they were made over to [the guar¬
dianship of] the great nobles of Kh urasan, and instructions
were given to them that the Saljuks should, in no way, and
on no account, be permitted to carry arms. Their chief, who
was the eldest son of Salju]|:, and famous for hi^ manhood,
was sent to Multan, along with two of his sons * likewise ;
and at Multan, after some time had passed away, they
also died *. The remainder of the Salju|^ tribe, who had re¬
mained behind in Mawar-un-Nahr, were in the habit every
year of migrating from Nur of Bukhara to Darghan * of
Kh warazm. to the pasture-lands therein. They entertained
innate enmity towards the Malik [chief] of Jund, whose
name was Shah ; and, in the reign of Sultan Mas’ud, the
Martyr, the Amtr [Governor] of Kh warazm. the son of
Altun-Tasli *, rebelled against the Sultan’s authority. The

* Also written Yagdi-mur.

t It will be doubtless noticed here that our author stated just a few lines
above, quoting Baihaj^i, as he says, that the Saljufcs, who crossed the Jihun
into Khurasan, hadchiefs, and immediately after says, " their chief, who
was Saljufc's son,” died at Multan. He evidently confounds those of the tribe
who entered Kh uAsan with the remainder who stayed behind. See p. 121.
Yafa’i states that their place of abode was twenty farsakhs, or leagues, distant
from Bukhara.

* All the copies of the work do not contain this last sentence about the
sons.

* Fafih- 1 , Baifawi, and other authorities, mention the death of Isra’il, son
of Beghu, son of Suliman, son of Saljuk, at Kalinjar, in 426 H. His son had
come with a party of followers from Mawar>un-Nahr to effect his release and
carry him off. They had succeeded in getting him out of the fortress, but
missed the road, were pursued, and overtaken. When his pursuers were in
the act of searing him, be cried out to his son : “ I shall never be released ;
do you seek to acquire territory.” That same year Da’ud-i-Jaghnr Beg broke
out into open rebellion i and took up his quarters at Marw.

* Considered generally as belonging to Samr^and.

* Altun-Tash, the appointed viceroy of Khwarazm by Sultan

Mahmud in 407 H. > after he [Mahmud] hod proceeded thither in person, and
had defeated the rebels, who had slain his son-in-law, Mamiin, son of M 3 mun,
and had put Nial-Tigin to death, as related in the events of MahmQd’s reign.
When the SultSn returned to Balkk, after his raid upon the Afgjttns, Altun-
Taah-i-Kkwararm Sha h, as he is styled, was sent for. He came and remained
at Court three months. He then obtained permission to return ; and, in the
presence of Khwajah Ahmad-i-^asan, Maimandt, the Waztr, and the Khwajah
-i-’Amtd, Abu Na?r-i-Mi5hk5n, gave his word, and swore, that he would never

THE SALJOhIAH dynasty.

I2I

Salju^s joined him in that outbreak; and, in the year
435 H., he bestowed upon them a tract of country belong¬
ing to the territory of Khwarazm. which they call Raba(-i-
Ma§ah, as gprazing ground for their flocks and herds. The
chief of Jund, having received information as to their situa¬
tion, made a raid upon them, and slew about eight thou¬
sand of the males, and but few of them remained, and they
became totally at a loss as to what they should do in this
state of affairs.

The Governor ofKhwarazm. Harun, the rebel, the son of
Altun-Tash [with whom the Salju^s had sided, as before
stated] had [lately] been killed, and they found it impos¬
sible to continue to dwell in the territory of Khw arazm;
and, through fear of the sons of 'All Tigin, the late ruler of
Bulehara, who was one of the Afrasiyabi Kha n a. or chief¬
tains, they were unable to enter that territory. Out of
necessity, therefore, they moved towards Nisa and Marw
—in all about seven hundred horsemen—with their pro¬
perty, and their families and dependents.

Yagh-mur, who was one of their chiefs, had died pre¬
viously to this, and a son of his remained ; and, when that
portion of the tribe [who had escaped the sword of the
Malik of Jund] came towards Nisa and Marw from Khw a-
razm, the son of Yagh-mur* was unable to cope with them,
for, although they were weak in numbers themselves, other
tribes, such as the Ntalts ^ and others, had joined them. The
son of Yagh-mur [with his tribe, who had first crossed the
Jt^un] retired before them, and entered Tra^, and seized
upon Rai; and the Salju^s took up their residence in the

act contrary to the SulSan’s wishes and commands; and he left two sons,
Saihl p] and Yusuf, at Court. In 422 H., after the accession of Mas’Qd, the
Martyr, Altun-T^ah presented himself at Court, and was soon allowed to 1
return. After he had departed, a number of the Sulfan’s advisers, worked on
the mind of the SulJSn so much about it, that he regretted he had allowed him
to leave. A message was sent for him to return, but he made excuses,and did
not do so. It was thought he had penetrated into the design against him ;
but subsequently he became satisfied, after receiving kind messages firom the
SulSSn. No mention is made in Fa^ih*! respecting this grant of lands by the
“ son of Altun-Tash,” to the SaljQVs-

* Here again our author says the son of Yagh-mfir, but does not give any
name. This Is his constant failing.

I The Ntalts refer to the sidherents of Ntal-Tigtn, viceroy of the Panjab,
who had rebelled, and had been removed. See Baiha^t.

I

isa the taba^At-I.na^irL

grazini^ lands on the border of the desert [in the districts of
Nis<l and Marw].

The Almighty gave them strength and power, so that
they possessed themselves of the territories of Kh urasan ;
and the east, .and the west, and whatever the dominions of
Isl3m were, wholly and completely came under the sway of
their descendants, in such wise that their fame will remain
upon the records of time unto the judgment day*.

I. TUGHRIL, SON OF MIKA’IL*.

The author of the. Tarikh-i-Nasirl *. Imam Abu-l-Fa?l-i-
Baiha]|f:t, relates after this manner : that, at this period when
the Salju]|f:s entered the skirt of the desert of Khu rasan,
and the son of Yagh-mur retired discomfited* before them,
their Mihtars [chiefs] were three persons—Tughril and
Da’ud, two brothers, the sons of Mika’il, and their uncle
Beghu; and all three in accord determined to tender their
services to Sultan Mas’ud, and despatched a confidential
agent to the SultSn’s presence—he, at that time, having
come to NtshapQr from Gurgan—and solicited that the dis¬
tricts of Nisa, Farawah, and certain places at the head of the
desert might be assigned to them in fief*. In the missive

■ The commencement of the outbreak of the SaljO^ 'was in 433 H. ; aiid,
in the same year, l^adr the Turk, ruler of MZwar>un-Nahr, died.

Jas 3 i<ur Beg, son of Abu Sultman, seized Mamr, and took up his quarters there
in 436 H. The SaljulFS made an attempt upon Hirftt in 438 H., but were re¬
pulsed, and forced to retire. They return^ however in the following year,
and compelled the place to capitulate, and the territory was annexed in the
name of Sultln Xudvil Beg; but SnltSn Mas’Gd subsequently gained re¬
possession of Hirit, and severely punished those who had, as he considered,
so tamely capitulated to the Saljn^s. See note *, p. 139.

* His correct name is AbQ Muhammad, and his titles Rukn-ud-dtn,

Xugliril Beg, Yamtn-i-Amtr.ul-Mumintn, or “The Right Hand of the Lord
of the Faithful.”

* This work is styled TSrtJcb-i-Muhaddast-i-Naviii in two copies of the
text at this place.

* The word here used is “ssweArsuw,” signifying routed, put to flight,
discomfited in battle^ dispersed, &c.

* As from other writers, our author has not quoted Biuhaht correctly. The
text states that they tent a trustworthy agent to the Snltdn* The following is
condensed from what Baihaht says in this matter. Soon after Mas’Od arrived
at GurgKn, a despatch reached his minister from BS-Fafl, SQrt, Dtwin of
Ntihlpar, which had been brought by horsemen in two da3rs and a half from
that city, intimating an irruption of SaljOVs and Nlalts from Marw, who bad

THE SALJfOil^lAH DYNASTY.

133

in question they had written their own names in the fol¬
lowing manner:—“ Tughril. and Beghu, and D 3 .’ud, who

l»t>ceeded to Nisa, where they had joined the Turkmans [see note *, page 119]
there, and that they had heen reinforced by other SalJuV* and SJiwarazmts ;
and further, that he, BQ-Fa;!, enclosed therewith a communication addressed to
him by Begjiu, Tughril, and DS’ud, in order that the Sult 3 n might give such
orders upon it as he might deem fit The communication began thus : “ To
his Excellency the Shaikh, the Illustrious Lord, the' Sayyid Maul&n2 Abl-ul*
Fafl-i-Surt, from bis servants, Beghu [it will be noticed that the uncle here
takes precedence of the nephews], Tugjxril, and Da’ud, the MuwUt or lieges
of the Amtr-ul-Mumintn and began, “ We, your servants.” They went
on to state that they found it impossible to dwell in M 3 war-un-Nahr and
Bukhara since the death of Alt-Tigin, who had been kind and friendly towards
them, as his affairs were now administered by his two sons, inexperienced
boys, who were hostile towards them. On account of the distracted
state of Shadirazm, through Harun, its ruler, having being killed, they
found it impossible likewise to remove thither; and therefore they had
come to put themselves under the protection of the Sovereign of the
World and Lord of Beneficence, the great Sultan. They hoped the
TTh u^jah [Abt-ul>Fafl] would aid them at this juncture, and write on
their ]>ehalf to the Skwajah, ’Abu Nafr [theWazfr], and advocate their
cause as they were known to him. They farther solicited that, as through that
minister’s gc^ offices [EllwSjah Abu Nafr-i-Ahmad had previously been Waair
to H£riin and his father], the late Harfin, Skwarazm Shah, used to allow them
to remove with their families and flocks into his territory in winter, he would
aasbt.them now. If the Sultan, they said, would accept their vassalage, one
of them would constantly attend at Court [as a pledge of good faith], and
the other two would serve him in such manner as he might command ; and
they Wduld rest under his great diadow. They asked that the territories of
Nisa and Farawah, which lay on the edge of the Desert [between the moun¬
tains bounding Kh nrSsgn on the north-east, and the Jfhfia or Oxus], should be
conferred upon them, in return for which they promised they would undertake
to prevent any rebel from raising, his head in BnUrhSn Koh, Dihistan, the
direction of Ekwaracm, or the Jihun ; and would assail the ’Irakis [the Turk¬
mans under Yagh-mfir*a son are here referred to] and drive them out. Their
request Was couched in civil words, to all appearance, but concluded as
follows : ’* but if, which God forbid, die Sultan would not grant their request,
and should refuse his permission, they did not know what the state of affairs
might become, because they had no place on earth, and none remained to
them. Not having the boldness to venture to address such an august person
[as the Sul^n’s Wazlr], tbey-had addressed the Ekw&jah [Abt-ul-Fafl] to
solicit him. Please God I to bring their request to a favourable issue.”

SultXn Mas’fid wished to move at once against them, so wrath was he at
this insolent demand > and bitterly complained of the injury and trouble his
father had entaUed upon the empire and upon him, through allowing any of
those ** ounel-drivers,” as he styled the SUjiiks, to pass the Jihfin, in the first
instance. The Waxtr and some others counselled the acceptance of the
allegiance of the Saljiik chie6.; but another party at the Court advised the
SnltSn not to think of marching against them himself, or at the present dme^
as they would have it that the cattle of his army, after the late expedition,
required rest. They advised that a reply should be sent to Ab{-ul-Fa>l, telling

I a

134

THE TABA¥AT.I.NA$IRI.

are the M^walt [lieges] of the Lord of the Faithful, repre¬
sent unto your presence/' &c. The Almighty had been
pleased to fill their hearts with much arrogance and con¬
tumacy ; and, when the purport of their request was made
known to the Sultan, he at once commanded that they
should have a reply couched in courteous words, but a
force of about 15,000 horse, under the command of the
Salar [general], Bak-Taghdi. was told off in the year
4*0 h/, to proceed against them.

When that force reached the Saljuks, it fought a stub¬
born battle with them, and the Sultan’s army sustained
a defeat, and the Sultan, out of necessity, had to come to

him to acquaint the Saljufc chiefs, in reply to their demand, “ to be under no
concern, as they had come to their own homes [as it were], and that they were
in his dominions, and under his protection and to pretend that he was going
to march to Rai, but instead to proceed to Nf^apur, and get a force
ready to send against them unawares. The Sul{£n was induced to follow
this advice, and the upshot was the despatch of 15,000 horse to NisS,
under the ^ajib, Bak-Taghdt. He, on first coming upon the SaljOVs
near Saraldxs, defeated and routed them; but, soon after, his troops, who
were already encumbered with baggage and women, having taken to plunder,
he was himself overthrown, by the SaljOlts, who had again rallied and
attacked him. Tliis took place in Sha’ban. 427 H., not in 420 H., as .
our author relates, and as is written in the ten copies of his work collated.
After this affair, Mas’Qd had to agree to their demands, they being tAe first
however to open negotiations, and Fai 3 .wah was given to Beghu, Nisa to
Tughril. and Dihistan to Da’ud, Having obtained their demands, they
became more insolent than ever.

* Several other writers differ here, not only from our author, but also from
BaihaVt, who is very particular respecting dates. In the banning of 426 H.,
the TCha saVi TChad im^ Nush-Tigtn, routed a body of Turkmans near Marw ; and
in the same year, a force of I7,cxx> horse, under the Salar, Bak-Taghdt, was sent
against them. He was at first successful; but, the enemy having drawn him
into the desert, where water was not procurable, and his troops being careless
and over confident, he sustained a complete defeat in the eighth month of that
year. In the following year, a force of lo^ooo horse and 5000 foot was prepared
to operate against the Saljufps, under the command of the ^ajib-i-Buzoxg,
Subaaill. In the first month of 429 H., in fulfilment of a vow made during
illness, Masud undertook an expedition against HSnst, captured it in the third
month of that year, and in the fourth returned to Gh azntn. In the same yeat*,
Mas’ud, being unable from the state of affairs to proceed against the Saiju^s
as he was desirous of doing, despatched orders to the to expel them ^m

Sburasan. Subasht sent a reply to the effect that they were far more than he
could cope with. Mas’ud imagined the ^^jib was enhancing, or desirous of
enhancing, his services, and sent him orders to march against them without
farther delay. He did so, and his meeting them, and his defeat followed.
The Hajib is styled Surlwobt, and SuriASbt by Guztdah, Sanbaght in the
Tartlcb-i-Alft, and SulSgf by our author. The name mentioned by BaihaJ^t
is no doubt correct.

THE SALjO^iAH DYNASTY. las

ait accommodation with them. He bestowed NisS. upon
Xufhril, and the Dihistan on Da’ud, and gave FarSwah to
Begliu. The SulJtan then proceeded towards Bal fch. and
conferred the government of Hindustan upon his son
Maudud *.

In 429 H., the Salju^s possessed themselves of the towns
on the skirt of the desert, such as Marw, Sarakhs. and
other places besides, and solicited that Khurasan should
be made over to them. The Sultan thereupon despatched
the Hajib, Subasl, with a large army to expel them.
An engagement took place between the Sultan’s forces and
the Saljuks, and the Sultart’s troops were defeated*, and
the Saljuks acquired power over the territory of ]^uriUan.
They sent Ibrahim, Nialiah to seize upon NisJiapur, and,
subsequently, f ughril himself followed him thither. At
Nishapur he ascended the throne, and became a sovereign;
and the Khutbah was read in his name *. He despatched
Da’ud to Sarakhs, and nominated Beghu to proceed to
Man#; and they took possession of Khurasan, and one-
half* of that territory passed from the sway of the servants
of the Mas’udt dynasty *.

• Not so! Majdud was viceroy of the Indian provinces, Maudud was
left at the capital; and subsequently, when Mas’ud retired into the Panjib,
the latter was sent to BalJch, and he was with his father in the battle of
Dandan^ad.

• Farther on, our author, when mentioning the council held by the Saljuks
when they thought of leaving Mas^ud’s dominions, says, They are said to have
been defeated by the Suljan’s troops several times.” See p. 130.

7 Ibrahim, son of Nl’al, was XuShril’s mother’s brother.

• Tiighril Beg assumed sovereignty over a portion of Ehurasan, and
4tfcended the throne at Nishapur in 4*9 u. ; and the Salju^l dynasty is con¬
sidered by several authors to have commenced from that year. Others,
however, with very good reason, say that the SaljuVs only assumed indejtendent
sovereignty after the defeat of Sultan Mas’fid at Dae-Van or Dandan^an XDan-
din^d], as stated by our author farther on. He acquired sway over a large
portion of Western Asia, SJiwarazm, Dihistan, Tabbas, Rai, ^azwin, &c>, in
447 H., in which same year the Elx*lli'^i^> Al-^Ca’lm, summoned ^ngluil to
Bagltdad, and ordered his name to be entered in the Kh utbah, and impressed
upon the coin. Fanakatl states that the Khalifat sent a commission with a
robe of honour to 7’^ghril.

• A paradox of our author’s.

» Xwelvil Beg died at Xuruaht [>*^1 near Rai, Friday, 8th of Rama«Sn,
455 H., at the agp of seventy. His reign is variously computed: FanSkatl
states that he died in 442 H., after a reign of ten years 1 From 429 H. to
455 H., however, is a period of twenty-six.

126

THE taba?:At.i.nA5ir1.

II. MALIK DA’OD-I-JAGHAR BEG*, SON OF MIKA^L,

When Da’ud, after leaving the presence of his brother
Tughril. came for the purpose of taking possession of
MarW and Sarakhs. Sultan Mas’ud was at Balkhi and he
sent an agent to him [Da’ud] to see whether or not an
accommodation could be brought about*.

At that time Da’ud was in the neighbourhood of Marw,
with his forces, and it was he who was the mover in all this
boldness and audacity. He advanced to the gate of Marw.
It was at the dawn of the morning, and the Mu’a^^in
from the top of a Minarah was proclaiming this verse:—
“ O Da’ud, verily we have made thee a sovereign prince on
earth: judge therefore between men with truthDa’ud,
hearing his own name, inquired of a learned person what
was the meaning of this. The signification was explained
to him, upon which he again drew his sword, and pressed
forward after the troops of the Sultan, which were in Marw,
and put the whole of them to the sword *.

At this period, when the Sultan’s envoy from Ballch pre¬
sented himself before him, a Mu’az^in at Maiw was repeating
this verse :—“ Thou givest dominion unto whom Thou wilt,
and Thou takest away dominion from whom Thou wilt®."

* Also written Ja^art Beg. Guztdah has both Jaghar and ChaEhnr Beg.
His title is Amir ’ImSd-ud-DauIah, Abu Suliman-i-DS’ud-i-Jaghar Beg.
Guzidah, Fa$ih'l> FanSikatt, and several others, do not consider Da’ud as a
sovereign, and Alb-Arsalan is, by them, very properly, accounted the second
monarch of the SaljuVt dynasty, having succeeded his uncle Tughril. Di’ud
had died some years before. Fanakatf likewise says that on the death of
Isia’il, at Kalinjar, his son, Tughril, broke out into rebellion in 432 H., in the
reign of Sullan Mas’ud. This would imply that Tughril and the SaljuVs had
keen quiet up to this time, but such is not the case ; and Isra’il died in 426 H.
See note *, p. 120.

* This is not correct. A person was sent, according to Baihayit, to sound
the SaljuVs end, as if coming as a friend to them, to induce them to open
negotiations. They appeared quite willing to do so, and at once sent an agent
to the Waztr. It was on this occasion that Mas’Qd gave them the territory
mentioned in note *, page 122-3. 'I'he author makes great repetition through
mixing up the events of TuShnl’s reign with DS’ud’s affiairs.

* Tfxu^in, chap, xxxviii.

* The above sounds all very well, and may ber true ; but it is not contained
in BaihaVt or any other historian with whom I am acquainted. The last sen¬
tence here, it would require the author himself to explain.

* A portion of the 25th verse of chap. iii. of the

THE SALJOEIAH dynasty, »7

The envoy of SultSn Mas’Qd perceived DE*Gd, who had spread
his felt saddle-cloth under him, seated on the ground, with
his saddle placed on one side of him. Sometimes he would
rest his head upon the saddle, and stretch himself out [on
the felt] on the ground, and then again he would sit up,
and support himself resting on his elbow. His quiver of
arrows was placed near him, and at times he would draw
forth an arrow from the quiver, and he would sharpen the
head of the arrow, and then again he would smooth out the
feathers of it. The envoy of the Sultan, having concluded
his message, asked for an answer. Da'ud replied ;—" What
was this Mu’a^^in calling out about ‘Thou givest,' ‘Thou
givest’? Write that down.” A scribe accordingly wrote
down this verse on paper:—“ Possessor of all power. Thou
givest dominion unto whom Thou wilt, and Thou takest
away dominion from whom Thou wilt; Thou exaltest
whom Thou wilt, and Thou humblest whom Thou wilt,”
&c., and gave it to the envoy ^ When the envoy reached
the presence of Sultan Mas'ud, and made known to him
the condition and mode of life of Da’Gd, and placed before
him the verse in reply to his message, he understood that
the period of the sovereignty of the Ma[imudt dynasty over
the territory of Khurasan had come to an end, and, in bis
heart, he relinquished all hope of holding it*.

The Saljul^s having acquired Sarakhs and Marw, and
being left in undisturbed possession of the whole of those
districts, Da’ud determined to attack Upper Khurasan.
Manifesting the utmost daring and boldness on that occa¬
sion, he again assembled together a force of ii,ooo horse*,
and pushed on to the gates of Bal]cj|ii where the Sultan
was at the time, with all his great nobles and bis forces.

* An elephant was tied up in a place in the outskirts of the
city, and an elephant-driver had fallen asleep upon the
animal’s back. Da’Od' came during the night, unfastened

f It i( strange that all this is neither to be found in BaihaVt nor in the other
authors I have been quoting.

■ The author here contradicts hintiself, as is not unusual; for the battle of
DSe*Van [Dandinf^Sd] had not yet been fought, even by his own account.

• Most copies of the work have "Ae came with e/even horsemen," which is
absurd.

* Our author does not quote Baihaftf correctly here, as the following
extract, which 1 have nude from the original, a good MS. copy in my posses-

t 28

THE TABA]^T-I-NA$1RL

the elephant, end drove it off, and, by the time the driver
had awakened from his slumbers, the elephant had been

sion, and the printed edition of his work edited by Morley, will diow. It will
be found rather different to the translation 'given in Elliot, vol. ii. p. 143,
“The Amfr halted to celebrate the festival of No-roz, on Wednesday, the 8tb
of JamSdi-ul-AUiir. On Friday, the loth. of the same month, other news
arrived [the sentence following and part of next is not in my MS.] that Di’&d
had come to Tae'lF&n [Morley has 'j%l-Van] with a strong force, and well pre>
pared. On Tliursday, the i-bth of the month, farther information was received
that he had reached Pir-yab [Far-^b is equally correct^—^ and yare inter*
changeable], and that from thence he Would speedily advance to Sblwar-IcZn
[SJiaburglAn of course is meant—the name is spelt both ways t and our author,
as. well as Baihal^t, is perfectly correct as to the name, notwithstanding the
efforts of editors to make out otherwise. In the Persian, b is often inter*
dulnged for f, and ^ for gh, and so, in reality, both ways of writing may be, and
were adopted ; but never with s for sh, except through axi error of a copyist.
The Burh&n*i*Eata’ says, Sliahurgjiiui, in ancient times, was the name of the
city of Balkb, but now it is the name of a kasbah near it. Compare Billiot's
India, voL ii. p. 142], and that wherever -they appeared [D&’ud and his
troops] there plunder and slaughter followed. On Saturday [here the quotation
whi^ our author states he had taken from BaihaVt follows], the 18th of this
month, at night, ten Turkman [no such mode of spelling as Turkoman will be
found in any lexicographical work : the derivation is from Turk, and mSnind
—Turk-like = Turk-mim] horsemen came by stealth, close to the B&|^*i*
Sttit&n. [the Sultan’s garden—the garden in which the Sulk’s palace was
situated], and slew four Hindu foot soldiers. From thence they pushed on
near the ^uhandujj [citadel], and there the elephants were kept. They espied
one elephant, and on it a youth who had fallen asleep behind the neck of the
animal [any one who has seen elephants and their drivers will know what, is
meant by this]. These Turkmans came up and began to drive the elephant,
the youth being [still] asleep. The Turkmans passed on a fartang [or
league] from the dty, and then they awoke the youth, and said, 'Drive the
elephant faster, otherwise we will kill thee.’ He replied, ‘ 1 am obedient to
your commands;’ and began to urge the animal on, the horsemen following
close behind, urging it onwards, and goadizig it with their lances. By the time
day broke, they had gone a- considerable, distance; and they brought the
elephant to fibaburghin. Da’ud gave a present to the horsemen, and directed
them to take it to Nishapiir. From this the troops [of Mas’ud] acquired a very
bad irame, for people said, * Among these men such neglect exists, that enemies
are able to carry off an elephant from them.’ The 'next day the Amtr heard
of it, and became very much irritated tnereat, and reproved the elephant*
drivers severely, and comnanded that 100,000 dirams, should be deducted
from them, for ths price of the elephant, and several of them were castigated.
IThere is no mention of 'Hindu elephant-riders’ in the MS., although Hindfr
Ftlbans are mentioned in the printed text, but even then it would not follow
that they were Hindus in faith.]

' ‘ On Monday, the 20th of this month, Altt Sakman, the ^ajib [Chamber-
lain] of Da’ud, with 2000 horse, came up to the [very] gate of Balkb, and took
up a position at a place called the Band-i-Kafiran or the Iiifidels’ Dyke, and
plundered two villaiges. When the news reached the city, the Amir became very
angry because the horses were in the Darah-i-Gaz, &c. There is not one word

THE SALJ 0 :^AH DYNASTY. 139

taken away some five leagues, and the driver dared not
utter a word.

Da'ud [then] advanced with his forces from ShafurkSn
to 'Ali-abad of Bal kh. and fought an engagement with the
Sultan, but, notwithstanding all the efforts and endeavours
of Da’ud, he was defeated.

In the month of Shawwal of the year 429 H. the whole
of the Saljuks assembled together, Tughril, Beghu. and
Da’ud, and also the Nlalts, and the Mas’udi and Mahmudl
Turks *, some of whom had joined the Saljuks. The Sul¬
tan marched from Balkh with his forces, and led them
towards Marw and Sarakhs *; and in the desert of Sarakhs
an engagement ensued, which was contested from day-
dawn until the time of afternoon prayer, when the Saljuks
were overthrown*.

about Da’ud’s coining up to the gates of BalJcb, for Sakman was driven off in
the afternoon by one of the ^jibs with a small body of troops, and some
under the Sipah>sklar; and the Turkmans retired to ’Al{- 2 lAd again, where
they remained that night. He reported what had happened to DS’Qd, who
then advanced to 'AU> 8 b 3 d from Shaburghan. As soon as Amir Mas’fid
heard of his movements, he moved out to the Pul-i-KSrwSn until troops
arrived; and, on the 9th of Rajab, routed Ot’Qd and his troops as soon as they
reached 'Alt-abad from the direction of the desert

Several partial engagements took place up to the 5th of Shawwkl; and,
whenever the Sultan’s troops could get at the Turkmans, they overthrew them,
and scattered them “ like thin clouds before a Biscay gale,” but the difficulty
was to bring them to close quarters : they would not stand. At last, the Waztr
contrived to come to an accommodation with the SaljufFs, who appeared as
willing as he was for that course, and tracts about Nisa, Baward, and Fai^wah,
were assigned to them ; but Mas’ud agreed to it, fully determined to attack
them next year. He then returned to HirSt. Our author, as on many other
occasions, has misplaced events, putting those first which happened last, and
vice versd, as Baiha^^l’s history shows ; and in some cases, as in the following
page, has mentioned the same events twice oyer.

* The Turkish Slaves who had been first entertained by Mal^ud and othen,
and since taken into pay by Mas’ud, are here referred to. They may have been
in some way kinsmen of the Saljuks. Some of them had deserted some time
previously.

* The Sultan marched against them by way of Himt, because the SaljOlcs,

after having been compelled to withdraw from that place in 428 H., as already
stated, had returned in the following year, and had compelled the defenders to
surrender it, and the Shutbah had been read there for Sultfin

Mas’ud took the opportunity, on this occasion, when marching against the
SaljDVs, to punish the Hiratls for surrendering so easily. He reached Hirat in
^ 1 ‘Ka'dah, 430 H., and proceeded by way of Mlhanah [»;«,. or it is
spelt both ways : European writers have transformed it into MaimanahJ.

* The author here is quite confused : he makes out a second engagement,
hut no other engagement took place titan is mentioned in the preceding note

130

THE 7ABA¥AT-1-NA$IRL

The Sultan, after this, returned to Hirat; and the Sal-
jul^s, becoming aware of it, again-sought an accommoda¬
tion ; and, as a matter of necessity [on the part of the
Sultan], once more a peace was concluded. However,
Sultan Mas’ud summoned troops, with all requisite stores
and war-material, from Gha znin ; but, when those reinforce¬
ments ■ reached him, famine prevailed in Kh urasan, and
there was a great scarcity of forage. The forces of the
Sultan had become quite powerless and ineffective, and
the horses and camels had grown weak and emaciated. The
Sultan, with his whole army, advanced towards Tus ; and
“yughril retired from Nishapur. and fell back upon Sarakhs.

All the Saljulcs now met together, and came to the
unanimous conclusion, that they had no longer any power
to oppose Sultan Mas’ud and his forces ; and, as they had
been defeated several times, that it was advisable to make
terms with the Sultan, or otherwise to move towards the
territory of’Irale, and abandon Kh urasan altogether. The
lion-hearted Amir Da’ud, who had no compeer in loftiness
of spirit and energy, said;—“ Confidence is necessary in
making conquests *, even though it were necessary to
devote [one’s] life a thousand times over. I have no means
or appliances to depend upon save war ; so—Sovereignty or
destruction!—Victory or death *!” When the Saljul^ chief¬
tains beheld this bold and intrepid bearing on the part of
Da’ud, they coincided with him with one accord. Having
come to this determination, they sent away all their fami¬
lies, and dependents, and effects, into the desert; while the
horsemen, alone and unincumbered, took up a position on the
skirt of the desert, at Dae-l<:an, prepared for war and conflict.

in which also the accommodation is also referred to, but it took place btfore
the Sultan’s return to Hiriit.

From the description here, the reader would scarcely understand that the Sul^in
had advanced in the meantime from Hiriit to Nishapur. See note next page.

* Nearly all copies of the text have the words—“ should not have confi¬
dence of heart but I read it as above, and the context proves the correctness
of that reading.

• There is nothing of this kind in BaihaVt. What Da’ud said was to the
effect, that the heads of the tribe made a great mistake in imagining that they
would be able to obtain territory so easily in ’IraV and farther west ; and, that
if they should move one step out of Khurasan, Sul{an Mas'ud would not allow
them to rest upon the face of the earth, and would raise up powerful enemies
against them every where. He ended by saying that, at least, they should try
the upshot of another engagement before deciding upon abandoning KhnrSs&n.

THE SALjCylAH DYNASTY,

*3«

When the SultSn reached the spot, the battle com¬
menced ; and for three days, from morning’s dawn to the
setting of the sun, the conflict went on, until, on Friday,
the 9th of the month of Ramazan, in the year 431 H., the
troops of Sultan Mas’ud became hard pressed, and his own
Turkish troops even began to give way legion after legion.
Sultan Mas’ud was defeated^; and the Saljul^s gained the
victory, and assumed independent sovereignty.

^ This was Mas’ud’s second expedition In person against the SaljC^s,
although his officers had prevk>usly encountered them upon several occasions.
He had passed the winter of 430-31 H. at Nlahapur, with his forces encamped
in and about BaihaV [not Baiha^l’s native place], Khowaf, Bakhurz, Isfand,
Jus, and other places facing the desert. The utmost scarcity prevailed, and
grain had to be brought from a great distance. On the 28th of JamSdi-ul-
Akhir of 431 H. was the vernal equinox [about the end of March, 1039 A.D.],
and Mas’ud prepared for a fresh campaign. He had really made no prepara¬
tion for it ; but the Saljuk-s had issued from the Balkkan mountains and the
desert, and were assembled around Sarakhs. The scarcity was so great that
the force could hardly be prevented from melting away ; yet the Sultan deter¬
mined to advance to Marw, notwithstanding his Waztr and nobles advised
him against it {but Abu Na$r-i-Misllkan, the only one who could venture to
speak his mind and expostulate effectually, was dead], as the greater part of
his men had lost their horses, and had to march on foot. The animals
that remained also were nearly useless, whilst the SaljuVs were in pos¬
session of Marw, and were well supplied with all things. He moved
from Sarakks on the 19th of S 2 ia’ban towards Marw. The Turkmans soon
appeared, and among them were many rebels who had deserted from the
Turkish troops in India, and others ; and, according to their usual mode of
fighting, continued to harass Mas’Gd’s troops, who wanted for every thing.
The details are far too long for insertion ; but I may mention that Mas’ud and
his troops fought under the greatest disadvantages, for the enemy had either
emptied or filled up the few wells which the desert tract contained, while they
themselves wetted their clothes beforehand, and carried water along with
them. Mas’ud’s men and their cattle suffered from heat and extreme thirst;
and some of his Ghu lams [Turkish slaves], who, on the march, had been
obliged to ride on caiinels, in the confusion that ensued, made all the TGzik
horsemen they met dismount and give up their horses to them, after which a
large body of them deserted to the enemy. Mas’ud’s forces became separated
and confused ; order was at an end ; and leaders became separated from their
melt. “The Turkish troops,” says BaihaVt, who was present, “went one
way, and the Hindu [i. e. natives of Hind, whatever their creed] another, and
neither Kurds nor ’Arabs could be distinguished. A few Kllowa;is or body¬
guards, who remained near the Suljan, made several and repeated charges
upon the enemy ; and Mas’ud himself, who carried a poisoned halberd or
short spear ib his hand, slew every one that came within arm’s length of him—
man and hOrse. I saw Mawdud [the son of Mas’ud] myself, who was gallop¬
ing his horse here and there endeavouring to rally men around him, but no one
gave ear to him, for every one was for himself.” This occurred on the 9(h of
Romofin, 431 h., beyond the river Morw-ar-Rud, two stages from Marw-i-
ShUi-i- Johan.

13*

THE TABA]g:AT-I-NA$IRl.

After the battle was over, a throne " was set up upon the
battle-field itself, and Tughril became sovereign*. Beghu
proceeded to Marw, and Amtr DS^ud led a force towards
•yii lfha ristan and Bal kh. and subdued the territories of that
region. Subsequently, Tughril and Da’ud marched into
Khw arazm. and secured that country; and some time after
they had brought those countries under subjection, Tughril
died, and Da’ud entered into a treaty with the Mahmudts
and the Sultans of Gh aznin, and became sovereign of
Kh urasan and the territories of 'Ajam, and the universe
was given up to him \

He reigned for a period of above twenty years, and died
in the year 451 H., and the throne of sovereignty became
adorned by the victorious Sultan, Alb-Arsalan.

m. sultAn alb-arsalan-i-ghAzi, son of dA’Od-i-

JAOHAR BEG.

He ascended the throne of Kh urasan after Da’ud, in the
year 451 H.®, and the territories of Khurasan. 'Ajam, with

* - BaihaVf does not say any thing about a throne.

* Vafa’l says that great discrepancy exists among chroniclers respecting the
date of the first assumption of sovereignty by the SaijuVs, and differs much
from them. Guzidah, Fa^ih-ft and other writers of authority, state that
Tughril Beg assumed independent sovereignty over the greater part of
Ehuiiisan, at Ntahapur, in 428 H., while some few writers say, in 429 H.
In 431 H., after the defeat of Sultan Mas’ud, and his retreat to fzhaznfn, all
Kh urasan fell into the hands of the Saljul^s ; and the two brothers, and Beghu,
their uncle, divided the territory between them. In 432 H., Tughril, who had
acquired territory farther west, in ’IraV-i-’Ajam, obtained the Ehaltfah’s
consent to his assuming sovereignty, and the title of Sultan. He made Rai
his capital, and chose ’ Iia%:-i-Ajam, with its dependencies, as his portion.
Khurasan was reserved for the elder brother, Jaghar Beg-i-Di’ud, who made
Marw [some say Ballchl his capital ; and Beghu, the uncle, obtained Kirman,
Tabas, Hart [Hirat], Bust, and as much of the territory of Hind as he could
lay hands upon and filch from the Ghazntn rulers. [See page 99, in which his
and Da’ud’s defeat by Tughril, the slave of’ABD-UR-RASHlD, is mentioned
by our author only.^ He has made a complete muddle of Tughril’s reign, as
well as Da’ud’s proceedings, and it is difficult to separate them, without a much
longer note.than space will permit.

* This is a good specimen of our author’s rattdom mode of writing history.
Tughril, who was considered the head of the family, survived E^'ud some
years, and died in 455 11., as previously stated. Guzidah says he died in
453 H., Fa^ih-t 451 H., and some say 452 H. In nearly every copy of the
text he is styled Alb-Arsalan-i-Tu^ril Beg, a blunder sufficiently apparent.
His name was not Tughdl.

* Alb-Arsahui ascended the throne of ’Irak and Khurasan in Ramaf&n 45S

THE SALjO?iAH DYNASTY. 1J3

the whole of ’lr 3 V, Ebwarazm, Jabaristin, KirtnSn, Flu's,
and SlstSn he brought under his sway*. He alro led
an army into Turkistan and Turan, and the Maliks of
Turkistan, and the Afrasiyabl Amirs, submitted to his
authority.

The vastness of his fotces, the immensity of his war-
material, and the military resources of his empire, attained
to such extent, that the intellect of the geometrician would
remain in the labyrinth of helplessness, in an attempt to
compute the quantity: as a poet—in all probability the
Hakim Sana’l—who, after Alb-Arsalan’s decease, com¬
posed a dirge, says of him, in the following strophe:—

** Thoa sawest the head of Alb-Arsalfin elevated to the sublimity of the
seventh heaven ;

Come to Marw that thou mayest see the hody.of Alb-Arsalan buried in the
dust

Attended neither by train or guards, nor the moon-faced, dimple-chinn’d;

Nor the steed press’d by his thighs, nor the reins'vrithin his grasp

When Alb-Arsalan ascended the throne, he despatched
ambassadors to the Court of Ghaznln, and entered into the
strongest terms of friendship and amity with Suljtan IbrS-
hlm *, and did not interfere with the Ghaznln dominions.
He occupied himself in holy wars against Turkistan and
Rum, and in securing possession of the territories of Hijaz

not before; but he succeeded to his father’s dominions in Khurasan, at his
father’s death in 451 subject to 'Tughril of course. His correct name and
title is ’U(d-ud-Daulah, Abu Shuja’-i-Mubammad, Alb-Arsalan.

* Our author forgets to state, or did not know, that, by the will of
Tughril Beg, Sultman, son of Taghar Beg-i-Da’ud, succeeded; but
ttmiah [also writterr Eatl-miah], son of Isra’tl, Tughril’s uncle, with the
aid of the Turkmans, fought a battle with Sullman, at Damghgn. and
overthrew him. On this Alb-Arsalan came against Esl-timiah, and in
the action which ensued, near Damghan, Eal-timigh was killed by a fall
from his horse, and Alb-Arsalan was left without a rival. The ]Qialtfah,
Al-Ek’lm Bi-amr-ullah, conferred upon him the title of Burhan-ul-Muminfn.
YSfa’l, however, says that as no successor had been named by the will of
Tugliril, SultmSn, half-brother of Alb-Arsalan, ascended the throne, and that
Kal-timish joined Alb-ArsalSn against him.

* This verse, minus- the last half, is what Gibbon would lead useo believe was
the instription on Alb-Ar$alan's tomb. The third line is different in some
copies, and might be rendered :—“ Neither -with the glittering blade at his
side,” &C., or, "Neither attended by his train with the star [one of the
emblems of royalty], nor the moon-faced,” &c.

* See page 103, and note *.

^34

THE TABA¥AT>I.NA$1RI.

and Mi^r; and^ influenced by the sense of pure faith and
belief, he began to render services to the Court of the Lord
of the Faithful, Al-Ka’tm. He was distinguished upon
several occasions with honorary dresses from the TCha lt-
fah's Court, and the lieutenancy of the capital, Baghdad,
was conferred upon him.

The writer and author of this Tabae:At, Minhaj-i-
Saraj, Al-Jurjant, intimates that, in the year 613 H., he was
at the Court of Sijistan, and in that capital there was an
Imam * [Patriarch], the teacher of the doctors in wisdom
and philosophy, and the asylum of the learned of the
time ^ whom they called Imam Rashid-ud-Din-i-’Abd-ul-
Majld. I heard him, when speaking of the magnificence
and majesty of Alb-Arsalan, state, that that monarch, in
the year 453 or 454 H., had undertaken the subjugation of
the territory of Turkistan. When he reached the frontiers
of Kaslj-ghar and Balasaghun *, messengers followed him
thither, bringing intelligence that the Lord of the Faithful,
the l^^lifah, Al-l^a’im B’illah *, had sustained a great mis-

• It will, doubtless, be noticed that our author seldom quotes the writings of
others, and that most of his information is hearsay. The value, or otherwise, of
his statements may be judged of accordingly. How he had been deceived by his
<‘asylum of the learned of the time,’’may be seen from note >, page 135. Heonly
quotes Abu-l-Fafl-i-BaibaVt for the Saljub dynasty, a very good and trustworthy
authority, but often quotes him incorrectly, as shown in the preceding notes.

^ The meaning of which is, that he was, by our author’s account, one of the
most learned men of his time.

• A city of MSwar-un-Nahr, near Kashsliar, and the capital of Afr3siyab,

which continued the seat of government of bis descendants until the time of
Gur [not Kor Shan, as Europeans generally write it], <i stands for

f as well as in Persian, unless explained to the contrary.

• Al'Sii’lmBi-amr>’ullah. TheSaifarof Rum, Armanus [Romanus], entered
the dominions of Alb-ArsalSn with the intention of invading Iran, but the greater
part of his army perished through the excessive heat, and the Saijar retired. Sub-
sequently, Armlnus again invaded Alb-Arsalan’s dominions, and the latter, with
ia,ooo horse—a rather improbable number—marched to encounter him. They
met at a place named MalSzah-gird [the ancient Mauro—Castrum], in AjarbalJSn,
in the vicinity of Akhlat, in which action the Saifar was taken captive by a Rumt
[Roman] slave in Alb-Arsalan’s army, whose person was so weak and so con¬
temptible, that at the time of mustering the army the ’Ariy [muster-master,
not a “general”] reftised to take his name down, when Sa’ad-ud-Daulah, the
Shabnah or agent of Alb-Arsalan, at Baghdad, said “ Write down his name ;
who knows but that he might take the Iglaifar prisoner I” Guzidah states that
Alb-ArsaUbi himself ordered that his name should be taken down. The emperor
ArminOs [Romantis] was defeated and taken prisoner in 459 h. [after the death
of Al-ljpi’tm], but was set at liberty the same year, on undertaking to pay “a

early tribute at the rate of 1000 dInSrs a-day, or'360^000 dtnSrs every year.”

THE SALJtJylAH DYNASTY. 13S

fortune—that an action had taken place b^|;ween him and
the Christians of Rum, and that the troops of Islam had
been overthrown; and further, that the Kha lifah himself had
been taken prisoner, and had been immured within the
walls of a fortress, situated in the lofty mountains of the
territory of Anbar* and the Jazirah [Mesopotamia] on the
frontiers of the empire of Rum. The fortress in question
is situated on a high hill, or mountain, on the bank of the
river Furat [Euphrates].

Alb-Arsalan, with a force of 180,000 horse, all brave and
veteran soldiers, returned with the utmost expedition, in
order to release the Lord of the Faithful, and revenge the
defeat of the army of Islam. He pushed on with such
speed, and made such long marches, that in the space of
sixteen or seventeen days—God knows the truth of the
statement—he appeared at the foot of the walls of that
fortress, which was situated on the bank of the Furat, from
Balasag^un. Adopting such means of procedure as the
occasion demanded, he called upon the governor of that
fortress to embrace the Muhammadan faith, and caused
him to be ennobled with the robe of Islam ; and, with the
aid of Almighty God, he released the Kha lifah from con¬
finement*. He accompanied the Kh alifah's sacred caval-

* There is a place of this name on the Euphrates, Felugia or Anhar, men¬
tioned in Julian’s campaigns as Pirisabur, and called the second city in Assyria.
The Kha ltfah was confined at ’Anah. See next note over leaf. A copyist
might write ^4*1 for *>U

* Our author has made a muddle of the reigns of these Salju^^ monarehs,
and betrays such complete ignorance here, that we may doubt his correctness
in many other cases after and before. Both in the text above, as rendered
faithfully, and word for word, and in the six lines devoted to t^e history of
Al-^31’tm’s EhilSfat, in Section IV., our author plainly asserts that the
Ehaltfah’s troops were defeated by the Na^aranls or Christians, and that th*
ITka lifak was made prisoner by them, and confined in a fortress on the frontier
until released by Alb~Arsaldn. The author, apparently, had either no written
authorities to refer to, or did not trouble himself to do so, and composed his
work chiefly on hearsay, hence the wofiil blunder he has herein made. The
LiUbb-nt-TawSrilclii strange to say, has made the same error. The Shallfah
Al-^pl’tm never fell into the hands of the Romans, and was never confined in a
fortress by them.

Our author has confounded the events of Beg’s reign with those of Alb-

Arsalftn’s. In 448 H. [MuntaUiab-ut-TawSrlkh 'says in 447 H.] Al-l^a’fm
summoned 7‘°gkril to Baglid&d, and directed that his name should be read
in the Sbutbah after his own, and also be impressed upon the coin ; while the
name of the Mtdik-ur-RahI>n‘>*A.ba Nafr, son of ’Im2d-ud-dtn, son of Snl^n-
ud-Dauloh, Buwtah, was to come in after Tugjiril finding his oppor.

THE TABA^T.I.NA$IRL

136

cade to the precincts of the capital of Islam, and then
solicited permission to return [to his own dominions].
Having obtained it, at the time of taking leave, Alb-Arsa-
lan dismounted from his horse, and honoured his imperial
lips by placing them to the hoof of the animal which bore
the Lord of the Faithful, and kissed it. On this occasion,
in return for these signal services rendered by him, during
all this time, to the Court of Islam, he received this much
commendation and esteem, that the Lord of the F^iithful,
Al-^a’im Bi-amr-’ullah, thus expressed himself:—“ Thou
hast saved the servants of God from slaugh er, and the
country from destruction.” Let those who read these
words calmly ponder in their minds between the extent of
the services of Alb-Arsalan-i-Ghazt, and on the sublime
fortitude and high resolve expressed in the words of the

tunity, after pretending friendship towards, and alliance with, the Buwtah ruler
of Baghdad, seized and imprisoned him. In 448 H. Al-^’tm espoused the
daughter of Tughril’s brother [daughter of D 3 .’ad-i-Jaghar Beg], £j)adijah by
name. In 450 H. BasSsirt rose against the Ehallfah, and put him in coniine*
ment in the fortress of ’Anah, a town of DiySr*i-Bakr, or Mesopotamia, on the
east bank of the Fuiat, four miles from RSwS, and seven days’ journey from
Baghdad by kSrwan route. The Khaltfah appealed to Tnghril Beg^ not to Alb*
ArsalSn, who did not come to the throne until nearly five years after. X’^Shril
reached Baghdad in 451 H., BasSsirt fled, the Shnllfah was set at liberty, and
Xughril went to meet him, and walked, on foot, at the head of the Khal ifah’a
horse. On that occasion Al-^pl’tm hailed him—“ Ya Rukn-ud-dtn 1 ”—O
Pillar of the Faith!”—and his title, which had been Rukn-ud-Daulah- or
Pillar of the State, was changed to Rukn*ud-din. T“ghi-il entered Baghdad
on the 14th of the month of $afar ; and in that same year also Da’ud*i-Ja^iar
B^, his elder brother, died. Some few authors say these events happened in
452 H. Basasiri was soon after captured and put to death, but Fa^ib-t says
he was captured before the Ehaltfah’s release. In 455 h. Tughril espoused a
daughter of the Shalifah’s. The betrothal took place at Tabriz, but Tughril
was desirous that the marriage should be consummated at his capital, which
was Rai, and he set out for that city ; but before he reached his palace, having
halted a short distance from the city, to enjoy the cool air. hsemorrhage came
on [not "dysentery”] and could not be stopped. He died 8th of RamafSn ;
and the Sballfah’s daughter hearing of his decease, when on the way to join
him, returned, a virgin bride, to her father at Baghdad.

I may mention that the Tarlkh-i-YSfa’I, which is generally so very correct
and minute in the description of important events, says not a word respecting
any hostilities between Alb-ArsalSn and the Romans, and nothing whatever
about Armlnus [Romanus] having been captured.

The ShulSfat-ul-Akhbar turns the two expeditions of the Romans, ip the
Ixut of which Romanus was taken captive, into one, and again makes the same
Romanus a prisoner in Malik Shah ’s reign. There is much similar discre¬
pancy in some other authors, which I have not space to notice here.

THE SALJO^IAH DYNASTY. 137

Lord of the Faithful, and what amount of eulogium every
one of them conveyed.

Alb-Arsal 3 n’s reign extended over a period of fourteen
years*. He ascended the throne in the year 451 H,, and
in the month of Safar, 465 H., he was martyred*. May the
Almighty again raise Up their pure souls with like glory,
and reserve them to Himself in Paradise above !

IV. SULJAN JALAL-UD-DIN, MALIK ^AH », SON OF ALB-

arsalAn.

Sultan Malik Shah ascended the throne at Marw, after
the death of his father, and took possession of the whole
of the territories of I-ran, Turan, the Jibal [Highlands of
'Ira^], ’Irak, Dilam, Tabaristan, Rum, Mi^r, and Sham,
besides Diyar-i-Bakr, Arman, Sistan, and Fars ; and in all
the pulpits of Islam the Khutbah was read in his name,
and the coin^ both diram and dinar, became ennobled by
his titles.

He was, himself, a victorious and a conquering monarch,
and governed with a firm hand ; and was sagacious, brave,
and just, and endowed with all the accomplishments
befitting a sovereign and empire. He brought under his
sway the whole of the countries of Turkistan*, and sub-

• The length of his reign dej^nds upon how it is computed. If his acces¬
sion to his father’s territory be reckoned, of course it is considerably longer ;
l)Ut he succeeded as an independent sovereign in the tenth month of 555 H.

* Our author does not say how his martyrdom took place. Perhaps his
authority for the Shaltfah’s captivity in the Roman territory did not inform
him. It is very interesting, but much too long for insertion here ; but his
assassinator was Yusuf, a native of Kh warazm. the governor of the fortress of
Barzam [on the Jl^un], which Alb-Arsalan had taken. The murderer was
nearly escaping, when a Farrash, or tent-pitcher, beat in his head with a
wooden mallet, used for driving tent-pegs. This took place in Rabt’-ul-
Awwal, 4^5 H. Other authors state that the name of the fortress in question
was Firbad, or Firbof.

• His title, according to most writers, was Mu’izz-ud-Dfn, and hLs patro¬
nymic, Abir- 1 -Fatl;i. The NitSm-ut-Tawartldl and JahUn-Ara say hLs title
was Jalal-ud-Daulah. The correct titles appear to have been Sultan Jalal-ud-
Dfn, Mu’izz-ud-Daulah, Malik S[iah, Yamtn [some say ^j[^tm]-i-Amtr-ul-
Mumintn.

* In 468 H. Malik Shah entered Mawar-un-Nahr, and subdued that territory,
and took the Kha n of Samr^and captive. He was taken all the way from
Samrt^and to Isfahan on foot; but, subsequently, he was taught better beha
viour, and restored. In 471 11. Malik Shah again entered Mawar-un-Nahr, and

K

138

THE TABA?:AT.I.NA§IRi.

dued the territory of Rum ; and the vice-royalty and
sovereigfnty of Baghdad, subordinate to the Dar-ul-Khilafat.
were conferred upon him. In Makkah and Madinah, and
in Yaman and the country of Hijaz, in the whole of the
pulpits of Islam, the Kh utbah was read in his name.

He carried on various hostilities, and undertook many
holy wars in various parts of the country of the Turks and
the territory of Rum ; and, on every side of the territories
of the east and of the west, he acquired a kingdom, and
placed viceroys of his own therein. He conferred the
kingdom of Rum upon one of his brothers, and, after him,
he gave it to his own son, Mahmud^; and, up to this
period, that territory is still in the possession of his
descendants, as will, hereafter, please God, be mentioned*.

removed, for the second time, Suliman KhS n from the government. He was
subsequently sent to the fortress of Oz.gand [Or-ganj of the present day], ^nd
there immured. This is, no doubt, the same event as is referred to in the
JSmi’ut'Tawarildt, and in Alfj, but under a wrong year. In those works it is
stated that Malik Shah, in 482 H., annexed the territory of SamrVand, taking
it from Ahmad Khan, son of Ja’far Kha n, who was a great tyrant. He was
the brother of Turkan Kh alBn. the consort of Malik Shah, who was mother
of SultSn Sanjar.

f This is totally incorrect: Mahmud, son of Malik Shah, was never ruler of
the territory of Rum. See note \ page 157.

" Our author’s account of this reign is much the same as the tragedy of
“Hamlet” would be with the part of the Prince of Denmark left out. I must
give a brief outline of the chief events that occurred to make it intelligible :—

The year following his accession, 466 H., his brother, Takish [Tughan Shahl.
rebelled at Hirat. He was taken and imprisoned at Isfahan, the capital.
Then followe'd the rebellion of his uncle, If^awurd, according to Guztdah ; but
he was the founder of the Kirman dynasty of the SaljuVs which our author
says not one word about. They met in battle at Karkh, near Baghdad, and
^piwurd was defeated and slain ; but his son succeeded him in Kirman, and
was allowed to hold that territory. In 467 11. [Jami’-ut-Tawarikll and
Alfi, mistaking the dates, or wrongly written in the copies of those works, say
in 473 H.] his brother, Takish [this name is written by our author Takish;
in the Shams-ul-Lughat. Tagish [Takish ?] ; and in the Burhan-i-l^ati’,
Takash] rebelled, and seized several districts in northern Kh urasan, and shut
himself up' in Nfshapiir. Malik Shah sent an army against him [Jami’-ut*
Tawarlkh and Alff say he went in person, and that it was in 476 H.]. In
468 H. he subdued Mawar-un-Nahr for the first time, previously mentioned.
In the following year AntaVtah [Antioch] was taken, and the territory as far
as the sea-coast. 10471 h. Samr];and was taken, and Suliman Shan, the
ruler, again deposed, and confined in the fortress of Oz-gand. On this
occasion, Malik Shah demanded the hand of Turkan Kha tun. daughter of
*yiiiin gh»«h [also written Kha n, a descendant of Bugh>'a ShSn.

In 475 H. Shwarazm was subdued, and conferred upon Nush-T^tn, who
founded the Khwarazm-Shkht dynasty. [See note page 169.] The follow-

THE SALjC^fiAH DYNASTY.

»39

In the Muntakhab-i-Tarikh-i-Nasirt. which work was
composed by one of the great men of the Court * of
Gh azninr I read that, upon a certain occasion, Sultan
Malik Shah requested his Wazir, Ni^am-ul-Mulk, to make
ready his forces, as he had resolved upon proceeding into
the territory of Mi§r [Egypt]. The Wazir, Nijiam-ul-
Mulk, represented, saying :—“ It is right for the Sultan to
ponder well over this undertaking, because that country con¬
tains the ^aramitah sect, and other heretics, and something
of the profanities of their creed might come to the hearing
of an orthodox monarch like his Majesty ; and I do not
consider it right that such depravity should find access to
the royal mind.” Suljtan Malik Shah enjoined that they
should be diligent in making due preparation for the
expedition, as for him to repudiate that determination of
his was impossible. Nizam-ul-Mulk [consequently] made
great preparations, and got all things in readiness ; and
the Suljtan, with a numerous army, set out in the direction
of Migr,

When he arrived in the vicinity of it, the people of Migr
hastened forth to perform the duty of receiving the Suljtan ;
but he paid no regard to any one, neither did he turn hi.s
eyes towards any thing, until he arrived before the gate of

iiifj year saw the rise of Ilasan-i-^abbati, and the heretic sect of Mulatiidahs.
fn 4S0 It. Malik Shah gave the territory of Rrnn to .Suliniati, son of
tiinisb> which his descendants held for a long period of years. Sham he
l)Cstowcd upon Ills brother, 'I’litash not “Tiinish”], who gained

successes over the'Arabs, Kumfs, and Karangs. Other territories were con¬
ferred upon some of his Mamluks or slaves, as will be mentioned hereafter.
In 482 II. [the pcriotl assigned in J.ami’-ut-Taw.arilch and Alft for the cx-
l>cdition into Mawar-un-Nahr, just referred to,] Malik ^vab undcrtiHik a c.ain-
paign .against the ]^ai$ar, as the Greek emperors of Constantinople are termed
liy Mu]^amm.adan writers ; upon which occasion, as related by all .authors of
repute, SulJ-an Malik Shah fell into the hands of a party of the l^igar’s
soldiers ; but, not liaving liccn rccognizeil by any one, he was released through
the great tact of his minister, Nijam-ul-Mulk. Next day, a battle took place
between them, when the IKai$ar was taken prisoner, on which occasion Malik
Shah set hint at liberty. In 481 ll., os has been mentioned farther on, Malik
Shah went on a pilgrimage to Makkah. In 484 11., Nij^am-ul-Mulk was
ilcprivcd of the Waztrship through the intrigues of Turkan Kh atun. In 485 11.,
Malik Sha h sent a force against the Mulabidahs, but it was defeated by those
schismatics ; and, in that same year, Nifam-ul-Mulk was assassinated by them.
He was the first that fell beneath the daggers of that sect ; and, within
a few days over a month, Malik Sh ah himself <leparted this life at
Baghdad.

' Jj^ofrat, signifying the Court, the presence of ihe sovereign.

K a

140 THE TABA¥AT-I-NA$IR!.

the city of Mi§r*. When he had passed over the ferry of
Mi^r, and the river Nil, he inquired which was the palace of
Fir’awn [Pharaoh].

On being told where it was situated, he turned towards
that direction, and ordered his army to halt on the spot
where it then was. Sultan Malik Shah, attended only by
a single stirrup-holder, set out alone towards the place
indicated. He then dismounted from his horse, and, at the
place where was the palace* of Fir’awn, performed a prayer
of two genuflections. He then laid his forehead in the dust,
and lifted up his voice in supplication, saying:—“ Oh God,
Thou didst bestow the dominion of Mi^r upon one, Thy
servant, and he proclaimed, saying:—‘ I am your most
supreme Lord *but this Thy erring servant, having been
exalted [by Thee] to the sovereignty of the countries of
the east and the west, has come hither, and, bowing his
forehead in the dust, says :—‘ Great God I O Lord most
High! be pleased of Thy grace and goodness to have
mercy upon this Thy servant.’ ”

Then, raising his head from his posture of adoration, he
came back, and, without entering the city of Mi^r [at all]i
returned to Kh urasan. This anecdote is related to show
the exalted nature of the faith of that just and victorious
sovereign*.

* Al-Mijr— 7 %^ City—Old Cairo, as it is called by the Chroniclers of tne
Crusades. Its inhabitants, in ancient times, were rated at two millions ; and
those of New Cairo [l^hirah] at four millions. The old city stood on the east
bank of the Nile, and was some twenty two miles in extent. Some say its
extent was thirty miles. Old Cairo, or The Mi^r, was, perhaps, deducting
exaggerations, the largest and most densely populated city the world ever con¬
tained, after l^hirah, ancient Thebes, and Babylon on the Euphrates. The
name Mi;r is generally applied at present to the whole of Egypt, but should
be Diyar-ul-Mi;rtah, as in ancient ’Arab writings.

* Lit. “ Where was the place of Fir’awn’s throne,” signifying his Court,
residence, &c.

* Rlur’an, chap. Ixxix.

* Whatever the author of the Munta][liab-i-Tartklt*i-NS$irt may have said
on the subject, I may here mention that this statement of Malik Shah’s having
made a journey, accompanied by a “large army,” into Egypt and crossed the
Nile, is not confirmed, in fact, is not recorded in any history with which I am
acquainted. Malik Shah certainly made a tour throughout his dominions,
“from Antakiah of Sham and Ladaj^tah of Rum to Mawar-un-Nahr, the
frontiers of K.h a^a-t and Kh utan ; and from the Bahr-i- Kh ui-z [the Ca.spian]
lo Yaman and Tayif.” He also performed the pilgrimage to Makkah and
Madinah ; bul there is no mention of Misr or the Nile. Some of the story-

141

THE SALJOEIAH dynasty.

Another anecdote, respecting the same monarch, is
narrated in the Muntakhab-i-Tarikh-i-Nasirl; that some
persons in ^uhistan sent in a memorial to the Wazir,
Ni|^m-ul-Mulk, to the effect that a wealthy person had
died, leaving no other heir behind him than a sister’s
child, and that he had left great wealth, and further that
it ought to go to the Bait-ul-Mal* [the royal treasury].
Ni^m-ul-Mulk,at a convenient opportunity, represented the
matter to Malik Shah, but he obtained no answer, and did
not receive one, until after mentioning it three times. Malik
Shah said he would give him a reply respecting it on the
following day ; but, when it came, he set out for the chase.

Ni^am-uUMulk, in his eagerness to augment the royal
treasury, followed after the Sultan [to obtain the promised
reply]. Malik Shah had to pass the camp bazar on his
way; and, when he returned from the hunting-ground,
gave directions to one of his attendants, saying:—“I am
hungry; and in the bazar I saw some wheaten cakes^ and
my appetite has a mind for some. Go and purchase as
many as you can procure, and bring them hither.”

When Malik Shah approached the precincts of the
camp, he ascended a rising ground, and sat down, until such
time as they brought the wheaten cakes. He then made all
the nobles with him sit down to partake of the cakes. There
was one very large dish full*, which sufficed for more than
fifty Maliks and Amirs, with their attendants. After he
had eaten, Malik Shah arose and inquired of his attendant:
.—“ For how much didst thou purchase these ?•' The man,
with eyes bent on the ground, replied :—“ For four and a
half ddngs' [little pieces] of coin.” The Sultan then asked
the whole of those present, whether they had had sufficient,
to which they replied, that through the Sultan’s liberality
they had eaten all that they desired. Malik Shah, on

books mention it, but the account is evidently copied from our author. The
Isma’tlt KTia ltfahs were independent of Malik Shah.

• See note •, p. 62.

t Thin cakes of paste called “tutmaj.”

• All the copies of the work but two say there were ten large dishes full.
One copy says two; but, as one large dish is mentioned in another work,
which gives this same anecdote, I have adopted that reading.

• A ilang signifies a grain in general, either of wlieat, barley, or the like,
and is used to signify the fourth part of a dram. It is aiso used lo signify the
sixth part of a city, and the like.

143

THE TABA¥AT.I-NA5IRL

hearing the price, defrayed the amount out of his own
private purse ; and, turning towards Ni^am-ul-Mulk, he
said :—“ A poor frail creature like Malik Shah, and a
minister such as Ni^am-ul-Mulk, and so considerable
a number of followers, have eaten their fill at the cost of
four and a half little pieces of coin ; therefore it would be
the height of inhumanity to covet the property of orphans.
Whosoever hath amassed wealth, and hath accumulated
both lawful and unlawful gains, did so in order that, after
his decease, his property should go to his progeny and his
dependents, and not that I should take possession of it
arbitrarily. Therefore give up the matter, and say no
more on the subject." The mercy of the Almighty be
upon him ! and may those, who read this, utter a benedic¬
tion to his memory and to mine.

Many monuments of the goodness and wisdom of that
excellent monarch remain in the world, among which one
is, that the astronomical calculations were, during his
reign, tested anew, and, the calendar reformed ; and it
was after the following manner:—It had been discovered
from observations, that, from the want of an inter¬
calation, very great confusion existed with regard to
the lunar months, and that calculations had fallen into
disorder, and that the zodiacal signs in the almanac had
become involved in error. Sultan Malik Shah commanded
that the most learned men in the science of astronomy,
and the most profound arithmeticians, should make fresh
observations, and that the seasons and months should be
again tested and adjusted ; and the first day of spring,
which is the first degree of the sign Aries, became named,
after that monarch, the No-roz-i-Jalali.

Nizani-ul-Mulk, Tusi, who has left in the world so many
proofs of his goodness and nobleness, was his Wazir ; and
Shaikh Abu Sa’id-i-Abu-l- Kh ayr. and Imam Gh azzali lived
in his reign. Sultan Malik Shah’s reign extended over a
period of twenty-six years, and, in the year 491 H. ‘, he died.
God alone is immortal,

> Sic in nil copies of the work. Our author is greatly out of bis reckoning
here. According to the Jami’-ut-Tawarikh, Guzldah, Alfi, Fa^ih-l, Lubb-ut-
Tawartkh. and all others of authority, Malik Shah died at Baghdad in the
month of Shawwal, 485 11., years l>crorc the date our author gives; anti,
according to the Nizam iit-Tawarfhh .and others, in 471 H.

THE SALJO^IAH DYNASTY.

»43

V. MlUjLAMMAD*, SON OF MALIK SHAH.

When Sultan Malik Shah took his departure from this
world, three sons survived him. Muhammad, the elder,

• Here we have a specimen of our author’s mode of writing history ; and,
if we may judge of the rest of his work from this part, but little dependence can
be placed in him. He leaves out the reigns of M A^MOD and BARKIA RO^'f
the successors of Malik ShMi. entirely, a period of thirteen years I Space will
only permit me to give a brief summary of those events.

After Mahk Shah’s death, at Badidad, his consort, Turkan EIxatun, who
had previously been plotting to secure the succession of her son, Mugj^g.ud-
Dtn, Mai^mud, set him up at BacJidad, and had the Khu^hnh read for him.
She sent off swift messengers; to Isfahan to secure the person of BarkfaruV,
the eldest son, who had been nominated heir and successor by his father.
Having succeeded in securing him, Turkan Kba trm^ with her son Ma^ud,
advanced towards Isfahan, the capital. Bark^rOV, aided by the slaves and
partisans of the late Wazlr, Ni{am-ul-Mulk, who had been reipoved from office
*t Turkw Kbatfin’s instigation, because he opposed her views, succeeded in
escaping from Isfahan to Rai, where forces flocked around him from all parts.
He defeated bodies of troops sent against him upon two occasions, but was not
powerful enough, as yet, to attempt to regain Isfahan, and so he remained at
Rai. TurkSi) Shatun having died in Ramadan, 487 H., he moved against the
capital, and Ma^Qd, his brother tmd rival, t came forth to submit to him,
and the brothers embraced each other. Some of Mahmud’s partisans, however,
succeeded in seizing Barktaru^, and were going to deprive him of his sight,
when Mabmud was seized with small-pox, and died on the third day. There
is some discrepancy here, among a few authors of authority, who state that
BarkfaruV’s escape took place in 488 h., and that he again retired to Rai,
where he was crowned and enthroned, and that he was again seized and im¬
prisoned in 489 H., at which time his brother Mahmud died, as above related.
However, on the death of his brother, Barktaruh was brought forth from his
prison, and raised to the throne ; and, from this date, his reign properly com--
mences. The Shalifah acknowledged him, and the titles he conferred upon him
were, according to Yafa’i, Guztdah, and others, RUKN-UD-DiN, ABO-L-
MUZAFFAR, BARKIARC]^; but Fa$ih -1 and others say, RUKN-UD-DIN,
ABO-L-FAWARIS, were his titles, lliere was no peace for him still, and he
had constantly to take the field. In 488 H. hie uncle, Tokiah, lovolted, but he
was defeated ; and, in the following year, he was moving against another uncle,
Arsalan-i-Argjiu, when a slave of the latter put his master to death, l>cfore
BarktarfiV arrived. On the death of Arsolan-i-Ar^u, who had held the
greater part of Khurasan, in 489 H., Sanjar, the third son of Malik Sha h, and
full brother of Muhammad, was set up in Kbnrgsiin » and, in 490 H., when in
his eleventh year, his brother, Suljan Barktaruh, nominated him to the govern¬
ment of Khurasan as his deputy. In 492. u., the year in which Jeniaalem was
taken by the Crusaders, and 8ul{Sn Ibrahim of Ghazntn died, Barkfaruh’s
troops revolted against him, and he retired into ShnaistSn. On this, his other
brother, Muhammad, who appears to have been in revolt since 489 h. [some
say 490 H.], moved from Anan of Afarb&ljSn to HamadSn, during Baikt&ruV’s
absence, and assumed the throne. In Rajab of the following year, Barkhiruh
marched against him, but was defeated, and had to retire into Kh uzistan again.

144

THE taba]b:At-i.nA$irL

they called by the name of Ttr, and the second son was
named Sanjar, and the youngest, Mal^mud*.

Mu^mmad Tlr, the eldest, ascended the imperial throne,

He, however, regained soffident itrength daring the next year to be able to
inarch against Mubaminad again; and, in JanUhlt-ul-Akbir, he defeated him
in 'IrSk, and Mubommad fled to Rai, at which tiine^ according to Fa|ib-t,
Sanjar joined him from EhniflaSn. In 493H., acoordl^to Fofib'lt BarblSrO):
was again defeated by Mubammad; and, in the some year, the former had to
encounter Sanjar in ShviSsSii, but he was again nnsubcessfiil, and had to Ay.
BarkfSriib, notwithstanding he was exceedingly weak from severe illness, set
out from Baghdad to oppose Mubammad; but the great nobles on either side
succeeded in effecting an accommodation between the brothers, and Mubammad
returned to Eaz''rl"> which part he had held the government previously.
Mubammad, however, soon regretted .what he had done, and further hostilities
arose. BarktarQb again marched against him, and, in Rabt’-ul-Akhir, 495 if.,
a‘battle took place between them near Siwah, in which Mubammad was
defeated and routed, and he fled to IffahSn, followed by Barktarub, who in¬
vested him therein. Mubammad ventured out to try and raise the investment,
but was again overthrown, and fled towards Shue. Barktar&b followed, and
came up with him near Gaiijah, and again defeated him. In Jamkdt-ul-Ahhir,
496 H., a peace was brought about, on the agreement that Mubammad should
have the western parts of the empire, AfarlStjSn, ShlUn, Arman, Gurjistin,
and a part of ’InMt, <tnd BaiktSrSb the remainder of the empire. This having
been agreed upon, Barktiiiib ^>9 return to Baghdad ; but bis illness

assumed a more dangerous form on the way thither, and he died on the 12th of
Rabt’-ul-Awwal, 498 H., after a stormy reign of twelve years, having nomi¬
nated his son,-Malik fjb ah, his successor. This is a mere outline of the events
entirely left out by our author; and, in the account which he gives of Mu-
bammad's reign, he makes still more serious errors than before. Gibbon
[chap. Ivii] destroys the emigre of the Salj&bs in.a few words.- He asserts
that “ The greatness and unity of the Turkish empire expired in the person of
Malek Shah,” and of course never mentibns his successors, Mabmud, Barkti-
rOb, or Mubammad. A Ifttje farther on he does say that " Sangiar, the last
hero of thdr race,” was unknown to the Franks, and that he might l^ve been
made prisoner by the Franks, as well as by the Uses.” ' He metuu the Qbuez
tribe probably; but he omitted to state f^t the first Crusaders were oppbsed,
really, by about the least powerful of the Satraps of the SaljOb empire. The
eig^t successors of this “the lost of Us race,” as well as himself,, will be
mentioned farther on.

* Our author is totally incorrect here agaiiL Mubammad did not succeed
his father, as already shown, neither did three sons [most of the copies of the
work say “two”] only survive Malik Shah. There -wesefottr, the eldest of whom
was BarktSrOb i the youngest, BlabmOd, an account of whom I have just
given. The other two sons were Mubammad and Sanjar, who were full
brothers : an adopted son is also mentioned. The name Ttr [j^] and Tabr
for some copies say one, and some the other, given to Mubammad by our
author, is not mentioned in any other work, and the significations of eithn do
not appear applicable. I am inclined to consider that he has confounded the
name of MubammSd with that of his uncle Tutigh [tr*!], the progenitor of
the Saljub dynasty of Sl^bn, out of whose hands the Franks ydtested Antioch,
in the first Crusade.

THE SALJO^IAH DYNASTY. 145

and all the Maliks and great nobles, with their loins girded,
stood before him ready to do his bidding. The Waztrs,
or ministers of the east and the west, by their tact and
experience, succeeded in securing possession of the whole of
the territories of the empire ; and the Sultans of the neigh¬
bouring countries submitted to his suzerainty.

Sultan Muhammad Ttr, however, was a person wholly
given to pleasure ; and, having found his dominions tranquil
and undisturbed, he was in the habit of abandoning himself
wholly to wine. He never led his forces in person towards
any part of the frontiers of his empire, neither did he
nominate any forces [under others for that service] ; con¬
sequently, no event worthy of record took place during his
reign, nor did his territories acquire any extension. His
life of pleasure soon terminated ; and, after passing two
years in gaiety and jollity, he died; and the sovereignty
passed to Sultan Sanjar*.

* Mu^amibad, bom 474 H., whose correct titles are fihiySS'ud-Dln, Abu
Mutiammad, E^t>n-i*Amtr-ul>Mumintn, whom our author calls a
wine-bibber, and wholly addicted to pleasure, and who, according to his
account, but on what authority he does not mention, never led his troops or
despatched any under his nobles upon any exptedition whatever, was, on the
testimony of authors of undoubted authority, one of the most intrepid of the
SaljuV sovereigns, of high principle, faithful to his engagements, truthful, just,
a cherisher of his subjects, and moreover pious and tempierate. See R.'iufat-
u9-$afa for his character. At the very outset of his reign, having claimed the
whole empire as his right, he moved to Baghdad, against the adherents
of Malik Shiih, son of Barklaru^, who had been set up as successor to his
father’s dominions, according to the terms arranged between BarklarD^: and
Muhammad already explained. $adahah and Ayaz were defeated, $adalcah
slain [Fa^ih-t, however, says he was put to death in 501 H.], Ayaz taken
prisoner, and Malik Shah was seized and kept in confinement. In 504 H.
Muhitmmad defeated the Mulahidahs, who had acquired great strength during
the stormy period of Barkfaruk’s reign, and had occupied a strong fortress of
IffahSn, named Kala’-i-Shah. The place was reduced, and the leader put
to death. After this, an expedition into Ilindust^—the western frontier must
be referred to—the destruction of a famous idol-temple, and the removal of the
idol to Isfahan, is mentioned in some authors of authority. It seems im¬
probable, but is distinctly mentioned, and further research may throw some
light upon it. Fa;ih-t, however, does not mention it Subsequently hlu-
hammad despatched an army, under the command of one of his great nobles,
against Almut, the stronghold of ^asan-i-^abbah, the head of the sect of
MulShidahs, but the Sultan’s death liappening soon aAer prevciitetl the
expedition succeeding. Muhammad died in 510 H., but some authors say in
$11 H., so that he reigned twelve years and nine months.

146

THE TABA]S^T.I.NA$IRI.

VI, SULTAN-UL-A’ZAM, MUTZZ.UD-DUNyA-WA-UD.DlN»,
SANJAR, SON OF MALIK SHAH.

Sultan S'anjar was a great, dignified, and mighty
monarch. His birth took place in the country of Sanjar,
in the year 479 H., at the time when his father, Malik Shah,
was engaged in the sendee of the Court of the Khilafat. and
occupied in the disposal of the affairs of the Lord of the
Faithful.

When his father died, Sultan Sanjar was in his tenth
year, and his brother Muhammad ascended the throne*.
After his brother’s death, Sanjar was raised to the
sovereignty ; and was distinguished by the Court of Bagh¬
dad with a dress of honour, a standard, and a commission
of investiture. At the capital, Marw of Shah-i-Tahan. and
throughout the whole of the territories of Islam, over which
his father and grandfather had held sway, the Kh utbah
was read for him, and his name was impressed upon the
coin.

When he attained unto years of discretion, the flower of
youth, and the bloom of manhood, the dominions of the
east and of the west came under the control and adminis¬
tration of the slaves and vassals of his empire^. His first

* Yafa’t says his titles were Sultlm-ul-A’sain, Mu’izz-ud>Dtn, and his patro¬
nymic Abu I^rig-i-Sanjar. Fanakatt calls him Mu’i2£.ud-Daulah'; Fa^ih-f,
Saif-ud-Daulah ; Mirat-i-Jahln NumS styles him Sult&n-us-SalSttn, Mu’izz-ud-
Dfn, Abu-^wj, &c.; and Ni;am-ut-Tawartkll and MuntaUiab say his
patronymic was Abu-l-^Srig-i-Ahthad,

* On the death of Muhammad, Sanjar, then the only surviving son of Malik

Sh*h. who had held the government of TOiurSaan since his brother, BarktSruh,
conferred it upon him, assumed sovereignty over the whole empire, notwith¬
standing Muhammad had bequeathed the sovereignty over ’Iii^ to his son
Mahmud. An engagement took place between Sanjar and his netdiew, in
which the latter was defeated ; but Sanjar allowed him to retain the sove¬
reignty, subject to himself. Mahmud did not enjoy it long, for he died the
same year, and his son, Xu^ril, succeeded ; but he too died the same year,
and Mas’ud, another son of Sultan Muhammad, succeeded. There having
been two Mos’ud’s and three several authors, one of whom is gene¬

rally so correct as to dates—the Muntalthab-ut-Ta'miriUi—have confounded
them. See note *, p. 151, and note *, p. 173.

7 Sanjar did not succeed to the sovereignty over the whole empire until the
death of his elder brother, Muhammad, in 511 H. [Fa^ih-t says in 510 U.],
■Ithongh he had held great part of Kh urgsan, almost independent, for some
time previously. In 511 h., he was just thirty-one years old, and he then
assumed the title of Sultan.

THE SALjO?lAH DYNASTY.

*47

hostile operations were directed against Muhammad, "Khan*
of Samrhand, whom he defeated ; and, subsequently,
Sultan Sanjar fought sixteen different engagements on
different frontiers of his territories, and came forth vic¬
torious from the whole of them.

His reign extended over a long period of time ; and
public affairs went on in the highway of legality, and on
the beaten track of equity and justice. The ordinances of
the sacred law of Muhammad, and the canons of the faith
of Islam, conformable with the Divine commands, acquired
fresh vigour and newness.

The countries of Kh urasan. 'Irah, and Mawar-un-Nahr,
became exceedingly populous and flourishing; and, at
Baghdad, royal palaces were erected in his name. The
viceroyalty, and the command of the troops of Baghdad,
under the same conditions and provisions as those under
which his forefathers had held these offices, indeed upon
even more favourable terms, came into the possession of
him, and of his representatives.

He installed his slaves in the government, and adminis¬
tration of every country*. Arran, 'Irak, and A?arbaijan
he conferred upon Iladd-giz', who was his slave; and he

* Sanjar fought aereral battles before he became supreme ruler, on the death

of hU brother, Muhammad. His first was with Daulat gliah, Waif of Balkb,
who was his cousin-german. This took place in 491 h., but, as Sanjar was
oafy then in his twelfth year, he could not have taken part in it. He may
have been present with the army. The second encounter was with his elder
brother, BarkfarGh [who had nominated him to the government of ShuiasSn
in 490 H. j, in 493 H. The third was with E^nduz iShan, near Tirmiz, in
495 H. The fourth with ArsalSn Sb^h, Qijaznawf, in 511 H. The jfrr/
^ttle fought, after he became supreme sovereign in 511 H., was against his
nephew, MahmOd, in the neighbourhood of Sawah, in 513 H., which appears
to be tl^ said to have been fought with Mas’ud. See page 151, and note *.
Sultln Sanjar fought nine battles, in the whole of which he was victorious ;
and was defeated in two, as our author himself allows a few pages farther on.
The expedition agaiiut Ahmad [also called Muhammad] EbSn, son of Sull-
iti8n TChitn. styled ** BgdshSh ” of Mawar-un-Nahr. took place in 534 K. The
Muntakhab-ut'Tau'krfUi mentions an expedition against "Muhammad Sbkn,
wait of SamrVand,”' in 514 H. It appears to be the same which Fajih't,
Guztdah, and Jahan-ArS place ten years after. Ahmad was token

prisoner, but he was restored to his sovereignty in 530 h.

* Our author’s statements here are contrary to facts. See note * at page
168.

* This ttame is smngly given here in all the copies of the work but one,
although, subsequently, when giving an account of him, the author calls him
by his right name. As ^ is interchangeable with /, it can be, and sometimes is.

148 THE TABA^AT-r-HA^IRl.

was the father of the Ata-bak, Muhammad ; and the Ata-
bak, Oz-bak, and the Ata-bak, Akhtan*. are both descend¬
ants of his. The territory of Pars was given to Sanhur,
who was the ancestor of the Ata-baks of Pars; and the
Ata-bak, Zangt,the Ata-bak, Duklah, and the Ata-bak, Sa’d,
and his sons, are all his [Sanhur’s] descendants. The
country of Khw arazm he conferred upon the son of
Khw arazm Shah, who was one of his [the Sultan’s] ser¬
vants, who was the father of I-yal-Argalan, who was the
father of Takish, Khwarazm Shah, father of Muhammad,
Khwarazm Shah.

The Sultan of Ghaznin. Mas’ud-i-Karim [the Beneficent],
son of Sultan Ra?zi-ud-Dm, Ibrahim,—May the light of
the Almighty illumine their resting place I — took the
sister of Sultan Sanjar to wife. During the reign of the
last, through the death of Sultan Mas’ud-i-Karim, it is
said that dissension arose between the Sultans of Ghaznin.
Malik Arsalan, son of Sultan Mas’ud, ascended the throne
at Ghaznin. and Bahram Shah, another son of Mas’ud, was
with his father, in the district of Tigin-abad of Garmsir“,
at the time of his father’s decease; and, from that place,
Bahram Shah proceeded to the presence of SuUan Sanjar *
[his maternal uncle], and for a considerable period con¬
tinued in attendance at his Court.

After some time had elapsed, Sultan Sanjar came to
Ghaznin to the aid of Bahram Shah, and set Bahram upon
the throne of Ghaznin; and in that territory, and in
Hindustan likewise, the Khutbah was read and the coin
stamped, in Sultan Sanjar’s name*.

This dominion and power which Sanjar possessed was
more extensive than had been possessed by any of his
ancestors*. He conferred the territory of Mau§il upon one

written llatt-giz. This person’s name has been incorrectly written “Atlaktn,”
and “ lldekuz,” in many translations. See page I 70 » and note •.

* No Ata-bak of this name occurs elsewhere.

• See note », p. 107.

* At this period Sanjar was merely ruler of Ehurasan, subordinate to his
brother, although he succeeded to the whole empire shortly alter.

• Sanjar imposed a tribute of one thousand dinars per day upon Bahrnm
Shall ; and, in 530 H., had to march to CLho^ntn to enforce payment, and
reduce him to submission.

« It is beyond a doubt that the Saljul^ empire was of the greatest extent in
Malik Shah’s reign. See latter part of note *, page 140.

*49

THE SALjiO^lAH DYNASTY.

of his slaves',—and the Ata-baks of Mau^l, who have been
lip to nearly this present time, are the descendants of this
slave of his, who was a Turk of Khita- 1 .—and the whole of
the territories of Sham were held by his slaves. Sultan
Nur-ud-Dln, of Sham, likewise, was one of the descendants
of the Ata-baks of M^u$il, as will, please God, be hereafter
mentioned. The Maliks of Gljur, and the Sultans of the
Jibal •, were all subject to Sultan Sanj2ir.

During his reign hostility arose between-the Sukans* of
Qhcizntn and the Maliks of Gh ur^ and the latter were
overcome. When, however, the territory of Gh ur came
under the rule of Sultan ’Ala-ud-Din, Husain, he refused to
pay submission to the Sultan; and an engagement took
place between him and Sultan Sanjar in the neighbourhood
of the mountain tracts of Hirat, at a place named Sih
Goshah-nab*. and the forces of Ghur were routed, and
Sultan ’Ala-ud-Din was taken prisoner*. After some time
he obtained his release, and became one of the especial
confidants and intimate companions of Sultan Sanjar.

About the time of the troubles consequent on the out¬
break of the Gh uzz tribe, when ’Ala-ud-Din was in company
one day with Sultan Sanjar, and engaged in a carousal, San¬
jar, who was seated upon the throne, thrust out one of his
august legs, and let the foot, on the sole of which there
was a black mole, dangle over the throne *. On ’Ala-ud-

* See note *, page i68.

* Jib&l here signifies the northern parts of Ghufi BSmfan, &c., not of

* Petty chieftains at'this time, and holding bat a very small tract of
country. See note •, page io6.

*..Thi8 encounter took place before the gate of Aobah.

* Our author, being, such a warm partisan of the Ghiirts and their Turk

successors, would not probably mention, if he knew of it, the circumstance of
BahrSm of Gha zntn Sending the head of Saif-ud-Dtn, Siirt, son of j^usain, son
of SSm, to his uncle. Sult 3 n Sanjar encountered the Ghurlans upon two
occasions. The first time, in 501 H., in which affair ^usain, son of SSm, was
made captive, and- Sanjar gave orders to put him to death, but he was saved at
the intercession of Sha ikh Ahmad, Q 2 iazz£lt; and, it is stated, that for two
years ^usain used to light the fires for the cooks of the Sultan’s army, to such
misery was he reduced. For fiirther details see Section XVIII. The second
occasion, when, according to our author, **’Ala-ud-Dln refused to

pay submission to the Sultan,” was in 547 H., just before Sanjar moved
against the Gh uzs tribe, in which afiair he was taken prisoner, and at the
time when the Sultan’s power was almost at the lowest ebb. See note *,
page 155.

s This statement is much more probable than that of the Raufat-«9-$afti,

ISO THE TABA]^AT.I.NA$IRt.

Dtn’s noticing this mole, he stood'up and solicited that he
might be allowed the honour of kissing it; and repeated
these lines suitable to the occasion :—

" Verily'the dust at the gate of thy palace is [my] diadem,

[And] this, the collar of thy service, is my adornment
In the same manner as I kiss the mole on the sole of thy foot.

Even so good fortune [likewise] salutes my head*.”

Sultan Sanjar acceded to his request; and, when ’Ala-ud-
Din knelt down and kissed the mole, the Sultan contrived
to twist his toes in the hair about the face of 'Ala-ud-Dtn,
and to keep him on the floor. 'Ala-ud-Din desired to raise
his head from the ground, but was held down by his hair.
Those present laughed, and ’Ala-ud-Din became disturbed,
and his countenance changed. Sultan Sanjar, noticing his
mortification, out of his princely beneficence and sympathy,
said:—“ ’Ala-ud-Din, this jesting hath hurt thy feelings ; let
the dominion of Gh ur be [my] amends to thee. I con¬
gratulate thee 1 Return again to thy capital and throne:
thou art my brother! Now that the troubles with the
Qhuzz tribe have arisen, take along with thee all the flocks
of sheep and herds of horses and camels belonging to me,
my own private property. If victory aid my efforts against
them, and the outbreak of this, tribe should be quelled, send
them back to me again ; but, if not, let them be. It is far
better that they should remain with thee, than that they
should fall into the hands of such ingrate rebels.”

Sult 3 n ’Ala-ud-Din returned to Qhur, and through the
magnanimity and generosity of Sultan Sanjar regained his
throne. This was a tradition of Sanjar’s beneficence and
kindliness ; but the author of this Tabai^nt will here relate
that which sets forth his sovereignty. I, Minhaj-i-Saraj, in
the year 6ii ll., when at Firuz-koh, which was the capital
and seat of government of the Sultans of Q^r, heard [the
following] from Amir ’Ali, the Cha-ush [pursuivant], who
said that his grandfather was the Marshal of the retinue* of
Sultan Sanjar: and that his grandfather stated, that, when
Sultan Mas’ud of ’Irak, who was one of Sultan Sanjar’s

and far more cleanly. The throne of state is not meant, but a chair or
raised .scat used on ordinary occasions. See Dom’s “ Afghans," part ii, p. 85.
' The point of the original, of course, Ls,partially lost in translation.

* This seems to be about the only meaning applicable to the term fitu}\

THE SALJC^AH DYNASTY. 151

brothers’ sons*, broke out into rebellion, and ]^arajah, the
Salf:t [cup-bearer], who was one of Sanjar’s slaves, became
his supporter in that revolt, the Sultan marched an army
from Marw, with the object of falling upon the rebels
unawares.

He reached the summit of the Sawah Pass, at the foot of
which, on the 'Ira!^ side, the rebels were encamped, and
issued from it with a few followers; but, when his eye
caught sight of the forces of the enemy, he reined in his
horse, and came to a halt. A party of nobles, who had
reached the spot where he was, he summoned to his side,
and said to them :—“ We have come upon this gathering,

* Some discrepancy exists among historians respecting the sons of Mutiammad,
son of Malik S];^h, the nephews of Sultan Sanjar. Guztdoh and others men¬
tion. an encounter between Sanjar and his nephew, Mahmfid, in 513 H., in'
who uras defeated and fled to SSwah, but mention no revolt on the part
of Mas’ud, who only succeeded to the subordinate sovereignty over ’Ir&tc-i>
'Ajom, on the death of his brother ‘yughril, in 529 H., who succeeded
MatpmQd, the other brother. In the enumeration of the different victories
obtained by Sultan Sanjar during his reign, the Muntakltab-ut-TarrartUt men¬
tions oite gained over his nephew, Ma)unud, in the neighbourhood of Sawah,
in 513 H., and a second gained over another nephew p], Mas’ud, near Dtnawr,
in 526 H. i but Mas’Gd only succeeded his brother in 529 H. He may have
bem, however, rebellious before he succeeded. The cause for such discrepancy
appears to have arisen from there having been two Mas’Qds and three
^ghrils, who held ’Irit^-i-’Ajam under Sanjar, on the authority of Fafi^t,
who E^ves the events of each year in chronological order. That work states,
that "Mahmud, son of Muhammad, Sanjar’s brother, at his Other’s death in
510 H. [some say it took place in 511 H.j, notwithstanding he had opposed
his uncle in battle, was allowed to retain the government of ’Idlh['i'’Ajam],”
but that he died in that same year. 7’^ghril, his brother, succeeded him, but
in that same year fufi^ril likewise died. On this, Mas’Qd, the third brother,
succeeded, and he became disaffected towards his uncle, who marched against
him, and defeated him in 513 H. in sight of HamadSn [a long way from Sawah].
Mas’Qd fled to Juij 9 n ; but he was permitted, shortly after, to resume his
government, but under supervision, There is no mention of his having been
taken prisoner, yet this is the account which agrees best with the statement
of our author. This Mas’ud died in 525 H. The JahSln-ArS, and Muntakhab-
ut-Tawartkh state, that Mahmud died in that year [Thn-i. Kha lkan says in
524 tl.], and was succeeded by his brother, Tugjiril, who died in 529 H., and
was succeeded by Mas’ud ; but, if Mas’ud only succeeded in 529 h., how
could he, according to the same authors, have been defeated by his uncle in
526 H. ? According to Fa;i^.f, Mas’ud was succeeded by yughril. his brother,
but probably his son, as the same author states that his brother Tuglpril died
in the same year as Ma^mOd, who died in 525 h. [this date agrees with Jahan-
ArH and the Muiitaldiab-ut-Tawarlkll above quoted], when Mas’ud, son 0/
JUakmiid [son of Muhammad], Saiijar’s nephew, succeeded. He died in
547 H., and is said to have al-ways been Io3raI to Sanjar. He was succcede<t
by his brother, Mughig-ud-Dtn, Malik Sl^k.

J5a THE TABAJ 8 AT-I.NA 5 Iia

but we have but a weak following, while the enemy are
very numerous : what is it advisable to do ?” Some among
the nobles replied, that whatsoever, in accordance with his
Majesty’s opinion, he might be pleased to command would
be most advisable; but, if his Majesty would defer any
movement until ^uch time as the whole of the force should
come up, and then dash upon them, it would be still more
advisable. Others of the nobles said :—“ These people too
are his Majesty’s servants: it is necessary that he should
be pleased to show clemency towards, and have compas¬
sion on them, and give them intimation of the arrival of the
imperial standards, so that the whole of them may be able
to come and tender their services, and rest in safety under
the shadow of the imperial protection and pardon.” In
short, each one of the great lords and nobles made repre¬
sentation of such opinions as entered their minds. ^
Sultan Sanjar [then] turned his face towards the Amir-i-
Cha-ush. who was also Marshal of his retinue, and sa^d:

_“ Olia-uglL what is it advisable to do ?” The Cha-ush

dismounted from his horse, and, bowing his head to the
ground, repeated the following lines

*• Great monarch I we ought to give battle :

We should close vrith the foe.

All the fierce lions of the forest
Must be brought into the field.

All the huge elephants of war

Should doubtless be brought into the fray.

It is the day of battle : it is meet to engage.

It is the hour for action : it is well to be doing.

If thou wouldst render the kingdom stable,

It is essential that the sword should be plied.”

The Sultan replied ” It is necessary to act as the Qia-
usli advisesand at once, without any further delay, with
as many cavalry as had come up, Sultan Sanjar dashed
upon the rebel forces, ^larajah, th6 cup-bearer, and Mas ud
of ’Ira]p were both taken prisoners, and the forces of this
gathering were defeated and put to the rout, and the
countries of ’Ira^ and AyarbaijSn were recovered anew.

The Sultan returned to Khurasan ; and it was a constant
practice with him to pass the hot season at Bukhara, and
the winter at Marw of happened, one

year, that he remained longer than was his wont at Marw'.

THE SALjOylAH DYNASTY 153

The temperature began to rise, and not one of his Court had
the courage to represent that it would be well to return to
the land of BuJsh^ra. The climate of Bu lch arS agreed with a
number of the nobles and great men. They urged Amlr-i-
^u’azzt that he should, by means of verse, bring the charms
and beauties of the villas and gardens of the city of Bu¬
khara to the imperial hearing, so that Kamal-uz-Zaman
might, at an opportune time, sing it, accompanied with
lutes.

Amir Mu’azzt, who was the Chief of Poets, or Poet-
Laureate, and who, along with forty other adepts [in the
art], was in the habit, on days of entertainment and at
banquets, of recounting the deeds of the Sultan, and [of
v/hom] it is related, that the whole of these [poets] were of
his clan and followers, accordingly composed the following
strophe^: and the Minstrel, Kamal-uz-Zaman, early one
morning, when the Sultan had taken his morning draught
of wine, played* it with such feeling and touching effect,
that the Sultan, half-dressed as he was and in his slippers,
came forth, mounted on horseback, and took neither

Our author is unfortunate with regard to his quotations very often. These
lines were neither composed by the poet Mu’azzf, nor were they composed to
influence SultSn Sanjar to return to Ru lrha ra It was neither his capital, nor
did he “use” to pass the hot seasons there. The lines were composed
more than two hundred years before Sanjar was bom, with the title “Mtr”
instead of “ SKih,” by Farfd-ud-Dtn, Abu ’Abd-utlah, Muhammad, bora at
Ru<)ak of $amrVand, and hence known as Rudak$, a famous poet, blind from
his birth, but endowed with a very melodious voice, and he played enchant*
ingly on the barbat, a kind of lute. He was also the first native of ’Ajam who
composed a Dfwan. The lines In question were composed to try and influence
the Amtr, AbS-l-l^asan-i-Nafr, s<m of Ahmad, Samant, to return to his
capital, which was BukllSra. One author states that he went to HirSt, and
was so delighted with the place that he remained a long time, and even
thought of taking up his residence there. His ministers, nobles, and troops,
who longed to return to Bukharii, were much put out at this, so mudi so that
they, finding all remonstrance useless, even contemplated rebelling. Another
writer, who gives a biography of Rudakt, states that the place was Marw with
which Nafr was so murh taken up. But, be this as it may, the poet, ROdakt,
was induced to use his efibrts upon the Amtr. He accordingly composed
these lines, and in the SarSe or villa, in which Nafr had taken his morning
collation, the poet sang them accompanied by his lute. Na^r became so
enchanted on hearing some of the lines, that he did not stay to hear all; but,
without either turban or shoes, he at once mounted and rode off the first s/agr
on the way to BukJiSifi.

* “ Lutes” are mentioned above in all the copies ; whilst here, it appears,
the minstrel sang it, accompanying it with his lute.

L

154 the XABA¥AT-I-NA$IR!.

rest nor repose until he reached the appointed destina¬
tion :—

** The breeze from Mulfin’s rivulet reacheth me the same,.

Even as cometh the fragrance of a loving friend.

The gravel of the AmO, and the roughness thereof,

Appeareth like as the softest silk beneath my feet.

The river Ji^un, with its wide-spread surface,

Reacheth, even now, to my white steed’s very giillis*.

0 Rii kbar S I rejoice, and be thou glad once more.

For the Sha h even now cofmeth a guest ^ unto thee.

The Sha h is a moon, and Bukhara a firmament;

The moon likewise riseth the celestial vault within.

The Shah is a cypress, and Rnkhara is a garden;

The cypress also cometh unto the garden now.”

After a great part of his reign had elapsed, a body of
people from Kara-Khata-i. from Tamghaj. and the depen¬
dencies of Chin, entered the confines of Kara Kuram of
Turkistan, and solicited Sultan Sanjar to assign them
gp'azing-lands ; and, with the Sultan’s permission, they took
up their quarters on those confines, in Bilasaghun, Kabalik,
and Almalik, and made those parts their grazing-grounds.

When their progeny became very numerous, during the
Sultan’s reign, they rebelled against his authority, and
fought a battle against him. T^niko of ']Caraz, at the
nomination of Sunkam and I-ma,‘ was at the head of the
Khata’is. The Sultan’s forces, from a long period of inac¬
tion, and enervated by protracted ease and luxury, were
unable to cope with or stand before the enemy, and were
overthrown ; and they took Turkan Khatun. who was the
Malikah-i-Jahan [Queen of the Universe], and consort of
Sultan Sanjar, captive*.

* The only other signification the word used will admit of is a boat, which
does seem more appropriate, for I do not think the Jf^un can be forded on
horseback. 1 have doubts whether the word is correct in the originaL

> Sic in MSS.

* In 534 H. Sanjar marched to Samr^and, and fought a battle with At
Shim ; but he was defeated, and. had to retreat to the fortress of Tirmiz, or
Tirmid, as it is also called. Turkan Kbatnn, and the Malik of Nfmroz, and
many other great men, were left in the hands of the enemy. These infidels of
ShatH-l, and Mughals likewise, overran Mawar-un-Nahr, slaying; devastating,
and making the people captives; and, included in the numbers put to the
sword by the invaders, were many great and learned men. The Shat&'t’s and
Miiglinia remained in Mawar-un-Nahr until driven out by Sul^Sn Muhammad,
Shwarazm Sha h. Guzfdah and Muntakhnb-ut-Tawarikh state that this reverse
took place in 535 H.

As soon as this disaster befell Sanjar, his vassal, Utsuz [it is written “Itsis”

THE SALjC^:iAH DYNASTY. 155

This was the first reverse the Sultan had ever sustained ;
and, subsequently, he concluded a peace with them, and the
pasture-lands of Turkistan and BilasaghOn, along with the
cities and towns included in those frontier tracts, were left
in the hands of the Kha ta-i invaders. After the peace was
concluded they sent back Turkan Kha tun to the Sul^aii
again. The Hakim [philosopher] Koshaki has written much
satire upon this unfortunate event, which is contained in
Diwans and [other] books.

When this reverse became public, the affairs of the empire
began to decline, and to grow weak *; and, of the reign of
Sanjar, sixty years'* had passed away. A body of the
Gh uzz tribe, from Kha ndan *, now rose in revolt against the
Sultan’s authority®, and withheld the yearly tribute which
had been previously fixed. The Sultan marched an army
against them, and the j^uzz were willing to pay a kalah
[ingot] of silver ^ for each family, but the Sultan would not

in Burhan-i-KSta’, and in the TarfkIl-i-Ibiahfmt, " Utsiz," and by our author,
^‘Utsuz”], SOB of E^utb-ud-Dtn, Muhammad, son of Nflgll-Tigfn, upon whom
Sanjar’s father conferred the rule over Khwamzin, threw off his allegiance.
Sanjar invested him in HazSr-asp in 535 H., which was taken ; but he treated
the rebel leniently, and still allowed him to retain that territory. In 537 H.
[Guztdah says in 535 H., while the Muntakliab-ut-Tawarfkll says it hap¬
pened in 536 H.] Gut Khan, who, in concert with At KhS n, defeated Sanjar in
the Dasht. or Desert of l^tran on the frontier of Samr^and, died;

and, aAer this happened, Muhammad Kh w^raam Sha h expelled the infidels
from Mawar-un-Nahr.

* It was, according to Guztdah and others, after Sanjar’s defeat by the
E 2 |at&-t’s and Mughals that ’Ala-ud-Dtn, cdiief of Gh ur. ventured to show
hostility tovrards him. Sanjar defeated him before Aobah in 547 h., and ’Alft-
ud-Dtn was taken prisoner, but was subsequently released. Our author has
mentioned this as about the first event of Sanjar’s reign.

See note *, page 157.

* A tract of territory on the frontier of Chtn. A few MSS. have Shhtl&n.

* Fanlkatf says that, when the Qhtizz tribe crossed the Jfhun, Badr-ul-
Mulk, ’Ajamt, the Sul^n’s Waztr, advised Sultan Sanjar to attack them.
This he did, and was overthrowm and taken prisoner, and Khi imsan. KirmSn,
and FSrs 'were seized by them 1

The Sultftn marched against the GHe^xz in 548 H. Tlie details are far too long
for insertion here. Upwards of a hundred thousand persons, not including
women and children, were afterwards massacred by the fhe terri¬

tory of Sburasan was devastated. In the following year was bom TamQchfn,
afterwards knowm by the name of Chingtz Kban.

7 Guztdah says “a maun [which signifies two pounds of twelve ounces
each] of silver.” Price, quoting the Slinl&fat-ul-AlchbSr, says “ a quarter 0/
a ktendredweif^t of p>ld, be»des 100,000 dtnfirs,” which is ridiculous. Our
author’s account is the most probable one.

L. a

THE TABA^AT-I-NA^IEI.

156

agree to it, and, on this account, gave battle to them, and
was defeated and taken prisoner.

On the Sultan falling into their hands, the whole of the
Gh uzz dismounted before his stirrup, and saluted him, and
tendered their services. The Ql|uzz chieftains, such as Tuti,
I^urgharat. Malik Dinar, Ibrahim, and Kh utall. besides
others, girded up their loins before the Sultan’s throne [to
serve him], and began themselves to issue mandates [in
his name]; and they divided Kh urasan among themselves.
Whatever it was requisite to do they did, and they used to
state, “ The Sultan commands this and that,” The slaves
and servants of the Sanjart dynasty became dispersed
and separated ; and the affairs of the country became
disorganized, and the thread of sovereignty snapped
asunder.

After some time had passed—about a year, more or less*
—one of the slaves, who was one of the Sultan’s nobles,
proceeded to the Sultan Sanjar’s presence, and presented
himself, and, as if going out on a hunting excursion,
mounted the Sultan on horseback, and brought him away
[out of the hands of the GJjuzz], and restored him to
liberty once more. He conducted the Sultan to Marw *,
and placed him on the throne again, and some of the still
remaining adherents of the dynasty collected around him ;
but the Sultan’s days had now drawn towards their close,
and the sovereignty had grown antiquated and'gqne to
decay. On Monday, the 24th of the month Rabi’-ul-
Awwal, in the year 552 H., Sultan Sanjar died at Marw,
and was there buried. His age was seventy-three years

* Our author generally eschews elates. Here Aguin we have a specimen of
his mode of writing history, when he asserts that Sanjar remained in captivity
“about a year, more or less.” Sanjar remained nearly four years in the
hands of the Gh uzz. and, during this period, no efforts were made to effect
his escape, lesl his consort, Turkan Kbstrin- who appears to have again fallen
into captivity, might remain in their hands. She having died, however, ,in
551 H., Sultan Sanjar succeeded in gaining over the Gh uzz chief who had
charge of him, so far as to get him to take him out on a hunting excursion to
the banks of the Jt^un. Arrangements had been made for the occasion, and
Amtr Ahmad-i-^amaj, governor of Tirmiz, was awaiting him on the bank,
where he had got boats in readiness. The Sultan succeeded in throwing
himself into one, and his people got into others, and then made their escape.
In Rama^gn of that year, the Sultan succeeded in assembling a force at
Tirmiz, and he then set out, under its escort, to Marw.

* See latter part of preceding note.

THE SALJO^AH DYNASTY.

*57

and a little over, and his reign lasted sixty-two *. The
mercy of the Almighty be upon him I

»

ACCOUNT OF THE SULTANS OF ROM •, OF THE SALjO^lAH

DYNASTY.

The Sultans of Rum were of the race of Saljul^, and were
great and powerful monarchs ; and, in the territories of Rum
and the country of Afranj *, numerous signs and marks
of their goodness and benevolence, their expeditions and
holy wars, their conflicts with unbelievers, buildings of public
utility and charity, in the shape of colleges, mosques, monas¬
teries for darweshis. karwansaraes, bridges, and charitable
and pious foundations, remain to this day ; and the accounts
of their descendants, their Maliks, and their Amtrs, and of
their heroic achievements in that country, are recorded in
trustworthy books.

When the Sultan of Sultans, Sanjar, on whom be the
mercy of the Almighty, ascended the throne of his father,
and t^came established in the sovereignty of the worlds and,
when the territories of IslSm, both east and west, were taken
possession of by his servants, and the Kh utbah was read
for him from all the pulpits of Islam, and the money of the
world became adorned with his name and titles, he conferred
the. kingdom of Rum upon his brother, Ma^imud, son of
Malik Shah*. The whole of the Sultans [of that country]

1 Guztdali s&ys Sanjar died of grief on the l6th of Rabf*-al-Awwal 5 S^ **.,
aged seventy-two years. The length of his reign must be calculated from the
death of his brother Muhanunad in 510 H., at which period he was thirty-one
years old. Previous to this he was but subordinate ruler of EhurasSn ; and
historians calculate his reign from the date above mentioned. Other authors
state that he reigned forty-one years.

■ Our author completed his work in 638 H., and Sanjar died in 553 H.;
and, although the SaljOk dynasty existed for thirty-two years after Sanjar’s
death, and had terminated ninety-eight years before our author closed his
history, he says nothing about Sanjar’s successors.

* Europe, the countries of the Christians, and the Roman empire of the east.

* All the copies of the text are alike here. Our author has made a precious
ha«h of this Section of the RQmt dynasty of the. Salju^s. Sanjar not, as
he states^ first establish that dynasty, neither was Sanjar’s brother, MahmQd,
the first subordinate sovereign of Riim, nor was his son, Mas’Dd, the second,
nor were they ever its rulers. He has confounded the Sultfins of ’Iriih and
those of RQm together. Sanjar’s brother, MahinGd, moreover, died when in

158 THE TABA^T-I-NA$IRL

are his [Matimud’s] descendants, an account of every one of
who^ is recorded in this Taba^at, in order that its readers
may call to remembrance, with a blessing, those who have
passed away, and acquire some information respecting that
dynasty*.

* 1 will now demonstrate what 1 have referred to by giving a brief account
of the rulers of Rum, of the Salju^ dynasty.

l^l-timiah —written likewise !^il>timish and ^at-limiah i.A>^—

hut the last syllable is evidently the same as occurs in the name of the Turkish
slave-sovereign of Dihlt, “ I-yal-timiab,”] son of Isra’il, son of Saljuk, Alb-
Arsalan’s great uncle’s son, according to the MuntaJdiab-ut-TawarlJch, rebelled
against him [Alb-Arsalan] ; but, in an action near Damghan in Mubarmm,
456 H., Ipl-timisll was defeated, and was found dead on the field. Alb-
Arsalan desired to put ^il-timish’s sons to death, but was dissuaded from doing
so by his Waztr, and was induced to make Sultman, son of ^il-timish. viceroy
of certain territories of Sham, and he was the founder of the Saljul^ Sultans of
Rum. Guztdah states that ^il-timisli received the investiture of the govern¬
ment of DamaahV, from Malik Shah, at the time u'hen he conferred so many
territories upon others. See note *, page 168. Suliman, who was employed
against the Christians in 467 H. [a.d. 1074-5]—but Fa;i];i-t and a few others say
in 469 H. —succeeded by stratagem in wresting An^aktah out of the hands of
Firdaus [Philaretus], Rumt, after it hod been in the hands of the Christians

his tenth year, in 489 h., only twenty-one years before Sanjar succeeded' to the
throne, and when Sanjar was about the same age. The first two sovereigns
here mentioned as rulers of Rum, who undertook expeditions against “the
infidel Afranj,” were the first two rulers of’Iral^, subordinate to Sanjar, as
will be seen on reference to the second Rumt sovereign, so called, and Sanjar’a
reign where ^pirajah, the cup-bearer, is referred to, page 151. From the third
to the ninth, the rulers mentioned in this Section are correctly given as far as
their names and a very meagre account of their reigns go ; but the tenth ruler,
again, was the last ruler of ’Irslk, not of Rum. I noticed, when reading the
work, that, at the latter part of the reign of Mas’ud, all the copies of the
original contained matter totally unintelligible with regard to that sovereign.
It is strange too that all the copies of the work should be the.same, for some
of the MSS. I have collated, one in particular,' are certainly five or six hundred
years old. Still more strange is it, however, that, not only should the author
in bis preliminary notice of the Sultans of Rum mention Mahmud, brother of
Sanjar, as the first, but, that he should subsequently mention his undertaking ex¬
peditions against the Christians; and, with reference to the second ruler, Mas’ud,
Mabmud’s son, he says that Sanjar, <ttfirst, conferred the throne of’IrSbupon
him [Mas’ud], thus inferring that, subsequently, that of Rum was given to
him. The heading of a chapter or paragraph might be put in incorrectly by a
copyist, but the sense of the matter cannot be, nor could Rum have been
inserted for It is therefore evident that our author himself made ta

muddle of his work, and confounded the rulers of ’Ii^V with those of ROm,
which, from other errors he has made, is not improbable. It will also be
noticed that he makes no mention whatever of the Saljuks of KirmSn, consist¬
ing of eleven sovereigns, whose dynasty outlasted all the others—but he has also
left out all the other ’IraVt rulers, except the two first and the last, who do
duty for the Rumts—nei^er has he given any account whatever of Sanjar’s
successors, nor does he notice at all other less powerful dynasties.

THE SALjO^lAH DYNASTY.

*59

I. MAHMOD, son of MALIK SHAH.

On the throne of the territory of Rum having been con¬
ferred upon him by Sultan Sanjar, his brother, he undertook
many holy wars in that region, and on the frontiers of
Islam. He marched armies against the infidel Afranj, and
carried on holy war according to the canons and ordinances
of the sacred law. He captured fortresses and cities, and
ruled over the servants of Almighty God with justice and
beneficence. After he had reigned for a considerable time
he died.

II. MAS’ 0 D,:SON OF MA^MOD SHAH.

Sultan - Mas’ud was the son of Mahmud, son of Malik
Shah. At first, Sultan Sanjar conferred the throne of 'Iralf
upon him; and, on one occasion, through the power and
authority which he had acquired in that territory, he com¬
bined with ^arajah, the Safei [cup-bearer], and they rebelled
against the Sultan.

The Siiltan came upon them suddenly, and attacked
them*, and took both Mas’ud and IKarajah, the cup¬
bearer, prisoners. After that occurrence the affairs of
Mas’ud went to ruin, and he never ascended the throne
again ; but, in the person of his son, Kazil-Arsalan by name,
he acquired considerable power, and became sovereign, and
carried on the government*.

***** *

[Twelve copies of the original are all hopelessly defective
here, and no two copies are alike. No break occurs in eithet
MS. to indicate that any portion whatever has been lost or
misplaced, or that any omission has been made in copying^.

since 358 H. This was effected during the reign of the Greek emperor, Alexius
Comnenus. I. SULImAN [the Solyman of Tasso] acquired great renown
by this, and, in 480 h., Malik Sl^h [not Sanjar, as our author states, for he
was then only an infant in his first year], conferred the sovereignty on him.
He reigned twenty years, and was succeeded by his son, II. DA’OD, who

* See the particulars, at page 151. ... j ..

* This is the only sense that is to be gathered from the original, and the

statment is incorrect. See note *, page 157 . . ^ , r j,

* Not even in the precious Paris copy, which M. Taseberau so fondly

imagines to be in our author's own handwriting.

i6o THE TABA^T-I-NA$lRf.

The context, in fact, proves that Minhaj-i-Saraj considered
]|j|[azil-Arsalan to be the son and successor of Mas’ud ; and,
such being the case, the extent of our author's knowledge
of history is impressively indicated.]

1|C 3tC ])( iK * >|C

III. ¥AZIL-ARSALAN», son of MAS’OO, son of MA^MOD,
SON OF MALIK SHAH.

After the decease of his father, jSazil-Arsalan acquired
some little power, and possessed himself of some of the
frontier districts of the territory of Rum. He ruled for a
short period and died.

IV. ^:ulu-arsalan, son of e^azil-arsalan.

Kulij-Arsalan was the son of Kazil-Arsalan, who was
the son of Mas’ud, son of Mahmud, son of Malik Shah.
He assumed the sovereignty of Rum after the death of
his father, and became a very great and powerful monarch.
He possessed himself of the territories upon the confines of
ROm, captured many fortresses and strongholds, performed
many heroic exploits, and acquired a great name on ac¬
count of the infidel Afranj having been often worsted and
overthrown by him.

All the Sultans of Rum glory in their connexion with
him ; and he obtained the felicity of martyrdom. He was
interred at Kuniah*, which is a laige city in Rum.

ascended the throne at ^Ontah. He gained some successes over the Christians,
and, after a r«gn of eighteen years, died in 518 H. His brother. III. KULIJ*
ARSALAN, succeeded, who is said by one author to have fought a naval
battle with the Christians, and, after an arduous struggle, to have been
victorious ; but there is some discrepancy with respect to the date, and the story
may refer to the previous reign. He reigned until 539 H., but some say until
537 H. ; but, having been defeated in a battle with the ’IitVi Salja^s, he was
drowned whilst crossing a river, when retreating before them. His son, IV.
SUL7AN MAS’OD, succeeded, who, after a reign of nineteen years, died in

* Mas’ud, brother of Ma^ud, son of Gkiyag-ud-Dtn, Mubammdd, Sanjar’s
brother, had no son so named. The lines whitdi follow are meaningless, but
are alike in all the copies.

* Called Koniah by Europeans.

THE SALjOf^AH DYNASTY.

t6i

V. ’IZZ-UD-DiN, KAI-KA-OS, SON OF ]^ULIJ-ARSALAN.

Sultan ’Izz-ud-Dln, Kai-Ka-us, ascended the throne after
his father’s death, and brought the country under his rule.
He carried on holy war against the infidels of Afranj, and
fought several battles with them in that country. He
founded colleges and masjids, and left many monuments
of his goodness and bounty behind. He was interred by
the side of his father in the city of ^untah.

VI. kai-eiubAd, son of kai-kA-Cs.

Sultan ’Ala-ud-Din, Kai-^ubad, ascended the throne on
the decease of his father, Kai-K<l-us, and brought under his
sway the territories of Rum, and parts adjacent.

558 H. He was succeeded by his son, V. 'IZZ-UD-DiN, E^ULIJ-AKSALAN,
who ascended the throne at E^flntah. He annexed some of the teiri-
tories of the Christians, and, after a reign of twenty yean, died in 578 H.
After him came his son, VI. RUKN.UD-DlN, SULImAN SHAH, the
eldest, and, between him and his brother GlliySs*ud>Dtn, Kai-Ehusran, who
had been nominated successor his father, hostilities arose, which went on
till $88 H. Kai-Shnsran fled to the Christians. Sullman annexed Aff-i-Rihn
and Elir? [Kars], with their dependencies. He reigned twenty-fonr yeaia^ and
died In 603 M. His son, VII. ’IZZ-UD-DIN, KULIJ-ARSALAN II.,
son of Sulfman, succeeded. He was an infant, and his uncle, Kai-Shuarau,
having been recalled from the Farang, in 6 oy H., succeeded, after a year, in
depriving him of the sovereignty, and l^ulij-Aisalln was shut up in a fortress,
where he died in 609 H. VIII. ^IYAS-UD-DIN, KAI-KHUSRAU.
after dethroning his young nephew in 603 H., assumed the sovereignty. He
took Antakfah from the Christians, into whose hands it had 'again fallen, in
603 H., and was himself killed in a battle with the ruler (A Istanbul [Constan¬
tinople], after a reign of six years, in 609 H., but some authors say in the pre¬
ceding year, and some, 610 H. This probably is the fifth monarch referred to
by our outhor, under the name of l^ullj-Arsalan, as he is the only one
mentioned who attained the felicity of martyrdom in having been slain by the
Christians. His brother, ’Ala-ud-Din, Kai-]^ubad, rose against him, but bad
to submit, and was confined in a fortress.

Qbiy&S-ud-Dtn, Kai-Shosrau, having been slain in battle with the Chris*
tians, was succeeded by his son, IX. 'IZZ-UD-DiN, KAI-KA-OS, but he
died after a short reign of about a year. Most authors do not mention this
prince at alL He was succeeded by his uncle, ’Ali-ud-Dln, Kai-]^ub!ld,
who is about the first of the sovereigns of this dynasty that con be traced
by his correct name and title, from our author’s account of them. X. ’ALA-
UD-DlN, KAI-KUBAD, who had-been immured in a fortress, succeeded his
nephew, ’Izz-u 4 -Din, Kai-Kfi-iis, in 610 H., and is accounted one of the
greatest sovereigns of the dynasty. Hostilities arose between him and the

■6a

THE TABA^T-I>NA$1RI.

He fought battles with the infidels of Afranj ; and many
indications of his goodness exist to this day.

He had sons, who acquired great renown, and became
great men. He died on the 5th of the month Shawwal. in
the year 633 H., and he, likewise, was buried at ^Ontah.

VII. KAI-KHUSRAU, SON OF KAI- 5 :UBAD.

Sultan Ghiyas-ud-Din. Kai- Kh usrau^.was a great monarch
of noble disposition and excellent qualities, just and
impartial. Having ascended the throne after the death of
his father, he took possession of the territories of Rum, and
assumed the government of them.

In this reign, the disturbance and disorder consequent
upon the irruption of the army of infidel Mughals had
reached the frontiers of Rum*. ‘The SuRan, in such
manner as he was able, entered into friendly relations with
the Farang *. He was assembling an army upon the fron¬
tiers bordering upon the territory of Islam, when, suddenly,

unfortunate but gallant Jalil-ud-Dln, the last of the Ehwoiazra Shahts. They
fought a battle, in Ramaflm, 627 H., in which Kai-l^ubad was victorious.
The Mughal, Uktae Ra’an, sent him. a Yaritgh [diploma] congratulating him,
and the Kh aliiah [for overthrowing a good Musalman perhaps] conferred upon
him the title of Sultan-i-A’gam, wa l^Iastm-i-Mu’accam. He reigned twenty*
six years, and died in 634 H., having been jioisoned) by mistake some authors
say, by his son, Qhiyas-ud-Dtn, Kai-Qiusrau, who assumed the throne.

• Our author is correct here as to the name and title. GHIVAS-UD-DIN,
KAI- KH USRAU. the eleventh of the dynasty, is the man who poisoned his
own father, of whom our author gives such a glowing account.

• An army of Mughals matched against him, under Taju, NuySn, and the
Mughals obtained sway over the territory of RQm, after an engagement at
Koshah-dagh. in 641 H. Kai-Siusrau died in 642 H., but Guztdah says in
644 H., and Jahln-Arii and Mimta]diab-ut-Tawart]dl say in 643 h., but
Raufat-a9-$afa says in.640 H., which is certainly inooiiect. His son Sultman
succeeded.

• The word “ Farang” is used here in all the copies; hut Afranj is the word
previously used. This, doubtless, is what Gibbon refers to in grandiloquent style,
which often covers great errors :—**inying from the arms of the Moguls, thoM
shepherds of the Caspian [whom he styles ' the strange and savage hordes ofCessrH-
snians,' thus indicating the extent of his knowledge of th6 matter] rolled
headlong on Syria ; and the union of the Franks with the'Sultans of Aleppo,
Hems, and Damascu-s, was insufficient to stem the violence of the torrent.”
The “torrent” of course signifies the fugitive BultSn Jalfil-ud-Dtn flying from
the Mughals, who was defeated by Alfi-ud-Dtn, Kai-lj^ubfid, as related in a
previous note.

THE SALJO^AH DYNASTY.

163

he was deserted and left alone by his troops. The Mughal
forces made an inroad into that territory; and, after they
again retired, Kai- Kh usrau died in the beginning of
Muharram, 643 H.*

He reigned for a period of eleven years, and named his
son, ’Izz-ud-Dtn, Kai-Ka-us, his heir and successor.

VIII. TZZ-UD-DiN, KAI-KA-OS, SON OF KAl-KHUSRAU.

According to his father’s nomination as successor to the
sovereignty, Sulj^n ’Izz-ud-Dtn, Kai-Ka<us, ascended the
throne of Rum in the beginning of the year 643 H., and
the Maliks and other great nobles submitted to his autho¬
rity *.

As he was celebrated for his energy, his warlike accom¬
plishments, and his nobility of mind, he strengthened his
frontiers on the side of Afranj ; and, as a matter of necessity,

* Died in 644 H. according to'Guztdati and Fa$iti-t, and in 642 H. accord¬
ing to the Mnntakliab-ut-Tawartkh.

* As is often the cose towards the termination of a dynasty, authors here arc

at variance one with another respecting the succession. Some say that Ghlyaff-
ud-Dtn, Kai- Kh usrau. was succeeded by his son, 'Izz-ud-Dln, Kai-Ka-Qs, and
that he, as our author states, despatched his brother Rukn-ud-Din, I^uIfj-ArsaUln
[called by others Rukn-ud-Din, Suliman], to the camp of the Mugltal ^a’an.
The facts, however, appear to be as follow. On the death of Gbiyaj-ud-Din,
Kai-Shusrau, in 642-H., his son, XII. KUKN-UD-DiN, .SULIMAN, suc¬
ceeded. It was he who despatched his brother, ’Ala-ud-Dtn, Kai-E^ubdd, to the
Court of Ab-g]^ [called also Ab-ka] where he continued fora consider¬

able time in distress dnd trouble. Having at length suceeetlcd in his mission, he
set out on his return, but Rukn-ud-Din, Suliman, suspecting he was coming
with designs against him, had him put to death as soon ns he entered his terri¬
tory ; and another brother, 'Izz ud-Din, Kai-Ka-us, fle<l to the camp of Uarka
TOia n. After a reign, so called, of twenty years, Suliman was himself put to
death, by order of Ab-gl£ Sian, in 664 H,

Others, on the contrary, say that Rukn-ud-Din, having succeeded in obt-ain-
ing from the Mughal ^a’an, a grant of investiture for himself, on his return
into Rum, was the cause of great disorders; and that ’Izz-ud-Din, Kai- Kh usrau.
fled to Istanbul, and was proceeding to the Dasht-i-Ipibclialc to lay his case
before the E^’an, but died on the way, Rukn-ud-Din having in the mean¬
time, with Mughal aid, assumed the sovereignty ; but, after a short time had
elapsed, Rukn-ud-Din [called Kulij-Arsalan by sbme and Suliman by others]
was found to have been intriguing with the ruler of Mijr, and was put to death
in 664 H.

As our author finished his history in 658 H. I have no occasion to say
more than that he records events, respecting the Mughals which, evidently,
belong to the reign of Ohi^S-wd-Din, K.'ti-SJiusrau, the seventh ruler, by his
.account, and has confusctl the events of the following ones.

164

THE TABA]^AT-I-NA$IRI.

consequent upon the power and predominance of the inhdel
Mughals over the dominions of Islam, he, in order to ward
off [the inroads of] that race, despatched his younger
brother into Turkistan to the Court of Mangu Kha n, the
Mughal, so that he might, under terms of peace,* be left in
possession of his dominions.

On Rukn-ud-Din, Kulij-Arsalan, the envoy and brother
of Sultan Kai-Ka-us, reaching the presence of Mangu
Kha n, the Mughal, he preferred requests, and made solici¬
tations contrary to the mandate of his brother. He sought
from Mangu Kh an the territory of Rum for himself, and
likewise assistance from him to enable him to liberate that
country from the hands of his brother. Mangu Kha n gave
him the daughter of the Nu-in* [a-Prince, or a great noble,]
Aljakta,the Mughal, and despatched Aljakta, with his troops,
to aid Rukn-ud-Din, Kulij-Arsalan [against his brother].

When they reached the Rumi territory, ’Izz-ud-Din,
Kai-Ka-us, retired before them ; and IKultJ-Arsalan and
the Mughals became dominant over Rum. Kai-Ka-us
went to Aor Khan of Rum, and, having obtained aid from
him, came and suddenly attacked the Mughals. and over¬
threw them’. He captured his brother, and immured him
in a fortress.

After some time, he, IKulij-Arsalan, succeeded in escap¬
ing, and went to the Mughals ; and, as what has happened
since has not become known to the author, this [notice of
him] has been thus much abridged.

IX. KUTB-UD-DiN* ^^fULIJ-ARSALAN.

Trustworthy persons call him Rukn-ud-Din, IKultj-
Arsalan, and say that he is among the Mughals. along
with Hulau, the Accursed, in the direction of the terti-
tory of Azarbaijan. What the upshot of his affairs
may be no one can say ; but, please God, may they end
well •!

* Also written Nuyan.

? Who Aor [in one copy Oz] Kh an of Rum might have been, it would
require our author to explain. No overthrow of the Mughals by the SaljuVs
of Rum ib mentioned by other writers.

• One copy has Rukn-ud-Din.

^ This short account varies, and is somewhat less in some of the copies ot
the work. Hulau is also styled Hulaku.

THE SALJC^IAH DYNASTY, 165

[The author now returns to the last of the Saljul^s of
'Iral^'. All the MSS. are alike here.]

an

X. TUGHRIL. SON OF TUGHRIL.

Respecting the descent of this Prince two different
accounts have been given. Some relate that he is Tughril.
the son of Tugliril, son of l^azil Arsalan *.

Sulj^n Tughril was a sovereign, and the son of a
sovereign, and a person of great magnificence ; and his reign
was contemporary with that of Sultan 'Ala-ud-Dtn, Takish.
Khwarazm Shah *.

His strength was so verj- great, that not a warrior of hfts
day could lift his mace * from the ground, and he was a
man of great stature and of awe-striking presence. Per¬
sons of credit relate, that the hair on his upper lip was so
long, that he used to draw his moustaches back, and put
them behind his ears.

He was one of the brother’s sons of Sultan Sanjar*, and
was [left] very young in years on the decease of his father.
The sons of the Ata-bak Iladd-giz—who was one of Sanjar’s
slaves, and had, previously, been ruler of that territory, and
had espoused TughriPs mother [grandmother of Tughril.
widow of Arsalan, Tughril’s father], after his father's death
—had acquired• power over ’Irak; and, when their father
died, they immured Sultan Tughril in one of the fortresses
of ’Irak, and took the country into their own possession*.

* All the copies are alike in this respect, and no hiatus whatever occurs in
the diflTerent MSS. to show it. 1 merely discovered it from the names and
events mentioned.

* Not so : Tughril. the last of the dynasty, was son of ArsalSn Shah , and

his title was Rtikn-ud-Dln. There are no contrary accounts that 1 know of.
One copy has son of Arsalan, son of ^ulij-Arsalw.

* In some copies this paragraph is placed at the end of his reign.

* See note •, page 91.

* He was Sanjar’s brother’s great-grandson, if not one generation farther
removed.

* I have been obliged to take a little liberty with the text of this paragraph,
whidi, in all twelve copies, is in a hopeless state of muddle. No two copies
are alike ; and, as the text now stands, it is a mere jumble of words without any
observance of grammatical rules. The literal translation of this passage, as it
now stands, is as follows:—** He was one of the brother’s sons of Suljtln

i66

THE TABA¥AT-I-NA 9 IR!.

When Sult 3 n Tughril reached man’s estate, and became
famous for his vast strength, his great bodily vigour, his
nobility of mind, and his warlike accomplishments, a party
[of adherents] rendered him aid, and set him at liberty from
imprisonment. He came forth, and great numbers of the
servants of his father and grandfather flocked around him.
He assumed the Chatr [canopy of royalty], and became
Sultan.. The following are two lines from a poem composed
on his escape fromconfinement, and his rise to dominion and
power ^:—

“ The tidings reach’d Rai—‘ Tlie SultSn is come J ’—

And that august canopy of his is to Hamadfin come.”

After Sultan Tughril had acquired supremacy over
the territory of ’Iral^, and had reigned for a considerable
period, a number of his servants despatched letters to
Sultan 'Ala-ud-Din, Takish. Khwarazm Shah, and invited
him to come into that country. In accordance with that
request, Sultan Takish invaded ’Iralf with a laige army.
When the two armies came into proximity with each other,
one or two ingrate slaves acted treacherously towards
Sultan Tughril, and came up behind his august back and
martyred him.

At this period his other followers were engaged in front,
at the head of a pass, fighting bravely, and did not become
aware of this piece of treachery, until those treacherous
ingrates brought the august head of their sovereign to
Sultan Takish, Khw arazm Shah, who despatched it to that
staunch and steadfast band of Tughril’s followers.

Sanjar, and had been left, ader his father fs death] very young [in years].
The fenf of the Ata-bak lladd-giz, who was a slave of Sanjar’s, having
acquired power Over because Air [sic] father was ruler of ’IrSV } [ttnd],

when he died, tA^ imprisoned Sultan Tughril in one of the fortresses of
took his mother to wife [sic], and possessed themselves of the country.” For
a correct account of these matters see the following note, and note page 169.

7 Jah&n*Pahlaww, the AtS-bak, on the death of his half-brother'[see under
Ata-baks of A^arbafjSn and ’Ira]^, page 171, and note*] ArsaUin S 2 i|ih, set up
the latter’s son, Tughril, as sovereign of 'IiSIf, who was then seven years old.
While his maternal uncle, JahSn-Pahlaw&n, lived, fughnl’s affairs prospered!
and he reigned in some splendour. JahSn-Pahlawan, however, died in 58a H.,
and l^jCazil-Arsalan, his full brother, desired to take his place as AtA-bak to
fu^rih The latter, being impatient of restraint, would not brook it, and,
accordingly enmity arose between them. Tor farther particnlars respecting
‘J'ugiiril and ^^l-ArsaUn, see note*, i>age 171, and note* page 17a.

/

THE SALjt)] 0 AH DYNASTY. 167

When they found what had happened, they declared
that they would not cease fighting and using the sword,
until he, Sultan Takish, should deliver up to them the
murderers of their sovereign, whereupon they would yield
to him. Sultan Takish complied, and delivered up the
murderers, whom they sent to the infernal regions. Then,
taking along with them the head of Sultan Tughril, they
proceeded to the presence of Sultan Takigh, and sub¬
mitted to him. He took the head in his arms, and, along
with them, performed the customary mourning [for the de¬
ceased] ; and Sultan Takish, Khwarazm Sh^, took pos¬
session of ’Iralj:*.

• "yugiiril’s death occurred in the following mannerTahisli of Mwirazm,
having invaded TraV at the instigation of I^Iutlagifa; inanaj, encountered
Jujiril’s forces within three farsakhs of Rai, where Tuj^l had_ pitched his
camp. According to several authors Tughril and E-^tlagh Ininaj were
engaged hand to hand, when Tughril struck his own horse a blow with his
mace, which was intended for his opponent, and the horse fell with him, and
Tughril was slain by l^utlagh Irmnaj. I prefer, however, the circumstantial
account of Yafa’t, who says that whilst Tughril was leading his troops in a
charge, his horse stumbled, and Tughril was thrown to the ground. At this
moment l^utlagh Inanaj reached the spot, and desired to give Tughril a
finishing blow, and slay him before he was recognized. This he accomplished,
and the body was then placed upon a camel and taken to the presence of
Takish, “who, on seeing his enemy in this condition, knelt down and gave
t hanlrn to thc Almighty for the mercy vouchsafed to him.” His head was
sent, as an insult, to the Kha lifah at Baghdad, and his body was exposed upon
a gibbet in the lAzar of Rai, on Thursday, the 29th of Rabl’-ul-Awwal, 590 H.
Thus ended the first dynasty of the Saljiilfs, who ruled over Murisan and
’Irik for a period of *6l years. This account of Tughril and his death is
vridely different from our author’s. The Khalifah was hostile to Takish. See
under his reign. Section XVI.

Our author does not give any account of the Saljuk dynasty ot Shtoi or
of that which ruled so long in Kirman.

SECTION XIII.

ACCOUNT OF THE SANJARIYAH RULERS.

The humblest of the servants of the Almighty's Court,
Minhaj-i-Saraj, Jurjan!, states, that, when the period of
the dynasty of the Sanjariyah expired, and no son remained
unto Sultan San jar, nor brother's sons* [likewise], everyone
of his slaves held some territory among the dominions of
Islam. These slaves assumed the title of Ata-baks [guar¬
dians and preceptors], and, to the brother’s sons of Sultan
Sanjar, they accorded the title of Sovereign, whilst they
possessed themselves of the different territories of the
empire *.

These Ata-baks were of different races. One was the
descendant of the Ata-bak, Ilatt-giz, to whom Sultan
Sanjar had given the territories of 'Irak and Azarbaijan;
the second, the Ata-bak, Sanlj:ur, to whom he had given

‘ So in all the copies, but a few lines under our author contradicts himself.

s Our author appears quite as much in the dark with respect to the Ati-baks,
if not more so than he is with regard to the Sultans of Rum. It was Sulfin
Malik Shah, the father of Suljan Sanjar—not Sanjar himself—who made
several of his Mamluks or slaves, as well as some of his relatives and nobles,
rulers over different parts of his vast empire [see page 138], as the dates which
I shall give will prove, and on the authority of authors of undoubted authority,
such as have been already mentioned. For the information of the general
reader uninitiated in Oriental lore, I would mention that the words Mamluk
and Ghulam: signifying “ slave,” must not be understood in the sense “ slave "
conveys in our language. These slaves were sometimes captives, but more
often boys of Turkish origin, purchased by kings and their great nobles of
traders—slave-dealers—and trained for the highest offices. They were some¬
times adopted by their masters, and were frequently made governors of pro¬
vinces, and leaders of armies. Numbers of these Turkish slaves possessed the
throne of Dihlt, as will hereafter be mentioned in these pages.

The Ata-baks, it must be remembered, notwithstanding our author’s
assertions, were, at the outset, more or less, subject to the sovereigns of the
house of SaljuV:, and acted as tutors and guardians of various young princes,
which the word At&-bak means, from the' Turkish aid, father, and daA, a lord,
a great man. Sanjar himself was put in charge of Ehuriis&n in the thirteenth
year of his age, which signifies that the government was administered in his
name, and that his At&-bak carried on the administration.

THE SANJARlYAH DYNASTIES.

169

the territory of Pars; and, third, the Ata-baks of Mausil,
and the Maliks of Sham*. Trustworthy authorities have
related some little ‘respecting the events [in the lives] of
two of these dynasties, as has been [herein] recorded ; and,
with regard to the Ata-baks of Mau$il, as much as has been
written respecting the affairs of Sultan NQr-ud-Din of Sham
is all the information that has been obtained, with the
exception of that of which the Kh udawand-Zadah [son of a
lord or great man] of Mau^il informed me, which was this
much, that his eighth ancestor was a Turk of Kha ta-t. and
the slave of Sultan Sanjar\ Such being the case, this
dynasty [of Ata-baks] has been classified into three
sections*.

FIRST DYNASTY.

THE SANJARlYAH MALIKS OF TRAR AND A^ARBAIJAN.

Be it known that one night, at a convivial entertainment,
Sultan Sanjar conferred sovereignty-upon three persons—
to Malik Utsuz* he gave the throne of Kh warazm ; to the
Ata-bak, Ilatt-giz, the throne of A^arbatjan; and the
throne of Pars to the Ata-bak, San^^:ur^ ^

* Respecting both of which dynasties he gives no account. From the
remarks which follow, our author seems to have l>een at a loss fur materials,
and his statements fully prove it.

* A vast deal of information, certainly.

* It will be noticed that our author, who generally eschews dates, never
gives a single date throughout his account of tlie three following dynasties, so
called.

■ Also written Utsiz, and in the Burhan-i-RaJa’, Itsiz.

r Sanjar’s father, Malik Shah, who certainly held a greater extent of terri¬
tory than any other of the Salju^ sovereigns, bestowed territories, that is the
viceroyalty over them, upon his Mamiuks and officers. Kh warazm he gave to
Nush-Tigtn-i-Gharjah, who was also a slave, on his conquest of that territory,
in 475 H. [He was the progenitor of that dynasty], and this happened fivt
years b^ore Sanjar taas born. The latter, during his reign, in S 3 S «•» endea¬
voured to reduce Itsijc, the grandson of Nush-'Tigtn, who died when Sanjar
was in his tiuel/ih year^ but was unable, and Itsiz became an independent
sovereign. On AV-San^ur, the progenitor of the At 3 .-baks of FSrs and of
DiySr-i-Bakr, Mu^mmad, Sanjar’s predecessor, bestowed the government of
^^lab, in 487 H., upwards of Jive years before Sanjar came to the throne of the
empire : he had only held Kh urasan before. It was Ma[imud, nephew of
Sanjar, who gave lladd-giz the widow of his brother in marriage, and the
government of A^arlAtjSn, as mentioned farther on. I have been thus par¬
ticular here in order to show the “value of our author’s statements with respect

M

170

THE TABA^AT-I-NA^IRI.

When the next day came round, a number of his Waztrs,
confidants, and advisers, represented to the Sult&n, that, on
the previous night, his Majesty had given thrones away
to three different persons, out of whose hands he would not,
hereafter, be able to disengage them. He inquired what
three persons they were, and, when they informed him, he
confirmed the appointments, saying :—“ Those two first
mentioned are my slaves, and the other is in my service.
As there is no son to interpose, who would be heir to
the sovereignty, it is better that my slaves should be
paramount.”

I. THE ATA-BAK, iLATT-GIZ», US-SANJARI.

The Ata-bak, Ilatt-giz, was a slave of Sultan Sanjar’s,
and he was possessed of great strengthjind nobility of mind.

Having brought the territory of Ayarbaijan under his
sway, he performed many great adts; and many monu¬
ments of his goodness still remain in that country.

to the Ata-baks, whatever may be the value of what he says about Hindustan.
As the other slaves, who were appointed rulers at the same time, are not
mentioned by our author, I need not refer to Oihm here.

* The Ata-bak, iladd-giz [or Ilatt-giz, / and d being Interphangeable], was
the slave of Kamal-ud-Din, ’All, Samairamf, the Wazir of Suli;an Mahmud,
son of Sultan Muhammad, son of Suljan Malik gj^h. [See note *, page 146.
As the author leaves out Mahmud's reign, it is not surprising that he makes
errors with respect to lladd-giz.] Samairam is one of the dependencies of
Isfahan, and is said to have been founded by Sam, the son of Nuh [Noah],
who gave it the name of Sam-Aram—Sam’s resting-place [or place of rest]—
but, from constant use, in course of time, the name got corrupted into
Samairam. After the Waztr, Kamal-ud-Dtn, was put to death, in the month
of gafar, 516 H., lladd-giz became the servant of Sul|;an Mahmud, during
whose reign he rose to the highest rank and dignity, and great power. Mah-
mUd gave the widow of his brother Jughril, the mother of ArsalSn SUU>
[see page 165, where ihe author falls into utter confusion : this note tends to
throw some light upon his sUtemenU there], in marriage to lladd-giz, and
bestowed upon him the government of Afarbfttjan. He became very powerful,
and nn nMed Ganjah and ShfrwUn to his territory. He set up ArsalSn gliUh,
son of Xttghril, his wife’s son, as sovereign, and, at once, assumed the entire
direction of affairs, and all the ptower, ArsalSn possessing nothing of sove¬
reignty except the bare name. lladd-giz died at Hamadan, according to
Fafih-t, in 567 H., but some say in 569 H. In 557 H., an army of 3(^000
Guijis [Georgians] invaded AfarbStjan, destroy^ the city of DQ-tn, and slew
10,000 MusalmSns, carried off a number of captives, and burnt the great
Masjid. Sb^ms-nd-Dln,* lladd-giz, took the field with 50,000 horse, at Tabriz,
in order to aid the ruler of Akblfit and the lord of Maifi^Mh, and to revenge
this invasion, which he effected in the following year.

THE SANJARlYAH DYNASTIES.

171

The Almighty gave him worthy and accomplished sons ;
and he carried on wars with the infidels of Afranj and
Ka rkh. and reduced the country, as far as the frontiers of
Rum, under his subjection, and conquered a great part of
Tr^. He died after reigning a considerable time.

II. THE ATA-BAK, MUHAMMAD, SON OF ILATT-GIZ.

The Ata-bak, Muhammad, was a great monarch, and
succeeded his father on the throne*. He took possession
of the- territories of ’Irah and Azarbaijan, and performed
many illustrious deeds. He was just and of implicit faith,
he founded colleges and masjids, and undertook many
expeditions against the unbelievers. He likewise per¬
formed many gallant exploits in the direction of Karkh.
and reduced the territory, as far as the frontiers of Rum
and Sham, under his sway.

He reigned for a considerable period, and had slaves
who attained great eminence and grandeur, who, after him,
took possession of the territories of ’Irah*. such as I-tagh-
mi^,.and Ada-mish, and others besides them, the whole
of which they held up to the time of Kh warazm Sha h, when
the territories of ’Iralf passed out of their hands, and they
died.

In the lengfth of his reign*, his justice, and his bene¬
ficence, the Ata-bak, Muhammad, was a second Sanjar.

* Iladd'giz was succeeded as Ata-bak by his son, Jahan Fahlawan, Muham¬
mad, by the widow of Sulian Tughrilf and half-brother of Arsalan Shah. The
latter having died in 571 m., the Ata-bak set Arsalan’s son, X^ghril, a child in
his serventh year, upon the throne of ’Iralt; but he was a mere puppet, and,
except in name, the Ata-bak was sovereign. Jahan Pahlawan then despatched
bis full brother, HiazU-Arsalan, as his deputy, to A^rbatjan. Jahan Fahlav^
died at Rai in 583 H. There is a good deal of discrepancy among authors as
to the dates of the deaths of these two Ata-baks.

* As the Ata-bak, Muhammad, Jahan Fahlawan, had several sons, who
succeeded to.hit territories, the mention of his “skives,” who held them “up
to the time of Sttwarazm Shah . ” is, like many other statements of our author,
inexplicable. No other lyritcr makes such a statement.

* The AUUbak, lladd-gis, died in 567 h., some say in 568 H., and others,

$69^1. He held away about 35 years. The Ata-bak, Muhammad, who, our
qwthM says, was- “a secoad Sanjar in length of rMgn,” only held power from
the date of his fathei't until 583 H., just 15 years. Hd has confounded

th^ fisthor with the ton.

M 2

17 *

THE TABA^T. 1 -NA$IR.!.

III. THE ATA-BAK, YOZ-BAK, SON OF MUHAMMAD, US-

SANJARl.

The Ata-bak, Yuz-bak, was sovereign of A^arbatjan.
Some have said* that he was the brother of the Ata-
bak, Muhammad, son of the Ata-bak, Ilatt-giz, the San-
jart;

Yuz-bak was a man of energy and experience, and reigned
over the territory of A^arbatjan for a considerable time.

* An absurd way of writing history, when he is not even certain of the names
and descent of the people he pretends to write about, who flourished only a
short time before he compiled his work. The AtS-bak, JahSn Pahlawiln,
Muhammad, was succeeded by bis brother, l^adl-Arsalan, not by YQz-bak.
At the decease of the former, Ipuil presented himself before Sultan fuchril,
in expectation that he woidd permit him to act as his Ata-bak ; but he, having
experienced severity from Jahan PahlawSn, and having now grown older, was
not inclined to have another master, and would not consent. E^il. becoming
hopeless of gaining his object, retired into A;arbatJSn, and rebelled ; but was
defeated in an engagement with TughriPs partisans. In 583 H., l>ad

gained sufficient strength to be able to renew hostilities ; and, in 586 H., he
made T^gliril prisoner, with his son, named Malik Shah, and immured them
in a strong fortress in AfarbSlJan, and E^>l*Ar$aian assumed independent
sovereignty. Ipu*!-Arsalan was assassinated by the disciples of the Mulatddab
in 587 H., after reigning five years. See ptages 165 and 166.

He was succeeded by his nephew, Nu^rat-ud-Dtn, Abu-Bikr, the son of
Jahan Pahlawan, in the territory of Afarbatjan only, and ’Irajp passed to his
brother, l^utla^ Inanaj. In 587 H., the year after Abu-BikPs death, Sul^n.
Tugliril effected his escape from imprisonment, and succeeded in reaching
'Irajp. ^utla^ Inanaj, after marrying his mother to Tugfaril. combined with
her to administer poison to Tugbril in his food ; but, having receiv^ a warn¬
ing, Tughril compelled his wife to take it, upon which she almost immediately
died, ^utla^ Inanaj was imprisoned for a time, but was subsequently set at
liberty. He went to the Court of Takish. Sultan of Ehwarazm, and brought
him with an army upon Tughril. and, in a battle which took place between
them, Tughril was slain, and the first dynasty of the Salju^s terminated. This
will throw some light upon the almost unintelligible and confused account g^ven
by our author respecting the reign of Sultan Tughril, at page 166, and the
very romantic, but not very authentic account of his death. It will be noticed
that, up to this time, even the At2-baks were nominally but the ministers of
the SaljOV sovereigns, and not “great monarchs” who ascended “thrones,”
as our author asserta

The. Atii-bak, Uz-bak, or Yuz-bak [the name is written both ways], son of
Jahin Pahlawiln, was the last of the At2-baks of A^arbatjan, and succeeded
Nu^rat-ud-Dln, Abu-Bikr, in the government of that territory. He was the
Ata-bak whose city of Tabriz, Sultan Jalal-ud-Dtn, the last of the Ehw&razmt
SulpSns, invested. Yuz-bak had left it, and had placed his consort in charge ;
and she, having fallen in love with Jalal-ud-Dtn, became his wife, and sur¬
rendered the city to him. Yuz-bak died of grief and chagrin. For an account
of this circumstance, sec the reign of Jaldl-ud-Dtn, .Section XVI.

THE SANJARlYAB DYNASTIES.

*73

He continued in possession of it until the reign of SultSn
Muhammad, Khw arazm Sl|ah. Upon several occasions
the forces of Khw arazm Shah were appointed to act against
him, but he did not fall into their hands, until he advanced
into ’Irah> being eager for the possession of Isfahan, and
hostilities were going on between him and the Ata-bak of
Fars, Sa’d [son of Zangt].

Unexpectedly, Suljtan Muhammad, Khw arazm Shah,
came upon them. The Ata-bak, Yuz-bak, was defeated
and completely overthrown, and Azarbaijan passed out of
his possession, and he died.

IV. THE ATA-BAK, ABO-BIKR, SON OF MUHAMMAD.

The Ata-bak, Abu-Bikr, was a great monarch; and the
territory of'Irah* and the Jibal [the mountain tracts of ^Irah]
came into his possession. He ruled his subjects justly and be¬
neficently,and cleared the frontiers of his territoryof enemies.
_ He founded colleges and masjids in Trah, Arran, and
A^arbatjan, and a very large college at Maraghah ; and
was the patron of ecclesiastics and learned men. He had
numerous slaves, both of his father’s and of his own, each
of whom was Malik [ruler] in one of the cities of ’Ira]^. He
was the elder brother of the Ata-bak, Yuz-bak, and he
reigned for a considerable time, and died, leaving no
children behind him.

SECOND DYNASTY.

THE SANJARlYAH MALIKS OF FARS.

I. THE ATA-BAK, SAN]pUR«, US-SANJARL

As soon as the throne of Fars* was conferred upon the
Ata-bak, Sanl(:ur, by Sultan Sanjar, Sankur brought that

* Gozldah says that AV-San^ur [turned into “ Ascansar” by Gibbon], who
held 9 alab of Sultan Malik Sh^h, is the progenitor of these Ata-baks of FSrs.

* We now come to the Ata-baks of F 3 .rs, whom our author continually styles
'•great monarchs,” who ascended thrones, although, at the very outset, he says the
brothers’ sons of Sanjar retained the title of Badshah. He begins with the
Ath-bak, SanV'ur, and would lead his readers to imagine that he was the first
of the rulers of Fars who bore that title, and that SultSn Sanjar bestowed the

174

THE TABA^T.I.NA$IRt

territory under subjection*, and acted with justice and
beneficence to the people under his sway.

On the death of Suljan Sanjar, some of the brothers’
sons of that monarch came into the territory of Fars from
’Iralf. Sanifur sent them to Istakhur, in that territory,

sovertigniy of that territory upon him, as he did upon others of his slaves.
Such, however, is not the case. The Ata-baks of Fars were of the race of
Salgliur, a Turkman chief, who, about the time of the great movement of the
SaljuVs towards Khurasan, made raids into that territory, and committed
great ravages; until the SaljuVs became complete masters of it, when that
chieftain is said to have taken service under Sultan fujjiril Beg, and Salghur
and his tribe took up their quarters in Fars, miuzistan, Luristan, and parts
adjacent. From the downfall of the Dtalamah dynasty to the rise to indepen¬
dent sovereignty of the SanVurtah, of whom our author’s SanVur is the first,
seven persons ruled over Fars, six of whom were governors on the part of the
SaljuV sovereigns. The first of these was Fafl, son of Hasan, who in 459 tt*,
after Alb-Arsalan, the previous year, had inflicted chastisement upon the Shalmn-
karah, seized Manjur-i-Fulad Sutun [Pillar of .Steel], the last of the Dllamt
sovereigns of the family of Buwiah, and imprisoned him. He then seized
upon Fars, which he appears to have been allowed to retain ; but, subsequently,
having become disaffected, he was replaced by the Amir Hiumar-Tigin. To
him succeeded the Ata-bak, Jawli [also written Qliawlt], who reduced the
power of the Shabankarah. He wtis succeeded in the government by the Ati-
bak, E^arSjah, who was slain at Hamadan [Guzidah ssiys in Fars]. He was
followed by the Ata-bak, Mangu [.also called Mangus], his son. Subsequently,
the Ata-bak, Buzabah [also written Fuzabah,/being interchangeable with h],
was ifiade governor by Sultan Mas’ud, son of Muhammad, son of Malik gl^ah,
SaljuVt. He rebelled against Mas’ud, son of MaVmud, and was taken in an
engx^ement with him, and put to death in 54 ^ tt. After this, Sultan Mas ud
.uaHp. his brother’s son, Malik Shah [Guztdah says, MuVammad], ruler of Fars.
He was a youth wholly given to pleasure; and, after a time, he put to death,
without cause, the Ata-bak [his own Ata-bak in all probability], Salghur. On
this, SanVur-Tigtn, son of Maudud, son of Zangt, son of AV-SanVur, son of
Salghur, rose against Malik Shah, and expelled him from the tcrritoiy of
Fars. Malik Shah went to his uncle’s court, obtained assistance, and again
entered Fars, but was unable to effect any thing; and, in 543 H., SanVur
assumed independent sovereignty. The account given in Guzfdah is some¬
what different, but to the same purpose. It says, “ Buzabah, having rebelled
against Sultan Mas’ud In S41 H., was defeated before Hamadan, taken
prisoner, and put to death in 543 H. The brother’s son of BOzabah, SanVur,
son of Maudud, in revenge for his uncle’s death, seized upon the territory of
Firs.” All these events took place in Sanjar’s lifetime. SanVur assumed the
rifU of Mu*afiar-ud-Din, and ruled for a period of thirteen years, and died in
556 H. He was succeeded, not by his son, but by his brother, Tuklah. It
must be borne in mind that all these Ata-baks were, more or less, subject to
the successors of Sultan Sanjar, while the dynasty lasted. Mas’ud died in
547 H., and Malik Shah succe^ed. See latter part of previous note, and
note • page 146, and note •, page 151.

b The constant recurrence, throughout the work, of this stock phrase of our
author's, may be partly accounted for from the fact that confusion, more or less,
arose on the death of each ruler.

THE SANJARlYAH DYNASTIES. t7S

and assigned a stipend, and furnished them with all things
necessary for their support. Those ptinces -were allowed
to retain the empty title of Badgj^ah, whilst Sankur, under
the name of At&-bak [guardian and preceptor], ruled over
the territory of Pars. Hereigned for a lengthened period,and
died.

II. THE ATA-BAK, ZANGI^ SON OF SAN^UK.

The Ata-bak, Zang^, ascended the throne of Pars after
the death of his father. He was a great monarch, and was
just, and ruled' with a firm handand he brought the do¬
minions of liis father under his control and government.

With respect to the rulers of the countries around, he
guided his policy as the circumstances of the times ren¬
dered feasible ; and he held the sovereignty of Pars for a
long period, and died*.

III. THE ATA-BAK, DUKLAH, SON OF SAN^UR.

The Ata-bak, Duklah, after the decease of his brother,
ascended the throne of Pars. He was an energetic and
rigorous monarch, and brought the territory of Pars under
his control.

Hostilities broke out between him and the Maliks of
'Irik ; and he collected together, from all parts of the
country, a vast quantity of material and munitions, the like
of which, to such an amount of wealth and treasure, none
of his predecessors in the rule of Pars had ever possessed.

He reigned for a long time, and died*.

7 Oar author het« has made a great blunder. There were two

Zangts and two Tuklahs [or Duklahs, d being interchangeable with /]. The
first, according to the Munta^ab-ut-TawSrUch, San^ur’s brother, Tuklah,
having become suspicious of his brother’s intentions, retired among the Faf la-
wtahs. The chief rendered Tuklah assistance, and be, one night, suddenly
fell upon SariVur by surprise, seized him, and immured him in the E’tla’*
{•Saftd. Tuklah tlien assumed the authority, and held it four years. He died
in 553 H. ; aAer which Sanl^ur again obtained power, and in 556 H. he died-.
He was succeeded by hjs brother, Zangt, son of Maudud.

• 2angt, son of Man^iid, only reigned for a short period, and died in the
fj^wing year, 557 H. He was succeeded by his son [not his brother ; our
author confounds the two Tuklahs into one], Tuklah, or Duklah, as our author
now states. He was confirmed in possession of .Fars by Sul^Sn Arsalin, son
of Xnsbul, son of Mubamroad, son of Malik ShSh.

• Tuklah died in S90-H., hut the Muntakhstb-uuTawartkh sa>-s in 591 H.

176

THE taba 4 :At.i-nA$irL

IV. THE ATA-BAK, SA’D, SON OF ZANGl».

The At 5 -bak, Sa’d, was a great monarch, and ascended
the throne of Pars after the decease of his uncle [the Ata-
bak, Duklah], and brought the different parts of that
country under his rule^ in the manner which has been
described \

He was a most just and intrepid sovereign; and trust¬
worthy authorities have related this, that the weight of his-
arms and armour was so g^eat, that a powerful man could
not lift from the ground the armour he used to wear.

He led armies against ’Ira^ upon several occasions, and
in some engagements he was victorious; but, in others
again, he was defeated, as happened when a battle took
place between him and Su 4 iin Muhammad, Khw arazm
Shah, undesignedly, and in the following manner. The
Ata-bak, Sa’d, was marching an army .into ’Irah, with the
object of capturing Isfahan; and the Ata-bak, Yui^bak,
son of the Ata-bak, Muhammad, had come out of A^ar-
batjAn also, with the object of gaining possession of ^at
city.

u The two armies, of Pars and of A^arbatjan, were march¬
ing towards the same point from opposite directions, when
Sultan Muhammad*, Kh warazm ^ah, arrived [with an
army] upon the frontier of 'Irah- He obtained informa¬
tion that the Ata-bak, Sa’d, was marching an army from
Pars, towards the gate of Isfahan, in order to give battle to
the Ata-bak, Yuz-bak, and he [Suljtan Muhammad] ad¬
vanced Mrith his troops towards the Ata-bak, Sa’d.

When the troops of Khwarazm Shah came in sight*, the
Ata-bak, Sa'd, imagined that this was the army of the AtR-

* Duklah was succeeded by his cousin, the Ata-bak, 'J'utfhril, brother of
Zar^, and son of SanVur, son of Maudud, son of Zangt, son of AV-Sankur,
thf other brother of the first ruler ; and hostilities went on between him and
Sa’d, son of Zangt, for a considerable time, during which Pars suffered great
desolation. At length Tughril was taken captive by Sa’d, who deprived him
of his sight, and immured him within the walls of the fortress of lataUinr,
where he died, 599 H. He was succeeded by Sa'd, son of Zangt, son ot
Maudud, who is fourth according to our author.

^ Not mentioned in any other place in the work.

* Sultan ’.\ia-ad-Dtn, Muhammad.-

* The Muntakhab-ut-TawartJcli and JaUn-Aril say this affiur took place bn
the confines of Rai.

THE sanjarIyah DYHASTIES. irt

bak, YQz-bak, and at once marshalled his ranks in order,
and attacked the Sultan’s army, and threw it into confu¬
sion. Suddenly, xine of the champions of TChw ararm Shah ’s
army joined spears with him ; and the name of that cham¬
pion wras Kashkah*. who was the [Sultan’s] Amlr-i- Akh ur
[lord of the stables]. The champion hurled the horse of
Sa’d to the ground, and wanted to slay him ; but the Ata-
bak cried out to him :—" I am the Ata-bak, Sa’d ; do not
slay me. Say, Whose army is yours ?” The champion
replied :—“ The army of Sultan Muhammad, KhwSrazm
Shah.” The Ata-bak rejoined :— “ Take me to the SultSn’s
presence.”

On reaching the Sultan’s presence, Sa’d kissed th^
ground, and said :—“ King of the Universe, by the great
God, this your servant knew not that this was the king’s
army, otherwise he would never have drawn his sword.”
The Sultan comforted and encouraged him, and forthwith
had him remounted ; and, on account of what had reached
the ears of the Sultan respecting the great energy, man¬
liness, and intrepidity, of the AtS-bak, Sa’d, he treated
him with honour and reverence, and restored to him the
dominion of Pars, upon this stipulation—^that one half of
that territory should be held by the Maliks, or great nobles,
and trusty retainers of the Khw arazm Shahl dynasty, and
the other half should belong to the Ata-bak*.

The Sultan likewise appointed a force to accompany
him, for this reason, that, on the Ata-bak, Sa’d, having been
taken prisoner, his son, the Ata-bak, Abu-Bikr, had taken
possession of the territory of Pars, and had read the Khut-
bah in his own name.

When the Ata-bak, Sa’d, with the forces of Kh warazm
Shah , and the Sahib [lord] IJshtiySr-ul-Mulk,. Amlr-i-Hajl,
who was despatched along with Sa’d by jy^warazm Shah,

* In some few co|nes Kaihtlt, others Kadllht.

* In the year 603 H., Sn’d was token piisoher on the confines of Rai bjr the

troops of SultSn ’Alft-ud-Dtn 'Muhammad, Sh^finton Sh&h. He was
released on the stipulation “that he should pay four [a ding is the fonrth

part of a dram, and the meaning here signifies a fourth part of any thing: some
arritdrs say a third] of the revenue of Firs and ’Ir&h, which be appears to
have then held, into the Snltin’s treasury,” and, upon these terms, he was
allowed to retain th.ese territories. The MunUkhab-nt-Tawiillcll calls the
Sultia by the title of fCntb-nd.Oth, and mya that Sa’d was released on the
intercession of the Malik of Zawsaiu

* 7 «

THE TABA]^T.I.NA$IRL

reached the frontier of FSrs, the Ata-bak, AbC-Bikr, ad¬
vanced to oppose them, and the father and son came to
blows. The Ata-bak, Sa’d, wounded his son, Abu-Bikr, in
the face with his sword, and the ranks of the Farsi army
became disoi^nized.

The Ata-bak, Sa’d, again ascended the throne of Fars,
and imprisoned his son. After this, Sa’d reigned for a
considerable period over [half of.’] that territory, and died
after the misfortunes attending the irruption of the infidel
Mughals^

The Ata-bak, Sa’d, was endowed with many distinguished
' virtues, and excellent qualities. In the first place, the flag,
which, every year, he used to send along with the caravan
of pilgrims on the journey to the Ka’bah [at M&kkah], when
the pilgrims returned, he used to have kept constantly set
up before the entrance of his palace or pavilion ; and, every
time he came to the hall of audience, or his private apart¬
ments, he used to perform a prayer of two genuflexions
under the flag in question, after which he would mount his
throne. This circumstance indicates how excellent was
his faith; but, respecting his ostentation and pomp, a trust¬
worthy person has related, that the revenues of one of the
provinces of the territory of Fars was set apart for the
expenses of his own wardrobe. The revenue of the pro¬
vince in question amounted, every year, to three hundr^
and sixty thousand golden dinars*, and, every day, one
thousand dtnSrs of red gold used to be expended upon his
attire, in the shape of head-dresses, tunics^ mantles, robes, and
expensive fabrics, girdles, jewel-studded collars, and the like.

If any surplus remained over and above the necessary
expenses of his wardtVibe, he would purchase therefvith

f Sa'd died at Baifd in 6 zs R., but the HuntaJdiab-at-TawtifUt' says his
death happened in 6a8 H., which is evidently incorrect. His Wostri Sbwt-
jah Qbiy&c-ud-Dfn, kept his death secret, and sent Sa’d’s signet-ring to the
]^aIa’-i-Saftd, and released Sa’d’s son, AbQ Bikr, who had been confined in
that fortress for a co n s ider a ble time, bad him brought into the pavilion, and
Uien said, as though Sa’d were still alive, "Thi AUl-bak is pleased to com¬
mand * the AUi-bak, Aba Bikr, is his heir,’ ” and be succeeded accordingly.
The MniltaUiab-ut-TawiHj^ says that Aba-Bikr was confined in the fortress
of IftaUinr. Gutfdah, on the other hand, says that, when SultBn JaUl-nd-
Dth, the last of the ShsdUasm ghihtii, entered Firs, on his return from Hind,
he set AbB-Bikr at liberty. Tlfr-t says mu^ fhc same.

* I rather expect this is much more than ait the revenues of F|ts at
present

*79

THE SANJARITAH DYNASTIES.

valuable gems and jewels, which used to be arranged about
his head-dress, his tunic, and girdle. He never wore a suit
byt one day; the next day he would invest one of his
nobles or grandees with it. May the Almighty have mercy
upon him, and pardon his sins!

V.» THE ATA.BAK, ABO.BIKR, SON OF SA’D.

The Ata-bak, Abu-Bikr', is a great monarch, and he has
brought under his sway the territories of Fars.

When the At 3 -bak, Sa’d,' was sent back again to ascend
the throne of Fars by Sultan Mubammad, Khwarazm Shah,
under the agreement that one half the territory of Fars
should remain in the possession of Sa’d, and the other half
be held by the Sultan, the latter despatched [a body of
troops] along with the Ata-bak, Sa’d, under the Amir-i-Hajt,
Ikhtivar-ul-Mulk. Ntshapurt, to enable Sa’ti to re-possess
himself of that half.

The AtS-bak, Abu-Bikr, and his two brothers, Tahamtan
and SanVur with the troops of Fars, advanced against
their father, determined that they would not give up their
dominions into the hands of their enemies*. When the
battle on both sides had been duly ordered, the Ata-bak,
Sa’d, issued from the ranks of his forces, while his son, the
Atl-bak, Abu-Bikr, came forth from the ranks of the troops
of Fars to encounter his father. Sa’d struck and wounded
his son in the face with his sword, [and, seeing this,] the
ranks of the Farst army gave way.' Sa’d took his son, Abu-
Bikr, prisoner,'and put him in confinement.

■When Sa’d departed this life, they brought forth Abu-Bikr
from his place of confinement, and raised him to the throne
of Fars ; and he brought under his rule the territories of
his father, and his grandfather, and chastised his enemies.

After some time, he sent an army towards the sea [of
Fars*], and took the capital of the country of Kish*,

* He is the eighth, not the fifth, of the AtS-baks of f^rs.

t Sheykh Sa’df dedicated his GuHstSn and Bostan to this prince.

'* See page 178, and note *

* He annexed the greater part of the tracts lying on the side of the Gulf of
Persia, such as HurmGz, B^atff, Bahrain, ’Ummfin, and I.ah-«& [^ 1 , the
A 1 - 9 asS [UU] seemingly of Ibn-i-Batfitah, which he says was previously
calM Hajar. The Shw 9 razm Sliahf dynasty, at this time, had fallen.

« Kish is described in old geographical works as a city, on a hill, on an

tio THS TABA^T-I-NA9IRL

[together with} Bahrain and Hurmfiz. He also despatched
one of his brothers to the infidel Mughals, and entered into
a treaty of peace with that race. He engaged to pay tri¬
bute and revenue to them, and brought reproach and dis¬
honour-upon himself by becoming a tributary of the infidels
of Chi n*, and became hostile to the D£r-ul-Khilafat.

Up to the time this history was written, affairs are in
this state*. May the Almighty God continue the Sul(aA
of the Sultans of Islam, and the great nobles and lords of his
Court, in sovereignty, and in rendering boundeil duty to the
Dar-ul-Khilafat. and the house of ’Abbas, for the sake of
Muhammad, his family, and the whole of his companions
and friends I.

THIRD DYNASTY.

THE SANJARIYAH MALIKS OF NISHAPOR.

I. MALIK MU-AYYID, US-SANJARl.

Malik Mu-a)yid was a slave of Sult£n Sanjar’s, and a
Turk^ He held the government of the territory of

island, in the sea of Firs, called HiumCz; and is said to be so called firom its
resemblance, when viewed from the hills, to a qniver for arrows, whidi Klib
signifies. The word is sometimes spelt Kiali, and sometimes Keab* See note *,
p. 46.

* At the time of the interregnum after the death of Cliangis ITbin, AbQ<
Bikr sent his brother, Tahamtan, to the presence of Oktae-^>in with rich
presents, and received from him a charter, and the title of ^utla^ Sihin.
He likewise obtained a charter from Huliku Shfin, and reigned for a period
of thirt]r>three years.

* The Ati-bak, Abu-Bikr, died in 558 H., the very year in which bur author
completed his History. The dynasty did not terminate for several years after;
and three persons, including a female, ruled over the territory remaining to
them, tributary to the Mu^ials, until M5 h.

^ The first of the Mu-ayyidtah dynasty was Mn-ayyid-nd-Dln, who was one
of the slaves of SultSn Sanjar. As he was the A’tnah-dfir, or mirror-bearer,
to that monarch, he became known by the name of Mu-ayyid-i-A’tnah. After
Sul^n Sanjar’s death, he for a short time pretended to be obedient to Rukn-
nd-Dln, Mahmud, the sod of MuhanSmad Khan, son of Bu^ii Sliiln, who had
married Sanjar’s sister, who, when Sanjar fell into the hands of the tribe,

was raised to sovereignty in Sbuifisfin ; but he soon threw off his disguise, and,
having seised Mahmud, in the fifth year of his sovereignty, deprived him of
bis sight, and assumed the sovereignty over the tract of territory extending
from Hiiit to Roi. In 569 h. , he undertook' an expedition against MSxan*
doifin, and mode great bloodshed and devastation therein. He subsequently

THE SANJARIYAH DYNASTIES. tSi

Nl^&pQr, and the parts adjacent,-such as jSm, BSj^turz,
Sbang^Sn, SabrSs*, j 9 .-jurm, Sharistanah. and

other cities and towns which are dependencies of
Ntshapur.

He was a Malik of good disposition ; and, when the San*
jaii dynasty passed away, Malik Mu-ayyid, the sovereign
of the Maliks of ’Iralj:, and the Sultans of

entered into terms of friendship and amity together
for mutual support and security. Under the shelter and
support of this arrangement, Malik Mu-ayyid continued for
some years, and died.

II. MALIK TUGHAN shah, SON OF MU-AYYID.

Malik yughan Shah was a monarch of blooming pro¬
spects, and of handsome person, and greatly addicted
to pleasure and gaiety. He used to spend his days in
pleasure, in singing, and convivial meetings, along with his
confidants and favourites, minstrels and singers and boon
companions'.

When the territory of Ni sfi apOr passed from his father
under his own control, he entered into relations of amity
and dependence towards the neighbouring Maliks and
Sultans, and rendered homage unto them ; and, as he was
incapable of injuring oi; molesting them, they all refrained
from troubling him.

He passed his whole time in pleasure and jollity, dancing

[but, according to Fa^ib-t, in the same year], in concert with SnItSn
Shwlrazint, the rival of SnltSn Tahiflh, encountered the latter in battle, «ras
taken prisoner, and put to death by Takiah- A portion of the territory of
Sanjar’s nephew, on the usurpation of Mu-ayyid, had passed into the possession
of Ae Kh erilraant sovereign. See reign of Takiah, V. oi the ShwSraxm
SllShts.

■ Some of these names are rather doubtful. Some copies have Sangftn, and
SJxogfin, and Sabrftdh, Bihids, Strin, and Shlifh!. Possibly, SuuJdtSs and
SamnakXn are meant.

* The accounts of other writers difler considerably from our author’s as to
this prince and his doings. Sll^h, in 576 H., fought a battle with

SultSn fitiShp the SJxrWirazmt, and rival of ’AUl-ud-Dtq, Takiah, near Sarakhs,
after Sul^n ghldi had renamed from Gur ShUn’s territory, whither he had fled
after his previous defeat in which Tugfakn’s father was made prisoner. XughKn
was routed, and sought protection from Sult&n Takiah, and also from the sove¬
reign of GhOr. but without avail ; and Sultkn Slllih possessed himself of TO*
and SaraJtha. ™

t>8 THE tabas;At-i>nA$irL

and wine-drinking; and, for the sake of his own pleasure
and merriment, he had the sleeves of his vest made each
about ten ells in length, to which small golden bells were
fastened, and he would himself join in the dance. He soon
took his departure from this world.

III. SANJAR SHAH, SON OF JUGHAn SHAH.

When Tughan Shah ascended the throne of Nlsh^pur,
ha entered into connexion with the Maliks of Ghur. and
despatched a confidential agent, and demanded the hand
of the daughter of Sultan Ghiya^-ud-Dm, Muhammad
Sam, /or his son, Sanjar Shah. The chief men among the
ecclesiastics and theologians of Nlshapur accordingly came
[into Ghur].-and the knot of that marriage contract was
tied.

When yughan Shah died, Taki sh. Khwarazm Shah,
marched an army from Khwarazm^ and advanced to Nlsha*
pur, and possessed himself of that city and territory,
seized Saniar Shah, and carried him away to Khwarazm*.

Sultan Ghiyas-ud-Dtn released his daughter, Malikah-i>
Jalalt*, from her betrothal; and, according to the statement
of Imam Shaft 1 . he gave her in man-iage, in Sliur, to
Malik ’Ala-ud-Din*. Sanjar Shah died in Khwarazm.

* Sanjar Shah succeeded to his father’s territory; and Mangult Be^ a slave
of his grandfather’s, through the youthfulness Of Sanjar, acquired the whole
power, and was in consequence put to death by Sultan Takish. After this,
Takish married Sanjaris mother, and gave a daughter of his own to Sanjar in
marriage. In 591 H., Sanjar was accused of meditating rebellion, and was
deprived of his sight. He died in 595 h., and his territory wds taken posses¬
sion of by the Shwarazm Shih t sovereign.

* A title, not her name.

* In three copies ^iy3-ud-Dfn.

SECTION XIV.

THE MALIKS OF SIJISTAN AND NIMROZ.

As this Taba^at ‘ is being written in the name of the great
SultSn, the king of kings [over] both Turk and ^Ajam,
Na$ir-ud-Dunya wa ud-Din, Abu-l-Mu^afTar, Mahmud, son
of Sultan I*yal-timis2l—May his sovereignty endured-
and, as an account of all rulers and their Taba^at is being
penned, the author, Minhaj-i-Saraj, Jurjant, would state
that he desires, to the extent of his capability, to commit
to writing vdiat has come to his hearing, and what he has
himself seen respecting the Maliks of Ntmroz.

They were able and just monarchs, virtuous, and cherishers
of the indigent, whose country, from the Sanjart era up to
this time, when the territories of Iran have, through the
cruelty and rapine of the infidels of Chin, become ruined,
was adorned by the grandeur, the justice, the munificence,
and the nobility of mind of those monarchs, and, therefore,
the author desires that he himself, and those Maliks, may
continue to call forth the favourable mention of those under
whose notice this [account] may come, and, that a bene¬
diction may be offered for the sovereign of the present
time.

The origin and lineage of these rulers from the previous
Amirs, did not seem clearly deducible in History*.

‘ The word Jaba^it being a portion of the title of the original woric, it haa
been used here, for convenience, in the singular form, although really the
plural of

* As in scores of other places, our author is also very incorrect here. He
has already given us a Section on the ^uflllirtans of Sijistan or Ntmroz, and
has mentioned the names of the other sons of Lai], the Brazier; but he does
not appear to,have known that the descendants of ’Umro, son of Laif, sabse-
quent to his captivity, ruled over Fars [for a time] and Sijistin, although these
events took place some fhrtt eettturus btfort our author composed his work.
There is consequently an hiatus of the reigns and struggles of no less than six
princes of this family, and the events of just one century are entirely passed
over; and two Sections are given, and two dynasties made, of one and the
tame family, whatever claims Shalaf <nay had to descent from the Kai-

184

THE TABAig:AT-I-NA$IRt.

r. XAHIR, son of MUHAMMAD.

Trustworthy persons have related, that, when the
dominion and sovereignty of the Matunudt dynasty passed

intiiis. Our author appears here to greater disadvantage, as an historian,
than even in hb accounts of the Saljults and the Kurds, which are sufficiently
incorrect.

I wiU here briefly supply an account of the $ufrfir!&ns, passed over by our
nnthor, in order to make the subject intelligible to the reader.

When’Umro^ son of Lai;, was defeated under the walls of Balldt tqr Ivmk’tl,
SSmint, in 387 h., as related at page 35, his grandson, 7AHIR, son of Mu-
son of ’Umro, was set up as his successor. His career was a
diequered one. He at first possessed himself of Fars, and drove out the
Shndiah’s officers, but was subsequently obliged to relinquish it Subae-
qnently, however, the administration of the affairs of Fars was conferred upon
him by the Court of Baghd&d; but, shortly after, a slave of his grandfather's
rose against him, in that territory.

[In nearly every history in which this slave is referred to, his namt is said to
be Saikzt, Sabkrt, Sankil, and the like; but further research, since note *,
page 34, was written, tends to show that this cotild not have been intended for
the namt of the slave, but of his race. He was a Sigisl, one of a people often
mentioned in the following pages. "Sigiz, and Sigist, is the name of a lofty
mountain [range of hills 7 ] in Zdbulistin, and the pedple dwelling thereabout
are called after that mountain, Sigizts and SigiztSn. Rustam-i-Z|l is alki
called Sigizt on the same account Some consider, however, that the meaning
of Sigizt is 3 tstint, because the 'Arabs change the g intoy, and call Sigistkn,
which is the proper name of that country, Sijistan, and Sigizt, by the same
Cuhion, Sijizt.” The Sigizts are not Af^ifUis, so must not be turned into
PapUrs, but there is a small tribe of that people called Sekart.]

A battle took place between pihir and the Sigizt slave, and Tihir was
worsted, and fell into the hands of the rebel, who sent him, together with his
brother Ya'[d>b, to BaglidSd, through which city they were paraded on a
camel [one author says on two elephants]. This happened in the year 393 H.,
and y»liir died after having ruled for a period of six years. Some say he died
in 396 H.

On this, in the same year, LAIS, son of 'Alt, entered Firs [from Sijistln],
and the rebel Sigizt slave fled ; but, being supported by an army sent by the
Sbaltfah under his general, Munis-i-IQllidim, he was enabled to march against
Laig. Although Laif made a gallant and vigorous dash upon their forces near
Oj&n, he was unsuccessful, and fell a captive into their hands, and the Sigizt
again acquired possession of Firs. Soon after, however, the Kbaltfah had to
despatch Munis into Firs again, as the Sigizt withheld the revenue [the
Slialtfah's share], which amounted to 400,000 dirams. The Sigizt now
offered to pay I,o0(^ooo dirams, but this offer was not accepted, and, after
several encounters with Mu^mmad, son of Ja’far, the Xltaltfidi's general, the
Sigizt fled to the fortress of Bamm, in Kirmin ; but, as he was followed by
that officer, he fled firom Bamm, and retired into the wilds of Sburisin ; and
Muhammad was entrusted with the administration of the affiurs of Firs and
Kirmin.

185

THE MALIkS OF SIJISTAN AND NiMROZ.

over to the family of Saljuli:, the nobles who were exercising
authbrity in the country of SijistSn acquired power, and,

In that same year, AbQ Na}r-t>Ahmad, SSmSnt, took possession of SijistSn,
and, as he had succeeded in making prisoner of Mul^nunad, son of'Alt,
brother of Ya’V&b, ’'Umio, and Mu’addU, sons of Laig, and the Sigisl also,
they were despatched to BagiidSd, by the Ehalifah’s directions, and entered
it paraded on elephants; and rich pretents were sent by the. sjiallfah to the
SSmInt prince, in return for this seiVlce.

In 299 H. [some say in 298 Laigi son of’All, died in FSrs, and his
brother, MU’ADDIL, assumed the sovereignty over Sijistan, and drove out the
SSmSnt governor, Abu ^ih*i^MangQr, SSmSnt, cousin of Amtr AbQ Nagr-i>
Ahmad, on which, the latter despatched a large army under some of his
greatest nobles, such as ^usain ’Alt, Marw-ar-Rudt, Ahmad, son of Sahl,
'Muhammad, son of Mugaffar, Stmjur-l-Dow 3 tt, && Mu’addil, on becoming
apprised of this, Mnt his brother Muhammad for supplies, to enable him to
stand a siege, into Zamtn-i-DSwar; but, as he happen^ to fall into the hands
of the SSmSnt forces, Mu’addil, on receipt of the news of this disaster, came
and surrendered on terms to those leaders, and was taken to Bukhara, from
whence he was sent to Bai^dSd. See page 34.

In the year 300 h., ’UMRO, son of Ya’hub, son of Muhammad, son of
’Umro, son of Lais-i>$ttfirSr, rose in SijistSn, and assumed the sovereignty.
Amtr Abu Nagr-i-Ahmad, SSmSnt, again despatched a force under ^usain
’Alt, Marw>ar-Rudt, against him.' After defending the capital for a period of
nine months, ’Umro surrendered on terms of capitulation, and the territory of
Ntmroz received a SSmSnt governor.

In the year 309 K., Alf^M AD, said by Guztdah to have been the grandson
of TShir, but by others to have been the son of Muhammad, son of Shalaf,
son of Abu Ja’far, son of Laig [which Laig is not mentioned, but, if the
Brazier be meiant, AbQ Ja’far must have been a fifth son, but no doubt he waa
a'grandson], who was living in great distress and misery at HirSt, chanced to
come under the notice of Amtr Abu-l-l^ksan-i-Nagr, son of Ahmad, the fifth
of the SSmSnt rulers, who bestowed upon Ahmad-i-^uffSr the government of
his native country, SijistSn.

Fagih-t, among the occurrences of the year 310 h., says, that by command
of the Shaltfah, Al-Muktadir, honorary dresses were bestowed upon and
Ya’hub, sons of ’Umro, Laig ; but this must refer to Laig, son of ’Alt, son of
Laig the Brazier, as 1 'Shir, son of’Umro, the second of the dynasty, died at
BaghdSd many years previous to' this. In 311 H., according to Fagih-t, Shah
Malik, son of Ya’^ub-i-Laig, ^uffart, with a body of Sigizls, attempted to
gain ix>ssession of Hirat, but after a time left, and proceeded to FQshanj. He
returned to the Dasht of MSlSn of Hirat again, and invested HirSt for four
months, but had to abandon it, and he and his party retired discomfited.
StmjOr held HirSt on that occasion.

Ah.mad was succeeded as ruler of Sijistan by his son, KH ALAF. but the
date of the former’s death or the latter’s accession is not mentioned—it was
probably in 331 H. —but, in 353 h., Shalaf set out on a pilgrimage to Makkah,
leaving as his deputy, his son-in-law, 7 ^hir, son of Al-^usain, to administer
the government of SijistSn.- coveted his dominions, and, when yhalaf

returned from the pU^moge, he would not allow him to resume his authority.
TCl^alaf proceeded to the Court of Mangur, son of NQh, SSmSnt, the eighth ot
that dynasty, who sent a force with Sltalaf, which, after ousting and
reinstotihg in i»i»ff returned to BnkhSrS-

N

i86

THE TABAfla.T.I.NA5IRi.

having tendered their allegiance to the Sultans, Alb-Arsalan
and Malik Sh5h. the states of Nimroz came under their
sway, and they took possession of those territories.

TShir now returned, and again dispossessed Ehalaf, who, a second time,
received aid fronf Man$ur, Samanl; - but, by the time the Samanl forces
reached Sfstan, Tahir was dead, and ^usain, his son, had succeeded to the
authority. After considerable fighting, Qusain retired to one of the fortresses
of that territory, and was therein invested. He despatched an envoy to Amtr
Mansur’s presence, who sent a mandate directing him to appear before him,
and so ^usain was allowed to proceed to Bukhara. This was at a period
when the Samant power was much weakened, and in the same year that
Is-h&kf son of Alb-Tigtn, the Turk, encountered Abu-Alt-i-Lawtk, previously
ruler of Ghazntn.

Nothing more is mentioned about Ehalaf except his rebellion against Nuh,
SSm&nf, and the seven years’ investment of his capital, until the- year 390 H.,
in which year. Bn ghrajak. the uncle of Mahmud of Qhazntn, was slain by
Shalafs son, Tahir, at Fuahanj. On this, Mahmud marched against Ehalaf,
who retired for shelter within the walls of the fortress of Talf, and he was
invested therein. In 393 H., Ehalof again withdrew from public life, and gave
up the government of Sijistan to his son fahir, but, soon after, he regretted
what he had done, resumed the authority, and put his son Tahir to death.
Some say he put two sons, ^ahir and ’Umro, to death with his own hand.
This ruined KhalaTs affairs, and his nobles rose against him on account of this
abominable conduct; and they invested him in the city which he had made
his capital, and read the Sllutbah, and coined money in the name of Sult&n
MahmQd of Qkazntn.

Mahm&d, on account of this last act of Ehalaf, again entered SijistSn, and
Kba lnf was defeated and retired once more to the fortress of Tak, but it was
taken by assdult and TCh alaf was captured. It was on this occasion that
Skalaf, when brought before Mahmud, addressed him by the name of
“ Sul{an ” [see note •, page 76], and his life was spared. The district of
JilzjSnan was assigned for his future residence, and, with his family and
dependents, he left Sijistan for ever and proceeded thither. Sijistfln was
conferred by Mahmud upon his brother Na^r, and that territory continued for
a considerable time in the possession of the Gkaznawts.

In 39S H. TOiiil af was found to have been intriguing against Mahmud with
1 -lak Kha n, ruler of Turkistan, and was, in consequence, confined within the
walls of the fortress of Juzdez. He died in the following year ; and Mahmftd
directed that his property and effects should be made over to his son, Abu- 1 -
Kha laf was a learned and intelligent man, and, by his command, the
learned men of his time compiled a commentary on the E'Ur’an in one hundred
volumes, and at the expense of roo,ooo dinars; yet, with all this, he committed
the cruel act of slaying his own sons. See also note *, p. ^ 6 .

The sovereignty of Sijistan, or Ntmroz, having been taken from Khniaf
remained in the possession of the kings of Gh azntn for a considerable time.
At length, by the support of the Sultans, Alb-Arsalan, and Malik Si^h, a
great grandson of Elialaf, 7 AHIR, son of Muhammad, sonof
ICb nlnf. obtained the government of his native country ; and the ruler’s palace
in Sistan is called the Sarae-i-Tahirt after him. This is the Jlrsi of the rulers
of Ntmroz by our author’s account, but the s/x/A of chroniclers of authority,
after Ya’kub and 'Umro, the founders of the $uffirtSn dynasty. A few authors

THE MALIKS OF SIJISTAN AND NlMKOZ.

187

When the throne of sovereignty became adorned by the
phoenix-like splendour of Sanjar, the territories of Ntmroz
passed to Amir Tahir ; and, in the service of that monarch,
he gave proofs of his loyalty and good faith. The Sarae-
or Tahiri Palace, in Sistan, which was the seat
of government, was founded by him. He instituted regu¬
lations and precepts of government, brought under his
control the different districts and dependencies of the
country of Ntmroz, reigned for a considerable time, and
died. These Maliks claimed descent from the race of Kai-
Ka’us. May the Almighty reward them !

Trustworthy persons have related that Sijistan is called
Ntmroz for the reason that, in ancient times, the whole of
that tract was a sea ; and, when Mihtar^ Sultman, reclining
on the couch which the winds used to bear, had to pass
over that country on his way from Pars to the mountains
of Sultman, which are opposite Multan, he commanded
that that sea should be filled with sand. The Dtws, in
the space of half a day, completed the task, and the sea
became dry land ; and the name by which it was called
was Ntm-roz, signifying mid-day, and that designation
continued to be applied to that country. God alone is
eternal, and His kingdom only is eternal, without intermis¬
sion and without wane.

II. MALIK TAJ-UD-DIN, ABO-L-FAT^ «, SON OF XAHIR.

Taj-ud-D!n was a great and a just monarch, and, when
his father departed this life, in conformity with the mandate
of Sultan Sanjar, Salju^i, he assumed authority over the
territory of Ntmroz, and brought it under his sway. He
spread the carpet of justice, and the people became obedient
to his authority; and, both in the city and round about
Sijistan, numerous monuments of his goodness remained.

mention tlmt some writers consider IChal af to have been a descendant of the
4mcient kings of trftn.

* See the short account of the descent of the Afghans in the Introduction to
my Afg^ftn Grammar; last edition, page 7, respecUng Mihtar SultmSn and the
Sultmln mountains.

* Styled TSj'ud-Dtn, Abu-l-Fafl-i-Nafr, son of by others. He sue*

needed to the sovereignty in 480 H. He was just, valiant, and beneficent; and
was loyal to the utmost degree towards SultKn Sanjar.

N a

i88

tHE 7ABA¥AT.I-NA$IRT.

He accompanied SultSn Sanjar in the campaign
against Kh ita. and took along with him the troops of
Sijistan ; and, when Sultan Sanjar’s army was defeated,
Malik Taj-ud-Din, Abu-l-Fath, was taken prisoner. When
they had taken him to the place where the camp of the
Kh ita-is was situated, his feet were confined in a pair of
wooden stocks* and secured with a heavy chain, and he
was kept in imprisonment.

A number of trustworthy persons* have related, that one
of the ladies of the Great Kh an [of Kh ita] got a sight of
Malik Taj-ud-Din, and, secretly, used to entertain great
affection for hini, and to have all his wants, and even more,
liberally supplied, and have great care and attention paid
to him. That lady left not the least thing undone, or a
moment to be lost, until, by her endeavours also, Malik
Taj-ud-Din was suddenly set at liberty, and was enabled to
fly from the camp of the Khita-is; and he brought back his
chain and the stocks along with him to Sistan.

The territory of Nimroz, which, during his captivity, had
been deprived of his comeliness and munificence, now
began to acquire fresh grace and elegance. The stocks
and chain, which he had brought away with him [when he
escaped], were, by his orders, hung up in the most sacred
place in the great mosque [where the Imam stands during
the prayers]; and Minhaj-i-Saraj, the writer of this Taba^at,
in the year 613 H., arrived in the city of Ststan^ and, in

* This battle having taken place in 534 h. [some say in 536 H.], and Taj-ud-
Dtn being above a hundred when he died in 559 H., he must have been about
eighty years of age when taken prisoner.

* Trustworthy persons ” are constantly mentioned by our author, but it is
strange that they are ttanteless.

1 ■ I have constantly noticed, in several authors, tha^ when mentioning the
eountry, the names Ntmroz and Sijist&n are applied ; and that StstSn almost
invariably signifies the city, the capital of the country ; but I have also noticed
that the latter name is sometimes, but not often, applied to the country also.
There is one rather astonishing thing, however. Our author invariably says the
city of Ststan was the capital; while travellers, such as Pottinger and Christie,
and other European authors also, say that Dooghak, or JalKl&bad, is the
capital. “Who shall decide when doctors disagree?” The author of the
Masalik wa Mamai.ik, who visited it before our author wrote, says that
Zarattj is the capital, and that there is no city in the territory of Ntmros so
large ; and, further, describes the buildings and gates and other matters in
' such manner, that there can be no doubt whatever but that Zaranj was the
of the capitsd of SijistSn, or NtmTos-; and no such dty as StstSn is ever men*
tioned in that work.

(89

THE MALIKS OF SIJISTAN AND NiMROZ.

the great mosque there, saw that chain and stocks; and
whoever may have reached that great city, will also have
seen them.

Malik Taj-ud-Din, Abu-l-Fath, was a learned and en¬
lightened sovereign ; and they relate that, sometimes, he
would himself read Ae Friday’s Kh utbah ; and" this fact is
an indication of the extent of his wisdom and knowledge.

He reigned for a considerable time”, and died ; and his
mausoleum is at Sistan.

III. MALIK-US-SA’iS *, .WAMS-UD-DiN MUHAMMAD, SON OF

tAj-ud-dIn.

When Malik Taj-ud-Din, Abu-l-Fath*, passed away,
several sons survived him, and the eldest of them was
Malik Shams-ud-Din. Muhammad. He succeeded to the
sovereignty, and brought the territory of Nimrod under his
sway. He deprived one of his brothers, ’Izz-ul-Muluk, of
his sight, and put the rest of them to death; and he
caused a great number of the Amirs and Maliks of Nimroz
and Sistan to be executed.

He was a sanguinary man, and it is related of him, that,
at the outset of his reign, he killed eighteen of his brothers
in one day. The royal palace, which he founded in Sistan,
is [on this account] called by the name of Sarae-i-Siasatl,
or Palace of Slaughter; and, through his excessive murders
and executions, the people’s hearts became filled with
terror.

At the time when the reign of Sultan Sanjar came to a
termination, and the territories of ]^urasan, Ghaz ntn^ and
Kirman fell into the hands of the tyrannical tril^ of
Qhuzz, Malik Sham's-ud-Din had already established his
authority over Nimroz. On several occasions the Gh uzz
forces resolved to subvert his rule, but they did not succeed
in their design.

The grandfather of the author of this work, Maulana

* He died in 559 h., after having reigned over Mmroz, subordinate to the
SaljOlF SultXns, for just eighty years, and his age was above a hundred. It
seems strange onr author did not know the year of his death.

* Torturer, exeeuUoner.

* It was with this ruler that Mu’iSs-ud-Dtn, Ohnrt. the conqueror of Hin-
dOsOn, passed one cold seastm, after he and his brother, Ghly Sg-nd-ntn, hod
been released from coafiaemeat

190 .

THE TABA¥AT.I.NA§IRI.

Minhaj-ud-Dtn, ’Ugman, Juijant, who was on his way to
Ghaznln and Lohor, on his return from the pilgrimage to
Hijaz and the sacred Ka’bah [at Makkah], reached Ststan
during the reign of Malik Shams-ud-Dln. At that time
there was residing there one of the great theologians,
whom they called Imam Awhad-ud-Din, Bukhari, one of
the most eminent men of Kh urasan. He was also one of
the incomparable ones of the world, and one of the col¬
leagues of the Khw aiah—a second Imam Nu’man*—Abu-
l-Faj;!, Kirmant. There was likewise there another man of
learning, who went by the name of Im&m, Kawam-ud-Din,
Zawzani, a talkative, open-mouthed, staring-eyed fellow,
who was in the constant habit of annoying Imam Awhad-
ud-Din, and of behaving insolently towards him in public.

Imam Sharaf-ud-Din. ’Attar, related this anecdote, which
was told to him, respecting this man : that, when Maulana
Minhaj-ud-Dtn arrived at Sistan, it was customary with the
rulers of Ntmroz to treat strange ’Ulama with respect and
kindness; and they used to command them to deliver a
discourse, and expound some religious dogma, in their
presence, at the Court. Malik Shams-ud-Dth. accordingly,
commanded that Maulana Minhaj-ud-Dtn should expound
a dogma at the Court.

The 'Ulama of that city having presented themselves
there, Maulana Minhaj-ud-Din expounded the dogma of
defiling emissions'. When the exposition was concluded,
]^awam-ud-Dtn, Zawzant, wishing, by his insolence, to
annoy and mortify Maulana Minhaj-ud-Dtn, aiKl to clash
with him, said :—" We had heard great report of thy emi¬
nence, of thy learning and thy reputation ; but this much
was incumbent on thee, that, in the presence of such a
great monarch, thou shouldst not have mentioned the
precept of defiling emissions.” When Maulana Minhaj-
ud-Dtn perceived that he intended insolence and rudepess,
he replied, saying :—“ Maulana ]^awam-ud-Dln, it is not
necessary to make a long story of it; thou art filthiness
itself. I beheld thee, and that precept came to my recol¬
lection.”

At this rejoinder, Maulana ]^awam-ud-Dtn was com-

* The celebrated Imilin, Abil ^anffhh of KOfah, was called Nu’mtln.

* Emissions in sleep, &c., requiring ablution'afterwards.

THE MALIKS OF SIJISTAN AND NImROZ.

191

pletely silenced, and Malik Shams-ud-Dln was so overcome
with laughing, that he rolled over and over, almost beside
himself, on his couch *. That day Imam Awbad-ud»Dm was
made himself again by this rejoinder of Maulana Minhaj-
ud-Din, who also gave A/a/ to that dogma likewise; and
that monarch showed abundant kindness and consideration
towards Maulana Minhaj-ud-Dtn.

Malik Sh ams-ud-Dln reigned for a considerable time,
and was put to- death, and passed away *.

IV. MALIK.US.SA’iD, TAj-UD-DiN-I.^ARAB, SON OF
MUHAMMAD •.

Malik Taj-ud-Din was a’great, learned, and just sovereign,
and a cherisher of his subjects. He had a number of chil¬
dren, and, during his lifetime, two of his sons succeeded to
the throne of Nlmroz, as will, please God, be hereafter
mentioned ^

The first incidents in his career were these. When
Malik ^ams-ud-Din, his uncle, came to the throne, he
deprived his, Taj-ud-Dtn’s, father of his sight, and put the
rest of his brothers to death. Malik Shams-ud-Dln had a
sister, who was aunt to Malik Taj-ud-Dln-i-Harab, who pos¬
sessed great influence ; and, when the tyranny and oppres¬
sion of Shams-ud-Dln became unbearable, the people
became quite sated of his rule, and prayed the Almighty
to grant them redress.

A party of the nobles and chief men of the country of
Nlmroz sought the aid and assistance of that Malikah, the
aunt of Malik Taj-ud-Din-i-Harab ; and they held counsel

* A couch or sort of throne or seat spread with four cushions.

* Our author, who has a peculiar way of his own for relating important
events, says this ruler was martyred. He was such a blood-sheddcr and tyrant
that his troops rose against him, attached themselves to his sister, and put him
to death. Our author relates it among the events of the following reign instead
of here.

* Styled TSj-ud-Dln, ^asan, son of Tzz-ul-Muluk by Fafih-l, and Malik
TSj-ud-Dtn-i-^arab, son of ’Izz-ul-Muluk, by others. Why he and some
others are styled ^arab [in the very old MS. 1 have previously referred to the
vowel points are given], and what the real signification of the word may be, it is
difficult to tell; but some of the Mu ghal officers—not Mughals probably—are
designated by this same appellation.

f How could they possibly attain the throne during his lifetime,” unless
they previously dethroned him ?

19*

THE XABA¥AT-I-NA§lRi.

together, and made arrangements for a change [of rulers],
and fixed upon Malik Taj-ud-Din by general consent. At
that time he was sixty years of age, and none else remained
of the descendants of the Maliks who was eligible for the
sovereignty.

There is a place, outside the city of SistSn, where, in
ancient times, there was an old city, which place they call
Hasbnue*. At night, all the populace of SistSn and the
soldiery assembled there, and, in the morning they rose
against Malik Shams-.-ud-Din. and put him to death with
eighteen of his sons; and Malik Taj-ud-Din-i-Harab was
raised to the throne. His father, Tzz-ul-Muluk, was still
living, but deprived of the blessing of sight*.

When Malik Taj-ud-Din ascended the throne, he governed
the people with equity and justice, and all submitted to his
authority. He entered into communication with the Sultans
of Ghur and Kh urasan, and became feudatory to them,
and read the Kh utbah * in the name of the Sultans of
Gh ur. He used his utmost endeavours in the support and
encouragement of ecclesiastics and learned men*, and in
securing the rights of the weak and helpless ; and it was a
rale with that family to show great honour and respect to
strangers and travellers. Malik Taj-ud-Din, in this respect,
greatly surpassed his ancestors. He commanded, likewise,
that for every mosque of Bujrhara a prayer-carpet should
be woven, according to the size of each, and despatched to
that city; and for the sacred mosque at Makkah, and the
holy Ka'bah, he despatched carpets, mats, and'the like, as
well as vessels of different kinds, in great quantity.

* During the reign of Malik Taj-ud-Dtn, the father of the
author of this volumei Maulana Saraj-ud-Dtn-i-MinhSj *

■ R&t her doubtful, as the MSS. are all at variance here. Some have If^aihQe,
otheiB lOmahudl and l^ushnudt, some l^asue and ^JbahnQe. 1 do ndt find
either of these names in the ancient accounts of Sijist&n.

* Therefore he was precluded from the succession.

* The coin also was stamped with the tkles and name of the Sult&n of
Ghiir.

* It must have bean in this reign, not during that of the Blood-Shedder, that
our author’s grandfather met with such a good reception at the capital of
Sijistan, as blood-thirsty tyrants are not generally those who patronize priests
and learned men. This seems confirmed by the author’s own remarks a little
farther on.

* Sometimes he writes MinhSj-i-SarSj, and at others SarSj-i-MinbSj.

THE MALIKS OF SIJISTAN AND NiMROZ.

*93

came to Ststan on two occasions. The first time, he went
there on a mission from the august Sultan, Ghiyas-ud-Dln.
Muhammad-i-Sam ; and on the second occasion^, when he
ivas proceeding from the preseoce of that monarch to
present himself at the Court of the Kbalifah, Un-Na$ir->
ud-Dtn 'Ullah, by viAy of Mukran, he likewise passed by
way of Ststan, and received great kindness and benevolence
at the hands of Malik Tfij-ud-Dln-i-Harab.

During his own lifetime, Malik Taj-ud-Din made his
eldest son, Na$ir-ud-Dln, ’Usman, his heir-apparent; and,
subsequently, when Nasir-ud-Din died, he nominated an¬
other son, Yamtn-ud-Dfn, Bahram Shah, as his heir and
successor.

Towards the end of his reign, Malik Taj-ud-D!n became
totally blind. He had reigned for a period of sixty years,
and his age was a hundred and twenty. He died in the
year 612 H.

V. MALIK NA$IR-UD-DIN, 'USMAN-l-|jlARAB. SON OF MALIK

tAj.ud-dIn.

Malik Nasir-ud-Din was a just monarch*, and ’Ayishah
Kha tun. the daughter of the Malik of Kh urasan. ’Umr-i-
Maraghani. was married to him. He had good and worthy
sons ; and, upon several occasions, he marched from Sistan
with numerous forces, and Joined the Sulfan Gh iyas-ud-
Dln*, Muhafpmad-i-Sam, in Kh urasan. At the time of the
success at Nishapur. he was present with that monarch’s
Court.

He was a Malik of good disposition, and tlie patron of
learned men, and passed his life among men in [the
exercise of] justice, benehcence, and humanity.

During the reign of his father, Malik Taj-ud-Din, he
acted as his representative and lieutenant, in the adminis-

* See page 244. This was the occasion when the author's father, whilst
proceeding by way of MukrSn to BaghdSd, lost his life.

* He died during his father’s lifetime ; consequently, he is not entitled to be
considered as one of the sovereigns of Sijistan, and he is not accounted such by
other writers. He was a regent or lieutenant only; and, on account of the
extreme age of his father, at his [Nafir’s] death, his son, Yamtn.ud-Dtn,
Bahr 3 m Sl^h, became regent.

* His suzerain. See account of Section XVII.

194

THE TABA^T.I.NA$IRI.

tration of the government of the territory of Ntmroz ; and,
outside the city of Sistan, on the bank of the river Htrmand,
he founded a- large and noble palace.

He ruled the country for a considerable period, and
likewise died during his father’s, lifetime.

VI. MALIK UL-OIlAZi, VAMiN-UD-DAULAH WA UD-DlN
BAHKAM SHAH, SONr OF TAj-UDrOiN-I-^^ARAB.

Yamin-ud-Din, Bahram Shah, was a firm and stem ruler,
very severe but strictly just; and he continued to observe
the rule established by his ancestors, of treating learned men
and strangers and travellers with respect and reverence.

During the lifetime of Malik Taj-ud-Din, his father, he
became greatly distinguished, and was famous for his
valour, sagacity, activity, and magnanimity. He ruled
over the territory of Ntmroz for a considerable time during
the lifetime of his father; and, when his father died, the
sovereignty passed to him.

Both Bahram himself and two other brothers were
borne by a Turkish slave-girl; and, previous to his time,
all the sovereigns and nobles, according to ancient custom,
allowed their hair to hang loosely, and used to wear conical
caps on their heads, with two or three fillets wound round
them, with a black fillet over the others ; but, when
Malik Yamin-ud-Din, Bahram Shah, came to the throne,
his mother being of the Turkish race, he assun\ed the cap
of sable, and camlet garments, and curling ringlets like the
Turks ; and both his brothers, one, Malik Shihab-ud-Din,
'Ali, and the other, Malik Shah, likewise adopted similar
costume.

The author of this work, in the year 613 H., set out from
the city of Bust for the purpose of proceeding to Sistan.
When he arrived within a short distance of that capital,
where there is a place which they call by the name of
Gumbaz-i-Baluch—the Cupola of the Baluch*—on the east
side [of Sistan], at this place, a deputation received him, and

r The grandson, not the son of Taj-ud-Dtn. BahiSm Shah was the son of
Ni;iT-ud-Dtn. S^ note preccdii^

* One copy has Bal&I, but the rest have Baluj and BalQch.' .The place is not
mentioned in the anedent, accounts of the countty. Balut means an oak.

THE MALIKS OF SIJISTAN AND NiMROZ. 195

brought him to the city; and* there, at a place which is
named the Madrasah-i-sar-i-Haw?—the College at the head
of the Reservoir—to the south of the city, which they call
Dar-i-Ta’am‘ and Baz 3 r-i-Farod, he alighted and took up
his quarters*.

The author delivered a discourse in the private audience
hall of that dignified sovereign, within the Sarae-i-Siasatl;
and, upon two occasions, he was honoured with robes of
di.stinction from that beneficent monarch, consisting, each
time, of three dresses; and, as long as the author remained
at Slstan, every month, Malik Yamin-ud-Din sent him a
liberal allowance in money and grain, and treated him
with the utmost kindness and respect. After sojourning
there for a period of seven month.s, the author returned
again to Kh urasan.

Malik Yamin-ud-Din, Bahram Shah, ruled with great
firmness and sagacity. It had been a practice of old,
in the territory of Nimroz, among the tribes [therein], to
be constantly quarrelling and fighting among themselves ;
and no person entered a city or town without being fully
armed. When the sovereignty devolved upon Bahram
Shah, he made every tribe give hostages, and kept them
shut up in different fortresses, so that, in whatever tribe
blood might be shed unjustly, the chiefs and head men of
the tribe were held responsible for the crime. Through
this stringent order such acts of bloodshed decreased.

Yamin-ud-Din, Bahram ^ah, on two occasions waged
holy war against the heretics of Kuhistaii*, and carried on
hostilities against them for a long time. Imam Sharaf-ud-
Din, Ahmad* of Farah, who was the most eloquent man
of his time, composed these lines on those successes, and
in praise of them :—

* One or two copies omit the “and.”

I See page 20, and note *.

* The places noticed here were at Zaranj, and their mention proves the
statements of the author of the Masalik wa Mamalik to be correct. See
also note 1 , p. 188.

* The chief place of which is ^’fn, formerly of considerable importance.
He led troops against those heretics upon several occasions.

* Several other authors, and among them the author of the Nusakh-i-
Jah 2 n-Ar 3 , say, that Abb Nofr, FarShf, was the composer of these lines.
He was the author of the celebiatcd lexicographical work entitled “ Nif&b.i*
Ni^Sbfan.”

196

THE TABAV;AT.1.NA$IRL

« August and auspicious unto the world’s people
Is the revered countenance of the Shah of exalted descent.

At this warfare, which thou didst in E^uhist&n wage,

The globe is with justice, with equity, and requital, full.

Thou art the king of mid-day *, and of thy day’s reign
’Tis as yet but the propitious early dawn thereof.

Like as the warriors of Muhammad exult iu thee.

In such wise the soul of Muhammad in thee rejoiceth.

Continue in the world whilst the world hath freshness
From water and from fire, from earth and from air.

From the remembrance of the great king will not be obliterated
The encomiums of the Fariih-t, if aught of memory remain

After Yamin-ud-Dtn, Bahrain Shah, had reigned for a
considerable time, the calamities attending the irruption of
the infidel Mughals arose, and Kh urasan became desolated
by them, and the kingdoms of Islam fell.

There is A fortress on the confines of Neh, in the terri¬
tory of Nimroz, which they call the castle of Shahanshahi;
and the nephew of Bahram Shah, the son of Na§ir-ud-Din,
'Usman, had sold the fortress of Shahanshah! to the here¬
tics of !l^uhistan, and it was in their possession. Yamin-
ud-Dtii, Bahram Shah, at this time, despatched an agent to
demand the re.storation of that fortress, and further, to
intimate that, in case any difficulty should arise, a force
would be speedily brought against it.

On this account, disciples were nominated, by the heretics
of ^uhistan to remove him ; and, in the year 618 H., on a
Friday, when proceeding on his way to the mosque to
perform his devotions, in the middle of the bazar, four
fida’is, or disciples, surrounded him and martyred him.

VII. MALIK NU§RAT-UD-DiN, SON OF MALIK YAMlN-UD-DIN,

bahrAm shah.

On the death of Malik Yamin-ud-Din, Bahram Shah,
the great nobles and chief men of Nimroz agreed together
and raised to the throne Nu^rat-ud-DIn, the middle son
of the late ruler. This caused agitation and commotion to

* A play upon the word Ntmroz, signifying mid-day. See p. 187.

c Like all translated poetry, these lines, which are fine enough in the ori¬
ginal, lose by translation, and the play upon words is generally lost. Two
copies of the text contain one distich more, but the second line is precisely the
same as the sixth line above, and therefore it must be an interpolation, or the
first line has been lost.

THE MALIKS OF SIJISTAN AND NIMROZ. 197

arise in the country of Ntmroz, and, in every direction,
disorder and confusion occurred.

The eldest son of Bahram Shah, named Rukn-ud-Din,
was detained in confinement^ [as a state prisoner]. The
orthodox people of both parties were all partisans, well*
wishers, and under allegiance to Amir Nu§rat-ud-Din,
while the whole of the heretics of the districts of Nlmroz
were friendly towards, and submissive to Rukn-ud-Dtn*.
After some months had passed away from the accession of
Amir Nu^rat-ud-Din, the heretics broke out into rebellion
and brought forth Rukn-ud-Din ; and, between Amir Nu?-
rat-ud-Din and his brother, Rukn-ud-Din, an encounter
ensued, in which Nugrat-ud-Din was defeated, and he
retired into Khurasan and Gh ur.

He returned a second time to Sistan, and liberated the
country from the hands of Rukn-ud-Din ; but, at last, as
a body of troops of the infidels of Chin and Mughals*
advanced against Sistan, it fell into the hands of those
infidels, and Nu^rat-ud-Din obtained martyrdom, and
died*

VIII, MALIK RUKN-UD-DiN, MA^MOD, SON OF YAMIN-UD-
DIN, BAHRAM SHAH.

Malik Rukn-ud-Din, Mahmud, was a prince harsh, san¬
guinary, and cruel. The author of this work saw him,
during the lifetime of his father, in attendance upon that
sovereign. Rukn-ud-Dln was a person of niiddle height,
ruddy, and fair ; and his mother was a Rumi slave-girl.
During the lifetime of his father he had been guilty of
several perverse and contumacious acts ; and his father,
Malik Yamin-ud-Din, Bahram Shah, on two occasions, had
imprisoned him on account of his misdeeds.

Sultan Muhammad, Kh warazm Shah, sent a mandate
from Khwarazm to Bahram Shah, requesting him to des¬
patch a force from Nimroz to join him. In conformity

r Rukn-ud-Dtn had been kept in confinement by his lather, and was still
imprisoned when his brother succeeded, for reasons afterwards explained. He
soon after made his escape.

■ This accounts partly for his being kept imprisoned in his father’s reign.

* Sic in MSS., and this difference between Mughals and infidels of Chtn
often occurs in the text.

> Nufrot-ud-Dtn was slain early In the Mu^al troubles by those infidels.

198

THE TABA^AT-I NA^IRI.

with this command, Malik Yamin-i^d-Din, Bahram Shah,
nominated his son, Rukn-ud-Din, Mahmud, to proceed
with this army, and despatched it towards the confines of
Kh urasan along with the applicant for assistance, who
had come from Khwarazm Shah, to the presence of that
Sultan [Bahram Shah],

When he had reached the limits of Fushanj, and arrived
near Hirat, Malik Rukn-ud-Dtn, while engaged in a drink¬
ing bout, slew the applicant in question, who was a Turk
of distinction, and, out of fear for what he had done,
returned towards Sistan again. Malik Yamin-ud-Din,
Bahram Shah, on account of this misconduct, put him in
durance, and despatched a numerous force under Amir
Shams-ud-Din. together with presents of silks and fine
linen, and numerous expressions of obligation, with many
apologies, to the presence of Khw arazm Shah.

In that same year the calamities caused by the infidel
Mughals happened, and those troops of Nimroz were
ordered to the [frontier] fortress of Tirmiz®. Chingiz*
Khan, the Accursed, advanced with his forces against it
in person, and took Tirmiz ; and the whole of the troops
of Nimroz were martyred therein.

When Malik Rukn-ud-Din, after overcoming his brother,
assumed the sovereignty over Sijistan, he began to tyrannize,
and stretched out the hand of violence and oppression;
upon which, at the solicitations of the inhabitants of Sistan,
his brother, Amir Nugrat, returned from Khurasan, and
between the brothers contention again ensued.

At this crisis an army of Mughals unexpectedly reached
Sistan, and the whole were either slaughtered, exterminated,
made captive, or martyred. The city of Sistan became
desolate, and its inhabitants obtained martyrdpm\

IX. MALIK .SHIHAB-UD.dIN. MA^MCD, SON OF HARAB*.

When the army of infidels, after having reduced it to
desolation, turned their backs upon Sistan, Malik Shihab-

I Sometimes spcU Tarmaz, but incorrectly.

* Chingis and also Chingiz. The word is speh both ways; the latter
appears to be the most correct.

* Killed in battle with the Mughals, or slaughtered afterw.ircls.

* He is said to have been the son of Malik Na;ir-ud-Din, ’XTgmln, brother

THE MALIKS OF SIJISTAN AND NiMROZ.

*99

ud-Dtn, who had kept in concealment, came forth and took
possession of Sistan; but, as it was in a very ruinous state,
and no inhabitants remained, he did not acquire much
Strength or power.

A party of heretics gathered together in some force, and
besought Shah ’Ugman, the grandson of Nagir-ud-Din,
'Ugman®, Taj-ud-Dtn-i-Harab, to come from the city of
Neh, and occupy Sistan. He called in the aid of a force
of Khw arazm-Shahl troops, from the Malik of Kirman,
whom they styled Bur^, the Hajib [chamberlain]. When
that body of troops, from Kirman, joined Shah 'Ugman
and came to Sistan, Shihab-ud-Dtn. Mahmud, was mar¬
tyred, and his brother, Amir 'Ali-i-Zahid' [a recluse, a holy
man], ascended the throne. Still the government did not
acquire stability, and he died.

X. MALIK TAJ-UD-DIN, BINAL-TIGIN “, KJIWARAZMI.

Malik Taj-ud-Din, Binal-Tigin, was of the same family
as the Maliks [sovereigns] of Kh warazm. and was a son
of one of the maternal uncles of Sultan, Kh warazm Shah*;
and, at the period that the Sultans of Gh ur took Ntghapfir',
Taj-ud-Din, Binal-Tigin, with his cousin, Malik Firuz-i-
I-yal-timish. came into Hindustan.

At the time of the irruption of the infidels of Ch in, and
consequent calamities, this Taj-ud-Dtn was in the service

of Bahrain Shah. In some copies of the text he is styled son of !^Jiarab, and
simply Matimud-i-^JCarab in others.

• See page 196.

7 Neither of these persons is mentioned in J ahiln-Ai^ os ruler in Sijistan,
but Binal-Tigtn is. Raiifat-u9-§afa, copying from our author, of course men¬
tions the two first, but not the last. Sliihab-ud-Dfn, Mahmud, encountered
Shah ’Ugman and Binal-Tigtn, and was slain in battle ; but Fagih-t, under
the events of the year 646 ll., mentions a Malik ’All, ruler of Ntmroz, having
been put to death by Malik Shams-ud-Dtn, Muhammad, the Kurt.

• Ntal-Tig^n, in some copies and in some other works, is totally incorrect.
The name, as above, is corrolxirated by other writers ; and, in the old copy of
the text, the vowel points arc also given. It appears to be an error of copyists
writing JU for JV4

■ Which is not said. Some copies have Sultans. Raugat-ug-^a^ says
Sultiln Muhammad. He certainly was of the same tribe as the Kh warazm
Sha hl rulers.

• See under reign of QhiyilS-tnl-Din, Qhuri, Section XVII;

THE TABA¥AT-I-NA$IRI.

of Malik Kartm>ud-Din, Hamzah, at N^-awr* ofSiwalikh.
All at once he sought an opportunity, slew Khwajah
Najib-ud-Din; and an elephant, which was there, he sent
on in advance*, and then set out towards O chch ah*. and
joined Malik Na^ir-ud-Din, l^ubajah*. When Sultan
Jalal-ud-Din, Mangabarnl, Kh warazm Shah, reached the
territory of Sind, Taj-ud-Din, Binal-Tigin, left O chch ah
and went and joined Sultan Jalal-ud-Dln. He accompanied
him into the territory of Kirman ; and, in that country,
the district of Kh uk and Luk* was entrusted to his charge.

As the rival Maliks of Ntmroz were struggling against
each other, the grandson of Na?ir-ud-Din, ’Ugman, whom
they styled by the name of Shah, sought assistance from
the Maljk^ of Kirman, who was the chamberlain, Burak,
Khi ta'i. He despatched Malik Taj-ud-Din, Binal-Tigtn,
to Neh, to his aid, in the year 622 H., and, when he reached
that place, he rendered him assistance, and assumed the
authority himself, and took possession of the territory and
city of Neh on his own account*.

A body of people from the city of Sistan presented
themselves before him, and sought his help and assistance,
saying that, as they had killed* Malik Shihab-ud-Din. aiid

* The proper mode of BX>clling this word, on the authority of the Shams-ul-
T.ughat and others, is jjfl'—Nag-awr ; and SiwiUikh is said to have been the
name applied to the territory. Karim-ud-Dtn was the governor of the pro<
vince.

* This sentence is the same in all the copies of the text on which dependence
can be placed. He slew Kariin*ud-Din, and carried off a number of horses
and several elephants.

* Written —O chch ah. and at times — Uchchah, according to native

authorities ; but which English writers have turned into Uch and Ooch.

* See Section XX., the third ruler.

* In the majority of copies these words are thus written, but in some
copies they are Juk and Kuk, Juk and Euk, and Huk and Kurk or Kark,
and Khuk and Kuk. These places arc not mentioned in Masalik WA
Mam ALIK. The Crnvk of motlem maps probably.

^ Styled ButaV Kh in in one or two copies of the text. He was the brother
of Tantko of the Apiir-ul-Umia of Gur Kh gn^ who was defeated in

battle and taken prisoner b/ .Sultan Muhammad, Khwarazm Shah. See under
the tenth sovereign. Section XVI.

<* All the copies of the text, with two exceptions, say ke did render assistance
to Sliah ’Usman ; but the only assistance he appears to have afforded was in
joining Shfth ’Ugman to overcome his rival, Shah Mahmud ; and, after (he
latter’s defeat and death, Binal-Tigin showed no further regard or respect to
’Usm2n, but took possession of the country for himself.

* See note p. 199.

SOI

THE MALIKS OF SIJISTAN AND NIMROZ.

Ststan remained without a ruler, he should take Shah ’Ugman
to Ststan and set him up there. Taj-ud-Din, Binal-Tigtn,
accordingly moved to Ststan, took possession of the
city, and brought the territory of Ntmroz under his own
sway.

At this juncture, Malik Rukn-ud-Dtn, of Kha esar* of
Gh ur. despatched this, his dependent, Minhaj-i-Saraj, from
Ghur, on a mission to Malik Taj-ud-Dtn, Binal-Tigtn. The
author found him at the city of Farah, in Dawarf, and
waited on him ; and a Arm compact was concluded.

After returning from thence, and reaching Gh ur again,
between Malik Taj-ud-Dtn and the Mulahidah heretics
hostility arose, and an engagement ensued between them,
and he was defeated. After this, he returned to Ststan
again,, and overthrew a body of Kh ariii schismatics who
had revolted against him.

In the year 623 H., the author of this _ work was des¬
patched a second time*, and he proceeded again to his pre¬
sence ; and, after that, Taj-ud-Dtn came himself into Ghur.
and took possession of the fortresses of Tulak and IsArar;
and, in this same year, after his return from Ntmroz, the
author had occasion to undertake a journey into Hind'.

In the year 625 IL, an army of Mughals advanced into
the territory of Ntmroz a second time; and Taj-ud-Dtn,
Binal-Tigtn, was invested within the walls of the fortress
of Arg* of Ststan. For a period of nineteen months he

* This journey is again referred to by our author towards the end of his work,
under the heading “Downfall of the Mulab'dahs,” Section XXllI. ; and this
place is again mentioned, but is there written in two different ways—Ebaesar
and Kh aisar.

* This word is used in all the copies of the text, with one exception,

which has [darue or daru-t]. This can scarcely refer to the district of

D&war [not Dawart], which lies more to the east. In the Masai.ik wa
Mamalik the [wadt is a valley, low-lying ground, &c.] of Farah is

mentioned ; but this is an Arabic term, not a prop>er name. The “compact”
here referred to could not have been very “firm,” as may be seen from a more
detailed account of these journeys of the author, under the head of “Downfall
of the MulShidahs” towards the end of the Section above mentioned.

* The author contradicts himself, not an unusual thing, in the Section referred
to in the previous note, which see.

* The BurhSn-i.K^-A’ one of the meanings of the word Atg is “ a

citadel,” but that it is also the name of a fortress in the territory, not the city,
of StstSn. See note *, p. 34, and the account of the investment of Ststan
[as our author calls it] by the Mugb^ts in Section XXIll., where the situation
of this fortress is mentioned.

O

202

THE taba?:At.i-nA§irL

defended the place; and the whole of his followers with him
in that stronghold, consisting of Ghuris, Tulakis, Sigizis*,
and Turks, all perished. Taj-ud-Din himself received an
arrow in one of his eyes, and he straightway fell from the
battlements to the ground, and became a captfve to the
Mughals.

The fortress was taken, and the remainder of the people
within the walls were martyred ; and Taj-ud-Din, Binal-
Tigin, was brought from Sistan to the fortress of Safhed
Koh‘, and at the foot of the walls of that castle they mar¬
tyred him. The mercy of the Almighty be upon him !

* See fourth paragraph to notepp. 183-4.

• Also called Sufcd-Koh. Our autlior was once detained within the walls of
his fortress by Binal-Tigtn.

SECTION XV.

THE KURDIAH MALIKS OF SMAM.

MinhAj-i-SarAj, JurjSni, thie humblest of the servants of
the threshold of the Most High, begs to mention, that, as
an account of the Maliks of the East and West, both inhdel
and of the true faith, has been detailed and recorded, to the
best of his ability and power, and a small portion, in a
condensed form, has also been related from the annals of
the Maliks of 'Ajam and the East, this work has been
embellished [!] with a description of the Maliks of Sham.
Mi§r, Hijaz, and Yaman, who were Sultans in Islam, and
Maliks and warriors of the true faith, of great renown,’and
who, subsequent to the Sanjart and Saljuki dynasties, held
sway over those countries. He has done so in order that
the readers of this Taba^at, when these pages come under
their observation, may remember the author with a pious
benediction, and the Sultan of the Musalmans with a
prayer for the stability and permanency of his sovereignty
and dominion, and the increase of his conscientiousness
and benehcence.

I. sultan nCr-ud-din, ma^^mCd-i-zangi >.

Sultan Nur-ud-Din, Ma^imud-i-Zangi, was one of the
Ata-baks of Mau§il; and the Ata-baks of Mausil were

> Sultan Nur-ud-Dtn was not the first of this dynasty, neither was he a Ku^
nor one of the Ati*baks of Maufil, but, by our author's own account, the
descendant of a Turk of Kh itaand yet he places him at the head of the
dynasty which he calls t£e Kurdtah Maliks of Shiiin I In this Section, above
all the others in his work, and that is saying a good deal, he has greatly ex¬
posed his ignorance; and appears to have concocted, out of his own fertile
imagination, the greater part of what he has here’ adduced, beyond what he
heard of the rulers of Maufil and Sbam front u fugitive at Lakhnautt, in
Bengal, who called himself one of their descendants.

The first pf this dynasty was ABO SA’ID-I-A^-SANJ^UR [turned into
ASCANSaR by Gibbon], son of ’Abd-ullah, styled the ^Rjib^ and Ibn-l-

O 4

J04 the TABA^T-l-N^hpIRL

descendants of slaves of SultSn Sanjar; and this bondman
of Sanjar, who was the first Malik of Mau^il, was a Turk
of Khita.

This relation the author heard, in the city of Lakhnautt,
from one of the descendants of that family, and the son of
one of the Lords of Mau$il himSelf. In the country of
Hindustan, and at the capital, Dihll, he was known as the
Kh udawand-^adah of Mausil. He was of the same pro*
genitors* as the august Sultan, Shams-ud-Dunva wa ud-
Dtn [I-yal-timish]*.

according to some. In 478.H., the year brfort Sanjar was bom, TSj-ud>
Dauloh, Aha Sa’td, sumotned Tutigli, son of Alb-ArsnlSn, the gained

possession of I^lab and its dependencies. Aif:-SanVur, who was one of his
brother's slaves, in whom he placed great dependence, he made his Deputy
there. Taj-ud-DauIah.i-Tutigli at this time resided at Damaahk
San^nr became disaffected, and Tutiah marched against him ; and, in a battle
which took place between them, nearHalab, in 487 H., A(;-San^iir was slain.

Ue was succeeded by his son, 'IMAD-UD-DIN, ZANGf, who had
previously held the government of Baghdad under Sultan Mahmud, son of
Mut^ammod, son of Malik Shah. SaljuVt; but, in 521 H. [some say 522 H.],
through the efforts of the Kh altfah of Baghdad, Mustarahld, ’Imad-ud>Dtn,
Zang}, was appointed to the government of 'IraV'i-’Arab, the capital of which
was Mau;il—so called from being situated between 'Irak and the Jazfrnh
[Mesopotamia], and derived from the 'Arabic —and Sultan MahmCid
sent two of his sons, Alb.Arsalan and FarruUl Shah, to Zangt to be brought
up; hence he was styled Ata-bak or Preceptor. In the same year he took
^alab, and, in 523 H. , the fortress of Himar, in Kurdistan, which he razed,
aiid erected a fortress in place of it, which he named after himself, and it is
still known as 'ImOdtah. He acquired sway over the greater part of Sham,
Diyar-i'Bakr, the Jaza’fr, and Mau;il. Zongf was slain while besieging the
fortress of Ja’bar. He was killed, some say, by his own slaves, in Muharram
[Yal&'f says in Rabt'.ut-Akhir], 54 * H. We now come to Nur-ud-Dtn, whom
our author places as first of the Kurdish sovereigns of Sham.

On the death of Zangf, his two sons, Saif-ud-Dtn.i. Gha zt. and.ABC-L-
I^SIM, NOR-UD-DIN, MAIIMOD, styled AL-MALIK-UL-'ADIL [the
Jast Malik], divided their father's dominions among them. The former took
Mausil and its dependencies, and the latter Sham and its dependencies. Nur-
nd-Dtn proceeded to and began to extend his authority. In 549 ii. he

gsuned possession of DamashV, nnd his power and dominions were greatly
extended. He also gained possession of Ijlim;, l^amah, Manbij, Ba'olbaV,
rntd other fortresses in the territory of Rum, and numerous strongholds in the
country of the Farangs [the Latin kingdom of Jerusalem], moip than fifty in
number in all. He sent the Amtr, Asad-ud-Dln, Sher-i-Ki>h, on three dif.
feient occasions into Mifr ; and, on the third occasion, $alah-ud-Dln, Yusuf,
became the Deputy of Nur.ud-Dtn in that country. See under $ala|t-ud.Din,

p. 214.

* The word used is wlL. another signification of which, but not applicable
here I think, is the affinity between two men who have married two sisters.

* And so the first—the Turk of Ski{a—is here made "a /Curd," while his

THE KUlfMAH MALIKS OF SJfAM. ao5

This KhudSwand-2^dah stated to the author, that the
whole of his ancestors were descendants of a slave of Sanjar
Shah; and, that he himself was the eighth in descent from
that Turk of Shita previously mentioned.

In short, Sul^An Nur-ud-Dtn, who was Malik of Sham,
was a just and conscientious monarch, and did a great deal
of good. He undertook many expeditions against the
infidels, and engaged in many conflicts with them. A
number of Maliks [chieftains], Kurds, Turks, ’Ajamts, and
‘Arabs were in his service.

Sultan Nur-ud-Din left numerous, marks of his goodness
behind him in the territory of Sham*, and reigned for
very many years*.

At the time of his death he left one son, named ‘All,
who succeeded him.

II. malik-u5-$Ali^, ’alI*, son of mahmOd-i-zangI.

Malik>u9-SaHh, ‘Alt, ascended the throne of Sham at the
city of Damashk ; and the great nobles and chieftains paid

brother Thrk —the slave 'king of Dihlt—is turned into “a PafSn,” i.e. an
Afgi^n, by Dow and his copyists.

* Nur>ud'Dtn reigned for a considerable time in great grandeur and glory,
and the laudable course of his life, and his conduct towards his people, were
such that he was accounted, by them, as one of the saints; and it is said, that
prayers, offered up before his tomb, are effectuaL He founded a great hospital
at Damashk, <ui<l u university or college, and died in the month of ShawwSl^
569 u., but some say in 56S H., when leading an army towards Mifr against
$alah-ud>Dtn, who had become disaffected. Ihn-i. Kh alltan says he died in

the citadel of Damaghk*

* His descendant, apparently, did not know how long his ancestor reigned.

* N,ur-ud-Dtn does not appear to have had any son called ’Alt; but certain
it is that he was not succeeded by one of that name, as our author states, but
by his son ISMA’IL, entitled MALIK-U$-$AL 1 Q, then a mere child, being'
only in his eleventh year. ^al&k-ud-Dtn, at first, read the Shutbah for him,
and coined the money in his name, as he had done for his father previously ;
but in 570 H., the year after his accession, when in his twelfth year, $alih-ud>
Dtn, taking advantage of his extreme youth, brought an army before Damaolikt
and seized upon it and the greater part of Sham, leaving nothing to his bene-
fiictor’s Son but the city of H^lab and its environs, to which place Malik-uf-
$Uih retired. He dwelt there till S 77 when he died in his nineteenth
year, much regretted by the people for his virtues ; and, with him, this branch
terminated.

If this account be compared with our author’s, the absurdity and incorrect¬
ness of his statements will be sufficiently apparent, more particularly those
contained in the last paragraph of his account of them. Of the Ata-baks of
Maufil and several other dynasties, he gives no account.

ao6 THE TABA^T- 1 -NA$^L

allegiance and submission to him ; and the districts around
Sham, and J^alab, and Diyar-i>Bakr, came under his sway.

When intimation of the decease of Sultan Nur-ud-Din
reached Mi^r—and at this time the sovereignty of Mi^r
had passed to Sultan Salab-ud-Dtn, Yusuf—as he owed
a heavy debt of gratitude for favours conferred, Sultan
Sal£d;i-ud-Din determined to proceed from Misr to the
presence of Malik-us-$alib> pay his obeisance to him, and
perform the forms of condolence, and congratulate Malik-
U9-Salib on his succession to the dominion of Sham, and
then return again.

He set out from Migr [accordingly] with a body of troops
and conducted it to Sham' ; and, as soon as he reached
the frontier of that territory, information of his arrival was
brought to Damashk. The heart of Malik-us-Salib was
filled with affright and consternation, and he asked advice
of everybody as to what he ought to do. There was a
servant of Malik-u$-Salib, who had also been an old follower
of his father, Sultan Nur-ud-Din, who was named Aymin,
and he said to Malik-u^-Salib :—“ It is advisable, when
Salab-ud-Din comes, to turn yoyr face towards Halab and
proceed thither, and relinquish Damashk and Sham to
him, since fear of him has taken root in people’s hearts.

r A novel mode of expressing his gratitude. A traitor in Damaxhk. who
had been gained over by $aldh'ud-D!n, gave out that $aldh-ud-Dfn was coming
merely to adjust the affairs of the child. Our author either forgets to allude to,
or did not know of, the hostilities that took place between Salah-ud-Ufn and
Saif.tid ■ Ofn-i- fih azt. the latter of whom sent his troops to aid his brother
’Izz-ud-Dtn, Mas’ud [they were sons of Maudud, sons of Zangt, cousins of
Ma]ik-U9-$dlih]> who advanced to and, taking his cousin Malik-uf>

$alih and the latter’s troops with him, marched to give battle to $alah-ud>
Dtn. The latter offered peace, which ’Izz-ud-Dfn refused ; and, in Ramadan
of 570 H., a battle took place near Hamah, in which $alah*ud-Dfn was
victorious. After this, Malik-u^-^alih entered into terms with him for Halab
and some other places. Further hostilities took place between Saif-ud-Dtn-i>
Gl^t, -supported by his brother, and—but 1 might fill a volume by merely
Mitiing our author’s misstatements, and other important matters which he
liaa left out, without giving any details of the facts. He omits nothing that is
childish and ridiculous ; the ball, for example, overshadowing the sun [p. 215],
the rings for the Christian captives [p. sat], and such like nonsense : it is the
important events only that he eschews. $alah‘ad-Dtn subsequently endeavoured
further to " express his gratitude,” by attempting, in 571 h., to gain posses*
tion of H^dab. He remained a long time before it, without being able to
take it. At last, a dau^ter of the late Suljtan Nur-ud-Dtn was made over to
hi|n«, and, for her sake, he left Malik-uf-^ih unmolested.

THE KURDlAH MALIKS OF SHAM. 907

He has great resources and a large anny> and he is able
to reduce the territories under his sway. He is likewise
legitimately bom, and has a well-disposed mind, and will
respect your rights and the gratitude he owes to your
father. If you should enter into hostilities with him, you
have neither the means nor the power to oppose nor to
resist him.” The opinion of Malik-U9-Salih was in accord
with this fact; and he left Damashk. and retired to Halab,
and consigned the territory of Sham into the hands of
Sal^-ud-Din.

Malik-u$-Salih passed the remainder of his lifetime at
Halab; and ^alah-ud-Din served him in all honour and
reverence, guarded his rights, and, in the observance of the
laws of good faith, and the fulfilment of his engagements^
he failed neither to observe nor to neglect the most minute
thing.

III. MALIK AIYCB, son OF SHADI*.

This Malik Aiyub, son of Shad!, and his brother, Malik
Asad-ud-Din, were two brothers, and sons of one .of the

* The correct titles and name of $alah-ud-Dtn’s father were Malik-ul-Affal,
Najm-ud>Dfn, AbQ.Laalihar-i-Aiyub.

SbSdi, their father, son of Mardan, was bom in a village of Afarbstjan,
and belonged to a Kurdish tribe, which he left and proceeded to Baghdad,
with his two sons, Asad-ud-Din, Sher-i-Koh. and Najm-ud-Dfn, Aiyub. The
sons entered the service of Bahruz, the prefect of Baghdad, and were entrusted
by him with the charge of the fortress of Takrtt, and there Shadi died. His
tomb was still to be seen there when Yafa’t wrote ; and within the walls of
that stronghold $alah-ud-Din was bom. The brothers continued there for a
considerable period; and, at the time when Tmad-ud.Din, Zangt, in 526 H.,
came tothe aid of SultSn Mas’Qd, Salju^i, and his brother Saljuf; Shah, aitd
his Ata-bak, Kur^juh, the cup-bearer, were routed, Zangi passed the Tigris
near the fort of Takrtt, by means of boats provided by the brothers. Su^>
quently, Asad-ud-Dtn having slain a person, they had to leave the fortress of
Takrtt, and they proceeded to Maufil, and presented themselves at the Court
of ZangL - He received them with great favour, and bestowed fiefs upon each
of them.

Subsequently, when Zangt was assassinated, and his son, Saif-ud-Dtn-i-
GllSzt, succeeded him as ruler over Maujil, Najm-ud-Din-i-Aiyub, who bad
been assigned the territory of Ba’albaV by Zangt, finding Saif-ud-Dtn-i-Ghist
unable to protect him,' had to give it up, and went and entered the service of
the then ruler of DamaglilFt named Majtr-ud-Dtn, Artul^ [ArtQlctah], who gave
him a fief Asad-ud-Dtn, Sher-i-Koh. Aiyub’s brother, went to
took service under Nur-ud-Dtn, Mahmud, Saif>ud-Dln's brother, who had
seen the honour with which he had been treated in his father’s time, and he
raised Asod.ud-Dln to the highest position among his nobles; and, at the

908

THE taba]B:At-i.nA$irl.

Kurdish chieftains in the territory of ; and they

passed a number of years in the service of Sul^An Nur-ud-
Dtn. They performed great deeds, and on the confines of
Maghrab and of Sham, with numerous forces, they waged
holy war, and fought engagements against unbelievers.

When Malik Aiyub, son of Shadi. departed this life, he
left four sons behind him: first, Malik Salah-ud-Dtn,
Yusuf; second, Malik ’Adil-i-Abu-Bikr; third. Shahan¬
shah ; and fourth, Saif-ul-Islam* : and Malik Asad-ud-Dtn,
son of Shadt. as before stated, was the brother of Malik
Aiyub*.

When the latter died, his sons were in the service of their
uncle, Malik Asad-ud-Din ; and the first person among
them [sic in MSS.] who became sovereign of Mi§r was this
same Asad-ud-Din ; and the first one who acquired sove¬
reignty in Sham was Sal^-ud-Dtn, Yusuf, son of Aiyub,
as 'will, please God, be hereafter recorded *.

IV. MALIK ASAD-UD-DlN*. SON OF SHAdI, IN MI§R.

Trustworthy persons have related after this manner: that
a body of Maghra^bt 'Alawis laid claim to the Kh ilafat*.

talcing of DamasliV, Asad-ud-Dtn, Sher-i-Koh. and ^alSVod-Dtn, were in
Nur-ud-Dtn’s service ; and the former held the government of

* Aba Lstahlcar-i-Aiyub had six renowned sons, the titles and names of
whom, according to the years of their birth, are as follow :—i. Amtr-Nur-ud-
Daulah, Shahan-Shah. 3. Malilc-ul-Muarram, Shams-ud-Daulah, TurOn
Shah. 3. Malik-uii-Nafir, ^lah-ud Dtn, Yhsuf. 4. Malik-ul-’Adil, Saif-
ud-Dtn [Daulah], Abu Bikr, Muhammad. 5. Malik-ul-’Adz, Zahtr-ud-Dtn,
Aba FarSs-i-Xufih'Tigtn, Saif-ul-Islam. 6. Taj-ul-Muluk, Majd-ud-Dtn—
the least in years, the greatest in learning and accomplishments.

* Any one reading this would imagine that Aiyhb had been an independent
ruler in Sh^ni, and one of the dynasty, and that he had died before Asad-ud-
Dtn, and before $alah-ud-Dtn rose to power ; but neither of these is the fact.
AiyCb merely held Ba’alba]): of 2 Umgt and another fief under his son. See
note *, page 215.

* Here is another specimen of an author who " narrates his facts in a plain,

straightforward manner, which induces a confidence in the sincerity of his
statements, and the accuracy of his knowledge.” He begins this Section with
an account of the Kurdish rulers of ~ Sha in and Misr, the two first of whom
were Turks, and the third never reigned at all; while he himself states, subs^
quently, that the fourth vras the first Kurd that ruled in Mifr, and the ^th, the
first Kurdish ruler of 1

* His correct name and titles are Aba-l-Hfirig, Shcr-i Koh [the Lion of the
Mountains], Asad-ud-Din, sumamed Al-M^ik-ul-ManfOr.

* Nearly three hundred years before NOr-ud-Dtn despatched Asad-ud-

THE KURDlAH MALIKS OF SHAM.

ac 9

and brought an army from Maghrab into Mi^r, and wrested*
it out of the hands of the governors and nobles of the
’Abbasi Kha ltfahs.

The chief of them was named Al-Munta^ir*; and some
theologians regard them as Karamitahs. The territory of
Mi$r had continued in the possession of his descendants
up to the period that an army of Afranj set out towards
Mi$r, and plundered and sacked the country. The ’Alawis
of Mi$r had not the power to resist them, nor to drive out
that host of infidels ; so they solicited aid from Sultan
Nur-ud-Dinof Sham. He nominated Malik Asad-ud-Din,
son of ^adi, to proceed into Mi$r, and expel the Afranj
infidels from that country*.

Dfn into Mifr, viz. in 296 H.; In 351 H. they removed from tlie territory
styled Magdiirab, and took up their abode in the former country.

* Abu-Tamfm-i-Sa’d, AI-Mustanfir B’illah, was the eighth of the IsmS-
’tltSns or Fktimites. They had been in Egypt, and had founded Rahirah
upwards of sixty years before Al-Mustan;ir succeeded to the TThilsfat- All
the copies of the text have “ Munta^ir.”

• Our author’s statements here are totally incorrect. Asad-ud-Dtn, Sher- 1 -
Koh, was despatched into Mi;r—or more correctly DiySr-i>Mifrfah, for Mifr
is the name of the ancient capital of Egypt, and Y&fa'f and others make this
distinction—upon three different occasions. The first occasion was in this
wise ; SbH’ih', the Waztr of Ml$r, who held the chief power, for the Isma’tltan
Shalffahs appear to have possessed little authority, had been ousted from
office by a powerful rival, ;^ir>^X2m by name, who obtained the chief authority,
and put Slm’ur’s son, ’^ae, to death. On this, Sha’ur came to the presence of
Nur-ud-Dfn to solicit his aid in restoring him to power; and, in Ramofkn,
558 H. [accordii:g to some in 559 H.], Nur-ud>Dfn despatched a numerous
army into Mi^rfah for the purpose, under Asa<f-ud-Dtn, Sher-i-Koh. and
^alSh'Ud-Dfn, his nephew, accompanied him.

The objects of NQr>ud>Dfn, in seiiding this expedition, were twofold. One
was to aid SlUl’ur, and the second was. his desire to know the exact state of the
affiurs of that country, as he had been informed that there sVas really no ruler'
in it, and that it might be easily annexed. Asad was therefore selected to
command, as Nur-ud-Dtn had implicit confidence in him. He accordingly
entered the Mifrtah territory in JamSdl-ul-Akhir, 559 H. [some say in 558 H.],
and ^r-giUhn was put to death, his head placed on a spear, and his body left
to the dogs and jackals ; but his remains were subsequently buried. Sht’Or
again assumed the Wazir-ship, but, finding the presence of Asad and his army
iricsome, and fearing treachery on Asad’s part, he sought an alliance with the
Farangs [Latin Christians of JerusalemJ to counteract it. Asad in consequence
was unable to hold his own in the Mi;rtah territory, and he accordingly retired
into Shi m again and returned to Damafihlt, and entered it in ^t-l^ijjah, 559 if.
[some say in 558 H.] Asad-ud-Dtn’s thoughts, however, were concentrated on
Mifrtali, and he was constantly pondering the subject. SbS’flr, becoming
aware of his ambition and covetous designs, entered into a treaty with the
Farangs to aid him, in case of need, against the ruler of Sbfon.

On the news of these negotiations r e ach ing the ears of N&r>ud>Dtn and

aio

THE TABA]BJlT-I-NA$IRl.

Malik Asad-ud>D!n preferred a request to the Sultlin
that he would appoint Salah-ud-Din, Yusuf, his nephew, to
accompany him on the expedition. This was granted ; and
Malik Asad-ud-Din, along with Salah-ud>Din, set out from
Sham towards Mi$r.

When they reached the frontier of that country, the
infidel Afranj, having gained information of the arrival of
the troops of Sham, reined in the bridle of their audacity,
and they halted in that part of the country which they had
then reached.

The troops of Sham entered the territory of Mi^r, and
acquired predominance over it; and, as they possessed
great power and magnificence, the ’Alawis of Mi^r became
timid of them, and repented of ever having sought their
assistance, as they were not sufficiently strong to hinder
them [the ^amis] from the usurpation of power and
authority over the country.

The Sayyid, who filled the masnad of the “Khi lafat in
Mi9r, had a Waztr, who bore the name of Sha-ur, and he
summoned him privily, and commanded that he should
write a letter, secretly, to the infidel Farangs, and tell
them “ neither we nor our troops will render any help to
the Shamls. and we will not send them sufficient succour.
It behoveth you to advance upon them: put forth your
strength, and drive them out of this country, and all the

Asad, they consulted together, and the former, fearing lest the Farangs might
gain a footing in Mi^rtah, and thereby acquire domimon over the -whole of the
parts adjacent, determined to despatch Asad with a large army against Sj^S-Tir,
which commenced its march in Rabt’-ul-Awwal, 563 H., and $aUl)i-ud-Dtn
attended him, being in his service.

aha Tir. on this movement, called in the Farangs ; and, with those allies,
encountered Asad and his forces in several engagements, but without decisive
advantage on either side. Nur-ud-Dfn now created a diversion by sending a
force against the Farangt territory, and succeeded in taking Montreal [? tik-**].
The news of this having reached Almeric [ jt^], king of Jerusalem, an accommo¬
dation was entered into by the contending parties, under the agreement that
not a man of either the SbSmts or Farangs should remain in the Miyrtah
territory, and that both armies should retire into their respective countries.

Asad-ud-Dfn, Sher-i-Koh. in 564 H., again advanced into the Mifrtah
territory, accompanied by his nephew, $alat-ud-Dtn, and a large army, and
sought to subdue it $al&f>-ud-Dfn succeeded in getting possession of Iskan-
darfah, but Sl^’ur invested him therein with the forces of Mifr, and Asad had
to evacuate Sa’td and march to his succour. At last a peace was come to, and
Asad and $aUlti-ud-Dtn returned to Sl^*" again. For an account of the third
expedition see note *, page 313.

THE KURDlAH MAUKS OF SHAM. JII

spoil taken from them shall be yours.” In short, the
Mi^ris sought, by such like treachery, to betray the army
of Sham into the hands of the troops of the infidels of Rum'
and the Farangs*.

In accordance with the solicitation contained in the letter
referred to, the Farang infidels advanced upon the forces of
Sham to give them battle, and drive them out of Mi^r.
The army of the infidel Farangs amounted to 80,000 men,
and that of Sham numbered 700 horse*.

When the two armies came into contact with each other
and the conflict and struggle began, the troops of Sham,
on account of the smallness of their numbers, were unable
to withstand their opponents; and, as a matter of necessity,
they were discomfit^, and fled, fighting, from the gate of
Mi$r until they reached a place which is called Talbts.
This place had a fortified wall all round it, and a citadel;
and, in it, they sought shelter, and they shut themselves up
within the walls. The troops of the infidel Farangs com-
pletely surrounded it, pitched their camp, and commenced
their preparations for taking the place.

When the ShSml forces perceived the extreme danger
they were in, and that they were completely invested,
besides the treachery of the ’Alawis of Mi$r, they all, of one
accord, deliberated together, and discussed a plan of escape.
Malik Asad-ud-Dtn and Sal^i-ud-Din told them, saying:
—“ The plan of saving yourselves consists in staking your
lives; in victory or death.” They all, accordingly, agreed
together; and, placing their hands within the open grasp of
confidence, and with full trust in the Most High and Holy
God, they, having quite resigned themselves to sacrifice sweet
life if necessary,-suddenly and unawares, issued from the
place and commenced fighting the infidels, as by orthodox
law prescribed: and heavenly succour came to their aid; and,
according to the promise of Him who promised victory to

1 No troops whatever of the Greek empire were employed on the occasion ;
but, the fact is, our author was not acquainted with his subject at all, and has
concocted much nonsense.

■ The words Afranj and Farang are oAen used here indiscriminately.

* On the preceding page he says Asad-ud-Dtn’s troops “acquired predo¬
minance over the territory of Migr,” and ShS’ur had to call in the Christians
to expel them, and immediately after tells this impudent falsehood. A very
trustworthy writer c e rtainly 1

ais

THE TABA^T.I.Ni^$IRl.

the true believers, He sent succour, and the army of the
infidels was put to the rout, and the defenders of the truth
gained the victory; and from that.place to the gate of
Mi$r', and in the vicinity, and in the parts round about,

* The cause of the third expedition was that, in 564 .H., the Ffuangs [King
Almeric and the Hospitallers, A.D. 1168] invaded the Mifrtah territory,
intending to seize it for themselves. They inarched to Balbts [the ancient
Pelusium], took it, and put the'inhabitants to the sword. Again Sha Tir
sought aid from Nur-ud-Dtn, who, fearing the Farangs and their designs, and
possessing vast resources, sent a countless army [not 700 horse probably] thither
under Asad-ud*Din, who, on this occasion, took with him his brethren [sic in
MS.] and kinsmen, including $alatl-ud-Dtn. The account of the advance of
this host having been conveyed to the Farangs, they desisted from further
operations, evacuated Balbts, and retired from the country, pressed hsud in
their retreat by Nur-ud-Dtn’s Turkmans. The author, from whom I have been
taking these extracts chiefly, says, “ $alati-ud-Dtn told me himself that he
[$alah-ud-Dtn] did not accompany his uncle of his own choice; and further,
t^t Sha ’ur used to promise to defray all the expanses of this expedition, under*
taken on his accotmt; but he did not fulfil his promises, and sometimes he
would be with the Farangs, and at times he would be with the Amir [Asad-
ud-Dtn]. Fearing the perfidy and double-dealing of Sha’iir. Amtr Asad
resolved to seize him; and, one day, when Sha’ur. attended with drums and
trumpets, and banners, as is the custom with the Waztrs of Mifr, mounted and
set out with a cavalcade to visit Asad>ud-Dtn, the latter also mounted and
rode forth to receive him j but, when they met, he seized Sha’iir by the collar,
and gave a sign to his own followers to secure him. This was done, and
Sha’Or was detained as a prisoner in a tent. Shortly after, a body-servant
arrived from the sovereign of Mi^rtah [Abu Muhammad-i-’Abd-ullab, entitled
’Afid, the last of the Isma’tlts of Egypt] signifying his desire that the head of
Si^’ur should be sent to him. This was in accordance with the custom of
the country, that any one who, by force, seized the Waztr’s person, and cut off
his h<^ and sent it to the ruler, should have the robe of Waztr-ship forthwith
brought to him ; and, according to that custom, Asad cut pff the head of
Sba’ur [had it cut off] and sent it, and on the same day he assumed the robe
of Waztr-ship, and the supreme direction of the affairs of the country.” This
occurred 17th of Rabt’-ul-Ajchir, 564 H.

Another account of the events ending in the death of SlU’ur, quoted in
Yafa’t, is not unworthy of a brief record here, and, in all probability, is the
most correct. When Asad-ud-Dtn reached the Mifrtah territory, and entered
^hirah on the 17th of Rabt’-nl-AJchir, 56411., ’Afid-i-’Abd-ullah, the last
of the Ismi’tlt Shaltfahs, on the Friday following, came forth and held
an interview with Asad, and had him arrayed in a dress of honour, and treated
him with great distinction. Asad now requested Sha’ur to disburse the
expenses incurred on his account, which be had agreed to defray; but Sha ’ar
delayed. Asad sent a person to him with a message, saying, ” My troops,
through want of their pay, are much incensed agunst you; ther^ore be
careful.” Slja’nr evinced no fear, and resolved to invite Asad to an entertain¬
ment in order to seize his person. This design having come to Asad’s knosr-
ledge, Amtr’’Izz-ud-Din, one of Nur-ud-Dtn’s nobles, and $ala^ad>Dtn,
agreed together to kill Sha’ur. and communicated the design to Asad, who for¬
bade them to do so. Sha’-flr. subsequently, in order to visit Asad, without any

THE KURDlAH MALIKS OF SHAM. S13

they made heaps of the slain. Praise be unto God 1 May
victory ever be theirs I

The troops of Islam having gained such a victory, at
once appeared before the gate of Mi$r. The Waztr of
Mi^r, who was named Sha-ur. performed the ceremonies of
going to receive them ; but, as soon as the sight of that
victorious Sultan*, Salah-ud-Di'n, fell upon him, he, in the
presence of Malik Asad-ud-Dln, with his own august hand,
struck off with his sword the wretched head from that
accursed one’s body.

The whole of the people of Mi§r and the forces of Sham
agreed together, with one accord, to raise Malik Asad-ud-
Din to the sovereignty; and he became sovereign of Mi^r
accordingly, and obtained the throne of that country*.

The ’Alawts ofMi^r, without molestation or impediment,
were placed in seclusion, and the Kh utbah was read for
them in the same manner as before\

The news of this success was despatched to ^am ; and
the territory of Mi$r, together with its coasts and confines,
was taken possession of by Malik Asad-ud-Dln, who resided
there for a considerable time; and he died*.

suspicion, came to the bank of the Ntl, wliere his [Asad’s] tents were pitched
to enable his followers to visit conveniently the tomb of ImSm Shafi’t. Amtr
’Izz-ud-Dfn and $aUlh'Ud-Dfn, after they had received Sha’ur. at 1 the usual
salutation of “Peace be unto thee,” &c., had passed—Asad was not present at
the time—dragged him from his horse, upon which. his followers fled. They
then handcuffed him, Md kept him a prisoner in one of the tents, but did not
dare to put him to- death without the permission of Nur-ud-Dfn [Asad ?]. In
the meantime, ’Afid, the Isma’flf, sent an order to put Sha’ur to death
.[according to the pustom before mentioned], on which his head was cut off [by
two slaves of Nur-ud-Dfn] and sent to 'Afid on a spear. After this, ’Afid
summoned Asad-ud-Dfn to his presence, who went ; and the Waztr’s robe was
conferred upon him, with the title of Al-Malik-ul-Manfur, Amtr-ul-Juyush.

* At this time this “victorious Sultdn” was serving under his uncle, who
eras himself serving Niir-ud-Dtn.

* Asad-ud-Dtn was not raised to the sovereignty, and never occupied the
throne of Mi^r. For the refutation of this absurd and untrue statement, see
preceding note *.

* At page 215 our author contradicts his own statement.

* Asad did not enjoy his Waztr-ship very long; for on the 22nd [some say
26th] of Jamadt-ul-Akhir of the s(ime year, two months and five days after he
obtained it—a " considerable time ” truly—he died suddenly at KUhirah. He
was first buried there, but subsequently, according to his last tvi.she$, his
remains were removed to Madlnah. The “Lion of the Mountains ” left a son,
NS9ir-ud-Dln, Muhammad, Sher-i-Koh. entitled Al-Malifc-ul-Ka.hirah. When
his father died, Sult&n Nur-ud>Dtn of Shflm. deprived him of the fief of

THE TABAig:AT-I-NA91Rt

ai4

V. sultan 9 ALA]et-UD-DlN, YOSUF, SON OF AIYOB-AL-

KURDI.

SultAn §aiaJ^>ud-Dtn was a great and illustrious monarch,
and he waged holy wars and undertook many religious
expeditions; and the ^aisar of Rum and the infidel
Farangs, he encountered in many conflicts. It was most
probable, that in all his doings, and throughout the whole
of his career, the sword of heavenly success and divine
victory attended him. The territories of §ham, ^udst
[the Holy Land], Mi^r, Hijaz, and Yaman*, all came under
his rule.

As the Most High God willed that, at this, the end
of time^ His true religion should be manifested, and that
the empire of Islam should be victorious, from every illus¬
trious family He made choice of one sovereign. His servant,
and, by means of the key of holy war waged by him,
caused the gates of conquest of the countries of the infidels
to be thrown open. In the same manner as in the countries
of the East He distinguished Sultan Mu’izz-ud-Dtn, Mu-
hammad-irSlm, Sliansabt [ghansabanl], l^uri, by great
victories in the country of Hindustan, as far as the |x>un-
daries of Chin ; in the territories of the West, and in the
country of Sham, He made Sultan Salah-ud-Din, Yusuf,
the Kurd, exalted by the conquests of the territories of
Maghrab. and of the Afranj*, so that great victories were
achieved by him.

He brought back again the realm of Mi^r from the hands

; but, when §alab-ud-Dtn, his cousin, gained possession of Sl^m, he
lestoied ^Jim? to him, and there he died in 581 H.

s ^alab-ud*Dtn had an elder brother named Malik-ul-Muasfam, Sh^i»s-ud>
Daulah, TOrin Shsh, and greatly esteemed by that SultSn. He employed
him in an expedition into Yaman, and subsequently sent him into Nubah
[Nubia of Europeans], and he was afterwards placed in chai^ of DamaahlF-
He died in $afar, 576 H., and was buried in the Madr a sa h in sight of Da m a g h^

which he had himself founded. u u

r Our author has been as unsuccessful in foretelling the end of the world,
as tome others, his successors, who pretend to know the secteU of futurity and

the will <rf Providence. .

• It is somewhat new to find that $aUb-ud-Dtn made conquests in Europe.
He does not mean conquests in Palestine or the Greek empire, for he mentions
them a little farther on. This U merely another of his audadous falsehoo^ -^e
words he uses are, J ^ UV *-*-> sH'**’ C**

THE ICURDIAH MALIKS OF SHAM. SiS

of the Mifti *Alaw!s, who were the chiefs and heads of the
B^ttnah and l^rSmitah heretics, under ^e sway of the
Sha^ltfahs of the house of ’Abbas; and l^uds [the Holy
'Akkah [Acre], and a great portion of the territories
of Rum, and Fili^ttn, he liberated from the hands of the
infidel Farang^.

The beginning of his career was this. When his father,
Malik Aiyub, son of Shadl. departed this life*, he was 4 n
the service of his unde, Malik Asad>ud-Dln, as has been
already stated in what has been previously recorded, and
used to be constant in his attendance at the Court of Sultan
Nur~ud-Dtn. He had acquired great fame for his manhood,
his activity, and his sagacity. He had also become an
associate with Sultan Nur-ud-Din in the game of Chaugan.
and playing at ball on the course*. ''

One of the trustworthy has related after the following
manner :—One day $al^i-ud-Din was engaged with Sultan
Nur-ud-Din in the game at ball, and the ball fell between
him and the Sultan. By his strength and agility, Sal^t>
ud>Dtn, with one blow, bore away the ball from the Sultan
in such a way, that, from the immense force with which
his Cliaugan struck it, the ball flew into the air so far that
it became immersed in the light of the sun, and the shadow
of it fell upon Nur-ud-Din*. When the Sultan noticed this
circumstance, his heart became so overpowered with wrath,
that he threw down his Chaugan in a rage and left the
course. This circumstance filled Salah-ud-Dln with fear
and apprehension, and he began to conceal himself from

* Here is another specimen of the false statements of our author, so " trust*
worthy.” Asad died in 564 H., and ^al&b-ud-Dtn’s father, AbC-Lashkar-i-
Aiyftb, joined his son in Egypt in the following year, when $alab*ud-Dtn had
succeeded to the 'Waztr-ship held previously by his uncle. $alab-ud-Dtn
wished his father to accept the office, but AiyQb refused, saying, “The
Almighty hath chosen thee, my son, for this office, and- consequently no one
is worthy of it.” Aiy&b was killed from injuries sustained by a fall from
his horse, which threw him when he was viewing $alah-ud*Dtn’s troops file
past before the B2b>an-Nafr [the Nafr Gate] of Kahirah, on an expedition
against Karak, in i^i-Hliloh. 567 h., about three years a/ier Asad’s death.
Aiyfib entered Rajab, 565 M., and ’Afid, the Ismfi’flten Shalffidi,

in order to gratify $alah*u<l'^b'> forth to receive his father, whom he

treated with great reverence and distinction.

t Sie in MSS.

■ Our author must have been a very simple-minded man indeed if he
believed this ; but many of his stalemento are equally childish and absurd.

■an6

THE TABA^AT.I.NA9IRI.

the Sultan’s sight, and seldom used to present himself to
the Sultan’s observation.

The author heard from Khwaiah Muzhir, a merchant,
that, at the period in question, one night Sultan Sal^-ud-
Din saw, in a dream, that he was in Mi^r, and that, at
night, some people seized him, and took him away to the
palace of the sovereign, and, having placed a tent>rope
around his neck, they hung him up from the battlements of
the palace. The terror which this produced awoke him
from his sleep, and his apprehension became still greater
than before, and he was constantly overwhelmed with
anxiety*. Unexpectedly, the envoy from the ’Alawts of
Misr arrived to solicit aid from Sultan Nur-ud-Din, as has
been related previously. The Sultan appointed Sal^-ud-
Din’s uncle, Malik Asad-ud-Din, to proceed thither, and he
solicited that his nephew, Salab-ud-Din, should be allowed
to accompany him.

The latter was so overcome with fear, caused by this
dream, that he went to an interpreter of dreams, and related
the dream to him. The interpreter said :—“ May the sove¬
reignty of Mi$r be propitious ! Allow no anxiety to find a
way into thy mind, for the Almighty God will make thee
a great king." On the strength of that interpretation, with
a buoyant heart and with expanded hope, he reached Mi^r,
where all those circumstances happened to-him and to his
uncle, as already stated.

When his uncle died, the people of Mi^r and the troops
of Sham were agreeable to his assuming the sovereignty,
but he would not in any way assent to it*. When the

* These are the exact words of our author ; but the story is related somewhat
differently. '* One night, before he had gone to Mi^r, he- saw in a dream that
a party of people, having put a tent-rope about his neck, drew him up to the
battlements of the metropolis of Mi^r by the neck. When Asad-ud-Dfn was
about to proceed into that country, he used to endeavour to persuade $alkb-
nd-Dtn to accompany him ; but the latter, on account of this dream, which he
kept secret, used to manifest great disinclination to accede. At length, having
communicated the dream to an interpreter of dreams, he was told that it sig¬
nified he should become ruler of that country, and after this he was quite
willing to go."

* Another of our author’s ab.surdities or wilful perversions of facta After
the death of Asad-ud-Dfn, his nephew, $alSb'Ud-Dfn, was chosen Wozfr,
from among several candidates, by the Isma’tlt Shaltfah, ’Afid, as he con¬
sidered $ala]^-ud-Dfn rather weak in intellect, and leas to be feared than the
others, in which he greatly deceived himself. Instead of seiung people’s

/ ' THE KURDlAH MALIKS OF ^AM. ai 7

importunity of people, however, exceeded all bounds,
SultAn Sal 3 b~ud-Dtn commanded, saying:— “ I will comply

j^roperty and effects, $aUlh*t>d-Dtn b^an to appropriate thdr hearts, by
Aaking; them his own ; and he likewise resolved. to lead a new life, and
renounced wine and women, riotous living and amusements, and other vicious
practices. Having obtained the direction of the affairs of the coimhy,
ud-Dtn Issued commands to read the Khutbah for N&r-ud-Dtn ; and the latter
-addressed him in all hb communications as the Amtr-i>Sipah-s 3 lSr fAfid
having previously given him the title of Malik-un-Nijir]. As ^alab-ud-Dtn
acquired the attachment of the people, *Af id lost it ; and he now sent for his
brothers, who were in the service of Nur-ud-Dln, who would not allow them to
go, mentioning; as his reason, his fear lest either of tliem should become hostile to
his brother $aUi(h-ud-Dtn, but the tmth was Nur-ud-Dln suspected his motives.
However, when Nur-ud-Dln subsequently despatched his troops to operate
against the Farangs, udio had invaded the Mi^rlah territory, he entrusted
$ala^-ud-Dln’s elder brother, g^ms-ud-Daulah, Turiin Sh&h. with a com¬
mand in that army, but with orders that he was not to consider YQsuf [^alZb*
ud-Dln] as his younger brother, but as the lord of Mifr, and his [NSr-nd-
Dln’s] lieuteiumt and representative; and this order TurSn Sfash agreed to
obey.

I bn Aslr says, that, when $ala^-ud-Dln had become firmly established, NOr-
ud-toln sent to command him to give up reading the Ehvfbah.for 'Afid, atul
to read it for the ’Abbasl Kha llfahs. ^iS^-ud-Dln excused himself by saying
that the people were well-inclined towards the present family, and he feared,
if he obeyed, that an insurrection would take place. Nur-ud-Dln, however,
wrote the second and the third time to order him to do so, and $alilti-pd-Dtn, not
daring to disobey the reiterated comitutnds of his suzerain, was in a dilemma,
but it so. happened that 'Afid was about this time taken ilL $aUl 4 -ud- 4 >ln
now consulted with the chiefs and nobles as to what shotdd be done; but
some said one thing and some another, and the difficulty was us great as
before. At this juncture, a person of some note, named Amlr-i-’Alim [Guzl-
dah calls him Najm-ud-Dln], an ’ Ajaml, who had come to ■ Mbr, offered to
take the initiative, if permitted and, on the first Friday in the month of
Mur^rram, before the Shallb [the preacher who pronotmees the Shntlwh]
entered the pulpit, this ’Ajaml got into it, and prayed for the ’AbbSst Shall*
fah. Imam Musta*! B’nOr-Ullah. The Mi^ris who were present made no
objection, and the next Friday §alah-ud-Dln directed that the Ehulbah for
’Afid should be discontinued at Ipihirah and at Mifr [the old capital], and that
for Mustaf 1 B’nur-Ullah adopted, and also in other parts of the Dlyar-i-Mi;rlah.
The disorder of *A{id had increased, and this matter was, in consequence, not
communicated to him, because, in case he ever arose from his bed again, he
would soon hear of it, and if not, of what use was it to afflict him ? $aUih-ud*
Din took care, however, to separate the family, slaves, aiul dependents of’Afid
from each other, and to provide ?or the security of the dying man’s wealth and
effects. Before his death, ’Ajidsent for him ; but, fearing treachery, as he pre¬
tended, $alah-ud-Dln did not go, and regretted it afterwards. ’Af Id died lOth
of Mubarram, 567 H. [FasHi-l says 565 H-]t “"d the 'Ubaidl Isma’llt dynasty
terminated. [According to Vertot vol. ii. p. 309, $alat[-ud-Dln had the
Shallfnh murtlered in or out of his bath, and says it was narrated freely by
the Christians, but that the Moslems were silent on the matter.] When the
AbbSst Kh allfah , Al-Mustafl B’nur-Ullah, received information that the
•ghii thnh had been read for him in Mi;rtah, he despatched ’ImSd-ud-Dln, a

P

THE TABA]e:AT*I-KA$IRL

ai8

with 3rour solicitations, on the stipulation that you attend
to a request of mine.” To this demand of his they signified
their assent. Sultan Sal^-ud-Dtn commanded that they
should assemble, on the morrow, in the gr^at mosque, at
which time he would make his request known to them, and
accept the sovereignty of Mi$r. To this all pledged their
faith ; and the next day they all assembled in the great
mosque of Mi$r, and solicited that he would mention his
request.

Salah-ud'Din demanded that they should give their alle>
giance to the Kha lifahs of the house of ’Abbas as the
successors of the Prophet and chief patriarchs. The people
all agreed to pledge their fealty to the house of ’Abbas;
and, at that time, the Lord of the Faithful, Al-Musta?t
B’amr-Ullah*, filled the office of Khalifah. and the Khutbah
was pronounced in the name of the ’Abbasi family. A
despatch announcing this triumph was forwarded to Bagh¬
dad, the capital of the Khaltfahs, together with the standard
of the Farangs, inverted, and the flags of the !l^aramitah
heretics, to the presence of the Khalifah. Al-Musta^i
B’amr-Ullah.

From the capital of Islam, Salah-ud-Din received the
title of Malik-un-Nagir*, and he became sovereign of Mi§r;

venerable and illustrious dependent of the ’AbbSsf dynasty, to S^am, with
rich dresses of honour for Nur-ud-Dtn—to the sovereign, not to his lieutenant,
$al&b ud-Dfn,—but robes of honour were also despatched to $alal^-ud-Dfn,
together with black hangings for the pulpits of Mifrfah, as the Isnta’flf
colour was green.

In 569 H. Nur>ud-Dtn directed $al&^-ud-Dfn to assen\ble the forces of
Mifrtah, and march against the Christian territory, and invest Karak, and pro¬
mised to pome himself likewise. reported his departure 20th of

Mubarram, from Igllahirah ; and Nur-ud-Dtn, on receipt of his despatch at
Damaahb, marched towards Karak, and, having reached it, fully expected the
arrival of $alab>ud-Dtn and his forces. He was, however, too canning to
trust himself in the power of his master, and wrote excusing himself on
account of pretended disaffection in Mi^rtah. Nur.ud-Dtn repeated his com.
mands without avail, and had serious intentions of marching into the country
and removing his disobedient lieutenant. Ibn-i-Shadad gives a different
account of this circumstance, which is too long for -insertion here, and says it
happened in 568 H. Nur-ud-Dtn died in 569 H.

* Fafib-t stiys that, the first time the Khiithah -was read in the Diyar-t*
Mivrtah, It was read for Al-Mustanjid, who died in the beginning of the
month of Kabt’-ul-Awwal, 566 H., but, subsequently, the news of his death, and
the accession ofhis son Al-Musta^t B’nQr-Ullah [not B’amr-Ullah] was received.

• This statement is totally incorrect: the title was conferred upon him by
’Afid, the Ismi’tli EJ^altfah, when ^alab-ud-Ittn became his Wastr.

THE KURDlAH MALIKS OF SHAM. aiQ

and, at this time also, Sultan Nur-ud-Dtn died^ Sultan
^alah-ud-Din marched into ^am, and assumed the throne
of sovereignty, as has been previously stated. He con¬
ferred the [government of the] territory of Mi$r upon one
of his sons, Malik-ul-’Aziz, and another son, Malik-ul-
Af^al, he i^ominated to be his heir; and upon his brother,
Malik-ul-’Adil, he conferred the province of Diyar-i-Bakr.

One of the most distinguished [persons] of the trust¬
worthy has related, that, when the news of the accession of
Sultan Salah-ud-Din reached the territories of Rum and
the ]^ai$ars* of the Farangs, a countless army came from
the country of the infidels, and advanced into Sham, and
fought a battle with Sultan $al^-ud-Din before the, gate
of Damashk*. The army of Islam was defeated and over¬
thrown, and the Sultan, flying before them, retired within
the walls of the city of Damashk. The infidels pitched
their camp before the gates of the place, and the Musal-
mans sustained great calamity and misery.

Sultan Salah-ud-Dtn assembled the inhabitants of Dam-
ashk in a certain place, in order to induce them to pledge
themselves to make holy war upon the infidels, and to
attack them and drive them away. He deputed one of the
godly 'Ulama to ascend the pulpit, to speak a few words
in order to incite the people to holy warfare, and urge them

r Nur-ud-Dfn did not die until 569 u., and the Kh uthah was read for the
’Abbots in 567 H.

” The plural form is used in all the copies of the text collated.

* This assertion is totally false : during the whole of the reign of $alah-u<l*
Dtn, and the numerous battles that took place therein, no battle was ever fought
before Damashk between him and the Farangs. The rest of our author’s state¬
ment may be depended Upon accordingly. It is something like 700 horse
routing 8^000 Crusaders, and their dead lying in heaps for miles. Our worthy
author probably considered, when he wrote this, that, as Hindustan was such a
far-off country, he might make any statement for the glorification of the Mus-
salmSn faith with impunity. The great battles that took place during the
reign of $alSh-ud-Dtn, of course, are not mentioned, and were probably
unknown to Minhaj-i-Saiaj, who was “so industrious in collecting information
from ‘trustworthy persons,’ and who often [very I] mentions his authority for
the facts he records ”—of which, probably, the matter of the rings for the ears
of the Crusaders farther on is one. Our author has evidently been confused
about the investment of DamaahV litc year 543 H., some years before Sultan
Nur-ud-Dtn obtained possession of it, when $alah-ud-Dtn was in his eleventh
year, and in the defence of which city his eldest brother, Amtr Nur-ud-Daulah
St^abnn gj^h, so greatly distinguished himself, and died of the wound.s he
received on that occa.sion.

1’ 2

THE TABA^AT-I-NASIRI.

to enter into conflict with the infidels'. The godly eccle¬
siastic, with all sincerity of heart, turned his face towards
Salah-ud-Dtn, and said:—“ Oh, Salah-ud>Dtn, from thy
mouth, thy tongue, and thy person, emanateth the effluvium
of Satan’s urine i How canst thou expect that the Most
High God will ratify thy vow ? how can it be regarded as
real and sincere ?”

This reproof, by the grace of God, took effect upon the
august heart of Salah-ud-Dtn. He got up, and on the
hand of that godly ecclesiastic he expressed contrition, and
renounced wine and all other sins*. The people, with sin¬
cere eagerness and willingness, renewed to him their vows
to undertake holy war; and from that very spot they
turned their faces in the direction of the scene of holy
warfare. The whole of the people issued from the city, and
they fell upon the army of the infidels. The Most High
God sent them heavenly assistance, and the enemies of the
faith were defeated and overthrown, and such a vast num¬
ber of them were sent to Hell by the stroke of the sword
of the defenders of the true faith, as cannot be numbered
or computed*. The whole of the Maliks* [princes], and

* ^alS^-ud-Dtnvas too wise to trust to “the people " to make holy war and
defend his cities. He depended more upon his hardy troops, well knowing
that rabble cannot be turned into soldiers at a nod of the hea^

* See beginning of note *, p. 216. Our author confounds both times as
well as events.

* $al&t^-ud-Dtn’s total overthrow, near ’Asfpihin, at the head of an immense
force by the sick king Baldwin lV.->-at the time that $al2t^*ud-Dtn marched
against Jerusalem in Nov. 1179 A.D. = 575 h., when Odo de St. Amand, the
Master of the Temple, at the head of eighty of his knights rode through $alah-ud-
Dtn’s MamlQk body-guard of a thousand picked men, in coats of mail and saffron
coloured mantles, and penetrated to $alkh-nd-Dtn’s own tent, from which he
with difficulty escaped almost naked, and had scarcely time to scramble up the
bock of a fleet dromedary and make for the desert<—is an event which our
anthor would scorn to chronicle. On this occasion, pigeons spread over Egypt
the triumphant news of a victory,.in order, as the Arab chroniders say, “ to ftUet
tk* minds 0/ thtpeople," although scarcely one of the Egyptian army ever got
back to E^pt again. Neither would our author condesomd to chronide the
crushing defeat, inflicted upon $aUih*nd-Dtn and his immense host, by Richard
Ccrar-de-Lion, and his Frendi and Burgundian allies, near Arsflf, in 1191 a,i>.
=-587 K., nor the alacrity with which, soon after, he agreed to enter into a
treaty with Richard [who bad rebellion at home to crush], when his forces were
in such a woeful plight, but the real state of his affairs unknown to the
Christians.

« The Word Malik may mean kit^ here ; and our author might have desired
his readers to believp that aU the kings of the Franks were made captive.

331

THE KURDlAH MALIKS OF SHAM.

nobleSj and chief personages among the Farangs wens
made captives.

The Islamis having become victorious and triumphant,
Sultan Salah-ud-Din directed every one to devise [means]
for the disposal of the Farang captives. At last the Sultan
determined to set the whole of them at liberty, and they
were set free accordingly; and he made them signify their
repentance, and conferred gifts uppn them. After they had
departed to the distance of a day’s journey, they sent a
representation to the Sultan, saying:—“ We are all your
servants, set at liberty by you : send to each of us a ring
that we may insert it in our ears*, and then we will depart.”
The Sultan commanded that a sufficient number of rings
should be prepared, of pure gold, sufficient to supply every
one of them with one of the weight of one mish^l*; and they
were sent to them, and the whole of the liberated captives
inserted the rings in their ears, and they went away; and
of that host not one person ever again came to fight against
the Sultan’s troops.

Sultan Sal^-ud-Din became firmly established, and
his illustrious deeds in Islam will endure. He reigned for
a very long period, and died. He had six sons, whose
titles were as follows' Malik-u*-Zahir, Malik-ul-Affal,

Probably he heard something about $ala^>ud-IMn’s encoonten with the I .a tin
Christians and the battle of Tiberias, just before the capitulation of Jerusalem in
583 H., and has confounded them with the investment of DamaahlF i>y
Emperor Conrad and Louis VII. in 54 * **., some years before the death of
Zan^, NOr.ud-Dtn’s father, when $aii^<ud-Dtn was about nine years old.
He has made a precious hash of fhe account of the Kurdish rulers, and of
^alSh'Ud-Dtn’s reign in' particular.

* Rings in the ears are emblems of slavery. Bigoted Mullas, like our author,
stick at no fiUsehoods in their endeavours to e nh ance the deeds of their co¬
religionists ; but the ’Arab chroniclers of the Crusades are very different, and
their writings, generally, bear the stamp of truth. I need scarcely say that
their accounts are very different to our author’s, and that such an absurd state¬
ment will not be found in any of their writings.

* He kno'ws all about the rings and their wmght, but he does not know how
long $aUl(i-nd-I>tn ruled, or when he died. All his sovereigns reign “for a
long period, and die and the same stereotyped expression answers for Asad-
nd-Dtn, $alSh*ud-Dtn’s uncle, who never reigned at all, but ■was the Waztr of
Egypt for sixty-five days, and for ^al&h*ud-Otn, who reigned [after Nur-ud-
Dtn’s death] from 569 to 589 H.

' $aUih-ud-Dln had a number of sons, but the names of six only have been
recorded ; the others may have died very young. The correct titles and names
of the six referred to are as follows;—

1. Abd-l-^asan-i-’Alt, Malik-ul-Af^, Nur-ud-Dtn, who was the eldest

322

THE JABA^AT-I.NA^IRI.

Malik-ul-’Aziz, Malik-ul>Mu]ttsin, Malik-ul-Mushtammir.
and Malik-u9-Salib<

VI. MALIK-UL-AF?AL*,’ALi, SON OF ^ALA^^-UD-DIN, YCSUF,
SON OF AIYCB, AL-KURDi.

Malik-ul-Af;al, ’Ali, was the heir of Sultan Sala^t-ud-Dln,
Yusuf; and on the death of the Sultan he ascended the
throne of the territories of Damashk and Sham*.

All presented themselves before him, and paid him hom¬
age, and submitted to him, with the exception of Malik-ul-
’Aziz, his brother, who was ruler of Mi$r. He led an army
into Sham in order to claim the sovereignty from ’Aziz;
and Malik-ul-’Adil, Abu-Bikr, son of Aiyub, the brother of
[the late] Salah-ud-Din, and who held the territory of
Diyar-i-Bakr, took part with [his nephew] Malik-ul-’Aziz.
They invested Malik-ul-Afzal within the walls of Damashk.
and for a considerable time contention continued between
them. At length it was agreed that Damashk should be
given up to Malik-ul-’Aziz, and peace was effected. The
territory of Sar-hadd*, which is a tract of country in
Sham, was assigned to Malik-ul-Af?al.

son, and the heir-apparent. 2. Malik-ul-’Azlz, ’Imad-ad-Dln, AbQ-l-Fath,
’Usman, -who was the favourite son. 3. Malik-ut-fahir, Qhi^9-nd-Dtn,
Abu-Man;ur- 1 -Ghnzt. 4. Malik-us-Zaiir, Al-Mu i^h tammir, Mu^afiar-ud-Dtn,
Abu-l-lJ^asun, Abu-l-'Abt»s-i-Hufr, full brother of ^fir. 5. Malik-u^-^ahir,
the remainder of whose titles and names are not mentioned, neither are the titles

Malik-ul-Muhsin,” nor “ Malik-u;-$alih'’ mentioned except by our author.
6. Malik-uy-^hid, Majir-ud-Dfn, Abu-Sultman-i-Da’ud. lie was the twtljih
son of $alah-ud-Din, and full brother of ^hir.

* For his correct name and titles see note 1 above. He was tiie eldest son
of Sultan $alah-nd-D{n, and his father’s heir-apparent. On the death of his
father, at Oamashk. where Aff al then was, and which he held the government
of, he assumed the sovereignty over that territory, whilst his brother, 'Azfz,
assumed sovereignty over the Diy&r-i-Mifriah, of which he held charge.
Another brother, Malik-uf-Zahir, held l^lab. Contention went on between
the brothers, Af;^ and ’Aztz, the latter supported by his uncle ’Adil, for a
coirsiderable time, the details of which are too long for insertion here. At last,
Aff al was invested in Damashk and made prisoner, and a portion of territory
on the frontier was assigned to him.

* Other writers place Malik-nl-’Aztz next after his father, as he assumed
the sovereignty over the territory of Mifrtah, and overcame his brother, Malik-
ul-Affai, who held Sliam.

> The word here used is unintelligible. It is written in different ways In
nearly every copy and also >a' C . > Yafa’l says, ^Ua which

means "a place on the frontier.” There is a place ctdled “$ar-Uli8d.”

THE KURDlAH MAUKS OF SHAM. saj

He was a learned and very enlightened man*, and com¬
posed beautiful poetry. The situation in which he was
[now] placed, together with the condition of his brother,
who was named ’Ugman [Malik-ul-’Aziz], and their uncle,
Abu-B^ikr [Malik-ul-’Adil], he depicted in the two following
couplets, and sent them to the Court of Baghdad, to the
S^ialifah, Un-Na§ir-ud-Dtn-Ullah ; for the office of Kh alifah
had fallen to Imam, Un-Na$ir. The two couplets are as
follows :—

“ My lord t AbS-Bikr and his companion, ’Ugman,

Have, by the sword, deprived ’Alt of his right.

Remark the fatality of the name; how it suffers, from the last.

The same wrong as from the first [generation] it endured *.*’

Alter some time expired, Malik-ul-’Aziz died, and Malik
ul-Af^al was entreated to come into* Mi§r. He proceeded
thither, and from- thence he brought an army into Sham.
Malik-ul-’Aziz had made over Sham to his uncle, Malik-ul-
’Adil, and he and Malik-ul-Afzal came to a battle, and the
latter was defeated*. At length, however, Malik-uI-Afjal
. chanced to have a meeting with his uncle, who gave him
Samisat*. He remained there for a long time, and he
died\

VII. MALIK.UL.’AZlZ, ’USMAN, SON OF gALA^-UD.DIN,
YCSUF, son of AIYOB, AL-KURDl.

The name of Malik-ul-’Aziz was ’Usman; and, when
Suljtan Salah-ud-Din came to the throne of Sham, and the

Other writers say Af^al was a state prisoner when his brother die<l, and that
he was invited to Migr to act as Ata-bak to ’Aziz’s son, Malik-ul-Mansur.

* The celebrated historian, the learned Abu-l-Fatb-i-Nasr-ullah, son of
?lya-ud-Dlli, Mubammad, Shtbant. sumamed Ibn Agtr, was Malik-ul-Afgal's
Waztr.

* Yafa’t has four lines more. The reference of course is to the Shaltfah
’Alt and the two first Kh alifahs.

* All the copies of the text are alike here ; but, as ’Aztz died in Migr,
Afjal was invited to come to Migr. See last paragraph of the next reign,
page 224.

* After assuming the throne of Migr after ’Aztz’s death, Afgal invested his
uncle, ’Adil, within the walls of DamashVi and reduced him to great straits ;
but his son, Kimil, having advancetl from the eastern parts with an army,
raised the investment, and the father and son overcame^Afjal, and deprived
him of Migr, and he was fain to content himself with^^amigit.

* Some write this name Samtsat, others, ShamisSt, and some, $amlgit.
The last, however, seems most correct.

f In 622 H.

394

THE TABA¥AT.I.NA$IRL

d(Hninions of ShSm and the territories of Mi$r, Diyar-t>
Bakr, Filisttn, and Sikandariah came under his sway, he
conferred the throne of Mijr upon his eldest son®, who bore
the title of Malik-ul-’Aztz. He brought that country
under subjection, and was a man of tact and capacity, and
in the guardianship of that country, he showed many
laudable dispositions.

When his father, Sultan Salah-ud-Din, died, Malik-ul-
’Aziz led an army from Mijr smd appeared before
Damashk ; and his uncle, Malik-ul-’Adil, joined him. He
wrested the territories of Diyar-i-Bakr and Damashllj: * out
of the hands of his brother, Malik-ul-Af|;al, and gave up to
his uncle, Malik-ul-’Adil, Sham and Damash^ and the
whole of that region, and returned again to Mi$r.

A short time afterwards the decree of destiny overtook
him, and he sustained a fall from his horse, and broke his
neck, and he died. After this occurrence, Malik-ul-Af^al
came into Mi$r, and took possession of that country'.

VlII. malik-ul-’AdIl, abO.bikr*, son of aivOb, son of

SHAdI, AL.KURD 1 .

Some time subsequent to Malik-ul-’Adil’s having as¬
cended the throne of the kingdom of Sham, and after he
had defeated Malik-ul-Af;pal, who had brought an army
from the side of Mi^r, and he [’Adil] had reduced the
various provinces of the territory [entrusted to him] under
his sway, the daughter of a ^ai^ar of the Farangs* entered

* ’Aztt was the second, not the eldest son. Affal was the eldest of
$alah-ad-Dtn’s sons, according to Yafa’t and other chroniclers. See note 1
p. 321 . ’Aztz was merely his father’s lieutenant in Mi;r.

* The first attempt on the p'art of ’Aztz to deprive his brother of Damaihk
did not succeed ; but on the second occasion he succeeded.

* See page 223, and note

* His correct titles and name are, Malik-ul-’Adil, Saif-ud-Dtn, AbQ-Bikr-i-
Muhammad.

^ Our author has neglected—for a very good reasMi, doubtless—to name his
."trustworthy” authority for this stateriient, of a piece with the "rings,” and
the like. There is nothing whatever contained in any of the authmrities I have
consulted to warrant such an assertion, not even that a Christian female had
had the misfortune to be his captive, and was immured in his h<t>um, much
less a Christian princess. Such a circtunstance, if true, was not Ukely to have
been passed over in silence.

THE KURDlAH MALIKS OP SHAM. aag

his ffaratHy and he married her, and that daughter bore him
several children.

This Malik-ul-’Adil was a sagacious, discerning, compe¬
tent, experienced, and crafty man, and he ruled for a great
number of years. He held possession of the different parts
[of his territory], to the best of his judgment and ability;
and his adversaries kept quietly and peaceably each within
his own dominions, and hence he had but seldom to carry
on hostilities \

He had several distinguished sons, who acquired g^eat

* Malik'Ul-’Adil accompanied his uncle, Asad-ud-Dtn, when the latter was
despatched into Mifr by Nur>ud-Dfn, at which time $alaih-ud-Dtn also went,
as previously related. When l^ah-ud-Dfn acquired power in that country,
he sent his brother, 'Adil, as his representative into Sha m ; and, when $alah-
ud-Dtn marched against Karak, in Rabt’-ul-Awwal, 579 H., *Adil was left in
Mifr, but he was summoned from thence, with all the available troops, to
join $alati-ud>Dfn, as the Christians had assembled in strong force with
hostile intent against the MusalmSns. ’Adil joined him there accordingly,
with an imipense army, in Sha ’ian of the same year. When $al 2 h-ud-Dfn
gained possession of Qalab, in the same year, he bestowed it upon ’Adil,
having taken it from his own son Malik-ut-TShir, to whom he had just before
entrusted it. $alah-ud-Dtn was in the habit of placing his strongholds in
charge of hJs brothers and nephews and other kinsmen, and not of entrusting
them to bis sons. At last, Sulfman, one of the Amtrs [nobles] of l^^ab, an old
friend of $alaIi>ud-Dtn, expostulated with him on the subject and it took effect,
and he at once gave back H<tlsb to Jlhir. When Sultan $alah*ud>Dtn went
against Maufil, in Sha’ban. 5S1 H., and was taken ill, and a peace was con¬
cluded between him and 'Izz-ud-Dfn Mas’ud, of Mausil, he was joined at ^^arran,
by his brother ’Adil, on whom he had conferred the fiefs of H<trran, Ruha
[Edessa], and MlaiarVifn [Martyropolis], alter which the Sultan returned to
DamaBh^-

After the Crusaders, under Richard Coeur-de-Lion and Philip Augustus, took
’Aka [Acre], in Jamadt-ul-A](fiir, 587 H., when *’ the Musalmans sustained such
a great calamity,” and the Christians were preparing to march against ’AsValan
[Ascalon], $aiah*ud-Dtn, in consultation with the chiefs of his forces, deter¬
mined to entrust his brother ’Adil with a portion of his army, to hold the
Christians in check, whilst he himself, with the remainder, proceeded to
*Astalan to raze it, in order to deter the enemy from marching thither. Whilst
engaged in this operation, during the same night, a messenger arrived from
Malik-ul-’Adil, saying that the Christians were willing to make peace, if the coast
towns were ceded to them. ^lih-ud-Dln, finding his troops so disorganized
and dispirited, was under the necessity of agreehig, and he wrote to ’Adil to make
an accommodation on the best terms he could. The authorities, from which these
details are taken, agree generally with European chroniclers of the Crusades at
this period, and their writings are free from such nonsense as our author writes.

’Adil did not succeed to the sovereignty of Egypt and Damaahli until after
the death of his nephew ’Aztz, and ousting the latter’s son, Malik-ul-ManjSr,
under pretence of serving whom he came into Mtfr, from the former country. The
Khutbah was read for him there in Shawudd, 596 h., and at 59^

when he obtained sway over it and other parts of ShUm and the eastern provinces.

Ma6 THE TABA«LAT-X-Nil$IRL

renown, such as Malik-ul-K 3 mil, Malik-ul-Mua^sam-i-’Isa,
Malik-ul-Ashraf. Malik-ul-Fa’tz*, Malik-ul-Q 3 xazi *, Malik-
ul-Awhad, Malik-ul-Mamdud, Malik-ul-Amjad, and Malik-
us'I^alih-i-Isma’il. Each one of them was a sovereign»over
a different tract of territory comprised within his do¬
minions ; and the annals of the good works, and the cir¬
cumstances of the sovereignty of his sons, will remain
[inscribed] on the pages of time, in the countries of Hijaz,
^am, and Yaman, until the resurrection at the last day.

Eadi of the different portions of his dominions Malik-ul-
*Adil conferred upon one of his sons, whilst he himself
continually moved about from one part to another with his
forces, and, with equity and sagacity, guarded and watched
over them.

He always had a bow at his side, and such was his great
strength, that no one in that part, or at that time, could
bend his bow on account of its great tallness. He was
noted, both by friend and foe, for his truthfulness of word.
The whole of the enemies of his country, who were the
infidels of Rum and the Farangs, placed implicit trust in
his word; for the dust of falsehood had never soiled the
skirts of the robe of his word and his promise. Throughout
his dominions no human being suffered from tyranny or
oppression.

He reigned in tranquillity and affluence for a period of
thirty odd years, and died*.

• ’Abid, in one copy. • in two copies.

^ The word used by onr author is “ BSdgli^,” but his sons were only bis
lieutenants charged with the administration, subject to his control. When
be became firmly tttablished in his dominions, he divided them among
his sons, giving each of them charge of one or more provinces. To Malik-ul-
Kimil he assigned the Diyar-i-Mifilah, to Malik-ul-Mua(tam the territory of
Sl^Unfah, to Malik .ul-Aaliraf the Sharktah [the eastern parts], and to Malik-ul-
Awhad the territory of Miafarktn; and, in 6lo H., after he had established his
authority over Yaman, and Awhad had been sent to MtiftUktn, another son,
Malik-ubMas’ud, was sent to Yaman.

• Malik-ul-’Adil died in Jam&dt-ul-A]dlir, 615 H., near the village of
’AUtn, in sight of Damashk, when moving against the Christians, who had
entered the coasts of ShSm. Hearing of his death, they gave up their designs
on S]|Sm, and turned their thoughts towards Egypt, and appeared before Dimyit
[Damietta]. He was a man of great wisdom and intellect, of considerable judg¬
ment and conception, of good disposition and temperament, constant to* his re-
1 igious duties and attendance at public wordtip, a follower of the orthodox, inclined
to learned men, and, altogether, a fortunate and- august personage. He was
alike abstemious in his food, and moderate in his passions.

THE KURDlAII MALIKS OF SfiAM.

337

IX. MALIK-UL-MUAZZAM*, ’ISA, SON OF ABC-BIKR, SON OF
AIYCB, SON OF ^AdI, AL-KURDL

Malik-ul-Mua^^am was a learned monarchy and endowed
with great accomplishments, and Alinighty God had
dignified him with great attainments.

Among the sons of Malik-iil-’Adil, who observed the
ordinances of the followers of the traditions of the sect of
Shafi’l. Malik-ul-Mua^^am * was the only one who was of
the sect of the great Imam, Abu Hanifah>i-Nu’man, son of
Sabit, Al-Kufl.

During the troubles in the territories of ’Ajam, when the
'Ulama of Kh urasan, and Mawar-un-Nahr, became dispersed
at the period of the inroad of the infidels of Chin. Imam
Sharaf-ud-Din. Adimi, who was a prodigy in the science of
theology and religious jurisprudence, and Imam Jamal-ud-
Din,J^a$lri*, whowas a master in the science of physiognomy,
came and presented themselves at his Court. Malik-ul-
Mua^^am became the disciple of these two great Imams,
and other eminent ’Ulama,—the mercy of the Almighty
be upon the whole of them 1—and assigned them emolu¬
ments and rewards, and fixed places for their abode. He,
however, sought mostly to secure the presence of Muham¬
mad Husam*, Shibanl.

The brother of Malik-ul-Mua^?am, Malik-ul-’Adil, was
by the same mother as himself, and for a long time was

* Most other- tniters place Malik•ul-KSmil, the other son of ’Adil. next oAcr
his father as ruler of Mi^r; but our author has reversed them. Malik-ul-
Mua^fam’s proper titles and name are, Al-Malik-ul-Muasfam, S]jaraf-ud-Dtn,
’isd. To read our author’s account of him, one would imagine that he reigned
over the whole of his father’s territories, but such was not the case. He held
a large portion of Sham, but never reigned in Mi^r at all ; and, at his death, at
DamaabV, >n 634 H., his son, Malik-un-Nafir, $alah*ud- 0 }n-i>£>a’ud, succeeded
him as ruler of that territory. The latter died in 650 H.

> One author says of him :—"He was a man of great firmness and resolution,
bold and intrepid, of great stateliness and gravity, high-minded and endowed
with many virtues and excellencies, the friend and patron of ecclesiastics and
learned men, strongly attached to the doctrines of the j^Iantfah sect, in fact, the
only one of the race of Aiyub who w.is a follower of Abu I^nifah. He had
performed the pilgrimage to Makkah and Madtnah, and was, altogether, one
of the best and the most inestimable of men. ”

* Also written, ^a^irt.

3 In two copies, ]|[^asan.

aaS THE TABA^T-I.NA$Ild.

his brother's associate and lieutenant In the territory of
Damashl^ [?].

Malik-ul-Mua;^am reigned for a considerable period, and
died.

X. MALIK-UL-KAMIL ♦, SON OF ABO-BIKR, son of aiyOb,
SON OF ShADI, AL-KURDl.

Malik-ul-Kamil was his father’s heir, and ascended the
throne of Misr after his father’s death. On the decease of
his brother, Malik-ul-Mtia^^am, he brought the territories
of Sham under his jurisdiction. He conferred the sove¬
reignty of the territory of Yaman upon his Son, who was
named Malik Mas’Qd, and also brought Hijaz under his
sway.

* His names are Abu-l-Ma’alt, Mu^^ammad, entitled Al-Malik-ul-KSmil,
NSfir-ud'Dln. He vras about the greatest of his family, and, of course, our
author has said the least about him. He held the government of the territory
of Mi^r during his father’s lifetime, and at his death assumed the sovereignty
over it. It .will be remembered that his father, Malik-ul-’Adil, died when on
bis way to oppose the Christians, who, on hearing of his death, turned their
arms against. Mijr. They had now reached DimySt- Malik-ul-KSmil
assembled a large force to repel them, and was joined by his brother, Malik-ul*
Mua;;am, I.ord of DamashV, who by his tact prevented Kamil’s being
dethroned by his own nobles, and his brother Malik-ul-FS’tz, SabiV-ud-Dln,
Ibrahim. After the Christians had taken DimySt, they determined to advance
to I^ahirah and Mi;r ; but the Almighty gave Kamil success, and the Christians
abandoned the strong position they had taken up in the prosecution of their
design, and an accommodation was come to nth of Rajab, 6l8 H., and the
Christians returned to their own territories, after they had remained between
Sha m and Mi5r for forty months [four ?] and seventeen days.

Malik-ul-Kamil raised a dome over the tomb of ImSm on the banks

of the Nil ; and, when his brother, Malik-ul-Muaeeam of ShSm. died, and the
latter’s son, Malik-un-Na^ir, succeeded him, Kfimil marched from Mi^r to
deprive him of his territory. He was joined by another brother, Malik-ul-
Aahraf, Mueaffar-ud-Dtn, Musa ; and, having subdued Shim in 625 H., he
bestowed it upon Ashraf instead of the eastern provinces, which he resumed,
and set out for those parts. It was at this time that Sultan JalM-ud-Dln,
Kh warazm Sha h, invested Shalat [also called AldllSt]. Kamil subsequently
made his son, Najm-ud-Dtn, Abu-l-Mueaffar, Aiyub, his lieutenant over the
eastern parts, and his youngest son, Saif-ud-Din, Abu-Bikr, lieutenant in the
Mifrtah territory, and another son, Mas’ud, he sent into Yaman. The latter
annexed Makkah, and the HijUz territory ; and the empire of Klmil became of
vast extent When the 2 Lhattb of Makkah, on Fridays, prayed for him, he
styled him, ” Lord of Makkah, ’Ubaidtan, Yaman, Baidkn, Mifr, Sa’tdan,
Sham, SanSdtan, the Jazfiilh, and Walfdan, Sultan-ul-Eabtlatain wa Rabb-ul-
’Alamatain-ush.Shartl. Abu- 1 -Ma’Slt, Muhammad, Al-Malik-ul-Kamil, NSfir-
ud-Diii, Kha ltl.i-Amtr-ul-Mumintn.” I have not space to say more. He
died at DamashV Rajab, 635 H.

THE KURDlAH MALIKS OF SHAM. 239

In the direction of Rum and 'Arab, he undertook
numerous expeditions against infidels, and waged holy war
as by orthodox law required ; and, after having ruled over
the kingdom for some time, he died.

XI. MALIK.U§-§ALI 9 , son of al-kAmil, son of abO-bikr,
SON OF AIYOB, son OF ^ADI, AL-KURDI.

Malik-u$>Salih was his father’s heir, and, when Malik-ul-
Kamil departed this life, Malik-u$-Salih' ascended the

* The nearer he approaches his own time, the more our author blunders,
and the shorter and more confused his accounts become. Here, the ruler of
Mifr is said to be ruler of Sh^ni, and vice vers 6 . After the death of Malik*
ut-Kfirail, his empire soon fell into utter disorder and confusion. His son,
Malik-nl-’Adil, Abu-Bikr, who was quite a youth, succeeded ; and his cousin,
Malik-ul-Jawad, Mufaffar-ud-Dtn, Yunas, son of Shams-ud-Dtn, MaudQd,
son of 'Adil [$alati'Ud-Dtn’s brother, and father of Malik-ul-Kamil], became
his deputy with the accord of the nobles of Kamil. Malik-ul-’Adil exercised
the sovereignty, or held the name of sovereign rather, for about two years,
when his nobles assembled together at Balbfs, seized him, and sent for his
brother, MALIK-U§-$ALIH, NAJM-UD-DiN, AIYOB, who was at
Damaaill^ which he had promised to give up to Malik-ul-Jawad for other
territory. On this, §aiit’s uncle, also called Malik- u5-§alit, Tmad-ud-Dtn,
Lord of Ba’albaV, being supported by Muj 5 hid-ud-Din, Asad-i-gher-i-Koh,
Lord of I^im;, when, §alih [son of Kamil] set out towards Mifriah, and
remained encamped at Balbts for some time, made a dash upon Damagblc and
gained possession of it. Malik-u?-§alib’s [son of Kamil] adherents, fearing
for the safety of their-families and homes at DamaahVi deserted him, and left
him nearly alone in his camp at Balbts, and went over to $Mih, the uncle.
The younger $alih,‘ before he could fly to some place of safety, was pounced
upon by Malik-un-Na§ir, son of Malik-ul-Muajpfam [son of the first ’Adil],
Lord of Karuk, who carried him off to that stronghold ; but he set him at
liberty again the same year, 637 H., and at the request of’Adil’s nobles, and
attended by the same NSjir and his forces, Malik-u?-§alih [son of Kamil]
entered Ifahirah in Zt-Ifa’dah of the same year. The author from whose work
most of these extracts have been taken, says, '• I was present there at tMe time,
and Malik-ul-’Adil was brought forth seated in a covered litter, and under on
scort, and immured in the fortress of SultSnIah.”

Malik-u$-$alih regained possession of Damaallti in 643 H., and proceeded
thither, and, when on his way back to Mijrtah, was taken dangerously ill, and
had to remain at Shamum. The Christians had resolved to attack his terri¬
tory, and they reached Dimyat on Friday, aoih of §afar, 647 H. The city
was totally abandoned by its inhabitants, who fled. They gained possession
of the place on the fisllowing Sunday. Malik-u?-§alili was removed from
to Man^Grah, and had to be kept there, so ill was he, until the night
of 14th of Sha ’han- when he died. His ranains were deposited in the Jadtdah
Masjid, and for near three months his death was concealed, until his son,
Malik-ul'Muaf^m, TurSn Skah. arrived there from his fief of Kaif [or Kayif i
when the Tthn^hah was read for him, and the father’s death was made known.

ajo THE TABA?AT-I-NASIRI.

throne of Mi^r, and took possession of the donvinions of
his father and his- grandfather.

According to the best of his capability, he provided for
and advanced the sons of his uncles, and his own brothers,
and took measures for the safety pf his dominions ; but his
life was a brief one, and, after a short time, he died, leaving
young children behind him.

Trustworthy persons have related, that, during the
calamities and troubles which happened in Iran, when the
irruption of Qiingiz Khan took place, a body of Turks
of ibiwarazm. and [several] nobles of the Khwarazm-Shahi
dynasty, retiring before the infidels of Chin, after the defeat
of Sultan Jalal-ud-Din, Mang-barni, son of Muhammad,
Khwarazm Shah, reached the territories of Sham and Mi§r,
and possessed themselves of the dominions of the ’Adili
dynasty. Some they slew, some passed away, and some
remained. May the Almighty have mercy upon the whole
of them!

Turan Shlh did not get on with his father’s slaves [nobles and chiefs], and,
after he had put some of them to death for their rebellious conduct, the
remainder combined against him, and put him to death in Muharram, 648 H.

Malik-ul.’Adil died in confinement in 646 H., and left a young son named
Mughtj-ud-Dln, ’Umr. He subsequently had possession of Karak and its
dependencies, but was invested therein by the rebel slaves, and capitulated on
terms in 662 h., but was put to death by the usurper of the Mi^rtah throne.
Most authors consider the Aiyub dynasty to have ended with Malik-ul-Muaj-
f am, Turan Shah. There were other branches of the same family, who ruled
in different parts until the irruption of the Mu^hals, but I have not space to
mention them here.

SECTION XVI.

THE MALIKS OF THE KHWARAZM-SHAHIAH DYNASTY.

Respecting this notice of the Maliks of the Turks, and
the Sultans of Khwarazm. the Almighty’s humble servant,
Mlnhaj-i-Saraj, Jutjanl, states, that, as the account of the
rulers of the different nations, from first to last, is now
being compiled in the name of his Majesty, the Sultan of
Suites of both Turk and ’Ajam, Na^ir-ud-Dunya wa ud-
Din, Abu-l-Mu?affar-i-Matimud, son of the Sultan I-yal-
timish—May the Almighty perpetuate his dominion and
his sovereignty!—he thinks it expedient to enter here
the account of the dynasty of the Sultans and Maliks of
Khwarazm. the standards of whose sovereignty, after the
decline of the Sanjari dynasty, began to float on high; into
whose possession the whole of the territories of Iran came,
after the extinction of the dominion of the Maliks of Ghur
and Ghaznln ; who undertook numerous expeditions against
infidels, and waged many holy wars; the monuments of
the goodness of whom abound in the land of Iran; and,
who, in fact, were the last of the Sultans of Islam*.

I. ¥UTB-UD.DUNYA wa UD.DiN, I-BAK, THE TURK*.

The ancestry of these Maliks was related by Malik

> What of the slave who reigned at Dihlf, who refused shelter to Sultan
JaUU*ud-Dtn—he who is, and whose descendants are, so often styled " Sult&n
over both Turk and 'Ajam,” and “ Sultan of Sultans of Islam” ?

* Our author, in his account of the first two personages of this dynasty,
differs wholly from other writers, and, as he has constantly made great
blunders respecting other dynasties, and at times quoted authors incorrectly,
his statements here, although obtained, as he asserts, from a descendant of
those rulers, must be received at their worth.

Baihakt, quoting from Bu-Rfhan, mentions that the territory of Ehwirazm
always formed a separate sovereignty from the period when a kinsman of
Baht5m*Giir, the famous monarch of 'Ajam, acquired power over it, and also
after its conquest by the 'Arabs; and further, that even after the 'Arab con¬
quest it was not considered as a dependency of Ehurasan, like Khutliln and

»3* THS TABA¥AT-l.NA$IItf.

Taj-ud-Din, Binal-Tigtn, who came from the border of Kir-

C]|<i 8 hS»t 3 n were, even in the time of the T^hirfs. Rulers bearing the title
of Shw&raran g^ah are mentioned upwards of a century and a half previous
to the dynasty now under notice, which I must briefly refer to. Our author
himself adverts [page 38] to ’Abd-ullah, son of Ashkan, Khwarazm Sh ah , as
early as 332 H. ; and in the present Section farther on [page 233] again refers
to them. In 386 h., mention is made of another ’Abd-ullah, styled Eiiwarazm
Shiih, who in that year was made prisoner by the forces of Mamun, son of
Muhnnimad, Lord of JQrJanlah of Kh warmni- ’Abd-ullah was taken in fettefs
to JCrjSntah, and subsequently beheaded ; and the whole of Kh wamam passed
under the rule of Mamun, son of Muhammad. The territories of Khwarazm
and JurjSntah, had, for a considerable time, been in the possession of this family,
who are styled Fartghunt, subordinate to the Samanl sovereigns. In 387 H.,
the same year in which N&h, son of Mah^ur, Saman}, Amir Sabuk-Tigin, and
FaUtr-ud-Daulah, Dilami, died, Mamun, Farighunl, died also, and was
succeeded by his son, Abu ’Ali, who was married to a sister of Mahmud of
Uhazntn. ’Alt died in 390 H., and was succeeded by his brother, Abu-U
’AbbSs-i-Mamun [son of MSmun], He de-sitatched an envoy to Mahmud,
asking the latter’s consent to his [Abu-l-’AbbiU] espousing his brother’s widow,
the sister of Mahmud, which request was acquiesced in. This Abu-l-’Abbas
was the patron of Bu-Rth^n, who passed seven years in his service. The
Shaltfah, ^dlr B'illah, sent him a dress of honour, a title, and addressed
him as Khwarazm Shah ; but, such was ’Abbas’ attachment to [or fear of?]
MahmQd, that he did not make this matter known. In 407 h. his nobles and
troops rose against him, because he meditated acknowledging the suzerainty
of Mahmad. put him to death, and set up his nephew in his stead. Mahmud
marched into Khwarazm, to revenge his brother.in-law, slew Alb-Tigtn [some
call him Nial-Tigtn] ’Abbas’ chamberlain, and other ringleaders, and the
murderers of ’Abbas, annexed the territory, and conferred the govermnent of it
upon his [own] Great Chamberlain, Altun-Taah, with the designation of Khwa¬
razm Shah. Abu Na^r, son of’Abd-ul-l^ir§, Farighunt, Wah of JOrjanan and
the territory of Jawzjanan, of the same family, had died in 402 H., upon which
Mahmud had annexed tliat territoiy, and had sent a Htwan of his own to
administer its affairs.

Altun-Tash, Khwarazm Shah, presented himself at the court of his sove-
reign, Sultan Mas’ud, in 422 H., and died from the effects of a wound received
in battle in 424 H. His son HSrun, who succeeded, became disaffected towards
SultUn Mas’ud, in 425 H., assumed independence, and intrigued with the Turk¬
mans and Saljuhs. This fact our author alludes to at pages 120 and 121, but
says nothing further. Harun was killed in 426'H., and was succeeded by his
brother, Isma’il, who held Kh warazm for a short time; but he was soon after
ousted by Shah Malik, a neighbouring chief, upon whom Sultan Mas’ud con¬
ferred it, provided he could drive out Isma’il. Isma’tl, accordingly, having
been driven out, took shelter with the Saljugs in Kh urasan. In 434 h. Sultan
'J'ughril annexed Kh warazm to his dominions ; and but little is said about it
afterwards until 475 H., when Malik Shah. SaljuVt, conferred the Intendancy
of Khwarazm upon the slave, Nush-Tii^n-i-Gharjah. the father of Kutb-ud-
Htn, Muhammad, the first ruler of the dynasty mentioned by our author.

Balka-Tigtn [Guztdah and Jahan-Ara style him Malka-Tigtn, but it is an
error], one of the slaves and grandees of the court of Malik Shah, who held
the office of Xasht-dar, or Purveyor, purchased Nush-Tigtn. much in the same
manner as Alb-Tigtn, the slave of the Siuaauis, purchased Sabuk-Tigin

*33

THE SHWARAZM-SBAHIAH DYNASTY.

mSn, ih the year 622 H. *, to the aid of the sons * of the Maliks
of Ntmroz, and arrived in that country, and the territories
of Ntmroz were left in his possession.

The author of this book came from TChA esSr of Gh Gr. on
a mission from the august Malik, Rukn-ud-Din, Muham¬
mad, 'Ugman, Maraghani. in order to secure a compact, and
arrived at Farah of Ststan, and proceeded to the presence
of Malik Taj-ud-Dtn, Binal-Tigin.

During the conversation at the interview, Malik Taj-ud-
Din mentioned that Malik Kutb-ud-Din, I-bak, the Turk,
came, with his tribe and kindred, towards Jund and Khwa-
razm, from the side of Suhart*[orSahari], and from among
the tribes of Kifchak* and ^ankuli, and, for a consider¬
able period, dwelt in those tracts, subject to the Kh warazm-
Shahi rulers, Abu Ja’far and Mamun ^ and their posterity,
and used to subsist in the wilds and pasturedands.

upwards of a century before, at Gh arjah of Sainr|can(f. Some consider he
was of i-ghfir descent, and that he was of the Bekdalt [or Begdalt] tribe.
After the decease of Balka-Tigtn, his slave, Nflah-Tigln, who through his
talents and sagacity had risen to distinction, succeeded to the office of
dar ; and as the revenues of the Khwarazm territory were assigned to defray
the expenses of the Purveyorship, in the same manner as those of ShOzistln
were assigned for the expenses of the wardrobe, the government of the territory
whence the expenses of the Purveyorship were drawn was conferred upon
NuSh'Tigln, with the title of Khwarazm ghah.

He placed his eldest son, Kuib-ud-Dln, Muhammad, with a preceptor at
Marw, to be educated in a manner becoming his station, and on the death of
Nuah-Tigtn, his father, in 490 H. [some writers say in 491 H.], the lieutenant
of Suljan Barktariih, in Khurasan, at the recommendation of Sanjar, Bar-
ktaruh’s brother—for Sanjar did not obtain the sovereignty until many years
after—appointed Muhammad, Nuah-Tigtn’s son, after the

removal of Alanjt, son of Jaghdar [some call him Fahhar] to the government
of ELhwarazm ; and the title which his father had held was also conferred upon
him. See page 169, and note *.

* See page 199.

* To the aid of one only ; but all the copies have “sons of the Maliks,” as
above. See page 200.

* One copy has IHi^rt which tiiajf be the most correct; but the

majority of copies of the text have guharl, or gahili'l [>*^]* Neither of
these names occurs in the M.\sAi.ik-w.\-MamAlik. The latter word, if not a
proper name, may be the plural of ’Arabic ^ signifying “extending,
wide [as plains], wild, desert,” in which case the broad and extensive deserts
of Turkistan would be meant. Yafa -1 mentions guhAra in one or two places.

* In some feWeopies of the original, and in Yafa-t, this name is written with
fch —Khifcbak. It is the name of a tribe of Turks, and of a desert of
Turkistan, commonly called Dasht-i-ffipcllSV-

J These were of the Fartghunt family mentioned in note *, preceding page.

Q

*34

THE TABA^T.X-NA$1R1.

As ^utb-ud-Din was a spirited, enterprising, and high-
minded chief, and of admirable temperament, the leader¬
ship of the forces of the Maliks of Kh warazm was entrusted
to him, until, as Providence had decreed, the ruler of
Khw arazm at that period died, and no son of his survived
who could take his place, and his dominions were left
without a sovereign. A daughter, however, survived him ;
and the whole of the great nobles of Kh warazm agreed
among themselves, and gave that daughter in marriage to
Malik Ku(b-ud-Din. The espousals having been concluded,
the name of sovereign was assigned to that daughter, and
the viceroyalty was conferred upon Malik Ku$b-ud-Din,
the Turk, her husband.

He brought the whole of the territory of Kh warazm
under his jurisdiction, and the tracts on the confines under
subjection*; and by his alertness and his sagacity, restrained
enemies and tyrants from violence and sedition. He also
guarded the frontiers of Kh wArazm Shah from the infidels
of Sa^^sin, Bulghar, and Kifchak.

The Almighty so decreed that Malik ^utb-ud-Dtn had
a son born to him by that lady [the daughter of the late
ruler], and they gave him the name of Muhammad ; and,
after the termination of the lives of his mother and father,
the sovereignty of Kh warazm devolved upon him.

II. MALIK TAJ-UD-DIN, MUHAMMAD*. SON OF I-BAK.

When the mother of Taj-ud-Din, Muhammad, passed
away, and his father died, he became ruler of the kingdom

* From 'wbat our author says, the reader would imagine that X^utb-ud-Dtn,
was an independent ruler, but such was not the case. He was ever loyal to
his SoljfiVf suzerain, and was in the constant habit of attending the court of
Snlt&n Sanjar every other year. When he returned to Kh warazm, his son,
who succeeded him, Itsiz - called Utsuz by our author, and, by his account,
](;iutb-ud-Dfn’8 grandson—took his father's place at court, nominally as his
representative, but in reality as security for his father’s good faith. X^ulb-ud-
Dtn, Muhammad, died in 521 H. [some say in 522 H.], and was succeeded by
Itsiz. By no other writer is ^utb-ud-Dfn styled !-bak. Our author’s account
of him is confused, and he has evidently lost himself here again. At page 148
he says Sanjar “conferred” ShwSrazm “upon the son of Shw 3 razin Shah,
who was one of his servants, who was the father of I-yal-Arsalan, who was the
father of Takigb, father of Muhammad;” and, at page 169, states that he gave
the throne of Kh wSrazm to Malik Utsuz.

* The father of Itsiz [Utsuz of our author], according to all authors of

»3S

THB JEUiWARAZM-SilAHlAH DYNASTY.

of Khw5razm in succession to them. He also had a
brother, and of his own father and mother, younger than
himself; and upon him he conferred the government of the
tribes of l^ankull and Kifchal^. from which their own race
had sprung, his brother having solicited it, and Malik T5j-
ud'Dtn acceded to his request.

That same brother had sons' who acquired great dis¬
tinction, and became powerful Maliks in Khurasan and
Tra^. During the time of Sultan Takish-i- Kh warazm
Sh&h, and his son, Suljtan Muhammad, they were Maliks
of 2£hurasan, like as was Ulugh Kh an-i-Abl. Muhammad,
Kh an of Guzarwan*. Subsequently he became Kh an of
Trah under the name of Ata-bak, or preceptor, of the great
Sultan, Rukn-ud-Oin, Gh url Shanast!. son of Muhammad,
Kh warazm Shah.

Ulugh Kh an-i-Abi. Muhammad, had two sons, the
eldest, Taj-ud-Din, Azabar* Shah, and the younger,
Nu^rat-ud-Din, Shah ; and there were likewise

brothers’ sons of Ulugh Kh an-i-Abl. Muhammad, in Hin¬
dustan, such as Malik Firuz-i-I-yal-timi§h, son of SSlar,
and Malik Taj-ud Din, Binal-Tigln, who left Hindustan,
and became Malik of Sistan ; and whose narrative this
is.

This Malik Taj-ud-Dln, Muhammad, son of I-bak, was
an intrepid, just, and resolute sovereign ; and he came to
the Court of the Saljuh sovereigns, and paid homage to

authorhy—in fact, acc rding to all writers but our author—was l^utb-ud-Dtn,
Muhammad, son of NPsh-Tigtn-l-Gharjah. the firit of the dynasty ; and no
person of the above name and title is mentioned by any other writer among
the rulers of Kh wamzm. I suspect our author has done much the same here
as he has In his account of the Salju^s of Rum—mixed up the aflatrs of two
dynasties.

> As other authors do not mention the name of any such ruler as Malik
TSj-ud.Dtn, Itsix being the second of the dynasty, and as our author himself
gives no name to this said brother, although he gives names to his sons, it will
be easily imagined that other authors do not name either the brother or
his sons.

* This name is somewhat doubtful, but the majority of copies have it as
above written ; and, in all probability, it is the place referred to by V&fa-i, up
the valley of the Murijjx'lb river, which he writes Juzarwan. The other copies
of the text have GurdwSn, Gurzawhn, and GQrwSn; and one, which is gene¬
rally pretty correct, has Gujsorw&n—g and j are interchangeable, and jg is
often used for s.

* This name too Is doubtful: there are scarcely two copies alike. One has
UrsulO. which Is a proper name, as well as Hijxabr.

Q 3

THE TABA:^T*I-NA$IRL

336

them. He performed great deeds, and ruled the people
with equity and beneficence.

He reigned for a long time, subordinate to the SaljO^FS,
and died.

III. MALIK JALAL-UD-DIN, UTSUZ \ KHWARAZM SHAH,
SON OF TAJ-UD-DIN, MUIJAMMAD,

Utsuz-i- Khw arazm Shah, after the death of his father*,
Muhammad, brought the dominions of Kh warazm under
his authority, and ruled over its people with uprightness,
justice, and beneficence.

On several occasions he had to move* from Khw arazm.

* Written Itdz and Itsiz by others [and Atsiz by Guzfdah], signifying in
Turkl “ lean, fleshless, thin.” His title was Mutaflar-ud-Dtn, but some writers
say it was Abu- 1 -Mu;aflar, ’Ala-ud-Dfn. He succeeded his father by farman
of Sultiin Sanjar, his suzerain.

* Muhammad, son of Nush-Tigtn, and father of Itsiz, died
in 531 H. [some say in 532 H.], after a reign of thirty years, and was noted for
his loyalty to Sultan Sanjar.

* He liad really to fly, but our author softens it down. In the beginning of
his career and government of £ 3 tw 3 razm, no one could have been more loyal
towards SultSn Sanjar than luiz was, and Sanjar was also much attached to him,
more particularly because Itsiz had once saved his life. This moved the envious
to sow the seeds of distrust and suspicion between them. In 537 H. [some
say when Sanjar marched against BahiSm Shah of QJiazntn, but this can
scarcely be, as that event occurred three years after], Itsiz obtained per*
mission to proceed to his government, although Sanjar snspected his loyalty j
and in a short time alter he openly showed his disaffection. Sulj^ Sanjar
m.-urched against him in 533 H., and Invested Haz 3 .r-Asp, which was taken.
Itsiz was totally defeated, and fled; and the Sultan installed his nephew,
SuItmUn Shah, son of Muhammad, as ruler of Khwarazm. As soon, however,
as Sanjar returned to KhuiasSn, Itsiz again appeared ; and Sulfman ShH h, not
being sufficiently powerful to oppose him, evacuated EhwSrazm, and returned
to his uncle’s court.

Itsiz now [535 H.] assumed independence and the title of BUdsh^h, and
coined money in his own name ; and this may be partly, if not altogether,
accounted for by the fact that Sanjar had sustained a defeat at the hands of
the infidels of Kara-Shita only the previous year. Some authors contend that
Sanjar’s defeat took place in 536 H., and that Itsiz assumed independence in
537 II. The Suljan again determined to attempt toVeduce him in 538 H., on
which Itsiz sought with entreaties, prayers, and costly presents, to propitiate
the Suljan’s anger, and was forgiven • but soon after he again showed disaffec¬
tion, treated the Sultan’s farman with contempt, and subsequently, in 541 H.,
despatched two criminals, released from prison for the purpoA, to assassinate
his Irciiefactor, to show Iris gratitude, perhaps, for “ the confidence and good¬
will ” of the Sultan towards him, as our author says, and for pardoning his
past offences. Ag.-iin [in 543 H., or, acconling to Yafa-t, in 541 h.] Sanjar

THE EHWARAZM-SIiAHlAH DYNASTY.

»37

sometimes out of necessity, and at others of his own free
will. He marched forces against Jund, Turlcistan, and
^ifchak; and through his wisdom, abilities, and skill, he
was exceedingly fortunate in all his affairs. The Court of
Khwarazm, through his enlightened policy and beneficence,
became the resort of the most learned men.

After obligations and stipulations had been entered into,
he presented himself at the Court of Sultan Sanjar, and for
some time, in conformity with his commands, Malik Jalal-
ud-D!n, Utsuz, continued in attendance at the Court of
that Sult^ until he gained the confidence and good-will of
Sanjar ^ah [Sultan Sanjar], who gave him back the throne
of Khwarazm

After some period of time had elapsed, through the
conduct of Malik 'All, Qhatrl *, who was governor of Hirat,
with respect to Malik Utsuz, he [Utsuz] rebelled, and
declined any longer to submit to the yoke, or to attend the
Suljtan’s presence *. When the dominion of the house of
Sanjar came to an end, the sovereignty of Khwarazm,
and the whole of the territory of Suhart* [or l^ahart] of
Turkistan, and Jund, fell into his hands, and were left in his
possession *.

marched against him, and invested Hour-Asp a second time. After taking
it, the Sultan was about to invest the capital, when, at the intercession of a
holy man, namely, the Zahid.i-Ahfl-posh. and the Sayyids and heads of the
religious bodies, Itsiz again succeeded in propitiating the SultSn, and solicited
permission to present himself before him, and sue for forgiveness. This he
did, after a fashion : he came forth, and appeared before the SuljtSn, and from
his horse bowed his head and retired. lliis took place Monday, lath
Mu^arram, 543 H. Sanjar was not in a position to renew hostilities, so he
passed his rebel vassal’s conduct over, and allowed, or rather was obliged to
allow him to continue In possession of the territory of Shwarazm. Soon
after Sanjar became a captive to the Qhuzz tribe. See Sanjar’s reign, page 154.

f See page 169, where our author says that Sanjar bestowed the sovereignty
upon " Utsuz”; but in this Section he has said that the throne descended to
him from his ancestors.

* This person, and what he did, are not mentioned by other authors that

hat'e come under my notice, with a solitary exception. Fufik-t refers to it,
under the year 542 H., in these exact words :—“ Rebellion of ’Alt Jatrt, Wilt
of Hirftt, during the absence of Sultan Sanjar, and his combining with 'A 12 -
nd-Dtn, I^usain, Malik of nothing more. See reign of ’Ala-ud-Dtn.

* This is utter nonsense. See note * page 236. Itsiz merely acted according
to the world’s ways. When he found his suzerain weak and in difficulties be
took advantage of it.

1 This name is plainly written in nearly every copy. See note *, page 233.

* Fafi^-t says that G&r SJ^n, wht^ in concert with At Khan, defeated

THE TABA^t-l.NA$lRL

238

The greater number of the most learned men of the
Court * had previously attached themselves to his service;
and Imam Rashid-ud - Din. Watwat*, wrote, and dedicated
to him, the work entitled “ Hadayilf-us-Sahr fl Da^ayih-
ush-Shi’r ” [“ Gardens of Enchantment in the Subtilties of
Poesy ”]. At the time, likewise, that Malik Utsuz was in
attendance, at the Court of Sultan Sanjar, he became greatly
attached to Sultan ’Ala ud-Din, Husain, Gh uri. Jahan-soz*,
on account of his learning and talents, to such a degree,
that when Sultan ’Ala ud-Din, Husain, returned again to
assume the throne of Gh ur. the Almighty blessed him with
a son, and he gave him the name of Utsuz.

Malik Utsuz reigned over Kh warazm for a long period*
and died.

IV. MALIK^ I-YAL-ARSALAN, SON OF JALAL-UD-DINj

UTSUZ.

Malik I-yal-Arsalan ascended the throne of Kh waraam
after the decease of his father, and assumed authority over
the whole of his late father’s dominions. He ruled his
people with justice and benevolence”, and concluded a

SultSn Sanjar a few years before, died in 537 H., after which Sultan Itsiz
reduced Mawar>un-Nahr, which Sanjar had lost, under his sway.

* What court is not stated, but Sultan Sanjar’s court, it is to be presumed.
Courtier-like, finding Sanjar in difficulties, they sought a more powerful
master.

* This Rashtd-ud-Dtn. Watwal, was a lineal descendant of the Shaltfah

’Umr.

* Al-Ij[usain [Tzz-ud-Din], son of Sam, Q^urt, it is said, was made prisoner

by Sanjar in $01 H. ; but the person here referred to is his son, Jah&n-soz,
’Al 9 .-ud-Din, Husain, son of Sam, taken prisoner in 547 u.

See note *, page 149, note *, page 155, and account of’A 13 .-ud-Din.

* As usual, he reigned for a long period and died, according to our author,
** who rarely indulges in high-flown eulogy, but narrates his facts in a plain,
straightforward manner, which induces a confidence in the sincerity of his
statements and the accuracy of his knowledge.” Itsiz ruled over Kh waravm
for a period of twenty-nine years, sixteen of which were independent, and died
in 551 H. ; and in the same year TurkSn Khatrm also died.

1 Styled Sultan by others.

* How good all our author’s rulers are I all so just and beneficent: never
were the like k^o^vn before or since. Immediately on assuming the throne,
suspecting bis younger brother, Sultmiln ShUh, he seized and imprisoned him,
and put a number of nobles, Sultmkn’s adherents, to death. l-yal-ArsaUa
was engaged in hostilities with the ruler of SamrVand, and subsequently, in
558 H., marched against gJiad-ya'idi of NtsllSpur—Sanjar had lately died—and

THE KHVTARAZM-SHAHIAH dynasty. 939

treaty with the infidels of l^arS Kh itS. whereby he stipu>
lated to pay a certain Axed tribute yearly*.

He contracted an alliance with the Kh Sns of Kifchak.
and guarded his dominions to the best of his power and
ability. He became involved in disagreements and hosti¬
lities with some of the slaves of Sultan Sanjar who were
rulers of Kh urasan, and peace was brought about in the
manner he could best effect.

He reigned for a long time', and died leaving sons
behind him, such as ’Ala-ud-Din, Taki sh. and SultSn Shah.
Mahmud.

V. suljAn takish*, son of i-yal-arsalAn.

Sultan Takish was a very great monarch, and was
endowed with considerable attainments, capacity, and

CDgaged in hostilities with Rukn-ud-Dfn, MahmQd Shiln, a grandson of
Bu^ra Kh an on the father’s side, and a nephew of Sanjar on his mother's ;
and, after an engagement with Mii-ayyid-i>A’inah-dar [see note* to page 180],
returned into his own territory after effecting an accommodation. Subsequently,
having, in the seventh year of his reign, neglected to pay the tribute to the
ruler of ICarS- Kh itS-f, the tormer sent a force against l.yal-ArsalSn, and the
latter’s troops, which moved to oppose them, were routed. l.yal-Arsalali
died from the effects of a disorder contracted during the war with the EarS*
yChita.fa.

* If the Ata-bak, Abti-Bikr [see p. 179], by becoming tributary to the
Mughals, “brought reproach and dishonour upon himself,” by bowing his
head to circumstances which he could not remedy nor control, and when he was
well aware that, at the nod of the IQian of the Mugbals, his territory could be
subdued and desolated; what is the conduct of I-yal-Arsalan here, and what
that of the Kh alifah. Un-Na^ir, when he, some years before AbO Bikr’s day,
sent an agent to the infidel Ch ingiz, and incited him to invade the territory of
Islam out of hostility to the Kh warazm Sul^any because he woiild not give
him, Un-Na^ir, a slice of ’IraV? Our author was too pious a MusalmBn to
name such a disgraceful act as this. See note *, page 242, and page 265.

* In this instance the “long time” was only eight years. I-yal-Arsalan
died, according to most authors, in 567 H. ; but one or two say it occurred in
568. As Takiab rose against his brother, Sultan Shah, in the former year, it
is natural to conclude that he could have had no occasion to do so in his father’s
lifetime.

* Styled ’Imad-ud-Dfn, Takish Khan. Some call him ’Ala-ud-Dtn.
Other authors generally, with the exception of Yafa-t, place Sultan Shah,
MahmQd, next after his father, Itsiz, and before Takish; and do not bring in
Takish at all until after Sultan Shah’s death in 589 11. Sultan Sh^ih succeeded
to the throne according to the will of his father ; and, as he was a mere boy,
his mother, Malikah Turkan, conducted his affairs. She sent an agent to
summon Takigh, the eldest son by a different mother, who hehl the govern-

the TABAVAT*X-NA9IRL

understanding, and was a proficient in the science of
music.

When he ascended the throne he brought under his
sway the different tracts of the territory of Shwarazm, and
likewise some parts of Khurasan, either by force of arms
or by peaceful means.

He entered into union with the Khan of ^ifchAV, who
was named A]^ran [or Il^ran], and married the daughter
of that ruler. That lady acquired great celebrity in the
world, and rose to great eminence, more particularly
during the reign of her son, Sultan Muhammad, Khwarazm
Shah. She was a woman of great firmness of chara.cter,

ment of Jiind [some say he retired thither] to Kha^nmn. As he refused to
obey, an army was sent against him. Guztdah and Yilfa-f state that Taki|]|
demanded a portion of his father’s dominions, and was refused ; on which he,
in 567 H., rebelled, and determined to seek aid from the Khgn-i-Khanan. or
Great irWan of Rkra- Kh ita-t. The latter’s wife, at that time, held the
sovereignty, and Takisb entered into an alliance with her; but no mention
whatever is made by these or other authors as to Takisb having taken either
her or her dau.'hter to wife, as they, no doubt, would have done, had such an
alliance as our author refers to taken place. Takisb, having reached her
territory, agreed to make over to her the treasures and revenues of Sbwarazm,
as soon as he, by her aid, should obtain possession of it, and afterwards to pay
a yearly tribute. A numerous army was accordingly sent along with Takisb
to put him in possession. Sultan ShSh and his mother, as soon as they became
aware of the combination against them, evacuated Shwarazm, and joined
Malik Mu.ayyid-i.A’tnah-dar, Walt of SburSsSn [NtshSpur. See page 180^
and note 7 ], and Takisb obtained possession of the SbwSrazm territory.
These events took place in 568 H.

SultSn Sha h, however, acquired power over a considerable portion of
SburSsSn, and hostilities went* on between the rival brothers up to the end of
SultSn Sbah’s life. He lived twenty-one years after these events. In 569 h.
Malik Mu-ayyid-i-A’tnah-dSr, in order to aid Sulj^n Shah, marched in concert
with him against Takisb, and gave him battle; but they were defeated, and
Mu-ayyid was taken and cut in two by order of Takisb. Sultan Shah and his
mother fled to Dihistan, followed by Takisb and his troops. The mother of
SultSn Sl]ah was killed, after which Takisb marched against NtsbSpur, the
capital of Mu-ayyid’s territory. Hostilities having afterwards arisen between
Takisb and his former ally, SultSn SbMi sought aid from the female ruler o[
l^arft Sbit^-t, and she and Sullen Qbi3rS3.ud-Dtn, Qburt, both rendered him
aid. The details are far too voluminous for insertion here: suffice it to say
that an accommodation subsequently took place between the brothers in 585 H. ;
but hostilities were again renewed in 589 h., in which year SultSn Sltkh died.
After his death Takisb acquired the whole power; and, according to Guztdah,
he now for tko first time assumed the title of Sulfftn, being without a rival.
These events are referred to by our author in his accounts of Sbusrau Malik,
the last of the Qbxn^wtds^ *tnd in his account of the Sultans of Ghfir. which

THE XBWARAZM-SaAHlAH DYKASIY.

* 4 *

very impetuous, and of imperious temperament; and,
daring the reign of her son, she had the title of Khud^-
wandah'i-jahin [Princess of the Universe]. So great
was her spirit, her haughtiness, and her resentment, when
roused, that, on one occasion, she became enraged with her
husband, SultSn Takish. on account of a female slave with
whom he had formed a connexion, and followed him to
the bath, and closed the door of the hot bath upon him,
so that the Sult3n very nearly perished. Information of
the circumstance was conveyed to a party of the great
nobles, and a number of lords and chiefs arrived, broke
open the door of the hot bath, and took Suljtan Takish out.
He had been reduced to a state of lividness, and one of his
eyes had been nearly destroyed.

Sultan Takish was a wise and sagacious monarch ; and,
with respect to his witticisms, they relate that on a certain
occasion a necessitous person wrote to him a statement
of his affairs, saying:—“ If thou givest me one hundred
dlitdrs, what difference will it make to the amount of thy
treasures ?” The Sultan, with his own hand, wrote at the
head* of the statement, “one hundred dfndrs and this
reply, in the opinion of men of learning and talent, was
exceedingly clever. On another occasion a person wrote
to him, saying:—“ In being a Musalman I am thy brother;
give me a portion of thy treasures." The Sultan com¬
manded that ten dinars of gold should be presented to
him. When that gift reached the indigent person, he wrote
another communication to the Sultan, saying :—“ I am thy
brother; and yet, with all the treasures that thou p>ossessest,
not more than ten dinars of gold do I obtainThe
Sultin wrote in reply:—“ If the rest of my brethren should
demand their shares also, thou wouldst not have received
even this much.” May the Almighty have mercy on
him I

Sultan Takigli reduced a half of JQiurasan under his
sway by force, and the Maliks [kings] of Mazandaran
acknowledged his superiority. He also subdued a part of

* It is customaiy, in the East, to write orders, decrees, &c., at the head of
documents.

* This anecdote, or one very similar, is related of another before the time of
Sultin Takiab.

* 4 * the TABA^T.X.NA$1RL

the territory of ; and Sultan fughril. of ’IrSl^, who
was the nephew of Sult&n Sanjar, fell a captive into his
hands*.

Hostilities arose between him and the Court of the
IQialifah on account of some of the territories of ’Iral^*,

* At page 165, which see, our author was in doubt as to who *yughril was.
In 558 H. X^utlagh inanaj, son of the AtS-bak, JahSn Pahlaw&n, Muhammad,
sent envoys, one after the other, to Sultan Takish informing him of the escape
of Sultan Tughril, Saljuhi, from the fortress in which he had been immured,
and inviting him to invade 'TraV, promising to support him. For further par*
ticulars of these events, see note •, page 167, and note •, page 17a, where our
author entirely contradicts this statement respecting Sultkn *rughril.

* The Khaltfah, Un-Nafir, on Takiah overrunning TritV, <tnd possessing
himself of the strong places, was desirous that Takish should let him have
some share of that territory, and make over some portion of it to his DtwSns.
Envoys came aiid went between them ; but, as Takish in the end refused to
give up any portion, Un-Na^ir, in 590 H., despatched Mu-ayyid-ud-Dln,
lbn-uI-Ea9;&b, or the Butcher’s Son, with robes of honour, valuable' presents,
and the like, in hopes that on his appearance at Hamadan he Vrould be favour¬
ably received, and that Takigli would come out to receive him, and do him
honour as the Khaltfah’s envoy, and humble himself before him ; but, on his
reaching Asad-abad, the Sulfin despatched a force to compel him to retire.
Mu-ayyid-ud-Dtn fled, and speedily placed the river Dajlah between himself
and Takiah's troops. After this, Takiah pushed on to Dtnawr, and plundered
the place and country round, and returned to Hamadan laden with diranu and
diftdrx, and other booty beyond compute.

In 593 H., shortly after his son, Eutb-ud-Dtn, Muhammad, had been
entrusted with the government of Kh urSsan. after the death of his elder
brother, he was recalled to proceed at the head of an army against Gh a-tr
Buhk the I-ghur ruler. Me conducted the campaign successfully,

and Gha-tr BuVa was made prisoner, and brought to Shwarazm, in Rabt'-
ul-Awwal of the following year. Another expedition was undertaken
shortly after against the successor of GJia-tr Bu^a, which Takish conducted
in person.

At the end of the year 594 H. Takiab marched into Kh urgsan again. After
three months’, halt at Shftd-yftkh he proceeded into ’IrkV against MtanjuV, the
Ata-bak of his son, Yunas Khan, who was disaflected. He passed the cold
season in Mazandar&n, and in the following spring pursued MtftnjuV: from one
end of ’Ir&V to the other. MtanjuV and his party were pounced upon and
most of them put to the sword, and the rebel took shelter in FirClz-koh, from
which stronghold he had ousted the Sult&n’s seneschal some time before. It
was invested and taken, and Mi&njuV was placed on a camel and brought to
Eazwin. He was imprisoned for a year, and subsequently exiled for life on
the hostile frontier of Jund. After this Sultin Takish is said to have received
a dress of honour from the Khaltfah. with the investiture [which he could
neither give nor withhold] of’Iritf^, Shuraskn, and TurkistSn !

In the following year, 595 h., the Waztr of the Ehaltfah, who was at
Hamad&n with an army, drove out the Khw5rarmt troops, upon which Takish
again entered ’Irilf. from SliwArazm, and hostilities were renewed. The Wazir,
however, who commanded the Xhaltfah’s troops, had died a few days before
the forces came into contact; but the fact was kept concealed, and was not

THE KHWARAZM SHAhIAH dynasty.

«43

and Ibn-ul-]^a 99 Sb, who waa the Waztr of the Dir-ul-
Khilafat. entered 'Iralb: [with an army] to repel Sultan
Takish ; but he was defeated, and retired to Baghdad
again.

This disloyalty towards the Khaltfah was a disaster^ to
the empire of Takish, as Maulana Zahir-ud-Din, Faryabi*,
says in the following strophe :—

Oh, Shih ! since ’Ajatn, by the sword, to thee has been consign’d,
Towards place of repose, an army send.

Then lay the Ka’bah desolate, and a fan bring.

And like unto useless atoms, to the winds the dust of the H^ram send.
Within the Ka’bah the draptery crumbleth away : place it in thy treasury.
And, for the Prophet’s tomb, two or three ells of matting send.

When thou shah have a perfect infidel become, rush on Karkh,

And, then, the Kh aJtfah’s head to Shitli send.”

Although Sultan Takislj had entered into a treaty with
the Sultans of Ghur*, nevertheless, through the hostility of
[the Court of] Baghdad. Ibn-ur-Rabbi’ came from Bagh¬
dad into the territories of Ghur and Ghaznln ; and, on
another occasion, Ibn-ul- Kha tlb came to the Court of Firuz-
koh, and one Friday read the Kfautbah, and, whilst reading
it, he made use of these words in the presence of Sultan
Ghiyag-ud-Din, 'Muhammad-i-Sam :—" Ayyahu-l-Ghiyag
al'Mustaghas min ul Takish ut-taghi ul-baghi.” “ Hail!
prop of defence against Takish the traitor and the rebel 1”

At the time of Ibn-ul-Khatib*s returning to Baghdad’,

msde known until after the Khalifah’s troops had been defeated and put to the
rout. The body of the Wazfr was exhumed, and the head cut off, and sent to
Sbwtrazm. Fasib-t mentions this affair, but places it several years earlier,
and calls the Waztr, Abu-l-Fa?l-i-Mubammad, son of ’Alt, styled Ibn-ul-
Baifa ; and further states that, Takish being absent from ’Irak at the time,
the Waztr, with the aid of ^utlagh Inanaj, drove out the Khwirazmt troops,
and pursued them as far as Bustam. After this Takish again entered ’IrSV>
and overthrew the Khalllah’s troops.

f The ascendency and power which Takish acquired by this success, instead
of being a blow to the prosperity of his rule, had quite a contrary effect. It
became noised abroad throughout both ’IraVs, and thereby his affairs attained
a greater grandeur than before. Possibly our author may refer to the inveterate
hostility of the Kh altfah towards his son and grandson, and his refusing aid to
the latter when hard pressed by the infidel Mughals.

• The Malik-ush'Shu’at* [Prince of Poets], Shwajah J^lr-ud>Dln of
Fliylb, who died in 59S H.

• A treaty with the .SultSns of ChQr i* out of the question ; in fact the
author’s own words disprove it. See also following note, and note *, page 265.

> A correspondence found when the son of Takish acquired possessitm of

•44 THB TABA«:AT•^NA9I1a.

the father of the author, MaulanS Sar&j-ud>Dtn-i-Minh3j,
was despatched to the Court of Baghdad along with
him, and, on the confines of Mukran, the Maul3nS was
martyred*.* This intimation arrived from the Court of
the Shallfah, Un-N3sir-ud-Dtn Ullah, about it, saying :—
"Furthermore, Saraj-i-Minh3j perished in an affray on the
road ; the Almighty recompense him !”

Sultan Takish-i-Khwarazm Shah was in firm alliance
with Kh ita; and trustworthy persons have stated that
Sultan Takish had enjoined his son, Sultan 'Ala-ud-Dln,
Muhammad, never to quarrel or embroil himself with
Tgbi ta if he desired to preserve the safety of his dominions*;
and it turned put as this wise monarch had said. They
also relate, with respect to this subject, that the Sultan
often used to say that there would be two judgment-days

_one, that time which Almighty God has ordained ; and

the other, that which would happen when he should be
removed from this world, through his son’s bad faith to¬
wards the infidels [of Chin].

Sultan TakisJi reigned for many years, and died*.

Cliazntn confinns these hostile intentions. See note page 26$. In his
account of the TCha ltfah. Un-Na?ir, our author states that three envoys arrived
from the Shaltfah’s court to solicit aid from the two brothers, CLhiyas-ud-Dln
of Ghur. artd Mu’izz-ud-Dln of Qhazntn ; and that they were named respec¬
tively, lm 2 m Shams-ud-Itfn. Turk, Ibn-ur-Rabbf, and Ibn-ul-Shuttb ; and
that his father was sent along with them when they returned to Baghdad.

• Some copies merely mention that he died.

• Yafa-t says that Takiah’s last request was that his son should neither clash
with, nor show resistance against, Gur ]iQian, nor depart from the agreement
previously settled [the tribute], because Gur Sian was as a bulwark of defence
in his rear against enemies in that quarter which he should not break down.

• During his reign Takish became involved, upon more than one occasion,
in hostilities with the Khita-ts and the rulers of TurkistSn ; and, towards the
close of his reign, waged war upon the Mulilhidah heretics in and B^his-
tan. He gained possession of their stronghold of Arsalan-Kuabae, the strongest
fortress ill Asia, it is said. He then left his son, T 3 .j-ud-Dtn, ’Alt gbllh, in

with l;falubi as- his place of residence, and set out on his return to
Shwarazm, and reached it in Jamkd!-ul-Akbir, 596 «. The heretics supposed
the Waztr, Nisam-ul-MuIk, to have been the author of their disasters; so they
assassinated him. Sultan Takigh resolved to avenge him. An army was
despatched against them under his son, Kutb-ud-Dtn, Muhammad, who bud
siege to Turshtz. Our author chronicles his own father’s death, but says
nothing of the time or place of the decease of the sovereign whose reign he is
supposed to be giving an account of; and, although Takigll reigned so near his
own time, our author docs not appear to have known that he reigned for
twenty-five years and sfx months, the last six and a half years being over ’Ir 3 h

THE K 2 fWAEAZM-£aiAHlAH DYNASTY.

MS

VI. SULTAN JALAL.UD.DiN, MA^CMOD », SON OF LYAL.

ARSALAN.

MatimOd, son of I-yal-Arsalan, Sultan Shah-i-TalSl-ud-
Din, was a rash and impetuous monarch. When his
brother, Takish, assumed the throne of Khwarazm. dis¬
sension arose between them, and he [Sultan Shah] went
from Kh warazm towards Kh urSsan. and from thence came
into the states of Qhur, and presented himself at the Court
of Sultan Ghiyas-ud-Din, Muhammad-i-Sam. Sultan
Ghtyag-ud-Dln, and his Maliks *, treated him with honour
and deference.

Between the Sultans of Ghur and Sultan Takish a firm
compact existed ; and some parts of fChurasan had fallen
into the possession of the Amirs of the Ghuzz tribe, and
some to the slaves of the Sanjari dynasty, whilst others had
become dependencies of the Court of Ghur and Firuz-
koh, and of Bamian.

Sultan ^ah solicited assistance from the Ghurian Sul¬
tans to enable him to liberate Khurasan from the hands
of his brother and the Ghuzz Amirs. They assigned him
a fief for the present, and he was furnished with all things
necessary as a guest; but they continued to observe the
treaty between themselves and his brother, Sultan Takish.
and hesitated to furnish him with the aid he sought ^

also. Having despatched his son against the Mulatiidahs, SulfSn Takish was
organizing forces at Kh warazm to follow, when he was suddenly taken ill. He
recovered, and was advised not to undertake so long a journey, but he would
proceed. He was taken ill again, and died on the way, in Rnmafan, 596 H.
See note *, page 354. Many eminent and learned men flourished during his
reign, and numerous works on poetry, medicine, and other sciences, were
written and dedicated to him.

* Styled Sultan Shah. Ma^imud, by others.

* In a few copies there is a slight difference in this clause of the sentence,
which, in them, is—“and the Maliks of filxur.”

r After his defeat along with Mu.ayyid-i-A’fnah-dar, and the latter had been
cut in two [see note *, page 180], and Sultan ShSk’s mother had also been put
to death by Takish. Sultan gjiah went to Shad-yakh to Mu-ayyid’s son,
Tugfaan Shah, who had succeeded his father, and took up his quarters in the
territory of NtaMptii'. As Tuglian, however, had not power to help him, he
left his territory and went to the Sultans of Gbiit [after obtaining written
promises of favourable treatment], who received him well. Hostility having
arisen shortly after between his brother Takiah and the Eb'ta-f ruler,
Sultan Shah was delighted, and entered into negotihtion with that sovereign.

* 4 *

THS TABA^AT- 1 -NA$IR|.

Sultan Shah [consequently] left the territory of GhOr.
and proceeded to Mawar-un-Nahr and Turkistan, and
sought assistance from the Great Khan of Khita ; and
brought an army, and freed Kh urasan from the oppressive
grasp and possession of the Ghuzz chiefs, and their
tyranny*. He made Marw his capital, and marched an

who, to spite Takish, invited him to his Court. On leaving the Gh artln territory
he oliserved to the nobles of his party that it occurred to him, although he had
had to put up with some annoyance and mortification from him, that man
[Ghiyas-ud'Dtn, Ghnrt] would cause much sedition in ShurfUan ; and so it
turned out.

* He stated to the Shits.-! ruler that the Shwiraxmls and the troops gene¬
rally were Well inclined towards 4 iim, and thereby Induced the KbSn to send
forces along with him to reinstate him. On their arrival before Shd^razm,
the Shi^-ts were undeceived, and, finding that no advantage was likely to
accrue by investing it, determined to retire again. Sultan Shah now solicited
that a portion of the Khi^a-t army might 1)6 sent along with him into
Khuiiisan, against Sarakhs. This was assented to, and Sultan Shah and his
allies suddenly appeared before it. Malik Dfnar, one of the Gh uzz chiefs,
held it at that time ; and most of his followers were put to the sword, and
Malik Dinar himself was dragged out of the ditch of that fortress, by the hair
of his head. The rest of his followers sought shelter within the walls. After
this, Sultan Shah marched to Marw and there took up his quarters, and dis¬
missed the Kh ita-t troops to their own territory. He continued after that to
make constant incursions against Sarakhs, until most of the Gh uzz were
dispersed and driven from it, but Tughan Shah got possession of it. In
^ijjah, 576 H., hostilities arose between Sultan Sha h and 7 n^bdin Sha h about
the possession of Sarakhs ; and an engagement was fought between them, in
which the former was victorious and obtained possession of that place, and
fus likewise. From this success Sultan Shah acquired considerable power,
because he, contrary to Tughan Sha h, was not taken up with cymbals and
lutes, and such like frivolous pursuits. He made constant raids upon Tuvian’s
territory, unril his nobles and troops became greatly harassed and distressed ;
and they had mostly gone over to Sultan Shnh, and no power was left to
TTughan. He applied for aid both to Takish nnd to the Sultan of Ghfir. and
once went to Hirat, in person, to solicit assistance from Gh iyas-ud-Dtn,
Chart; but all was of no avail. Disappointed and depressed, he lived on
miserably till Muharram, 581 H., when he died. See our author’s account of
him at page 181, where he says “all rulers refrained from molesting him.”
The same night in which fnshih* Shah died, his son, Sanjar - Shah, was
raised to his father’s masnad, and Mangult B^, his slave, was made'his Atl-
bok. The latter afterwards-went over to Sulj^n Shah, who acquired sway
over the greater part of 'I'nfihiin’s territory. Malik Dfnar, the Gh"" chief,
went off to Kirmin, and established himself as ruler therein ; and everywhere
the Ghuzz Turks were reduced to subjection, or rooted out. She page 18a;
note*.

In the beginning of 582 H., Takiih having entered Shurffain, Sulfln Sllkk
marched against Skwarazm with a large army, in hopes of seizing it; but
Takiih, in return, nuurched to Marw, Snltln Shkh’s capital, and sat down
before iL As Sultln Sha h found he could not gain admittance into 2 ihwa-

THE KHWARAZM-SHAHIAH DYNASTY. 347

army against Hirat, and invested Fushanj ; and made raids

razm, and that Marw was in danger, he abandoned the attempt ; and, on
reaching Am&tah, left his army, and taking fifty picked men with him, made
for Marw, passed through Takish’s army, and succeeded in throwing himself
into Marw. Next day, on hearing of this feat, Takish marched away to
Shad-yakh. and, in Rabf’-ul Awwal, 582 H., invested Sanjar Shah, and his
Ata-bak, Mangult Beg, therein. After two months an accommodation was
entered into, and several men of rank were left there by Takish to carry out
the terms, and he departed for Kh warazm. Mangulf Beg, as soon as Takiah
had marched away, seized his officers and delivered them over to Sultan Shah ;
and they were kept in durance for a long time by him, until a truce was brought
about between the brothers, which, however, was but of short duration.

After the truce, Takiah again moved against Shad-vftkh. secured Mangult
Beg, and then returned to his capital, Kh warazm. SulJIn Shah, being
ambitious of possessing Shad.yakh. now seized the opportunity and marched
against it. He invested it for a time, but, finding the defenders had the best of
it, he raised the investment and set out for SabzwSr, and invested that place.
It capitulated on terms on the intercession of a holy man, and Sultan Shah, in
conformity with those terms, entered it, remained an hour, and departed for
Marw again. In Mubarram, 583 H., Takish again appeared before Shad-
yakh, and it was forced to submit, and Mangult Beg came forth and capitu¬
lated. Sult&n Takish entered it in Rabt’-ul-Awwal of that year. Mangult
was compelled to disgorge the wealth he had deprived others of, and was
aflcn^ards delivered over to the son of an Imam, whose father he had put to
death unjustly, to suffer death according to the law of of retribution.

Three months afterwards, Takish having set out for Khwarazm, Sultin Shah,
finding the coast clear, made another effort to get possession of Shad •3rakh :
but, although the walls were for the most part destroyed, the place was obsti¬
nately defended. Takish marched into Kh urasan again on becoming aware of
this movement on Sultan Shah’s part, and the latter, hearing of Takish’*
entering Kh urgsSn. burnt his battering-rams and made off. Takish remained
all the cold season in Kh urasan, preparing for a campaign in AsarhStj&n, and
nearly all the Amirs of Kh urasSn. who had hitherto not presented themselves,
now joined him. In the spring he returned from A^arlntjan, and encamped
in the plain of Radakan of Tus, an accommodation having been come to
between the brothers in 585 H., whereby Sultan Shah was left in piossession of
considerable territory in Kh urasan, such as Jim, Bajchurz, and other district*.
Takish ascended the throne at Radakan of Xu* [but not before], and soon after
set out for Kh warazm. Peace continued between them until after the affiiir at
Marw-ar-Rud with the Gh flrts. with whom Sultan Slikh had previously been
on the most brotherly terms, in which Sultan Sha h was com]ie]led to'retire,
and his power became much broken^ when, having infringed some of the stipu¬
lations with his brother in 586 H., Takish again marched to Sarakhs, which
Sultan Shah had made the depository of his treasures and military material.
It was taken; but, subsequently, another accommodation having been
arranged, it was restofed to Sultan Sl^h, who again repaired it. In 588 H.,
Takiah having entered 'Irak at the solicitation of Kdtla^ Inanaj [see page
167, and note *], against Sultan TuCOnU SaljOkt* Sultan ffh»h seized the
opportunity, marched with his forces against ShwBrazm, and invested it; but,
hearing of the return of hi* brother from the ’Irak expedition, he abandoned
the investment, and retired into his own territory. Takiflht having passed the
winter at Sh*riirazra, marched against his brother, Sultan Sh8h, in the follow*

* 4 *

THE TABA 9 :AT.I.NA$IRI.

upon the frontiers of the territory of £hur, and created
tumult and disorder.

Some of the nobles and slaves of the Sanjart dynasty
joined him—such as Baha-ud-Dtn, Tughril, who was
governor of Hirat, and used constantly to harass and afflict
the frontiers of the kingdo/n of ^lur. Sul$an Ghivas-ud-
Din, Muhammad-i-Sam, gave instructions so that his
Sultans*, namely, Sultan-i- Gh azl. Mu’izz-ud«Din, Muhani-
mad-i-Sam, from Gh aznin. Sultan Shams-ud-Din. Muham¬
mad, from Bamlan, and Malik Taj-ud-Din-i-Harab, from
Sistan, all assembled, marched, and joined Sultan Gh iy5s-
ud-Din, after which they set out for the purpose of repelling
Sultan Shah.

They advanced into the valley of the river of Marw, and
pitched their camp between Dazah [Dajzah ?] and Marw-
ar-Rud, while Sultan Shah moved his forces from Marw
farther up ; and, for a period of six months, the two armies,
Ghurfs and Turks, were arrayed confronting each other.
Sultan Shah used to display great audacity and boldness,
and was in the constant habit of cutting off the foragers [of
the GbQrian army], whence it arose that Malik ]l^utb-ud-
Dln, I-bak, the Turk, of Hindustan, who, at that time, was
Amlr-i-Ajkhur [lord of the stables—master of the horse] of
the Gh aznin * [ruler], was taken prisoner by the troops of
Sultan Shah.

Matters went on in this manner, until, at the expiration
of six months, an engagement took place, and Sultan Shah
had not the power to resist his opponents, for the troops of
Gh aznin crossed the river Murgh-ab and attacked the army*
of Sultan Shah, who, unable to repel them, or make a stand

ing spring. As soon as Takish reached Alitward, negotiations for a peaceable
settlement of their differences were entered into, and letters passed between the
brothers ; but, through the folly and precipitancy of .Sultan Shah, the negotia¬
tions were In abeyance, when he was betrayed by Badr-ud-Dtn, Ja’far, an
officer in his service, who held Sarakh't for him. Ja’far delivered up .the fortress
to Takish, together with his master’s treasures ; and two days after, at the end
of Ramafin, 589 H., Sultan Shah died. He had reigned for twenty-two
years.

* His brother, his kinsman, and his vassal.

■ To Mu’izz-ud-Dtn, Sulpin of Gha antn. whose slave he was, and s$tise- .
gtuntfy ruler of Dibit.

s Five copies have “attacked the camp.” Yafa-t barely alludes to this
affiiir on the Murgh-ab.

THE SHWARAZM-SHAHIAH dynasty.

949

before them, was defeated ; and, perplexed and distracted,
he retired towards Marw again.

Malik Baha-ud-Dtn, Tughril, of HirAt, who was with
Sultan Shah’s army, fell into the hands of the troops of
Bamtan ; and they brought his head to the presence of
Sultan Gh ivas-ud-Dln. and he commanded them to take it
to Hirat. Sultan Shams-ud-Dln of Bamian [likewise], on
that day, was assigned a chatr [canopy]; and he was
honoured with the title of Sultan.

When they brought the head of X^gliril to Hirat, a Poet
repeated these lines :—

The head of which he carried higher than the* altitude of the

heavens.

And which possessed the jewel and diadem of haughtiness and pride.

Without a body, hath to Had, a spectacle come.

For this reason, that he had an inclination for Hart in his head.”

Sultan Shah, having been thus defeated, and his army
routed and dispersed, retired to Marw; and this affair
and this victory took place in the year 588 H.

Sultan Shah was [it appears] troubled with a complaint,
for which every year he used to take a small quantity of a
certain poison, in order to cure it; and, in that same year,
the complaint increased, and as a remedy against it he
took somewhat more of the antidote, and it killed him, and
he died.

VII. YON AS khan, son of TAKI SH. KHWARAZM SHAH».

Yunas Kh an was the son of Sultan Takish ; and, when
Sultan Takish subdued the territory of ’Irak, and wrested
it out of the hands of the Ata-bak, Abu-Bikr, the son of

* The seventh ruler and successor of Takish wa.s his son Suljtan 'AlS-ud-
Dtn, Muhammad ; and neither Yunas Khan, Malik Kh^n, nor 'Alt Shah,
were ever rulers of Kh warazm. but merely held subordinate governments
under their lather. When Sultan Takish entered TraV in the b<^inning of
590 H., and SultSn T»Shril was slain in battle [see page 167, and note *],
Takish. after securing ’Irilh, conferred Isfahan on Inilnaj, son of the

At&.bak JahSn Pahlawan, leaving the Amtrs of Trah wi^h him , and the terri¬
tory of Rai and its dependencies was conferred upon Takish’s son VQnaa
Whsr i with Mt&njuh as-his Ati-bak and the commander of his troops; The
whole of TriiV be never held. Takish did not take TrSh from the AtA-bek
Aba-Bikr, son of Muhammad, for a very good reason that no such Atfi-bak
ever held it in the reign of Takish-

R

350

THE TABA?AT.I.NA§IRI.

the Atl-bak, Muhammad, and a second time caused its
deliverance from Sultan Tughril, he conferred it upon his
son, Yunas Kh an.

He was a monarch of good disposition, and used to live
on good terms among his people, and brought ’Irak under
his subjection. He began to enter into contention with
the troops of the Court of the Kh alifah. and that untoward
circumstance became a source of misfortune to the sove¬
reignty of his father, and to their dynasty^.

He reigned for a considerable time over ’Irak, and died.

VIII. MALIK ILHAN », SON OF TAKISH, KHWARAZM SHAH.

Malik Kh an was the eldest son of Sultan Takish. and
was a mighty and arrogant monarch*. He was endowed
with great sagacity, wisdom, knowledge, and understanding,
nobleness of mind, and intrepidity.

When his father wrested Nishapur and other parts of
that territory out of the hands of the Sanjart slaves, such
as the descendants of Malik Mu-ayyid were, Sanjar Shah,
who was the son of Tughan ^ah, the son of Malik Mu-
Ayyid, he induced, by treaty, to come out of Nishapur^
and gave the throne of Nishapur to his son, Malik Kh an.

When he assumed the throne of that territory, he brought
under his sway the tracts of country around as far as the

* Whilst his father was absent on the expedition against Qha-lr BuVa Shan,
the I'ghur, in 591 h., Yunas Kh an turned his arms [or rather his AUl-bak for
him] against the Khaltfah’s troops in TraV. Yunas sought help to carry out
this hostile purpose, from his brother Malik Shah, who held the government of
Marw and its dejlendencies. Yunas, however, before being joined by his
brother, had defeated the troops of Baghdad, and had acquired great broty.
The brothers met at Hamadan, where they made some stay ; and, after they
had passed a jovial time together, Malik Kha n—nr gjjah, as he is also styled—
set out on his return to Kh urasan.

* His title was Nafir-ud-Dtn.

* W'hen Sultan Takish entered Khurasgn {n 590 h. on his way back from
’IraV, he heard of the illness of his son Malik Shah, who held at t^t time the
government of Marw. Takish directed that his son should be brought to him ;
and, when they reached Jus, Sultan Shah recovered. His father transferred
him to the government of NfahUpur, which he had previously held, with gliad-
traUi as his residence in place of Marw, from the unwholesome climate of
which his health had suffered ; and an appanage was conferred upon his other
son, Ij^utb-ud-Dln, Muhammad, in SJxurasan ; and he was made his father’s
companion and favourite.

' For thc_^tefT, see note • to Sultan Shah's reign, page 346.

TAE SHWARAZM-SIIAHIAH dynasty.

asi

gate* of ’Irai:; and a great number of eminent men assem>
bled at his Court. He reigned for a considerable time, and
died*, leaving a son named Hindu Kh an.

He [Hindu Khan] was an exceedingly intrepid, high-
minded prince, and was endowed with a poetical genius.
After the decease of his father and his grandfather, he
began to collect forces in Kh urasan, and, in consequence,
his uncle, Sul(an Muhammad, son of Takish, reprehended
him*. Hindu IGian composed a few elegant lines, and sent
them to his uncle :—

*■ A hundred treasure-hoards be thine : the keen poniard mine.

The palace thine : the steed and the battle-field be mine.

Shouldst thou desire that hostility cease between us.

Be Kh warazm thine. King ! the country of Khurasan mine

* Alike in all the copies. The Hulwan Pass may be called the "gate” of
Ti 5 k.

* Malik Shah having returned from Hamadan, as related in note *, pre¬
ceding page, as soon as he entered Khurasan, despatched Arsalan ShSh, one
of the nobles, to act for him at ghad-yahh, and set out himself for Khwarazm.
During his absenee great disorder and sedition arose in the Ntshapur territory
in consequence of disaffected ytenom inciting .Sanjar Shah, son of yughan
&hSh, who had previously been relieved of the cares of indejiendent sove¬
reignty, to rebel against Sultan Takiah. He had been treated with the utmost
kindness, the .Sultan had married his mother, and after his daughter’s decease,
who had been espoused by Sanjar, he had also given him his sister in marriage,
and was regarded as a son. He was accordingly summoned to KhwSrazm
and deprived of his sight, and his fief was taken from him. This was in
591 H., and in 595 ii. he died. After Sanjar Stjah’s threatened outbreak,
SultSn Takish had to march into ’Irak against the ’IraVt nobles, in conse¬
quence of his son Yunas Khan’s acts. It was on this occasion that the
Kha llfah’s troops, after the death of their leader, the Waztr, were defeated.
Takiah returned into Kh warazm by way of Isfahan, and conferred the
government of Kh urasan upon Malik Shah, with directions not to go to Marw
because of its unhealthiness. His partiality for it, however, was so great, that
it drew him there. He was taken ill soon after, and returned to NlahapQr ;
but his illn&ss increased, and he died at the close of the year 593 H.

* Yafa-t, which contains so much information respecting this dynasty,
merely states that Sultan Takish had to delay his departure on an expedition
against inhdels [heretics], fearing an outbreak on the part of Malik Shah’s
sons. Accordingly, the Wazlr, $adr-ud-Dln, Mas'ud, Harawl, was despatched
to Shad-vakh to assume charge of affairs. He contrived to prevent any
tumult, and sent the eldest son, Hindu Kh Sn. to Khwarazm. Subsequently
Sultan Takish conferred the government of Kh urasan upon his son, Kt>li’'Ud-
Dtn, Muhammad, who proceeded thither ; and, two days after he reached
Shad-yakhf the Waztr set out to join the Sultan, in Zt-Hijjah, 593 H. Hindu
Khan subsequently took service with his country’s enemies, the Gh urts. See
note f, page 255.

* This line, according to two copies of the original, might be read :—"Be
Khwarazm thine : mine alone the realm of Khurasan.”

R 2

iS» the TABA¥AT.I.NA$IRI.

Sultan Muhammad-i-Takish wrote the following lines in
reply :—

** Soul of thine uncle I this ambition takes the path of insanity t
This monition will take eflect neither on thee nor on me,

’Till blood, to the hilt, shall the sword’s blade smear :

’Till, of one of us two, triumph’s fire shall the highest blaze.”

Hindu Kh an was not powerful enough to offer opposition
to his uncle and his armies, and he came to the territories
of Ghur. and sought assistance; but he was unable to
obtain it, and he pressed onwards for Kili(a. He possessed
mettle, but he was not favoured by fortune; and he was
martyred on the confines of Bamtan.

IX. 'ALl SHAH». SON OF TAKI SH. KHWARAZM SHAH.

Sultan ’All Shah was a very great and illustrious prince ;
and, when the period came for his brother to assume the
sovereignty, he made ’Alt Shah ruler of Nishapur. When
the Suljans of Ghur conquered^ Nishapur, Malik* •• 'All
Shah, with other Maliks of Kh warazm, under terms of
treaty, came out of that city, and presented themselves
before Sultan GIjiyag-ud-Din, and the victorious Sultan
Mu’izz-ud-Din ; and they brought Sultan ’Alt Shah [with
them] to Ghaznin. When Sultan Muhammad [of Kh warazm]
appeared, the second time, before the gate of Nishapur.
and Malik Ziya-ud-Din*, under terms of convention, came
out [and surrendered the city], the Sultan sent him back
to Ghur", and the Sultans of Gh ur sent back Malik ’Alt
Shah also, to his brother, Sultan Muhammad.

* His title was Taj-iid-Ofn. He had Ijcen placed in charge of a part of
’IraV, with Iffahan as the seat of government, some time before the accession
.of his brother l^utb-ud-Dtn, and when the Gh firf Sulpns appeared before

Shad-vakh. in Rajah, 597 h. —particul.irs of which are given under his brother’s
reign - Taj-ud-Din, ’Alt Shah, who hatl recently left ’IraV, chanced to be
there, together with a number of his other brothers’ nobles and ofRcers.

•• Ntihapur capitulated on terms only. They were not obser%-ed fairly ; and
’Alt Shah and the Kh warazmt nobles and officers with him were treated with
great indignity by the Ohurts. See note^, page 255.

* The titles SultSn and Malik are used here indiscriminately.

* A kinsman of Suli&n Gh iyas-ud-Utn and his brother.

* Together with his garrison ; and they had dresses of honour given to them,
and were treated with the utmost consideration, in order to show the Ghurts
how to behave to fallen foes.

THE SHWARAZM-SQAHIAH DYNASTY.

*53

The latter bestowed the throne of l^afahSn and
upon his brother, 'Alt gJi^'h, and, for a considerable period,
he continued in that country ; when, suddenly, he became
overcome with fear and apprehension from some cause or
other, and left it, and came into the territories of Qhur, and
presented himself at the Court of Firuz-koh.

At that period, the throne of Ftruz-koh had passed to
Sultan Qh>y^ 9 -nd-Din, Mahmud, son of Muhammad-i-
Sam; and Suljtan Muha-mmad despatched envoys from
Kh warazm to the presence of Sultan Gh iyas-ud-Din.
Mahmud, so that 'Alt ^ah was seized and placed in
durance. At length, a party of ’Ali Shah's followers de¬
voted themselves to the cause of their master, and martyred
Sultan Mahmud, son of Muhammad-i-Sam.

When the throne of the kingdom of Gljur had passed to
the sons of Sultan Gh iya^-ud-Din. Mahmud, son of [Mu¬
hammad-!-] Sam, an army from Kh urasan * arrived there in
order to take possession of Gh ur, as will subsequently be
related ; and the Ghurians caused 'Alt Shah to be set at
liberty, on the day that the Kh warazmi forces gained
possession of Firuz-koh.

'All ^ah proceeded to Ghaznin. and there he continued
as Malik for a considerable time*. Subsequently, Sultan
Muhammad, Kh warazm Shah, despatched persons who
entered into engagements with him on favourable terms;
so much so that 'Alt Shah, placing faith therein, was
induced to leave Gh aznin. and join the Kh warazmi army
and reached Tigin-abad of Garmsir. A party was [subse¬
quently] appointed and despatched from Kh warazm^ and
in the year 609 H., they martyred 'Ali Shah.

X. SULTAN 'ALA-UD-DIN », MUHAMMAD, SON OF TAKISH,
KHWARAZM SH AH.

Sultan 'Ala-ud-Din, Muhammad, had five sons; the

* Sh^^razmt troops, though no doubt chiefly natives of ShuiSsSn—the
KhnrSsant contingent.

* One copy alone of the original contains the word ** Malik.” For a correct
account of these matters, see the reign of MahmQd, in Section XVII., for our
author seems to have been determined not to relate anything not tending to
the ^orification of the Gh Brts. and often distorts facts to suit his purpose.

' Before he came to the throne his title was but on his

accession he assurned that of ’Al&-ud-Dtn, the title home by his lather.

THE TABA¥AT.1.NA§IRI.

aS4

first, Har-roz Shah ; the second, Gh urt Shanasti*: the
third, Jalal-ud-Din, Mang-barnl; the fourth, Arzalu Shah ;
and the fifth, AV Sulttan*.

He was a great and potent monarch, wise, valiant,
munificent, a patron of the learned, a conqueror, and im¬
petuous ; and, whatever qualifications it was desirable a
great sovereign and just ruler should possess, the Almighty
had endowed him with.

During the lifetime of his father, he bore the title of
Kutb-ud-Din ; and, when his brother, Malik Kh an, died,
his father conferred upon him the throne of Ni^apur, and
Malik Sharaf-ud-Din. Mas’ud-i-Hasan, was appointed to
be his Ata-bak or governor; and, after some time, the
command of the forces of Kh warazm was conferred upon
him.

On the side of his mother, likewise, he was a prince of
[the house of] Kifchak and very great, his mother being
the daughter of Kadr Kh an of Kifchak; and, from the
days of his boyhood, the marks of intelligence and clever¬
ness shone clearly and conspicuously on his brow. Every
expedition on which his father sent him, in the direction of
Jund and Turkistan, he brought to such a successful issue
as was desirable, in fact even a better than could have been
anticipated.

At the period when death overtook his father, Suljiin
Takish, Muhammad was absent in the direction of Jund
and Turkistan^, and, when he obtained information of that

* This name is very doubtful. Three copies of the text, in two or more
places, agree in the above reading; but others, again, have Nashanastl.
Mashanastt. Hash^stt, anil SJiansabt, all of which are unintelligible ; whilst
other authors, such as Gur.ldah, JahSn-Ara, and others, have Gh urt Sanjt,
which, they say, signifies “ the Ghurt fled.”

* The name of the first son here mentioned varies considerably in different
copies. The majority have Har-roz Shah, but the St. Pcterslnirg copies have
IJiruz [Ftruz?], Nimroz, and Ptr Sllah. respectively. This last name is con¬
firmed by other authors, .as will l)c mentioned farther on. The name of the
fourth also is written A^arlu, Arzalu, and Uzurlu. The whole of these names
are omitted altogether in most copies of the text. Other writers say he had
seven sons, three only of whom attained sovereign power. Guzldah mentions
their n.amesas follows:—AV->^ult.an, AzlaV [one copy, OzUllf], Kurj.a[onecopy,
Kuja ; Yafa-t h.as Kiijae] Tigin [?], Ughiil Malik, JalM-ud-Dm, Ghiyas-ud-
Dtn [Pir Shah], and Rukn-ud-Dtn, Gh urt Sh.anastt. See note * alwve.
Yafa-i mentions another, Ttmflr Malik. Sec note *, page 285.

* Nothing of the kind : our author commences this reign with a totally in¬
correct statement. He was engaged in the siege of Turahiz when the news of

THE shwArazm-suAhIah dynasty.

ass

circumstance, he returned to Khwarazm, and assumed the
throne; and, in the year 595 H.*, he brought the dominions
of his father under his own jurisdiction.

He conferred the throne of Ntshapur upon his brother,
’All ^ah *, as has been already stated ; and despatched an
envoy to the Courts of Ghur and Ghaznin. and sought for
peace; and I, Minhaj-i-Saraj, heard from one of the trust¬
worthy [persons] of the Maliks of Gliur the statement, that
one of the messages and requests of Sultan Muhammad
was this ^:—“ I, Muhammad-i-Takish, who am their ser-

his father’s death was received, and another week would have>been sufficient to
have taken it. His father’s ministers kept the matter secret, and sent off tb
acquaint Sultan Muhammad of it. He concealed the matter from his army,
and, feigning; illness, prepared to retire. The Mulahidahs sent him valuable
presents, and offered an additional sum of 100,000 duuirs as tribute. The
Sultan proceeded to Sharistanah. performed the funeral ceremonies of his
father, and set out with all haste for Khwanum. This is a most important
reign, and such events as our author has related—a number of most important
ones have been passed over—are either incorrectly stated, or moulded to the
glorification of the Qburts ; hence the notes here will be found, I fear, volu-
minous, and, were I to notice every thing, 1 might almost fill'a volume.

* Not so; his father died in Kama^an, 596 H., and Suljan Muhammad
ascended the throne in ShjtwwSl of that year.

• See note *, page 251.

^ This statement is ridiculous, and totally unworthy of credit j moreover,
the eventsovhich follow prove the contrary. No sooner had the Suljans of
Gh ur and Gh azntn obtained information of the death of Sultan Takigh, “ than
the devil," as one of the authors from whom this extract is taken says, “ex¬
cited their envy and ambition ; and they, without loss of time, despatched a
force to Marw under Muhammad-i- Kh anrak. whilst they followed at the head
of an immense force, including ninety great elephants like mountains in appear¬
ance." On reaching Tus they plundered and devasted the country, and
slaughtered the people, and then marched to ghiid-yakll. The Sultan’s
brother, Taj-ud-Dtn, ’Alt gllah, who had lately returned from ’Ir.aV, happened
to be there, and the Ghurtans obtained possession of the place by capitulation,
a tower having fallen from the number of spectators in it, which they took a' a
good omen. This our author turns into a miracle in the account of Ghiyag-ud-
Dtn, who, by his account, was a nnraclc-worker. This was in Kajab, 597 n.
The place was given up to plunder, and ’Alt Sh ah, the Sultan’s officials, and
the chief men of the place, were inhumanly treated and sent off with the
garrison to the capital of Gh ur. by the fall of this place the Gbfnts acquired
temporary possession of the whole country, as far as Ihistain and Jfirjan. This
effected, the brothers left a strong force at Ni-shapur [Shiid-y.ildl was .a portion
of that city, or rather a fortified suburb] under Malik Ziy.a-ud-Din ; and
Giiyag-ud-Dtn repaired to Hirat, and ^ihab-ud-Din into the Kuhistan
against the Mulahidahs of that part, and afterwards returned to Hii.at likewise.
As soon as Sultan Muhammad liearil of these troubles in ^hur.isan, he, in ^f-
^ijjah of the same year [597 it.], set out at the head of his tioops, and early
in 598 H, encamped before Sh ad-vakli. .After some skiimishing outside, the

SS6 THE TABA^AT.I.HA^IRL

vant, make this request, that the Suljtans would be pleased
to accept my services; and, although I am not possessed
of the worthiness of being a son, it behoveth that the
Sultan-i- Gh azl. Mu’izz-ud-Dtn, Muhammad>i-Sam, should
take to wife my mother, Kh udawandah-i-J ahan. and that
he should accept me, Muhammad-i-Takish. as his son and
servant, in order also that I, his servant, may, by the name
on the coin * of that august monarch, and the Kh utbah of
that sovereign of exalted dignity, conquer the whole world ;
and, for the servants of the Court of the Sultans—the
asylum of the world—draw the sword, and become one of
those servants.”

When this overture had been delivered, the purport
coincided with the inclinations of Suljtan Gh iya^-ud-Din,
but did not accord with the sentiments of Sultan Mu’izz-
ud-Din [the person chiefly interested], and he declined to
ratify it*. The latter Sultan assembled his troops, and
marched into Kh urasan, and subdued the whole of that
territory ; but, when he subsequently set out on his return,
Sultan Muhammad brought an army, and again recovered
Khurasan.

Whenever the Sultans of GhOr [and Qh^znln] used to
march into Klh urasan. Sultan Muhammad used to retire
[as they advanced] to the distance of two or three marches
before them ; and when they fell back he would follow
them up at the distance of two or three marches'. In

fihurts retired within the walls “like mice to their holes,” and the battering-
rams were placed in position, and the ditch filled, when the Gh urts capitulated.
They were treated honourably, and sent back to Gh ur ‘‘ with dresses of honour,
in order to show the Gh urts hOw to treat fidlen foes.” The Sulffin, after this
affair, directed that the walls of Shiid^klx should be razed. All these events
certainly look as though Sultan Mubammad had solicited the Sult&ns of Gh Or
to accept his vassalage. After this the Sult&n proceeded to Marw and Sinklis,
which last mentioned l>lace was held by his nephew, Hindu Shan, aod held by
him for the Sul^ns of Gh fir and Gj^azntn. On the approach of Ut uncle
Hinds RbSn fled to Ghur ; but, as the governor in charge of Sarakhs refused
to open the gates, Sultan Muhammad left a force to take it, and contiiuied his
march to ShwSrazm by way of Marw to prepare for a campaign against Hirilt.
In ^t-Hiijah of that year he encamped in the plain of RSdakSn ; and having
muster^ his forces, both Turk and TSJgik, he commenced his march, and in
due time his tents were pitched in sight of Hirat.

• The text differs here in some copies. Some have “by the name and coin,”
others “ by the name 0/"tk* coin,” &c., both of which are meaningless.

* Not desiring to be roasted in a bath. Hit first title was Shihab-ud-Dfn.

> The reader would imagine, from the above, that the dxurtan Sultans were

*57

the KHwArazm-shAhIah dynasty.

1 sustained a complete overthrow, and he

us^ to give proofs of his skill and bravery; but, as those
Sultans were monarchs of great power and magnificence,
he was unable to cope with them effectually.

When the Sultans of Gljur died, Sultan Muhammad,
iyiwarazm Sfeah, appeared before the gates of Hirat*, and

^ ^

only the above would imagine that Hirat sustained siege

Dtn', ‘his reign, and that one Sllihab-^-

Dtns^ce^se ; and onr author, whose idea of epitomizing events ^peam to

wnl tT'., ‘h>-“ sieges, and one of these occurred

Shihilb-ud Dtru ^^'^**'***'.^^ **** second long ^fore the death of

sio^h^^K^ - ^ first occurred at the close of 598 n.; upon which occa-

fr^v invested it, after the battering-rams had been

of ’ ^ ® ‘*’® governor, ’Izz-ud-Dtn, >Umr, Maraghant. a

monfvP^nce, and the terms were agreed upon, and a large sum of
money was paid as ransom. “

ali*h«rl"f ‘"vestment of Hirtt, the Sultans of fihur and fihaznln made

^sTfs . “nd Shihah-ud-Dtn^ at the head of a large army, advanced by way

whS hf did■’ d Muhammad thought it advisable to retire^

Im ‘"‘vards Marw by way of Marw-ar-Rud. When

he ^ched Sarakhs he halted, and negotiations went on between him and the
Giurfs, who ^ught the cession of some portion of Khurasan, the detaiU of
SVhsK u" These events took place in 599 h.

*’°'^*ver, heard of the death of hU brother,
aurasan, leaving Muhammad Khamak, the
gn^t of the J^urt nobles, and the champion of fihOr, to hold Marw. The

hSf rnToTat r"* by a bodyof Khwarazmt troops, threw

adJl;!!i“rT.« elated the Khwarazmt nobles and ministers that they

SiTuTlhi r bff" possession of it.

® ""°"S ‘Itemselves about the late Sultan\

-f ^ V “P*" “™»- I" ‘l>e month of

Ja^-«l.Aw^l. 600 H.-fihiyas-ud-Dtn had died in the previous year

HiSr V « J-‘fie Sultan appeareti before

^ time ; and, after immense stones had been poured into the

^i!f^a ***' nrptiations for surrender were again opened by

Alb-i-eiiazt the governor, sister’s son of the two fihflrtan Sullfcis ; and after
sUpulations had been entered into for the safety of life and property, and the
pajment of a large sum of money, the place was given up.

Some y^ passed between this affair and the next investment of Hirat
dunng which time ghihib-ud-Dtn invaded Khwirazm, and had to beat L
“d of vrhich will be found under his reign farther on.

“'“b-ud-Dfn had subsequently entered into a treaty of peace with Sultan
Mupammad, Khwarazm Sh^h, and had been assassuiatcd, Khwarazm Sbdh had

158 THE TABA5:AT.I-NA§IRI.

Malik ’Izz-ud-Dtn, Husain-i-Kharmil, Ghurl, came out and
paid homage to him; and the Sultan brought all IQiurasan
under his sway. When, by his command, Husain-i-Khar-
mil was seized by his troops, a Khwajah of Hirat, named
Sa’d-ud-Din, a native of Tirmiz, succeeded in getting
away from the [ Kh warazmil army, and threw himself into

annexed the Gh aznin territory, and the successor of Suljan djiyag-ud-Dtn had
acknowledged Sultan Muhammad’s suzerainty before the next investment of
Hirat took place, on which occasion the uaters of the Ilart-rud were dammed
up ; and ’Irz-ud-I)tn, Hiisain-i-Kharmtl. one of the Gh urian nobles, had in the
meanwhile become Walt of Hirat and its dependencies, which he held of
Sultan Mahmud, son of the late Ghiyag-ud-Dtn. Kharmtl, being suspicious of
the "upshot of the aflairs of Ghur, sent to the Sultan repeatedly tendering his
allegiance to him. The Sultan was occupied with the affairs of £hita-t at the
time, and could not proceed to Hirat, as Kharmtl solicited him to do, and to
take possession of it and its dependencies. At length the Sultan set out for
Khurasan, and, having taken possession of Balkll by the way, he marched by
way of Jazuran to Hirat. He entered it in Jamadi-ul-Awwal, 607 H. After
this Mahmud of Ghur acknowledged his suzerainty, and read the Khutbah,
and coined money in the ^ Sultan’s name, and sent him costly presents,
inclutling a white elephant. ' Kharmtl was continued in the government of
Hirat with a salary of 250,000 gold dinars yearly out of the revenues of
Kh urasan.

After the Sultan returned to Khwarazm, and became occupied in the affairs
of Khifa-t, and a rumour had spread abroad that the Suljan had been taken
prisoner by the JQilta-is, Kharmtl became disaffected, and began intriguing
with the Gh urt ruler, and again coined money in his name [from thi.s it would
appear that the governor of every province had a mint, or rather coined money,
at the provincial capital], and apologized for the past ; but the Ghints, l>eing
enraged at his past conduct, rcsi.)lved upon hostility, and <letcrmined to try and
oust him from Hirat, and adtanced with an army towaids it. Khaimil, who
in the meantime had heard of the .Sultan’s safety, fearing the consequences of
his acts, and in order to palliate them, called upon the Khwarazmi nobles
stationed in eastern Khurasan to aid him in resisting the Ghurts. They came
to his assistance with a body of troops, and, after oaths aiul stipulations of safe-
conduct, Kharmtl came out, and in combination they routed the forces of Ghur;
and this blow quite liroke the little power still possessed by them. The
Khwarazmi nobles now wrote to Sultan Muhammad, saying that Hirat was
like a forest, and Kharmil like a lion within it, and thought the time propitious
for getting rid of him. They kept on good terms with him until the Suljan’s
reply reached them, after which they invited him to a consultation. When the
council broke up, the Malik of Zawzan, Kawam-ud-Din, invited Kharmtl to his
quarters to a feast ami drinking bout, fie excused himself under plea of want
of leisure. Kawam-ud-Din seized his bridle as though determined to take no
denial, and gave a sign to the rest of the nobles and chiefs along with him,
who drew their swords, dispersed Kbiarmil’s followers, and dragged him on
foot to their tents. He was sent away a prisoner to the fortress of Salomad of
Khowaf [another historian says “of Zawzan it is probably the Sala-Mihr of
our author ; see page 283], and his effects were seized, and a short time after¬
wards bis head was sent to Kh warazm.

THE KHwArazm-SHAhIah dynasty.

*S9

the city, and, for a period of eleven months, he continued
to hold the place*.

The IQiwarazmi army, by a contrivance devised by
Husain-i-JQiarmil, dammed up the water of the river of
Hirat above the city, and all round became like unto a sea ;
and matters assumed such an aspect, that, if the city had
not been entirely surrounded by walls, the water, which
rose higher than the housetops, would have overwhelmed
it As it was, upon one or two occasions the ground opened
in the middle of the city, and water issued forth from the
midst, but it was diverted [and the danger obviated].

For a period of eight months hostilities continued
between the defenders of the city and the Khwarazmt
forces in boats*; and, when eleven months of the invest¬
ment had passed, Sultan Muhammad-i-Takish arrived*
from Kh warazm. and gave directions that the dyke [which
kept the water in] should be opened ; and, when the water
flowed out, it carried along with it about three hundred

* The steward or deputy in Kharmil’s employ, Zaydj by name, a man of
acuteness and cunning, managed to throw himself into the fortress, seeing the
state of affairs, and shut himself up there. He was joined by igjiatmil’s fol¬
lowers and all the vagabonds and rascals of the city, among whom he distributed
the wealth in Sbarmil’s treasury, and defied the E^warazmi forces. It so
happened that the Sultan, on account of the disaffection of a relative of his
mother, who held the government of §had-yakh, had come into Khurasan at
this juncture, and had reached .Saiakhs on his return. Zaydi now began to
fear the consequences'of his temerity, and to jilead as an cA;use that he could
not plage any confidence in the Khwarazrui noble-, for his safety, and that he
was merely awaiting the arrival of the .Sultan at Iliiat to give it up. This the
nobles communicated to the Kultan, and solicited him to come. He di<I so,
and, on being made acquainted with Z,aydi’s doings, his anger was so much
kindled, that he OKdereei that the ivaUrs should be dammed up. When the waters
had accumulated sufficiently the dam was opened, the waters rushed in, and one
of the principal bastions fell. The tlitch near was filled iqi with trees and
rubbish, and rendered practicable for the troops ; and one day, whilst Zaydt
was entertaining his vaga.bond followers, the Kh warazmt soldiers planted the
Sultan’s standards on the wall.s, rushed in, slew them, and carried the place.
Zaydt sought to get away unnoticed, but was seized, and dnagged before the
Sultan by the hair of his head. After this the Sultan directed that plunder
should cease, and the shojis were again opened ; and thus w.as flirat freed from
the tyranny of Zaydt and his gang. As Kharmtl h.ad been put to death some
time before, his having advised the damming up of the llait-Kud is, like many
other of our author’s statements, purely imaginary.

* Boats are not mentioned in all the copies.

* Two paragraphs before this our author states that Sultan Mufiamm.ad
appeared before the gates of Hirat and invested it, but now says quite dif¬
ferently.

»6o THE TABA?:AT.I.NA?IR1.

ells of the walls of the -city, and a breach was thereby
effected ; and, after fifteen days* fighting, the city was taken
by assault.

After this success the Sultan marched to Bal kh. and
gained possession of that place likewise ; and Malik
*lm3d-ud-Din, ’Umr, Fiwari* [native of Fiwar], who was
governor of the province of Balkh, on the part of the
Sultans of Bamian, was sent away [as a prisoner] to
Kh warazm. From thence the Sultan set out towards
Mawar-un-Nahr and Turkistan ; and the whole of the
Maliks and Sultans of the-Afrasiyabi dynasty, who held
territory in the countries of Mawar-un-Nahr and Fargha-
nah, presented themselves before him.

He then turned his face towards Kulij^ Kh an of Kh ita-t.

* In some copies he is called Malik Tm^-u 1 -MuIk, Ahwazt; and in some
it is stated that (le wen/, in others that he was sen/, and in others that he was
/aken. Balkh was surrendered before the last investment of Hirat, as mentioned
in the preceding note. Imad-ud-Din, having been found acting perfidiously,
instead of being put to death, was removed from the government of Balkh and
sent to Khwarazm, and was employed elsewhere.

V Our author has misplaced the order of these events and related them
incorrectly, as well as confounded one with another. After the death of Sultin
Shihab-ud-Dfn, Gh urt. in 6o2 H., Sultan Muhammad, having no cause for
anxiety respecting the safety of his dominions in ShurasUn, turned his attention
to Mawar-un-Nahr, which had remained in subjection to the infidels of Shit^-f
since the'defeat of Sultan Sanjar. The chiefs of that territory had repeatedly
solicited him to deliver them from the yoke of those infidejs, and, being quite
wearied and disgusted with the constant arrivals of agents from Gur Kh an
demanding payment of the tribute, which he had purposely kept in arrears,
and which his father, Takish. had agreed to pay to the sovereigns of Shita-l for
assistance rendered*to him against his brother, Sultan Shah, he now readily
acceded to these requests, considering himself powerful enough to ignore all
future payments, which he had long considered dishonourabie to his sovereignty.

BuJdl^ra at this time was held by a mean upstart named Sanjar Malik, It
was annexed, and the upstart met with his deserts. The Sul^n then despatched
an agent to ’U$man, SultSn of Samrkand, of the race of Afrasiyab, and of the
family of Bugkra Khan, the antagonist of the latter Sam&ntan princes. He
was already disaffected towards Gur Khan, for he had solicited the hand of a
daughter of the latter, and had been refused ; so he became secretly a zealous
ally of the Suljan. This was in 606 H.; and, after consulting with the Sultan
of Sultans—as ’Usman had been Hitherto styled—and his chiefs, SultSn
Muhammad returned to Khwarazm to prepare for the campaign.

In the eastern parts of Gur Khan’s dominions, his great vassals at this period
began to act rebelliously ; and Kojlak [called Koshlak and Kuahlak by some
writers, but not KashlQ, as our author writes it], son of Tae-n 3 .k [also written
Taya-nak] Khan, the NaemSn mler, who had fled from the power of Chingiz
KhSn, and had sought GQr protection, was at Bis court, and ready to

take advantage of any outbreak against his protector.

THE SHWARAZM-SHAmIAH DYNASTY.

«6i

and, throughout the territories of Khi ta-l and the country,
of Turkistan, as far as Bilasa-ghun and Kashghar. the
Khutbah was read for him, and the coin was impressed
with his name. The forces of Khita-i. which, in point of
numbers, were beyond account and computation, advanced
to encounter him. At the head of these forces was Bantko
of a Turk of great age and wisdom, but victorious

in battle. He had fought forty-hve engagements, tn the
whole of which he had been victorious ; and he had defeated
Sul(an Sanjar, son of Malik Shah, and overthrown Sul$an
Mu’izz-ud-D}n, Muhammad-i-Sam, before Andkhud ; and,
at this time, he was at the head of that army.

When the battle ensued, Sul(an Muhammad received
divine succour and heavenly assistance, and overthrew the
host of Kh ita-l. and took Banlko of Taraz prisoner, and he
was converted to the true faith by means of the Sultan
himself, and was treated with respect and honour*.

Sultan Muhammad thought this opportunity propitious, and such as he had
long sought. He accordingly inarched to Samr^and, and, being joined by
’UffinSn and other vassals, set out to invade G&r ShSn’s dominions, reached the
JthQn of Fangkat, and-ctossed. Having advanced into the territory of TatSz,
the Shwirazmi forces found BSntko [several writers call him Tinlko], of
TarSz—&mous a» Jai>ttmur, son of Kaldiiz, elder brother of Bui^,- the CEam-
berlain, who.subsequently-usurped the government of Kirman—the commander-
in-chief of Gur Kbgii.’ » troops, at the head of a numerous, brave, and well-
equipped army, drawn up to receive them. An obstinate and bloody battle
ensued, in Rabl’-ul-A^^h ^7 tt., which terminated in the complete over¬
throw of the forces. Banlko, of Tar 3 z, was wounded and taken, as

related on the next page, and booty to a vast amount fell into the hands of the
victors. This victoiy filled all the neighbouring rulers with fear and awe of
Sull&n Muhammad’s power, and he now assumed the title of “The Second
Alexander.”

In the previous year Mazandar&u had been annexed, and in this same year
{607 K.] KirmSn was also added to his dominions. Who Ettllj £ll 3 n was it
would be diffindt to tell ; he is a totally different person to Kojlak [Koshlak],
by our author's own account, and cannot be intended for Gur JShibi, as he
mentions that nder subsequently. KashlQ >s evidently mistaken for Kojlak.
Bintko, of T^aiiz, was Gur Kha n’s general, as stated above.

* How absurd, or rather deceptive, our author’s statements are, compared
with the accounts of writers who state &cts, or who, at least, knew what they
were writing about I Bhniko was wounded in this severe encounter, and was
left on the field with only a slave-girt standing over him. A Shwirazmt
toldier coming up was about to cut off his head, when the girl cried out to him
not to slay him, for it was Bftnlko. He was taken accordingly to the Sultan’s
presence, and aAerwards sent to Khwarazm as a trophy with the bulletin
announcing the victory. When SultSn Muhammad returned to JShwarozm,
on the termination of this campaign, he ordered BSnfko to be put to death, and

»6t THE TABA]^T-I-NA$Ik!.

A reliable person among the trustworthy has related,
that, when Baniko of Taraz became a Musalman, Suljtan
Muhammad was wont to show him great deference and
respect, and used constantly to send for him, and was in
the habit of questioning him respecting the past events [in
the history] of Khita-i, and the previous Maliks [kings]
who had fought with him in the forty-five encounters he
had been engaged in, the whole of which the Sultan made
inquiry' about of him. Upon one occasion, when engaged in
such conversation, the Sul(an inquired of him, saying :—
“ In all these battles which you have fought, and amid the
monarchs you have defeated, which among the whole of
them was the most valiant and the sturdiest in battle.?”
Baniko replied :—“ I found none more valiant, more im¬
petuous in battle, or more intrepid than the Ghurt* ; and, if
he had had an army along with him refreshed and not worn
out, I should never have been able to beat him ; but, he
had retreated before the army of Kh warazm, and but a
small number of cavalry remained with him, and their
horses had become thin and weak.” Suljtan Muhammad
replied :—” You speak truly.” The mercy of God be upon
them !

Sultan Muhammad having gained such a great success,
the second year after, again assembled an army, and led a
force of 4 (X),(X)0 effective cavalry, both horses and riders
arrayed in defensive armour*, into Kh ita-i. and completely

his body was cast into the river. There is not a word as to his having been
converted to Islam. This was the “deference and respect” he received. What
follows, as to the conversations about the Gh firis, must be taken at its true
value. See also note *, page 283.

• Here again we see the «letermination to glorify all things Gh Crian. One
of the oldest copies has “ if his army and himself had been refreshed,” &c.
For a correct account of this affair, see the reign of Mu’izz-ud-Dtn, otherwise
Shihab-ud-Din. Gh uri. Section XVII.

‘ After the victory gained over Baniko, the Sultan marched against the
Malik of Utrar, who, notwithstanding the Sultan had invited him to sever his
connexion with Gur Shan, refused. His chiefs, however, on the approach of
the Khwarazm-Shaht troops, forced him to submit. He came out clothed in
a winding sheet, and with a sword hanging about his neck, but was pardoned
on the understanding that he should be removed together with his family,
kinsmen, and dependents to Nisa, in Upper Khurasan, and Sult|an Mu^iammad
placed a governor of his own in Utrar. After this, the Sultan returned to
Samrf^and, and bestowed a daughter in marriage upon Sultan ’Ugman, and
leaving an intendant of his own at SamrVand, returned to Kh warazm. It
was at this time that he gave orders to put Baniko to death ; and ambassadors

THE SHWARAZM-SHAHIAII DYNASTY.

a63

overthrew Gur IQian, who was the Great Khan of [^ara]
2^ita-t. The whole of the horses, camels, and other

from all parts hastened to tender their masters’ submission ; and it was at this
period that disaffection showed itself at J und among the remaining vassals of
l^dir £^&n [called JSia.dr Slian by our author, and some few other writers,
who appear to have copied from him], and therefore Sultan Miihammad did
not rest long at his capital, but put his forces in motion and marched to Jund.
After exterminating those rebels, Sultan ’Ugman and his family took up their
residence in Kh warazm ; and some authors state that he was soon after, in the
year 609 H., put to death. Having disposed of the affairs of Jund, information
reached the Sultan that 30^000 of Gur Kh an’s troops had appeared before
Samr^and, and invested the city.

The Kh>la -1 forces used their utmost endeavours to take it, but their inces¬
sant attacks were of no avail. The Sultan was hastening his preparations to
relieve it, when the Kh ita-t forces were recalled to act against Kojlak, the
Naeman, who was now making head again. The Sultan marched to Samr-
]cand, and, having been joined by additional forces from various parts, set out
from SamrVand against A’najc [or I’naV, or Ighna^ ?], the ruler of which was
in alliance with Gur Khan. He had been summoned to submit to the Suitan
utron very favourable terms, but, trusting to the strength of his fortress, refused.
A force was detached against him, and he was compelled to submit.

The Sul{an, who had heard of Kojiak’s successes, became more ambitious
than ever, and Kojlak entered into secret negotiations with him, and incited
him to another invasion of Gur Khan’s territory. The agreement was, that
whoever could first dispossess Gur Khan of the territories of Kashghar and
Khutan as far as the Jihun should have them ; and, in case the Suljan did so,
Kojlak was to have the remainder. Gur Kh an, having obtained information
respecting the Sultan’s movements, also prepared to opp>ose him.

The Snljan had traitors also in his camp. Two of his great vassals, the
governor of Samrfirand, and the A;fahed [also written Asfahed, the title borne
by the Maliks of Tabaristan and Rustamdar], despatched agents to Gur Kh an
secretly, and offered to desert the Sultan with their troops on the" day of battle,
if, in case of success, the former should have Khwarazm and the latter
Khurasan .assigned to him as the price of his treachery. This was
guaranteed ; and on the day of the engagement, when the ranks of the two
armies were drawn up in array, the left wing of the Khila-fs attacked the right
of the Kh warazmts ; and, as agreed upon, the two nobles with their troops,
who appear to have been stationed in the right wing, retired from the field,
and the Sultan’s right wing was forced back and broken. In the meantime,
the latter’s left wing broke the right of the Kh ita-ts and routed them, and the
centres of both armies fell upon each other. The wings on either side began
to plunder, and neither party knew whether they were the conquerors or con¬
quered. It was usual with the Sultan to di.sgu''se himself on the day of battle,
by dressing in the costume of the enemy : and on this occasion, in the utter
confusion which ensued, the centres of both armies having become disengaged
from each other, the .Sultan got mixed up with the enemy’s troops, and not being
recognized by his attendants, for some days he was in the greate.st danger in
the very camp of the enemy. Finding an opportunity, however, he succeeded
In getting away, reached the river of Fanakat, and restored fresh life to his
troops. The news of the Sultan’s tlisappearance, however, had spread into all
parts of his dominions. Some said he had been killed, some that he had been

364

THE TABA^AT-I-NA^IRL

cattle, baggage, and followers of the army of Khi ta-t were
captured, and the Great Kh an retreated discomfited before
him. Suddenly Kashlu Kh Sn. the Tatar, who had come
from Turkistan, fell upon Gur Kh an, attacked him, and
made him captive ; and the whole of the dominions of
Kh ita * were left in the possession of Sultan Muhammad-i>

made prisoner ; for no authentic account had been received, and the ambitious
were ready to take advantage of it.

As soon as he joined his army, messengers were sent out into all parts to
intimate his safety ; and the Sultan returned to Shvmmzni to prepare for a
fresh campaign. It was on the occasion of the Sultan's disappearance, that
ICha rmtl of Hirat became disaffected, and began intriguing with the G-h Brts.

The Shit^-t troops on their retreat through their own territory slew and
plundered their own people, and devastated the whole country until they
reached BilasS-ghun- called Ghu-baligh. by the Mug^ials. On reaching that
city they /bund the gates closed against them, for the inhabitants made sure
that Sullen Muhammad would annex that part, and that he must be following
Gur trtia n's troops with his army, and therefore refused to admit them. All
the promises and oaths of Gur ShSn and his Waztr were of no avail; and the
place was attacked and defended for sixteen days, in expectation of the arrival
of the Khwarazmt troops. At last it was taken and given up to plunder and
massacre, which went on for tAree days and nights, and a vast amount of booty
was taken by the troops.

Two or three writers mention these occurrences immediately after the first
defeat of Gur 2 [hian’s troops, when BBnfko was-taken ; but this is impossible,
as, very shortly after the sacking of BiiasS|3t^> f^^r Sl^n was seised by
Kojiak, and his dynasty terminated after it had lasted ninety.five years. The
cause of it was this :—Gur Kha n II.—for he was the second of the name—was
desirous of enriching himself and replenishing his coffer^ by making his nobles
and chiefs disgorge the booty they had acquired by the sacking of BilSsS^gfaBn
and country round. ITiis caused great disorders, which Kojiak becoming
aware of, and finding that Gur Kha n had been almost deserted by his troops,
suddenly surrounded his camp. Kojiak treated him with respect, but pos¬
sessed himself of great part of his territory. This took place In 610 H., and
two years after Gur B^h an was put fo death—some say he died.

Most works are, more or less, defective with respect to the Sultan’s cam¬
paigns against Gur Kha n, and dates are not often mentioned. The Raufat-
U9-$afa only mentions one battle, others mentipn two ; but Guztdah says there
were three battles in all, but gives no details. Here, I regret to say, my
excellent guide, Yafa-t, which gives full details of two battles, already men¬
tioned, becomes somewhat abrupt with respect to the affairs of Gur &han, and,
possibly, there may be an hiatus in the MS., as, from the context, a third and
more decisive battle is implied ; and it must have been after a third encounter
that BilBsa-ghQn was sacked,, and Kojiak was enabled to seize the person of
rtfir TTha n. The second encounter took place in 610 H., and Fa^ib-t, under
the events of 613 h., mentions that, in that year, Sultan Muhammad acquired
sway over the whole of Mawar-un-Nahr, which had continued in the possession
of the inftdels of E>trii-'Sllil 2 -f, and the Mughal^, since SulJ&n Sanjaris defeat.
On the other hand,-however, most writers state that GOr was taken

prisoner in 610 H., and died in firz H.

* Gross exoneration, as shown by the notes.

THE KHWARAZM-SHAhIAH DYNASTY. 265

Takigli. The Suljan of Samr^rand, and the Afrasiyabt
Sul{ans, he directed should be removed from S^mr^and*
and some of them were martyred.

From thence [Samr^and .^] Sultan Muhammad advanced
intoTrah, and the territories of’Irak, Azarbatjan, and Fars
fell into his hands. He took the Ata-bak Sa’d captive in
battle, as has already been stated, and the Ata-bak Yuz-bak
was likewise put to flight". He placed his son, Suljan

• All the copies, except one of the oldest, are minus the words “ from Samr-
Vand.” Our author inverts the order of most of the events of this reign, as
the previous notes show.

* Our authdr, on a previous page, has mentioned the hostility existing
between the ’Abbast Shalifahs and Sultan Takiah, Muhammad's father; and
the arrival in Qhur of ambassadors from Baghdad to negotiate with the
brothers, Suljans Ghiyas-ud-Dtn and Sllihab-ud-Din, and his own father’s
return to Baghdad along with them ; and, likewise, the Khal ifah’s continued
enmity towards the son of Takigh also. No sooner had Sultan Takish died,
than the Sultans of Qhur and Ghaznln hastened to take advantage of the
Shalifah’s recommendation, notwithstanding our author’s absurd statement at
pAge 255. He was too orthodox a MusalmSn, of course, to mention such a
horrid rircumstance as the Shaltfah, Un-Nagir’s, despatching an agent to the
infidel Chingiz Sh&n, prior to the period of this expedition into ’IraV< inciting
him to make war upon Suipn Muhammad—a Musalman, and of which faith
he [Un-Nkgir] was himself the patriarch and head I It was upon this occasion
that, fearing to send a letter, the communication addressed to the traitor
Muhammad, Yalwaj, the minister of Chingiz, was written or rather tattooed
[there is a precisely similar story in Herodotus] on the agent’s shaVen head.
The hair was left to grow over it before he was despatched, lest even that
mode of communication might be discovered. Among other causes of hostility
was this :—The Sultan’s flag, borne by the karwan of pilgrims to Makkah, was
placed behind that of Jalal-ud-Din, ^asan, of Alamut, the Mulahidah heretic,
lately turned orthodox; and another was that the Shalifah borrowed, so to
speak. Several FidH-ts [volunteers, or disciples rather, of the head of the
MuUbidahs are so called] from the former, intending to despatch them to
assassinate the Sul]an ; and had sent some of these disciples to murder the
Sharif of Makkah, but, instead, they assassinated his brother. Further, when
Sultin Mui^ammad acquired possession of Qhaznfn, after the death of Taj-ud-
Dtn, I-yal-duz [styled Yal-dGz, and Yal-duz by some], in 611-12 H., and
gained possession cd the treasury of the late SnltSn Sllihab-ud-Din, Ghuri. a
document was found therein, from the Shalliah to the ChGrian Sultans, urging
them to hostility against him [Mui^ammad], which accounted for the persistent
hostility of the brothen towards him, notwithstanding our author’s ridiculous
statement referred to above. At length, in 613 H., the Sultan, having sufficient
excuse, obtained the necessary decree from the chief ecclesiastic of his
dominions, issued a proclamation to the effect that as long as a descendant of
Fatimah lived the Abbasls had no right to the SbilSfat, and that the then
I^allffih was to be considered dethroned. His name was omitted from the
Slxotbnh and the coin, and the name of Sayyid ’Aia-ul-Mulk [some few call
him ’Ala-ud-D(n] of Tlrmid, a lineal descendant of Indm Husain, was inserted
instead, and he was to be considered as the rightful Khaltfah,

S

266

THE TABA^AT-I-NASIRI.

Rukn-ud-Din, styled Gh urt Shanastt. on the throne of
’Ira|f, and appointed Ulugh Kh an-i-Abl Muhammad, his
Ata-bak and Lieutenant; and the Maliks of Gh ur were
directed to proceed into that territory*.

Sultan Muhammad now left ’Iralk, and set out on his
return to Mawar-un-Nahr; but, turning suddenly off from

The Sultan assembled an army accordingly for the purpose of proceeding
to Baghdad, ousting Un-Na;ir, and placing Sayyid ’Ala-ul-Mulk in his
place.

On reaching Damghan, Sultan Muhammad found that the Ata-bak Sa’d,
ruler of Pars, with an army, had reached Rai with hostile designs against the
territory of TraV- He pushed on without delay, and at once attacked him.
The troops of were broken and overthrown at the first onset, and Sa’d

was taken prisoner. The SuUan was for putting him to death, but Sa’d,
having made interest with the Malik of Zauzan, was admitted, through him, to
the Sultan’s presence. Sa’d was released on the agreeiqent to give up two of
the strongest fortresses of Pars, one of which \vas I$takliur, and to pay one-
fourth of the revenues as tribute. Pa$ih-i states that this took place in 603 H.;
but Yafa-i and Guzidah say it happened in 613 H. ; while Rau^at-uj-^ata,
Kh ula^at-iil-Akhhar, and some others, say in 614 H. It is somewhat strange
that Sa’d did not attempt to shake off the yoke and break the treaty after the
disasters which befell the Sultan soon after, if the two latter dates be the more
correct. Sa’d made over his son Zangi as a hostage and was allowed to
depart, as already related ; see page 176 and page note*.

At this same time the Ata-bak Yuz-bak, ruler of AjarbafjSn, had also
marched from that territory with the object of invading ’IraV, and had reached
Hamadan. The Kh warazml forces advanced against him, but, on their reach¬
ing Hamadan, Yuz-bak decamped. The Sultan’s nobles urged pursuit, but
that monarch refused his sanction, saying that it would be a bad omen to take
two kings in one year ; so Vuz-bak got safely back to his own territory. As
soon as he did so, however, he sent envoys with rich presents to the Suljan,
and acknowledged his sovereignty.

In the meantime, the advance of the Sultan into ’IraV had filled Un-Na^ir
and his people with terror. Un-Nafir despatched an agent to Hamadan to
endeavour to deter him by remonstrances and threats, but found them of no
use with the Sultan with 300,000 horse at his back, who was resolved to
persist. When he reached the ^ulwan Pass [the town of Asad-abad] it was
autumn, and, whilst there encamped, he encountered a heavy fall of snou',
which rose even higher than the tent walls ; and nearly the whole of the cattle
of his army, and a great number of men, perished. This was the first disaster
he had ever met with, and he had to abandon the expc<lition and return to
Hamadan. When the cold season drew towards a close, he thought it
advisable to retrace his steps. He returned to Rai, and remained in that part
for a little while to repair his losses and reorganize his forces, and arrange the
affairs of that territory. He was on his return from thence, where he had left
his son, Rukn-ud-Din, in charge of the government, when a messenger reached
him from the governor of Utrar, intimating the arrival there of a number of
Tatar spies, as he termed them, with a large amount of valuable property.
Por details sec farther on.

* To serve with their contingents. They were subordinate then.

THE KHWARAZM-SHAHIAH DYNASTY. 367

the banks of the river Jazar*, he pushed on towards Bamlan,
and, suddenly and unawares, pounced upon Sultan Jalal-ud-
’All, son of Sam, ruler of Bamian, seized him, and mar¬
tyred him, and then returned [to Kh warazm].

In the year 612 H., Sultan Muhammad advanced from
MSwar-un-Nahr and came to Gh aznin^ and suddenly and
unexpectedly possessed himself of the Ghazntn territories
likewise. Sultan Taj-ud-Din, Yal-duz, retired towards
Hindustan' by the way of Sang-i-Surakh ; and the countries
of Qhaznin, Zawulistan, and Kabul, as far as the banks of
the Sind, came under the jurisdiction of the Kh warazml
nobles. The Kh ’an-salar [the Sewer of the imperial house¬
hold], Kuriz*, was stationed at Ghaznin; and the countries of
Slur, Ghaznin, the Bilad-i-Dawar [Zamin-i-Dawar], Jarum,
and the throne of the two Sultans, Gh iyas-ud-Din, and
Mu’izz-ud-Din, sons of Muhammad-i-Sam, was conferred, by
the Sultan, upon his eldest son, Sultan Jalal-ud-Din, Mang-
barni, after which he himself returned to Mawar-un-Nahr.

In the year 615 H., he pushed on towards Turkistan in
pursuit of ]^adr Khan*, who was the son of Yusuf the
Tatar, and penetrated as far as Yigliur* [I-ghur] of Tur¬
kistan, so far to the north, that he came under the North
Pole, and reached a tract where the light of twilight did not
disappear at all from the sight ; and, to the vision, in the
direction of the north, the glow seemed merely to incline
[change over] from the west to the east, and the light of
dawn appeared and the day broke.

The matter was accordingly referred to the ’Ulama and
Muftis of Bukhara respecting the obligation to repeat the
last prayer at night*, [question being asked] to this effect:—

* In most copies this part of the sentence is left out altogether. The name
is also written Jow 3 r.

^ I-yal-duz [or Yal-duz] was taken prisoner and put to death by I-yal-timish
in 611 H., before the Sultan entered the djaznin territory.

* This name differs considerably in some copies of the text.

® There is no expedition against any ruler styled ^Cadr Kh an mentioned
by other writers at this period, for it was in this very year that the Sultan fle<l
from the Mughal invaders. Our author has evidently lost himself again. At
page 254, he says the Sultan’s mother was the -daughter of ICadr £han of
yifchajf, and he, incorrectly, styles the governor of Utrar by the same name ;
and thus no less than three ICadr IQians aje mentioned.

* All the copies of the text are somewhat at variance here with respect to
this name; but it is mentioned again farther on, and is quite plain in several copies.

* Prayer before retiring to rest, repeated some two or three hours after sunset.

S 2

368

THE TABA¥AT.I-NA$IRI.

As the light of twilight did not disappear at all, whether
the prayer before sleep was necessary or not ? They,
with one accord, wrote a reply, that the prayer before
sleep was not necessary, when the prescribed time for it
could not be found with the people inhabiting such region*.

l^adr Khan, the Tatar, having" in this expedition been
overcome, the calamity of the infidels of Ch in arose, and
the darkness of the night of sedition and tumult showed
its head from the mantle-collar of actuality, and was the
beginning of dire misfortunes to the true faith, and
the commencement of calamities and afflictions upon the
Muhammadan people. That circumstance occurred after
this manner:— Ch ingiz Kh an, the Mughal, had a son, the
eldest of all his sons, Tushi* by name. At this time, this

* Having noticed in the month of June at St. Petersburg that the light
did not leave the sky during the whole night, and being desirous of discovering
as nearly as possible how far north of the Sftiuu the Sultan may really have
penetrated, as the territory flf Taiaz is the most northern tract reached by the
Sultan, according to Yafa-t, I referred the paragraph to the Rev. Robert
Main, M.A., Radcliffe Observer, at Oxford; and to the kindness of that
gentleman I am much indebted for the following explanation ;—

“ It is usually considered titat twilight exists as long as the sun is not more
than l8° below the horizon, and hence we shall readily find that the Imtvst
latitude which will have twilight all night, at midsummer, will be 48° 30'
(= sun’s solstitial N. P, D. — i8®= 66® 30*—18°). As we go northwards, of
course the twilight will continue longer, till, at the Arctic circle, the sun does
not set on midsummer-day.

“I presume, therefore, that the Sultan’s expedition was towards the north,
and the time not far from midsummer ; and, from the expressions used, he must
have been getting into rather high latitudes, where the sun, after dipping for a
little while, would soon transfer the twilight glow from the west to the east. It
would appear also that the Sul}^ and his army had never seen this phenomenon
before, by their apparent surprise at it, and by his sending for advice con¬
cerning the evening prayer.”

From the above remarks it would also further appear, that Sultan Muham¬
mad could not have had any people in his army who had ever been so far
north before, and he and they were so much surprised that they concluded [or,
rather, our author concluded] that they must be “ under the North Pole.” It
also seems strange that he should see the necessity of writing to Bukhara for
advice, since we might suppose that the people of ShwSrxum would have been
aware of the fact of this phenomenon.

The tenttory of Taraz lies between 46® and 49® N. lat.

* Also called Jujt. This affair took place a considerable time after the mer¬
chants had been put to death, and subsequent to the Sultin’s return from ’Irak,
and, of course, our author has put it before. See note *, page 272. Whilst delaying
at Samrkand, intimation was brought to Sultan Muhammad that T&k-Tughan,
one of the chiefs of Turkistan, of the tribe of Takrtt, was retreating before the
Mughals towards ^ara-lf^uram, the locale of the ^abkulf trib^ and that he.

THE SHWARAZM^SSAhIaH DYNASTY. 369

Tusbtf by command of Chingiz Khan, his father, had come
out of the territory of Chin, in pursuit of an army of
Tatars, and SultSn Muhammad, from Mawar-un-Nahr
and Khurasan, had likewise pushed on in the same direo
tion ; and the two armies fell in with each other.

A battle ensued between them, and the fighting,
slaughter, struggle, and conflict, continued and was main¬
tained from the beginning of the day until the time of

with some troops, had turned his steps in the direction of Jund. The SultXn
now moved from Samr^and towards Jund, by way of BukhXrX, to guard his
own territory, and prevent their entering it; but, hearing that they were pur*
sued by a numerous army of Chingiz Kha n’s, under the leadership of his'son,
jajt or Tushf, the Sul^Xn again returned to Samr^and, and taking with him the
remainder of his forces, previously left there, advanced with great pomp at the
head of a lai^e force to Jund, thinking, as the author from whom a portion of
these extracts are taken says, “ to bring down two birds with one arrow." [In
the meantime, in 615 h., Kojlak had been overthrown by Chingiz, and slain.]
He pushed on [from Jund] until he reached a place in Kash^iar, lying
between two small rivers, where evidences of a late conflict, in the shape of
fresh blood and numerous dead bodies, were diXiiDvered. Search ^as made,
and one among those who had fallen was discovered to be still alive. From
Information gained from the wounded man, it was found that Chingiz KhXn's
troops had there overtaken TOh-TughSn and his followers, who had been
defeated and put to the sword, after which Jujt and his Mughak had set out
to rejoin his father. Hearing also that the Mui^ls had only marched that
very day, the SultXn pushed on, and by dawn the next morning came up with
them, and at once prepared to engage them. The Mughal leaders were not
willing to fight, saying that they had been sent in pursuit of prey, which they
had already entrapped, and had not p>ermission from Chingiz Khan, but that
they could not retire if the Sul]^n should attack them ; and, at the same time,
advised that he should not make matters worse than they were already between
himself and Chingiz Kha n, by any fresh act of hostility. Sultan Muhammad’s
good star was on the wane, and he attacked the Mughals, who stood their
ground manfully. The right wings of either army, as is often the case in
eastern as it hM frequently been in western battles, broke their respective
opponents, and the Mughals at last attacked the SullXn’s centre, and forced it
l 4 ck some distance. The SultXn was in some danger, when his gallant son,
JalXl-ud-Dtn, who had been victorious on the right, charged the Mughak in
Hank, and saved the centre from defeat. The fight was maintained with great
obstinacy until night came, when each army retired to a short distance, con*
fronting each other. The Mughak lighted an immense number of fires to
deceive the Shwarazmfs, and decamped quietly during the night, and set out
to join the camp of Chingiz, who was hastening his preparations for the
invasion of the SultXn’s territories. The Snl^Xn halted on the fiel# 4 n: a few
days, and, after thk occurrence, his mind, already much changed, appears to
have given way entirely ; and, having with hU own eyes witnessed the vigour
and tenacity of the Mughals, he became filled with apprehensions and
misgivings, and retreated to Samfhand without attempting anything more.
Irresolution and bewilderment now marked all his proceedings. For further
particulars, see page 374 and note

370

THE TABA?AT-I.NA§IR1.

evening prayer, and the ranks of both the armies assumed
the form of a circle. The right wing of the Musalman
forces routed the left wing of the infidels, and pursued after
them ; while the right wing of the Mughal infidels routed
the left wing of the army of Islam and pursued it, and, in
this manner, the armies assumed the form of a circle. This
battle was maintained from the dawn of day ; and, when
night came, the two armies separated from each other, and
withdrew to a short distance. There was a small stream of
water between them ; and the two armies halted, facing
each other, on the banks of that stream and bivouacked.
When the morning broke [it was found] that the Mughal
army had marched away. They had lighted great fires,
and had decamped, and left fhem burning.

Sultan Muhammad having thus witnessed and beheld
with his own eyes, in this encounter, the warlike feats, the
activity, and the efforts of the Mughal forces, the next day
retired from that place ; and fear and dread of them took
possession of his heart and mind, and he never again came
against them. This was one of the causes of the miseries
and troubles which befell the people of Islam.

The second reason was this. When Chingiz Kh an broke
out into revolt in the land of Chin, and Tamghaj, and the
Greater* Turkistan, and Altun Kh an of Tamghaj. who was
sovereign of Upper Turkistan, and the lineal monarch of
Kara Kh ita-i*. was overcome by him, and the territories of
Tamghaj. Tingit, and Yighur [I-ghur], and Tatar, all fell
into his hands ; the news of these successes having come to
the hearing of Sultan Muhammad, his mind became filled
with ambition [for the possession] of Chin, and he became
desirous of obtaining authentic information respecting the
forces of the Muglials, and the condition of Ch ingiz Kh an.
Accordingly, the most excellent Sayyid, Baha-ud-Din,
RazU, with a party of other persons, were despatched on a

* Or, Upper Turkistan : the original word will serve for either.

• For our author's further and more detailed account of Ghingiz Kh an's
proceedings, see last -Section of this work.

r Probably Ahmad, Kh ujandf. is the person whom our author has mistaken
here ; but I am rather inclined to think that this “excellent Sayyid” can be
no other than the Badr-ud-Din referred to by Guzidah, who was the chief
Diw.an in Sultan Mutiammad’s service, and who became suspicious and dis¬
affected on some account or other, and fled and took service with Qkingiz.
For account of further proceedings of this arch-traitor, sec note *, page 274.

THE KHWARAZM-SHAHIAH HYNASTY. 271

mission to Chtn*; and, when these agents reached that
country, Qiingiz JOjan sent trustworthy and confidential
persons of his own, bearing numerous rarities as presents
to Sultan Muhammad.

I heard from the Sayyid Baha-ud-Dtn—the mercy of the
Almighty be upon him !—[who said :—] “ When we reached
the presence of Qhingiz IQian, the accursed, the Wazir of
Tamghaj, and the son and the uncle of Altun JOian, were
brought in, and we were summoned. Then, turning his
face towards them, Chingiz said ‘ Behold, my affairs and
my sovereignty have attained to such a pitch of grandeur.

Be this as it may, our author differs wholly from other writers here. I have
only space for a few details. A person named Ahmad, a merchant of Khu¬
jand, and two others, with a considerable quantity of merchandize suitable for
the purpose, set out for the great camp of Chingiz Khan. At this time he had
reduced under his yoke most of the nomad tribes of Mughalistan and Turkistan
—Tatars, Mughals, I-ghurs, and others—and a portion of Chin and Ma-chtn.
The merchants were well received and liberally treated. Subsequently, Chingiz
directed his sons, the great nobles, and others, to despatch servants of their
own with merchandize into the territory of Suljan Muhammad, to accompany
Ahmad of Khujand and the others on their return journey. A large party of
merchants, numbering about 450, Musalmans it is stated, left Chingiz Khin’s
territo^ with property of immense value, and set out, accordingly, for the
Sultan’s dominions. At the same time, Chingiz Khan sent three agents of his own
to the Sultan, intimating the despatch of these traders with the object of pur¬
chasing merchandize suitable for his camp ; and, further, to state that he had
reduced the refractory around him to subjection and considerable tracts under
his sway, -and that, in place of estrangement and distrust, intercourse and
confidence might arise between them j that merchants and traders might be
free to go and come ; tbat their subjects and dominions might be secure
and open to each other’s people ; and that they might aid and assist each
other under any circumstances that might arise. When they reached Utrar
on the St^un, the frontier capital of the Sultan’s dominions in that direction,
the governor, Anial-juV by name, a kinsman of the Sultan’s mother, who bore
the title of Gha-tr K^jan [not Kadr Khan, as our author states], being offended
at the impertinence of one of Ahmad Kh ujandi’s party,—said to have been a
Hindu—who addressed'him in too familiar a style ; and his cupidity likewise
being excited by the arrival of all this treasure and valuable property brought
by the merchants, sent off a messenger to the Sultan, announcing tlie aiTival
of a number of spies of the Tatar, Ghingiz, on their way into Iran, aiul asked
permission to put them to death and confiscate their property.

The Sultan, whose mind was already disquieted at the successes of Chingiz,
deceived by the picrfidious message of QJia-ir Khun, and his temper still niUlcd
at the disaster he had so lately sustained, without thought or consideration
most unfortunately gave his consent. The merchants, numbering about 450
MusalmSns, including Ch ingiz’s messengers, were put to death, with the
exception of one person, who eventually escaped, and told the tale to Chingiz;
and the whole of their property was confiscated.

* Most of the MSS. are defective here, and do not contain the last sentence.

373

THE TABA^T-r-NA$IRl.

that the monarch of the [empire of the] setting sun has
sent envoys unto me.’ In short,” said the Sayyid, “ when
he sent us away, he requested that envoys on both sides,
and merchants, and karwans, should constantly come and
go, and bring and take away with them choice descriptions
of arms, cloths, and stuffs, and other articles of value and
elegance of both empires ; and that between the two
monarchs a permanent treaty should be maintained.”

He despatched merchants along with the envoys of
Sultan Muhammad, with about five hundred camel-loads
of gold, silver, silks, and targh u [a description of woven
silk of a red colour], together with other precious and
valuable commodities, that they might trade with them.
They entered the territory of Islam by way of Utrar.

At that place, there was a governor named Kadr Kh an*,
and he sent an account to Sultan Muhammad respecting
the importance and value of the merchandize ; and solicited
permission from him, in a perfidious manner, to stop the
party of merchants. Having obtained permission to do so,
he seized the envoys and the whole of the merchants, and
slew them, and took possession of all their property, and
sent it to the Sultan’s presence. Of that party, there was
one person, a camel-driver, who had gone to one of the
[public] hot baths, and he succeeded in making his escape
by way of the fire place. He, having taken to the wilds,
returned back to Chin, and made Chingiz acquainted with
the perfidious conduct of Kadr Kh an of Utrar and the
slaughter of the party'.

Chingiz I^an prepared to take revenge*; and he caused

• For his correct name and title, see preceding note^. At page 254, Kadr Kh an
is said, by our author, to have been the name of the ruler of Kifchak, and, at
page 267, we have another I<:adr Khan, son of Vi'isuf the Tat&r. This is a third.

• From our author’s account of the putting the merchants to death, one
would imagine that Chingiz Khan marched ■Ji'ithout the least delay, but a con¬
siderable time elapsed between that unfortunate act and the appearance of the
Mughals before Utrir. The first took place in 614 H., and the second in
616 Ji.

• As soon as Chingiz became aware of this outrage, he despatched an

envoy [some say, envoys] calling for redress for Gha-ir Khan’s perfidy, and
demanding that the latter should be deliveretl over to him, to punish according
to the Muhammadan law of ; but, as Qha-ir Khan was related to many

of the chief officers of his troops, the Sultan was powerless to comply, even
had be so desired, and, in an evil hour, gave orders to put the envoy to death
likewise. The rage of Chingiz knew no bounds : he collected his troops to

THE KHWARAZM-SHAHIaH dynasty.

*73

the forces of Ch in and Turkistan to be got ready for that
purpose. Trustworthy persons have related, that, at the
place where he then was, seven* hundred banners were
brought forth, and under every banner one thousand horse¬
men were arrayed. Every ten horsemen were directed to
take with them three dried* Mughali sheep, and an iron
cauldron; and he set out on his way.

From the place where Chingiz was at this period, to the
boundary of Utrar, was a three months’ journey through
the wilderness; and, along with his hosts, he despatched
horses, mares, and geldings, without number, to supply
them with milk, and for riding. The journey through the
wilds was got over in a short time*, and he issued forth on
the Utrar frontier ; and that fortress and city was taken, and

take revenge, and, according to a few authors, even despatched another envoy
to announce his coming; but he took care in the first place to quell all dis¬
orders in his own dominions.

The Sultan having disix>sed of the affairs of Tra\r, and having left his son,
Rukn-ud'Djtn, in charge of the government of the province—nominally, it
must be understood, for Kukn-ud-Dtn was only in his fifteenth year—set out
for the purpose of proceeding into Mawor-un-Nahr. On reaching Ntabiipili',
on the 8th of ShawwSl. 614 K., contrary to his wont, he gave himself up to
wine and women. After delaying there moK than a month, on the 10th of
Shahan. he nuuxhed to Bukhara ; and, it being spring, pitched his tents in the
pleasant meads near that city. Having given himself up to pleasure there also
for some time, he assembled the troops of that part, and determined to move
against ICojlak, who had been extending his dominions to the territories
towards the head of the *nd marched to Samrkand, after reaching

which the same infatuated course of pleasure was followed. It was at this time
that, hearing of the movement of TuV-Tughiln [the TaknS Kh*n of some
European authors and translators] of the tribe of Makrtt, the Sultfin advanced
towards Jund, and the engagement with the troops of £llingia took plaoe^
which our author has related, out of its proper order, at page 26S. For a
correct account of that battle see note ^ to the page referred to.

* In two or three copies ‘‘three,*’but seven hundred isthe more correct number.

« .Sheep’s or goat’s deSh salted and dried in the sun, called “landaey” by
the Afyhgns-

» One or two copies of the text have “ in three months,” but the majority
have “in a short time.” Utrftr was, however, taken after_/Sw Vfhen

the Sultan retired to Samr^and, after the encounter with Tusht. he had a force
of 400,000 n*-" The greater part of these was Irft in Mawar-un-Nahr and
Turkistan ; 50,000 men were detached to Utrar to jom Cka-tr ; and

when report followed report of the advance of Chingiz, 10,000 more were sent
to reinforce Ghk-ir SUin, under the On reaching Utrar,

Chingia ptudied on to Bukhara, after leaving a force to invest the former place,
which was not the first that was captured, as our author makes it appear.
Fafih-i says he reached it on the last day of ^t-^Iijjah, 616 H., and entered it
the following day.

*74

THE TABA]pAT-I.NA5IRl.

the whole of the inhabitants were martyred. From thence
Ch ingiz Kha n marched towards Bukhara ; and, on the day of
the Festival of the Sacrifice*, loth of the month Zt-Hijjah,
in the year 6i6 H., he captured the city, and martyred
the whole of the inhabitants, put the ’Ulama to the sword,
and gave the libraries of books to the flames. They have
related that the Imam-zadah, Rukn-ud-Din—the mercy of
the Almighty be upon him!—^when they were martyring
him, repeated the following lines :—

“ I said, that my heart said, ' It is murder committed by us

I said, my soul said, that * It is the carrier away of us.’

I said, that *Thy powerful dog has fallen on me.’

It [my soul ?] said, ‘ Thou shouldst not draw breath, for it is brought upon
ourselves •.’ ”

Ch ingiz Kh an, after the catastrophe of the city of
Bukh^r^t marched towards Samr^and, in which city Sultan
Muhammad, Kh warazm Shah, had stationed 6o,coo horse,
fully equipped and furnished *, consisting of different races
of Turks, Ghuris. and Kh urasanis, together with the Maliks
and troops of Ghur, who were all included among that
body of troops. After a few days, on the lOth of the
month of Muharram, 617 H., Samr^and was also captured,
and the whole of the inhabitants were martyred .

* Abraham’s offering up of his son Isaac.

f That is “ it [viz. this fact] is murder committed by us,” in the sense, as it
were, “ we have done for ourselves.”

* These four lines are with difficulty translatable or intelligible, nor do the
various texts enlighten us. Generally it seems a mere amplification of “we’re
undone,” or “ I’m undone.” The first two lines are apparently the expression
of the inner consciousness. The third line is the man’s summary judgment.
The fourth line is the reproof of conscience again, that he should spare his
words. The latter part of the second line might be translated “the tearer of
our curtain [honour].”

* Yafa-t says the Sultan only left 30,000 men to garrison BukllSra, and that
110,000, among whom were some of the greatest of his nobles and leaders,
were left at Samr^and ; and that 60,000 Tajiks [the forces of Qlxur], each of
them a Rustam in valour, were stationed in other fortresses,

* When the Sultan left Samr^and, dispirited and hopeless, he set out, by
wayof Nakhshab, towards £hurasan. As he proceeded, he told the people of
the places he passed by the way, to shift for themselves and provide for their
own safety. Swift messengers were also despatched to Kh warazm, to tell his
mother, to take with her all bis family and effects, and proceed towards Mazan-
daran. Before doing so she caused all the state prisoners there, and such as
were supposed ambitious of sovereignty, to be cast into the Ji]^un. See page 279.

The Suljtan’s apprehensions and irresolution caused the utmost confusion in
all State affairs ; and. as if this was not enough, some astrologers began to

THE KHWARAZM-SHAHIAH DYNASTY.

*75

When the accounts of these disasters came to the hearing
of Sultan Muhammad, the forces, then along with him
before the gates of Baljch, consisted almost entirely of
Tatar and ]^hita-t troops, whilst his own old soldiers and
vassals had been left behind by him in Mawar-un-Nahr;
and those people, on whom the most implicit trust and
confidence could be placed, were also all away in those
parts. The troops who were along with him [now] conspired
together to seize him, and to make that act of perfidy and
treachery the means of their own deliverance ; and, having
seized the Sultan, to take him and deliver him over as an
offering to Qliingiz Klha n*.

declare that the stars prognosticated his downfall, and that he would be unable
to apply himself to any measures for effective opposition to the enemy. His
chief men and his sagest ministers were paralyzed at all these misfortunes.
The most experienced among them in the world’s affairs urged that it was
hopeless to attempt to preserve any hold over Mawar>un-Nahr, but that the
utmost efforts should be directed to the preservation of Kh urasan and ’ItaV;
to concentrate all his available forces, and raise the whole people to arms ; to
make the Jf^un their ditch, and defend the line of that river. Others, craven-
hearted, advised his going to Qh^zntn, there to raise troops and make a stand,
and, if unsuccessful, make Hindust^ hLs rampart. The latter advice the
Sultan proposed to follow, and he came as far as Balkh with this object, when
'Imiid'Ul-Mulk, who had great influence over him, arrived from ’IriV- from
Rukn-ud-Din, the Sultan’s son. *Imad-ul-Mulk, who was a native of that
part, advised the Sultan to retire into ’Irak, and assemble the forces of that
ountry to oppose the Mughals. The'Sultan’s eldest son, Jalal-ud-Dtn, who
had often before entreated his father to adopt vigorous measures, now again
protested, and entreated his father to concentrate his troops, as far as lay in his
power, and advance to .meet the enemy ; but, if his heart would not permit
him to do so, to proceed into ’Irak, and leave the troops with him, that he
might hasten to the frontier and attack the invading hordes, and see what
Providence willed, that he himself, at least, might be exonerated before men.
“ If fortune favour me,” he said, “I will carry off the ball of desire with the
Chaug&n of Divine aid ; but, if fortune favours me not, neither will the finger
of reproach be pointed at us, nor the tongue of malediction curse ; and the
world will not be able to say :—‘ They have collected taxes and tribute from
us for so long, and at a time like this they renounce our affairs, and abandon
us to be captive to infidels,’ ” This counsel he continued to urge, and burned
to receive his father’s consent. All was of no avail ; the Sultan’s panic was so
great that the sage advice of his son was considered the mere lispings of an
infant.

• The Sultan left Balldl with the object of retiring into ’IriMp ; and with this
intention was encamped on the bank of the Tirmid river [the Jfbunj, when
news of the fall of BnkbSrti reached him, and, very soon after, that of Samrkand
also. He now gave up all hopes of preserving his dominions. The majority
of the troops with him then-anti they were not numerous, and were in a
disorganized state—were Turks of the tribe of his mother .and her kinsrnen,
called Crantan ; and, during the confusion and distraction which had now arisen.

#76 the TABA?plT-r.NA$IRl.

One of the party, however, presented himself before
Sultan Muhammad, and told him all about the plot. The
Sultan kept his own counsel ; and, at night, he left the
camp, in order to test beyond a doubt the perfidy of the
conspirators. At midnight the party drew near to the
imperial pavilion, formed a cordon about it, and completely
surrounded it. Not finding him within the tent, they came
upon the camp at that untimely hour*, and the whole army
fell into utter disorder and confusion. Sultan Mubammad
was forced to fly, and set out towards Nishapur, and wrote
mandates to the Amirs and Maliks in every part of his
dominions, commanding them to put the fortresses of
Khwarazm, Gljur, Kh urasan, and 'Irak in a posture of

they conspired against him. One of the Sul{Sn’s own ministers, the Dfwin,
Badr-ud-Dtn, previous to this, had fled, and had entered the service of Ch mgiy-
Not satisfied with this, he had forged letters, as though the Suljin’s nobles had
written, tendering their services to the Mughal chief, and urging him to hostility
against their sovereign ; and also forged replies, as coming from Chingiz,
promising them aid and assistance. These letters were made over to a spy, with
instructions to let them fall into the hands of the Sultan’s trusted followers. This
caused suspicion to arise between the Sultan and his nobles ; and, having been
warned by one of them of the meditated treachery of the troops, he left his
pavilion that very night, and changed his place of repose. The mutinous
troops, in the night, took to their bows, and the next morning the pavilion was
found like a sieve from the holes made by the volleys of arrows discharged
into it. Finding, however, that the Sultan was safe, and their object dis- .
covered, these disaffected troops dispersed, and finally joined Ch ingiz, The
Suljan now began to suspect his nobles, along with him, and they were mostly
sent away, on some duty or other ; and he then set out for Nifihapur with all
haste, and the greater part of his forces dispersed. On the way, he urged the
people of the places he passed through, to see to their fortifications and means
of defence, which filled them with perplexity and fear, and rendered easy matters
difficult. On reaching Kalat, near Tus, he was induced -to consent to make a
stand there—it is a place of great strength, the upper part of which was said
to be seven leagues round, and capable of an energetic defence [it is a valley,
so to say, enclosed within lofty hills ; Nadir considered the position so strong
that he deposited his treasures there]—and to erect fortifications there. Some
of the Sultan’s effects were removed thither accordingly, and provisions were
collected. This, however, was also abandoned ; and, on the I2th of $afar,
617 H., the Sultan reached Ntsh^pur, where he abandoned himself to pleasure
—if such can be so called—more than ever, for he considered that fate was
against him, and all state affairs were abandoned. Whilst thus occupied news
reached him, in the following Rabt’-ul-Akhir, that an army of Mughals under
Yamah Nu-yan, SabtHe, and Taghajar [some authors say Jabah Nu-yan,
Swidae Bahadur, and TuVjar; the first some European authors call “Hubbe”],
and other leaders, had, after the fall of Bukhara, crossed the Jihun at Tirmiz,
in Rabi’>ul-Awwal, in pursuit of him. He -left Ntshapur without delay, and
fled by way of Isfaratn to Rai.

* The words “at that untimely hour ” arc contained in one MS. only.

THE KHWARAZM.SHAH!AH DYNASTY.

*77

defence; and throughout the empire of Islam disorder arid
tumult arose.

Ch ingiz Kh an, having received information of the dis¬
organization and dissolution of the army of Sultan
Muhammad, after the capture of Samrkand, nominated a
force of 60,000 Mughal horse, which was placed under the
command of two Mughals. chiefs of high rank, one of
whom was Yamah Nu-in, and the other Sahudah Bahadur,
to proceed in pursuit of the Sultan. When this force had
passed over the river [Jihun], the Sul(an retired from
NtshapOr. and set out towards' Mazandaran, and his camp
was pitched at the top of the Darah or Pass of Tamtgliah'',
when the Mughal troops came upon him. The Sultan was
obliged to fly from thence, and entered the hills on foot; and
got away; and, going from one range of hills to another,
entered Mazandaran*. The son of the chief of MazandarSn,

♦ Only a single copy of the texts collated gives this name correctly.

* Any one reading the above would injagine that the Sultan proceeded
direct from Ntall 4 piir into Mazandaran, but such was not the case ; he took a
much longer circuit, as already shown. When he reached Rai news came to
him from IjCh uraSan that a strange army had reached it, which report made
him regret the haste he had shown in coming into ’Iralf. He left Rai accord¬
ingly, and proceeded to the fortress of E^zwin [some say ](i 3 r&n], at the foot
of which his son, Sultan Rukn-ud-Dfn, was encamped, with an army of 30,000
'Irakis. The SultSn sent his other son, Qhiyag-ud-Dtn, and his mother, and
some of the ladies of his family, to the fortress of ^farun-xlujz for safety, and
his own mother and the rest of the family to I-lal, a fortress of MSzandaran.
He was advised by the Amirs of Trat: to take shelter at Slliran-koh, and there
concert measures and assemble troops, and oppose the Mughal army which
was in pursuit of him.- Again he declined, saying that it was not safe, and
could not be defended against the MughMs ; and this disheartened his followers
stfn more. He was 'advised by some to start that very hour. Between
LurisUn and Firs, they said, was a range of mountains, called Tang-Talu,
after they had pas^ which they would enter a rich country, and could take
shelter there, collect troops, and, in case the Mughals should arrive, be ready
to encounter them. Whilst considering this advice, which he thought good,
news arrived from Rai of the Mughals having reached it; and now his followers
began to desert him, as is the nature of the world, and to seek their own safety
and interests. ■ Almost deserted, the unfortunate monarch set out with his son,
Jalal-ud-Dtn, and u-ith scarcely any followers, for the fortress of ?arun-dujz,
whither he had previously sent fihiyas-ud-Din and his mother and the ladies
of his family. On the way he was actually overtaken by the Mughal advance ;
but the smallness of his party led to their not recognizing him. They gave
them, however, a volley of arrows, which wounded the Suljan’s horse, but it
brought him safely to ESrun. He only stayed one day, and, after providing a
fresh horse, made off in the direction of Bagdad. The Mughals .appeared
before ^pirun, which they attacked, .md fighting went on as long as they
thought the SuUan was there ; but, finding ihis was not the case, and that he

278 THE JABA^fAT-I-NAglRl.

who had Joined him, was in attendance on the Sultan, and
his own son, Sultan Jalal-ud-Din, Ma'ng-barni, was also
with him. Sultan Muhs^mmad embarked on the Sea of
Khurz [the Caspian], and for a considerable time he
continued on an island therein, in distress and affliction.

had set out towards Bafijidad, they followed on his tracks. They came up
with a small body of his party, who acted as a rear-guard, and slew them ; but
the Sultim having changed his route—he had found shelter in a fortress—they
missed him, and at last gave up the pursuit. Having remained a few days at
the latter place, the .Sul{an set out towards Gtlan, and then on to Asdar,
where what remained of his treasures was lost. He then-entered the district
of Amul. His family had reached that part, and had taken shelter in its
strongholds. The Muglials were in pursuit, however ; and he, having con¬
sulted with the chief men of those parts, it was determined that the SiUJan
should seek refuge for a time in one of the islands of the Sea of Kh nrr, named
Ab-i-Sugun.

[A few words may not be out of place here respecting this island and its name.
An old writer states that it was the name of an island [one of several], and of
a small town of Tabaristan, in the district of Astarabad, three days’ journey
from Gurgan or Gurgan, called Jurjan and JurJan by Muhammadans, who
change the to j's according to the 'Arabic custom ; and that it was also
the name of a considerable river, which formerly came from Kh waraam [the
Oxus ; but more probably the river of Gurgan or Jurjan], and fell into the Sea
of Shurz—the Caspian. When this river approaches the sea, it flows very
slowly and quietly ; hence its name, Ab-i-Sugun, the tranquil or quiet river.
Some, however, sqy the place where the river enters the sea was called by this
name. The islands in question, for there were several, were situated near the
river’s mouth. That on which the Suljan took refuge, and where he died, has
long since been swallowed up by the sea. The Introduction of the i^ar-
Namah says the sea is called Ab-i-Sugun, and the island on which the Sultan
took shelter, Ab-gun].

The Sultan, having taken shelter on one of them, moved occasionally, for
safety’s sake ; and well he did, for a party of Mughals did actually come to the
first island in search of him after he had left it. The army of Mughals under
Yamah Nu-^n and others, who had reached Rai in pursuit of him, had returned
on not finding him there, and invested the fortresses of ^arun and 1-lal, in
which his mother and wives and children had taken refuge, and soon took
them. The males were all slaughtered, even the infants, and the females were
sent to Chingiz’s camp. The thoughts of the dishonour of the females of his
family, the slaughter of his children and his servants, and the miseries of his
country, afflicted him to such a degree that he died of a broken heart, and in
great misery, in one of the islands above mentioned, and was there buried. So
great was the distress of the party, that his son, Jalal-ud Dtn, could not
procure even a winding-sheet to bury him in, and he had to be consigned to the
grave in part of the apparel which he had on at the time of* his death. Sub¬
sequently, however, Jalal-ud-Dtn removed his father’s remains from the island
to the fortress of Ardas [?]. The Muglials, some time after, gained possession
of this place likewise, and they exhumed his remains, and burnt them. That
the Sultan died <?» rr/ary /a Kh warazm is like many other of our author’s
.statements. He never left the island alive. His death filled Islam w'ith
distress ; and this event took place in Shawwiil. 617 H.

THE KHWARAZM-SIlAHiAH DYNASTY.

379

The Mughal troops, not finding the Sultan in the pro-
vinqe of Mazandaran, passed out of it, and entered Tra^t,
on which Sultan Muhammad, with the few horsemen who
still continued with him, left the island; but he was
prostrated with disease of the bowels, and melancholy-
supervened, and he became quite out of his mind. He urged
his son, Sultan Jalal-ud-Din, Mang-barni, saying :—“ En¬
deavour to take me to Khw arazm ; for from thence was the
commencement of oar dominion.” These lines, also, he
often repeated:—

“ When men become distracted about their own aflfairs,

Than that, it will be better that the thread of life were sever’d.”

When his disease increased, he was totally unable to ride
on horseback, and camels were procured for him j and he
was placed in a camel-litter, and they sent him off towards
Kh warazm. He died on the road, in the year 617 H. : and
Sultan Jalal-ud-Din brought his father’s remains to
Khwarazm. and buried them by the side of Sultan Takish.
his father. Sultan Muhammad’s reign extended over a
period of twenty-one years. May the mercy of God and
His pardon be on him !

XI. ^fUTB-UD-DIN ARZALC SHAH, SON OF MUHAMMAD, SON
OF TAKISH. khwarazm SHAH.-

Kutb-ud-Din, was the son of Sultan Muhammad, and
his mother was a kinswoman of his father’s mother, and of
the family of Kadr Khan of Kifchak; and he was the
heir-apparent to the throne of Khwarazm*.

When the calamities consequent on the irruption of

• The name of this young prince is written in various ways—not only in our
author’s text, but also by other writers—AzilaV, ArzaV, CzlaV, Arzalu, and
Arzala^; the last seems the most correct. Certain it is that he was not heir-
apparent to the Khwarazmi empire. The word Shah or Suljan affixed to his
other name signifies ihat it was not his title as sovereign, but merely one of his
names. Other writers, with whom I am acquainted, do not account him as a
ruler at all. It was through the influence of Turkan Khatun, Suljan Muham¬
mad’s mother, that this boy, of very ordinary intellect, was set up at KhwS-
razm, during Jalal-ud-Dfn’s absence with his father. Arzala^’s supporters
imagined, that, in case Jalal-ud-Dtn should ascend the throne and establish his
power, they would not be permitted to do as they liked, as was likely to be
the case with ArzalaV Suljan as sovereign ; and, as long as their objects were
gained, they cared nothing for their country. Uiuler such circumstances, it is
not snii>rising that the Mugbals met with little or no opposition.

28 o

THE TABA^fAT.I.NA5IRL

C 2 |ingiz Kh an arose, and Sul{an Muhammad was obliged
to fly from the banks of the Jihun and the vicinity
of Bal]sj|i> and retired to Ntshapur. the grandmother of
Arzalu Shah, the mother of Sultan Muhammad^, and the
people of Khwarazm. the Maliks, and the Amirs, con¬
certed'together, and raised Kutb-ud-Din, Arzalu Shah, to
the throne of Kh warazm. and the whole of them applied
themselves to his service.

The Sultans and Maliks, from both the east and west,
and of the countries of Iran and Turan, who were
imprisoned at Kh warazm. were all drowned in the Jihun ;
and not one of them was left alive,.by the time that one of
the sons of Chingiz Kh an. Tushi by name, with a numerous
army, from* Mawar-un-Nahr, was nominated to march into
Turkistan and Khwarazm * and arrived before the gates of
the latter-named city.

As Arzalu Shah did not possess the power to oppose
him, he took along with him' his dependents, his sisters,
and mothers*, the ladies of the Haram of Sultan Muhammad,
his father, together with the Khudawandah-i-Jahan, his
father’s mother, and brought them into Tabaristan and
Mazandar&n, and threw himself into the fortress of Lai in
Tabaristan*.

r Turkan Sbatun, the consort of Takish. the strong-minded woman, who
roasted lier husband.

* All the copies of the text collated, with one exception, are defective
here.

* When Chingiz arrived at Uttar, he left a force to invest it, but pushed on
with the bulk of his forces to Bukhara; and it was only after the fall of
Samrkand that troops were sent against Khwarazm. In the first place, he
despatched his three sons, Tushi [Jujl], Uktae, and ChaghatSe, with several
tumdns or hordes thither; but, having quarrelled on the road, they came to
blows, and a number of the Mughal troops were slain by each other. Chingiz
then recalled them, and Tull, his other son, was sent in command in their
stead.

* Other writers state, that after Jalal-ud-Dln left Khwarazm for KhurSsan,
as mentioned in note *, page 286, which see, his brothers, Arzalak Sult3n, Ak
Sultan, and two others, followed after him, escorted by a body of troops,
to endeavour to induce him to return. They did not overtake him, but
encountered on their way the same body of Mughals their brother had so
recently opposed and escaped from. They were all taken and, with their
followers, put to the sword.

* The mothers of the different brothers of Arzalu [ArzalSk Sultin]—the
other wives of his father, Suljin Muhammad, and his grandmother are
meant here.

* See latter part of note *, page 277. Alfl calls it the fortress of l 4 r-jSr.

THE KHWARAZM-SHAhIaH DYNASTY.

381

When Tusht. son of Ch ingiz TCha n. appeared with his
troops before the gates of Kh warazm. the people of the
city [the troops quartered there] came forward to resist
them, and fighting commenced ; but, in the course of a very
few days, Kh warazm was taken, and the inhabitants were
martyred, and the whole city was razed to the ground,
with the exception of the Kushk-i-A khi uk. which was the
ancient palace, and the sepulchral vault of Sultan Taki sh.
Khw arazm Shah, which was allowed to stand ; but all else
was overthrown.

After this, Tusht pushed on in pursuit of the dependents
and ladies of Arzalu Shah's family, captured them all, and
martyred the whole of them. The mercy of the Almighty
be upon them^!

XII, SULTAN RUKN.UD-DiN, QHORI SHANASTI, SON OF
MUHAMMAD, KHWARAZM SHAH.

Sultan Rukn-ud-Din was another of Sultan Muhammad’s
sons, and his birth took place on the night preceding the
day on which Sultan Mu'izz-ud-Dtn Muhammad-i-Sam,
Ghuri. retreated from before the gates of Khwarazm in the
year 601 H. ; and, on that account, he was named Ghuri
Shanasti. that is to say, “ The Ghuri Breaker."

When the territory of 'Irak fell under the sway of
Sultan Muhammad, Khwarazm Shah, he conferred the
throne of that country upon Rukn-ud-Din*. The daughter
of Malik Ulugh Kh an-i-Abi Muhammad, who was

♦ Most of the copies of the text are defective here : only three have the last
paragraph, and, of these, but two appear correctly written.

* Rukn-ud-Din was younger than his brothers, Jalal-ud-Dtn, and ShiySg-
ud-Din i but, having acquired greater ascendency, the government of Tralf
was conferred upon him, when his father left ’IrftV on his last expedition into
M 5 war-un-Nahr. Yafa-f says he gave himself up to excess—he was only
fifteen —and his father had just become aware of his misconduct, when the
Mughal troubles began. On the death of his father, the Amirs of that
territory became disaffected. He moved against them, reduced them, and
gave them their lives, and overlooked their misdeeds, thinking kindness w'ould
be returned with gratitude. But, after a short time, finding he could not hold
his own, he retired, after his father’s death, accompanied by only a few
followers, towards Kirman. He reached Cawashir, and was subsequently
joined by the chiefs and partisans of the Malik of Zawzan [Eawam-ud-Din,
Mu-ayyid-uI-Mulk, Abi-Bikr, son of’All, Az-Zawzanf. His son, ’Izz-ud-Dtn,
held KirmBn and its dependencies after his father's death but he was removed,

T

282

THE TABA¥AT-I.NA?IRL

a descendant of one of the paternal uncles of the
Khw arazm Shahs, was given him in marriage, and the
father-in-law was made the Lieutenant of Sultan Rukn-
ud-Din, by Sultan Muhammad; and the whole of the
Maliks of Gh ur. and the troops of the Jibal [of Kh urasan],
were left to serve under him. When [his father], Sultan
Muhammad, retired from the territory of ’Irak, the Turks
of ’Irak, who were slaves of the Ata-baks, assembled [their
troops] together, and gave him battle, but the Kh warazm
Shahis gained the victory, in the year 614 H.

Rukn-ud-Din reigned in ’Irak for a considerable period ;
and, when the Mughal troops reached that country, and
tribulation befell the Musalmans, the whole of the Khw a-
razm Shahis fell into captivity, in the year 617 H., and
were, in all probability, martyred*.

XIII. MALIK CJHIYA.S-UD-DIN, A? SULTAN?, SON OF
MUHAMMAD, KHWARAZM SHAH.

Ah Sultan was another of the sons of Sultan Muhammad;
and, when the latter obtained possession of the throne of

and the government was conferred upon Rukn-ud-Din.], who were in those
parts. He divided the treasure, accumulated by the Malik referred to, among
his followers, and advanced to Isfahan to endeavour to gain a footing in ’IraV
again. When he entered it, the kept aloof, and Rukn-ud-Din thought it

advisable to leave the city, and pitch his tents outside. He was soon attacked
by the ^a;I’s adherents, on a hint from their master, who slew looo of Rukn-
ud-Din’s followers, and lost many themselves. When the Mugfaals had
disposed of other matters in Kh urasan, a force was sent against Rukn-ud-Din.
He had given up all hope of acquiring possession of ’Iralp, and had retired to
Firiiz-koh, and the Tatar forces invested him therein. He held out for six
months, at the end of which period he had to come down and yieltl. All the
threats of the infidels could not induce him to bend the knee to their leader,
and he was put to the swor<l, along with his folhjwers and dependents, and the
people of the fortress. This took place in 619 H. ; but .some writers say
it happened in 618 h., and others, in 620 H.

• Mere, also; considerable difference occurs in the various copies of the text,
and the style is different, as in several other places, .‘some have, “ and the
whole of them were martyred.”

^ Pir Shah bore the title of Gh iyas-iid-lJin. and he was ruler [nominally]
of Kirman, after the ilalik of Zaw/an, and his son. Sultan was tiever put

in charge of any tenitory whatever. Our author has perpetrate<l another great
blunder here. . 4 ]f-.Sultan was killed at the same lime that Sultan ArzalaV
.and two other younger hi others were massacred by the MugJjals. See note *,
page 2S6

THE KHWARAZM-SHAHIAH DYNASTY.

aS3

Kirman, and the masnad of Gawashir. he placed the
Khw ajah of Zawzan upon the throne* of Kirman. After
some years, the Kh wajah of Zawza'n died. He was an
excellent man, and founded colleges of great repute, and
rabats [hostels for travellers], and erected the fortress of
Sala-Mihr of Zawzan.

When he died, Sultan Mui^iammad had conferred the
throne of Kirman upon his own son, Ak Sultan ; and he
proceeded into Kirman, and brought under his jurisdiction
that territory as far as the sea-shore, and the frontiers of
Mukran*. When the calamities caused by the Mughal

• Utter nonsense ; the Malik of Zawzan was merely governor on the part
of the Sultan, and never ascended a “ throne.”

* Gh ivas-ud-Din. Pir Shah, had been named ruler of Kirman by his father;
“but what help is there, when man’s proposals chime not with destiny’s
disposals?” When the convulsions arose at the outset of the Mughal troubles,
Gh iy 5 .s-ud-Dtn determined to proceed into Kirman. At this time, Shuja’-ud-
Din, Abu-l-^^sim, who had held the government on the part of the son of the
Malik of Zawzan, was acting as the Prince’s deputy. The “world being filled
with tumult and sedition,” he would not receive him, and the Prince was com.<
pelled to retire into ’ImV, where he stayed a short time. A party of his
father’s troops, which had remained in concealment, now joined him, and
Bur&V, who was a native of ^^ara-Khita-l, also became his adherent. He was
a relative—some say a younger brother, some the son—of B&ntko of Tarilz,
and.had been converted to Islam, and had risen in Sultan Muhammad’s
service to the rank of l^ajib ; and some writers state that he had been
nominated preceptor to the young Prince. Be this as it may, on being joined
by Buri^c and his followers, Gh iyas-ud-Dtn marched into Pars against the
Ata-bak Sa’d [see note *, page 266], who was routed. Gh iyas-ud-Din and
his forces committed great devastation in Pars, after which he retired. BuiaV,
however, being aggrieved with him for some reason, deserted Gkiyag-ud-Dtn
one night, and set out with his adherents, intending to proceed by way of Klfih
and Mukran into Hindustan, “to take service with I-yal-timiah, ruler of
Dihll, who was also a native of E^>^*Sl>ita-l.” On reaching the frontier of
Kirman, Shuia*-ud-Din. Abu-l-]$!asim, who had been made governor of
GawSshtr for Gh ivas-ud-Din. but who had refused to receive him, was induced
by some of the youths among his followers, who sought to plunder Buie’s
party and cany off the “ moon-faced Kb ita-t damsels ” among them, to inter¬
cept Bui2j)L by the way. They came into contact at Rudbar of Jfrfat, and,
during the fight which ensued, a party of Turks, serving with Shuia’-ud-Dtn.
went over to BuiiljF. Shuia’-ud-Din was taken and put to death, and Burak
acquired power over KirmSn. This was in the year 621 K. Shuja’-ud-Dtn’s
son continued to hold the citadel imtil Jalal-ud-Djn arrived. After his sepa¬
ration from Burak, Gh ivas-ud-Dtn had taken up his quarters at Rai; and, when
his brother, Jalal-ud-Dfn, reached ’Irak, after his return from Sindh, Qhiyag-
ud-Dtn had joined him, had misconducted himself, and, finally, deserted his
brother in an engagement with the Tat&rs, and finally retired into SliQzistSn.
See note *, page 297. He then sent an agent to Bui 3 k to tell him of his
arrival there^ Butlk pretended to be overjoyed ; and, after oaths and pro-

T 2

a«4 THE TABA?:AT.I.NA5IRt

irruption befell the empire of Islam, and Qiingi* TfhSH
became triumphant over Iran, a body of Khija-is, and
some troops of Sultan Muhammad, along with Burak, the
Chamberlain, a native of Khita, a newly converted Musal*
man, proceeded into Kirman, and contention and strife arose
between them and Sultan Ghiyas-ud-Dtn-i-Ak Sultan. The
latter, not being powerful enough to repel the Khita-is, out
of necessity, left Kirman and proceeded into Trah to his
brother, Sultan Rukn-ud-Din, leaving the Amir, Shuja’-
ud-Din, Abu-l-Kasim, in the city of Gawashir, which was
the seat of government and capital of Kirman, with the
name of Deputy and Seneschal of the city.

Burah, Khita-i, the Chamberlain, with a numerous army,
appeared before the gates of Gawashir, and took up his
position there; and contention went on between them,
which continued for a considerable length of time, until the'
period when Sultan Jalal-ud-Din, Mang-barnt, marched
from the land of Sind, by way of Mukran, into Kirman.
As soon as he arrived in the vicinity of the latter territory,
Burak, the Chamberlain, having obtained news of

the coming of Sulfan Jalal-ud-Din, proceeded to wait upon
mm, and pay him homage; and ^uja’-ud-Din, Abu- 1 -
ISasim, likewise, came out of the city of Gawashir to pay
homage to the Sultan'.

When Suljan Jaial-ud-Dtn reached the city, he had but
a small following with him, and, therefore, he became
anxious with respect to Burak, the Chamberlain, and made
over the country of Kirman to him as governor, and
proceeded into ’Irak himself. After Burak, the Chamber-
lain, had acquired possession of Kirman, Ak Sultan, having

been entered Into by both parties. GhiySs-ud-Dm set out for Kirman
71 , ***"* followers, and BuraV came forth to receive him with a laim

together for some time, until BuilV began to
‘ “"‘J finally demanded hU mother in

* reluctant consent for the sake of her son. Two kins-
^ of Bui^s now became partisans of the Prince, warned him of Burik’,
designs a^mst him, and asked his permission to kill him. Ghiyas-ud-Dtn

A few days after, Bum^ became
** kinsmen were cut to pieces, Ghiyaf-ud-Din

M^ed, and jus mother and aU their followers and deports were put to

‘r ^*.*'*‘*"* ** ‘1*® “id the head of GhiySo-

^mn to Ult^. wn of Cinngir, and obtained from the hfmdwl the investiture
of Kiroian, which he held for eleven years, when it passed to his descendants
His son came out and presented the keys <rf GawSgttr to the Saljan.

THE KHWARAZM-SHAhIaH DYNASTY. 285

quarrelled with his brothers, in ’Iral^, returned again into
Kirman, and obtained martyrdom at the hand of Buralj:,
Kh ita-1. the Chamberlain, and died*.

XIV. sultan JALAL-UD-DIN, MANG-BARNi», SON OF
SULTAN MU^JIAMMAD, KHWARAZM SHAH.

Sultan Jalal-ud-Din, Mang-barni, was the eldest son of
Sulj;an Muhammad, and was endowed with great heroism,
valour, and high talents and accomplishments.

When his father, Sultan Muhammad, acquired possession
of the territories of Gh Or and Ghaznin, he conferred them
on Jalal-ud-Din, and made over both those kingdoms to
his charge ; and deputies of his were placed in those
countries. Gh aznin was given to Malik Kuriz* ; Ftruz-
koh was entrusted to Mubariz-ud-Din, Sabzwari ; and the
Wazarat was entrusted to Shihab-ud-Din-i-Alb. Sarakhsi.
Karrman was given to the Malik-ul-Umra [Chief, or Noble
of Nobles], Burshor* [Peshawar .>] and Bu-bikrpur [or, Abu-

* was murdered in the fortress of Gaw 3 s]hir in 627 H.
There is some discrepancy as to dates, which I have not space to discuss, but
the former appears the most correct, as BuraV evidently took advantage of
Jalal-nd-Din’s defeat, mentioned in note *, page 297, to make himself inde¬
pendent, and would scarcely have dared to put his brother to death while
JalSl-ud-Din had the power to chastise him.

* In one of the oldest copies of the text where the vowel-points are given,
he is called Mang-bami, and was so styled from having a mole on his nose.
He sgras, according to Vafa-t, and other trustworthy writers, the greatest, the
most noble-minded, the most warlike, and the most devout of the sons of his
father, and most worthy of the diadem of sovereignty. His valour rivalled that
of Rustam and IsfandiySr, and he was able, skilful, and sagacious. If there
was any man in those days capable of coping with Ch ingiz successfully, it was
he ; and, from his subsequent heroic actions, there can be little doubt but
that his eflbrts would have been crowned with success, if his advice been
acted upon, or he had had the direction of af&irs, and had been seconded by
his brothers, nobles, and subjects, with that unity of purpose so essential in the
hour of danger. His brothers, however, were selfish beyond measure, and cared
for naught but their own interests and worldly pleasures and excesses, whilst
JalU-ud-Dtn was kept in constant attendance upon his father, contrary to bis
own inclinations.

* Possibly, Kurbuz. The majority of copies are as above, bat otben have
>jf' and [?] all of which .seem meaningless.

* This may refer to Peahkwar, which was'called BagrSm up to Kbar^s tiine»

but there is a place named Burahor ], much farther south, between

y a nd a h fir and the Indus ; and our author, in his account of MahmOd of
filiazntn, when referring to the idol-temple which fell at his birth, says it was
hear BarahEbur quite a different mode of spelling. See jiage 76.

386

THE TABA^AT.I-NA$IRI.

Bikrpur] were conferred upon Malik Ikhtiyar-ud-Dln.
Mu^nimad Ali-i- Kha r-post.

When the irruption of Ch angiz Kh an occurred, Sultan
Jalal-ud-Din, Mang-barni, was in attendance upon his
father, as has been previously recorded ; and, when he
brought his father’s remains to Kh warazm and interred
them, his brother [Arzalu Shahl was seated on the throne
of Khw arazm. although he was a [much] younger brother ;
and both the brothers were apprehensive of each other*.
Kutb-ud-Din, Arzalu Shah, conspired against Jalal-ud-
X>tn, who, having obtained information of his design, came
out of Kh warazm. and departed by the route of the wilds
of Sharistan. From thence he proceeded to the westward
of Nlshapur. and entered the desert between Kh urasan and
Kirman, with the determination of proceeding to Gh azntn^

* After his father had breathed his last and had been buried, Jalabud-Din
left the island of Ab-i-Sug^n with a few followers, and set out for KJiwarazm,
where were his younger brothers, ArzalaV Sultan, A^ SultUn, Ttmur Malik,
Aghal $atiib, and Kajae Tigin, with 90,000 ^nkulis. He had vast difficulties
to encounter from the confused state of affairs at that time, the successes of
Chi ngiz and his sons, and from his own countrymen, who considered that the
glory of the house of Takigli had departed. It may be as well to mention,
that the following notes give a consecutive account of Jalal-ud-Din’s life.

All men of experience, and the soldiery generally, were desirous of the
sovereignty of Jalabud-Din, and, although the most solemn agreement had
been entered into by the two brothers not to injure or molest each other, the
ill-disposed Amirs of Arzala\|t’s party, who desired a weak and inexperienced
Prince at the head of affairs for their own selfish purposes, combined to fall
suddenly upon Jalal-ud-Din and slay him. He, finding such acts could be
contemplated at such a time, and knowing the state of utter misery in which
the country was now overwhelmed, considered it advisable to leave Kh warazm
in the hands of his brother and his party, rather than weaken the little power
still remaining by civil strife. He determined to proceed, attended only by a
small following, by way of Nisa to Shad-vakh [of Nishapur]. As it was, an
army of Mnghals had already reached the Kh warazm territory, and Jalal-ud-
Din was closely pursued [near Astawah, according to Alfi,] by a portion of
that horde, on his way to Shad-yakh. and had great difficulty in effecting his
escape. His brothers—four in all—who had followed after him to try and
induce him to return, or, more probably, because they could not stay any
longer, fell into the hands of this band, and were all put to the sword. See
note *, page 280.

1 Sulpan Jalal-ud-Din only remained two or three days at Shad-vakh. in
order to get together as many men as possible ; and, on the 12th of Zi-HiJJah,
he set out quietly at night, by way of Zawzan, towards Qhaznin, to the govern¬
ment of which part he had been nominated by his lather. The Mughals were
close at hand, and he had not left more than an hour before they appeared before
the place. As soon as they found he was not there they set out in pursuit,
and piLshed on until they came to a place where two roads branched off. At

THE KHWARAZM-SIlAHiAH DYNASTY. 287

Trustworthy persons have related, that Jalal-ud-Din, in
that desert, saw Mihtar Kh izr*. who foretold his sove¬
reignty, but, under this compact, that the blood of no
Musalman should be shed by his hand. From thence,
Jalal-ud-Dtn proceeded into the territories of Nimroz, Bust,
and Dawar, and came to Ghaznin*.

Malik Khan of Hirat, who formerly bore the name of
Amin-i-Hajib[Amin-ul-Mulk?] *, and had killed Muhammad
Khamak, Qhuri, and who had, before the arrival of Jalal-ud-
Din, set out towards Hindustan, at this time, that the Sultan
came to Ghazntn, likewise, joined him. Chingiz Kha n
detached an army, from his Mughal following, in search of
Sul(an Jalal-ud-Din, towards Ghaznin, and Fihu* Nu-yan,

this place the Suljan had left a small party of his followers, under an Amtr, with
directions, in case of his being pursued, to resist the Mughals for a short
period, to give him time, and then to take the other road. This was done ; and
the Mughals, thinking they were on the Sultan’s track, took the wrong road.
The Sultan on this occasion is said to have made a march of forty farsa khs
without a halt.

On reaching Zawzan he wished to enter and take some repose, and give rest
to his horses ; but admittance was refused, the excuse being, that, in case of
attack by the Mughals, the people could not hold out the place for an hour,
and that any attempt at opposition would bring vengeance upon them. He,
therefore, continued his route as far as Mabam-abad f?]. He left that place at
midnight, and at dawn the next morning the Mughals reached it. They
followed in the track of the Sultan as far almost as Yazdawiah [also called
Zaudiah—Jezdoun of the maps?], a dependency of Hirat [about seventy-five
miles S.W. of that city], and then abandoned the pursuit.

■* Another of our author’s childish tales, certified by '‘trustworthy autho¬
rities. ”

• The Sultan, without further trouble, reached Ghaznin, on the 17th of
Zi'Hujah, 617 H. Amin Malik, called also Amin-ul-Mulk [he is styled
Yamin-ul-Mulk in Ranfat-u;-$afa and Habib-us-Siyar, and Yamin Malik by
Alfi], the governor, who had 50,000 men with him, came out to receive th
•Sultan, and both the troops and people rejoiced at his arrival, for the govern¬
ment of the territory formerly possessed by the Sultans of Gh Gr had been
previously assigned to him by his father. He encamped on the MaidSn-i-
Sabz of Gh aznin ; and, as soon as the news of his arrival spread abroad, chief¬
tains and troops [who were in those parts previously, no doubt] began to flock
to his standard from all parts around, and among the number was Saif-ud-Din,
Ighi^Vf with 40,000 men, E^nhulis, Sialj, and Turkmans ; and the Amtm
of Ghiir >dso Joined him from the parts adjacent. His affairs now assumed
considerable grandeurandmagnificence, and a large anny assembled around him.

* Some copies of the text, but they are those least to be depended upon,
differ considerably here. Tliey have,—“ Malik Rban of Hirat, who was named
Amtn-i-HSjib, at the outset of the events respecting Muliammad Kha mak.
{xhurt, before Jalill-ud-Dtn had come into Hindustan,” &c. The correct
name of this chief was Amin Malik, and he is also called Amin-ul-Mulk.

' * In some copies Fitltu.

388 THE TABA 1 ^AT- 1 -NA$ 1 RI.

who was Qhingiz IQ^n’s son-in-law, was the commander of
that force.

Sultan Jalal-ud-Din advanced against the Mughal army
as far as the limits of Barwan*, and overthrew the Mughal

* Ea^ly in the spring of 6i8 H. he put his forces in motion, and advanced to
Barwftn. Having encamped there, he received intimation that a Mughal
army, under Bak-|^ak and Yam-shih' [these leaders are somewhat differently
called by some writers—Kam-chak, and Yighur, Tamghur, and even BalghCr],
was pressing the siege of Wamiw [B&mtan, w and b being interchangeable] ;
and that it was in danger of falling into their hands, if not speedily relieved.

[With regard to these places—the town and fortress referred to—I must
here make a few remarks. The town, or position, of BarwSn, is like¬
wise called Parwan, Farwan, BSiiin, and BarwSn on the Ab-i-Barftnt,
by as many different writers. The letters b, p, and / are interchangeable.
The two first are undoubtedly incorrect. Babar and Abu-l-Fa^l call the
upper portion of the Kabul river the “ Ab-i-Barant,” and, in my humble
opinion, this proves the correctness of the situation of this place, as given by
BaihaVt, YSfa-i, and Jami’-ut-Taw 5 rikh—which latter work also states that it
lies on the “banks of the Ab-i-B&ranl ”—as situated between Giiazntn and
W&mt&n, but nearer Gh azntn. What modem writers and travellers in Af¬
ghanistan call the Logurh [the Lohgar] river, the historians above quoted, and
many others, call the Ab-i-Barant, and consider it, very properly, as the main
stream of the upper portion of that river which, ultimately, enters the Indus
above Atak. Barwan is also to be found in many maps, although the position
may not be quite correct, at about five or six stages north of Ghay.n tir. With
respect to the fortress invested by the Mughals, the Introduction to the Zafar-
N&mah, an excellent and trustworthy authority, says it was ‘ ‘ Bamian, also called
Wimtfin and this last seems to be the name which some writers have mis¬
taken for Walian. Certainly there is a place mentioned in the MasAlik-wa-
MamAlik named Walin, but one syllable less than Walian and WSmtan, as
being “the same distance from Kh ulum as the latter is from Balkh.” There
is also a Parwan or Farwin, on the Panj-hir river ; but those who have seen
the Parwan valley, north of K 3 bul, describe it as very tortuous, and, in many
places, a mere rocky defile ; and there is also the pass of the same name over
Hind&'Kush, not the easiest by far. If Barwan, or Panran, north of Kabul,

could possibly be the place referred to, and WaliSn-the Wilin of MasAlik-

wa-MamAlik, and which Mr. Thomas, R. A. S. J., vol. xvii. p. 86, calls
“ WawAlin,” and considers to have been situated near the “ modem Kunduz ”
[Kundus, by ’Arabs, E^nduz, is described as a very aneient place, by oriental
writers, who say the correct name was Kuhandujz, signifying a fortress, but by
coqstant use shortened into Kundus. BaihaVl repeatedly refers to Kuhandujz,
and constantly mentions WalwSlij JVj also, but neither “ Wiwilln” nor

Waltn]-be the place to which the ^Mughals were laying siege, Jal 3 l-ud-

Dtn would have had to cross and re-cross the Hindu-Kush on this occasion, a
rather difficult matter at any time, even for travellers, much more for an army
of about 100,000 horsemen, in early spring, and a dangerous one too, con¬
sidering that Chingiz, with his main force, was before T^e-hAn, only about
twenty miles from Kundus, while the Parwibi Pass, and Sar-i-Ulang Pass,
connected with it, and the other passes of HindQ-Kuih, were no less than
ttgkty miles off, or more. Jal^l-ud-Dtn might have been cut off from the
passes easily by a force from Chingiz’s army whilst he was engaged with the

THE KHWARAZM SBAHIAH dynasty. a89

infidels. He encountered them upon three different times in
that quarter, and on all three occasions success and victory

Mus 2 i»l forces before ’Wl mt g n , or 'WlllSn so called. Besides, we are pUdnljr
told that Barwln, on the hanks of the Ab>i-Bbftnt, was a town or city behottn
Gh azntn and Balltlt. Chlngix himself came in pursuit of the SnltSn, by way
of Andar-ib, K 2 bul, and Bftmtin.]

Leaving bis heavy material and baggage at Barwftn, SultSn JaUl>ud-Dfn
marched to the relief of the fortress ; and, having come upon the advanced
force of the Mugfaals in that direction, made a dash upon them, and Inflicted a
loss of looo men. The SultSn’s troops being the most numerous, the MugJials
retired across the river, destroying the bridge after them [this shows the river,
whatever it was, was not fordable], and took up a position on the op{x>site side.
Vollies of arrows were discharged on either side until night closed, and during
the darkness the Mughals, according to their favourite manceuvre, seemingly,
decamped. [If WaliSn lay where Kundus does now, a messenger would have
brought Chingiz with his whole army, or a large portion of it, from TSe-VSn
before night.] The Sultan now caused a great quantity of food and other
necessaries [scarcely brought over the Parwan Pass] to be sent to the fortress
of WS.mian, after which he retfimed to his camp at Barvriin.

Chingiz, having heard before Tae-VSn of this reverse, despatched another
force of 30,000 picked troops, under Shabki ^otu [according to Vafa-t, but
by our author and some others, Fiku Nu-yan ; by the ^far-Namah, KanV&d
and other leaders ; and by others, ^ubQr] to take revenge, and prepared to
follow in person ; and one morning, in the early forenoon, about a toetk ajler
his return to Barw'an, intimation reached the Sultan that the Mughalk were
approaching. He at once put his troops in motion, and advanced about a
league to meet them, and drew up his ranks in readiness to receive them. [If
the modem Parwan be the place, a position they were not likely to venture
into with such a large force able to attack them within it, and a strong fortress
in their rear, the Mughals must have been about to issue from the pass, and
the Sultan must have advanced towards its entrance to receive them ; but I doubt
very much whether those who have seen those passes would consider such to be
probable or possible.] Amin Malik had the right wing, and Saif-ud-Din,
Ighiak. the left, while the Sultan took post in the centre. He gave orders
for the troops to dismount, and hold their horses’ bridles in hand. [Thrown
over the arm probably, but scarcely to * ‘ bind the reins of their horses round
their waists." What if the horses had taken fright? Even with the reins
thrown over their arms, the men would have had to fight in a single rank—a
strange mode of fightmg. The probability is that the bridles of the horses were
fastened at the saddle, to, or round, the horses’ waists, which would enable a few
men comparatively to look after-them.] This they obeyed, determined to do
or die. The right wing, under Amm Malik, being the strongest division of
the Sult&n’s army, the Mughals directed their chief efforts against it, and it
was forced back ; but, prompt aid being afforded from the left and centre, the
Mughals, in their turn, were compelled to give way. Not a man on either
side turned his back : great valour was shown on both sides, and the fighting
only ceased with the light.

Next morning preparations were made to renew the engagement, but the
Sultln’s troops, having noticed the ranks of another division [the ** wood and
felt” ranks of the Raufat-u;-$afa], apparently drawn up in rear of the Mughal
ranks, conceived that reinforcements must have reached them during the night,
and they seemed disinclined to encounter them. Counsel was taken as to the

THE TABA^T.I-NA$IRI.

rewarded him; but, on the news of these successes of his
reaching Chingiz Kh an, he, being at Tal-Van of Kh urasan
[*jrae-kan of Tukharistan ?] at the time, marched his armies
towards Gh aznin *. Sultan Jalal-ud-Dinwas unable to offer

Advisability of falling bock to and taking shelter near the foot of the hills, and
retiring to the high ground and spurs ; but the Sultan would not hear of such a
prejudicial movement. The troops were directed to dismount as on the
previous day [ordering them to dismount would indicate ground impracticable
for cavalry, but dismounting to fight also indicates a determination to conquer
or die]; and, on this occasion, the enemy’s eflTorts were directed against the left
wing under Saif-ud-Dfn, IghraVf the valour and spirit of whose men they had
had such recent proof of, and their best men were pitted against it. The troops
of the left wing, however, stood their ground so determinedly, and plied their
auTows with such effect, that the Mughals were hurled back. They having
turned their backs without venturing to renew the attack, the SuItSn directed
that the tymbals should sound the charge, upon which the whole force mounted
and charged the Mufijials [I &ncy the Farwan Pass is not a nice place for a
general durge by a numerous army of cavalry], who turned their backs and made
off. Again they rallied, charged the Sultan’s advanced troops, and inflicted a loss
of 500 warriors ; but the Sul[an flew to the rescue, and again charged the
Mughals and put them to flnal rout, making great slaughter among them.
The two leaders returned with the remiuint of their forces to Ckingiz’s camp at

Tae-V*“-

The Sul^hi’s troops, having defeated the Mu|^ials, took to plunder; and,
most unfortunately, a dispute arose between Amtn Malik and Saif-ud-Dtn,
Igllridt) about a horse, and Amfn Malik, in the heat of the dispute, struck
the latter over the head with his whip. The Sultan was unable [not

unwilling”] to investigate the matter, because he doubted whether the
E^rnkults [Amtn Malik’s followers] would submit to any decision. In conse¬
quence of this untoward event, Saif-ud-Dtn, IghraV, smarting under the insult,
stayed with the Sultan but for the day; and, when night set in, “ with the
instinct [and cunning] of the wild beasts,” he marched away with his whole
force towards the mountains of Karprian and San^uran [some say,' Skanuzan].

This event completely broke the power of Jalal-ud-Dtn, having deprived him
of nearly half his army ; and, under the circumstances, be thought it advisable
to retire to Gh aznin.

* Ckingiz Khan, who had ndw disposed of Tae-V^n, having become aware
of this division among, and partial dispersion of, the Sultan’s army, hastened to
take revenge. Leaving his heavy material behind at BukUln, he advanced
with his whole available force, by way of Andar-ab, it is said, against WamiSn
or BSmian. [This certainly must be the Walian, as he would scarcely have
left it unmolested. ] He was detained a month before it, and, having taken it,
he put every soul to the sword, and then set out again.st Sultan Jalal-ud-Dtn.

The Sult&n, on becoming aware of Chingiz’s intentions, being far too weak
to make a stand against such forces, which no ruler of that time could out¬
number, resolved to cross the Sindh, and retire into Hindustan [the reason
probably was, that he claimed the western parts of the Panj&b, and also of
Sindh, as successor to the dominions of Mu’izz [Shihahj-nd-Dtn, GhCrf; and,
leaving a garrison at GJhazntn, he set out. Oz Khan was left at Kajlah
KajUi, probably, the name of a place on the route to the Indus by the
Paiwdr Pass], with the rear-guard of the SnltSn’s small forces to endeavour to

THE SawARAZM-fiHAHlAH DYNASTY. 991

resistance to these forces, and retired towards Burshor [PeshS-

hold Chingiz’s advance at bay, and give liiin time to send his family and
effects across, and 'to get his foUowers across also, on the appearance of the
Mughals, but Cz Sh2n was defeated and forced back. Chingiz, who saw through
the SultSn’s object, and knew that he had left Gh azntn fifteen days before his
reaching it, pushed on with all possible celerity, and, after crushing the SultSn’s
rear-guard, made a forced march during the night. It was in the month of
Rajab, 618 h. [corresponding to September, lazi a.d., although a few writers
mention ghawwal—December] ; and, when the morning dawned, the Sult&n,
who was encamped near the bank of the river nearly opposite the Ntl- 5 b ferry
[the place where Timilr is said, subsequently, to have passed the Indus, but
he crossed at Dinkot], and who had along with him his family, dependents,
and treasures, found the Mughals on three sides of him—they were in his front
and on both flanks, and the river was in his rear. Notwithstanding the extreme
danger of his situation, he was not to be daunted, and determined to stand his
ground. The Mngbala began by attacking his right wing [the odds were
more than fifty to one], under Amin Malik, a body of them having advanced
along the river’s bank to take him in flank ; and they ovei^iowered him, and
most of his party were slaughtered. Amtn Malik, with the few men remaining
of the right wing, made for Rarshawar ; but, as the Mughals had occupied the
route, he and they were all slaughtered by the way. The left wing, under Kh Sn
Malik, was likewise overwhelmed. The Sultan had kept up this unequal
combat from dawn to noon, and was now left with the remains of his centre
reduced by this time to about 700 men [some say 100 only]. He flew from the
flank to the centre, and centre to flank of the enemy, and fought like a lion at
bay, charged them repeatedly [the Mughals were commanded not to kill him,
but to take him alive if possible], overthrowing numbers, and clearing a space
around him at every onset, and filling them with amazement at his valour. All was
of no avail ; it was like attempting to stay the ocean’s billows, for the Mughal
forces increased every moment by the arrival of fresh troops, and pressed
forward, every instaAt contracting the area round the gallant Sul[an. [If the
reader will examine one of the Panjab survey maps of this part, he will find
that the nature of the ground was of some advantage to Sultan Jalal-ud-Dfn,
by rendering it difficult for the Mughals to t>how an extended front.]

'When he perceived that his situation was become desperate, and had gone
beyond name and fame, he surveyed the scene with tearful eyes and fevered
lip. At this crisis Ujash Malik [also Akh^], son of Kha n Malik, his materruil
uncle, seized the bridle of his horse, and dragged him away. With weeping
eyes, and his heart filled with a thousand pangs, he bade adieu to his wives
and children, his mother, and other relations and dependents, called for his
state charger to be saddled and brought forth, and, having mounted him, once
more, like the crocodile, he plunged into the sea of conflict, and, having forced
back the foremost of the enemy for a short distance, turned round, divested
himself of his armour, slung his shield at his back, and, seizing his canopy
without its staff, and urging his charger with his whip [spurs not used], he
plunged into the-Sindh, although the water was at a distance of eight or ten
yards below the bank ; and, armed wdth his sword, spear, shield, aivl quiver of
arrows, “like unto a fearless lion rushing along a plain, he passed the Jthun,
and reached the opposite bank in safety, after having been carried down some
distance by the force of the current, and before reaching a spot favourable for
landing.” [A <amH does not look very “ proud” when crossing a river, much
less the Indus, even In a boat. See Elliot, vol. ii.» note 2, page 553.

»9a THE TABA]|PAT.I.NA$IRI.

war ?]; and, on the banks of the river Sind, an encounter

Between « lion and a camel there is a vast differtMet, althongh they are but two
faints —and jii >—But who could mistake them, the camel being a very
model of awkwardness? The word “ JthQn,” used by one of the authors from
which this is taken, seems to signify any mighty river, as the Jthiin of Sindh;
and, in this sense, Ibn Shurdabih appears to use it There is a place, on the
west bank of the Indus, a little below Ntl-kb, called {zbofS-Trap, or the
"Morse’s Leap,” and very probably the name is derived from the SultSn’s
feat above recorded. Chingiz TChan caused a monument [iS*] to be erected
where the battle took place. It has been said [Elliot, vol IL, App. page
571], that “the passage of the river [Indus] would have been no such very
gallant feat [Columbus and the egg to wit: nothing is after it has been
accomplished !] in that month [December] when the river was at its lowest,”
and reference is made to “ Altamah ” [I-}ral-timiah] and old Ranjtt Singh ; but
where did they cross ? Where the river was broad and shallow, and the current
not rapid ; but where Jalal-ud-Dln is said to have plunged in from the over*
haitging bank, ^me 25 to 30 feet above the water, was at a place a few
miles Mow Nil-kb, where the river is about 180 feet deep, 250 3rards wide,
and running at the rapid rate of nine or ten miles an hour. The whole distance
between Ntl-kb and (his place may be described as one immense and irresistible
rapid. See Wood : “ Oxus.”] Chingiz, seeing the Sultan in the act of crossing,
galloped to the bank ; and some of his Mughals would have thrown themselves
in after htm , but Chin giz forbade them, and they took to their bows. A group,
tvAa witnessed the scene, relate that, as far as their arrows could teach, the water
was red with blood, for several of his followers followed his example. Some
idea may be formed, from what has been noticed above, of the value of the
" Universal History,” the best authority for the English reader to consult,
when it is therein stated, that JaUU-ud-Dtn, when in the middle of the river—
running about nine miles an hour—“stopped to insult Jenghiz Khan, who was
come to the bank to admire his courage, and emptied his quiver of arrows
against him” I!

Having reached the opposite side, the Sultan, slowly and sorrowfully, rode
upwards along the bank until he reached a spot facing his own camp, and
beheld the plunder of his family, kinsmen, dependents, his treasures, and all
his belongings, without being able to render them succour, while Chingiz
continued' astride his horse on the opposite side, pointing out the Sultkn to
his sons. The Sultkn now dismounted from his charger, loosened the girths,
took off the felt saddle-cloth, together with his own tunic and cloal:, and his
arrows, and laid them in the sun to dry, and spread his canopy on the head
of bis spear, which he stuck into the ground to shade him from the sun. He
remained all alone until the time of afternoon prayer, when about seven of his
followers joined him, and a small tent was pitched for his convenience. Whilst
the light permitted, he watched the proceedings of the Mughals, “whilst the
heavens almve looked down upon him with wonder and amazement, as though
they said,—

* Never hath the world beheld a man like this.

Nor heard of one among the heroes of ancient dm^' ”

Chingiz Kban and the whole of the Mughnls, who witnessed this wonderful
feat, placed their hands to their mouths [denoting amazment]; and Chingiz
himself^ when he beheld the Sult&n’s lofty bearing, turned his face towards his
sons, and said,—“ Such a son as this is worthy to survive his father ! Since he
has escaped the vortex of fire and water, and reached the shore of escape.

THK SHWARAZM-SBAHIAH DYNASTY.

393

took place between them. SuIJSn Jalal-ud-Din was defeated
and overthrown, and he threw himself into the river, and
retired, discomfited, into Hindustan.

The august Sultan, Shams-ud-Dunya wa ud-Dln,
despatched a force from his armies against him, upon which
Sul$an Jalal-ud-Din turned aside, and proceeded towards
P chch ah and Multan*. From thence he entered the

countless deeds will be achieved by him, and vast trouble caused ; and, as long
as he lives, it is fallacious for us to entertain the hope of dominion and empire,
and how then is it possible for any prudent man to be heedless of his actions !”

Several historians say, that this event occurred in the “ vicinity” of

Baraihawar; and, from this, we may judge how far Waihind or Bahind,
mentioned under Mahmud of CiJiaznfn [page 76], may have been distant from
that place. See also note *, page 285.

• Here we have a good specimen of our author’s wilful concealment and
distortion of facts : he could not have been ignorant of these events, which
happened during his own lifetime, in the country in which he was residing, and
at Court, where all these matters were perfectly well known. He came first
into Sindh in 624 H., not long after they happened. I must only give a brief
summary of the principal events to elucidate JalU-ud-Dfn’s Indian career,
and correct our author's blunders and misstatements. The Sultan, having
crossed the Indus in safety, as soon os night came on, entered the Chiil [un¬
cultivated or desert tract] of Jaru[f—called to this day, the Cllul-i-Jalalf—with
his few followers, and was joined, by degrees, by stragglers from his army,
until they numbered .about 50 or loo men, some badly armed. With this
handful of followers he attacked a town, where there was a considerable force
of Hindus, defeated them, and captured the place, and in it obtained some
horses and arms. Shortly after, others of his men, who had escaped from the
banks of the Indus also joined him. He sent a force of 500 horse against
another place in that vicinity, and again defeated the. people of those parts
who showed hostility towards him. By degrees his force increased to between
4000 and 5000 men ; and Cllingis who was still in the vicinity of the Indus
on hearing of it, and fearing the energy of Jalal-ud-Din, de.spatched a force
against him under 4 leader named Tfirt 3 e. The Sulfan, not being strong
enough to oppose the Mughals retired through a part of the Panjab towards
the frontier of the kingdom of Dibit. On this the Mughal leader again retired,
after plundering the neighbourhood of Malkapur. The Sul^Sn despatched
an envoy to I-yal-timigh, the slave-king of Dihit, on arriving near his frontier,
requesting that the latter would assign a place for his residence for a short time,
and urged this request upon the previous good understanding, which had
existed between them as neighbours [his father’s officials and the ruler of Dihlt
probably], and further urged the great advantage of mutual support, and that,
even for humanity’s sake, he would grant this favour of an asylum. '* The base
nature of the slave, however, was,” as one author says, “unchanged in the
king ; and, sprinkling his head with tlie dust of churlishness and ill-nature,
he, after taking a long time to consider on the subject, put the SultSn’s envoy
to death [some say he had him poisoned], under pretence that the envoy had
been conspiring against him, but, in reality, fearing the effect upon his own
Turkish followers, and probably the Suljan’s superiority over himself, his war¬
like character, his nobility of mind, and great energy. The manumitted slave

•94 TH& TABAI^T-I.NA^IRL

territory of Kirman, and afterwards Pars. The AtS-bak,

excused himself by saying, that the climate of the countiy would not agree with
the SultSn’s health, but that, if he would accept a place in the environs of
Pihlt, one should be assigned to him. This, of course, was to get him into
his power, if possible. As to I-yal-timigh sending, “ an army” against the
Sultan, it is absurd ; he knew better than to do that. He did send a great
man as env<^, with rich presents and supplies, and false excuses, for the murder
of the Sultair's envoy. The Sultan, having returned to Balalah and Nikalah,
near L&hor, and his forces having now increased, by the arrival of irtany of his
old soldiers, to the number of about lo^ooo^ but by no means sufficient to bring
the ruler of Dihlf to account, despatched a portion of his army against the
Hills of Jud. That force defeated the Khokar [or more correctly, Khokhar]
chief, erroneously styled Rae Koklr and Kokar by most writers [the Ghakhars
are quite a distinct race], and returned witn great booty. The Sultan demanded
the chief’s daughter in marriage, which was readily acceded to; and, moreover,
the Rhe sent his son at the head of a considerable body of his tribe, to join the
Sultin’s troops, and the title of Ijjiutlagh [some say Q^ulfj] Kha n was b^towed
upon the latter.

Hostility of long standing existed between the Khokhar chief and l^ubachah,
governor of Sindh [the whole valley of the Indus, below the Salt Range, was
called Sindh in those days], who had now begun to consider himself an
independent sovereign. He was encamped itear O chcha h with 20,ooo men,
and a force of 7000 was despatched against him, by the Sultan, under JahUn
PahlawSn, guided by the cbief’s son. They made a forced march, and, falling
suddenly upon l^ubadiah, in the night, totally overthrew him. Jl^ubachah
got on board a vessel, and made for his stronghold of Akar and Bakar [Sakar
and Bhakar? Jami’>ut-Tawartkli says, “two fortresses on ef/ie island”],
“ which are two islands in the river Sindh ” [more on this subject anon], and
the Sultan came to O chch ah. yubachah now managed to get back to
Mult&n, alter having, on the Sulj^n’s demand, paid him a considerable sum
of money as tribute. The hot season coming on, the Sulfan returned to the
Salt Range hills again, and, on the way, took a fortress called Bisiram or Bisram
[Bisram-pur ?], where he was wounded in the band by an arrow.

Chingiz had despatched another army against him, and the Sultan was
obliged to move towards Lower Sindh. On his arrival in sight of MultSn,
he sent an agent to ^ubachah and demanded a contribution ; but be, knowing
the Murals were on the move, refused, and showed determined hostility.
The Sultan did not tarry in the vicinity, but proceeded to O chcha h. which,
proving hostile also, he remained before two days, and set fire to. From thence
he advanced to Sindustan [the name given by the generality of historians is
Stwastan—AUt says, “ Sadusan, which b StwastSn”]—the present European¬
ized Sehwan. The city and fortress were held by a deputy of IjiCubacliab’s,
Fakhr-ud-Dtn, Salarf. A force sent out by him, under Lachm. a native of
Shits, having been overthrown by the Sulfan’s vanguard under Oz Shkn,
Fakhr-ud-Dtn, on the Sulfan’s arrival, came forth, and delivered up the place.
Jalil-ud-Dtn entered the city, and remained there a month, after which be con¬
ferred a dress of honour upon FaUlr-ud-Dtn, left him in charge as his lieutenant
in Sindustan, and marched to Dtbal and Damrtlah. A ^abash [Abyssinian
or negro], who whs ruler of that part, fled, got on ship-board, and escaped.
The SultSn encamped near those places ; and, from thence, detached a force,
under KbSs Kbgn towards Nahrwalah, from which he returned with immense
booty. SultSn Jal&l-ud-Dfn founded a Jfimi’ Masjid at Dfwal or Dtbal, as it

THE s&wArazm-shAhIah dynasty. 995

Abu-Bikr, ruler of Pars*, gave the Sultan his sister in

is also called, cm the ruins of an idol-temple. [The situation of this place
seems to have puzzled many. Istakhurt says it lies west of the river
idihr&n ; Abt-l-Euim, Ibn l^uital, says, in one place, that it lies on the
sea-cxKist on the eastern bank of the Mihran ; while, in another place, he
says the waters of the MihrSn fall into the sea east of Dtbal. AbQ-l-]^sim.i-
’Abd-ullah, son of SburdSd, Khuiasanf, author of the MasAlik-wa-MamA-
I.IK, also says the Mibtan passes Dihal on the east ; but Abu-l-Fa^l says,
plainly, that Btahmanal»d was subsequently styled Dtbal or Dtwal and
Thathah, and so does the Jgmi’-ut-Tawartkh and others also. Extensive ruins
exist for miles around Thathah ; and, in endeavouring to fix the site of Dtbal,
which the ancient geographers say was situated on the cxxist, and modem
writers expecrt to find there still, the latter do not make allowance for
alterations and changes in the course, and for the deposits at the mouth of
the Indus, which, during the lapse of many centuries, have increased the
distance of the present '^athah from the sea many miles. The mouth
[or mouths] of the Indus must have changed considerably within the last 250
years, Thatliah and Dlwal be one and the same place ; for Paynton, in his
account of the voyage of Captain Christopher Newport, who took out Sir
Robert Shirley as envoy to Persia in 1613, says Sir Robert was landed there.
He remarks,—“We tame to an anchor r/mr tke eify of Diul, in the mouth o/the
river Sittde, in 24° 3c/ N. Lat., and our varying at the-same place 16“ 45'.”
Thathah is in I.at. 24“ 44', and Karachi, which is also suppo^ by some to
^ the site of Dibal, lies in 24* 51'.]

Whilst in Lower Sindh, information reached the Sultan, that his brother,
GhiyUs-ud-Din, Pir Shah, was established in Tra|c; but that the troops,
generally, desired his [Jalal-ud-Din’s] presence, and were calling for hilp to
head them ; and further, that Buialc, the Hajib, was in Kirman, and was then
investing the town [city] of Bardasir. [Ibn Hulcal says—“Bardasir, which
is to say, PawSshir.] These things, together adth information respecting the
movements of a large Mughal force [the one previously alluded to, which was
despatched into the Mukmnat—the Mukrans], and the return of Chingiz to
his own country again, determined the Sultan to set out for ’Iioh by way^of
Mukran, which he did in 621 H. ; and, like Alexander before him, lost a
number of his followers from the unhealthiness of the climate.

From this point, in order to save space, 1 must greatly curtail the notes I
had written, although the remaining events in the career of Jalal-ud-Dln are very
interesting. The Sultan entered Kirm^, and Shuja*-ud-Dln. Abu-l-ESsim'*
son, who held out Gawashrr [also called Bardastr] for Chiyas-ud-Din, the
Sullan’s brother, and who was then holding it against Buralc, the I^jib,
came out and presented the keys to the Sultan. BuraV pretended to submit
and to be most loyal, and gave his daughter to the Sult^, but, subsequently,
shut him out of the capital, and sent out his followers, although he pretended
merely to hold it, and the territory of Kirman, as the Sultan’s deputy. Jalfil.
ud-Dtn had matters of greater importance to engage his attention at that time,
and he accordingly set out for ’Irfi^ by way of Shtraz. and sent an envoy to the
Ata-bak Sa’d to announce his coming.

• Not so; the Ata-bak Sa’d still ruled in Firs, and AbQ-Bikr did not
succeed him until 628 H. —seven years subsequently. How different was the
behaviour of Sa’d to that of the "august Sulian” of our author ! As soon as
the Sultan’s agent came, he despatched his son, Sal^ur g^h, with 500 horsey
to do him honour, and to apologize for not coming himself, because, some time

THE XABA|PAT.I-NA$IRI.

marriage, and entertained him as a guest. From Firs,
Jalal-ud-Dln entered the country of A^arbaijan, and
defeated the infidels of Gutj ^ [Georgia], and reduced that
country under his jurisdiction.

previously, he had taken an oath which he could not break, that he would
never more go forth to receive any one soever. Jal&l-ud>Din accepted his
apology, received his son with great favour, and conferred the title of Farzand
Sh&n upon him. On the Sul{an reaching the neighbourhood of Sa’d’s capital,
he supplied him with evei-y sort of thing that could be desired—clothes, arms,
horses, supplies of all descriptions, and even Habashi. Hindi, and Turkish
slaves to serve him. After certain agreements and stipulations had been
concluded between them, the Ata-bak Sa’d gave a daughter of his own in
marriage to the Sultan, the ceremonies of which were duly celebrated, and a
thoroughly good understanding was established between them, and Sa’d was
confirmed in his possessions. On his departure for Isfahan, the Sultan
induced Sa’d to release his'son Abu-Bikr, who had long been imprisoned
for hostility towards his father [see page 178], and Abu-Bikr was released and
allowed to follow in the train of the Sultan.

Having entered ’IiaV, the Sultan proceeded to Rai; and his brother,
<Tb iyaa-ud-Dtn- Ptr Sh 5 h. pretended to submit to his brother’s authority.
On the way to I;fahSn, the Sultan was joined by the venerable ’Ala-ud-Daulah,
who bore the title of Ata-bak, and, for the last sixty years, had held the govern¬
ment of Yazd. He was the lineal descendilnt of the last of the Dtalamah
rulers of the family of Buwiah. See page 66, and note t.

JalSl-ud-Dtn’s affairs now began to acquire some stability. He determined
to proceed tp Shustar for the winter of 621 H., and afterwards, having
previously despatched an envoy, to proceed to Baghdad and endeavour to
establish friendly relations with the Kha ltfah, and solicit his aid and support
against the common enemy of their faith, or at least to obtain the countenance
and sanction of the Kb alffah for his own efforts against them. All was to no
purpose ; the hostility of Un-Na$ir towards the father was continued towards
the son, although the common enemy of their faith was, so to speak, at his own
gates. He not only refused to hold any communication with him, but sent
two armies to expel him from his territory; but the Sultan, who was compelled
to fight in his own defence, defeated and routed both armies in detail, with
much inferior numbers. Un-Ni$ir died in the following year, 622 H.

The Sult&n, unsuccessful at the court of Baghdad, determined to bring
under his jurisdiction the. subject province of Afarbfitjan, in which the At 3 .-
bak, Yuz-bak, the son of the AtS-bak, Jahan Pahlawan, ruled. Yuz-bak fled
from his capital, Tabriz, on the Sudan’s approach, and retired to his stronghold
of AlanjuV, leaving his consort, the daughter of Sultin Tughril [not Sanjar],
Saljuj^i, in charge of the capital. She was aggrieved with Yuz-bak on some
account, and stated that he had divorced her; and, having obtained a dispen¬
sation from the chief fo fltttt effect, she, after consulting with and

obtaining the sanction of the chieft and great men, agreed to deliver up Tabriz
to the Sultan, if he would, after the prescribed period, marry her. The SultSn
agreed, and the capital was delivered up to him, and he entered it in 622 H.
Subsequently, he went to NakhjGin, and espoused Shams Malikah SllStGn,
as agreed; and, a few days after the news reached her former husband, the
At 2 -bak Yuz-bak, he died of grief and chagrin.

Soon after JalSI-ud-Dtn engaged in hostilities with the Gurjts, and was

THE SHWARAZM-SHAHlAH DYNASTY.

*97

He also fought engagements with the armies of RGm
^nd of g^m, and was defeated and overcome; but, at
length, peace was concluded between him and the army of
gilAm. Turtt, the Mughal, who had invested Multan®, left
Qllingiz l^an, and came and joined Sultan Jalal-ud-Dtn,
and became a convert to the Muhammadan faith.

The Mughal forces, upon several occasions, went in
pursuit of Sultan Jalal-ud-D!n, but victory always attended
him*. At last, in the year 628, or 629 H., the Sultan was

successiU against them ; but was impeded in his operations by ButS^, the
^ijib, throwing off his allegiance. He determined to move against the rebel
at once, and acted with such celerity, that on the eighteenth day he reached
Kinnan from Tiflts, only 300 horse having kept up with him. BurSV hastened
to make submission, by sending apologies, rich and costly presents, and
protestations of loyalty for the future, but did not, of course, venture into the
Sultin’s presence. The latter could do nought else than accept his submission,
for during his absence, Malik-ul-Ashraf. ruler of Sham, instigated by BurZV to
create a diversion in his own favour, sent an army into the Sultan’s territory,
under the governor of AkhlaJ, who carried off ShSms Malikah Tthatrm from
Sbue, and dishonoured her [Jami’-ut-Tawart]di says, Malik-ul-Ashraf dis¬
honoured her, and Raufat-uf-^afa says, it was the l^jib, ’Ali] ; and the
Guijts also rose. Fhe Sultan lost no time in taking revenge, and canned
slaughter and devastation up to the very gates of Akhl^t* He had, however,
to abandon his operations against it, from intimation that two Mughal armies
had entered 'Ir&k. One of these supposed armies turned out to be JahZn
PahlawSn, Ir-bak [Thus in one copy of Guzidah, with the diacritical points ;
in others, Ir-lak and Ir-ltk ; and in other writers, Uz-bak and Oz-bak and
Oz-bak Shan, but I do not account the last three correct], and his followers,
who had been left by the Sultan as governor of his conquests in the valley of
the Indus. JalU-ud-Dtn, however, broke up his camp before Akhl&I, and
retired into ’IiaV to oppose the Mughals. Nearly every copy of the text has
Karkh instead of Guij.

* This statement is not mentioned by other authors quoted herein, and is
very doubtful.

* In Ramadan 624 h. [Jami’-ut-TawartUl and some others say, in 626 H.,
and others, 625 h., but the first, from other circumstances and data, is correct],
he encountered the enemy between Isfahan and Rai. The right wing of the
Sol{2n’s army, led by Oz Khan, overthrew the opposing force of Mu^ials,
when the Suljan’s brother, {^iySg-ud-Dtn, who had charge of the other wing,
deserted during the action, with all his adherents, and fled into Lfirlst&n. [Ii
was subsequent to this that he was put to death by Buiftk- See page 285, and
note*.] This dastardly act on the part of his brother caused the Sultan’s
overthrow, and he bad to cut his way out of the fight. He succeeded in
reaching the neighbouring hills, and, after some days, reached IffahSn, to the
joy and surprise of ’the troops and people, who feared he must have fierished.
The Mu^ials, after this, re red into Sliuifisftn again. Their object, at this
period, seems to have been to prevent the Sult&n’s government from acquiring
any stability, to ravage the country they passed through, and to endeavour to
surprise him. In consequent of their retreat, the Sul^fin had time to renew

U

39 S

THE TABA^T.I.NA$IRI.

encamped on the confines of Afarbatjan, on the side of
Sham and Diyar-i-Bakr, when an army of Mughals came
unexpectedly upon him, and he was obliged to fly'.

his operations in Gurjistan and Arman. He inarched, from I^fahin, in 625 H.,
and, having succeeded against the Gurjis, marched to AJchhit once more, took
it by storm, captured the governor’s [^Ujib ’All’s]' wife, whom he made his
slave, and amply revenged the outrage Shams Malikah SJiatun had suffered at
her husband's hands.

Jalal-ud'Din now turned his arms against the Sultan of Rum, ’Ala-ud-Dfn,
son of Kai-l^ubad, Salju]^t [see bottom of page 162], and Malik-ul-Ashraf.
ruler of Sli^m, who had combined against him [all the Muhammadan rulers
at this time, with few exceptions, seem bent on their own destructiod, and
played into the hands of the Mughals], and had been joined by forces from
Arman, Gurjistan, and KtfchaV: [Krim?]. In the first action, the Sultan
overthrew a portion of them ; but in a second engagement, having to dismount
from his horse through illness, his troops, thinking he had retired from the held,
Wcame dispirited and gave way. They were not pursued, because the enemy
considered their flight a mere stratagem of the Sultan’s to draw'them into an
ambuscade. This is said to have taken place in 627 h. Jalal-ud-Din had
endeavoured [in 627-8 H.] to induce the rulers of Rum and Sha m to join him
against the common enemy, but jealousy and suspicion on their part prevented
so advantageous an alliance.

' The end of the g.'tllant Sultan’s eventful career, however, was approaching.
He had passed the winter of 628 H. in the neighbourhood of Irmaniah, when
intimation reached him of the despatch of a fresh and numerous army of
Mughals, under Jarmaghun, and of their early approach: He despatched
tjz Kh an, with a strong patrol, to make inquiries. He proceeded as far as
'I'abriz, where he was told that they had retired from the country again, and,
without satisfying himself as to the truth of this report, he returned to the
Su 1 {an’s camp with it. Thrown off his guard by this false report, the Sultan
and his troops gave themselves up to festivity and carousal. After some time
had elapsed, one night, in the month of Shawwal of the above year, the
Mughals came suddenly upon him. The Sultan, who was sound asleep at the
time from the effects of his potations, was aroused by tjz Kh an, who urged
him to fly. The Mughals had already got into his camp, and were slaying all
who came in their way. Oz Kha n kept them at bay for a short time, during
which the Sultan was able to mount his hor.se, and fly towards the hills of the
Kurds. He wandered about for some time, when sleep overcame him ; he lay
down, and fell fast asleep. A Kurd, attracted by the richness of his dress,
seized him. The Sultan made himself known to him, and requested the man
to conduct him to Malik Muzaffar, the then governor of Akhlat. The Kurd
conducted him first to his dwelling, and then went back to the place where he
had found the Sul];an asleep to search for his horse, which had strayed whilst
his master slept. Another Kurd, whose brother had been killed in the storming
of AJdllaJ—some say by the Sultan’s own hand—having heard where he was,
came, during the absence of his clansman, and slew him in revenge for his
brother’s death.

With Jalal-ud-Dtn, the Kh wSrazm Sha hf dynasty terminated. Some
authors relate that he was not slain on the above occasion, .but that he changed
clothes with the Kurd, and turned devotee, and wandered about the world.
Curiously enough, I have accidentally met with a confirmation of this. It is

. THE KHWARAZM-SHAHIAH DYNASTY.

*99

He succeeded in reaching a place in the territory of
Akhlat. and halted to rest near a village, the chief of
which recognized him. In a battle, which had taken place
between the Sultan and the troops of Sham, he had slain
the brother* of that chief. Having the Sultan thus in his
power, that chieftain martyred him. The next day,
information was conveyed to the sovereign of Sham, who
was greatly grieved [at his fate] ; and he commanded that
the murderer should suffer condign punishment.

On the occurrence of this misfortune, the sister of the
Ata-bak, Abu-Bikr, ruler of Pars [Jalal-ud-Din’s consort],
reached Sham. She Avas treated with honour and reverence,
and was conducted back to Pars.

Thus the dominion of the Khw arazm Shahs terminated ;
and their remaining Maliks, and their followers, took up
their residence in Sham and in Mi$r.

most interesting, and from one who attended him in his last moments. Shaikh
’Ala.ud-Daulah, Al-ByabSnkf, us*Simnanf relates as follows ;—“ When at
Baghdad, I used daily, at noon, to wait upon the pious and venerable Sha ikh.
Nur>ul-Haklt wa ud-Dtn, ’Abd-ur-Rahnian-i-Isfaraini—may his tomb be sanc¬
tified ! I happened to go upon one occasion, at the usual hour, and found him
absent from his abode, a rather unusual occurrence at that time of the day. I
went again on the following morning to wait upon him, and inquired as to
the cause of his absence on the previous day. He replied, ‘ My absence was
caused through Sul^w Jalal-ud-Din, Mang-bamf, having been received into the
Almighty’s mercy.’ I inquired, ‘What, had he been living all this time?’
He answered, ‘ You may have noticed a certain aged man, with a mole upon
his nose, who was wont to stay at a certain place,’ which he named. I had
often remarked the venerable devotee in question and that was the heroic,
but unfortunate Sultan, Jalal-ud-Din. According to this account, Jalal ud-Din
could not have died until 688 H., above sixty years after the period above
mentioned.

* Tbe most reliable copies have “brother;” others, “ brothers and sons
and some again, "sons” only.

U 2 ‘
