History of English Literature (Hippolyte Taine (H. Van Laun, trans.), 1871)
==========================================================
The founding text of deterministic literary history; milieu theory's bible. Public domain. Internet Archive full text (bwb_P9-CKZ-922_4).

COLLEGE
OF THE PACIFIC


seu


one


fatoatea


OO TT I I aE aw te! ape


HISTORY


ENGLISH LITERATURE


in 2025


httos://archive.org/details/owb_P9-CKZ-922 4


peel
a _,


Sr > 5 skew york SS ane FLORES
< WORTHINGYON CO., 4% BROADWAY”


HISTORY


OF


MONGLISH LITERATURE


BY


H. A. TAINE, D.C.L.


TRANSLATED FROM THE FRENCH BY H. VAN LAUN


ONE OF THE MASTERS AT THE EDINBURGH ACADEMY


WITH PREFACE
BY


Roos STODDARD


NiO av.


NEW YORK
WORTHINGTON CO., 747 BROADWAY
1889


CopPpyRIGHtT, 1889,
BY
R. H. STODDARD.


CONTENTS.


—— =


BOOK IV.—MODERN LIFE.


CHAPTER I.


Lord Byron,
Paas
£ The Man—Family—Impassioned character—Pre-
cocious loves—Life of excess—Combative charac-
ter—Revolt against opinion—English Bards
and Scotch Reviewers—Bravado and rashness—
Marriage—Extravagance of adverse opinion—
Departure— Political life in oor mig 2 and
viclence E 1
uu. The poct—Reasons for ering Manes of aie
—How his poetry is personal—Classical taste—
How this gift served him—Childe Harold—The
hero—The scenery—The style Be 13
I. His short poems—Oratorical Pacer i olndramante
effects—Truth of his descriptions of scenery—
Sincerity of sentiments—Pictures of sad and
extreme emotions—Dominant idea of death and
despair—Mazeppa, The Prisoner of Chillon, The
Siege of Corinth, The Corsair, Lara—Analogy of
this conception with the Edda and Shakspeare—
Darkness c , ; :


bo
BO


vi CONTENTS.


PAGE


1v. Manfred—Comparison of Manfred and Faust—Con-
ception of legend and life in Goethe —Symbolical
and philosophical character of Faust—Wherein
Byron is inferior to Goethe—Wherein he is
superior—Conception of character and action in
Byron+-Dramatic character of his poem—Con-
trast between the universal and the personal
poet . : ; : : : : . 34
v. Scandal in England—Constraint and hypocrisy of
manners—How and by what law moral con-
ceptions vary—Life and morals of the south—
Beppo—Don Juan—tTransformation of Byron’s
talent and style—Picture of sensuous beauty and
happiness—Haidée—How he combats British
cant—Human hypocrisy—His idea of man—Of
woman—Donna Julia—The shipwreck—The
capture of Ismail—Naturalness and variety of
his style—Excess and wearing out of his poetic
vein—His drama—Departure for Greece, and
death . ; ‘ ; : : : rae Yj
vi. Position of Byron in his age—Disease of the age—
Divine conceptions of happiness and life—The
conception of such happiness by literature—By
the sciences—Future stability of reason—-Modera
conception of nature. : ‘ “ . 65


CHAPTER III.
The Past and the Present.
§ 1.


1, The past—The Saxon invasion—How it cstablished
the race and determined the .character—The
Norman Conquest—How it modified the charac-
ter and established the Constitution 79


Il,


Tit,
IV.


CONTENTS.


The Renaissance—How it manifested the national
mind—The Reformation—How it fixed the ideal
—The Restoration—How it imported classical
culture and misled the national mind— The
Revolution—How it developed classical culture
and restored the national mind 2

The modern age—How European ideas widened the
national mould


§ 2.
The present—Concordances of observation and history
—Sky—Soil— Products—Man
Commerce—Industry
Agriculture
Soetoro rig arte Philosophy Religion
What forces have produced the present civilisation,
and are working out the future civilisation


BOOK V.—MODERN AUTHORS.


Intropuctory Notre


Il.


CHAPTER I.
The Novel—Dickens.


§ 1.—Tux AvTHoR.


Connection of the different elements of each talent—
Importance of the imaginative faculty

Lucidity and intensity of imagination in Dickens—
Boldness and vehemence of his fancy—How
with him inanimate objects are personified and
impassioned—Wherein his conception is akin
to intuition—How he describes idiots and mad-
men


vil


PAS


103


110


113


117


118


viii CONTENTS.


ut. The objects to which he directs his enthusiasm —
His trivialities and minuteness—Wherein he
resembles the painters of his country— Wherein
he differs from George Sand—Miss Ruth and
Geneviéve—A journey in a coach

Iv. Vehemence of the emotions which this kind of
imagination must produce—His pathos—Stephen,
the factory hand—His humour—Why he attains
to buffoonery and caricature—Recklessness and
nervous exaggeration of his gaiety .


§ 2.—TuE Pusttic.


1. English novels are compelled to be moral— Wherein
this constraint modifies the idea of love—Com-
parison of love in George Sand and Dickens—
Pictures of the young girl and the wife—
Wherein this constraint qualifies the idea of
passion—Comparison of passions in Balzac and
Dickens—Inconvenience of this foregone conclu-
sion —How comic or odious masks are substituted
for natural characters—Comparison of Pecksniff
and Tartuffe—Why unity of action is absent in
Dickens


§ 3.—THE CHARACTERS.


1. Two classes of characters—Natural and instinctive
characters—Artificial and positive characters—
Preference of Dickens for the first—Aversion
against the second

u, The hypocrite—Mr. Beckett Wheres he is ePa:
lish—Comparison of Pecksniff and Tartuffe—The
positive man—Mr, Gradgrind—The proud man
—Mr. ‘Dombey— Wherein these characters are
English


PAGE


129


133


142


15]


III.


CONTENTS


Children— Wanting in French literature— Little
Joas and David Copperfield—Men of the lower
orders .


Iv. The ideal man pocontang to Divers = Whereis this


It,


IIT.


1Y.


VI.


Vil.


conception corresponds to a public need—Opposi-
tion of culture and nature in England—Reasser-
tion of sensitiveness and instinct oppressed by
conventionalism and rule—Success of Dickens .


CHAPTER II.
The Nobel continued—Thackeray.


Abundance and excellence of novels of manners in
England—Superiority of Dickens and Thackeray
—Comparison between them . : :


§ 1.—THE Satirist.

The satirist—His moral intentions—His moral dis-
sertations :

Comparison of Pallery in Braue a Reglende
Difference of the two eee tastes, and
minds . 3

Superiority of Puackeyt in biter and serious satire
—Serious irony—Literary snobs—WMiss Blanche
Amory—Serious caricature—Miss Hoggarty

Solidity and precision of this satirical conception—
Resemblance of Thackeray and Swift—The duties
of an ambassador .

Misanthropy of heey cilliness of oe Tenis.
—Silliness of love—Inbred vice of human gen-
erosities and exaltations .

His levelling tendencies—A want of riers tha
society in England—Aversions and preferences
—The snob and the aristocrat—Portraits of the


163


165


166


176


CONTENTS.


king, the great court noble, the county gentle-
man, the town gentleman—Advantages of this
aristocratic institution—Exaggeration of the
satire .


§ 2.—Tue Artist.


vil. The artist—Idea of pure art— Wherein satire injures


il,


Ui,


iV.


art—W herein it diminishes the interest— W here-
in it falsifies the characters—Comparison of
Thackeray and Balzac—Valérie Marneffe and
Rebecca Sharp.

Attainment of pure mee Porte of Heine Eimond
—Historical talent of Thackeray—Conception of
ideal man 3

Literature is a definition of aie dennidon
according to Thackeray— Wherein it differs from
the truth


CHAPTER. GL
Criticism and Wistory.—fHacaulay.


The vocation and position of Macaulay in England .

His Essays—Agreeable character and utility of the
style—Opinions—Philosophy. Wherein it is
English and practical—His Essay on Bacon—The
true object, according to him, of the sciences—
Comparison of Bacon with the ancients

His criticissa—Moral prejudices—Comparison of
criticism in France and England—Why he is
religious—Connection of religion and Liberalism
in England—Macaulay’s Liberalism—Essay on
Church and State

His passion for political liberty—How ae is the ora-
tor and historian of the Whig party—Zssays on
the Revolution and the Stuarts .


PAGE


191


227


233


238


CONTENTS.


v. His talent--Taste for demonstration—Taste for
development—Oratorical character of his mind
—Wherein he differs from classic orators—His
estimation for particular facts, experiment on the
senses, personal reminiscences—Importance of
decisive phenomena in every branch of knowledge
—LEssays on Warren Hastings and Clive

vi. English marks of his talent—Rudeness—Humour—
Poetry .

vil. His work—Harmony of Bis latent Spinto: a
work—Universality, unity, interest of his history
—Picture of the Highlands—James II. in Ireland
—The Act of Toleration—The Massacre of Glencoe
—tTraces of amplification and rhetoric ‘

vii. Comparison of Macaulay with French historians—
Wherein he is classical— Wherein he is English
—Intermediate position of his mind between the
Latin and the Germanic mind.


CHAPTER IV.
Philosophy and Mistory.—Carlyle,


§ 1.—Stye anp Minp.


Pacs


243


255


263


282


ECCENTRIO AND IMPORTANT POSITION OF CARLYLE IN ENGLAND.


1. His strangenesses, obscurities, violence—Fancy and
enthusiasm—Crudeness and buffooneries .

u. Humour—Wherein it consists—It is Germanic—
Grotesque and tragic pictures—Dandies and Poor
Slaves—The Pigs’ Catechism—Extreme tension
of his mind and nerves .

uu. Barriers which hold and direct Ramee arcenien of
the real and of the sublime 3 ;

iv. His passion for exact and demonstrated fact—His
search after extinguished feelings—Vehemence


285


300


xii CONTENTS.


PAGE


of his emotion and sympathy—Intensity of belief
and vision—Past and Present—Cromwell’s Letters
and Speeches—Historical mysticism—Grandeur
and sadness of his visions—How he represents
the world after his own mind. : 301
v. Every object is a group, and every sioplovatant of
human thought is the reproduction of a group—
Two principal modes of reproducing it, and two
principal modes of mind—Classification—Intui-
tion—Inconvenience of the second process—It is
obscure, hazardous, destitute of proofs—It tends
to affectation and exaggeration—Hardness and
presumption which it provokes—Advantages of
this kind of mind—Alone capable of reproducing
the object—Most favourable to original invention
—tThe use made of it by Carlyle . : 6 SY


ba J


§ 2.— Vocation.


INTRODUCTION OF GERMAN IDEAS IN EUROPE AND ENGLAND—
GERMAN STUDIES OF CARLYLE.
1. Appearance of original forms of mind—How they act
and result—Artistic genius of the Renaissance—
Oratorical genius of the classic age—Philosophi-
cal genius of the modern age—Probable analogy
of the three ages . : ep oe:
iz. Wherein consists the modern and Ganaa form of
mind—How the aptitude for universal ideas has
renewed the science of language, mythology,
esthetics, history, exegesis, theology, and meta-
physics—How the metaphysical bent has trans-
formed poetry é . 3l4
1, Capital idea derived tienes Cte of es)
and complementary parts—New conception of
nature and man . . 316
Iv. Inconvenience of this apliteane Oratntioun hypo-


Vs


vI,


IL.


III,


vi,


HIS METHOD IS MORAL,


CONTENTS.


thesis and vague abstraction—Transient discredit
of German speculations .

How each nation may re-forge Siariecaeane ex-
amples; Spain in the sixteenth and seventeenth
centuries—The Puritans and Jansenists in the
seventeenth century—France in the eighteenth
century—By what roads these ideas may enter
France—Positivism—Criticism

By what roads these ideas may enter Hnpland—Exact
and positive mind—Impassioned and poetic in-
spiration—Road followed by Carlyle coe on


§ 3.—PumosorHy, Moraity, AND CRITICISM.


RESEMBLES THE PURITANS—SARTOR RESARTUS.


Sensible things are but appearances—Divine and
mysterious character of existence—His meta-
physics °

How we may form ints one erothen ore att
spiritualistic, and mystical ideas—How in Carlyle
German metaphysics are altered into English
Puritanism 4 5

Moral character of this myatiim —Conoeption of
duty—Conception of God. .

Conception of Christianity—Genuine and conven-
tional Christianity—Other religions—Limit and
scope of doctrine

Criticism—What weight it gives %p Pits Wiha
class of writers it exalts— What class of writers
it depreciates—His esthetics—His judgment of
Voltaire : :

Future of Galician herein tnt is wae to the
prejudices of the age and of its vocation—Taste
has but a relative authority


Elli
PAGE


318


319


320


NOT SCIENTIFIC—-WHEREIN BE


323


328


330


. £331


335


338


X1V


Ii.


Iv.


VI.


VII,


Il,


CONTENTS.


§ 4.—Concerption or History.


Supreme importance of great men—They are re-
vealers—They must be venerated

Connection between this and the German eoteettan
—Wherein Carlyle is imitative—Wherein he is
original—Scope of his conception :

How genuine history is that of heroic sentiments—
Genuine historians are artists and psychologists

His history of Cromwell—Why it is only composed
of texts connected by a commentary—Its novelty
and worth—How we should consider Cromwell
and the Puritans—Importance of Puritanism in
modern civilisation—Carlyle admires it unre-
servedly : :

His history of the F roueh evalit co career of
his judgment— Wherein he has sight of the truth,
and wherein he is unjust

His judgment of modern England Apainet the on
for comfort and the lukewarmness of convictions
—Gloomy forebodings for the future of modern
democracy—Against the authority of votes—
Monarchical theory

Criticism of these theeres Wanvere of stun
—Comparison of Carlyle and Macaulay


CHAPTER V.


Philosophy.— Stuart MAM,


Philosophy in England—Organisation of positive
science—Lack of general ideas =

Why metaphysics are wanting—Authority of Re.
ligion . :

Indications and elena of free ihourhe New


PAGE


340


342


343


345


349


351


355


357


358


CONTENTS.


exegesis—Stuart Mill—His works—His order
of mind—To what school of philesophers he
belongs—Value of higher speculation in human
civilisation : Z : : 2 °


§ 1.—EXPERIENCE.


1. Object of logic—Wherein it is distinguished from
psychology and metaphysics :

u. What is a judgment?—What do we know of the
external and inner worlds !—The whole cae of
science is to add or connect facts

im. The system based on this view of the nature of our
knowledge . A

tv. Theory of definitions—Its irpotiones=-Tietenticn
of the old theory—There are no definitions of
things, but of names only

v. Theory of proof—Ordinary eons Wheat:
What is the really fundamental part of a
syllogism ?

vi. Theory of rey jose Its <neaen
—Axioms are only truths of experience of a
certain class .

vit. Theory of induction—The cause of a fer is aak: an
invariable antecedent—Experience alone proves
the stability of the laws of nature—What is a
law 1—By what methods are laws discovered —
The methods of agrcement, of differences, of
residues, of concomitant variations .

vit, Examples and applications—Theory of dew

1x. Deduction—Its province and method

x. Comparison of the methods of induction and dedue.
tidén—Ancient employment of the first—Modern
use of the second—Sciences requiring the first—
Sciences requiring the second—Positive character
of Mill’s work—His predecessors


xy


PAGE


360


362


364


369


370


374


379


382
390
395


397


xvi


&i,


vi.


VII.


VIII.


IX,


CONTENTS.


Limits of our knowledge—lIt is not certain that all
events happen according to laws—Chance in
nature .


§ 2.— ABSTRACTION.


Agreement of this philosophy with the English mind
—Alliance of the positive and religious spirits—
By what faculty we arrive at the knowledge of
causation

There are no pabeeances or ae te se facts a
laws— Abstraction—Its nature—Its part in
science

Theory of dokniions =e agar de abeicaet
generating elements of things .

Theory of proof—The basis of proof in Shas is
an abstract law

Theory of axioms—Axioms are relations beeen
abstract truths—They may be reduced to the
axiom of identity .

Theory of induction—Its eed are ee Sear
or abstraction :

The two great operations of Nee eee experience
and abstraction—The two great manifestations
of things, sensible facts and abstract laws—Why
we ought to pass from the first to the second—
Meaning and extent of the axiom of causation .

It is possible to arrive at the knowledge of first
elements—Error of German metaphysicians—
They have neglected the element of chance, and
of local perturbations—What might be known
by philosophising ant—Idea and limits of meta-
physics—lIis state in the three thinking nations

A morning in Oxford .


PAGE


400


405


414


416


420
424


Iv.


CONTENTS.


CHAPTER VI.
Poetry. Termyson.


Talent and work—First attempts—-Wherein he was
opposed to preceding poets—Wherein he abe
on their spirit

First period—Female eeatariors—Delicaty and re-
finement of sentiment and style—Variety of his
emotions and of his subjects—Literary curiosity
and poetic dilettantism—The Dying Swan—The
Lotos-Eaters .

Second period—Popularity, Pood forte: ay fae
Permanent sensibility and virgin freshness of the
poetic temperament— Wherein he is at one with
nature—Locksley Hall—Change of subject and
style—Violent outbreak and personal feeling—
Maud .

Return of Tennyson to pe first ein Mopar
—Elegance, coldness, and lengthiness of this
poem—The subject and the talent must har-
monise— What subjects agree with the dilettante
artist—The Princess—Comparison with As You
Like It—Fanciful and picturesque world—How
Tennyson repeats the dreams and the style of the
Renaissance .

How Tennyson repeats SF ingenuousness ata sim-
plicity of the old epic—The Idylls of the King—
Why ke has restored the epic of the Round Table
—Purity and elevation of his models and his
poetry —Elaine—Morte d’Arthur—Want of indi-
vidual and absorbing passion—Flexibility and
disinterestedness of his mind—Talent for meta-
morphosis, embellishment, and refinement


xVil


PAGE


427


428


439


447


xViii CONTENTS.


PAGE


vi. His public—Society in England—Country comfort—
Elegance—Education—Habits— Wherein Ten-
nyson suits such a society—Society in France—
Parisian life—Its pleasures — Display—Con-
vereation—Boldness of mind—Wherein Alfred
de Musset suits such a society—Comparison of
the two societies and of the two poets 454


HISTORY OF ENGLISH LITERATURE.


BOOK IV.
MODERN LIFE.


ee
CHAPTER IL
Lory Boron,


i


I HAVE reserved for the last the greatest and most
English of these literary men; he is so great and so
English that from him alone we shall learn more truths
of his country and of his age than from all the rest put
together. His ideas were proscribed during his life ;
it has been attempted to depreciate his genius since his
death. Even at the present day English critics are
hardly just to him. He fought all his life against the
society from which he was descended; and during his
life, as after his death, he suffered the penalty of the
resentment which he provoked, and the dislike to which
he gave rise. A foreign critic may be more impartial,
and freely praise the powerful hand whose blows he has
not felt.

If ever there was a violent and madly sensitive soul,
but incapable of shaking off its bonds; ever agitated,

VOL. IV. B


g MODERN LIFE. BOOK IY.


but yet shut in; predisposed to poetry by its innate
fire, but limited by its natural harriers to a single kind
of poetry,—it was Byron’s.

This promptitude to extreme emotions was with him
a family legacy, and the result of education. His
great-uncle, a sort of raving and misanthropical maniac,
had slain in a tavern. brawl, by candle-light, Mr.
Chaworth, his relative, and had been tried before the
House of Lords. His father, a brutal roysterer, had
eloped with the wife of Lord Carmarthen, ruined and
ill-treated Miss Gordon, his second wife; and, after
living like a madman and a scoundrel, had gone with the
remains of his wife’s family property, to die abroad. His
mother, in her moments of fury, would tear her dresses
and her bonnets to pieces. When her wretched hus-
band died she almost lost her reason, and her cries
were heard in the street. It would take a long story
to tell what a childhood Byron passed under the care of
“this lioness ;” in what torrents of insults, interspersed
with softer moods, he himself lived, just as passionate
and more bitter. His mother ran after him, called him
a, “lame brat,” shouted at him, and threw fire-shovel and
tongs at his head. He held his tongue, bowed, and none
the less felt the outrage. One day, when he was “in
one of his silent rages,” they had to take out of his hand
a knife which he had taken from the table, and which
he was already raising to his throat. Another time
the quarrel was so terrible, that son and.mother, each
privately, went to “ the apothecary’s, inquiring anxiously
whether the other had been to purchase poison, and
cautioning the vendor of drugs not to attend to such an
application, if made.”!_ When he went to school, “his


¥’Byron’s Works, ed. Moore, 17 vols: 1882; Life, i. 102.


CHAP. II. LORD BYRON. 3


friendships were passions.”. Many years after he left
Harrow, he never heard the name of Lord Clare, one
of his old schoolfellows, pronounced, without “a beating
of the heart.”! A score of times he got himself into
trouble for his friends, offering them his time, his pen,
his purse. One day, at Harrow, a big boy claimed the
right to fag his friend, little Peel, and finding him re-.
fractory, gave him a beating on the inner fleshy side of
his arm, which he had twisted round to render the pain
more acute. Byron, too small to fight the rascal, came up
to him, “blushing with rage,” tears in his eyes, and
asked with a trembling voice how many stripes he meant
to inflict. “Why,” returned the executioner, “ you little
rascal, what is that to you?” “ Because, if you please,”
said Byron, holding out his arm, “I would take half.”?
He never met with objects of distress without affording
them succour.? In his latter days in Italy, he gave
away a thousand pounds out of every four thousand he
spent. The upwellings of this heart were too copious,
and flooded forth good and evil impetuously, and at the
least collision. Like Dante, in his early youth, Byron,
at the age of eight, fell in love with a child named
Mary Duff.

“ How very odd that I should have been so utterly, devotedly
fond of that girl, at an age when I could neither feel passion,
nor know the meaning of the word! ,..I recollect all our
caresses, ... my restlessness, my sleeplessness. My misery,
my love for that girl were so violent, that I sometimes doubt
if I have ever been really attached since. When I heard of
her being married, . . . it nearly threw me into convulsions.” 4


At twelve years he fell in love with his cousin, Margaret
Parker :
1 Byron’s Works, Life, i. 63. 2 Tbid. i. 69,
3 Ibid. 137. 4 Tbid. i. 26.


4 MODERN LIFE. BOOK IV.


“My passion had its usual effects upon me, I could not
sleep—I could not eat—I could not rest; and although I had
reason to know that she loved me, it was the texture of my
life to think of the time which must elapse before we could
meet again, being usually about twelve hours of separation. -
But I was a fool then, and am not much wiser now.” +


He never was wiser, read hard at school; took too
much exercise; later on, at Cambridge, Newstead, and
London, he changed night into day, rushed into de-
bauchery, kept long fasts, led an unwholesome way of
living, and engaged in the extreme of every taste and
every excess. As he was a dandy, and one of the most
brilliant, he nearly let himself die of hunger for fear of
becoming fat, then drank and ate greedily during his
nights of recklessness. Moore said:


“Lord Byron, for the last two days, had done nothing
towards sustenance beyond eating a few biscuits and (to appease
appetite) chewing mastic. .. . He confined himself to lobsters,
and of these finished two or three to his own share,—interposing,
sometimes, a small liqueur-glass of strong white brandy, some-
times a tumbler of yery hot-water, and then pure brandy again,
to the amount of near half a dozen small glasses of the latter,

. .. After this we had claret, of which having despatched two
bottles between us, at about four o’clock in the morning we
parted.” ?


Another day we find in Byron’s journal the following
words :


Yesterday, dined téte-a-téte at the “Cocoa” with Scrope
Davies—sat from six till midnight—drank between us one
bottle of champagne and six of claret, neither of which wines
ever affect me.” 3

1 Byron’s Works, Life, i. 58. 2 Toid. iii. 83.
3 [bid. iii. 20, March 28, 1814.


CHAP, II. LORD BYRON. 5


Later, at’ Venice:


“T have hardly had a wink of sleep this week past. I have
had some curious masking adventures this carnival. ... I will
work the mine of my youth to the last vein of the ore, and
then—good night. I have lived, and am content.” }


At this rate the organs wear out, and intervals of tem-
perance are not sufficient to repair them. The stomach
does not continue-to act, the nerves get out of order,
and the soul undermines the body, and the body the
soul.


“T always wake in actual despair and despondency, in all
respects, even of that which pleased me over-night. In England,
five years ago, I had the same kind of hypochondria, but
accompanied with so violent a thirst that I have drank as
many as fifteen bottles of soda-water in one night after going
to bed, and been still thirsty, ... striking off the necks of
bottles from mere thirsty impatience,” ?


Much less is necessary to ruin mind and body wholly.
Thus these vehement minds live, ever driven and broken
by their own energy, like a cannon ball, which, when
fired, turns and spins round quickly, but at the smallest
obstacle leaps up, rebounds, destroys everything, and
ends by burying itself in the earth. Beyle, a most
shrewd observer, who lived with Byron for several
weeks, says that on certain days he was mad; at other
times, in presence of beautiful things, he became sublime.
Though reserved and proud, music made him weep.
The rest of his time, petty English passions, pride of
rank, for instance, a vain dandyism, unhinged him:
he spoke of Brummel with a shudder of jealousy and


a
1 Byron’s Works, Life, iv. 81; Letter to Moore, Feb, 12, 1818.
2 Tbid. v. 96, Feb. 2, 1821.


6 MODERN LIFE. BOOK IV.


admiration. But small or great, the passion of the
hour swept down upon his mind like a tempest, roused
him, transported him either into imprudence or genius.
Byron’s own Journal, his familiar letters, all his un-
studied prose, is, as it were, trembling with wit, anger,
enthusiasm; the smallest words breathe sensitiveness ;
since Saint Simon we have not seen more lifelike con-
fidences. All styles appear dull, and all souls sluggish
by the side of his.

In this splendid rush of unbridled and disbanded
faculties, which leaped up at random, and seemed to
drive him without option to the four quarters of the
globe, one took the reins, and cast him on the wall
against which he was broken.


“Sir Walter Scott describes Lord Byron as being a man
of real goodness of heart, and the kindest and best feelings,
miserably thrown away by his foolish contempt of pubic opinion.
Instead of being warned or checked by public opposition, it
roused him to go on in a worse strain, as if he said, “Ay, you
don’t like it ; well, you shall have something worse for your
pains,” 2


This rebellious instinct is inherent in the race; there
was a whole cluster of wild passions, born of the
climate,? which nourished him: a gloomy humour,
violent imagination, indomitable pride, a relish for
danger, a craving for strife, that inner exaltation, only
satiated by destruction, and that sombre madness which


? Lockhart’s Life of Sir Walter Scott, vii. 823.

* “Tf I was born, as the nurses say, with a ‘silver spoon in my
mouth,’ it has stuck in my throat, and spoiled my palate, so that
nothing put into it is swallowed with much relish,—unless it be
cayenne. ... I see no such horror in a dreamless sleep, and I have no
conception of any existence which duration would not make tiresome.”


CHAP. IL LORD BYRON. 7


urged forward the Scandinavian Berserkirs, when, in an
open bark, beneath a sky cloven with lightning, they
abandoned themselves to the tempest, whose fury they
had breathed. This instinct is in the blood: people are
born so, as they are born lions or bull-dogs.! Byron
was still a little boy in petticoats when his nurse
scolded him roughly for having soiled or torn a new
frock which he had just put on. He got into one of
his silent rages, seized the garment with his hands,
rent it from top to bottom, and stood erect, motionless,
and gloomy before the storming nurse, so as to set
more effectually her wrath at defiance. His pride
mastered him. When at ten he inherited the title of
lord, and his name was first called at school, preceded
by the title dominus, he could not answer the customary
adsum, stood silent amidst the general stare of his
school-fellows, and at last burst into tears. Another
time, at Harrow, in a dispute which was dividing the
school, a boy said, “ Byron won’t join us, for he never
likes to be second anywhere.” He was offered the
command, and then only would he condescend to take
part with them. Never to submit to a master; to rise
with his whole soul against every semblance of encroach-
ment or rule; to keep his person intact and mviolate
at all cost, and to the end against all; to dare every-
thing rather than give any sign of submission,—such was
his character.. This is why he was disposed to undergo
anything rather than give signs of weakness. At ten
he was a stoic from pride. His foot was painfully
stretched in a wooden contrivance whilst he was taking


1 “J like Junius: he was a good hater.—I don’t understand
yielding sensitiveness. What I feel is an immense rage for forty-cight
hours.”


8 MODERN LIFE. BOOK IV.


his Latin lesson, and his master pitied him, saying “he
must be’ suffering.” “Never mind, Mr. Rogers,” he
said, “you shall not see any signs of it in me”? Such
as he was as a child, he continued as aman. In mind
and body he strove, or prepared himself for strife.
Every day, for hours at a time, he boxed, fired pistols,
practised sword-exercise, ran and leaped, rode, overcame
obstacles. These were the exploits of his hands and
muscles; but he needed others. For lack of. enemies
he found fault with society, and made war upon it.
We know to what excesses the dominant opinions then
ran. England was at the height of the war with France,
and thought it was fighting for morality and liberty.
In English eyes, at this time, Church and State were
holy things: any one who touched them became a
public enemy. In this fit of national passion and
Protestant severity, whosoever publicly avowed liberal
ideas and manners seemed an incendiary, and stirred
up against himself the instincts of property, the doc-
trines of moralists, the interests of politicians, and the
prejudices of the people. Byron chose this moment
to praise Voltaire and Rousseau, to admire Napoleon,
to avow himself a sceptic, to plead for nature and
pleasure against cant and regularity, to say that high
English society, debauched and hypocritical, made
phrases and killéd men, to preserve its sinecures and
rotten boroughs. As though political hatred was not
enough, he contracted, in addition, literary animosities,
attacked the whole body of critics,? ran down the new
poetry, declared that the most celebrated were “ Claudi-
ans,” men of the later empire, raged against the Lake
1 Byron's Works, Life, i. 41.
3 In English Bards and Scotch Reviewers,


CHAP, II. LORD BYRON, 9


school, and in consequence had in Southey a bitter and
unwearied enemy. Thus provided with enemies, he
laid himself open to attack on all sides. He decried
himself through his hatred of cant, his bravado, his
boasting about his vices. He depicted himself in his
heroes, but for the worse; in such a way that no man
could fail to recognise him, and think him much worse
than he was. Walter Scott wrote, immediately after
seeing Childe Harold:


“Childe Harold is, I think, a very clever poem, but gives no
good symptom of the writer’s heart or morals... . Vice ought
to be a little more modest, and it must require impudence
almost equal to the noble Lord’s other powers, to claim
sympathy gravely for the ennui arising from his being tired
of his wassailers and his paramours, There is a monstrous
deal of conceit in it, too, for it is informing the inferior part
of the world that their little old-fashioned scruples of limitation
are not worthy of his regard.” }

“My ‘noble friend is something like my old peacock, who
chooses to bivouac apart from his lady, and sit below my
bedroom window, to keep me awake with his screeching
lamentation, Only, I own he is not equal in melody to Lord
Byron.” 2


Such were the sentiments which he called forth in all
respectable classes. He was pleased thereat, and did
worse—giving out that in his adventures in the East
he had dared a good many things; and he was not
indignant when identified with his heroes. He said
he should like to feel for once the sensations of a man
who had committed a murder, Another time he wrote
in his Diary:


1 Lockhart’s Life of Sir Walter Scott, iii. 389. 2 Ibid. v. 141.


10 MODERN LIFE. BOOK IV.


“ Hobhouse told me an oad report,—that I am the actual
Conrad, the veritable Corsair, and that part of my travels are
supposed to have passed in privacy. Um! people sometimes
hit near the truth, but never the whole truth. He don’t know
what I was about the year after he left the Levant ; nor does
any one—nor—nor—nor—however, it is a lie—‘‘ but I doubt
the equivocation of the fiend that lies like truth.”’+


These dangerous words were turned against him like
a dagger; but he loved danger, mortal danger, and was
only at ease when he saw the points of all angers
bristling against him. Alone against all, against an
armed society; erect, invincible, even against common
sense, even against conscience,—it was then he felt in
all his strained nerves the great and terrible sensation,
to which his whole being inyoluntarily inclined.

A last imprudence brought down the attack. As
long ag he was an unmarried man, his excesses might
be excused by the over-strong passions of a tempera-
ment which often causes youth in England to revolt
against good taste and rule; but marriage settles them,
and it was marriage which in him completed his un-
settling. He found that his wife was a kind of paragon
of virtue, known as such, “a creature of rule,” correct
and without feelings, incapable of committing a fault
herself, and of forgiving. His servant Fletcher ob-
served, “It is very odd, but I never yet knew a lady
that could not manage my Lord except my Lady.”?
Lady Byron thought her husband mad, and had him
examined ‘by physicians. Having learned that he
was in his right mind, she left him, returned to her

1 Moore’s Life of Byron, iii. 12, March 10, Thor’s day. The last


part of the sentence is a quotation from Macbeth, v. 5.
2 Ibid. iv. 169. note.


CHAP. II. LORD BYRON. ll


father, and refused ever to see him again. Thereupon
he passed for a monster. The papers covered him
with obloquy ;.his friends induced him not to go to a
theatre or to Parliament, fearing that he would be
hooted or insulted. The rage and pangs which so
violent a soul, precociously accustomed to brilliant glory
felt in this universal storm of outrage, can only be
learned from his verses. He grew stubborn, went to
Venice, and steeped himself in the voluptuous Italian
life, even in low debauchery, the better to insult the
Puritan prudery which had condemned him, and left it
only through an offence still more blamed, his public
intimacy with the young Countess Guiccioli. Mean-
while he showed himself as bitterly republican in
politics as in morality. He wrote in 1813: “I have
simplified my politics into an utter detestation of all
existing governments.” This time, at Ravenna, his
house was the centre and storehouse of conspirators, and
he generously and imprudently prepared to take arms
with them, to strike for the deliverance of Italy:


“They mean to insurrect here, and are to honour me with a
call thereupon. I shall not fall back; though I don’t think
them in force and heart sufficient to make much of it. But,
onward, ,.. What signifies self?... It is not one man nor a
million, but the spirit of liberty which must be spread....
The mere selfish calculation ought never to be made on such
occasions ; and, at present, it shall not be computed by me.
... 1 should almost regret that my own affairs went well,
when those of nations are in peril.” ?


In the meantime he had quarrels with the police: his
house was watched, he was threatened with assassina-


1 Moore, Byron’s Works ; Life, v. 67, Jan. 9, 1821.


ie MODERN LIFE. BOOK IV.


tion, and yet he rode out daily, and went into the
neighbouring pine-forest to practice pistol-shooting.
These are the sentiments of a man standing at the
muzzle of a loaded cannon, waiting for it to go off.
The emotion is great, nay, heroic, but it is not agree-
able; and certainly, even at: this season of great emo-
tion, he was unhappy. Nothing is more likely to
poison happiness than a combative spirit. He writes:


“What is the reason that I have been, all my lifetime, more
or less ennuyé?... I do not know how to answer this,
but presume that it is constitutional,—as well as the waking
in low spirits, which I have invariably done for many years.
Temperance and exercise, which I have practised at times, and
for a long time together vigorously and violently, made little
or no difference. Violent passions did: when under their
immediate influence—it is odd, but—I was in agitated, but
not in depressed spirits.... Wine and spirits make me sullen
and savage to ferocity—silent, however, and retiring, and not
quarrelsome, if not spoken to. Swimming also raises my
spirits ; but in general they are low, and get daily lower. That
is hopeless ; for I do not think I am so much ennuyé as I was at
nineteen, The proof is, that then I must game, or drink, or
be in motion of some kind, or I was miserable.” }

“What I feel most growing upon me are laziness, and a
disrelish more powerful than indifference, If I rouse, it is into
fury. I presume that I shall end (if not earlier by accident,
or some such termination) like Swift, “dying at top.”? Lega
(his servant) came in with a letter about a bill unpaid at Venice
which I thought paid months ago, I flew into a paroxysm of
rage, which almost made me faint. I have always had wne dime,
which not only tormented itself, but everybody else in contact
with it, and an esprit violent, which has.almost left me without
any esprit at all.”


1 Moore, Byron’s Works; Lije, v. 60. Jan. 6, 1821.
2 Ibid. v. 97, Feb. 2, 1821. 3 [bid, 95.


CHAP, II, LORD BYRON. 13


A horrible foreboding, which haunted him to the end!
On his deathbed, in Greece, he refused, I know not
why, to be bled, and preferred to die at once. They
threatened that the uncontrolled disease might end in
madness. He sprang up: “There! you are, I see, a
d—d set of butchers! Take away as much blood as you
like, but have done with it,”? and stretched out his arm.
Amidst such wild outbursts and anxieties he passed
his life. Anguish endured, danger braved, resistance
overcome, grief relished, all the greatness and sadness
of the black warlike madness,—such are the images
which he needs must let pass before him. In default
of action he had dreams, and he only betook himself to
dreams for want of action. He said, when embarking
for Greece, that he had taken. poetry for lack of better,
and that it was not his fit work. “What is a poet?
what is he worth? what does hedo? He isa babbler.”
He augured ill of the poetry of his age, even of his own ;
saying that, if he lived ten years more, they should see
something else from him than verses. In reality, he
would have been more at home as a sea-king, or a cap-
tain of a band of troopers during the Middle-ages.
Except two or three gleams of Italian sunshine, his
poetry and life, are those of a Scald transplanted into
modern life, who in this over-well regulated world did
not find his vocation.


II.


Byron was a poet, but in his own-way—-a strange
way, like that in which he lived. There were inter-
nal tempests within him, avalanches of ideas, which
found issue only in writing. He wrote: “I have


1 Moore, Byron’s Works ; Life, vi. 206.


14 MODERN LIFE. BOOK IV.


written from the fulness of my mind, from passion,
from impulse, from many motives, but not ‘for their
sweet voices. To withdraw myself from myself has
ever been my sole, my entire, my sincere motive in
scribbling at all—and publishing also the continuance
of the same object, by the action it affords to the mind,
which else recoils upon itself.” He wrote almost always
with astonishing rapidity, The Corsair, in ten days, The
Bride of Abydos in four days. While it was printing
he added and corrected, but without recasting: “I told
you before that I can never recast anything. I am like
the tiger. If I miss the first spring, I go grumbling
back to my jungle again; but if I do it, it is crushing”?
Doubtless he sprang, but he had a chain: never, in the
freest flight of his thoughts, did he liberate himself from
himself. He dreams of himself, and sees himself
throughout. It is a boiling torrent, but hedged in with
rocks. No such great poet has had so narrow an im-
agination; he could not metamorphose himself into
another. They are his own sorrows, his own revolts,
his own travels, which, hardly transforined and modified,
he introduces into his verses. He does not invent, he
observes ; he does not create, he transcribes. His copy
is darkly exaggerated, but it is a copy. “I could not
write upon anything,” says he, “ without some personal
experience and foundation.” We will find in his letters
and note-books, almost feature for feature, the most strik-
ing of his descriptions. The capture of Ismail, the ship-
wreck of Don Juan, are, almost word for word, like two
accounts of it in prose. If none but cockneys could
attribute to him the crimes of his heroes, none but blind
men could fail to see in him the sentiments of his


2 Moore, Byron’s Works; Zife, v. 33, Ravenna, Nov. 18, 1820.


CHAP. Il. LORD BYRON. 15


characters. This is so true, that he has not created
more than one. Childe Harold, Lara, the Giaour, the’
Corsair, Manfred, Sardanapalus, Cain, Tasso, Dante, and
the rest, are always the same—one man represented
under various costumes, in several lands, with different
expressions; but just as painters do, when, by change
of garments, decorations, and attitudes, they draw fifty
portraits from the same model. He meditated too much
upon himself to be enamoured of anything else. The
habitual sternness of his will prevented his mind from
being flexible; his force, always concentrated for effort
and bent upon strife, shut him up in self-contempla-
tion, and reduced him never to make a poem, save of
his own heart.

What style would he adopt? With these concen-
trated and tragic sentiments he had a classical mind.
By the strangest mixture, the books, which he preferred,
were at once the most violent or the most proper, the
Bible above all: “I am a great reader and admirer of
those books (the Bible), and had read them through
and through before I was eight years old; that is to
say, the Old Testament, for the New struck me as a
task, but the other as a pleasure.”? Observe this word :
he did not relish the tender and self-denying mysticism
of the gospel, but the cruel sternness and lyrical outcries
of the old Hebrews. Next to the Bible he loved Pope,
the most correct and formal of men:


“ As to Pope, I have always regarded him as the greatest
name in our poetry. Depend upon it, the rest are barbarians.
He is a Greek Temple, with a Gothic Cathedral on one hand,
and a Turkish Mosque and all sorts of fantastic pagodas and
conventicles about him, You may call Shakspeare and Milton


1 Moore, Byron’s Works ; Life, v. 265.


16 MODERN LIFE, BOOK IY.


pyramids, but I prefer the Temple of Theseus or the Parthenon
to a mountain of burnt brickwork.,.. The grand distinction
of the underforms of the new school of poets is their vulgarity,
By this I do not mean they are coarse, but shabby-genteel.”?


And he presently wrote two letters with incomparable
vivacity and spirit, to defend Pope against thé scorn of
modern writers, These writers, according to him, have
spoiled the public taste. The only ones who were worth
anything—Crabbe, Campbell, Rogers—imitate the style
of Pope. <A few others had talent; but, take them all
together, those who had come last had perverted litera-
ture: they did not know their own language; their
expressions are only approximate, above or below the
true tone, forced or dull. He ranges himself amongst
the corrupters,* and we soon see that this theory is not
an invention, springing from bad temper and polemics ;
he returns to it. In his two first attempts—Hours of
Idleness, English Bards and Scotch Reviewers—he tried
to follow it up. Later, and in almost all his works, we
find its effect. He recommends and practises the rule
of unity in tragedy. He loves oratorical form, sym-
metrical phrase, condensed style. He likes to plead
kis passions. Sheridan tried to induce Byron to devote
himself to eloquence; and the vigour, piercing logic,
wonderful vivacity, close argument of his prose, prove
that -he would have taken the first rank amongst
pamphleteers. If he attains to it amongst the poets,
it is partly due to his classical system. This oratorical


1 Moore, Byron’s Works; Life, v. 150, Ravenna, May 8, 1821.

2 ** All the styles of the day are bombastic. I don’t except my
own; no one has done more through negligence to corrupt the lan-
guage.”

® Seo his English Bards and Scotch Reviewers,


CHAP, IL, LORD BYRON, 17


form, in which Pope compresses his thought like La
Bruyére, magnifies the force and swing of vehement
ideas; like a narrow and straight canal, it collects and
dashes them in their right direction; there is then
nothing which their impetus does not carry away ;
and it is thus Lord Byron from the first, in the face
of hostile criticisms, and over iealous reputations, has
made his way to the public.?

Thus Childe Harold made its way. At the first
onset every man Who read it was agitated. It was
more than an author who spoke; it was a man. In
spite of his denial, the author was identified with his
hero: he calumniated himself, but still it wes himself
whom he portrayed. He was recognised in that young
voluptuous and disgusted man, ready to weep amidst
his orgies, who

“Sore sick at heart,
And from his fellow bacchanals would flee ;
’Tis said, at times the sullen tear would start,
But Pride congeal’d: the drop within his ee:
Apart he stalk’d in joyless reverie,
And from his native land resolved to go,
And visit scorching climes beyond the sea ;
With pleasure drugg’d, he almost long’d for woe.” ?


Fleeing from his native land, he carried, amongst the
splendours and cheerfulness of the south, his unwearying
persecutor, “demon thought,” implacable behind him.
The scenery was recognised: it had been copied on the
spot. And what was the whole book but a diary of
travel? He said in it what he had seen and thought.
What poetic fiction is so valuable as genuine sensation ?

1 Thirty thousand copies of the Corsair were sold in one day.

2 Byron’s Works, viili.; Childe Harold’s Pilgrimage, c. i. 6.

VOL, IV. Cc


18 MODERN LIFE. BOOK IV


What is more penetrating than confidence, voluntary
or involuntary? Truly, every word here expressed an
emotion of eye or heart :


“The tender azure of the unruffled deep, .. .
The mountain-moss by scorching skies imbrown’d.. .
The orange tints that gild the greenest bough,” .. .}


All these beauties, calm or imposing, he had enjoyed,
and sometimes suffered through them; and hence we
see them through his verse. Whatever he touched, he
made palpitate and live; because, when he saw it, his
heart had beaten and he had lived. He himself, a
little later, quitting the mask of Harold, took up the
parable in his own name; and who is not touched by
an avowal so passionate and complete ?


“Yet must I think less wildly :—I have thought
Too long and darkly, till my brain became,
In its own eddy boiling and o’erwrought,
A whirling gulf of phantasy and flame?
And thus, untaught in youth my heart te tame,
My springs of life were poison’d, ‘Tis tco late!
Yet am I changed: though still enough the same
In strength to bear what time can not abate,
And feed on bitter fruits without accusing Fate... .


But soon he knew himself the most unfit
Of men to herd with Man; with whom he held
Little in common ; untaught to submit
His thoughts to others, though his soul was quell’d
In youth by his own thoughts ; still uncompell’d,
He would not yield dominion of his mind
To spirits against whom his own rebell’d ;
Proud though in desolation, which could find,

A life within itself, to breathe without mankind. ...


1 Childe Harold's Pilgrimage, ¢ i. 19.


CHAP, If, LORD BYRON. 19


Like the Chaldean, he could watch the stars,
Till he had peopled them with beings bright
As their own beams ; and earth, and earth-born jars,
And human frailties, were forgotten quite :
Could he have kept his spirit to that flight
He had been happy ; but this clay will sink
Its spark immortal, envying it the light
To which it mounts, as if to break the link
» That keeps us from yon heaven which woos us to its brink.


But in Man’s dwellings ke became a thing
Restless and worn, and stern and wearisome,
Droop’d as a wild-born falcon with clipt wing,
To whom the boundless air alone were home ;
Then came his fit again, which to o’ercome,
As eagerly the barr’d-up bird will beat
His breast and beak against his wiry dome
Till the blood tinge his plumage, so the heat

Of his impeded soul would through his bosom eat.” !


Such are the sentiments wherewith he surveyed
nature and history, not to comprehend them and forget
himself before them, but to seek in them and impress
upon them the image of his own passions. He does
not Jeave objects to speak of themselves, but forces
them to answer him. Amidst their peace, he is only
occupied by his own emotion. He attunes them to
his soul, and compels them to repeat his own cries.
All is inflated here, as in himself; the vast strophe
rolls along, carrying in its overflowing bed the flood of
vehement ideas; declamation unfolds itself, pompous,
and at times artificial (it was lis first work), but
potent, and so often sublime that the rhetorical rub-
bish, which he yet preserved, disappeared under the


1 Childe Harold’s Pilgrimage, ¢. iii. 7-15.


20 MODERN LIFE. BOOK Iv,


afflux of splendours, with which it is loaded. Words-
worth, Walter Scott, by the side of this prodigality of
accumulated splendours, seemed poor and dull; never
since A‘schylus was seen such a tragic pomp; and
men followed with a sort of pang, the train of gigantic
figures, whom he brought in mournful ranks before
their eyes, from the far past:


“‘T stood in Venice, on the Bridge of Sighs ;

A palace and a prison on each hand:

I saw from out the wave her structures rise

As from the stroke of the enchanter’s wand :

A thousand years, their cloudy wings expand

“Around me, and a dying Glory smiles

O’er the far times, when many a subject land

Look’d to the winged Lion’s marble piles,
Where Venice sate in state, throned on her hundred isles !


She looks a sea Cybele, fresh from ocean,
Rising with her tiara of proud towers
At airy distance, with majestic motion,
A ruler of the waters and their powers :
And such she was !—her daughters had their dowers
From spoils of nations, and the exhaustless East
Pour’d in her lap all gems in sparkling showers,
In purple was she robed, and of her feast
Monarchs partook, and deem’d their dignity increased. . .?


Lo! where the Giant on the mountain stands,

His blood-red tresses deep’ning in the sun,

With death-shot glowing in his fiery hands,

And eye that scorcheth all it glares upon ;
Restless it rolls, now fix’d and now anon

Flashing afar,—and at his iron feet

Destruction cowers, to mark what deeds are done ;


1 Childe Harold's Pilgrimage, c. iv. 1 and 2.


CHAP. II. LORD BYRON, 2)


For on this morn three potent nations meet,
To shed before his shrine the blood he deems most sweet.


By Heaven ! it is a splendid sight to see
(For one who hath no friend, no brother there)
Their rival scarfs of mix’d embroidery,
Their various arms that glitter in the air!
What gallant war-hounds rouse them from their lair,
And gnash their fangs, loud yelling for the prey !
All join the chase, but few the triumph share ;
The Grave shall bear the chiefest prize away,

And Havoc scarce for joy can number their array. . .!


What from this barren being do we reap ?

Our senses narrow, and our reason frail’,

Life short, and truth a gem which loves the deep,

And all things weigh’d in custom’s falsest scale ;

Opinion an omnipotence, whose veil

Mantles the earth with darkness, uatil right

And wrong are accidents, and men grow pale

Lest their own judgments should become too bright,
And their free thoughts be crimes, and earth have too much

light.


And thus they plod in sluggish misery,
Rotting from sire to son, and age to age,
Proud of their trampled nature, and so die,
Bequeathing their hereditary rage
To the new race of inborn slaves, who wage
War for their chains, and rather than be free,
Bleed ‘gladiator-like and still engage
Within the same arena where they see
Their fellows fall before, like leaves of the same tree.” ?


1 Childe Harold's Pilgrimage, c. i. $9 and 40,
3 Ibid. c. iv. 98 and. 94


Pd MODERN LIFE, BOOK IY.


Has ever style better expressed a soul? It is seen
here labouring and expanding. Long and stormily the
ideas boiled within this soul like bars of metal heaped
in the furnace. They melted there before the strain of
the intense heat; they mingled therein their heated mass
amidst convulsions and explosions, and then at last the
door is opened; a slow stream of fire descends into the
trough prepared beforehand, heating the circumambient
air, and its glittering hues scorch the eyes which persist
in looking upon it.


1ane


Description and monologue did not suffice Byron;
and he needed, to express his ideal, events and actions.
Only events try the force and elasticity of the soul;
only actions display and regulate this force and elas-
ticity. Amidst events he sought for the most power-
ful, amidst actions the strongest; and we see appear
successively The Bride of Abydos, The Giaour, The
Corsair, Lara, Parisina, The Siege of Corinth, Mazeppa,
and The Prisoner of Chillon.

I know that these sparkling poems have grown dull
in forty years. In their necklace of Oriental pearls
have been discovered beads of glass; and Byron, who
only half loved them, judged better than his judges.
Yet he judged amiss; those which he preferred are
the most false. His Corsair is marred by classic
elegancies: the pirates’ song at the beginning is no
truer than a chorus at the Italian Opera; his scamps
propound philosophical antitheses as balanced as those
of Pope. A hundred times ambition, glory, envy,
despair, and the other abstract personages, whose
images in the time of the first Empire the French used


CHAP, IL. ' LORD BYRON. 23


to set upon their drawing-room clocks, break in amidst
living passions.! The noblest passages are disfigured
by pedantic apostrophes, and the pretentious. poetic
diction sets up its threadbare frippery and conventional
ornaments? Far worse, he studies effect and follows
the fashion. Melodramatic strings pull his characters
at the right time, so as to obtain the grimace which
shall make his public shudder :


“Who thundering comes on blackest steed,
With slacken’d bit and hoof of speed !
. . . Approach, thou craven crouching slave,
Say, is not this Thermopylae ?”


Wretched mannerisms, emphatic and vulgar, imitated
from Lucan and our modern Lucans, but which produce
their effect only on a first perusal, and on the common
herd of readers. There is an infallible means of attract-
ing a mob, which is, to shout out loud ; with shipwrecks,
sieges, murders, and combats, we shall always interest
them; show them pirates, desperate adventurers,—
these distorted or raging faces will draw them out of
their regular and monotonous existence; they will go
to see them as they go to melodramas, and through the
same instinct which induces them to read novels in
penny numbers. Add, by way of contrast, angelic
women, tender and submissive, beautiful as angels.


1 For example, “as weeping Beauty’s cheek at Sorrow’s tale.”
2 Here are verses like Pope, very beautiful and false :
*‘ And havock loath so much the waste of time,

She scarce had left an uncommitted crime.

One hour beheld him since the tide he stemm’d,

Disguised, discover’d, conquering, ta’en, condemn’d,

A chief on land, an outlaw on the deep,

Destroying, saving, prison’d, and asleep !”


24 MODERN LIFE. BOOK IV.


Byron describes all this, and adds to these seductions a
bewitching scenery, oriental or picturesque adornments ;
old Alpine castles, the Mediterranean waves, the setting
suns of Greece, the whole in high relief, with marked
shadows and brilliant colours. We are all of the
people, as regards emotion; and the great lady, like
the waiting-woman, sheds tears, without cavilling with
the author as to the means he uses.

And yet, after all, there is a great deal of truth in
Byron’s poems. No; this man is not a mere arranger
of effects or an inventor of phrases. He has lived
amidst the spectacles he describes; he has experienced
the emotions he relates. He has been in the tent of
Ali Pacha, and relished the strong savour of ocean ad-
venture and savage manners. He has been a score of
times near death,—in the Morea, in the anguish and the
solitude of fever; at Suli, in a shipwreck; at Malta,
in England, and in Italy, in the dangers of a duel, plots
of insurrection, commencements of sudden attacks, at
sea, in arms, on horseback, having seen assassination,
wounds, agonies close to him, and that more than once.
“T am living here exposed to it (assassination) daily,
for I have happened to make a powerful and unprinci-


pled man my enemy; and I never sleep the worse for -


it, or ride in less solitary places, because precaution is
useless, and one thinks of it as of a disease which may
or may not strike.” * He spoke the truth; no one
ever held himself more erect and firm in danger. One
day, near the Gulf of San Fiorenzo, his yacht was thrown
on the coast; the sea was terrific, and the rocks in
sight; the passengers kissed their rosaries, or fainted
with horror; and the two captains being consulted


1 Moore’s Life, iv. 345.


;
}


CHAP, Il, LORD BYRON. 25


declared shipwreck inevitable. “Well,” said Lord
Byron, “we are all born to die; I shall go with regret,
but certainly not with fear.” And he took off his
clothes, begging the others to do the same, not that they
could save themselves amidst such waves; but “it is
every man’s duty to endeavour to preserve the life God
has given him; so I advise you all to strip: swimming, -
indeed, can be of little use in these billows; but as
children, when tired with crying, sink placidly to repose,
we, when exhausted with struggling, shall die the
easier... .” He then sat down, folding his arms,
very calm; he even joked with the captain, who was
putting his dollars into his waistcoat pocket... .
The ship. approached the rocks. All this time Byron
was not seen to change countenance. A man thus
tried aud moulded can paint extreme situations and
sentiments. After all, they are never painted otherwise
than by experience. The most inventive—Dante and
Shakspeare—though quite different, yet do the same
thing. However high their genius rose, it always had
its feet on observation; and their most foolish, as well
as their most splendid pictures, never offer to the world
more than an image of their age, or of their own heart.
At most, they deduce ; that is, having derived from two
or three features the inward qualities of the man within
themselves and of the men around them, they draw
thence, by a sudden ratiocination of which they have
no consciousness, the varied skein of actions and senti-
ments. They may be artists, but they are observers.
They may invent, but they describe. Their glory does
not consist in the display of a phantasmagoria, but in
the discovery of a truth. They are the first to enter
some unexplored province of humanity, which. becomes


26 MODERN LIFE. BOOK IV.


their domain, and thenceforth supports their name lke
an appanage. Byron found his domain, which is that
of sad and tender sentiments: it is a heath, and full
of ruins; but he is at home there, and he is alone.
What an abode! And it is on this desolation that
he dwells. He muses on it. See the brothers of
Childe Harold pass—the characters who people it.
One in his prison, chained up with his two remaining
brothers. Their father and three others had perished
fighting, or were burnt for their faith. One by one,
before the eyes of the eldest, the last two languish and
fade: a silent and slow agony amidst the damp dark-
ness into which a beam of the sickly sun pierces through
a crevice. After the death of the first, the survivors
“begged as a boon” that he shall at least be buried on
a spot “ whereon the day might shine.” The jailers
“ Coldly laugh’d—and laid him there:

The flat and turfless earth above

The being we so much did love ;

His empty chain above it leant.” !


Then the youngest “faded” daily
With all the while a cheek whose bloom
Was as a mockery of the tomb,
Whose tints as gently sunk away
As a departing rainbow’s ray.” ?


But the pillars to which they are chained are too far
apart,—the elder cannot approach his dying younger
brother; he listens and hears the failing sighs; he cries
for succour, and none comes. He bursts his chain with
one strong bound: allis over. He takes that cold hand,


} Byron’s Works, x. The Prisoner of Chillon, c. vii. 284.
2 Ibid. ce, viii. 235.


CHAP. II. LORD BYRON. 27


and then, before the motionless body, his senses are lost,
bis thoughts arrested ; he is like a drowning man, who,
after passing thfough pangs of agony, lets himself sink
down like a stone, and no longer feels existence but
by a complete petrifaction of horror. Here is another
brother of Childe Harold, Mazeppa, bound naked on a
wild horse, rushing over the steppes. He writhes, and
his swollen limbs, cut by the cords, are bleeding. <A
whole day the course continues, and .behind him the
wolves are howling. The night through he hears their
long monotonous chase, and at the end his energy fails.


66


.. The earth gave way, the skies roll’d round,
I seem’d to sink upon the ground ;
But err’d, for I was fastly bound.
My heart turn’d sick, my brain grew sore,
And throbb’d awhile, then beat no more ;
The skies spun like a mighty wheel ;
I saw the trees like drunkards reel,
And a slight flash sprang o’er my eyes,
Which saw no further: he who dies
Can die no more than then I died....
I felt the blackness come and go,
And strove to wake ; but could not make
My senses climb up from below :
I felt as on a plank at sea,
When ail the waves that dash o’er thee,
At the same time upheave and whelm,
And hurl thee towards a desert realm.” ?


Shall I enumerate them all? Hugo, Parisina, the
Foscari, the Giaour, the Corsair. His hero is always
a man striving with the worst anguish, face to face
with shipwreck, torture, death,—his own painful and


1 Byron’s Works, xi., Mazeppa, c. xiii. 167.


28 ~ MODERN LIFE. BOOK IV.


prolonged death, the bitter death of his well-beloved,
with remorse for his companion, amidst the gloomy
prospects of a threatening eternity, with no other
support but innate energy and hardened pride. These
men have desired too much, too impetuously, with a
senseless swing, like a horse which does not feel the
bit, and thenceforth their inner doom drives them to the
abyss which they see, and cannot escape from. Whata
night was that of Alp before Corinth! He is a rene-
gade, and comes with the Mussulmans to besiege the
Christians, his old friends—Minotti, the father of the
girl he loves. Next day he is to lead the assault, and
he thinks of his death, which he forebodes, the carnage
of his own soldiers, which he is preparing. There is no
inner support, but rooted resentment and a firm and
stern will, The Mussulmans despise him, the Christians
execrate him, and his glory only publishes his treason.
Dejected and fevered, he passes through the sleeping
camp, and wanders on the shore:


“Tis midnight: on the mountains brown
The cold, round moon shines deeply down ;
Blue roll the waters, blue the sky
Spreads like an ocean hung on high,
Bespangled with those isles of light... .
The waves on either shore lay there
Calm, clear, and azure as the air ;

And scarce their foam the pebbles shook,

But murmur’d meekly as the brook.

The winds were pillow’d on the waves ;

The banners droop’d along their staves, .. .
And that deep silence was unbroke,

Save where the watch his signal spoke,

Save where the steed neighed oft and shrill, . .


CHAP. IL. LORD BYRON. 29


And the wide hum of that wild host
Rustled like leaves from coast to coast.” ...1


How the heart sickens before such spectacles! What
a contrast between his agony and the peace of immortal
nature! How man stretches then his arms towards
ideal beauty, and how impotently they fall back at the
contact of our clay and mortality! Alp advances over
the sandy shore to the foot of the bastion, exposed to
the fire of the sentinels; and he hardly thinks of it:


“And he saw the lean dogs beneath the wall
Hold o’er the dead their carnival,
Gorging and growling o’er carcase and limb ;
They were too busy to bark at him !
From a Tartar’s skull they had stripped the flesh,
As ye peel the fig when its fruit is fresh ;
And their white tusks crunched o’er the whiter skull,
As it slipp’d through their jaws, when their edge grew dull.
As they lazily mumbled the bones of the dead,
When they scarce could rise from the spot where they fed ;
So well had they broken a lingering fast
With those who had fallen for that night’s repast.
And Alp knew, by the turbans that roll’d on the sand,
The foremost of these were the best of his band: ~
Crimson and green were the shawls of their wear,
And each scalp had a single long tuft of hair,
All the rest was shaven and bare.
The scalps were in the wild dog’s maw,
The hair was tangled round his jaw.
But close by the shore on the edge of the gulf,
There sat a vulture flapping a wolf,
Who had stolen from the hills, but kept away,
Scared by the dogs, from the human prey ;


1 Byron’s Works, x., The Siege of Corinth, c. xi. 115.


30 “ MODERN LIFE. Sow es


But he seized on his share of a steed that lay,
Pick’d by the birds, on the sands of the bay.” }


Such is the goal of man; the hot frenzy of life ends
here; buried or not, it matters little: vultures or
jackals, one gravedigger is as good as another. The
storm of his rages and his efforts have but served to
cast him to these animals for their food, and to their
beaks and jaws he comes only with the sentiment of
frustrated hopes and insatiable desires. Could any of
us forget the death of Lara after once reading it? Has
any one elsewhere seen, save in Shakspeare, a sadder
picture of the destiny of a man vainly rearing against
inevitable fate? Though generous, like Macbeth, he
has, like Macbeth, dared everything against law and
conscience, even against pity and the most ordinary
feelings of honour. Crimes committed have forced him
into other crimes, and blood poured out has made him
glide into a pool of blood. As a corsair, he has slain; as
a cut-throat, he assassinates; and his former murders
which haunt his dreams come with their bat’s-wings
beating against the portals of his brain. He does not
drive them away, these black visitors; though the mouth
remains silent, the pallid brow and strange smile bear
witness to their approach. And yet it is a noble spec-
tacle to see man standing with calm countenance even
under their touch. The last day comes, and six inches of
iron suffice for all this energy and fury. Lara is lying
beneath a lime tree, and his wound “is bleeding fast
from life away.” With each convulsion the stream
gushes blacker, then stops; the blood flows now only
drop by drop, and his brow is already moist, his eyes


1 Byron’s Works, x., The Siege of Corinth, c. xvi. 123.


CHAP, Il. LORD BYRON. Sil


dim. The victors arrive—he does not deign to answer
them ; the priest brings near the absolving cross, “ but
he look’d upon it with an eye profane.” What remains
to him of life is for his poor page, the only being who
loved him, who has followed him to the end, and who
now tries to stanch the blood from his wound:


“He scarce can speak, but motions him ’tis vain,
He clasps the hand that pang which would assuage,
And sadly smiles his thanks to that dark page. .
His dying tones are in that other tongue,
To which some strange remembrance wildly clung...
And once, as Kaled’s answering accents ceased,
Rose Lara’s hand, and pointed to the Kast :
Whether (as then the breaking sun from high
Roll’d back the clouds) the morrow caught his eye,
Or that ’twas chance, or some remember’d scene,
That raised his arm to point where such had been,
Scarce Kaled seem’d to know, but turn’d away,
As if his heart abhorr’d that coming day,
And shrunk Lis glance before that morning light,
To look on Lara’s brow—where all grew night... .
But from his visage little could we guess,
So unrepentant, dark, and passionless. .. .
But gasping heaved the breath that Lara drew,
And dull the film along his dim eye grew ;
His limbs stretch’d fluttering, and his head droop’d o’er.”}


All is over, and of this haughty spirit there remains
but a poor piece of clay. After all, it is the desirable
lot of such hearts; they have spent life amiss, and only
rest well in the tomb.

A strange and altogether northern poetry, with its
root in the Edda and its flower in Shakspeare, born


1 Byron’s Works, x. ; Lara, c. 2, st. 17-20, 60.


32 MODERN LIFE. BOOK IV.


long ago under an inclement sky, on the shores of a
stormy ocean,—the work of a too wilful, too strong, too
sombre race,—and which, after lavishing its images of
desolation and heroism, ends by stretching like a black
veil over the whole of living nature the dream of
universal destruction: this dream is here, as in the
Edda, almost equally grand:


‘“‘T had a dream, which was not all a dream,
The bright sun was extinguish’d, and the stars
Did wander darkling in the eternal space,
Rayless, and pathless, and the icy earth
Swung blind and blackening in the moonless air ;
Morn came and went—and came, and brought no day....
Forests were set on fire—but hour by hour
They fell and faded—and the crackling trunks
Extinguish’d with a crash—and all was black... .
And they did live by watchfires—and the thrones,
The palaces of crowned kings—the huts,
The habitations of all things which dwell,
Were burnt for beacons ; cities were consumed,
And men were gathered round their blazing homes
To look once more into each other’s face... .
The brows of men by the despairing light
Wore an unearthly aspect, as by fits
The flashes fell upon them ; some lay down
And hid their eyes and wept ; and some did rest
Their chins upon their clenched hands, and smiled ;
And others hurried to and fro, and fed
Their funeral piles with fuel, and look’d up
With mad disquietude on the dull sky,
The pall of a past world ; and then again
With curses cast them down upon the dust,
And gnash’d their teeth and howl’d: the wild birds shriek’d,
And, terrified, did Hutter on the ground,


CHAP. Il. LORD BYRON.


And flap their useless wings ; the wildest brutes
Came tame and tremulous ; and vipers crawl’d
And twined themselves among the multitude,
Hissing, but stingless—-they were slain for food :
And War, which for a moment was no more,

Did glut himself again ;—a meal was bought

With blood, and each sate sullenly apart

Gorging himself in gloom: no love was left ;

All earth was but one thought—and that was death,
Immediate and inglorious ; and the pang

Of famine fed upon all entrails—men

Died, and their bones were tombless as their flesh ;
The meagre by the meagre were devour’d,

Even dogs assail’d their masters, all save one,

And he was faithful to a corse, and kept

The birds and beasts and famish’d men at bay,

Till hunger clung them, or the dropping dead
Lured their lank jaws ; himself sought out no food,
But with a piteous and perpetual moan,

And a quick desolate cry, licking the hand

Which answer’d not with a caress—he died.

The crowd was famish’d by degrees ; but two

Of an enormous city did survive,

And they were enemies: they met beside

The dying embers of an altar-place

Where had been heap’d a mass of holy things

For an unholy usage ; they raked up,

And shivering scraped with their cold skeleton hands
The feeble ashes, and their feeble breath

Blew for a little life, and made a flame

‘Which was a mockery ; then they lifted up

Their eyes as it grew lighter, and beheld

Each other’s aspects—saw, and shriek’d, and died —
Even of their mutual hideousness they died.”? . . .


1 Byron’s Works, x. ; Darkness, 283.
VOL, IV. D


33


34 MODERN LIFE. BOOK Iv.


IV.


Amongst these unrestrained and gloomy poems, which
incessantly return and dwell on the same subject, there
is one more imposing and lofty than the rest, Manjred,
twin-brother of the greatest poem of the age, Goethe’s
Faust. Goethe says of Byron: “This singular intel-
lectual poet has taken my Faustus to himself, and
extracted from it the strongest nourishment -for his
hypochondriac humour. He has made use of the im-
pelling principles in his own way, for his own purposes,
so that no one of them remains the same; and it is
particularly on this account that I cannot enough
admire his genius.” The play is indeed original. Byron
writes: “His (Goethe’s) Faust I never read, for I don’t
know German; but Matthew Monk Lewis, in 1816, at
Coligny, translated most of it to me vivd voce, and I was
naturally much struck with it; but it was the Steinbach
and the Jungfrau and something else, much more than
Faustus, that made me write Manfred.” Goethe adds:
“The whole is so completely formed anew, that it would
be an interesting task for the critic to point out not
only the alterations he (Byron) has made, but their
degree of resemblance or dissimilarity to the original.”
Let us speak of it; then, quite freely: the subject ‘of
Manfred is the dominant idea of the age, expressed so
as to display the contrast of two masters, and of two
nations.

What constitutes Goethe’s glory is, that in the
nineteenth century he did produce an epic’ poem—I
mean @ poem in which genuine gods act and speak.


1 Byron’s Works, iv. 820 ; Letter to Mr. Murray, Ravenna, June 7, 1820.


CHAP, Il. LORD BYRON. 35


This appeared impossible in the nincteenth century,
since the special work of our age is the refined consider-
ation of creative ideas, and the suppression of the
poetic characters by which other ages have never failed
to represent them. Of the two divine families, the
Greek and the Christian, neither seemed capable of re-
entering the epic world. Classic literature dragged
down in its fall the mythological puppets, and the
ancient gods slept on their old Olympus, whither history
and archzology alone might go to arouse them. ‘The
angels and saints of the Middie-ages, as strange and al-
most as far from our thoughts, slept on the vellum of
their missals and in the niches of their cathedrals; and
if a poet like Chateaubriand, tried to make them enter
the modern world,’ he succeeded only in degrading them,
and in making of them vestry decorations and operatic
machinery. The mythic credulity disappeared amid
the growth of experience, the mystic amid the growth of
prosperity. Paganism, at the contact of science, was
reduced to the recognition of natural forces; Christianity
at the contact of morality, was reduced to the adoration
of the ideal. In order again to deify physical powers,
man should have become once more a healthy child, as
in Homers time. In order again to deify spiritual
powers, man should have become once more a sickly child
as in Dante’s time. But he was an adult, and could
not ascend again to civilisations or epics, from which
the current of his thought and of his life had with-
drawn him for ever. How was he to be shown
his gods, the modern gods? how could he reclothe
them in a personal and visible form, since he had


1 The angel of holy loves, the angel of the ocean, the choirs of
happy spirits. See this at length in the Martyrs.


36 MODERN LIFE. BOOK IV.


toiled to strip them precisely of all personal and
sensible form, and had succeeded in this. Instead of
rejecting legend, Goethe took it up again. He chose
a medieval story for his theme. Carefully, scrupu-
lously, he tracked old manners and old beliefs; an
alchemist’s laboratory, a sorcerer’s conjuring-book,
coarse villagers, students’ or drunkards’ gaiety, a
witches’ meeting on the Brocken, a mass in church;
we might fancy we saw an engraving of Luther's
time, conscientious and minute: nothing is omitted.
Heavenly characters appear in consecrated attitudes
after the text of Scripture, like the old mysteries: the
Lord with his angels, then with the devil, who comes
to ask permission to tempt Faust, as formerly he
tempted Job; heaven, as St. Francis imagined it and
Van Eyck painted it, with anchorites, holy women and
doctors—some in a landscape with bluish rocks, others
above in the sublime air, hovering in choirs about
the Virgin in glory, one tier above another. Goethe
affects even to be so orthodox as to write under
each her Latin name, and her due niche in the
Vulgate! And this very fidelity proclaims him a
sceptic. We see that if he resuscitates the ancient
world, it is as a historian, not as a believer. He is
only a Christian through remembrance and poetic feel-
ing. In him the modern spirit overflows designedly
the narrow vessel in which he designedly seems to
enclose it, The thinker percolates through the narrator.
Every instant a calculated word, which seems invol-
untary, opens up glimpses of philosophy, beyond the
veils of tradition. Who are they, these supernatural


2 Magna peccatrix, S. Luce, vii. 86; Mulier Samaritana, 8, _
Johannis, iv. ; Maria Zgyptiaca (Acta Sanctorum), etc.


CHAP, Il, LORD BYRON, 37


personages,—this god, this Mephistopheles, these angels?
Their substance incessantly dissolves and re-forms, to
show or. hide alternately the idea which fills it. Are
they abstractions or characters? Mephistopheles, a
revolutionary and a philesopher,-who has read Candide,
and cynically jeers-at the Powers,—is-he anything but
“the spirit of negation ?”
The angels
“Rejoice to share:

The wealth exuberant of all that’s fair,

Which lives, and has its being everywhere !°

And the creative essence which surrounds,

And lives in all, and worketh ever more,

Encompass . . . within love’s gracious bounds ;.

And all the world of things, which flit before

The gaze in seeming fitful and obscure,

Do... in lasting thoughts embody and secure,” t


Are these angels, for an instant at least, anything else
than the ideal intelligence which comes, through sym-
pathy, to love all, and through ideas, to comprehend all ?
What shall we say of this Deity, at first biblical and
individual, who little by little is unshaped, vanishes
and, sinking to the depths, behind the splendours of
living nature and mystic reverie,.is confused with the
inaccessible absolute? Thus is the whole poem un-
folded, action and characters, men and gods, antiquity
and middle-ages, aggregate and details, always on the
confines cf two worlds—one visible and figurative, the
other intelligible and formless; one comprehending the
moving externals of history or of life, and all that hued
and perfumed bloom which nature lavishes on the sur-


3 Goethe’s Faust, translated: by Theodoré Martin. Prologue in
Heaven,


38 MODERN LIFE. BOOK IV


face of existence, the other containing the profound
generative powers and invisible fixed laws by which all
these living beings come to the light of day.’ At last
we see our gods: we no longer parody them, like our
ancestors, by idols or persons; we perceive them as
they are in themselves, and we have no need, in order
to see them, to renounce poetry, nor break with the
past. We remain on our knees before the shrines
where men have prayed for three thousand years; we
do not tear a single rose from the chaplets with which
they have crowned their divine Madonnas; we do not
extinguish a single candle which they have crowded on
the altar steps; we behold with an artist’s pleasure the
precious shrines where, amidst the wrought candlesticks,
the suns of diamonds, the gorgeous copes, they have
scattered the purest treasures of their genius and their
heart. But our thoughts pierce further than our eyes.
For us, at certain moments, these draperies, this marble,
all this pomp vacillates; it is no longer aught but
beautiful phantoms; it vanishes in the smoke, and we
discover through it and behind it the impalpable ideal
which has set up these pillars, lighted these roofs, and
hovered for centuries over the kneeling multitude.

To understand the legend and also to understand
life, is the object of this work, and of the whole work
of Goethe. Everything, brutish or raticnal, vile or sub-
lime, fantastic or tangible, is a group of powers, of
which our mind, through study and sympathy, may
reproduce in itself the elements and the disposition.
Let us reproduce it, and give it in our thought a new
existence. Is a gossip like Martha, babbling and fool-


1 Goethe sings: “ Wer ruft das Einselne zur allgemeinen Weihe
Wo es in herrlichen Accorden schligt ?”


CHAP, Il. LORD BYRON. 39


ish—a drunkard like Frosch, brawling and dirty,.and
the other Dutch boors—unworthy to enter a picture ?
Even the female apes, and the apes who sit beside
the cauldron, watching that it does not boil over,
with their hoarse cries and disordered fancies, may
repay the trouble of art in restoring them. Where-
ever there is life, even bestial or maniacal, there is
beauty. The more we look upon nature, the more we
find it divine—divine even in rocks and plants. Con-
sider these forests, they seem motionless ; but the leaves
breathe, and the sap mounts insensibly through the
massive trunks and branches, to the slender shoots,
stretched like fingers at the end of the twigs; it fills
the swollen ducts, leaks out in living forms, loads the
frail aments with fecundating dust, spreads profusely
through the fermenting air the vapours and odours: this
luminous air, this dome of verdure, this long colon-
nade of trees, this silent soil, labour and are trans-
formed; they accomplish a work, and the poet’s heart
has but to listen to them to find a voice for their ob-
scure instincts. They speak in his heart; still better,
they sing, and other beings do the same; each, by its
distinct melody, short or long, strange or simple, solely
adapted to its nature, capable of inanifesting it fully,
in the same manner as a sound, by its pitch, its height,
its force, manifests the inner structure of the body which
has produced.it. This melody the poet respects; he
avoids altering it by confusing its ideas or accent; his
whole care is to keep it intact and pure. Thus is his
work produced, an echo of universal nature, a vast chorus
in which gods, men, past, present, all periods of history,
all conditions of life, all orders of existence agree with-
out confusion, and in which the flexible genius of the


40 MODERN LIFE. BOOK IV.


musician, who is alternately transformed into each one
of them in order to interpret and comprehend them,
only bears witness to his own thought in giving an
insight, beyond this.immense harmony, into the group
of ideal laws whence it is derived, and the inner reason
which sustains it.

Beside this lofty conception, what is the supernatural
part of Manfred? Doubtless Byron is. moved by the
great things of nature; he has just left the Alps; he
has seen those glaciers which are like “a frozen hur-
ricane,’——those “ torrents which roll the sheeted silver’s
waving column o’er the crag’s headlong perpendicular,
like the pale courser’s tail, as told in the Apocalypse,”
—but he has brought nothing from them but images.
His witch, his spirits, his Arimanes, are but stage gods.
He believes in them no more than we do. Genuine
gods are created with much greater difficulty; we must
believe in them; we must, like Goethe, have assisted long
at their birth, like philosophers and scholars; we must
have seen of them more than their externals. He
who, whilst continuing a poet, becomes a naturalist and
geologist, who has followed in the fissures of the rocks
the tortuous waters slowly distilled, and driven at
length by their own weight to the light, may ask him-
self, as the Greeks did formerly, when they saw them
roll and sparkle in their emerald tints, what these
waters might be thinking, whether they thought.
What a strange life is theirs, alternately at rest and in
violent motion! How far removed from ours! With
what effort must we tear ourselves from our worn and
complicated passions, to comprehend the youth and
divine simplicity of a being-without reflection and form !
How difficult is such a work fora modern man! How


CHAP, II. LORD BYRON, 41


impossible for an Englishman! Shelley, Keats ap-
proached it,—thanks to the nervous delicacy of their
sickly or overflowing imagination; but how partial still
was this approach! And how we feel, on reading them,
that they would have needed thé aid of public culture,
and the aptitude of national genius, which Goethe pos-
sessed! That which the whole of: civilisation has
alone developed in the Englishman, is energetic will
and practical faculties. Here man has braced: himself
up in his efforts, become concentrated in resistance,
fond of action, and hence shut out, from pure speculation,
from wavering sympathy, and from disinterested art.
In him metaphysical liberty has perished under
utilitarian preoccupation, and pantheistic reverie under
moral prejudices. How would he frame and bend his
imagination so as to follow the numberless and fugitive
outlines of existences, especially of vague existences ?
How would he leave his religion so as to reproduce
indifferently the powers of indifferent nature? And
who is further from flexibility and indifference than he?
The flowing water, which in Goethe takes the mould
of all the contours of the soil, and which we perceive
in the sinuous and luminous distance beneath the
golden mist which it exhales, was in Byron suddenly
frozen into a mass of ice, and makes but a rigid block
of crystal. Heré, as elsewhere, there is but one cha-
ratter, the same as before. Men, gods, nature, all the
changing and multiplex world of Goethe, has. vanished.
The poet alone subsists, as expressed in his character.
Inevitably imprisoned within himself, he could see
nothing but himself; if he must come to other exist-
ences, it is that they may reply to him; and through
this pretended epic he persisted in his eternal monologue.


42 MODERN LIFE. BOOK IV,


But how’ all these powers, assembled in a single
being, make him great! Into what mediocrity and
platitude sinks the Faust of Goethe, compared to
Manfred! As soon as we cease to see humanity in
this Faust, what does he become? Is heahero? A
sad hero, who has no other task but to speak, is afraid,
studies the shades of his sensations, and walks about!
His worst action is to seduce a grisette, and to go and
dance by night in bad company—two exploits which
many a German student has accomplished. His wil-
fulness is whim, his ideas are longings and dreams.
A poet’s soul in a scholar’s head, both unfit for action,
and not harmonising well together; discord within, and
weakness without ; in short, character is wanting: it is
German all over. By his side, what a man is Manfred!
‘He zs a man; there is no fitter word, or one which
could depict him better. He will not, at the sight of
a spirit, “quake like a crawling, cowering, timorous
worm.” He will not regret that “he has neither land,
nor pence, nor worldly honours, nor influence.” He
will not let himself be duped by the devil like a school-
boy, or go and amuse himself like a cockney with the
phantasmagoria of the Brocken. He has lived like a
feudal chief, not like a scholar who has taken his degree ;
he has fought, mastered others; he knows how to
master himself. If he has studied magic arts, it is not
from an alchemist’s curiosity, but from a spirit of
revolt :

“ From my youth upwards
My spirit walk’d not with the souls of men,
Nor look’d upon the earth with human eyes ;
The thirst of their ambition was not mine,
The aim of their existence was not mine;


To eo,


iy


7 +. ah


CHAP, II. LORD BYRON. 43


My joys, my griefs, my passions, and my powers
Made me a stranger ; though I wore the form,
Thad no sympathy with breathing flesh. . . .
My joy was in the Wilderness, to breathe

The difficult air of the iced mountain’s top,
Where the birds dare not build, nor insect’s wing
Flit o’er the herbless granite, or to plunge

Into the torrent, and to roll along

On the swift whirl of the new breaking wave....
To follow through the night the moving moon,
The stars and their development ; or catch

The dazzling lightnings till my eyes grew dim ;
Or to look, list’ning, on the scatter’d leaves,
While Autumn winds were at their evening song.
These were my pastimes, and to be alone;

For if the beings, of whom I was one,—

Hating to be so,—-cross’d me in my path,

I felt myself degraded back to them,

And was all clay again... .}

I could not tame my nature down ; for he

Must serve who fain would sway—and soothe—and sue—
And watch all time—and pry into all place—
And be a living lie—who would become

A mighty thing amongst the mean, and such

The mass are ; I disdain’d to mingle with

A herd, though to be leader—and of wolves. . . . ?


He lives alone, and he cannot live alone. The deep
source of love; cut off from its natural issues, then over-
flows and lays waste the heart which refused to expand.
He has loved, too well, one too near to him, his sister it
may be; she has died of it, and impotent remorse fills
the soul which no human occupation could satisfy :


1 Byron’s Works, xi. ; Manfred, ii. 2, 32.
2 Ibid. ; Manfred, iii. 1, 56.


44 MODERN LIFE. BOOK IV,


“| | My solitude is solitude no more,
But peopled with the Furies ;—I have gnash’d
My teeth in darkness till returning morn,
Then cursed myself till sunset ;—I have pray’d
For madness as a blessing—’tis denied me.
I have affronted death—but in the war
Of elements the waters shrunk from me,
And fatal things pass’d harmless—the cold hand
Of an all-pitiless demon held me back,
Back by a single hair, which would not break,
In fantasy, imagination, all
The affluence of my soul, . . . I plunged deep,
But, like an ebbing wave, it dashed me back
Into the gulf of my unfathom’d thought... .
I dwell in my despair
And live, and live for ever.” !


He only wishes to see her once more: to this sole and all-
powerful desire flow all the energies of his soul. He calls
her up in the midst of spirits ; she appears, but answers
not. He prays to her——with what cries, what doleful
eries of deep anguish! How he loves! With what
yearning and effort all his downtrodden and outcrushed
tenderness gushes out and escapes aé the sight of those
well-beloved eyes, which he sees for the last time!
With what enthusiasm his convulsive arms are stretched
towards that frail form which, shuddering, has quitted
the tomb !-—-towards those cheeks in which the blood,
forcibly recalled, plants “a strange hectic—like the
unnatural red which Autumn plants upon the perish’d
leaf.”


“. . . Hear me, hear me—
Astarte! my beloved! speak to me:


1 Byron’s Works, xi. ; Manfred, ii. 2, 35.


anid


OHAP, II. LORD BYRON,


I have so much endured—so much endure—


45


Look on me! the grave hath not changed thee more


Than I am changed for thee. Thou lovedst me


Too much as I loved thee: we were not made
To torture thus each other, though it were
The deadliest sin to love as we have loved.


Say that thou loath’st me not—that I do bear


This punishment for both—that thou wilt be
One of the blessed—and that I shall die ;
For hitherto all hateful things conspire

To bind me in existence—in a life

Which makes me shrink from immortality—
A future like the past, I cannot rest.

I know not what I ask, nor what.I seek :

I feel but what thou art—and what I am;
And I would hear yet once before I perish


The voice which was my music—Speak to me!


For I have call’d on thee in the still night,


Startled the slumbering birds from the hush’d boughs,
And woke the mountain wolves, and made the caves


Acquainted with thy vainly echoed name,


Which answer’d me—many things answer’d me—


Spirits and men—but thou wert silent all... .


Speak to me! I have wander’d o’er the earth,
And never found thy likeness—-Speak to me |!
Look on the fiends around—they feel for me:
I fear them not, and feel for thee alone—


Speak to me! though it be in wrath ;—but say—


I reck not what—but let me hear thee once—
This once—once more !” +


She speaks. What a sad and doubtful reply!


fred’s limbs are convulsed when she disappears.


an instant after the spirits see that:


1 Byron’s Works, xi. ; Manfred, ii. 4, 47.


Man-
But


46 MODERN LIFE, BOOK IV.


“© | , He mastereth himself, and makes
His torture tributary to his will.
Had he been one of us, he would have made
An awful spirit,” }


Will is the unsnaken basis of this soul. He did not
bend before the chief of the spirits; he stood firm and
calm before the infernal throne, whilst all the demons
were raging who would tear him to pieces: now he
dies, and they assail him, but he still strives and con-
quers :


“  . . Thou hast no power upon me, that I feel ;
Thou never shalt possess me, that I know:
What I have done is done; I bear within
A torture which could nothing gain from thine :
The mind which is immortal makes itself
Requital for its good or evil thoughts—

Ts its own origin of ill and end—

And its own place and time—its innate sense,
When stripp’d of this mortality, derives

No colour from the fleeting things without ;
But is absorb’d in sufferance or in joy,
Born from the knowledge of its own desert.
Thow didst not tempt me, and thou couldst not tempt me;
I have not been thy dupe, nor am thy prey—
But was my own destroyer, and will be

My own hereafter.—Back, ye baffled fiends !
The hand of death is on me—but not yours!” 2


This “I,” the invincible I, who suffices to himself, on
whom nothing has a hold, demons nor men, the sole
author of his own good and ill, a sort of suffering or fallen
god, but god always, even in its quivering flesh, amidst
his soiled and blighted destiny,—such is the hero and


1 Byron’s Works, xi, ; Manjred, ii. 4, 49. 2 Ibid, iii. 4, 70.


CHAP, II. LORD BYRON, 47


the work of this mind, and of the men of his race. If
Goethe was the poet of the wniverse, Byron was the
poet of the individual; and if in one the German
genius found its interpreter, the English genius found
its interpreter in the other.


As


‘We can well imagine that Englishmen clamoured at
and repudiated the monster. Southey, the poet-laureate,
said of him, in good biblical style, that he savoured of
Moloch and Belial—most of all of Satan; and, with
the generosity of a brother poet, called the attention
of Government to him. We should fill many pages
if we were to copy the reproaches of the respectable
reviews against these “men of diseased hearts and de-
praved imaginations, who, forming a system of opinions
to suit their own unhappy course of conduct, have re-
belled against the holiest ordinances of human society,
and, hating that revealed religion which, with all their
efforts and bravadoes, they are unable entirely to dis-
believe, labour to make others as miserable as them-
selves, by infecting them with a moral virus that eats
into the soul.”! This sounds like the emphasis of an
episcopal tharge and of scholastic pedantry : in England
the press does the duty of the police, and it never did
it more violently than at that time. Opinion backed
the press. Several times, in Italy, Lord Byron saw
gentlemen leave a drawing-room with their wives, when
he was announced. Owing to his title and celebrity,
the scandal which he caused was more conspicuous than
any other: he was a public sinner. One day an ob-


1 Sonthev. Preface to A Vision of Judament.


48 MODERN LIFE. BOOK Iv.


scure parson sent him a prayer which he had found
amongst the papers of his wife—a charming and pious
lady, recently dead, and who had secretly prayed to
God for the conversion of the great sinner. Conserva-
tive and Protestant England, after a quarter of a
century of moral wars, and two centuries of moral educa-
tion, carried its severity and rigour to extremes; and
Puritan intolerance, like Catholic intolerance previously
in Spain, put recusants out of the pale of the law.
The proscription of voluptuous or abandoned life, the
narrow observation of order and decency, the respect of
all police, human and divine; the necessary bows at
the mere name of Pitt, of the king, the church, the God
of the Bible; the attitude of the gentleman in a white
tie, conventional, inflexible, implacable,—such were the
customs then met with across the Channel, a hundred
times more tyrannical than now-a-days: at that time,
as Stendhal says, a peer at his fireside dared not cross
his legs, for fear of its being improper. England held
herself stiff, uncomfortably laced in her stays of de-
corum. Hence arose two sources of misery: a man
suffers, and is tempted to throw down the ugly choking
apparatus, when he is sure that it can be done secretly.
On one side constraint, on the other hypocrisy—these
are the two vices of English civilisation; and it was
these which Byron, with his poet’s discernment and his
combative instincts, attacked.

He had seen them from the first; true artists are
perspicacious : it is in this that they outstrip us; we
judge from hearsay and formulas, like cockneys; they,
like eccentric beings, from accomplished facts, and
things: at twenty-two he perceived the tedium born
of constraint desolating all high life:


CHAP, IT. LORD BYRON, 49


“There stands the noble hostess, nor shall sink
With the three-thousandth curtsy ;. .
Saloon, room, hall, o’erflow beyond their brink,
And long the latest of arrivals halts,
"Midst royal dukes and dames condemn’d to climb,
And gain an inch of staircase at a time,” ?


He wrote also:


“He (the Count) ought to have been in the country during
the hunting season, with ‘a select party of distinguished guests,’
as the papers term it. He ought to have seen the gentleman
after dinner (on the hunting days), and the soirée ensuing
thereupon,—and the women looking as if they had hunted, or
rather been hunted ; and I could have wished that he had been
at.a dinner in town, which I recollect at Lord C * * ’s—small,
but select, and composed of the most amusing people. The
dessert was hardly on the table, when, out of twelve I counted
five asleep.” 2


As for the morals of the upper classes, this is what he
says :

“Went to my oox at Covent Garden to-night... . Casting
my eyes round the house, in the next box to me, and the next,
and the next, were the most distinguished old and young
Babylonians of quality... .It was as if the house had been
divided between your public and your understood courtesans ;
—but the intriguantes much outnumbered the regular merce-
naries. Now, where lay the difference between Pauline and
her mother, ... and Lady * * and daughter? except that the
two last may enter Carlton and any other house, and the two
first are limited to the Opera and b— house. How I do
delight in observing life as it really is!—and myself, after all,
the worst of any !”°


50 MODERN LIFE. BOOK IV.


Decorum and debauchery; moral hypocrites, “qui
mettent leurs vertus en mettant leurs gants blancs ;”?
an oligarchy which, to preserve its places and its sine-
cures, ravages Europe, preys on Ireland, and excites
the people by making use of the grand words, virtue,
Christianity, and liberty: there was truth in all these
invectives.? It is only thirty years since the ascend-
ency of the middle class diminished the privileges and
corruptions of the great; but at that time hard words
could with justice be thrown at their heads. Byron
said, quoting from Voltaire :


“<Ta Pudeur s’est enfuie des cceurs, et s’est refugiée sur les
ldvres.’, .. ‘Plus les mceurs sont dépravées, plus les expres-
sions deviennent mesurées; on croit regagner en langage ce
qu’on a perdu en vertu.’ This is the real fact, as applicable
to the degraded and hypocritical mass which leavens the present
English generation; and it is the only answer they deserve.
... Cant is the crying sin of this double-dealing and false-
speaking time of selfish spoilers,” °


And then he wrote his masterpiece, Den Juan.*

All here was new, form as well as substance; for he
had entered into a new world. The Englishman, the
Northman, transplanted amongst southern manners and
into Italian life, had become imbued with a new sap,
which made him bear new fruit. He had been induced
to read® the rather free satires of Buratti, and the


1 Alfred de Musset.

* Seo his terrible satirical poem, The Vision of Judgment, against
Southey, George IV., and official pomp.

® Byron’s Works, xvi. 131; Preface to Don Juan, cantos vi. vii.
and viii.

* Don Juan is a satire on the abuses in the present state of society,
and not a eulogy of vice,

5 Stendhal, Mémoires sur Lord Byron.


CHAP, II. LORD BYRON. 51


more than voluptuous sonnets of Baffo. He lived in
the happy Venetian society, still exempt from political
animosities, where care seemed a folly, where life was
looked upon as a carnival, pleasure displayed itself
openly, not timid and hypocritical, but loosely arrayed
and commended. He amused himself here, impetuously
at first, more than sufficient, even more than too much,
and almost killed himself by these amusements; but
after vulgar gallantries, having felt a real feeling of love,
he became a cavalier’ servente, after the fashion of the
country where he dwelt, with the consent of the family
of the lady, offering his arm, carrying her shawl, a little
awkwardly at first, and wonderingly, but on the whole
happier than he had ever been, and fanned by a warm
breath of pleasure and abandon. . He saw in Italy the
overthrow of all English morality, conjugal infidelity
established as a rule, amorous fidelity raised to a duty:
* There is no convincing a woman here that she is in the
smallest degree deviating from the rule of right or the
fitness of things in having an amoroso.’ . . . Love (the
sentiment of love) is not merely an excuse for it, but
makes it an actual virtue, provided it is disinterested, and
not a caprice, and is confined to one object.”? A little
later he translated the Morgante Maggiore of Pulci, to
show “ What was permitted in a Catholic country and
a bigoted age to a churchman on the score of religion,
and to silence those buffoons who accuse me of attacking
the Liturgy.”® He rejoiced in this liberty and this
ease, and resolved never to fall again under the pedantic
inquisition, which in his country had condemned and

1 Byron’s Works, iii. 833; Letter to Murray, Venice, Jan. 2, 1817.


2 Ibid. iii. 363; Letter to Moore, Venice, March 25, 1817.
8 Ibid. iv. 279; Letter to Murray, Ravenna, Feb. 7, 1820,


52 MODERN LIFE. BOOK fv.


damned him past forgiveness. He wrote his Beppe like
an improvisatore, with a charming freedom, a flowing
and fantastic lightness of mood, and contrasted in it
the recklessness and happiness of Italy with the pres
judices and repulsiveness of England :


“T like... to see the Sun set, sure he’ll rise to morrow,
Not through a misty morning twinkling weak as
A drunken man’s dead eye in maudlin sorrow,
But with all Heaven t’ himself; that day will break as
Beauteous as cloudless, nor be forced to borrow
That sort of farthing candlelight which glimmers
Where reeking London’s smoky caldron simmers,


T love the language, that soft bastard Latin,

Which melts like kisses from a female mouth,

And sounds as if it should be writ on satin,

With syllables which breathe of the sweet South,
And gentle liquids gliding all so pat in,

That not a single accent seems uncouth,

Like our harsh northern whistling, grunting guttural,
Which we’re obliged to hiss, and spit, and sputter all.


I like the women too (forgive my folly),

From the rich peasant cheek of ruddy bronze,
And large black eyes that flash on you a volley
Of rays that say a thousand things at once,

To the high dama’s brow, more melancholy,
But clear, and with a wild and liquid glance,
Heart on her lips, and soul within her eyes,
Soft as her clime, and sunny as her skies.” 1


With other manners there existed in Italy another
morality ; there is one for every age, race, and sky—I
mean that the ideal model varies with the circumstances


1 Byron's Works, xi. ; Beppo, c. xliii.—xly. 121.


CHAP. II. LORD BYRON. 53


which fashion it. In England the severity of the
climate, the warlike energy of the race, and the liberty
of the institutions prescribe an active life, severe
. Manners, Puritanic religion, the marriage tie strictly
kept, a feeling of duty and self-command. In Italy
the beauty of the climate, the innate sense of the
beautiful, and the despotism of the government induced
an idle life, loose manners, imaginative religion, the
culture of the arts, and the search after happiness.
Each model has its beauties and its blots,—the epi-
curean artist like the political moralist ;' each shows
by its greatnesses the littlenesses of the other, and, to
set in relief the disadvantages of the second, Lord Byron
had only to set in relief the seductions of the first.
Thereupon he went in search of a hero, and did not
find one, which, in this age of heroes, is “an uncommon
want.” For lack of a better he chose “our ancient
friend Don Juan,’—a scandalous choice: what an out-
cry the English moralists will make! But, to cap the
horror, this Don Juan is not wicked, selfish, odious,
like his fellows; he does not seduce, he is no corrupter.
When an opportunity arises, he lets himself drift; he
has a heart and senses, and, under a beautiful sun, they
are easily touched: at sixteen a youth cannot help
himself, nor at twenty, nor perhaps at thirty. Lay it
to the charge of human nature, my dear moralists; it
is not I who made it as it is. If you will grumble,
address yourselves ‘higher: we are here as painters, not
as makers of human puppets, and we do not answer for
the inner structure of our dancing-dolls. Our Don Juan


1 See Stendhal, Vie de Giacomo Rossini, and Dean Stanley’s Life of
Dr. Arnold. The contrast is complete. See also Mad. de Stael’s
Corinne, where this opposition is vefy clearly grasped.


54 MODERN LIFE. BOOK IV.


is now going about; he goes about in many places, and
in all he is young; we will not launch thunderbolts on
his head because he is young; that fashion is past:
the green devils and their capers only come on the stage
in the last act of Mozart’s Don Giovanni. And, more-
over, Juan is so amiable! After all, what has he done
that others don’t do? He has been a lover of Catherine
IL, but he only followed the lead of the diplomatic
corps and the whole Russian army. Let him sow his
wild oats; the good grain will spring up in its time.
Once in England, he will behave himself decently. I
confess that he may even there, when provoked, go a
gleaning in the conjugal gardens of the aristocracy;
but in the end. he will settle, go and pronounce moral
speeches in Parliament, become a member of the Society
for the Suppression of Vice. If you wish absolutely to
have him punished, we will “make him end in hell, or
in an unhappy imarriage, not knowing which would be
the severest: the Spanish tradition says hell: but it
is probably only an allegory of the other state”? At
all events, married or damned, the good folk at the end
of the piece will have the pleasure of knowing that he
is burning all alive.

Is not this a singular apology? Does it not aggra-
vate the fault? Let us wait; we know not yet the
whole venom of the book: together with Juan there
are Donna Julia, Haidée, Gulbeyaz, Dudu, and many
more. It is here the diabolical poet digs in his sharpest
claw, and he takes care to dig it into our weakest
side. What will the clergymen and white-chokered
reviewers say? For, to speak the truth, there is no


1 Byron’s Works, v. 127; Letter to Mr, Murray, Ravenna, Feb. 16,
1821,


CHAP, ir, LORD BYRON. 65


preventing it: we must read on, in spite of ourselves.
Twice or three times following we meet here with
happiness ; and when I say happiness, I mean profound
and complete happiness—not mere voluptuousness, not
obscene gaiety; we are far removed from the nicely-
written ribaldry of Dorat, and the unbridled license of
Rochester. Beauty is here, southern beauty, resplendent
and harmonious, spread over everything, over the
luminous sky, the calm scenery, corporal nudity, artless-
ness of heart. Is there a thing it does not deify ?
All sentiments are exalted under its hands. What was
»gross becomes noble; even in the nocturnal adventure
in the seraglio, which seems worthy of Faublas, poetry
embellishes licentiousness. The girls are lying in the
large silent apartment, like precious flowers brought
from all climates into a conservatory :


“One with her flush’d cheek laid on her white arm,
And raven ringlets gather’d in dark crowd
- Above her brow, lay dreaming soft and warm;...
One with her auburn tresses lightly bound,
And fair brows gently drooping, as the fruit
Nods from the tree, was slumbering with soft breath,
And lips apart, which show’d the pearls beneath. ...
A fourth as marble, statue-like and still,
Lay in a breathless, hush’d, and stony sleep ;
White, cold, and pure... a carved lady on a monument.”?


However, “the fading lamps waned dim and blue;”
Dudu is asleep, the innocent girl; and if she has cast
a glance on her glass,
“Twas like the fawn, which, in the lake display’d,
Beholds her own shy, shadowy image pass,


1 Byron’s Works, xvi. ; Don Juan, c. vi. st. Ixvi. Ixviii.


56 MODERN LIFE. BOOK Iv.


When first she starts, and then returns to peep,
Admiring this new native of the deep.” }


What will become now of Puritanic prudery? Can
the proprieties prevent beauty from being beautiful ?
Will you condemn a picture of Titian for its nudity?
What gives value to human life, and nobility to human
nature, if not the power of attaining delicious and sublime
emotions? We have just had one—one worthy of a
painter; is it not worth that of an alderman? Shall
we refuse to acknowledge the divine beéause it appears
in art and enjoyment, and not only in conscience and
action? There is a world beside ours, and a civilisation *
beside ours; our rules are narrow, and our pedantry
tyrannic; the human plant can be otherwise developed
than in our compartments and under our snows, and
the fruits it will then bear will not be less precious.
We must confess it, since we relish them when they
are offered to us. Who has read the love of Haidée,
and has had any other thought than to envy and pity
her? She is a wild child who has picked up Juan—
another child cast ashore senseless by the waves. She
has preserved him, nursed him like a mother, and now
she loves him: who can blame her for loving him ?
Who, in presence of the splendid nature which smiles
on and protects them, can imagine for them anything
else than the all-powerful feeling which unites them:


“Tt was a wild and breaker-beaten coast,
With cliffs above, and a broad sandy shore,
Guarded by shoals and rocks as by an host,...
And rarely ceased the haughty billow’s roar,
Save on the dead long summer days, which make
The outstretch’d ocean glitter like a lake. . .


1 Byron’s Works, Don Juan, c. vi. st. lx.


CHAP. II. LORD BYRON. 57


And all was stillness, save the sea-bird’s ery.
And dolphin’s leap, and little billow crost

By some low rock or shelve, that made it fret
Against the boundary it scarcely wet... .


And thus they wander’d forth, and hand in hand,
Over the shining pebbles and the shells,

Glided along the smooth and harden’d sand,

And in the worn and wild receptacles

Work’d by the storms, yet work’d as it were plann’d,
In hollow halls, with sparry roofs and cells,

They turn’d to rest ; and, each clasp’d by an arm,
Yielded to the deep twilight’s purple charm.


They look’d up to the sky whose floating glow
Spread like a rosy ocean, vast and bright ;

They gazed upon the glittering sea below,
Whence the broad moon rose circling into sight ;
They heard the wave’s splash and the wind so low,
And saw each other’s dark eyes darting light

Into cach other—and, beholding this,

Their lips drew near, and clung into a kiss. ...


They were alone, but not alone as they

Who shut in chambers think it loneliness ;

The silent ocean, and the starlight bay

The twilight glow, which momently grew less,
The voiceless sand, and dropping caves that lay
Around them, made them to each other press,

As if there were no life beneath the sky

Save theirs, and that their life could never die,” }


An excellent opportunity to introduce here your formu-
laries and catechisms :


“‘ Haidée spoke not of scruples, ask’d-no vows,
Nor offer'd any...


2 Byron’s Works, xv. ; Don Juan, ¢, ii. st. clxxvii-clxxxviii.


58° MODERN LIFE. BOOK Iv.


She was all which pure ignorance allows,
And fiew to her young mate like a young bird.” ?


Nature suddenly expands, for she is ripe, like a bud
bursting into bloom, nature in her fulness, instinct, and
heart :


“‘ Alas! they were so young, so beautiful,
So lonely, loving helpless, and the hour
Was that in which the heart is always full,
And, having o’er itself no further power,
Prompts deeds eternity can not annul.”?...


O admirable moralists, you stand before these two
flowers like patented gardeners, holding in your hands
a model of the bloom sanctioned by your society of
horticulture, proving that the model has not been
followed, and deciding that the two weeds must be cast
into the fire, which you keep burning to consume
irregular growths. You have judged well, and you
know your art.

Besides British cant, there is universal hypocrisy ;
besides English pedantry, Byron wars against human
roguery. Here is the general aim of the poem, and to this
his character and genius tended. His great and gloomy
dreams of juvenile imagination have vanished; experi-
ence has come; he knows man now; and what is man,
once known? does the sublime abound in him? Do
we think that the grand sentiments—those of Childe
Harold, for instance,—are the ordinary course of life ?°
The truth is, that man employs most of his time

1 Byron’s Works, xv. ; Don Juan, c. ii. st. exe.

2 Ibid. c, ii. st. cxcii.

3 Byron says (v., Oct. 12, 1820), “Don Juan is too true, and would,


I suspect, live longer than Childe Harold. The women hate many
things which strip off the tinsel of sentiment.”


a


CHAP, II. LORD BYRON. 59


in sleeping, dining, yawning, working like a horse,
amusing himself like an ape. According to Byron, he
is an animal; except for a few minutes, his nerves, his
blood, his instincts lead him. Routine works over it
all, necessity whips him on, the animal advances. As the
animal is proud, and moreover imaginative, it pretends
to be marching for its own pleasure, that there is no
whip, that at all events this whip rarely touches: its
flanks, that at least its stoic back can make-believe that
it does not feel it. It thinks that it is decked with
the most splendid trappings, and thus struts on with
measured steps, fancying that it carries relics and treads
on carpets and flowers, whilst in reality it tramples in
the mud, and carries with it the stains and bad smells
of every dunghill. What a pastime to touch its mangy
back, to set before its eyes the sacks full of flower which
it carries, and the goad which makes it go!+ Whata
pretty farce! It is the eternal farce; and not a senti-
ment thereof but provides him with an act: love in
the first place. Certainly Donna Julia is very lovable,
and Byron loves her; but she comes out of his hands,
as rumpled as any other woman. She is virtuous, of
course; and what is better still, she desires to be so.
She plies herself, in connection with Don Juan, with the
finest arguments; what a fine thing are arguments, and
how suited they are to check passion! Nothing can be
more solid than a firm purpose, propped up by logic,
resting on the fear of the world, the thought of God,
- the recollection of duty; nothing can prevail against
it, except a téte-d-téte in June, on a moonlight evening.


1 Don Juan, c. vii. st. 2. I hope it is no crime to laugh at all
things. For I wish to know what, after al], are all things—but a
show ?


60 MODERN LIFE. BOOK IV.


At last the deed is done, and the poor timid lady is
surprised by her outraged husband; in what a situa-
tion! Let us look again at the book. Of course she
will be speechless, ashamed and full of tears, and the
moral reader duly reckons on her remorse. My dear
reader, you have not reckoned on impulse and nerves.
To-morrow she will feel shame; the business is now to
overwhelm the husband, to deafen him, to confound
him, to save Juan, to save herself, to fight. The war once
begun, is waged with all kinds of weapons, and chiefly
with audacity and insults. The only idea is the present
need, and this absorbs all others; it is in this that
woman is a woman. This Julia cries lustily. Itisa
regular storm: hard words and recriminations, mockery
and challenges, fainting and tears. In a quarter of an
hour she has gained twenty years’ experience. You
did not know, nor she either, what an actress can
emerge, all on a sudden, unforeseen, out of a simple
woman. Do you know what can emerge from yourself ?
You think yourself rational, humane; I admit it for
to-day; you have dined, and you are comfortable in a
pleasant room. Your human mechanism works without
getting into disorder, because the wheels are oiled and
well regulated; but place it in a shipwreck, a battle,
let the failing or the plethora of blood for an instant
derange the chief pieces, and we shall see you howling
or drivelling like a madman or an idiot. Civilisation,
education, reason, health, cloak us in their smooth and
polished cases; let us tear them away one by one, or
all together, and we laugh to see the brute, who is
lying at the bottom. Here is our friend Juan reading
Julia’s last letter, and swearing in a transport never to
forget the beautiful eyes which he caused to weep so


2. owernagn tating


CHAP, II, LORD BYRON.


much, Was ever feeling more tender or sincere ?


unfortunately Juan is at sea, and sickness sets in.


cries out:


Sooner shall earth resolve itself to sea,
Than I resign thine image, oh, my fair! ...


61


But
He


(Here the ship gave a lurch, and he grew sea-sick.) . . .


Sooner shall heaven kiss earth—(here he fell sicker.)


Oh Julia! what is every other woe?

(For God’s sake let me have a glass of liquor ;
Pedro, Battista, help me down below).

Julia, my love !—(You rascal, Pedro, quicker)—
Oh, Julia !—(this curst vessel pitches so)
Beloved Julia, hear me still beseeching !
(Here he grew inarticulate with retching.) ...
Love’s a capricious power...

Against all noble maladies he’s bold,

But vulgar illnesses don’t like to meet; ...
Shrinks from the application of hot towels,
And purgatives are dangerous to his reign,
Sea-sickness death.” ...


Many other things cause the death of Love:


“Tis melancholy, and a fearful sign
Of human frailty, folly, also crime,
That love and marriage rarely can combine,
Although they both are born in the same clime ;
Marriage from love, like vinegar from wine—
A sad, sour, sober beverage.”
An honest gentleman, at his return,
May not have the good fortune of Ulysses;...
The odds are that he finds a handsome urn
To his memory—and two or three young misses


Born to some friend, who holds his wife and riches,—


And that his Argus bites him by—the breeches.” $


1 Byron’s Works, xv. ; Don Juan, c. ii. st. xix—xxiii.


2 Thid. c. iii. st. V. ® Tbid. c. iii. st. xxiii.


62 MODERN LIFE. BOOK Iv.


These are the words of a sceptic, even of a cynic
Sceptic and cynic, it is in this he ends. Sceptic
through misanthropy, cynic through bravado, a sad and
combative humour always impels him; southern volup-
tuousness has not conquered him; he is only an epi-
curean through contradiction and for a moment:


“Let us have wine and women, mirth and laughter,
Sermons and soda-water the day after.
Man, being reasonable must get drunk ;
Tho best of life is but intoxication.” ?


We see clearly that he is always the same, going to
extremes and unhappy, bent on destroying himself. His
Don Juan, also, is a debauchery ; in it he diverts himself
outrageously at the expense of all respectable things,
as a bull in a china shop. He is always violent, and
often ferocious; a sombre imagination intersperses his
love stories with horrors leisurely enjoyed, the despair
and famine of shipwrecked men, and the emaciation of
the raging skeletons feeding on each other. He laughs
at it horribly, like Swift; he jests over it like Voltaire :


“And next they thought upon the master’s mate,
As fattest ; but-he saved himself, because,
Besides being much averse from such a fate,
There were some other reasons’: the first was,
He had been rather indisposed of late ;

And that which chiefly proved his saving clause,
Was a small present made to him at Cadiz,
By general subscription of the ladies.” 2


With his specimens in hand,* Byron follows with a
surgeon’s exactness all the stages of death, gorging, rage,


1 Byron’s Works, xv. ; Don Juan, c. ii. st. clxxviii., clxxix.
2 Ibid. c. ii. st. Ixxxi.
8 Byron had before him a dozen authentic descriptions.


(CHAP. It, LORD BYRON. 63


adness, howling, exhaustion, stupor; he wishes to
touch and exhibit the naked and ascertained truth, the
last grotesque and hideous element of humanity. Let
us read again the assault on Ismail,—the grape-shot
and the bayonet, the street massacres, the corpses used
as fascines, and the thirty-eight thousand slaughtered
Turks. There is blood enough to satiate a tiger, and
this blood flows amidst an accompaniment of jests;
it is in order to rail at war, and the butcheries dignified
with the name of exploits. In this pitiless and uni-
versal demolition of all human vanities, what remains ?
What do we know except that life is “a scene of all-
confess’d inanity,” and that men are,


** Dogs, or men !—for I flatter you in saying
That ye are dogs—your betters far—ye may
Read, or read not, what I am now essaying
To show ye what ye are in every way?”?


What does he find in science but deficiencies, and in
religion but mummeries?” Does he so much as pre-
serve poetry? Of the divine mantle, the last garment
which a poet respects, he makes:a rag to trample upon,
to wring, to make holes in, out of sheer wantonness.
At the most touching moment of Haidée’s love he vents
a buffoonery. He concludes an ode with caricatures.
He is Faust in the first verse, and Mephistopheles in
the second. “He employs, in the midst of tenderness
or of murder, penny-print witticisms, trivialities, gossip,
with a pamphleteer’s vilification and a buffoon’s whim-
sicalities. He lays bare the poetic method, asks him-
self where he has got to, counts the stanzas. already


1 Byron’s Works, xvi. ; Don Juan, ¢. vii. st. 7.
2 See his Vision of Judgment,


64 MODERN LIFE. BOOK Iv.


done, jokes the Muse, Pegasus, and the whole epic stud,
as though he wouldn’t give twopence for them. Again,
what remains? Himself, he alone, standing amidst all
this ruin. It is he who speaks here; his characters
are but screens; half the time even he pushes them
aside, to occupy the stage. He lavishes upon us his
opinions, recollections, anger, tastes; his poem is a
conversation, a confidence, with the ups and downs, the
rudeness and freedom of a conversation and a confidence,
almost like the holographic journal, in which, by night,
at his writing-table, he opened his heart and discharged
his feelings.. Never was seen in such a clear glass the
birth of lively thought, the tumult of great genius, the
inner life of a genuine poet, always impassioned, inex-
haustibly fertile and creative, in whom suddenly, suc-
cessively, finished and adorned, bloomed all human
emotions and ideas,—sad, gay, lofty, low, hustling one
another, mutually impeding one another like swarms of
insects who go humming and feeding on flowers and in
the mud. He may say what he likes; willingly or
unwillingly we listen to him; let him leap from
sublime to burlesque, we leap with him. He has so
much wit, so fresh a wit, so sudden, so biting, such a
prodigality of knowledge, ideas, images picked up from
the four corners of the horizon, in heaps and masses,
that we are captivated, trdnsported beyond all limits;
we cannot dream of resisting. Too vigorous, and hence
unbridled,—that is the word which ever recurs when
we speak of Byron; too vigorous against others and
himself, and so unbridled, that after spending his life in
setting the world at defiance; and his poetry in depict-
ing revolt, he can only find the fulfilment of his talent
and the satisfaction, of his heart, in a poem waging war


CHAP, II. LORD BYRON. 65


on all human and poetic conventions. When a man
lives in such a manner he must be great, but he be-
comes also morbid. There is a malady of heart and
mind in the style of Don Juan, as in Swift. When a
man jests amidst his tears, it is because he has 4
poisoned imagination. This kind of laughter is a spasm,
and we see in one man a hardening of the heart, or
madness; in another, excitement or disgust. Byron
was exhausted, at least the poet was exhausted in him.
The last cantos of Don Juan drag: the gaiety became
forced, the escapades became digressions; the reader
began to be bored. A new kind of poetry, which he
had attempted, had given way in his hands: in the
drama he only attained to powerful declamation, his
characters had no life; when he forsook poetry, poetry
forsook him; he went to Greece in search of action,
and only found death.


VI.


So lived and so died this unhappy great man; the
malady of the age had no more distinguished prey.
Around him, like a hecatomb, lie the others, wounded
also by the greatness of their faculties and their immode-
rate desires,—some ending in stupor or drunkenness,
others worn out by pleasure or work; these driven to
madness or suicide; those beaten down by impotence,
or lying on a sick-bed; all agitated by their too acute
_ or aching nerves; the strongest carrying their bleeding
wound to old age, the happiest having suffered as much
as the rest, and preserving their scars, though healed.
The concert of their lamentations has filled their century,
and we stood around them, hearing in our hearts the low
echo of their cries. We were sad like them, and like

VOL. IV. ¥


66 MODERN LIFE. BOOK Iv.


them inclined to revolt. The reign of democracy ex-
cited our ambitions without satisfying them; the
proclamation of philosophy kindled our curiosity with-
out satisfying it. In this wide-open career, the plebeian,
suffered for his mediocrity, and the sceptic for his doubt.
The plebeian, like the sceptic, attacked by a precocious
melancholy, and withered by a premature experience,
abandoned his sympathies and his conduct to the poets,
who declared happiness impossible, truth unattainable,
society ill-arranged, man abortive or marred. From
this unison of voices an idea arose, the centre of the
literature, the arts, the religion of the age, to wit that
there is a monstrous disproportion between the differ-
ent parts of our social structure, and that human destiny
is vitiated by this disagreement.

What advice have they given us to cure this?
They were great; were they wise? “Let deep and
strong sensations rain upon you; if the human mechan-
ism breaks, so much the worse!” “Cultivate your
garden, bury yourself in a little circle, re-enter the flock,
be a beast of burden.” “Turn believer again, take holy
water, abandon your mind to dogmas, and your éonduct
to manuals of devotion.” “Make your way; aspire to
power, honours, wealth.” Such are the various replies of
artists and citizens, Christians and men of the world.
Ate they replies? And what do they propose but to
satiate one’s self, to become stupid, to turn aside, to
forget? There is another and a deeper answer, which
Goethe was the first to give, the truth of which we begin
to conceive, in which issue all the labour and experi-
ence of the age, and which may perhaps be the subject-
matter of future literature: “Try to understand yourself,
and things in general.” <A strange reply, which seems


_—eee


CHAP, II, LORD BYRON. 67


hardly new, whose scope we shall only hereafter discover.
For a long time yet men will feel their sympathies thrill
at the sound of the sobs of their great poets. Fora
long time they will rage against a destiny which opens
to their aspirations the career of limitless space, to
shatter them, within two steps of the goal, against
a wretched post which they had not seen. For a long
time they will bear like fetters the necessities which
they ought to have embraced as laws. Our genera-
tion, like the preceding, has been tainted by the
malady of the age, and will never more than half get
rid of it. We shall arrive at truth, not at tranquillity.
All we can heal at present is our intellect; we have
no hold upon our feelings. But we have a right to
conceive for others the hopes which we no longer
entertain for ourselves, and to prepare for our descend-
ants the happiness which we shall never enjoy. Brought
up in a more wholesome air, they will have, mayhap, a
wholesomer heart. The reformation of ideas ends by
reforming the rest, and the light of the mind produces
serenity of heart. Hitherto, in our judgments on men,
we have taken for our masters the oracles and poets,
and like them we have received for undoubted truths the
noble dreams of our imagination and the imperious
suggestions of our heart. We have bound ourselves to the
partiality of religicus divinations, and the inexactness
of literary divinations, and we have shaped our doctrines
according to our instincts and our vexations. Science
at Jast approaches, and approaches man; it has gone
beyond the visible and palpable world of stars, stones,
plants, amongst which man disdainfully confined her.
It reaches the heart provided with exact and penetrating
implements, whose justness has been proved, and their


68 MODERN LIFE. BOOK IV.


reach measured by three hundred years of experience.
Thought, with its development and rank, its structure
and relations, its deep material roots, its infinite growth
through ‘history, its lofty bloom at the summit of
things, becomes the object of science,—an object which,
sixty years ago, it foresaw in Germany, and which,
slowly and surély probed, by the same methods as the
physical world, will be transformed before our eyes, as
the physical world has been transformed. It is already
being transformed, and we have left behind us the light
in which Byron and the French poets had considered
it. No, man is not an abortion or a monster; no,
the business of poetry is not to disgust or defame him.
He is in his place, and completes a chain. Let us
watch him grow and increase, and we shall cease to
rail at or curse him. He, like everything else, is a
product, and as such it is right he should be what
he is. His innate imperfection is in order, like the
constant abortion of a stamen ina plant, like the fund-
amental irregularity of four facets in a crystal What
we took for a deformity, is a form; what seemed to
us a subversion of a law, is the accomplishment of a
law. Human reason and virtue have for their foun-
dation instincts and animal images, as living forms
have for their instruments physical laws, as organic
matters have for their elements mineral , substances.
What wonder if virtue or human reason, like living
form or organic matter, sometimes fails or decomposes,
since like them, and like every superior and complex
existence, they have for support and control’ inferior and
siniple forces, which, according to circumstances, now
maintain it by their harmony, now mar it by their dis-
cord? What wonder if the elements of existence, like


rr


CHAP. IL. LORD BYRON, 69


those of quantity, receive, from their very nature, the
immutable laws which constrain and reduce them to a
certain species and order of formation? Who will rise up
against geometry ? Who, especially, will rise up against
a living geometry ? Who will not, on the contrary, feel
moved with admiration at the sight of those grand powers
which, situated at the heart of things, incessantly urge
the blood through the limbs of the old world, disperse
it quickly in the infinite network of arteries, and spread
over the whole surface the eternal flower of youth and
beauty? Who, finally, will not feel himself ennobled,
when he finds that this pile of laws results in a regular
series of forms, that matter has thought for its goal,
that nature ends in reason, and that this ideal to which,
amidst so many errors, all the aspirations of men cling,
is also the end to which aim, amidst so many obstacles,
all the forces of the universe? In this employment, of
science, and in this conception of things, there is a new
art, a new morality, a new polity, a new religion, and
it is in the present time our task to try and discover
them.


GHAPTER: LL
The Past and the Present.


Siete
ix

Havine reached the limits of this long review, we
can now survey as a whole the aggregate of English
civilisation: everything is connected there: a few
primitive powers and circumstances have produced the
rest, and we have only to pursue their continuous
action in order to comprehend the nation and its his-
tory, its past and its present. At the beginning and
far away in the region of causes, comes the race. A
whole people, Angles and Saxons, destroyed, drove
away, or enslaved the old inhabitants, wiped out the
Roman culture, settled by themselves and unmixed,
and, amongst the later Danish pirates, only en-
countered a new reinforcement of the same blood.
This is the primitive stock: from its substance and
innate properties is to spring almost the whole future
growth. At this time and as they then were, alone in
their island, the Angles and Saxons attained a develop-
ment such as it was, rough, brutal, and yet solid.
They ate and drank, built and cleared the land, and, in
particular, multiplied: the scattered tribes who crossed
the sea in leather boats, became a strong compact nation,
—three hundred thousand families, rich, with store of


so ma od le


cHap, 11. THE PAST AND THE PRESENT. 71


cattle, abundantly provided with corporal subsistence,
partly at rest in the security of social life, with a king,
respected and frequent assemblies, good judicial customs :
here, amidst the fire and vehemence of barbarian tem-
perament, the old Germanic fidelity held men together,
whilst the old Germanic independence, held them
upright. In all else they barely advanced. A few
fragmentary songs, an epic in which still are to be found
traces of the warlike excitement of ancient barbarism,
gloomy hymns, a harsh and fierce poetry, sometimes
sublime and always rude,—this is all that remains of
them. In six centuries they had scarcely gone one
step beyond the manners and sentiments of their un-
civilised Germany: Christianity, which obtained a hold
on them by the greatness of its biblical tragedies and
the troubled sadness of its aspirations, did not bring
to them a Latin civilisation: this remained outside,
hardly accepted by a few great men, deformed, when it
did enter, by the difference between the Roman and
Saxon genius—always altered and reduced; so much
so, that for the men of the Continent these islanders
were but illiterate dullards, drunkards, and gluttons ;
at all events, savage and slow by mood and nature,
rebellious against culture, and sluggish in development.

The empire of this world belongs to force. These
people were conquered for ever and permanently,—
conquered by Normans, that is, by Frenchmen more
clever, more quickly cultivated and organised than
they. This is the great event which was to complete
their character, decide their history, and stamp upon
character and history an impress of the political and
practical spirit which separates them from other German
nations. Oppressed, enclosed in the unyielding meshes


72 - MODERN LIFE. BOOK IY.


of Norman organisation, they were not destroyed al-
though they were conquered, they were on their own
soil, each with his friends and in his tithings; they
formed a body; they were yet’ twenty times more
numerous than their conquerors. Their situation and
their necessities create their habits and their aptitudes.
They endure, protest, struggle, resist together and
unanimously; strive to-day, to-morrow, daily, not to
be slain or plundered, to restore their old laws, to
obtain or extort guarantees; and they gradually acquire
patience, judgment, all the faculties and inclinations by
which liberties are maintained and states are founded.
By a singular good fortune, the Norman lords assist them
in this; for the king hes secured to himself so much,
and is so formidable, that, in order to repress the
great pillager, the lesser ones are forced to make use
of theix Saxon subjects, to ally themselves with them,
to give them a share in their charters, to become
their representatives, to admit them into Parliament,
to leave them to labour freely, to grow rich, to acquire
pride, strength, authority, to interfere with themselves
in public affairs. Thus, then, gradually the English
nation, struck down by the Conquest to the ground, as if
with a mace, extricates and raises itself; five hundred
years and more being occupied in this re-elevation. But,
during all this time, leisure failed for refined and lofty
culture: it was needful to live and defend themselves,
to dig the ground, spin wool, practise the bow, attend
public meetings, serve on juries, to contribute and argue
for common interests: the important and respected man
is he who knows how to fight well and to gain much
money. It was the energetic and warlike manners
which were developed, the active and positive spirit


ow ey te


cpap. 1. THE PAST AND THE PRESENT. 73


which predominated; learning and elegance were left
to the Gallicised nobles of the court. When the valiant
Saxon townsfolk quitted bow and plough, it was to
feast copiously, or to sing the ballad of “ Robin Hood.”
They lived and acted; they did not reflect or write;
their national literature was reduced to fragments and
rudiments, harpers’ songs, tavern epics, a religious poem,
a few books on religious reformation. At the same
time Norman literature faded; separated from the
stem, and on a foreign soil, it languished in imitations ;
only one great poet, almost French in mind, quite
French in style, appeared, and, after him, as before him,
we find helpless drivel. For the second time, a civili-
sation of five centuries became sterile in great ideas
and works; this still more so than its neighbours, and
for a twofold reason,—because to the universal impot-
ence of the Middle-ages was added the impoverishment
of the Conquest, and because of the two component
literatures, one transplanted, became abortive, and the
other, mutilated, ceased to expand.


iT;


But amongst so many attempts and trials a cha-
racter was formed, and the rest was to spring from
it. The barbarous age established on the soil a Ger-
man race, phlegmatic and grave, capable of spiritual
emotions and moral discipline. The feudal age im-
posed on this race habits of resistance and association,
political and utilitarian prepossessions. Fancy a Ger-
man from Hamburg or Bremen confined for five
hundred years in the iron corslet of William the Con-
queror : these two natures, one innate, the other acquired


74 MODERN LIFE. BOOK IV.


constitute all the springs of his conduct. So it was in
other nations. Like runners drawn up in line at the
entrance of the arena, we see at the epoch of the Renais-
sance the five great peoples of Europe start, though we
are unable at first to foresee anything of their career.
At first sight it seems as if accidents or circumstances
will alone regulate their speed, their fall, and their
success. It is not so: from themselves alone their history
depends: each nation will be the artisan of its fortune ;
chance has no influence over events so vast; and it is
national tendencies and faculties which, overturning
or raising obstacles, will lead them, according to their
fate, each one to its goal,— some to the extreme of de-
cadence, others to the height of prosperity. After all,
man is ever his own master and his own slave. At
the outset of every age he in a certain fashion -7s: his
body, heart, mind have a distinct structure and dispo-
sition: and from this lasting arrangement, which all
preceding centuries have contributed to consolidate or
to construct, spring permanent desires or aptitudes, by
which he determines and acts. Thus is formed in him
the ideal model, which, whether obscure or distinct, com-
plete or rough-hewn, will henceforth float before his eyes,
rally all his aspirations, efforts, forces, and will cause him
to aim for centuries at one effect, until at length, renewed
by impotence or success, he conceives a new goal, and
assumes new energy. The Catholic and enthusiastic
Spaniard figures life like the Crusaders, lovers, knights,
and abandoning labour, liberty, and science, casts himself,
in the wake of the inquisition, and his king, into fanatical
war, romanesque slothfulness, superstitious and impas-
sioned obedience, voluntary and incurable ignorance.


1 Sev the Travels of Madame @ Aulnay in Spain, at the end of the


vet tl ih


cuap, ur. THE PAST AND THE PRESENT. 75


The theological and feudal German settles in his district
docilely and faithfully under his petty chief, through
natural patience and hereditary loyalty, engrossed by
his wife and household, content to have conquered re-
ligious liberty, clogged by the dulness of his tempera-
ment in gross physical existence, and in sluggish respect
for established order. The Italian, the most richly
gifted and precocious of all, but, of all, the most incap-
able of voluntary discipline and moral austerity, turns
towards the fine arts and voluptuousness, declines,
deteriorates beneath foreign rule, takes life at its
easiest, forgetting to think, and satisfied to enjoy. The
sociable and levelling Frenchman rallies round his king,
who secures for him public peace, external glory, the
splendid display of a sumptuous court, a regular ad-
ministration, a uniform discipline, a predominating
influence in Europe, and universal literature. So, if we
look at the Englishman in the sixteenth century, we
shall find in him the inclinations and the powers which
for three centuries are to govern his culture and shape
his constitution. In this European expansion of
natural existence and pagan literature we find at first
in Shakspeare, Ben Jonson, and the tragic poets, in
Spenser, Sidney, and the lyric poets, the national: feat-
ures, all with incomparable depth and splendour, and
such as race and history have impressed and implanted
in them for a thousand years. Not in vain did inva-
sion settle here so serious a race, capable of reflection.
Not in vain did the Conquest turn this race toward
seventeenth century. Nothing is more striking than this revolution, if
we compare it with the times before Ferdinand the Catholic, namely,
the reign of Henry IV., the great power of the nobles, and the inde-


pendence of the towns. Read about this history, Buckle’s History of
Civilisation, 1867, 3 vols., ii. ch: viii.


76 ~ MODERN LIFE. BOOK IY.


warlike life and practical preoccupations. From the
first rise of original invention, its work displays the
tragic energy, the intense and disorderly passion, the
disdain of regularity, the knowledge of the real, the
sentiment of inner things, the natural melancholy, the
anxious divination of the obscure beyond,—all the
instincts which, forcing man upon himself, and con-
centrating him within himself, prepare him for Pro-
testantism and combat. What is this Protestantism
which establishes itself? What is this ideal model
which it presents; and what ‘original conception is to
furnish to this-people its permanent and dominant
poem? The harshest and most practical of all—that
of the Puritans, which, neglecting speculation, falls back
upon action, encloses human life in a rigid discipline,
imposes on the soul continuous efforts, prescribes to
society a cloistral austerity, forbids pleasure, com-
mands action, exacts sacrifice, and forms a moralist,
a labourer, a citizen. Thus is it implanted, the great
English idea—I mean the conviction that man is before
all a free and moral personage, and that, having con-
ceived alone in his conscience and before God the rule
of his conduct, he must employ himself entirely in
applying it within himself, beyond himself, obstinately,
inflexibly, by offering a perpetual resistance to others,
and imposing a perpetual restraint upon himself. In
vain will this idea at first bring discredit upon itself by
its transports and its tyranny; weakened by practice,
it will gradually accommodate itself to humanity,
and, carried from Puritan fanaticism to laic morality,
it will win all public sympathy, because it answers
to all the national instincts. In vain it will vanish
from high society, under the scorn of the Restora-


cHaP. 11. THE PAST AND THE PRESENT. 77


tion, and the importation of French culture; it subsists
underground. For French culture did not come to a
head in England: on this too alien soil it produced only
unhealthy, coarse, or imperfect fruit. Refined elegance
became low debauchery ; hardly expressed doubt became
brutal atheism ; tragedy failed, and was but declamation ;
comedy grew shameless, and was but a school of vice;
of this literature, there remained only studies of close
reasoning and good style; it was driven from the
public stage, together with the Stuarts, at the beginning
of the eighteenth century, and liberal and moral maxims
resumed the ascendency, which they -will not again
lose. For, with ideas, events have followed their course :
national inclinations have done their work in society
as in literature; and the English instincts have trans-
formed the constitution and politics at the same time
as the talents and minds. These rich tithings, these
valiant yeomen, these rude, well-armed citizens, well
fed, protected by their juries, wont to reckon on
themselves, obstinate, combative, sensible, such as the
English Middle-ages bequeathed them to modern Eng-
land, did not object if the king practised his temporary
tyranny on the classes above them, and oppressed
the nobility with a rigorous, despotism which the re-
collection of the Civil Wars and the danger of high
treason justified. But Henry VIII, and Elizabeth
herself were -obliged to follow in great interests the
current of public opinion: if they were strong, it was
because they were popular; the people only supported
their designs, and authorised their violences, because
they found in them defenders of their religion, and the
protectors of their labour The people themselves


1 Buckle, History of Civilisation, i. ch. vii.


78 ~ MODERN LIFE. BOOK Iv.


became immersed in this religion, and, from under a
State-church, attained to personal belief. They grew
rich by toil, and under the first Stuart already occupied
thehighest place in the nation. At this moment every-
thing was decided: whatever happened, they must
one day become masters. Social situations create poli-
tical situations ; legal constitutions always accommodate
themselves to real things; and acquired preponderance
infallibly results in written rights. "Men so numerous,
so active, so resolute, so capable of keeping themselves,
so disposed to educe their opinions from their own 7e-
flection, and their subsistence from their own efforts,
will under all circumstances seize the guarantees which
they need. At the first onset, and in the ardour of pri-
mitive faith, they overturn the throne, and the current
which bears them is so strong, that, in spite of their
excess and their failure, the Revolution is accomplished
by the abolition of feudal tenures, and the institution
of Habeas Corpus under Charles II.; by the universal
upheaving of the liberal and Protestant spirit, under
James Ii.; by the establishment of the constitution,
the act of toleration, the freedom of the press, under
William III. From that moment England had found
her proper place ; her two interior and hereditary forces
—moral and religious instinct, practical and political
aptitude—had done their work, and were henceforth
to build, without impediment or destruction, on the
foundation which they had laid.


Er


Thus was the literature of the eighteenth century
born, altogether conservative, useful, moral, and limited.


osaP, 1. THE PAST AND THE PRESENT. 79


Two powers direct it, one European, the other English:
on one side a talent of oratorical analysis and habits
of literary dignity, which belong to a classical age;
on the other, a taste for application and an energy
of precise observation, which are peculiar to the
national mind. Hence that excellence and origin-
ality of political satire, parliamentary discourse, solid
essays, moral novels, and all kinds of literature which
demand an attentive good sensé, a correct good style,
and a talent for advising, convincing, or wounding
others. Hence that weakness or impotence of specula-
tive thought, of genuine poetry, of original drama, and
of all the kinds which require a grand, free curiosity,
or a grand, disinterested imagination. The English
did not attain complete elegance, nor superior philo-
sophy ; they dulled the French refinements which they
copied, and were terrified by the French boldness which
they suggested; they remained half cockneys and half
barbarians; they only invented insular ideas and
English ameliorations, and were confirmed in their
respect for their constitution and their tradition. But,
at the same time, they cultivated and reformed them-
selves: their wealth and comfort increased enormously ;
literature and opinion became severe and even in-
tolerant; their long war against the French Revolu-
tion caused their morality to become strict and even
immoderate; whilst the invention of machinery de-
veloped their comfort and prosperity a hundredfold.
A salutary and despotic code of approved maxims,
established proprieties, and unassailable beliefs, which
fortifies, strengthens, curbs, and employs man_ use-
fully and painfully, without permitting him ever to
deviate or grow weak; a minute apparatus, and an


80 MODERN LIFE. BOOK IV.


admirable provision of commodious inventions, associa-
tions, institutions, mechanisms, implements, methods,
which incessantly co-operate to furnish body and mind
with all which they need,—such are henceforth the
leading and special features of this people. To con-
strain themselves and to provide for themselves, to
govern themselves and nature, to consider life as
moralists and economists, like a close garment, in
which people must walk becomingly, and like a good
garment, the best to be had, to be at once respectable
and comfortable : these two words embrace all the main-
springs of English actions. Against this limited good
sense, and this pedantic austerity, a revolt broke out.
With the universal renewal of thought and imagination,
the deep poetic source, which flowed in the sixteenth
century, seeks anew an outlet in the nineteenth, and a
fresh literature springs up; philosophy and history in-
filtrate their doctrines into the old establishment; the
greatest poet of the time shocks it incessantly with his
curses and sarcasms; from all sides, to this day, in
science and letters, in practice and theory, in private
and in public life, the most powerful minds endeavour
to open up a new channel to the stream of continental
ideas. But they are patriots as well as innovators, con-
servative as well as revolutionary; if they touci religion
and constitution, manners and doctrines, it is to widen,
not to destroy them: England is made; she knows it,
and they know it. Such as this country is, based on
the whole national history and on all the national
instincts, it is more capable than any other people in
Europe of transforming itself without recasting, and of
devoting itself to its future without renouncing its
past, "Ss


ee


cHap, 1. THE PAST AND THE PRESENT. 81


§ 2.
I;

I began to perceive these ideas when I first landed
in England, and I was singularly struck how they
were corroborated, by observation and history ; it seemed
to me that the present was completing the past, and the
past explained the present.

At first the sea troubles and strikes a man with
wonder; not in vain is a people insular and maritime,
especially with such a sea and such coasts; their painters,
not very gifted, perceive, in spite of all, its alarming
and gloomy aspect; up to the eighteenth century,
amidst the elegance of French culture, and under the
joviality of Flemish tradition, we will find in Gains-
borough the ineffaceable stamp of this great sentiment.
In pleasant moments, in the fine calm summer days,
the moist fog stretches over the horizon its pearl-grey
veil; the sea has a pale slate colour; and the ships,
spreading their canvas, advance patiently through the
mist. But let us look around, and we will soon see
the signs of daily peril. The coast is eaten out, the
waves have encroached, the trees have vanished, the
earth is softened by incessant showers, the ocean is
here, ever intractable and fierce. It growls and bellows
eternally, that old hoarse monster; and the barking
pack of its waves advances like an endless army, before
which all human force must give way. Think of the
winter months, the storms, the long hours of the
tempest-tossed sailor whirled about blindly by the
squalls! Now, and in this fine season, over the whole
circle of the horizon, rise the dull, wan, clouds, soon
like the smoke of a coal-fite, some of a frail and dazzling

VOL. IV, G


82 MODERN LIFE. BOOK IY.


white, so swollen that they seem ready to burst. Their
heavy masses creep slowly along; they are gorged, and
already here and there on the limitless plain a patch of
sky is shrouded in a sudden shower. After an instant,
the sea becomes dirty and cadaverous; its waves leap
with strange gambols, and their sides take an oily
and livid tint. The vast grey dome drowns and hides
the whole horizon; the rain falls, close and pitiless.
We cannot have an idea of it, until we have seen it.
When the southern men, the Romans, came here for
the first time, they must have thought themselves in
the infernal regions. The wide space between earth
and sky, and on which our eyes dwell as their domain,
suddenly fails; there is no more air, we see but a flow-
ing mist. No more colours or forms. In this yellowish
smoke, objects look like fading ghosts; nature seems a
bad crayon-drawing, over which a child has awkwardly
smeared his sleeve. Here we are at Newhaven, then
at London; the sky disgorges rain, the earth returns
her mist, the mist floats in the rain; all is swamped:
looking round us, we see no reason why it should ever
end. Here, truly, is Homer's Cimmerian land: our
feet splash, we have no use left for our eyes; we feel
all our organs stopped up, becoming rusty by the mount-
ing damp; we think ourselves banished from the
breathing world, reduced to the condition of marshy
beings dwelling in dirty pools: to live here is not life.
We ask ourselves if this vast town is not a cemetery,
in which dabble busy and wretched ghosts. Amidst
the deluge of moist soot, the muddy stream with its
unwearying iron ships, like black insects which take on
board and land shades, makes us think of the Styx.
As there is no light, they create it: Lately, in a large


ote he


cHAP. ul, THE PAST AND THE PRESENT, 83


square in London, in the finest hotel, it was necessary
to leave the gas alight for five days running. We
bécome melancholy ; we are disgusted with others and
with ourselves. What can people do in this sepulchre ?
To remain at home without working is to gnaw one’s
vitals, and to prepare one’s self for suicide. To go out is
to make an effort, to care neither for damp nor cold, to
brave discomfort and unpleasant sensations. Such a
climate prescribes action, forbids sloth, develops energy,
teaches patience. I was looking just now on the steam-
boat at the sailors at the helm,—their tarpaulins, their
great streaming boots, their sou’-westers, so attentive, so
precise in their movements, so grave, so sélf-contained.
I have since seen workmen at their looms,—caim, seri-
ous, silent, economising their efforts, and persevering all
day, all the year, all their life, in the same regular and
monotonous struggle of mind and body: their soul is
suited to their climate. Indeed it must be so in order
to live: after a week, we feel that here a man must
renounce refined and heartfelt enjoyment, the happiness
of eareless life, complete idleness, the easy and harmoni-
ous expansion of artistic and animal nature; that here
he must marry, bring up a house-full of children, assume
the cares and importance of a family man, grow rich,
provide against an evil day, surround himself with
comfort, become a Protestant, a manufacturer, a politi-
cian; in short, capable of activity and resistance; and
in all the ways open to men, endure and strive.

Yet there are charming and touching beauties here
—those, to wit, of a well-watered land. When, on
a partly clear day, we take a drive into the country
and reach an eminence, our eyes experience a unique
sensation, and a pleasure hitherto unknown. In the


84 ~ MODERN LIFE. BOOK IV.


far distance, wherever we look on the horizon, in
the fields, on the hills, spreads the always visible
verdure, plants for fodder and food, clover, hops ; lovely
meadows overflowing with high thick grass; here and
there a cluster of lofty trees; pasture lands hemmed
in with hedges, in which the heavy cows ruminate
in peace. The mist rises insensibly between the
trees, and in the distance float luminous vapours.
There is nothing sweeter in the world, nor more delicate,
than these tints; we might pause for hours together
gazing on these pearly clouds, this fine aerial down,
this soft transparent gauze which imprisons the rays of
the sun, dulls them, and lets them reach the ground
only to smile on it and to caress it. On both sides
of our carriage pass before our eyes incessantly meadows
each more lovely than the last, in which buttercups,
meadow-sweet, Easter-daisies, are crowded in succession
with their dissolving hues; a sweetness almost painful,
a strange charm, breathes from this inexhaustible and
transient vegetation. It is too fresh, it cannot last;
nothing here is staid, stable and firm, as in the South;
all is fleeting, springing up, or dying away, hovering
betwixt tears and joy. The rolling water-drops shine
on the leaves like pearls; the round tree-tops, the
widespread foliage, whisper in the feeble breeze, and
the sound of the falling tears left by the last shower
never ceases. How well these plants thrive in the
glades, spread out wantonly, ever renewed and watered
by the moist air! How the sap mounts in these
plants, refreshed and protected against the weather!
And how sky and land seem made to guard their tissue
and refresh their hues! At the least glimpse of sun
they smile with delicious charm; we would call them


~


cuap. 11. THE PAST AND THE PRESENT. 85


delicate and timid virgins under a veil about to be
raised. Let the sun for an instant emerge, and we
will see them grow resplendent as in a ball dress,
The light falls in dazzling sheets; the lustrous golden
petals shine with a too vivid colour; the most splendid
embroideries, velvet starred with diamonds, sparkling
silk seamed with pearls, are not to be compared to this
deep hue; joy overflows like a brimming cup. In the
strangeness and the rarity of this spectacle, we under-
stand for the first time the life of a humid land. The
water multiplies and softens the living tissues; plants
increase, and have no substance: nourishment abounds,
and has no savour; moisture fructifies, but the sun does
not fertilise. Much grass, much cattle, much meat; large
quantities of coarse food: thus an absorbing and phleg-
matic temperament is supported; the human growth,
like the animal and vegetable, is powerful, but heavy ;
man is amply but coarsely framed; the machine is solid,
but it turns slowly on its hinges, and the hinges gener-
ally creak and are rusty. When we look at the people
closer, it seems that their various parts are independent,
at least that they need time to let sensations pass
through them. Their ideas do not at first break out in
passions, gestures, actions. As in the Fleming and the
German, they dwell first of all in the brain; they ex-
pand there, they rest there ; man is not shaken by them,
he has no difficulty in remaining motionless, he is not
rapt: he can act wisely, uniformly ; for his inner motive
power is an idea or a watchword, not an emotion or an
attraction. He can bear tedium, or rather he does not
weary himself; his ordinary course consists of dull
sensations, and the insipid monotony of mechanical life
has nothing which need repel him. He is accustomed


86 ~ MODERN LIFE. BOOK Iv.


to it, his nature is suited for it. When a man has all
his life eaten turnips, he does not wish for oranges.
He will readily resign himself to hear fifteen consecutive
discourses on the same subject, demanding for twenty
years the same reform, compiling statistics, studying
moral treatises, keeping Sunday schools, bringing up a
dozen children. The piquant, the agreeable, are not a
necessity to him. The weakness of his sensitive im-
pulses contributes to the force of his moral impulses.
His temperament makes him argumentative; he can get
on without policemen; the shocks of man against man
do not here end in explosions. He can discuss in the
market-place aloud, religion and politics, hold meetings,
form associations, rudely attack men in office, say that
the Constitution is violated, predict the ruin of the State:
there is no objection to this; his nerves are calm; he
will argue without cutting throats; he will not raise
revolutions; and perhaps he will obtain a reform.
Observe the passers-by in the streets; in three hours
we will see all the visible features of this temperament:
light hair, in children almost white; pale eyes, often
blue as Wedgwood-ware, red whiskers, a tall figure, the
motions of an automaton; and with these other still
more striking features, those which strong food and com-
bative life have added to this temperament. Here
the enormous guardsman, with rosy complexion, majestic,
slightly bent, who struts along twirling a little cane in
his hand, displaying his chest, and showing a clear
parting between his pomaded hair; there the over-fed
stout man, short, sanguine, like an animal fit for the
shambles, with his startled, dazed, yet sluggish air; a
little further on the country gentleman, six feet high,
stout and tall, like the German who left his forest,


cHar, in, THE PAST AND THE PRESENT, 87


with the muzzle and nose of a bull-dog, tremendous
savage-looking whiskers, rolling eyes, apoplectic face;
these are the excesses of coarse blood and food; add to
which, even in the women, the white front teeth of a
carnivorous animal, and big feet solidly shod, excellent
for walking in the mud. Again, look at the young
men in a cricket match or picnic party ; doubtless mind
does not sparkle in their eyes, but life abounds there;
there is something cf decision and energy in their
whole being; healthy and active, ready for motion,
for enterprise, these are the words which rise involun-
tarily to our lips when we speak of them. Many
look like fine, slender harriers, sniffing the air, and in
full cry. A life passed in gymnastic exercises or in
venturesome deeds is honoured in England; they must
move their body, swim, throw the ball, run in the damp
meadow, row, breathe in their boats the briny sea-
vapour, feel on their foreheads the raindrops falling
from the large oak trees, leap their horses over ditches
and gates; the animal instincts are intact. They still
relish natural pleasures; precocity has not spoiled
them. Nothing can be simpler than the young English
girls; amidst many beautiful things, there are few so
beautiful in the world; slim, strong, self-assured, so
fundamentally honest and loyal, so free from coquetry !
A man cannot imagine, if he has not seen it, this fresh-
ness and innocence; many of them are flowers, ex-
panded flowers; only a morning rose, with its transient
and Gelicious colour, with its petals drenched in dew,
can give us an idea of it; it leaves far behind the
beauty of the South, and its precise, stable, finished
contours, its well-defined outlines; here wo perceive
fragility, delicacy, the continual budding of life; candid


88 ~ MODERN LIFE. BOOK IV.


eyes, blue as periwinkles, looking at us without think-
ing of our look. At the least stirring of the soul, the
blood rushes in purple waves into these girls’ cheeks,
neck, and shoulders; we see emotions pass over these
transparent complexions, as the colours change in the
meadows; and their modesty is so virginal and sincere,
that we are tempted to lower our eyes from respect.
And yet, natural and frank as they are, they are not
languishing or dreamy; they love and endure exercise
like their brothers; with flowing locks, at six years they
ride on horseback and take long walks. Active life in
this country strengthens the phlegmatic temperament,
and the heart is kept more simple whilst the body
grows healthier. Another observation: far above all
these figures one type stands out, the most truly English,
the most striking to a foreigner. Post yourself for an
hour, early in the morning, at the terminus of a railway,
and observe the men above thirty who come to London
on business: the features are drawn, the faces pale, the
eyes steady, preoccupied; the mouth open and, as it
were, contracted; the man is tired, worn out, and
hardened by too much work; he runs without looking
round him. His whole existence is directed to a single
end; he must incessantly exert himself to the utmost,
practise the same exertion, a profitable one; he has
become a machine. This is especially visible in work-
men; perseverance, obstinacy, resignation, are depicted
on their long bony and dull faces. I¢ is still more
visible in women of the lower orders: many are thin,
consumptive, their eyes hollow, their nose sharp, their
skin streaked with red patches; they have suffered too
much, have had too many children, have a washed-out,
or oppressed, or submissive, or stoically impassive air;


cHaP. ur. THE PAST AND THE PRESENT. 89


we feel that they have endured much, and can endure
still more. Even in the middle or upper class this
patience and sad hardening are frequent; we think
when we see them of those poor beasts of burden, de-
formed by the harness, which remain motionless under
the falling rain without thinking of shelter. Verily the
battle of life is harsher and more obstinate here than
elsewhere; whoever gives way, falls. Beneath the
rigour of climate and competition, amidst the strikes of
industry, the weak, the improvident, perish or are
degraded; then comes gin and does its work; thence
the long files of wretched women who sell themselves
by night in the Strand to pay their rent; thence those
shameful quarters of: London, Liverpool, all the great
towns, those spectres in tatters, gloomy or drunk, who
crowd the dram-shops, who fill the streets with their
dirty linen, and their rags hung out on ropes, who
lie on a soot-heap, amidst troops of wan children;
horrible shoals, whither descend all whom their wounded,
idle, or feeble arms could not keep on the surface of
the great stream. The chances of life are tragic here,
and the punishment of improvidence cruel. We soon
understand why, under this obligation to fight and
grow hard, fine sensations disappear; why taste is
blunted, how man becomes ungraceful and stiff; how
discords, exaggerations, mar the costume and the fashion;
why movements and forms become finally energetic and
discordant, like the motions of a machine. If the man
is German by race, temperament, and mind, he has
been compelled in process of time to fortify, alter,
altogether turn aside his original nature; he is no
longer a primitive animal, but a well-trained animal ;
his body and mind have been transformed by strong


90 ~ MODERN LIFE. ROOK IV.


food, by bodily exercise, by austere religion, by public
morality, by political strife, by perpetuity of effort ;
he has become of all men the most capable of acting
usefully and powerfully in all directions, the most
productive and effectual labourer, as his ox has be-
come the best animal for food, his sheep the best for
wool, his horse the best for racing.


lap


Indeed, there is no greater spectacle than his work ;
in no age or amongst no nation on the earth, I believe,
has matter ever been better handled and utilised. If we
enter London by water, we see an accumulation of toil
and work which has no equal on this planet. Paris, by
comparison, is but an elegant city of pleasure ; the Seine,
with its quays, a pretty serviceable plaything. Here
all is vast. I have seen Marseilles, Bordeaux, Amster-
dam, but I had no idea of such a mass. From Green-
wich to London the two shores are a continuous wharf:
merchandise is always being piled up, sacks hoisted,
ships moored; ever new warehouses for copper, beer,
ropework, tar, chemicals. Docks, timber-yards, calking-
basins, and shipbuilders’ yards, multiply and encroach on
each other. On the left there is the iron framework of a
church being finished, to be sent to India. The Thames
is a mile broad, and is but a populous street of vesseis,
a winding workyard. Steamboats, sailing vessels, ascend
and descend, come to anchor in groups of two, three,
ten, then in long files, then in dense rows; there are
five or six thousand of them at anchor. On the right,
the docks, like so many intricate, maritime streets, dis-
gorge or store up the vessels. If-we get on a height,


cHap. ur. THE PAST AND THE PRESENT. 91


we see vessels in the distance by hundreds and thousands,
fixed as if on the land; their masts in a line, . their
slender rigging,make a spider-web which girdles the hori-
zon. Yet on the river itself, towards the west, we see an
inextricable forest of masts, yards, and cables; the ships
are unloading, fastened to one another, mingled with
chimneys, amongst the pulleys of the storehouses, cranes,
capstans, and all the implements of the vast and cease-
less toil. A foggy smoke, penetrated by the sun,.wraps
them in its russet veil; it is the heavy and smoky air
of a big hot-house; soil and man, light and air, all is
transformed by work. If we enter one of these docks,
the impression will be yet more overwhelming: each
resembles a town; always ships, still more ships, in a
line, showing their heads; their wide sides, their copper
chests, like monstrous fishes under their breastplate of
scales. When we are on the ground, we see that this
breastplate is fifty feet high; many ships are of three
thousand or four thousand tons. Clippers three hundred
feet long are on the point of sailing for Australia,
Ceylon, America. A bridge is raised by machinery ;
it weighs a hundred tons, and only one man is needed
to raise it. Here are the wine stores—there are thirty
thousands tuns of port in the cellars; here the place
for hides, here for tallow, here for ice. The store for
groceries extends as far as the eye can see, colossal,
sombre as a picture by Rembrandt, filled with enormous
vats, and crowded with many men, who move about in
-the flickering shade. The universe tends to this centre.
Like a heart, to which blood flows, and from which
it pours, money, goods, business arrive hither from the
four quarters of the globe, and flow thence to the distant
poles. And this circulation seems natural, so well is


92 MODERN LIFE. BOOK IV.


it conducted. The cranes turn noiselessly; the tuns
seem to move of themselves; a little car rolls them at
-once, and without effort ; the bales descend by their own
weight on the inclined planes, which lead them to their
place. Clerks, without flurry, call out the numbers ;
men push or pull without confusion, calmly, husbanding
their labour; whilst the stolid master, in his black hat,
gravely, with spare gestures, and without one word,
directs the whole.

Now let us take rail and go to Glasgow, Birmingham,
Liverpool, Manchester, to see their industry. As we
advance into the coal country, the air is darkened
with smoke; the chimneys, high as obelisks, are in
hundreds, and cover the plain as far as we can see;
many and various rows of lofty buildings, in red mono-
tonous brick, pass before our eyes, like files of economi-
cal and busy beehives. The blast-furnaces flame through
the smoke; I counted sixteenin one group. The refuse
of minerals is heaped up lke mountains; the engines
run like black ants, with monotonous and violent mo-
tion, and suddenly we find ourselves swallowed up ina
monstrous town. This manufactory has five thousand
hands, one mill 300,000 spindles. The Manchester
warehouses are Babylonian edifices of six storeys high,
and. wide in proportion. In Liverpool there are 5000
ships along the Mersey, which choke one another up;
more wait to enter. The docks are six miles long, and
the cotton warehouses on the side extend their vast
red rampart out of sight. All things here seem built
in unmeasured proportions, and as though by colossal
arms. We enter a mill; nothing but iron pillars, as
thick as tree-trunks, cylinders as big as a man; loco-
motive shafts like vast oaks, notching machines which


cHap. 11. THE PAST AND THE PRESENT, 93


send up iron chips, rollers which bend sheet-iron like
paste, fly-wheels which become invisible by the swift-
ness of their revolution. Eight workmen, commanded.
by a kind of peaceful colossus, pushed into and pulled
from the fire a tree of red-hot iron as big as my body.
Coal has produced all this. England produces twice
as much coal as the rest of the world. It has also
brick, on account of the great schists, which are close to
the surface ; it has also estuaries filled by the sea, so as
to make natural ports. Liverpool and Manchester, and
about ten towns of 40,000 to 100,000 souls, are
springing up in the basin gf Lancashire. If we glance
over a geological map we see whole parts shaded with
black ; they represent the Scotch, the North of England,
the Midland, the Welsh, the Irish coal districts. The
old antediluvian forests, accumulating here their fuel,
have stored up the power which moves matter, and the
sea furnishes the true road by which matter can be tran-
sported. Man himself, mind and body, seems created to
make the most of these advantages. His muscles are
firm, and his mind can support tedium. He is less sub-
ject to weariness and disgust than other men. He works
as well in the tenth hour as in the first. No one handles
machines better; he has their regularity and precision.
Two workmen in a cotton-mill do the work of three, or
even four, French workmen. Let us look now in the sta-
tistics how many leagues of stuffs they manufacture every
year, how many millions of tons they export and import,
how many tens of millions they produce and consume ;
let us add the industrial or commercial states they have
founded, or are founding, in America, China, India,
Australia ; and then perhaps, reckoning men and money-
value,—considering that their capital is seven or eight


94 ~ MODERN LIFE. BOOK IV.


times greater than that of France, that their population
has doubled in fifty years, that their colonies, wher-
ever the climate is healthy, are becoming new Englands,
—we will obtain some notion, very slight, very im-
perfect, of a work whose magnitude the eyes alone can
measure.

There remains yet one of its parts to explore, the
cultivation of the land. From the railway carriage we
see quite enough to understand it: a field with a
hedge, then another field with another hedge, and so
on: at times vast squares of turnips; all this well
laid out, clean, glossy; no forests, here and there only
a cluster of trees. The country is a great kitchen-
garden—-a manufactory of grass and meat. Nothing is
left to nature and chance; all is calculated, regulated,
arranged to produce and to bring in profits. If we
look at the peasants, we find no genuine peasants;
nothing like French peasants,—a sort of fellahs, akin
to the soil, mistrustful and uncultivated, separated by
a gulf from the townsmen. The countryman here is
like an artisan; and, in fact, a field is a manufactory,
with a farmer for the foreman. Proprietors and farmers,
lavish their capital like great contractors. They drain
the land, and have a rotation of crops; they have pro-
duced cattle, the richest in returns of any in the world ;
they have introduced steam-engints into cultivation,
and into the rearing of cattle; they perfect already
perfect stables. The greatest-of the aristocracy take
a pride in it; many country gentlemen have no other
occupation. Prince Albert, near Windsor, had a model
farm, and this farm brought in money. A few years
ago the papers announced that the Queen had dis-
covered a cure for the turkey-disease. Under this uni-


cHAP. 11. THE PAST AND THE PRESENT. 95


versal effort,’ the products of agriculture have doubled
in fifty years. In England, two and a half acres (hectare)
receive eight or ten times -more manure than the same
number of French acres; though of inferior quality, the
produce is double that of the French. Thirty persons are
enough for this work, when in France forty would be re-
quired for half thereof. We.come upon a farm, even a
small one, say of a hundred acres; we find respect-
able, dignified, well-clad men, who express themselves
clearly and sensibly; a large, wholesome, comfortable
dwelling—often a little porch, with creepers—a well-
kept garden, ornamental trees, the inner walls white-
washed yearly, the floors washed weekly,—an almost
Dutch cleanliness; therewith plenty of books—travels,
treatises on agriculture, a few volumes of religion or
history ; and above all, the great family Bible. Even
in the poorest cottages we find a few objects of comfort
and recreation; a large cast-iron stove, a carpet, nearly
always paper on the walls, one or two moral tales,
and always the Bible. The cottage is clean; the habits
are orderly ; the plates, with their blue pattern, regularly
arranged, look well above the shining dresser; the red
floor-tiles have been swept; there are no broken or dirty
panes; no doors off hinges, shutters unhung, stagnant
pools, straggling dunghills, as amongst the French
villagers; the little garden is kept free from weeds;
frequently roses and honeysuckle round the door; and
on Sunday we can see the father and mother, seated by
a well-scrubbed table, with tea, bread and butter, enjoy-
ing their home, and the order they have established
there. In France the peasant on Sunday leaves his hut
to visit Ais land: what he aspires to is possession ;


1 Léonce de Lavergne Hconomte rurale en Angleterre, passim.


96 “MODERN LIFE. BOOK Iv,


what Englishmen love is comfort. There is no land in
which they demand more in this respect. An English-
man said to me, not very long ago: “ Our great vice is
the strong desire we feel for all good and comfortable
things. We have too many wants, we spend too much.
As soon as our peasants have a little money, they buy
the best sherry and the best clothes they can get, instead
of buying a bit of land.”?

As we rise to the upper classes, this taste becomes
stronger. In the middle ranks a man burdens himself
with toil, to give his wife gaudy dresses, and to fill his
house with the hundred thousand baubles of quasi-
luxury. Higher still, the inventions of comfort are so
multiplied that people are bored by them; there are
too many newspapers and reviews on the table ;- too
many kinds of carpets, washstands, matches, towels
in the dressing-room ; their refinement is endless; in
thrusting our feet into slippers, we might imagine that
twenty generations of inventors were required to bring
sole and lining to this degree of perfection. We cannot
conceive clubs better furnished with necessaries and
superfluities, houses so well arranged and managed,
pleasure and abundance so cleverly understood, ser-
vants so reliable, respectful, handy. Servants in the
last census were “the most numerous class of Her
Majesty’s subjects ;” in England there are five where
in France they have two. When I saw in Hyde Park
the rich young ladies, the gentlemen riding or driving,

2 De Foe was of the same opinion, and pretended that economy was
not an English virtue, and that an Englishman can hardly live with
twenty shillings a weck, while a Dutchman with the same money be-
comes wealthy, and leaves his children very well off. An English


labourer lives poor and wretchedly with nine shillings a week, whilst
a Dutchman lives very comfortably with the same wages,


cuap, 11, THE PAST AND THE PRESENT. 97


when I thought of their country houses, their dress,
their parks and stables, I said to myself that verily this
people is constituted after the heart of economists: I
mean, that it is the greatest producer and the greatest
consumer in the world; that none is more apt at
squeezing out and absorbing the quintessence of things ;
that it has developed its wants at the same time as its
resources ; and we involuntarily think of those insects
which, after their metamorphosis, are suddenly provided
with teeth, feelers, unwearying claws, admirable and
terrible instruments, fitted to dig, saw, build, do every-
thing, but furnished also with incessant hunger and
four stomachs.
III.

How is this ant-hill governed? As the train moves
on, we perceive, amidst farms and tilled lands, the
long wall of a park, the frontage of a castle, more gene-
rally of some vast ornate mansion, a sort of country
town-house, of inferior architecture, Gothic or Italian
pretensions, but surrounded: by beautiful lawns, large
trees scrupulously preserved. Here lives the rich bour-
geois; I am wrong, the word is false—iI must say
gentleman : bourgeois is a French word, and signifies the
lazy parvenus, who devote themselves to rest, and take
no part in public life; here it is quite different; the
hundred or hundred and twenty thousand families, who
spend a thousand and more annually, really govern
the country. And this is no government imported, im-
planted artificially and from without; it is a: spon-
taneous and natural government. As soon as men
wish to act together, they need leaders; every associa-
tion, voluntary or not, has one; whatever it be, state,
army, ship, or parish, it cannot do without a guide to

VOL. IVs: H


98 MODERN LIFE. BOOK iv.


find the road, to take the lead, call the rest, scold the
laggards. In vain we call ourselves independent; as
soon as we march in a body, we need a leader; we
look right and left expecting him to show himself.
The great thing is to pick him out, to have the best,
and not to follow another in his stead; it is a great
advantage that there should be one, and that we should
acknowledge him. These-men, without popular elec-
tion, or selection from government, find him ready made
and recognised in the large landed proprietor, a man
whose family has been long in the county, influential
through his connections, dependents, tenantry, interested
above all else by his great estates in the affairs of the
neighbourhood, expert in directing these affairs which his
family have managed for three generations, most fitted by
education to give good advice, and by his influence to
lead the common enterprise to a good result. Indeed, it
is thus that things fall out; rich men leave London by
hundreds every day to spend a day in the country ; there
is a meeting on the affairs of the county or of the church ;
they are magistrates, overseers, presidents of all kinds of
societies, and this gratuitously. One has built a bridge
at his own expense, another a chapel or a school; many
establish public libraries, where books are lent out,
with warmed and lighted rooms, in which the villagers
in the evening can read the papers, play draughts,
chess, and have tea at low charges,—in a word, simple
amusements which may keep them from the public-
house and gin-shop. Many of them give lectures;
their sisters or daughters teach in Sunday schools; in
fact, they provide for the ignorant and poor, at their
own expense, justice, administration, civilisation. I
know a very rich man, who in his Sunday school


cHAP, ur, THE PAST AND THE PRESENT, 99


taught singing to little girls. Lord Palmerston offered
his park for archery meetings ; the Duke of Marlborough
opens his daily to the public, “requesting,” this is the
word used, “the public not to destroy the grass.” A firm
and proud sentiment of duty, a genuine public spirit, a
noble idea of what a gentleman owes to himself, gives
them a moral superiority which sanctions their com-
mand; probably from the time of the old Greek cities, no
education or condition has been seen in which the innate
nobility of man has received a more wholesome or com-
pleter development. In short, they are magistrates and
patrons from their birth, leaders of the great enterprises
in which capital is risked, promoters of all charities,
all improvements, all reforms, and with the honours
of command they accept its burdens. For observe, in
contrast with the aristoeracies of other countries, they are
well educated, liberal, and march in the van, not in the
rear of public civilisation. They are not drawing-room
exquisites, like the French marquises of the eighteenth
century: an English lord visits his fisheries, studies the
system of liquid manures, speaks to the purpose about
cheese ; and his son is often a better rower, walker, and
boxer than the farmers. They are not malcontents, like
the French nobility, behind their age, devoted to whist,
and regretting the middle-ages. They have travelled
through Europe, and often further ; they know languages
and literature; their daughters read Schiller, Manzoni,
and Lamartine with ease. By means of reviews, news-
papers, innumerable volumes of geography, statistics,
and travels, they have the world at their finger-ends.
They support and preside over scientific societies; if
the free inquirers of Oxford, amidst conventional rigour,
have been able t6 give their explanations of the Bible,


100 MODERN LIFE. BOOK IV.


it is because they knew themselves to be backed by
enlightened laymen of the highest rank. There is
also no danger that this aristocracy should become
a set; it renews itself; a great physician, a profound
lawyer, an illustrious general, become ennobled and
found families. When a manufacturer or merchant
has gained a large fortune, he first thinks of acquiring
an estate; after two or three generations his family has
taken roct and shares in the government of the country :
in this way the best saplings of the great popular forest
fill up the aristocratic nursery. Observe, finally, that
an aristocracy in England is not an isolated fact. LEvery-
where there are leaders recognised, respected, followed
* with confidence and deference, who feel their responsi-
bility, and carry the burden as well as the advantages
of the dignity. Such an aristocracy exists in marriage,
where the man incontestably rules, followed by his
wife to the end of the world, faithfully waited for in
the evenings, unshackled in his business, of which he
does not speak, There is such in the family, when the
father’ can disinherit his children, and keeps up with
them, in the most petty circumstances of daily life, a
degree of authority and dignity unknown in France: if
in England a son, through ill-health, has been away for
some time from his home, he dare not come into the
country to see his father without first asking if he may
come; a servant to whom I gave my card refused to
take it, saying, “Oh! I dare not hand it in now.
Master is dining.” There is respect in all ranks, in the
workshops as well as in the fields, in the army as in
the family. Throughout there are inferiors and


1 In familiar language, the father is called in England the gover-
nor; in France Je banquwier.


cHAP. 11, THE PAST AND THE PRESENT. 101


superiors who feel themselves so; if the mechanism of
established power were thrown out of gear, we should
behold it reconstructed of itself; below the legal con-
stitution is the social, and human action is forced into
a solid mould prepared for it.

It is because this aristocratic network is strong
that human action can be free; for local and natural
government being rooted throughout, like ivy, by a
hundred small, ever-growing fibres, sudden movements,
violent as they are, are not capable of pulling it up
altogether. In vain men speak, cry out, call meetings,
hold processions, form leagues: they will not demolish
the state; they have not to deal with a set of function-
aries who have no real hold on the country, and who,
like all external applications, can be replaced by another
set: the thirty or forty gentlemen of a district, rich,
influential, trusted, useful as they are, will become the
leaders of the district. “As we see in the papers,”
says Montesquieu, speaking of England, “that they are
playing the devil, we fancy that the people will revolt
to-morrow.” Not at all, it is their way of speaking;
they only talk loudly and rudely. Two days after I
arrived in London, I saw advertising men walking with
a placard on their backs and their stomachs, bearing
these words: “Great usurpation! Outrage of the
Lords, in their vote on the budget, against the rights
of the people.” But then the placard added, “ Fellow-
countrymen, petition!” Things end thus; they argue
freely, and if the reasoning is good it will spread.
Another time in Hyde Park, orators were declaiming
in the open air against the Lords, who were called
rogues. The audience applauded or hissed, as it pleased
them. “After all,” said an Englishman to me, “ this


102 ‘MODERN LIFE. BOOK IV.


is how we manage our business. With us, when a
man has an idea, he writes it; a dozen men think it
good, and all contribute money to publish it; this
creates a little association, which grows, prints cheap
pamphlets, gives lectures, then petitions, calls forth
public opinion, and at last takes the matter into Parlia-
ment; Parliament refuses or delays it; yet the matter
gains weight: the majority of the nation pushes, forces
open the doors, and then you'll have a law passed.”
It is open to every one to do this; workmen can league
against their masters ; in fact, their associations embrace
all England; at Preston I believe there was once a
strike which lasted more than six months. They will
sometimes mob, but never revolt; they know political
economy by this time, and understand that to do
violence to capital is to suppress work. Their chief
quality is coolness ; here, as elsewhere, temperament has
great influence. Anger, blood does not rise at once to
their eyes, as in the southern nations; a long interval
always separates idea from action, and wise arguments,
repeated calculations, occupy the interval. If we go
to a meeting, we see men of every condition, ladies
who come for the thirtieth time to hear the same speech,
full of figures, on education, cotton, wages. They do
not seem to be wearied; they can bring argument
against argument, be patient, protest gravely, recom-
mence their protest; they are the same people who
wait for the train on the platform, without getting
crushed, and who play cricket for a couple of hours
without raising their voices or quarrelling for an instant.
Two coachmen, who run into one another, set themselves
free without storming or scolding. Thus their political
association endures; they can be free because they


wre ee


cHAP I. THE PAST AND THE PRESENT. 103


nave natural leaaers and patient nerves. After all, the
state is a machine like other machines; let us try to
have good wheels, and take care not to break them;
Englishmen have the double advantage of possessing
very good ones, and of managing them coolly.


LNG


Such is our Englishman, with his laws and _ his
administration. Now that he has private comfort and
public security, what will he do, and how will he
govern himself in this higher, nobler domain, to which
man climbs in order to contemplate beauty and truth ?
At all events, the arts do not lead him there. That
vast London is monumental; but, like the castle of a
man who has become rich, everything there is well pre-
served and costly, but nothing more. Those lofty
houses of massive stone, burdened with porches, short
columns, Greek decorations, are generally gloomy; the
poor columns of the monuments seem washed with ink.
On Sunday, in foggy weather, we would think ourselves
in a cemetery; the perfect-readable names on the
houses, in brass letters, are like sepulchral inscriptions.
There is nothing beautiful: at most, the varnished
middle-class houses, with their patch of green, are
pleasant; we feel that they are well kept, commodious,
capital for a business man who wants to amuse himself
and unbend after a hard day’s work. But a finer and
higher sentiment could relish nothing here. As to the
statues, it is difficult not to laugh at them. We see
the Duke of Wellington, with a cocked hat and iron
plumes; Nelson, with a cable which serves him for a
tail, planted on his column, and pierced by a lightning-


104 MODERN LIFE. BOOK IV,


conductor, like a rat impaled on the end of a pole; or
again, the half-dressed Waterloo Generals, crowned by
Victory. The English, though flesh and bone, seem
manufactured out of sheet-iron: how much stiffer
will English statues look? They pride themselves on
their painting; at least they study it with surprising
minuteness, in the Chinese fashion; they can paint a
truss of hay so exactly, that a botanist will tell the
species of every stalk; one artist lived three months
under canvas on a heath, so that he might thoroughly
know heath. Many are excellent observers, especially
of moral expression, and succeed very well in showing
the soul in the face; we are instructed by looking at
them; we go through a course of psychology with
them; they can illustrate a novel; we are touched by
the poetic and dreamy meaning of many of their land-
scapes. But in genuine painting, picturesque painting,
they are revolting. I do not think there were ever
laid upon canvas such crude colours, such stiff forms,
stuffs so much like tin, such glaring contrasts. Fancy
an opera with nothing but false notes in it. We may
see landscapes painted blood-red, trees which split the
canvas, turf which looks like a pot of overturned green,
Christs looking as if they were baked and preserved in
oil, expressive stags, sentimental dogs, undressed women,
to whom we should like forthwith to offer a garment.
In music, they import the Italian opera; it is an orange-
tree kept up at great cost in the midst of turnips.
The arts require idle, delicate minds,—not stoics, especi-
ally not puritans,—easily shocked by dissonance, in-
clined to visible pleasure, employing their long periods
of leisure, their free reveries, in harmoniously arranging,
and with no other object but enjoyment, forms, colours,


cHAP. 11. THE PAST AND THE PRESENT. | 105


and sounds. I need not say that here the bent of
mind is quite the opposite; and we see clearly enough
why, amidst these combative politicians, these laborious
toilers, these men of energetic action, art can but
produce exotic or ill-shaped fruit.

Not so in science; but in science there are two
divisions. It may be treated as a business, to glean
and verify observations, to combine experiments, to
arrange figures, to weigh probabilities, to discover facts,
partial laws, to possess laboratories, libraries, societies
charged with storing and increasing positive knowledge ;
in all this Englishmen excel. They have even a Lyell,
a Darwin, an Owen, able to embrace and renew a science ;
in the construction of the vast edifice, the industrious
masons, masters of the second rank, are not lacking; it
is the great architects, the thinkers, the genuine specu-
lative minds, who fail them; philosophy, especially
metaphysics, is as little indigenous here as music and
painting; they import it, and yet they leave the best
part on the road. Carlyle was obliged to transform it
into a mystical poetry, humorous and prophetic fancies ;
Hamilton touched upon it only to declare it chimerical ;
Stuart Mill and Buckle, only seized the most palpable
part—a heavy residuum, positivism. It is not in
metaphysics that the English mind can find its vent.
It is on other objects that the spirit of liberal inquiry
—the sublime instincts of the mind, the craving for
the universal and the infinite, the desire of ideal and
perfect things—will fall back. Let us take the day
on which the hush of business leaves a free field for
disinterested aspirations. There is no more striking
spectacle for a foreigner than Sunday in London. The
streets are empty, and the churches full. An Act of


106 MODERN LIFE, BOOK IV.


Parliament forbids any playing to-day, public or private ;
the public-houses are not allowed to harbour people
during divine service. Moreover, all respectable people
are at worship, the seats are full: it is not as in France,
where there are none but servants, old women, a few
sleepy people, of private means, and a sprinkling of
elegant ladies ; but in England we see men well dressed,
or at least decently clad, and as many gentlemen as
ladies in church. Religion does not remain out of the
pale, and below the standard of public culture; the
young, the learned, the best of the nation, all the upper
and middle classes, continue attached to it. The clergy-
man, even in a village, is not a peasant’s son, with not
over much polish, just out of the seminary, shackled in a
cloistral education, separated from society by celibacy,
half-buried in medievalism. In England he is a man
of the times, often a man of the world, often of good
family, with the interests, habits, freedom of other men;
keeping sometimes a carriage, several servants, having
elegant manners, generally well informed, who has
read and still reads. On all these grounds he is able
to be in his neighbourhood the leader of ideas, as his
neighbour the squire is the leader of business. If he
does not walk in the same path as the free-thinkers,
he is not more than a step or two behind them; a
modern man, a Parisian, can talk with him on all lofty
themes, and not perceive a gulf between his own mind
and the clergyman’s. Strictly speaking, he is a layman
like ourselves; the only difference is, that he is a
superintendent of morality. Even in his externals,
except for occasional bands and the perpetual white tie,
he is like us; at first sight, we would take him for a
professor, a magistrate, or a notary; and his sermons


cHap, 11. THE PAST AND THE PRESENT. 107


agree with his person. He does not anathematise the
world; in this his doctrine is modern; he follows the
broad path in which the Renaissance and the Reformation
impelled religion. When Christianity arose, eighteen
centuries ago, it was in the East, in the land of the
Essenes and Therapeutists, amid universal dejection
and despair, when the only deliverance seemed a re-
nunciation of the world, an abandonment of civil life,
destruction of the natural instincts, and a daily waiting
for the kingdom of God. When it rose again, three
centuries ago, it was in the West, amongst -laborious
and half-free peoples, amidst universal restoration and
invention, when man, improving his condition, regained
confidence in his worldly destiny, and widely expanded
his faculties. No wonder if the new Protestantism differs
from the ancient Christianity, if it enjoins action instead
of preaching asceticism, if it authorises comforts in place
of prescribing mortification, if it honours marriage, work,
patriotism, inquiry, science, all natural affections and
faculties, in place of praising celibacy, withdrawal from
the world, scorn of the age, ecstasy, captivity of mind, and
mutilation of the heart. By this infusion of the modern
spirit, Christianity has received new blood, and Protest-
antism now constitutes, with science, the two motive
organs, and, as it were, the double heart of European life.
For, in accepting the rehabilitation of the world, it has
not renounced the purification of man’s heart; on the
contrary, it is towards this that it has directed its whole
effort. It has cut off from religion all the portions
which are not this very purification, and, by reducing
it, has strengthened it. An institution, like a machine,
and like a man, is the more powerful for being more
special: a work is done better because it is done singly,


108 MODERN LIFE. BOOK IV.


and because we concentrate ourselves upon it. By the
suppression of legends and religious observances, human
thought in its entirety has been concentrated on a
single object—moral amelioration. It.is of this men
speak in the churches; gravely and coldly, with a suc-
cession of sensible and solid arguments; how a man
ought to reflect on his duties, mark them one by one
in his mind, make for himself principles, have a sort of
inner code, freely accepted and firmly established, to
which he may refer all his actions without bias or
hesitation; how these principles may be rooted by
practice; how unceasing examination, personal effort.
the continual edification of himself by himself, ought
slowly to confirm our resolution in uprightness. These
are the questions which, with a multitude of examples,
proofs, appeals to daily experience, are brought forward
in all the pulpits, to develop in man a voluntary
reformation, a guard and empire over himself, the habit
of self-restraint, and a kind of modern stoicism, almost
as noble as the ancient. On all hands laymen help in
this; and moral warning, given by literature as well as
by theology, harmoniously unites society and the clergy.
Hardly ever does a book paint a man in a disinterested
manner : critics, philosophers, historians, novelists, poets
even, give a lesson, maintain a theory, unmask or pun-
ish a vice, represent a temptation overcome, relate the
history of a character being formed. Their exact
and minute description of sentiments ends always in
approbation or blame; they are not artists, but moral-
ists: it is only in a Protestant country that we will
find a novel entirely occupied in describing the progress


1 Let the reader, amongst many others, peruse the sermons of Dr,
Arnold, delivered in the School Chapel at Rugby.


cHap. 11. THE PAST AND THE PRESENT, 109


of moral sentiment in a child of twelve.’ All co-oper-
ate in this direction in religion, and even in the mystic
part of it. Byzantine distinctions and subtleties have
been allowed to fall away; Germanic inquisitiveness
and speculations have not been introduced ; the God of
conscience reigns alone; feminine sweetness has been
cut off; we do not find the husband of souls, the lov-
able consoler, whom the author of the Imitation of
Christ follows even in his tender dreams; something
manly breathes from religion in England; we find
that the Old Testament, the severe Hebrew Psalms,
have left their imprint here. It is no longer an intimate
friend to whom a man confides his petty desires, his
small troubles, a sort of affectionate and quite human
priestly guide; it is no longer a king whose relations
and courtiers he tries to gain over, and from whom he
looks for favour or place; we see in him only a
guardian of duty, and we speak to him of nothing else.
What we ask of him is the strength to be virtuous, the
inner renewal by which we become capable of always
doing good; and such a prayer is in itself a sufficient
lever to tear a man from his weaknesses. What we
know of the Deity is that he is perfectly righteous ;
and such a reliance suffices to represent all the events
of life as an approach to the reign of righteousness.
Strictly speaking, righteousness alone exists; the world
is a figure which conceals it, but heart and conscience
sustain it, and there is nothing important or true in
man but the embrace by which he holds it. So speak
the old grave prayers, the severe hymns which are sung


1 The Wide Wide World, by Elizabeth Wetherell (an American
book). See also the novels of Miss Yonge, and chiefly those of George
Eliot.


110 MODERN LIFE, BOOK IV.


in the church, accompanied by the organ. Though a
Frenchman, and brought up in a different religion, I
listened to them with a sincere admiration and emotion.
Serious and grand poems, which, opening a path to the
Infinite, let in a ray of light into the limitless darkness,
and satisfy the deep poetic instincts, the vague desire
of sublimity and melancholy, which this race has maui-
fested from its origin, and which it has preserved to
the end.


V.


As the basis of the present as well as of the past ever
reappears an inner and persistent cause, the character of
the race; transmission and climate have maintained it ;
a violent perturbation—the Norman Conquest—warped
it; finally, after various oscillations, it was manifested
by the conception of a special ideal, which gradually
fashioned or produced religion, literature, institutions.
Thus fixed and expressed, it was henceforth the mover
of the rest; it explains the present, on it depends the
future ; its force and direction will produce the present
and future civilisation. Now that great historic vio-
lences—I mean the destructions and enslavements of
peoples—have become almost impracticable, each nation
can develop its life according to its own conception of
life; the chances of a war, a discovery, have no hold
but on details; national inclinations and aptitudes alone
now show the great features of a national history ; when
twenty-five millions of men conceive the good and useful
after a certain type, they will seek and end by attain-
ing this kind of the good and useful. The Englishman
has henceforth his priest, hig gentleman, his manufac-
ture, his comfort, and his novel, If we wish to know


cuap. i. THE PAST AND THE PRESENT. 11i


in what sense this work will alter, we must enquire in
what sense the central conception will change. A vast
revolution has taken place during the last three cen-
turies in human intelligence,—like those regular and
vast uprisings which, displacing a continent, displace
all the prospects. We know that positive discoveries
go on increasing day by day, that they will increase
daily more and more, that from object to abject they
reach the most lofty, that they begin by renewing the
science of man, that their useful application and their
philosophical consequences are ceaselessly unfolded ;
in short, that their universal encroachment will at last
comprise the whole human mind. From this body of
invading truths springs in addition an original concep-
tion of the good and the useful, and, moreover, a new
idea of church and state, art and industry, philosophy
and religion. This has its power, as the old idea had ;
it is scientific, if the other was national ; it is supported
on proved facts, if the other was upon established things.
Already their opposition is being manifested; already
their labours begin; and we may affirm beforehand,
that the proximate condition of English civilisation
will depend upon their divergence or their agreement.


= ee ae big
ue eer Ones
ee adtine:


iid . i
,


- _ av ote Ja 1% 4G,
7 re ; a
: ri!


ois We ti
iw 44055!


BOOK V.
MODERN AUTHORS


—_—e—


INTRODUCTORY NOTE.


THE translator thinks it due to M. Taine to state, that the
fifth book, on the Modern Authors, was written whilst Dickens,
Thackeray, Macaulay, and Mill were still alive. He also gives
the original preface of that book :—

“This fifth book is the complement to the History of English
Interature ; it is written on another plan, because the subject is
different. The present period is not yet completed, and the ideas
which govern it are in process of formation, that is, in the rough.
We cannot therefore as yet systematically arrange them. When
documents are still mere indications, history is necessarily
reduced to “studies ;” knowledge is moulded from life; and
our conclusions cannot be other than incomplete, so long as the
facts which suggest them are unfinished. Fifty years hence
the history of this age may be written ; in the meantime we can
but sketch it. I have selected from contemporary. English
writers the most original minds, the most consistent, and the
most contrasted ; they may be regarded as specimens, represent-
ing the common features, the opposing tendencies, and conse-
quently the general direction of the public mind.

“They are only specimens. By the side of Macaulay :and
Carlyle we have historians like Hallam, Buckle, and Grote ; by
the side of Dickens, novel-writers like Bulwer, Charlotte Bronté,
Mrs. Gaskell, George Elliot, and many more; by the side of

VOL. IV. I


114 MODERN AUTHORS, BOOE ¥.


Tennyson, poets like Elizabeth Browning ; by the side of Stuart
Mill, philosophers like Hamilton, Bain, and Herbert Spencer.
I pass over the vast number of men of talent who write anony-
mously in reviews, and who, like soldiers in an army, display at
times more clearly than their generals the faculties and inclina-
tions of their time and their country. If we look for the common
marks in this multitude of varied minds, we shall, I think, find
the two salient features which I have already pointed out, One
of these features is proper to English civilisation, the other to
the civilisation of the nineteenth century, The one is national,
the other European. On the one hand, special to this people,
their literature is an inquiry instituted into humanity, altogether
positive, and consequently only partially beautiful or philosoph-
ical, but very exact, minute, useful, and moreover very moral ;
and this to such a degree, that sometimes the generosity or
purity of its aspirations raises it to a height which no artist or
philosopher has transcended. On the other hand, in common
with the various peoples of our age, this literature subordinates
dominant creeds and institutions to private inquiry and estab-
lished science—I mean, to that irresponsible tribunal which is
erected in each man’s individual conscience, and to that univer-
sal authority which the diverse human judgments, mutually
rectified, and controlled by practice, borrow from the verifica-
tions of experience, and from their own harmony.

“ Whatever be the judgment passed on these tendencies and
on these doctrines, we cannot, I think, refuse them the merit
of spontaneity and originality. They are living and thriving
plants, The six writers, described in this volume, have expressed
efficacious and complete ideas on God, nature, man, science,
religion, art, and morality. To produce such ideas we have in
Europe at this day but three nations—England, Germany, and
France. Those of England will here be fotind arranged, discussed,
and compared with those of the other two thinking countries,”


oneal hg


CHAPTER I.
he Motel—Dickens.


Were Dickens dead, his biography might be written.
On the day after the burial of a celebrated man, his
friends and enemies apply themselves to the work;
his schoolfellows relate in the newspapers his boyish
pranks; another man recalls exactly, and word for word,
the conversations he had with him more than a score of
years ago. The lawyer, who manages the affairs of the
deceased, draws up a list of the different offices he has
filled, his titles, dates and figures, and reveals to the
matter-of-fact readers how the money left has been
invested, and how the fortune has been made; the
grandnephews and second cousins publish an account
of his acts of humanity, and the catalogue of his domestic
virtues. If there is no literary genius in the family,
they select an Oxford man, conscientious, learned, who
treats the deceased like a Greek author, collects endless
documents, overloads them with endless comments,
crowns the whole with endless discussions, and comes
ten years later, some fine Christmas morning, with his
white tie and placid smile, to present to the assembled
family three quartos of eight hundred pages each, the
easy style of which would send a German from Berkn
to sleep. He is embraced by them with tears in their
eyes; they make him sit down; he is the chief orna-
ment at their feasts; and his work is sent to the


116 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


Edinburgh Review. The latter groans at the sight of
the enormous present, and tells off a young and intrepid
member of the staff to concoct some kind of 4 biography
from the table of contents. Another advantage of post-
humous biographies is, that the dead man is no longer
there to refute either biographer or man of learning.
Unfortunately Dickens is still alive, and refutes the
biographies made of him. What is worse, he claims to
be his own biographer. His translator in French once
asked him for a few particulars of his life; Dickens
replied that he kept them for himself. Without doubt,
David Copperfield, his best novel, has much the appear-
ance of a confession; but where does the confession
end, and how far does fiction embroider truth? All
that is known, or rather all that is told, is that Dickens
was born in 1812, that he is the son of a shorthand-
writer, that he was himself at first a shorthand-writer,
that he was poor and unfortunate in his youth, that
his novels, published in parts, have gained for him
a great fortune and an immense reputation. The
reader may conjecture the rest; Dickens will tell it
him one day, when he writes his memoirs. Meanwhile
he closes the door, and leaves outside the too inquisitive
folk who go on knocking. He has a right to do so.
1M. Taine was not wrong in thinking so. In the Life of Charles
Dickens by J. Forster we find (vol. i. p. 8) the following words :—‘‘ And
here I rnay at once expressly mention, what already has been hinted,
that even as Fielding described himself and his belongings in Captain
Booth and Amelia, and protested always that he had writ in his books
nothing more' than he had seen in life, so it may be said of Dickens, in
more especial relation to David Copperfield. Many guesses have been
made since his death, connecting David’s autobiography with his own
....» There is not only truth in all this, but it will very shortly be


seen that the identity went deeper than any had supposed, and covered


experiences not less startling in the reality than they appear to be in
the fiction.” —Tr,


op he @


CHAP. 1. THE NOVEL—DICKENS., 117


Though a man may be illustrious, he is not on that
account public property; he is not compelled to be
confidential ; he still belongs to himself; he may reserve
of himself what he thinks proper. If we give our works
to our readers, we do not give our lives. Let us be
satisfied with what Dickens has given us. Forty
volumes suffice, and more than suffice, to enable us to
know a man well; moreover, they show of him all that
it is important to know. It is not through the
accidental circumstances of his life that he belongs to
history, but by his talent; and his talent is in his books.
A man’s genius is like a clock; it has its mechanism,
and amongst its parts a mainspring. Find out this
spring, show how it communicates movement to the
others, pursue this movement from part to part down
to the hands in which it ends. This inner history of
genius does not depend upon the outer history of the
man; and it is worth more.


§ 1.—Tue AUTHOR.


i


The first question which should be asked in connec-
tion with an artist is this: How does he regard
objects? With what clearness, what energy, what
force? The reply defines his whole work beforehand ;
for in a writer-of novels the imagination is the master
faculty ; the art of composition, good taste, the feeling of
what is true, depend upon it; one degree more of vehe-
mence destroys the style which expresses it, changes
the characters which it produces, breaks the plot in
which it is enclosed. Consider the imaginative power


118 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


of Dickens, and you will perceive therein the cause of
his faults and his merits, his pewer and his excess.


10h


There is a painter in him, and an English painter.
Never surely did a mind figure to itself with more
exact detail or greater force all the parts and tints of a
picture. Read this description of 4 storm; the images
seem photographed by dazzling flashes of lightning:


“The eye, partaking of the quickness of the flashing light,
saw it in its every gleam a multitude of cbjects which it could
not see at steady noon in fifty times that period, Bells in
steeples, with the rope and wheel that moved them; ragged
nests of birds in cornices and nooks ; faces full of consternation
in the tilted waggons that came tearing past: their frightened
teams ringing out a warning which the thunder drowned ; har-
rows and ploughs left out in fields ; miles upon miles of hedge-
divided country, with the distant fringe of trees as obvious
as the scarecrow in the beanfield close at hand ; in a trembling,
vivid, flickering instant, everything was clear and plain: then
came a flush of red into the yellow light ; a change to blue; a
brightness so intense that there was nothing else but light ; and
then the deepest and profoundest darkness.” }


An imagination so lucid and energetic cannot but
animate inanimate objects without an effort. It pro-
vokes in the mind in which it works extraordinary
emotions, and the author pours over the objects which
he figures to himself, something of the ever-welling
passion which overflows in him. Stones for him take
a voice, white walls swell out into big phantoms, black


1 ‘Martin Chuzzlewit, ch. xlii, The translator has used the “ Charles
Dickens” edition, 1868, 18 vols.


CHAP. I. THE NOVEL—DICKENS. 119


wells yawn hideously and mysteriously in the darkness ;
legions of strange creatures whirl shuddering over the
fantastic landscape; blank nature is peopled, inert
matter moves. But the images remaim clear; in this
madness there is nothing vague or disorderly; im-
aginary objects are designed with outlines as precise
and details as numerous as real objects, and the dream
is equal to the reality.

There is, amongst others, a description of the night
wind, quaint and powerful, which recalls certain pages
of Notre-Dame de Paris. The source of this description,
as of all those of Dickens, is pure imagination. He
does not, like Walter Scott, describe in order to give
his reader a map, and to lay down the locality of his
drama. He does not, like Lord Byron, describe from
love of magnificent nature, and in order to display a
splendid succession of grand pictures) He dreams
neither of attaining exactness nor of selecting beauty.
Struck with a certain spectacle, he is transported, and
breaks out into unforeseen figures. Now it is the
yellow leaves, pursued by the wind, fleeing and jostling,
shivering, scared, in a giddy chase, clinging to the
furrows, drowned in the ditches, perching on the trees."
Here it is the night wind, sweeping round a church,

1 “Tt was small tyranny for a respectable wind to go wreaking its
vengeance on such poor creatures as the fallen leaves; but this wind
happening to come up with a great heap of them just after venting its
humour on the insulted Dragon, did so disperse and scatter them that
they fled away, pell-mell, some here, some there, rolling over each
other, whirling round and round upon their thin edges, taking frantic
flights into the air, and playing all manner of extraordinary gambols
in the extremity of their distress. Nor was this enough for its malici-
ous fury : for, not content with driving them abroad, it charged small


parties of them and hunted them into the wheelwright’s saw-pit, and
below the planks and timbers in the yard, and, scattering the saw-dust


120 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK v,


moaning as it tries with its unseen hand the windows
and the doors, and seeking out some crevices by which
to enter:


“ And when it has got in; as one not finding what he seeks,
whatever that may be; it wails and‘howls to issue forth again :
and, not content with stalking through the aisl&s, and gliding
round and round the pillars, and tempting the deep organ, soars
up to the roof, and strives to rend the rafters: then flings itself
despairingly upon the stones below, and passes, muttering, into
the vaults. Anon, it comes up stealthily, and creeps along the
walls : seeming to read, in whispers, the Inscriptions sacred to
the Dead. At some of these, it breaks out shrilly, as with
laughter ; and at others, moans and cries as if it~were lament-
ing.” 1


Hitherto you have only recognised the sombre imagina-
tion of a man of the north. A little further you
perceive the impassioned religion of a revolutionary
Protestant, when he speaks to you of “a ghostly sound
too, lingering within the altar; where it seems to chaunt,
in its wild way, of Wrong and Murder done, and false
Gods worshipped ; in defiance of the Tables of the Law,
which look so fair and smooth, but are so flawed and
broken. Ugh! Heaven preserve us, sitting snugly
round the fire! It has an awful voice, that wind at


in the air, it locked for them underneath, and when it did meet with
any, whew ! how it drove them on and followed at their heels !

“The scared leaves only flew the faster for all this, and a giddy
chase it was: for they got into unfrequented places, where there was no
outlet, and where their pnrsuer kept them eddying round and round at
his pleasure ; and they crept under the eaves of houses, and clung
tightly to the sides of hay-ricks, like bats ; and tore in at open chamber
windows, and cowered close to hedges; and, in short, went anywhere
for safety.”—(Martin Chuzzlewit, ch. ii.)

2 The Chimes, first quarter.


CHAP. 1. THE NOVEL—DICKENS. 121


Midnight, singing in a church!” But an instant after,
the artist speaks again; he leads you to the belfry, and
in the jingle of the accumulated words, communicates
to your nerves the sensation of an aerial tempest.
The wind whistles, blows, and gambols in the arches:
“High up in the steeple, where it is free to come and
go through many an airy arch and loophole, and to
twist and twine itself about the giddy stair, and twirl the
groaning weathercock, and make the very tower shake
and shiver!” Dickens has seen it all in the old belfry ;
his thought is a mirror; not the smallest or ugliest
detail escapes him. He has counted “ the iron rails
ragged with rust;” “the sheets of lead,” wrinkled and
shrivelled, which crackle and heave beneath the unac-
customed tread; “the shabby nests” which “ the birds
stuff into corners” of the old oaken joists and beams ;
the gray dust heaped up; “ the speckled spiders, indolent
and fat with long security,” which, hanging by a thread,
“swing idly to and fro in the vibration of the bells,”
and which “climb up sailor-like in quick-alarm, or drop
upon the ground and ply a score of nimble legs to save
one life.” This picture captivates us. Kept up at such
a height, amongst the fleeting clouds which cast their
shadows over the town, and the feeble lights scarce
distinguished in the mist, we feel a sort of. dizziness ; and
we nearly discover, with Dickens, thought and a soul in
the metallic voice of the chimes which inhabit this
trembling castle.

He writes a story about them, and it is not the first.
Dickens is a poet; he is as much at home in the
imaginative world as in the actual. Here the chimes
are talking to the old messenger and consoling him,


1 The Chimes, first quarter.


122 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


Elsewhere it is the Cricket on the Hearth singing of
all domestic joys, and bringing before the eyes of the
lonely master the happy evenings, the intimate conver-
sations, the coinfort, the quiet cheerfulness which he
has enjoyed, and which he has no longer. In another
tale it is the history of a sick and precocious child “who
feels itself dying, and who, sleeping in the arms of its
sister, hears the distant song of the murmuring waves
which rocked him to sleep. Objects, with Dickens,
take their hue from the thoughts of his characters.
His imagination is so lively, that it carries everything
with it in the path which it chooses. If the character
is happy, the stones, flowers, and clouds must be happy
too; if he is sad, nature must weep with him. Even
to the ugly houses in the street, all speak. The style
runs through a swarm of visions; it breaks out into
the strangest oddities. Here is a young girl, pretty and
good, who crosses Fountain Court and the law purlieus
in search of her brother. What can be more simple?
what even more trivial? Dickens is carried away by
it. To entertain her, he summons up birds, trees,
houses, the fountain, the offices, law papers, and much
besides. It is a folly, and it is all but an enchantment :


“Whether there was life enough left in the slow vegetation
of Fountain Court for the smoky shrubs to have any conscious-
ness of the brightest and purest-hearted little woman in the
world, is a question for gardeners, and those who are learned in
the loves of plants. But that it was a good thing for that same
paved yard to have such a delicate little figure flitting through
it ; that it passed like a smile from the grimy old houses, and
the worn flagstones, and left them duller, darker, sterner than
before ; there is no sort of doubt. The Temple fountain might
have leaped up twenty feet to greet the spring of hopeful maiden-


CHAP, I THE NOVEL—DICKENS. 123


hood, that in her person stole on, sparkling, through the dry
and dusty channels of the Law; the chirping sparrows, bred in
Temple chinks and crannies, might have held their peace to
listen to imaginary sky-larks, as so fresh a little creature passed ;
the dingy boughs, unused to droop, otherwise than in their puny
growth might have bent down ina kindred gracefulness, to shed
their benedictions on her graceful head ; old love-letters, shut
up in iron boxes in the neighbouring offices, and made of no
account among the heaps of family papers into which they had
strayed, and of which, in their degeneracy, they formed a part,
might have stirred and fluttered with a moment’s recollection
of their ancient tenderness, as she went lightly by. Anything
might have happened that did not happen, and never will, for
the love of Ruth,” !


This is far-fetched, without doubt. French taste, always
measured, revolts against these affected strokes, these
sickly prettinesses. And yet this affectation is natural ;
Dickens does not hunt after quaintnesses; they come
to him. His excessive imagination is like a string too
tightly stretched; it produces of itself, without any
violent shock, sounds not heard elsewhere.

We shall see how it is excited. Imagine a shop,
no matter what shop, the most repulsive; that of a
mathematical-instrument maker. Dickens sees the
barometers, chronometers, telescopes, compasses, charts,
maps, sextants, speaking trumpets, and so ferth. He
sees so many, sees them so clearly, they are crowded
and crammed, they replace each other so forcibly in his
brain, which they fill and obstruct; there are so many
geographical and nautical ideas exposed under the glass
cases hung from the ceiling, nailed to the wall, they
swamp him from so many sides, and in such abundance,


1 Martin Chuzzlewit, ch. xlv.


124 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V,


that he loses his judgment. “The shop itself, partaking
of the general infection, seemed almost to become a
snug, sea-going, ship-shape concern, wanting only good
sea-room, in the event of an unexpected launch, to work
its way securely to any desert island in the world.”?
The difference between a madman and a man of
genius is not very great. Napoleon, who knew men,
said so to Esquirol.2 The same faculty leads us to
glory or throws us into a cell in a lunatic asylum. It is
visionary imagination which forges the phantoms of the
madman and creates the personages of an artist, and
the classifications serving for the first may serve for the
second. The imagination of Dickens is like that of
monomaniacs. To plunge oneself into an idea, to be
absorbed by it, to see nothing else, to repeat it under a
hundred forms, to enlarge it, to carry it, thus enlarged,
to the eye of the spectator, to dazzle and overwhelm
him with it, to stamp it upon him so firmly and deeply
that he can never again tear it from his memory,—these
are the great features of this imagination and style.
In this, David Copperfield is a masterpiece. Never did
objects remain more visible and present to the memory
of a reader than those which he describes. The old
house, the parlour, the kitchen, Peggotty’s boat, and above
all the school play-ground, are interiors whose relief,
energy, and precision are unequalled. Dickens has the
passion and patience of the painters of his nation; he
reckons his details one by one, notes the various hues
of the old tree-trunks; sees tho dilapidated cask, the
greenish and broken flagstones, the chinks of the damp
walls; he distinguishes the strange smells which rise
from them; marks the size of the mildewed spots, reads


t Dombey and Son, ch. iv. 2 See ante, vol. ii. note, page 123.


CHAP. I. THE NOVEL—DICKENS, 125


the names of the scholars carved on the door, and
dwells on the form of the letters. And this minute
description has nothing cold about it: if it is thus
detailed, it is because the contemplation was intense ;
it proves its passion by its exactness. We felt this
passion without accounting for it; suddenly we find it
at the end of a page; the boldness of the style renders
it visible, and the violence of the phrase attests the
_violence of the impression. Excessive metaphors bring
before the mind grotesque fancies. We feel ourselves
beset by extravagant visions. Mr. Mell takes his flute,
and blows on it, says Copperfield, “until I almost
thought he would gradually blow his whole being into
the large hole at the top, and ooze away at the keys.”?
Tom Pinch, disabused at last, discovers that his master
Pecksniff is a hypocritical rogue. He “had so long
been used to steep the Pecksniff of his fancy in his tea,
and spread him out.upon his toast, and take him as a
relish with his beer, that he made but a poor breakfast
on the first morning after his expulsion.” We think of
Hoffmann’s fantastic tales; we are arrested by a fixed
idea, and our head begins to ache. These eccentricities
are in the style of sickness rather than of health.
Therefore Dickens is admirable in depicting halluci-
nations. We see that he feels himself those of his
characters, that he is engrossed by their ideas, that he
enters into their madness. As an Englishman and a
moralist, he has described remorse frequently. Perhaps
it may be said that he makes a scarecrow of it, and
that an artist is wrong to transform himself into an
assistant of the policeman and the preacher. What of
that? The portrait of Jonas Chuzzlewit is so terrible,


1 David Copperfield, ch. v. 2 Martin Chuzzlewit, ch. xxxvi.


126 MODERN AUTHORS, BOOK ¥.


that we may pardon it for being useful. Jonas, leaving
his chamber secretly, has treacherously murdered his
enemy, and thinks henceforth to breathe in peace;
but the recollection of the murder gradually disorganises
his mind, like poison. He is no longer able to control
his ideas; they bear him on with the fury of a terrified
horse. He is for ever thinking, and shuddering as he
thinks, of the room where people believed he slept. He
sees this room, counts the tiles of the floor, pictures
the long folds of the dark curtains, the tumbled bed,
the door at which some one might have knocked. The
more he wants to escape from this vision, the more he
is immersed in it; it is a burning abyss in which he
rolls, struggling, with cries and sweats of agony. He
fancies himself lying in his bed, as he ought to be, and
an instant after he sees himself there. He fears this
other self. The dream is so vivid, that he is not sure
that he is not in London. “He became in a manner
his own ghost and phantom.” And this imaginary
being, like a, mirror, only redoubles before his conscience
the image of assassination and punishment. He returns,
and shuffles, with pale face, to the door of his chamber.
He, a man of business, a man of figures, a coarse
machine of positive reasoning, has become as fanciful
as anervous woman. “He stole on, to the door, on tip-
toe, as if he dreaded to disturb his own imaginary rest.”
At the moment when he turns the key in the lock, “a
monstrous fear beset his mind. What if the murdered
man were there before him.” At last he enters, and
tumbles into bed, burnt up with fever. “He buried
himself beneath the blankets,” so as to try not to see
“that infernal room”; he sees it more clearly still.
The rustling of the clothes, the buzz of an insect, the


CHAP. I. THE NOVEL—DICKENS. 127


beatings of his heart, all cry to him Murderer! His
mind fixed with “an agony of listening” on the door,
he ends by thinking that people open it; he hears it
creak. His senses are distorted; he dares not mistrust
them, he dares no longer believe in them; and in this
nightmare, in which drowned reason leaves nothing
but a chaos of hideous forms, he finds no reality but
the incessant burden of his convulsive despair. Thence-
forth all his thoughts, dangers, the whole world dis-
appears for him in “the one dread question only,”
“When would they find the body in the wood?” He
forces himself to distract his thoughts from this; they
remain stamped and glued to it; they hold him to it
as by a chain of iron. He continually figures himself
going into the wood, “going softly about it and about
it among the leaves, approaching it nearer and nearer
through a gap in the boughs, and startling the very
flies, that were thickly sprinkled all over it, like heaps
of dried currants.” His mind was fixed and fastened
on the discovery, for intelligence of which he listened
intently to every cry and shout; listened when any
one came in, or went out; watched from the window
the people who passed up and down the street.” At
the same time, he has ever before his eyes that corpse
“lying alone in the wood ;” “he was for ever showing
and presenting it, as it were, to every creature whom
he saw. ‘ Look here! do you know of this? Is it
found? Do-you suspect me?’ If he had been con-
demned to bear the body in his arms, and lay it down
for recognition at the feet of every one he met, it could
not have been more constantly with him, or a cause of
more monotonous and dismal occupation than it was
in this state of his mind.”*
1 Martin Chuzzlewit, ch. li.


128 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


Jonas is on the verge of madness. There are other
characters quite mad. Dickens has drawn three or four
portraits of madmen, very funny at first sight, but so
true that they are in reality horrible. It needed’ an
imagination like his, irregular, excessive, capable of fixed
ideas, to exhibit the derangements of reason. Two
especially there are, which make us laugh, and which
make us shudder. Augustus, a gloomy maniac, who is
on the point of marrying Miss Pecksniff; and poor Mr.
Dick, partly an idiot, partly a monomaniac, who lives
with Miss Trotwood. To understand these sudden ex-
altations, these unforeseen gloominesses, these incredible
summersaults of perverted sensitiveness; to reproduce
these hiatuses of thought, these interruptions of reason-
ing, this recurrence of a word, always the same, which
breaks in upon a phrase attempted and overturns re-
nascent reason; to see the stupid smile, the vacant look,
the foolish and uneasy physiognomy of these haggard
old children who painfully grope about from one idea
to another, and stumble at every step on the threshold of
the truth which they cannot attain, is a faculty which
Hoffmann alone has possessed in an equal degree with
Dickens. The play of these shattered reasons is like the
creaking of a door on its rusty hinges; it makes one
sick to hear it. We find in it, if we like, a discordant
burst of laughter, but we discover still more easily a
groan and a lamentation, and we are terrified to gauge
the lucidity, strangeness, exaltation, violence of imagi-
nation which has produced such creations, which has
carried them on and sustained them unbendingly to
the end, and which found itself in its proper sphere in
imitating and producing their irrationality.


CHAP, I. THE NOVEL— DICKENS. 129


it


To what can this force be applied? Imaginations
differ not only in their nature, but also in their object;
after having gauged their energy, we must define their
domain; in the wide world the artist makes a world
for himself; involuntarily he chooses a class of objects
which he prefers; others do not warm his genius, and
he does not perceive them. Dickens does not perceive
great things ; this is the second feature of his imagina-
tion. Enthusiasm seizes him in connection with every-
thing, especially in connection with vulgar objects, a
curiosity shop, a sign-post, a town-crier. He has vigour,
he does not attain beauty. His instrument produces
vibrating, but not harmonious sounds. If he is describ-
ing a house, he will draw it with geometrical clearness ;
he will put all its colours in relief, discover a face and
thought in the shutters and the spouts; he will make
a sort of human being out of the house, grimacing and
forcible, which attracts our attention, and which we
shall never forget; but he will not see the grandeur of
the long monumental lines, the calm majesty of the
broad shadows boldly divided by the white plaster ; the
cheerfulness of the light which covers them, and becomes
palpable in the black niches in which it dives as though
to rest and to sleep. If he is painting a landscape, he
will perceive the haws which dot with their red fruit the
leafless hedges, the thin vapour steaming from a distant
stream, the motions of an insect in the grass; but the
deep poetry which the author of Valentine and André!
would have felt, will escape him. He will be lost,
like the painters of his country, in the minute and


1 Novels of George Sand
VOL. IV- K


130 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


impassioned observation of small things ; he will have no
love of beautiful forms and fine colours. He will not
perceive that the blue and the red, the straight line and
the curve, are enough to compose vast concerts, which
amidst so many various expressions maintain a grand
serenity, and open up in the depths of the soul a spring
of health and happiness. Happiness is lacking in him;
his inspiration is a feverish rapture, which does not
select its objects, which animates promiscuously the
ugly, the vulgar, the ridiculous, and which communi-
cating to his creations an indescribable jerkiness and
violence, deprives them of the delight and harmony
which in other hands théy might have retained. Miss
Ruth is a very pretty housekeeper; she puts on her
apron; what a treasure this apron is! Dickens turns it
over and over, like a milliner’s shopman who wants to
sellit. She holds it in her hands, then she puts it round
her waist, ties the strings, spreads it out, smoothes it that
it may fall well. What does she not do with her apion ?
And how delighted is Dickens during these innoceut
cccupations? He utters little exclamations of joyous
fun. “Oh heaven, what a wicked little stomacher !”
He apostrophises a ring, he sports round Ruth, he is so
delighted that he claps his hands. It is much worse when
she is making the pudding; there is a whole scene, dra-
matic and lyric, with exclamations, protasis, sudden in-
versions as complete as a Greek tragedy. These kitchen
refinements and this waggery of imagination make us
think, by way of contrast, of the household pictures of
George Sand, of the room of Geneviéve the flower-girl.
She, like Ruth, is making a useful object, very useful, since
she will sell it to-morrow for tenpence; but this object
is a full-blown rose, whose fragile petals are moulded


CHAP. I. THE NOVEL—DICKENS. 131


by her fingers as by the fingers of a fairy, whose fresh
corolla is purpled with a vermilion as tender as that of
her cheeks ; a fragile masterpiece which bloomed on an
evening of poetic emotion, whilst from her window she
beheld in the sky the piercing and divine eyes of the stars.
and in the depths of her virgin heart murmured the first
breath of love. Dickens does not need such a sight for his
transports ; a stage-coach throws him. into dithyrambs :
the wheels, the splashing, the cracking whip, the clatter
of the horses, harness, the vehicle; here is enough te
transport him. He feels sympathetically the motion
of the coach ; it bears him along with it; he hears the
gallop of the horses in his brain, and goes off, uttering
this ode, which seems to proceed from the guard’s horn:


“Yoho, among the gathering shades ; making of no account
the deep reflections of the trees, but scampering on through light
and darkuess, all the same, as if the light of London, fifty miles
away, were quite enough to travel by, and some to spare. Yoho,
beside the village green, where cricket-players linger yet, and
every little indentation made in the fresh grass by bat or wicket,
ball or player’s foot, sheds out its perfume on the night. Away
with four fresh horses from the Bald-faced Stag, where topers
congregate about the door admiring; and the last team, with
traces hanging loose, go roaming off towards the pond, until
observed and shouted after by a dozen throats, while volunteer-
ing boys pursue them, Now, with a clattering of hoofs and
striking out of fiery sparks, across the old stone bridge, and
down again into the shadowy road, and through the open gate,
and far away, away into the wold. Yoho!

“Yoho, behind there, stop that bugle for a moment! Come
creeping over to the front, along the coach-roof, guard, and make
one at this basket ! Not that we slacken in our pace the while,
not we: we rather put the bits of blood upon their mettle, for
the greater glory of the snack. Ah! It is long since this bottle


132 MODERN AUTHORS, BOOK V.


of old wine was brought into contact with the mellow breath of
night, you may depend, and rare good stuff it is to wet a bugler’s
whistle with. Only try it. Don’t be afraid of turning up your
finger, Bill, another pull! .Now, take your breath, and try the
bugle, Bill, There’s music! There’sa tone! ‘ Over the hills
and far away,” indeed, Yoho! The skittish mare is all alive to-
night. Yoho! Yoho!

“See the bright moon ; high up before we know it; making
the earth reflect the objects on its breast like water. Hedges,
trees, low cottages, church steeples, blighted stumps and flourish-
ing young slips, have all grown vain upon the sudden, and mean
to contemplate their own fair images till morning. The poplars
yonder rustle, that their quivering leaves may see themselves
upon the ground, Not so the oak ; trembling does not become
him ; and he watches himself in his stout old burly steadfastness,
without the motion of a twig. The moss-grown gate, ill poised
upon its creaking hinges, crippled and decayed, swings to and
fro before its glass like some fantastic dowager; while our own
ghostly likeness travels on, Yoho! Yoho! through ditch and
brake, upon the ploughed land and the smooth, along the steep
hill-side and steeper wall, as if it were a phantom-Hunter.

“Clouds too! And a mist upon the Hollow! Not a dull
fog that hides it, but a light, airy, gauze-like mist, which in our
eyes of modest admiration gives a new charm to the beauties it
is spread before: as real gauze has done ere now, and would
again, so please you, though we were the Pope. Yoho! Why,
now we travel like the Moon herself. Hiding this minute in a
grove of trees, next minute in a patch of vapour, emerging now
upon our broad, clear course, withdrawing now, but always dash-
ing on, our journey is a counterpart of hers. Yoho! A match
against the Moon !

“The beauty of the night is hardly felt, when Day comes
leaping up. Yoho! Two stages, and the country roads are
almost changed+to a continuous street. Yoho, past market
gardens, rows of houses, villas, crescents, terraces, and squares ;


CHAP, I. THE NOVEL—DICKENS. 133


past waggons, coaches, carts; past early workmen, late stragglers,
drunken men, and sober carriers of loads ; past brick and mortar
in its every shape ; and in among the rattling pavements, where
a jaunty-seat upon a coach is not so easy to preserve! Yoho
down countless turnings, and through countless mazy ways, until
an old Inn-yard is gained, and Tom Pinch, getting down, quite
stunned and giddy, is in London !”?


All this to tell us that Tom Pinch is come to
London! This fit of lyric poetry, in which the most
poetic extravagances spring from the most vulgar
commonplaces, like sickly flowers growing in a broken
old flower-pot, displays in its natural and quaint
contrasts all the sides of Dickens’ imagination. We
shall have his portrait if we picture to ourselves a man
who, with a stewpan in one hand and a postillion’s
whip in the other, took to making prophecies.


IV.


The reader already foresees what vehement emotions
this species of imagination will produce. The mode of
conception in a man governs the mode of thought.
When the mind, barely attentive, follows the indistinct
outlines of a rough sketched image, joy and grief
glide past him with insensible touch. When the
mind, with rapt attention, penetrates the minute details
of a precise image, joy and grief shake the whole man.

Dickens has this attention, and sees these details:
this is why he meets everywhere with objects of
exaltation. He never abandons his impassioned tone ;
he never rests in a natural style and in simple
narrative; he only rails or weeps; he writes but


1 Martin Chuazlewit, ch. xxxvi.


134 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK. V.


satires or elegies. He has the feverish sensibility of a
woman who laughs loudly, or melts into tears at the
sudden shock of the slightest occurrence. This impas-
sioned style is extremely potent, and to it may be
attributed half the glory of Dickens. The majority of
men have only weak emotions. We labour mechanic-
ally, and yawn much; three-fourths of things leave
us cold; we go to sleep by habit, and we no longer
remark the household scenes, petty details, stale
adventures, which are the basis of our existence. A
man comes, who suddenly renders them interesting;
nay, who makes them dramatic, changes them into
objects of admiration, tenderness and dread. Without
leaving the fireside or the omnibus, we are trembling,
our eyes full of tears, or shaken by fits of inextinguish-
able laughter. We are transformed, our life is doubled;
our soul had been vegetating; now it feels, suffers,
loves. The contrast, the rapid succession, the number
of the sentiments, add further to its trouble; we are
immersed for two hundred pages in a torrent of new
emotions, contrary and increasing, which communicates
its violence to the mind, which carries it away in
digressions and falls, and only casts it on the bank
enchanted and exhausted. It is an intoxication, and
on a delicate soul the effect would be too forcible;
but it suits the English public, and that public has
justified it.

This sensibility can hardly have more than two issues
—laughter and tears. There are others, but they are
only reached by lofty eloquence; they are the path to
sublimity, and we have seen that for Dickens this path
is cut off. Yet there is no writer who knows better
how to touch and melt; he makes us weep, absolutely


aed


CHAP. I. THE NOVEL—DICKENS. 135


shed tears; before reading him we did not know there
was so much pity in the heart. The grief of a child,
who wishes to be loved by his father, and whom his
father does not love; the despairing love and slow
death of a poor half-imbecile young man: all these
pictures of secret grief leave an ineffaceable impression.
The tears which he sheds are genuine, and compassion
is their only source. Balzac, George Sand, Stendhal
have also recorded human miseries; is it possible to
write without recording them? But they do not seek
them out, they hit upon them; they do not dream of
displaying them to us; they were going elsewhere, and
met them on their way. They love art better than
men. They delight only in setting in motion the
springs of passions, in combining large systems of
events, in constructing powerful characters: they do
not write from sympathy with the wretched, but from
love of beauty. When we have finished George Sand’s
Mauprat, our emotion is not pure sympathy; we feel,
in addition, a deep admiration for the greatness and
the generosity of love. When we have come to the
end of Balzac’s Le Pere Goriot, our heart is pained by
the tortures of that anguish; but the astonishing inven-
tiveness, the accumulation of facts, the abundance of
general ideas, the force of analysis, transport us into
the world of science, and our painful sympathy is
calmed by the spectacle of this physiology of the heart.
Dickens never calms our sympathy; he selects subjects
in which it alone, and more than elsewhere, is unfolded :
the long oppression of children persecuted and starved
by their schoolmaster; the life of the factory-hand
Stephen, robbed and degraded by his wife, driven away
by his fellow-workmen, accused of theft, lingering six


136 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


days at the bottom of a pit into which he has fallen,
maimed, consumed by fever, and dying when he is at
length discovered. Rachael, his only friend, is there;
and his delirium, his cries, the storm of despair in which
Dickens envelopes his characters, have prepared the
way for the painful picture of this resigned death.
The bucket brings up a poor, crushed human creature,
and we see “the pale, worn, patient face looking up to
the sky, whilst the right hand, shattered and hanging
down, seems as if waiting to be taken by another hand.”
Yet he smiles, and feebly said “Rachael!” She
stooped down, and bent over him until her eyes were
between his and the sky, for he could not so much
as turn them to look at her. Then in broken words
he tells her of his long agony. Ever since he was
born he has met with nothing but misery and injustice ;
it is the rule—the weak suffer, and are made to suffer.
This pit into which he had fallen “has cost hundreds
and hundreds o’ men’s lives—fathers, sons, brothers,
dear to thousands an’ thousands, an’ keeping ’em fro’
want and hunger.... The men that works in pits...
ha’ pray’n an’ pray’n the lawmakers for Christ’s sake
not to let their work be murder to ’em, but to spare ’em
for th’ wives and children, that they loves as well as
gentlefok loves theirs;” all in vain. “When the pit
was in work, it killed wi’out need; when ’t is let alone,
it kills wiout need.”* Stephen says this without
anger, quietly, merely as the truth. He has his
calumniator before him; he does not get angry, accuses
no one; he only charges old Gradgrind to clear him
and make his name good with all men as soon as he
shall be dead. His heart is up there in heaven, where


? Hard Times, bk. 8, ch. vi,


CHAP, I. THE NOVEL—DICKENS. 137


he has seen a star shining. In his agony, on his bed
of stones, he has gazed upon it, and the tender and
touching glance of the divine star has calmed, by its
mystical serenity, the anguish of mind and body.


“*Tt ha’ shined upon me,’ he said reverently, ‘in my pain
and trouble down below. It ha’ shined into my mind, I ha’
lookn at’t and thowt o’ thee, Rachael, till the muddle in my
mind have cleared awa, above a bit, I hope. If soom ha’ been
wantin’ in unnerstan’in’ me better, I, too, ha’ been wantin’ in
unnerstan’in’ them better.

“¢Tn my pain an’ trouble, lookin’ up yonder,—wi’ it shinin’
on me.—I ha’ seen more clear, and ha’ made it my dyin’ prayer
that aw th’ world may on’y coom toogether more, an’ get a
better unnerstan’in’ o’ one another, than when I were in’t my
own weak seln.

“Often as I coom to myseln, and found it shinin’ on me
down there in my trouble, I thowt it were the star as guided to
Our Saviour’s home. I awmust think it be the very star!’

“‘They carried him very gently along the fields, and down
the lanes, and over the wide landscape ; Rachael always holding
the hand in hers. Very few whispers broke the mournful silence.
It was soon a funeral procession. The star had shown him
where to find the God of the poor ; and through humility, and
sorrow, and forgiveness, he had gone to his Redeemer’s rest.” 1


This same writer is the most railing, the most comic,
the most jocose of English authors. And it is moreover
a singular gaiety! It is the only kind which would
harmonise with this impassioned sensibility. There is
a laughter akin to tears. Satire is the sister of elegy :
if the second pleads for the oppressed, the first combats
the oppressors. Feeling painfully all the wrongs that
are committed, and the vices that are practised, Dickens


1 Hard Times, bk. 8, ch. vi.


138 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


avenges himself by ridicule. He does not paint,
he punishes. Nothing could be more damaging than
those long chapters of sustained irony, in which the
sarcasm is pressed, line after line, more sanguinary and
piercing in the chosen adversary. There dre five or six
against the Americans,—their venal newspapers, their
drunken journalists, their cheating speculators, their
women authors, their coarseness, their familiarity, their
insolence, their brutality,—enough to captivate an absol-
utist, and to justify the French Liberal who, returning
from New York, embraced with tears in his eyes the
first gendarme whom he saw on landing at Havre.
Starting of commercial companies, interviews between a
member of Parliament and his constituents, instructions
of a member of the House of Commons to his secretary,
the outward display of great banking - houses, the
laying of the first stone of a public building, every kind
of ceremony and lie of English society, are depicted
with the fire and bitterness of Hogarth. There are
parts where the comic element is so violent, that it has
the semblance of vengeance,—as the story of Jonas
Chuzzlewit. “The very first word which this excellent
boy learnt to spell was gain, and the second (when he
came into two syllables) was money.” This fine-
education had unfortunately produced two results:
first, that, “having been long taught by his father to
overreach everybody, he had imperceptibly acquired a
love of overreaching that venerable monitor himself ;”
secondly, that being taught to regard everything as a
matter of property, “he had gradually come to look
with impatience on his parent as a certain amount of
personal estate,” who would be very well’“ secured,” in
that particular description of strong-box which is


(CHAP. I. THE NOVEL—DICKENS. 139


commonly called a coffin, and banked in the grave.!
“Ts that my father snoring, Pecksniff?” asked Jonas;
“tread upon his foot; will you be so good? The foot
next you is the gouty one.”? Young Chuzzlewit is
introduced to us with this mark of attention; we
may judge by this of his other feelings. In reality,
Dickens is gloomy, like Hogarth; but, like Hogarth,
he makes us burst with laughter by the buffoonery
of his invention and the violence of his caricatures.
He pushes his characters to absurdity with unwonted
boldness. Pecksniff hits off moral phrases and senti-
mental actions in so grotesque a manner, that they make
him extravagant. Never were heard such monstrous
oratorical displays. Sheridan had already painted an
English hypocrite, Joseph Surface; but he differs from
Pecksniff as much as a portrait of the eighteenth century
differs from a cartoon of Punch. Dickens makes hypo-
crisy so deformed and monstrous, that his hypocrite
ceases to resemble a man ; we would call him one of those
fantastic figures whose nose is greater than his body.
This exaggerated comicality springs from excess of imag-
ination. Dickens uses the same spring throughout. The
better to make us see the object he shows us, he dazzles
the reader's eyes with it; but the reader is amused by
this irregular fancy: the fire of the execution makes
him forget that the scene is improbable, and he laughs
heartily as he listens to the undertaker, Mould, enume-
rating the consolations which filial piety, well backed
by money, may find in his shop. What grief could not
be softened by

““¢ Four horses to each vehicle . . . velvet trappings .. .
drivers in cloth cloaks and top-boots . . . the plumage of the


1 Martin Chuzzlewit, ch. viii 2 Ibid.


140 MODERN AUTHORS, BOOK V.


ostrich, died black . . . any number of walking attendants,
dressed in the first style of funeral fashion, and carrying batons
tipped with brass . . . a place in Westminster Abbey itself, if
he choose to invest it in such a purchase. Oh! do not let us
say that gold is dross, when it can buy such things as these.’
‘Ay, Mrs. Gamp, you are right,’ rejoined the undertaker. ‘We
should be an honoured calling. We do good by stealth, and
blush to have it mentioned in our little bills. How much con.
solation may I—even I,’ cried Mr. Mould, ‘ have diffused among
my fellow-creatures by means of my four long-tailed prancers,
never harnessed under ten pund ten!’”?


Usually Dickens remains grave whilst drawing his
caricatures. English wit consists in saying very jocu-
lar things in a solemn manner. Tone and ideas are
then in contrast ; every contrast makes a strong impres-
sion. Dickens loves to produce them, and his public
to hear them.

If at times he forgets to castigate his neighbour, if
he tries to sport, to amuse himself, he is not the more
happy for all that. The chief element of the English
character is its want of happiness. The ardent and
tenacious imagination of Dickens is impressed with
things too firmly, to pass lightly and gaily over the
surface. He leans too heavily on them, he penetrates,
works into, hollows them out; all these violent actions
are efforts, and all efforts are sufferings. To be happy,
aman must be light-minded, as a Frenchman of the
eighteenth century, or sensual, as an Italian of the
sixteenth ; a man must not get anxious about things,
if he wishes to enjoy them. Dickens does get anxious,
and does not enjoy. Let us take a little comical acci-
dent, such as we meet with in the street—a gust of


1 Martin Chuzelewit, ch. xix.


CHAP, I, THE NOVEL—DICKENS, 141


wind, which blows about the garments of a street-porter.
Scaramouche will grin with good humour; Le Sage smile
like a diverted man; both will pass by and think no
more of it. Dickens muses over it for half a page.
He sees so clearly all the effects of the wind, he puts
himself so entirely in its place, he imagines for it a
will so impassioned and precise, he shakes the clothes
of the poor man hither and thither so violently and so
long, he turns the gust into a tempest, into a persecu-
tioh so great, that we are made giddy; and even whilst
we laugh, we feel in ourselves too much emotion and
compassion to laugh heartily :


“And a breezy, goose-skinned, blue-nosed, red-eyed, stony-
toed, tooth-chattering place it was, to wait in, in the winter-
time, as Toby Veck well knew. The wind came tearing round
the corner—especially the east wind—as if it had sallied forth,
express, from the confines of the earth, to have a blow at Toby.
And often-times it seemed to come upon him sooner than it had
expected ; for, bouncing round the corner, and passing Toby, it
would suddenly wheel round again, as if it cried: ‘ Why, here
he is!’ Incontinently his little white apron would be caught
up over his head like a naughty boy’s garments, and his feeble
little cane would be seen to wrestle and struggle unavailingly in
his hand, and his legs would undergo tremendous agitation ,
and Toby himself, all aslant, and facing now in this direction,
now in that, would be so banged and buffeted, and touzled, and
worried, and hustled, and lifted off his feet, as to render it a
state of things but one degree removed from a positive miracle
that he wasn’t carried up bodily into the air as a colony of frogs
or snails or other portable creatures sometimes are, and rained
down again, to the great astonishment of the natives, on some
strange corner of the world where ticket-porters are unknown,” }


1 The Chimes, the first quarter.


142. — MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


If now we would picture in a glance this imagina-
tion,—so lucid, so violent, so passionately fixed on the
object selected, so deeply touched by little things, so
wholly attached to the details and sentiments of vulgar
life, so fertile in incessant emotions, so powerful in
rousing painful pity, sarcastic raillery, nervous gaiety,
—we must fancy a London street on a rainy winter’s
night. The flickering light of the gas dazzles our eyes,
streams through the shop windows, floods over the
passing forms; and its harsh light, settling upon their
contracted features, brings out, with endless detail
and damaging force, their wrinkles, deformities, troubled
expression. If in this close and dirty crowd we dis-
cover the fresh face of a young girl, this artificial light
covers it with false and excessive lights and shades;
it makes it stand out against the rainy and cold black-
ness with a strange halo. The mind is struck with
wonder; but we carry our hand to our eyes to cover
them, and, whilst we admire the force of this light,
we involuntarily think of the real country sun and the
tranquil beauty of day.


§ 2.—TuE PUBLIC.


LE.

Plant this talent on English soil; the literary opinion
of the country will direct its growth and explain its
fruits. For this public opinion is its private opinion ;
it does not submit to it as to an external constraint,
but feels it inwardly as an inner persuasion; it does
not hinder, but develops it, and only repeats aloud what
it said to itself in a whisper.

The counsels of this public taste are somewhat like


CHAP. I. THE NOVEL—DICKENS, tas


this; the more powerful because they agree with its
natural inclination, and urge it upon its special
course :—

“Be moral. All your novels must be such as may
be read by young girls. We are practical minds, and
we would not have literature corrupt practical life.
We believe in family life, and we would not have
literature paint the passions which attack family life.
We are Protestants, and we have preserved something
of the severity of our fathers against enjoyment and
passions. Amongst these, love is the worst. Beware
of resembling in this respect the most illustrious of
ovr neighbours. Love is the hero of all George Sand’s
novels. Married or not, she thinks it beautiful, holy,
sublime in itself; and she says so. Don’t believe this;
and if you do believe it, don’t say it. It is a bad ex-
ample. Love thus represented makes marriage a
secondary matter. It ends in marriage, or destroys it,
or does without it, according to circumstances; but
whatever it does, it treats it as inferior; it does not
recognise any holiness in it, beyond that which love
gives it, and holds it impious if it is excluded. A novel
of this sort is a plea for the heart, the imagination,
enthusiasm, nature; but it is also often a plea against
society and law: we do not suffer society and law to
be touched, directly or indirectly. To present a feeling
as divine, to make all institutions bow before it, to
carry it through a series of generous actions, to sing
with a sort of heroic inspiration the combats which it
wages and the attacks which it sustains, to enrich it
with all the force of eloquence, to crown it with all
the flowers of poetry, is to paint the life, which it results
in, as more beautiful and loftier than others, to set it


144 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


far above all passions and duties, in a sublime region,
on a throne, whence it shines as a light, a consolation, a
hope, and draws all hearts towards it. Perhaps this is
the world of artists; it is not the world of ordinary
men. Perhaps it is true to nature; we make nature
give way before the interests of society. George Sand
paints impassioned women; paint you for us good
women. George Sand makes us desire to be in love;
do you make us desire to be married.

“This has its disadvantages without doubt; art
suffers by it, if the public gains. Though your char-
acters give the best examples, your works will be of
less value. No matter; you may.console yourself with
the thought that you are moral. Your lovers will be
uninteresting ; for the only interest natural to their age
is the violence of passion, and you cannot paint passion.
In Nicholas Nickleby you will show two good young
men, like all young men, marrying two good young
women, like all young women; in Martin Chuzalewit you
will show two more good young men, perfectly resem-
bling the other two, marrying again two good young
women, perfectly resembling the other two; in Dombey
and Son there will be only one good young man and one
good young woman. Otherwise there is no difference.
And so on. The number of your marriages is marvel-
lous, and you marry enough couples to people England.
What is more curious still, they are all disinterested,
and the young man and young woman snap their
fingers at money as sincerely as in the Opéra Comique.
You will not cease to dwell on the pretty shynesses of
the betrothed, the tears of the mothers, the tears of all
the guests, the amusing and touching scenes of. the
dinner table ; you will create a crowd of family pictures,


CHAP, I. THE NOVEL—DICKENS, 145


all touching, and almost all as agreeable as screen-
paintings. The reader is moved; he thinks he is be-
holding the innocent loves and virtuous attentions
of a little boy and girl of ten. He should like to
say to them: ‘Good little people, continue to be very
proper. But the chief interest will be for young
girls, who will learn in how devoted and yet suit-
able a manner a lover ought to court his intended.
If you venture on a seduction, as in Copperfield, you
do not relate the progress, ardour, intoxication of
love; you only depict its miseries, despair, and re-
morse. If in Copperfield and the Cricket on the Hearth
you present a troubled marriage and a suspected wife,
you hasten to restore peace to the marriage and
innocence to the wife; and you will deliver, by her
mouth, so splendid a eulogy on marriage, that it
might serve for a model to Emile Augier! If in Hard
Times the wife treads on the border of crime, she shall
check herself there. If in Dombey and Son she flees
from her husband’s roof, she remains pure, only incurs
the appearance of crime, and treats her lover in such a
manner that the reader wishes to be the husband.
If, lastly, in Copperfield you relate the emotions
and follies of love, you will rally this poor affection,
depict its littlenesses, not venture to make us hear
the ardent, generous, undisciplined blast of the all-
powerful passion; you turn it into a toy for good chil-
dren, or a pretty marriage-trinket. But marriage will
compensate you. Your genius of observation and
taste for details is exercised on the scenes of domestic
life; you will excel in the picture of a fireside, family

1 A living French author, whose dramas are all said to have a moral


purpose.—TR.
VOL. IV. L


146 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


prattle, children on the knees of their mother, a hus-
band watching by lamplight by the side of his sleeping
wife, the heart full of joy and courage, because it feels
that it is working for its own. You will describe
charming or grave portraits of women; of Dora, who
after marriage continues to be a little girl, whose
pouting, prettinesses, childishnesses, laughter, make the
house gay, like the chirping of a bird; Esther, whose
perfect goodness and divine innocence cannot be
affected by trials or years; Agnes, so calm, patient,
sensible, pure, worthy of respect, a very model of a
wife, sufficient in herself to claim for marriage the
respect which we demand for it. And when it is
necessary to show the beauty of these duties, the great-
ness of this conjugal love, the depth of the sentiment
which ten years of confidence, cares, and reciprocal
devotion have created, you will find in your sensibility,
so long constrained, speeches as pathetic as the strongest
words of love."

“The worst novels are not those which glorify
love. A man must live across the Channel to dare
what the French have dared. In England, some admire
Balzac; but no man would tolerate him. Some pre-
tend that he is not immoral ; but every one will recognise
that he always and everywhere makes morality an
abstraction. George Sand has only celebrated one
passion; Balzac has celebrated them all. . He has
considered them as forces; and holding that force is
beautiful, he has supported them by their causes,
surrounded them by their circumstances, developed
them in their effects, pushed them to an extreme, and


" David Copperfield, ch. lxy.; the scene between the doctor and
his wife,


CHAP. I. THE NOVEL—DIOKENS. 147


magnified them so as to make them into sublime
monsters, more systematic and more true than the truth.
We do not admit that a man is only an artist, and
nothing else. We would not have him separate him-
self from his conscience, and lose sight of the practical.
We will never consent to see that such' is the leading
feature of our own Shakspeare; we will not recognise
that he, like Balzac, brings his heroes to crime and
monomania, and that, like him, he lives in a land of
pure logic and imagination. We have changed much
since the sixteenth century, and we condemn now what
we approved formerly. We would not have the reader
interested in a miser, an ambitious man, a rake. And
he is interested in them when the writer, neither prais-
ing nor blaming, sets himself to unfold the mood,
training, shape of the head, and habits of mind which
have impressed in him this primitive inclination, to
prove the necessity of its effects, to lead it through all
its stages, to show the greater power which age and
contentment give, to expose the irresistible fall which
hurls man into madness or death. The reader, caught
by this reasoning, admires the work which it has pro-
duced, and forgets to be indignant against the personage
created. He says, What a splendid miser! and thinks
not of the evils which avarice causes. He becomes
a philosopher and an artist, and remembers not that he
is an upright man. Always recollect that you are
such, and renounce the beauties which may flourish on
this evil soil.

« Amongst these the first is greatness. A man must
be interested in passions to comprehend their full effect,
to count all their springs, to describe their whole course,
They are diseases; if a man is content to blame them


148 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK Y,


he will never know them; if you are not a physiologist,
if you are not enamoured of them, if you do not make
your herges out of them, if you do not start with
pleasure at the sight of a fine feature of avarice, as at
the sight of a valuable symptom, you will not be able
to unfold their vast system, and to display their fatal
greatness. You will not have this immoral merit ; and,
moreover, it does not suit your species of mind. Your
extreme sensibility, and ever-ready irony, must needs
be exercised; you have not sufficient calmness to pene-
trate to the depths of a character, you prefer to weep
over or to rail at it; you lay the blame on it, make
it your friend or foe, render it touching or odious;
you do not depict it; you are too impassioned, and
not enough inquisitive. On the other hand, the ten-
acity of your imagination, the vehemence and fixity
with which you impress your thought into the detail
you wish to grasp, limit your knowledge, arrest you in
a single feature, prevent you from reaching all the parts
of a soul, and from sounding its depths. Your imagina-
tion is too lively, too meagre. These, then, are the
characters you will outline. You will grasp a personage
in a single attitude, you will see of him only that, and
you will impose it upon him from beginning to end.
His face will always have the same expression, and this
expression will be almost always a grimace. Your per-
sonages will have a sort of knack which will not quit
them. Miss Mercy will laugh at every word; Mark
Tapley will say ‘jolly’ in every scene; Mrs. Gamp will
be ever talking of Mrs. Harris ; Dr. Chillip will not ven-
ture a single action free from timidity ; Mr. Micawber
_ will speak through three volumes the same kind of em-
phatic phrases, and will pass five or six times, with


CHAP, I. THE NOVEL—DICKENS, 149


comical suddenness, from joy to grief. Each of your
characters will be a vice, a virtue, aridicule personified ;
and the passion, with which you endow it, will be so
frequent, so invariable, so absorbing, that it will no longer
be like a living man, but an abstraction in man’s clothes.
The French have a Tartuffe like your Pecksniff, but the
hypocrisy which he represents has not destroyed the other
traits of his character; if he adds to the comedy by his
vice, he belongs to humanity by his nature. He has,
besides his ridiculous feature, a character and a mood;
he is coarse, strong, red in the face, brutal, sensual ;
the vehemence of his blood makes him bold; his bold-
ness makes him calm; his boldness, his calm, his quick
decision, his scorn of men, make him a great politician.
When he has entertained the public through five acts,
he still offers to the psychologist and the physician
more than one subject of study. Your Pecksniff will
offer nothing to these. Hé will only serve to instruct
and amuse the public. He will be a living satire of
hypocrisy, and nothing more. If you give him a taste
for brandy, it is gratuitously ; in the mood which you
assign to him, nothing requires it; he is so steeped in
oily hypocrisy, in softness, in a flowing style, in literary
phrases, in tender morality, that the rest of his nature
has disappeared ; it isa mask, andnotaman. But this
mask is so grotesque and energetic, that it will be
useful to the public, and will diminish the number of
hypocrites. It is our end and yours, and the list of
. your characters will have rather the effect of a book of
satires than of a portrait gallery.

“For the same reason, these satires, though united,
will continue effectually detached, and will not consti-
tute a genuine collection. You began with essays, and


150 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V


your larger novels are only essays, tagged together.
The ‘only means of composing a natural and solid whole
is to write the history of a passion or of a character, to
take them up at their birth, to see them increase, alter,
become destroyed, to understand the inner necessity for
their development. You do not follow this develop-
ment; you always keep your character in the same
attitude ; he is a miser, or a hypocrite, or a good man
to the end, and always after the same fashion: thus he
has no history. You.can only change the circumstances
in which he is met with, you do not change him; he
remains motionless, and at every shock that touches him,
emits the same sound. The variety of events which
you contrive is therefore only an amusing phantas-
magoria; they have no connection, they do not form a
system, they are but a heap. You will only write lives,
adventures, memoirs, sketches, collections of scenes, and
you will not be able to compose an action. But if the
literary taste of your nation, added to the natural
direction of your genius, imposes upon you moral in-
tentions, forbids you the lofty depicture of characters,
vetoes the composition of united aggregates, it presents
to your observation, sensibility, and satire, a succession
of original figures which belong only to England, which,
drawn by your hand, will form a unique gallery, and
which, with the stamp of your genius, will offer that of
your country and of your time.”


§ 3.—THE CHARACTERS.


I.


Take away the grotesque characters, who are only
introduced to fill up and to excite laughter, and you will


CHAP, I, THE NOVEL—DICKENS. 151


find that all Dickens’ characters belong to two classes
—people who have feelings and emotions, and people
who have none. He contrasts the souls which nature
creates with those which society deforms. One of his
last novels, Hard Times, is an abstract of all the rest.
He there exalts instinct above reason, intuition of heart
above positive knowledge; he attacks education built
on statistics, figures, and facts; overwhelms the positive
and mercantile spirit with misfortune and ridicule;
and the aristocrat; falls foul of manufacturing towns,
combats the pride, harshness, selfishness of the merchant
towns of smoke and mud, which fetter the body in an arti-
ficial atmosphere, and the mind in a factitious existence.
He seeks out poor artisans, mountebanks, a foundling,
and crushes beneath their common sense, generosity,
delicacy, courage, and gentleness, the false science, false
happiness, and false virtue of the rich and powerful
who despise them. He satirises oppressive society ;
mourns over oppressed nature; and his elegiac genius,
like his satirical genius, finds ready to his hand in the
English world around him, the sphere which it needs
for its development.


Like


The first fruits of English society is hypocrisy. It
ripens here under the double breath of religion and
morality ; we know their popularity and sway across
the Channel. In a country where it is shocking
to laugh on Sunday, where the gloomy Puritan has
preserved something of his old rancour against happi-
ness, where the critics of ancient history insert disserta-
tions on the relative virtue of Nebuchadnezzar, it is
natural that the appearance of morality should be


192 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


serviceable. It is a needful coin: those who lack good
money coin bad; and the more public opinion declares
it precious, the more it is counterfeited. This vice is
therefore English. Mr. Pecksniff is not found in France.
His speech would disgust Frenchmen. If they have
an affectation, it is not of virtue, but of vice: if they
wish to succeed, they would be wrong to speak of their
principles: they prefer to confess their weaknesses ;
and if they have quacks, they are boasters of immorality.
They had their hypocrites once, but it was when religion
was popular. Since Voltaire, Tartuffe is impossible.
Frenchmen no longer try to affect a piety which would
deceive no one and lead to nothing. Hypocrisy comes
and goes, varying with the state of morals, religion,
and mind; we can see, then, how Pecksniff’s suits the
dispositions of his country. English religion is not very
dogmatical, but wholly moral. Therefore Pecksniff does
not, like Tartuffe, utter theological phrases; he expands
altogether in philanthropic tirades. He has progressed
with the age; he has become a humanitarian philo-
sopher. He calls his daughters Mercy and Charity.
He is tender, he is kind, he gives vent to domestic
effusions. He innocently exhibits, when visited, charm-
ing domestic scenes; he displays his paternal heart,
marital sentiments, the kindly feeling of a good master.
The family virtues are honoured now-a-days; he must
muffle himself therewith. Orgon formerly said, as
taught by Tartuffe :

‘My brother, children, mother, wife might die !

You think I'll care ; no surely, no! not I!”1

1 « Et je verrais mourir frére, enfants, mére, et femme

Que je m’en soucierais autant que de cela.”


These lines, said by Orgon to his brother-in-law Cléante, are from
Moliére’s Tartuffe, i. vi.


CHAP. I. THE NOVEL—DICKENS. 153


Modern virtue and English piety think otherwise ;
we must not despise this world in view of the next;
we must improve it. Tartuffe speaks of his hair-shirt
and his discipline; Pecksniff, of his comfortable little
parlour, of the charm of friendship, the beauties of
nature. He tries to make men “dwell in unity.”
He is like a member of the Peace Society. He de-
velops the most touching considerations on the bene-
fits and beauties of union among men. It will be
impossible to hear him without being affected. Men
are refined now-a-days, they have read much elegiac
poetry ; their sensibility is more active; they can no
longer be deceived by the coarse impudence of Tartuffe.
This is why Mr. Pecksniff will use gestures of sublime
long-suffering, smiles of ineffable compassion, starts,
free and easy movements, graces, tendernesses which
will seduce the most reserved and charm the most
delicate. The English in their Parliament, meetings,
associations, public ceremonies, have learned the oratori-
cal phraseology, the abstract terms, the style of political
economy, of the newspaper and the prospectus. Peck-
sniff talks like a prospectus. He possesses its obscurity,
its wordiness, and its emphasis. He seems to soar
above the earth, in the region of pure ideas, in the
bosom of truth. He resembles an apostle, brought up
in the Times office. He spouts general ideas on every
occasion. He finds a moral lesson in the ham and eggs
he has just eaten. As he folds his napkin, he rises to
lofty contemplations :

“Even the worldly goods of which we have just disposed,
even they have their moral. See how they come and go.
Every pleasure is transitory.” }


1 Martin Chuzzlewit, ch. ii.


154 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK VY.


“<The process of digestion, as I have been informed by
anatomical friends, is one of the most wonderful works of
nature. I do not know how it may be with others, but it is a
great satisfaction to me to know, when regaling on my humble
fare, that I am putting in motion the most beautiful machinery
with which we have any acquaintance, I really feel at such
times as if I was doing a public service. When I have wound
myself up, if I may employ such a term,’ said Mr. Pecksniff
with exquisite tenderness, ‘and know that Iam Going, I feel
that in the lesson afforded by the works within me, 1 am a
Benefactor to my Kind!’”?


We recognise a new species of hypocrisy. Vices, like
virtues, change in every age.

The practical, as well as the mural spirit, is English ;
by commerce, labour, and government, this people has
acquired the taste and talent for business; this is why
they regard the French as children and madmen. The
excess of this disposition is the destruction of imagina-
tion and sensibility. Man becomes a speculative ma-
chine, in which figures and facts are set in array; he
denies the life of the mind, and the joys of the heart ; he
sees in the world nothing but loss and gain; be becomes
hard, harsh, greedy, and avaricious; he treats men as
machinery ; on a certain day he finds himself simply a
merchant, banker, statistician; he has ceased to be a
man. Dickens has multiplied portraits of the positive
man—Ralph Nickleby, Scrooge, Anthony Chuzzlewit,
Jonas Chuzzlewit, Alderman Cute, Mr. Murdstone and
his sister, Bounderby, Gradgrind: we can find them
in all his novels. Some are so by education, others by
nature; but all are odious, for they all rail at and
destroy kindness, sympathy, compassion, disinterested


) Martin Chuzzlewit, ch. viii.


CHAP. I. THE NOVEL—DICKENS. 155


affections, religious emotions, a fanciful enthusiasm,
all that is lovely m man. They oppress children,
strike women, starve the poor, insult the wretched.
The best are machines of polished steel, methodically
performing their official duties, and not knowing that
they make others suffer. These kinds of men are not
found in France. Their rigidity is not in the French
character. They are produced in England by a school
which has its philosophy, its great men, its glory, and
which has never been established amongst the French.
More than once, it is true, French writers have depicted
avaricious men, men of business, and shopkeepers:
Balzac is full of them; but he explains them by their
imbecility, or makes them monsters, like Grandet and
Gobseck. Those of Dickens constitute a real class, and
represent a national vice. Read this passage of Hard
Times, and see if, body and soul, Mr. Gradgrind is not
wholly English :


“<«WNow, what I want is Facts. Teach these boys and girls
nothing but Facts. Facts alone are wanted in life. Plant
nothing else, and root out everything else. You can only form
the minds of reasoning animals upon Facts: nothing else will
ever be of any service to them, This is the principle on which
I bring up my own children, and this is the principle on which
I bring up these children. Stick to Facts, sir!’

“The scene was a plain, bare, monotonous vault of a school-
room, and the speaker’s square forefinger emphasised his obser-
vations by underscoring every sentence with a line on the
schoolmaster’s sleeve. The emphasis was helped by the speaker’s
square wall of a forehead, which had his eyebrows for its base,
while his eyes found commodious cellarage in two dark caves,
overshadowed by the wall. The emphasis was helped by the
speaker’s mouth, which was wide, thin, and hard set. The


156 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


emphasis was helped by the speaker’s voice, which was inflexible,
dry, and dictatorial.. The emphasis was helped by the speaker’s
hair, which bristled on the skirts of his bald head, a plantation
of firs to keep the wind from its shining surface, all covered with
knobs, like the crust of a plum-pie, as if the head had scarcely
warehouse-room for the hard facts stored inside. The speaker's
obstinate carriage, square coat, square legs, square shoulders—
nay, his very neckcloth, trained to take him by the throat with
an unaccommodating grasp, like a stubborn fact, as it was—all
helped the emphasis.

“<Tn this life we want nothing but Facts, sir; nothing but
Facts !’

“The speaker, and the schoolmaster, and the third grown
person present, all backed a little, and swept with their eyes
the inclined plane of little vessels then and there arranged in
order, ready to have imperial gallons of facts poured into them
until they were full to the brim.?

“THOMAS GRADGRIND, sir! A man of realities. A man
of facts and calculations, A man who proceeds upon the
principle that two and two are four, and nothing over, and who
is not to be talked into allowing for anything over. Thomas
Gradgrind, sir—peremptorily Thomas—Thomas Gradgrind,
With a rule and a pair of scales, and the multiplication table
always in his pocket, sir, ready to weigh and measure any parcel
of human nature, and tell you exactly what it comes to. It is
a@ mere question of figures, a case of simple arithmetic. You
might hope to get some other nonsensical belief into the head
of George Gradgrind, or Augustus Gradgrind, or John Gradgrind,
or Joseph Gradgrind (all supposititious, non-existent persons),
but into the head of Thomas Gradgrind—no, sir !’

“Tn such terms Mr, Gradgrind always mentally introduced
himself, whether to his private circle of acquaintance, or to the
oublic in general, In such terms, no doubt, substituting the
words ‘boys and girls’ for ‘sir,’ Thomas Gradgrind now pre-


1 Hard Times, book i. ch, i,


CHAP, I, THE NOVEL—DICKENS. 157


sented Thomas Gradgrind to the little pitchers before him, who
were to be filled so full of facts,”}


Another fault arising from the habit of commanding
and striving is pride. It abounds in an aristocratic
country, and no one has more soundly rated aristocracy
than Dickens; all his portraits are sarcasms. James
Harthouse, a dandy disgusted with everything, chiefly
with himself, and rightly so; Lord Frederick Verisopht,
a poor duped idiot, brutalised with drink, whose wit
consists in staring at men and sucking his cane; Lord
Feenix, a sort of mechanism of parliamentary phrases,
out of order, and hardly able to finish the ridiculous
periods into which he always takes care to lapse; Mrs.
Skewton, a hideous old ruin, a coquette to the last,
demanding rose-coloured curtains for her death-bed,
and parading her daughter through all the drawing-
rooms of England, in order to sell her to some vain
husband; Sir John Chester, a wretch of high society,
who, for fear of compromising himself, refuses to save
his natural son, and refuses it with all kinds of airs, as
he finishes his chocolate. But the most complete and
most English picture of the aristocratic spirit is the
portrait of a London merchant, Mr. Dombey.

In France people do not look for types among the
merchants, but they are found among that class in
England, as forcible as in the proudest chateaux. Mr.
Dombey loves his house as if he were a nobleman, as
much as himself. If he neglects his daughter and
longs for a son, it is to perpetuate the old name of
his bank. He has his ancestors in commerce, and he
likes to have his descendants in the same branch of
business. He maintains traditions, and continues a


1 Hard Times, book i. ch. ii.


158 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


power. At this height of opulence, and with this scope
of action, he is a prince, and with a prince’s position
he has his feelings. We see there a character which
could only be produced in a country whose commerce
embraces the globe, where merchants are potentates,
where a company of merchants has trafficked in con-
tinents, maintained wars, destroyed kingdoms, founded
an empire of a hundred million men. The pride of
such a man is not petty, but terrible; it is so calm
and high, that to find a parallel we must read again
the Mémoires of the Duke of Saint Simon. Mr.
Dombey has always commanded, and it does not enter
his mind that he could yield to any one or anything.
He receives flattery as a tribute to which he has a
right, and sees men beneath him, at a vast distance, as
beings made to beseech and obey him. His second
wife, proud Edith Skewton, resists and scorns him;
the pride of the merchant is pitted against the pride of
the high-born woman, and the restrained outbursts of
this growing opposition reveal an intensity of passion,
which souls thus born and bred alone can feel. Edith,
to avenge herself, flees on the anniversary of her mar-
riage, and gives herself the appearance of being an adult-
eress. It is then that his inflexible pride asserts itself
in all its rigidity. He has driven out of the house
his daughter, whom he believes the accomplice of his
wife; he forbids the one or the other to be recalled to
his memory; he commands his sister and his friends
to be silent; he receives guests with the same tone and
the same coldness. With despair in his heart, and
feeling bitterly the insult offered to him by his wife,
the conscientiousness of his failure, and the idea of
public ridicule, he remains as firm, as haughty, as calm


CHAP, I. THE NOVEL—DICKENS, 159


as ever. He launches out more recklessly in specu-
lations, and is ruined; he is on the point of suicide.
Hitherto all was well: the bronze column continued
whole and unbroken; but the exigencies of public
morality mar the idea of the book. His daughter
arrives in the nick of time. She entreats him; his
feelings get the better of him, she carries him off; he
becomes the best of fathers, and spoils a fine novel.


sane


Let us look at some different personages. In con-
trast with these bad and factitious characters, produced
by national institutions, we find good creatures such
as nature made them; and first, children.

We have none in French literature. Racine’s little
Joas could only exist in a piece composed for the
ladies’ college of Saint Cyr; the little child speaks like
a prince’s son, with noble and acquired phrases, as if
repeating his catechism. Now-a-days these portraits
are only seen in France in New-year’s books, written
as models for good children. Dickens painted his
with special gratification ; he did not think of edifying
the public, and he has charmed it. All his children
are of extreme sensibility; they love much, and they
crave to be loved. To understand this gratification of
the painter, and this choice of characters, we must
think of their physical type. English children have a
colour so fresh, a complexion so delicate, a skin so
transparent, eyes so blue and pure, that they are like
beautiful flowers. No wonder if a novelist loves them,
lends to their soul a sensibility and innocence which
shine forth from their looks, if he thinks that these
frail and charming roses are crushed by the coarse


160 MCDERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


hands which try to bend them. We must also imagine
to ourselves the households in which they grow up.
When at five o’clock the merchant and the clerk leave
their office and their business, they return as quickly
as possible to the pretty cottage, where their children
have played all day on the lawn. The fireside by
which they will pass the evening is a sanctuary, and
domestic tenderness is the only poetry they need. A
child deprived of these affections and this happiness
seems to be deprived of the air we breathe, and
the novelist does not find a volume too much to
explain its unhappiness. Dickens has recorded it in
ten volumes, and at last he has written the history of
David Copperfield. David is loved by his mother, and
by an honest servant girl, Peggotty; he plays with her
in the garden; he watches her sew; he reads to her
the natural history of crocodiles; he fears the hens and
geese, which strut in a menacing and ferocious manner
in the yard; he is perfectly happy. His mother
marries again, and all changes. The father-in-law, Mr.
Murdstone, and his sister Jane, are harsh, methodical,
and cold beings. Poor little David is every moment
wounded by harsh words. He dare not speak or move;
he is afraid to kiss his mother; he feels himself
weighed down, as by a leaden cloak, by the cold looks
of the new master and mistress. He falls back on
himself; mechanically studies the lessons assigned him ;
cannot learn them, so great is his dread of not knowing
them. He is whipped, shut up with bread and water
in a lonely room. He is terrified by night, and fears
himself. He asks himself whether in fact he is not
bad or wicked, and weeps. This incessant terror, hope-
less and issueless, the spectacle of this wounded


CHAP, I, THE NOVEL—DICKENS, 161


sensibility and stupefied intelligence, the long anxieties,
the sleepless nights, the solitude of the poor imprisoned
child, his passionate desire to kiss his mother or to weep
on the breast of his nurse,—all this is sad to see. These
children’s griefs are as heart-felt as the sorrows of a man.
It is the history of a frail plant, which was flourishing
in a warm air, beneath a mild sun, and which, suddenly
transplanted to the snow, sheds its leaves and withers.

The working-classes are like children, dependent, not
very cultivated, akin to nature, and liable to oppression.
And so Dickens extols them. That is not new in
France; the novels of Eugéne Sue have given us more
than one example, and the theme is as old as Rousseau ;
but in the hands of the English writer it has acquired
a singular force. His heroes possess feelings so deli-
cate, and are so self-sacrificing, that we cannot admire
them sufficiently. They have nothing vulgar but their
pronunciation ; the rest is but nobility and generosity.
We see a mountebank abandon his daughter, his only
joy, for fear of injuring her in any way. A young
woman devotes herself to save the unworthy wife of a
man who loves her, and whom she loves; the man
dies; she continues, from pure self-sacrifice, to care for
the degraded creature. A poor waggoner, who thinks
his wife unfaithful, loudly pronounces her innocent, and
all his vengeance is to think only of loading her with
tenderness and kindness. None, according to Dickens,
feel so strongly as they do the happiness of loving and
being loved——the pure joys of domestic life. None
have so much compassion for those poor deformed and
infirm creatures whom they so often bring into the world,
and who seem only born to die. None have a juster
and more inflexible moral sense. I confess even that

VoL. IV. M


162 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V,


Dickens’ heroes unfortunately resemble the indignant
fathers of French melodramas. When old Peggotty
learns that his niece is seduced, he sets off, stick in hand,
and walks over France, Germany, and Italy, to find her
and bring her back to duty. But above all, they have
an English sentiment, which fails in Frenchmen: they
are Christians. It is not only women, as in France,
who take refuge in the idea of another world; men
turn also their thoughts towards it. In England,
where there are so many sects, and every one chooses
his own, each one believes in the religion he has made
for himself; and this noble sentiment raises still
higher the throne upon which the uprightness of their
resolution and the delicacy of their heart has placed
them.

In reality, the novels of Dickens can all be reduced
to one phrase, to wit: Be good, and love; there is
genuine joy only in the emotions of the heart; sensi-
bility is the whole man. Leave science to the wise,
pride to the nobles, luxury to the rich; have compas-
sion on humble wretchedness; the smallest and most
despised being may in himself be worth as much as
thousands of the powerful and the proud. Take care
not to bruise the delicate souls which flourish in all
conditions, under all costumes, in all ages. Believe
that humanity, pity, forgiveness, are the finest things
in man; believe that intimacy, expansion, tenderness,
tears, are the sweetest things in the world. To live is
nothing ; to be powerful, learned, illustrious, is little ;
to be useful is not enough. He alone has lived and is
@ man who has wept at the remembrance of a kind
action which he himself has performed or received.


CHAP, I. THE NOVEL—-DICKENS, 163


TY;


We do not believe that this contrast between the
weak and the strong, or this outcry against society in
favour of nature, are the caprice of an artist or the
chance of the moment. When we penetrate deeply into
the history of English genius, we find that its primitive
foundation was impassioned sensibility, and that its
natural expression was lyrical exaltation. Both were
brought from Germany, and make up the literature ex-
isting before the Conquest. After an interval you find
them again in the sixteenth century, when the French
literature, introduced from Normandy, had passed away :
they are the very soul of the nation. But the education
of this soul was opposite to its genius; its history con-
tradicted its nature; and its primitive inclination has
clashed with all the great events which it has created
or suffered. The chance of a victorious invasion and
an imposed aristocracy, whilst establishing the enjoy-
ment of political liberty, has impressed on the character
habits of strife and pride. The chance of an insular
position, the necessity of commerce, the abundant pos-
session of the first materials for industry, have developed
the practical faculties and the positive mind. The acqui-
sition of these habits, faculties, and mind, to which must
be added former hostile feelings to Rome, and an invete-
rate hatred against an oppressive church, has given birth
to a proud and reasoning religion, replacing submission
by independence, poetic theology by practical morality,
and faith by discussion. Politics, business, and reli-
gion, like three powerful machines, have created a
new man above the old. Stern dignity, self-command,
the need of authority, severity in its exercise, strict


164 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


morality, without compromise or pity, a taste for figures
and dry calculation, a dislike of facts not palpable and
ideas not useful, ignorance of the invisible world, scorn
of the weaknesses and tendernesses of the heart,—such
are the dispositions which the stream of facts and the
ascendency of institutions tend to confirm in their souls.
But poetry and domestic life prove that they have only
half succeeded. The old sensibility, oppressed and
perverted, still lives and works. The poet subsists
under the Puritan, the trader, the statesman. The
social man has not destroyed the natural man. This
frozen crust, this unsociable pride, this rigid attitude,
often cover a good and tender nature. It is the English
mask of a German head; and when a talented writer,
often a writer cf genius, reaches the sensibility which
is bruised or buried by education and national institu-
tions, he moves his reader in the most inner depths,
and becomes the master of all hearts.


CHAPTER II.
The-Nobel continued—Thackeray,
I.


THE novel of manners in England multiplies, and for
this there are several reasons: first, it is born there,
and every plant thrives well in its own soil; secondly,
it is a natural outlet: there is no music in England as in
Germany, or conversation as in France; and men who
must think and feel find in it a means of feeling and
thinking. On the other hand, women take part in it
with eagerness; amidst the stagnation of gallantry and
the coldness of religion, it gives scope for imagination
and dreams. Finally, by its minute details and practical
counsels, it opens up a career to the precise and moral
mind. The critic thus is, as it were, swamped in this
copiousness ; he must select in order to grasp the whole,
and confine himself to a few in order to embrace all.

In this crowd two men have appeared of superior
talent, original and contrasted, popular on the same
grounds, ministers to the same cause, moralists in
comedy and drama, defenders of natural sentiments
against social institutions; who, by the precision of
their pictures, the depth of their observations, the suc-
cession and bitterness: of their attacks, have renewed,
with other views and in another style, the old combative
spirit of Swift and Fielding. _


166 MODERN AUTHORS, BOOK V.


One, more ardent, more expansive, wholly given up
to rapture, an impassioned painter of crude and dazzling
pictures, a lyric prose-writer, omnipotent in laughter
and tears, plunged into fantastic invention, painful
sensibility, vehement buffoonery ; and by the boldness
of his style, the excess of his emotions, the grotesque
familiarity of his caricatures, he has displayed all the
forces and weaknesses of an artist, all the audacities, all
the successes, and all the oddities of the imagination.

The other, more contained, better informed and
stronger, a lover of moral dissertations, a counsellor of
the public, a sort of lay preacher, less bent on defending
the poor, more bent on censuring man, has brought to
the aid of satire a sustained common sense, a great
knowledge of the heart, consummate cleverness, powerful
reasoning, a treasure of meditated hatred, and has per-
secuted vice with all the weapons of reflection. By
this contrast the one completes the other; and we may
form an exact idea of English taste, by placing the
portrait of William Makepeace Thackeray by the side
of that of Charles Dickens.


§ 1.—Tue Satirist.


LE


No wonder if in England a novelist writes satires.
A gloomy and reflective man is impelled to it by his
character; he is still further impelled by the surround-
ing manners. He is not permitted to contemplate
passions as poetic powers; he is bidden to appreciate
them as moral qualities. His pictures become sen-
tences; he is a counsellor rather than an observer, a


CHAP, II, THE NOVEL—THACKERAY. 167


judgerather than an artist. We see by what machinery
Thackeray has changed novel into satire.

I open at random his three great works— Pendennis,
Vanity Fair, The Newcomes. Every scene sets in
relief a moral truth: the author desires that at every
page we should form a judgment on vice and virtue ;
he has blamed or approved beforehand, and the dia-
logues or portraits are to him only means by which he
adds our approbation to his approbation, our blame to
his blame. He is giving us lessons; and beneath the
sentiments which he describes, as beneath the events
which he relates, we continually discover rules for our
conduct and the intentions of a reformer.

On the first page of Pendennis we see the portrait
of an old major, a man of the world, selfish and vain,
seated comfortably in his club, at the table by the fire,
and near the window, envied by surgeon Glowry, whom
nobody ever invites, seeking in the records of aristo-
cratic entertainments for his own name, gloriously
placed amongst those of illustrious ‘guests. A family
letter arrives. Naturally he puts it aside and reads it
carelessly last of all. He utters an exclamation of
horror; his nephew wants to marry an actress. He
has places booked in the coach (charging the sum which
he disburses for the seats to the account of the widow
and the young scapegrace of whom he is guardian),
and hastens to save the young fool. If there were a
low «marriage, what would become of his invitations ?
The manifest conclusion is: Let us not be selfish, or
vain, or fond of good living, like the major.

Chapter the second: Pendennis, the father of the young
man in love, had “ exercised the profession of apothecary
and surgeon,” but, being of good birth, his “secret am-
bition had always been to be agentleman.” He comes


168 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


into money; is called Doctor, marries the very distant
relative of a lord, tries to get acquainted with high
families. He boasts to the last day of his life of
having been invited by Sir Pepin Ribstone to an enter-
tainment. He buys a small estate, tries to sink
the apothecary, and shows off in the new glory of a
landed proprietor. Each of these details is a concealed
or evident sarcasm, which says to the reader: “ My good
friend, remain the honest John Tomkins that you are;
and for the love of your son and yourself, avoid taking
the airs of a great nobleman.”

Old Pendennis dies. His son, the noble heir of the
domain, “Prince of Pendennis and Grand Duke of
Fairoaks,” begins to reign over his mother, his cousin,
and the servants. He sends wretched verses to the
county papers, begins an epic poem, a tragedy in which
sixteen persons die, a scathing history of the Jesuits,
and defends church ‘and king like a loyal Tory. He
sighs after the ideal, wishes for an unknown maiden,
and falls in love with an actress, a woman of thirty-two,
who learns her parts mechanically, as ignorant and stupid
as can be. Young folks, my dear friends, you are all
affected, pretentious, dupes of yourselves and of others.
Wait to judge the world until you have seen it, and do
not think you are masters when you are scholars.

The lesson continues and lasts as long as the life
of Arthur. Like Le Sage in Gl Blas, and Balzac in Le
Pere Goriot, the author of Pendennis depicts a young
man having some talent, endowed with good feelings,
even generous, desiring to make a name, whilst, at the
same time, he falls in with the maxims of the world;
but Le Sage only wished to amuse us, and Balzac only
wished to stir our passions: Thackeray, from begin-
ning to end, labours to correct us.


CHAP. IE. THE NOVEL—THACKERAY, 169


This intention becomes still more evident if we
examine in detail one of his dialogues and one of his
pictures. We will not find there impartial energy,
bent on copying nature, but attentive thoughtfulness,
bent on transforming into satire objects, words, and
events. All the words of the character are chosen
and weighed, so as to be odious or ridiculous. It
accuses itself, is studious to display vice, and behind
its voice we hear the voice of the writer who judges,
unmasks, and punishes it. Miss Crawley, a rich old
woman, falls ill’ Mrs. Bute Crawley, her relative,
hastens to save her, and to save the inheritance. Her
aim is to have excluded from the will a nephew, Captain
Rawdon, an old favourite, presumptive heir of the old
lady. This Rawdon is a stupid guardsman, a frequenter
of taverns, a too clever gambler, a duellist, and a
rowé. Fancy the capital opportunity for Mrs. Bute, the
respectable mother of a family, the worthy spouse of a
clergyman, accustomed to write her husband’s sermons !
From sheer virtue she hates Captain Rawdon, and will
not suffer that such a good sum of money should fall
into such bad hands. Moreover, are we not responsible
for our families? and is it not for us to publish the
faults of our relatives? It is our strict duty, and Mrs.
Bute acquits herself of hers conscientiously. She col-
lects edifying stories of her nephew, and therewith she
edifies the aunt. He has ruined so and so; he has
wronged such a woman. He has duped this tradesman ;
he has killed this husband. And above all, unworthy
man, he has mocked his aunt! Will that generous lady


? Vanity Fair. [Unless the original octavo edition is mentioned, the
translator has always used the collected edition of Thackeray’s works
jn small octavo, 1855-1868, 14 vols.1


170 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


continue to cherish such a viper? Will she suffer her
numberless sacrifices to be repaid by such ingratitude
and such ridicule? We can imagine the ecclesiastical
eloquence of Mrs. Bute. Seated at the foot of the bed,
she keeps the patient in sight, plies her with draughts,
enlivens her with terrible sermons, and mounts guard
at the door against the probable invasion of the heir.
The siege was well conducted, the legacy attacked so
obstinately must be yielded up; the virtuous fingers of
the matron grasped beforehand and by anticipation the
substantial heap of shining sovereigns. And yet a
carping spectator might have found some faults in her
management. Mrs. Bute managed rather too well. She
forgot that a woman persecuted with sermons, handled
like a bale of goods, regulated like a clock, might take
a dislike to so harassing an authority. What is worse,
she forgot that a timid old woman, confined to the
house, overwhelmed with preachings, poisoned with pills,
might die before having changed her will, and leave all,
alas, to her scoundrelly nephew. Instructive and for-
midable example! Mrs. Bute, the honour of her sex,
the consoler of the sick, the counsellor of her family,
having ruined her health to look after her beloved sister-
in-law, and to preserve the inheritance, was just on the
point, by her exemplary devotion, of putting the patient
in her coffin, and the inheritance in the hands of her
nephew.

Apothecary Clump arrives; he trembles for his dear
client ; she is worth to him two hundred a year; he is
resolved to save this precious life, in spite of Mrs. Bute.
Mrs. Bute interrupts him, and says: “I am sure, my
dear Mr. Clump, no efforts of mine have been wanting
to restore our dear invalid, whom the ingratitude of her


CHAP. II. THE NOVEL—THACKERAY. 171


nephew has laid on the bed of sickness. I never shrink
from personal discomfort; I never refuse to sacrifice
myself... .I would lay down my life for my duty, or
for any member of my lusband’s family.”» The dis-
interested apothecary returns to the charge heroically.
Immediately she replies in the finest strain; her
eloquence flows from her lips as from an over-full pitcher.
She cries aloud: “Never, as long as nature supports
me, will I desert the post of duty. As the mother of
a family and the wife of an English clergyman, I
humbly trust that my principles are good. When my
poor James was in the small-pox, did I allow any
hireling to nurse him? .No!” The patient Clump
scatters about sugared compliments, and pressing his
point amidst interruptions, protestations, offers of sacri-
fice, railings against the nephew, at last hits the mark.
He delicately insinuates that the patient “should have
change, fresh air, gaiety.” “The sight of her horrible
nephew casually in the Park, where I am told the
wretch drives with the brazen partner of his crimes,”
Mrs. Bute said (letting the cat of selfishness out of the
bag of secrecy), “would cause her such a shock, that we
should have to bring her back to bed again. She must
not go out, Mr. Clump. She shall not go out as long
as I remain to watch over her. And as for my health,
what matters it? I give it cheerfully, sir. I sacrifice
it at the altar of my duty.” It is clear that the author
attacks Mrs. Bute and all legacy-hunters. He gives
her ridiculous airs, pompous phrases, a transparent,
coarse, and blustering hypocrisy. The reader feels
hatred and disgust for her the more she speaks. He
would unmask her; he is pleased. to see her assailed,


1 Vanity Fair, ch. xix.


172 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


driven into a corner, taken in by the polished manceuvres
of her adversary, and rejoices with the author, who tears
from her and emphasises the shameful confession of her
tricks and her greed.

Having arrived so far, satirical reflection quits the
literary form. In order the better to develop itself, it
exhibits itself alone. Thackeray now attacks vice him-
self, and in his own name. No author is more fertile in
dissertations; he constantly enters his story to reprimand
or instruct us; he adds theoretical to active morality.
We might glean from his novels one or two volumes of
essays in the manner of La Bruyére or of Addison.
There are essays on love, on vanity, on hypocrisy on
meanness, on all the virtues, all the vices; and turning
over a few pages, we shall find one on the comedies of
legacies, and on too attentive relatives :

“ What a dignity it gives an old lady, that balance at the
banker’s! How tenderly we look at her faults, if she is a
relative (and may every reader have a score of such), what a
kind, good-natured old creature we find her! How the junior
partner of Hobbs and Dobbs leads her smiling to the carriage
with the lozenge upon it, and the fat wheezy coachman! How,
when she comes to pay us a visit, we generally find an oppor-
tunity to let our friends know her station in the world! We
say (and with perfect truth) I wish I had Miss MacWhirter’s
signature to a cheque for five thousand pounds, She wouldn’t
miss it, says your wife. She is my aunt, say you, in an easy
careless way, when your friend asks if Miss MacWhirter is any
relative? *Your wife is perpetually sending her little testimonies
of affection ; your little girls work endless worsted baskets,
cushions, and foot-stools for her. What a good fire there is in
her room when she comes to pay you a visit, although your wife
laces her stays without one! The house during her stay assumes
a festive, neat, warm, jovial, snug appearance not visible at other


CHAP. I. THE NOVEL—THACKERAY, 173


seasons. You yourself, dear sir, forget to go to sleep after din-
ner, and find yourself all of a sudden (though you invariably
lose) very fond of a rubber. What good dinners you have—
game every day, Malmsey-Madeira, and no end of fish from
London! Even the servants in the kitchen share in the general
prosperity ; and, somehow, during the stay of Miss Mac Whirter’s
fat coachman, the beer is grown much stronger, and the con-
sumption of tea and sugar in the nursery (where her maid takes
her meals) is not regarded in the least. Is it so, or is it not
so? I appeal to the middle classes. Ah, gracious powers! I
wish you would send me an old aunt—a maiden aunt—an aunt
with a lozenge on her carriage, and a front of light coffee-coloured
hair—how my children should work workbags for her, and my
Julia and I would make her comfortable! Sweet—sweet vision!
Foolish—foolish dream !” 1


There 1s no disguising it. The reader most resolved
not to be warned, is warned. When we have an aunt
with a good sum to leave, we shall value our attentions
and our tenderness at their true worth. The author
has taken the place of our conscience, and the novel
transformed by reflection, becomes a school of manners.


hae


The lash is laid on very heavily in this school ; it
is the English taste. About tastes and whips there is
no disputing ; but without disputing we may understand,
and the surest means of understanding the English taste
is to compare it with the French taste.

I see in France, in a drawing-room of men of wit, or
in'an artist’s studio, a score of lively people: they must
be amused, that is their character. You may speak
to them of human wickedness, but on condition of di-


1 Vanity Fair, ch. ix.


174 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


verting them. If you get angry, they will be shocked ;
if you teach a lesson, they will yawn. Laugh, it is the
rule here—not cruelly, or from manifest enmity, but in
good humour and in lightness of spirit. This nimble
wit must act; the discovery of a clean piece of folly
is a fortunate hap for it. As a light flame, it glides
and flickers in sudden outbreaks on the mere surface
of things. Satisfy it by imitating it, and to please gay
people be gay. Be polite, that is the second command-
ment, very like the other. You speak to sociable deli-
cate, vain men, whom you must take care not to
offend, but whom you must flatter, You would wound
them: by trying to carry conviction by force, by dint
of solid arguments, by a display of eloquence and
indignation. Do them the honour of supposing that
they understand you at the first word, that a hinted
smile is to them as good as a sound syllogism, that
a fine allusion caught on the wing reaches them better
than the heavy onset of a dull geometrical satire.
Think, lastly (between ourselves), that, in politics as in
religion, they have been for a thousand years very well
governed, over governed; that when a man is bored
he desires to be so no more; that a coat too tight splits
at the elbows and elsewhere. They are critics from
choice; from choice they like to insinuate forbidden
things; and often, by abuse of logic, by transport, by
vivacity, from ill humour, they strike at society through
government, at morality through religion. They are
scholars who have been too long under the rod; they
break the windows in opening the doors. I dare not
tell you to please them: I simply remark that, in order
to please them, a grain of seditious humour will do no
harm.


CHAP, II. THE NOVEL—THACKERAY. 175


I cross seven leagues of sea, and here [ am in a
great unadorned hall, with a multitude of benches,
with gas burners, swept, orderly, a debating club or a
preaching house. There are five hundred long faces,
gloomy and subdued ;! and at the first glance it is clear
that they are not there to amuse themselves. In. this
land a grosser mood, overcharged with a heavier and
stronger nourishment, has deprived impressions of their
swift nobility, and thought, less facile and prompt, has
lost its vivacity and its gaiety. If we rail before them,
“we must think that we are speaking to attentive, con-
centrated men, capable of durable and profound sensa-
tions, incapable of changeable and sudden emotion.
Those immobile and contracted faces will preserve the
same attitude; they resist fleeting and _half-formed
smiles; they cannot unbend; and their laughter is a
convulsion as stiff as their gravity. Let us not skim
over our subject, but lay stress upon it; let us not pass
over it lightly, but impress it ; let us not dally, but strike;
be assured that we must vehemently move vehement
passions, and that shocks are needed to set these nerves
in motion. Let us also not forget that our hearers are
practical minds, lovers of the useful; that they come
here to be taught; that we owe them solid truths; that
their common sense, somewhat contracted, does not fall
in with hazardous extemporisations or doubtful hints ;
that they demand worked out refutations and complete
explanations; and that if they have paid to come in, it
was to hear advice which they might apply, and satire
founded on proof. Their mood requires strong emotions;
their mind asks for precise demonstrations. To satisfy


1 Thackeray, in his Book of Snobs, says: ‘‘ Their usual English
expression of intense gloom and subdued agony.”


176 MODERN AUTHORS, BOOK V.


their mood, we must not merely scratch, but torture
vice; to satisfy their mind, we must not rail in sallies,
but by arguments. One word more: down there, in
the midst of the assembly, behold that gilded, splendid
book, resting royally on a velvet cushion. It is the
Bible; around it there are fifty moralists, who a while
ago met at the theatre and pelted an actor off the stage
with apples, who was guilty of having the wife of a
citizen for his mistress. If with our finger-tip, with
all the compliments and disguises in the world, we
touch a single sacred leaf, or the smallest moral con-
ventionalism, immediately fifty hands will fasten them-
selves on our coat collar and put us out at the door.
With Englishmen we must be English, with their pas-
sion and their common sense adopt their leading-strings.
Thus confined to recognise truths, satire will become
more bitter, and will add the weight of public belief
to the pressure of logic and the force of indigna-
tion.


IV.


No writer was better gifted than Thackeray for this
kind of satire, because no faculty is more proper to
satire than reflection. Reflection is concentrated
attention, and concentrated attention increases a
hundredfold the force and duration of emotions. He
who is immersed in the contemplation of a vice, feels a
hatred of vice, and the intensity of his hatred is measured
by the intensity of his contemplation. At first anger
is a generous wine, which intoxicates and excites;
when preserved and shut up, it becomes a liquor burn-
ing all that it touches, and corroding even the vessel
which contains tt. Of all satirists, Thackeray, after


CHAP, II, THE NOVEL—THACKERAY. Dia


Swift, is the most gloomy. Even his countrymen have
reproached him with depicting the world uglier than it
is’ Indignation, grief, scorn, disgust, are his ordinary
sentiments. When he digresses, and imagines tender
souls, he exaggerates their sensibility, in order to render
their oppression more odious. The selfishness which
wounds them appears horrible, and their resigned sweet-
ness is a mortal insult to their tyrants: it is the same
hatred which has calculated the kindliness of the victims
and the harshness of the persecutors.?

This anger, exasperated by reflection, is also armed
by reflection. It is clear that the author is not carried
away by passing indignation or pity. He has mastered
himself before speaking. He has often weighed the
rascality which he is about to describe. He is in pos-
session of the motives, species, results, as a naturalist is
of his classifications. He is sure of his judgment, and
has matured it. He punishes like a man convinced,
who has before him a heap of proofs, who advances
nothing without a document or an argument, who has
foreseen all objections and refuted all excuses, who will
never pardon, who is right in being inflexible, who is
conscious of his justice, and who rests his sentence and
his vengeance on all the powers of meditation and equity.
The effect of this justified and contained hatred is over-
whelming. When we have read to the end of Balzac’s
novels, we feel the pleasure of a naturalist walking
through a museum, past a fine collection of specimens
and monstrosities. When we have read to the end of
Thackeray, we feel the shudder of a stranger brought


1 The Edinburgh Review.
2 See the character of Amelia in Vanity Fair, and of Colonel New-


come in the Newcomes,
VOL. IV. N


178 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


before a mattress in the operating-room of an hospital,
on the day when cautery is applied or a limb is taken off.

In such a case the most natural weapon is seri-
ous irony, because it bears witness to concentrated
hatred: he who employs it suppresses his first feeling ;
he feigns to be speaking against himself, and constrains
himself to take the part of his adversary. On the
other hand, this painful and voluntary attitude is the
sign of excessive scorn ; the protection which apparently
is afforded to an enemy is the worst of insults. The
author seems to say: “I am ashamed to attack you ; you
are so weak that, even supported, you must fall; your
reasonings are your shame, and your excuses are your
condemnation.” Thus the more serious the irony, the
stronger it is; the more you take care to defend your
adversary, the more you degrade him; the more you
seem to aid him, the more you crush him. This is why
Swift's grave sarcasm is so terrible; we think he is
showing respect, and he slays; his approbation is a
flagellation. Amongst Swift’s pupils, Thackeray is the
first. Several chapters in the Book of Snobs—that, for
instance, on literary snobs—are worthy of Gulliver.
The author has been passing in review all the snobs
of England; what will he say of his colleagues, the
literary snobs? Will he dare to speak of them?
Certainly :


“My dear and excellent querist, whom does the Schoolmaster
flog so resolutely as his own son? Didn’t Brutus chop his off-
spring’s head offf You have a very bad opinion indeed of the
present state of Literature and of literary men, if you fancy that
any one of us would hesitate to stick a knife into his neighbour
penman, if the latter’s death could do the State any service,

“ But the fact is, that in the literary profession there are no


CHAP. II, THE NOVEL—THACKERAY, 179


Snobs. Look round at the whole body of British men of letters,
and I defy you to point out among them a single instance of
vulgarity, or envy, or assumption.

“Men and women, as far as I have known them, they are all
modest in their demeanour, elegant in their manners, spotless in
their lives, and honourable in their conduct to the world and to
each other. You may occasionally, it is true, hear one literary
man abusing his brother ; but why? Not in the least out of
malice ; not at all from envy ; merely from a sense of truth and
public duty. Suppose, for instance, I good-naturedly point out
a blemish in my friend Mr. Punch’s person, and say Mr. P. has
a hump-back, and his nose and chin are more crooked than those
features in the Apollo or Antinous, which we are accustomed to
consider ae our standards of beauty ; does this argue malice on my
part towards Mr, Punch? Not in the least. It is the critic’s
duty to point out defects as well as merits, and he invariably
does his duty with the utmost gentleness and candour. .. .

“That sense of equality and fraternity amongst Authors has
always struck me as one of the most amiable characteristics of
the class. It is because we know and respect each other, that
the world respects us so much ; that we hold such a good posi-
tion in society, and demean ourselves so irreproachably when
there.

“‘ Literary persons are held in such esteem by the nation, that
about two of them have been absolutely invited to Court during
the present reign; and it is probable that towards the end of
the season, one or two will be asked to dinner by Sir Robert
Peel.

“They are such favourites with the public, that they are con-
tinually obliged to have their pictures taken and published ; and
one or two could be pointed out, of whom the nation insists upon
having afresh portrait every year. Nothing can be more grati-
fying than this proof of the affectionate regard which the people
has for its instructors.

“ Literature is held in such honour in England, that there is


180 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


2 sum of near twelve hundred pounds per annum set apart to
pension deserving persons following that profession, And a
great compliment this is, too, to the professors, and a proof of
their generally prosperous and flourishing condition. They are
generally so rich and thrifty, that scarcely any money is wanted
to help them.” }


We are tempted to make a mistake; and to compre-
hend this passage, we must remember that, in an
aristocratical and monarchical society, amidst money-
worship and adoration of rank, poor and low-born
talent is treated as its low-birth and poverty deserve ? ?
What makes these ironies yet stronger, is their length ;
some are prolonged during a whole tale, like the Fatal
Boots. A Frenchman could not keep up a sarcasm so
long. It would escape right or left through various
emotions; it would change countenance, and not
preserve so fixed an attitude—the mark of such a de-
cided animosity, so calculated and bitter. There are
characters which Thackeray develops through three
volumes— Blanche Amory, Rebecca Sharp—and of
whom he never speaks but with insult; both are base,
and he never introduces them without plying them
with tendernesses: dear Rebecca! tender Blanche!
The tender Blanche is a sentimental and literary young
creature, obliged to live with her parents, who do not
understand her. She suffers so much, that she ridicules
them aloud before everybody; she is so oppressed by
the folly of her mother and father-in-law, that she
never omits an opportunity of making them feel their
folly. In good conscience, could she do otherwise ?

1 The Book of Snobs, ch. xvi. ; on Literary Snobs.


* Stendhal says: L’esprit et le génie perdent vingt-cing pour cent
de leur valeur en abordant en Angleterre.”


CHAP, II. THE NOVEL—THACKERAY. 181


Would it not be on her part a lack of sincerity to
affect a gaiety which she has not, or a respect which
she cannot feel? We understand that the poor child
is in need of sympathy. When she gave up her dolls,
this loving heart became first enamoured of Trenmor,
a high-souled convict, the fiery Sténio, Prince Djalma,
and other heroes of French novels. Alas! the imagi-
nary world is not sufficient for wounded souls, and
to satisfy the craving for the ideal, for satiety, the
heart at last gives itself up to beings of this world.
At eleven years of age Miss Blanche felt tender
emotions towards a young Savoyard, an organ-grinder
at Paris, whom she persisted in believing to be a
prince carried off from his parents; at twelve an old
and hideous drawing master had agitated her young
heart; at Madame de Carmel’s_ boarding-school a
correspondence by letter took place with two young
gentlemen of the College Charlemagne. Dear forlorn
girl, her delicate feet are already wounded by the briars
in her path of life; every day her illusions shed- their
leaves; in vain she puts them down in verse, in a
little book bound in blue velvet, with a clasp of gold,
entitled Mes Larmes. In this isolation, what is she to
do? She grows enthusiastic over the young ladies
whom she meets, feels a magnetic attraction at sight of
them, becomes their sister, except that she casts them
aside to-morrow like an old dress: we cannot command
our feelings, and nothing is more beautiful than the
natural. Moreover, as the amiable child has much
taste, a lively imagination, a poetic inclination for
change, she keeps her maid Pincott at work day and
night. Like a delicate person, a genuine dilettante


182 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


and lover of the beautiful, she scolds her for her heavy
eyes and her pale face:


“Our muse, with the candour which distinguished her, never
failed to remind her attendant of the real state of matters. ‘I
should send you away, Pincott, for you are a great deal too weak,
and your eyes are failing you, and you are always crying and
snivelling, and wanting the doctor ; but I wish that your parents
at home should be supported, and I go on enduring for their
sake, mind, the dear Blanche would say to her timid little
attendant. Or, ‘ Pincott, your wretched appearance and slavish
manner, and red eyes, positively give me the migraine; and
I think I shall make you wear rouge, so that you may look a
little cheerful ;’ or, ‘ Pincott, I can’t bear, even for the sake of
your starving parents, that you should tear my hair out of my
head in that manner; and I will thank you to write to them
and say that I dispense with your services,’” }


This fool of a Pincott does not appreciate her good for-
tune. Can one be sad in serving such a superior being
as Miss Blanche? How delightful to furnish her with
subjects for her style! for, to confess the truth, Miss
Blanche has not disdained to write “some very pretty
verses about the lonely little tiring-maid, whose heart
was far away,” “sad exile in a foreign land.” Alas! the
slightest event suffices to wound this too sensitive
heart. At the least emotion her tears flow, her feelings
are shaken, like a delicate butterfly, crushed as soon
as touched. There she goes, aerial, her eyes fixed on
heaven, a faint smile lingering round her rosy lips, a
touching sylphide, so consoling to all who surround
her, that every one wishes her at the bottom of a well.

One step added to serious irony leads us to serious


? These remarks are only to be found in the octavo edition of
Pendennis.—Tr.


CHAP. IL THE NOVEL—THACKERAY. 183


caricature. Here, as before, the author pleads the rights
of his neighbour; the only difference is, that he pleads
them with too much warmth; it is insult upon insult.
Under this head it abounds in Thackeray. Some of his
grotesques are outrageous: for instance, M. Alcide de
Mirobolant, a French cook, an artist in sauces, who de-
clares his passion to Miss Blanche through the medium
of symbolic dishes, and thinks himself a gentleman;
Mrs. Major O'Dowd, a sort of female grenadier, the
most pompous and talkative of Irishwomen, bent on
ruling the regiment, and marrying the bachelors will
they uill they; Miss Briggs, an old companion born to
receive insults, to make phrases and to shed tears; the
Doctor, who proves to his scholars who write bad Greek,
that habitual idleness and bad construing lead to the
gallows. These calculated deformities only excite a sad
smile. We always perceive behind the oddity of the
character the sardonic air of the painter, and we conclude
that the human race is base and stupid. Other figures
less exaggerated, are not more natural. We see that
the author throws them expressly into palpable follies
and marked contradictions. Such is Miss Crawley, an
old maid, without any morals, and a free-thinker, who
praises unequal marriages, and falls into a fit when on
the next page her nephew makes one; who calls Re-
becca Sharp her equal, and at the same time bids her
“put some coals on the fire;” who, on learning the de-
parture of her favourite, cries*with despair, “ Gracious
goodness, and who’s to make my chocolate?” These
are comedy scenes, and not pictures of manners. There
are twenty such. You see an excellent aunt, Mrs.
Hoggarty, of Castle Hoggarty, settling down in the
house of her nephew Titmarsh, throw him into vast


184 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK Y¥.


expenses, persecute his wife, drive away his friends,
make his marriage unhappy. ‘The poor ruined fellow
is thrown into prison. She denounces him to the credi-
tors with genuine indignation, and reproaches him with
perfect sincerity. The wretch has been his aunt’s exe-
cutioner; she has been dragged by him from her home,
tyrannised over by him, robbed by him, outraged by his
wife. She writes:


“Such waist and extravygance never, never, never did I
see. Butter waisted as if it had been dirt, coles flung away,
candles burned at both ends; ... and now you have the
audassaty, being placed in prison justly for your crimes, for
cheating me of £3000. . . . You come upon me to pay your
detts! No, sir, it is quite enough that your mother should go
on the parish, and that your wife should sweep the streets, to
which you have indeed brought them; J, at least . . . have
some of the comforts to which my rank entitles me. The furni-
tur in this house is mine; and as I presume you intend your
lady to sleep in the streets, I give you warning that I shall
remove it allto-morrow. Mr, Smithers will tell you that I had
intended to leave you my intire fortune. I have this morning,
in his presents, solamly toar up my will, and hereby renounce
all connection with you and your beggarly family. P.S.—I took
a viper into my bosom, and it stung me,” }


This just and compassionate woman finds her match, a
pious man, John Brough, Esquire, M.P., director of the
Independent West Diddlesex Fire and Life Insurance
Company. This virtuous Christian has sniffed from
afar the cheering odour of her lands, houses, stocks, and
other landed and personal property. He pounces upon
the fine property of Mrs. Hoggarty, is sorry to see that


1 The History of Sumuel Titmarsh and the Great Hoggarty Diamond,
cha xis


CHAP, II. THE NOVEL—THACKERAY. 185


it only brings that lady four per cent, and resolves to
double her income. He calls upon her at her lodgings
when her face was shockingly swelled and bitten by
—never mind what:


“Gracious heavens !’ shouted John Brough, Esquire, ‘a lady
of your rank to suffer in this way !—the excellent relative of
my dear boy, Titmarsh! Never, madam—never let it be said
that Mrs. Hoggarty of Castle Hoggarty should be subject to such
horrible humiliation, while John Brough has a home to offer her
—a humble, happy Christian home, madam, though unlike, per-
haps, the splendour to which you have been accustomed in the
course of your distinguished career. Isabella, my love !—
Belinda ! speak to Mrs, Hoggarty. Tell her that John Brough’s
house is hers from garret to cellar. I repeat it, madam, from
garret to cellar, I desire—I insist——I order, that Mrs. Hoggarty
of Castle Hoggarty’s trunks should be placed this instant in my
carriage |?” }


This style raises a oe if you will, but a sad laugh.
We have just learned that man is a hypocrite, unjust,
tyrannical, blind. In our vexation we turn to the
author, and we see on his lips only sarcasms, on his
brow only chagrin.


V..

Let us look carefully; perhaps in less grave matters
we shall find subject of genuine laughter. Let us con-
sider, not a rascality, but a misadventure; rascality
revolts, a misadventure might amuse. But amusement
alone is not here; even in a diversion the satire retains
its force, because reflection retains its intensity. There

in English fun a seriousness, an effort, an application
that is marvellous, and their comicalities are composed


1 The History of Samuel Titmarsh and the Great Hoggarty Diamond,
ch, ix.


186 MODERN AUTHORS, BOOK V.


with as much knowledge as their sermons. The power-
ful attention decomposes its object in all its parts, and
reproduces it with illusive detail and relief. Swift
describes the land of speaking horses, the politics of
Lilliput, the inventors of the Flying Island, with details
as precise and harmonious as an experienced traveller,
an exact inquirer into manners and countries. Thus
supported, the impossible monster and the literary
grotesque enter upon actual existence, and the phantoms
of imagination take the consistency of objects which
we touch. Thackeray introduces this imperturbable
gravity, this solid conception, this talent for illusion,
into his farce. Let us study one of his moral essays;
he wishes to prove that in the world we must conform
to received customs, and he transforms this commonplace
into an Oriental anecdote. Let us count up the details
of manners, geography, chronology, cookery, the mathe-
matical designation of every object, person, and gesture,
the lucidity of imagination, the profusion of local truths ;
we will then understand why his raillery produces so
original and biting an impression, and we will find
here the same degree of study and the same attentive
energy as in the foregoing ironies and exaggerations:
his humour is as reflective as his hatred; he has changed
his attitude, not his faculty :


“T am naturally averse to egotism, and hate self-laudation
consumedly ; but I can’t help relating here a circumstance illus-
trative of the point in question, in which I must think I acted
with considerable prudence.

“Being at Constantinople a few years since—(on a delicate
mission)—the Russians were playing a double game, between
ourselves, and it became necessary on our part to employ an
extra negotiator—Leckerbiss Pasha of Roumelia, then Chief


CHAP, II. THE NOVEL—THACKERAY. 187


Galeongee of the Porte, gave a diplomatic banquet at his sum-
mer palace at Bujukdere, I was on the left of the Galeongee ;
and the Russian agent Count de Diddloff on his dexter side.
Diddloff. is a dandy who would die of a rose in aromatic pain :
he had tried to have me assassinated three times in the course
of the negotiation : but of course we were friends in public, and
saluted each other in the most cordial and charming manner.

“The Galeongee is—or was, alas! for a bow-string has done
for him—a staunch supporter of the old school of Turkish poli-
tics. We dined with our fingers, and had flaps of bread for
plates ; the only innovation he admitted was the use of European
liquors, in which he indulged with great gusto. He was an
enormous eater, Amongst tle dishes a very large one was
placed before him of a lamb dressed in its wool, stuffed with
prunes, garlic, assafcetida, capsicums, and other condiments, the
most abominable mixture that ever mortal smelt or tasted. The
Galeongee ate of this hugely ; and, pursuing the Eastern fashion,
insisted on helping his friends right and left, and when he came
to a particularly spicy morsel, would push it with his own hands
into his guests’ very mouths.

“T never shall forget the look of poor Diddloff, when his
Excellency, rolling up a large quantity of this into a ball, and
exclaiming, “Buk Buk” (it is very good), administered the
horrible bolus to Diddloff. The Russian’s eyes rolled dreadfully
as he received it: he swallowed it with a grimace that I thought
must precede a convulsion, and seizing a bottle next him, which
he thought was Sauterne, but which turned out to be French
brandy, he drank off nearly a pint before he knew his error. It
finished him ; he was carried away from the dining-room almost
dead, and laid out to cool in a summer-house on the Bosphorus.

“When it came to my turn, I took down the condiment with
a smile, said “Bismillah,” licked my lips with easy gratification,
and when the next dish was served, made up a ball myself so
dexterously, and popped it down the old Galeongee’s mouth with
so much grace, that his heart was won. Russia was put out of


188 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


Court at once, and the treaty of Kabobanople was signed. As for
Diddloff, all was over with him, he was recalled to St: Petersburg,
and Sir Roderick Murchison saw him, under the No. 3967,
working in the Ural mines.!


The anecdote is evidently authentic; and when De
Foe related the apparition of Mrs. Veal, he did not
better imitate the style of an authenticated account.


VI.


Such attentive reflection 1s a source of sadness. To
amuse ourselves with human passions, we must con-
sider them as inquisitive men, like shifting puppets,
or as learned men, like regulated wheels, or as artists,
like powerful springs. If we only consider them as
virtuous or vicious, our lost illusions will enchain us
in gloomy thoughts, and we will find in man only
weakness and ugliness. This is why Thackeray depre-
ciates our whole nature. He does as a novelist what
Hobbes does as a philosopher. Almost everywhere,
when he describes fine sentiments, he derives them
from an ugly source. Tenderness, kindness, love, are
in his characters the effect of the nerves, of instinct,
or of a moral disease. Amelia Sedley, his favourite,
and one of his masterpieces, is a poor little woman,
snivelling, incapable of reflection and decision, blind,
a superstitious adorer of a coarse and selfish husband,
always sacrificed by her own will and fault, whose love
is made up of folly and weakness, often unjust, accus-
tomed to see falsely, and more worthy of compassion
than respect. Lady Castlewood, so good and tender,
is enamoured, like Amelia, of a drunken and imbecile


1 The Book of Snobs, ch. i. ; The Snob playfully deali with.


CHAP. II. THE NOVEL—THACKERAY. 189


boor ; and her wild jealousy, exasperated on the slightest
suspicion, implacable against her husband, giving utter-
ance violently to cruel words, shows that her love springs
not from virtue but from mood. Helen Pendennis,
a model mother, is a somewhat silly country prude,
of narrow education, jealous also, and having in her
jealousy all the harshness of Puritanism and passion.
She faints on learning that her son has a mistress: it
is “such a sin, such a dreadful sin. JI can’t bear to
think that my boy should commit such a crime. I
wish he had died, almost, before he had done it.”!
Whenever she is spoken to of little Fanny, “ the widow’s
countenance, always soft and gentle, assumed a cruel
and inexorable expression.”* Meeting Fanny at the
bedside of the sick young man, she drives her away, as
if she were a prostitute and a servant. Maternal love,
in her as in the others, is an incurable blindness: her
son is her idol; in her adoration she finds the means of
making his lot unbearable, and himself unhappy. As
to the love of the men for the women, if we judge from
the pictures of the author, we can but feel pity for it,
and look on it as ridiculous. At a certain age, accord-
ing to Thackeray, nature speaks: we meet Somebody ;
a fool or not, good or bad, we adore her; it is a fever.
At the age of six months dogs have their disease ; man
has his at twenty. If a man loves, it is not because
the lady is loveable, but because it is his nature so to
do. “Do you suppose you would drink if you were
not thirsty, or eat if you were not hungry ?”°

He relates the history of this hunger and thirst with
a bitter vigour. He seems like an intoxicated man
grown sober, railing at drunkenness. He explains at


1 Pendennis, ch. liv. 2 Ibid, ch, lii. 3 [bid. ch. liii.


190 MODERN AUTHORS, BOOK V.


length, in a half sarcastic tone the follies which Major
Dobbin commits for the sake of Amelia; how the Major
buys bad wines from her father; how he tells the
postillions to make haste, how he rouses the servants,
persecutes his friends, to see Amelia more quickly ; how,
after ten years of sacrifice, tenderness, and service, he
sees that he is held second to an old portrait of a faith-
less, coarse, selfish, and dead husband. The saddest of
these accounts is that of the first love of Pendennis—
Miss Fotheringay, the actress, whom he loves, a matter-
of-fact person, a good housekeeper, who has the mind
and education of a kitchen-maid. She speaks to the
young man of the fine weather, and the pie she has
just been making: Pendennis discovers in these two
phrases a wonderful depth of intellect and a superhuman
majesty of devotion. He asks Miss Fotheringay, who
has just been playing Ophelia, if the latter loved Hamlet.
Miss Fotheringay answers :


“¢Tn love with such a little ojous wretch as that stunted
manager of a Bingley?’ She bristled with indignation at the
thought. Pen explained it was not of her he spoke, but of
Ophelia of the play. ‘Oh, indeed; if no offence was meant,
none was taken: but as for Bingley, indeed, she did not value
him—not that glass of punch.’ Pen next tried her on Kotzebue.
‘Kotzebue? who was he?’ ‘The author of the play in which
she had been performing so admirably.’ ‘She did not know
that—the man’s name at the beginning of the book was
Thompson,’ she said, Pen laughed at her adorable simplicity,”

“ «How beautiful she is,’ thought Pen, cantering homewards.
‘ Pendennis, Pendennis—how she spoke the word! Emily, Emily!
how good, how noble, how beautiful, how perfect she is !’”2


The first volume runs wholly upon this contrast; it


1 Pendennis. ch. v.


CHAP, II. THE NOVEL—THACKERAY. 191


seems as though Thackeray says to his reader: “My
dear brothers in humanity, we are rascals forty-nine
days in fifty ; in the fiftieth, if we escape pride, vanity,
wickedness, selfishness, it is because we fall into a hot
fever ; our folly causes our devotion.”


NLL


Yet, short of being Swift, a man must love some-
thing; he cannot always be wounding and destroying ;
and the heart, wearied of scorn and hate, needs repose
in praise and tenderness. Moreover, to blame a fault ig
to laud the contrary quality; and a man cannot
sacrifice a victim without raising an altar: it is cir-
cumstance which fixes on the one, and which builds up
the other; and the moralist who combats the dominant
vice of his country and his age, preaches the virtue
contrary to the vice of his age and his country. In an
aristocratical and commercial society, this vice is
selfishness and pride! Thackeray therefore extols
sweetness and tenderness. Let love and kindness be
blind, instinctive, unreasoning, ridiculous, it matters
little: such as they are, he adores them; and there is
no more singular contrast than that of his heroes and
of his admiration. He creates foolish women, and
kneels before them; the artist within him contradicts
the commentator: the first is ironical, the second
laudatory ; the first represents the pettiness of love, the
second writes its panegyric; the top of the page is a
satire in action, the bottom is a dithyramb in periods.
The compliments which he lavishes on Amelia Sedley,
Helen Pendennis, Laura, are infinite; no author ever
more visibly and incessantly paid court to his female


192 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


creations; he sacrifices his male creations to them, not
once, but a hundred times:


“Very likely female pelicans like so to bleed under the selfish
little beaks of their young ones: it is certain that women do,
There must be some sort of pleasure which we men don’t
understand, which accompanies the pain of being sacrificed. . . .
Do not let us men despise these instincts because we cannot
feel them. These women were made for our comfort and
delectation, gentlemen,—with all the rest of the minor animals.”
. . . Be it for a reckless husband, a dissipated son, a darling
scapegrace of a brother, who ready their hearts are to pour out
their best treasures for the benefit of the cherished person ; and
what a deal of this sort of enjoyment are we, on our side, ready
to give the soft creatures! There is scarce a man that reads
this, but has administered pleasure in that fashion to his woman-
kind, and has treated them to the luxury of forgiving him.”


When he enters the room of a good mother, or of a
young honest girl, he casts down his eyes as on the
threshold of a sanctuary. In the presence of Laura
resigned, pious, he checks himself :


‘And as that duty was performed quite noiselessly—while
the supplications which endowed her with the requisite strength
for fulfilling it, also took place in her own chamber, away from
all mortal sight,—we, too, must be perforce silent about these
virtues of hers, which no more bear public talking about than a
flower will bear to bloom in a ball-room.”¢


Like Dickens, he has a reverence for the family, for
tender and simple sentiments, calm and pure content-
ments, such as are relished by the fireside between a

1 Pendennis, ch. xxi. This passage is only found in the octavo
edition. —Tr. 2 Ibid. ch. xxi.


3 Tbid. ch, xxi. These words are only found in the octavo edition.
—Tr, 4 Ibid. ch. li.


CHAP, II. THE NOVEL—THACKERAY. 193


child and a wife. When this misanthrope, so reflective
and harsh, lights upon a filial effusion or a maternal
grief, he is wounded in a sensitive place, and, like
Dickens, he makes us weep.’

We have enemies because we have friends, and
aversions because we have preferences. If we prefer
devoted kindliness and tender affections, we dislike
arrogance and harshness; the cause of love is also the
cause of hate; and sarcasm, like sympathy, is the criti-
eism of a social form and a public vice. This is why
Thackeray’s novels are a war against aristocracy. Like
Rousseau, he praised simple and affectionate manners ;
like Rousseau, he hated the distinction of ranks.

_ He wrote a whole book on this, a sort of moral and
half political pamphlet, the Book of Snobs. The word
does not exist in France, because they have not the
thing. The snob is a child of aristocratical societies ;
perched on his step of the long ladder, he respects the
man on the step above him, and despises the man on
the step below, without inquiring what they are worth,
solely on account of their position; in his innermost
heart he finds it natural to kiss the boots of the first,
and to kick the second. Thackeray reckons up at
length the degrees of this habit. Hear his conclusion:


“T can bear it no longer—this diabolical invention of gentility,
which kills natural kindliness and honest friendship. Proper
pride, indeed! Rank and precedence, forsooth! The table of
ranks and degrees is a lie and should be flung into the fire.
Organise rank and precedence! that was well for the masters of
ceremonies of former ages. Come forward, some great marshal,
and organise Equality in society.”

1 See, for example, in the Great Hoggarty Diamond, the death of
the little child. The Book of Snobs ends thus: ‘Fun is good, Truth
is still better, and Love best of all.” ;

VOL. IV. (0)


194 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


Then he adds, with common sense, altogether English
bitterness and familiarity :


“Tf ever our cousins the Smigsmags asked me to meet Lord
Longears, I would like to take an opportunity after dinner, and
say, in the most good-natured way in the world :—Sir, Fortune
makes you a present of a number of thousand pounds every
year. The ineffable wisdom of our ancestors has placed you as
a chief and hereditary legislator over me. Our admirable
Constitution (the pride of Britons and envy of surrounding
nations) obliges me to receive you as my senator, superior, and
guardian, Your eldest son, Fitz-Heehaw, is sure of a place in
Parliament ; your younger sons, the De Brays, will kindly con-
descend to be post-captains and lieutenant-colonels, and to
represent us in foreign courts, or to take a good living when it
falls convenient. These prizes our admirable Constitution (the
pride and envy of, etc.) pronounces to be your due; without
count of your dulness, your vices, your selfishness; of your
entire incapacity and folly. Dull as you may be (and we have
as good a right to assume that my lord is an ass, as the other
proposition, that he is an enlightened patriot) ;—dull, I say, as
you may be, no one will accuse you of such monstrous folly, as
to suppose that you are indifferent to the good luck which you
possess, or have any inclination to part with it. No—and
patriots as we are, under happier circumstances, Smith and I, I
have no doubt, were we dukes ourselves, would stand by our order.

“We would submit good-naturedly to sit in a high place.
We would acquiesce in that admirable Constitution (pride and
envy of, etc.) which made us chiefs and the world our inferiors ;
we would not cavil particularly at that notion of hereditary
superiority which brought so many simple people cringing to
our knees. May be we would rally round the Corn-Laws; we
would make a stand against the Reform Bill; we would die
rather than repeal the acts against Catholics and Dissenters ; we
would, by our noble system of class-legislation, bring Ireland to
its present admirable condition.


CHAP, Il. THE NOVEL—THACKERAY. 195


“But Smith and I are not Earls as yet. We don’t believe
that it is for the interest of Smith’s army, that young De Bray
should be a Colonel at five-and-twenty, of Smith’s diplomatic
relations, that Lord Longears should go ambassador to Constan-
tinople,—of our politics, that Longears should put his hereditary
foot into them.

“This booing and cringing Smith believes to be the act of
Snobs ; and he will do all in his might and main to be a Snob,
and to submit to Snobs no longer. To Longears he says, ‘ We
can’t help seeing, Longears, that we are as goad as you. We
can spell even better ; we can think quite as rightly ; we will
not have you for our master, or black your shoes any more,’”?


Thackeray's opinion on politics only continues his
remarks as a moralist. If he hates aristocracy, it is
less because it oppresses man than because it corrupts
him; in deforming social life, it deforms private life ;
in establishing injustice, it establishes vice; after hav-
ing made itself master of the government, it poisons
the soul; and Thackeray finds its trace in the perver-
sity and foolishness of all classes and all sentiments.

The king opens this list of vengeful portraits. It is
George IV., “the first gentleman in Europe.” This
great monarch, so justly regretted, could cut out a coat,
drive a four-in-hand nearly as well as the Brighton
coachman, and play the fiddle well. “In the vigour of
youth and the prime force of his invention, he invented
Maraschino punch, a shoe-buckle, and a Chinese pavilion,
the most hideous building in the world :”


“Two boys had leave from their loyal masters to go from
Slaughter House School where they were educated, and to
appear on Drury Lane stage, amongst a crowd which assembled
there to greet the king. THE KING? There he was, Beef-


1 The Book of Snobs, last chapter.


196 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


eaters were before thé august box: the Marquis of Steyne (Lord
of the Powder Closet) and other great officers of state were
behind the chair on which he sate, He sate—florid of face, portly
of person, covered with orders, and in a rich curling head of hair
—How we sang God save him! How the house rocked and
shouted with that magnificent music. How they cheered, and
cried, and waved handkerchiefs. Ladies wept: mothers clasped
their children; some fainted with emotion. ... Yes, we saw
him. Fate cannot deprive us of that. Others have seen
Napoleon. Some few still exist who have beheld Frederick the
Great, Doctor Johnson, Marie Antoinette, etc.—be it our
reasonable boast to our children, that we saw George the Good,
the Magnificent, the Great.”}


Dear prince! the virtues emanating from his heroic
throne spread through the hearts .of all his courtiers.
Whoever presented a better example than the Marquis
of Steyne? This lord, a king in his own house, tried to
prove that he was so. He forces his wife to sit at table
beside women without any character, his mistresses. Like
a true prince, he had for his special enemy his eldest son,
presumptive heir to the marquisate, whom he leaves to
starve, and compels to run into debt. He is now making
love to a charming person, Mrs. Rebecca Crawley, whom
he loves for her hypocrisy, coolness, and unequalled insen-
sibility. The Marquis, by dint of debasing and oppress-
ing all who surround him, ends by hating and despising
men ; he has no taste for anything but perfect rascalities.
Rebecca rouses him; one day even she transports him
with enthusiasm. She plays Clytemnestra in a charade,
and her husband Agamemnon; she advances to the bed,
a dagger in her hand; her eyes are lighted up with a


1 Vanity Fair, ch. xlviii. This passage is only found in the original
octavo edition. —Tr


CHAP, II, THE NOVEL—THACKERAY. 197


smile so ghastly, that people quake as thef look at her;
Brava! brava! old Steyne’s strident voice was heard
roaring over all the rest, “ By , she’d do it too !”
We can hear that he has the true conjugal feeling.
His conversation is remarkably frank. “I can’t send
Briggs away,” Becky said. You owe her her wages,
I suppose,” said the peer—‘ Worse than that, I have
ruined her.”-—“ Ruined her? then why don’t you turn
her out ?”

He is, moreover, an accomplished gentleman, of fasci-
nating sweetness; he treats his women like a pacha,
and his words are like blows. Let us read again the
domestic scene in which he gives the order to invite
Mrs. Crawley. Lady Gaunt, his: daughter-in-law, says
that she will not be present at dinner, and will go home.
His lordship answered :


“J wish you would, and stay there. You will find the
bailiffs at Bareacres very pleasant company, and I shall be freed
from lending money to your relations, and from your own
damned tragedy airs. Who are you to give orders here? You
have no money. You've got no brains, You were here to have
children, and you have not had any. Gaunt’s tired of you;
and George’s wife is the only person in the family who doesn’t
wish you were dead, Gaunt would marry again if you were.
. . . You, forsooth, must give yourself airs of virtue: . .
Pray, madame, shall I tell you some little anecdotes about my
Lady Bareacres, your mamma?” }


The rest is in the same style. His daughters-in-law,
driven to despair, say they wish they weredead. This
declaration rejoices him, and he concludes with these
words: “This Temple of Virtue belongs tome. And
if I invite all Newgate or all Bedlam here, by —, they


1 Vanuy Fair, ch. xlix.


198 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK VY,


shall be welcome.” The habit of despotism makes de-
spots, and the best means of implanting despots in
families, is to preserve nobles in the State.

Let us take rest in the contemplation of the country
gentleman. The innocence of the fields, hereditary
respect, family traditions, the pursuit of agriculture,
the exercise of local magistracy, must have produced
these upright and sensible men, full of kindness and
probity, protectors of their county, and servants of their
country. Sir Pitt Crawley is a model; he has four
thousand a year and two parliamentary boroughs. It is
true that these are rotten boroughs, and that he sells
the second for fifteen hundred a year. He is an ex-
cellent steward and shears his farmers so close that
he can only find bankrupt-tenants. A coach proprietor,
a government contractor, a mine proprietor, he pays his
subordinates so badly, and is so niggard in outlay, that
his mines “are filled with water; and as for his coach-
horses, every mail proprietor in the kingdom knew that
he lost more horses than any man in the country ;” the
Government flung his contract of damaged beef upon
his hands. A popular man, he always prefers the so-
ciety of a horse-dealer to the company of a gentleman.
“He was fond of drink, of swearing, of joking with the
farmers’ daughters; . . . would cut his joke and drink
his glass with a tenant, and sell him up the next day;
or have his laugh with the poacher he was transporting
with equal good humour.” He speaks with a country
accent, has the mind of a lackey, the habits of a boor.
At table, waited on by three men and a butler, on
massive silver, he inquires into the dishes, and the
beasts which have furnished them. “What ship was
it, Horrocks, and when did you kill?” “One of the


CHAP, II. THE NOVEL—THACKERAY. 199


black-faced Scotch, Sir Pitt: we killed on Thursday.”
“Who took any?” “Steel of Mudbury took the saddle
and two legs, Sir Pitt; but he says the last was too
young and confounded woolly, Sir Pitt.” “What be-
came of the shoulders?” The dialogue goes on in the
same tone; after the Scotch mutton comes the Black
Kentish pig: these animals might be Sir Pitt’s family,
so much is he interested in them. As for his daughters,
he lets them stray to the gardener’s cottage, where they
pick up their education. As for his wife, he beats her
from time to time. If he pays his people one farthing
more than he owes them he asks it back. “ A farthing
a day is seven shillings a year: seven shillings a year
is the interest of seven guineas. Take care of your
farthings, old Tinker, and your guineas will come quite
natral.” “He never gave away a farthing in his life,”
growled Tinker. “Never, and never will: it is against
my principle.” He is impudent, brutal, coarse, stingy,
shrewd, extravagant; but is courted by ministers, is a
high-sheriff, honoured, powerful, he rolls in a gilded
carriage, and is one of the pillars of the State.

These are the rich; probably money has corrupted
them. Let us look for a poor aristocrat, free from tempt-
ations; his lofty mind, left to itself, will display all its
native beauty. Sir Francis Clavering is in this case. He
has played, drunk, and supped until he has nothing
more left. Transactions at the gambling-table speedily
effected his ruin; he had been forced to sell out of his
regiment; had shown the white feather, and after fre-
quenting all the billiard-rooms in Europe, been thrown
into prison by his uncourteous creditors. To get out he
married a good-natured Indian widow, who outrages spell-
ing, and whose money was left her by her father, a disre-


200 MODERN AUTHORS, BOOK Y.


putable old lawyer and indigo-smuggler. Clavering ruins
her, goes on his knees to obtain gold and pardon, swears
on the Bible to contract no more debts, and when he
goes out runs straight to the money-lender. Of all the
rascals that novelists have ever exhibited, he is the
basest. He has neither resolution nor common sense ; he
is simply a man in a state of dissolution. He swallows
insults like water, weeps, begs pardon, and begins again.
He debases himself, prostrates himself, and the next
moment swears and storms, to fall back into the depths
of the extremest cowardice. He implores, threatens,
and in the same quarter of an hour accepts the
threatened man as his intimate confidant and friend:


“ Now, ain’t it hard that she won't trust me with a single
tea-spoon ; ain’t it ungentlemanlike, Altamont? You know
my lady's of low birth—that is—I beg your pardon—hem—
that is, it’s most cruel of her not to show more confidence in
me. And the very servants begin to langh—the dam scoundrels !
. .. They don’t answer my bell; and—and my man was at
Vauxhall last night with one of my dress shirts and my velvet
waistcoat on, I know it was mine—the confounded impudent
blackguard !—and he went on dancing before my eyes, confound
him! I’m sure he'll live to be hanged—he deserves to be
hanged—all those infernal rascals of valets !”}


His conversation is a compound of oaths, whines, and
ravings; he is not a man, but the wreck of a man:
there survive in him but the discordant remains of vile
passions, like the fragments of a crushed snake, which,
unable to bite, bruise themselves and wriggle about m
their slaver and mud. The sight of a bank-note makes
him launch blindly into a mass of entreaties and lies,
The future has disappeared for him, he sees but the


1 Pendennis, ch. Ix.


CHAP, I. THE NOVEL—THACKERAY. 201


present. - He will sign a bill for twenty pounds at three
months to get a sovereign. His degradation has become
imbecility ; his eyes are shut; he does not see that his
protestations excite mistrust, that his lies excite disgust,
that by his’ very baseness he loses the fruit of his base-
ness; so that when he comes in, a man feels a violent
inclination to take the honourable baronet, the member
of parliament, the proud inhabitant of a historic house,
by the neck, and pitch him, like a basket of rubbish,
from the top of the stairs to the bottom.

We must stop. A volume would not exhaust the
list of perfections which Thackeray discovers in the
English aristocracy. The Marquis of Farintosh, twenty-
fifth of his name, an illustrious fool, healthy and full of
self-conceit, whom all the women ogle and all the men
bow to; Lady Kew an old woman of the world,
tyrannical and corrupted, at enmity with her daughter,
and a match-maker; Sir Barnes Newcome, one of the
most cowardly of men, the wickedest, the falsest, the
best abused and beaten who has ever smiled in a
drawing-room or spoken in Parliament. I see only one
estimable character, and he is not in the front rank—
Lord Kew, who, after many follies and excesses, is
touched by his Puritan old mother, and repents. But
these portraits are sweet compared to the dissertations ;
the commentator is still more bitter than the artist ; he
wounds more in speaking than in making his person-
ages speak. We must read his biting diatribes against
marriages for the sake of money or rank, and against
the sacrifice of girls; against the inequality of in-
heritance and the envy of younger sons; against the
education of the nobles, and their traditionary in-
solence; against the purchase of commissions in the


202 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


army, the isolation of classes, the outrages on nature
and family, invented by society and law.. Behind this
philosophy is shown a second gallery of portraits as
insulting as the first: for inequality, having corrupted
the great men whom it exalts, corrupts the small men
whom it degrades; and the spectacle. of envy or base-
ness in the small, is as ugly as that of insolence or
despotism in the great. According to Thackeray,
English society is a compound of flatteries and intrigues,
each striving to hoist himself up a step higher on the
social ladder and to push back those who are climbing.
To be received at court, to see one’s name in the papers
amongst a list of illustrious guests, to give a cup of tea
at home to some stupid and bloated peer; such is the
supreme limit of human ambition and felicity. For
one master there are always a hundred lackeys. Majot
Pendennis, a resolute man, cool and clever, has con-
tracted this leprosy. His happiness to-day is to bow
to a lord. He is only at peace in a drawing-room, or
in a park of the aristocracy. He craves to be treated
with that humiliating condescension wherewith the
great overwhelm their inferiors. He pockets lack of
attention with ease, and dines graciously at a noble
board, where he is invited twice in three years to stop
a gap. He leaves a man of genius or a woman of wit,
to converse with a titled fool or a tipsy lord. He
prefers being tolerated at a Marquis’ to being respected
at a cominoner’s. Having exalted these fine dispositions
into principles, he inculcates them on his nephew, whom
he loves, and to push him on in the world, offers him
in marriage a basely acquired fortune and the daughter
of a convict. Others glide through the proud drawing-
rooms, not with parasitic manners, but on account of


CHAP, IL, THE NOVEL—THACKERAY, 203


their splendid balance at the banker’s. Once upon a
time in France, the nobles manured their estates with
the money of citizens; now in England the citizens
ennoble their money by marrying a lady of noble birth.
For a hundred thousand pounds to the father, Pump,
the merchant, marries Lady Blanche Stiffneck, who,
though married, remains my Lady. Naturally young
Pump is scorned by her, as a tradesman, and more-
over, hated for having made her half a woman of the
people. He dare not see his own friends in his own
house; they are too vulgar for his wife. He dare not
visit the friends of his wife; they are too high for
him. He is his wife’s butler, the butt of his father-
in-law, the servant of his son, and consoles himself
by thinking that his grandsons, when they become
Lord Pump, will blush for him and never mention
his name.! A third means of entering the aristocracy
is to ruin oneself, and never see any one This ingeni-
ous method is employed by Mrs. Major Ponto in the
country. She has an incomparable governess for her
daughters, who thinks that Dante is called Alighieri
because he was born at Algiers, but who has educated
two marchionesses and a countess.


“Some one wondered we were not enlivened by the appear-
ance of some of the neighbours.—We can’t in our position of
life, we can’t well associate with the attorney’s family, as I
leave you to suppose—and the Doctor—one may ask one’s
medical man to one’s table, certainly: but his family.—The
people in that large red house just outside of the town,—What !
the chdteau-calicot, That purse-proud ex-linendraper — The
parson—Oh! he used to preach in a surplice. He is a
Puseyite !”

1 The Book of Snobs, ch. viii. ; Great City Snobs.


204 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


This sensible Ponto family yawns in solitude for six
months, and the rest of the year enjoys the gluttony of
the country-squires whom they regale, and the rebuffs
of the great lords whom they visit. The son, an officer
of the hussars, requires to be kept in luxury so as to
be on an equality with his noble comrades, and his
tailor receives above three hundred a year out of the
nine hundred which make up the whole family income.!
I should never end, if I recounted all the villanies and
miseries which Thackeray attributes to the aristocratic
spirit, the division of families, the pride of the ennobled
sister, the jealousy of the sister who has not been
ennobled, the degradation of the characters trained up
from school to reverence the little lords, the abasement
of the daughters who strive to compass noble marriages,
the rage of snubbed vanity, the meanness of the
attentions offered, the triumph of folly, the scorn of
talent, the consecrated injustice, the heart rendered un-
natural, the morals perverted. Before this striking
picture of truth and genius, we need remember that
this injurious inequality is the cause of a wholesome
liberty, that social injustice produces political welfare,
that a class of hereditary nobles is a class of hereditary
statesmen, that in a century and a half England has
had a hundred and fifty years of good government, that
in a century and a half France has had a hundred and
fifty years of bad government, that all is compensated,
and that it is possible to pay dearly for capable leaders,
a consistent policy, free elections, and the control of
the government by the nation. We must also remem-
ber that this talent, founded on intense reflection,
concentrated in moral prejudices, could not but have


1 The Book of Snobs, ch. xxvi.; On Some Country Snobs.


CHAP, IL THE NOVEL—THACKERAY. 205


transformed the picture of manners into a systematic
and combative satire, exasperate satire into calculated
and implacable animosity, blacken human nature, and
attack again and again with studied, redoubled, and
natural hatred, the chief vice of his country and of his
time.


§ 2.—TuE ARTIST.


VIIl.


In literature as well as in politics, we cannot have
everything. Talents, like happiness, do not always
follow suit. Whatever constitution it selects, a people
is always half unhappy; whatever genius he has, a
writer is always half impotent. We cannot preserve
at once more than a single attitude. To transform the
novel is to deform it: he who, like Thackeray, gives
to the novel satire for its object, ceases to give it art
for its rule, and the complete strength of the satirist is
the weakness of the novelist.

What is a novelist? In my opinion he is a
psychologist, who naturally and involuntarily sets
psychology at work; he is nothing else, nor more. He
loves to picture feelings, to perceive their connections,
their precedents, their consequences; and he indulges
in this pleasure. In his eyes they are forces, having
various directions and magnitudes. About their justice
or injustice he troubles himself little. He introduces
them in characters, conceives the dominant quality,
perceives the traces which this leaves on the others,
marks the discordant or harmonious influences of
temperament, of education, of occupation, and labours
to manifest the invisible world.of inward inclinations
and dispositions by the visible world of outward words


206 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


and actions. To this ishis labour reduced. Whatever
these bents are, he cares little. A genuine painter
sees with pleasure a well-shaped arm and vigorous
muscles, even if they be employed in knocking down a
man. A genuine novelist enjoys the contemplation of
the greatness of a harmful sentiment, or the organised
mechanism of a pernicious character. He has sympathy
with talent, because it is the only faculty which
exactly copies nature: occupied in experiencing the
emotions of his personages, he only dreams of marking
their vigour, kind, and mutual action. He represents
them to us as they are, whole, not blaming, not punish-
ing, not mutilating them; he transfers them to us
intact and separate, and leaves to us the right of
judging if we desire it. His whole effort is to make
them visible, to unravel the types darkened and altered
by the accidents and imperfections of real life, to set
in relief grand human passions, to be shaken by the
greatness of the beings whom he animates, to raise us
out of ourselves by the force of his creations. We
recognise art in this creative power, impartial and
universal as nature, freer and more potent than nature,
taking up the rough-drawn or disfigured work of its
rival in order to correct its faults and give effect to its
conceptions.

All is changed by the intervention of satire; and
more particularly, the part of the author. When in an
ordinary novel he speaks in his own name, it is to
explain a sentiment or mark the cause of a faculty; in
a satirical novel it is to give us moral advice. It has
been seen to how many lessons Thackeray subjects us.
That they are good ones no one disputes; but at least
they take the, place of useful explanations. A third of


CHAP. I. THE NOVEL—THACKERAY. 207


a volume, being occupied by warnings, is lost to art.
Summoned to reflect on our faults, we know the
character less. The author designedly neglects a
hundred delicate shades which he might have discovered
and shown to us. The character, less complete, is less
lifelike ; the interest, less concentrated, is less lively.
Turned away from it instead of brought back to it,
our eyes wander and forget it; instead of being
absorbed, we are absent in mind. And, what is worse,
we end by experiencing some degree of weariness.
We judge these sermons true, but repeated till we are
sick of them, we fancy ourselves listening to college
lectures, or handbooks for the use of young priests.
We find similar things in books with gilt edges and
pictured covers, given as Christmas presents to children.
Are we much rejoiced to learn that marriages for the
sake of money or rank have their inconveniency, that
in the absence of a friend we readily speak evil of him,
that a son often afflicts his mother by his irregularities,
that selfishness is an ugly fault? All this is true;
but it is too true. We listen in order to hear new
things. These old moralities, though useful and well
spoken, smack of the paid pedant, so common in Eng-
land, the clergyman in the white tie, standing bolt
upright in his room, and droning, for three hundred
a year, daily admonition to the young gentlemen whom
parents have sent to his educational hothouse.

This regular presence of a moral intention spoils the
novel as well as the novelist. It must be confessed, a
volume of Thackeray has the cruel misfortune of recall-
ing the novels of Miss Edgeworth or the stories of
Canon Schmidt. Here is one which shows us Pendennis
proud, extravagant, hair-brained, lazy, shamefully plucked


208 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK Y.


at his examination; whilst his companions, less intel-
lectual but more studious, take high places in honours
or pass with decent credit. This edifying contrast
does not warn us; we do not wish to go back to school ;
we shut the book, and recommend it like medicine, to
our little cousin. Other puerilities, less shocking, end
in wearying us just as much. We do not like the pro-
longed contrast between good Colonel Newcome and
his wicked relatives. The Colonel gives money and
cakes to every child, money and shawls to all his cousins,
money and kind words to all the servants; and these
people only answer him with coldness and coarseness.
It is clear, from the first page, that the author would
persuade us to be affable, and we kick against the too
matter-of-course invitation ; we don’t want to be scolded
in a novel; we are in a bad humour with this invasion
of pedagogy. We wanted to go to the theatre; we
have been taken in by the outside bill, and we growl
sotto voce, to find ourselves at a sermon.

Let us console ourselves: the characters suffer as
much as we; the author spoils them in preaching to us;
they, like us, are sacrificed to satire. He does not
animate beings, he lets puppets act. He only com-
bines their actions to make them ridiculous, odious, or
disappointing. After a few scenes we recognise the
spring, and thenceforth we are always foreseeing when
it is going to act. This foresight deprives the character
of half its truth, and the reader of half his illusion.
Perfect fooleries, complete mischances, unmitigated
wickednesses, are rare things. The events and feelings
of real life are not so arranged as to make such calecu-
lated contrasts and such clever combinations. Nature
does not invent these dramatic effects: we soon see


CHAP. IL, THE NOVEL—THACKERAY, 209


that we are before the foot-lights, in front of bedizened
actors, whose words are written for them, and their
gestures arranged.

To bring before our mind exactly this alteration of
truth and art, we must compare two characters step by
step. There is a personage, unanimously recognised as
Thackeray’s masterpiece, Becky Sharp, an intriguante and
a bad character, but a superior and well-mannered woman.
Let us compare her to a similar personage of Balzac, in
les Parents pawvres, Valérie Marneffe. The difference of
the two works will exhibit the difference of the two
literatures. As the English excel as moralists and satir-
ists, so the French excel as artists and novel-writers.

Balzac loves his Valérie; this is why he explains
and magnifies her. He does not labour to make her
odious, but intelligible. He gives her the education of
a prostitute, a “husband as depraved as a prison full of
galley-slaves,” luxurious habits, recklessness, prodigality,
womanly nerves, a pretty woman’s dislikes, an artist’s
rapture: Thus born and bred, her corruption is natural.
She needs elegance as she needs air. She takes it no
matter whence, remorselessly as we drink water from the
first stream. She is not worse than her profession;
she has all its innate and acquired excuses, of mood,
tradition, circumstances, necessity; she has all its
powers, abandon, charms, mad gaiety, alternations of
triviality and elegance, sudden audacity, cornical devices,
magnificence and success. She is perfect of her kind,
like a proud and dangerous horse, which we admire
while we fear it. Balzac delights to paint her only for
the sake of his picture. He dresses her, lays on for
her her patches, arranges her garments, trembles before
her dancing-girl’s motions. He details her gestures

VOL. IV. P


210 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


with as much pleasure and truth as if he were her
waiting-woman. His artistic curiosity is fed on the
least traits of character and manners. After a violent
scene, he pauses at a spare moment, and shows her idle,
stretched on her couch like a cat, yawning and basking
in the sun. Like a physiologist, he knows that the
nerves of the beast of prey are softened, and that it
only ceases to bound in order to sleep. But what
bounds! She dazzles, fascinates; she defends herself
successively against three proved accusations, refutes
evidence, alternately humiliates and glorifies herself, rails,
adores, demonstrates, changing a score of times her
voice, her ideas, tricks, and all this in one quarter of an
hour. Anold shopkeeper, protected against emotions by
trade and avarice, trembles at her speech: “She sets
her feet on my heart, crushes me, stuns me. Ah, what
a woman! When she looks cold at me, it is worse than
a stomach-ache. . . . Howshe tripped down the steps,
making them bright with her looks!” Everywhere
passion, force, atrocity, concéal the ugliness and corrup-
tion. Attacked in her fortune by a respectable woman,
Mad. Marneffe gets up an incomparable comedy, played
with a great poet’s eloquence and exaltation, and broken
suddenly by the burst of laughter and coarse triviality
of a porter’s daughter on the stage. Style and action
are raised to the height of an epic. “ When the words
‘Hulot and two hundred thousand francs’ were men-
tioned, Valérie gave a passing look from between her
two long eyelids, like the glare of a cannon through its
smoke.” A little further, caught in the act by one of
her lovers, a Brazilian, and quite capable of killing her,
she blenched for an instant; but recovering the same
moment, she checked her tears. “She came to him,


CHAP, IL. THE NOVEL—THACKERAY. 211


and looked so fiercely that her eyes glittered like
daggers.” . Danger roused and inspired her, and her
excited nerves propel genius and courage to her brain.
To complete the picture of this impetuous nature,
superior and unstable, Balzac at the last moment makes
her repent. To proportion her fortune to her vice, he
leads her triumphantly through the ruin, death, or de-
spair of twenty people, and shatters her in the supreme
moment by a fall as terrible as her success.

Before such passion and logic, what is Becky Sharp ?
A calculating plotter, cool in temperament, full ofcommon
sense, an ex-governess, having parsimonious habits, a
genuine woman of business, always proper, always active,
unsexed, void of the voluptuous softness and diabolical
transport which can give brilliancy to her character and
charm to her profession. She is not a prostitute, but
a petticoated and heartless barrister. Nothing is more
fit to inspire aversion. The author loses no opportunity
of expressing his own; through two-thirds of the book
he pursues her with sarcasms and misfortunes; he puts
only false words, perfidious actions, revolting sentiments,
in her mouth. From her coming en the stage, at the
age of seventeen, treated with rare kindness by a simple-
minded family, she lies from morning to night, and by
coarse expedients tries to fish there for a husband.
The better to crush her, Thackeray himself sets forth
all this baseness, these lies, and indecencies. Rebecca
ever so gently pressed the hand of fat Joseph: “It
was an advance, and as such, perhaps, some ladies of
indisputable correctness and gentility will condemn the
action as immodest; but, you see, poor dear Rebecca
had all this work to do for herself. If a person is too
poor to keep a servant, though ever so elegant, he must


De MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


sweep his own rooms: if a dear girl has no dear mamma
to settle matters with the young man, she must do it for
herself.” Whilst Becky was a governess at Sir Pitt
Crawley’s, she gains the friendship of her pupils, by
reading to them the tales of Crébillon the younger, and of
Voltaire. She writes to her friend Amelia: “The rector’s
wife paid me a score of compliments about the progress
my pupils made, and thought, no doubt, to touch my
heart—poor, simple, country soul! as if I cared a fig
about my pupils.”? This phrase is an imprudence hardly
natural in so careful a person, and the author adds it
gratuitously to her part, to make it odious. A little
further Rebecca is grossly adulatory and mean to old Miss
Crawley; and her pompous periods, manifestly false,
instead of exciting admiration, raise disgust. She is
selfish and lying to her husband, and knowing that he is
on the field of battle, busies herself only in getting to-
gether a little purse. Thackeray designedly dwells on
the contrast: the heavy dragoon “went through the
various items of his little catalogue of effects, striving
to see how they might be turned into money for his
wife’s benefit, in case any accident should befall him.”
“Faithful to his plan of economy, the captain dressed
himself in his oldest and shabbiest uniform” to get
killed in:

“‘And this famous dandy of Windsor and Hyde Park went
off on his campaign . . . with something like a prayer on the
lips for the woman he was leaving. He took her up from the
ground, and held her in his arms for a minute, tight pressed
against his strong beating heart. His face was purple and his
eyes dim, as he put her-down and left her. . . . And Rebecca,
as we have said, wisely determined not to give way to unavail-


1 Vanity Fair, ch. iv. 2 Tbid. ch. xi.


CHAP, Ii. THE NOVEL—THACKERAY. 213


ing sentimentality on her husband’s departure. . . . ‘What a
fright I seem,’ she said, examining herself in the glass, ‘and how
pale this pink makes one look.’ So she divested herself of this
pink raiment; . . . then she put her bouquet of the ball into a
glass of water, and went to bed, and slept very comfortably.” 4


From these examples judge of the rest. Thackeray’s
whole business is to degrade Rebecca Sharp. He
convicts her of being harsh to her son, robbing trades-
men, deceiving everybody. And after all, he makes
her a dupe; whatever she does, comes to nothing.
Compromised by the advances which she has lavished
on foolish Joseph, she momentarily expects an offer of
marriage. <A letter comes, announcing that he has gone
to Scotland, and presents his compliments to Miss
Rebecca. Three months later, she secretly marries
Captain Rawdon, a poor dolt. Sir Pitt Crawley,
Rawdoun’s father, throws himself at her feet, with four
thousand a year, and offers her his hand. In her con-
sternation she weeps despairingly. “ Married, married,
married already!” is her cry; and it is enough to
pierce sensitive souls. Later, she tries to win her sister-
in-law by passing for a good mother. “ Why do you
kiss me here?” asks her son; “you never kiss me at
home.” The consequence is, complete discredit; once
more she is lost. The Marquis of Steyne, her lover,
presents her to society, loads her with jewels, -bank-
notes, and has her husband appointed to some island in
the East. The husband enters at the wrong moment,
knocks my lord down, restores the diamonds, and drives
her away. Wandering on the Continent, she tries five
or six times to grow rich and appear honest. Always,
at the moment of success, accident brings her to the


1 Vanily Fair, ch. xxx.


214 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


ground. Thackeray sports with her, as a child with a
cockchafer, letting her hoist herself painfully to the top
of the ladder, in order to pluck her down by the foot
and make her tumble disgracefully. He ends by
dragging her through taverns and greenrooms, and
pointing his finger at her from a distance, as a gamester,
a drunkard, is unwilling to touch her further. On the
last page he installs her vulgarly in a small fortune,
plundered by doubtful devices, and leaves her in bad
odour, uselessly hypocritical, abandoned to the shadiest
society. Beneath this storm of irony and contempt,
the heroine is dwarfed, illusion is weakened, interest
diminished, art attenuated, poetry disappears, and the
character, more useful, has become less true and beauti-
ful.


IX.


Suppose that a happy chance lays aside these causes
of weakness, and keeps open these sources of talent.
Amongst all these transformed novels appears a single
genuine one, elevated, touching, simple, original, the
history of Henry Esmond. Thackeray has not written
a less popular nor a more beautiful story.

This book comprises the fictitious memoirs of Colonel
Esmond, a contemporary of Queen Anne, who, after a
troubled life in Europe, retired with his wife to Virginia,
and became a planter there. Esmond speaks; and the
necessity of adapting the tone to the character sup-
presses the satirical style, the reiterated irony, the
bitter. sarcasm, the scenes contrived to ridicule folly,
the events combined to crush vice. ‘Thenceforth we
enter the real world; we let illusion guide us, we
rejoice in a varied spectacle, easily unfolded, without


CHAP, It, THE NOVEL—THACKERAY. 215


moral intention. . We are no more narassed by personal
advice; we remain in our place, calm, sure, no actor's
finger pointed at us to warn us at an interesting
moment that the piece is played on our account, and
to do us good. At the same time, and unconsciously,
we are at ease. Quitting bitter satire, pure narration
charms us; we take rest from hating We are
like an army surgeon, who, after a day of fights and
manceuvres, sits on a hillock and beholds the motion
in the camp, the procession of carriages, and the
distant horizon softened by the sombre tints of evening.

On the other hand, the long reflections, which seem
vulgar and out of place under the pen of the writer,
become natural and interesting in the mouth of the chief
character in this novel. Esmond is an old man, writing
for his children, and remarking upon his experience.
He has a right to judge life; his maxims are suitable to
his years: having passed into sketches of manners, they
lose their pedantic air; we hear them complacently,
and perceive, as we turn the page, the calm and sad
smile which has dictated them.

With the reflections we endure the details. Else-
where, the minute descriptions appear frequently puerile;
we blamed the author for dwelling, with the preciseness
of an English painter, on school adventures, coach
scenes, inn episodes; we thought that this intense
studiousness, unable to grasp lofty themes of art, was
compelled to stoop to microscopical observations and
photographic details. Here everything is changed.
A writer of memoirs has a right to record his childish
impressions. His distant recollections, mutilated rem-
pants of a forgotten life, have a peculiar charm; we
accompany him back to infancy. A Latin lesson, a


916 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


soldiers’ march, a ride behind some one, become impor-
tant events embellished by distance; we enjoy his
peaceful and familiar pleasure, and feel with him a
vast sweetness in seeing once more, with so much ease
and in so clear a light, the well-known phantoms of
the past. Minute detail adds to the interest in adding
to the naturalness. Stories of campaign life, random
opinions on the books and events of the time, a hun-
dred petty scenes, a thousand petty facts, manifestly
useless, are on that very account illusory. We forget
the author, we listen to the old Colonel, we find our-
selves carried back a hundred years, and we have the
extreme pleasure, so uncommon, of believing in what
we read.

Whilst the subject obviates the faults, or turns them
into virtues, it offers for these virtues the very finest
theme. A powerful reflection has decomposed and
reproduced the manners of the time with a most
astonishing fidelity. Thackeray knows Swift, Steele,
Addison, St. John, Marlborough, as well as the most
attentive and learned historian. He depicts their
habits, household, conversation, like Walter Scott him-
self; and, what Walter Scott could not do, he imitates
their style so that we are deceived by it; and many of
their authentic phrases, inwoven with the text can-
not be distinguished from it. This perfect imitation is
not limited to a few select scenes, but pervades the
whole volume. Colonel Esmond writes as people
wrote in the year 1700. The feat, I was going to say
the genius, is as great as the attempt of Paul Louis
Courier, in imitating successfully the style of ancient
Greece. The style of Esmond has the calmness, the
exactness, the simplicity, the solidity of the classics. Our


CHAP, II. THE NOVEL—THACKERAY. 217


modern temerities, our prodigal imagery, our jostled
figures, our habit of gesticulation, our striving for
effect, all our bad literary customs have disappeared.
Thackeray must have gone back to the primitive sense
of words, discovered their forgotten shades of meaning,
recomposed an obliterated state of intellect and a lost
species of ideas, to make his copy approach so closely
to the original. The imagination of Dickens himself
would have failed in this. To attempt and accomplish
this, needed all the sagacity, calmness, and power of
knowledge and meditation.

But the masterpiece of the work is the character of
Esmond. Thackeray has endowed him with that
tender kindliness, almost feminine, which he everywhere
extols above all other human virtues, and that self-
mastery which is the effect of habitual reflection.
These are the finest qualities of his psychological
armoury ; each by its contrast increases the value of
the other. We see a hero, but original and new, Eng-
lish in his cool resolution, modern by the delicacy
and sensibility of his heart.

Henry Esmond is a poor child, the supposed bastara
of Lord Castlewood, brought up by his heirs. In the
opening chapter we are touched by the modulated and
noble emotion which we retain to the end of the work.
Lady Castlewood, on her first visit to the castle, comes
to him in the “book-room or yellow gallery ;” being
informed by the house-keeper who the little boy is, she
blushes and walks back; the next instant, touched by
remorse, she returns:

“With a look of infinite pity and tenderness in her eyes, she
took his hand again, placing her other fair hand on his head,
and saying some words to him, which were so kind, and said in


218 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


a voice so sweet, that the boy, who had never looked upon so
much beauty before, felt as if the touch of a superior being or
angel smote him down to the ground, and kissed the fair pro-
tecting hand as he knelt-on one knee. To the very last hour of
his life, Esmond remembered the lady as she then spoke and
looked, the rings on her fair hands, the very scent of her robe,
the beam of her eyes lighting up with surprise and kindness, her
lips blooming in a smile, the sun making a golden halo round
her hair. . . . There seemed, as the boy thought, in every look
or gesture of this fair creature, an angelical softness and bright
pity—in motion or repose she seemed gracious alike; the tone
of her voice, though she uttered words ever so trivial, gave him
a pleasure that amounted almost to anguish. It cannot be
called love, that a lad of twelve years of age, little more than a
menial, felt for an exalted lady, his mistress; but it was wor-
ship.” *


This noble and pure feeling is expanded by a series
of devoted actions, related with extreme simplicity;
in the least words, in the turn of a phrase, in a chance
conversation, we perceive a great heart, passionately
grateful, never tiring of doing a kindness, or a service,
sympathising, friendly, giving advice, defending the
honour of the family and the fortune of the children.
Twice Esmond interposed between Lord Castlewood
and Mohun the duellist; it was not his fault that the
murderer’s weapon did not reach his own breast. When
Lord Castlewood on his deathbed revealed that Esmond
was not a bastard. but that the title and fortune of
Castlewood were lawfully his, the young man, with-
put a word, burned the confession which would have
rescued him from the poverty and humiliation in which
he had so long pined. Insulted by the Lady Castle-


' The History of Henry Esmond, wx. i. ch. i.
2 [bid. bk. i. ch. vii.


CHAP. Il. THE NOVEL—THACKERAY. 219


wood, sick of a wound received by his kinsman’s side,
accused of ingratitude and cowardice, he persisted in
his silence with the justification in his hand: “And
when the struggle was over in Harry’s mind, a glow of
righteous happiness filled it; and it was with grateful
tears in his eyes that he returned thanks to God for
that decision which he had been enabled to make.” }
Later, being in love, but sure not to marry if his birth
remained under a cloud in the eyes of the world, having
repaid his benefactress, whose son he had saved, en-
treated by her to resume the name which belonged to
him, he smiled sweetly, and gravely replied :


“¢Tt was settled twelve years since, by my dear lord’s bed-
side,’ says Colonel Esmond. ‘The children must know nothing
of this, Frank and his heirs after him must bear our name.
Tis his rightfully ; I have not even a proof of that marriage of
my father and mother, though my poor lord, on his deathbed,
told me that Father Holt had brought such a proof to Castlewood.
I would not seek it when I was abroad, I went and looked at
my poor mother’s grave in her convent. What matter to her
now? No court of law on earth, upon my mere word, would
deprive my Lord Viscount and set me up. Iam the head of
the house, dear lady ; but Frank is Viscount of Castlewood still.
And rather than disturb him, I would turn monk, or disappear
in America.’

“ As he spoke so to his dearest mistress, for whom he weuld
have been willing to give up his life, or to make any sacrifice
any day, the fond creature flung herself down on her knees be-
fore him, and kissed both his hands in an outbreak of passionate
love and gratitude, such as could not but melt his heart, and
make him feel very proud and thankful that God had given him
the power to show his love for her, and to prove it by some
little sacrifice on his own part, ‘To be able to bestow benefits


1 The History of Henry Esmond, bk. ii. ch. i.


220 MODERN AUTHORS, BOOE V.


or happiness on those one loves is sure the greatest blessing con-
ferred upon a man—and what wealth or name, or gratification
of ambition or vanity, could compare with the pleasure Esmond
now had of being able to confer some kindness upon his best
and dearest friends ?

“<< Dearest saint,’ says he, ‘ purest soul, that has had so much
to suffer, that has blest the poor lonely orphan with such a
treasure of love. ’Tis for me to kneel, not for you: .’tis for me
to be thankful that I can make you happy. Hath my life any
other aim? Blessed be God that I can serve you!’”?


This noble tenderness seems still more touching when
contrasted with the surrounding circumstances. Esmond
goes to the wars, serves a political party, lives amidst
dangers and bustle, judging revolutions and politics from
a lofty: point of view; he becomes a man of experience,
well informed, learned, farsighted, capable of great
enterprises, possessing prudence and courage, harassed
by his own thoughts and griefs, ever sad and ever
strong. He ends by accompanying to England the
Pretender, half-brother of Queen Anne, and keeps him
disguised at Castlewood, awaiting the moment when the
queen, dying and won over to the Tory cause, should
declare him her heir. This young prince, a true Stuart,
pays court to Lord Castlewood’s daughter Beatrix,
whom Esmond loves, and gets out at night to join her.
Esmond, who waits for him, sees the crown lost and his
house dishonoured. His insulted honour and outraged
love break forth in a proud and terrible rage. Pale,
with set teeth, his brain on fire by four sleepless nights
of anxiety, he keeps his mind clear, and his voice
calm; he explains to the prince with perfect etiquette,


1 The History of Henry Esmond, bk. iii. ch. ii.


CHAP, Il, THE NOVEL—THACKERAY. 221


and with the respectful coldness of an official messenger,
the folly which the prince has committed, and the
villany which the prince contemplated. The scene
must be read to see how much superiority and passion
this calmness and bitterness imply :


““« What mean you, my lord?’ says the Prince, and muttered
something about a guet-d-pens, which Esmond caught up.

“*The snare, Sir,’ said he, ‘was not of our laying; it is not
we that invited you. We came to avenge, and not to compass,
the dishonour of our family.’

“¢Dishonour! Morbleuw! there has been no dishonour,’ says
the Prince, turning scarlet, ‘only a little harmless playing.’

«That was meant to end seriously,’

““<T swear,’ the Prince broke out impetuously, ‘upon the
honour of a gentleman, my lords’—

“«That we arrived in time. No wrong hath been done,
Frank,’ says Colonel Esmond, turning round to young Castle-
wood, who stood at the door as the talk was going on. ‘See!
here is a paper whereon his Majesty hath deigned to commence
some verses in honour, or dishonour, of Beatrix. Here is,
“Madame” and ‘ Flamme,” “Cruelle” and ‘“ Rebelle,” and
“ Amour” and “ Jour,” in the Royal writing and spelling. Had
the Gracious lover been happy, he had not passed his time in
sighing.’ In fact, and actually as he was speaking, Esmond
cast his eyes down towards the table, and saw a paper on which
my young Prince had been scrawling a madrigal, that was to
finish his charmer on the morrow.

‘<¢ Sir’? says the Prince, burning with rage (he had assumed
his Royal coat unassisted by this time), ‘did I come here to
receive insults ?’

“¢To confer them, may it please your Majesty,’ says the
Colonel, with a very low bow, ‘and the gentlemen of our family
are come to thank you.’

“¢ Maltdiction !’ says the the young man, tears starting into


222 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


his eyes with helpless rage and mortification, ‘ What will you
with me, gentlemen 3’

“<Tf your Majesty will please to enter the next apartment,’
says Esmond, preserving his grave tone, ‘I have some papers
there which I would gladly submit to you, and by your permis-
sion I will lead the way ;’ and taking the taper up, and back-
ing before the Prince with very great ceremony, Mr. Esmond
passed into the little Chaplain’s room, through which we had
just entered into the house :—‘ Please to set a chair for his
Majesty, Frank,’ says the Colonel to his companion, who won-
dered almost as much at this scene, and was as much puzzled
by it, as the other actor in it, Then going to the crypt over
the mantel-piece, the Colonel opened it, and drew thence the
papers which so long had lain there.

“‘* Here, may it please your Majesty,’ says he, ‘is the Patent
of Marquis sent over by your Royal Father at St. Germain’s to
Viscount Castlewood, my father: here is the witnessed certifi-
cate of my father’s marriage to my mother, and of my birth and
christening ; I was christened of that religion of which your
sainted sire gave all through life so shining example. These are
my titles, dear Frank, and this what I do with them: here go
Baptism and Marriage, and here the Marquisate and the August
Sign-Manual, with which your predecessor was pleased to hon-
our ourrace,’ And as Esmond spoke he set the papers burning
in the brazier. ‘ You will please, sir, to remember,’ he continued,
‘that our family hath ruined itself by fidelity to yours; that
my grandfather spent his estate, and gave his blood and his son
to die for your service; that my dear lord’s grandfather (for
lord you are now, Frank, by right and title too) died for the
same cause ; that my poor kinswoman, my father’s second wife,
after giving away her honour to your wicked perjured race, sent
all her wealth to the King, and got in return that precious title
that lies in ashes, and this inestimable yard of blue riband. I
lay this at your feet, and stamp upon it: I draw this sword,
and break it and deny you; and had you completed the wrong


tes eel


CHAP. Il. THE NOVEL—THACKERAY. 223


you designed us, by Heaven I would have driven it through


your heart, and no more pardoned you than your father pardoned
Monmouth.’” }


Two pages later he speaks thus of his marriage to Lady
Castlewood :


“That happiness which hath subsequently crowned it, cannot
be written in words; ’tis of its nature sacred and secret, and
not to be spoken of, though the heart be ever so full of thankful-
ness, save to Heaven and the One ear alone—to one fond being,
the truest and tenderest and purest wife ever man was blessed
with. As I think of the immense happiness which was in store
for me, and of the depth and intensity of that love which, for so
many years, hath blessed me, I own to a transport of wonder and
gratitude for such a boon—nay, am thankful to have been en-
dowed with a heart capable of feeling and knowing the immense
beauty and value of the gift which God hath bestowed upon me.
Sure, love vincit omnia, is immeasurably above all ambition,
more precious than wealth, more noble than name. He knows
not life who knows not that: he hath not felt the highest
faculty of the soul who hath not enjoyed it. In the name of my
wife I write the completion of hope, and the summit of happi-
ness. ‘To have such a love is the one blessing, in comparison of
which all earthly joy is of no value; and to think of her, is to
praise God.”


A character capable of such contrasts is a lofty
work; it is to be remembered that Thackeray has
produced no other; we regret that moral intentions
have perverted these fine literary faculties; and we
deplore that satire has robbed art of such talent.


1 The History of Henry Esmond, bk. iii. ch. xiii.


224 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V,


X.


Who is he; and what is the value of this literature of
which he is one of the princes? At bottom, like every
literature, it is a definition of man; and to judge it, we
must compare it with man. We can do so now; we
have just studied a mind, Thackeray himself; we have
considered his faculties, their connections, results, their
different degrees; we have before our eyes a model of
human nature. We have a right to judge of the copy
by the model, and to control the definition which his
novels lay down by the definition which his character
furnishes.

The two definitions are contrary, and his portrait is
a criticism on his talent. We have seen that in him
the same faculties produce the beautiful and the ugly,
force and weakness, success and failure; that moral
reflection, after having provided him with every satiri-
cal power, debases him in art; that, after having spread
over his contemporary novels a tone of vulgarity and
falseness, it raises his historical novel to the level of
the finest productions; that the same constitution of
mind teaches him the sarcastic and violent, as well as
the modulated and simple style, the bitterness and harsh-
ness of hate with the effusion and delicacy of love.
The evil and the good, the beautiful and the ugly, the
repulsive and the agreeable, are in him then but remoter
effects, of slight importance, born of changing circum-
stances, acquired and fortuitous qualities, not essential
and primitive, different forms which different streams
present in the same current. So it is with other men.
Doubtless moral qualities are of the first rank; they
are the motive power of civilisation, and constitute the


CHAP. II. THE NOVEL—THACKERAY. 225


nobleness of the individual; society exists by them
alone, and by them alone man is great. But if they
are the finest fruit of the human plant, they are not its
root; they give us our value, but do not constitute our
elements. Neither the vices nor the virtues of man
are his nature; to praise or to blame him is not to
know him; approbation or disapprobation does not
define him; the names of good or bad tell us nothing
of what he is. Put the robber Cartouche in an Italian
court of the fifteenth century; he would be a great
statesman. Transport this nobleman, stingy and narrow-
minded, into a shop; he will be an exemplary trades-
man. This public man, of inflexible probity, is in his
drawing-room an intolerable coxcomb. This father of
a family, so humane, is an idiotic politician. Change
a virtue in its circumstances, and it becomes a vice;
change a vice in its circumstances, and it becomes a
virtue. Regard the same quality from two sides; on
one it is a fault, on the other a merit. The essential
man is found concealed far below these moral badges ;
they only point out the useful or noxious effect of our
inner constitution: they do not reveal our inner con-
stitution. They are safety or advertising lights attached
to our names, to warn the passer-by to avoid or ap-
proach us; they are not the explanatory chart of our
being. Our true essence consists in the causes of our
good or bad, qualities, and these causes are discovered
in the tempérament, the species and degree of imagina-
tion, the amount and velocity of attention, the magni-
tude and direction of primitive passions. A character
is a force, like gravity, or steam, capable, as it may
happen, of pernicious or profitable effects, and which
must be defined otherwise than by the amount of the


VOL. LY, Q


Zo0 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


weight it can lift or the havoc it can cause. It is
therefore to ignore man, to reduce him, as Thackeray
and English literature generally do, to an aggregate of
virtues and vices; it is to lose sight in him of all but
the exterior and social side; it is to neglect the inner
and natural element. We will find the same fault in
English criticism, always moral, never psychological,
bent on exactly measuring the degree of human honesty,
ignorant of the mechanism of our sentiments and
faculties; we will find the same fault in English
religion, which is but an emotion or a discipline; in
their philosophy, destitute of metaphysics; and if we
ascend to the source, according to the rule which derives
vices from virtues, and virtues from vices, we will see
all these weaknesses derived from their native energy,
their practical education, and that kind of severe and
religious poetic instinct which has in time past made
them Protestant and Puritan.


oo


CHAPTER III.
Criticigm and Wistory.— Macaulay,


I


I SHALL not here attempt to write the life of Lord
Macaulay. It can only be related twenty years hence,
when his friends shall have put together all their recol-
lections of him. As to what igs public now, it seems
to me useless to recall it: every one knows that his
father was an abolitionist and a philanthropist; that
Macaulay passed through a most brilliant and complete
classical education; that at twenty-five his essay on
Milton made him famous; that at thirty he entered
parliament, and took his standing there amongst the
first orators; that he went to India to reform the law,
and that on his return he was appointed to high
offices; that on one occasion his liberal opinions in
religious matters lost him his seat in parliament; that
he was re-elected amidst universal congratulations ; that
he continued to be the most celebrated publicist and
the most accomplished writer of the Whig party; and
that on this ground, towards the close of his life, the
gratitude of his party and the public admiration, made
him a British peer. It will be a fine biography to
write—a life of honour and happiness, devoted to -
noble ideas, and occupied by manly enterprises ; literary
in the first place, but sufficiently charged with action


228 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


and immersed in business to furnish substance and
solidity to his eloquence and style, to form the observer
side by side with the artist, and the thinker side by
side with the writer. On the present occasion I will
only describe the thinker and writer: I leave the life,
I take his works; and first his Hssays.


II.


His Hssays are a collection of articles from reviews :
I confess to a fondness for books of this kind In the first
place, we can throw down the volume after a score of
pages, begin at the end, or in the middle; we are not
its slave, but its master; we can treat it like a newspaper :
in fact, it is the journal of a mind. In the second
place, it is miscellaneous; in turning over a page, we
pass from the Renaissance to the nineteenth century,
from England to India: this diversity surprises and
pleases. Lastly, involuntarily, the author is indiscreet ;
he displays himself to us, keeping back nothing; it is
a familiar conversation, and no conversation is worth so
much as that of England’s greatest historian. We are
pleased to mark the origin of this generous and power-
ful mind, to discover what faculties have nourished his
talent, what researches have shaped his knowledge, what
opinions he formed on philosophy, religion, the state,
literature ; what he was, and what he has become ; what
he wishes, and what he believes.

Seated in an arm-chair, with our feet on the fender,
we see little by little, as we turn over the leaves of the
book, an animated and thoughtful face arise before us ;
the countenance assumes expression and clearness; the
different features are mutually explained and lightened


CHAP. 11. CRITICISM & HISTORY—-MACAULAY, 229


up; presently the author lives again for us, and before
us ; we perceive the causes and birth of all his thoughts,
we foresee what he is going to say; his bearing and
mode of speech are as familiar to us as those of a man
whom we see every day; his opinions correct and
affect our own; he enters partly into our thoughts and
our life; he is two hundred leagues away, and his book
stamps his image on us, as the reflected light paints on
the horizon the object from which it is emitted. Such
is the charm of books, which deal with all kinds of
subjects, Which give the author’s opinions on all sorts of
things, which lead us in all directions of his thoughts,
and make us, so to speak, walk around his mind.
Macaulay treats philosophy in the English fashion,
as a practical man. He is a disciple of Bacon, and
sets him above all philosophers ; he decides that genuine
science dates from him; that the speculations of old
thinkers are only witticisms; that for two thousand
years the human mind was on a wrong tack; that only
since Bacon it has discovered the goal to which it must
turn, and the method by which it must arrive there.
This goal is utility. The object of knowledge is not
theory, but application. The object of mathematicians
is not the satisfaction of an idle curiosity, but the in-
vention of machines calculated to alleviate human
labour, to increase the power of subduing nature, to
render life more secure, commodious, and happy. The
object of astronomy is not to furnish matter for vast
calculations and poetical cosmogonies, but to subserve
geography and to guide navigation. The object of
anatomy and the zoological sciences is not to suggest
eloquent systems on the nature of organisation, or to
set before the eyes the orders of the animal kingdom by


230 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK ¥.


an ingenious classification, but to conduct the surgeon’s
hand and the physician’s prognosis. The object of
every research and every study is to diminish pain, to
augment comfort, to ameliorate the condition of man ;
theoretical laws are serviceable only in their practical
use; the labouis of the laboratory and the cabinet
receive their sanction and value only through the use
made of them by workshops and mills; the tree of
knowledge must be estimated only by its fruits. If
we wish to judge of a philosophy, we must abserve its
effects ; its works are not its books, but its acts. The
philosophy of the ancients produced fine writings, sub-
lime phrases, infinite disputes, hollow dreams, systemg
displaced by systems, and left the world as ignorant,
as unhappy, and as wicked as it found it. That of
Bacon produced observations, experiments, discoveries,
machines, entire arts and industries :


“Tt has lengthened life ; it has mitigated pain; it has ex-
tinguished diseases ; it has increased the fertility of the soil ;
it’has given new securities to the mariner ; it has furnished new
arms to the warrior; it has spanned great rivers and estuaries
with bridges of form unknown to our fathers; it has guided
the thunderbolt innocnously from heaven to earth ; it has lighted
up the night with the splendour of the day; it has extended
the range of the human vision ; it has multiplied the power of
the human muscles ; it has accelerated motion; it has annihi-
lated distance; it has facilitated intercourse, correspondence,
all friendly offices, all despatch of business ; it has enabled man
to descend to the depths of the sea, to soar into the air, to pene-
trate securely into the noxious recesses of the earth, to traverse
the land in cars which whirl along without horses, and the
ocean in ships which run ten knots an hour against the wind,” }


1 Macaulay’s Works, ed. Lady Trevelyan, 8 vols. 1866; Essay on
Bacon, vi, 222,


CHAP. UI. CRITICISM & HISTORY—MACAULAY. 231


The first was consumed in solving unsolvable enigmas,
fabricating portraits of an imaginary sage, mounting
from hypothesis to hypothesis, tumbling from absurdity
to absurdity ; it despised what was practicable, promised
what was impracticable; and because it disregarded the
limits of the human mind, ignored its power. The
other, measuring our force and weakness, diverted us
from roads that were closed to us, to start us on roads
that were open to us; it recognised facts and laws,
because it resigned itself to remain ignorant of their
essence and principles; it rendered man more happy,
because it has not pretended to render him perfect;
it discovered great truths and produced great effects,
because it had the courage and good sense to study
small things, and to keep for a long time to petty
vulgar experiments; it has become glorious and
powerful, because it deigned to become humble and
useful. Formerly, science furnished only vain preten-
sions and chimerical conceptions, whilst it held itself
far aloof from practical existence, and styled itself the
sovereign of man. Now, science possesses acquired
truths, the hope of loftier discoveries, an ever-increasing
authority, because it has entered upon active existence,
and has declared itself the servant of man. Let it
keep to its new functions; let it not try to penetrate
the region of the invisible; let it renounce what must
remain unknown; it does not contain its own issue, it
is but a medium; man was not made for it, but
science was made for man; it is like the thermometers
and piles which it constructs for its own experiments ;
its whole glory, merit, and office, is to be an instrument:

“We have sometimes thought than an amusing fiction might
be written, in which a disciple of Epictetus and a disciple of


232 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


Bacon should be introduced as fellow-travellers. They come to
a village where the small-pox has just begun to rage, and find
houses shut up, intercourse suspended, the sick abandoned,
mothers weeping in terror over their children. The Stoic
assures the dismayed population that there is nothing bad in the
small-pox, and that to a wise man disease, deformity, death, the
loss of friends, are not evils. The Baconian takes out a lancet
and begins to vaccinate. They find a body of miners in great
dismay. An explosion of noisome vapours has just killed many
ofithose who were at work ; and the survivors are afraid to ven-
ture into the cavern. The Stoic assures them that such an
accident is nothing but a mere daorgonymivov, The Baconian,
who has no such fine word at his command, contents himselt
with devising asafety-lamp. They find a shipwrecked merchant
wringing his hands on the shore. His vessel with an inestim-
able cargo has just gone down, and he is reduced in a moment
from opulence to beggary. The Stoic exhorts him not to seek
happiness in things which lie without himself, and repeats the
whole chapter of Epictetus, «pic rovg ray admoginy dedoméras.
The Baconian constructs a diving-bell, goes down in it, and re-
turns with the most precious effects from the wreck. It would
be easy to multiply illustrations of the difference between the
philosophy of thorns and the philosophy of fruit, the philosophy
of words and the philosophy of works.” }


It is not for me to discuss these opinions; it is for
the reader to blame or praise them, if he sees fit: I do
not wish to criticise doctrines, but to depict a man;
and truly nothing could be more striking than this
absolute scorn for speculation, and this absolute love
for the practical. Such a mind is entirely suitable
to the national genius: in England a barometer is
still called a philosophical instrument; philosophy is
there a thing unknown. The English have moralists,


1 Macaulay’s Works ; Essay on Bacon, vi. 223.


cHaP. 11, CRITICISM & HISTORY—MACAULAY. 233


psychologists, but no metaphysicians: if there is one—
Hamilton, for instance—he is a sceptic in metaphysics ;
he has only read the German philosophers to refute
them ; he regards speculative philosophy as an extrava-
gance of visionaries, and is compelled to apologize to
his readers for the strangeness of his subject, when
he tries to make them understand somewhat of Hegel’s
conceptions. The positive and practical English, ex-
cellent politicians, administrators, fighters, and work-
ers, are no more suited than the ancient Romans for
the abstractions of subtle dialectics and grand systems;
and Cicero, too, once excused himself, when he tried to
expound to his audience of senators and public men,
the deep and audacious deductions of the Stoics.


II.


The only part of philosophy which pleases men of
this kind is morality, because like them it is wholly
practical, and only attends to actions. Nothing else
was studied at Rome, and every one knows what place
it holds in English philosophy : Hutcheson, Price, Fer-
guson, Wollaston, Adam Smith, Bentham, Reid, and many
others, have filled the last century with dissertations
and discussions on the rule of duty, and the faculty
which discovers our duty ; and Macaulay’s Hssays are a
new example of this national and dominant inclina-
tion: his biographies are less portraits than judgments,
What strictly is the degree of uprightness and dishonesty
of the personage he describes, that is the important
question for him; he makes all other questions refer to
it; he applies himself throughout only to justify, excuse,
accuse, or condemn. If he speaks of Lord Clive, Warren


234 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


Hastings, Sir William Temple, Addison, Milton, or any
other man, he devotes himself first of all to measure
exactly the number and greatness of their faults and vir-
tues; he interrupts himself, in the midst of a narration,
to examine whether the action, which he is relating, is
just or unjust ;, he considers it as a legist and a moralist,
according to positive and natural law; he takes into
account the state of public opinion, the examples which
surrounded the accused, the principles he professed, the
education he has received; he bases his opinion on
analogies drawn from ordinary life, from the history
of all peoples, the laws of all countries; he brings
forward so many proofs, such certain facts, such con-
‘clusive reasonings, that the best advocate might find a
model in him ; and when at last he pronounces judg-
ment, we think we are listening to the summing up of a
judge. If he analyses a literature—that of the Restora-
tion, for’ instance—he empanels before the reader a
sort of jury to judge it. He makes it appear at the
bar, and reads the indictment; he then presents the plea
of the defenders, who try to excuse its levities and inde-
cencies: at last he begins to speak in his turn, and
proves that the arguments set forth are not applicable
to the case in question; that the accused writers have
laboured effectually and with premeditation, to corrupt
morals; that they not only employed unbecoming words,
but that they designedly, and with deliberate intent,
represented unbecoming things; that they always took
care to conceal the hatefulness of vice, to render virtue
ridiculous, to make adultery fashionable and a neces-
sary exploit of a man of taste; that this intention
was all the more manifest from its being in the
spirit of the times, and that they were pandering to a


cnaP, in. CRITICISM & HISTORY—MACAULAY. 235


crime of their age. If I dare employ, like Macaulay,
religious comparisons, I should say that his criticism was
like the Last Judgment, in which the diversity of talents,
characters, ranks, emp]oyments, will disappear before the
consideration of virtue and vice, and where there will
be no more artists, but a judge of the righteous and the
wicked.

In France, criticism has a freer gait; it is less
subservient to morality, and more akin to art. When
we try to relate a life, or paint the character of a man,
we more readily consider him as a simple subject of
painting or science: we only think of displaying the
various feelings of his heart, the connection of his ideas
and the necessity of his actions; we do not judge him, *
we only wish to represent him to the eyes, and make
him intelligible to the reason. We are spectators, and
nothing more. What matters it if Peter or Paul is a
rascal? that is the business of his contemporaries :
they suffered from his vices, and ought to think only cf
despising and condemning him. Now we are beyond
his reach, and hatred has disappeared with danger.
At this distance, and in the historic perspective, I see
in him but a mental machine, provided with certain
springs, animated by a primary impulse, affected by
various circumstances. I calculate the play of his
motives ; I feel with him the impact of obstacles ; I see
beforehand the curve which his motion will trace out ;
T feel for him neither aversion nor disgust; I have
left these feelings on the threshold of history, and
I taste the very deep and pure pleasure of seeing a soul
act after a definite law, in a fixed groove, with all the
variety of human passions, with the succession ‘and


236 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


constraint, which the inner structure of man imposes
on the external development of his passions.

In a country where men are so much occupied by mo-
rality, and so little by philosophy, there is much religion.
For lack of natural theology they have a positive theology,
and demand from the Bible the metaphysics not sup-
plied by reason. Macaulay is a Protestant; and though
a very candid and liberal man, he at times retains the
English prejudices against the Roman-Catholic religion."
Popery in England always passes for an impious idolatry
and for a degrading servitude. After two revolutions,
Protestantism, allied to liberty, seemed to be the religion
of liberty; and Roman-Catholicism, allied to despotism,
seemed the religion of despotism : the two doctrines have
both assumed the name of the cause which they supported.
To the first has been transferred the love and veneration
which were felt for the rights which it defended; on
the second has been poured the scorn and hatred which
were felt for the slavery which it would have introduced :
political passions have inflamed religious beliefs; Pro-
testantism has been confounded with the victorious
fatherland, Roman-Catholicism, with the conquered
enemy; prejudices survive when the strife is ended,
and to this day English Protestants do not feel for the


1 “Charles himself, and his creature Laud, while they abjured the
innocent badges of Popery, retained all its worst vices,—a complete
subjection of reason to authority, a weak preference of form to substance,
a childish passion for mummeries, an idolatrous veneration for the
priestly character, and, above all, a merciless intolerance.””—Macaulay,
v. 24; Afilton.

“*It is difficult to relate without a pitying smile, that in the sacri-
fice of the mass, Loyola saw transubstantiation take place, and that, as
he stood praying on the steps of the Church of St. Dominic, he saw the
Trinity in Unity, and wept aloud with joy and wonder.”—Macaulay,
vi. 468 : Ranke, History of the Popes.


es ay i Ae
‘ - re Tis


& 7) MAY
ae oS


we J
See
eae a
oes i
fi vr
rele ew
. *
7 ~
=
i=
=i
ar
‘
.
i
t
‘
‘
’
s ©
~.-* 4 oo
i ;
A rid At" a the 8 7 4 ‘
—. = a * a  s Poa, ~~) a
rhs bs © . 7 “wT ~~ e : a
mate haan, hg | Is og as Se
~—— a i : ae a _ ye a
lain SS j vad P ie a ie eee . m ; 7
Sa eo. Cyaan ey es eS rs
~~ lel dt . @ i - An
— : 1 yee ,
; ey ce — © | : ag
‘ id ’ ; a ied


> oe

j a
Nats . . ae A

= mee . aa (
+ P Bos ee U ta

aly is ia i
ae zi 2 < Ra
° 5 NY = 4

—— a =


:
oo ‘A
: i
i ' re a .
+ La te . ,
mit ~<a |
i oo
at ; Ar
- 7 >.
a vs he: ae Be ‘
ie ne wel eC ’ »
=s = i


cuap. ul. CRITICISM & HISTORY—MACAULAY. 237


doctrines of Roman-Catholics the same good-will or im-
partiality which French Roman-Catholics feel for the
doctrines of Protestants.

But these English opinions are moderated in Macaulay
by an ardent love for justice. He is a liberal in the
largest and best sense of the word. He demands that
all citizens should be equal before the law, that men of
all sects should be declared capable to fill all public func-
tions—that Roman-Catholics and Jews may, as well as
Lutherans, Anglicans, and Calvinists, sit in Parliament.
He refutes Mr. Gladstone and the partisans of State
religion with incomparable ardour and eloquence, abund-
ance of proof, and force of argument; he clearly proves
that the State is only a secular association, that its end
is wholly temporal, that its single object is to protect the
life, liberty, and property of the citizens; that in entrust-
ing to it the defence of spiritual interests, we overturn
the order of things; and that to attribute to it a religious
belief, is as though a man, walking with his feet, should
also confide to his feet the care of seeing and hearing.
This question has often been discussed in France; it is
so to this day; but no one has brought to it more com-
mon sense, more practical reasoning, more palpable
arguments. Macaulay withdraws the discussion from
the region of metaphysics; he leads it back to’ the
earth; he brings it home to all minds; he takes his
proofs and examples from the best known facts of
ordinary life; he addresses the shopkeeper, the citizen,
the artist, the scholar, every one; he connects the truth,
which he asserts, with the familiar and intimate truths
which no one can help admitting, and which are be-
lieved with all the force of experience and habit; he
carries off and conquers our belief by such solid reasons,


238 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK ¥.


that his adversaries will thank him for convincing them ;
and if by chance a few amongst us have need of a les-
son on tolerance, they had better look for it in Macaulay's
Essay on that subject.
Ty,

This love of justice becomes a passion when political
liberty is at stake; this is the sensitive point; and
when we touch it, we touch the writer to the quick.
Macaulay loves it interestedly, because it is the only
guarantee of the properties, happiness, and life of
individuals; he loves it from pride, because it is the
honour of man: he loves it from patriotism, because it
is a legacy left by preceding generations; because for
two hundred years a succession of upright and great
men have defended it against all attacks, and preserved
it in all dangers; because it has made the power and
glory of England; because in teaching the citizens to
will and to decide for themselves, it adds to their
dignity and intelligence; because in assuring internal
peace and continuous progress, it guarantees the land
against bloody revolutions and silent decay. All these
_advantages are perpetually present to his eyes; and
whoever attacks the liberty, which forms their founda-
tion, becomes at once his enemy. Macaulay cannot
look calmly on the oppression of man; every outrage on
human will hurts him like a personal outrage. At
every step bitter words escape him, and the stale adula-
tion of courtiers, which he meets with, brings to his
lips a sarcasm the more violent from being the more
deserved. Pitt, he says, at college wrote Latin verses
on the death of George I. In this piece “the Muses
are earnestly entreated to weep over the urn of Casar:


oHapP, ul. CRITICISM & HISTORY—MACAULAY, 239


for Cesar, says the poet, loved the muses; Czesar, who
could not read a line of Pope, and who loved nothing
but punch and fat women.”! Elsewhere, in the bio-
graphy of Miss Burney, he relates how the poor young
lady, having become celebrated by her two first novels,
received as a reward, and as a great favour, a place of
keeper of the robes of Queen Charlotte; how, worn out
with watching, sick, nearly dying, she asked as a favour
the permission to depart; how “the sweet queen” was
indignant at this impertinence, unable to understand
that anyone could refuse to die in and for her service,
or that a woman of letters should prefer health, life,
and glory to the honour of folding her Majesty’s dresses.
But it is when Macaulay comes to the history of the
Revolution that he hauls to justice and vengeance
those men who violated the rights of the public, who
hated and betrayed the national cause, who outraged
liberty. He does not speak as a historian, but as a
contemporary ; it seems as though his life and his honour
were at stake, that he pleaded for himself, that he was
a member of the Long Parliament, that he heard at the
door the muskets and swords of the guards sent to
arrest Pym and Hampden. M. Guizot has related the
same history; but we recognise in his book the calm
judgment and impartial emotion of a philosopher. He
does not condemn the actions of Strafford or Charles ;
he explains them.; he shows in Strafford the imperious
character, the domineering genius which feels itself born
to command and to crush opposition, whom an invin-
cible bent rouses against the law or the right which re-
strains him, who oppresses from a sort of inner craving,
and who is made to govern as a sword is to strike.


1 Macaulay, vi. 89; An Essay on William Pitt, Earl of Chatham..


240 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK ¥.


He shows in Charles the innate respect for royalty, the
belief in divine right, the rooted conviction that every
remonstrance or demand is an insult to his crown, an
outrage on his rights, an impious and criminal sedition.
Thenceforth we see in the strife of king and parliament
but the strife of two doctrines; we cease to take an
interest in one or the other, to take an interest in both;
we are spectators of a drama; we are no longer judges
at a trial. But it ig a trial which Macaulay conducts
before us; he takes a side in it; his account is the
address of a, public prosecutor before the court, the most
entrancing, the most acrimonious, the best reasoned, that
was ever written. He approves of the condemnation of
Strafford ; he honours and admires Cromwell; he exalts
the character of the Puritans; he praises Hampden to
such a, degree, that he calls him the equal of Washing-
ton; he has no words scornful and insulting enough for
Laud; and what is more terrible, each of his judgments
is justified by as many quotations, authorities, historic
precedents, arguments, conclusive proofs, as the vast
erudition of Haliam or the calm dialectics of Mackintosh
could have assembled. Judge of this transport of
passion and this withering logic by a single passage :


“For more than ten years the people had seen the rights
which were theirs by a doubie claim, by immemorial inheritance
and by recent purchase, infringed by the perfidious King who
had recognised them, At length circumstances compelled
Charles to summon another parliament: another chance was
given to our fathers: were they to throw it away as they had
thrown away the former? Were they again to be cozened by
le Rot le veut? Were they again to advance their money on
pledges which had been forfeited over and over again? Were
they to lay a.second Petition of Right at the foot of the throne,


cuAP. ut. CRITICISM & HISTORY—MACAULAY, 241


to grant another lavish aid in exchange for another unmeaning
ceremony, and then to take their departure, till, after ten years
more of fraud and oppression, their prince should again require
a supply and again repay it with a perjury? They were, com-
pelled to choose whether they would trust a tyrant or conquer
him. We think that they chose wisely and nobly.

“The advocates of Charles, like the advocates of other male-
factors against whom overwhelming evidence is produced,
generally decline all controversy about the facts, and content
themselves with calling testimony to character. He had so
many private virtues! And had James the Second no private
virtues? Was Oliver Cromwell, his bitterest enemies them-
selves being judges, destitute of private virtues? And what,
after all, are the virtues ascribed to Charles? A religious zeal,
not more sincere than that of his son, and fully as weak and
narrow-minded, and a few of the ordinary household decencies
which half the tombstones in England claim for those who lie
beneath them. A good father! A good husband! Ample
apologies indeed for fifteen years of persecution, tyranny, and
falsehood !

“We charge him with having broken his coronation oath ;
and we are told that he kept his marriage vow! We accuse
him of having given up his people to the merciless inflictions of
the most hot-headed and hard-hearted of prelates ; and the de-
fence is, that he took his little son on his knee and kissed him !
We censure him for having violated the articles of the Petition
of Right, after having, for good and valuable consideration,
promised to observe them ; and we are informed that he was
accustomed to hear prayers at six o’clock in the morning! It
is to such considerations as these, together with his Vandyke
dress, his handsome face, and his peaked beard, that he owes,
we verily believe, most of his popularity with the present
zeneration.

“For ourselves, we own that we do not understand the
common phrase, a good man, but a bad king. We can as easily

VOL. IV. R


242 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


conceive a good man and an unnatural father, or a good man
and a treacherous friend. We cannot, in estimating the char-
acter of an individual, leave out of our consideration his conduct
in the most important of all human relations; and if in that
relation we find him to have been selfish, cruel, and deceitful,
we shall take the liberty to call him a bad man, in spite of all
his temperance at table, and all his regularity at chapel.” }


This is for the father; now the son will receive
something. The reader will perceive, by the furious
invective, what excessive rancour the government of
the Stuarts left in the heart of a patriot, a Whig, a
Protestant, and an Englishman :


“Then came those days, never to be recalled without a blush,
the days of servitude without loyalty and sensuality without
love, of dwarfish talents and gigantic vices, the paradise of cold
hearts and narrow minds, the golden age of the coward, the
bigot, and the slave. The King cringed to his rival that he
might trample on his people, sank into a viceroy of France, and
pocketed, with complacent infamy, her degrading insults, and
her more degrading gold. The caresses of harlots, and the jests
of buffoons, regulated the policy of the state. The government
had just ability enough to deceive, and just religion enough to
persecute, The principles of liberty were the scoff of every
grinning courtier, and the Anathema Maranatha of every fawn-
ing dean. In every high place, worship was paid to Charles
and James, Belial and Moloch ; and England propitiated those
obscene and cruel idols with the blood of her best and bravest
children, Crime succeeded to crime, and disgrace to disgrace,
till the race accursed of God and man was a second time driven
forth, to»-wander on the face of the earth, and to be a by-word
and a shaking of the head to the nations,” 2


This piece, with all the biblical metaphors, which has
1 Macaulay, v. 27; Ifilton, 2 Thid,. v. 35; Milton,


Onap. u1, ORITICISM & HISTORY—MACAULAY. 243


preserved something of the tone of Milton and the
Puritan prophets, shows to what an issue the various
tendencies of this great mind were turning—what was
its bent—how the practical spirit, science and historic
talent, the unvaried presence of moral and religious
ideas, love of country and justice, concurred to make of
Macaulay the historian of liberty.


v.


In this his talent assisted him; for his opinions are
akin to his talent.

What first strikes us in him is the extreme solidity
of his mind. He proves all that he says, with astonish-
ing vigour and authority. We are almost certain never
to go astray in following him. If he cites a witness,
he begins by measuring the veracity and intelligence of
the authors quoted, and by correcting thé errors they
may have committed, through negligence or partiality.
If he pronounces a judgment, he relies on the most
certain facts, the clearest principles, the simplest and
most logical deductions. If he develops an argument,
he never loses himself in a digression; he always has
his goal before his eyes; he advances towards it by
the surest and straightest road. If he rises to general
considerations he mounts step by step through all the
grades of generalisation, without omitting one; he feels
his way every instant; he neither adds nor subtracts
from facts; he desires at the cost of every precaution
and research, to arrive at the precise truth. He knows
an infinity of details of every kind; he owns a great
number of philosophic ideas of every species; but his
erudition is as well tempered as his philosophy, and


244 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


both constitute a coin worthy of circulation, amongst
all thinking minds. We feel that he believes nothing
without reason; that if we doubted one of the facts
which he advances, or one of the views which he pro-
pounds, we should at once encounter a multitude of
authentic documents and a serried phalanx of convinc-
ing arguments. In France and Germany we are too much
accustomed to receive hypotheses for historic laws, and
doubtful anecdotes for attested events. We too often
see whole systems established, from day to day, accord-
ing to the caprice of a writer; a sort of castles in the
air, whose regular arrangement simulates the appearance
of genuine edifices, and which vanish at a breath, when
we come to touch them. We have all made theories,
in a fireside discussion, in case of need, when for lack of
argument we required some fictitious reasoning, like those
Chinese generals who, to terrify their enemies, placed
amongst their troops formidable monsters of painted
cardboard. We have judged men at random, under the
impression of the moment, on a detached action, an
isolated document; and we have dressed them up with
vices or virtues, folly or genius, without controlling
by logic or criticism the hazardous decisions to which
our precipitation had carried us. Thus we feel a deep
satisfaction and a sort of internal peace, on leaving so
many doctrines of ephemeral bloom in our books or
reviews, to follow the steady gait of a guide so clear-
sighted, reflective, instructed, able to lead us aright.
We understand why the English accuse the French
of being frivolous, and the Germans of being chimerical.
Macaulay brings to the moral sciences that spirit of
circumspection, that desire for certainty, and that in-
stinct of truth, which make up the practical mind, and


cHAP. 1. CRITICISM & HISTORY—MACAULAY. 245


which from the time of Bacon have constituted the
scientific merit and power of his nation. If art and ~
beauty loose by this, truth and certainty are gained ;
and no one, for instance, would blame our author for


inserting the following demonstration in the life of
Addison :


“He (Pope) asked Addison’s advice. Addison said that the
poem as it stood was a delicious little thing, and entreated
Pope not to run the risk of marring what was so excellent in
trying to mend it. Pope afterwards declared that this insidious
counsel first opened his eyes to the baseness of him who gave it.

‘* Now there can be no doubt that Pope’s plan was most in-
genious, and that he afterwards executed it with great skill and
success. But does it necessarily follow that Addison’s advice
was bad? And if Addison’s advice was bad, does it necessarily
follow that it was given from bad motives? If a friend were
to ask us whether we would advise him to risk his all in a
lottery of which the chances were ten to one against him, we
should do our best to dissuade him from running such a risk.
Even if he were so lucky as to get the thirty thousand pound
prize, we should not admit that we had counselled him ill; and
we should certainly think it the height of injustice in him to
accuse us of having been actuated by malice. We think
Addison’s advice good advice. It rested on a sound principle,
the result of long and wide experience. The general rule un-
doubtedly is that, when a successful work of imagination has
been produced, it should not be recast. We cannot at this
moment call to mind a single instance in which this rule has
been transgressed with happy effect, except the instance of the
Rape of the Lock. Tasso recast his Jerusalem, Akenside recast
his Pleasures of the Imagination and his Epistle to Curio.
Pope himself, emboldened no doubt by the success with which
he had expanded and remodelled the Rape of the Lock, made
the same experiment on the Dunciad. All these attempts failed.


246 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


Who was to foresee that Pope would, once in his life, be able
to do what he could not himself do twice, and what nobody else
has ever done ?

“ Addison’s advice was good. But had it been bad, why
should we pronounce it dishonest? Scott tells us that one of
his best friends predicted the failure of Waverley. Herder ad-
-jured Goethe not to take so unpromising a subject as Faust.
Hume tried to dissuade Robertson from writing the History of
Charles'the Fifth. Nay, Pope himself was one of those who
prophesied that Cato would never succeed on the stage, and
advised Addison to print it without risking a representation.
But Scott, Goethe, Robertson, Addison, had the good sense and
generosity to give their advisers credit for the best intentions.
Pope’s heart was not of the same kind with theirs,” +


What does the reader think of this dilemma, and this
double series of inductions? The demonstrations would
not be more studied or rigorous, if a physical law were
in question.

This demonstrative talent was increased by his talent
for development. Macaulay enlightens inattentive
minds, as well as he convinces opposing minds; he
manifests, as well as he persuades, and spreads as much
evidence over obscure questions as certitude over doubt-
ful points. It is impossible not to understand him;
he approaches the subject under every aspect, he turns
it over on every side; it seems as though he addressed
himself to every spectator, and studied to make himself
understood by every individual; he calculates the
scope of every mind, and seeks for each a fit mode of
exposition; he takes us all by the hand, and leads us
alternately to the end, which he has marked out before-
hand. He sets out from the simplest facts, he descends


1 Macaulay, vii. 109 ; Life and Writings of Addison.


cHap. 11. CRITICISM & HISTORY—MACAULAY, 247


to our level, he brings himself even with our mind; he
spares us the pain of the slightest effort; then he leads
us on, and smoothes the road throughout ; we rise gradu-
ally without perceiving the slope, and at the end we
find ourselves at the top, after having walked as easily
as on the plain. When a subject is obscure, he is not
content with a first explanation; he gives a second,
then a third: he sheds light in abundance from all sides,
he searches for it in all regions of history; and the
wonderful thing is, that he is never prolix. In reading
him we find ourselves in our proper sphere; we feel as
though we could understand; we are annoyed to have
taken twilight so long for day; we rejoice to see this
abounding light rising and leaping forth in torrents;
the exact style, the antithesis of ideas, the harmonious
construction, the artfully balanced paragraphs, the
vigorous summaries, the regular sequence of thoughts,
the frequent comparisons, the fine arrangement of the
whole—not an idea or phrase of his writings in which
the talent and the desire to explain, the characteristic
of an orator, does not shine forth. Macaulay was a
member of Parliament, and spoke so well, we are told,
that he was listened to for the mere pleasure of listen-
ing. The habit of public speaking is perhaps the cause
of this incomparable lucidity. .To convince a great
assembly, we must address all the members; to rivet
the attention of absent-minded and weary men, we
must save them from all fatigue; they must take in too
much in order to take in enough. Public speaking
vulgarises ideas; it drags truth from the height at
which it dwells, with some thinkers, to bring it amongst
the crowd; it reduces it to the level of ordinary minds,
who, without this intervention, would only have seen it


948 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


from afar, and high above them. Thus, when great
orators consent to write, they are the most powerful of
writers; they make philosophy popular; they lift all
minds a stage higher, and seem to enlarge human
intelligence. In the hands of Cicero, the dogmas of
the Stoics and the dialectics of the Academicians lose
their prickles. The subtle Greek arguments become
united and easy; the hard problems of providence,
immortality, highest good, become public property.
Senators, men of business, lawyers, lovers of formulas and
procedure, the massive and narrow intelligence of
publicists, comprehend the deductions of Chrysippus ;
and the book De Offciis has made the morality of
Panetius popular. In our days, M. Thiers, in his two
great histories, has placed within reach of everybody
the most involved questions of strategy and finance ;
if he would write a course of political economy for
street-porters, I am sure he would be understood; and
pupils of the lower classes at school have been able to
read M. Guizot’s History of Civilisation.

When, with the faculty for proof and explanation, a
man feels the desire of proving, he arrives at vehemence.
These serried and multiplied arguments which all tend
to a single aim, those reiterated logical points, return-
ing every instant, one upon the other, to shake the
opponent, give heat and passion to the style. Rarely
was eloquence more captivating than Macaulay’s. He
has the oratorical afflatus; all his phrases have a tone;
we feel that he would govern minds, that he is irritated
by resistance, that he fights as he discusses. In his
books the discussion always seizes and carries away the
reader; it advances evenly, with accumulating force,
straightforward, like those great American rivers, impetu-


cHAP. 1, CRITICISM & HISTORY—MACAULAY. 249


ous as @ torrent and wide as a sea. This abundance of
thought and style, this multitude of explanations, ideas,
and facts, this vast aggregate of historical knowledge
goes rolling on, urged forward by internal passion,
sweeping away objections in its course, and adding to
the dash of eloquence the irresistible force of its mass
and weight. We might say that the history of James
Il. is a discourse in two volumes, spoken without
stopping, and with never-failing voice. We see the
oppression and discontent begin, increase, widen, the
partisans of James abandoning him one by one, the idea
of revolution arise in all hearts, confirmed, fixed, the
preparations made, the event approaching, growing
imminent, then suddenly falling on the blind and un-
just monarch, and sweeping away his throne and
dynasty, with the violence of a foreseen and fatal tem-
pest. True eloquence is that which thus perfects
argument by emotion, which reproduces the unity of
events by the unity of passion, which repeats the motion
and the chain of facts by the motion and the chain of
ideas. It is a genuine imitation of nature; more com-
plete than pure analysis ; it reanimates beings ; its dash
and vehemence form part of science and of truth. Of
whatever subject Macaulay treats, political economy,
morality, philosophy, literature, history, he is impassioned
for his subject. The current which bears away events,
excites in him, as soon as he sees it, a current which
bears forward his thought. He does not set forth his
opinion; he pleads it. He has that energetic, sustained,
and vibrating tone which bows down opposition and
conquers belief. His thought is an active force; it is
imposed on the hearer; it attacks him with such supe-
riority, falls upon him with such a train of proofs, such


250° MODERN AUTHORS, meee


a manifest and legitimate authority, such a powerful
impulse, that we never think of resisting it; and it
masters the heart by its vehemence, whilst at the same
time it masters the reason by its evidence.

All these gifts are common to orators; they are
found in different proportions and degrees, in men like
Cicero and Livy, Bourdaloue and Bossuet, Fox and
Burke. These fine and solid minds form a natural
family, and all have for their chief feature the habit
and talent of passing from particular to general ideas,
orderly and successively, as we climb a ladder by
setting our feet one after the other on every round.
The inconvenience of this art is the use of common-
place. They who practise it do not depict objects
with precision; they fall easily into vague rhetoric.
They hold in their hands ready-made developments, a
sort of portable scales, equally applicable on both sides
of the same and every question. They continue will-
ingly in a middle region, amongst the tirades and
arguments of the special pleader, with an indifferent
knowledge of the human heart, and a fair number of
amplifications on that which is useful and just. In
France and at Rome, amongst the Latin races, especially
in the seventeenth century, these men love to hover
above the earth, amidst grand words or general con-
siderations, in the style of the drawing-room and the
academy. They do not descend to minor facts, convine-
ing details, circumstantial examples of every-day life.
They are more inclined to plead than to prove. In
this Macaulay is distinguished from them. His
principle i8, that a special fact has more hold on the
mind than a general reflection. He knows that, to give
* men a clear and vivid idea, they must be brought back


cHAP. 1. CRITICISM & HISTORY-—-MACAULAY. 251


to their personal experience. He remarks! that, in order
to make them realise a storm, the only method is to
recall to them some storm which they have themselves
seen and heard, with which their memory is still
charged, and which still re-echoes through all their
senses. He practises in his style the philosophy of
Bacon and Locke. With him, as well as with them,
the origin of every idea is a sensation. Every compli-
cated: argument, every entire conception, has certain
particular facts for its only support. It is so for every
structure of ideas, as well as for a scientific theory.
Beneath long calculations, algebraical formulas, subtle
deductions, written volumes which contain the combina-
tions and elaborations of learned minds, there are two
or three sensible experiences, two or three little facts
on which we may lay our finger, a turn of the wheel in
a machine, a scalpel-cut in a living body, an unlooked-
for colour in a liquid. These are decisive specimens.
The whole substance of theory, the whole force of proof,
is contained in this. Truth is here, as a nut in its
shell: painful and ingenious discussion adds nothing
thereto; it only extracts the nut. Thus, if we would
rightly prove, we must before everything present these
specimens, insist upon them, make them vistble and
tangible to the reader, as far as may be done in words.
This is difficult, for words are not things. The only
resource of the writer is to employ words which bring
things before the eyes. For this he must appeal to the
reader's personal observation, set out from his experi-
ence, compare the unknown objects presented to him
with the known objects which he sees every day, place

1 See in his Essay on the Life and Writings of Addison (vii. 78)
Macaulay’s observations on the Campaign.


252° MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


past events beside contemporary events. Macaulay
always has before his mind English imaginations, full
of English images, I mean full of the detailed and
present recollections of a London Street, a dram-shop,
a wretched alley, an afternoon in Hyde Park, a moist
green landscape, a white ivy-covered country-house, a.
clergyman in a white tie, a sailor in a sou’-wester.
He has recourse to such recollections; he makes them
still more precise by descriptions and statistics; he
notes colours and qualities; he has a passion for exact-
ness; his descriptions are worthy both of a painter
and a topographer; he writes like a man who sees a
physical and sensible object, and who at the same time
classifies and weighs it. We will see him carry his
figures even to moral or literary worth, assign to an
action, a virtue, a book, a talent, its compartment and
its step in the scale, with such clearness and relief,
that we could easily imagine ourselves in a classified
museum, not of stuffed skins, but of feeling, suffering,
living animals.

Consider, for instance, these phrases, by which he tries
to render visible to an English public, events in India:


‘“‘ During that interval the business of a servant of the Com-
pany was simply to wring out of the natives a hundred or two
hundred thousand pounds as speedily as possible, that he might
return home before his constitution had suffered from the heat,
to marry a peer’s daughter, to buy rotten boroughs in Cornwall,
and to give balls in St. James’s Square! . . . There was stilla
nabob of Bengal, who stood to the English rulers of his country
in the same relation ia which Augustulus stood to Odoacer, or
the last Merovingians to Charles Martel and Pepin. He lived
at Moorshedabad, surrounded by princely magnificence. He was


1 Macaulay, vi. 549; Warren Hastings.


cHaPp. 11. CRITICISM & HISTORY—MACAULAY, ‘253


approached with outward marks of reverence, and his name was
used in public instruments, But in the government of the


country he had less real share than the youngest writer or cadet
in the Company’s service.” }


Of Nuncomar, the native servant of the Company, he
writes ;


“Of his moral character it is difficult to give a notion to
those who are acquainted with human nature only as it appears
in our island. What the Italian is to the Englishman, what the
Hindoo is to the Italian, what the Bengalee is to other Hindoos,
that was Nuncomar to other Bengalees. The physical organiza-
tion of the Bengalee is feeble even to effeminacy. He lives ina
constant vapour bath. His pursuits are sedentary, his limbs
delicate, his movements languid. During many ages he has
been trampled upon by men of bolder and more hardy breeds,
Courage, independence, veracity, are qualities to which his con-
stitution and his situation are equally unfavourable. His mind
bears a singular analogy to his body. It is weak even to help-
lessness, for purposes of manly resistance; but its suppleness
and its tact move the children of sterner climates to admiration
not unmingled with contempt. All those arts which are the
natural defence of the weak are more familiar to this subtle race
than to the Ionian of the time of Juvenal, or to the Jew of the
dark ages. What the horns are to the buffalo, what the paw is
to the tiger, what the sting is to the bee, what beauty, accord-
ing to the old Greek song, is to woman, deceit is to the Ben-
galee. Large promises, smooth excuses, elaborate tissues of cir-
cumstantial falsehood, chicanery, perjury, forgery, are the
weapons, offensive and defensive, of the people of the Lower
Ganges, All those millions do not furnish one sepoy to the
armies of the Company. But as usurers, as money-changers,
as sharp legal practitioners, no class of human beings can bear
a comparison with them,” ?


1 Macaulay, vi. 553; Warren Hastings. 2 Tbid. 555.


204 MODERN AUTHORS, BOOK V.


It was such men and such affairs, which were to provide
Burke with the amplest and most brilliant subject-
matter for his ‘eloquence; and when Macaulay described
the distinctive talent of the great orator, he described
his own:


“ He (Burke) had, in the highest degree, that noble faculty
whereby man is able to live in the past and in the future, in the
distant and in the unreal, India and its inhabitants were not to
him, as to most Englishmen, mere names and abstractions, but
a real country and areal people. The burning sun, the strange
vegetation of the palm and the cocoa-tree, the rice-field, the
tank, the huge trees, older than the Mogul empire, under which
the village crowds assemble ; the thatched roof of the peasant’s
hut ; the rich tracery of the mosque where the imaum prays
with his face to Mecca, the drums, and banners, and gaudy idols,
the devotee swinging in the air, the graceful maiden, with the
pitcher on her head, descending the steps to the river-side, the
black faces, the long beards, the yellow streaks of sect, the
turbans and the flowing robes, the spears and the silver maces,
the elephants with their canopies of state, the gorgeous palan-
quin of the prince, and the close litter of the noble lady, all
those things were to him as the objects amidst which his own
life had been passed, as the objects which lay on the road be-
tween Beaconsficld and St. James’s Street. All India was
present to the eye of his mind, from the halls where suitors laid
gold and perfumes at the feet of sovereigns, to the wild moor
where the gipsy camp was pitched, from the bazaar, humming
like a bee-hive with the crowd of buyers and sellers, to the jungle
where the lonely courier shakes his bunch of iron rings to scare
away the hyenas. He had just as lively an idea of the insurrec-
tion at Benares as of Lord George Gordon’s riots, and of the
execution of Nuncomar as of the execution of Dr. Dodd. Op-
pression in Bengal was to him the same thing as oppression in
the streets of London.” }


1 Macaulay, vi. 619; Warren Hastings,


cHaP, 11, ORITICISM & HISTORY—MACAULAY. 255


NI


Other forms of his talent are more peculiarly English
Macaulay has a rough touch; when he strikes, he
knocks down. Béranger sings:


“Chez nous, point,
Point de ces coups de poing
Qui font tant @honneur & |’Angleterre.” !


And a French reader would be astonished if he heard
a great historian treat an illustrious poet in this style:


“* But in all those works in which Mr. Southey has completely
abandoned narration, and has undertaken to argue moral and
political questions, his failure has been complete and ignomini-
ous. On such occasions his writings are rescued from utter
contempt and derision solely by the beauty and purity of the
English. We find, we confess, so great a charm in Mr, Southey’s
style that, even when he writes nonsense, we generally read it
with pleasure, except indeed when he tries to be droll. A
more insufferable jester never existed. He very often attempts
to be humorous, and yet we do not remember a single occasion
“on which he has succeeded further than to be quaintly and
flippantly dull. In one of his works he tells us that Bishop
Spratt was very properly so called, inasmuch as he was a very
small poet, And in the book now before us he cannot quote
Francis Bugg, the renegade Quaker, without a remark on his
unsavoury name. A wise man might talk folly like this by his
own fireside; but that any human being, after having made
such a joke should write it down, and copy it out, and transmit
it to the printer, and correct the proof-sheets, and send it forth
into the world, is enough to make us ashamed of our species,” ?


1 Béranger, Chansons, 2 vols. 1853 ; Les Boxeurs, ou L’ Anglomane.
2 Macaulay, v. 333 ; Southey’s Collogutes on Society.


256 MODERN AUTHORS. ‘BOOK V.


We may imagine that Macaulay does not treat the dead
better than the living. Thus he speaks of Archbishop
Laud :


“ The severest punishment which the two Houses could have
inflicted on him would have been to set him at liberty and
send him to Oxford. There he might have staid, tortured by
his own diabolical temper, hungering for Puritans to pillory
and mangle, plaguing the Cavaliers, for want of somebody else
to plague, with his peevishness and absurdity, performing
grimaces and antics in the cathedral, continuing that incompar-
able diary, which we never see without forgetting the vices of
his heart in the imbecility of his intellect, minuting down his
dreams, counting the drops of blood which fell from his nose,
watching the direttion of the salt, and listening for the note of
the screech-owls, Contemptuous mercy was the only vengeance
which it became the Parliament to take on such a ridiculous
old bigot,” 2


While he jests he remains grave, as do almost all the
writers of his country. Humour consists in saying
extremely comical things in a solemn tone, and in
preserving a lofty style and ample phraseology, at the
very moment when the author is making all his hearers
laugh. Such is the beginning of an article on a new
historian of Burleigh :


“The work of Dr. Nares has filled us with astonishment
similar to that which Captain Lemuel Gulliver felt when first
he landed in Brobdingnag, and saw corn as high as the oaks in
the New Forest, thimbles as large as buckets, and wrens of the
bulk of turkeys. The whole book, and every component part
of it, is on a gigantic scale, . The title is as long as an ordinary
preface; the prefatory matter would furnish out an ordinary
book: and the book contains as much reading as an ordinary


1 Macaulay, v. 204; Hallam’s Constitutional History.


cHap. 11. CRITICISM & HISTORY-—-MACAULAY. 257


library. We cannot sum up the merits of the stupendous mass
of paper which lies before us better than by saying that it
consists of about two thousand closely printed quarto pages,
that it occupies fifteen hundred inches cubic measure, and tnat
it weighs sixty pounds avoirdupois. Such a book might, before
the deluge, have been considered as light reading by Hilpah
and Shalum. But unhappily: the life of man is now threescore
years and ten ; and we cannot but think it somewhat unfair in
Dr. Nares to demand from us so large a portion of so short an
existence,” !


This comparison, borrowed from Swift, is a mockery in
Swift’s taste. Mathematics become in English hands
an excellent means of raillery; and we remember how
the Dean, comparing Roman and English generosity by
numbers, overwhelmed Marlborough by a sum in addi-
tion. Humour employs against the people it attacks,
positive facts, commercial arguments, odd contrasts drawn
from ordinary life. This surprises and perplexes the
reader, without warning; he falls abruptly into some
familiar and grotesque detail; the shock is violent; he
bursts out laughing without being much amused; the
trigger is pulled so suddenly and so roughly, that it is
like a knockdown blow. For instance, Macaulay is re-
futing those who would not print the indecent classical
authors :


“We find it difficult to believe that, in a world so full of

_ temptations as this, any gentleman whose life would have been
virtuous if he had not read Aristophanes and Juvenal will be
made vicious by reading them. A man who, exposed to all the
influences of such a state of society as that in which we live, is
yet afraid of exposing himself to the influence of a few Greek
or Latin verses, acts, we think, much like the felon who begged


1 Macaulay, v. 587 ; Burleigh and his Times.
VOT... IV. Ss


258 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


the sheriffs to let him. have an umbrella held over his head
from the door of Newgate to the gallows, because it was 4
drizzling morning, and he was apt to take cold.” +


Irony, sarcasm, the bitterest kinds of pleasantry, are the
rule with Englishmen. They tear when they scratch.
To be convinced of this, we should compare French
scandal, as Moliére represents it in the Misanthrope,
with English scandal as Sheridan represents it, imitating
Moliére and the Misanthrope. Céliméne pricks, but
does not wound; Lady Sneerwell’s friends wound, and
leave bloody marks on all the reputations which they
handle. The raillery, which I am about to give, is one
of Macaulay’s tenderest :


“They (the ministers) therefore gave the command to Lord
Galway, an experienced veteran, a man who was in war what
Moliére’s doctors were in medicine, who thought it much more
honourable to fail according to rule, than to succeed by innova-
tion, and who would have been very much ashamed of himself
if he had taken Monjuich by means so strange as those which
Peterborough employed. This great commander conducted the
campaign of 1707 in the most scientific manner. On the plain
of Almanza he encountered the army of the Bourbons. He
drew up his troops according to the methods prescribed by the
best writers, and in a few hours lost eighteen thousand men, a
hundred and twenty-standards, all his baggage and all his
artillery.” 2


These incivilities are all the stronger, because the
ordinary tone is noble and serious.

Hitherto we have seen only the reasoner, the scholar,
the orator, and the wit: there is still in Macaulay a
poet; and if we had not read his Lays of Ancient Rome,


1 Macaulay, vi. 491; Comie Dramatists of the Restoration.
2 Ibid. v. 672 ; Lord Mahon’s War of the Succession in Spain.


cHar,iu. QRITICISM & HISTORY—MACAULAY, 259


it would suffice to read a few of his periods, in which
the imagination, long held in check: by the severity of
the proof, breaks out suddenly in splendid metaphors,
and expands into magnificent comparisons, worthy by
their amplitude of being introduced into an epic :


“ Ariosto tells a pretty story of a fairy, who, by some
mysterious law of her nature, was condemned to appear at
certain seasons in the form of a foul and poisonous snake.
Those who injured her during the period of her disguise were
for ever excluded from participation in the blessings which she
bestowed. But to those who, in spite of her loathsome aspect,
pitied and protected her, she afterwards revealed herself in the
beautiful and celestial form which was natural to her, accom-
panied their steps, granted all their wishes, filled their houses
with wealth, made them happy in love and victorious in war.
Such a spirit is Liberty. At times she takes the form of a
hateful reptile. She grovels, she hisses, she stings. But woe
to those who in disgust shall venture to crush her! And
happy are those who, having dared to receive her in her
degraded and frightful shape, shall at length be rewarded by
her in the time of her beauty and her glory !”?


These noble words come from the heart; the fount is
full, and though it flows, it never becomes dry. As
soon as the writer speaks of a cause which he loves, as
soon as he sees Liberty rise before him, with Humanity
and Justice, Poetry bursts forth spontaneously from his
soul, and sets her crown on the brows of her noble
sisters :


“The Reformation is an event long past. That volcano has
spent its rage. The wide waste produced by its outbreak is
forgotten, The landmarks which were swept away have been


1 Macaulay, v. 81; Milton.


260 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V


replaced. The ruined edifices have been repaired. The lava
has covered with a rich incrustation the fields which it once
devastated, and, after having turned a beautiful and fruitful
garden into a desert, has again turned the desert into a still
more bedutiful and fruitful garden. The second great eruption
is not yet over. The marks of its ravages are still all around
us. The ashes are still hot beneath our feet. In some direc-
tions, the deluge of fire still continues to spread. Yet experience
surely entitles us to believe that this explosion, like that which
preceded it, will fertilise the soil which it has devastated.
Already. in-those parts which have suffered most severely, rich
cultivation and secure dwellings have begun to appear amidst
the waste. The more we read of the history of past ages, the
more we observe the signs of our own times, the more do we
feel our hearts filled and swelled up by a good hope for the
future destinies of the human race.” !


I ought, perhaps, in concluding this analysis, to point
out the imperfections caused by these high qualities ;
how ease. charm, a vein of amiability, variety, simpli-
city, playfulness, are wanting in this manly eloquence,
this solid reasoning, and this glowing dialectic ; why the
art of writing and classical purity are not always found
in this partisan, fighting from his platform ; in short, why
an Englishman is not a Frenchman or an Athenian. I
prefer to transcribe another passage, the solemnity
and magnificence of which will give some idea of the
grave and rich ornament, which Macaulay throws over
his narrative, a sort of potent vegetation, flowers of
brilliant purple, like those which are spread over every
page of Paradise Lost and Childe Harold. Warren
Hastings had: returned from India, and had just been
placed on his trial:


* Macaulay, v. 595 ; Burleigh and his Times.


CHAP, I, CRITICISM & HISTORY—MAOCAULAY. 261


“On the thirteenth of February 1788, the sittings of the
Court commenced. There have been spectacles more dazzling
to the eye, more gorgeous with jewellery and cloth of gold,
more attractive to grown-up children, than that which was
then exhibited at Westminster; but, perhaps, there never was
a spectacle so well calculated to strike a highly cultivated, a
reflecting, an imaginative mind. All the various kinds of
interests which belong to the near and to the distant, to the
present and to the past, were collected on one spot, and in one
hour, All the talents and all the accomplishments which are
developed by liberty and civilisation were now displayed, with
every advantage that could be derived both from co-operation
and from contrast. Every step in the proceedings carried the
mind either backward, through many troubled centuries, to the
days when the foundations of our constitution were laid ; or far
away, over boundless seas and deserts, to dusky nations living
under strange stars, worshipping strange gods, and writing
strange characters from right to left. The High Court of
Parliament was to sit, according to forms handed down from
the days of the Plantagenets, on an Englishman accused of
exercising tyranny over the lord of the holy city of Benares, and
over the ladies of the princely house of Oude.

“The place was worthy of such a trial. It was the great
Hall of William Rufus, the hail which had resounded with
acclamations at the inauguration of thirty kings, the hall
which had witnessed the just sentence of Bacon and the just
absolution of Somers, the hall where the eloquence of Strafford
had for a moment awed and melted a victorious party inflamed
with just resentment, the hall where Charles had confronted
the High Court of Justice with the placid courage which has
half redeemed his fame. Neither military nor civil pomp was
wanting. The avenues were lined with grenadiers. The streets
were kept clear by cavalry. The peers, robed in gold -and
ermine, were marshalled by the heralds under Garter King-at-
arms. The judges in their vestments of state attended to give


262 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


advice on points of law. Near a hundred and seventy lords,
three-fourths of the Upper House as the Upper House then
was, walked in solemn order from their usual place of assembling
to the tribunal. The junior baron present led the way, George
Eliott, Lord Heathfield, recently ennobled for his memorable
defence of Gibraltar against the fleets and armies of France and
Spain. The long procession was closed by the Duke of Norfolk,
Earl Marshal of the realm, by the great dignitaries, and by the
brothers and sons of the King. Last of all came the Prince of
Wales, conspicuous by his fine person and noble bearing. The
grey old walls were hung with scarlet. The long galleries
were crowded by an audience such as has rarely excited the
fears or the emulation of an orator. There were gathered
together, from all parts of a great, free, enlightened, and
prosperous empire, grace and female loveliness, wit and learning,
the representatives of every science and of every art. There
were seated round the Queen the fair-haired young daughters
of the house of Brunswick. There the Ambassadors of great
Kings and Commonwealths gazed with admiration on a spectacle
which no other country in the world could present. There
Siddons, in the prime of her majestic beauty, looked with
emotion on a scene surpassing all the imitations of the stage.
There the historian of the Roman Empire thought of the days
when Cicero pleaded the cause of Sicily against Verres, and
when, before a senate which still retained some show of freedom,
Tacitus thundered against the oppressor of Africa. There were
seen, side by side, the greatest painter and the greatest scholar
of the age. The spectacle had allured Reynolds from that
easel which has preserved to us the thoughtful foreheads ef so
many writers and statesmen, and the sweet smiles of so many
noble matrons. It had induced Parr to suspend his labours in
that dark and profound mine from which he had extracted a vast
treasure of erudition, a treasure too often buried in the earth,
too often paraded with injudicious and inelegant ostentation,
but still precious, massive, and splendid. There appeared the


CHAP. 111. CRITICISM & HISTORY—MACAULAY. 263


voluptuous charms of her to whom the heir of the throne
had in secret plighted his faith, There too was she, the
beautiful mother of a beautiful race, the Saint Cecilia whose
delicate features, lighted up by love and music, art has rescued
from the common decay. There were the members of that
brilliant society which quoted, criticised, and exchanged re-
partees, under the rich peacock-hangings of Mrs. Montague.
And there the ladies whose lips, more persuasive than those of
Fox himself, had carried the Westminster election against
palace and treasury, shone round Georgiana, Duchess of Devon-
shire.” 1


This evocation of the national history, glory, and
constitution forms a picture of a unique kind. The
species of patriotism and poetry which it reveals is an
abstract of Macaulay’s talent; and the talent, like the
picture, is thoroughly English.


VII.


Thus prepared, he entered upon the History of Eng-
land; and he chose therefrom the period best suited to
his political opinions, his style, his passion, his know-
ledge, the national taste, the sympathy of Europe. He
related the establishment of the English constitution,
and concentrated all the rest of history about this
unique event, “the finest in the world,” to the mind of
an Englishman and a politician. He brought to this
work a new method of great beauty, extreme power;
its success has been extraordinary. When the second
volume appeared, 30,000 copies were ordered before-
hand. Let us try to describe this history, to connect
it with that method, and that method to that order of


mind.
1 Macaulay, vi. 628; Warren Hastings.


264 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


The history is universal and not broken. It com-
prehends events of every kind, and treats of them
simultaneously. Some have related the history of
races, others of classes, others of governments, others
of sentiments, ideas, and manners; Macaulay has
related all.


“T should very imperfectly execute the task which I have
undertaken if I were merely to treat of battles and sieges, of
the rise and fall of administrations, of intrigues in the palace,
and of debates in the parliament. It will be my endeavour to
relate the history of the people as well as the history of the
government, to trace the progress of useful and ornamental arts,
to describe the rise of religious sects and the changes of literary
taste, to portray the manners of successive generations, and not
to pass by with neglect even the revolutions which have taken
place in dress, furniture, repasts, and public amusements. I
shall cheerfully bear the reproach of having descended below
the dignity of history, if I can succeed in placing before the
English of the nineteenth century a true picture of the life of
their ancestors,” }


He kept his word. He has omitted nothing, and
passed nothing by. His portraits are mingled with his
narrative. We find those of Danby, Nottingham,
Shrewsbury, Howe, during the account of a session,
between two parliamentary divisions. Short curious
anecdotes, domestic details, the description of furniture,
intersect, without disjointing, the record of a war.
Quitting the narrative of important business, we gladly
look upon the Dutch tastes of William, the Chinese
museum, the grottos, the mazes, aviaries, ponds, geo-
metrical garden-beds, with which he defaced Hampton


? Macaulay, i. 2; Histohy of England before the Restoration, ch. i.


cHaP.mt. CRITICISM & HISTORY—MACAULAY. 265


Court. A political dissertation precedes or follows the
relation of a battle; at other times the author is a
tourist or a psychologist before becoming a politician
or a tactician. He describes the highlands of Scot-
land, semi-papistical and semi-pagan, the seers wrapped
in bulls’ hides to await the moment of inspiration,
Christians making libations of milk or beer to the
demons of the place; pregnant women, girls of eighteen,
working a wretched patch of oats, whilst their husbands
or fathers, athletic men, basked in the sun; robbery
and barbarities looked upon as honourable deeds ;
men stabbed from behind or burnt alive; repulsive
food, coarse oats, and cakes made of the blood of a live
cow, offered to guests as a mark of favour and polite-
ness; infected hovels where men lay on the bare
ground, and where they woke up half smothered, half
blinded by the smoke, and half mad with the itch. The
next instant he stops to mark a change in the public
taste, the horror then experienced on account of these
brigands’ retreats, this country of wild rocks and barren
moors; the admiration now felt for this land of heroic
warriors, this country of grand mountains, seething
waterfalls, picturesque defiles. He finds in the progress
of physical welfare the causes of this moral revolution,
and concludes that, if we praise mountains and an un-
civilised life, itis because we are satiated with security.
He is successively an economist, a literary man, a pub-
licist, an artist, a historian, a biographer, a story-teller,
even a philosopher; by this diversity of parts he imi-
tates the diversity of human life, and presents to the
eyes, heart, mind, all the faculties of man, the complete
history of the civilisation of his country.

Others, like Hume, have tried or are trying to do it.


266 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V,


They set forth now religious matters, a little further
political events, then literary details, finally general con-
siderations on the change of society and governinent, be-
lieving that a collection of histories is history, and that
parts joined endwise are a body. Macaulay did not be-
lieve it and he did well. Though English, he had the
spirit of harmony. So many accumulated events form
with him not a total, but a whole. Explanations, ac-
counts, dissertations, anecdotes, illustrations, comparisons,
allusions to modern events, everything is connected in
his book. It is because everything is connected in his
mind. He had a most lively consciousness of causes ;
and causes unite facts. By them, scattered events are
assembled into a single event; they unite them because
they produce them, and the historian, who seeks them
all out, cannot fail to perceive or to feel the unity which
is their effect. Read, for instance, the voyage of
James IJ. to Ireland: no picture is more curious. Is
it, however, nothing more than a curious picture?
When the king arrived at Cork, there were ne horses
to be found. The country is a desert. No more
industry, cultivation, civilisation, since the English and
Protestant colonists were driven out, robbed, and slain.
James was received between two hedges of half-naked
Rapparees, armed with skeans, stakes, and half-pikes ;
under his horse’s feet they spread by way of carpet the
rough frieze mantles, such as the brigands and shepherds
wore. He was offered garlands of cabbage stalks for
crowns of laurel. In a large district he only found
two carts. The palace of the lord-lieutenant in Dublin
was so ill built, that the rain drenched the rooms. The
king left for Ulster; the French:officers thought they
were travelling “through the deserts of Arabia.’ The


cHaP. 1m. CRITICISM & HISTORY—MACAULAY. 267


Count d’Avaux wrote to the French court, that, to get
one truss of hay they had to send five or six miles.
At Charlemont, with great difficulty, as a matter of
favour, they obtained a bag of oatmeal for the French
legation. The superior officers lay in dens which they
would have thought too foul for their dogs. The Irish
soldiers were half-savage marauders, who could only
shout, cut throats, and disband. Il] fed on potatoes
and sour milk, they cast themselves like starved men
on the great flocks belonging to the Protestants. They
greedily tore the flesh of oxen and sheep, and swallowed
it half raw and half rotten. For lack of kettles, they
cooked it in the skin. When Lent began, the plunderers
generally ceased to devour, but continued to destroy.
A peasant would kill a cow merely in order to get a
pair of brogues. At times a band slaughtered fifty or
sixty beasts, took the skins, and left the bodies to
poison the air. The French ambassador reckoned thet
in six weeks, there had been slain 50,000 horned
cattle, which were rotting on the ground. They
counted the number of the sheep and lambs slain at
400,000. Cannot the result of the rebellion be
seen beforehand? What could be expected of these
gluttonous serfs, so stupid and savage? What could
be drawn from a devastated land, peopled with robbers ?
To what kind of discipline could these marauders and
butchers be subjected? What resistance will they
make on the Boyne, when they see William’s old regi-
ments, the furious squadrons of French refugees, the
enraged and insulted Protestants of Londonderry and
Enniskillen, leap into the river and run with uplifted
swords against their muskets? They will flee, the
king at their head; and the minute anecdotes scattered


268 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


amidst the account of receptions, voyages, and cere-
monies, will have announced the victory of the Protes-
tants. The history of manners is thus seen to be
involved in the history of events; the one is the cause
of the other, and the description explains the narrative.

It is not enough to see some causes; we must see a
great many of them. Every event has a multitude. Is
it enough for me, if I wish to understand the action of
Marlborough or of James, to be reminded of a disposi-
tion or a quality which explains it? No; for, since it
has for a cause a whole situation and a whole character,
I must see at one glance and in abstract the whole
character and situation which produced it. Genius
concentrates. It is measured by the number of recol-
lections and ideas which it assembles in one point.
That which Macaulay has assembled is enormous. I
know no historian who has a surer, better furnished,
better regulated memory. When he is relating the
actions of a man or a party, he sees in an instant all
the events of his history, and all the maxims of his
conduct; he has all the details present; he remembers
them every moment, and a great many of them. He has
forgotten nothing; he runs through them as easily, as
completely, as surely, as on the day when he enumerated
or wrote them. No one has so well taught or known
history. He is as much steeped in it as his personages.
The ardent Whig or Tory, experienced, trained to
business, who rose and shook the House, had not more
numerous, better arranged, more precise arguments.
He did not better know the strength and weakness of
his cause ; he was not more familiar with the intrigues,
rancours, variation of parties, the chances of the strife,
individual and public interests. The great novelists


ouaP, 11. CRITICISM & HISTORY—MACAULAY. 269


penetrate the soul of their characters, assume their feel-
ings, ideas, language; it seems as if Balzac had been a
commercial traveller, a female door-keeper, a -courtesan,
an old maid, a poet, and that he had spent his life in
being each of these personages: his existence is multi-
plied, and his name is legion. With a different talent,
Macaulay has the same power: an incomparable
advocate, he pleads an infinite number of causes; and
he is master of each cause, as fully as his client. He
has answers for all objections, explanations for all
obscurities, reasons for all tribunals. He is ready at
every moment, and on all parts of his case. It seems
as if he had been Whig, Tory, Puritan, Member of the
Privy Council, Ambassador. He is not a poet like
Michelet; he is not a philosopher like Guizot; but he
possesses so well all the oratorical powers, he accumu-
lates and arranges so many facts, he holds them so
closely: in his hand, he manages them with so much
ease and vigour, that he succeeds in recomposing the
whole and harmonious woof of history, not losing or
separating one thread. The poet reanimates the dead ;
the philosopher formulates creative laws; the orator
knows, expounds, and pleads causes. The poet resusci-
tates souls, the philosopher composes a system, the
orator redisposes chains of arguments; but all three
march towards the same end by different routes, and
the orator, as well as his rivals, and by other means
than his rivals, reproduces in his work the unity and
complexity of life.

A second feature of this history is clearness. It
is popular; no one explains better, or so much, as
Macaulay. It seems as if he were making a wager
with his reader, and said to him: Be as absent in mind,


270 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


as stupid, as ignorant as you please; in vain you will
be absent in mind, you shall listen to me; in vain you
will be stupid, you shall understand; in vain you will
be ignorant, you shall learn. J will repeat the same
idea in so many different forms, I will make it
sensible by such familiar and precise examples, 1 will
announce:it so clearly at the beginning, I will resume
it so carefully at the end, I will mark the divisions so
well, follow the order of ideas so exactly, I will display
so great a desire to enlighten and convince you that
you cannot help being enlightened and convinced. He
certainly thought thus, when he was preparing the
following passage on the law which, for the first time,
granted to Dissenters the liberty of exercising their
worship :


“ Of all the Acts that have ever been passed by Parliament,
the Toleration Act is perhaps that which most strikingly illus-
trates the peculiar vices and the peculiar excellences of English
legislation. The science of Politics bears in one respect a close
analogy to the science of Mechanics. The mathematician can
easily demonstrate that a certain power, applied by means of a
certain lever or of a certain system of pulleys, will suffice to
raise a certain weight. But his demonstration proceeds on the
supposition that the machinery is such as no load will bend or
break. If the engineer, who has to lift a great mass of real
granite by the instrumentality of real timber and real hemp,
should absolutely rely on the propositions which he finds in
treatises on Dynamics, and should make no allowance for the
imperfection of his materials, his whole apparatus of beams,
wheels, and ropes would soon come down in ruin, and, with all
his geometrical skill, he would be found a far inferior builder
to those painted barbarians who, though they never heard of
the parallelogram of forces, managed to pile up Stonehenge.
What the engineer is to the mathematician, the active states-


cHaP, mr. CRITICISM & HISTORY—MACAULAY. 271


man is to the contemplative statesman. It is indeed most
important that legislators and administrators should be versed
in the philosophy of government, as it is most important that
the architect who has to fix an obelisk on its pedestal, or to
hang a tubular bridge over an estuary, should be versed in the
philosophy of equilibrium and motion. But, as he who has
actually to build must bear in mind many things never noticed
by D’Alembert and Euler, so must be who has actually to
govern be perpetually guided by considerations to which no
allusion can be found in the writings of Adam Smith or
Jeremy Bentham. The perfect lawgiver is a just temper
between the mere man of theory, who can see nothing but
general principles, and the mere man of business, who can see
nothing but particular circumstances. Of lawgivers in whom
the speculative element has prevailed to the exclusion of the
practical, the world has during the last eighty years been singu-
larly fruitful. To their wisdom Europe and America have
owed scores of abortive constitutions, scores of constitutions
which have lived just long enough to make a miserable noise,
and have then gone off in convulsions. But in English legisla-
tion the practical element has always predominated, and not
seldom unduly predominated, over the speculative, To think
nothing of symmetry and much of convenience; never to
remove an anomaly merely because it is an anomaly ; never to
innovate except when some grievance is felt ; never to innovate
except so far as to get rid of the grievance ; never to lay down
any proposition of wider extent than the particular case for
which it is necessary to provide ; these are the rules which
have, from the age of John to the age of Victoria, generally
guided the deliberations of our two hundred and fifty Parlia-
ments,”


Is the idea still obscure or doubtful? Does it still
need proofs, illustrations? Do we wish for anything


+ Macaulay, ii. 463, History of Englund, ch. xi


242 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


more? You answer No; Macaulay answers Yes.
After the general explanation comes the particular; after
the theory, the application ; after the theoretical demon-
stration, the practical. We would fain stop; but he
proceeds :


“The Toleration Act approaches very near to the idea of a
great English law. To a jurist, versed in the theory of legisla-
tion, but not intimately acquainted with the temper of the sects
and parties into which the nation was divided at the time of
the Revolution, that Act would seem to be a mere chaos of
absurdities and contradictions, It will not bear to be tried by
sound general principles. Nay, it will not bear to be tried by
any principle, sound or unsound. The sound principle undoubt-
edly is, that mere theological error ought not to be punished
by the civil magistrate. This principle the Toleration Act not
only does not recognise, but positively disclaims. Not a single
one of the cruel laws enacted against nonconformists by the
Tudors or the Stuarts is repealed. Persecution continues to be
the general rule. Toleration is the exception. Nor is this all.
The freedom which is given to conscience is given in the most
capricious manner. A Quaker, by making a declaration of
faith in general terms, obtains the full benefit of the Act
without signing one of the thirty-nine Articles, An Independ-
ent minister, who is perfectly willing to make the declaration .
required from the Quaker, but who has doubts about six or seven
of the Articles, remains still subject to the penal laws. Howe
is liable to punishment if he preaches before he has solemnly
declared his assent to the Anglican doctrine touching: the
Eucharist. Penn, who-altogether rejects the Eucharist, is at
perfect liberty to preach without thaking any declaration what-
ever on the subject.

“These are some of the obvious faults which must strike
every person who examines the Toleration Act by that standard
of just reason which is the same in all countries and in all ages.


CHAP, m1, ORITIOISM & HISTORY—MACAULAY. 273


But these very faults may perhaps appear to be merits, when
we take into consideration the passions and prejudices of those
for whom the Toleration Act was framed. This law, abounding
with contradictions which every smatterer in political philo-
sophy can detect, did what a law framed by the utmost skill of
the greatest masters of political philosophy might have failed
to do. That the provisions which have been recapitulated are
cumbrous, puerile, inconsistent with each other, inconsistent
with the true theory of religious liberty, must be acknowledged.
All that can be said in their defence is this ; that they removed
a vast mass of evil without shocking a vast mass of prejudice ;
that they put an end, at once and for ever, without one division
in either House of Parliament, without one riot in the streets,
with scarcely one audible murmur even from the classes most
deeply tainted with bigotry, to a persecution which had raged
during four generations, which had broken innumerable hearts,
which had made innumerable firesides desolate, which had
fiiled the prisons with men of whom the world was not worthy,
which had driven thousands of those honest, diligent'and god-
fearing yoeman and artisans, who are the true strength of a
nation, to seek a refuge beyond the ocean among the wigwams
of red Indians and the lairs of panthers. Such a defence, how-
ever weak it may appear to some shallow speculators, will
probably be thought complete by statesmen.” }


What I find complete in this, is the art of de-
veloping. This antithesis of ideas, sustained by
the antithesis of words, the symmetrical periods, the
expressions designedly repeated to attract. attention,
the exhaustion of proof, set before our eyes the
special-pleader’s and oratorical talent, which we just
before encountered in the art of pleading all causes,
of employing an infinite number of methods, of mastet-
ing them all and always, during every incident of the

1 Macaulay, ii. 465, History of England, ch, xi

VOL. IV. ae


274 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


lawsuit. The final manifestation of a mind of this sort
are the faults into which its talent draws it. By dint
of development, he protracts. More than once his ex-
plications are commonplace. He proves what all allow.
He makes clear what is already clear. In one of his
works there is a passage on the necessity of reactions
which reads like the verbosity of a clever schoolboy.
Other passages, excellent and novel, can only be read
with pleasure once. On the second reading they ap-
pear too true; we-have seen it all at a glance, and are
wearied. I have omitted one-third of the passage on
the Act of Toleration, and acute minds will think that I
ought to have omitted another third.

The last feature, the most singular, the least English
of this History, is, that it is interesting. Macaulay
wrote, in the Edinburgh Review, several volumes of
Essays ; and everyone Imows that the first merit of a
reviewer or a journalist is to make himself readable.
A thick volume naturally bores us; it is not thick for
nothing; its bulk demands at the outset the attention
of him who opens it. The solid binding, the table of
contents, the preface, the substantial chapters, drawn
up like soldiers in battle-array, all bid us take an arm-
chair, put on a dressing-gown, place our feet on the
fender, and study; we owe no less to the grave man
who presents himself to us, armed with 600 pages of
text and three years of reflection. But a newspaper
which we glance at in a club, a review which we finger
in a drawing-room in the evening, before sitting down
to dinner, must needs attract, the eyes, overcome absence
of mind, conquer readers. Macaulay attained, through
practice, this gift of readableness, and he retains in
his History the habits which he acquired in peri-


cHAP. ur. ORITICISM & HISTORY—-MACAULAY. 275


odicals. He employs every means of keeping up
attention, good or indifferent, worthy or unworthy of his
great talents; amongst others, allusion to actual circwn-
stances. You may have heard the saying of an editor,
to whom Pierre Leroux offered an article on God.
“God! there is no actuality about it!” Macaulay
profits by this remark. He never forgets the actual.
If he mentions a regiment, he points out in a few
lines the splendid deeds which it has done since its
formation up to our own day: thus the officers of this
regiment, encamped in the Crimea, stationed at Malta,
or at Calcutta, are obliged to read his History. He
relates the reception of Schomberg in the House: who
is interested in Schomberg? Forthwith he adds that
Wellington, a hundred years later, was received, under
like circumstances, with a ceremony copied from the
first: what Englishman is not interested in Wellington ?
He relates the siege of Londonderry, he points out the
spot which the ancient bastions occupy in the present
town, the field which was covered by the Irish camp,
the well at which the besiegers drank: what citizen of
Londonderry can help buying his book? Whatever
town he comes upon, he notes the changes which it has
undergone, the new streets added, the buildings repaired
or constructed, the increase of commerce, the introduc-
tion of new industries: hence all the aldermen and
merchants are constrained to subscribe to his work.
Elsewhere we find an anecdote of an actor and actress:
as the superlative degree is interesting, he begins by
saying that William Mountford was the most agreeable
comedian, that Anne Bracegirdle was the most popular
actress of the time. If he introduces a statesman, he
always announces him by some great word: he was the


276 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


most insinuating, or the most equitable, or the best
informed, or the most inveterately debauched, of all
the politicians of the day. But Macaulay’s great
qualities serve him as well in this matter as his literary
machinery, a little too manifest, a little too copious, a
little too coarse. The astonishing number of details,
the medley of psychological and moral dissertations,
descriptions. relations, opinions, pleadings. portraits,
beyond all, good composition and the continuous stream
of eloquence. seize and retain the attention to the end.
We have hard work to finish a volume of Lingard or
Robertson ; we should have hard work not to finish a
volume of Macaulay.

Here is a detached narrative which shows very well,
and in the abstract. the means of interesting which he
employs, and the great interest which he excites. The
subject is the Massacre of Glencoe. Macaulay begins
by describjng the spot like a traveller who has seen it,
and points it out to the bands of tourists and dilettanti,
historians and antiquarians, who every year start from
London :


*Mac Ian dwelt in the mouth of a ravine situated not far
from the southern shore of Loch Leven, an arm of the sea
which deeply indents the western coast of Scotland, and separ-
ates Argyleshire from Inverness-shire. Near his house were
two or three small hamlets inhabited by his tribe, The whole
population which he governed was not supposed to exceed two
hundred souls, In the neighbourhood of the little cluster of
villages was some copsewood and some pasture land: but a
little further up the defile no sign of population or of fruitful-
ness was to be seen. In the Gaelic tongué, Glencoe signifies
the Glen of Weeping: and, in truth, that pass is the most
dreary and melancholy of all the Scottish passes, the very


cuap, 11. CRITICISM & HISTORY—MACAULAY, 277


Valley of the Shadow of Death. Mists and storms brood over
it through the greater part of the finest summer ; and even on
those rare days when the sun is bright, and when there is no
cloud in the sky, the impression made by the landscape is sad
and awful. The path lies along a stream which issues from
the most sullen and gloomy of mountain pools. Huge preci-
pices of naked stone frown on both sides. Even in July the
streaks of snow may often be discerned in the rifts near the
summits. All down the sides of the crags heaps of ruin mark
the headlong paths of the torrents. Mile after mile the
traveller looks in vain for the smoke of one hut, or for one
human form wrapped in a plaid, and listens in vain for the
bark of a shepherd’s dog or the bleat of a lamb. Mile after
mile the only sound that indicates life is the faint cry of a bird
of prey from some storm-beaten pinnacle ofrock. The progress of
civilisation, which has turned so many wastes into fields yellow
with harvests or gay with apple blossoms has only made
Glencoe more desolate, All the science and industry of a
peaceful age can extract nothing valuable from that wilderness :
but, in an age of violence and rapine, the wilderness itself was
valued on account of the shelter which it afforded to the
plunderer and his plunder.” +


The description, though very beautiful, is written for
effect. The final antithesis explains it; the author has
made it in order to show that the Macdonalds were
the greatest brigands of the country.

The Master of Stair, who represented William III. in
Scotland, relying on the fact that Mac Ian had not
taken the oath of allegiance on the appointed day,
determined to destroy the chief and his clan. He was
not urged by hereditary hate nor by private interest ;
he was a man of taste, polished and amiable. He did
this crime out of humanity, persuaded that there was


1 Macaulay, ili. 513, History of England, ch. xviii.


278 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK Vv.


no other way of pacifying the Highlands. Thereupon
Macaulay inserts a dissertation of four pages, very well
written, full of interest and knowledge, whose diversity
affords us rest, which leads us over all kinds of his-
torical examples, and moral lessons :


“We daily see men do for their party, for their sect, for
their country, for their favourite schemes of political and social
reform, what they would not do to enrich or to avenge them-
selves, At a temptation directly addressed to our private
cupidity or to our private animosity, whatever virtue we have
takes the alarm. But virtue itself may contribute to the fall
of him who imagines that it is in his power, by violating some
general rule of morality, to confer an important benefit on a
church, on @ commonwealth, on mankind JHe silences the
remonstrances of conscience, and hardens his heart against the
most touching spectacles of misery, by repeating to himself that
his intentions are pure, that his objects are noble, that he is
doing a little evil for the sake of a great good. By degrees he
comes altogether to forget the turpitude of the means in the
excellence of the end, and at length perpetrates without one
internal twinge acts which would shock a buecaneer, There is
no reason to believe that Dominic would, for the best arch-
bishopric in Christendom, have incited ferocious marauders to
plunder and slaughter a peaceful and industrious population,
that Everard Digby would, for a dukedom, have blown a large
assembly of people into the air, or that Robespierre would have
murdered for hire one of the thousands whom he murdered
from philanthropy.” !


Do we not recognise here the Englishman brought up
on psychological and moral essays and sermons, who
involuntarily and every instant spreads one over the
paper? This species of literature is unknown in


1 Macaylay, iii, 519 ; History of England, ch. xviii.


cHap, 11. .CRITICISM & HISTORY—MACAULAY. 279


French lecture-rooms and reviews; this is why it is
unknown in French histories. When we wish to enter
English history, we have only to step down from the
pulpit and the newspaper.

I do not transcribe the sequel of the explanation, the
examples of James V., Sixtus V., and so many others,
whom Macaulay cites to fitid precedents for the Master
of Stair. Then follows a very circumstantial and very
solid discussion, to prove that William III. was not re-
sponsible for the massacre. It is clear that Macaulay’s
object, here as elsewhere, is less to draw a picture than
to suggest a judgment. He desires that we should
have an opinion on the morality of the act, that we
should attribute it to its real authors, that each should
bear exactly his own share, and no more. A little
further, when the question of the punishment of the
crime arises, and William, having severely chastised the
executioners, contents himself with recalling the Master
of Stair, Macaulay writes a dissertation of several
pages to consider this injustice and to blame the king.
Here, as elsewhere, he is still an orator and a moralist ;
nothing has more power to interest an English reader.
Happily for us, he at length becomes once more a
narrator; the petty details which he then selects fix
the attention, and place the scene before our eyes :


“The sight of the red coats approaching caused some anxiety
among the population of the valley. John, the eldest son of
the Chief, came, accompanied by twenty clansmen, to meet the
strangers, and asked what this visit meant. Lieutenant
Lindsay answered that the soldiers came as friends, and wanted
nothing but quarters. They were kindly received, and were
lodged under the thatched roofs of the little community,
Glenlyon and several of his men were taken into the house of a


280 MODERN AUTHORS, BOOK V.


tacxsman who was named from the cluster of cabins over which
he exercised authority, Inverriggen, Lindsay was accommodated
nearer to the abode of the old chief. Auchintriater, one of the
principal men of the clan, who governed the small hamlet of
Auchnaion, found room there for a party commanded by a
serjeant named Barbour, Provisions were liberally supplied.
There was no want of beef, which had probably fattened in
distant pastures: nor was any payment demanded: for in
hospitality, as in thievery, the Gaelic marauders rivalled the
Bedouins, During twelve days the soldiers lived familiarly
with the people of the glen, Old Mac Ian, who had before
felt many misgivings as to the relation in which he stood to
the government seems to have been pleased with the visit.
The officers passed much of their time with him and his family.
The long evenings were cheerfully spent by the peat fire with
the help of some packs of cards which had found their way to
that remote corner of the world, and of some French brandy
which was probably part of James’ farewell gift to his highland
supporters. Glenlyon appeared to be warmly attached to his
niece and her husband Alexander. Every day he came to their
house to take his morning draught. Meanwhile he observed
with minute attention all the avenues by which, when the signal
for the slaughter should be given, the Macdonalds might attempt
to escape to the hills ; and he reported the result of his observa-
tions to Hamilton, .. .

“The night was rough. Hamilton and his troops made
slow progress, and were long after their time. While they
were contending with the wind and snow, Glenlyon was
supping and playing at cards with those whom he meant to
butcher before daybreak. He and Lieutenant Lindsay had
engaged themselves to dine with the old Chief on the morrow.

“Late in the evening a vague suspicion that some evil was
intended crossed the mind of the Chief’s eldest son. The
soldiers were evidently in a restless state; and some.of them
uttered strange exclamations, Two men, it is said, were over-


cHaP, 1. CRITICISM & HISTORY—MACAULAY, 281


heard whispering. ‘I do not like this job, one of them
muttered ; ‘I should be glad to fight the Macdonalds, But to
kill men in their beds—’ ‘We must do as we are bid,’
answered another voice. ‘If there is anything wrong, our
officers must answer for it.’ John Macdonald was so uneasy,
that, soon after midnight, he went to Glenlyon’s quarters.
Glenlyon and his men were all up, and seemed to be getting
their arms ready for action, John, much alarmed, asked what
these preparations meant, Glenlyon was profuse of friendly
assurances. ‘Some of Glengarry’s people have been harrying
the country. We are getting ready to march against them,
You are quite safe. Do you think that, if you were in any
danger, I should not have given a hint to your brother Sandy
and his wife?’ John’s suspicions were quieted. He returned
to his house, and lay down to rest,” 2


On the next day, at five in the morning, the old chief-
tain was assassinated, his men shot in their beds or by
the fireside. "Women were butchered; a boy, twelve
years old, who begged his life on his knees, was slain ;
they who fled half-naked, women and children, died of
cold and hunger in the snow.

These precise details, these soldiers’ conversations,
this picture of °evenings by the fireside, give to history
the animation and life of a novel. And still the
historian remains an orator: for he has chosen all these
facts to exhibit the perfidy of the assassins and the
horrible nature of the massacre; and he will make use
of them later on, to demand, with all the power and
passion of logic, the punishment of the criminals.


1 Macaulay, iii. 526 ; History of England, ch, xviii.


282 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


VITL


Thus this History, whose qualities seem so little
English, bears throughout the mark of genuine English
talent. Universal, connected, it embraces all the facts
in its vast, undivided, and unbroken woof. Developed,
abundant, it enlightens obscure facts, and opens up to
the most ignorant the most complicated questions.
Interesting, varied, it attracts and preserves the atten-
tion. It has life, clearness, unity, qualities which
appear to be wholly French. It seems as if the author
were a populariser like Thiers, a philosopher like Guizot,
an artist like Thierry. The truth is, that he is an orator,
and that after the fashion of his country; but, as he
possesses in the highest degree the oratorical faculties,
and possesses them with a national tendency and
instincts, he seems to supplement through them the
faculties which he has not. He is not genuinely
philosophical: the mediocrity of his earlier chapters on
the ancient history of England proves this sufficiently ;
but his force of reasoning, his habits of classification
and order, bestow unity upon his History. He is not
a genuine artist; when he draws a picture, he is
always thinking of proving something; he inserts dis-
sertations in the most interesting and affecting places ;
he has neither charm, lightness, vivacity, nor finesse,
but a marvellous memory, vast knowledge, an ardent
political passion, a great legal talent for expounding
and pleading every cause, a precise knowledge of precise
and petty facts which rivet the attention, charm,
diversify, animate, and warm a narrative. He is not
simply a populariser; he is too ardent, too eager to
prove, to conquer belief, to beat down his foes, to have


cHAP. 111, . CRITICISM & HISTORY—MACAULAY. 283


only the limpid talent of a man who explains and ex-
pounds, with no other end than to explain and expound,
which spreads light throughout, and never spreads heat ;
but he is so well provided with details and reasons, so
anxious to convince, so rich in his expositions, that he
cannot fail to be popular. By this breadth of know-
ledge, this power of reasoning and passion, he has
produced one of the finest books of the age, whilst
manifesting the genius of his nation. This solidity,
this energy. this deep political passion, these moral
prepossessions, these oratorical habits, this limited
philosophical power, this somewhat uniform style, with-
out flexibility or sweetness, this eternal gravity, this
geometrical progress to a settled end, announce in him
the English mind. But if he is English to the French,
he is not so to his nation. The animation, interest,
clearness, unity of his narrative, astonish them. They
think him brilliant, rapid, bold ; it is, they say, a French
mind. Doubtless he is so in many respects: if he
understands Racine badly, he admires Pascal and
Bossuet ; his friends say that he used daily to read
Madame de Sévigné. Nay more, by the structure of
his mind, by his eloquence and rhetoric, he is Latin;
so that the inner structure of his talent places him
amongst the classics: it is only by his lively apprecia-
tion of special, complex, and sensible facts, by his
energy and fierceness, by the rather heavy richness of
his imagination, by the depth of his colouring, that he
belongs to his race. Like Addison and Burke, he
resembles a strange graft, fed and transformed by the
sap of the national stock. At all events, this judgment
is the strongest mark of the differeuce between the two


284 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V,


nations. To reach the English intellect, a Frenchman
must make two voyages. When he has crossed the
first interval, which is wide, he comes upon Macaulay.
Let him re-embark; he must accomplish a second
passage, just as long, to arrive at Carlyle for instance,


—a, mind fundamentally Germanic, on the genuine
English soil.


CHAPTER IV.
Pbtlosophy anv Wistory.—Carlyle.


WHEN we ask Englishmen, especially those under
forty, who amongst them are the great thinkers, they
first mention Carlyle; but at the same time they
advise us not to read him, warning us that we will not
understand him at all. Then, of course, we hasten to
get the twenty volumes of Carlyle—criticism, history,
pamphlets, fantasies, philosophy; we read them with
very strange emotions, contradicting every morning our
opinion of the night before. We discover at last that
we are in presence of a strange animal, a relic of a lost
family, a sort of mastodon, who has strayed in a world,
not made for him. We rejoice in this zoological good
luck, and dissect him with minute curiosity, telling our-
selves that we shall probably never find another like
him.


§ 1.—STYLE AND Mrnp.


We are at first put out. All is new here—ideas,
style, tone, the shape of the phrases,-and the very
vocabulary. He takes everything in a contrary meaning,
does violence to everything, to expressions as well as to
things. With him paradoxes are set down for prin-
ciples; common sense takes the form of absurdity. We
are, as it were. carried into an unknown world, whose


286 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


inhabitants walk head downwards, feet in the air,
dressed in motley, as great lords and maniacs, with
contortions, jerks, and cries; we are grievously stunned
by these extravagant and discordant sounds; we want
to stop our ears, we have a headache, we are obliged
to decipher a new language. We see upon the table
volumes which ought to be as clear as possible—The
History of the French Revolution, for instance ; and there
we read these headings to the chapters: “ Realised
Ideals—Viaticum—Astrea Redux—Petition in Hiero-
glyphs—Windbags—Mercury de Brézé—Broglie the
War-God.” We ask ourselves what connection there
can be between these riddles and such simple events as
we all know. We then perceive that Carlyle always
speaks in riddles. “ Logic-choppers” is the name he
gives to the analysts of the eighteenth century; “Beaver
science” is his word for the catalogues and classifications
of our modern men of science; “ Transcendental moon-
shine” signifies the philosophical and sentimental dreams
imported from Germany. The religion of the “rotatory
calabash” means external and mechanical religion.’
He cannot be contented with a simple expression; he
employs figures at every step; he embodies all his ideas ;
he must touch forms. We see that he is besieged
and haunted by brilliant or gloomy visions; every
thought with him is a shock; a stream of misty passion
comes bubbling into his overflowing brain, and the tor-
rent of images breaks forth and rolls on amidst every
kind of mud and magnificence. He cannot reason, he
must paint. If he wants to explain the embarrassment


1 Because the Kalmucks put written prayers into a calabash turned
by the wind, which in their opinion produces a perpetual adoration.
In the same way are the prayer-mills of Thibet used.


cHaP. Iv, , PHILOSOPHY & HISTORY—CARLYLE. 287


of a young man obliged to choose a career amongst the
lusts and doubts of the age, in which we live, he tells
you of


“A world all rocking and plunging, like that old Roman one
when the measure of its iniquities was full ; the abysses, and
subterranean and supernal deluges, plainly broken loose ; in the
wild dim-lighted chaos all stars of Heaven gone out. No star
of Heaven visible, hardly now to any man; the pestiferous fogs
and foul exhalations grown continual, have, except on the
highest mountain-tops, blotted out all stars: will-o’-wisps, of
various course and colour, take the place of stars. Over the
wild surging chaos, in the leaden air, are only sudden glares of
revolutionary lightning ; then mere darkness, with philanthro-
pistic phosphorescences, empty meteoric lights; here and there
an ecclesiastical luminary still hovering, hanging on to its old
quaking fixtures, pretending still to be a Moon or Sun,—though
visibly it is but a Chinese Lantern made of paper mainly, with
candJe-end foully dying in the heart of it.”}


Imagine a volume, twenty volumes, made up of such
pictures, united by exclamations and apostrophes; even
history—that of the French Revolutvon—is like a de-
lirium. Carlyle is a Puritan seer, before whose eyes
pass scaffolds, orgies, massacres, battles, and who, be-
set by furious or bloody phantoms, prophesies, en-
courages, or curses. If we do not throw down the book
from anger or weariness, we will become dazed; our
ideas leave us, nightmare seizes us, a medley of grin-
ning and ferocious figures whirl about in our head;
we hear the howls of insurrection, cries of war; we
are sick; we are like those hearers of the Covenanters,
whom the preaching filled with disgust or enthusiasm,


1 The Life of vohn Sterling, ch. v. ; A Profession.


288 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


and who broke the head of their prophet, if they did not
take him for their leader.

These violent outbursts will seem to us still more
violent if we mark the breadth of the field which they
traverse. From the sublime to the ignoble, from the
pathetic to the grotesque, is but a step with Carlyle.
At one and the same time he touches the two extremes.
His adorations end in sarcasms. The Universe is for
him an oracle and a temple, as well as a kitchen and a
stable. He moves freely about, and is at his ease in
mysticism, as well as in brutality. Speaking of the
setting sun at the North Cape, he writes:


“* Silence as of death ; for Midnight, even in the Arctic lati-
tudes, has its character: nothing but the granite cliffs ruddy-
tinged, the peaceable gurgle of that slow-heaving Polar Ocean,
over which in the utmost North the great Sun hangs low and
lazy, as if he too were slumbering. Yet is his cloud-couch
wrought of crimson and cloth-of-gold ; yet does his light stream
over the mirror of waters, like a tremulous fire-pillar, shooting
downwards to the abyss, and hide itself under my feet. In
such moments, Solitude also is invaluable; for who would
speak, or be looked on, when behind him lies all Europe and
Africa, fast asleep, except the watchmen; and before him the
silent Immensity, and Palace of the Eternal, whereof our Sun
is but a porch-lamp?”}


Such splendours he sees whenever he is face to face with
nature. No one has contemplated with a more power-
ful emotion the silent stars which roll eternally in the
pale firmament and envelop our little world. No one
has contemplated with more of religious awe the infinite
obscurity in which our slender thought appears for
an instant like a gleam, and by our side the gloomy


1 Sartor Resartus, 1868, bk. ii. ch. viii. ; Centre of Indafference.


cHaP.iIv. PHILOSOPHY & HISTORY—CARLYLE. 289


abyss in which the hot frenzy of life is to be extin-
guished. His eyes are habitually fixed on this vast
Darkness, and he paints with a shudder of veneration
and hope the effort which religions have made to pierce
it :


“Tn the heart of the remotest mountains rises the little Kirk ;
the Dead all slumbering round it, under their white memorial
stones, ‘in hope of a happy resurrection ;’-—dull wert thou, O
Reader, if never in any hour (say of moaning midnight, when
such Kirk hung spectral in the sky, and Being was as if
swallowed up of Darkness) it spoke to thee—things unspeak-
able, that went to thy soul’s soul. Strong was he that had a
Church, what we can call a Church: he stood thereby, though
‘in the centre of Immensities, in the conflux of Eternities,’ yet
manlike towards God and man: the vague shoreless Universe
had become for him a firm city, and dwelling which he knew.” !


Rembrandt alone has beheld these sombre visions
drowned in shade, traversed by mystic rays: look, for
example, at the church which he has painted; glance
at the mysterious floating apparition, full of radiant
forms, which he has set in the summit of the heavens,
above the stormy night and the terror which shakes
mortality.2. The two imaginations have the same pain-
ful grandeur, the same scintillations, the same agony,
and both sink with like facility into triviality and
crudeness. No ulcer, no filth, is repulsive enough to
disgust Carlyle. On occasion he will compare the
politician who seeks popularity to “the dog that was
drowned last summer, and that floats up and down
the Thames with ebb and flood. . . . You get to know
him by sight. . . with a painful oppression of nose

1 History of the French Revolution, bk. i. ch. ii. ; Realised Ideals.

2 In the Adoration of the Magi.
VOL. IV. U


230 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


... Daily you may see him,... and daily the
odour of him is getting more intolerable.” Absurdi-
ties, incongruities, abound in his style. When the
frivolous Cardinal de Loménie proposed to convoke a
Plenary Court, he compares him to “trained canary
birds, that would fly cheerfully with lighted matches
and fire cannon; fire whole powder magazines.” At
need, he turns to funny images. He ends a dithyramb
with a caricature: he bespatters magnificence with ec-
centric and coarse language: he couples poetry with
puns :


“The Genius of England no longer soars Sunward, world
defiant, like an Eagle through the storms, ‘mewing her mighty
youth,’ as John Milton saw her do: the Genius of England,
much liker a greedy Ostrich intent on provender and a whole
skin mainly, stands with its other extremity Sunward ; with its
Ostrich-head stuck into the readiest bush, of old Church-tippets,
King-cloaks, or what other ‘sheltering Fallacy’ there may be,
and so awaits the issue. The issue has been slow; but it is
now seen to have been inevitable. No Ostrich, intent on gross
terrene provender, and sticking its head into Fallacies, but will
be awakened one day,—in a terrible @-posteriort manner if not
otherwise ?” $


With such buffoonery he concludes his best book, never
quitting his tone of gravity and gloom, in the midst of
anathemas and prophecies. He needs these great shocks.
He cannot remain quiet, or stick to one literary province
at a time. He leaps in unimpeded jerks from one end
of the field of ideas to the other; he confounds all styles,
jumbles all forms, heaps together pagan allusions, Bible
1 Latter-Day Pamphlets, 1850 ; Stump Orator, 35.


2 The French Revolution, i. bk. iii. ch. vii. ; Internecine.
3 Cromwell’s Letters and Specches, iii. x. ; the end.


cap, iv. PHILOSOPHY & HISTORY—CARLYLE, 291


reminiscences, German abstractions, technical terms,
poetry, slang, mathematics, physiology, archaic words,
neologies. There is nothing he does not tread down and
ravage. The symmetrical constructions of human art
and thought, dispersed and upset, are piled under his
hands into a vast mass of shapeless ruins, from the top
of which he gesticulates and fights, like a conauering
savage.


IL.


This kind of mind produces humour, a wora untran-
slatable in French, because in France they have not
the idea. Humour is a species of talent which amuses
Germans, Northmen; it suits their mind, as beer and
brandy suit their palate. For men of another race it
is disagreeable; they often find it too harsh and bitter.
Amongst other things, this talent embraces a taste for
contrasts. Swift jokes with the serious mien of an ecclesi-
astic, performing religious rites, and develops the most
grotesque absurdities, like a convinced man. MHanlet,
shaken with terror and despair, bristles with buffooneries.
Heine mocks his own emotions, even whilst he displays
them. These men love travesties, put a solemn garb
over comic ideas, a clown’s jacket over grave ones.
Another feature of humour is that the author forgets
the public for whom he writes. He tells us that he
does not care for us, that he needs neither to be under-
stood nor approved, that he thinks and amuses hinself
by himself, and that if his taste and ideas displeuse us
we have only to take ourselves off. He wislies to be
refined and orivinal at his ease ; he is at home in his book,
and with closed doors, he gets into his slippers, dressing-
gown, often with his feet in the air, sometimes without a


292 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


shirt. Carlyle has a style of his own, and marks his idea
in his own fashion ; it is our business to understand it,
He alludes to a saying of Goethe, or Shakspeare, or to an
anecdote which strikes him at the moment; so much
the worse for us if we do not know it. He shouts
when the fancy takes him; the worse for us if our
ears do not like it. He writes on the caprice of his
imagination, with all the starts of invention; the worse
for us if our mind goes at a different pace. He catches
on the wing all the shades, all the oddities of his con-
ception ; the worse for us if ours cannot reach them.
A last. feature of humour is the irruption of violent
joviality, buried under a heap of sadness. Absurd
incongruity appears unexpected. Physical nature,
hidden and oppressed under habits of melancholic reflec-
tion, is laid bare for an instant. We see a grimace, a
clown’s gesture, then everything resumes its wonted
gravity. Add lastly the unforeseen flashes of imagina-
tion. The humorist covers a poet; suddenly, in the
monotonous mist of prose, at the end of an argument, a
vista opens up; beautiful or ugly, it matters not; it is
enough that it strikes our eyes. These inequalities
fairly paint the solitary, energetic, imaginative German,
a lover of violent contrasts, based on personal and gloomy
reflection, with sudden up-wellings of physical instinct,
so different from the Latin and classical races, races of
orators or artists, where they never write but with an
eye to the public, where they relish only consequent
ideas, are only happy in the spectacle of harmonious
forms, where the fancy is regulated, and voluptuous-
ness appears natural. Carlyle is profoundly German,
nearer to the primitive stock than any of his contem-
poraries, strange and unexampled in his fancies and his


cHAP.Iv. PHILOSOPHY & HISTORY—CARLYLE., 293


pleasantries; he calls himself “a bemired aurochs or
urus of the German woods, ... the poor wood-ox
so bemired in the forests.” For instance, his first book
Sartor Resartus, which is a clothes-philosophy, contains,
& propos of aprons and breeches, metaphysics, poli-
tics, psychology. Man, according to him, is a dressed
animal. Society has clothes for its foundation. “How,
without Clothes, could we possess the master-organ,
soul’s seat, and true pineal gland of the Body social: I
mean, a PuRSE:”?

“To the eye of vulgar Logic,” says he, “what is man? An
omnivorous Biped that wears Breeches. To the eye of Pure
Reason what is he? A Soul, a Spirit, and divine Apparition,
Round his mysterious Mz, there lies, under all those wool-rags,
a Garment of Flesh (or of Senses) contextured in the Loom of
Heaven; whereby he is revealed to his like, and dwells with
them in Union and Diviston ; and sees and fashions for him-
self a Universe, with azure Starry Spaces, and long Thousands
of Years. Deep-hidden is he under that strange Garment ;
amid Sounds and Colours and Forms, as it were, swathed-in,


and inextricably over-shrouded : yet it is skywoven, and ‘worthy
of a God.”


The paradox continues, at once eccentric and mystical,
hiding theories under follies, mixing together fierce
ironies, tender pastorals, love-stories, explosions of rage,
and carnival pictures. He says well:

‘“‘ Perhaps the most remarkable incident in Modern History
is not the Diet of Worms, still less the battle of Austerlitz,
Wagtam, Watcrloo, Peterloo, or any other Battle; but an in-
cident passed carelessly over by most Historians, and treated
with some degree of ridicule by others: namely, George Fox’s
making to himself a suit of Leather.”*


1 Life of Sterling. 2 Sartor Resartus, bk. i. ch. x. ; Pure Reason.
3 Tid. 4 Tbid. bk, iii. ch. i. ; Incident in Modern History.


294 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


For, thus clothed for the rest of his life, lodging in a
tree and eating wild berries, man could remain idle and
invent Puritanism, that is, conscience-worship, at his
leisure. This is how Carlyle treats the ideas which
are dearest to him. He jests in connection with the
doctrine, which was to employ his life and occupy his
whole soul.

Should we like an abstract of his politics, and his
opinion about his country? He proves that in the
modern transformation of religions two principal sects
have risen, especially in England; the one of “ Poor
Slaves,” the other of Dandies. Of the first he says:


“ Something Monastic there appears to be in their Constitu-
tion : we find them bound by the two Monastic Vows, of Poverty
and Obedience ; which Vows, especially the former, it is said,
they observe with great strictness ; nay, as I have understood
it, they are pledged, and be it by any solemn Nazarene ordina-
tion or not, irrevocably consecrated thereto, even before birth.
That the third Monastic Vow, of Chastity, is rigidly enforced
among them, I find no ground to conjecture.

“ Furthermore, they appear to imitate the Dandiacal Sect in
their grand principle of wearing a peculiar Costume. ... Their
raiment consists of innumerable skirts, lappets, and irregular
wings, of all cloths and of all colours; through the labyrinthic
intricacies of which their bodies are introduced by some unknown
process, It is fastened together by a multiplex combination of
buttons, thrums, and skewers; to which frequently is added a
girdle of leather, of hempen or even of straw rope, round the
loins. To straw rope, indeed, they seem partial, and often wear
it by way of sandals. .

“One might fancy them worshippers of Hertha, or the Earth:
for they dig and affectionately work continually in her bosom ;
or else, shut up in private Oratories, meditate and manipulate
the substances derived from her ; seldom looking-up towards


cHAP.Iv, PHILOSOPHY & HISTORY—CARLYLE. 295


the Heavenly Luminaries, and then with comparative indiffer-
ence. Like the Druids, on the other hand, they live in dark
dwellings ; often even breaking their glass-windows, where they
find such, and stuffing them up with pieces of raiment, or other
opaque substances, till the fit obscurity is restored... .

“Tn respect of diet they have also their observances, All
Poor Slaves are Rhizophagous (or Root-eaters) ; a few are Ich-
thyophagous, and use Salted Herrings ; other animal food they
abstain from ; except indeed, with perhaps some strange inverted
fragment of a Brahminical feeling, such animals as die a natural
death. Their universal sustenance is the root named Potato,
cooked by fire alone....In all their Religious Solemnities,
Potheen is said to be an indispensable requisite, and largely
consumed,” !


Of the other sect he says:


“A certain touch of Manicheism, not indeed in the Gnostic
shape, is discernible enough: also (for human Error walks in a
cycle, and reappears at intervals) a not-inconsiderable resem-
blance to that Superstition of the Athos Monks, who by fasting
from all nourishment, and looking intensely for a length of
time into their own navels, came to discern therein the true
Apocalypse of Nature, and Heaven Unveiled. To my own sur-
mise, it appears as if this Dandiacal Sect were but a new
modification, adapted to the new time, of that primeval Super-
stition, Self-worship, ...

“ They affect great purity and separatism ; distinguish them-
selves by a particular costume (whereof some notices were given
in the earlier part of this Volume) ; likewise, so far as possible,
by a particular speech (apparently some broken Lingua-franca,
or English-French) ; and, on the whole, strive to maintain a
true Nazarene deportment, and keep themselves unspotted from
the world.”

“They have their Temples, whereof the chief, as the Jewish


1 Sartor Resartus, bk. iii. ch. x. ; The Dandiacal Body.


296 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


Temple did, stands in their metropolis ; and is named Almack’s,
a word of uncertain etymology. They worship principally by
night; and have their Highpriests and Highpriestesses, who,
however, do not continue for life. The rites, by some supposed
to be of the Menadic sort, or perhaps with an Eleusinian or
Cabiric character, are held strictly secret. Nor are Sacred
Books wanting to the Sect ; these they call Fashionable Novels:
however, the Canon is not completed, and some are canonical,
and others not.”1 ...


Their chief articles of faith are:


“1. Coats should have nothing of the triangle about them ;
at the same time, wrinkles behind should be carefully avoided.

“9. The collar is a very important point: it should be low
behind, and slightly rolled.

“3. No licence of fashion can allow a man of delicate taste
to adopt the posterial luxuriance of a Hottentot,

“4, There is safety in a swallow-tail.

“5, The good sense of a gentleman is nowhere more finely
developed than in his rings.

“6. It is permitted to mankind, under certain restrictions,
to wear white waistcoats,

“7, The trousers must be exceedingly tight across the hips.

** All which Propositions I, for the present, content myself
with modestly but peremptorily and irrevocably denying.” 2


This premised, he draws conclusions :


“T might call them two boundless and indeed unexampled
Electric Machines (turned by the ‘ Machinery of Society’), with
batteries of opposite quality ; Drudgism the Negative, Dandyism
the Positive: one attracts hourly towards it and appropriates
all the Positive Electricity of the nation (namely, the Money
thereof) ; the other is equally busy with the Negative (that is
to say the Hunger), which is equally potent. Hitherto you see


1 Sartor Resartus, bk. iii. ch. x. ; The Dandiacal Body. 7 Ibid.


cHAP, Iv. , PHILOSOPHY & HISTORY—CARLYLE. 297


only partial transient sparkles and sputters: but wait a little,
till the entire nation is in an electric state; till your whole
vital Electricity, no longer healthfully Neutral, is cut into two
isolated portions of Positive and Negative (of Money and of
Hunger) ; and stands there bottled-up in two World-Batteries !
The stirring of a child’s finger brings the two together; and
then—What then? The Earth is but shivered into impalpable
smoke by that Doom’s-thunderpeal: the Sun misses one of his
Planets in Space, and thenceforth there are no eclipses of the
Moon. Or better still, I might liken—”!


He stops suddenly, and leaves you to your conjectures.
This bitter pleasantry is that of an enraged or despair-
ing man, who designedly, and simply by reason of the
violence of his passion, would restrain it and force him-
self to laugh; but whom a sudden shudder at the end
reveals just as he is. In one place Carlyle says that
there is, at the bottom of the English character, under-
neath all its habits of calculation and coolness, an inex-
tinguishable furnace :


“Deep hidden it lies, far down in the centre, like genial
central fire, with stratum after stratum of arrangement, tradi-
tionary method, composed productiveness, all built above it,
vivified and rendered fertile by it: justice, clearness, silence,
perseverance unhasting, unresting diligence, hatred of disorder,
hatred of injustice, which is the worst disorder, characterise this
people: the inward fire we say, as all such fires would be, is
hidden in the centre. Deep. hidden, but awakenable, but im-
measurable ; let no man awaken it.”


It is a fire of extraordinary fierceness, as the rage of
devoted Berserkirs, who, once rushing to the heat of
the battle, felt no more their wounds, and lived, fought,


1 Sartor Resartus, bk, ili. ch. x. ; The Dandiacal Body.


298 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


and killed, pierced. with strokes, the least of which
would have been mortal to an ordinary man. It is this
destructive frenzy, this rousing of inward unknown
powers, this loosening of a ferocity, enthusiasm, and
imagination disordered and not to be bridled, which
appeared in these men at the Renaissance and the
Reformation, and a remnant of which still endures in
Carlyle. Here is a vestige of it, in a passage almost
worthy of Swift, which is the abstract of his customary
emotions, and at the same time his conclusion on the
age in which we live:


“ Supposing swine (I mean four-footed swine), of sensibility
and superior logical parts, had attained such culture ; and could,
after survey and reflection, jot down for us their notion of the
Universe, and of their interests and duties there,—might it not
well interest a discerning public, perhaps in unexpected ways,
and give a stimulus to the languishing book-trade? The votes
of all creatures, it is understood at present, ought to be had ;
that you may ‘legislate’ for them with better insight. ‘ How
can you govern a thing,’ say many, ‘without first asking its
vote?’ Unless, indeed, you already chance to know its vote,—
and even something more, namely, what you are to think of its
vote ; what «¢ wants by its vote; and, still more important,
what Nature wants,—which latter, at the end of the account,
—the only thing that will be got !— —Pig Propositions, in a
rough form, are somewhat as follows :

‘1. The Universe, so far as sane conjecture can go, is an
immeasurable Swine’s-trough, consisting of solid and liquid, and
of other contrasts and kinds ;—especially consisting of attainable
and unattainable. the latter in immensely greater quantities for
most pigs.

“2, Moral evil is unattainability of Pig’s-wash ; moral good,
attainability of ditto.

“3, ‘What is Paradise, or the State of Innocence?’ Para-


cHaAP, Iv. PHILOSOPHY & HISTORY—CARLYLE, 299


dise, called also State of Innocence, Age of Gold, and other
names, was (according to Pigs of weak judgment) unlimited
attainability of Pig’s-wash ; perfect fulfilment of one’s wishes, so
that the Pig’s imagination could not outrun reality ; a fable and
an impossibility, as Pigs of sense now see. :

“ 4. ‘Define the Whole Duty of Pigs.’ It is the mission of
universal Pighood, and the duty of all Pigs, at all times, to
diminish the quantity of unattainable and increase that of
attainable. All knowledge and device and effort ought to be
directed thither and thither only: Pig science, Pig enthusiasm
and Devotion have this one aim. It is the Whole Duty of Pigs.

“5, Pig Poetry ought to consist of universal recognition of
the excellence of Pig’s-wash and ground barley, and the felicity
of Pigs whose trough is in order, and who have had enough :
Hrumph !

“6, The Pig knows the weather ; he ought to look out what
kind of weather it will be.

“7, ‘Who made the Pig?’ Unknown ;—perhaps the Pork-
butcher.

“8. ‘Have you Law and Justice in Pigdom?’ Pigs of
observation have discerned that there is, or was once supposed
to be, a thing called justice, Undeniably at least there is a
sentiment in Pig-nature called indignation, revenge, etc., which,
if one Pig provoke another, comes out in a more or less destruc-
tive manner: hence laws are necessary, amazing quantities of
laws. For quarrelling is attended with loss of blood, of life, at
any rate with frightful effusion of the general stock of Hog’s-
wash, and ruin (temporary ruin) to large sections of the universal
Swine’s trough: wherefore let justice be observed, that so
quarrelling be avoided.

“9. ‘What is justice?’ Your own share of the general
Swine’s-trough, not any portion of my share.

“10. ‘But what is ‘my’ share?’ Ah! there, in fact, lies
the grand difficulty ; upon which Pig science, meditating this
long while, can settle absolutely nothing. My share—hrumph !


300 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


—mny share is, on the whole, whatever I can contrive to get
without being hanged or sent to the hulks.”}


Such is the mire in which he plunges modern life,
and, beyond all others, English life; drowning at the
same time, and in the same filth, the positive mind,
the love of comfort, industrial science, Church, State,
philosophy, and law. This cynical catechism, thrown
in amidst furious declamations, gives, I think, the
dominant note of this sirange mind: it is this mad
tension which constitutes his talent; which produces
and explains his images and incongruities, his laughter
and his rages. There is an English expression which
cannot be translated into French, but which depicts
this condition, and illustrates the whole physical consti-
tution of the race: His blood is up. In fact, the cold
and phlegmatic temperament covers the surface; but
when the roused blood has swept through the veins, the
fevered animal can only be glutted by devastation, and
be satiated by excess.


III.


It seems as though a soul so violent, so enthusiastic,
go savage, so abandoned to imaginative follies, so entirely
without taste, order, and measure, would be capable only
of rambling, and expending itself in hallucinations, full
of sorrow and danger. In fact, many of those who
had this temperament, and who were his genuine fore-
fathers—the Norse pirates, the poets of the sixteenth
century, the Puritans of the seventeenth—were mad-
men, hurting others and themselves, bent on devas-


1 Latter-Day Pamphlets, 1850: Jesuitism, 28.


cuap.iv. PHILOSOPHY & HISTORY—CARLYLE. 301


tating things and ideas, destroying the public secu-
rity and their own heart. Two entirely English
barriers have restrained and directed Carlyle: the senti-
ment of actuality, which is the positive spirit, and of
the sublime, which makes the religious spirit; the first
turned him to real things, the other furnished him
with the interpretation of real things: instead of being
sickly and visionary, he became a philosopher and a
historian.


lV.


We must read his history of Cromwell to understand
how far this sentiment of actuality penetrates him;
with what knowledge it endows him; how he rectifies
dates and texts; how he verifies traditions and gene-
alogies; how he visits places, examines the trees, looks
at the brooks, knows the agriculture, prices, the whole
domestic and rural economy, all the political and
literary circumstances ; with what minuteness, precision,
and vehemence he reconstructs before his eyes and
before ours the external picture of objects and affairs,
the internal picture of ideas and emotions. And it is
not simply on his part conscience, habit, or prudence,
but need and passion. In this great obscure void of
the past, his eyes fix upon the rare luminous points as
on a treasure. The black sea of oblivion has swallowed
up the rest: the million thoughts and actions of so
many million beings have disappeared, and no power
will make them rise again to the light. These few
points subsist alone, like the summits of the highest rocks
of a submerged continent. With what ardour, what
deep feeling for the destroyed worlds, of which these


302 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V,


rocks are the remains, does the historian lay upon them
his eager hands, to discover from their nature and struc-
ture some revelation of the great drowned regions, which
uo eye shall ever see again! A number, a trifling
detail about expense, a petty phrase of barbarous Latin,
is priceless in the sight of Carlyle. I should like you
to read the commentary with which he surrounds the
chronicle of the monk Jocelin of Brakelond,! to show
you the impression which a proved fact produces on
such a soul; all the attention and emotion that an old
barbarous word, a bill from the kitchen, summons up :


“ Behold, therefore, this England of the year 1200 was no
chimerical vacuity or dreamland, peopled with mere vaporous
Fantasms, Rymer’s Foedera, and Doctrines of the Constitution ;
but a green solid place, that grew corn and several other things,
The sun shone on it; the vicissitude of seasons and human
fortunes. Cloth was woven and worn; ditches were dug,
furrow-fields ploughed, and houses built. Day by day all men
and cattle rose to labour, and night by night returned home
weary to their several lairs.. . . The Dominus Rex, at departing,
gave us ‘ thirteen sterlingii,’ one shilling and one penny, to say
amass for him, ... For king Lackland was there, verily he. . . .
There, we say, is the grand peculiarity ; the immeasurable one ;
distinguishing to a really infinite degree, the poorest historical
Fact from all Fiction whatsoever. ‘Fiction,’ ‘ Imagination,’
‘Imaginative poetry,’ ete. etc., except as the vehicle for truth,
or is fact of some sort . . . . what is it?2 . ... And yet these
grim old walls are not a dilettantism and dubiety ; they are an
earnest fact. It was a most real and serious purpose they were
built for! Yes, another world it was, when these black ruins.
white in their new mortar and fresh chiselling, first saw
the sun as walls, long ago. . . . Their architecture, belfries,


1 In Pust und Present, bk. ii.
2 Ibid. ch. i. ; Jocelin of Brakelond.


cHAP.Iv. PHILOSOPHY & HISTORY—CARLYLE. 303


land-carucates? Yes,—and that is but a small item of the
matter. Does it never give thee pause, this other strange item
of it, that men then had a sowl,—not by hearsay alone, and as
a figure of speech ; but as a truth that they knew and practi-
cally went upon !”}


And then he tries to resuscitate this soul before our
eyes; for this is his special feature, the special feature
of every historian who has the sentiment of actuality,
to understand that parchments, walls, dress, bodies
themselves, are only cloaks and documents; that the
true fact is the inner feeling of men who have lived,
that the only important fact is the state and structure
of their soul, that the first and sole business is to
reach that inner feeling, for that all else diverges from it.
We must tell ourselves this fact over and over again ;
history is but the history of the heart; we have to
search out the feelings of past generations, and nothing
else. This is what Carlyle perceives; man is before
him, risen from the dead; he penetrates within him,
sees that he feels, suffers, and wills, in that special and
individual manner, now absolutely lost and extinguished,
in which he did feel, suffer, and will. And he looks
upon this sight, not coldly, like a man who only half
sees things in a gray mist, indistinctly and uncertain,
but with all the force of his heart and sympathy, like
a convinced spectator, for whom past things, once proved,
are as present and visible as the corporeal objects which
his hand handles and touches, at the very moment.
He feels this fact so clearly, that he bases upon it all
his philosophy of history. In his opinion, great men,
kings, writers, prophets, and poets, are only great in
this sense: “It is the property of the hero, in every
1 In Past and Present, ch. uu. ; St. Ldmondsbury.


304 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK Y.


time, in every place, in every situation, that he comes
back to reality; that he stands upon things, and not
shows of things.”! The great man discovers some
unknown or neglected fact, proclaims it; men hear
him, follow him; and this is the whole of history.
And not only does he discover and proclaim it, but he
believes and sees it. He believes it, not as hearsay or
conjecture, like a truth simply probable and handed
down ; he sees it personally, face to face with absolute
and indomitable faith ; he deserts opinion for conviction,
tradition for intuition. Carlyle is so steeped in his
process, that he imputes it to all great men. And he
is not wrong, for there is none more potent. Wherever
he penetrates with this lamp, he carries a light not
known before: He pierces mountains of paper erudition,
and enters into the hearts of men. Everywhere he
goes beyond political and conventional history. He
divines characters, comprehends the spirit of extinguished
ages, feels better than any Englishman, better than
Macaulay himself, the great revolutions of the soul.
He is almost German in his power of imagination, his
antiquarian perspicacity, his broad general views, and
yet he is no dealer in guesses. The national common
sense and the energetic craving for profound belief
retain him on the limits of supposition; when he does
guess, he gives it for what it is worth. He has no
taste for hazardous history. He rejects hearsay and
legends; he accepts only partially, and under reserve,
the Germanic etymologies and hypotheses. He wishes
to draw from history a positive and active law for him-
self and us. He expels and tears away from it all the
doubtful and agreeable additions which scientific curio-


1 Lectures on Heroes, 1868.


oHAP.Iv. PHILOSOPHY & HISTORY—CARLYLE, 305


sity ana romantic imagination accumwmate. He puts
aside this parasitic growth to seize the useful and solid
wood. And when he has seized it, he drags it so
energetically before us, in order to make us touch it,
he handles it in so violent a manner, he places it under
such a glaring light, he illuminates it by such coarse
contrasts of extraordinary images, that we are infected,
and in spite of ourselves reach the intensity of his
belief and vision.

He goes beyond, or rather is carried beyond this.
The facts seized upon by this vehement imagination are
melted in it as in a fire. Beneath this fury of concep-
tion, every thing wavers. Ideas, changed into halluci-
nations, lose their solidity, realities are like dreams; the
world, appearing in a nightmare, seems no more than a
nightmare ; the attestation of the bodily senses loses its
weight before inner visions as lucid as itself. Man finds
no longer a difference between his dreams and his per-
ceptions. Mysticism enters like smoke within the over--
heated walls of a collapsing imagination. It was thus
that it once penetrated into the ecstasies of ascetic Hin-
doos, and into the philosophy of our first two centuries.
Throughout, the same state of the imagination has pro-
duced the same teaching. The Puritans, Carlyle’s true
ancestors, were inclined to it. Shakspeare reached it
by the prodigious tension of his poetic dreams, and
Carlyle ceaselessly repeats after him that “we are such
stuff ag dreams are made of.” This real world, these
events so harshly followed up, circumscribed, and
handled, are to him only apparitions; the universe is
divine. “Thy daily life is girt with wonder, and based
on wonder; thy very blankets and breeches are
miracles. . . . The unspeakable divine siguificance, full

VOL, IV. x


306 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


of splendour, and wonder, and terror, lies in the being
of every man and of everything; the presence of God
who made every man and thing.”


“ Atheistic science babbles poorly of it, with scientific
nomenclatures, experiments, and what-not, as if it were a poor
dead thing, to be bottled up in Leyden jars, and sold over
counters: but the natural sense of man, in all times, if he will
honestly apply his sense, proclaims it to be a living thing,—ah,
an unspeakable, godlike thing ; towards which the best attitude
for us, after never so much science, is awe, devout prostration
and humility of soul ; worship if not in words, then in silence.” !


In fact, this ig the ordinary position of Carlyle. It ends
in wonder. Beyond and beneath objects, he perceives
as it were an abyss, and is interrupted by shudderings.
A score of times, a hundred times in the History of the
French Revolution, we have him suspending his narra-
tive, and falling into a reverie. The immensity of the
black night in which the human apparitions rise for an
instant, the fatality of the crime which, once committed,
remains attached to the chain of events as by a link of
iron, the mysterious conduct which impels these float-
ing masses to an unknown but inevitable end, are the
great and sinister images which haunt him. He dreams
anxiously of this focus of existence, of which we are
only the reflection. He walks fearfully amongst this
people of shadows, and tells himself that he too is a
shadow. He is troubled by the thought that these
human phantoms have their substance elsewhere, and
will answer to eternity for their short passage. He ex-
claims and trembles at the idea of this motionless world,
of which ours is but the mutable figure. He divines


1 Lectures on Heroes, i.; The Hero as Divinity.


cHap. Iv. PHILOSOPHY & HISTORY—CARLYLE, 307


in it sometaing avgust and terrible. For he shapes it,
and he shapes our world according to his own mind;
he defines it by the emotions which he draws from it,
and figures it by the impressions which he receives
from it. A moving chaos of splendid visions, of infinite
perspectives, stirs and boils within him atthe least
event which he touches; ideas abound, violent, mutu-
ally jostling, driven from all sides of the herizon amidst
darkness and flashes of lightning; his thought is a
tempest, and he attributes to the universe the magui-
ficence, the obscurities, and the terrors of a tempest.
Such a conception is the true source of rel«rious and
moral sentiment. The man who is penetrated by thein
passes his life, ike a Puritan, in veneration and fear.
Carlyle passes his in expressing and impresxing venera-
tion and fear, and all his books are preachings


V.


Here truly is a strange mind, and one which makes
us reflect. Nothing is more calculated to manifest
truths than these eccentric beings. It will uot be ume
misspent to discover the true position of this mind, and
to explain for what reasons, and in what measure, he
must fail to possess, or must attain to beauty and truth.

As soon as we wish to begin to think, we have
before us a whole and distinct object—that ts. an
ageregate of details connected amongst themselves,
and separated from their surroundings. Whatever the
object, tree, animal, sentiment, event, it is always the
same; it always has parts, and these parts always form
a whole: this group, more or less vast, col prises others.
and is comprised in others, so that the smallest portion


308 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


of the universe is, like the entire universe, a group.
Thus the whole employment of human thought is to
reproduce groups. According as a mind is fit for this
or not, it is capable or incapable. According as it can
reproduce great or small groups, it is great or small.
According as it can produce complete groups, or only
some of their parts, it is complete or partial.

What is it, then, to reproduce a group? It is first
to separate therefrom all the parts, then to arrange
them in ranks according to their resemblances, then to
form these ranks into families, lastly to combine the
whole under some general and dominant mark; in
short, to imitate the hierarchical classifications of science.
But the task is not ended there: this hierarchy is not
an artificial and external arrangement, but a natural
and internal necessity. Things are not dead, but living ;
there is in them a force which produces and organises
this group, which binds together the details and the
whole, which repeats the type in all its parts. It is
this force which the mind must reproduce in itself,
with all its effects; it must perceive it by rebound and
sympathy: this foree must engender in the mind the
entire group, and must be developed within it as with-
out it: the series of internal ideas must imitate the
series of external; the emotion must follow the concep-
tion, vision must complete analysis; the mind must
become, like nature, creative. Then only can we say:
We know.

All minds take one or other of these routes, and are
divided by them into two great classes, corresponding
to opposite temperaments. In the first are the plain
men of science, the popularisers, orators, writers—in
general, the classical ages and the Latin races; in the


CHAP. Iv. PHILOSOPHY & HISTORY—CARLYLE. 309


second are the poets, prophets, commonly the inventors
—-in general, the romantic ages and the Germanic races.
The first proceed gradually from one idea to the next:
they are methodical and cautious; they speak for the
world at large, and prove what they say; they divide
the field which they would traverse into prelimin-
ary sections, in order to exhaust their subject; they
march on straight and level roads, so as to be sure never
to fall; they proceed by transitions, enumerations,
summaries; they advance from general to still more
general conclusions; they form the exact and complete
classification of a group. When they go beyond simple
analysis, their whole talent consists in eloquently plead-
ing a thesis. Amongst the contemporaries of Carlyle,
Macaulay is the most complete model of this species
of mind. The others, after having violently and con-
fusedly rummaged amongst the details of a group,
rush with a sudden spring into the mother-notion.
They see it then in its entirety; they perceive the
powers which organise it; they reproduce it by divina-
tion; they depict it abridged by the most expressive
and strangest words; they are not capable of decom-
posing it into regular series, they always perceive in a
lump. They think only by sudden concentrations of
vehement ideas. They have a vision of distant effects
or living actions; they are revealers or poets. Michelet,
amongst the French, is the best example of this form
of intellect, and Carlyle is an English Michelet.

He knows it, and argues plausibly that genius is an
intuition, an insight: “Our Professor’s method is not,
in any case, that of common school Logic, where the
truths all stand in a row, each holding by the skirts of
the other; but at best that of practical Reason, proceed-


310 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK VY.


ing by large Intuition over whole systematic groups and
kingdoms; whereby we might say, a noble complexity,
almost like that of Nature, reigns in his Philosophy, or
spiritual Picture of Nature: a mighty maze, yet, as
faith whispers, not without a -plan.”! Doubtless, but
disadvantages nevertheless are not wanting; and, in the
first place, obscurity and barbarism. In order to under-
stand him, we must study laboriously, or else have
precisely the same kind of mind as he. But few men
are critics by profession, or natural seers; in general, an
author writes to be understood, and it is annoying to
end in enigmas. On the other hand, this visionary
process is hazardous: when we wish to leap immedi-
ately into the inner and generative idea, we run the
risk of falling short; the gradual progress is slower, but
more sure. The methodical people, so much ridiculed
by Carlyle, have at least the advantage over him in
being able to verify all their steps. Moreover, these
vehement divinations and assertions are very often void
of proof. Carlyle leaves the reader to search for them:
the reader at times does not search for them, and refuses
to believe the soothsayer on his word. Consider, again,
that affectation infallibly enters into this style. It
must assuredly be imevitable, since Shakspeare is full
of it. The simple writer, prosaic and, rational, can
always reason and stick to his prose; his inspiration
has no gaps, and demands no efforts. On the contrary,
prophecy is a violent condition which does not sustain
itself. When it fails, it is replaced by grand gesticula-
tion. Carlyle gets up the steam in order to continue
glowing. He struggles hard; and this forced, perpetual
epilepsy is a most shocking spectacle. We cannot


1 Sartor Resartus, bk. i. ch. viii. : The World out of Clothes.


cHap.Iv. PHILOSOPHY & HISTORY—CARLYLE. 311


endure a man who wanders, repeats himself, returns
to oddities and exaggerations which he had already
employed; makes a jargon of them, declaims, exclaims,
and makes it a point, like a wretched bombastic
comedian, to upset our nerves. Finally, when this
species of mind coincides in a lofty mind with the
habits of a gloomy preacher, it results in objectionable
manners. Many will find Carlyle presumptuous, coarse ;
they will suspect from his theories, and also from his
way of speaking, that he looks upon himself as a great
man, neglected, of the race of heroes; that, in his
opinion, the human race ought to put themselves in his
hands, and trust him with their business. Certainly
he lectures us, and with contempt. He despises his
epoch; he has a sulky, sour tone; he keeps purposely
on stilts. He disdains objections. In his eyes, oppo-
nents are not up to his form. He abuses his prede-
cessors: when he speaks of Cromwell’s biographers, he
takes the tone of a man of genius astray amongst
pedants. He has the superior smile, the resigned
condescension of a hero who feels himself a martyr,
and he only quits it, to shout at the top of his voice,
like an ill-bred plebeian.

All this is redeemed, and more, by rare merits. He
speaks truly: minds like his are the most fertile.
They are almost the only ones which make discoveries.
Pure classifiers do not invent; they are too dry. “To
know a thing, what we can call knowing, a man must
first Jove the thing, sympathise with it.” “Fantasy is
the organ of the Godlike, the understanding is indeed
thy window; too clear thou canst not make it; but
fantasy is thy eye, with its colour-giving retina, healthy
or diseased.” In more simple language, this means


312 MCDERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


that every object, animate or inanimate, is gifted with
powers which constitute its nature and produce its
development; that, in order to know it, we must recre-
ate it in ourselves, with the train of its potentialities,
and that we only know it entirely by inwardly perceiv-
ing all its tendencies, and inwardly seeing all its effects.
And verily this process, which is the imitation of nature,
is the only one by which we can penetrate nature ;
Shakspeare had it as an instinct, and Goethe as a
method. There is none so powerful or delicate, so fitted
to the complexity of things and to the structure of our
mind. ‘There is none more proper to renew our ideas,
to withdraw us from formulas, to deliver us from the
prejudices, with which education involves us, to over-
throw the barriers in which our surroundings enclose
us. It is by this that Carlyle escaped from conven-
tional English ideas, penetrated into the philosophy and
science of Germany, to think out again in his own
manner the Germanic discoveries, and to give an origi-
nal theory of man and of the universe.


§ 2.—VOocATION.


It is from Germany that Carlyle has drawn his
greatest ideas. He studied there, he knows perfectly
its literature and language, he sets this literature in the
highest rank, he translated Wilhelm Meister, he wrote
upon the German writers a long series of critical articles,
he has just written a life of Frederick the Great. He
is the best accredited and most original of the inter-
preters who have introduced the German mind into
England. This is no small thing to do, for it is in such
a work that every thinking person is now labouring.


OHAP. Iv. PHILOSOPHY & HISTORY—CARLYLE, 313


a


From 1780 to 1830 Germany has produced all the
ideas of our historic age; and for half a century still,
perhaps for a whole century, our great work will be to
think them out again. The thoughts which have been
born and have blossomed in a country, never fail to
propagate themselves in neighbouring countries, and
to be engrafted there for a season. That which is
happening to us has happened twenty times already in
the world; the growth of the mind has always been
the same, and we may, with some assurance, foresee for
the future what we observe in the past. At certain
times appears an original form of mind, which produces
a philosophy, a literature, an art, a science, and which,
having renewed the form of man’s thought, slowly and
infallibly renews all his thoughts. All minds which
seek and find are in the current; they only advance
through it: if they oppose it, they are checked; if they
deviate, they are slackened: if they assist it, they are
carried beyond the rest. And the movement goes on so
long as there remains anything to be discovered. When
art has given all its works, philosophy all its theories,
science all its discoveries, it stops; another form of
mind takes the sway, or man ceases to think. Thus
at the Renaissance appeared the artistic and poetic
genius, which, born in Italy and carried into Spain, was
there extinguished after a century and a half in the uni-
versal extinction, and which, with other characteristics,
transplanted into France and England, ended after a
hundred years in the refinements of mannerists and the
follies of sectarians, having produced the Reformation,
confirmed free thought, and founded science. Thus with


314 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


Dryden in England, and with Malherbe in France, was
born the oratorical and classical spirit, which, having pro-
duced the literature of the seventeenth century and the
philosophy of the eighteenth, dried up under the suc-
cessors of Voltaire and Pope, and died after two hundred
years, having polished Europe and raised the French
Revolution. Thus at the end of the last century arose
the philosophic German genius, which, having engen-
dered a new metaphysics, theology, poetry, literature,
linguistic science, an exegesis, erudition, descends now
into the sciences, and continues its evolution. No
more original spirit, more universal, more fertile in
consequences of every scope and species, more capable
of transforming and reforming everything, has appeared
for three hundred years. It is of the same order as
that of the Renaissance and of the Classical Age. — It,
like them, connects itself with the great works of
contemporary intelligence, appears in all civilised lands,
is propagated with the same inward qualities, but under
different forms. It, like them, is one of the epochs of
the world’s history. Jt is encountered in the same
civilisation and in the same races. We may then
conjecture, without too much rashness, that it will have
a like duration and destiny. We thus succeed in fixing
with some precision our place in the endless stream of
events and things. We know that we are almost in
the midst of one of the partial currents which compose
it. We can perceive the form of mind which directs
it, and seek beforehand the ideas to which it conducts
us.
II.

Wherein consists this form? In the power of

discovering general ideas. No nation and no ago has


cHap, Iv, . PHILOSOPHY & HISTORY—CARLYLE. 315


possessed it in so high a degree as the Germans. This
is their governing faculty; it is by this power that
they have produced all that they have done. This gift
is properly that of comprehension (Begreifen). By it
we find the aggregate conceptions (Begriff) ; we reduce
under one ruling idea all the scattered parts of a sub-
ject; we perceive under the divisions of a group the
common bond which unites them; we conciliate objec-
tions; we bring down apparent contrasts to a profound
unity. It is the pre-eminent philosophical faculty ;
and, in fact, it is the philosophical faculty which has
impressed its seal on all their works. By it, they
vivified dry studies, which seemed only fit to occupy
pedants of the academy or seminary. By it, they
divined the involuntary and primitive logic which
created and organised languages, the great ideas which
are hidden at the bottom of every work of art, the
secret poetic emotions and vague metaphysical intui-
tions which engendered religions and myths. By it,
they perceived the spirit of ages, civilisations, and
races, and transformed into a system of laws the
history which was but a heap of facts. By it, they
rediscovered or renewed the sense of dogmas, con-
nected God with the world, man with nature, spirit
with matter, perceived the successive chain and the
original necessity of the forms, whereof the aggregate
is the universe. By it, they created a science of
linguistics, a mythology, a criticism, an esthetics, an
exegesis, a history, a theology and metaphysics, so new
that they continued long incomprehensible, and could
only be expressed by a special language. And this
bent was so dominant, that it subjected to its empire
even art and poetry. The poets by it have become


516 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


erudite, philosophical; they constructed their dramas,
epics, and odes after prearranged theories, and in order
to manifest general ideas. They rendered moral theses,
historical periods, sensible; they created and applied
esthetics ; they had no artlessness, or made their art-
lessness an instrument of reflection; they loved not
their characters for themselves; they ended by trans-
forming them into symbols; their philoscphical ideas
broke every instant out of the poetic shape in which
they tried to enclose them; they have been all critics,’
bent on constructing or reconstructing, possessing eru-
dition and method, attracted to imagination by art and
study, incapable of producing living beings unless by
science and artifice, really systematical men, who, to
express their abstract conceptions, employed, in place
of formulas, the actions of personages and the music
of verse.


III.


From this aptitude to conceive the aggregate, one
sole idea could be produced—the idea of aggregates.
In fact, all the ideas worked out for fifty years in
Germany are reduced to one only, that of development
(Entwickelung), which consists in representing all the
parts of a group as jointly responsible and complemental,
so that each necessitates the rest, and that, all combined,
they manifest, by their succession and their contrasts,
the inner quality which assembles and produces them.
A score of systems, a hundred dreams, a hundred thou-
sand metaphors, have variously figured or disfigured
this fundamental idea. Despoiled of its trappings, it
merely affirms the mutual dependence which unites the


} Goethe, the greatest of them all.


cHaP.iv. PHILOSOPHY & HISTORY—CARLYLE. 317


terms of a series, dnd attaches them all to some abstract
property within them. If we apply it to Nature, we
come to consider the world as a scale of forms, and, as
it were, a succession of conditions, having in themselves
the reason for their succession and for their existence,
containing in their nature the necessity for their decay
and their limitation, composing by their union an
indivisible whole, which, sufficing for itself, exhausting
all possibilities, and connecting all things, from time
and space to existence and thought, resembles by its
harmony and its magnificence some omnipotent and
immortal god. If we apply it to man, we come to con-
sider sentiments and thoughts as natural and necessary
products, linked amongst themselves like the transfor-
mations of an animal or plant; which leads us to con-
ceive religions, philosophies, literatures, all human
conceptions and emotions, as necessary series of a
state of mind which carries them away on its passage,
which, if it returns, brings them back, and which, if we
can reproduce it, gives us in consequence the means of
reproducing them at will. These are the two doctrines
which run through the writings of the two chief thinkers
of the century, Tegel and Goethe. They have used
them throughout as a method, Hegel to grasp the
formula of everything, Goethe to obtain the vision
of everything; they steeped themselves therein so
thoroughly, that they have drawn thence their inner
and habitual sentiments, their morality and their con-
duct. We may consider them to be the two philo-
sophical legacies which modern Germany has left to
the human race.


318 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V-


IV.


But these legacies have not been unmixed, and this
passion for aggregate views has marred its proper work
by its excess. It is rarely that the mind can grasp
ageregates: we are imprisoned in too narrow a corner
of time and space; our senses perceive only the surface
of things; our instruments have but a small scope;
we have only been experimentalising for three centuries ;
our memory is short, and the documents by which we
dive into the past are only doubtful lights, scattered
over an immense region, which they show by glimpses
without illuminating them. To bind together the small
fragments which we are able to attain, we have gener-
ally to guess the causes, or to employ general ideas so
vast, that they might suit all facts; we must have
recourse either to hypothesis or abstraction, invent
arbitrary explanations, or be lost in vague ones. These,
in fact, are the two vices which have corrupted German
thought. Conjecture and formula have abounded.
Systems have multiplied, some above the others, and
broken out into an inextricable growth, into which no
stranger dare enter, having found that every morning
brought a new budding, and that the definitive discovery
proclaimed over-night was about to be choked by
another infallible discovery, capable at most of lasting
till the morning after. The public of Europe was
astonished to see so much imagination and so little
common sense, pretensions so ambitious and theories so
hollow, such an invasion of chimerical existences and
such an overflow of useless abstractions, so strange a
lack of discernment and so great a luxuriance of irra-
tionality. The fact was, that folly and genius flowed


cHap.Iv. PHILOSOPHY & HISTORY—CARLYLE, 319


from the same source; a like faculty, excessive and all-
powerful, produced discoveries and errors. If to-day
we behold the workshop of human ideas, overcharged
as it is and encumbered by its works, we may compare
it to some blast-furnace, a monstrous machine which
day and night has flamed unwearingly, half darkened
by choking vapours, and in which the raw ore. piled
heaps on heaps, has descended bubbling in glowing
streams into the channels in which it has become hard.
No other furnace could have melted the shapeless mass,
crusted over with the primitive scorie; this obstinate
elaboration and this intense heat were necessary to
overcome it. Now the heavy castings burden the
earth ; their weight discourages the hands which touch
them; if we would turn them to some use, they defy
us or break: as they are, they are of no nse; and yet
as they are, they are the material for every tool, and
the instrument of every work; it is vur business to
cast them over again. Every mind must carry them
back to the forge, purify them, temper them, recast them,
and extract the pure metal from the rough mass.


NG


But every mind will re-forge them according to its
own inner warmth; for every nation has its original
genius, in which it moulds the ideas elsewhere derived.
Thus Spain, in the sixteenth and seventeenth cen-
turies, renewed in a different spirit Italian painting
and poetry. Thus the Puritans and Jansenists thought
out in new shapes primitive Protestantism; thus the
French of the eighteenth century widened and put
forth the liberal ideas, which the English had applied


320 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


or proposed in religion and politics. It is so in the
present day. The French cannot at once reach, like
the Germans, lofty aggregate conceptions. They can
only march step by step, starting from concrete ideas,
rising gradually to abstract ideas, after the progressive
methods and gradual analysis of Condillac and Descartes.
But this slower route leads almost as far as the other;
and, in addition, it avoids many wrong steps. It is by
this route that we succeed in correcting and compre-
hending the views of Hegel and Goethe; and if we
look around us, at the ideas which are gaining ground,
we find that we are already arriving thither. Posi-
tivism, based on all modern experience, and freed since
the death of its founder from his social and religious
fancies, lias assumed a new life, by reducing itself to
noting the connection of natural groups and the chain
of established sciences. On the other hand, history,
novels, and criticism, sharpened by the refinements of
Parisian culture, have made us acquainted with the
laws of human events; nature has been shown to be
an order of facts, man a continuation of nature; and
we have seen a superior mind, the most delicate, the
inost lofty of our own time, resuming and modifying
the German divinations, expounding in the French
manner everything which the science of myth, religion,
and language had stored up, beyond the Rhine, during
the last sixty years.


VEE


The growth in England is more difficult; for the
aptitude for general ideas is less, and the mistrust of
general ideas is greater: they reject at once all that


1M. Renan.


cHap. iv. PHILOSOPHY & HISTORY—CARLYLE. 321


remotely or nearly seems capable of injuring practical
morality or established dogma. The positive spirit
seems as if it must exclude all German ideas; and yet
it is the positive spirit which introduces them. Thus
theologians,! having desired to represent to themselves
with entire clearness and certitude the characters of the
New Testament, have suppressed the halo and mist in
which distance enveloped them; they have figured
them with their garments, gestures, accent, all the
shades of emotion of their style, with the species of
imagination which their age has imposed, amidst the
scenery which they have looked upon, amongst the
remains of former ages before which they have spoken,
with all the circumstances, physical or moral, which
learning and travel can render sensible, with all the
comparisons which modern physiology and psychology
could suggest; they have given us their precise and
demonstrated, coloured and graphic idea; they have
seen these personages, not through ideas and as myths,
but face to face and as men. They have applied
Macaulay’s art to exegesis; and if the entire German
erudition could pass unmutilated through this crucible,
its solidity, as well as its value, would be doubled.

But there is another wholly Germanic route by
which German ideas may become Enclish. This is the
road which Carlyle has taken; by this, religion and
poetry in the two countries are alike; by it the two
nations are sisters. The sentiment of internal things
(insight) is in the race, and this sentiment is a sort of
philosophical divination. At need, the heart takes the
place of the brain. The inspired, impassioned man pene-
trates into things; perceives the cause by the shock


1 Tn particular, Stanley and Jowett.
VOL. IV. Ww


322 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


which he feels from it; he embraces aggregates by the
lucidity and velocity of his creative imagination; he
discovers the unity of a group by the unity of the
emotion which he receives from it. For as soon as we
create, we feel within ourselves the force which acts in
the objects of our thought; our sympathy reveals to
us their sense and connection; intuition is a finished
and living analysis; poets and prophets, Shakspeare
and Dante, St. Paul and Luther, have been systematic
theorists, without wishing it, and their visions comprise
general conceptions of man and the universe. Carlyle’s
mysticism is a power of the same kind. He translates
into a poetic and religious style German philosophy.
He speaks, like Fichte, of the divine idea of the world,
the reality which lies at the bottom of every apparition.
He speaks, like Goethe, of the spirit which eternally
weaves the living robe of Divinity. He borrows their
metaphors, only he takes them literally. He considers
the god, which they consider as a form or a law, as a
mysterious and sublime being. He conceives by ex-
altation, by painful reverie, by a confused sentiment of
the interweaving of existences, that unity of nature
which they arrive at by dint of reasonings and abstrac-
tions. Here is a last route, steep doubtless, and little
frequented, for reaching the summits from which German
thought at first issued forth. Methodical analysis added
to the co-ordination of the positive sciences; French
criticisin refined by literary taste and worldly observa-
tion; English criticism supported by practical common
sense and positive intuition; lastly, in a niche apart,
sympathetic and poetic imagination: these are the four
routes by which the human mind is now proceeding to
reconquer the sublime heights to which it believed itself


cHaP. 1v.. PHILOSOPHY & HISTORY—CARLYLE. 323


carried, and which it has lost. These routes all conduct
to the same summit’ but with different prospects. That
by which Carlyle has advanced, being the lengthiest,
has led him to the strangest perspective. I will let him
speak for himself; he will tell the reader what he has
seen.


§ 3.—PuHILosopHy, Moratiry, ap Criticism.


“ However it may be with Metaphysics, and other abstract
Science originating in the Head (Verstand) alone, no Life-
Philosophy (Lebensphilosophie), such as this of Clothes pretends
to be, which originates equally in the Character (Gemzith), and
equally speaks thereto, can attain its significance till the
Character itself is known and seen”?


Carlyle has related, under the name of Teufelsdroeckh,
all the succession of emotions which lead to this Life-
Philosophy. They are those of a modern Puritan;
the same doubts, despairs, inner conflicts, exaltations,
and pangs, by which the old Puritans arrived at faith :
it is their faith under other forms. With him, as with
them, the spiritual and inner man frees himself from the
exterior and carnal; perceives duty amidst the solicita-
tions of pleasure ; discovers God through the appearances
of nature ; and, beyond the worid and the instincts of
sense, sees a supernatural world and instinct.


i em


The specialty of Carlyle, as of every mnystic, is to see
a double meaning in everything. For him texts and
objects are capable of two interpretations : the one gross,
open to all, serviceable for ordinary life ; the other sub-


1 Sartor Resartus, bk. i. ch. xi. 5 Prospective,


824 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


lime, open to a few, serviceable to a higher life. Car-
lyle says:


“To the eye of vulgar Logic, what is man? An omnivorous
Biped that wears Breeches. To the eye of Pure Reasun what
is he? A Soul, a Spirit, and divine Apparition. Round his
mysterious Mr, there lies, under all those wool-rags, a Garment
of Flesh (or of Senses), contextured in the Loom of Heaven,
. . . Deephidden is he under that strange Garment; amid
Sounds and Colours and Forms, as it were, swathed-in, and
inextricably over-shrouded : yet it is skywoven, and worthy of
a God,” 4

“For Matter, were it never so despicable, is Spirit, the
manifestation of Spirit: were it never so honourable, can'it be
more? The thing Visible, nay, the thing Imagined, the thing
in any way conceived as Visible, what is it but a Garment, a
Clothing of the higher, celestial, Invisible, ‘unimaginable,
formless, dark with excess of bright ?’” ?

“ All visible things are emblems; what thou seest is not
there on its own account; strictly taken, is not there at all:
Matter exists only spiritually, and to represent some Idea, and
body it forth.” ® ‘i


Language, poetry, arts, church, state, are only symbols:


“Tn the Symbol proper, what we can call a Symbol, there is
ever, more or less distinctly and directly, some embodiment and
revelation of the Infinite ; the Infinite is made to blend itself
with the Finite, to stand visible, and as it were, attainable
there. By Symbols, accordingly, is man guided and com-
manded, made happy, thade wretched. He everywhere finds
himself encompassed with Symbols, recognised as such or not
recognised: the Universe is but one vast Symbol of God; nay,
if thou wilt have it, what is man himself but a Symbol of God ;


1 Sartor Resartus, bk. i. ch. x. ; Pure Reason. 2 Tbid,
3 bid. bk. i. ch. xi. : Prospective.


cHap, Iv. PHILOSOPHY & HISTORY—CARLYLE. 325


is not all that he does symbolical ; a revelation to Sense of the
mystic god-given force that is in him?” !


Let us rise higher still and regard Time and Space, those
two abysses which it seems nothing could fill up or de-
stroy, and over which hover our life and our universe.
“They are but forms of our thought... . There ig
neither Time nor Space; they are but two grand funda-
mental, world-enveloping appearances, SPACE and TIME.
These as spun and woven for us from before Birth itself,
to clothe our celestial Mz for dwelling here, and yet to
blind it,—lie all embracing, as the universal canvas, or
warp and woof, whereby all minor illusions, in this
Phantasm Existence, weave and paint themselves.”?
Our root is in eternity; we seem to be born and to die,
but actually, we are.


“Know of a truth that only the Time-shadows have
perished, or are perishable; that the real Being of whatever
was, and whatever is, and whatever will be, 7s even now and
for ever... . Are we not Spirits, that are shaped into a body,
into an Appearance; and that fade away again into air and
Invisibility?” ‘‘O Heaven, it is mysterious, it is awful to
consider that we not only carry each a future Ghost within
him ; but are, in very deed, Ghosts! These Limbs, whence
had we them; this stormy Force; this life-blood with its
burning Passion? They are dust and shadow; a Shadow-
system gathered round our Mr; wherein, through some mo-
ments or years, the Divine Essence is to be revealed in the
Flesh.

“ And again, do we not squeak and gibber (in our discordant,
screech-owlish debatings and recriminatiugs); and glide bodeful,
and feeble, and fearful ; or uproar (poltern), and revel in our


1 Surtor Resartus, bk. iii. en. iii. ; Symbols.
2 Tid. bk. iii. ch. viii. ; Natural Supernaturalism. 3 Ibid.


326 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


mad Dance of the Dead,—till the scent of the morning air
summons us to our still Home; and dreamy Night becomes
awake and Day ?”?


What is there, then, beneath all these empty appear-
ances? What is this motionless existence, whereof
nature is but the “ changing and living robe?” None
knows; if the heart divines it, the mind perceives it
not. “Creation, says one, lies before us like a glorious
rainbow; but the sun that made it lies behind us,
hidden from us.” We have only the sentiment thereof,
not the idea. We feel that this universe is beautiful
and terrible, but its essence will remain ever unnamed.
We have only to fall on our knees before this veiled
face: wonder and adoration are our true attitude:


“The man who cannot wonder, who does not habitually
wonder (and worship), were he President of innumerable
Royal Societies, and carried the whole Mécanique Céleste and
Hegel’s Philosophy, and the epitome of all Laboratories and Obser-
vatories, with their results, in his single head,—is but a Pair of
Spectacles behind which there is no Eye. Let those whe have
Eyes look through him, then he may be useful.

“Thou wilt have no Mystery and Mysticism; wilt walk
through thy world by the sunshine of what thou callest Truth,
or even by the hand-lamp of what I call Attorney-Logic: and
‘explain’ all, ‘account’ for all, or believe nothing of it. Nay,
thou wilt attempt laughter; whoso recognises the unfathomable,
all-pervading domain of Mystery, which is everywhere under
our feet and among our hands; to whom the Universe is an
oracle and Temple, as well as a Kitchen and Cattle-stall,—he
shall be a delirious Mystic ; to him thou, with sniffing charity,
wilt protrusively proffer thy Hand-lamp, and shriek, as one
injured, when he kicks his foot through it.” 2


1 Sartor Resartus, bk. iii. ch. viii. ; Natural Supernaturalism.
2 Thid. bk. 1, ch, x. ; Pure Reason.


CHAP, Iv. PHILOSOPHY & HISTORY—CARLYLE. 327


“We speak of the Volume of Nature; and truly a Volume
it is—whose Author and Writer is God. To read it! Dost
thou, does man, so much as well know the Alphabet thereof ?
With its Words, Sentences, and grand descriptive Pages,
poetical and philosophical, spread out through Solar Systems,
and Thousands of Years, we shall not try thee. It isa Volume
written in celestial hieroglyphs, in the true Sacred-writing ; of
which even Prophets are happy that they can read here a line
and there a line. As for your Institutes, and Academies of
Science, they strive bravely ; and from amid the thick-crowded,
inextricably intertwisted hieroglyphic writing, pick out, by
dexterous combination, some Letters in the vulgar Character
and therefrom put together this and the other economic Recipe,
of high avail in Practice,”?


Do we believe, perhaps,


“That Nature is more than some boundless Volume of such
Recipes, or huge, well-nigh inexhaustible Domestic-Cookery
Book, of which the whole secret will in this manner one day
evolve itself ?”2...

“ And what is that Science, which the scientific head alone,
were it screwed off, and (like the Doctor’s in the Arabian tale)
set in a basin, to keep it alive, could prosecute without shadow
of a heart, but one other of the mechanical and menial handi-
crafts, for which the Scientific Head (having a soul in it) is too
noble an organ? I mean that Thought without Reverence is
barren, perhaps poisonous,” ®


Let the scales drop from our eyes, and let us look:


“Then sawest thou that this fair Universe, were it in the
meanest province thereof, is in very deed the star-domed City
of God ; that through every star, through every grass-blade,


1 Sartor Resartus, bk. iii. ch. viii. ; Natwral Supernaturalism.
2 Tbid, 3 Ibid, bk. i. ch, x. ; Pure Reason,


328 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


and most through every Living Soul, the glory of a present
God still beams.” 4

“ Generation after generation takes to itself the form of a
Body ; and forth-issuing from Cimmerian Night, on Heaven’s
mission APPEARS, What Force and Fire is in each he expends :
one grinding in the mill of Industry ; one, bunter-like, climbing
the giddy Alpine heights of Science; one madly dashed in
pieces on the rocks of Strife, in war with his fellow :—and
then the Heaven-sent is recalled ; his earthly Vesture falls away,
and soon even to Sense becomes a vanished Shadow. Thus,
like some wild-flaming, wild-thundering train of Heaven’s
Artillery, does this mysterious Manxinp thunder and flame, in
long-drawn, quick-succeeding grandeur, through the unknown
Deep. Thus, like a God-created, fire-breathing Spirit-host, we
emerge from the Inane; haste stormfully across the astonished
Earth, then plunge again into the Inane. . . . But whence 1—
O Heaven, whither? Sense knows not; Faith knows not;
only that it is through Mystery to Mystery, from God and to
God.”


TE


This vehement religious poetry, charged as it is with
memories of Milton and Shakspeare, is but an English
transcription of German ideas. There is a fixed rule
for transposing,—that is, for converting into one another
the ideas of a positivist, a pantheist, a spiritualist, a
mystic, a poet, a head given to images, and a head
given to formulas. We may mark all the steps which
lead simple philosophical conception to its extreme and
violent state. Take the world as science shows it; it
is a regular group or series which has a law ; according
to science, it is nothing more. As from the law we


1 Sartor Resartus, bk. iii, ch. viii. ; Natural Supernaturalism,
2 Ibid,


cHapP.1v. PHILOSOPHY & HISTORY—CARLYLE. 329


deduce the series, we may say that the law engenders
it, and consider this law as a force. If we are an
artist, we will seize in the aggregate the force, the
series of effects, and the fine regular manner in which
force produces the series. To my mind, this sympa-
thetic representation is of all the most exact and
complete : knowledge is limited, as long as it does not
arrive at this, and it is complete when it has arrived
there. But beyond, there commence the phantoms
which the mind creates, and by which it dupes itself.
If we have a little imagination, we will make of this
force a distinct existence, situated beyond the reach of
experience, spiritual, the principle and the substance of
concrete things. That is a metaphysical existence.
Let us add one degree to our imagination and enthusiasm,
and we will say that this spirit, situated beyond time
and space, is manifested through these, that it subsists
and animates everything, that we have in it motion,
existence, and life. When carried to the limits of vision
and ecstasy, we will declare that this principle is the
only reality, that the rest is but appearance: thenceforth
we are deprived of all the means of defining it; we
can affirm nothing of it, but that it is the source of
things, and that nothing can be affirmed of it; we
consider it as a grand unfathomable abyss; we seek,
in order to come at it, a path other than that of clear
ideas; we extol sentiment, exaltation. If we have a
gloomy temperament, we seek it, like the sectarians,
painfully, amongst prostrations and agonies. By this
scale of transformations, the general idea becomes a
poetical, then a philosophical, then a mystical existence ;
and German metaphysics, concentrated and heated, is
changed into English Puritanism.


330 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK Y,


LG


What distinguishes this mysticism from others is its
practicality. The Puritan is troubled not only about
what he ought to believe, but about what he ought to
do; he craves an answer to his doubts, but especially
a rule for his conduct; he is tormented by the notion
of his ignorance, as well as by the horror of his vices; he
seeks God, but duty also. In his eyes the two are but
one; moral sense is the promoter and guide of philo-
sophy °


“Is there no God, then: but at best an absentee God, sitting
idle, ever since the first Sabbath, at the outside of his Universe,
and seeing it go? Has the word Duty no meaning ; is what
we call Duty no divine Messenger and Guide, but a false earthly
Fantasm, made-up of Desire and Fear, of emanations from the
gallows and from Dr. Graham’s Celestial-Bed? Happiness of
an approving Conscience! Did not Paul of Tarsus, whom ad-
miring men have since named Saint, feel that he was the ‘ chief
of sinners ;’ and Nero of Rome, jocund in spirit (wohlgemuth),
spend much of his time in fiddling? Foolish Word-monger and
Motive-grinder, who in thy Logic-mill hast an earthly mechanism
for the Godlike itself, and wouldst fain grind me out Virtue
from the husks of pleasure,—I tell thee, Nay !”?


There is an instinct within us which says Nay. We
discover within us something higher than love of happi-
ness,—the love of sacrifice. That is the divine part of
our soul. We perceive in it and by it the God, who
otherwise would continue ever unknown. By it we
penetrate an unknown and sublime world. There is
an extraordinary state of the soul, by which it leaves


1 Sartor Resartus, bk. ii. ch. vii. ; The Everlasting No.


cHaP, Iv. PHILOSOPHY & HISTORY—CARLYLE. 331


selfishness, renounces pleasure, cares no more for itself,
adores pain, comprehends holiness.!

This obscure beyond, which the senses cannot reach,
the reason cannot define, which the imagination figures
as a king and a person; this is holiness, this is the
sublime. “The hero is he who lives'in the inward
sphere of things, in the True, Divine, Eternal, which
exists always, unseen to most, under the Temporary,
Trivial; his being is in that.... His life is a piece
of the everlasting heart of nature itself”? Virtue is a
revelation, heroism is a light, conscience a philosophy ;
and we shall express in the abstract this moral mysticism,
by saying that God, for Carlyle, is a mystery whose
only name is the Ideal.


IV.


This faculty for perceiving the inner sense of things,
and this disposition to search out the moral sense of
things, have produced in him all his doctrines, and
first his Christianity. This Christianity is very broad:
Carlyle takes religion in the German manner, after a
symbolical fashion. This is why he is called a Panthe-
ist, which in plain language means a madman or a
rogue. In England, too, he is exorcised. His friend
Sterling sent him long dissertations, to bring him back
to a personal God. Every moment he wounds to the

1 “Only this I know, If what thou namest Happiness be our true
aim, then are we all astray. With Stupidity and sound Digestion man
may front much. But what, in these dull, unimaginative days, are the
terrors of Conscience to the diseases of the Liver! Not on Morality,
but on Cookery, let us build our stronghold: there brandishing our
frying-pan, as censer, let us offer sweet incense to the Devil, and live at


ease on the fat things he has provided for his Elect !” —Sarior Resartus,
bk. ii. ch, vii. 2 Lectwres on Heroes,


332 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK VY.


quick the theologians, who make of the prime cause
an architect or an administrator. He shocks them
still more when he touches upon dogma; he considers
Christianity as a myth, of which the essence is the
Worship of Sorrow :


“ Knowest thou that ‘ Worship of sorrow?’ The Temple
thereof founded some eighteen centuries ago, now lies in ruins,
overgrown with jungle, the habitation of doleful creatures:
nevertheless, venture forward; in a low crypt, arched out of
falling fragments, thou findest the Altar still there, and its
sacred Lamp perennially burning.” ?


But its guardians know it no more. A frippery of
conventional adornments hides it from the eyes of men.
The Protestant Church in the nineteenth century, like
the Catholic Church in the sixteenth, needs a reforma-
tion. We want a new Luther:


‘For if Government is, so to speak, the outward sKIN of the
Body Politic, holding the whole together and protecting it ; and
if all your Craft-Guilds and Associations for Industry, of hand
or of head, are the Fleshly Clothes, the muscular and osseous
Tissues (lying wnder such skin), whereby Society stands and
works ;— then is Religion the inmost Pericardial and Nervous
Tissue which ministers Life and warm Circulation to the
whole . .

“ Meanwhile, in our era of the World, those same Church
Clothes have gone sorrowfully out-at-elbows: nay, far worse,
many of them have become mere hollow Shapes, or Masks,
under which no living Figure or Spirit any longer dwells; but
only spiders and unclean beetles, in horrid accumulation, drive
their trade ; and the mask still glares on you with its glass-eyes,
in ghastly affectation of Life,—some generation and half after
Religion has quite withdrawn from it, and in unnoticed nooks


) Sartor Resartus, bk. ii. ch. ix. ; The Everlasting Yea.


nap. 1v. PHILOSOPHY & HISTORY—CARLYLE. 333


is weaving for herself new Vestures, wherewith to reappear and
bless us, or our sons or grandsons.” 4


Christianity once reduced to the sentiment of
abnegation, other religions resume, in consequence,
dignity and importance. They are, like Christianity,
forms of universal religion. “They have all had a
truth in them, or men would not have taken them up.” ?
They are no quack’s imposture or poet’s dream. They
are an existence more or less troubled by the mystery,
august and infinite, which is at the bottom of the uni-
verse :


“Canopus shining down over the desert, with its blue
diamond brightness (that wild blue spirit-like brightness, far
brighter than we ever witness here), would pierce into the heart
of the wild Ishmaelitish man, whom it was guiding through the
solitary waste there. To his wild heart, with all feelings in it,
with no speech for any feeling, it might seem a little eye, that
Canopus, glancing-out on him from the great deep Eternity ;
revealing the inner Splendour to him,” $


“Grand Lamaism,” Popery itself, interpret after their
fashion the sentiment of the divine; therefore Popery
itself is to be respected. “While a pious life remains
capable of being led by it, . . . let it last as long as it
can.”* What matters if people call it idolatry ?


“ Tdol is Eidolon, a thing seen, asymbol. It is not God, but
a symbol of God... . Is not all worship whatsoever a worship
by Symbols, by eidola, or things seen? . . . The most rigorous
Puritan has his Confession of Faith, and intellectual Representa-
tion of Divine things, and worships thereby. . . . All creeds,


1 Sartor Resartus, bk. iii. ch. ii. ; Church Clothes.
2 Lectwres on Heroes, i. ; The Hero as Divinity. 3 Tbidd,
4 Thid. iv.; The Hero as Priest.


334 MODERN AUTHORS, BOOK V
liturgies, religious forms, conceptions that fitly invest religious
feelings, are in this sense eidola, things seen. All worship
whatsoever must proceed by Symbols, by Idols :—we may say,
all Idolatry is comparative, and the worst Idolatry is only more
idolatrous.” 1


The only detestable idolatry is that from which the
gentiment has departed, which consists only in cere-
monies learned by rote, in mechanical repetition of
prayers, in decent profession of formulas not understood.
The deep veneration of a monk of the twelfth century,
prostrated before the relies of St. Edmund, was worth
more than the conventional piety and cold philosophical
religion of a Protestant of to-day. Whatever the wor-
ship, it is the sentiment which gives it its whole value.
And this sentiment is that of morality:


“‘ The one end, essence, and use of all religion past, present,
and to come, was this only: To keep that same Moral Con-
science or Inner Light of ours alive and shining, . . . All religion
was here to remind us, better or worse, of what we already know
better or worse, of the quite infinite difference there is between
a Good man and a Bad ; to bid us love infinitely the one, abhor
and avoid infinitely the other,—strive infinitely to be the one,
and not to be the other. ‘All religion issues in due Practical
Hero-worship.’ ” ?

“ All true Work is religion ; and whatsoever religion is not
Work may go and dwell among the Brahmins, Antinomians,
Spinning Dervishes. or where it will; with me it shall have no
harbour.” °


Though it has “no harbour” with Carlyle, it has else-
where. We touch here the English and narrow feature
1 Lectures on Heroes, iv. ; The Hero as Priest.


° Past and Present, bk. iii. ch. xv. 3 Morrison Again.
3 Ibid. bk, ui. ch. xii. ; Reward.


cHap.1v. PHILOSOPHY & HISTORY—CARLYLE. 335


of this German and broad conception. There are many
religions which are not moral; there are more still
which are not ‘practical. Carlyle would reduce the
heart of man to the English sentiment of duty, and his
imagination to the English sentiment of respect. The
half of human poetry escapes his grasp. For if a part
of ourselves raises us to abnegation and virtue, another
part leads us to enjoyment. and pleasure. Man is
pagan as well as Christian; nature has two faces:
several races, India, Greece, Italy, have only compre-
hended the second, and have had for religions merely
the adoration of overflowing force and the ecstasy of
grand imagination ; or otherwise, the admiration of har-
monious form, with the culture of pleasure, beauty, and
happiness.


V.


His criticism of literary works is of the same char-
acter and violence, and has the same scope and the
same limits, the same principle and the same conclu-
sions, as his criticism of religious works. Carlyle has
introduced the great ideas of Hegel and Goethe, and
has confined them under the narrow discipline of Puritan
sentiment.1 He considers the poet, the writer, the
artist, as an interpreter of “the Divine Idea of the
World, that which lies at the bottom of Appearance ;”
as ‘a revealer of the infinite, as representing his century,
his nation, his age: we recognise here all. the German
formulas. They signify that the artist detects and ex-
presses better than any one, the salient and durable
features of the world which surrounds him, so that we
might draw from his work a theory of man and of nature,


2 Lectures on Heroes ; Miscellanies, passim.


336 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


together with a picture of his race and of his time.
This d‘scovery has renewed criticism. Carlyle owes to
it his finest views, his lessons on Shakspeare and Dante,
his studies on Goethe, Dr. Jobnson, Burns, and Rousseau.
Thus, by a natural enthusiasm he becomes the herald
of German literature; he makes himself the apostle of
Goethe; he has praised him with a neophyte’s fervour,
to the extent of lacking on this subject skill and
perspicacity ; he calls him a Hero, presents his life as
an example to all the men of our century; he will not
see his paganism, manifest as it is, and so repellent to
a Puritan. Through the same causes, he has made of
Jean-Paul Richter, an affected clown, and an extravagant
humorist, “a giant,” a sort of prophet; he has heaped
eulogy on Novalis and the mystic dreamers; he has set
the democrat Burns above Byron; he has exalted Dr.
Johnson, that honest pedant, the most grotesque of liter-
ary behemoths. His principle is, that in a work of the
mind, form is little, the basis alone is important. As
soon as a man has a profound sentiment, a strong con-
viction, his book is beautiful. A writing, be it what it
will, only manifests the soul: if the soul is serious, if
it is intimately and habitually shaken by the grave
thoughts which ought to preoccupy a soul; if it loves
what is good, is devoted, endeavours with its whole
effort, without any mental reservation of interest or
self-love, to publish the truth which strikes it, it has
reached its goal. We have nothing to do with the
talent ; we need not to be pleased by beautiful forms;
our sole object is to find ourselves face to face
with the sublime; the whole destiny of man is to per-
ceive heroism; poetry and art have no other employ-
ment or merit. We see how far and with.what excess


cuap, tv. PHILOSOPHY & HISTORY—CARLYLE, 337


Carlyle possesses the Germanic sentiment, why he loves
the mystics, humorists, prophets, illiterate writers, and
men of action, spontaneous poets, all who violate regu-
lar beauty through ignorance, brutality, folly, or delib-
erately. He goes so far as to excuse the rhetoric of
Dr. Johnson, because Johnson was loyal and sincere;
he does not distinguish in him the literary man from
the practical; he avoids seeing the classic declaimer, a
strange compound of Scaliger, Boileau, and La Harpe,
majestically decked out in the Ciceronian gown, in
order to see only a man of faith and conviction. Such
a habit prevents a man seeing one half of things.
Carlyle speaks with scornful indifference! of modern
dilettantism, seems to despise painters, admits no
sensible beauty. Wholly on the side of the authors,
he neglects the artists; for the source of art is the
sentiment of form; and the greatest artists, the
Italians, the Greeks, did not know, like their priests
and poets, any beauty beyond that of voluptuousness
and force. Thence also it comes that he has no
taste for French literature. The exact order, the fine
proportions, the perpetual regard for the agreeable
and proper, the harmonious structure of clear and
consecutive ideas, the delicate picture of society, the
perfection of style-—nothing which moves us, has
attraction for him. His mode of comprehending life is
too far removed from ours. In vain he tries to under-
stand Voltaire, all he can do is to slander him:


“We find no heroism of character in him, from first to last ;
nay, there is not, that we know of, one great thought in all
his six-and-thirty quartos. ... He sees but a little way
into Nature ; the mighty All, in its beauty and infinite mys-

1 Life of Sterling.
VOL. IV. Z


338 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


terious grandeur, humbling the small me into nothingness,
has never even for moments been revealed to him ; only this and
that other atom of it, and the differences and discrepancies of
these two, has he looked into and noted down. His theory of
the world, his picture of man and man’s life is little ; for a poet
and philosopher, even pitiful, ‘The Divine idea, that which lies
at the bottom of appearance,’ was never more invisible to any
man. He reads history not with the eyes of a devout seer, or
even of a critic, but through a pair of mere anticatholic spectacles.
It is not a mighty drama enacted on the theatre of Infinitude,
with suns for lamps and Eternity as a background, . . . but a
poor wearisome debating-club dispute, spun through ten cen-
turies, between the Encyclopédie and the Sorbonne. . . . God’s
Universe is a larger patrimony of St. Peter, from which it were
well and pleasant to hunt out the Pope... . The still higher
praise of having had a right or noble aim cannot be conceded
him without many limitations, and may, plausibly enough, be
altogether denied. . . . The forco necessary for him was nowise
a great and noble one ; but small, in some respects a mean one,
to be nimbly and seasonably put into use. The Ephesian
temple, which it had employed many wise heads and strong
arms for a lifetime to build, could be unbuilt by one madman,
in a single hour.”?


These are big words; we will not employ the like. I
will simply say, that if a man were to judge Carlyle,
as a Frenchman, as he judges Voltaire as an English-
man, he would draw a different picture of Carlyle from
that which I am trying here to draw,


VI.


This trade of calumny was in vogue fifty years ago;
in fifty more it will probably have altogether ceased.
The French are beginning to comprehend the gravity


1 Critical and Miscellaneous Essays, 4 vols. ; ii. Voltaire.


char. lv, PHILOSOPHY. & HISTORY—CARLYLE. 339


of the Puritans; perhaps the English will end by
comprehending the gaiety of Voltaire: the first are
labouring to appreciate Shakspeara; the second will
doubtless attempt to appreciate Racine. Goethe, the
master of all modern minds, knew well how to appre-
ciate both.’ The critic must add to his natural and
national soul five or six artificial and acquired souls,
and his tlexible sympathy must introduce him to extinct
or foreign sentiments. The best fruit of criticism is to
detach ourselves from ourselves, to constrain us to
raake allowauce for the surroundings in which we live,
to teach us to distinguish objects themselves through
the transient appearances, with which our character
and our age never fail to clothe them. Each person
regards them through glasses of diverse focus and hue,
and no one can reach the truth save by taking into
account the form and tint which his glasses give to
the objects which he sees. Hitherto we have been
wrangling and pummelling one another,—this man
declaring that things are green, another that they
are yellow; others, again, that they are red; each
accusing his neighbour of seeing wrong, and being
disingenuous. Now, at last, we are learning moral
optics; we are finding that the colour is not in the
objects, but in ourselves; we pardon our neighbours
for seeing differently from us; we recognise that they
may see red what to us appears blue. green what to us
appears vellow; we can even define the kind of glasses
which produces yellow, and the kind which produces
green, divine their effects from their nature, predict to
people the tint under which the object we are about to
present to them will appear, construct beforehand the


1 See this double praise in Withelm Meister,


340 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


system of every mind, and perhaps one day free our-
selves from every system. “As a poet,” said Goethe,
“T am a polytheist; as a naturalist, a pantheist; as a
moral man, a deist; and in order to express my mind,
I need all these forms.” In fact, all these glasses are
serviceable, for they all show us some new aspect of
things. The important point is to have not one, but
several, to employ each at the suitable moment, not to
mind the particular colour of these glasses, but to
know that behind these million moving poetical tints,
optics only prove transformations governed by a law.


§ 4.—Conceprion or History.


is


Universal History, the history of what man has accom-
plished in this world, is at bottom the History of the Great
Men who have worked here. They were the leaders of men,
these great ones ; the modellers, patterns, and in a wide sense
creators, of whatsoever the general mass of men contrived todo
or to attain ; all things that we see standing accomplished in
the world are properly the outer material result, the practical
realisation and embodiment of Thoughts that dwelt in the
Great Men sent into the world; the soul of the whole world’s
history, it may justly be considered, were the history of these.”!


Whatever they be, poets, reformers, writers, men of
action, revealers, he gives them all a mystical character :


“Such a man is what we call an original man; he comes to
us at first-hand. A messenger he, sent from the Infinite
Unknown with tidings to us. . . . Direct from the Inner Fact
of things ;—he lives, and has to live, in daily communion with


1 Lectures on Heroes, i. ; The Hero as Divinity.


cHaP. tv. PHILOSOPHY & HISTORY—CARLYLE. 341


that. Hearsays cannot hide it from him ; he is blind, homeless,
miserable, following hearsays ; it glares in upon him... . It is
from the heart of the woyld that he comes ; he is portion of the
primal reality of things.” 1


In vain the ignorance of his age and his own imper-
fections mar the purity of his original vision; he ever
attains some immutable and life-giving truth; for this
truth he is listened to, and by this truth he is powerful.
That which he has discovered is immortal and efficacious:


“The works of a man, bury them under what guano-moun-
tains and obscene owl-droppings you will, do not perish, cannot
perish. What of Heroism, what of Eternal Light was in a
Man and his Life, is with very great exactness added to the
Eternities ; remains forever a new divine portion of the Sum of
Things,” 2

“No nobler feeling than this of admiration for one higher
than himself dwells in the breast of man. It is to this hour,
and at all hours, the vivifying influence in man’s live. Religion
I find stand upon it, ... What therefore is loyalty proper, the
life-breath of all society, but an effiluence of Hero-worship,
submissive admiration for the truly great? Society is founded
on Hero-worship,” °


This feeling is the deepest part of man. It exists even
in this levelling and destructive age: “I seem to see
in this indestructibility of Hero-worship the everlasting
adamant lower than which the confused wreck of
revolutionary things cannot fall.” *


1 Lectures on Heroes, ii. ; The Hero as Prophet.

2 Cromwell's Letters and Speeches, iii. part x. ; Death of the Pro-
tector.

3 Lectures on Heroes, i. ; Lhe Hero as Divinity. 4 bid.


342 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


iN


We have here a German theory, but transformed,
made precise, thickened after the English manner. The
Germans said that every nation, period, civilisation,
had its idea; that is its chief feature, from which the
rest were derived; so that philosophy, religion, arts,
and morals, all the elements of thought and action,
could be deduced from some original and fundamental
quality, from which all proceeded and in which all
ended. Where Hegel proposed an idea, Carlyle proposes
atheroic sentiment. It is more palpable and moral.
To cumplete his escape from the vague, he considers
this sentiment in a hero. He must give to abstractions
a body and soul; he is not at ease in pure conceptions,
and wishes to touch a real being.

But this being, as he conceives it, is an abstract of
the rest. For according to him, the hero contains and
represents the civilisation in which he is comprised ;
he has discovered, proclaimed or practised an original
conception, and in this his age has followed him. The
knowledge of a heroic sentiment thus gives us a know-
ledge of a whole age. By this method Carlyle has
emerged beyond biography. He has rediscovered the
grand views of his masters. He has felt, like them,
that a civilisation, vast and dispersed as it is over time
and space, forms an indivisible whole. He has com-
bined in a system of hero-worship the scattered frag-
ments which Hegel united by a law. He has derived
from a common sentiment the events which the
Germans derived from a common definition. He has
comprehended the deep dnd distant connection of
things, such as bind a great man to his time, such as


cHAP. Iv. PHILOSOPHY & HISTORY—CARLYLE, 343


connect the works of accomplished thought with the
stutterings of infant thought, such as link the wise in-
ventions of modern constitutions to the disorderly furies
of primitive barbarism :


“Silent, with closed lips, as I fancy them, unconscious that
they were specially brave; defying the wild ocean with its
monsters, and all men and things ;—progenitors of our own
Blakes and Nelsons, ... Hrolf or Rollo, Duke of Normandy,
the wild Sea-king, has a share in governing England at this
hour,”!

“ No wild Saint Dominics and Thebaid Eremites, there had
been no melodious Dante ; rough Practical Endeavour, Scandi-
navian aud other, from Odin to Walter Raleigh, from Ulfila to
Cranmer, enabled Shakspeare to speak. Nay, the finished
Poet, I remark sometimes, is a symptom that his epoch itself
has reached perfection and is finished; that before long there
will be a new epoch, new Reformers needed.” ?


His great poetical or practical works only publish or
apply this dominant idea; the historian makes use of
it, to rediscover the primitive sentiment which engen-
ders them, and to form the aggregate conception which
unites them.


TUT:


Hence a new fashion of writing history. Since the
heroic sentiment is the cause of the other sentiments,
it ig to this the historian must devote himself. Since
it is the source of civilisation, the mover of revolutions,
the master and regenerator of human life, it is in this
that he must observe civilisation, revolutions, and
human life. Since it is the spring of every move-


1 Lectures on Heroes, i..3 The Hero as Divinity.
2 Tbid. iv.; The Hero as Priest.


344 _ MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


ment, it is by this that we shall understand every
movement. Let the metaphysicians draw up deductions
and formulas, or the politicians expound situations and
constitutions. Man is not an inert being, moulded by
a constitution, nor a lifeless being expressed by formula;
he is an active and living soul, capable of acting, dis-
covering, creating, devoting himself, and before all, of
daring; genuine history is an epic of heroism. This
idea is, in my opinion, brilliant and luminous. For
men have not done great things without great emotions.
The first and sovereign motive of an extraordinary re-
volution is an extraordinary sentiment. Then we see
appear and swell a lofty and all-powerful passion,
which has burst the old dykes, and hurled the current
of things into a new bed. All starts from this, and it is
this which we must observe. Let us leave metaphysical
formulas and political considerations, and regard the
inner state of every mind. Let us quit bare narrative,
forget abstract explanations, and study impassioned
souls. A revolution is only the birth of a great
sentiment. What is this sentiment, how is it bound to
others, what is its degree, source, effect, how does it
transform the imagination, understanding, common
inclinations; what passions feed it, what proportion
of folly and reason does it embrace—these are the
main questions. If any one wishes to represent to me
the history of Buddhism, he must show me the calm
despair of the ascetics who, deadened by the contempla-
tion of the infinite void, and by the expectation of final
annihilation, attain in their monotonous quietude the
sentiment of universal fraternity. If any one wishes to
represent to me the history of Christianity, he must
show me the soul of a Saint John or Saint Paul, the


-cHap.tv. PHILOSOPHY & HISTORY—CARLYLE, 345


sudden renewal of the conscience, the faith-in invisible
things, the transformation of a soul penetrated by the
presence of a paternal God, the irruption of tenderness,
generosity, abnegation, trust, and hope, which rescued
the wretches oppressed under the Roman tyranny and
decline. To explain a revolution, is to write a partial
psychology ; the analysis of critics and the divination
of artists are the only instruments which can attain to
it: if we would have it precise and profound, we must
ask it of those who, through their profession or their
genius, possess a knowledge of the soul—Shakspeare,
Saint-Simon, Balzac, Stendhal. This is why we may
occasionally ask it of Carlyle. And there is a history
which we may ask of him in preference to all others,
that of the Revolution which had conscience for its
source, which set God in the councils of the state, which
imposed strict duty, which provoked severe heroism.
The best historian of Puritanism is a Puritan.


IV.


The history of Cromwell, Carlyle’s masterpiece, is
but a collection of letters and speeches, commented on
and united by a continuous narrative. The impression
which they leave is extraordinary. Grave constitu-
tional histories hang heavy after this compilation.
The author wished to make us comprehend a soul. the
soul of Cromwell, the greatest of the Puritans, their
chief, their abstract, their hero, and their model. His
narrative resembles that of an eye-witness. A cove-
nanter who should have collected letters, scraps of
newspapers, and daily added reflections, interpreta-
tions, notes, and anecdotes, might have written just


346 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK Vv.


such a book. At last we are face to face with
Cromwell. We have his words, we can hear his tone
of voice; we seize, around each action, the circum-
stances which produced it: we see him in his tent,
in council, with the proper background, with his face
and costume: every detail, the most minute, is here.
And the sincerity is as great as the sympathy; the
biographer confesses his ignorance, the lack of docu-
ments, the uncertainty; he is perfectly loyal though
a poet and a sectarian. With him we simultaneously
restrain and give free play to our conjectures; and we
feel at every step, amidst our affirmations and our
reservations, that we are firmly planting our feet upon
the truth. Would that all history were like this, a
selection of texts provided with a commentary! I
would exchange for such a history all the regular
arguments, all the beautiful colourless narrations, of
Robertson and Hume. I can verify the judgment of
the author whilst reading this; I no more think after
him, but for myself; the historian does not obtrude
himself between me and his subject. I see a fact, and
not an account of a fact; the oratorical and personal
envelope, with which a narrative covers the truth,
disappears; I can touch the truth itself. And this
Cromwell, with his Puritans, comes forth from the test,
recreated and renewed. We divined pretty well
already that he was not a mere man of ambition, a
hypocrite, but we took him for a fanatic and hateful
disputant. We considered these Puritans as gloomy
madmen, shallow brains, and full of scruples. Let us
quit our French and modern ideas, and enter into these
souls: we shall find there something else than hypo-
chondria, namely, a grand sentiment—am I a just man ?


cHaP.Iv, PHILOSOPHY & HISTORY—CARLYLE. 347


And if God, who is perfect justice, were to judge me at
this moment, what sentence would he pass upon me?
—Such is the original idea of the Puritans, and through
them came the Revolution into England. The feel-
ing of the difference there is between good and evil,
filled for them all time and space, and became
incarnate, and expressed for them, by such words as
Heaven and Hell. They were struck by the idea
of duty. They examined themselves by this light,
severely and without intermission; they conceived
the sublime model of infallible and complete virtue;
they were imbued therewith; they drowned in this
absorbing thought all worldly prejudices and all incli-
nations of the senses; they conceived a horror even
of imperceptible faults, which an honest mind will ex-
cuse in itself; they exacted from themselves absolute
and continuous perfection, and they entered into life
with a fixed resolve to suffer and do all, rather than
deviate one step. We laugh at a revolution about
surplices and chasubles; there was a sentiment of the
divine underneath all these disputes about vestments.
These poor folk, shopkeepers and farmers, believed, with
all their heart, in a sublime and terrible God, and the
manner how to worship Him was not a trifling thing
for them :


‘Suppose now it were some matter of vital concernment,
some transcendent matter (as Divine worship is), about which
your whole soul, struck dumb with its excess of feeling, knew
not how to form itself into utterance at all, and preferred form-
less silence to any utterance there possible,—what should we
say of a man coming forward to represent or utter it for you in
the way of upholsterer-mummery? Such a man,—let him
depart swiftly, if he love himself! You have lost your only


348 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


gon; are mute, struck down, without even tears: an impor-
tunate man importunately offers to celebrate Funeral Games
for him in the manner of the Greeks,”!


This has caused the Revolution, and not the Writ of
Shipmoney, or any other political vexation. “You may
take my purse, . . . but the Self is mine and God my
Maker’s.”* And the same sentiment which made them
rebels, made them conquerors. Men could not under-
stand how discipline could exist in an army in which
an inspired corporal would reproach a lukewarm general.
They thought it strange that generals, who sought the
Lord with tears, had learned administration and strategy
in the Bible. They wondered that madmen could be men
of business. The truth is, that they were not madmen,
but men of business. The whole difference between ~
them and practical men whom we know, is that they
had a conscience; this conscience was their flame;
mysticism and dreams were but the smoke. They
sought the true, the just; and their long prayers, their
nasal preachings, their quotations from the Bible, their
tears, their anguish, only mark the sincerity and ardour
with which they applied themselves to the search.
They read their duty in themselves; the Bible only
aided them. At need they did violence to it, when
they wished to verify by texts the suggestions of their
own hearts. It was this sentiment of duty which
united, inspired, and sustained them, which made their
discipline, courage, and boldness; which raised te
ancient heroism Hutchinson, Milton, and Cromwell;
which instigated all decisive deeds, grand resolves,
marvellous successes, the declaration of war, the trial


1 Lectures on Heroes, vi. ; The Hero as King. 3 Thid.


caaP.iv. PHILOSOPHY & HISTORY—CARLYLE, 349


of the king, the purge of Parliament, the humiliation
of Europe, the protection of Protestantism, the sway of
the seas. These men are the true heroes of England;
they display, in high relief, the original characteristics
and noblest features of England—practical piety, the
rule of conscience, manly resolution, indomitable energy.
They founded England, in spite of the corruption of the
Stuarts and the relaxation of modern manners, by the
exercise of duty, by the practice of justice, by obstinate
toil, by vindication of right, by resistance to oppression,
by the conquest of liberty, by the repression of vice.
They founded Scotland, they founded the United States :
at this day they are, by their descendants, founding
Australia and colonising the world. Carlyle is so much
their brother, that he excuses or admires their excesses
—the execution of the king, the mutilation of Parlia-
ment, their intolerance, inquisition, the despotism of
Cromwell, the theocracy of Knox. He sets them before
us as models, and judges both past and present by
them alone.


V


Hence he saw nothing but evil in the French Re-
volution. He judges it as unjustly as he judges
Voltaire, and for the same reasons. He understands
our manner of acting no better than our manner of
thinking. He looks for Puritan sentiment; and, as he
does not find it, he condemns us. The idea of duty,
the religious spirit, self-government, the authority of an
austere conscience, can alone, in his opinion, reform a
corrupt society; and none of all these are to be met
with in French society. The philosophy which has
produced and guided the Revolution was simply des-


350 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


tructive, proclaiming no other gospel but “that a lie
cannot be believed! Philosophy knows only this: Her
other relief is mainly that in spiritual, supra-sensual
matters, no belief is possible.” The theory of the Rights
of Man, borrowed from Rousseau, is only a logical game,
a pedantry almost as opportune as a “Theory of Ir-
regular Verbs.” The manners in vogue were the
epicurism of Faublas. The morality in vogue was the
promise of universal happiness. Incredulity, hollow
rant, sensuality, were the mainsprings of this reforma-
tion. Men let loose their instincts and overturned the
barriers. They replaced corrupt authority by unchecked
anarchy. In what could a jacquerie of brutalised
peasants, impelled by atheistical arguments, end ?


“For ourselves, we answer that French Revolution means
here the open violent Rebellion, and Victory, of disimprisoned
Anarchy against corrupt, worn-out Authority)...

“So thousandfold complex a Society ready to burst up from
its infinite depths ; and these men its rulers and healers, with-
out life-rule for themselves—other life-rule than a Gospel
according to Jean Jacques! To the wisest of them, what we
must call the wisest, man is properly an accident under the sky.
Man is without duty round him, except it be to make the
Constitution. He is without Heaven above him, or Hell
beneath him ; he has no God in the world.

“While hollow languor and vacuity is the lot of the upper,
and want and stagnation of the lower, and universal misery is
very certain, what other thing is certain? . . . What will
remain? The five unsatiated senses will remain, the sixth
insatiable sense (of vanity) ; the whole demoniac nature of man
will remain.

“‘ Man is not what we call a happy animal ; his appetite for
sweet victual is too enormous. ... (He cannot subsist) except


1 The French Revolution, i. bk. vi. ch. i; Make the Constitution.


cHAP. Iv. PHILOSOPHY & HISTORY—CARLYLE, 351


by girding himself together for continual endeavour and endur-
ance.” 1


But set the good beside the evil; put down virtues
beside vices! These sceptics believed in demonstrated
truth, and would have her alone for mistress. These
logicians founded society only on justice, and risked
their lives rather than renounce an established theorem.
These epicureans embraced in their sympathies entire
humanity. These furious men, these workmen, these
hungry, threadbare peasants, fought on the frontiers
for humanitarian interests and abstract principles.
Generosity and enthusiasm abounded in France, as well
as in England; acknowledge them under a form which
is not English, These men were devoted to abstract
truth, as the Puritan to divine truth; they followed
philosophy, as the Puritans followed religion; they had
for their aim universal salvation, as the Puritans had
individual salvation. They fought against evil in
society, as the Puritans fought it in the soul. They
were generous, as the Puritans were virtuous. They
had, like them, a heroism, but sympathetic, sociable,
ready to proselytise, which reformed Europe, whilst the
English one only served England.


Vi.


This exaggerated Puritanism, which revolted Carlyle
against the French Revolution, revolts him against
modern England :


“ We have forgotten God ;—in the most modern dialect and
very truth of the matter, we have taken up the Fact of ‘this
Universe as it is not. We have quietly closed our eyes to the


> The French Revolution, i. bk. vi. ch. i. : Bake the Constitution.


852 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


eternal Substance of things, and opened them only to the Shows
and Shams of things. We quietly believe this Universe to be
intrinsically a great unintelligible PERHAPS ; extrinsically, clear
enough, it is a great, most extensive Cattlefold and Workhouse,
with most extensive Kitchen-ranges, Dining-tables,—whereat he
ig wise who can find a place! All the Truth of this Universe
is uncertain ; only the profit and loss of it, the pudding and
praise of it, are and remain very visible to the practical man.
“There is no longer any God for us! God’s Laws are
become a Greatest-Happiness Principle, a Parliamentary Expedi-
ency ; the Heavens overarch us only as an Astronomical Time-
keeper ; a butt for Herschel-telescopes to shoot science at, to
shoot sentimentalities at: in our and old Jonson’s dialeet, man
has lost the sow! out of him; and now, after the due period,—
begins to find the want of it! This is verily the plague-spot ;
centre of the universal Social Gangrene, threatening all modern
things with frightful death. To him that will consider it, here
is the stem, with its roots and taproot, with its world-wide
upas-boughs and accursed poison-exudations, under which the
world lies writhing in atrophy and agony. You touch the
focal-centre of all our disease of our frightful nosology of
diseases, when you lay your hand on this. There is no religion:
there is no God; man has lost his soul, and vainly seeks
antiseptic salt. Vainly: in killing Kings, in passing Reform
bills, in French Revolutions, Manchester Insurrections, is found
no remedy. The foul elephantine leprosy, alleviated for an
hour, reappears in new force and desperateness next hour,” }


Since the return of the Stuarts, we are utilitarians or
sceptics. We believe only in observation, statistics,
gross and concrete truths; or else we doubt, half
believe, on hearsay, with reserve. We have no moral
convictions, and we have only floating convictions.
We have lost the mainspring of action; we no longer


1 Past and Present, bk. iii. ch. i. ; Phenomena.


cHaP. 1v, PHILOSOPHY & HISTORY—CARLYLE. 353


set duty in the midst of our resolve, as the sole and
undisturbed foundation of life; we are caught by all
kinds of little experimental and positive receipts, and we
amuse ourselves with all kinds of pretty pleasures, well
chosen and arranged. We are egotists or dilettanti.
We no longer look on life as an august temple, but as
a machine for solid profits, or as a hall for refined
amusements. We have our rich men, our manu-
facturers, our bankers, who preach the gospel of gold;
we have gentlemen, dandies, lords, who preach the
gospel of manners. We overwork ourselves to heap up
guineas, or else we make ourselves insipid to attain an
elegant dignity. Our hell is no longer, as under
Cromwell, the dread of being found guilty before the
just Judge, but the dread of making a bad speculation,
or of transgressing etiquette. We have for our aristo-
cracy greedy shopkeepers, who reduce life to a calcula-
tion of cost and sale-prices; and idle amateurs, whose
great business in life is to preserve the game on their
estates. Weare no longer governed. Our government
has no other ambition than to preserve the public peace,
and to get in the taxes. Our constitution lays it down
as a principle, that, in order to discover the true and
the good, we have only to make two million imbeciles
vote. Our Parliament is a great word-mill, where
plotters out-bawl each other for the sake of making a
noise.’


2 “Tt is his effort and desire to teach this and the other thinking
British man that said finale, the advent namely of actual open Anarchy,
cannot be distant, now when virtual disguised Anarchy, long-continued,
and waxing daily, has got to such a height ; and that the one method
of staving off the fatal consummation, and steering towards the Con-
tinents of the Future, lies not in the direction of reforming Parliament,
but of what he calls reforming Downing Street; a thing infinitely


VOL. IV. 2A


304 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK VY.


Under this thin cloak of conventionalities and
phrases, ominously growls the irresistible democracy.
England perishes if she ever ceases to be able to sell a
yard of cotton at a farthing less than others. At the
least check in the manufactures, 1,500,000 workmen,
without work, live upon public charity. The formid-
able masses, given up to the hazards of industry, urged
by lust, impelled by hunger, oscillates between the
fragile cracking barriers; we are nearing the final
breaking-up, which will be open anarchy, and the
democracy will heave amidst the ruins, until the senti-
ment of the divine and of duty has rallied them around
the worship of heroism; until it has discovered the
means of calling to power the most virtuous ard the
most capable;* until it has given its guidance into
their hands, instead of making them subject to its
caprices; until it has recognised and reverenced its
Luther and its Cromwell, its priest and its king.


urgent to be begun, and to be strenuously carried on. To find a Parlia-
ment more and more the express image of the People, could, unless the
People chanced to be wise as well as miserable, give him no satisfaction.
Not this at all ; but to find some sort of King, made in the image of
God, who could a little achieve for the People, if not their spoken
wishes, yet their dumb wants, and what they would at last find to
have been their instinctive wii/,—which is a far different matter
usually, in this babbling world of ours.’—Parliaments, in Latter-Day
Pamphlets.

‘A king or leader, then, in all bodies of men, there must be; be
their work what it may, there is one man here who by character,
faculty, position, is fittest of all to do it.

**He who is to be my ruler, whose will is to be higher than my
will, was chosen for mein Heaven. Neither, except in such obedience
to the Heaven-chosen, is freedom so much as conceivable.”

1 Official Report, 1842. 2 Lutter-Day Pamphiets ; Parliaments.


cHAP. Iv» PHILOSOPHY & HISTORY—CARLYLE. 355


VEE


Now-a-days, doubtless, in the whole civilised world,
democracy is swelling or overflowing, and all the chan-
nels in which it flows, are fragile or temporary. But
it is a strange offer to present for its issue the fanaticism
and tyranny of the Puritans. The society and spirit
which Carlyle proposes, as models for human nature,
lasted but an hour, and could not last longer. The
asceticism of the Republic produced the debauchery of
the Restoration; Harrison preceded Rochester, men
like Bunyan raised up men like Hobbes; and the
sectaries, in instituting the despotism of enthusiasm,
established by reaction the authority of the positive
mind and the worship of gross pleasure. Exaltation
is not stable, and it cannot be exacted from man,
without injustice and danger. The sympathetic gene-
rosity of the French Revolution ended in the cynicism
of the Directory and the slaughters of the empire.
The chivalric and poetic piety of the great Spanish
monarchy emptied Spain of men and of thought. The
primacy of genius, taste, and intellect in Italy, reduced
her at the end of a century to voluptuous sloth and
political slavery. ‘“ What makes the angel makes the
beast ;” and perfect heroism, like all excesses, ends in
stupor. Human nature has its explosions, but with
intervals: mysticism is serviceable but when it is
short. Violent circumstances produce extreme con-
ditions; great evils are necessary in order to raise great
men, and you are obliged to look for shipwrecks when
you wish to behold rescuers. If enthusiasm is beauti-
ful, its results and its originating circumstances are
sad; it is but a crisis, and a healthy state is better.


356 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


In this respect Carlyle himself may serve for a proof.
There is perhaps less genius in Macaulay than in
Carlyle; but when we have fed for some time on this
exaggerated and demoniacal style, this marvellous and
sickly philosophy, this contorted and prophetic history,
these sinister and furious politics, we gladly return to
the continuous eloquence, to the vigorous reasoning, to
the moderate prognostications, to the demonstrated
theories, of the generous and solid mind which Europe
has just lost, who brought honour to England, and
whose place none can fill.


CHAPTER V.
PhHilosophy.—Stuart Mill


I.


WueEN at Oxford some years ago, during the meeting
of the British Association, I met, amongst the few
students still in residence, a young Englishman, a man
of intelligence, with whom I became intimate. He
took me in the evening to the New Museum, well
filled with specimens. Here short lectures were de-
livered, new models of machinery were set to work;
ladies were present and took an interest in the experi-
ments: on the last day, full of enthusiasm, God save


1M. Taine has published this ‘‘Study on Mill” separately, and
preceded it by the following note, as a preface :—‘‘ Whe this Study
first appeared, Mr. Mill did me the honour to write to me that it would
not be possible to give in a few pages a more exact and complete notion
of the contents of his work, considered as a body of philosophical
teaching, ‘But,’ he added, ‘I think you are wrong in regarding the
views J adopt as especially English. They were so in the first half of
the eighteenth century, from the time of Locke to that of the reaction
against Hume. This reaction, beginning in Scotland, assumed long ago
the German form, and ended by prevailing universally. When I wrote
my book, J stood almost alone in my opinions; and though they have met
with a degree of sympathy which I by no means expected, we may still
count in England twenty @ priori and spiritualist philosophers for every
partisan of the doctrine of Experience.’

‘This remark is very true. I myself could have made it, having
been brought up in the doctrines of Scottish philosophy and the writings
of Reid. I simply answer, that there are philosophers whom we do not
count, and that all such, whether English or not, spiritualist or not,


358 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


the Queen was sung. I admired this zeal, this solidity
of mind, this organisation of science, these voluntary
subscriptions, this aptitude for association and for
labour, this great machine pushed on by so many arms,
and so well fitted to accumulate, criticise, and classify
facts. But yet, in this abundance, there was a void;
when I read the Transactions, I thought I was present
at a congress of leads of manufactories. All these
learned men verified details and exchanged recipes.
It was as though I listened to foremen, busy in com-
municating their processes for tanning leather or dyeing
cotton: general ideas were wanting. I used to regret
this to my friend; and in the evening, by his lamp,
amidst that great silence in which the university town
lay wrapped, we both tried to discover its reasons.


‘iti


One day I said to him: You lack philosophy—lI
mean, what the Germans call metaphysics. You have


may be neglected without much harm. Once in a half century, or
perhaps in a century, or two centuries, some thinker appears ; Bacon
and Hume in England, Descartes and Condillac in France, Kant and
Hegel in Germany. At other times the stage is unoccupied, or ordinary
men come forward, and offer the public that which the public likes—
Sensualists or Idealists, according to the tendency of the day, with
sufficient instruction and skill to play leading parts, and enough
capacity to re-set old airs, well drilled in the works of their prede-
cessors, but destitute of real invention—simple executant musicians,
who stand in the place of composers. In Europe, at present, the stage
isa blank, The Germans adapt and alter effete French materialism.
The French listen from habit, but somewhat wearily and distractedly,
to the scraps of melody and eloquent commonplace which their in-
structors have repeated to them for the last thirty years. In this deep
silence, and from among these dull mediocrities, a master comes forward
to speak. Nothing of the sort has been seen since Hegel.”


CHAP. Vv. PHILOSOPHY—STUART MILL. 359


learned men, but you have no thinkers. Your God
impedes you. He is the Supreme Cause, and you dare
not reason on causes, out of respect for him. He ig
the most important personage in England, and I see
clearly that he merits his position; for he forms part
of your constitution, he is the guardian of your morality,
he judges in final appeal on all questions whatsoever,
he replaces with advantage the prefects and gendarmes
with whom the nations on the Continent are still en-
cumbered. Yet, this high rank has the inconvenience
of all official positions; it produces a cant, prejudices,
intolerance, and courtiers. Here, close by us, is poor
Mr. Max Miiller, who, in order to acclimatise the study
of Sanscrit, was compelled to discever in the Vedas
the worship of a moral God, that is to say, the religion
of Paley and Addison. Some time ago, in London, I
read a proclamation of the Queen, forbidding people to
play cards, even in their own houses, on Sundays.’ It
seems that, if I were robbed, I could not bring my thief
to justice without taking a preliminary religious oath ;
for the judge has been known to send a complainant
_ away who refused to take the oath, deny him justice,
and insult him into the bargain. Every year when we
read the Queen’s speech in youn papers, we find there
the compulsory mention of Divine Providence, which
comes in mechanically, like the invocation to the im-
mortal gods on the fourth page of a rhetorical:declama-
tion; and you remember that once, the pious phrase
having been. omitted, a second communication was
made to Parliament for the express purpose of supply-
ing it. All these cavillings and pedantries indicate to
my mind a celestial monarchy ; naturally it resembles all


1 This law has been abrogated by an Act of Parliament.—Tr.


360 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


others; I mean that it relies more willingly on tradition
and custom than on examination and reason. A
monarchy never invited men to verify its credentials.
As yours is, however, useful, well adapted to you, and
moral, you are not revolted by it; you submit to it
without difficulty, you are, at heart, attached to it;
you would fear, in touching it, to disturb the constitu-
tion and morality. You leave it in the clouds, amidst
public homage. You fall back upon yourselves, confine
yourselves to matters of fact, to minute dissections, to
experiments in the laboratory. You go culling plants
and collecting shells. Science is deprived of its head ;
but all is for the best, for practical life is improved,
and dogma remains intact.


Til.


You are truly French, he answered; you ignore
facts, and all at once find yourself settled in a theory.
I assure you that there are thinkers amongst us, and
not far from hence, at Christ Church, for instance. One
of them, the professor of Greek, has spoken so deeply
on inspiration, the creation and final causes, that he is
out of favour. Look at this little collection which has
recently appeared, Hssays and Reviews ; your philosophic
freedom of the last century, the latest conclusions of
geology and cosmogony, the boldness of German exegesis,
are here in abstract. Some things are wanting, amongst
others the waggeries of Voltaire, the misty jargon of
Germany, and the prosaic coarseness of Comte; to my
mind, the loss is small. Wait twenty years, and you
will find in London the ideas of Paris and Berlin—
But they will still be the ideas of Paris and Berlin.


CHAP. V. PHILOSOPHY—STUART MILL. 361


Whom have you that is original 2—Stuart Mill—Who
is he ?—A political writer. His little book On Liberty
is as admirable as Rousseau’s Contrat Social is bad.—
That is a bold assertion—-No, for Mill decides as
strongly for the independence of the individual as
Rousseau for the despotism of the State—vVery well,
but that is not enough to make a philosopher. What
besides is he ?—An economist who goes beyond his
science, and subordinates production to man, instead of
man to production—Well, but this is not enough to
make a philosopher. Is he anything else ?—A logician.
Very good; but of what school ?—-Of his own. I told
you he was original.—Is he Hegelian ?—By no means ;
he is too fond of facts and proofs.—Does he follow
Port-Royal ?—Still less; he is too well acquainted
with modern sciences.—Does he imitate Condillac ?—
Certainly not; Condillac has only taught him to write
well.— Who, then, are his friends ?—-Locke and Comte
in the first rank; then Hume and Newton.—lIs he a
system-monger, a speculative reformer ?—-He has too
much sense for that ; he only arranges the best theories,
and explains the best methods. He does not attitudinise
majestically in the character of a restorer of science ;
he does not declare, like your Germans, that his book
will open up a new era for humanity. He proceeds
gradually, somewhat slowly, often creepingly, through
a multitude of particular facts. He excels in giving
precision to an idea, in disentangling a principle, in
discovering it amongst a number of different facts; in
refuting, distinguishing, arguing. He has the astute-
ness, patience, method, and sagacity of a lawyer.— Very
well, you admit that I was right. A lawyer, an ally
of Locke, Newton, Comte, and Hume; we have here


362 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V,


only English philosophy; but no matter. Has he
reached a grand conception of the universe ?—Yes.—
Has he an individual and complete idea of nature and
the mind ?—-Yes.—Has he combined the operations
and discoveries of the intellect under a single principle
which puts them all in a new light?—-Yes; but we
have to discover this principle-—That is your business,
and I hope you will undertake it——But I shall fall
into abstract generalities There is no harm in that?
—But this close reasoning will be like a quick-set
hedge. We will prick our fingers with it—But three
men out of four would cast aside such speculations as
idle-—So much the worse for them. For in what does
the life of a nation or a century consist, except in the
formation of such theories? We are not thoroughly
men unless so engaged. If some dweller in another
planet were to come down here to ask us the nature of
our race, we should have to show him the five or six
great ideas which we have formed of the mind and the
world. That alone would give him the measure of our
intelligence. Expound to me your theory, and I shall
go away better instructed than after having seen the
masses of brick, which you call London and Manchester.


§ 1.—EXPERIENCE.
Th


Let us begin, then, at the beginning, like logicians.
Mill has written on logic. What is logic? It is a
science. What is its object? The sciences; for, sup-
pose that you have traversed the universe, and that you
know it thoronghly, stars, earth, sun, heat, gravity,
chemical affinities, the species of minerals, geological


CHAP. V. PHILOSOPHY—STUART MILL. 363


revolutions, plants, animals, human events, all that
classifications and theories explain and embrace, there
still remain these classifications and theories to be
learnt. Not only is there an order of beings, but also
an order of the thoughts which represent them; not
only plants and animals, but also botany and zoology ;
not only lines, surfaces, volumes, and numbers, but also
geometry and arithmetic. Sciences, then, are as real
things as facts themselves, and therefore, as well as facts,
become the subject of study. We can analyse them as
we analyse facts, investigate their elements, composition,
order, relations, and object. There is, therefore, a science
of sciences; this science is called logic, and is the sub-
ject of Mill’s work. It is no part of logic to analyse
the operations of the mind, memory, the association of
ideas, external perception, etc.; that is the business
of psychology. We do not discuss the value of such
operations, the veracity of our consciousness, the ab-
solute certainty of our elementary knowledge; this
belongs to metaphysics. We suppose our faculties to
he at work, and we admit their primary discoveries.
We take the instrument as nature has provided it, and
we trust to its accuracy. We leave to others the task
of taking its mechanism to pieces, and the curiosity
which criticises its results. Setting out from its primi-
tive operations, we inquire how they are added to each
other; how they are combined ; how one is convertible
into another; how, by dint of additions, combinations,
and transformations, they finally compose a system of
connected and developed truths. We construct a theory
of science, as others construct theories of vegetation, of
the mind, or of numbers. Such is the idea of logic;
and it is plain that it has, as other sciences, a real


364 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


subject-matter, its distinct province, its manifest import-
ance, its special method, and a certain future.


it;


Having premised so much, we observe that all these
sciences which form the subject of logic, are but collec-
tions of propositions, and that each proposition merely
connects or separates a subject and an attribute, that
is, two names, a quality and a substance: that is to say,
a thing and another thing. We must then ask what
we understand by a thing, what we indicate by a name:
in other words, what it is we recognise in objects, what
we connect or separate, what is the subject-matter of
all our propositions and all our science. There is a
point in which all our several items of knowledge
resemble one another. There is a common element
which, continually repeated, constitutes all our ideas.
There is, as it were, a minute primitive crystal which,
indefinitely and variously repeating itself, forms the
whole mass, and which, once known, teaches us before-
hand the laws and composition of the complex bodies
which it has formed.

Now, when we attentively consider the idea which we
form of anything, what do we find in it? Take first
substances, that is to say, Bodies and Minds.’ This

1 “Tt is certain, then, that a part of our notion of a body consists
of the notion of a number of sensations of our own or of other sentient
beings, habitually occurring simultaneously. My conception of the
table at which I am writing is compounded of its visible form and size,
which are complex sensations of sight ; its tangible form and size,
which are comylex .vnsations of our organs of touch and of our
muscles ; its eight, which is also a sensation of touch and of the


muscles ; its colour, which is a sensation of sight ; its hardness, which
is a sensation of the muscles; its composition, which is another word


CHAP, V. PHILOSOPHY—STUART MILL. 365


table is brown, long, wide, three feet high, judging by
the eye: that is, it forms a little spot in the field of
vision ; in other words, it produces a certain sensation
on the optic nerve. It weighs ten pounds: that is, it
would require to lift it an effort less than for a weight
of eleven pounds, and greater than for a weight of nine
pounds; in other words, it produces a certain muscular
sensation. It is hard and square, which means that, if
first pushed, and then run over by the hand, it will
excite two distinct kinds of muscular sensations. And
so on. When I examine closely what I know of it, I
find that I know nothing else except the impressions it
makes upon me. Our idea of a body comprises nothing
else than this: we know nothing of it but the sensations
it excites in us; we determine it by the nature, number,
and order of these sensations; we know nothing of its
inner nature, nor whether it has one; we simply affirm
that it is the unknown cause of these sensations.
When we say that a body has existed in the absence of
our sensations we mean simply that if, during that time,
we had been within reach of it, we should have had
sensations which we have not had. We never define
it save by our present or past, future or possible, com-
plex or simple impressions. This is so true, that
philosophers like Berkeley have maintained, with some


for all the varieties of sensation which we receive, under various cir-
cumstances, from the wood of which it is made; and so forth. All or
most of these various sensations frequently are, and, as we learn by
experience, always might be, experienced simultaneously, or in many
different orders of succession, at our own choice : and hence the thought
of any one of them makes us think of the others, and the whole becomes
mentally amalgamated into one mixed state of consciousness, which, in
the language of Locke and Hartley, is termed a Complex ldea,”—
Mru’s System of Logic, 4th ed. 2 vols., i. 62.


366 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


&


show of truth, that matter is a creature of the imagina-
tion, and that the whole universe of sense, is reducible
to an order of sensations. It is at least so, as far as
our knowledge is concerned; and the judgments which
compose our sciences, have reference only to the impres-
sions by which things are manifested to us.

So, again, with the mind. We may well admit that
there is in us a soul, an “ego,” a subject or recipient of
our sensations, and of our other modes of being, distinct
from those sensations and modes of existence; but we
know nothing of it. Mr. Mill says:


“For, as our conception of a body is that of an unknown
exciting cause of sensations, so our conception of a mind is that
of an unknown recipient, or percipient, of them; and not of
them alone, but of all our other feelings. As body is the
mysterious something which excites the mind to feel, so mind
is the mysterious something which feels, and thinks. It is un-
necessary to give in the case of mind, as we gave in the case of
matter, a particular statement of the sceptical system by which
its existence as a Thing in itself, distinct from the series of
what are denominated its states, is called in question. But it
is necessary to remark, that on the inmost nature of the think-
ing principle, as well as on the inmost nature of matter, we are,
and with our faculties must always remain, entirely in the dark.
All which we are aware of, even in our own minds, is a certain
‘thread of consciousness ;’ a series of feelings, that is, of sensa-
tions, thoughts, emotions, and volitions, more or less numerous
and complicated, ” 2


We have no clearer idea of mind than of matter; we can

say nothing more about it than about matter. So that

substances, of whatever kind, bodies or minds, within

or without us, are never for us more than tissues,
1 Mill’s Logie, i. 68.


CHAP, V. PHILOSOPHY—STUART MILL. — 3867


more or less complex, more or less regular, of which our
impressions and modes of being form all the threads.
This is still more evident in the case of attributes
than of substances. When I say that snow is white, I
mean that, when snow is presented to my sight, I have
the sensation of whiteness. When I say that fire is hot,
I mean that, when near the fire, I have the sensation of
heat. We call a mind devout, superstitious, meditative,
or gay, simply meaning that the ideas, the emotions, the
volitions, designated by these words, recur frequently in
the series of its modes of being! When we say that
bodies are heavy, divisible, movable, we mean simply
that, left to themselves, they will fall; when cut, they


1 “Every attribute of a mind consists either in being itself affected
in a certain way, or aflecting other minds in a certain way. Considered
in itself, we can predicate nothing of it but the series of its own feel-
ings. When we say of any mind, that it is devout, or superstitious, or
meditative, or cheerful, we mean that the ideas, emotions, or volitions
implied in those words, form a frequently recurring part of the series of
feelings, or states of consciousness, which fill up the sentient existence
of that mind.

“Jn addition, however, to those attributes of a mind which are
grounded on its own states of feeling, attributes may also be ascribed to
it, in the same manner as to a body, grounded on the feelings which it
excites in other minds. A mind does not, indeed, like a body, excite
sensations, but it may excite thoughts or emotions. The most impor-
tant example of attributes ascribed on this ground, is the employment
of terms expressive of approbation or blame. When, for example, we
say of any character, or (in other words) of any mind, that it is admirable,
we mean that the contemplation of it excites the sentiment of admira-
tion ; and indeed somewhat more, for the word implies that we not only
feel admiration, but approve that sentiment in ourselves. In some
cases, under the semblance of a single attribute, two are really predi-
cated : one of them, a state of the mind itself; the other, a state with
which other minds are affected by thinking of it. As when we say of
any one that he is generous. The word generosity expresses a certain
state of mind, but being a term of praise, it also expresses that this
state of mind excites in us another mental state, called approbation.


+


368 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


will separate; or when pushed, they will move: that is,
under such and such circumstances they will produce
such and such a sensation in our muscles, or our sight.
An attribute always designates a mode of our being, or
a series of our modes of being. In vain we disguise
these modes by grouping, concealing them under abstract
words, dividing and transforming them, so that we are
frequently puzzled to recognise them: whenever we
pierce to the basis of our words and ideas, we find them
and nothing but them. Mill says:


“Take the following example: A generous person is worthy
of honour. Who would expect to recognise here a case of co-
existence between phenomena? But so it is. The attribute
which causes a person to be termed generous is ascribed to him
on the ground of states of his mind, and particulars of his con-
duct ; both are phenomena; the former are facts of internal
consciousness, the latter, so far as distinct from the former, are
physical facts, or perceptions of the senses. Worthy of honour,
admits of a similar analysis. Honour, as here used, means a
state of approving and admiring emotion, followed on occasion
by corresponding outward acts. ‘Worthy of honour’ connotes
all this, together with an approval of the act of showing honour.
All these are phenomena ; states of internal cotisciousness, ac-
companied or followed, by physical facts. When we say, A
generous person is worthy of honour, we affirm coexistence be-
tween the two complicated phenomena connoted by the two
terms respectively. We affirm, that wherever and whenever
the inward feelings and outward facts implied in the word gen-
erosity, have place, then and there the existence and manifest-
ation of an inward feeling, honour, would be followed in our
minds by another inward feeling, approval.” }


The assertion made, therefore, is twofold, and of the following purport :
Certain feelings form habitually a part of this person’s sentient ex-
istence ; and the idea of those feelings of his, excites the sentiment of
approbation in ourselves or others.” —Mill’s Logic, i. 80. 1 Ibid. 110.


CHAP, V. PHILOSOPHY—STUART MILL. 369


In vain we turn about as we please, we remain still in
the same circle. Whether the object be an attribute or
a substance, complex or abstract, compound or simple,
its material is to us always the same; it is made up
only of our modes of being. Our mind is to nature
what a thermometer is to a boiler: we define the pro-
perties of nature by the impressions of our mind, as we
indicate the conditions of the boiling water by the
changes of the thermometer. Of both we know but
condition and changes; both are made up of isolated
and transient facts; a thing is for us but an aggregate
of phenomena. These are the sole elements of our know-
ledge : consequently the whole effort of science will be
to link facts to facts.


I.


This brief phrase is the abstract of the whole system.
Let us master it, for it explains all Mill’s theories. He
has defined and restated everything from this starting-
point. In all forms and all degrees of knowledge, he
has recognised only the knowledge of facts, and of their
relations.

Now we know that logic has two corner-stones, the
Theories of Definition and of Proof. From the days of
Aristotle logicians have spent their time in polishing
them. They have only dared to touch them respectfully,
as if they were sacred. At most, from time to time,
some innovator ventured to turn them over cautiously,
to put them in a better light. Mill shapes, cuts, turus
them over, and replaces them both in a similar manner
and by the same means,

VOL. IV. 22


370 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


IV.


I am quite aware that now-a-days men laugh at those
who reason on definitions; the laughers deserve to be
laughed at. There is no theory more fertile in uni-
versal and important results ; it is the root by which the
whole tree of human science grows and lives. For to
define things is to mark out their nature. To introduce
a new idea of definition is to introduce a new idea of
the nature of things; it is to tell us what beings are, of
what they are composed, into what elements they are
capable of being resolved. In this lies the merit of
these dry speculations ; the philosopher seems occupied
with arranging mere formulas; the fact is that in them
he encloses the universe.

Take, say logicians, an animal, a plant, a feeling,
a geometrical figure, an object or group of objects of any
kind. Doubtless the object has its properties, but it has
algo its essence. It is manifested to the outer world by
an indefinite number of effects and qualities; but all
these modes of being are the results or products of its
inner nature. There is within it a certain hidden sub-
stratum which alone is primitive and important, with-
out which it can neither exist nor be conceived, and
which constitutes its being and our notion of it
They call the propositions which denote this essence
definitions, and assert that the best part of our know-
ledge consists of such propositions.

1 According to idealist logicians, this being is arrtved at by ex-
amining our notion of it ; and the idea, on analysis, reveals the essence.
According to the classifying school, we arrive at the being by placing
the object in its group, and the notion is defined by. stating the genus


and the difference. Both agree in believing that we are capable of
grasping the essence.


cHaPp.v. §PHILOSOPHY—STUART MILL. 371


On the other hand, Mill says that these kinds of pro-
positions teach us nothing: they show the mere sense
of a word, and are purely verbal.1 What do I learn by
being told that man is a rational animal, or that a
triangle is a space contained by three lines? The first
part of such a phrase expresses by an abbreviative word
what the second part expresses in a developed phrase.
You tell me the same thing twice over; you put the
same fact into two different expressions ; you do not add
one fact to another, but you go from one fact to its
equivalent. Your proposition is not instructive. You
might collect a million such, my mind would remain
entirely void; I should have read a dictionary, but not
have acquired a single piece of knowledge. Instead of
saying that essential propositions are important, and
those relating to qualities merely accessory, you ought
to say that the first are accessory, and the second im-
portant. I learn nothing by being told that a circle is a
figure formed by the revolution of a straight line about
one of its points as centre; I do learn something when
told that the chords which subtend equal arcs in the
circle are themselves equal, or that three given points
determine the circumference. What we call the nature of
a being is the connected system of facts which constitutes
that being. The nature of a carnivorous mammal consists


1 « An essential proposition, then, is one which is purely verbal ;
which asserts of a thing under a particular name, only what is asserted
of it in the fact of calling it by that name; and which therefore either
gives no information, or gives it respecting the name, not the thing.
Non-essential or accidental propositions, on the contrary, may be called
Real Propositions, in opposition to Verbal. They predicate of a thing,
some fact not involved in the signification of the name by which the
preposition speaks of it; some attribute not connoted by that name.”
—Mru’s Logic, i. 127.


372 MODERN’ AUTHORS. BOOK V.


in the fact that the property of giving milk, and all its
implied peculiarities of structure, are combined with the
possession of sharp teeth, instincts of prey, and the corre-
sponding faculties. Such are the elements which compose
its nature. They are facts linked together as mesh to
mesh ina net. We perceive a few of them ; and we know
that beyond our present knowledge and our future ex-
perience, the network extends to infinity its interwoven
and manifold threads. The essence or nature of a being
is the indefinite sum of its properties. Mull says:


“The definition, they say, unfolds the nature of the thing:
but no definition can unfold its whole nature ; and every pro-
position in which any quality whatever is predicated of the
thing, unfolds some part of its nature, The true state of the
case we take to be this. All definitions are of names, and of
names only ; but in some definitions it is clearly apparent, that
nothing is intended except to explain the meaning of the word ;
while in others, besides explaining the meaning of the word, it
is intended to be implied that there exists a thing, correspond-
ing to the word,”


Abandon, then, the vain hope of eliminating from pro-
perties some primitive and mysterious being, the source
and abstract of the whole ; leave entities to Duns Scotus ;
do not fancy that, by probing your ideas in the German
fashion, by classifying objects according to genera and
species like the schoolmen, by reviving the nominalism
of the Middle Ages or the riddles of Hegelian meta-
physics, you will ever supply the want of experience.
There are no definitions of things; if there are defini-
tions, they only define names. No phrase can tell me
what a horse is; but there are phrases which will in-


1 Mill’s Logic, i. 162.


CHAP. V. PHILOSOPHY—STUART MILL. 373


form me what is meant by these five letters. No
phrase can exhaust the inexhaustible sum of qualities
which make up a being; but several phrases may point
out the facts corresponding to a word. In this case
definition is possible, because we can always make an
analysis, which will enable us to pass from the abstract
and summary term to the attributes which it represents,
and from these attributes to the inner or concrete feel-
ings which constitute their foundation. From the term
“dog” it enables us to rise to the attributes “mam-
miferous,” “ carnivorous,” and others which it represents ;
and from these attributes to the sensations of sight, of
touch, of the dissecting knife, on which they are founded.
It reduces the compound to the simple, the derived to
the primitive. It brings back our knowledge to its
origin. It transforms words into facts. If some defini-
tions, such as those of geometry, seem capable of giving
rise to long sequences of new truths,’ it is because, in
addition to the explanation of a word, they contain the
affirmation of a thing. In the definition of a triangle
there are two distinct propositions,—the one stating
that “there may exist a figure bounded by three straight
lines ;” the other, that “such a figure may be termed a
triangle.” The first is a postulate, the second a defini-
tion. The first is hidden, the second evident; the first

1 ‘‘The definition above given of a triangle obviously comprises not
one, but two propositions, perfectly distinguishable. The one is,
‘There may exist a igure bounded by three straight lines ;’ the other,
‘And this figure may be termed a triangle.’ The former of these
propositions is not a definition at all; the latter is a mere nominal de-
finition, or explanation of the use and application of a term. The first
is susceptible of truth or falsehood, and may therefore be made the
foundation of a train of reasoning. The latter can neither be true nor


false ; the only character it is susceptible of is that of conformity to the
ordinary usage of language.” —MILL’s Logic, i. 162.


374 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK VY.


may be true or false, the second can be neither. The
first is the source of all possible theorems as to triangles,
the second only resumes in a word the facts contained
in the other. The first is a truth, the second is a con-
vention; the first is a part of science, the second an
expedient of language. ‘The first expresses a possible
relation between three straight lines, the second gives
a name to this relation. The first alone is fruitful,
because it alone conforms to the nature of every fruit-
ful proposition, and connects two facts. Let us, then,
understand exactly the nature of our knowledge: it
relates either to words or to things, or to both at once.
If it is a matter of words, as in the definition of names,
it attempts to refer words to our primitive feelings,
that is to say, to the facts which form their elements.
If it relates to beings, as in propositions about things,
its whole effort is to link fact to fact, in order to con-
nect the finite number of known properties with the
infinite number to be known. If both are involved, as
in the definitions of names which conceal a proposition
relating to things, it attempts to do both. Everywhere
its operation is the same. The whole matter in any
case is to understand each other,—that is, to revert to
facts, or to learn,—that is, to add facts to facts.


V.


The first rampart is destroyed; our adversaries take
refuge behind the second—the Theory of Proof. This
theory has passed for two thousand years for a sub-
stantiated, definite, unassailable truth, Many have
deemed it useless, but no one has dared to call it false.
On all sides it has been considered as an established


CHAP. V. PHILOSOPHY—STUART MILL. 375


theorem. Let us examine it closely and attentively.
What is a proof? According to logicians, it is a syl-
logism. And what is a syllogism? A group of three
propositions of this kind: “ All men are mortal; Prince
Albert is a man; therefore Prince Albert is mortal.”
Here we have the type of a proof, and every complete
proof is conformable to this type. Now what is there
according to logicians, in this proof? A general pro-
position concerning all men, which gives rise to a par-
ticular proposition concerning a certain man. From
the first we pass to the second, because the second is
contained in the first; from the general to the particu-
lar, because the particular is comprised in the general.
The second is but an instance of the first; its truth is
contained beforehand in that of the first, and this is
why it is a truth. In fact, as soon as the conclusion
is no longer contained in the premisses, the reasoning is
false, and all the complicated rules of the Middle Ages
have been reduced by the Port-Royalists to this .single
rule, “The conclusion must be contained in the pre-
misses.” Thus the entire process of the human mind
' in its reasonings consists in recognising in individuals
what is known of a whole class; in affirming in detail
what has been established for the aggregate; in laying
down a second time, and piecemeal, what has been laid
down once for all ai first.

By no means, replies Mill; for if it were so, our
reasoning would be good for nothing. It would not be
a progress, but a repetition. When I have affirmed
that all men are mortal, I have affirmed implicitly that
Prince Albert is mortal. In speaking of the whole
class, that is to say, of all the individuals of the class, I
have spoken of each individual, and therefore of Prince


376 _ MODERN AUTHORS, BOOK V.


Albert, who is one of them. I say nothing new, then,
when I now mention him expressly. My conclusion
teaches me nothing; it adds nothing to my positive
knowledge; it only puts in another shape a knowledge
which I already possessed. It is not fruitful, but
purely verbal. If, then, reasoning be what logicians
represent it, it is not instructive. I know as much of
the subject at the beginning of my reasoning as at the
end. I have transformed words into other words; I
have been moving without gaining ground. Now this
cannot be the case; for, in fact, reasoning does teach
us new truths. I learn a new truth when I discover
that Prince Albert is mortal, and I discover it by dint
of reasoning; for, since he is still alive, I cannot have
learnt it by direct observation. Thus logicians are
mistaken; and beyond the scholastic theory of syllogism,
which reduces reasoning to substitutions of words, we
must look for a positive theory of proof, which shall
explain how it is that, by the process of reasoning, we
discover facts.

For this purpose, it is sufficient to observe, that
general propositions are not the true proof of particular
propositions. They seem so, but are not. It is not
from the mortality of all men that I conclude Prince
Albert to be mortal; the premisses are elsewhere, and
in the background. The general proposition is but a
memento, a sort of abbreviative register, to which I
have consigned the fruit of my experience. This
memento may be regarded as a notebook to which we
refer to refresh our memory; but it is not from the
book that we draw our knowledge, but from the objects
which we have seen. My memento is valuable only
for the facts which it recalls. My general proposition


CHAP, V. PHILOSOPHY—STUART MILL. 377


has no value except for the particular facts which it
sums up.


“The mortality of John, Thomas, and company is, after all,
the whole evidence we have for the mortality of the Duke of -
Wellington. Not one iota is added to the proof by interpolat-
ing a general proposition. Since the individual cases are all
the evidence we can possess, evidence which no logical form
into which we choose to throw it can make greater than it is;
and since that evidence is either sufficient in itself, or, if
insufficient for the one purpose, cannot be sufficient for the
other ; I am unable to see why we should be forbidden to take
the shortest cut from these sufficient premisses to the conclusion,
and constrained to travel the ‘ high priori road’ by the arbitrary
fiat of logicians,” }


“The true reason which makes us believe that Prince
Albert will die is, that his ancestors, and our ancestors,
and. all the other persons who were their contemporaries,
are dead. These facts are the true premisses of our
reasoning.” It is from them that we have drawn the
general propositiun; they have taught us its scope
and truth; it confines itself to mentioning them in a
shorter form; it receives its whole substance from them ;
they act by it and through it, to lead us to the con-
clusion to which it seems to give rise. It is only their
representative, and on occasion they do without it.
Children, ignorant people, animals know that the sun
will rise, that water will drown them, that fire will
burn them, without employing this general proposition.
They reason, and we reason, too. not from the general
to the particular, but from particular to particular:

“ All inference is from particulars to particulars: General
propositions are merely registers of such inferences already made,

1 Mill’s Logie, i 211.


378 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


and short formule for making more: The major premiss of a
syllogism, consequently, is a formula of this description: and
the conclusion is not an inference drawn from the formula, but
an inference drawn according to the formula: the real logical
antecedent, or premisses, being the particular facts from which
the general proposition was collected by induction. Those facts,
and the individual instances which supplied them, may have
been forgotten ; but a record remains, not indeed descriptive of
the facts themselves, but showing how those cases may be
distinguished respecting which the facts, when known, were
considered to warrant a given inference, According to the
indications of this record we draw our conclusion ; which is to
all intents and purposes, a conclusion from the forgotten facts,
For this it is essential that we should read the record correctly :
and the rules of the syllogism are a sect of precautions to ensure
our doing so,” }

“Tf we had sufficiently capacious memories, and a sufficient
power of maintaining order among a huge mass of details, the
reasoning could go on without any general propositions ; they
are mere formule for inferring particulars from particulars,” ?


Here, as before, logicians are mistaken: they gave the
highest place to verbal operations, and left the really
fruitful operations in the background. They gave the
preference to words over facts. They perpetuated the
nominalism of the Middle Ages. They mistook the
explanation of names for the nature of things, and the
transformation of ideas for the progress of the mind.
It is for us to overturn this order in logic, as we have
overturned it in science, to exalt particular and in-
structive facts, and to give them in our theories that
superiority and importance which our practice has con-
ferred upon them for three centuries past.


1 Mill's Logic, i. 218. 3 Ibid. i. 240.


CHAP. V. PHILOSOPHY—STUART MILL. 379


VI.


There remains a kind of philosophical fortress in
which the Idealists have taken refuge. At the origin
of all proof are Axioms, from which all proofs are
derived. Two straight lines cannot enclose a space;
two things, equal to a third, are equal to one another;
if equals be added to equals, the wholes are equal.
These are instructive propositions, for they express, not
the meanings of words, but the relations of things.
And, moreover, they are fertile propositions ; for arith-
metic, algebra, and geometry are all the result of their
truth. On the other hand, they are not the work of
experience, for we need not actually see with our eyes
two straight lines in order to know that they cannot
enclose a space; it is enough for us to refer to the
inner mental conception which we have of them: the
evidence of our senses is not needed for this purpose ;
our belief arises wholly, with its full force, from the
simple comparison of our ideas. Moreover, experience
follows these two lines only to a limited distance, ten,
a hundred, a thousand feet; and the axiom is true
for a thousand, a hundred thousand, a million miles,
and for an unlimited distance. Thus, beyond the
point at which experience ceases, it is no longer experi-
ence which establishes the axiom. Finally, the axiom
is a necessary truth; that is to say, the contrary is
inconceivable. We cannot imagine a space enclosed
by two straight lines: as soon as we imagine the space
enclosed, the two lines cease to be straight; and as
soon as we imagine the two lines to be straight, the
space ceases to be enclosed In the assertion of axioms,
the constituent ideas are irresistibly drawn together. In


380 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


the negation of axioms, the constituent ideas inevit-
ably repel each other. Now this does not happen
with truths of experience: they state an accidental
relation, not a necessary connection; they lay down
that two facts are connected, and not that they must
be connected; they show us that bodies are heavy,
not that they must be heavy. Thus, axioms are not,
and cannot be the results of experience. They are not
so, because we can form them mentally without the aid
of experience; they cannot be so, because the nature
and scope of their truths lie beyond the limits of
experience. They have another and a deeper source.
They have a wider scope, and they come from else-
where.

Not so, answers Mill. Here again you reason like
a schoolman; you forget the facts concealed behind
your conceptions; for examine your first argument.
Doubtless you can discover, without making use of
your éyes, and by purely mental contemplation, that
two straight. lines cannot enclose a space; but this
contemplation is but a displaced experiment. Im-
aginary lines here replace real lines: you construct
the figure in your mind instead of on paper: your
imagination fulfils the office of a diagram on paper:
you trust to it as you trust to the diagram, and it is as
good as the other; for in regard to figures and lines
the imagination exactly reproduces the sensation.
What you have seen with your eyes open, you will see
again exactly the same a minute afterwards with your
eyes closed; and you can study geometrical properties
transferred to the field of mental vision, as accurately
as if they existed in the field of actual sight. There
are, therefore, experiments of the brain a3 there are


CHAP. V. PHILOSOPHY—STUART MILE. 381


ocular ones ; and it is after just such an experiment that
you deny to two straight lines, indefinitely prolonged,
the property of enclosing a space. You need not for
this purpose pursue them to infinity, you need only
transfer yourself in imagination to the point where they
converge, and there you have the impression of a bent
line, that is of one which ceases to be straight.!
Your presence there in imagination takes the place of
an actual presence; you can affirm by it what you
affirmed by your actual presence, and as positively.
The first is only the second in a more commodious form,
with greater flexibility and scope. It is like using a
telescope instead of the naked eye; the revelations of
the telescope are propositions of experience; so are
those of the imagination. As to the argument which
distinguishes axioms from propositions of experience
under the pretext that the contraries of the latter are
conceivable, while the contraries of axioms are incon-
ceivable, it is nugatory, for this distinction does not
exist. Nothing prevents the contraries of certain
propositions of experience from being conceivable, and


1 <*For though, in order actually to see that two given lines never
meet, it would be necessary to follow them to infinity ; yet without
doing so we may know that if they ever do meet, or if, after diverging
from one another, they begin again to approach, this must take place
not at an infinite, but at a finite distance. Supposing, therefore, such
to be the case, we can transport ourselves thither in imagination, and
can frame a mental image of the appearance which one or both of the
lines must present at that point, which we may rely on as being pre-
cisely similar to the reality. Now, whether we fix our contemplation
upon this imaginary picture, or call to mind the generalisations we
have had occasion to make from former ocular observation, we learn by
the evidence of experience, that a line which, after diverging from
another straight line, begins to approach to it, produces the impression
on our senses which we describe by the expression ‘a bent line,’ not by
the expression ‘a straight line.’”—MILt's Logic, i. 364.


382 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V,


the contraries of others inconceivable. That depends
on the constitution of our minds. It may be that in
some cases the mind may contradict its experience, and
in others not. It is possible that in certain cases our
conceptions may differ from our perceptions, «nd some-
times not. It may be that, in certain cases, external
sight is opposed to internal, and in certain others not.
Now, we have already seen that in the case of figures,
the internal sight exactly reproduces the external.
Therefore, in axioms of figures, the mental sight cannot
be opposed to the actual; imagination cannot contradict
sensation. In other words, the contraries of such
axioms will be inconceivable. Thus axioms, although
their contraries are inconceivable, are experiments of a
certain class, and it is because they are so that their
contraries are inconceivable. At every point there
results this conclusion, which is the abstract of the
system: every instructive or fruitful proposition is
derived from experience, and is simply a connecting
together of facts.


VII.


Hence it follows that Induction is the only key to
nature. This theory is Mill’s masterpiece. Only so
thorough-going a partisan of experience could have
constructed the theory of Induction.

What, then, is Induction ?


“Induction is that operation of the mind by which we infer
that whac we know to be true in a particular case or cases,
will be true in all cases which resemble the former in certain
assignable respects. In other words, Induction is the process
by which we conclude that what is true of certain individuals


CHAP, V. PHILOSOPHY—STUART MILL. 383


of a class is true of the whole class, or that what is true at
certain times will be true in similar circumstances at all
times.” 1


This is the reasoning by which, having observed that
Peter, John, and a greater or less number of men have
died, we conclude that all men will die. In short,
induction connects “mortality” with the quality of
“man;” that is to say, connects two general facts
ordinarily successive, and asserts that the first is the
Cause of the second.

This amounts to saying that the course of nature is
uniform. But induction does not set out from this
axiom, it leads up to it; we do not find it at the begin-
ning, but at the end of our researches.2?, Fundamentally,
experience presupposes nothing beyond itself. No &
priori principle comes to authorise or guide her. We
observe that this stone has fallen, that this hot coal
has burnt us, that this man has died, and we have no
other means of induction except the addition and
comparison of these litle isolated and transient facts.
We learn by simple practical experience that the sun
gives light, that bodies fall, that water quenches thirst,

1 Mill’s Logic, i. 315. :

2 <¢We must first observe, that there is a principle implied in the
very statement of what Induction is ; an assumption with regard to the
course of nature and the order of the universe: namely, that there are
such things in nature as parallel cases ; that what happens once, will,
under a sufficient degree of similarity of circumstances, happen again,
and not only again, but as often as the same circumstances recur.
This, I say, is an assumption, involved in every case of induction.
And, if we consult the actual course of nature, we find that the
assumption is warranted. The universe, so far as known to us, is so
constituted, that whatever is true in any one case, is true in all cases
of a certain description ; the only difficulty is, to find what description.”
—Mu1’s Logie, i. 337.


384 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V,


and we have no other means of extending or criticising
these inductions than by other like inductions. Every
observation and every induction draws its value from
itself, and from similar ones. It is always experience
which judges of experience, and induction of induction.
The body of our truths has not, then, a soul distinct
from it, and vivifying it; it subsists by the harmony
of all its parts taken as a whole, and by the vitality of
each nart taken separately.


“Why is it that, with exactly the same amount of evidence,
both negative and positive, we did not reject the assertion that
there are black swans, while we should refuse credence to any
testimony which asserted that there were men wearing their
heads underneath their shoulders? The first assertion was more
credible than the latter. But why more credible? So long as
neither phenomenon had been actually witnessed, what reason
was there for finding the one harder to be believed than the
other? Apparently because there is less constancy in the colours
of animals, than in the general structure of their internal an-
atomy. But how doweknowthis? Doubtless from experience.
It appears, then, that we need experience to inform us in what
degree, and in what cases, or sorts of cases, experience is to be
relied on, Experience must be consulted in order to learn from
it under what circumstances arguments from it will be valid.
We have no ulterior test to which we subject experience in
general ; but we make experience its own test. Experience
testifies, that among the uniformities which it exhibits, or seems
to exhibit, some are more to be relied on than others; and
uniformity, therefore, may be presumed, from any given number
of instances, with a greater degree of assurance, in proportion as
thé case belongs to a class in which the uniformities have
hitherto been found more uniform.” }


¥ Mill’s Logic, i. $51.


cHap.v. PHILOSOPHY—STUART MILL. 385


Experience is the only test, and it is to be found
everywhere.

Let us then consider how, without any help but
that of experience, we can form general propositions,
especially the most numerous and important of all,
those which connect two successive events, by saying
that the first is the cause of the second.

Cause is a great word; let us examine it. It carries
in itself a whole philosophy. From the idea we have
of Cause depend ali our notions of nature. To give a
new idea of Causation is to transform human thought ;
and we shall see how Mill, like Hume and Comte, but
better than they, has put this idea into a new shape.

What is acause? When Mill says that the contact
of iron with moist air produces rust, or that heat dilates
bodies, he does not speak of the mysterious bond by
which metaphysicians connect cause and effect. He
does not busy himself with the intimate force and
generative virtue which certain philosophers insert
between the thing producing and the product. Mill
says:

‘“‘ The only notion of a cause, which the theory of induction
requires, is such a notion as can be gained from experience.
The Law of Causation, the recognition of which is the main
pillar of inductive science, is but the familiar truth, that in-
variability of succession is found by observation to obtain
between every fact in nature and some other fact which has
preceded it; independently of all consideration respecting the
ulterior mode of production of phenomena, and of every other
question regarding the nature of ‘ Things in themselves,’” }


No other foundation underlies these two expressions.
We mean simply that everywhere, always, the contact
1 Mill’s Logic, i. 359,

VOL. IV. 2¢


386 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


of iron with the moist air will be followed by the
appearance of rust; the application of heat by the
dilatation of bodies: “The real cause is the whole of
these antecedents.”! “There is no scientific foundation
for distinguishing between the cause of a phenomenon
and the conditions of its happening. . .. The dis-
tinction drawn between the patient and the agent is
purely verbal.” “The cause, then, philosophically
speaking, is the sum total of the conditions, positive
and negative, taken together; the whole of the con-
tingenoies of every description, which being realised,
the consequent. invariably follows.”* Much argument
has been expended on the word necessary: “If there
be any meaning which confessedly belongs to the term
necessity, it is wnconditionalness. That which is neces-
sary, that which must be, means that which will be,
whatever supposition we may make in regard to all
other things.”® This is all we mean when we assert
that the notion of cause includes the notion of necessity.
We mean that the antecedent is sufficient and complete,
that there is no need to suppose any additional ante-
cedent, that it contains all requisite conditions, and
that no other condition need exist. To follow uncon-
ditionally, then, is the whole notion of cause and effect.
We have none else. Philosophers are mistaken when
they discover in our will a different type of causation,
and declare it an example of efficient cause in act and
in exercise. We see nothing of the kind, but there, as
elsewhere, we find only continuous successions. "We
do not see a fact engendering another fact, but a fact
accompanying another. “Our will,” says Mill, “produces
our bodily actions as cold produces ice, or as a spark


1 Mill’s Logic, i. 360. 2 Ibid. i. 365. 3 Ibid. i. 372.


CHAP. V. PHILOSOPHY—STUART MILL. 387


produces an explosion of gunpowder.” There is here,
as elsewhere, an antecedent, the resolution or state of
mind, and a consequent, the effort or physical sensation.
Experience connects them, and enables us to foresee
that the effort will follow the resolution, as it enables
us to foresee that the explosion of gunpowder will
follow the contact of the spark. Let us then have
done with all these psychological illusions, and seek
only, under the names of cause and effect, for phenomena
which form pairs without exception or condition.

Now, to establish these connections of phenomena,
Mill discovers four methods, and only four,—namely,
the Methods of Agreement,’ of Difference,’ of Resi-


1 “Tf we take fifty crucibles of molten matter and let them cool,
and fifty solutions and let them evaporate, all will crystallize.
Sulphur, sugar, alum, salt—substances, temperatures, circumstances—
all are as different as they can be. We find one, and only one, common
fact—the change from the liquid to the solid state—and conclude,
therefore, that this change is the invariable antecedent of crystallization,
Here we have an example of the Method of Agreement. Its canon is :—

*¢*], If two or more instances of the phenomenon under investiga-

tion have only one circumstance in common, the circumstance in which
alone all the instances agree, is the cause (or effect) of the given pheno-
menon.’”—MItu’s Logic, i. 422.
2 ¢ A bird in the air breathes ; plunged into carbonic acid gas, it ceases
to breathe. In other words, in the second case, suffocation ensues. In
other respects the two cases are as similar as possible, since we have
the same bird in both, and they take place in immediate succession.
They differ only in the circumstance of immersion in carbonic acid gas
being substituted for immersion in the atmosphere, and we conclude
that this circumstance is invariably followed by suffocation, The
Method of Difference is here employed. Its canon is :—

«¢¢T], If an instance in which the phenomenon under investigation
occurs, and an instance in which it does not occur have every circum-
stance in common. save one, that one occurring only in the former ;
the circumstance in which alone the two instances differ, is the effect,
or the cause, or a necessary part of the cause, of the phenomenon.’ ”—


Mitu’s Logic, i. 423.


388 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


dues,! and of Concomitant Variations. These are the
only ways by which we can penetrate into nature. There
are no other, and these are everywhere. And they all
employ the same artifice, that is to say, elimination ;
for, in fact, induction is nothing else. You have two


1 [**A combination of these methods is sometimes employed, and
is termed the Indirect Method of Difference, or the Joint Method of
Agreement and Difference. It is, in fact, a double employment of the
Method of Agreement, first applying that method to instances in which
the phenomenon in question occurs, and then to instances in which it
does not occur. The following is its canon :—

‘¢*TII, If two or more instances in which the phenomenon occurs
have only one circumstance in common, while two or more instances in
which it does not occur have nothing in common, save the absence of
that circumstance ; the circumstance in which alone the two sets of
instances differ, is the effect, or the cause, or a necessary part of the
cause, of the phenomenon.’”|—MILL’s Logie, i. 429.

“If we take two groups—one of antecedents and one of consequents
—and can succeed in connecting by previous investigations all the
antecedents but one to their respective consequents, and all the conse-
quents but one to their respective antecedents, we conclude that the
remaining antecedent is connected to the remaining consequent. For
example, scientific men had calculated what ought to be the velocity
of sound according to the laws of the propagation of sonorous waves,
but found that a sound actually travelled quicker than their calculations
had indicated. This surplus or residue of speed was a consequent for
which an antecedent had to be found. Laplace discovered the ante-
cedent in the heat developed by the condensation of each sonorous
wave, and this new element, when introduced into the calculation,
rendered it perfectly accurate. This is an example of the Method of
Residues, the canon of which is as follows :—

***TV. Subduct from any phenomenon such part as is known by
previous inductions to be the effect of certain antecedents, and the
residue of the phenomenon is the effect of the remaining antecedents.’ ”
—Mu1’s Logic, i. 431

“‘Let us take two facts—as the presence of the earth and the
oscillation of the pendulum, or again the presence of the moon and the
flow of the tide. To connect these phenomena directly, we should have
to suppress the first of them, and see if this suppression would occasion
the stoppage of the second. Now, in both instances, such suppression


CHAP. V. PHILOSOPHY—STUART MILL. 389


groups, one of antecedents, the other of consequents,
each of them containing more or fewer elements, ten,
for example. To what antecedent is each consequent
joined? Is the first consequent joined to the first
antecedent, or to the third, or sixth? The whole diffi-
culty, and the only possible solution lie there. To
resolve the difficulty, and to effect the solution, we
must eliminate, that is, exclude those antecedents which
are not connected with the consequent we are consider-
ing. But as we cannot exclude them effectually, and
as in nature the pair of phenomena we are seeking is
always surrounded with circumstances, we collect various
cases, which by their diversity enable the mind to lop
off these circumstances, and to discover the pair of
phenomena distinctly. In short, we can only perform
induction by discovering pairs of phenomena: we form
these only by isolation; we isolate only by means of
comparisons.
is impossible. So we employ an indirect means of connecting the
phenomena. We observe that all the variations of the one correspond
to certain variations of the other; that all the oscillations of the
pendulum correspond to certain different positions of the earth ; that
all states of the tide correspond to positions of the moon. From this
we conclude that the second fact is the antecedent of the first. These
are examples of the Method of Concomitant Variations. Its canon is :—

s¢¢V, Whatever phenomenon varies in any manner whenever
another phenomenon varies in some particular manner, is either a cause
or an effect of that phenomenon, or is connected with it through some
fact of causation.’”—Mutu’s Logic, i. 435.

1“The Method of Agreement,” says Mill (Logic, i. 424), ‘‘stands
on the ground that whatever can be eliminated, is not connected with
the phenomenon by any law. The Method of Difference has for its
foundation, that whatever can not be eliminated, 7s connected with the
phenomenon by a law.” The Method of Residues is a case of the
Method of Differences. The Method of Concomitant Variations, is
another case of the same method; with this distinction, that it is
applied, not to the phenomena, but to their variations.


390 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK Vv.


oN,


These are the rules; an example will make them
clearer. We will show you the methods in exercise;
here is an example which combines nearly the whole of
them, namely, Dr. Well’s theory of dew. I will give
it to you in Mill’s own words, which are so clear that
you must have the pleasure of pondering over them:
“We must separate dew from rain and the moisture of
fogs, and limit the application of the term to what_is
really meant, which is, the spontaneous appearance of
moisture on substances exposed in the open air when
no rain or visible wet is falling.” * What is the cause of
the phenomena we have thus defined, and how was
that cause discovered ?


““¢ Now, here we have analogous phenomena in the moisture
which bedews a cold metal or stone when we breathe upon it ;
that which appears on a glass of water fresh from the well in
hot weather ; that which appears on the inside of windows
when sudden rain or hail chills the external air ; that which runs
down our walls when, after a long frost, a warm moist thaw
comes on.’ Comparing these cases, we find that they all contain
the phenomenon which was proposed as the subject of investiga-
tion. Now ‘all these instances agree in one point, the coldness
of the object dewed in comparison with the air-in contact with
it’ But there still remains the most important case of all, that
of nocturnal dew : does the same circumstance exist in this case ?
‘Is it a fact that the object dewed is colder than the air?
Certainly not, one would at first be inclined to say ; for what
is to make it so? But... the experiment is easy ; we have
only to lay a thermometer in contact with the dewed substance.


1 This quotation, and all the others in this paragraph, are taken
from Mill’s Logic, i. 451-9. Mr. Mill quotes from Sir John Herschel’s
Discourse on the Study of Natural Philosophy.


CHAP. V. PHILOSOPHY—STUART MILL. 391


and hang one at a little distance above it, out of reach of its
influence. The experiment has been therefore made; the
question has been asked, and the answer has been invariably in
the affirmative. Whenever an object contracts dew, it is colder
than the air.’

“Here then is a complete application of the Method of
Agreement, establishing the fact of an invariable connection
between the deposition of dew on a surface, and the coldness of
that surface compared with the external air. But which of
these is cause, and which effect? or are they both effects of
something else? On this subject the Method of Agreement can
afford us no light: we must call in a more potent method.
‘We must collect more facts, or, which comes to the same thing,
vary the circumstances ; since every instance in which the cir-
cumstances differ is a fresh fact: and especially, we must note
the contrary or negative cases, i.e. where no dew is produced :’
for a comparison between instances of dew and instances of no
dew, is the condition necessary to bring the Method of Difference
into play.

““* Now, first, no dew is produced on the surface of polished
metals, but it 7s very copiously on glass, both exposed with
their faces upwards, and in some cases the under side of a
horizontal plate of glass is also dewed.’ Here is an instance in
which the effect is produced, and another instance in which it
is not produced ; but we cannot yet pronounce, as the canon of
the Method of Difference requires, that the latter instance agrees
with the former in all its circumstances except one: for the
differences between glass and polished metals are manifold, and
the only thing we can as yet be sure of is, that the cause of
dew will be found among the circumstances by which the former
substance is distinguished from the latter.”


To detect this particular circumstance of difference, we
have but one practicable method, that of Concomitant
Variations ;


392 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


“¢Tn the cases of polished metal and polished glass, the con-
trast shows evidently that the substance has much to do with
the phenomenon ; therefore let the substance alone be diversified
as much as possible, by exposing polished surfaces of various
kinds. This done, a scale of intensity becomes obviovs. Those
polished substances are found to be most strongly dewed which
conduct heat -worst, while those which conduct well resist dew
most effectually.’...

“The conclusion obtained is, that ceteris paribus the deposi-
tion of dew is in some proportion to the power which the body
possesses of resisting the passage of heat ; and that this, there-
fore (or something connected with this), must be at least one of
the causes which assist in producing the deposition of dew on
the surface.

“¢But if we expose rough surfaces instead of polished, we
sometimes find this law interfered with. Thus, roughened
iron, especially if painted over or blackened, becomes dewed
sooner than varnished paper: the kind of surface, therefore, has
a great influence. Expose, then, the same material in very
diversified states as to surface’ (that is, employ the Method of
Difference to ascertain concomitance of variations), ‘and another
scale of intensity becomes at once apparent; those surfaces
which part with their heat most readily by radiation, are found
to contract dew most copiously.’ .. .

“The conclusion obtained by this new application of the
method is, that ceteris paribus the deposition of dew is also in
some proportion to the power of radiating heat; and that the
quality of doing this abundantly (or some cause on which that
quality depends) is another of the causes which promote the
deposition of dew on the substance.

“¢ Again, the influence ascertained to exist of substance and
surface leads us to consider that of texture; and here, again, we
are presented on trial with remarkable differences, and with a
third scale of intensity, pointing out substances of a close firm
texture, such as stones, metals, etc., as unfavourable, but those


cHaPp. Vv. | PHILOSOPHY—STUART MILL. 393


of a loose one, as cloth, velvet, wool, eiderdown, cotton, etc., as
eminently favourable to the contraction of dew.’ The Method
of Concomitant Variations is here, for the third time, had re-
course to; and, as before, from necessity, since the texture of
no substance is absolutely firm or absolutely loose. Looseness
of texture, therefore, or something.which is the cause of that
quality, is another circumstance which promotes the deposition
of dew ; but this third cause resolves itself into the first, viz.,
the quality of resisting the passage of heat: for substances of
loose texture ‘are precisely those which are best adapted for
clothing, or for impeding the free passage of heat from the skin
into the air, so as to allow their outer surfaces to be very cold,
while they remain warm within.’.. .

“Tt thus appears that the instances in which much dew is
deposited, which are very various, agree in this, and, so far as
we are able to observe, in this only, that they either radiate
heat rapidly or conduct it slowly : qualities between which there
is no other circumstance of agreement than that by virtue of
either, the body tends to lose heat from the surface more rapidly
than it can be restored from within. The instances, on the
contrary, in which no dew or but a small quantity of it, is formed,
and which are also extremely various, agree (so far as we can
observe) in nothing except in not having this same property. ...

“This doubt we are now able to resolve. We have found
that, in every such instance, the substance must be one which,
by its own properties or laws, would, if exposed in the night,
become colder than the surrounding air. The coldness, there-
fore, being accounted for independently of the dew, while it is
proved that there is a connection between the two, it must be
the dew which depends on the coldness ; or, in other words, the
coldness is the cause of the dew.

“This law of causation, already so amply established, admits,
however, of efficient additional corroboration in no less than
three ways. First, by deduction from the known laws of
aqueous vapour when diffused through air or any other gas,


394 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


and though we have not yet come to the Deductive Method, we
will not omit what is necessary to render this speculation com-
plete. It is known by direct experiment that only a limited
quantity of water can remain suspended in the state of vapour
at each degree of temperature, and that this maximum grows
less and less as the temperature diminishes, From this it
follows deductively, that if there is already as much vapour
suspended as the air will contain at its existing temperature,
any lowering of that temperature will cause a portion of the
vapour to be condensed, and become water. But, again, we
know deductively, from the laws of heat, that the contact of
the air with a body colder than itself, will necessarily lower the
temperature of the stratum of air immediately applied to its sur-
face ; and will therefore cause it to part with a portion of its
water, which accordingly will, by the ordinary laws of gravita-
tion or cohesion, attach itself to the surface of the body, thereby
constituting dew. This deductive proof, it will have been seen,
has the advantage of proving at once causation as well as co-ex-
istence; and it has the additional advantage that it also
accounts for the exceptions to the occurrence of the phenomenon,
the cases in which, although the body is colder than tke air,
yet no dew is deposited, by showing that this will necessarily
be the case when the air is so under-supplied with aqueous
vapour, comparatively to its temperature, that even when some-
what cooled by the contact of the colder body, it can still
continue to hold in suspension all the vapour which was pre-
viously suspended in it: thus in a very dry summer there are
no dews, in a very dry winter no hoar frost. . . .

“ The second corroboration of the theory is by direct experi-
ment, according to the canon of the Method of Difference. We
can, by cooling the surface of any body, find in all cases some
temperature (more or less inferior to that of the surrounding air,
according to its hygrometric condition) at which dew will begin
to be deposited. Here, too, therefore, the causation is directly
proved. We can, it is true, accomplish this only on a small


CHAP, V. PHILOSOPHY—STUART MILL, 395


scale ; but we have ample reason to conclude that the same
operation, if conducted in Nature’s great laboratory, would
equally produce the effect.

* And, finally, even on that great scale we are able to verify
the result. The case is one of those rare cases, as we have
shown them to be, in which nature works the experiment for us
in the same manner in which we ourselves perform it; intro-
ducing into the previous state of things a single and_ perfectly
definite new circumstance, and manifesting the effect so rapidly
that there is not time for any other material change in the pre-
existing circumstances. ‘It is observed that dew is never
copiously deposited in situations much screened from the open
sky, and not at all in a cloudy night ; but if the clouds withdraw
even for a few minutes, and leave a clear opening, a deposition of
dew presently begins, and goes on increasing. . . . Dew formed
in clear intervals will often even evaporate again when the sky
becomes thickly overcast.’ The proof, therefore, is complete,
that the presence or absence of an uninterrupted communication
with the sky causes the deposition or non-deposition of dew.
Now, since a clear sky is nothing but the absence of clouds, and
it is a known property of clouds, as of all other bodies between
which and any given object nothing intervenes but an elastic
fluid, that they tend to raise or keep up the superficial tempera-
ture of the object by radiating heat to it, we see at once that
the disappearance of clouds will cause the surface to cool; so
that Nature in this case produces a change in the antecedent by
definite and known means, and the consequent follows accord-
ingly: a natural experiment which satisfies the requisitions of
the Method of Difference.”


IX.


These four are not all the scientific methods, but
they lead up to the rest. They are all linked together,
and no one has shown their connection better than Mill.


396 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


In many cases these processes of isolation are powerless ;
namely, in those in which the effect, being produced by
a concourse of causes, cannot be reduced into its
elements. Methods of isolation are then impracticable.
We cannot eliminate, and consequently we cannot
perform induction. This serious difficulty presents
itself in almost all cases of motion, for almost every
movement is the effect of a concurrence of forces; and
the respective effects of the various forces are found so
mixed up in it that we cannot separate them without de-
stroying it, so that it seems impossible to tell what part
each force has in the production of the movement.
Take a body acted upon by two forces whose directions
form an angle: it moves along the diagonal ; each part,
each moment, each position, each element of its move-
ment, is the combined effect of the two impelling forces.
The two effects are so commingled, that we cannot
isolate either of them, and refer it to its source. In
order to perceive each effect separately, we should have
to consider the movements apart, that is, to suppress
the actual movement, and to replace it by others.
Neither the Method of Agreement, nor of Difference,
nor of Residues, nor of Concomitant Variations, which
are all decomposing and eliminative, can avail against
a phenomenon which by its nature excludes all elimina-
tion and decomposition. We must therefore evade the
obstacle; and it is here that the last key of nature
appears, the Method of Deduction. We quit the study
of the actual phenomenon to observe other and simpler
cases; we establish their laws, and we connect each
with its cause by the ordinary methods of induction.
Then, assuming the concurrence of two or of several of
these causes, we conclude from their known laws what


CHAP. V. PHILOSOPHY—STUART MILL. 397


will be their total effect. We next satisfy ourselves
as to whether the actual movement exactly coincides
with the movement foretold; and if this is so, we
attribute it to the causes from which we have deduced
it. Thus, in order to discover the causes of the plane-
tary motions, we seek by simple induction the laws of
two causes: first, the force of primitive impulsion in
the direction of the tangent; next, an accelerative
attracting force. From these inductive laws we deduce
by calculation the motion of a body submitted to their
combined influence; and satisfying ourselves that the
planetary motions observed coincide exactly with the
predicted movements, we conclude that the two forces
in question are actually the causes of the planetary
motions. “To the Deductive Method,” says Mill, “ the
human mind is indebted for its most conspicuous tri-
umphs in the investigation of nature. To it we owe
all the theories by which vast and complicated pheno-
mena are embraced under a few simple laws.” Our
deviations have led us further than the direct path ;
we have derived efficiency from imperfection.


x


If we now compare the two methods, their aptness,
function, and provinces, we shall find, as in an abstract,
the history, divisions, hopes, and limits of human science.
The first appears at the beginning, the second at the
end. The first necessarily gained ascendency in
Bacon’s time,! and now begins to lose it; the second
necessarily lost ascendency in Bacon’s time, and now
begins to regain it. So that science, after having


1 Mill’s Logic, i. 526,


398 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


passed from the deductive to the experimental state, is
now passing from the experimental to the deductive.
Induction has for its province phenomena which are
capable of being decomposed, and on which we can
experiment. Deduction has for its province indecom-
posable phenomena, or those on which we cannot
experiment. The first is efficacious in physics, chemistry,
zoology, and botany, in the earlier stages of every
science, and also whenever phenomena are but slightly
complicated, within our reach, capable of being modified
by means at our disposal. The second is efficacious in
astronomy, in the higher branches of physics, in physi-
ology, history, in the higher grades of every science,
whenever phenomena are very complicated, as in animal
and social life, or lie beyond our reach, as the motions
of the heavenly bodies and the changes of the atmosphere.
When the proper method is not employed, science is at
a stand-still: when it is employed, science progresses.
Here lies the whole secret of its past and its present.
If the physical sciences remained stationary till the
time of Bacon, it was because men used deduction when
they should have used induction. If physiology and
the moral sciences are now making slow progress, it is
because we employ induction when deduction should
be used. It is by deduction, and according to physical
and chemical laws, that we shall be enabled to explain
physiological phenomena. It is by deduction, and
according to mental laws, that we shall be enabled to
explain historical phenomena.’ And that which has

1 See chapter 9, book vi. v. 2, 478, on The Physical or Concrete
Deductive Method as applied to Sociology ; and chapter 18, book iii., for
explanations, after Liebig, of Decomposition, Respiration, the Action of


Poisons, etc. A whole book is devoted 'to the logic of the moral sciences ;
I know no better treatise on the subject.


CHAP. V. PHILOSOPHY—STUART MILL. 399


become the instrument of these two sciences, it is the
object of all the others to employ. All tend to become
deductive, ard aim at being summed up in certain
general propositions, from which the rest may be
deduced. The less numerous these propositions are,
the more science advances. The fewer suppositions
and postulates a science requires, the more perfect it
is become. Such a reduction is its final condition.
Astronomy, acoustics, optics, present its models; we
shall know nature when we shall have deduced her
millions of facts from two or three laws.

I venture to say that the theory which you have just
heard is perfect. I have omitted several of its charac-
teristics, but you have seen enough to recognise that
induction has nowhere been explained in so complete and
precise a manner, with such an abundance of fine and just
distinctions, with such extensive and exact applications,
with such a knowledge of the practical methods and
ascertained results of science, with so complete an
exclusion of metaphysical principles and arbitrary
suppositions, and in a spirit more in conformity with
the rigorous procedure of modern experimental science.
You asked me just now what Englishmen have effected
in philosophy; I answer, the theory of Induction.
Mill is the last of that great line of philosophers, which
begins at Bacon, and which, through Hobbes, Newton,
Locke, Hume, Herschell, is continued down to our own
times. They have carried our national spirit into
philosophy; they have been positive and practical ;
they have not soared above facts; they have not
attempted out-of-the-way paths; they have cleared the
human mind of its illusions, presumption3, and fancies.
They have employed it in the only direction in which


400 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


it can act; they only wished to mark out and light up
the already weli-trodden ways of the progressive sciences.
They have not been willing to spend their labour vainly
in other than explored and verified paths; they have
aided in the great modern work, the discovery of
applicable laws; they have contributed, as men of
special attainments do, to the increase of man’s power.
Can you find many philosophers who have done as
much ?


XI.


You will tell me that our philosopher has clipped
his wings in order to strengthen his legs. Certainly;
and he has acted wisely. Experience limits the career
which it opens to us; it has given us our goal, but
also our boundaries. We have only to observe the
elements of which our experience is composed, and the
facts from which it sets out, to understand that its
range is limited. Its nature and its method confine
its progress to a few steps. And, in the first place,’
the ultimate laws of nature cannot be less numerous
than the several distinct species of our sensations. We
can easily reduce a movement to another movement,
but not the sensation of heat to that of smell, or of
colour, or of sound, nor either of these to a movement.
We can easily connect together phenomena of different
degrees, but not phenomena differing in species. We
find distinct sensations at the bottom of all our know-
ledge, as simple indecomposable elements, separated
absolutely one from another, absolutely incapable of
being reduced one to another. Let experience do what
she will, she cannot suppress these diversities which


1 Mill’s Logic, ii, 4.


CHAP. V. PHILOSOPHY—STUART MILL, 401


constitute her foundation. On the other hand, experi-
ence, do what she will, cannot escape from the condi-
tions under which she acts. Whatever be her province,
it is bounded by time and space; the fact which she
observes, is limited and influenced by an infinite number
of other facts to which she cannot attain. She is obliged
to suppose or recognise some primordial condition from
whence she starts, and which she does not explain?
Every problem has its accidental or arbitrary data: we
deduce the rest from these, but there is nothing from
which these can be deduced. The sun, the earth, the
planets, the initial impulse of the heavenly bodies, the
primitive chemical properties of substances, are such
data.? If we possessed them all we could explain


1 “* There exists in nature a number of Permanent Causes, which
have subsisted ever since the human race has been in existence, and for
an indefinite and probably an enormous length of time previous. The
sun, the earth, and planets, with their various constituents, air, water,
and the other distinguishable substances, whether simple or compound,
of which nature is made up, are such Permanent Causes. They have
existed, and the effects or consequences which they were fitted to produce
have taken place (as often as the other conditions of the production
met), from the very beginning of our experience. But we can give no
account of the origin of the Permanent Causes themselves.”—MILL’s
Logic, i. 378.

2 <The resolution of the laws of the heavenly motions established
the previously unknown ultimate property of a mutual attraction
between all bodies: the resolution, so far as it has yet proceeded, of
the laws of crystallisation, or chemical composition, electricity, mag-
netism, etc., points to various polarities, ultimately inherent in the par-
ticles of which bodies are composed ; the comparative atomic weights of
different kinds of bodies were ascertained by resolving, into more
general laws, the uniformities observed in the proportions in which
substances combine with one another; and so forth. Thus, although
every resolution of a complex uniformity into simpler and more
elementary laws has an apparent tendency to diminish the number of
the ultimate properties, and really does remove many properties from
the list ; yet (since the result of this simplifying process is to trace


VOL. IV. 2D


402 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


everything by them, but we could not explain these
themselves. Mill says:


“Why these particular natural agents existed originally and
no others, or why they are commingled in such and such pro-
portions, and distributed in such and such a manner through-
out space, is a question we cannot answer. More than this:
we can discover nothing regular in the distribution itself; we
can reduce it to no uniformity, to no law. There are no means
By which, from the distribution of these causes or agents in one
part of space, we could conjecture whether a similar distribution
prevails-in another.” !


And astronomy, which, just now, afforded us the model
of a perfect science, now affords us an example of a
limited science. We can predict the numberless posi-
tions of all the planetary bodies; but we are obliged to
assume, beside the primitive impulse and its amount.
not only the force of attraction and its law, but also the
masses and distances of all the bodies in question. We
understand millions of facts, but it is by means of a
hundred facts. which we do not comprehend; we arrive
at necessary results, but it is only by means of acci-
dental antecedents; so that if the theory of our uni-
verse were completed there would still remain two great
voids: one at the commencement of the physical world,
the other at the beginning of the moral world; the one
comprising the elements of being, the other embracing
the elements of experience: one containing primary


up an ever greater variety of different effects to the same agents), the
further we advance in this direction, the greater number of distinct
properties we are forced to recognise in one and the same object ;. the
cv-existences of which properties must accordingly be ranked among
the ultimate generalities of nature.” —MIiLL’s Logic, ii. 108.

1 Tbid, i. 378.


CHAP, V, PHILOSOPHY—STUART MILL. 403


sensations, the other primitive agents. “Our know-
ledge,” says Royer-Collard, “consists in tracing ignorance
as far back as possible.”

Can we at least affirm that these irreducible data
are so only in appearance, and in relation to our mind?
Can we say that they have causes, like the derived facts
of which they are the causes? Can we conclude that
every event, always and everywhere, happens according
to laws, and that this little world of ours, so well
regulated, is a sort of epitome of the universe? Can
we by aid of the axioms, quit our narrow confines, and
affirm anything of the universe? In no wise; and it
is here that Mill pushes his principles to their furthest
consequences: for the law which attributes a cause to
every event, has to him no other foundation, worth,
or scope, than what it derives from experience. It has
no inherent necessity; it draws its whole authority
from the great number of cases in which we have
recognised it to be true; it only sums up a mass of
observations ; it unites two data, which, considered in
themselves, have no intimate connection; it joins ante-
cedents generally to consequents generally, just as the
law of gravitation joins a particular antecedent to a
particular consequent; it determines a couple, as do all
experimental laws, and shares in their uncertainty
and in their restrictions. Listen to this bold assertion :


“T am convinced that any one accustomed to abstraction and
analysis, who will fairly exert his faculties for the purpose, will,
when his imagination has once learnt to entertain the notion,
find no difficulty in conceiving that in some one, for instance, of
the many firmaments into which sidereal astronomy now divides
the universe, events may succeed one another at random, with-
out any fixed law; nor can anything in our experience, or in


404 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


our mental nature, constitute a sufficient, or indeed any, reason
for believing that this is nowhere the case. The grounds, there-
fore, which warrant us in rejecting such a supposition with
respect to any of the phenomena of which we have experience,
must be sought elsewhere than in any supposed necessity of our
intellectual faculties,” }


Practically, we may trust in so well-established a law;
but


“In distant parts of the stellar regions, where the phenomena
may be entirely unlike those with which we are acquainted, it
would be folly to affirm confidently that this general law
prevails, any more than those special ones which we have found
to hold universally on our own planet. The uniformity in the
succession of events, otherwise called the law of causation, must
be received not as a law of the universe, but of that portion of
it only which is within the range of our means of sure observa-
tion, with a reasonable degree of extension to adjacent cases.
To extend it further is to make a supposition without evidence,
and to which, in the absence of any ground from experience for
estimating its degree of probability, it would be idle to attempt
to assign any.” ?


We are, then, irrevocably driven back from the infinite ;
our faculties and our assertions cannot attain to it; we
remain confined in a small circle; our mind reaches
not beyond its experience; we can establish no uni-
versal and necessary connection between facts; such a
connection probably does not even exist. Mill stops
here ; but certainly, by carrying out his idea to its full
extent, we should arrive at the conception of the world
as a mere collection of facts; no internal necessity
would induce their connection or their existence; they
would be simple arbitrary, accidentally-existing facts.
1 Mill’s Lovie, ii, 95. * did, ii, 104.


CHAP, V. PHILOSOPHY—STUART MILL, 405


Sometimes, as in our system, they would be found as-
sembled in such a manner as to give rise to regular
recurrences; sometimes they would be so assembled
that nothing of the sort would occur. Chance, as
Democritus taught, would be at the foundation of all
things. Laws would be the result of chance, and
sometimes we should find them, sometimes not. It
would be with existences as with numbers—decimal
fractions, for instance, which according to the chance of
their two primitive factors, sometimes recur regularly,
and sometimes not. This is certainly an original and
lofty conception. It is the final consequence of the
primitive and dominant idea, which we have discovered
at the beginning of the system, which has transformed
the theories of Definition, of Propositions, and of the
Syllogism ; which has reduced axioms to experimental
truths; which has developed and perfected the theory
of induction; which has established the goal, the limits,
the prevince, and the methods of science; which every-
where, in nature and in science, has suppressed interior
connections; which has replaced the necessary by the
accidental; cause by antecedent; and which consists
in affirming that every assertion which is not merely
verbal forms in effect a couple, that is to say, joins
together two facts which were separate by their nature.


§ 2.—ABSTRACTION.


I.

An abyss of chance and an abyss of ignorance. The
prospect is gloomy: no matter, if it be true. At all
events, this theory of science is a theory of English
science. Rarely, I grant you, has a thinker better


406 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK v.


summed up in his teaching the practice of his country ;
seldom has a man better represented by his negations
and his discoveries the limits and scope of his race.
The operations, of which he constructs science, are those
in which the English excel all others, and those which
he excludes from science are precisely those in which
the English are deficient more than any other nation.
He has described the English mind whilst he thought
to describe the human mind. That is his glory, but it
is also his weakness. There is in your idea of know-
ledge a flaw of which the incessant repetition ends by
creating the gulf of chance, from which, according to
him, all things arise, and the gulf of ignorance, at
whose brink, according to him, our knowledge ends.
And see what comes of it. By cutting away from
science the knowledge of first causes, that is, of divine
things, you reduce men to become sceptical, positive,
utilitarian, if they are cool-headed ; or mystical, enthu-
siastic, methodistical, if they have lively imaginations.
In this huge unknown void which you place beyond
our little world, passionate men and uneasy consciences
find room for all their dreams; and men of cold judg-
ment, despairing of arriving at any certain knowledge,
have nothing left but to sink down to the search for
practical means which may serve for the amelioration
of our condition. It seems to me that these two disposi-
tions are most frequently met with in an English mind.
The religious and the positive spirit dwell there side by
side, but separate. This produces an odd medley, and
I confess that I prefer the way in which the Germans
have reconciled science with faith—But their philo-
sophy is but badly written poetry—Perhaps so.—But
what they call reason, or intuition of principles, is only


CHAP. V. PHILOSOPHY—STUART MILL. 407


the faculty of building up hypotheses——Perhaps so.—
But the systems which they have constructed have not
held their ground before experience.—I do not defend
what they have done.—But their absolute, their subject,
their object, and the rest, are but big words—TI do not
defend their style— What, then, do you defend ?—Their
idea of Causation—You believe with them that causes
are discovered by a revelation of the reason !}—By no
means.—You believe with us that our knowledge of
causes is based on simple experience ?—-Still less.—
You think, then, that there is a faculty, other than ex-
perience and reason, capable of discovering causes ?—
Yes.— You think there is an intermediate course between
intuition and observation, capable of arriving at prin-
ciples, as it is affirmed that the first is, capable of arriv-
ing at truths, as we find that the second is ?—-Yes.—
What is it? Abstraction. Let us return to your
original idea; I will endeavour to show in what I think
it incomplete, and how you seem to me to mutilate the
human mind. But my argument will be the formal
one of an advocate, and requires to be stated at length.


TT


Your starting-point is good: man, in fact, does not
know anything of substances; he knows neither minds
nor bodies; he perceives only transient, isolated, in-
ternal conditions; he makes use of these to affirm and
name exterior states, positions, movements, changes,
and avails himself of them for nothing else. He can
only attain to facts, whether within or without, some-
times transient, when his impression is not repeated ;
sometimes permanent, when his impression many times


408 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


repeated, makes him suppose that it will be repeated
as often as he wishes to experience it. He only grasps
colours, sounds, resistances, movements, sometimes mo-
mentary and variable, sometimes like one another, and
renewed. To group these facts more advantageously,
he supposes, by an artifice of language, qualities and
properties. We go even further than you: we think
that there are neither minds nor bodies, but simply
groups of present or possible movements or thoughts.
We believe that there are no substances, but only
systems of facts. We regard the idea of substance as
a psychological illusion. We consider substance, force,
and all the modern metaphysical existences, as the
remains of scholastic entities. We think that there
exists nothing but facts and laws, that is, events and
the relations between them; and we recognise, with
you, that all knowledge consists first of all in connect-
ing or adding fact ta fact. But when this is done, a
new operation begins, the most fertile of all, which
consists in reducing these complex into simple facts.
A splendid faculty appears, the source of language, the
interpreter of nature, the parent of religions and philo-
sophies, the only genuine distinction, which, according
to its degree, separates man from the brute, and great
from little men. JI mean Abstraction, which is the
power of isolating the elements of facts, and of con-
sidering them one by one. My eyes follow the outline
of a square, and abstraction isolates its two constituent
properties, the equality of its sides and angles. My
fingers touch the surface of a cylinder, and abstraction
isolates its two generative elements, the idea of a
rectangle, and of the revolution of this rectangle about
one of its sides as an axis. A hundred thousand


CHAP. VY. PHILOSOPHY—STUART MILL. 409


experiments develop for me, by an infinite number of
details, the series of physiological operations which
constitute life; and abstraction isolates the law of this
series, which is a round of constant loss and continual
reparation. Twelve hundred pages teach me Muill’s
opinion on the various facts of science, and abstraction
isolates his fundamental idea, namely, that the only
fertile propositions are those which connect a fact with
another not contained in thé first. Everywhere the
case is the same. A fact, or a series of facts, can
always be resolved into its components. It is this
resolution which forms our problem, when we ask what
is the nature of an object. It is these components we
look for when we wish to penetrate into the inner
nature of a being. These we designate under the
names of forces, causes, laws, essences, primitive pro-
perties. They are not new facts added to the first,
but an essence or extract from them; they are contained
in the first, they have no existence apart from the
facts themselves. When we discover them, we do not
pass from one fact to another, but from one to another
aspect of the same fact; from the whole to a part,
from the compound to the components. We only see
the same thing under two forms ; first, as a whole, then
as divided: we only translate the same idea from one
language into another, from the language of the senses
into abstract language, just as we express a curve by
an equation, or a cube asa function of its side. It
signifies little whether this translation be difficult or
not; or that we generally need the accumulation or
comparison of a vast number of facts to arrive at it,
and whether our mind may not often succumb before
accomplishing it. However this may be, in this opera-


410 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


tion, which is evidently fertile, instead of proceeding
from one fact to another, we go from the same to the
same; instead of adding experiment to experiment, we
set aside some portion of the first; instead of advancing,
we pause to examine the ground we stand on. There
are, thus, fruitful judgments, which, however, are
not the results of experience: there are essential pro-
positions, which, however, are not merely verbal: there
is, thus, an operation, differing from experience, which
acts by cutting down instead of by addition; which,
instead. of acquiring, devotes itself to acquired data;
and which, going farther than observation, opening a
new field to the sciences, defines their nature, determines
their progress, completes their resources, and marks out
their end,

This is the great omission of your system. Abstrac-
tion is left in the background, barely mentioned, con-
cealed by the other operations of the mind, treated as
an appendage of Experience; we have but to re-estab-
lish it in the general theory, in order to reform the
particular theories in which it is absent.


III.


To begin with Definitions. Mill teaches that there
is no definition of things, and that when you define a
sphere as the solid generated by the revolution of a
semicircle about its diameter, you only define a name.
Doubtless you tell me by this the meaning of a name,
but you also teach me a good deal more. You state
that all the properties of every sphere are derived from
this generating formula; you reduce an infinitely com-
plex system of facts to two elements; you transform


CHAP, V PHILOSOPHY—STUART MILL. 411


sensible into abstract data; you express the essence of
the sphere, that is to say, the inner and primordial
cause of all its properties. Such is the nature of every
true definition; it is not content with explaining a
name, it is not a mere description; it does not simply
indicate a distinctive property ; it does not limit itself
to that ticketing of an object which will cause it to be
distinguished from all others. There are, besides its
definition, several other ways of causing the object to
be recognised; there are other properties belonging to
it exclusively: we might describe a sphere by saying
that, of all bodies having an equal surface, it occupies
the most space; or in many other ways. But such
descriptions are not definitions; they lay down a
characteristic and derived property, not a generating
and primitive one; they do not reduce the thing to its
factors, and reconstruct it before our eyes; they do not
show its inner nature and its irreducible elements. A
definition is a proposition which marks in an object
that quality from which its others are derived, but
which is not derived from others. Such a proposition
is not verbal, for it teaches the quality of a thing. It
is not the affirmation of an ordinary quality, for it
reveals to us the quality which is the source of the
rest. It is an assertion of an extraordinary kind, the
most fertile and valuable of all, which sums up a whole
science, and in which it is the aim of every science to
be summed up. There is a definition in every science,
and one for each object. We do not in every case
possess it, but we search for it everywhere We have
arrived at defining the planetary motion by the tan-
gential force and attraction which compose it; we can
already partially define a chemical body by the notion


412 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


of equivalent, and a living body by the notion of type.
We are striving to transform every group of phenomena
into certain laws, forces, or abstract notions. We en-
deavour to attain in every object the generating
elements, as we do attain them in the sphere, the
cylinder, the circle, the cone, and in all mathematical
loci. We reduce natural bodies to two or three kinds
of movement—attraction, vibration, polarisation—as we
reduce geometrical bodies to two or three kinds of
elements—the point, the movement, the line; and we
consider our science partial or complete, provisional or
definite, according as this reduction is approximate or
absolute, imperfect or complete.


IV.


The same alteration is required in the Theory of
Proof. According to Mill, we do not prove that Prince
Albert will die by premising that all men are mortal,
for that would be asserting the same thing twice.over ;
but from the facts that John, Peter, and others, in short,
all men of whom we have ever heard, have died.—I
reply that the real source of our inference lies neither
in the mortality of John, Peter, and company, nor in
the mortality of all men, but elsewhere. We prove a
fact, says Aristotle, by showing its cause. We shall
therefore prove the mortality of Prince Albert by
showing the cause which produces his death. And why
will he die? Because the human body, being an un-
stable chemical compound, must in time be resolved;
in other words, because mortality is added to the quality


1 See the Posterior Analytics, which are much superior to the Prior
— 5 alriwy Kat mporépwr,


CHAP. V. PHILOSOPHY—STUART MILL. 413


of man. Here is the cause and the proof. It is this
abstract law which, present in nature, will cause the
death of the prince, and which, being present to my
mind, shows me that he will die. It is this abstract
proposition which is demonstrative; it is neither the
particular nor the general propositions. In fact, the
abstract proposition proves the others. If John, Peter,
and others are dead, it is because mortality is added to
the quality of man. If all men are dead, or will die,
it is still because mortality is added to the quality of
man. Here, again, the part played by Abstraction has
been overlooked. Mill has confounded it with Experi-
ence: he has not distinguished the proof from the
materials of the proof, the abstract law from the finite
or indefinite number of its applications. The applica-
tions contain the law and the proof, but are themselves
neither law nor proof. The examples of Peter, John,
and others, contain the cause, but they are not the
cause. It is not sufficient to add up the cases, we
must extract from them the law. It is not enough to
experimentalise, we must abstract. This is the great
scientific operation. Syllogism does not proceed from
the particular to the particular, as Mill says, nor from
the general to the particular, as the ordinary logicians
teach, but from the abstract to the concrete; that is to
say, from cause to effect. It is on this ground that it
forms part of science, the links of which it makes and
marks out; it connects principles with effects; it
brings together definitions and phenomena. It diffuses
through the whole range of science that Abstraction
which definition has carried to its summit.


414 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK Y.


V..


Abstraction explains also axioms. According to
Mill, if we know that when equal magnitudes are
added to equal magnitudes the wholes are equal, or that
two straight lines cannot enclose a space, it is by ex-
ternal ocular experiment, or by an internal experiment
by the aid of imagination. Doubtless we may thus arrive
at the conclusion that two straight lines cannot enclose a
space, but we might recognise it also in another manner.
We might represent a straight line in imagination, and
we may also form a conception of it by reason. We
may either study its form or its definition. We can
observe it in itself, or in its generating elements. I can
represent to myself a line ready drawn, but I can also
resolve it into its elements. I can go back to its
formation, and discover the abstract elements which
produce it, as I have watched the formation of the
cylinder and discover the revolution of the rectangle
which generated it. It will not do to say that a
straight line is the shortest from one point to another,
for that is a derived property ; but I may say that it is
the line described by a point, tending to approach
towards another point, and towards that point only:
which amounts to saying that two points suffice to
determine a straight line; in other words, that two
straight lines, having two points in common, coincide
in their entire length; from which we see that if two
straight lines approach to enclose a space, they would
form but one straight line, and enclose nothing at all.
Here is a second method of arriving at a knowledge of
the axiom, and it is clear that it differs much from the
first. In the first we verify; in the second we deduce


CHAP. V. PHILOSOPHY—STUART MILL. 415


it. In the first we find by experience. that it is true;
in the second we prove it to be true. In the first we
admit the truth; in the second we explain it. In the
first we merely remark that the contrary of the axiom
is inconceivable; in the second we discover in addition
that the contrary of the axiom is contradictory. Having
given the definition of the straight line, we find that
the axiom that two straight lines cannot enclose a space
is comprised in it, and may be derived from it, as a
consequent from a principle. In fact, it is nothing
more than an identical proposition, which means that
the subject contains its attribute; it does not connect
two separate terms, irreducible one to the other; it
unites two terms, of which the second is a part of the
first. It is a simple analysis, and so are all axioms.
We have only to decompose them, in order to see that
they do not proceed from one object to a different one,
but are concerned with one object only. We have but
to resolve the notions of equality, cause, substance, time,
and space into their abstracts, in order to demonstrate
the axioms of equality, substance, cause, time, and
space. There is but one axiom, that of identity. The
others are only its applications or its consequences.
When this is admitted, we at once see that the range of
our mind is altered. We are no longer merely capable
of relative and limited knowledge, but also of absolute
and infinite knowledge; we possess in axioms facts
which not only accompany one another, but one of which
includes the other. If, as Mill says, they merely ac-
companied one another, we should be obliged to conclude
with him, that perhaps this might not always be the
case. We should not see the inner necessity for their
connection, and should only admit it as far as our


416 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


experience went; we should say that, the two facts
being isolated in their nature, circumstances might arise
in which they would be separate; we should affirm the
truth of axioms only in reference to our world and mind.
If, on the contrary, the two facts are such that the first
contains the second, we should establish on this very
ground the necessity of their connection; wheresoever
the first may be found, it will carry the second with it,
since the second is a part of it, and cannot be separated
from it. Nothing can exist between them and divide
them, for they are but one thing under different aspects.
Their connection is therefore absolute and universal ;
and we possess truths which admit neither doubt nor
limitation, nor condition, nor restriction. Abstraction
restores to axioms their value, whilst it shows their
origin; and we restore to science her dispossessed
dominion, by restoring to the mind the faculty of which
it had been deprived.


Vi.


Induction remains to be considered, which seems to
be the triumph of pure experience, while it is, in reality,
the triumph of abstraction. When I discover. by
induction that cold produces dew, or that the passage
from the liquid to the solid state produces crystallisa-
tion, I establish a connection vetween two abstract
facts. Neither cold, nor dew, nor the passage from the
liquid to the solid state, nor crystallisation, exist in
themselves. They are parts of phenomena, extracts
from complex cases, simple elements included in com-
pound aggregates. I withdraw and isolate them; I
isolate dew in general from all local, temporary, special
dews which I observe; I isolate cold in general from


cHaP, v. §_PHILOSOPHY—STUART MILL. 417


all special, various distinct colds which may be pro-
duced by all varieties of texture, all diversities of
substance, all inequalities of temperature, all complica-
tions of circumstances. I join an abstract antecedent
to an abstract consequent, and I connect them, as Mill
himself shows, by subtractions, suppressions, elimina-
tions; I expel from the two groups, containing them,
all the proximate circumstances ; I discover the couplé
under the surroundings which obscure it; I detach, by
@ series of comparisons and experiments, all the
subsidiary accidental circumstances which have clung
to it, and thus I end by laying it bare. I seem to be
considering twenty different cases, and in reality I only
consider one; I appear to proceed by addition, and in
fact I am performing subtraction. All the methods of
Induction, therefore, are methods of Abstraction, and
all the work of Induction is the connection of abstract
facts.


VIL.


We see now the two great moving powers of science,
and the two great manifestations of nature. There are
two operations, experience and abstraction; there are
two kingdoms, that of complex facts, and that of
simple elements. ‘The first is the effect, the second
the cause. The first is contained in the second, and is
deduced from it, as a consequent from its principle.
The two are equivalent, they are one and the same
thing considered under two aspects. This magnificent
moving universe, this tumultuous chaos of mutually
dependent events, this incessant life, infinitely varied
and multiplied, may be all reduced to a few elements
and their relations. Our whole efforts result in passing

VOL. IV. 25


418 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


from one to the other, from the complex to the simple,
from facts to laws, from experiences to formule. And
the reason of this is evident; for this fact which I
perceive by the senses or the consciousness is but a
fragment arbitrarily severed by my senses or my
consciousness from the infinite and continuous woof of
existence. If they were differently constituted, they
would intercept other fragments; it is the chance of
their structure which determines what is actually per-
ceived. They are like open compasses, which might
be more or less extended; and the area of the circle
which they describe is not natural, but artificial. It
is so in two ways, both externally and internally. For,
when I consider an event, I isolate it artificially from
its natural surroundings, and I compose it artificially
of elements which do not form a natural group.
When I see a falling stone, I separate the fall from the
anterior circumstances which are really connected with
it; and I put together the fall, the form, the structure,
the colour, the sound, and twenty other circumstances
which are really not connected with it. A fact, then,
is an arbitrary aggregate, and at the same time an
arbitrary severing ;* that is to say, a factitious group,
which separates things connected, and connects things
that are separate. Thus, so long as we only regard
nature by observation, we do not see it as it is: we
have only a provisional and illusory idea of it. Nature
is, in reality, a tapestry, of which we only see the
reverse; this is why we try to turn it. We strive to
discover laws; that is, the natural groups which are
really distinct from their surroundings, and composed


1 An eminent student of physical science said to me: ‘A fact isa
superposition of laws.”


CHAP. V. PHILOSOPHY—STUART MILL. 419


of elements really connected. We discover couples;
that is to say, real compounds and real connections.
We pass from the accidental to the necessary, from the
telative to the absolute, from the appearance to the
reality; and having found these first couples, we
practise upon them the same operation as we did
upon facts, for, though in a less degree, they are of the
same nature. Though more abstract, they are still
complex. They may be decomposed and explained.
There is some ulterior reason for their existence.
There is some cause or other which constructs and
unites them. In their case, as well as for facts, we
can search for generating elements into which they may
be resolved, and from which they may be deduced.
And this operation may be continued until we have
arrived at elements wholly simple; that is to say, such
that their decomposition would involve a contradiction.
Whether we can find them or not, they exist; the axiom
of causation would be falsified if they were absent.
There are, then, indecomposable elements, from which
are derived more general laws; and from these, again,
more special laws; and from these the facts which we
observe; just as in geometry there are two or three
primitive notions, from which are deduced the properties
of lines, and from these the properties of surfaces, solids,
and the numberless forms which nature can produce or
the mind imagine. We can now comprehend the value
and meaning of that axiom of causation which governs
all things, and which Mill has mutilated. There is an
inner constraining force which gives rise to every event,
which unites every compound, which engenders every
actual fact. This signifies, on the one hand, that there
is a reason for everything; that every fact has its law;


420 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


that every compound can be reduced to simple elements;
that every product implies factors; that every quality
and every being must be reducible from some superior
and anterior term. And it signifies, on the other hand,
that the product is equivalent to the factors, that both
are but the same thing under different aspects; that
the cause does not differ in nature from the effect;
that the generating powers are but elementary proper-
ties; that the active force by which we represent
Nature to our minds is but the logical necessity which
mutually transforms the compound and the simple, the
fact and the law. Thus we determine beforehand the
limits of every science; and we possess the potent
formula, which, establisaing the invincible connection
and the spontaneous production of existences, places in
Nature the moving spring of Nature, whilst it drives
home and fixes in the heart of every living thing the
iron fangs of neccssity.


VEL:


Can we arrive at a knowledge of these primary
elements? For my part, I think we can; and the
reason is, that, being abstractions, they are not beyond
the region of facts, but are comprised in them, so that
we have only to extract them from the facts. Besides,
being the most abstract, that is, the most general of all
things, there are no facts which do not comprise them,
and from which we cannot extract them. However
limited our experience may be, we can arrive at these
primary notions; and it is from this observation that
the modern German metaphysicians have started in
attempting their vast constructions. They understood
that there are simple notions, that is to say, indecom-


CHAP. V, PHILOSOPHY—STUART MILL. 421


posable abstract facts, that the combinations of these
engender all others, and that the laws for their mutual
union or contrarieties, are the primary laws of the uni-
verse. They tried to attain to these ideas, and to evolve
by pure reason the world as observation shows it to us.
They have partly failed; and their gigantic edifice,
factitious and fragile, hangs in ruins, reminding one of
those temporary scaffoldings which only serve to mark
out the plan of a future building. The reason is, that
with a high notion of our powers, they had no exact
view of their limits. For we are outflanked on all
sides by the infinity of time and space ; we find ourselves
thrown in the midst of this monstrous universe like a
shell on the beach, or an ant at the foot of a steep slope.
Here Mill is right. Chance is at the end of all our
knowledge, as on the threshold of all our postulates :
we vainly try to rise, and that by conjecture, to an
initial state; but this state depends on the preceding one,
which depends on another, and so on; and thus we are
forced to accept it as a pure postulate, and to give up
the hope of deducing it, though we know that it ought
to be deduced. It is so in all sciences, in geology,
natural history, physics, chemistry, psychology, history;
and the primitive accidental fact extends its effects into
all parts of the sphere in which it is comprised. If it
had been otherwise, we should have neither the same
planets, nor the same chemical compounds, nor the
same vegetables, nor the same animals, nor the same
races of men, nor, perhaps, any of these kinds of beings.
If an ant were taken into another country, it would
see neither the same trees, nor insects, nor dispositions
of the soil, nor changes of the atmosphere, nor perhaps
any of these forms of existence. There is, then, in


429 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


every fact aud in every object, au accidental aud local
part, a vast portion, which, like the rest, depends on
primitive laws, but not directly, only through an infinite
circuit of consequences, in such a way that hetween it
and the primitive laws there is an infinite hiatus, which
can only be bridged over by an infinite series of deduc-
tions.

Such is the inexplicable part of phenomena, and this
is what the German metaphysicians tried to explain.
They wished to deduce from their elementary theorems
the form of the planetary system, the various laws of
physics and chemistry, the main types of life, the
progress of human civilisations and thought. They
contorted their universal formule with the view of
deriving from them particular cases; they tuok indirect
and remote consequences as direct and proximate ones;
they omitted or suppressed the great work which is
interposed between the first laws and the final conse-
quences; they discarded Chance from their construction,
as a basis unworthy of science; and the void so left,
badly filled up by deceptive materials, caused the whole
edifice to fall to ruins.

Does this amount to saying, that in the facts with
which this little corner of the universe furnishes us,
everything is local? By no means. If an ant were
capable of making experiments, it might attain to the
idea of a physical law, a living form, a represeutative
sensation, an abstract thought; for a foot of vround, on
which there is a thinking brain, includes all these.
Therefore, however limited be the field of the mind, it
contains general facts; that is, facts spread over very
vast external territories, into which its limitation pre-
vents it from penetrating. If the ant were capable of


CHAP, V. PHILOSOPHY—STUART MILL. 423


reasoning, it might construct arithmetic, algebra, geo-
metry, mechanics; for a movement of half an inch
contains in the abstract, time, space, number, and force,
all the materials of mathematics: therefore, however
limited the field ‘of a mind’s researches be, it includes
universal data; that is, facts spread over the whole
region of time and space. Again, if the ant were a
philosopher, it might evolve the ideas of existence, of
nothingness, and all the materials of metaphysics; for
any phenomenon, interior or exterior, suffices to present
these materials: therefore, however limited the field of
a mind be, it contains absolute truths; that is, such
that there is no object from which they could be absent.
And this must necessarily be so; for the more general
a fact is, the fewer objects need we examine to meet
with it. If it is universal, we meet with it everywhere ;
if it is absolute, we cannot escape meeting it. This is
why, in spite of the narrowness of our experience,
metaphysics, I mean the search for first causes, is pos-
sible, but on condition that we remain at a great height,
that we do not descend into details, that we consider only
the most simple elements of existence, and the most
general tendencies of nature. If any one were to collect
the three or four great ideas in which our sciences result,
and the three or four kinds of existence which make
up our universe; if he were to compare those two
strange quantities which we call duration and extension,
those principle forms or determinations of quantity
which we call physical laws, chemical types, and living
species, and that marvellous representative power, the
Mind, which, without falling into quantity, reproduces
the other two and itself; if he discovered among these
three terms—the pure quantity, the determined quan-


494 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


tity, and the suppressed quantity ’—such an order that
the first must require the second, and the second the
third; if he thus established that the pure quantity is
the necessary commencement of Nature, and that
Thought is the extreme term at which Nature is wholly
suspended ; if, again, isolating the elements of these
data, he showed that they must be combined just as
they are combined, and not otherwise: If he proved,
moreover, that there are no other elements, and that
there can be no other, he would have sketched out a
system of metaphysics without encroaching on the
positive sciences, and have attained the source without
being obliged to descend to trace the various streams.

In my opinion, these two great operations, Experience
as you have described it, and Abstraction, as I have tried
to define it, comprise in themselves all the resources of
the human mind, the one in its practical, the other in
its speculative direction. The first leads us to consider
nature as an assemblage of facts, the second as a system
of laws: the exclusive employment of the first is
English; that of the second, German. If there is a
place between these two nations, it is ours. We have
extended the English ideas in the eighteenth century ;
and now we can, in the nineteenth, add precision to
German ideas. Our business is to restrain, to correct,
to complete the two types of mind, one by the other, to
combine them together, to express their ideas in a style
generally understood, and thus to produce from them
the universal mind.


Tx


We went out. As it ever happens in similar cir-


1 Die aufgehobene Quantitit,


a


CHAP, V. PHILOSOPHY--STUART MILL. A25


cumstances, each had caused the other to reflect, and
neither had convinced the other. But our reflections
were short: in the presence of a lovely August morning,
all arguments fall to the ground. The old walls, the
rain-worn stones, smiled in the rising sun. A fresh
light rested on their embrasures, on the keystones of
the cloisters, on the glossy ivy leaves. Roses and
honeysuckles climbed the walls, and their flowers
quivered and sparkled in the light breeze. The foun-
tains murmured in the vast lonely courts. The beau-
tiful town stood out from the morning’s mist, as
adorned and tranquil as a fairy palace, and its robe of
soft rosy vapour was indented, as an embroidery of the
Renaissance, by a border of towers, cloisters, and palaces,
each enclosed in verdure and decked with flowers.
The architecture of all ages had mingled their arches,
trefoils, statues, and columns; time had softened their
tints; the sun united them in its light, and the old city
seemed a shrine to which every age and every genius
had successively added a jewel. Beyond this, the
river rolled its broad sheets of silver: the mowers stood
up to the knee in the high grass of the meadows.
Myriads of buttercups and meadow-sweets; grasses,
bending under the weight of their grey heads, plants
sated with the dew of the night, swarmed in the rich
soil. Words cannot express this freshness of tints, this
luxuriance of vegetation. The more the long line of
shade receded, the more brilliant and full of life the
flowers appeared. On seeing them, virgin and timid in
their gilded veil, I thought of the blushing cheeks and
fine modest eyes of a young girl who puts on for the
first time her necklace of jewels. Around, as though
to guard them, enormous trees, four centuries old, ex-


426 MODERN AUTHORS, BOOK V.


tended in reguiar lines; and I found in them a new
trace of that practical good sense which has effected
revolutions without committing ravages; which, while
reforming in all directions, has destroyed nothing;
which has preserved both its trees and its constitution,
which has lopped off the dead branches without level-
ling the trunk; which alone, in our days, among all
nations, is in the enjoyment not only of the present,
but of the past.


CHAPTER VI
Poetry. — Tennyson,


i


WHEN Tennyson published his first poems, the critics
found fault with them. He held his peace; for ten
years no one saw his name in a review, nor even in a
publisher’s catalogue. But when he appeared again
before the public, his books had made their way alone
and under the surface, and he passed at once for the
greatest poet of his country and his time.

Men were surprised, and with a pleasing surprise.
The potent generation of poets who had just died out,
had passed like a whirlwind. Like their forerunners
of the sixteenth century, they had carried away and
hurried everything to its extreme. Some had culled
gigantic legends, piled up dreams, ransacked the Kast,
Greece, Arabia, the Middle Ages, and overloaded the
human imagination with hues and fancies from every
clime. Others had buried themselves in metaphysics
and moral philosophy, had mused indefatigably on the
condition of man, and spent their lives on the sublime
and the monotonous. Others, making a medley of
crime and heroism, had conducted, through darkness and
flashes of lightning, a train of contorted and terrible
figures, desperate with remorse, relieved by their gran-
deur. Men wanted to rest after so many efforts and so


428 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


much excess. On the going out of the imaginative,
sentimental and Satanic school, Tennyson appeared ex-
quisite. All the forms and ideas which had pleased
them were found in him, but purified, modulated, set in
a splendid style. He completed an age; he enjoyed
that which had agitated others; his poetry was like
the lovely evenings in summer: the outlines of the
landscape are then the same as in the daytime; but
the splendour of the dazzling celestial arch is dulled;
the re-invigorated flowers lift themselves up, and the
calm sun, on the horizon, harmoniously cast a network
of crimson rays over the woods and meadows which it
just before burned by its brightness.


IL.


What first attracted people were Tennyson’s portraits
of women. Adeline, Eleanore, Lilian, the May Queen,
were keepsake characters, from the hand of a lover and
an artist. The keepsake is gilt-edged, embossed with
flowers and decorations, richly got up, soft, full of deli-
cate faces, always elegant and always correct, which we
might take to be sketched at random, and which are
yet drawn carefully, on white vellum, slightly touched
by their outline, all selected to rest and occupy the
soft, white hands of a young bride or a girl. I have
translated many ideas and many styles, but I shall not
attempt to translats one of these portraits. Each word
of them is like a tint, curiously deepened or shaded by
the neighbouring tint, with all the boldness and results
of the happiest refinement. The least alteration would
obscure all. And there an art so just, so consummate,
is necessary to paint the charming prettinesses, the
sudden hauteurs, the half blushes, the imperceptible and


CHAP. VI. POETRY—TENNYSON. 429


fleeting caprices of feminine beauty. He opposes,
harmonises them, makes of them, as it were, a gallery.
Here is the frolicsome child, the little flutiering fairy,
who claps her tiny hands, who,


“So innocent-arch, so cunning-simple,
From beneath her gather’d wimple
Glancing with black-beaded eyes,
Till the lightning laughters dimple
The baby-roses in her cheeks ;
Then away she flies,” }


Then the pensive fair, who dreams, with large open
blue eyes :


“‘ Whence that aery bloom of thine,
Like a lily which the sun
Looks thro’ in his sad decline,
And a rose-bush leans upon,
Thou that faintly smilest still,
As a Naiad in a well,
Looking at the set of day.” 2


Anew “the ever varying Madeline,” now smiling, then
frowning, then joyful again, then angry, then uncertain
between the two:


‘‘ Frowns perfect-sweet along the brow
Light-glooming over eyes divine,
Like little clouds sun-fringed.” %


The poet returned well pleased to all things, refined and
exquisite. He caressed them so carefully, that his
verses appeared at times far-fetched, affected, almost
euphuistic. He gave them too much adornment and


1 Poems by A. Tennyson, 7th ed, 1851; Lilian, 5.
3 Tbid, Adeline, 33. 3 Ibid, Madeline, 15.


430 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


polishing ; he seemed like an epicurean in style, as well
as in beauty. He looked for pretty rustic scenes,
touching remembrances,, curious or pure sentiments.
He made them into elegies, pastorals, and idyls. He
wrote in every accent, and delighted in entering into
the feelings of all ages. He wrote of St. Agnes, St.
Simeon Stylites, Ulysses, CEnone, Sir Galahad, Lady
Clare, Fatima, the Sleeping Beauty. He imitated alter-
nately Homer and Chaucer, Theocritus and Spenser,
the old English poets and the old Arabian poets. He
gave life successively to the little real events of English
life, and the great fantastic adventures of extinguished
chivalry. He was like those musicians who use their
bow in the service of alk masters. He strayed through
nature and history, with no foregone conclusions, with-
out fierce passion, bent on feeling, relishing, culling
from all parts, in the flower-stand of the drawing-room
and in the rustic hedgerows, the rare or wild flowers
whose scent or beauty could charm or amuse him.
Men entered into his pleasure; smelt the grateful
bouquets which he knew so well how to put together ;
preferred those which he tcok from the country ; found
that his talent was nowhere more at ease. They ad-
mired the minute observation and refined sentiment
which knew how to grasp and interpret the fleeting
aspects of things. In the Dying Swan they forgot
that the subject was almost threadbare, and the in-
terest somewhat slight, that they might appreciate such
verses as this


“Some blue peaks in the distance rose,
And white against the cold-white sky,
Shone out their crowning snows.


CHAP, VI. POETRY—TENNYSON. 431


One willow over the river wept,
And shook the wave as the wind did sigh ;
Above in the wind was the swallow,
Chasing itself at its own wild will,
And far thro’ the marish green and still
The tangled water-courses slept,
Shot over with purple, and green, and yellow.”!


But these melancholy pictures did not display him
entirely ; men accompanied him to the land of the sun,
toward the soft voluptuousness of southern seas; they
returned, with an involuntary fascination, to the verses
in which he depicts the companions of Ulysses, who,
slumbering in the land of the Lotos-eaters, happy
dreamers like himself, forgot their country, and re-
nounced action :


“ A land of streams ! some, like a downward smoke,
Slow-dropping veils of thinnest lawn, did go;
And some thro’ wavering lights and shadows broke,
Rolling a slumbrous sheet of foam below.
They saw the gleaming river seaward flow
From the inner land: far off, three mountain-tops,
Three silent pinnacles of aged snow,
Stood sun-set flush’d: and, dew’d with showery drops,
Up-clomb the shadowy pine above the woven copse....


There is sweet music here that softer falls

Than petal from blown roses on the grass,

Or night-dews on still waters between walls

Of shadowy granite, in a gleaming pass °

Music that gentlier on the spirit lies,

Than tir’d eyelids upon tir’d eyes ;

Music that brings sweet sleep down from the blissful skies.


1 Poems by A. Tennyson, 7th ed. 1851; The Dying Swan, 45.


432


MODERN AUTHORS.- BOOK VY.


Here are cool mosses deep,

And thro’ the moss the ivies creep,

And in the stream the long-leaved flowers weep,

And from the craggy ledge the poppy hangs in sleep. ...


Lo! in the middle of the wood,

The folded leaf is woo’d from out the bud
With winds upon the branch, and there
Grows green and broad, and takes no care,
Sun-steep’d at noon, and in the moon
Nightly dew-fed ; and turning yellow
Falls, and floats adown the air.

Lo ! sweeten’d with the summer light,
The full-juiced apple, waxing over-mellow,
Drops in a silent autumn night.

All its allotted length of days,

The flower ripens in its place,

Ripens and fades, and falls, and hath no toil,
Fast-rooted in the fruitful soil... .


But, propt on beds of amaranth and moly,

How sweet (while warm airs lull us, blowing lowly),
With half-dropt eyelids still,

Beneath a heaven dark and ne

To watch the long bright river drawing slowly

His waters from the purple hill—

To hear the dewy echoes calling

From cave to cave thro’ the thick-twined vine—

To watch the emerald-colour’d water falling

Thro’ many a wov’n acanthus-wreath divine !

Only to hear and see the far-off sparkling brine,
Only to hear were sweet, stretch’d out beneath the pine.” ?!


1 Poems by A. Tennyson, 7th ed, 1851; The Lotus-Eaters, 140.


CHAP, VI. POETRY—TENNYSON. 433


Til.


- Was this charming dreamer simply a dilettante ?
Men liked to consider him so; he seemed too happy
to admit violent passions. Fame came to him easily
and quickly, at the age of thirty. The Queen had
justified the public favour by creating him Poet Laure-
ate. A great writer declared him a more genuine
poet than Lord Byron, and maintained that nothing so
perfect had been seen since Shakspeare. The student,
at Oxford, put Tennyson’s works between an annotated .
Euripides and a handbook of scholastic philosophy.
Young ladies found him amongst their marriage presents.
He was said to be rich, venerated by his family,
admired by his friends, amiable, without affectation,
even unsophisticated. He lived in the country, chiefly
in the Isle of Wight, amongst books and flowers, free
from the annoyances, rivalries, and burdens of society,
and his life was easily imagined to be a beautiful dream,
as sweet as those which he had pictured.
Yet the men who looked closer saw that there was
a fire of passion under this smooth surface. A genuine
poetic temperament never fails in this. It feels too
acutely to be at peace. When we quiver at the least
touch, we shake and tremble under great shocks. Al-
ready here and there, in his pictures of country and
love, a brilliant verse broke with its glowing colour
through the calm and correct outline. He had felt
that strange growth of unknown powers which suddenly
arrest a man with fixed gaze before revealed beauty.
The specialty of the poet is to be ever young, for ever
virgin. For us, the vulgar, things are threadbare; sixty
centuries of civilisation have worn out their primitive
VOL. IV. 2F


434 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK Y,


freshness; thiugs have become commonplace; we per-
ceive them only through a veil of ready-made phrases ;
we employ them, we no longer comprehend them ; we see
in them no longer magnificent flowers, but good vege-
tables; the luxuriant primeval forest is to us nothing
but a well-planned, and too well-known, kitchen garden.
On the other hand, the poet, in presence of this world,
is as the first man on the first day. In a moment our
phrases, our reasonings, all the trappings of memory
and prejudice. vanish from his mind; things seem new
to him; he is astonished and ravished; a headlong
stream of sensations oppresses him; it is the all-potent
sap of human invention, which, checked in us, begins
to flow in him. Fools call him mad, but in truth he
is a seer: for we may indeed be sluggish, but nature is
always full of life; the rising sun is as beautiful as
on the first dawn; the streaming floods, the teeming
flowers, the trembling passions, the forces which hurl
onward the stormy whirlwind of existence, aspire and
strive with the same energy as at their birth; the im-
mortal heart of nature beats yet, heaving its coarse.
trappings, and its beatings work in the poet’s heart
when they no longer echo in our own. Tennyson felt
this, not indeed always; but twice or thrice at least he
has dared to make it heard. We have found anew
the free action of full emotion, and recognised the voice
of a man in these verses of Locksley Hall :


“Then her cheek was pale and thinner than should be for one
so young,
And her eyes on all ny motions with a mute observance hung.


And I said, ‘My cousin Amy, speak, and speak the truth to me,
Trust me, cousin, all the current of my being sets to thee,’


(AP, VI. POETRY—TENNYSON. 435


On her pallid cheek and forehead came a colour and a light,
As I have seen the rosy red flushing in the northern night.


And she turn’d—her bosom shaken with a sudden storm of
sighs—
All the spirit deeply dawning in the dark of hazel eyes—


Saying, ‘I have hid my feelings, fearing they should do me
wrong ;’

Saying, ‘Dost thou love me, cousin?’ weeping, ‘I have loved
thee long.’


Love took up the glass of Time, and turn’d it in his glowing
hands -
Every moment, lightly shaken, ran itself in golden sands.


Love took up the harp of Life, ana smote on all the chords
with might ;

Smote the chord of Self, that, trembling, pass’d in music out
of sight.

Many a morning on the moorland did we hear the copses ring,

And her whisper throng’d my pulses with the fulness of the
Spring.

Many an evening by the waters did we watch the stately
ships,

And our spirits rush’d together at the touching of the lips.

O my cousin, shallow-hearted! O my Amy, mine no more !

O the dreary, dreary moorland! O the barren,. barren shore !


Falser than all fancy fathoms, falser than all songs have sung,
Puppet to a father’s threat, and servile to a shrewish tongue!


"Is it well to wish thee happy ?—having known me—to decline
On a range of lower feelings and a narrower heart than mine !


Yet it shall be: thou shalt lower to his level day by day,
What is fine within thee growing coarse to sympathise with
clay.


436 MODERN AUTHORS. coeur


As the husband is, the wife is: thou art mated with a clown,
And the grossness of his nature will have weight to drag
thee down.


He will hold thee, when his passion shall have spent its
novel force,
Something better than his dog, a little dearer than his horse.


What is this? his eyes are heavy: think not they are glazed
with wine.

Go to him: it is thy duty: kiss him: take his hand in thine.

It may be my lord is weary, that his brain is overwrought :

Soothe him with thy finer fancies, touch him with thy lighter
thought.


He will answer to the purpose, easy things to understand—
Better thou wert dead before me, tho’ I slew thee with
my hand!” +


This is very frank and strong. Maud appeared, and
was still more so. In it the rapture broke forth with
all its inequalities, familiarities, freedom, violence. The
correct, measured poet betrayed himself, for he seemed
to think and weep aloud. This book is the diary of a
gloomy young man, soured by great family misfortunes,
by long solitary meditations, who gradually became
enamoured, dared to speak, found himself loved. He
does not sing, but speaks ; they are the hazarded, reckless
words of ordinary conversation; details of everyday
life; the description of a toilet, a political dinner, a
service and sermon in a village church. The prose of
Dickens and Thackeray did not more firmly grasp real
and actual manners. And by its side, most splendid
poetry abounded and blossomed, as in fact it blossoms


2 Poems by A. Tennyson, 7th ed. 1851; Locksley Hail, 266.


CHAP. VI. POETRY—TENNYSON. 437


and abounds in the midst of our commonplaces, The
smile of a richly dressed girl, a sunbeam on a stormy
sea, Or on a spray of roses, throws all at onee these
sudden illuminations into impassioned souls. What
verses are these, in which he represents himself in his
dark little garden :


“A million emeralds break from the ruby-budded lime
In the little grove where I sit—ah, wherefore cannot I be
Like things of the season gay, like the bountiful season bland,
When the far-off sail is blown by the breeze of a softer clime,
Half lost in the liquid azure bloom of a crescent of sea,
The silent sapphire-spangled marriage ring of the land”?!


What a holiday in his heart when he is loved! What
madness in these cries, that intoxication, that tenderness
which would pour itself on all, and summon all to the
spectacle and the participation of his happiness! How
all is transfigured in his eyes; and how constantly he
is himself transfigured! Gaiety, then ecstasy, then
archness, then satire, then disclosures, all ready move-
ments, all sudden changes, like a crackling and flaming
fire, renewing every moment its shape and colour: how
rich is the soul, and how it can live a hundred years
in a day! The hero of the poem, surprised and in-
sulted by the brother of Maud, kills him in a duel, and
loses her whom heloved. He flees; he is seen wander-
ing in London. What a gloomy contrast is that of the
great busy careless town, and a solitary man haunted by
true grief! We follow him down the noisy thorough-
fares, through the yellow fog, under the wan sun which
rises above the river like a “dull red ball,” and we hear
the heart fuil of anguish, deep sobs, insensate agitation


1 Tennyson’s Maud, 1856, iv. 1, p. 15.


438 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V,


- of a soul which would but cannot tear itself from its
memories. Despair grows, and in the end the reverie
becomes a vision :
“ Dead, long dead,
Long dead !

And my heart is a handful of dust,

And the wheels go over my head,

And my bones are shaken with pain,

For into a shallow grave they are thrust,

Only a yard beneath the street,

And the hoofs of the horses beat, beat,

The hoofs of the horses beat,

Beat into my scalp and my brain,

With never an end to the stream of passing feet

Driving, hurrying, marrying, burying,

Clamour and rumble, and ringing and clatter... .

O me! why have they not buried me deep enough ?

‘Is it kind to have made me a grave so rough,

Me, that was never a quiet sleeper ?

Maybe still I am but half-dead ;

Then I cannot be wholly dumb ;

I will cry to the steps above my head,

And somebody, surely, some kind heart will come

To bury me, bury me

Deeper, ever so little deeper.” 2


However, he revives, and gradually rises again. War
breaks out, a liberal and generous war, the war against
Russia; and the big, manly heart, wounded by deep
love, is healed by action and courage.

“ And I stood on a giant deck and mix’d my breath


With a loyal people shouting a battle ery. . . .
Yet God’s just wrath shall be wreak’d on a giant liar ;


2 Tennyson’s Maud, 1856, xxvii. 1, p. 99.
2 Tbid, xxvii. 11, p. 105.


CHAP, VI. POETRY—TENNYSON. 439


And many s darkness into the light shall leap,

And shine in the sudden making of splendid names,
And noble thought be freer under the sun,

And the heart of a people beat with one desire ;

For the peace, that I deem’d no peace, is over and done,
And now by the side of the Black and the Baltic deep,
And deathful-grinning mouths of the fortress, flames
The blood-red blossom of war with a heart of fire.”


This explosion of feeling was the only one; Tennyson
has ‘not again encountered it. In spite of the moral
close, men said of Maud that he was imitating Byron ;
they cried out against these bitter declamations; they
thought that they perceived the rebellious accent of the
Satanic school; they blamed this uneven, obscure,
excessive style; they were shocked at these crudities
and incongruities; they called on the poet to return to
his first well-proportioned style. He was discouraged,
left the storm-clouds, and returned to the azure sky.
He was right; he is better there than anywhere else.
A fine soul may be transported, attain at times to the
fire of the most violent and the strongest beings: per-
sonal memories, they say, had furnished the matter of
Maud and of Locksley Hall; with a woman’s delicacy,
he had the nerves of a woman. The fit over, he fell
again into his “golden languors,” into his calm reverie.
After Locksley Hall he wrote the Princess ; after Maud
the Jdylls of the King.


TV.


The great task of an artist is to find subjects which
suit his talent. Tennyson has not always succeeded
in this. His long poem, Jn Memoriam, written in


1 Tennyson’s Maud, xxviii. 8 and 4, p. 108.


440 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOE V.


praise and memory of a friend who died young, is cold,
monotonous, and too prettily arranged. He goes into
mourning; but, like a correct gentleman, with bran
new gloves, wipes away his tears with a cambric hand-
kerchief, and displays throughout the religious service,
which ends the ceremony, all the compunction of a
respectful and well-trained layman. He was to find
his subjects elsewhere. To be poetically happy is the
object of a dilettante-artist. For this many things are
necessary. First of all, that the place, the events, and
the characters shall not exist. Realities are coarse, and
always, in some sense, ugly; at least they &re heavy;
we do not treat them as we should like, they oppress
the fancy; at bottom there is nothing truly sweet and
beautiful in our life but our dreams. We are ill at
ease whilst we remain glued to earth, hobbling along
on our two feet, which drag us wretchedly here and
there in the place which impounds us. We need to
live in another world, to hover in the wide-air kingdom,
to build palaces in the clouds, to see them rise and
crumble, to follow in a hazy distance the whims of
their moving architecture, and the turns of their golden
volutes. In this fantastic world, again, all must be
pleasant and beautiful, the heart and senses must enjoy
it, objects must be smiling or picturesque, sentiments
delicate or lofty; no crudity, incongruity, brutality,
savageness, must come to sully with its excess the
modulated harmony of this ideal perfection. This
leads the poet to the legends of chivalry. Here is the
fantastic world, splendid to the sight, noble and speci-
ally pure, in which love, war, adventures, generosity,
courtesy, all spectacles and all virtues which suit the
instincts of our European races, are assembled, to


- ome


CHAP, VI. POETRY— TENNYSON. 44]


furnish them with the epic which they love, and the
model which suits them.

The Princess is a fairy tale as sentimental as those of
Shakspeare. Tennyson here thought and felt like a
young knight of the Renaissance. The mark of this
kind of mind is a superabundance, as it were, a super-
fluity of sap. In the characters of the Princess, as in
those of As You Like It, there is an over-fulness of
fancy and emotion. They have recourse, to express
their thought, to all ages and lands; they carry speech
to the most reckless rashness; they clothe and burden
every idea with a sparkling image, which drags and
glitters around it like a brocade clustered with jewels.
Their nature is over-rich; at every shock there is in
them a sort of rustle of joy, anger, desire; they live
more than we, more warmly and more quickly. They
are ever in excess, refined, ready to weep, laugh, adore,
jest, inclined to mingle adoration and jests, urged
by a nervous rapture to opposite extremes. They
sally in the poetic field with impetuous and ever
changing caprice and joy. To satisfy the subtlety and
superabundance of their invention, they need fairy-
tales and masquerades. In fact, the Princess is both.
The beautiful Ida, daughter of King Gama, who is
monarch of the South (this country is not to be found
on the map), was affianced in her childhood to a beauti-
ful prince of the North. When the time appointed has
arrived, she is claimed. She, proud and bred on learned
arguments, has become irritated against the rule of
men, and in order to liberate women has founded a
university on the frontiers, which is to raise her sex,
and to be the colony of future equality. The prince
sets out with Cyril and Florian, two friends, obtains


442 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


permission from good King Gama, and, disguised as a
girl, gets admission to the maiden precincts, which no
man may enter on pain of death. There is a charm-
ing and sportive grace in this picture of a univer-
sity for girls. The poet gambols with beauty; no
badinage could be more romantic or tender. We
smile to hear long learned words come from these rosy
lips :
‘“‘ There sat along the forms, like morning doves
That sun their milky bosoms on the thatch,
A patient range of pupils.”*


They listen to historic dissertations and promises of
a social revolution, in “Academic silks, in hue the
lilac, with a silken hood to each, ahd zoned with gold,

. as rich as moth from dusk cocoons,” Amongst
these girls was Melissa, a child—


** A rosy blonde, and in a college gown
That clad her like an April daffodilly
(Her mother’s colour), with her lips apart,
And all her thoughts as fair within her eyes,
As bottom agates seem to wave and float
Tn crystal currents of clear morning seas.” 2


The site of this university for girls enhances the magic
of the scene. The words “College” and “ Faculty”
bring before the mind of Frenchmen only wretched and
dirty buildings, which we might mistake for barracks or
boarding-houses. Here, as in an English university,
flowers creep up the porches, vines cling round the bases
of the monuments, roses strew the alleys with their
petals; the laurel thickets grow around the gates, the
courts pile up their marble architecture, bossed with

1 The Princess, a Medley, 12th ed. 1864, ii, 34, 2 Ibid. ii. 46, -


CHAP. VI. POETRY—TENNYSON. 443


sculptured friezes, varied with urns from which droops
the green pendage of the plants. “The Muses and the
Graces, group’d in threes, enring’d a billowing fountain
in the midst.” After the lecture, some girls, in the deep
meadow grass, “smoothed a petted peacock down ;”
others,
_“ Leaning there on those balusters, high

Above the empurpled champaign, drank the gale

That blown about the foliage underneath,

And sated with the innumerable rose

Beat balm upon our eyelids.” }


At every gesture, every attitude, we recognise young
English girls; it is their brightness, their freshness,
their innocence. And here and there, too, we perceive
the deep expression of their large dreamy eyes:


“ Tears, idle tears, I know not what they mean,
Tears from the depth of some divine despair
Rise in the heart, and gather to the eyes,

In looking on the happy Autumn-fields,
And thinking of the days that are no more,...


Dear as remember’d kisses after death,

And sweet as those by hopeless fancy feign’d
On lips that are for others ; deep as love,
Deep as first love, and wild with all regret ;

O Death in Life, the days that are no more,” ?


This is an exquisite and strange voluptuousness, a
reverie full of delight, and full, too, of anguish, the
shudder of delicate and melancholy passion which we
have already found in Winter's Tale or in Twelfth


Night.
The three friends have gone forth with the princess


1 [he Princess, a Medley, 12th ed. 1864, iii. 60.  ? Ibid, v. 76.


444 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


and her train, all on horseback, and pause “near a
coppice-feather'd chasm,”
“ till the Sun
Grew broader toward his death and fell, and all
The rosy heights came out above the lawns.”


Cyril, heated by wine, begins to troll a careless tavern-
catch, and betrays the secret. Ida, indignant, turns to
leave; her foot slips, and she falls into the river; the
prince saves her, and wishes to flee. But he is seized
by the Proctors and brought before the throne, where
the haughty maiden stands ready to pronounce sentence.
At this moment
“. .. There rose

A hubbub in the court of half the maids

Gather’d together: from the illumined hall

Long lanes of splendour slanted o’er a press

Of snowy shoulders, thick as herded ewes,

And rainbow robes, and gems and gemlike eyes,

And gold and golden heads ; they to and fro

Fluctuated, as flowers in storm, some red, some pale,

All open-mouth’d, ‘all gazing to the light,

Some crying there was an army in the land,

And some that men were in the very walls,

And some they cared not; till a clamour grew

As of a new-world Babel, woman-built,

And worse-confounded : high above them stood

The placid marble Muses, looking peace.” }


The father of the prince has come with his army to
deliver him, and has seized King Gama as a hostage.
The princess is obliged to release the young man.
With distended nostrils, waving hair, a tempest raging
in her heart, she thanks him with bitter irony. She


1 The Princess, a Medley, 12th ed. 1864, iv. 99.


CHAP. VI. POETRY—TENNYSON. 445


trembles with wounded pride; she stammers, hesitates ;
she tries to constrain herself in order the better to
insult him, and suddenly breaks out;


“**-You have done well and like a gentleman,
And like a prince: you have our thanks for all :
And you look well too in your woman’s dress :
Well have you done and like a gentleman.
You saved our life: we owe you bitter thanks :
Better have died and spilt our bones in the flood—
Then men had said—but now—What hinders me
To take such bloody vengeance on you both ?—
Yet since our father—Wasps in our good hive,
You would-be quenchers of the light to be,
Barbarians, grosser than your native bears—
O would I had his sceptre for one hour !
You that have dared to break our bound, and gull’d
Our servants, wronged and lied and thwarted us—
JI wed with thee! I bound by precontract
Your bride, your bondslave! not tho’ all the gold
That veins the world were pack’d to make your crown,
And every spoken tongue should lord you. Sir,
Your falsehood and yourself are hateful to us :
I trample on your offers and on you:
Begone: we will not look upon you more.
Here, push them out at gates.’”}


How is this fierce heart to be softened, fevered with
feminine anger, embittered by disappointment and
ingult, excited by long dreams of power and ascendency,
and rendered more savage by its virginity! But how
anger becomes her, and how lovely she is! And how
this fire of sentiment, this lofty declaration of inde-
pendence, this chimerical ambition for reforming the


1 The Princess, a Medley, iv. 102.


446 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


future, reveal the generosity and pride of a young
heart, enamoured of the beautiful! It is agreed that
the quarrel shall be settled by a combat of fifty men
against fifty other men. The prince is conquered, and
Ida sees him bleeding on the sand. Slowly, gradually,
in spite of herself, she yields, receives the wounded in
her palace, and comes to the bedside of the dying
prince. Before his weakness and his wild delirium
pity expands, then tenderness, then love:


“ From all a closer interest flourish’d up
Tenderness touch by touch, and last, to these,
Love, like an Alpine harebell hung with tears
By some cold morning glacier ; frail at first
And feeble, all unconscious of itself,

But such as gather’d colour day by day.” ?


One evening he returns to consciousness, exhausted,
his eyes still troubled by gloomy visions; he sees Ida
before him, hovering like a dream, painfully opens his
pale lips, and “ utter'd whisperingly :”


“**Tf you be, what I think you, some sweet dream,
I would but ask you to fulfil yourself:
But if you be that Ida whom I knew,
I ask you nothing: only, if a dream,
Sweet dream be perfect, I shall die to-night,
Stoop down and seem to kiss me ere I die,”
. .. She turned ; she paused ;
She stoop’d ; and out of languor leapt a cry ;
Leapt fiery Passion from the brinks of death :
And I believe that in the living world
My spirit closed with Ida’s at the lips ;
Till back I fell, and from mine arms she rose


' The Princess, a Medley, v. 163.


CHAP, VI. POETRY—TENNYSON. 447


Glowing all over noble shame ; and all

Her falser self slipt from her like a robe,

And left her woman, lovelier in her mood

Than in her mould that other, when she came
From barren deeps to conquer all with love ;
And down the streaming crystal dropt ; and she
Far-fleeted by the purple island-sides,

Naked, a double light in air and wave.” 1


This is the accent of the Renaissance, as it left the
heart of Spenser and Shakspeare; they had this vol-
uptuous adoration of form and soul, and this divine
sentiment of beauty.


V.


There is another chivalry, which inaugurates the
Middle Age, as this closes it; sung by children, as
this by youths; and restored in the Jdylls of the King,
as this in the Princess. It is the legend of Arthur,
Merlin and the Knights of the Round Table. With
admirable art, Tennyson has modernised the feelings and
the language; this pliant soul takes all tones, in order
to give itself all pleasures. This time he has become
epic, antique, and ingenuous, like Homer, and like the
old trowvéres of the chansons de reste. It is pleasant
to quit our learned civilisation, to rise again to the
primitive age and manners, to listen to the peaceful
discourse which flows copiously and slowly, as a river
in a smooth channel. The distinguishing mark of the
ancient epic is clearness and calm. The ideas were new-
born; man was happy and in his infancy. He had not
had time to refine, to cut down and adorn his thoughts ;
he showed them bare. He was not yet pricked by


1 The Princess, a Medley, v. 165.


448 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOE V.


manifold lusts; he thought at leisure. Every idea in-
terested him; he unfolded it curiously, and explained it.
His speech never jerks; he goes step by step, from one
object to another, and every object seems lovely to him:
he pauses, observes, and takes pleasure in observing.
This simplicity and peace are strange and charming ; we
abandon ourselves, it is well with us; we do not desire
to go more quickly; we fancy we would gladly remain
thus, and for ever. For primitive thought is wholesome
thought; we have but marred it by grafting and
cultivation ; we return to it as our familiar element, to
find contentment and repose.

But of all epics, this of the Round Table is dis-
tinguished by purity. Arthur, the irreproachable king,
has assembled


“ A glorious company, the flower of men,
To serve as model for the mighty world,
And be the fair beginning of a time.
1 made them lay their hands in mine and swear
To reverence the King, as if he were
Their conscience, and their conscience as their King, ...
To speak no slander, no, nor listen to it,
To lead sweet lives in purest chastity,
To love one maiden only, cleave to her,
And worship her by years of noble deeds,”


There is a sort of refined pleasure in having to do with
such a world; for there is none in which purer or more
touching fruits could grow. I will show one—“ Elaine,
the lily maid of Astolat ””—who, having seen Lancelot
once, loves him when he has departed, and for her
whole life. She keeps the shield, which he has left in


1 Idylls of the King, 1864; Guinevere, 249.


CHAP. VI. POETRY—TENNYSON. 449


a tower, and every day goes up to look at it, count-
ing “every dint a sword had beaten in it, and every
scratch a lance had made upon it,” and living on
her dreams. He is wounded: she goes to tend and
heal him :


“She murraur’d, ‘ vain, in vain: it cannot be.
He will not love me: how then? must I die?’
Then as a little helpless innocent bird,

That has but one plain passage of few notes,
Will sing the simple passage o’er and o’er

For all an April morning, till the ear

Wearies to hear it, so the simple maid

Went half the night repeating, ‘must I die ?’”?


At last she confesses her secret; but with what modesty
and spirit! He cannot marry her; he is tied to
another. She droops and fades; her father and brothers
try to console her, but she will not be consoled. She
is told that Lancelot has sinned with the queen; she
does not believe it:


“ At last she said, ‘Sweet brothers, yester night
T seem’d a curious little maid again,
As happy as when we dwelt among the woods,
And when you used to take me with the flood
Up the great river in the boatman’s boat.
Only you would not pass beyond the cape
That hast the poplar on it ; there you fixt
Your limit, oft returning with the tide.
And yet I cried because you would not pass
Beyond it, and far up the shining flood
Until we found the palace of the king.
., . Now shall I have my will.’” ?


I Tdylis of the King, 18643 Elaine, 193. 2 Thid, 201,
VOL. 1V. 26


450 MODERN AUTHORS, BOOK Y.


She dies, and her father and brothers did what she had
asked them to do:


“But when the next sun brake from undergrouna,
Then, those two brethren slowly with bent brows
Accompanying, the sad chariot-brier
Past like a shadow thro’ the field, that shone
Full summer, to that stream whereon the barge,
Pall’d all its length in blackest samite, lay.
There sat the lifelong creature of the house,
Loyal, the dumb old servitor, on deck,

Winking his eyes, and: twisted all his face.

So those two brethren from the chariot took
And on the black decks laid her in her bed,
Set in her hand a lily, o’er her hung

The silken ease with braided blazonings

And kiss’d her quiet brows, and saying to her:
Sister, farewell for ever,’ and again

‘ Farewell, sweet sister,’ parted all in tears.

Then rose the dumb old servitor, and the dead
Steer’d by the dumb went upward with the flood—
In her right hand the lily, in her left

The letter—all her bright hair streaming down—
And all the coverlid was cloth of gold

Drawn to her waist, and she herself in white

All but her face, and that clear-featured face

Was lovely, for she did not seem as dead

But fast asleep, and lay as tho’ she smiled.” }


Thus they arrive at Court in great silence, and King
Arthur read the letter before all his knights and weep-
ing ladies:
“ Most noble lord, Sir Lancelot of the Lake,
I, sometime call’d the maid of Astolat,
1 Tdylis of the King ; Elaine, 206.


CHAP.-VI. POETRY—TENNYSON, 451


Come, for you left me taking no farewell,
Hither, to take my last farewell of you.
T.loved you, and my love had no return,

And therefore my true love has been my death,
And therefore to our lady Guinevere,

And to all other ladies, I make moan.

Pray for my soul, and yield me burial.

Pray for my soul thou too, Sir Lancelot,

As thou art a knight peerless.” !


Nothing more: she ends with this word, full of so sad
a regret and so tender an admiration: we could hardly
find anything move simple or more delicate.

It seems as if an archeologist might reproduce all
styles except the grand, and Tennyson has reproduced
all, even the grand. It is the night of the final battle ;
all day the tumult of the mighty fray “roll’d among
the mountains by the winter sea;” Arthurs knights
had fallen “man-by man;” he himself had fallen,
“deeply smitten through the helm,” and Sir Bedivere,
the last of all his knights, bore him to a place hard by,


“ A chapel nigh the field,
A broken chancel with a broken cross,
That stood on a dark strait of barren land.
On one side lay the Ocean, and on one
Lay a great water, and the moon was full.” ?


Arthur, feeling himself about to die, bids him take his
sword Excalibur “and fling him far into the middle
meer ;” for he had received it from the sea-nymphs,
and after him no mortal must handle it. Twice Sir
Bedivere went to obey the king: twice he paused, and


1 Tdylls of the King ; Elaine, 213.
2 Poems by A. Tennyson, 7th ed. 1851 ; Morte d’ Arthur, 189.


452 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


came back pretending that he had flung away the
sword; for his eyes were dazzled by the wondrous
diamond setting which clustered and shone about the
haft. The third time he throws it:


“The great brand
Made lightnings in the splendour of the moon,
And flashing round and round, and whirl’d in an arca,
Shot like a streamer of the northern morn,
Seen where the moving isles of winter shock
By night, with noises of the northern sea.
So fiash’d and fell the brand Excalibur :
But ere he dipt the surface, rose an arm
Clothed in white samite, mystic, wonderful,
And caught him by the hilt, and brandish’d him
Three times, and drew him under in the meer.” !


Then Arthur, rising painfully, and scarce able to
breathe, bids Sir Bedivere take him on his shoulders
and “bear me to the margin.” “Quick, quick! I fear
it is too late, and I shall die” They arrive thus,
through “icy caves and barren chasms,” to the shores
of a lake, where they saw “the long glories of the
winter moon :”


“ They saw then how there hove a dusky barge
Dark as a funeral scarf from stem to stern,
Beneath them ; and descending they were ware
That all the decks were dense with stately forms
Biack-stoled, black-hooded, like a dream—by these
Three Queens with crowns of gold—and from them rose
A cry that shiver’d to the tingling stars, _
And, as it were one voice, an agony
Of lamentation, like a wind, that shrills


1 Poems by A. Tennyson, 7th ed. 1851; Morte d Arthur, 194.


CHAP. VI. POETRY—TENNYSON. 453


All night in a waste land, where no one comes,

Or hath come, since the making of the world.

Then murmur’d Arthur: ‘Place me in the barge,’

And to the barge they came, There those three Queens
Put forth their hands, and took the King, and wept.
But she, that rose the tallest of them all

And fairest, laid his head upon her lap,

And loosed the shatter’d casque, and chafed his hands
And call’d him by his name, complaining loud... .” +


Before the barge drifts away, King Arthur, raising his
slow voice, consoles Sir Bedivere, standing in sorrow
on the shore, and pronounces this heroic and solemn
farewell :


“The old order changeth, yielding place to new,
And God fulfils himself in many ways,
Lest one good custom should corrupt the world. ...
If thou shouldst never see my face again,
Pray for my soul, More things are wrought by prayer
Than this world dreams of... .
For so the whole round earth is every way
Bound by gold chains about the feet of God.
But now farewell, I am going a long way
With these thou seést,—if indeed I go—
(For all my mind is clouded with a doubt)
To the island-valley of Avilion ;
Where falls not hail, or rain, or any snow,
Nor ever wind blows loudly ; but it lies
Deep-meadow’d, happy, fair with orchard-lawns
And bowery hollows crown’d with summer sea,
Where J will heal me of my grievous wound.” ?


Nothing, I think, calmer and more imposing has been
seen since Goethe.


1 Poems by A. Tennyson, 7th ed. 1851; Morte d’ Arthur, 196.
3 Tbid. 197.


454 MODERN AUTHORS. Book V.


How, in a 1ew words, shall we assemble all the
features of so manifold a talent? Tennyson is a born
poet, that is, a builder of airy palaces and imaginary
castles. But the individual passion and absorbing pre-
occupations which generally guide the hands of such
men are wanting to him; he found in himself no plan
of a new edifice; he has built after all the rest; he
has simply chosen amongst all forms the most elegant,
ornate, exquisite. Of their beauties he has taken but
the flower. At most, now and then, he has here and
there amused himself by designing some genuinely
English and modern cottage. If in this choice of
architecture, adopted or restored, we look for a trace
of him, we shall find it, here and there, in some more
finely sculptured frieze, in some more delicate and
graceful sculptured rose-work; but we only find it
marked and sensible in the purity and elevation of the
moral emotion which we carry away with us when we
quit his gallery of art.


VI.


The favourite poet of a nation, it seems, is he whose
works a man, setting out on a journey, prefers to put
into his pocket. Now-a-days it would be Tennyson in
England, and Alfred De Musset in France. The two
publics differ: so do their modes of life, their reading,
and their pleasures. Let us try to describe them ; we
shall better understand the flowers if we see them in
the garden.

Here we are at Newhaven, or at Dover, and we glide
over the rails looking on either side. On both sides
fly past country houses; they exist everywhere in


CHAP, VI. POETRY—TENNYSON, 455


England, on the margin of lakes, on the edge of the
bays, on the summit of the hills, in every picturesque
point of view. They are the chosen abodes; London
is but a business-place; men of the world live, amuse
themselves, visit each other, in the country. How well
ordered and pretty is this house! If near it there was
some old edifice, abbey, or castle, it has been preserved.
The new building has been suited to the old; even if
detached and modern, it does not lack style; gable-ends,
mullions, broad-windows, turrets perched at every corner,
have a Gothic air in spite of their newness, Even this
cottage, though not very large, suited to people with a
moderate income, is pleasant to see with its pointed roofs,
its porch, its bright: brown bricks, all covered with ivy.
Doubtless grandeur is generally wanting; in these days
the men who mould opinion are no longer great lords,
but rich gentlemen, well brought up, and landholders ;
it is pleasantness which appeals to them. But how
they understand the word! All round the house is
turf fresh and smooth as velvet, rolled every morning.
In front, great rhododendrons form a bright thicket, in
which murmur swarms of bees; festoons of exotics
creep and curve over the short grass; honeysuckles
clamber up the trees; hundreds of roses, drooping over
the windows, shed their rain of petals on the paths.
Fine elms, yew-trees, great oaks, jealously tended, every-
where combine their leafage or rear their heads. Trees
have been brought from Australia and China to adorn
the thickets with the elegance or the singularity of
their foreign shapes; the copper-beech stretches over
the delicate verdure of the meadows the shadow of its
dark metallic-hued foliage. How delicious is the fresh-
ness of this verdure! How it glistens, and how it


456 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK Vv.


abounds in wild flowers brightened by the sun! What
care, what cleanliness, how everything is arranged, kept
up, refined, for the comfort of the senses and the
pleasure of the eyes! If there is a slope, streamlets
have been devised with little islets in the glen, peopled
with tufts of roses; ducks of select breed swim in the
pools, where the water-lilies display their satin stars.
Fat oxen lie in the grass, sheep ag white as if fresh
from the washing, all kinds of happy and model animals,
fit to delight the eyes of an amateur and a master.
We return to the house, and before entering I look upon
the view; decidedly the love of Englishmen for the
country is innate; how pleasant it will be from that
parlour window to look upon the setting sun, and the
broad network of sunlight spread across the woods!
And how cunningly they have disposed the house, so
that the landscape may be seen at distance between the
hills, and at hand between the trees! We enter. How
nicely everything is got up, and how commodious. The
smallest wants have been forestalled, and provided for;
there is nothing which is not correct and perfect; we
imagine that everything in the house has received a
prize, or at least an honourable mention, at some indus-
trial exhibition. And the attendance of the servants is
as good as everything else; cleanliness is not more
scrupulous in Holland; Englishmen have, in proportion,
three times as many servants as Frenchmen; not too
many for the minute details of the service. The domes-
tic machine acts without interruption, without shock,
without hindrance; every wheel has its movement and
its place, and the comfort which it dispenses falls like
honey in the mouth, as clear.and as exquisite as the
sugar of a model refinery when quite purified.


CHAP, VI. POETRY—TENNYSON. 457


We converse with our host. We very soon find that
his mind and soul have always been well balanced.
When he left college he found his career shaped out for
him; no need for him to revolt against the Church,
which is half rational; nor against the Constitution,
which is nobly liberal: the faith and law presented to
him are good, useful, moral, liberal enough to maintain
and employ all diversities of sincere minds. He became
attached to them, he loves them, he has received -from
them the whole system of his practical and speculative
ideas; he does not waver, he no longer doubts, he
knows what he ought to believe and to do. He is not
carried away by theories, dulled by sloth, checked by
contradictions. Elsewhere youth is like water, stagnant
or running to waste; here there is’a fine old channel
which receives and directs to a useful and sure end the
whole stream of its activities and passions. He acts,
works, rules. He is married, has tenants, is a magis-
trate, becomes a politician. He improves and rules his
parish, his estate, and his family. He founds societies,
speaks at meetings, superintends schools, dispenses
justice, introduces improvements; he employs his read-
ing, his travels, his connections, his fortune, and his
rank, to lead his neighbours and dependants amicably
to some work which profits themselves and the public.
He is influential and respected. He has the. pleasures
of self-esteem and the satisfaction of conscience. He
knows that he has authority, and that he uses it loyally,
for the good of others. And this healthy state of mind
is supported by a wholesome life. His mind is beyond
doubt cultivated and occupied; he is well-informed,
knows several languages, has travelled, is fond of all
precise information; he is kept by his newspapers


458 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


conversant with all new ideas and discoveries. But, at
the same time, he loves and practises all bodily exer-
cises. He rides, takes long walks, hunts, yachts,
examines for himself all the details of breeding and
agriculture ; he lives in the open air, he withstands the
encroachments of a sedentary life, which always else-
where leads the modern man to agitation.of the brain,
weakness of the muscles, and excitement of the nerves.
Such is this elegant and common-sense society, refined
in comfort, regular in conduct, whose dilettante tastes
and moral principles confine it within a sort of flowery
border, and prevent it from having its attention diverted.

Does any poet suit such a society better than Tenny-
son? Without being a pedant, he is moral; he may
be read in the family circle by night; he does not
rebel against society and life; he speaks of God and
the soul, nobly, tenderly, without ecclesiastical prejudice;
there is no need to reproach him like Lord Byron; he
has no violent and abrupt words, extravagant and
scandalous sentiments; he will pervert nobody. We
shall not be troubled when we close the book; we may
listen when we quit him, without being shocked by
the contrast, to the grave voice of the master of the
house, who reads evening prayers before the kneeling
servants. And yet, when we quit him, we keep a smile
of pleasure on our lips. The traveller, the lover of
archeology, has been pleased by the imitations of
foreign and antique sentiments. The sportsman, the
lover of the country, has relished the little country
scenes and the rich rural pictures. The ladies have
been charmed by his portraits of women; they are so
exquisite and pure! He has laid such delicate blushes
on those lovely cheeks! He has depicted so well the


CHAP, VI. POETRY—TENNYSON., 459


changing expression of those proud or candid eyes!
They like him because they feel that he likes them.
He even honours them, and rises in his nobility to the
height of their purity. Young girls weep in listening
to him; certainly when, a little while ago, we heard
the legend of Hlaine or Enid read, we saw the fair heads
drooping under the flowers which adorned them, and
white shoulders heaving with furtive emotion. And
how delicate was this emotion! He has not rudely
trenched upon truth and passion. He has risen to the
height of noble and tender sentiments. He has gleaned
from all nature and all history what was most lofty and
amiable. He has chosen his ideas, chiselled his words,
equalled by his artifices, successes, and versatility of
style, the pleasantness and perfection of social elegance
in the midst of which we read him. His poetry is
like one of those gili and painted stands in which flowers
of the country and exotics mingle in artful harmony
their stalks and foliage, their clusters and cups, their
scents and hues. It seems made expressly for these
wealthy, cultivated, free business men, heirs of the
ancient nobility, new leaders of a new England. It
is part of their luxury as well as of their morality; it
is an eloquent confirmation of their principles, and a
precious article of their drawing-room furniture.

We return to Calais, and travel towards Paris, with-
out pausing on the road. There are on the way plenty
of noblemen’s castles, and houses of rich men of busi-
ness. But we do not find amongst them, as in England,
the thinking elegant world, which, by the refinement of
its taste and the superiority of its mind, becomes the
guide of the nation and the arbiter of the beautiful.
There are two peoples in France: the provinces and


460 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


Paris; the one dining, sleeping, yawning, listening;
the other thinking, daring, watching, and speaking: the
first drawn by the second, as a snail by a. butterfly,
alternately amused and disturbed by the whims and the
audacity of its guide. It is this guide we must look
upon! Let usenter Paris! What a strange spectacle!
It is evening, the streets are aflame, a luminous dust
covers the busy noisy crowd, which jostles, elbows,
crushes, and swarms near the theatres, behind the
windows of the cafés. Have you remarked how all
these faces are wrinkled, frowning or pale; how anxious
are their looks, how nervous their gestures? . A violent
brightness falls on these shining heads; most are bald
before thirty. To find pleasure here, they must have
plenty of excitement: the dust of the boulevard settles
on the ice which they are eating; the smell of the gas
and the steam of the pavement, the perspiration left on
the walls dried up by the fever of a Parisian day, “the
human air full of impure rattle”—this is what they
cheerfully breathe. They are crammed round their
little marble tables, persecuted by the glaring light, the
shouts of the waiters, the jumble of mixed talk, the
monotonous motion of gloomy walkers, the flutter of
loitering courtesans moving about anxiously in the dark.
Doubtless their homes are not pleasant, or they would not
change them for these bagmen’s delights. We climb four
flights of stairs, and find ourselves in a polished, gilded
room, adorned with stuccoed ornaments, plaster statu-
ettes, new furniture of old oak, with every kind of
pretty nick-nack on the mantelpieces and the whatnots.
“Tt makes a good show ;” you can give a good reception
to envious friends and people of standing. It is an
advertisement, nothing more; we pass half-an-hour


hap ain ile


CHAP. VI. POETRY—TENNYSON. 461


there agreeably, and that is all. You will never make
more than a house of call out of these rooms; they are
low in the ceiling, close, inconvenient, rented by the year,
dirty in six months, serving to display a fictitious luxury.
All the enjoyments of these people are factitious, and, as
it were, snatched hurriedly; they have in them some-
thing unhealthy and irritating. They are like the cookery
of their restaurants, the splendour of their cafés, the
gaiety of their theatres. They want them too quick, too
pungent, too manifold. They have not cultivated them
patiently, and culled them moderately ; they have forced
them on an artificial and heating soil; they grasp them
in haste. They are refined and greedy; they need
every day a stock of word-paintings, road anecdotes,
biting railleries, new truths, varied ideas. They soon
get bored, and cannot endure tedium. They amuse
themselves with all their might, and find that they are
hardly amused. They exaggerate their work and their
expense, their wants and their efforts. The accumula-
tion of sensations and fatigue stretches their nervous
machine to excess, and their polish of social gaiety chips
off twenty times a day, displaying an inner ground of
suffering and ardour.

But how quick-witted they are, and how unfettered
is their mind! How this incessant rubbing has
sharpened them! How ready they are to grasp and
comprehend everything! How apt this studied and
manifold culture has made them to feel and relish
tendernesses and sadnesses, unknown to their fathers,
deep feelings, strange and sublime, which hitherto seemed
foreign to their race! This great city is cosmopolitan ;
here all ideas may be born; no barrier checks the mind:
the vast field of thought opgns before them without a


462 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK


beaten or prescribed track. Use neither hinders nor
guides them; an official Government and Church rid
them of the care of leading the nation: the two powers
are submitted to, as we submit to the beadle or the
policeman, patiently and with chaff; they are looked
upon asa play. In short, the world here seems but a
melodrama, a subject of criticism and argument. And
be sure that criticism and argument have full scope.
An Englishman entering on life, finds to all great ques-
tions an answer ready made. A Frenchman entering
on life finds to all great questions simply suggested
doubts. In this conflict of opinions he must create a
faith for himself, and, being mostly unable to do it, he
remains open to every uncertainty, and therefore to
every curiosity and to every pain. In this gulf, which
is like a vast sea, dreams, theories, fancies, intemperate,
poetic and sickly desires, collect and chase each other
like clouds. If in this tumult of moving forms we
seek some solid work to prepare a foundation for future
opinions, we find only the slowly-rising edifices of the
sciences, which here and there obscurely, like submarine
polypes, construct of imperceptible coral the basis on
which the belief of the human race is to rest.

Such is the world for which Alfred de Musset wrote:
in Paris he must be read. Read? We all know him
by heart. He is dead, and it seems as if we daily hear
him speak. A conversation among artists, as they jest
in a studio, a beautiful young girl leaning over her box at
the theatre, a street washed by the rain, making the black
pavement shine, a fresh smiling morning in the woods
of Fontainebleau, everything brings him before us, as
if he were alive again. Was there ever a more vibrat-
ing and genuine accent? This man, at least, never


CHAP. VI. POETRY—TENNYSON. 463


lied. He only said what he felt, and he has said it as
he felt it. He thought aloud. He made the confession
of every man. He was not admired, but loved; he
was more than a poet, he was a man. Every one
found in him his own feelings, the most transient, the
most familiar; he did not restrict himself, he gave
himself to all; he possessed the last virtues which
remain to us, generosity and sincerity. And he had
the most precious gift which can seduce an old
civilisation, youth. As he said, “that hot youth, a
tree with a rough bark, which covers all with its
shadow, prospect and path.” With what fire did he hurl
onward, love, jealousy, the thirst of pleasure, all the
impetuous passions which rise with virgin blood from
the depths of a young heart, and how did he make
them clash together! Has any one felt them more
deeply ? He was too full of them, he gave himself up
to them, was intoxicated with them. He rushed
through life, like an eager racehorse in the country,
whom the scent of plants and the splendid novelty of
the vast heavens urge, headlong, in its mad career, which
shatters all before him, and himself as well. He
desired too much; he wished strongly and greedily to
enjoy life in one draught, thoroughly ; he did not glean
or enjoy it; he tore it off like a bunch of grapes,
pressed it, crushed it, twisted it; and he remains with
stained hands as thirsty as before.’ Then broke forth
sobs which found an echo in all hearts. What!
so young, and already so wearied! So many precious
gifts, so fine a mind, so delicate a tact, so rich and


1 «*Q médiocrité! celui qui pour tout bien
T’apporte 4 ce tripot dégofitant de la vie
Est bien poltron au jeu s'il ne dit : Tout ou rien.”


464 MODERN AUTHORS BOOK V.


varied a fancy, so precocious a glory, such a sudden
blossom of beauty and genius, and yet anguish, disgust,
tears, and cries! What a mixture! With the same
attitude he adores and curses. Eternal illusion, invin-
cible experience, keep side by side in him to fight and
tear him. He became old, and remained young; he is
a poet, and he is a sceptic. The Muse and her
peaceful beauty, Nature and her immortal freshness,
Love and his happy smile, all the swarm of divine
visions barely passed before his eyes, when we see
approaching with curses, and sarcasms, all the spectres of
debauchery and death. He is as a man in a festive
scene, who drinks from a chased cup, standing up, in
front, amidst applause and triumphal music, his eyes
laughing, his heart full of joy, heated and excited by
the generous wine he quaffed, whom suddenly we see
growing pale; there was poison in the cup; he falls,
and the death-rattle is in his throat; his convulsed
feet beat upon the silken carpet, and all the terrified
guests look on. This is what we felt on the day when
the most beloved, the most brilliant amongst us, sud-
denly quivered from an unseen attack, and was struck
down, being hardly able to breathe, amid the lying
splendours and gaieties of our banquet.

Well! such as he was, we love him for ever: we
cannot listen to another; beside him, all seem cold or
false. We leave at midnight the theatre in which he
had heard Malibran, and we enter the gloomy rue des
Moulins, where, on a hired bed, his Rolla! came to
sleep and die. The lamps cast flickering rays on the
slippery pavement. Restless shadows march past the
doors, and trail along their dress of draggled silk to


1 See vol. i. p. 287, n. 1.


OHAP. VI, POETRY—TENNYSON 465


meet the passers-by. The windows are fastened; here
and there a light pierces through a half closed shutter,
and shows a dead dalilia on the edge of a window-sill.
To-morrow an organ will grind before these panes, and
the wan clouds will leave their droppings on these dirty
walls. From this wretched place came the most im-
passioned of his poems! These vilenesses and vul-
garities of the stews and the lodging-house caused this
divine eloquence to flow! it was these which at such a
moment gathered in this bruised heart all the splendours
of nature and history, to make them spring up in
sparkling jets, and shine under the most glowing
poetic sun that everrose! We feel pity; we think of
that other poet, away there in the Isle of Wight, who
amuses himself by dressing up lost epics. How
happy he is amongst his fine books, his friends, his
honeysuckles and roses! No matter. De Musset, in
this wretched abode of filth and misery, rose higher.
From the heights of his doubt and despair, he saw the
infinite, as we see the sea from a storm-beaten pro-
montory. Religions, their glory and their decay, the
human race. its pangs and its destiny, all that is sublime
in the world, appeared there to him in a flash of
lightning. He felt, at least this once in his life, the
inner tempest of deep sensations, giant-dreams, and
intense voluptuousness, the desire of which enabled
him to live, the lack of which forced him to die. He
was no mere dilettante; he was not content to taste
and enjoy; he left his mark on human thought; he
told the world what was man, love, truth, happiness.
He suffered, but he imagined; he fainted, but he
created. He tore from his entrails with despair the
idea which he had conceived, and showed it to the eyes
VOL. IV. 2H


466 MODERN AUTHORS. BOOK V.


of all, bloody but alive. That is harder and lovelier
than to go fondling and gazing upon the ideas of others.
There is in the world but one work worthy of a man,
the production of a truth, to which we devote ourselves,
and in which we believe. The people who have
listened to Tennyson are better than our aristocracy of
townsfolk and bohemians; but I prefer Alfred de
Musset to Tennyson.


INDEX.


—_@~—


ABELARD, i. 214, 217.

Addison, Joseph, iii. 68, 100, 112,
127 ; his life and writings, 150- 197,
438, "454 ; iv. 216, 234, 245 seq.,
283,

Adhelm, i. 88, 90, 91, 250.

Agriculture, improvement in, in six-
teenth century, i. 232 ; in the nine-
teenth, iii. 382 ; iv. 94 seg.

Akenside, Mark, iii. 376.

Alcuin, i, 83, 91.

Alexander VI., Pope, ii. 145.

- Alexandrian philosophy, i. 29.

Alfred the Great, i. 83, 89.

Alison, Sir Archibald, iii. 382.

Amory, Thomas, iii. 308.

Angelo, Michael, i. 247 ; ii. 67 ;
364.

Anglo-Saxon poetry, i. 66 seg.

Ann of Cleves, i, 251.

Anselm, i. 99.

Anthology, the, i. 282, 325.

Arbuthnot, Dr. John, iii. 227.


Architecture, Norman, Hoon 72s
the Tudor style, 235.
Ariosto, i. 250, 300 ; iii. 22.


Aristocracy, British, in the nineteenth
century, iv. 96 seq.

Arkwright, Sir Richard, iii. 141.

Armada, the, i. 232, 380.

Arnold, Dr. Thomas, iii. 461 ; iv. 108.

Arthur and Merlin, romance of, i.
100.

Ascham, Roger, i. 244, 334;

Athelstan, i. 45, 69.

Augier, Emile, iv. 145.

Austen, Jane, iii. 441.


ii, 143,


Bacon, Francis, Lord, i. 338, 348.
358 ; ii. 187, 193; iv. 229 seg.
251.

Bacon, Roger, i. 217.

Bain, Alexander, iv. 114.

Bakewell, Robert, iii. 141.

Bale, John, i. 250.

Balzac, Honoré de, i. 4 ; iv. 155, 209.

Barclay, Alexander, i. 223.

Barclay, John, iii. 100.

Barclay, Robert, ii. 221.

Barrow, Isaac, iii. 99, 104 seg.

Se Richard, i. 364; ii. 218 ; iii
00.

_| ar (Lewis) Practice of Piety, ii.
227.

Beattie, James, fii, 810, 377.

Beauclerk, Henry, i. 99.

Beaunont, Francis, i, 397, 420-433 ;
ii, 196, 203, 280.

Becket, Thomas & i. 129.

Beckford, W., iii. 429.

Bede, the Venerable, i. 83.

Bedford, Duke of (John Russell), iii.
126.

Beethoven, Lewis van, iii. 443.

Behn, Mrs. Aphra, ii. 357 ; iii. 47.

Bell, Currer. See Bronté, Charlotte.

Bénoit de Sainte Maure, i. 100.

Bentham, Jeremy, iii. 141; iv. 233.

Bentley, Richard, iii. 115, 116.

Beowulf, an Anglo-Saxon epic poem,
i. 62-67.

Béranger, ii, 153; iv. 255.

Bergmann’s translations of Icelandic
legends, i. 52.

Berkeley, Bishop, iii, 115.


468


Berkley, Sir Charles, ii. 333.

Berners, Lord, i. 251.

Best, Paul, ii. 209.

Bible, English. See Wiclif, Tyndale.

Bilney, Thomas, martyrdom of, ii.
Wit

Blackmore, Sir Richard, iii. 6.

Blount, Edward, i. 259.

Boccaccio, i. 171, 178 ; iii. 62, 63.

Bodley, Sir Thomas, i. 334.

Boethius, i. 83-87.

Boileau, ii. 338, 394; iii. 4, 59, 89,
335, 345 ; iv. 337.

Boleyn, Ann, i. 251, 376.

Bolingbroke, Lord (Henry St. John),
iii. 76, 80, 81, 115, 337; iv. 216.

Bonner, Edmund, ii. 185.

Borde, Andrew, i. 250.

Borgia, Cesar, ii. 145, 146.

Borgia, Lucretia, i. 246 ; ii. 146.

Bossu (or Lebossu), iii. 4, 179, 187.

Bossuet, i. 24 ; iii. 17, 360; iv. 283.

Boswell, James, iii. 316 seq.

Bourchier. See Berners.

Boyle, the Hon. Robert, iii. 115,

Bridaine, Father, iii. 108.

Britons, ancient, i. 46, 47.

Bronté, Charlotte (Currer Bell), iii.
441, 462; iv. 113.

Browne, Sir Thomas, i. 333, 335,
343-347 ; ii. 187, 193.
Browning, Mrs., iii. 462; iv. 114.
Brunanburh, Athelstan’s victory at,
celebrated in Saxon song, i. 69.
Buckingham, 2d Duke of (George
Villiers), ii. 335, 350, 389; iii. 5.

Buckinghamshire, Duke of (John
Sheffield), ii, 394.

Backle, Henry Thomas, iv. 75 seq.,
105.

Bulwer, iii. 441; iv. 118.

Bunyan, John, ii, 221-238, 322.

Burke, Edmund, iii. 115, 136-149,
816 ; iv. 254, 283.

Burleigh, Lord (William Cecil), i.
872; iv. 256, 257.

Burnet, Bishop, iii. 100.

Burney, Francisca (Madame D’Ar-
blay), iii. 87, 140, 316; iv. 239.
Burns, Robert, iii, 43; sketch of his

life and works, 389-412.


INDEX.


Burton, Robert, i. 235, 336-342; it
187, 280.

Busby, Dr. Richard, iii. 50.

Bute, Lord, iii. 74 seg., 126.

Butler, Bishop, iii. 141.

Butler, Samuel, ii. 328-332 ; iii, 116.

Byng, Admiral, iii. 73, 125.

Byron, Lord, iii. 341; his life and
works, iv. 1-69.


CapMon, hymns of, i. 74, 79; his
metrical paraphrase of parts of the
Bible, 79-82, 250.

Calamy, Edmund, ii. 221.

Calderon, i. 218, 380; ii. 1, 354.

Calvin, John, ii. 154, 208 ; iif. 113.

Camden, William, i. 334. _

Campbell, Thomas, iii. 427; iv. 16.

Carew, Thomas, i. 323.

Carey, Mr., iii. 429.

Carlyle, Thomas, i 8; iii. 462; iv.
105, 113 ; style and, mind, 285 seq. ;
vocation, 312 seg.; philosophy,
morality, and criticism, 323 seg. ;
conception of history, 338.

Carteret, John (Earl Granville), iii,
127.

Castlereagh, Lord, ii. 2.

Catherine, St., play of, i. 100.

Cellini, Benvenuto, i. 34, 153, 248.

Cervantes, i. 134, 203, 300 ; iii. 268.

Chalmers, George, i. 94.

Chandos, Duke of (John Brydges), iii.
337.

Chapman, George, ii. 4,

Charles of Orléans, i. 111, 213.

Charles I. of England, iv. 239.

Charles IT. and his court, ii. 332 seq.

Chateaubriand, i. 6 ; iii. 177.

Chatham. See Pitt.

Chaucer, i. 141-143, 170, 212; iii.
63, 64.

Chesterfield, Lord, iii, 80 seg., 316,
347.

Chevy Chase, ballad of, i. 168.

Chillingworth, William, iL 308; ii.
189, 192; iii, 112.

Christianity, introduction of, into
Britain, i. 72, 82.

Chroniclers, French, i. 110.

Chronicles, Saxon, i. 88.


INDEX.


Cibber, Colley, iii. 337, 350.

Cimbrians, the, i. 50.

Clarendon, Lord Chancellor (Edward
Hyde), i. 333; ii. 332.

Clarke, Dr. John, iii. 95, 113.

Classic spirit in Europe, its origin and
nature, ii. 372-378.

Se authors translated, i, 243,
257.

Clive, Lord, iv. 238.

Coleridge, Hartley, i. 381.

Coleridge, Samuel Taylor, iii. 422
seq.

Collier, Jeremy, iii. 6, 50, 51.

Collins, William, iii. 337.

Colman, George, ii. 446.

Comedy-writers, English, ii. 399 seg.

Comines, Philippe de, i. 168.

Commerce in sixteenth century, i.
232 ; iv. 88 seg.

Comte, Auguste, iv. 361.

Condillac, Stephen-Bonnot de, iv. 320,
361.

Congreve, William, ii. 399, 412, 420-
430 ; iii. 87.

Conybeare, J. J., i. 69 seg.

Corbet, Bishop, ii. 189.

Corneille, i. 21 ; iii. 4, 21.

Cotton, Sir Robert, i. 334.

Court pageantries in the sixteenth
century, i. 236, 237.

Coventry, Sir John, ii. 334,

Coverdale, Miles, ii. 167.

Cowley, Abraham, i. 328-330; ii.
186, 239.

Cowper, William, iii. 414-422.

- Crabbe, George, iii. 420; iv. 16.
Cranmer, Archbishop, ii. 159, 171.
Crashaw, Richard, ii. 186,

Criticism and History, iv. 227 seq.

Cromwell, Oliver, i. 8; ii, 188, 216 ;
iv. 240, 301, 345.

Crowne, John, ii. 357.

Curll, Edmund, iii. 350.


DANIEL, Samuel, i. 334.

Dante, L 182, 213, 217 ; ii 295; iv.
322.

Darwin, Charles, i. 18.

Davie, Adam, i. 124.

Davies, Sir John, ii. 186.


469


Daye, John, ii. 206.

Decker, Thomas, i. 383.

De Foe, iii 121, 255-268 ; iv. 96.

Delille, James, iii. 355.

Denham, Sir John, ii. 395-398.

Denmark, i, 38, 42.

Dennis, John, iii. 156.

Descartes, ii. 345 ; iii, 17; iv. 320.

Dickens, Charles, iii, 441, 462; his
novels, iv. 115-164,

Domesday Book, i. 93, 102, 139.

Donne, John, i. 326, 327 ; ii. 189.

Dorat, C. J., iii. 848; iv. 55.

Dorset, Earl of (Charles Sackville),
ii, 388, 389.

Drake, Admiral, i. 232.

Drake, Dr. Nathan, i. 282, 233, 369,

Drama, formation of the, i. 897 seq.

Drayton, Michael, i. 276 seqg., 287 ;
ii, 186.

Drummond, William, ii. 280.

Dryden, John, i. 24; ii. 2793; his
comedies, ii. 850-356, 394 ; his life
and writings, iii, 2-72, 157, 334;
iv. 314,

Dudevant, Madame (George Sand),
iv. 144.

Dunstan, St., i. 45 seg.

Durer, Albert, ii. 150-153.

Dyer, Sir Edward, i. 274.


EaRLe, John, i. 334,

Eddas, the Scandinavian, i.
iv. 31.

Edgeworth, Maria, iv. 207.

Edward VI., ii. 178.

Edwy and Elgiva, story of, i. 47, 48.

Eliot, George. See Evans, Mary A.

England, climate of, i. 40.

English Constitution, formation of
the, i. 140, 141.

Elizabeth, Queen, i. 234-240, 332,
868.

Elwin, Rev. Whitwell, iii, 332, 341
seq.

Frigena, John Scotus, i. 83, 89.

Esménard, Joseph Alphonse, i. 221.

Essex, Robert, Earl of, i. 368, 369,
372.

Etherege, Sit George, ii. 357, 399.


52-58 ;


470


Evans, Mary A. (George Eliot), iii.
441 ; iv. 109, 118.
Eyck, Van, i. 203.


FaLKLAnp, Lord, i. 333.

Farnese, Pietro Luigi, ii 146.

Farquhar, George, ii, 399, 400, 429,
432.

Faust, iii. 387.

Featley, Dr., ii. 213.

Feltham, Owen, i. 334.

Fenn, Sir John, i. 231. .

Ferguson, Dr. Adam, iii, 118; iv
233.

Fermor, Mrs. Arabella, iii. 847, 348.

Feudalism, the formation and charac-
ter of, i, 95.

Fichte, iv. 322.

Fielding, Henry, ii. 3, 325 ; 3 iii, 289-
300, 325.

Filmer, Sir Robert, iii. 119.

Finsborough, Battle of, an Anglo-
Saxon poem, i. 69.

Fisher, John, Bishop of Rochester, i.
875 ; ii. 175, 176.

Flemish artists, i, 229, 239,

Fletcher, Giles, ii, 186.

Fletcher, John, i. 397, 420-424, 428-
432 ; ii. 196, 203, 280.

Ford, John, i. 397, 406 seg., 425-427 ;
iii, 38.

Fortescue, Sir John, i. 151 seg.

Fox, Charles James, iii. 127, 134 seq.

Fox, Henry (1st Lord Holland), iii.
77 seq.

Fox, George, ii 213, 221, 322.

Fox, John, ii. 157, 163 seg.

Francis of Assisi, i. 218.

Freeman, Edward A., i. 96,

Frisians, the, i, 38, 39.

Froissart, i. 110, 186, 171, 174, 178.

Froude, i A,, i 139; id 159 seq.

Fuller, Thomas, ii, 2,


Garmar, Geoffroy, i. 100, 122.

Gainsborough, Thomas, landscape
painter, ii, 446.

Garrick, David, iii. 316, 821,

Gaskell, Mrs. Elizabeth C., iii, 441;
iv. 113,


INDEX.


Gay, John, ii, 433; iii. 81, 82, 331,
367-369.
Geoffrey of Monmouth, i. 122, 181.
German ideas, introduction of, in
Europe and England, iv. 312 seq.
Germany, drinking habits in, ii 148,
149.

Gibbon, Edward, iii. 316.

Gladstone, William Ewart, iv. 237.

Glencoe, massacre of, iv. 276 seq.

Glover, Richard, iii. 377.

Godwin, William, iii. 454.

Godwin, Mrs. William. See Woll-
stonecraft, Mary.

Goethe, i. 7, 24; ii, 295, 304; iii.
296, 887, 388, 425 ; iv. 84-42, 312


seq.

Goldemith, Oliver, ii, 433; iii, 122,
310-316.

Goltzius, i, 265.

Gower, John, i, 119, 220.

Grammont, Count de, ii, 325, 373,
374.

Gray, Thomas, iii. 376.

Greene, Robert, i. 278, 279, 283, 284,
332, 383-385 ; ii. 65.

Grenville, George, iii, 126.

Gresset, J. B. Lewis, iii. 348.

Grey, Lady Jane, i. 243, 368.

Grostéte, Robert, i. 119, 124.

Grote, George, iv. 113.

Guicciardini, Ludovic, i. 282.

Guido, i, 22.

Guizot, i. 1, 144; iv. 289, 248, 282.

Guy of Warwick, i 100.


Hasinaton, William, i. 326.”

Hackluyt, Richard, i. 334.

Hale, Sir Matthew, ii, 161.

Hales, John, ii 333; ii 189, 191,
192; iii, 118.

Halifax, Charles Montague, Barl of,
iii, 153, 160, 200, 206.
Hall, Bishop Joseph, i. 834; ii, 188,
Hallam, Henry, i 158 ; iv. 240.
Hamilton, Anthony, ii 325 seg.
Hamilton, Sir William, iv. 114.

Hampden, John, iv. 239.
Hampole, i. 124.
Hardyng, John, i. 366.


. Harrington, Sir John, i. 322.


INDEX.


47]


Harrison, William, i. 283 seg. ; iv. | lonnanp and its legends, i. 48, 52.


355.

Hartley, David, iv. 865.

Hastings, Warren, iii. 135 ; iv. 238,
253 seg., 260.

Hawes, Stephen, i. 223,

Hegel, i. 24, 29, 215; iv. 233, 317


seq.

Heine, i. 3, 39; ii, 59; iii 380, 388,
425, 443.

Hemling, Hans, i. 229.

Henry Beauclerk, i. 99.

Henry of Huntingdon, i. 48, 100.

Henry VIII. and his Court, i. 367,
368 ; ii. 159.

Herbert, George, i. 326.

Herbert, Lord, i. 333.

Herder, John Godfrey von, i. 8.

Herrick, Robert, i. 323, 324.

Herschel, Sir John, iv. 390, 399.

Hertford, Earl of, i. 368.

Hervey, Lord, iii. 362.

Heywood, Mrs. Eliza, iii, 351.

Heywood, John, i. 250, 381.

Higden, Ralph, i. 118.

Hill, Aaron, iii. 337.

History, philosophy of.
troduction, passin.

Hobbes, Thomas, ii. 342-350 ; iii.
41, 355, 399.

Hogarth, William, iii. 324-329.

Holinshed’s Chronicles, i. 236, 237,
334, 375.

Holland, Lord. See Fox, Henry.

Holland, i. 37 seq.

Homer and Spenser, i. 294.

Hooker, Richard, i. 833; ii. 189 seq.

Horn, King, romance of, i. 100, 134.

Hoveden, John, i. 119.

Howard, John, iii. 141.

Howard, Sir Robert, iii. 27.

Howe, John, iv. 272.

Hugo, Victor, i. 8, 224; iii, 69, 424,
443.

Hume, David, iii, 117, 310; iv.
265, 346, 361, 399.

Hunter, William, martyrdom of, ii.
183, 184.

Hutcheson, Francis, iii, 118, 141 ;
iv. 233.

Hutchinson, Col. John, iv. 348.


See the In-


Independency in the sixteenth cen-
tury, ii. 209 seg., 265.

Industry, British, in the nineteenth
century, iv. 90 seg.

Irish, the ancient, i. 46.

Italian writings and ideas, taste for,
in sixteenth century, i. 244; vices
of the Italian Renaissance, ii. 142-
148,


James I, and his Court, i. 321 seg.

James IL, iv. 249.

Jewell, Bishop, i. 377.

Johnson, Samuel, ii. 3; iii, 115, 141,
316-329, 339-341, 379; iv. 337.

Joinville, Sire de, i. 110.

Jones, Inigo, i. 235; ii. 5.

Jones, Sir William, iii. 316.

Jonson, Ben, i. 281, 361, 381, 382;
ii. 2, 3, 280; iv. 75; sketch of
his life, ii. 1-5 ; his learning, style,
etc., 6-14; his dramas, 14-21;
his comedies, 21-38 ; compared
with Molitre, 87; fanciful come-
dies and smaller poems, 38-45.

Jordaens, Jacob, i. 239.

Jowett, Benjamin, iii. 462 ; iv. 321.

Judith, poem of, i. 77-79.

Junius, Francis, i. 81,

Junius, Letters of, iii. 127 seg. ; iv. 7.

Jutes, the, and their country, i, 38


8eq.


Keats, John, iv. 41.

Kemble, John M., i. 45, 62 seq.
Knighton, Henry, i 166.

Knolles, Richard, i. 334.

Knox, John, ii 148, 177 ; iv. 349.
Kyd, Thomas, i. 382.


LACKLAND, John, i 136.

La Harpe, iv. 337.

Laing, David, ii. 3.

Lamartine, i. 8; iii, 425, 443,

Lamb, Charles, iii. 423, 427.

Laneham, Robert, i. 238.

Lanfranc, first Norman Archbishop
of Canterbury, i. 99.

Langtoft, Peter, i 119.


472


Languet, Hubert, i. 262.

Latimer, Bishop, i. 145; ii 162,
176 seq.

Laud, Archbishop, ii. 193; iv. 258.

Lavergne, Léonce de, i. 40.

Law, William, iii. 116.

Layamon, i. 123.

Lebossu. See Bossu.

Lebrun, Ponce Denis Ecouchard, i.
221.

Lee, Nathaniel, iii. 28.

Leibnitz, iii. 358.

Leighton, Dr. Alexander, ii, 208,
264.

Lely, Sir Peter, iii. 140.

Leo X., Pope, ii 144.

Lessing, Gotthold Ephraim, i. 6.

Lingard, Dr. John, i. 42, 43.

Locke, John, ii. 239; iii, 112, 116
seg., 141; iv. 251, 361, 365.

Lockhart, John Gibson, iii. 431 seq.

Lodge, Thomas, i. 276, 381.

Lombard, Peter, i. 212, 216.

Loménie de Brienne, Cardinal, iv.
290.

London in Henry VIII.’s time, i.
233; in the present day, iv. 89
SCq.

Longchamps, William, i 129.

Longus, Greek romance writer, i. 282.

Lorris, Guillaume de, i. 111, 127.

Loyola, i. 218, 230 ; iv. 236.

Ludlow, Edmund, ii. 310.

Lulli, a renowned Italian composer,
iii, 16.

Lully, Raymond, i. 218.

Luther, Martin, i. 34, 230; ii, 142-
145, 148.

Lydgate, John, Abbot of St. Alban’s,
i, 221-224.

Lyly, John, i, 259.

Lyly, William, i. 243.


Maoav3ay, Thomas Babington (Lord),
iii. 461 ; his works, iv. 227-284.
Mechiavelli, i. 246.
Mackenzie, Henry, iii. 875, 392.
Mackintosh, Sir James, iv. 240.
Macpherson, James, iii. 375, 876.
Malcolm, Sir John, iii. 429.
Malherbe, Francis de, iv. 314.


INDEX.


Malte-Bran, Conrad, i. 38.

Mandeville, Bernard, iii. 115..

Manners of the people in the sixtesnth
century, i. 239 seq.

Marguerite of Navarre, i. 178.

Marlborough, Duchess of, iii. 362.

Marlborough, Duke of, iii. 78, 121;
iv. 216.

Marlowe, Christopher, true founder of
the dramatic school, i. 284, 285,
332, 381; iii. 423; his dramas, i.
385-397.

Marston, John, ii. 4.


| Martyr, Peter, ii. 171.


Martyrs in the reign of Mary, ii.
181-186. |

Marvell, Andrew, iii. 47.

Masques under James I., i. 238 ; ii.
42, 43.

Massillon, ii. 178.

Massinger, Philip, i. 381, 382, 405 seq.

Maundeville, Sir John, i. 121, 122,
137.

May, Thomas, ii. 220.

Medici, Lorenzo de, i. 246.

Melanchthon, Philip, ii, 157, 171.

Merlin, i. 100.

Meung, Jean de, i. 124, 220.

Michelet, Jules, i. 6, 73; iv. 309.

Middleton, Thomas, i. 397.

Mill, John Stuart, iii. 462; iv. 105,
357-426.

Milton, John, i. 80, 290, 888 ; ii. 239-
256 ; his prose writings, ii. 257-279 ;
his poetry, 279-318 ; iii. 179, 180;
iv. 234.

Molitre, i. 288 ; ii. 57, 60, 398 seg. ;
iii, 280°; iv. 152.

Mommsen, Theodor, i. 25.

Montagu, Lady Mary Wortley, iii.
289, 336, 346.

Montesquieu, Ch., i. 27, 38.

Moore, Thomas, iii. 310, 427 seg. ; iv.
51.

More, Sir Thomas, i. 884, 377.

Miiller, Max, iv. 359.

Muller, Ottfried, i. 8.

Murray, John, iii, 431; iv. 51, 54,

Musset, Alfred de, i. 3, 269, 385; ii.
10, 56; iii, 65, 380, 425, 448 ; iv.
454 seg.; 462, 466.


INDEX.


Nasu, Thomas, i, 888,

Nayler, James, ii, 209, 214, 220.

Neal’s History of the Puritans, ii.
214-217, 264.

Newcastle, Duchess of (Margaret Lu-
cas), ii, 898.

Newspaper, first daily, iii, 382.

Newton, Sir Isaac, iii, 95, 115; iv.
399.

Nicole, Peter, iii. 88.

Norman Conquest, the, i. 92-95; its
effects on the national language and
literature, 116 seg., 164-169; iv.
(ple Pe .

Normens; the, character of, i. 97 ; how
they became French, 97; their
taste and architecture, 98, 99; their
literature, chivalry, and success,
99-104 ; their position and tyranny
in England, 115-120 ; iv. 71, 72.

Nott, Dr. John, i. 258.

Novel, the English—its characteristic,
iii, 257 seg.; the modern school of
novelists, iv. 113 seg.

Nut-brown Maid, the,—an ancient
ballad, i. 256.


Oates, Titus, iii. 52.

Occam, William, i. 218.
Occleve, Thomas, i, 221.
Ochin, Bernard, ii. 171.
Oliphant, Mrs., iii. 288.
Olivers, Thomas, iii. 98.
Orley, Richard van, i. 230.
Orrery, Earl of, iii. 337.
Otway, Thomas, iii. 28, 38, 41.
Ouseley, Sir William, iii. 429.
Overbury, Sir Thomas, i. 335.
Owen, Dr. John, ii. 221.


PacanisM of poetry and painting in
Italy in the sixteenth century, i.
224 seq.

Paley, William, iii. 112.

Palgrave, Sir Francis, i 39.

Parnell, Dr. Thomas, iii. 331.

Pascal, iii. 112, 254, 361; iv. 288.

Pastoral poetry, i 276.

Peele, George, i. 381.

Penn, William, iii. 95; iv. 272.

Pepys, Samuel, ii, 334, 336, 840, 341.


VOL. IV.


478


Percy, Thomas, iff, 423,

Pérelle, 1 4,

Potrarch, £ 171, 250, 251, 256,

Philips, Arbrose, ili, 831,

Philosophy and history, iv. 285 seg.

Philosophy and poétry, connection of
i, 213.


Picts, i 46.

Pickering, Dr. Gilbert, iii. 8.

Piers Plowman’s Crede, i. 165.

Piers Ploughman, Vision of, i, 161-
165, 250.

Pitt, William, first Earl of Chatham,
iii, 77, 125 seg.; iv. 238.

Pitt, William (second son of the pre-
ceding), iii, 127. 186, 148, 412,
413,

Pleiad, the, i. 24.

Pluche, Abbé, iii. 171.

Poe, Edgar Allen, iii. 261.

Pepe, Alexander, iii. 44, 151, 156,
227, 383-364; iv. 15-17, 22, 245


seq.
Prayer-book, English, ii. 171-175.
Preaching at the Reformation period,
BOs) 16s .
Presbyterians and Independents in
the sixteenth century, ii. 209, 266,
267. .
Price, Dr. Richard, iii. 118, 141; iv.
233.
Priestley, Dr., iii. 413.
Prior, Matthew, iii. 331, 364.
Proclus, i. 215.
Prynne, William, ii, 220.
Pulci, an Italian painter, i. 246.
Pultock, Robert, iii. 308.
Purchas, Samuel, i. 334.
Puritans, the, ii. 203 seg., 320 seg.
Puttenham, George, i. 250, 334.
Pym, John, iv. 239.


QUARLES, Francis, i. 325; ii. 186.


RaBELAIS, i, 202, 300, 361; ii. 67,
338 ; iii. 238, 308.

Racine, ii. 74; iii, 4, 89; iv. 159,
283,

Raleigh, Sir Walter, i.
372; ii. 187.

Rapin, iii, 4.


289, 334,


2a


474A


Ray, John, iii. 115, 116.

Reformation in England made way for
‘by the Saxon character and the
situation of the Norman Church, i.
162-169, 225 ; ii. 148 seq.

Reid, Thomas, iii, 118, 141, 310; iv.
233, 357.

Renaissance, the English : manners of
the time, i. 227-249; the theatre
its original product, 359 seq.

Renan, Ernest, i. 25, 172.

Restoration, period of the, in England,
ii. 319 seg., 430.

Revolution, period of the, in Eng-
land, iii. 72 seg.

Reynolds, Sir Joshua, ii. 446 ; iii.
140, 316.

Richard Coeur de Lion, i. 134.

Richardson, Samuel, ii. 325 ; iii. 115,
270-288, 316, 329, 337, 375.

Ridley, Nicholas, ii. 181, 182.

Ritson, Joseph. See Robin Hood.

Robert of Brunne, i. 123, 124.

Robert of Gloucester, i. 123.

Robertson, Dr. William, iii, 310,
330, 379; iv. 346.

Robespierre, iii. 89.

Robin Hood ballads, i. 145-149, 240,
250.

Rochester, Earl of (John Wilmot), ii.
337 seg., 394; iii, 165, 365; iv.
55, 355.

Rogers, John, martyrdom of, ii. 182,
183.

Rogers, Samuel, iv. 16.

Roland, Song of, i. 100, 106 seq.

Rollo, a Norse leader, i. 97.

Ronsard, Peter de, i, 24.

Roscellinus, i. 217.

Roscommon, Ear] of, ii. 394.

Roses, wars of the, i. 152, 1538, 168,
231, 392.

Rotheland, Hugh de, i. 119.

Rousseau, Jean-Baptiste, iii. 356.

Rousseau, Jean Jacques, iii. 321,

/ $48, 378; iv. 361.

Royer-Collard, Pierre-Paul, iv. 402.

Rubens, i. 204, 288, 239, 314; ii, 1,
67 ; iii, 864.

Riickert, iii. 425.

Russell, Lord William, if, 334.


INDEX.


SACHEVERELL, Dr., iii. 74, 121.
Sackville, Thomas (Earl of Dorset),

; i 251.

| Sacy, Lemaistre de, ii. 169.

| Sadeler, engravings of, i. 265.

| St. Alban’s, Abbot of. See Lydgate,

John.
| St. John, See Bolingbroke, Lord.
St. Theresa, i 218.

| Saint-Simon, Duke of, i. 4 ; iv. 6, 158.

Sainte-Beuve, i. 8.

Saintré, Jehan de, i. 136.

Sand, George. See Dudevant, Ma-
dame.

Savage, Richard, iii, $51.

Sawtré, William, i. 167.

Saxons, the, i 37 seg. ; character of
the race, 93; contrast with. the
Normans, 98; their endurance,
138 seg. ; their invasion of Eng-
land, iv. 70-72.

Scaliger, iv. 337.

Schelling, i, 29.

Schiller, iii, 388, 425, 443.

Scotland in the seventeenth century,
ii, 323, 324.

Scott, Sir Walter, £ 6; ii 355; iii.
2 seg., 199 seg., 310, 425 ; iv. 6,
9, 216; his novels and poems, iii.
430-442,

Scotus, Duns, i. 215 seg. ; iv. 373.

Scudéry, Mademoiselle de, i. 263.

errr Sir Charles, i, 326; ii, 386,

Selden, John, i. 334.

Seres, William, ii. 206.

Settle, Elkanah, iii, 5, 27.

Sévigné, Madame de, iii, 346; iv
283.

Shadwell, Thomas, ii. 857; iii. 27
56.

Shaftesbury, Anthony Cooper, third
Earl of, iii. 118.

Shakspeare, William, i 252, 276,
278, 3382; ii 1; iii, 12, 28 seg. ;
iv. 75 ; general idea of, ii, 45-49 ;
his life and character, 50-67 ; his
style, 67-74 ; and manners, 74-83 ;
his dramatis persone, 83-90 ; his
men of wit, 90-95; and women,
96-101 ; his villains, 101-104 ; the


INDEX.


principal characters in: his plays,
104-123; fancy, imagination,—
ideas of existence—love ; harmony
between the artist and his work,
124-141,

heftield, John, See Buckinghamshire,
Duke of.

Shelley, Percy Bysshe, iii, 425, 454-
460 ; iv. 41.

Shenstone, William, iii, 377.

Sheridan, Richard Brinsley, ii. 435
seqg.; iii. 127, 310; iv. 16.

Sherlock, Bishop, iii. 99, 118, 271.

Shirley, James, i. 382; ii. 350.

Sidney, Algernon, i. 333; ii, 239, 334.

Sidney, Sir Philip, i. 252, 262-276,
333, 362; ii. 193; iv. 75.

Skelton, John, i. 224, 250.

Smart, Christopher, iii. 377.

Smith, Adam, iii, 118, 141; iv. 233,
271.

Smith, Sydney, iii. 86, 461.

Smollett, Tobias, iii. 123, 301-306,
311.

Society in Great Britain in the present
day, iv. 96 seqg.; in England and in
France, 454 seq.

South, Dr. Robert, iii. 99, 104, 108-
shh

Southern, Thomas, iii. 28.

Southey, Robert, iii, 808, 421, 427 ;
iv. 47, 255.

Speed, John, i. 334.

Spelman, Sir Henry, i. 334.

Spencer, Herbert, iv. 75, 114.

Spenser, Edmund, i. 252, 276, 288,
383; ii, 239, 294; his life, cha-
racter, and poetry, i. 289-321 ; iii
22; iv. 75, 430, 447.

Stanley, Arthur Penrhyn, iii. 462 ; iv.
321.

Steele, Sir Richard, iii 127, 151; iv.
216.

Stendhal, Count de, i. 33, 97, 191.

Sterling, John, iv. 287 seq.

Sterne, Laurence, iii. 806-811, 375.

Stewart, Dugald, iii, 141, 810, 406.

Stillingfleet, Bishop, iii. 99, 112, 113.

Stowe, John, i. 334,

Strafford, Thomas Wentworth, Earl
of, iv. 239 seq.


475


Strafford, William, i. 232.

Strype, John, i. 364.

Stubbes, John, i. 235, 241, 242.

Suckling, Sir John, i. 323, 3253; ii.
3890.

Sue, Eugéne, iv, 161.

Surrey, Henry Howard, Earl of, i.
251-259 ; ii, 160.

Swift, Jonathan, ii. 325; iii. 4, 115,
116, 127, 150 seg.; iv. 216, 257;
sketch of his life, iii, 198-210 ; his
wit, 210-214 ; his pamphlets, 214-
226; his poetry, 226-238; his
philosophy, etc., 238-256.


TAILLEFER, i. 103, 118,

Tasso, i. 300, 311.

Taylor, Jeremy, i. 334; ii, 189, 193.
202.

Temple, Sir William, ii. 378; iii,
205, 239, 330; iv. 284.

Teniers, David, iii, 438.

Tennyson, Alfred, iii. 462; iv. 114,
427-466.

Thackeray, William M., iii. 441, 461;
his novels, iv. 165-226.

Theatre, the, in the sixteenth century,
i, 360; after the Restoration, ii,
850, 351, 399 seg. ; iii, 6 seg.

Thibaut of Champagne, i. 111.

Thierry, Augustin, i. 6, 42, 72, 116,
117; iv. 282.

Thiers, Louis Adolphe, iv. 248, 282,

Thomson, James, iii. 371-374.

Thorpe, John, i. 52, 53, 60, 71.

Tickell, Thomas, iii, 331.

Tillotson, Archbishop, iii. 99 seg.

Tindal, Matthew, iii. 115,

Titian, i. 319; ii. 67.

Tocqueville, Alexis de, i. 25.

Toland, John, iii. 115.

Toleration Act, the, iv. 272, 273.

Tomkins, Thomas, ii. 184.

Townley, James, ii. 446.

Turner, Sharon, i. 61, 69 seq.

Tutchin, John, iii. 351.

Tyndale, William, ii. 166 seg., 177
206.


UrFs, Honoré a’, i 263, 480.
Usher, James, i. 334,


476


VANBRUGH, Sir John, ii. 398-432.

Vane, Sir Harry, ii. 336.

Vega, Lope de, i. 218, 380; ii. 1,
354.


INDEX.


Wells, Dr. William Charles, iv. 390.
Wesley, John, iii, 95-99.

Wetherell, Elizabeth, iv. LOY.
Wharton, Lord, iii. 362.


Village feasts of sixteenth century | Whitefield, George, iii, 95-98.


described, i. 240-242.
Villehardouin, a French chronicler, i.
110, 137.
Villiers, George. See Buckingham.
Vinci, Leonardo da, i. 22.
Voltaire, i. 21, 22 ; iii. 321, 356 ; iv.
50, 337.
Vos, Martin de, i. 265.


Wace, Robert, i. 100, 103 seg., 118.

Waldenses, the, i. 217.

Waller, Edmund, i. 326; ii. 239,
350, 389-395; iii, 330.

Walpole, Horace, iii. 347.

Walpole, Sir. Robert, iii, 74, 82.

Walton, Isaac, i. 285, 384,

Warburton, Bishop, iii. 115.

Warner, William, i. 286.


Wiclif, John, i. 166, 391; ii 159,
166.

Wilkes, John, iii. 126,

William IIl., ii. 379 ; iv. 73.

Williara of Malmesbury, i. 100.

Williar- the Conqueror, i. 102 seq.

Windhain, William, iii 127.

Witenagemote, the, i. 58.

Wither, George, ii. 189.

Wollaston, William Hyde, iv. 233.

Wolsey, Cardinal, i 224; ii. 161.

Wollstonecraft, Mary (Mrs. Godwin),
tase

Wordsworth, William, iii. 423, 444-
454,


| Wortley, Lady Mary. See Montagu,


Lady Mary.
Wyatt, Sir Thomas, i. 250, 251.


Warton, Thomas, i. 94, 117-119, 126, | Wycherley, William, i. 24; ii. 357-


127, 219; iii 423.
Watt, James, iii. 141.
Watteau, Anthcny, iii. 346.
Watts, Isaac, iii. 377.


Webster, John, i, 397, 406 seg. ; ii.


il rete Bis},


371, 385, 398, 399, 419; iii 41,
165.


Yonag, Charlotte Mary, iv. 109.
Young, Arthur, iii, 141.
Young, Edward, iii, 377.


THE END.


> Gial oe”
iTaine, Hippolyte
Puiotory of English 935


, MAR 3 = 1958 x


y


Taine, Hipvolyte PR


| Hietay of English 93

| literature 28
1889
| vob.4


)


76869


8 Du:


