The Ancient Regime (Hippolyte Taine (John Durand, trans.), 1876)
==========================================================
Taine's scientific history of the Revolution's causes: race, milieu, moment applied to 1789. Public domain. Internet Archive full text (ancientregime00tainuoft).

ANCI


F


E


fs ~

b> 4

‘ > ee 4
‘ 4 r i

‘ i“ s
7 % . b ve
s) ?

ree >


NT REI


sp aclak


i


; 3i5ix
é a +
; : 4 P
$53 :
Le
o
aa SG ‘
i
N . :
et < OX
y Be


=
3


TAINE’S WORKS,


UnirorM LIBRARY EDITION. 12M0, GREEN °
CLoTH, $2.50 PER VOLUME.


ENGLISH LITERATURE, 3 vols.
ON INTELLIGENCE, 2 vols,


LECTURES ON ART. First Series, Contain-
ing The Philosophy of Art; The Ideal in Art,


LECTURES ON ART. Second Series. Con-
taining The Philosophy of Art in Italy; The Phi-
lorophy of Art in the Netherlands; The Philosophy
of Art in Greece.


NOTES ON ENGLAND, With Portrait.
NOTES ON PARTS.


A TOUR THROUGH THE PYRENEES,
(The Same, Illustrated by Gustave Doré. 8vo,
cloth, $10.00; full morocco, $20.00.)


ITALY, ROME, AND NAPLES.
ITALY, FLORENCE, AND VENICE.
THE ANCIENT REGIME.


HENRY HOLT & CO., Publishers, _
25 Bond Street, New York.


ae


'THE ORIGINS OF CONTEMPORARY « FRANCE )


’ ; THE
| ANCIENT REGIME


BY


HIPPOLYTE ADOLPHE TAINE


Author of ‘ ‘A History of English Literature,” “Ttaly,” etc, —


TRANSLA T ED By)! L


JOHN DURAND.


NEW YORK
HENRY HOLT AND COMPANY
1876


__ NOTE BY THE TRANSLATOR.


*


In the title of this work, Z’ Ancien Régime, I have translated


_the French word azcien by the English word “ancient,” not


because the latter accurately expresses the meaning of the
former, but because the French term azcien, as here used,
implies not merely an o/d but a sfecial régime; and because
since the publication of De Tocqueville’s work, LZ’ Ancien
hégime et la Revolution, the term “ancient” applied to”
régime seems a naturalized translation of ancien, through its
frequent use in conversation, as well asin print ; lastly, because
Webster seems to sanction the translation of ancien by “an-
cient” in giving the French term as one of the etymological


sources of the English term.
J. Ds


PREFACE


In 1849, being twenty-one years of age, I was an elector and
was very much perplexed; for I had to participate in the election
of fifteen or twenty deputies and, moreover, according to French
practice, to select not only men but to discriminate as to theories.
It was optional with me to be royalist or republican, democrat or
conservative, socialist or Bonapartist; I was neither, nor even
anything at all, and, at times, I envied so many people of faith
who had the good fortune to be something. After hearing the
various doctrines I felt there was undoubtedly some void in my
mind. Motives valid for others were not so for me; I could not
understand how, in politics, one could make up his mind
according to his predilections. Peremptory advisers constructed


-aconstitution as if it were a house, according to the most


attractive, the newest and the simplest plan, holding up for
consideration the mansion of a marquis, the domicile of a bour-
geois, a tenement for workmen, barracks for soldiers, the
communist philanstery and even a camp for savages. Each one
asserted of his model: “This is the true abode of man, the only
one a man of sense can dwell in.” In my opinion, the argument
was weak; personal fancies, in my judgment, are not authorities.
It appears to me that a house might not be built for the architect,
nor for itself, but for the owner and occupant. To ask the
opinion of the owner, to submit plans to the French people of
its future dwelling, was too evidently a parade or a deception: in
such cases the question is tantamount to the answer, and besides,
a*


vi PREFACE.


had this answer been unconditioned, France was scarcely more
at liberty to give it than I was; ten million ignorant men cannot —
constitute a wise one. A people, on being consulted, may,
indeed, tell the form of government they like, but not the form
they need; this is possible only through experience; time is
required to ascertain if the political dwelling is convenient, du-
rable, proof against inclemencies, suited to the occupant’s habits, —
pursuits, character, peculiarities and caprices. Now, as proof of
this, we have never been content with our. own; within eighty
years we have pulled it down thirteen times in order to rebuild it,
and this we have done in vain, not having yet found one that
suits us. If other people have been more fortunate, if, in other
countries, many political institutions are durable and last indefi-
nitely it is because they have been organized in a peculiar manner,
around a primitive and massive nucleus, supported on some old
central edifice, many times repaired but always preserved, en-
larged by degrees, adapted and modified according to the wants
of the inhabitants. None of them were built at one stroke, on
a new pattern, and according to the provisions of reason alone.
We must, perhaps, admit that there is no other way of building
permanently and that the sudden concoction of a new constitu-
tion, suitable and durable, is an undertaking surpassing the forces
of the human mind. In any event, I came to the conclusion
that if we should ever discover the one we need it will not be by
the means in practice. The point is to discover it, if it exists, and
not to put it to vote. In this respect, our preferences would be
fruitless ; nature and history have chosen for us in advance; it is
for us to adapt ourselves to them, as it is certain they will not
accommodate themselves to us. The social and political mould
into which a nation may enter and vemain is not subject to its
will, but determined by its character and its past. It is essential
that, even in its least traits, it should be shaped on the living
traits to which it is applied; otherwise it will burst and fall to
pieces. Hence, if we should succeed in finding ours, it will only
be through a study of ourselves, while the more we understand


“


PREFACE, vil


exactly what we are the more certainly will we distinguish what


best suits us. We ought, therefore, to reverse the ordinary meth-
ods and form some conception of the nation before formulating
its constitution. Doubtless the first operation is much more
tedious and difficult than the second. How much time, how
much study, how many observations rectified one by the other,
how many researches in the past and the present, over all the
domains of thought and of action, what manifold and secular
labors to acquire an accurate and complete idea of a great people
which has lived a people’s age and which still lives! But it is
the only means of avoiding error after having reasoned on
nothing; and I promised myself that, for my own part, if I should
some day undertake to form a political opinion, it would be only
after having studied France.

What is contemporary France? To answer this question we
must know how this France is formed, or, what is still better, to
act as spectator at its formation. At the end of the last century,
like a moulting insect, it underwent a metamorphosis. Its
ancient organization was dissolved; it tears away its most pre-


cious tissues and falls into convulsions which seem mortal. Then,


after multiplied throes and a painful lethargy, she re-establishes
herself. But her organization is no longer the same: by silent
interior travail a new being is substituted for the old. In 1808,
its leading characteristics are decreed and defined: departments,
arondissements, cantons and communes, no change has since
taken place in its exterior divisions and functions; Concordat,
Code, Tribunals, University, Institute, Préfets, Council of State,
Taxes, Collectors, Cours des Comptes, a uniform and centralized
administration, its principal organs, are still the same; nobility,
commoners, artisans, peasants, each class has henceforth the
position, the sentiments, the traditions which we see at the
present day. Thus the new creature is at once stable and com-
plete; consequently its structure, its instincts and its faculties
mark in advance the circle within which its thought and its action
will be stimulated. Around it, other nations, some precocious,


viii | PREFACE.


others backward, all with greater cautiousness, some with better
success, operate in like manner the transformation which transfers
them from the feudal to the modern order of things; the gesta-
tion is universal and all but simultaneous. But, beneath the new
forms as beneath the ancient, the weak is always the prey of the
strong. Woe to those whose too lingering evolution surrenders _
them to the neighbor suddenly emancipated from his chrysalis
state and the first to go forth fully armed! Woe likewise to him |
whose too violent and too abrupt evolution has badly balanced
his internal economy, and who, through the exaggeration of his
governing apparatus, through the deterioration of his deep-seated
organs, through the gradual impoverishment of his vital tissues


is doomed to inconsiderate acts, to debility, to impotency, amidst —


sounder and better balanced neighbors! In the organization
which France effected for herself at the beginning of the century,
all the general lines of her contemporary history were traced,—
political revolutions, social Utopias, division of classes, policy of
the church, conduct of the nobility, of the commonalty, and of
the people, the development, the direction, or deviation of —
philosophy, of letters and of the arts. Hence, when we wish to
understand our present condition our attention always reverts to
the terrible and fruitful crisis by which the ancient régime pro-
duced the Revolution and the Revolution the new régime.
Ancient régime, Revolution, new régime, I am going to try to -
describe these three conditions with exactness. I presume to
declare here that I have no other object in view. A historian
may be allowed to act as a naturalist: I have confronted my
subject as I would the metamorphosis of an insect. Moreover,
the event is so interesting in itself it is worth the trouble of being
observed for itself alone, and no effort is required to exclude
mental reservations. Partiality being set aside, curiosity becomes
scientific and is wholly centred in the secret forces which guide
the marvellous process. These forces are the situation, the pas-
sions, the ideas, the wills of each group, and we are able to
distinguish them, almost to measure them. They lie under our


PREFACE. ix


eyes; we are not reduced to conjectures about them, to uncertain
divinations, to vague indications. By singular good fortune we


- perceive the men themselves, their exterior and their interior.


The French of the ancient régime are still within range of our
observation. Each of us, in our youth, has been able to associate
with some of the survivors of this vanished society. Many of
their mansions still remain with their apartments and furniture


intact. By means of.their pictures and engravings we follow


them in their domestic life, we see their costumes, their attitudes
and their gestures. With their literature, their philosophy, their
sciences, their gazettes, and their correspondences, we can repro-


duce all their thoughts, and even their familiar conversation. A


multitude of memoirs, issuing for the past thirty years from
public and private memoirs, lead us from one drawing-room to
another as if we were introduced into them. ‘The letters and
journals of travellers from other countries control and complete,
by their independent delineations, the portraits which this society
has traced of itself. It has set forth everything pertaining to
itself except what it regarded as commonplace and familiar to its
contemporaries, what appeared technical, tiresome and vulgar,
what affected the province, the commonalty, the peasant, the
artisan, the administration and the household. I was desirous of
supplying these omissions, and, outside the small circle of learned
and cultured Frenchmen, of comprehending France. Owing to
the kindness of M. Maury and the precious indications of M.
Boutaric, I have examined a mass of manuscript documents, the
correspondence of a large number of intendants, directors of
excise, farmers-general, magistrates, employés, and private persons
of every kind and of every degree during the thirty last years of
the ancient régime, the reports and memorials of the various
departments of the royal household, the proces-verbaux and cahiers
of the States-General, in one hundred and seventy-six volumes,
the correspondence of the military officers in 1789 and 1790, the
letters, memoirs and statistical details contained in the hundred
cartons of the ecclesiastical committee, the correspondence in


x PREFACE,


ninety-four files of the departmental and municipal administra-
tions with the ministers from 1790 to 1799, the reports of the
councillors of State on their mission at the end of 1801, the
correspondence of préfets under the Consulate, the Empire, and
under the Restoration up to 1823, and a number of documents
so unknown and so instructive that, indeed, the history of the
Revolution seems still unpublished. At least, we have but these
documents to show us living figures, the petty nobles, curates,
monks and nuns of the provinces, lawyers, aldermen and bour-
geoisie of the towns, the rural attorneys and village syndics, the
laborers and artisans, officers and soldiers. ‘These only enable us
to see, nearly in detail, the condition of men, the interior of a
parsonage, of a convent, of a town council, the wages of a
workman, the produce of a field, the taxes imposed on a peasant,
the occupation of a collector, the outlay of a noble or of a
prelate, the budget, the retinue and ceremonial of a court.
Owing to these we can give precise figures, and know, hour by
hour, the occupation of a day, and, better still, tell the order of
a bill of fare, and recompose an ostentatious toilet. We have,
again, marked out on paper and classed by dates, the varieties of
dress worn by the queen, Marie Antoinette, and, on the other
hand, we can picture to ourselves the attire of a peasant, describe
his bread, state the kinds of flour composing it, and give in sows
and deniers how much it cost him a pound. With such resources
one becomes almost the contemporary of the men whose history
one writes, and, more than once, at the Archives, in tracing their


_handwriting on the yellow paper, I was tempted to speak to
them aloud.


August, 1875.


CON T ENTS.


PREFACE, = - - - e e - = . ° v


BOOK FIRST.
THE STRUCTURE OF SOCIETY.


CuHapTeER I : : . . . . . ea

THE ORIGIN OF PRIVILEGES.—I. Services and recompenses of the clergy,

p- 1.—II. Services and recompenses of the nobles, p. 4.—II. Services
and recompenses of the king, p. 9.


CuarTeR II. : : . . : i ae
PRIvILEGES.—I. Number of the privileged classes, p. 13.—II. Their pos-
sessions, capital, and revenue, p. 13.—III. Their immunities, p 16.—IV.
Their feudal rights.—These advantages the remains of primitive sover-
eignty, p. 19.—V. They may be justified by local and general services,

p- 26.


Cuaprer III. : gis P . i ee
LOCAL SERVICES DUE BY THE PRIVILEGED CLASSES.—I. Examples in Ger-
many and England.—These services not rendered by the privileged
classes in France, p. 28.—II. Resident seigniors.—Remains of the be-
neficent feudal spirit—They are not rigorous with their tenants but no
longer retain the local government.—Their isolation.—Insignificance or
mediocrity of their-means of subsistence.—Their expenditure.—Not in
a condition to remit dues.—Sentiments of the peasantry towards them,
p- 30.—III. Absentee seigniors,—Vast extent of their fortunes and
rights. — Possessing greater advantages they owe greater services.—
Reasons for their absenteeism.—Effect of it.—Apathy of the provinces.
—Condition of their estates.—They give no alms.—Misery of their
tenantry.—Exactions of their farmers.—Exigencies of their debts.—
State of their justiciary.—Effects of their hunting rights.—Sentiments
of the peasantry towards them, p. 40.


CHAPTERIV . ‘ : ; , ; : at hs OS
PUBLIC SERVICES DUE BY THE PRIVILEGED CLASSES.—I. An English ex-
ample.—The privileged class renders no service in France.—The influ-
ence and rights which remain to them.—They use them only for them-
selves, p. 60.—II. Assemblies of the clergy.—They serve only ecclesias-


_


xii


CONTENTS.


tical interests. —The clergy exempted from taxation.—Solicitations of its
agents.—Its zeal against the protestants, p, 61.—III. Influence of the no-
bles.—Regulations in their favor.—Preferments obtained by them in the
church.—Distributign of bishoprics and abbeys.—Preferments obtained
by them from the State.—Governments, offices, sinecures, pensions, gra-
tuities.—Instead of being useful they are an expense, p. 64.—IV. Isolation
of the chiefs.—Sentiments of subordinates.—Provincial nobility.—The
curates, p. 72.—V. The king.—The most privileged of all.—Having mo-
nopolized all powers, he takes upon himself their functional activity.—
The burden of this task.—He evades it or is incompetent.—His con-
science at ease.—France is his property.—How he abuses it.—Royalty
the center of abuses, p. 77.—VI. Latent disorganization in France, p. 84.


BOOK SECOND.
HABITS AND CHARACTERS.


CHAPTER I 3 : 4 : : et . . - SBS
THE PRINCIPLE OF SOCIAL HABITS UNDER THE ANCIENT REGIME.—The


Court and a life of pomp and parade.—I. The physical aspect and the
moral character of Versailles, p. 87.—II. The king’s household.—Its
officials and expenses. —His military family, his stable, kennel, chapel,
attendants, table, chamber, wardrobe, outhouses, furniture, journeys,
p- 91.—III. The society of the king.—Officers of the household.—In-
vited guests, p. 98.—IV. The king’s occupations.—Rising in the morn-
ing, mass, dinner, walks, hunting, supper, play, evening receptions.—
He is always on parade and before company, p. 104.—V. Diversions of
the royal family and of the court.—Louis XV.—Louis XV., p. 109.—
VI. Other similar lives.—Princes and princesses.—Seigniors of the
court.—Financiers and parvenues.—Ambassadors, ministers, governors,
officers-généraux, p. 113.—VII. Prelates, seigniors and minor provincial
nobles.—The feudal aristocracy transformed into a drawing-room group,
p- 119.


CuHAPTeR II . : ; : é s : “20 ee
DRAWING-ROOM LIFE.—I. Perfect only in France.—Reasons for this de-


rived from the French character.—Reasons derived from the tone of the
court.—This life becomes more and more agreeable and absorbing, p.
123.—II. Subordination to it of other interests and duties.—Indifference
to public affairs. —They are merely a subject of jest.—Neglect of private
affairs.—Disorder in the household and abuse of money, p. 126.—III.
Moral divorce of husband and wife.—Gallantry.—Separation of parents
and children. —Education, its object and omissions.—The tone of servants
and purveyors.—Pleasure-seeking, universal, p. 131.—IV. The charm
of this life.—Good-breeding in the 18th Century.—Its perfection and
its resources.—Taught and prescribed under feminine authority, p. 138.
—V. What constitutes happiness in the 18th Century.—The fascination
of display.—Indolence, recreations, light conversation, p. 143.—VI.
Gayety in the 18th Century.—Its causes and- effects: —Toleration and


CONTENTS. xiii


license.— Balls, fétes, hunts, banquets, pleasures.— Freedom of the
magistrates and prelates, p. 147.—VII. The principal diversion, elegant
comedy.—Parades and extravagance, p. 152.


Cuarter III ‘ : ‘ F ‘ ‘ seh Sy
DISADVANTAGES OF THIS DRAWING-ROOM LIFE.—I. Its barrenness and
artificiality. Return to nature and sentiment, p. 157.—II. Its impres-
sionability the final trait which completes the physiognomy of the
century.—Date of its advent.—Its symptoms in art and in literature.—

Its dominion in private.—Its affectations.—Its sincerity.—Its delicacy,

‘p. 160.—III. The failings of character thus formed.—Adapted to one
situation but not to a contrary situation.—Defects of intelligence.—De-
fects of disposition.—Such a character is disarmed by good-breeding,


p- 165. ;
BOOK THIRD.


THE SPIRIT AND THE DOCTRINE.


CHAPTER I .- : . » : ‘ ; PR YL
THE COMPOSITION OF THE REVOLUTIONARY SPIRIT.—Scientific acquisitions
its first element.—I. The accumulation and progress of discoveries in
science and in nature.—They serve as a starting-point for the new phi-
losophers, p. 170.—II. Change of the point of view in the science of
man.—It is detached from theology and is united with the natural
sciences, p. 175.—III. The transformations of history.—Voltaire.—
Criticism and conceptions of unity.—Montesquieu.—An outline of social
laws, 177.—IV. The transformation of psychology.—Condillac.—The
theory of sensation and of signs, p. 181.—V. The analytical method.—
Its principle.—The conditions requisite to make it productive.—These
conditions wanting or inadequate in the 18th century.—The truth and
survival of the principle, p. 183.


CHAPTER II ; ; ; ; : f “ic 84
THE CLASSIC SPIRIT, THE SECOND ELEMENT.—I. Its signs, duration and
power.—lIts origin and public supporters.—Its vocabulary, grammar and
style.—Its method, merits and defects, p. 184.—II. Its original de-
ficiency.—Signs of this in the 18th century.—It grows with time and
success.—Proofs of this growth in the 18th century.—Serious poetry,
the drama, history and romances.—Short-sighted views of man and of
human existence, p. 194.—III. The philosophic method in conformity
with it.—Ideology.— Abuse of the mathematical process.—Condillac,
Rousseau, Mably, Condorcet, Volney, Sieyés, Cabanis, and de Tracy.
—Excesses of simplification and boldness in organizing, p. 201.


Cuapter III ; ? : é ; ; - 204
COMBINATION OF THE TWO ELEMENTS.—I. The doctrine, its pretensions,
and its character.—A new authority for reason in the regulation of human
affairs.—Government thus far traditional, p. 204.—II. Origin, nature and
value of hereditary prejudice.— How far custom, religion and government


b


CONTENTS.


are legitimate, p. 207—III. The classic intellect incapable of accepting
this point of view.—The past and present titles of tradition misunder-
stood.—Reason undertakes to set them aside, p. 211.—IV. Two stages
in this operation.—Voltaire, Montesquieu, the deists and the reformers
represent the first one.—What they destroy and what they respect, p. 214.
—V. The second stage, a return to nature.—Diderot, d’Holbach and the
materialists.—Theory of animated matter and spontaneous organization.
—The moral of animal instinct and self-interest properly understood, p.
216.—VI. Rousseau and the spiritualists.—The original goodness of
man.—The mistake committed by civilization.—The injustice of property
and of society, p. 221.—VII. The forlorn hope of the philosophic party.
—Naigeon, Sylvain Maréchal, Mably, Morelly.—The entire discredit of
traditions and institutions derived from it, p. 230.


CHAPTER IV . # i uae : 5 g see
THE ORGANIZATION OF SOCIETY IN THE FUTURE.—I. The mathematical


CHAPTER I. - ‘ f z ‘ : . eam


method.—Definition of man in the abstract.—The social contract.—Inde-
pendence and equality of the contractors.—All equal before the law and
each sharing in the sovereignty, p. 232.—II. The first result.—The
theory easily applied.—Confidence in it due to belief in man’s inherent
goodness and reasonableness, p. 234.—III. The inadequacy and fragility


_of reason in man.—The rarity and inadequacy of reason in humanity.


—Subordination of reason in human conduct.— Brutal and dangerous
forces. —The nature and utility of government.—Government impossible
under the new theory, p. 238.—IV. The second result.—The new theory
leads to despotism.—Precedents for this theory.—Administrative central-
ization.—The Utopia of the Economists.—Invalidity of preceding rights.


—Collateral associations not tolerated.—Complete alienation of the in- |


dividual from the community.— Rights of the State in relation to
property, education and religion.—The State a Spartan convent, p. 244. ©


—V. Complete triumph and last excésses of classic reason.—How it be-
comes monomania.—Why its work is not enduring, p. 250.


BOOK FOURTH.
THE PROPAGATION OF THE DOCTRINE.


SUCCESS OF THIS PHILOSOPHY IN FRANCE.—Failure of the same philoso-


phy in England.—I. Causes of this difference.—The art of writing in
France.—Its superiority at this epoch.—It serves as the vehicle of new
ideas.—Books are written for people of the world.—The philosophers are


people of the world and consequently writers.—This accounts for philoso- |


phy descending to the drawing-room, p. 253.—II. Owing to this method
it becomes popular, p. 256.—III. Owing to style it becomes pleasing. —
Two stimulants peculiar to the 18th century, coarse humor and irony, p-
257.—1V. The art and processes of the masters.—Montesquieu.—Vol-
taire.—Diderot.—Rousseau.—‘‘ The Marriage of Figaro,” p. 259.


CONTENTS. XV


CHAPTER II : : . : : : ee
THE FRENCH PuBLIC.—I. The Aristocracy.—Novelty commonly repug-

nant to it.—Conditions of this repugnance.—Example in England, p.
277.—II. The opposite conditions found in France.—Indolence of the
upper class.—Philosophy seems an intellectual drill.—Besides this, a
subject for conversation.—Philosophic converse in the 18th century.—
Its superiority and its charm.—The influence it exercises, p. 279.—III.
Further effects of indolence.— The sceptical, licentious and seditious
spirit.— Previous resentment and fresh discontent at the established
order of things.—Sympathy for the theories against it—How far ac-
cepted, p. 284.—IV. Their diffusion among the upper class.—Progress of
incredulity in religion.—Its causes.—It breaks out under the Regency.—
Increasing irritation against the clergy.—Materialism in the drawing-
room.—Estimate of the sciences.—Final opinion on religion.—Scepti-
cism of the higher clergy, p. 287.—V. Progress of political opposition.
—lIts origin.—The economists and the parliamentarians.—They prepare
the way for the philosophers.— Political fault-finding in the drawing-
rooms.—Female liberalism, p. 294.—VI. Infinite, vague aspirations.—
Generosity of sentiments and of conduct.—The mildness and good’
intentions of the government.—lIts blindness and optimism, p. 297.


CuapTerR III “ee : : ‘ : . 7 308
THE MIDDLE CLASS.—I. The former spirit of the Third-Estate.—Public
_ matters concern the king only.—Limits of the Jansenist and parliament-
arian opposition, p. 305.—II. Change in the condition of the bourgeois.—
He becomes wealthy.—He makes loans to the State.—The danger of his
creditorship.—He interests himself in public matters, p. 307.—III. He
rises on the social ladder.—The noble draws near to him.—He becomes
cultivated.—He enters into society.—He regards himself as the equal of
the noble.—Privileges an annoyance, p. 311.—IV. Philosophy in the
minds thus fitted for it.—That of Rousseau prominent.—This philosophy
in harmony with new necessities.—It is adopted by the Third-Estate, p. .
315.—V. Its effect therein.—The formation of revolutionary passions.—
Levelling instincts.—The craving for dominion.—The Third-Estate de-
cides and it constitutes the nation.—Chimeras, ignorance, exaltation, p.
- 319.—VI. Summary, p. 327..


BOOK FIFTH.


THE PEOPLE.


CHAPTER I. + 329
I. Privations. Ss ituites one XIV. 2 Veder Laas XV. Fae Louis
XVI, p. 329.—II. The condition of the peasant during the last thirty
years of the Ancient Régime.—His precarious subsistence.—State of
agriculture.—Uncultivated farms.—Poor cultivation.—Inadequate wa-
ges.—Lack of comforts, p. 337.-—III. Aspects of the country and of the
peasantry, p- 342.—IV. How the peasant becomes a proprietor.—He


xvi CONTENTS.


is no better off.—Increase of jase’, He: is the “mule” of the Ancient
Régime, P+ 345+ ;


Cuaprer ID. : : : ; : : - 3498
TAXATION THE PRINCIPAL CAUSE OF MISERY.—I. Direct taxes.—State of
different domains at the end of the reign of Louis XV.—Levies of the
tithe-owner and of the fisc.—What remains to the proprietor, p. 349.
II. State of certain provinces on the outbreak of the Revolution.—The
taille, and other imposts.—The proportion of these taxes in relation to’
income.—The sum total immense, p. 351.—III. Four direct taxes on
the common laborer, p. 353.—IV. Collections and seizures, p. 354.—V.
Indirect taxes.—The salt-tax and the excise, p. 358.—VI. Why taxation
is so burdensome.— Exemptions and privileges, p. 362. VII. The? |
octrois of towns.—The poor the greatest sufferers, p. 368.—VIII. Com- 7
plaints in the memorials, p. 370. {


CuaptTer III : : : : , : - 3748
INTELLECTUAL STATE OF THE PEOPLE.—I. Intellectual incapacity.—How
ideas are transformed into marvellous stories, p. 374.—II. Political in-
capacity.—Interpretation of political rumors and of government action, 3
p- 377-—IllI. Destructive impulses.—The object of blind rage.—Dis- ~
trust of natural leaders.—Suspicion of them changed into hatred.—Dis-"
position of the people in 1789, p. 379.—IV. Insurrectionary leaders and
recruits. —Poachers.—Smugglers and dealers in contraband salt.—Ban-
dittii-Beggars and vagabonds.—Advent of brigands.—The people of
Paris, p. 380.


Cuaprer IV é ‘ : : : ‘ . 390
I. Military force declines.—How the army is recruited.—How the soldier)
is treated, p. 390.—II. The social organization is dissolyed.—No cent
ee. —Inertia of the provinces.—Ascendency of soe P- 3


and Sigets the sole surviving fikces, p- 395-


CHAPTER V_. ere ae ; ‘ : » - a
I, p. 398.—II, p. 400.


NOTES.


~ Note 1, p. 403.—Note 2, p. 404.—Note 3, p. 409.—Note 4, p. bis —Note
5) P- 412.


THE ANCIENT REGIME.


BOOK FEIRST:
The Structure of Society.


CHAPTER I.


THE ORIGIN OF PRIVILEGES.—I. Services and Recompenses of the Clergy.
—II. Services and Recompenses of the Nobles.—III. Services and Recom-
penses of the King.


In 1789 three classes of persons, the Clergy, the Nobles, and
the King, occupied the most prominent position in the State,
with all the advantages which it comports; namely, authority,
property, honors, or,’at the very least, privileges, immunities,
favors, pensions, preferences, and the like. If they occupied
this position for so long a time, it is because for so long a time
they had deserved it. They had, in short, through an immense


and secular effort, constructed by degrees the three principal
foundations of modern society.


L

Of these three superadded foundations the most ancient and
deepest was the work of the clergy. For twelve hundred years
and more they had labored upon it, both as architects and work-
men, at first alone and then almost alone. In the beginning,
during the first four centuries, they constituted religion and the
church. Let us ponder over these two words, in order to weigh
them well. On the one hand, in a society founded on conquest,


hard and cold like a machine of brass, forced by its very struct-
I


2 THE ANCIENT REGIME. BOOK I,


ure to destroy among its subjects all courage to act and all de- ;
sire to live, they had proclaimed the “glad tidings,” held forth
the “kingdom of God,” preached loving resignation in the hands
of a Heavenly Father, inspired patience, gentleness, humility,
self-abnegation, and charity, and opened the only issues by which
man stifling in the Roman ergastulum could again breathe and.
see daylight—and this is religion. On the other hand, in a State
gradually undergoing depopulation, crumbling away, and fatally
becoming a prey, they had formed a living society governed by
laws and discipline, rallying around a common object and a
common doctrine, sustained by the devotion of chiefs and by
the obedience of believers, alone capable of subsisting beneath
the flood of barbarians which the empire in ruin suffered to es
in through its breaches—and this is the church.

It continues to build on these two first foundations, and after
the invasion, for over five hundred: years, it saves what it can
still save of human culture... It sends missionaries to the bar-
barians or converts them directly after their entrance, which is a“
wonderful advantage. Let us judge of it by a single fact: In
Great Britain, which like Gaul had become Latin, but whereof
the conquerors remained pagan during a century and a half, arts,
‘industries, -society, language, all were’ destroyed; nothing re-
mained of an entire people, either massacred or fugitive, but
slaves. We have still to divine their traces; reduced to the con-
dition of beasts of burden, they disappear from history. Such
might have been the fate of Europe if the clergy had not
promptly tamed the fierce brutes to which it belonged. Before
the bishop in his gilded cope, before the monk, “‘emaciated, clad
in skins,” wan, “dirtier and more spotted than a chameleon,”!
the converted German stood fear-stricken as before a sorcerer.
In his calm moments, after the chase or inebriety, the vague div-
ination of a mysterious and grandiose future, the dim conception |
of an unknown tribunal, the rudiment of conscience which he
already had in his forests beyond the Rhine, arouses in him
through sudden alarms half-formed, menacing visions. At the —
moment of violating a sanctuary he asks himself whether he —
may not fall on its threshold with vertigo and a broken neck? —


1 “Les Moines d’Occident,” by Montalembert, I. 277; St. Lupicin before the Burgun- 5
dian King Chilperic, II. 416; St. Karileff before King Childebert; cf. passim, Gregory of
‘Tours and the Bollandist collection.


? No legend is more frequently encountered; we find it as late as the twelfth century.


|


CHAP. I. THE STRUCTURE OF SOCIETY. 3


Convicted through his own perplexity, he stops and spares the
farm, the village, and the town which live under the priest’s pro-
tection. If the animal impulse of rage, or of primitive lusts,
leads him to murder or to rob, later, after satiety, in times of
sickness or of misfortune, taking the advice of his concubine or
of his wife, he repents and makes restitution twofold, tenfold, a
hundredfold, unstinted in his gifts and immunities.1 Thus, over
the whole territory the clergy maintain and enlarge its asylums
for the oppressed and the vanquished. On the other hand,
among the warrior chiefs with long hair, by the side of kings
clad in furs, the mitred bishop and abbot, with shaven brows,
take seats in the assemblies; they alone know how to use the pen


and how to discuss. Secretaries, councillors, theologians, they par-


ticipate in all edicts; they have their hand in the government;
they strive.through its agency to bring a little order out of im-
mense disorder; to render the law more rational and more hu-
mane, to re-establish or preserve piety, instruction, justice, prop-
erty, and especially marriage. To their ascendency is certainly
due the police system, such as it was, intermittent and incom-
plete, which prevented Europe from falling into a Mongolian an-
archy. If, down to the end of the twelfth ‘century, the clergy’
bears heavily on the princes, it is especially to repress in them
and beneath them the brutal appetites, the rebellions of flesh and
blood, the outbursts and relapses of irresistible ferocity which are
undermining the social fabric. Meanwhile, in its churches and
in its convents, it preserves the ancient acquisitions of humanity,
the Latin tongue, Christian literature and theology, a portion of
pagan literature and science, architecture, sculpture, painting, the
arts and industries which aid worship, the more valuable indus-
tries which provide man with bread, clothing, and shelter, and
especially the greatest of all human acquisitions, and the most


_ opposed to the vagabond humor of the idle and plundering bar-
_barian, the habit and taste for labor. In the districts depopu-


lated through Roman exactions, through the revolt of the Ba-
gaudes, through the invasion of the Germans, and the raids of
brigands, the Benedictine monk built his cabin of boughs amid
briers and brambles;? jarge areas around him, formerly culti-


1 Chilperic, for example, acting under the advice of Fredegonde after the death of their


‘children.


2 Montalembert, z4z¢, II. book 8; and especially ‘Les Forets de la France dans !’antiq-
uité et au Moyen Age,” by Alfred Maury. Sfcve et repres is a phrase constantly recur-
ring in the lives of the saints, 6


4 THE ANCIENT REGIME. BOOK I.


vated, are nothing but abandoned thickets. Along with his as-
sociates he clears the ground and erects buildings; he domesti-
cates half-tamed animals; he establishes a farm, a mill, a forge,
an oven, and shops for shoes and clothing. According to the
rules of his order, he reads daily for two hours; he gives seven
hours to manual labor, and he neither eats nor drinks more than
is absolutely essential. ‘Through his intelligent, voluntary labor,
conscientiously performed and with a view to the future, he pro-
duces more than the layman. Through his temperate, judicious,
economical system he consumes less than the layman. Hence
it is that where the layman had failed he sustains himself and
even prospers.! He welcomes the unfortunate, feeds them, sets
them to work, and unites them in, matrimony; beggars, vaga-
bonds, and fugitive peasants gather around the sanctuary. ‘Their
camp gradually becomes a village and next a small town; man
ploughs as soon as he can be sure of his crops, and becomes the
father of a family as soon as he considers himself able to provide
for his offspring. In this way new centres of agriculture and in-
dustry are formed, which likewise become new centres of popu-
lation.? |

To food for the body add food for the soul, not less essential ;
for, along with aliments, it was still necessary to furnish man
with inducements to live, or, at the very least, with the resigna-
tion which makes life endurable; also with the affecting or poetic
reverie which supplies the place of absent felicity. Down to the
middle of the thirteenth century the clergy stands almost alone
“in furnishing this. ‘Through its innumerable legends of saints,
through its cathedrals and their construction, through its statues
and their expression, through its services and their still transpar-
ent meaning, it rendered visible “the kingdom of God,” and
set up an ideal world at the end of the actual world, like a
magnificent golden pavilion at the end of a miry morass.’ The


1 We find the same thing to-day with the colonies of Trappists in Algiers.

2 “ Polyptique d’Irminon,” by Guérard. In this work we see the prosperity of the domain
belonging to the Abbey of St. Germain des Prés at the end of the eighth century. Accord-
ing to M. Guérard’s statistics, the peasantry of Paliseau were about as prosperous in the
time of Charlemagne as at the present day.

8 There are twenty-five thousand lives of the saints, between the sixth and tenth centu-
ries, collected by the Bollandists. The last that are truly inspired are those of St. Francis
of Assisi and his companions at the beginning of the fourteenth century. The same vivid
sentiment extends down to the end. of the fifteenth century in the works of Fra Angelico
and Hans Memling. The Sainte Chapelle i in Paris, the upper church at Assisi, Dante’s


—


CHAP. 1. THE STRUCTURE OF SOCIETY. 5


saddened heart, athirst for tenderness and serenity, takes ref-
uge in this divine and gentle world. Persecutors there, about
to strike, are arrested by an invisible hand; wild beasts become
docile; the stags of the forest come of their own accord every
morning to draw the chariots of the saints; the country blooms
for them like a new Paradise; they die only when it pleases
them. Meanwhile they comfort mankind; goodness, piety, for-
giveness flows from their lips with ineffable sweetness; with eyes
upturned to heaven, they see God, and without effort, as in a
dream, they ascend into the light and seat themselves at His
‘right hand. How divine the legend, how inestimable in value
under the universal reign of brute force, when, to endure this life,
it was necessary to imagine another, and to render the second as
visible to the spiritual eye as the first was to the physical eye.
The clergy thus nourished men for more than twelve centuries,
and in the grandeur of its recompense we can estimate the depth
of their gratitude. Its popes, for two hundred years, were the
dictators of Europe. It organized crusades, dethroned mon-
archs, and distributed kingdoms. Its bishops and abbots became
here, sovereign princes and there, veritable founders of dynasties.
Nita in its grasp a third of the territory, one-half of the reve-
nue two-thirds of the capital of Europe.. “Let us not be-
eve that man counterfeits gratitude, or that he gives without a
valid motive; he is too egotistical and too envious for that.
Whatever may be the institution, ecclesiastic or secular, whatever
may be the clergy, Buddhist or Christian, the contemporaries
who observe it for forty generations are not bad judges; they
surrender to it their will and their possessions, just in proportion
to its services, and the excess of their devotion may measure the
immensity of its benefaction.


af.


Up to this point no aid is found against the power of the
sword and the battle-axe except in persuasion and in patience.
Those States which, imitating the old empire, attempted to rise
up into compact organizations, and to interpose.a barrier against
constant invasion, obtained no hold on the shifting soil; after


Paradise, and the Fioretti, furnish an idea of these visions. In the way of modern litera-
| ture the state of a believer’s soul in the middle ages is perfectly described in the “ Pelerin-
f age 4 Kevlaar,” by Heine, and in “‘ Les Reliques vivantes,” by Tourgueneff.

[*


6 | THE ANCIENT REGIME. BOOK I.


Charlemagne everything melts away. There are no more sol-
diers after the battle of Fontanet; during half a century bands
of four or five hundred brigands sweep over the country, killing,
burning, and devastating with impunity. But, by way of compen-
sation, the dissolution of the State raises up at this very time a


military generation. Each petty chieftain has planted his feet |


firmly on the domain he occupies, or which he withholds; he no
longer keeps it in trust, or for use, but as property, and an inher-
itance. It is his own manor, his own village, his own earldom;
it no longer belongs to the king; he contends for it in his own
right. The benefactor, the conservator at this time is the man
capable of fighting, of defending others, and such really is the
character of the newly established class. The noble, in the lan-
guage of the day, is the man of war, the soldier (miles), and it is
he who lays the second foundation of modern society.

In the tenth century his extraction is of little consequence.
He is oftentimes a Carlovingian count, a beneficiary of the king,
the sturdy proprietor of one of the last of the Frank estates.
In one place he is a martial bishop or a valiant abbot; in another
a converted pagan, a retired bandit, a prosperous adventurer, a
tude huntsman, a long time supporting himself on the chase and
on wild fruits! The ancestors of Robert the Strong are un-
known, and later the story runs that the Capets are descended
‘from a Parisian butcher. In any event ‘the noble of that epoch
is the brave, the powerful man, expert in the use of arms, who,
at the head of a troop, instead of flying or paying ransom, offers
his breast, stands firm, and protects a patch of the soil with his
sword. To perform this service he has no need. of ancestors;
all that he requires is courage, for he is himself an ancestor;
security for the present, which he insures, is too acceptable to
permit any quibbling about his title.

Finally, after so many centuries, we find each canton pos-
‘sessing its armed men, a settled body of troops capable of
resisting nomadic invasion; the community is no longer a prey
to strangers; at the end of a century this Europe, which had
been sacked by flotillas of two-masted vessels, is to throw two
hundred thousand armed men into Asia, and henceforth, both
north and south, in the face of Mussulmans and of pagans,


1 As, for example, Tertullian, founder of the Plantagenet family, Rollo, Duke of Nor-
mandy, Hughes, Abbot of St. Martin, of Tours, and of St. Denis.


x
ran
ow


f
f


CHAP. I. THE STRUCTURE OF SOCIETY. 7


instead of being conquered it is to conquer. For the second
time an ideal figure becomes apparent after that of the saint,
the hero, and the new-born sentiment, as efficacious as the old
one, thus groups men together into a stable society, ‘This con-
sists of a resident corps of gendarmes, in which, from father to
son, one is always a gendarme. Each individual is born into it
with his hereditary rank, his local post, his pay in landed prop-
erty, with the certainty of never being abandoned by his chief-
tain, and with the obligation of giving his life for his chieftain in
time of need. In this epoch of perpetual warfare only one
regimen is suitable, that of a body of men confronting the
enemy, and such is the feudal system; we can judge by this
trait alone of the perils which it wards off, and of the ‘service


which it enjoins. ‘In those days,” says the Spanish general-


chronicle, “kings, counts, nobles, and knights, in order to be
ready at all hours, gis their horses in the rooms in which they
slept with their wives.” The viscount in. his tower defending


the entrance to a valley or the passage of a ford, the prareyiits


thrown as a forlorn hope on the burning frontier, sleeps with his
hand on his weapon, like an American lieutenant among the Sioux
behind a western stockade. His dwelling is simply a camp and
arefuge; straw and heaps of leaves overspread the pavement of
the great hall; here he rests with his cavaliers, taking off a spur
if he has a chance to sleep; the loopholes in the wall scarcely
allow daylight to enter; the main ‘thing is not to be shot with
arrows. Every taste, every sentiment is subordinated to mil-
tary service; there are certain places on the European frontier
where a child of fourteen is required to march, and where the
widow up to sixty is required to remarry. Men to fill up the
ranks, men to mount guard, is the call which at this moment
proceeds from all institutions like the summons of a brazen


3 “ae to these braves, the peasant (villanus) enjoys pro-


tection. He is no longer to be slaughtered, no longer to be led
captive with his family, in herds, with his neck in a pitchfork.
He ventures to plough and to sow, and to rely upon his crops;
in case of danger he knows that he can find an asylum for
himself, and for his grain and cattle, in the circle of palisades at


1 See the “Cantilenes” of the tenth century in which the ‘‘Chansons de Geste” are
indicated.


8 THE ANCIENT REGIME. BOOK I.


the base of the fortress. By degrees necessity establishes a tacit -—
contract between the military chieftain of the donjon and the
early settlers of the open country, and this becomes a recognized
custom. They work for him, cultivate his ground, do his cart-
ing, pay him quittances, so much for house, so much per head
for cattle, so much to inherit or to sell; he is compelled to
support his troop. But when these rights are discharged he errs
if, through pride or greediness, he takes more than his due. As
to the vagabonds, the wretched, who, in the universal disorder.
and devastation, seek refuge under his guardianship, their con- -
dition is harder; the soil belongs to him, because without him it —
would be uninhabitable; if he assigns them a plot of ground,
if he permits them merely to encamp on it, if he sets them to
work or furnishes them with seeds, it is on conditions which he -
prescribes. They are to become his serfs, his mortmains; wher- —
ever they may go he is to have the right of fetching them back,
and from father to son they are his born domestics, assignable to
any pursuit he pleases, taxable and workable at his discretion,
and not allowed to transmit anything to a child unless the latter,
“living from their pot,” can, after their death, continue their
service. ‘Not to be killed,” says Stendhal, “and to have a
good sheepskin coat in winter, was, for many people in the
tenth century, the height of felicity”; let us add, for a woman,
that of not being violated by a whole band. When we clearly
represent to ourselves the condition of humanity in those days,
we can comprehend how men readily accepted the most obnox-
ious of feudal rights, even that of the droit du seigneur. The
risks to which they were daily subject were even worse.! The
proof of it is that the people flocked to the feudal structure as
soon as it was completed. In Normandy, for instance, when
Rollo had divided off the lands with a line, and hung the
robbers, the inhabitants of the neighboring provinces rushed in
to establish themselves. The slightest security sufficed to re-
populate a country.

/ People accordingly lived, or rather began to live, under the
rude, iron-gloved hand which used them roughly, but which af-
forded them protection. The seignior, sovereign and proprie-


1 See in the ‘‘ Voyages de Caillaud,” in Nubia and Abyssinia, the raids for slaves made
by the Pacha’s armies; Europe presented about the same spectacle between the years 800
and goo. }


CHAP. I. THE STRUCTURE OF SOCIETY. 9


‘tor, maintains for himself under this double title, the moors, the
river, the forest, all the game; it is no great evil, since the coun-


try is nearly a desert, and he devotes his leisure to exterminating
large wild beasts. He alone possessing the resources, is the
only one that is able to construct the mill, the oven, and the
wine-press; to establish the ferry, the bridge, or the highway;
to dike in a marsh, and to raise or purchase a bull; and to in-
demnify himself he taxes for these or forces their use. If he is
intelligent and a good manager of men, if he seeks to derive the
greatest profit from his ground, he gradually relaxes, or allows


to become relaxed, the meshes of the net in which his villeins
_ and serfs work unprofitably because they are too tightly drawn.
_ Habit, necessity, a voluntary or forced conformity, have their


effect; seigniors, villeins, serfs, and bourgeois, in the end adapted
to their condition, bound together by a common interest, form to-
gether a society, a veritable corporation. The seigniory, the
county, the duchy becomes a patrimony which is loved through a
blind instinct, and to which all are devoted. It is confounded
with the seignior and his family ; in this relation people are proud
of him; they narrate his feats of arms; they cheer him as his cay-
alcade passes aiong the street; they rejoice in his magnificence
through sympathy.' If he becomes a widower and has no chil-
dren, they send deputations to him to entreat him to remarry, in
order that at his death the country may not fall into a war of suc-:
cession or be given up to the encroachments of neighbors, Thus
there is a revival, after a thousand years, of the most powerful and
the most vivacious of the sentiments that support human society.
This one is the more precious because it is capable of expanding:


for the small feudal patrimony to become the great national pat-


rimony, it now suffices for all the seigniories to be combined in
the hands of a single seignior, and that the king, chief of the
nobles, should overlay the work of the nobles with the third


foundation of France. is


III. |
The King built the whole of this foundation, one stone after


another. Hugues Capet laid the first one. Before him royalty


1 See the zeal of subjects for their lords in the historians of the middle ages; Gaston Phee-


bus, Comte de Foix, and Guy, Comte de Flandres in Froissart; Raymond de Bézier$ and
. Raymond de Toulouse, in the chronicle of Toulouse. This profound sentiment for small


local patrimonies is apparent at each provincial assembly in Normandy, Brittany, Franche-
Comté, etc.


10 THE ANCIENT REGIME. BOOK I.


conferred on the King no right to a proyin¢e, not even Laon; itis
he who added his domain to the title. During eight hundred
years, through conquest, craft, inheritance, the work of acquisition
goes on; even under Louis XV. France is augmented by the ac-
quisition of Lorraine and Corsica. Starting from nothing, the
King is the maker of a compact State, containing a population of
twenty-six millions, and then the most powerful in Europe.
Throughout this interval he is at the head of the public defence;
the liberator of the country against foreigners, against the Pope
in the fourteenth century, against the English in the fifteenth,
against the Spaniards in the sixteenth. . In the interior, from the
twelfth century onward, with the helmet on his brow, and always:
on the road, he is the great justiciary, demolishing the towers of
the feudal brigands, repressing the excesses of the powerful, pro-


tecting the oppressed ;? he puts an end to private warfare; he |


establishes order and tranquillity ;—an immense accomplishment,
which, from Louis le Gros to St. Louis, from Philippe le Bel to
Charles VII., and to Louis XI., from Henry IV. to Louis XIII.
and Louis XIV., continues uninterruptedly up to the middle of
the seventeenth century in the edict against duels and in the
“Grands Jours.”* Meanwhile all useful projects carried out un-
der his orders, or developed under his patronage, roads, harbors,
canals, asylums, universities, academies, institutions of piety, of
refuge, of education, of science, of industry, and of commerce,
bear his imprint and proclaim the public benefactor. Services of
this character challenge a proportionate recompense; it is allowed
that from father to son he is wedded to France; that she acts only
through him; that he acts only for her; while every souvenir of
the past and every present interest combine to sanction this union.
The Church consecrates it at Rheims by a sort of eighth sacrament,
accompanied with legends and miracles; he is the anointed of
God.*? The nobles, through an old instinct of military fealty, con-
sider themselves his body-guard, and down to August 10 (1789),
rush forward to die for him on his staircase; he is their general by

birth. The people, down to 1789, regard him as the redresser
of abuses, the guardian of the right, the protector of the weak,


1 Suger, Life of Louis VI.


2 “Les Grands Jours d’Auvergne,” by Fléchier, ed. Chéruel. The last feudal brigand,
the Baron of Plumartin, in Poitou, was taken, tried, and executed under Louis XV. in ©
1756.


8 As late as Louis XV. a procés-verbal is made of the number of cures of the King’s evil.


CHAP. I. THE STRUCTURE OF SOCIETY. : IL


7


the great almoner, the universal refuge. At the beginning of the

reign of Louis XVI. “the shouts of Vive Ze roi, which began at

six o’clock in the morning, continued scarcely interrupted until

after sunset.”! When the Dauphin was born the joy of France

was that of a whole family. “People stopped each other in the
streets, spoke together without any acquaintance, and everybody
embraced everybody he knew.”? Every one, through vague
tradition, through immemorial respect, feels that France is a ves-
sel constructed by his hands and the hands of his ancestors ;
that, in this sense, the structure is his property; that his right in
it is that of each passenger to his private goods; and that his
whole duty consists in being expert and vigilant in the conduct
of the magnificent ship over.the sea whereon the public welfare
floats beneath his banner.

Under the ascendency of such an idea he was allowed to do
everything. By fair means or foul, he so reduced ancient author-
ities as to make them a mere ruin, asemblance,asouvenir. The
nobles are simply his officials or his courtiers. Since the Con-
cordat he nominates the dignitaries of the Church. _ The States-
General were not convoked for a hundred and seventy-five
years; the provincial assemblies which continue to subsist do
nothing but apportion the taxes; the parliaments are exiled
when they risk a remonstrance. Through his council, his in-

| tendants, his sub-delegates, he interposes in the most trifling of
| local matters. He enjoys a revenue of four hundred and
seventy-seven millions.» He disburses one-half of that of the
Clergy. In short, he is absolute master, and he so declares
himself.t Possessions, freedom from taxation, the satisfactions
of vanity, a few remnants of local jurisdiction and authority, are |
consequently all that is left to his ancient rivals; in exchange for
these they enjoy his favors and marks of preference.


we,


1 «Mémoires of Madame Campan,” I. 8g; II. 215.

2In 1785 an Englishman visiting France boasts of the ecliuca liberty enjoyed in his
country. As an offset to this the French reproach the English for having decapitated
Charles I., and “ glory in having always maintained an inviolable attachment to their own
king; a fidelity, a respect which no excess or severity on his part has ever shaken.” (‘fA
Comparative View of the French and of the English Nation,” by John Andrews, p. 257).

3 Memoirs of D’Augeard, private secretary of the Queen, and a former farmer-general.

4 The following is the reply of Louis XV. to the Parliament of Paris, March 3, 1766, in a
lit de justice: ‘‘The sovereign authority is vested in my person. ... The legislative
power, without dependence and without division, exists in myself alone. Public security

emanates wholly from myself; I am its supreme custodian. My people are one only with

me; national rights and interests, of which an attempt is made to form a body separate from
those of the monarch, are necessarily combined with my own and only rest in my hands.”


x


12 THE ANCIENT REGIME. BOOK 1. 4


Such, in brief, is the history of the privileged classes, he |
Clergy, the Nobles, and the King. It must be kept in mind to ©
comprehend their situation at the moment of their fall; having —
created France, they enjoy it. Let us see near by what become 4
of them at the end of the eighteenth century; what poe
of their advantages they preserved; what services they still
render, and what services they do not render.


CHAPTER II.


PrivitEecEes.—I. Number of the Privileged Classes.—II. Their Posses-
sions, Capital, and Revenue.—III. Their Immunities.—IV. Their Feudal
Rights.—These advantages the remains of primitive sovereignty.—V. They
may be justified by local and general services.


I,

THE privileged classes number about 270,000 persons, com-
prising of the nobility 140,000 and of the clergy 130,000.!_ This
makes from 25,000 to 30,000 noble families; 23,000 monks in
2,500 monasteries, and 37,000 nuns in 1,500 convents, and 60,000
curates and vicars in as many churches and chapels. Should the
reader desire a more distinct impression of them, he may imagine
on each square league of territory, and to each thousand of in-
habitants, one noble family in its weathercock mansion, in each
village a curate and hts church, and, every six or seven leagues,
a conventual body of men or of women. We have here the an-
cient chieftains and founders of France; thus entitled, they still
enjoy many possessions and many rights.


II,

Let us always keep in mind what they were in order to
comprehend what they are. Great as their advantages may
be, these are merely the remains of still greater advantages.
This or that bishop or abbot, this or that count or duke,
whose successors make their bows at Versailles were formerly
the equals of the Carlovingians and the first Capets% A Sire
de Montlhéry held King Philippe I. in check.?, The abbey
of St. Germain des Prés possessed four hundred and thirty thou-
sand -hectares of land (about go0,000 acres), almost the extent


1 See note 1 at the end of the volume.

2 Suger “‘Vie de Louis VI.,” chap. viii. Philippe I. became master of the Chateau de
Montlhéry only by marrying one of his sons to the heiress of the fief. He thus addressed his
Successor: *‘ My child, take good care to keep this tower of which the annoyances have made
me grow old, and whose frauds and treasons have given me no peace nor rest.”

2


14 ; THE ANCIENT REGIME. BOOK I.


of an entire department. “We need not be surprised that they
remained powerful, and, especially, rich; no stability is greater
than that of an associative body. After ‘eight hundred years, in
spite of so many strokes of the royal axe, and the immense
change in the culture of society, the old feudal root lasts and
still vegetates. We remark it first in the distribution of prop-
erty.! A fifth of the soil belongs to-the crown and the com-
munes, a fifth to the third estate, a fifth to the rural popula-
tion,-a fifth to the nobles and a fifth to the clergy. Accordingly, |
if we deduct the public lands, the privileged classes own one-
half of the kingdom. ‘This large portion, moreover, is at the

same time the richest, for it comprises almost all the large and
handsome buildings, the palaces, castles, convents, and cathe-
drals, and almost all the valuable movable property, such as fur-
niture, plate, objects of art, the accumulated masterpieces of

centuries. We can judge of it by an estimate of the portion be-
longing to the clergy. Its possessions, capitalized, amount to
nearly 4,000,000,000 francs;” the income from this amounts to
80 and 100 millions, to which must be added the dzme, or tithes,
123 millions per annum, in all 200 millions, a sum which must
be doubled to show its equivalent at the present day, and to this
must be added the chance contributions, and the usual church
collections.* To fully realize the breadth of this golden stream —


’ 1 Léonce de Lavergne, ‘‘ Les Assemblées Provinciales,”’ p. 19. Consult the official state-

ment of the provincial assemblies, and especially the chapters treating of the wingtiémes
(an old tax of one-twentieth on incomes.—TR.)

2 A report made by Treilhard in the name of the ecclesiastic committee, (Moniteur, roth
December, 1789): The religious establishments for sale in Paris alone were valued at 150
millions. Later (in the session of the 13th February, 1791), Amelot estimates the property
sold and to be sold, not including forests, at 3,700 millions. M. de Bouillé estimates the
revenue of the clergy at 180 millions. (Mémoires, p. 44). [French currency is so well
known to readers in general it is not deemed necessary to reduce statements of this kind to
the English or American standard, except in special cases. —TR. ]

3 A report by Chasset on Tithes, April, 1790. Out of 123 millions 23 go for the costs of
collection; but, in estimating the revenue of an individual the sums he Pays to his intend-

ants, overseers and cashiers are not deducted.

Talleyrand (October 10, 1789) estimates the revenue of real property at 70 millions and its
value at 2,100 millions. On examination however both capital and revenue are found con-
siderably larger than at first supposed. (Reports of Treilhard and Chasset). Moreover, in
his valuation, Talleyrand left out habitations and their enclosures as well asa reservation of
one-fourth of the forests. Besides this there must be included in the revenue before 1789
the seigniorial rights enjoyed by the Church. Finally, according to Arthur Young, the
rents which the French proprietor received were not two and a half per cent. as nowadays
but three and a half.

This necessity of doubling the figures to obtain a present money valuation is supported by


innumerable facts, and among others the price of a day's labor which at that time was nine-
teen sous. (Arthur Young).


CHAP. I. THE STRUCTURE OF SOCIETY. 15


let us look at some of its affluents. ‘Three hundred and ninety-
nine monks at Prémontré estimate their revenue at more than
1,000,000 livres, and their capital at 45,000,000. The Provincial
of the Dominicans of Toulouse admits, for his two hundred and
thirty-six monks, “‘more than 200,000 livres net revenue, not in-
cluding the convent and its enclosure, also, in the colonies, real
estate, negroes and other effects, valued at several millions,” The
Benedictines of Cluny, numbering two hundred and thirty-eight,
enjoy a revenue of 1,800,000 livres. ‘Those of Saint-Maur, num-
bering sixteen hundred and seventy-two, estimate the movable
property of their churches and houses at 24,000,000, and their


net revenue at 8,000,000, “ without including that which accrues


to Messieurs the abbots and priors commendatory,” which
means as much and perhaps more. Dom Rocourt, abbot: of
-Clairvaux, has from 300,000 to 400,000 livres income; the Car-
dinal de Rohan, archbishop of Strasbourg, more than 1,000,000.!
In Franche-Comté, Alsace and Roussillon the clergy own one-
half of the territory; in Hainaut and Artois, three-quarters ; in
Cambrésis fourteen hundred plough-areas out of seventeen hun-
dred.?, Almost the whole of Le Velay belongs to the Bishop
of Puy, the abbot of La Chaise-Dieu, the noble chapter of
Brionde and to the seigniors of Polignac. The canons of St.


. Claude, in the Jura, are the proprietors of twelve thousand serfs


or mainmorts.?

Through fortunes of the first class we can imagine those of
the second. As along with the noble it comprises the ennobled,
and as the magistrates for two centuries, and the financiers for
one century had acquired or purchased nobility, it is-clear that
here are to be found almost all the great fortunes of France, old
or new, transmitted by inheritance, obtained through court. fa-
yors, or acquired in business; when a class reaches the summit
it is recruited out of those who are mounting or clambering up.
Here, too, there is colossal wealth. It has been calculated that

_the appanages of the princes of the royal family, the Comtes of
Artois and of Provence, the Ducs d’Orléans and de Penthiévre


1 National archives, among the papers of the ecclesiastical committee, sections 10, I1, 13,
25. Beugnot’s Memoirs, I. 49, 79; Delbos, ‘‘L’Eglise de France,” I. 399; Duc de Lévis,
«Souvenirs et Portraits,” p. 156.

2 Léonce de Lavergne, ‘“‘ Economie Rurale en France,” p. 24. Perin, ‘‘La Jeunesse de
Robespierre,”” (Memorial of grievances in Artois), p. 317. ;

3 Boiteau, ‘‘ Etat de la France en 1789,” p. 47. Voltaire, ‘‘ Politique et Legislation,” the
petition of the serfs of St. Claude.


16 THE ANCIENT REGIME. BOOK I,


then covered one-seventh of the territory.1_ The princes of the
blood have together a revenue of from 24,000,000 to 25,000,000;
the Duc d’Orléans alone has a rental of 11,500,000.”

‘These are the vestiges of the feudal régime. . Similar vestiges’
are found in England, in Austria, in Germany and in Russia.
Proprietorship, indeed, a long time survives the circumstances —
on which it is founded. Sovereignty had constituted property ;
divorced from sovereignty it has remained in the hands formerly
sovereign. In the bishop, the abbot and the count, the king
respected the proprietor while overthrowing the rival, and/ in
the existing proprietor a hundred traits still indicate the annihi-
lated or modified sovereign.


III. 7
Such is the total or partial exemption from taxation. The j
tax-collectors halt in their presence because the king well knows)


that feudal property has the same origin as his own; if royalty is
one privilege seigniory is another; the king himself is simply the
most privileged among the privileged. The most absolute, the —
most infatuated with his rights, Louis XIV., entertained scruples
when extreme necessity compelled him to enforce on everybody
the tax of the tenth.? Treaties, precedents, immemorial custom,
reminiscences of ancient rights again restrain the fiscal hand./
The clearer the resemblance of the proprietor to the ancient .


CTW Fe iwc ~~ pee


1 Necker, ‘‘ De l’Administration des Finances,” II. 272.

2 De Bouillé, ‘‘ Mémoires,” p. 41. It must not be forgotten that these figures must be
doubled to show corresponding sums of the present day. 10,000 livres (francs) rental in
1766 equal in value 20,000 in 1825. (Madame de Genlis, ‘‘ Memoirs,” chap. IX.)

Arthur Young, visiting a chateau in Seine-et-Marre, writes: ‘I have been sifting
Madame de Guerchy on the expenses of living . . . and I learn that to live in a chateau
like this with six men servants, five maids, eight horses, a garden and a regular table, with
company, but never go to Paris, might be done for 1,000 louis per annum. It would in
England cost 2,000, At the present day in France 24,000 francs would be 50,000 and more.”
Arthur Young adds: ‘There are gentlemen (noblesse) that live in this country on 6,000 or
8000 livres, that keep two men, two maids, three horses and a cabriolet.” To do this
nowadays would require from 20,000 to 25,000 francs.

Living in the provinces, especially, is dearer through the effect of rail-road communica-
tion. ‘According to my friends du Rouergue,” he says again, ‘‘I could live at Milhau
with my family in the greatest abundance on 100 louis (2,000 francs); there are noble
families supporting themselves on revenues of fifty and even twenty-five louis.” At Mil-
hau, to-day, prices are triple and even quadruple. In Paris, a house in the Rue St.
Honoré which was rented for 6,000 francs in 1787 is now rented for 16,000 francs.

8 “ Rapports de l'Agence du clergé de 1780 & 1785.” In relation to the feudal rights the
abolition of which is demanded in Boncerf’s work, the Chancellor Séguier said in 1775:
“Our Kings have themselves declared that they are, fortunately, impotent to make any
attack on property.”


ibe


|


| work, or a steward, to communicate to the land his original


at
oe


CHAP. II. THE STRUCTURE OF SOCIETY. 17


independent sovereign the greater his immunity. At one time
he is guaranteed by a recent treaty, by his position as a stranger,
by his almost royal extraction. “In Alsace foreign princes in
possession and the Teutonic order and the order of Malta, enjoy
exemption from all real and personal contributions.” ‘In Lor-
raine the chapter of Remiremont has the privilege of assessing
itself in all state impositions.”! Again, he is protected by the
maintenance of the provincial Assemblies, and through the in-
corporation of the nobility with the soil: in Languedoc and in
Brittany the plebeian estate alone paid the Zaz/e.2, Everywhere
else his quality preserved him from it, he, his chateau and the
chateau’s dependences; the /ai//e reaches him only through his
farmers. And better still, it is sufficient that he himself should


independence; so soon as he touches the soil, either personally
or through his agent, he screens of it four ploughing-areas (guatre
charrues), three hundred arpents,’ which in other hands, would


_ pay two thousand francs tax, and besides this, “the woods, the
_meadows, the vines, the ponds and the enclosed land belonging


to the chateau of whatever extent it may be.” Consequently,
in Limousin and elsewhere, in regions principally devoted to


_pasturage or to vineyards, he takes care to manage himself,


or to have managed, a notable portion of his domain; in this
way he exempts it from the tax-collector.* There is yet more.
In Alsace, through an express covenant:-he does not pay a cent
of tax. Thus, after the assaults of four hundred and fifty years,
taxation, the first of fiscal instrumentalities, the most burdensome
of all, leaves feudal property almost intact.® For a century
back, two new instrumentalities, the capitation-tax and the vingt-
demes, seem more efficacious, and yet are but little more so.


1 Léonce de Lavergne, ‘‘ Les Assemblées provinciales,” p. 296. Report of M. Schwendt
on Alsace in 1787. Warroquier, “‘ Etat de la France en 1789,’’ I. 541. Necker, ‘‘ De l’Ad-
ministration des Finances,” I. 19, 102. ‘Turgot, (collection of economists), ‘‘ Réponse aux
observations du garde des sceaux sur la suppression des corvées,” I. 559.

2 This term embraces various taxes originating in feudal times, and rendered particularly
burdensome to the peasantry through the management of the privileged classes.—TR.

‘7 The arpent measures between one and one and a half acres.


~ 4De Tocqueville, “‘L’ Ancien Régime et la Révolution,” p. 406. ‘The inhabitants of


N on’ bazen had subjected to taxation the stewards of the duchy which belonged to the
Prince de Rohan. ‘This prince caused this abuse to be stopped and succeeded in recovering
the sum of 5,344 livres which he had.been made to pay unlawfully under this right.”

5 Necker, “ Administration des Finances:” ordinary taxation produced 91,000,000; les
vingtiémes, 76,500,000; the capitation-tax, 41,500,000.
2*


- of as


18 THE ANCIENT REGIME. ; BOOK L a9


At first, through a master-stroke of ecclesiastical diplomacy, the
clergy diverts or weakens the blow. Forming a body, and
holding assemblies, it is able to negotiate with the king, to buy
itself off, to avoid being taxed by others, to tax itself, to have it.
understood that its payments are not compulsory contributions,
but a “free gift,” to obtain in exchange a mass of concessions, to
diminish this gift, sometimes not to make it, in any event to
reduce it to sixteen millions every five years, that is to say to &
little more than three millions per annum; in 1788 it is only
1,800,000 livres, and in £789 it is refused altogether.! And still
better: as it borrows to provide for this tax, and as the décimes
which it raises on its property do not suffice to reduce the capital
and meet the interest on its debt, it has the adroitness to secure,
besides, a grant from the king out of the royal treasury, each
year, of 2,500,000 livres, so that, instead of paying, it receives;
in 1787 it receives in this way 1,500,000 livres. In relation to
the nobles,‘they, unable to combine together, to have represent-
atives, to act in a public way, operate in a private way, con- °
fronting ministers, intendants, sub-delegates, farmer-generals, and
all others clothed with authority, their quality securing attentions,
consideration and favors. In the first place, this quality ex-
empts them, they, their dependants, and the dependartts of.
their dependants, from drafting in the militia, from lodging
soldiers, from (¢a corvée) laboring on the highways. — Next,
the capitation being fixed according to the tax system, they
pay little because their taxation is of little account. More-
over, each one brings all his credit to bear against assess-
ments; “‘your sympathetic heart,” writes one of them to the
intendant, “will never allow a father of my condition to be
taxed for the wingtiemes rigidly like a father of low birth.” On
the other hand, as the tax-payer pays the capitation-tax instead
of his entire household, often far away from his estates, and no
one having any knowledge of his personal income, he may pay
whatever seems to him proper. ‘There are no proceedings
against him, if he is a noble; the greatest circumspection is


4
|
Pi
9]
H
\
i
i
t
|


1 Raudot, “La France avant la Révolution,” p, 51. De Bouillé, ‘“‘ Mémoires,” p. 44.
Necker, “ De l’Administration des Finances,” v. I]. p. 181. The above relates to what was
called the clergy of France, (116 dioceses). The clergy called foreign, consisted of that of
the three bishoprics and of the countries acquired after Louis X1V.; it had a separate
régime and paid somewhat like the nobles. ‘The décimes which the clergy of France levied
on its property amounted to a sum of 10,500,000 livres.


CHAP. II. THE STRUCTURE OF SOCIETY. 19


used towards persons of high rank; “in the provinces,” says
Turgot, “the capitation-tax of the privileged classes has been
successively reduced to an exceedingly small matter, whilst the
capitation-tax of those who are liable to the Za7//e, is almost equal
to the principal of that tax.” Andi finally, “the collectors think
that they are obliged to act towards them with marked con-
sideration” even when they owe; “the result of which,” says
Necker, “is that very ancient, and much too large amounts,
of their capitation-tax remain unpaid.” Accordingly, not having
been able to repel the assault of the fisc in front they evaded it
or diminished it until it became almost unobjectionable. In


~ Champagne, “on nearly 1,500,000 livres provided by the capita-
_ tion-tax, they paid in only 14,000 livres,” that is to say, “2 sous


and 2 deniers for the same purpose which costs 12 sous per


ee livre to those chargeable with the Zaz//e.” According to Calonne,


*if concessions and privileges had been suppressed the vingtiémes


= would have furnished double the amount.” In this respect the


most opulent were the most skilful in protecting themselves.
“With the intendants,” said the Duc d’Orléans, “I settle matters,
and pay about what I please,” and he calculated that the pro-
vincial administration, rigorously taxing him, would cause him


“to lose 300,000 livres rental. It has been proved that the


princes of the blood, paid, for their two-twentieths, 188,000
instead of 2,400,000 livres. . In the main, in this régime, excep?


tion from taxation is the last remnant of sovereignty or, at least,


of independence. The privileged person avoids or repels taxa?
tion, not merely because it despoils him, but because it belittles
him; it is a mark of plebeian condition, that is to say, of former
servitude, and he resists the fisc as much through pride as
through interest.


IV.

Let us follow him home to his own domain. A bishop, an
abbé, a chapter of the clergy, an abbess, each has one like a lay
Seignior; for, in former times, the monastery and the church
were small governments like the county and the duchy.

Intact on the other bank of the Rhine, almost ruined in
France, the feudal structure everywhere discloses the same plan.
In certain places, better protected or less attacked, it has pre-
served all its ancient externals. At Cahors, the bishop-count of


20 THE ANCIENT REGIME.


the town had the right, on solemnly officiating, “to place his
casque, cuirass, gauntlets and sword on the altar.”? At Besan-—
con, the archbishop-prince has six high officers, who owe him
homage for their fiefs, and who attend at his coronation and at
his obsequies. At Mende,’ the bishop, seignior-suzerain for
Gévaudan since the eleventh century, appoints “the courts, ordi-
nary judges and judges of appeal, the commissaries and syndics 7
of the country,” disposes of all the places, “municipal and ©
judiciary,” and, entreated to appear in the assembly of the three —
orders of the province, “replies that his place, his possessions —
and his rank exalting him above every individual in his diocese, —
he cannot sit under the presidency of any person; that, being —
seignior-suzerain of all estates and particularly of the baronies,
he cannot give way to his vassals,” in brief that he is king, or
but little short of it, in his own province. At Remiremont, the
noble chapter of canonesses has, “ inferior, superior, and ordinary
judicature in fifty-two bans of seigniories,” the gift of seventy-
five curacies and of ten male canonships, appointing the munici-
pal officers of the town and, besides this, three lower and higher
courts and everywhere the officials in the jurisdiction over woods
and forests. Thirty-two bishops, without counting the chap- —
ters, are thus temporal seigniors, in whole or in part, of their
episcopal town, sometimes of the surrounding district, and some-
times, like the bishop of St. Claude, of the entire country. Here
the feudal tower has been preserved. Elsewhere it is plastered
over anew, and more particularly in the appanages. In these
domains, comprising more than twelve of our departments, the
princes of the blood appoint to all offices in the judiciary and to
all clerical livings. Being substitutes of the king they enjoy his
serviceable and honorary rights. They are almost delegated
kings, and for life; for they not only receive all that the king
would receive as seignior, but again a portion of that which he
would receive as monarch. For example, the house of Orleans |
collects the excises,’ that is to say the duty on liquors, on works
in gold or silver, on manufactures of iron, on steel, on cards, q


1 See ‘La France ecclésiastique, 1788,” for these details."

2 Official statements and manuscript reports of the States-General of 1789. te Aveta
nationales,” vol. LXXXVIII. pp. 23, 85, x21, 122, 152. Procés-verbal of January 12, 1789.

* Necker, ‘De l’Administration des Finances, ” v. IL pp. 271, 272. “The house of


Orleans, he says, is in possession of the excises,” He values this tax at 51,000,000 for the
entire kingdom,


CHAP. II. THE STRUCTURE OF SOCIETY. 21


on paper and starch, in short, on the entire sum-total of one of
the most onerous indirect imposts. It is not surprising, if, ap-
proximating to the sovereign condition, they have, like sover-
eigns themselves, a council, a chancellor, an organized debt, a
court,! a domestic ceremonial system, and that the feudal edifice
in their hands should put on the luxurious and formal trappings
which it had assumed in the hands of the king.

Let us turn to its inferior personages, to a seignior of medium


rank, on his square league of ground, amidst the thousand in-


habitants which were formerly his villeins or his serfs, within
reach of the monastery, or chapter, or bishop whose rights inter-
mingle with his rights. Whatever may have been done to abase


him his position is still very high. He is yet, as the intendants


say, “the first inhabitant;”’a prince whom they have about
despoiled of his public functions and consigned to his honorary


and available rights, but who nevertheless remains a prince? He


has his bench in the church, and his right of sepulture in the


choir; the tapestry bears his coat of arms; they bestow on him


incense, “holy water by distinction.” Often, having founded
the church, he is its patron, choosing the curate and pretending
to control him; in the rural districts we see him advancing or
retarding the hour of the parochial mass according to his fancy.


If he bears a title he is supreme judge, and there are entire
_ provinces, Maine and Anjou, for example, where there is no fief


without the judge. In this case he appoints the bailiff, the
‘registrar, and other legal and judicial officers, attorneys, notaries,
seigniorial sergeants, constabulary on foot or mounted, who draw
up documents or decide in his name in civil and criminal cases
on the first trial. He appoints, moreover, a forest-warden, or
decides forest offences, and enforces the penalties which this
officer inflicts. He has his prison for delinquents of various
kinds, and sometimes his forked gibbets. On the other hand, as


1 Beugnot, ‘ Mémoires,” v. I. p. 77. Observe the ceremonial system with the Duc de
Penthiévre, chapters I., III. The Duc d’Orléans organizes a chapter and bands of canon-
esses. The post of chancellor to the Duc d’Orléans is worth 100,000 livres per annum,
(“Gustave III. et la cour de France,” by Geffroy, I. 410.)

2 De Tocqueville, 77d. p. 40. Renauldon, advocate in the bailiwick of Issoudun, ‘‘ Traité
historique et pratique des droits seigneuriaux, 1765,”’ pp. 8, 10, 81 and fassziz. Memorial
of a magistrate of the Chatelet on seigniorial judgments, 1789. Duvergier, ‘Collection
des Lois,’”’ Decrees of the 15~28 March, 1790, on the abolition of the feudal régime, Merlin of
Douai, reporter, I. 114. Decrees of 19-23 July, 1790, I. 293. Decrees of the 13-20 April,
1791, I. 2g5.


4


22 THE ANCIENT REGIME. BO be


compensation for his judicial costs, he obtains the pope
the man condemned to death and the confiscation of his esta
he succeeds to the bastard born and dying in his seigniory }
out leaving a testament or. legitimate children ; he inherits f
the native, a legitimate child, “dying intestate in his house with-
out apparent heirs; he appropriates to himself movable object :,
animate or inanimate, which are found astray and of which the
owner is unknown; he claims one-half or one-third of treasure
trove, and, on the coast, he takes for himself the waif of wrecl
and finally, what is more fruitful, in these times of misery, he bent
comes the possessor of abandoned lands that have remained un-
tilled for ten years. Other advantages demonstrate still mor -
clearly that he formerly possessed the government of the canton. |
Such are, in Auvergne, in Flanders, in Hainaut, in Artois, in —
Picardy, Alsace, and Lorraine, the dues for poursoin ou de
sauvement (care or safety within the walls of a town), paid to
him for his general protection; those of guet et de garde (watch F
and guard), claimed by him for military protection; of afforage,
exacted of those who sell beer, wine and other beverages, whole- :
sale or retail; of fowage, dues on fires, in money or grain, which,
according to many common-law systems, he levies on each fire-
side, house or family; of pu/vérage, quite common in Dauphiny
and Provence, on passing flocks of sheep; the Jods e¢ ventes
(lord’s due), an almost universal tax, consisting of the deduction
of a sixth, often of a fifth or even a fourth, of the price of every _
piece of ground sold, and of every lease exceeding nine years;
the dues for redemption or relief, equivalent to one year’s in- |
come and which he receives from collateral heirs, and often from —
direct heirs; and finally, a rarer due, but the most burdensome
of all, that of acapte ou de plait-a-merct, which is a double rent,
or a year’s yield of fruits, payable as well on the death of the -
seignior as on that of the copyholder. These are veritable taxes,
landed, on movables, personal, for licenses, for traffic, for muta-
tions, for successions, established formerly on the condition of per-
forming a public service which he is no longer obliged to perform.
Other dues are also ancient imposts, but he still performs the
service for which they are a quittance. The king, in fact, sup-
presses many of the tolls, twelve hundred in 1724, and the sup-
pression is kept up; but a good many remain to the profit of the
seignior,—on bridges, on highways, on fords, on boats ascending


emap.u. j4§ THE STRUCTURE OF SOCIETY. 23


& or descending, he being at the expense of keeping up bridge,
_ road, ford and tow-path, several being very lucrative, certain
_ tolls producing go,ooo livres.‘ In hke manner, on condition
- of maintaining the market-place and of providing scales and
_ weights gratis, he levies a tax on provisions and on: merchandise
brought to his fair or to his market ;—at Angouléme a forty-
eighth of the grain sold, at Combourg near Saint-Malo, so much
_ per head of cattle, elsewhere so much on wine, éatables and
fish Having formerly built the oven, the wine-press, the mill
and the slaughter-house, he obliges the inhabitants to use these
or pay for their support, and he demolishes all constructions
| which might enter into competition with him. These, again,
__ are evidently monopolies and ocfrois going back to the time
___when he was in possession of public authority.
'_ Not only did he then possess the public authority but he
| possessed the soil and the men on it. Proprietor of men, he is
| _ s0 still, at least in many respects and in many provinces. “In
_ Champagne proper, in the Sénonais, in la Marche, in the Bour-
 bonnais, in the Nivernais, in Burgundy, in Franche-Comté, there
| are none, or very few domains, no signs remaining of ancient
| ‘servitude. . . . A good many personal serfs, or so constituted
| ‘through their own gratitude, or that of their progenitors, are
; ‘still found.”* There, man is a serf, sometimes by virtue of his


5


|
|


’ 1 National archives, G, 300, (1787). ‘‘M. de Boullongne, seignior of Montereau, possesses
a toll-right consisting of 2 deniers (farthings) per ox, cow, calf or pig; 1 per sheep; 2 fora
loaded animal; 1 sou and 8 deniers for each four-wheeled vehicle; 5 deniers for a two-
ja wheeled vehicle, and ro deniers for a vehicle drawn by three, four, or five horses; besides a
' ~~ tax of ro deniers for each barge, boat or skiff ascending the river; the same tax for each
team of horses dragging the boats up; 1 denier for each empty cask going up.”” Analogous
| “taxes are enforced at Varennes for the benefit of the Duc de Chatelet, seignior of Varennes.
_ 2 National archives, K, 1453, No. 1448: A letter by M. de Meulan, dated June 12, 1789.
| i tax on grain belonged at that time to the Comte d’Artois. Chateaubriand, ‘‘Mémoires,”
' » 73
\ _ %Renauldon, 247d 249,258. ‘‘There are few seignioral towns which do not have the lord’s
slaughter-houses. The butcher must obtain special permission from the seignior.” The
_ tax on grinding was an average of a sixteenth. In many provinces, Anjou, Berry, Maine,
Brittany, there was a lord’s mill for cloths and barks.
_ 4Renauldon, 7é2d. pp. 181, 200, 203; observe that he wrote this in 1765. Louis XVI.
‘suppressed villeinage on the royal domains in 1778; and many of the seigniors, especially
“in Franche-Comté, followed his example.
Beugnot, “Mémoires,” v. I. p. 142. Voltaire, ‘“‘ Mémoire au roi sur les serfs du Jura.”
“Mémoires de Bailly,” I]. 214, according to an official report of the Nat. Ass., August
1 7 1789. I rely on this report and on the book of M. Clerget, curate of Onans in Franche-
‘Comté, who is mentioned in it. M. Clerget says that there are still at this time (1789)
_~ 3,500,000 subjects of the king in a state of servitude but he brings forward no.proofs to sup-
‘port these figures. Nevertheless it is certain that the number of serfs and mortmains is still


24 THE ANCIENT REGIME. BOOK f.


birth and again through a territorial condition. Whether in
servitude, or as mortmains, or as cotters, one way or anoth
fifteen hundred thousand individuals, it is said, wore about th
necks a remnant of the feudal collar; this is not surprising since, —
on the other side of the Rhine, almost all the peasantry still w at
it. ‘The seignior, formerly master and proprietor of all their
goods and chattels and of all their labor, can still exact of them
from ten to twelve corvées per annum and a fixed annual tax: |
In the barony of Choiseul near Chaumont in Champagne, “the
inhabitants are required to plough his lands, to sow and reap
them for his account and to put the products into his barns;
each plot of ground, each house, every head of cattle pays a
quit-claim ; children may inherit from their parents only on con-
dition of remaining with them; if absent at the time of their
decease he is the inheritor.” ‘This is what was styled in the
language of the day an estate “with excellent dues.” Elsewhere
the seignior inherits from collaterals, brothers or nephews, if
they were not in community with the defunct at the moment
of his death, which community is only valid through his consent.
In the Jura and the Nivernais, he may pursue fugitive serfs, and
demand at their death, not only the ‘property left by them on
his domain, but, again, the pittance acquired by them elsewhere.
At Saint-Claude, he acquires this right over any person that
passes a year and a day in a house belonging to the seigniory. —
As to ownership of the soil we see still more clearly that he once ~
had entire possession of it. In the district subject to his juris-
diction the public domain remains his private domain; roads,
streets and open squares form a part of it; he has the right
to plant trees in them and to take trees up. In many provinces,
through a pasturage rent, he obliges the inhabitants to pay for
permits to pasture their cattle in the fields after the crop, and in
the open common lands, (/es terres vaines et vagues). Unnavigable
streams belong to him, as well as islets and accumulations
formed in them and the fish that are found in them. He has the


right of the chase over the whole extent of-his jurisdiction, this
st ;
very great. National archives, H, 723, memorials on mortmains in Franche-Comté in 1788 ;
H, 200, memorials by Amelot on Burgundy in 1785. “‘ In the sub-delegation of Charolles the
inhabitants seem a century behind the age; being subject to feudal tenures, such as mort-_
main, neither mind nor body have any play. The redemption of mortmain, of which the
king himself has set the example, has been put at such an exorbitant price by laymen, th
unfortunate sufferers cannot, and will not be able to secure it.”


‘sd


CHAP. II. THE STRUCTURE OF SOCIETY. 25


_ or that plebeian being sometimes compelled to throw open to
Bo him his park enclosed by walls.
One more trait serves to complete the picture. This head of
the State, a proprietor of man and of the soil, was once a resi-
| dent cultivator on his own small farm amidst others of the same
class and, by this title, he reserved to himself certain. working
privileges which he always retained. Such is the right of danvin,
still widely diffused, consisting of the privilege of selling his own
wine, to the exclusion of all others, during thirty or forty days
after gathering the crop. Such is, in Touraine, the right of
préage, which is the right to send his horses, cows and oxen “ to
browse under guard in his subjects’ meadows.” Such is, finally,
‘the monopoly of the great dove-cot, from which thousands of
pigeons issue to feed at all times and seasons and on all grounds,
without any one daring to kill or take them. Through another
"effect of the same qualification he imposes quit-claims on property
on which he has formerly given perpetual leases, and, under the
5 terms, cers, censives (quit-rents), carpot (share in wine), champart
(share i in grain), agrier (a cash commission on general product),
_terrage parciere (share of fruits), all these collections, in money or
in kind, are as various as the local situations, accidents and
"transactions could possibly be. In the Bourbonnais he has one-
_ quarter of the crop; in Berry twelve sheaves out of a hundred.
_ Occasionally his debtor or tenant is a community: one deputy
in the National Assembly owned a fief of two hundred casks of
wine on three thousand pieces of private property.' Besides,
through the vetraz¢ censuel (a species of right of redemption), he
can “retain for his own account all property sold on the condi-
tion of remunerating the purchaser, but previously deducting for
his benefit the lord’s dues (/ods et ventes).” The reader, finally,
must take note that all these restrictions on property constitute,
for the seignior, a privileged credit as well on the product as on
the price of the ground, and, for the copyholders, an impre-
Scriptible, indivisible and psdaaaeable debt.

Such are the feudal rights. To form an idea of them in their
totality we must always imagine the count, bishop or abbot of
the tenth century as sovereign and proprietor in his own canton.
The form which human society then takes grows out of the


ta 1 Boiteau, zd7d. p. 25, (April, 1790). Beugnot, ‘ Mémoires,” I. 142.


3


26 | THE ANCIENT REGIME.


exigencies of near and constant danger with a view : to le 1
defence, by subordinating all interests to the necessities © 5.
living, in such a way as to protect the soil by fixing on tl 7
soil, through property and its enjoyment, a troop of brave
men under the leadership of a brave chieftam. ‘The dai
having passed away the structure became dilapidat sd.
a pecuniary compensation the seigniors allowed the econ
and tenacious peasant to pick off it a good many st
Through constraint they suffered the king to appropriate to
self the public portion. ‘The primitive foundation remains,
erty as organized in ancient times, the fettered or exhausted
supporting a social conformation that has melted away, in short,
an order of privileges and of thraldom of which the cause al ¢ E
the purpose have disappeared.’ | Seip.


Vv


All this does not suffice to render this order detriment:
even useless. In reality, the local chief who no longer pe
his ancient service may perform a new one in exchange
Instituted for war when life was militant, he may serve in q
times when the régime is pacific, while the advantage to 1
nation is great in which this transformation is accomplished ; 1
retaining its chiefs, it is relieved of the uncertain and peril
operation which consists in creating others. There is no
more difficult to establish than a government, that is to say,
a stable government: this involves the command of some and
the obedience of all, which is against nature. ‘That a man in
his cabinet, often a feeble old person, should dispose of the lives
and property of twenty or thirty thousand men, most of whom
he has never seen; that he should order them to pay away the
tenth or a fifth of their income and they should do it; that
he should order them to go and slaughter or be slaughtered and
that they should go; that they should thus continue,for ten
years, twenty years, through every kind of trial, defeat, misery
and. invasion, as with the French under Louis XIV., the Englis
under Pitt, the Prussians under Frederick II., without sither
sedition or internal disturbances, is certainly a marvellous thing,
and, for a people to remain free it is essential that they should


1 See note 2 at the end of the volume,”


Temp.u. .§ THE STRUCTURE OF SOCIETY. 27
=


‘De ready to do this daily. Neither this fidelity nor this concord
_are due to sober reflection (/a raison raisonnante) ; reason is too
| yacillating and too feeble to bring about such a universal and ener-
fe getic result. Abandoned to itself and suddenly restored to a nat-
- ural condition, the human flock is capable only of agitation, of mut-
~ ual strife until pure force at length predominates, as in barbarous
times, and until, amidst the dust and outcry, some military leader
"rises up who is, generally, a butcher. Historically considered it is
__ better to continue on than to begin over again. Hence, especially
when the majority is uncultivated, it is beneficial to have chiefs
_ designated beforehand through the hereditary custom by which
| people follow them, and through the special education by which
‘ ‘w 1ey are qualified. In this case the public has no need to seek
_ for them to obtain them. They are already on hand, in each
canton, visible, accepted beforehand; they are known by their
names, their title, their fortune, their way of living; deference to
_ their authority is established. They are almost always deserving
_ of this authority; born and brought up to exercise it they find in
tradition, in family example and in family pride, powerful ties
that nourish public spirit in them; there is some. probability of
their comprehending the duties with which their prerogative
~ endows them.
_ Such is the renovation which the feudal régime comports.
a e ancient chieftain can still guarantee his pre-eminence by
his services, and remain popular without ceasing to be privileged. »
_ Once a captain in his district and a permanent gendarme he is
_*to become the resident and beneficent proprietor, the voluntary
- promoter of useful undertakings, the obligatory tutor of the
“poor, the gratuitous administrator and judge of the canton, the
“unsalaried deputy to the king, that is to say, a leader and prc-
| tector as formerly, through a new system of patronage accom-
_modated to new circumstances. Local magistrate and central .
_| Tepresentative, these are his two principal functions, and, if we
extend our observation beyond France we find that he exercises
either one or the other, or both together.


-


CHAPTER III.


LOCAL SERVICES DUE BY THE PRIVILEGED CLASSES.—I. Examples is 3 Se
many and England.—These services not rendered by the privileged el
in France.—II. Resident Seigniors.—Remains of the beneficent feudal s
—They are not rigorous with their tenants but no longer retain the 1
government.—Their isolation. —Insignificance or mediocrity of their a
of subsistence.—Their expenditure.—Not in a condition to remit dues.—
Sentiments of the peasantry towards them.—III. Absentee Seigniors,—Vast
extent of their fortunes and rights.—Possessing greater advantages the owe
greater services.—Reasons for their absenteeism.—Effect of it.—Ap.: A :
the provinces.—Condition of their estates.—They give no alms. —Misery of
their tenantry.—Exactions of their agents.—Exigencies of their debts. —
State of their justiciary.—Effects of their ari rights. Sor of the
peasantry towards them. :


i

Let us consider the first one, local government. Thies
countries at the gates of France in which feudal subjection, more 7
burdensome than in France, seems lighter because, in the o ther
scale, the benefits counterbalance disadvantages. At Munster, in
1809, Beugnot finds a sovereign bishop, a town of convents and
a large seigniorial mansion, a few merchants for indispensable
trade, a small bourgeoisie, ane all around, a peasantry co |
of either colons or serfs. The seignior deducts a portion of all
their crops in provisions or in cattle, and, at their deaths, a por-
tion of their inheritances ; if they go away their property reverts
to him. His servants are chastised like Russian moujiks, and in
each outhouse is a trestle for this purpose “ without prejudice to
graver penalties,” probably the bastinade and‘ the like. But
“never did the culprit entertain the slightest idea of complain
or appeal.” or if the seignior whips them as the father of 4
family he protects them “as the father of a family, ever coming
to their assistance when misfortune befalls them and taking caré
of them in their illness ;” he provides an asylum for them in ol¢
age; he looks after their widows, and rejoices when they hav


CHAP. III. THE STRUCTURE OF SOCIETY. 29


ro »


plenty of children ; he is bound to them by common sympathies ; ;


Bs they are neither Miserable nor uneasy; they know that, in every


is


i
&
%
}
:


extreme or unforeseen necessity, he will be their refuge. In the
Prussian states, and according to the code of Frederick the Great,


' a still more rigorous servitude is atoned for by similar obligations,


_ The peasantry, without their seignior’s permission, cannot alienate
' a field, mortgage it, cultivate it differently, change their occupa-


' tion or marry. If they leave the seigniory he can pursue them
in every direction and bring them back by force. He has the
- right of surveillance over their private life and he chastises them
if drunk or lazy. When young they serve for years as servants


in his mansion; as cultivators they owe him corvées and, in cer-


_ tain places, three times a week. But, according to both law and
_ custom, he is obliged “to see that they are educated, to succor
_ them in indigence, and, as far as possible, to provide them with
_ the means of support.” Accordingly he is charged with the


~ duties of the government of which he enjoys the advantages,
_ and, under the heavy hand which curbs them, but which sustains


them, we do not find his subjects recalcitrant. In England, the


_ upper class attain to the same result by other ways. ‘There also


the soil still pays the ecclesiastic tithe, strictly the tenth, which


is much more than in France.?. The squire, the nobleman, pos-
" sesses a still larger portion of the soil than his French neighbor
_ and, in truth, exercises greater authority in his canton. But his


tenants, the lessees and the farmers, are no longer his serfs, nor


even his vassals; they are free. If he governs it is through in-


fluence and not by virtue of a command.’ Proprietor and patron,
he is held in respect; lord-lieutenant, officer in the militia, ad-
“ministrator, justice,/he is visibly yseful. And, above all, he lives
at home, from father to son; he belongs to the canton; he is in
hereditary and constant relation with the local public, through
his occupations and through his pleasures, through the chase and
caring for the poor, through his farmers whom he admits at his
‘table and through his neighbors whom he meets in committee or
in the vestry. ‘This shows how the old hierarchies are main-


1 Beugnot, ‘‘ Mémoires,” v. I. p. 292. De Tocqueville, ‘‘L’ Ancien Régime et la Révolu-
tion.” ,

2 Arthur Young, ‘Travels in France,” II. 456. In France, he says, it is from the eleventh
to the thirty-second. ‘‘But nothing is known like the enormities committed in England
where the tenth is really taken.”


a”


3° THE ANCIEN T REGIME.


tained: it.is necessary, and it suffices, that they should changs
their military into a civil order of things and find noc 0:
_ployment for the chieftain of feudal times. Sil, ol


Il.


If we go back a little way in our history we find heres
there similar nobles.1. Such was the Duc de Saint-Simon, f fathe
of the writer, a real sovereign in his government of Blaye, a1
respected by the king himself. Such was the grandfather o
Mirabeau, in his chateau of Mirabeau in Provence, the haugh
tiest, most absolute, most intractable of men, “demanding that
the officers whom he appointed in his regiment should be favor-
ably received by the king and by his ministers,” tolerating na
inspectors only as a matter of form, but heroic, generous, faithful,
distributing the pension offered to himself among Six wound
captains under his command, mediating for poor litigants amt
mountain, driving off his grounds the wandering attorneys 4
come to practise their chicanery, “the natural protector of man,”
even against ministers and the king. A party of tobacco in |
spectors having searched his curate’s house, he pursues them
so energetically on horseback that they hardly escape him by
fording the Durance, whereupon, “he wrote to demand the dis-
missal of the officers, declaring that unless this was done over
person employed in the Excise should be driven into the E o
or the sea; some of them were dismissed and the director ‘ini ‘
self came to give him satisfaction.” Finding his canton sterile
and the settlers on it idle he organizes them into companies,
men, women and children, and, in the foulest weather, puts
Liowele at their head, with his twenty severe wounds and his
neck supported by a piece of silver; he pays them to work,
making them clear off the lands, akiels he gives them on leases
of a hundred years, and he makes them enclose a mountain
of rocks with high walls and plant it with olive trees. ‘Noone,
under any pretext could be excused from working unless he suet,


} Saint-Simon, ‘ Mémoires,” ed. Chéruel, vol. I. Lucas de Montigny, « Mémoires de
Mirabeau,” I. 53-182. Marshal Marmont, “Mémoires,” I. 9, 11. Chateaubriand, “Mé-
moires,”” 1. 17. De Montlosier, “Mémoires,” 2 vol. passim.


Mme. de Larochejacquelein,
“Souvenirs,” passim,


Many details concerning the types of the old nobility will be found
in these passages. They are truly and forcibly depicted in two novels by Balzac,


in
oe Béatrix,” the Baron de Guénic, and in the “ Cabinet des Antiques,” the vena
grignon.


- CHAP, IIL THE STRUCTURE OF SOCIETY. 31


--and in this case under treatment, or occupied on his own property,
a point in which my father could not be deceived, and nobody
would have dared to do it.” ‘These are the last offshoots of the
old, knotty, savage trunk, but still capable of affording shelter,

Others could still be found in remote cantons, in Brittany and
in Auvergne, veritable district commanders, and I am sure that
an time of need the peasants would obey them as much out

_-of respect as from fear, Vigor of heart and of body justifies its

own ascendency, while the superabundance of energy which

_ begins in violence ends in beneficence.

_, Less independent and less harsh a paternal government sub-

sists elsewhere, if not in the law at least through custom. In

_ Brittany, near Tréguier and Lannion, says the bailly. of Mira-

_ -beau,! “the entire staff of the coast-guard is composed of peo-

_ .ple of quality and of races of a thousand years. I have not

seen one of them get irritated with a peasant-soldier, while, at

‘the same time, I have seen on the part of the latter an air of

' filial respect for them. . . . It isa terrestrial paradise with respect

_.to patriarchal manners, simplicity and true grandeur: the atti-

tude of the peasants towards the seigniors is that of an affection-

-ate son with his father; and the seigniors in talking with the
peasants use their rude and coarse language and speak only in a

_-kind and genial way. We see mutual regard between masters
and servants.” Farther south, in the Bocage, a wholly agricultural
region, and with no roads, where ladies are obliged to travel on

horseback and in ox-carts, where the seignior has no farmers, but
only twenty-five or thirty mé¢ayers who work for him on shares,
the supremacy of the great is no offence to their inferiors.

People live together harmoniously when living together from

_ birth to death, familiarly, and with the same interests, occupa-

.tions and pleasures ; like soldiers with their officers, on campaigns
and under tents, in subordination although in companionship,
familiarity never endangering respect. ‘The seignior often visits
‘them on their small farms,? talks with them about their affairs,
about taking care of their cattle, sharing in the accidents and
Mishaps which likewise seriously affect him. He attends their


“ASS


1 A letter of the bailly of Mirabeau, 1760, published by M. de Loménie in the ‘ Corres-

pondant,” v, XLXIX. p. 132.

f . * Mme. de Larochejacquelein, did. I. 84. “As M. de Marigny had some knowledge of
the veterinary art the peasants of the canton came after him when they had sick animals.”


32 THE ANCIENT REGIME. BOOK 1,


childrens’ weddings and drinks with the guests. On Sunday
there are dances in the chateau court and the ladies take part in —
them.” When he is about to hunt wolves or boars the curate —
gives notice of it at the sermon; the peasants, with their guns, —
gayly assemble at the rendezvous, finding the seignior who assigns 4
them their posts, and strictly observing the directions he gives”
them. Here are soldiers and a captain ready made. A little
later, and of their own accord, they will choose him for com- —
mandant in the national guard, mayor of the commune, chief —
of the insurrection, and, in 1792, the marksmen of the parish -
are to march under him against “the blues” as, at this epoch,
against the wolves. Such are the remnants of the good feudal
spirit, like the scattered remnants of a submerged continent.
Before Louis XIV., the spectacle was similar throughout France.
“The rural nobility of former days,” says the Marquis of Mira-
beau, “spent too much time over their cups, slept on old chairs
or pallets, mounted and started off to hunt before daybreak, met
together on St. Hubert’s and did not part until after the octave
of St. Martin. . . . These nobles led a gay and hard life, volun-
tarily, costing the State very little and producing more for it by
staying at home and utilizing manure-heaps than we of to-day
with our tastes, our researches, our cholics and ‘our vapors. . . .
The custom, and it may be said, the passion of constantly
making presents to the seigniors, is well known. I have, in my
time, seen this custom everywhere disappear, and properly. ...
The seigniors are no longer of any consequence to them; it
is quite natural that they should be forgotten by them as they
forget. . . . The seignior being no longer known on his estates
everybody pillages him, which is right.”1 Everywhere, except
in remote corners, the affection and unity of the two classes has
disappeared; the shepherd is separated from his flock, and the
pastors of the people end in being considered its parasites.

Let us first follow them into the provinces. We here find
only the minor class of nobles and a portion of those of medium
rank; the rest are in Paris.2 There is the same line of separation
in the church: abbés-commendatory, bishops and archbishops
very seldom live at home; the grand-vicars and canons live in


? Marquis de Mirabeau, “ Traité de la Population,” p. 57.


* De Tocqueville, ibid. p. 180. This is proved by the registers of the capitation-tte
which was paid at the actual domicile.


CHAP. Ill. THE STRUCTURE OF SOCIETY. a


the large towns; only priors and curates dwell in the rural dis-
tricts; ordinarily the entire ecclesiastic or lay staff is absent;
residents are furnished only by the secondary or inferior isietes.
What are their relations with the peasant? One point is certain,
and that is that they are not usually hard, nor even indifferent, to
_ him. Separated by rank they are not so by distance; neighbor-
hood is of itself a bond among men. I have read in vain, but I
have not found them the rural tyrants which the declaimers of the
Revolution portray them. Haughty with the bourgeois they
are generally kind to the villager. “Let any one travel through
the provinces,” says a contemporary advocate, “over the estates
occupied by the seigniors; out of a hundred one may be found
where they tyrannize over their dependants; all the others
patiently share the misery of those subject to their jurisdiction.
. They give their debtors time, remit sums due and afford
them every facility for settlement. They mollify and temper
the sometimes over-rigorous proceedings of the fermiers, stewards
- and other men of business.”+~ An Englishwoman, who observes
them in Provence just after the Revolution, says that, detested
_ at Aix, they are much beloved on their estates. ‘Whilst they
pass the first citizens with their heads erect and an air of disdain,
they salute peasants with extreme courtesy and affability.” One
of them distributes among the women, children and the aged on
his domain wool and flax to spin during the bad season and, at
_ the end of the year, he offers a prize of one hundred livres for
the best two pieces of cloth. In numerous instances the peasant-
purchasers of their land voluntarily restore it for the purchase
‘money. Around Paris, near Romainville, after the terrible storm
of 1788 there is prodigal alms-giving; ‘a very wealthy man im-
mediately distributes forty thousand francs among the surround-
ing unfortunates;” during the winter, in Alsace and in Paris,
everybody is giving; ‘in front of each hotel belonging to a well-
known family a big log is burning to which, night and day, the
poor can come and warm themselves.” In the way of charity,
the monks who remain on their premises and witness the public
misery, continue faithful to the spirit of their institution. On


1 Renauldon, zéid., Preface p. 5. Anne Plumptre, “A narrative of three years residence
in France from 1802 to 1805,”” II. 357. Baroness Oberkirk, “Mémoires,” II. 389. ‘De
Pétat religieux,” by the abbés Bonnefoi and Bernard, 1784, p. 295. Mme. Vigée-Lebrun,
“Souvenirs,” p. 171.


34 THE ANCIENT REGIME. BOOK E


y=


the birth of the Dauphin the Augustins of Montmorillon in-
Poitou pay out of their own resources the /az//es and coruées of
nineteen poor families. In 1781, in Provence, the Dominica: s
of Saint Maximin support the population of their district in |
which the tempest had destroyed the vines and the olive trees.
“The Carthusians of Paris furnish the poor with eighteen hun-_
dred pounds of bread per week. During the winter of 1784 |
there is an increase of alms-giving in all the religious establish-

ments; their farmers distribute aid among the poor people of —
the country, and, to provide for these extra necessities, many of
the communities increase the nigor of their abstinences.” When,
at the end of 1789, their suppression is in question, I find a
number of protests in their favor, written by municipal officers,
by prominent individuals, by a crowd of inhabitants, workmen
and peasants, and these columns of rustic signatures are truly
eloquent. Seven hundred families of Cateau-Cambrésis! send in
a petition to retain “the worthy abbés and monks of the Abbey
of St. Andrew; their common fathers and benefactors, who fed
them during the tempest.” ‘The inhabitants of St. Savin, in the
Pyrenees, “portray with tears of grief their consternation” at
the prospect of suppressing their abbey of Benedictines, the sole
charitable organization in this poor country. At Sierk, near
Thionville, “the Chartreuse,” say the leading citizens, “is, for us,
in every respect, the Ark of the Lord; it is the main support of
from more than twelve to fifteen hundred persons who come to
it every day in the week. This year the monks have distributed
amongst them their own store of grain at sixteen livres less than
the current price.” The regular canons of Domiévre, in Lor-
raine, feed sixty poor persons twice a week; it is essential to re-
tain them, says the petition, “out of pity and compassion for the
poor beings whose misery cannot be imagined; where there are
no regular convents and canons in their dependency, the poor |~
cry with misery.”* At Moutiers-Saint-John, near Sémur in Bur-
gundy, the Benedictines of Saint-Maur support the entire village —


? Archives nationales, D, XIX. portfolios 14, 15, 25. Five bundles of papers are filled
with these petitions. d

* /bid. D, XIX. portfolio 11. An admirable letter by Joseph of Saintignon, abbé of
Domiévre, general of the regular canons of Saint-Sauveur and a resident. He has 23,000
livres income, of which 6,066 livres is a pension from the government, in recompense for his __
services. His personal expenditure not being over 5,000 livres “he is in a situation to


distribute among the poor and the workmen, in the space of eleven years, more than 250,000
livres,”’ i :


| CHAP. III. THE STRUCTURE OF SOCIETY. 35


;
| and supply it this year with food during the famine. Near
Morley in Barrois, the abbey of Auvey, of the Cistercian
| order, “was always, for every village in the neighborhood, a
| bureau of charity.” At Airvault, in Poitou, the municipal offi-
cers, the colonel of the national guard, and numbers of “rustics
and inhabitants” demand the conservation of the regular canons
of St. Augustin. ‘Their existence,” says the petition, “is abso-
Jutely essential, as well for our town as for the country and we
should suffer an irreparable loss in their suppression.” The
| municipality and permanent council of Soissons write that the
establishment of Saint-Jean des Vignes “‘has always earnestly
claimed its share of the public charges. This is the institution
~ which, in times of calamity, welcomes shelterless citizens and
_ provides them with subsistence. It alone bears the expenses of
_ the assembly of the-bailiwick at the time of the election of
_~ deputies to the National Assembly. A company of the regiment
_ of Armagnac is actually lodged under its roof. ‘This institution
__ is always found wherever sacrifices are to be made.” In scores
__ of places declarations are made that the monks are “the fathers
_ Of the poor.” In the diocese of Auxerre, during the summer of
_ 1789, the Bernardines of Rigny, “stripped themselves of all they
__ possessed in favor of the inhabitants of neighboring villages:
_- bread, grain, money and other supplies, have all been lavished
__ on about twelve hundred persons who, for more than six weeks,

_ mever failed to present themselves at their door daily...
_ Loans, advances made on farms, credit with the purveyors of the
house, all has contributed to facilitating their means for relieving
‘the people.” I omit many other traits equally forcible; we see
that the ecclesiastical and lay seigniors are not simple egoists
_ when they live at home. Man is compassionate for ills of which
he is a witness; absence is necessary to deaden their vivid im-
‘pression ; the heart is moved by them when the eye contemplates
them. Familiarity, moreover, engenders sympathy; one cannot
‘remain insensible to the trials of a poor man to whom, for over
twenty years, one says good-morning every day on passing him,
_ with whose life one is acquainted, who is not an abstract unit in
the imagination, a statistical cipher, but a sorrowing soul and
a suffermg body. And so much the more because, since the
‘Writings of Rousseau and the economists, a spirit of humanity,
‘daily growing stronger, more penetrating and more universal, has


36 THE ANCIENT REGIME. © BOOK I.


arisen to soften the heart. Henceforth the poor are thought of,
and it is esteemed an honor to think of them. We have only ~
to read the memorials of the States-General’ to see that the —
spirit of philanthropy spreads from Paris even to the chateaux | |
and abbeys of the provinces. I am satisfied that, excepting —
scattered country squires, either huntsmen or drinkers, carried
away by the need of physical exercise, and confined through :
their rusticity to an animal life, most of the resident seigniors
resembled, in fact or in intention, the gentry whom Marmontel, f
in his moral tales, then brought on the stage; for fashion took
this direction, and people in France always follow the fashion.
There is nothing feudal in their characters; they are “sen-
sible” folks, mild, very courteous, tolerably cultivated, fond
of generalities and easily and quickly roused and very much
in earnest, like that amiable logician the Marquis de Ferriéres, an
old light-horseman, deputy from Saumur in the National Assem-
bly, author of an article on Theism, a moral romance and genial
memoirs of no great importance; nothing could be more re-
mote from the ancient harsh and despotic temperament. They
would be glad to relieve the people and they try to favor them
as much as they can.” They are found detrimental, but they are ~
not wicked ; the evil is in their situation and not in their charac-
ter. It is their situation, in fact, which, allowing them rights —
without exacting services, debars them from the- public offices,
the beneficial influence, the effective patronage by which they
might justify their advantages and attach the peasantry to them.
But on this ground the central government occupies their place.
For a long time they are very feeble against the intendant, ut-
terly powerless to protect their parish. ‘Twenty gentlemen can-
not assemble and deliberate without the king’s special permis-
sion.’ If those of Franche-Comté happen to dine together and
hear a mass once a year, it is through tolerance, and even then
this harmless coterie may assemble only in the presence of the
intendant. Separated from his equals, the seignior again is sep- |


a


? On the conduct and sentiments of lay and ecclesiastical seigniors cf. Léonce de La-
vergne, ‘‘Les Assemblées provinciales,” 1 vol. Legrand, “L’intendance du Hainaut,”
vol. Hippeau, ‘Le Gouvernement de Normandie,” 9 vols.

2“ The most active sympathy filled their breasts; that which an apulent man most
dreaded was to be regarded as insensible.” Lacretelle, vol. V. p. 2. > ©

5 Floquet, “‘ Histoire du Parlement de Normandie,” vol. VI. p- 696. In 1772 twenty-five


gentlemen are imprisoned or exiled for having signed a protest against the orders of the _
court. - fs


CHAP. m1. THE STRUCTURE OF SOCIETY. 77


‘ arated from his inferiors. ‘The administration of a village is of
“no concern to him; he has’ not even its superintendence. The
Bisportioninent of taxes, the militia contingent, the repairs of the
~ church, the summoning and presiding over a parish assembly,
_ the making of roads, the establishment of charity workshops, all
this is the intendant’s business or that of the communal officers
which the intendant appoints or directs! Except through his
_ justiciary rights, so much curtailed, the seignior is an idler in
' public matters.” If, by chance, he should desire to act in an
. pecs capacity, to make some reclamation for the community,
' the bureaux of administration would soon close his mouth.
“Since Louis XIV., the clerks have things their own way; all leg-
~ islation and the eniee administrative system operate against the
. seignior to deprive him of his functional efficacy and to
ie" confine him to his naked title. Through this separation of func-


Sort, the local government, in the hands of clowns brutadened
_ by men of the pen, is a plebeian, scribbling affair which seems
_ to him offensive. ‘His pride would be wounded if he were
_ asked to attend to it. Raising taxes, levying the militia, regula-
_ ting the corvées, are servile acts, the works of a syndic.” He ac-
cordingly abstains, remains isolated on his manor and leaves to
: others a task from which he is excluded and which he disdains.
Far from protecting his peasantry he is scarcely able to protect
_ himself, to preserve his immunities, to have his poll-tax and
_ vingticmes reduced, to obtain exemption from the militia for.his
Be domestics, and to keep his own person, dwelling, dependants, and
_ hunting and fishing rights from the universal usurpation which
- places all possessions and ‘all privileges in the hands of “ Mon-
| ocd Vintendant” and Messieurs the sub-deltgates. And


Ln


a 1De Tocqueville, ibid. pp. 39, 56, 75, 119, 184. He has developed this point with admira-
, | _ ble force and insight.
2 De Tocqueville, 247d. p. 376. Complaints of the provincial assembly of Haute-Guyenne.
“People complain daily that there is no police in the rural districts. How could there be
one? The noble takes no interest in anything, excepting a few just and benevolent
} ‘seigniors who take advantage of their influence with their vassals to prevent affrays.”
{ _- ® Records of the States-General of 1789. Many of the memorials of the noblesse consist
| of the requests by nobles, men and women, of some honorary distinctive mark, for instance
} across or a ribbon which will make them recognizable.


4


—!
i
.


35 THE ANCIENT REGIME. - BOOK


oftener is this the case because he is poor. Bouillé estimates that
all the old families, save two or three hundred, are ruined.’ Ii
Rouergue several of them live on an income of fifty and e ¢
twenty-five louis, (1000 and 500 francs). In Limousin, says-an in-
tendant at the beginning of the century, out of several thousands
there are not fifteen who have twenty thousand livres income. In
Berry, towards 1754, “three-fourths of them die of hunger.” Ir
Franche-Comté the fraternity to which we have alluded, appears
in a humorous light, “after the mass each one returning to his
domicile, some on foot and others on their Rosinantes.” — In
Brittany “there is a crowd of gentlemen cellar-rats on the farms
in the lowest occupations.” An M. de la Morandais becomes”
the overseer of an estate. A certain family with nothing but 2 v
small farm, “attests its nobility only by the dove-cote; it lives”
like the peasants, eating nothing but brown bread.” Another |
gentleman, a widower, “passes his time in drinking, living licen-_
tiously with his servants and covering butter-pots with the hand-"
somest title-deeds of his lineage.” “All the chevaliers de Chat-~
eaubriand,” says the father, were drunkards and whippers of —
hares.” He himself just makes shift to live in a miserable”
way, with five domestics, a hound and two old mares “in a
chateau capable of accommodating a hundred seigniors with
their suites.” Here and there in the various memoirs we see these —
strange superannuated figures passing before the eye, for in-
stance, in Burgundy, “gentlemen huntsmen wearing gaiters and -
hob-nailed shoes, carrying an old rusty sword under their arms, —
dying with hunger and refusing to work ;”? elsewhere, “M. de
Pérignan, in dress attire, with sandy perruque and visage, hay-
ing dry stone walls built on his domain, and getting intoxicated
with the blacksmith of the place ;” related to Cardinal Fleury he
is made the first Duc de Fleury.
Everything contributes to this downfall, the law, habits and
customs, and, above all, the right of primogeniture. Instituted
for the purpose of maintaining undivided sovereignty and pat-
ronage it ruins the nobles since sovereignty and patronage have


' De Bouillé, “Mémoires,” p. 50. De Tocqueville, 7d. pp. 118, 119. De Loménie
“Les Mirabeau,” p. 132. A letter of the bailly of Mirabeau, 1760. De Chateaubriand,
“Mémoires,” I. 14, 15, 29, 76, 80, 125. Lucas de Montigny, “‘ Mémoires de Mirabeau,”
160. Reports of the Société du Berry, “ Bourges en 1753 et 1754,” according to a diary (
the national archives), written by one of the exiled parliamentarians, p. 273.

* “La vie de mon pére,” by Rétif de la Bretonne, I. 146.


CHAP. IIL. THE STRUCTURE OF SOCIETY. 39


<


13


-no material to work on. “In Brittany,” says Chateaubriand,
"the elder sons of the nobles swept away two- thirds of the
hae
property while the younger sons shared in one-third of the
_ paternal heritage.”’. Consequently, “the younger sons of
_ younger sons soon come to the sharing of a pigeon, rabbit,
' hound and fowling-piece. The entire fortune of my grandfather
did not exceed five thousand livres income, of which his elder
. _ son had two-thirds, three thousand three hundred livres, leaving
‘one thousand six hundred and sixty-six livres for the three
s _ younger ones upon which sum the elder still had a préciput
 claim.”? This fortune, which crumbles away and dies out, they
__ neither know how, nor are they disposed, to restore by com-
ty _ merce, manufactures or proper administration of it; it would be
_ derogatory. “High and mighty seigniors of dove-cote, frog-
pond and rabbit-warren,” the more substance they lack the
_ more value they set on the name. Add to all this the winter
sojourn in town, the ceremonial and expenses comportable with
_ yanity and social requirements, and the visits to the governor and
the intendant: a man must be either a German or an English-
man to be able to pass three gloomy, rainy months in a castle or
on a farm, alone, in companionship with rustics, at the risk
of becoming as awkward and as fantastic as they.” They ac-
_ cordingly run in debt, become involved, sell one piece of ground
and then another piece: a good many alienate the whole, ex-
cepting their small manor and their seigniorial dues, the cens
and the ods ef ventes, and their hunting and justiciary rights on
the territory of which they were formerly proprietors.4 Since
they must support themselves on these privileges they must
Necessarily enforce them, even when the privilege is burdensome,
-and even when the debtor is a poor man. How could they


: _ 1 The rule is analogous with the other coutumes (common-law rules), of other places and
especially in Paris. (Renauldon, zdid. p. 134.)
2 A sort of dower right.
_ 8 Mme. d’Oberkirk, “Mémoires,” I. 395.

—4De Bouillé, ‘‘ Mémoires,” p. 50. According to him, “all the noble old families, except-
‘ing two or three hundred, were ruined. A larger portion of the great titled estates had be-
come the appanage of financiers, merchants and their descendants. The fiefs, for the most

_ part, were in the hands of the bourgeoisie of the towns.” Léonce de Lavergne, **Econo-
‘mie rurale en France,” p. 26. ‘‘ The greatest number vegetated 1 in poyerty in small country
fiefs often not worth more than 2,000 or 3,000 francs a year.” In the apportionment of the

i indemnity i in 1825, many received less than 1,o0ofrancs. The greater number of indemnities
do not exceed 50,000 francs. ‘The throne,” says Mirabeau, “is surrounded only by ruined


nobles.”


-


40 THE ANCIENT REGIME, BOOK I,


te


remit dues in grain and in wine when these constitute their
bread and wine for the entire year? How could they dispense a
with the fifth and the fifth of the fifth (au guint et du requint)


should they not be exacting ? Acoordagies in relation to the
peasant, they are simply his creditors; and to this end comes
the feudal régime transformed by the monaten Around the
chateau I see sympathies declining, envy raising its head, and |
hatreds on the increase. Set aside in public matters, freed.
from taxation, the seignior remains isolated and a stranger
among his vassals; his extinct authority with his unimpaired
privileges form for him an existence apart. When he emerges
from it, it is to forcibly add to the public misery. On this soil,
ruined by the fisc, he takes a portion of its product, so much in
sheaves of wheat and so many measures of wine. His pigeons
and his game eat up the crops. People are obliged to grind in
his mill, and to leave with him a sixteenth of the flour. The
sale of a field for the sum of six hundred livres puts one hun-
dred livres into his pocket. A brother’s inheritance reaches
a brother only after he has gnawed out of it a year’s income.
A score of other dues, formerly of public benefit, no longer
serve but to support a useless private individual. The peasant,
then as at the present day, eager for gain, determined and
accustomed to do and to suffer everything to save or gain a
crown, ends by bestowing side glances of anger on the turret in
which is preserved the archives, the rent-roll, the detested parch-
ments by means of which a man of another species, favored to
the detriment of the rest, a universal creditor and paid to do
nothing, grazes over all the ground and feeds on all the products.
Let the opportunity come to enkindle all this covetousness and
the rent-roll will burn and with it the turret, and with the turret,
the chateau.


III. |

The spectacle becomes still more gloomy, on passing from the
estates on which the seigniors reside to those on which they are
non-residents. Noble or ennobled, lay and ecclesiastic, the latter
are privileged among the privileged and form an aristocrac
inside of an aristocracy. Almost all the powerful and accredited
families belong to it whatever may be their origin and their


- onar. Ill. THE STRUCTURE OF SOCIETY. 4t


~


e Through their habitual or frequent residence near the
Ourt, through their alliances or mutual visits, through their
| habits and their luxuries, through the influence which they
| exercise and the enmities which they provoke, they form a
group apart, and are those who possess the most extensive
__ estates, the leading suzerainties, and the completest and most
‘comprehensive jurisdictions. Of the court nobility and of the
- higher clergy, they number, perhaps, a thousand in each order,
_ while their small number only brings out in higher relief the
| _ enormity of their advantages. We have seen that the appanages ~
_ of the princes of the blood comprise a seventh of the territory ;
Necker estimates the revenue of the estates enjoyed by the
_ king’s two brothers at two millions? The domains of the Ducs
. de Bouillon, d’Aiguillon, and some others cover entire leagues
and in immensity and continuity, remind one of those which
the Duke of Sutherland and the Duke of Bedford now possess
“in England. With nothing else than: his forests and his canal,
a. Duke of Orleans, before marrying his wife, as rich as himself,
- obtains an income of a million. A certain seigniory, le Cler-
aa belonging to the Prince de Condé, contains forty

thousand inhabitants, which is the extent of a German principal-
. ‘ity; ; “moreover all the taxes or subsidies occurring in le Cler-
_ montois are imposed for the benefit of His Serene Highness,
~ the king receiving absolutely nothing.”* Naturally authority
and wealth go together, and, the more an estate yields, the more
its owner resembles a sovereign. The archbishop of Cambray,
“Duc de Cambray, Comte de Cambrésis, possesses the suzerainty
over all the fiefs of a region which numbers over seventy-
five thousand inhabitants; he appoints one-half of the alder-
“men of Cambray and the whole of the administrators of Ca-
_ teau; he has the nomination to two great abbeys, and pre-


1De Bouillé, ‘‘Mémoires,” p. 50. Cherin, ‘“‘Abrégé chronologique des édits” (1788).
_ “Of this innumerable multitude composing the privileged order scarcely a twentieth part of
it can really pretend to nobility of an immemorial and ancient date.” 4,070 financial, ad-
“ministrative, and judicial offices conferred nobility. ‘Turgot, ‘Collection des Economistes,”
Il. 276. ‘Through the facilities for acquiring nobility by means of money there is no rich
-man who does not at once become noble.”” D’Argenson, ‘‘ Mémoires,” ITI. 402.
2 Necker, “‘De l’Administration des Finances,” II. 271. Legrand, ‘‘L’Intendance de
Hainaut,” pp. 104, 118, 152, 412.
3 Even after the exchange of 1784, the prince retains for himself ‘‘all personal impositions
as well as subventions on the inhabitants,”’ except a sum of 6,000 livres for roads. Archives
f nationales, G, 192, a memorial of April 14th, 1781, on the state of things in the Clermontois.
Report of the provincial assembly of the Three Bishoprics (1787), p. 380.


4*


42 THE ANCIENT REGIME.


sides over the provincial assemblies and the permanent bi rea
which succeeds them; in short, under the intendant, or at
side, he maintains a pre-eminence, and better still, an influ
somewhat like that to-day maintained over his domain byil
grand-duke incorporated into the new German empire. © 1 ‘ear
him, in Hainaut, the abbé of Saint-Amand possesses seven:
eighths of the territory of the provostship while pai or
the other eighth the seigniorial taxes of the corvées and
dime; and more besides, he nominates the provost of the ¢ al-
~ dermen, so that, in the words of the grievances, “he qi Dose ;

the entire State, or rather he is himself the State”? -I should:
never end if I were to specify all these big prizes. Let us select

only those of the prelacy, and but one particular side, that
af money. In the “Almanach Royal,” and in “ La France ee
clésiastique” for 1788, we may read their admitted revenues ; ut
the veritable revenue is one-half more for the bishopries, ia 4
double and triple for the abbeys; and we must again double
the veritable revenue in order to estimate its value in the monéy
of to-day The one hundred and thirty-one bishops and —
bishops possess in the aggregate 5,600,000 livres of episcopal ir
come and 1,200,000 livres in abbeys, averaging 50,060 livres ola
head as in the printed record, and in reality 100,000; a bisho i
thus, in the eyes of his contemporaries, according to the state-
ment of spectators cognizant of the actual truth, was “a grand
seignior, with an income of 100,000 livres.” Some of the mos
important sees are magnificently endowed. That of Sens brings
in 70,000 livres; Verdun, 74,000; Tours, 82,000; Beauvais,
Toulouse and Bayeux, 90,000; Rouen, 100,000; Auch, Metz
and Albi, 120,000; Narbonne, 160,000; Paris and Cambray,
200,000 according to official reports, and probably half as much
more in sums actually collected. Other sees, less lucrative, are,
proportionately, still better provided. Imagine a small provincial
town, oftentimes not even a petty sub-prefecture of our times,—
Conserans, Mirepoix, Lavaur, Rieux, Lombez, Saint-Papoul,
Comminges, Lucon, Sarlat, Mende; Fréjus, Lescar, Belley, Saint.
Malo, Tréguier, Embrun, Saint-Claude,—and, in the neighbor
hood, less than two hundred; one hundred, and sometimes eve


1 The town of St. Amand, alone, contains to-day 10,210 inhabitants.
2 See note 3 at the end of the volume.
5 De Ferriéres, “‘ Mémoires,” II. 57. ‘‘ All had 100,000, some 200, 300, and even Bonjogo'?


=e


CHAP. UI. THE ‘STRUCTURE OF SOCIETY. 43


less than fifty parishes, and, as recompense for this slight ecclesi-
astical surveillance, a prelate receiving from 25,000 to 70,000
livres, according to official statements; from 37,000 to 105,000
livres ‘in -actual -receipts; and from 74,000 to 105,000 livres
in the money of to-day. As to the abbeys, I count thirty-
three of them producing to the abbé from 25,000 to 120,000
livres, and twenty-seven which. bring from 20,000 to 100,000
livres to the abbess; weigh these sums taken from the Almanach,
3 and bear in mind that they must be doubled, and more, to
obtain the real revenue, and be quadrupled, and more, to >
obtain the actual revenue. /It is evident, that, with such
~ reyenues, coupled with the feudal rights, police, justiciary and
administrative, which accompany them, an ecclesiastic or lay
grand seignior is, in fact, a sort of prince in his district; that he
bears too close. a.resemblance to the ancient sovereign to be
_ entitled to live as an ordinary individual; that his private ad-
__yantages impose on him a public chavacter’ that his rank, and
his enormous profits, make it incumbent on him to perform
‘proportionate services, and that, even under the sway of the
"intendant, he owes to his vassals,to his tenants, to his feudato-
e support of his mediation, of his patronage and of his
gains.
_ This requires a home residence, but, generally, he is an ab-
sentee. For a hundred and fifty years a kind of all-powerful
attraction diverts the grandees from the provinces and impels
_ them towards the capital ; and the movement is irresistible for it
is the effect of two forces, the greatest and most universal that
- influence mankind, one, a social position, and the other the
national character. A tree is not to be severed from its roots
ith impunity. An aristocracy organized to rule becomes de-
_ tached from the soil. when it no longer rules ; and it ceases to
) ul ike moment when, through increasing and constant en-
+ croachments, almost the entire justiciary, the entire administra-
_ tion, the entire police, each detail of the local or general gov-
_ ernment, the power of ‘initiating, of collaboration, of control
_ tegarding taxation, elections, roads, public works and. charities,
_ passes over into the hands of the intendant or of the sub-delegate,
nder the supreme direction of the comptroller-general or of the
_king’s council.! Clerks, gentry “of the robe and the quill,”


+ 1 De Tocqueville, 2bid. book 2, chap. 2. P. 182. Letter of the bailly of Mirabeau, August
os sias “This feudal order was merely vigorous, and they have pronounced it barbarous,


ecepeinat ET in tenet
}


ae
~


44 THE ANCIENT REGIME.


plebeians enjoying no consideration, perform the work ; ‘the
is no way to prevent it. Even with the king’s delegates, a p o- ;
vincial governor, were he hereditary, a prince of the Lb lood,
like the Condés in Burgundy, must efface himself before
intendant; he holds no efficient office; his public duties con s
of self-parade and in giving éhtertainmetite: And yet he we |
badly perform others ; the administrative machine, with its tho
sands of hard, creaking and dirty wheels, as Richelieu and Loui
XIV. fashioned it, can work only in the hands of workmen r e
movable at pleasure, unscrupulous and prompt to give way ft
the judgment of the State. It is impossible to commit oncselt
with rogues of that description. He accordingly abstains, and
abandons public affairs to them. Unemployed, enervated, what
could he now do on his domain, where he no longer reigns, and
where dulness overpowers ae He betakes himself to =
city, and especially to the court. After all, this is the only ce
open to him; to be successful he has to become a courtier. _ =
is the will of the king, one must frequent his apartments to ob-
tain his favors; otherwise, on the first application for them t
answer will be, “Who is he? He isa man that I never see.” J
his eyes there is no excuse for absence, even when the cau
is a conversion, with penitence for a motive; God is preferre
to him and it is desertion. The ministers write to the intend-
ants to ascertain if the gentlemen of their province “like to stay
at home,” and if they “refuse to appear and perform their duties
to the king.” /Imagine the grandeur of a trait like this; gov-
ernments, commands, bishoprics, benefices, court-offices, survivor-
ships, pensions, credit, favors of every kind and degree for self
and family, all that a State of twenty or twenty-five millions of
men can offer that is desirable to ambition, to vanity, to interest, is
found here collected as in a reservoir. ‘They rush to it and draw
from it. And the more readily because it is an agreeable place,
arranged just as they would have it, and purposely to suit the


because France, which had the vices of strength has only those of feebleness, and beca'
the flock which was formerly devoured by wolves is now eaten up with lice.” Three o

four kicks or blows with a stick were not half so injurious to a poor man’s fenities t
himself, as being devoured by six rolls of handwriting.” ‘The nobility,” says St. Simon
in his day, ‘‘has become another people with no choice left it but to crouch down in morta
and ruinous indolence, which renders it a charge and contemptible, or to go and be killed i
warfare subject to the insults of clerks, secretaries of the state and the secretaries of i
tendants.” Such are the complaints of feudal spirits. The details which follow are 2
derived from Saint Simon, Dangeau, de Luynes, d’Argenson and other court historians. _


SHAP. IIT. THE STRUCTURE OF SOCIETY. 45


al aptitudes of the French character. The court is a vast
9ermanent drawing-room to which “access is easy and free to
Fiine’s subjects ; ” where they live with him, “in gentle and
irtuous society in spite of the almost infinite distance of rank
4 power ;” where the monarch prides himself on being the per-
fect master of a household. In fact, no drawing-room was ever
s0 well kept up, nor so well calculated to retain its guests by
every kind of enjoyment, by the beauty, the dignity and the
_ charm of its decoration, by the selection of its company and by
_ the interest of the spectacle. Versailles is the only place to show
eself off, to make a figure, to push one’s way, to be amused,
_ to converse or gossip at the head-quarters of news, of activity
and of public matters, with the i of the kingdom and the
arbiters of fashion, elegance and taste; “Sire,” said M. de Vardes
fo Louis XIV., “away from Your Majesty one not only feels mis-
rable but ridiculous.” None remain in the provinces except the
oor rural nobility; to live there one must be behind the age,
disheartened or in exile. The king’s banishment of a seignior
0 his estates is the highest disgrace; to the humiliation of this
1 is added the insupportable weight of ennui. ‘The finest chat-
au on the most beautiful site is a frightful “‘ desert ”; nobody is
een there save the grotesques of a small town or the village rus-
tics.” /“ Exile alone,” says Arthur Young, “forces the French
mobility to do what the English prefer to do, and that is to live
B, = their estates and embellish them.” Saint-Simon and other
court historians, on mentioning a ceremony, repeatedly state that
J «: all France was there” ; in fact, every one of consequence in
France is there, and each recognizes the other by this sign.
: 3 aris and the court becomes, accordingly, the necessary sojourn
of alkfine people. In such a situation departure begets depart-
“ure; the more a province is forsaken the more they forsake it.
_ “There is not in the kingdom,” says the Marquis of Mirabeau,
“a single estate of any size of which the proprietor is not in Paris
who, consequently, neglects his buildings and chateaux.” 3


Wei of Louis XIV. and his own words. Mme. Vigée-Lebrun, “ Souvenirs, Se ee
have seen the queen (Marie Antoinette), obliging Madame to dine, then six years of

i, with a little peasant girl whom she was taking care of, and insisting that this little one
ceo be served first, saying to her daughter: ‘You must do the honors.’ ”

_ 2 Moliére, “‘Misanthrope.” This is the ‘‘desert” in which Céliméne refuses to be buried
a, Alceste. See also in the “Tartuffe” the picture which Dorine draws of a small town.
i _ Arthur Young, **Voyages en France,” I. 78.
. 3“ Tyaité de la Population,” p. 108, (1756).


“a


46 THE ANCIENT REGIME. | cee


The lay grand seigniors have their hotels in the capital, their e7t-—


twenty leagues; if they visit their estates at long intervals, it is
to hunt. The fifteen hundred commendatory abbés and priors
enjoy their benefices as if they were so many remote farms, The
two thousand seven hundred vicars and canons visit each ot er
and dine out. With the exception of a few apostolic characte s
the one hundred and thirty-one bishops stay at home as little as .
they can; nearly all of them being nobles, all of them men of)
society, what could they do out of the world, confined to a pre
vincial town? Can we imagine a grand seignior, once a gay anc
gallant abbé and now a bishop with a hundred thousand livres
income, voluntarily burying himself for the entire Be Mende
at Comminges, in a paltry cloister? The interval has become
too great between the refined, varied and literary life of the
great centre, and the monotonous, inert, practical life of the prov-
inces. Hence it is that the grand seignior who withdraws from
the former cannot enter into the latter, and he remains an ab-
sentee, at least in feeling.

A country in which the heart ceases to seabed the blood
through its veins presents a sombre aspect. Arthur Young, who
travelled over France between 1787 and 1789, is surprised to
find at once such a vital centre and such dead extremities. Be
tween Paris and Versailles the double file of vehicles going and
coming extends uninterruptedly for five leagues from morning
till night.t. The contrast on other roads is very great. Leav-
ing Paris by the Orleans road, says Arthur Young, “we met not
one stage or diligence for ten miles; only two messageries and
very few chaises, not a tenth of what would have been met had we
been leaving London at the same hour.” On the highroad”
near Narbonne, “for thirty-six miles,” he says, “I came across
but one cabriolet, half a dozen carts and a few women leading”
asses.”. Elsewhere, near St. Girons, he notices. that in two hun:)
dred and fifty miles he encountered in all, “two cabriolets and.
three miserable things similar to our old one-horse post chaise,
and not one gentleman. ” Throughout this country the inns are”
execrable ; it is impossible to hire a wagon, while in England, |
even in a town of fifteen hundred or two thousand inhabitants |


1] have this from old people who witnessed it bebine 1789.


THE STRUCTURE OF SOCIETY. 47


Lane and five times as magnificent. don Dieu / I cried to my-
self, do all these wastes, the deserts, the heath, ling, furze,
bi oom, and bog, that I have passed for 300 miles lead to this
spectacle? . . . You pass at once from beggary to profusion,
... . the country deserted, or if a gentleman in it, you find him
jn some wretched hole to save that money which is lavished
W ith profusion in the luxuries of. a capital.” “A coach,” says
M. de Montlosier, “set out weekly from the principal towns in
‘the provinces for Paris and was not always full, which represents
the activity in business. There was a single journal called the
‘Gazette de France, appearing twice a week, which represents
the activity of minds.”! Some of the magistrates of Paris in exile
P at Bourges i In 1753 and 1754, give the following picture of that
place. ‘A town in which no one can be found with whom you
‘can talk at your ease on any topic whatever, reasonably or sen-
sibly; nobles, three-fourths of them dying of hunger, rotting
with pride of birth, keeping apart from men of the robe and of -
finance, and finding it strange that the daughter of a tax-col-
lector, married to a counsellor of the parliament of Paris, should
presume to be intelligent and entertain company; citizens of
the | grossest ignorance, the sole support of this species of leth-
arg ry in which the minds of most of the inhabitants are plunged;
jomen, bigoted and pretentious, and much given to play and to
gallantry ;”? in this impoverished and benumbed society, among
these Messieurs Thibaudeau the counsellor and Harpin the tax-
collector, among these vicomtes df Sotenville and Countesses
| scarbagnas, lives the Archbishop, Cardinal de Larochefou-
‘cauld, grand almoner to the king, provided with four great ab-
| deys, possessing five hundred thousand livres income, a man of
| we -world, generally an absentee, and when at home, finding
nusement in the embellishing of his gardens and palace, in
| , the golden pheasant of an aviary in a poultry yard of
| | geese 3 °N aturally there is an entire absence of tease iene ab


‘ « Mémoires de M. de Montlosier,’’ I. p. 161.

“2 Reports of the Société de Berry, ‘Bourges en 1753 et 1754,” Pp. 273.
i %/bid. p. 271. One day the cardinal, showing his guests over his palace just completed,
led them to the bottom of a corridor where he had placed water closets, at that time a


48 THE ANCIENT REGIME. .


“You cannot imagine,” says the manuscript, “a person mor ei
different to all public matters.” Ata later period, in the 4
midst of events of the gravest character, and which most.nea r
concern them, there is the same apathy. At Chateau-Thie rT
on the 4th of July, 1789,! there is not a café in which a ne
paper can be found; there is but one at Dijon; at Moulins, tt 1
7th of August, “in the best café in the town, where I fous
near twenty tables set for company, but as for a newspapé
might as well have demanded an elephant.” Between
bourg and Besangon there is not a gazette. At Besangc
there is “nothing but the Gazette de France, for which, a
this period, a man of common sense would not give one ¢
. and the Courier de 1’ Europe a fortnight old; and well
dressed people are now talking of the news of two or
weeks past and plainly by their discourse know nour of
what is passing.” At Clermont “I dined, or supped, five tim
at the table d’héte with from twenty to thirty merchants, trade
men, Officers, etc., and it is not easy for me to express the in 2
nificance,—the inanity of their conversation. Scarcely any pol
itics at a moment when every bosom ought to beat with non
but political sensations. The ignorance or the stupidity of th
people must be absolutely incredible; not a week passes wit
out their country abounding with events that are analyzed anc
debated by the carpenters and blacksmiths of England.”/ The
cause of this inertia is manifest; interrogated on their opinions,
all reply: “We are of the provinces and we must wait to know
what is going on in Paris.” Never having acted, they do no
know how to act. But, thanks to this inertia, they let them
selves be driven. The provinces form an immense stagnan
pond, which, by a terrible inundation, may be emptied exclu
sively on one side, and suddenly; the fault lies with the engi
neers who failed to provide it with either dikes or outlets. _
Such is the languor or, rather, the prostration, into which loca
life falls when the local chiefs deprive it of their presence, action


*


novelty. M. Boutin de la Coulommiére, the son of a receiver-general of the finances, ma¢

an exclamation at the sight of the ingenious mechanism which it pleased him to kee

moving, and, turning towards the abbé de Canillac, he says: ‘That is really admirable, b

what seems to me still more admirable is that His Eminence, being above all human weal

ness, should condescend to make use of it.” This anecdote is valuable, as it serves

illustrate the rank and position of a grand-seignior prelate in the provinces.
1 Arthur Young, v. II. p. 230 and the following pages.


THE STRUCTURE OF SOCIETY. 49


yr sympathy. I find only three or four grand seigniors taking a
art in it, practical philanthropists following the example of
Snglish noblemen; the Duc d’Harcourt, who settles the law-
its of his peasants; the Duc de Larochefoucauld-Liancourt
tho establishes a model farm on his domain, and a school of in-
justrial pursuits for the children of poor soldiers; and the Comte
le Brienne, whose thirty villages are to demand liberty of the
Be eention? The rest, for the most part liberals, content them-
selves with discussions on public affairs and on political econo-
ny. In fact, the difference in manners, the separation of inter-
ests, the remoteness of ideas are so great that contact between
those most exempt from haughtiness and their immediate ten-
\try is rare, and at long intervals. Arthur Young, needing some
information at the house of the Duc de Larochefoucauld .him-
elf, the steward is sent for. “At an English nobleman’s, there
vo ld have been three or four farmers asked to meet me who
uld have dined with the family amongst the ladies of the first
* . I donot exaggerate when I say that I have had this at
; an hundred times in the first houses of our islands. It is,
ih wever, a thing that in the present style of manners in France
suld not be met with from Calais to Bayonne except, by chance,
nthe house of some great lord that had been much in England,
id then not unless it was asked for. The nobility in France
ave no more idea of practising agriculture, and making it a
pect of conversation, except on the mere theory, as they
ould speak of a loom or a bowsprit, than of any other object
e most remote from their habits and pursuits.” ‘Through tradi-
ion, fashion and deliberately, they are, and wish only to be,
e ople of society; their sole concern is to talk and to hunt.
ver have the leaders of men so unlearned the art of leading
en ; the art which consists of marching along the same pathway
; wi ith Shen but at the head, and directing their labor by sharing in
. /Our Englishman, an.eye-witness and competent, again writes:
& 2 rhus it is whenever you stumble on a grand seignior, even one


Rcaie “Les Mirabeau,” p. 134. A letter of the bailly September 25, 1760: “I
t Harcourt, where I admire the master’s honest, benevolent greatness. You cannot
me my pleasure on féte days at seeing the people everywhere around the chateau,

id the good little peasant boys and girls looking right.in the face of their good landlord
and ost pulling his watch off to examine the trinkets on the chain, and all with a frater-
sir, Petahcks familiarity. The good duke does not allow his vassals to go to law; he
¢ns to them and decides for them, humoring them with admirable patience.”’ Lacretelle,
ans d’épreuve,”’ p. 58.


De
RR
Lat


50 THE ANCIENT REGIME. E OKI


that was worth millions, you are sure to find his property desert
Those of the Duc de Bouillon and of the Prince de Soubise ar
two of the greatest properties in France; and all the signs 1 ha ¢
yet seen of their greatness are wastes, landes, deserts, fern, ling
Go to their residence, wherever it may be and you would prob
ably find them in the midst of a forest very well peopled wit
deer, wild boars and wolves.” ‘The great proprietors,” say
another contemporary,} “attracted to and kept in our cities by
luxurious enjoyments know nothing of their estates,” save “of
their agents whom they harass for the support of a ruinous os:
tentation. How can ameliorations be looked for from those who
even refuse to keep things up and make indispensable repairs?”
A sure proof that their absence is the cause of the evil is founc
in the visible difference between the domain worked under an
absent abbé-commendatory and a domain superintended by
monks living on the spot. “The intelligent traveller recognizes
it” at first sight by the state of cultivation. “If he finds fields
well enclosed by ditches, carefully planted, and covered with
rich crops, these fields, he says to himself, belong to the monks.
Almost always, alongside of these fertile plains, is an area o
ground badly tilled and almost barren, presenting a painful con-
trast; and yet the soil is the same, being two portions of the
same domain; he sees that the latter is the portion of the abbé-
commendatory.” ‘The abbatial manse,” said Lefrane de Pom-
pignan, “frequently looks like the patrimony of a dissipator; the
monastic manse is like a patrimony whereon nothing is neglectec
for its amelioration,” to such an extent that “the two-thirds’
which the abbé enjoys bring him less than the third reserved by
his monks. ‘The ruin or impoverishment of agriculture is, agai
one of the effects of absenteeism; there was, perhaps, one-thirc
of the soil in France, which, deserted as in Ireland, was as badl
tilled, as little productive as in Ireland in the hands of the rick
absentees, the English bishops, deans and nobles.
Doing nothing for the soil how could they do anything fc
men? Now and then, undoubtedly, especially with farms th
pay no rent, the steward writes’ a letter, alleging the misery of th
farmer. ‘There is no doubt, also, and especially for thirty yea
back, they desire to be humane; they descant among themselv:


“1 “De l'état religieux,” by the abbés de Bonnefoi et Bernard, 1784, pp. 287, 291,


ee err. THE.STRUCTURE OF SOCIETY. 5t


bout the rights of man; the sight of the pale face of a hungry
yeasant would give them pain. But they never see him; does
t ever occur to them to fancy what it is like under the awkward
ind complimentary phrases of their agent? Moreover, do they
know what hunger is? Who amongst them has had any rural
mxperiences? And how could they picture to themselves the
nisery of this forlorn being? They are too remote from him to
Ac » that, too ignorant of his mode of life. The portrait they
Ae onceive of him is imaginary; never was there a falser repre-
ntation of the peasant ; accordingly the awakening is to be ter-
. e. They view him as the amiable swain, gentle, humble and
rateful, simple-hearted and nght-minded, easily led, being con-
€ ed according to Rousseau and the idyls performed at this —
ery epoch in all private drawing-rooms.’ Lacking a knowledge
of him they overlook him; they read the steward’s letter and
‘inimediately the whirl of high life again seizes them and, after a
ih bestowed on the distress of the poor, they make up their
minds that their income for the year will be short. A disposi-
on of this kind is not favorable to charity. Accordingly,
cO eats arise, not against the residents but against the
sentees.” “The possessions of the Church, aes a memorial,

ve only to nourish the passions of their holders.” “According
9 the canons, says another memorial, every beneficiary must
> a quarter of his income to the poor; nevertheless in our
arish there is a revenue of more than twelve thousand livres,
and none of it is given to the poor unless it is some small matter
at the hands of the curate.” “The abbé de Conches gets one-
ha of the tithes and contributes nothing to the relief of the
parish.” Elsewhere, “the chapter of Ecouis, which owns the
? benefice of the tithes is of aS advantage to the poor, and only
i eeks to augment its income.” Near by, the abbé of Croix-Leu-
\ froy, “(a heavy tithe-owner, and the abbé de Bernay, who gets
fifty-seven thousand livres from his benefice, and who is a non-
| resident, keep all and scarcely give enough to their officiating
cure ates to keep them alive.” ‘I have in my parish, says a cur-
e of Berry,® six simple benefices of which the titularies are al-


B; w) 1 See on this subject “La partie de chasse de Henri IV.,” by Collé. Cf. Berquin, Florian,
farmontel, etc., and likewise the engravings of that day.

Rekea-Champeaux, «Notice historique sur la Révolution dans le département de |’ Eure,”
pp. 63, 61.

_ 8 Archives nationales, Reports of the States-General of 1789, T, XX XIX., p. 111. Letter


52 THE ANCIENT REGIME. BOOK.


ways absent, and they enjoy together an income of nine thou-
sand livres; I sent them in writing the most urgent entreaties
during the calamity of the past year; I received from one of §
them two louis only, and most of them did not even answer me.”
Stronger is the reason for a conviction that in ordinary times
they will make no remission of their dues. Moreover, these
dues, the censives, the ods et ventes, tithes, and the like, are in the?
hands of a steward, and he is a good steward who returns a large?
amount of money. He has no right to be generous at his mas-
ter’s expense, and he is tempted to turn the subjects of his ma 4
ter to his own profit. In vain might the soft seignorial hand b
disposed to be easy or paternal; the hard hand of the prox
bears down on the peasants with all its weight, and the cautious:
ness of a chief gives place to the exactions of a clerk. How is
it then when, instead of a clerk on the domain, a fermier is
found, an sdpidicatet who, for an annual- sum, purchases of the
seignior the management and product of his dues? In: the
election of Mayenne,! and certainly also in many others, the
principal domains are rented in this way. Moreover there are
a number of dues, like the tolls, the market-place tax, that on
the flock apart, the monopoly of the oven and of the mill which
can scarcely be. managed otherwise ; the seignior must necessa~
rily employ an adjudicator who spares him the disputes and the
trouble of collecting. In this case, so frequent, the presst :
and the rapacity of the contractor, who is determined to gain or,
at least, not to lose, falls on-the peasantry: “ He is a ravenous:
wolf,” says Renauldon, “let loose on the estate, who draws upon
it to the last sou, who crushes the subjects, reduces them to beg=
gary, forces the cultivators to desert, and renders odious thé
master who finds himself obliged to tolerate his exactions to bé
_ able to profit by them.” Imagine, if you can, the evil which @
country usurer exercises, armed against them with such bur
densome rights; it is the feudal seigniory in the hands of Har
pagon, or rather of old Grandet. When, indeed, a tax becomes
insupportable we see, by the local complaints, that it is 1 nea ly


ni


<5

of the 6th March, 1789, from the curate of St. Pierre de Ponsigny, in Berry. D’ Argenso

6th July, 1756. ‘The late cardinal de Soubise had inate millions in cash and he se
nothing to the poor.”

1 De Tocqueville, zb¢éd. 405. Renauldon, zdid. 628.


* The example is set by the king who sells to the farmer-generals, for an annual sum, the
management and product of the principal indirect taxes. oi


bap IL THE STRUCTURE OF SOCIETY. - 53


lways a fermier who enforces it:' it is one of these, acting for a
ody of canons, who claims Jeanne Mermet’s paternal inheritance
mn the pretence that she had passed her wedding night at her
sband’s house. It would be difficult to find parallel exactions
in the Ireland of 1830, on those estates where, the farmer-gen-
a area to sub-farmers, and the latter to others still below
1em, the poor tenant at the foot of the ladder himself bore the
all weight of it, so much the more crushed because his creditor,
ished himself, measured the requirements he exacted by those
e had to submit to.

_ Suppose that, seeing this abuse of his name, the seignior is de-
jrous of withdrawing the administration of his domains from
hese mercenary hands; in most cases he is unable to do it: he
3 too deeply in debt, having appropriated to his creditors a cer-
ain portion of his land, a certain branch of his income. For
enturies, the nobles are involved through their luxuriousness,
heir prodigality, their carelessness, and through that false sense
¥ honor which consists in looking upon attention to accounts
is the occupation of an accountant. ‘They take pride in their
legligence, regarding it, as they say, living nobly.” “ Monsieur
ye archbishop,” said Louis XVI. to M. de Dillon, “they say
hat you are in debt, and even largely.” “Sire,” replied the
relate, with the irony of a grand seignior, “TI will ask my intend-
nt and inform Your Majesty.” Marshal de Soubise has five
wundred thousand livres income, which is not sufficient for him.
Ve know the debts of the Cardinal de Rohan and of the Comte
Artois; their millions of income were vainly thrown into this
sulf. The Prince de Guéménée happens to become bankrupt on
urty-five millions. The Duke of Orleans, the richest proprietor
n the kingdom, owed at his death seventy-four millions. When
t became necessary to pay the creditors of the emigrants out of |
he proceeds of their possessions, it was proved that most of the


a ae ‘Politique et Législation, La voix du Curé,” (in relation to. the serfs of St.
aude}. A speech of the Duke d’Aiguillon, August 4th, 1789, in the National Assembly :

Mitadiectors of fiefs, of seigniorial estates, are eatery guilty of the excesses of which
gare complain; but their agents are often pitiless.”’

2 Beugnot, “Mémoires,” v. I. p. 136. Duc de Lévis, ‘Souvenirs et portraits,” p. ia
eur,” the session of November 22, 1872, M. Bocher says: “‘ According to the state-
nit dete up by order of the Convention the Duke of Orleans’s fortune consisted of
oo of indebtedness and 140,000,000 of assets. On the 8th January, 1792, he had
d to his creditors 38,000,000 to obtain his discharge.”


54 - THE ANCIENT REGIME.


large fortunes were eaten up with mortgages.1 Readers of t h ne
various memoirs know that, for two hundred years, the defici

cies had to be supplied by marriages for money and ohh the
favors of the king. This explains why, following the “oa a
ample, the nobles converted everything into money, and ¢ pe-
cially the places at their disposition, and, in relaxing author it

for profit, why they alienated the last fragment of government
remaining in their hands. Everywhere they thus laid aside the
venerated character of a chief to put on the odious character of
a trafficker. ‘Not only,” says a contemporary,” “do they giv
no pay to their officers of justice, or take them at a discoun st
but, what is worse, the greater portion of them make a sale of
these offices.” In spite of the edict of 1693, the judges thus ap-.
pointed take no steps to be admitted into the royal courts and”
they take no oaths. ‘What is the result? Justice, too a
administered by knaves, degenerates into brigandage or into ¢
frightful impunity.” Ordinarily the seignior who sells the office
on a financial basis, deducts, in addition, the hundredth, the Af.
tieth, the tenth of the price, when it passes into other hands@
and at other times he disposes of the survivorship. He creates”
these offices and survivorships purposely to sell them. “All the
seigniorial courts, say the memorials, are infested with a crowd
of officials of every description, seigniorial sergeants, mounted
and unmounted officers, keepers of the provostship of the funds, 7
guards of the constabulary; it is by no means rare to find ¢
many as ten in an’arrondissement which could hardly sala
two if they confined themselves within the limits of their duties.”
Also “they are at the same time judges, attorneys, fiscal-attor-
neys, registrars, notaries,” each in a different: place, each prac-
tising in several seigniories under various titles, all perambulat-
ing, all in league like thieves at a fair, and assembling together
in the taverns to plan, prosecute and decide. Sometimes the
seignior, to economize, confers the title on one of his own de-
pendants: “At Hautemont, in Hainaut, the fiscal-attorney is a
domestic.” More frequently he intrusts it to some starveling
advocate of a petty village in the neighborhood on wages whic


1Jn 1785, the Duke de Choiseul in his testament estimated: his property at fo

millions and his debts at ten millions. Comte de Tilly, “Mémoires,” II. 215. :

® Renauldon, 7did. 45, 52,628. Duvergier, ‘*Collection des Lois,” II. 391; law of Angus

; October 18, 1792. Memorial of a magistrate of the Chatelet on scigniaey t
(1780), p. 29. Legrand, “I’Intendance du Hainaut,” p. 119.


P. Ill. THE STRUCTURE OF SOCtTETY. 55


_ “would not suffice to keep him alive a week.” He indemnifies
himself out of the peasants. Processes of chicanery, delays and
_ wilful complications in the proceedings, sittings at three livres
_ the hour for the advocate, and three livres the hour for. the bailly :
_ the black brood of judicial leeches suck so much the more
M3 eagerly, because the more numerous, a still more meagre prey,
__ having paid for the privilege of sucking it. 1 The arbitrariness,
the corruption, the laxity of such a régime can be divined.
5 impunity,” says Renauldon, “is nowhere greater than in the
; _ seigniorial tribunals. . . . The foulest crimes obtain no consid-
| eration there,” for the seignior dreads supplying the means for a
‘criminal trial, while his judges or prosecuting attorneys fear that
Bie, will not be paid for their proceedings. Moreover, his jail is
often a cellar under the chateau; “there is not one tribunal out
_ ofa hundred in conformity with the law on the side of prisons ;”
_ their keepers shut their eyes or stretch out their hands. Hence
“it is that “his estates become the refuge of all the scoundrels in
the canton.” The effect of his indifference is terrible and it is to
_ react against him: to-morrow, at the club, the attorneys whom
pe has multiplied will demand his head, and the bandits whom
he has tolerated will place it on the end of a pike.
_ One point remains, the chase, wherein the noble’s jurisdiction
is still active and severe, and it is just the point which is found the
' most offensive. Formerly, when one-half of the canton con-
sisted of forest, or waste land, while the other half was being
Beevrecd by wild beasts, he was justified in reserving the right to
hunt them; it entered into his function as local captain. He
was the hereditary gendarme, always armed, always on horse-
_ back, as well against wild boars and wolves as against rovers and
_brigands. Now that nothing is left to him of the gendarme but
the title and the epaulettes he maintains his privilege through tra-
dition, thus converting a service into an annoyance. Hunt he
must, and he must hunt by himself; it is a physical necessity
_ and, at the same time, a sign of his blood. A Rohan, a Dillon,
| _ chases the stag although belonging to the church, in spite of edicts


! Archives nationales, H, 614 (“‘Mémoire” by René de Hauteville, advocate to the
Parliament, Saint-Brieuc, October 5, 1776.) In Brittany the number of seigniorial courts

_ is immense, the pleaders being obliged to pass through four or five jurisdictions before reach-

__ ing the Parliament. ‘‘ Where is justice rendered? In the cabaret, in the tavern, where, in
| ___ the bosom of intoxication and debauchery, the judge sells justice to whoever pays the most


for it.”


56 | THE ANCIENT REGIME. — “BOOK 1


and in spite of the canons. “You hunt too much,” said Louis
XV.,! to the latter; “I know something about it. How can you
prohibit your curates from hunting if you pass your life in setting
them such.an example ?—Sire, for my curates the chase is a ©
fault, for myself it is the fault of my ancestors.” When the self-
love of caste thus mounts guard over a right it is with obstinate
vigilance. Accordingly, their captains of the chase, their game-
keepers, their wood-rangers, their forest-wardens protect brutes as’
if they were men and men as if they were brutes. In the baili-
wick of Pont-l’Evéque in 178g four instances are cited “of recent
assassinations committed by the game-keepers of Mme. d’A——,
Mme. N——, a prelate and a marshal of France, on ple-
beians caught breaking the game laws or carrying guns. All
four publicly escape punishment.” In Artois, a parish makes”
declaration that “on the lands of the chattellany the game de-
vours all the avétis (pine saplings) and that the growers of them’
will be obliged to abandon their business.” Not far off, at
Rumancourt, at Bellone, “the hares, rabbits and partridges en-—
tirely devour them, Count d’Oisy never hunting nor having
hunts.” In twenty villages in the neighborhood around Oisy
where he hunts it is on horseback and across the crops. “His
game-keepers, always armed, have killed several persons under
the pretence of watching over their master’s rights... . The
game, which greatly exceeds that of the royal captainries, con-
sumes annually all prospects of a crop, twenty thousand vaziéres
of wheat and as many of other grains.” In the bailiwick of
Evreux “the game has just destroyed everything up to the very
houses. . . . On account of the game the citizen is-not free to
pull up the weeds in summer which clog the grain and injure the
seed sown. . . . How many women are there without husbands,
and children without fathers, on account of a poor hare or rab-
bit!” The game-keepers of the forest of Gouffray in Nor-
mandy “are so terrible that they maltreat, insult and kill men.
. . » I know of farmers who, having pleaded against the lady to
be indemnified for the loss of their wheat, not only lost their
time but their crops and the expenses of the trial. . . . Stags
and deer are seen roving around our houses in open daylight.”
In the bailiwick of Domfront, “the inhabitants of more than ten _
parishes are obliged to watch all night for more than six months


1 Beugnot, “Mémoires,” vol. I. p. 35.


| sta ut. THE STRUCTURE OF SOCIETY. 57


of the year to secure their crops.! This is the effect of the right
f the chase in the provinces. It is, however, in the Ile-de-
‘ra nce, where captainries abound, and become more extensive,
that the spectacle is more lamentable. A froces-verbal shows
Jat in the single parish of Vaux, near Meulan, the rabbits of
warrens in the vicinity ravage eight hundred cultivated arpents
| f ground and destroy the crops of two thousand four hundred
seliers (three acres each), that is to say, the annual supplies of
eight hundred persons. Near that place, at la Rochette, herds
of deer and of stags devour everything in the fields during the
de day, and, at night, they even invade the small gardens of the in-
aabitants to consume vegetables and to break down young trees.
tis found impossible in a territory subjected to a captainry to
gather up vegetables safe in gardens, enclosed by high walls. At
Farcy, of five hundred peach trees planted in a vineyard and
rowsed on by stags, only twenty remain at the end of three
‘Over the whole territory of Fontainebleau, the commu-
ities, to save their vines, are obliged to maintain, with the
ent always of the captainry, a gang of watchmen who, with
censed dogs, keep watch and make a hubbub all night from the
rst of May to the middle of October. At Chartrettes the deer
ross the Seine, approach the doors of the Comtesse de Laroche-
foucauld and destroy entire plantations of poplars. A domain
rented for two thousand livres brings in only four hundred after
h establishment of the captainry of Versailles. In short,
leven regiments of an enemy’s cavalry, quartered on the eleven
ay tainties near the capital, and starting out daily to forage,
d not do more mischief. We need not be surprised if, in the
ernood of these lairs, the people become weary of culti-
a ing? Near F eatainebleau and Melun, at Bois-le-Roi, three-


ivin-Champeaux, z4zd. 48. Renauldon, 26, 416. Manuscript reports of the States-

(Archives nationales) t. CX XXII. pp. 896andgor. Hippeau, ‘‘ Le Gouvernement de
ie,” VII. 61, 74. Périn, a Jeunesse de Robespierre,” pp. 314-324. ‘‘ Essai sur
taineries royales et autres,” (1789) fasst#m. De Loménie, ““Beaumarchais et son
‘ad 1 125. Beaumarchais having purchased the office of lieutenant-general of the
2 in the bailiwicks of the Louvre warren (twelve to fifteen leagues in circumference)
uents under this title. July rsth, 1766, he sentences Ragondet, a farmer, toa
= of one hundred livres together with the demolition of the walls around an enclosure,
Iso of his shed newly built without license, as tending to restrict the pleasures of the king.
’ Argenson, ‘‘ Mémoires,” ed. Rathery, January 21, 1757. ‘‘’The sieur de Montmorin,
ain of the game-preserves of Fontainebleau, derives from his office enormous sums, and
es himself like a brigand. The population of more than a hundred villages around


58 THE ANCIENT REGIME, BOOK * |


quarters of the ground remains waste; almost all the houses in
Brolle are in ruins, only halt enibinny gables being visible; at
Coutilles and at Chapelle-Rablay, five farms are abariienseal
at Arbonne, numerous fields are neglected; at Villiers, and at
Dame-Marie, where there were four farming companies and a |
number of special cultures, eight hundred avfen¢s remain un-—
tilled. Strange to say, as the century becomes more polished
the system of the chase becomes more imperious. The officers 7
of the captainry are zealous because they labor under the eye 7
and for the “pleasures” of their master. In 1789, eight hun-7
dred preserves had just been planted in one single canton of the”
captainry of Fontainebleau, and in spite of the proprietors of ©
the soil. According to the regulations of 1762 every private in- ©
dividual domiciled on the reservation of a captainry is inter-~
dicted from enclosing his homestead or any ground ‘whatever ~
with hedges or ditches, or walls without a special permit. In ~
case of a permit being given he must leave a wide, open, and
continuous space in order to let the huntsmen easily pass ©
through. He is not allowed to keep any ferret, any fire-arm,
any instrument adapted to the chase, nor to be followed by any”
dog even if not adapted to it, except the dog be held by a leash ©
or clog fastened around its neck. And better still. He is for-_
bidden to reap his meadow or his luzerne before St. John’s day, —
to enter his own field between the first of May and the twenty-_
fourth of June, to visit any island in the Seine, to cut grass on it
or osiers, even if the grass and osiers belong to him, The rea-
son is, at this time, the partridge is hatching and the legislator
protects it; he would take less pains for a woman in confine-_
ment; the old chroniclers would say of him, as with William {
Rutis, that his bowels are paternal only for animals. Now, in
France, four hundred square leagues of territory are subject to
the control of the captainries, and, over all France, game, large
or small, is the tyrant of the peasant. The conclusion is, or
rather, listen to the people’s conclusion. “Every time,” says M.
Montlosi¢r, in 1789, “that I chanced to encounter herds of deer


‘a


They keep only a few vines which they preserve six months of the year by mounting guaail
day and night with drums, making a general turmoil to frighten off the destructive animals.”
January 23, 1753.—‘*M. le Prince de Conti has established a captainry of eleven leagues
around lle-Adam and where everybody is vexed at it.” September 23, 1753.—“* Since
M. le Duc d’Orléans came to Villers-Cotterets, he has revived the captainry; there are mor
than sixty places for sale on account of these princely annoyances.”


-cHar. I. THE STRUCTURE OF SOCIETY. 59
or does on my road my guides immediately shouted, There
_ goes the nobility! alluding to the ravages committed by these
- animals on their grounds.” Accordingly, in the eyes of their
_ subjects, they are wild animals.

_ This shows to what privileges lead when divorced -from ser-
_yices. It is thus that an obligation to protect degenerates into a
right of devastation; thus do humane and rational beings act,
unconsciously, like irrational and inhuman beings. » Divorced
_ from the people they misuse them; nominal chiefs, they have un-
i learned the function of an effective chief; having lost all public
_ character they abate nothing of their private advantages. So
much the worse for the canton, and so much the worse for
- themselves! The thirty or forty poachers whom they prosecute
to-day on their estates will march to-morrow to attack their
, chateaux at the head of an insurrection. The absence 6f_the
masters, the apathy of the provinces, the bad state of cultivation,
pie exactions of agents, the corruption of the tribunals; the-vex-
ations of the captainries, indolence, the indebtedness* and. exi-
__gencies of the seignior, desertion, misery, ‘the brutality and hos-
_ tility of vassals, all proceeds from the same cause and terminates
in the same effect. When-sovereignty becomes.transformed into
a sinecure it becomes burdensome without being useful, and
on becoming burdensome without being useful it is overthrown.


1
:
"
if
1
4 fi
4
da
@

¥


* —Royalty the centre of abuses.—Latent disorganization in France. 89


ae


CHAPTER IV.


PUBLIC SERVICES DUE BY THE PRIVILEGED CLASSES.—I. An English ex- 7
ample.—The privileged class renders no service in France.—The influence
and rights which remain to them.—They use them only for themselyes.— ~
II. Assemblies of the clergy.—They serve only ecclesiastical interests.— —
The clergy exempted from taxation.—Solicitations of its custo ae
against the Protestants.—III. Influence of the nobles. —Regulations in ae x
favor.—Preferments obtained by them in the Church.—Distribution of bish-
oprics and abbeys.—Preferments obtained by them from the State.—Gov-
ernments, offices, sinecures, pensions, gratuities.—Instead of being useful —
they are an expense.—IV. Isolation of the chiefs.—Sentiments of subordi- a
nates. — Provincial nobility.—The Curates.—V. The King.—The most priv- Me
ileged of all.—Having monopolized all powers, he takes upon himself their 7
functional activity. —The burden of this task.—He evades it or is incompe-
tent.—His conscience at ease.—France is his property.— How he abuses it.


I. | memer es (ean

UsELEss in the canton they might have been useful at the —
centre of the State, and, without taking part in the local govern- —
ment, they might have served in the general government. Thus
does a lord, a baronet, a squire act in England, even when not a
“justice” of his county or a committee-man in his parish. Elected
a member of the lower house, a hereditary: member of the upper
house, he holds the strings of the public purse and prevents the
sovereign from spending too freely. Such is the régime in coun-
tries where the feudal seigniors, instead of allowing the sovereign -
to ally himself with the people against them, allied themselves
with the people against the sovereign. To protect their own in-
terests better they secured protection for the interests of others,
and, after having served as the representatives of their com- |
peers they became the representatives of the nation. Nothing |
of this kind takes place in France. The States-General are
fallen into desuetude and the king may with truth declare him- ©
self the sole representative of the country. Like trees rendered ,


AP. IV. THE STRUCTURE OF SOCIETY. 61


feless under the shadow of a gigantic oak, other public powers
rish through his growth; whatever still remains of these en-
mbers the ground, and forms around him a circle of clamber-
1g briers or of decaying trunks. One of them, the Parliament,
n offshoot simply of the great oak, sometimes imagined itself in
ossession of a root of its own; but its sap was too evidently de-
wative for it to stand by itself and provide the people with an
ndependent shelter. Other bodies, surviving, although stunted,
he assembly of the clergy and the provincial assemblies, still
yrotect an order, and four or five provinces; but this protection
xtends only to the order itself or to the province, and, if it pro-
scts a special interest it is commonly at the expense of the gen-
al interest.


i II.

= us observe the most vigorous and the best-rooted of these
, the assembly of the clergy. It meets every-five years,
Pduting the interval, two agents selected by it, watch over
e interests of the order. Convoked by the government, sub-
#t0 its guidance, retained or dismissed when necessary, al-
in its hands, used by it for political ends, it nevertheless
ntinues to be a refuge for the clergy, which it represents. But
is an asylum solely for that body and, in the series of transac-
or ns by which it defends itself against fiscal demands, it eases its
mn n shoulders of the load only to make it heavier on the shoul-
lers of others. We have seen how its diplomacy saved clerical
nits how it bought off the body from the poll-tax and the
iemes, how it converted its portion of taxation into a “ free
ift,” how this gift is annually applied to refunding the capital
yhich it has borrowed to obtain this exemption, by which deli-
e art it succeeds, not only in not contributing to the treasury,
ae : withdrawing from it every year about 1,500,000 livres, all
f which is so much the better for the church but so much the
oe for the people. Now run through the file of folios in
hich from one period of five years to another the reports of its
g sents follow each’other,—so many clever men thus preparing
: emselves for the highest positions in the church, the abbés de
Is ee: de Périgord, de Barral, de Montesquiou ; at each mo-

aula to their solicitations with judges and the council,
¢ to the authority, which the discontent of the powerful or-


62 THE ANCIENT REGIME.


der felt to be behind them gives to their complaints, some ec
clesiastical matter is decided in an ecclesiastical sense; some
feudal right is maintained in favor of a chapter or of a bishop ;
some public demand is thrown out.’ In 1781, notwithstanding

decision of the Parliament of Rennes, the canons of St. Malc
are sustained in their monopoly of the district oven, to the det:
riment of the bakers who prefer to bake at their own domiciles,
as well as of the inhabitants who would have to pay less for breac
made by the bakers. In 1773, Guénin, a schoolmaster, dis


F


charged by the bishop of Langres, and supported in vain by the
inhabitants, is compelled to hand his place over to a successor
appointed by the bishop. In 1770, Rastel, a Protestant, having
opened a public school at Saint-Affrique, is prosecuted at the de~
mand of the bishop and of clerical agents; his school is closed
and he is imprisoned. When an organized body keeps the
purse-strings in its own hands it secures many favors; these are
the equivalent for the money it grants. The commanding tone
of the king and the submissive air of the clergy effect no funda-
mental change; with both of them it is a bargain,’ giving and
taking on both sides, this or that law against the Protestants
going for one or two millions added to the free gift. In ‘this
way the revocation of the Edict of Nantes is gradually brought
about, article by article, one turn of the rack after another turn,
each fresh persecution purchased by a fresh largess, the clergy
helping the State on condition that the State becomes an execu-
tioner. ‘Throughout the eighteenth century the church sees that
this operation continues.*, In 1717, an assemblage of seventy-
four persons having been surprised at Andure the men are sent
to the galleys and the women are imprisoned. In 1724, an edict
declares that all who are present at any meeting, or who shall
have any intercourse, direct or indirect, with preachers, shall be
condemned to the confiscation of their property, the women to
have their heads shaved and be shut up for life, and the men to be
sent to the galleys for life. In 1745 and 1746, in Dauphiny, tiv


a


* “Rapport de l’'agence du clergé,” from 1775 to 1780, pp. 31-34. did. from 1780 to 1785
p. 237.

? Lanfrey, “L’Eglise et les philosophes,” pass.

® Boiteau, “Etat de la France en 1789,” pp. 205, 207. D’Argenson, “Mémoires,” Mz
5, 1752, Pp. 3, 22; September 25, 1753; October 17, 1753, and October 26, 1775. Pru
‘homme, “Résumé général des cahiers des Etats-Généraux,” 1789, (Memorials of the |
Clergy). ‘‘ Histoire des églises du désert,” par Charles Coquerel, I. 151 and those following


; cHar. IV. THE STRUCTURE OF SOCIETY. 63


_ hundred and seventy-seven Protestants are condemned to the
galleys, and numbers of women are whipped. Between 1744
and 1752, in the east and in the south, six hundred Protestants
_ are imprisoned and eight hundred condemned to various penal-
ties. In 1774, the two children of Roux, a Calvinist of Nimes,
are carried off. Up to nearly the beginning of the Revolution,
in Languedoc, ministers are hung, while dragoons are despatched
_ against congregations assembled to worship God in deserted
_ places; the mother of M. Guizot here received shots in the
_ skirts of her dress; this is owing to the fact that, in Languedoc,
_ through the provincial States-Assembly “ the bishops control tem-
_ poral affairs more than elsewhere, their disposition being always
_ to dragoon and- make converts at the point of the bayonet.”
_ In 1775, at the coronation of the king, archbishop Lonémie of
Brienne, a well-known unbeliever, addresses the young king:
You will disapprove of the culpable systems of toleration. . . .
Complete the work undertaken by Louis the Great. To you is
_ reserved the privilege of giving the final blow to Calvinism in
_ your kingdom.” In 1780, the assembly of the clergy declares
_ “that the altar and the throne would equally be in danger if
_ heresy were allowed to throw off its shackles.” Even in 1789,
_ the clergy in its memorials, while consenting to the toleration of
; Bei-Cetholics; finds the edict of 1788 too liberal; they desire
_ that they should be excluded from judicial offices, that they
_ should never be allowed to worship in public, and that mixed
. é marriages should be interdicted ; and much more than this ;_ they
_ demand: preliminary censure of all works issued by the book-
a ‘sellers, an ecclesiastical committee to act as informers, and igno-
_ minious punishment to be awarded to the authors of irreligious
books; and lastly they claim for their body the direction of pub-
lic schools and the oversight of private schools. ‘There is noth-
4 ing strange in this intolerance and in this egoism. A collective
_ body, as with an individual, thinks of itself first of all and above
iv all. If, now and then, it sacrifices some one of its privileges it
a is for the purpose of securing the alliance of some other body.
| In that case, which is that of England, all these privileges, which
compound with each other and afford each other mutual support,
& form, through their combination, the public liberties. In this
| €ase, only one body being eakented, its deputies are neither
be _ directed nor tempted to make concession to others; the interest


64 THE ANCIENT REGIME.


of the body is their sole guide; they subordinate the common i .
terest to it and serve it at any cost, even to criminal atten on
the public welfare. : : “


III.


Thus do public bodies work when, instead of being associated
together, they are separate. ‘The same spectacle is apparent on ©
contemplating castes and coteries; their isolation is the cause
of their egoism. From the top to the bottom of the scale the ~
legal and moral powers which should represent the nation repre-
sent themselves only, while each one is busy in its own behalf at -
the expense of the nation. The nobility, in default of the right
to meet together and to vote, exercises its imfluence, and, to”
know how it uses this, it is sufficient to read over the edicts and
the Almanach. A regulation imposed on Marshal de Ségur* has
just restored the old barrier which excluded plebeians from mil-
itary rank, and thenceforward, to be a captain, it is necessary to
prove four degrees of nobility. In like manner, in late days,
one must be a noble to be a master of requests, and it is secretly -
determined that in future “all ecclesiastical property, from the
humblest priory to the richest abbeys, shall be reserved to the
nobility.” In fact, all the high places, ecclesiastic or laic, are
theirs; all the sinecures, ecclesiastic or laic, are theirs, or for
their relations, adherents, protegés, and servitors. France is —
like a vast stable in which the blood-horses obtain double
and triple rations for doing nothing, or for only half-work,
whilst the draft-horses perform full service on half a ration and
that often not supplied. Again, it must be noted, that among
these blood-horses is a privileged set which, born near the man-
ger, keeps its fellows away and ‘feeds bountifully, fat, shining, ©
with their skins polished, and up to their bellies in litter, and |
with no other occupation than that of appropriating everything |)
to themselves. These are the court nobles, who live within ~
reach of favors, brought up from infancy to ask for them, to ob- ©
tain and to ask again, solely attentive to royal condescension ~
and frowns, for whom the @i/ de beuf ® forms the universe, “in- ©


1De Ségur, ‘“ Mémoires,” vol. I. pp. 16, 41. De Bouillé, “Mémoires,” p. 54. Mme. |
Campan, “‘ Mémoires,” v. I. p. 237, proofs‘in detail.
? An antechamber in the palace of Versailles in which there was a round or bull’s-eye |


window, where courtiers assembled to await the opening of the loos into the king’s apart- 4
ment.—TR


‘


p. IV. THE STRUCTURE OF SOCIETY. 65°
ifferent to the affairs of the State as to their own affairs, allow-
ng one to be governed by provincial intendants as they allowed
he other to be governed by their own intendants.”

Let us contemplate them at work on the budget. We know
how large that of the church is; I estimate that they absorb at
east one-half of it. Nineteen chapters of male nobles, twenty-
ve chapters of female nobles, two hundred and sixty command-
ries of Malta belong to them by institution. ‘They occupy, by
avor, all the archbishoprics, and, except five, all the bishoprics.1
[hey furnish three out of four abbés-commendatory and vicars-
eneral. If, among the abbeys of females royally nominated, we
; pepe those bringing in twenty thousand livres and more, we
1d that they all have ladies of rank for abbesses. One fact
Jone shows the extent of these favors: I have counted eighty-
hree abbeys of men possessed by the almoners, chaplains, pre-
septors or readers to the king, queen, princes, and princesses ;
of them, the abbé de Vermont, has 80,000 livres income in
yenefices. In short, large or small, the fifteen hundred ecclesi-
stical sinecures under royal appointment constitute a currency
pithe service of the great, whether they pour it out in golden
‘in to recompense the assiduity of their intimates and followers,
“keep it in large reservoirs to maintain the dignity of their
fe, Besides, according to the fashion of giving more to those
tho have already enough, the richest prelates possess, above
eir episcopal revenues, the wealthiest abbeys. According to
he Almanach, M. d’Argentré, bishop of Séez,? thus enjoys an
‘extra income of 34,000 livres; M. de Suffren, bishop of Sisteron,
_ 36,000; M. de Girac, bishop of Rennes, 40,000; M. de Bour-
le, bishop of Soissons, 42,000; M. d’Agout de Bonneval,
shop of Pamiers, 45,000; M. de Marbceuf, bishop of Autun,
000; M. de Rohan, bishop of Strasbourg, 60,000; M. de
ficé, archbishop of Bordeaux, 63,000; M. de Luynes, arch-
ishop of Sens, 82,000; M. de Bernis, archbishop of Alby,
00,000; M. de Brienne, archbishop of Toulouse, 106,000; M.
é Dillon, archbishop of Narbonne, 120,000; M. de Laroche-
uld, archbishop of Rouen, 130,000, that is to say, double
id sometimes triple the sums stated, and quadruple, and often
x times as much, according to the present standard. M. de


1 “Ta France ecclésiastique,”’ 1788.
2 Granier de oo “Des causes de la Révolution Frangaise,’’ III. 58.


RT


66 THE ANCIENT REGIME.


Rohan derived from his abbeys not 60,000 livres but 400,00¢
and M. de Brienne, the most opulent of all, next to M. de Ro
han, the 24th of August, 1788, at the time of leaving the m
istry,! sent to withdraw from the treasury, “the 20,000 livres o
his month’s salary which had not yet fallen due, a punctu alit
the more remarkable that, without taking into account
salary of his place, with the 6,000 livres pension attached tof ns.
blue ribbon, he possessed, in benefices, 678,000 livres incoum
and that, still quite recently, a CHMens of wood on one of.
abbey domains yielded him a million.” a
Let us pass on to the lay budget; here also are prolific sir
cures, and almost all belong to the nobles. Of this class thea
are in the provjnces the thirty-seven great governments-general
the seven small governments-general, the sixty-six lieutenancies-
general, the four hundred and seven special governments, the
thirteen governorships of royal palaces, and a number of others
all of them for ostentation and empty honors, all in the hands of
the nobles, all lucrative, not only through salaries paid by the
treasury, but also through local profits. Here, again, the nobility
allowed itself to evade the authority, the activity and the useful-
ness of its charge on the condition of retaining its title, pomp
and money.2 The intendant is really the governor; “the titu-
lar governor exercising a function with special letters of com-
mand,” is only there to give dinners; and again he must have
permission to do that, “the permission to go and reside at his
place of government.” The place, however, yields fruit: the
government-general of Berry is worth 35,000 livres income, that
of Guyenne 120,000, that of Languedoc 160,000; asmall specia
government, like that of Havre, brings in 35,000 livres, besides
the accessories ; a medium lieutenancy-general, like that of Rous


1 Marmontel, ‘‘ Mémoires,” v. II. book xiii. p. 221.

2 Boiteau, ‘‘ Etat de la France en 1789,” pp. 55, 248. D" Argenson, “ Considérations s
le gouvernement de la France,” p. 177. De Luynes, “ Journal,’” XIII. 226, XIV. 28
XIII. 33, 158, 162, 118, 233, 237, XV. 268, XVI. 304. The government of Ham is wo
11,250 livres, that of Auxerre 12,000, that of Briangon 12,000, that of the islands of Ste
Marguerite 16,000, that of Schelestadt 15,000, that of Brisach from 15 to 16,000, that o
Gravelines 18,000. The ordinance of 1776 had reduced these various places as follows
(Warroquier, II. 467). 18 general governments to 60,000 livres, 21 to 30,000; 114 speci
governments; 25 to 12,000 livres, 25 to 10,000 and 64 to 8,000; 176 lieutenants and com
mandants of towns, places, etc., of which 35 were reduced to 16,600 and 141 from 2,000 &
6,000. ‘The ordinance of 1788 established, besides these, 17 commands in chief with fro
20,000 to 30,000 livres fixed salary and from 4,000 to 6,000 a month for residence, and com
mands of a secondary grade.


IAP. IV. THE STRUCTURE OF SOCIETY. 67


sillon, 13,000 to 14,000 livres; one special government from
12,000 to 18,000 livres; and observe that, in the Isle of France
alone, there are thirty-four, at Vervins, Senlis, Melun, Fontaine-
bleau, Dourdan, Sens, Limours, Etampes, Dreux, Houdan and
other towns as insignificant as they are pacific; it is the staff of
the Valois dynasty which, since the time of Richelieu, has ceased
‘to perform any service, but which the treasury continues to pay.
_ Consider these sinecures in one province alone, in Languedoc,
a country of provincial assemblies—where it seems as if the tax-
‘payer’s purse ought to be better protected. There are three
sub-commandants at Tournon, Alais, and Montpelier, ‘ each one
paid 16,000 livres, although without any functions since their
places were established at the time of the religious wars and
tro bles, to keep down the Protestants.” Twelve royal lieuten-
ants are equally useless, and only for parade. The same with

three lieutenants-general, each one “receiving in his turn, every
three years, a gratuity of 30,000 livres, for services senkiatad in
the at said province, which are vain and chimerical, and which are
not specified ;” because none of them reside there, and if they
re paid, it is to secure their support at the court. “Thus the
Comte de Caraman, who has more than 600,000 livres income
as proprietor of the Languedoc canal, receives 30,000 livres
every three years, without legitimate cause, and independently
of frequent and ample gifts which the province awards to him
_ for repairs on his canal.” The province likewise gives to the
commandant, Comte de Périgord, a gratuity of 12,000 livres in.
addition to his salary, and to his wife another gratuity of 12,000
livres on her honoring the states for the first time with her pres-
ence. It again pays, for the same commandant, forty guards,
= “of which twenty-four only serve during his short appearance at
ee the Assembly,” and who, with their captain, annually cost 15,000
|| Tlivres. It pays likewise for the Governor from eighty to one
hundred guards,“ who each receive 300 or 400 livres, besides man y
exemptions, and who are never on service, since the Governor is
i non-resident.” The expense of these lazy subalterns is about
4,000 livres, besides 5,000 to 6,000 for their captain, to which
must be added 7,500 for gubernatorial secretaries, besides 60,000
livres salaries, and untold profits for the Governor himself. I
_ find everywhere secondary idlers swarming in the shadow of
in chief, and deriving their vigor from the public purse


68 THE ANCIENT REGIME.


which is the common-nurse. Al! these people parade an
drink and eat copiously, in grand style: it is their principe
service, and they attend to it conscientiously. The session S
of the Assembly are junketings of six weeks’ duration, in which
the intendant expends 25,000 livres in dinners and receptions.* —
Equally lucrative and useless are the court offices?—-so many
domestic sinecures, the profits and accessories of which largely,
exceed the emoluments. I find in the printed register 295
cooks, without counting the table-waiters of the king and his
people, while “the head butler obtains 84,000 livres a year im
billets and supplies,” without counting his salary and the “grand”
liveries” which he receives in money. The head chambermaids
to the queen, inscribed in the Almanach for 150 livres and paid
12,000 francs, make in reality 50,000 francs by the sale of the
candles lighted during the day. Augeard, private secretary, and
whose place is set down at goo livres a year, confesses that it is
worth to him 200,000, The head-huntsman at Fontainebleatt ~
sells for his own benefit each year 20,000 francs worth of —
rabbits. ‘On each journey to the king’s country residences the
ladies ‘of the bedchamber gain eighty per cent. on the expenses
of moving; it is said that the coffee and bread for each of these
ladies costs 2,000 francs a year, and so on with other things.”
“Mme. de Tallard made 115,000 livres income out of her place ~
of governess to the children of France, because her salary was |
increased 35,000 livres for each child.” The Duc de Penthiévre, —
as grand admiral, received an anchorage due on all vessels “en-~
tering the ports and rivers of France,” which produced annually ~
91,484 francs. Mme. de Lamballe, superintendent of the
queen’s household, inscribed for 6,000 francs, gets 150,000.97
The Duc de Gévres gets 50,000 crowns by one piece of fire- -
works out of the fragments and scaffolding which belong to him
by virtue of his office.* Grand officers of the palace, governors


:


' Archives nationales, H, 944, April 25, and September 20, 1780. Letters and Memoirs
of Furgole, advocate at Toulouse.

? Archives nationales, O, 738 (Reports made to the bureau-general of the king’s house-
hold, March, 1780, by M. Mesnard de Chousy). Augeard, “Mémoires,” 97. Mme.
Campan, “‘ Mémoires,” I. 291. D’Argenson, “‘ Mémoires,” February ro, December 9, 1751,


“Essai sur les Capitaineries royales et autres” (1789), p. 80. Warroquier, “Etat de la
France en 1789,” I. 266.


3 ** Marie Antoinette,” by D’Arneth and Geffroy, II. 377.
* Mme. Campan, ‘‘ Mémoires,” I. 296, 298, 300, 301; III. 78. Hippeau, “Le Gouvern
ment de Normandie,” IV. 171 (Letter from Paris, December 13, 1780). D’Argenso


* Mémoires,” September 5, 1755. Bachaumont, January 19, 1758. ‘‘ Mémoire sur l'impo-
sition territoriale,”” by M. de Calonne (1787), p. 54.


¥


a F


IAP. IV. THE STRUCTURE OF SOCIETY. Ss


of royal establishments, captains of captainries, chamberlains,

equerries, gentlemen in waiting, gentlemen in ordinary, pages,

governors, almoners, chaplains, ladies of honor, ladies of the bed-
chamber, ladies in waiting on the King, the Queen, on Monsieur,
on Madame, on the Comte D’Artois, on the Comtesse D’ Artois,
on Mesdames, on Madame Royale, on Madame Elisabeth, in each
princely establishment and elsewhere—hundreds of places pro-
vided with salaries and accessories are without any service to per-
form, or simply answer a decorative purpose. ‘‘ Mme. de Laborde
1as just been appointed keeper of the queen’s bed, with 12,000
francs pension out of the king’s privy purse; nothing is known of
the duties of this position, as there has been no place of this kind
since Anne of Austria.” ‘The eldest son of M. de Machault is
4 ppointed intendant of the classes. ‘This is one of the employ-
ents called complimentary : ie is worth 18,000 livres income to
sign one’s name twice a year.” And likewise with the post of
secretary-general of the Swiss guards, worth 30,000 livres a year
and assigned to the Abbé Barthélemy; and the same with the
post of secretary-general of the dragoons, worth 20,000 livres a
, held in turn ‘by Gentil Bernard and by Laujon, two small
pocket poets. It would be simpler to give the money without the
dla There is indeed no end to them. On reading various
memoirs day after day it seems as if the treasury was open to
2 nder. ‘The courtiers, unremitting in their attentions to the
ing, force him to sympathize with their troubles. They are his
timates, the guests of his drawing-room; men of the same
stamp as himself, his natural clients, the only ones with whom he
“an converse, and whom it is necessary to make contented; he
cannot avoid helping them. He must necessarily éontribute to
the dowries of their children since he has signed their marriage
contracts; he must necessarily enrich them since their profusion
“serves for the embellishment of his court. Nobility being one of
e glories of the throne, the occupant of the throne is obliged to
regild it as often as is necessary.! In this connection a few
gures and anecdotes among a thousand speak most eloquently.


—


q * 1D’Argenson, “Mémoires,” December 9, 1751. ‘‘The expense to courtiers of two new
'S magnificent coats, each for two féte days, ordered by the king, completely ruins them.”
*De Luynes, “Journal,” XIV. pp. 147-295, XV. 36, 119. D’Argenson, ‘‘ Mémoires,”

il 8, 1752, March 30 and July 28, 1753, July 2, 1735, June 23, 1756. Hippeau, zéid. IV.
i (Letter of May 15, 1780). Necker, ‘De |’Administration des Finances,” II. pp. 265,
‘= “209, 270, 271, 228. Augeard, ‘‘ Mémoires,” p. 249.
= 3 ae


70 THE ANCIENT REGIME.


The Prince de Pons, had a pension of 25,000 livres, out of th Y
king’s bounty on which his Majesty was pleased to give 6,00
to Mme. de Marsan, his daughter, Canoness of Remiremon
The family represented to the king the bad state of the Prince d
Pons’s affairs, and his Majesty was pleased to grant to his sor
Prince Camille, 15,000 livres of the pension vacated by the death
of his father, and 5,000 livres increase to Mme. de Marsan.

de Conflans espouses Mlle. Portail. “In honor of this marria
the king was pleased to order that out of the pension of 1o, 000
livres granted to Mme. la Presidente Portail, 6,000 of it should
pass to M. de Conflans after the death of Mme. Portail.” M. de)
Séchelles, a retiring minister, had 12,000 livres in an old pension:
which the king continued; he has, besides this, 20,000 livres pe oe
sion as minister; and the king gives him in addition to all this a
pension of 40,000 livres. The motives which prompt these.
favors are often remarkable. M. de Rouillé has to be consoled
for not having participated in the treaty of Vienna; this Seal :
why “a pension of 6,000 livres is given to his niece, ‘Mae: de Cas
. tellane, and another of 10,000 to his daughter, Mme. de Beuvror ra
who is very rich.” “M. de Puisieux enjoys about 76,000 o
77,000 livres income from the bounty of the king; it is true that
he has considerable property, but the revenue - this property 1s
uncertain, being for the most part in vines.” “A pension of 5
10,000 livres has just been awarded to the Mere de Léde be-
cause she is disagreeable to Mme. Infante, and to secure her
resignation.” The most opulent stretch out their hands and take
accordingly. “It is estimated that last week 128,000 livres in
pensions were bestowed on ladies of the court, while for the past
two years the officers have not received the slightest pension:
eight thousand livres to the Duchesse de Chevreuse, whose hus-
band has an income of 500,000 livres; 12,000 livres to Mme. de
Luynes, that she may not be jealous; 10,000 to the Duchesse de
Brancas; 10,000 to the dowager Duchesse de Brancas, mothe
of the preceding,” etc. At the head of these leeches come th
princes of the blood. “The king has just given 1,500,000 livre
to M. le Prince de Conti to pay his debts, 1,000,000 of which
under the pretext of indemnifying him for the injury done him b
the sale of Orange, and 500,000 livres as a gratuity.” “The D
d’Orléans formerly had 50,000 crowns pension, as a poor maf
and awaiting his father’s inheritance. This event making hi


Seeviv. «- THE STRUCTURE OF SOCIETY. m


ich, with an income of more than 3,000,000 livres, he gave up
his pension. But having since represented to the king that his
expenditure exceeded his income, the king gave him back his
50,000 crowns.” ‘Twenty years later, in 1780, when Louis XVL.,
lesirous of relieving the treasury, signs “the great reformation of
the table, 600,000 livres are given to Mesdames for their tables.”
This is what the dinners, cut down, of three old ladies, cost the
public For the king’s two brothers, 8,300,000 livres, besides
2,000,000 income in appanages; for the Dauphin, Madame
- Madame Elisabeth, and Mesdames 3,500,000 livres; for
2 queen, 4,000,000 ;—such is the statement of Necker in ea:
Ac d to this the casual donations, admitted or concealed; 200,000
ancs to M. de Sartines, to aid him in paying his debts; 200,000
‘to M. Lamoignon, keeper of the seals; 100,000 to M. de
'Miromesnil for expenses in establishing himself; 166,000 to the
widow of M. de Maurepas; 400,000 to the Prince de Salm;
| 3,200,000 to the Duc de Polignac for the pledge on the county
of Fenestranges; 754,337 to Mesdames to pay for Bellevue.!
Mz. de Calonne,” says Augeard, a reliable witness,” “scarcely en-
tered on his duties, raised a loan of 100,000,000 livres, one-quar-
ter of which did not find its way into the royal treasury; the rest
| was eaten up by people at the court; his donations to the Comte
VArtois are estimated at 56,000,000; the portion of Monsieur is
25,000,000; he gave to the Prince de Condé, in exchange for
100,000 feces’ income, 12,000,000 paid down and 600,000 livres
inuity, and he causes the most burdensome acquisition to be
ade for the State, in exchanges of which the damage is more
an five to one.” We must not forget that in actual rates all
these donations, pensions, and salaries are worth double the
amount.
- Such is the use of the great in relation to the central power;


1 Nicolardot, ‘‘ Journal de Louis XVI.,” p. 228. Appropriations in the Red Book of 1774
'1789: 227,985,716 livres, of which 80,000,000 are in acquisitions and gifts to the royal
mily. Among others there are 14,600,000 to the Comte d’Artois and 14,450,000 to Mon-
ur; 7776,253 are given to the Queen for Saint-Cloud; 8,700,000 for the acquisition of Ile-


- 2C£ “Compte général des revenus et dépenses fixes au rer Mai,-1789”” (Imprimerie roy-

ale, 1789, in 4). Estate of Ile-Dieu, acquired in 1783 of the Duc de Mortemart, 1,000,000;

of Viviers, acquired of the Prince de Soubise in 1784, 1,500,000; estates of St. Priest

ae of St. Etienne, acquired in 1787 of M. Gilbert des Voisius, 1,335,935; the forests of

iors and of Floranges, acquired of the Duc de Liancourt in 1785, 1,200,000; the county
“Montgommery, acquired of M. Clement de Basville in 1785, 3,306,604.


72 THE ANCIENT REGIME.


instead of constituting themselves representatives of the peoy
they aimed to be the favorites of the sovereign, and they st
the flock which they ought to preserve.


4 yd IV. atl
The excoriated flock is to discover finally whats 1S hehe | wi
its wool. Sooner or later,” says a parliament of 1764, “t
people will learn that the remnants of our finances continu
be. wasted in donations which are frequently undeserved ; in ¢
cessive and multiplied pensions for the same persons; in do
ries and promises of dowry, and in useless offices and sala :
Sooner or later they will thrust back “these greedy hands whic
are always open and never full; that. insatiable” crowd wh
seems to be born only to seize all and possess nothing, ¢
pitiless as it is shameless.” And when this day arrives the ¢
tortioners will find that they stand alone. For the character
of an aristocracy which cares only for itself is to lapse into a ¢
terie. Having forgotten the public, it additionally neglects.
subordinates; after being separated from the nation it separat
itself from its own adherents. It is a set of staff-officers on fi
lough, indulging in sports without giving themselves further co!
cern about inferior officers; when the hour of battle comes 1
body will march under their orders, and chieftains are soug
elsewhere. Such is the isolation of the seigniors of the cou
and of the prelates among the lower grades of the nobility and
the clergy; they appropriate to themselves too large a share, ani
give nothing, or almost nothing, to the people who are not of
their society. For a century a steady murmur against them i
rising, and goes on expanding until it becomes an uproar, -
which the old’and the new spirit, feudal ideas and philosop i
ideas, threaten in unison. “I see,” said the bailly of Mirabeau
“that the nobility is demeaning itself and becoming a y e ck
It is extended to all those children of bloodsuckers, the vaga
bonds of finance, introduced by La Pompadour, herself the o


1 “Ye President des Brosses,”” by Foisset. (Remonstrances to the king Deas Egham
of Dijon, Jan. 19, 1764).

2 Lucas de Montigny, ‘‘ Mémoires de Mirabeau.” Letter of the bailly, May 26, 1 r
D’Argenson, ‘* Mémoires,” IV. 156, 157, 160, 76; VI. p. 320. Marshal Marmont, “
moires,”’ I. 9. De Ferriéres, “Mémoires,” preface. See, on the difficulty in succeedi
the Memoirs of Dumourier. Chateaubriand’s father is likewise one of the discontented,
political /rondeur, and very inimical to the court” (I. 206). Records of the States-Ger
of 1789, a general summary by Prud’homme, II. Aasszim.


Seunr. wv. THE STRUCTURE OF SOCIETY. 73


spring of this foulness. One portion of it demeans itself in its
ility to the court; the other portion is amalgamated with
that quill-driving rabble who are converting the blood of the
sing’s subjects into ink; another perishes stifled beneath vile
obes, the ignoble atoms of cabinet-dust which an office drags up
mut of the mire;” and all, -parvenues of ancient or of the new
race, form a band called the court. “The court!” exclaims
YArgenson. “The entire evil is found in this word. The
wrt has become the senate of the nation; the least of the
alets at Versailles is a senator; chambermaids take part in the
yovernment, if not to legislate, at least to impede laws and reg-
lations; and. by dint of hindrance there are no longer either
wws, or rules, or law-makers. . . . Under Henry IV. courtiers
emained each one at home; they had not entered into ruinous
expenditure to belong to the court; favors were not thus dwe to
hem as at the present day. . . . The court is the sepulchré of
he nation.” Many noble officers, finding that high grades are
uly for courtiers, abandon the service, and betake themselves
“with their discontent to their estates. Others, who have not left
heir domains, brood there in discomfort, idleness, and exnud,
heit ambition embittered by their powerlessness. In 178g, said
he Marquis, de Ferriéres, most of them “are so weary of the
and of the ministers they are almost democrats.” At least,
want to withdraw the government from the ministerial
igarchy in whose hands it is concentrated ;” there are no grand
“seigniors for deputies; they set them aside and “absolutely reject
‘them, saying that they would traffic with the interests of the
‘nobles ;-” they themselves, in their memorials, insist that there
‘be no more court nobility.
_ The same sentiments prevail among the lower clergy, and still
lore actively ; for they are excluded from the high offices, not
‘Only as inferiors, but again as plebeian.! Already, in 1766, the
| ee de Mirabeau writes: “It would be an insult to most of
t pretentious ecclesiastics to offer them a curacy. Revenues
d honors are for the abbés-commendatory, for tonsured bene-
aries not in orders, for the numerous chapters.” On the
nit Bey: *the ‘true pastors of souls, the collaborators in the


ee


:


Berehesiicn du citoyen,” II. 202, 203. Voltaire, ‘‘ Dictionnaire philosophique,”
“Curé de Campagne.” Abbé Guettée, “Histoire de I’ Eglise de France,” XII. 399-


74 | THE ANCIENT REGIME. BOOK 1.


holy ministry, scarcely obtain a subsistence.” The first class
“drawn from the nobility and from the best of the bourgeoisi
have pretensions only, without being of the true ministry, ‘ ne
other, only having duties to fulfil without expectations and
almost without income... can be recruited only from the
lowest ranks of civil society,” while the parasites who despoil
the laborers “affect to subjugate them and to degrade them
more and more.” “I pity,” said Voltaire, “the lot of a country
curate, obliged to contend for a sheaf of wheat with his un-7
fortunate parishioner, to plead against him, to exact the tithe of
peas and lentils, to waste his miserable existence in constant
strife. . . . I pity still more the curate with a fixed allowance to
whom monks, called gros décimateurs} dare offer a salary of fort
ducats, to go about during the year, two or three miles from his
home, day and night, in sunshine and in rain, in the snow and
in the ice, exercising the most trying and most disagreeable
functions.” Attempts are made for thirty years to secure ther
salaries and raise them a little; in case of their inadequacy th¢
‘beneficiary, collator or tithe-owner of the parish is require
to add to them until the curate obtains 500 livres (1768), the
700 livres (1785), the vicar 200 livres (1768), then 250 (1778)
and finally 350 (1785). Strictly, at the prices at which thing
are, a man may support himself on that.2 But he must liv
among the destitute to whom he owes alms, and he cherishes 2
the bottom of his heart a secret bitterness towards the indolen
Dives who, with full pockets, despatches him, with emp
pockets, on a mission of charity. At Saint-Pierre de Barjouvillé
in the Toulousain, the archbishop of Toulouse appropriates t
himself one-half of the tithes and gives away eight livres a yeal
in alms; at Bretx, the chapter of Isle Jourdain, which retains
one-half of certain tithes and three-quarters of others, gives té
livres; at Croix Falgarde, the Benedictines, to whom a half <¢ |
the tithes belong, give ten livres per annum.® At Sainte-Cro®
de Bernay in Normandy,‘ the non-resident abbé, who receivé


! Those entitled to tithes in cereals.—Tr.
2 A curate’s salary at the present day is, at the minimum, goo francs with a house an
perquisites.
’ Théron de Montaugé, ‘“L’agriculture et les classes rurales dans le pays Toulousaii
p. 86. 4
4 Périn, “la Jeunesse de Robespierre,” complaints of the rural parishes of Artois, p. 3 J
Boivin Champeaux, é/d. pp. 65, 68. Hippeau, zd. VI. p. 79 et VII. 177. Letter of B


“CHAP. Iv. THE STRUCTURE OF SOCIETY. 75


57,000: livres gives 1,050 livres to the curate without a parson-
age and whose parish contains 4,000 communicants. At Saint-
~Aubin-sur-Gaillon, the abbé, a gros décimateur, gives 350 livres to
the vicar who is obliged to go into the village and obtain con-
tributions of flour, bread and apples. At Plessis Hébert, “the
“substitute déortuaire, not having enough to live on is obliged to
‘get his meals in the houses of neighboring curates.” . In Artois,
where the tithes are often seven and a half and eight per cent. on
‘the product of the soil, a number of curates have a fixed rate
‘and no parsonage; their church goes to ruin and the beneficiary
gives nothing to the poor. “At Saint-Laurent, in Normandy,
the curacy is worth not more than 400 livres, which the curate
‘shares with an oéitier? and there are 500 inhabitants, three-
quarters of whom receive alms.” As the repairs on a parsonage
or on a church are usually at the expense of a seignior or of
‘a beneficiary often far off, and in debt or indifferent, it sometimes
happens that the priest does not know where to lodge nor to say
‘mass. “I arrived,” says a curate of the Touraine, “in the month
of June, 1788... . . The parsonage would resemble a hideous
ca ve were it not open to. all the winds and the frosts; below
there are two rooms with stone floors, without doors or windows,
and five feet high; a third room six feet high, paved with stone,
serving as parlor, hall, kitchen, wash-house, bakery and sink for
the water of the court and garden; above are three similar
rooms, the whole cracking and tumbling in ruins, absolutely
‘threatening to fall, without either doors and windows that hold,”
and, in 1790, the repairs are not yet made. See by way of con-
rast the luxury of the prelates possessing half a million income,
‘the pomp of their palaces, the hunting equipment of M. de
Dillon, bishop of Evreux, the confessionals lined with satin of
_M. de Barral, bishop of Troyes, and the innumerable culinary
utensils in massive silver of M. de Rohan, bishop of Strasbourg.
_ Such is the lot of curates at the established rates, and there
_ are “a great many” who do not get the established rates, withheld
: ? from them through the ill-will of the higher clergy; who, with


ao -


ergent, curate of Vallers, January 27, 1790. (Archives nationales, DXIX. portfolio 24.)
is I wetter of M. Briscard, curate of Beaumont-la-Roger, diocese of Evreux, December 19, 1789.
“fs (ZZ id. DXIX. portfolio 6.) ‘‘ Tableau moral du clergé de France” (1789), p. 2.
_ 1 He who has the right of receiving the first year’s income > of a parish church after a
Las ancy caused by death.—Tr.
~ 2. One who performs masses for the dead at fixed epochs.—Tr.


— Cea! el ong


76 THE ANCIENT REGIME. BOOK I.


their perquisites, get only from 400 to 500 livres, and who
vainly ask for the meagre pittance to which they-are entitled by |
the late edict. ‘Ought not such a request,” says a curate, “be
willingly granted by Messieurs of the upper clergy who suffer
monks to enjoy from five to six thousand livres income each”
person, whilst they see curates, who are at least as necessary,
reduced to the lighter portion as well for themselves as for their
parish.” And they yet gnaw on this slight pittance to pay the 7
free gift. In this as in the rest, the poor are charged to discharge
the rich. In the diocese of Clermont, “the curates, even with
the simple fixed rates, are subject to a tax of 60, 80, 100, 120
livres and even more; the vicars, who live only by the sweat of
their brows, are taxed 22 livres.” ‘The prelates, on the contrary,
pay but little and “it is still a custom to present bishops on
New-Year’s day with a receipt for their taxes.”4 There is no
escape for the curates. Save two or three small bishopries of
“lackeys,” all the dignities of the church are reserved to the
nobles; ‘to be a bishop nowadays,” says one of them, “a man 7
must be a gentleman.” I regard them as sergeants who, like )
their fellows in the army, have lost all hope of hecoming officers.
Hence there are some whose anger bursts its bounds: “We,
unfortunate curates at fixed rates; we, commonly assigned to
the largest parishes, like my own which, for two leagues in the
woods, includes hamlets that would form another; we, whose
lot makes even the stones and beams of our miserable dwellings

cry aloud,” we have to endure prelates “who would still, through ©
their forest-keepers prosecute a poor curate for cutting a stic
in their forests, his sole support on his long journeys over the
road.” On their passing, the poor man “is obliged to jump close
against a slope to protect himself from the feet and the spat-_
terings of the horses as likewise from the wheels and, perhaps,
the whip of an insolent coachman,” and then, “begrimed with
dirt, with his stick in one hand and his hat, such as it is, in the
other, he must salute, humbly and quickly, through the door of 7
the close, gilded carriage, the counterfeit hierophant who is snor.

ing on the wool of the flock the poor curate is feeding, anc
of which he merely leaves him the dung and the grease.” T
whole letter is one long cry of rage; it is rancor of this stamp)
which is to fashion Joseph Lebons and Fouchés. In this situas)


Complaints on the additional burdens which the Third-Estate have to support, by Ga
de Bianzat (1788), p. 237.


PeikV. THE STRUCTURE OF SOCIETY. 77


‘tion and with these sentiments it is evident that the lower clergy
will treat its chiefs as the provincial nobility treated theirs}
f hey will not select “for representatives those who swim in opu-
ence and who have always regarded their sufferings with tran-
‘quillity.”. The curates, on all sides “will confederate together”
‘to send only curates to the States-General, and to exclude “not
‘only canons, abbés, priors and other beneficiaries, but again the
principal superiors, the heads of the hierarchy,” that is to say, the
bishops. In fact, in the States-General out of three hundred
clerical deputies we count two hundred and eight curates, and,
like the provincial nobles, they bring along with them the distrust
and the ill-will which they have so long entertained against their
chiefs. We shall soon see a test of it. If the first two orders
are constrained to combine against the communes it is at the
critical moment when the curates withdraw. If the institution
of an upper chamber is rejected it is owing to the commonalty
of the gentry (la piebe des gentilshommes) being unwilling to
allow the great families a prerogative which they have abused.


, V.

_ One privilege remains, the most considerable of all, that: of
he king ; for, in this staff of hereditary nobles he is the heredi-
ty general. His office, indeed, is not a sinecure, like their
ank; but it comports quite as grave disadvantages and worse
€ pert Two things are pernicious to man, the lack of
occupation and the lack of restraint; neither inactivity nor
pmnipotency are comportable with his nature, the absolute prince
who is all-powerful, like the listless aristocracy with nothing to
io, ending in becoming useless and mischievous. In grasping
L all powers the king insensibly took upon himself all functions,—
| an immense undertaking and one surpassing human strength.
Por it is the Monarchy, and not the Revolution, which endowed
France with administrative centralization.2 Three functionaries,
one above the other, manage all public business under the di-
ection of the king’s council; the comptroller-general at the.


: . a Hippeau, zd/d¢. VI. 164. (Letter of the curate of Marolles and of thirteen others. Letter
Mf the bishop of Evreux, March 20, 1789. Letter of the abbé d’Osmond, April 2, 1789).
- rchives nationales, manuscript documents (frocés-verbau.x) of the States-General, V. 148.
" . 245-247. emcGule of the curates of Toulouse, t. 150, p. 282, in the representations
f the Dijon chapter.
: —2De Tocqueville, book II. This capital truth has been established by M. de Tocqueville
Se. h superior discernment.


| (aa *
| | air. 7


\


"8 THE ANCIENT REGIME. BOOK I.


centre, the intendant in each generalship,! the sub-delegate in
each election, fixing, apportioning and levying taxes and the
militia, laying out and building highways, employing the national
police force, distributing succor, regulating cultivation, imposing
their tutelage on the parishes and treating municipal magistrates”
as valets. “A village,” says Turgot,’ “is simply an assemblage
of houses and huts, and of inhabitants equally passive. . . . Yo ar
Majesty is obliged to decide wholly by yourself or through your
mandataries. . . . Each awaits your special instructions to con-—
tribute to the public good, to respect the rights of others, and
even sometimes to exercise his own.” Consequently, adds
Necker, “the government of France is carried on in the bureaux,

The clerks relishing their influence, never fail to persuade
the minister that he cannot separate himself from command in a
single detail.” Bureaucratic at the centre, arbitrariness, ex-
ceptions and favors everywhere, such is a summary of -the
system. ‘“Sub-delegates, officers of elections, receivers and comp=-
trollers of the vwingtiémes, commissaries and collectors of the
tailles, officers of the salt-tax, process-servers, vot/uriers-buraiistes,
overseers of the corvées, clerks of the excise, of the registry, and
of dues reserved, all these men belonging to the tax-service, each
according to his’ disposition, subject to their petty authority,
and overwhelm with their fiscal knowledge, the ignorant and
mexperienced tax-payers incapable of recognizing when they are
cheated.”* A rude species of centralization, with no control over
it, with no publicity, without uniformity, thus installs over the
whole country an army of petty pachas who, as judges, decide
causes in which they are themselves the contestants, ruling by
delegation, and, to sanction their stealings or their insolence,
always having on their lips the name of the king who is obliged
to let them do as they please. In short, the machine, through


1 A term indicating a certain division of the kingdom of France to facilitate the collection
of taxes. Each generalship was subdivided into elections, in which there was a tribuna
called the bureau of finances. .

? Remonstrances of Malesherbes; Memorials by Turgot and Necker to the king, (La-
boulaye, “ De I’administration frangaise sous Louis XVI.,”” Revue des cours litterairés, I
423, 759, 814.)

8 Financiers have been known to tell citizens: ‘The ferme (revenue-agency), ought
grant you favors, you ought to be forced to come and ask for them. He who pays never
knows what he owes. The /ermier is sovereign legislator in matters relating to his personal
interest. Every petition, in which the interests of a province, or those of the whole na-
tion are concerned, is regarded as penal temerity if it is signed by a person in his private
capacity and as illicit association if it be signed by several.”” Malesherbes, zdid.


P, IV. THE STRUCTURE OF SOCIETY. 79


its complexity, irregularity, and dimensions escapes from his
grasp. A Frederick II., who rises at four o’clock in the morning,
a Napoleon who dictates half the night in his bath, and who
works eighteen hours a day, would scarcely suffice for its needs.
Such a régime cannot operate without constant strain, without
indefatigable energy, without infallible discernment, without mil-
itary rigidity, without superior genius; on these conditions alone
‘can one convert twenty-five millions of men into automatons and
“substitute his own will, lucid throughout, coherent throughout and
€ rerywhere present for the wills of those he abolishes. Louis


' down into apathy. “They would have it so, they thought it
all for the best,”! is his manner of speaking when ministerial
_ measures prove unsuccessful. “If I were a lieutenant of the
_ police,” he would say again, “I would prohibit cabs.” In vain
is he aware of the machine being dislocated for he can do nothing
and he causes nothing to be done. In the event of misfortune
he has a private reserve, his purse apart. “The king,” said
_ Mme. de Pompadour, “would sign away a million without think-
ing of it, but he would scarcely bestow a hundred louis out
of his own little treasury.” Louis XVI. strives for some time to
remove some of the wheels, to introduce better ones and to
reduce the friction of the rest; but the pieces are too rusty, and
too weighty; he cannot adjust them, or harmonize them and
keep them in their places; his hand falls by his side wearied and
powerless. He is content to practise economy himself; he re-
~ cords in his journal the mending of his watch, and allows the
_ public vehicle in the hands of Calonne to be loaded with fresh
_ abuses that it may revert back to the old rut from which it is
to issue only by breaking down.

Undoubtedly the wrong they do, or which is done in their name,
' dissatisfies and chagrins them, but, at bottom, their conscience is
not disturbed. They may feel compassion for the people but
_ they do not feel themselves culpable; they are its sovereigns and
not its mandators. . France, to them, is as a domain to its seign-
“ior, while a seignior is not derelict to honor in being prodigal and
_ neglectful. He merely dissipates away his own property and no-
| _ body has a right to call him to account. Founded on feudal


‘ —.
ia
__ ! Mme. Campan, “‘ Mémoires,” v. I. p. 13. Mme. du Hausset, ‘“‘ Mémoires,” p. 114.


| ae
: 3


80 THE ANCIENT REGIME.


seigniory royalty is like an estate, an inheritance, and it would | :
infidelity, almost treachery in a prince, in any event weak and
base, to allow any portion of the trust received by him intact.
from his ancestors for transmission to his children, to pass into the
hands of his subjects. Not only according to mediaeval traditions ©
is he proprietor-commandant of the French and of France, but
again according to the theory of the legists, he is, like Caesar, the ©
sole and perpetual representative of the nation, and, according to»
the theological doctrine, like David, the sacred and special dele-
gate of God himself. It would be astonishing, if, with all these
titles, he did not consider the public revenue as his personal reve-
nue, and if, in many cases, he did not act accordingly. Our
point of. view, in this matter, is ‘so essentially opposed to his, we
can scarcely put ourselves in his place; but at that time his point
of view was everybody’s point of view. It seemed, then, as
strange to meddle with the king’s business as to meddle with that
of a private person. Only at the end of the year 1788? the fa-
mous salon of the Palais-Royal “ with boldness and unimaginable
folly, asserts that in a true monarchy the revenues of the State
should not be at the sovereign’s disposition; that he should be
granted merely a sum sufficient to defray the expenses of his
establishment, of his donations, and for favors to his servants as
well as for his pleasures, while the surplus should be deposited in
the royal treasury to be devoted only to purposes sanctioned by
the National Assembly.” ‘To reduce the sovereign to a civil list,
to seize nine-tenths of his income, to forbid him cash acquittances,
what an outrage! The surprise would be no greater if at the
present day it were proposed to divide the income of each mill-
ionaire into two portions, the smallest to go for the owner’s sup-
port, and the largest to be placed in the hands of the government
to be expended in works of public utility. An old farmer-gene-
ral, an intellectual and unprejudiced man, gravely attempts to
justify the purchase of Saint-Cloud by calling it “a ring for the
queen’s finger.” The ring cost, indeed, 7,700,000 francs, but ©
“the king of France then had an income of 477,000,000. What
could be said of any private individual who, with 477,000 livres
income, should for once in his life, give his wife diamonds wort


1 “Gustave III. et la cour de France,” by Gefroy, II. 474. (‘Archives de Dresde,
French correspondence, November 20, 1788.)


CHAP. IV. THE STRUCTURE OF SOCIETY. 81


7,900 oF 8,000 livres?” + People would say that the gift j is oma?
erate and that the husband is reasonable.

_ To properly understand the history of our kings, let the funda-
‘mental principle be always recognized that France is their territory,
a farm transmitted from father to son, at first small, then slowly
enlarged, and, at last, prodigiously enlarged, because the proprie-
tor, always on the watch, has found means to make favorable ad-
ditions to it at the expense of his neighbors; at the end of eight
hundred years it comprises about 27,000 square leagues of ter-
titory. His interests and his self-love certainly harmonize at cer-
"tain points with the public welfare; in the aggregate, he is not a
poor administrator, and, since he has always aggrandized himself,
e has done better than many others. Moreover, around him, a
“number of expert individuals, old family councillors, withdrawn
from business and devoted to the domain, with good heads and
4 ay beards, respectfully remonstrate with him when he spends
too freely; they often interest him in public improvements,
‘roads, canals, hotels for invalids, military schools, scien-
ific institutions and charity workshops, in the limitation of main-
iorts, in the toleration of heretics, in the postponement of mo-
lastic vows to the age of twenty-one, in provincial assemblies, and
4 n other reforms by which a feudal domain becomes transformed
3 a modern domain. Nevertheless, the domain, feudal or
modern, remains his property which he can abuse as well as use;
“now, whoever uses with full sway ends by abusing with full
lic sense. If, in his ordinary conduct, personal motives do not pre-
jail over public motives, he might be a saint like Louis IX., a
Stoic like Marcus Aurelius, while remaining a seignior, a man ‘ok
by Ps world like the people of his court, yet more badly brought
D, worse surrounded, more solicited, more tempted and more
t slindfolded. At the very least he has, like them, his own self-love,
_ his own tastes, his own kindred, his mistress, his wife, his friends, all
' intimate and influential solicitors who must first be satisfied, while
the nation only comes after them. The result is, that, for a hun-
— dr d years, from 1672 to 1774, whenever he makes war it is
through pique, through vanity, through family interest, through
calculation of private advantages, or to gratify a woman. Louis
. Maintains his wars yet worse than in undertaking them ;?


Bf a Augeard, ‘‘ Mémoires,” p. 135.
2 Mime, de Pompadour, writing to Marshal d’Estrées, in the army, about the campaign


. 82 THE ANCIENT REGIME.


while Louis XVI., during the whole of his foreign policy, finds a
trammel in the conjugal netting. Internally, he lives like other
seigniors, but more grandly, because he is the greatest seignior in
France; I shall describe his course presently, and farther on we
shall see by what exactions this pomp is supported. In the mean-
time, let us note two or three details. According to authentic
statements, Louis XV. expended on Mme. de Pompadour thirty-
six millions of francs, which is at least seventy-two millions now-
adays.' According to d’Argenson, ? in 1751, he has four thou-
sand horses in his stable, and we are assured. eal his household |
alone, or his personality “cost this year 68,000,000,” almost a quate
ter of the public revenue. Why be astonished if we look upon
the sovereign in the manner of the day, that is to say, as a cas-
tellan in the enjoyment of his hereditary property? He con-
structs, he entertains, he ‘gives festivals, he hunts, he spends
money according to his station. Moreover, being the master of
his own funds, he gives to whomsoever he pleases, and all his
' selections are favors. ‘Your Majesty knows better than myself,”
writes the abbé de Vermond to the empress Maria Theresa,
“that, according to immemorial custom, three-fourths of the
places, honors and pensions are awarded not on account of ser-
vices but out of favor and through influence. This favor was
originally prompted by birth, alliance, and fortune; it rarely has
any other basis than patronage and intrigue. This course of
things, so well established, is respected as a sort of justice even
by those who suffer the most from it ; aman of worth not able to
dazzle by his court alliances, nor throwels a bewildering expendi-
. ture, would not dare to demand a regiment, however ancient anc
illustrious his services, or his birth. Twenty years: ago, the
sons of dukes and of ministers, of people attached to the court
the relations and protégés of mistresses, became colonels at the
age of sixteen; M. de Choiseul excited: loud complaints on ex


operations; and tracing for him a sort of plan, had marked on the paper with szouches (face

patches), the different places which she advised him to attack or defend.” Mme. de Genlis,

“Souvenirs de Félicie,” p. 329. Narrative by Mme. de Puisieux, the motherinlaw 0

Marshal d’Estrées.
’ According to the manuscript register of Mme. de Pompadour’s expenses, in the archive:

¥ the préfecture of Versailles, she had expended 36,327,268 livres. Granier de sail
gt.
? D'Argenson, ‘‘ Mémoires,” VI. 398 (April 24, 1751). ‘‘M. du Barry declared openly

that he had consumed 18,000,000 belonging to the State.” (Correspondence by Métra, I. 2;
* “ Marie Antoinette,” by d’Arneth and Geffroy, vol. II. p. 168 (June 5, 1774).


~ cuar. 1v. THE STRUCTURE OF SOCIETY. 83


tending this age to twenty-three years; but to compensate
favoritism and absolutism he assigned to the pure grace of
the king, or rather to that of his ministers, the appointment of
the lieutenant-colonelcies and to the majorities which, until that
' time, belonged of right to priority of services in the govern-
ment, also the commands of provinces and of towns. You
‘are aware that these places have been largely multiplied, and
that they are bestowed through favor and credit, like the regi-
I ‘ments. The cordon bleu and the cordon rouge are in the like po-
sition, and even sometimes the cross of St. Louis. Bishoprics
_ and abbeys are still more constantly subject to the régime of in-
- fluence. As to positions in the finances, I dare not allude to
_ them. Appointments in the judiciary are the most conditioned
A b services rendered; and yet how much do not credit and rec-
~ ommendation influence the nomination of intendants, first presi-
- dents”—and others? Necker, entering on his duties, finds
_ twenty-eight millions in pensions paid from the royal treasury,
and, at his fall, there is an outflow of money scattered by mil-
lions on the people of the court. Even during his term of office
the king allows himself to make the fortunes of his wife’s friends
of both sexes; the Countess de Polignac obtains 400,000 francs
to pay her debts, 800,000 francs dowry for her daughter, and,
besides, for herself, the promise of an estate of 35,000 livres in-
pee, and, for her lover, the Count de Vaudreil, a pension of
0,000 livres; the Princess de Lamballe obtains 100,000 crowns
per annum, as much for the post of superintendent of the
' ae een’s household, which is revived in her behalf, as for a po-
ition for her brother.’ But it is under Calonne that prodigality
a x -aches insanity. The king is reproached for his parsimony ;
why should he be sparing of his purse? Started on a course
5% not his own, he gives, buys, builds, and exchanges; he as-
a ats those belonging to his own society, doing everything in a
Style becoming to a grand seignior, that is to say, throwing
money away by handfuls. One instance enables us to judge of
this: in order to assist the bankrupts Guéménée, he purchases
of them three estates for about 12,500,000 livres, which they had
7: purchased for 4,000,000; moreover, in exchange for two
domains in Brittany, which tridisbe 33,758 livres income, he


a


ee et


1 “Marie Antoinette,” zdid. vol. II. p. 377; vol. III. p. 391.


84 | THE ANCIENT REGIME.


makes over to them the principality of Dombes which produces
nearly 70,000 livres income.'. When we come to read the Red
Book further on we shall find 700,000 livres of pensions for th
Polignac family, most of them reversionary from one member to
another,_and nearly 2,000,000 of annual benefactions to the
Noailles family. The king has forgotten that his favors are
mortal blows, “the courtier who inestae 6,000 livres pension, re- —
ceiving the /ail/e of six villages.”? Each largess of the monarch, ~
considering the state of the taxes, is based on the privation of
the peasants, the sovereign through his clerks, taking bread from |
the poor to give coaches to the rich. The centre of the govern-
ment, in short, is the centre of the evil; all the wrongs and all
the miseries start from it as from a centre of pain and in-
flammation; here it is that the public abscess comes to a head,
and here will it break.


VI.


Such is the just and fatal effect of privileges turned to selfish
purposes instead of being exercised for the advantage of others.
To him who utters the word, sire or seignior means “the protec-
tor who feeds, the ancient who leads;”* with this title and for
this purpose too much cannot be granted to him, for there is no
more difficult nor more exalted function. But he must fulfil its |
duties; otherwise in the day of peril he will be left to himself.
Already, and long before the day arrives, his flock is no longer
his own; if it marches onward it is through routine; it is simply
a multitude of persons, but no longer an organized body. Whilst
in Germany and in England the feudal régime, retained or trans-
formed, still composes a living society, in France its mechanical
framework encloses only so many human particles. We still find
the material order, but we no longer find the moral order of
things. A lingering, deep-seated revolution has destroyed the
close hierarchical union of recognized supremacies and of volun
tary deferences. It is like an army in which the sentiments that
form its chiefs and those that form its subordinates have disap-
peared; grades are indicated by uniforms, but they have no hold


} Archives nationales, H, 1456, Memoir for M. Bouret de Vezelay, syndic for the creditors,

? Marquis de Mirabeau, “ Traité de la population,” p. 8r.

8 Lord, in Old Saxon, signifies ‘““he who provides food;” seZgnzor, in the Latin of th eg
middle ages, signifies ‘‘the ancient,” the head or chief of the flock.


HAP. IV. THE STRUCTURE OF SOCIETY. 85


gn consciences; all that constitutes a well-founded army, the
legitimate ascendency of officers, the justified trust of soldiers,
the daily interchange of mutual obligations, the conviction of
each being useful to all and that the chiefs are the most useful of
all, is wanting to it. How could we encounter this conviction in
an army whose staff-officers have no other occupation but to dine
out, to display their epaulettes and to receive double pay? Long
b efore the final crash France is in a state of dissolution, and she
is in a state of dissolution because the privileged classes had for-
gotten their characters as public men.
ge


BOOK SECOND.


+ Wabdits anv Characters,


CHAPTER I.


THE PRINCIPLE OF SOCIAL HABITS UNDER THE ANCIENT REGIME.—The —
Court and a life of pomp and parade.—I. The physical aspect and the
moral character of Versailles.—II. The king’s household.—lIts. officials i
and expenses.—His military family, his stable, kennel, chapel, attendants, — ;
table, LP ses wardrobe, outhouses, jek ees fa The sors 4


supper, play, evening receptions.—He is always on parade and in ee
pany.—V. Diversions of the royal family and of the court.—Lonis XV.
Louis XVI.—VI. Other similar lives.—Princes and princesses.—Seigniors —
of the court.—Financiers and parvenues. —Ambassadors, ministers, govern- — 1
ors, general officers.—VII. Prelates, seigniors and minor provincial nobles.
—The feudal aristocracy transformed into a drawing-room group.


rs

A MILITARY staff on furlough for a century and more, around a
commander-in-chief who gives fashionable entertainments is the
principle and summary of the habits of society under the ancient
régime. Hence, if we seek to comprehend them, we must first
study them at their centre and their source, that is to say, in the
court itself. Like the whole ancient régime the court is the
empty form, the surviving adornment of a military institution,
the causes of which have disappeared while the effects remain,
custom surviving utility. Formerly, in the early times of feudal-
ism, in the companionship and simplicity of the camp and the cas-
tle, the nobles served the king with their own hands, one providing
- for his house, another bringing a dish to his table, another. disrob-
ing him at night, and another looking after his falcons and horses.


i | HABITS AND CHARACTERS. 87


Still later, under Richelieu and during the Fronde,' amid the
sudden attacks and the rude exigencies of constant danger they
constitute the garrison of his hotel, forming an armed escort for
him, and a retinue of ever-ready swordsmen. Now as formerly
phey are equally assiduous around his person, wearing their
swords, awaiting a word, and eager to do his bidding, while those
of highest rank seemingly perform domestic service in his house-
e ‘Pompous parade, however, has been substituted for effi-
sient surface; they are elegant adornments only, and no longer
seful instrumentalities ; they act along with the king Who is him-
self an actor, their persons serving as royal decoration.


3


It must be admitted that the decoration is successful, and, that
since the fétes of the Italian Renaissance, more magnificent
displays have not been seen. Let us follow the file of carriages
which, from Paris to Versailles, rolls steadily along like a river.
Certain horses called “des enragés,” fed in a particular way, go
and come in three hours.? One feels, at the first glance, as if he
were in a city of a particular stamp, suddenly erected and at one
stroke, like a prize-medal for a special purpose, of which only one
is made, its form being a thing apart as well as its origin and use.
In vain is it one of the largest cities of the kingdom, with its
oe of eighty thousand souls ;? it is filled, peopled, and
ecupied by the life of a single man; it is simply a royal residence,
anged entirely to provide for the wants, the pleasures, the
ice, the guardianship, the society, the display of a king.
Here and there, in corners and around it, are inns, stalls, taverns,
hovels for laborers and for drudges, for dilapidated soldiers and
‘accessory menials; these tenements necessarily exist, since
Mechanicians are essential to the most magnificent apotheosis.


_1Mémoires de Laporte” (1632). ‘‘M. d’Epernon came to Bordeaux, where he found
His Eminence very ill. He visited him regularly every morning, having two hundred
uards to accompany him to the door of his chamber.” ‘‘ Mémoires de Retz.” ‘‘Wecame

© the audience, M. de Beaufort and myself, with a corps of nobles which might number
three hundred gentlemen; MM. the princes had with them nearly a thousand gentlemen.”
All the memoirs of the time show on every page that these escorts were necessary to make
; 0 repel sudden attacks.

_ Mercier, ‘‘ Tableau de Paris,” IX. 3.
bl a 8 Leroi, ‘‘ Histoire de Versailles,” II. 21. (70,000 fixed population and 10,000 floating pop-
__ ulation according to the registers of the mayoralty.)


sayy: THE ANCIENT REGIME. BOOK Is


The rest, however, consists of sumptuous hotels and edifices,
sculptured facades, cornices and balustrades, monumental stair-
ways, seigniorial architecture, regularly spaced and disposed, as in
a procession, around the vast and grandiose palace where all thi
terminates. Here are the fixed abodes of the noblest families ; to
the right of the palace are the hétels de Bourbon, a
de la Trémoille, de Condé, de Maurepas, de Bouillon, d’Eu, de
Noailles, de Penthiévre, de Livry, du Comte de la Marche, c 3
Broglie, du Prince de Tingry, d’Orléans, de Chatillon, de Villerry .
d’Harcourt, de Monaco; on the left are the pavilions d’Orléans, =
d’Harcourt, the hétels de Chevreuse, de Babelle, de Hopital,
d’Antin, de Dangeau, de Pontchartrain—no end to their enume-—
ration. Add to these those of Paris, all those which, ten leagues
around, at Sceaux, at Génevilliers, at Brunoy, at Ile-Adam, at
Rancy, at Saint-Ouen, at Colombes, at Saint-Germain, at Marly,
at Bellevue, in countless places, form a crown of architectural
flowers, from which daily issue as many gilded wasps to shine and”
buzz about Versailles, the centre of all lustre and affluence.
About a hundred of these are “ presented” each year, men and
women, which makes about two or three thousand in all;?* this
forms the king’s society, the ladies who courtesy before him, and
the seigniors who accompany him in his carriage; their hotels are ~
near by, or within reach, so as to fill his drawing-room or his |
antechamber at all hours. a

A drawing-room like this calls for proportionate dependencies ; —
the hotels and buildings at Versailles devoted to the private
service of the king and his attendants number by hundreds. No
human existence since that of the Czesars has so spread itself out
in the sunshine. In the Rue des Reservoirs we have the old
hotel and the new one of the governor of Versailles, the hotel
of the tutor to the children of the Comte d’Artois, the ward-
robe of the crown, the building for the dressing-rooms and
green-rooms of the actors who perform at the palace, with the
stables belonging to Monsieur. In the Rue des Bon-Enfants are
the hotel of the keeper of the wardrobe, the lodgings for the
fountain-men, the hotel of the officers of the Comtesse de, Pro-
vence. In the Rue dela Pompe, the hotel of the grand-provost,
the Duke of Orleans’s stables, the hotel of the Comte d’Artois’s


1 Warroquier, ‘Etat de la France” (1789). The list of persons presented at court be.
tween 1779 and 1789, contains 463 men and 4r4 women. Vol. II. p. 515.


HAP: I. HABITS AND CHARACTERS. 89°


_ guardsmen, the queen’s stables, the pavilion des Sources. In the
Rue Satory the Comtesse d’Artois’s stables, Monsieur’s English’
Be, the king’s ice-houses, the riding-hall of the king’s light-
1 sind, the garden belonging to the hotel of the treasurers
of the buildings. Judge of other streets by these four. One
‘cannot take a hundred steps without encountering some accessory
of the palace,—the hotel of the staff of the body-guard, the hotel
of the staff of light-horseguards, the immense hotel of the body-
suard itself, the hotel of the gendarmes of the guard, the hotel
of the grand wolf-huntsman, of the grand falconer, of the grand
. otsman, of the grand-master, of the commandant of the
? anal, of the comptroller-general, of the superintendent of the
uildings, and of the chancellor; buildings devoted to falconry,
Bnd the vol de cabinet, to boar hinitine, to the grand kennel, to
the duphin kennel, to the kennel for untrained dogs, to the court
¢ iages, to shops and storehouses connected with amusements,
© the great stable and the little stables, to other stables in the
Que de Limoges, in the Rue Royale, and in the Avenue Saint-
Jloud ; to the king’s vegetable garden comprising twenty-nine
ardens and four terraces; to the great habitation occupied by
wo thousand persons, with other tenements called “ Louises”
m which the king assigned temporary or permanent lodgings,
words on paper render no physical impression of the physi-
cal enormity.
_ At the present day nothing remains of this old Versailles,
mutilated and appropriated to other uses, but fragments, which
_ hevertheless, go and see. Observe those three avenues meeting
_ at the great square, two hundred and forty feet broad and twenty-
~ four hundred long, and not too large for the gathering crowds,
display, the blinding velocity of the escorts in full speed and
Of the carriages running “at death’s door;”! observe the two
tables facing the chateau with their railings one hundred and
_‘Binety-two feet long, costing in 1682, three millions, that is to
_ Say, fifteen millions to-day; so ample and beautiful that, even
Beer - Louis XIV. himself, they sometimes served as a cavalcade
ircus for the princes, sometimes as a theatre, and sometimes
is a ball-room; then let the eye follow the development of the
igantic semi-circular square which, from railing to railing and


| ___ 1 People were run over almost every day in Paris by the fashionable vehicles, it being the
habit of the great to ride very fast.


go. THE ANCIENT REGIME. BOOK Te.


from court to court, ascends and slowly decreases, at first b
tween the hotels of the ministers and then between the t
colossal wings, terminating in the ostentatious frame of the mz 1
ble court where pilasters, statues, pediments, and multiplied ar
accumulated ornaments, story above story, carry the ee a |
ularity of their lines and the overcharged mass of their a
tion up to the sky. According to a bound manuscript bearing
the arms of Mansart, the palace cost 153,000,000, that is to say,
about 750,000,000 francs of to-day:+ when a king aims at ir
posing display this is the cost of his lodging. Now turn the e a
to the other side, towards the gardens, and this self-display be-
comes the more impressive. The parterres and the park are,
again, a drawing-room in the open air; there is nothing natural
of nature here; she is put in order and rectified wholly with
a view to society; this is no place to be alone and to relax
oneself, but a place for promenades and the exchange of polite
salutations. ‘Those formal groves are walls and hangings; those
shaven yews are vases and lyres. ‘The parterres are flowering
carpets. In those straight, rectilinear avenues the king with his
cane in his hand, groups around him his entire retinue. )
ladies in brocade dresses, expanding into skirts measuring twenty=
four feet in circumference, easily find room on the steps-of the
staircases.” Those verdant cabinets afford shade for a princely
collation. Under that circular portico, all the seigniors enjoyi
the privilege of entering it witness together the play of a new
jet d'eau, Their counterparts greet them even in the marble
and bronze figures which people the paths and basins, in the
dignified face of an Apollo, in the theatrical air of a Jupiter, i
the worldly ease or studied nonchalance of a Diana or a Venus
The stamp of the court, deepened through the joint efforts o
society for a century, is so strong that it is graven on each detai
as on the whole, and on material objects as on matters of the
intellect. |


ng
—


1 153,282,827 livres, ro sous, 3 deniers. ‘‘ Souvenirs d’un page dela cour de Louis XVI,
by the Count d’Hézecques, p. 142. In 1690, before the chapel and theatre were constructed
it had already cost 100,000,000, (St. Simon, XII. 514. Memoirs of Marinier, clerk of tht
king’s buildings.)

? Museum of Engravings, National Library. ‘‘ Histoire de France par estampes,”’ Jassd#t
and particularly the plans and views of Versailles, by Aveline, also, ‘‘the drawing of ac
lation given by M. le Prince in the Labyrinth of Chantilly,” Aug. 29, 1687. -


HABITS AND CHARACTERS. gl.


oss: Il.

pene foregoing is but the framework; before 1789 it was com-
le etely filled up. “ You have seen nothing,” says Chateaubriand,
if you have not seen the pomp of Versailles, even after the dis-
| a nding of the king’s household; Louis XIV. was always there.” ?
it is a swarm of liveries, uniforms, costumes and equipages as
rilliant and as varied as in a picture. I should be glad to have
ived eight days in this society. It was made expressly to be
yainted, being specially designed for the pleasure of the eye,
ike an operatic scene. But how can we of to-day imagine peo-
le for whom life was wholly operatic? At that time a grandee
as obliged to live in great state; his retinue and his trappings
rmed a part of his personality; he fails in doing himself justice
f these are not as ample and as splendid as he can make them;
e would be as much mortified at any blank in his household as
ve with a hole in our coats. Should he make any curtailment
le would decline in reputation; on Louis XVI. undertaking re-
wms the court says that he acts like a bourgeois. When a
rince or princess becomes of age a household is formed for them ;
hen a prince marries a household is formed for his wife; and by
household it must be understood that it is a pompous display
fifteen or twenty distinct services,—stables, a hunting-train, a
hapel, a faculty, the bedchamber and the wardrobe, a chamber
f disbursements, a table, pantry, kitchen, and wine-cellars, a
uitery, a fowrriére, a common kitchen, a cabinet, a council;? she
ould feel that she was not a princess without all this. There
we 274 appointments in the household of the Duc d’Orléans,
110 in that of Mesdames, 68 in that of Madame Elisabeth, 239
o that of the Comtesse d’Artois, 256 in that of the Comtesse de
rovence and 496 in that of the Queen. When the formation of
household for Madame Royale, one month old, is necessary,
‘the queen,” writes the Austrian ambassador, “ desires to sup-
ess a baneful indolence, a useless affluence of attendants and
| @yery practice tending to give birth to sentiments of pride. In
“Spite of the said retrenchment the household of the young prin-
is to consist of nearly eighty persons destined to the sole


a FE Memoirs, I. 221. He was presented at court February 19, 1787.

* “3 oh these details cf. Warroquier, vol. I. Aass¢m. Archives imperiales, O, 710 37s, the
ku z's household, expenditure of 1771. D’Argenson, February 25, 1752. In 1771 three
nil i ons are expended on the installation of the Count d’Artois. A suite of rooms for Mme.
delaide cost 800,000 livres. ‘


92 THE ANCIENT REGIME.


service of her Royal Highness.” 1 The civil household of 1 Mor
sieur comprises 420 appointments, his military househOleen 7
that of the Comte d’Artois 237 and his civil household 4
Three-fourths of them are for display; with their anbkoul
and laces, their unembarrassed and polite expression, their att en
tive and discreet air, their easy way of saluting, walking a
smiling, they appear well in an antechamber placed in lines,

scattered in groups in a gallery; I should have liked to conte
plate even the stable and kitchen array, the figures filling up t
background of the picture. By these stars of inferior magnitud
we may judge of the splendor of the royal sun. . ee
-. The king must have guards, infantry, cavalry, body-guare Is ;
French guardsmen, Swiss guardsmen, Cent Suisses, light-horsi se:
——s gendarmes of the guard, gate-guardsmen, in all, 9,050

men,” costing annually- 7,681,000 livres. Four companies of th e
French guard, and two of the Swiss guard parade every day i
the court of the ministers between the two railings, and when th ;
king issues in his carriage to go to Paris or Fontainebleau the
spectacle is magnificent. Four trumpeters in front and —
behind, the Swiss guards on one side and the French guar
on the other, form a line as far as it can reach.* The Cen
Suisses march ahead of the horsemen in the costume of t
sixteenth century, wearing the halberd, ruff, plumed hat andl he
ample parti-colored striped doublet; alongside of these are th
provost- -guard with scarlet facings and gold frogs, and compa-
nies of yeomanry bristling with gold and silver. ‘The officers of
the various corps, the trumpeters and the musicians, covered wi
gold and silver lace, are dazzling to look at; the kettledrum
suspended at the saddle-bow, overcharged with painted anc
gilded ornaments, is a curiosity for a glass case; the negrc
cymbal-player of the French guards resembles the sultan of 2
fairy-tale. Behind the carriage and alongside of it trot th¢
body-guards, with sword and carbine, wearing red breeches, hig
black boots, and a blue coat sewn with white embroidery, all o


+


1 Marie Antoinette, ‘‘ Correspondance secréte,” by d’Arneth and Geffroy, III. 292. Lett
of Mercy, January 25,1779. Warroquier, in 1789, mentions only fifteen places inthe hous
hold of Madame Royale. This, along with other indications, shows the inadequacy
official statements.

? The number ascertainable after the reductions of 1775 and 1776, and before those of 178
See Warroquier, vol. I. Necker, ‘‘ Administration des Finances,” II. 119.

8 “La Maison du Roi en 1786,” colored engravings in the Museum of Engravings.


HABITS AND CHARACTERS. 93


unquestionable gentlemen; there were twelve hundred of
ese selected among the nobles and according to size; among
hem are the guards de da manche, still more intimate, who at
hurch and on ceremonial occasions, in white doublets starred with
ilver and gold spangles, holding their damascene partisans in
heir hands, always remain standing and turned towards the king
so as to see his person from all sides.” Thus is his protection
msured. Being a gentleman the king is a cavalier and he must
ve a suitable stable,! 1,857 horses, 217 vehicles, 1,458 men
yhom he clothes, the liveries costing 540,000 francs a year;
resides these there were 20 tutors and sub-tutors, almoners,
rofessors, cooks, and valets to govern, educate and serve the
ages; and again about thirty physicians, apothecaries, nurses for
: e sick, intendants, treasurers, workmen, and licensed and paid
o hants for the accessories of the service; in all more than
men. Horses to the amount of 2 50,000 francs are pur-
Bised yearly, and there are stock-stables in Limousin and in
0 dy to draw on for supplies. 287 horses are exercised
aily in the two riding-halls; there are 443 saddle-horses in the
nall stable, 437 in the large one, and these are not sufficient
the “vivacity of the service.” The whole cost 4,600,000
res in 1775, which sum reaches 6,200,000 livres in 1787.”

ill another spectacle should be seen with one’s own eyes,—

le pages,? the grooms, the laced pupils, the silver-button
upils, the boys of the little livery in silk, the instrumentalists
anc the mounted messengers of the stable. ‘The use of the horse
sa feudal art; no luxury is more natural to a man of quality.
think of the stables at Chantilly which are palaces. To convey
in idea of a well-educated and genteel man he was then called


1 Archives nationales, Ol, 738. Report by M. Tessier (1780), on the large and small
tables. The queen’s stables comprise 75 vehicles and 330 horses. These are the veritable
ures taken from secret manuscript reports, showing the inadequacy of official statements.
€ Versailles Almanach of 1775 for instance, states that there were only 335 men in the
ables while we see that in reality the number was four or five times as many. ‘‘ Previous
ll the eforms, says a witness, I believe that the number of the king’s horses amounted
© 3,000.” (D’ Hézecques, ‘“‘Souvenirs d’un page de Louis XVI.,” p. rer.)
2a Maison du Roi justifiée par. un soldat citoyen,” (1786) according to statements
ublished by the government. ‘‘ La future maison du roi’’ (1790). ‘*' The two stables cost
786, the larger one 4,207,606 livres, and the smaller 3,509,402 livres, a total of 7,717,058
2s, of which 486,546 livres were for the purchase of horses.”
“On my arrival at Versailles (1786), there were 150 pages not including those of the
rinces of the blood who lived at Paris. A page's coat cost 1,500 livres, (crimson velvet
broidered with gold on all the sr ai and a hat with feather and Spanish point lace.) ””
Hézecques, 2d7d. 112.


94 THE ANCIENT REGIME.


“ an accomplished cavalier ;” in fact, his importance
manifest only when he was in the saddle, on a blood-horse
himself. Another genteel taste, the effect of the prece ing
the chase. It costs the king from 1,100,000 to 1,200,000 liv:
year, and requires 280 horses besites those of the two stables. ~
more varied or more complete equipment could not bei imag a} :
—a pack of hounds for the boar, another for the wolf, ano’
for the roe-buck, a cast, (of hawks) for the crow, a cast for z
magpie, a cast for merlins, a cast for hares, a cast for the f
In 1783, 179,194 livres are expended for feeding horses
53,412 livres for feeding dogs.’ The entire territory, ten cae
around Paris, is a game-preserve; “not a gun could be fired t
accordingly the plains are seen covered with paetideel
tomed to man, quietly picking up the grain and never stir =
he passes.” Add to this the princes’ captainries extending as fa
as Villers-Cotterets and Orleans; these form an almost contit
ous circle around Paris, thirty leagues in circumference wh
game, protected, replaced and multiplied, swarms for the pleasu
of theking. The park of Versailles alone forms an enclosure oft ni
than ten leagues. The forest of Rambouillet embraces 25,000
arpents (30,000 acres). Herds of seventy-five and eighty sta
are encountered around Fontainebleau. No true hunter cou
read the minute-book of the chase without feeling an imp se of
envy. The wolf-hounds run twice a week and they take for
wolves a year. Between 1743 and 1744 Louis XV. runs dow
6,400 stags. Louis XVI. writes August 30th, 1781: “Killed 46¢
pieces to-day.” In 1780 he brings down 20,534 pieces; in 1781
20,291; in fourteen years, 189,251 pieces, besides 1,254 stags
while boars and bucks are proportionate; and it must be note
that this is all done by his own hand since his parks appro: C
his houses. ae
Such is, in fine, the character of a “ well-appointed house old,
that is to say, provided with its dependencies and_ service;
Everything is within reach; it is a complete world in itself a
self-sufficing. One exalted being attaches to and gathers aro
it, with universal foresight and minuteness of detail, every a


1 Archives nationales, O01, 778. Memorial on the hunting-train between 1760 and 1792 4
especially the report of 1786. dey ;
2 Mercier, ‘Tableau de Paris,” vol. I. p. rr; v. p. 62. D’Hézecques, 2did. 253. “‘Je
nal de Louis XVI.” published by Nicolardot, passzm.


HABITS AND CHARACTERS. 95


tenance it employs or can. possibly employ. Each prince,
each princess thus has a professional faculty and a chapel ;' it
rould not answer for the almoner who says mass or the doctor
vho looks after their health to be obtained outside. So much
stro: nger is the reason that the king should have ministrants of
his stamp; his chapel embraces seventy-five almoners, chaplains,
nfessors, masters of the oratory, clerks, announcers, carpet-
arers, choristers, copyists, and composers of sacred music;
s faculty is composed of forty-eight physicians, surgeons, apoth-
‘caries, oculists, operators, bone-setters, distillers, chiropodists
nd spagyrists (a species of alchemists). We must still note his de-
E nent of profane music consisting of one hundred and twen-
y- eight vocalists, dancers, instrumentalists, directors and superin-
endents; his library corps of forty-three keepers, readers, inter-
vr eters, engravers, medallists, geographers, binders and printers ;

he staff of ceremonial display, sixty-two heralds, sword-bearers,
shers and musicians ; the staff of housekeepers consisting of six-
y-eight marshals, guides and commissaries. I omit other services
1 haste to reach the most important,—that of the table, a fine
ouse and good housekeeping being known by the table.

There are three sections of the table service ;” the first for the
ing and his younger children; the second, called the little ordi-
ary, for the table of the grand-master, the grand-chamberlain and
e princes and princesses living with the king; the third, called
é great ordinary, for the grand-master’s second table, that of
h butlers of. the king’s household, the almoners, the gentlemen
h waiting, and that of the vadets-de-chamoére, in all three hun-
red and eighty-three officers of the table and one hundred and
hree waiters at an expense of 2,177,771 livres; besides this
ere are 389,173 livres appropriated to the table of Madame
isabeth, and 1,093,547 livres for that of Mesdames, the total
ing 3,660,491 livres for the table. The wine-merchant fur-
ished wine to the amount of 300,000 francs per annum, and


t


1 Warroquier, vol. I. sassivz. Household of the Queen: for the chapel 22 persons, the
culty 6. That of Monsieur, the chapel 22, the faculty 2x. That of Madame, the chapel
ie faculty 9. ‘That of the Comte d’Artois, the chapel 20, the faculty 28. That of the
‘omtes se d’Artois, the chapel 19, the faculty 17. That of the Duc d’Orléans, the chapel
1e faculty 19.
2 Archives nationales, Ol, 738. Report by M. Mesnard de Choisy, (March, 1780). They
see a reform (August 17, 1780). ‘‘La Maison du roi justifiée” (1789), p. 24. In 1788 the
es of the table are reduced to 2,870,999 livres, of which 600,000 livres are appropri-
dito Bisdiaes for their table.


96 THE ANCIENT REGIME.


the purveyor game, meat and fish at a cost of 1,000,000 livr
Only to fetch water from Ville-d’Avray and to convey serv:
waiters and provisions required fifty horses hired at the
70,591 francs per annum. ‘The privilege of the royal prin
and princesses “to send to the bureau for fish on fast days wh
not residing regularly at the court” amounts in 1778, to 17
livres. On reading in the Almanach the titles of the offic
holders we see a Gargantua’s feast spread out before us, ‘
formal hierarchy of the kitchens, so many grand officials of t
table—the butlers, comptrollers and comptroller-pupils, ©
clerks and gentlemen of the pantry, the cup-bearers and cary
the officers and equerries of the kitchen, the chiefs, assistants ¢
head-cooks, the ordinary scullions, turnspits and claret,
common gardeners and salad gardeners, laundry servants, fp
try-cooks, plate-changers, table-setters, crockery-keepers, ‘¢ anc
broach-bearers, the butler of the table of the head-butler, —an
entire procession of broad-braided backs and imposing rounc
bellies, with grave countenances,which, with order andconvi tion,
exercise their functions before the saucepans and around t
buffets.

One step more and we enter the sanctuary, the king’s ape
ment. ‘Two principal dignitaries preside over this and <achil
under him about a hundred subordinates. On one side is -
grand chamberlain with his first gentlemen of the bedebatalil :
the pages of the bedchamber, their governors and instructors,
the ushers of the antechamber, with the four first valets-de-
chambre in ordinary, sixteen special valets serving in turn, his
regular and special cloak-bearers, his barbers, upholsterers
watch-menders, waiters and porters; on the other hand is the
grand-master of the wardrobe, with the masters of the wardrobe
and the valets of the wardrobe regular and special, the ordinary
trunk-carriers, mall-bearers, tailors, laundry servants, starche
and common waiters, with the gentlemen, officers and secretarie
in ordinary of the cabinet, in all 198 persons for domestic servic«
like so many domestic utensils for every personal want or ¢
sumptuous pieces of furniture for the decoration of the apa
ment. Some of them fetch the mall and the balls, others ho
the mantle and cane, others comb the king’s hair and dry hi
off after a bath, others drive the mules which transport his be
others watch his pet greyhounds in his room, others fold, put ¢


HABITS AND CHARACTERS. 97


nd tie his cravat, and others fetch and carry off his easy chair.!
3ome there are whose sole business it is to fill a corner which
nust not be left empty. Certainly, with respect to ease of
eportment and appearance these are the most conspicuous of
il; being so close to the master they are under obligation to
ippear well; in such proximity their bearing must not create a
liscord.

Such is the king’s household, and I have only described one
yf his residences. He has a dozen of them besides Versailles,
reat and small,—Marly, the two Trianons, la Muette, Meudon,
hoisy, Saint-Hubert, Saint-Germain, Fontainebleau, Compiégne,
aint-Cloud, Rambouillet,? without counting the Louvre, the
vuileries and Chambord, with their parks and hunting-grounds,
leir governors, inspectors, comptrollers, concierges, fountain-
enders, gardeners, sweepers, scrubbers, mole-catchers, wood-
angers, mounted and foot-guards, in all more than a thousand
ersons, Naturally he entertains, plans and builds, and, in this
yay expends three or four millions per annum:? | Naturally, also,
repairs and renews his furniture; in 1778, which is an
verage year, this costs him 1,936,853 livres. Naturally, also,
e takes his guests along with him and defrays their expenses,
hey and their attendants; at Choisy, in 1780, there are sixteen
ables with three hundred and forty-five seats besides the dis-
‘ibutions ; at Saint-Cloud, in 1785, there are twenty-six tables;
n excursion to Marly of twenty-one days is a matter of 120, 000
vres extra expense;” the excursion to Fontainebleau has cost
;much as 400,000 and 500,000 livres. His removals, on the
werage, cost half a million and more per annum.‘ To complete


a


ur idea of this immense paraphernalia it must be borne in


. D’Hézecques, bid. 212. Under Louis XVI. there were two chair-carriers to the king,
ho came every morning, in velvet coats and with swords by their sides, to inspect and
apty the object of their functions; this post was worth to each one. 20,000 livres per
2 In 1787, Louis XVI. either demolishes or orders to be sold, Madrid, la Muette and Choisy,
$ acquisitions, however, Saint-Cloud, Ile-Adam and Rambouillet, greatly surpassing his
* Necker, “‘Compte-rendu,” II. 452. Archives nationales, Ol, 736. ‘‘La Maison du roi
stafes ” (1789). Constructions in 1775, 3,924,400, in 1786, 4,000,000, in 1788, 3,077,000
res. Furniture in 1788, 1,700,000 livres.

. Here are some of the casual expenses. (Archives nationales, O!, 2805). On‘the birth
“the Duc de Bourgogne in 1751, 604,477 livres. For the Dauphin’s marriage in 1770,
P 977° livres. For the marriage of the Comte d’ Artois in 1773, 2,016,221 livres. For the
Sronation in 1775, 835,862 livres. For plays, concerts and balls in 1778, 481,744 livres, and

779) 382,986 livres.


98 THE ANCIENT REGIME.


mind that the artisans and merchants belonging to these vari
ous official bodies are obliged, through the privileges they « en
joy, to follow the court “on its journeys that it may be provide
on the spot with apothecaries, armorers, gunsmiths, sellers ¢
silken and woollen hosiery, butchers, bakers, embroiderers, pub oi
cans, cobblers, belt-makers, candle-makers, hatters, pork-deale ;
surgeons, shoemakers, curriers, cooks, pinkers, gilders. and er
gravers, spur-makers, sweetmeat-dealers, furbishers, old-clot

brokers, glove-perfumers, watchmakers, booksellers, linen-drape
wholesale and retail wine-dealers, carpenters, coarse-jewelt T)
haberdashers, jewellers, parchment-makers, dealers in rim
chicken-roasters, fish-dealers, purveyors of hay, straw and a
hardware-sellers, saddlers, tailors, gingerbread and starch-deal
fruiterers, dealers in glass and in violins.”+ One might cal i
an oriental court which, to be set in motion, moves an entire
world: “when it begins to move one has to take the post i
advance to go anywhere.” The total is near 4,000 persons for -th
king’s civil household, 9,000 to 10,000 for his military household,
at least 2,000 for those of his kindred, in all 15,000 individuals |
at an expense of forty and fifty millions livres, which wo
be equal to double the amount to-day and which, at that time,
constituted one-tenth of the public revenue.” We have hereg h
central figure of the monarchical show. However grand a
costly it may be, it is only proportionate to its purpose, since th h |
court is a public institution and the aristocracy, with nothing t :O
do, devotes itself to filling up the king’s drawing-room, |


Il.


Two causes maintain this affluence, one the feudal form stil
preserved, and the other the new centralization just introduce ;


1 Warroquier, vol I. did. “Marie Antoinette,” by d’Arneth and Geffroy. Letter of
Mercy, Sept. 16, 1773. ‘‘ The multitude of people of various occupations following th
king on his travels resembles the progress of an army.”

2 The civil households of the king, queen, and Mme. Elisabeth, of Mesdames, and Mn
Royale, 25,700,000. ‘To the king’s brothers and sisters-in-law, 8,040,000. ‘The king
military household, 7,681,000, (Necker, ‘‘Compte-rendu,” II. 119). From 1774 to 1788 t
expenditure on the households of the king and his family varies from 32 to 36 millions, n
including the military household, (‘La Maison du roi justifiée”’). In 1789 the households
the king, queen, Dauphin, royal children and of Mesdames, cost 25,000,000. Those
Monsieur and Madame, 3,656,000; those of the Count and Countess d’Artois, 3,656,00
those of the Dukes de Berri and d’Angouléme, 700,000; salaries continued to persons f
merly in the princes’ service, 228,000. ‘The total is 33,240,000. To this must be Ped
king’s military household and two millions in the princes’ appanages. (A general a
of fixed incomes and expenditure on the first of May, 1789, rendered by the mi ie
finances to the committee on finances of the National Assembly. ) _


.P. I. HABITS AND CHARACTERS. 99


0 one placing the royal service in the hands of the nobles, and the
other converting the nobles into place-hunters.

Through the duties of the palace the highest nobility live
“with the king, residing under his roof; the grand-almoner is |
_M. de Montmorency-Laval, bishop of Metz; the first almoner
‘is M. de Bussuéjouls, bishop of Senlis; the grand-master of
‘France is the Prince de Condé; the first royal butler is the
“Comte d’Escars; the second is the Marquis de Montdragon ;
the. master of the pantry is the Duke de Brissac; the chief cup-
bearer is the Marquis de Verneuil; the chief carver is the Mar-
‘quis de la Chesnaye; the first gentlemen of the bedchamber are
the Ducs de Richelieu, de Durfort, de Villequier, and de Fleury ;
e grand-master of the wardrobe is the Duc de la Roche-
fe Bald: Liancourt; the masters of the wardrobe are the Comte
de Boisgelin and the Marquis de Chauvelin; the captain of the
‘fe Uconry is the Chevalier du Forget; the cuain of the boar-
hunt is the Marquis d’Ecquevilly; the superintendent of
edifices is the Comte d’Angevillier; the grand-equerry is the
Prince de Lambesc; the master of the hounds is the Duc de
Penthiévre; the er master of ceremonies is the Marquis de
Bréze ; the grand-master of the household is the Marquis de la
uze; the captains of the guards are the Ducs d’Agen, de Vil-
lery, de Brissac, d’Aguillon, and de Biron, the Princes de Poix,
Je Luxembourg and de Soubise; the provost of the hotel, is the |
Marquis de Tourzel; the governors of the residences and cap-
4 “ of the chase are the Duc de Noailles, Marquis de Champ-
cenetz, Baron de Champlost, Duc de Coigny, Comte de Modena,
Comte de Montmorin, Duc de Laval, Comte de Brienne, Duc
@Orléans, and the Duc de Gévres.! All these seigniors are the
‘king’s necessary intimates, his permanent guests and generally
hereditary, dwelling under his roof, in close and daily intercourse
with him since they are “his folks” (gens)? and perform domestic
Service about his person. Add to these their equals, as noble
and nearly. as numerous, dwelling with the queen, with Mes-
dames, with Mme. Elisabeth, with the Comte and Comtesse de
Provence and the Comte and Comtesse d’Artois. And these
are only the heads of the service; if, below them in rank and


or 1 Warroquier, ibid. (x789) vol. I., passim. ;
. Cal ivjes oo of the Comte d’ rhstois on —cngeicsiiaciate. the officers of his household to his


a


“100 } THE ANCIENT REGIME.


eitide I count the titular nobles I find, among others, 68 a
moners or chaplains, 170 gentlemen of the bedchamber ‘or -
waiting, 117 gentlemen of the stable or of the huntioe, ¢ i
148 pages, 114 titled ladies in waiting, besides all the of :
even to the smallest of the military household, without count
1,400 ordinary guards who, verified by the genealogist, are ad
mitted by virtue of their title to pay their court.t Such is the
fixed body of recruits for the royal receptions; the distinctive
trait of this régime is the conversion of its servants into “sues
the drawing-room being filled from the anteroom. 77
Not that the drawing-room needs to be filled in this manne:
Being the source of all preferment and of every favor, it is nat-
ural that it should overflow; in our levelling society, that of an”
insignificant deputy, or of a mediocre journalist, or of a fashion-
able woman is full of courtiers under the name of friends and
visitors. Moreover, here, to be present is an obligation; it might
be called a continuation of ancient feudal homage; the staff of
nobles is maintained as the retinue of its born general. In the
language of the day, it is called “paying one’s duty to the king.”
Absence, in the sovereign’s eyes, would be a sign of independence”
as well as of indifference, while submission as, well as assiduity is
his due. In this respect we must study the institution aes he
beginning. ‘The eyes of Louis XIV. go their rounds at every —
moment, “on arising or retiring, on passing into his apart. ic
ments, in his gardens, . . . nobody escapes, even those who |
hoped they were not seen; it was a demerit with some, and the
most distinguished, not to make the court their ordinary sojourn,
to others to come to it but seldom, and certain disgrace to those
who never, or nearly never, came.”” Henceforth, the main
thing, for the first personages in the kingdom, men and women,
ecclesiastics and laymen, the grand affair, the first duty in life, the
true occupation, is to be at all hours and in every place under the
king’s eye, within reach of his voice and of his glance. “Who
ever,” says La Bruyére, “considers that the king’s countenance
is the courtier’s supreme felicity, that he passes his life looking or


1 The number of light-horsemen and of gendarmes was reduced in 1775 and in 1776; bo
bodies were suppressed in 1787.
2 Saint-Simon, ‘‘ Mémoires,” XVI. 456. This need of being always surrounded continu
up to the last moment; in 1791, the queen exclaimed bitterly, speaking of the nobili
“when any proceeding of ours displeases them they are sulky; no one comes to my tab
the king retires alone; we have to suffer for our misfortunes.” Mme. Campan, II. 177. |


HAP, I. “HABITS AND CHARACTERS. ) 101


it and within sight of it, will comprehend to some extent how
‘to see God, constitutes the glory and happiness of the saints.”
‘There were at this time prodigies of voluntary assiduity and sub-
jection. The Duc de Fronsac, every morning at seven o’clock,
a winter and in summer, stationed himself, at his father’s com-
‘mand, at the foot of the small stairway leading to the chapel, solely
to shake hands with Mme. de Maintenon on her leaving for St.
Cyr. 1 «Pardon me, Madame,” writes the Duc de Richelieu
, o her, “the great liberty I take in presuming to send you the
if etter which I have written to the king, begging him on my
knees that he will occasionally allow me to pay my court to him
t Ruel, for 7 would rather die than pass two months without see-
ing him.” ‘The true courtier follows the prince as a shadow fol-
lows its body; such, under Louis XIV., was the Duc de la
Rochefoucauld, the master of the hounds. ‘He never missed
the king’s rising or retiring, both changes of dress every day, the
hunts and the promenades, likewise every day, for ten years in
succession, never sleeping away from the place where the king
rested, and yet on a footing to demand leave,—but not to stay away
all night, for he had not slept out of Paris once in forty years,—but
to go and dine away from the court, and not be present on the
ic.” If, later, and under less exacting masters, and in
the general laxity of the eighteenth century, this discipline is
relaxed, the institution nevertheless subsists;? in default of
Fob: dience, tradition, interest and amour- papier suffice for the
people of the court. To approach the king, to be a domestic in
his household, an usher, a cloak-bearer, a valet, is a privilege
that is purchased, even in 1789, for thirty, forty, and a hun-
dred thousand livres; so much greater the reason why it is a
Pp ivilege to form a part of his society, the most honorable, the
most useful, and the most coveted of all. In the first place, it is
a proof of race. A man, to follow the king in the chase, and a
yoman, to be presented to the queen, must previously satisfy the
renec Sait, and by authentic documents, that his or her nobility
‘goes back to the year r400. In the next place, it ensures good
fortune. This drawing-room is the only place within reach


1 Duc de Lévis, ‘Souvenirs et Portraits,” 29. Mme. de Maintenon, “Correspondance.”
_ 2M. de V—— who was promised a king’s lieutenancy or command yields it to one of
‘Mme. de Pompadour’s protégés, obtaining in lieu of it the part of exemft in ‘Tartuffe,”
played by the seigniors before the king in the small cabinet. (Mme. de Hausset, 168).
“M. de V— thanked Madame as if she had made him a duke.” :
> ae


102 i THE ANCIENT REGIME. —*BOOK Al


of royal favors; accordingly, up to 1789, the great families never
stir away Ss Versailles, and day and night they lay.in a
bush. The valet of the Marshal de Noailles says to him a
night on closing his curtains, “At what hour will Monseig a
be awakened?” “At ten o’clock, if no one dies during the
night.”! Old courtiers are again found who, “eighty years of
age, have passed forty- -five on their feet in the antechambers of
the king, of the POBES and of the ministers. ... You have
only three things to do,” says one of them to a dcbutate “spea :
well of SATO, ask for every vacancy, and sit down when ;
you can.” Hence, the king always has a crowd around him. |
The Comtesse du Barry says, on presenting her niece at court, —
the first of August, 1773, “the crowd is so great at a presenta-
tion, one can scarcely get through the antechambers.”” In De-
cember, 1774, at Fontainebleau, when the queen plays at her
own table every evening, “the apartment, though vast, is never
empty. . . . The crowd is so great that one can talk only to the

two or cpae persons with whom one is playing.” ‘The fourteen
apartments, at the receptions of ambassadors are full to oval |
flowing with seigniors and richly dressed women. On the firs’ :
of January, 1775, the queen “counted over two hundred ladies —
presented to her to pay their court.” In 1780, at Choisy, a —
table for thirty persons is spread every day for the king, another —
with thirty places for the seigniors, another with forty places for
the officers of the guard and the equerries, and one with fifty for —
the officers of the bedchamber. According to my estimate, the |
king, on getting up and on retiring, on his walks, on his hunts, —
at play, has always around him at least forty or fifty seigniors
-and, generally, a hundred, .with as many ladies, besides his at-
tendants on duty; at Fontainebleau, in 1756, although “there
were neither fétes nor ballets this year, one hundred and six ladies
were counted.” When the king holds a “grand appartement,”
when play or dancing takes place in the gallery of mirrors, four
or five hundred guests, the elect of the nobles and of the fashion,


1“ Paris, Versailles et les provinces au dix-huitiéme siécle,” II. 160, 168. Mercier,
“Tableau de Paris,” IV. 150. De Ségur, ‘‘ Mémoires,” I. 16.

2 “ Marie Antoinette,” by D’Arneth and Geffroy, Il. 27, 255, 281. ‘Gustave III.” by
Geffroy, November, 1786, bulletin of Mme. de Staél. D’Hézecques, zdéd. 231. _ Archives
nationales, O!, 736, a letter by M. Amelot, September 23, 1780. De Luynes, XV. 260, 367;
XVI. 248. 163 ladies, of which 42 are in service, appear and courtesy tothe king. 160 men
and more than roo ladies pay their respects to the Dauphin and Dauphine.


HABITS AND CHARA CLIERS. 103)


ange themselves on the benches or gather around the card and
* agnole tables! This is a spectacle to be seen, not by the im-
a oO: or through imperfect records, but with our own eyes
and on the spot, to comprehend the spirit, the effect and the
t imph of monarchical culture. In an elegantly furnished house,
he dining-room is the principal room, and never was one more
dazzling than this. Suspended from the sculptured ceiling ~
peopled with sporting cupids, descend, by. garlands of flowers
and foliage, blazing chandeliers, whose splendor is enhanced
by the tall mirrors; the light streams down in floods on‘gildings,
diamonds, and beaming, arch physiognomies, on fine busts,
and on the capacious, sparkling and garlanded dresses. The
skirts of the ladies ranged in a circle, or in tiers on the benches,
“form a rich esfalier covered with pearls, gold, silver, jewels,
spangles, flowers and fruits, with their artificial blossoms, goose-
perries, cherries, and strawberries,” a gigantic animated bouquet
of which the eye can scarcely support the brilliancy. There are
no black coats, as nowadays, to disturb the harmony. With
the hair powdered and dressed, with buckles and knots, with
cravats and ruffles of lace, in silk coats and vests of the hues of
fe 8g leaves, or of a delicate rose tint, or of celestial blue, em-
llished with gold braid and embroidery, the men are as ele-_
sant as the women. Men and women, each is a selection; they
are all of the accomplished class, gifted with every grace which
‘ace, education, fortune, leisure and custom can bestow; they
are perfect of their kind. There is not a toilet here, an air of
he head, a tone of the voice, an expression in language which
‘is not a masterpiece of worldly culture, the distilled quintessence
of all that is exquisitely elaborated by social art. Polished as the
‘society of Paris may be, it does not approach this ;” compared
‘with the court, it seems provincial. 'It is said that a hundred
thousand roses are required to make an ounce of the unique
‘perfume used by Persian kings; such is this drawing-room, the
frail vial of crystal and gold containing the substance of a
‘human vegetation.* To fill it, a great aristocracy had to be
‘transplanted to a hot-house and become sterile in fruit and


Cochin. Engravings of a masked ball, of a dress ball, of the king and queen at play, of
e interior of a theatre (1745). Costumes of Moreau (1777). Mme. de Genlis, ‘‘ Diction-
re des etiquettes,” the article parure.

Obs The-difference between the tone and language: of the court and the town was about as

pe erc eptib as that between Paris and the provinces.” (De Tilly, ‘‘ Mémoires,” I. 153.)


104 THE ANCIENT REGIME.


flowers, and then, in the royal alembic, its pure sap is CO ice
trated into a few drops of aroma. ‘The price is excessive, bi
only at this price can the most delicate perfumes be mar


ured)
IV.


"An operation of this kind absorbs him who undertakes it as
well as those who undergo it. A nobility for useful purpos

is not transformed with impunity into a nobility for ornament;
one falls himself into the ostentation which is substituted f
action. The king has a court which he is compelled to mae
tain. So much the worse if it absorbs all his time, his intellect
his soul, the most valuable portion of his active forces and the
forces of the State To be the master of a house is not an easy
task, especially when five hundred persons are to be entertained;
one must necessarily pass his life in public and be on exhibition.
Strictly speaking it is the life of an actor who is on the stage th
entire day. To support this load, and work besides, i oe
temperament of Louis XIV., due vigor of his body, the ext:
dinary firmness of his nerves, the strength of his digestion, a1 a
the regularity of his habits; his successors who come after him
grow weary or stagger ae the same load. But they cann¢
throw it off; an incessant, daily performance is inseparable ron
their position and it is imposed on them like a heavy, gilde ed,
ceremonial coat. ‘The king is expected to keep the entire aris- —
tocracy busy, consequently to make a display of himself, to pay _
back with his own person, at all hours, even the most private,
even on getting out of bed, and even in his bed, In the.
morning, at the hour named by himself beforehand,” the head


Be 4


1 The following is an example of the compulsory inactivity of the nobles—a dinner
Queen Marie Leezinska at Fontainebleau: ‘‘I was introduced into a superb saloon w
found about a dozen courtiers promenading about and a table set for as many persons,
was nevertheless prepared for but one person... . . The queen sat down while the twelve
courtiers took their positions in a semi-circle ten Seep from the table; I stood alongside of
them imitating their deferential silence. Her Majesty began to eat very fast, keeping her
eyes fixed on the plate. Finding one of the dishes to her taste she returned to it, and then,
running her eye around the circle, shesaid: ‘‘ Monsieur de Lowenthal?” On hearing this
name a fine-looking man advanced, bowing, and he replied, ‘‘ Madame?” “I find that
this ragout is fricasee chicken.” ‘‘I believe it is, Madame.” On making this answer, in
the gravest manner, the marshal, retiring backwards, resumed his position, while the queen
finished her dinner, never uttering another word and going back to her room the same eis 4
as she came.” (Memoirs of Casenova.)

2 “Under Louis XVL., who arose at seven or eight o’clock, the Zever took place at ‘all
past eleven unless hunting or ceremonies required it earlier.” There is the same ceremoni
at eleven, again in the evening on retiring, and also during the day, when he changes h
boots. (D’Hézecques, 161.)


CHAP: 1. | HABITS AND CHARACTERS. “105


alet awakens him; five series of persons enter in turn to perform
t eir duty, and, “ atinouigh very large, there are days when the

waiting-rooms can hardly contain the crowd of courtiers.” The
first one admitted is “entrée Samilicre, ” consisting of the chil-_
dren of France, the princes and princesses of the blood, and,
besides these, the chief physician, the chief surgeon and other
serviceable persons. Next, comes the “ grande entrée,” which
comprises the grand-chamberlain, the grand-master and master
of the wardrobe, the first gentlemen of the bedchamber, the
Dukes of Orleans and Penthiévre, some other highly favored
“seigniors, the ladies of honor and in waiting of the queen,
eo and other princesses, without enumerating barbers,
ailors and various descriptions of valets. Meanwhile spirits’ of
wine are poured on the king’s hands from a service of plate, and
he is then handed the basin of holy water; he crosses himself
and repeats a prayer. ‘Then he gets out of bed before all these
people and puts on his slippers. The grand-chamberlain and
t e first gentleman hand him his dressing-gown; he puts this. on
and seats himself in the chair in which he is to put on his clothes.
‘At this moment the door opens and a third group enters, which
is the “entrée des brevets” the seigniors who compose this enjoy,
in addition, the precious privilege of assisting at the “evite
coucher,” while, at the same moment there enters a detachment
of attendants, consisting of the physicians and surgeons in ordi-
, the intendants of the amusements, readers and others, and
among the latter those who preside over physical requirements;
he publicity of a royal life is so great that none of its functions
an be exercised without witnesses. At the moment of the
Reseach of the officers of the wardrobe to dress him the first
gentleman, notified by an usher, advances to read to the king the
Fe mes of the grandees who are mang at the door: this is
e fourth entry called “/a chambre,” and larger than those pre-
ig it; for, not to mention the cloak-bearers, gun-bearers,
. Bibearers and other valets it comprises most of the superior
off flicials, the grand-almoner, the almoners on duty, the chaplain,
the master of the oratory, the captain and major of the body-
guard, the colonel-general and major of the French guards, the
colonel of the king’s regiment, the captain of the Cent Suwisses,


1 Warroquier, I. 94. Compare corresponding details under Louis XVI. in St. Simon,
XII. 8s.


“ee


106 THE ANCIENT REGIME.


the grand-huntsman, the~ grand wolf-huntsman, the grand-
provost, the grand-master and master of ceremonies, the fi
butler, the grand-master of the pantry, the foreign ambas
dors, the ministers and secretaries of state, the marshall
France and most of the seigniors and prelates of. distinction
Ushers place the ranks in order and, if necessary, impose siler
Meanwhile the king washes his hands and begins his cole
Two pages remove his slippers; the grand-master of the wardr obe


wardrobe by the left arm, and both of théfa hand it to an offcont
the wardrobe, whilst a ‘sides of the wardrobe fetches the s i |
wrapped upin white taffeta. Things have now reached the solem
point, the culmination of the ceremony; the fifth entry has bee: n x
introduced and, in a few moments, after the king has put h i
shirt on, all that is left of those who are known, with other house= ©
hold officers waiting in the gallery, complete the influx. There is ;

quite a formality in regard to this shirt. The honor of hanes 5
it is reserved to the sons and grandsons of France; in default of
these to the princes of the blood or those legitimaiads in thei
default to the grand-chamberlain or to the first gentleman of 1
bedchamber ;—the latter case, it must be observed, being very
rare, the princes being obliged to be present at the king's dal
as well as the princesses at that of the queen.' At last the nine
is presented and a valet carries off the old one; the first valet o!
the wardrobe and the first valet-de-chambre hold the fresh onew
each by a right and left arm respectively,” while two other valets, —
during this operation, extend his dressing-gown in front of him |
to serve as a screen. The shirt is now on his back and the —
toilet commences. A valet-de-chambre supports a mirror bee
fore the king while two others on the two sides light it up, if
occasion requires, with flambeaux. Valets of the wardrobe fetch
the rest of the attire; the grand-master of the wardrobe puts the
vest on and the doublet, attaches the blue nibbon, and clasps
his sword around him; then a valet assigned to the cravats brings
several of these in a basket, while the master of the wardrobe
arranges around the king’s neck. that which the king selects.
After this a valet assigned to the handkerchiefs brings three of


pe


1“ Marie Antoinette,” by d’Arneth and Geffroy, II. 217.
? In all changes of the coat the left arm of the king is appropriated to the wardrobe a an
the right arm to the ‘‘ chambre.”’


CHARI HABITS AND CHARACTERS. 107


fa


these on a silver salver, while the grand-master of the wardrobe
offers the salver to the king who chooses one. Finally the master
of the wardrobe hands to the king his hat, his gloves and his
‘cane. ‘The king then steps to the side of the bed, kneels on a
cushion and says his prayers whilst an almoner in a low voice
recites the orison gu@sumus, deus omnipotens. This done, the
king announces the order of the day and passes with the leading
persons of his court into his cabinet where he sometimes gives
audience. Meanwhile the rest of the company await him in the
gallery in order to accompany him to mass when he comes out.
_. Such is the Zever, a piece in five acts. Nothing could be con-
itrived better calculated to fill up the void of an aristocratic life ;
a hundred or thereabouts of notable seigniors dispose of a couple
of hours in coming, in waiting, in entering, in defiling, in taking
positions, in standing on their feet, in maintaining an air of
‘respect and of ease suitable to a superior class of walking gen-
‘tlemen, while those best qualified are about to do the same thing
‘over in the queen’s apartment.!. The king, however, to offset
this suffers the same torture and the same inaction as he imposes.
Ae also is playing a part; all his steps and all his gestures have
een determined beforehand; he has been obliged to arrange
his physiognomy and his voice, never to depart from an affable
and dignified air, to award judiciously his glances and his nods,
to keep silent or to speak only of the chase, and to suppress his
own thoughts, if he has any. One cannot indulge .in revery,
meditate or be absent-minded when one is before the footlights ; _
the part must have due attention. Besides, in a drawing-room
there is only drawing-room conversation, and the master’s
thoughts, instead of being directed in a profitable channel, must
be scattered about as if the holy water of the court. All hours
of the day are thus occupied, except three or four in the morning,
during which he is at the council or in his private room; it must


+


_- 1 The queen breakfasts in bed, and ‘‘there are ten or twelve persons present at this recep-
tion,” . . . the grand receptions taking place at the dressing hour. ‘‘This reception com-
"prised the princes of the blood, the captains of the guards and most of the grand-officers.”
The same ceremony occurs with the chemise as with the king’s shirt. One winter day
Ime. Campan offers the chemise to the queen when a lady of honor enters, removes her
wi Beloves and takes the chemise in her hands. - A movement at the door and the Duchess of
_ Orleans comes in, takes off her gloves and she receives the chemise. Another movement
and it is the Comtesse d’ Artois whose privilege it is to hand the chemise. Meanwhile the
__ queen sits there shivering with her arms crossed on her breast and muttering, ‘It is dreadful,
~ what importunity!’’ (Mme. Campan, II. 217; III. 309-316).


108 THE ANCIENT REGIME.


be noted, too, that on the days after his hunts, on pie
from Rambouillet at three o’clock in the morning, he must s
the few hours he has left to him. The ambassador Mercy,! ne t ef
theless, a man of close application, seems to think it suffici
he, at least, thinks that “ Louis XVI. is a man of order, loll
time in useless things;” his predecessor, indeed, worked much
less, scarcely an hour a day. ‘Three-quarters of has time is re
given up to show. ‘The same retinue surrounds him when f
puts on his boots, when he takes them off, when he changes hi
clothes to mount his horse, when he returns home to dress for
the evening and when he goes to his room at night to re 14
“ Every evening for six years, says a page,” either myself or one ©
of my comrades, has seen Louis XVI. get into bed in public,” —
with the ceremonial just described. “It was not omitted ten times —
to my knowledge, and then accidentally or through indisposition.”

The attendance is yet more numerous when he dines and takes
supper; for, besides men there are women present, duchesses
seated on the folding-chairs, also others standing around the table.
It is needless to state that in the evening when he plays, or gives
a ball, or a concert, the crowd rushes in and overflows. W en
he hunts, besides the ladies on horses and in vehicles, besides
officers of the hunt, of the guards, the equerry, the cloak-bearer,
gun-bearer, surgeon, bone-setter, lunch-bearer and I know not
how many others, all the gentlemen who accompany him are
his permanent guests. And do not imagine that this suite isa i
small one ;? the day M. de Chateaubriand is presented there are
four fresh additions, and “ with the utmost punctuality” all the
young men of high rank join the king’s retinue two or t
times a week. Not only the eight or ten scenes which compose ~
each of these days, but again the short intervals between the —
scenes are besieged and carried. People watch for him, walk by i
his side and speak with him on his way from his cabinet to the |
chapel, between his-apartment and his carriage, between his
carriage and his apartment, between his cabinet and his dining-
room. And still more, his life behind the scenes belongs to the
public. If he is indisposed and broth is brought to him, € be


1 “* Marie Antoinette,” by d’Arneth and Gefftoy, II. 223 (August 15, 1774).
2 D’Hézecques, zdid, p. 7. ; us
8 Duc de Lauzun, ‘‘ Mémoires,” 51. Mme. de Genlis, “  Wigncines,® ch. XIT. “Our
husbands, regularly on that day (Saturday) slept at Versailles to hunt the next in with
the king.”


a \ ~


cHar:t. | | HABITS AND CHARACTERS. 109)


js ill and medicine is handed to him, “a servant immediately sum-
pron the ‘ grande entrée.’” Verily, the king resembles an oak {

stifled. by the innumerable creepers which, from top to bottom,
3 > ing to its trunk. Under a régime of this stamp there is a want
Gg air; some opening has to be found; Louis XV. availed him-
self of the chase and of suppers ; Louis XVI. of the chase and
of lock-making. And I have not mentioned the infinite detail
of etiquette, the extraordinary ceremonial of the state dinner,
the fifteen, twenty and thirty beings busy around the king’s
plates and glasses, the sacramental utterances of the occasion,
the procession of the retinue, the arrival of “la nef,” “lessai des
plats, ” all as if in a Byzantine or Chinese court.1 On Sundays
the entire public, the public.in general, is admitted, and this is
called the “grand couvert,’ as complex and as solemn as a high
“mass. Accordingly to eat, to drink, to get up, to go to bed, is
toa descendant of Louis XIV., to officiate? Frederick II., on
hearing an explanation of this etiquette, declared that if he were
_king of France his first edict would be to appoint another king
to hold court in his place. In effect, if there are idlers to salute
there must be an idler to be saluted. Only one way was possi-
_ble by which the monarch could have been set free and that was
to have recast and transformed the French nobles according to
the Prussian system into a hard-working regiment of serviceable
functionaries. But so long ag the court remains what it is, that
is to say, a pompous parade and a drawing-room decoration, the
king himself must likewise form a showy seis sane of little use
or of none at all.


N..

_ Inshort, what is the occupation of a well-qualified master of

a house? He amuses himself and he amuses his guests; under

4 his roof a new pleasure-party comes off daily. Let us enumer-

_ ate those of a week. “Yesterday, Sunday,” says the Duc de
_Luynes, “I met the king going to hunt on the plain of. St.


_ 1 The state dinner takes place every Sunday. La xef is a piece of plate at the centre of
_ the table containing between scented cushions the napkins used by the king. The essaz is
phe tasting of each dish by the gentlemen servants and officers of the table before the king
_partakes of it. And the same with the beverages. It requires four persons to serve the
king with a glass of wine and water.

2 When the ladies of the king’s court, and especially the princesses, pass before the king’s
“bed they have to make an obeisance ; the palace officials salute the ~¢f on passing that, A
_ priest or sacristan does the same thing on passing before the altar.


Io


anid


110 THE ANCIENT: REGIME.


Denis, having slept at la Muette, where he intends to : p>
shooting to-day and to-morrow, and to return here on Tu
or Wednesday morning torun down a stag the camel L
Wednesday.”1 Two months after this, “the king,” again ‘
M. de Luynes, “has been hunting every day of the past and
the present week, except to-day and on Sundays, keting sin
the beginning, three thousand five hundred partridges.” He
always on the road, or hunting, or passing from one reside
to another, from Veisailles to Fontainebleau, to Choy
Marly, to la Muette, to Compiégne, to Trianon, to Saint-Hu ber
to Bellevue, to Rambouillet, and, generally, with his |
court.” . At Choisy, especially, and at Fontainebleau this com:
pany all lead a merry life. At Fontainebleau “Sunday ani
Friday, play ; Monday and Wednesday, a concert in the queen’
apartments; Tuesday and Thursday, the French comedians
and Saturday it is the Italians;” there is something for eve ss
day in the week. At Choisy, writes the Dauphine,® “from on
o’clock (in the afternoon) when we dine, to one o’clock at nigh
we remain out. . . . After dining we play until six o’clock, afte
which we go to the theatre, which lasts until half-past nin
o’clock, and next, to supper; after this, play again, until one
and sometimes half-past one, o’clock.” At Versailles thing
are more moderate; there are but two theatrical entertainment
and one ball a week; but every evening there is play amt
a reception in the king’s apartment, in his daughters’, in ‘his
mistress’s, in his daughter-in-law’s, besides hunts and three pett:
excursions per week. Records show that, in a certain year,
Louis XV. slept only fifty-two nights at Versailles, while the
Austrian Ambassador well says that “his mode of living leaves
him not an hour in the day for attention to important matters.”
As to Louis XVI., we have seen that he reserves a few hours of |
the morning; but the machine is wound up and go it must. |
How can he withdraw himself from his guests and not do —


1 De Luynes, IX, 75, 79, 105 (August, 1748, October, 1748). “2

? The king is at Marly, and here is a list of the excursions he is to make before g oing
Compiégne (De Luynes, XIV, 163, May, 1755): Sunday, June 1st, to Choisy until ¥
day evening. Tuesday, the 3d, to Trianon, until Wednesday. Thursday, the sth,
to Trianon where he will remain until after supper on Saturday. Monday, the ye Q
Crécy, until Friday, 1 3th. Return to Crécy the r6th, until the 21st. July 1st to la Mue
the 2d, to Compiégne.”


’ “Marie Antoinette,” by d’Arneth and Geffroy, I. 19 Guly 12,1770). I265 com
1771). I. Ill. (October 18, 1770), at


apt. HABITS AND CHARACTERS. am
thi honors of his house ? Moreover, propriety and custom are
despotic; a third despotism must be added, still more absolute,


endure an hour’s reading. At Versailles, three theatrical enter-
tainments and two balls a week, two grand suppers Tuesday and
Thursday, and from time to time, the opera in Paris! At
Fontainebleau, the theatre three times a week and on other
days, play and suppers. During the following winter the queen
gives a masked ball each week, in which “the contrivance
of the costumes, the quadrilles arranged in ballets, and the
daily rehearsals, take so much time as to consume the entire
week.” During the carnival of 1777 the queen, besides her
‘own fétes, attends the balls of the Palais-Royal and the masked
balls of the opera; a little later, I find another ball at the
abode of the Comtesse Diana de Polignac, which she attends
with the whole royal family, except Mesdames, and which lasts
from half-past eleven o’clock at night until eleven o’clock the
next morning. Meanwhile, on ordinary days, there is the rage
‘of faro; in her drawing-room “there is no limit to the play;
in one evening the Duc de Chartres loses eight thousand louis.
It really resembles an Italian carnival; there is nothing lacking,


le ugh, they dance, they dine, they listen to music, they don
costumes, they get up picnics (/tes-champétres), they indulge in
gossip and gallantries.” “The newest song,”? says a cultivated,
earnest lady of the bedchamber, “the current witticism, and
"little scandalous stories formed the sole subjects of conversation
in the queen’s circle of intimates.” . As to the king, who is
rather dull and who requires physical exercise, the chase is
his most important occupation. Between 1755 and 1789,° he
himself, on recapitulating what he had accomplished, finds “one
hundred and forty boar-hunts, one hundred and thirty stag-
hunts, two hundred and sixty-six: of bucks, thirty-three with
hounds, and one thousand and twenty-five shootings,” in all
fifteen hundred and sixty-two hunting-days, averaging at least
one hunt every three days; besides this there are a hundred and


the imperious vivacity of a frolicsome young queen who cannot


neither masks nor the comedy of private life; they play, they »


» 1*Marie Antoinette,” by d’Arneth and Geffroy, II. 270 (October 18, 1774). II. 395
_ (November 15, 1775). IlI.-295 (February 20, 1775). III. 25 (February 11, 1777). Il.
119 (October 17, 1777). III. 409 (March 18, 1780).

_ 2Mme. Campan, I. 147.

8 Nicolardot, ‘‘ Journal de Louis XVI.,” 129.


/


112 THE ANCIENT REGIME.


forty-nine excursions without hunts and two hundred

twenty-three promenades on horseback or in carriages. “ Dn
ing four months of the year he goes to Rambouillet twice :
-week and returns after having supped, that is to say, at
o’clock in the morning.”! This inveterate habit ends in bal on
ing a mania and-even in something worse. -“The ee
writes Arthur Young, June 26, 1789, “and even stupidity of
the court, is without example; the moment demands the greate:
decision,—and yesterday, while it was actually a question whetl
he should be a doge of Venice ora king of France, the kin
went a hunting!” His journal is like that of a whipper-iny
On reading it at the most important dates one is amazed a
its records. He writes ofhing on the days not devoted to hunt?
ing, which means that to him these days are of no account,
“July 11, 1789, nothing; M. Necker leaves.—r2th, vespers and /
benediction ; Messieurs de Montmorin, de Saint-Priest and de }
Luzerne leave.—13th, vothing.—14th, nothing.—2gth, nothing
M. Necker returns.—August 4th, stag-hunt in the forest a
Marly; took one; go and come on horseback.—x3th, audienc |
of the States in the gallery; Te Deum during the mass belo: v
one stag taken in the hunt at Marly. . . . 25th, complimentar
audience of the States; high mass with the cordons bleus ; XN
Bailly sworn in; vespers and benediction; state dinner. . . |
October 5th, shooting near Chatillon; killed eighty-one pieces’
interrupted by events; go and come on horseback.—October 6th, |
leave for Paris at half-past twelve; visit the Hotel-de-Ville; sup
and rest at the Tuileries—October 7th, zothing; my aunts come —
and dine.—8th, nothing... .. 12th, nothing, the stag hunted a it
Port Royal.” Shut up in Paris, the captive of the masses, nis
heart is always with the hounds. Twenty times in 1790 we read
in his journal of a stag-hunt occurring in this or that place; he
regrets not being on hand. No privation is more intolerable to’
him; we encounter traces of his chagrin even in the formal
protest he draws up before leaving for Varennes; transported to
Paris, stationary in the Tuileries, “where, far: from finding con-
veniences to which he is accustomed, he has not even enjoyed
the advantages common to persons in easy circumstances,” his
crown to him having apparently lost its brightest jewel.


1 D’ Hézecques, zbéd. 253. Arthur Young, I. 215.


HABITS AND CHARACTERS.


VI.


__ As is the general so is his staff; the grandees imitate their
‘monarch. Like-some costly colossal effigy in marble, erected in
the centre of France, and of which reduced copies ar@ scattered
‘by thousands throughout the provinces, thus does royal life
repeat itself, in minor proportions,*even among the remotest |
gentry. The object is to make a parade and to receive; to
make a figure and to pass away time in good society. I find,
first, around the court, about a dozen princely courts; each’
prince or princess of the blood royal, like the king, has his house
fitted up, paid for, in whole or in part, out of the treasury, its
‘service divided into special departments, with gentlemen, pages,
4 ind ladies in waiting, in brief, fifty, one hundred, two hundred,
and even five hundred appointments. ‘There is a household of
this kind for the queen, one for Madame Victoire, one for
Madame Elisabeth, one for Monsieur, one for Madame, one for
the Comte d’Artois, one for the Comtesse d’Artois; there will be
c ne for Madame Royale, one for the little Dauphin, one for the
Duc de Normandie, all three children of the king, one for the
Duc d’Angouléme, one for the Duc de Berry, both sons of the
omte d’Artois: children six or seven years of age receive and
make a parade of themselves. On referring to a particular
date, in 1771, I find still another for the Duc d’Orléans, one
for the Duc de Bourbon, one for the Duchesse, one for the
Prince de Condé, one for the Comte de Clermont, one for the
Princess dowager de Conti, one for the Prince de Conti, one for
the Comte de la Marche, one for the Duc de Penthiévre.
E personage, besides his or her apartment under the king’s
roof has his or her chateau and palace with his or her own
circle, the queen at Trianon and at Saint-Cloud, Mesdames at
Bellevue, Monsieur at the Luxembourg and at Brunoy, the
Comte d’Artois at Meudon and at Bagatelle, the Duc d’Orléans
at the Palais-Royal, at Monceaux, at Rancy and at Villers-
Cotterets, the Prince de Conti at the Temple and at Ile-Adam,
he Condés at the Palais-Bourbon and at Chantilly, the Duc de


113)


J List of pensions paid to members of the royal family in 1771. Duc d’Orléans, 150,000;
Prince de Condé, 100,000; Comte de Clermont, 70,000; Due de Bourbon, 60,000; Prince
Je Conti, 60,000; Comte de la Marche, 60,000; Dowager-Countess de Conti, 50,000; Duc
le Penthiévre, 50,000; Princess de Lamballe, 50,000; Duchess de Bourbon, 50,000 ; (Archives
a itionales, Ol, 710, dzs).

10* "


114 THE ANCIENT REGIME.


Penthiévre at Sceaux, Anet and Chateauvilain. J omit one-h
of these residences. At the Palais-Royal those who are presente
may come to the supper on opera days. At Chateauvilain ;
those who come to pay court are invited to dinner, the noble
at the duke’s table and the rest at the table of his first gentleman
At the Temple one hundred and fifty guests attend the Mc _ E
suppers: Forty or fifty persons, said the Duchesse de Mam

constitute “a prince’s private company.”! The princes’ train
so inseparable from their persons that it follows them even il
camp. ‘The Prince de Condé,” says M. de* Luynes, sete
for the army to-morrow with a large suite: he has two hunc it
and twenty-five horses, and the Comte de la Marche one hundre
M. le duc d’Orléans leaves on Monday; he has three nun de
and fifty horses for himself and suite.”? Below the rank of tl he
king’s relatives all the grandees who figure at the court fig
as well in their own residences, at their hotels at Paris or
Versailles, also in their chateaux a few leagues away from Pari
On all sides, in the memoirs, we obtain a foreshortened view of
some one of these seignorial existences. Such is that of the Du
de Gévres, first gentleman of the bedchamber, governor of Paris
and of the Ile-de-France, possessing besides this the specia
governorships of Laon, Soissons, N oyon, Crespy and Valois, th
captainry of Mousseaux, also a. pension of twenty thous: a
livres, a veritable man of the court, a sort of sample in high re
of the people of his class, and who, through his appoint <i |
his favor, his luxury, his debts, the consideration he enjoys, his”
tastes, his occupations and his turn of mind presents to us an -
abridgment of the fashionable world.* His memory for relation- |
ships and genealogies is surprising; he is an adept in the
precious science of etiquette, and on these two grounds he is an
oracle and much‘consulted. “He greatly increased the bez
of his house and gardens at Saint-Ouen. At the moment of I
death,” says the Duc de Luynes, “he had just added ovens
arpents to it which he had begun to enclose with a covered


’

1 Beugnot, I. 77. Mme. de Genlis, ‘‘ Mémoires,” ch. xvii. De Goncourt, “La Fem
au dix-huitiéme siécle,” 52. Champfort, *‘ Caractéres et Anecdotes.”

2 De Luynes, XVI. 57 (May, 1757). In the army of Westphalia the Count d'Estr bes
commander-in-chief, had twenty-seven secretaries, and Gremin was the twenty-e ighth
When the Duc de Richelieu set out for his government of Guyenne he was obliged to hav:
relays of a hundred horses along the entire road.

3 De Luynes, XVI. 186 (October, 1757).


tees. - HABITS AND CHARACTERS. . Te


errace. . . . He had quite a large household of gentlemen,
jages, and domestics of various kinds, and his expenditure was
snormous. ... He gave a grand dinner every day. ... He
fave special audiences almost daily. There was-no one at the
court, nor in the city, who did not pay their respects to him.
‘he ministers, the royal princes themselves did so. He received
company whilst still in bed. He wrote and dictated amidst a
large assemblage. . . . His house at Paris and his apartment
ut Versailles were never empty from the time he arose till the
ime he retired.” ‘Two or three hundred households at Paris, at
Versailles and in their environs offer a similar spectacle.
Never is there solitude. It is the custom in France, says
Horace Walpole, to burn your candle down to its snuff in public.
The mansion.of the Duchesse de Gramont is besieged at. day-
reak by the noblest seigniors and the noblest ladies. Five
imes a week, under the Duc de Choiseul’s roof, the butler
nters the drawing-room at ten o’clock in the evening to bestow
. glance on the immense crowded gallery and decide if he shall
ay the cloth for fifty, sixty or eighty persons ;! with this example
defore them all the rich establishments soon glory in providing an
table for allcomers. Naturally, the parvenues, the financiers-
vho have purchased or taken the name of an estate, all those
raffickers and sons of traffickers who, since Law, associate with
= nobility, imitate their ways. And I do not allude to -the
ourets, the Beaujons, the St. Jameses and other financial
etches whose paraphernalia effaces that of the princes; but
ake a plain associé des fermes, M. d’Epinay, whose modest and
fined wife refuses such excessive display.2 He had just com-
leted his domestic arrangements, and was anxious that his
ife should take a second maid; but she resisted; nevertheless,
n this curtailed household, “the officers, women and valets,
mounted to sixteen. . . . When M. d’Epinay gets up his valet
nters on his duties. Two lackeys stand by awaiting his orders.
the first secretary enters for the purpose of giving an account:
‘Of the letters received by him and which he has to open; but he
“i interrupted two hundred times in this business by all sorts of
“people imaginable. Now it is a horse-jockey with the finest
jorses to sell. . . . Again some scrapegrace who calls to screech


1 De Goncourt, zdéd. 73, 75. .
2 Mme. d’Epinay, ‘‘ Mémoires.” Ed. Boiteau, I.°306 (1751).


116 ‘ THE ANCIENT REGIME.


out a piece of music and in whose behalf some influence

been exerted to get him into the opera, after giving him ei
lessons in good taste and teaching him what is proper in Fre
music. Again a young lady who is made to wait to ascer
Tam still at home. ... I get up and go out. Two lack Key
open the folding doors to let me pass, I who could pass ° us
the eye of a needle, while two servants bawl out in shoal
chamber, ‘Madame, gentlemen, Madame!’ All form a lines
gentlemen consisting of dealers in stuffs, in instruments, jeweller
hawkers, lackeys, shoeblacks, creditors, in short everything it
aginable that is most ridiculous and annoying. ‘The clock strike
twelve or one before this toilet matter is over, and the sec —
who, doubtless, knows by experience the impossibility of rendé
ing a detailed statement of his business, hands to ‘his master
small memorandum informing him what he must say in the a

sembly of fermiers.” Indolence, disorder, debts, ceremony, #1
tone and ways of the patron, all seems a parody of owe e
thing. We are beholding the last stages of aristocracy. ~ Al
yet the court of M. d’Epinay is a miniature resemblance of tl
of the king. <a

So much more essential is it that the arabes ae minis

and general officers who represent the king should display. ;
selves in a grandiose manner. No circumstance rendered th
ancient régime as brilliant and more oppressive} in ee si
all the rest, Louis XIV. is the principal author of evil as of ¢
The policy which fashioned the court prescribed ostentati
“He was pleased to see a display of dress, table, equipz
buildings and play; these afforded him opportunities for ente
into conversation with people. The contagion had spread
the court into the provinces and to the armies where people, 0 i
any position, were esteemed only in proportion to their ege
magnificence.” ! During the year passed by the Marshal de Bell
Isle at Frankfort, on account of the election of -Charles visk 2
expended 750,000 livres in journeys, cary 5 festivals and


2 —

1St. Simon, XII. 457, and Dangeau, VI. 408. The Marshal de Boufflers at the cam
Compiégne (September, 1698) had every night and morning two tables for twee
twenty-five persons, besides extra tables; 72 cooks, 340 domestics, 400 dozens of napkin:
80 dozens of silver plates, 6 dozens of porcelain plates. Fourteen relays of horses bro
fruits and liquors daily from Paris; every day an express brought fish, poultry. and ¢
from Ghent, Brussels, Dunkirk, Dieppe and Calais. Fifty dozens of wine were wea
ordinary days, and eighty dozens during the visits of the king and the princes.


CHAP. I. HABITS AND CHARACTERS. 117


jinners, in constructing a kitchen and dining-hall, and besides
ll this, 150,000 livres in snuff-boxes, watches and other presents;
by order of Cardinal Fleury, so economical, he had in his kitchens
one hundred and one officials! At Vienna, in 1772, the ambas-
ador, the Prince de Rohan, had two carriages costing together
40,000 livres, forty horses, seven noble pages, six gentlemen, five
Secretaries, ten musicians, twelve footmen, and four grooms whose
gorgeous liveries each cost 4,000 livres, and the rest in proportion.?
We are familiar with the profusion, the good taste, the exquisite
dinners, the admirable ceremonial display of the Cardinal de
Bernis in Rome. “ He was called the king of Rome and indeed
he was such through his magnificence and in the consideration
he enjoyed. . . . His table afforded an idea of what is possible.
. . . In festivities, ceremonies and illuminations he was always be-
yond comparison.” He himself remarked, smiling, “I keep a
French inn on the cross-roads of Europe.” Accordingly their
salaries and indemnities are two or three times more ample than
tthe present day. “The king gives 50,000 crowns to the great
bassies. The Duc de Duras received even 200,000 livres per
annum for that of Madrid, also, besides this, 100,000 crowns gra-
ity, 50,000 livres for secret service and he had the loan of furni-
ture and effects valued at 400,000 and 500,000 livres, of which
ne kept one-half.”*. The outlays and salaries of the ministers
are similar. In 1789, the Chancellor gets 120,080 livres salary
and the Keeper of the Seals 135,000. “ M. de Villedeuil, as
Secretary of State, was to have had 180,670 livres, but as he rep-
resented that this sum would not cover his expenses, his salary was
ised to 226,000 livres, everything included.”® Moreover, the
ule is, that on retiring from office the king awards them a pen-
sion of 20,000 livres and gives a dowry of 200,000 livres to their
daughters. This is not excessive considering the way they live.
«They are obliged to maintain such state in their households, for


1De Luynes, XIV. 149.
_ 2 Abbé Georgel, ‘‘ Mémoires,”’ 216.
8 Sainte-Beuve, ‘‘ Causeries du lundi,” VIII. 63, the texts of two witnesses, MM. de Genlis
id Roland.
De Luynes, XV. 455, and XVI. 219 (1757). ‘The Marshal de Belle-Isle contracted an
ebtedness amounting to 1,200,000 livres, one-quarter of it for pleasure-houses and the rest
the king’s service. The king, to indemnify him, gives him 400,000 livres on the salt
nue, and 80,000 livres income on the company privileged to refine the precious metals.”
P Bails -of fixed incomes and expenditures, May rst, 1789, p. 633. These figures, it
must be noted, must be doubled to have their actual equivalent.


118 THE ANCIENT REGIME. sal


they cannot enrich themselves by their places. All keep 0

table at Paris three days in the week, and at Fontainebleau, ey:
day.”! M. de Lamoignon being appointed Chancellor wit
salary of 100,000 livres, people at once declare that he will
ruined ;? “for he has taken all the officials of M. d’Aguesse:
kitchen, whose table alone cost 80,000 livres. The banque of
gave at Versailles to the first council held by him cost 6,00
livres, and he must always have seats at table, at Versailles ar
at Paris, for twenty persons.” At Chambord,’ Marshal de Sa
always has two tables, one for sixty, and the other for eigh
persons, also four hundred horses in his stables, a civil list”
more than 100,000 crowns, a regiment of Uhlans for his guai
and a theatre costing over 600,000 livres, while the life he lea
‘or which is maintained around him, resembles one of Ruben
bacchanalian scenes. As to the special and general provinei
governors we have seen that, when they reside on the spot, the
fulfil no other duty than to entertain ; alongside of them the ii
tendant, who alone attends to business, likewise receives, an
magnificently, especially in the country of a States-Genera
Commandants, lieutenants-general, the envoys of the centr
government throughout, are equally induced by habit and pi Op.
ety, as well as by their own lack of occupation, to maintain a dra
ing-room; they bring along with them the elegancies and hosp
tality of Versailles. If the wife follows them she becomes weat
and “ vegetates in the midst of about fifty companions, talking”
nothing but commonplace, knitting or playing loto, and sitting
three hours at the dinner table.” But “all the military men, a
the neighboring gentry and all the ladies in the town,” eagerly
crowd to her balls and delight in commending “her grace, her
politeness, her equality.”* ‘These sumptuous habits prevail even
among people of secondary position. By virtue of established
usage colonels and captains entertain their subordinates and thus
expend “ much beyond their salaries.”> This is-one of the rea-
sons why regiments are reserved for the sons of the best


1 Mme. de Genlis, “‘ Dict. des Etiquettes,” I. 349. > wt
? Barbier, “Journal,” III. 2x1 (December, 1750).
3 Aubertin, ‘‘L’ Esprit public au dix-huitiéme siécle,” 255. ‘
4 Mme. de Genlis, ‘‘ Adéle et Théodore,” III. 54. —
5 Duc de Lévis, 68. The same thing is found, previous to the late reform, in the En ha
army. Cf. Voltaire, ‘Entretiens entre A, B, C,”’ 15th entretiens. ‘‘A regiment is not t
reward for services but the prize for the sum which the parents of a young man advance
order that he may go to the provinces for three months in the year and keep open house.’


a


f milies and companies in them for wealthy gentlemen. The
ast royal tree, expanding so luxuriantly at Versailles, sends forth |
ts Fashoots to overrun France by thousands and to bloom every-
Biscre, as at Versailles, in bouquets of holiday sport and of
drawing-room sociability.
4 VIL.

pe solowing this pattern, and as well through the effect of tem-
perature, we see, even in remote provinces, all aristocratic
branches tending to a worldly efflorescence. Lacking other em-
ployment, the nobles interchange visits, and the chief function
of a prominent seignior is to do the honors of his house credit-
itably. This applies as well to ecclesiastics as to laymen. The
‘one hundred and thirty-one bishops and archbishops, the seven
hundred abbés-commendatory, are all men of the world; they
dD ehave well, are rich, and are not austere, while their episcopal
palace or abbey is for them a country-house, which they repair
or embellish with a view to the time they pass in it, and to the
« fempeny they welcome to it | At Clairvaux, Dom Rocourt,
very affable with men and still more gallant with the ladies, never
drives out except with four horses, and with a mounted groom
ahead; his monks do him the honors of a Monseigneur, and he
; qaintains a veritable court. The chartreuse of Val Saint-Pierre
is S a sumptuous palace in the centre of an immense domain, and
eeet: procurator, Dom Effinger, passes his days in entertain-
g his guests.” At the convent of Origny, near Saint-Quentin,?
. abbess has her domestics and her carriage and horses, and
receives men on visits, who dine in her apartments.” The prin-
ce Christine, abbess of Remiremont, with her lady canonesses,
a re almost always travelling; and yet “they enjoy themselves in
" the abbey,” entertaining there a good many people “in the private

apartments of the princess, and in the strangers’ rooms.”4 The
twenty-five noble chapters of women, and the nineteen noble
‘chapters of men, are as many permanent drawing-rooms and
i gathering places incessantly resorted to by the fine society which

a slight ecclesiastical: barrier scarcely divides from the great


a


—,


a AP. I. HABITS AND CHARACTERS. Mig


1 Beugnot, I. 79.

% . 2 Merlin de Thionville, ‘‘ Vie et Correspondances.” Account of his visit to the chartreuse
f Val St. Pierre in Thierarche.

5 , 3Mme. de Genlis, “‘ Mémoires,” ch. vii,

3 4 Mme. d’Oberkirk, I. 15.


\


120 THE ANCIENT REGIME. — BOO}


a he


is
pais"


world from which it is recruited. At the chapter of Alix, nes ea
Lyons, the canonesses wear hoopskirts into the choir, “dres

as in the world outside,” except that their black silk robes a .
their mantles are-lined with ermine.! At the chapter of Ott
marsheim in Alsace, “our week was passed in promenadin
~visiting the traces of Roman roads, in laughing a good deal
even in dancing, for there were many people visiting the aba :
and especially to talk over dresses.” Near Sarrelouis, the cano. 1-
esses of Loutre dine with the officers and are anything but pr
dish. Numbers of convents serve as agreeable and respe 2
asylums for widowed ladies, for young women whose husbands
are in the army, and for young ladies of rank, while the sup erior, |
generally some noble damsel, wields, with ease and dexterity he
sceptre of this pretty feminine world. But nowhere is the pom “7
of hospitality, or the concourse greater, than in the episcopal p: i
aces. I have described the situation of the bishops; wie the
opulence, possessors of the like feudal rights, heirs and successor:
to the ancient sovereigns of the territory, and besides all this & mer :
of the world and frequenters of Versailles, why should they no
keep a court? A Cicé, archbishop of Bordeaux, a Dillon, z rch-
bishop of Narbonne, a Brienne, archbishop of Toulouse, a
tellane, bishop of Mende and seignior-suzerain of the whole 0
Gévaudan, an archbishop of Cambrai, duke of Cambray, seign
ior-suzerain of the whole of Cambrésis, and president by sire zt
of the provincial States-General, are nearly all princes ;—why no
parade themselves like princes? Hence, they build, hunt
have their clients and guests, a ever, an antechamber, ushers, offi-
cers, a free table, a complete household, equipages, and, ofte he
still, debts, the finishing touch of a grand seignior. In the al-.
most regal palace which the Rohans, hereditary bishops of Stras-
bourg and cardinals from uncle to nephew, erected for themselves
at Saverne® there are 700 beds, 180 horses, 14 butlers, and 25
valets. “The whole province assembles there;” the cardinal
lodges as many as two hundred guests at a time, without count-
ing the valets; at all times, there are found under his roof By m
twenty to thirty ladies the most agreeable of the province, <


1 Mme. de Genlis, I. ch. xxvi. Mme. d’Oberkirk, I. 62.
2 De Lauzun, ‘‘ Mémoires,” 257.

% Marquis de Valfons, *‘ Mémoires,” 60. De Lévis, 156. Mme. d’Oberkirk, I. 127., I

360.


paar 1: HABITS AND CHARACTERS. 121


th is:number ‘is"often increased by those of the court and from
Paris. . . . Theentire company sup together at nine o’clock in
the evening, which always looks like a féte,” and the cardinal
himself is its chief ornament. Splendidly dressed, fine-looking,
‘gallant, exquisitely polite, the slightest smile is a grace. “His
facé, always beaming, inspired confidence; he had the true phys-
iognomy of a man expressly designed for pompous display.”

Such likewise is the attitude and occupation of the principal
lay seigniors, at home, in summer, when a love of the charms
of fine weather brings them back to their estates. For example,
Harcourt in Normandy and Brienne in Champagne are two
chateaux the best frequented. Persons of distinction resort to
it from Paris, eminent men of letters, while the nobility of the
anton pay there an assiduous court.”! ‘There is no residence
where flocks of fashionable people do not light down permanently
to dine, to dance, to hunt, to gossip, to unravel,’ ( parjiler) to
play comedy. We can trace these birds from cage to cage; they
Temain a week, a month, three months, displaying their plumage
‘and their prattle. From Paris to Ile-Adam, to Villers-Cotterets,
to Frétoy, to Planchette, to Soissons, to Rheims, to Grisolles, to
Beery, to Braine, to Balincourt, to Vaudreuil, the Comte and
Somtesse de Genlis thus bear about their leisure, their wit, their
gayety, at the domiciles of friends whom, in their turn, they en-
tertain at Genlis. A glance at the exteriors of these mansions
suffices to show that it was the chief duty in these rie to be
Béspitable, ‘as it was a prime necessity to be in society.* Their
luxury, indeed, differs from ours. With the exception of a few
princely establishments it is not great in the matter of country
furniture ; a display of this description is left to the financiers.
“ But it is prodigious in all things which can minister to the en-
joyment of others, in horses, carriages, and in an open table, in
accommodations given even to people not belonging to the house,
in boxes at the play which are loaned to friends, and lastly, in
Servants, much more numerous than nowadays.” ‘Through this
mutual and constant attention the most rustic nobles lose the rust
still encrusting their counterparts in Germany or in England.
We find in France few Squire Westerns and Barons de Thunder-


r
<4


1 Beugnot, I. 71. Hippeau, ‘‘ Le Gouvernement de Normandie,” Jassim.
2 An occupation explained farther on, page 145.—TR.
3 Mme. de Genlis, ‘‘ Mémoires,” Jassim. ‘Dict. des Etiquettes,” I. 348.


It


122 THE ANCIENT REGIME.


tentronk ; an Alsatian lady, on seeing at Frankfort, the grote
country squires of Westphalia, is struck with the contrast." Th c se 2
of France, even in distant provinces, have frequented the draw-
ing-rooms of the commandant and intendant and have enco ve
tered on their visits some of the ladies from Versailles; he 1
“they always show some familiarity with superior manners 4
some knowledge of the changes of fashion and dress.” The ;
most barbarous will descend, with his hat in his hand, to the
foot of his steps to escort his guests, thanking them for the honor
they have done him. The greatest rustic, when in a wom an’ ’s
presence, dives down into the depths of his memory for some ~
fragment of chivalric gallantry. .The poorest and most secluded —
furbishes up his coat of royal blue and his cross of St. Louis that a
he may, when the occasion offers, tender his respects to his neigh- |
bor, the grand seignior, or to the prince who is passing by. “a

Thus is the feudal staff wholly transformed, from the lowest t
the highest grades. Taking in at one glance its thirty or fort
thousand palaces, mansions, manors and abbeys, what a brillia
and engaging scene France presents! She is one vast drawal g-
room, and I detect only drawing-room company. Every |
the rude chieftains once possessing authority have become the
masters of households administering favors. Their society is
that in which, before fully admiring a great general, the question
is asked, “is he amiable?” Undoubtedly they still wear the ds, |
and are brave through self-love and tradition, and they k
how to die, especially in duels and according to form. |
worldly traits have overspread the ancient military groundwork; ~
at the end of the eighteenth century their genius is to be well-
bred and their employment consists in entertaining or in being”
entertained, x


1 Mme. d’Oberkirk, I. 395. The Baron and Baroness de Sotenyille in Moliére are no
well brought up although provincial and pedantic.


—a = = | Uh


i 3 CHAPTER IL.


=


DRAWING-ROOM LIFE.—I. Perfect only in France.—Reasons for this de-
‘rived from the French character.—Reasons derived from the tone of the
-‘court.—This life becomes more and more agreeable and absorbing.—II. Sub-
ordination to it of other interests and duties.—Indifference to public affairs.—
They are merely a subject of jest.—Neglect of private affairs.—Disorder in
the household and abuse of money.—III. Moral divorce of husband and
-wife.— Gallantry.—Separation of parents and children. — Education, its
_ object and omissions.—The tone of servants and purveyors.—Pleasure-seek-
‘ing, universal.—IV. The charm of this life. —Good-breeding in the 18th
Century.—Its perfection and its resources.—Taught and prescribed under
feminine authority.—V. What constitutes happiness in the 18th Century.—
Re The fascination of display.—Indolence, recreations, light conversation.—VI.
_ Gayety in the 18th Century.—lIts causes and effects. —Toleration and license.
'—Balls, fétes, hunts, banquets, pleasures.—Freedom of the magistrates and
‘prelates.—VII. The principal diversion, ed so comedy.—Parades and ex-
travagance.
= Va
SIMILAR circumstances have led other aristocracies in Europe
to nearly similar ways and habits. There also the monarchy
has given birth to the court and the court to a refined society.
But the development of this rare plant has been only partial.
The soil was unfavorable and the seed was not of the right sort.
In Spain, the king stands shrouded in etiquette like a mummy
in its wrappings, while a too rigid pride, incapable of yielding to
the amenities of the worldly order of things, ends in a sentiment
c morbidity and in insane display.! In Italy, under petty des-
potic sovereigns, and most of them strangers, the constant state
of danger and of hereditary distrust, after having tied all tongues,
' turns all hearts towards the secret delights*of love or towards

the mute gratifications of the fine arts. In Germany and in
England, a cold temperament, dull and rebellious to culture,


_1De Loménie, “ Beaumarchais et son temps,” I. 403. Letter of Beaumarchais, Dec. 24,
1764. The travels of Mme. d’Aulnoy and the letters of Mme. de Villars. As to Italy see
tendhal, ‘‘Rome, Naples et Florence.”’ For Germany see the ‘‘ Mémoires” of the Mar-
grave of Bareith, also of the Chevalier Lang. For England see mp ‘ Histoire de la littéra-
e Anglaise,”’ vols. III., IV.


124 THE ANCIENT REGIME.


keeps man, up to the close of the last century, within the. C (
manic habits of solitude, inebriety and brutality. In France, 0
the contrary, all things combine to make the social senti ne
flourish; in this the national genius harmonizes with the polit-
ical régime, the plant appearing to be selected for the soil
forehand.
_ The Frenchman loves company through instinct, and thet
son is that he does well and easily whatever society calls upc
him to do. He has not the false shame which renders his ne
ern neighbors awkward, nor the powerful passions which abs
his neighbors of the south. ‘Talking is no effort to him, havi
none of the natural timidity which begets constraint, and with
constant preoccupation to overcome. He accordingly conve
at his ease, ever on the alert, and conversation affords him extren
- pleasure. For the happiness which he requires is of a peculi
kind: delicate, light, rapid, incessantly renewed and varied,
_ which his intellect, his self-love, all his emotional and sympathetic
faculties find nutriment ; and this quality of happiness is provided —
for him only in society and in conversation. Sensitive as he is,
personal attention, consideration, cordiality, delicate flattery, e¢ .
stitute his natal atmosphere, out of which he breathes with di
culty. He would suffer almost as much in being impolite as
encountering impoliteness in others. For his instincts of ki
ness and vanity there is an exquisite charm in the habit of be-
ing amiable, and this is all the greater because it proves
tagious. When we afford pleasure to others there is a desir
please us, and what we bestow in deference is returned in atten
tions. In company of this kind one can talk, for to talk is ° to
amuse another in being oneself amused, a Frenchman finding
no pleasure equal to it! Lively and sinuous conversation to h
is like the flying of a bird; he wings his way from idea to ide 2
alert, excited by the inspiration of others, darting forward, wheel
ing round and unexpectedly returning, now up, now down, now
skimming the ground, now aloft on the peaks, without sinking
into quagmires, or getting entangled in the briers, and “at
nothing of the thousands of objects he slightly grazes but
diversity and the gayety of their aspects. ae


1 Volney, “Tableau du climat et du sol’ des Etats-Unis d’Amérique.” The leading trait
of the French colonist when compared with the colonists of other nations, is, accordin;
this writer, the craving for neighbors and conversation.


Bie, <1. HABITS AND CHARACTERS. © 125


- Thus endowed, and thus disposed, he is made for a régime
which, for ten hours a day, brings men together; natural feel-
ing in accord with the social order of things, renders the
_ drawing-room perfect. The king, at the head of all, sets the
example. Louis XIV. had every qualification for the master of '
_ahousehold: a taste for pomp and hospitality, condescension ac-
- companied with dignity, the art of playing on the self-love of
others and of maintaining his own position, chivalrous gallantry,
tact, and even charms of intellectual expression. “His address
was perfect ;1 whether it was necessary to jest, or he was in a
playful humor, or deigned to tell a story, it was ever with in-
_ finite grace, and a noble refined air which I have found only in
him.” “Never was man so naturally polite,? nor of such circum-
_ spest politeness, so powerful by degrees, nor who better discrimi-
nated age, worth, and rank, both in his replies and in his deport-
ment. ... His salutations, more or less marked, but always
_ slight, were of incomparable grace and majesty. . . . He was ad-
“mirable in the different acknowledgments of salutes at the head
_ of the army and at reviews. . . . But especially toward women
there was nothing like it. . . . Never did he pass the most in-
different woman without taking off his hat to her; and I mean
_chambermaids whom he knew to be such. . . . Never did he |
chance to say anything disobliging to anybody. . . . Never be-
fore company anything mistimed or venturesome, but even to
_ the smallest gesture, his walk, his bearing, his features, all being
_ proper, respectful, noble, grand, majestic, andthoroughly natural.”
_ Such is the model, and, nearly or remotely, it is imitated up to
the end of the ancient régime. If it undergoes any change, it is
‘only to become more sociable. In the eighteenth century, ex-
cept on great ceremonial occasions, it is seen descending step by
step from its pedestal. It no longer imposes “that stillness around
‘it which lets one hear a fly walk.” “Sire,” said the Marshal de
‘Richelieu, who had seen three reigns, addressing Louis XVL.,

“under Louis XIV. no one dared utter a word; under fia
XV. people whispered; under your Majesty they talk aloud.”
‘If authority is a loser, society is the gainer; etiquette, insensibly
telaxed, allows the introduction of ease and cheerfulness. Hence-


1Mme. de Caylus, ‘‘ Souvenirs,” p. 108,
2 St. Simon, 461.


. ee THE ANCIENT REGIME.


off stateliness like an uncomfortable and ridiculous garment,
““seeking respect less than applause. It no longer suffices to be
affable; one has to appear amiable at any cost with one’s inferiors
as with one’s equals.”! The French princes, says again a con-
temporary lady, “are dying with fear of being deficient ?
graces.”” Even around the throne “the style is free and pla
ful.” The grave and disciplined court of Louis XIV. became a
the end of the century, under the smiles of the youthful queen, :
the most seductive and gayest of drawing-rooms. Through
this universal relaxation, a worldly existence gets to be perfect ch
“He who was not living before 1789,” says Talleyrand at a later
period, “knows nothing of the charm of living.” It was pi: |
great; no other way of living was appreciated; it engross ed
man wholly. When society becomes so attractive, people live f

it alone. ‘F


ae


II.


There is neither leisure nor taste for other matters, even —
things which are of most concern to man, such as public affair,
the household, and the family. With respect to the first, I have
already stated that people abstain from them, and are indiffere ts
the administration of things, whether local or general, is out of
their hands and no longer interests them. They only allude tol ts
in jest; events of the most serious consequence form the subj :
of witticisms. After the edict of the Abbé Terray, which threw
the funds half into bankruptcy, a spectator, too much crowded in 1 dl
the theatre, cried out, “Ah, how unfortunate that our good Abbé —
Terray is not here to cut us down one-half!” Everybody laug Q
and applauds. All Paris the following day, is consoled for ae
ruin by repeating the,phrase. Alliances, battles, taxation, tree
ministries, coups d’état, the entire history of the country, is pat


|


1 Duc. de Lévis, p. 32r.

2 Mme. de Genlis, ‘Souvenirs de Félicie,” p. 160. It is important, however, to
attention to the old-fashioned royal attitude under Louis XV. and even Louis sa
“Although I was advised,” says Alfieri, “that the king never addressed ordinary strangers,
I could not digest the Olympian-Jupiter look with which Louis XV. measured the person
presented to him, from head to foot, with such an impassible air; if a fly should be intro- —
duced to a giant, the giant, after looking at him, would smile, or perhaps remark. ‘What
a little mite!’ In any event, if he said nothing, his face would express it for him.” Alfieri,
“Mémoires,” I, 138, 1768. See in Mme. d’Oberkirk’s ‘‘ Mémoires,” (II. 349), the lesson
administered by Mme. Royale, aged seven and a half years, to a lady introduced to her.


‘CHAP. Il. HABITS AND CHARACTERS. 127


into epigrams and songs. One ’day,' in an assembly of young
_ people belonging to the court, one of them, as the current witti-
cism was passing around, raised his hands in delight and ex-
claimed, “How can one help being pleased with great events,
_ even with disturbances, when they give us such wit!” Thereupon
_ the wit circulates, and every disaster in France is turned into non-
sense. A song on the battle of Hochstaedt was pronounced
poor, and some one im this connection said: “I am sorry that
battle was lost—the song is so worthless.” ?

Even when eliminating from this trait all that belongs to the
sway of impulse and the license of paradox, there remains the
stamp of an age in which the State is almost nothing and society
almost everything. We may on this principle divine what order
of talent was required im the ministers. M. Necker, having
given a magnificent supper with serious and comic opera, “finds
that this festivity is worth more to him in credit, favor, and sta-
bility than all his financial schemes put together. . . . His last
arrangement concerning the vizgtiéme excited remark only for |
one day, while everybody is still talking about his féte; at
Paris, as well as in Versailles, its attractions are dwelt on in de-
tail, people emphatically declaring that Monsieur and Mme.
Necker are a grace to society.”* Good society devoted to
pleasure imposes on those in office the obligation of providing
pleasures for it. It might also say, in a half-serious, half-ironical
tone, with Voltaire, “that the gods created kings only to give
fetes every day provided they differ; that life is too short to
make any other use of it; that lawsuits, mtmgues, warfare, and
the quarrels of priests, which consume human life, are absurd and
horrible things; that man is born only to enjoy himself;” and
_ that among the essential things we must put the “superfluous” in
the first rank.

According to this, we can easily foresee that they will be as
- little concerned with their private affairs as with public affairs.
_ Housekeeping, the management of property, domestic economy,


'1Champfort, 26, 55; Bachaumont, I. 136 (Sept. 7, 1762). One month after the Parliament
had passed a Jaw against the Jesuits, little Jesuits in wax appeared, with a snail for a base.
“By means of a thread’the Jesuit was made to pop in and out from the shell. It is all the
rage—there is no house without its Jesuit.”

-? On the other hand, the song on the battle of Rosbach is fine.

3 “Correspondance secréte,” by Métra, Imbert, etc., V. 277 (Nov. 17,1777). Voltaire,

“Princess de Babylone.”


128 | THE ANCIENT REGIME.


are in their eyes vulgar, insipid in the highest degree,
suited to an intendant ora butler. Of what use are such per- A
sons if we must have such cares? Life is no longer a festival if
one has to provide the ways and means. Comforts, luxuries, the | ;
agreeable must flow naturally and greet our lips of their own ac- 4
cord. As a matter of course and without his intervention, a i


‘=F


so that he may reserve all his attention to be expended in eee. 7
on the guests in his drawing-room. Such a mode of living ~
is not to be maintained without waste, and the domestics, left to.
themselves, make the most of it. What matter is it, so long as
they perform their duties? Moreover, everybody must live, and ag
it is pleasant to have contented and obsequious faces around one. —
Hence the first hquses in the kingdom are given up to pillage.
Louis XV., on a hunting expedition one day, accompanied by
the Duc de Choiseul,' inquired of him how much he thought #

the carriage in which they were seated had cost. M. de Choi-
seul replied that he should consider himself fortunate to get one *
like it for 5,000 or 6,000 francs; but, “ His Majesty paying for r:
it as a king, and not always paying cash, might have paid +
8,000 francs for it.” ‘You are wide of the mark,” rejoined the © 3
king, “for this vehicle, as you see it, cost me 30,000 francs....
The robberies in my howeelold are enormous, but it is impossi-
ble to put a stop to them.” In effect, the great help themselves"
as well as the little, either in money, or in kind, ar in services.
There are in the king’s household fifty-four horses for the grand
equerry, thirty-eight of them being for Mme. de Brionne, the —
administratrix of the office of the stables during her son’s minor-
ity; there are two hundred and fifteen grooms on duty, and
about as many horses kept at the king’s expense for various other _
persons, entire strangers to the department.” What a nest of
parasites on this one branch of the royal tree! Elsewhere I find
Madame Elisabeth, so moderate, consuming fish amounting to
30,000 francs per annum; meat and game to 70,000 francs; can-
dles to 60,000 francs; Mesdames burn white and yellow candles to


1 De Bezenval, ‘‘ Mémoires,” II. re An anecdote related by the Duke. .
2 Archives nationales, a pes by M. Texier (1780). A report by M. Mesnard de Chom ;
(O!, 738).


CHAP. IL. HABITS AND CHARACTERS. 129


“the amount of 215,068 francs; the light for the queen comes to’
157,109 francs. ‘The street at Versailles is still shown, formerly
lined with stalls, to which the king’s valets resorted to nourish Ver-
sailles by the sale of his dessert. ‘There is no article from which the
domestic insects do not manage to scrape and glean something.
_ The king is supposed to drink orgeat and lemonade to the value of
_ 2,1go0 francs; “The grand broth, day and night,” which Mme.
‘Royale, aged six years, sometimes drinks, costs 5,201 francs per
annum. ‘Towards the end of the preceding reign! the femmes-
de-chambre enumerate in the Dauphine’s outlay “four pairs of
_ shoes per week; three ells of ribbon per diem, to tie her dress-
ing-gown; two ells of taffeta per diem, to cover the basket in
which she keeps her gloves-and fan.” A few years earlier the
king paid 200,000 francs for coffee, lemonade, chocolate,
orgeat, and water-ices; several persons were inscribed on the
list for ten or twelve cups a day, while it was estimated that the
coffee, milk and bread each morning for each lady -of the bed-
chamber cost 2,000 francs per annum.” We can readily under-
_ stand how, in households thus managed, the purveyors are
willing to wait. They wait so well that often under Louis XV.
they refuse to provide and “hide themselves.” Even the delay is
_ so regular that at last they are obliged to pay them five per cent.
interest on their advances; at this rate, in 1778, after all Turgot’s
_ economic reforms, the king still owes nearly 800,000 livres to his
- wine merchant, and nearly three millions and a half to his pur-
_ veyor.? The same disorder exists in the houses which surround
the throne. “Mme. de-Guéménée owes 60,000 livres to her shoe-
maker, 16,000 livres to her paper-hanger, and the rest in propor-
tion.” Another lady, whom the Marquis de Mirabeau sees with
hired horses, replies at his look of astonishment, “It is not
_ because there are not seventy horses in our stables, but none of
them are able to walk to-day.” Mme. de Montmorin, on ascer-
taining that her husband’s debts are greater than his property,
thinks she can save her dowry of 200,000 livres, but is informed
_ that she had given security for a tailor’s bill, which, “ incredible


}


1 “Marie Antoinette,” by d’Arneth and Geffroy, I. 277 (February 29, 1772).

2 De Luynes, XVII. 37 (August, 1758). D’Argenson, February 11, 1753.

_ 8 Archives nationales, O}, 738. Various sums of interest.are paid: 12,969 francs to the
baker, 39,631 francs to the wine merchant, and 173,899 francs to the purveyor.

4 4 Marquis de Mirabeau, “‘Traité de Population,” 60. ‘Le Gouvernement de Normandie,”

_ by Hippeau, IT. 204 (Sept. 30, 1780).


130 “THE ANCIENT REGIME.


and ridiculous to say, amounts to the sum of 180,000 livres.’ 1
“One of the decided manias of these days,” says Mme. d’O

kirk, “is to: be ruined in everything and by everything.” “T
two brothers Villemer build country cottages at from 500,000
600,000 livres; one of them keeps forty horses to ride occas
‘ally in the Bois de Boulogne on horseback.”? In one night }
de Chenonceaux, son. of M. et Mme. Dupin, loses at play
700,000 livres. ‘“M. de Chenonceaux, and M. de Francueil ran
through seven or eight millions at this epoch.”? “The Duc de
Lauzun, at the age of twenty-six, after having run through tl
capital of 100,000 crowns revenue, is prosecuted by his cre ;
itors for nearly two millions of indebtedness.”* “M. le Prince
de Conti lacks bread and wood, although with an income of
600,000 livres,” for the reason that “he buys and builds wildly |
on all sides.”® Where would be the pleasure if these peop! enm
were reasonable? What kind of a seignior is he who studies the
price of things? And how can the exquisite be reached if one
grudges money? Money, accordingly, must flow and’ — on
until it is exhausted, first by the innumerable secret or tolerated
bleedings through domestic abuses, and next in broad streams sof.
the master’s own prodigality, through structures, furniture, toilets,
hospitality, gallantry, and pleasures. ‘The Comte d’Artois, t
he may give the queen a féte, demolishes, rebuilds, arranges,
furnishes Bagatelle from top to bottom, employing nine hundi _
workmen, day and night, and, as there is no time to go any dis-
tance for ae: plaster, and cut stone, he sends patrols of the
Swiss guards on the highways to sieze, pay for, and. immediately
bring in all carts thus loaded.6 The Marshal de Soubise, enter-
taining the king one day at dinner and over night, in his country
house, expends 200,000 livres.?. Mme. de Matignon makes a con- if
tract to be furnished every day with a new head-dress at 24,000 ‘
livres per annum. Cardinal de Rohan has an alb bordered with


'
'


1 Mme. de Larochejacquelein, ‘‘ Mémoires,” p. 30. Mme. d’Oberkirk, II. 66.

2 D’Argenson, January 26, 1753.

3 George Sand, ‘‘ Histoire de ma vie,” I. 78.

4 “Marie Antoinette,”’ by d’Arneth and Geffroy, I. 61 (March 18, 1777).

5 D’Argenson, January 26, 1753.

6 “Marie Antoinette,” III. 135, November 19, 1777.

7 Barbier, IV., 155. The Marshal de Soubise had a hunting lodge to which the king came
from time to baat to eat an omelet of pheasants’ eggs, costing 157 livres, 10 sous. (Mercier,
XII. 192; also, according to the cook’s statement who made it.)


CHAP. HL. ITABITS AND .CHARACTERS. 131


point lace, which is valued at more than 100,000 livres, while
his kitchen utensils are of massive silver.!

Nothing is more natural, considering their ideas of money ;
hoarded and piled up, instead of being a fertilizing stream, it is a
useless marsh exhaling bad odors. The queen, having presented
the Dauphin with a carriage whose silver-gilt trappings are
decked with rubies and sapphires, naively exclaims, “ Has not the
king added 200,000 livres to my treasury? ‘That is no reason for
keeping them!”* They would rather throw it out of the win-
dow,—which was actually done by the Marshal de Richelieu with
a purse he had given to his grandson, and which the lad, not know-
‘ing how to use, brought back intact. Money, on this occasion,
was at least of service to the passing street-sweeper that picked it
up. But had there been no passer-by to pick it up, it would have
been thrown into the river. One day Mme. de B , being with
the Prince de Conti, hinted that she would like a miniature of
her canary bird set in a ring. ‘The Prince offers to have it made.
His offer is accepted, but on condition that the miniature be
set plain and without jewels. Accordingly the miniature is placed
in a simple rim of gold. But, to cover over the painting, a large
diamond, made very thin, serves as a glass. Mme. de B ;
having returned the diamond, “M. le Prince de Conti had it
ground to powder which he used to dry the ink of the note he
wrote to Mme. de B on the subject.” This pinch of pow-
der cost four or five thousand livres, but'we may divine the turn
and tone of the note. The extreme of profusion must accom-
pany the height of gallantry, the man of the world being so much
the more important according to his contempt for money.


IIl.

In a drawing-room the wife who receives the least attention
from a man is his own and on condition of doing likewise. Hence
at a time like this, when people live for society and in society,
there is no place for conjugal intimacy. Moreover, when a mar-
ried couple occupy an exalted position they are separated by cus-


1 Mme. d’Oberkirk, I. 129, II. 257.

2 Mme. de Genlis, ‘Souvenirs de Félicie,” 80; and “‘Théatre de |’Education,” II. 367. A
virtuous young woman in ten months runs into debt to the amount of 70,000 francs: ‘‘’Ten
louis for a small table, 15 louis for another, 800 francs for a bureau, 200 francs for a small
writing desk, 300 francs for-a large one; hair rings, hair glass, hair chain, hair bracelets, hair
clasps, hair necklace, hair box, g,g00 francs,” etc.


132 THE ANCIENT REGIME. BOOK Il.


tom and decorum. Each party has his or her own household,
at least their own apartments, servants, equipage, receptions and
distinct society, and, as self-parade entails ceremony, they stand _
towards each other in deference to their rank on the footing of

; |
polite strangers. ‘They are each announced in each other’s apart- — ‘ts
ment; they address each other “ Madame, Monsieur,” and not _
alone in public, but in private; they shrug their shoulders when, é..
sixty leagues off from Paris, they encounter in some old chateaua ~


.


provincial wife ignorant enough to say “my dear” to her hus- ~
band before company.! Already. separated at the fireside, theta
two lives diverge beyond it at an ever increasing radius. The ~
husband has a government of his own: his private command, his
private regiment, his post at court, which keeps him absent from
home; only in his declining years does his wife consent to follow
him into garrison or into the provinces.” And rather is this the
case because she is herself occupied, and as seriously as himself; —
often with a position near a princess, and always with an important —
circle of company which she must maintain. At this epoch woman
is as active as man,* following the same career, and with the same
resources, consisting of the flexible voice, the winning grace, they dl 4
insinuating manner, the tact, the quick perception of the right —
moment, and the art of pleasing, demanding, and obtaining ss
there is not a lady at court who does not bestow regiments and <a
benefices. Through this right the wife has her personal retinue
of solicitors and protégés, also, like her husband, her friends, her
enemies, her own ambitions, disappointments, and rancorous feel-
ing; nothing could be more effectual in the disruption of a &
household than this similarity of occupation and this division of _
interests. The tie thus loosened ends by being sundered under


1 Mme. de Genlis, ‘* Adéle et Théodore,” III. 14. )

2 Mme. d’Avray, sister of Mme. de Genlis, sets the example, for which she is at first much
criticized.

3 “*When I arrived in France M. de Choiseul’s reign was just over. The wife who nee
please him, or even please his sister-in-law the Duchesse de Gramont, was sure of setting
crazy every colonel and lieutenant-general she was acquainted with. Women were of conse-
quence even in the eyes of the old and of the clergy; they were thoroughly familiar, to an.
extraordinary degree, with the march of events; they knew by heart the characters ane
habits of the king’s friends and ministers. One of these, on returning to his chateau from —
Versailles, informed his wife about every thing with which he had been occupied; with us he
says one or two words to her about her water-color sketches, or remains silent and thoughtful,
pondering over what he has just heard in Parliament. Our poor ladies are abandoned to the
society of those frivolous men who, for want of intellect, have no ambition, and of courseno
employment (dandies).” (Stendhal, ‘Rome, Naples, and Florence,” 377. A narrative by —
Colonel Forsyth). .


CHAP. IL. : HABITS AND CHARACTERS. 133


the ascendency of opinion. “It looks well not to live together,”
to grant each other every species of tolerance, and to devote
oneself to society. Society, indeed, then fashions opinion, and
through opinion it urges on the habits which it requires. .
Toward the middle of the century the husband and wife lodge
under the same roof, but that is all. ‘They are never at home
in private; they are never encountered in the same carriage;
they are never met in the same house; nor, through the necessity
of the case, are they ever together in public.” Profound senti-
ment would have seemed odd and even “ridiculous,” in any event
unbecoming; it would have been as unacceptable as an earnest
*‘aside” in the general current of light conversation. Each has
a duty to all, and for a couple to entertain each other is isolation ;
in company there exists no right of the téte-a-téte' It was
hardly allowed for a few days to lovers.” And even then it was
regarded unfavorably; they were found too much occupied with
each other. Their preoccupation diffused around them an at-
mosphere of “constraint and eznuz, one had to be upon one’s
guard and to check oneself.” They were “dreaded.” The
exigencies of society are those of an absolute king, and admit
of no partition. “If morals was the loser, society was infinitely
the gainer,” says M. de Bezenval, a contemporary; “having got
rid of the annoyances and dulness caused by the husbands’
presence, the freedom was extreme; the coquetry both of men
and women kept up social vivacity and daily provided piquant
adventures.” Nobody is jealous, not even when in_ love.
“People are mutually pleased and become attached; if one
grows weary of the other, they part with as little concern as
they came together. Should the sentiment revive they take to
each other with as much vivacity as if it were the first time they
had been engaged. ‘They may again separate, but they never
quarrel. As they have become enamored without love, they part
without hate, deriving from the feeble desire they have inspired
the advantage of being always ready to oblige.”* Appearances,
moreover, are respected. An uninformed stranger would detect


1 De Bezenval, 49, 60. ‘‘Out of twenty seigniors at the court there are fifteen not living
with their wives, and keeping mistresses. Nothing is so common at Paris among certain per-
sons.” . (Barbier, IV. 496.)

2 Ne soyez point epoux, ne soyez point amant.
‘ Soyez homme du jour et vous serez charmant.
3 Crébillon /7s, ‘La nuit et le moment,” IX. 14.
12


wd


nothing to excite suspicion. An extreme curiosity, says Horace
Walpole,! or a great familiarity with things, is necessary to detect
the slightest intimacy between the two sexes. . No familiarity is


allowed except under the guise of friendship, while the vocabulary —


of love is as much prohibited as its rites apparently are. Even
with Crébillon Zs, even with Laclos, at the most exciting mo-
ments, the terms their characters employ are circumspect and
irreproachable. Whatever indecency there may be, it is never


expressed in words, the sense of propriety in language imposing —


itself not only on the outbursts of-passion, but again on the
grossness of instincts. Thus do the sentiments which are nat-
urally the strongest lose their point and sharpness; their rich and
polished remains are converted into playthings for the drawing-
room, and, thus cast to and fro by the whitest hands, fall on the
floor like a shuttlecock. We must, on this point, listen to the
heroes of the epoch; their free and easy tone is inimitable, and
it depicts both them and their actions. “I conducted myself,”
says the Duc de Lauzun, “very prudently, and even deferentially
with Mme. de Lauzun; I had Mme. de Cambis very openly for


whom I concerned myself very little; I kept the little Eugénie
whom I loved a great deal; I played high, I paid my court to
the king, and I hunted with him with great punctuality.”* He


had for others, withal, that indulgence of which he himself stood
in need.. “He was asked what he would say if his wife (whom
he had not seen for ten years) should write to him that she had
just discovered that she was enceinte. He reflected a moment
and then replied, ‘I would write, and tell her that I was delighted
that heaven had blessed our union; be careful of your health; I
will call and pay my respects this evening.’” There are countless
replies of the same sort, and I venture to say that, without hay-
ing.read them, one could not imagine to what a degree social art
had overcome natural instincts.


1 Horace Walpole’s letters (January 25, 1766). The Duke de Brissac, at Louveciennes, the
lover of Mme. du Barry, and passionately fond of her, always in her society assumed the
attitude of a polite stranger. (Mme. Vigée-Lebrun, ‘‘Souvenirs,” I. 165.) :

2 De Lauzun, 51. Champfort, 39. ‘‘The Duc de whose wife had just been the subject
of scandal, complained to her mother-in-law; the latter replied with the greatest coolness,
‘Eh, Monsieur, you make a good deal of talk about nothing. Your father was accustomed
to better company.’” (Mme. d’Oberkirk, II. 135, 241). ‘A husband said to his wife, ‘I
allow you everybody outside of princes and lackeys.’ He was true to the fact, these two ex-
tremes bringing dishonor on account of the scandal attached to them.” (Sénac de Meilhan,
‘‘Considerations sur les Mceurs””). On a wife being discovered by a husband, he simply ex-
claims, ‘‘ Madame, what imprudence! Suppose that I was any other man.” - (“La femme
au dix-huitiéme siécle,” zor.)


134 . THE ANCIENT REGIME. BOOK II,


Ke;


ax


CHAP. 11. HABITS AND CHARACTERS. 135


“Here at Paris,” writes Mme. d’Oberkirk, “I am no longer my
own mistress. I scarcely have time to talk with my husband
and to answer my letters. I do not know what women do that
are accustomed to lead this life; they certainly have no families
to look after, nor children to educate.” At all events they act
as if they had none, and the men likewise. Married people not
living together live but rarely with their children, and the causes
which disintegrate wedlock also disintegrate the family. In the
first place there is the aristocratic tradition, which interposes a
barrier between parents and children with a view to maintain a
respectful distance. Although enfeebled and about to disappear,}
this tradition still subsists. The son says “ Monsieur” to his
father; the daughter comes “respectfully” to kiss her mother’s
hand at her toilet. A-caress is rare and seems a favor; children
generally, when with their parents, are silent, the sentiment that
usually animates them being that of deferential timidity. At one
time they were regarded as so many subjects, and up to a certain
point they are so still; while the new exigencies of worldly life
place them or keep them effectually aside. M. de Talleyrand
stated that he had never slept under the same roof with his father
and mother. And if they do sleep there, they are not the less
neglected. “I was entrusted,” says the Count de Tilly, “to
valets and to a kind of preceptor resembling these in more re-
spects than one.” During this time his father ran after women.
“T have known him,” adds the young man, “to have mistresses .
up to an advanced age; he was always adoring them and con-
stantly abandoning them.” ‘The Duc de Lauzun finds it difficult
to obtain a good tutor for his son; for this reason the latter
writes, “he conferred the duty on one of my late mother’s lackeys
who could read and write tolerably well, and to whom the title
of valet-de-chambre was giver to insure greater consideration.
They gave me the most fashionable teachers besides; but M.
Roch (which was my mentor’s name) was not qualified to arrange


1 See in this relation the somewhat ancient types, especially in the provinces. ‘My mother,
my sister, and myself, transformed into statues by my father’s presence, only recover ourselves
after he leaves the room.” (Chateaubriand, ‘“‘ Mémoires,” I. 17, 28, 130; “Mémoires de
Mirabeau,” I. 53.) The Marquis said of his father Antoine: ‘‘I never had the honor of kiss-
ing the cheek of that venerable man. . . . At the Academy, being two hundred leagues
away from him, the mere thought of him made me dread every youthful amusement which
could be followed by the least unfavorable results.” Paternal authority seems almost as rigid
among the middle and lower classes. (‘‘ Beaumarchais et son temps,” by De Loménie, I, 23;
**Vie de mon pére,”’ by Restif de la Bretonne, Jasszvz.)


136 THE ANCIENT REGIME. BOOK i,”


their lessons, nor to qualify me to benefit by.them. I was, more- a
oyer, like all the children of my age and of my station, dressed a
in the handsomest clothes to go out, and naked and dying with —
hunger in the house,”! and not through unkindness, but through
household oversight, dissipation, and disorder, attention being —
given to things elsewhere. One might easily count the fathers”
who, like the Marshal de Belle-Isle, brought up their sons under
their own eyes, and themselves attended to their education me-—
.thodically, strictly, and with tenderness. As to the girls, they
were placed in convents; relieved’ from this care, their parents —
only enjoy the greater freedom. Even when they retain charge ~
of them they are scarcely more of a burden to them. Little Fé-
licité de Saint-Aubin” sees her parents “ only on their waking up
and at meal times.” Their day is wholly taken up; .the mother
is making or receiving visits; the father is in his laboratory or en-
gaged in hunting. Up to seven years of age the child passes her
time with chambermaids who teach her only a little catechism,
“ with an infinite number of ghost stories.” About this time she
is taken care of, but in a way which well portrays the epoch.
The Marquise, her mother, the author of mythological and pas-
toral operas, has a theatre built in the chateau; a great crowd of
company ‘resorts to it from Bourbon-Lancy and Moulins; after |
rehearsing twelve weeks the little girl, with a quiver of arrows ~
and blue wings, plays the part of Cupid, and the costume is so be-
coming she is allowed to wear it in common during the entire day —
for nine months. ‘To finish the business they send for a dancing-
fencing master, and, still wearing the Cupid costume, she takes les-
sons in fencing and in deportment. ‘The entire winter is devoted
to playing comedy and tragedy.” Sent out of the room after din-
ner, she is brought in again only to play on the harpsichord or to
declaim the monologue of Alzire before a numerous assembly,
Undoubtedly such extravagances are not customary; but the spirit
of education is everywhere the same; that is to say, in the eyes of —
parents there is but one intelligible and rational existence, that of
society, even for children, and the attentions bestowed on these —
are solely with a view to introduce them into it or to prepare them
for it.


1 Sainte-Beuve, ‘‘ Nouveaux Lundis,” XII. 13; Comte de Tilly, ‘‘ Mémoires,” I. 12; Due
de Lauzun, 5; ‘‘ Beaumarchais,” by De Loménie, IT. 298.
2 Nicene de Genlis, ‘‘ Mémoires,” ch. ii, and iii.


P Fi


CHAP. I. HABITS AND CHARACTERS. 137°


Even in the last years of the ancient régime! little boys have
their hair powdered, “a pomatumed chignon (dourse), ringlets,
and curls”; they wear the sword, the chapeau under the arm, a
frill, and a coat with gilded cuffs; they kiss young ladies’ hands
with the air of little dandies. A lass of six years is bound up. in


a whalebone waist; her large hoop-petticoat supports a skirt


covered with wreaths; she wears on her head a skilful combina-
tion of false curls, puffs, and knots, fastened with pins, and
crowned with plumes, and so high that frequently. “the chin is
half way down to her feet”; sometimes they put rouge on her
face. She is a miniature lady, and she knows it; she is fully up
in her part, without effort or inconvenience, by force of habit;
the unique, the perpetual instruction she gets is that on her de-
portment ; it may be said with truth that the fulcrum of education
in this country is the dancing-master.” They could get along
with him without any others; without him the others were of no
use. For, without him, how could people go through. easily,
suitably, and gracefully the thousand and one actions of daily life,
walking, sitting down, standing up, offering the arm, using the fan,
listening and smiling, before eyes so experienced and before such
a refined public? ‘This is to be the great thing for them when
they become men and women, and for this reason it is the thing
of chief importance for them as children. Along with, graces-of,


attitude and of gesture, they already have those of the mind and


of expression. Scarcely is their tongue loosened when they
speak the polished language of their parents. The latter amuse
themselves with them and use them as pretty dolls; the preach-
ing of Rousseau, which, during the last third of the last century,
brought children into fashion, produces no other effect. They
are made to recite their lessons in public, to perform in proverbs,
to take parts in pastorals. ‘Their sallies are encouraged. They
know how to turn a compliment, to invent a clever or affecting
repartee, to be gallant, sensitive, and even spirituelle, The little
Duc d’Angouléme, holding a book in his hand, receives Suffren,
whom he addresses thus: “I was reading Plutarch and his illus-


1 Mme. d’Oberkirk, II. 35. This fashion lasts until 1783. De Goncourt, ‘‘La femme au
dix-huitiéme siécle,”’ 415. ‘Les petits parrains,” an engraving by Moreau. ~Berquin, “ L’ami
des enfants,” Jassim. Mme. de Genlis, “‘Théatre de I’Education,” passzuz.

2 Le Sage, ‘‘Gil Blas”: the discourse of the dancing-master charged with the education of
the son of Count d’Olivarés.


12*


138 THE ANCIENT REGIME. BOOK IT,


trious men.. You could not have entered more apvopos.”! The
children of M. de Sabran, a boy and a girl, one eight and the
other nine, having taken lessons from the comedians Sainval and
Larive, come to Versailles to play before the king and queen in
Voltaire’s “Oreste,” and on the little fellow being interrogated
about the classic authors, he replies to a lady, the mother of three
charming girls, “ Madame, Anacreon is the only poet I can think
of here!” Another, of the same age, replies to a question of
Prince Henry of Prussia with an:agreeable impromptu in verse.”
To cause witticisms, insipidities, and mediocre verse to germi-
nate in a brain eight years old, what a triumph for the culture of
the day! It is the last characteristic of the régime which, after
having stolen man away from public affairs, from his own affairs,
from marriage, from the family, hands him over, with all his sen-
timents and all his faculties, to social worldliness, he and all that
belong to him. Below him fine ways and forced politeness pre-
vail, even with his servants and tradesmen. A Frontin has a gal-
lant unconstrained air, and he turns a compliment.’ An abigail
needs only to be a kept mistress to become a lady. A shoe-
maker is a “monsieur in black,” who says to a mother on saluting
the daughter, “ Madame, a charming young person, and I am
more sensible than ever of the value of your kindness,” on which
the young girl, just out of a convent, takes him for a suitor and
blushes scarlet. Undoubtedly less unsophisticated eyes would
distinguish the difference between this pinchbeck louis d’or and a
genuine one; but their resemblance suffices to show thé universal
action of the central mint—machinery which stamps both with
the same effigy, the base metal and the refined gold. |
IV.

A society which obtains such ascendency must possess some

charm; in no country, indeed, and in no age has so perfect a


1 “Correspondance,” by Métra, XIV. 212; XVI. roo. Mme. d’Oberkirk, IT, 302.
2 De Ségur, I. 297. i
; Ma naissance n’a rien de neuf,
J'ai suivi la commune régle,
Mais c’est vous qui sortez d’un ceuf,
Car vous étes un aigle.
Mme. de Genlis, “‘ Mémoires,” ch. iv. Mme. de Genlis wrote verses of this kind at twelve —
years of age.
3 Already in the Précieuses of Moliére, the Marquis de Mascarille and the Vicomte de Jode-
let. And the same in Marivaux, “L’épreuve, les jeux de l’amour et du hasard,” etc. Le
Sage, ‘Crispin rival de son maitre.” Laclos, ‘Les liaisons dangéreuses,”’ first letter.


Slain


F
i
¢
if
:
ihe
‘™
Ma
Wa


CHAP, II. HABITS AND CHARACTERS. 139


social art rendered life so agreeable. Paris is the school-house
of Europe, a school of urbanity to which the youth of Russia,
Germany, and England resort to become civilized. Lord Ches-
terfield in his letters never tires of reminding his son of this,
and of urging him into these drawing-rooms, which will remove
“his Cambridge rust.” Once familiar with them they are never
abandoned, or if one is obliged to leave them, one always sighs
for them. ‘Nothing is comparable,” says Voltaire,! “to the
genial life one leads there in the bosom of the arts and of a
calm and refined voluptuousness; strangers and monarchs have
preferred this repose, so agreeably occupied in it and so enchant-
ing to theirown countries and thrones. The heart there softens and
melts away like aromatics slowly dissolving in moderate heat, evap-


_orating in delightful perfumes.” Gustavus III., beaten by the
_ Russians, declares that he will pass his last days in Paris in
a house on the boulevards; and this is not merely compli-


mentary, for he sends for plans and an estimate.” A supper
or an evening entertainment brings people two hundred leagues
away. Some friends of the Prince de Ligne “leave Brussels
after breakfast, reach the opera in Paris just in time to see the
curtain rise, and, after the spectacle is over, return immediately
to Brussels, travelling all night.” Of this delight, so eagerly
sought, we have only imperfect copies, and we are obliged to
revive it intellectually. It consists, in the first place, in the
pleasure of living with perfectly polite people; there is no en-
joyment more subtle, more lasting, more inexhaustible. The
self-love of man being infinite, intelligent people are always able
to produce some refinement of attention to gratify it. Worldly
sensibility’ being infinite there is no imperceptible shade of it


permitting indifference. After all, man is still the greatest source


of happiness or of misery to man, and in those days the ever-
flowing fountain brought to him sweetness instead of bitter-
ness. Not only was it essential not to offend, but it was essen-
tial to please; one was expected to lose sight of oneself
in others, to be always cordial and good-humored, to keep one’s
own vexations and grievances in one’s own breast, to spare others
melancholy ideas and to supply them with cheerful ideas. ‘Was
any one old in those days? It is the Revolution which brought


1 “* Princesse de Babylone.”’
2 “Gustave III.,”” by Geffroy, II. 37. Mme. Vigée-Lebrun, I. 81.


ae
140 - THE ANCIENT REGIME. BOOK I


old age info the world. Your grandfather, my child,! was hand-
some, elegant, neat, gracious, perfumed, playful, amiable, affec-
tionate, and good-tempered to the day of his death. People
then knew how to live and how to die; there was no such thing
as troublesome infirmities. If any one had the gout, he walked
along all the same and made no faces; people well brought
up concealed their sufferings. ‘There was none of that absorp-
tion in business which spoils a man inwardly and dulls his brain.
People knew how to ruin themselves without letting it appear,
like good gamblers who lose their money without showing un-
easiness or spite. A man would be carried half dead to a hunt.
It was thought better to die at a ball or at the play than in one’s
bed between four wax candles and horrid men in black. Peo-


ple were philosophers ; they did not assume to be austere, but


often were so without making a display of it. If one was dis-
creet, it was through inclination and without pedantry or prudish-
ness. People enjoyed this life, and when the hour of departure
came they did not try to disgust others with living. The last


request of my old husband was that I would survive him as


long as possible and live as happily as I could.”

When, especially, women are concerned it is not sufficient to
be polite; it is important to be gallant. Each lady invited by
the Prince de Conti to Ile-Adam “ finds a carriage and horses at
her disposal; she is free to give dinners every day in her own
rooms to her own friends.” Mme. de Civrac, obliged to go to the
springs, her friends undertake to divert her on the journey; they
keep ahead of her a few posts, and, at every place where she
rests for the night, they give her a little /éve champétre, disguised
as villagers and in bourgeois attire, with bailiff and scrivener, and
other masks all singing and reciting verses. A lady on the eve
of Longchamp, knowing that the Vicomte de V possesses
two caléches, makes a request for one of them; it is disposed of,


but he is careful not to decline, and immediately has one of


the greatest elegance purchased to Joan it for three hours; he is


only too happy that anybody should wish to borrow from him, -


1 George Sand, I. 58-60. A narration by her grandmother, who, at thirty years of age,
married M. Dupin de Francueil, aged sixty-two.
2 Mme. de Genlis, “Souvenirs de Félicie,” 77. ‘Dict. des Etiquettes,” I. 348. Mme.
Campan, III. 74. ;


PRES


» oF


ae


———
ie -


= 727) corte ++
1


LOIRE AE Bie ET


CHAP. TI. HABITS AND CHARACTERS. 141


his prodigality appearing amiable but not astonishing.' The
reason is that women then were queens in the drawing-room; it is
their right; this is the reason why, in the eighteenth century,
they prescribe the law and the fashion in all things. Having
formed the code of usages, it is quite natural that they should
profit by it, and see that all its prescriptions are carried out. In
this respect any circle “of the best company” is a superior tri-
bunal, serving as a court of last appeal.* The Maréchale de
Luxembourg is an authority; there is no point of manners
which she does not justify with an ingenious argument. Any
expression, any neglect of the standard, the slightest sign of pre-
tension or of self-conceit incurs her disapprobation, from which
there is no appeal, and the delinquent is for ever banished from
refined society. -Any subtle observation, any well-timed silence,
an “oh” uttered in an appropriate place instead of an “ah,”
secures from her, as from M. Talleyrand, a diploma of good
breeding which is the commencement of fame and -the promise
of a fortune. Under such an “ instructress” it is evident that
deportment, gesture, language, every act or omission in this
mundane sphere, becomes, like a picture or poem, a veritable
work of art; that is ‘to say, infinite in refinement, at once
studied and easy and so harmonious in its details that its perfec-
tion conceals the difficulty of combining them.

A great lady “receives ten persons with one courtesy, bestowing
on each, through the head or by a glance, all that he is entitled
to;”+ meaning by this the shade of regard due to each phase of
position, consideration, and birth. ‘She has always to deal with
easily irritated amour-propres ; consequently the slightest defi-
ciency in proportion would be promptly detected.”* But she is
never mistaken, and never hesitates in these subtle distinctions ;
with incomparable tact, dexterity, and flexibility of tone, she reg-
ulates the degrees of her welcome. She has one “for women of
condition, one for women of quality, one for women of the court,
one for titled women, one for women of historic names, another


1 See an anecdote concerning this species of royalty in ‘‘ Adéle et Théodore,” I. 69 by
Mme. de Genlis. Mme. Vigée-Lebrun, I.156. ‘‘Womenruled then; the Revolution has de-
throned them. . . . This gallantry I speak of has entirely disappeared.”

2 ““Women in France to some extent dictate whatever is to be said and prescribe whatever is
to be done in the fashionable world.” (‘A comparative view,’’ by John Andrews, 1785.)

3 Mme. d’Oberkirk, I. 299; Mme. de Genlis, ‘‘ Mémoires,” ch. xi.

4 De Tilly, I. 24.

5 Necker, “‘Euvres Completes,” XV. 259.


142 THE ANCIENT REGIME. BOOK I


for women of high birth personally, but married to men beneath
them; another for women who by marriage have changed a com-
mon into a distinguished name; another still for women of repu-
table names in the law; and, finally, another for those whose re-


lief consists chiefly of expensive houses and good suppers.” A — :,


stranger would be amazed on seeing with what certain and adroit
steps she circulates among so many watchful vanities without ever
giving or receiving a check. “She knows how to express all
through the style of her salutations; a varied style, extending
through imperceptible gradations, from the accessory of a single
shrug of the shoulder, almost an impertinence, to that noble and
deferential reverence which so few women, even of the court,
know how to do well; that slow bending forward, with lowered
eyes and straightened figure, gradually recovering and modestly
‘glancing at the person while gracefully raising the body up, al-
together much more refined and more delicate than words, but
very expressive as the means of manifesting respect.” ‘This is
but a single action and very common; there are a hundred
others, and of importance. Imagine, if it is possible, the degree


of elegance and perfection to which they attained through good !


breeding. I select one at random—a duel between two princes
of the blood, the Comte d’Artois and the Duc de Bourbon. *
The latter being the offended party, the former, his superior, had
to offer him a meeting. ‘As soon as the Comte d’Artois saw
him he leaped to the ground, and walking directly up to him, said
to him smiling: ‘Monsieur, the public pretends that we are seek-
ing each other.’ The Duc de Bourbon, removing his hat, replied,
‘Monsieur, I am here to receive your orders.’ ‘To execute your
own,’ returned the Comte d’Artois, ‘but you must allow me to
return to my carriage.’ He comes back with a sword, and the
duel begins. After a certain time they are separated, the seconds
deciding that honor is satisfied. ‘It is not for me to express an
opinion,’ says the Comte d’Artois. ‘Monsieur le Duc de Bour-
bon is to express his wishes; I am here only to receive his or-
ders.’ ‘Monsieur,’ responds the Duc de Bourbon, addressing the —
Comte d’Artois, meanwhile lowering the point of his sword, ‘I
am overcome with gratitude for your kindness, and shall never be
insensible to the honor you have done me.’” Could there be a


1 Narrated by M. de Bezenyal, a witness of the deed.


CHAP. II. HABITS AND CHARACTERS. 143


juster and more delicate sentiment of rank, position, and circum-
stance, and could a duel be surrounded with more graces?
There is no situation, however thorny, which is not saved by po-
liteness. . Through habit, and a suitable expression, even in the -
face of the king, they conciliate resistance and respect. When
Louis XV., having exiled.the Parliament, caused it to be pro-
claimed through Mme. Du Barry that his mind was made up and
that it would not be changed, “ Ah, Madame,” replied the Duc
de Nivernais, “when the king said that he was looking at your-
self.” “My dear Fontenelle,’ said one of his lady friends to
him, placing her hand on his heart, “the brain is there likewise.”
Fontenelle smiled and made no reply.. We see here, even with
an academician, how truths are forced down, a drop of acid ina
sugar-plum; the whole so thoroughly intermingled that the
piquancy of the flavor only enhances its sweetness. Night after
night, in each drawing-room, sugar-plums of this description are
served up, two or three along with the drop of acidity, all the
rest not less exquisite; but possessing only the sweetness and the
perfume. Such is the art of social worldliness, an ingenious and
delightful art, which, entering into all the details of speech and
of action, transforms them into graces; which imposes on man
not servility and falsehood, but civility and concern for others,
and which, in exchange, extracts for him out of human society all
the pleasure it can afford.


V.

One can very well understand this kind of pleasure in a sum-
mary way, but how is it to be made apparent? ‘Taken by them-
selves the pastimes of society are not to be described; they are
too ephemeral; their charm arises from their accompaniments.
A narrative of them would be but tasteless dregs,—dges the
libretto of an opera give any idea of the opera itself?/ If the
reader would revive for himself this vanished world let him seek
for it in those works that have preserved its externals or its ac-
cent, and first in the pictures. and engravings of Watteau, Fra-
gonard and the Saint-Aubins, and then in the novels and dramas of
Voltaire and Marivaux, and even in Collé and Crébillon Zs ,}


1 See especially, Saint-Aubin, “Le bal paré,” “‘Le Concert;’’ Moreau, ‘‘Les Elégants,”
La Vie d’un Seigneur 4 la mode,” the vignettes of “‘La nouvelle Héloise;’? Beaudouin,
La Toilette,” ‘‘ Le Coucher de la Mariée;”” Lawrence, “‘Qu’en dit l’abbé?”’ Watteau, the
first in date and in talent, ¢ransposes these customs and depicts them the better by making


144, THE ANCIENT REGIME.


then do we see the breathing figures and hear their eiali?? 3
What bright, winning, intelligent faces beaming with pleasure and as
with the desire to please! What ease in bearing and in gesture!
_ What piquant. grace in the toilet, in the smile, in vivacious-
ness of expression, in the control of the fluted voice, in the
coquetry of hidden meanings! How involuntarily we stop to


look and listen! Attractiveness is everywhere, in the small


spirituelle heads, in the slender hands, in the rumpled attire, in the
pretty features, in the demeanor. /The slightest gesture, a
pouting or mutinous turn of the head, a plump little wrist peer-
ing from its nest of lace, a yielding waist bent over an embroid-
ery frame, the rapid rustling of an opening fan, is a feast for the
eyes and the intellect. It is indeed all daintiness, a delicate
caress for delicate senses, extending to the external decoration of
life, to the sinuous outlines, the showy drapery, and the refinements
of comfort in the furniture and architecture. Fill your imagina-
tion with these accessories and with these figures and you will take
as much interest in their amusements as they did. In such a
place and in such company it suffices to be together to be con-
tent. Their indolence is no burden to them for they sport with ex-
istence. / At Chanteloup, the Duc de Choiseul, in disgrace, finds
the fashionable world flocking to see him; nothing is done —
and yet no hours of the day are unoccupied! “The Duchess has
only two hours’ time to herself, and these two hours are de-
voted to her toilet and her letters; the calculation is a simple
one,—she gets up at eleven; breakfasts at noon, and this is fol-
lowed by conversation, which lasts three or four hours; dinner
comes at six, after which there is play and the reading of the
memoirs of Mme. de Maintenon.” Ordinarily -: ee company re-
mains together until two o’clock in the morning.” Intellectual
freedom is complete. There is no confusion, no anxiety. They
play whist and tric-trac in the afternoon and faro in the evening.
“They do to-day what they did yesterday and what they will do
to-morrow; the dinner-supper is to them the most important af-
fair in life, and their only complaint in the world is of their diges-


them more poetic. Of the rest, read ‘‘ Marianne,” by Marivaux; “La Verité dans le vin,” by
Collé; “ Le coin du feu,” “La nuit et le moment,” by Crébillon /s ; and two letters in the
“Correspondance inédite” of Mme. du Deffant, one by the Abbé Barthélemy and the other
by the Chevalier de Boufflers, (I. 258,341.).

1 «Correspondance inédite de Mme. du Deffant,” published by M. de Saint-Aulaire, I. 235,
258, 296, 302, 363.


CHAP. TI. HABITS AND CHARACTERS. %—145


tion. Time goes so fast Balways fancy that I aitived only the |
evening before.” Sometimes they get up a little race and the
ladies ‘are disposed to take part in it, “for they are all very spry
and able“to run around the drawing-room five or six times every
day.” But they prefer indoors to the open air; in these days
true sunshine consists of candle-light and the finest sky is a
Pe <4 painted ceiling,—is there any other less subject to inclemencies or
| better adapted to conversation and merriment? They accord-
a ingly chat and jest, in words with present friends, and by letters
le with absent friends. They lecture old Mme. du Deffant, who is
_* too lively and whom they style the “little girl”; the young
Duchesse, tender and sensible, is “her grandmama.” As for
“ srandpapa,” M. de Choiseul, “a slight cold keeping him in
bed he kas fairy stories read to him alt day long, a species of
reading to which we are gll given; we find them as probable as
modern history. Do not imagine that he is unoccupied. He «
has had a tapestry frame put up in-the drawing-room at which
he works, I cannot say with the greatest skill, but at least with
the greatest assiduity. . . . Now, our delight~is in flying a kite;
grandpapa has never seen this sight and he is enraptured with it.”
The pastime, in itself, is nothing; it is resortéd to according to
opportunity or the taste of the hour,.how taken up and now let
alone, and the abbé soon writes «I do not speak about our races
because we race no more, nor of our readings because we do not
read, nor of our promenades because we do not go out. What,
then, do we do? Some play billiards, others dominoes, and
others backgammon. We weave, we ravel and we unravel.
Time pushes us on and -we pay him back.”

Other circles present the same spectacle, Every occupation
being an amusement, a caprice or an impulse of fashion brings
one into favor. At present, it is unravelling; every white hand at
Paris, and in the chateaux, being busy in undoing trimmings,
epaulettes and old stuffs, to pick out the gold and silver threads.
They find in this employment the semblance of economy, an ap-
pearance of occupation, in any event something to keep them in
countenance. On a circle of ladies being formed a big unravel-
ling bag in green taffeta is placed on the table, which belongs to
the lady of the house; immediately all the ladies call for their
bags and “ vozla les fous en l’air.”1/ It is all the rage. They


- . Mme. de Genlis, “Dict. des Euhuettes, ” TT. 38. ‘‘Adéle et Théodore,” I. 212; i. 350.
George Sand, “Histoire de ma ts * I. 228. De Goncourt, p. 111.
?


= covered


wy.


“should su


SS ae ee ee
~& Ree rf x oe
. > *, : < ae
- THE ANCIENT. REGIME 5d BOOK... 555


hg a Bel eae mics and several bout e deste q some derive font tan
~ it'a hundred louis d’or per annum


he entlemen are expected
to provide the materials for the work; the > Due de Lauzun, ac-
cordingly, gives to Madame de V. a ‘harp»of natural size
vith. gold thread; an enormous golden.
as a present” from the Comte de Lowenthal, and Whiclt eost two
or three thousand francs, brings, picked to pieces, five or six hun-
dred francs, But they do not look into matters so closely. $


employment is essential for idle hands, some manual outlet for ° hes “a


nervous activity; a humorous petulance breaks out in the middle
of the pretended work./ One day, when about going out, Ma-
dame de R observes that the gold fringe on Iker dress would
be capital for unraveling whereupon, with a dash, “she cuts one of
the fringes off. “Ten women suddenly surround a man wearing
fringes, pull off his coat and put his fringes and laces into their bags,
just as if a bold flock of tomtits, fluttering and chattering in the air,

dently dart on a jay to pluck off its feathers; thence-
forth a man who enters a circle of women stands in danger of
being stripped alive. Ad] this pretty world has the same pas-
times, the ‘men-as well as the women. Scarcely a man can
be found without«some drawing-room accomplishment, some tri-
fling way of keeping his mind and hands busy and of filling up
the vacant hour; almost all make rhymes, or act in private the-
atricals; many of them are musicians and painters of still-life
subjects. M. de Choiseul, as we have just seen, works at tap-
estry ; others embroider or make sword-knots../ M. de Francueil
is a good violinist and makes violins himself, and besides this he
is “ watchmaker, architect, turner, painter, locksmith, decorator,


~ cook, poet, music-composer and he embroiders remarkably well.” !


In this general state of inactivity it is essential “to know how to
be pleasantly occupied in behalf of others as well as in one’s own


behalf.” Madame de Pompadour is a musician, an actress, a
Pp , ’


painter and an engraver. Madame Adelaide learns watchmaking
and plays on all instruments from a horn to the jew’s-harp, not
very well, it is true, but as well as a queen can sing, whose fine
voice is only ever half in tune. / But they make no pretensions.
The thing is to amuse oneself and nothing more; high spirits and
the amenities of the hour cover all. Rather read this capital fact


Pa
—


1 George Sand, I. 59.


, brought,


: Aina. a tai =
° oS Tha a


CHAP. Mn. HABITS AND. CHARA CTERS. 147


of hess de Lauzun’ at Chanteloup : “Do you know,” writes
the abbé, “that nobody possesses: in a higher degree one quality
which you would never suspect of her, that of preparing scrain-
bled eggs? This talent has been buried in the ground,—she
cannot recall the time she acquired it; I believe that she. had it
at her birth. Accident made it kadwn, and immediately it was
put to the test. Yesterday morning, an hour for ever memorable
in the history of eggs, the implements necessary for this great
operation were all brought out, a heater, some gravy, some pep-
per, salt and eggs. Behold Madame de Lauzun, at first blush-
ing and in a tremor, soon with intrepid courage, breaking the eggs,
beating them up in the pan, turning them over, now to the right,
now to the left, now up and now down, with unexampled precision
and success! Never was a more excellent dish eaten.” What
laughter and gayety in the group comprised in this little scene.
And, not long after, what madrigals and allusions! Gayety here
resembles a dancing ray of sunlight; it flickers over all things
and reflects its grace on every object.


VI.

“The Frenchman’s characteristic,” says an English traveller in
1785, “is to be always gay;”! and he remarks that he must be so
because in France, such is the tone of society and the only mode of
pleasing the ladies, the sovereigns of society and the arbiters
of good taste. Add to this the absence of the causes which pro-
duce modern dreariness and which convert the sky above our
heads into one of leaden gloom. ‘There was no laborious, forced
work in those days, no furious competition, no uncertain careers,
no infinite perspectives. Ranks were clearly defined, ambitions
limited, and there was less envy. Man was not'habitually dissatis-
fied, soured and preoccupied as he is nowadays. Few free passes
were allowed where there was no right to pass; we think of
nothing but advancement; they thought only of amusing them-
selves. An officer, instead of raging and storming over the year-
book, busies himself in inventing some new disguise for a masked-
ball; a magistrate, instead of counting the convictions he has se-
cured, provides a magnificent supper. At Paris, every afternoon
in the left avenue of the Palais-Royal “fine company, very richly


1 “A comparative view,” etc., by John Andrews,


148 FHE ANCIENT REGIME. BOOK IL


dressed, gather under the large trees;” and im the evening “on


leaving the opera at half-past eight, they go back there and re-
main until two o’clock in the morning.” ‘They have music in the
open air by moonlight, Gavat singing, and the cheyalier de


Saint-George playing on the violin. At Morfontaine, “the
Comte de Vaudreuil, Lebrun the poet, the chevalier de Coigny, so
amiable and so gay, Brongniart, Robert, hen ae) charades
every night and wake each other up to repeat them.” At-Mau-
pertuis in M. de Montesquiou’s house, at Saint-Ouen with the
Marshal de Noailles, at Genevilliers with the Comte de Vau-
dreuil, at Rainay with the Duc d’Orléans, at Chantilly with the
Prince de Condé, there is. nothing but festivity. /We read no
biography of the day, no provincial document,’ no inventory,
without hearing the tinkling of the universal carnival. } At Mon-
choix,” the residence of the Comte de Bédée, Chateaubriand’s
uncle, “they had music, dancing and hunting, rollicking from
morning to night, eating up both capital and income.” At Aix
and Marseilles, throughout the fashionable world, with the Comte
de Valbelle, I find nothing but concerts, entertainments, balls,
gallantries, and private theatricals with the Comtesse de Mira-
beau for the leading performer. At Chateauroux, M. Dupin de
Francueil entertains “a troop of musicians, lackeys, cooks, para-
sites, horses and dogs, bestowing everything lavishly, in amuse-
ments and in charity, wishing to be happy himself and everybody
else around him,” never casting up accgunts, and going to ruin in
the most delightful manner possible. ¥< othing arrests this gayety,
not old age, nor exile, nor misfortune; in 1793 it still subsists in
the prisons of the Republic. A man in place is not then made
uncomfortable by his official coat, perked up by his situation,
obliged to maintain a dignified and important air, constrained under
that assumed eravily, which democratic envy imposes on us as if a
ransom. / In 1753,? the parliamentarians, just exiled to Bourges,
get up three companies of private theatricals and perform come-
dies, while one of them, M. Dupré de Saint-Maur fights a rival
with the sword. In 1787,* when the entire parliament is banished
to ‘Troyes the bishop, M. de. Barrall, returns from his chateau de


1 Mme. Vigée-Lebrun, I. 15, 154.
2 Chateaubriand, I. 34. ‘Mémoires de Mirabeau,” assim. George Sand, I. 59, 76.
3 Comptes rendus de la société de Berry (1863-1864).
4 “Histoire de Troyes pendant la Révolution,” by Albert Babeau, I. 46.


CHAP. II. HABITS AND CHARACTERS. 149


Saint-Lye expressly to receive it, presiding every evening at a din-
ner of forty persons. ‘There was no end to the fétes and din-
nérs in the town; the president kept open house,” a triple quan-
tity of food being consumed in the eating-houses and so much
wood burned in the kitchens, that the town came near being put
on-short allowance. Feasting and jollity is but little less in or-
dinary times. A parliamentarian, like a seignior, must do credit
to his fortune. See the letters of the President des Brosses con-
cerning society in Dijon; it reminds us of the abbey of Thé-
léme; then contrast this with the same town to-day.) In 1744,
Monseigneur de Montigny, brother of the President de Bour-
bonne, apropos of the king’s recovery, entertains the workmen,
tradesmen and artisans in his employ to the number of eighty,
another table being for his musicians and comedians, and a third
for his clerks, secretaries, physicians, surgeons, attorneys and no-
taries; the crowd collects around a triumphal car covered with
shepherdesses, shepherds and rustic divinities in theatrical costume;
fountains flow with wine “as if it were water,” and after supper
the confectionery is thrown out of the windows. Each parlia-
mentarian around him has his “little Versailles, a grand hotel be-
tween court and garden.” This town, now so silent, then rang
with the clatter of fine equipages. The profusion of the table
is astonishing, “not only on gala days, but at the suppers of each
week, and I could almost say, of each day.” -Amidst all these féte-
givers, the most illustrious of all, the President des Brosses, so
grave on the magisterial bench, so intrepid in his remonstrances, so
laborious,” so learned, is an extraordinary stimulator of fun (doute-
entrain), a genuine Gaul, with a sparkling, inexhaustible fund of
salacious humor: with his friends he throws off his perruque,
his gown, and even something more. Nobody dreams of being
offended by it; nobody conceives that dress is an extinguisher,
which is frue of every species of dress, and of the gown in par-
ticular. / “When I entered society, in 1785,” writes a parliamen-
tarian, “I found myself introduced in a certain way, alike to the


! Foisset, ‘‘Le Président des Brosses,”’ 65, 69, 70, 345. ‘Lettres du Président des Brosses,”’
(ed. Coulomb), Jasszwz. Piron being uneasy concerning his “Ode a Priape,” President
Bouhier, a man of great and fine erudition, and the least starched of learned ones, sent for
the young man and said to him, “‘You are a foolish fellow. If any one presses you to know
the author of the offence tell him that I am.” (Sainte-Beuve, ‘‘ Nouveaux Lundis,” VII.
414.)

2 Foisset, zd¢d. 185. Six audiences a week and often two a day besides his labors as anti-
quarian, historian, linguist, geographer, editor and academician.


“3”


150 THE ANCIENT REGIME. _ BOOK I.


wives and the mistresses of the friends of my family, passing
Monday evening with one, and Tuesday evening with the other.
And I was only eighteen, and I belonged to a family of magis-
trates.”! At Basville, at the residence of M. de Lamoignon, dur-
ing the autumnal vacation and the Whitsuntide holidays, there
are thirty persons at the table daily; there are three or four hunts
a week, and the most prominent magistrates, M. de Lamoignon,
M. Pasquier, M. de Rosambo, M. and Mme. d’Aguesseau, per-
form the “ Barber of Seville” in the chateau theatre. ,
/As for the cassock it enjoys the same freedom as the robe,”
At Saverne, at Clairvaux, at Le Mans and at other places, the
prelates wear it as freely as a court dress. /The revolutionary
upheaval was necessary to make it a fixture on their bodies and,
afterwards, the hostile supervision of an organized party and the
fear of constant danger. Up to 1789 the sky is too serene and ~
the atmosphere too balmy to lead them to button it up to the
neck. ‘Freedom, facilities, Monsieur l’Abbé,” said the Cardinal
de Rohan to his secretary, “without these this life would be
a desert.”* This is what the good cardinal took care to avoid;
on the contrary he had made Saverne an enchanting world
according to Watteau, almost “a landing-place for Cythera.”
Six hundred peasants and keepers ranged in a line a league long,
form in the morning and beat up the surrounding country while
hunters, men and women, are posted at their stations. “For
fear that the ladies might be frightened if left alone by them-
selves, the man whom they hated least was always left with them
to tranquillize them,’? and as nobody was allowed to leave his
post before the signal “it was impossible to be surprised.” / About
an hour after noonday “the company gathered under a beautiful
tent, on the bank of a stream or in some delightful place, where
an exquisite dinner was served up, and, as every one had to be
made happy, each peasant received a pound of meat, two of
bread and half a bottle of wine, only asking to begin it all over
again, as well as the ladies’ The accommodating prelate migh:
certainly have replied to scrupulous people along with Voltaire,
that “nothing is wrong in good society.” In fact, he so made
answer, and in these very terms. One day, a lady accompanied


1 “Souvenirs manuscripts,” by M. X——. (As the author’s name cannot be given I shall
use this designation hereafter.)
_ * De Valfons, ‘‘Souvenirs,”’ 60.


CHAP. II. _ HABITS AND CHARACTERS. 15!


by a young officer, having come on a visit, and_ being obliged-to
keep them over night, his valet comes and whispers to him that
there is no more room. “Is the bath-room occupied?’ ‘No,
Monseigneur!’ ‘Are there not two beds there?’ ‘Yes, Mon-
seigneur, but they are both in the same chamber, and that
officer—’ ‘Very well, didn’t they come together? Shallow
people like you always see something wrong. You will find that
they will agree very well together,—there is not the slightest
reason to object.’” And really nobody did object, either the
officer or the lady. At Granselve, in the Gard, the Bernardines
are: still more hospitable. People resort to the féte of St. Ber-
» nard which lasts a couple of weeks; during this time they dance,
and hunt, and act comedies, “the tables being ready, at all
hours.” The quarters of the ladies are provided with every
requisite for the toilet; they lack nothing, and it is even said
that it was not necessary for any of them to bring their officer.

might cite twenty prelates not less gallant,—the second Cardi-
‘nal de Rohan, the hero of the necklace, M. de Jarente, bishop
of Orleans, who keeps the record of benefices, the young M. de
Grimaldi, bishop of Le Mans, M. de Breteuil, bishop of Mont-
auban, M. de Cicé, archbishop of Bordeaux, the Cardinal de
Montmorency, .grand-almoner, M. de Talleyrand, bishop of
Autun, M. de Conzié, bishop of Arras,” and, in the first rank, the
Abbé de Saint-Germain des Prés, Comte de Clermont, prince
of the blood, who, with an income of three hundred and
seventy thousand francs succeeds in ruining himself twice, who
performs in comedies in his town and country residences, who
writes to Collé in a pompous style and, who, in his abbatial
mansion at Berny, installs Mademoiselle Leduc, a dancer, to do
the honors of his table. There is no hypocrisy. In the house
‘of M. Trudaine, four bishops attend the performance of a piece
by Collé entitled “ Les accidents ou les Abbés,” the substance
of which, says Collé himself, is so free that he did not dare print
it along with his other pieces. A little later, Beaumarchais,
on reading his “ Marriage of Figaro” at the Maréchal de Riche-


1 Montgaillard (an eye-witness), ‘‘ Histoire de France,’’ IT. 246.
* 8M. de Conzié is surprised at four o’clock in the morning by a rival, an officer in the guards.
“*Make no noise,” said he to him, ‘‘my coat which is like yours will be brought to me and I
will make a gueue so that we shall be on the same footing.” A valet brings him his weapons.
He descends into the garden of the mansion, fights with the officer and disarms him. (‘‘Cor-
respondance,” by Métra, XIV. May 20, 1783.) ‘‘Le Comte de Clermont,” by Jules Cousin,
passim. ‘Journal de Collé,” III. 232 (July, 1769).


152 -eDTHE ANCIENT REGIME. BOOK II,


lieu’s domicile, not expurgated, much more crude and coarse
than it is to-day, has bishops and archbishops for: his auditors,
and -these, he says, “after being infinitely amused by it, did
me the honor to assure me that they would state that there was
not a single word in it offensive to good morals:”! thus was
the piece accepted against reasons of State, against the king’s
will, and through the connivance of all those most interested
in suppressing it. ‘There is something more irrational than my
piece and that is its success,” said its author. The attraction


‘was too strong. People devoted to pleasure could not dispense


with the liveliest comedy of the age. They came to applaud
a satire on themselves; and better still, they themselves acted in
it. A prevalent taste ends, like a powerful passion, in extremes
which become follies; it must enjoy what is offered to it at any
cost; any momentary gratification of it is as with a child tempted
by fruit; nothing arrests it, neither the danger to which it is in-
sensible, nor the sense of propriety it establishes for itself,


VIL.


To divert oneself is to turn aside from oneself, to get away from
oneself, and to forget oneself; and to forget oneself fully one


~~


must be transported into another, put himself in the place of an- |


other, take his mask and play his part. Hence the liveliest .


of diversions is the comedy in which one is an actor. It is
that of children who, as authors, actors and audience, improvise
and represent petty scenes the livelong day. It is that of a people
whose political régime excludes manly solicitudes, and who sport
with life after the fashion of children, At Venice, in the eigh-
teenth century, the carnival lasts six months; in France, under
another form, it lasts the entire year. Less familiar and less pict-
uresque, more refined and more elegant, it abandons the public


square where it lacks sunshine, to shut itself up in drawing-rooms .


where chandeliers are the most suitable for it. It has retained
of the vast popular masquerade only a fragment, the opera ball,
very splendid and frequented by princes, princesses and the
queen; but this fragment, brilliant as it is, does not suffice; con-
sequently, in every chateau, in every mansion, at Paris and in
the provinces, it sets up travesties on society and domestic com-


1 De Loménie, ‘‘ Beaumarchais et son temps,” IT. 304.


—™=


(CHAP. III. HABITS AND CHARACTERS. 153


edies. On welcoming a great personage, on celebrating the birth-
day of the master or mistress of the house, its guests or invited
persons perform in an improvised operetta, in an ingenious,
laudatory pastoral, sometimes dressed as gods, as Virtues, as
mythological abstractions, as operatic Turks, Laplanders and
Poles, similar to the figures then gracing the frontispieces of
books, sometimes in the dress of peasants, pedagogues, pedlars,
milkmaids and flower-girls like the fanciful villagers with which the
current taste then fills the stage. They sing, they dance, and
come forward in turn to recite petty verses composed for the occa-
sion consisting of so many well-turned compliments.!. At Chantilly
“the young and charming Duchesse de Bourbon, attired as a
voluptuous Naiad, guides the Comte du Nord, in a gilded gon-
dola, across the grand canal to the island of Love;” the Prince
de Conti, in his part, serves as pilot to the Grand Duchesse ;
other seigniors and ladies “each in allegorical guise,” form the
escort,” and on these limpid waters, in this new garden of Alci-
_ nous, the smiling and gallant retinue seems a fairy scene in Tasso.
At Vaudreil, the ladies, advised that they are to be carried off to
seraglios, attire themselves as vestals, while the high-priest wel-
comes them with pretty couplets into his temple in the park;
meanwhile over three hundred Turks arrive who force the enclos-
ure to the sound of music, and bear away the ladies in palanquins
along the illuminated gardens. At the little Trianon, the park is
arranged as a fair, and the ladies of the court are the saleswomen,
“the queen keeping a café,” while, here and there, are processions
and theatricals; this festival costs, it is said, one hundred thou-
sand livres, and a repetition of it is designed at Choisy attended
with a larger outlay.

Alongside of these masquerades which stop at costume and
require only an hour, there is a more important diversion, the
private theatrical performance, which completely transforms the
man, and which for six weeks, and even for three months, absorbs
him entirely at rehearsals. Towards 1770° “the rage for it is


1 De Luynes, XVI. 161 (September, 1757). The village festival given to King Stanislas
by Mme. dé’ Mauconseil at Bagatelle. Bachaumont, III. 247 (September 7, 1767). Festival
given by the Prince de Condé.

2 “Correspondance,”” by Métra, XIII. 97 (June 15, 1782), and V. 232 (June 24 and 25,
1777). Mme. de Genlis ‘‘ Mémoires,” chap. xiv.

8 Bachaumont, November 17, 1770. ‘Journal de Collé,” III. 136 (April 29, 1767). De
Montlosier, ‘‘Mémoires,”’ I. 43. ‘‘At the residence of the Commandant (at Clermont) they
would haye been glad to enlist me in private theatricals.”’


154 THE ANCIENT REGIME. BOOK Il.


incredible; there is not an attorney in his cottage who does not
wish to have a stage and his company of actors.” A Bernardine
living in Bresse, in the middle of a wood, writes to Collé that he
and his brethren are about to perform “La Partie de Chasse de
Henri IV.,” and that they are having a small theatre constructed
“without the knowledge of bigots and small minds.” Reformers
and moralists introduce theatrical art into the education of chil-
dren; Mme. de Genlis composes comedies for them, considering
these excellent for the securing of a good pronunciation,
proper self-confidence and the graces of deportment. The theatre,
indeed, then prepares man for society as society prepares him for the
theatre; in either case he is on representation, composing his
attitude and tone af voice, and playing a part; the stage and the
drawing-room are on an equal footing. ‘Towards the end of the
century everybody becomes an actor, everybody having been one
before. “We hear of nothing but little theatres set up in the
country around Paris.” Fora long time those of highest rank
set the example. Under Louis XV. the Ducs d’Orléans, de
Nivernais, d’Ayen, de Coigny, the Marquises de Courtenvaux,
and d’Entraigues, the Comte de Maillebois, thes Duchesse de
Brancas, the Comtesse d’Estrades form, with Madame de Pom-
padour, the company of the “small cabinets;” the Duc de la
Valliére is the director of them; when the piece contains a ballet
the Marquis de Courtenvaux, the Duc de Beuvron, the Comtes
de Melfort and de Langeron are the titulary dancers.” “Those
who are accustomed to such spectacles,” writes the sedate and
pious Duc de Luynes, “agree in the opinion that it would be
difficult for professional comedians to play better and more intelli-
gently.” The passion reaches at last still higher, even to the
royal family. At Trianon, the queen, at first before forty persons
and then before a more numerous‘audience, performs Colette in
“Le Devin de Village,” Gotte, in “ La Gageure imprévue,” Rosine
in “Le Barbier de Seville,’ Pierette in “Le Chasseur et la
Laitiére,”*® while the other comedians consist of the principal men
of the court, the Comte d’Artois, the Comtes d’Adhémar and de


1 “Correspondance,” by Métra, IT. 245 (Nov. 18, 1775). :

2 Julien, ‘‘ Histoire du Théatre de Madame de Pompadour.”” These representations last
seven years and cost during the winter alone of 1749, 300,000 livres. De Luynes, X. 45+
Mme. du Hausset, 230.


3 Mme. Campan, I. 130. Cf. with caution the very suspicious Memoirs, much made up, of —
Fleury. De Goncourt, 114.


CHAP. III. _ HABITS AND CHARACTERS. 155


Vaudreuil, the Comtesse de Guiche, and the Canoness de Polignac,
A theatre is formed in Monsieur’s domicile; there are two in the
Comte d’Artois’s house, two in that of the Duc d’Orléans, two in
the Comte de Clermont’s, and one in the Prince de Condé’s.
The Comte de Clermont performs serious characters; the Duc
d’Orléans represents with completeness and naturalness, peas-
ants and financiers; M.de Miromesnil, keeper of the seals, is the
smartest and most finished of Scapins; M. de Vaudreuil seems to
rival Molé; the Comte de Pons plays the “ Misanthrope” with
rare perfection.! “More than ten of our ladies of high rank,”
writes the Prince de Ligne, “play and sing better than the best
of those I have seen in our theatres.” By their talent judge of
their study, assiduity and zeal. It is evident that for many of
them it is the principal occupation. Ina certain chateau, that
of Saint-Aubin, the lady of the house, to secure a large enough
troupe, enrolls her four chambermaids in it, making her little
daughter, ten years old, play the part of Zaire, and for over twenty
months she has no vacation.. After her bankruptcy, and in her exile,
the first thing done by the Princess de Guéménée was to send for
upholsterers to arrange a theatre. In short, as nobody went out
in Venice without a mask so here nobody, comprehended life
without the masqueradings, metamorphoses, representations~ and
triumphs of the player.

The last trait I have to mention, yet more significant, is the
after-piece. Really, in this fashionable circle, life is a carni-
val as free and almost as rakish as that of Venice. The play
commonly terminates with a parade borrowed from La Fon-
taine’s tales or from the farces of the Italian drama which are
not only pointed but more than free, and sometimes so broad
_ “that they can be played only before princes and courtesans ;”?
a morbid palate, indeed, having no taste for orgeat, and de-
manding a dram. The Duc d’Orléans sings on the stage the
most spicy songs, playing Bartholin in “ Nicaise,” and Blaise in
“Joconde.” ‘Le Marriage sans Curé,” “Leandre grosse,”
“VL’amant poussif,” “Leandre Etalon,” are the showy titles of the


1 Jules Cousin, “‘ Le Comte de Clermont,” p. 21. Mme. de Genlis, “‘ Mémoires,” chap. iii
and xi. De Goncourt, 14.

? Bachaumont, III. 343 (February 23, 1768) and IV. 174, III. 232.“ Journal de Collé,”
passim. Collé, Laujon and Poisinet are the principal purveyors for these displays; the only
one of merit is “La Verité dans la Vin.” In this piece instead of “Mylord,” there is the
‘bishop of Avranches,” and the piece was thus performed at Villers-Cotterets in the house of
the Duc d’Orléans.


156 THE ANCIENT REGIME. BOOK Il.


pieces composed by Collé “for the amusement of His Highness
and the Court.” For one which contains salt there are ten stuffed
with strong pepper. At Brunoy, at the residence of Monsieur,
so gross are they! the king regrets having attended; “nobody
had any idea of such license; two women in the auditorium.
had to go out and, meat is most extraordinary, they had dared
to invite the queen.” Gayety is a sort of intoxication which
draws the cask down to the dregs, and when the wine is gone
it draws on the lees. Not only at their little suppers, and with
courtesans, but in the best society and with ladies they .com-
mit the follies of a bagnio. Let us use the right word, they are
blackguards and the word is no more offensive to them, than
the action. “For five or six months,” writes a lady in 17827?
“the suppers are followed by a blindman’s-buff or by a draw-
dance and they end in general mischievousness, (une polissonnerie
générale).” Guests are invited a fortnight inadvance. “On this
occasion they upset the tables and the furniture; they scattered
twenty caraffes of water about the room; I finally got away at
half-past one, wearied out, pelted with handkerchiefs, and leaving
Madame de Clarence hoarse, with her dress torn to shreds, a
scratch on her arm, and a bruise on her forehead, but delighted
that she had given such a gay supper and flattered with the idea
of its being the talk the next day.” This is the result of a cray-
ing for amusement. Under its pressure, as under the sculptor’s
thumb, the face of the century becomes transformed and insensi-
bly loses its seriousness ; the formal expression of the courtier at
first becomes the sprightly physiognomy of the worldling, and
then, on these smiling lips, whose contours changed, we see the
bold, unbridled grin of the scamp.?


1 Mme. d’Oberkirk, II. 82. On the tone of the best society see ‘‘ Correspondance ” by Mé
tra, I. 20, III. 68, and Bezenval (Ed. Barriére) 387 and 349.

2 Mme. de Genlis, ‘‘ Adéle et Théodore,” IT. 362.

3 George Sand, I. 85. ‘‘At my grandmother’s I have found boxes full of couplets, madrigal
and biting satires. I burned some of them so obscene that I would not dare read them throug
and these written by abbés I had known in my infancy and by a marquis of the best blood.”
Among other examples, toned down, the songs on the Bird and the Shepherdess - may be
read in “ Correspondance,” by Métra.


CHAPTER III.


DISADVANTAGES OF THIS DRAWING-ROOM LIFE.—I. Its barrenness and
artificiality.—Return to nature and sentiment.—II. Its impressionability the
final trait which completes the physiognomy of the century.—Date of its
adyent.—Its symptoms in art and in literature.—Its dominion in private.—*
Its affectations.—Its sincerity. —Its delicacy.—III. The failings of character
thus formed.—Adapted to one situation but not to a contrary situation.—
Defects of intelligence.—Defects of disposition.—Such a character is dis-
armed by good-breeding.


i. | iy

Merz pleasure, in the long run, ceases to gratify, and however
agreeable this drawing-room life may be, it ends in a certain
hollowness. Something is lacking without any one being able to
say precisely what that something is; the soul becomes restless,
and slowly, aided by authors and artists, it sets about investigat-
ing the cause of its uneasiness and the object of its secret long-
ings. Barrenness and artificiality are the two traits of this
society, the more marked because it is more complete, and,
in this one, pushed to extreme, because it has attained to supreme
refinement. In the first place naturalness is excluded from it;
everything is arranged and adjusted,—decoration, dress, attitude,
tone of voice, words, ideas and even sentiments. “A genuine sen-
timent is so rare,” said M. de V , “that, when I leave Versailles,
I sometimes stand still in the street to see a dog gnaw a bone.’’!
Man, in abandoning himself wholly to society, had withheld no
portion of his personality for himself, while decorum, clinging to


i
j
if


him like so much ivy, had abstracted from him the substance -


of his being and subverted every principle of activity. ‘There
was then,” says one who was educated in this style,? “a certain
way of walking, of sitting down, of saluting, of picking up a
glove, of holding a fork, of tendering any article, in fine, a com-


1 Champfort, 110.
2 George Sand, V. 59. ‘‘I was rebuked for everything; I never made a movement which
was not criticized.”


x


—


158 THE AN cee T REGIME. BOOK Il.


plete mimicry, which children bai to be taught at a very early
age in order that habit might become a second nature, and this
calventionality formed so important an item in the life of men
and women in aristocratic circles that the actors of the present
day, with all their study, are scarcely able to give us an idea
of it.’ Not only was the outward factitious but, again, the in-
ward; there was a certain prescribed mode of feeling and of
thinking, of living and of dying. It was impossible to address a
man without placing oneself at his orders, or a woman without
casting oneself at her feet. Fashion, /e don ton, regulated every
important or petty proceeding, the manner of making a declara-
tion to a woman and of breaking an engagement, of entering
upon and managing a duel, of treating an equal, an inferior and
a superior. If any one failed in the slightest degree to conform
to this code of universal custom, he is called “a specimen.” A
man of heart or of talent, D’Argenson, for example, bore a
surname of “simpleton,” because his originality transcended the
conventional standard. ‘That has no name, there is nothing like
it!” embodies the strongest censure. In conduct as in literature,
whatever departs from a certain type is rejected. ‘The quantity
of authorized actions is as great as the number of authorized
words. The same super-refined taste impoverishes the initiatory
act as well as the initiatory expression, people acting as they
write, according to acquired formulas and within a circumscribed
circle. Under no consideration can the eccentric, the unforeseen,
the spontaneous, vivid inspiration be accepted. Among twenty
instances I select the least striking since it merely relates to a
simple gesture, and is a measure of other things. Mademoiselle
- de obtains, through family influence, a pension for Marcel,
a famous dancing-master, and runs off, delighted, to his domicile
to convey him the patent. Marcel receives it and at once flings
it on the floor: “ Mademoiselle, did I teach you to offer an object
in that manner? Pick up that paper and hand it to me as you
ought to.” She picks up the patent and presents it to him with
all suitable grace. ‘That’s very well, Mademoiselle, I ac-
cept it although your elbow was not quite sufficiently rounded,
and I thank you.”'! So many graces end in becoming weari-


1 “Paris, Versailles et les provinces,” I. 162. ‘‘The king of Sweden is here; he wears
rosettes on his breeches; all is over; he is ridiculous, and a provincial king.” ( ‘* Le Gouv-
ernement de Normandie,”’ by Hippeau, IV. 237, July 4, 1784.)


4


CHAP, TI. HABITS AND CHARACTERS. 159


some; after having eaten rich food for years, a little milk and
dry biead becomes welcome.

Among all these social flavorings one is especially abused,
and which, unremittingly employed, communicates to all dishes
its frigid or piquant savor, I mean insincerity (dadinage). So-
ciety does not tolerate passion, and in this it exercises its
right. One does not enter company to be either vehement or
sombre; a strained air or one of concentration would appear incon-
gruous. The mistress of a house is always right in reminding a
man that his emotional constraint brings on silence. “ Monsieur
Such-a-one, you are not amiable to-day.” To be always amiable
is, accordingly, an obligation, and, through this training, a sensi-
bility that is diffused through innumerable little channels never
produces a broad current. “One has a hundred friends, and out
of these hundred friends two or three may have some chagrin
every day; but one could not award them sympathy for any
length of time as, in that event, one would be wanting in consid-
eration for the remaining eighty-seven;”! one might sigh for an
instant with some one of the eighty-seven, and that would be all.
Madame du Deffant, having lost her oldest friend, the President
Hénault, that very day goes to sup in a large assemblage:
“Alas,” she exclaimed, “he died at six o’clock this evening;
otherwise you would not see me here.” Under this constant ré-
gime of distractions and diversions there are no longer any pro-
found sentiments; we have nothing but an epidermic exterior;
love itself is reduced to “the exchange of two phantasies.”
And, as one always falls on the side to which one inclines, levity —


. becomes deliberate and a matter of elegance.” Indifference of


the heart is in fashion; one would be ashamed to show any gen-
uine emotion. One takes pride in playing with love, in treating
woman as a mechanical puppet, in touching one inward spring,
and then another, to force out, at will, her anger or her pity.
Whatever she may do, there is no deviation from the most insult-
ing politeness; the very exaggeration of false respect which is
lavished on her is a mockery by which indifference for her is fully


1 Stendhal, ‘‘ Rome, Naples and Florence,” 379. Stated by an English lord.
2 Marivaux, ‘Le Petit-Maitre corrigé.” Gresset, “Le Méchant.” Crébillon j#/s, ‘‘ La


- Nuit et le Moment,” (especially the scene between Clitandre and Lucinde). Collé, “La


Verité dans le Vin,” (the part of the abbé with the préstdente). De Bezenval, 79. (The
Comte de Frise and Mme. de Blot). ‘‘ Vie privée du Maréchal de Richelieu,”’ (scenes with
Mme. Michelin), De Goncourt, 167 to 174.


160 THE ANCIENT REGIME. © ‘BOOK Ib


manifested. But they go still further, and in souls naturally un-
feeling, gallantry turns into wickedness. Through exaw and the
demand for excitement, through vanity, and as a proof of dexterity,
delight is found in tormenting, in exciting tears, in dishonoring and
in killing women by slow torture. . At last, as self-love is a bottom-
less pit, there is no species of blackness of which these polished exe-
cutioners are not capable; the personages of Laclos are derived
from these originals.1 Monsters of this kind are, undoubtedly,
rare; but there is no need of reverting to them to ascertain how
much egotism is harbored in the gallantry of society. The women
who erected it into an obligation are the first to realize its deceptive-
ness, and, amidst so much homage without heat, to pine for the
communicative warmth of a powerful-sentiment. The character
of the century obtains its last trait when “the man of feeling”

comes on the stage. |


II.

It is not that the groundwork of habits becomes different, for
these remain equally worldly and dissipated up to the last. But
fashion authorizes a new affectation, consisting of effusions, rev- ~
eries, and sensibilities as yet unknown. The point is to return
to nature, to admire the country, to delight in the simplicity of
rustic manners, to be interested in village people, to be humane,
to have a heart, to find pleasure in the sweetness and tenderness
of natural affections, to be a husband and a father, and still more,
to possess a soul, virtues, and religious emotions, to believe in Proy-
idence and immortality, to be capable of enthusiasm, One wants
to be all this, or at least show an inclination that way. In any
event, if the desire does exist it is on the implied condition, that
one shall not be too much disturbed in his ordinary pursuits and
that the sensations belonging to the new order of life shall in
no respect interfere with the enjoyments of the old one. Ac-
cordingly the exaltation which arises is little more than cerebral fer-
mentation, and the idyl is to be almost entirely performed in the
drawing-room. Behold, then, literature, the drama, painting and all
the arts pursuing the same sentimental road to supply heated
imaginations with factitious nourishment.2 Rousseau, in labored


1 Laclos, ‘‘ Les Liaisons Dangereuses.”” Mme. de Merteuil was copied after a Marquise de
Grenoble. Remark the difference between Lovelace and Valmont, one being stimulated by
pride and the other by vanity. .

* The growth of sensibility is indicated by the following dates: Rousseau, ‘ Sur l’influence


CHAP. Til. HABITS AND CHARACTERS. ) 161


periods, preaches the charms of-an uncivilized existence, while
other masters, between two madrigals, fancy the delight of sleep-
ing naked in the primeval forest. ‘The lovers in “La Nouvelle
Héloise” interchange passages of fine style through four volumes,
whereupon a person “not merely methodical but prudent,” the
Comtesse de Blot, exclaims, at a social gathering at the Duchesse
de Chartres’s, “a woman truly sensitive, unless of extraordinary
virtue, could refuse nothing to the passion of Rousseau.”! Peo-
ple collect in a dense crowd in the Exhibition around “ L’Accordée
de Village,” “La Cruche ‘Cassée,” and the “ Retour de nourrice,”
with other rural and domestic idyls by Greuze; the voluptuous
element, the tempting undercurrent of sensuality made per-
ceptible in the fragile simplicity of his artless maidens, is a dainty
bit for the libertine tastes which are kept alive beneath moral as-
pirations.” After these, Ducis, Thomas, Parny, Colardeau,
Boucher, Delille, Bernardin de St. Pierre, Marmontel, Florian,
the mass of orators, authors and politicians, the misanthrope
Champfort, the logician La Harpe, the minister Necker, the versi-
_ fiers and the imitators of Gessner and Young, the Berquins, the
Bitaubés, nicely combed and bedizened, holding embroidered
handkerchiefs to wipe away tears, are to marshal forth the univer-
sal eclogue down to the acme of the Revolution. Marmontel’s
** Moral Tales” appear in the columns of the “ Mercure” for 1791
and 1792,° while the number following the massacres of Septem-
ber opens with verses “to the manes of my canary-bird.”
Consequently, in all the details of private life, sensibility dis-
plays its magniloquence. A small temple to Friendship is erected
in a park. A little altar to Benevolence is set up in a private
closet. Dresses & la Fean- Facques- Rousseau are worn “analogous
to the principles of that author.” Head-dresses are selected with
“puffs au sentiment” in which one may place the portrait of one’s
daughter, mother, canary or dog, the whole “ garnished with the


des lettres et des arts,” 1749; “‘Surl’inégalité,” 1753; ‘‘ Nouvelle Héloise,” 1759. Greuze, ‘‘Le
Pére de Famille lisant la Bible,’ 1755; ‘‘L’ Accordée de Village,” r761. Diderot, “Le fils
naturel,” 1757; ‘Le Pére de Famille,” 1758.

1 Mme. de Genlis, ‘‘ Mémoires,”’ chap. xvii. George Sand, I. 72. The young Mme. de
Francueil, on seeing Rousseau for the first time, burst into tears.

2 This point has been brought out with as much skill as accuracy by Messieurs de Gon-
court in ‘‘L’Art au dix-huitiéme siécle,’’ I. 433-438.

3 The number for August, 1792, contains ‘‘Les Rivaux d’eux-mémes.” About the same
time other pieces are inserted in the “ Mercure,” such as “‘ The federal union of Hymen and
Cupid,” ‘‘ Le Jaloux,” ‘‘A Pastoral Romance,” ‘‘Ode Anacréontique a Mlle. S. D. . . .” ete.


14*


162 THE ANCIENT REGIME. BOOK Il, _


hair of one’s father or intimate friend.”!: People keep intimate
friends for whom “they experience something so warm and so
tender that it nearly amounts to a passion” and whom they cannot
go three hours a day without seeing. ‘ Every time female com-
panions interchange tender ideas the voice suddenly changes into
a pure and languishing tone, each fondly regarding the other with
approaching heads and frequently embracing,” and suppressing a
yawn a quarter of an hour after, with a nap in concert, because
they have no more to say. Enthusiasm becomes an obligation.
On the revival of “ Le pére de famille” there are as many hand-
kerchiefs counted as spectators, and ladies faint away. “It is
customary, especially for young women, to be excited, to turn
pale, to melt into tears and, generally, to be seriously affected on
encountering M. de Voltaire; they rush into his arms, stammer and
weep, their agitation resembling that of the most passionate love.”?
When a society-author reads his work in a drawing-room, fashion
requires that the company should utter exclamations and sob, and
that some pretty fainting subject should be unlaced. Mme.deGen-
lis, who laughs at these affectations, is no less affected than the rest. _
Suddenly some one in the company is heard to say to the young or-
phan whom she is exhibiting: “ Pamela show us Héloise,” where-
upon Pamela, loosening her hair, falls on her knees and turns her
eyes up to heaven with an air of inspiration, to the great applause
of the assembly.* Sensibility becomes an institution. The same
Madame de Genlis founds an order of Perseverance which soon
counts up “as many as ninety chevaliers in the very best society.”
To become a member it is necessary to solve some riddle, to an-
swer a moral question and pronounce a discourse on virtue.
Every lady or chevalier who discovers and publishes “ three well-
verified virtuous actions” obtains a gold medal. Each chevalier
has his “ brother in arms,” each lady has her bosom friend and
each member has a device and each device, framed in a little pict-


1 Mme. de Genlis, ‘‘ Adéle et Théodore,” I. 312. De Goncourt, “La Femme au dix-
huitiéme siécle,” 318. Mme. d’Oberkirk, I. 56. Description of the puff aw sentiment of
the Duchesse de Chartres (de Goncourt, 311) : ‘“‘In the background is a woman seated in a
chair and holding an infant, which represents the Duc de Valois and his nurse. On the right
is a paroquet pecking at a cherry, and on the left a little negro, the duchess’s two pets: the
whole is intermingled with locks of hair of all the relations of Mme. de Chartres, the hair of
her husband, father and grandfather.”

2 Mme. de Genlis, ‘‘ Les Dangers du Monde,” I. scene vii.; II. scene iv.; “ Adéle et Thé-
odore,” I, 312; “Souvenirs Félicie,” 199; Bachaumont, IV., 320.

3 Mme. de Larochejacquelein, ‘‘ Mémoires.”


t-


CHAP. Ill. : HABITS AND CHARACTERS. 163


“ure, figures in the “Temple of Honor,” a sort of tent gallantly


decorated, and which M. de Lauzun causes to be erected in the
middle of a garden.! The sentimental parade is complete,
a drawing-room masquerade being visible even in this chivalric
revival.

The froth of enthusiasm and of fine words nevertheless leaves
in the heart a residuum of active benevolence, trustfulness, and
even happiness or, at least, expansiveness and freedom. Wives,
for the first time, are seen accompanying their husbands into gar-
rison; mothers desire to nurse their infants, and fathers begin to
interest themselves in the education of their children. Simplic-
ity again forms an element of manners. Hair-powder is no
longer put on little boys’ heads; many of the seigniors abandon
laces, embroideries, red heels and the sword, except when in
full dress. People appear in the streets “dressed a la Franklin, in
coarse cloth, with a knotty cane and thick shoes.”” The taste no
longer runs on cascades, statues and stiff and pompous decora-
tions; the preference is for the English garden. ‘The queen ar-
ranges a village for herself at the Trianon, where, “dressed in a
frock of white cambric muslin gnd a gauze neck-handkerchief,
and with a straw hat,” she fishes in the lake and sees her cows
milked. Etiquette falls away like the paint scaling off from the
skin, disclosing the bright hue of natural emotions. Madame
Adelaide takes up a violin and replaces an absent musician to let
the peasant girls dance.* The Duchesse de Bourbon goes out


- early in the morning incognito to bestow alms, and “to see the


poor in their garrets.” The Dauphine jumps out of her carriage
to assist a wounded postilion, a peasant knocked down by a
stag. ‘The king and the Comte d’Artois help a carter disen-
gage his cart from the mud. People no longer think about self-
constraint, and self-adjustment, and of keeping up their dignity
under all circumstances, and of subjecting the weaknesses of hu-
man nature to the exigencies of rank. On the demise of the first
Dauphin,‘ whilst the people in the room place themselves before


1 Mme. de Genlis, ‘‘ Mémoires,” chap. xx. De Lauzun, 270.

2 Mme. d’Oberkirk, II. 35 (1783-1784). Mme. Campan, III. 371. Mercier, ‘“‘ Tableau de
Panis,” passim.

$ “Correspondance” by Métra (XVII. 55, 1784). Mme. d’Oberkirk, II. 234. ‘Marie
Antoinette,” by d’Arneth and Geffroy, II. 63, 29.

4 “Le Gouvernement de Normandie,” by Hippeau, IV. 387 (Letters of June 4, 1789, by an
eye-witness).


164 THE ANCIENT REGIME. BOOK”


the king to prevent him from entering it, the queen falls at his.
knees and he says to her, weeping, “Ah, my wife, our dear child
is dead since they do not wish me to see him.” And the narra-
tor adds with admiration; “I always seem to see a good hus-
bandman and his excellent partner a prey to the deepest despair
at the loss of their beloved child.” ‘Tears are no longer con-
cealed, as it is a point of honor to be a man. One becomes hu-
man and familiar with one’s inferiors. A prince, on a review,
says to the soldiers on presenting the princess to them, “My —
boys, here is my wife.” ‘There is a disposition to make people
happy and to take great delight in their gratitude. To be kind,
to be loved is the object of the head of a government, of a man
in place. This goes so far that God is prefigured according to
this model. The “harmonies of nature” are’ construed into the
delicate attentions of Providence; on instituting filial affection the
Creator “ deigned to choose for our best virtue our sweetest pleas-
ure.”! The idyl which is imagined to take place in ‘heaven, cor-
responds with the idyl practised on earth. From the public up
to the princes, and from the princes down to the public, in prose,
in verse, in compliments at festivities, in official replies, in the style
of royal edicts down to the songs of the market-women, there is
a constant interchange of graces and of sympathies. Applause
bursts out in the theatre at any verse containing an allusion to
princes, and, a moment after, at the speech which exalts the
merits of the people, the princes return the compliment by ap-
plauding in their turn.2 On all sides, just as this society is van-
ishing, a mutual deference, a spirit of kindliness arises, like a soft
and balmy autumnal breeze, to dissipate whatever harshness re-
mains of its aridity and to mingle with the radiance of its last
hours the perfume of dying roses. We now encounter ‘acts and


1 Florian, “‘ Ruth.”
? Hippeau, IV. 86 (June 23, 1773), on the representation of “Le Siege de Calais,” at the
Comédie Frangaise, at the moment when Mlle. Vestris uttered these words:
Le Frangais dans son prince aime a trouver un frére
Qui, né fils del’Etat, en devienne le pére. ;
“‘Long and universal ‘plaudits greeted the actress who had turned in the direction of the
Dauphin.” In another place these verses occur:
Quelle legon pour vous, superbes potentats !
Veillez sur vos sujets dans le rang le plus bas,
Tel, loin de vos regards, dans le misére expire,
Qui quelque jour peut-étre, eut sauvé votre empire.
“The Dauphin and the Dauphine in‘turn applauded the tirade. This demonstration of their
sensibility was welcomed with new transports of affection and gratitude.”


fr
CHAP. III. HABITS AND CHARACTERS. (165 |


words of infinite grace, unique of their kind, like a lovely, ex-
quisite little figure on old Sévres porcelain. One day, on the
Comtesse Amélie de Boufflers speaking somewhat flippantly of
her husband, her mother-in-law interposes, “ You forget that you
are speaking of my son.” “True, mamma, I thought I was only
speaking of your son-in-law.” It is she again who, on playing
“the boat,” and obliged to decide between this beloved mother-
in-law and her own mother, whom she scarcely knew, replies, “I
would save my mother and drown with my mother-in-law.”! The
Duchesse de Choiseul, the Duchesse de Lauzun, and others be-
sides, are equally charming miniatures. When the affections and
the intellect combine their refinements they produce masterpieces,
and these; like the art, the refinements and the society which
surrounds them possess a charm unsurpassed by anything except
their own fragility.


III.

The reason is that, the better adapted men are to a certain sit-
uation the less prepared are they for the opposite situation) The
habits and faculties which serve them in the previous condition
become prejudicial to them in the new one. In acquiring talents
adapted to tranquil times they lose those suited to times of agit: |
tion, reaching the extreme of feebleness at the same time with )
the extras of urbanity. / The more polished an aristocracy be- /
comes the weaker it becomes, and when no longer possessing te
power to please it no longer possesses the strength to struggle’
And yet, in this world, we must struggle if we would live,” In
humanity as in nature empire belongs to force. Every creature
that loses the art and energy of self-defence becomes so much
more certainly a prey according as its brilliancy, imprudence and
even gentleness deliver it over in advance to the gross appetites
roaming around it. Where find resistance in characters formed by
the habits we have just described?» To defend ourselves we
must, first of all, look carefully around us, see and foresee, and
provide for danger. How could they do this living as they did ?
Their circle is too narrow and too carefully enclosed. Confined
to their castles and mansions they see only those of their own
sphere, they hear only the echo of their own ideas, they imagine
that there is nothing beyond; the public seems to consist of
two hundred persons./ Moreover, disagreeable truths are not ad-


1 Madame de Genlis, ‘Souvenirs de Félicie,” 76, 161.


166 THE ANCIENT REGIME. BOOK IL.


mitted into a drawing-room, especially when of personal import,
an idle fancy there becoming a dogma because it becomes
conventional. Here accordingly we find those who, already de-
ceived by the limitations of their accustomed horizon, fortify
heir delusion still more by delusions about their fellow-men.
4 They comprehend nothing of the vast world which envelopes
their little world; they are incapable of entering-into the senti- —
ments of a bourgeois, of-a villager; they have no conception of
the peasant as he is but as they would like him to be. ‘The idyl
is in fashion and no one dares to dispute it; any other supposi-
tion would be falsé because it would be disagreeable and as the
drawing-rooms have decided that all will go well, all must go well.
Never was a delusion more complete and more voluntary/ The
Duc d’Orléans offers to wager a hundred louis that the States-
General will dissolve without accomplishing anything, not even
abolishing the /ettre-de-cachet. Zi After the demolition has begun, and
yet again after it is finished, they will form opinions no more accu-
rate. ‘They have no idea of social architecture; they know
nothing about either its materials, its proportions, or its harmoni-
ous balance; they have had no hand in it, they have never
worked at it. They are entirely ignorant of the old building? in
which they occupy the first story. They are qualified to
calculate either its pressure or its rsitance? They conclude
finally that it is better to let the thing tumble in, and that the
restoration of the edifice in their behalf will follow its own course, —
and that they will return to their drawing-room, expressly rebuilt
for them, and freshly gilded, to begin over again the pleasant
conversation which an accident, some tumult in the street, had
interrupted.’ Clear-sighted in society, they are obtuse in politics.
They examine everything by the artificial light of candles; they
are disturbed and bewildered in the powerful light of open day.
The eyelid has grown stiff through age. The organ so long bent on
the petty details of one refined life no longer takes in the popu-
lar life of the masses, and, in the new sphere into which it is sud-


1M. de Montlosier, in the Constituent Assembly, is about the only person familiar with
feudal laws.

* “A competent and impartial man who would estimate the chances of the success of the
Revolution would find that there are more against it than against the five winning num-
bers in a lottery; but this is possible, and unfortunately, this time, they all came out.” (Due
de Léyis, “‘ Souvenirs,” 328.)

8 “Corinne,” by Madame de Staél, the character of the Comte d’Erfeuil. Malonet, “Mé.
moires,” II, 297 (a memorable instance of political stupidity), °


CHAP. III, HABITS AND CHARACTERS. 167


denly plunged, its refinement becomes the source of its blindness.

Nevertheless action is necessary for danger is seizing them by
the throat. But the danger is of an ignoble species, while their
education has provided them with no arms suitable for warding
it off. They have learned how to fence but not how to box.


/They are still the sons of those at Fontenoy, who instead of be-


ing the first to fire, courteously raised their hats and addressed
their English antagonists, “ No, gentlemen, fire yourselves.” Be-
ing the slaves of good-breeding they are not free in their move-
ments. Numerous acts, and those the most important, those of a
sudden, vigorous and rude stamp, are opposed to the respect a
well-bred man entertains for others, or at least to the respeet
which he owes to himself,/ They do not consider these allowable
among themselves; they do not dream of their being allowed
and, the higher their position the more their rank fetters them.
When the royal family sets out for Varennes the accumulated de-
lays by which they are lost are the result of etiquette. Madame
de Touzel insists on her place in the carriage to which she is en-
titled as governess of the Children of France. The king, on ar-
riving, is desirous of conferring the marshal’s baton on M. de
Bouillé and after running to and fro to obtain a baton he is
obliged to borrow that of the Duc de Choiseul. The queen can-
not dispense with a. travelling dressing-case and one has to be
made large enough to contain every imaginable implement from a
warming-pan to a silver porridge-dish, with other dishes besides ;
and, as if there were no shifts to be had in Brussels, there had to be
a complete outfit in this line for herself and her children.!. A nar-
row fidelity, humanity in its own despite (guand méme ), the frivol-
ity of the small literary spirit, graceful urbanity, profound igno-
rance,” the nullity or rigidity of the understanding and of the will
are still greater with the princes than with the nobles. ‘All are im-
potent against the wild and roaring outbreak. They have not the
physical superiority that can master it, the vulgar charlatanism
which can charm it away, the tricks of a Scapin to throw it off the
scent, the bull’s neck, the mountebank’s gestures, the stentor’s lungs,
in short, the resources of the energetic temperament and of animal
cunning alone capable of diverting the rage of the unchained


1 Mme. Campan, II. 140, 313. Duc de Choiseul, ‘‘ Mémoires.”
2 Journal of Dumont d’ Urville, commander of the vessel which transported Charles X. into
exile in 1830. See note 4 at the end of the volume.


168 THE ANCIENT REGIME, “BOOK IL,


wares To secure weteailons of this stamp they seek for three
or four men of‘a different race and education, men having suf
fered and roamed about, a brutal plebeian like the abbé Maury,
a colossal and dirty satyr like Mirabeau, a bold and prompt
adventurer like that ‘Dumouriez who, at Cherbourg, when,
through the feebleness of the Duc de Beuvron, the stores of grain
were given up and the riot began, hooted at and nearly cut to ~
pieces, suddenly sees the keys of the storehouse in the hands of
a Dutch sailor, and, yelling to the mob that it was betrayed through
a foreigner having got hold of the keys, himself jumps down
from ‘the railing, seizes the keys and hands them to the officer
of the guard saying to the people, “I am your father,—I
am the man to be responsible for the storehouse!”+ To entrust
oneself with porters and brawlers, to be collared by a political club,
to improvise on the highways, to bark louder than the barkers,
to fight with the fists or a cudgel, as with the gay youths of a
later day, against brutes and lunatics incapable of employing
other arguments and who must be answered in the same vein, to
mount guard over the Assembly, to act as volunteer constable,
to spare neither one’s own hide nor that of others, to be one of-
the people to face the people, are simple and effectual proceed-
ings, but so vulgar as to appear to them disgusting. /The idea
of resorting to such means never enters their head; they neither
know how, nor do they care to make use of their hands in such
business.” / They are skilled only in the duel and, almost immedi-
ately, the brutality of opinion, by means of assaults, stops the way
to polite combats. / Their arms, the shafts of the drawing-room,
epigrams, witticisms, songs, parodies, and other needle thrusts are
impotent against the popular bull. This character lacks both
roots and resources; through super-refinement it has become
etiolated ; nature, impoverished by culture, is incapable of the
transformations by which we are renewed and survive. An all-


1 Dumouriez, “‘ Mémoires,” III. chap. iii. (July 21, 1789).

2 ‘All these fine ladies and gentlemen who knew so well how to bow and courtesy and walk
over a carpet, could not take three steps on God’s earth without getting dreadfully fatigued. ~
They could not even open or shut a door; they had not even strength enough to lift a log to
put it on the fire; they had to call a servant to draw up a chair for them; they could not
come in or go out by themselves. What could they have done with their graces, without
their valets to supply the place of hands and feet?” (George Sand, V. 6%)

’ When Madame de F had expressed a clever thing she felt quite proud of it. M——
remarked that on uttering something clever about an emetic she was quite ae that she
was not purged, Champfort, 107.


= ee Ee


CHAP. 111. HABITS AND CHARACTERS. 169


powerful education has repressed, mollified, enfeebled instinct
itself. About to die they experience none of the reactions of
blood and rage, the universal and sudden restoration of the forces,
the murderous spasm, the blind irresistible need of striking those
who strike them. If a gentleman is arrested in his own house by
a Jacobin we never find him splitting his head open. They
allow themselves to be taken, going quietly to prison; to make
an uproar would be bad taste; it is necessary, above all things, to
remain what they are, well-bred people of society. In prison
both men and women dress themselves with great care, pay each
other visits and keep up a drawing-room ; it may be at the end
of a corridor in the light of three or four candles; but here they
circulate jests, compose madrigals, sing songs and pride them-
selves on being as gallant, as gay and as gracious as ever: need
people be morose and ill-behaved because accident has. con-
signed them to a poor inn? _~ They preserve their dignity and
their smile/before their judges and on the cart; the women, es-
pecially, mount the scaffold with the ease and serenity characteris-
tic of an evening entertainment. It is the supreme characteristic of
good-breeding, erected into an unique duty, and become to this
aristocracy a second nature, which is found in its virtues as well
as in its vices, in its faculties as well as in its impotencies, in its
prosperity as at its fall, and which adorns it even in the death
to which it conducts.


1 The following is an example of what armed resistance can accomplish for a man in his
own house. ‘A gentleman of Marseilles, proscribed and living in his country domicile, has
provided himself with gun, pistols and sabre and never goes out without this armament, de-
claring that he will not be taken alive. Nobody has dared to execute the order of arrest.”
(Anne Plumptre, ‘A Residence of three years in France,” 1802-1805, II. 115,


sit


BOOK THIRD.
The Spirit and the Doctrine,


CHAPTER I. :


THE COMPOSITION OF THE REVOLUTIONARY SPIRIT.—Scientifie acquisi-
tions its first element.—I. The accumulation and progress of discoveries in
science and in nature.—They serve as a starting- point for the new philoso-
phers.—II. Change of the point of view in the science of man.—It is de-
tached from theology and is united with the natural sciences.—III. The
transformations of history. —Voltaire.—Criticism and conceptions of unity.—~
Montesquieu.—An outline of social laws.—IV. The transformation of psy-
chology.—Condillac.—The theory of sensation and of signs.—V. The ana-
lytical method.—Its principle.—The conditions requisite to make it produc- .
tive.—These conditions wanting or inadequate in the r8th century.—The
truth and survival of the principle. s


On seeing a man with a somewhat feeble constitution, but healthy —
in appearance and of steady habits, greedily swallow some
new kind of cordial and then suddenly fall to the ground, foam
at the mouth, act deliriously and writhe in convulsions, we at once -
surmise that this agreeable beverage contained some dangerous
substance; but a delicate analysis is necessary to detect and de-
compose the poison. The philosophy of the eighteenth century
contained poison, and of a kind as potent as it was peculiar; for,

- not only is it a long historic elaboration, the final and condensed
essence of the tendency of the thought of the century, but again,
its two principal ingredients have this peculiarity that, separate,
they are salutary and in combination they form a venomous com- —
pound.


I,


The first is scientific discovery, admirable on all sides, and
beneficent in its nature; it is made up of masses of facts slowly


ToS


CHAP; I: . THE SPIRIT AND THE DOCTRINE. 171


accumulated and then summarily presented or in rapid succession.
For the first time in history the sciences expand and affirm
each other to the extent of providing, not, as formerly, under
Galileo and Descartes, constructive fragments, or a provisional
scaffolding, but a definite and demonstrated system of the uni-
verse, that of Newton.!_ Around this capital fact, almost all the
discoveries of the century, either as complementary or as pro-
longations, range themselves. / In pure mathematics we have the
Infinitesimal Calculus discovered simultaneously by Leibnitz and
Newton, mechanics reduced by d’Alembert to a single theorem,
and that superb collection of theories which, elaborated by the
Bernouillis, Euler, Clairaut, d’Alembert, Taylor and Maclaurin, is
finally completed at the end of the century by Monge, Lagrange,
and Laplace.” In astronomy, the series of calculations and
observations which, from Newton to Laplace, transforms science
into a problem of mechanics, explains and predicts the movements
of the planets and of their satellites, indicating the origin and
formation of our solar system, and, extending beyond this, through
the discoveries of Herschel, affording an insight into the distri-
bution of the stellar archipelagoes and of the grand outlines of
celestial architecture. In physics, the decomposition of light and
the principles of optics discovered by Newton, the velocity of
sound, the form of its undulations, and, from Sauveur to Chladni,
from Newton to Bernouilli and Lagrange, the experimental laws
and leading theorems of Acoustics, the primary laws of the radi-


ation of heat by Newton, Kraft and Lambert, the theory of
_latent heat by Black, the proportions of caloric by Lavoisier and


Laplace, the first true conceptions of the source of fire and heat,
the experiments, laws, and means by which Dufay, Nollet,
Franklin, and especially Coulomb explain, manipulate and, for
the first time, utilize electricity. In Chemistry, all the foundations
of the science: isolated oxygen, nitrogen and hydrogen, the com-
position of water, the theory of combustion, chemical nomencla-


ture, quantitative analysis, the indestructibility of matter, in short,


the discoveries of Scheele, Priestley, Cavendish and Stahl,


1 “Philosophie naturalis principia,” 1687; ‘‘ Optique,”’ 1704.

2 See concerning this development Comte’s “‘ Philosophie Positive,” vol. I. At the begin-
ning of the eighteenth century, mathematical instruments are carried to such perfection as to
warrant the belief that all physical phenomena may be analyzed, light, electricity, sound,
crystallization, heat, elasticity, cohesion and other effects of molecular forces. See “‘ Whew-
ell’s History of the Inductive Sciences,” II., III.


172 THE ANCIENT REGIME, ~ _ BOOK II.


crowned with the clear and concise theory of Lavoisier. In
Mineralogy, the goniometer, the constancy of angles and the
primary laws of derivation by Romé de Lisle, and next the
discovery of types and the mathematical deduction of secondary
forms by Haiiy. In Geology, the verification and results of
Newton’s theory, the exact form of the earth, the depression of
the poles, the expansion of the equator,' the cause and the law of
the tides, the primitive fluidity of the planet, the constancy of its
internal heat, and then, with Buffon, Desmarets, Hutton and .
Werner, the aqueous or igneous origin of rocks, the stratifications
of the earth, the structure of beds of fossils, the prolonged and
repeated submersion of continents, the slow growth of animal
and vegetable deposits, the vast antiquity of life, the denudations,
fractures and gradual transformation of the terrestrial surface,”
and, finally, the grand picture in which Buffon describes in approx-
imative features the entire history of our globe, from the moment
it formed a mass of glowing lava down to the time when our
species, after so many lost or surviving species, was able to
inhabit it.

Upon this science of inorganic matter we see arising at the
same time the science of organic matter. Grew, and then Vail-
lant had just demonstrated the sexual system and described the
fecundation of plants; Linnzus invents botanic nomenclature
and the first complete classifications ; the Jussieus discover the sub-
ordination of characteristics and natural classification. Diges-
tion is explained by Réaumur and Spallanzani, respiration by
Lavoisier ;, Prochaska verifies the mechanism of reflex actions;
Haller and Spallanzani experiment on and describe the conditions.
and phases of generation. Scientists: penetrate to.the lowest
stages of animal life. Réaumur publishes his admirable observa-
tions on insects and Lyonnet devotes twenty years to portraying ©
the willow-caterpillar ; Spallanzani resuscitates his rotifers, Trem-
blay dissects his fresh-water polyps and Needham reveals his
infusoria, The experimental conception of life is deduced from
these various researches. Buffon already, and especially Lamarck,
in their great and incomplete sketches, outline with penetrating
divination the leading features of modern physiology and zool-


1 The travels of La Condamine in Peru and of Maupertuis in Lapland. |
? Buffon, ‘‘ Théorie de la Terre,” 1749; ‘‘ Epoques de la Nature,’ 1788. ‘*Carte géologique —
de l’Auvergne,” by Desmants, 1766,


ELE


CHAP. I. THE SPIRIT AND THE DOCTRINE. 173


ogy. - Organic molecules everywhere diffused or everywhere
growing, species of globules constantly in course of decay and
restoration, which, through blind and spontaneous development,
transform themselves, multiply and combine and which, without


either foreign direction, or any. preconceived end, solely through
the effect of their structure and surroundings, unite together to form


those masterly organisms which we call plants and animals: in the
beginning, the simplest forms, and next a slow, gradual, complex
and perfected organization; the organ created through habits,
necessities and surrounding medium; heredity transmitting ac-
quired modifications, all denoting in advance, in a state of con-
jecture and approximation, the cellular theory of later physi-


ologists? and the conclusions of Darwin. / In the picture which


the human mind draws of nature, the general outline is marked
by the science of the eighteenth century, the arrangement of its
plan and of the principal masses being so correctly marked, that


_to-day the leading lines remain intact. With the exception of a


few partial corrections we have nothing to efface.

This vast supply of positive or probable facts, either demon-
strated or anticipated, furnishes food, substance and impulse to
the intellect of the century.. Consider the leaders of public opin-
ion, the promoters of the new philosophy: they are all, in various
degrees; versed in the physical and natural sciences. Not only
are they familiar with theories and authorities but again they
have personal knowledge of facts and objects./ Voltaire? is


_ among the first to explain the optical and astronomical theories


of Newton, and again to make calculations, observations and ex-
periments of his own. He writes memoirs for the Academy of.
Sciences ‘On the Measure of Motive Forces,” and ‘On the Na-
ture and Diffusion of Heat.” He handles Réaumur’s thermome-
ter, Newton’s prism, and Muschenbrock’s pyrometer. In his lab-
oratory at Cirey he has all the known apparatus for physics and


1See a lecture by M. Lacaze-Duthier on Lamarck, ‘‘ Revue Scientifique,” III. 276-311.

? Buffon, “ Histoire Naturelle,” II. 340: ‘All living beings contain a vast quantity of
living and active molecules. ° Vegetal and animal life seem to be only the vesadts of the actions
oS all the smail lives peculiar to each of the active molecules whose life is primary.” Cf.
Diderot, ‘‘ Reyue de d’Alembert.”’

3 “* Philosophie de Newton,” 1738, and “‘ Physique,” by Voltaire. Cf. du Bois-Raymond,
“Voltaire physicien,” (Revue des Cours Scientifique, V. 539), and Saigey, ‘‘la Physique de
Voltaire.” ‘* Voltaire,” writes Lord Brougham, “had he continued to devote himself to ex-
perimental physics would undoubtedly have inscribed his name among those of the greatest
discoverers of his age.”


zc


174 THE ANCIENT REGIME. BOOK III.


chemistry. He experiments with his own hand on the reflection.
of light in space, on the increase of weight in calcined metals, on
the renewal of amputated parts of animals, and in the spirit of |
a true savant, persistently, with constant repetitions, even to
the beheading of forty snails and slugs, to verify an asser-
tion made by Spallanzani. , The same curiosity and the, same
preparation prevails with all imbued with the same spirit. /In the
other camp, among the Cartesians, about to disappear, F ontenelle
is an excellent mathematician, the competent biographer of all —
eminent men of science, the official secretary and true represent-
ative of the Academy of Sciences. In other places, in the
Academy of Bordeaux, Montesquieu reads discourses on _
mechanism of the echo, and on the use of the renal glands;
dissects frogs, tests the effect of heat and cold on animated =
sues, and publishes observations on plants and insects. Rous-
seau, the least instructed of all, attends the lectures of the chem-
ist Rouelle botanizing and appropriating to himself all the ele-
ments of human knowledge with which to write his “ Emile.”
Diderot taught mathematics and devoured every science and art
even to the technical processes of all industries. D’Alembert
stands in the first rank of mathematicians. Buffon translated
Newton’s theory of fluxions, and the Vegetable Statics of
Hales; he is in turn a metallurgist, optician, geographer, geolo-
gist and, last of all, an anatomist. Condillac, to explain the use
of signs and the filiation of ideas, writes abridgments of arithmetic,
algebra, mechanics and astronomy. Maupertuis, Condorcet and
Lalande are mathematicians, physicists and astronomers; d’Hol-
bach, Lamettrie and Cabanis are chemists, naturalists, physiolo-
gists and physicians,/ Prophets of a superior or inferior kind,
masters or pupils, specialists or simple amateurs, all draw directly
or indirectly from the living source that has just burst forth.
From this they all start to teach man what he is, from whence he
came, where he is going, what he may become and what he
should be. A new point of departure leads to new points of
view, and hence the idea which was then entertained of man is
to effect a complete transformation.


1 See his ‘* Logique des Calculs” and his “Art de Raisonner.”


CHAP. I. THE SPIRIT AND THE DOCTRINE. 175


7 7 Il.

Suppose a mind thoroughly imbued with these new truths;
place the spectator on the orbit of Saturn, and let him observe.!
Amidst this vast and overwhelming space and in these boundless
solar archipelagoes, how small is our own sphere, and the earth,
what a grain of sand! What multitudes of worlds beyond our
own, and, if life exists in them, what combinations are possible
other than those of which we are the result! What is life, what
is organic substance in this monstrous universe but an indifferent
mass, a passing accident, the corruption of a few epidermic par-
ticles? And if this be life, what is that humanity which is so
small a fragment of it? Such is man in nature, an atom, an
ephemeral particle; let this not be lost sight of in our theories
concerning his origin, his importance, and his destiny. “A mite
that would consider itself as the centre of all things would be
grotesque, and. therefore it is essential that an insect almost in-
finitely small should not show conceit almost infinitely great.” ?
How slow has been the evolution of the globe itselfY What
myriads of ages between the first cooling of its mass and the be-
ginnings of life!’ Of what consequence is the turmoil of our
ant-hill alongside of the geological tragedy in which we have borne
no part, the strife between fire and water, the thickening of the
earth’s crust, the formation of the universal sea, the construction
and separation of continents! Previous to our historical record
what a long history of vegetable and animal existences! What
a succession of flora and fauna! What generations of marine
organisms in forming the strata of sediment! What generations
of plants in forming the deposits of coal! What transformations
of climate to drive the pachydermata away from the pole!’ And
now comes man, the latest of all, shooting up as the terminal ~


1 For a popular exposition of these ideas see Voltaire, Jass7m, and particularly the ‘“‘ Mi-
cromégas”’ and ‘‘ Les Oreilles du Comte de Chesterfield.”

2 Cf. Buffon, zd. I. 31: ‘‘ Those who imagine a reply with final causes do not reflect
that they take’the-effect for the cause. The relationship which things bear to us having no
influence whatever on their origin, moral fitness can never become a physical explanation.”
Voltaire, “Candide”: ‘‘ When His High Mightiness sends a vessel to Egypt is he in any re-
spect embarrassed about the comfort of the mice that happen to be aboard of it?”

3 Buffon, zdzd. ‘‘ Supplement,” II. 513; IV. (‘‘ Epoques de la Nature’’), 65, 167. Ac-
cording to his experiments with the cooling of a cannon ball he based the following periods:
From the glowing fluia mass of the planet to tHe fall of rain 35,000 years. From the begin-
ning of life to its actual condition 40,000 years. From its actual condition to the entire con-
gealing of it and the extinction of life 93,000 years. He gives these figures simply as the
minima. We now know that they are much too limited.


i76 / THE ANCIENT REGIME. — BOOK Ti.


bud of the top of a lofty antique tree, growing there a few sea-
sons, but destined to perish, like the tree, after a few seasons,
when the increasing and foretold congelation allowing the tree
to live shall force the tree to die. He is not alone on the
branch: beneath him, around him, on a level with him, other
buds shoot forth, born of the same sap; but he must not forget,
if he would comprehend his own.being, that, along with himself,
other lives exist in his vicinity, graduated up to him and issuing
from the same trunk. If he is unique he is not isolated, being
an animal among other animals;! in him and with them, sub-
stance, organization and birth, the formation and renewal of
the functions, senses and appetites, are similar, while his supe-
rior intelligence, like their rudimentary intelligence, has for
an indispensable organ a nervous matter whose structure is the
same with him and with them. ‘Thus surrounded, brought forth
and borne along by nature, is it to be supposed that in nature he is
an émpire within an empire? He is there as the part of a whole,
by virtue of being a physical body, a chemical composition, an”
animated organism, a sociable animal, among other bodies, other
compositions, other social animals, all analogous to him; and, by
virtue of these classifications, he is, like them, subject to laws.
For, if the first cause is unknown to us, and we dispute among
ourselves to know what it is, whether innate or external, we affirm
with certainty the mode of its action, and that it operates only
according to fixed and general laws. Every circumstance, what-
ever it may be, is conditioned, and, its conditions being given, it
never fails to conform to them./ Of two links forming a chain,
the first always draws on the second. / There are aw num-
bers, forms, and motions, for the revolutions of the planets and
the fall of bodies, for the diffusion of light and the radiance of
_ heat, for the attractions and repulsions of electricity, for chemical
combinations, and/ for the growth, equilibrium and dissolution of
organized matter. They exist/for the growth, support, and de-
velopment of human societies, for the formation, conflict, and
direction of the ideas, the passions and the wills of human indi-
viduals.?_ In all this, man continues nature; hence, if he would


1 Buffon, zbéd. I. 12: ‘ The first truth derived from this patient investigation of nature is,
perhaps, a humiliating truth for man, that of taking his place in the order of animals.”

? Voltaire, ‘‘ Philosophie, Du principe d'action : ”. “ All beings, without wa ies iy are fpr
ject to invariable laws.”


CHAP. I. THE SPIRIT AND THE DOCTRINE. 177


comprehend him, he must observe him in her, after her, and like


her, with the same independence, the same precautions, and in
the same spirit.. Through this remark alone the method of the
moral sciences is fixed. In history, in psychology, in morals, in
politics, the thinkers of the preceding century, Pascal, Bossuet,
Descartes, Fénélon, Malebranche, and La Bruyeére, still start from
dogma; it is plain to every one qualified to read them that their
position is already determined. Religion provided them with a
complete theory of the moral order of things; according to this
theory, latent or exposed, they described man and accommodated
their observations to the preconceived type. ‘The writers of the
eighteenth century overthrow this method: they dwell on man,
on the observable man, and on his surroundings; in their eyes,
conclusions about the soul, its origin, and its destiny, must come
afterwards and depend wholly, not on that which revelation, but
on that which observation, furnishes. The moral sciences are
divorced from theology and attach themselves, as if a prolonga-
tion of them, to the physical sciences.


III.


Through this substitution and this combination they become
sciences. In history, every foundation is laid on which we of
the present day build. Compare Bossuet’s “ Discours sur l/his-
toire universelle,” and Voltaire’s “‘ Essai sur les mceurs,” and we
at once see how new and deep these foundations were.  Criti-


‘cism at once obtains its fundamental principle: considering that


the laws of nature are universal and immutable it concludes from
this that, in the moral world, as in the physical world, there can
be no infringement of them and that no arbitrary or foreign force
intervenes to disturb the regular course of things, which affords
a sure means of discerning myth from truth.! Biblical exegesis
is born out of this maxim, and not-alone that of Voltaire, but
the exegetical methods of the future. Meanwhile it sceptically
examines the annals of all people, carelessly cutting away and
suppressing, too hastily, extravagantly, especially where the an-
cients are concerned, because its historical expedition is simply


1“ Bssai sur les Moeurs,” chap. cxlvii., the summary: ‘The intelligent reader readily
sees that he must believe only in great events possessing some probability, and view with
pity the fables with which fanaticism, romantic taste and credulity have at all times filled the
world,”


178 THE ANCIENT REGIME. BOOK III.


a reconnoitering journey, but everywhere bestowing such ac-—
curate glances that we now preserve almost all the outlines
of its summary chart. The primitive man was not a superior
being, enlightened from above, but:a coarse savage, naked and
miserable, slow of growth, sluggish in progress, the most destitute
and most needy of all animals, and, on this account, sociable,
endowed like the bee and the beaver with an instinct for living
in groups, and moreover, an imitator like the monkey, but more
intelligent, capable of passing by degrees from the language
of gesticulation to that of articulation, beginning with a mono-
syllabic idiom which gradually increases in richness, precision
and subtlety... How many centuries are requisite to attain to
this primitive language! How many centuries more to the
discovery of the most necessary arts, the use of fire, the fabrica-
tion of “‘hatchets of silex and jade,” the melting and refining
of metals, the domestication of animals, the production and
modification of edible plants, the formation of early civilized and
durable communities, the discovery of writing, figures and as-
tronomical periods.” Only after a dawn of vast and infinite
length, do we see in Chaldea and in China the commencement
of an accurate chronological history. There are five or six
of these great independent centres of spontaneous civilization,
China, Babylon, ancient Persia, India, Egypt, Phoenicia, and the
two American empires. On collecting theSe fragments together,
on reading such of their books as have been preserved and
which travellers bring to us, the five Kings of the Chinese, the”
Vedas of the Hindoos, the Zendavesta of the ancient Persians,
we find that all contain religions, moral theories, philosophies
_ and institutions, as worthy of study as our own. ~Three of
these codes, those of India, China and the Mussulmans, still at
the present time govern countries as vast as our Europe and
nations of equal importance. We must not, like Bossuet, ‘‘over-
look the universe in a universal history,” and subordinate hu-
manity to a small population confined to a desolate region ~


1“ Traité de Metaphysique,” chap. i. ‘Having fallen on this little heap of mud, and
with no more idea of man than man has of the inhabitants of Mars or Jupiter, I set foot on
the shore of the ocean of the country of Caffraria and at once began to search for a man. I
encounter monkeys, elephants and negroes, with gleams of imperfect intelligence, etc.”
The new method is here clearly apparent. é

2 “Introduction A |’Essai sur les Mceurs: Des Sauvages.” Buffon, in ‘“‘ Epoques de la


nature,” the seventh epoch, precedes Darwin in his ideas on the modifications of the useful
Species of animals.


=
_


‘


~ Te ee
; eres =


CHAP. I. THE SPIRIT AND THE DOCTRINE. 179


around the Dead Sea.!. Human history is a thing of natural
growth like the rest; its direction is due to its own elements;
no external force guides it, but the inward forces that create it;
it is not tending to any prescribed end but developing a result.
And the chief result is the progress of the human mind.
“Amidst so many ravages and so much destruction, we see
a love of order secretly animating the human species, and fore-
stalling its utter ruin. It is one of the springs of nature ever
recovering its energy; it is the source of the formation of the
codes of nations; it causes the law and the ministers of the
law to be respected in Tonquin and in the islands of Formosa
as well asin Rome.” Man thus possesses “a principle of rea-
son,” namely, a “mechanical instinct” suggesting to him useful
implements ;? also an instinct of right suggesting to him his
moral conceptions. These two instincts form a part of his
organization; he has them from his birth, “as the birds have
their feathers, and bears their hair.” Hence he is perfectible
through nature and merely conforms to nature in improving his
mind and in bettering his condition. ‘The savage, “the Brazilian,
is an animal that has not yet attained to the completeness of its
species; a worm enclosed in its chrysalis envelope and not
to become a butterfly until after the lapse of centuries.” Extend
the idea farther along with Turgot and Condorcet,? and with all
its exaggerations, we see arising, before the end of the century,
our modern theory of progress, that which founds all our aspira-


tions on the boundless advance of the sciences, on the increase


of comforts which their applied discoveries constantly bring
to the human condition, and on the increase of good sense
which their discoveries, popularized, slowly deposit in the human.
brain.

A second principle has to be established to complete the foun-
dations of history. Discovered by Montesquieu it still to-day
serves as a constructive support, and, if we resume the work, as if
on the substructure of the master’s edifice, it is simply owing to ac-
cumulated erudition placing at our disposal more substantial and
more abundant materials. / In human society all parts are inter-


1 “Remarques de |’Essai sur les Moeurs.” ‘‘We may speak of this people in connection
with theology but they are not entitled to a prominent place in history.” ‘‘Entretien entre
A, B,.C,” the seventh,

2 Franklin defined man as a maker of tools.

3 Condorcet, ‘‘Esquisse d’un tableau historique des progrés de l’esprit humain.”


180 THE ANCIENT REGIME. BOOK Hi.”


dependent ; no modification of one can take-place without effect- |
ing proportionate changes in the others. Institutions, laws and
customs are not mingled together, as in a heap, through chance or
caprice, but connected one with the other through convenience
or necessity as ina harmony.’ According as authority is in all,
in several or in one hand, according as the sovereign admits or
rejects laws superior to himself, with intermediary powers’ below
him, everything differs or tends to differ in an understood sense
and in a constant quantity,—public intelligence, education, the
form of judgments, the nature and order of penalties, the condi-
tion of women, military organization and the nature and extent
of taxation. A multitude of subordinate wheels depend on the
great central wheel. / For, if the clock goes, it is owing to the har-
mony of its various parts, from which it follows that, on this
harmony ceasing, the clock gets out of order. But, besides the
principal spring, there are others which, acting on or in combi-
nation with it, give to each clock a special character and a pecul-
iar movement. / Such, in the first place, is climate, that is to say,
the degree of heat or cold, humidity or dryness, with its infinite
effects on man’s physical and moral attributes, followed by its in-
fluence on political, civil and domestic servitude or freedom.
Likewise the soil, according to its fertility, its position and its ex-
tent. Likewise, the physical régime according as a people is
composed of hunters, shepherds or agriculturists. Likewise the
fecundity of the race, and the consequent slow or rapid increase
of population, and also the excess in number, now of males and
now of females. And finally, likewise, are national character and
religion. All these causes, each added to the other, or each lim-
ited by the other, contribute together to form a total result, namely
society. Simple or complex, stable or unstable, barbarous or
civilized, this society contains within itself its explanations of its
being. Strange as its structure may be, it can be explained,
also its institutions however contradictory. Neither prosperity,
nor decline, nor despotism, nor freedom, is a cast of the die
brought on by the vicissitudes of chance, nor so many passages
of theatrical display improvised by individual wills. ‘They are


1“ Esprit des Lois,” preface. ‘I, at first, examined men, thinking that, in this infinite
diversity of laws and customs, they were not wholly governed by their fancies. I brought
principles to bear and I found special cases yielding to them as if naturally, the histories of
all nations being simply the result of these, each special law being atest: with another
law or depending on some general law.”


CHAP. k. ~ THE SPIRIT AND THE DOCTRINE. 181


conditions from which we cannot abstract ourselves. In any
event it is serviceable to know these conditions, either to better
ourselves or take all things patiently, now to carry out opportune
reforms, now to renounce impracticable reforms, now to acquire


_ the skill which enables us to succeed and now to acquire the pru-


dence which leads us to abstain.


IV.

The centre of the moral sciences is herein reached; the ques-
tion now is concerning man in general. The natural history of
the soul has to be set forth, and this must be done as we have
done the others, by discarding all prejudice and adhering to facts,
taking analogy for our guide, beginning with origins and follow-
ing, step by step, the development by which the infant, the savage,
the uncultivated primitive man, is converted into the rational and
cultivated man. Let us consider life at the outset, the animal at
the lowest degree on the scale, man as soon as he is born. ‘The
first thing we find is sensation, of this or that species, agreeable
or painful, and next a want, tendency or desire, and next after
these, through physiological mechanism, voluntary or involuntary
movements, more or less exactly and more or less quickly appro-
priated and co-ordinated. And this elementary fact is not merely
primitive ; it is, again, constant and universal since we encounter
it at each moment of each life, and in the most complicated as
well as in the simplest. Let us accordingly ascertain whether it is


- not the thread with which all our mental cloth is woven, and


whether its spontaneous unfolding, and the knotting of mesh after
mesh, 1s not finally to produce the entire network of our thought
and passion. Condillac, with a mind of incomparable precision
and lucidity, provides replies to nearly all the important questions _
arising from this idea, and which a revival of theological prejudice
and the importation of German metaphysics into France was to
bring into discredit at the beginning of the nineteenth century,
but which fresh observation, the establishment of mental pathol-
ogy, and multiplied vivisections now come to reanimate, to justify
and to complete.! Locke had already stated that our ideas all


1 Pinel (1791), Esquirol (1838), on mental diseases. Prochaska, Legallois (1812), and then
Flourens for vivisection. Hartly and James Mill at the end of the eighteenth century follow
Condillac on the same psychological road; all contemporary psychologists have entered
upon it. -(Wundt, Helmholtz, Fechner, in Germany, Bain, Stuart Mill, Herbert Spencer
and Carpenter, in England).


16


182 THE ANCIENT REGIME. BOOK It.


originate in outward or inward experience. Condillac shows
additionally that the actual elements of perception, memory, idea, —
imagination, judgment, reasoning, knowledge are sensations,
properly so called, or revived sensations; our loftiest ideas are
derived from no other materials, for they can be reduced to
signs which are themselves sensations of a certain kind. Sen-
sations accordingly form the substance of human or of animal in-
’ telligence; but the former infinitely surpasses the latter in this,
that, through the creation of signs, it succeeds in isolating, ab-
stracting and noting fragments of sensations, that is to say, of
forming, combining and employing general conceptions. ‘This
being granted, we are able to verify all our ideas, for, through re-
flection, we can revive and reconstruct the ideas we had formed
without any reflection. No abstract definitions exist at the
outset; abstraction is ulterior and derivative; at the head of
-each science must be placed examples, experiences, evident
facts; from these we derive our general idea. In like manner
we derive from several general ideas of the same degree another
general idea, and so on successively, step by step, always proceed-
ing according to the natural order of things, by constant analysis,
using expressive signs, as with mathematicians in passing from
calculation by the fingers to calculation by numerals and from
this to calculation by letters, and who, calling upon the eyes to
aid reason, depict the inward analogy of quantities by the outward
analogy of symbols. In this way science becomes complete by
means of a properly organized language! Through this reversal
of the usual method we summarily dispose of disputes about
words, escaping the illusions of human speech, simplifying study,
remodelling education, insuring discoveries, subjecting every as-


sertion to control and bringing all truths within reach of all un-


derstandings.


V.

Such is the course to be pursued with all the sciences and es-
pecially with the moral and political sciences. To consider in
turn each distinct province of human activity, to decompose the
leading notions out of which we form our conceptions, those of
religion, society and government, those of utility, wealth and ex-


5 Condillac, Jassim., and especially in his last two works the “Logique,” and the “ Langue
des Calculs,”’


:


CHAP. I. THE SPIRIT AND THE DOCTRINE. 183


change, those of justice, right and duty; to revert to palpable
facts, to first experiences, to the simple circumstances harboring
the elements of our ideas; to derive from these the precious ore
without loss or alloy; to recompose our ideas with this, to fix its
meaning and determine its value ; to substitute for the vague and
vulgar notion with which we started, the precise scientific de-
finition we arrive at, the base metal we receive for the refined
metal we obtain, constituted the prevalent method taught by the
philosophers under the name of analysis, and which sums up the
whole progress of the century. Up to this point, and no farther,
they are right: truth, every truth, is found in observable objects
and only from thence can it be derived; there is no other pathway
leading-to discovery. ‘The operation, undoubtedly, is productive
only when the vein is rich and we possess the means of extract-
ing theore. To obtain a just notion of government, of religion,
of right, of wealth, a man must be a historian beforehand, a
jurisconsult and economist, and have gathered up myriads of
facts; and, besides all this, he must possess a vdst erudition
and practised and special acuteness. If these conditions are only
partially complied with, the operation again doubtless affords
but incomplete results or a dubious alloy, a few rough drafts of
the sciences, the rudiments of pedagogy along with Rousseau,
of political economy with Quesnay, Smith, and Turgot, of linguist-
ics with Des Brosses, and of arithmetical morals and criminal leg-
islation with Bentham. Finally, if none of these conditions are


complied with,the same operation in the hands of closet specula-


tors, drawing-room amateurs, and oratorical charlatans in public
places, will undoubtedly end only in mischievous compounds and
in destructive explosions. Nevertheless a good law remains
good even when the ignorant and the impetuous make a bad
use of it, and if we of to-day resume the abortive effort of the
eighteenth century it is within the lines it transmitted to us.


CHAPTER II. a


THE CLASSIC SPIRIT, THE SECOND ELEMENT. nod Its signs, duration snd
power.—Its origin and public supporters. —Its vocabulary, grammar and —
style.—Its method, merits and defects.—II. Its original deficiency. —
Signs of this in the 17th century.—It grows with time and success.—
Proofs of this growth in the 18th century.—Serious poetry, the drama, .
history and romances.—Short-sighted views of man and of human existence. —
—III. The philosophic method in conformity with it.—Ideology.—Abuse of
the mathematical process.—Condillac, Rousseau, Mably, Condorcet, Volney, —
Sieyés, Cabanis, and de Tracy.—Excesses of simplification and belerey of
organization.


7


Tus grand and magnificent edifice of new truths resembles a —
tower of which the first story, quickly finished, at once becomes —
accessible to the public. The public ascends the structure and
is requested by its constructors to look about, not at the sky and :
at surrounding space, but right-before it and on the ground, so
as to know the country on which it dwells. ‘The point of view —
is certainly favorable and the recommendation is judicious. To —
conclude, however, that the public will see accurately would not —
be warranted, for the state of its eyes must be examined, to ascer- —
tain whether it is near or far-sighted, or if the retina naturally, or
through habit, is sensitive to certain colors. In like manner the —
French of the eighteenth century must be considered, the struct-
ure of their inward vision, that is to say, the fixed form of under- —
standing they bear with them, unconsciously or undesignedly, a
into the tower.


i.

I. This fixed form consists of the classic spirit, and this, ap-
plied to the scientific acquisitions of the period, produces the
philosophy of the century and the doctrines of the Revolution.
Various signs denote its presence, and notably its oratorical, reg-
ular and correct style, wholly consisting of generalized expressions
and of related ideas. It lasts two centuries, from Malherbe and


idl et


\-


_ CHAP. II THE SPIRIT AND THE DOCTRINE. 185


Balzac to Delille and de Fontanes, and during this long period,
no man of intellect, save two or three, and then only in the secret’
' memoirs, as in the case of St. Simon, also in familiar letters like
those of the Marquis and bailly of Mirabeau, either dares or can
withdraw himself from its empire. Farfrom disappearing with
the ancient régime it forms the matrix out of which every discourse
and document issues, even the phrases and vocabulary of the
Revolution. Now, what is more efficacious than a mould pre-
pared beforehand, either imposed or accepted, in which, by virtue
of natural tendency, of tradition and of education, every mind
may properly shape itself? Hence the historic force, and of
the highest order, which this one possesses. Fully to comprehend
it let us study its formation.
Its establishment is coeval with that of the regular monarchy
‘and ‘polished intercourse, and it accompanies these, not acciden-
tally butm the natural order of things. For it is the work of the
new public which the new régime and new habits then formed,
consisting of an aristocracy rendered listless by the encroaching
monarchy,:of people well born and well educated who, with-
drawn from activity, fall back on conversation and devote their
leisure to enjoying the calm or refined pleasures of the intellect.
At last they find no other occupation or interest: to talk, to
listen, to entertain themselves agreeably and with ease, on all
subjects, grave or gay, of any interest to the men, and especially
to the women, of society is their great affair. In the seventeenth
century they are styled “honest folks” and thenceforth a writer,
even the most abstract, addresses himself to them. ‘The honest
man,” says Descartes, “need not have read all books nor have
studiously acquired all that is taught in the schools ;” and he en-
titles his last treatise, “A search for Truth according to natural
light which alone, without the aid of Religion or Philosophy, de-
termines the truths an Aovest man should possess on all matters
forming the subjects of his thoughts.”* In short, from one end


1 Voltaire, ‘‘ Dict. Phil.,”’ see the article on Language. ‘‘Of all the languages in Europe
the French is most generally used because it is the best adapted to conversation. Its char-
acter is derived from that of the people who speak it. For more than a hundred and fifty
years past, the French have been the most familiar with society and the first to discard any
discomfort in it. . . . It is a better currency than any other even if it should lack weight.”

2 Descartes, ed. Cousin, XI. 333, I. 121. Descartes depreciates ‘simple knowledge ac-
quired without the aid of reflection, such as languages, history, geography, and, generally,
whatever is not based on experience. . . . It is no more the duty of an honest man to know
Greek or Latin than to know the Swiss or Breton languages, nor the history of the Romano-
Germanic ee any more than of the smallest country in Europe.”

I


186 THE ANCIENT REGIME. BOOK TI,


of his philosophy to the other, the only qualification he demands ~
of his readers is “natural good sense” added to the common —
stock of experience acquired by contact with the world. / As 4
these form the auditory they are likewise the judges. “One ©
must study the taste of the court,” says Moliére,’ “for in no place
are verdicts more just. . . . With simple common sense and in-
tercourse with people of refinement, a habit of mind is there ~
obtained which, without comparison, forms a more accurate 4
judgment of things than the rusty attainments of the pedants.” —
From this’time forth, it may be said that the arbiter of truth and
of taste is not, as before, an erudite Scaliger, but.a man of the
world, a Larochefoucauld, or a Tréville.2 The pedant and, after
him, the savant, the specialist, is set aside. ‘True honest peo- —
ple,” says Nicole after Pascal, ‘require no sign. They need not
be divined; they join in the conversation going on as they enter”
the room. ‘They are not styled either poets or geometers but —
they are the judges of all these.”? In the eighteenth century they —
constitute the sovereign authority. In the great crowd of “im-
beciles,” sprinkled with vulgar pedants, there is, says Voltaire, “a
small group apart called good society, which group, rich, well —
brought up, well informed ‘and polished, forms, so to say, the —
flower of humanity ; for it the greatest men have labored; it is that —
which creates fame.”* Admiration, favor, importance, belong not —
to those who are worthy of it but to those who address themselves
to this group. / “In 1789,” said the Abbé Maury, “the French —
Academy alone enjoyed any consideration in France, and it really ~
gave a position. ‘That of the Sciences signified nothing in public
opinion any more than that .of Inscriptions. ... Languages
form the science of simpletons. D’Alembert was ashamed of be- —
longing to the Academy of Sciences. Only a handful of peo- —
ple listen to a mathematician, a chemist, etc.; the man of letters,


.


1 Moliére, ‘Les Femmes Savantes,” and “La Critique de l’école des femmes.” The
parts of Dorante with Lycidas and of Clitandre with Trissotin. —

? The learned Huet, (1630-1721), true to the taste of the sixteenth century, describes this.
change very well from his point of view. ‘‘ When I entered the world of letters these were :
still flourishing; great reputations maintained their supremacy. I have seen letters decline
and finally reach an almost entire decay. For I scarcely know a person of the present time __
that one can truly call a savant.” The few Benedictines like Ducange and Mabillon, and !
later, the academician Fréret, the president Bouhier of Dijon, in short, the veritable erudites
exercise no influence. .

8 Nicole; ‘‘(Euvres morales,” in the second essay on Charity and Self-love, 142 .

* Voltaire, “Dialogues,” ‘L’intendant des menus et l’abbé Grizel,” 129.


CHAP. Il. THE SPIRIT AND THE DOCTRINE. 187


the orator, addresses the universe.” 4 / Under a strong pressure of
this kind the mind necessarily accommodates itself to the exigen-
cies, the proprieties, the tastes, and the degree of attention and
of instruction of its public. Hence the classic mould,—formed
out of the habit of speaking, writing and thinking for a drawing-
room audience.

This is evidently the case, and at the first glance, in relation to
style and language. Between Amyot, Rabelais and Montaigne
on the.one hand, and Chateaubriand, Victor Hugo and Honoré
de Balzac on the other, classic French comes into being and dies.
Its title is ensured at the start; it is the language of honest peo-
ple; it is fashioned not merely for them, but by them, and Vau-
gelas,” their secretary, devotes himself for thirty years to the reg-
istry of decisions according to the usages only of good society.
Hence, in all its parts, both in its vocabulary and in its grammar,
language is refashioned over and over again, according to the cast
of their intellects, which is the prevailing intellect. In the first
place the vocabulary is diminished. Most of the words specially
employed on erudite and technical subjects, expressions that are
too Greek and too Latin, terms peculiar to the schools, to science,
to occupations, to the household, are excluded from discourse ;
those too closely denoting a particular occupation or profession
are not considered proper in general conversation. A vast nuin-
ber of picturesque and expressive words are dropped, all that are
crude, saulois or naifs, all that are local and provincial, or per-
sonal and made-up, all familiar and proverbial locutions,? many
brusque, familiar and frank turns of thought, every haphazard,
telling metaphor, almost every description of impulsive and dex-
terous utterance throwing a flash of light into the imagination
and bringing into view the precise, colored and complete form,
but of which a too vivid impression would run counter to the
proprieties of polite conversation. “One improper word,” said


>


.1 Mably adds with his accustomed coarseness, ‘‘ We, in the French Academy, looked upon
the members of the Academy of Sciences as our valets.” These valets at that time consisted
of Lavoisier, Fourcroy, Lagrange, Laplace, etc. (A narrative by Joseph de Maistre, quoted
by Sainte-Beuve, ‘‘Causeries du lundi,” IV. 283.)

2 Vaugelas, ‘‘Remarques sur la langue frangaise:” ‘It is the mode of speech of the
most sensible portion of the court as well as the mode of writing of the most sensible authors
of the day. It is better to consult women and those who have not studied than those who
are very learned in Greek and in Latin.”

8 One of the causes of the fall and discredit of the Marquis d’Argenson in the eighteenth
century, was his habit of using these,


188 | THE ANCIENT REGIME. — “voor


Vaugelas,*“ is all that is necessary to bring a person in society.
into contempt,” and, on the eve of the Revolution, an objection-
able term denounced by Madame de Luxembourg still consigns _
a man to the rank of “ especes ” because correct expression isever —
an element of good manners. 1 Language, through this constant _
screening, becomes attenuated and colorless: Vaugelas estimates
that one-half of the phrases and terms employed by Amyot are —
stricken out. With the exception of La Fontaine, an isolated
and spontaneous genius, who reopens the old sources, and La —
Bruyére, a bold seeker, who opens a fresh source, and Voltaire,
an incarnate demon who, in his anonymous and pseudonymous
writings, gives the rein to the violent, crude expressions of his in-
spiration,” the.terms which are most appropriate fall into desue-
tude. One day, Gresset, in a discourse at the Academy, dares —
utter four or five of these,’ relating, I believe, to carriages and
head-dresses, whereupon murmurs at once burst forth. During
his long retreat he had become provincial and lost the tone. By
degrees, discourses are composed of ‘ general expressions” only.
These are even employed, in accordance with Buffon’s precept, to
designate particular objects. They are more in conformity with the —
urbane disposition which effaces, smooths away and avoids brusque —
and familiar accents, to which a crowd of ideas seems gross or
trivial when not enveloped in a semi-transparency. They are
better suited to a languid attention; general terms in conversa- —
tion alone suddenly arouse current and common ideas; they are —
intelligible to every man from the single fact that he belongs to the
drawing-room ; special terms, on the contrary, demand an effort
of the memory or of the imagination; suppose that, in relation
to Franks or to savages, I should mention “a battle-axe,” which
would be at once understood ; should I mention a ‘‘tomahawk,””
or a “francisque,” * many would imagine that I was speaking Teu-
ton or Iroquois.? In this respect the more elevated the genus,


1 Vaugelas, zdid. ‘‘ Although we may have eliminated one-half of his phrases and terms
we nevertheless obtain in the other half all the riches of which we boast and of which we
make a display.” Compare together a lexicon of two or three writers of the sixteenth cen-_
tury and one of two or three writers of the seventeenth. A brief statement of the results of
the comparison is here given. Let any one, with pen in hand, note the differences on a
hundred pages of any of these texts, and he will be surprised at it. ‘Take, for example, two
writers of the same category, and of secondary grade, Charron and Nicole

2 For instance, in the article ‘‘ Ignorance,” in the ‘‘ Dict. Philosophique.”

3 La Harpe, ‘‘ Cours de Littérature,”’ ed. Didot. II. 142. .

4 A battle-axe used by the Franks. —Tr.

5 I cite an example haphazard from the ‘ Optimiste” (1788), by Colin d’ Harleville. In


~


cuar.u. THE SPIRIT AND THE DOCTRINE. 189


the more powerful the scruple; every appropriate werd is ban-
ished from poetry; if one happens to enter the mind it must. be
evaded or replaced by a paraphrase. An eighteenth century poet
avails himself of but little more than one-third of the dictionary,
and poetic language at last becomes so restricted as to compel
a man with anything to utter not to utter it in verse.

On the other hand the more pruning language undergoes the
clearer it becomes. Reduced toa select vocabulary the French-
man says fewer things, but he says them more agreeably and more
accurately. ‘Urbanity, exactitude,” these two words, born at
the same time with the French Academy, are’an abridgment of
the reform of which it is the organ, and which the drawing-room,
by it, and alongside of it, imposes on the public. Grand seigniors
in retirement, and unoccupied fine ladies, obtain amusement in
an examination of the subtleties of words for the purpose of com-
posing maxims, definitions and characters. With admirable
scrupulousness and infinitely delicate tact, writers and people of
society apply themselves to weighing each word and each
phrase in order to fix its sense, to measure its force and bearing,
to determine its affinities, use and connections; and this work of
precision is carried on from the earliest academicians, Vaugelas,
Chapelain and Conrart, to the end of the classic epoch, in the
“Synonymes” of Bauzée and Girard, in the “Remarques” by
Duclos, in the “‘Commentaire” by Voltaire, in Corneille, in the
“Lycée” of La Harpe, in the efforts, the example, the practice
and the authority of the great and the inferior writers of which all
are correct. Never did.architects, obliged to use the common
stones of a highway in building, better understand each piece,
its dimensions, its shape, its resistance, its possible connections
and suitable position. All this understood, the question arises
how to construct with the least trouble and with the utmost so-
lidity, while the grammar undergoes reformation in the same sense
as the dictionary. Words following each other according to the
variable order of impressions and emotions are no longer allow-
able; they must be regularly and rigorously assigned accord-


a certain description, ‘‘ The scene represents.a bosquet filled with odoriferous trees.”” The
classic spirit rebels against stating the- species of tree, whether lilacs, lindens or hawthorns.
In the landscapes of this era we have the same thing, the trees being generalized,—of no
known species.

1See in the “Lycée,” by La Harpe, after the analysis of each piece, his remarks on
detail in style.


190 THE ANCIENT REGIME.  — BOOK Ih.


ing to the unchangeable order of ideas. The author loses the “
right of placing ahead, or as a vidette, the object or trait which —
first and most vividly impresses him; the plan is arranged and ~
positions are assigned beforehand. Each portion of the discourse |
has its own plan; no omission or transposition is permitted as was
done in the sixteenth century ;! all are necessary to it, and in
definite positions, at’ first the subject of the sentence with its
appendices, then the verb, then the object direct and, finally, the a
indirect connections. In this way the sentence forms a graduated
scaffolding, the substance coming foremost, then the quality, then
the modes and varieties of the quality, just as a good architect -
in the first place poses his foundation, then the building, then the —
accessories, economically and prudently, with a view to adapt
each section of the edifice to the support of the section following 4
after it. No sentence demands any less attention than another,
nor is there any in which one may not at every step verify the —
connection or incoherence of the parts.2, The method govern-
ing the arrangement of the simple sentence also governs that of
the period, the paragraph and the series of paragraphs; it
forms the style as it forms the syntax. Each small edifice occupies
a distinct position, and but one, in the great total edifice. As
the discourse advances, each section must in turn file in, never

before, never after, no parasitic member being allowed to intrude, —
and no regular member being allowed to encroach on its neigh-

bor, while all these members bound together by their very posi-

tions must move onward, combining all their forces on one single
point. Finally, we have for the first time in a writing, natural
and distinct groups, complete and compact harmonies, none of

which infringe on the others or allow others to infringe on them.

It is no longer allowable to write haphazard, according to the ca-
price of one’s inspiration, to discharge one’s ideas in bulk, to
let oneself be interrupted by parentheses, to string along inter-
minable rows of citations and enumerations. An end is proposed;
some truth is to be demonstrated, some definition to be ascer-
tained, some conviction to be brought about; to do this we must
march and ever directly onward. Order, sequence, progress,


1 The omission of the pronouns, /, he, we, you, they, the article ¢#e, and of the verb,
especially the verb fo de. Any page of Rabelais, Amyot or Montaigne, suffices to show new
numerous and various were the transpositions.

i Vaugelas, z6é¢. ‘‘No language is more inimical to ambiguities and every species of
obscurity.” ; x


‘CHAP. II. THE SPIRIT AND THE DOCTRINE. IgI


proper transitions, constant development constitute the character-
istics of this style. To such an extent is this pushed, that from
the very first, familiar letters, romances, humorous pieces, and all
ironical and gallant effusions, consist of morsels of systematic


eloquence.' At the Hétel Rambouillet, the explanatory period is


displayed with as much fulness and as rigorously as with Des-


cartes himself. One of the words the most frequently occurring


with Mme. de Scudéry is the conjunction for. Passion is worked


out through close-knit arguments. Drawing-room compliments


stretch along in sentences as finished as those of an academical
oration. Scarcely completed, the instrument already discloses


_ its aptitudes; we are aware of its being made to explain, to de-


monstrate, to persuade and to popularize ; Condillac, a century
later, is justified in saying that it is in itself a systematic means
of decomposition and of recomposition, a scientific method


‘analogous to arithmetic and algebra. At the very least it pos-
sesses the incontestable advantage of starting with a few ordi-


mary terms and of leading the reader along with facility and
promptness, by a series of simple combinations, up to the loftiest.?
By virtue of this, in 1789, the French tongue ranks above every
other. The Berlin Academy establishes a prize to secure an ex-
planation of its pre-eminence. It is spoken throughout Europe.
No other language is used in diplomacy. As, formerly, with Latin,
it is international and henceforth seems to be the chosen organ
of reasoning.

It is the organ only of a certain species of reasoning, /a raison
raisonnante, that requiring the least preparation for thought,
giving itself as little trouble as possible, content with its acquisi-
tions, taking no pains to increase or renew them, incapable of,
or unwilling to embrace the plenitude and complexity of actual--
ities. In its purism, in its disdain of terms suited to the occasion,
Mm its avoidance of lively sallies, in the extreme regularity of its
developments, the classic style is powerless to fully portray or to
record the infinite and varied details of experience. It declines


1See the principal romances of the seventeenth century, the ‘‘Roman Bourgeois,” by
Furetiére, the ‘‘ Princesse de Cléves,”” by Madame de Lafayette, the ‘‘Clélie,”” by Mme. de
Scudéry, and even Scarron’s “‘ Roman Comique.’”’ See Balzac’s letters, and those of Voiture


and their correspondents, the “ Récit des grands jours d’Auvergne,” by Fléchier, etc. On
' the oratorical peculiarities of this style cf. Sainte-Beuve, “Port-Royal,” 2d ed. I. 515.


2 Voltaire, ‘‘Essai sur le poéme épique: Our nation, regarded by strangers as superficial,
is, with the pen in its hand, the wisest of all. Method is the dominant quality of all our


| writers.


192 THE ANCIENT REGIME.


to render the outward guise of things, the immediate
of the spectator, the heights and depths of passion, the’ a |
nomy, at once so composite and absolutely personal, of the
breathing individual, in short, that unique harmony of countless
traits, blended together and animale which compose not human ~
character in general but one particular character, and whic ch S
a Saint-Simon, a Balzac, or a Shakespeare himself. could n not |
render if the copious language they used, and which was en- .
riched by their temerities, did not contribute its subtleties to the ©
multiplied details of their observation Neither the Bible, nor ©
Homer, nor Dante, nor Shakespeare? could be translated with
this style. Read Hamlet’s monologue in Voltaire and see what
remains of it, an abstract piece of declamation, with about as
much of the original in it as there is of Othello in his Orosmane.
Look at Homer and then at Fénélon in the island of Calypso; ©
the wild, rocky island, where “gulls and other sea-birds with —
long wings,” build their nests, becomes in pure French prose an
orderly park arranged “for the pleasure of the eye.” In the
eighteenth century, contemporary novelists, themselves belonging |
to the classic epoch, Fielding, Swift, Defoe, Sterne and Richard- —
son, are admitted into France only after excisions and much ~
weakening; their expressions are too free and their scenes are too —
impressive ; their freedom, their coarseness, their quaintness, would —
form blemishes ; the ranslaeer abbreviates, softens, and some- —
times, in his preface, apologizes for what he retains. Room is ;
found, in this language, only for a portion of the truth, a scanty —
portion, and which constant refining daily renders still more
scanty. Considered in itself, the classic style is always in danger
of accepting slight, unsubstantial commonplaces for its materials.
It spins them out, mingles and weaves them together; only ©
a fragile filigree, however, issues from its logical apparatus; we
may admire the elegant workmanship; but in practice, the work
is of little, none, or dangerous service.


1 “Shakespeare, who displayed a greater variety of expression than probably any writer in
any language, produced all his plays with about 15,000 words. Milton’s works are built up
with 8,000; and the Old Testament says all it has to say with 5,642 words.” (Max Miiller,
‘Lectures on the Science of Language,” I. 309.) It would be interesting to place alongside
of this Racine’s restricted vocabulary. That of Mme. de Scudéry is extremely limited. In |
the best romance of the XVIIth century, the ‘‘Princesse de Cléves,” the number of words
is reduced to the minimum. The Dictionary of the old French Academy contains 29,742
words; the Greek Thesaurus, by H. Estienne, contains about 150,000

2 Compare together the translations of the Bible made by de Seni and Luther; noe y
Homer by Dacier, Bitaubé and Lecomte de Lisle; those of Herodotus, by Larcher and
Courrier, the popular tales of Perrault and those by Grimm, ete.


vm


THE SPIRIT AND THE DOCTRINE. 93


ee these characteristics of style we divine those of the
ind for which it serves as the organ. T'wo principal operations
Pete ictivute the activity of the human understanding. Placed before
- objects, it receives a more or less complete, profound and exact
_ impression of these; and after this, turning away from: them,
it analyzes its impression, and classifies, distributes, and more or
less skilfully expresses the ideas derived from them. In the second
_ of these operations the classicist is superior. Obliged to adapt
. “himself to his audience, that is to say, to people of society who
_ are not specialists and yet critical, he necessarily carries to per-
- fection the art of exciting attention and of making himself heard,
_ that is to say, the art of composition and of writing. With
~ patient industry, and multiplied precautions, he carries the reader
along with him by a series of easy rectilinear conceptions, step by
_ step, omitting none, beginning with the lowest and thus ascending
to the highest, always progressing with steady and measured pace,
securely and agreeably as on a promenade. No interruption or
- diversion is possible: on either side, along the road, balustrades
) keep him within bounds, each idea extending into the following
_ one by such an insensible transition, that he involuntarily ad-
vances, without stopping or turning aside, until he is led to the
final truth where he is to be seated. All the classic literature
‘bears the imprint of this talent; there is no branch of it into
which the qualities of a good discourse do not enter and form a
_ part. It is paramount in those branches which, -in, them-
selves, are only half-literary, but which, by its means, become
_ fully so, transforming writings into fine works of art which their
__ matter would seem to class with scientific works, with the instru-
_ mentalities of action, with historical documents, with philosophical
_ treatises, with doctrinal expositions, with sermons, polemics, dis-
__Sertations and demonstrations, even with dictionaries, from
Descartes to Condillac, from Bossuet to Buffon and Voltaire,
: _ from Pascal to Rousseau and Beaumarchais, in short, prose al-
most entirely, even official despatches and diplomatic correspon-
_ dence, and private correspondence from Madame de Sévigné to
_ Madame du Deffant, including so many perfect letters escaping
_ from the pens of wonren who never thought of it. It is paramount
in those kinds which, in themselves, are literary, but which derive
from it an oratorical turn. Not only does it impose a rigid plan,


¥7


194 THE ANCIENT REGIME. _—


a regular distribution of parts’ on dramatic woe accu
proportions, suppressions and connections, a sequence anda
ress, as in a passage of eloquence, but again it tolerates”
the most perfect discourses. ‘There is no character that is not
accomplished orator; with Corneille and Racine, with Me
himself, the confidant, the barbarian king, the young cavalier
drawing-room coquette, the valet, show themselves adepts i oe
use of language. Never have we encountered such adroit ex
diums, such well-arranged evidence, such just ‘reflections, s
delicate transitions, such conclusive perorations. Never |]
dialogues borne such a strong resemblance. to oratorical

Each narration, each piece of portraiture, each detail of act
might be detached and serve as a model example for
boys along with the masterpieces of the antique tribune. —
strong is this tendency that, on the approach of the final m
in the agony of death, alone and without witnesses, a che
contrives to plead his own frenzy and to die eloquently.


II. 7 Bs | 7 ..


This excess marks a defect. In the two operations which the
man mind performs, the classicist is more successful in the seco:
than in the first. The second, indeed, stands in the way of the fir
the obligation of saying things perfectly always impeding the u
terance of what should be said. With him the form is more ad- s
mirable than the substance is rich, the general impression which 2
serves as the animating source losigeed in the regular channels to 2
which it is confined, its force, depth and impetuosity. "Poetry, E
properly so called, the outflow of meditation and of insight, isan
impossibilty. Lyric poetry proves abortive and likewise the epic %
poem.” N othing springs up on these remote and sublime confines — "
where speech is in accordance with music and painting. Never do ‘-
we hear the involuntary outburst of vivid impressions, the lonely


1 See the ‘‘Discours académique,” by Racine, on the reception of Thomas Corsi “4
“In this chaos of dramatic poetry your illustrious brother brought season on the stage, but
reason associated with all the pomp and the ornamentation our language is capable of.”

? Voltaire, ‘‘Essai sur le potme épique,” 290. “It must be admitted that a Frenchman
has more difficulty in writing an epic poem than anybody else. . . . Dare I confess ies
Our own is the least poetic of all polished nations. ‘The works in verse the most highly
esteemed in France are those of the drama, which must be written in a familiar style
approaching conversation.” ‘


THE SPIRIT AND THE DOCTRINE. 195


_ confession of an overcharged soul,’ which gives itself voice only for
_ relief and expansion. When a creation of characters is impera-
tive, as in dramatic poetry, the classic mould fashions but one spe-
_ cies, those which through education, birth, or imitatively, always
speak correctly, in other words, so many people of society. No
others are visible on the stage or elsewhere, from Corneille and
Racine to Marivaux and Beaumarchais. So strong is the yoke
as even to impose itself on La Fontaine’s animals, on the servants
and valets of Moliére, on Montesquieu’s Persians, and on the
_ Babylonians, the Indians and the Micromégas of Voltaire. It
must be stated, furthermore, that these personages are only partially
_ real. In each living being two kinds of characteristics are found,
_ the first not numerous or common to all individuals of its class,
~ and which any reader or observer may readily distinguish, and
_ the second in large number, appertaining to it alone, and not to
_ be detected without some effort. Classic art concerns itself only
| with the former ; it purposely effaces, neglects or subordinates the
latter. Its creations are not veritable individuals, but generalized
_ characters, a king, a queen, a young prince, a confidant, a high-
_ priest, a captain of the guards, possessing some general passion,
habit or inclination, such as love, ambition, fidelity or perfidy, a
_ despotic or a yielding temper, some species of wickedness or of
_ native goodness. As to the circumstances of time and place,
_ which exercise the most powerful influence {n fashioning and di-
 versifying man, it scarcely indicates them, making an abstraction
- of them. In.tragedy the scene is really everywhere and of all
centuries, the opposite affirmation being equally true that it is no-
poe and of no century. It consists of any palace or of any
_ temple,? in which, to get rid of all historic or personal impres-

sions, habits and costumes are introduced conventionally, being
neither French nor foreign, nor ancient, nor modern. In this ab-
_ Stract world the address is always “‘you,”? “Seigneur” and ‘ Mad-


-


eee 1 Except in the “‘ Pensées,” by Pascal, a few notes dotted down by a morbidly exalted

_ Christian and which certainly, in the perfected work, would not have been allowed to re-

_ main as they are.

ee, 2 See in the Cabinet of Engravings the theatrical costumes of the middle of the XVIIIth

__ ¢entury. Nothing could be more opposed to the spirit of the classic drama than the parts

_ of Esther and Brittannicus, as they are played nowadays, in the accurate costumes and with

scenery derived from late discoyeries at Pompeii or Ninevah.

_____ 8 The formality which this indicates will be understood by those familiar with the use of

the pronoun Zo in France, denoting intimacy and freedom from restraint in contrast with
ceremonious and formal intercourse.—Tr.


s


196 THE ANCIENT REGIME.


ame,” the noble style always clothing the most opposite char:
ters with the same drapery. When Corneille and Racine, throug
the stateliness and elegance of their verse, afford us a glimpse of O
contemporary figures they do it unconsciously, imagining that
they are portraying man in himself; and, if we of the present
time recognize in their pieces either the cavaliers, the duellists, ;
the bullies, the politicians or the heroines of the Fronde, or the
courtiers, princes and bishops, the ladies and gentlemen in wait-—
ing of the regular monarchy, it is owing to their brush having —
been involuntarily dipped in their own experience and some of —
its color having fallen accidentally on the bare ideal outline —
which they wished to trace. We have simply a contour, a gen-—

eral sketch, filled up with the harmonious gray tone of correct —

diction. Even in comedy, necessarily portraying surrounding —
habits, even with Moliére, so frank and so bold, the model shows —
its incompleteness, all individual peculiarities being suppressed,
the face becoming for a moment a theatrical mask, and the per-—
sonage, especially when talking in verse, sometimes losing its an-

imation in becoming the speaking-trumpet of a tirade or of a dis-
sertation.! The stamp of rank, condition or fortune, whether —
gentleman or bourgeois, provincial or Parisian, is frequently -
overlooked.?, We are rarely made to appreciate physical exter-
nals, as in Shakespeare—the temperament, the state of the ner-—
vous system, the bluff or drawling tone, the impulsive or re-—
strained action, the emaciation or obesity of a character.* Fre-

quently no trouble is taken to find a suitable name, this being

either Chrysale, Orgon, Damis, Dorante, or Valére. The name |
designates only a simple quality, that of a father, a youth, a
valet, a grumbler, a gallant, and, like an ordinary cloak, fitting ~
indifferently all forms alike, as it passes from the wardrobe of |

Moliére to that of Regnard, Destouche, Le Sage or Marivaux.*


1 See the parts of the moralizers and reasoners like Cléante in ‘‘Tartuffe,” Ariste in “ Ties}
Femmes Savantes,” Chrysale in “L’Ecole des femmes,” etc. See the discussion between.
the two brothers in “Le Festin de Pierre,” ITI. 5; the discourse of Ergaste in “*L’Eéole des
Maris”; that of Eliante, imitated from Lucretius in the “* Misanthrope,” II. 5; the portrai-
ture, by Dorine in ‘‘Tartuffe,” I) 1; the portrait of the hypocrite; by Don Juan in “
Festin de Pierre,” V. 2.

? For instance the parts of Harpagon and Arnolphe.

8 We see this in Tartuffe, but only through an expression by Dorine and not directly. Ch
in Shakespeare, the parts of Coriolanus, Hotspur, Falstaff, Othello, Cleopatra, etc. ~ 4

4 Balzac passed entire days in reading the ‘‘Almanach des cent mille adresses,” also in a ©
cab in the streets during the afternoons, examining signs for the purpose of finding suitab 2
names for his characters. ‘This little circumstance shows the difference between two diverse
conceptions of mankind.


CHAP. II. THE SPIRIT AND THE DOCTRINE. 197


_ The character lacks the personal badge, the unique, authentic ap-
_ pellation serving as the primary stamp of an individual. All these
details and circumstances, all these aids and accompaniments of a
_ man, remain outside of the classic theory. To secure the ad-
mission of some of them required the genius of Moliére, the
fulness of his conception, the wealth of his observation, the ex-
treme freedom of his pen. It is equally true again that he
Often omits them, and that, in other cases, he introduces only a
small number of them because he avoids giving to these general
_ characters a richness and complexity that would embarrass the
action. ‘The simpler the theme the clearer its development,
|. the first duty of the author throughout this literature being to
_ clearly develop the restricted theme of which he makes a selection.
_ There is, accordingly, a radical defect in the classic spirit, the
"defect of its qualities, and which, at first kept within proper
| ee _ bounds, contributes towards the atedncton of its purest master-
Hie ; Pieces, but which, in accordance with the universal law, goes on
"increasing and turns into a vice through the natural effect of age,
_ wuse,andsuccess. Contracted at the start, it is to become yet more
« so. .In the eighteenth century the portrayal of living realities,
__an actual individual, just as he is in nature and in history, that is
_ to say, an undefined unit, a rich plexus, a complete organism of
e ‘peculiarities and traits, superposed, commingled and co-ordinated,
_ is improper. The capacity to receive and contain all these is
‘ wanting, Whatever can be discarded is cast aside, and to such
- an extent that nothing is left at last but a condensed extract, an
evaporated residuum, an almost empty name, in short, what is
in called a hollow abstraction. The only characters in the eigh-
| teenth century exhibiting any life are the off-hand sketches, made

i ‘in passing and as if contraband, by Voltaire,—Baron de Thun-


: : dertentronk and Milord Watthen,—the lesser figures in his


]


bh: stories, and five or six portraits of secondary rank,—Turcaret,
_ Gil Blas, Marianne, Manon Lescaut, Rameau, and Figaro,—two

or three of the rough sketches of Crébillon the younger and of

' Collé, all so many works in which sap flows through a familiar
| knowledge of things, comparable with those of the minor masters
in painting,—Watteau, Fragonard, Saint-Aubin, Moreau, Lan-
cret, Pater, and Beaudouin,—and which, accepted with dif-

-ficulty, or as a surprise, by the official drawing-room are still
to subsist after the grander and soberer canvases shall have

7"


198 _ THE ANCIENT REGIME.


become mouldy through their: wearisome exhalations. Every-—
where else the sap dries up, and, instead of blooming plants, 1
encounter only flowers of painted paper. What are all the
serious poems, from the “ Henriade” of Voltaire to the “ Mois”
by Roucher or the “ Imagination” by Delille, but so many pieces —
of rhetoric garnished with rhymes? Examine the innumerable
tragedies and comedies of which Grimm and Collé give us mort- —
uary extracts, even the meritorious works of Voltaire and Crk |
billon, ‘and later, those of authors of repute, Du Belloy, La
Harpe, Ducis, and Marie Chénier? Eloquence, art, situations, —
correct verse, all exist in these except human nature; the per- —
sonages are simply well-taught puppets, and generally mere —
mouthpieces by which the author makes his declamation public; —
Greeks, Romans, medieval knights, Turks, Arabs, Peruvians, ~
Giaours, or Byzantines, all form the same declamatory mechanism. _
The public, meanwhile, betrays no surprise. It does not possess —
the historic sentiment. It accepts humanity as everywhere the ~
same. It establishes the success alike of the “Incas” by Mar- —
montel, that of ‘“‘Gonsalve” and of the “ Nouvelles” by Florian,
also of the peasants, mechanics, negroes, Brazilians, Parsees, and
Malabarites that appear before it uttering their amplifications. Fi
Man is simply regarded as a reasoning being, alike in all ages
and alike in all places; Bernardin de Saint-Pierre endows his
pariah with this habit, also Diderot, in his Otaheitians. The
one recognized principle is that every human being must think
and talk like a book.

Accordingly how inadequate are historical productions !
With the exception of Charles XII., a contemporary on whom
Voltaire bestows fresh life, through the accounts-of him by eye-
witnesses, also his spirited sketches of Englishmen, Frenchmen,
Spaniards, Italians and Germans, scattered through his stories,
where are men found? - With Hume, Gibbon and Robertson,
belonging to the French school, and who are at once adopted |
in France, in the researches into our middle ages of Dubos and ~
of Mably, in the “ Louis XI.” of Duclos, in the “ Anacharsis ”
of Barthélemy, even in the “Essai sur ‘les Moeurs,” and in the ©
“Siecle de Louis XIV.” of Voltaire, even in the “Grandeur des —
Romains” and in the “ Esprit des Lois” of Montesquieu, what
remarkable incompleteness! Erudition, criticism, common sense,
an almost exact exposition of dogmas and of institutions, philo-


“ewar.s = THE SPIRIT AND THE DOCTRINE. 199


_ sophic views of the relation of events and on the general course
_ of things, nothing is wanting but souls! On reading these it
seems as if the climates, institutions and civilizations transform-
_ ing the human mind from one given whole to another, are
_ simply so many externals, so many accidental coverings, which,
far from reaching down to its depths scarcely penetrate beneath
its surface. The vast differences separating the men of two cen-
turies, or of two races, escape them entirely... The ancient
_ Greek, the early christian, the conquering Teuton, the feudal
-man, the Arab of Mahomet, the German, the Renaissance En-
- glishman, the puritan, appear in their books about the same as
_ im engravings and frontispieces, with some difference in cos-
 tume, but the same in form, feature and expression, attenuated,
| { faded and respectable, and adapted to the conventionalities of
_ good-breeding. That sympathetic imagination by which the
4 writer enters into the mind of another, and_ reproduces -in
himself a system of habits and feelings opposed to his own, is the
- talent the most wanting in the eighteenth century. With the
§ a exception of Diderot, who uses it badly and capriciously, it al-
_ most entirely disappears in the last half of the century. Con-
| _ sider in turn, during the same period, in France and in England,
q where it is most extensively used, the romance, a sort of mirror
_ everywhere transportable, the best adapted to reflect all phases
_ of nature and of life. After reading the series of English novel-
ists, Defoe, Richardson, Fielding, Smollett, Sterne, and Gold-
smith down to Miss Burney and Miss Austen, I am familiar with
_ England in the eighteenth century; I have encountered clergy-
men, country gentlemen, farmers, innkeepers, sailors, people of
_ every condition in life, high and low; I know the details of fort-
unes and of careers, how much is earned, how much is expended,
how journeys are made and how people eat and drink: I have
accumulated for myself a file of precise biographical events, a
complete picture in a thousand scenes of an entire community,
the amplest stock of information to guide me should I wish to
frame a history of this vanished world. On reading a corres-
ponding list of French novelists, the younger Crébillon, Rous-


rs


a me


1 “ At the present day, whatever may be said, there is no such thing as Frenchmen, Ger-
‘mans, Spaniards, and Englishmen, for all are Europeans. All have the same tastes, the
Same passions, the-same habits, none having obtained a national form through any specific

institution.” Rousseau, ‘‘Sur le gouvernement de Pologne,” 170.


“
a


‘8S THE ANCIENT REGIME. —


seau, Marmontel, Laclos, Restif de la Breton, -Louvet, Madam 2
de Staél, Madame de Genlis and the rest, including Mercier and
even Mme. Cottin, I scarcely take any notes ;.all precise and in-
structive little facts are left out; I find avila polite. Hig ra


They carefully abstain from mentioning money, from giving 1 1e |
figures, from describing a wedding, a trial, the administration of |
a piece of property; I am ignorant of the situation of a curate, :.
of a rustic noble, of a resident prior, of a steward, of an intend-
ant. Whatever relates to a province or to the rural districts, to i
the bourgeoisie or to the shop,' to the army or to a soldier, to the -
clergy or to convents, to justice or to the police, to business orto
housekeeping remains vaguely in my mind or is falsified; to clear — a
up any point I am obliged to recur to that marvellous Voltaire —
who, on laying aside the great classic coat, finds plenty of elbow
room and tells all. On the organs of society of vital importance,
on the practices and regulations that provoke revolutions, on feudal
rights and seigniorial justice, on the mode of recruiting and gov- ~
erning monastic bodies, on the revenue measures of the prov- ~
inces, of corporations and of trade-unions, on the tithes and ~
the corvées,? literature provides me with scarcely any information.
Drawing-rooms and men of letters are apparently its sole ma- —
terial. ‘The rest is null and void. Under the good society that
is able to converse France appears perfectly empty. On the ap-
proach of the Revolution the elimination increases. Glance over
the harangues of the clubs and of the tribune, over reports, leg-
islative bills and pamphlets, and through the mass of writings
prompted by passing and exciting events, in none of them do we
see any sign of the human creature as we see him in the fields
and in the street; he is always regarded as a simple automaton,
a well-known mechanism. Among writers he was but lately re-
garded as a mechanical warbler; with politicians he is now a
mechanical voter; touch him in the proper place and he re-
sponds in the desired manner. Facts are never apparent; only
abstractions, long arrays of sentences on nature, reason, and the


1 Previous to 1750 we find something about these in ‘“‘Gil-Blas,” and in “ Marianne,”
(Mme. Dufour the sempstress and her shop). Unfortunately the Spanish travesty prevents
the novels of Le Sage from being as instructive as they might be.

? Interesting details are found in the little stories by Diderot as, for instance, ‘Les deux
amis de Bourbonne.” But elsewhere he is a partisan, especially in the “Religieuse,” and
conveys a false impression of things.


CHAP. I. THE SPIRIT AND THE DOCTRINE. 201


_ people, on tyrants and liberty, like inflated balloons, uselessly
conflicting with each other in space. Were we not aware that
all this would terminate in terrible practical effects we should re-
gard it as so much logical sportiveness, as school exercises, or
academic parades, or ideological compositions. Ideology, the last
_ emanation of the century, is in effect about to give of the classic
spirit the final formula and the last word.
III.
= To pursue in every research, with the utmost confidence, with-
- out either reserve or precaution, the mathematical method; to
derive, limit and isolate a few of the simplest generalized no-
: _ tions; and then, setting experience aside, comparing them, com-


_ bining them, and, from the artificial compound thus obtained,


deducing all the consequences they involve by pure reasoning,
_ 4s the natural process of the classic spirit. It is so deeply im-
_ planted as to be equally encountered in both centuries, as well


_ with Descartes, Malebranche! and the partisans of innate ideas as


with the partisans of sensation, of physical needs and of primary
instinct, Condillac, Rousseau, Helvétius, and, later, Condorcet,


' Volney, Sieyés, Cabanis and Destutt de Tracy. In vain do the


_ latter assert that they are the followers of Bacon and reject
innate ideas; with another starting point than the Cartesians
they pursue the same path and, as with the Cartesians, after
_ borrowing a little, they leave experience behind them. In this
_ vast moral and social world, they only remove the superficial -
‘bark from the human tree with its innumerable roots and
branches; they are unable to penetrate to or grasp at anything
beyond it; their hands cannot contain more. ‘They have no
suspicion of anything outside of it; the classic spirit, with limited
comprehension, is not far-reaching. To them the bark is the


entire tree and, the operation once completed, they retire, bear-


ing along with them the dry, dead epidermis, never returning to
the trunk itself. Through intellectual incapacity and literary


1 “To attain to the truth we have only to fix our attention on the ideas which each diié
finds within his own mind.” (Malebranche, ‘Recherche de la Vérité,”” book I. ch. i.)
“Those long chains of reasoning, all simple and easy, which geometers use to arrive at their
most difficult demonstrations, suggested to me that all things which come within human
knowledge must follow each other in a similar chain.” Lewes, (Descartes, ‘‘Discours de la
Methode,” I. r42).. In the eighteenth century @ frvorZ ideas were employed, in the eigh-
teenth century sensations, but always following the same mathematical method fully dis-
played in the “ Ethics” of Spinoza.


°


:_ -—_—


202 THE ANCIENT REGIME. BOOK Il.


pride theyomit the characteristic detail, the animating fact, the —
specific circumstance, the significant, convincing and complete 7
example. Scarcely one of these is found in the “ Logique” and —
in the “Traité des Sensations” by Condillac, in the “ Idéologie” — F
by Destutt de Tracy, or in the “Rapports du Physique et du |
Morale” by Cabanis.1_ Never, with them, are we on the solid —
and visible ground of personal observation and narration, but ~
always in the air, in the empty space of pure generalities. Con-
dillac declares that the arithmetical method is adapted to psy-
chology and that the elements of our ideas can be defined by a
process analogous “to the rule of three.” Sieyés holds history
in profound contempt, and believes that he had “perfected the
science of politics”? at one stroké, through an effort of the


brain, in the style of Descartes, who thus discovers analytic


geometry. Destutt de Tracy, in undertaking to comment on |
Montesquieu, finds that the great historian has too servilely con-
fined himself to history, and attempts to do.the work over again
by organizing society as it should be, instead of studying society
as itis. Never were such systematic and superficial institutions
built up with such a moderate extract of human nature. Con-
dillac, employing sensation, animates a statue, and then, by a a
process of pure reasoning, following up its effects, as he supposes,
on smell, taste, hearing, sight and touch, fashions a complete
human soul. Rousseau, by means of a contract, founds political
association, and, with this given idea, pulls down the constitu-
tion, government and laws of every balanced social system. In~
a book which serves as-the philosophical testament of the
century,? Condorcet declares that this method is “the final step
of philosophy, that which places a sort of eternal barrier between
humanity and its ancient infantile errors.” ‘In its application
to morals, politics and political economy ” we succeed in obtain-
ing a foothold in the moral sciences “as certain as in the natural
sciences; through it we have been able to discover the rights
of man.” A single fundamental proposition is deduced, as in


1 See especially his memoir: ‘De l’influence du climat sur les habitudes morales,” vague,
and wholly barren of illustrations excepting one citation from Hippocrates.

2 These are his own words. He adds elsewhere, ‘‘There is no more reality in assumed
historical truths than in assumed religious truths.” (‘Papiers de Sieyés,” the year 1772,
according to Sainte-Beuve, ‘‘Causeries du lundi,” V. 194). Descartes and Malebranche
already expressed this contempt for history.

§ Condorcet, ‘‘Esquisse d’un tableau historique de l’esprit humain,” ninth epoch.


THE SPIRIT AND THE DOCTRINE. 203


mathematics, which proposition, similar to a first principle in
mathematics, becomes a fact of daily experience, verified by
everybody and therefore self-evident. This school is to subsist
Beare out the Revolution, the Empire and even into the Res-
_ toration,* along with the tragedy of which it is the sister, with
the classic spirit their common parent, a primordial, sovereign
_ power as hurtful as it is useful, as destructive as it is creative, as
capable of propagating error as truth, as astonishing in the
_ rigidity of its code, in the limitations of its authority and in the
uniformity of its works as in the duration of its reign and the
universality of its ascendency.


3 2 See the ‘‘ Tableau historique,” presented to the Institute by Chénier in 1808, showing
_ byits statements that the classic spirit still prevails in all branches of literature. Cabanis
died in 1818, Volney in 1820, de Tracy and Sieyés in 1836, Daurron in 1848. In May 1845,
: -Saphary and Valette are still professors of Condilllac’s philosophy in the two lycées in Paris.


CHAPTER III..


CoMBINATION OF THE TWO ELEMENTS.—I. The doctrine, its pretensions, — |
and its character.—A new authority for reason in the regulation of human g
affairs: —Government thus far traditional.—II. Origin, nature and value of d
hereditary prejudice.—How far custom, religion and government are legiti- —
mate.—III. The classic intellect incapable of accepting this point of view.— —
The past and present titles of tradition misunderstood,—Reason undertakes
to set themaside.—IV. Two stages in this operation.—Voltaire, Montesquieu,
the deists and the reformers represent the first one.— What they destroy and =
what they respect.—V. The second stage, a return to nature.—Diderot, |
d’Holbach and the materialists.—Theory of animated matter and spontaneous _~
organization.—The moral of animal instinct and self-interest properly under- | '
stood.—VI. Rousseau and the spiritualists.—The original goodness of man.
—The mistake committed by civilization.—The injustice of property and of | a
society. —VII. The forlorn hope of the philosophic party. —Naigeon, Sylvain i
Maréchal, Mably, Morelly.—The entire discredit of traditions and institu- | a
tions derived from it. %


I, s

Our of the scientific acquisitions thus set forth, elaborated by —
the spirit we have just described, is born a doctrine seemingly arev-
elation and which, under this title, assumes to regulate the govern-
ment of human affairs. On the approach of 1789 it is generally
admitted that man is living in “a century of light,” in “theage |
of reason ;” that, previously, the human species was in its infancy
and that now it has attained to its “majority.” ‘Truth, finally, is _
made manifest and, for the first time, its reign on earth is apparent.
The right is supreme because it is truth itself. It must direct all
things because through its nature it is universal. ‘The philosophy
of the eighteenth century, in these two articles of faith, resembles
a religion, the puritanism of the seventeenth century, and Ma-
hometanism in the seventh century. We see the same outburst —
of faith, hope and enthusiasm, the:same spirit of propagandism
and of dominion, the same rigidity and intolerance, the same
ambition to recast man and to remodel human life according to


cuap.. THE SPIRIT AND THE DOCTRINE. 205


_ apreconceived type. The new doctrine is also to have its doctors,
- its dogmas, its popular catechism, its fanatics, its inquisitors and
‘its martyrs. It is to speak as loudly as those preceding it, as
a legitimate authority to which dictatorship belongs by right of
__ birth, and against which rebellion is criminal or insane. It differs,
_ however, from the preceding religions in this respect, that instead
__ of imposing itself in the name of God, it imposes itself in the
name of Reason.
_ ~ The authority, indeed, was a new one. Up to this time, in the
control of human actions and opinions, reason had played but a
~ small and subordinate part. Both the motive and its direction
_ were obtained elsewhere; faith and obedience were an inherit-
_ .ance; a man was a christian and a subject because he was born
_ christian and subject. Surrounding this budding philosophy and
_ the reason which enters upon its great investigation, is a system
of recognized laws, an established power, a reigning religion ; all
' the stones of this structure hold together and each story is sup-
. ported by a preceding story. But what does the common
| cement consist of and what is its first foundation? Who author-
izes all these civil regulations which control marriages, testa-
_ ments, inheritances, contracts, property and persons, these fanci-
- ful and often contradictory regulations? In the first place im-
memorial custom, varying according to the province, according
to the title to the soil, according to the quality and condition of
M4 the person; and next, the will of the king who caused the cus-
_ tom to be inscribed and who sanctioned it. Who authorizes this
S will, this sovereignty of the prince, this first of public obligations ?
4 In the first place, eight centuries of possession, a hereditary right
_ similar to that by which each one enjoys his own field and do-
_ main, a property established in a family and transmitted from one
| _ eldest son to another, from the first founder of the State to his
| last living successor; and, in addition to this, a religion directing
men to submit to the constituted powers. And who, finally, au-
_ thorizes this religion? At first, eighteen centuries of tradition,
_ the immense series of anterior and concordant proofs, the steady
belief of sixty preceding generations; and after this, at the
beginning of it, the presence and teachings of Christ, then, far-
ther back, the creation of the world, the command and the voice
_ of God. Thus, throughout the moral and social order of things
the past justifies the present; antiquity provides its title and if,
18


206 THE ANCIENT REGIME. , BOOK Ul |


beneath all these supports which age has consolidated, the deep
primitive rock is sought for in subterranean depths, we find it in
the divine will. During the whole of the seventeenth century
this theory still absorbs all souls in the shape of a fixed habit and |
of inward respect; it is not open to question. It is regarded in
the same light as the heart of the living body; whoever would —
lay his hand upon it would instantly draw back, moved by a
vague sentiment of its ceasing to beat in case it were touched. -
The most independent, with Descartes at the head, “would be ~
grieved” at being confounded with those chimerical speculators —
who, instead of pursuing the beaten track of cap; dart blindly "
forward “across mountains and over precipices.” In subjecting —
their belief to systematic investigation not only do they except
and set aside “the truths of faith,” ! but again the dogma they
suppose to have been discarded remains in their mind latent and
effective, to lead them on without their knowledge and to con-
vert their philosophy into a preparation for, or a confirmation
of, christianity? Summing it all up, faith, the performance of re- —
ligious duties, with religious and political institutions, provide the ~
mother ideas of the seventeenth century. Reason, whether she.
admits it or is ignorant of it, is only a subaltern, an oratorical
agency, a setter-in-motion, forced by religion and the monarchy
to labor in their behalf. With the exception of La Fontaine, —
whom I regard as unique in this as in other matters, the greatest _
and most independent, Pascal, Descartes, Bossuet, La Bru- —
yére, derive from the established system their first conception |
of nature, of man, of society, of right and of government.®
So long as reason is limited to this function its work is that of a
councillor of State, an extra preacher which its superiors despatch
on a missionary tour in the departments of philosophy and of
literature. Far from proving destructive it consolidates; in fine,
even down to the Regency, its chief employment is to produce
good christians and loyal subjects. .


1 “Discours de la Methode.” ;

2 This is evident with Descartes in the second step he takes. (The theory of pure spirit,
the idea of God, the proof of his existence, the veracity of our intelligence demonstrated by —
the veracity of God, etc.)

3 See Pascal, ‘‘ Pensées” (on the origin of property and rank). The “‘Provinciales” (on —
homicide and the right to kill). Nicole, ‘‘Deuxiéme traité de la charité, et de ’amour- —
propre” (on the natural man and the object of society). Bossuet, “Politique tirée de
l’Ecriture sainte.” La Bruyére,‘‘ Des Esprits forts,”


‘cuar.mt. THE SPIRIT AND THE DOCTRINE. 207
_ But here the parts become inverted; tradition descends from
the upper to the lower ranks while reason ascends from the lat-
ter to the former. On the one hand religion and the monarchy,
through their excesses and misdeeds under Louis XIV., and their
da: ae and incompetency under Louis XV., demolish piece
y piece the basis of hereditary reverence and filial obedience
.. so long serving them as a foundation. and which maintained
‘them aloft above all dispute and free of investigation; hence
, : the authority of tradition insensibly declines and disappears. On
the other hand science, through its imposing and multiplied dis-°
-coveries, erects piece by piece a basis of universal trust and def-
rence, raising itself up from an interesting subject of curiosity
_ tothe rank of a public power; hence the authority of reason aug-
ments and occupies its place. A time comes when, the latter
authority having dispossessed the former, the mother ideas tradi-
5 = had reserved to itself fall into the grasp of reason. . Investi-
ration penetrates into the forbidden sanctuary. Instead of
_ deference there is verification, and religion, the state, the law,
) a tom, all the organs in short, of moral and practical life, be-
_ come subject to analysis, to be preserved, restored or replaced,
" according to the prescriptions of the new doctrine.


Ei.


E Nothing could be better had the doctrine been complete and
had reason, instructed by history and rendered critical, been quali-
fied to comprehend the rival she replaced. For then, instead of
_ fegarding her as an usurper to be repelled she would have recog-
nized in her an elder sister whose part must be left to her.
be ereditary prejudice is a sort of reason operating unconsciously,
et ms claims as well as reason, but it is unable to present


forth the doubtful ones. Its archives are buried; to exhume
these it is necessary to make researches of which it is incapable;


| ing them to light. Careful investigation shows that, like sci-
_ ence, it issues from a long accumulation of experiences: men,
after a multitude of gropings and efforts, have satisfied themselves
~ that a certain way of living and thinking is the only one adapted
| to their situation, the most practical and the most salutary, the
‘system or Baan now seeming arbitrary to us being at first


208 THE ANCIENT REGIME.


a confirmed expedient of public safety. ‘Frequently it is st

still; in any event, in its leading features, it is indispensable ;~
may be stated with certainty that, if the leading pn
the community should suddenly disappear, man, deprived of #
precious legacy transmitted to him by the wisdom of ages, wou
at once fall back into a savage condition and again become what
he was at first, namely, a restless, famished, wandering, ht nt r

brute. ‘There was a time when this heritage was lacking; th
are populations to-day with which it is still utterly lacking —
abstain from eating human flesh, from killing useless or burden.
some aged people, from exposing, selling or killing children oné
does not know what to do with, to be the one husband of but
one woman, to hold in horror incest and unnatural practices, to
be the sole and recognized owner of a distinct field, to be mind:
ful of the superior injunctions’ of modesty, humanity, honor < i. :
conscience, all these observances, formerly unknown and slow!
established, compose the civilization of human beings. Be Aust
we accept them in full security they are not the less sacred, :
they become only the more sacred when, submitted to investi ol -
tion and traced through history, they are disclosed to us as the se-
cret force which has converted a herd of brutes into a society of
men. In general, the older and more universal a custom, the
more it is based on profound motives, on physiological motive:
and on those of hygiene and on those instituted for social protec:
tion. At one time, as in the separation of castes, a heroic 01
thoughtful race must be preserved by preventing the mixta A ‘
by which inferior blood introduces mental debility and low i
stincts.2 At another, as in the prohibition of spirituous igucil
and of animal food, it is necessary to conform to the climate pre- |
scribing a vegetable diet or to the racial temperament for which
strong drink is pernicious.? At another, as in the institution of
the right of primogeniture, it was important to prepare and desig-~
nate beforehand the military commander which the tribe woulc
obey, or the civil chieftain that would preserve the domain, supe


1Cf. Sir John Lubbock, “Early Civilization.” Gerand-Teulon, ‘‘Les Origines de la


famille.” ae
‘2 The principle of caste in India; we see this in the contrast between the apane ant ine
aborigines, the Soudras and the pariahs. ae

8 In accordance with this principle the inhabitants of the Sandwich Islands passed a law
forbidding the sale of liquor to the natives and allowing it to Europeans. (De Varig
‘*Quatorze ans aux iles Sandwich.’’)


MAP. III. THE SPIRIT AND THE DOCTRINE. 209


ntend its cultivation, and support the family.’ If there are valid
asons for legitimating custom there are reasons of higher im+
port for the consecration of religion. Consider this point, not in
general and according to a vague notion, but at the outset, at its
birth, in the texts, taking for an example one of the faiths which
now rule in society, christianity, brahminism, the law of Ma-
homet or of Buddha. At certain critical moments in history, a
‘few men, emerging from their narrow and daily routine of “life;
form some generalized conception of the infinite universe’; the
august face of nature is suddenly unveiled to them; in their sub-
me emotion they seem to have detected its first cause; they have
“at least detected some of its elements. ‘Through a fortunate con-
junction of circumstances these elements are just those which
h leit century, their race, a group of races, a fragment of human-
Y, is in a state to comprehend. ‘Their point of view is the only
ne at which the graduated multitudes below them are able to
3 ce themselves. For millions of men, for hundreds of genera-
‘tions, only through them is any access to divine. things to be ob-
tained. Theirs is the unique utterance, heroic or affecting, en-
_thusiastic or tranquillizing; the only one which’ the hearts and
ea around them and after them will heed; the only one
lapted to profound cravings, to accumulated aspirations, to he-
‘Teditary faculties, to a complete intellectual and moral organism ;
der that of Hindostan or of the Mongolian; here that of the
Binite or of the European; in our Europe that of the German,
the Latin or the Sclave; in such a way that its contradictions in-
stead of condemning it, justify it, its diversity producing its adap-
ation and its adaptation producing its benefits
a This is no barren formula. A sentiment of such grandeur, of
‘such comprehensive and penetrating insight, an idea by which
man, compassing the vastness and denth: of things, so greatly
Oversteps the ordinary limits of his mortal condition, resembles an
illumination; it is easily transformed into a vision; it is never re-
‘mote from ecstacy; it can express itself only through symbols ;
= vokes divine figures? Religion in its nature is a metaphysical
accompanied by faith. Under this title it is popular and
icacious ; for, apart from an invisible select few, a pure abstract


} at


: °
1 Cf. Leplay, ‘‘De l’Organization de la famille,” the history of a domain in the Pyrenees.
2 See, especially, in Brahminic literature the great metaphysical poems and the Puranas,


18*


210 THE ANCIENT REGIME. ° BC OK


idea is only an empty term, and truth, to be apparent, must be
clothed with a body. It requires a form of worship, a legend. d,
and ceremonies in order to address the people, women, chi 2 -
the credulous, every one absorbed by daily cares, any 1 ‘
standing in which ideas involuntarily translate themselves throu igh
imagery. Owing to this palpable form it is able to soci it 'S
weighty support to the conscience, to counterbalance nature 2
egoism, to curb the mad onset of brutal passions, to lead the
will to abnegation and devotion, to tear man away from himse
and place him wholly in the service of truth, or of his kind, to
form ascetics, martyrs, sisters of charity and missionaries. Thus
throughout society, religion becomes at once a natural and p at
cious Hapbatinen tility. On the one hand men require it for th
contemplation of infinity and to live properly ; if it were sae
to be taken away from them their souls would be a mournful
void and they would do greater injury to their neighbors. Be
sides, it would be vain to attempt to take it away from
the hand raised against it would encounter only its enve
it would be repelled after a sanguinary struggle, its purge tyi in
too deeply to be extirpated. ae |

And when, at length, after religion and habit, we resandl th re
State, that is to say, the armed power possessing both physical —
force and moral authority, we find for it an almost equally nob le
origin. In Europe at least, from Russia to Portugal, and _
Norway to the two Sicilies it is, in its origin and essence, a mili-”
tary foundation in which heroism constitutes itself the champied 0 14
of right. Here and there, in the chaos of mixed races and of |
crumbling societies, some man has arisen who, through his
ascendency, rallies around him a loyal band, driving out in-
truders, overcoming brigands, re-establishing order, reviving agri-
culture, founding a patrimony, and transmitting as property to
his descendants his office of hereditary justiciary and born general.
Through this permanent delegation a great public office is re-
moved from competitors, fixed in one family, sequestered in safe
hands; thenceforth the nation possesses a vital centre and each
right obtains a visible protector. If the sovereign confines him-
self to his attributions, is restrained in despotic tendencies,
and avoids falling into egotism, he provides the country with the
best government of which the world has any knowledge, not
alone the most stable, the most capable of continuance, the mos


aa .
ra
Pi


wap.mt. THE SPIRIT AND THE DOCTRINE. 211


suitable for maintaining together a body of twenty or thirty thou-
and men, but again one of the best because self-sacrifice digni-
es both command and obedience and, through the prolongation
ee ralitary tradition, fidelity and honor, from grade to grade,
hes the chieftain to his duty and the soldier to his chieftain.
“Such are the strikingly valid claims of hereditary prejudice.
ike instinct, it appears to us as a blind form of reason. ‘That
. i irakes it fully legitimate is reason herself being obliged to
borrow its form to obtain any efficacy. A doctrine becomes
inspiring only through a blind medium. To become of practical
use, to take upon itself the government of souls, to be trans-
formed into a spring of action, it must be deposited in minds
given up to systematic belief, of fixed habits, of established
tendencies, of domestic traditions, and, from the stormy heights
of the intellect, descend into and become amalgamated with the
passive forces of the will; then only does it form a part of the
character and become a social force. At the same time, how-
ever, it ceases to be critical and clairvoyant; it no longer tol-
erates doubt and contradiction, nor admits’further restrictions or
Mice distinctions; it is either no longer cognizant of, or badly
appreciates, its own evidences. We of the present day believe in
infinite progress about the same as people once believed in
0 i Bee! sin; we still receive ready- made opinions from above,
Bcheademy of Sciences occupying in many respects the place
f the ancient councils: Except with a few special savants, be-
ief and obedience will always be unreflecting, while reason
would wrongfully resent the leadership of prejudice in human af-
fairs since, to lead, it must itself become prejudice.

- TI.

_ Unfortunately, in the eighteenth century, reason was classic ;
not only the aptitude but the documents which enable it to com-
prehend tradition, were absent. In the first place, there was
no knowledge of history; there was a repugnance to erudition,
ecause of its dulness and tediousness; learned compilations,
_ yast collections of extracts and the slow work of criticism were
eldin disdain. Voltaire rallied the Benedictines. Montesquieu,
_ to ensure the acceptance of his “Esprit des lois,” indulged in wit
“about laws. Raynal, to give an impetus to his history of com-
_ merce in the Indies, welded to it the declamation of Diderot.


f
>


212 THE ANCIENT REGIME. * BOO 6 I.


The Abbé Barthélemy covered over the realities of Greek ma
and customs with his literary varnish.” Science was expected
be either epigrammatic or oratorical; crude or technical - ail
would have been objectionable to a pubie composed of pe
of society; correctness of style drove out or falsified weld
significant facts which give a peculiar sense and their origina
relief to antiquated characters. Even if writers had dareal
note them, their sense and bearing would not have been nei
stood. ‘The sympathetic imagination did not exist ; people were
incapable of going out of themselves, of pethine themselves
to distant points of view, of conjecturing the peculiar and violen
states of the human brain, the decisive and fruitful moment
during which it gives birth to a vigorous creation, a religion des-
tined to rule, a state that is sure to endure. The imagination of ©
man is limited to personal experiences, and where, in their”
experience, could individuals in ‘this society find the material:
with which to imagine the pains of the parturition? How could
minds as polished and as amiable as these fully adopt th
sentiments of an apostle, of a monk, of a barbaric or feuda
founder, see these in the mz/iew which explains and justifies them
picture to themselves the surrounding crowd, at first souls i
despair and haunted by mystic dreams, and next the rude a :
violent intellects given up to instinct and imagery, thinking w
half-visions, their wills consisting of irresistible impulses?
reason of this stamp forms no conception of figures like these
To bring them within its rectilinear limits they require to b
reduced and made over; the Macbeth of Shakespeare becon me:
that of Ducis, and the Mationet of the Koran that of Voltaire. -
Consequently, as they failed to see souls, they misconcei ed
institutions. The suspicion that truth could have been conveyed
only through the medium of legends, that justice could have
been established only by force, that religion was obliged”
assume the sacerdotal form, that the State necessarily took a mil- -
itary form, and that the Gothic edifice possessed, as well as other
structures, its own architecture, proportions, balance of pees
solidity, utility, and even beauty, never entered their heads.
Consequently again, unable to comprehend the past, they were
unable to comprehend the present. They had no accurate
conception of the present, of the mechanic, of the provin
cial bourgeois, or even of the inferior rural noble; these were


HAP, IIL. THE SPIRIT AND THE DOCTRINE. 213


yisible only at a distance, half-effaced, and wholly transformed
through philosophic theories and sentimental mistiness. ‘Two or
three thousand”! polished and cultivated individuals formed the
ci rcle of honest folks, and they never went outside of this. If
ney obtained glimpses of the people from their chateaux and
n their journeys, it was in passing, the same as of their post-
h orses, or of the cattle on their farms, showing compassion un-
-doubtedly, but never divining their anxious thoughts and their
obscure instincts. ‘The structure of the still primitive mind of
the people was never imagined, the paucity and tenacity of their
ideas, the narrowness of their mechanical, routine existence, de-
yoted to manual labor, absorbed with anxieties for daily bread,
pained to the bounds of a visible horizon; their attachment to
e local saint, to rites, to the priest, their deep- seated rancor,
neir inveterate distrust, their credulity growing out of the imag-
Baton, their lack of capacity for conceiving abstract right and
of comprehending public events, the silent operation by which
political novelties became transformed in their brain into nursery
fables or into ghost stories, their contagious infatuations like
those of sheep, their blind fury lke that of bulls, and all those
traits of character the Revolution was about to bring to light.
“Twenty millions of men and more had scarcely passed out of the
mental condition of the middle ages; hence, in its grand lines,
the social edifice in which they could dwell was necessarily me+
lizval. It had to be made healthy and cleaned, windows put
“in and walls pulled down, but without disturbing the foundations,
or the main building si its general arrangement; otherwise,
after demolishing it and living encamped for ten years in the open
fi ur like savages, its inmates would have been obliged to rebuild
; it on the same plan. In uneducated minds, those having not yet
attained to reflection, faith attaches itself only to the corporeal
bol, obedience being brought about only through physical
aint; there is no religion outside of the curate, and no state
out ide of the soldier. But one writer, Montesquieu, the best
“instructed, the most sagacious, and the best balanced of all the
pirits of the age, made these truths apparent, because he was at
‘Once an erudite, an observer, a historian and a jurisconsult. He,
_ however, spoke as an oracle, in sentences and enigmatically ; he


1 Voltaire, ‘Dict. Phil.” the article on Punishments.


214 THE ANCIENT REGIME.


ran off as if upon live coals, every time that he touched 3 na
ters belonging to his country and epoch. Hence, he remaine
respected, but isolated, his fame exercising no influence:
classic reason declined! to go far enough to laboriously study th
ancient man and the actual man. It found the way shorter ant
more convenient to follow its original bent, to shut its eyes 0
the real being, to fall back upon its stores of current notions, t
derive from these an idea of man in general, and build up ¢

cordingly. Through this natural and conclusive state of blind
ness, it no longer heeds the old and living roots of contemporar
institutions; no longer seeing them it denies that they exist
Hereditary prejudice to it becomes pure prejudice; tradition has
no further claim on us, and royalty is an usurpation. Thence:
forward reason arms itself against its predecessor to wrest av “ ]
the government of souls and to substitute the ree of cruth i
the reign of error.


IV.


In this great undertaking there are two halting-places; eit a
through good sense or through timidity many stop half-way
The first campaign results in carrying the enemy’s out-works <
his frontier fortresses, the philosophical army being led by Vol
taire. To combat hereditary prejudice, other prejudices é
opposed to it whose empire is as extensive and whose authorit
is not less recognized. Montesquieu looks at France throb
the eyes of a Persian, and Voltaire, on his return from England
describes the English, an unknown species. Confronting dogma
and the prevailing system of worship, accounts are given, eit ia a
with open or with covert irony, of the various christian sect
the anglicans, the quakers, the presbyterians, the socinians, ~—
of ancient or of remote people, the Greeks, Romans, Egyptian
Mahometans and Guebers, of the worshippers 6f Brahma, of
the Chinese and of pure idolaters. In relation to established laws
and customs, expositions are made, with evident intentions,
of other constitutions and other social habits, of despotism,
of limited monarchy, of a republic, here the church subject
to the state, there the chutch free of the state, in this countr
castes, in another polygamy, and, from country to country, fro
century to century, the diversity, contradiction and antagonism


ry


1 “Resumé des cahiers,” by Prud’homme, preface, 1789.


P, III. THE SPIRIT AND THE DOCTRINE. 215


f fundamental customs which, each on its own ground, are
ll equally consecrated by tradition and legitimately forming the
ystem of public rights. From this time forth the charm is
woken. Ancient institutions lose their divine prestige; they are
imply human works, the fruits of the place and of the moment,
ind born out of convenience and a covenant. Scepticism enters
through all the breaches. With regard to christianity it at
once enters into open hostility, into a bitter and prolonged
olemical warfare; for, under the title of a state religion this
occupies the ground, censuring free thought, burning writings,
exiling, imprisoning or disturbing authors and everywhere acting
a natural and official adversary. Moreover, by ‘virtue of
bein ig an ascetic religion, it condemns not only the free and
ch heerful ways tolerated by the new philosophy but again the
natural tendencies it sanctions, and the promises of terrestrial
licity with which it everywhere dazzles the eyes. Thus the
leart and the head both agree in their opposition. Voltaire,
vith texts in hand, pursues it from one end to the other of
ts history, from the first biblical narration to the latest papal
julls, with unflagging animosity and energy, as critic, as his-
orig n, as geographer, as logician, as moralist, questioning its
urces, opposing evidences, driving ridicule lke a pick-axe
ito every weak spot where an outraged instinct beats against
$ mystic walls, and into all doubtful places where ulterior
ttchwork disfigures the primitive structure. He respects, how-
: the first foundation, and in this particular the greatest
ters of the day follow the same course. Under positive
el ligions that are false there is a natural religion that is true.
“This is the simple and authentic text of which the ethers are
“altered and amplified translations. On removing the ulterior
om ae surplusage the original remains and this common
? , with which all copies harmonize, is deism. The same
Dice ensues with civil and political laws. In France where
) many institutions survive their utility, where privileges are
res sanctioned by services, where rights are changed into
uses, how incoherent is the architecture of the old Gothic
ilding! How poorly adapted to a modern nation! / Of what
2, In an unique and compaet state, of all those feudal compart-
me pats. separating orders, corporations and pas What a


216 THE ANCIENT REGIME.


owning twelve thousand serfs, a drawing-room abbé rake
ported by a monastery he never saw, a séignior liberally p
sioned to figure in antechambers, a magistrate purchasing
right to administer justice, a colonel leaving college to ake
command of his inherited regiment, a Parisian trader who, mr
ing a house for one year in Franche-Comté, alienates the owt
ship of his property and of his person, Throughout Eun
there are others of the same character. The best that c:
said of “a polished nation” is that its laws,:customs and p
tices i composed “one-half of abuses and one-half of tole
usages.” / But, underneath these positive laws, which cor ie
each other, and of which each contradicts itself, a natura lI
exists, implied in the codes, applied socially, and. writt
all hearts. ‘““Show me a country where it is honest to seal 1
fruits of my labor, to violate engagements, to lie for injuri
purposes, to calumniate, to assassinate, to imprison, to be :
grateful to one’s benefactor, to strike one’s father and mie
on offering you food.” / “Justice - and injustice is aed
throughout the universe,” and, as in the worst community fe
always, in some respects, is at the service of right so, in the w
religion, the extravagant dogma always in some fashion pre la
a supreme architect, Religions and communities, accordin,
disintegrated under the investigating process, disclose at —
bottom of the crucible, some a residuum of truth, other
residuum of justice, a small but precious balance, a 7
gold ingot preserved by tradition, purified by reason, and w
little by little, freed from its alloys, elaborated and dey
to all usages, must solely provide the substance of 7c ge
all the threads of the social warp. s


V.


Here begins the second philosophic expedition. It cons
of two armies, the first composed of the encyclopedists, s¢ me
them sceptics like d’Alembert, others pantheists like Diderot a
Lamarck, others open atheists and materialists like d’Holbat
Lamettrie and Helvétius, and later, Condorcet, Laland
Volney, all differing and independent of each other,
unanimous in regarding traditions the common enemy.
is the effect of prolonged hostilities: the duration of y
begets exasperation; the desire to be master of veueel n, gs,


MAP. UL  7HE SPIRIT AND THE DOCTRINE. 217


ush the adversary to the wall, to drive him out of all his posi-
ons. ‘They refuse to admit that reason and tradition can oc-
I and defend the same citadel together; as soon as one
aters the other must depart; henceforth one prejudice is estab-
hed against another prejudice. In fact, Voltaire, “the patri-
4 ch, does not desire to abandon his redeeming and avenging
Soc oe us tolerate in him this remnant of superstition on ac-
count Of his great services; but let us examine this phantom in
nan which he wegards with infantile vision. We admit it into
our minds through faith, and faith is always suspicious. It is
fo rged by ignorance, fear, and imagination, which are all decep-
tive powers. At first it was simply the fetish of savages ; in vain
ave we striven to purify and aggrandize it; its origin is always
i am ; its history is that of a hereditary dream which, arising
in a rude and doting brain, prolongs itself from generation to
generation, and still lasts in the healthy and cultivated brain.
Voltaire would have this dream true because, otherwise, he
: is unable to explain the admirable order of the world, the
peck: suggesting a watchmaker; prove, first, that the world
| a watch and, then, let us see if the arrangement, such as
z t is, incomplete, which we have observed, cannot be better
‘plained by a simpler supposition and more conformable ~
fo experience, that of eternal matter in which motion is eter-

Mobile and active particles, the different kinds of which
2 in different states of equilibrium, efford minerals, inorganic
ubstances, marble, lime, air, water and coal. I form humus
ut of this, “ I sow peas, beans and cabbages,” plants finding their
Ourishment in the humus and “I find my nourishment in the
plants.” / At every meal, within me, and through me, inanimate
j I aatter becomes animate; “I convert it into flesh. I animalize
“it. I render it sensitive.” / It harbors latent, imperfect sensibil-
“ity rendered perfect and made manifest. Organization is the
_ Cause, and life and sensation are the effects; I need no spiritual
ig nad to account for effects since. I am in possession of the
“cause. “Look at this egg, with which all schools of theology
Z an d all the temples of the earth can be overthrown. What is
” this egg? A sensationless mass previous to the introduction of


ime 1 Voltaire, “Dict. Phil.,” the article on . Religion. ‘Tf there is a hamlet to be governed it
_ must have a religion.”
Su “Le réve de d’Alembert,” by Diderot, Zassime.


ie 79


218 THE ANCIENT REGIME.


the germ. And what is it after the introduction of the @
An insensible mass, an inert fluid.” Add heat to it, eecai al iti
oven, and let the operation continue of itself, and we - la
a chicken, that is to say, “sensibility, life, memory, conse ien
passions and thought.” That which you call soul is the ner
centre in which all sensitive chords concentrate. Their “a
tions produce sensations; a quickened or reviving sensat
meEMOry; our ideas are the result of sensations, memory a
signs. ‘ Matter, accordingly, is not the work of an intellige
but matter, through its own arrangement, produces intelligen:
Let us fix intelligence where it is, in the organized body; w
must not detach it from its support to perch it in the ee s
an imaginary throne. This disproportionate conception, 0
introduced into our minds, ends in perverting the natural ]
of our sentiments, and, like a monstrous parasite, ahsaaekell
itself all our substance. The first duty of a sound man is to ge
rid of it, to discard every superstition, évery “fear of invisible
powers.”? Then only can he establish a moral order of thin
and distinguish “the natural law.” The sky consisting: # (
empty space, we have no need to seek commands from on f
Let us look down to the ground; let us consider man in hi ase
as he appears in the eyes of the naturalist, namely, an organize
‘body, a sensitive animal possessieg weet appetites and ii
stincts. Not only are these indestructible but they are Bie t
mate. Let us throw open the prison in which i sect
fines them; let us give them free air and space; let
displayed in all their strength and all will go well./ Accord dia
to Diderot,’ a lasting marriage is an abuse, being “‘the tyre
of a man who has converted the possession of a womatt
property.” Purity is an. invention and conyentional, like
dress ;* happiness and morals go together only in countries’
where instinct is sanctioned as in Otaheite, for instance, whe


1 “Tf a misanthrope had proposed to himself to injure humanity what could he b
vented better than faith in an incomprehensible being, about which men never codes
to any agreement, and to which they would attach more importance than to their owe
istence?” Diderot, ‘‘ Entretien d’un philosophe avec la Maréchale ——.” :

? Cf. “Catéchisme Universel,” by Saint-Lambert, and the “ Loi naturelle ou Catéchism
du citoyen frangais,” by Volney. ="

8 “*Supplément au voyage de Bougainville.” : r

4 Cf. “Mémoires de Mme. d’Epinay,” a conversation with Duclos and Saint-Lamt non
the house of Mlle. Quinault. Rousseau’s “Confessions,” part 1. book V. These are
same principles taught by M. de la Tavel to Mme. de Warens. wt


map. THE SPIRIT AND THE DOCTRINE. 219


narriage lasts but a month, often only a day, and sometimes a
uarter of an hour, where, in the evening and with hospitable
ent, a host offers his daughters and wife to his guest, where
the son espouses his mother out of politeness, where the union
of the sexes is a religious festivity celebrated in public. And,
pushing things to extremes, the logician ends with five or six
pages calculated “to make one’s hair stand on end,”?! himself
avowing that his doctrine is “not suited to children or the great.”
With Diderot, to say the least, these paradoxes have their cor-
rectives. In his pictures of modern ways and habits, he is the
noralist. He not only is familiar with all the chords of the
wuman keyboard, but he classifies each according to its rank.
He loves fine and pure tones, and is full of enthusiasm for noble
harmonies; his heart is equal to his genius.” And better still,
on the question of primitive impulsions arising, he assigns,
side by side with self-love, an independent and superior position
to pity, sympathy, benevolence and well-doing; to every gener-
oon of the heart displaying sacrifice and devotion with-
calculation or personal benefit. But, associated with him, |
thers, cold_and narrow, who form moral systems Sccuutanee
0 the mathematical methods of the ideologists, after the style of
fobbes.2 One motive alone satisfies these, the simplest and
no palpable, utterly gross, almost mechanical, completely phys-
lological, the natural animal tendency of avoiding pain and seek-
g pleasure “Pain and pleasure, ” says Helvétius, ‘‘form the
"springs of the moral universe, while the sentiment of self-
-is the only basis on which we can lay the foundations of
i usefulness. What motive but that of self-interest could
ead a man to perform a generous action? Hecan as little love
good for the sake of good as evil for the sake of evil.”* The
principles of natural law, say the disciples, are reduced to one
"unique and fundamental principle, self-preservation.”* “To pre-
Serve oneself, to be happy,” is instinct, right and duty. “Oh,


os


: =) “Suite du réve de d’Alembert.” ‘‘Entretien entre Miles. de Lespinasse et Bordeu.”
‘Mémoires de Diderot,” a letter to Mlle. Volant, III. 66.
nace his admirable tales, ‘‘Entretiens d’un pére avec ses enfants,’


and ‘* Le neveu de


‘ ie ibid. ‘The natural law consists wholly of facts of which the demonstration is
asingly renewed to the senses and which compose. a science as precise and accurate’as
7 8 netry and mathematics.”

r “4 Helvétius, “De V'Esprit, ” passin.

_ + ® Volney, zézd. chap. iii. Saint-Lambert, 2d¢d. the first dialogue.


220 THE ANCIENT REGIME. BOOK I


ye,”! says nature, “who, through the impulsion I bestow on 01
tending towards happiness at every moment of your being, resis
not my sovereign law, strive for your own felicity, enjoy fearless
and be happy!” But, to be happy, contribute to the happines
of others; if you wish them to be useful to you, be useful t
them; your interest, properly understood, commands you ©
serve them. “Every man, from birth to death, has need of me
kind.” “Live then for them, that they may live for you.” “B
good, because goodness links hearts together; be gentle, because
gentleness wins affection; be modest, because pride repels beir
full of their self-importance. . . . Be citizens, because the cour
try is necessary to ensure your safety and well-being. Defen
your country, because it renders you happy and contains you
possessions.” Virtue thus is simply egotism furnished with a
spy-glass; man has no other reason for doing good but the fear”
of doing himself harm, while self-devotion consists of self-inte est i
One goes fast and far on this road. When the sole law for ea
person is to be happy, each wishes to be so immediately and i
his own way ; the herd of appetites is let loose, rushing ahead an
breaking down all barriers. And the more readily nechaeil
has been demonstrated to them that every barrier is an evil, in
verited by cunning and malicious shepherds, the better to milk a ani
shear them. “The state of society is a state of warfare of th
‘sovereign against all, and of each member against the rest.? .
We see on the face of the globe only incapable, unjust sovereigns
enervated by luxury, corrupted by flattery, depraved through un-
punished license, and without talent, morals, or good qua ities
. Man is wicked not because he is wicked, but because he
has been made so.” ‘Would you know the story, in brief, of ©
almost all our wretchedness?? Here it is. There existed the
natural man, and into this man was introduced an artificial m an,
whereupon a civil war arose within him, lasting through life.
eae you propose to become a tyrant over him, .. 540
best to poison him with a theory of morals against tia ; impose |
every kind of fetter on him; embarrass his movements with a
thousand obstacles; place phunboae around him to frighten him.
. Would you see him happy and free? Do not meddle witl


1 D’Holbach, “‘ Systéme de la Nature,’’ II. 408-493. 2 Ibid. 1. 347.
8 Diderot, ‘‘Supplément au voyage de Bougainville.”


CHAP, III. THE SPIRIT AND THE DOCTRINE. 221
is affairs. . . . Remain convinced of this, that these wise legis-
ators have formed and shaped you as they have done, not for
your benefit, but for their own. I appeal to every civil, religious,

nd political institution ; examine these closely, and, if I am not
mistaken, you will find the human species, century after century,
subject to a yoke which a mere handful of knaves chose to impose
on it. . . . Be wary of him who seeks to establish order; to
order is to obtain the mastery of others by giving them trouble.”
this must come to an end; the passions are proper, and if the
herd would eat freely, its first care must be to trample under its
Sabots the mitred and crowned animals who keep it in the fold
for their own advantage.!


VI.


_ A return to nature, meaning by this the abolition of society, is
the war-cry of the whole encyclopedic battalion. The same
shout is heard in another quarter, coming from the Rousseau
battalion and that of the socialists who, in their turn, march up
to the assault of the established régime. The mining and sapping
of the walls practised by the latter seems less extensive, but
only the more efficacious, while the distinctive machinery it em-
ploys consists likewise of a new conception of human nature.
tousseau derived this conception wholly from the spectacle he
contemplated in his own breast :? a strange, original and superior
na , who, from his infancy, harbored within him a germ of in-
anity and who finally became wholly insane; a wonderful,
ll-balanced mind in which sensations, emotions and images are —
00 powerful: at once blind and perspicacious, a veritable poet


1 Diderot, “‘ Les Eleuthéromanes.”
Et mes mains, ourdissant les entrailles du prétre,
En feraient un cordon pour le dernier des rois.
Brissot: ‘‘ Wants being the sole title to property the result is that when a want is satisfied
=. is no longer a property owner. . . . Two prime necessities are due to the animal con-
ution, food and waste. . . . May mennourish themselves on their fallen creatures? (Yes,
all beings may justly paneeh themselves on any material calculated to supply their
x : vants. . Man of nature, fulfil your desire, give heed to your cravings, your sole masters
d your ondty guide. Do you feel your veins throbbing with inward fires at the sight of a
ch ming creature? She is yours, your caresses are innocent and your kisses pure. Love
P ne entitles to enjoyment as hunger is the warrant for property.” (An essay published
i ¥ 1 3780, and reprinted in 1782 in the ‘ Bibliothéque du Législateur,” quoted by Roux and
ie ez “ Histoire parlementaire,” XIII. 431.
* 3 The words of Rousseau himself ( ‘‘ Rousseau juge de Jean-Jacques,” third dialogue, p.
193): ‘“‘From whence may the painter and apologist of nature, now so disfigured and so
“Ealumniated, derive his model if not from his own heart ?”’


GBH AL a


222 THE ANCIENT REGIME.


and a morbid poet, who, instead of objadis beheld reve es,
living in a romance and dying i in a nightmare of his own cone
incapable of self-mastery and of self-management, regarding res-
olutions as acts, a-slight impulse for a resolution and the part he >
assumed for the character he thought he possessed; wholly re |
proportionate to the ordinary ways of the world, striking against, 4
wounding himself and sullying himself at every barrier by the
wayside; committing absurdities, meannesses and crimes and
yet preserving up to the end delicate and profound sensibility,
humanity, pity, the gift of tears, the faculty of loving, the passion »
for justice, the sentiment of religion and of enthusiasm, like
so many vigorous roots in which generous sap is always fer-
menting, whilst the stem and the branches prove abortive and
become deformed or wither under the inclemencies of the at-
mosphere. How explain such a contrast? How did Rousseau
himself account for it? A critic, a psychologist would merely
regard it as a singular case, the effect of an extraordinarily
discordant mental formation, analogous to that of Hamlet, Chat-
terton, René or Werther, adapted to poetic spheres, but unsuit-
able for real life. Rousseau generalizes; occupied with himself,
even to infatuation, and regarding no one in the world but
himself he imagines man accordingly and “ describes him as he
feels him within.” Self-esteem, moreover, finds its account in
this ; one is gratified at considering himself the type of humanity ;
the statue one erects of himself becomes more important; one
rises in his own estimation when, in confessing to himself, he”
thinks he is confessing the human species. Rousseau convokes
the assembly of generations with the trumpet of the day of judg
ment, and boldly stands up in the eyes of all men and of th¢
Supreme Judge, exclaiming, “Let one of you dare to say I
am better than thou!”! His contaminations all come to him
from without; his vices and his baseness must be attributed to”
circumstances: “If I had fallen into the hands of a bette


1 “ Confessions,” Book I. p. 1, and at the end of the fifth book. See his letter to Male-
sherbes: “I know my great faults, and am profoundly sensible of my vices. With all)
that I shail die under the persuasion that of all the men I have encountered no one was be
ter than myself.”” ‘To Madame B——, March 16, 1770, he writes: ‘‘ You have awarded m
esteem for my writings; your esteem would be yet greater for my life if it were open to ou
inspection, and still greater for my heart if it were exposed to your view. Never wa
there a better one, a heart more tender or more just. . . » My misfortunes are all due t
my virtues.” To Madame de la Tour, ‘‘ Whoever is sie cartesian in my behalf is. u1
worthy of me,’


~


cuar.t. = = 7HE SPIRIT AND THE DOCTRINE. 223


master... 1 should have been a good christian, a good father,
| sa good friend, a “good workman, a good man in all things.” ‘The
wrong is thus all on the side of society.. In like manner nature,
} swith man in general, is good. “His first impulses are always
right. . . . The fundamental principle of all moral questions, on
~ which I have argued in all my writings, is that man is naturally
_ good and loving justice and order. ‘Emule,’ especially, is a trea-
tise on the natural goodness of man, intended to show how vice
_ and error, foreign to his constitution, gradually. find their way into
_ itfrom without and insensibly change him. . . . Nature made man
_ to be happy and good, while society has made him depraved and
~ miserable.”! — Divest him, in thought, of his factitious habits, of
his superadded necessities, of his false prejudices; put aside
‘systems, study your own heart, listen to the inward dictates of
feeling, let yourself be guided by. the light of instinct and of
conscience, and you will again find the first Adam, like an incor-
tuptible marble statue that has fallen into a marsh, a long time
is under a crust of slime.and mud, but which, released from its
f pu covering, may be replaced on its pedestal in the completeness
of its form and in the perfect purity of its whiteness.
_ Around this central idea a reform occurs in the spiritualistic
| ‘doctrine. A being so noble cannot possibly consist of a simple
Mreollection of organs; he is Something more than mere matter;
ha impressions he derives from his senses do not constitute em
poll being. ‘Iam not merely a sensitive and passive being, but an
ctive and intelligent being and, whatever philosophy may say, I
: dare claim the honor of thinking.” And better still, this thinking
E aciple, in man, at least, is of a superior kind. ‘Show me
3 meter animal on the globe capable of producing fire and of
‘ e admiring the sun. What! I who am able to observe, to compre-
end beings and their associations; who-can appreciate order,
_ beauty and virtue; who can contemplate the universe and exalt
Seeryscif to the hand which controls it; who can love the good
and do good, I compare myself to hates !” Man is free, capable
_ Of deciding between two actions, and therefore the creator of
Tis actions; he is accordingly a first and original cause, “an
material eberencé, ” distinct from the body, a soul hampered
by the body and which may survive the body. This immortal
- soul imprisoned within the flesh has conscience for its organ.


‘
it


a -1The letter to M. de Beaumont, p. 24. ‘Rousseau juge de Jean-Jacques,” third dia-
a 193.


224 THE ANCIENT REGIME. BOOK 111 |


“QO Conscience, divine instinct, immortal and celestial voice, the
unfailing guide of an ignorant and finite but free and intelligent be- j
ing, the infallible judge between good and evil, and which rend 21s S
man similar to God, thou formest the superiority of his nature!”
Alongside of self-love, by which we subordinate everything to
ourselves, there is a love of order by which we subordinate ourselves 4
to the whole. Alongside of egotism, by which man seeks happi-
ness even at the expense of others, is sympathy by which he
seeks the happiness of others even at the expense of his own,
Personal enj oyment does not suffice him; he still needs tranquil-
lity of conscience and the-effusions of the heart. Such is man
as God designed and created him; in his organization there i is”
no defect. Inferior elements are as serviceable as the superior
elements; all are essential, proportionate, in proper place, not
only the heart, the conscience, the intellect, and the faculties by
which we surpass brutes, but again the inclinations in common
with animals, the instinct of self-preservation and of self- defence, |
the need of physical activity, sexual appetite, and othér primitive -
impulses as we observe them in the child, the savage and the ©
uncultivated man.! None of these in themselves are either
vicious or injurious. None are too strong, even the love of self.
None come into play out of season. If we would not interfere
with them, if we would impose no constraint on them, if we
would permit these sparkling fountains to flow according to their
bent, if we would not confine them to our artificial and foul
channels we should never see them boiling over and becoming
turbid. We look with wonder on their ravages and on their
contaminations; we forget that, in the beginning, they were pure
and undefiled. ‘The fault is with us, in our social arrangements, in
our incrusted and formal channels whereby we cause deviations!
and windings and make them heave and bound. “Your yery
governments are the cause of the evils which they pretend to
remedy. Ye scepters of iron! ye absurd laws, ye we reproach
for our inability to fulfil our duties on earth!” Away with
these dykes, the work of tyranny and routine! An emanci-
pated nature will at once resume a direct and healthy course and
man, without effort, will find himself not alone happy but virtuous.”


1 “Emile,” book I. and the letter to M. de Beaumont, passtne, Ny
? Article I. ‘All Frenchmen shall be virtuous.” Article II. ‘All Frenchmen shall b ;


happy.” (Draft of a constitution found among the papers of Sismondi, at that time in
school.) _*g


cuar.ut. ZHE SPIRIT-AND THE DOCTRINE. 228


On this principle the attack begins: there is none that is pushed
further, nor conducted with more bitter hostility. Thus far ex
‘sting institutions are exhibited simply as oppressive and unrea
eee; they are now charged with being unjust and corrupting
Reason and the appetites were the only insubordinates; con
science and pride are now in rebellion. With Voltaire and Mon
squieu fewer evils might be anticipated. With Diderot and
‘ Plotbach the horizon discloses only a glowing Eldorado or
| - comfortable Cythera. With Rousseau I behold within reach

n Eden where I shall immediately recover the nobleness insep-
‘able from felicity. It is my right; nature and Providence sum-
mon me to it; itis my heritage. One arbitrary institution alone
Keeps me away from it, the creator of my vices as of my
n ery. With what rage and fury will I overthrow this ancient
barrier! We detect this in the vehement tone, in the embit-
te ed style, and in the sombre eloquence of the new doctrine. Hu-
nor and scurrility are no longer an object; a serious tone is
maintained; people become exasperated, while the powerful voice
now heard penetrates beyond the drawing-room, to the rude and
Suffering crowd to which no word has yet been spoken, whose
mute resentment for the first time finds an interpreter, and whose
c lestructive instincts are soon to be set in motion at the summons
_ of its herald. Rousseau is one of the people and not a man of
“society. He feels awkward ina drawing-room.!_ He is not capa-
ble of conversing and of appearing amiable; his wit is late,
soming to him on the steps as he leaves the house; he keeps
lent with a sulky air or utters stupidities, redeeming his awk-
yardness with the sallies of a clown or with the phrases of a
nu Igar pedant. Elegance annoys him, luxuriousness makes him
u comfortable, politeness 1 is a lie, conversation mere prattle, ease

Mf manner a grimace, gayety a conventionalism, wit a parade,
science so much charlatanry, philosophy an affectation and mor-
is utter corruption. All is factitious, false and unwholesome,?


Confessions,” part 2, book IX. 368. ‘I cannot comprehend howany one can converse
‘ circle, . . . I stammer out a few words, with no meaning in them, as quickly as I can,
; ry glad if they convey no sense. . . . I should be as fond of society as anybody if I were
“no Peetain of appearing not merely ws deedventice but wholly different from what I really
am.” Cf. in the “ Nouvelle Héloise,” 2d part, the letter of Saint-Preux on Paris. Also in
ile,” the end of book IV.

“Confessions,” part 2, IX. 361. ‘I was so weary of drawing-rooms, of jets of water,
, Of flower-beds and of-those that showed them to me; I was so overwhelmed
pamphlets, harpsichords, games, knots, stupid witticisms, simpering looks, petty story-


bed


226 “THE ANCIENT REGIME. - BOOK Il,


from the paint, toilet and beauty of women to the tea
the apartments and the ragouts on the dinner-table, in sentiment
as in amusement, in literature as in music, im government as in
religion. ‘This civilization, which boasts of its splendor, is simply
the restlessness of over-excited, servile monkeys each i mere
other, and each corrupting the other to attain to super-refinem
discomfort and ennui. Human culture, accordingly, is in itse
bad, while the fruit it produces is merely excrescence and poison
Of what service are the sciences? Uncertain and useless, they
afford merely a pasture- -groynd for idlers and wranglers.t “ Vhe 0.
could pass a lifetime in sterile observation, did each person, cor
sulting human duties and nature’s demands, bestow his time on
his country, on the unfortunate and on his friends?” Of what!
use are the fine arts? They serve only as public flattery of domi-
nant passions. “The more pleasing and the more perfect tl
drama, the more baneful its influence;” the theatre, even vith
Moliére, is a school of bad morals, “ ‘pesieiets as it excites per
fidious souls to inflict punishment, under the guise of es
the candor of the innocent.” Tragedy, said to be mora
wastes in counterfeit effusions, the little virtue that still ret
“ After a man has seen and admired admirable conduct in fa 2S
what more is expected of him? After paying homage to vir

is he not discharged from all that he owes to it?- What m
would they have him do? Must he practise it himself? He
has no part to play, he is not a’ comedian.” The sciences, the
fine arts, the arts of luxury, philosophy, literature, all is adapted
to enervating and dissipating the soul; all is contrived for | (
small crowd of brilliant and noisy insects buzzing around ele:
vated places in society and sucking away the public substanc
In the way of science but one is important, that of our duties
and, without so many subtleties and so much study, innate sen
ment suffices for our teaching. In the way of the arts only thos


tellers and heavy suppers, that when I spied out a corner in a hedge, a bush, a barn
meadow, or when, on passing through a hamlet, I caught the smell of a good parsely ome
. I sent to the devil all the rouge, furbelows and perfumery, and, regretting a’plain dint
and common wine, I would gladly have pummelled both the head cook and the maste
the house who forced me to dine when I generally supped and to sup when I generally
to bed, but especially the lackeys that envied me every morsel I ate and who, at the ris k
iny dying with thirst, sold me the drugged wine of their master at ten times the pric
would have to pay for better wine at a tavern.” :
' “Discours sur l’influence des sciences et des arts.” The letter to d'Alembert on
cal performances,


ro THE SPIRIT.AND THE DOCTRINE. 227


should be tolerated which, ministering to our prime necessities,
_ provide us with bread for our support, a roof to shelter us, cloth-
_ ing to cover our bodies and arms with which to defend ourselves.
__ In the way of existence that only is healthy which enables us to’
_ live im the fields, requiring no preparation, without display, in
_ family union, devoted to cultivation, living on the products of the
_ soil and among neighbors that are equals and with servants that
one trusts as friends.. In the way of classes but one is respect-
able, that of laboring men, especially that of men working
'. with their own hands, artisans and mechanics, only these be-


| under a rough exterior, the warmth, the goodness and the integ-
_ tity of primitive instincts. Accordingly call by its true name this
~ elegance, this luxury, this urbanity, this literary delicacy, this phil-
_ osophical eccentricity, admired by the prejudiced as the flower of
the life of humanity, but which is only its mould and moss. In
like manner esteem at its just value the swarm that live upon it,
_ namely, the indolent aristocracy, the fashionable world, the privi-
leged who direct and make a display, the idlers of the drawing-
room who talk, divert themselves and regard themselves as the
' elect of humanity, but who are simply so many parasites.
- Whether parasitic or excretory one attracts the other, and the
o: tree can only again become healthy ‘by getting rid of one or
_ the other. |
_ ff ayilization is bad, society is worse.’ For this could not have
~ been established except by destroying primitive equality, while
"its two principal institutions, property and government, are usur- -
' pations. “He who first enclosed a plot of ground, and who took
__ it into his head to say this belongs to me, and who found people
simple enough to believe him,? was the true founder of civil society.
__ What crimes, what wars, what murders, what misery and what hor-
Lo would have been spared the human race if he who, pulling up
the landmark and filling up the ditch, had cried out to his fellows:
_ Be wary of that impostor; you are lost if you forget that no one
has a right*to the ground and that its fruits are the property of


5


Le


—


j a 2 “Society is as natural to the human species as decrepitude to the individual. The
ie people require arts, laws, and governments, as old men require crutches.’’ See the letter to
_M. Philopolis, p. 248.

{ _ 2 See the discourse on the “ Origine de l’Inégalité,”’  sassim.


re .


-, *
vee
a


228 THE ANCIENT REGIME. BOOK TI.


all!” The first property right was a robbery by which an indi-
vidual abstracted from the community a portion of the public do- ~
main. Nothing could justify the outrage, nothing added by Ps.

to the soil, neither his industry, nor his trouble, nor his vai
“In vain may he assert that he built this wall, and acquired th this
land by his labor.. Who marked it out for him, one might a:
and how do you come to be paid for,labor which was never m .
posed on you? Are you not aware that a multitude of your bret
ren are suffering and perishing with want because you have te ‘a
much, and that the express and unanimous consent of the whole
human species is requisite before appropriating to yourself more
than your share of the common subsistence?” Underneath thi 1S
theory we recognize the personal animus, the rancor of the
poor embittered plebeian, who, on entering society, finds th -
places all taken, and who is incapable of creating one for himse
who, in his confessions, marks the day when he ceased to feel bu
gry, who, for lack of something better, lives in concubinage w:
a serving- -woman and places his five children in a hospital, w
is, in turn, valet, clerk, vagabond, teacher and copyist, alway
the watch and making shift to maintain his iuiepen cela dis
gusted with the contrast between what he is outwardly and 4
he feels himself inwardly, avoiding envy only by disparagement,
and preserving in the folds of his heart an old grudge “agai
the rich and the fortunate in this world as if they were so at his
expense, as if their assumed happiness had been an infringement
on his happiness.”! Not only is there injustice in the origin of
property but again there is injustice in the power it secures to 1
self, the wrong increasing like a canker under the partiality
law. “Are not all the advantages of society for the rich and fe
the powerful? Do they not absorb to themselves all lucrati
positions? Is not the public authority wholly in their intere
If a man of position robs his creditors or commits other offe:
is he not certain of impunity? Are not the cudgellings hell
stows, his violent assaults, the murders and the assassinations he:
guilty of, matters that are hushed up and forgotten in a fe
months? Let this same man be robbed and the entire police s
to work, and woe to the poor innocents they suspect! Has he to
pass a dangerous place, escorts overrun the country. If the wal


1 “Emile,” book IV. Rousseau’s narrative, p. 13.


+


cuar.iu. THE SPIRIT AND THE DOCTRINE. 229


x
: _ of ‘his coach breaks down everybody runs to help him. Isanoise
- made at.his gate, a word from him and all is silent. Does the
‘crowd annoy him, he makes a sign and order reigns. Does a
carter chance to cross his path, his attendants are ready to knock
_ him down, while fifty honest pedestrians might be crushed rather
_ than a puppy be stopped on his headlong career. All this defer-
% ence to him costs him nota penny. What a difference in the pict-
ure of the poor! The more humanity owes to it the more soci-
' ety refuses it. All doors are closed to it even when it has
: the right to have them opened, and if it sometimes obtains
_ justice it experiences more trouble than another in obtaining
- favors. If there are corvées to work out, a militia to raise, the
_ poor are the most eligible. It always bears the burden of which
its wealthier neighbor with influence secures exemption. At the
. Teast accident to a poor man everybody abandons him. Let his
upset and I regard him as fortunate if he escapes the insults
_ of the smart companions of a young duke passing by. In a
i word all gratuitous assistance is withheld from him in time of
“need, precisely because he cannot pay for it. I regard him as a
lost man if he is so unfortunate as to be honest and have a pretty
' daughter and a powerful neighbor. Let us sum up in few
_ words the social pact of the two estates: You need me because I
am rich and you are poor: let us then make an agreement together.
ey will allow you the honor of serving me on condition that you give
me the little that remains to you for the trouble I have in governing
a you.”
_ This shows the spirit, the object and the effect of political
society. At the start, according to Rousseau, it consisted of an
bg bargain, made by an adroit rich man with a poor
_ dupe, porting new fetters for the weak and fresh power
i Hor the rich,” and, under the title of legitimate property, hallow-
ing the usurpation of the soil. ‘To-day the contract is still more
| iniquitous “as a child may govern an old man, a fool lead the
_ wise, and a handful of people burst with superfluities whilst
| a famished multitude lack the necessaries of life.’ It is the
nature of inequality to grow; hence the authority of some in-
_ereases along with the dependence of the rest, so that the two
| _ conditions, having at last reached their extremes, the hereditary
| and perpetual subjection of the people seems to be a divine


ie ‘tight equally with the hereditary and perpetual despotism of the
| king,
|


46 | [HE ANCIENT REGIME, ———*—* BOOK MH


This is the present condition of things and if a change occu
it is for the worse. “For,! the occupation of all kings, or
those charged with their functions, consists wholly of two «
jects, to extend their sway abroad and to render it more abso. n
at home.” If any other aim is alleged it is a pretext. ee
terms public welfare, happiness of subjects, the glory of the n
tion, so pretentiously employed in public edicts, never seal
other than disastrous commands, and the people shudder be
forehand when its masters allude to their paternal solicitu tod
However, this fatal point once reached, “the contract with the
government is dissolved; the despot is master only while reme in
ing the most powerful, and, as soon as he can be expelled, he hi
no reclamation against violence.” Right exists only ito I
consent, and no consent nor right can exist between master anc
slave. “Whether between one man and another man, or B
tween one man and a people, the following is an absurd ¢
dress: ‘J make an agreement with you wholly at your expei a
and to my advantage which I shall respect as long as I please an
which you shall respect as long as tt pleases me”” Madmen ma
sign such a treaty, but, as madmen, they are not in a condition »
negotiate. and their signature is not binding. Those who ai
"stricken to the ground, with swords pointed at their throats, ma
accept such conditions but, being under constraint, their promist
is null and void. Madmen and the conquered may for a thou-
sand years have bound over all subsequent generations, bu
a contract for a minor is not a contract for an adult, and «
the child arriving at the age of reason he belongs to hin im
self. We at last have become adults, and we have only to ¢
amine into the authority calling itself legitimate to tring ME :
pretensions to their just value. It has power on its side am
nothing more. But “A pistol, in a brigand’s hand is powe
and will you say that I am conscientiously obliged to hand hin
my purse? I obey through force and I will have my purse pacl
if I can take his pistol away from him. a


VII. 3

5 ir

We stop here. It is not worth while to follow the forlorn hope.
of the party, Naigeon and Sylvain Maréchal, Mably and Morelly,


the fanatics that erected atheism into an obligatory dogma and


_"


1 “Discours sur I’Origine de I’Inégalité,” 178. ‘*Contrat Social,” I. ch. iv.


; CHAP. III. THE SPIRIT.AND THE DOCTRINE. 231


into a superior duty; the socialists who, to suppress egoism,
_ propose a community of goods and who found a republic in
which any man that proposes to re-establish “detestable owner-
ship” shall be declared an enemy of humanity, treated as a
“raging maniac” and shut up in a dungeon for life. It is
sufficient to have studied the operations of large armies and of
_ great campaigns. With different resources and contrary tactics,
“the various attacks are all directed to the same end. Every in-
_ stitution is undermined at its foundations. ‘The dominant
" “philosophy withdraws all authority from custom, from religion,
€ from the State. Not only is it admitted that tradition in itself is
false, but again that it is baneful through its works, that it builds
_ up injustice on error and that by rendering man blind it leads him
' to oppress. Henceforth it is proscribed. Let this “infamous
' thing” with its upholders be crushed out. It is the great wrong
of the human species, and, when suppressed, only the right
will remain. “The time will then come! when the sun will shine
' only on free men recognizing no other master than reason;
' when tyrants and slaves, and priests with their senseless or
_ hypocritical instruments will exist only in history and on the
_ the stage; when attention will no longer be bestowed on them
_ except to pity their victims and their dupes, keeping oneself
_ vigilant and useful through horror of their excesses, and able to
_ recognize and extinguish by the force of reason the first germs
_ of superstition and of tyranny, should they ever venture to
_ reappear.” The millenium is approaching and reason must
be its own organizer. We are thus to owe everything to its
salutary authority, the foundation of the new order of things as
well as the destruction of the old one.


*
it
-


1 Condorcet, ‘‘ Tableau des progrés de l’esprit humain,” the tenth epoch.


CHAPTER IV.


THE ORGANIZATION OF SOCIETY IN THE FUTURE.—I. The mathemati¢c
method.—Definition of man in the abstract.—The social contract.—Ind
‘pendence and equality of the contractors.—All equal before the law and e
sharing in the sovereignty.—II. The first result.—The theory easly
plied.—Confidence in it due to belief in man’s inherent goodness and re:
ableness.—III. The inadequacy and fragility of reason in man,—The 5 ‘ity
and inadequacy of reason in humanity.—Subordination of reason in hum
conduct.—Brutal and dangerous forces.—The nature and utility of gover
ment.—Government impossible under the new theory-—IV. The second re
sult.—The new theory leads to. despotisni.—Precedents for this theory. —A
ministrative centralization.—The Utopia of the Economists.—Invalidity :
preceding rights.—Collateral associations not tolerated. —Complete alienat
of the individual from the community.—Rights of the State in relation
property, education and religion.—The State a Spartan convent.—
Complete triumph and last excesses of classic reason.—How it beco: ;
monomania.—Why its work is not enduring.


a>


i.

CoNSIDER future society as it appears at this moment to ot
legislators of the closet and bear in mind that it will soon app x
under the same aspect to the legislators of the Assembly. I
their eyes the decisive moment has come. Henceforth two hi
tories are to exist;! one, that of the past, the other, that “
future, formerly a history of man still deprived of his rea:
and at present the history of the rational man. At let
the rule of right is to begin. Of all that the past has found le
and transmitted nothing is legitimate. Overlaying the natur
man it has created an artificial man, either ecclesiastic or laic
noble or plebeian, sovereign or suber proprietor or proletary ;
ignorant or cultivated, peasant or citizen, slave or master, all E
ing factitious qualities which we are not to heed, as their origin j
tainted with violence and robbery. Strip off these superadded


' Barrére, “ Point du jour,” No, 1, (June 15, 1789). “You are summoned to give hi
a fresh start.”


CHAP. Iv. LHE SPIRIT AND THE DOCTRINE. 233


garments; let us take man in himself, the same under all con-
ditions, in all situations, in all countries, in all ages, and strive to
oo what sort of association is the best adapted to him.
‘The problem thus stated the rest follows.
_ Conformably to the ways of the classic spirit, and to the pre-
cepts of the prevailing ideology, a political system is constructed
after a mathematical model.’ A simple proposition is selected,
and set apart, very general, familiar, readily apparent, and easily
‘understood by the most ignorant and inattentive schoolboy.
Reject every difference which separates one man from other
men; retain of him only the portion common to him and to
thers. ‘This remainder constitutes man in general, or in other
ords, “a sensitive and rational being who, thus endowed, avoids
pain, and seeks pleasure,” and therefore aspiring to “happiness,
namely, a stable condition in which one enjoys greater pleasure
than pain,” or, again, “a sensitive being sae, of forming
Tational opinions aa of acquiring moral ideas.”? The first
omer is cognizant of this notion in his own experience, and can
erify it at the first glance. Such is the social unit; let several
of these be combined, a thousand, a hundred thousand, a million,
enty-six millions, and you have the French people. Men
at twenty-one years of age, without relations, without a
t, without traditions, without a country, are supposed to be
assembled for the first time and, for the first time, to treat with
ee other. In this position, at the moment of contracting
together, all are equal: for, as the definition states, the extrinsic
and spurious qualities through which alone all differ have been
sjected. All are free, for, according to the definition, the unjust
iraldom imposed on all by brute force and by hereditary preju-
ice, has been suppressed. But, if all men are equal, no rea-
son exists why, in this contract, any special advantage should be
conceded to one more than to another. Accordingly all shall
be equal before the law; no person, or family, or class, shall be
allowed any privilege; no one shall claim a right of which


&


[a aa zbid. ‘The methods of the mathematical sciences, applied to new objects,

have ppeacd new roads to the moral and political sciences.” Cf. Rousseau, in the “ Contrat

Social,” the mathematical calculation of the fraction of sovereignty to which each individual
EY :

int-Lambert, “‘ Catéchisme universel,”’ the first dialogue, p. 17.

Sondorcet, 7ééd., ninth epoch. ‘‘From this single truth the publicists have been able to

e the rights of man.”


20*


234 THE ANCIENT REGIME,


another might be deprived ; no one shall be subject to any d : i
of which another is exempted. On the other hand, all b
free, each enters with a free will along with the prot. aikl wills
constituting the new community; it is necessary that in h
common resolutions, he should fully concur. Only on thes
conditions does he bind himself; he is bound to respect law:
only because he has assisted in making them, and to obey m ‘gis
trates only because he has aided in electing them. Undernez
all legitimate authority his consent or his vote must be apparent
while, in the humblest citizen, the most exalted of public powe
must recognize a member of their own sovereignty. No om
may alienate or lose this portion of his sovereignty; it 1S im
separable from his person, and, on delegating it to another, h
reserves to himself full possession of it. ‘The liberty, equality
and sovereignty of the people constitute the first articles of th
social contract. These are rigorously deduced from a primar}
definition ; other rights of the citizen are to be no less a sh
deduced from it, the main features of the constitution, the n
important civil and political laws, in short, the order, the fort
and the spirit of the new state. x


Il.


Hence, two consequences. In the first place, a society t
organized is the only just one; for, the reverse of all othed
it is not the result. of a blind subjection to traditions, but :
a contract concluded among equals, examined in open day ig
and assented to in full freedom.!_ The social contract, compose
of demonstrated theorems, has the authority of geometry; hence
an equal value at all times, in every place, and for,every people;
it is accordingly rightfully established. - Whatever interposes any
obstacle thereto is inimical to the human race; whether a govern-
ment, an aristocracy or a clergy, it must be overthrown. Reyolt


1? Rousseau still entertained admiration for Montesquieu but, at the same time, with 5
reservation ; afterwards, however, the theory developed itself, every historical right bei a
jected. “Then,” says Condorcet, (2dd., ninth epoch), “they found themselves obliged
abandon a false and crafty policy which, forgetful of men deriving equal rights
their nature, attempted at one time to estimate those allowed to them according to ex
of territory, the temperature of the climate, the national character, the wealth of the po
tion, the degree of perfection of their commerce and industries, and again to apportion the
same rights unequally among diverse classes of men, bestowing them on birth, riches an
professions, and thus creating opposite interests and opposite powers, for the purpose
subsequently establishing an equilibrium alone rendered necessary by these institutions then
selves and which the danger of their tendencies by no means corrects.”


‘omar.tv. 7HE SPIRIT AND THE DOCTRINE. 235


F
E simply just defence; in withdrawing ourselves from such hands
we only recover what has been wrongfully retained and which
“legitimately belongs to us. In the second piace, this social code,
as just set forth, once promulgated, is applicable without mis-
conception or resistance; for it is a species of moral geometry,
pler than any other, reduced to first principles, founded on
E e clearest and most popular notions, and, in four steps, leading
to capital truths. The comprehension and application of these
"truths demand no preparatory study-or profound reflection; good
_ Sense suffices, and even common sense. Prejudice and. selfish-
ess alone impair the testimony; but never will testimony be
wanting in a sound brain and in an upright heart. Explain the
‘rights of man to a laborer or to a peasant and at once he be-
comes an able politician; teach children the citizen’s catechism
and on leaving school they comprehend duties and rights as well
is the four fundamental principles. Thereupon hope spreads


It is admitted that of itself, and through its own force, the theory
engenders its own application; it suffices for men to decree
or accept the social compact to acquire under this same act,
“at once a capacity for comprehending it and the disposition to
ry it out.

Such trust is marvellous, and, at the first glance, inexplicable,
“suggesting an idea then entertained*by man which we no longer
ssess. Man, indeed, was regarded as essentially good and rea-
! sonable. Reasonable, that is to say, capable of assenting to a
‘clearly defined principle, of following an ulterior chain of argu-
“ments, of understanding and accepting a final conclusion, of ex-

cting for himself, on the occasion calling for it, the varied con-

" Sequences to which it leads: such is the ordinary man in the eyes
"of the writers of the day; they judge him by themselves. To
them the human intellect is their own, the classic intellect. For
a hundred and fifty years it rules in literature, in philésophy, in
Science, in education, in conversation, by virtue of tradition, of
| usage and of good taste. No other is tolerated and no other is
| imagined, and if, within this closed circle, a stranger succeeds in
' introducing himself it is on condition of adopting the oratorical
| idiom which the raison raisonnante imposes on all its guests, on
| Greeks, Englishmen, barbarians, peasants and savages, how-


ever different from each other and however different they may be


LS
=


bh


236 THE ANCIENT REGIME. BOOK If


amongst themselves. In Buffon, the first man, on narrating th
first hours of his being, analyzes his sensations, emotions and im:
pulses, with as much subtlety as -Condillac himself. Witl
Diderot, Otou the Otaheitian, with Bernardin de St. Pierre, :
semi-savage Hindoo and an old colonist of the Ile-de-F rance

with Rousseau a country vicar, a gardener and a juggler, are a 2
complished conversationists and moralists. In Marmontel <
in Florian, in all the literature of inferior rank preceding or .
companying the Revolution, also in the tragic or comic dra’
the chief talent of the personage, whoever he may be, whe net
an uncultivated rustic, tattooed barbarian or naked savage, cor n- @
sists in explaining himself, in arguing and in following e
abstract discourse with intelligence and attention, in tracing for
himself, or in the footsteps of a guide, the rectilinear pathway of
general ideas. Thus, to observers in the eighteenth century,
reason is everywhere and she stands alone in the world.
form of intellect so universal necessarily strikes them as natural;
they resemble people who, speaking but one language, and oné
they have always spoken with facility, cannot imagine any othet
language being spoken or that they may be surrounded by the
deaf and the dumb. And so much the more inasmuch as their
theory authorizes this prejudice. According to the new ideology
all minds are within reach of all truths. If the mind does not
attain to them the fault is ours in not being properly prepared ;
will attain to them if we take the trouble to guide it properly
For it has senses the same as our own, and sensations, revived,
combined and noted by signs, suffice to form “not only all our
conceptions but again all our faculties.”!_ An exact and constant
filiation of ideas attaches our simplest perceptions to the most
complex sciences and, from the lowest to the highest degree, a
scale is practicable; if the scholar stops on.the way it is owing
to our having left too great an interval between two degrees of
the scale}; let no intermediary degrees be omitted and he will
mount to the top of it. To this exalted idea of the faculties o.
man is added a no less exalted idea of his heart. Rousseau hay
ing declared this to be naturally good, the refined class plunge int¢
the belief with all the exaggerations of fashion and all the senti
mentality of the drawing-room. The conviction is widespread


1 Condillac, ‘‘ Logique.”


IV. THE SPIRIT AND THE DOCTRINE. — 237


“man, and especially the man of the people, is sensitive and affec-
tionate by nature, that he is immediately impressed by benefac-
ons and disposed to be grateful for them, that he softens at the
} aed sign of interest in him, and that he is capable of every
‘Tefinement. A series of engravings represents two children in a
Denar cottage,! one five and the other three years of age, by
e side of an infirm grandmother, one supporting her head and the
other giving her drink; the father and mother enter and, on seeing
“this touching incident, “these good people find themselves a
ppy in possessing such children they forget they are poor.”
“Oh, my father,” cries a shepherd youth of the Pyrenees,” “accept
‘this faithful dog, so true to me for seven years; in future let him fol-
‘low and defend you, for never will he have served me so usefully.”
eit would require too much space to follow in the literature of the
end of the century, from Marmontel to Bernardin de Saint-Pierre,
and from Florian to Berquin and Bitaubé, the interminable repeti-
‘tion of these sweet insipidities. The illusion even reaches states-


+


a


“men. “Sire,” says Turgot, on presenting the king with a plan of
political education,® “I venture to assert that in ten years your
‘nation will no longer be recognizable, and through enlighten-
“ment and good morals, in intelligent zeal for your service and for
‘the country, it will rise above all other nations. Children who
‘are now ten years of age will then be men prepared for the
_ state, loving their country, submissive to authority, not through
‘fear but through reason, aiding their fellow-citizens, and accus-
i: tomed to recognizing and respecting ’ ustice.” In the month of


imminent danger anata from the unswerving efforts of the
a hird- Estate, “coldly replied, turning his eyes upward, ‘reliance
“must be placed on the moral virtues of man.’” In the main,
on the imagination forming any conception of human society, this
“consists of a vague, semi-bucolic, semi-theatric scene, somewhat


Sans
=


¥ *.
Hy, 1 “Histoire de France par Estamps,” 1789.
_ # Mme. de Genlis, ‘‘Souvenirs de Félicie,” 371-391.
7 8 De Tocqueville, ‘“L’ Ancien régime,”’ 237. Cf. “L’an 2440,” by Mercier, IIT. vols. One
Of these imaginings in all its details may be found here. The work was first published in
1770. “The Revolution,” says one of the characters, ‘‘ was brought about wzthout an effort,
through the heroism of a great man, a royal philosopher worthy of power, because he de-
Spised it,” etc. (Tome II. 109.) :
_ 4“Mémoires de M. de Bouillé,” p. 70. Cf. Barante, “Tableau de la litt. frangaise au dix-
huitiéme siécle,” p. 318. ‘Civilization and enlightenment were supposed to have allayed all
Passions and softened all characters. It seemed as if morality had become easy of practice
and that the balance of social order was so well adjusted that nothing could disturb it.”


238 THE ANCIEN z REGIME. BOOK : Ih


resembling those displayed on the frontispieces of the illustrated
works on morals and politics. Half-naked men with others
clothed in skins, assemble together under a large oak tree; in the |
centre of the group a venerable old man arises and makes an
address, using “the language of nature and reason,” proposing -
that all should be united, and explaining how men are bound to-
gether by mutual obligations; he shows them the harmony of
private and of public interests, and ends by making them sensible
of the beauties of virtue.! All utter shouts of joy, embrace each
other, gather round the speaker and elect him chief magistrate;
dancing is going on under the branches in the background and
henceforth happiness on earth is fully established. This is no
exaggeration. ‘The National Assembly addresses the nation in
harangues of this style. For many years the government speaks
to the people as it would to one of Gessner’s shepherds. The
peasants are entreated not to burn castles because it is painful for
their good king to see such sights. They are exhorted “to sur-
prise him with their virtues in order that he may be the sooner.
rewarded for his own.”? At the height of the Jacquerie tu-—
mults the sages of the day seem to think they are living in a state ©
of pastoral simplicity and that with an air on the flute they may
restore to its fold the howling pack of bestial animosities and
unchained appetites.


III. 3

It is a sad thing to fall asleep in a sheepcot and, on awaken-
ing, to find the sheep transformed into wolves. And yet, in case
of a revolution this is what we may expect. What we call reason
in man is not an innate endowment, primitive and enduring, but
a tardy acquisition and a fragile composition. The slightest
physiological knowledge suffices to show that it is a state of un
stable equilibrium, dependent on the no less greater instability of
the brain, nerves, circulation and digestion. Take women that
are hungry and men that have been drinking; place a thousand
of these together, and let them excite each other with their ex-
clamations, their anxieties, and the contagious reaction of thei


1 See in Rousseau, in the ‘Lettre 4 M. de Beaumont,’”’ a scene of this description,
establishment of deism and toleration, associated with a similar discourse. q

? Roux et Buchez, “Histoire parlementaire,” IV. 322, the address made on the 11th Feb.
1790. ‘What an affecting and sublime address,” says a deputy. It was greeted by ‘th
Assembly with “unparalleled applause.” The whole address should be quoted entire. ~


‘ea
aon


—


waP.tv. THE SPIRIT AND THE DOCTRINE. 239


ZW


ver-increasing emotions; it will not be long before you find them
a crowd of dangerous maniacs. This is evident in 1789 and
more besides. | Now, interrogate psychology. The simplest men-
Beeston, a sensuous perception, an act of memory, the ap-
Biance of a name, an ordinary act of judgment is the play of
complicated mechanism, the joint and final result of several mill-
ions of wheels which, like those of a clock,! turn and propel
lindly, each for itself, each through its own force, and each kept
im place and in functional activity by a system of balance and
compensation. If the hands mark the hour with any degree of
accuracy it is due to a wonderful if not miraculous conjunction,
while hallucination, delirium and monomania, ever at the door,
are always ready to enter it. Properly speaking man is imbecile,
as the body is morbid, by nature; the health of our mind, like
the health of our organs, is simply a repeated achievement and a
happy accident. If such happens to be the case with the coarse
woof and canvas, with the large and approximatively strong
thr of our intellect, what risks are imminent for the ulterior
and superadded embroidery, the subtle and complicated netting
forming reason properly so called and which is composed of
general ideas? Formed by a slow and delicate process of weav-

g, through a long system of signs, amidst the agitations of
pride, of enthusiasm and of dogmatic obstinacy, how many
chances there are, even in the most perfect brain, of these ideas
in eeaeetely corresponding with outward things! All that we
squire in this connection is to witness the operation of the idyl in
vog e with the philosophers and politicians. These being the
superior minds, what can be said of the masses of the people, of
the uncultivated or semi-cultivated brains ? According as reason
$s crippled - in man so is it rare in humanity. General ideas
and accurate reasoning are found only in a select few. The
* aprehension of abstract terms and the habit of making accu-
+. te deductions requires previous and special preparation, a pro-

onged mental exercise and steady practice, and besides this,
iwhere political matters are concerned, a degree of comiposure
vhich, affording every facility for reflection, enables a man to de-
ach himself for a moment from himself for the consideration of
is interests as a disinterested observer. If one of these con-


re
Cc


1 The number of cerebral cells is estimated (the cortical layer), at twelve hundred millions
_ and the fibres binding them together at four thousand millions.


aN THE ANCIENT REGIME.


Or he is wanting, reason, especially 1 in relation to polities, is 2 es
sent. In a peasant or a villager, in any man brought up from i a
fancy to manual labor, not only is the network of ——— as bes:
ceptions defective, but again the internal machinery by w |
they are woven is not perfected. Accustomed to the open air, )
the exercise of his limbs, his attention flags if he stands inactive
for a quarter of an hour; generalized expressions find their way
into his mind only as saned the mental combination they ought
to excite cannot be produced. He becomes drowsy unless ¢
powerful vibrating voice contagiously arouses in him the i c
of flesh and blood, the personal cravings, the secret enmities which
restrained by outward discipline, are always ready to be set ee
In the half-cultivated mind, even with the man who thinks himse
cultivated and who reads the newspapers, principles are gene
disproportionate guests; they are above his comprehensieely he
does not measure their bearings, he does not appreciate soi
limitations, he is insensible to their restrictions and he :
sifies their application. !They are like those preparations ‘of
the laboratory which, harmless in the chemist’s hands, becom
destructive in the street under the feet_of passing people. To :
soon will this be apparent when, in the name of popular
sovereignty, each commune, each mob, shall regard itself as the
nation and act accordingly; when reason, in the hands of its ne
interpreters shall inaugurate riots in the streets and ort in
surrections in the fields.

This is owing to the philosophers of the age having bee
mistaken in two ways. Not only is reason not natural to mar
nor universal in humanity, but again, in the conduct of man an¢
of humanity, its influence is small. Except with a few cool an
clear intellects, a Fontenelle, a Hume, a Gibbon, with whom
may prevail because it encounters no rivals, it is very far fro
playing the leading part; it belongs to other forces born within
and which, by virtue of being the first comers, remain in posses
sion of the field. The place obtained by reason is always restricted
the office it fulfils is generally secondary. Openly or secretly,
it is only a convenient subaltern, a domestic advocate unceasingly,
suborned, employed by the proprietors to plead in their be
half; if they yield it precedence in public it is only through:
decorum. Vainly do they proclaim it the recognized sovereign;
they grant it only a passing authority, and, under its nominé


map.iv. THE SPIRIT AND THE DOCTRINE. 241


control, they remain the inward masters. These masters of
man consist of physical temperament, bodily needs, animal
astinct, hereditary prejudice, imagination, generally the dominant
passion, and more particularly personal or family interest, also that
of caste or party. We should labor under serious error were we
fo suppose ourselves naturally good, generous, sympathetic, or,
yen at the least, gentle, pliable, and ready to sacrifice ourselves
to social interests or to those of others. There are several of them,
ind of the most powerful kind, and which, if left to themselves,
you d make only havoc. In the first place, if there is no certainty
ff man being a remote blood cousin of the monkey, it is at least
sertain that, in his structure, he is an animal closely related to the
monkey, provided with canine teeth, carnivorous, formerly cannibal
ind, therefore, a hunter and bellicose. Hence there is in him a
teady substratum of brutality and ferocity, and of violent and
lestructive instincts, to which must be added, if he is French,
ayety, laughter, and a strange propensity to gambol and act
asanely in the havoc he makes ;—we shall see him at work. In
ie second place, at the outset, his condition casts him naked and
estitute on an ungrateful soil on which subsistence is difficult,
yhere, at the risk of death, he is obliged to save and to economize.
[ence a constant preoccupation and the rooted idea of acquiring,
ecumulating, and possessing, rapacity and avarice, more partic-
larly in the class which, tied to the glebe, fasts for sixty
enerations in order to support other classes and whose crooked
Mgers are always outstretched to clutch the soil whose fruits
ley cause to grow ;—we shall see this class at work. Finally,
is more delicate mental organization makes of him from the
uliest days an imaginative being in which swarming fancies
evelop themselves into monstrous chimeras to expand his
Opes, fears and desires beyond all bounds. Hence an excess of
msibility, sudden outbursts of emotion, contagious transports,
a resistible currents of passion, epidemics of credulity and suspi-
on, in short, enthusiasm and panic, especially if he is French,
lat is to say, excitable and communicative, easily thrown off his
Dalance and prompt to accept foreign impulsion, deprived of the
tural ballast which a phlegmatic temperament and the concen-
‘tration of lonely meditations secure to his German or Latin
‘neighbors ;—and all this we shall see at work. These constitute
‘some of the brute forces that control human life. In ordinary
ei 2Y


‘ a
“Gi


242 7 THE ANCIENT REGIME. — BOOK II.


times we pay no attention to them; being subordinated they @ de
not seem to us formidable. We take it for granted that they are
allayed and pacified; we flatter ourselves that the disciplin
imposed on them has made them natural, and that by dint of
flowing between dykes they are settled down into their accus
tomed beds. ‘The truth is that, like all brute forces, like a strear m
or a torrent, they only remain in these under constraint; it is h¢ .
dyke which, through its resistance, produces this moderation,
Another force equal to their force had to be installed against their
outbreaks and devastations, graduated according to their scale, all
the firmer as they are more menacing, despotic if need be against
their despotism, in any event constraining and repressive, at the
outset a tribal chief, later an army general, all modes consistin g
in an elective or hereditary gendarme, possessing vigilant eyes a
vigorous arms, and who, with blows, excites fear and, cheowel
fear, maintains order. In the regulation and limitation of his
blows divers instrumentalities are employed, a pre-established
constitution, a division of powers, a code of laws, tribunals, and
legal formalities. At the bottom of all these wheels ever appear
the principal lever, the efficacious instrument, namely, the
gendarme armed against the savage, brigand and madman each
of us harbors, in repose or manacled, but always living, in the re
cesses of his own breast.

On the contrary, in the new theory, every principle promul
gated, every precaution taken, every suspicion awakened is aimed
at the gendarme. In the name of the sovereignty of the people
all authority is withdrawn from the government, every prerog
ative, every initiative, its continuance and its force. The peopl
being sovereign the government is simply its clerk, and less tha
its clerk, merely its domestic. Between them “no contrac
indefinite or at least enduring, “and which may be cancelle
only by mutual consent or the unfaithfulness of one of the tw
parties.” “It is against the nature of a political body for tk
sovereign to impose a law on himself which he cannot set aside.
There is no sacred and inviolable charter “binding a peop
to the forms of an established constitution.” “The right
change these is the first guarantee of all rights.” ‘There is n
and never can be, any fundamental, obligatory law for the ent
body of a people, not even the social contract.” It is throw
usurpation and deception that a prince, an assembly, and a bo :


cHap.tv. THE SPIRIT AND THE DOCTRINE. 243
of magistrates declare themselves representatives of the people.
“Sovereignty is not to be represented for the same reason that it
is not to be alienated. . The moment a people gives itself
re presentatives it is no toniger free, it exists no more... . The
i english people think themselves free but they deceive icupeks Ge.

the sy are free only during an election of members of st) ogi

1 the election of these they become slaves and are null;

tT . ne deputies of the people are not, nor can they be, ‘te ay
res entatives; they are simply its commissioners and can establish
o final compact. Every law not ratified by the people them-
elves is null and is no law.” “A body of laws sanctioned by
3 assembly of the people through a fixed constitution of the
SI ta ate, does not suffice; other fixed and periodical assemblies are
necessary which cannot be abolished or prorogued, so arranged
t on a given day the people may be legitimately convoked by
oo no other formal convocation being requisite. . . . The
n nor ent the people are thus assembled the jurisdiction of the
Zo ernment is to cease and the executive power is to be sus-
nded,” society commencing anew, while citizens, restored to
hei primitive independence, may reconstitute at will, for any
period they determine, the provisional contract to which they
have assented only for a determined time. ‘The opening of
_ these assemblies, whose sole object is to maintain the social
- compact, should always take place with two propositions, never
Suppressed and which are to be passed on separately; the first
ne, whether the sovereign is willing to maintain the actual form
f f the government ; and the second, whether the people are will-
g to leave its administration in the hands of those actually per-
ming its duties.’ ‘Thus, “the act by which a people is subject
0 its chiefs is absolutely only a commission, a service in which,

s simple officers of their sovereign, they exercise in his name
e power of which he has made them depositaries and which he
1ay modify, limit and resume at pleasure.”! Not only does it
Ways reserve to itself “the legislative power which belongs °
pit and which can belong only to it,” but again, it delegates
md withdraws the executive power according to its fancy.
_ Those who exercise it are its employés. “It may establish and
“depose them when it pleases.” In relation to it they have no


=


} Rousseau, “‘Contrat social,” I, ch. 7; III. ch. 13, 14, 15, 18; IV. ch. 1, 18; IV. 3. Cf.
_Condorce: ninth epoch.


244 THE ANCIENT REGIME. ». Book If


rights. “It is not a matter of contract with them but one of
obedience;” they have “‘no conditions” to prescribe ; they ca
not demand of it the fulfilment of any engagement. It is us
less to raise the objection that, according to this, every maf
of spirit or of culture will decline our offices and that our chief
will bear the character of lackeys. We will not leave them the
freedom of accepting or declining office; we impose it on the
authoritatively. “In every true demioeesce the magistrature 1s is
not an. advantage but an onerous burden, not to be assigt a
to one more than to another.” We can lay hands on our magis-
trates, take them by the collar and seat them on their benches 7
their own despite. By fair means or foul they are the workir 1g
subjects (corvéables) of the State, in a lower condition than a
valet or a mechanic, since the mechanic does his work according
to acceptable conditions and the discharged valet can claim 5
eight days’ notice to quit. When government throws off this
humble attitude it usurps, while constitutions are to proc n
that, in such an event, insurrection is not only the most sacré
right but the most imperative duty. $ .
Practice, accordingly, accompanies the theory, and the ie na
of the sovereignty of the people, interpreted by the mass, is”
produce a perfect anarchy, up to the moment when, interpretec 3
by its chiefs, it produces a perfect despotism.


IV.


For there are two sides to this theory; whilst one sid
leads to the perpetual demolition of government, the othe
terminates in the illimitable dictation of the State. The ne
contract is not a historic fact like the English Declaration
Rights in 1688 or the Dutch federation in 1579, entered into
actual and living individuals, admitting acquired situatio
groups already formed, established positions, and drawn up to re
ognize, define, guarantee and complete an anterior right.
' tecedent to the social contract no veritable right exists; f
veritable rights are born solely out of the social contract,
only valid one, since it is the only one agreed upon between b
ings perfectly equal and perfectly free, so many abstract creé
ures, so many species of: mathematical units, all of th
value, all playing the same part and whose inequality or ec
straint never disturbs the common understanding, Hence, <


map.iv. THE SPIRIT AND THE DOCTRINE. 245


moment of its completion, all other facts are nullified. Property,
family, church, no ancient institution may invoke any right against
he new State. The area on which it is built up must be consid-
ered vacant; if old structures are partly allowed to remain
tis only i in its name and for its benefit, to be enclosed within its
barriers and appropriated to its use; the entire soil of humanity
7 ‘its property. On the other Raed it is not, according to the
American doctrine, an association for mutual protection, a society
2 other societies, circumscribed in its purpose, restricted to its
lice, limited in its powers, and by which individuals reserving
» themselves the better portion of their property. and persons,
assess each other for the maintenance of an army, a police, tri-
yunals, highways, schools, in short, the major instrumentalities of
public safety and utility, at the same time withholding the re-
yainder of local, general, spiritual and material services in favor
of private initiative and of spontaneous associations that may
‘ise as occasion or necessity calls for them. Our State is not to
a simple utilitarian machine, a convenient, handy implement,
\f which the workman avails himself without abandoning the
ree use of his hand, or the simultaneous use of other implements.
Being elder born, the only son and sole representative of reason,

“must, to ensure its sway, leave nothing beyond its grasp. In
his respect the old régime paves the way for the new one, while
e established system inclines minds beforehand to the budding
heory. Through administrative centralization the State already,
or a long time, has its hands everywhere.! “ You must know,”
ays Law to the Marquis d’Argenson, “that the kingdom of
BE nce is governed by thirty intendants. You have neither par-
iaments, assemblies or governors, simply thirty masters of re- —
pes ts, provincial clerks, on whom depends the hagpwess or mis-
ry, the fruitfulness or sterility of these provinces.” The king, in
act, sovereign, father, and universal guardian, manages local af-
airs through his delegates and intervenes in private affairs
1ro) igh his pardons or /e¢tres-de-cachet. Such an example and
such a course followed for fifty years excites the imagination.
oo instrumentality is better calculated to effect reforms on
a large scale and at one stroke. Hence, far from restricting the
¢ ieteal power the economists are desirous of extending its action.


1De Tocqueville, “T’Ancien régime,” book II. entire, and book IIT. ch. 3.


246 THE ANCIENT REGIME.


Instead of setting up new dykes against it they interest them
selves only in destroying what is left of the old dykes still im
terfering with it. “The system of counter-forces in a govern-
ment,” say Quesnay and his disciples, “is a fatal idea... . T \e
speculations on which the system of counter-balance is foundet
are chimerical. . . . Let the government have a full compreh
sion of its duties andl be left free. . . . The State must go om
according to the essential laws of order and in this case unlimited _
power is requisite.” On the approach of the Revolution the |
same doctrine reappears except in the substitution of one term
for another term. In the place of the sovereignty of the king |
the “ Contrat social” substitutes the sovereignty of the people.
The latter, however, is much more absolute than the former, and,
in the democratic convent which Rousseau constructs, on the
Spartan and Roman model, the individual is nothing and the
State everything.. |

In effect, “the clauses of the social contract er ehienass
to one, namely, the total transfer of each associate with rh
rights to the community.” Every one surrenders himself
tirely, ‘‘just as he stands, he and all his forces and of which 4
property forms a portion.” “There is no exception nor reserva=
tion; whatever he may have been previously and whatever may
have belonged to-him is no longer his own. Henceforth what-_
ever he becomes or whatever he may possess devolves on him
only through the. delegation of the social body, the universal_
proprietor and absolute master. All rights must be vested in 1
State and none in the individual; otherwise there would be lit di
gation between them, and, “as there is no common superior to”
decide between them ” their litigation would never end. On the
contrary, through the complete donation which each one makes
of himself, “the unity is as perfect as possible;” having: re-
nounced all and renounced himself “he has no further claim to
make.” a.

This being admitted, let us trace the consequences. Int
first place, I enjoy my property only through tolerance anda a
second-hand; for, according to the social contract, I have surre
dered it ;? “ it now forms a portion of the national estate 7” if


1 Rousseau, Contrat social.” I. 6.
2 Jbid. I. 9. ‘The State, in relation to its members is master of all their possessions
cording to the social compact; possessors are considered as depositaries of the — wealtl


21*


HAP. IV. THE SPIRIT AND THE DOCTRINE. 247


"retain the use of it for the time being it is through a concession
the State which makes me a “depositary” of it. And this
favor must not be considered asa restitution. “ Far from accept-
g the property of individuals society despoils them of it, simply
averting the ss het into a veritable right, the enjoyment of
; it into proprietorship.” Previous to the social contract I was
ssessor not by right but in fact, and even unjustly if I had
ge possessions ; for, ‘every man has naturally a right to what-
ever he needs,” and I have robbed other men of all that I
possessed beyond my subsistence. Hence, so far from the State
being under obligation to me, I am under obligation to it,
t . @ property which it returns to me not’ being mine but that
= which the State favors me. It follows, accordingly, that the
fate may impose conditions on its gift, limit the use I may make
f it according to its fancy, restrict and regulate my ws Leena
Pit, my right to bequeath it. “ According to nature,! the right
Bieraperty does not extend beyond the life of its owner;
the moment he dies his possessions are no longer his own.
3 jus, to prescribe the conditions on which he may dispose of it
is really less to change his right in appearance than to extend it
t effect.” In any event as my title is an effect of the social
contract it is precarious like the contract itself; a new stipulation
a ffices to limit it or to destroy it. “The sovereign? may legiti-
ately appropriate to himself all property as was done’ in Sparta in
he time of Lycurgus.” In our laical convent whatever each
“monk possesses is only a revocable gift by the convent.
In the second place, this convent is a seminary. I have no
ight to bring up my children in my own house and in my own
way. “As the reason of each man* must not be the sole arbiter
Of his rights so much less should the education of children, which
is of more consequence to the State than to fathers, be left to the
‘Antelligence and prejudices of their fathers.” “If public author-
i “a 9 taking the place of fathers in assuming this important func-
, acquires their rights in fulfilling their duties, they have so
w the less reason to complain inasmuch as they merely un-
de ergo a change of name, and, under the title of citizens, exercise
i, in common the same authority over their children that they have


1 Rousseau, ‘“Discours sur I’Economie politique,” 308.
2 [bid. “‘Emile,”’ book V. 175.
3 Jbid. “Discours sur |’ Economie politique,” 302.


248 & THE ANCIENT REGIME.


separately exercised under the title of fathers.” In other word: "5
you cease to be a father, but, in exchange, become a school

spector; one is as good as the other and what complaint have a 4
tomake? Such was the case in that perpetual army called Sparta; 4
there, the children, genuine regimental children, equally obeyed i
all properly-formed men. Thus, “ public education, within laws —
prescribed by the government and under magistrates appointed -
by sovereign will, is one of the fundamental maxims of popular
or legitimate government.” Through this the citizen is formed
in advance. “It gives the national form to souls.! Nations, in’
the long run, are what the government: makes them—soldiers,
citizens, men when so disposed, a populace, canaille if it pleases,”
being fashioned by their education. “ Would you obtain an idea’
of public education? Read Plato’s ‘ Republic.’? . . . The best
social institutions are those the best qualified to change man’s |
nature, to destroy his absolute being, to give him a relative being,
and to convert se/f into the common unity, so that each individ-
ual may not regard himself as one by himself, but a part of the
unity and no longer sensitive but through the whole. An infant,
on opening its eyes, must behold the common patrimony and, to”
the day of its death, behold that only. . . . He should be dis-
ciplined so as never to contemplate the individual except in his
relations with the body of the State.” Such was the practice of
Sparta, and the sole aim of the “ great Lycurgus.” “All being
equal through the law, they must be brought up together and in
the same manner.” “The law must regulate the subjects, the
order and the form of their studies.” They must, at the very
least, take part in public exercises, in horse-races, in the games
of strength and of agility instituted “to accustom them to law
equality, fraternity, and competition;” to teach them how “ta
live under the eyes of their-fellow-citizens and to crave publi¢
applause.” Through these games they become democrats from
their early youth, since, the prizes being awarded, not throug]
the arbitrament of masters, but through the cheers of spectators
they accustom themselves to recognizing as sovereign the legiti-
mate sovereignty, consisting of the verdict of the assemble
people. ‘The important interest of the State is, always, to forn
the wills of those by which it lasts, to prepare the vote’ that ar


1 Rousseau, on the ‘Gouvernement de Pologne,” 277, 283, 287.
2 Ibid, “Emile,” book I.


map.iv. HE SPIRIT AND THE DOCTRINE. 249


4 maintain it, to uproot passions in the soul that might be op-
posed to it, to implant passions that will prove favorable to it, to
x firmly within the breasts of its future citizens the sentiments
, id prejudices it will at some time need.!_ If it does not secure
the children it will not possess the adults. Novices in a convent .
must be educated as monks, otherwise, when they grow up, the
cor ivent will no longer exist.

_ Finally, our lay convent has its own religion, a lay religion.
Tf I possess any other it is through its condescension and under
restrictions. It 1 is, by nature, hostile to other associations than
its own ; they are rivals, they annoy it, they absorb the will and
2 Brithe votes of its members. ‘To ensure a full declaration
of the general will it is an important matter not to allow any
pecial society in the State, and that each citizen should: pro-
mounce according to it alone.”? “Whatever breaks up social
unity is worthless,” and it would be better for the State if there
were no Church. Not only is every church suspicious but, if I
im a christian, my belief is regarded unfavorably. According to
his new legislator “ nothing is more opposed to the social spirit
han christianity. ... A society of true christians would no
onger form a society of men.” For, “the christian patrimony is
ot of this world.” It cannot zealously serve the State, being
bound by its conscience to support tyrants. Its law “preaches
only servitude and dependence . . . it is made for a slave,” and
lever will a citizen be made out of aslave. “ Christian Republic,
jae of these two words excludes the other.” Therefore, if the
uture  Ré@public assents to my profession of christianity, it is on
he Be aetctood condition that my doctrine shall be shut up: in
y mind, without even affecting my heart. _If I am a Catholic,
f Bis enty-ave out of twenty-six millions Frenchmen are like
ne |, my condition is worse. For the social pact does not tolerate
in intolerant religion; any sect that condemns other sects is a
ublic enemy; “ whoever presumes to say that cere ts no salva-
ion out of the church, must be driven out of the State.” Should I
e, finally, a free-thinker, a positivist or sceptic, my situation is
tle better. “There is a civil religion,” a catechism, “a profes-
on of faith, of which the sovereign has the right to dictate the


my orelly, “Code de la nature.” “At the age of five all children should be removed from
eit families and brought up in common, at the charge of the State, in a uniform manner.”
‘similar project, perfectly Spartan, was found among the papers of St. Just.
( , “‘Contrat social,” II. 3; IV. 8.


250 THE ANCIENT REGIME.


articles, not exactly as religious dogmas but as sentiments of so-
cial import without which we cannot be a good citizen or a loyal
subject.” These articles embrace “the existence of a powerful,
intelligent, beneficent, foreseeing and provident divinity, the fu-
ture life, the happiness of the good, the punishment of the
wicked, the sacredness of the social contract and of the laws.!
Without forcing any one to believe in this creed, whoever does —
not believe in it must be expelled from the State; it is necessary
to banish such persons not on account of impiety, but as un-—
sociable beings, incapable of sincerely loving law and justice and,

if need be, of giving up life for duty.” Take heed that this pro-—
fession of faith be not a vain one, for a new inquisition is to test

its sincerity. ‘Should any person, after having publicly assented

to these dogmas, act as an unbeliever let him be punished with
death. He has committed the greatest of crimes : he has lied be-
fore the law.” Truly, as I said above, we belong to a convent.


V.


These articles are all necessary sequels of the social .contract.
The moment I enter the corporation I abandon my own personal-
ity; I abandon, by this step, my possessions, my children, my
church, and my opinions. I cease to be proprietor, father, chris-
tian and philosopher. The State is my substitute in all these
functions. In place of my will, there is henceforth the public
will, that is to say, in theory, the mutable absolutism of a majority
counted by heads, while in fact, it is the rigid absolutism of
the assembly, the faction, the individual who is custodian of
the public authority. On this principle an outburst of boundless |
infatuation takes place. ‘The very first year Grégoire states in the;
tribune of the Constituent Assembly “ we might change religion if ~
we pleased, but we have no such desire.” A little later the desire
comes, and it is to be carried out; that of Holbach is proposed, the
that of Rousseau, and they dare go much farther: In the name |
of Reason, of which the State alone is the representative and in-7
terpreter, they undertake to unmake and make over, conformably to
reason and to reason alone, all customs, festivals, ceremonies, 2
costumes, the era, the calendar, weights and measures, the names |


1 Cf. Mercier, ‘L’an 2240,” I. ch. 17 and 18. From 1770 on, he traces the programms of |
a system of w orship similar to that of the Theo-philanthropists, the chapter being entitled |
‘Pas si éloigné qu’on le pense.”


-


THE SPIRIT AND THE DOCTRINE. 251


f the seasons, months, weeks and days, of places and monu-
nents , family and baptismal names, complimentary titles, the
( Sof discourse, the mode of salutation, of greeting, of speaking
& 3 bot writing, in sucha fashion, that he Frenchman, as formerly
with the puritan or the quaker, remodelled even in his inward
substance, exposes, through the minutest details of his conduct .
-and exterior, the dominance of the all-powerful principle which
refashions his being and the inflexible logic which controls
his thoughts. This constitutes the final result and complete tri-
umph of the classic spirit. Installed in narrow brains, incapable
of “entertaining two related ideas, it is to become a cold or furious
i. od yeoman maddened in the destruction of a past it curses, and
a the establishment of the millenium it pursues, ‘and all in
‘the name of an imaginary contract, at once anarchical and des-
P pot, which unfetters insurrection and justifies dictation; all
to end in a social antagonism, resembling now a bacchanalian
| or org of demons, and now a Spartan conventual group; all with

1 view to substitute for the existing man, enduring and slowly
formed by history, an improvised automaton that is to fall away
throwgh its own debility when the external and mechanical forcé
that keeps it up will no longer sustain it.


et


BOOK FOURTH.


The Propagation of the Doctrine,


CHAPTER I.


SUCCESS OF THIS PHILOSOPHY IN FRANCE.—Failure of the same philoso-
phy in England.—I. Causes of this difference.—The art of writing in —
France.—Its superiority at this epoch.—It serves as the vehicle of new ~
ideas.—Books are written for people of the world.—The philosophers are
people of the world and consequently writers.—This accounts for philosophy
descending to the drawing-room.—II. Owing to this method it becomes —
popular.—III. Owing to style it becomes pleasing.—Two stimulants peculiar :
to the 18th century, coarse humor and irony.—IV. The art and processes
of the masters. —Montesquiet, —Voltaire.—Diderot.—Rousseau.—‘‘ The
Marriage of Figaro.”


ANALOGOUS theories have many times traversed the imagina-
tions of men and analogous theories will yet traverse them more
than once again. In all ages and in all countries, any con-
siderable change effected in the conception of human nature
suffices to disclose, by way of counterstroke, utopias and dis-
coveries springing up on the territories of politics and religion. |
But this does not suffice for the propagation of the new doctrine
nor, above all, for speculation to become application. Although
born in Fagland the philosophy of the eighteenth century could
not develop itself in England; the fever for demolition and
reconstruction remained superficial there and momentary. De-
ism, atheism, materialism, scepticism, ideology, the theory of the
return to nature, the proclamation of the rights of man, all the
temerities of Bolingbroke, Collins, Toland, Tindal and Mande-
ville, the bold ideas of Hume, Hartley, James Mill and Bentham,
all the revolutionary doctrines, were so many conservatory plants


MAP. 1. THE PROPAGATION OF THE DOCTRINE. 253
_ produced, here and there, in the isolated studies of a few thinkers:
jn the open air they proved abortive, after blooming for a little
time under the too vigorous competition with the old vegetation
4 which the soil belonged. On the contrary, in France, the
zed imported from England takes root and spreads with extra-
4 orc inary vigor. After the Regency it is in full bloom.” Like any
peers favored by soil and climate, it invades all soils, appro-
ating light and atmosphere to itself, scarcely allowing in its
‘shadow a few abortions of an inimical species, the survival
of an antique flora like Rollin, or a specimen of an eccentric
flora like Saint-Martin. Large trees and dense thickets, masses
_ of brushwood and low plants,—Voltaire, Montesquieu, Rousseau,
Diderot, d’Alembert and Buffon,—Duclos, Mably, Condillac, Tur-
"got, Beaumarchais, Bernardin de Saint-Pierre, Barthélemy and
Thomas, the crowd of journalists, compilers and conversation-
ists, the ete of the philosophical, scientific and literary mul-
‘titude,—absorb the Academy, the stage, the drawing- room and
“conversation. Every tall form of the century is one of its off-
s hoots, and among these are some of the loftiest produced by the
human species. This is owing to the seed having fallen on suit-
able ground, that is to say, on the patrimony of the classic spirit.
In this land of the raison raisonnante it no longer encounters the
“rivals that*impeded its growth on the other side of the Channel -
and it not only immediately acquires vigor of sap but, again, the
4 propagating organ which it required.


Is


_ This organ is the “art of expression, eloquence applied to the
"gravest subjects, the talent for making things clear.”* “The great
' writers of this nation,” says their great adversary, “express them-
Peles better than those of any other nation. Their books give
_ but little information to true savants,” but “through the art of ex-
pression they influence men” and “the mass of men, constantly
ai from the sanctuary of the sciences by the dey style and


2 1 “Who, born within the last forty years, ever reads a word of Collins, and Toland, and
‘indal, or of that whole race who called themselves freethinkers?”’ (Burke, ‘‘ Reflexions on
the French Revolution,” 1790).

- "? The “«(Edipe,” by Voltaire, belongs to the year 1718, and his “Lettres sur les Anglais,”
_ to the year 1728. The-“‘Lettres Persanes,” by Montesquieu, published in 1721, contain the
germs of all the leading ideas of the century.
iT /4 Joseph de Maistre, ‘‘CEuvres inédites,” pp. 8, 11.


22


254 THE ANCIENT REGIME,


bad taste of (other) scientific writers, cannot resist the seduction:
of the French style and method.” ‘Thus the classic spirit tha
furnishes the ideas likewise furnishes the means of convey in}
them, the theories of the eighteenth century being like t 8
seeds provided with wings which float and distribute themselves
on all soils. There is no book of that day not written for p +
ple of the world, and even for women of the world. In Fonte ‘
nelle’s dialogues on the Plurality of Worlds the principal per: on-
age is a marchioness. Voltaire composes his “ Métaphysique”
and his “Essai sur les Mceurs” for Madame du Chatelet, 2 nd |
Rousseau his “Emile” for Madame d’Epinay. Condillac y ote |

the “Traité des Sensations” from suggestions of Mademoiselle
Ferrand, and he sets forth instructions to young ladies how to
read his “ Logique.” Baudeau dedicates and explains to a lady
his “Tableau Economique.” Diderot’s most profound work is a
conversation between Mademoiselle de I’Espinasse and d’Alem- |
bert and Bordeu.!_ Montesquieu had placed an invocation to the
muses in the middle of the “Esprit des Lois.” Almost every
work is a product of the drawing-room, and of one obtaining the
first fruits of the work before being presented to the public. In
this respect the habit is so strong as to last up to the end of |
1789; the harangues about to be made in the National Assembly |
are passages of dravura previously rehearsed before ladies at an
evening entertainment. The American Ambassador, a practical —
man, explains to Washington with sober irony the fine academic
and literary parade preceding the political tournament in public.” 4
“The speeches are made beforehand in a small society of young —
men and women, and generally the fair friend of the speaker —
is one, or else the fair whom he means to make his friend, and
the society very politely give their approbation, unless the lady
who gives the tone to that circle chances to reprehend something
which is of course altered if not amended.” It is not surprising,
‘with customs of this kind, that professional philosophers should |
become men of society. At no time nor in any place have they
been so to the same extent, nor so habitually. The great delight |
of a man of genius or of learning here, says an English traveller,
is to reign over a brilliant assembly of people of fashion.®


=
? His letters on the Blind and on the Deaf and Dumb are addressed in whole or in part to
women.
2 Works of Sosecar Morris, II. 89. (Letter of January 24, 1790).
* John Andrews in “A comparative view,” etc. (1785). Arthur Young, I. 123. “I should
pity the man who expected, without other advantages of a very different nature, to be well |


‘
«


MAP.1. THE PROPAGATION OF THE DOCTRINE. 255


ilst in England they bury themselves morosely in their books,
living amongst themselves and appearing in society only on con.
dition of “doing some political drudgery,” that of journalist or
pamphleteer in the service of a party, in France they dine out
<i ery evening and constitute the ornaments and amusement of
h > drawing-rooms to which they resort to converse. There is
n not a house in which dinners are given that has not its titular
LP hi ilosopher, and, later on, its economist and man of science.
In the various memoirs, te in the collections of correspondence,
mS track them from one drawing-room to another, from one
iateau to another, Voltaire to Cirey at Madame du Chatelet’s,
a Wn d then home, at Ferney where he has a theatre and entertains
all Europe; Rousseau to Madame d’Epinay’s, and M. de Lux-
embourg’s; the Abbé Barthélemy to the Duchesse de Choiseul’s ;
‘Thomas, Marmontel and Gibbon to Madame Necker’s; the
encyclopedists to d’Holbach’s ample dinners, to the plain and
discreet table of Madame Geoffrin, and to the little drawing-
‘oom of Mademoiselle de L’ Espinasse, all belonging to the great
central state drawing-room, that is to say, to the French Acad-
emy, where each newly-elected member appears to parade his
st le and obtain from a polished body his commission of master
in the art of discourse. Such a public imposes on an author the
obligation of being more a writer than a philosopher. The
thinker is expected to concern himself with his sentences as
~ much as with his ideas. He is not allowed to be a mere scholar
in his closet, a simple erudite, diving into folios in German
fashion, a metaphysician absorbed with his own meditations,
he ag an audience of pupils who take notes, and, as readers,
men devoted to study and willing to give themselves trouble,
a Kant, who forms for himself a special language, who waits for
Bei to comprehend him and who leaves the room in which
labors only for the lecture-room in which he delivers his

es. Here, on the contrary, in the matter of expression, all


. ‘received in a brilliant circle in London, because he was a fellow of the Royal Society. But
this would not be the case with a member of the Academy of Sciences at Paris, he is sure of
| good Teception everywhere.”

“T met in Paris the d’Alemberts, the Marmontels, the Baillys at the houses of duchesses,
hich was an immense advantage to all concerned. . When a man with us devotes himself
_ to writing books he is considered as renouncing the eciees equally of those who govern as of

hose who laugh. . . . Taking literary vanity into account the lives of your d’Alemberts and
au illys are as Blekeaat as those of your seigniors.” (Stendhal, “Rome, Naples et Florence,”
775 in a narrative by Col. Forsyth).


er


256 THE ANCIENT REGIME, .


~ are experts and even professional. The mathematician d’A
bert publishes small treatises on elocution; Buffon, the natur ali
pronounces a discourse on Style; the feast Montesquieu c <:
poses an essay on Taste; the psychologist Condillac write
volume on the art of writing. In this consists their grea '
glory; philosophy owes its entry into society to them.
withdrew it from the closet, the clique and the school, to it
troduce it into company and into conversation.


II.


“ Madame la Maréchale,” says one of Diderot’s personage
“T must consider things from a somewhat higher point |
view.” —“ As high as you please so long. as I understand you,”-
“If you do not understand me it will be my fault.”—“ You a
very polite, but you must know that I have studied nothir
but my prayer-book.” ‘That makes no difference; the pre
woman, ably led on, begins to philosophize witout: kao
arriving without effort at the distinction between good and evi
comprehending and deciding on the highest doctrines of mo
ality and religion. Such is the art of the eighteenth centu ry
and the art of writing. People are addressed who are perfecth
familiar with life, but who are commonly ignorant of orthography,
who are curious in all directions, but illy prepared for any; the”
object is to bring truth down to their level. Scientific or too
abstract terms are inadmissible; they tolerate only those used
ordinary conversation. And this is no obstacle ; it is easier t
talk philosophy in this language than to use it in discussing pre=
cedences and mantua-making. For, in every abstract questic ¥
there is some leading and simple conception on which the rest
depends, those of unity, proportion, mass and motion in mathe
matics; those of organ, function and being in physiology, those
of mhagalion. pain, pleasure and desire in psychology; those of
utility, contract and law in politics and morality ; those of capital
production, value, exchange in political economy and the same
in the other sciences, all of these being conceptions derived fro
passing experience, from which it follows that, in appealing t
common experience by means of a few familiar circumstance:
such as short stories, anecdotes, agreeable, tales, and the lk


1 “¥ntretien d’un philosophe avec la Maréchale ——.” ; s .


AP.1. THE PROPAGATION OF THE DOCTRINE. 257


these conceptions are fashioned anew and rendered precise.
This being accomplished, almost everything is accomplished ; for
nothing then remains but to lead the listener along step by step,
light by flight, to the remotest consequences. “Will Madame
a Maréchale have the kindness to recall my definition ?””—“ I re-
member: it well—do you call that a definition ? ”’—* Yes:”——“ That,
, is philosophy ! ”—“ Admirable ! ”—“ And I have been philo-
sophical ? —‘ As you read prose, without being aware of it.”
The rest is simply a matter of reasoning, that is to say, of leading
on, of putting questions in the right order, and of analysis.
With the conception thus renewed and rectified the truth nearest
hand is brought out, then, out of this, a second truth related
© the first one, and so on to the end, no other obligation being
s gta in this method but that of carefully advancing step by
step, and of omitting no intermediary step.
_ With this method one is able to explain all, to make everything
inderstood, even by women, and even by women of society.
n the eighteenth century it forms the substance of all talents,
e warp of all masterpieces, the lucidity, popularity and authority
f philosophy. The “ Eloges” of Fontenelle, the “ Philosophe
gnorant et le principe d’action” by Voltaire, the “ Lettre 4 M.
e Beaumont,” and the “ Vicaire Savoyard” by Rousseau, the
‘Traité de homme” and the “ Epoques de la Nature” by Buffon,
ne “ Dialogues sur les blés” by Galiani, the “-Considérations ”
y d'Alembert, on mathematics, the “ Langue des Calculs” and
e “ Logique” by Condillac, and, a little later, the “ Exposition
u systeme du Monde” by Laplace and the “ Discours généraux ”
y Bichat and Cuvier; all are based on this method.’ Finally,
Mis is the method which Condillac erects into a theory under the
Mame of ideology, soon acquiring the ascendency of a dogma,
nd which then seems to sum up all methods. At the very
east it sums up the process by which the philosophers of the
century obtained their audience, propagated their doctrine and
achieved their success.


. ae III.
‘ _ Thanks to this method one can be understood; but, to be read,
‘Something more is necessary. I compare the eighteenth century


ae 7 : :
A |The same process is observable in our day in the ‘‘Sophismes économiques” of Bastiat,
the “‘Eloges historiques” of Flourens, and in “Le Progrés,” by Edmond About.

Se a2"


7.
a i?


258 THE ANCIENT REGIME. | BOOK IV.


to a company of people around a table; it is not sufficient that
the food before them be well prepared, well served, within reach
and easy to digest, but it is important that it should be some
choice dish or, better still; some dainty. The intellect is epicu- |
rean; let us supply it with savory, delicate viands adapted toi its
taste; it will eat so much the more owing to its appetite being
sharpened by sensuality. ‘Two special condiments enter into the
cuisine of this century and, according to the hand that makes
use of them, they furnish all literary dishes with a coarse or
delicate seasoning. In an epicurean society, to which a return
to nature and the rights of instinct are preached, voluptuous
images and ideas present themselves involuntarily; this is the
appetizing, exciting spice-box. Each guest at the table uses or
abuses it; many empty its entire contents on their plate. And I
do not allude merely to the literature read in secret, to the
extraordinary books Madame d’Audlan, governess to the French
royal children, peruses, and which stray off into the hands of the
daughters of Louis XV.,! nor to other books, still more extraor-
dinary,” in which philosophical arguments appear as an interlude
between filth and the illustrations, and which are kept by the
ladies of the court on their toilet-tables, under the title of
“ Heures de Paris.” I refer here to the great men, to the masters
‘of the public intellect. With the exception of Buffon, all put”
pimento into their sauces, that is to say, loose talk or coarseness ©
of expression. We find this even in the “ Esprit des Lois;” there

is an enormous amount of it, open and covered up, in the “ Lettres
Persanes.” Diderot, in his two great novels, puts it in by hand-|
fuls, as if during an orgy. ‘The teeth crunch on it like so many!
grains of pepper, on every page of Voltaire. We find it, not
only piquant, but strong and of burning intensity, in the —
“Nouvelle Héloise,” scores of times in “ Emile,” andy in the
“Confessions,” from one end to the other. It was the taste o
the day. M. de Malesherbes, so upright and so grave, committed
“a Pucelle” to memory and recited it. We have from the pen
of Saint-Just, the gloomiest of the “Mountain,” a poem as_
lascivious as that of Voltaire, while Madame Roland, the noblest |
of the Girondins, has left us confessions as venturesome and
specific as those of Rousseau. a


1 The ‘‘ Portier de Chartres.”
2 “Thérese Philosophe.” There is a complete literature of this species.
8 See the edition of M. Dauban in which the suppressed passages are restored.


on A ats THE PROPAGATION OF THE DOCTRINE. 259


re) n the other hand there is a second box, that containing the
d Gallic salt, that is to say, humor and raillery. Its mouth is
ide open in the hands of a philosophy proclaiming the sov-
ae of reason. Whatever is contrary to reason is to it ab-
urd and therefore open to ridicule. ‘The moment the solemn
he ereditary mask covering up an abuse is brusquely and adroitly
corn aside, we feel a curious spasm, the corners of our mouth
tretching apart and our breast heaving violently, as if a kind of
su dden relief, an unexpected deliverance, experiencing a sense of
w recovered superiority, of our revenge being gratified and of
act of justice having been performed. But it depends on the
node in which the mask is struck off whether the laugh shall be
‘ ici light or loud, suppressed or unbridled, now amiable and
heerful, or now bitter and sardonic. Humor (/ Jlaisanterie)
somports with all aspects, from buffoonery to indignation ; no liter-
y seasoning affords such a variety, or so many mixtures, nor one
so well enters into combination with that above-mentioned.
> two together, from the middle ages down, form the principal
ngredients employed by the French cazszve in the composition of
ts most agreeable dainties,—fables, tales, witticisms, jovial songs
md waggeries, the eternal heritage of a good-humored, mocking
ace, preserved by La Fontaine athwart the pomp and sobriety
yf the seventeenth century and, in the eighteenth, reappearing
sverywhere at the philosophic banquet. Its charm is great to
the brilliant company at this table, so amply provided, whose
incipal occupation is pleasure and amusement. It is all the
reater because, on this occasion, the passing disposition is in har-
mc with hereditary instinct, and because the taste of the epoch
$ fortified by the national taste. Add to all this the exquisite art
f the cooks, their talent in commingling, 1 in apportioning and in
mcealing the condiments, in Varying and arranging the dishes,
ie certainty of their hand, the finesse of their palate, their ex-
rience in processes, in the traditions and practices which, al-
eac ee a hundred years, form of French prose the most deli-
cat peeetent of the intellect. It is not strange to find them
ed in regulating human speech, in extracting from it its quin-
ssence and in distilling its full delight.


IV.


In this respect four among them are superior, Montesquieu,
Voltaire, Diderot and’ Rousseau. It seems sufficient to mention


260 THE ANCIENT REGIME.


their names. Modern Europe has no greater writers. And i
their talent must be closely examined to sek sari comprehen
their power. “a

In tone and style Montesquieu is the first. No writer Pa: or
master of himself, more outwardly calm, more sure of his mean
ing. His voice is never boisterous; he expresses the most pow:
erful thoughts with moderation. There is no gesticulation; « ox
clamations, the abandonment of impulse, all that is irreconcilable
with decorum is repugnant to his tact, his reserve, his dignit ty. 4
He seems to be always addressing a select circle of people wit
acute minds, and in such a way as to render them at every mo- |
ment conscious of their acuteness. No flattery could be more”
delicate ; we feel grateful to him for making us satisfied with o1
intelligence. We must possess some intelligence to be oa
read him, for he deliberately curtails developments and omits.
sitions; we are required to supply these and to comprehend
adden meanings. "He is rigorously systematic but the system i
concealed, his concise completed sentences succeeding eac
other separately, like so many precious coffers or caskets, non
simple and plain in aspect, now superbly chased and decora
but always full. Open them and each contains a treasure; het ere .
is placed in narrow compass a rich store of reflections, of é
tions, of discoveries, our enjoyment being the more iol 2 |
because we can easily retain all this fora moment in the palm ¢ f
our hand. “That which usually forms a grand conception,” he’
himself says, “is a thought so expressed as to reveal a number
of other thoughts, and>suddenly disclosing what we could not
anticipate without patient study.” This, indeed, is his manner;
he thinks with summaries; he concentrates the-essence of des-
potism in a chapter of three lines. The summary itself ofte
bears the air of an enigma, of which the charm is twofold; we
have the pleasure of comprehension accompanying the satis
faction of divining. In all subjects he maintains this suprem
discretion, this art of indicating without enforcing, these reti
cences, the smile that never becomes a laugh. “In my defenc
of the ‘Esprit des Lois,’” he says, “that which gratifies me is n¢
to see venerable theologians crushed to the ground but to st
them glide down gently.” He excels in tranquil irony, in pé
ished disdain,! in disguised sarcasm. His Persians judge Fram


1 “¥ sprit des Lois,” ch. xv. book V. (Reasons in favor of slavery).- The ‘Defence of |
Esprit des Lois,” I. Reply to the second objection. II. Reply to the fourth objection.


iar.) THE PROPAGATION OF THE DOCTRINE. 261


s Persians, and we smile at their errors; unfortunately the laugh
s not against them but against ourselves, for their error is found
9 be a verity! This or that letter, in a sober vein, seems a
somedy at their expense without reflecting upon us, full of Ma-
] hometan prejudices and of oriental infatuation ;? reflect a mo-
ent, and our infatuation, in this relation, appears no less. Blows
) of extraordinary force and reach are given in passing, as if
oughtlessly, against existing institutions, against the transformed
‘e: Catholicism which “in the present state of Europe, cannot last
hundred years,” against the degenerate monarchy which
causes useful citizens to starve to fatten parasite courtiers.
The entire new philosophy blooms out in his hands with an air
of innocence, in a pastoral romance, in a simple prayer, in an art-
ess letter. None of the gifts which serve to arrest and fix the
ittention are wanting in this style, neither grandeur of imagina-
ion nor profound sentiment, vivid characterization, delicate
radations, vigorous precision, a sportive grace, unlooked-for bur-
esque, nor variety of representation. But, amidst so many in-
enious devices, apologues, tales, portraits and dialogues, in ear-
yest as well as when masquerading, his deportment throughout is
rreproachable and his tone is perfect. If, as an author, he de-
relops a paradox it is with almost English gravity. If he fully
xP oses indecency it is with decent terms. In the full tide of
buffoonery, as well as in the full blast of license, he is ever the
well-bred man, born and brought up in the aristocratic circle in
which full liberty is allowed but where good-breeding is supreme,
here every idea is permitted but where words are weighed,
ghere one has the privilege of saying what he pleases but on
‘ondition that he never forgets himself.

‘A circle of this kind is a small one, comprising only a select
; to be understood by the multitude requires another tone of
Bee. “Philosophy demands a writer whose ‘principal occupa-
ion is a diffusion of it, who is unable to keep it to himself, who
Dours it out like a gushing fountain, who offers it to everybody,
ail -and in every form, in broad streams and in small drops,


— 24 (on Louis XIV.)
-*Tetter 18 (on the purity and impurity of things). Letter 39 (proofs of the mission of
net).
s 75 and 118.
98 (on the modern sciences), 46 (on a true system of worship), 1x and 14 (on the


262 THE ANCIENT REGIME.


without exhaustion or weariness, through every crevice and b:
every channel, in prose, in verse, in imposing and in triflin
poems, in the drama, in history, in novels, in. pamphlets,
pleadings, in treatises, in essays, in dictionaries, in correspondence
openly and in secret, in order that it may penetrate to all ¢ depth
and in every soil, and this is Voltaire. “I have accomplished
more in my day,” he says somewhere, “than either Luther or Ca

vin,” in which he is mistaken. The truth is, however, he has —
something of their spirit. Like them he is desirous of changing -
the prevailing religion, he takes the attitude of the founder of? a
sect, he recruits and binds together proselytes, he writes lette a
of exhortation, of direction and of predication, he puts watel
words in circulation, he furnishes “the brethren” with a device
his passion reocibites the zeal of an apostle or of a prophe
Such a spirit is incapable of reserve; it is militant and fern .
nature; it apostrophizes, reviles and improvises; it writes ie
the dictation of impressions; it allows itself every species of ut

terance and, if need be, the coarsest. It thinks by explosions; it
emotions are sudden starts, and its images so many sparks; it lets —
the rein go entirely; it gives itself up*to the reader and hence it~
takes possession of him. Resistance is impossible; the contagion |
is too overpowering. A creature of air and flame, the most ex-
citable that ever lived, composed of more ethereal and more
throbbing atoms than those of other men; none is there whose
mental machinery is more delicate, nor whose equilibrium is at
the same time more shifting and more exact. He may be com-
pared to those accurate scales that are affected by a breath but
alongside of which every other measuring apparatus is incorrect
and clumsy. But, in this delicate balance only the lightest
weights, the finest specimen must be placed; on this conditio
only it rigorously weighs all substances ; such is Voltaire, involun
tarily, through the demands of his intellect, and in his own be
half as much as in that of his readers. An entire philosophy
ten,volumes of theology, an abstract science, a special library, a
important branch of erudition, of human experience and inven
tion, is thus reduced in-his hands to a phrase or to a stanza
Irom the enormous mass of riven or compact scoria he extract:
whatever is essential, a grain of gold or of copper as a specimel
of the rest, presenting this to us in its most convenient and mo:
manageable form, in a simile, in a metaphor, in an epigram tha


- HL p.1. THE PROPAGATION OF THE DOCTRINE. 263


pee a proverb. In this no ancient or modern writer ap-
roaches him; in simplification and in popularization he has not
Be crsal-i in she world. Without departing from the usual con-
rsational tone, and as if in sport, he puts into little portable
a ases the greatest discoveries and hypotheses of the human
mind, the theories of Descartes, Malebranche, Leibnitz, Locke
and Newton, the diverse religions of antiquity and of modern
times, every known system of physics, physiology, geology, mo-
tality, natural law, and political economy,! in short, all the gen-
eralized conceptions in every order of knowledge to which hu-
manity had attained in the eighteenth century. His tendency in
this direction is so strong as to carry him too far; he belittles
reat things by rendering them accessible. Religion, legend, an-
cient popular poesy, the spontaneous creations of instinct, the
sague visions of primitive times are not thus to be converted into
small current coin; they are not subjects of amusing and lively
conversation. A piquant witticism is not an expression of all
this, but simply a travesty. But how charming to Frenchmen,
ind to people of the world! And what reader can abstain from
2: book containing all human knowledge summed up in piquant
 wWitticisms? For it is really a summary of human knowledge, no
m important idea, as far as I can see, being wanting to a man whose
reviary consisted of the “ Dialogues,” the “ Dictionary,” and the
Novels.” Read them over and over five or six times and we
en form some idea of their vast contents. Not only do
ews of the world and of man abound in them, but again they
rss with positive and even technical details, thousands of little
scattered throughout, multiplied and precise details on
stronomy, physics, geography, physiology, statistics, and on the
ustory of all nations, the innumerable and personal experiences
Pa man who has himself read the texts, handled the instruments,
: ieited the countries, taken part in the industries, and associated
vitl the persons, and who, in the precision of his marvellous
memory, in the liveliness of his ever-blazing imagination, revives
ses, as with the eye itself, everything that he states and as he
‘States it. It is a unique talent, the rarest in a classic era, the

10st precious of all, since it consists in the display of actual be-


ef Micromégas,” “L’homme aux quarantes écus,” “‘ Dialogues entre A, B, C,”’ “Dict,
ilosophique,” Jassim. In verse, ‘Les » nine tl ‘‘La loi naturelle,” ‘‘Le pour et le


tre,” ‘‘ Discours sur l’homme,”’ etc.


264 THE ANCIENT REGIME. . rf


ings, not through the gray veil of abstractions, but‘in them
as they are in nature and in history, with their visible color
forms, with their accessories and surroundings in time and 5)
a peasant at his cart, a quaker in his meeting-house, a Ger
baron in his castle, Dutchmen, Englishmen, Spaniards, Italiar
Frenchmen, in their homes,' a great lady, a designing woma
provincials, soldiers, courtesans,’ and the rest of the human 1
ley, on every step of the social ladder, each an abridge nena ¢
his kind and in the passing light of a sudden flash.

For, the most striking feature of this style is the prodig iC
rapidity, the dazzling and bewildering stream of novelties, i id
images, events, landscapes, narratives, dialogues, brief -
pictures, following each other rapidly as if in a agian
withdrawn almost as soon as presented by the impatient magic
who, in the twinkling of an eye, girdles the world and, conste it
accumulating one on top of the other, history, fable, tr .
and fancy, the present time and times past, frames in his wor
now, with a parade as absurd as that of a country fair, is 101
with a fairy scene more magnificent than all those of th
To amuse and be amused, “to diffuse his spirit in every ima sei
ble mode, like a glowing furnace into which all substances ai
thrown by turns to evolve every species of flame, corrusce
and odor,” is his first instinct. “ Life,” he says again, “is an
infant to be rocked until it goes to sleep.” Never was mortal
more excited and more exciting, more incapable of silence anc
more hostile to eznwui,? better endowed for Brg evi:
dently destined to become the king of a sociable century in which
with six pretty stories, thirty witticisms and some confidenc¢
in himself, a man could obtain a social passport and the certaint
of being everywhere welcome. Never was there a writer posses:
ing to so high a degree and in such abundance every qualificatia
of the conversationist, the art of animating and of enliveni


1“Traité de métaphysique,” chap. i. p. x. (on the peasantry)» ‘Lettres sur les Ang ai
passim. “Candide,” passim. ‘La Princesse de Babylone,” ch. vii viii. ix. x. and xi.

2 “Dict. Phil.” articles ‘‘ Maladie,” (Replies to the princess). ‘‘Candide,” at Madame
Parolignac. The sailor in the wreck. Narrative of Paquette. The “ Ingénu,” the
chapters. a

8 “Candide,” the last chapter. When there was no dispute going on, it was so we:
some that the old woman one day boldly said to him: ‘I should like to know which is w
to be ravished a hundred times by negro pirates, to have one’s rump gashed, or be swil c
by the Bulgarians, to be scourged or hung in an auto-da-fé, to be cut to pieces, to row |
galleys, to suffer any misery through which we have pee or sit be and do no
‘That is a great question,” said Candide.


7."
ha


—
i


API. THE caveats TION OF THE DOCTRINE. © 265


iscourse, the talent for giving pleasure to people of society.
feetly refined when he chose to be, confining himself without
convenience to strict decorum, of finished politeness, of ex:
Site gallantry, deferential without being servile, fond without be-
8 pe ‘and always at his ease, it suffices that he should be
> the public, to fall naturally into the proper tone, the discreet
s, the winning half-smile of the well-bred man who, introduc-
b his readers into his mind, does them the honors of the place.
re you on familiar terms with him, and of the small private circle
1 which he freely unbends himself, with closed doors? You never
re of laughing. With a sure hand and without seeming to touch
, he abruptly tears aside the veil hiding a wrong, a prejudice, a
lly, in short, any human idolatry. ‘The real figure, whether
‘formed, odious or spiritless, suddenly appears in this instanta-
flash; we shrug our shoulders. This is the risibility of an
>, triumphant reason. We have another in that of the gay
r mperament, of the droll improvisator, of the man keeping
yuthful, a child, a boy even to the day of his death, and who
: SE snbols on his own tombstone.” He is fond of caricature,
sing the features of faces, bringing grotesques on the
ge,” walking them about in all lights like marionettes, never
eary of taking them up and of making them dance in new
stumes ; in the very midst of his philosophy, of his propagan-
sm and polemics, he sets up his portable theatre in full blast,
: uibiting oddities, the scholar, the monk, the inquisitor, Mau-
ttuis, Pompignan, Nonotte, Fréron, King David, and countless _
hers who appear before us, capering and gesticulating in their
tlequin attire. When a farcical talent is thus added to the
juirements of truth humor becomes all-powerful; for it grati-
s the profound and universal instincts of human nature, a
schievous curiosity, the spirit of disparagement, the aversion
constraint, that groundwork of ill-nature which is established
ir us by conventionality, etiquette and the social obligation
aring the burdensome cloak of respect and of decency ;
oments occur in life when the wisest is not sorry to throw this


For example, i in ‘din lines addressed to the Princess Ulrique in the preface to ‘‘ Alzire,”’

icated to Madame du Chatelet.

= **Souvent un peu de verité,” etc.

= scholar in the dialogue of “Les Mais,” (Jenny). The canonization of Saint Cucufin.

; € to brother Pediculoso. The diatribe of Doctor Akakia. Conversation of the
ror of China with brother Rigolo, etc.


a 23


266 THE ANCIENT REGIME.


half aside and even cast it off entirely. On each page, no
with the bold stroke of a hardy naturalist, now with the qui¢
turn of a mischievous monkey, Voltaire lets the solemn or seric
drapery fall, disclosing man, the poor biped, and in
attitudes!1_ Swift alone dared to present similar pictures
What physiological crudities relating to the origin and end of our
most exalted sentiments! What disproportion between such
feeble reason and such powerful instincts! What recesses in :
wardrobes of politics and religion concealing their foul linen!
We laugh at all this so as not to weep, and yet behind thi
laughter there are tears; he ends sneeringly, subsiding into a tone
of profound sadness, of mournful pity. In this degree, and with
such subjects, it is only an effect of habit, or as an Maar” a
mania of inspiration, a fixed condition of the nervous mz se sry
rushing headlong over everything, without a break and in | |
speed. Gayety, let it not be forgotten, is still a mainsprin
of action, the last that keeps man erect in France, the best
maintaining the tone of his spirit, his strength and his powell
resistance, the most intact in an age when men, and women”
believed it incumbent on them to die people of good society,
with a smile and a jest on their lips.” 3 ™
When the talent of a writer thus accords with public in
clinations it is a matter of little import whether he deviates 0}
fails since he is following the universal tendency. He may wan
der off or besmirch himself in vain for his audience is only th
more pleased, his defects serving him as advantageously as hi
good qualities. After the first generation of healthy minds t
second one comes on, the intellectual balance here being eque
inexact. “ Diderot,” says Voltaire, “is too hot an oven, ever}
thing that is baked in it getting burnt.” Or rather, he is an eru
tive volcano which, for forty years, discharges ideas of every ord
and species, poring and fused together, precious metals, coar
scorie and fetid mud; the steady stream overflows at will acco:
ing to the roughness of the ground, but always displaying t
ruddy light and acrid fumes of glowing lava. He is not mas
of his ideas, but his ideas master him; he is under submission
them ; he has not that firm foundation of common practical se


1 “Dict. Philosophique,” the article “Ignorance.” ‘Les Oreilles du Comte de Che
field,”* ‘*L’homme au quarante écus,” chap. vii. and xi. ~
* Bachaumont, III. 194. (The death of the Comte de Maugiron).


p.%. THE PROPAGATION OF THE DOCTRINE. 267


hich controls their impetuosity and ravages, that inner dyke of
cial caution which, with Montesquieu and Voltaire, bars the way
‘outbursts. Everything with him rushes out of the surcharged
, never picking its way, through the first fissure or crevice
finds, according to his haphazard reading, a letter, a conver-
ti on, an improvisation, and not in frequent small jets as with
‘oltaire, but in broad currents tumbling blindly down the most
ecipitous declivities of the century. Not only does he descend
s to the very depths of anti-religious and anti-social doctrines,
it logical-and paradoxical rigidity, more impetuously and more
bstt pe ecrously than d’Holbach himself; but again he falls into and
s himself in the slime of the age, consisting of obscenity, and
ihe beaten track of declamation. In his leading novels he
wells a long time on salacious equivocation, or on a scene of
vdness. -Crudity with him is not extenuated by malice or
sed over by elegance. He is neither refined nor pungent; he
quite incapable, like the younger Crébillon, of depicting the
; pegrace of ability. He is a new-comer, a parvenue in stand-
Rescicty ; you see in him a plebeian, a powerful reasoner, an
defatigable workman and great artist, introduced, through the
istoms of the day, at a supper of fashionable livers. He en-
Osses the conversation, directs the orgy, and in the contagion,
po ona wager, says more filthy things, more “ gueu/ées,” than
| the guests put together! In like manner, in his dramas, in
3 “Essays on Claudius and Nero,” in his “ Commentary on
neca,” in his additions to the “ Philosophical History,” of Ray-
1, he forces the tone of things. ‘This tone, which then prevails
: irtue of the classic spirit and of the new fashion, is that of
timental rhetoric.* Diderot carries it to extremes in the exag-
ration of tears or of rage, in exclamations, in apostrophes, in
emess of feeling, in violences, in indignations, in enthusi-
ns, in full-orchestra tirades, in which the fire of his brain finds
ployment and an outlet.

On 1 the other hand, among so many superior writers, he is the


Py
“The novels of the younger Crébillon were in fashion. My father conversed with
e de Puisieux on the ease with which licentious works were composed; he contended
s only y necessary to find an amusing idea as a peg to hang others on in which in-
ct I libertinism should be a substitute for taste. She challenged him to produce one of
At the end of a fortnight he brought her ‘Les bijoux indiscrets’ and fifty louis.”
moires of Diderot, by his daughter). ‘La Religieuse,” has a similar origin, its object
g to mystify M. de Croismart.


268 THE ANCIENT REGIME.


only genuine artist, the creator of souls, the mind in which
jects, events and personages are born and become orgar ined
themselves, through their own forces, by virtue of natural affiniti
involuntarily, without foreign intervention, in such a way <
live for and in themselves, safe from the author’s inteotionatl :
outside of his combinations. . The composer of the “Salons,” th
‘“‘ Petits Romans,” the “ Entretien,” the “ Paradoxe du Comédien
and especially the “ Réve de d’Alembert” and the“ Neveu ¢
Rameau” is a man of an unique species in his time. However al e
and brilliant Voltaire’s personages may be, they are always pup-
pets; their action is derivative; always behind them you c atch @ |
glimpse of the author mes ee the strings. With Diderot, tl
strings are severed; he is not speaking through the lips of I
characters; they are not his comical speaking-trumpets or dane
ing-jacks, but independent and detached creations, with an actio
of their own, a personal accent, with their own temperamen
passions, ideas, philosophy, style and spirit, and occasional! Ys
in the “ Neveu de Rameau,” a spirit so original, complex and e
plete, so alive and so deformed that, in the natural non
man, it becomes an incomparable monster and an immo:
Rocutaent He has expressed everything concerning nature) a
morality and life? in two small treatises of which twenty suc
sive readings exhaust neither the charm nor the sense.
elsewhere, if you can, a similar stroke of power and a greate
masterpiece, “anything more absurd and more profound !”” a

Such is the advantage of men of genius possessing no con
trol over themselves. They lack discernment but they have it
spiration. Among twenty works, either shapeless, unwholesom
or foul, they produce one-that is a creation, and still better, a
animated thing, able to live by itself, before which others, fab
cated by merely intellectual people, resemble simply well-dress
puppets. Hence it is that Diderot is so great a narrator, a ma
ter of dialogue, the equal in this respect of Voltaire, and, throu
a quite opposite talent, believing all he says at the moment
saying it; forgetful of his very self, carried away by his own
cital, listening to. inward voices, surprised with the respon
which come to him unexpectedly, borne along, as if on an 1


' 1 “Te Réve de d’Alembert.” ts
2 “Te neveu de Rameau.” =
8 The words of Diderot himself in relation to the ‘‘Réve de d’Alembert.”


up. THE PROPAGATION OF THE DOCTRINE. 269


own river, by the current of action, by the sinuosities of the
ation inwardly and unconsciously developed, aroused by
» flow of ideas and the leap of the moment to the most un-
Sl imagery, extreme in burlesque or extreme in magnifi-
now lyrical even to providing Musset with an entire
ro ke? now comic and droll with outbursts unheard of since
ie days of Rabelais, always in good faith, always at the mercy
‘is subject, of his inventions, of his emotions, the most
of writers in an age of artificial literature, resembling a
reign tree which, transplanted to a parterre of the epoch, swells
it and decays on one side of its stem, but of which five or six
anches, thrust out into full light, surpass the neighboring un-
rw wood in the freshness of their sap and in the vigor of their
Rousseau is also an artisan, a man of the people, ill-adapted
elegant and refined society, out of his element in a drawing-
om and, moreover, of low birth, badly brought up, sullied
ra vile and precocious experience, highly and offensively
suc al, morbid in mind and in body, fretted by superior and dis-
dant faculties, possessing no tact, and carrying the contamina-
n of his imagination, temperament and past life into his austere
rality and into his purest idyls:? besides this he has no fervor
id in. this he is the opposite of Diderot, avowing himself “that his
e arrange themselves in his head with the utmost difficulty, that
tain sentences are turned over and over again in his brain for
e or six nights before putting them on paper, and that a letter on
é most trifling subject costs him hours of fatigue,” that he cannot
| into an easy and agreeable tone nor succeed otherwise than
aos which demand application.”* As an offset to this,
in this ardent brain, under the influence of intense, pro-


x


ne of the finest strophes in ‘‘Souvenir” is almost literally transcribed (involuntarily, I
¢), from the dialogue on Otaheite.
avelle Héloise,” Zasszvz., and notably Julie’s extraordinary letter, second part, number
ile,” the preceptor’s discourse to Emile and Sophie the morning after their marriage.
of the Comtesse de Boufflers to Gustavus III., published by Geffroy, (“Gustave III.
de France ”). T entrust to Baron de Lederheim, though with reluctance, a book
1 which has just been published, the infamous memoirs of Rousseau entitled ‘Confes-
1s.” They seem to me those of a common scullion and even lower than that, being dull
igh hout, whimsical and vicious in the most offensive manner. I do not recur to my
p of him (for such it was); I shall never console myself-for its having caused the death
lat eminent man David Hume, who, to gratify me, undertook to entertain that filthy

England. ”

“Confessions,” part 1, book III. ,
23* °


270 . THE ANCIENT REGIME.


longed meditation, incessantly hammered and re-hammered, b
comes more concise and of higher temper than is elsewhere foun
Since La Bruyére we have seen no more ample, virile phrases, i
which anger, admiration, indignation, studied and concentrate
passion, appear with more rigorous precision and more powe
ful relief. He is almost the equal of La Bruyére in the arrang
ment of skilful effects, in the aptness and ingenuity of develop
ments, in the terseness of impressive summaries, in the overpow bs: :
ing directness of unexpected arguments, in the multiplicity of li or.
ary achievements, in the execution of those passages of brav ‘ a,
portraits, descriptions, comparisons, creations, wherein, as 1 ue:
musical crescendo, the same idea, varied by a series of yet m
animated expressions, attains to or surpasses, at the last note, a
that is possible of energy and of brilliancy. Finally, he has th

which is wanting in La Bruyére; his passages are linked together
he is not a writer of pages but of books; no logician is more con:
densed. His demonstration is knitted together, mesh by mes!

for one, two and three volumes like a great net without an o
ing in which, willingly or not, we remain caught. He is a sy
tematizer who, absorbed with himself, and with his eyes =
bornly fixed on his own revery or on his own principle, burie
himself deeper in it every day, weaving its consequences off 0
by one and always holding fast to the various ends. Do nots
near him. Like a solitary, enraged spider he weaves this ol
of his own substance, out of the most cherished convictions of h
brain and the deepest emotions of his heart. He trembles at th
slightest touch; ever on the defensive, he is terrible,’ besid
himself,? even venomous through suppressed exasperation an
wounded sensibility, furious against an adversary, whom he stif
with the multiplied and tenacious threads of his web, but st
more redoubtable to himself than to his enemies, soon caught
his own meshes,’ believing that France and the universe consp
against him, deducing with wonderful subtlety the proofs of
chimerical conspiracy, made desperate, at last, by his over-pla
ble romance and strangling in the cunning toils which, by dint:
his own logic and imagination, he has fashioned for himself. —


1 Letter to M. de Beaumont.

2 “Emile,” letter IV. 193. ‘People of the world must necessarily put on discos
them show themselves as they are and they would horrify us,”’ etc. -
8 See, especially, his book entitled “‘ Rousseau juge de Jean-Jacques,”’ his connectit n
Hume and the last books of the “Confessions.” ;


*


HAP. 1. ZHE PROPAGATION OF THE DOCTRINE. 271


One runs a risk of killing himself with arms of this description,
ut there is power in it. Rousseau was powerful, equally so with
foltaire; it may be said that the last half of the eighteenth
century belongs to him. A foreigner, a protestant, original in
emperament, in education, in heart, in mind and in habits, at
“once misanthropic and philanthropic, living in an ideal world
_ constructed by himself, entirely opposed to the world as it is, he
finds himself standing in a new position. No one is so sensitive
4 the evils and vices of actual society. No one is so affected by
e virtues and happiness of the society of the future. This ac-
nts for his having two holds on the public mind, one through
iti e and the other through the idyl. These two holds are un-
7 dout wtedly slighter at the present day; the substance of their
srasp has disappeared; we are not the auditors to which it
uppealed. The famous discourse on the influence of literature
ind on the origin of inequality seems to us a collegiate oration ;
m effort of the will is required to read the “ Nouvelle Héloise.”
The author is repulsive in the persistency of his spitefulness or in
he exaggeration of his enthusiasm. He is always in extremes,
now moody and with knit brows, and now streaming with tears
nd with outstretched arms to Heaven. Hyperbole, prosopopzia,
amid other literary machinery is too often and too deliberately
ised by him. We are tempted to regard him now as a sophist
making the best use of his arts, now as a rhetorician cudgelling
his brains for a purpose, now as a preacher becoming excited,
that is to say, an actor ever maintaining a thesis, striking an atti-
tude and aiming at effects. Finally, with the exception of the
“Confessions” his style soon wearies us; it is too studied, and
too constantly overstrained. ‘The author is always the author
and he communicates the defect to his personages. His Julie
gues and descants for twenty successive pages on duelling, on
Ove, on duty, with a logical completeness, a talent and phrases
hat would do honor to an academical moralist. Common-
lace exists everywhere, general themes, a raking fire of ab-
stractions and arguments, that is to say, truths more or less
empty and paradoxes more or less hollow. The smallest detail
O oe an anecdote, a trait of habit, would suit us much better,
and hence we of to-day prefer the precise eloquence of ob-
jec ts to the lax eloquence of words. In the eighteenth century
it was otherwise; to.every writer this oratorical style was the


272 THE ANCIENT REGIME. B01 RY


prescribed ceremonial costume, the dress-coat he had to pi yu
on for admission into the company of select people. That whic
seems to us affectation was then only proper; in a classic epoch
the perfect period and the sustained development constitute d

corum and are therefore to be observed. It must be no od.
moreover, that this literary drapery which, with us of the p io ni
day, conceals truth did not conceal it to his contemporaries; the
saw under it the exact feature, the perceptible detail no longer
detected by us. Every abuse, every vice, every excess of refine-_
ment and of culture, all. that social and moral disease which
Rousseau scourged with an author’s emphasis, existed before \
them under their own eyes, in their own breasts, visible and ¢ ally
manifested in thousands of domestic incidents. In applying
satire they had only to observe or to remember. ‘Their exper-
ience completed the book, and, through the co-operation of hi
readers, the author possessed power which he is now deprivec 7
of. If we were to put ourselves in their place we should re-
cover their impressions. His denunciations and sarcasms, the
harsh things of all sorts he says of the great, of fashionable pec os |
and of women, his rude and cutting tone, provokes and irritates,
but is not displeasing. On the contrary, after so many cor vpli- ©
ments, insipidities and petty versification all this quickens 4
blunted taste; it is the sensation of strong common wine after
long indulgence in orgeat and preserved citron. Accordingly,
his first discourse against art and literature “lifts one at once
above the clouds.” But his idyllic writings touch the heart more
powerfully than his satires. If men listen to the moralist that
scolds them they throng in the footsteps of the magician that
charms them; especially do women and the young adhere: to
one who shows them the promised land. All accumulated dis-
satisfactions, weariness of the world, ennui, vague disgust, a multi-
tude of suppressed desires gush forth, like subterranean waters
under the sounding line that for the first time brings them to
light. Rousseau with his soundings struck deep and _ true
through his own trials and through genius. In a wholly artificial
society where people are drawing-room puppets, and where life
consists in a graceful parade according to a recognized mode
he preaches a return to nature, independence, earnestness, Pa $
sion, and effusions, a manly, active, ardent and happy existen
in the open air and in sunshine. What an outlet for restrainet


. - THE PROPAGA z. JON OF THE DOCTRINE, ° 273
ilties, for the broad and luxurious fountain ever bubbling in
n’s breast and for which no issue is provided into this beauti-
al world A woman of the court is familiar with love as then
3 ractised, simply a preference, often only a pastime, mere gal-

try of which the exquisite polish poorly conceals the shal-
= ess, coldness and, occasionally, wickedness, in short, ad-
ventures, amusements and personages as described by Crébillon
the younger. One evening, about to go out to the opera
ball, she finds the “ Nouvelle Héloise” on her toilet-table; it is
not surprising that she keeps her horses and footmen waiting from
hour to hour, and that at four o’clock in the morning she orders
the ‘horses to be unharnessed, and then passes the rest of the
night in reading, and that she is stifled with her tears; for the
first time in her life she finds a man that loves.!. In like manner
if you would comprehend the success of “Emile,” call to mind
the children we have described, the embroidered, gilded, dressed-
up powdered little gentlemen, decked with sword and sash, car-
ing the chapeau under the arm, bowing, presenting the hand,
ehearsing fine attitudes before a mirror, repeating prepared com-
plime ants, pretty little puppets in which everything is the work of
Resin, the hairdresser, the preceptor and the dancing-master ;

al longside of these, little ladies of six years, still more artificial,
an up in whalebone, harnessed in a heavy skirt composed of
hair and a girdle of iron, supporting a head-dress two feet in
1 . poh, so many veritable dolls to which rouge is applied, and
with which a mother amuses herself each morning for an hour
ind then consigns them to her maids for the rest of the day.?
This mother reads “Emile.” It is not surprising that she imme-
diately strips the poor little thing and determines to nurse her
next child herself.

It is through these contrasts that Rousseau is strong. He
revealed the dawn to people who never got up until noon, the
andscape to eyes that had thus far rested only on palaces and
rawing-rooms, a natural garden to men who had never prome-


“Confessions,” part 2. book XI. ‘‘ The women were intoxicated with the book and with
€ author to such an extent that there were few of them, even of high rank, whose conquest
d not have made if I had undertaken it. I possess evidence of this which I do not care
blish, and which, without having been obliged to prove it by experience, warrants my
nent.” Cf. G. Sand, “ Histoire de ma vie,” I. 73.

ee an engraving by Moreau called “Les Petits Parrains.” Berquin, Jassi., and among
hers “‘L’épée.” Remark the ready-made phrases, the style of an author common to chil-
iren, ‘in Berquin and Madame de Genlis.


274 | THE ANCIENT REGIME, ~ BOOK 1


naded outside of clipped shrubs and rectilinear borders, th
country, the family, the people, simple and endearing pleasures
to townsmen made weary by social avidity, by the excesses ani
complications of luxury, by the uniform comedy which, in th
glare of hundreds of*lighted candles, they played night afte
night in their own and in the homes of others.1. An audience
thus disposed makes no clear distinction between pomp and sin
cerity, between sentiment and sentimentality. They follow their
author as one who makes a revelation, as a prophet, even to the
end of his ideal world, much more through his exaggeratic
than through his discoveries, as far on the road to error as on the
pathway of truth. a
These are the great literary powers of the century.
inferior successes, and through various combinations, the elements
which contributed to the formation of the leading talents als¢
form the secondary talents, like those below Rousseau,—Bernar-
din de St. Pierre, Raynal, Thomas, Marmontel, Mabie’ Flo
rian, Dupaty, Mercier, Madame de Staél; below Voltair
the lively and piquant intellects of Duclos, Pron; Galiani, Pre
dent Des Brosses, Rivarol, Champfort, and to speak with pes cISIOI
all other talents. Whenever a vein of talent, however meag m
peers forth above the ground it is for the propagation and carrying
forward of the new doctrine; scarcely can we find two ‘or .
little streams that run in a contrary direction like the journal
of Fréron, a comedy by Palissot, or a satire by Gilbert. Philo 5 i
ophy winds through and overflows all channels public and privat
through manuals of impiety, like the “ Théologies pottatives,”
and in the lascivious novels circulated secretly, through epigrams
and songs, through daily novelties, through the amusements|
of fairs,? and the harangues of the Academy, through tragedy
and the opera, from the beginning to the end of the century
from the “ Gidipe” of Voltaire, to the “ Tarare”” of Beaumarchais
It seems as if there was nothing else in the world. At least it is
found everywhere and it floods all literary efforts; nobody car
whether it deforms them, content in making them serve as <


1 See the description of sunrise in ‘‘ Emile,” of the Elysée (a natural garden), in “ are
And especially i in “Emile,” at the end of the fourth book, the pleasures which Rous
would enjoy if he were rich.

? See in Marivaux, (‘‘La double inconstance,”) a satire on the court, courtiers and the co
ruptions of high life, opposed to the inferior class who have maintained primitive simplictt
the village swains and lasses.


war.1. THE PROPAGATION OF THE DOCTRINE. 275


conduit. In 1763, in the tragedy of Manco-Capac! the “ prin-
cips part, ” writes a contemporary, “is that of a savage who
tters in verse all that we have read, scattered through ‘ Emile’
md the ‘ Contrat Social,’ concerning kings, liberty, the rights of
man and the inequality of conditions.” This virtuous savage
Saves a king’s son over whom a high-priest raises a poniard and
then, designating the high-priest and himself by turns, he cries,
«Behold the civilized man,—here is the savage man!” At this
ne the applause breaks forth, and the success of the piece is
s such that it is demanded at Versailles and played before the
court.

_ The same ideas have to be expressed with skill, brilliancy,
gayety, energy and scandal, and this is accomplished in “The
| iage of Figaro.” Never were the ideals of the age displayed
mder a more transparent disguise, nor in an attire that rendered
‘more attractive. Its title is the “Folle journée,” and
indeed it is an evening of folly, an after-supper like those oc-
ring in the fashionable world, a masquerade of Frenchmen
pe epanish costumes, with a parade of dresses, changing scenes,
re} eS a ballet, a singing and dancing village, a medley of odd
aracters, gentlemen, servants, duennas, judges, notaries, lawyers,
sic-masters, gardeners, pastoureaux,; ip short,a spectacle for the
yes and the ears, for all the senses, the very opposite of the
prevailing drama in which three pasteboard characters, seated on
classic chairs, exchange didactic arguments in an abstract saloon.
And still better, it is an imbroglio displaying a superabundance
0 action, amidst intrigues that cross, interrupt and renew
each other, through a fé/e-méle of travesties, exposures, surprises,
mistakes, leaps from windows, quarrels and slaps, and all in spark-


..
4°


ling style, each phrase flashing on all sides, where responses
‘seem to be cut out by a lapidary, where the eyes would forget them-
‘selves in contemplating the multiplied brilliants of the dialogue if
the mind were not carried along by its rapidity and the excite-
Ment of the action. But here is another charm, the most welcome
of all in a society passionately fond of Parny; according to an
expression by the Comte d’Artois, which I dare not quote, this
‘appeals to the senses, the arousing of which constitutes the


-spiciness and savor of the piece. The fruit that hangs ripening


=


1 Bachaumont, I. 254.


rae THE ANCIENT REGIME, _- BOOK T


and savory on the branch never falls but always seems on t
point of falling; all hands are extended to catch it, its volup R
ousness somewhat veiled but so much the more provok in
declaring itself from scene to scene, in the Count’s gallentiyad n
the Countess’s agitation, in the simplicity of Fanchette, in the
jestings of Figaro, in the liberties of Susanne, and reaching its
climax in the precocity of Cherubino, Add to this a continua al
double sense, the author hidden behind his characters, truth put
into the mouth of a clown, malice enveloped in simple utterance “
the master duped but saved from being ridiculous by his dep ort-
ment, the valet rebellious but preserved from acrimony by hi
gayety, and you can comprehend how Beaumarchais could ha
the ancient régime played before its head, put political and soci
satire on the stage, publicly attach an expression to each si ons
so as to become a by-word and ever making a loud report
gather up into a few traits the entire polemics of the philosop!
against the prisons of the State, against the censorship of litera-
ture, against the venality of office, against the privileges of birth,
against the arbitrary power of ministers, against the incapacity o
people in office, and still better, to sum up in one characte} 7
every public demand, give the leading part to a plebeian, bas-
tard, bohemian and valet, who, by dint of dexterity, cou
and good-humor, keeps himself up, swims with the tide, <
shoots ahead in his little skiff, avoiding contact with larger |
and even supplanting his master, accompanying each pull on —
the oar with a shower of wit cast broadside at all his rivals.

After all, in France-at least, the chief power is intellect. :
erature in the service of philosophy is all-sufficient. The public |
opposes but a feeble resistance to their complicity, the mistress
finding no trouble in convincing those who have already bom
won over by the servant.


2


=. %

‘=

1 “A calculator was required for the place but a dancer got it.” ‘The sale of offices is a
great abuse.” Yes, it would be better to give them for nothing.” ‘Only small men
small literature.” ‘Chance makes the interval, the mind only can alter that!” ‘Aco
ier?—they say it isa very difficult profession.” ‘To receive, to take, and to ask, is the se-


cret in three words,” etc. Also the entire monologue by Figaro and all the scenes with
Bridoisin. 5


~ CHAPTER II.


Tm FRENCH PuBLic.—I. The Aristocracy.—Novelty commonly repug-
unt to it.—Conditions of this repugnance.» Example in England.—II. The
opposite conditions found in France.—Indolence of the upper class.—Phil-
oO osophy seems an intellectual drill.—Besides this, a subject for conversation.

—Philosophic converse in the 18th century.—Its superiority and _ its
harm.—The influence it exercises. —III. Further effects of indolence.—The
ptical, licentious and seditious spirit.—Previous resentment and fresh dis-
ent at the established ordeF of things.—Sympathy for the theories
against it.—How far accepted.—IV. Their diffusion among the upper class. -
—Progress of incredulity in religion.—Its causes.—It breaks out under the
gency.—Increasing irritation against the clergy.—Materialism in the draw-
g-room.—Estimate of the sciences.—Final opinion on religion.—Scepti-
of the higher clergy.—V. Progress of political opposition.—Its origin.
= economists and the parliamentarians.—They prepare the way for the
uilosophers.—Political fault-finding in the drawing-rooms.—Female liberal-
n.—VI. Infinite, vague aspirations.—Generosity of sentiments and of
id duct. —The mildness and good intentions of the government.—lIts blind-
and optimism.


tol


_ Tuts public has yet to be made willing to be convinced and to
ye won over; belief occurs only when there is a disposition to
believe, and, in the success of books, its share is often greater
han that of their authors. On addressing men about politics or
their opinions are, in general, already formed; their
dices, their interests, their situation have confirmed them be-
and; they listen to you only after you have uttered aloud
ut they inwardly think. Propose to them to demolish the great
al edifice and to rebuild it anew on quite an opposite plan:
marily your auditors will consist only of those who are poorly

zed or shelterless, who live in garrets or cellars, or who sleep
inder the stars, on the bare ground in the vicinity of houses.
The common run of people, whose lodgings are small but toler-
able, dread moving and adhere to their accustomed ways. The


24


278 THE ANCIENT REGIME,


difficulty becomes much greater on appealing to the upper classes
who occupy superior habitations ; their acceptance of your pro-
posal depends either on their great delusions or on their great dis-—
interestedness. In England they quickly foresee the danger. In
vain is philosophy there indigenous and precocious; it does not
become acclimated. In 1729, Montesquieu writes in his mem-
orandum-book: “No religion in England; four or five members _
of the House of Commons attend mass or preaching in the.

House. . . . When religion is mentioned everybody begins to”
laugh. A man having said: I believe that as an article of faith,
everybody laughed. A committee is appointed to consider the 7
state of religion but it is regarded as absurd.” Fifty years later ~

the public mind undergoes a reaction; all with a good roof over
their heads and a good coat on their backs! see the bearing of —
the new doctrines.» In any event they feel that closet spe :
tions are not to become street preaching. Impiety seems to them ~
an indiscretion ; they consider religion as the cement of public
order. ‘This is owing to the fact that they are themselves public
men, engaged in active life, taking a part in the government, and
instructed through their daily and personal.experience. Prac-
tical life fortifies them against the chimeras of theorists; they —
have proved to themselves how difficult it is to lead and to con-—
trol men. Having had their hand on the machine they know |
how it works, its value, its cost, and they are not tempted to cast —
it aside as rubbish to try another, said to be superior, but whi Lad
as yet, exists only on paper. The baronet, or squire, a justice on
his own domain, has no trouble in discerning in the clergyman
of his parish an indispensable co-worker and a natural ally. The
duke or marquis, sitting in the upper house by the side of bish-
ops, requires their votes to pass bills, and their assistance to rally
to his party the fifteen hundred curates who influence the rural
conscience. Thus all have a hand on some social wheel, large
or small, principal or accessory, and this endows them with
earnestness, foresight and good sense. On coming in contact with
realities there is no temptation to soar away into the imaginary
world; the fact of one being at work on solid ground of its
makes one dislike aerial excursions in empty space. The mor
occupied one is the less one dreams, and, to men of business, th


1 Macaulay. 7


fap. u. ZHE PROPAGATION OF THE DOCTRINE. 279
geometry of the “ Contrat Social” is merely intellectual gymnas-
CICS. ;
bi:

a II.
. It og quite the reverse in France. “TI arrived there in 1774,”!
says an English gentleman, “having just left the house of my
ther, who never came home from Parliament until three o’clock
: the morning, and who was busy the whole morning correcting
1e proofs of his speech for the newspapers, and who, after hastily
Kissing us, with an absorbed air, went out to a political dinner.
-. . In France I found men of the highest rank enjoying per-
fect leisure. They had interviews with the ministers but only to
- terchange compliments; in other respects they knew as little
ab un public affairs of France as they did about those of
Japan,” and less of local affairs than of general affairs, having no
BE ticdee of their peasantry other than that derived from the
Bconts of their stewards. If one of them, bearing the title of
governor, visited a province, it was, as we have seen, for outward
pa ade; whilst the intendant carried on the administration, he
CC himself with grace and magnificence by giving recep-
ions and dinners. To receive, to give dinners, to entertain guests
eably is the sole occupation of a grand seignior; hence it is
Peaigion and government only serve him as subjects of con-
versation. The conversation, moreover, occurs between him
and his equals, and a man may say what he pleases in good |
ec ompany. Moreover the social system turns on its own axis, like
e sun, from time immemorial, through its own energy, and shall
ihe deranged by what is said in the drawing-room ? In any
rent he does not control its motion and he is not responsible.
Accordingly there is no uneasy undercurrent, no morose preoc-
pation in his mind. Carelessly and boldly he follows in the
tack of his philosophers; detached from affairs he can give him-
self up to ideas, just as a young man of family, on leaving college,
lays hold of some principle, deduces its consequences, and forms
a system for himself without concerning himself about its appli-
cation.”
7 Stendhal, “Rome, Bailes et Florence,” ‘ 371.
_# Morellet, “Mémoires,” I. 139 (on the writings and conversations of Diderot, d’Holbach
d the atheists). ‘At that time, in this philosophy, all seemed innocent enough, it being


confine to the limits of speculation and never seeking, even in its boldest flights, anything
eyond a calm intellectual exercise.”


ee


280 THE ANCIENT REGIME.


Nothing is more enjoyable than this speculative inspiration
The mind soars amon g the summits as if it had wings;
embraces vast horizons in a glance, taking in all of human_ lif ;
the economy of the world, the origin of the universe, of religic
and of societies. Where, accordingly, would conversation be i
people abstained from philosophy ? What circle is that in y
serious political problems and profound criticism are not arid
ted? And what motive brings intellectual people together if n rT
the desire to debate questions of the highest importance? J]
two centuries in France all this forms the pabulum of conversa=
tion, and hence its great charm. Strangers find it irresistible; noth= |
ing like it is found at home; Lord Chesterfield sets it forth as a
example. It always turns, he says, on some point in history, o
criticism or even philosophy which is much better suited to re
tional beings than our English discussions about the weather an
whist. Rousseau, so querulous, admits “that a moral “a
could not be better discussed in a wage: of philosophers tl tha
in that of a pretty woman in Paris.” Undoubtedly fered
good deal of idle talk, but with all the chattering “let a mar ‘
any authority make a serious remark or start a grave subject a1
the attention is immediately fixed on this point; men and wore
the old and the young, all give themselves to its consideratior
on all its sides, and it is surprising what an amount of reason and |
good sense issues, as if in emulation, from these frolicsome brains.” |
The truth is that, in this constant holiday which this brilliant
society gives itself, philosophy is the principal amusement ;
Without philosophy the ordinary ironical chit-chat would -
vapid. It is a sort of superior opera in which every g a
conception that can interest a reflecting mind passes before i
now in comic and now in sober attire, and each in conflict
the other. The tragedy of the day scarcely differs from it e
in this respect, that it always bears a solemn aspect and is to
only in the theatres; the other assumes all sorts of physiognomieés
and is found evetywhend because conversation is everywhere
carried on. Not a dinner, nor a supper is given at which it does
not find place. One sits at the table amidst refined luxuriousness
among agreeable and well-dressed women and pleasant an
well-informed men, a select company, in which comprehension
prompt and intercourse safe. After the second course the inspir
tion breaks out in the liveliest sallies, all minds flashing ar


fi ty


4 a THE PROPAGATION OF THE DOCTRINE. 281


ing. When the dessert comes on what is to prevent the

G vest t of subjects from being put into witticisms? On the ap-
°: ance of the coffee questions on the immortality of the soul
nd on the existence of God come up.

To form any idea of this attractive and bold conversation we.
a consult the correspondence of the day, the short treatises
ee oetcs of Diderot and Voltaire, whatever is most ani-
sd, most delicate, most piquant and most profound in the lit-
ra are of the century; and yet this is only a residuum, a lifeless
agment. The whole of this written philosophy was uttered in
yords, with the accent, the impetuosity, the inimitable natural-
aess of improvisation, with the versatility of malice and of en-
qusiasm. Even to-day, chilled and on paper, it still transports
and seduces us, What must it have been issuing breathing and
aibrating from the lips of Voltaire and Diderot? Daily, in
Paris, suppers took place like those described by Voltaire,! at
yhich “two philosophers, three clever intellectual ladies, M. Pinto
1e famous Jew, the chaplain of the Batavian ambassador of the
sformed church, the secretary of the Prince de Galitzin of the
sree! church, and a Swiss calvinist captain,” seated around the
ame table, for four hours interchanged their anecdotes, their
lashes of wit, their remarks and their decisions “on all subjects
yf interest relating to science and taste.” The most learned and
listinguished foreigners daily visited, in turn, the house of the
aron d’Holbach,—Hume, Wilkes, Sterne, Beccaria, Veri, the
Abbé Galiani, Garrick, Franklin, Priestley, Lord Shelburne, the
“C ymte de Creutz, the Prince of Brunswick and the future Elector
of eae With respect to society in general the Baron enter-
Lin a Diderot, Rousseau, Helvétius, Duclos, Saurin, Raynal,

, Marmontel, Boulanger, the Chevalier de Chastellux, the
eer La Condamine, the physician Barthéz, and Rouelle, the
hem ist. Twice a week, on Sundays and Thursdays, “ without
ce udice to other days” they dine at his house, according to
ustom, at two o’clock, a significant custom which thus leaves to
sonversation and gayety a man’s best powers and the best hours
f the day. Conversation, in those days, was not relegated to
iY and late hours; a man was not forced, as at the present


“I/Homme aux quarante écus.” Cf. Voltaire, “‘Mémoires,” the suppers given by
ick 11. “Never in any place in the world was there greater freedom of conversation


cerning the superstitions of mankind.”
a5 .


282 THE ANCIENT REGIME.


day, to subordinate it to the exigencies of work and mone
of the Assembly and the Exchange. Talking is the main 1 mI
ness, “Entering at two o'clock,” says Morellet,! “we alneal
remained until seven or eight o’clock in the evening. . Te
could be heard the most liberal, the most animated, the ‘most
structive conversation that ever took place. . . . There was n
political or religious temerity which was not biobiht forward and
discussed pro and con. . . . Frequently some one of the com=
pany would begin to speak and state his theory in full, without
interruption. At other times it would be a combat of a sin “a 4
kind of which the rest remained silent spectators. Here Ih ea |
Roux and Darcet expose their theory of the earth, Marmontel th
admirable principles he collected together in his ‘ Eléments d ed
Littérature,’ Raynal, telling us in 4vres, sous and deniers, th
commerce of the Spaniards with Vera-Cruz and of the Englis
with their colonies.” Diderot improvises on the arts and on moré
and metaphysical subjects, with that incomparable fervor an
wealth of expression, that flood of logic and of illustration, thos
happy hits of style and that mimetic power which belonged t
him alone and of which but two or three of his works preserve
even the feeblest image. In their midst Galiani, secretary of |
the Neapolitan Embassy, a clever dwarf of genius, “a sort 0 S,
Plato or Machiavelli with the spirit and action of a harlequin,” j
inexhaustible in stories, an admirable buffoon, and an accom-
plished sceptic, “having no faith in anything, on anything o t
about anything,”? not even in the new philosophy, braves the’
atheists of the drawing-room, beats down their dithyrambs with
puns, and, with his perruque in his hand, sitting cross-legged on
the chair on which he is perched, proves to them in a comic ap
ologue that they raisonnent (reason) or résonnent (resound Ot
echo) if not as cruches (blockheads) at least as cloches (bells),” in
any event almost as poorly as theologians. One of those presen
says, ‘‘It was the most diverting thing possible and worth the bes
of plays.”

How can the nobles, who pass their lives in talking, refrai
from the society of people who talk so well? They might
well forbid their wives, who frequent the theatre every night, an
who perform at home, not to attract famous actors and singers’


1 Morellet, “‘ Mémoires,” I. 133.
2 Galiani, ‘‘Correspondance,” passim.


~~ A


HAP. 1. THE PROPAGATION OF THE DOCTRINE. 283


thei receptions, Jelyatte,Sainval, Préville, and young Molé who,
q ite ill and needing restoratives, “receives in one day more
than two thousand bottles of wine of different sorts from the
Tadies of the court,” Mlle. Clairon, who, consigned to prison in
Fort ’Eveque, attracts to it “an immense crowd of carriages,”
a esiding over the most select company in the best apartment of
a 1 With life thus regarded, a philosopher with his ideas
wage necessary in a drawing-room as a chandelier with its lights.
2 forms a part of the new system of luxuriousness. He is
r a article of export. Sovereigns, amidst their splendor, and
at the height of their success, invite them to their courts to
r enjoy for once in their life the pleasure of perfect and a
‘discourse. When Voltaire arrives in Prussia Frederic II.

ee ling to kiss his hand, fawning on him as on a mistress, and, ie
a later period, after sigh mutual fondling, he cannot dispense
fith carrying on conversations with him by letter. Catherine II.
‘st pads for Diderot and, for two or three hours every day, she
plays with him the great game of the intellect. Gustavus III., in
France, is intimate with Marmontel, and considers a visit from
Rousseau as the highest honor.? It is said with truth of Voltaire
that “he holds the four kings in his hand,” those of Prussia,
epe Denmark and Russia, without mentioning lower
, the princes, princesses, grand dukes and margraves. The
rincipal réle in this society evidently belongs to authors; their
ways and doings form the subject of gossip; people never weary
paying them homage. Here, writes Hume to Robertson,? “I
feed ‘on ambrosia, drink nothing but nectar, breathe incense only
-and walk on flowers. Every man I meet, and especially every
’ voman, would consider themselves as failing in the most indis-
pensable duty if they did not favor me with a lengthy and
‘ingenious discourse on my celebrity.” Presented at court, the
future Louis XVI., aged ten years, the future Louis XVIII., aged
eight years, and the future Charles X., aged four years, each recite
a compliment to him on his works. I need not narrate the
‘return of Voltaire, his triumphant entry,* the Academy in a body
‘coming to welcome him, his carriage stopped by the crowd, the


“y


1 Bachaumont, III. 93 (1766), II. 202 (1765).
2 Geffroy, ‘‘Gustave IJI.,” I. 114.
3 Villemain, “‘ Tableau de la Littérature au dix-huitiéme siécle,” IV. 409.
4 Grimm, “Corresp. littéraire,” IV. 176. De Ségur, “Mémoires,” I. 113.


“284 THE ANCIENT REGIME.


thronged streets, the windows, steps and balconies filled w
admirers, an intoxicated audience in the theatre incessantly ay
plauding, outside an entire population carrying him off witl
huzzas, in the drawing-rooms a continual concourse equal to thai
of the king, grand seigniors pressed against the door with ¢
stretched ears to catch a word and great ladies condi
tiptoe to observe the slightest gesture. “To form any concep: a
of what I experienced,” says one of those present, ‘one shoul
breathe the atmosphere of enthusiasm I lived in. I spoke vit
him.” ‘This expression at that time converted any new-cc me
into an important character. He had, in fact, seen the wonderfu
orchestra-leader who, for more than fifty years, conducted the
tumultuous concert of serious or court-vétues ideas, and who, al-
ways on the stage, always chief, the recognized leader of unive < al
conversation, supplied the motives, gave the pitch, marked @ th
measure; stamped the inspiration and drew the first- note on th :
violin. +
5
14, :
Listen to the shouts that greet him: Hurrah: for the author of
the Henriade / the defender of Calas, the author of Za Pucelle!
Nobody of the present day would utter the first nor especially.
the last hurrah. ‘This indicates the tendency of the century; not —
only were writers called upon for ideas but again for antagonistic
ideas. To render an aristocracy inactive is to render it i.
finding ; man willingly accepts a law only when he assists in ue 4
plying it. Would you rally him to the support of the govern "e
ment? Then let him take part in it. If not he stands by as ; a
looker-on and sees nothing but the mistakes it commits, feeling } e
Only its irritations, and disposed only to criticize and to hoot at it
In fact, in this case, he is asif in the theatre, where he goes to k SS
amused and, especially, not to be put to any inconvenienct
What inconveniencies in the established order of things and i
deed in any established order! In the first place, as regards r¢
ligion. To the amiable “idlers” whom Voltaire describes,’ to-
“the hundred thousand persons with nothing to do but to play
and to amuse themselves,” she is the most disagreeable of peda-
gogues, always scolding, hostile to sensible amusement and free


1 “Princesse de Babylone.” Cf. “le Mondain.”


mar. u. THE PROPAGATION OF THE DOCTRINE. 285


dis ussion, burning books which one wants to read, and i imposing
dogmas that are no longer comprehensible. In plain terms she
san eyesore and whoever wishes to throw stones at her is wel-
‘ me. ‘There is another bond, the moral law of the sexes. It
ems onerous to men of pleasure, to the companions of Riche-
eu, Lauzun and Tilly, to the heroes of Crébillon the younger,
and all others belonging to that libertine and gallant society for
Ms 10m license has become the rule. Our fine gentlemen are quite
eady to adopt a theory which justifies their practices. They are
ve glad to be told that marriage is conventional and a thing of
arejudice. Saint-Lambert obtains their applause at supper when,
raising a glass of champagne, he proposes as a toast, a return to
hature and the customs of Otaheite.'| The last fetter of all is
> government, the most galling, for it enforces the rest and
keeps man down with its weight along with the added weight of
the others. It is absolute, it is centralized, it works through fa-
Vorites, it is backward, it makes mistakes, it has reverses,—how
many causes of discontent embraced in a few words! It is op-
dosed by the vague and suppressed resentment of the former
wers which it has dispossessed, the provincial assemblies, the
Siaments, the grandees of the provinces, the old stock of no-
bi es, who, like the Mirabeaus, retain the old feudal spirit, and like
eee wadbriand's father, call the Abbé Raynal a “ master-man.” ©
gainst it is the spite of all those who imagine themselves frus-
ited in the distribution of offices and of favors, not only the
provincial nobility who: remain outside? while the court nobility
re feasting at the royal banquet, but again the majority of the
tiers who are obliged to be content with crumbs, while the
= circle of intimate favorites swallow down the large morsels.
It has against it the l-humor of those under its direction who,
Seeing it play the part of Providence and providing for all, ac-
cuses it of everything, the dearness of bread as well as of the decay
of a highway. It has against it the new humanity which, in the
most elegant drawing-rooms, lays to its charge the maintenance of
he eenated remains of z a barbarous epoch, illy-imposed, illy-


1 1M Ime. @’Epinay, ed. Boiteau, I. 216, at a supper given by Mlle. Quinault, the comedian,
thich are present Saint-Lambert, the Prince de ——, Duclos and Mme. d’Epinay.

* For example, the father of Marmont, a military deanna, who, having won the cross of
ys a twenty-eight, abandons the service because he finds that promotion is only for
le of the court. In retirement on his estates he is a liberal, teaching his son to read the
ts made by Necker. (Marshal Marmont, ‘‘ Mémoires,” I. 9).


“286 THE ANCIENT REGIME.


apportioned and illy-collected taxes, sanguinary laws, bling
ecutions, atrocious punishments, the persecution of the protesta
lettres-de-cachet, and prisons of State. And Ido not include it
cesses, its scandals, its disasters and its disgraces,—Rosbach, th
treaty of Paris, Madame du Barry, and bankruptcy. Disg
intervenes, for everything is decidedly bad. ‘The pe 0
the play say to each other that not only is the piece itself poor
but the theatre is badly built, uncomfortable, stifling and con
tracted, to such a degree that, to be at one’s ease, the whole thin;
must be torn down and rebuilt from cellar to garret.

Just at this moment the new architects appear, with their s
cious arguments and their ready-made plans, proving that ever
great public structure, religious and moral, and all communities
cannot be otherwise than barbarous and insalubrious since, thu
far; they are built up out of bits and pieces, by degrees bs
generally by fools and savages, in any event by common ma
who built haphazard, feeling their way and devoid of princi
They are genuine architects and they have principles, thas 7
say, reason, nature, and the rights of man, all being ‘ripe 4
fruitful principles which everybody can understand, the conse
quences derived from them sufficing to substitute for the il
shapen tenements of the past, the admirable edifice of the futw
To irreverent, epicurean and philanthropic malcontents the tem


tation is a great one. They readily adopt maxims which se

in conformity with their secret wishes ; at least they adopt th 3
in theory and in words. The imposing terms of liberty, justice
public good, man’s dignity, are so admirable and besides
vague! What heart can refuse to cherish them, and what inte
ligence can foretell their innumerable applications? And all t
more because, up to the last, the theory does not descend from
the heights, being confined to abstractions, resembling an :
ademic oration, always treating of man in himself, of the socia
contract, and of the imaginary and perfect civic body. Is there
a courtier at Versailles who would refuse to proclaim equality im
the city of the Salentini! Communication between the two
stories of the human intellect, the upper where abstract reas

ing spins its arguments, and the lower where an active ait
reposes, is neither complete nor immediate. A certain set c
principles never leave the upper stories; they remain there in tl
position of curiosities, so many delicate, ingenious subtleti


AP: am THE PROPAGATION OF THE DOCTRINE. 287


Rakich a parade is willingly made but which scarcely ever
mter into actual service. If the proprietor sometimes transfers
hem to the lower story he makes but a partial use of them;
stablished customs, anterior and more powerful interests and
astincts restrict their employment. In this respect he is not
ting in bad faith, but as a man, each of us: possessing truths
yhich he does not put in practice. One evening Target, a dull
wyer, having taken a pinch from the snuff-box of the Maréchale
e Beauvau, the latter, whose drawing-room is a small dem- |
cratic club, is amazed at such monstrous familiarity. Later,
\ Mirabeau, on returning home just after having voted for the
abolition of nobility titles, takes his servant by the ear and bawls
ut to him in his stentorian voice, “Look here, dé/e, I trust that
o you I shall-always be Monsieur le Comte!” This shows to
vhat extent new theories are admitted into an aristocratic brain.
they occupy the whole of the upper story, and there, with a
pl ns murmur, they weave the web of interminable conversa-
ion; their buzzing lasts throughout the century; never have the
fawing- -rooms seen such an outpouring of fine sentences and
f fine words. Something of all this drops from the upper to the
story, if only as dust, that is to say, hope, faith in the future,
elief in reason, a love of truth, the generosity of youthful feel-
ng, the enthusiasm that quickly passes but which is often exalted
nto self-abnegation and devotion.


IV.


_ Let us follow the progress of philosophy in the upper class.
Religion is the first to receive the severest attacks. The small
roup of sceptics, which is hardly perceptible under Louis XIV.,
s obtained its recruits in the dark; in 1698 the Palatine, the
nother of the Regent, writes that “‘we scarcely meet a young
Jan now who is not ambitious of being an atheist.”! Under
he Regency, unbelief comes out into open daylight. “I doubt,”
ys this lady again, in 1722, “‘if, in all Paris, a hundred individ-
als can be found, either ecclesiastics or laymen, who have
Re irie faith, or even believe in our Lord. It makes one trem-
le. . . .” The position of an ecclesiastic in society is already
lifficult. He is looked upon, apparently, as either a puppet or a


1 Aubertin, “L’Esprit-public,” in the 18th century, p. 7.


288 THE ANCIENT REGIME.


butt! “The moment we appear,” says one of them, “we
forced into discussion; we are called upon to prove, for exat ay
the utility of prayer to an unbeliever in God, and the necessit
of fasting to a man who has all his life denied the immortal
of the soul; the effort is very irksome, while those who la
are not on our side.” It is not long before the continu
scandal of confession tickets and the stubbornness of the bisho
in not allowing ecclesiastical property to be taxed, e: ci te
opinion against the clergy and, as a matter of course, af gail
religion itself. “There is danger,” says Barbier in 1751, “
this may end seriously; we may some day see a revolution
this country in favor of protestantism, ”2 «The hatred agair nst t ‘
priests,” writes d’Argenson 1 in 1753, “is carried to extremes. —
scarcely show themselves in the streets without being boobed
. As our nation and our century are quite otherwise en igh
ened (than in the time of Luther), it will be carried far enc
they will expel the priests, abolish the priesthood and get rid
all revelation and all mystery. . . . One dare not spon in I
half of the clergy in social crcless one is scoffed at and regard
as a familiar of the inquisition. The priests remark that, th }
year, there is a diminution of more than one-third in the nui
ber of communicants. The College of the Jesuits is being
serted ; one hundred and-twenty boarders have been withdrawn
from these so greatly defamed monks. It has been observed
also that, during the carnival in Paris, the number of masks
counterfeiting ecclesiastical dress,—bishops, abbés, monks and
nuns,—was never so great.” So deep is this antipathy, thes a 0 t
mediocre books become the rage so long as they are anti
christian and condemned as such. In 1748 a work by Toussaint
called “Les Mceurs,” in favor of natural religion suddenly b
comes so famous “that there is no one among a certain c 5 ¢
people,” says Barbier, “man or woman, pretending to be ir tel 2}
lectual, who is not eager to seeit.” People accost each other 01
their promenades, Have you read “Les Mceurs?” Ten y ar
later they are beyond deism. “ Materialism,” again says Bat piel
“is the great grievance.” ‘Almost all people of acquiremer
and of wit,” writes d’Argenson, “inveigh against our holy x


' Montesquieu, ‘Lettres Persanes,” (Letter 61). Cf. Voltaire, (Diner du
Boulainvilliers’’).


? Aubertin, pp. 281, 282, 285, 289.


*


THE PROPAGATION OF THE DOCTRINE. 289


jon. . . . It is attacked on all sides, and, what animates unbe-
vers still more, is the efforts made by the devout to compel
lief. ‘They publish books which are but little read; disputes
pence: take place, ee hue being laughed at, bite people
Sist in materialism.” Horace Walpole, who returns to France
ess” and whose good sense anticipates the danger, is aston-
ed at such imprudence: “I dined to-day with a dozen
ms, and although all the servants were waiting, the conversa-
1 was much more unrestrained, even on the Old Testament,
a I would suffer at my own table in England even if a single
ot man was present.” People dogmatize everywhere. “ Laugh-
x is as much out of fashion as cpasitins or bilboquets. Good
ks, they have no time to laugh! There is God and the king
be pulled down first; and men and women, one and all, are
voutly employed in the demolition. They think me quite
ne for having any belief left... . Do you know who “he
ilosophers are, or what the term means here? In the first
ace it comprehends almost everybody; and in the next, means
m, who, avowing war against popery, aim, many of them, at
subversion of all religion. . . . These savans—lI beg their par-
ms, the philosophers—are insupportable, superficial, overbear-
z and fanatic: they preach incessantly and their avowed doc-
he is atheism, you would not believe how openly. Voltaire
mself does not satisfy them. One of their lady devotees said
him, ‘ He is a bigot, a deist !’”
T his is very strong, and yet we have not come to the end of
for, thus far, impiety is less a conviction than the fashion.
ieee, a careful observer, is not deluded by it. “By what I
ve said of their religious or rather irreligious opinions, you must
: conclude their people of quality atheists—at least not the
nm. Happily for them, poor souls! they are not capable of go-
0 far into thinking. They assent to a great deal because it
h tion, and because they don’t know how to contradict.”
7 “that dandies are antiquated” and everybody is “a philos-
: Be tthey are philosophers.” It is essential to be like all the
ithe world. But that which they best appreciate in the
vo B initerialism is the pungency of paradox and the freedom
fen to pleasure. ‘They are like the boys of good families, fond


lorac Walpole, “Letters and Correspondence,” Sept. 27th, October 19th and 28th,
"mber 19, 1765, January 25, 1766.


a 25
;
y 7
~


290 THE ANCIENT REGIME.


of playing tricks on their ecclesiastical preceptor. ‘They té
of learned theories just what is wanted to make a dunce-cap, at
derive the more amusement from the fun if it is seasoned
impiety. A seignior of the court having seen Doyen’s pictu: a ¢
“St. Genevieve and the plague-stricken,” sends to a painter th
following day to come to him at his mistress’s domicile: “
would like,” he says to him, “to have Madame painted in

swing put in motion by a bishop; you may place me in such |
way that I may see the ankles of that handsome woman, an
even more, if you want to enliven your picture.”! The licentious
song “Marotte” “spreads like wildfire;” “a fortnight after its
publication,” says Collé, ‘I met no one without a copy; and it
the vaudeville, that is to say, the clerical assembly, which giv ves,
its popularity.” The more irreligious a licentious book is 1
more it is prized; when it cannot be printed it is copied in mani
script. Collé counts “perhaps two thousand manuscript opi 7
of ‘La Pucelle’ by Voltaire, scattered about Paris in one month

The magistrates themselves burn it only for form’s sake. “It
must not be supposed that the hangman is allowed to ic :
books whose titles figure in the decree of the Court. Me
would be loath to deprive their libraries of the copy of shovgil wor
which fall to them by right and have the registrar supply its pli
with a few poor records of chicanery of which there is no sc
provision.”? iM

But, as the century advances, infidelity becomes less obstrepé

ous and more resolute. It invigorates itself at the fount
head; the women themselves begin to be infatuated with ;
sciences. In 1782,3 one of Mme. de Genlis’s characters write:
«Five years ago I left them thinking only of their attire and th
preparation of their suppers; I now find them all scientific an
witty.” We find in the study of a fashionable woman, alongsi
of a small altar dedicated to Benevolence or Friendship, a di
tionary of natural history and treatises on physics and chemistr
A woman no longer has herself painted as a goddess on a clo:
but in a laboratory, seated amidst squares and telescopes. T


1 “Journal et Mémoires de Collé,” published by H. Bonhomme, IT. 24 (October, 1755)
III. 165 (October, 1767).

2 “Corresp. littéraire,” by Grimm (September, October, 1770).

8 Mme. de Genlis, ‘‘Adéle et Théodore,” I. 3r2. ir

4 De Goncourt, ‘La femme au-dix-huitiéme siécle,” 371-373: Bachaumont, I. 224 {
13, 1763). ‘


pu. THE PROPAGATION OF THE DOCTRINE. 291


Marquise de Nesle, the Comtesse de Brancas, the Comtesse de
Pons, the Marquise de Polignac, are with Rouelle when he un-
dertakes to melt and volatilize the diamond. Associations of
twenty or twenty-five persons are formed in the drawing-rooms to
attend lectures either on physics, applied chemistry, mineralogy
sron botany. Fashionable women at the public meetings of the
Academy of Inscriptions applaud dissertations on the bull Apis,
and reports on the Egyptian, Phoenician and Greek languages.
Finally, in 1786, they succeed in opening the doors of the Col-
lege de France. Nothing deters them. Many of them use the
ancet and even the scalpel; the Marquise de Voyer attends on
dissections, and the young Comtesse de Coigny dissects with her
own hands. The current infidelity finds fresh support on this
foundation, which is that of the prevailing philosophy. Towards
end of the century! “we see young persons who have been
in society six or seven years openly pluming themselves on their
mreligion, thinking that impiety makes up for wit, and that to be
atheist is to be a philosopher.” There are, undoubtedly, a
sood many deists, especially‘ after Rousseau appeared, but I
uestion whether, out of a hundred persons, there were in Paris at
his time ten christian men or women. ‘The fashionable world
for ten years past,” says Mercier” in 1783, “has not attended
mass. People go only on Sundays so as not to scandalize their
ackeys while the lackeys well know that it is on their account.
Phe Duc de Coigny,® on his estate near Amiens, refuses to be
rayed for and threatens his curate if he takes that liberty to have
um cast out of his pulpit; his son becomes ill and he prohibits
e administering of the sacraments; the son dies and he opposes
he usual obsequies, burying the body in his garden; becoming ill
umself he closes his door against the bishop of Amiens, who
omes to see him twelve times, and dies as he had lived. A
andal of this kind is doubtless notorious and, therefore, rare.
Bicsost everybody, male and femafe, “ally with freedom of ideas
/proper observance of forms.”* When a maid appears and says
> her mistress, “‘ Madame la Duchesse, the Host (/e bon Dieu) is
utside, will you allow him to enter? He desires to have the


1 1 Mine. de Genlis, “‘ Adéle et Théodore,” II. 326.

2 “Tableau de Paris,” III. 44.

3 Métra, ‘Correspondance secrete,” XVII. 387 (March 7, 1785).

= De Goncourt, zé¢d. 456. Vicomtesse de Noailles, ‘Vie de la Princesse de Foix,” formerly
Deauvan,


292 THE ANCIENT REGIME..


honor of administering to. you,” appearances are kept up. Tl
troublesome individual is admitted and he is politely
If they slip away from him it is under a decent pretext; but :
he is humored it is only out of a sense of decorum; “At $

when a man dies, he holds a cow’s tail in his han e
was never more detached from christianity. In its eyes a po
itive religion is only a popular superstition, good enough f
children and innocents but not for “sensible people” and th th
great. It is your duty to raise your hat to the Host as it oe
but your duty is only to raise your hat. .

The last and gravest sign of all! If the curates who vol

who are of the people hold the people’s ideas, the prelates w:
talk, and who are of society hold the opinions of society. Ar
I do not allude merely to the abbés of the drawing-room, tl
domestic courtiers, bearers of news, and writers of light * ors
those who fawn in boudoirs, and who, when in company, an y
like an echo and who, between one drawing-room and anoth
serve as speaking-tubes ; an echo, a speaking-tube only reps
the phrase, whether sceptical or not, with which it is charge Bt
refer to the dignitaries, and, on this point, the witnesses all concu
In the month of August, 1767, the Abbé Bassinet, grand vicar 6:
‘Cahors, on pronouncing the panegyric of St. Louis in the Lou
chapel,' ‘‘suppressed the sign of the cross, making no quotati
from Scripture and never uttering a word about Christ and t
Saints. He considered Louis 1X. merely on the side of his pt
litical, moral and military virtues. He animadverted on the ¢ Cr r
sades, setting forth their absurdity, cruelty and even injus
He struck openly and without caution at the see of Rome
Others “avoid the name of Christ in the pulpit and merely al
to him as a christian legislator.”* In the code which chad
vailing steal, and social decency imposes on the clergy: 3 a ¢
cate observer ® thus specifies distinctions in rank with their pr
shades of behavior: “A plaiff priest, a curate, must have a ]
‘faith, otherwise he would be found a hypocrite ; at the same t


bi
+
pe


-.


a.


1 The Abbé de Latteignaut, canon of Rheims, the author of some light poetry ind ¢
vivial songs, ‘has just composed for Nicolet’s theatre a parade in which the intrigue is s
ported by a good many broad jests, very much in the fashion at this time. The courtiers \
give the tone to this theatre think the canon of Rheims superb.” (Bachaumont, IV.
November, 1768). . ;

* Bachaumont, III, 253. Chateaubriand, “Mémoires,” I. 246.

% Champfort, 279.


i
—


MAP. 1. THE PROPAGATION OF THE. DOCTRINE, 293


1e must not: be too well satisfied, for he would. be found intoler-
ant. On the contrary, the grand vicar may smile at an expres-
sion against religion, the bishop may laugh outright, and the car-
dinal may add something of his own to it.” “A little while ago,”
a chronicle narrates, “‘some one put this question to one of the
most respectable curates in Paris: Do you think that the bishops
who insist so strenuously on religion have much of it themselves ?
The worthy pastor replied, after a moment’s hesitation: There
may be four or five among them who still believe.” To one who —
is familiar with their birth, their social relations, their habits and
heir tastes, this does not appear at all improbable. “Dom Col-
lignon, a representative of the abbey of Mettach, seignior high-
usticiary and curate of Valmunster,” a fine-looking man, fine
talker, and an agreeable housekeeper, avoids scandal by having
his two mistresses at his table only with a select few; he is in
ther respects as little devout as possible, and much less so than
the Savoyard vicar, “finding evil only in injustice and in a lack
if charity,” and considering religion merely as a political institu-
on and for moral ends. I might cite many others, like M. de
srimaldi, the young and gallant bishop of Le Mans, who selects
roung and gallant comrades of his own station for his grand
icars, and who has a rendezvous for pretty women at his country
eat at Coulans.!. Judge of their faith by their habits. - In other
sases we have no difficulty in determining. Scepticism is noto-
fous with the Cardinal de Rohan, with M. de Brienne, arch-
shop of Sens, with M. de Talleyrand, bishop of Autun, and
with the Abbé Maury, defender of the clergy. Rivarol,” himself
i sceptic, declares that at the approach of the Revolution, “the
nlightenment of the clergy equalled that of the philosophers.”
7 he body with the fewest prejudices,” says Mercier,’? “who
gould believe it, is the clergy.” And the Archbishop of Nar-
onne, explaining the resistance of the upper class of the clergy
1 1791,‘ attributes it, not to faith but to a point of honor. “We
onducted ourselves at that time like true gentlemen, for, with.


“Merlin de Thionville, “Vie ct correspondance,” by Jean Raynaud. (‘La Chartreuse du
al Saint-Pierre.” Read the entire passage). ‘Souvenirs Manuscrits,” by M—.
Rivarol, “Mémoires,” I. 344. :

8 Mercier, IV. 142. “In Auvergne, says M. de Montlosier, I formed for myself a society
} iests, men of wit, some of whom were deists and others open atheists, with whom I
rriec [on a contest with my brother.” (‘‘ Mémoires,” I. 37).

‘La ayette, ‘‘ Mémoires,” III. 58.

oe


294 . THE ANCIENT REGIME: ~ t


most of us, it could not be said that it was through religious fee
ing.” ae
V. 2 aie
The distance between the altar and the throne is a short ¢ on
and yet it requires thirty years for opinion to overcome it. J
political or social attacks are yet made during the first lf |
the century. The irony of the “ Lettres Persanes” is as cau a
as it is delicate, and the “ Esprit des Lois” is conservative.
to the Abbé de Saint-Pierre his reveries provoke a smile, a an
when he undertakes to censure Louis XIV. the Academy ‘strike
him off its list. At last, the economists on one side and th
parliamentarians on the other, give the signal. Voltaire says
that “about 1750 the nation satiated with verse, tragedies, com
dies, novels, operas, romantic histories, and still more romant
moralizings, and with disputes about grace and convulsions, be
to discuss the question of corn.” What makes bread dea
Why is the laborer so miserable? What constitutes the matet
and limits of taxation? Ought not all land to pay taxes a
should one piece pay more than its net product? These a
the questions that find their way into drawing-rooms under
king’s auspices, by means of Quesnay, his physician, “his thir
the founder of a system which aggrandizes the sovereign | te
relieve the people and which multiplies the number of tax-pay
to lighten the burden of taxation. At the same time, throug
the opposite door, other questions enter, not less novel. “|
France? a mild and representative monarchy or a governmet
of the Turkish stamp? Are we subject to the will of an absolut
master, or are we governed by a limited and regulated powe
. The exiled parliaments are studying public rights at th
sources and conferring together on these as in the acader
Through their researches, the opinion is gaining ground in th
public mind that the nation is above the king as the re H
church is above the pope.” The change is striking and @
immediate. “Fifty years ago,” says d’Argenson, again, P
public showed no curiosity concerning matters of the State. 1
day everybody reads his Gazette de Paris, even in the provir


1 *Tict, Phil.” article **Corn.”” The most important work of Quesnay is of the nae 175
“Tableau économique.’
? D’Argenson, ‘‘ Mémoires,” IV. 141; VI. 320, 465; VII. 23; VIII. 153 (1752, 1753, 4
Rousseau’s discourse on Inequality belongs also to 1753. On this steady march of ©
consult the excellent work of d’Aubertin, ““L’Esprit public au dix-huitiéme siécle.”


euAP. 11. THE PROPAGATION OF THE DOCTRINE. 295


People reason at random on political subjects, but nevertheless
ee occupy themselves with them.” Conversation having once |
provided itself with this aliment holds fast to it, the drawing-rooms,
ccordingly, opening their doors to political philosophy and,
consequently, to the Social Contract, to the Encyclopedia, to the
Beeching: of Rousseau, Mably, d’Holbach, Raynal, and Diderot.
I n 1759, d’Argenson, wis becomes excited, already thinks the
ast hour has come. “We feel the breath of a philosophical
n mti-monarchical, free government wind; the idea is current and
I eeily this form of government, already i in some minds, is to be
a ied out the first favorable opportunity. Perhaps the revolution
x og take place with less opposition than one supposes, occur-
ig by acclamation,” }

"The time-is not yet come, but the seed is coming up. Bachau-
mont, in 1762, notices a deluge of pamphlets, tracts and political
discussions, “a rage for arguing on financial and government
matters.” In 1765, Walpole states that the atheists, who then
monopolize conversation, inveigh against kings as well as
against priests. A formidable word, that of citizen, imported by
Rousseau, has entered into common speech, and the matter is
settled on the women adopting it as they would acockade. “As
a friend and a ¢itoyenne could any news be more agreeable to me
than that of peace and the health of my dear little one?” ?
Another word, not less significant, that of exergy, formerly ridic-
ul ous, becomes fashionable and is used on every occasion.’
A ‘long with language there is a change of sentiment, ladies of
igh rank passing over to the opposition. In 1771, says the scoffer
Be enval, after the exile of the Parliament “social meetings
for Pieicure or other purposes had become petty States-Generals
in which the women, transformed into legislators, established the
premises and confidently propounded maxims of public right.”
¢ Comtesse d’Egmont, a correspondent of the King of Sweden,
pe ds him a memorial on the fundamental law of France, favor-
ng the Parliament, the last defender of national liberty, sean
e encroachments of Chancellor Maupeou. “The Chancellor,”
be says,* “within the last six months has brought people to


* 1 This seems to be prophetic of the night of August 4, 1789.

_ 2 Corresp. de Laurette de Malboissiére,” published by the Marquise de laGrange. (Sept.
4, 1762, November 8, 1762).

Madame du Deffant in a letter to Madame de Choiseul, (quoted by Geffroy), “Gustave
st la cour de France,” I. 279.

_ 4 Gefiroy, tbid. 1. 232, 241, 245.


296 THE ANCIENT REGIME, |


know the history of France who would have died without 3
knowledge of it.... I have no doubt, sire,” she adds, “ :
you never will GhiGe the power an enraptured people haveg
trusted to you without limitation... . May your reign pro
the epoch of the re-establishment of a free and independent 501
ernment but never the source of absolute authority.” Numbe
of women of the first rank, Mesdames de la Marck, de Bo
de Brienne, de Mesmes, de Luxembourg, ss Croy, think ¢
write in the same style. ‘Absolute power,” says one of tl
“is a mortal malady which, insensibly corrupting moral quali litie
ends in the destruction of states. . . . The actions of sover
are subject to the censure of Pet cubiecks as to that of tl
universe. . . . France is undone if the present administratic
lasts,” + When, under Louis XVI., a new administration propo OSE
and withdraws feeble measures of reform their criticism show;
the same firmness: “Childishness, weakness, constant inco SI
ency,” writes another,? “incessant change and always worse
than we were before. Monsieur and M. le Comte d’Artoi
have just made a journey through the provinces but only
people of that kind travel, with a frightful expenditure an
devastation along the whole road, coming back extraordinar lj
fat; Monsieur is as big as a hogshead; as to M. le Comte
d’Artois he is bringing about order by the life he leads.”
inspiration of humanity animates these feminine breasts alon,
with that of liberty. ‘They interest themselves in the poor, i

children, in the people; Madame d’Egmont recommends us
tavus ITI. to plant Dalecarlia with potatoes. On the appearanc .
of the engraving published for the benefit of Calas? “all Frar
and even all Europe, hastens to subscribe for it, the Empresa a) ft
Russia giving 5,000 livres. “Agriculture, economy, reforn m,
philosophy,” writes Walpole, “are don ‘on, even at the court.”
President Dupaty having drawn up a memorial in behalf
three innocent persons sentenced “to be broken on the whe
everybody in society is talking about it;” “idle conversation no
longer prevails in society,” says a “correspondent of Gu:
tavus ITI. “since it is that which forms public opinion. Word


1 Geffroy, z4id. I. 267, 281. See letters by Madame de Boufflers (October, 1772, July 177

2 /bid. 1. 285. ‘The letters of Mme. de la March (1776, 1777, 1779).

3 A victim of religious rancor against the protestants, whose cause, taken up by Voltai
excited great indignation. —Tr.

4 Bachaumont, III. 14 (March 28, 1766. Walpole, Oct. 6, 1775).

5 Geffroy, 2béd. (A letter by Mme. de Staél, 1776).


, x u. ZHE PROPAGATION OF THE DOCTRINE, 297


e become actions. Every sensitive heart praises with transport
m SP aiorial inspired by humanity and which appears full of talent
ye cause it is full of feeling.” When Latude is released from the
a on of Bicétre Mme. de Luxembourg, Mme. de Boufflers, and
Mme. de Staél dine with the grocer-woman who “for three years
and a half moved heaven and earth” to set the prisoner free,
+ is owing to the women, to their sensibility and zeal, to a
CO onspiracy of their sympathies, that M. de Lally succeeds in the
rehabilitation of his father. When they take a fancy to a person
* become infatuated with him; Madame de Lauzun, very
m mid, goes so far as to publicly ask a man who speaks ill of
[. Necker. It must be borne in mind that, in this century, the
3 men were queens, setting the fashion, giving the tone, leading -
n conversation and naturally shaping ideas and opinions.!_ When
ey take the lead on the political field we may be sure that the
en will follow them: each one carries her drawing-room circle


vith her.


VI.


_ An aristocracy imbued with humanitarian and radical maxims,
ourtiers hostile to the court, privileged persons aiding in under-
ining privileges, presents to us a strange spectacle in the testi-
nony of the time. A contemporary states that it is an accepted
rk pole “to change and upset everything.” High and low, in
ssemblages, i in public places, only reformers and opposing parties
encountered among the privileged classes. “In 1787, almost
yer prominent man of the peerage in the Parliament declared
mself in favor of resistance. . . . I have seen at the dinners we
en attended almost every eee aa forward, which, soon after-
s, produced such startling effects.”* Already in 1774, M. de
abla, on his way to Metz, finds a diligence containing an
esiastic and a count, a colonel in the hussars, talking political
on. nomy constantly. “It was the fashion of the day. Every-
ey - was an economist. People conversed together only about
los sophy, political economy and especially humanity, and the


Coll “ Journal,” III. 437 (r770): ‘Women have got the upper hand with the French
stich an extent, the have so subjugated them, that they neither feel nor think except as
”


+*¢ 0 espondance,” by Métra, III. 200; IV. 131.
“Souvenirs Manuscrits,” by M
De Vaublanc, “Souvenirs,” I. 117, 377.


bn
“!


2098 THE ANCIENT REGIME.


means for relieving the good people, which two wont ere
everybody’ smouth.” To this must be added equality ;
in a eulogy of Marshal Saxe says, “I cannot conceal it, ne4
of royal blood,” and this phrase was admired. A few of (
heads of old parliamentary or seigniorial families maintain the
patrician and monarchical standard, the new generation suce ie
ing to novelty. ‘“ For gurselves,” says one of them belong s
the youthful class of the nobility,’ “ with no regret for the pa st
anxiety for the future, we marched gayly along over a carpet 0
flowers concealing an abyss. Mocking censors of antiqua ite
ways, of the feudal pride of our fathers and of their sober et
quette, everything antique seemed to us annoying and ridicule
The gravity of old doctrines oppressed us. The cheerful p D
losophy of Voltaire amused and took possession of us. itho
fathoming that of graver writers we admired it for its stamp
fearlessness and resistance to arbitrary power. . . . Liberty, wha
" ever its language, delighted us with its spirit, and equality on a
count of its convenience. It is a pleasant thing to descen d
long as one thinks one can ascend when one pleases; we wer 23
once enjoying, without forethought, the advantages of the pi
ciate and the sweets of a plebeian philosophy. Thus, altho a
our privileges were at stake, and the remnants of our former § Sl
premacy were undermined under our feet, this little warfare gra
ified us.. Inexperienced in the attack, we simply admired th
spectacle. Combats with the pen and with words did not appe.
to us capable of damaging our existing superiority, which sever
centuries of possession had made us regard as impregnable. T
forms of the edifice remaining intact, we could not see ne
could be mined from within. We laughed at the serious m
of the old court and of the clergy which thundered avait the
spirit of innovation. We applauded republican scenes i ;
theatre,” philosophic discourses in our Academies, the bold
publications of the literary class.” If inequality still subsi
the distribution of offices and of places, “ equality begins to reigi
in society. On many occasions literary titles obtain precede enc


1 De Ségur, ‘‘ Mémoires,” I. 17.
2 Jbid, 1. 151. ‘‘I saw the entire court at the theatre in the chateau at Veradillesta
astically applaud Voltaire’s tragedy of ‘Brutus,’ and especially these lines:
Je suis fils de Brutus, et je porte en mon coeur
La liberté gravée et les rois en horreur.”’


pu. ZHE PROPAGATION OF THE DOCTRINE. 299


pre titles of nobility. Courtiers and servants of the State in
fashion, paid their court to Marmontel, d’Alembert and Raynal.
We frequently saw in company literary men of the second and
hird rank greeted and receiving attentions not extended to the
n Ee obies of the provinces. . . . Institutions remained monarchical,
but manners and customs bechenie republican. A word of praise
from d’Alembert or Diderot was more esteemed than the most
marked favor from a prince. It was impossible to pass an even-
i ng with d’Alembert, or at the Hétel de Larochefoucauld among
the friends of Turgot, to attend a breakfast at the Abbé Raynal’s,
to be admitted into the society and family of M. de Malesherbes,
in fine, to approach a most amiable queen ‘and a most upright
king without believing ourselves about to enter upon a kind of

golden era of which preceding centuries afforded no idea... .
We were bewildered by the prismatic hues of fresh ideas and
ee rirines, radiant with hopes, ardently aglow for every sort of
Teputation, enthusiastic for all talents and beguiled by every se-
ductive dream of a philosophy that was about to secure thé hap-
piness of the human species. Far from foreseeing misfortune,
<cess, crime, the overthrow of thrones and of principles, the fu-


tive from the sovereignty of reason. Free circulation was left to
" every reformatory writing, to every project of innovation, to the
_ most liberal ideas and to the boldest of systems. Everwhadl
thought himself on the road to perfection without being under
ny embarassment or fearing any kind of obstacle. We were proud
of being Frenchmen and, yet again, Frenchmen of the eighteenth
century. . . . Never was a more terrible awakening preceded by
a sweeter slumber or by more seductive dreams.”
_ They do not content themselves with dreams, with pure de-
> with passive aspirations. ‘They are active, and truly gener-
S; a worthy cause suffices to secure their devotedness. On the
jews of the American rebellion, the Marquis de Lafayette, leav-
ng his young wife pregnant, escapes, braves the orders of the
Ou , purchases a frigate, crosses the ocean and fights by the side
5 eo nstn. “The moment the quarrel was made known to
- he says, “my heart was enlisted in it, and my only thought
5 to rejoin my regiment.” Numbers of gentlemen follow in
1S Be tsteps They undoubtedly love danger; ‘“‘the chance of


&


/


ture disclosed to us only the benefits which humanity was to de-.


300 : THE ANCIENT REGIME.


being shot is too precious to be neglected.” + But the
is to emancipate the oppressed; “we showed ourselves ph:
phers by becoming paladins,”” the chivalric sentiment enlisting
the service of liberty. Other services besides these, mores a
tary ‘and less brilliant, find no fewer zealots. “The chief. Me
sonages of the provinces in the provincial assemblies,’ the bis
ops, archbishops, abbés, dukes, counts, and marquises, with th
wealthiest and best informed of the notables in the Third-Estat
in all about a thousand persons, in short the social elect, the et
tire upper class convoked by the king, organize the budget, «
fend the tax-payer against the fisc, arrange the land-regi :
equalize the /ail/e, provide a substitute for the corvée, provide p
lic roads, multiply charitable asylums, educate agriculturists, pi
posing, encouraging and directing every species of reformat
movement. I have read through the twenty volumes of t
proces-verbaux : no better citizens, no more conscientious n :
no more devoted administrators can be found, none-gratuitous
taking so much trouble on themselves with no object but t
public welfare. Never was an aristocracy so deserving of pow
at the moment of losing it; the privileged class, aroused fro
their indolence, were again becoming public men,-and, restores
to their functions, were returning to their duties. In 1778, in th
first assembly of Berry, the Abbé de Seguiran, the reporter, ha
the courage to state that “the distribution of the taxes should bi
a fraternal partition of public obligations.”* In 1780 the ab ¢
priors and chapters of the same province contribute 60,000 liv
of their funds, and a few gentlemen, in less than ile
hours, contribute 17,000 livres. In 1787, in the assembly ©
Alengon the nobility and the clergy assess themselves 30,0¢
livres to relieve the indigent in each parish subject to taxatio
In the month of April, 1787, the king, in an assembly of the nt
ables, speaks of ‘the eagerness with which archbishops and bisk


1 De Lauzun, 80 (in relation to his expedition into Corsica).

2 De Ségur, I. 87.

3 The assemblies of Berry, Haute-Guyenne, open in 1779; those of other gene 7
1787; all are in session until 1789. (Cf. Léonce de Lavergne, “ Les Assemblées p 0 “i -
ciales’’). :

4 Léonce de Lavergne, zdid. 26, 55, 183. The tax department of the provincial as
of Tours likewise makes its demands on the privileged class in the matter of taxation. — —
5 Procés-verbaux of the prov. ass. of Normandy, the generalship of Alengon, 252.
Archives nationales, H, 1149: in 1778 in the generalship of Moulins, thirty-nine perso
mostly nobles, supply from their own funds 18,950 livres to the 60,000 livres “allowed by
king for roads and asylums.


“ mu. THE PROPAGATION OF THE DOCTRINE, 301


F come forward Seeing no exemption in their contributions to the
sublic revenue.” In the month of March, 1789, on the opening
of the bailiwick assemblies, the entire clergy, nearly all the nobility,
n short, the whole body of the. privileged class voluntarily re-
pounce their privileges in relation to taxation. The sacrifice is
voted unanimously ; ; they themselves offer it to the Third- “Estate,
and it is worth while to see their generous and sympathetic tone in
the manuscript froces-verbaux. ‘The nobility of the bailiwick of
Tours,” says the Marquis de Lusignan,! “considering that they
are men and citizens before being nobles, can make amends
inno way more in conformity with the spirit of justice and pat-
" cian that animates the body, for the long silence to which it
has been condemned by the abuse of ministerial power, than in
declaring to their fellow-citizens that in future they will claim
I one of the pecuniary advantages secured to them by custom, and
that they. unanimously and solemnly bind themselves to bear
cs C ually, each in proportion to his fortune, all taxes and gen-
1 contributions which the nation shall prescribe.” “I repeat,”
iy: the Comte de Buzangois at the meeting of the Third-Es-
tate of Berry, “that we are all brothers, and that we are anxious
to share your burdens. . . . We desire to have but one single
voice go up to the assembly and thus manifest the union and
harmony which should prevail there. I am directed to make the
‘proposal to you to unite with you in one memorial.” “These
“qualities are essential in a deputy,” says the Marquis de Barban-
gon speaking for the nobles of Chateauroux, “integrity, firmness
and knowledge; the first two are equally found among the dep-
uties of the three orders; but knowledge will be more generally
ound in the Third-Estate, which is more accustomed to sage
2 fairs.” “A new order of things is unfolding before us,” says
the Abbé Legrand in the name of the clergy of Chateauroux ;
2 “the veil of prejudice 1 is being torn away and giving place to rea-
son. She is possessing herself of all French hearts,.attacking at
Bhe root whatever is based on former opinion and deriving her
ower only from herself.” Not only do the privileged classes


, Sen nationales, Arocés-verbaux and memorials of the States-General, vol. XLIX.
B32, 714 (the nobles and clergy of Dijon); t. XVI. p. 183 (the nobles of Auxerre); t.
“ose PP. 352, 455, 458 (the clergy and nobles of Berry); t. CL. p. 266 (the clergy and
nobles of Tours) ; t. XXIX. (the clergy and nobles of Chateauroux, January 29, 1789); pp-
‘57 abs. t. XIII. 765 (the nobles of Autun). See as a summary of the whole, the “‘ Résumé
_—_, by Prud’homme, 3 vols.


26


302 THE ANCIENT REGIME.


make advances but it is no effort to them; they use the sariie la
guage as the people of the Third-Estate; they are disciples s ¢
the same philosophers and seem to start orn the same princip 'S,
The nobility of Clermont in Beauvoisis,! order its deputies Me
demand, first oe all, an explicit declaration of the rights bel
ing toall men.” ‘The nobles of Mantes and Meulan affirm “that
political principles are as absolute as moral principles since b 20 /
have reason for a common basis.” The nobles of Rheims de na nd
“that the king be entreated to order the demolition of the Bas:
tille.” Frequently, after such expressions and with such a 3 a
ing disposition, the delegates of the nobles and clergy are greeted
in the assemblies of the Third-Estate with the clapping of hands
“tears” and transports. On witnessing such effusions how can
one avoid believing in concord? And how can one foresee strife
at the first turn of the road on which they have just irater nally
entered hand in hand? 4
Wisdom of this melancholy stamp is not theirs. They set out
with the principle that man, and especially the man of the pec
ple, is good; why conjecture that he may desire evil for be
who wish him well? They are conscientious in their benevolence
and sympathy for him. Not only do they utter these sentiments
but they give them proof. ‘At this moment,” says a conte mpo-
rary,” “the most active pity animates all breasts; the great ¢ be
of the opulent is to appear insensible.” The archbishop ©
Paris, subsequently followed and stoned, is the donator of ¢ one
hundred thousand crowns to the hospital of the Hétel-D
The intendant Berthier, who is to be massacred, draws up t the
new assessment-roll of the Ile-de-France, equalizing the Zale,
and which allows him to abate the rate, at first, an eighth, ant
next, a quarter.? The financier Beaujon constructs a hospital. —
Necker refuses the salary of his place and lends the treasury two”
millions to re-establish public credit. ‘The Duc de Charost, from
1770* down, abolishes seigniorial corvées on his domain. nd
founds a hospites in his seigniory of Meillant. The Prine


! Prud’homme, 7é7d. IT. 39, 51, 59- De Lavergne, 384. In 1788, two hundred gentl me n
of the first families of Dauphiny sign, conjointly with the clergy and the Third-Estate of the
province, an address to the king in which occurs the following passage: “Neither time nor
obligation legitimizes despotism the rights of men derive from nature alone and are indep Der id
ent of their engagements.’

2 Lacretelle, ‘ Hist. de France au dix-huitiéme siécle,” V. 2.

8 Procés-verbaix of the prov. ass. of the Ile-de-France (1787), p. 127.

* De Lavergne, sid. 52, 369.


/


cuap.u. THE PROPAGATION OF THE. DOCTRINE. 303


_ Beaufremont, the presidents de Vezet, de Chamolles, de Chaillot,
_ with many seigniors beside in Franche-Comté, follow the example
of the king in emancipating their serfs.1_ The bishop of Saint-
- Claude demands, in spite of his chapter, the enfranchisement of
‘his mainmorts. ‘The Marquis de Mirabeau establishes on his
domain in Limousin, a gratuitous bureau for the settlement of
lawsuits, while daily, at Fleury, he causes nine hundred pounds
_ of cheap bread to be made for the use of “the poor people who
_ fight to see*who shall have it.”* M. de Barral, bishop of Castres,
directs his curates to preach and to diffuse the cultivation of
' potatoes. The Marquis of Guerchy himself mounts on the top of
_apile of hay with Arthur Young to learn how to construct a hay-
stack. The Marquis de Lasteyrie imports lithography into
France. A number of grand seigniors and prelates figure in the
_ agricultural societies, compose or translate useful books, famil-
_ iarize themselves with the applications of science, study political
- economy, inform themselves about industries, and interest them-
selves, either as amateurs or promoters, in every public ameliora-
tion. “ Never,” says Lacretelle again, ‘‘ were the French so
combined together to combat the evils to which nature makes us
_ pay tribute and those which in a thousand ways creep into all
' social institutions.” Can it be admitted that so many good
intentions thus operating together are to end in destruction ?
_ All take courage, the government as well as the higher class,
im the thought of the good accomplished or which they desire to
accomplish. The king remembers that he has restored civil
_ rights to the protestants, abolished preliminary torture, suppressed
the corvée in kind, established the free circulation of grains,
instituted provincial assemblies, built up the marine, assisted the
_ Americans, emancipated his own serfs, diminished the expenses
of his household, employed Malesherbes, Turgot and Necker,
_ given full play to the press, and listened to public opinion. No
'- government displayed greater mildness; on the 14th of July,
__ 1789, only seven prisoners were confined in the Bastille, of which
one was an idiot, another kept there by his family, and four


_ 1 Qe cri de la raison,” by Clerget, curé d’Onans (1789), p. 258.
{ * 2Lucas de Montigny, ‘‘ Mémoires de Mirabeau,” I. 290, 368. Théron de Montaugé,
_ “Lagriculture et les classes rurales dans le pays Toulousain,” p. 14.
- Foreigners generally could scarcely form an idea of the power of public opinion at this
time in France; they can with difficulty Sempeshend the nature of that invisible power
3 which commands even in the king’s palace.’ (Necker, 1784, quoted by De Tocqueville).


304 ' THE ANCIENT REGIME.


under the charge of counterfeiting! No sovereign was m
humane, niore charitable, more preoccupied with the unfortut
In 1784, the year of inundations and epidemics, he renders
sistance to the amount. of three millions. Appeals are made t
him direct, even for personal accidents. On the 8th of Ju
178 5, he sends two hundred livres to the wife of a Breton
ing-man who, already having two children, brings three at
into the world.2. During a severe winter he allows the poor d
to invade his kitchen. It is quite probable that, next to Tur
he is the man of his day who loved the people most. His ¢
gates under him conform to his views; I have read countless |
by intendants who try to appear as little Turgots. “One builc
hospital, another admits artisans at his table;”* a certain mee:
ual undertakes the draining of amarsh. M. dela Tour, in
ence, is so beneficent during a period of forty years that 4
Tiers-Etat vote him a gold medal in spite of himself* A
ernor delivers a course of lectures on economical ee
What possible danger is there with shepherds of this kind ¢
their flocks? On gs! king convoking the States-General nobo
had “any suspicion,” nor fear of the future. “A new State ee \-
stitution is spoken of as an easy performance, and as a matter of
course.”®> “The best and most virtuous men see in this the b
ginning of a new era of happiness for France and for the wh
civilized world. The ambitious rejoice in the broad field op
to their desires. But it would have been impossible to find
most morose, the most timid, the most enthusiastic of men ant ic. -
ipating any one of the extraordinary events towards which t!
assembled states were drifting.”


1 Granier de Cassagnac, II. 236. M. de Malesherbes, according to custom, inspected
different state prisons, at the beginning of the reign of Louis XVI. ‘He told me hin
that he had only released ¢wo.’” (Senac de Meilhan, ‘‘ Du gouvernement, des mee
des conditions en France.’’) : a

2 Archives nationales, II, 1418, r149, f. 14, 2073. Assistance rendered to various suffer
provinces and places. ;

3 Aubertin, p. 484 (according to Bachaumont).

4 De Lavergne, 472. Se

5 Mathieu Dumas, ‘‘ Mémoires,” I. 426. Sir Samuel Romilly, “Mémoires,” I. 99. **Con-
fidence increased even to extravagance,” (Mme. de Genlis). On the 29th June, 1789, Necke

said at the council of the king at Marly, “What is more frivolous than the fears now
entertained concerning the organization of the assembly of the States-General? No law can
be passed without obtaining the king’s assent.” (De Barentin, ‘‘ Mémoires,” p.
Address of the National Assembly to its constituents, October 2, 1789. “‘A great rey
of which the idea would have appeared chimerical a few months since has been ef
amongst us.”


CHAPTER III..


_ THE MIDDLE cLAss.—I. The former spirit of the Third-Estate.—Public
aatters concern the king only. —Limits of the Jansenist and parliamentarian
opposition. —II. Change in the condition of the bourgeois.—He becomes
ealthy.—He makes loans to the State. —The danger of his creditorship.—He
n rests himself in public matters.—III. He rises on. the social ladder.— _
the noble draws near to him.—He becomes cultivated.—He enters into so-
sty.—He regards himself as the equal of the noble.—Privileges an annoy-
ice.—IV. Philosophy in the minds thus fitted for it.—That of Rousseau
ominent.—This philosophy in harmony with new necessities.—It is adopted
; the Third-Estate-—V. Its effect therein. —The formation of revolutionary
assions.—Levelling instincts.—The craving for dominion.—The Third-Es-
e decides and it constitutes the nation. Sets. *: ignorance, exaltation. —
vi. Summary.


I.


4 THE new philosophy, confined to a select circle, had long
served as a mere luxury for refined society. Merchants, manu-
a cturers, shopkeepers, lawyers, attorneys, physicians, actors,
or ofessors, curates, every description of functionary, employé
nd clerk, the entire middle class, had been absorbed with its
wn cares. The horizon of é¢ach was limited, being that of the
ofession or occupation which ‘each exercised, that of the cor-
Oration in which each one was comprised, of the town in which
ich one was born, and, at the utmost, that of the province
thich each one inhabited! A dearth of ideas coupled with
onscious diffidence restrained the bourgeois within his hereditary
atriers. His eyes seldom chanced to wander outside of them
ito the forbidden and dangerous territory of state affairs; hardly
s a furtive and rare glance bestowed on any of the abies acts,
n the matters which “belonged to the kings” There was no


21 have verified these sentiments myself in the narration of aged people deceased twenty
urs Ago. Cf. manuscript memoirs of Hardy the bookseller (analyzed by Aubertin), and
“Travels of Arthur Young.”

26*


306 THE ANCIENT REGIME.


1
critical irritability then, except with the bar, the compulsory sa
ellite of the Parliament and borne along in its orbit. In 17 (8
after a session of the royal court (Zt de justice), the lawyei
of Paris being on a strike the Regent exclaims angrily and wit
astonishment, “What! those fellows meddling too!”! It mu
be stated furthermore that many kept themselves in the back
ground. ‘My father and myself,” afterwards writes the advocat
Barbier, “‘took no part in the uproars, among those caustic and
turbulent spirits.” And he adds this significant article of fa
“TI believe that one has to fulfil his duties honorably, qwéthon
concerning oneself with state affairs in which one has no mission
and exercises no power.” During the first half of the “st at
century I am able to discover but one centre of opposition in t
Third-Estate, the Parliament, and around it, feeding the f
the ancient gallican or Jansenist spirit. “The good city ¢
Paris,” writes Barbier in 1733, “is Jansenist from top to botto: ny
and not alone the magistrates, the lawyers, the professors, th
best among the dourgeoisie, “but again the mass of the Parisian
men, women and children, all upholding that doctrine, withor
comprehending it, or understanding any of its distinctions an
interpretations, out of hatred to Rome and the Jesuits. Wome
the silliest, and even chambermaids, would be hacked to piece
for it... .” This party is increased by the honest folks of the
kingdom detesting persecutions and injustice. Accordingly.
when the various chambers of magistrates, in conjunction with
the lawyers, tender their resignations and file out of the pala
“amidst a countless multitude, the crowd exclaims: Behold
true Romans, the fathers of the country / and as the two counsel
lors Pucelle and Menguy pass along they fling them crow
The quarrel between the Parliament and the Court, sca
revived, is one of the sparks which provokes the grand fina
explosion, while the Jansenist embers, smouldering in the ashes
are to be of use in 1791 when the ecclesiastical edifice comes
be attacked. But within this old chimney-corner only wai
embers are now found, firebrands covered up, sometimes scatte
ing sparks and flames, but in themselves and by themselves, r
incendiary ; the flame is kept within bounds by its stru
and its supplies limit its heat. The Jansenist is too good
christian not to respect powers inaugurated from above. T


1 Aubertin, zdzd. 180, 362.


F mt. LHE PROPAGATION OF THE DOCTRINE. © 307


fliamentarian, conservative through his profession, would be
rified at overthrowing the established order of thin gs. Both
ombat for tradition and against innovation ; hence, after having
ended the past against arbitrary power ey are to defend it
sainst revolutionary violence and to fall, the one into impotency
d the other into oblivion.


)TY.

ordingly, the conflagration is of slow growth among the
iddle class, and, to ensure its spreading, a gradual transforma-
on has to be effected beforehand to render the refractory
aterials combustible. In the eighteenth century a great change
<es place in the condition of the Third-Estate. The bourgeois
s labored, manufactured, traded, earned and saved money,
4 d ihe has daily become richer and richer. This great expansion
} Pree of trade, of speculation and of fortunes dates from .
aw; arrested by war it reappears with more vigor and more
n Siation at each interval of peace after the treaty of Aix-la-
yhapelle i in 1748, and that of Paris in 1763, and especially after
ne beginning of the reign of Louis XVI. The exports of France
ghich amounted to one hundred and six millions in 1720, to one
ae and twenty-four millions in 173s, and to one hundred
ad “ninety-two millions in 1748, amount to two hundred and
y-seven millions. in 1755, to three hundred and nine millions
£1776, and to three hundred and fifty-four millions in 1788.
n 1786 St. Domingo alone sends to the metropolis one hundred
a esiglbges millions of its products and takes back fifty-
millions in merchandise. As an effect of these interchanges
B see arising at Nantes, and at Bordeaux, colossal commercial
uses. I consider Bordeaux, says Arthur Young, as richer and
ving more business than any city in England except London,
+. of late years the progress of maritime commerce bas


' Voltaire, “Si&cle de Louis XV.,” ch. xxxi; ‘*Siécle de Louis XIV.,” ch. xxx. ‘Industry
ses every day. To see the private display, the prodigious number of pleasant dwellings
ected in Paris and in the provinces, the numerous equipages, the conveniences, the acquisi-

s comprehended in the term /zxe, one might suppose that opulence was twenty times
ethan j it formerly was. All this is the result of ingenuity, much more than of wealth.
The middle class has become wealthy by industry. Commercial gains have augmented.
e opulence of the great is less than it was formerly and much larger among the middle
8s, the distance between men even being lessened by it. Formerly the inferior class had
resource but to serve their superiors; nowadays industry has opened up a thousand roads
nown a hundred years ago.”


308 "THE ANCIENT REGIME.


“been more ‘rapid in France than even in England! Ace a i
to an administrator of the day if the taxes on the consumpt (
of products daily increase the revenue, it is owing to
decapanns of industry having become greatly extent
1774.2 And this progress is regular and constant. “ We m
calculate,” says Necker in 1781, “on an increase of two millions
year on all the duties on consumption.’ ‘| In this great ‘effort ¢
invention, labor and genius, Paris, constantly growing, is he
central workshop... It enjoys, to a much greater extent ere:
day, the monopoly of all works of intelligence and taste, boo!
pictures, engravings, statues, jewelry, toilet details, carri ses
furniture, articles of fashion and rarity, whatever affords pleas:
and ornamentation for an elegant worldly society; all Europe
thus supplied by it. In 1774 its trade in books is estimated
forty-five millions, and that of London at only one-quarter <
that sum.? Many immense fortunes were accumulated, and a
still larger number of moderate fortunes, while the capital th
increasing sought investment. The highest in the kingdom al
standing ready with outstretched hands to’ obtain it, noble
princes of the blood, provincial assemblies, assemblies of #l
clergy, and, at the head of all, the king who, the most needy ;
borrows at ten per cent., and is always in quest of fresh lenders
Already under Fleury, the debt has augmented to eighteen’
millions in vezées and during the Seven Years’ War, to thirty-
millions. Under Louis XVI. M. Necker borrows a capital 0 f
five hundred and thirty millions; M. Joly de Fleury, three yun :
dred millions; M. de Calonne, eight hundred millions ; in al ;
sixteen hundred and thirty millions in a peroid of ten ears.
The interest of the public debt, only forty-five millions in 1755;
reaches one hundred and six millions in 1776 and amounts to
two hundred and six millions in 1789.4 What creditors aré indi
cated by these few figures! As the Third- Estate, it must be Bag
is the sole body that makes and saves money, nearly all
creditors belong to it. Thousands of others must be added t {
these. In the first place, the financiers who make advances t


gy’


1 Arthur Young, II. 360, 373.

2 De Tocqueville, 255.

3 Aubertin, 482.

* Roux and Buchez, “ Histoire parlementaire.” Extracted from the accounts made up
the comptrollers-general, I. 175, 205. The report by Necker, I. 376. To the 206,000
must be added 15,802,000 for expenses and interest on advances. q


.m1. THE PROPAGATION OF THE DOCTRINE. 309


.  hiecioemese advances that are indispensable, because, from
e immemorial, it has eaten the calf in the cow’s belly, while
e passing year is always gnawing into the product of coming
; there are eighty millions of advances in 1759, and one
ndred and seventy millions in 1783. In the second place
e are so many purveyors, large and small, who, on all points
Ethe territory, keep accounts with the government for their
upplies and for public works, a veritable army and increasing
ai y, since the government, impelled by centralization, takes
ole charge of all enterprises, and, through the urgency of opin-
on, enterprises of public utility. Under Louis XV. the State
uilds six thousand leagues of roads, and under Louis XVI. in
788, to guard against famine, it purchases grain to the amount
of forty millions.

Through this increase of activity and the demands for capital
t becomes the universal debtor ; henceforth public affairs are no
mger exclusively the king’s affairs. His creditors become un-
: sy at his expenditures, for their money is being wasted, and, if
€ proves a bad administrator, they will be ruined. They want
> know something of his budget, to examine his books; a lender
lways has the right to look after his securities. [ We iccurtieay
ee the bourgeois raising his head and beginning to pay close at-
ention to the great machine whose performances, hitherto con-
ealed from vulgar eyes, have, up to the present time, been kept
state secret. He becomes a politician, and, at the same time,
fiscontented. For it cannot be denied that these matters, in
fhich he is interested, are badly conducted. Any responsible
vember of a family managing affairs in the same way would be
rested. ‘The expenses of the administration of the State are al-
ays in excess of the revenue. According to official admissions"
ie annual deficit amounted to seventy millions in 1770, and
ighty millions in 1783; the attempts to reduce this consist
f bankruptcies; one of two millions at the end of the reign
: Louis XIV., and others almost equal to it in the time of Law,
a d another from a third to a half of all the venées in the time of
ray, without mentioning suppressions in detail, reductions,
efinite delays in payment, and other violent and fraudu-
nt means which a powerful debtor employs with impunity
gain t a feeble creditor. “Fifty-six violations of public faith


1 Roux and Buchez, I. 190. ‘‘ Rapport,” by M. de Calonne.


310 - THE ANCIENT REGIME. BO


have occurred from Henry IV. down to the ministry © of M
Loménie inclusive,” ! while a last bankruptcy, more frigh
the others, looms up on the horizon. Several personas
and Linguet for instance, earnestly recommend it as a necess. -
salutary amputation. Not only are there precedents for th
in this respect the government will do no more than fol ne
own example, but such is its daily practice, since it lives o7
day to day, by dint of expedients and delays, digging one I ole
stop up another, and escaping failure only through the force r
tience which it imposes on its creditors. With it, says a conte
porary, people were never sure of anything, being obliged ab
to wait.2 “Were their capital invested in its loans, they co
never rely on a fixed epoch for the payment of interest. W
vessels reconstructed, the highways repaired, or the sole
clothed, they remained without guarantees for their advam
without certificates of repayment, being reduced to calculati
chances of a ministerial contract as they would the risks of-a be
speculation.” It pays if it can and only when it can, @
the members of the household, the purveyors of the tak
and the personal attendants of the king. In 1753 the dom se
of Louis XV. had received nothing for three years. Wee |
seen how his grooms went out to beg during the night in the street
of Versailles ; j how his purveyors “hid themselves ; ” hhow,<til in
Louis XVI. in 1778, there were 792,620 francs due to the win
merchant, and 3,467,980 francs to the purveyor of fish’ ee
meat.? In 1788, so great is the distress, the Minister de Lomé
appropriates and expends the funds of a private subscript :
raised for a hospital, and, at the time of his resignation, the tr as-
ury is empty, save four hundred and fifty thousand franes
the half of which he puts in his pocket. What an admi res 8
tion ! al
In the presence of this debtor, evidently becoming ir
everybody, far and near, interested in his business, vet
gether with alarm, and debtors are innumerable, consistiny
bankers, merchants, manufacturers, employés, lenders of a |
kind and degree, and, in the front rank, the fund-holders, wl


— Toe


? Champfort, p. tog. ° .

2 De Tocqueville, 26x.

* DY Argenson, April 12, 1752, February 11, 1752, July 24, 1753, December 7,
Archives nationales, O", 738. t


Ss ee oe
as: CO


- i= 7,
‘ J
AR. mM. THE PROPAGATION OF TRE DOCTRINE. gar


ye put all their means for life ito his hands, and who are
gz should he not pay them annually the forty-four millions he
them the industrialists and traders who have intrusted their
integrity to him and who would shrink with horror
+ tailuit as its offset; and after these come their creditors,
cit clerks, their kindred, in short, the largest portion of the
g and peaceable class which, thus far, has obeyed without
murmur and never dreamed of bringing the established order
Fihings under its control. Henceforth this class will exercise
ntrol attentively, distrustfully and angrily. Woe to those who
re at fault for they well know that the ruin of the State is their


; Il.

Meanwhile this class has climbed up the social ladder and,
hrough its dive, rejoined those in the highest position. Formerly
stween Dorante and M. Jourdain, between Don Juan and M.
manche, between M. de Sotenville himself and Georges Dan-
in, the interval was immense; everything was different—dress,
muse, habits, characters, points of honor, ideas and language.
n the one hand the nobles are drawn nearer to the Third-Estate
on the other, the Third-Estate is drawn nearer to the nobles,
tual equality having preceded equality as a right.

On the approach of the year 178q9 it was difficult to distinguish
> from the other in the street. The sword is no longer worn
ag in the city; they have abandoned embroideries
d laces and walk about in plain frock-coats or drive them-
ves in their cabriolets.* “The simplicity of English customs,”
d the customs of the Third-Estate seem to them better adapted
‘ordinary life. Their prominence proves irksome to them and
rh weary of being always on parade. Henceforth they
Sept familiarity that they may enjoy freedom of action and
icnatent “to mingle with their fellow-citizens without obstacle
ostentation.”, It is certainly a grave sign, and the old feudal
age reason to tremble. The Marquis de Mirabeau, on

ng that his son wishes to act as his own lawyer, consoles
self by seeing others, of still higher rank, do much worseS


{ 2 Characters in Moligre’s comedies. —Tx.
* ? De Ségur. I. rp.
8 Lucas de Montigny, Letter of the Marquis de Mirabeau, March 23, 179.


312 THE ANCIENT REGIME.


“Although it was difficult to accept the idea of t .
son of our grandfather, as we saw him pass by at thee
the whole crowd, little and big, raising their hats to ss -
now about to figure-at the bar of a lower tribunal, cont a
about matters of practice with the barking dogs of shies
I said to myself that Louis XIV. would be still more ast nis
could he see the wife of his grand-successor, dressed ir
peasant’s frock and apron, with no attendants, not a page 0 or ai
one else, running about the palace and the terraces, reque si
the first scamp in a frock-coat she encountered to give k
hand, which he simply does down to the foot of the steps.”
equalization of the ways and externals of life is, indeed, o
manifestation of the equalization of minds and Bai
antique scenery being torn away indicates the disappe
of the sentiments to which it belonged. It betokened g
dignity, habits of self-constraint and of living in public, av
and command. It was the rigid and ostentatious parade
a social corps of staff-officers. At this time the parade is disc
tinued because the corps has been dissolved. If the nobl
dress like the bourgeoisie it is owing to their having become b
geois, that is to say, idlers retired from business, with noth
do but to talk and amuse themselves. Undoubtedly theyll
themselves and converse like people of refinement; but it i
very difficult to equal them in this respect. Now that the Thi
Estate has acquired its wealth a good many a h

become people of society. The successors of Samuel Ber
are no longer so many Turcarets, but Paris-Duverneys, §
Jameses, Labordes, refined men, people of culture and of eel
possessing tact, literary and philosophical attainments, bem vO-
lent, giving fétes and knowing how to entertain. With them
with a shade of difference, we find about the same company |
with a grand seignior, the same ideas and the same tone.
sons, Messieurs de Villemer, de Francueil, d’Epinay, —
money out of the window with as much elegance as the yc
dukes with whom they sup. A parvenu with money and it

lect soon becomes brightened and his son, if not ssl


1 Mme. Vigéesbebraw I. 269, 231. The domestic establishment of two farmers-gené
(M. de Verdun, at Colombes, and M. de St. James, at Neuilly). A superior type of
bourgeois and of the merchant has already been put on the stage by Sedame in ‘‘Le oh ae
phe sans le Savoir.’


HAP. 1. THE PROPAGATION OF THE DOCTRINE. 313


Mitiated: a few years’ exercises in an academy, a dancing-
me ster, and one of the four thousand public offices which confer
jobility, supply him with the deficient externals. Now, in
hese times, as soon as one knows how to conform to the laws
f good-breeding, how to bow and how to converse, one pos-
asses a patent for admission everywhere. An Englishman! re-
marks that one of the first expressions employed in praise of a
man is, “he has a very graceful address.” The Maréchale de
suxembourg, so high-spirited, always selects La Harpe as her
avalier because “he offers his arm so well.” The plebeian not
nly enters the drawing-room, if he is fitted for it, but he stands
emost in it if he has any talent. The first place in conversa- |
ion, and even in public consideration, is for Voltaire, the son
fa notary, for Diderot, the son of a cutler, for Rousseau, the
m of a watchmaker, for d’Alembert, a foundling brought up by
palace and, after the great men have disappeared, and no
miters of the second grade are left, the leading duchesses are
ill content to have the seats at their tables occupied by Champ-
rt, another foundling, Beaumarchais, the son of another watch-
aker, La Harpe, supported and raised on charity, Marmontel,
e son of a village tailor and many others of less note, in short,
ery parvenue possessing any intellectual power.

The nobility, to perfect their own accomplishments, borrow
heir pens and aspire to their successes. ‘We have recovered
those old Gothic and absurd prejudices against literary
ulture,” says the Prince de Hénin;? “as for myself I would
ympose a comedy to-morrow if I had the talent, and if I hap-
med to be made a little angry, I would perform in it.” “And,
“the Vicomte de Ségur, son of the minister of war, plays
> part of the lover in ‘Nina’ on Mlle. de Guimard’s stage
h the actors of the Italian Comedy.”* One of Mme. de
enlis’s personages, returning to Paris after five years’ absence,
ys that “he left men wholly devoted to play, hunting, and
eir small houses and he finds them all turned authors.”* They


ye


J
a
re


Jo n Andrews, “‘A comparative view,” etc., p. 58.

le Tilly, “Mémoires,” I. 31.

Geffroy, “Gustave Ill,” Letter of Mme. de Staél (August, 1786).

‘ s Genlis, ** Adéle et Théodore” (1782), I. 312. Already in 1762, Bachaumont
is several pieces written by grand seigniors, such as “‘Clytemnestre,” by the Comte
“au ure ati ; “Alexandre,” by the Chevalier de Fénélon ; “Don Carlos,” by the Marquis


nines.


a}


314 THE ANCIENT REGIME.


hawk about their tragedies, comedies, novels, eclogues, di
tions and treatises of all kinds from one drawing-roc
another. They strive to get their pieces played; they previously
submit them to the judgment of actors; they solicit a worc
praise from the Mercure ; they read fables at the sittings oft |
Academy. They become involved in the bickerings, in the va
glory, in the littleness of literary life, and still worse, of the li
of the stage, inasmuch as they are themselves performers ar
play in company with real actors in hundreds of private theat
Add to this, if you please, other petty amateur talents ae a
sketching in water-colors, writing songs, and playing the flute.
After this intermixture of classes and this displacement of cl char-_
acter what superiority rests with the nobles? By what spec : .
merit, through what recognized capacity are they to secure |
respect of a member of the Third-Estate? Outside of fas
able elegance and a few points of breeding, in what veopeall |
they differ from him? What superior education, what familiarit
with affairs, what experience with government, what political i
struction, what local ascendency, what moral authority can b a
leged to sanction their pretensions to the highest places? In th
way of practice, the Third-Estate already does the work, pro
viding the qualified men, the intendants, the ministerial h
clerks, the lay and Sebladiasn cad administrators, the comp ren|
laborers of all kinds and degrees. Call to mind the Marquis 0
whom we have just spoken, a former captain in the French guard:
a man of feeling and of loyalty, admitting at the elections of be 789
that “the knowledge essential to a deputy would most gener
be found in the Third-Estate, the mind there being accustomec
to business.” In the way of theory: the plebeian is as well
informed as the noble, and he thinks he is still’ better informed
because, having read the same books and arrived at the sar
principles, he does not, like him, stop half-way on the 0
their consequences, but plunges headlong to the very depth
the doctrine, convinced that his logic is clairvoyance and that h
is the more enlightened because he is the least prejudiced, Col
sider the young men who, about twenty years of age in 178
born in industrious families, accustomed to effort and able
work twelve hours a day, a Barnave, a Carnot, a Roederer
Merlin de Thionville, a Robespierre, an energetic race consci
of its strength, criticizing their rivals, aware of their weakness, ¢


HAP. UI. THE PROPAGATION OF THE DOCTRINE. 315


aring their own application and education to their levity and
ncompetency, and, at the moment when youthful ambition stirs
within them, seeing themselves excluded in advance from any su-
erior position, consigned far life to subaltern employment, and
u bjected in every career to the precedence of superiors whom
hey hardly recognize as their equals. At the artillery examin-
tions where Chérin, the genealogist, refuses plebeians, and where
> Abbé Bosen, a mathematician, rejects the ignorant, it is dis-
Boece that capacity is wanting among the noble pupils and no-
bili among the capable pupils,’ the two qualities of gentility and
intelligence seeming to exclude each other, as there are but four
r five out of a hundred pupils who combine the two conditions.
Now, as society at this time is mixed, such tests are frequent and
sy. Whether lawyer, physician, or man of letters, a member
of the Third-Estate with whom a duke converses familiarly, who
sits in a diligence alongside of a count-colonel of hussars,? can
appreciate his companion or his interlocutor, weigh his ideas, test
his merit and esteem him at his just value, and I am sure that he
loes not overrate him. ‘The nobility having lost a special capac-
ty, and the Third-Estate having acquired a general capacity, they
ire ON a par in education and in aptitudes, the inequality which
separated them becoming offensive in becoming useless. Nobil-
ity being instituted by custom it is no longer sanctified by con-
: am the Third-Estate being justly excited against privileges
at have no justification, neither in the capacity of the noble or
n the incapacity of the bourgeois.


B. IV.

_ Distrust and wrath towards the government which compromises
all fortunes, rancor and hostility against the nobility which bars
ul roads, are, then, the sentiments that develop themselves in
he middle class solely through the advance of its wealth and
sulture. Acting on material of this descripition we can divine the
effect of the new philosophy. At first, confined to the aristocratic
reservoir, the doctrine filters out through all interstices like so many
trickling streams and insensibly diffuses itself among the lower


lass. Already, in 1727, Barbier, a bourgeois of the old stock


10h mpfort, 119.
2 De Vaublane I. 117. Beugnot, ‘‘ Mémoires,” (the first and second passages relating to
y at the domiciles of M. de Brienne, and the Duc de Penthiévre.)


316 THE ANCIENT REGIME.


and having little knowledge of philosophy and _ philosoy
except the name, thus writes in his journal: “A hundred f
families are deprived of the annuities on which they suppc
themselves, acquired with bonds for which the king is respe
and of which the capital is obliterated; fifty-six thousand
are given in pensions to people who have held the best offic
where they have amassed considerable property, always 2 it

expense of the people, and all this merely that they ma 2
themselves and do nothing.”* One by one, ‘clonal ide
penetrate to his office of consulting advocate; conversation hi
sufficed to propagate them, homely common sense needing 1
philosophy to secure their recognition. “The tax on property,
said he, in 1750, “should be proportioned and equally distrib
among all the king’s subjects and the members of the govern
in proportion to the property each really possesses in the kin
in England, the lands of the nobility, the clergy and the T
Estate pay alike without distinction, and nothing is more just.
In the six years which follow the flood increases. People e de
nounce the government in the cafés, on their promenades, w
the police dare not arrest malcontents “ because they woulda .
to arrest everybody.” The disaffection goes on increasing |
to the end of the reign. In 1744, says the bookseller a |
during the king’s illness at Metz, private individuals cause si2 .
thousand masses to be said for his recovery and pay for them it
the sacristy of Notre Dame; in 1757, after Damiens’s attemp *
on the king’s life, the number of masses demanded is only si x
hundred; in 1774, during the malady which carries him off, th e
number falls down to three. The government is in compl ©
discredit, which is an immense success for Rousseau, theses iy
events, occurring simultaneously, affording a date for the conver-
sion of the Third-Estate to philosophy.? A traveller, at the be-
ginning of the reign of Louis XVI., who returns home after some
years’ absence, on being asked saat change he noticed in +e
nation, replied, “ Vothing, except that what used to be talked aboui


1 Barbier, II. zdéd. ; III. 255 (May, 1751). ‘‘The king is robbed by all the seig: eb
around him, esieeiatiy. on his journeys to his different chateaux, which are frequent.” 4
September, 1750. Cf. Aubertin, 291, 415 (“‘ Mémoires,” manuscript by Hardy).

* Treaties of Paris and Hubersbourg, 1763. ‘The trial of La Chalotais, 1765. Bankruptcy
Terray, 1770. Destruction of the Parliament, 1771. The first partition of Poland, 17
‘Rousseau, ‘‘Discours sur l'inégalité,” 1753. ‘‘Héloise,” 1759. ‘‘Emile” and ‘Cont
Social,” 1762, =


AP. I, THE PROPAGATION OF THE DOCTRINE. 317


B the drawing-rooms 1s repeated i in the streets.” And that which
Bepecated in the streets is Rousseau’s doctrine, the Discourse
mn Inequality, the Social Contract amplified, popularized and
epeated by disciples in every tone and in every shape. What
s more fascinating for the man of the Third-Estate? Not only
s this theory in vogue, and encountered by him at the decisive
noment when, for the first time, he turns his attention to general
inciples, but again it provides him with arms against social ine-
uality and political absolutism, and much sharper than he needs.
: To people disposed to put restraints on power and to abolish
rivileges, what guide is more sympathetic than the writer of
genius, the powerful logician, the impassioned orator, who es-
ablishes natural law, who repudiates historic law, who proclaims
the equality of men, who contends for the sovereignty of the
people, who denounces on every page the usurpation, the vices,
the worthlessness, the malefactions of the great and of kings!
A ad I omit the points by which he makes acceptable to a rigid
ind laborious dowrgeoisie, to the new men that are working and
idvancing themselves, his steady earnestness, his harsh and
bitter tone, his eulogy of simple habits, of domestic virtues, of
e onal merit, of virile energy, the plebeian addressing plebeians.
t is not surprising that they should accept him for a guide and
elcome his doctrines with that fervor of faith which constitutes
: nthusiasm and which is always an accompaniment of the new-
orn idea as of the new-born affection.
A competent judge, and an eye-witness, Mallet Dupan, writes
a 1799: “Rousseau had a hundred times more readers among
he middle and lower classes than Voltaire. He alone inoculated
he French with the doctrine of the sovereignty of the people and
it eB its extremest consequences. It would be difficult to cite a
agle revolutionist who was not transported over these anarchical
heories, and who did not burn with ardor to realize them. ‘That
% trat Social, the disintegrator of societies, was the Koran of
1e pretentious talkers of 1789, of the Jacobins of 1790, of the
spublicans of 1791, and of the most atrocious of the madmen.
. I heard Marat in 1788 read and comment on the Contrat
ecial in the public streets to the applause of an enthusiastic aud-
ory.” The same year, in an immense throng filling the great


a


[>  1De Barante, “‘ Tableau de la littérature frangaise au dix-huititme siécle,” 312.
ya


318 : THE ANCIENT REGIME.


hall of the Palais de Justice, Lacretelle hears the same be
cited, its dogmas enforced “by members of the bar,! by yc
lawyers, by the whole lettered tribe swarming with new-fl
publicists.” Hundreds of details show us that it is a catechis
in every hand. In 1784? certain magistrates’ sons, on takin
their first lesson in jurisprudence of an assistant professor, B |
Saveste, have the “Contrat Social” placed in their hands as~
manual. ‘Those who find this new political geometry too ¢ ficult
learn at least its axioms, and, if these prove unmanageable es
derive from them their palpable consequences, so many convenien
equivalents, the small current change of the literature in of
whether drama, history, or romance.? The dogmas of equali
and liberty infiltrate and penetrate the class able to read th
“Eloges” by Thomas, the pastorals of Bernardin de St. Pie ie
the compilation of Raynal, the comedies of Beaumarchais a
even the “ Young Anarcharsis” and the literature of the new-fas
ioned Greek and Roman antiquity. “A few days ago,”
Métra,® “a dinner of forty ecclesiastics from the country t
place at the house of the curate of Orangis five leagues ro}
Paris. At the dessert, and in the truth which came out over t - i
wine, they all admitted that they came to Paris to see the ‘Mar- |
riage of Figaro.’ ... Up to the present time it seems as if
comic authors Geadee to make sport for the great at the exper se
of the little, but here, on the contrary, it is the little who laugh at th
expense of the great.” Hence the success of the piece. A stewat
of a chateau finds a Raynal in the library, the furious declame tio ;
of which so delights him that, at the end of thirty years, he ca
peat it without stumbling. A sergeant in the French guards }
broiders waistcoats throughout the night to earn the wherewi
to purchase new books of this stamp. After the gallant pict
of the boudoir comes the austere and patriotic picture; “Be
rius” and the “Horatii” of David indicate the new public spit
also that of the studios.6 The spirit is that of Rousseau, “the re


1 Lacretelle, “‘ Dix. ans d’épreuves,”’ p. 21. ae

2 «Souvenirs manuscrits,”” by M——.

8 “*T.e Compére Mathieu,”’ by Dulaurens (1766). ‘Our sufferings are due to the way
which we are brought up, namely, the state of society in which we are born. Now th
state being the source of all our ills its dissolution must become that of all our good.”

4 The “Tableau de Paris,” by Mercier (x2 vols. ), is the completest and most exact |
trayal of the ideas and aspirations of the middle class from 1781 to 1788. :

5 “Correspondance,” by Métra, XVII. 87 (August 20, 1784).

6 “ Belisarius,” belongs to 1780, and the “Oath of the Horatii,” to 1783.


HAP. WI. THE PROPAGATION OF THE DOCTRINE. 319


ublican spirit;”? the entire middle class, artists, employés,
surates, physicians, attorneys, advocates, the lettered and the jour-
nalists, all are won over to it; and its aliment consists of the
worst as well as the worthiest pbisions ambition, envy, craving
for liberty, zeal for the public welfare and the consciousness of
right.


2.7,


V.


3 _ All these passions intensify each other. There is nothing like
a wrong to quicken the sentiment of justice. There is nothing
like the sentiment of justice to quicken the injury proceeding from
awrong. The Third-Estate, considering itself deprived of the
place to which it is entitled, finds itself uncomfortable in the place
jit occupies and, accordingly, suffers through a thousand petty
‘grievances it would not, formerly, have noticed. On discovering
that he is a citizen a man is imitated at being treated as a subject,
no one accepting an inferior position alongside of one of whom
he believes himself the equal. Hence, during a period of twenty
years, the ancient régime vainly grows easier, seeming to be
still more burdensome, while its scratches exasperate as if they
were so many wounds. Countless instances might be quoted
instead of one. At the theatre in Grenoble, Barnave,? a child, is
‘with his mother in a box which the Duc de Tonnerre, governor
of the province, had assigned to one of his satellites. ‘The man-
ger of the theatre, and next an officer of the guard, request
Madame Barnave to withdraw. She refuses, whereupon the gov-
ernor orders four fusileers to force her out.— The pit had already
‘taken the matter up and violence was feared when M. Barnave,
advised of the affront, entered and led his wife away, exclaiming
aloud, “I leave by order of the governor.” ‘The indignant pub-
lic, all the bourgeoisie, agreed among themselves not to enter the
theatre again without an apology being made, the theatre, in
fact, remaining empty several months until Madame Barnave
consented to reappear there. This outrage afterwards recurred
to the future deputy, and he then swore “to elevate the caste to
which he belonged out of the humiliation to which it seemed


1 1 Geffroy, “‘Gustave III. et la cour de France.” ‘Paris, with zs republican spirit,
yenerally applauds whatever fails at Fontainebleau.” (A letter by Madame de Staél, Sept.
: 1786). ‘

_ Sainte-Beuve, ‘‘Causeries du Lundi,” IT. 24, in the article on Barnave.


320 THE ANCIENT REGIME.


condemned.” In like manner Lacroix, the future member of ©
Convention,! on leaving a theatre and jostled by a gentl
who was giving his arm to a lady, utters a loud comp
“Who are you?” says the person. Still the provincial, he i is
ple enough to give his name, surname, and qualifications in
“Very well,” says the other man, “good for you—I am
Comte de Chabannes and I am in a hurry,” saying wh
“laughing heartily,” he jumps into his vehicle, ‘Ah, oo
claimed Lacroix, still much excited by his misadventure, “p
and prejudice establish an awful gulf between man and man!”
We may rest assured that, with Marat, a veterinary surgeon in t
Comte d’Artois’s stables, with Robespierre, a protegé of t
bishop. of Arras, with Danton, an insignificant lawyer in Mery-
sur-Seine, and with many others beside, self-esteem, in frequent
encounters, bled in the same fashion. The concentrated bitt
ness with which Madame Roland’s memoirs is imbued has ni
other cause. ‘She could not forgive society” for the inferior
sition she had so long occupied in it.”* Thanks to Rousse:
vanity, so natural to man, and especially sensitive with a Fren
man, becomes still more sensitive. The slightest discrimina
a tone of the voice, seems a mark of disdain. “One day,‘ ona
luding, before the minister of war, to a general officer who he


officer of luck.’ This expression, being repeated pee commenti ai
on does much mischief.” In vain do the grandees show thei
condescending spirit, “welcoming with equal kindness and gen-


1 De Tilly, “Mémoires,” I. 243.

2 The words of Fontanes who knew her and admired her. (Sainte-Beuve, ‘‘ Nouvez
Lundis,” VIII. 221). ae

3“ Mémoires de Madame “Roland,” Aasszm. At fourteen years of age, on being in-
troduced to Mme. de Boismorel, she is hurt at hearing her grandmother addressed “Ma-
demoiselle.” Shortly after this, she says: ‘‘I could not conceal from myself that I was of
more consequence than Mlle. d’Hannaches whose sixty years and her genealogy di
enable her to write a common-sense letter or one that was legible.” About the same epo'
she passes a week at Versailles with a servant of the Dauphine, and tells her mother, “ 4
few days more and I shall so detest these people that I shall not know how to suppress my
hatred of them.’ ‘What injury have they done you?’ she inquires. ‘It is the feeling
injustice and the constant contemplation of absurdity!’” At the chateau of Fontenay where
she is invited to dine, she and her mother are made to dine in the servants’ room, etc. = lr
1818, in a small town in the north, the Comte de dining with a bourgeois sub-prefect
and placed by the side of the mistress of the house says to her, on accepting the soup
‘Thanks, my dear,’ (merci, ma chére). Through the Revolution the lower class bourgeois
have full play; a moment after, she addresses him, with one of her sweetest smiles, ‘Wi
you take some chicken, my dear?’” (It is useless to state that the sense of this anecdote
not fully conveyed by a literal translation. y=TR:

* De Vaublanc, I. 153.


tap. mi. THE PROPAGATION OF THE DOCTRINE. 321


eness all who are presented to them.” In the mansion of the
luc de Penthiévre the nobles eat at the table of the master of the
P se, the plebeians dine with his first gentleman and only enter
i eon when coffee is served. There they find “in full
ength and with a high tone” the others who had the honor of
7 pte with His Highness, and “who do not fail to salute the
w arrivals with a complacency 1 instinct with patronage.”! This
ffices ; in vain the Duke “carries his attentions even to the most
11 inute degree.” Beugnot, so pliable, has no desire to return.
a hey bear them ill-will, not only on account of their slight bows
ut again on account of their over-politeness. Champfort acri-
10 iously relates that d’Alembert, at the height of his reputation,
: Ing in Madame du Deffant’s drawing-room with President Hé-
ult and M. de Pont-de-Veyle, a physician enters named Four-
sr, and he, addressing Madame du Deffant, says, “Madame,
ve the honor of presenting you with my very humble respects ;’
ning to President Hénaulf, “I have the honor to be your obe-
se servant,” and then to M. de Pont-de- Veyle, “Sir, your
0s obedient,” and to d’Alembert, “Good day, sir.”? To a re- .
lous heart everything i is an object of resentment. The Third-
State, following Rousseau’s example, cherishes ill-feeling against
e nobles for what they do, and yet again, for what they are,
their luxury, their elegance, their insincerity, their refined
nd brilliant behavior. Champfort is embittered against them on
count of the polite attentions with which they overwhelm him.
eyés bears them a grudge on account of a promised abbey
hich he did not obtain. Each individual, besides the general
jevances, has his personal grievance. Their coolness, like their
niliarity, attentions and inattentions, is an offence, and, under
ese millions of needle-thrusts, real or imaginary, the mind gets
e full of gall.
In B $86, it is full to overflowing. “The most honorable title
‘the French nobility,” writes Champfort, “is a direct descent
mi some thirty thousand helmeted, cuirassed, armletted beings


Beugnot, “ Mémoires,” I. 77.

hampfort, 16. ‘Who would believe it? Not taxation, nor Jettves-de-cachet, nor the
ses of power, nor the vexations of intendants, and the ruinous delays of justice have pro-
‘ I the ire of the nation, but their prejudices against the nobility towards which it has shown
est hatred. ‘his evidently proves that the bourgeoisie, the men of letters, the finan-
class, in fine all who envy the nobles have excited against these the inferior class in the
_-geenti the rural peasantry.” (Rivarol, ‘‘ Mémoires.’’)


322 THE ANCIENT REGIME,


who, on heavy horses sheathed in armor, trod under foot eight
ten millions of naked men, the ancestors of the actual r es
Behold these well-established claims to the respect and affee ;
of their descendants! And, to complete the respectability of 1
nobility, it is recruited and regenerated by the adoption of t
who have acquired fortune by plundering the cabins of the p
who are unable to pay its impositions.”? Why should not
Third-Estate send back,” says Sieyés,? “into Franconia’
family that maintains its absurd pretension of having spriangell
the loins of a race of conquerors and of having =cceeeall
the rights of conquest? I can well imagine, were pee
police, every Cartouche firmly establishing himself on the I
road—would that give him a right to levy toll? Suppose h a
sell a monopoly of this kind, once common enough, to an hones
successor, would the right become any more respectable int
hands of the purchaser? .. . Every privilege, in its nature, i
unjust, odious, and against the social compact. The blood b bois
at the thought of its ever having been possible to legally conse
crate down to the eighteenth century the abominable fruits oF
abominable feudal system. . . The caste of nobles is real
a population apart, a feadalent population, however, which

lack of serviceable faculties, and unable to exist alone, fasten
itself upon a living nation, like the vegetable tumors that sup
port themselves on the sap of the plants to which they ea
burden and which wither beneath the load. . . . They suck a
everything being for them. . . . Every branclt of the exe
power has fallen into the hands of this caste, which’ (fo Be
supplied the church, the robe and the sword. A sort of confra
ternity or joint paternity leads the nobles each to prefer the othe
and all to the rest of the nation... . The Court reigns ¢
not the monarch. The Court creates and distributes fe
And what is the Court but the head of this vast aristocracy #
covers all parts of France and which, through its members, <
tains to and exercises everywhere whatever is requisite in
branches of the public administration?”? Let us put an end
“this social crime, this long parricide which one class does its


ats


1 Champfort, 335.

2 Sieyés, ‘ Qu’est ce que le Tiers?” 17, 41, 139, 166.

3 “The nobility, say the nobles, is an intermediary between the king and the people.
as the hound is an intermediary between the hunter and thehare.”” (Champfort). —


.


CH: pul THE PROPAGATION OF THE DOCTRINE. 323


the honor to commit daily against the others. ... Ask no
longer what place the privileged shall occupy in the social order ;
it is simply asking what place in a sick man’s body must be
assigned to a malignant ulcer that is undermining and tormenting
it... tothe loathsome disease that is consuming the living flesh.”
‘The result is apparent—let us eradicate the ulcer, or at least
weep away the vermin. ‘The Third-Estate, in itself and by
i itself, is “a complete nation,” requiring no organ, needing no aid
to subsist or to govern itself, and which will recover its health on
‘ idding itself of the parasites infesting its skin. “What is the
‘Third-Estate? Everything. What, thus far, is it in the political
‘body? Nothing. What does it demand? To become some-
thing.” Not a portion but the whole. Its political ambition
is as great as its social ambition, and it aspires to authority
as well as to equality. If privileges are an evil that of the king
is the worst for it is the greatest, and human dignity, wounded by
the prerogative of the noble, perishes under the absolutism of the
king. Of little consequence is it that he scarcely uses it, and
that his government, deferential to public opinion, is that of a
pectating and indulgent parent. Emancipated from real des-
‘potism, the Third-Estate becomes excited against possible des-
potism, imagining itself in slavery in consenting to remain
subject. A proud spirit has recovered itself, become erect, and,
the better to secure its rights, is going to claim all nghts. To the
man who from antiquity down has been subject to masters, it is
so sweet, so intoxicating to be in their places, to say to himself,
they are my mandataries, to regard himself a member of the
‘sovereign power, king of France in his quota relationship, the
sole legitimate author of all rights and of all functions! In con-
formity with the doctrines of Rousseau the memorials of the
Third-Estate unanimously insist on a constitution for France;
none exists, or at least the one she possesses is of no value.
Thus far “the conditions of the social compact have been ig-
nored ; ”1 now that they have been discovered they must be
Env ten out. To say, with the nobles according to Montesquieu,
‘that the constitution exists, that its great features need not be
changed, that it is necessary only to reform abuses, that the States-
General exercise only limited power, that they are incompetent to


1 Prud’homme, IIE. 2. (‘The Third-Estate of Nivernais,” assim.) Cf., on the other
_hand, the memorials of the nobility of Bugey and of Alengon.


324 THE ANCIENT REGIME. ~ 2008 7


substitute another régime for the monarchy, is not true. Tacitly
or expressly, the Third-Estate refuses to restrict its mandate and
allows no barriers to be interposed against it. It requires its 4
uties accordingly to vote “not by orders but each by himself.
conjointly.” “In case the deputies of the clergy or of the nobility
should refuse to deliberate in common and individually, the dep .
uties of the Third-Estate, representing twenty-four millions te
men, able and obliged to declare itself the National Assembly, not-
withstanding the scission of the representation of four hundred
thousand persons, will propose to the King in concert with thos
among the Clergy and the Nobility disposed to join them, their as-
sistance in providing for the necessities of the State, and ol ;
taxes thus assented to shall be apportioned among all the subje ts.
of the king without distinction.” Do not object that a people
thus mutilated becomes a mere crowd, that leaders cannot |}
improvised, that it is difficult to dispense with natural guide
that, considering all things, this Clergy and this Nobility still for
a select group, that two-fifths of the soil is in their hands, th
one-half of the intelligent and cultivated class of men are in th
ranks, that they are exceedingly well-disposed and that old hi
toric bodies have always afforded to liberal constitutions the r 4
best supports. According to the principle enunciated by Rou
seau we are not to value men but to count them. In politi
numbers only are respectable; neither birth, nor property, nor |
function, nor capacity, are titles to be considered; high or low, ©
ignorant or learned, a general, a soldier, or. a hod-carrier, each
individual of the social army is a unit provided with a vo e ae
wherever a majority is found there is the right. Hence, the Thi
Estate puts forth its right as incontestable and, in its turn, it prom
claims with Louis XIV., “I am the State.”

This principle once admitted or enforced, all will go well. “lt
seemed,” says an eye-witness,” “as if we were about to be governed
by men of the golden age. This free, just and wise people,
always in harmony with itself, always clear-sighted in choosing
its ministers, moderate in the use of its strength and power, never
could be led away, never deceived, nevereunder the dominion of,
or enslaved by, the authority which it confided. Its will would
fashion the laws and the law would constitute its happiness.”


1 Prud’homme, zid., Cahiers of the Third-Estates of Dijon, Dax, Bayonne, Saint-Sévére,
Rennes, etc.


# Marmontel, “Mémoires,” IT. 247:


cuar. ui. THE PROPAGATION OF THE DOCTRINE. 325


he nation is to be regenerated, a phrase found in all writings
-and in every mouth. At Nangis, Arthur Young finds this the sub-
‘stance of political conversation.1 The chaplain of a regiment,
A curate in the vicinity, keeps fast hold of it; as to knowing
what it means that is another matter. It is impossible to
find anything out through explanations of it otherwise than “a
theoretic perfection of government, questionable in its origin,
hazardous in its progress, and visionary in its end.” On the
Englishman proposing to them the British constitution as a
model they “hold it cheap in respect of liberty” and greet it
with a smile; it is, especially, not in conformity with “the princi-
ples.” And observe that we are at the residence of a grand
“seignior, in a circle of enlightened men. At Riom, at the election
assemblies? Malouet finds “persons of an ordinary stamp, practi-
‘tioners, petty lawyers, with no experience of public business,
quoting the ‘Contrat Social,’ vehemently declaiming against
tyranny, and each proposing his own constitution.” Most of
them are without any knowledge whatever, mere traffickers in
chicane; the best instructed entertain mere schoolboy ideas of
politics. In the colleges of the University no history is taught.
“The name of Henry IV., says Lavalette; was not once uttered
during my eight years of study and, at seventeen years of age, I
was still ignorant of the epoch and the mode of the establishment
of the Bourbons on the throne.” The stock they carry away
with them consists wholly, as with Cansille Desmoulins, of
» scraps of Latin, entering the world with brains stuffed with “re-
publican maxims,” excited by souvenirs of Rome and Sparta,
_and “penetrated with profound contempt for monarchical govern-
ments.” Subsequently, at the law school, they learn something
about legal abstractions, or else learn nothing. In the lecture-
courses at Paris there are no auditors; the professor delivers his
lecture to copyists who sell’ their copy-books. If a pupil should
attend himself and take notes he-would be regarded with suspi-
cion; he would be charged with trying to deprive the copyists
of the means of earning their living. A diploma, consequently, '
is worthless. At Bourges one is obtainable in six months; if the
young man succeeds in comprehending the law it is through


1 Arthur Young, I 222.
2 Malouet, “‘ Mémoires,” I. 279.
8 De Lavalette, I. 7. ‘Souvenirs Manuscrits,”” by M——.


28


326 ; THE ANCIENT REGIME.


later practice and familiarity with it. Of foreign laws and in:
tutions there is not the least knowledge, scarcely even a
or false notion of them. Malouet himself entertains a me:
idea of the English Parliament, while many, with respect to ¢
monial, imagine it a copy of the Parliament of France. Them
anism of free constitutions, or the conditions of effective libs
that is too complicated a question. Montesquieu, save in the g
magisterial families, is antiquated for twenty years past.
what avail are studies of ancient France? . “ What is the
of so much and such profound research? Laborious conjecture
and reasons for doubting.”! It is much more conyenient to
start with the rights of man and to deduce the consequenc
Schoolboy logic suffices for that to which collegiate rhetoric su
plies the tirades. *%
In this great void of enlightenment the vague terms of liberty, —
equality and the sovereignty of the people, the glowing exp
sions of Rousseau and his successors, all these new axioms, ble
up like burning coals, discharging clouds of smoke and intoxicat-
ing vapor. High- -sounding and vague language is interpos
between the mind and objects around it; all outlines are confus
and the vertigo begins. Never to the same‘extent have me n
lost the purport of outward things. Never have they been at zs)
once more blind and more chimerical. Never has their disturbed —
reason rendered them more tranquil concerning real danger
created more alarm at imaginary danger. Strangers with
blood and who witness the spectacle, Mallet-Dupan, Du
of Geneva, Arthur Young, Jefferson, Gouverneur Morris, wr
that the French are insane. Morris, in this universal delirium,
can mention to Washington but one sane mind, that of Marmontel,
and Marmontel speaks in the same style as Morris. At the
preliminary meetings of the clubs and at the assemblies of
electors he is the only one who opposes unreasonable propositions.
Surrounding him are none but the excited, the exalted, about
| nothing even to grotesqueness.? In every act of the established
régime, in every administrative measure, “in all police regulation:
in all financial decrees, in all the graduated authorities on wh ic
public order and tranquillity depend, there was nought in whic
they did not find an aspect of tyranny. . . . On the walls an¢


1 Prud’homme, ‘“‘ Résumé des cahiers,” the “‘preface,” by J. J. Rousseau.
2 Marmontel, II. 245.


‘cuap.1n. ZHE PROPAGATION OF THE DOCTRINE. 327


' barriers of Paris being referred to, these were denounced as
enclosures for deer and derogatory to man.” “TJ saw,” says one
of these orators, “at the barrier Saint-Victor, sculptured on one
_ of the pillars—would you believe it ?>—an enormous lion’s head,
_ with open jaws vomiting forth chains as a menace to those who
passed it. Could a more horrible emblem of slavery and of
_ despotism be imagined!” “The orator himself imitates the roar
of the lion. The listeners were all excited by it and I, who
_ passed the barrier Saint-Victor so often, was surprised that this
_ horrible: image had not struck at me. That very day I examined
it closely and, on the pilaster, I found only a small buckler
_ suspended as an ornament by a little chain attached by the

sculptor to a little lion’s mouth, like those we see serving as
_ door-knockers or as water-cocks.” Perverted sensations and
delirious conceptions of this kind would be regarded by physi-
_ cians as the symptoms of mental derangement, and we are only
_ in the early months of the year 1789! In such excitable and
_ over-excited brains the powerful fascination of words is about to
‘exorcise phantoms, some of them hideous, the aristocrat and the
tyrant, and others adorable, the friend of the people and the
incorruptible patriot, so many disproportionate figures fashioned
in dreams, but the substitutes of figures in actual life, and which
the maniac is to overwhelm with his praise or pursue with his fury.


VI.


Thus does the philosophy of the eighteenth century descend
among the people and propagate itself. Ideas, on the first story
of the house, in handsome gilded rooms, serve only as an evening
illumination, as drawing-room explosives and pleasing Bengal
lights, with which people amuse themselves and then laughingly
throw from the windows into the street. = Collected together in the
story below and on the ground floor, transported to shops, to
warehouses and into business cabinets, they find combustible ma-
_ terial, piles of wood a long time accumulated, and here do the
flames enkindle. ‘The conflagration seems to have already begun,
for the chimneys roar and a ruddy light gleams through the win-
dows, but “‘ No,” say the people above, “those below would take
care not to set the house on fire for they live in it as we do. It
is only a straw bonfire or a burning chimney, and a little water


i? oe "AY he eT ae ae oe et
ay ee ee
4 6 (pu
. -t y.
t/ ; a
es


Ae eae ete nt FR ANCIENT: RE L


will extinguish it, and, besides, ee little acc’ cid ents

chimney and burn out the soot.” ak:
Take care! Under the vast deep ates support 7

cellars of the house, there is a magazine of pes Pt : Her


¢
nad -
r

a he

& )
‘ as
“ py

.

P sty

7 =

-
.
i
/
,
as
.
«
>
.
*
.
o
’


BOOK FIFTH.
The People.


CHAPTER I.


I. Privations.—Under Louis XIV.—Under Louis XV.—Under Louis
XVI.—II. The condition of the peasant during the last thirty years of the
Ancient Régime.—His precarious subsistence.—State of agriculture.—Un-
Itivated farms.—Poor cultivation.—Inadequate wages.—Lack of comforts.
—III. Aspects of the country and of the peasantry.—IV. How the peasant
becomes a proprietor.—He is no better off.—Increase of taxes.—He is the
‘*mule” of the Ancient Régime.


. I
LA BRUYERE wrote, just a century before 1789,! “Certain
savage-looking beings, male and female, are seen in the country,
black, livid and sunburnt, and belonging to the soil which they
dig and grub with invincible stubbornness. They seem capable
of articulation, and, when they stand erect, they display human
lineaments. ‘They are, in fact,men. ‘They retire at night into
their dens where they live on black bread, water and roots.
“hey spare other human beings the trouble of sowing, ploughing
and harvesting, and thus should not be in want of the bread they
nave planted.” ‘They continue in want of it during twenty-five
years after this and die in herds. I estimate that in 1715 more
than one-third of the population, six millions, perish with hunger
and of destitution. The picture, accordingly, for the first quarter
of the century preceding the Revolution, far from being over-
drawn, is the reverse; we shall see that, during more than half a
sentury, up to the death of Louis XV. it is exact; perhaps in-
stead of weakening any of its points, they should be strengthened,


-1La Bruyére, edition of Destailleurs, II. 97. Addition to the fourth ed. (1689).
28*


330 THE ANCIENT REGIME.


“In 1725,” says St. Simon, “with the profuseness of Stras
bourg and Chantilly, the people, in N ormandy, live on the gra :
of the fields. The first king in Europe is great simply by bei
a king of beggars of all conditions, and by turning his kingd e
into a vast hospital of dying people of whom their all is tak
without a murmur.”! In the most prosperous days of Flev
and in the finest region in France, the peasant hides “his wine ¢ on
account of the excise and his bread on account of the cs
convinced “that he is a lost man if any doubt exists of his dyi
of starvation.”* In 1739 d’Argenson writes in his jou
“The famine has just occasioned three insurrections in the prov:
inces, at Ruffec, at Caen, and at Chinon. Women carrying their
bread with them have been assassinated on the highways. .. .
M. le Duc d’Orléans brought to the Council the other ‘ag 1
piece of bread, and placed it on the table before the king; ‘Si
said he, ‘there is the bread on which your subjects now feec
themselves.’” “In my own canton of Touraine men have been
eating herbage more than a year.” Misery finds company ¢ al
all sides. “It is talked about at Versailles more than ever. The
king interrogated the bishop of Chartres on the condition of his”
people; he replied that ‘the famine and the mortality were such }
that men ate grass like sheep and died like so many flies.” In
1740, Massillon, bishop of Clermont-Ferrand, writes to Fleury:
“The people of the rural districts are living in frightful destitu-
tion, without beds, without furniture; the majority, for half the
year, even lack barley and oat bread, their sole food, and which
they are compelled to take out of their own and their childrens’
mouths to pay the taxes. It pains me to see this sad spectacle
every year on my visits. The negroes of our colonies are, in this


1 Oppression and misery begin about 1672. At the end of the seventeenth century (1698),
the reports made up by the intendants for the Duc de Bourgogne, state that many of the
districts and provinces have lost one-sixth, one-fifth, one-quarter, the third and even the
half of their population, (See details in the ‘‘Correspondance des contréleurs-généraux
from 1683 to 1698,” published by M. de Boislisle). According to the reports of intendants.
(Vauban, “Dime Royale,” ch. vii. § 2.), the population of France in 1698 amounted t¢
19,994,146 inhabitants. From 1698 to 1715 it decreases. According to Forbonnais, t
were but 16 or 17 millions under the Regency. After this epoch the population no longe:
diminishes but, for forty years, it hardly increases. In 1753 (Voltaire, ‘Dict. Phil.,’ ” artic
Population), there are 3,550,499 firesides, besides 700,000 souls in Paris, which makes fro
16 to 17 millions of inhabitants if we count four and one-half persons to each fireside, 2
from 18 to 19 millions if we count five persons.

2 Floquet, “Histoire du Parlement de Normandie,” VII. 402.

8 Rousseau, ‘‘Confessions,”’ 1st part, ch. iv. (1732).

4D Argenson, 19th and 24th May, July 4, and Aug. 1, 1739.

5 “Résumé de histoire d'Auvergne par un Auvergnat” (M. Tallandier), p. 313.


THE PEOPLE. 331


respect, infinitely better off, for, while working, they are fed and
clothed along with their wives and children, while our peasantry,
the most laborious in the kingdom, cannot, with the hardest and
most devoted labor, earn bread for themselves and their families,
and at the satne time, pay the subsidies.” In 1740,! at Lille, the
people rebel against the export of grain. “An intendant informs
me that the misery increases from hour to hour, the slightest
‘danger to the crops resulting in this for three years past... .
Flanders, especially, is greatly embarrassed; there is nothing to
live on until the harvesting, which will not take place for two
months. The provinces the best off are not able to help the
‘others. Each bourgeois in each town is obliged to feed one or
two poor persons and provide them with fourteen pounds of
bread per week. In the little town of Chatellerault, (of four
thousand inhabitants), eighteen hundred poor, this winter, are on
hat footing. . ... The poor outnumber those able to live without
. while prosecutions for unpaid dues are carried on
with unexampled rigor. The clothes of the poor are seized and
‘their last measure of flour, the latches on their doors, etc... .
The abbess of Jouarre told me yesterday that, in her canton, in >
Brie, most of the ground had not been planted.” It is not sur-
prising that the famine spreads even to Paris. ‘Fears are enter-
tained of next Wednesday. ‘There is no more bread in Paris,
except that of the damaged flour which is brought in and which
burns (when baking). ‘The mills are working day and night at
Belleville, regrinding old damaged flour. The people are ready
to rebel; bread goes up a so/ a day; no merchant dares, or is
disposed, to bring in his wheat. The market on Wednesday was
almost in a state of revolt, there being no bread in it after seven
o’clock in the morning. . . . The poor creatures at Bicétre were
put on short allowance, three guarterons (twelve ounces), being
reduced to only half a pound. A rebellion broke out and they
forced the guards. Numbers escaped and they have inundated
‘Paris. The watch, with the police of the neighborhood, were
called out and an attack was made on these poor wretches with
bayonet and sword. About fifty of them were left on the ground;
the revolt was not suppressed yesterday morning.”
_ Ten years later the evil is greater.” ‘In the country around


1 D’Argenson, 1740, Aug. 7 and 21, September 19 and 24, May 28, November 7.
2 D’Argenson, October 4, 1749; May 20, Sept. 12, Oct. 28, Dec. 28, 1750; June 16, Dec.
22, 1751, etc.


332 THE ANCIENT REGIME.


me, ten leagues from Paris, I find increased privation and consta
complaints. What must it be in our wretched provinces in

interior of the kingdom? ... My curate tells me that eigh
families, supporting ecusdves on their labor when I left, are nd

begging their bread. ‘There isno work to be had. The w
are economizing like the poor. And with all this the Zaz
exacted with military severity. The collectors, with their offic se |
accompanied by locksmiths, force open the doors and carry O

and sell furniture for one-quarter of its value, the expenses ex-—
ceeding the amount of the tax... .” “Iam at this moment : |
my estates in Touraine. . I encounter nothing but frightful ori \
tions; the melancholy sentiment of suffering no longer prevails
with the poor inhabitants but rather one of utter despair; they
desire death only and avoid increase. . . . It is estimated that
one-quarter of the working-days of the year go to the corvées, the
laborers feeding themselves, and with what? . . . I see poor peo-
ple dying of destitution. They are paid fifteen sous a day, equal
to a crown, for. their load. Whole villages are either ruined or
broken up, and none of the households recover. . . . Judging by
what my neighbors tell me the inhabitants have diminished one-
third. . . . The daily laborers are all leaving and taking reficem in
the small towns. In many villages everybody leaves. I hae
several parishes in which the ¢az//e for three years is due, the pro-
ceedings for its collection always going on. . . . The receivers of f 4
_ the /ail/e and of the fisc add one-half each yeas in expenses above
the tax. . : . An assessor, on coming to the village where I have
my au ee states that the facie this year will be much in-
creased; he noticed that the peasants here were fatter than e :
where ; ‘that they had chicken feathers before their doors, and that —
the ine here must be good, everybody doing well, etc. This is
the cause of the peasant’s discouragement, and likewise the cause
of misfortune throughout the kingdom.” “In the country wher re
Iam staying I hear that marriage is declining and that the po D=
ulation is decreasing on all sides. In my parish, with a few i |
sides, there are more than thirty single persons, male and female
old enough to marry and none of them having any idea of it:
On being urged to marry they all reply alike that it is not worth
while to bring unfortunate beings like themselves into the world
I have myself tried to induce some of the women to marry b
offering them assistance, but they all reason in this way as if the


Dultse > a -


a


ZAP. I. ' THE PEOPLE. 333


lad consulted together.”* “One of my curates sends me word
that, although he is the oldest in the province of Touraine, and
las seen many things, including excessively high prices for wheat,
he remembers no misery so great as that of this year, even in
1 09. . Some of the seigniors of Touraine inform me that,
eing asics of setting the inhabitants to work by the day, they
4 und very few of them and these so weak that they were unable
to use their arms.”
_ Those who are able to leave, emigrate. “A person from Lan-
suedoc tells me of vast numbers of peasants deserting that prov-
ince and taking refuge in Piedmont, Savoy, and Spain, tormented
and frightened by the measures resorted to in collecting tithes.
. The extortionets sell everything and imprison everybody as
if Be scasniers of war, and even with more avidity and malice in
der to gain something themselves.” “I met an intendant of
one of the finest provinces in the kingdom, who told me that no
more farmers could be found there; that parents preferred to send
eir children to the towns; that living in the surrounding country
yas daily becoming more horrible to the inhabitants. ...A
man, well-informed in financial matters, told me that over two
hundred families in Normandy had left this year, fearing the col-
ections in their villages.” At Paris, “the streets swarm with
beggars. One cannot stop before a door without a dozen men-
dicants besetting him with their importunities. They are said to
9e people from the country who, unable to endure the persecu-
ions they have to undergo, take refuge in the cities . » . prefer-
fing mendicity to labor.” And yet the people of the cities are
10t much better off. “An officer of a company in garrison at
Meziéres tells me that the poverty of that place is so great that,
fter the officers had dined in the inns, the people rush in and pil-
age the remnants.” ‘There are more than twelve thousand beg-
ing workmen in Rouen, quite as many in Tours, etc. More
than twenty thousand of these workmen are estimated as having
eft the kingdom in three months for Spain, Germany, etc.. At
Lyons twenty thousand workers in silk are watched and kept in
ight for fear of their going abroad.” At Rouen,” and in Nor-
mandy, “those in easy circumstances find it difficult to get bread,


2 D’Argenson, June 21, 1749; May 22, 1750; March 19, 1751; February 14, April rs,
52, etc.
2 Floquet, ibid: VII. 410 (April, 1752, an address to the Parliament of Normandy).


334 | THE ANCIENT REGIME.


the bulk of the people being entirely without it, and, to we
starvation, providing themselves with food that shocks humid nity
“Even at Paris,” writes d’Argenson,! “I learn that on the day M
le Dauphin and Mme. la Dauphine went to Notre Dame, on pa: 5
ing the bridge of the Tournelle, more than two thousand wome
assembled in that quarter crying out, ‘Give us bread, or we sh |
die of hunger.’ . . . A vicar of the parish of Saint. Margie
affirms that over ajarit hundred persons died in the Faubourg ail
Antoine between January 20th and February 2oth; that the poor
expire with cold and hunger in their garrets, and that the p ce
arriving too late, see them expire without any possible reli
Were I to enumerate the riots, the seditions of the famishedea
the pillagings of storehouses, I should never end; these are t
convulsive twitchings of exhaustion; the people have fasted a
long as possible, and instinct, at last, rebels. In 1747,7 “exte
sive bread-riots occur in Toulouse, and in Guyenne they té
place on every market-day.” In 1750, from six to seven thousat
men gather in Bearn behind a river to resist the clerks; t
companies of the Artois regiment fire on the rebels and kill
dozen of them. In 1752, a sedition at Rouen and in its ne igh
borhood lasts three days; in Dauphiny and in Auvergne riotot
villagers force open the grain warehouses and take away wheat a
their own price; the same year, at Arles, two thousand arr
peasants demand bread at the town-hall and are dispersed by th
soldiers. In one province alone, that of Normandy, I find insurre¢
tions in 1725, in 1737, in 1739, iN 1752, in 1764, 1765, 1766, 176 4
and 1768,° and always on account of bread. “Entire hamlets, 5,”
writes the Parliament, “being without the necessities of life, wan
compels them to resort to the food of brutes... . Two. days
more and Rouen will be without provisions, without grain, with
out bread.” Accordingly, the last riot is terrible; on this occe
sion, the populace, again masters of the town for three days, pl pil
lage the public granaries and the stores of all the communities
Up to the last and even later, in 1770 at Rheims, in 1775 at Dijor
at Versailles, at St. Germain, at Pontoise and at Paris, in 17722
Poitiers, in 1785 at Aix in Provence, in 1788 and 1789 in Par
and throughout France, similar eruptions are visible.4 Undoul


* a


:
3
|
:
i


1 D’Argenson, November 26, 1751; March 15, 1753.

2 D’Argenson, IV. 124; VI. 165; VII. 194, etc.

3 Floquet, 747d. VI. 400-430

4 “Correspondance,” by Métra, I. 338, 341. Hippeau, “‘Le Gouvernement de*Norn
die,” 1V. 62, 199, 358. i.


HAP. I. THE FEOPLE:; 335


edly the government under Louis XVI. is milder; the intendants
‘are more humane, the administration is less rigid, the sai//e be-
comes less unequal, and the corvée is less onerous through its
transformation, in short, misery has diminished, and yet this is
‘greater than human nature can bear.
_ Examine administrative correspondence for the last thirty
years preceding the Revolution. Countless statements reveal
excessive suffering, even when not terminating in fury. Life to
a man of the lower class, to an artisan, or workman, subsisting
on the labor of his own hands, is evidently precarious; he ob-
tains simply enough to keep him from starvation and he does
ot always get that.! Here, in four districts, “the inhabitants
live only on buckwheat,” and for five years, the apple crop hav-
ing failed, they drink only water. There, in a country of vine-
yards,” “the vine-dressers each year are reduced, for the most
part, to begging their bread during the dull season.” Elsewhere,
several of the day-laborers and mechanics, obliged to sell their
effects and household goods, die of the cold; insufficient and un-
healthy food generates sickness, while, in two districts, thirty-five
ousand persons are stated to be living on alms. In a remote
anton the peasants cut the grain still green and dry it in the
oven, because they are too hungry to wait.. The intendant of
Poitiers writes that ‘as soon as the workhouses open, a prodig-
ous number of the poor rush to them, in spite of the reduction
of wages and of the restrictions imposed on them in behalf of the
)most needy.” ‘The intendant of Bourges notices that a great
many métayers have sold off their furniture and that “entire
families pass two days without eating,” and that in many par-
ishes the famished stay in bed most of the day because they suf-
fer less. The intendant of Orleans reports that “in Sologne,
poor widows have burned up their wooden bedsteads and others |
lave consumed their fruit trees,” to preserve themselves from
he cold, and he adds, “nothing is exaggerated in this statement ;
the cries of want cannot be expressed; the misery of the rural


_ 1“ Procés-verbaux de l’assemblée provinciale de Basse Normandie” (1787), p. 151.
3 2 Archives nationales, G, 319. Condition of the directory of Issoudun, and H, 1149,
512, 1418.

% bid. The letters of M. de Crosne, intendant of Rouen (February 17, 1784); of M. de
3lossac, intendant of Poitiers (May 9, 1784); of M. de Villeneuve, intendant of Bourges
‘March 28, 1784); of M. de Cypiérre, intendant of Orleans (May 28, 1784); of M. de
faziron, intendant of Moulins (June 28, 1786); of M. Dupont, intendant of Moulins (Nov.
, 1779), etc.


330 THE ANCIENT REGIME.


districts must be seen with one’s own eyes to obtain an id e:
it.” From Rioni, from La Rochelle, from Limoges, from I
from Montauban, from: Caen, from Alengon, from Flander:
Moulins come similar statements by other intendants. €
might call it the interruptions and repetitions of a funeral kne |
even in years not disastrous it is heard on all sides. In
gundy, near Chatillon-sur-Seine, “taxes, seigniorial dues,
tithes, and the expenses of cultivation, divide up the production
of the soil into thirds, leaving nothing for the unfortunate culti.
vators, who would have abandoned their fields, had. not two.
Swiss manufacturers of calicoes settled there and distri ute

about the country forty thousand francs a year in cash.”! Tr

Auvergne, the country is depopulated daily; many of the village:

have lost, since the beginning of the century, more than om
third of their inhabitants.” “Had not steps been promptly tak
to lighten the burden of a down-trodden people,” says the.
vincial assembly in 1787, ‘ Auvergne would have forever lost it
population and its cultivation.” In Comiminges, at the outbre
of the Revolution, certain communities threaten to abandon thei
possessions, should they obtain no relief? “It is a well-know
fact,” says the assembly of Haute-Guyenne, in 1784, “that the k
of the most severely taxed communities is so rigorous as to v
led their proprietors frequently to abandon their property.* Wh
is not aware of the inhabitants of Saint-Servin having abandon ned
their possessions ten times and of their threats to resort again to
this painful proceeding in their recourse to the administra :
Only a few years ago an abandonment of the community of
Boisse took place through the combined action of the inhe
ants, the seignior and the décimateur of that community ;” ai
the desertion would be still greater if the law did not forbid
sons liable to the ¢ad//e abandoning over-taxed property, ex
by renouncing whatever they possessed in the community. Ir
the Soissonais, according to the report of the provincial asser
bly,> “misery is excessive.” In Gascony the spectacle is “ht


1 Archives nationales, H, 200 (A memorial by M. Amelot, intendant at Dijon, re

? Gautier de Bianzat, ‘“‘Doléances sur les surcharges que portent les gens du Tiers-E
etc. (1789), p. 188. ‘‘ Procés-verbaux de l’assemblée provinciale d’Auvergne”’ (1787), rig

8 Théron de Montaugé, ‘‘L’ Agriculture et les chores rurales dans le Toulousain,” 122.

4 “Procés-verbaux de l’assemblée provinciale de la Haute-Guyenne,” I. 47, 79.

5 ** Procés-verbaux de l’assemblée provinciale du Soissonais” (1787), p. 857; “eat
blée provinciale d’Auch,” p. 24. ‘


- CHAP. I. THE PEOPLE. 337


_ rending.” In the environs of Toule, the cultivator, after paying
_ his taxes, tithes and other dues, remains empty-handed. “ Agri-
_ culture is an occupation of steady anxiety and privation, in which
_ thousands of men are obliged to painfully vegetate.”! In a vil-
" lage in Normandy, “nearly all the inhabitants, not excepting the
_ farmers and proprietors, eat barley bread and drink water, living
like the most wretched of men, so as to provide for the payment
of the taxes with which -they are overburdened.” In the same
province, at Forges, ‘many poor creatures eat oat bread, and
others bread of soaked bran, this nourishment causing many
deaths among infants.” People evidently live from day to day ;
_ whenever the crop-proves poor they lack bread. Let a frost
- come, a hailstorm, an inundation, and an entire province is inca-
_ pable of supporting itself until the coming year; in many places
even an ordinary winter suffices to bring on distress. On all
sides hands are seen outstretched to the king, who is the univer-
sal almoner. The people may be said to resemble a man at-
tempting to wade through a pool with the water up to his chin,
and who, losing his footing at the slightest depression, sinks
down and drowns. Existent charity and the fresh spirit of hu-
'manity vainly strive to rescue them; the water has risen too
high. It must subside to a lower level and the pool be drawn
off through some adequate outlet. Thus far the poor man
catches breath only at intervals, running the risk of drowning at
every moment.


II.


Between 1750, and 1760,° the idlers who eat suppers begin to
regard with compassion and alarm the laborers who go without
dinners. Why are the latter so impoverished, and by what mis-
‘chance, on a soil as rich as that of France, do those lack bread
who grow the grain? In the first place many farms remain un-
cultivated, and, what is worse, many are deserted. According
to the best observers “one-quarter of the soil is absolutely lying
waste; ... Hundreds and hundreds of arfends of heath and
moor form extensive deserts.”* “Let a person traverse Anjou,


1 “Résumé des cahiers,” by Prud’homme, III. 271.

_ ® Hippeau, ibid. V1. 74, 243 (Complaints drawn up by the Chevalier de Bertin).

3 See the article ‘“‘Fermiers et Grains,” in the Encyclopedia, by Quesnay, 1756.

_ 4Théron de Montaugé, p. 25. “‘Ephémérides du citoyen,” III. 190 (1766); TX. 15 (an
article by M. de 'Butré, 1767).


a


338 THE ANCIENT REGIME.


Maine, Brittany, Poitou, Limousin, la Marche, Berry, Nivernais
Bourbonnais and Auvergne, and he finds one-half of thes
provinces in heaths, forming immense plains all of which might
be cultivated.” In Touraine, in Poitou and in Berry they form
solitary expanses of thirty thousand e@rpents. In one can on
alone, near Preuilly, forty thousand arpents of good soil cone
of heath. ‘The agricultural society of Rennes declares that tv
thirds of Brittany is lying waste. ‘This is not sterility but ddeatl
dence. The régime invented by Louis XIV. has produced its —
effect ; the soil for a century past, is reverting back to a wild state.
“We see only abandoned and ruinous chateaux; the principal —
towns of the fiefs, in which the nobility formerly lived at their —
ease, are all now occupied by poor métayer herdsmen whose _
scanty labor hardly suffices for their subsistence and a remnant —
of tax ready to disappear through the ruin of the proprietors”
and the desertion of the settlers.” In the election-district of —
Confolens a piece of property rented for 2,956'livres in 1665, —
brings in only goo livres in 1747. On the confines of la Marche ©
and of Berry a domain which, in 1660, honorably supported two
seigniorial families is now simply a small unproductive métayer- —
farm; ‘the traces of the furrows once made by the ploughshare
being still visible on the surrounding heaths.” Sologne, once —
flourishing,! becomes a marsh and a forest; a hundred years
earlier it produced three times the quantity of grain; two-thirds —
of its mills are gone; not a vestige of its vineyards remains;
“srapes have given way to the heath.” Thus abandoned by
the spade and the plough, a vast portion of the soil ceases. to
feed man, while the rest, poorly cultivated, scarcely provides the
simplest necessities.” x

In the first place, on the failure of a crop, this portion remains
untilled; its occupant is too poor to purchase seed; the intendant
is often obliged to distribute seed, without which the disaster of
the current year would be followed by sterility the following year.*
Every calamity, accordingly, in these days affects the future as


ee a eee pA We ally ee a mas gl > nds pare


1 “Procés-verbaux de l’assemblée provinciale de I’Orléanais” (1787), in a memoir by M
d’Autroche. J

? One is surprised to see so many supported where one-half, or one-quarter of the arab
ground is sterile wastes. -ARTHUR YOUNG.

3 Archives nationales, H, 1149. A letter of the Comtesse de Saint-Georges Gare J
the effects of frost. ‘‘The ground this year will remain uncultivated, there being alrea
much land in this condition and especially in our parish.” Théron de Montaugé, 70#d. 45, ¢


CHAP. I. THE PEOPLE. 339


well as the present; during the two years of 1784 and 178s,
around Toulouse, the drought having caused the loss of all draft
animals, many of the cultivators are obliged to let their fields lie
fallow. In the second place, cultivation, when it does take place,
_ is carried on according to medizval modes. Arthur Young, in
1789, considers that French agriculture has not progressed be-
yond that of the tenth century.! Except in Flanders and on the
plains of Alsace, the fields lie fallow one year out of three and
oftentimes one year out of two. The implements are poor;
_ there are no ploughs made of iron; in many places the plough
of Virgil’s time is still in use. Cart-axles and wheel-tires are
‘made of wood, while a harrow often consists of the trestle of a
cart. ‘There are few animals and but little manure; the capital
bestowed on cultivation is three times less than that of the present
‘day. The yield is slight: “our ordinary farms;” says a good
observer, “taking one with another return about six times the seed
sown.”? In 1778, on the rich soil around Toulouse, wheat returns
about five for one, while at the present day it yields eight to one
and more. Arthur Y estimates that, in his day, the English
acre produces twenty-eight bushels of grain, and the French
acre eighteen bushels, and that the value of the total product of
the same area for a given length of time is thirty-six pounds
sterling in England and only twenty-five in France. As the
parish roads are frightful, and transportation often impracticable,
it is clear that, in remote cantons, where poor soil yields scarcely
three times the seed sown, food is not always obtainable. How
do they manage to live until the next crop? This is the ques-
tion always under consideration previous to, and during, the
Revolution. I find, in manuscript correspondence, the syndics
‘and mayors of villages estimating the quantities for local subsist-
ence at so many bushels in the granaries, so many sheaves in the
‘barns, so many mouths to be filled, so many days to wait until
the August wheat comes in, and concluding on short supplies for
two, three and four months. Such a state of inter-communica-
tion and of agriculture condemns a country to periodical famines,
and I venture to state that, alongside of the small-pox which,
out of eight deaths, causes one, another endemic disease exists,
as prevalent and as destructive, and this disease is starvation.


1 Arthur Young, II. 112, 115. Théron de Montaugé, 52, 6r.
2 The Marquis de Mirabeau, “ Traité de la population,” p. 29.


340 THE ANCIENT REGIME.


We can easily imagine the people as sufferers by it and,
especially, the peasant. An advance in the price of bread
prevents him from getting any, and even without that advan
he obtains it with difficulty. Wheat bread cost, as at the pre
day, three sovs per pound,' but as the average day’s work
brought only nineteen sows instead of forty, the day-laboall 1
working the same time, could buy only the half of a loaf instead #
of a full loaf? Taking everything into account, and wages be
estimated according to the price of grain, we find that th ne
husbandman’s manual labor then procured him 959 “res of*
wheat, while nowadays it gives him 1,851 “ves; his well-being, —
accordingly, has advanced ninety-three per cent., which suffices —
to show to what extent his predecessors suffered pave And
these privations are peculiar to France. Through analogous _
observations and estimates Arthur Young shows that in France —
those who lived on field labor, and they constituted the great —
majority, are seventy-six per cent. less comfortable than the same —
laborers in England, while they are seventy-six per cent. less well |
fed and well clothed, besides being worse treated in sickness and —
in health. The result is that, in seven-eighths of the kingdom, ~ 4
there are no farmers but simply métayers.? The peasant is too
poor to undertake cultivation on his own account, possessing. no ‘3
agricultural capital.4 ‘The proprietor, desirous of improving
his land, finds no one to cultivate it but miserable creatures pos-
sessing only a pair of hands; he is obliged to advance everything
for its cultivation at his own expense, animals, implements and —
seed, and even to advance the wherewithal to this métayer to a
feed him until the first crop comes in.” “At Vatan, for example, —
in Berry, the métayers, almost every year, borrow bread of the
proprietor in order to await the harvesting.” “ Very rarely is
one found ins is not indebted to his master at least one hundred
livres a year.” Frequently the latter proposes to abandon the
entire crop to them on condition that they demand nothing of —
him during the year; ‘these miserable creatures” have refused ;


1 Cf. Galiani, “Dialogues sur le commerce des blés” (1770), p. 193. Wheat bread at this
time cost four sous per pound.

? Arthur Young, II. 200, 20r, 260-265. Théron de Montaugé, 59, 68, 75s 79 81, 84.

3 “The poor people who cultivate the soil here are mé¢tayers, that is, men who hire the
land without ability to stock it; the proprietor is forced to Aguada cattle and seed and he .
and his tenants divide the produce.”—ArTuHuR YOuNG.

4“ Ephémérides du citoyen,” VI. 81-94 (1767), and IX. 99 (1767)...


ie
4


CHAP. I. THE PEOPLE. 341


left to themselves, they would not be sure of keeping themselves
alive. In Limousin and in Angoumois their poverty is so great!
“that, deducting the taxes to which they are subject, they have
no more than from twenty-five to thirty livres each person per
annum to spend; and notin money, it must be stated, but count-
ing whatever they consume in kind out of the crops they
produce. ‘Frequently they have less, and when they cannot
possibly make a living the master is obliged to support them.

. The métayer is always reduced to just what is absolutely
“necessary to keep him from starving.” As to the small proprie-
tor, the villager who ploughs his land himself, his condition is
but little better. “* Agriculture,” as our peasants practise it, is a
veritable drudgery; they die by thousands in childhood, and in
maturity they seek places everywhere but where they should
be.” In 1783, throughout the plain of the Toulousain they eat
only maize, a mixture of flour, common seeds and very little
wheat; those on the mountains feed, a part of the year} on
chestnuts ; the potato is hardly known, and, according to Arthur
Young, ninety-nine out of a hundred peasants would refuse to
eat it. According to the reports of intendants, the basis of food,
in Normandy, is oats; in the election-district of Troyes, buck- »
wheat; in the Marche sad in Limousin, buckwheat with chestnuts
and radishes; in Auvergne, buckwheat, chestnuts, milk-curds and
a little salted goat’s meat; in Beauce, a mixture of barley and
rye; in Berry, a mixture of barley and oats. There is no wheat
bread; the peasant consumes inferior flour only because he is
unable to pay two sous a pound for his bread. There is no
butcher’s meat; at best he kills one pig a year. His dwelling is
built of clay (ise), roofed with thatch, without windows, and the
floor is the beaten ground. Even when the soil furnishes good
building materials, stone, slate and tile, the windows have no
sashes, In a parish in Normandy, in 1789, “most of the dwell-
ings consist of four posts.” They are often mere stables or
barns “to which a chimney has been added made of four poles
and some mud.” ‘Their clothes are rags, and often, in winter
these are muslin rags. In Quercy and elsewhere, they have no
stockings, or shoes or sadots (wooden shoes). “It is not in the
power of an English imagination,” says Arthur Young, “to figure


1 Turgot, “Collections des économistes,” I. 544, 549.
2 Marquis de Mirabeau, “ Traité de la population,” 83.


29*


342 THE ANCIENT REGIME.


the animals that waited on us here at the Chapeau Rouge.
Some things that called themselves by courtesy Souillac wom
: but in sine th walking dung-hills, But a neatly dressed, clean


On seid Pevcrintinds made on the spot we see in Frande a
similar aspect of country and of peasantry as in Ireland, at least |
in its broad outlines, >


h


Il. a


tages and faces denote “ misery and privation.”!- “The peasants
are generally feeble, emaciated and of slight stature.” Nearlyallde-

rive wheat and wine from their homesteads but they are forced tosell _
this to pay their rents and imposts; they eat black bread, made
of rye and barley, and their sole beverage is water poured onthe
lees and the husks. “An Englishman? who has not travelled can —
not imagine the figure made by infinitely the greater part of the _
countrywomen in France.” Arthur Young, who stops to talk ~
with one of these in Champagne, says that “this woman, at no
great distance, might have been taken for sixty or seventy, her fig-
ure was so bent and her face so hardened and furrowed by labor—
but she said she was only twenty-eight.” This woman, her hus-
band and her household, afford a sufficiently accurate example of
the condition of the small proprietary husbandmen. Their property
consists simply of a patch of ground, with a cow and a poor little
horse ; their seven children consume the whole of the cow’s milk. _
They owe to one seignior a franchard (forty-two pounds) of flour,
and three chickens ; to another three /ranchards of oats, one chicken ~
and one sow, to which must be added the Zaz//e and other imposts.
“God keep us!” she said, * for the ¢az//es and the dues crush us.”
What must it be in districts where the soilis poor! ‘“ From Ormes,
(near Chatellerault), as far as Poitiers,” writes a lady,? “ there is a
good deal of ground which brings in nothing, and from Poitiers
to my residence (in Limousin) twenty-five thousand arpents of
ground consist wholly of heath and sea-grass. The peasantry live
on rye, of which they do not remove the bran, and which is as black - |
and heavy as lead. In Poitou, and here, they plough up only the —


1 Dulaure, ‘‘ Description de l Auvergne,”’ 1789.
2 Arthur Young, L. 235.
8 “Ephémérides du citoyen,” XX. 146, a letter of the Marquis de ——, August 17, 1767.


CHAP. I. THE PEOPLE. 343


skin of the ground with a miserable little plough without wheels. . . .
From Poitiers to Montmorillon it is nine leagues, equal to sixteen
of Paris, and I assure you that I have seen but four men on the
road and, between Montmorillon and my own house, which is
_ four leagues, but three; and then only at a distance, not having
met one on the road. You need not be surprised at this in such
a country... . Marriage takes place as early as with the grand
seigniors,” doubtless for fear of the militia. ‘ But the population of
the country is no greater because almost every infant dies. Mothers
having scarcely any milk, their infants eat the bread of which I
spoke, the stomach of a girl of four years being as big as that of a preg-
nant woman. . . . The rye crop this year was ruined by the frost
on Easter day; flour is scarce; of the twelve méfairies owned by
my mother, four of them may, perhaps, have some on hand.
‘There has been no rain since Easter; no hay, no pasture, no veg-
etables, no fruit. You see the lot of the poor peasant. ‘There is
no manure, and there are no cattle. . . . My mother, whose gran-
' aries used to be always full, has not a grain of wheat in them,
because, for two years past, she has fed all"her métayers and the
poor.”

“The peasant is assisted,” ‘Says a seignior of the same prov-
ince, “ protected, and rarely maltreated, but he is looked upon
with disdain. If kindly and pliable he is made subservient, but
if ill-disposed he becomes soured and irritable. . . . He is kept
in misery, in an abject state, by men who are not at all inhuman
but whose prejudices, especially among the nobles, lead them to
regard him as of a different species of being. . . . The proprie-
tor gets all he can out of him; in any event, looking upon him
and his oxen as domestic animals, he puts them into harness and
employs them in all weathers for every kind of journey, and for
every species of carting and transport. On the other hand, this
- métayer thinks of living with as little labor as possible, convert-
ing as much ground as he can into pasturage, for the reason that
the product arising from the increase of stock costs him no labor.
The little ploughing he does is for the purpose of raising low-
priced provisions suitable for his own nourishment, such as
buckwheat, radishes, etc. His enjoyment consists only of his
own idleness and sluggishness, hoping for a good chestnut year
and doing nothing voluntarily but procreate;” unable to hire
farming hands he begets children. The rest, ordinary laborers,


344 THE ANCIENT REGIME. | BOOK VY,


have small supplies, “ living on the spontaneous and ona few goats a


which devour everything.” Often again, these, by order of Fate)


liament, are killed by the keepers. A woman, with two child
in swaddling clothes, having no milk, “and Beh So an inch of
ground,” whose two goats, her sole resource, had thus been
and another, with one goat slain in the same way, and who


all these poor people is to endure. “ As with rain and hail, they re-


along with her boy, present themselves at the gate of the chateau ; 7 | |
one receives twelve livres, while the other is admitted as a domes- ”

tic, and henceforth, “this village is all bows and smiling faces,” ae
In short, they are not accustomed to benefactions; the lot of


gard as inevitable the necessity of being oppressed by the strong- a:


est, the richest, the most skilful, the most in repute,” .and this


stamps on them, “if one may be allowed to say so, an air of pain-
ful suffering.”


In Auvergne, a feudal country, covered with extensive ec- —


clesiastic and seigniorial domains, the misery is the same. At


Clermont-Ferrand,’ “there are many streets that can for black- _
ness, dirt and scents only be represented by narrow chan-


nels cut in a night dunghill.” In the inns of the largest bourgs,
“closeness, misery, dirtiness and “darkness.” ‘That of Pradelles
is “one of the worst in France.” ‘That of Aubenas, says Young,
“would be a purgatory for one of my pigs.” The senses, in
short, are paralyzed. ‘The primitive man is content so long as he
can sleep and get something to eat. He gets something to eat,
but what kind of food? ‘To put up with the indigestible mess a
peasant here requires a still tougher stomach than in Limousin ;
in certain villages where, ten years later, every year twenty or
twenty-five hogs are to be slaughtered, they now slaughter but
three? On contemplating this temperament, rude and intact


since Vercingétorix, and, moreover, rendered more savage by
suffering, one cannot avoid being somewhat alarmed. The Mar-—


quis de Mirabeau describes “the votive festival of Mont-Dore,


savages descending from the mountain in torrents,® the curate


with stole and surplice, the justice in his wig, the police corps
with sabres drawn, all guarding the open square before letting


the bagpipers play ; the dance interrupted in a quarter of an hour. ~


1 Arthur Young, I. 280, 289, 294.
2 Lafayette, ‘‘ Mémoires,” V. 533.
3 Lucas de Montigny, zézd. (a letter of August 18, 1777).


CHAP. I. THE PEOPLE. 345


by a fight; the hootings and cries of -children, of the feeble and
other spectators, urging them on as the rabble urge on so
many fighting dogs; frightful-looking men, or rather wild beasts
_ covered with coats of coarse wool, wearing wide leather belts
pierced with copper nails, gigantic in stature, which is increased
by high sado¢s, and making themselves still taller by standing on
tiptoe to see the battle, stamping with their feet as it progresses
and rubbing each other’s flanks with their elbows, their faces
haggard and covered with long matted hair, the upper portion


_ pallid, and the lower distended, indicative of cruel delight and a


_ sort of ferocious impatience. - And these folks pay the azl/e /
And now they want to take away their salt! And they know
_ nothing of those they despoil, of those whom they think they
govern, believing that, by a few strokes of a cowardly and care-
less pen, they may starve them with impunity up to the final
catastrophe! Poor Jean-Jacques, I said to myself, had any one
_ despatched you, with your system, to copy music amongst these
_ folks he would have had some sharp replies to make to your dis-
_ courses!’’ Prophetic warning and admirable foresight in one
whom an excess of evil does not blind to the evil of the remedy!
_ Enlightened by his feudal and rural instincts, the old man at
once judges both the government and the philosophers, the An-
- cient Régime and the Revolution.


IV.


Misery begets bitterness in a man; but ownership coupled
with misery renders him still more bitter. He may have
- submitted to indigence but not to spoliation—which is the
situation of the peasant in 1789, for, during the eighteenth
century, he had become the possessor of land. But how could
he maintain himself in such destitution? The fact is almost in-
credible, but it is nevertheless true. We can only explain it by
_ the character of the French peasant, by his sobriety, his tenacity,
his rigor with himself, his dissimulation, his hereditary passion for
property and especially for that of the soil. He had lived on
privations, and economized sou after sou. Every year a few
“pieces of silver are added to his little store of crowns buried in
‘the most secret recess of his cellar; Rousseau’s peasant, conceal-
‘ing his wine and bread in a pit, assiredly had a yet more secret
hiding-place ; a little money in a woollen stocking or in a


346 THE ANCIENT REGIME. BOOK V.


jug escapes, more readily than elsewhere, the search of the *
clerks. Dressed in rags, going barefoot, eating nothing but coarse —
black bread, but cherishing the little treasure in his breast on
which he builds so many hopes, he watches for the opportunity
which never fails to come. “In spite of privileges,” writes a gen-
tleman in 175s, “the nobles are daily being ruined and reduced,
the Third-Estate making all the fortunes.” A number of :do- —
mains, through forced or voluntary sales, thus pass into the hands —
of financiers, of men of the quill, of merchants, and of the —
well-to-do bourgeois. Before undergoing this total disposses- —
sion, however, the seignior, involved in debt, is evidently re-
signed to partial alienations of his property. The peasant who
has bribed the steward is on hand with his hoard. “It is poor —
property, my lord; and it costs you more than you get from it.” —
This may refer to an isolated patch, one end of a field or —
meadow, sometimes a farm whose farmer pays nothing, and gen-
erally worked by a métayer whose wants and indolence make
him an annual expense to his master. The latter may say'to _
himself that the alienated parcel is not lost since, some day or —
other, through his right of repurchase, he may take it back, while,
in the meantime, he enjoys a cens, drawbacks, and the lord’s dues.
Moreover, there is on his domain and around him, extensive open
spaces which the decline of cultivation and depopulation have
left a desert. To restore the value of this he must surrender its
proprietorship. ‘There is no other way by which to attach man
permanently to the soil. And the government helps him along in
this matter. Obtaining no revenue from the abandoned soil, it
assents to a provisional withdrawal of its too weighty hand. By
_ the edict of 1766, a piece of cleared waste land remains free of
the aille for fifteen years, and, thereupon, in twenty-eight prov-
_inces four hundred thousand arfents are cleared in three years.'

This is the mode by which the seigniorial domain gradually
crumbles away and decreases. ‘Towards the last, in many places,
with the exception of the chateau and the small adjoining farm,
which brings in two or three thousand francs a year, nothing is
left to the seignior but his feudal dues;? the rest of the soil :


1 “ Procés-verbaux de l’assemblée provinciale de Basse Roseinadie” (1787), p. 205.
? Léonce de Lavergne, p. 26 (according to the tables of indemnity granted to the emig7é
in 1825) In the estate of Blet (see note 2 at the end of the volume), twenty-two parcels are
alienated in 1760. Arthur Young, I. 308 (the domain of Tour-d’Aigues, in Provence), an
II. 198, 214. Doniol, ‘* Histoire des classes rurales,” p. 450. De Tocqueville, p. 36.


_ CHAP. I. THE PEOPLE. 347


belongs to the peasantry. Forbonnais already remarks, towards

1750, that many of the nobles and of the ennobled “reduced to
extreme poverty but with titles to immense possessions,” have
sold off portions to small cultivators at low prices, and often for
the amount of the Ze. Towards 1760, one-quarter of the soil
is said to have already passed into the hands of agriculturalists.
In 1772, in relation to the vingtiéme, which is levied on the net
revenue of real property, the intendant of, Caen, having com-
pleted the statement of his quota, estimates that out of one
hundred and fifty thousand “there are perhaps fifty thousand
whose liabilities did not exceed five sows and perhaps still as
many more not exceeding twenty souws.”! Contemporary ob-
servers authenticate this passion of the peasant for real property.
“The savings of the lower classes, which elsewhere are invested
with individuals and in the public funds, are wholly destined in
France to the purchase of land.” “Accordingly the number of
small rural holdings is always on the increase. Necker says that
there is an zmmensity of them.” Arthur Young, in 1789, is as-
tonished at their great number and “inclines to think that they
form a third of the kingdom.” This already would be our actual
estimate, and we still find, approximatively, the actual figures, on
estimating the number of proprietors in comparison with the
number of mhabitants.

The small cultivator, however, in becoming a_possessor of the
soil assumed its charges, Simply as day-laborer, and with his
arms alone, he was only partially affected by the taxes; “where
there is nothing the king loses his dues.” But now, vainly is he
poor and declaring himself still poorer; the fisc has a hold on
him and on every portion of his new possessions. ‘The col-
fectors, peasants like himself, and jealous, by virtue of being his


1 Archives nationales, H, 1463 (a letter by M. de Fontette, November 16, 1772). Cf.
Cochut, ‘Revue des Deux Mondes,’’ September, 1848. The sale of the national property
seems not to have sensibly increased small properties nor sensibly diminished the number of the
large ones. The Revolution developed moderate sized properties. In 1848, the large estates
numbered 183,000 (23,000 families paying 300 francs taxes, and more, and possessing on the
average 260 hectares of land, and 160,000 families paying from 250 to 500 francs taxes and
. possessing on the average 75 /ectares). These 183,000 families possess 18,000,000 hectares.
There are besides 700,000 medium sized estates (paying ftom 50 to 250 francs tax), and com-
prising 15,000,000 hectares., And finally 3,900,000 small properties comprising 15,000,000
hectares (900,000 paying from 25 to 50 francs tax, averaging five and one-half hectares each,
and 3,000,000 paying less than 25 francs, averaging three and one-ninth /ectares each).
-According to the partial statements of De Tocqueville the number of holders of real property
had increased, on the average, to five-twelfths ; the population, at the same time, having in-
creased five-thirteenths (from 26 to 36 millions).


348 . THE ANCIENT REGIME.


neighbors, know how much his property, exposed to view, brings’
in; hence they take all they can lay theirhands on. Vainly has —
he labored with renewed energy; his hands remain as empty a
and, at the end of the year, he discovers that his field has pro-
duced him nothing. The more he acquires and produces the
more burdensome do the taxes become. In 1715, the Zailleand
the poll- -tax, which he alone pays, or nearly alone, amounts to |
sixty-six millions of livres; the amount is ninety-three millions 1 in *
1759 and one hundred aad ten millions in 1789.! In 1757, the | i
imposts amount to 283,156,000 livres; in 1789 to 476,294,000 ~~
livres. 3

Theoretically, through humanity and rapid good pe Ez


for bias But, in practice, through necessity and routine, he is
treated according to Cardinal Richelieu’s precept, as a. beast i
of burden to which oats are measured out for fear that he may
become too strong and kick, “‘a mule which, accustomed to his”
load, is spoiled more by long repose than by work.” ;


1 ““Compte-général des revenus et dépenses fixes au rer Mai, 1789 (Imprimerie Royale,
1789). De Luynes, XVI. 49. Roux and Buchez, I. 206, 374. (This relates only to the
countries of election ; in the provinces, with assemblies, the increase is no less great).
Archives nationales, H?, 1610 (the parish of Bourget, in Anjou). Extracts from the Peake
rolls of three s¢tayer-farms belonging to M. de Ruillé. The imposts in 1762 are 334 avi
3 Sous ; in 1783, 372 “évres 15 sous.


CHAPTER II.


TAXATION THE PRINCIPAL CAUSE OF MISERY.—I. Direct taxes.—State of
_ different domains at the end of the reign of Louis XV.—Levies of the tithe-
owner and of the fisc.—What remains to the proprietor.—II. State of cer-
tain provinces on the outbreak of the Revolution. —The /az//e, and other im-
posts.—The proportion of these taxes in relation to income.—The sum total
immense.—III. Four direct taxes on the common laborer.—IV. Collections
_ and seizures.—V. Indirect taxes.—The salt-tax and the excise. —VI. Why
‘taxation is so burdensome.—Exemptions and privileges.—VII. The océrois
of towns.—The poor the greatest sufferers. — VIII. Complaints in the memo-
rials.


Z.

Ler us closely examine the extortions he has to endure, which
are very great, much beyond any that we can imagine. Econo-
mists had long prepared the budget of a farm and shown by
statistics the excess of charges with which the cultivator is over-
whelmed. If he continues to cultivate, they say, he must have
his share in the crops, an inviolable portion, equal to one-half of
the entire production and from which nothing can be deducted
without ruining him. This portion, in short, accurately repre-
_ sents, and not a sow too much, in the first place, the interest of
_ the capital first expended on the farm in cattle, furniture, and im-
plements of husbandry; in the second place, the maintenance of
this capital, every year depreciated by wear and tear; in the third
place, the advances made during the current year for seed, wages,
and food for men and animals; and, in the last place, the com-
_ pensation due him for the risks he takes and his losses. Here is
a first lien which must be satisfied beforehand, taking precedence
of all others, superior to that of the seignior, to that of the tithe-
owner (décimateur ), to even that of the king, for it is an indebted-
hess due tothe soil! After this is paid back, then, and only then,


4 **Collection des économistes,” II..832. See a tabular statement by Beaudan.


350 THE ANCIENT REGIME. | BOOK V._


that which remains, the xe¢ product, can be touched. | Now, in the
then state of agriculture, the tithe-owner and the king appro- —
priate one-half of this net product, when the estate is large, and
the whole, if the estate-is a small one.!_ A certain large farm in
_ Picardy, worth to its owner 3,600 livres, pays 1,800 livres to the
king, and 1,311 livres to the tithe-owner; another, in the Soisson- «
nais, rented for 4,500 livres, pays 2,200 pean taxes and more than
1,000 livres to the tithes. An ordinary métayer-farm near Nevers _
pays into the treasury 138 livres, 121 livres to the church, and —
114 livres to the proprietor. On another, in Poitou, the fisc ab-
sorbs 348 livres, and the proprietor receives only 238. In gen- —
eral, in the regions of large farms, the,proprietor obtains ten
livres the arfent if the cultivation is very good, and three livres —
when ordinary. In the regions of small farms, and of the métayer
system, he gets fifteen sous the a7fenzé, eight sous and even six scus.
The entire net profit may be said to go to the church and into the ~
State treasury. ;
Hired labor, meantime, is no less costly. On this métayer- —
farm in Poitou, which brings in eight sous the arpent, thirty- 1
six laborers consume each twenty- -six francs per annum in rye, _
two francs respectively in vegetables, oil and milk preparations, —
and two francs ten sous in pork, amounting to a sum total, each
year, for each person, of sixteen pounds of meat at an expense
of thirty-six francs. In fact they drink water only, use rape-seed
oil for soup and for light, never taste butter, and dress themselves
in materials made of the wool and hair of the sheep and goats
they raise. ‘They purchase nothing save the tools necessary to
make the fabrics of which these provide the material. On an-
other métayer-farm, on the confines of la Marche and Berry,
forty-six laborers cost a smaller sum, each one consuming only
the value of twenty-five francs per annum. We can judge by
this of the exorbitant share appropriated to themselves by the
Church and State since, at so small a cost of cultivation, the
proprietor finds in his pocket, at the end of the year, six or eight |
sous per argent, out of which, if plebeian, he must still pay the
dues to his seignior, contribute to the common purse for the
militia, buy his taxed salt and work out his corvée and the rest.
Towards the end of the reign of Louis XV. in Limousin, says


1 “Ephémérides du citoyen,” IX. 15; an article by M. de Butré, 1767.


CHAP. II. THE PEOPLE. 351


_ Turgot,! the king derives for himself alone “about as much from
the soil as the proprietor.” A certain election-district, that
of Tulle; where he abstracts fifty-six and one-half per cent. of the
product, there remains to the latter forty-three and one-half per
cent. thus accounting for “a multitude of domains being aban-
doned.”

It must not be supposed that time renders the tax less onerous
or that, in other provinces, the cultivator is better treated. In
this respect the documents are authentic and almost up to the
latest hour.\ We have only to take up the official: statements
of the provincial assemblies held in 1787, to learn by official
figures to what extent the fisc may abuse the men who labor, and
take bread out of the mouths of those who have earned it by
the sweat of their brows.


II.


Direct taxation alone is here concerned, the /az//es, collat-
eral imposts, poll-tax, wimgtiémes, and the pecuniary tax sub-
stituted for the corvée.2 In Champagne, the tax-payer pays
on 100 livres income fifty-four livres fifteen sous, on the aver-
age, and in many parishes,’ seventy-one livres thirteen sous. In
the Ile-de-France, “if a taxable inhabitant of a village, the pro-
prietor of twenty avpents of land which he himself works, and the
income of which is estimated at ten livres per @7fent, it is sup-
posed that he is likewise the owner of the house he occupies, the
site being valued at forty livres.”* This tax-payer pays for his
real Zai//e, personal and industrial, thirty-five livres fourteen sous,
for collateral taxes seventeen livres seventeen sous, for the poll-
tax twenty-one livres eight sous, for the wgtiemes twenty-four
livres four sous, in all ninety-nine livres three sous, to which
must be added about five livres as the substitution for the corvée,
in all 104 livres on a piece of property which he rents for 240
livres, and which amounts to five-twelfths of his income.

It is much worse on making the same calculation for the


» 1 Collection des économistes,” I. 551, 562.

2 “ Procés-verbaux de l’assembl¢e provinciale de Champagne” (1787), p. 240.

3 Cf. “Notice historique sur la Révolution dans le département de |’Eure,” by Boivin-
Champeaux, p. 37. A memorial of the parish of Epreville; on 100 francs income the
Treasury takes 27 for the ¢azZ/e, 16 for collaterals, 15 for the poll-tax, 1 for the vingtzémes,
total 67 livres.

4 “« Procés-verbaux de l’assemblée provinciale de I’Ile-de-France” (1787), P- 131-


—


sous three deniers more; the vimgtiémes, two sous and three


352 THE ANCIENT REGIME.


poorer generalities. In Haute-Guyenne,! “all property in land is
taxed, for the /ail/e, the collateral imposts, and the wagtiemes,
more than one-quarter of its revenue, the only deduction being ~
the expenses of cultivation; also dwellings, one-third of nei
revenue, deducting only the cost of repairs and of maintenance 5
to which must be added the poll-tax, which takes about oi
tenth of the revenue; the tithe, which absorbs one-seventh ;
seigniorial rents which take another seventh; the tax substitid sie |
for the corvée,; the costs of compulsory collections, seizures, sé: ed
questrations and constraints, and all ordinary and extraordinary — 4
local charges. This being subtracted, it is evident that, in com- — :
munities moderately taxed, the proprietor does not enjoy a third |
of his income, and that, in the communities wronged by the assess:
ments, the proprietors are reduced to the status of simple farmein
tae d able to get enough to restore the expenses of cultiva-
tion.” In Auvergne,” the ¢az/Ze amounts to four sous on the livre |
net profit; the collateral imposts and the poll-tax take off four


;
)
2,
4


4


deniers; the contribution to the royal roads, to the free gift, to
local charges and the cost of levying, take again one sou one 4
denier, the total being eleven sous and seven deniers on the livre _
income, without counting seigniorial dues and the tithe. “The —
bureau, moreover, recognizes with regret, that several of the
collections pay at the rate of seventeen sous, sixteen sous, and
the most moderate, at the rate of fourteen sous the livre. The
evidence of this is in the bureau; it is on file in the registry
of the court of excise, and of the election-districts. It is still ©
more apparent in parishes where an infinite number of assess-
ments are found, laid on property that has been abandoned,
which the collectors lense, and the product of which is often in-
adequate to pay the tax.” - Statistics of this kind are terribly elo-
quent. They may be summed up in one word. Putting together
Normandy, the Orleans region, that of Soissons, Champagne,
Ile-de-France, Berry, Poitou, Auvergne, the Lyons region, Gas-
cony, and Haute-Guyenne, in brief the principal e/ec#zon sections,
we find that out of every hundred francs of revenue the direct |
tax on the tax-payer is fifty-three francs, or more than one-half?’
This is about five times as much as at the present day.
>


1 « Procés-verbaux de I’ass. prov. de la Haute-Guyenne”’ (1784), II. 17, 40, 47.
2 <¢ Procés-verbaux de l’ass. prov. d’ Auvergne” (1787), p. 253.
8 See note 5 at the end of the volume.


‘CHAP. II. THE PEOPLE, — 353


III.
» . The. fisc, Risieenies. in thus bearing down on taxable property
: has not released the taxable person without property. In the
absence of land it seizes on men. In default of an income it
taxes a man’s wages. With the exception of the vingticmes, the
preceding imposts not only bore on those who possessed some-
thing but, again, on those who possessed nothing. In the
-Toulousain,' at St. Pierre de Barjouville, the poorest day-laborer,
with nothing but his hands by which to earn his support, and
getting ten sous a day, pays eight, nine and ten livres poll-tax.
“In Burgundy” it is common tosee a poor mechanic, without
‘any property, taxed eighteen and twenty livres for his poll-tax
and the aide.” In Limousin,’ all the money brought back by
he masons in winter serves “to pay the imposts charged to their
families.” As to the rural day-laborers and the settlers (colons )
the proprietor, even when privileged, who employs them, is
ese to take upon himself a part of their quota, otherwise,
being without anything to eat, they cannot work,* even in the
interest of the master; man must have his ration of bread the
same as an ox his ration of hay. “In Brittany,° it is notorious
that nine-tenths of the artisans, though poorly fed and poorly
clothed, have not a crown free of debt at the end of the year,”
the poll-tax and others carrying off this only and last crown. At
Paris® “the dealer in ashes, the buyer of old bottles, the gleaner
of the gutters, the peddlers of old iron and old hats,” the mo-
ment they obtain a shelter pay the poll-tax of three livres and
ten sous each. To ensure its payment the occupant of a house
who sub-lets to them is made responsible. Moreover, in case
of delay, a “blue man,” a bailiff’s subordinate, is sent who in-
stalls himself on the spot and whose time they have to pay for.
Mercier cites a mechanic, named Quatremain, who, with four
small children, lodged in the sixth story, where he had arranged
a chimney as a sort of alcove in which he and his family slept.


'1“Théron de Montaugé,” p. 109 (1763). Wages at this time are from 7 to 12 sous a day
n summer.
2 Archives nationales, procés-verbaux and memorials of the States-General, v. LIX. p,
. A memorial to M. Necker, by M. d’Orgeux, honorary counsellor to the Parliament of
gundy, Oct 25, 1788.
3 /étd. H, 1418. A letter of the intendant of Limoges, Feb. 26, 1784.
4 Turgot, Il. 259.
5 Archives nationales, H, 426 (remonstrances of the Parliament of Brittany, Feb. 1783).
6 Mercier, XI. 59; X. 262.


30*


354 THE ANCIENT REGIME.


“One day I opened his door, fastened with a latch only, the roo
presenting to view nothing but the walls and a vice; the n
coming out from under his chimney, half sick, says to 1
thought it was the blue man for the poll-tax.’” Thus, wh
the condition of the person subject to taxation, however strip
and destitute, the dexterous hands of the fisc take hold of -

Mistakes cannot possibly occur: it puts on no disguise, it come
on the appointed day and rudely lays its hand on his shoulde
The garret and the hut, as well. as the farm and_ the farm-ho us
know the collector, the constable and the bailiff; no hovel escapes”
the detestable brood. ‘The people sow, harvest their i :
work and undergo privation for their benefit; and, should t
farthings so painfully saved each week amount, at the end ¢ of
the year, to a piece of silver, the mouth of their pouch 2 ;
over it. -


bi


IV.


Observe the system actually at work. It is a sort of she: arin
machine, clumsy and badly put together, of which the action is
about as mischievous as it is serviceable. -The worst feature re
is, that, with its creaking gear, the taxable, those cmos
its final instruments, are equally shorn and flayed. Each
ish contains two, three, five, or seven individuals who, und
the title of collectors, and under the authority of the e/ection 1 ri-
bunal, apportion and assess the taxes. ‘ No duty is more oner:
ous ;”+ everybody, through patronage or favor, tries to get rid ¢ of
it. The communities are constantly pleading against the refrac.
tory, and, that nobody may escape under the pretext of ignorance,
the table of future collectors is made up for ten ‘and fifteen yea:
in advance. In parishes of the second class these consist o
“small proprietors, each of whom becomes a collector abou
every six years.” In many of the villages the artisans, day-labe
ers, and métayer-farmers perform the service, although requirir
all their time to earn their own living. In Auvergne, where tl
able-bodied men expatriate themselves in winter to find work, t
women are taken;? in the election-district of Saint-Flour, a c


! Archives nationales, H, 1422, a letter by M: d’Aine, intendant of Limoges (Feber
17, 1782); one by the intendant of Moulins (April, 1779); the trial of the communit
Mollon (Bordelais), and the tables of its collectors. i
. ? “Procés-verbaux de l’ass. prov. d’Auvergne,” p. 266.


Biase, : THE PEOPLE. — 355


tain village has four collectors in petticoats. They are responsi-
ble for all claims entrusted to them, their property, their furniture
and their persons; and, up to the time of Turgot, each is bound
for the others. We can judge of their risks and sufferings. In
1785," in one single district in Champagne, eighty-five are impris-
oned and two hundred of them are on the road every year. “The
collector, says the provincial assembly of Berry,” usually passes
one-half of the day for two years samt: from door to door to
see delinquent tax-payers.” “This service,” writes Turgot,’ “ is the
despair and almost always the ruin of those obliged to perform
it; 3 all families in easy circumstances in a village are thus suc- .
sessively reduced to want.” In short, there is no collector who
$ not forced to act and who has not each year “eight or ten
writs” served on. him. Sometimes he is imprisoned at the ex-
pense of the parish. Sometimes proceedings are instituted against
him and the tax-contributors by the installation of “ ‘blue men’
and seizures, seizures under arrest, seizures in execution and
sales of furniture.” ‘In the single district of Villefranche,” says
the provincial Assembly of Haute-Guyenne, “a hundred and six
warrant officers and other agents of the bailiff are counted always
on the road.”

_ The thing becomes customary and the parish suffers in vain,
or it would suffer yet more were it to do otherwise. “ Near
Aurillac,” says the Marquis de Mirabeau,°® “there is industry,
application and economy without which there would be only
misery and want. This produces a partially insolvent people
with timorous rich ones who, for fear of overcharge, produce the -
impoverished. ‘The Zaid/e once assessed, everybody groans and
omplains and nobody pays it. The term having expired, at the
our and minute, constraint begins, the collectors, although able,
taking no trouble to arrest this by making a settlement, notwith-
tanding the installation of the bailiff’s men is costly. But this
sind of expense is habitual and people expect it instead of fearing
it, for, if it were less rigorous, they would be sure to be addi-
gonally burdened the following year.” The receiver, indeed, who


1 Albert Babeau, ‘Histoire de Troyes,” I. 72.

2 “ Procés-verbaux de l’ass. prov. de Berry”’ (1778), I. pp. 72, 80.

De Tocqueville, 187.

4 Archives nationales, H, 1417. (A letter of M. de Cypiérre, intendant at Orleans, April
7, 1765).

5 “Traité de Population,” 2d part, p. 26.


356 . THE ANCIENT REGIME.


pays the bailiff’s officers a franc a day, makes them pay two frane:
and appropriates the difference. Hence “if certain parish
venture to pay promptly, without awaiting constraint, the receiver,
who sees himself deprived of the best portion of his gains, be
comes ill-humored, and, at the next department (meeting), ai
arrangement is made between himself, messieurs the elected, th
subdelegate and other shavers of this species, for the paris
to bear a double load, to teach it how to behave itself.”

A population of administrative blood-suckers thus lived24
the peasant. “ Lately,” says an mtendant, “‘in the district of
. morantin,! the collectors received nothing from a sale of furnit
amounting to six hundred livres, because the proceeds y
absorbed by the expenses. In the district of Chateandanl h
same thing occurred at a sale amounting to nine hundred livres
and there are other transactions of the same kind of wil
have no information, however flagrant.” Besides this, the fis
itself is pitiless. ‘The same intendant writes, in 1784, a year 0
famine:? “ People have seen, with horror, the collector, in #
country, disputing with heads of families over the costs of a sal
of furniture which had been apprepriated to stopping the
children’s cry of want.” Were the collectors not to make seiz-
ures they would themselves be seized. Urged on by the recei :
we see them, in the documents, soliciting, prosecuting and
persecuting the tax-payers. Every Sunday and every fete |
_ they are posted at the church door to warn delinquents ;
then, during the week they go from door to door to obtain
aes. oF Commonly. they cannot write and take a scribe wit
them.” Out of six hundred and six traversing the district 0 of
Saint-Flour not ten of them are able to read the official summot
and sign a receipt; hence innumerable mistakes and frauds
Besides a scribe they take along the bailiff’s subordinates, per
sons of the lowest class, laborers without work, conscious of bein
hated and who act accordingly. ‘* Whatever orders may be give’
them not to take anything, not to make the inhabitants fee
them, or to enter taverns with collectors,” habit is too en
“and the abuse continues.”* But, burdensome as the bailif


1 Archives nationales, H, 1417. (A letterof M. de Cypiérre, intendant at Orleans, A
17, 1765).

? Ibid. H, 1418. (Letter of May 28, 1784).

3 /bid. (Letter of the intendant of Tours, June 15, 1765.)


CHAP. II. THE PEOPLE. 357


men may be, care is taken not to evade them. In this respect,
writes an intendant, “their obduracy is strange.” ‘“ No person,”
a receiver reports,! “ pays the collector until he sees the bailiff’s
man in his house.” ‘The peasant resembles his ass, refusing to go
without being beaten, and, although in this he may appear stupid,
he is politic. For the collector, being responsible, “ naturally
inclines to an increase of the assessment on prompt payers to the
advantage of the negligent. Hence the prompt payer becomes,
in his turn, negligent and, although with money in his chest, he
allows the process to go on.”” Summing all up, he calculates
that the process, even if expensive, costs less than extra taxation,
and of the two evils he chooses the least. He has but one
resource against the collector and receiver, his simulated or act-
ual poverty, voluntary or involuntary. “Every one subject to
tl e éaille,” says, again, the provincial assembly of Berry, “ dreads
to expose his resources; he avoids any display of these in his
furniture, in his dress, in his food, and in everything open to
nother’s observation.” ‘M. de Choiseul-Gouffier,’ willing to
oof his peasants’ houses, liable to take fire, with tiles, they
th hanked him for his kindness but-begged him to leave them as
hey were, telling him that if these were covered with tiles, instead
of with thatch, the subdelegates would increase their taxation.”

* People work, but merely to satisfy their prime necessities. . . .
The fear of paying an extra crown makes an average man neglect
| profit of four times the amount.”* “. . . Accordingly, lean cattle,
900r implements, and bad manure- heaps when they might have
Mthers.”® “If I earned any more,” says a peasant, “it would be
or the collector.” Annual and illimitable spoliation “ takes away
yen the desire for comforts.” The majority, pusillanimous,
strustful, stupefied, ‘debased,” “differing little from the old
= ”6 resemble Egyptian fellahs and Hindoo pariahs. The
c, indeed, through the absolutism and enormity of its indebted-
ess, renders property of all kinds precarious, every acquisition
ain, every accumulation derisive; in fact, proprietors are posses-
ors only of that which they can sequestrate from it.


1 Archives Nationales, H, 1417. A report by Raudon, receiver of ¢azd/es in the election of
aon, January, 1764.

2 “ Procés-verbaux de l’ass. prov. de Berry” (1778), I. p. 72.

* Champfort, 93.

4“ Procés-verbaux de l’ass. prov. de Berry,” I. 77.

6 Arthur Young, II. 205.

6 “ Procés-verbaux of the ass. prov, of the generalship of Rouen” (1787), p. 271-


358 | THE ANCIENT REGIME.


V.

The fisc, in every country, has two hands, one, which v
and directly searches the coffers of tax-payers, aid the
which covertly employs the hand of an intermediary so as 1
incur the odium of fresh extortions. Here, no precaution of
kind is taken, the claws of the latter being as visible as thos .
the former; according to its structure and the complaints m
of it, I am ‘yempred to believe it more offensive than the o ner, I
In the first place, the salt-tax, the excises and the customs
annually estimated and sold to adjudicators who, purely a
business matter, make as much profit as they can by their barg:
In relation to the tax-payer they are not administrators but sp
ulators; they have bought him up. He belongs :to them by d
terms of their contract; they will squeeze out of him, not me eely
their advances and the interest on their advances, but, 4
every possible benefit. ‘This suffices to indicate the mode of le
ing indirect imposts. In the second place, by means of fl t
salt-tax and the excises, the inquisition enters each hou a
In the provinces where these are levied, in Ile-de-Frat n
Maine, Anjou, Touraine, Orléanais, Berry, Bourbonnais, E Bu
gogne, Champagiie, Perche, Normandy and Picardy, salt
thirteen sous a pound, four times as much as at the present dz
and, considering the standard of money, eight times as m
And, furthermore, by virtue of the ordinance of 1680, each
son over seven years of age is expected to purchase seven po
per annum, which, with four persons to a family, makes eight
francs a year, and equal to nineteen days’ work: a new direc
tax, which, like the /a//e, is a fiscal hand in the pockets of he
tax-payers, and compelling them, like the /zil/e,; to torment eac
other. Many of them, in fact, are officially appointed to asses
this obligatory use of salt and, like the collectors of the #az//
these are “corporately responsible for the price of te
Others below them, ever following the same course as in coll
ing the ¢aille, are likewise responsible. “ After the former ha
been distrained in their persons and property, the speculator /z
mier is authorized to commence action, under the principle


1 Letrosne (1779). ‘‘ De l’administration provinciale et de la reforme de I’impét,” Pr
262 and 138. Archives nationales, H. 138 (1782). Cahier de Bugey, ‘‘ Salt costs the co
man purchasing i it of the retailers from 15 to 17 sous a pound, according to the way of n


uring it.’ Ri


CHAP. I. THE PEOPLE. 359


mutual responsibility, against the principal inhabitants of the par-
ish.” ‘The effects of this system have just been described. Ac-
cordingly, “in Normandy,” says the Rouen parliament, 1 “unfor-
tunates without bread are daily objects of seizure, sale and exe-
Le ition.”

— But if the rigor is as great as in the matter of the /ai//e, the
-yexations are ten times greater, for these are domestic, minute
and of daily occurrence. It is forbidden to divert an ounce of
_the seven obligatory pounds to any use but that of the “pot and
the salt-cellar.” Ifa villager should economize the salt of his
soup to make brine for a piece of pork, with a. view to winter
consumption, let him look out for the collecting-clerks! His
pork is confiscated and the fine is three hundred livres. The
man must come to the warehouse and purchase other salt, make
a declaration, carry off a certificate and show this at every visit
of inspection. So much the worse for him if he has not the
wherewithal to pay for this supplementary salt; he has only to
‘sell his pig and abstain from meat on Christmas. This is the
‘more frequent case and I dare say that, for the métayers who
pay twenty-five francs per annum, it is the usual case. It is for-
bidden to make use of any other salt for the pot and salt-cellar
than that of the seven pounds. “I am able to cite,” says Le-
trosne, “two sisters residing one league from a town in which
the warehouse is open only on Saturday. Their supply was ex-
' hausted. ‘To pass three or four days until Saturday comes they
boil a remnant of brine from which they extract a few ounces of
salt. A visit from the clerk ensues and a procées-verbal. Having
friends and protectors this costs them only forty-eight livres.”
It Is forbidden to take water from the ocean and from other
saline sources, under a penalty of from twenty to forty livres fine.

Iti is forbidden to water cattle in marshes and other places con-
taining salt, under penalty of. confiscation and a fine of three
hundred livres. It is forbidden to put salt into the bellies of
mackerel on returning from fishing, or between their superposed
‘layers. An order prescribes one pound and a half to a barrel.

Another order prescribes the destruction annually of the natural
salt formed in certain cantons in Provence. Judges are prohib-
ited from moderating or reducing the penalties imposed in salt


1 Floquet, VI. 367 (May 10, 1760).


360 THE ANCIENT REGIME.


cases, under penalty of accountability and of deposition.
over quantities of orders and prohibitions, existing by hundre
This legislation encompasses tax-payers like a net with a thou
sand meshes, while the official who casts it is interested in find
ing them at fault. We see the fisherman, accordingly, unp
ing his barrel, the housewife seeking a certificate for her ham:
the exciseman inspecting the buffet, testing the brine, peerin
into the salt-box and, if it is of good quality, declaring it contra
band because that of the ferme, the only legitimate salt, is usuall
adulterated and mixed with plaster. So
Meanwhile, other officials, those of the excise, descend into the
cellar. None are more formidable, nor who more eagerly seize»
on pretexts for delinquency.! “Let a citizen charitably be tow
a bottle of wine on a poor feeble creature and he is liable to
prosecution and to excessive penalties. .. . The poor iny:
that may interest his curate in the bese oF a bottle of ¥
for him will undergo a trial ruining, not alone the niforinaiell ma 2 :
that obtains it, but again the benefactor who gave it to him
This is not a fancied story.” By virtue of the right of deficien
revenue the clerks may, at any hour, take an inventory of wine —
on hand, even the stores of a vineyard proprietor, indicate wh at
he may consume, tax him for the rest and for the surplus quant ity
already drunk, the ferme thus associating itself with the wine-
producer and claiming its portion of his production. In a vine
yard at Epernay? on four casks of wine, the average product of
one argent, and worth six hundred francs, it levies, at first,
thirty francs, and then, after the sale of the four casks, seventy-
five francs additionally. Naturally, “the inhabitants resort ‘to
the shrewdest and best planned artifices to escape” such potent
rights. But the clerks are alert, watchful, and well-informed,
and they pounce down unexpectedly on every suspected domicile;
their instructions prescribe frequent inspections and exact regis-
tries “enabling them to see at a glance the condition of the
cellar of each inhabitant.”4 The manufacturer having paid up,
the merchant now has his turn. The latter, on sending the four
casks to the consumer again pays seventy-five francs to the ferme


1 Boivin-Champeaux, p. 44. (Cahiers of Bray and of Gamaches).

2 Arthur Young, IL. 175-178.

% Archives nationales, G, 300; G, 319. (Memorials and instructions of various lot
directors of the Excise to their successors). ,

4 Letrosne, zbzd. 523.


CHAP. Il. ; THE PEOPLE. 361


‘The wine is despatched and the ferme prescribes the roads by
which it must go; should others be taken it is confiscated and)
at every step on the way some payment must be made. “A
boat laden with wine from Languedoc, Dauphiny or Roussillon,
-ascending the Rhone and descending the Loire to reach Paris,

through the Briare canal, pays on the way, leaving out charges
on’the Rhone, from thirty-five to forty kinds of duty not com-
prising the charges on entering Paris.” It pays these “at fifteen
or sixteen places, the multiplied payments obliging the carriers
to devote twelve or fifteen days more to the passage than they
otherwise would if their duties could be paid at one bureau.”
The charges on the routes by water are particularly heavy.
“From Pontarlier to Lyons there are twenty-five or thirty tolls;
_ from Lyons to Aigues-Mortes there are others, so that whatever
-costs ten sous in Burgundy amounts to fifteen and eighteen sous at
_ Lyons and to over twenty-five sous at Aigues-Mortes.” The
wine at last reaches the barriers of the city where it is to be
drunk. Here it pays an océroi of forty-seven francs per hogshead.
Entering Paris it goes into the tapster’s or innkeeper’s cellar
where it again pays from thirty to forty francs for the duty on
selling it at retail; at Rethel the duty is from fifty to sixty francs
per puncheon, Rheims gauge. ‘The total is exorbitant. “At
~ Rennes,' the dues and duties on a barrel of Bordeaux wine, to-
gether with a fifth over and above the tax, local charges, eight
sous per pound and the oc/roi, amount to more than seventy-two
livres exclusive of the purchase money; to which must be added
the expenses and duties advanced by the Rennes merchant and
which he recovers from the purchaser, Bordeaux drayage, freight,

insurance, tolls of the flood-gate, entrance duty into the town,

‘hospital dues, fees of gaugers, brokers and inspectors. ‘The total
outlay for the tapster who sells a barrel of wine amounts to two
hundred livres.” We may imagine whether, at this price, the

people of Rennes drink it, while these charges fall on the wine-

grower, since, if consumers do not purchase, he is unable to sell.
Accordingly, among the small growers, he is the most to be
‘pitied; according ta the testimony of Arthur Young, wine-
grower and misery are two synonymous terms. ‘The crop often
fails, “every doubtful crop ruining the man without capital.” In


1 Archives nationales, H, 426 (Papers of the Parliament of Brittany, February, 1783).
3t |


Ay s os


362 THE ANCIENT REGIME. B00K 1


Burgundy, in Berry, in Soisonnais, in the Tice Erde i in
Champagne,} I find in every report that he lacks bread and li
on alms. In Champagne, the syndics of Bar-sur-Aube write’
that the inhabitants, to escape duties, have more than es
emptied their wine into the river, the provincial assembly d
claring that “in the greater portion of the province the slightest
augmentation of duties would cause the cultivators to desert t “
soil.” Such is the history of wine under the ancient régime.
From the producer who grows to the tapster who sells what —
extortions and what vexations! As to the salt-tax, according 4
to the comptroller-general,? this annually produces four thou-
sand domiciliary seizures, three thousand four hundred imprison-
ments, five hundred sentences to flogging, exile and the galley:
If ever two imposts were well combined, not only to despol 1
but to irritate the peasantry, the poor and the people, here ae
are.


VI. reget a

Evidently the burden of taxation forms the chief cause of
misery; hence an accumulated, deep-seated hatred against the
fisc and its agents, receivers, store-house keepers, excise officials M
customs officers and clerks. But why is taxation so burdensome 2? 7
The answer is not doubtful, the communes which annually plead
against certain persons to subject them to the éaz//e writing it out —
fully in their demands. What renders the charge overwhelming}
is the fact that the strongest and those best able to bear taxation _
succeed in evading it, the prime cause of misery being their ex-_
emption. he

Let us follow up the matter impost after impost. In the first |
place, not only are nobles and ecclesiastics exempt from the
personal Zaid/e but again, as we have already seen, they are
exempt from the cultivator’s /az//e, through cultivating their do-
mains themselves or by a steward. In Auvergne,‘ in the single
election-district of Clermont, fifty parishes are enumerated ir


1 “* Procés-verbaux de l’ass. prov. de Soissonnais” (1787), p. 45. Archives nationales, H
1515 (Remonstrances of the Parliament.of Metz, 1768). ‘‘ The class of indigents form mo
than twelve-thirteenths of the whole number of villages of laborers and generally those of th
wine-growers.”” did. G, 319 (Tableau des directions of Chateaudun and Issoudun),

2 Albert Babeau, I. 89. p. 21.

3 “ Mémoires,” presented to the Assembly of Notables, by M. de Calonne (1787), p. 67.

4 Gautier de Bianzat, “‘ Doléances,” 193, 225. ‘‘ Procés-verbaux de l’ass. prov. de Poitou
(1787), P. 99.


CHAP. II. _ THE PEOPLE. 363


_ which, owing to this arrangement, every estate of a privileged
person is exempt, the /az//e falling wholly on those subject to it.
Furthermore, it suffices for a privileged person to maintain that
his farmer is only a steward, which is the case in Poitou in several
_ parishes, the subdelegate and the éz not daring to look into the
matter too closely. In this way the privileged classes escape the
taille, they and their property, including their farms. Now, the
taille, ever augmenting, is that which provides, through its special
delegations, such a vast number of new offices. A man of the
Third-Estate has merely to run through the history of its period-
ical increase to see how it alone, or almost alone, paid and is pay-
ing ' for the construction of bridges, roads, canals and courts of jus-
tice, for the purchase of offices, for the establishment and support
of houses of refuge, insane asylums, nurseries, post-houses for
horses, fencing and riding schools, for paving and sweeping Paris,
for salaries of lieutenants-general, governors, and provincial com-
manders, for the fees of bailiffs, seneschals and ‘vice-bailiffs, for
the salaries of financial and election officials and of commission-
ers despatched to the provinces, for those of the police of the
watch and I know not how many other purposes. In the prov-
inces which hold assemblies, where the ¢ai//e would’seem to be
more justly apportioned, the like inequality is found. In Bur-
gundy? the expenses of the police, of public festivities, of keep-
‘*ing horses, all sums appropriated to the courses of lectures on
chemistry, botany, anatomy and parturition, to the encourage-
ment of the arts, to subscriptions to the chancellorship, to frank-
ing letters, to presents given to the chiefs and subalterns of com-
- mands, to salaries of officials of the provincial assemblies, to the
ministerial secretaryship, to expenses of levying taxes and even
alms, in short, 1,800,000 livres expended in the public service at
_the charge of the Third-Estate, the two higher orders not paying
 acent.

In the second place, with respect to the poll-tax, originally dis-
tributed among twenty-two classes and intended to bear equally
on all according to fortunes, we know that, from the first, the
_ clergy buy themselves off, and, as.to the nobles, they manage


1 Gautier de Bianzat, zdzd.

2 Archives nationales, the procés-verbaux and cahiers of the States-General, V. 59. p. 6.
(Letter of M. Orgeux to M. Necker), t. 27. p. 560-573. (Cahiers of the Third-Estate of
Arnay-le-Duc).


364 THE ANCIENT REGIME.


so well as to have their tax reduced proportionatelyywith its in-
crease at the expense of the Third-Estate. A count or a marquis, ©

an intendant or a master of requests, with 40,000 livres income, ~
who, according to the tariff of 1695,! should pay from 1,700 to
2,500 livres, pays only 400 livres, while a bourgeois with 6,000
livres income and who, according to the same tariff should par
70 livres, pays 720. The poll-tax of the privileged individual is
thus diminished three-quarters or five-sixths, while that of the §
taille-payer has increased tenfold. In the Ile-de-France,’ on an —
income of 240 livres, the éai//e-payer pays twenty-one livres eight —
sous, and the nobles three livres, and the intendant himself states —
that he taxes the nobles only an eightieth of their revenue; that ~
of Orléanais taxes them only a hundredth, while, on the other
hand, those subject to the /ail/e are assessed the eleventh. If
other privileged parties are added to the nobles, such as officers
of justice, employés of the /ermes, and exempted townsmen,
a group is formed embracing nearly everybody rich or well-off
and whose revenue certainly greatly surpasses that of those who ~
are subject to the faze. Now, the budgets of the provincial as- ~
semblies inform us how much each province levies on each of ©
the two groups: in the Lyonnais district those subject to the —
taille pay 898,000 livres, the privileged, 190,000; in the Ile-de-
France, the former pay 2,689,000 livres and -the latter 232,000; *
in the generalship of Alengon, the former pay 1,067,000 livres
_ and the latter 122,000; in Champagne, the former pay 1,377,000 ~
livres, and the latter 199,000; in Haute- Guyenne, the former pay —
1,268,000 liyres, and the latter 61,000; in the generalship of
anche the former pay 797,000 livres, the privileged 21,000; in sy
Auvergne the former pay 1,753,000 livres and the latter 86,000; |
in short, summing up the total of ten provinces, 11,636,000 livres
paid by the poor group and 1,450,000 livres by the rich BrouP,
the latter paying eight times less than it ought to pay.

With respect to the vzugztiémes, the disproportion is less, the pre-
cise amounts not being attainable; we may nevertheless assume
that the assessment of the privileged class is about one-half of


1 In these figures the rise of the money standard has been kept in mind, the silver ‘‘mare,”
worth 29 francs in 1695, being worth 49 francs during the last half of the eighteenth century.
2 “ Procés-verbaux de Il’ass. prov. de I’Ile-de-France,” 132, 158; “‘—— de One |
96, 367.


CHAP. I. THE PEOPLE. 365


what it should be. “In 1772,” says! M. de Calonne, “it was
admitted that the wgtiémes were not carried to their full value.
False declarations, counterfeit leases, too favorable conditions
‘granted to almost all the wealthy proprietors gave rise to inequal-
ities and countless errors. A verification of 4,902 parishes shows
that the product of the two vingtiémes amounting to 54,000,000
should have amounted to 81,000,000.” A seigniorial domain
which, according to its own return of income, should pay 2,400
livres, pays only 1,216. ‘The case is much worse with the princes
of the blood; we have seen that their domains are exempt and
pay only 188,000 livres instead of 2,400,000. Under this sys-
tem, which crushes the weak to relieve the strong, the more cap-
- able one is of contributing, the less one contributes. ‘The same
story characterizes the fourth and last direct impost, namely, the
tax substituted for the goryée. This tax attached, at first, to the
vingliemes and consequently extending to all proprietors, through
an act of the Council is attached to the /ai//e and, consequently,
bears on those the most burdened.” Now this tax amounts to an
extra of one-quarter added to the principal of the ¢az//e, of which
one example may be cited, that of Champagne, where, on every
100 livres income the sum of six livres five sous devolves on the
taille-payer. “Thus,” says the provincial assembly, “every road
impaired by active commerce, by the multiplied coursings of the
rich, is repaired wholly by the contributions of the poor.”

As these figures spread out before the eye we involuntarily re-
cur to the two animals in the fable, the horse and the mule trav-
elling together on the same road; the horse, by right, may prance
along as he pleases; hence his load is gradually transferred to the
- mule, the beast of burden, which finally sinks beneath the extra

load. 7

Not only, in the corps of tax-payers, are the privileged disbur-
dened to the detriment of the taxable, but again, in the corps of
the taxable, the rich are relieved to the injury of the poor, to such
an extent that the heaviest portion of the load finally falls on the
most indigent and most laborious class, on the small proprietor


1 “Mémoire,” presented to the Assembly of Notables (1787), p. 1. See note 2 at the end
of the volume, on the domain of Blet.

2 “¢ Procés-verbaux de l’ass. prov. d’Alsace”’ (1787), p. 116; “ of Champagne,” x92.
(According to a declaration of June 2, 1787, the tax substituted for the corvée may be ex-
tended to one-sixth of the ¢az//e, with accessory taxes and the poll-tax combined). ‘De la
généralité d’Alengon,” 179; “‘—— du Berry,” I. 218.


32"


366 THE ANCIENT REGIME. - sOoK We


cultivating his own field, on the simple artisan with nothing but —
his tools and his hands, and, in general, on the inhabitants of vil-
lages. In the first place, in the matter of imposts, a number of
the towns are “abonnées,” or free. Compiégne, for the fad//e-and ©
its accessories, with 1,671 firesides, pays only”8,000 francs, whilst —
one of the villages in its neighborhood, Canly, with 148 firesides, —
pays 4,475 francs. In the poll-tax, Versailles, Saint-Germain,
Beauvais, Etampes, Pontoise, Saint-Denis, Compiégne, Fontaine-
bleau, taxed in the aggregate at 169,000 livres, are two-thirds ex-
empt, contributing but little more than one franc, instead of three
francs ten sous, per head of the population; at Versailles it is still
less, since for 70,000 inhabitants the poll-tax amounts to only —
51,600 francs.? Besides, in any event, on the apportionment of
a tax, the bourgeois of the town is favored above his rural neigh-
bors. Accordingly, “the inhabitants of the country, who depend ~
on the town and are comprehended in its functions, are treated
with a rigor of which it would be difficult to form an idea... .
Town influence is constantly throwing the burden on those who
are trying to be relieved of it, the richest of citizens paying less
taille than the most miserable of the peasant farmers.” Hence, —
“a horror of the ¢ai//e depopulates the rural districts, concentrat-
ing in the towns both capacity and capital.”? Outside of thetowns
there is the same inequality. Each year, the ¢/vs and their col- |
lectors, exercising arbitrary power, fix the /az//e of the parish and
of each inhabitant. In these ignorant and partial hands the scales _
are not held by equity but by self-interest, local hatreds, the desire
for revenge, the necessity of favoring some friend, relative, neigh- q
bor, protector, or patron, some powerful or some dangerous per- a
son. ‘The intendant of Moulins, on visiting his generalship, finds —
“people of influence paying nothing, while the poor are over-
charged.” That of Dijon writes that “the basis of apportionment
is arbitrary, to such an extent that the people of the province must
not be allowed to suffer any longer.” In the generalship of Rouen —
‘some parishes pay over four sous the livre and others scarcely _
one sou.”4 “For three years past that I have lived in the coun-


1 Archives nationales, G, 322 (Memoir on the excise dues of Compiégne and its neighbor-
hood, 1786). ‘

2 * Procés-verbaux de Il’ass. prov. de I’Ile-de-France,” p. 104.

8 “Procés-verbaux de I’ass. prov. de Berry, I. 85, II. 9x. ‘—— de I’Orléanais, p. 225.”
“ Arbitrariness, injustice, inequality, are inseparable from the ¢az//e when any change of col-
lector takes place.”

4 «Procés-verbaux de l’ass. prov. de la généralité de Rouen,” p. gt.


CHAP. II. IHE PEOPLE. 367


try,” writes a lady of the same district, “I have remarked that
most of the wealthy proprietors are the least pressed; they are
_ selected to make the apportionment and the people are always

abused.”+ “T live-on an estate ten leagues from Paris,” wrote
d’Argenson, “ where an effort is made to assess the /ail/e propor-
tionately, but only injustice has prevailed; the seigniors have suc-
ceeded in relieving their farmers.”* Besides those who, through fa-
vor, diminish their zaz//e, others buy themselves off entirely. An in-
tendant, visiting the subdelegation of Bar-sur-Seine, observes “ that
the rich cultivators succeed in obtaining petty commissions in con-
nection with the king’s household and enjoy the privileges attached
to these, which throws the burden of taxation on the others.” 3
“ One of the leading causes of our prodigious taxation,” says the
provincial assembly of Auvergne, “is the inconceivable number
of the privileged, which daily increases through traffic in and the
assignment of offices; cases occur in which these have ennobled
six families in less than twenty years.” Should this abuse con-
tinue “in a hundred years every tax-payer the most capable of
supporting taxation will be ennobled.” * Observe, moreover, that
an infinity of offices and functions, without conferring nobility,
exempt their titularies from the personal /az//e and reduce their
poll-tax to the fortieth of their income; at first, all public func-
tionaries, administrative or judicial, and next all employments in
the salt-department, in the customs, in the post-office, in the royal
domains, and in the excise.® “There are few parishes,” writes an
intendant, “in which these employés are not found, while several
contain as many as two or three.”® A postmaster is exempt
from the Zaz//e, in all his possessions and offices, and even on his
farms to the extent of a hundred arfents. The notaries of An-
gouléme are exempt from the corvée, from collections, and the
lodging of soldiers, while neither their sons or chief clerks can be
drafted in the militia. On closely examining the great fiscal net
in administrative correspondence, we detect at every step some


1 Hippeau, VI. 22 (1788).

2 D’Argenson, VI. 37.

3 Archives nationales, H. 200 (Memoir of M. Amelot, 1785).

4 “ Procés-verbaux de l’ass. prov. d’Auvergne,” 253.

5 Boivin-Champeaux, ‘‘Doléances de la parvisse de Tilleul-Lambert” (Eure). ‘‘ Numbers
of privileged characters, Messieurs of the elections, Messieurs the post-masters, Messieurs
the presidents and other attachés of the salt-warehouse, every individual possessing extensive
property pays but a third or a half of the taxes they ought to pay.”

6 De Tocqueville, 385. ‘‘Procés-verbaux de l’ass. prov. de Lyonnais,” p. 56.


368 THE ANCIENT REGIME. BOOK Vs


meshes by which, with slight effort and industry, all the big and


average-sized fish escape; the small fry alone remain at the bot- —
tom of the scoop. A surgeon not an apothecary, aman of good —


family forty-five years old, in commerce, but living with his par- —


ent and in a province with a written code, escapes the collector. —


The same immunity is extended to the begging agents of the


monks of “la Merci” and “ L’Etroite Observance.” ‘Throughout — {


the South and the East individuals in easy circumstances purchase
this commission of beggar for a “/owis,” or for ten crowns, and,
putting three livres in a cup, go about presenting it in this or that


parish: ten of the inhabitants of a small mountain village and


five inhabitants in the little village of Treignac obtain their dis-
charge in this fashion. Consequently, ‘the collections fall on the
poor, always powerless and often insolvent,” the privileged who


effect the ruin of the tax-payer causing the deficiencies of the


treasury.


Vil.


One word more to complete the picture. People take refuge
in the towns and, indeed, compared with the country, the towns
are a refuge. But misery accompanies the poor, for, on the one
hand, they are involved in debt, and, on the other, the coterie
administering municipal affairs imposes taxation on the indigent.
The towns being oppressed by the fisc, they oppress the people
by throwing on these the load which the king imposes on
them. Seven times in twenty-eight years” he withdraws and
re-sells the right of appointing their municipal officers, and, to get
rid of “this enormous financial burden,” the towns double their
octrois. At present, although liberated, they still make payment ;
the annual charge has become a perpetual charge; never does
the fisc release its hold; once beginning to suck it continues to
suck. “Hence, in Brittany,” says an intendant, “not a town is
there whose expenses are not greater than its revenue.”* They
are unable to mend their pavements, and repair their streets, “the
approaches to them being almost impracticable.” What could


1 Archives nationales, H, 1422. (Letters of M. d’Aine, intendant, also of the receiver for
the election of Tulle, February 23, 1783).
? De Tocqueville, 64, 363.


3 Archives nationales, H, 612, 614. (Letters of M. de la Bove, September 11, and Dee. 2, F


1774; June 28, 1777).


CHAP. II. THE PEOPLE. 369


they do for self-support, obliged, as they are, to pay over
again after having already paid? Their augmented oc¢rois, in
1748, ought to furnish in eleven years the 606,000 livres agreed
upon; but, the eleven years having lapsed, the satisfied fisc still
maintains its exigencies, and to such an extent that, in 1774, they
have contributed 2,071,052 livres, the provisional ocfroi being
_ still maintained. Now, this exorbitant octroi bears heavily every-
where on the most indispensable necessities, the artisan being
more heavily burdened than the bourgeois. In Paris,‘as we have }
seen above, wine pays forty-seven livres a puncheon entrance
duty which, at the present standard of value, must be doubled.
“A turbot, taken on the coast at Harfleur and brought by post,
pays an entrance duty of eleven times its value, the people of the
capital therefore being condemned to dispense with fish from the
sea.”1 At the gates of Paris, in the little parish of Aubervilliers,
I find “excessive duties on hay, straw, seeds, tallow, candles,
eggs, sugar, fish, faggots and firewood.”* Compiégne pays the
whole amount of its /ai//e by means of a tax on beverages and
cattle.* “In Toul and in Verdun the taxes are so onerous that
but few consent to remain in the town, except those kept there by
their offices and by old habits.” * At Coulommiers, “the merchants
_and the people are so severely taxed they dread undertaking any
enterprise.” Popular hatred everywhere is profound against oc-
troi, barrier and clerk. The bourgeois oligarchy everywhere
first cares for itself before caring for those it governs. At Nevers
and at Moulins,’ “all rich persons find means to escape the col-
lections by different commissions, or through their influence with
the ¢/us, to such an extent that the collectors of Nevers, of the
present and preceding year, would be considered true beggars:
there are no small villages whose collectors are solvent, since the
métayers have to be taken.” At Angers, “independent of pres-
ents and candles, which annually consume 2,172 livres, the public
pence are employed and wasted in clandestine outlays according
to the fancy of the municipal officers.” In Provence, where the
communities are free to tax themselves and where they ought,
apparently, to consider the poor, “most of the towns, and notably


1 Mercier, II. 62.
2 “Doléances” of the parish of Aubervilliers.
8 Archives nationales, G, 300; G, 322 (‘‘ Mémoires” on the excise duties).
4 « Procés-verbaux de I’ass. prov. des Trois-Evéchés,”’ p. 442.
5 Archives nationales, H, 1422 (Letter of the intendant of Moulins, April 1779).


370 THE ANCIENT REGIME.


Aix, Marseilles and Toulon,! pay their impositions,” local and gen- —
eral, “only by the duty of fzguet.” This is a tax ‘on all spec
of flour belonging to and consumed on the territory ;” for exam
plé, on 254,897 livres, which Toulon expends, the /iguet furnishes —
233,405. ‘Thus the taxation falls wholly on the people, while the

bishop, the marquis, the president, the merchant of importance
pay less on their dinner of delicate fish and becaficos than the —
caulker or porter on his two pounds of bread rubbed with a piece —
of garlic! Bread in this country is already too dear! And the ©
quality is so poor that Malouet, the intendant of the marine, re- —
fuses to let his workmen eat it! “Sire,” said M. de la Fare, ~
bishop of Nancy, from his pulpit, May 4th, 1789, “Sire, the |
people over which you reign has given unmistakable proofs of its.
patience. . . They are martyrs in whom life seems to have been i
allowed tom remain to enable them to suffer the longer.”


VIII. 4
“T am miserable because too much is taken from me. Too —
much is taken from me because not enough is taken from the ~
privileged. Not only do the privileged force me to pay in their —
place, but, again, they previously deduct from my earnings their —
ecclesiastic and feudal dues. When, out of my income of 100 —
francs, I have parted with fifty-three francs, and more, to the col- —
lector, I am obliged again to give fourteen francs to the seignior, | =
also more than fourteen for tithes,” and, out of the remaining eigh-
teen or nineteen francs, I have additionally to satisfy the excisemen. P j
I alone, a poor man, pay two governments, one the old govern- ~
ment, local and now absent, useless, inconvenient and humiliating, —
and active only through annoyances, exemptions and taxes; and
the other, recent, centralized, everywhere present, which, taking ba
upon itself all functions, has vast needs and makes my mé
shoulders support its enormous weight.” These, i in precise terms,
are the vague ideas beginning to ferment in the popular brain


1 Archives nationales, H, 1312 (Letters of M. d’Antheman procureur-général of the exci
court (May 19, 1783), and of the Archbishop of Aix (June 15, 1783).) Provence prod ‘
wheat only sufficient for seven and a half months’ consumption,

* The feudal dues may be estimated at a seventh of the net income and the dime also
seventh. These are the figures given by the ass. prov. of Haute-Guyenne (Procés-verbau
p. 47). Isolated instances, in other provinces, indicate similar results. The dzme rane
from a tenth to the thirteenth of the gross product, and commonly the tenth. I regard the
average as about the fourteenth, and as one-half of the gross product must be deducted for
expenses of cultivation, it amounts to one-seyenth, ' Letrosne says a fifth and evena quarter,


CHAP. Il. THE PEOPLE. 371


and. encountered on every page of the records of the States-
General. “Would to God,” says a Normandy village, “the
monarch might take into his own hands the defence of the miser-
able citizen pelted and oppressed by clerks, seigniors, justiciary
and clergy!” “Sire,” writes a village in Champagne,’ “the only
message to us on your part is a demand for money. We were
led to believe that this might cease, but every year the demand
comes for more. We do not hold you responsible for this be-
cause we love you, but those whom you employ, who better know
how to manage their own affairs than yours. We believed that
you were deceived by them and we in our chagrin said to our-
selves, If our good king only knew of this! . . . We are crushed


_. down with every species of taxation; thus far we have given you


a part of our bread and, should this continue, we shall be in
want. . . . Could you see the miserable tenements in which we,
live, the poor food we eat, you would feel for us; this would
prove to you better than words that we can support this no
longer and that it must be lessened. . . . That which grieves us
is that those who possess the most, pay the least. We pay the
tailles and for our implements, while the ecclesiastics and nobles
who own the best land pay nothing. Why do therich pay the
least and the poor the most? Should not each pay according to
his ability? Sire, we entreat that things may be so arranged, for
that is just. . . . Did we dare, we should undertake to plant the
slopes with vines; but we are so persecuted by the clerks of the
excise we would rather pull up those already planted; the wine
that we could make would all go to them, scarcely any of it
remaining for ourselves. These exactions are a great scourge
and, to escape them, we would rather let the ground lie waste.
. . . Relieve us of all these extortions and of the excisemen; we
are great sufferers through all these devices; now is the
time to change them; never shall we be happy as long as these
last. We entreat all this of you, Sire, along with others of your
subjects as wearied as ourselves. . .. We would entreat yet
more but you cannot do all at one time.” _Imposts and privileges,
in the really popular memorials, are the two enemies against
which complaints everywhere arise? “We are overwhelmed by


1 Boivin-Champeaux, 72.

2 Grievances of the community of Culmon (Election de Langres.)
- 8 Boivin-Champeaux, 34, 36, 41, 48., Périn (‘ Doléances de sparoisses rurales de I’ Artois,”
301, 308). Archives nationales, procés-verbaux and cahiers of the States-Généraux, v. XVII.
p. 12 (Letter of the inhabitants of Darcy-de-Viteux).


372 THE ANCIENT REGIME. BOOK V.


’
t


demands for subsidies, . . . we are burdened with taxes — 4
our strength, . . . we do not feel able to support any more, . . a
we perish, overpowered by the sacrifices demanded of us... .
Labor is taxed while indolence is exempt. . . . Feudalism is the
most disastrous of abuses, the evils it causes surpassing those of —
hail and lightning. . . . Subsistence is impossible if three-quarters
of the crops are to be taken for field-rents, zerrage, etc. ... The
proprietor has a fourth part, the décimateur a twelfth, the har-
vester a twelfth, taxation a tenth, not counting the depredations _
of vast quantities of game which devour the growing crops:
nothing is left for the poor cultivator but pain and sorrow.” Why
should the Third-Estate alone pay for roads on which the nobles
and the clergy drive in their carriages? Why are the poor alone —
subject to militia draftings? Why does “the subdelegate cause
only the defenceless and the unprotected to be drafted?” Why
does it suffice to be the servant of a privileged person to escape
this service? Destroy those dove-cotes, formerly only small
pigeon-pens and which now contain as many as five thousand
pairs. Abolish the barbarous rights of “motte, guevaise and
domaine congéable* under which more than five hundred thousand
persons still suffer in Lower Brittany.” “You have in your
armies, Sire, more than thirty thousand Franche-Comté serfs ;”
should one of these become an officer and be pensioned out —
of the service he would be obliged to return to and live inthe
hut in which he was born, otherwise, at his death, the seignior
will take his pittance. Let there be no more absentee prelates, —
nor abbés-commendatory. “The present deficit is not to be paid
by us but by the bishops and beneficiaries; deprive the princes
of the church of two-thirds of their revenues.” “Let feudalism
be abolished. Man, the peasant especially, is tyrannically bowed
down to the impoverished ground on which he lies exhausted.
. There is no freedom, no prosperity, no happiness where the =
sl is enthralled. . . . Let the lord’s dues, and other odious
taxes not feudal, be abolished, a thousand times returned to the
privileged. Let feudalism content itself with its iron sceptre
without adding the poniard of the revenue speculator.”” Here,


na


Site vie r . ie
ner : ba, y ot med
at ad See “aa: Pee ae ee


1 Motte: a mound indicative of seigniorial dominion; guevaise: the right of forcing a
resident to remain on his property under penalty of forfeiture; domaine congéable: property
held subject to capricious ejection.

2 Prud’homme, “ Résumé des cahiers,” III. assim, and especially from 417 to 340.


P cutar..1. THE PEOPLE. 373


and for some time before this, it is not the countryman who
speaks but the frocureur, the lawyer, who places professional
_ metaphors and theories at his service. But the lawyer has simply
translated the countryman’s sentiments into literary dialect.

32


CHAPTER III.


INTELLECTUAL STATE OF THE PEOPLE.—I. Intellectual incapacity. —How
ideas are transformed into, marvellous stories.—II. Political incapacity.—
Interpretation of political ramors and of government action.—III. Destruc-
tive impulses.—The object of blind rage.—Distrust of natural leaders.- a
Suspicion of them changed into hatred.—Disposition of the people in 1789.
—IV. Insurrectionary leaders and _ recruits.—Poachers.—Smugglers me
dealers in contraband salt.—Banditti.—Beggars and vagabonds.—Advent
brigands.—The people of Paris.


G | ?
To comprehend their actions we ought now to look into he
condition of their minds, to know the current train of their ideas,
their mode of thinking. But, is it really essential to draw this
portrait, and are not the details of their mental condition we hay ne
just presented sufficient? We shall obtain a knowledge of them ~
later, and through their actions, when, in Touraine, they come to C
bestowing kicks with their sado¢s on a mayor and his assistar
chosen by themselves, because, in obeying the National Assemb
these two unfortunate men prepared a table of imposts; or when
at Troyes, they drag through the streets and tear to pieces th
venerable magistrate who was nourishing them at that v
moment, and who had just dictated his testament in their fay
Take the still rude brain of a contemporary peasant and deprive |
it of the ideas which, for eighty years past, have entered it by si
many channels, through the primary school of each villag
through the return home of the conscript after his seven yea
service, through the prodigious multiplication of books, new
papers, roads, railroads, foreign travel and every other specie
communication! Try to imagine the peasant of that


1 Théron de Montaugé, ro2, 113. In the Toulousain ten parishes out of fifty have school
In Gascony, says the ass. prov. of Auch (p. 24), “most of the rural districts are witho'
schoolmasters or parsonages.” In1778, the post between Paris and Toulouse runs only thr


CHAP. III. THE PEOPLE. es


penned and shut up from father to son in his hamlet, without
_ parish highways, deprived of news, with no instruction but the
_ Sunday sermon, solicitous only for his daily bread and the im-
posts, “ with his wretched, dried-up aspect,”! not daring to repair
his house, always persecuted, distrustful, his mind contracted and
stinted, so to say, by misery. His condition is almost. that of
his ox or his ass, while his ideas are those of his condition. He
has been a long time stolid; “he lacks even instinct,”? mechan-
ically and fixedly regarding the ground on which he drags along
his hereditary plough. In 1751, d’Argenson wrote in his journal:
“nothing in the news from the court affects them; the reign is
indifferent to them. . . . The distance between the capital and
the province daily widens. . . . Here they are ignorant of the
striking~occurrences that most impressed us at Paris... . The
inhabitants of the country are merely poverty-stricken slaves,
draft cattle under a yoke, moving on as they are goaded, caring
for nothing and embarassed by nothing, provided they can eat
and sleep at regular hours.” ‘They make no complaints, “ they do
not even dream of complaining ;”® their wretchedness seems to
them natural like winter or hail. Their minds, like their agricult-
ure, still belong to the middle ages. In the Toulousain,* to
ascertain who committed a robbery, to cure a man or a sick
_ animal, they resort to a sorcerer who divines this by means of a
sieve. The countryman fully believes in ghosts and, on All
' Saints’ eve, he lays the cloth for the dead. In Auvergne, at the
outbreak of the Revolution, on a contagious fever making its ap-
pearance, M. de Montlosier, declared to be a sorcerer, is the
» cause of it and two hundred men assemble together to demolish
his dwelling. ‘Their religious belief is on the same level.>  “ Their
+priests drink with them and sell them absolution. On Sundays,
' at the sermon, they put up lieutenancies and sub-lieutenancies
_ (among the saints) for sale: so much for a lieutenant’s place
"under St. Peter! If the peasant hesitates in his bid a eulogy of


times a week; that of Toulouse by way of Alby, Rodez, etc., twice a week; for Beaumont,
_ Saint-Girons, etc., once a week. ‘‘In the country,” says Théron de Montaugé, “‘one may
__ be said to live in solitude and exile.” In 1789 the Paris post reaches Besangon three times
a week. _ (Arthur Young, I. 257).

1 One of the Marquis de Mirabeau’s expressions.

2 Archives nationales, G, 300, [etter of an excise director at Coulommiers, Aug. 13, 1781.

3 D’Argenson, VI. 425 (June 16, 1751).

4 De Montlosier, I. 102, 146.

5 Théron.de Montaugé, 102.


376 THE ANCIENT REGIME. ROOK Vs


St. Peter at once begins and then our peasants run it up fast
enough.” To intellects in a primitive state, barren of ideas and
crowded with images, idols on earth are as essential as idols in
heaven. “No doubt whatever existed in my mind,” says R
de la Bretonne,! “‘ of the power of the king to compel any man
to bestow his wife or daughter on me, and my village (Sacy, ir v
Burgundy) thought as I did.”* There is no room in minds of ~
this description for abstract conceptions, for any idea of social
order; they are submissive to it and that is all. “The mass of —
the people,” writes Gouverneur Morris in 1789, “have no religion
but that of their priests, no law but that of those above them, no
morality but that of self-interest; these are the beings who, led
on by drunken curates, are now on the high road to liberty, and
the first use they make of it is to rebel on all sides because ther
is a dearth,” ? 5!
How could things be otherwise ? Every idea, previous t
taking root in their brain, must possess a legendary otra a é ts
absurd as it is simple, adapted to their experiences, their faculties,
their fears and their aspirations. Once planted in this unculti
vated and fertile soil it vegetates and becomes transformed, de-
veloping into gross excrescences, sombre foliage and poisonous |
fruit. ‘The more monstrous the greater its vigor, clinging to the
slightest of probabilities and tenacious against the most certain
of demonstrations. Under Louis XV., in an arrest of vagabonds, |
a few children having been carried off wilfully or by mistake, the —
rumor spreads that the king takes baths in blood to restore his
exhausted functions, and, so true does this seem to be, the women,
horrified through their maternal instincts, join in the riot;
policeman is seized and knocked down, and, on his demandir
a confessor, a woman in the crowd picking up a stone, cries out
that he must not have time to go to heaven, and smashes :
head with it, believing that she is performing an act of justice.
Under Louis XVI. evidence is presented to the people that nel ‘ |
is no scarcity: in 1789,° an officer, listening to the converse at
of his soldiers, hears them state “with full belief that the pri sa


eh


1 Monsieur Nicolas, I. 448. sa

2 «Tableaux de la Révolution,”’ by Schmidt, II. 7 (Report by the agent Perriere who li
in Auvergne.)

8 Gouverneur Morris, II. 69, April 29, 1789.

4 Mercier, ‘‘ Tableau de Paris,” XII. 83.

5 De Vaublanc, 209.


CHAP. III. THE PEOPLE. 377


_and courtiers, with a view to starve Paris out, are throwing flour
into the Seine.” ‘Turning to a quarter-master he asks him how he
_ can possibly believe such an absurd story. “Lieutenant,” he re-
plies, “’tis time—the bags were tied with d/we strings (cordons
_ bleus).” To them this is a sufficent reason and no argument
_ could convince them to thecontrary. Thus, among the dregs of
society, foul and horrible romances are forged, in connection with
_ famine and the Bastille, in which Louis XVI., the queen Marie An-
toinette, the Comte d’Artois, Madame de Lamballe, the Polignacs,
the revenue farmers, the seigniors and ladies of high rank are
portrayed as vampires and ghouls. I have seen many editions
of these in the pamphlets of the day, in the engravings not ex-
hibited and among popular prints and illustrations, the latter the
most efficacious since they appeal to the eye. They surpass the
stories of Mandrin and Cartouche, being exactly suitable for
men whose literature consists of the complaints of Mandrin and
Cartouche.


IT.


By this we can judge of their political intelligence.- Every ob-
ject appears to them in a false light; they are like children
who, at each turn of the road, see in each tree or bush some
frightful hobgoblin. Arthur Young, on visiting the springs near
Clermont, is arrested,! and the people want to imprison a woman,
his guide, some of the bystanders regarding him as “an agent
of the Queen, who intended to blow the town up with a mine,
and send all that escaped to the galleys.” Six days after this,
| beyond Puy, and notwithstanding his passport, the village guard
‘come and take him out of bed at eleven o’clock at night, declar-
ing that “I was undoubtedly a conspirator with the Queen, the
Count d’Artois and the Count d’Entragues (who has property
here), who had employed me as arfenfeur to measure their fields
in order to double their taxes.” We here take the unconscious,
| apprehensive, popular imagination in the act; a slight indication,
a word, prompting the construction of either airy castles or fan-
) tastic dungeons, and seeing these as plainly as if they were so
"many substantial realities. ‘They have not the inward resources
that render them capable of separating and discerning; their


1 Arthur Young, I. 283 (Aug. 13, 1789); I. 289 (Aug. 19, 1789).
*
32


378 THE ANCIENT REGIME.


conceptions are formed iz a ump ; both object and fancy appear
together and are united in one single perception. At the m on
ment of electing deputies the report is current in Provence! #
“the best of kings desires perfect equality, that there are to t pe
no more bishops, nor seigniors, nor tithes, nor seigniorial dt a
no more titles or distinctions, no more hunting or fishing rights, ~
. that the people are to be wholly relieved of taxation, and ~
that the first two orders alone are to provide the expenses of the —
government.” Whereupon forty or fifty riots take place in one —
day. ‘Several communities refuse to make any payments to”
their treasurer outside of royal requisttions.” Others do better: |
“on pillaging the strong-box of the receiver of the tax on leather
at Brignolles, they shout out Vive le Roi /” “The peasant con-
stantly asserts his pillage and destruction to be in seis y
with the king’s will.” A little later, in Auvergne, the pease
who burn castles are to display “much repugnance” in thus ma
treating “such kind seigniors,” ‘but they allege ‘imperative on
ders, having been advised that the king wished it.”? At Lyodll ns,
when the tapsters of the town and the peasants of the neighbo: =
hood pass over the bodies of the customs officials they believe
that the king has suspended all customs dues for three days
The scope of their imagination is proportionate to their short.
sightedness. “ Bread, no more rents, no more taxes!” is the sole —
cry, the cry of want, while exasperated want plunges ahead lik
a famished bull. Down with the monopolist !—storehouses are _
forced open, convoys of grain are stopped, markets are pillage d,
bakers are hung, and the price of bread is fixed so that none ag
to be had or is concealed. Down with the octvoi /—hbarriers a
demolished, clerks are beaten, money is wanting in the towns f ot |
urgent expenses. Burn tax registries, account-books, municipa.
archives, seigniors’ charter-safes, convent parchments, every de
testable document creative of debtors and sufferers! The village
itself is no longer able to preserve its parish property. The ra;
against any written document, against public officers, against an y


1 Archives nationales, H, 274. Letters respectively of M. de Caraman (March 18 and
April 12, 1789); M. d’Eymar de Montmegran (April 2); M. de la Tour (March 30). « Ph
sovereign’s greatest benefit is interpreted in the strangest manner by an ignorant populace.

2 Doniol, ‘‘Hist. des classes rurales,” 495. (Letter of Aug. 3, 1789, to M. de Clermon
‘Tonnerre).

3 Archives nationales, H, 1453. (Letter of Imbert Colonnés, prévét des marchands, da’
July 5, 1789).


_ CHAP. Il. THE PEOPLE. 379


_ man more or less connected with grain, is blind and determined.
The furious animal destroys all, although wounding himself, driv-
_ ing and roaring against the obstacle that ought to be outflanked.


ETE:
This is owing to the absence of leaders and to the absence of
organization, a multitude being simply a herd. Its mistrust of
its natural leaders, of the great, of the wealthy, of persons in of-
_ fice and clothed with authority, is inveterate and incurable.
_ Vainly do these wish it well and do it good; it has no faith in
_ their humanity or disinterestedness. It has beentoodown-trodden ;
it entertains prejudices against every measure proceeding from
them, even the most liberal and the most beneficial. “At the
_ mere mention of the new assemblies,” says a provincial commis-
sion in 1787,' “we heard a workman exclaim, ‘ What, more new
_ extortioners!’” Superiors of every kind are suspected, and from
suspicion to hostility the road is not long. In 1788? Mercier de-
clares that “insubordination has been manifest for some years, es-
pecially among the trades. . . . Formerly, on entering a printing-
office the men took off their hats. Now they content themselves
with staring and leering at you; scarcely have you crossed the
threshold than you hear yourself more lightly spoken of than if
you were one of them.” The same attitude is taken by the peas-
_ants in the environs of Paris; Madame Vigée-Lebrun,’ on going
' to Romainville to visit Marshal de Ségur, remarks: “ Not only
do they not remove their hats but they regard us insolently ; some
of them even threatened us with clubs.” In March and April
» following this, her guests arrive at her concert in consternation.
“Tn the morning, at the promenade of Longchamps, the populace,
assembled at the barrier of |’Etoile, insulted the people passing by
‘In carriagesinthe grossest manner; some of these wretches jumped
_on the footsteps exclaiming: ‘ Next year you shall be behind the
carriage and we inside.’” At the close of the year 1788, the
stream becomes a torrent and the torrent acataract. An intend-
-ant* writes that, in his province, the government must decide, and


1 “ Procés-verbaux de I’ass. prov. de l’Orléanais,” p. 296. ‘‘ Distrust still prevails through-
| out the rural districts. . . . Your first orders for departmental assemblies only awakened
“suspicion in certain quarters.”

2 “Tableau de Paris,” XII. 186.
_ 3 Mme. Vigée-Lebrun, I. 158 (1788) ; I. 183 (1780).

4 Archives nationales, H, 723. (Letter of M. de Caumartin, intendant at Besangon, Dec.
5, 1788).


380 THE ANCIENT REGIME. BOOK V.


in the popular sense, to separate from privileged classes, abandon
old forms and give the Third-Estate a double vote. The clergy
and the nobles are detested, and their supremacy is a yoke,
“Last July,” he says, “the old States-General would have
been received with transport and there would have been few ob-
stacles to its formation. During the past five months minds haye -
become enlightened; respective interests have been discussed,
and leagues formed. You have been kept in ignorance of the P|
fermentation which is at its height among all classes of the '
Third-Estate, and a spark will kindle the conflagration. If the 3
king’s decision should be favorable to the first two orders a gen-
eral insurrection will occur throughout the province, 600,000 men
in arms and the horrors of the Jacquerie.” The word z spoken |
and the reality is coming. An insurrectionary multitude reject- ~
ing its natural leaders must elect or submit to others. It is like |
an army which, entering on a campaign, should depose its officers 5
the new grades are for the boldest, most violent, most oppressed,
for those who, putting themselves ahead, cry out “march” and
thus form advanced bands. In 1789, the bands are ready; for,
below the mass that suffers another suffers yet more, with which
the insurrection is permanent, and which, repressed, perso uiiall
and obscure, only awaits an opportunity to issue from its hiding- —
place and ravage in the open daylight.


IV. i
Vagrants, every species of refractory spirit, victims of the law _
and of the police, mendicants, deformities, foul, filthy, haggard —
and savage, are engendered by the abuses of the system, and,
around every one of the social wounds, these swarm like ver-—
min. Four hundred leagues of guarded captainries and the ,
security enjoyed by vast quantities of game feeding on crops:
under their owners’ eyes, give rise to thousands of poachers, the
more dangerous that they are armed and defy the most terrik
laws. Already in 17521 are seen around Paris “ gatherings ©
fifty or sixty, all fully armed and acting as if on regular foraging 1 1
campaigns, with the infantry at the centre and the cavaligee on
the wings. ... They live in the forests behind retired anc
guarded entrenchments, paying exactly for what they take t


1'D’Argenson, March 13, 1752.


CHAP. III. THE PEOPLE, : 381


live on.” In 1777, at Sens in Burgundy, the procureur-général,
M. Terray, hunting on his own property with two officers, meets
a gang of poachers who fire on the game under his own eye and
soon afterwards fire on them. M. Terray is wounded and one
of the officers has his coat pierced; guards arrive, but the poach-
ers stand firm and repel them; dragoons are sent for, at Provins,
and the poachers kill one of these, along with three horses, and
are attacked with sabres; four of them are brought to the ground
and seven are captured. Reports of the States-General show
that every year, in each extensive forest, murders occur, some-
times at the hands of a poacher and again, and the most fre-
quently, by the shot of a gamekeeper. Domestic warfare is or-
ganized; every vast domain thus harbors its rebels provided
with powder and ball and knowing how to use them.

Other recruits for turbulence are found in smugglers and in
dealers in contraband salt! A tax, as soon as it becomes exor-
bitant, invites fraud, and raises up a population of delinquents ©
_ against its army of clerks. The number of defrauders of this
_ species may be estimated by the number of their supervisors:

twelve hundred leagues of interior custom districts are guarded by
50,000 men of which 23,000 are soldiers not in uniform? “In
the chief provinces of the salt-tax and in the provinces of the
five great fermes, four leagues one way and another along the
line of defence,” cultivation is abandoned; everybody is either a
customs official or a smuggler.? The more excessive the tax the
higher the premium offered to the_ violators of the law; at every
place on the boundaries of Brittany with Normandy, Maine and
Anjou, four sows per pound added to the salt-tax multiplies be-
yond any conception the already enormous number of contra-
band dealers. “Numerous bands of men,‘ armed with /reéées, or
long sticks pointed with iron, and often with pistols or guns,
attempt to force a passage. A multitude of women and of chil-
dren, quite young, cross the lines of the brigades while, on the


1 Beugnot, I. 142. ‘No inhabitant of the barony of Choiseul mingled with any of the
bands composed of the patriots of Montigny, smugglers and outcasts of the neighborhood.”


a See, on the poachers of the day, ‘‘Les deux amis de Bourbonne,”’ by Diderot.


2De Calonne, ‘‘ Mémoifes presentés A l’ass. des notables,” No. 8. Necker, “De ) Ad-
ministration des Finances,” I. 195.

3 Letrosne, “‘ De l’Administration des Finances,” 59.
' 4 Archives nationales, H. 426. (Memorials of the farmers-general, Jan. 13, 1781; Sept.
» 15, 1782). H, 614. (Letter of M. de Coetlosquet, April 25, 1777). H, 1431. Report by
the farmers-general, March 9g, 1787.


382 THE ANCIENT REGIME. - BOOK V.


other hand, troops of dogs brought upon the’free soil and kept
there a certain time without food, are loaded with salt and this,
urged by their hunger, they immediately transport to their masters.”
Vagabonds, outlaws, the famished, sniff this lucrative occupation”
from afar and run to it like so many packs of hounds. ‘The
outskirts of Brittany are filled with a population of emigrants,
mostly outcasts from their own districts, and who, after a year’s —
sojourn here in domicile, enjoy the privileges of the Bretons: —
their occupation is limited to collecting piles of salt to re-sell to —
the contraband dealers.” We obtain a glimpse, as in a flash of —
lightning, of this long line of restless, hunted, midnight rovers, a |
male and female population of savage wanderers, accustomed to —
blows, hardened to the inclemencies of the weather, ragged, —
“almost all with an obstinate itch;” and I find similar bodies in ©
the vicinity of Morlaix, Lorient, and other ports on the frontiers
of other provinces and on the frontiers of the kingdom. From ~
1783 to 1787, in Quercy, two allied bands of smugglers, sixty |
and eighty each, defraud the revenue of forty thousands of
tobacco, kill two customs officers and, with their guns, defend
their magazine in the mountains; to suppress them soldiers are
requisite, which their military commander will not furnish. Jn |
1789;! a large troop of smugglers carry on operations permanently —
on the frontiers of Maine and Anjou; the military commander ~
writes that “their chief is an intelligent and formidable bandit, —
that he already has under him fifty-five men, that he will soon ~
have a corps, embarrassing through misery and through the dis- |
position of minds ;” it would be well, possibly, to corrupt some of —
his men so as to have him betrayed since they cannot capture 4
him. These are the means resorted to in regions where brigand-
age is endemic. Here, indeed, as in Calabria, the people are on
the side of the brigands against the gendarmes. ‘The exploits
of Mandrin in 1754,” may be remembered: his company of sixty
men who bring in contraband goods and ransom only the clerks,
his expedition, lasting nearly a year, across Franche-Comté, Ly-
onnais, Bourbonnais, Auvergne and Burgundy, the twenty-seven
towns he enters making no resistance, delivering prisoners and
making sale of his merchandise; to overcome him a camp ha¢
to be formed at Valence and two thousand men sent against hi


1 Archives nationales, H, 1453. (Letter of the Baron de Bezenval, June 19, 1789.
2 “Mandrin,” by Paul Simian, passim. ‘Histoire de Bearme,” by Rosségnol, p. 453)+


_ CHAP, III. _ THE PEOPLE. 383


-. he was taken through treachery and still at the present day
certain families are proud of their relationship to him, declar-
ing him a liberator. No symptom is more alarming: on the
enemies of the law being preferred by the people to its defenders,
society disintegrates and the worms begin to work. Add to these
the veritable brigands, assassins and robbers. “In 1782,! the
provost’s court of Montargis is engaged on the trial of Hulin
and two hundred of his accomplices who, for ten years, by means
of joint enterprises, have desolated a portion of the kingdom.”
Mercier enumérates in France “an army of more than 10,000
brigands and vagabonds” against which the police, composed of
3,756 men, isalwaysonthe march. “Complaints are daily made,”
says the provincial assembly of Haute-Guyenne, “that there is
no police in the country.” ‘The absentee seignior pays no atten-
tion to this matter; his judges and officials take good care not
to operate gratuitously against an insolvent criminal, while “ his
- estates become the refuge of all the rascals of the canton.”? Every
_ abuse thus engenders a danger, ill-placed neglect equally with
excessive rigor, relaxed feudalism equally with a too-exacting
monarchy. All institutions seem under agreement to multiply
or tolerate the abettors of disorder and to prepare, outside the
social pale, the executive agents who are to carry it by storm.

But the total effect of all this is yet more pernicious, for,
out of the vast numbers of laborers it ruins it forms mendicants
unwilling to work, dangerous sluggards going about begging and
extorting bread from peasants who have not too much for them-
selves. “The vagabonds about the country,” says Letrosne,°
“are a terrible pest; they are like an enemies’ force which, dis-
tributed over the territory, obtains a living as it pleases, levy-
ing veritable contributions. ... They are constantly roving
_ around the country, examining the approaches to houses, and
informing themselves about their inmates and of their habits.


' Woe to those supposed to have money! . . . What numbers of


_ highway robberies and what burglaries! What numbers of trav-
 ellers assassinated, and houses and doors broken into! What
assassinations of curates, farmers and widows, tormented to dis-
cover money and afterwards killed!” ‘Twenty-five years anterior


1 Mercier, XI. 116.
2 See ante, book I. p. 55.
3 Letrosne, zdzd@. (1779), P- 539-


384 THE ANCIENT REGIME.


to the Revolution it was not infrequent to see fifteen or :
of these “invade a farm-house to sleep there, intimidating the
farmers and exacting whatever they pleased.” In 1764, the goy-—
ernment takes measures against them which indicates the magni-
tude of the evil! “Are held to be vagabonds and vagrants, and
condemned as such, those who, for a preceding term of a
months, shall have exercised no trade or profession, and who, —
having no occupation or means of subsistence, can procure n +
persons worthy of confidence to attest and verify their habits andy
mode of life. . . . The intent of His Majesty is not merely to ar-
rest vagabonds Gravering the country but, again, all mendicant 7
whatsoever, who, without occupations, may be regarded as su
pected of vagabondage. ” ‘The penalty for able-bodied men is i Ce |
years’in the galleys; in case of a second conviction, nine years ;
case of a third conviction, the galleys for life. For invalid culprits,
three years imprisonment; in case of a second conviction, nine
years, and for a third, imprisonment for life. Under the age of
sixteen, they are put in a hospital. “A mendicant who has made |
himself liable to arrest by the police,” says the circular, “isnot to
be released except under the most positive assurance that he will
no longer beg; this course will be followed only in case of per-
sons worthy of confidence and solvent, guaranteeing the mendi- ©
cant and engaging to provide him with employment or to support
him, and they shall indicate the means by which they are to pre- — bs
vent him from begging.” ‘This being furnished, the special authomg ;
ization of the intendant must be obtained in addition. By virtue
of this law, 50,000 beggars are said to have been arrested 4
once, and, as the ordinary hospitals and prisons were not cent
enough to contain them, jails had to be constructed. Up to the |
end of the ancient régime this measure is carried out with ocea-
sional intermissions: in Languedoc, in 1768, arrests were. et
made of 433 in six months, and, in 1785, 205 in four month:
About the same epoch 300 were confined in the depot of Besan-
gon, soo in that of Rennes and 650 in that of St. Denis. nig c

the king a million a year to support them, and God knows hi 3
they were supported! Water, straw, bread, and two ounces ¢


1 Archives nationales, F1§, 965, and H, 892. (Ordinance of August 4, 1764; a =
instructions of July 20, 1767; aletter of a police lieutenant of Toulouse, September 21, 1787).
2 Archives nationales, H, 724; H, 554; F4, 2397; F!6, 965. Letters of the jail-keepers o
Carcassonne (June 22, 1789); of Béziers (July 19, 1786); of Nimes (July 1, 1786); of th
intendant, M. d’Aine (March 19, 1786).


CHAP. III. THE PEOPLE. 385


salted grease, the whole at an expense of five sows a day; and, as
the price of provisions for twenty years back had increased more
_ than a third, the keeper who had them in charge was obliged to
_ make them fast or ruin himself. With respect to the mode of
filling the depots, the police are Turks in their treatment of the
‘lower class; they strike into the heap, their broom bruising as
many as they sweep out. According to the ordinance of 1778,
writes an intendant,’ “the police must arrest, not only beggars
and vagabonds whom they encounter but, again, those denounced
as such or as suspected persons. ‘The citizen, the most ir-
reproachable in his conduct and the least open to suspicion of
vagabondage, is not sure of not being shut up in the depot, as
his freedom depends on a policeman who is constantly liable to
be deceived by false denunciation or corrupted by a bribe. I
_ have seen in the depot at Rennes several husbands arrested
solely through the denunciation of their wives, and as many.
women through that of their husbands; several children by the
first wife at the solicitation of their step-mothers; many female
domestics pregnant by the masters they served, shut up at their
instigation, and girls in the same situation at the instance of their
_ seducers; children denounced by their fathers, and fathers de-
_ nounced by their children; all without the slightest evidence of
vagabondage or mendicity. . . . No decision of the provost’s
court exists.restoring the incarcerated to their liberty, notwith-
standing the infinite number arrested unjustly.” Suppose that a
humane intendant, like this one, sets them at liberty: there they
are in the streets, mendicants through the action of the law which
_ proscribes mendicity and which adds to the wretched it prose-
 cutes the wretched it creates, still more embittered and corrupt in
body and in soul. “It nearly always happens,” says the same in-
tendant, “that the prisoners, arrested twenty-five or thirty leagues
_ from the depot, are not confined there until three or four months


’ after their arrest and sometimes longer. Meanwhile, they are


_ transferred from brigade to brigade, in the prisons found along the
_ road, where they remain until the number increases sufficiently to
_ form a convoy. Men and women are confined in the same
_ prison, the result of which is, the females not pregnant on enter-
ing it are always so on their arrival at the depot. The prisons are


1 Archives nationales, H, 554. (Letter of M. de Bertrand, intendant of Rennes, August
7 1785).
33


786 THE ANCIENT REGIME. BOOK Ve)


generally unhealthy ; frequently, the majority of the prisoners are —
sick on leaving it;” and many become rascals on coming incon-
tact with rascals. Moral contagion and physical contagion, the —
ulcer thus increasing through the remedy; centres of repression —
becoming centres of corruption. .

And yet with all its rigors the law does not attain its andi |
“Our towns,” says the parliament of Brittany,! “are so filled
with beggars it seems as if the measures taken to suppress men-
dicity only increase it.” “The principal highways,” writes the
intendant, “are infested with dangerous vagabonds and vagrants,
actual beggars, which the police do not arrest, either through
negligence or because their interference is not provoked by special _
solicitations.” What would be done with them if they were —
arrested? There are too many, and there is no place to put —
them. And, moreover, how prevent people who live on alms from
demanding alms? ‘The effect, undoubtedly, is lamentable but
inevitable. Poverty, to a certain extent, is a slow gangrene
in which the morbid parts consume the healthy parts, the man
scarcely able to subsist being eaten up alive by the man who has
nothing to liveon. ‘The peasant is ruined, perishing, the victim
of oppression by the multitude of the poor that lay waste the —
country and take refuge in the towns. Hence the mobs so prej- _
udicial to public safety, that crowd of smugglers and vagrants,
that large body of men who have become robbers and assassins,
solely because they lack bread. This gives but a faint idea
of the disorders I have seen with my own eyes.? The poverty —
of the rural districts, excessive in itself, becomes yet more so —
through the disturbances it engenders; we have not to seek else- _
where for frightful sources of mendicity and for all the vices.”3 —
Of what avail are palliatives or violent proceedings against an
evil which is in the blood and which belongs to the very consti-
tution of the social organism ? What police force could effect
anything in a parish in which one-quarter or one-third of its in-—
habitants have nothing to eat but that which they beg from door.
to door? At Argentré,* in Brittany, “a town without trade or


1 Archives nationales, H, 426. (Remonstrance, Feb. 4, 1783). H, 554. (Letter of M. de
Bertrand, Aug. 17, 1785).
2 Jbid. H, 614. (Memorial by René de Hauteville, parliamentary advocate, St. Brieug,
Dec. 25, 1776).
3 ** Procés-verbaux de l’ass. prov. de Soissonnais”’ (1787), p. 457.
4 Archives nationales, H, 616. (A letter of M. de Baves, intendant of Rennes, April "3
1774).


CHAP. Ill. RHE PEOPLE. 387


industry, out of 2,300 inhabitants, more than one-half are any-
thing else but well-off, and over 500 are reduced to beggary.”
At Dainville, in Artois, “ out of 130 houses sixty are on the poor-
list.”* In Normandy, according to statements made by the
curates, “of goo parishioners in Saint-Malo, three-quarters can
barely live and the rest are in poverty.” “Of 4,500 inhabitants
‘in Saint-Patrice, 400 live on alms of 500 inhabitants in Saint-
Laurent three-quarters live on alms.” At Marbceuf, says a report,
“of 500 persons inhabiting our parish, 100 are reduced to men-
dicity and besides these, thirty and forty a day come to us from
neighboring parishes.”” At Bolbone in Languedoc ® daily at the
convent gate is “general alms-giving to 300 or 400 poor people,
independent of that for the aged and the sick which is more
numerously attended.” At Lyons, in 1787, “30,000 workmen
depend on public charity for subsistence ;” at Rennes, in 1788,
after an inundation, “two-thirds of the inhabitants are in a state
of destitution ;”* at Paris, out of 650,000 inhabitants, the census
of 1791 enumerates 118,784 as indigent.® Let frost or hail come,
as in 1788, let a crop fail, let bread cost four sous a pound, and
let a workman in the charity-workshops earn only twelve sous
a day,’ can one imagine that people will resign themselves to
death by starvation ? Around Rouen, during the winter of 1788, |
the forests are pillaged in open day, the woods at Baguéres are
wholly cut away, the fallen trees are publicly sold by the ma-
-rauders.? Both the famished and the marauders go together,
necessity making itself the accomplice of crime. From province
to province we can follow up their tracks: four months later, in
the vicinity of Etampes, fifteen brigands break into four farm-
houses during the night, while the farmers, threatened by incen-
diaries, are obliged to give, one three hundred francs, another
five hundred, all the money, probably, they have in their coffers.*


1 Périn, ‘La Jeunesse de Robespierre,” 301. (Doléances des parvisses rurales in 1789).

2 Théron de Montaugé, p. 87. (Letter of the prior of the convent, March, 1789).

3 Hippeau, “Le Gouvern. de Normandie,” VII. 147-177 (1789). Boivin-Champeaux,
“Notice hist. sur la Révolution dans le département de |’Eure,” p. 83 (1789).

4 “ Procés-verbaux de I’ass. prov. de Lyonnais,” p. 57. Archives nationales, F4, 2073.
Memorial of Jan. 24, 1788. ‘‘Charitable assistance is very limited, the provincial authorities
providing no resources for such accidents.” ; f

5 Levasseur, “La France industrielle,” 119. In 1862, the population being almost triple
(1,696,000), there are but 90,000.

6 Albert Babeau, “Hist. de Troyes,” I. 91. (Letter of the mayor Huez, July 30, 1788).

7 Floquet, VII. 506. ee ;

8 Archives nationales, H, 1453. (Letter of M. de Saint-Suzanne, April 29, 1789).


len


388 THE ANCIENT REGIME. BOOK V.


“Robbers, convicts, the worthless of every species,” are to form _
the advance guard of insurrections and lead the peasantry to the ©
extreme of violence.! After the sack of the Reveillon house in —
Paris it is remarked that “of the forty ringleaders arrested, there ©
was scarcely one who was not an old offender, and either flogged _
or branded.”? In every revolution the lees of society come to
the surface. Never had these been visible before; like badgers
_in the woods, or rats in the sewers, they had remained in their
burrows or in their holes. They issue from these in swarms, |
while, in Paris, what figures suddenly come to light!* “Never —
had any like them been seen in open day. . . . Where do they ~
come from ? who has brought them out of their obscure hiding-
places? . . . Foreigners from every country, armed with clubs,
ragged, . . . some almost naked, others oddly dressed” in in-—
congruous patches and “frightful to look at,” constitute the riot-
ous chiefs or their subordinates, at six francs. ee! head, behind §
which the people are to march. aa

“In Paris,” says Mercier,* “the people are weak, pallid, dimnind 2
utive, stunted,” maltreated, “and, apparently, a class apart from y
other classes in the State. The rich and the great who possess —
equipages, enjoy the privilege of crushing them or of mutilating
them in the streets. . . . There is no convenience for foot-pas- —
sengers, no sidewalks. Hundreds of victims die annually under —
the carriage wheels.” “I saw,” says Arthur Young, “a poor
child run over and probably killed, and have been myself many ~~
times blackened with the mud of the kennels. . . . If young no-
blemen at London were to drive their chaises in streets without
foot-ways, as their brethren do at Paris, they would speedily and ~
justly get very well threshed or rolled in the kennel.” Mercier q
grows uneasy in the face of the immense populace. “In Paris — y
there are, probably, two hundred thousand individuals with no
property intrinsically worth fifty crowns, and yet the city sub- |
sists!” Order, consequently, is maintained only through fear
and by force, owing to the soldiery of the watch who are called —


1 Arthur Young, I. 256.

2 “Corresp. secréte inédite,” from 1777 to 1792 published by M. de Lescure, IT. 35
(May 8, 1789). Cf. C. Desmoulins, ‘‘La Lanterne,” of 100 rioters arrested at Lyons 96 were
branded.

3 De Bezenval, II. 344, 350. Dussault, “La Prise de la Bastille,” 352. Marmontel, II.
ch. xiv. 249. Mme. Vigée-Lebrun, I. 177, 188.

4 Mercier, I. 32; VI. 15; X. 179; XI. 59; XII. 83. Arthur Young, I. 122.


CHAP. III. THE PEOPLE. 389


tristes-a-paite by the masses. “This appellation excites the rage
of this species of militia who then deal heavier blows around
them, wounding indiscriminately all they encounter. The low
class is always ready to make war on them because it has never
_ been fairly treated by them.” In. fact, “a squad of the guard
often scatters, with no trouble, platoons of five or six hundred
men, at first greatly excited, but melting away in the twinkling
of an eye, after the soldiery have distributed a few blows and
handcuffed two or three of the ringleaders.’ Nevertheless, “were
the people of Paris abandoned to their first transports, did they
not feel the horse and foot guards behind them, the commissary
and policeman, they would set no limits to their disorder. The
populace, delivered from its accustomed restraint, would give it-
self up to violence of so cruel a stamp as not to know when to
stop. . . . As long as white bread? lasts, the commotion will not
prove general ; the flour market? must interest itself in the matter,
if the women 4re to remain tranquil. . . .-Should white bread be
wanting for two market days in succession, the uprising would
be universal, and it is impossible to foresee the lengths this mul-
titude at bay will go to escape famine, they and their children.”
In 1789 white bread proves to be wanting throughout France.


1 In the original, Jazz de Gonesse, — bread made in a village of this mame near Paris, and
renowned for its whiteness.—TR.

2 “Dialogues sur le commerce des blés,” by Galiani (1770). ‘If the powerful of the
markets are content, no misfortune will happen to the administration. The great conspire
and rebel; the bourgeois murmurs and lives a celibate; peasants and artisans despair and
go away; porters get up riots.”


33"


CHAPTER IV. aoe


I. Military force declines. —How the army is recruited.—How the soldier —
is treated. —IIL. The social organization is dissolved.—No central rallying-
point.—Inertia of the proyinces.—Ascendency of Paris.—III. Direction of
‘the current.—The people led of lawyers.—Theories ea piques the te sm
surviving forces. : 4


AGAINST universal sedition where is force’? In the hundred —
and fifty thousand men who maintain order dispositions are the | Z
same as in the twenty-six millions of men who are subject to it,
while abuses, disaffection, and all the causes that Saisie the —
nation, dissolve the army. Of the ninety millions of pay! which —
the army annually costs the treasury, forty-six millions are for —
officers and only forty-four millions for soldiers, and we are —
already. aware’ that.a new ordinance reserves ranks of all kinds ~
for verified nobles. In no direction is this inequality, against a
which public opinion rebels so vigorously, more apparent; on
the one hand, authority, honors, money, leisure, good-living, —
social enjoyments, and plays in private, for the minority; on the —
other hand, for the majority, subjection, abjection, fatigue, we
forced or betrayed enlistment, no hope of promotion, pay at six
sous a day, a narrow cot for two, bread fit for,dogs, and, for
several years, kicks like those bestowed on a dog;” on the one


the populace. One might say that this was specially designed —
for contrasts and to intensify irritation. “The insignificant pay x
of the soldier,” says an economist, “the way in which he is —
dressed, lodged and fed, his utter dependence, would render it
cruelty to take any other than a man of the lower class.”3_


.


1 Necker, ‘‘ De |’ Administration des Finances,” II. 422, 435. .
2 Aubertin, 345. Letter of the Comte de St. Germain (during the Seven Years War).

“The soldier’s hardships make one’s heart bleed; he passes his days in a state of abject

misery, despised and living like a fighting dog in chains.”
3 De Tocqueville, 190, 191.


CHAP. IV. THE PEOPLE. 391


Indeed, he is sought for only in the very lowest stages. Not
only are nobles and the bourgeoisie exempt from conscription,
but again the employés of the administration, of the fermes and
of public works, “all gamekeepers and forest-rangers, the hired
‘domestics and valets of ecclesiastics, of communities, of religious
establishments, of the gentry and of nobles,’! and even of the
' bourgeoisie living in grand style, and still better, the sons of culti-
vators in easy circumstances, and, in general, all possessing
influence or any species of protector. There remains, accord-
ingly, for the militia none but the poorest class and they do not
willingly enter it. On the contrary, the service is hateful to
them; they conceal themselves in the forests where they have to
be_pursued with arms in the hand: in a certain canton which,
three years later, furnishes in one day from fifty to one hundred
volunteers, the young men cut off their thumbs to escape the
‘draft.2 To this scum of society is added the sweepings of the
depots and of the jails. Among the vagabonds that fill these,
after winnowing out those able to make their families known or
‘to obtain sponsors, “there are none left,” says an intendant, “but
those who are entirely unknown and dangerous, out of which
‘those regarded as the least vicious are selected and efforts are
made to place these in the army.”* ‘The last of its affluents is
_ the half-forced, half-voluntary enlistment by which the ranks are
for the most part filled, the offscourings of large towns, like
adventurers, discharged apprentices, young reprobates turned out
of doors, and people without homes or steady occupation. ‘The
recruiting agent who is paid so much a head for his recruits and
so much an inch on their stature above five feet, “ holds his court
in a tavern, treats” and fashions the article: “Come, boys, soup,
fish, meat and salad is what you get to eat in the regiment;” that is
all, “I don’t deceive you—pie and Arbois wine are the extras.” *
He pushes around the glass, pays accordingly and, if need be,
yields his mistress: “After a few days debauchery, the young


1 Archives nationales, H, 159t.

2De Rochambeau, “Mémoires,” I. 427. D’Argenson, Decem. 24, 1752, “£30,000 men
have been punished for desertion since the peace of 1748; this extensive desertion 1s attribu-
ted to the new drill which fatigues and disheartens the soldier, and especially the veterans.
Voltaire, “Dict. Phil.,” article “Punishments.” ‘‘I was amazed one day on secing the list
of deserters, for eight years amounting to 60,000.” ;
' 8 Archives nationales, H, 554. (Letter of M. de Bertrand, intendant of Rennes, August
17, 1785).

4 Mercier, XI. 121.


392 THE ANCIENT REGIME. BOOKV.


libertine, with no money to pay his score, is obliged to sell him-
self, while the laborer, transformed to a soldier, begins to drill
under the lash.” Strange recruits these, for the protection of —
society, all selected from the attacking class, down-trodden peas-
ants, imprisoned vagabonds, social outcasts, poor fellows in debt,”
disheartened, excited and easily tempted, who, according to
circumstances, become, at one time, rioters and, at another,
soldiers.

Which lot is preferable? The bread the soldier eats is not
more abundant than that of the prisoner, while poorer in quality ;
for, the bran is taken out of the bread which the locked-up vaga-
bond eats and left in the bread which is eaten by the soldier who
locks him up. In this state of things the soldier ought not to
meditate on his lot, and yet this is just what his officers incite him
to do. They also have become politicians and fault-finders.
Some years before the Revolution! “disputes occurred” in the
army, “discussions and complaints and, the new ideas fermenting
In their heads, a correspondence was established between two
regiments. Written information was obtained from Paris, au-
thorized by the Minister of War, which cost, I believe, twelve
louis per annum. It soon took a philosophic turn, embracing
dissertations, criticisms of the ministry, and of the government,
desirable changes and, therefore, the more diffused.” Sergeants
like Hoche, and fencing-masters like Augereau, certainly often
read this news, carelessly left lying on the tables, and commented
on it during the evening in their soldier quarters. Discontent is
of ancient date and already, at the end of the late reign, grievous”
_ words are heard. At a banquet given by a prince of the blood,?
with a table set for a hundred guests under an immense tént and
served by grenadiers, the odor these diffused offended the prince’s
delicate olfactories. ‘These worthy fellows,” said he, a little too
loud, “smell strong of the stocking.” ‘One of the grenadiers
bluntly responded, “‘ Because we haven’t got any,” which “was


followed by profound silence.” During the ensuing years irrita-


tion smoulders and augments; the soldiers of Rochambeau have
fought side by side with the free militia of America and they
keep this in mind. In 1788, Marshal de Vaux, previous to the


1 De Vaublanc, 149.
2 De Ségur, I. 20 (1767).
3 Augeard, ‘“‘ Mémoires,” 165.


CHAP. IV. ' THE PEOPLE. 303


insurrection in Dauphiny, writes to the minister that “ it is impos-
sible to rely on the troops,” while four months after the opening
of the States-General sixteen thousand deserters roaming around
Paris lead the revolts instead of suppressing them.!


LE,

This dyke once carried away no other. remains, the inunda-
tion overspreading France as if an immense plain. With other
nations in like circumstances, some obstacles have been encoun-
tered; elevations have existed, centres of refuge, old construc-
tions in which, in the universal fright, a portion of the population
could find shelter. Here, the first crisis sweeps away all that
remains, each individual of the twenty-six scattered millions
standing alone by himself. The administrations of. Richelieu
and Louis XIV. had been a long time at work insensibly destroy-
ing the natural groupings which, when suddenly dissolved, unite
and form over again of their own accord. Except in Vendée, I
find no place, nor any class, in which a good many men, having
confidence in a few men, are able, in the hour of danger, to
rally around these and form a compact body. Neither provin-
cial nor municipal patriotism any longer exists. .The inferior
clergy are hostile to the prelates, the gentry of the province to
the nobility of the court, the vassal to the seignior, the peasant to
the townsman, the urban population to the municipal oligarchy,
corporation to corporation, parish to parish, neighbor to neigh-
bor. All are separated by their privileges and their jealousies, by
the consciousness of having been imposed on, or frustrated, for
the advantage of another. The journeyman tailor is embittered
against his foreman for preventing him from doing a day’s work in
_ private houses, hairdressers against their employers for the like
reason, the pastrycook against the baker who prevents him from
baking the pies of housekeepers, the village spinner against the
town spinners who wish to break him up, the rural wine-growers
against the bourgeois who, in the circle of seven leagues, strives
to have their vines pulled up,” the village against the neighbor-
ing village whose reduction of taxation has ruined it, the over-
taxed peasant against the undertaxed peasant, one- -half of a par-


1 Horace Walpole, September 5, 17389.
~ 2 Laboulaye, ‘‘ De l’Administration frangaise sous Louis XVI.” (Revue des Cours litté-
raires, IV. 743). ‘Albert Babeau, I. iii. (Doléances et voeux des corporations de Troyes).


394 THE ANCIENT REGIME. “BOOK Ve


ish against its collectors who, to its detriment, have favored the —
other half. “The nation,” says Turgot, mournfully,! “is asociety —
composed of different orders badly united and of a people whose
members have few mutual liens, zobody, consequently, caring jor” q
any interest but his own. Nowhere is there any sign of an inter- .
est in common. ‘Towns and villages maintain no more relation _
with each other than the districts to which they are attached; they —
are even unable to agree together with a view to carry out pub- —
lic improvements of great importance to them.” ‘The central —
power for a hundred and fifty years rules through its division of _
power. Men have been kept separate, prevented from acting in
concert, the work being so successful that they no longer under-
stand each other, each class ignoring the other class, each form- _
ing of the other a chimerical picture, each bestowing on the other —
the hues of its own imagination, one composing an idyl, the 7 .
other framing a melodrama, one imagining peasants as senti- :
mental swains, the other convinced that the nobles are horrible ty- 2
rants. |
Through this mutual misconception and this secular isolation,
the French lose the habit, the art and the faculty for acting in an
entire body. ‘They are no longer capable of spontaneous agree-
ment and ‘collective action. No one, in the moment of danger,
dares rely on his neighbors or on his equals. No one knows ©
where to turn to obtain a guide. “A man willing to be responsible
for the smallest district cannot be found; and, more than this, one
man able to answer for another man.”? Utter confusion exists —
and there is no remedy. ‘The theoretical Utopia is brought to —
perfection and the savage condition has recommenced. Individ-
uals now stand in juxtaposition; every man reverts back to his
original feebleness, while his possessions and his life are at the _
mercy of the first band that comes along. He has nothing within ~
him to control him but the sheep-like habit of being led,
awaiting an impulsion, of turning towards the accustomed cen-—
tre, towards Paris, from which his orders have always arrived, —
Arthur Young is struck with this mechanical movement.’ Polit- _
ical ignorance and docility are everywhere complete. He, a for-
eigner, conveys the nets of Alsace into Burgundy: the insure *


Ss


1De Tocqueville, 158.
2 Tbid. 304 (The words of Burke). =


3 Travels in France, I. 240, 263.


"CHAP. IV. | THE PEOPLE. 208


tion there had been terrible, the populace having sacked the city-
hall at Strasbourg, of which not a word was known at Dijon ;
“yet it is nine days since it happened; had it been nineteen I
question if they would more than have received the intelligence.”
‘There are no newspapers in the ycales ; no local centres of infor-
mation, of resolution, of action. The province submits to events
at the capital; ‘people dare not move; they dare not even form
an opinion before Paris speaks.” Monarchical centralization
thus culminates. Groups are deprived of their cohesiveness and
individuals of their springs of action. Only human dust remains,
and this, whirling about and gathered together in massive force,
4s blindly driven along by the wind.


III.


We are all well aware from which side the gale comes, and, to
assure ourselves, we have merely to see how the reports of the
‘Third-Estate are made up. The peasant is led by the man of
the law, the petty attorney of the rural districts, the envious ad-
vocate and theorist. He insists, in the report, on a statement be-
ing made in writing and at length of his local and personal
grievances, his protest against taxes and deductions, his request
to have his dog free of the clog, and his desire to own a gun to
use against the wolves. The latter, who suggests and directs,
envelopes all this in the language of the Rights of Man and that
of the circular of Sieyés. ‘For two months,” writes a com-
mandant at the South,” “inferior judges and lawyers, with which
both town and country swarm, with a view to their election to the
States-General, have been racing after the members of the Third-
Estate, under the pretext of standing by them and of giving them
information. . . . They have striven to make them believe that,
in the States-General, they alone would be masters and regulate
all the affairs of the kingdom; that the Third-Estate, in selecting
its deputies among men of the robe, would secure the might and
the right to take the lead, to abolish nobility and to cancel all its
rights and privileges; that nobility would no longer be heredi-
tary; that all citizens, in deserving it, would be entitled to claim
it; that, if the people deputed them, they would have accorded


1 Beugnot, I. 115, 116.
2 Archives nationales, procés-verbaux and cahiers of the States-General, XIII. p. 405.
(Letter of the Marquis de Fodoas, commandant of Armagnac, to M. Necker, May 29, 1789.)


396 THE ANCIENT REGIME. BOOK V.


to the Third-Estate whatever it desired, because the curates, be-
longing to the Third-Estate, having agreed to separate from the
higher clergy and unite with them, the nobles and the clergy,
united together, would have but one vote against two of -the
Third-Estate. . .. If the Third-Estate had chosen sensible
townspeople or merchants they would have combined without
difficulty with the other two orders. But the assemblies of the
bailiwicks and other districts were stuffed with men of the robe
who. have absorbed all opinions and striven to take precedence
of the others, each, in his own behalf, intriguing and conspiring to
be appointed a deputy.” ‘In Touraine,” writes the intendant,
“most of the votes have been bespoken or begged for. Trusty
agents, at the moment of voting, placed ready-prepared ballots in’
the hands of the voters, and put in their way, on reaching the
taverns, every document and suggestion calculated to excite
their imaginations and determine their choice for the gentry of —
the bar.” “In the séuéchaussée of Lectoure, a number of par-
ishes have not been designated or notified to send their reports or
deputies to the district assembly. In those which were notified
the lawyers, attorneys and notaries of the small neighboring
towns, have made up the list of grievances themselves without
summoning the community. ... Exact copies of this single
rough draft were made and sold at a high price to the councils of —
each country parish.” ‘This is an alarming symptom, one marking ~
out in advance the road the Revolution is to take: the man of
the people is indoctrinated by the advocate, the pikeman allowing
himself to be led by the spokesman. La
The effect of their combination is apparent the first year. In
Franche-Comté? after consultation with a person named Rouget, —
the peasants of the Marquis de Chaila “ determine to make no 4
further payments to him and to divide amongst themselves the t me
product of the wood-cuttings.” In his paper “the lawyer states —
that all the communities of the province have decided to do the
same thing. . . . His consultation is. diffused to such an ea
around the country that many of the communities are satisfied
that they owe nothing more to the king nor to the seigniors:. M.
de Marnésia, deputy to the (National) Assembly, has arrived (here) —
to pass a few days at home on account of his health. He has


1 Archives nationales, H, 784. (Letters of M. de Langeron, military commandant at
Besangon, October 16 and 18, 1789). ‘The consultation is annexed.


CHAP. IV. LHE PEOPLE. 397


_ been treated in the rudest and most scandalous manner; it was

even proposed to conduct him back to Paris under guard. After

his departure his chateau was attacked, the doors burst open and

the walls of his garden pulled down. (And yet) no gentleman

has done more for the people on his domain than M. le Marquis

de Marnésia. . . . Excesses of every kind are on the increase;

I have constant complaints of the abuse which the national mili-
tia make of their arms, and which I cannot remedy.” According
to an utterance in the National Assembly the police imagines that
it is to be disbanded and has therefore no desire to make ene-
mies for itself. ‘The daz//ages are as timid as the police-forces ;

I send them business constantly, but no culprit is punished.” ‘No
nation enjoys liberty so indefinite and so disastrous to honest peo-

ple; it is absolutely against the rights of man to see oneself con-
stantly liable to have his throat cut by the scoundrels who daily
confound liberty with license.” In other words, the passions, to
obtain a sanction, have recourse to theory, and theory, to secure

its application, has recourse to the passions. For example, near
Liancourt, the Duc de Larochefoucauld possessed an uncultivated
area of ground; “at the commencement of the revolution, the poor
of the town declare that, as they form a part of the nation, un-

tilled lands being national property, this belongs to them,” and
with no other formality” they take possession of it, divide it up,

plant hedges and clear it off. “This, says Arthur Young, shows

the general disposition. . . . Pushed a little farther the conse-

quences would not be slight for properties in this kingdom.” Al- |
ready, in the preceding year, near Rouen, the marauders, who cut

down and sell the forests, declare that ‘‘ the people have the right to

take whatever they require for their necessities.” They have had

the doctrine preached to them that they are sovereign, and they

act as sovereigns. The condition of their intellects being given,

nothing is more natural than their conduct. Several millions of

savages are thus let loose by a few thousand declaimers, the pol-

itics of the café finding an interpreter and ministrants in the mob

of the streets. On the one hand brute force is at the service of

the radical dogma. On the other hand radical dogma is at the

service of brute force. And here, in disintegrated’ France, do the

two powers appear together erect on the general ruin.


34


CHAPTER V.


iy


THEY are the successors and executors of the ancient régime, —
and, on contemplating the way in which this engendered, brought —
forth, nourished, installed and stimulated them we cannot avoid _
considering its history as one long suicide, like that of a man
who, having mounted to the top of an immense ladder, cuts away
from under his feet the support which has kept him up. Ina ~
case of this kind good intentions are not sufficient; to be liberal
and even generous, to enter upon a few semi-reforms, is of no —
avail. On the contrary, through both their qualities and defects, —
through both their virtues and their vices, the privileged wrought —
their own destruction, their merits contributing to their ruin as —
well as their faults—Founders of society, formerly entitled to —
their advantages through their services, they have preserved their
rank without fulfilling their duties; their position in the localas
in the central government is a sinecure, and their privileges have _
become abuses. At their head, the king, creating France by
devoting himself to her as if his own property, ended by sacri- —
ficing her as if his own property; the public purse is his private
purse while passions, vanities, personal weaknesses, luxurious bs
habits, family solicitudes, the intrigues of a mistress and the
caprices of a wife, govern a state of twenty-six millions of men —
with an arbitrariness, a heedlessness, a prodigality, an unskilfu -—
ness, an absence of consistency that would scarcely be over-
looked in the management of a private domain.—The king and
the privileged excel in one direction, in good-breeding, in goo ey
taste, in fashion, in the talent for self-display and in entertaining, —
in the gift of graceful conversation, in finesse and in gayety, in
the art of converting life into a brilliant and ingenious festivity,
regarding the world as a drawing-room of refined idlers in which
it suffices to be amiable and witty whilst, actually, it is an arena
where one must be strong for combats, and a laboratory in which


CHAP. Vv. THE PEOPLE. 399


one must work in order to be useful.—Through the habit, per-
fection and sway of polished intercourse they stamped on the
French intellect a classic form, which, combined with recent
scientific acquisitions, produced the philosophy of the eighteenth
century, the ill-repute of tradition, the ambition of recasting all
human institutions according to the sole dictates of reason, the
appliance of mathematical methods to politics and morals, the
catechism of the nghts of man, and other dogmas of anarch-
ical and despotic character in the Contrat Social—Once this
chimera is born they welcome it as a drawing-room fancy; they
use the little monster as a plaything, as yet innocent and decked
with ribbons like a pastoral lambkin; they never dream of its be-
coming a raging, formidable brute; they nourish it, and caress it
and then, opening their doors, they let it descend into the streets.
—Here, amongst a middle class which the government has
rendered ill-disposed by compromising its fortunes, which the
privileged have offended by restricting its ambition, which is
wounded by inequality through injured self-esteem, the revolu-
tionary theory gains rapid accessions, a sudden asperity, and, in
a few years, it finds itself undisputed master of public opinion.—
At this moment and at its summons, another colossal monster
rises up, a monster with millions of heads, a blind, startled
animal, an entire people pressed down, exasperated and suddenly
loosed against the government whose exactions have despoiled it,
against the privileged whose rights have reduced it to starvation,
without, in these rural districts abandoned by their natural pro-
tectors, encountering any surviving authority; without, in these
provinces subject to the yoke of mechanical centralization, a
single independent group being left; without, in this society dis-
aggregated by despotism, the possibility of forming any centres
of initiation and resistance; without, in this upper class disarmed
by its very humanity, any statesman being found exempt from
‘illusion and capable of action; without these good intentions and
fine intellects being able to protect themselves against the two
enemies of all liberty and of all order, against the contagion
of the democratic nightmare which disturbs the ablest heads and
against the irruptions of the popular brutishness which perverts
the best of laws. At the moment of opening the States-General
the course of ideas and events is not only fixed but, again, ap-
parent. Each generation, beforehand and unconsciously, bears


400 THE ANCIENT REGIME.


within itself its future and its history; long before the issue the
destinies of this one could be anticipated, and, if the details fel
within our comprehension as well as the completed whole, we
could readily accept the following fiction which La Harpe com. 4-7
posed at the end of the Directory, recurring to his souvenirs. sgh
Il. ea
“Tt seems to me,” he says, “‘as if it were but yesterday, and yet
it is at the beginning of the year 1788. We were dining with |
one of our confréres of the Academy, a grand seignior and a
man of intelligence. The company was numerous and of every —
profession, cman advocates, men of letters and academicians; —
all had feasted luxuriously according to custom. At the devices  ,
the wines of Malvoisie and of Constance contributed to the social —
gayety a sort of freedom not always kept within decorous —
limits. At that time society had reached the point at which —
everything may be expressed that excites laughter. Champfort —
had read to us his impious and libertine stories, and great ladies —
had listened to these without recourse to.their fans. Hence a q
deluge of witticisms against religion, one quoting a tirade from
‘La Pucelle,’ another bringing forward certain philosophical
stanzas by Diderot. . . . and with unbounded applause, . se 4
conversation becomes more serious; admiration is expressed at
the revolution accomplished by Vickaiie and all agree in its being — ;
the first title to his fame. ‘He gave the tone to his century, —
finding readers in the antechambers as well as in the drawing- —
room.’ One of the guests narrates, bursting with laughter,
what a hairdresser said to him while powdering his hair: ‘You
see, sir, although I am a miserable scrub, I have no more religion
than any one else.’ They conclude that the Revolution will
soon be consummated, that superstition and fanaticism mus ml
wholly give way to philosophy, and they thus calculate the a
bilities of the epoch and those of the future society which will
see the reign of reason, The most aged lament not being a
to flatter themselves that they will see it; the young rejoice —
in a reasonable prospect of seeing it, my especially do the y |
congratulate the Academy on having paved the way for
the great work and in having been the headquarters, the centre,
the inspirer of freedom of thought. | a
“One of the guests had taken no part in this gay conversation,


a sane ea


CHAP. V. THE PEOPLE. 401


- . - a person named Cazotte, an amiable and original man, but,
unfortunately, infatuated with the reveries of the illuminati. In the
most serious tone he begins: ‘Gentlemen,’ says he, ‘be con-
tent; you will witness this great revolution that you so much de-
sire. You know that I am something of a prophet, and I re-
peat it, you will witness it. . . . Do you know the result of this
revolution, for all of you, so long as you remain here ?’—‘ Ah!’
exclaims Condorcet with his shrewd, simple air and smile, ‘let us
see, a philosopher is not sorry to: encounter a prophet.’—‘ You,
Monsieur de Condorcet, will expire stretched on the floor of a
dungeon; you will die of the poison you take to escape the exe-
cutioner, of the poison which the felicity of that era will compel
you always to carry about your person!’ At first, great astonish-
ment was manifested and then came an outburst of laughter.
‘What has all this in common with philosophy and the reign of
reason ?’—‘ Precisely what I have just remarked to you; in the
name of philosophy, of humanity, of freedom, under the reign
of reason, you will thus reach your end; and, evidently, the reign
of reason will arrive, for there will be temples of reason, and, in
those days, in all France, the temples will be those alone
of reason... . You, Monsieur de Champfort, you will sever
your veins with twenty-two strokes of a razor and yet you
will not die for months afterwards. You, Monsieur Vicq-
d’Azir, you will not open your own veins but you will have
them opened six times in one day, in the agonies of gout, so
as to be more certain of success, and you will die that night.
You, Monsieur de Nicolai, on the scaffold; you, Monsieur
Bailly, on the scaffold; you, Monsieur de Malesherbes, on the
scaffold; . . . you, Monsieur Roucher, also on the scaffold.’—
‘But then we shall have been overcome by Turks or Tartars ?’—
‘By no means; you will be governed as I have already told you,
solely by philosophy and reason. ‘Those who are to treat you in
this manner will all be philosophers, will all, at every moment,
have on their lips, the phrases you have uttered within the hour,
will repeat your maxims, will quote, like yourselves, the stanzas
of Diderot and of “La Pucelle.”’—‘And when will all this hap-


‘pen ?’—‘Six years will not pass before what I tell you will be


accomplished.’ Well, these are miracles,’ exclaims La Harpe,

‘and you leave me out ?’—‘ You will be no less a miracle, for you

will then be a christian.’—‘ Ah,’ interposes Champfort, ‘I breathe
34*


‘


402 THE ANCIENT REGIME. BOOK V.


again; if we are to die only when La Harpe becomes a christian _
we are immortals.—‘ As to that, we women,’ says the Duchesse —
de Gramont, ‘are extremely fortunate in being of no consequence
~ jin revolutions. It is understood that we are not to blame, and
our sex . . ..—‘ Your sex, ladies, will not protect you this time. —
. .. You will be treated precisely as men, with no difference —
whatever. . . . You, Madame la Duchesse, will be led to the
scaffold, you and many ladies besides yourself, in a cart with your _
hands tied behind your back.’—‘ Ah, in that event, I hope to have —
at least a carriage covered with black.’-—‘No, Madame, greater —
ladies than yourself will go, like yourself, in a cart and with their _
hands tied like yours.’ ‘Greater ladies! _ What, princesses of the —
blood !’—‘Still greater ladies than those .. .’ They began to —
think the jest carried too far. Madame de Gramont, to dispel —
the gloom, did not insist on a reply to her last exclamation, con-
tenting herself by saying in the lightest tone, ‘And they will not —
even leave one a confessor!’—‘No, Madame, neither you nor —
any other person will be allowed a confessor; the last of the con-
demned that will have one, as an act of grace, will be . . .’ He ©
stopped a moment. ‘Tell me, now, who is the fortunate mortal
enjoying this prerogative ?’—‘The last that will remain to him,

the King of France.’” 2


THE END.


NOTES.


LVote i.


On the number of ecclesiastics and nobles.


_ These approximative estimates are arrived at in the following manner:

_ 1. The number of nobles in 1789 was unknown. The genealogist Chérin,
in his ‘‘ Abrégé chronologique des Edits, etc.’”’ (1789), states that he is igno-
rant of the number. Moheau, to whom Lavoisier refers in his report, 1791,
‘is equally ignorant in this respect. (‘‘ Recherches sur la population de la
France,” 1778, p. 105); Lavoisier states the number as 83,000, while the
Marquis de Bouillé (‘* Mémoires,” p. 50), states 80,000 families, neither of
these authorities advancing proofs of their statements. I find in the ‘* Cata-
logue nominatif des gentilshommes en 1789,” by Laroque and De Barthélemy,
the number of nobles voting, directly or by proxy, in the elections of 1789,
in Provence, Languedoc, Lyonnais, Forez, Beaujolais, Touraine, Normandy,
and Ile-de-France, as 9,167. According to the census of 1790, given by
Arthur Young in his ‘‘ Travels in France,” the population of these provinces
was 7,757,000, which gives a proportion of 30,000 nobles voting in a popula-
tion of 26,000,000. On examining the law and on summing up the lists, we
find that each noble represents somewhat less than a family, inasmuch as the
son of the owner of a fief votes if he is twenty-five years of age; I think,
accordingly, that we are not far out of the way in estimating the number of
noble families at 26,000 or 28,000, which number; at five individuals to the
family, gives 130,000 or 140,000 nobles. The territory of France in 1789
being 27,000 square leagues, and the population 26,000,000, we may assign
one noble family to every square league of territory and to every 1,000 in-
habitants. ;

2. Concerning the clergy I find in the National Archives, among the eccle-
siastical records, the following enumeration of monks belonging to 28 orders :
Grand Augustins 694, Petits-Péres 250, Barnabites 90, English Benedictines
52, Benedictines of Cluny 298, of Vannes 612, of Saint-Maur 1,672, Citeaux
1,806, Récollets 2,238, Prémontrés 399, Prémontrés Réformés 394, Capucins
3,720, Carmes déchaussés 555, Grands-Carmes 853, Hospitaliers de Saint-
Jean de Dieu 218, Chartreux 1,144, Cordeliers 2,018, Dominicans 1,172,
Feuillants 148, Genovéfains 570, Mathurins 310, Minimes 684, Notre-Dame
de la Merci 31, Notre-Saveur 203, Tiers-Ordre de St. Francis 365, Saint-Jean
és Vignes de Soissons 31, Théatins 25, abbaye de Saint-Victor 21, Maisons
soumises 4 l’ordinaire 305. Total 20,745 monks in 2,489 convents. To this


404 NOTES.


must be added the Péres de ]’Oratoire, de la Mission, de la J Doctrine | chré. 5
tienne and some others; the total of monks being about 23,000. As to

nuns, I have a catalogue from the National Archives of twelve dioceses, com- a:
prising according to ‘France ecclésiastique” 1788, 5,576 parishes: the —
dioceses respectively of Perpignan, Tulle, Marseilles, Rhodes, Saint-Flour,
Toulouse, le Mans, Limoges, Lisieux, Rouen, Reims, and Noyon, in all,
5,394 nuns in 198 establishments. The proportion is 37,000 nuns in 1,500
establishments for the 38,000 parishes of France. The total of regular —
clergy thus amounts to 60,000 persons. The secular clergy may be estimated
at 70,000: curates and vicars 60,000 (‘‘ Histoire de l’Eglise de France,” XII.
142, by the Abbé Guettée); prelates, vicars-general, canons of chapters,
2,800; collegiate canons, 5,600 ; ecclesiastics without livings, 3,000 (Sieyés).
Moheau, a clear-headed and cautious statistician, writes in 1778 (‘* Recher-
ches,” p. 100): ‘Perhaps, to-day, there are 130,000 ecclesiastics in the —
kingdom.” The enumeration of 1866 (‘Statistique de la France,” popula-
tion), gives 51,100 members of the secular clergy, 18,500 monks, 86,300 |
nuns; total, 155,900 in a population of 38,000,000 inhabitants. ae


N
PS


LVole 2. —
On feudal rights and on the state of feudal dominion in 1783. . |
FI


_ The following information, for which I am indebted to M. de Boislisle, is
derived from an act of partition drawn up September 6, 1783.

It relates to the estates of Blet and Brosses. The barony and estate of i
Blet lies in Bourbonnais, two leagues from Dun-le-Roi. Blet, says a me- ‘i
morial of an administrator of the Excise, is a ‘‘ good parish; the soilis ex-
cellent, mostly in wood and pasture, the surplus being in tillable land for
wheat, rye and oats. . . .. The roads are bad, especially in winter. Thetrade
consists principally of horned cattle and embraces grain; the woods rot away
on account of their remoteness from the towns and the difficulty of turning
them to account.’ ? - |

‘This estate,” says the act of valuation, ‘‘is in royal tenure on account of
the king’s chateau and fortress of Ainay, under the designation of the town
of Blet.”” The town was formerly fortified and its castle still remains. Its
population was once large, ‘‘but the civil wars of the sixteenth century, and —
especially the emigration of the protestants caused it to be deserted to such
an. extent that out of its former population of 3,000 scarcely 300 remain? _
which is the fate of nearly all the towns in this country.” The estate of Blet, ;
for many centuries in the possession of the Sully family, passed, on the


marriage of the heiress.in 1363, to the house of Saint-Quentin, and was
then transmitted in direct line down to 1748, the date of the death of Alex )
ander If. of Saint-Quentins, Count of Blet, governor of Berg-op-Zoom, and
father of three daughters from whom the actual heigs descend. These heirs


are the Count de Simiane, the Chevalier de Simiane, and the minors of Bercy,


! Archives nationales, G, 319 (‘‘ Etat actuel de la Direction de Bourges au point de vue des
aides,” 1774).
2 Blet, at the present day, contains 1,629 inhabitants. ee


?


NOTES. 405


iek: party owning one-third, represented by 97,667 livres in the Blet estate,
and 20,408 livres in the Brosses estate. The eldest, Comte de Simiane, en-
» joys, besides, a préciput (according to custom in the Bourbonnais), worth
15,000 livres, comprising the castle with the adjoining farm and the seignio-
rial rights, honorary as well as profitable.

- The entire domain, comprising -both estates, is valued at 369,227 livres.
The estate of Blet, comprises 1,437 arfents, worked by seven farmers and
furnished, by the proprietor, with cattle valued at' 13,781 livres. They pay

together to the proprietor 12,060 livres rent (besides claims for poultry and

corvées). One, only, has a large farm, paying 7,800 livres per annum, the
others paying rents of 1,300, 740, 640, and 240 livres per annum. The

Grosses estate comprises 515 a7fents, worked by two farmers to whom the

proprietor furnishes cattle estimated at 3,750 livres, and these together return

to the proprietor 2,240 livres.!. These weétairies are all poor; only one of
them has two rooms with fire-places ; two or three, one room with a fire-
place; the others consist of a kitchen with an oven outside, and stables and
barns. Repairs on the tenements are essential on all the farms except three,
‘thaving been neglected for thirty years.” ‘*The mill-flume requires to be
cleaned out, and the stream whose inundations injure the large meadow ; also
repairs are necessary on the banks of the two ponds; on the church, which
is theseignior’s duty, the roof being in a sad state, the rain penetrating
through the arch;”’ and the roads require mending, these being in a deplor-
able condition during the winter. ‘‘The restoration and repairs of these
roads seem never to have been thought of.”” The soil of the Blet estate is
excellent, but it requires draining and ditching to carry off the water, other-
wise the low lands will continue to produce nothing but weeds. Signs of °
neglect and desertion are everywhere visible. The chateau of Blet has re-
mained unoccupied since 1748; the furniture, accordingly, is almost all
decayed and useless; in 1748 this was worth 7,612 livres, and now it is esti-
mated at 1,000 livres. ‘*The water-power costs nearly as much to maintain
as the income derived from it. The use of plaster as manure is unknown,”
and yet ‘‘in the land of plaster it costs almost nothing.” The ground,
moist and yery good, would grow excellent live hedges; and yet the fields
are enclosed with bare fences against the cattle, “‘which expense, say the
farmers, is equal to a third of the net income.” This domain, as just de-
scribed, is valued as follows:

I. The estate of Blet, according to the custom of the country for noble
estates, is valued at rate twenty-five, namely, 373,000 livres, from which
must be deducted a capital of 65,056 livres, representing the annual charges
(the fixed salary of the curate, repairs, etc.), not including personal charges
like the wingtiémes. Its net revenue per annum is 12,300 livres, and is worth,
net, 308,003 livres.

2. The estate of Brosses is estimated at rate twenty-two, ceasing to be
noble through the transfer of judicial and fief rights to that of Blet. Thus
rated it is worth 73,583 livres, from which must be deducted a capital of


1 The farms of Blet and Brosses really produce nothing for the proprietor, inasmuch as the
tithes and the chanipart (field-rents), (articles 22 and 23), are comprehended i in the rate of
the leases. r


406 NOTES,


12,359 livres for actual charges, the estate bringing in 3,140 livres wae annum | %
and worth, net, 61,224 livres. oe
These revenues are derived from the following sources: ee

I. Rights of the high, low and middle courts of justice over the entire
territory of Blet and other villages, Brosses and Jalay. The upper courts, —
according to an act passed at the Chatelet, April 29, 1702, ‘‘ take cognizance —
of all actions, real and personal, civil and criminal, even actions between —
nobles and ecclesiastics, relating to seals and inventories of movable effects, _
tutelages, curacies, the administration of the property of meee of domains
and of the customary dues and revenues of the seigniory, etc.’

2. Rights of the forests, edict of 1707. The seignior’s warden deckdenll ey
in all cases concerning waters,’and woods, and ‘customs, and crimes roles ~ ;
to fishing and hunting. q

3. Right. of votrie, or the police of the highways, streets, and buildings
(excepting the great main roads). The seignior appoints a bailly, warden
and road overseer, one M. Theurault (at Sagonne), a fiscal attorney, Baujard
(at Blet); he may remove them ‘‘in case they make no returns.” ‘*The ©
rights of the grefe were formerly secured to the seignior, but as itis now
very difficult to find intelligent persons in the country able to fulfil its
‘functions, the seignior abandons his rights to those whom it may concern.”
(The seignior pays forty-eight livres per annum to the bailly to hold his
court once'a month, and twenty-four livres per annum to the fiscal pains
to attend them).

He receives the fines and confiscations of cattle raced by his officers
The profit therefrom, an average year, is eight livres.

He must maintain a jail and a jailer. (It is not stated whether thet was.
one). No sign of a gibbet is found in the seigniory.

He may appoint twelve notaries; only one, in fact, is appointed at Blet
‘‘and he has nothing to do,” an M. Baujard, fiscal attorney. This commis- —
sion is assigned him gratuitously, to keep up the privilege, ‘otherwise it
would be impossible to find any one sufficiently piers, a: to perform its —
functions.” a

He appoints a sergeant, but, fora long time, this sergeant pays no rent or Re rf
anything for his lodging. ;

4. Personal and real ‘az//e. ‘In Bourbonnais the dzaz/le was formes
serf, and the serfs mainmortable. ‘‘Seigniors still possessing rights of
bordelage, well established throughout their fiefs and courts, at the present
time, enjoy rights of succession to their vassals in all cases, even to the
prejudice of their children if non-resident and no longer dwelling under their _
roofs.” But in 1255, Hodes de Sully, having granted a charter, renounced
this right of real and personal ¢az//e for a right of bourgeoisie, still main-_
tained, (see further on). er

5. Right to unclaimed property, cattle, furniture, effects, stray swarms of
bees, treasure-trove; (no profits from this for twenty years past). ‘

6. Right to property of deceased persons without heirs, to that of
deceased bastards, the possessions of condemned criminals either to i—
to the galleys or to exile, etc., (no profit).

7. Right of the chase de of fishing, the latter worth fifteen livres pet


annum.


NOTES. 407


8. Right of dourgeoisie (see article 4), according to the charter of 1255,
and the court-roll of 1484. The wealthiest pay annually twelve bushels of
oats at forty livres and twelve deniers parasis ; the less wealthy nine bushels
and nine deniers; all others six bushels and six deniers. ‘These rights of
bourgeoisie are well established, set forth in all court-rolls and acknowledg-
ments rendered to the king and perpetuated by numerous admissions; the
motives that have led former stewards and /ermiers to interrupt the collection
of these cannot be divined. Many of the seigniors in Bourbonnais have the
benefit of and exact these taxes of their vassals by virtue of titles much more
open to question than those of the seigniors of Blet.”

9. Rights of protection of the chateau of Blet. The royal edict of 1497,
fixing this charge for the inhabitants of Blet and all those dwelling within
the jurisdiction of its tribunals, those of Charly, Boismarvier, etc., at five
sous per fire per annum, which has been carried out. ‘Only lately has the
collection of this been suspended, notwithstanding its recognition at no late
date, the inhabitants all admitting themselves to be subject to the said guet
et garde of the chateau.

10. Right of toll on all merchandise and provisions passing through the
town of Blet, except grain, flour and-vegetables. (A trial pending before
the Council of State since 1727 and not terminated in 1745; -‘‘the collection
thereof, meanwhile, being suspended’’).

11. Right of Jotage on wines sold at retail in Blet, ensuring to the seignior
nine pints of wine per cask, leased in 1782 for six years, at sixty livres per
annum.

12. Right of doucherie or of taking the tongues of all animals slaughtered
in the town, with, additionally, the heads and feet: of all calves. No
slaughter-house at Blet, and yet ‘‘during the harvesting of each year about
twelve head of cattle are slaughtered.”’ This tax is collected by the steward
and is valued at three livres per annum.

13. Right of fairs and markets, aunage, weight and measures. Five fairs
per annum and one market-day each week, but little frequented; no grain-
market. ‘This right is valued at twenty-four livres per annum.

14. Corvées of teams and manual labor, through. seigniorial right, on
ninety-seven persons at Blet (twenty-two corvées of teams.and seventy-five
of manual labor), twenty-six persons at Brosses (five teams and twenty-one
hands). The seignior pays six sous for food, each corvée, on men, and
twelve sous on each corvée of four oxen. ‘‘Amomng those subject to this
corvée the larger number are reduced almost to beggary and have large
families which often induces the seignior not to exact this right rigorously.”
The reduced value of the corvées is forty-nine livres fifteen sols.

15. Banalité (socome), of the mill, (a sentence of 1736 condemning Roy,
a laborer, to have his grain ground in the mill of Blet, and to pay a fine for
having ceased to have grain ground there during three years). The miller
reserves a sixteenth of the flour ground. The district-mill, as well as the
windmill, with six avfenzs adjoining, are leased at 600 livres per annum.

16. Banalité of the oven. Agreement of 1537 between the seignior and
his vassals: he allows them the privilege of a small oven in their domicile
of three squares, six inches each, to bake pies, biscuits and cakes; in other


408 | NOTES.


respects subject to the district oven. He is entitled to one-sixteenth of the _
dough ; this right might produce 150 livres annually, but, for several yee
the oven has been dilapidated. Re,
17. Right of the colomébier,dove-cot. The chateau park contains one.
18. Right of dordelage. (The seignior is heir-at-law, except when the —
_ children of the deceased live with their parents at the time of his death). re
This right covers an area of forty- eight avpents. For twenty years, pa
neglect or from other causes, he has derived nothing from this. 3
19. Right over waste and abandoned ground and to alluvial accumulations. *
20. Right, purely honorary, of seat and burial in the choir, of incense and —
of special prayer, of funeral hangings outside and inside the church.
21. Rights of dods et ventes on copyholders, due by the purchaser of
property liable to this lien, in forty days. ‘In Bourbonnais, the Jods ef
ventes are collected at a third, a quarter, at the sixth, eighth and twelfth rate.”
The seignior of Blet and Brosses collects at rate six. It is estimated that. —
sales are made once in eighty years; these rights bear on 1,356 avfents
which are worth, the best, 192 livres per afew, the second best, 110 livres,
the poorest, 75 livres. At this rate the 1,350 avfen/s are worth 162,750
livres. A discount of one-quarter of the /ods et ventes is allowed to pur-
‘chasers. Annual revenue of this right 254 livres.
22. Right of tithe and of charnage. The seignior has obtained all tithe
rights, save a few belonging to the canons of Dun-le-Roi and to the prior of
Chaumont. The tithes are levied on the thirteenth sheaf. They are com-
prised in the leases.
23. Right of éerrage or champart: the right of collecting, after the tithes,
a portion of the produce of the ground. ‘‘In Bourbonnais, the éerrage is
collected in various ways, on the third sheaf, on the fifth, sixth, seventh, and
commonly one-quarter; at Blet it is the twelfth.” The seignior of Blet
collects ¢errage only on a certain number of the farms of his seigniory; ‘fin —
relation to Brosses, it appears that all domains possessed by copyholdersare
subject to the right.” These rights of 4errage are comprised in the baie of
the farms of Blet and of Brosses. |
24. Cens, surcens and rentes due on real property of different kinds, houses, _
fields, meadows, etc., situated in the territory of the seigniory. In the
seigniory of Blet, 810 avfents, divided into 511 portions, in the hands of 120
copyholders, are in this condition, and their cezs annually consists of 137
francs in money, sixty-seven bushels of wheat, three of barley, 159 of oats, es
sixteen hens, 130 chickens, six cocks and capons; the total valued at 575
francs. On the Brosses estate, eighty-five avpfenis, divided into 112 par
in the hands of twenty copyholders, are in this condition, and -their a
cens is fourteen francs money, seventeen bushels of wheat, thirty-two of bar- 7
ley, twenty-six hens, three chickens and one capon; the whole valued-at 126 - |
francs. |
25. Rights over the commons (124 arfents in Blet and 164 arpents in
Brosses).
The vassals have on these only the right of use. ‘‘ Almost the whole of
the land, on which they exercise this right of pasturage, belongs to the
seigniors, save this right with which they are burdened: it is granted only
to a few individuals,”


. 4 BG -


NOTES. 409


26. Rights over the fe/s mouvants of the barony of Blet. Some are situ-
ated in Bourbonnais, nineteen being in this condition. In Bourbonnais, the
fiefs, even when owned by plebeians, simply owe Za douche et les mains to the
seignior at each mutation. Formerly the seignior of Blet enforced, in this
case, the right of redemption which has been allowed to fall into desuetude.
Others are situated in Berry where the right of redemption is exercised.
One fief in Berry, that of Cormesse held by the archbishop of Bourges,
comprising eighty-five azpents, besides a portion of the tithes, and producing
2,100 livres per annum, admitting a muéation every. twenty years, annually
brings to the seignior of Blet 105 livres.

Besides the charges indicated there are the following:

1. To the curate of Blet, his fixed salary. According to royal enactment
in 1686, this should be 300 livres. According to arrangement in 1692, the
curate, desirous of assuring himself of this fixed salary, yielded to the seign-
ior all the dimes, novales, etc. The edict of 1768 having fixed the curate’s
salary at 500 livres, the curate claimed this sum through writs. The canons
of Dun-le-Roi and the prior of Chaumont, possessing tithes on the territory
of Blet, were obliged to pay a portion of it. At present it is at the charge of
the seignior of Blet. “g

2. To the guard, besides his lodging, warming and the use of three
arpents, 200 livres.

_ 3. To the steward or registrar, to preserve the archives, look after repairs,
collect /ods et ventes, and fines, 432 livres, besides the use of ten axfends.

4. To the king, the vingtiémes. Formerly the estates of Blet and Brosses
paid 810 livres for the two vingtiémes and the two sous per livre. After the
establishment of the third vinzgtiéme they paid 1,216 livres.


LVotle 3.


Difference between the actual and nominal revenues of ecclesiastical dignities
r vig and benefices.


According to Raudot (‘‘ La France avant la’ Revolution,” p. 84), one-half
extra must be added to the official valuation ; according to Boiteau ( ** Etat
de la France en 1789,” p. 195), this must be tripled and even quadrupled.
I think that, for the episcopal sees, one-half extra should be added and, for
the abbeys and priories, double, and sometimes triple and even quadruple
the amount. The following facts show the variation between official and
actual sums.

1. Inthe ‘‘Almanach Royal,” the bishopric of Troyes is valued at 14,000
livres; in “‘France Ecclésiastique of 1788,” at 50,000. According to Albert
Babeau (*‘ Histoire de la Révolution dans le départment de l’Aube”’), it brings
in 70,000 livres. In “France Ecclésiastique,” the bishopric of Strasbourg
is put down at 400,000 livres. According to the Duc de Lévis (‘*Souve-
nirs,”’ p. 156) it brings in at least 600,000 livres income.

2. In the same work, the abbey of Jumiéges is assigned for 23,000 livres.
I find, in the papers of the ecclesiastic committee, it brings to the abbé
50,000 livres. In this work the abbey of Béze is estimated at 8,000 livres.
I find it bringing to the monks alone 30,000, while the abbé’s portion 1s at


35


410 NOTES. a


least as large. (‘‘ De l’Etat religieux, par les abbés de Bonnefoi et Bernard,”
1784). The abbé thus receives 30,000 livres. Bernay (Eure), is officially
reported at 16,000. The ‘‘Doléances” of the cahiers estimate it at 57,000.
Saint-Amand is put down as bringing to the Cardinal of York 6,000 livres
and actually brings him 100,000. (De Luynes, XIII. 215).

Clairvaux, in the same work, is put down at 9,000, and in Warroquier
(‘Etat Général de la France en 1789,”’) at 60,000. According to Beugnot,
who belongs to the country, and a practical man, the abbé has from 300,000
to 400,000 livres income. .

Saint-Faron, says Boiteau, set down at 18,000 livres, is worth 120,000
livres.

The abbey of Saint-Germain des Prés (in the stewardships), is put down
at 100,000 livres. The Comte de Clermont, who formerly had it, leased it |
at 160,000 livres, ‘‘not including reserved fields and all that the farmers
furnished in straw and oats for his horses.”’ (Jules Cousin, ‘*‘Comte de
Clermont and his court.’’)

Saint-Waas d’Arras, according to ‘‘La France Ecclésiastique,” brings —
40,000 livres. Cardinal. de Rohan refused 1,000 livres per month for his
portion offered to him by the monks. (Duc de Lévis, ‘‘Souvenirs,” p. 156).
Its value thus is about 300,000 livres.

Remiremont, the abbess always being a royal princess, one of the most
powerful monasteries, the richest and best endowed, is officially valued at the
ridiculous sum of 15,000 livres.


Note 4.
On the education of princes and princesses.


An entire chapter might be devoted to this subiect; I shall cite but a few
texts.

(Barbier, ‘‘Journal,’’ October, 1670). The Dauphine has just given birth
to an infant.

<‘La jeune princesse en est 4 sa quatriéme nourrice. . . . J’ai appris a
_ cette occasion que tout se fait par forme a la cour, suivant un protocole de
médecin, en sorte que c’est un miracle d’élever un prince et une princesse.
La nourrice n’a d’autres fonctions que de donner 4 téter a l’enfant quand on
le lui apporte; elle ne peut pas lui toucher. Il ya des remueuses et femmes
préposées pour cela, mais qui n’ont point d’ordre 4 recevoir de la nourrice. __
Il y a des heures pour remuer |’enfant, trois ou quatre fois dans la journée.
Si l’enfant dort, on le réveille pour le remuer. Si, aprés avoir été changé, il
fait dans ses langes, il reste ainsi trois ou quatre heures dans son ordure.
Si une épingle le pique, la nourrice ne doit pas l’éter; il faut chercher et at-
tendre une autre femme; |’enfant crie dans tous ces cas, il se tourmente et
s’échauffe, en sorte que c’est une vraie misére que toutes ces cérémonies.”

(Madame de Genlis, ‘‘Souvenirs de Félicie,” p. 74. Conversation with
Madame Louise, daughter of Louis XV., and recently become a Carmelite).

‘*T should like to know what troubled you most in getting accustomed to
your new profession ?”

‘“‘You could never imagine,” she replied, smiling. ‘It was the descent

s


SE CE ERTIES OR


NOTES. 4ll


of a small flight of steps alone by myself. At first it seemed to me a dread-
ful precipice, and I was obliged to sit down on the steps and slide down in
that attitude.” ‘‘A princess, indeed, who had never descended any but the
grand staircase at Versailles, leaning on the arm of her cayalier in waiting
and surrounded by pages, necessarily trembled on finding herself alone on
the brink of steep winding steps. (Such is) the education, so absurd in
many respects, generally bestowed on persons of this rank ; always watched
from infancy, followed, assisted, escorted and everything anticipated, (they)
are thus, in great part, deprived of the faculties with which nature has en-
dowed them.”

Madame Campan, ‘‘ Mémoires,” I. 18, 28.

‘*Madame Louise often told me that, although twelve years of age, she
had not fully learned the alphabet. . . .

“It was necessary to decide absolutely whether a certain water-bird was
fat or lean. Madame Victoire consulted a bishop. . . . He replied that, in
a doubt of this kind, after having the bird cooked it would be necessary to
puncture in on a very cold silver dish and, if the juice coagulated in one-
quarter of an hour, the bird might be considered fat. Madame Victoire im-
mediately put it to test; the juice did not coagulate. The princess was
highly delighted as she was very fond of this species of game. Fasting (on
religious grounds), to which Madame Victoire was addicted, put her to in-
convenience; accordingly she awaited the midnight stroke of Holy Saturday


_ impatiently. A dish of chicken and rice and other succulent dishes were


then at once served up.”

(‘Journal de Dumont d’Urville,” commanding the vessel on which Charles
X. left France in 1830. Quoted by Vaulabelle, History of the Restoration,
VIII. p. 465).

“The king and the Duc d’Angouléme questioned me on my various
campaigns, but especially on my voyage around the world in the ‘ Astrolabe.’
My narrative seemed to interest them very much, their interruptions consist-
ing of questions of remarkable naiveté, showing that they possessed no no-
tions whatever, even the most superficial, on the sciences or on VOFEES
being as ignorant on these points as any of the old vendéers of the Marais.”


412


NOTES.


Vote 5.
On the rate of direct taxation.


The following figures are extracted from the procés-verbaux of the pro-
vincial assemblies (1778-1787).


Access- yee Total en
: ; Capitation | Impét Pia id
Taille. | iores de | Citable |des roates.| Multiples
Ile-de-France, ...-..- 4,296,040|2,207,826|2,689,287| 519,989 | 2,23
Lyonnais, ..--.---.-- 1,356,954} 903,653] 898,089} 315,869 | 2,61
Généralité de Rouen, -|2,671,939|1,595,051/1,715,592| 598,258!| 2,46
Généralité de Caen, -.|1,939,665|1,212,429/1,187,823] 659,034 2,56
Perry coe e. vee eee 821,921} 448,431| 464,955] 236,900] 2,50 |
Potow, siinss..asdony 2,309,681] 1,113,706] 1,403,402] 520,000 | 2,30
Soissannais, -...-.--- 1,062,392} 911,883] 734,899] 462,883 | 2,94
Orléanais, ......---..|2,353,892|1,256,125|1, ee: 586,385 2534
Champagne, ..--..--- 1,783,850] 1,459, 780/1,377,371| 807,280 | 3
Généralité d’Alengon, |1,742,655|1,120,041/1,067,849| 435,637 | 2,47
Auvergne, ssf id5ce. 2 1,999,040] 1,399,678} 1, 753,026| 310,468 2,70
Généralité d’Auch, ...|1,440,533| 931,261} 797,268] 316,9092| 2,35
Haute-Guyenne, -...- 2,131,314] 1,267,619|1,268,855| 308,9933| 2,47


The principal of the ézl/e being one, the figures in the last column repre-
sent, for each province, the total of the four taxes in relation to the /az//e.
The average of all these is 2.53. The accessories of the /az//e, the poll-tax
and the tax for roads, are fixed for each assessable party, pro rata to his
taille. Multiply the sum representing the portion of the d¢az//e deducted
from a net income, by 2.53 to know the sum of the four taxes put together
and deducted from this income.

This part varies from province to province, from parish to parish, and
even from individual to individual. Nevertheless we may estimate that the
taille, on the average, especially when bearing on a small peasant proprietor,
without protector or influence, abstracts one-sixth of his net income, say
16 fr. 66 c. on 100 francs. For example, according to the declarations of
the provincial assemblies, in Champagne, it deducts 3 sous and % of a
denier per livre, or 15 fr. 28 c. on 100 francs; in the Ile-de-France, 35
livres 14 sous on 240 livres, or 14 fr. 87 c. on 100; in Auvergne, 4 sous
per livre of the net income, that is to say, 20 per 100. Finally, in the
generalship of Auch, the provincial assembly estimates that the /ad//e and
accessories absorb three-tenths of the net revenue, by which it is evident
that, taking the amounts of the provincial budget, the ¢az//e alone absorbs
eighteen fr. ten c. on 100 francs of revenue.

Thus stated, if the zaz//e as principal absorbs one-sixth of the net income
of the subject of the ¢azl/e, that is to say, 16 fr. 66 c. on 100, the total of


1 This amount is not given by the provincial assembly; to fill up this blank I have taken
the tenth of the ¢azl/e, of the accessories and of the assessable poll-tax, this being the mode
followed by the provincial assembly of Lyonnais. By the declaration of June 2, 1787, the
tax on roads may be carried to one-sixth of the three preceding imposts ; it is commonly one-
tenth or, in relation to the principal of the ¢az//e, one-quarter.—? Same remark.—* The pro-
vincial assembly carries this amount to one-eleventh of the ¢az//e and accessories combined.


NOTES. "413


the four-imposts above mentioned, takes 16 fr. 66.c. X 2,53 = 42 fr. 15 c. on
100 fr. income. To which must be added 11 fr. for the two vingtiémes
and 4 sous per livre added to the first vingtiéme, total 53 fr. 15 c. direct tax
on 100 livres income subject to the Zaz//e.

The dime, tithe, being estimated at a seventh of the net income, abstracts
in addition 14 fr. 28c. The feudal dues being valued at the same sum also
take off 14 fr. 28 c., total 28 fr. 56c. | .

Sum total of deductions of the direct royal tax, of the ecclesiastic tithes,
and of feudal dues, 81 fr. 71 c. on 100 fr. income. There remain to the tax-
payer 18 fr. 29 c. |


INDEX.


A


Absenteeism, 40, 43, 50; destructive
to sympathy, 50-2.

Adjudicators of taxes, 358.

Agriculture, backward condition of,
339-

Alienation of peasantry from nobles,
causes of, 40.

Ambassadors,
116-17.

Appanages, 15-16.

Architects of the edifice of the future,
286.

Aristocracy, the, an attar of roses,
103-4; anomalous position of, 297 ;
undermine their own ground,
298-9; inaugurate reforms, 302-3;
proofs of benevolence given by,
302-3; lay aside their distinctive
badges, 311, 312; aspire to liter-
ary honors, 313-14; Champfort on
origin of, 321-2; Sieyes on origin
of, 322. (See Nobles, Privileged
Classes, etc.)

Army, the, inequality in, 390; re-
cruited from the lowest class,
391-2; become politicians, 392.


display made by,


B
Barbarians, attitude of, towards the
clergy, 2
Barbier on the situation in 1750,
315-17.


Beaumarchais, 276.
Beggars, arrests of, 384-5.
Belle-Isle, Maréchal de, 116-17.
- Benevolence, proofs of, given by the
aristocracy, 302-3; by the king,
- 303-4-
Bon-mot, on the Abbé Terray’s re-
trenchments, 126; value attached
_ toa, 126-7. .


Bourgeoisie, easily irritated, 319-21.
(See Third-Estate. )

Bourges, in 1753, 47.

Bread, cost of, 340; results of a scar-
city of, 389.

Bread-riots from 1725 to 1789, 334.

Brigandage, 383, 387-8.

Brittany, mutual affection beleeon
lords and vassals in, 31,2.


Buffon, 172, 174, 175 note.


Bureaucracy, 78.


Cc

Calonne, 71, 83.

Calculus, Infinitesimal, discovery of,
171. ee

Canary-bird, miniature of a, 131.

Capitation-tax, 18,

Centralization, 78.

Ceremonial royal, engrossing to chief
actor, 104-7; lasts all day, 107-9;
Frederick IL.’s opinion of, 109.

Champfort on origin of the aris-
tocracy, 321-2.

Changes made in the name of Reason,
250-1.

Chanteloup, employments at, 144-5.

Charities of the clergy, 33-5.

Charlemagne, disorganization after, 6.

Chase, the, feudal rights of, well-
founded, 55; a hardship to the
farmer, 56-9.

Children, neglected by their parents,
135-6; extremely submissive to
them, 135; dress and manners of,
136-8, 273; theatricals employed in
education of, 154.

Church, the, regarded as dangerous
to the State, 249-50.

Citizen, a new word, 295.

Civility, graded, an insult, 321.

Civilizers, the clergy the earliest, 1-5.


INDEX, 415


Classic spirit, the, neglects facts, 200;
natural working of, 201 ; superficial
work of, 201-3. (See Mind.)

Clergy, the earliest civilizers, 1-5;
guardians of human attainments, 3;
their share in public affairs, 3; their
example and teaching, 3-5; grati-
tude of society towards, 5; great
wealth of, 14-15; exempt from taxa-
tion, 18; as feudal seigniors, 19-20;
charities of, 33-5; assembly of, 61;
hardships of the lower, 73-7; free-
dom of manners of, 150-2; scepti-
cism and immorality of the higher,
292-4. _

Clothing, peasants’, 341-2.

Collectors of taxes, obliged to serve,
354; held responsible, 354-5; wo-
men, 354-5; their extortions, 356-7;
everywhere insolvent, 369.

Comparison of France with Germany
and England, 60, 84; of court so-
ciety of France with that of Spain,
Germany, and England, 123-4; of
English and French novelists of the
18th century, 199-200; of English
and French nobility in 1774, 279.

Condillac, 174.

Condition of France in the 18th cen-
tury, gloomy, 46.

Contract, the social, iniquity of, 229-
30; theory of its formation, 233-5;
in France not-an historic fact, 244;
not an association for mutual de-
fence, 245 ; based on the sovereignty
of the people, 246-251.

Contrat Social, much quoted, 325;
used as a manual, 318; teaches
anarchy and despotism, 399.

Convent, France a lay, 247, 248.

Convents and abbeys, scenes of dis-
play and hospitality, 119-20.

Conversation, value attached to, in the
18th century, 185; religion and gov-
ernment subjects for, 279-81 ; Ches-
terfield on, 280; Rousseau on, 280;
the business of the day, 281.

Corvée, 18, 407; substitute for, 365.

Court, attractiveness of, 44-6; offices,
68-9 ; obligation to be present at,
IOO0-IOI; eagerness to be present
at, Io; advantages of being at,


IoI-2; great crowd at, 102; bril-
liancy of, 103-4; amusements at,
109-11.

Courts, miniature, of the nobles,
114-16,

Creed of the Republic, 250.

Crops, results from failures of, 338-9.

Curates, complaints of, 75, 76-7; in
the States-General, 77.

Custom surviving utility, 86-7.

Customs, foundations of, 208-9.


D


D'Argenson, on public disrespect for
religion, 288-9 ; on the government,
294-5; on public destitution, 330,
331-3, 334; on the /¢az//le, 367; on the
peasant, 375.

Debt, the public, 308-9.

Décimes, 18.

Deficit in the public revenue, 309-10,

Deism, 215.

Demand for pleasure in the 18th cen-
tury, 127-8,

Deputies of the people, not repre-
sentatives, but commissioners, 242-3.

Destitution, extreme general, state-
ments of La Bruyére concerning, in
1689, 329; of St. Simon in 1725,
329-30; of D’Argenson in 1739-53,
330, 331-3, 334; of Massillonin 1740,
339.

Diderot, 219, 220-21; critical notice
of, 266-9; a brilliant talker, 282;
visits Catherine II., 283.

Discovery, scientific, first ingredient
in French philosophy, 170-1.

Display made by clergy and abbesses,
IIg-20.,

Dissolution of France, cause of, 85.

Domains, seigniorial, crumble away,
346-7.

Donations of the king to individual
nobles, 70-71 °

Drawing-room life, unsatisfactory,
157-9; insincere, 159; cruel, 169,

Du Deffant, Mme. de, 145, 159.

Duel, conducted with politeness,
142-3.

Duras, Duc de, pay of, 117.

Dwellings of peasants, 341, 344.


416


“E

Ecclesiastic, posittan: of an, in society,
287-8,

Education, of children by theatricals,
154; of es and princesses,
410-11.

Eighteenth Century, its discoveries in
relation to inorganic matter, 171-2;
to organic matter, 172-3; facts the
food of its intellect, 173; founda-
tions of history laid in, 177; the
analytic method a discovery of,
182-3; English and French novel-
ists of, compared, 199-200; intellec-
tual epicureanism of, 251; coarse-
ness of the writers of, 258; their
humor, 259; peasant of the, 374;
philosophy of the, a subtle poison,
170; its two main ingredients, 176;
its development in England, 252-3;
in France, 253; women interested
in, 254, 256, 257; an object of sus-
picion in England; society of the,
luxury characteristic of, 121; man-
ners of, 122; genius and employ-
ment of, 122; modification of eti-
quette in, 125-6; Talleyrand on,
126 ; demand for pleasure in, 127-8 ;
conjugal indifference the rule in,
131-2; pictures of the, 143-4; lack
of force in, 165, 167-9 ; ignorance of
realities in, 166; value attached to
conversation in, 185.

Emigration of the poor, 333.

Encyclopedists, 216.

' England, early, pagan, therefore bar-
barous, 2; feudal subjection less
burdensome in, 29; philosophic
teachings suspected in, 278; alli-
ance between clergy and _ public
men in, 278-9.

Enthusiasm obligatory, 162-3.

Epicureanism, intellectual, of the r8th
century, 162-3.

d'Epinay, M., his household, 115-16.

Exaggeration, tendency to, 326-7.

Excises, collected by House of Or-
leans, 20-21.

Excitability, French, 241.

Exports, statistics of, 307.

Expression, art of, cultivated by the
French, 253-4, 255-6, 257.


INDEX,


F
Facts, popular ignorance of, 326.
Failures of crops, results of, 338-9.
Feudal nobility, wealth of certain
families of, 41. ;
Feudal proprietor, charities of, 33.-
Feudal rights and revenues in 7783,
instance of, 404-10.
Feudal subjection less burdensome in
Germany and England, 28-9.


Feudal system, theory of, 7-8.


Food, of peasants, 337, 341, 342-3,


344-

Foundations of laws and religion,
205-6; of customs, 208-9. .

Frederick II., his opinion of French
court céreinionial: 109. ;

French, classic, date of, 187; pater,
ished vocabulary of, 187-9 ; extreme
accuracy of, 189; general expres-
sions favored by, 188-9; gram-
matical arrangement of, 190-1;
value of, 191; insufficiency of, 191-2.


G
Gevres, Duc de, his household, 114-15,
Government, difficult to establish, 26;
when established, should be pre-
served, 27.


H


Helvétius, 219.

Hero, the second ideal figure, 7.

History, foundations of modern study
of, 177; beginnings of, 178 ; natural
growth of, 179; interdependence ot
parts in, 179-81 ; popular-ignorance
of, 325-6.

d'Holbach, Baron,
house of, 281-2.

Household, a well-appointed, 94-5 ;
of the Duc de Gevres, TI4-15 ;
plunder in the, 128.

Households, of the royal family, ex-
penses of, 98 xote,; of princes of
the blood, 113-14; of bishops,
splendor of, 120-21.

Hume received with homage in Paris,
283.

Husbands and wives, independent
existence of, 131-3; absence of
jealousy between, 133-4.


receptions at


Sgt iven


INDEX. 417


I


Ideas, an illumination in the salon, a
conflagration in the basement, 327-8.

Ideology, Condillac’s, 257.

Ignorance, popular, of history, 325-6;
of facts, 326.

Impiety an indiscretion in England,
278.

Indifference, conjugal, the rule, 131-2.

Individual, the A, development
of, 181-2,

Ingredients of French philosophy,
two, 170.

Lntendants, 36-7, 43-4, 66, 245; their
testimony as to public destitution,
335-6; as to taxes, 356-7, 366-7;
as to vagrancy, 385-6, 387.


J
Jansenist, Paris, 306.
Jealousy, absence of, among the
higher class, 133-4.


K


King, the, third founder of social
order, 9; absolute power. of, 11;
victorious over the nobles, 11; the
sole representative of the. country,
60; naturally sympathetic with his
courtiers, 69; his donations to indi-
vidual nobles, 70-1; disadvantage
of his position, 77, 79; France re-
garded as the private estate of,

/ 79-81. :
L

Labor, cost of, 350.

La Bruyére compared with Rousseau,
270.

Lafayette, 299.

La Harpe, his fiction of a prophecy,
400-2,

Land lying waste, 337-8.

Language, French, Voltaire’s opinion
of, 185 ote; superiority of, 185,
191. (See Classic French.)

Languedoc, sinecures in, 67-8.

Lauzun, Duce de, his way of living,
134-5; Mme. de, as a cook, 147.

Lever, details of, 104-7.

Louis XIV., at Versailles, 91, 100,
104; requires display from his no-


27


bles, 116; elegance of his manners,
125.

Louis XV., on the situation, 79; ex-
travagance of, 82; his hunting, 94;
his amusements, 109, 110.

Louis XVI., his attempts at reform,
79; his extravagance, 83-4; - his
hunting, 94, 111-12; his position,
108, 109, IIO,

Luxembourg, la Maréchale de, an
authority on manners, 141.


M

Magistrates, compulsory service of,
243-4.

Man, insignificance of, before natural
phenomena, 175-7 ; prehistoric con-
dition of, 178 ; in the abstract, notion
of, 233-4; believed good and rea-
sonable, 235-8, 302, 324.

** Manco-Capac,”’ tragedy of, 275.

Manners, freedom of, 149, 150, 152,


155-6; of the clergy, 150-2; in
prison, 169.

Manuscript copies of irreligious
works, 290,


‘* Marriage of Figaro,’’ 275-6, 318.

Masquerades, 152-3.

Masses for the king’s life, an index of
public feeling, 316.

Matter eternal, encyclopedic theory
of, 217-18.

Maury, the Abbé, on the French
Academy, 186-7.

Men, demand for, 7.

Mendicancy, statistics of, 387.

Mesdames, cost of dinners of, 71.

Meétayers, 338, 34°, 341, 343-

Method, the analytic, 182-3; possible
bad use of, 183.

Mind, the classic mould of, 184-5; its
existence how manifested, 184, 187;
historic force of, 185; how formed,
185-7; its merits, 193-4; its faults,
194-5, 197; generalization a pecu-
liarity of, 195-7; its inadequacy to
represent real life and history, 197-
201. (See Classic Spirit.)

Ministers, display made by, 117-18.

Mirabeau, Chateau de, absolutism in,
30-31 ; Marquis de, on the nobility,
32, 34; on his son's becoming a


418


lawyer, 311-12}; on peasants, 344-5;
on taxes, 355-6.

Mobs, attacks upon, 389.

‘* Meurs, les,"’ a popular book, 288.

Molitre, his idea of a good critic, 186.

Monopoly by the canons of St. Malo,
62.

Montesquieu, 174, 179; critical notice
of, 260-1; on religion in England,

"278.

Morals, encyclopedic theory of, 218-
221.

Morris, Gouverneur, on French phi-
losophers, 254, 326; on French
peasants, 376.


N


Nancy, Bishop of, his testimony in
1789, 370.

Nantes, Edict of, revocation, 62,

Necker, 71, 83, 127.

Newton, 171.

Nobles, gratitude of society towards,
9; exempt from taxation, 16-17;
debts of the, 53; all chief places
reserved for, 64; sinecures enjoyed
by, 66-9; complaints against, 72-3;
highest, resident under the king's
roof, 99, 100; extravagance of,
130-31; objects of inveterate sus-
picion, 380; statistics of number of,
402-3. (See Aristocracy and Priv.
Classes.)

‘* Nouvelle Héloise,’’ the, its effect on
women, 273.


Oo
Octrois of the towns doubled, 368;


extremely burdensome, 369. (See
Taxation.)
Offices, sale of, 54-5; bestowed


through favor, 82-3.

Officials, display made by, 118-19.

Opinions on politics and religion
changed reluctantly, 277.

Optimist views of mankind, 235-8,
302, 324.

Organization, social,
232-4,

Orleans, House of, collects the ex-
cises, 20-21; Duke of, his wealth,


the problem,


INDEX.


41; his debts, 53; pensioned as a
poor man, 7o-1. .


P.


Palais-Royal, saloz of the, 80. °

Paris, the school of Europe, 139;
Jansenist, 306; the central work-
shop, 308; disorder in, 388.

Parliament, 61; remonstrance of, in
1764, 72. ;

Parliamentarians,
cised by, 148-9.

Passions, the masters of mankind,
241, 242.

Pastime, a court, unravelling, 145-7.

Peasant, protected by the noble, 7, 8;
original mutual relations of noble
and, 8-9; of the 18th century, his
personal appearance, 342, 344-5;
idleness, 343; economy, 345-6, 347°
becomes a land-owner, 346-7; op-
pression of, 348; his mind, 374-7.;
D’Argenson on, 375 ; belongs to the
Middle Ages, 375; Gouverneur
Morris on, 376; superstitions of,
375-7 ; wildhallucinations of, 377-9;
insolence of, 379.

Pensions, 69, 70, 71, 84, 117.

People, a monster let loose, 399;
sovereignty of, 242-4, 246-51.

Philosopher, a, essential toa salon, 283.

Philosophy, the fashion, 254-5; per-
vading all literature, 274-5; the
social pastime, 280-1.

Plunder by the king's purveyors, 129;
in the houses of the nobles, 129-30.

Poachers, 381.

Political economy the fashion, 297.

Poll-tax, evaded by the clergy, 363;
evaded in part by the nobles, 364;
statistics of, 364. (See Taxation.)

Poverty of the old families, 38.

Prelates, wealth of, 65-6, 75 ; splendor
of their households, 120-21. (See
Clergy and Privileged Classes.)

Prejudice, hereditary, to be respected, —
207-8, 211.

Primogeniture, right of, its effects,
38-9.

Princes of the blood, wealth of, 15-16,
41; sharers in royal rights, 20-21;
gifts to, 7o-1 ; households of, 113-


hospitality exer-


INDEX, 419


14; and princesses, education of,
410-II,

Princesses, expenses of, 128-9.

Privileged classes, founders of society,
I; Statistics of, 13, 402-3; property
belonging to, 14; escape taxation,

| 362-8. (See Aristocracy, Nobles,
etc.)

Privileges changed into abuses, 509,
398.

Productiveness of French and Eng-
lish acre compared, 339.

Properties, small, development of, 347
note.

Property, rights of, theory concerning,
246-7.

Prophecy, La Harpe’s fiction of a,
400-2,

Proprietor, landed, a lesser sovereign,
16, 43; peasant becomes a, 345-6,

- 347; taxes on, 347-8.

Protestants, oppression of, 62-3;
edicts against, obtained by the
clergy, 62-3.

Puffs au sentiment, 161-2.


R ;

Reason, the age of, 204-5; of the

'. 18th century unable to comprehend
tradition, 211; ignorant of his-
tory, 211-12; lacking in imagina-
tion, 212-14; in arms against tradi-
tion, 214; its quarrel with estab-
lished religion, 214-15; its first

. campaign, 214; its second, 216 ; ad-
mits a natural religion, 215; its
quarrel with the laws, 215-16; ad-
mits a natural law, 216; in mankind
a fragile composition, 238; rare,
239-40; its influence small, 240-2.

Réaumur, 172, 173.

Reforms, attempted by Louis XVI.,
79 ; inaugurated by the aristocracy,
300-2.

Religion, its nature, 209-10 ; attacked

- by the upper class, 287-94; forms
of respect for, retained, 291-2.

Remonstrance of parliament in 1764,
72.

Restraints burdensome, 284-6.

Residences, royal, 97-

Revenue, deficit in, 309-10.


Revenues and rights, feudal, in 1783,
404-0.

Roads, bad state of, 339.

Rohan, Prince de, 117; Cardinals de,
120-21.

Roland, Mme., 320.

Rousseau, 160-1, 174; an exceptional
character, 221-2; imagines himself
the type, 222 ; a self-admirer, 222-3;
advances new theory of morals,
223-4 ; an embittered plebeian, 225-
6, 228; disdains science and art,
226-7; attacks established rights,
227-8 ; the champion of the poor,
228-9; condemns the social con-
tract, 229-30; compared with Vol-
taire, 268 ; critical notice of, 269-74;
compared with La Bruyeére, 270;
on conversation, 280; his doctrine
popular, 316-17; fosters French
vanity, 320.

Royalty, services rendered by, 10;
gratitude towards, Io, 11:


S


Salt, tax on, 358-60; contraband
dealers in, 381-2.

Scientists, leaders of public opinion,
173-4.

Sees, endowments of, 42-3.

Ségur, de, on the state of public senti-
ment, 298-9.

Seignior, foundation of early rights
of, 8,9; rights on his own domain,
21-6; possible transformation of,
26-7; friendliness of, towards his
tenants, 35-6.

Sentiments developed in the middle
class, 315-16.

Sensibility, affectation of, 160-5.

Severity of agents, 52-3.

Sityes, on the aristocracy, 322.

Sinecures, enjoyed by the nobles,
66-9.

Smugglers, 381-2; large troops of,
382-3.

Society, privileged classes founders
of, 1; fondness for, a French trait,
124; French, delightful character
of, 138 ; faultlessly polite, 139; ex-
treme self-control required by, 139-
40; gallantry towards women, I40-


/


420


1; perfect tact of, 141-2; cheerful
tone of, 147-8; Voltaire’s definition
of, 186; to be abolished, 221; de-
tached from. Christianity, 291-2;
‘disintegration of, 393-5. ;
Sovereign authority, Louis XV.’s
views of, 11 wo/e.
Spallanzani, 172.

Starvation an endemic disease, 339.
State, origin of the, 210-11 ; substitu-
tion of, for the individual, 246-50.
Statement of popular grievances,

37°-3-
States-General, 60,
St. Cloud, ‘‘ a ring,” 80-1.
Suffering, extreme, revealed in ad-
ministrative correspondence, 335-7.
Suicide of the old régime, 398.
Superiority, question of, between
nobles and plebeians, 314-15.


T


Table-service, 95-6.

Taille, the, 17, 19, 84, 332, 406, 412-13;
amount of, 348; exemption of no-
bles and clergy from the, 362-3;
pays heavy public expenses, 363;


unjust apportionment of, 363;
D’Argenson on, 367. (See Taxa-
tion.)


Taxation, exemption of nobles from,
16,17; of clergy, 18; regarded a
mark of servitude, 19; seigniorial
rights of, 22-3; evaded by privi-
leged classes, 61 ; of peasants, 341-2;
too burdensome, 349-51; statistics
of, direct, 350-4; Marquis de Mira-
beau on, 355-6; indirect, 358-62;
evaded by the strong, 362; falls
heaviest ‘on the poorest and most
industrious, 365-6; rate of direct,
412-13. (See Zazi/e, etc.)

Tenth Century, the noble of the, 6-7.

Theatricals, a court amusement, 148,
153-6; employed in education, 154 ;
at Trianon, 154-5.

Theory, of feudal system, 7-8; of
royal ownership of France, 79-81 ;
encyclopedic, in respect to matter,
217-18; of morals, 218-221; of mor-
als, Rousseau’s, 223-4; concerning
tights, 246-7; concerning educa-


INDEX,


tion; 247-9; not to be. reduced to
practice, 286-7; of popular rights
reduced to practice, 396-7.

Third Estate, long ignorant and silent,
305-7 ; increased wealth of, 307-8;
becomes the public creditor, 308-9 ;
anxious about its money, 310-11;
has risen socially, 311, 312-13; its
claims, 323-4 ; leaders of the, 395-6.

Throne, first attacks upon, 294-5.

Town favored above country in tax-
ation, 366.

Tradition, authority of, declines, 207.

Trianon, village at, 163; theatricals
at, 154-5.

Turgot, his characterization of a vil-
lage, 78.


U


Unravelling, a court pastime, 145-7.
Utopia, the theoretical, brought to
perfection, 394-5.


V

Vagrancy, rise of, 380-1.

Vagrants, increase of, 383-4; meas-
ures against, 384; crowds of, 386;
intendants’ reports on, 385-6, 387.

Vanity, French, fostered by Rous-
seau, 320.

Versailles, peculiar character of, 87;
hotels of nobles in, 88; accessories
of the palace, 88-9 ; avenues of, 89;
cost of palace, go; households of
royal family at, 91-2; king's guards,
92-3; stables, 93-4; hunting estab-
lishment, 94.

Vingtiomes, 17 note, 18, 19; reduced
by privileged classes, 364-5. (See
Taxation.)

Voltaire, 173-4; his opinion of French
language, i85 mote; attacks reli-
gion, 215; a deist, 217; critical no-
tice of, 261-6; a guest of Frederick
II., 283; triumphant reception on
his return, 283-4; on the situation
in 175¢, 294.


W


Walpole (Sir Horace), on French
imprudence, 289.
Wine-tax, 360-2. °


INDEX,


Women, interested in philosophy, 234,
256, 257; devoted to science, 290-1 ;
advance ideas of liberty, 295-6; of
humanity, 296-7 ; criticize the gov-
ernment, 296; enthusiasm of, 297.

Words, number of, in dictionary of
old French Academy, 192 vo¢e.

Writers, four great philosophic, 259-
274.


421


Y


Young, Arthur, his observations in
1787, 16 mote, 45, 46, 48, 49-50; on
Bordeaux, 307-8; compares the
French and English acre, 339; ar-
rested as an agent of the queen,
377; on disorder in Paris, 388; on
public ignorance, 394-5.


4 3 €
:
~
~ ea!
‘
eS
‘ ‘ eS
>
a
> -
os
.


-& aaivai $ ’ / .


tds re


‘
<i):
~
; -
z
2
i
+s
at’ te,
r ;
A 3 1 . bahar -
Sy, : ASB 52 Ones tae:
4 %
r = ot ~
BT 5 me ae
. - E
. p - ‘
\ a i?
L : ; a : eB _ “5
y ae ~ 4 4
‘ by » : & . 4
4 a -
s aaah!
7
-
baad i
: '
pl
hn, ge
¥ ie


PUBLISHED BY HENRY HOLT & CO.


TAINE’S (HIPPOLYTE ADOLPHE) WORKS. Unirorm
Liprary EpITION. 13 vols., large 12mo. $2.50 per vol. Lach
vol. sold separately,

In box, per set, cloth, $32.50; half calf, $65.co; tree calf, $78.00.

‘The paper, print, and binding of this series leave nothing to be
desired in point of taste and attractiveness.’’"—/Vation.

The Ancient Régime. Being the first of a series of works on

“* Les Origines de la France Contemporaine,.’ Translated by John

Durand. Large 12mo. $2.50. (Nearly ready. )

History of English Literature. Translated by H. VAN Laun.

From new stereotype plates. 3 vols., $7.50; half calf, $15.00.

On Intelligence. Translated by T. D. HAYE. 2 vols. $5.00.
Italy. (Rome and Naples.) By JoHN DuRAND. $2.50.
Italy. (Florence and Venice.) By JoHN DuRAND. $2.50.
Notes on Paris. THE LIFE AND OPINIONS OF M. FREDERICK
THOMAS GRAINDORGE. Tr. by JOHN AUSTIN STEVENS, $2.50.
Notes on England. Translated, with an introductory chapter,
by W. F. Raz. With a portrait of the author, Large 12mo. $2.50.
A Tour through the Pyrenees. Tr. by J. Safford Fiske. $2.50.
Lectures on Art. Translated by JOHN DuRAND, First Series.
(Containing the Philosophy of Art; The Ideal in Art.) $2.50.
Lectures on Art. Translated by JOHN DURAND. Second Series.

(Containing the Philosophy of Art in Italy ; The Philosophy of Art

in the Netherlands ; The Philosophy of Art in Greece.) $2.50.


SEPARATE EDITIONS.


A Tour through the Pyrenees. Translated by J. Safford Fiske,
Illustrated by GusTAVE Dork. Square 8vo, gilt, $10.00. Full
levant morocco, $20.00.

A superb presentation volume, with nearly 250 illustrations in Doré's
early, careful manner. ‘The illustrations are not confined to the scenery,
but also refer to many of the adventures, tragic and grotesque, that be-
set the traveller, and, what is of more interest and importance, many of
the legends of that historic and romantic country from Froissart and the
other old Chroniclers.

‘‘Tt is rarely that a book is printed in so perfect a combination of the
book-making trinity, author, artist, and publisher, as is this superb
work.” —W. Y. Evening Mail.

‘* A marvel of beauty." —Boston Transcript.

The Philosophy of Artin Italy. Translated by JoHN DURAND.
16mo, $1.25.

Artin the Netherlands. Translated by JOHN DURAND. 16mo.
$1.25.

The Class-room Taine. History of English Literature, by H. A.
Taine. Abridged from the translation of H. VAN LAuN, and edited,
with chronological table, notes, and index, by JOHN FISKE, Lecturer
and Assistant Librarian in Harvard University. Large1zmo. $2.50.


PUBLISHED BY HENRY HOLT & CO,


AUSTIN’S (JOHN) JURISPRUDENCE. Lectures on Juris-
prudence, the Philosophy of Positive Law. By the late John Austin,
of the Inner Temple, Barrister-at-Law. Abridged from the larger
work for the use of students. By ROBERT CAMPBELL, I vol. 8vo.


.o.

MAINES (SIR HENRY_SUMNER) WORKS. Ancient
Law: Its Connection with the Early History of Society, and its Re-
lation to Modern Ideas. By HENRY SUMNER MAINE. 8vo. $3.50.

‘‘ History read from the point of Law, and Law studied by the light of
History. It is consequently a book that addresses itself as much to the
general student as to the lawyer.''"— Westminster Review.

‘* Mr. Maine’s profound work on Ancient Law in its relation to modern
ideas." —Fohn Stuart Mill. »

‘Sir Henry Maine's great work on Ancient Law.”—WVatioz.

‘* A text-book for all English students of jurisprudence.'’"—Saturday
Review.

Lectures on the Early History of Institutions. 8vo. $3.50.

‘‘In the power of tracing analogies between different institutions, in
the capacity for seeing the bearing of obscure and neglected facts, he
surpasses any living writer.’’—Vatzon.

Village Communities and Miscellanies. (/x preparation.)

MILL'S (JOHN STUART) MISCELLANEOUS WORKS.
Uniform Library edition. 8vo. Tinted and laid paper, $2.50 per
volume (except volume on Comte), The 12 volumesin a box, $29.00;
half calf or-half morocco, $59.00.

Three Essays on Religion. 1 vol.

The Autobiography. 1 vol.

Dissertations and Discussions. 5 vols.

Considerations on Representative Government. ‘1 vol.
Examination of Sir William Hamilton’s Philosophy. 2 vols,
On Liberty: The Subjection of Women. Both in 1 vol.
Comte’s Positive Philosophy. 1 vol. $1.50.


CHEAP EDITIONS.


The Subjection of Women. 12mo, $1.25.
Principles of Political Economy. t12mo. $2.50,
Memorial Volume. John Stuart Mill: His Lite and Works.
Twelve Sketches, as follows: (His Life, by J..R. Fox’ Bourne; His
Career in the India House, by W. T. Thornton; His Moral Character,
by Herbert Spencer; His Botanical Studies, by Henry Turner; His
Place as a Critic, by W. Minto; His Work in Philosophy, by i H.
Levy; His Studies in Morals and Jurisprudence, by W.A. Hunter; His
Work in Political Economy, by J. E. Cairnes; His Influence at the Uni-
versities, by Henry Fawcett; His Influence as a Practical Politician, by
Mrs. Fawcett; His Relation to Positivism, by Frederick Harrison ; His
Position as a Philosopher, by W. A. Hunter. 16mo. $1.00.
STEPHEN’S (J. F.) LIBERTY, EQUALITY, PRATER
NITY. Large 12mo. $2.00.
A criticism of ‘Mill on Liberty.”
‘‘One of the most thorough overhaulings of the moral, religious, and
political bases of society which they have recently received.
Everybody who wants to see all the recent attempts to set things right
analyzed by a master-hand, and in English which stirs the blood, will
have a great treat in reading him.’’— ation.
‘One of the most valuable contributions to political philosophy which
have been published in recent times.”—Lonxdon Saturday Review.


a?


> ee — ae DS r


~


act PUBLISHED BY HENRY HOLT & CO.


BRINTON’S (D. G.) WORKS. The Myths of the New


World. A Treatise on the Symbolism and Mythology ofthe Red Race


of America. Second edition, large 12mo, $2.50, Large-paper (first)
edition, $6.00.
’ “« The philosophical spirit in which it is written is deserving of unstinted
praise, and justifies the belief that in whatever Dr. Brinton may in future
contribute to the literature of Comparative Mythology, he will continue
to reflect credit upon himself and his country."—W. A. Review.

The Religious Sentiment, its Source and Aim. A contribution
' to the science and philosophy of religion. Large 12mo. $2.50.

( Fust ready.)

CONWAY’S (M. D.) Sacred Anthology. 8vo. $4.00.

‘He deserves our hearty thanks for the trouble he has taken in col-
lecting these gems, and stringing them together for the use of those who
have no access to the originals, and we trust that his book will arouse a
more general interest in a long-neglected and even despised branch of
literature, the Sacred Books of the East.’"—Prof. MAX MULLER.

DEUTSCH’sS (E.) LITERARY REMAINS. With a Brief
Memoir, 8vo. $4.00.

ConTENTS :—The Talmud—Islam—Egypt. Ancient and Modern—Hermes
Trismegistus— Judeo-Arabic Metaphysics—Semitic Paleography—Renan’s “‘ Les
Apdtres””—Worship of Baalim in Israel—The (Ecumenical Council—Apostolicz
Sedes ?—Roman Passion Drama—Semitic Languages—Samaritan Pentateuch—
The Targums—Book of Jashar—Arabic Poetry.

‘“‘A noble monument of study and erudition.”—M. Y. Tribune.

GOULD’S (REV.S. B.) LEGENDS of the PATRIARCHS
AND PROPHETS. Crown 8vo. $2.00.

‘‘There are few Bible readers who have not at some time wished for
just such a volume. ’’—Congregationalist. .

HAWHBIS’ (REV. H.R.) THOUGHTS FOR THE TIMES.
Sermons by the author of ** Music and Morals.” t12mo, $1.50.

‘‘ They have a special interest as exhibiting the treatment which old-
fashioned orthodoxy is just now undergoing at the hands of the liberal
clergy.—Pall Mall Gazette.

MARTINEAU’S (JAMES) WORKS.

Essays, Theological and Philosophical. 2 vols. 8vo. $5.00.

Mr. Martineau's contributions to the Prospective, Westminster, Na-
tional, and other Reviews attracted the attention of the best minds in
both England and America, and produced a marked and favorable im-
pression upon men of all denominations.

The New Affinities of Faith. 12mo, paper. 25 cents,

STRAUSS’ (D. F.) THE OLD FAITH AND THE NEW.
12mo, $2.00.

‘‘ Will make its mark upon the time, not so much as an attack upon
what we venerate as an apology for those who honestly differ from the
majority of their brothers.""—4tantic Monthly.

TYLOR’S (E.B.) PRIMITIVE CULTURE: Researches into
the Development of Mythology, Philosophy, Religion, Art, and Cus-
tom. 2 vols., 8vo. $5.00.

‘‘One of the most remarkable and interesting books of the present
day. .-. . It takes up man .. . at the remotest periods of
which we have any knowledge, and traces his intellectual growth ade s
from that time forth. . . MAdmirably written, often with great humor,
and at times with eloquence, and never withadull line. . . . The
many students of Darwin and Spencer in this country cannot do better
than to supplement the books of those writers by . . . these really
delightful volumes.'’"—Adantic Monthly.

“One of the few erudite treatises which are at once ‘truly great and
thoroughly entertaining."—WVorth American Review,


PUBLISHED BY HENRY HOLT & CO.


ADAMS’ (PROF. C. K.) DEMOCRACY AND MONAR-
CHY IN FRANCE, from the Inception of the Great Revolution to
the Overthrow of the Second Empire. By Prof. C. K, Adams, of the
University of Michigan. Large 12mo. Cloth, $2.50.

‘A valuable example of the. scientific mode of dealing with political
problems. ’'—Wation.

‘‘ Full of shrewd and suggestive criticism, and few readers will peruse
it without gaining new ideas on the subject.""—London Saturday Review.

‘‘ Remarkably lucid writing.”"— Loxdon Academy.


CHESNEY’S (C. C.) MILITARY BIOGRAPHY. Essays in
Military Biography. By CHARLES CORNWALLIS CHESNEY, Colonel
in the British Army, Lieutenant-Colonel in the Royal Engineers,
Large 12mo, $2.50.

‘* Very able.” —Vation.

‘* Uncommonly entertaining and instructive.""--V. Y. Evening Post.

‘Full of interest, not only to the professional soldier, but to the gen-
eral reader.'’"—Bostox Globe.


FAMILY RECORD ALBUM. In Blanks classified on a New
System. Large quarto, gilt edges, 328 pages. Cloth, $5. Half
Morocco, $8. Full Morocco, $15. Levant or Russia, $25.

Tuis Book for keeping family records has been made because the
editor felt the need of it and supposed that many others felt the same
need.

The pages are of eight kinds, called respectively Family, Genealogi-
cal, Tabular, Biographical Heirloom, Domestic Economy, Travel, and
Miscellaneous.


FREEMAN’S (EDWARD A.) HISTORICAL COURSE.
A series of historical works on a plan entirely different from that of any
before published for the general reader or educational purposes, It
embodies the results of the latest scholarship in comparative philology,
mythology, and the philosophy of history. Uniform volumes. 16mo.


1. General Sketch of History. By EpwaArp A. FREEMAN,
D.C.L. 16mo, $1.25. 4
2. History of England. By Miss EpIrH THOMPSON. $1.00.
3. History of Scotland. By MARGARET MACARTHUR. $1.00.
4. History of Italy. By Rev. W. Hunt, M.A. $1.00.
5. History of Germany. By JAMES SIME. $1.00.
6. History of the United States. By J. A. DoyLe. With
Maps by Francis A. Walker, Prof. in Yale College. $1.40.
“7. History of France. By Rev. J. R. GREEN. (2 prepara-
tion. )
8. History of Greece. By J. ANNAN Bryce. (/” prepara-
tion.)
‘‘ Useful not only for school study, but for the library.”—JZostonx Ad-
vertiser.


SUMNER’S (PROF. W.G.) HISTORY OF AMERICAN
CURRENCY. With Chapters on the English Bank Restriction and
Austrian Paper Money. To which is appended ‘* The Bullion Report.”
Large 12mo. With diagrams. $3.00.

‘The historical information which it contains has never been brought
together before within the compass of a single work.”"—W.. Y. Tribune.

‘‘A most valuable collection of facts, thoroughly digested and properly
arranged. . . . Has a freshness and vivacity rarely found in works
of the kind:"’"—-4tlantic Monthly, :


PUBLISHED BY HENRY HOLT & CoO.


BOSWELL’S (J.) LIFE OF JOHNSON, including a Tour
to the Hebrides. Condensed by C. H. Jones. (/x press.)


COLERIDGE’S BIOGRAPHIA LITERARIA. 2 vols. large
I2mo, $5.00,


CRITICAL AND SOCIAL ESSAYS. Reprinted from the New
York Nation. 16mo0,. $1.50. :
‘‘ The best thinking and temper of the time." —M. 4. Review.


HADLEY’S (PROF. JAS.) ESSAYS, Philological and Critical.
With an introduction by W. D. WuHi?TNEY, 8yvo. $5.00.

‘‘Certainly no teacher or student of English can afford to be without
these essays. . . . Few books have as much in them to praise, and as
little to find fault with.""—/Vation.

“ Rarely have we read a book which gives us so high a conception of
the writer's whole nature.'"—London Atheneum.


HOUGHTON’S (LORD) MONOGRAPHS, Personal and
Social. By Lorp HouGHTON (Richard Monckton Milnes). 12mo.
With Portraits of WALTER SAVAGE LANDOR, CHARLES BULLER,
HARRIET LADY ASHBURTON, and SULEIMAN PASHA. I2mo. $2.00.

‘©An extremely agreeable volume. . . . . . He writes soas to
adorn everything which he touches.''—London Atheneum.

Monographs Political and Literary. (/x preparation.)

LIBRARY OF FOREIGN POETRY. 16mo. Gilt top and
side stamp, bevelled edges.

I. Herz’s King René’s Daughter, $1.25.
II. Tegnér’s Frithiof’s Saga. $1.50.
III, Lessing’s Nathan the Wise. $1.50.
IV. Selections from the Kalevala. $1.50.
V. Heine’s Book of Songs. $1.50.
VI. Goethe’s Poems and Ballads. $1.50.

MARTINEAU’S (H.) BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES. Bio-
graphical Sketches. By HARRIET MARTINEAU. 8vo. $1.50.

There are over fifty eminent persons ‘‘ sketched ” in this volume.

‘* Miss Martineau’s large literary power, and her fine intellectual train-
ing, makes these litttle sketches more instructive, and constitute them
more generally works of art, than many more ambitious and diffuse
biographies.''"—Sortnightly Review.

MOSCHELES’ (IGNATZ) RECENT MUSIC AND MU-
SICIANS. 12mo. (Amateur Series.) $2.00.

‘‘ Full of pleasant gossip. The diary and letters between them contain
notices and criticisms on almost every musical celebrity of the last half
century.” —FPall Mall Gazette.

SAINTE-BEOVE’S (C. A.) ENGLISH PORTRAITS. Select-
ed and translated from the ‘* Causeries du Lundi.” With an Introductory
Chapter on Sainte-Beuve’s Life and Writings. 12mo. $2.00.

ConTEnTs :—Sainte-Beuve’s Life— His Writings—General Scemmgnte— itary

Queen of Scots—Lord Chesterfield—Benjamin Franklin—Edward Gibbon—Wil-

liam Cowper—English Literature by H. Taine—Pope as a Poet.

‘‘ A charming volume, and one that.may be made a companion, in the
confident assurance that the better we know it the better we shall enjoy
it.” —Boston Advertiser

WAGNER'S (R.) ART AND LIFE THEORIES. Selected
from his Writings, and translated by Epwarp L, BURLINGAME,
With a preface, a catalogue of Wagner’s published works, and draw-
ings of the Bayreuth Opera House. 12mo, (Amateur Series.) $2.00.

‘‘ A more beautiful and every way delightful gift-book for Christmas or
any other season would be difficult to conceive.""—Boston Advertiser.


PUBLISHED BY HENRY HOLT & CO,


GAUTIER’S (THEOPHILE) WORKS. A Winter in Russia.
Translated from the French by M. M. R1pLEy. 12mo. $2.00.

‘“The book is a charming one, and nothing approaching it in merit
has been written on the outward face of things in Russia.’"—Vation.


‘‘We do not remember when we have taken up a more fascinating
book.'’—Boston Gazette.


Constantinople. Translated from the French by Robert Howe
Gould, M.A. 1I2mo. $2.00.
‘‘ It is never too late in the day to reproduce the sparkling descriptions


and acute reflections of so brilliant a master of style as the present
author.’""—lV. Y. Zrzbune.


JONES’ (C. H.) AFRICA: the History of Exploration and Ad-
venture as given in the leading authorities from Herodotus to Living-
stone. ByC. H. Jones. With Map and Illustrations, 8vo. $5.00.

‘‘A cyclopedia of African exploration, and a useful substitute in the


library for the whole list of costly original works on that subject.”—
Boston Advertiser,

‘This volume contains the quintessence of a whole library. . . .
What makes it peculiarly valuable is its combination of so much ma-
terial which is inaccessible to the general reader. The excellent map,
showing the routes of the leading explorers, and the numerous illustra-
tions increase the value and interest of the book.”’"—Zoséon Globe.


MORELET’S (ARTHUR) TRAVELS IN CENTRAL
AMERICA. Including Accounts of some Regions Unexplored since
the Conquest. Introduction and Notes by E. GEO, SQUIER, Post 8vo,
Illus, $2.00.

‘‘One of the most interesting books of travel we have read for a long


time. . . . His descriptions are evidently truthful, as he seems pene-
trated with true scientific spirit.”"—Vation.


PUMPELLY’S (R.) AMERICA AND ASIA. Notes of a Five
Years’ Journey Around the World, and of Residence in Arizona, Japan
and China. By RAPHAEL PUMPELLY, Professor in Harvard Univer-
sity, and some time Mining Engineer in the employ of the Chinese and
Japanese Governments, With maps, wovdcuts, and lithographic fac-
similes of Japanese color-printing. Fine edition, royal 8vo, tinted
paper, gilt side, $5.00. Cheap edition, post 8vo, plain, $2. 50.

‘‘One of the most interesting books of travel we have ever read .. .
We have great admiration of the book, and feel great respect for the
author for his intelligence, humanity, manliness, and philosophic spirit,
which are conspicuous throughout his writings.'’"—Vation.

‘‘ Crowded with entertainment and instruction. <A careful reading of
it will give more real acquaintance with both the physical geography and
the ethnology of the northern temperate regions of both hemispheres
than perhaps any other book in existence.""—.V. Y. Evening Post.


STILLMAN’S (W. J.) CRETAN INEURRECTION OF
1866-7-8. By W. J. STILLMAN, late U. S: Consul in Crete, 12mo.
$1.50.

WHIST (SHORT WHIST). Edited by J. L. Baldwin. The
Standard adopted by the London Clubs. Anda Treatise on the
Game, by J. C. 18mo, appropriately decorated, $1.00.


‘‘ Having been for thirty-six years a player and lover of the game, we
commend the book to a beginner desirous of playing well."—Boston
Commonwealth,


~JaMOUAOd JO AWVN


= -
-


ya”


sith.


dH


“paeand


‘oTesse


eydTopy


uyor Aq*st fomyapa qeroas.°


‘ouTeL


am


BINDING LIST 4PR 15 1949


‘ees Ct eee eee


area ee


Seeh te
A


Reigatiranmtatns teers y.
onnae Lo


