Memoirs of the Prince de Talleyrand, Vol. I (Charles Maurice de Talleyrand (Raphael Ledos de Beaufort, trans.), 1838)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1891 Putnam's edition, translated by Raphael Ledos de Beaufort (https://archive.org/details/memoirsofprinced01tall). Talleyrand's own account, Vol. I — the Revolution, the Directory and Napoleon's rise, from the century's supreme survivor-diplomat.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

of  California 
a  Regional 
f  Facility 


MEMOIRS 


OF   THE 


PRINCE   DE   TALLEYRAND 


a 


ia.o/e     Jt 


e      t?  t  &"/  '&cr*~c> \  / 


FR1NCE   TALLEYRAND   AS    ABBE,    FROM    AN    ORIGINAL   PASTEL,    IN    THE    POSSESSION 
OF    MONSIEUR    MOREAU-CHASLONS,    THE   WELL-KNOWN    AMATEUR. 


MEMOIRS 


OF    THE 


PRINCE  DE  TALLEYRAND 


EDITED,    WITH    A    PREFACE   AND   NOTES,    BY 

THE    DUC   DE    BROGLIE 

Of  the  French  Academy 
TRANSLATED   BY 

RAPHAEL   LEDOS   DE   BEAUFORT,  F.R.  Hist.  S. 


WITH    AN    INTRODUCTION    BY 

THE   HONOURABLE   WHITELAW   REID 

American  Minister  in  Paris 


VOLUME   I 


WITH  AN  AUTOGRAPH  LETTER  AND  PORTRAITS 


GRIFFITH    FARRAN    OKEDEN    AND   WELSH 

NEWBERY  HOUSE,  CHARING  CROSS  ROAD,  LONDON 
AND  SYDNEY 

189I 


J 


The  Rights  of  Translation  and  Reproduction  are  Reserved. 


LIBKAKY 
UNIVERSITY -OJ CAIJFOR! 
SANTA   i:\Ki{;\|iA 


PREFACE. 

The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  died  on  the  17th  of  May  1838. 

On  the  10th  of  January  1834,  he  had  made  a  will  relative  to 
the  division  of  his  fortune  among  his  heirs,  and  to  the  various 
bequests  he  left  as  remembrances  to  his  relatives,  friends  or 
servants. 

Two  years  after,  on  October  1,  1836,  he  added  to  his  will  the 
following  declaration,  of  a  very  different  nature  : — 

"  This  is  to  be  read  to  my  relatives,  to  my  heirs  and  to  my 
private  friends,  as  a  sequel  to  my  will. — In  the  first  place,  I 
declare  that  I  die  in  the  Catholic,  Apostolic  and  Roman  Faith. 

"  I  do  not  wish  to  speak  here  of  the  share  I  had  in  the  various 
decisions  and  measures  taken  by  the  Constituent  Assembly,  or 
of  my  first  journeys  to  England  or  to  America. 

"  This  portion  of  my  life  will  be  found  in  the  Memoirs,  which 
shall  be  published  some  day.  But  I  feel  it  a  duty  to  furnish  my 
family,  and  the  persons  who  displayed  friendship,  or  simply 
kindness  towards  me,  with  some  explanations  concerning  the 
responsibility  I  had  in  the  events  which  happened  in  France 
after  my  return  from  America. 

"  I  had  resigned  the  bishopric  of  Autun,  and  my  resignation 
had  been  accepted  by  the  Pope,  by  whom   I   have  since  been 


viii  PREFACE. 

secularized.  The  instrument  of  my  secularization  is  annexed  to 
my  will.  I  considered  myself  free,  and  my  situation  required 
that  I  should  find  my  way.  I  did  so  alone,  for  I  did  not  wish  my 
future  to  be  linked  to  any  political  party,  for  they  none  of 
them  tallied  with  my  views.  I  carefully  considered  the  matter 
and  decided  on  serving  France  for  her  sake  alone,  in  whatever 
situation  she  might  be  placed  :  some  good  was  to  be  done  in 
each.  Therefore,  I  do  not  blame  myself  for  having  served 
all  the  political  parties  which  ruled  France,  from  the  Directory 
to  the  government  existing  at  the  time  of  my  writing  this. 
After  the  horrors  of  the  Revolution,  all  that  was  calculated  to 
lead,  one  way  or  the  other,  to  order  and  security  was  useful  ; 
and,  at  that  time,  sensible  men  could  wish  for  nothing  more. 

"  To  restore  monarchical  institutions  was  a  matter  of  impos- 
sibility in  the  state  in  which  France  then  was.  To  do  so,  inter- 
mediate forms  of  government — several  of  them — were  needed. 
One  could  not  expect  even  the  shadow  of  royalty  in  the 
Directory  ;  the  spirit  of  the  Convention  must  predominate  there, 
and  so  it  did,  in  reality,  though  in  a  milder  form  :  but,  by  reason 
of  this  spirit,  that  government  was  not  to  last  long.  It  paved 
the  way  for  the  Consulate,  which  already  contained  the  principle 
of  royalty,  though  as  yet  in  disguise.  Some  good  was  to  be 
done  there  ;  that  form  of  government  possessed  a  remote,  it 
is  true,  but  real  resemblance  to  monarchy. 

"  The  imperial  rule  which  followed  was  more  like  an  autocracy 
than  a  regular  monarchy.  This  is  true,  but  at  the  time  when 
Bonaparte  put  the  crown  on  his  head,  war  with  England  was 
raging  again  ;  other  wars  were  imminent  ;  the  spirit  of  faction 
was  rampant,  and  the  safety  of  the  country  might  have  been 
jeopardized  if  its  ruler  had  confined  himself  to  the  exercise  of 


PREFACE.  ix 

the  sole  prerogatives  of  a  simple  king.  I  therefore  served  the 
Emperor  Napoleon,  as  I  had  done  the  Consul  Bonaparte  :  I 
served  him  with  loyalty,  so  long  as  I  could  believe  him  exclu- 
sively devoted  to  France.  But,  as  soon  as  I  saw  him  enter  on 
the  revolutionary  path  which  led  him  to  ruin,  I  left  the  cabinet, 
and  for  that  he  never  forgave  me. 

"  In  1 8 14,  the  Bourbons,  with  whom,  since  1791, 1  had  had  no 
relations,  were  recalled.  They  were  so,  for  the  only  reason  that 
their  reign  was  deemed  more  favourable  than  any  other  to  the 
rest  so  much  needed  by  France  and  by  Europe.  I  have  related, 
in  my  Memoirs,  the  chief  part  I  played  in  that  great  event,  and 
the  rather  bold  steps  I  took  in  those  memorable  days.  The 
recall  of  the  princes  of  the  House  of  Bourbon  was  not  the 
acknowledgment  of  pre-existing  rights.  If  they  so  construed 
it,  it  was  neither  on  my  advice,  nor  with  my  assent  ;  for  here  is 
my  opinion  on  the  matter. 

"  Monarchs  are  such  only  by  virtue  of  public  instruments 
which  constitute  them  the  heads  of  civil  society.  These  instru- 
ments are,  it  is  true,  irrevocable  for  each  monarch  and  for  his 
posterity  so  long  as  the  reigning  monarch  keeps  within  the 
limits  of  his  own  province  ;  but  if  he  attempts  to  go  beyond  it, 
he  loses  all  right  to  a  title  which  his  own  acts  either  have 
belied  or  would  soon  belie.  Such  being  my  opinion,  I  have 
never  found  it  necessary  to  disclaim  it  in  order  to  accept  the 
functions  which  I  have  discharged  under  various  governments. 

"As  I  now,  in  my  eighty-second  year,  call  to  mind  the 
numerous  events  of  my  political  life,  which  has  itself  been  long, 
and  weigh  them,  on  the  eve  of  entering  into  eternity,  I  find  as 
the  result: — 

"  That   of    all    the    governments    I    have    served,    there    is 


x  PREFACE. 

not   one    to    which     I     have    not    given    more    than     I     have 
received. 

"That  I  have  never  abandoned  any,  till  it  had,  first  of  all, 
abandoned  itself. 

"  That  I  have  never  considered  the  interests  of  any  party,  my 
own,  or  those  of  my  friends,  before  the  true  interests  of  France, 
which  besides  are  never,  in  my  opinion,  contrary  to  the  true 
interests  of  Europe. 

"  This  judgment,  for  which  I  am  alone  responsible,  will,  I  hope, 
be  confirmed  by  all  impartial  minds  ;  and  should  this  justice  be 
refused  me.  when  I  am  no  longer  living,  the  conviction  of  its 
truth  will  yet  serve  to  brighten  my  last  days 

"  My  wish — and  I  consign  it  here,  giving  it  the  same  force  as 
my  will — my  wish,  I  say,  is  that  the  writings  that  I  leave 
behind  me,  be  published  only  when  thirty  years,  dating  from 
the  day  of  my  death,  shall  have  elapsed,  in  order  that  those  of 
whom  I  have  had  to  speak,  being  no  longer  alive,  may,  none  of 
them,  have  to  suffer  from  what  the  truth  may  have  compelled 
me  to  say  to  their  disadvantage,  for  I  have  never  written  with 
the  intention  of  hurting  any  one,  whoever  he  might  be.  Thus, 
even  thirty  years  after  my  death,  my  Memoirs  are  only  to  appear 
if  those  of  my  heirs  to  whom  I  leave  them,  judge  that  they  can 
be  published  without  inconvenience  to  any  one. 

"  I  also  enjoin  the  trustee  of  my  papers  to  neglect  no  precau- 
tion that  may  be  necessary,  or  at  least  calculated  to  prevent,  or 
defeat  any  furtive  attempts  that  may  be  made  against  them. 

"  Further,  as  in  the  times  in  which  we  live,  we  are  inundated 
with  spurious  memoirs,  forged  some  by  starvelings,  or  covetous 
characters,  others  by  cowardly  and  unprincipled  scoundrels, 
who,  in  order  to  exercise  their  party  spite  without  risk  to  them- 


PREFACE.  xi 

selves,  dare  to  brand  as  far  as  lies  in  their  power,  the  memory  of 
the  great  dead,  under  whose  name  they  spread  the  grossest  lies 
and  most  absurd  calumnies, — I  expressly  charge  the  trustees  of 
my  manuscripts  to  publicly,  peremptorily  and  without  delay, 
disclaim,  as  I  hereby  now  disclaim,  any  writing  whatever  which 
may  chance  to  be  published  under  my  name  before  the  expiration 
of  the  thirty  years  above  specified. 

"Valencay,  October  i,  1836. 

"{Signed)  PRINCE  DE  TALLEYRAND." 

This  important  paper  has,  as  may  be  seen,  two  very 
different  aims  in  view. 

The  first  is  to  make  a  profession  of  principle,  which  M.  de 
Talleyrand  only  submits  to  the  judgment  of  his  conscience  and 
of  posterity,  and  which  therefore  necessitates  no  comment. 

Then  follow  prescriptions  relative  to  the  keeping  and 
publication  of  his  papers. 

It  is  for  these  latter  only,  and  for  the  measures  which  had 
to  be  taken  accordingly,  that  the  editors  of  these  Memoii's  have 
to  account. 

These  prescriptions  were  repeated  and  completed  in  a  codicil 
joined  to  the  will  and  instrument  of  1836,  dated  March  17,  1838, 
and  couched  in  the  following  terms  : — 

"  I,  the  undersigned,  hereby  declare  that  the  Duchesse  de 
Dino,  as  my  universal  legatee,  has  alone  the  right  of  collecting 
all  my  papers  and  writings  zvithotct  exception,  in  order  to  do 
with  them  what  I  have  enjoined  her,  and  what  she  already 
knows  ;  and  I  forbid  her  to  divulge  in  any  way  the  contents 
of  the  papers  that    I   shall  leave,  save   after  the   expiration   of 


xii  PREFACE. 

thirty  years  after  my  decease ;  nevertheless,  M.  de  Bacourt,  the 
king's  minister  at  Baden,  to  whom  I  give  and  bequeath  a 
diamond  of  fifty  thousand  francs  in  value,  which  1  beg  him  to 
accept  as  a  token  of  my  esteem  and  friendship  for  him,  will  be 
so  good,  in  default  of  the  Duchesse  de  Dino,  and  in  that  case 
only  that  she  departs  this  life  before  myself,  as  to  take  charge 
of  all  my  unpublished  papers  that  I  have  left  in  England." 

The  Duchesse  de  Dino,  who  was  soon  afterwards  called  upon 
to  assume  the  title  of  Duchesse  de  Talleyrand  and  Sagan,  died 
on  September  29,  1862,  six  years  before  the  date  fixed  by 
M.  de  Talleyrand  for  the  publication  of  his  papers  by  his 
heirs. 

The  Duchesse  de  Talleyrand  had  none  the  less  taken  full 
and  entire  possession  of  all  the  papers  of  her  uncle,  as  shown  in 
her  will,  made  September  19,  1862,  at  Sagan,  and  which  bears, 
in  paragraph  17,  the  following  injunction  : — 

"  The  papers  of  my  late  uncle,  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand, 
which  have  been  handed  over  to  me  in  accordance  with  the 
instructions  contained  in  his  will,  are  to  be  found,  for  the  most 
part,  in  the  keeping  of  M.  Adolphe  de  Bacourt ;  some  of  them 
with  the  necessary  instructions  relative  to  them,  are  to  be 
found  amongst  the  property  disposed  of  in  my  will.  By  this 
present  writing,  I  order  that,  after  my  decease,  this  part  of  the 
papers  as  well  be  remitted  to  M.  de  Bacourt,  who  will  receive 
them  under  the  same  conditions  fixed  by  my  late  uncle,  as  1 
myself  received  them." 

M.  de  Bacourt,  who  died  April  28,  1865,  did  not  long  survive 
the   Duchesse  de  Talleyrand  ;  but  even  during  the  lifetime  of 


PREFACE.  xiii 

the  Duchesse  he  had,  as  we  have  just  seen,  been  associated  with 
her  in  the  keeping  of  the  papers  and  their  classification,  with 
which  the  illustrious  statesman  had  charged  her.  He  had 
been  instructed  by  her  to  collect  all  the  papers  that  had  been 
left  her,  those  that  had  been  left  in  England,  just  as  well  as 
those  that  might  yet  be  found  in  France. 

Left  in  sole  possession  of  this  mass  of  papers  for  three  years, 
M.  de  Bacourt  applied  himself  with  indefatigable  zeal  to  the 
task  of  revising  them  and  preparing  the  publication  of  the 
Memoirs,  which  formed  a  principal  part  of  them.  With  this 
intention,  he  had  arranged  numerous  notes,  complementary  or 
explanatory,  bearing  on  the  most  important  points  in  the  life 
of  the  prince,  and  on  those  over  which  the  greatest  amount  of 
controversy  had  raged.  Finally,  he  had  neglected  no  means  of 
enlarging  the  precious  trust  confided  to  him,  by  the  acquisition 
of  a  number  of  unpublished  documents  emanating  either  from 
M.  de  Talleyrand  himself,  or  addressed  to  him  by  various  people, 
or  which  were  likely  to  throw  some  fresh  interest  on  his  life. 

It  was  assuredly  with  the  design,  that  this  work,  to  which  he 
had  given  himself  with  an  almost  religious  devotion,  should  be 
continued  after  his  death  in  the  same  spirit  in  which  he  had 
treated  it  himself,  that  he  thought  fit  to  introduce  into  his  will 
a  number  of  injunctions,  of  which  the  text  must  be  literally 
reproduced. 

"  On  account  of  the  arrangements  made  in  the  two  wills 
that  I  have  just  quoted  (those  namely  of  the  Prince  and  of  the 
Duchesse  de  Talleyrand),  I  find  myself  compelled  to  provide 
for  the  consequence  that  might  ensue,  if  I  died  before  accom- 
plishing the  duty  which  has  been  laid  upon  me  with  respect  to 


xiv  PREFACE. 

the  papers  left  by  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand,  which  are  all  in  my 
possession. 

"  I  thought  the  best  plan  was  to  choose,  according  to  the 
custom  adopted  in  England,  so  called  Trustees,  or  persons  of 
trust,  who  in  case  of  my  death,  would  be  charged  :  ist,  To  take 
my  place  as  guardians  of  the  said  papers ;  2nd,  to  provide  for 
the  time  fixed  by  me  for  the  publication  of  those  of  these 
papers  which  are  destined  to  be  published.  I  have  therefore 
appointed  for  this  purpose  M.  Chatelain,  ex-notary,  living  in 
Paris,  No  17,  Rue  d'Anjou-Saint-Honore,  and  M.  Paul  Andral, 
a  barrister  in  practice  at  the  imperial  courts  at  Paris,  dwelling  in 
that  city,  No  101,  Rue  Saint-Lazare,  who  have  both  willingly 
accepted  the  mission  I  thus  entrust  them  with.  I  require  and  com- 
mand that  these  two  gentlemen  be  informed  immediately  after  my 
death  of  the  place  where  these  papers  are  deposited,  and  told 
that  they  are  there  at  their  disposal  ;  and  that  means  of  taking 
possession  of  them,  together  with  all  necessary  measures  of 
security  for  so  doing  be  afforded  them.  ...  I  impose,  as  a  special 
injunction,  on  MM.  Chatelain  and  Andral,  that  no  publication 
taken  from  these  papers  be  made,  in  any  case  whatever,  before 
the  year  eighteen  hundred  and  eighty-eight  thus  adding  a  term 
of  twenty  years  to  that  of  thirty  fixed  by  the  Prince  de  Talley- 
rand." 

M.  de  Bacourt  adding,  as  we  have  just  seen,  a  fresh  proro- 
gation of  twenty  years  to  that  of  the  thirty  fixed  by  M.  de 
Talleyrand,  made  use  of  a  power  reserved  by  the  prince  himself 
to  his  heirs.  Those  who,  in  their  turn,  received  the  legacy  of 
M.  de  Bacourt  had  no  right  to  exempt  themselves  from  this 
restriction. 


PREFACE.  xv 

Before  the  expiration  of  this  prorogation,  one  of  them,  M. 
Chatelain,  had  ceased  to  live,  and  had  to  be  replaced  by  his  son  ; 
and  when  the  fixed  term  had  elapsed,  his  partner,  M.  Andral, 
was  already  attacked  by  the  disease  which,  in  the  following  year 
snatched  him  away  from  his  sorrowing  friends. 

It  was  then  only  at  the  beginning  of  the  current  year  that  I 
was  informed  of  the  honour  that  my  ever  lamented  friend  had 
paid  me,  by  handing  on  to  me  the  accomplishment  of  the  task 
which  the  last  will  and  testament  of  M.  de  Bacourt  had  imposed 
on  him,  and  which  his  illness  hindered  him  from  carrying  out. 
Nothing  had  prepared  me  for  it,  and  no  communication  on  his 
part  had  led  me  even  to  suspect  it.  I  had  understood  and 
shared  the  impatience  which  the  public  had  long  shown  for  be- 
coming acquainted  with  a  work  of  high  value,  and  one  which  was 
a  legitimate  object  for  curiosity.  But  however  great  may 
have  been  the  wish  of  M.  Chatelain  and  my  own  in  this  respect, 
it  was  yet  necessary  to  take  time,  in  order  to  neglect  no  care 
demanded  by  the  publication  of  a  work  of  such  importance. 

It  will  have  been  noticed  how  careful  both  the  Duchesse 
de  Talleyrand  and  M.  de  Bacourt  were  to  state  that  they  were 
in  possession  of  all  the  papers  of  the  prince  without  exception, 
and  that  nothing  could  either  have  been  taken  from  or  escaped 
them.  The  fear  of  seeing,  throughout  the  long  years  of  silence 
that  had  been  imposed  upon  them,  the  name  of  M.  de  Talleyrand 
at  the  head  of  fictitious  memoirs,  and  apocryphal  documents 
which  would  have  misrepresented  him  (as  but  too  often  happens 
in  the  case  of  celebrated  men),  had  evidently  deeply  affected 
them.  It  is  against  all  abuse  and  forgery  of  this  kind  that 
they  firmly  protested  beforehand,  remaining  faithful  in  this 
to  the  thought  that  had  dictated  to  M.  de  Talleyrand  himself 


xvi  PREFACE. 

the  injunction  he  gave  his  heirs  in  the  instrument  of  1836,  to 
preserve  his  memory  from  all  stealtJiy  publication. 

This  precaution,  very  natural  in  itself,  was  moreover 
especially  justified  by  the  knowledge  of  a  very  serious  fact, 
and  one  of  which  the  consequences  had  even  before  the  death 
of  M.  de  Talleyrand  caused  an  anxiety  to  himself  and  his  family 
that  may  easily  be  understood. 

A  secretary  who  had  enjoyed  his  confidence  throughout  the 
years  in  which,  either  as  minister  or  ambassador,  he  had  been 
charged  with  the  gravest  interests  of  the  State,  had  been  dismissed 
after  twenty  years  of  this  intimate  service  for  sufficiently  serious 
reasons  ;  and  although  the  precaution  of  demanding  from  him  to 
deliver  up  any  pieces  that  might  be  in  his  hands  was  by  no 
means  neglected,  it  was  not  long  before  it  was  found  that  not 
only  had  this  restitution  been  far  from  complete,  but  that  the 
secretary  thus  dismissed,  boasted  of  having  kept  back  more 
than  one  important  document,  which  he  threatened  to  make 
use  of,  without  the  permission  of  his  old  patron,  and  with 
the  express  purpose  of  doing  him  harm. 

What  made  the  conduct  of  this  faithless  agent  as  dangerous 
as  reprehensible  was,  that  during  these  years  of  familiar  inter- 
course with  M.  de  Talleyrand,  he  had  learnt  to  counterfeit  his 
handwriting,  in  such  a  manner  as  to  deceive  those  who  ought  to 
be  best  acquainted  with  it,  and  it  was  soon  found  that  he  had 
turned  this  paltry  talent  to  advantage  by  circulating  as  having 
emanated  from  M.  de  Talleyrand,  writings,  forged  or  falsified,  of 
such  a  character  as  to  cause  unpleasantness  in  his  relations 
with  his  family  and  friends,  and  to  accredit  the  most  infamous 
accusations  against  him. 

Chance  allowed  M.  de  Bacourt  to  get  genuine  and  undeniable 


PREFACE.  xv  ii 

proofs  of  this  fraud  ;  these  he  put  into  a  special  drawer  amongst 
his  papers  where  they  are  still.  With  respect  to  the  original 
letters  of  M.  de  Talleyrand,  he  has  produced  facsimiles,  found 
among  the  papers  of  the  copyist,  so  closely  resembling  the 
originals  that  they  could  not  be  distinguished  from  them,  were  it 
not  that  certain  sentences,  manifestly  introduced  with  evil  intent, 
betray  the  imposture. 

It  is  thus  not  difficult  to  conceive  the  anxiety  which  the 
executors  of  the  will  of  M.  de  Talleyrand  must  have  experienced 
when,  three  days  after  his  death,  May  20,  1838,  the  English 
paper,  the  Ti?nesy  published  the  following  : — 

"  With  regard  to  the  political  Memoirs  of  M.  de  Talleyrand, 
it  is  well  known  that  they  were  only  to  see  the  light  thirty  years 
after  his  death,  but  his  secretary,  M.  Perrey,  being  possessed  of 
a  large  portion  of  the  manuscript,  it  is  believed  that  the 
intentions  of  the  deceased  will  not  be  realised,  except  at  the  cost 
of  a  great  pecuniary  sacrifice.  Amongst  the  papers  that  M. 
Perrey  is  known  to  possess,  are  satirical  portraits  of  more  than 
a  hundred  of  our  contemporaries." 

Let  us  add  that  the  Times  named  as  among  these  con- 
temporaries all  the  personal  friends  of  M.  de  Talleyrand  and 
his  family. 

It  is  true  that  eight  days  later,  on  May  28,  M.  Perrey 
himself  (the  Times  being  the  paper  that  had  mentioned  his  name 
in  the  matter)  in  a  letter  addressed  to  it,  denied  the  allegation, 
and  said  that  he  was  ready  to  bring  an  action  before  the  courts 
against "  whomsoever  should  venture  to  use  his  name  in  order  to 
give  some  appearance  of  authenticity  to  these  so-called  writings 
of  M.  de  Talleyrand."  But  what  weight  did  this  disclaimer  carry, 
VOL.  1.  b 


xviii  PREFACE. 

a  disclaimer  which  could  not  be  dispensed  with,  without  allowing 
the  shadow  of  criminal  dishonesty  to  rest  upon  one's  self,  and 
what  foundation  was  there  for  the  allegation  of  the  Times  ?  Had 
M.  Perrey  attempted  this  process  of  reproduction,  amplifying 
and  altering,  at  which  he  was  known  to  be  an  adept,  on  some 
stolen  fragments  of  the  Memoirs,  or  on  some  notes  prepared 
for  their  publication  ?  If  he  had  attempted  anything  of  this 
kind,  what  guarantee  was  there  that  he  had  destroyed  all  trace 
of  it,  and  was  there  no  risk  of  its  being  introduced  to  the  public 
through  some  intermediary,  to  whom  he  might  have  given  it 
gratis  or  for  a  money  consideration  ? 

No  precaution  whatever  was  thought  superfluous  by  the 
Duchesse  de  Talleyrand  and  M.  de  Bacourt  ;  and,  in  order  to 
render  all  challenge  or  confusion  impossible,  M.  de  Bacourt 
undertook  to  transcribe  with  his  own  hand  the  text  of  the 
Memoirs,  as  he  had  received  it  from  M.  de  Talleyrand,  with  the 
complementary  notes  and  documents. 

This  copy  is  mentioned  in  the  inventory  of  the  papers  of 
M.  de  Bacourt,  subjoined  to  his  will  in  the  following  terms : — 

"  Four  volumes,  bound  in  leather,  which  form  the  only 
complete  and  authentic  copy  of  Prince  Talleyrand's  Memoirs, 
done  by  M.  de  Bacourt  from  the  original  manuscripts,  dictated 
documents,  and  copies  whose  purpose  M.  de  Talleyrand  had 
indicated  to  him." 

Furthermore  the  first  of  these  four  volumes  bears  on  its 
last  page  the  following  declaration  : — 

"  I,  the  undersigned,  testamentary  executrix  of  my  late  uncle, 
Charles-Maurice,  Prince  de  Talleyrand,  declare  and  certify  that 


PREFACE.  xix 

the  present  folio  volume,  containing  five  hundred  and  one  hand- 
written pages,  comprises  the  only  original,  complete,  and  faithful 
copy  of  the  first  five  parts  of  his  Memoirs,  and  of  a  fragment  on 
the  Due  de  Choiseul  left  by  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand-Perigord. 
"  Sagan,  May  20,  1858. 

"  DOROTHEE   DE   COURLANUE, 
"  DUCHESSE    DE   TALLEYRAND  ET   DE   SAGAN." 

A  declaration,  similar  in  all  respects  and  bearing  the  same 
signature,  closes  the  second  volume. 

At  the  end  of  the  third,  it  is  M.  de  Bacourt,  sole  survivor,  who 
thus  expresses  himself: — 

"  I,  the  undersigned,  testamentary  executor  of  the  late  Prince 
Charles-Maurice  de  Talleyrand-Perigord,  and  of  the  Duchesse 
de  Talleyrand  and  Sagan,  Princesse  de  Courlande,  declare  and 
certify  that  the  present  folio  volume  of  five  hundred  and  six 
manuscript  pages  comprises  the  sole  original,  complete,  and 
authentic  copy  of  the  eighth,  ninth,  and  tenth  parts  of  the 
Memoirs  left  by  Prince  Charles-Maurice  de  Talleyrand-Perigord. 

"  Ad.  de  Bacourt. 

"  BADEN,  January  20,  1 863." 

No  declaration  is  found  at  the  end  of  the  fourth  volume,  for 
the  reason  that  the  last  part  of  this  volume  was  to  have 
been  completed  by  subjoined  extracts,  whose  complete  tran- 
scription was  not  accomplished  when  death  overtook  M.  de 
Bacourt. 

It  is  from  the  text  prepared  for  press  by  the  very  people 
whom  M.  de  Talleyrand  had  charged  with  doing  so,  and 
according  to  the   instructions    that    they    held    of    him,  that 

b2 


xx  PREFACE. 

the  present  publication  is  made.  Neither  suppression,  nor 
even  toning  down,  have  in  any  degree  been  allowed.  Only 
some  of  the  notes  prepared  by  M.  de  Bacourt  have  been 
omitted,  owing  to  their  having,  by  this  time,  lost  their  interest. 
On  the  other  hand,  other  notes,  a  considerable  number  of  them, 
have  been  added,  containing  either  biographical  information 
concerning  persons  mentioned  in  the  Memoirs,  or  explanation 
of  facts  reported  in  them,  of  which  the  reader  of  to-day  might 
not  have  retained  a  sufficiently  clear  recollection. 

With  regard  to  the  writing  relative  to  the  ministry  of  the 
Due  de  Choiseul,  mentioned  in  the  declaration  of  the  Duchesse 
de  Talleyrand,  M.  de  Bacourt  thought  that  it  ought  to  appear 
at  the  head  of  the  first  part  of  the  Memoirs,  although  it 
would  not  naturally  find  a  place  there,  having  been  composed  at 
a  later  date.  But  it  has  been  found  more  convenient  to  place 
this  detached  document  at  the  end  of  the  last  volume,  where 
some  other  writings  of  M.  de  Talleyrand  that  have  been  either 
unpublished  hitherto,  or  forgotten,  but  which  may  still  be  read 
with  interest,  will  also  be  relegated. 

II. 

The  twelve  parts  of  which  the  Memoirs  are  composed  will 
be  found  to  be  very  far  from  forming  a  complete  and  con- 
secutive whole.  They  can  be  divided  into  two  distinct  portions. 
The  first  extends  from  M.  de  Talleyrand's  birth  to  1815,  being 
the  close  of  his  ministry  under  Louis  XVIII.  There  are 
clear  indications  to  show  that  this  portion  of  the  Memoirs  was 
drawn  up  during  the  Restoration.  The  second  commences 
after   the    revolution    of    1830,   with    the    embassy    of    M.    de 


PREFACE.  xxi 

Talleyrand  to  London,  and  contains  the  account  of  this 
mission.  It  was  probably  written  during  the  retirement  which 
followed  his  resignation  given  in  1834. 

A  break  of  fourteen  years,  as  well  as  the  brevity  with  which 
the  narrative  passes  over  certain  portions  of  the  political  career 
of  M.  de  Talleyrand  (among  others,  the  part  he  played  in  the 
Constituent  Assembly),  witness  sufficiently  that  his  intention  was 
by  no  means  to  present  a  complete  picture  of  his  whole  life  in 
his  Memoirs.  He  himself,  in  a  note  put  at  the  head  of  the  first 
part,  warns  the  reader  that  Memoirs  is  an  improper  expression, 
and  only  employed  from  want  of  a  better  one.  That  which  will 
least  be  found  in  them  as  a  matter  of  fact  is  that  which  is  gene- 
rally most  sought  after  in  memoirs,  viz.,  revelations  of  incidents 
but  little  known  in  the  life  of  the  writer,  or  his  personal  impres- 
sions on  events  that  he  himself  witnessed.  Apart  from  a  few 
pages  devoted  to  his  childhood  and  youth,  the  narrative  of  M.  de 
Talleyrand  is  more  than  reserved  as  to  his  private  life  ;  and  that 
of  those  whom  he  has  known  finds  still  less  place  there.  His 
criticisms  of  the  society  amid  which  he  lived  are  full  of  penetra- 
tion and  good  taste ;  but  the  reader  who  expects  to  find  anecdotes, 
indiscretions,  or  confidences  among  them,  and  who  would  not 
object  to  the  spice  of  a  little  scandal,  will  be  completely  deceived. 
The  tone  of  the  narrative,  uniformly  earnest,  never  lends  itself 
to  disclosures  of  this  nature. 

M.  de  Talleyrand  also  seems  to  have  not  the  slightest  in- 
tention of  replying,  by  way  of  explanation  or  apology,  to  the 
various  charges  that  have  been  brought  against  him.  Save  the 
share  that  some  writers  have  ascribed  to  him  in  the  outrage  that 
put  an  end  to  the  days  of  the  Due  d'Enghien,  and  which  he  indig- 
nantly disclaims  in  a  special  note,  he  preserves  a  silence  which 


xxii  PREFACE. 

does  not  merely  appear  to  be  that  of  disdain  :  it  is  rather  a  sort 
of  resolution  taken  to  occupy  the  attention  of  his  readers  with 
nothing  that  concerns  himself  alone,  but  to  reserve  all  their 
attention  for  the  great  political  and  national  interests,  whose 
fate  he  held,  on  several  occasions,  in  his  own  hands,  and  for 
which  France  and  posterity  have  the  right  to  demand  account. 

If  such  has  been  his  object  (and  everything  leads  to  this 
conviction),  if  he  has  really  thought  neither  of  satire,  pleading, 
nor  confession  of  any  kind,  but  merely  of  showing  that  the 
fortune  of  France  had  not  lost  by  being  entrusted  to  his  care, 
he  could  scarcely  have  found  a  better  way  of  clearing  his 
memory  from  the  accusations,  which,  having  never  been  spared 
him  in  his  lifetime,  were  not  likely  to  be  spared  him  in  the 
grave.  There  have  been  errors  and  mistakes  in  the  private  life 
of  M.  de  Talleyrand  which  no  one  has  a  right  to  justify,  since 
some  of  those  he  himself,  of  his  own  free  will,  solemnly  re- 
tracted on  the  point  of  death.  His  part  in  home  politics,  during 
the  various  phases  of  the  Revolution  in  which  he  mixed,  will 
always  give  rise  to  different  judgments ;  and  as  he  belonged 
to  none  of  the  parties  into  which  France  was  at  that  time 
divided,  there  is  no  one  but  believes  himself  justified  in 
severely  criticising  some  of  his  actions.  But  when  he  had  to 
defend,  whether  as  ambassador  or  minister,  the  greatness  and 
independence  of  his  country  in  the  face  of  the  foreigner  (foe, 
rival,  or  ally,)  it  would  be  difficult  to  question,  and  it  will  be 
found  that  he  has  not  exaggerated,  the  importance  of  the 
service  he  has  rendered. 

To  do  him  full  justice  in  this  respect,  one  must  not  stay 
at  the  recital  he  gives  of  the  action  he  was  enabled  to  take  as 
minister  of  the  Directory  or  of  the  First  Empire.     He  himself 


PREFACE.  xxiii 

passes  fairly  quickly  over  these  first  phases  of  his   ministerial 
career,  and  however  great  be  the  events  which  follow  each  other 
at  that  time,  if  he  often  draws  a  picture  of  them  with  the  art 
of  a  consummate  historian,  it  is  rather  as  a  witness,  than  as  an 
actor  in  them  that  he  speaks.    He  leaves  his  reader  to  understand 
that,  whatever  high  office,  he,  at  that  time,  held,  his  power  was 
in  reality  but  nominal.      He  only  carried  out  decisions  that  he 
had,    as    often    as   not,  first    combated.      Being   unable   either 
to  make  himself  understood  by  the  incapable  upstarts  of  the 
Revolution,  or  listened  toby  an  imperious  master  who  only  asked 
counsel  of  his  genius  or  of  his  passions,  all  his  ingenuity  was 
employed,     after     giving    advice    which    was    not    followed,    in 
repairing  the   faults    which    he    would   never   have    committed. 
It  is  at  the  Congress  of  Vienna,  after  the  Restoration,  at  the 
embassy  at  London,  after  1830,  that,  invested  with  the  full  con- 
fidence  of  the   sovereigns    whom    he    represented,   he  showed 
himself  free  to  act  as  he  would. 

In  these  two  circumstances,  the  most  brilliant  of  his  long 
career,  and  which  naturally  hold  the  foremost  place  in  the 
volumes  now  submitted  to  the  reader,  Talleyrand  gave  diplo- 
macy a  place  such  as  it  perhaps  had  never  before  enjoyed,  and 
imparted  to  the  person  of  an  ambassador  an  importance  almost 
without  precedent  in  history.  As  a  general  rule,  the  most 
renowned  ambassadors  have  only  been  the  fortunate  interpreters 
of  a  thought  that  was  not  their  own,  and  the  clever  executors  of 
designs  handed  to  them  by  those  above  them  in  office.  What 
would  Father  Joseph  have  been  without  Richelieu  ?  Their  credit, 
besides,  depends  less  on  their  own  merits,  than  on  the  use  they 
know  how  to  make  of  the  fear  or  the  confidence  which  the 
governments  that  they  represent  inspire.     What  would  the  great 


xxiv  PREFACE. 

negotiators  of  the  peace  of  Westphalia,  or  of  that  of  the  Pyrenees 
have  been,  without  the  victories  of  Conde  and  Turenne  ?  No 
support  of  this  kind  came  to  Talleyrand  on  the  two  occasions  on 
which  all  the  interests  of  our  country  were  entrusted  to  him. 
In  the  one  as  in  the  other,  he  had  to  rely  upon  himself  alone. 

At  Vienna,  he  presented  himself  before  four  victorious 
powers,  closely  united,  and  still  under  arms  ;  he  spoke  in 
the  name  of  a  monarchy  restored  after  twenty-five  years  of 
trouble,  on  a  tottering  basis,  in  a  country  still  covered  with 
foreign  troops,  whose  decimated  army  was  not  even  loyal. 
Before  the  congress  had  finished  its  work,  the  sad  mishap 
of  the  Hundred  Days  reduced  him  to  the  almost  ridiculous 
position  of  ambassador  of  an  exiled  prince.  At  London,  he 
was  the  agent  of  a  still  budding  power,  proceeding  from  a 
revolution,  held  for  this  reason  in  contempt  by  all  the  mon- 
archies of  Europe,  and  threatened  every  moment  (at  least,  it 
was  so  believed),  with  destruction  by  the  very  popular  force  that 
had  called  it  into  being.  There  were  days  when  the  voice  of  the 
ambassador,  bringing  assurances  of  peace  to  the  conferences,  was 
drowned  by  echoes  from  Paris  bearing  shouts  of  war,  and  the 
rumbling  of  rebellion. 

It  cannot  however  be  called  into  question  (and  if  there  did 
exist  any  doubts  in  this  respect,  the  reading  of  the  Memoirs 
would  at  once  dispel  them)  that  M.  de  Talleyrand  never  ceased 
a  single  day,  either  at  London  or  Vienna,  to  be  the  soul  of  the 
congresses  and  conferences,  and  the  true  inspirer  of  the  resolu- 
tions of  assembled  Europe,  of  which,  when  all  is  summed  up, 
and  the  difficulties  of  the  circumstances  allowed  for,  France  has 
in  no  way  suffered.  It  is  easier  to  state  than  to  define  the 
sovereign   art,  which  enabled  him  to  supply,  by  means  of  his 


PREFACE.  xxv 

cleverness  and  intellect  alone,  that  support  which,  at  every 
moment,  failed  him  from  without.  In  public  as  in  private  life, 
the  ascendency  which  one  man  knows  how  to  exercise  over 
all  those  who  in  any  way  have  dealings  with  him,  is  a  natural 
gift  for  which  no  species  of  supremacy  will  ever  adequately 
account.  The  unexpected  successes  which  he  obtained,  are, 
however,  to  be  explained  in  a  great  measure,  as  may  be  seen 
from  the  Memoirs,  by  the  rare  accuracy  of  glance  which  enabled 
him  to  perceive  at  once,  and  before  all  trial,  the  resources  which 
could  yet  be  drawn  from  a  situation  which  any  other  man 
would  have  considered  hopeless. 

Thus,  in  1814,  on  entering  the  European  senate,  devoid  of 
all  means  for  making  himself  feared,  he  discerned  at  once,  that 
even  on  the  morrow  of  a  victory,  material  force  is  not  every- 
thing, and  that  the  course  of  events  which  appeared  to  be  most 
unfavourable  to  him,  had  yet  put  at  his  service  a  moral 
force,  which,  cleverly  managed,  could  take  the  place  of  weapons 
of  a  different  character,  which  he  lacked.  This  moral  force, 
superior  even  to  the  force  which  the  allied  courts  against  us 
owed  to  the  number  of  their  soldiers,  he  sought  and  found 
in  the  principle  loudly  proclaimed  of  monarchical  legitimacy. 
The  text  of  the  instructions  he  took  to  the  Congress  and 
which  he  gave  to  himself — being  at  once  minister  and  ambas- 
sador— will  be  read  ;  it  is  a  general  scheme  for  the  restoration 
of  legitimate  monarchy  over  the  whole  surface  of  Europe,  and 
as  a  natural  consequence  the  restitution  to  all  sovereigns  of 
whatever  lands  their  forefathers  possessed.  The  project  is 
systematically  applied,  article  by  article,  state  by  state,  without 
reserve,  without  restriction,  without  embarrassment ;  I  might 
almost  say,  without  false  pride,  without  Talleyrand  ever  sus- 


xxvi  PREFACE. 

pecting,  for  a  moment,  that  this  monarchical  faith  will  cause 
some  surprise  in  the  mouth  of  a  former  minister  of  the  Republic 
and  of  the  Empire. 

To  those  who  would  have  expressed  this  surprise  to  him, 
I  feel  convinced  that  he  would  have  been  ready  to  reply  with 
his  habitual  sang-froid,  that  this  contradiction  on  his  part  was 
only  one  more  homage  rendered  to  necessity  by  experience. 
But  the  truth  is  that,  after  twenty  years  of  strife,  which, 
saturating  the  soil  of  Europe  with  blood,  had  mutilated, 
lacerated,  cut  up  all  territories  in  a  thousand  different  ways, 
an  extreme  weariness,  and  a  profound  disgust  of  conquests 
and  revolutions  had  taken  possession  of  the  public  mind.  The 
rapid  succession  of  the  republics  instituted  by  the  Directory, 
and  of  the  kingdoms  created  by  imperial  whim,  the  speedy 
passage  of  these  phantasms,  that  sprung  up  one  day,  only  to 
vanish  on  the  next,  had  fatigued  as  much  as  dazzled  the  gaze 
of  peoples.  Subjects  and  princes  alike  demanded  rest,  the  one  as 
wearied  with  passing  from  hand  to  hand,  and  master  to  master, 
as  the  others  with  being,  by  turn,  crowned  and  dethroned, 
according  to  the  chance  of  the  day.  Some  principle  of  public 
law  was  demanded  on  all  hands,  which  by  regulating  the 
orderly  transmission  of  power,  should  strengthen  the  basis 
of  all  states,  tottering  from  the  effect  of  so  many  shocks.  It 
was  the  credit  of  Talleyrand  to  understand  the  imperious 
character  of  this  general  sentiment,  and  the  influence  which 
the  representative  of  Louis  XVIII.  could  draw  from  it.  The 
French  monarchy  restored  within  its  former  limits,  deprived 
only  of  those  annexations  which  had  been  acquired  by  but 
transient  success,  seemed  the  first  and  noblest  application  of 
the  principle  of  reparation.     In  making   of  Louis  XVIII.  an 


PREFACE.  xxv  ii 

interpreter  of  the  common  wish  and  a  living  protest  against 
the  barbarity  of  a  regime  of  usurpation  and  violence,  he  assigned 
to  him  at  once  an  original  and  paramount  position  among 
his  royal  peers.  Restored  by  the  acts  of  a  war  in  which  he 
had  not  concurred,  the  King  of  France  was  under  obligations 
to,  and  protected  by,  those  who  had  reopened  to  him  the  gates 
of  his  country.  Re-established  by  virtue  of  a  right  which 
did  not  depend  on  force,  he  became  once  more  their  equal, 
and  considering  the  antiquity  of  his  race,  in  a  certain  measure, 
even  their  superior.  That  which  the  fear  of  his  arms  could 
not  effect,  respect  for  a  principle  obtained  for  him,  and  by 
restraining  the  ambition  of  Napoleon's  conquerors,  hindered 
them  from  imitating  his  example  and  appropriating,  as  he 
had  done,  at  their  own  caprice  and  desire,  territories  occupied 
by  their   armies. 

It  has  been  said,  I  know,  that  there  were  here  considerations 
stamped  with  a  chivalrous  loyalty,  whose  somewhat  stilted 
expression  could  scarcely  have  been  sincere,  or  even  quite 
serious  on  the  part  of  Talleyrand.  We  are  given  to  understand 
that,  instead  of  thus  following  up,  from  Dresden  to  Naples,  and 
in  fact  over  all  Europe,  the  restoration  of  legitimate  sovereigns, 
he  could  with  less  trouble,  have  obtained  more  solid  and 
substantial  advantages.  For  example,  if  he  had  allowed  Russia 
and  Prussia  to  extend  as  they  chose  in  the  north  at  the  expense 
of  their  neighbours,  it  would  have  been  possible  (it  is  thought)  to 
have  driven  back  the  German  frontier  from  our  own,  thus 
preventing  conflicts  in  the  future,  and  giving  us  a  better  place  in 
the  new  European  equilibrium.  This  judgment,  which  claims 
to  be  essentially  useful  and  practical,  has  seemed  always  to 
me  to  depend  upon  a  narrow  and  superficial  acquaintance  with 


xxviii  PREFACE. 

facts.  I  doubt  whether  it  could  be  maintained  in  face  of  the 
account  of  M.  de  Talleyrand's  first  appearance  at  the  Congress  of 
Vienna.  There  is  nothing  more  dramatic  than  the  account  of  this 
first  interview,  in  which  the  great  powers  still  allied,  declared 
to  him  with  a  haughty  coldness,  that,  even  after  peace  was 
concluded,  they  intended  to  maintain  themselves  in  a  close  and 
impenetrable  bond,  meaning  to  form  a  smaller  assembly  within 
the  great  one,  in  which  the  fate  of  Europe  would  have  been 
decided  with  closed  doors,  and  whose  resolutions  France  would 
have  had  no  other  alternative  but  to  submit  to.  Had  Talleyrand 
done  nothing  else  except  break  this  cordo?i  sanitaire,  by  showing 
himself  to  be  animated  with  a  monarchical  sentiment,  even  more 
exaggerated  than  that  of  those  who  suspected  him  ;  had  this 
unexpected  manoeuvre  had  no  other  result  than  to  cause  one  of 
his  interlocutors  to  say,  with  a  surprise  which  but  ill-concealed 
his  deception  :  "  In  truth,  Talleyrand  speaks  to  us  like  a  minister 
of  Louis  XIV.  ! "  those  who  care  for  our  national  dignity,  even 
in  the  past,  ought  yet  to  be  grateful  to  him  for  it.  But  it  was, 
at  bottom,  a  very  different  question  from  one  of  mere  dignity  or 
even  honour.  It  was  (as  the  event  but  too  soon  proved)  the 
very  existence  of  France  and  its  unity  which  were  continually 
at  stake.  For  by  what  other  title  after  all  than  that  of  his 
hereditary  right,  had  Louis  XVIII.  got  complete  restoration  of 
the  territory  of  his  forefathers  ?  Besides,  to  allow  elsewhere  the 
principle  of  heredity  to  be  violated  at  the  expense  of  the  weak, 
without  a  protest,  after  having  benefited  by  it  one's  self,  would 
have  been  an  inconsistency,  nay,  even  a  species  of  moral  ingrati- 
tude which  would  soon  have  borne  fruit,  and  the  perpetrator  of  it 
would  soon  have  had  occasion  to  repent.  Ten  months  had  not 
yet  elapsed,  when  France  having  met  with  fresh  disasters,  saw  her 


PREFACE.  xxix 

fate  once  more  placed  at  the  mercy  of  her  conquerors,  in  days 
of  inexpressible  anguish.  One  map  was  already  drawn,  which 
took  away  some  of  her  dearest  provinces.  Louis  XVIII.  had 
once  more  to  proclaim  the  inviolable  nature  of  his  heritage. 
But  how  could  he  have  raised  his  voice  and  gained  a  hearing,  if 
he  had  himself  connived  by  complying  through  the  complacency 
of  his  ambassador  at  Vienna,  in  other  robberies,  as  little  justifiable 
as  those  with  which  he  was  threatened  ?  Suppose,  for  example, 
that,  from  motives  of  self-interest,  Talleyrand,  instead  of 
defending  the  patrimony  of  our  old  and  faithful  friend,  the 
King  of  Saxony,  had  given  it  up  as  a  prey  to  the  King  of 
Prussia  who  coveted  it,  who  could,  after  Waterloo,  have  stayed 
these  same  appetites  whose  insatiable  greed  was  already  only 
too  well  known,  from  extending  beyond  the  Rhine,  as  far 
as  the  Meuse  and  the  Vosges  ?  In  reality,  the  position  of 
defender  of  legitimate  rights  assumed  by  Talleyrand,  was  never 
better  justified  than  on  the  day  when  the  shadow  of  the 
material  power  of  the  sovereign  whom  he  represented  had 
vanished,  and  there  only  remained  to  him  this  moral  power, 
ideal  in  appearance,  but  whose  force,  the  least  fanciful  man 
that  ever  lived  well  appreciated  on  that  day. 

Fifteen  years  pass  :  fifteen  years'  break  in  the  active  life  of 
Talleyrand,  fifteen  years'  silence  in  the  Memoirs.  Then  he  re- 
emerges,  coming  to  London  to  demand  admission  to  the 
councils  of  Europe,  for  a  new  power,  created  on  the  morrow  of  a 
revolution,  whose  first  act  had  been  to  interrupt  the  regular  course 
of  the  royal  succession.  The  transition  is  sudden,  it  must  be 
admitted,  and  this  change  of  role  as  of  language  takes  the 
reader  by  surprise.  On  second  thoughts,  however,  it  is  seen  that, 
in  spite  of  the  difference  and  even  often  of  the  contradiction  of 


xxx  PREFACE. 

words,  the  man  has  not  changed  ;  that  the  end  he  pursues  is  the 
same,  and  that  he  displays  the  same  art,  and  the  same  talents, 
whose  application  alone  differs.  At  Vienna,  it  was  a  question  of 
dissolving  a  coalition,  which,  maintaining  itself  in  full  peace 
condemned  us  for  ever  to  powerlessness  by  isolation.  At 
London,  it  was  necessary  to  hinder  the  same  coalition  from 
re-forming  for  a  new  war  ;  the  danger  was  not  less  pressing  and 
everything  led  to  the  opinion  that  it  would  be  more  difficult  to 
overcome  ;  for  nothing  had  changed  in  the  external  condition  of 
Europe  since  1815  ;  the  same  sentiments  apparently  animated 
the  same  cabinets,  presided  over  by  the  same  men  :  the  same 
generals  were  ready  to  take  command  of  the  same  armies,  and 
the  rumour  of  a  revolution  in  France  was  more  than  sufficient  to 
re-awaken  the  scarcely-lulled  hostilities.  By  the  most  singular 
chance,  it  was  the  conqueror  of  Waterloo  himself  who  presided 
over  the  council  of  the  ministers  of  England.  It  seems  that  he 
had  only  one  word  to  pronounce,  one  order  to  give,  to  set  in 
motion  all  that  mass  of  men  whom  he  had  led  to  victory. 

And  yet  all  is  not  the  same,  for,  during  these  fifteen  years 
"  this  large  slice  of  mortal  life,"  as  Tacitus  says,  time  has  done 
its  work,  and  underneath  the  apparently  unchanged  surface,  a 
great  change  has  taken  place  in  the  heart  of  public  opinion,  and 
nowhere  more  profoundly  than  in  that  land  of  Britain,  where 
M.  de  Talleyrand,  a  refugee  and  proscribed,  has  already  passed 
a  part  of  his  youth.  That  old  England  which  he  knew  at  that 
time,  the  England  of  Pitt  and  Castlereagh,  the  England  which 
had  been  the  soul  of  the  European  coalition,  which  had  breathed 
into  it  the  inspiration  of  its  hate,  and  paid  for  it  with  its  cash ; 
that  England  whose  aristocratic  pride  and  moral  instincts  Burke 
had  excited  against  the  revolutionary  excesses,  that  England  was 


PREFACE.  xxxi 

no  longer  recognizable.  A  breath  of  democratic  reforms  had 
crossed  the  Channel  and  penetrated  even  the  Gothic  vaults  of 
Westminster,  and  when  the  rising  of  July  1830  broke  out  at 
Paris,  no  voice  was  raised  to  curse  the  new  revolution.  On  the 
contrary,  England  remembered  complacently  that  she  had 
herself  had  her  revolution,  and  passed  the  crown  from  one 
branch  to  another  of  the  reigning  family.  The  new  French 
monarchy  was  formed  after  the  model  of  the  English  monarchy 
of  1688,  and  gave  signs  of  remaining  faithful  to  it  ;  this 
resemblance  pleased  British  pride,  which  was  flattered  that 
any  one  should  copy  her  example.  M.  de  Talleyrand  had  no 
sooner  set  foot  upon  English  ground,  than  he  was  warned  of 
this  change  by  every  current  of  political  atmosphere  that 
surrounded  him,  and  divined  at  once  new  means  of  action  that 
a  new  situation  had  given  him.  His  plan  was  made  ;  to  the 
coalition  of  the  monarchies  of  the  Continent  which  were  fright- 
ened by  all  revolutions,  he  opposed  the  alliance  of  two  liberal 
monarchies,  both  founded  on  national  will ;  and,  in  the  speech 
he  addressed  to  the  King  of  England,  the  first  time  he  was 
received  in  solemn  audience,  he  did  not  hesitate  to  offer  to 
the  heir  of  the  House  of  Brunswick  the  friendship  of  the 
King  of  the  French  in  the  name  of  a  community  of  principles, 
and  of  a  common  origin. 

From  this  moment  his  course  was  safe.  The  accession  of 
a  liberal  ministry,  whose  coming  into  office  he  had  foreseen, 
only  served  to  remove  all  obstacles.  He  took  a  lever  that 
he  knew  how  to  use.  The  threatening  coalition  was  crushed 
in  the  bud,  as  soon  as  England  retired  from  it.  The  English 
alliance  even  became  the  pivot  of  a  long  negotiation,  which  was 
to  end  in  substituting  on   our  frontiers,  an   amicable  neutrality 


xxxii  PREFACE. 

for  a  very  inconvenient  neighbour,  by  creating,  at  Brussels,  one 
more  kingdom  which,  like  that  of  France,  was  the  result  of 
the  national  choice. 

Here  we  are,  and  we  must  acknowledge  it,  far  from  Vienna, 
and  the  absolute  principle  of  legitimacy.  It  could  of  course 
no  longer  be  appealed  to,  at  least  with  the  same  authority.  It 
is  the  respect  due  to  the  national  will  that  has  replaced  it. 
There  are  certainly  many  objections  to  make  to  that  supple- 
ness of  mind  which  permitted  political  principles  to  be 
considered  not  as  ultimate  truths  compelling  assent,  but  as 
instruments  of  a  practical  utility,  which  could  be  made  use  of 
according  to  the  convenience  of  their  application.  Do  we  not, 
however,  see  in  that  the  almost  inevitable  result  of  frequent 
revolutions  ?  Talleyrand,  assuredly,  is  not  the  only  man  of  that 
generation  of  1789,  who,  having  entered  life  with  noble  illusions, 
after  several  unsuccessful  attempts,  followed  by  as  many  dis- 
appointments, conceived  a  contempt  for  theory,  and  acquired  a 
stock  of  political  scepticism.  Allowing  full  weight  to  this 
reservation,  it  is  difficult  not  to  be  sensible  of  the  suppleness 
and  richness  of  that  mind  which,  proceeding  from  most  dis- 
similar cases,  from  entirely  opposite  sources,  could  draw  to  the 
service  of  the  same  cause  an  inexhaustible  variety  of  arguments 
and  resources :  and  it  is  only  fair  to  acknowledge,  besides  the 
flexibility  of  his  form,  the  perseverance  of  his  patriotism,  and 
that  he  never  lost  sight  of  the  fact  that,  whatever  might  be  the 
internal  condition  of  France,  whether  she  be  preparing  revolu- 
tions or  restorations,  it  was  still  France,  and  that  she  had  a  right 
to  be  served  with  equal  care  for  her  present  security  and  future 
greatness. 

Finally,  we  should  still  fall  short  of  doing  full  justice,  if,  by 


VOL.  I. 


4  f.^1 


5   ^  ^-4   ^\* 


c/j  w 


a 

u 
X 

o 

2 
O 

H 
<! 

in 

< 
H 

a 

W 
H 


o 

« 

H 
Z 

o 

H 

o 
iz; 

H 

o 

o 
h 


PREFACE.  xxxv 

the  side  of  the  personal  share  taken  by  Talleyrand  in  the  happy 
results  of  the  negotiations  he  conducted,  the  honour  of  which 
accrues  to  him,  we  failed  to  attribute  an  honour  as  great,  or 
almost  so,  to  the  firm  and  intelligent  support  rendered  him  by 
the  two  sovereigns  whom  he  served.  The  Memoirs  have  the 
merit  of  acknowledging  this  share,  and  of  rendering  to  both 
representatives  of  the  House  of  France  the  exalted  position 
which  is  their  due. 

The  letters  of  Louis  XVIII.  that  have  been  already  pub- 
lished will  not  be  read  without  emotion,  letters  which  compel 
admiration  for  the  nobleness  of  the  language  which  is  only 
equalled  by  the  sublimity  of  the  sentiments  it  expresses,  and  the 
unmistakable  royal  tone  that  pervades  them.  Certain  papers, 
not  yet  published,  will  but  serve  to  confirm  and  increase  this 
impression.1  In  the  negotiation  relative  to  the  creation  of  the 
kingdom  of  Belgium,  the  correspondence  of  Louis  Philippe, 
presents  a  character,  different  indeed,  but  which  does  him  no 
less  honour.  They  are  the  counsels  of  perfected  experience,  of 
a  restless  vigilance,  noting  the  most  minute  details,  and  giving 
the  preference  consistently,  to  every  public  interest,  as  against 

1  There  will  be  found,  worthy  of  special  note,  in  the  third  volume  of  the  Memoirs, 
a  letter  from  King  Louis  XVIII.  which  is  of  such  keen  interest  that  I  feel  that  I 
ought  to  give  it  at  once.  It  is  addressed  to  M.  de  Talleyrand  in  1815,  at  the  time  of 
the  second  occupation  of  Paris  by  the  allies,  on  receipt  of  the  news  that  the  Prussians 
were  proposing  to  destroy  the  "  Bridge  of  Jena,"  whose  name  aroused  painful  mem- 
ories.    The  following  is  the  tenor  of  it : — 

"I  have  just  been  informed  that  the  Prussians  have  undermined  the  bridge  of 
Jena,  and  that  they  will  probably  blow  it  up  to-night.  The  Due  d'Otrante  carries 
instructions  to  General  Maison  to  prevent  this  by  every  means  in  his  power.  But,  as 
you  know,  he  has  none  at  all.  So  do  all  you  possibly  can,  by  means  of  the  Duke  (of 
Wellington)  and  Lord  Castlereagh.  As  to  myself,  I  will,  if  necessary,  go  to  the 
bridge  in  person  ;  they  may  then  blow  me  up,  if  they  like. 

"  Louis. 
"  Saturday,  10  a.m." 

This  document,  signed  by  the  king  himself,  is  to  be  found  in  the  papers  of  M.  de 
Talleyrand,  who  took  the  more  care  to  preserve  it  that  this  generous  trait  of  Louis 
XVIII.,  already  mentioned,  though  it  is  in  the  writings  of  the  time,  has  often  been 
questioned. 

C    2 


xxxvi  PREFACE. 

those  of  dynasty,  or  family,  while,  on  critical  occasions,  his 
decision  is  always  manly  and  sensible.  Both  of  them,  in  a 
word,  have  been  the  faithful  guardians  of  the  powerful  French 
unity  created  by  their  ancestors,  and  which  they  have  had  the 
good  fortune  to  leave  intact  to  their  successors,  whose  blunders 
and  follies  have  since  compromised  it.  If  the  lamentable 
mutilation  that  this  unity  has  undergone  were  irreparable, 
history  would  say  that  it  perished  on  the  day  on  which  the 
race  that  founded  it  left  the  throne. 


INTRODUCTION. 

The  appearance  of  these  memoirs  has  been  long  awaited 
with  much  curiosity  and  some  alarm.  Their  author  was  believed 
to  possess  more  dangerous  secrets  of  high  importance  than  any- 
other  man  of  his  time  ;  and  whether  or  not  he  had  friends  to 
reward  it  was  known  that  he  had  many  enemies  to  punish. 
When  it  was  found  that  he  had  forbidden  the  publication  of  his 
manuscripts  until  thirty  years  after  his  death,  the  belief  in  their 
compromising  and  dangerous  character  was  confirmed ;  and 
when,  after  the  lapse  of  the  required  time,  they  were  still 
withheld,  they  began  to  be  looked  upon  as  a  species  of  historical 
dynamite,  only  to  be  exploded  after  everybody  in  danger  had 
been  removed  from  the  field  of  human  activity.  But  if  this 
anticipation  were  disappointed — if  it  were  found  that  the  old 
diplomatist  had  been  thinking,  as  was  his  wont,  of  himself 
rather  even  than  of  his  enemies,  and  if  his  memoirs  should  not 
teem  with  scandalous  revelations  concerning  great  personages, 
it  was  still  thought  certain  that  they  would  undertake  to  vindi- 
cate what  had  been  portrayed  by  French  writers  and  statesmen 
as  well  nigh  the  most  scandalous  career  of  the  two  centuries  to 
which  it  belonged ;  and  such  a  vindication,  whether  successful 
or  not,  would  necessarily  shed  a  flood  of  light  on  some  of  the 
greatest  transactions  and  some  of  the  most  extraordinary  men 
of  modern  times. 

Whatever  effect  the  memoirs  may  now  have,  the  place  of  their 
author  in  history  has  not  hitherto  been  materially  changed  in 
the  fifty-two  years  that  have  elapsed  since  his  death.  No  reve- 
lations affecting  French  annals,  from  the  days  preceding  the 


xxxviii  INTRODUCTION. 

Revolution  of  '89  down  to  the  reign  of  the  Citizen  King,  have 
diminished  Talleyrand's  share  in  events  or  modified  the  accepted 
estimates  of  his  work  and  character.  His  career  was — and  it 
remains — unparalleled  in  modern  Europe,  for  length  and  variety 
of  distinguished  service.  Beginning  with  Louis  XVI.,  from 
whom  he  received  his  first  appointment,  and  from  whom  he 
went,  later,  with  a  letter  to  the  King  of  England,  he  served  in 
all  eight  known  masters,  not  to  reckon  a  great  number  of  others 
who  were,  at  one  time  or  another,  said  to  have  him  secretly  in 
their  pay.  He  was  President  of  the  Constituent  Assembly 
which  organized  the  French  Revolution.  He  was  sent  to 
London  on  a  secret  mission  with  a  passport  from  Danton.  He 
was  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  under  the  Directory,  under  the 
Consulate,  under  the  Empire,  under  Louis  XVIII.,  and  under 
Louis-Philippe.  In  diplomatic  skill  and  success  contemporary 
public  opinion  held  him  the  first  man  of  his  period  ;  that  is  to 
say,  for  half  a  century  the  first  man  in  Europe.  As  to  real 
influence  on  affairs,  it  is  doubtful  if  any  minister  since  can  be 
said  to  have  exerted  more,  with  the  exceptions  only  of 
Bismarck  and  Cavour.  Even  they  did  not  cover  so  wide  a 
range  or  deal  with  such  a  bewildering  variety  of  negotiations, 
extending  over  so  great  a  time  and  furthering  the  views  of  so 
many  masters. 

Sir  Henry  Bulwer  has  a  phrase  that,  in  a  way,  measures  him. 
"  He  was  the  most  important  man  in  the  Constituent  Assembly 
after  Mirabeau  ;  and  the  most  important  man  in  the  Empire 
after  Napoleon."  But  to  gauge  fairly  his  extraordinary  public 
life,  it  must  be  remembered  that  he  held  place  and  gained  in 
power  for  forty  years  after  Mirabeau's  death  ;  and  that  having 
been  one  of  the  leading  men  of  France  before  Napoleon  was 
heard  of,  he  remained  a  minister  and  an  ambassador  of  France 
long  after  Napoleon  had  eaten  out  his  heart  at  St.  Helena. 

Yet  in  spite  of  this  amazing  career,  his  countrymen  have  not 
been  generally  disposed  to  speak  well  of  him.  Napoleon  said 
of  him,  and  to  him,  that  he  was  a  silk  stocking  filled  with  filth. 
Carnot  said, "  He  brings  with  him  all  the  vices  of  the  old  regime, 
without  having  been  able  to  acquire  any  of  the  virtues  of  the 
new  one.     He  has  no  fixed  principles  ;  he  changes  them   as  he 


INTRODUCTION.  xxxix 

does  his  linen,  and  takes  them  according  to  the  wind  of  the  day 
— a  philosopher,  when  philosophy  is  the  mode  ;  a  republican 
now,  because  that  is  necessary  in  order  to  become  anything.  To- 
morrow he  will  declare  for  an  absolute  monarchy,  if  he  can  make 
anything  out  of  it.  I  don't  want  him  at  any  price."  Mirabeau 
called  him  "  this  vile,  base  trickster,"  and  again  wrote,  "  It  is 
dirt  and  money  that  he  wants.  For  money  he  has  sold  his 
honour  and  his  friend.  For  money  he  would  sell  his  soul — and 
he  would  be  right,  for  he  would  be  trading  muck  for  gold."  The 
very  member  of  the  Assembly  who  secured  his  recall  from  exile, 
Chenier,  wrote  of  him,  "  This  letter  of  the  Abbe  Maurice  proves 
to  me  that  after  having  been  Anarchist  and  Orleanist,  and  not 
having  been  Robespierrist  only  because  Robespierre  wouldn't 
have  him,  he  has  now  become  a  partisan  of  the  Directory.  This 
limp-foot,  without  respect  for  his  bishopric,  is  like  a  sponge, 
which  sucks  up  every  liquid  into  which  it  is  dropped,  but,  unlike 
the  sponge,  he  never  gives  anything  back.  Here  he  is,  recalled 
from  exile  yesterday,  and  proposing  proscriptions  for  to-morrow. 
If  the  Directory  wants  blood,  look  out  for  your  head  ; — Maurice 
will  not  refuse  it." 

Modern  French  writers,  while  of  course  less  passionate,  have 
been  apt  to  agree  in  admitting  his  extraordinary  venality,  his 
treachery  to  his  chiefs,  and  his  lack  of  veracity.  Lamartine 
admired  him,  but  Louis  Blanc  was  as  severe  as  the  bitterest  of 
his  contemporaries.  Chateaubriand  wrote  of  him,  "  When 
Monsieur  Talleyrand  is  not  conspiring,  he  is  making  corrupt 
bargains."  x  Guizot  said  he  was  a  man  of  the  court  and  of  diplo- 
macy,— not  of  government ;  that  he  was  indifferent  to  means  and 
almost  indifferent  to  the  end,  provided  he  found  in  it  a  personal 
success.  And,  to  quote  but  one  opinion  not  coming  from  his 
countrymen,  Gouverneur  Morris  said  of  him,  "  This  man  appears 
to  me  polished,  cold,  tricky,  ambitious  and  bad." 

Few  men,  indeed,  spoke  well  of  him.  Towards  the  close  of 
his  life,  when  he  was  ambassador  in  London,  an  attack  was  made 
upon  him  in  the  House  of  Lords  by  the  Marquis  of  London- 
derry. The  Duke  of  Wellington  offered  a  spirited  defence.  He 
had  held  official  relations  with  M.  de  Talleyrand  in  most  critical 
1  "  Quand  Monsieur  Talleyrand  ne  conspire  pas,  il  trafique." 


xl  INTRODUCTION. 

periods.  Never  had  he  encountered  a  man  more  vigorous  and 
skilful  in  protecting  the  interests  of  his  own  country,  or  one 
more  upright  and  honourable  in  his  attitude  towards  other 
countries.  Talleyrand  was  found  the  next  day  reading  the  report 
of  this  debate  with  tears  in  his  eyes  ;  and  he  said  to  his  visitor, 
"  I  am  all  the  more  grateful  to  the  Duke,  since  he  is  the  one 
statesman  in  the  world  who  has  ever  spoken  well  of  me." 

Later,  while  the  diplomatist,  now  a  very  old  man,  was  still 
in  office,  in  the  reign  of  Louis-Philippe,  Alexandre  Salle  published 
in  Paris  a  volume  undertaking  to  give  an  "  impartial  history  of 
Talleyrand's  political  life."  It  bore  upon  its  title-page  as  a 
motto,  a  verse  by  Barthelemy,  which  may  be  roughly  rendered 
thus  :  "  The  incarnate  lie,  the  living  perjury,  Prince  de  Benevent ; 
impenitent  Judas,  anointed  with  the  sacred  oil,  he  opens  his 
career  by  betraying  God  himself.  Alike  at  the  altar  and  at  the 
Court,  the  double  apostate  treats  the  State  as  he  treated  the 
Church."  The  introduction  to  this  same  work  concludes  with 
the  story  that  Louis  XVIII.  when  asked  to  express  his  opinion 
about  his  famous  Foreign  Minister,  replied  by  quoting  some 
lines  of  Corneille  regarding  Richelieu,  of  which  this  is  the 
substance :  "  He  has  done  me  too  much  good  that  I  should 
speak  ill  of  him,  and  too  much  harm  that  I  should  speak  well  of 
him."1 

The  evil  in  a  public  man's  life  is  apt  to  attract  wider  attention 
than  the  good,  and  certainly  his  countrymen  have  made  no 
exception  to  this  rule  in  Talleyrand's  favour.  Taking  his  career 
from  their  records,  what  an  extraordinary  portrait  is  presented  ! 
Here  are  a  few  of  the  lines  in  it  : — 

A  profligate  priest,  who  owed  his  start  in  life  to  an  ill- 
flavoured  joke  about  the  immorality  of  Paris,  made  in  the 
drawing-room  of  Madame  du  Barry,  the  king's  favourite. 

A  bishop  who  was  forced  into  the  public  journals  to  explain 
that  the  money  he  had  recently  made  in  gambling  was  not  won 
in  gambling  houses,  but  in  clubs  ;  and  that  it  was  not  so  much 
as  reported — being  only  30,000  francs,  instead  of  six  or  seven 
hundred  thousand. 

1  "  U  m'a  fait  trop  de  bien  pour  en  dire  du  mal, 
11  m'a  fait  trop  de  mal  pour  en  dire  du  bien." 


INTRODUCTION.  xli 

A  confidential  friend  of  Mirabeau,  yet  accused  of  poisoning 
him. 

A  minister,  and  for  years  the  intimate  of  Napoleon,  yet 
suspected  of  a  plot  to  assassinate  him. 

A  great  statesman  whose  enormous  and  continuous  receipt 
of  bribes  from  the  beginning  to  the  end  of  his  long  career  is 
unquestioned. 

A  trusted  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  who,  while  in  office 
under  the  Directory,  thwarted  their  measures  and  plotted  for 
the  coup  d'etat  of  Napoleon  ;  who,  while  in  office  under  Napoleon, 
conspired  with  the  Emperors  of  Russia  and  Austria  to  defeat 
his  plans,  and  plotted  for  the  return  of  the  Bourbons  ;  who,  while 
in  office  under  Louis  XVIII.  schemed  for  his  overthrow,  and  for 
the  accession  of  Louis  Philippe. 

The  Constituent  Assembly  forbade  his  return  to  France. 
Pitt  expelled  him  from  England.  Washington  refused  to  receive 
him  in  America.     The  Pope  excommunicated  him. 

And  yet  he  lived  to  be  summoned  back  to  France  and 
appointed  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  for  the  revolutionary 
government  ;  lived  to  return  to  England  as  ambassador  from 
France,  with  the  prestige  of  the  most  distinguished  living  diplo- 
matist, to  meet  with  a  reception  which  could  scarcely  have  been 
more  respectful  if  he  had  been  a  crowned  head  ;  lived  to  give 
notice  to  the  American  Ministers  Plenipotentiary  in  Paris  that 
they  must  buy  peace  or  leave  the  country  ;  lived  to  have  the 
Pope's  excommunication  withdrawn,  and  died  in  the  odour  of 
sanctity,  with  his  king  at  his  bedside,  and  the  blessings  of  the 
Cardinal  of  Paris. 

Many  of  the  lineaments  in  this  strange  portrait  drawn  by 
the  French  historians  are  not  to  be  much  changed.  There  is 
little  chance  to  erase  the  licentiousness,  the  treachery,  the  deceit, 
the  monstrous  venality.  In  recalling  them,  however,  it  must 
always  be  remembered  that  he  can  be  only  fairly  judged  by  the 
standard  of  his  time,  which  was  lax  to  a  degree  we  can  hardly 
comprehend,  especially  with  reference  to  the  first  of  these  vices 
and  the  last.  When  the  American  Commissioners  resented 
Talleyrand's  demand  for  a  bribe  of  250,000  dollars  for  himself, 
and  a  bigger  one  called  a  loan,  for  the  Directory,  his  representa- 


xlii  INTRODUCTION. 

tive  said  naively,  "  Don't  you  know  that  everything  is  bought  in 
Paris  ?  Do  you  dream  that  you  can  get  on  with  this  Govern- 
ment without  paying  your  way  ?  " 

It  must  be  further  remembered,  and  to  his  honour,  that  while 
he  may  be  said  to  have  betrayed  her  rulers,  he  never  betrayed 
France.  On  the  contrary,  when  he  was  secretly  thwarting  his 
masters,  he  was  often  helping  his  country.  On  notable  occa- 
sions he  rendered  her  service  of  incomparable  value,  and  almost 
saved  her  from  destruction  as  a  first-class  European  power. 

It  was  a  touching  eulogy  pronounced  on  him  at  his  death  in 
varying  phrases  by  both  Thiers  and  Mignet,  that  he  had  always 
shown  an  aversion  to  persecutions  and  violence,  and  that  he  had 
never  done  harm  to  anybody.  In  the  main  this  praise  is 
deserved.  "  But,"  exclaims  St.  Beuve,  in  protest,  "  there  are 
three  points  in  his  life  which  raise  terrible  doubts — the  death  of 
Mirabeau,  the  affair  of  the  Due  d'Enghien,  the  affair  of  Mem- 
breuil."     This  last  was  the  plot  for  the  assassination  of  Napoleon. 

Talleyrand  was  perfectly  aware  of  the  shocking  charges 
against  himself  in  connection  with  the  death  of  Mirabeau,  but 
he  makes  no  reference  whatever  to  them  in  the  portion  of  his 
memoirs  treating  of  that  period.  The  fact  that  they  were 
believed  at  the  time  only  shows  the  estimate  then  placed  on  him 
by  some  of  his  contemporaries.  On  the  other  hand,  it  must  be 
said  that  many  things  make  the  story  improbable,  and  that  the 
so-called  evidence  is  circumstantial  and  trivial.  Napoleon, 
repeatedly,  in  conversation  and  in  writing,  charged  the  murder 
of  the  Due  d'Enghien  to  him.  Talleyrand  devotes  one  chapter 
to  repelling  the  accusation,  and  fixing  the  responsibility  for  the 
crime  on  Napoleon  himself.  As  to  the  plot  to  have  Napoleon 
assassinated,  even  Talleyrand's  enemies  must  admit  that,  while 
some  circumstances  were  certainly  suspicious,  the  proof  of  his 
complicity  is  fragmentary  and  not  convincing. 

No  portrait  of  the  man  can  be  just  which  does  not  relieve  by 
many  light  touches  the  sombre  colours  in  which  he  has  generally 
been  depicted.  He  had  the  uniform  courtesy  and  dignity  of  the 
old  regi))ie.  He  was  the  most  accomplished  of  courtiers  ;  the 
most  correct  of  masters  of  ceremonies.  He  spoke  well,  and  he 
wrote  better — his  few  appearances  at  the  Academy  being  really 


IN  TROD  UCTION.  xl  i  i  i 

events.  In  the  brilliant  salons  of  the  Court  circles  before  the 
Revolution,  he  was  a  social  lion.  Women  always  liked  and 
helped  him.  His  witty  sayings  were  the  talk  of  Paris.  In 
prosperity  he  was  not  arrogant ;  in  times  of  trouble  he  bore 
himself  with  unruffled  dignity  and  composure.  When  Napoleon 
denounced  him  in  the  presence  of  others,  for  treachery  and 
venality,  he  merely  said,  as  he  went  down  the  staircase,  "  What 
a  pity  that  so  great  a  man  should  have  been  so  badly  brought 
up."  At  another  time,  when  Napoleon,  then  First  Consul,  asked 
him  how  he  had  become  so  rich  (he  was  said  to  be  already  worth 
thirty  millions  of  francs),  he  replied,  "  Nothing  could  be  more 
simple,  General ;  I  bought  Rentes  the  day  before  the  iSth  Brumaire 
(the  day  on  which  Napoleon  seized  power),  and  I  sold  them  the 
day  after."  He  had  taken  office  under  Louis  XVIII.,  and  was 
representing  France  at  the  Congress  of  Vienna,  when  Napoleon 
suddenly  came  back  from  Elba.  He  merely  discovered  that  his 
liver  was  a  little  out  of  order,  and  he  must  go  to  Carlsbad. 
"  The  first  duty  of  a  diplomat,"  he  observed,  "  after  a  Congress, 
is  to  take  care  of  his  liver."  A  few  months  later,  after  Waterloo, 
there  were  fresh  symptoms  of  trouble  with  the  same  organ,  while 
Louis  XVIII.  regarded  him  askance  ;  but  the  moment  he  was 
reappointed  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  all  was  well. 

The  evil  Talleyrand  did  was  chiefly  to  individuals.  The 
good  he  did  was  to  France.  His  public  action  in  the  Constituent 
Assembly  was  most  important,  and  in  the  main  most  judicious. 
The  French  writers  of  that  period,  and  even  down  to  the  day  of 
his  death,  habitually  ascribed  sinister  motives  to  every  act,  and 
professed  to  find  his  hidden  hand  in  many  excesses  of  the 
Revolutionary  party.  But  he  can  only  be  fairly  judged  now  by 
what  he  is  known  to  have  done  ;  and  by  that  standard  there  is 
no  Frenchman  who  might  not  be  proud  of  his  record  in  the 
Constituent  Assembly.  He  was  the  pioneer  in  the  establish- 
ment of  the  metric  system.  He  opposed  the  issue  of  the  assignats, 
and  accurately  foretold  their  end.  He  presented  an  elaborate 
and  well-considered  plan  for  the  reform  of  the  finances,  and  the 
establishment  of  a  sinking  fund.  He  urged  the  suppression  of 
lotteries.  He  presented  in  a  comprehensive  report  and  bill,  a 
judicious  system  of  national  education,  including  a  plan  for  the 


xliv  INTRODUCTION. 

secularization  of  the  schools.  He  favoured  the  policy  of  peace 
and  alliance  with  England.  Bishop  as  he  still  was,  he  presented 
the  measure  for  selling  the  property  of  the  clergy,  and  thus 
secured  for  the  almost  bankrupt  treasury  of  Louis  XVI.  two 
milliards  of  francs.  He  carried  the  measure  for  abolishing  the 
oppressive  tithes  of  the  clergy.  In  effect  this  representative  of 
the  old  nobility  of  France  showed  himself  among  the  earliest  to 
recognize  the  inevitable  changes,  and  loyally  endeavoured  to 
introduce  reforms  which  would  enable  the  monarchy  to  adapt 
itself  to  them  without  too  violent  a  wrench.  As  time  went  on, 
he  became  convinced  of  the  incapacity  of  the  king  to  meet  the 
crisis.  Thenceforward  he  went  with  the  tide,  but  strove  rather 
to  moderate  and  restrain  it.  The  address  to  the  people  of  France 
which  the  Assembly  chose  him  to  prepare,  breathed  throughout 
a  spirit  of  genuine  and  almost  republican  devotion  to  the  rights 
of  man  as  we  now  understand  them. 

In  other  and  widely  differing  occasions  his  influence  was 
exerted  to  promote  peace,  and  to  discourage  wars  of  mere  am- 
bition. He  faithfully  warned  Napoleon  against  his  Spanish 
policy,  and  fell  into  disgrace  for  a  time  through  efforts  to  thwart 
it.  With  that  Spanish  policy,  the  downfall  of  Napoleon  began. 
At  Erfurt  he  protested  against  the  schemes  of  wanton  attack 
upon  Austria,  and  even  maintained  private  relations,  and  had 
nightly  interviews  with  the  Czar  Alexander  to  keep  him  from 
being  led  into  them  by  Napoleon's  importunities.  At  another 
stage  in  Napoleon's  extraordinary  aggressions  he  protested,  "  I 
do  not  want  to  be  the  torment  of  Europe."  He  lost  his  place 
in  the  cabinet  of  Louis  XVIII.  because  that  king  would  not 
tolerate  his  plans  for  an  alliance  with  England.  Later  on,  he 
went  to  England  as  the  ambassador  of  Louis-Philippe,  and 
there  negotiated  the  treaty  of  1834,  which  secured  his  country 
many  years  of  peace  and  prosperity.  He  rendered  useful  ser- 
vice at  the  peace  of  Amiens.  At  the  Congress  of  Vienna  his 
efforts  were  directed  to  an  English  rather  than  to  a  Russian 
alliance  ;  and  for  this  Thiers  and  others  have  criticized  him,  but 
the  memoirs  make  an  end  of  that  criticism.  In  the  negotiations 
before  and  after  the"  Hundred  Days  "  Talleyrand  is  now  seen  to 
have  rendered  his  country  one  of  the  greatest  services,  perhaps 


INTRODUCTION.  xlv 

the  greatest  service,  of  his  life.  He  may  be  said  perhaps  to 
have  saved  her  from  dismemberment,  and  certainly  to  have 
preserved  her  great  place  in  Europe. 

Two  other  acts  of  Talleyrand's  in  widely  different  fields, 
may  here  be  cited,  out  of  many  which  this  generation  should  not 
allow  to  be  forgotten. 

He  proposed  under  the  Consulate  a  practical  system  of 
Civil  Service  for  the  Department  of  Foreign  Affairs.  He  was 
only  permitted  to  introduce  it  in  part,  but  his  remarkable  memo- 
randum on  the  subject  can  be  read  with  profit  to  this  day. 

He  defended  the  liberty  of  the  press  under  Louis  XVIII. 
against  the  tendency  of  the  king  and  the  court.  Twice,  in  the 
Chamber  of  Peers,  in  successive  years,  he  faced  the  reaction  on 
this  subject,  and  exposed  the  fatal  path  on  which  the  court  party 
wished  to  enter. 

"  Let  us  take  for  granted,"  he  once  said,  "  that  what  has  been 
held  good  and  useful  by  all  the  enlightened  men  of  a  country, 
without  variation,  during  a  succession  of  years  of  various  govern- 
ments, is  a  necessity  of  the  time.  Such,  gentlemen,  is  the  liberty 
of  the  press.  .  .  I  do  not  say  that  governments  ought  to  hasten 
to  recognize  these  new  necessities.  But  when  they  have  been 
recognized,  to  take  back  what  was  given,  or — which  comes  to 
the  same  thing — to  suspend  it  indefinitely,  that  is  a  rashness 
which  I,  more  than  any  one  else,  hope  may  not  bring  a  sad  re- 
pentance to  those  who  have  conceived  the  convenient  but  pitiful 
thought.  You  must  never  compromise  the  good  faith  of  a 
government.  In  our  days  it  is  not  easy  to  deceive  for  a  long 
time.  There  is  some  one  who  has  more  sense  than  Voltaire, 
more  sense  than  Bonaparte,  more  than  any  Director,  more  than 
any  Minister,  past,  present,  or  to  come.  That  is  everybody.  To 
undertake  or  even  to  persist  in  a  controversy,  where  all  the 
world  is  interested  against  you,  is  a  fault ;  and  to-day  all  political 
faults  are  dangerous."  Students  of  current  American  politics 
are  accustomed  to  the  phrase,  "  Everybody  is  wiser  than  any- 
body." It  may  interest  some  of  them  to  note  that  Talleyrand 
said  so,  before  the  American  politicians. 

The  memoirs  have  been  expected  to  clear  up  some  of  the 
dark  charges  against  him,  and  to  do  much  towards  clarifying 
our  views  of  that  extraordinary  epoch.     They  are  sure  to  leave 


xlvi  INTRODUCTION. 

a  better  impression  as  to  the  work  of  Talleyrand  himself.  One 
of  his  most  merciless  critics,  St.  Beuve,  writing  in  1867,  as  to 
the  anticipations  then  felt  concerning  the  present  publication, 
judiciously  says  :  "  I  am  persuaded  that  everything  to  be  found 
in  the  letters  and  other  writings  of  Talleyrand  will  give  one  a 
more  favourable  idea  of  him.  People  of  genius  like  his  never 
put  the  worst  of  their  thoughts  or  of  their  lives  on  paper." 

What  we  now  find  that  he  did  put  on  paper  proves  to  be,  and 
was  intended  by  its  author  to  be,  as  the  French  say,  a  "  serious 
book," — meaning  thereby  that  whatever  its  variety  of  subjects  or 
interest  in  treatment,  it  is  written  throughout  with  a  constant 
view  to  a  serious  purpose.  Whoever  comes  to  it  for  the  enter- 
tainment which  a  man  with  such  a  well-grounded  reputation  for 
wit  and  repartee  might  easily  have  furnished — for  anecdotes, 
amusing  reminiscences  of  court  incidents,  and  in  general,  for  the 
table-talk  of  the  ruling  classes  during  the  momentous  periods  of 
which  it  treats,  will  be  disappointed.  WThoever  seeks  details 
even  of  the  author's  own  life  will  be  disappointed.  The  memoirs 
are  obviously  meant  to  be  the  elaborate  vindication  of  a  great 
career  ;  not  an  autobiography,  nor  a  lively  account  of  the  author's 
times,  not  a  collection  of  scandalous  anecdotes,  nor  even  a  series 
of  malicious  revelations  of  state  secrets  to  the  hurt  of  old  enemies. 
Incidentally,  some  state  secrets  may  be  revealed  ;  as  a  means  of 
vindication  some  of  the  highest  reputations  are  mercilessly 
assailed,  and  certainly  some  of  the  most  important  occurrences 
in  the  history  of  modern  Europe  are  set  in  a  new  light.  But  the 
one  controlling  aim  of  Prince  Talleyrand  was  to  elucidate  and 
vindicate  his  own  large  part  in  the  events  of  his  time. 

He  does  it  with  a  certain  haughty  dignity.  He  apologizes 
for  nothing.  He  conceives  that  he  gave  to  every  government  he 
served  as  much  as  he  received  from  it,  and  he  goes  far  towards 
adducing  the  proof.  He  narrates  without  passion,  and  reasons 
generally  on  the  high  plane  of  the  real  interests  of  his  country, 
and  the  real  interests  of  Europe,  which  he  declares  were  not 
antagonistic. 

He  has  been  well  served  by  those  to  whom  he  committed  his 
memoirs.  They  have  been  able  to  secure  the  admirable  execu- 
tion of  his  wishes,  even  after  they  have  followed  him  to  the  grave. 
The  author  himself  could  not  fail  to  be  content  with  the  admir- 


INTRODUCTION.  xlvii 

able  editing  which  it  finally  fell  to  the  Due  de  Broglie  to  give  to 
his  work  ;  and  the  eminent  abilities  of  that  French  statesman 
have  never  accomplished  more  skilfully  a  more  difficult  task  than 
in  his  prefatory  analysis  and  appreciation  of  Talleyrand's  career. 
The  memoirs  are  written  in  a  pure  and  admirable  French  style, 
the  charm  of  which  defies  translation  ;  but  in  M.  de  Beaufort  the 
publishers  have  found  a  translator  whose  previous  rendering 
of  the  memoirs  of  the  late  Due  de  Broglie,  and  of  Prince  Jerome's 
Napoleon  and  his  Detractors,  gave  every  guarantee  of  accuracy, 
while  his  scholarship  and  familiarity  with  the  subject  lend  value 
to  the  notes  he  has  added. 

The  great  periods  in  Talleyrand's  career  were  the  Constituent 
Assembly ;  the  first  years  of  his  co-operation  with  Napoleon  ; 
the  later  years  when  he  resisted  but  was  still  able  to  influence 
Napoleon's  aggressions  ;  the  Congress  of  Vienna  and  the  last 
mission  to  England.  On  the  first  of  these,  for  reasons  hereafter 
suggested,  the  memoirs  give  less  new  information  than  was  to  be 
expected.  Their  account  of  the  resistance  to  Napoleon  enhances 
the  estimate  of  Talleyrand's  work  at  that  epoch  ;  and  in  their 
story  of  the  transactions  at  Vienna  we  see  for  the  first  time  in 
an  adequate  light,  the  great  diplomatist  at  the  height  of  his 
powers,  and  winning  his  worthiest  triumphs.  He  went  to  Vienna 
the  representative  of  a  prostrate  nation,  and  of  a  throne  propped 
up  by  the  bayonets  of  the  army  that  had  conquered  it.  He 
found  the  victors  apportioning  the  spoil  without  reference  to  him, 
and  without  even  admitting  him  to  their  conferences.  He  had 
neither  physical  power  nor  moral  prestige  behind  him  ;  no  great 
army,  no  established  institutions  ;  hardly  even  a  country  ;  and 
the  very  instructions  he  bore  he  had  written  himself.  He  stood 
alone  against  Europe.  And  yet  in  a  few  months,  by  sheer  force 
of  intellect  and  skill,  he  had  divided  the  allies,  had  secured  the 
territorial  integrity  of  his  country,  had  negotiated  most  useful 
alliances,  had  greatly  strengthened  the  French  throne,  had  done 
something  towards  preventing  the  wanton  partition  of  other 
nationalities,  and  had  put  France  again  in  her  leading  position 
in  Europe. 

The  popular  idea  was  (in  accordance  with  the  hint  which  he 
himself  threw  out),  that  he  forbade  the  publication  of  his  manu- 
scripts for  so  long  a  period  after  his  death  because  they  com- 


xlviii  INTRODUCTION. 

promised  too  many  reputations.  It  is  quite  as  probable  that  his 
sense  of  the  generally  hostile  judgment  of  his  contemporaries 
and  particularly  of  his  countrymen,  was  so  keen  that  he  wished 
to  make  his  final  appeal  on  behalf  of  his  own  reputation  to 
another  generation. 

On  this  theory  of  the  purpose  with  which  they  were  written, 
these  memoirs  have  an  interest  from  the  points  on  which  they 
are  silent,  as  well  as  from  those  they  elucidate.  What  he  could 
not  defend,  or  what  he  despised  too  much  to  care  to  defend,  he 
ignores. 

On  the  subject  of  his  early  and  constant  receipt  of  bribes, 
there  is  a  profound  silence.  Yet  his  venality  was  so  notorious 
and  so  monstrous  that  Napoleon  denounced  him  for  it  again 
and  again  ;  details  had  repeatedly  appeared  in  specific  cases, 
and  statements  had  been  published  during  his  lifetime,  under- 
taking to  show  the  various  items  and  sources  for  his  receipts 
of  some  thirty  millions  of  francs,  acquired  in  a  few  years  of 
official  life  before  the  proclamation  of  the  Empire.1     It  was  a 

1  In  the  life  of  Talleyrand  by  Louis  Bastide,  published  in  1838,  a  few  months  only 
after  Talleyrand's  death,  the  following  table  is  given  of  his  receipts  for  three  years  : 

Francs. 

From  Portugal 1,200,000 

From  Austria  for  the  secret  articles  in  the  Convention  of 

Campo  Formio  in  1797 1,000,000 

From  Prussia,  for  having  advised  it  of  these  articles,  and  pre- 
vented their  execution 1,000,000 

From  the  Elector  of  Bavaria 500,000 

From  the  King  of  Naples,  as  the  price  of  recognizing  his 

neutrality 500,000 

From  the  Pope 150,000 

From  the  King  of  Sardinia 300,000 

From  the  Grand  Duke  of  Tuscany  in  order  that  the  French 

troops  should  respect  his  territory      500,000 

From  the  Cis-Alpine   Republic,  in  order  to  obtain  a  new 

agreement 1,000,000 

From  the  Batavian  Republic,  for  the  same  object 1,200,000 

During  the  first  six  months  of  the  Congress  of  Rastadt  .    .    .  1,800,000 
For  his  share  in  the  prizes  made  by  French  privateers  on 

neutral  vessels 2,000,000 

From  the  Prince  de  la  Paix 1,000,000 

From  the  Grand  Vizier 500,000 

From  the  Hanseatic  cities 500,000 

Net  profits  from  speculations  in  French  and  foreign  funds 

during  the  negotiations  of  Lord  Mai mesbury  at  Lille     .  1,500.000 

14,650,000 

To  which  should  be  added  the  enormous  profits  which  he  realized  by  his  operations  on 
the  Stock  Exchange  on  the  18th  Brumaire.     The  author  adds  that  all  these  details  had 


INTRODUCTION.  xlix 

subject  on  which  there  was  nothing  to  be  said,  and  the  sagacious 
diplomat  knew  when  to  say  nothing. 

But  aside  from  Napoleon's  charges,  oral  and  written,  as  well 
as  from  those  of  French  politicians  and  journals  which  he 
perhaps  thought  he  could  afford  to  ignore,  there  was  one 
arraignment  against  him  for  blackmail,  so  direct,  detailed,  and 
authoritative,  that  he  might  have  been  expected  to  offer  either 
an  explanation,  a  denial,  or  a  counter-attack.  This  was  the 
case  set  forth  by  the  three  American  Commissioners  and  Minis- 
ters Plenipotentiary,  Messrs.  Charles  C.  Pinckney,  John  Marshall, 
and  Elbridge  Gerry,  in  a  series  of  official  despatches  to  the  Secre- 
tary of  State  of  the  United  States,  transmitted  to  Congress  in 
special  messages  by  John  Adams,  then  the  President.  In  effect, 
Talleyrand,  as  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  under  the  Directory, 
refused  the  commissioners  official  recognition  unless  he  could 
be  assured  that  they  would  give  him  personally  a  "gratification  " 
of  two  hundred  and  fifty  thousand  dollars,  and  make  a  loan  to 
the  Directory  of  thirty-two  millions  of  Dutch  florins.  He  kept 
them  dancing  attendance  for  months,  and  long  declined  to  take 
up  their  business  at  all,  the  demand  for  the  money  being  mean- 
time often  repeated.  Mr.  Bellamy  of  Hamburg  and  Mr.  Hautval, 
with  one  or  two  others  whose  names  have  been  preserved  in  the 
State  department  at  Washington,  but  never  disclosed,  acted  at 
first  as  intermediaries.1  They  presented  the  demands,  orally 
and  in  writing,  and  persistently  argued  the  necessity  for  com- 
pliance. They  bore  messages  from  Talleyrand,  arranged  for 
meetings  with  him,  and  some  of  them  accompanied  the  commis- 
sioners to  these  meetings.  Talleyrand  himself  repeated  the 
demand  for  the  loan,  exactly  as  they  had  presented  it,  and 
urged  it  with  the  same  arguments.  He  even  put  it  in  writing, 
permitted  one  of  the  commissioners  to  read  it,  and  then  with- 
drew and  burnt  the  manuscript.  He  did  not  personally  demand 
the  "  gratification  "  of  a  quarter  of  a  million  dollars,  but  merely 
said,  in  reply  to  Mr.  Elbridge  Gerry's  remark  that  these  seemed 
much  the  same  financial  views  Mr.  Bellamy  had  been  urging, "that 

been  published  in  various  works,  and  that  M.  Talleyrand  had  never  dared  to  refute  or 
correct  these  figures. 

1   Treaties  and  Conventions  between  the  United  States  and  other  Powers,  with  Notes 
on  the  Negotiations.     Government  edition,  p.  998. 

VOL.    I.  d 


1  INTRODUCTION. 

the  information  Mr.  Bellamy  had  given  him  was  just,  and  might 
always  be  relied  on." 1  Mr.  Bellamy  was  the  one  who  had  been 
most  pertinacious  and  explicit  about  the  "  gratification,"  and  he 
was  present  at  this  conversation.  The  American  commissioners, 
through  months  of  solicitation,  sturdily  refused  the  demands, 
and  diplomatic  relations  between  the  two  countries  were  finally 
broken  off.  The  President,  in  communicating  the  last  of  the 
correspondence  to  Congress,  said,  "  I  will  never  send  another 
minister  to  France  without  assurances  that  he  will  be  received, 
respected,  and  honoured  as  the  representative  of  a  great,  free, 
powerful,  and  independent  nation."  2  The  documents  leave  no 
moral  doubt  of  the  story;  they  were  printed  in  the  volumes 
comprising  the  President's  official  communications  to  Congress, 
and  had  been  before  the  world  for  a  quarter  of  a  century  when 
these  memoirs  were  completed.  The  absence  of  a  line  of  refer- 
ence to  them  is  as  interesting  in  its  way  as  anything  Prince 
Talleyrand  could  have  said  on  the  subject. 

He  spent  many  months  in  the  United  States  soon  after  the 
establishment  of  their  independence,  in  which  France  had  aided, 
and  while  a  revolution,  stimulated  in  part  by  the  American 
example,  was  in  progress  in  his  own  land  ;  but  he  found,  in  his 
recollections  of  his  American  visit,  almost  nothing  suggested  by 
either  event,  and  nothing  concerning  the  great  man  then  Chief 
Magistrate  of  the  country  which  gave  him  hospitality.  His 
lack  of  sympathy  with  republicanism,  whether  in  the  United 
States  or  in  France,  explains  the  one  ;  and  General  Washington's 
refusal  to  receive  him  explains  the  other.  Lord  Lansdowne 
had  given  him  a  warm  letter  of  introduction  to  Washington, 
setting  forth  that  Talleyrand  was  really  in  exile  because, 
although  a  bishop,  he  had  desired  to  promote  the  general 
freedom  of  worship,  and  eulogizing  him  for  having  sacrificed  his 
ambition  in  the  Church  to  his  devotion  to  principle.  Washington 
possibly  had  his  own  views  as  to  the  extent  to  which  Talley- 
rand's exile  was  due  to  his  high  religious  principles.  Hamilton's 
influence,  always  great — was  joined  to  Lord  Lansdowne's 
eulogy  ;  but  both  were  unavailing.  The  refusal  to  receive  the 
French  exile,  however,  was  quietly  put  upon  political  grounds. 
1  American  State  Papers,  1798-1803,  vol.  iv.  p.  25.  -  Ibid.  p.  137. 


INTRODUCTION.  li 

To  men  of  this  time  it  seems  that  no  part  of  Talleyrand's 
life  was  more  creditable  or  useful  than  that  spent  in  the  Con- 
stituent Assembly.  But  this  scion  of  the  old  nobility  of  France 
had  never  changed  his  real  political  views.  He  was  always  a 
monarchist — in  the  Assembly,  under  the  Directory,  under 
Napoleon.  He  wished  to  assist  Louis  XVI.,  until  he  became 
convinced  that  the  constitutional  feebleness  and  obstinacy  of 
that  monarch  were  beyond  help.  "  The  ministers,"  he  says, 
"  did  not  know  that  arbitrary  power  has  no  right  to  punish  with 
moderation  those  who  resist  it,  and  that  by  its  very  nature  it  is 
required  either  to  ignore  or  to  crush  its  enemies."  When  he 
found  that  the  king  would  not  attempt  in  season  to  act  upon 
such  principles,  Talleyrand  abandoned  the  monarchy,  and  took 
care  of  himself.  But  while  he  went  with  the  Republican 
current,  he  was  never  republican.  He  found,  therefore,  little 
satisfaction  in  his  honourable  and  brilliant  record  in  the  Con- 
stituent Assembly,  and  his  account  of  it,  in  view  of  its  real 
importance,  is  meagre. 

So  he  touches  very  lightly  his  extraordinary  relations  to  the 
Church.  But  he  takes  pains  to  make  it  clear  that  he  was  forced 
into  the  priesthood,  and  that  he  never  felt  any  real  calling  for 
his  sacred  vocation.  He  is  equally  careful  to  show  that  in 
critical  emergencies  he  had  been  able  to  do  Rome  service,  and 
that  the  feelings  of  the  Pope  towards  him  were  friendly. 

The  scandals  of  his  private  life  as  priest  and  bishop  receive 
only  sufficient  allusion  to  indicate  his  contempt  for  the  subject. 
Thus  his  relations  to  the  Countess  Flahaut  were  known,  and  a 
letter  to  her  had  been  published,  in  which,  describing  his  exercise 
of  his  sacred  functions  at  the  great  ceremony  of  the  National 
Oath,  in  the  Champ  de  Mars,  he  first  hints  at  his  own  lack  of 
religious  faith,  and  then  says  :  "  I  hope  you  feel  to  what  divinity 
I  yesterday  addressed  my  prayers  and  my  oath  of  fidelity.  You 
alone  are  the  Supreme  Being  whom  I  adore,  and  always  will 
adore."  The  husband  of  the  Countess  afterwards  lost  his  head 
on  the  guillotine ;  and  the  widow  in  exile  at  Hamburg,  was 
about  to  contract  another  marriage,  as  Talleyrand,  returning 
from  his  exile,  came  to  the  same  place.  When  she  heard  of  his 
purpose  she  requested  him  not  to  come,  since  she  feared  that  his 

d  2 


Hi  INTRODUCTION. 

presence,  coupled  with  the  stones  of  their  former  relations,  might 
embarrass  her  approaching  marriage.  The  old  man  of  eighty 
puts  this  in  his  memoirs  as  an  amusing  instance  of  feminine 
simplicity,  and  says  that,  of  course,  he  paid  no  attention  to  the 
request.  He  goes  on  then  to  tell  of  meeting  Madame  de  Genlis 
again,  and  of  finding  her  unchanged — the  same  Madame  de 
Genlis  of  whom  in  relation  to  the  Due  d'Orleans  he  had  taken 
occasion  to  say  in  his  merciless  portrait  of  that  prince,  "  Madame 
de  Genlis  always  surrendered  early,  to  avoid  scandal." 

Talleyrand  evidently  cherished  bitter  memories  of  his  ex- 
pulsion from  England  by  Pitt,  but  he  finds  it  well  to  pass  the 
subject  with  the  slightest  possible  mention.  Nor  does  he  refer 
at  all  to  the  strange  letters  he  had  previously  sent  his  Govern- 
ment, reporting  that  England  was  practically  on  the  verge  of  a 
revolution  like  that  of  France,  analyzing  the  inadequate  military 
resources  at  hand  to  meet  it,  and  proposing  a  plan  for  a  French 
invasion  and  capture  of  Ireland.  Eight  days,  he  said,  were 
sufficient  to  land  60,000  men  at  twenty  or  thirty  different  points. 
As  a  matter  of  prudence,  they  might  perhaps  go  in  the  character 
of  emigres,  so  as  to  avoid  arousing  the  suspicions  of  the  Govern- 
ment. <:  Once  masters  of  the  principal  ports,"  he  continued, 
"  once  with  the  English  fleet  in  our  power,  we  can  easily  bring 
from  France  such  reinforcements  as  are  needed  ;  and  besides, 
as  the  march  of  our  troops  will  have  been  preceded  by  a 
proclamation  in  the  name  of  the  sovereign  people  of  France, 
addressed  to  the  sovereign  people  of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland, 
as  their  faithful  allies,  no  doubt  this  country  will  be  thrown  into 
a  revolution  more  prompt  and  more  happy  than  that  of  1688. 
The  elements  for  a  republic  are  riper  in  England  than  they 
were  in  France  four  years  ago,  and  it  may  take  fewer  weeks  for 
England  to  accomplish  this  great  and  salutary  change,  than  we 
spent  years."1 

With  the  gravest  charge  affecting  his  reputation  as  a  pub- 
lic man,  Talleyrand  does  deal  at  length,  but  after  his  own 
fashion.  He  makes  not  the  slightest  concealment  of  his  efforts 
to  thwart  the  plans  of  his  masters.  He  narrates  them  often  in 
detail,  with  entire  simplicity  and  the  utmost  directness.     But 

1  Letter  of  Talleyrand  to  Lebrun,  dated  October  10,  1792. 


INTRODUCTION.  liii 

the  narrative  always  tends  to  show  that  the  course  he  pursued 
was  in  the  interest  of  France,  and  that  the  rulers  he  thwarted 
either  did  not  know  that  interest  or  wished  to  sacrifice  it  for 
their  own.  Thus,  after  telling  how  he  had  secretly  laboured 
with  the  Czar  Alexander,  at  the  Erfurt  Conference,  to  defeat 
Napoleon's  plan  for  an  alliance. against  Austria,  and  had  suc- 
ceeded, he  calmly  says,  "  It  is  the  last  service  I  was  able  to 
render  to  Europe  while  Napoleon  continued  to  reign,  and  that 
was,  in  my  opinion,  a  service  rendered  also  to  him."  There  is 
nowhere  a  hint  that  in  his  mind  private  and  surreptitious 
conferences  with  the  sovereigns  of  other  countries  to  defeat  the 
plans  of  the  sovereign  whose  representative  and  confidential 
adviser  he  was,  had  the  slightest  immoral  quality. 

But  he  takes  care  to  show  Napoleon  in  a  light  that  must 
make  the  world  rather  rejoice  at  seeing  such  a  man  betrayed. 
The  memoirs  scarcely  touch  a  critical  point  in  the  emperor's 
career  without  dealing  him  a  stab.  They  make  him  paltry  in 
the  business  of  the  divorce.  They  picture  him  as  an  ignorant 
blusterer  in  the  affairs  of  the  Concordat.  They  detail  his  cheap 
devices  to  gain  the  admiration  of  men  of  letters.  They  show 
with  malicious  precision  how  he  laboriously  copied  out  the  draft 
of  a  treaty  which  Talleyrand  had  prepared  for  him,  that  the 
Czar,  finding  it  in  the  emperor's  handwriting,  might  think  it 
was  his  own  work.  They  preserve  his  letter,  complaining  that 
the  heir  to  the  Spanish  throne  wrote  him  as  "  My  Cousin,"  and 
requiring  the  minister  to  instruct  this  prince  of  ancient  royal 
lineage  that  the  only  word  proper  for  him  to  use  in  addressing 
Napoleon  was  "  Sire."  They  stoop  even  to  such  trifles  as  his 
fretting  on  the  evening  of  Austerlitz,  over  some  gossip  of  a 
fancied  slight  to  him  by  the  society  of  the  Faubourg  St. 
Germain.  Everywhere  they  paint  him  as  heartless,  vain,  vulgar, 
wanton  in  attack,  ungenerous  and  pitiless  to  the  defeated,  un- 
truthful, proud  of  his  ability  to  deceive,  wholly  without  prin- 
ciple and  without  gratitude.  And  they  do  this,  not  so  much 
by  ascribing  to  him  these  qualities,  as  by  the  careful  and  precise 
narration  of  incidents  that  exhibit  them. 

The  inference  which  Prince  Talleyrand  expects  his  readers 
to  draw  from  all  this  is  plain.    It  was  right,  when  in  power,  under 


1  i  v  IN  TROD  UCTION. 

such  a  man,  to  thwart  him  when  it  seemed  needful  in  the  interest 
of  France.  When  this  could  no  longer  be  done,  it  was  rio-ht  to 
prepare  the  way  for  a  Bourbon  successor — in  the  interest  of 
France.  When  the  restored  Bourbons  did  not  meet  his  views,  it 
was  right  to  plot  for  their  displacement  by  the  son  of  that  Due 
d'Orleans  whom  he  had  painted  as  a  brainless  and  heartless 
monster— in  the  interest  of  France.  In  other  cases  the  suggested 
defence  is  always  the  same  ;  wherever  he  deceived  her  rulers  he 
did  it  all  for  the  good  of  France. 

No  doubt  the  plea  will  have  force,  especially  with  his  country- 
men. Moralists  indeed  will  regard  with  surprise  the  claim  that 
a  minister,  though  holding  on  to  his  office,  no  longer  owes  personal 
loyalty  to  his  sovereign,  when  in  his  judgment  the  sovereign  is 
sacrificing  the  interests  of  his  country  to  his  own.  They  will 
ask  whether,  even  in  such  great  emergencies,  the  end  can  be 
admitted  to  justify  the  means.  Whatever  the  answer,  French- 
men, at  any  rate,  and  very  possibly  the  world  at  large,  will  have 
a  kindlier  feeling  for  the  veteran  public  servant  who  is  able  to  show 
that,  even  at  such  cost,  he  did  in  great  crises  serve  his  country. 
The  memoirs  will  not  change  the  world's  verdict  on  the  profligate 
Abbe  of  Perigord  and  Bishop  of  Autun.  They  will  not  lighten 
the  censure  on  the  Foreign  Minister  who  made  merchandise  of 
his  treaties,  and  became  a  millionaire  on  bribes.  They  will  not 
make  the  world  think  it  honourable  in  him  to  have  deceived  or 
betrayed  in  turn  almost  every  man  under  whom  he  held  office. 
Nevertheless,  they  will  heighten  and  broaden  his  fame.  The 
old  man  was  wise,  as  usual,  in  making  his  appeal  to  a  later 
generation.  He  played  a  great  part  ;  and  as  its  proportions  are 
here  revealed,  the  space  for  him  in  the  history  of  his  times  must 
be  materially  enlarged. 


J 

v.. 


-i 

V 


A 


^ 

* 


X 


J 


HL 


S 


S 


? 


"V 


r 


•s. 


^ 


i  4 


r 


t  'M 

J   - 

1 


i  '- 


J 


9* 


-\ 


N  i 


j 


e  r 


I 


V^ 


j 

■4 


• 

V 
V 

V 


Wj 


^      x        ^      - 


\  / 


t£ 


i 

V 


J 
J 

J 

Jj 
5 


^ 


< 


j 

=* 


< 


/ 


V\     /"/ 


J 


1 


I 


v. 


/3 


j 


X 


«N 


■./ 


N 


H  <* 


B!   3 
O   * 

—  y  a 


a  z  - 

z 

a 

S 


o 

H 

Q 

H 


*  2 
< 


?  <«  r 

w  ^ 

«  «  £ 

<   D  3 

«   O  <; 

O  Q  ^ 

«  "> 

P,  ")  S 

—  ^ 

z  S  H 

<  *  ^ 

>  z  - 

W   o  '~n 

-1   «  3 

►J  t-  a 

<»-  j 

*-  5  < 

u  £  < 

5  =  o 

«  w  a 

t,  z  ^ 

o  < 

«  2  S 

W   <  O 
en 

s  p 

p<  ,-<  o 

<  t-»3 

o  -•  •-> 

H 


I  DO  not  know  what  title  to  give  to  this  writing.  It  is  not 
a  literary  work :  it  is  full  of  repetitions.  I  can  scarcely  call 
it  My  Memoirs,  for  my  life  and  relations  will  be  found 
mentioned  in  it  as  seldom  as  I  could  help.  To  give  this  large 
work  the  title  of:  My  Opinion  on  the  Affairs  of  my  Time, 
would  be  a  term,  perhaps  justified,  but  also  too  decided  to  be 
at  the  head  of  the  production  of  a  man  who  has  doubted  as 
much  as  I  have  in  my  life.  A  philosophical  title  would  be 
incomplete  or  exaggerated.  I  therefore  begin  without  title, 
and  without  a  dedication,  for  I  recognize  in  the  Duchesse  de 
Dino  alone  the  obligation  of  defending  my  memory. 


CONTENTS. 

PART     I. 

THE  YEARS   PRECEDING  THE  REVOLUTION. 

I754—I79I- 

Talleyrand's  birth — His  parents — Early  years— Is  trained  for  the  Church  — 
Sent  to  Rheims — Coronation  of  Louis  XVI. — Appointed  Agent-general 
to  the  clergy — French  society  before  the  Revolution — Comte  de  Choiseul- 
GoufHer — American  War  of  Independence — Relations  between  Eng- 
land and  France — Turgot — de  Vergennes — Calonne — Necker — The 
deficit — The  Assembly  of  the  Notables — The  meeting  of  the  States- 
General — Public  opinion  and  the  clergy — The  French  aristocracy  on  the 
eve  of  the  Revolution — Talleyrand  appointed  deputy  of  the  clergy  to 
the  States-General — Premonitory  symptoms  of  the  Revolution — The 
Comte  d'Artois  —  The  emigration  of  the  nobles  —  The  Constituent 
Assembly — Restriction  of  the  royal  prerogatives — Civil  constitution  of 
the  clergy — Talleyrand  consecrates  the  first  constitutional  bishops — 
Resigns  the  bishopric  of  Autun — Interview  between  Talleyrand  and  the 
Comte  dArtois — Baron  de  Vitrolles'  letter  to  M.  de  Bacourt. 

Pages  1 — 108 

PART   II. 

THE  DUC  D'ORLEANS. 

General  considerations  on  the  importance  of  private  Memoirs  and  reliable 
biographies  to  history — Lineage  of  Louis-Philippe-Joseph,  fifth  Due 
d'Orle'ans — His  early  years  and  dispositions — His  education  —  His 
frivolity  and  dryness  of  heart — His  marriage  with  Mademoiselle  de 
Penthievre — Associates  of  the  Due  d'Orleans — M.  de  Voyer— Abbe  Yvon 
— M.  de  Lille — M.  de  Voyer's  philosophy — M.  de  Voyer  and  M.  de 
Maurepas — The  Prince  de  Lamballe — The  Marquis  de  Conflans — Cruel 
indifference  of  the  Due  d'Orleans — M.  de  Biron— The  liaisons  of  the 
Due  d'Orleans — The  Princesse  de  Bouillon — The  Marquis  de  Fleury — 
The  Princesse  de  Lamballe — Madame  de  Sillery,  Comtesse  de  Genlis — 


lviii  CONTENTS. 

Her  influence  over  the  Due  de  Chartres — Her  literary  productions — 
Count  de  Cagliostro— The  Chevalier  de  Luxemburg— Speculations  of 
the  Due  d'Orleans — Outrageous  proceedings  of  this  prince  towards  his 
treasurer,  Seguin — The  Due  d'Orleans  wishes  to  become  grand-admiral 
■ — He  is  appointed  colonel-general  of  hussars — Mademoiselle  Arnould, 
the  famous  actress — Journey  of  the  Due  d'Orleans  to  England  and  to 
Italy — He  falls  seriously  ill — Grand-master  of  the  freemasons — De- 
bauchery and  depravity  of  the  Due  d'Orleans — Agitation  in  France — 
Forebodings  of  the  Revolution — The  deficit — M.  de  Calonne  summons 
an  assembly  of  the  Notables — Intrigues  of  the  Due  d'Orleans  against 
the  king — The  Marquis  Ducrest — Ambition  of  the  Due  d'Orleans — 
Measures  taken  by  the  Archbishop  of  Toulouse  against  the  parlements 
— M.  and  Mdme.  de  Semonville — A  loan  of  ,£16,000,000 — General  dis- 
content of  the  people — Louis  XVI.  refuses  to  allow  the  Due  d'Orleans 
to  go  on  a  visit  to  England — Differences  between  the  Queen  and  the 
Due  d'Orleans — Trianon — The  Due  d'Orleans  becomes  the  head  of  all 
malcontents — M.  de  Limon's  ability — Abbe  Sabatier  de  Cabre — The  lits 
de  justice — The  Marquis  de  Lamoignon — The  edict  of  1787  and  the 
Protestants — The  sitting  of  November  19,  1787 — M.  d'Espresmenil — 
Public  protest  of  the  Due  d'Orleans  against  the  king's  orders — Lepelletier 
de  St.-Fargeau — Imprisonment  of  the  Abbes  Freteau  and  Sabatier — 
Exile  of  the  Due  d'Orleans — Popular  outburst  of  sympathy  on  this 
measure  being  known — Intervention  of  the  parlement  of  Paris — Ener- 
getic attitude  of  Louis  XVI. — The  Due  d'Orleans  forgiven  by  the  king — 
Struggle  between  M.  de  Brienne  and  the  parlements — Stringent  measures 
of  the  government — Premonitory  symptoms  of  the  Revolution — Riot  in 
the  Faubourg  St.-Antoine — M.  de  Laclos  —  Abbe  Sieyes — Project  of 
reforms  drawn  up  by  the  Due  d'Orleans  for  the  States-General — Judg- 
ment of  Prince  Talleyrand  on  the  political  part  played  by  the  Due 
d'Orleans — The  origin  and  causes  of  the  Revolution     .    Pages  109 — 164 


PART     III. 

THE  CONVENTION,  THE  DIRECTORY,  THE  CONSULATE,  THE  EARLY 

YEARS   OF   THE   EMPIRE. 

I79I  — 1808. 

Dangers  threatening  the  royal  family — Talleyrand  goes  to  London  with  a 
letter  of  Louis  XVI.  to  the  King  of  England — Defeat  of  the  French 
troops  under  the  Due  de  Biron — August  10 — Abolition  of  royalty — 
Could  the  royal  family  have  been  saved  in  1792  ? — Talleyrand  entrusted 
with  a  scientific  mission  to  England — The  Marquis  of  Lansdowne — The 
Marquis  of  Hastings — Doctors  Price  and  Priestley — George  Canning — 
Samuel  Romilly — Jeremy  Bentham — Lord  Henry  Petty — Charles  Fox 
— The  responsible  authors  of  the  Revolution— The  Alien  Bill — Lord 
Melville — William  Pitt— Talleyrand  expelled  from  England— Starts  for 


CONTENTS.  lix 

America — Nearly  shipwrecked — Stay  at  Falmouth — General  Arnold — 
Lands  at  Philadelphia — M.  de  Beaumetz — William  Penn — The  Mor- 
avian brethren — The  spirit  of  enterprise  in  America — General  Hamilton 
— American  commercial  competition  and  its  results — Talleyrand  at 
Chdnier's  request  is  authorized  to  return  to  France — Starts  for  Ham- 
burg— Madame  de  Flahaut  and  Talleyrand — Returns  to  Paris — Elected 
a  member  of  the  Institut — Madame  de  Stael — Talleyrand  and  Barras — 
Talleyrand  appointed  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs — Why  he  accepted 
office — Carnot  and  Barras  —  Talleyrand's  first  letter  to  Bonaparte — 
Treaty  of  Campo-Formio — Lord  Malmesbury — Fructidor  18  —  First 
interview  between  Bonaparte  and  Talleyrand — Catherine  of  Russia  and 
the  French  Revolution — The  Directory  and  Europe — Moreau — Talley- 
rand retires  from  the  Cabinet — Sidyes  and  the  Directory — Bonaparte  in 
Egypt — Brumaire  18 — Bonaparte  appointed  First  Consul — Talleyrand 
takes  office  again — Paul  I.  and  Bonaparte — Marengo — Treaty  of  Lune- 
ville — The  United  States  and  the  French  Republic — Lord  Cornwallis 
and  Joseph  Bonaparte — Treaty  of  Amiens — The  Concordat — Talley- 
rand's secularization — Bonaparte's  blunder — Annexation  of  Piedmont 
to  France — England  declares  war — Pichegru's  death — Assassination  of 
the  Due  d'Enghien — Proclamation  of  the  Empire — Napoleon  emperor 
and  king — The  camp  at  Boulogne — The  Austrian  campaign — Napoleon 
at  Schcenbrunn — Austerlitz — Napoleon  and  the  Faubourg  St.  Germain 
— Talleyrand  created  Prince  de  Be"ne"vent — Treaty  of  Presburg — Count 
von  Haugwitz — Fox  and  Talleyrand — Lord  Yarmouth  and  Lord  Lauder- 
dale— Prussia  and  Hanover — Battle  of  Jena — Treaty  of  Tilsit — Napoleon 
and  Poland  —War  with  Russia — Battle  of  Eylau — Battle  of  Friedland — 
The  interview  of  the  three  emperors — Napoleon  and  the  Queen  of 
Prussia — Napoleon's  return  to  Paris — Talleyrand  appointed  Vice  Grand 
Elector — Retires  from  the  Ministry — His  apology  for  doing  so — Napo- 
leon's designs  on  Spain — Defeat  of  Junot — Capitulation  of  Baylen — The 
Erfurt  interview  —  Talleyrand  and  the  Czar  Alexander — Failure  of 
Napoleon's  projects  against  Austria      ....     Pages  165 — 242 

PART  IV. 

SPANISH  AFFAIRS. 

1807. 

Napoleon  at  Finkenstein — His  love  of  deceit — Situation  of  France  at  the 
close  of  the  year  1807 — Napoleon's  designs  on  Spain — The  pretext 
he  chose  to  carry  them  out — Talleyrand  endeavours  to  dissuade  the 
emperor  from  wronging  the  old  ally  of  France — Treaty  of  Fontainebleau 
— Napoleon's  shameful  breach  of  faith  towards  Charles  IV.  of  Spain — 
Don  Juan  de  Escoiquiz,  Canon  of  Toledo,  and  the  Prince  of  the  Asturias 
— The  intrigues  of  Godoy,  Prince  of  the  Peace — Don  Escoiquiz'  plan  to 
thwart  them — The  French  ambassador  and  Don  Escoiquiz — Napoleon's 
ruse — Letter  of  the  Prince  of  the  Asturias  to  Napoleon — Letter  of  the 


Ix  CONTENTS. 

Prince  of  the  Peace  to  the  Emperor — Provisions  of  the  treaty  of 
Fontainebleau — Projected  dismemberment  of  Portugal — Secret  Conven- 
tion aimed  at  Spain,  though  ostensibly  at  Portugal — The  French  troops 
in  Spain — Arrest  of  the  Prince  of  the  Asturias — He  is  put  on  his  trial- 
Declared  not  guilty — Occupation  of  Navarra,  Catalonia,  and  Guipuzcoa 
by  the  French — Fears  of  the  Prince  of  the  Peace — Projected  flight  of 
the  royal  family — Indignation  of  the  people — General  discontent  against 
Godoy,  Prince  of  the  Peace — The  Aranjuez  riots — Popular  hatred 
against  Godoy — Loyalty  of  the  people  towards  the  royal  family — Arrest 
of  Godoy — He  is  put  on  his  trial — Abdication  of  King  Charles  IV.  in 
favour  of  Ferdinand,  Prince  of  the  Asturias — Arrival  of  Ferdinand  VII. 
at  Madrid — The  Grand  Due  de  Berg  (Murat)  and  King  Ferdinand — 
Change  of  the  people's  disposition  towards  the  French — Negotiations 
between  Don  Escoiquiz  and  the  Grand  Due  de  Berg — Murat  insists  on 
the  suspension  of  Godoy's  trial — Murat  demands  the  release  of  the  latter, 
in  Napoleon's  name — Ferdinand  VII.  sends  his  brother  Don  Carlos  to 
meet  Napoleon  on  his  way  to  Spain — Charles  IV.'s  protest — Retracts 
his  abdication — Don  Antonio  appointed  Regent — Ferdinand  VII.  leaves 
Madrid,  on  his  way  to  Bayonne — Free  for  eight  hours — Lasciate  ogni 
speranza — Arrival  at  Bayonne — Ferdinand  and  the  Infante  Antonio 
practically  prisoners — Napoleon  unmasks  his  designs — Offers  to  Ferdi- 
nand the  kingdom  of  Etruria,  in  exchange  for  the  cession  of  the  rights  of 
the  latter  to  the  Crown  of  Spain — Refusal  of  Ferdinand — Noble  reply  of 
the  Marquis  de  Labrador  to  M.  de  Champagny — Napoleon  and  Don 
Escoiquiz — It  is  too  late  ! — Charles  IV.  at  Bayonne — Ferdinand's  re- 
nunciation of  the  crown — Murat  appointed  lieutenant-general  of  Spain — 
The  royal  princes  of  Spain  at  the  chateau  of  Valengay — Prince  Talleyrand 
welcomes  them — Inaptitude  of  the  princes  for  study — Everyday  life  at 
Valengay — Talleyrand  summoned  to  Nantes — Napoleon's  bluster — 
Scathing  retort  of  Talleyrand — Rupture  between  Napoleon  and  Talley- 
rand— Talleyrand  summoned  to  Erfurt — Takes  leave  of  the  Spanish 
princes — Their  gratitude — By  the  grace  of  God — The  Emperor  of  Russia 
recognizes  Joseph  Bonaparte  as  King  of  Spain — Treaty  of  Valengay — 
Failure  of  Napoleon's  designs  on  Spain — The  result  of  Napoleon's 
threats  against  England — Want  of  dignity  of  Ferdinand  VII. — His 
return  to  Madrid — His  cruel  proceedings  towards  his  faithful  supporters 
— England's  fault  in  Spain Pages  243 — 292 

PART  V. 

THE  ERFURT   INTERVIEW. 
1808. 

Napoleon  holds  out  a  bait  to  Russia — The  prospective  partition  of  Turkey 
— Silesia  to  France  as  compensation  for  Wallachia  and  Moldavia  to 
Russia — Alexander  incensed — N apoleon's  letter  to  the  Czar,desisting  from 
all  pretensions  to  Silesia  and  proposing  to  meet  him  in  order  to  arrange 


CONTENTS.  1> 


XI 


the  best  means  of  carrying  war  into  India — Reply  of  Alexander  accept- 
ing to  meet  Napoleon — Count  Romanzoff  and  Turkey — Russia  wants 
Constantinople — The  Turks  must  be  driven  back  to  Asia — France  and 
the  Porte — Russia  and  Sweden — Conquest  of  Finland — Talleyrand 
receives  orders  to  accompany  Napoleon  to  Erfurt,  the  emperors'  meeting- 
place — Confidence  displayed  by  Napoleon  towards  Talleyrand — A 
brilliant  journey — Napoleon  wishes  to  dazzle  the  Germans — Invites 
Talleyrand  to  induce  the  kings  and  princes  to  come  to  Erfurt — 
Napoleon  and  Dazincourt — Choice  of  plays — Ci?ma — The  actors  of  the 
Comedie  Franqaise  ordered  to  repair  to  Erfurt — The  military  retinue  of 
Napoleon — Napoleon  discloses  to  Talleyrand  his  projects  for  Erfurt — 
Orders  Talleyrand  to  draw  up  a  convention  aimed  against  England — ■ 
Text  of  that  convention — Napoleon  objects  to  certain  expressions — 
Austria,  Napoleon's  enemy — Napoleon  insists  on  inserting  in  the 
convention  a  clause  directed  against  Austria — Rebukes  Talleyrand — 
Vons  etes  toujours  Autrichien ! — Final  instructions  of  Napoleon  to 
Talleyrand — Talleyrand's  arrival  at  Erfurt — M.  de  Caulaincourt  and 
Talleyrand— List  of  the  crowned  heads  and  eminent  personages  present 
at  Erfurt — Arrival  of  the  Emperor  Napoleon  at  Erfurt — General 
enthusiasm — The  attendant  kings  and  princes  humble  themselves  in  the 
presence  of  their  victor — Arrival  of  the  Czar  Alexander — His  friendly 
meeting  with  Napoleon — The  latter  introduces  changes  into  the  projected 
convention — Austria's  fear — M.  de  Vincent  and  Talleyrand — Interview 
between  Napoleon  and  Goethe — Napoleon's  judgment  on  Schiller's 
Thirty  Years'  War — The  play  at  Erfurt — The  impressions  of  the  kings 
and  princes — Delight  of  the  Czar — Private  interview  between  Napoleon 
and  the  latter — Uneasiness  of  the  Austrian  envoy — The  Princess  of 
Tour  and  Taxis — Napoleon  invites  Goethe  and  Wieland  to  lunch — 
Napoleon's  judgment  as  to  the  influence  of  Christianity  on  the  develop- 
ment of  civilization — Conversation  of  Napoleon  with  Wieland — Inter- 
view between  the  Czar  and  Talleyrand — The  latter  endeavours  to  defeat 
the  projects  of  Napoleon — Induces  the  Czar  to  write  to  the  Emperor 
of  Austria,  in  order  to  soothe  his  apprehensions — Napoleon  fails  to 
persuade  the  Czar — He  lets  out  his  secret — Fete  at  Weimar — Napoleon's 
opinion  on  Tacitus — Wieland's  defence  of  the  great  Roman  historian — 
Return  to  Erfurt — Confidential  interview  between  Napoleon  and  the 
Czar — Conversation  with  Talleyrand — Napoleon  wants  to  divorce — 
Judgment  of  the  Czar  on  Napoleon — Napoleon  and  the  Czar  before  a 
pitful  of  kings  at  Erfurt — Napoleon's  opinion  of  ideologists — Christianity 
the  best  system  of  philosophy — Napoleon  starts  for  Spain — The  Erfurt 
convention. Pages  293 — 342 


s 

* 


* 


^ 

i* 

^ 

.^ 


4 

v. 

\ 


cK 


J 


4 


< 


X 


4 


^ 


or 


Nf 


>v 


• 


o 
i 


,\ 


\ 

M 


! 


^ 


$ 
^ 


V 


X 

\ 


i 

V 


X 


4 

VI 


4 


w 
* 


T3 

O 

o 

J3 

H 

V 

£ 

> 

1— » 

X 

— « 

c3 

C 

& 

•*H 

O 

c/T- — « 

i-) 

CS    .• 

u, 

** 

o 

£■3 

U     <-) 

X/i 

fa 

rt   8 

GO    I 

*— < 

<: 

fa 

fa 

<: 

G     '. 

•z 

bJ3  >^ 

o 

"55  SP 

o  Ji 

» 

fa 

fn  u 

o 

_  <u 

fa 

fa 
o 

S    O 

m 

«    2 

w 

H 

jg-t 

in 

33  Ji 

s 

sf> 

s 

S? 

•«-■      .*!o 

w 

M      ^ 

on 

k         tt 

fa 

f^\ 

S3 

-°  o 

55 

^           ~ 

fa 

jy  »- 

o 

"2  8 

PS 
fa 
> 

w 
a 

1  s 

2J3 

o  ,*S 

O 
H 

C3    c3 

0 

c  £ 

£ 

rJ    . 

fa 

-a> 

0^3 

*"^ 

>*  of 

►J 

a,  bo 

►J 

OJ   s 

< 

^  3 

H 

^^ 

fa 

u 

"o-C 

!Z5 

-^   ^ 

•" * 

"o   V 

Oh 

<"  B 

fa 

t-  «3 

<u  •t-' 

fa 

O 

ISj 

4>l 

fa 

<D     Cj 

•£  c 

fa 

^  a 

-1 

o  .ti 

^    St 

< 

.S 

fa 

o 

A 

o 

1-4 

H 

o 

■4-» 

< 

(/) 

M 

H 

MEMOIRS 

OF   THE 

PRINCE    DE    TALLEYRAND. 

PART     I. 

THE  YEARS  PRECEDING  THE  REVOLUTION. 

J754— i79i- 

Talleyrand's  birth — His  parents — Early  years — Is  trained  for  the  Church — 
Sent  to  Rheims — Coronation  of  Louis  XVI. — Appointed  Agent-general 
to  the  clergy — French  society  before  the  Revolution — Comte  de  Choiseul- 
Gouffier — American  War  of  Independence — Relations  between  Eng- 
land and  France — Turgot — de  Vergennes — Calonne — Necker — The 
deficit — The  Assembly  of  the  Notables — The  meeting  of  the  States- 
General — Public  opinion  and  the  clergy — The  French  aristocracy  on  the 
eve  of  the  Revolution — Talleyrand  appointed  deputy  of  the  clergy  to 
the  States-General — Premonitory  symptoms  of  the  Revolution — The 
Comte  dArtois  —  The  emigration  of  the  nobles  —  The  Constituent 
Assembly— Restriction  of  the  royal  prerogatives — Civil  constitution  of 
the  clergy — Talleyrand  consecrates  the  first  constitutional  bishops — 
Resigns  the  bishopric  of  Autun — Interview  between  Talleyrand  and  the 
Comte  dArtois — Baron  de  Vitrolles'  letter  to  M.  de  Bacourt. 

I  WAS  born  in  1754 x;  my  parents  had  a  very  small  fortune 
but  held  at  court  a  position  which,  if  properly  taken  advantage 
of,  could  secure  for  themselves  and  their  children  the  highest 
offices. 

1  Charles-Maurice  de  Talleyrand,  the  author  of  these  memoirs,  was  the  son  of 
Charles-Daniel  de  Talleyrand-Perigord  (1734 — 1788),  lieutenant-general  and  ?nenin* 
to  the  Dauphin  ;  and  the  grandson  of  Daniel-Marie  de  Talleyrand,  Comte  de  Grignols, 
brigadier-general  of  the  king's  armies.  Alexandrine  de  Damas,  daughter  of  Joseph 
de  Damas,  Marquis  d'Antigny,  was  his  mother.  Marie-Elisabeth  Chamillard, 
daughter  of  Michel  Chamillard,  Marquis  de  Cany,  was  his  grandmother. 

*  The  name  given,  under  the  old  monarchy,  to  a  nobleman  attached  to  the  person  of  the  Dauphin. 
• — ( Translator.) 

VOL.    I.  B 


2  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

For  a  long  time,  the  chief  families  of  France,  though  not 
actually  disdaining  to  hold  offices  attaching  them  to  the  person 
of  the  sovereign,  displayed  little  anxiety  to  obtain  them.  They 
were  satisfied  with  believing,  or  affecting  to  believe,  themselves 
in  the  foremost  rank  in  the  nation.  Thus  the  descendants  of  the 
old  chief  vassals  of  the  Crown  had  less  occasion  to  be  personally 
known  to  the  king  than  the  descendants  of  some  minor  barons 
of  the  duchy  of  France,  holding,  for  this  reason,  higher  offices 
about  the  sovereign's  person. 

The  pride  which  induced  most  families  of  high  lineage  to 
keep  aloof  from  court,  caused  the  king  to  view  them  with  less 
favour. 

In  order  to  enhance  the  royal  power,  Cardinal  Richelieu  sum- 
moned the  heads  of  chief  families  before  the  king.  They  settled 
at  court,  forewent  their  independence,  and,  by  a  more  profound 
devotion,  endeavoured  to  make  up  for  the  disadvantage  of  having 
come  last. 

The  glory  of  Louis  XIV.  was  one  of  the  reasons  why,  under 
his  reign  and  subsequently,  all  men's  ideas  were  centred  within 
the  limits  of  the  chateau  of  Versailles. 

The  Regency  was,  so  to  speak,  an  interregnum,  undisturbed 
either  by  financial  disasters  or  by  the  depravation  of  morals,  the 
premonitory  symptoms  of  which  had  been  so  severely  checked 
at  the  close  of  the  former  reign. 

Louis  XV.  was  then  enjoying  universal  respect,  the  first 
subjects  of  the  Crown  still  considered  obedience  to  the  sovereign 
as  glorious  ;  they  did  not  conceive  any  other  power  or  lustre 
than  those  proceeding  from  the  king's  majesty. 

The  queen1  was  reverenced,  but  the  very  melancholy  of  her 
virtues  did  not  prepossess  people  in  her  favour.  She  was  wanting 
in  those  outward  charms  that  caused  the  nation  to  be  so  proud 
of  the  fine  features  of  Louis  XV.  Hence  the  mixed  feeling  of 
justice  and  indulgence  which  on  one  hand  led  people  to  pity  the 
queen,  and,  on  the  other,  induced  them  to  excuse  the  inclination 
shown  by  the  king  towards  Madame  de  Pompadour.2     M.  de 

1  Maria  Leczinska,  Queen  of  France,  daughter  of  Stanislas,  King  of  Poland,  and 
of  Catherine  Opalinska.  She  was  horn  in  1703  ;  in  1725  she  became  the  wife  of 
Louis  XV.,  by  whom  she  had  two  sons  and  eight  daughters.      She  died  in  1768. 

2  Jeanne-Antoinette  Poisson,   Marquise  de  Pompadour,  born  in  Paris  in   1721, 


THE  YEARS  PRECEDING  THE  REVOLUTION.  3 

Penthievre,1  the  MarecJiale  de  Duras,2  Madame  de  Luynes,3 
Madame  de  Marsan,4  Madame  de  Perigord,5  the  Duchesse  de 
Fleury,6  M.  de  Sourches,7  Madame  de  Villars,8  M.  de  Tavatmes,9 
Madame  d'Estissac,10  doubtless  grieved  at  the  fact,  yet  were 
afraid  of  disclosing  by  open  reproach  what  was  looked  upon  as 
one  of  those  known  family  secrets,  which  nobody  dares  to  deny, 
but  hopes  to  palliate  by  hushing  them  up  and  behaving  as 
though  one  were  not  aware  of  their  existence.  All  the  persons 
I   have  just  mentioned  would  have  considered  that  they  were 

died  in  1 764.  She  was  the  daughter  of  an  army  contractor,  and  when  quite  young 
married  Lenormand  d'Etioles,  a  fermier-gcncral.  In  1744,  she  left  her  husband  to 
become  the  mistress  of  the  king,  who  in  the  following  year  created  her  Marquise  de 
Pompadour,  with  a  yearly  income  of  200,000  livres  (about  ^"S,ooo).  In  1756,  she 
was  appointed  lady  of  the  queen's  household.  Madame  de  Pompadour  was  as  re- 
markable for  her  taste  as  for  her  beauty  ;  she  was  long  the  queen  of  fashion.  She 
preserved  her  influence  until  her  death.  The  memoirs  and  letters  published  under 
her  name  in  1785  are  apocryphal. — {Translator.) 

1  Louis  de  Bourbon,  Due  de  Penthievre,  born  in  1725,  was  the  son  of  the  Comte 
de  Toulouse,  illegitimate  son  of  Louis  XIV.  and  of  Madame  de  Montespan.  He 
married  Mademoiselle  d'Este.  The  Prince  of  Lamballe  was  one  of  his  sons  ;  the  Due 
d'Orleans  married  one  of  his  daughters.  The  Due  de  Penthievre  was  appointed 
grand-admiral  in  1734,  and  lieutenant-general  in  1744.  In  1787,  he  was  president  of 
one  of  the  committees  of  the  assemblee  des  notables  (a  deliberative  body  whose 
members  were  chosen  by  the  king,  chiefly  from  the  Third  Estate  [Translator]  ).  lie 
lived  on  his  estates  until  his  death,  which  occurred  in  1793. 

2  Angelique  de  Bournonville,  daughter  of  the  Prince  de  Bournonville,  Comte 
d'Heim,  became  in  1706  the  wife  of  Jean-Baptiste  de  Durfort,  Due  de  Duras, 
Marshal  of  France.  She  was  lady  in  waiting  to  Jlfesdames  the  daughters  of  Louis  XV., 
and  died  in  1764. 

3  Marie  Brulart  de  la  Borde,  daughter  of  a  chief  judge  in  the  parlanent  of 
Dijon,  was  the  second  wife  of  Philippe  d'Albert,  Due  de  Luynes,  whom  she  married 
in  1732.      She  was  lady  in  waiting  to  the  queen  and  died  in  1763. 

4  Marie-Louise  de  Rohan- Soubise,  a  relation  of  the  marshal  of  this  name,  was 
born  in  1720.  In  1736,  she  married  Gaston  de  Lorraine,  Comte  de  Marsan.  She  was 
governess  to  the  en/ants  de  France  (the  graceful  name  given  to  the  royal  children 
under  the  old  regime  [Translator]). 

5  Marguerite  de  Talleyrand,  daughter  of  Louis  de  Talleyrand,  Prince  de  Chalais, 
was  the  grand-aunt  of  the  author.  She  was  born  in  1727,  and  married  Gabriel  de 
Talleyrand,  Comte  de  Perigord,  in  1743. 

6  Anne  d'Auxy  de  Monceaux,  born  in  1721,  married  in  1736,  Andre  de  Rosset, 
Due  de  Fleury,  a  relation  of  the  cardinal  of  this  name.  In  1739,  she  was  appointed 
lady  of  the  queen's  household. 

7  Louis  Francois  du  Bouchet,  Comte  de  Sourches,  Marquis  de  Tourzel,  knight  of 
Malta,  grand  provost  of  France,  was  born  in  1744.  In  1764,  he  married  Louise  de 
Croy  d' Havre. 

8  Gabrielle  de  Noailles,  daughter  of  the  Marshal  Due  de  Noailles,  was  born  in 
1706.  In  1721,  she  became  the  wife  of  Armand,  Due  de  Villars,  son  of  the  marshal  of 
this  name.  She  was  successively  lady  of  the  queen's  household  and  lady  of  the  bed- 
chamber, and  died  in  1771. 

9  Charles,  Comte  de  Saulx-Tavannes,  was  born  in  1713.  In  1758,  he  was  lieutenant- 
general  and  Knight  of  Honour  (equerry)  to  the  queen. 

10  Marie  de  la  Rochefoucauld  (known  as  Mademoiselle  de  la  Roche-Guyon),  was 
born  in  1718.  In  1737,  she  was  married  to  Louis  de  la  Rochefoucauld  de  Roye, 
Due  d'Estissac,  grand  master  of  the  wardrobe. 

B    2 


4  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

forfeiting  their  honour  by  admitting  too  openly  the  failings  of 
the  king. 

My  relatives  held  various  situations  with  the  royal  family. 
My  grandmother  was  lady  of  the  queen's  household,  and  was 
treated  with  especial  regard  by  the  king  ;  she  always  resided  at 
Versailles  and  kept  no  house  in  Paris. 

She  had  five  children.  Like  that  of  all  persons  connected 
with  the  court,  their  early  tuition  was  rather  neglected,  or,  at 
least,  devoted  to  few  important  branches  of  knowledge.  As  to 
their  subsequent  education,  it  was  to  consist  merely  in  imparting 
to  them  what  was  termed  the  usages  of  society.  Their  outward 
appearance  was  prepossessing. 

My  grandmother  had  noble,  refined  and  reserved  manners. 
Her  piety  won  universal  respect  for  her,  and  the  fact  of  her 
numerous  family  caused  the  frequent  steps  she  took  towards 
securing  and  promoting  the  future  of  her  children  to  be  regarded 
as  quite  natural. 

My  father  held  the  same  views  as  his  mother  concerning 
the  education  befitting  children  whose  parents  enjoyed  a 
position  at  court.  Thus  mine  was  rather  left  to  take  care 
of  itself :  not  through  any  indifference  towards  me,  but  owing 
to  the  special  disposition  of  the  mind  which  leads  some 
people  to  consider  that  the  best  plan  is  to  do  or  to  be  like 
everybody  else. 

Too  much  care  would  have  seemed  pedantry ;  affection  too 
openly  expressed  would  have  been  regarded  as  quite  unusual  and 
therefore  ridiculous.  Children,  at  that  time,  inherited  their 
father's  name  and  coat  of  arms.  Parents  considered  they  had 
done  enough  for  their  progeny  by  opening  a  career  to  them 
and  securing  for  them  advantageous  posts  ;  by  marrying  them 
and  increasing  their  allowance. 

Paternal  care  had  not  yet  come  into  fashion  ;  the  fashion  was 
indeed  the  very  reverse,  when  I  was  a  child  ;  thus  my  early  years 
were  cheerlessly  spent  in  an  outlying  district  of  Paris.  At  the 
age  of  four,  I  was  still  there,  when  I  accidentally  fell  from  the 
top  of  a  cupboard,  and  dislocated  my  foot.  The  woman  to  whose 
care  I  was  entrusted  only  informed  my  family  of  this  several 
months  afterwards.     The  truth  became  known  only  when  my 


THE   YEARS  PRECEDING  THE  REVOLUTION.  5 

parents  sent  for  me  to  go  to  Perigord  to  visit  Madame  de  Chalais,1 
my  grandmother,  who  had  expressed  a  wish  to  see  me.  Although 
Madame  de  Chalais  was  my  great-grandmother,  I  always  called 
her  grandma,  very  likely,  I  think,  because  this  name  implied  a 
closer  relationship.  The  dislocation  of  my  foot  was  already  too 
old  to  be  remedied  ;  even  my  other  foot  having  had  to  bear 
alone  the  whole  weight  of  my  body,  had  grown  weaker,  and  thus 
I  remained  lame  for  life. 

This  accident  had  a  great  influence  on  my  after-life.  It 
indeed  led  my  parents  to  think  I  was  unfit  for  a  military  career, 
or  at  least,  that,  in  such,  I  should  labour  under  great  disadvan- 
tages ;  they  were  thus  induced  to  seek  for  me  some  other 
profession,  which,  in  their  eyes,  would  be  best  calculated  to  serve 
the  interests  of  the  family.  For,  in  great  families,  the  family  was 
far  more  cared  for  than  its  members  individually,  especially  than 
those  young  members  who  were  still  unknown.  These  considera- 
tions are  rather  painful  to  my  mind  ...  so  I  will  not  dwell  further 
on  them. 

In  the  Bordeaux  coach,  I  was  entrusted  to  the  care  of  a 
kindly  woman  named  Mademoiselle  Charlemagne,  and  after  a 
journey,  which  lasted  seventeen  days,  I  reached  Chalais.2 

Madame  de  Chalais  was  a  most  refined  and  distinguished 
lady  ;  her  mind,  her  language,  the  dignity  of  her  manners,  the 
sound  of  her  voice,  were  most  winning.  She  still  retained  what 
was  termed  the  wit  of  the  Mortemarts,  being  indeed  a  Mortemart 
by  birth. 

My  appearance  pleased  her  ;  she  acquainted  me  with  feelings 
hitherto  unknown  to  me.  She  was  the  first  member  of  my 
family  who  displayed  any  affection  towards  me,  and  also  the  first 
who  taught  me  the  sweetness  of  filial  love.  God  bless  her  for 
it !  .  .  .  For  I  was  really  fondly  attached  to  her !  To  this  day, 
her  memory  is  dear  to  me.  Many  a  time  have  I  regretted  her ! 
Many  a  time  have   I   bitterly  understood  how  priceless  is  the 

1  Marie-Francoise  de  Rochechouart,  daughter  of  Louis  de  Rochechouart,  Due  de 
Mortemart,  married  Michel  Chamillart,  Marquis  de  Cany,  by  whom  she  had  a  daughter 
— the  author's  grandmother.  After  the  death  of  the  marquis,  Marie-Francoise,  his 
widow,  became  the  wife  of  Louis  Charles  de  Talleyrand,  Prince  de  Chalais,  Spanish 
grandee,  who  died  in  1757. 

2  Chalais,  chief  town  of  the  canton  (administrative  district)  of  Charente,  near 
Barbezieux. 


6  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

sincere  affection  of  some  member  of  one's  own  family.  Such 
affection  affords  immense  comfort  through  the  trials  and  troubles 
of  life,  when  those  who  inspire  it  are  near  to  us.  When  they 
are  away,  it  soothes  both  the  heart  and  the  mind,  and  enables 
us  calmly  to  collect  our  thoughts. 

The  time  spent  at  Chalais  left  a  deep  impression  on  my  mind. 
The  dispositions  of  children  and  their  after-life  inclinations 
are  often  determined  by  the  objects  which  first  impressed  their 
eyes  and  minds. 

In  the  provinces  distant  from  the  capital,  a  certain  care  paid 
to  dignity  and  position,  ruled  the  relations  existing  between  the 
members  of  the  old  aristocracy  still  residing  on  their  estates,  and 
the  lesser  nobility  and  the  tenants  on  the  said  estates.  The 
chief  nobleman  of  a  province  would  have  considered  it  beneath 
him  not  to  have  been  kind  and  polite.  His  more  distinguished 
neighbours  would  have  considered  it  a  want  of  self-respect 
to  fail  in  displaying  towards  the  bearers  of  ancient  names 
that  regard  and  respect,  which,  expressed,  as  it  was,  freely  and 
without  emphasis,  seemed  but  the  homage  of  the  heart.  As  to 
the  peasantry,  their  lord  only  visited  them  to  assist  and  address 
to  them  some  kind  and  comforting  words,  the  influence  of  which 
was  felt  in  the  neighbourhood,  for  the  minor  nobility  endeavoured 
to  follow  the  example  set  them  by  the  leading  aristocracy  of 
their  province. 

The  manners  of  the  Perigord  nobility  resembled  their  old 
castles  ;  they  were  imposing  and  firmly  based ;  the  light  of  modern 
refinement  only  came  subdued.  People  were  moving  slowly  but 
wisely  towards  a  more  enlightened  stage  of  civilization. 

The  tyranny  of  petty  lords  no  longer  existed ;  it  had  been 
stamped  out  by  the  spirit  of  chivalry,  by  the  gallant  and 
courteous  feelings  the  latter  gave  rise  to  amongst  Southern 
nations,  and  chiefly  by  the  growth  of  royal  power  based  on  the 
emancipation  of  peoples. 

Those  whose  career  at  court  was  over,  were  fond  of  retiring 
to  the  provinces  that  had  witnessed  the  greatness  of  their 
families.  Once  back  on  their  estates,  they  there  enjoyed  the 
affectionate  and  respectful  consideration  of  all  around  them — a 
consideration  enhanced  by  the  traditions  of  the  province  and  the 


THE   YEARS  PRECEDING  THE  REVOLUTION.  7 

recollection  of  the  past  might  of  their  ancestors.  This  regard 
reflected  a  certain  credit  on  the  persons  composing  the  entourage 
of  the  descendants  of  the  families  which  were  formerly  the  sole 
dispensers  of  lordly  favours  in  the  district.  The  Revolution  itself 
failed  to  tarnish  the  lustre  of,  or  to  break  the  spell  possessed  by, 
these  ancient  seats  of  sovereign  power.  The  castles  of  provincial 
lords  are  like  those  old  deserted  shrines  from  which  the  faithful 
have  fled,  but  whose  traditions  still  enforce  respect. 

Chalais  Castle  was  one  of  the  relics  of  those  revered  and  dear 
old  times.  My  grandmother  there  held,  as  it  were,  a  court  com- 
posed of  several  gentlemen  of  ancient  families,  very  different  from 
the  vassals  of  the  thirteenth  century,  but  whose  deference  and 
refined  manners  were  mingled  with  the  loftiest  feelings.  M.  de 
Benac,  M.  de  Verteuil,  M.  d'Absac,  M.  de  Gourville,  M.  de 
Chauveron,  M.  de  Chamillard,  delighted  in  accompanying  her 
every  Sunday  to  the  parish  mass,  each  of  them  discharging 
towards  her  duties  dignified  by  exquisite  politeness.  A  little 
chair  close  to  my  grandmother's  prie-dieu  was  reserved  for  me. 

On  returning  from  mass,  everybody  met  in  a  spacious  hall  in 
the  castle  called  the  ApotJiicairerie}  This  room  contained  various 
large  jars  carefully  disposed  on  shelves  and  kept  with  scrupulous 
cleanliness  ;  they  were  filled  with  ointments,  the  recipes  of  which 
had  always  been  faithfully  preserved  at  the  castle.  Every  year 
they  were  prepared  with  the  greatest  care  by  the  village  surgeon 
and  vicar.  There  were  besides  a  few  bottles  of  elixirs  and 
syrups,  as  well  as  boxes  containing  other  medicaments.  In  the 
cupboards  was  stored  a  considerable  stock  of  lint  and  of  very 
fine  old  linen  bands  of  various  widths. 

All  the  sick  persons  who  required  assistance  were  assembled 
in  the  preceding  room.  We  greeted  them  as  we  passed  through. 
Mademoiselle  Saunier,  a  chambermaid  who  had  been  longest  in 
my  grandmother's  service,  introduced  them  in  turn.  My  grand- 
mother was  seated  on  a  velvet  armchair  ;  in  front  of  her  was 
placed  an  old  black  lacquered  table.  She  wore  a  silk  dress, 
trimmed  with  lace,  with  a  riband  collarette  and  sleeve-knots 
suited  to  the  season.  She  also  wore  triple  cuffs  with  large 
designs  ;  a  tippet,  a  head-dress  adorned  with  a  butterfly,  and  a 

1  The  surgery. 


8  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLE  YRAND. 

black  mantilla  tied  under  the  chin.  Such  was  her  Sunday  attire, 
more  elegant  than  that  she  wore  on  week-days. 

The  red  velvet  bag  trimmed  with  gold  lace,  containing  my 
grandmother's  books  of  devotion,  was  carried  by  M.  de  Benac, 
who,  on  his  great-grandmother's  side,  was  distantly  related 
to  us. 

My  close  relationship  secured  for  me  a  seat  next  to  the  old 
lady.  Two  sisters  of  mercy,  having  questioned  each  patient  as 
to  the  nature  of  his  disease  or  sore,  mentioned  the  special  oint- 
ment likely  to  heal  or  relieve  him.  My  grandmother  pointed 
out  where  the  remedy  was  kept  ;  one  of  the  gentlemen  who  had 
waited  on  her  at  church  fetched  it,  whilst  another  brought  the 
drawer  containing  the  linen  :  of  this  I  took  a  piece,  from  which 
my  grandmother  herself  cut  the  quantity  required  for  bandages. 
Each  patient  then  received  some  plants  for  his  potion,  some  wine, 
the  medicine  prescribed,  and  always  some  other  substantial  relief, 
but  that  which  most  touched  his  heart,  were  the  kind  and 
considerate  words  from  the  good  lady  who  endeavoured  to 
alleviate  his  sufferings. 

More  learned  and  elaborate  drugs,  even  if  distributed  as 
gratuitously  by  famous  doctors,  would  have  failed  to  attract  as 
many  poor  people,  and  especially,  to  do  them  as  much  good. 
Carefulness,  respect,  faith,  and  gratitude,  the  chief  means  of  cure 
for  the  lower  classes,  would  have  been  absent. 

Man  is  a  compound  of  a  body  and  soul,  which  latter  rules 
the  former.  Wounded  men  to  whose  sores  the  balm  of  conso- 
lation has  been  applied,  patients  to  whom  words  of  hope  have 
been  spoken,  are  on  the  high  road  to  recovery  ;  their  blood  flows 
more  freely,  their  humours  get  purified,  their  nerves  are  invigo- 
rated, sleep  returns  to  them,  and  their  bodies  regain  strength. 
Confidence  is  the  most  efficient  of  all  remedies,  and  it  is  strongest 
when  it  proceeds  from  the  solicitude  of  a  lady  of  rank  with  whom 
all  ideas  of  power  and  protection  are  connected. 

I  am  perhaps  dwelling  too  long  on  these  details,  but  I  am  not 
writing  a  book,  I  am  only  noting  my  impressions.  The  recollec- 
tion of  what  I  saw  and  heard  during  these  early  years  of  my  life  is 
extremely  pleasant  to  my  mind.  "  Your  name,"  I  was  daily  told, 
"  was  always  held  in  veneration  in  our  province." — "  Our  family," 


THE  YEARS  PRECEDING  THE  REVOLUTION.  9 

people  affectionately  said  to  me,  "  was  at  all  times  serving  some 
member  of  yours.  .  .  .  This  piece  of  ground  we  received  from 
your  grandfather  ...  he  it  was  who  built  our  church  .  .  .  my 
mother's    cross  is  a  gift  from  your  grandmother  ...  he  who 
comes  from  a  good  stock  cannot  degenerate  !     You  will  be  kind 
too,  will  you  not  ? "...  I  am  very  likely  indebted  to  these  early 
years  for  the  general  spirit  of  my  conduct  in  life.     If  I  displayed 
affectionate  and  even  tender  feelings  without  too  much  familiarity ; 
if,  in  various  circumstances,  I  showed  pride  without  haughtiness  ; 
if  I  love  and  respect  old  people,  it  is  at  Chalais,  by  the  side  of 
my  grandmother,  that   I   imbibed  all  the  good   feelings   which 
surrounded  my  relatives  in  that  district,  and  which  they  enjoyed 
with    delight.       For,    there    are    feelings   which    increase    from 
generation  to  generation.       For  a   long  time  to  come,  people, 
whose  fame  or   fortune  are  of  recent  origin  will  be  unable  to 
appreciate  their  sweetness.1     The  best  of  them  are  always  too 
much  inclined  to  act  the  part  of  protectors.     Let  the  wife  of 
Marshal  Lefebvre2  say  to  the  head  of  some  noble  Alsatian  family, 
devoid  of  resources  and  just  returned  from  emigration  :  "  What 
shall  we  do  with  your  eldest  son  ?  ...  In  what  regiment  shall 
we  place  his  brother  ?  .  .  .  Have  we  got  some  living  in  view  for 
the  abbe  ?  .  .  .  When  shall  we  marry  Henrietta  ?  .  .  .   I  know  a 
convent  where  we  ought  to  send  the  little  girl  .  .  ."    Though 
wishing    really  to  be   kind,  she  will  simply  appear    ridiculous. 
Inward    feelings  will    cause  him   to  decline    her  kindness,   and 
the  pride  of  poverty  will  even  experience  a  certain  satisfaction  at 
such  a  refusal.     But,  I  am  quite  forgetting  that  I  am  but  eight 
years    old ;    and    as    yet   incapable  of   foreseeing  that    present 
manners    bear  evident  signs  that   these  inherited    feelings  will 
gradually  dwindle  away. 

I  learned  at  Chalais  all  that  could  possibly  be  learned  in  the 

1  The  article  in  the  Charter  *  stating  that  the  old  and  new  titles  are  preserved  has  no 
more  sense  than  the  motion  made  by  M.  Mathieu  de  Montmorency  to  the  Constituent 
Assembly,  to  abolish  all  titles.  In  our  government,  the  political  nobility  resides 
wholly  in  the  House  of  Peers  ;  and  there,  it  is  individual.  Outside  of  it,  some  people 
bear  names  connected  with  some  historical  facts,  but  which  confer  no  legal  rights,  and 
which  it  is  impossible  either  to  over-  or  underrate. —  {Prince  Talleyrand.) 

2  When  but  a  private,  Marshal  Lefebvre,  Due  de  Dantzig,  had  married  the  laundress 
of  his  regiment. 

*  The  Charter  of  liberties  granted  to  France  by  Louis  XVIII.  on  his  return  from  Mittau.— (7Yii«.r/.) 


io  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

place,  that  is,  to  read,  write  and  to  a  certain  extent,  to  speak 
the  patois  of  the  province.  My  studies  had  been  limited  to 
this  when  I  had  to  return  to  Paris.  On  taking  leave  of  my 
grandmother  I  shed  tears,  and  so  did  she,  so  great  was  her 
affection  for  me.  As  on  coming  down,  so  on  returning,  the 
Bordeaux  coach  was  seventeen  days  on  the  way. 

At  eleven  o'clock  on  the  morning  of  the  seventeenth  day,  I 
reached  Paris.  An  old  valet  of  my  family  was  waiting  for  me 
at  the  station  in  the  Rue  d'Enfer,  and  took  me  direct  to  the 
College  d'Harcourt,1  where,  at  twelve  o'clock,  I  was  seated  at 
dinner  by  the  side  of  a  charming  boy  of  my  age  who  shared, 
and  still  shares,  all  the  cares,  pleasures,  and  dreams  of  my 
life.  This  was  M.  de  Choiseul,  known  ever  since  his  marriage 
under  the  name  of  de  Choiseul-Gouffier.2  I  had  been  pain- 
fully impressed  by  having  been  so  hurriedly  despatched  to 
college  without  having  been  previously  taken  to  my  father 
and  mother.  I  was  then  eight  years  old,  and  the  eyes  of 
my  parents  had  not  yet  rested  on  me.  I  was  told,  and  believed 
it,  that  all  this  hurried  arrangement  was  due  to  some  unforeseen 
and  unavoidable  circumstance :  so  I  followed  my  path. 

On  arriving  at  college,  I  was  led  to  the  apartment  of  M.  de 
la  Suze,3  a  cousin  of  mine,  and  entrusted  to  the  care  of  his  own 
tutor.4 

If  I  succeeded  at  all  in  my  studies,  that  result  cannot  be 
ascribed  either  to  the  example  of  my  cousin,  or  to  the  talents 
of  my  teacher. 

1  This  college,  which  had  been  founded  for  the  benefit  of  twenty-four  poor  students 
from  Normandy,  in  1280,  by  Raoul  d'Harcourt,  canon  of  the  Paris  clergy,  was,  at 
the  time  of  the  Revolution,  the  oldest  educational  establishment  in  Paris.  It  was 
turned  into  a  prison  during  the  Reign  of  Terror,  and  afterwards  became  the  quarters 
of  the  Ecole  normale.  It  resumed  its  first  character  only  in  1820,  when  it  took  the 
name  of  Lycee  Saint-Louis,  which  it  preserves  to  this  day. 

2  The  Comte  Auguste  de  Choiseul-Beaupre,  born  in  1752,  married  Marie  de 
Goufner,  whose  name  he  added  to  his  own.  He  was  at  first  captain  in  the 
Cuirassiers,  but  gave  way  to  his  taste  for  travelling,  and  visited  all  the  East.  In 
1784,  he  was  appointed  ambassador  at  Constantinople.  In  1789,  he  retired  to  Russia, 
returned  to  France  in  1802,  was  appointed  peer  of  France,  State  Minister,  and 
member  of  the  Privy  Council  by  Louis  XVIII.,  and  died  in  1817. 

a  Son  of  Louis-Michel  Chamillard,  Comte  de  la  Suze,  who  was  born  in  1709,  and 
became  in  1748  Grand  Marshal  of  the  King's  Household,  and  lieutenant-general 
(1748).  His  mother  having  become  a  widow  at  an  early  age,  married  Daniel  Marie, 
Prince  de  Talleyrand,  and  became  the  grandmother  of  the  author  of  these  memoirs. 
Youn£  de  la  Suze,  who  is  mentioned  here,  was  therefore  the  cousin  of  Prince  de 
Talleyrand. 

4  The  Abbe  Hardi. 


THE  YEARS  PRECEDING  THE  REVOLUTION.  n 

Once  a  week,  the  Abbe  Hardi  called  with  me  on  my 
parents,  and  we  dined  with  them.  On  rising  from  table, 
I  went  back  to  college  always  hearing  the  same  injunction : 
u  Be  a  good  boy,  and  give  satisfaction  to  the  Abbe."  I  got 
on  pretty  well ;  my  schoolfellows  liked  me  and  I  cheerfully 
submitted  to  my  new  position.  I  had  been  living  that  life 
for  three  years  when  I  caught  the  small-pox  ;  the  latter 
being  contagious,  I  had  to  leave  college.  My  family,  having 
been  informed  of  my  illness  by  my  tutor,  my  parents  sent  me  a 
sedan-chair  to  take  me  to  the  Rue  Saint-Jacques,  to  the  house  of 
Madame  Lerond,  a  nurse  employed  by  M.  Lehoc,  the  college 
physician.  In  these  days,  small-pox  patients  slept  in  beds 
surrounded  by  double  curtains  ;  the  windows  of  their  room  were 
made  proof  against  draughts,  a  blazing  fire  was  kept  up  in  it, 
and  fever  excited  by  means  of  suitable  beverages.  In  spite  of 
this  murderous  treatment,  which  killed  many  people,  I  got  over 
the  disease,  and  was  not  even  marked. 

I  was  then  twelve  years  old  ;  during  the  time  of  my  con- 
valescence the  peculiarity  of  my  position  struck  me.  My  heart 
was  full  at  the  little  interest  aroused  by  my  illness,  the  fact  of 
my  having  been  sent  to  college  without  having  seen  my  parents, 
and  some  other  grievous  recollections.  I  felt  myself  isolated, 
helpless  and  always  shut  up  in  myself :  I  do  not  complain  of  it,  for 
I  believe  that  my  early  meditations  developed  and  strengthened 
my  thinking  powers.  My  sad  and  cheerless  childhood  is  the  cause 
of  my  having  exercised  these  powers  at  an  early  age,  and  of 
having  accustomed  myself  to  think  more  deeply,  perhaps,  than 
I  should  have  done,  had  my  early  life  been  filled  with  happi- 
ness and  joy.  It  may  also  be  that  these  first  trials  of  my 
life  taught  me  to  bear  misfortune  and  disappointment  with 
indifference,  and  to  meet  the  latter  with  the  resources  which  my 
self-confidence  showed  me  I  possessed. 

There  is  a  sort  of  pleasant  pride  in  these  recollections  of  my 
youth. 

In  after-life,  it  has  struck  me  that  my  parents,  having  decided, 
in  consequence  of  what  they  regarded  as  the  interest  of  the 
family  that  I  should  be  trained  to  a  profession  for  which  I 
showed   no  aptitude,  were  afraid  that  they  might  fail  to  carry 


12  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

out  their  object,  if  they  saw  me  too  often.  That  fear  is  a  proof 
of  affection,  for  which  I  ought  to  feel  indebted  to  them. 

When  M.  de  la  Suze's  education  was  finished,  or,  rather, 
when  he  was  sixteen  years  old,  the  Abbe  Hardi,  his  tutor, 
retired.  For  a  few  months,  I  was  entrusted  to  the  care  of  a 
gentleman  named  Hullot,  who  soon  after  went  mad.  My  new 
tutor  was  M.  Langlois,  with  whom  I  remained  until  I  left  college, 
and  who  brought  up  my  brothers  afterwards.  He  was  a  perfect 
gentleman,  but  versed  in  nothing  but  French  history,  and  who 
had  devoted  too  much  attention  to  the  perusal  of  the  Court 
Directory.  In  books  of  that  kind  he  had  learned  that  the  post 
of  cape-bearer  to  princes^  conferred  nobility,  and  that  such  a  post 
was  given  on  the  introduction  of  the  Grand-Marshal.  The 
Grand-Marshal  being  my  uncle,2  we  secured  for  M.  Langlois  the 
post  he  was  so  eager  to  obtain.  In  1790,  my  former  tutor  had  his 
court-dress  made  and  emigrated,  so  that  his  letters  of  nobility 
might  bear  a  good  date.  He,  however,  was  in  too  great  a  hurry 
to  enjoy  his  new  privilege,  and,  having  returned  to  France  during 
the  revolutionary  period,  was  sent  to  prison.  So  that  now,  having 
a  twofold  fame,  by  emigration  and  imprisonment,  he  calmly 
spends  the  rest  of  his  life  in  the  noble  company  of  the  Faubourg 
Saint-Germain.  From  this,  it  may  be  judged  that  if  I  have, 
since  these  days,  given  way  to  the  temptation  of  playing  a 
part  in  public  affairs,  M.  Langlois  is  in  no  wise  responsible 
for   it. 

I  might  have  been  a  successful  scholar :  my  natural  bent 
leads  me  to  think  so,  and  I  notice  that  this  opinion  is  almost  uni- 
versally shared  by  my  schoolfellows.  The  little  encouragement 
given  me,  for  fear  lest  I  should  become  too  clever  a  young  man,  is 
the  cause  that  the  first  years  of  my  life  were  spent  in  a  rather 
dull  and  insignificant  manner. 

When  the  time  of  what  is  termed  the  conclusion  of  studies 
arrived,  the  complete  silence  of  my  father  as  to  my  future,  and 
a  few  conversations  held  in  my  hearing,  were  the  first  inti- 
mation I  had  of  the  career  intended  for  me. 

In  order  to  give  me  a  high  and  even  tempting  idea  of  the 
profession  marked  out  for  me,  it  was  thought  advisable  to  send 

1  Portc-manteait  chez  les princes.  2  The  Comte  de  la  Suze. 


THE   YEARS  PRECEDING  THE  REVOLUTION.  13 

me  to  Rheims,  the  chief  archbishopric  of  France,  to  the 
titular  of  which  one  of  my  uncles  was  coadjutor.1  As,  for  my 
family's  sake,  it  was  not  becoming  for  me  to  alight  from  the 
coach  at  the  archbishop's  residence,  my  journey  to  Rheims  was 
more  comfortable  than  that  to  Chalais  had  been.  A  post-chaise 
called  for  me  at  the  College  d'Harcourt,  and  drove  me  to  my 
destination  in  a  couple  of  days. 

My  parents  did  not  send  for  me  before  I  left.  I  repeat  this 
here,  and  hope  never  to  think  of  it  again.  I  am,  perhaps, 
the  only  man  of  distinguished  birth  and  belonging  to  a  numerous 
and  esteemed  family,  who  did  not,  for  one  week  in  his  life,  enjoy 
the  sweetness  of  being  under  his  father's  roof. 

The  disposition  of  my  mind  led  me  to  consider  my  new 
abode  as  but  an  ill-disguised  exile,  notwithstanding  all  the 
precautions  taken  to  render  it  attractive. 

The  opulence,  the  consideration,  the  very  pleasures  of  the 
Archbishop  of  Rheims  and  of  his  coadjutor  were  to  me  indifferent. 
A  life  full  of  formalities  was  unbearable  to  me.  At  the  age  of 
fifteen,  when  all  our  impulses  are  still  natural,  we  can  scarcely 
conceive  that  circumspection,  that  is,  the  art  of  disclosing  only  a 
portion  of  one's  actions,  thoughts,  feelings,  and  impressions, 
should  be  the  foremost  of  all  qualities.  In  my  opinion,  all  the 
wealth  and  pomp  of  Cardinal  de  la  Roche-Aymon,2  did  not 
deserve  the  complete  sacrifice  of  my  sincerity,  which  was  asked 
from  me. 

All  the  care  and  attention  paid  me  only  tended  to  impress 
me  deeply  with  the  idea  that,  my  lame  foot  rendering  me  in- 
capable of  serving  in  the  army,  I  must  necessarily  enter  holy 
orders,  as  no  other  career  was  open  to  a  man  of  my  name.  .  .  . 
Yet  what  was  to  become  of  the  lively  imagination  and  wit  with 

1  Alexandre  de  Talleyrand  was  born  in  1736.  He  was  successively  coadjutor  of 
the  Archbishop  of  Rheims  (1766),  Archbishop  in  partibus  of  Trajanopolis,  Arch- 
bishop-Duc  of  Rheims  (1777),  and  deputy  of  the  clergy  to  the  States-General  (1789). 
In  1801,  he  declined  to  resign,  was  called  to  Mittau  by  Louis  XVIII.,  in  1803,  and 
became  Grand-Chaplain  of  France  in  1808.  Peer  of  France  in  18x4,  Cardinal  in 
181 7,  and  finally  Archbishop  of  Paris,  he  died  in  1821.  He  was  the  paternal  uncle 
of  the  author. 

2  Charles- Antoine,  Comte  de  la  Roche-Aymon,  was  born  in  1697.  He  was  Vicar- 
General  of  Limoges  and  Bishop  in  partibus  of  Sarepta  in  1725.  Bishop  of  Tarbes, 
Archbishop  of  Toulouse  in  1740,  and  of  Narbonne  in  1752,  he  became  Grand-Chaplain 
of  France  in  1760,  Archbishop- Due  of  Rheims  in  1762,  Cardinal  in  1771,  and  died 
in  1777- 


H  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

which  I  was  credited  ?  The  only  plan  then  was  to  hold  out  to 
me  the  attraction  of  public  life,  and  to  picture  to  me  the  advan- 
tages to  be  obtained  from  it.  They  sought  to  avail  themselves 
of  the  characteristics  I  might  happen  to  possess. 

With  this  object,  I  was  induced  to  read  the  Memoirs  of 
Cardinal  de  Retz,  the  life  of  Cardinal  Richelieu,  that  of  Cardinal 
Ximenes,  and  that  of  Hincmard,  a  former  Cardinal  of  Rheims. 
.  .  .  Whatever  might  be  the  path  I  entered  upon,  my  parents 
were  disposed  to  agree  to  it,  provided  I  crossed  the  threshold  of 
the  Church. 

The  constant  pressure  brought  to  bear  on  me  did  not  fix  my 
resolution,  but  rather  unsettled  it.  Youth  is  the  time  in  life 
when  we  are  most  honest.  I  did  not  then  understand  what  it 
was  to  embrace  one  profession  with  the  intention  of  following 
another,  to  assume  a  part  of  constant  self-denial  in  order  the 
better  to  succeed  in  an  ambitious  career  ;  to  join  the  Church 
in  order  to  become  Minister  of  Finances.  It  required  too  great 
a  knowledge  of  the  society  which  I  was  entering,  and  of  the 
times  in  which  I  was  living,  to  regard  this  as  a  matter  of  course. 

But,  being  alone,  I  was  defenceless  ;  all  the  persons  who 
surrounded  me  spoke  a  conventional  language,  and  carefully 
concealed  from  me  all  means  of  avoiding  the  carrying  out  of  the 
plan  my  parents  had  formed  respecting  my  future. 

I  spent  a  year  at  Rheims,  at  the  expiration  of  which,  seeing 
that  my  fate  could  not  be  avoided,  my  wearied  mind  submitted  : 
I  allowed  myself  to  be  taken  to  Saint-Sulpice  College.1 

More  thoughtful  than  is  usual  at  the  age  I  was  then,  rebellious, 
but  powerless,  indignant,  without  either  daring  to,  or  being  justi- 
fied in,  displaying  my  indignation,  there  are  few  instances  of  a 
lad  of  sixteen  being  as  despondent  and  cheerless  as  I  was  on 
entering  that  college.  I  formed  no  intimacy.  I  did  everything 
in  cross-temper.  I  had  a  grudge  against  my  masters,  my 
parents,  institutions  generally,  but  chiefly  against  the  sway  of 
social  propriety  to  which  I  saw  myself  obliged  to  give  way. 

1  Saint-Sulpice  College  was  founded  in  1542  by  M.  Jean-Jacques  Oilier,  cure  of 
the  parish  ;  it  was  at  first  situated  at  Vaugirard.  It  soon  acquired  considerable 
importance,  owing  to  the  excellence  of  its  tuition  and  to  its  strict  ecclesiastical 
discipline.  The  present  building  was  erected  by  M.  Le  Ragon  de  Bretonvilliers,  cure 
of  Saint-Sulpice  parish.  It  contains  a  magnificent  ceiling  painted  by  Charles  Le 
Brun,  the  famous  artist. — {Translator.) 


THE   YEARS  PRECEDING  THE  REVOLUTION.  15 

I  spent  three  years  at  Saint-Sulpice  College,  and  hardly 
spoke  at  all  during  the  whole  time  ;  people  thought  I  was  super- 
cilious and  often  reproached  me  with  being  so.  This  seemed  to 
me  so  to  point  out  how  little  they  knew  me,  that  I  deigned  no 
reply  ;  they  then  said  that  my  arrogance  was  beyond  all 
endurance.  Good  Heavens !  I  was  neither  arrogant  nor 
proud  :  I  was  merely  a  harmless  young  man,  extremely 
miserable   and  inwardly  irritated.     People  say,  I  often  thought 

to  myself,  that  I  am  fit  for  nothing.  ....  Fit  for  nothing 

After  giving  way  to  despondency,  for  a  few  moments,  a  strong 
and  comforting  feeling  cheered  me,  and  I  discovered  that  I 
%vas  fit  for  something,  even  for  good  and  noble  deeds.  What  fore- 
bodings, a  thousand  times  dispelled,  did  not  then  cross  my  mind, 
always  placing  me  under  a  spell  which  I  was  unable  to  explain  ! 
The  library  of  Saint-Sulpice  College  had  been  enriched  by 
gifts  from  Cardinal  de  Fleury ;  its  works  were  numerous  and 
carefully  selected.  I  spent  my  days  there  reading  the  produc- 
tions of  great  historians,  the  private  lives  of  statesmen  and 
moralists,  and  a  few  poets.  I  was  particularly  fond  of  books  of 
travels.  A  new  land,  the  dangers  of  a  storm,  the  picture  of  a 
wreck,  the  description  of  a  country  bearing  traces  of  great 
changes,  sometimes  of  upheavals,  all  this  had  deep  interest  for 
me.  Sometimes,  when  I  considered  these  voyages  to  distant 
lands,  these  dreadful  scenes  described  so  vividly  in  the  writings 
of  modern  explorers,  it  seemed  to  me  that  my  lot  was  not  so 
hopeless  as  I  had  thought.  A  good  library  affords  true  comfort 
to  all  the  dispositions  of  the  soul. 

My  third  and  really  useful  education  dates  from  this  time,  it 
was  self-taught  in  lonely  silence  ;  as  I  was  always  face  to  face  with 
the  author  whose  work  I  was  reading,  and  could  only  use  my  own 
judgment,  it  nearly  always  happened  that,  when  my  opinions 
differed  from  those  of  another,  I  thought  mine  the  right  one. 
My  ideas  thus  remained  personally  my  own  :  the  books  I  read 
enlightened  my  mind,  but  never  enslaved  it.  I  do  not  pretend 
to  say  that  in  so  acting  I  was  right  or  wrong,  I  merely  state 
what  I  was.  Such  lonely  self-tuition  must  have  some  value. 
If  injustice,  whilst  developing  our  faculties,  has  not  embittered 
our   hearts  too   much,   we   derive    greater   comfort   from    lofty 


1 6  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

thoughts  and  noble  impulses,  we  feel  stronger  in  confronting  life's 
trials.  A  feeling  of  hope,  vague  and  indescribable,  like  all 
youthful  passions,  excited  my  mind  :  I  never  allowed  it  to  rest. 

By  the  merest  chance,  I  met  a  person  who  had  some 
influence  in  modifying  the  disposition  in  which  I  then  was.  I 
recollect  this  meeting  with  pleasure,  because  I  am  most  likely 
indebted  to  it  for  having  been  spared  all  the  effects  of  melancholy 
brought  to  its  most  intense  degree.  I  had  reached  the  age  of 
the  mysterious  revelations  of  the  soul  and  of  the  passions,  the 
moment  in  life  when  all  our  faculties  break  forth  in  super- 
abundant and  full  activity.  I  had  several  times  noticed,  in 
one  of  the  lateral  shrines  of  Saint-Sulpice  church,  a  hand- 
some young  lady  whose  simple  and  modest  look  pleased  me 
extremely.  At  eighteen,  this  is  an  attraction  for  any  young 
man  who  is  not  depraved  :  I  attended  the  chief  services  more 
assiduously.  One  day,  as  she  left  the  church,  a  severe  shower 
set  in  which  emboldened  me  to  propose  to  her  to  see  her  home, 
provided  she  did  not  live  too  far.  She  agreed  to  share  my 
umbrella.  I  accompanied  her  to  Rue  Ferou,  where  she  was 
lodging  ;  she  allowed  me  to  see  her  to  her  apartments  ;  and, 
quite  naturally,  like  a  very  pure  young  lady,  she  proposed  that 
I  should  come  again.  At  first,  I  availed  myself  of  her  offer  about 
twice  a  week,  and  afterwards  more  often.  Her  parents  had  sent 
her  on  the  stage  against  her  wish  ;  I  was  a  clerical  student  against 
mine.  This  sway  of  interest  in  her  case,  and  of  ambition  in 
mine,  brought  about  mutual  unreserved  confidence  between  us. 
All  the  troubles  of  my  life,  all  my  fits  of  ill-humour,  her  own 
trials  and  disappointments,  occupied  all  our  conversations.  I 
have  since  been  told  that  she  had  not  much  sense :  although  I 
saw  her  almost  daily  for  two  years,  I  never  noticed  it. 

Thanks  to  her,  I  became  even  in  college  more  amiable,  or  at 
least  better-tempered.  My  superiors  cannot  have  failed  to  have 
had  some  suspicion  of  what  had  reconciled  me  to  my  position  and 
even  made  me  somewhat  cheerful.  But  the  Abbe  Couturier  *  had 
taught  them  the  art  of  being  blind  when  necessary  ;  he  had  told 

1  The  Abbe  Couturier  was  born  in  1688.  He  was  a  friend  of  Cardinal  de  Fleury, 
who  appointed  him  Abbot  of  Chaumes,  and  afterwards  head  of  Saint-Sulpice  College, 
lie  died  in  1770. 


THE  YEARS  PRECEDING  THE  REVOLUTION.  17 

them  never  to  find  fault  with  a  young  student  whom  they  regarded 
as  destined  to  fill  high  posts,  to  become  coadjutor  to  the 
archbishop  of  Rheims,  perhaps  a  cardinal,  perhaps  even  Ministre 
de  la  feuille}     How  could  any  one  tell  ? 

I  left  college 2  some  time  before  the  coronation  of  the  king.3 
My  parents  sent  me  to  Rheims  in  order  to  attend  this  ceremony. 
The  power  of  the  clergy  was  then  at  its  height  ;  the  bishop 
suffragan  of  Rheims  was  to  officiate,  in  case  the  old  age  of 
Cardinal  de  la  Roche-Aymon  should,  as  it  was  feared,  prevent 
him  from  attending  this  solemn  ceremony.  .  .  What  a  glorious 
time !  .  .  . 

A  young  king,  scrupulously  moral  and  uncommonly  modest ; 
ministers,  well  known  for  their  ability  and  uprightness  ;  a 
queen  whose  affableness,  grace  and  kindness  tempered  the 
austere  virtues  of  her  consort  ;  everybody  filled  with  respect ! 
the  heart  of  every  subject  overflowing  with  affection  for  the 
young  sovereigns !  joy  was  everywhere !  .  .  Never  did  such  a 
bright  spring  precede  such  a  stormy  autumn,  such  a  dismal 
winter. 

My  acquaintance  with  several  women  remarkable  in  different 
ways,  and  whose  friendship  never  ceased  to  give  a  charm  to  my 
life,  dates  from  the  coronation  of  Louis  XVI.  These  ladies 
were  the  Duchesse  de  Luynes,4  the  Duchesse  de  Fitz-James,5  and 
the  Vicomtesse  de  Laval.6 

1  Literally,  Minister  of  the  Roll  (of  benefices).  The  feuille  was  a  book  in  which 
were  inscribed  all  the  vacant  benefices  in  the  gift  of  the  Crown.  This  book  was  kept 
by  a  prelate,  to  whom,  in  fact,  the  power  of  nomination  was  delegated  by  the  king. 
All  the  bishoprics  or  abbeys  in  the  gift  of  the  Crown  were  thus  conferred  by  the 
Ministre  de  la  feuille. 

2  It  may  be  noticed  that  M.  de  Talleyrand  does  not  mention  here  either  the  exact 
date  of  his  ordination,  or  the  circumstances  attending  this  ceremony.  The  Comte  de 
Choiseul-Gouffier,  speaking  on  this  subject,  related  that,  having  called  on  M.  de 
Talleyrand  on  the  evening  preceding  his  ordination,  he  found  him  in  a  state  of  violent 
inward  struggle,  all  in  tears,  and  giving  way  to  despair.  M.  de  Choiseul  then  endea- 
voured to  persuade  his  friend  not  to  consummate  the  sacrifice  ;  but  the  fear  of  his 
mother,  of  a  tardy  scandal,  a  certain  false  pride,  held  him  back,  and  he  exclaimed, 
"  It  is  too  late,  there  is  no  retreating  now." — {M.  de  Bacourt.) 

3  nth  June,  1775. 

4  Elisabeth  de  Montmorency-Laval,  daughter  of  the  Marshal  Due  de  Montmorency 
Laval,  married  in  1768  Louis  d: Albert,  Due  de  Luynes,  who  was  Brigadier-General, 
Deputy  to  the  States-General,  and  Senator  under  the  Empire. 

5  Probably  Marie  de  Thiard,  daughter  of  Henry  de  Thiard,  Comte  de  Bissy,  who 
married  in  1768  the  Due  de  Fitz-James,  Brigadier-General. 

6  Catherine  Tavernier  de  Boullongne,  who,  in  1765  married  Mathieu  de  Mont- 
morency-Laval, known  under  the  name  of  Vicomte  de  Laval. 

VOL.   I.  C 


18  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

The  assembly  of  the  clergy x  was  about  to  sit,  I  was  elected 
by  the  province  of  Rheims  to  be  a  member  of  this  assembly.  I 
carefully  watched  how  business  was  conducted  in  this  important 
body.  Ambition  was  there  represented  in  various  disguises. 
Religion,  humanity,  patriotism,  philosophy,  each  of  these  had  its 
so-called  supporters  !  Whenever  the  pecuniary  interests  of  the 
clergy  were  threatened,  all  the  members  rose  in  defence  of  these 
interests,  though  they  did  not  all  resort  to  the  same  arguments. 
The  most  pious  bishops  expressed  the  fear  that  the  proposed 
reforms  would  diminish  the  share  of  the  poor ;  those  who  be- 
longed to  the  high  aristocracy,  were  afraid  of  any  innovation  ; 
those  whose  ambition  was  an  open  secret,  claimed  that  the  clergy, 
being  the  most  enlightened  body  of  the  kingdom,  should  be  at 
the  head  of  all  government  administrations,  and,  in  order  not 
to  be  a  burden  on  the  State,  should  find,  in  the  wealth  bequeathed 
them  by  our  pious  forefathers,  the  means  of  facing  the  expenses 
necessarily  involved  in  the  tenure  of  high  State  offices.  Thus,  in 
the  management  of  their  temporal  affairs,  the  clergy  of  the 
eighteenth  century  made  no  concessions  to  the  spirit  of  the  times. 
When  M.  de  Machault,2  Minister  of  Finances,  proposed  to  tax  the 
property  of  the  clergy  like  that  of  all  other  subjects,  the  whole 
clergy  rose  to  oppose  the  motion,  and  declared  that  they  would 
not  submit  to  this  measure.  Property  given  to  the  Church, 
they  said,  belongs  to  God  and  is  consecrated  to  Him.  This 
consecration  has  the  effect  of  imparting  to  such  property  a 
peculiar  destination,  and  the  ministers  of  religion  are  its  sole  dis- 

1  These  assemblies  or  general  meetings  of  the  clergy  dated  from  the  sixteenth 
century.  Since  1567,  they  were  held  every  five  years.  Their  object  was  to  determine 
and  portion  out  the  amount  of  supplies  (free  gift)  to  be  paid  to  the  king.  They  also 
dealt  with  religious  matters.  They  were  divided  into  ordinary  and  extraordinary  or 
plenary  assemblies,  which  sat  alternately.  The  session  of  the  latter  lasted  six  months, 
and  comprised  two  deputies  of  the  first  order,  and  two  of  the  second,  for  each  ecclesias- 
tical province  ;  the  ordinary  or  minor  assemblies  only  lasted  three  months,  and  were 
only  composed  of  a  single  deputy  of  each  order  for  each  province. 

-  Jean-Baptiste  de  Machault,  Comte  d'Arnouville,  was  born  in  1701,  from  an  old 
family  of  magistrates.  He  became  successively  Counsellor  of  parlement*  (1721), 
Comptroller-General  (1745-1754),  Keeper  of  the  Seals  (1750),  and  Secretary  of  State 
to  the  Marine  Department.  He  was  dismissed  from  all  his  posts  in  1757,  and  lived 
in  retirement  until  the  Revolution.  Having  been  arrested  in  1794,  he  died  in  prison 
a  few  weeks  later. 

*  The  parlcnieitts  were  but  courts  of  law  established  in  the  chief  cities  of  old  France.  They  had 
no  political  character :  the  parlement  of  Paris,  however,  assumed  this  character  on  several 
occasions,  and  refused  to  register  certain  royal  edicts,  which  registration  constituted  its  exclusive 
privilege,  and  gave  the  edicts  the  force  of  law. — {Translator.) 


THE   YEARS  PRECEDING  THE  REVOLUTION.  19 

pensers  and  managers  ;  the  immunity  of  Church  property  is  a 
principle  of  French  public  law.  The  interference  of  conscience 
in  all  these  financial  quarrels  enabled  the  clergy  to  display,  in 
the  discussion  of  this  important  matter,  a  degree  of  eloquence 
which  they  alone  possess.  M.  de  Montauset,1  M.  de  Breteuil,2 
and  M.  de  Nicolai',3  having  attracted  attention  by  their  brilliant 
speeches,  took  up  a  prominent  position  in  the  assembly,  and 
enjoyed  all  the  importance  given  them  by  M.  de  Machault's 
resignation. 

The  government  gave  way  on  the  subject  of  possession,  but 
mooted  another  point,  which  referred  to  the  mode  by  which  the 
clergy  had  obtained  possession  of  their  property,  and  might  lead 
to  the  shaking  of  the  very  principle  of  possession.  The  question 
was,  to  decide  whether  the  clergy  were  subjected  to  fealty  and 
homage,  to  avowal  and  enumeration,  in  short,  to  feudal  duties 
towards  the  king.  It  had  been  discussed  several  times  since  the 
beginning  of  the  seventeenth  century,  and,  on  every  occasion,  the 
clergy  had  obtained  a  favourable  decision  ;  but,  as  they  could 
not  produce  any  documentary  evidence  in  support  of  their  claims, 
they  had  been  subjected  to  renewed  attacks.  In  1725,  the  clergy 
having  refused  to  admit  the  tax  of  the  fiftieth,  the  government 
enforced  the  execution  of  a  previous  declaration,  according  to 
which  the  clergy's  pretension  that  they  were  excused  from  dis- 
charging their  feudal  duties,  was  pronounced  null  and  erroneous. 
Since  then,  on  various  pretexts,  the  clergy  had  obtained  at  each 
subsequent  assembly,  orders,  which,  without  deciding  the  case, 
suspended  the  application  of  the  law  of  1674. 

Some  difficulties  and  some  delays  in  the  engrossing  of  the 
order  of  suspension4  of  1775,  induced  the  clergy  to  make  fresh 
efforts.     The  works  of  Dom  Bouquet 5  were  consulted  ;  and,  in 

1  No  person  of  this  name  existed  at  that  time.  The  author  probably  means 
M.  de  Montazet,  born  in  1713,  chaplain  to  the  king  in  1742,  Bishop  of  Autun  in  1748, 
Archbishop  of  Lyons  in  1759,  and  who  died  in  1788. 

2  Francois- Victor  le  Tonnelier  de  Breteuil,  born  in  1724,  Bishop  of  Montauban  in 
1762. 

3  There  were  at  this  time,  two  prelates  belonging  to  the  Nicolai  family  :  Louis- 
Marie,  born  in  1729,  Bishop  of  Cahors  in  1777  ;  Aimar-Claude,  born  in  1738,  Bishop 
of  Beziers  in  1771,  who  emigrated  in  1792,  and  died  in  Florence  in  18 14. 

4  Arret  de  stir  seance. 

5  Dom  Martin  Bouquet,  a  learned  Benedictine  monk,  born  at  Amiens  (1685— 1754). 
Chief  Librarian  of  the  Abbey  of  Saint-Germain-des-Pres.     He  is  the  author  of  a  work 

C    2 


20  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

numerous  memoirs,  of  one  of  which,  I  believe,  I  am  the  author, 
the  clergy  set  forth  that  seeing  that  they  held  their  immunity 
from  the  munificence  of  the  kings  of  France,  their  case  was 
ruled  by  the  general  legislation  of  the  kingdom,  which  protects 
equally  the  rights  of  all  the  orders  l  and  the  property  of  all 
citizens.  Going  further  into  the  details  of  the  case,  they 
pretended  that  all  the  property  they  possessed  previous  to  the 
year  1700,  proceeded  from  tithes,  allodium,  or  free  gifts.2  So 
that  no  feudal  service  being  due  for  tithes,  allodium,  or  free  gifts, 
the  conclusion  was  that  all  the  property  of  the  clergy  should  be 
free  from  feudal  duties.  I  do  not  recollect  how  they  got  over 
the  difficulty  arising  from  spiritual  peerages.3  The  Archbishops 
of  Narbonne,4  of  Aix,5  of  Bordeaux,6  and  the  Bishop  of 
Nevers,7  displayed  great  ability  in  the  course  of  this  great 
debate.  But  the  explanations  obtained  from  the  Chamber  of 
Accounts  8  in  pursuance  of  an  Order  in  Council,  and  furnished 

entitled  Recueil  des  Historiens  de  la  Gaide  ("  Collection  of  the  Historians  of  Gaul "). 
Another  Bouquet,  a  renowned  jurist  and  a  nephew  of  the  latter,  died  in  1781  ;  he 
published  various  works  on  ecclesiastical  law.  There  may  have  been  some  confusion 
between  the  two,  and  the  works  of  the  nephew  may  thus  have  been  erroneously 
ascribed  to  his  uncle. 

1  The  nation,  as  is  known,  was  divided  into  three  orders  :  the  clergy,  the  nobility, 
and  the  third  estate. — (Translator.) 

2  Tranches  aumones  was  the  name  given  to  free  gifts  made  to  churches  or  hos- 
pitals.— ( Translator. ) 

3  The  spiritual  or  temporal  peers  of  the  kingdom  owed  fealty  and  homage  to  the 
king,  and  had  to  discharge  all  the  feudal  duties  towards  him. 

4  Arthur  de  Dillon,  born  in  1721,  Bishop  of  Evreux(i753),  Archbishop  of  Toulouse 
(1758),  of  Narbonne  (1762),  President  of  the  States  of  Languedoc,  and  of  the  assembly 
of  the  clergy  held  in  1780. 

6  Jean-de-Dieu  Raymond  de  Boisgelin,  born  at  Rennes  in  1732,  Bishop  of  Lavaur 
(1765),  Archbishop  of  Aix  (1770),  President  of  the  States  of  Provence,  deputy  of  the 
clergy  to  the  States-General,  President  of  the  Constituent  Assembly  (1790).  He 
emigrated,  returned  to  France  in  1802,  was  appointed  Archbishop  of  Tours  and 
Cardinal,  and  died  in  1804. 

6  Ferdinand  Meriadec,  Prince  de  Rohan-Guemenee,  born  in  1738,  Archbishop  of 
Bordeaux  (1769),  and  of  Cambrai  (1781).  He  emigrated  in  1792,  returned  to  France 
in  1802,  and  was  appointed  chaplain  to  the  Empress  Josephine. 

7  Jean  Antoine  Tinseau,  born  at  Besancon  (1697),  Bishop  of  Nevers  (1751). 

8  The  Chambre  des  Comptcs  was  a  supreme  court  from  whose  decisions  there  was 
no  appeal.  It  was  instituted  for  the  hearing  and  verification  of  the  accounts  of  all 
officials  entrusted  with  public  money.  It  had  also  to  take  all  necessary  measures  for 
the  preservation  of  the  Crown  estates  and  property.  Besides  the  Chamber  of 
Accounts  of  Paris,  there  were  similar  courts  in  the  chief  towns  of  the  kingdom.  The 
Chamber  of  Accounts  of  Paris  was  founded  by  Philip  the  Fair.  The  Chamber  of 
Paris  verified  and  registered  all  the  ordinances  concerning  estates,  revenues,  or  ex- 
penditure of  the  Crown,  the  letters  of  nobility,  the  deeds  of  recognition  or  legitimiza- 
tion of  natural  children,  the  deeds  relating  to  the  sinking  of  debts,  the  deeds  of 
appanage,  &c.  It  received  the  oaths  of  allegiance  and  homage  to  the  king  from  his 
vassals,  and  registered  all  Crown  leases  and  generally  all  matters  concerning  the 
finances  of  the  State. — (Translator.') 


THE   YEARS  PRECEDING  THE  REVOLUTION.  21 

by  M.  de  Saint-Genis,1  were  on  the  point  of  bringing  about  a 
decision  exactly  in  opposition  to  the  pretensions  of  the  clergy, 
when  the  States-General  dispersed  everybody. 

Some  philosophical  views  shared,  as  already  mentioned, 
by  the  most  ambitious  portion  of  the  clergy,  had  induced 
several  prominent  bishops  to  solicit  the  carrying  out  of  the 
Order  in  Council  of  1766,  according  to  which  the  king  was  to 
appoint  a  commission  to  deal  with  reforms  to  be  introduced 
in  a  few  regular  religious  orders.2  A  particular  reform  such  as 
this,  so  much  in  keeping  with  the  ideas  of  the  time,  must  neces- 
sarily lead  to  a  general  attack  upon  these  illustrious  bodies. 
Having  once  dispersed  all  that  learned  staff,  it  became  easier 
to  approach  the  whole  ecclesiastical  edifice,  which,  being  thus 
deprived  of  what  constitutes  its  leading  spirit  and  strength,  could 
not  long  defend  itself  with  the  weapons  afforded  by  the  external 
ceremonies  of  religion  alone. 

M.  de  Brienne,3  Archbishop  of  Toulouse,  who  sought  support 
in  the  new  ideas,  was  chairman  of  the  Commission  in  1776. 
The  religious  orders  of  Sainte-Croix  and  of  Grandmont,  the 
Camaldules,  the  Servites,  the  Celestines,  had  already  been 
abolished.  The  order  of  Saint-Rufus  had  just  shared  a  similar 
fate.4    The  commissioners,  in  the  reports  in  which  they  proposed 

1  Nicolas  de  Saint-Genis,  born  in  1741,  died  in  1808  ;  Commissaire  des  guerres 
(an  officer  in  the  Commissariat)  (1762),  auditor  in  the  Court  of  Accounts  (1769).  He 
is  the  author  of  a  valuable  work  on  ecclesiastical  law. 

2  The  reform  of  religious  orders  was  urged  in  1765  by  the  assembly  of  the  clergy 
itself.  In  consequence,  the  King's  Council,  in  an  order  dated  May  26,  1766, 
appointed  a  commission  to  examine  the  reforms  which  it  was  proper  to  apply  to  con- 
ventual life.  This  commission  was  composed  of  five  prelates  and  five  councillors  of 
state  ;  it  drew  up  the  ordinance  of  March  24,  1768,  which  set  forth — 1st,  that  the  age 
at  which  vows  should  be  valid  was  henceforth  to  be  twenty  for  men,  and  eighteen 
for  women  ;  2nd,  that  members  of  religious  orders  of  either  sex  should  be  French  ; 
3rd,  that  no  town  should  have  more  than  two  convents  of  the  same  order  ;  4th,  that 
each  monastery  should  comprise  at  least  fifteen  monks  or  nuns. 

3  Etienne  de  Lomenie,  Comte  de  Brienne,  born  in  1727,  Bishop  of  Condom  ( 1 760), 
Archbishop  of  Toulouse  (1763),  chairman  of  the  Board  of  Finances  (1787),  Prime 
Minister,  Archbishop  of  Sens  (1788),  Cardinal  in  December,  1788  ;  he  took  the  oath 
to  the  civil  constitution  (of  the  clergy),  and  gave  up  his  dignity  of  cardinal.  He  was 
arrested  in  1793,  and  died  suddenly. 

4  The  regular  canons  of  Sainte-Croix,  whose  head  convent  was  at  Liege,  only 
possessed  in  France  twelve  establishments  numbering  forty-seven  members ;  their 
congregation  was  abolished  October  14,  1769. — The  order  of  Grandmont,  founded  in 
1 124  by  Saint-Stephen  at  Murat  (Limousin),  only  numbered  108  members,  occupying 
seven  convents,  in  the  eighteenth  century.  It  was  abolished  by  an  edict  of  March  3, 
1770,  confirmed  by  a  papal  bull  of  August  6,  1772. — The  Camaldules,  whose  order 
dated  from  the  tenth  century,  comprised  eight  monasteries  of  monks  (the  most  im- 


22  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

these  measures  of  destruction,  and  the  royal  orders  which  enjoined 
the  closing  of  these  convents,  alluded  with  regret  to  the  necessity 
of  having  recourse  to  such  extreme  steps  ;  but  it  was  then  wished 
to  consider  them  as  indispensable  in  order  to  strengthen  the 
discipline  of  the  Church,  and  to  preserve  from  corruption  those 
orders  which  it  was  hoped  could  still  be  allowed  to  exist. 

I  am  far  from  thinking  that  the  bishops  who  had  drafted  the 
project  of  that  permanent  commission,  were  aware  of  all  the 
danger  its  adoption  was  to  present  for  the  clergy.  They  surely 
believed  that  they  would  be  able  to  direct  its  application,  and, 
if  needed,  even  to  suspend  it.  But  the  time  had  already  come 
when  people  had  ceased  to  be  moderate  in  all  questions  relative 
to  religious  orders.  Hardly  a  day  passed  without  some  work 
being  published  concerning  the  abusive  practices  of  one  order, 
the  uselessness  of  another ;  and  I  do  not  recollect  that,  during 
the  twenty  years  that  preceded  the  French  Revolution,  a 
single  clever  pen  was  raised  in  defence  of  religious  orders. 
The  historians  no  longer  even  dared  to  say  that  convents  and 
monasteries,  more  than  any  other  cause,  imparted  a  peculiar 
character  to  the  great  European  civilization  and  made  it  dis- 
tinctly unlike  any  other.  It  has  often  occurred  to  me  that  the 
celibacy  of  priests  powerfully  contributed  to  preserve  Europe 
from  the  spirit  of  caste ;  and  it  is  but  necessary  to  refer  to 
history  to  see  that  this  spirit  tends  generally  to  check  the 
progress  of  civilization.  M.  de  Bonald  could  find  in  this  the 
text  of  a  paper  much  in  keeping  with  his  own  ideas. 

The  peculiarity  of  the  period  I  am  now  reaching,  was  that 
everybody  was  anxious  to  be  noted  for  talents  or  aptitudes 
foreign  to  his  pursuit.  The  formation  of  the  provincial  as- 
semblies1 furnished  the  occasion  of  calling  public  attention  to 

portant  of  which  was  on  Mont  Valerien  *)  and  twelve  convents  of  nuns.  It  was  the 
wealthiest  order  in  France. — The  order  of  Servitcs  was  founded  at  Florence  in  the 
thirteenth  century  by  seven  merchants.  Their  chief  establishment  was  the  convent  of 
the  Annunciade  in  Florence  ;  they  had  spread  to  France,  where  they  were  known  under 
the  name  of  Blancs-Mantcaux  t  on  account  of  their  dress. — The  order  of  Saint-Rufus 
dated  from  the  sixth  century.  At  the  time  of  its  abolition,  it  only  possessed  fifty-seven 
monasteries,  numbering  200  monks.  At  their  request,  Pope  Clement  XIV.  secularised 
them,  and  incorporated  them  in  the  military  order  of  Saint-Lazarus  (July,  1771). 
1  The    provincial   assemblies    were    collective   administrations   instituted    under 

*  A  well-known  hill  near  Paris.     The  fort  erected  on  it  caused  much  trouble  to  the  Germans  in 
1870-71.— (7  ranslator.)  t  Literally,  "White-cloaks." 


THE   YEARS  PRECEDING  THE  REVOLUTION.  23 

the  persons  elected  to  preside  over  them.  M.  Necker,1  who  was 
always  afraid  of  being  reproached  for  being  a  Calvinist,  thought 
he  could  shield  himself  by  appointing  to  the  different  posts  of  his 
department  all  bishops  endowed  with  some  talent  ;  thus  it  was 
that  within  a  few  years,  all  the  provincial  administrations  were 
managed  by  the  most  distinguished  bishop  of  each  province.  Is 
it  not  remarkable  that  a  clergy,  composed  of  men,  some  of  whom 
were  most  pious,  others  specially  good  administrators,  others, 
again,  worldly,  and,  like  the  Archbishop  of  Narbonne,  taking  a 
certain  pride  in  relinquishing  for  a  while  the  grave  and  severe 
duties  of  their  avocation  to  lead  the  life  of  a  nobleman  2 — is  it 
not  remarkable,  I  say,  that  being  composed  of  so  many  different 
elements,  this  clergy  should,  nevertheless,  preserve  the  same 
spirit  ?  Yet,  it  is  an  undeniable  fact,  and  more  than  substantiated 
by  an  incident  which  I  could  scarcely  credit,  had  I  not  witnessed 
it  personally.  A  few  days  after  the  opening  of  the  States-General, 
I  attended  with  the  chief  members  of  the  clergy  a  conference 
held  in  Versailles  at  Cardinal  de  la  Rochefoucauld's3;  there, 
M.  Dulau,4  Archbishop  of  Aries,  earnestly  proposed  to  seize  so 

Louis  XVI.  in  the  twenty-six  generalites  Selections  *  of  the  kingdom.  Turgot  was 
the  first  to  think  of  this  institution  ;  it  was  however  reserved  to  Necker  to  apply  the 
idea.  Those  assemblies  were  formed  of  members  of  the  three  orders,  the  Third  Estate 
sending  twice  the  number  of  the  other  two.  They  held  their  session  once  in  two 
years,  and  only  sat  for  a  month  ;  they  were  entrusted  with  the  levying  and  distribu- 
tion of  taxes,  and  possessed  besides,  nearly  all  the  attributes  of  the  present  General 
Councils  in  France.  Half  the  members  were  appointed  by  the  king,  and  these  elected 
the  other  half. 

1  Jacques  Necker  belonged  to  a  family  of  English  origin,  which  emigrated  to 
Germany  in  the  sixteenth  century.  In  1724,  his  father  took  up  his  residence  in 
Geneva,  where  he  became  professor  of  law.  Jacques  was  born  in  1732,  came  to  Paris 
in  1750,  and  founded  a  banking  concern  there.  He  became  Director  of  the  Treasury  in 
1776,  and  afterwards  General  Director  of  Finances,  with  all  the  power  of  a  Minister 
of  State — a  title  which  could  not  be  conferred  upon  him  for  the  twofold  reason  of  his 
being  a  Protestant  and  a  foreigner.  He  retired  to  private  life  in  1780,  was  exiled  in 
1787,  resumed  office  in  1788,  was  exiled  again  on  July  11,  1789,  and  called  again  to 
power  by  the  Assembly  ten  days  later.  His  popularity,  however,  did  not  last  long : 
he  resigned  on  September  18,  1790.     He  retired  to  Coppet,  where  he  died  in  1804. 

2  M.  de  Dillon,  Archbishop  of  Narbonne,  possessed  an  estate  near  Soissons,  where 
he  hunted  large  game  six  months  in  the  year.  Haute- Fontaine  was  the  name  of  this 
estate.  — {Prince  Talleyrand.) 

3  Dominique  de  la  Rochefoucauld,  Comte  de  Saint  Elpis,  born  in  171 3,  Arch- 
bishop of  Albi  (1747),  of  Rouen  (1759),  Cardinal  (1778),  Deputy  of  the  Clergy  to  the 
States-General.      He  emigrated  in  1792,  and  died  in  1800. 

4  Jean-Marie  Dulau,  born  near  Perigueux  in  1738  ;  Archbishop  of  Aries  in  1775, 

*  The  financial  jurisdictions  of  old  France  ;  each  of  them  was  administered  by  an  official  named 
intendant.  The  generalites  of  the  pays  d'etats  were  those  where  the  province  still  enjoyed  the  privi- 
lege of  fixing  its  own  taxation.  In  the  pays  d' election,  the  taxes  were  fixed  by  royal  delegates  called 
elus. — ( Translator.) 


24  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

favourable  an  occasion  (these  were  his  own  expressions)  to  get  the 
nation  to  pay  the  debts  of  the  clergy.  This  motion,  like  that  of 
M.  de  Themines1  when  he  advised  the  clergy  to  solicit  the  meeting 
of  the  States-General,  met  with  no  opposition.  The  Archbishop 
of  Aries,  in  whose  ability  and  wisdom  everybody  placed  confi- 
dence, was  appointed  to  second  the  motion  of  M.  Dulau,  and 
press  its  adoption  by  the  States-General,  whenever  he  thought 
the  moment  opportune.  It  required  the  lapse  of  many  months  and 
all  the  ominous  events  that  happened  in  the  meantime,  to  enable 
the  good  sense  of  M.  de  Boisgelin,  Archbishop  of  Aix,  to  persuade 
the  clergy,  not  only  to  waive  this  absurd  motion,  but  even  to 
make  a  considerable  sacrifice  in  order  to  cover  the  famous  deficit 
which  had  been  the  pretext  for  all  that  was  going  on  for  a  year ; 
it'was  too  late  ;  it  is  true,  the  pretext  was  forgotten  ;  besides  there 
was  no  longer  any  need  of  it,  since  the  States-General  had 
become  the  National  Assembly. 

I  notice  that  while  speaking  of  the  clergy,  I  do  not  observe 
chronological  order  ;  I  am  compelled  to  do  so.  A  work  on  any 
given  subject,  confined  to  studying  the  progress  of  events  year 
after  year,  must  needs  often  be  obscure  and  always  devoid  of 
interest.  I  think  it  preferable  for  clearness  of  exposition  to 
mention  at  once  that  naturally  belongs  to  the  subject  one  is 
dwelling  upon.  Besides,  it  has  the  invaluable  advantage  of  being 
much  easier,  and  when  people  do  not  pretend  to  write  a  book, 
they  may  be  allowed  to  take  it  easy. 

Cardinal  de  la  Roche-Aymon,  by  appointing  me  promoter  of 
the  assembly  of  1775,2  gave  me  the  opportunity  of  attracting 
notice,  and  from  that  moment,  I  was  destined  to  become  agent- 
general  of  the  clergy.3 

deputy  of  the  clergy  to  the  States-General.  Arrested  after  August  10,  he  was  im- 
prisoned at  the  "  Carmes,"  *  and  fell  a  victim  to  the  September  massacres. 

1  Alexandre  de  Lauzieres  de  Themines  (1742-1829),  chaplain  to  the  king,  Bishop 
of  Blois  (1776).  He  emigrated  in  1 791,  refused  to  resign  his  see  in  1801,  never 
acknowledged  the  Concordat,  and  died  in  Brussels  in  1829  without  having  ever 
returned  to  France. 

2  The  duties  of  the  promoter  were  to  plead  the  defence  of  public  interests.  His 
functions  were  equivalent  to  those  of  the  public  prosecutor  in  criminal  courts.  He 
had  to  expose  faulty  ecclesiastics,  and  to  see  that  the  rights,  liberties,  and  discipline 
of  the  Church  were  not  infringed. 

3  There  were  two  agents-general  of  the  clergy.  Their  duties  consisted  in  repre- 
senting the  interests  of  the  clergy  with  the  government,  in  all  that  related  to  the 

*  The  convent  ofa  religious  order  of  this  name  used  as  a  prison  during  the  Revolution. — (Translator. 


THE   YEARS  PRECEDING  THE  REVOLUTION.  25 

When  the  session  of  the  assembly  of  1775  was  over,  I  entered 
the  Sorbonne.  I  spent  two  years  there,  engaged  with  anything 
but  theology,  for  pleasures  occupy  most  of  the  time  of  a  young 
graduate.  Ambition  also  takes  up  a  portion  of  one's  time,  and 
the  memory  of  Cardinal  Richelieu,  whose  fine  mausoleum  was  in 
the  Sorbonne  church,  was  not  unsuggestive  in  this  respect.  At 
that  time,  I  only  knew  ambition  in  its  noble  acceptation,  I  was 
anxious  to  undertake  all  that  in  which  I  thought  I  could  succeed. 
The  five  years  of  exasperation,  silence  and  reading  which,  at 
Saint-Sulpice  college,  seemed  so  long  and  dismal  to  me,  were  not 
altogether  lost.  The  trials  of  youth  are  profitable  ;  it  is  a  good 
thing  to  have  been  steeped  in  the  waters  of  the  Styx,  and,  for 
many  reasons,  I  am  thankful  to  have  undergone  the  trials  of 
those  days. 

On  leaving  the  Sorbonne,  I  found  myself  at  last  entirely  free 
to  do  as  I  pleased. 

I  took  up  my  residence  at  Bellechasse,1  in  a  comfortable  little 
house.  My  first  care  was  to  form  a  library,  which  became  valu- 
able eventually  by  the  care  with  which  the  works  composing  it 
were  selected,  the  rarity  of  the  editions,  and  its  choice  and  elegant 
bindings.  I  sought  to  make  the  acquaintance  of  the  men  most 
renowned  for  their  past  life,  their  works,  their  ambition,  or  the 
prospects  held  out  to  them  by  their  birth,  their  friends  or  their 
talents.  Being  thus  placed  by  my  own  action  in  the  wide  circle 
where  so  many  brilliant  and  superior  minds  were  shining  in 
various  ways,  I  enjoyed  the  proud  pleasure  of  being  indebted  to 
myself  alone  for  my  position  in  life.  I  even  had  a  very  sweet 
moment  when,  having  been  appointed  by  His  Majesty  to  the 
benefice  of  the  abbey  of  Saint  Denis  at  Rheims,  the  first  income 
I  derived  from  it  enabled  me  to  pay  to  the  principal  of  Harcourt 
College  a  considerable  portion  of  the  fees  still  due  for  my 
education,  and  to  recompense  M.  Langlois  for  the  care  he  had 
taken  of  me  in  my  youth. 

revenue  and  expenditure  of  the  Church,  and  the  maintenance  of  her  privileges.     They 
were  elected  for  five  years  by  the  assemblies  of  the  clergy. 

1  The  Hotel  Bellechasse  was  situated  in  the  Faubourg  St.  Germain,  Rue  de 
Verneuil,  near  the  Rue  de  Bellechasse.  The  Bellechasse  inclosure  has  given  its  name 
to  the  convent  of  the  Canonesses  of  the  Holy  Sepulchre,  whose  property  it  was  ; 
it  was  situated  near  the  Rue  St.  Dominique. — {Translator.) 


26  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

Saint-Sulpice  and  the  Sorbonne  had  separated  me  from 
M.  de  Choiseul-Gouffier.  Of  all  the  young  men  with  whom  I 
had  been  brought  up,  he  was  the  first  whom  I  sought  to  meet 
again.  Since  I  had  missed  him,  he  had  married,  and  had  one  or 
two  children  ;  besides,  he  had  made  a  dangerous  and  interesting 
journey  which  had  brought  him  into  notice  in  society,  begun  his 
reputation,  and  determined  his  choice  of  a  career. 

I  shall  so  often  have  to  speak  of  M.  de  Choiseul,  in  the  course 
of  these  memoirs  that  I  must  indulge  in  the  pleasure  of  acquaint- 
ing my  readers  with  him.  Nature  has  endowed  M.  de  Choiseul 
with  imagination  and  talent ;  he  is  cultivated  ;  he  converses  and 
speaks  well  ;  his  delivery  is  fluent  and  unaffected.  If  in  his 
youth  he  had  less  admired  the  fine  sentences  of  M.  de  Buffon,1 
he  might  have  achieved  a  certain  reputation  as  a  writer.  People 
say  he  gesticulates  too  much  ;  it  is  also  my  opinion  ;  it  helps 
him  when  speaking  ;  and,  like  all  speakers  who  make  many 
gestures,  he  feels  amused  with  what  he  says  and  repeats  him- 
self a  little.  His  old  age  will  be  irksome  to  those  who  may 
have  to  nurse  him,  for  the  old  age  of  persons  who  only  possess 
mediocre  talent  is  generally  over-punctilious,  and  preserves 
merely  the  outward  forms  of  urbanity.  Wit  alone  can  make 
old  age  amiable,  because  it  gives  an  air  of  novelty  to  ex- 
perience, and  invests  it  almost  with  the  charm  of  a  discovery. 
M.  de  Choiseul  is  naturally  noble-minded,  kind,  full  of 
confidence  and  sincerity.  He  is  affectionate,  easily  to  get  on 
with  and  forgetful.  That  is  why  he  is  a  very  good  father  and 
an  excellent  husband,  although  he  seldom  visits  his  wife  or  his 
children.  He  has  friends,  is  fond  of  them,  wishes  them  happy 
and  would  fain  do  them  a  good  turn,  but  he  gets  on  very  well 
without  seeing  them.  He  devoted  but  a  small  part  of  his  life 
to  public  affairs ;  he  found  occupations  which  took  up  all  his 
time.  The  exquisite  taste  and  erudition  which  he  displayed 
in  Art  rank  him  among  the  most  useful  and  distinguished 
of  amateurs. 

M.  de  Choiseul  is  the  man  I  have  most  loved.  Although,  in 
society,   the  names  of  M.   de  Choiseul,   M.  de  Narbonne,2  and 

1  The  Comte  Georges  Louis  Leclerc  de  Buffon,  the  famous  French  naturalist  and 
writer. — ( Translator. ) 

•  The  Comte  Louis  de  Narbonne-Laru,  born  in  1755  at  Colorno  (Duchy  of  Parma) 


THE  YEARS  PRECEDING  THE  REVOLUTION.  27 

Abbe  de  Perigord l  were  often  associated,  our  intimacy  with  M. 
de  Narbonne  had  less  the  character  of  friendship.  M.  de  Nar- 
bonne  possesses  a  kind  of  mind  which  aims  only  at  effect,  which 
is  either  brilliant  or  insignificant,  which  exhausts  itself  in  a  note 
or  in  a  sally.  He  is  uniformly  polite  ;  his  mirth  often  runs 
foul  of  good  taste,  and  his  character  does  not  inspire  the 
confidence  required  by  intimate  relations.  His  company  is 
entertaining,  but  one  seldom  feels  at  ease  with  him.  A  sort  of 
grace  that,  better  than  any  one  else,  he  knows  how  to  give  to  his 
companionship,  has  gained  him  much  success,  chiefly  among 
witty  and  somewhat  vulgar  men.  He  is  less  to  the  taste  of 
men  who  appreciate  what,  in  our  youth,  was  termed  good 
breeding.  If  any  one  spoke  of  the  hjen  who  had  supped  on 
a  certain  day  at  the  house  of  the  Marechale  de  Luxem- 
bourg,2 and  he  had  been  there,  the  names  of  twenty  persons 
would  have  been  mentioned  before  his  own  ;  at  Julie's  he  would 
have  been  named  first. 

My  room,  where  we  gathered  every  morning,  and  where  my 
friends  shared  my  frugal  meals,  presented  a  singular  medley  : 
the  Due  de  Lauzun,3  Panchaud,4  Barthes,5  Abbe  Delille,6  Mira- 


of  a  very  ancient  family  from  Spain.  Having  come  to  France  in  1760,  he  served  in 
the  artillery,  after  which  he  entered  the  Foreign  Office.  He  was  brigadier-general  in 
1791,  Minister  of  War  from  December,  1791,  to  March,  1792.  A  writ  of  accusation 
being  issued  against  him  after  August  10,  he  managed  to  escape,  and  resided  abroad. 
In  1805,  he  was  re-instated  in  his  grade,  and  appointed  Governor  of  Raab,  and  after- 
wards of  Trieste  ;  minister  to  Bavaria,  aide-de-camp  to  the  emperor,  ambassador  at 
Vienna  (1813).  He  died  soon  after  at  Torgau.  M.  de  Narbonne  married  Mademoi- 
selle de  Montholon,  by  whom  he  had  two  daughters. 

1  It  was  under  this  name  that  M.  de  Talleyrand  was  known  in  his  youth. 

2  Madeleine  Angelique  de  Neufville-Villeroi,  grand-daughter  of  the  Marshal  Due 
de  Villeroi,  born  in  1707,  married  at  first  to  the  Due  de  Boufflers,  who  died  in  1747. 
In  1750,  she  married  the  Marshal  Due  de  Luxembourg,  and  died  in  1787. 

3  Armand  de  Gontaut,  Comte  de  Biron,  then  Due  de  Lauzun,  born  in  1747,  entered 
the  army,  fought  in  Corsica,  then  in  America  ;  deputy  of  the  nobility  of  Quercy  to 
the  States-General,  he  joined  the  party  of  the  Due  d'Orleans.  General-in-Chief  of 
the  army  of  the  Rhine  in  1792,  then  of  the  army  of  Vendee,  he  was  accused  of 
treason,  arrested,  and  guillotined  in  1793. 

4  Panchaud  was  a  Geneva  banker  established  in  Paris.  He  has  published  on  the 
finances  of  his  time  an  interesting  work  entitled,  Considerations  on  the  Present  State 
of  the  Credit  of  England  and  of  France.     ( Paris,  1 78 1 . )  * 

5  Joseph  Barthes  (1734-1806).     Physician  and  philosopher  of  great  reputation. 

6  Abbe  Delille,  born  at  Aigues-Perse  (Auvergne)  (1738-1813),  one  of  the 
most  agreeable  poets  of  the  eighteenth  century.  He  was  a  member  of  the 
Academy. 

*  "  Reflexions  sur  l'etat  actuel  du  Credit  de  l'Angleterre  et  de  la  France."    (Paris,  1781.) 


28  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

beau,1  Chamfort,2  Lauraguais,3  Dupont  de  Nemours,4  Rulhiere,5 
Choiseul-Gouffier,  Louis  de  Narbonne  met  there  habitually  and 
always  with  pleasure.  We  touched  upon  every  subject  and 
with  the  greatest  liberty.  It  was  the  spirit  and  fashion  of  the 
time.  These  conversations  were  both  pleasant  and  instructive, 
and  besides,  they  held  out  some  more  or  less  remote  prospect  of 
gratifying  our  ambition.  It  was  a  delightful  way  of  spending 
our  mornings  and  I  should  enjoy  doing  so  still. 

The  news  of  the  day,  political,  commercial,  administrative, 
and  financial  questions  all  in  succession  furnished  topics  of 
conversation.  One  of  the  matters  with  which  the  mind  of  the 
public  was  most  engrossed  at  that  time,  was  the  commercial 
treaty  just  concluded  between  France  and  England.6  The 
details  of  that  great  transaction  were  of  special  interest  to 
educated  men  such  as  Panchaud,  Dupont  de  Nemours  and 
others.  As  for  us  ignorant  ones,  Lauzun,  Barthes,  Choiseul  and 
myself,  though  anxious  to  learn,  we  confined  ourselves  to  gener- 

1  Honore-Gabriel  Riquetti  de  Mirabeau,  the  grand  orator  of  the  Constituent 
Assembly  (1749-1791),  son  of  the  Marquis  de  Mirabeau,  the  well-known  economist 
and  agriculturist. 

2  Sebastien  Chamfort  (1 741-1794),  born  near  Clermont-Ferrand.  He  wrote 
several  tragedies  and  poems,  which  obtained  for  him  the  favour  of  the  public.  He 
was  acquainted  with  the  leading  personages  of  the  Revolution,  and  collaborated  in 
the  works  of  Sieves  and  Mirabeau.  A  writ  of  accusation  having  been  issued  against 
him  in  1794,  he  killed  himself  as  they  came  to  arrest  him. 

3  Leon  de  Lauraguais,  Due  de  Brancas  (1 733-1824).  He  secluded  himself  all  his 
life  for  the  study  of  letters  and  scientific  works.  He  was  appointed  a  member  of  the 
Chamber  of  Peers  in  1814. 

4  Pierre  Dupont  de  Nemours  (1739-1817),  one  of  the  most  fervent  adepts  of  the 
physiocratic  school.  He  was  a  Councillor  of  State  and  Commissary-General  of  Com- 
merce under  Calonne  ;  deputy  to  the  States-General.  Imprisoned  during  the  Reign 
of  Terror,  he  was  saved  by  the  coup  d'etat  of  the  9th  Thermidor.  Member  of  the 
Conseildes  Cinq-cents*  He  lived  in  retirement  under  the  Empire,  emigrated  in  1815, 
and  died  in  America. 

5  Claude  Rulhiere,  born  at  Bondy,  near  Paris,  in  1735,  was  aide-de-camp  to 
Marshal  de  Richelieu.  Later,  M.  de  Breteuil  took  him  to  St.  Petersburg  as  private 
secretary  (1760).  He  witnessed  the  Revolution  of  1762,  and  undertook  to  write  an 
account  of  it.  This  work — Les  Revolutions  de  Russie — had  such  a  success  that  its 
author  was  commanded  to  write  a  history  of  Poland,  intended  for  the  instruction  of 
the  Dauphin.     Member  of  the  Academy  in  1787,  he  died  three  years  later. 

6  The  Treaty  of  September  26,  1786,  signed  under  the  ministry  of  Vergennes,  in 
accordance  with  Article  18th  of  the  Treaty  of  Versailles  of  1763.  It  raised  numerous 
criticisms  ;  Vergennes  was  accused  of  having  sacrificed  our  manufactures. 

*  The  Conseil  des  Cinq-cents  (Council  of  the  Five  Hundred),  thus  named  because  of  its  bein?  com- 
posed of  five  hundred  members,  was  instituted  by  the  constitution  of  the  year  III.  It  had  legislative 
powers.  Its  members  were  elected  from  among  citizens  of  more  than  twenty-five  years  of  age.  The 
functions  of  the  Conseil  des  Cinq-cents  were  similar  to  that  of  the  House  of  Commons  in  England,  or 
of  the  present  Chamber  of  Deputies  in  France,  with  the  difference  that  the  upper  chamber  or  Conseil 
des  A  neiens  (Council  of  Elders)  had  the  power  to  accept  or  reject,  as  they  pleased,  the  decisions  of  the 
Council  of  the  Five  Hundred,  and  was  thus  omnipotent. — (Translator.) 


THE   YEARS  PRECEDING  THE  REVOLUTION.  29 

alities.  I  am  anxious  to  record  here  what  I  recollect  of  these 
discussions,  because  they  belong  to  an  order  of  ideas  so  different 
from  those  I  have  heard  people  express  since,  that  I  think  it 
useful  to  state  them.  With  this  object  I  will  give  a  rapid  sketch  of 
the  various  events  and  negotiations  which  took  several  years  to 
bring  about  that  great  result. 

The  cabinets  of  Versailles  and  of  London  were  convinced  of 
the  reciprocal  advantage  which  would  accrue  from  the  official 
recognition  and  protection  of  commercial  relations  between  the 
two  countries.  No  previous  period  of  history  had  ever  offered  so 
favourable  an  occasion  for  a  commercial  treaty  between  England 
and  France.  Since  the  peace  of  1763,1  national  antipathies 
seemed  to  have  died  out,  and  immediately  after  the  recognition 
of  the  independence  of  America  by  England,  frequent  communi- 
cation between  France  and  Great  Britain  had  destroyed,  in  great 
measure,  many  repugnances.  Mutual  inclination  was  becoming 
evident ;  the  point  now  was  how  to  make  it  lasting  and  mutually 
advantageous  to  both  nations.  The  two  governments  named 
plenipotentiaries  to  discuss  this  important  question. 

In  England,  they  recollected  that  Lord  Bolingbroke  2  after 
concluding  the  treaty  of  Utrecht,  had  some  intention  of  proposing 
a  commercial  treaty  with  France.  This  project,  which  he  had 
failed  to  carry  out,  had  been  one  of  the  motives,  or  one  of  the 
pretexts,  for  the  persecution  he  had  experienced  on  the  part  of 
the  Whigs.  The  reasons  alleged  then  against  a  commercial 
treaty  with  France  may  have  been  plausible.  English  customs 
were  still  frightened  at  French  luxury  ;  too  close  relations  might 
arouse  the  fears  of  English  manufacturers  with  regard  to  the 
competition  of  French  goods  in  which  the  English  had  not 
yet  attained  a  standard  of  superiority.  The  advantage  that 
the  productions  of  French  soil  might  take  over  those  of 
Portugal  was   also  a  course  of  apprehension.      The  Treaty  of 

1  The  Treaty  of  Paris,  which  put  an  end  to  the  War  of  Seven  Years. 

2  Henry  Paulet  de  Saint-Jean,  Viscount  Bolingbroke,  born  in  1672  at  Battersea 
(Surrey).  Member  of  the  House  of  Commons  (1700),  Secretary  of  State  (1704), 
Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  (1713) ;  he  was  one  of  the  signatories  of  the  Peace  of 
Utrecht.  Exiled  after  the  death  of  Queen  Anne  (1714),  he  took  refuge  in  France, 
returned  to  England  in  1723,  and  was  for  ten  years  the  most  redoubtable  adversary  of 
Walpole.  He  died  in  1750,  without  having  been  able  to  regain  power.  He  married 
as  second  wife  the  Marquise  de  Villette,  niece  of  Madame  de  Maintenon. 


30  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

Methuen  l  was  yet  too  recent  to  make  it  prudent  to  compromise 
its  advantages  by  setting  up  a  rivalry  between  the  productions 
of  France  and  Portugal.  These  arguments,  which  were  not  devoid 
of  force,  either  no  longer  existed,  or  had  lost  their  weight. 
England  was  in  a  state  of  commercial  prosperity  which  was 
rendered  incalculable  by  the  invention  of  its  machines  and  the 
immensity  of  its  capital ;  fashion  took  upon  itself  to  destroy  the 
objections  resulting  from  the  increase  of  luxury.  The  influence 
of  the  ministry  and  the  interests  of  manufacturers  met  other 
objections  victoriously,  and  the  treaty  was  received  in  England 
with  almost  universal  approbation. 

Public  opinion  in  France  took  an  entirely  different  view  01 
the  treaty.  The  interests  of  her  maritime  population  were,  in  this 
case,  in  direct  opposition  with  those  of  the  inhabitants  of  her 
manufacturing  districts.  The  treaty  was  therefore  received  at 
first  with  some  astonishment.  Its  first  results  were  not  favour- 
able to  us.  The  English,  being  better  prepared  than  we  were, 
derived  large  profits  from  it.  The  city  of  Bordeaux,  the 
provinces  of  Guyenne,  Aunis  and  Poitou,  found  indeed  a  few 
more  outlets  for  their  wines,  their  brandies  and  the  other  products 
of  their  soil  ;  but  it  was  argued  that,  in  the  general  evaluation, 
these  local  advantages  could  not  compensate  for  the  inconveni- 
ences of  the  consumption  of  twenty-five  million  inhabitants, 
anxious  to  purchase  goods  superior  in  quality,  and  which  England 
could  provide  at  a  figure  much  lower  than  that  of  the  French 
market. 

Normandy,  so  skilful  in  the  defence  of  her  own  interests,  so 
important  by  her  wealth  and  population,  was  the  first  to  express 
her  discontent.  She  published  a  long  manifesto  against  the 
treaty.  The  cause  she  pleaded  soon  found  supporters  through- 
out the  land  ;  all  the  old  prejudices,  all  the  former  motives  of 
hate  and  animosity  re-appeared.  The  voice  of  the  consumers 
was  stifled,  and  the  government  soon  incurred  general  blame  for 
having  signed  the  treaty. 

1  The  Treaty  of  Methuen  between  England  and  Portugal,  so-called  after  the  name 
of  the  English  ambassador,  Lord  Methuen,  who  negotiated  it,  was  signed  in  1703. 
It  was  a  treaty  of  alliance  and  of  commerce,  by  which  England  reserved  to  herself  the 
monopoly  of  importation  into  Portugal.  The  latter  submitted  to  this  commercial 
vassalage  up  to  the  beginning  of  the  nineteenth  century. 


THE  YEARS  PRECEDING  THE  REVOLUTION.  31 

And  yet  the  spirit  that  inspired  that  great  transaction  was 
dictated  by  the  best  principles.  M.  de  Vergennes  x  and  M.  de 
Calonne,2  who  were  instrumental  in  its  adoption,  will  each  some 
day  derive  some  credit  from  it.  The  object  of  the  treaty  was  to 
put  an  end  to  the  smuggling  that  was  going  on  between  the 
two  countries,  and  to  furnish  the  public  treasury  with  a  revenue 
founded  on  duties  moderate  enough  to  leave  no  margin  for 
fraud.  This  advantage  was  evident  and  reciprocal  for  the 
two  countries.  If  it  increased  for  France  the  facility  of 
gratifying  the  taste  and  fancy  her  wealthy  people  showed  for 
English  goods,  it  enabled  England  to  enjoy  more  luxuries,  for 
which  she  paid  France,  by  a  reduction  of  duty  on  the  wines  of 
Champagne  and  Bordeaux,  a  reduction  which  must  increase  their 
consumption  in  England. 

The  result  of  this  reduction  of  duties  both  on  the  neces- 
saries of  life  and  on  luxuries,  must  have  been,  for  consumers, 
to  balance  more  equitably  the  taxes  levied  on  them,  and  to 
facilitate  their  payment  ;  as  for  the  public  treasury,  the  result  of 
the  treaty  would  have  been  to  increase  the  revenue  in  proportion 
as  the  consumption  was  augmented. 

It  may  also  be  mentioned  that  the  spirit  of  the  treaty  pro- 
vided that  all  classes  of  industries  should  be  divided  between  the 
two  nations,  each  being  awarded  the  class  of  industry  for  which 

1  Charles  Gravier,  Comte  de  Vergennes,  was  the  second  son  of  a  President  d 
Mortier*  of  the  parlement  of  Dijon.  Born  at  Dijon  in  1717,  he  entered  the  diplomatic 
service.  In  1750  he  was  appointed  minister,  and  sent  in  that  capacity  to  the  Elector 
of  Treves.  About  that  time  he  was  initiated  into  the  secrets  of  the  king,  of  whom  he 
became  one  of  the  most  devoted  agents.  Ambassador  at  Constantinople  (1754)  5  re" 
called  by  Choiseul  in  1768,  he  lived  in  retirement  until  the  fall  of  that  minister,  when 
he  was  (1771)  sent  as  ambassador  to  Sweden.  Louis  XVI.  appointed  him  Minister 
of  Foreign  Affairs  (1774).  He  signed  the  Treaty  of  Versailles  and  the  Treaties  of 
Commerce  with  England  and  Russia.  He  became  President  of  the  Council  of 
Finances  (1783),  and  died  in  17S7. 

2  Charles  Alexandre  de  Calonne  was  the  son  of  a  distinguished  Artesian  family  ; 
he  was  born  January  20,  1743,  at  Douai,  where  his  father  was  first  president  of 
parlement.  He  was  attorney-general  to  the  parlement  of  Douai,  intendant  of 
Metz  (1768),  of  Lille,  where  his  reputation  as  a  skilful  administrator  led  to  his  being 
appointed  comptroller-general  by  Louis  XVI.  After  the  meeting  of  the  Assembly 
of  the  Notables,  which  he  had  suggested,  he  was  dismissed  from  his  post  and  exiled 
to  Lorraine  (1787).  Thence  he  went  to  England,  returned  to  France  in  1789  in  the 
hope  of  securing  his  election  to  the  States-General.  He  however  failed,  went  back 
to  England,  where  he  played  an  active  part  amongst  the  emigres,  and  died  in  1802. 

*  This  was  the  official  appellation  of  the  chief-judge  of  the  Grand'  Chambre  of  the  parlements, 
that  is  to  say,  the  tribunal  appointed  to  take  cognizance  of  verbal  appeals  against  the  decisions  of  the 
" presidiaux"  (minor  judges),  bailliages,  and  other  inferior  courts.  They  were  so  named  from  the 
shape  of  their  caps,  somewhat  resembling  a  mDrtar  (mortier).— {Translator.) 


32  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

nature  seemed  to  have  fitted  it  best,  and   from   which  it  was 
likely  to  derive  most  advantages. 

This  latter  provision  might,  in  the  course  of  a  few  years,  have 
brought  about  the  triumph  of  the  principle  of  free-trade,  but 
prejudices  decided  otherwise.  They  have  too  deeply  rooted  a 
hold  upon  men,  for  it  to  be  prudent  to  endeavour  to  destroy 
them  too  suddenly.  I  refused  for  a  long  time  to  acknowledge 
this  sad  truth,  but  seeing  that  the  philosophers  of  the  eighteenth 
century,  with  all  the  good  and  bad  arguments  they  employed,  did 
fail  in  that  undertaking,  I  shall  henceforth  follow  the  example  of 
the  philosophers  of  the  nineteenth  century,  who  are  indeed  of  a 
very  different  stamp  from  that  of  their  predecessors,  and  allow 
it  to  trouble  me  no  longer. 

A  public  career  being  open  to  me,  I,  rather  cleverly,  took  advan- 
tage of  the  position  of  agent-general  of  the  clergy,  which  had  been 
promised  me,  to  extend  my  relations.  Early  in  life,  I  made  the 
acquaintance  of  M.  de  Maurepas,1  M.  Turgot,2  M.  de  Malesherbes,3 

1  Jean  Phelypeaux,  Comte  de  Maurepas,  and  of  Pontchartrain,  was  born  in  1709. 
His  father,  his  grandfather,  his  great-grandfather,  and  great-great-grandfather  had 
been,  like  himself,  Secretaries  of  State,  so  that  from  1610  to  1749  the  Phelypeaux 
family  was  represented  in  the  councils  of  the  king.  As  early  as  1715,  Maurepas  ob- 
tained the  reversion  of  the  post  of  Secretary  of  State,  which  his  father  had  resigned. 
The  Marquis  de  la  Vrilliere  was  selected  to  discharge  the  duties  of  that  office  in  the 
place  of  his  relation,  who  soon  became  his  son-in-law.  In  1725,  Maurepas  took  the 
direction  of  his  department  in  hand,  and  was  appointed  Secretary  of  Paris  and  of 
Marine.  He  fell  into  disgrace  in  1749,  was  exiled  to  Bourges,  and  afterwards  to 
his  estate  of  Pontchartrain,  near  Versailles.  His  father-in-law  had  replaced  him.  He 
took  office  again  under  Louis  XVI.,  who  appointed  him  Minister  of  State  and  Presi- 
dent of  the  Council  of  Finances  (1774).  Up  to  his  death  (1781)  he  had  in  reality  all 
the  power  of  a  prime  minister. 

"  Jacques  Turgot,  Baron  de  l'Aulne,  belonged  to  an  old  family  which  came 
originally  from  Brittany,  and  had  settled  in  Normandy.  He  was  born  in  1727.  He 
was  counsellor  of  parlement,  then,  in  1762,  intendant  of  Limoges,  where  his  en- 
lightened and  benevolent  administration  made  his  name  famous.  Secretary  of  State 
for  the  Department  of  Marine  (1774),  comptroller-general  in  the  same  year,  dismissed 
from  office  in  1776,  he  died  five  years  later.  Closely  associated  with  the  economist 
party,  he  left  several  works  on  political  economy  and  on  administration. 

a  Chretien-Guillaume  de  Lamoignon  de  Malesherbes,  of  an  illustrious  family  of 
Nivernais,  which  during  two  centuries  occupied  the  highest  posts  in  the  magistracy. 
He  was  born  in  1721,  was  counsellor  of  parle7)ient  (1744),  chief  president  of  the 
Cour  des  Aides*  (1750),  dismissed,  and  exiled  in  1771.  Re-instated  in  his  office  by 
Louis  XVI,  in  1774,  he  resigned  in  the  following  year.  Secretary  of  State  to  the 
King's  Household  (1775-1776),  Minister  of  State  (1787-1788).  He  lived  abroad 
until  1792,  when  he  returned  to  France  to  offer  his  services  to  the  king,  whose  defence 

*  The  Cours  des  Aides  were  tribunals  charged  with  judging  and  deciding  as  a  final  court  of  appeal 
all  civil  and  criminal  cases  concerning  taxes,  Gaiellesi  and  Tallies. X  That  of  Paris  dated  from  1355. 
This  tribunal  was  the  only  one  that  had  the  right  of  interpreting  the  royal  ordinances  concerning  the 
levying  of  taxes.  —  Translator. 

t  Salt  tax.     X  Villain-tax. — (Translator.) 


THE   YEARS  PRECEDING  THE  REVOLUTION.  33 

M.  de  Castries,1  M.  de  Calonne,  a  few  Councillors  of  State, 
and  several  heads  of  administration.  About  the  same  time,  I 
was  introduced  to  the  Due  de  Choiseul,2  Madame  de  Brionne,3 
Madame  de  Montesson,4  Madame  de  Bouffiers,5  Madame  de  la 
Reyniere ; 6  on  certain  days,  the  best  society  in  Paris  met  at  the 
houses  of  these  people. 

My  cold  manners  and  apparent  reserve,  had  induced  some 
persons  to  say  I  was  witty.  Madame  de  Gramont,7  who  did  not 
like  the  reputations  which  she  had  not  made  herself,  was  of  service 
to  me  by  seeking  to  embarrass  me,  at  the  time  I  first  went  into 
society.  I  was  supping  for  the  first  time  at  Auteuil  at  Madame  de 
Bouffiers',  and  was  seated  at  one  end  of  the  table,  hardly  speaking 
to  my  neighbour.     Madame  de  Gramont,  in  a  loud,  harsh  voice, 

he  pleaded  before  the  Convention.  Arrested  in  December,  1792,  he  mounted  the 
scaffold  with  his  daughter  and  his  son-in-law  (M.  de  Chateaubriand,  the  brother  of 
the  illustrious  writer). 

1  Charles  de  la  Croix,  Marquis  de  Castries,  belonged  to  an  old  family  of  Langue- 
doc.  Born  in  1727,  he  became  lieutenant-general,  Governor  of  Montpellier  and  of 
Cette  (1758),  Governor  of  Flanders  and  of  Hainaut,  Secretary  of  State  to  the  Depart- 
ment of  Marine  (1780),  Marshal  of  France  (1783).  He  emigrated  during  the  Revolu- 
tion, commanded  a  division  of  the  army  of  Conde,  and  died  in  1801. 

2  Etienne  Francois,  Due  de  Choiseul-Stainville  (1719-1785),  ambassador,  then 
Minister- Secretary  of  State  (1758-1770). 

3  Louise  de  Rohan,  Canoness  of  Remiremont,  daughter  of  Prince  Charles  de 
Rohan-Montauban,  lieutenant-general.  She  became  the  wife  of  Charles  de  Lorraine, 
Comte  de  Brionne,  Grand-Equerry  of  France. 

4  Charlotte  Beraud  de  la  Haie  de  Riou,  Marquise  de  Montesson,  born  in  1737. 
She  married,  in  1754,  the  Marquis  de  Montesson,  lieutenant-general.  Widowed  in 
1769,  she  married  secretly  the  Due  d'Orleans  (1773).  After  the  death  of  the  Due 
(1785),  she  lived  in  retirement.  Arrested  under  the  Terror,  she  was  saved  by  the 
9th  Thermidor.  She  was  very  intimate  with  Madame  de  Beauharnais,  aftenvards 
Empress  Josephine.  She  died  in  February,  1806.  Madame  de  Montesson  had 
written  much,  and  has  left  numerous  comedies  and  novels. 

5  The  Comtesse  Marie  de  Boufflers-Rouvrel,  nee  de  Campar-Saujon,  was  lady  in 
waiting  to  the  Duchesse  d'Orleans.  She  became  a  widow  in  1764.  Imprisoned  under 
the  Terror,  but  more  fortunate  than  her  daughter-in-law,  the  Duchesse  de  Lauzun,  she 
escaped  the  scaffold,  and  died  in  1800. 

6  Suzanne  de  Jarente,  daughter  of  Alexandre  de  Jarente,  Marquis  d'Orgeval, 
married  on  February  1,  1763,  Alexandre  Grimod  de  la  Reyniere,  who  from  being  a 
simple  pork-butcher  had  risen  to  the  post  of  Fermier- general.  *  He  made  a  con- 
siderable fortune,  and  built  the  superb  hotel  which  now  stands  at  the  corner  of  the 
Rue  Boissy-d'Anglas  and  of  the  Avenue  Gabriel.  This  hotel,  which  served  as  the 
residence  of  the  Russian,  and  afterwards  of  the  Turkish,  embassies,  belongs  to-day  to 
the  Cercle  de  V  Union  Artistique.  It  is  known  that  La  Reyniere  had  acquired  the 
reputation  of  an  epicure  of  the  first  order.  The  dinners  given  by  him  and  his  wife 
have  remained  famous. 

7  Beatrix  de  Choiseul-Stainville,  daughter  of  the  Due  de  Choiseul,  canoness  of 
Remiremont.  In  1759,  she  married  Antoine,  Due  de  Gramont,  Governor  of  Navarre. 
She  mounted  the  scaffold  in  1794  with  her  friend,  the  Duchesse  du  Chatelet. 

*  Fermier  General.     The  custom  existed  under  the  old  Monarchy  of  conferring  the  farming  of  the 
taxes  on  financiers  who  paid  a  fixed  sum  for  it. — (Translator.) 

VOL.    I.  D 


34  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

asked  me,  calling  me  by  my  name,  what  had  so  much  struck  me 
on  entering  the  drawing-room,  whither  I  followed  her,  to  say : 
"  Ah  !  ah  !  "  "  Your  grace,"  I  replied, "  did  not  exactly  hear  what 
I  said  ;  my  words  were  not  '  Ah  !  ah  ! '  but  '  Oh  !  oh  ! '  "  That 
wretched  reply  caused  general  hilarity  ;  I  continued  to  sup,  and 
did  not  say  another  word.  On  leaving  the  table,  a  few  persons 
came  up  to  me,  and  I  received  for  the  following  days  several 
invitations  which  enabled  me  to  make  the  acquaintance  of  the 
persons  whom  I  was  most  anxious  to  meet. 

I  had  no  occasion  to  do  so  at  the  house  of  my  parents ;  for 
they  saw  but  few  people,  and  especially  few  of  those  who  shone 
on  the  scene  where  ministerial  appointments  were  disputed.     I 
preferred  to  go  to  my  mother  at  the  hours  when  she  was  alone  : 
I  could  then  better  enjoy  the  graces  of  her  mind.     No  one  ever 
seemed  to  me   to  possess  such  fascinating  conversation.     She 
had  no  pretension.     She  spoke  only  by  shades  ;  she  never  made 
a  pun  :  that  would  have  been  too  pointed  ;  puns  are  remembered  ; 
she  merely  wished   what   she    said    to    please — to    please    her 
hearers  for  the  time  being  and  be  forgotten.     A  richness  of  easy 
expressions,  new  and  always  delicate,  supplied  the  various  needs 
of  her  mind.     From   her  I  have  inherited  a  great  aversion  for 
persons  who,  in  order  to  speak  with  more  accuracy,  use  only 
technical  terms.     I  have    faith    neither  in    the  wit  nor  in    the 
knowledge  of  those  who  do  not  know  equivalent  terms  and  are 
always   describing :  they   are    indebted   only  to  their   memory 
for   what    they  know,  their   knowledge  can    therefore  be    only 
superficial.      I    am    sorry   that    such  a    thought   should    have 
occurred  to  me  whilst   M.  von  Humboldt,1  is  in  Paris,  but  it  is 
written. 

I  spent  my  time  in  a  very  pleasant  manner  and  did  not  waste 
it  too  much  ;  the  circle  of  my  acquaintances  was  widening. 
The  relations  which  it  was  then  considered  good  style  to  have  with 
the  wits  of  the  day,  came  to  me  through  a  good  lady  named 

1  The  two  brothers,  William  and  Alexander  von  Humboldt,  both  made  their  names 
famous— the  former  in  literature  and  politics,  the  latter  in  science.  The  author  here 
refers  to  Alexander.  Born  in  1769,  he  travelled  a  long  time  in  America  and  in  Asia, 
and  published  an  account  of  his  travels  ;  he  is  also  the  author  of  numerous  scientific 
works  and  treatises,  notably  the  Cosmos.  Thanks  to  him,  physical  geography  and 
botany  made  remarkable  progress.     He  died  in  1859. 


THE  YEARS  PRECEDING  THE  REVOLUTION.  35 

Madame  d'Hericourt,1  whose  husband  had  held  the  post  of 
naval  commissary  at  Marseilles.  She  loved  wit,  young  people, 
and  good  cheer.  Every  week  we  had  dinner  at  her  house,  and 
a  most  enjoyable  one  it  was.  The  guests  were  M.  de  Choiseul, 
M.  de  Narbonne,  Abbe  Delille,  de  Chamfort,  de  Rulhiere,  de 
Marmontel,2  who  took  turns  with  Abbe  Arnaud,3  Abbe  Ber- 
trand,4  and  myself.  The  gaiety  that  reigned  there  kept  the 
pretentious  in  check,  and  I  must  state  that  in  that  company, 
where  so  much  gaiety  and  presumption  was  brought  together, 
jeering  or  slandering  were  never  indulged  in,  in  the  space  of  five 
years. 

Count  von  Creutz,5  Minister  of  Sweden,  who  thought  to 
please  his  master  by  pretending  to  be  considered  a  wit  in  France, 
took  great  pains  to  have  once  a  week  at  his  table,  the  same 
persons  who  composed  the  dinner-party  of  Madame  d'Hericourt. 
We  went  there  three  or  four  times,  but  Marmontel  read  so 
many  tragedies  that  he  drove  away  all  the  guests.  As  for  me 
I  held  firm  until  he  came  to  Numitor. 

Readings  after  dinner  were  then  the  reigning  fashion ; 
they  imparted  special  importance,  and  were  reputed  to 
give  a  select  tone,  to  some  houses.  One  seldom  dined 
at      the      houses      of     M.     de      Vaudreuil,6     M.      de      Lian- 

1  Louise  Duche,  daughter  of  a  chief  advocate-general  in  the  Cour  des  Aides  of 
Montpellier.  She  married,  in  1 741,  Benigne  du  Trousset  d'Hericourt,  a  former 
naval  commissary. 

2  Jean-Francois  Marmontel,  born  at  Bort  (Limousin)  in  1723.  On  the  advice  of 
Voltaire,  his  master  and  friend,  he  wrote  for  the  stage,  but  failed  completely.  He 
found  his  vein  only  in  moral  tales,  which  had  a  prodigious  success,  and  procured  him 
the  congratulations  of  nearly  all  the  sovereigns  of  Europe.  He  was  appointed  Historio- 
grapher of  France,  and  entered  the  Academy.     He  died  in  1799. 

3  Abbe  Francois  Arnaud,  born  in  1721,  at  Aubignon  (Vaucluse).  He  was  one 
of  the  warmest  supporters  of  the  philosophical  impulse  of  the  eighteenth  century, 
and  acquired  a  certain  celebrity  by  his  works.  He  was  a  member  of  the  French 
Academy.     He  died  in  1784. 

4  Abbe  Bertrand,  born  in  1755,  at  Autun.  He  studied  astronomy,  and  was 
appointed  Professor  of  Physics  at  Dijon.  He  was  admitted  to  the  academy  of  this 
city.  He  undertook  with  d'Entrecasteaux  a  voyage  round  the  world,  but  he  died  on 
the  way  at  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  (1792).      He  left  various  scientific  treatises. 

5  Count  Gustavus  von  Creutz  was  born  in  Sweden  in  1736.  Minister  from  Sweden 
to  Madrid  in  1753,  and  then  to  Paris,  where  he  remained  twenty  years.  His  salon 
became  one  of  the  circles  of  society  most  sought  by  philosophers  and  literary  men. 
In  1783,  King  Gustavus  III.  recalled  him  to  Stockholm,  and  appointed  him  Senator 
and  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs.      He  died  two  years  after. 

6  Joseph  de  Rigaud,  Comte  de  Vaudreuil,  belonged  to  a  very  old  family  of 
Languedoc  ;  he  was  born  in  1740.  He  lived  for  a  long  while  at  Versailles,  frequent- 
ing the  salon  of  Madame  de  Polignac  and  the  society  of  the  queen.  He  was  intimate 
with  the  Comte  d'Artois,  whom  he  accompanied  in  1782  to  the  siege  of  Gibraltar. 

D    2 


36  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRIXCE  TALLEYRAND. 

court,1  Madame  de  Vaines,2  M.  d'Anzely,  without  being  obliged 
to  hear  either  Le  Mariage  de  Figaro,  the  poem  known  as  Les 
Javelins?  or  Le  Connetable  de  Bourbon?  or  some  tales  by  Cham- 
fort,  or  what  was  then  called  La  Revolution  de  Russie*  It 
was  an  obligation  rather  strictly  enforced  on  all  the  persons 
invited  ;  but  then,  the  fact  of  being  a  guest  at  any  of  these 
houses,  ranked  one  among  the  distinguished  men  of  the  day. 
I  might  say  that  many  people  whom  I  did  not  know  spoke  of 
me  in  good  terms,  simply  because  they  had  met  me  at  some 
of  these  dinner-parties  to  which  the  right  of  making  people's 
reputation  had  been  granted.  In  this  respect,  I  was  like  the  man 
spoken  of  by  the  Chevalier  de  Chastellux  : 6  "  He  is  doubtless  a 
very  witty  man,"  remarked  the  Chevalier  to  some  one  ;  "  L  do  not 
know  him,  but  lie  goes  to  Madame  Geoffriris." 

I  had  also  noticed  that  when  one  was  anxious  not  to  be  classed 
among  the  habitue's  of  open  houses  and  thus  to  rank  with  the 
crowd,  some  advantage  could  be  derived  by  affecting  estrange- 
ment from,  and  even  aversion  for,  some  prominent  member  of 
society.  My  choice  fell  on  M.  Necker.  I  persistently  refused  to 
go  to  his  house.  I  said,  rather  boldly,  that  he  was  neither  a  good 

He  kept  open  house  at  his  residence  of  Gennevilliers,  and  often  received  M.  de  Talley- 
rand there.  He  emigrated  with  the  Comte  d'Artois,  took  up  his  residence  in  London 
in  1799,  returned  to  Paris  at  the  Restoration,  was  created  peer  of  France  in  18 14,  and 
died  in  18 1 7.  His  correspondence  with  the  Comte  d'Artois  was  published  in  Paris, 
1889  (2  vols.  8vo.     L.  Pingaud). 

1  Francois  de  la  Rochefoucauld,  Due  de  Liancourt,  bom  in  1747,  was  brigadier 
of  dragoons  ;  Grand  Master  of  the  Wardrobe  (1783),  deputy  of  the  nobility  of  Cler- 
mont to  the  States-General,  lieutenant-general  ( 1 792).  He  emigrated  after  August  10  ; 
he  lived  in  retirement  under  the  Empire.  At  the  Restoration  he  was  created  a  peer, 
but  his  liberal  opinions  precluded  him  from  obtaining  public  functions.  He  died  in 
1827.     His  funeral  gave  rise  to  tumultuous  incidents. 

2  This  was  probably  the  wife  of  M.  J.  de  Vaines,  Receiver-General,  Commissary 
of  the  Treasury  (1733- 1803).  He  was  often  seen  at  the  house  of  Marshal  de  Beauvau, 
and  at  that  of  Madame  Geoffrin. 

3  "  The  Marriage  of  Figaro,"  a  poem  of  Abbe  Delille  on  the  gardens  of  the  Due 
d'Orleans  at  Monceau. 

4  Tragedy  of  the  Comte  Jacques  de  Guibert  (1743-1790),  lieutenant-general.  His 
name  will  remain  known,  not  by  his  tragedies,  but  by  an  Essay  on  Tactics,  of  which 
Napoleon  said  "that  it  was  fitted  to  make  great  men." 

5  "The  Revolutions  of  Russia" — a  work  by  Ruhliere. 

6  Talleyrand  doubtless  means  here  Francois-Jean,  Marquis  de  Chastellux,  born  in 
Paris  in  1734  ;  he  took  service  in  Germany  from  1756  to  1763,  and,  in  1780,  went  to 
America  as  major-general,  and  there  formed  an  intimacy  with  Washington.  He  was 
a  friend  of  Voltaire  and  of  the  encyclopaedists.  He  wrote  various  works  and  was 
elected  a  member  of  the  Academie  Francaise.  His  essay  entitled  De  la  Felicite 
Pi(bHque{\Tj2),  was  praised  by  Voltaire.  He  is  the  author  of  another  essay  entitled 
Eloge  a" Helvitius  (1774),  and  of  an  account  of  travels  in  North  America  (1780-1782). 
He  died  in  1788.—  {Translator.^ 


THE   YEARS  PRECEDING  THE  REVOLUTION.  37 

minister  of  finances  nor  a  statesman  ;  that  he  had  few  ideas,  no 
administrative  system  of  his  own,  that  his  loans  were  badly  con- 
ducted, onerous  and  injurious  to  public  morals  ;  badly  conducted, 
because  they  provided  no  sinking-fund  ;  onerous,  because  the 
rates  of  public  bills  of  exchange  neither  required  so  high  an 
interest  as  that  paid  for  his  loan,  nor  such  delays  as  those,  which, 
in  order  to  make  the  fortune  of  Girardot's  and  of  Germani's  firms, 
were  granted  to  thirty  Geneva  bankers ;  injurious  to  public 
morals,  because  his  loans  based  on  life-interest  fostered  and 
developed  a  kind  of  selfishness  unknown  to  French  manners 
before  the  days  of  M.  Necker.  I  said  that  he  talked  badly,  that 
he  did  not  know  how  to  argue,  that  he  was  always  affected  ;  I 
said  that  the  weakness  of  his  constitution,  which  kept  him  in  a 
continual  state  of  fear,  reflected  upon  all  the  faculties  of  his 
mind.  I  said  that  his  pride  did  not  come  from  his  nature,  but 
rather  from  his  crooked  mind,  and  want  of  taste  ;  I  said  that 
with  his  fantastic  hat,  his  long  head,  his  big  body,  burly  and  ill- 
shaped,  his  inattentive  airs,  his  scornful  demeanour,  his  constant 
use  of  maxims,  painfully  drawn  from  the  laboratory  of  his  mind, 
he  had  all  the  appearance  of  a  charlatan.  I  said,  I  believe,  a 
thousand  other  things  that  it  would  be  useless  to  repeat,  because 
to-day  they  are  on  everybody's  lips. 

Madame  de  Montesson's  house,  which  was  kept  just  on  the 
verge  of  decency,  was  particularly  agreeable.  To  amuse  the  Due 
d'Orleans,  Madame  de  Montesson  had  pieces  played  by  her 
visitors,  which  she  knew  would  please  him ;  and,  in  order  not 
merely  to  amuse,  but  to  interest  him  as  well,  she  wrote  several 
of  these  pieces  herself.  In  the  theatre,  a  special  box  was 
placed  at  the  disposal  of  the  mundane  members  of  the  clergy ; 
to  which  the  Archbishop  of  Toulouse,1  the  Bishop  of  Rodez,2 
the  Archbishop  of  Narbonne,3  and  the  Bishop  of  Comminges,4 
had  secured  my  admission. 

1  M.  de  Brienne. 

2  Jerome  Champion  de  Cice,   born  at   Rennes  in   1735.     General-agent  of  the 
clergy  (1765),  Bishop  of  Rodez  (1770),  Archbishop  of  Bordeaux  (1781),  member  of 
the  Assembly  of  Notables  (1787),  deputy  of  the  clergy  to  the  States- General  (1789), 
Keeper  of  the  Seals  (1789).     He  refused  to  take  the  oath  to  the  civil  constitution  of 
the  clergy,  and  emigrated  (1791).     Archbishop  of  Aix  in  1802,  he  died  in  1810. 

3  M.  de  Dillon. 

4  Charles  d'Osmond  de  Medavy,  born  in   1723;  Bishop  of  Comminges  (1764- 
1785). 


38  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

Curiosity,  much  more  than  a  decided  taste  for  music,  took  me 
also  to  all  the  learned  and  wearisome  concerts  that  were  given 
then,  sometimes  at  the  house  of  the  Comte  de  Rochechouart, 
sometimes  at  M.  de  Albaret's,  sometimes  at  Madame  Lebrun's.1 
I  was  careful  not  to  have  an  opinion  on  French  music,  or  Italian 
music,  or  on  that  of  Gluck.  I  was  too  young  to  reason  as  to 
the  proportionate  value  of  what  fashion  forced  me  to  regard 
as  a  pleasure.  If,  however,  I  had  been  obliged  to  pass  an 
opinion,  I  would  have  felt  inclined  to  say  that  music  being,  in 
general,  only  a  language  which  expresses,  in  an  ideal  manner,  the 
sensations  and  even  the  sentiments  that  we  experience,  each 
country  must  have  a  style  of  music  peculiar  to  itself,  and  which 
the  taste  of  its  inhabitants  induces  them  to  prefer  to  all  others. 
But  my  ignorance  saved  me,  and  I  never  had,  on  this  important 
subject,  any  quarrel  with  any  one. 

The  position  I  had  taken  in  society  gave  a  sort  of  pre-emin- 
ence to  my  agency  ;  I  performed  its  duties  almost  alone,  because, 
a  few  months  after  our  taking  office,  a  rather  too  public  adven- 
ture had  deprived  Abbe  de  Boisgelin,2  my  colleague,  of  the 
confidence  of  the  clergy.  The  natural  indolence  of  M.  de  Bois- 
gelin and  his  passion  for  Madame  de  Cavanac  (famous  under  the 
name  of  Mademoiselle  de  Romans,  and  also  because  she  was 
the  mother  of  Abbe  de  Bourbon  3)  had  easily  induced  him  to 
countenance  my  doing  his  work  as  well  as  my  own. 

I  had  surrounded  myself  with  persons  of  learned  and  sound 
views  :  M.  de  Maunay,4  afterwards  Bishop  of  Treves  ;  M.  Bourlier,5 

1  Marie-Louise  Vigee-Lebrun,  born  in  1755,  was  one  of  the  most  celebrated 
painters  of  the  eighteenth  century.  She  left  France  in  1789,  and  was  received  with 
distinction  at  most  foreign  courts.  She  died  in  1842.  She  has  left  very  interesting 
Memoirs. 

2  Abbe  de  Boisgelin  was  a  cousin  of  the  cardinal-archbishop.  He  perished  in 
1792,  in  the  course  of  the  massacres  of  September. 

3  Mademoiselle  de  Romans  had,  by  Louis  XV.,  a  son  who  was  christened  under 
the  name  of  Bourbon,  a  favour  not  accorded  to  any  other  natural  son  of  the  king. 
She  however  failed  to  obtain  his  legitimization.  He  was  known  afterwards  under 
the  name  of  Abbe  de  Bourbon,  and  died  in  the  reign  of  Louis  XVI.  Mademoiselle 
de  Romans  married  later  M.  de  Cavanac  (see  the  Memoirs  of  Madame  Campan, 
vol.  iii.). 

4  Charles  Maunay,  born  at  Champoix  (Puy-de-D6me)  in  1745  ;  Bishop  of  Treves 
in  1802. 

6  Jean-Baptiste,  Comte  Bourlier,  born  at  Dijon  in  1731.  He  took  orders,  and 
the  oath  of  allegiance  to  the  civil  constitution  of  the  clergy.  Bishop  of  Evreux 
in  1802,  deputy  to  the  Corps  legislatif,  senator  in  1812,  peer  of  France  under  the 
Restoration,  he  died  in  182 1. 


THE  YEARS  PRECEDING  THE  REVOLUTION.  39 

afterwards  Bishop  of  Evreux ;  M.  Duvoisin,1  who  became 
Bishop  of  Nantes,  and  M.  Des  Renaudes,2  who  was  not  socially 
the  equal  of  the  former.  I  am  happy  to  acknowledge  here 
all  the  marks  of  friendship  displayed  towards  me  by  MM. 
Maunay,  Bourlier,  and  Duvoisin,  whom  I  have  always  been 
pleased  to  meet  at  all  periods  of  my  life.  M.  Des  Renaudes 
left  me  to  enter  the  house  of  Secretary  of  State,  Maret  3 ;  his 
style  of  talent  finding  permanent  employment  in  his  new 
duties  might  have  led  him  promptly  to  fortune  ■  he  was  a  man 
who  excelled  in  making  use  of  other  people's  ideas. 

I  was  anxious  not  to  keep  for  ever  my  post  of  agent-general 
of  the  clergy,  but  took  all  necessary  precautions  not  to  let  any 
one  suspect  my  ambition  ;  thus,  in  order  to  attract  notice,  I  was 
busily  engaged  on  works,  which,  without  belonging  exactly  to  my 
province,  were  not  altogether  foreign  to  the  duties  I  discharged. 

The  abolition  of  the  lotteries  was  one  of  my  favourite  ideas ; 
I  had  investigated  all  the  chances  and  all  the  consequences  of 
that  baneful  institution.  At  the  same  time,  I  noticed  that  the 
clergy,  being  attacked  and  scoffed  at  by  philosophers,  were  daily 

1  Jean-Baptiste,  Baron  Duvoisin,  born  at  Langres  in  1744,  was  a  professor  in  the 
Sorbonne,  a  promoter  of  the  Officialite*  of  Paris,  chief- vicar  of  Laon.  In  1792,  he 
was  exiled  for  refusing  to  submit  to  the  civil  constitution  of  the  clergy.  In  1802,  he 
was  appointed  Bishop  of  Nantes,  and  took  a  part  in  the  differences  that  arose  between 
the  emperor  and  the  Holy  See.     He  died  in  1813. 

2  Martial  Borge  des  Renaudes,  born  at  Tulle  in  1755,  was  chief- vicar  to  M.  de 
Talleyrand  at  Autun,  whom  he  assisted  in  the  capacity  of  under-deacon  at  the  Mass 
of  the  Federation.  He  was  the  confidential  man  of  Talleyrand,  who,  it  is  said, 
entrusted  him  with  the  task  of  writing  his  speeches.  Talleyrand's  report  on  public 
instruction  is  entirely  Des  Renaudes'  work.  Under  the  Consulate,  Des  Renaudes 
was  named  Tribune.  His  name  was  struck  out  of  the  list  of  the  Tribunate  in  1802. 
Later  on  he  was  appointed  Censetir\ — a  post  which  he  preserved  under  the 
Restoration.      He  died  in  1825. 

3  Hugues  Maret,  born  at  Dijon  in  1763,  advocate  to  the  parlement  of  Burgundy. 
Sent  to  Naples  in  1792,  he  was  seized  by  the  Austrians,  and  only  set  at  liberty  in 
1795,  being  exchanged  for  the  Duchesse  d'Angouleme.  Minister-Secretary  of  State 
in  1804,  he  was  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  in  181 1,  and  created  Due  de  Bassano  ; 
Minister  of  War  (1813).  He  was  exiled  in  1815  ;  peer  of  France  in  1831,  he  was  for 
a  while  President  of  the  Council  (November,  1834).     He  died  in  1839. 

*  The  Officialite  of  Paris  was  the  tribunal  of  bishops  and  archbishops.  All  students  came 
under  the  jurisdiction  of  this  court,  which  judged  certain  lay  cases  as  well  (tithes,  marriage  cases, 
heresy,  and  simony).  The  official  only  pronounced  canonical  penalties  ;  for  cases  requiring  corporal 
punishment  he  sent  the  culprit  to  the  secular  courts.  The promoteur  fulfilled  the  functions  of  public 
accuser.  M.  P.  Fournier  has  published  a  very  interesting  volume  on  the  officialite.  Paris.  Plon. 
One  8°  vol. — (Translator.') 

t  The  censorship  had  been  abolished  in  1791  for  the  press  as  well  as  for  books.  Re-established,  as  a 
matter  of  fact,  under  the  Directory,  it  was  legally  organized  under  the  Consulate.  A  censorship  was 
imposed  by  the  Empire  over  each  daily  paper.  The  Restoration  in  proclaiming  the  liberty  of  the 
press  re-established  the  censorship.  Among  the  papers  of  which  Des  Renaudes  was  censor,  L'  A  mi  de 
la  Religion  et  du  Roi  must  be  mentioned.  In  1808,  Des  Renaudes  was  appointed  councillor  of  the 
University  for  life. — {Translator.) 


40  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

losing  public  regard.  My  object  was  that  they  should  regain  the 
esteem  of  the  people,  and  for  this  purpose,  I  was  anxious  to  hold 
them  up  to  the  eyes  of  the  nation,  as  the  protectors  of  strict 
morality.  By  inducing  the  clergy  to  submit  to  some  pecuniary 
sacrifices  in  support  of  that  principle,  I  should  have  served,  not 
only  public  morals,  but  also  the  very  order  I  had  consented  to 
join. 

I  was  anxious  that  the  clergy  should  propose  to  buy  from  the 
government  the  royal  lottery,  in  order  to  suppress  it ;  that  is  to 
say,  that  they  should  engage  to  furnish  regularly  every  year, 
a  gratuitous  present  representing  as  much  revenue  as  the  lottery 
produced  for  the  royal  treasury.  The  memorial  to  be  addressed 
to  the  king  to  ask  him  to  proscribe  this  baneful  institution,  might 
have  been  superb ;  I  should  have  been  most  happy  to  have 
drafted  it.1 

The  members  of  the  clergy,  upon  whom  I  most  depended  to 
second  my  motion,  declined  to  do  so.  It  may  be  observed  that 
my  first  political  campaign  was  not  very  fortunate,  a  result 
which  I  dare  to  attribute  to  the  fact  that  my  proposals  were 
far  too  radical  for  the  men  with  whom  I  purposed  to  make  use 
of  them. 

The  amelioration  of  the  condition  of  the  clergy,  as  determined 
by  the  edict  of  1768,  appeared  to  me  far  from  sufficient.2  It  was 
necessary  to  induce  the  clergy  to  propose  an  increase  of  salary  ; 
but  in  order  to  respect  the  interests  of  the  chief  tithe-owners  as  far 

1  For  a  long  time,  lotteries  in  France  constituted  a  revenue  for  the  State.  The 
government  collected  the  fees  paid  by  the  persons  licensed  to  organize  lotteries,  and 
organized  some  official  ones  besides.  The  Order  in  Council  of  June  30,  1776,  created 
the  royal  lottery  of  France.  This  was  suppressed  in  the  year  II.,  re-established  in 
the  year  VI.,  and  not  definitely  abolished  until  1836,  in  execution  of  the  Law  of 
Finances  of  1832. 

2  The  lower  clergy  had  always  been  complaining  of  having  hardly  anything  to  live 
upon,  while,  on  the  contrary,  the  bishops  and  the  commendatory  abbots  were  enjoying 
considerable  incomes.  At  different  times  the  government  had  intervened  to  better 
their  condition.  An  edcit  of  1768  insured  a  minimum  salary  of  500  livres  *  to  a  curate, 
and  of  200  to  a  vicar.  In  1778,  the  former  received  700  livres,  and  the  latter  250, 
increased  afterwards  to  350  livres  (1785).  This  was  the  settled  allowance,  in  contrast 
with  which  it  is  as  well  to  cite  the  amount  of  income  derived  by  certain  chief  tithe- 
owners,  who  often  retained  for  themselves  half,  sometimes  even  three-quarters,  of  the 
total  amount  of  the  tithes.  The  Abbe  of  Clairvaux  received  thus  400,000  livres  a 
year  ;  the  Cardinal  de  Rohan,  1,000,000  ;  the  Benedictines  of  Cluny,  1,800,000  ;  the 
Benedictines  of  Saint-Maur,  1,672  in  number,  8,000,000,  and  these  were  not 
exceptions. 

*  A  French  coin  in  use  before  the  Revolution,  and  amounting  to  about  tenpence. — {Translator.) 


THE  YEARS  PRECEDING  THE  REVOLUTION.  41 

as  was  consistent  with  my  objects,  I  followed  the  plan  employed 
by  M.  de  Malesherbes  and  M.  de  Ruhliere,  when  they  pleaded 
the  cause  of  the  Protestants.  In  order  to  reach  their  end,  they 
both  maintained  that  the  intentions  of  Louis  XIV.  had  not  been 
carried  out.  I  maintained,  even,  that  the  principle  which  had 
served  to  establish  the  new  rate  of  State  allowance  for  the  lower 
clergy,  had  been  violated  in  deciding  that  the  said  allowance 
should,  in  no  case,  exceed  five  hundred  francs.  I  had  confined  my- 
self to  requesting  the  redress  of  an  error,  of  which,  as  I  said,  the 
higher  clergy  would  surely  have  been  glad  to  be  informed. 
According  to  the  value  of  the  silver  mark,  of  which  I  pointed  out 
the  growing  depreciation  and  its  low  proportion  to  the  price 
of  commodities,  the  increase,  to  be  fair,  ought  to  reach  seven 
hundred  and  fifty  francs.  To-day  a  thousand  francs  would  be 
required  to  obtain  what  these  seven  hundred  and  fifty  francs 
would  then  have  easily  procured.  However,  I  did  not  succeed. 
The  State  allowance  remained  fixed  at  five  hundred  francs, 
and  to-day,  I  believe,  it  still  stands  at  about  the  same  rate. 

Another  attempt  on  my  part  was  no  more  successful. 
During  a  journey  I  made  to  Brittany  I  noticed  that,  in  this 
country,  many  women  were  neither  maids,  wives,  nor  widows. 
They  had,  at  some  time  or  other,  been  married  to  sailors  who 
had  not  returned  home,  but  whose  death  had  never  been 
properly  ascertained.  The  law  forbade  their  marrying  again. 
I  employed  all  the  arguments  of  theology,  which,  when 
handled  with  a  little  judgment,  are  elastic  enough  to  serve 
any  purpose,  to  show  that  it  was  desirable  that,  after  a 
certain  number  of  years,  sufficient  to  prevent  social  scandal, 
these  poor  women  should  be  allowed  to  marry  again.  My 
memoir  was  committed  to  M.  de  Castries,  who  thought  it 
necessary  to  consult  his  friend,  the  Bishop  of  Arras,  on  the 
subject.1  The  latter  saw,  as  a  theologian,  that  my  suggestion 
could  be  of  no  use  to  him,  and,  therefore,  denounced  it  in  the 
strongest  terms.     My  memoir  was  thrown  into  the  fire,  and  it 

1  Louis  de  Conzie,  born  in  1732,  entered  the  army  at  first,  and  was  officer  of 
dragoons.  Having  embraced  the  ecclesiastical  career,  he  was  appointed  Bishop  of 
St.  Omer  in  1766,  and  of  Arras  in  1769.  A  violent  adversary  of  the  Revolution,  he 
refused  a  seat  in  the  States-General,  and  went  over  to  England.  He  died  in  1804,  in 
London. 


42  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLE  YRAND. 

required  no  less  an  event  than  the  Revolution  to  enable  all  these 
Breton  women — who  I  should  think,  were  no  longer  young — 
to  marry  again,  if  they  chose. 

The  care  I  bestowed  upon  the  private  affairs  of  the  clergy 
and  the  success  of  some  of  my  reports  to  the  Conseil des  Parties'1 
caused  my  superiors  to  overlook  all  the  little  reforms  of  general 
utility  which  I  endeavoured  to  rank  with  my  duties.  They  said  : 
"  It  is  the  result  of  his  youth  ;  with  a  little  experience  that  will 
soon  pass  off."  Emboldened  by  the  benevolent  disposition 
manifested  towards  me,  I  launched  myself  into  an  undertaking 
which  I  managed  to  connect  with  the  interests  of  the  clergy, 
although  in  point  of  fact,  it  was  quite  foreign  to  them.  M. 
d'Ormesson,2  a  very  honest  man,  but  one  of  the  most  wretched 
comptroller-generals  of  the  last  century,  had  undertaken  such 
a  series  of  unfortunate  speculations  that  the  government  was  left 
without  either  money  or  credit.  The  uneasiness  was  general : 
people  anxious  to  withdraw  their  deposits,  rushed  in  crowds  to 
the  Bank  of  Discount,3  the  directors  of  which,  in  the  interest 
of  a  few  bankers,  preferred  to  solicit  authorization  to  suspend 
payment  rather  than  diminish  their  rate  of  discount.  M. 
d'Ormesson  having  granted  the  authorization  requested  by  the 
directors,  bank-notes  obtained  a  forced  currency,  which  ne- 
cessarily caused  them  to  fall  in  value.4     The  clergy  possessed  a 

1  The  Conseil  des  Parties  was  a  section  of  the  Council  of  State  or  Council  of  the 
King,  the  great  administrative  body  of  the  kingdom.  It  decided  the  conflicts  of 
jurisdiction,  interpreted  the  laws  and  ordinances,  and  pronounced  on  the  cases  which 
the  king  "  thought  fit  to  bring  before  his  council."  It  was  composed  of  the  chan- 
cellor, president,  twenty-six  counsellors-in-ordinary,  and  sixteen  counsellors  appointed 
every  six  months. 

2  Henri  Lefevre  d'Ormesson  belonged  to  an  old  and  illustrious  family  of  magis- 
trates. He  was  born  in  1751,  was  Counsellor  of  parlement  and  Intendant  of 
Finances.  Raised  to  be  Comptroller-General  in  1783,  he  failed  completely  in  this 
office,  and  was  replaced  by  Calonne.  He  was  elected  Mayor  of  Paris  in  1792,  but 
declined  the  post.  He  was  afterwards  Administrator  of  the  Department  of  the  Seine, 
and  died  in  1807. 

3  Caisse  a" Escompte.  It  was  instituted  by  Turgot,  with  royal  license  in  1776; 
its  object  was  to  discount  at  four  per  cent,  all  bills  of  exchange,  and  to  bring  general 
interest  in  all  transactions  to  the  same  rate.  A  sum  of  seventy  millions  (about 
.£2,800,000)  having  been  exacted  from  its  governors  by  Comptroller-General  de 
Calonne  as  reserve  fund,  seriously  shook  its  credit.  It  was  abolished  on  August 
24,  1793,  by  decree  of  the  National  Convention.  —  {Translator.) 

4  The  ordinance  of  March  24,  1776,  authorized  the  creation  of  a  bank  named  the 
Caisse  d' Esco/npte,  which,  without  exclusive  privilege,  loaned  money  to  the  trade  at 
four  per  cent.  In  1783,  the  Treasury  being  in  a  most  critical  situation,  M.  d'Ormesson 
secretly  borrowed  six  millions  from  this  bank.     The  secret  got  abroad.     Holders  of 


THE  YEARS  PRECEDING  THE  REVOLUTION.  43 

large  number  of  them.  Having  alleged  the  necessity  for  watch- 
ing the  proceedings  of  the  bank,  I  was  enabled  to  attend  the 
first  meetings  of  the  shareholders.  Enlightened  men  thought 
with  reason  that  the  old  regulations  did  not  offer  sufficient 
security.  A  commission  was  named  to  examine  them ;  new 
regulations  were  agreed  to,  and  I  was  selected  to  draw  up  the 
report  to  be  read  at  the  general  assembly. 

This  was  the  first  time  that  I  was,  strictly  speaking,  con- 
nected with  public  affairs.  I  prefaced  my  report  by  a  speech  in 
which  I  had  applied  myself  to  set  forth  all  the  advantages  of 
public  credit ;  I  laid  stress  on  its  importance ;  I  established  the 
fact  that  all  was  possible  to  one  who  possessed  a  large  credit ; 
that  credit  alone  suffices  for  all  the  needs  of  commerce,  of  large 
trading  establishments,  of  manufactures,  and  so  on.  After 
having  set  forth  all  the  advantages  of  credit,  I  spoke  of  the 
means  of  obtaining  and  of  preserving  it.  I  remember  that,  in  this 
paper,  I  was  so  pleased  to  make  known  all  the  various  uses  of 
which  credit  is  susceptible,  that  I  made  use  of  a  host  of  expres- 
sions which  are  only  employed  to  depict  the  most  timid  and 
delicate  sentiments.  An  old  banker,  named  Rillet,  a  regular 
Genevese,  who  listened  to  me  with  attention,  learned  with 
extreme  pleasure,  which  he  expressed  by  the  roughest  gestures, 
that,  in  paying  exactly  his  bills  of  exchange,  he  did  something 
so  very  fine  that  it  could  only  be  expressed  in  the  language  of 
imagination.  He  came  to  me,  and  begged  me  as  he  pressed  my 
hands  to  allow  him  to  copy  that  part  of  my  speech.  His  en- 
thusiasm became  useful,  for  he  repeated  so  badly  what  I  had  just 
said,  that  I  deemed  it  quite  out  of  place,  and  left  it  out  in  the 
printed  text. 

From  the  advantages  of  credit,  and  the  means  of  obtaining 
it,  I  turned  at  last  to  the  special  institutions  which  facilitate, 
accelerate,  and  simplify  all  its  transactions  while  hastening  and 
ensuring  its  progress. 

notes  became  uneasy,  and  insisted  on  their  deposits  being  returned  to  them.  D'Or- 
messon  authorized  the  bank  to  suspend  for  three  months  the  payment  in  cash  of  notes 
of  more  than  300  livres,  and  gave  forced  currency  to  bank  notes.  The  panic  increased  ; 
the  payment  of  arrears  was  to  be  suspended.  Calonne  suppressed  the  forced  currency  ; 
the  bankers  advanced  to  the  bank  the  sums  necessary  for  its  payments  ;  its  credit  was 
re-established,  and  it  regained  the  greatest  prestige. 


44  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLE  YRAND. 

The  most  important  of  these  institutions  was  a  bank,  whose 
first  object  must  be  to  maintain  the  low  price  of  money,  and  to 
furnish  it  in  abundance  for  all  the  needs  of  circulation.  The 
crisis  which  the  Bank  of  Discount  had  just  passed  through 
required  that  great  changes  should  be  introduced  into  its  govern- 
ment ;  the  changes  I  proposed  were  all  adopted.  The  only 
article  that  met  with  any  opposition  was  that  in  which  I  suggested 
that  the  assembly  should  not  be  composed  of  so  many  bankers> 
because  their  personal  interest  was  opposed  to  that  of  the 
establishment  which  they  were  called  to  manage  ;  nevertheless 
as  the  greater  number  of  shares  were  in  the  hands  of  the  bankers 
of  Paris,  it  was  foreseen  that  the  article  would  be  easily  evaded, 
and  it  was  adopted. 

I  am  rather  prolix :  but  when  speaking  of  our  recollections 
we  speak  of  something  dear  to  us  :  besides,  when  I  began  these 
memoirs,  I  fully  made  up  my  mind,  rightly  or  wrongly,  to  disclose 
frankly  my  opinion  on  all  that  which,  either  as  an  act  of  admin- 
istration or  as  a  settled  project,  engaged  my  attention,  or  that 
of  the  public,  for  any  length  of  time. 

The  different  subjects  with  which  I  had  been  occupied  had 
attracted  to  me  the  attention  of  men,  who,  by  profession,  were 
acquainted  with  all  new  ambitions.  Foulon,1  Panchaud,  Sainte- 
Foy2  Favier,3  Daude  sought  my  acquaintance,  and  spoke  of 
me  as  destined  some  day  to  direct  the  affairs  of  the  State.  It 
was  indeed  somewhat  dangerous  to  be  too  closely  connected 
with  these  men  ;  though  also  advantageous  to  be  on  good 
terms  with  them.  Yet,  to  reach  his  goal  with  dignity,  it  was 
necessary  for  any'  one  that  the  suffrages  of  polite  society  should 

1  Joseph  Francois  Foulon,  born  at  Saumur  in  1715.  He  was  Commissioner  of 
War  under  the  ministry  of  M.  de  Belle-Isle.  Having  been  appointed  Intendant- 
General  of  the  armies  of  Marshals  de  Broglie  and  de  Soubise,  he  was  afterwards 
Intendant  of  Finance  (1771).  In  1789,  he  was  Councillor  of  State,  and  was  entrusted 
with  the  supply  of  the  troops  destined  to  act  against  Paris.  On  July  14,  fearing  for 
his  life,  he  tried  to  escape,  but  was  arrested  about  sixteen  miles  from  Paris,  brought 
back,  dragged  to  the  Hotel  de  Ville,  and  there  assassinated. 

2  Diplomatic  agent  and  secretary  of  the  Comte  d'Artois. 

3  Jean  Louis  Favier,  born  in  171 1,  was  Syndic-General  of  the  States  of  Langue- 
doc.  He  afterwards  entered  diplomacy,  and  became  one  of  the  principal  secret 
agents  of  Louis  XV.  Arrested  at  Hamburg  by  the  order  of  the  Due  d'Aiguillon,  and 
conducted  to  the  Bastille,  he  remained  there  until  the  accession  of  Louis  XVI.  He 
died  in  1784.  Favier  has  left  a  number  of  political  writings.  The  most  important — 
Reflexions  contre  le  Traite  de  1756  * — was  composed  for  M.  d'Argenson. 

*  "  Considerations  against  the  Treaty  of  1756." 


THE  YEARS  PRECEDING  THE  REVOLUTION.  45 

appoint  him  to  the  posts  he  wished  to  gain.  As  for  me,  I 
was  in  no  hurry  ;  I  was  instructing  myself.  I  took  journeys  ; 
I  had  done  my  best  to  form  some  idea  of  the  constitution  of  the 
pays  d'etats}  and  had  easily  convinced  myself  that  that  of 
Brittany,  where  Madame  de  Girac,2  sister-in-law  of  the  bishop 
of  Rennes,3  lived,  was  likely  to  procure  me  most  information.  I 
made  several  journeys  thither.  I  enjoyed  a  certain  reputation, 
but  not  being  yet  sufficiently  acquainted  with  the  world,  I  was 
happy  to  think  that  I  had  still  some  years  before  me  during 
which  I  might  share  the  life  and  pleasures  of  society,  without 
being  obliged  to  arrange  any  of  the  deep  combinations  required 
to  satisfy  the  aspirations  of  a  serious  ambition. 

All  who  sought  office  frequented  some  of  the  chief 
families  of  Paris,  whose  opinions  and  language  they  moulded. 
The  house  of  Madame  de  Montesson  was  visited  by  the 
Archbishop  of  Toulouse,  who  also  shared  with  M.  Necker  the 
sympathies  of  Madame  de  Beauvau.4     It  was  at  the  house  of 

1  One  knows  the  difference  which  existed  between  the  pays  d'e'tats  and  the  pays 
d 'election.  The  former  were  the  provinces  which  had  preserved  the  right  of  being 
taxed  by  their  provincial  States  (Brittany,  Burgundy,  Languedoc,  Dauphine,  Franche- 
Comte,  Lorraine,  &c. ).  The  others  were  those  which,  deprived  of  provincial  States, 
were  taxed  by  the  elus  (elect),  that  is,  agents  so-called,  since  the  States- General  had 
actually  elected  them,  and  who  still  preserved  this  name,  although  they  had  for  a  long 
time  past  been  appointed  by  the  king  himself. 

2  The  name  of  Madame  de  Girac  reminds  me  that  one  day,  she  being  indisposed, 
the  people  who  had  come  to  see  her  were  making  end-rhymes  late  in  the  evening,  and 
that  these  were  proposed  :  jolie,  folie,  sourit,  traces,  esprit,  grdces.  They  urged  me 
to  fill  them  out ;  I  said  that  I  had  never  made  verses.  They  did  not  even  give  me  a 
pencil.  The  second  verse  which  came  to  me,  and  which  is  almost  the  history  of  my 
life,  induced  me  to  write  on  a  card  : 

"  Et  que  me  fait  a  moi  qu'on  soit  belle  ou  jolie, 
A  moi  qui,  par  raison,  ai  fait  une  folie  ? 
Je  ne  puis  que  gemir  lorsque  tout  me  sourit. 

Et  1' austere  vertu  qui  partout  suit  mes  traces, 
A  peine  me  permet  les  plaisirs  de  l'esprit, 

Lorsque  mon  cceur  emu  veille  au  chevet  des  Graces."  * 

(Prince  Talleyrand. ) 

3  Francois  Bareau  de  Girac,  born  at  Angouleme  (1732),  was  vicar-general  of  this 
city,  then  Bishop  of  Saint-Brieuc  (1766),  and  of  Rennes  (1769).  He  refused  to  take 
the  oath  in  1791,  and  exiled  himself.  He  returned  to  France  under  the  Consulate, 
and  died  in  1820,  having  previously  been  appointed  a  canon  of  Saint-Denis. 

4  Marie  Sylvie  de  Rohan-Chabot  was  born  in  1729.  She  married  Jean  Baptiste 
de  Clermont  d'Amboise,  Marquis  de  Renel,  and,  at  his  death,  became  the  wife  of 
Charles  Just,  Prince  de  Beauvau-Craon,  grandee  of  Spain,  and  Marshal  of  France. 

*  "  What  do  I  care  if  people  be  beautiful  or  pretty, 
I  who,  out  of  reason,  indulged  in  folly? 
I  can  but  lament,  when  all  smiles  upon  me. 
And  that  austere  virtue  which  everywhere  follows  my  steps. 
Hardly  permits  me  the  pleasures  of  the  mind, 
When  my  aggrieved  heart  watches  by  the  pillow  of  the  Graces." 


46  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

Madame  de  Polignac,1  and  at  the  Hotel  de  Luynes  that  M.  de 
Calonne  found  his  supporters.  The  Bishop  of  Arras  was  next  to 
M.  Necker  in  the  eyes  of  Madame  de  Blot,2  and  of  M.  de  Castries. 
M.  de  Fleury  was  backed  by  Madame  de  Brionne.  The 
Baron  de  Breteuil 3  was  second  in  many  houses,  first  in  none.  M. 
de  Soubise  4  protected  Foulon.  The  Hotel  du  Chatelet  had  its 
own  ambition,  and  formed  wishes  for  the  appointment  of  the 
Due  de  Choiseul,  for  everybody  except  M.  Necker  was  in  favour 
with  Madame  de  la  Reyniere.  Les  Noailles  spoke  kindly  of 
M.  de  Meilhan,5  but  did  not  place  him  in  the  foremost  rank. 

I  went  almost  everywhere,  and  to  a  mind  somewhat  accustomed 
to  observe,  the  sight  offered  by  the  upper  classes  of  society,  during 

1  Gabrielle  de  Polastron  was  married  in  1749,  to  the  Comte  Jules  de  Polignac, 
who  was  raised  to  the  dukedom  in  1 780.  She  was  long  the  friend  of  Marie- Antoinette. 
Her  salon  was  the  centre  of  "the  Queen's  party"  ;  she  became  governess  of  the 
Enfants  de  France*  She  emigrated  after  the  14th  of  July,  and  died  shortly  after 
at  Vienna,  leaving  two  sons,  one  of  whom  became  the  minister  of  Charles  X. 

2  Pauline  Charpentier  d'Ennery,  born  about  1733,  married  in  1719  Gilbert  de 
Chauvigny,  Comte  de  Blot,  a  brigadier-general.  She  was  lady-in-waiting  to  the 
Duchesse  d'Orleans. 

3  Louis  Auguste  Le  Tonnellier,  Baron  de  Breteuil,  born  in  1738  at  Preuilly 
(Touraine)  ;  entered  the  Foreign  Office  when  still  quite  a  youth.  When  minister  at 
Cologne,  he  was  initiated  in  the  secret  diplomacy  of  the  king.  Ambassador  at  St. 
Petersburg  (1760).  Having  returned  to  France,  he  was  appointed  State  Minister  of  the 
king's  household  and  of  Paris  (1783).  He  re-assumed  for  a  while  the  direction  of 
affairs  in  1780.  He  emigrated  in  1790,  with  powers  from  the  king  to  negotiate  with 
foreign  sovereigns  ;  he  returned  to  France  in  1802,  and  died  in  1807. 

4  Charles  de  Rohan,  Prince  de  Soubise,  born  in  1715,  lieutenant-general  in  1748, 
Marshal  of  France  and  Minister  of  State  (1758).  He  died  in  1787.  He  was  married 
three  times — 1st,  to  Anne  de  la  Tour  d'Auvergne,  Princesse  de  Bouillon,  who  died  in 
1 739,  leaving  a  daughter,  who  married  the  Prince  de  Conde  ;  2nd,  to  the  Princesse 
Therese  de  Savoie-Carignan  ;  3rd,  to  the  Princess  Christine  de  Hesse- Rhinfeld. 

5  Gabriel  Senac  de  Meilhan,  born  in  1736,  was  first  Maitre  des  Requt>tcs,\  then 
Intendant  of  Aunis,  of  Provence  (where  the  il  allies  de  Meilhan"  at  Marseilles  still 
preserve  his  memory),  and  finally  of  Hainaut.  He  was  commissary-general  of  the 
"War  Department  in  1775  ;  he  emigrated  in  1791,  resided  in  Russia  on  the  invitation 
of  the  Empress  Catherine,  and  died  at  Vienna  in  1803.  Senac  de  Meilhan  wrote 
many  works,  two  of  which  have  established  his  reputation  as  a  writer  :  Les  Considera- 
tions stir  V Esprit  et  les  Mceurs  (1787),  and  Du  Gouvernement,  des  Mosurs,  et  des  Con- 
ditions en  France  avant  la  Revolution  J  (1795). 

*  The  graceful  title  given  to  the  royal  children  of  France  under  the  old  monarchy. — {Translator.') 
t  Maitre  des  Requetes,  to  the  number  of  eight  till  the  year  1344,  but  who  were  afterwards  raised 
to  eighty-eight,  had  two  principal  duties.  First,  they  sat  in  rotation  for  periods  of  three  months  at 
the  King's  Court,_  where  they  drew  up  reports  of  the  proceedings.  Second,  they  administered  justice 
for  three  months  in  rotation  at  the  Tribunal  of  the  Courts.  They  had  the  right  of  jurisdiction  over 
all  the  officers  of  the  king's  household.  In  the  first  instance,  they  examined  not  only  the  cases  of  these 
officers,  but  those  of  all  the  persons  who  had  the  right  of  coiiimittiii/iis.  Appeals  from  them  were 
made  to  the  fiarlciiients.  Sometimes,  though  very  seldom,  their  decision  in  the  cases  sent  before 
them  by  the  Council  of  State  for  final  trial  were  without  further  appeal.  These  trials  were  generally 
for  forgery  of  official  seals,  or  of  letters  patents,  or  infringements  of  the  privileges  of  authors  or 
printers.  They  were  also  entrusted  with  making  official  inquiries  in  the  provinces,  whenever  needed, 
and  from  amongst  ihem  the  Intendants  de  province  (whose  duties  resembled  somewhat  those  of  a 
high  sheriff)  were  chosen. — (Translator.) 

X  "  Considerations  on  Mind  and  Manners  "  (1787).     "Government,  Manners,  Customs,  and  Social 
Condition  of  France  before  the  Revolution  "  (1795)- 


THE  YEARS  PRECEDING  THE  REVOLUTION.  47 

the  ten  years  of  which  I  speak,  was  curious  indeed.  People's  preten- 
sions had  put  everybody  out  of  place.  Delille  dined  at  the  house  of 
Madame  de  Polignac  with  the  queen;  Abbede  Baliviere  played 
with  the  Comte  d'Artois ;  M.  de  Vianes  pressed  the  hand  of  M. 
de  Liancourt ;  Chamfort  took  the  arm  of  M.  de  Vaudreuil ;  La 
Vaupalliere,  Travanet,  Chalabre,  took  a  trip  to  Marly,  and  had 
supper  at  Versailles  at  the  house  of  Madame  de  Lamballe.1 
Gambling  and  witty  sayings  had  levelled  all  ranks.  Careers, 
that  great  support  of  hierarchy  and  of  good  order,  were  being 
destroyed.  All  young  men  considered  themselves  fitted  to  rule 
the  country.  They  criticized  all  the  measures  adopted  by  the 
ministers.  The  personal  acts  of  the  king  and  queen  were 
brought  under  discussion,  and  nearly  always  incurred  the  dis- 
approbation of  the  salons  of  Paris.  Young  women  spoke  per- 
tinently of  all  the  branches  of  the  administration.  I  remember 
that  at  a  ball,  between  two  dances,  Madame  de  Stael,2  taught 
M.  de  Surgere3  what  was  meant  by  the  kingdom  of  the  West ; — 
Madame  de  Blot  had  an  opinion  upon  all  the  officers  of  the 
French  Navy  ;  Madame  de  Simiane,4  said  that  there  ought  to  be 
no  duties  on  Virginia  tobacco.    The  Chevalier  de  BoufHers  5  who 

1  Marie  Therese  Louise  de  Savoie-Carignan,  Princesse  de  Lamballe,  was  the 
daughter  of  Prince  Victor  de  Savoie-Carignan.  Born  in  1749,  she  married  in  1767 
the  Prince  de  Lamballe,  son  of  the  Due  de  Penthievre.  Having  lost  her  husband 
after  a  year's  marriage,  she  spent  a  portion  of  her  life  near  the  queen,  who  appointed 
her  superintendent  of  her  household.  Having  been  arrested  after  the  events  of 
April  10,  1792,  she  was  murdered  on  September  2. 

2  Anne-Louise  Necker,  Baronne  de  Stael,  was  born  at  Paris  in  1766.  She  was 
the  daughter  of  Necker.  She  found  herself  early  in  life  in  contact  with  all  the  most 
distinguished  people  and  learned  men  of  the  time.  When  twenty  years  of  age,  she 
married  the  Baron  de  Stael-Holstein,  Swedish  Ambassador  to  Paris.  Madame  de 
Stael  resided  in  Paris  during  the  whole  of  the  Revolution,  and  took  an  active  part  in 
public  affairs.  Relentless  enmity  sprang  up  between  her  and  the  First  Consul. 
Having  been  exiled  to  Coppet  with  orders  not  to  leave  that  place,  she  managed  to 
escape  after  eight  months  of  semi-captivity.  She  visited  Vienna,  Moscow,  St.  Peters- 
burg, Stockholm,  and  London.  Returning  to  France  with  the  Restoration,  she  died 
on  July  10,  181 7. 

3  The  Vicomte  Jean-Francois  de  la  Rochefoucauld,  Comte  de  Surgere,  only 
known  under  this  last  name,  was  the  son  of  the  Marquis  de  Surgere,  a  lieutenant- 
general.  He  published  under  the  title  of  Ramassis  *  several  moral  treatises  (3  vol. 
in  12),  1734-88. 

4  Probably  Adelaide  de  Damas,  who  married,  in  1777,  the  Comte  Charles  de 
Simiane,  a  colonel  in  the  army,  and  gentleman-in-waiting  to  Monsieur,  the  Comte  de 
Provence,  afterwards  Louis  XVIII.,  next  brother  to  Louis  XVI. 

5  At  the  age  of  twenty-four,  the  Chevalier  de  Boufflers,  born  in  1738,  was  appointed 
a  Knight  of  Malta.  Brigadier-General  in  1784,  he  was,  in  the  following  year,  appointed 
Governor  of  Senegal.     Deputy  of  the  States-General  in  1789,  he  was  one  of  themem- 

*  Miscellanies. 


48  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

possessed  some  letters  from  Prince  Henry  of  Prussia  x  in  his 
pocket-book,  said  that  France  could  only  regain  her  political 
preponderance  by  abandoning  the  alliance  of  Austria  for  that  of 
Prussia.  "  There  is  much  more  learning  in  the  parlement  of 
Rouen  than  in  that  of  Paris,"  said  Madame  d'Henin.2  "Were  I 
in  the  king's  place,  I  would  do.  .  .  such  a  thing,"  said  M.  de 
Poix.3  "  Were  I  the  Comte  d'Artois,  I  would  say.  .  .  to  the 
king,"  said  St.  Blancard,4  and  so  on  with  the  others.  This  state 
of  affairs  would  have  changed  in  a  moment,  if  the  government 
had  been  stronger  or  more  skilful  ;  if  serious  preoccupations 
had  not  totally  gone  out  of  fashion  ;  if  the  queen,  less  beautiful 
and  above  all  less  pretty,  had  not  given  way  to  all  the  whims  and 
fancies  of  the  time.  Easy  manners  in  sovereigns  inspire  more 
love  than  respect,  and  when  troubles  come,  that  love  itself  van- 
ishes. Then  an  attempt  is  made  to  resort  to  authority,  but  it  is 
too  plain  that  this  show  of  authority  is  only  an  effort,  and  a  mere 
effort  does  not  last.  The  government,  not  daring  to  follow  up 
that  which  they  undertake,  fall  again,  of  necessity,  into  a  fatal 
indolence.  Then  comes  the  last  expedient — a  change  of  min- 
isters ;  that,  it  is  thought,  will  remedy  the  situation ;  it  may  con- 
tent some  families,  please  some  persons,  but  that  is  all.     At  that 

bers  of  the  Constitutional  Party.  He  emigrated  in  1792,  and  lived  at  Berlin  near 
Prince  Henry  of  Prussia.  He  returned  to  France  in  1800,  and  died  in  18 15.  The 
Chevalier  de  BoufHers  had  married  in  1768,  the  Princess  Lubomirska.  Later,  at 
Berlin,  he,  having  become  a  widower,  married  the  widow  of  the  Marquis  de  Sabran. 
The  letters  he  exchanged  with  his  second  wife  before  his  marriage  have  been 
published. 

1  Prince  Henry  of  Prussia  was  a  brother  of  the  great  Frederick.  He  obtained 
brilliant  successes  during  the  Seven  Years'  War.  Very  French  in  his  tastes  and 
manners,  he  often  came  to  Paris,  where  he  was  received  in  all  the  salons.  He  died 
in  1802. 

2  Mademoiselle  de  Monconseil  married,  in  1766,  Charles  d'Alsace  de  Henin- 
Lietard,  born  in  1744,  known  under  the  name  of  Prince  d'Henin.  She  was  lady-in- 
waiting  to  the  queen.  The  Vicomtesse  de  Noailles  has  penned  a  very  pretty  portrait 
of  her  in  the  Vie  de  la  Princesse  de  Poix. 

3  Philippe  de  Noailles-Mouchy,  Prince  de  Poix,  peer  of  France,  and  grandee  of 
Spain,  born  in  1752,  was  brigadier-general  in  1788.  Deputy  of  the  nobility  to  the 
States-General,  he  adopted  the  constitutional  principles,  and  was  elected  Commander 
of  the  National  Guard  at  Versailles.  He  emigrated  in  1791,  returned  to  France  in 
1S00,  and  lived  in  retirement  until  the  Restoration.  Lieutenant-General  in  1814,  he 
died  in  1819. 

4  Charles  de  Gontaut,  Marquis  de  Saint-Blancard  (born  in  1752)  was,  at  the  time 
Prince  Talleyrand  speaks  of,  a  captain  in  the  Gardes  francaises*  He  emigrated  in 
1792,  and  commanded  a  brigade  in  the  army  of  Conde.  Having  returned  to  France, 
he  lived  in  retirement  until  the  Restoration. 


„       1   1    >    V.V*       111      JLUIVMILIII        UIU1I       LIU-      JIM.OIU1   lUlV'll, 

*  A  body  of  French  troops  under  the  old  monarchy.— (Translator.) 


THE  YEARS  PRECEDING  THE  REVOLUTION.  49 

time,  France  had  the  appearance  of  being  composed  of  a  certain 
number  of  families  whose  interests  the  government  had  to  take 
into  account.  By  such  or  such  a  choice  they  gratified  the  wishes 
of  one  of  these  families,  and  secured  its  influence  ;  then  turning 
to  another,  they  made  use  of  it  in  the  same  manner.  How  could 
such  a  state  of  affairs  endure  ? 

The  power  of  what,  in  France,  they  call  Society,  was  prodigious 
during  the  years  which  preceded  the  Revolution,  and  even  during 
the  whole  of  the  last  century.  The  light  and  varied  ways 
peculiar  to  it,  probably  prevented  our  historians  from  noticing 
the  origin,  and  following  up  the  effects,  of  this  strange  result 
of  modern  civilization  ;  I  have  often  thought  of  it :  here  are 
my  ideas  on  the  subject. 

In  countries  where  the  constitution  is  lost  in  the  clouds  of 
history,  the  influence  of  society  must  be  immense.  When  the 
origin  of  that  constitution  is  recent  and  consequently  still 
before  us,  this  influence  amounts  to  nothing.  We  see  that 
Athens  and  Rome  in  antiquity,  England  and  the  United  States 
of  America  in  modern  times,  have  never  had,  and  have  no 
Society. 

The  dramatic  literature  of  the  ancients,  Plutarch,  the  letters 
of  Cicero,  those  of  Pliny,  the  chronicles  of  Suetonius,  give  us  no 
idea  of  society  circles.  If  we  are  to  judge  of  Athens  by  the 
comedies  of  Aristophanes,  or  by  the  fragments  of  those  of 
Menander,  which  have  been  preserved  in  the  clever  adaptations  of 
Terentius,  we  see  that  the  women  lived  in  absolute  retirement. 
The  love-intrigues  related  in  these  comedies  only  apply  to  courte- 
sans, or  to  young  girls  stolen  from  their  parents  by  slave-dealers. 

When  every  citizen  took  part  in  the  management  of  public 
affairs,  the  only  meeting  places  were  the  forum,  the  tribunal,  and 
the  stock-exchange.  Ardent  imaginations  gave  a  few  hours  to 
artists'  studios,  or  to  the  salons  of  famous  courtesans.  But  this 
was  not  the  general  custom,  it  was  only  the  amusement  of  a 
few.  The  Romans,  by  nature  warriors  and  conquerors,  always 
scorned  those  customs  which  make  life  more  quiet  and  plea- 
sant. If  eloquence  itself,  which  contributed  so  much  to  their 
glory,  was  not  banished  from  Rome,  it  was  merely  because  the 
Senate  made  use  of  it  when  discussing  the  great  interests  of  the 
VOL.  I.  E 


So  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

State,  and,  in  the  forum,  to  defend  the  property  and  the  lives  of 
the  citizens.  They  abandoned  even  the  arts,  fruits  of  their 
conquests,  to  slaves  or  to  freedmen.  The  women  of  Rome  never 
left  the  shelter  of  their  homes  ;  it  was  indecent  for  any  woman 
but  a  courtesan  to  show  any  talent. 

The  mingling  of  the  two  sexes  in  society  was  unknown  to 
the  ancients,  and  but  a  few  years  since  it  was  still  held  in  scorn 
by  the  customs  of  England  and  America. 

Permitted  in  France,  it  has  formed  the  essential  and  dis- 
tinctive character  of  society  :  it  was  under  the  reign  of  Francis  I. 
that  women  began  to  appear  at  court.  Their  presence  had  an 
immediate  influence  on  manners,  on  politeness  and  on  good 
taste. 

Italy  was  ahead  of  us  in  the  progress  of  social  refinement. 
The  courts  of  Naples,  of  Ferrara,  of  Mantua,  the  palace  of  the 
Medici,  already  presented  models  of  urbanity,  of  politeness, 
even  of  elegance.  Literature  was  in  honour,  the  fine  arts  were 
successfully  cultivated.  But  the  political  situation  of  Italy,  the 
wars  of  which  she  was  the  seat,  her  division  into  small  states, 
arrested  the  progress  that  would  have  been  accomplished  by  the 
practical  arts  of  life. 

The  carousals,  the  tournaments,  that  took  place  in  France 
under  Henry  II.  imparted  more  brilliancy,  more  grace,  more 
nobility  to  gallantry,  and  made  society  more  attractive  than  all 
the  inspirations  of  the  poets  of  Italy  had  done. 

The  court,  during  the  reign  of  Henry  III.,  degraded  itself  by 
adopting  the  frivolous  and  shameful  habits  of  the  sovereign,  and 
besides,  the  sad  agitations  occasioned  by  the  Reformation  pre- 
vented the  development  of  the  character  of  the  nation. 

Henry  IV.,  after  all  the  early  storms  of  his  life,  separated 
from  his  first  wife,  and  perpetually  quarrelling  with  the  second, 
had  no  court.  His  courage,  his  vivacity,  his  happy  sallies,  his 
simple  language,  gay  and  brilliant,  only  exercised  a  personal 
influence  on  the  customs  of  the  nation. 

Cardinal  de  Richelieu,  after  having  attracted  the  heads  of  the 
great  noble  families  to  the  court,  was  anxious  to  become  its 
centre  of  attraction.  With  this  object,  he  threw  open  his 
house    at    Rueil  to    the    men    and  women    whose    intellectual 


THE  YEARS  PRECEDING  THE  REVOLUTION.  51 

abilities  had  most  struck  him.  From  that  time  dates  the  first 
social  circle,  apart  from  that  of  the  court,  which  made  itself 
famous.  But  the  terrible  power  of  the  Cardinal  detracted  much 
from  its  pleasantness.  A  spark  caused  the  bursting  forth  of 
the  transient  conflagration  known  as  the  Fronde  ;  this  burlesque 
war,  which  had  no  other  aim  than  to  gratify  the  love  of  agitation 
entertained  by  its  promoters,  was  hardly  more  than  a  social  war, 
that  is,  a  war  between  rival  social  circles. 

This  chaos  ceased  with  the  accession  of  Louis  XIV.  He 
enforced  order  ;  at  his  voice  all  classes,  all  subjects,  assumed 
their  proper  rank,  without  effort  or  violence.  To  this  noble 
subordination  we  are  indebted  for  the  art  of  observing  propriety 
— the  elegance  of  manners  and  the  exquisite  politeness,  which 
are  the  main  characteristics  of  that  splendid  reign.  By  skilfully 
combining  the  aptitudes  peculiar  to  each  sex,  and  causing  men 
and  women  to  display  their  natural  dispositions  to  mutual 
advantage,  society  reached  a  degree  of  splendour,  the  most 
insignificant  details  of  which  Frenchmen  will  always  enjoy  to 
learn.  The  salon  of  Madame  de  Sevigne  is  one  of  the  monu- 
ments of  our  glory. 

Society  under  Louis  XV.,  had  all  the  weaknesses  of  his  reign  ; 
it  opened  its  sanctuary,  a  few  men  of  letters  slipped  in.  The 
effect  of  this  was  at  first,  to  improve  conversation  and  literature. 

M.  de  Fontenelle  and  M.  de  Montesquieu,  M.  de  Buffon, 
President  Herault,  M.  de  Mairan,  M.  de  Voltaire,  all  brought  up 
under  the  influence  of  the  century  of  Louis  XIV.,  kept  up  in 
society  that  exquisite  sense  of  propriety,  that  polite  and  yet  free 
speech,  that  noble  ease  which  made  the  charm  and  lustre  of 
Paris  gatherings.  Such  was  the  standard  which  one  had  to  observe. 

But  under  the  reign  of  Louis  XVI.,  every  class  of  literature 
spread  in  society.  Each  writer  altered  his  literary  manner, 
confusion  thus  crept  in,  pretensions  grew  bold,  and  the  sanctuary 
was  broken  into.  As  a  result  of  all  this,  the  general  spirit  of 
society  underwent  all  manner  of  modifications.  People  wanted 
to  know  everything,  to  fathom  everything,  to  judge  of  everything. 
Sentiments  were  replaced  by  philosophical  ideas ;  passions,  by 
the  analysis  of  the  human  heart ;  the  wish  to  please,  by  opinions  ; 

amusements,  by  plans,  projects,  &c Everything  became 

E  2 


52  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

unnatural.  I  pause,  for  fear  I  might  make  you  feel  too  strongly 
the  coming  of  the  French  Revolution,  from  which  several  years 
and  many  events  still  separate  us. 

The  quarrel  of  the  English  with  their  colonies  had  just 
broken  out.1  Philosophers  had  sounded  the  question  at  issue  in 
all  its  depths.  They  weighed  the  rights  of  peoples  and  of 
sovereigns.  Old  military  men  were  of  opinion  that  this  quarrel 
was  likely  to  bring  war,  young  men  saw  something  new  in  it  ; 
women  something  of  an  adventure ;  the  mean,  cavilling  and 
thoughtless  policy  of  the  government  made  them  responsible  for 
all  the  excitement  caused  by  these  distant  events.  They  had 
tolerated,  or  rather  countenanced,  the  departure  of  M.  de  la 
Fayette,2  of  M.  de  Gouvion,3  of  M.  Duportail.4  Only  the  first  of 
these  names  has  fame  handed  down  to  posterity.  When  writing  a 
novel,  an  author  will  endow  the  hero  with  an  enlightened  mind 
and  noble  impulses  ;  fortune  does  not  take  so  much  trouble : 
insignificant  men  often  play  the  leading  part  in  great  events, 
simply  because  they  happened  to  be  on  the  spot. 

M.  de  la  Fayette  comes  from  a  noble  family  of  Auvergne, 
not  yet  rendered  illustrious  until,  under  Louis  XIV.,  the  wit  of  a 
woman  reflected  some  lustre  on  this  name.  He  had  married  a 
young  lady  of  the  Noailles  family,  and  was  himself  the  owner  of 

1  The  Declaration  of  Independence  of  the  United  States  was  made  on  May  4, 
1776.  The  cabinet  of  Versailles  recognized  the  new  republic,  and  signed  a  treaty  of 
alliance  with  it  (February,  1778).  The  rupture  with  England  took  place  on  the  17th 
of  the  following  June. 

2  Gilbert  Motier,  Marquis  de  la  Fayette,  was  born  in  1757,  at  Chavagnac,  near 
Brioude.  At  twenty  years  of  age  he  fought  for  American  independence.  Member  of 
the  Assembly  of  Notables  in  1787  ;  deputy  to  the  States-General.  On  the  15th  of 
July  he  was  elected  Commander-General  of  the  National  Guards  of  the  Seine.  Out- 
lawed after  the  20th  June,  1792,  he  was  obliged  to  take  to  flight,  but  was  arrested  by 
the  Austrians,  and  remained  five  years  imprisoned  at  Olmiitz.  He  played  no  part 
under  the  Empire.  Having  been  elected  a  deputy  in  1814,  he  voted  for  the  deposi- 
tion of  the  emperor.  Still  a  deputy  under  the  Restoration,  he  always  sat  with  the 
Opposition.  Elected  Commander-in-Chief  of  the  National  Guards  in  1830,  he 
contributed  to  the  accession  of  Louis-Philippe.     He  died  in  1834. 

3  Jean-Baptiste  Gouvion  took  part  in  the  campaign  in  America  as  an  officer  of 
engineers.  Greatly  attached  to  la  Fayette,  he  was,  in  1789,  appointed  Major-General 
of  the  National  Guard.  Deputy  of  Paris  in  1791,  he  sent  in  his  resignation  in  1792, 
and  died  in  action  near  Maubeuge  on  the  nth  of  the  following  June. 

4  Duportail  took  part  in  the  campaign  of  America  as  an  officer  of  engineers.  He 
was  a  colonel  in  1783,  was  promoted  to  the  rank  of  brigadier-general,  and  appointed 
Minister  of  War  in  1790.  Violently  attacked  in  the  Assembly,  a  writ  of  accusation 
was  issued  against  him  on  the  10th  of  August.  He  remained  concealed  for  two  years, 
at  the  end  of  which  time  he  succeeded  in  reaching  America.  He  was  returning  to 
France  in  1802,  when  he  died  at  sea. 


THE   YEARS  PRECEDING  THE  REVOLUTION.  53 

a  large  fortune.  Had  not  some  extraordinary  event  brought  him 
to  the  front,  he  would  have  been  passed  by  unnoticed.  The  quali- 
ties of  M.  de  la  Fayette  were  only  such  as  to  permit  of  his  waiting 
patiently  for  promotion  ;  he  was  beneath  the  mark  at  which 
a  man  is  reputed  sensible  and  witty.  His  ambition,  and  his 
efforts  to  distinguish  himself,  did  not  seem  his  own,  but  rather 
to  have  been  taught  him.  Whatever  he  does  seems  foreign  to 
his  nature  ;  he  always  acts  as  though  he  followed  some  one  else's 
advice.  Unfortunately  no  one  will  ever  boast  of  having  been  his 
adviser  at  the  most  important  period  of  his  life. 

The  example  of  M.  de  la  Fayette  was  followed  by  all  the 
gilded  and  dashing  youth  of  the  nation.  The  young  members 
of  the  French  nobility,  who  had  enlisted  for  the  cause  of  inde- 
pendence, devoted  themselves  afterwards  to  the  principles  in 
defence  of  which  they  had  shed  their  blood.  They  had 
seen  the  head  of  a  great  State  rise  from  a  humble  private 
position  ;  they  had  seen  the  simple  men  who  seconded  him 
surrounded  by  public  consideration.  From  this,  it  was  but 
a  step  to  the  belief  that  services  rendered  to  the  cause  of  liberty 
are  the  only  true  titles  to  distinction  and  glory.  These  ideas, 
brought  over  to  France,  bore  fruit  all  the  quicker  because 
all  the  prestige  of  the  ruling  classes,  attacked  by  inferior  men 
who  had  obtained  an  introduction  to  society,  were  daily 
vanishing  from  sight. 

It  is  probable  that  I  shall  revert  several  times,  in  the  course 
of  these  memoirs,  to  the  considerations  upon  which,  following 
too  closely  the  order  of  the  times,  I  allow  myself  to  dwell  at 
this  point ;  for  they  will  surely  present  themselves,  and  with  a 
more  direct  application,  when  I  shall  speak  of  the  first  years 
of  the  French  Revolution. 

Interest  in  the  American  cause  was  kept  up  in  France  by 
the  account  of  all  the  deliberations  of  Congress  published 
every  week  in  a  paper  entitled  Le  Courrier  de  V Europe.  This 
paper,  the  first,  I  think,  of  specially  political  French  papers, 
was  edited  by  a  man  who  belonged  to  the  police  :  his  name 
was  Morande  ;  he  was  the  author  of  an  infamous  libel  which 
bore  the  title  of  Le  Gazettier  Cuirasse.1 

1  Charles  Thevenot  de  Morande,  born  in  1748  at  Arnay-le-Duc  (Cote  d'Or),  where 


54  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

Such  Frenchmen  who  had  gone  to  the  colonies  of  America 
with  military  expeditions  came  home  with  magnificent 
descriptions  of  all  the  wealth  that  new  part  of  the  world 
contained.  America  was  the  sole  topic  of  conversation.  The 
peculiarity  of  the  members  of  the  aristocracy,  in  the  time  of 
my  youth,  was  that  everything  that  was  new  to  them  they 
believed  they  had  discovered,  and  were,  therefore,  all  the  more 
fond  of  it.  "  What  should  we  be  without  America  ? "  was  on 
everybody's  lips.  "  It  gives  us  a  navy,"  said  M.  Malouet  j1  "It 
extends  our  commerce,"  said  Abbe  Raynal  ;2  "It  procures 
employment  for  our  excess  of  population,"  the  men  in  office  at 
the  time  were  wont  to  say  ;  "  It  is  the  refuge  of  all  restless 
minds,"  said  the  members  of  the  government ;  "  that  of  all 
dissenters,"  said  the  philosophers,  and  so  on.  .  .  .  No  country 
seemed  more  profitable,  none  better  fitted  to  develop  the  arts 
of  peace.  The  only  subject  of  conversation  was  the  glory 
connected    with    the    discovery    of   America.      And  yet   (for 

his  father  was  an  attorney.  He  came  to  Paris,  where  his  life  of  dissipation  and  intrigue 
led  to  his  being  imprisoned  for  fifteen  months  at  Fort  l'Eveque.  *  On  being  set  free,  ' 
he  went  to  England,  and  acquired  some  celebrity  as  a  pamphleteer.  His  Gazettier 
Cuirasse,  ou  Anecdotes  scandaleuses  de  la  Cour  de  France^  (1772)  caused  quite  a  sen- 
sation. He  lived  by  extorting  hush-money  from  various  people,  especially  from 
Madame  du  Barry,  who  sent  Beaumarchais  to  him  to  purchase  his  silence.  He  edited 
afterwards,  under  the  name  of  Cotirrier  de  I' Europe,  a  periodical  as  disgraceful  as  his 
pamphlet.  Having  returned  to  France,  he  was  imprisoned  after  August  10,  for  holding 
anti-revolutionary  views  ;  he  managed  to  escape,  however,  and  died  in  1803. 

1  Pierre- Victor,  Baron  Malouet,  born  at  Riom  in  1740,  began  life  as  an  attache  of 
embassy  at  Lisbonne  (1758).  He  afterwards  entered  the  naval  commissariat  at 
Rochefort  (1763)  ;  became  sub-commissary  in  1767,  and  was  sent  to  San  Domingo, 
and  to  Guyana  after  as  commissary-general.  Deputy  of  Riom  to  the  States-General, 
he  voted  with  the  constitutional  party  ;  emigrated  in  1792,  returned  to  France  in  1801, 
was  Prefet  maritime  at  Antwerp  (1801-1807),  and  Councillor  of  State  (1810-1812). 
He  was  minister  of  marine  under  the  provisory  government,  and  died  in  the  same 
year  (1814).  Malouet  is  the  author  of  numerous  works  on  the  navy  and  the  colonies. 
He  has  left  most  interesting  memoirs,  which  have  been  published  (2  vols.  8vo). 

2  Guillaume-Thomas  Raynal,  born  at  Saint-Geniez  (Aveyron)  in  171 3  ;  took  orders, 
and  came  to  Paris  in  I747>  where  he  won  reputation  both  as  a  professor  and  a  preacher. 
He  eventually  gave  up  his  ecclesiastic  appointments.  He  was  one  of  the  most  daring 
philosophers  of  his  time.  L '  Histoire  philosophique  des  Indes,%  which  made  his  repu- 
tation, was  burned  by  the  public  executioner's  hand,  and  Raynal  had  to  take  refuge 
abroad.  He  returned  to  France  in  1788,  was  elected  a  member  of  the  Institut  (1795), 
and  died  in  1 796. 

*  Le  For  l'Eveque,  which  some  people  wrongly  spell  Fort  l'Eveque,  was  the  prison  of  the  Bishop  of 
Paris.  It  was  situated  in  the  middle  of  the  Rue  St.  Germain  l'Auxerrois,  opposite  the  For  du  Roi. 
Louis  XIV.,  having  united  all  the  private  jurisdictions  at  the  Chatelet  in  1674,  the  For  l'Eveque 
served  from  that  time  as  a  debtors'  prison,  and  was  destroyed  about  1780. — (Translator.) 
t  "The  Unimpeachable-Gazetteer;  or.  Scandalous  Anecdotes  of  the  Court  of  France." 
J  "A  Philosophical  History  of  India."  It  may  be  as  well  to  note  here  that  this  work  excited  the 
enthusiasm  of  Bonaparte— then  but  a  subaltern  officer— who  professed  the  greatest  admiration  for  its 
author. — (Translator.) 


THE   YEARS  PRECEDING  THE  REVOLUTION.  55 

let  us  examine  things  to  the  bottom)  what  has  been  the 
result  of  all  our  intercourse  with  the  New  World  ?  Do  we 
see  less  misery  about  us  ?  Do  subverters  of  the  social  order 
no  longer  exist  ?  Have  not  the  glances  we  cast  on  distant 
countries  diminished  our  love  for  our  native  land  ?  Are  not  wars 
more  frequent,  longer,  more  widely  spread,  more  costly,  through 
the  fact  of  England  and  France  having  become  sensitive  and 
irritable  on  other  parts  of  the  globe  ?  The  history  of  mankind 
furnishes  us  with  the  following  sad  result  :  that  the  spirit  of  de- 
struction quickly  repairs  to  all  places  with  which  intercourse  has 
become  easier.  When  a  few  Europeans  cast  themselves  upon 
America,  they  at  once  found  that  vast  continent  too  narrow 
for  their  ambition,  and  their  interests  clashing  continually,  they 
fiercely  competed  against  each  other  until  one  of  them  became 
the  master.  To-day,  when  a  discussion  arises  between  the 
captain  of  a  merchant-vessel  and  a  director  of  the  Hudson's 
Bay  Company,  all  the  States  of  Europe  take  up  arms  in  the 
quarrel. 

I  know  how  much  all  I  have  just  said  is  contrary  to  current 
ideas.  Voyages  around  the  world  make  the  glory  of  some 
individuals,  and  even  of  the  governments  who  order  them. 
Learned  men  will  not  allow  any  of  the  discoveries  of  our 
great  navigators  to  be  attributed  merely  to  chance  ;  they 
insist  that  previous  knowledge  enabled  these  bold  pioneers  to 
guess,  or  at  least  suspect,  the  existence  of  the  new  countries 
which  enrich  our  maps.  However,  they  must  allow  us  to  point 
out,  that  in  our  own  days,  when  gravitation  has  become  the 
ruling  theory,  when  methods  of  calculation  have  reached  their 
greatest  perfection,  it  has  been  imagined  that,  in  order  to 
preserve  the  equilibrium  of  the  earth,  there  must  be  a  con- 
siderable continent  at  the  antarctic  pole ;  several  expeditions, 
however,  have  been  directed  towards  that  point,  and  all  their 
researches  have,  so  far,  proved  almost  useless.  The  unfortunate 
Louis  XVI.  held  to  that  idea,  and  we  ought  to  think  it  but 
natural  that  he,  of  all  men,  should  have  been  induced  to  seek 
afar  for  other  men. 

But  it  seems  to  me  of  little  interest  to  us  to  engage  in  such 
enterprises  ;  if  it  be  absolutely  necessary  that  they  should   be 


56  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

carried  out,  we  should   leave  this  duty  to  the  new  rulers  of  the 
ocean  ;  it  does  not  concern  us. 

A  correspondence  which  I  closely  kept  up  for  several  years 
with  M.  de  Choiseul-Gouffier,  then  ambassador  in  Constanti- 
nople, and  M.  Peissonel,  consul  in  the  seaports  of  the  Levant, 
fully  convinced  me  of  the  many  advantages  we  might  still  derive 
in  our  days,  by  turning  our  political  and  commercial  views 
towards  the  old  world. 

When  we  consider  the  geographical  position  of  this  com- 
pound, solid,  compact  body  which  is  called  France,  when  we 
follow  its  whole  coast,  we  needs  must  be  astonished  that  it  has 
not  always  looked  upon  the  Mediterranean  Sea  as  its  own 
domain.  This  basin,  the  entrance  to  which  is  accessible 
only  through  an  inlet  a  few  miles  wide,  is  closed  in  on  all 
sides  by  countries  possessing  little  or  no  shipping.  Pos- 
sessing in  herself,  and  in  Spain,  her  ally,  all  the  means 
afforded  by  the  fine  harbours  of  Toulon  and  Marseilles,  by 
Carthagena,  and  numerous  other  ports,  ....  France  can  easily 
acquire  in  the  Mediterranean  whatever  degree  of  superiority  she 
may  wish  to  possess.  The  immense  advantage  that  might 
result  for  her  from  such  superiority  has  hitherto  been  over- 
looked. 

A  spirit  of  imitation  and  a  sentiment  of  rivalry  attracted  us 
to  the  ocean.  It  is  a  remarkable  fact  that  all  the  schemes  for 
the  naval  greatness  of  France  always  required  the  spirit  of 
opposition  to  foster  them.  It  has  always  required  the  prospect 
of  having  to  fight  an  enemy,  or  weaken  some  nation,  to  excite 
our  pride,  rouse  our  courage,  and  develop  our  industry.  I  am 
sorry  to  make  the  statement,  but  everything  indicates  that  in 
man,  the  power  to  hate  is  stronger  than  that  of  love  to  humanity 
in  general,  and  even  than  that  of  our  personal  interests.  The 
idea  of  greatness  and  prosperity  without  jealousy  and  rivalry  is 
too  abstract  for  any  ordinary  mind  to  grasp  it :  ordinary  minds 
require  some  concrete  object  to  which  to  apply  their  conceptions, 
and,  so  to  speak,  measure  them  materially. 

In  order  to  palliate  somewhat  the  sadness  of  these  remarks, 
let  us  attempt  a  compromise.  Might  not  the  natural  rivalry 
which  exists  between  what  is  known  of  the  new  world  and  of 


THE  YEARS  PRECEDING  THE  REVOLUTION.  57 

the  old,  afford  a  sufficiently  large  field  to  the  men  who  are 
inclined  to  mischief?  Generous  impulses  would  thus  be  left 
the  hope  of  exciting  the  industry  of  the  two  continents,  and  of 
bringing  them  mutually  to  promote  each  other's  happiness 
and   prosperity. 

I  feel  no  restraint  in  discussing  this  question,  for  France  is 
almost  without  colonies  ;  the  ties  that  bound  her  to  her  former 
possessions  are  either  broken  or  loosened  ;  we  are  thus  free  to 
choose  the  system  which  may  appear  most  useful  to  us. 

Have  we  any  greater  interest  in  resuming  our  former  inter- 
course with  the  new  world  than  in  seeking  new  relations  with 
the  old  ?  It  is  important  that  this  political  problem  be  solved. 
If  it  could  be  proved  that  farming  is  easier  and  not  so  expensive 
in  the  old  world  as  it  is  in  the  new  one ;  that  the  produce  is 
equally  good,  and  that  merchant  shipping  would  not  surfer  by 
that  new  state  of  things,  the  solution  would  be  complete. 

In  the  first  place,  farming  is  easier,  for  since  the  abolition  of 
the  slave-trade,  pronounced  in  England,  at  the  Congress  of  Vienna 
and  in  the  United  States,  it  seems  impossible  that  any  people  of 
Europe  should  again  undertake  such  infamous  traffic,  and  that 
planters  should  much  longer  be  able  to  get  coloured  men, 
whose  number  is  growing  less  every  year,  to  till  the  soil  of  the 
West  Indies  and  of  the  equatorial  colonies.1  The  instruments  of 
agriculture  being  no  longer  the  same,  the  latter  must  experience 
changes,  and  the  bases  of  calculation  upon  which  the  riches  of  the 
American  colonies  were  founded  will  necessarily  become  inexact. 
The  cultivation  of  the  soil  in  these  hot  climates  being  more  diffi- 
cult and  costly,  the  productions  must  decrease,  and  their  price  be 

1  The  slave-trade  was  abolished  but  very  late  by  modern  civilized  nations.  During 
all  the  eighteenth  century,  England  reserved  to  itself,  by  the  treaty  of  Utrecht,  the 
monopoly  of  importing  negroes  to  all  the  Spanish  colonies — that  is  to  say,  to  nearly 
all  South  America.  When  the  English  colonies  had  a  proportion  of  twenty  blacks  to 
one  white,  it  occurred  to  them  to  be  indignant  at  the  immorality  of  the  traffic,  and 
one  of  the  first  acts  of  the  Union  was  the  prohibition  of  the  importation  (1794),  which 
was  even  punishable  by  death  (1818).  Denmark  had  preceded  them  (1792)  ;  England 
followed  (1806).  At  the  Congress  of  Vienna,  a  declaration  was  signed  by  all  the 
powers,  except  Spain  and  Portugal,  stating  that  the  slave-trade  tvas  repugnant  to  the 
principles  of  universal  morals  ;  that  it  afflicted  humanity  and  degraded  Europe  ;  that, 
in  consequence,  negotiations  should  be  opened  between  all  the  States  to  hasten  the  moment 
when  it  should  be  abolished  everywhere.  On  his  return  from  the  island  of  Elba, 
Napoleon  suppressed  the  slave-trade  in  all  the  French  colonies,  a  decree  which  was 
confirmed  by  Louis  XVIII.  For  many  years  after,  the  slave-trade  was  to  form  the 
subject  of  delicate  transactions  between  the  cabinets  of  Europe. 


5S  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

proportionately  increased.  None  of  these  inconveniences  would 
be  felt  in  the  old  world.  In  Africa,  the  instruments  are  there,  they 
are  numerous,  they  support  themselves.  If  the  soil  requires  more 
cultivation,  the  unoccupied  population  is  so  abundant  that  it 
easily  supplies  this  need.  We  must  no  longer  compare  the  work 
of  blacks  in  America  with  that  of  blacks  in  Africa.  It  is  white 
men  in  America  who  will  hereafter  be  employed  at  labour  beyond 
their  endurance ;  to  obtain  the  same  products  a  greater  number 
will  be  necessary,  and  will  they  have  this  number  ?  In  Africa 
they  have  them. 

The  second  point  of  the  problem  resolves  itself  equally  in 
favour  of  the  Mediterranean.  All  the  products  of  Africa  are 
good.  The  sugar  of  Egypt  is  hard  and  grained  ;  in  the  process 
of  refining  it  becomes  as  white  as  that  of  San  Domingo ;  and 
there  is  every  reason  to  believe  that  we  could  obtain  a  very  fine 
quality  in  the  central  parts  of  the  regencies  of  Tunis  and  of 
Algiers.  Abyssinia  produces  coffee  which  is  superior  to  that  of 
the  West  Indies  ;  if  its  culture  were  encouraged  by  an  assured 
sale,  all  the  kingdoms  and  islands  of  southern  Asia  would 
furnish  it  in  abundance.  The  beauty  of  the  cotton  cultivated  in 
Africa  merely  for  local  needs,  proves  that  it  would  easily  surpass 
that  of  Cayenne,  of  our  other  colonies  and  of  the  United  States 
of  America.  Indigo  is  cultivated  successfully  between  the  34th 
and  35th  degrees  of  latitude,  and  could  be  easily  obtained  in  this 
latitude  in  Africa. 

It  remains  then  to  be  seen  if  it  would  not  be  prejudicial  to 
the  great  art  of  navigation,  to  give  to  commerce  a  new  direction, 
^which,  at  first  sight,  appears  to  tend  to  narrow  the  domain  of 
science. 

There  would  be  no  foundation  for  any  fear  in  this  respect. 
One  cannot  seriously  believe  that  France,  with  the  extent  of 
coast  which  she  has  on  the  ocean,  and  the  ports  which  she  pos- 
sesses, could  allow  herself  to  lose  or  be  forbidden  her  competition 
in  the  navigation  of  the  high  seas.  This  supposition  needs  not 
even  be  discussed.  The  ocean,  the  seas  of  America  and  of 
India,  must  always  remain  open  to  all  nations  ;  it  is  the  great 
school  where  the  art  must  be  preserved  and  perfected.  The 
principles  of  the  great  discoveries  are  fixed ;  the  development 


THE  YEARS  PRECEDING  THE  REVOLUTION.  59 

of  which  they  are  susceptible  will  necessarily  follow.  Except 
by  a  frightful  revolution  of  the  whole  globe,  the  fruits  of  so 
many  efforts,  of  so  much  work,  of  so  many  centuries,  could  not 
be  lost  for  France,  any  more  than  for  the  rest  of  the  world.  It 
is  not  something  less  than  what  exists  that  I  demand,  it  is 
something  more.  While  England  is  so  placed  as  to  have  greater 
advantages  than  France  upon  the  ocean,  France  is  so  situated 
as  to  have  greater  advantages  on  the  Mediterranean  than  has 
England.  From  this  division,  there  would  result  even  for  com- 
mercial peoples,  motives  of  emulation  which  would  tend  to 
maintain  a  sort  of  level  between  the  industries  of  all  civilized 
countries. 

It  is  principally  to  commercial  interests  that  I  address  myself, 
because  I  am  disposed  to  believe  that  reason  or  rather  lassitude 
will  bring  about  a  state  of  affairs  in  which  so  much  attention  will 
no  longer  be  paid  to  the  strength  of  the  navy,  and  to  the  means 
it  affords  of  securing  the  upper  hand  in  war.  I  hope  that  some 
day  this  will  become  a  secondary  point  of  view,  and  that  the 
principal  object  of  a  navy  will  be  to  foster  trade,  to  increase 
comfort,  and  to  contribute  to  the  general  prosperity. 

However  vaguely  expressed  these  ideas  may  be,  and 
although  they  only  seem  confined  to  a  wish,  they  cannot  be 
regarded  as  idle  fancies,  if  we  put  aside  what  is  too  absolute  and 
arbitrary  in  them  and  confine  ourselves  to  considering  them  as 
subject  to  the  obstacles  which  proceed  from  those  events  which 
always  interfere  with  the  progress  of  human  schemes. 

A  little  good,  eagerly  grasped,  the  enjoyment  of  which 
is  always  of  short  duration,  is  all  human  nature  can  boast  of. 
Thus  it  suffices  that  a  political  view  offer  some  advantage,  that 
it  be  in  principle  conformable  to  nature,  that  it  present  little  risk, 
little  loss,  few  sacrifices,  for  it  to  be  regarded  as  good,  and  for 
men  to  be  able  to  place  hope  in  it,  without  fear  of  being  carried 
away  by  their  own  conceptions. 

One  would  be  more  encouraged  in  taking  this  view,  on  look- 
ing back  to  the  preceding  epochs  of  our  history.  Thus  it  would 
be  seen  that  in  the  time  of  the  Crusades  Europe  was  precisely 
on  the  way  to  these  ideas.  The  commerce  of  Asia,  liberty  of 
communication  with  this  rich  part  of  the  old  world,  were  among 


60  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

the  secret  motives  of  war  on  the  part  of  the  Western  Powers 
against  the  Califs  of  Arabia,  against  the  Soudans  of  Egypt, 
and  the  Sultans  of  Nicomedes.  Religion  served  as  a  pretext  for 
politics,  and  politics  could  gain  a  glimpse  already  of  the  advan- 
tages of  an  exclusive  navigation.  With  some  success,  prudently 
managed,  European  colonies  might  soon  have  been  seen  forming 
on  the  coasts  of  Egypt  and  Syria.  And  in  the  wars  which  would 
have  been  sustained  by  the  jealousies  and  rivalries  of  the 
confederate  princes,  France,  by  her  position,  would  have  had 
immense  advantages  that  later  she  was  not  able  to  regain  in  the 
struggle  caused  by  the  discovery  of  America.  In  our  days,  the 
great  difficulties  of  religion  having  been  overcome,  commercial 
arrangements  might  further  the  interests  of  all  the  powers  of  the 
East,  which  by  themselves  are  not  essentially  maritime  powers. 

That  is  why,  at  a  time  of  my  life  when  I  had  the  power  to 
do  so,  I  introduced  into  the  treaty  of  Amiens — as  a  mere  philo- 
sophical view,  so  as  to  give  no  umbrage  to  the  powers — a  few 
provisions  having  for  their  object  the  civilization  of  the  coast  01 
Africa.1  If  the  government  had  followed  the  matter  up  ;  if,  in- 
stead of  sacrificing  all  that  remained  of  the  fine  army  of  Egypt, 
to  the  vain  hope  of  reconquering  San  Domingo,2  one  had 
directed  against  the  States  of  Barbary  that  imposing  and 
already  acclimatized  force,  it  is  probable  that  my  philosophy 
would  have  become  practical,  and  that  France,  instead  of  having 
destroyed  in  a  few  months  a  fine  army  at  San  Domingo,  would 
now  be  firmly  established  on  the  African  coast  of  the  Mediter- 
ranean, thus  sparing  us  the  gigantic  and  disastrous  continental 
system. 

I  ought  still  to  indicate  another  strong  consideration  ;  it  is 

1  The  treaty  of  Amiens  guaranteed  the  independence  of  Malta,  its  neutrality,  and 
opened  its  ports  to  vessels  of  all  nations.  An  article  excepted  from  this  latter  privilege 
the  ships  of  the  Barbary  states,  until  by  means  of  an  arrangement  procured  by  the 
contracting  parties,  the  system  of  hostilities  existing  between  the  aforesaid  Barbary 
States  and  the  order  of  St.  John,  as  well  as  the  Christian  powers,  should  have  ceased. 
It  is  doubtless  this  latter  provision  which  denoted  on  the  part  of  its  author  certain 
views  on  the  Mediterranean  that  he  mentions  above. 

2  Since  1795,  the  island  of  San  Domingo  had  been  independent  under  the  govern- 
ment of  Toussaint-Louverture.  The  First  Consul  wished  to  re-occupy  it ;  his  brother- 
in-law,  General  Leclerc,  was  charged  with  the  expedition  (February,  1802).  He  was 
victorious  at  first,  and  took  possession  of  nearly  all  the  island,  but  sickness  decimated 
his  troops,  and  he  himself  died.  After  the  breach  of  the  peace  of  Amiens,  the  English 
seconded  the  efforts  of  the  blacks.  The  remnant  of  our  troops  were  obliged  to  evacuate 
the  island,  which  has  since  remained  independent. 


THE   YEARS  PRECEDING  THE  REVOLUTION.  61 

that  America  has  not  yet  taken  her  place  in  the  political  order, 
and  that  in  regard  to  her,  time  has  not  yet  furnished  its  proof.  If, 
some  day,  she  should  become  powerful  enough  to  dare  to  consider 
as  hers,  all  the  lands  grouped  about  the  new  continent,  what  an 
advantage  would  it  then  be  for  France  to  have  turned  her 
attention  to  the  old  world  !  By  this  means,  also,  she  would  have 
rendered  an  essential  service  to  humanity,  in  preventing, 
or  at  least,  in  lessening  the  movement  of  emigration  which  is 
leading  the  present  generation  towards  America.  The 
inclination,  almost  imperceptible,  which  draws  the  European 
population  towards  the  new  world  would  have  required  perhaps 
this  retrograding  force.  I  am  astonished  that  philosophers  have 
not  taken  hold  of  this  great  question.  It  touches,  in  all  its 
points,  on  their  principles  ;  the  slave-trade,  of  itself,  ought  not 
to  have  led  them  to  it.  But  since  they  have  neglected  it,  it 
is  probable  that  I  am  mistaken,  and  that  leads  me  to  believe 
that  I  do  not  even  understand  myself  very  well  when  I  speak  of 
Philosophers  ;  I  employ  this  term  as  some  people  do  Nature  when 
they  have  something  vague  to  say,  and  the  suitable  expression 
is  lacking.  But,  as  I  often  mention  the  Philosophers,  and  as  I 
credit  them  with  and  shall  credit  them  with  much  influence  on  my 
time,  I  ought,  in  order  to  be  clear,  to  explain,  once  for  all,  what 
I  mean  by  the  philosophers  of  the  eighteenth  century. 

If  the  philosophers  of  the  eighteenth  century  had  formed  a 
sect,  their  doctrine  would  be  easy  to  understand  ;  but  modern 
philosophy  has  nothing  in  common  with  the  spirit  of  a  sect.  The 
atheists  and  deists,  to  whom  alone  this  qualification  could  be 
applied,  hardly  belong  to  our  times.  When  one  endeavours  to 
fathom  the  depths  of  matters,  one  finds  that  the  secret  principle 
of  all  sects  is  political,  and  that  everywhere  they  are  all  born 
from  a  spirit  of  independence  and  liberty,  which,  finding 
itself  bound  by  established  constitutions,  and  restricted  by 
prevailing  laws,  comes  out  and  breaks  forth  under  forms  that 
it  tries  to  legitimatize  by  religion.  It  is,  beyond  doubt,  the 
spirit  of  opposition  to  the  established  government  which  is  the 
prime  mover  in  all  these  new  doctrines,  which  are  spread 
afterwards  with  various  modifications.  All  other  causes,  physical 
and  moral,  are  only  secondary  and  accessory. 


62  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

In  England,  where  the  principle  of  political  liberty  is  em- 
bodied in  the  constitution  of  the  State,  sects  are  innumerable, 
and  little  dangerous. 

In  Germany,  a  country  divided  into  various  small  states,  the 
spirit  of  reformation  has  been  perpetuated  since  Luther  and 
Calvin,  and  might  have  made  great  ravages,  if  the  French  Revolu- 
tion had  not  alarmed  all  governments  and  dispersed  inno- 
vators ;  those  who  remain,  including  Madame  von  Krudener,1 
are  only  ridiculous. 

I  do  not  name  either  Spain  or  Portugal,  because  in  respect 
of  philosophy,  letters,  and  science,  these  two  countries  have  made 
no  progress  since  the  fifteenth  century. 

In  France,  the  genius  of  the  exact  sciences,  by  the  pride  and 
the  real  supremacy  it  has  assumed,  has  annihilated  the  spirit  of 
sect  by  covering  all  systems  with  scorn.  The  introduction  of  the 
philosophy  of  Bacon,  of  Locke  and  of  Newton,  completed  by 
M.  de  Laplace,2  subjected  all  the  devices  of  imagination  to  a 
test  which  permitted  it  to  make  discoveries,  but  not  to  wander 
beyond  bounds. 

The  indecisions  of  Montaigne,  resting  his  mind  on  what  he 
calls  those  two  pillows  so  soft  for  a  well-made  head,  ignorance 
and  heedlessness,  prevented  him  from  joining  any  of  the  previous 
sects,  or  forming  a  new  one.  He  discusses  all  opinions,  adopts 
none,  and  intrenches  himself  behind  doubt  and  indifference. 

Almost  at  the  same  time,  Rabelais,  in  the  attacks  of  his 
railing,  cynical  and  droll  humour,  had  insulted  all  prejudices 
and  attacked  all  beliefs. 

It  appears  to  me  that  there  is  a  great  difference  between 
this  style  of  philosophy,  and  that  of  the  founders  of  sects.  By 
order  of  date,  Montaigne  and  Rabelais    are   the  oldest  of  our 

1  Julie  de  Wietinghoff,  daughter  of  a  rich  Lavonian  nobleman;  born  in  1764; 
married  at  eighteen  Baron  von  Krudener,  a  Russian  diplomatist.  Madame  von 
Krudener  had  a  restless  youth.  After  1804,  she  seemed  entirely  changed,  devoted 
to  austerities,  and  to  the  conversion  of  sinners.  In  1815,  she  became  acquainted  with 
the  Emperor  Alexander,  who  grew  attached  to  her,  and  over  whom  she  had  a  great 
ascendency.  She  wandered  afterwards  over  Switzerland  and  Germany,  disturbed  the 
cities  by  her  predictions,  and  was  often  persecuted.  She  returned  to  Russia  in  1818, 
and  died  in  1824. 

2  P.  Simon,  Marquis  de  Laplace,  born  in  1749  at  Beaumont-en- Auge  (Calvados), 
was  at  seventeen  years  of  age  Professor  of  Mathematics.  A  member  of  the  Institut 
from  its  foundation,  Minister  of  the  Interior  after  the  18th  Brumaire,  Senator  (1799), 
President  of  the  Senate,  peer  of  France  (1815).     He  died  in  1827. 


THE   YEARS  PRECEDING  THE  REVOLUTION.  63 

French  philosophers,  but  they  are  not  the  founders  of  schools. 
Their  pyrrhonism  threw  into  ideas  a  vagueness,  an  uncertainty, 
the  results  of  which  make  them  partly  responsible  for  that 
confusion  we  have  seen  in  the  last  century.  Thus  the  writers 
who  have  come  nearest  to  them  have  never  pretended  to  be 
the  exponents  of  any  doctrine  whatever.  The  disposition  to 
doubt,  and  the  spirit  of  sect  are  diametrically  opposed. 

The  spirit  of  sect  has  perhaps  less  of  inconvenience,  be- 
cause it  is  less  general  in  its  object,  and  because  it  takes 
possession  of  but  few  individuals,  and,  in  France,  for  a  short 
time  only  ;  for  the  frivolity  of  the  nation  does  not  permit  any 
opinion  of  this  nature  to  establish  a  lasting  rule.  Doubt, 
on  the  contrary,  can  extend  itself  to  all,  and  endure  a  long 
time  ;  it  is  so  convenient  that  it  takes  possession  of  all ;  for 
is  enlightenment  ever  sufficiently  clear  for  it  ?  and  its  danger 
lies  in  this,  being  the  aim  to  which  one  tends  ;  its  advan- 
tage, in  this  being  the  point  of  departure.  For  then  one  is 
afraid  of  divining  too  quickly  ;  one  is  afraid  of  simple  out- 
lines ;  intelligence  contents  itself  with  examining  modestly  in 
order  to  arrive  slowly  at  causes  :  it  thus  rises  by  degrees 
from  one  abstract  idea  to  another  ;  from  phenomena  to  pheno- 
mena, from  discovery  to  discovery,  and  finally  from  truth  to 
truth. 

This  method  was  not  fully  understood  or  faithfully  followed 
until  the  eighteenth  century,  for  up  to  this  time  France  was  wholly 
Cartesian.  The  schools,  the  Academy  of  Sciences,  even  Fontenelle 
and  Mairan,  were  consistently  faithful  to  Descartes.  I  remember, 
and  perhaps  I  alone,  that  M.  Duval,1  my  professor  of  philosophy 
at  the  Harcourt  College,  afterwards  Rector  of  the  University, 
had    issued    a  little  pamphlet  against  Newton  ;    D'Alembert,2 

1  Pierre  Duval,  born  in  1730  at  Breaute,  a  village  of  Normandy,  was  at  twenty- 
two  years  of  age  Professor  of  Philosophy  at  the  Harcourt  College,  principal  of 
the  same  college,  and  Rector  of  the  University  (1777).  There  are  numerous  treatises 
left  by  him,  in  which  he  endeavours  to  refute  the  philosophical  theories  of  the  time, 
notably  those  of  Buffon,  Rousseau,  and  Holbach.     He  died  in  1797. 

2  Jean  Lerond  d'Alembert  was  the  son  of  Madame  de  Tencin  and  of  the  Chevalier 
Destouches,  officer  of  artillery.  Abandoned  at  his  birth,  he  was  taken  and  brought  up 
by  a  family  of  working  people.  His  name  came  from  the  fact  that  he  was  found  on  the 
steps  of  the  church  Saint-Jean  Lerond,  which  is  now  destroyed.  He  soon  made  himself 
noticed  by  his  love  of  science,  entered  the  Academy  of  Sciences  in  1744,  and  the 
French  Academy  in  1754.  Closely  associated  with  Voltaire  and  Diderot,  he  joined 
with  them  in  the  publication  of  the  Encyclopedia.     He  died  in  1783. 


64  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLE  YRAND. 

Maupertuis,1  Clairault,2  and  Voltaire,  all  four  very  young,  were 
the  first  apostles  of  the  new  philosophy.  Thanks  to  them,  the 
philosophy  of  Newton,  or  rather  the  system  of  Nature,  has 
triumphed.  Thanks  to  them  once  more  the  philosophy  of  Bacon 
was  applied  to  science  and  shed  the  brightest  light  thereon.  This 
was  the  most  brilliant  side  of  the  philosophy  of  the  eighteenth  cen- 
tury ;  but  its  glory  becomes  obscured  when  one  looks  upon  its 
moral  influence,  and,  above  all,  upon  its  ravages  in  moral  science. 

Voltaire,  it  seems  to  me,  has  perfectly  traced  the  character 
and  mission  of  true  philosophy. 

"  Philosophy,"  said  he, "  is  simple  ;  she  is  tranquil,  without  envy, 
without  ambition  ;  she  meditates  in  peace,  far  from  the  luxury, 
the  tumult  and  the  intrigues  of  the  world  ;  she  is  indulgent,  she 
is  compassionate  ;  her  pure  hand  holds  the  torch  which  is  to 
enlighten  men  ;  she  never  makes  use  of  it  to  kindle  a  confla- 
gration in  any  place  on  earth  ;  her  voice  is  feeble,  but  makes 
itself  heard  ;  she  says,  she  repeats  :  '  Worship  God,  serve  kings, 
love  mankind.'  " 

The  beautiful  character  of  this  philosophy  is  found  in  all  the 
writings  of  Locke,  of  Montesquieu,  and  of  Cavendish.3  These 
true  sages,  always  prudent  in  their  boldness,  have  constantly 
respected,  and  often  strengthened,  the  eternal  foundations  on 
which  the  morals  of  mankind  rest.  But  some  of  their  disciples, 
less  enlightened,  and  consequently  less  circumspect,  have,  by 
dint  of  researches,  shaken  all  the  bases  of  the  social  order. 

When,  in  the  senate  of  Rome,  they  were  deliberating  on  the 
punishment  merited  by  the  accomplices  of  Catiline,  Caesar, 
reasoning  in  the  philosophy  of  the  eighteenth  century,  and  pre- 
senting abstract  principles  in  order  to  draw  political  conclusions 

1  Moreau  de  Maupertuis,  born  at  Saint-Malo  in  1698,  died  in  1759;  officer  of 
cavalry.  He  soon  left  the  army  for  the  study,  and  entered  the  Academy  of  Sciences 
in  1723.  In  1736,  he  set  out  on  a  scientific  expedition  to  the  polar  regions.  Member 
of  the  French  Academy  in  1743,  he  left  for  Berlin  in  1745,  where  King  Frederic 
named  him  President  of  the  Academy.  It  was  there  that  he  had  his  famous  debates 
with  Voltaire.  They  were  published  in  1856,  under  the  name  of  Life  of  Maupertuis, 
by  La  Beaumelle,  in  a  small  volume,  very  interesting  on  account  of  certain  letters 
of  Frederick's  contained  in  it. 

2  Alexis  Clairault,  born  in  1713  at  Paris,  astronomer  and  mathematician,  entered 
the  Academy  of  Sciences  at  eighteen  years  of  age.      He  died  in  1765. 

3  Henry  Cavendish,  illustrious  English  physician  and  chemist,  born  at  Nice  in 
1 73 r>  belonged  to  a  younger  branch  of  the  family  of  the  Dukes  of  Devonshire.  He 
was  admitted  in  1760  to  the  Royal  Society  of  London,  and,  in  1803,  was  associate 
of  the  Institute  of  France.     He  died  in  1810. 


THE  YEARS  PRECEDING  THE  REVOLUTION.  65 

from  them,  descanted  at  length  upon  the  nature  of  the  soul,  and 
professed  the  dogmas  of  the  Epicurean  philosophy.  Cato  and 
Cicero  arose  indignant,  and  declared  to  the  senate  that  Caesar 
was  professing  a  doctrine  dangerous  to  the  republic  and  to  man- 
kind. Now,  this  subversive  and  distressing  doctrine  that  these 
great  statesmen  had  the  wisdom  to  discard,  has  been  openly 
taught  in  the  last  century.  Under  the  pretext  of  uprooting 
superstition,  which  was  falling  of  itself,  and  of  extinguishing 
fanaticism,  which  inflamed  no  heads  but  theirs,  Helvetius,1 
Condorcet,2  Raynal,  Baron  von  Holbach,3  sometimes  with  "the 
state  of  nature,"  sometimes  with  "perfectibility,"  ruthlessly  broke 
all  the  ties  of  moral  and  political  order.  What  madness  to  pretend 
to  govern  the  world  with  abstract  ideas,  with  analyses,  with  incom- 
plete notions  of  order  and  equality,  and  with  a  purely  metaphysical 
morality  !     We  have  seen  the  sad  results  of  these  idle  fancies. 

If  such  is  the  necessary  outcome  of  analysis,  I  would  say  with 
good  old  La  Fontaine  to  the  imprudent  philosophers  who  apply  it 
to  everything :   Quittez-moi  voire  serpe,  instrument  de  dommage.^ 

Your  analysis  may  enlighten  the  mind,  but  it  extinguishes 
the  heat  of  the  soul ;  it  dries  up  all  sensitiveness,  it  withers  the 
imagination,  it  spoils  the  taste.  Has  not  Condillac,5  your  oracle, 
himself  said,  "Not/ting  is  more  opposed  to  good  taste  than  a  philo- 

1  Claude  Adrien  Helvetius,  born  in  Paris  about  1715,  obtained  at  the  age  of 
twenty-three  a  place  as  fermier-ge'neral.  He  gave  himself  entirely  to  philosophy, 
and  published  in  1758  his  book  V 'Esprit,  condemned  at  the  time  by  the  Pope,  the 
Sorbonne,  and  the  parlement.  His  works — fourteen  volumes — were  published  after 
his  death,  which  took  place  in  1771. 

2  M.  Caritat,  Marquis  de  Condorcet,  born  in  1743  at  Riblemont,  near  Saint- 
Quentin,  of  a  noble  family  originally  from  Dauphine.  He  was  received  into  the 
Academy  of  Sciences  at  the  age  of  twenty-six.  Closely  connected  with  the  philoso- 
phers, he  embraced  with  ardour  the  cause  of  the  Revolution.  Deputy  to  the  Legis- 
lative Assembly  and  to  the  Convention,  he  voted  with  the  Girondists.  Proscribed  on 
May  31,  I793>  he  remained  concealed  for  eight  months,  but,  leaving  his  retreat,  was 
arrested  and  imprisoned.  He  poisoned  himself  a  few  days  after  in  his  prison  (March, 
1794).  Condorcet  had  married  Mademoiselle  de  Grouchy,  sister  of  the  Marshal  of 
the  Empire. 

3  P.  Thiry,  Baron  von  Holbach,  celebrated  philosopher,  was  born  in  1723  at  Hildes- 
heim,  in  the  Palatinate.  He  came  to  Paris  in  his  youth,  and  embraced  the  most 
violent  philosophical  principles.  He  preached  atheism  openly.  His  best-known 
work,  The  System  of  Nat  tire,  was  condemned  even  by  Voltaire  and  Frederick  II.  He 
died  in  1789. 

4  Lay  aside  your  sickle,  it  is  a  dangerous  tool. 

5  Etienne  Bonnot  de  Condillac,  born  in  1715  at  Grenoble,  of  a  noble  family.  He 
took  orders,  but  without  exercising  ecclesiastical  functions  ;  was  preceptor  of  the  child 
of  the  Duke  of  Parma  in  1757  ;  member  of  the  French  Academy  in  1768.  Condillac 
has  left  several  works,  which  have  made  him  the  head  of  the  sensualist  school.  He 
died  in  1780. 

VOL.  I.  F 


66  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

sopJiical  mind ;  this  is  a  truth  that  I  must  own."  If  he  had  opened 
his  hand  wider,  perhaps  he  would  have  let  fall  a  few  others  of 
the  same  kind,  which,  to-day,  contrary  to  his  opinion,  are  pro- 
fessed in  our  schools. 

All  that  I  have  just  said  leads  me  to  think  that  the  peculiar 
character  of  the  philosophy  of  the  eighteenth  century  lies  in  the 
use  of  analysis  ;  useful,  when  applied  to  physical  sciences  ;  incom- 
plete, when  applied  to  moral  sciences  ;  dangerous,  when  applied 
to  social  order. 

Thus  in  all  I  have  written  and  in  all  I  shall  write,  the  object 
to  which  the  method  of  analysis  shall  be  applied  will  point  out, 
without  my  being  obliged  to  remark  it,  whether  the  name  of 
philosopher  is  to  be  taken  in  good  or  in  bad  part. 

The  importance  which  economic  philosophers  have  enjoyed 
for  nearly  thirty  years,  demands  that  I  should  speak  of  them  in 
a  special  manner. 

The  economists  were  a  section  of  philosophers  solely  occu- 
pied in  drawing  from  the  administration  all  the  means  of 
amelioration  of  which  they  believed  the  social  order  was  suscep- 
tible. They  were  divided  into  two  classes  :  the  one  looked  upon 
agriculture  as  the  only  creator  of  riches,  and  treated  industrial 
labour  and  commerce  as  sterile,  under  the  plea  that  they  only 
created  new  forms  and  changes  in  the  materials  produced  and 
created  by  agriculture.  The  doctrine  of  this  first  class  of 
economists  is  called  the  doctrine  of  the  nett  result,  and  is  set 
forth  in  the  Tableau  Economique}  The  object  of  this  work  is  to 
show  the  distribution  of  the  riches  produced  by  agriculture,  and 
spreading  thence  into  all  the  arteries  of  the  social  body.  The 
consequences  of  these  doctrines  following  the  circulation  of 
wealth,  end  in  the  theory  of  taxation,  which  eventually  saddles 
agriculture  exclusively. 

The  liberty  of  commerce  is  almost  the  only  point  upon  which 
this  first  class  of  economists  is  in  harmony  with  the  economists 
about  whom  I  am  going  to  speak.  The  latter  did  not  adopt  the 
division  of  sterile  classes ;  they  did  not  look  upon  the  Tableau 
Economique  as  a  strict  or  even  sufficient  demonstration  of  the 

1  The  Tableau  Economique,  in  which  is  set  forth  the  physiocratic  doctrine,  is  the 
work  of  the  physician  Quesnay,  1694-1774,  founder  and  head  of  that  school. 


THE  YEARS  PRECEDING  THE  REVOLUTION.  67 

phenomena  of  circulation.  They  restrict  themselves  in  this  re- 
spect to  some  truths  of  detail.  Their  great  principle  is  the  general 
liberty  of  trade  in  the  most  extended  sense.  As  for  taxation, 
they  accept  modifications — they  are  not  absolute. 

The  government  rejected  the  ideas  of  the  economists  of 
any  school  whatever ;  they  preferred  known  and  established 
principles.  They  feared  changes  which  might  interfere  with  the 
existing  method  of  taxation,  and  with  the  regular  flow  of  the 
revenue  thus  obtained  into  the  royal  treasury.  Their  fear  of 
some  diminution  in  the  revenues  of  the  State  was  such  as  to 
prevent  their  risking  any  means  of  increasing  them.  Such  short- 
sighted and  narrow  views  were  necessarily  prohibitive. 

It  was  not  yet  known  that  a  few  incontestable  principles 
of  political  economy,  besides  a  reasonable  use  of  public 
credit,  constitute  the  whole  science  of  financial  administration. 
Public  credit  would  have  diminished  the  inconvenience  which 
might  have  resulted  from  too  strict  an  application  of  the  principles 
of  political  economy  ;  the  principles  of  political  economy  would 
have  enlightened  and  moderated  the  enterprises  of  public  credit. 
M.  Turgot,  in  establishing  the  Discount  Bank,  appears  to  have 
foreseen  the  advantages  of  this  beneficial  alliance.  He  grasped 
the  method  which  carries  the  greatest  aid  to  all  industries,  by 
maintaining  the  price  of  money  at  a  moderate  rate  ;  but  he  went 
no  farther.  The  modern  art  of  procuring  for  the  State,  without 
raising  taxes,  extraordinary  levies  of  money  at  a  low  rate, 
and  of  distributing  the  burden  over  a  succession  of  years,  was 
unknown  to  him,  or,  if  he  knew  it,  perhaps  he  perceived,  in  its 
application,  future  difficulties  which  the  French  administration, 
always  too  lax  and  inclined  to  abuse,  might  some  day  render 
dangerous.  Besides,  to  borrow  continually  while  paying  debts 
as  constantly,  belonged  to  an  order  of  ideas  totally  opposed 
to  the  pure  doctrine  of  the  economists.  For,  to  issue  and  repay 
loans,  requires  the  temporary  use  of  moneys  for  that  special  object 
taken  from  a  class  of  State  revenues  distinct  from  the  land- 
taxes  which  are  intended  to  meet  a  permanent  and  special 
expenditure.  But,  to  attain  that  end,  various  articles  of  con- 
sumption should  be  taxed,  chiefly  those  which,  belonging  to 
the  comforts  of  life,  are   only  in   use  among?[men   who  are    in 

F   2 


68  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

luxurious,  or  at  least,  well-to-do  circumstances.  In  this  class,  the 
articles  I  speak  of  are  measured  by  the  resources  of  each  con- 
sumer, and  if  the  requirements  of  the  latter  become  too  great,  too 
imperative,  there  is  reason  to  believe  that  comfort  would  become 
more  exacting  and  find  compensation  in  the  perfection  of 
industrial  production,  the  limits  of  which  are  unknown  ;  it  is  true 
that  if  it  were  limited,  those  financial  administrations  which  had 
not  foreseen  it,  would  be  in  danger  of  finding  themselves  in 
trouble. 

This  prolific  subject  might  lead  me  a  long  way,  for  it  is  full 
of  charm  for  me.  It  recalls  to  me  all  that  I  learned  in  the  con- 
versation and  in  the  memoirs  of  a  man  whose  true  value  the 
English  have  acquainted  us  with.  M.  Panchaud  has  said  a 
thousand  times  to  M.  de  Calonne,  M.  de  Meilhan,  M.  Foulon, 
M.Louis,1  and  myself:  "In  the  present  state  of  Europe,  out  of 
the  two  countries,  France  and  England,  that  which  follows  exactly 
the  sinking  scheme  which  I  propose  will  see  the  end  of  the  other? 
These  were  his  own  words.  England  adopted  his  doctrine,  and 
so  for  thirty  years  has  directed  all  the  movements  of  Europe. 
M.  Panchaud  was  an  extraordinary  man  ;  he  had  at  once  the 
most  ardent,  broad,  and  vigorous  mind,  and  a  perfect  judgment. 
He  had  every  kind  of  eloquence.  If  an  equal  and  abundant 
proportion  of  perceptive  and  reasoning  powers  constitute  genius, 
Panchaud  was  a  man  of  genius.  Of  his  generosity,  candour,  and 
gaiety,  thousands  of  instances  occur  to  me  which  it  were  pleasant 
to  give  here. 

But,  I  must  refrain,  in  order  not  to  interrupt  too  long  the  order 
of  ideas  which  I  had  prescribed  to  myself,  and  I  fear  I  have 
already  some  cause  for  reproach  for  having  spoken  of  the 
influence  of  the  philosophers  and  the  economists  on  the  brilliant 
and  ambitious  portion  of  the  clergy,  long  before  I  had  explained 

1  Louis  Dominique,  called  the  Baron  Louis,  was  born  at  Paris,  November  13, 
1757.  He  was  destined  for  the  church,  and  was  counsellor-clerk  in parlement.  He 
was  intimately  associated  with  Talleyrand,  whom  he  assisted  as  under-deacon  at  the 
Mass  of  the  Federation.  He  was  appointed  minister  to  Denmark  (1792) ;  emigrated 
in  1793.  Returned  to  France  after  the  Consulate,  he  was  mait7-e  des  reqtitles  to  the 
Council  of  State  (1806),  Councillor  of  State  (1811),  Minister  of  Finances  in  1814, 
1815,  and,  in  1818,  Minister  of  State,  member  of  the  Privy  Council.  In  1822,  he  was 
deprived  of  all  his  posts.  As  a  deputy,  he  look  his  seat  in  the  Liberal  party.  In  1831, 
he  was  again  Minister  of  Finances,  was  created  a  peer  of  France  in  1832,  and  died  in 
1837- 


THE   YEARS  PRECEDING  THE  REVOLUTION.  69 

what  I  meant  by  philosophers  and  economists  ;  so  I  am 
obliged  now  to  ask  my  readers  to  recollect  what  I  have  said  of  the 
clergy,  that  it  may  well  be  understood  what  was  the  kind  of  spirit 
with  which  all  orders  of  the  State,  all  classes  of  society,  were 
more  or  less,  imbued.  My  remarks  on  the  clergy  apply  equally 
to  the  magistracy,  which,  by  its  great  civil  prerogatives,  has  a 
direct  influence  upon  all  minds.  It  is  constantly  in  operation  ;  it 
watches  every  act  of  life ;  it  gives  security  of  property  andof  person; 
its  power  is  immense;  consequently,  those  institutions  which  are 
assailed  by  the  magistracy  are  as  good  as  destroyed  in  the  minds 
of  the  people.  The  new  ideas  took  possession  of  all  the  youth 
in  the  parlement.  To  defend  the  royal  authority  was  denounced 
as  servile  obedience.  The  majority  which  President  d'Aligre  x 
preserved  for  the  court  was  every  day  diminishing,  and  was  lost 
on  the  occasion  of  the  quarrel  between  M.  de  Calonne  and 
M.  de  Breteuil.  Although  M.  d'Aligre  could  promise  to  the 
members  of  parlement  who  voted  with  him,  the  favour  of  M.  de 
Miromesnil,2  Keeper  of  the  Seals  ;  of  M,  de  Breteuil,  Minister  of 
Paris ;  of  the  queen  through  M.  de  Mercy,3  with  whom  he  was 
intimately  acquainted,  he  saw  his  majority  melt  away  at  the 
moment  that  he  was  at  open  war  with  the  comptroller-general. 
The  first  time  it  failed  him  was  on  a  question  which 
concerned  the  queen  personally.  The  counsellors  of  this 
unhappy  princess,  blinded  by  their  own  passion,  and  wish- 
ing to  serve  hers,  had  carried  before  the  tribunal,  and 
given  the  greatest  publicity  to  an  affair  known  as  that  of 
the  necklace,  which  ought  to  have  been  hushed  up  from  the 
very  beginning.4     The  decree  passed  by  the  parlement  of  Paris 

1  Etienne  Francois  d'Aligre  belonged  to  an  old  family  of  magistrates  originally 
from  Chartres.  President  a  mortier,  then  first  president  of  the  parlement  of  Paris 
(1768).  He  gave  in  his  resignation  in  1780,  went  to  England,  then  to  Brunswick, 
where  he  died  in  1798. 

2  Armand  Hue  de  Miromesnil  was  born  in  1723.  First-President  of  the  parle- 
ment of  Rouen  (1755).  Keeper  of  the  Seals  under  Louis  XVI.,  (1774-87).  He  died 
in  1766,  on  his  estate  of  Miromesnil  in  Normandy. 

3  Francois,  Comte  de  Mercy-Argenteau,  belonged  to  an  old  family  of  Lorraine. 
He  was  ambassador  of  the  German  empire  in  France,  during  the  whole  of  the  reign 
of  Louis  XVI.  From  1789,  Mercy  took  an  active  part  in  bringing  about  foreign 
intervention  in  favour  of  the  king.  He  died  in  1794.  His  correspondence  with 
Marie- Antoinette  and  Marie  Therese  has  been  published. 

4  It  is  well  known  what  this  sad  affair  was,  which  did  irreparable  injury  to  the 
queen,  although  she  was  entirely  innocent.  The  jeweller  Boehmer  had  offered  to  the 
queen  a  magnificent  necklace,  worth  1,600,000  francs.     She  refused  to  accept  it.     A 


jo  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

ought  to  have  made  a  profound  impression  on  the  queen, 
and  to  have  enlightened  her  as  to  the  character  of  the 
person  upon  whom  she  had  bestowed  her  confidence.  But 
fatality  prevented  this  hard  lesson  from  having  the  effect  one 
might  have  expected  ;  she  did  not  change  her  counsellors  ; 
the  Baron  de  Breteuil  and  the  Archbishop  of  Toulouse 
only  gained  in  power  ;  and  the  queen,  again  allowing 
herself  to  be  carried  away  by  the  frivolous  excitement  which 
surrounded  her,  satisfied  herself  with  speaking  with  scorn  of 
Abbe  Georgel,1  with  sharpness  of  MM.  Freteau,2  Louis,  Le 
Coigneux,3  de  Cabre,4  and  with  showing  displeasure  towards 
those  who  were  associated  with  Madame  de  Brionne  and  her 
daughters.  This  petty  revenge  was  extended  even  to  me,  and  I 
experienced  some  difficulty  in  obtaining  the  places  to  which  I 
was  naturally  called.  The  affection  of  Madame  de  Brionne  and  her 

lady  of  high  birth,  but  of  doubtful  morality,  Madame  de  la  Motte-Valois  wished  to 
appropriate  it.  She  succeeded  in  persuading  Cardinal  de  Rohan,  who  had  recently 
incurred  the  displeasure  of  Marie- Antoinette,  that  the  queen  had  only  refused  the 
necklace  in  appearance,  and  in  order  to  avoid  the  scandal  of  the  excessive  expense, 
but  that  she  would  be  very  grateful  if  he  would  secretly  facilitate  the  purchase.  The 
cardinal,  convinced,  bought  the  necklace  on  credit,  and  gave  it  to  Madame  delaMotte 
to  give  to  the  queen.  Madame  de  la  Motte  hastened  to  sell  it  in  England.  The  affair 
soon  got  abroad  through  the  complaints  of  Boehmer  who  had  not  been  paid.  The 
cardinal  and  Madame  de  la  Motte  were  arrested,  and  denounced  to parlement,  which 
acquitted  the  former  and  convicted  the  latter.  They  worded  their  veidict  in  such  a 
manner  as  to  throw  a  doubt  on  the  innocence  of  the  queen. 

1  Abbe  Jean  Francois  Georgel,  born  at  Bruyeres  (Lorraine)  in  1731,  was  at 
first  Professor  of  Mathematics  at  Strasbourg.  Cardinal  de  Rohan  took  him  to  Vienna 
as'  secretary  of  the  embassy.  On  his  return,  he  was  appointed  vicar-general  at 
Strasbourg.  In  the  affair  of  the  necklace,  he  rendered  the  greatest  service  to  the 
cardinal  by  burning  his  papers  and  writing  his  defence.  He  was  himself  exiled  to 
Mortagne  ;  he  emigrated  in  1793,  returned  to  France  in  1799,  refused  a  bishopric,  was 
named  vicar-general  of  the  Vosges.  He  died  in  1813.  Abbe  Georgel  left  some 
memoirs  extending  from  1760  to  1810  (Paris  1817,  6  vols.,  in  8vo.). 

2  Emmanuel  Freteau  de  Saint  Just,  was  born  in  1745.  Counsellor  of  parlement  in 
1765.  In  the  affair  of  the  necklace  he  took  the  part  of  the  cardinal.  He  was  im- 
prisoned after  the  session  of  November  17,  1787.  Deputy  of  the  nobility  to  the  States- 
General,  he  embraced  the  cause  of  the  Third  Estate ;  he  was  twice  President  of  the 
Assembly.  He  retired  to  the  country  after  August  10.  Arrested  in  1794,  he  was 
guillotined  on  June  14th. 

3  Marquis  Lecoigneux  de  Belabre  was  received  as  Counsellor  to  parlement  in 
1777.  He  was  a  descendant  of  the  first  president  Lecoigneux,  who  lived  at  the 
commencement  of  the  seventeenth  century,  and  whose  son  was  the  celebrated 
Bachaumont. 

4  AbW  Sabatier  de  Cabre  was  Secretary  of  the  Embassy  at  Turin.  Minister  at 
Liege  (1769).  Charge  d'affaires  at  St.  Petersburg.  Director  of  the  consulates  at  the 
Ministry  of  Marine  (1782).  He  was  advisory  clerk  to  the  parlement.  He  embraced 
with  ardour  the  cause  of  the  Revolution.  Arrested  under  the  Reign  of  Terror,  he 
escaped  the  scaffold  and  died  in  1816.  He  must  not  be  confounded  with  Abbe 
Sabaiier  de  Castre,  a  journalist  protected  by  Vergennes,  who  also  played  a  certain 
part  in  parliamentary  affairs  (1742- 181 7). 


THE   YEARS  PRECEDING  THE  REVOLUTION.  71 

daughters,  the  Princesse  de  Carignan  and  the  Princesse  Charlotte 
of  Lorraine,  indemnified  me  largely  for  all  the  opposition  I 
experienced  in  my  career.  The  beauty  of  a  woman,  her  noble 
pride  mingled  with  the  prestige  of  an  illustrious  and  famous  race, 
so  often  near  the  throne  either  as  enemy  or  as  support,  adds  a 
special  charm  to  the  sentiments  which  she  inspires.  I  thus 
remember  the  time  of  my  disfavour  at  court  with  more  pleasure 
than  many  of  the  fortunate  circumstances  in  which  I  have  been 
placed  in  life,  and  which  have  left  no  traces  either  in  my  mind 
or  on  my  heart.  I  scarcely  recollect  that  the  queen  prevented 
my  profiting  by  a  great  act  of  kindness  of  Gustavus  III.,1  who 
had  obtained  for  me  a  cardinal's  hat  from  Pope  Pius  VI.2  She 
told  M.  de  Mercy  to  advise  the  court  of  Vienna  to  oppose  the 
nomination  of  a  French  cardinal  before  the  promotion  of  the 
crown  cardinals?  Her  wishes  were  fulfilled,  the  nomination  of 
the  Pope  suspended,  and,  it  is  probable  that  since  that  time, 
my  cardinal's  hat  has  passed  some  years  in  French  fortresses. 

The  new  spirit  introduced  into  the  parlement  having  sown  the 
seeds  of  discontent  and  ambition  amongst  the  members  com- 
posing this  ancient  body,  intrigue  penetrated  everywhere.  M. 
Necker,  M.  de  Calonne,  M.  de  Breteuil,  each  had  their  creatures 
who  defended  or  attacked  the  measures  of  the  minister  whom 
they  wished  to  sustain  or  overthrow.  Each  day  saw  the  great 
magistracy  farther  estranged  from  the  royal  authority,  to 
which  in  the  best  times  of  the  monarchy,  it  had  been  constantly 
attached.  Even  esprit  de  corps  no  longer  existed  ;  the  demand  of 
the  States-General,  made  a  little  more  than  a  month  afterwards,  is 
a  proof  of  this.    An  alarming  number  of  scattered  opinions  which 

1  Gustavus  III.,  King  of  Sweden,  son  and  successor  of  Adolphus  Frederick.  Born 
in  1746,  he  mounted  the  throne  in  1771.  He  was  assassinated  in  a  conspiracy 
of  the  nobility,  March  16,  1792.     He  left  the  throne  to  his  son,  Gustavus  IV. 

2  Pope  Pius  VI.  gave  a  cordial  reception  to  the  King  of  Sweden,  Gustavus  III., 
during  a  visit  which  the  latter  paid  to  Italy.  He  sought  a  means  of  being  particularly 
agreeable  to  him,  and  accorded  him  the  promise  of  a  cardinal's  hat  for  the  Abbe  de 
Perigord,  for  whom  Gustavus  III.  had  solicited  it.  It  was  entirely  a  favour,  and  all 
the  more  remarkable  that  it  was  bestowed  upon  a  Protestant  prince. — (M.  de  Bacourt.) 

3  The  Pope  has  always  reserved  the  exclusive  right  of  naming  the  cardinals.  Some- 
times certain  Catholic  sovereigns,  the  King  of  France,  the  Emperor  of  Germany,  the 
King  of  Spain,  the  King  of  Poland,  the  Stuarts,  had  obtained  the  right  of  naming,  or 
rather  presenting  to  the  nomination  of  the  Pope,  who  always  sanctioned  their  choice, 
a  certain  number  of  cardinals,  who  were  named,  in  consequence,  the  cardinals  of  the 
crowns.  They  were  assimilated  with  the  other  cardinals,  and  represented  their 
sovereigns  at  the  papal  elections. 


72  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

did  not  always  take  their  stand  under  the  colour  of  any  party, 
caused  anxiety  to  the  ministry  on  the  registering  of  each  law 
that  the  needs  of  the  State  appeared  to  require. 

M.  de  Calonne  braved  this  state  of  affairs,  and  insisted  on 
bringing  before  the  parlement  a  law  on  a  very  delicate  matter 
which  required  a  mass  of  information  which  he  lacked. 

The  relative  value  adopted  in  gold  and  silver  money  in 
the  recoinage  of  1726,  was  no  longer  in  conformity  with  the 
marketable  value  of  gold  and  silver  metal.  A  mark  of  gold 
in  the  ingot,  of  the  same  standard  as  the  louis,  sold  for 
more  than  seven  hundred  and  twenty  livres,  yet  the  same 
mark  of  gold  made  into  louis  yielded  only  thirty  such  coins, 
equivalent  to  seven  hundred  and  twenty  livres.  It  was  neces- 
sary then  to  give  to  gold  coin,  in  its  relation  to  silver  coin, 
a  proportion  more  nearly  approaching  the  value  it  had  relatively 
to  silver  in  the  ingot.  By  the  law  of  1726,  the  proportion  of 
gold  to  silver  was  from  1  to  i4fVW  to  from  1  to  14$,  very 
nearly.  By  the  law  of  which  I  am  now  speaking,  the  propor- 
tion of  gold  to  silver  was  raised  to  from  1  to  1  5tVoV>  or  nearly 
from    1  to  15I. 

M.  de  Calonne  had  adopted  with  regard  to  this  the 
opinion  of  M.  de  Madinier,  a  broker,  who  was  better  versed  in 
commercial  transactions,  than  in  the  power  of  management, 
which  a  government  ought  always  to  possess  when  it 
deals  with  money.  It  must  be  shown  to  the  public,  by 
figures,  and  a  long  time  in  advance,  that  the  recoinage  is  done 
in  its  interests.  In  important  affairs,  the  reproach  of  being  slow 
contents  everybody  ;  it  gives  to  those  who  make  it  an  air  of 
superiority,  and  to  those  who  receive  it  an  air  of  prudence. 
M.  de  Calonne  was  right,  but  his  precipitation  gave  him  the 
appearance  of  being  wrong.  Baron  de  Breteuil,  Foulon,  little 
Fornier,  hawked  about  memoir  after  memoir  ;  Abbe  de  Vermond x 
gave  them  to  the  queen  who  sent  them  to  the  king.  The 
parlement,   having    become  an    instrument    of    intrigue,  made 

1  The  Abbe  Mathieu  de  Vermond  was  the  son  of  a  village  surgeon.  Born  in  1735, 
he  was  received  as  doctor  in  the  Sorbonne  in  1757.  He  attached  himself  to  the 
fortunes  of  the  Cardinal  de  Brienne,  was  in  1769,  sent  to  Vienna  by  Choiseul  as 
reader  to  the  future  dauphiness.  He  managed  to  obtain  the  confidence  of  the 
empress  and  of  the  archduchess,  and  gained  a  great  influence  over  them.  He 
emigrated  in  1790,  and  died  soon  after  at  Vienna. 


THE  YEARS  PRECEDING  THE  REVOLUTION.  73 

remonstrances,  which  showed  that  there  was  in  this  body 
not  so  much  light  on  these  matters,  as  a  disposition  to  put 
obstacles  in  the  way  of  the  comptroller-general.  The  legal 
motive  for  the  recoinage  was  to  reduce  the  quantity  of  fine 
gold  which  entered  into  the  composition  of  pieces  of  twenty-four 
livres  Tournois,  to  a  value  corresponding  to  that  of  a  silver 
ingot,  equivalent  to  four  six-livre  pieces. 

In  the  recoinage  of  1726,  grave  faults  were  committed. 
They  had  badly  solved  the  problem  of  an  exact  proportion 
between  the  value  of  the  two  metals  of  which  our  money  is 
made  (a  proportion  easy  to  establish,  but  difficult  to  maintain). 
The  valuation  had  been  fixed  at  about  one-sixth  above  the 
value  of  the  metal.  It  is  true  that  the  greater  number  of  the 
Mint  directors  had  lessened  this  inconvenience,  but  by  means 
of  a  grave  fraud,  by  reducing  the  standard  or  the  weight  to 
such  a  degree  that  the  remedy  had  become  worse  than 
the  evil.  Thus,  besides  the  defect  of  proportion  between  the 
two  metals,  there  was  a  defect  of  legal  identity  between  louis 
of  the  same  coinage.  A  new  coinage  was  thus  necessary  ;  but 
people  did  not  do  M.  de  Calonne  the  honour  to  believe  that  he 
meant  to  be  just.  They  did  not  understand  the  diminution 
of  weight  which  the  new  gold  pieces  were  to  undergo,  al- 
though this  was  an  indispensable  condition  for  the  re-estab- 
lishment of  the  proportion  between  gold  and  silver,  and 
although  in  the  change  of  coins,  compensation  was  allowed 
to  the  owners  of  the  old  money.  The  delivery  of  the  new 
louis  was  to  be  preceded  by  the  deposit  of  the  louis  of  the 
previous  coinage  ;  the  delays  for  changing  were  prolonged  far 
beyond  the  time  necessary  for  the  coinage,  and,  as  a  sequel 
to  so  many  other  financial  expedients  which  were  no  better,  it 
was  supposed  that  the  real  object  of  the  minister  was  to  obtain 
the  use  of  funds  by  a  sort  of  loan  from  the  owners  of  the  old 
pieces  of  gold.  Thus,  although  the  proportion  adopted  by 
M.  de  Calonne  was  good,  it  furnished  a  pretext  for  censure 
which  was  made  use  of  unscrupulously.  He  was  able  to 
establish  the  equilibrium  (at  least  for  a  time)  between  two  metals 
each  intended  to  be  recognized  as  a  standard,  but  without  having 
acquainted  himself  with  the  very  intricate  calculations  which 


74  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

justified  the  reform  of  the  law  of  1726,  and  consequently  without 
having  put  himself  in  a  position  to  reply  to  all  the  objections 
raised  by  sceptical  or  ignorant  persons.  He  achieved  his  aim, 
although  he  did  not  deserve  all  the  credit  of  it. 

Louis  XVI.,  encouraged  by  the  opinion  of  M.  de  Vergennes, 
displayed  a  very  strong  will  on  this  occasion.  The  remonstrances 
of  the  parlement  were  without  effect.  Madame  Adelaide,  aunt  of 
the  king,  to  whom  Madame  de  Narbonne  1  had  handed  a  very 
learned  memoir  on  this  subject,  was  not  even  able  to  prevent 
the  exile  of  Foulon.  This  unfortunate  man  was  banished  to  one 
of  his  estates  in  Anjou,  and  returned  a  few  years  afterwards 
only  to  be  one  of  the  first  victims  of  the  Revolution. 

Unremitting  firmness  was  not  in  the  nature  of  the  king, 
and  besides  he  was  necessarily  discouraged  by  the  want  of 
harmony  existing  in  his  council.  Matters  became  involved  ; 
public  opinion  gained  strength  ;  it  openly  censured  and  pro- 
tested. Its  action  was  too  powerful  to  be  arrested  or  even 
directed  ;  it  was  nearing  the  steps  of  the  throne  ;  people 
already  spoke  of  the  ministers  as  being  popular  or  unpopular,  a 
new  expression  which,  taken  in  the  revolutionary  acceptation, 
would  have  degraded  in  their  own  eyes  the  counsellors  of  Louis 
XIV.,  who  only  desired  the  esteem  and  consideration  of  the 
king,  but  which  flattered  the  republican  vanity  of  M.  Necker 
because  it  gave  him  an  influence  of  his  own. 

Ordinary  expedients  were  exhausted  :  it  was  thought  that  no 
more  reforms  could  possibly  be  made,  and  yet  the  expenditure 
exceeded  the  revenue  by  an  enormous  sum.  The  deficit  of  1783 
was  more  than  eighty  millions.  M.  Necker,  whatever  he  may 
have  said  in  his  official  report,  left  it  on  retiring  at  nearly 
seventy  millions.  Now  that  the  infatuation  he  had  aroused 
has  subsided,  everybody  acknowledges  this  as  a  fact.    The  bonds 

1  Mademoiselle  de  Chalus,  married  to  the  Comte  de  Narbonne- Lara,  brigadier- 
general.  She  was  maid-of-honour  to  Queen  Marie  Leczinska,  and  subsequently  to 
the  dauphiness.  She  was  the  mother  of  the  Comte  de  Narbonne,  Minister  of  War  in 
1 79 1,  spoken  of  above. 

2  The  financial  account  handed  in  by  Necker  was  published  in  January  1781.  It 
was  the  first  time  that  "the  secret  of  the  finances  was  placed  before  the  public,"  which 
until  then,  was  ignorant  as  to  its  payments  to  the  State,  and  as  to  that  which  the 
State  expended.  Thus  the  effect  was  prodigious.  Necker,  by  this  stroke  of  policy, 
reconquered  public  opinion,  and  regained  credit. 


THE  YEARS  PRECEDING  THE  REVOLUTION.  75 

of  the  Receivers-General,  that  of  the  treasurers,  of  the  registrars, 
which  are  made  use  of  to  make  anticipated  payments,  were 
only  negotiated  at  a  fearful  loss.  The  portions  of  the  loans 
of  M.  Necker,  which  did  not  bear  life-annuities,  bore  promise 
of  such  speedy  repayment  as  to  empty  the  royal  treasury. 
For,  in  the  year  1786,  those  repayments  amounted  to  nearly 
fifty-three  millions,  and  they  were  to  increase  from  year  to 
year  until   1790. 

This  was  no  longer  a  time  when  the  revenues  of  the  State 
could  be  increased  by  abandoning  the  fiscal  laws  to  the  interpre- 
tation of  companies,  who  knew  how  to  extend  their  application 
even  to  its  utmost  consequences  over  property  and  industry. 
The  four  sous  per  livre  levied  by  M.  de  Fleury  was  too  great  a 
burden  for  several  provinces  and  was  levied  with  difficulty. 
Offices  only  to  be  obtained  by  purchase  were  declined.  The 
parlement  was  unwilling  to  register  any  more  loans.  The 
public  funds  were  falling  day  by  day.  The  Bourse  of  Paris 
received  its  impetus  from  speculations  made  on  behalf  of  private 
establishments.  They  bought  or  sold  shares  of  the  Bank  of 
Discount,  of  the  India  Company,  of  the  water  companies 
of  Paris,  of  insurance  companies,  &c.  As  usual  in  times  of 
calamity,  gambling  occupied  the  attention  of  all.  The  govern- 
ment tried  to  raise  some  money  by  obtaining  an  Order  in 
Council  authorising  the  creation  of  lotteries  amounting  to 
several  millions  ;  but  these  weak  means  had  limits,  and  now 
they  were   reached. 

M.  de  Calonne,  thwarted  in  all  his  operations,  attacked  on 
all  sides,  sapped  by  the  intrigues  of  the  Archbishop  of  Tou- 
louse, but  having  still  M.  de  Vergennes  and  the  king  on  his  side, 
believed  he  would  be  able  to  overcome  all  the  difficulties  which 
assailed  him  by  resorting  to  a  new  method,  the  result  of  which 
was  not  to  be  devoid  of  success.  He  formed  the  project  of 
summoning  an  Assembly  of  Notables  ; 1  he  hoped,  by  this  un- 
expected appeal,  to  replace  the  national  sanction,  the  registra- 

1  The  Assembly  of  the  Notables  was  a  compromise  imagined  by  the  minister  to 
obviate  the  necessity  of  convening  the  States-General.  Calonne  wished  to  impose 
a  land-tax,  but,  foreseeing  the  resistance  of  the  parlement  and  of  the  clergy,  he 
was  anxious  to  find  support  in  the  nation.  The  Assembly  met  on  February  22,  at 
Versailles,  and  broke  up  on  the  25th  of  May. 


76  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

tion  of  the  parlement,  which  had  been  refused  him,  and  to  regain 
the  opinion  of  the  public,  before  which  he  was  confident  he  could 
appear  with  advantage. 

At  the  very  first  sitting  of  the  assembly,  he  proposed  the 
formation  of  provincial  assemblies  throughout  the  kingdom,  the 
suppression  of  statute-labour,  of  provincial  customs  and  of  several 
duties  connected  with  the  collection  of  taxes  and  disapproved  by 
public  opinion,  the  reduction  of  the  excise  duties  on  salt,  and  the 
freedom  of  the  corn  trade. 

He  boldly  resolved  to  increase  the  deficit  by  the  sacrifice  of 
ten  millions  on  the  product  of  the  salt-duties,  of  twelve  millions 
on  the  customs  and  the  duties  connected  with  the  collection  of 
taxes,  of  ten  millions  on  the  villein-tax,  of  seven  millions  to  help 
the  clergy  to  pay  their  debts,  the  principal  part  of  which  would  be 
cancelled  by  the  alienation  of  the  sporting  rights,  and  of  the 
honorary  rights  attached  to  its  possession  ;  and,  in  addition,  by 
an  expenditure  of  ten  millions  to  replace  the  statute-labour,  and 
of  six  millions  for  the  encouragement  of  agriculture,  the  arts  and 
commerce.  He  flattered  himself  that,  as  a  compensation  for  so 
many  advantages,  he  would  easily  be  allowed  to  raise  or  replace 
a  revenue  amounting  to  from  one  hundred  and  ten  to  one 
hundred  and  twelve  millions. 

He  could  already  reckon  on  fifty  of  them  in  the  regular  receipt 
of  the  two-twentieths  of  the  net  revenue  of  all  the  landed 
property  in  France.  The  increase  of  this  tax  proceeded  from 
the  proposal  of  M.  de  Calonne  to  destroy  all  the  privileges  of 
corporations  or  of  orders,  all  exemptions,  all  personal  favours. 
He  gave  to  this  new  tax  the  name  of  subvention  territoriale ; 
and  said  that  this  would  not  be  a  new  tax,  since  the  charge  for 
those  who  were  paying  exactly  the  two-twentieths  would  not  be 
increased,  and  that  it  was  only  a  matter  of  suppression  of  the 
abuse  of  an  unjust  apportioning  and  of  exemptions  which  those 
who  enjoyed  them  were  ready  to  forego. 

He  estimated  at  twenty  millions  the  revenue  from  the 
establishment  of  the  stamp  duty. 

The  infeofTment  of  domains,  and  a  better  administration  of 
the  forests  was  to  yield  ten  millions. 

In  order  to  reimburse  these  sums  at  fixed  periods,  he  issued 


THE   YEARS  PRECEDING  THE  REVOLUTION.  77 

an  annual   loan  of  twenty-five  millions,  which  was  only  to  be 
repaid  after  fifteen  years. 

He  also  submitted  retrenchments  amounting  to  fifteen 
millions. 

This  was  indeed  a  vast  plan,  but  it  could  not  be  carried  out 
seeing  that  the  Notables  had  no  power  to  vote  it ;  it  was  im- 
posing as  a  whole ;  it  presented  the  advantage  of  soothing 
the  apprehensions  of  all  those  who  had  money  invested  in 
the  funds,  and  of  adopting  by  legal  means  ideas,  which,  for  some 
time,  had  been  circulating  among  the  educated  classes  of 
society,  and  were  beginning  to  penetrate  the  mass  of  the 
nation. 

But  M.  de  Vergennes  was  dead,1  and  the  king  was  the  only 
and  feeble  support  for  a  minister  who  was  openly  attacking  so 
many  interests. 

The  clergy  were  subjected  to  a  tax  from  which  they  had  hoped 
their  gratuitous  donations  had  relieved  them  for  ever.  They 
maintained  that,  if  they  did  not  pay  the  twentieth  under  the 
name  of  twentieth,  they  paid  its  equivalent  under  the  name  of 
tenth  ;  then  leaving  the  question  which  concerned  them,  they 
attacked  the  subvention  from  a  general  point  of  view.  M.  de 
Calonne  was  unfortunately  persuaded  that  the  payment  of  taxes 
in  kind  would  prove  less  difficult  than  a  tax  of  fifty  millions  of 
money.  .  He  has  set  forth  in  one  of  his  memoirs  that  the  raising 
of  taxes  in  kind  is  the  easiest  way  to  make  the  division  propor- 
tional, to  abolish  arbitration,  and  to  spare  the  tax-payers  the  cruel 
necessity  of  paying  when  there  is  no  harvest.  The  Archbishop 
of  Narbonne,  the  Archbishop  of  Toulouse,  the  Archbishop  of 
Aix,  the  Archbishop  of  Bordeaux,  all  well-versed  in  this  question, 
of  which  their  tithes  had  taught  them  the  weak  side,  showed 
that  the  expenses  of  this  mode  of  taxation  would  be  very  great, 
that  the  difficulties  to  which  it  led  were  enormous,  and  that  the 
time  required  to  make  a  correct  classification  of  lands  would 
be  a  loss  for  the  royal  treasury. 

The  opinion  of  the  higher  clergy  became  that  of  the  Notables 
and  M.  de  Calonne  was  beaten  upon  that  point. 

One  check  leads  to  another,  often  indeed,  to  many. 

1  February  13,  1787. 


78  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

M.  de  Montmorin,1  the  successor  of  M.  de  Vergennes,  had  as 
yet  but  little  credit  ;  he  had  no  opinion  and  was  afraid  even 
of  being  thought  to  have  one.  M.  de  Miromesnil,  the  Keeper  of 
the  Seals,  found  that  the  new  enterprise  was  imprudent,  and  had 
compromised  the  royal  authority  ; — the  Baron  de  Breteuil  was  be- 
stirring himself — the  Archbishop  of  Toulouse  was  still  intriguing, 
and  M.  de  Calonne,  whose  position  the  importance  of  affairs 
still  made  tenable,  and  who,  at  the  conference  held  at  the  house  of 
Monsieur?  had  shown  a  prodigious  talent,  left  the  solid  ground 
on  which  he  had  been  standing,  and  no  longer  sought  for  means 
of  defence,  except  in  the  intrigues  of  the  court.  The  Comte 
d'Artois  sustained  his  credit  with  the  king  ;  Madame  de  Polignac 
placed  at  his  disposal  all  the  influence  she  still  enjoyed  over 
the  queen.  The  poet  Lebrun,3  at  M.  de  Vaudreuil's  request, 
addressed  him  in  beautiful  verse. 

All  this  might  have  had  some  influence  in  ordinary  times, 
but  it  was  of  very  little  account  in  such  ominous  circum- 
stances. M.  de  Calonne  no  longer  spoke  to  the  king  with  the 
same  assurance.  The  Assembly  of  the  Notables  had  been  an 
expedient,  and  he  needed  an  expedient  for  the  Assembly  of  the 
Notables.  He  had  none.  When  one  fears  others,  and  has  no 
longer  complete  confidence  in  one's  self,  one  only  makes  mistakes. 
What  ruined  him  was  the  interruption  of  the  session  during 
the  Easter  vacation.  The  Notables  left  Versailles  and  came 
to  Paris,  where  they  were  received  by  all  circles  of  society  ;  the 
spirit  of  opposition  they  brought  with  them,  strengthened  by  that 
which  they  found  there,  seemed  to  the  king  to  represent  the 
opinion  of  imposing  numbers  ;  he  was  frightened  at  it.     Since 

1  The  Comte  Armand  de  Montmorin  Saint-Herem,  issue  of  a  very  old  family  of 
Auvergne,  was  born  in  1745.  He  was  ambassador  at  Madrid.  Member  of  the 
Assembly  of  Notables,  1787.  Secretary  of  State  for  Foreign  Affairs,  1787.  He  was 
a  partisan  of  the  constitutional  monarchy.  Minister  of  the  Interior  adinteritn,  1791, 
he  resigned  all  his  functions  in  November  of  the  same  year.  Arrested  on  August  20, 
1792,  he  was  summoned  before  the  Assembly,  which  issued  against  him  a  writ  of 
accusation.     He  perished  in  the  massacres  of  September. 

2  The  title  given  in  France  to  the  king's  eldest  brother. 

3  Denis  Ecouchard-Lebrun,  lyric  poet,  was  born  in  1729.  He  has  written 
odes,  epigrams  and  elegies,  and  made  himself  such  a  reputation  that  he  was  known 
under  the  name  of  Lebrun  Pindar.  But  his  character  was  not  as  high  as  his  talent. 
After  having  lived  for  a  long  time  on  a  pension  from  the  queen,  he  joined  the 
revolutionary  party,  incited  the  violation  of  the  tombs  of  Saint-Denis,  demanded, 
in  another  ode,  the  death  of  Marie-Antoinette,  and  ended  by  being  the  poet-laureate 
of  the  empire.     He  died  in  1807. 


THE  YEARS  PRECEDING  THE  REVOLUTION.  79 

the  death  of  M.  de  Vergennes  no  one  possessed  enough 
influence  over  his  mind  to  reassure  him.  M.  de  Calonne  was 
dismissed. 

In  the  long  list  of  the  ministers  of  the  eighteenth  century,  I  do 
not  know  in  what  rank,  nor  by  the  side  of  whom,  history  will 
place  him  ;  but  this  is  what  I  saw  of  him. 

M.  de  Calonne  had  a  free  and  brilliant  mind,  a  shrewd  and 
quick  intellect.  He  spoke  and  wrote  well ;  his  diction  was  always 
clear  and  elegant,  he  had  the  talent  of  embellishing  what  he  knew, 
and  of  avoiding  the  discussion  of  that  which  he  did  not  know.  The 
Comte  d'Artois,  M.  de  Vaudreuil,  Baron  de  Talleyrand,1  the  Due 
de  Coigny,2  liked  in  Calonne  the  forms  he  had  borrowed  from  them, 
and  the  intellect  he  made  them  believe  they  possessed.  M.  de 
Calonne  was  susceptible  of  attachment  and  fidelity  to  his  friends  ; 
but,  in  selecting  these,  he  followed  more  the  dictates  of  his  mind 
than  of  his  heart.  Dupe  of  his  vanity,  he  believed  in  good 
faith  that  he  loved  the  men  his  vanity  had  sought.  He  was  ugly, 
tall,  nimble  and  well-shaped  ;  he  had  an  intellectual  counte- 
nance and  a  pleasant  voice.  In  order  to  enter  office,  he  had 
compromised  or,  at  least,  neglected  his  reputation.  He  was 
surrounded  by  worthless  people.  The  public  credited  him  with 
sense,  but  not  with  morality.  When  he  obtained  the  post 
of  comptroller-general,  he  seemed,  in  most  people's  eyes,  but  the 
clever  steward  of  some  ruined  spendthrift.  Great  quickness  of 
mind  pleases,  but  does  not  inspire  confidence  ;  it  is  generally 
thought  that  people  so  gifted  display  little  attention  and  scorn 
advice.  Most  men  like  industry  and  prudence  in  their  ministers. 
M.  de  Calonne  was  not  encouraging  in  this  respect ;  in  common 
with  all  brilliant  minds,  he  displayed  thoughtlessness  and  pre- 
sumption in  all  he  did.  This  was  the  salient  characteristic  of  his 
nature,  or  rather  of  his  way  of  proceeding.  I  will  quote  a  re- 
markable instance  of  this.    M.  de  Calonne  had  come  to  Dam- 

1  The  Baron  Louis  de  Talleyrand,  uncle  of  the  author,  born  in  1739,  was 
ambassador  to  the  King  of  the  Two  Sicilies  in  1785,  and  died  in  1799.  He  had 
married  Mademoiselle  Marie-Louise  de  Saint-Eugene  Montigny,  niece  of  de 
Calonne. 

2  Henri  De  Franquetot,  Due  de  Coigny,  born  in  1737.  Governor  of  Choisy  (1748), 
lieutenant-general  (1780),  first  equerry  to  the  king  since  177 1.  He  emigrated  in  1791  ; 
became  captain-general  in  Portugal.  Returned  to  France  in  1814,  and  was  appointed 
Marshal  of  France  and  Governor  of  the  Invalides.     He  died  in  1821. 


*y 


80  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLE  YRAND. 

pierre,1  to  visit  Madame  de  Luynes,  on  the  day  following  that 
on  which  the  king  had  decided  to  summon  an  Assembly  of  the 
Notables.  He  was  intoxicated  with  the  success  of  his  report 
to  the  council  of  ministers.  He  read  it  to  us,  enjoining  the 
greatest  secrecy.  This  was  at  the  close  of  the  summer  of  1786. 
A  week  before  February  22,  1787,  the  very  day  of  the 
opening  of  the  Assembly,  he  wrote  me  a  note,  in  which  he 
pressed  me  to  go  and  spend  the  week  with  him  at  Versailles, 
to  assist  him  in  revising  some  of  the  memorandums  which  he 
was  to  submit  to  the  Assembly.  He  added  that  I  should  find 
all  the  material  necessary  to  elucidate  the  points  I  should  under- 
take to  treat.  He  had  written  a  similar  letter  to  M.  de  la 
Galaiziere,2  to  M.  Dupont  de  Nemours,  to  M.  de  Saint-Genis,  to 
M.  Gerbier,3  and  to  M.  de  Cormerey.  We  found  ourselves  all, 
on  the  same  morning,  in  the  study  of  M.  Calonne,  who  handed 
us  bundles  of  papers  relative  to  each  of  the  questions  which  we 
were  to  treat.  From  these  we  were  to  draft  all  the  memorandums 
and  bills,  which  were  to  be  printed  and  submitted  to  the  dis- 
cussion of  the  Assembly  eight  days  later.  Thus,  on  February  14. 
not  a  line  of  this  work  had  yet  been  written.  We  divided  among 
us  this  immense  labour.  I  took  upon  myself  the  memorandum 
and  bill  on  corn  ;  I  wrote  them  both  without  assistance.  I  worked 
with  M.  de  Saint-Genis  on  the  memoir  relative  to  the  payment  of 
the  debts  of  the  clergy,  and  with  M.  de  la  Galaiziere  on  that  con- 
cerning statute  labour.  M.  de  Cormerey  drew  up  the  whole  project 
relative  to  the  abolition  of  the  barriers.4  Gerbier  wrote  paragraphs 
on  all  questions.  My  friend  Dupont,  who  believed  great  good 
was  to  be  accomplished,  applied  all  his  imagination,  mind  and 
heart,  to  the  questions  which  came  nearest  to  his  views.     We 

1  Dampierre,  village  of  Seine-et-Oise  on  the  Yvette,  at  some  distance  from  Ram- 
bouillet.  The  chateau  built  by  Mansart  for  the  Due  de  Lorraine,  became  afterwards 
the  property  of  the  de  Luynes  family. 

2  The  Marquis  Chaumont  de  la  Galaiziere,  born  in  1697,  was  Intendant  of 
Soissons,  and  Chancellor  of  Lorraine  (1737).  Councillor  of  State  in  1766,  mem- 
ber of  the  Royal  Council  of  Finances  (1776).     He  died  in  1787. 

3  Pierre  Gerbier,  a  celebrated  counsel  to  the  parlement  of  Paris.  He  was  born 
at  Rennes  in  1725.  He  was  one  of  the  few  counsels  who  consented  to  plead  before 
the  commission  instituted  by  Maupeou,  during  the  interregnum  of  the  pai-lement. 
He  was  nevertheless  elected  staff-bearer  of  his  order  in  1787.  He  died  in  the 
following  year. 

4  These  were  internal  customs  which  Calonne  wished  to  do  away  with,  and  to 
restrict  to  the  frontiers. 


THE  YEARS  PRECEDING  THE  REVOLUTION.  Si 

thus  accomplished,  in  a  week,  with  tolerable  success,  a  task 
which  the  presumption  and  heedlessness  of  M.  de  Calonne  had 
led  him  to  neglect  for  five  months. 

The  king,  compromising  with  himself,  had  been  weak  enough 
to  abandon  his  minister,  but  was  more  desirous  than  ever  to  carry- 
out  the  projects  which  had  been  brought  before  the  Notables,  and 
he  sought  to  find  as  a  successor  to  M.  de  Calonne,  a  man  whose 
own  opinion  would  lead  him  to  follow  the  plans  proposed. 

M.  de  Fourqueux1  seemed  the  most  suitable  in  this  respect. 
His  great  simplicity,  his  ideas,  his  freedom  from  all  intrigue,  and 
his  good  reputation  pleased  the  king.  But  his  assent  had  to  be 
obtained.  M.  de  Calonne,  who  preferred  him  to  any  one  else,  and 
who  feared  that  the  choice  of  the  king  might  eventually  fall  on 
the  Archbishop  of  Toulouse,  wrote  to  M.  de  Fourqueux.  He 
instructed  M.  Dupont,  who  had  had,  through  M.  Turgot,  M.  de 
Gournay,  and  M.  de  Trudaine,2  former  relations  with  M.  de 
Fourqueux,  to  carry  the  letter  to  him. 

I  only  mention  this  insignificant  detail  because  it  led  to  a 
rather  entertaining  scene.  While  M.  de  Calonne  was  gathering  up 
all  the  papers,  which  he  foresaw  he  might  need  if  his  administra- 
tion were  attacked,  his  particular  friends  were  awaiting  him  in 
the  large  drawing-room  of  the  comptroller-general,  where  they 
were  meeting  perhaps  for  the  last  time.  They  had  been  there 
a  long  while  ....  no  one  spoke  ....  it  was  eleven  o'clock 
in  the  evening  ....  the  door  opens  ....  Dupont  enters  pre- 
cipitately and  shouts  in  great  excitement :  "  Victory  !  victory  ! 
Mesdames  .  .  .  ."  Everybody  rises  and  surrounds  him,  whilst  he 
repeats  :  "  Victory  !  M.  de  Fourqueux  accepts,  and  he  will  follozv  oil 
the  plans  of  M.  de  Calonne.  .  .  ."  The  astonishment  caused  by 
this  kind  of   victory,  on  Madame  de  Chabannes3  Madame  de 

1  Michel  Bouvard  de  Fourqueux,  Counsellor  of  parlement  (1738),  Attorney- 
General  of  the  Court  of  Accounts  (1769),  Councillor  of  State  (1769),  Intendant  of 
Finances.     He  was  for  a  short  time  comptroller-general  in  1787. 

2  Ch.  de  Trudaine  de  Montignv,  born  in  1733,  was  Intendant-General  of  Finances 
(1763).  He  declined  the  office  of  comptroller-general,  and  died  in  1777.  He  had 
by  his  marriage  with  Mademoiselle  Fourqueux,  two  sons  who  were  guillotined  in 
1794. 

3  Marie-Elizabeth  de  Talleyrand,  daughter  of  Daniel-Marie  de  Talleyrand,  and 
aunt  of  the  author.  She  married,  in  1759,  the  Comte  Charles  de  Chabannes  La 
Palisse,  colonel  of  grenadiers.     She  was  lady-of-honour  to  Madame* 

*  The   title   given   to  the  king's   sister,    to   his   brother's   wife,   and  to  his  daughters ;    that   of 
Mademoiselle  being  reserved  to  the  king's  grand-daughters.—  (Translator.) 

VOL.   I.  G 


82  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

Laval,  Madame  de  Robecq,  and  Madame  d'Harvelay,  greatly 
scandalized  Dupont,  who  loved  M.  de  Calonne  on  account  of  the 
provincial  assemblies,  and  who  did  not  know  that  these  ladies 
loved  the  provincial  assemblies  on  account  of  M.  de  Calonne. 
Vesmeranges,1  who  was  also  waiting,  and  who  cared  little,  either 
for  the  provincial  assemblies  or  for  M.  de  Calonne,  but  who 
felt  the  greatest  respect  for  the  comptroller-general,  left  im- 
mediately for  Paris,  in  order  to  prepare,  ahead  of  everybody 
else,  the  speculations  which  the  nomination  of  M.  de  Fourqueux 
was  likely  to  render  advantageous. 

This  new  ministry  was  of  short  duration.  M.  de  Fourqueux 
soon  grew  discouraged,  and  the  queen,  at  last,  obtained  the 
nomination  of  the  Archbishop  of  Toulouse,  whose  mind  and 
character  were  not  on  a  level  with  the  circumstances  in  which 
France  was  now  placed. 

On  entering  office  the  latter  made  sacrifices  to  public  opinion, 
which,  encountering  only  weakness,  became  each  day  more 
exacting.  Nothing  could  be  obtained  from  the  Assembly  of 
the  Notables,  but  complaints  and  the  advice  to  convoke  the 
States- General,  and,  in  truth,  I  do  not  see  how  the  Notables 
could  have  done  otherwise  than  as  they  did.  All  concession 
on  their  part  would  have  been  useless,  because  they  were  really 
without  power  to  act  ;  and,  had  they  done  so,  they  would  only 
have  made  themselves  odious  to  no  purpose. 

It  was  therefore  a  great  mistake  to  have  summoned  them 
without  being  previously  sure  of  directing  their  deliberations. 
For  the  competence  of  the  parkments  having  been  called  into 
question,  or  rather  their  incompetence  being  implicitly  pro- 
claimed by  the  mere  fact  of  convening  the  Notables,  they  were 
henceforth  powerless.  Thus  they  refused  to  do  what  was 
asked  of  them,  alleging  that  they  had  not  the  right  to  do  so. 
Their  refusal  was  punished  by  exile,  which  made  them  popu- 
lar ;  they  were  recalled  soon  after,  which  making  them 
feel  their  importance  more,  could  but  induce  them  to  avoid 
compromising  it.  All  these  measures  having  served  only  to 
show  the  limits  of  royal  authority,  without  being  of  any  assistance 

1  M.  de  Vesmeranges  was  intendant  of  the  stations,  relays,  and  post-houses  of 
France. 


THE  YEARS  PRECEDING  THE  REVOLUTION.  83 

to  it,  there  only  remained  the  alternative  of  being  self- 
sufficient,  asking  sacrifices  from  no  one — which  the  deficit  in 
the  treasury  rendered  it  impossible  to  do — or  of  convoking  the 
States-General.  The  struggle  of  the  Archbishop  of  Toulouse 
with  the  parlements  was  of  sufficient  interest  to  induce  me  to 
relate  it  in  all  its  details,  in  the  second  part  of  these  recollec- 
tions, which  I  have  specially  devoted  to  it,  and  in  which  the  Due 
d'Orleans,  whose  political  life  was  closely  connected  with  the 
parliamentary  opposition  of  this  period,  plays  a  leading  part. 

None  of  the  operations  of  the  Archbishop  of  Toulouse  suc- 
ceeded ;  the  influence  which  he  had  used  to  overthrow  M.  de 
Calonne  was  entirely  his  own.  Although  he  deprived  M.  de 
Calonne  of  the  blue  riband ;l  although  he  obtained  for  himself  a 
cardinal's  hat,  the  archbishopric  of  Sens,  the  abbey  of  Corbie  ; 
although  he  made  his  brother  Minister  of  War,2  neither  fear  nor 
favour  gave  him  a  single  supporter.  Home  opposition  was 
becoming  stronger,  the  foreign  policy  of  France  was  annihilated  ; 
Holland,  so  easy  to  defend,  had  just  been  abandoned.3  The  royal 
treasury  was  empty,  the  throne  was  deserted  ;  the  diminution  of 
the  royal  power  was  the  reigning  passion  of  the  moment  ;  every 
subject  considered  himself  too  much  governed  ;  yet,  it  is  probable 
that  at  no  other  period  in  our  history,  were  people  subjected 
to  a  milder  rule,  and  never  did  they,  individually  and  collectively, 
so  much  trespass  beyond  proper  bounds. 

The  political  existence  of  every  nation  depends  essentially 
upon  the  strict  observance  of  the  duties  imposed  upon  each 
individual.  If,  at  the  same  moment,  all  these  duties  cease  to 
be  performed,  social  disorder  ensues.  This  was  the  position  of 
France  when  the  Archbishop  of  Sens  left  the  ministry. 

1  That  of  the  order  of  the  Holy  Ghost  (ordre  du  Saint- Esprit),  the  highest  order 
of  chivalry  under  the  old  monarchy. — (Translator.) 

-  Louis  Marie  de  brienne,  born  in  1730,  Lieutenant-General,  Minister  of  War 
(1787-1788).  He  was  guillotined  May  10,  1794,  with  his  two  sons  and  Madame  de 
Canisy,  his  daughter. 

3  Holland  had  re-established  the  stadtholdership  in  1747,  in  the  person  of  the 
Prince  of  Orange  ;  his  tyranny  irritated  all  parties,  and  in  1784,  the  states  deprived 
him  of  the  greater  part  of  his  authority.  The  prince,  supported  by  a  fraction  of  the 
nobility  and  of  the  populace,  called  England  and  Prussia  to  his  aid.  The  states 
claimed  the  intervention  of  France,  which  had  not  failed  them  in  1785,  after  their 
quarrel  with  the  emperor.  But  the  Cardinal  de  Brienne  did  not  dare  to  assemble  an 
army  on  the  frontier.  The  Dutch  were  crushed  by  the  Prussian  army,  and  delivered 
to  the  fury  of  the  victorious  faction  (September,  1787). 

G    2 


84  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLE  YRAND. 

The  Protestants  were  stirring  themselves  and  manifested 
alarming  confidence  in  M.  Necker. 

All  classes  were  ready  to  embrace  enthusiastically  the  new 
ideas.  All  the  men  who  had  been  to  college  or  to  an  academy, 
looked  upon  the  application  of  what  they  had  learned  or  read 
there,  as  conquests  to  be  made  by  the  human  mind.  Each 
state  wished  to  be  regenerated. 

The  clergy,  who  ought  to  be  as  immovable  as  dogmas,  had 
been  the  first  to  propose  great  innovations.  They  had  requested 
the  king  to  convene  the  States-General. 

The  pays  d'etats1  only  saw  in  their  treaties  of  union  with 
France,  a  means  of  opposing  all  the  general  measures  pro- 
posed by  the  government. 

The  parlements  seditiously  abdicated  the  power  which  they 
had  exercised  for  centuries,  and  called  from  every  direction  for 
representatives  of  the  nation. 

The  administration  itself,  which  until  then  had  cherished  the 
honour  of  being  appointed  by  the  king  to  represent  him,  now 
found  its  obedience  humiliating,  and  wished  to  be  independent. 

Thus,  all  the  bodies  of  the  State  were  diverging  from  their 
first  destination,  each  one  had  broken  its  bonds,  and  had  entered 
on  a  declivity  which,  deprived  as  they  were  of  experience,  light 
and  support,  must  necessarily  draw  them  into  the  precipice  ; 
therefore,  from  this  time  everything  presents  the  character  of 
fatality. 

Affairs  were  in  this  state  when,  in  spite  of  his  personal  re- 
pugnance, the  king  felt  obliged  to  recall  M.  Necker,  who,  by 
works  flattering  prevailing  ideas,  and  published  at  carefully 
studied  intervals,  had  managed  to  keep  constantly  the  attention 
of  the  public  upon  him.2  He  might,  perhaps,  in  ordinary  times 
have  worked  some  good  ;  I  do  not  know,  personally  I  do  not 
believe  it,  but  I  am  sure,  that,  in  1788,  the  king  could  not  have 

1  Certain  pays  d'etat s,  Brittany  for  instance,  at  the  time  of  their  union  with  France 
had  made  some  formal  reservations,  and  exacted  the  maintenance  of  all  their  rights 
and  privileges. 

2  Necker  resumed  the  direction  of  public  affairs  on  August  25,  17S8.  During  his 
retirement  he  had  published  a  new  report  on  the  finances,  which  appeared  in  1784, 
under  the  name  of  Administration  des  Finances  ^3  vols.  8vo.),  of  which  he  sold  nearly 
80,000  copies.  He  had  also  published  his  correspondence  with  M.  de  Calonne  (1787, 
4"  )• 


THE  YEARS  PRECEDING  THE  REVOLUTION.  85 

made  a  worse  choice.  At  the  time  of  a  purely  national  crisis,  to 
put  at  the  head  of  affairs  a  foreigner,  a  commoner  from  a  little 
republic,  professing  a  religion  which  was  not  that  of  the  majority 
of  the  nation,  only  endowed  with  moderate  talents,  full  of  himself, 
surrounded  by  flatterers,  without  personal  consistency,  and  con- 
sequently needing  to  please  the  people,  was  indeed  to  place  one's 
trust  in  a  man  who  could  only  overcome  the  difficulties  of  the 
situation,  and  that  badly,  by  summoning  a  meeting  of  the 
States-General.  It  had  been  shown  in  every  possible  way  that 
the  latter  were  dreaded,  yet  the  only  reason  which  made  them 
dreaded  was  ignored.  The  nature  of  the  danger  had  been  mis- 
understood ;  therefore  nothing  was  done  to  prevent  it,  and,  on 
the  contrary,  it  was  made  inevitable. 

The  States-General  were  composed  of  deputations  of  the 
three  orders  of  the  State,  so  that  no  one  was,  or  could  be,  a 
member  except  by  election.  All  that  could  be  hoped  or  feared 
was  consequently  subject  to  the  result  of  the  elections,  which 
itself  depended  upon  the  method  according  to  which  they  should 
be  carried  on. 

It  was  evident  that  a  coalition  of  the  three  orders  against  the 
throne  was  a  thing  morally  impossible  ;  that  if  it  were  attacked 
it  could  not  be  by  the  first  order  nor  by  the  second,  nor  as  long 
as  these  two  existed ;  but  by  the  third,  after  it  should  have  anni- 
hilated the  two  others,  and  that  its  first  blows  should  be  directed 
against  these.  It  was  equally  evident  that  the  first  and  second 
orders  having  nothing  to  gain  over  the  third,  had  consequently  no 
interest  in  attacking  it,  and  could  have  no  desire  to  do  so,  while 
the  third,  being  very  differently  situated  with  regard  to  the  two 
others,  was  naturally  the  only  one  to  be  feared  and  against 
which  it  was  necessary  to  be  forearmed.  In  this  state  of  affairs, 
the  only  end  to  secure  was  the  preservation  of  legitimate  rights, 
and  it  was  evident  this  could  not  be  attained  except  by  propor- 
tioning the  force  of  resistance  of  the  first  two  orders  to  the  force 
of  aggression  of  the  third,  and  that  it  was  necessary  that  the 
former  should  be  made  as  great  and  the  latter  as  feeble  as 
possible. 

There  were  two  methods  for  this. 

The  number  of  deputies  from  each  order  might  be  so  fixed 


86  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

that  the  most  important  members  of  this  order  in  rank  and 
fortune  should  suffice  to  fill  the  deputation,  and  the  right  to  elect 
or  the  right  of  being  elected  might  be  so  restricted  that  the  choice 
should,  of  necessity,  fall  upon  them.  In  this  way,  there  were 
reasons  to  believe  that,  in  the  deputations  of  the  first  two  orders, 
class-feeling  would  not  be  weakened  by  any  opposition  ;  that  the 
deputation  of  one  would  feel  as  interested  in  defending  that  of 
the  other  as  its  own  ;  that,  in  case  of  attack,  the  aggressors  could 
have  no  secret  intelligence  in  their  ranks  nor  find  there  auxili- 
aries ;  and,  that  in  the  deputations  of  the  third  order,  the  fear  of 
losing,  outweighing  the  desire  of  acquisition,  would  cause  the 
spirit  of  preservation  to  prevail  over  that  of  domination. 

It  still  remained  (and  this  would  have  been  the  best  plan)  to 
substitute  for  the  first  two  orders  a  peerage  composed  of 
members  of  the  episcopacy  and  of  heads  of  noble  families  of 
the  oldest  nobility,  greatest  wealth  and  lustre,  and  limit  the 
election  to  the  third  order  which  would  have  formed  a  separate 
assembly. 

Many  people,  after  the  Revolution  broke  out,  sought  a 
method  by  which  it  might  have  been  averted,  and,  with 
this  object,  they  imagined  various  remedies  corresponding  with 
the  causes  to  which  they  ascribed  it  ;  but,  at  about  the  time 
when  the  Revolution  broke  forth,  it  could  only  be  prevented 
by  one  of  the  two  methods  I  have  just  indicated. 

M.  Necker  adopted  neither  the  one  nor  the  other.  He  fixed 
the  number  of  deputies  in  such  a  manner  that  each  of  the  first 
two  orders  was  to  elect  three  hundred  members,  which  was  far 
too  many  to  avoid  the  necessity  of  extending  the  choice  to  the 
inferior  ranks  which  it  was  advisable  to  exclude.1 

On  the  other  hand,  almost  unlimited  latitude  was  left  as  to 
the  right  to  elect  or  to  be  elected,  which  put  the  higher  clergy 
and  nobility  in  the  minority,  in  the  deputation  of  their  order  ; 
and  caused  the  third  order  to  be  composed  .almost  exclusively 
of  barristers — a  class  of  men,  whose  method  of  thinking,  neces- 
sarily resulting  from  their  profession,  render  them  generally  very 
dangerous.   But  the  greatest  of  all  mistakes  was  to  authorise  the 

1  The  States-General  were  composed  of  1,145  deputies — 291  for  the  clergy,  270  for 
tlie  nobility,  and  584  for  the  Third  Estate. 


THE  YEARS  PRECEDING  THE  REVOLUTION.  87 

third  order  to  itself  elect  as  many  deputies  as  the  other  two 
together.  As  this  concession  could  only  be  useful  to  it  in  the 
case  of  a  fusion  of  the  three  orders  into  a  single  body,  it  could 
not  have  been  done  without  presupposing  this  fusion,  and  con- 
senting implicitly  to  it.  The  attempts  the  third  estate  would 
make  to  obtain  the  fusion  were  thus  rendered  legitimate  before- 
hand, its  chances  of  success  increased,  and  absolute  prepon- 
derance in  the  body  in  which  the  three  orders  were  to  be  blended 
was  assured  to  it. 

There  was  in  M.  Necker  a  something  which  prevented  his 
foreseeing  and  therefore  of  fearing  the  results  of  his  own 
measures.  He  persuaded  himself  that  he  possessed  an  all- 
powerful  influence  over  the  States-General,  that  the  members 
of  the  third  order,  above  all,  would  listen  to  him  as  to  an 
oracle,  would  only  see  with  his  eyes,  would  do  nothing  except 
by  his  advice,  and  would  not  use,  against  his  will,  the  weapons 
he  had  put  into  their  hands.  An  illusion  which  was  to  be  of 
short  duration.  Precipitated  from  the  height  where  his  vanity 
alone  had  placed  him,  and  from  which  he  flattered  himself  that 
he  ruled  events,  he  had  to  lament  in  retirement  the  evils  he 
had  not  wished  to  cause,  and  to  deplore  the  excesses  which 
horrified  his  probity,  but  which,  had  he  been  more  skilful  and 
less  presumptuous,  he  might  have  spared  France  and  the 
world. 

His  presumption  rendered  him  absolutely  incapable  of  seeing 
that  the  movement  then  taking  place  in  France,  was  the  result 
of  a  passion,  or  rather  of  the  errors  of  a  passion,  common 
to  all  men,  vanity.  In  the  majority  of  nations  it  exists  only  in  a 
subordinate  form,  and  only  constitutes  one  shade  of  the  national 
character,  or  else  it  is  apparent  only  in  a  single  object,  while 
with  the  French,  as  formerly  with  the  Gauls,  their  ancestors,  it 
mingles  with  all,  it  rules  in  everything  with  an  individual  and 
collective  energy  which  makes  it  capable  of  the  greatest  ex- 
cesses. 

In  the  French  Revolution,  this  passion  did  not  figure  alone  ; 
it  awakened  others  which  it  called  to  its  assistance,  but  these 
remained  subordinate  ;  they  took  its  colour  and  spirit,  acted 
in  accordance  with  it  and  to  further  its  ends.   It  so  far  gave  the 


88  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLE  YRAND. 

impulse  to  and  directed  the  movement  of  the  French  Revolution, 
that  one  may  really  say  this  great  event  was  born  of  vanity. 

Directed  towards  a  certain  aim,  and  confined  to  certain 
limits,  the  passion  of  which  I  speak,  binds  subjects  to  the 
State ;  it  animates  and  vivifies  it  ;  it  then  takes  the  name  of 
patriotism,  emulation,  love  of  glory.  By  itself,  and  apart  from 
its  direction  towards  a  determined  end,  it  is  only  the  desire  for 
pre-eminence.  One  can  desire  pre-eminence  for  his  country ; 
one  can  desire  it  for  a  body  of  which  one  is  a  member,  one  can 
desire  it  for  one's  self,and,in  this  case,  one  may  desire  to  obtain  it  in 
a  single  thing  or  in  several,  in  the  sphere  where  one  is  placed  or 
outside  of  that  sphere.  One  can,  in  short,  but  not  without  mad- 
ness, desire  to  have  it  in  everything  and  over  all.  If  circum- 
stances are  such  that,  with  the  generality  of  the  members  of 
a  State,  this  desire  bear  upon  social  distinctions,  the  inevitable 
consequence  will  be  that  the  greater  number  will  wish  only  for 
those  titles  of  distinction  that  each  of  them  may  flatter  himself 
that  he  has,  or  has  acquired,  to  the  exclusion  of  all  those 
which  by  their  nature  can  only  be  the  privilege  of  a  very  small 
number  ;  thus  from  the  desire  for  pre-eminence  will  proceed 
the  spirit  of  political  equality.  This  is  precisely  what  happened 
in  France  just  before  the  Revolution.  As  revolutionarily  set 
forth  by  Abbe  Sieyes,1  in  his  essay  on  privileges,  it  was  a 
natural  and  necessary  consequence  of  the  situation  in  which 
France  then  was. 

1  Emmanuel  Joseph  Sieyes  was  born  at  Frejus  in  1748.  He  took  orders,  and  was 
vicar-general  at  Rennes,  played  a  certain  part  in  the  philosophical  movement,  and 
became  acquainted  with  all  the  writers  of  the  time.  He  was  a  member  of  the  pro- 
vincial assembly  of  Orleans.  In  1789,  he  published  his  celebrated  pamphlet,  What 
is  the  Third  Estate  ?  of  which  30,000  copies  were  sold  in  a  few  days.  Deputy  of 
Paris,  he  became  one  of  the  most  influential  members  of  the  Third  Estate.  He  was 
elected  president  (June,  1790);  member  of  the  administration  of  the  Department  of 
Paris  (February,  1791).  He  declined  at  that  time  the  archbishopric  of  Paris.  In 
1792,  he  was  elected  to  the  Convention,  of  which  he  became  president.  He  voted  for 
the  death  of  the  king.  He  held  aloof  during  the  Reign  of  Terror,  was  appointed, 
in  1795,  a  member  of  the  Council  of  the  Five  Hundred,  and  sent  as  minister  to 
Berlin,  in  1798.  He  entered  the  Directory  (1799),  and  became  the  head  of  it.  He 
attached  himself  to  Bonaparte,  and  prepared  with  him  the  coup  d'etat  of  the  iSth 
Brumairc.  Provisory  consul,  he  presented  his  famous  constitutional  project,  was 
replaced  by  Cambaceres,  and  entered  the  Senate.  He  was,  in  1814,  one  of  the 
promoters  of  the  downfall  of  the  emperor,  was  created  peer  of  France  during  the 
Hundred  Days,  and  was  exiled  in  1816.  He  returned  to  France  in  1830,  and  died  in 
1836.  He  had  entered  the  Institut  in  1795.  Member  of  the  French  Academy  in 
1804,  his  name  was  cancelled  from  the  list  of  this  learned  body  in  1S16. 


THE   YEARS  PRECEDING  THE  REVOLUTION.  89 

The  State,  although  nominally  divided  into  three  orders,  was 
really  so  only  into  two  classes — the  nobles  and  the  plebeians ; 
a  portion  of  the  clergy  belonged  to  the  first,  and  the  rest  to 
the  second  of  these  two  classes. 

All  pre-eminence  in  social  order  is  founded  on  one  of  these 
four  things — power,  birth,  riches,  and  personal  merit. 

After  the  ministry  of  Cardinal  de  Richelieu  and  under 
Louis  XIV.,  all  the  political  power  became  concentrated  in  the 
hands  of  the  monarch,  and  the  orders  of  the  State  no  longer 
possessed  any. 

Industry  and  commerce  gave  riches  to  the  plebeian  class, 
which  developed  all  sorts  of  merit. 

Only  one  title  of  pre-eminence  thus  remained  :  birth. 

But,  as  nobility  had  been  conferred  for  a  long  time  on  the 
purchasers  of  venal  offices,  birth  itself  could  be  obtained  for 
money,  thus  lowering  it  to  the  level  of  riches. 

The  nobles  themselves  lowered  it  still  more,  by  taking  as 
wives  the  daughters  of  enriched  parvenus,  rather  than  poor  girls 
of  noble  blood.  Nobility  could  not  fall  below  riches,  without 
poverty  degrading  it  ;  and  the  greater  number  of  noble  families 
were  relatively  or  absolutely  poor.  Degraded  by  poverty,  it 
was  still  more  so  by  riches,  when  it  had,  as  it  were,  sacrificed 
itself  to  them  by  these  misalliances. 

In  the  Church  and  episcopacy,  the  most  lucrative  dignities 
had  become  the  almost  exclusive  portion  of  the  aristocracy. 
In  this  respect,  the  principles  constantly  followed  by  Louis  XIV. 
had  been  abandoned.  The  plebeian,  that  is  to  say  by  far  the 
most  numerous  section  of  the  clergy,  was  therefore  interested 
in  seeing  that,  in  its  order,  not  only  merit  should  always  prevail 
over  birth,  but  even  that  birth  should  count  for  nothing.  In  the 
noble  class,  there  was  no  fixed  hierarchy  :  the  titles  which  ought 
to  have  served  to  indicate  the  rank  had  no  constant  value. 

Instead  of  one  nobility,  there  were  seven  or  eight ;  that  of 
the  sword,  and  that  of  the  magistracy,  of  the  court,  and  the  pro- 
vincial nobility,  the  ancient  and  the  recent  nobility,  the  higher  and 
lesser  nobility.  Each  of  these  pretended  to  be  superior  to  the 
others,  which  themselves  claimed  to  be  its  equals.  Beside  these 
pretensions,  the  plebeian  raised  his  own  claims,  almost  equal  to 


9o  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

those  of  the  simple  gentleman  seeing  how  easily  he  could  obtain 
this  title.  Often  quite  superior  to  a  gentleman  in  wealth  and 
talents,  the  plebeian  did  not  believe  himself  inferior  to  the  nobles 
whom  the  simple  gentleman  considered  as  his  equal. 

The  nobles  no  longer  inhabited  their  feudal  towers  ;  war  was 
no  longer  their  sole  occupation.  They  no  longer  lived  ex- 
clusively with  nobles  like  themselves,  with  their  men-at-arms, 
or  with  the  tenants  of  their  estates.  Another  style  of  life  had 
given  them  other  tastes,  and  these  tastes  other  needs.  Often 
unoccupied,  and  making  pleasure  their  only  business,  everything 
which  was  a  resource  against  weariness,  all  that  added  to  their 
enjoyment,  became  necessary  to  them.  The  plebeian,  rich  and 
enlightened,  being  no  longer  dependent  upon  them,  having  indeed 
no  need  of  them,  I  have  already  said  so,  lived  with  them  as  with 
his  equals. 

When  I  spoke  of  the  upper  French  society  at  the  time  of  the 
Revolution,  my  object  was  to  make  known  all  the  heterogeneous 
elements  of  which  it  was  then  composed,  and  to  point  out  the 
results  which  such  inconsistency  of  manners  must  necessarily 
bring  about.  I  have  reached  the  time  when  love  of  equality 
began  to  manifest  itself  without  fear  and  with  open  face. 

In  polished  times,  the  culture  of  letters,  of  the  sciences,  and  of 
the  fine  arts,  constitutes  professions  followed  by  men  who 
generally  belong,  by  their  personal  merit,  to  all  that  is  most 
elevated  ;  and,  by  their  birth  or  fortune  to  all  that  is  most  inferior 
in  civil  society.  A  secret  instinct  must  induce  them  to  raise  the 
advantages  they  possess  to  the  level  of,  if  not  above,  those  of 
which  they  are  deprived.  Besides,  their  aim  is,  in  general,  to  secure 
celebrity.  The  first  condition  for  this  is  to  please  and  to  interest, 
to  succeed  in  which  there  is  no  safer  way  for  them  than  to  flatter 
the  ruling  tastes  and  the  prevailing  opinions,  which  they 
strengthen  by  flattering.  Manners  and  public  opinion  tended  to 
equality  ;  thus  these  men  became  its  apostles. 

While  there  were  few  other  riches  than  landed  property, 
and  this  was  in  the  hands  of  the  nobility,  while  industry  and 
commerce  were  the  callings  of  inferior  men,  the  nobles  scorned 
them,  and,  because  they  had  once  scorned  them,  they  believed  it 
their  right  and  even  their  duty  to  scorn  them  always  (even  when 


THE  YEARS  PRECEDING  THE  REVOLUTION.  91 

relating  themselves  by  marriage,  which  it  shocked  them  to  do, 
with  the  men  who  followed  those  callings),  and  by  this,  they 
incensed  the  pride  of  the  plebeian  class,  who  felt  that  one  could 
not  scorn  their  industry  without  scorning  themselves. 

From  among  the  ruins  of  its  former  existence,  the  nobility  had 
preserved  certain  privileges,  which,  in  their  origin,  were  only  a 
compensation  for  charges  which  they  alone  supported,  but 
which  they  had  ceased  to  support.  When  the  cause  existed  no 
longer,  these  privileges  appeared  unjust  ;  but  their  injustice  was 
not  that  which  made  them  most  odious,  it  was  rather  by  reason 
of  the  fact  that  not  on  the  quota  but  on  the  form  of  the  tax,  they 
established  a  distinction  in  which  the  plebeian  class  saw  less  a 
favour  to  the  nobles  than  a  slight  to  itself. 

These  sentiments  in  the  plebeian  class  proceeded  from  the 
spirit  of  equality,  and  served  to  encourage  it.  He  who  would  not 
be  considered  as  an  inferior,  either  claims  or  aspires  to  be  treated 
on  a  footing  of  equality. 

I  ought  to  say  besides,  that  that  portion  of  the  army  so  impru- 
dently sent  to  the  aid  of  the  English  colonies  struggling  against 
their  mother-country,  was  imbued  in  the  New  World  with  the 
doctrines  of  equality.  It  returned  full  of  admiration  for  these 
doctrines  and  perhaps  with  the  desire  also  to  put  them  into 
practice  in  France  ;  and,  by  a  sort  of  fatality,  it  was  even  this  very 
time  that  Marshal  de  Segur l  chose  for  reserving  for  the  nobles 
all  the  officers'  promotions  in  the  army.  A  host  of  articles  ap- 
peared denouncing  the  measure  which  closed  to  all  who  were  not 
nobles,  a  career  in  which  Fabert 2  Chevert,3  Catinat,4  and  others, 

1  Philippe  Henry,  Marquis  de  Segur,  belonged  to  an  old  family  of  Guyenne. 
Born  in  1724,  he  entered  the  army  at  fifteen,  was  badly  wounded  at  Raucoux,  and  at 
Lawfeld  ;  lieutenant-general  (1760)  ;  wounded  again  at  Clostercamp.  Governor  of 
Franche-Comte  (1775),  Minister  of  War  (1 780-1787),  Marshal  of  France  (1783). 
Imprisoned  under  the  Reign  of  Terror,  he  escaped  death.  In  1800,  he  received  a 
pension  from  the  First  Consul,  who  treated  him  with  all  the  honours  due  to  his  high 
dignity.      He  died  in  1S01. 

2  Abraham  Fabert  issued  from  a  Lorraine  family.  He  entered  the  army,  and  took 
part  in  all  the  campaigns  of  his  time.  He  became  Marshal  of  France  in  1654,  and 
died  in  1662. 

3  Francois  de  Chevert,  born  in  1695  at  Verdun.  He  enlisted  at  nine  years  of  age  ; 
at  eleven  he  was  appointed  lieutenant  in  the  regiment  of  Carne,  lieutenant-colonel  in 
the  campaign  of  Bohemia,  where  he  made  his  name  illustrious  by  the  taking  of  Prague, 
and  later,  in  defending  this  city.  Brigadier-general  (1744),  lieutenant-general  (1748), 
Grand  Cross  of  the  Order  of  St.  Louis.     He  died  in  1769. 

4  Nicolas  de  Calinat  de  la  Fauconnerie,  born  in  1637.     He  left  the  study  of  the 


92  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

plebeians  like  themselves,  had  covered  themselves  with  glory. 
The  lucrative  professions  being  forbidden  to  the  poor  nobility, 
it  had  been  thought  advisable  to  offer  them  this  compensation. 
Only  this  side  of  the  question  had  been  considered.  But  this 
measure,  substituting  evidently  birth  for  personal  merit,  in  what 
was  the  proper  domain  of  merit,  offended  both  reason  and  public 
opinion.  For,  in  order  to  indemnify  the  nobles  for  the  loss  of 
advantages  which  the  plebeian  class  already  looked  upon  as  a 
prejudice  humiliating  to  them,  on  the  latter  were  inflicted  an  in- 
justice and  an  affront.  This  measure  completed  the  estrange- 
ment of  the  troops  already  disaffected  by  the  introduction  of  a 
foreign  discipline  which  exposed  them  to  a  treatment,  which, 
from  the  earliest  times  had  been  considered  in  France,  as 
ignominious.1  It  seemed  as  though  it  were  wished  not  to  be  able 
to  depend  on  our  brave  soldiers  at  the  time  of  the  greatest 
danger,  and,  in  fact,  their  assistance  failed  when  it  was  most 
needed. 

Thus  all  tended  to  injure  the  noble  class  :  that  which  had  been 
taken  from  it,  and  that  which  had  been  left  to  it,  the  poverty  of 
some  of  its  members,  the  wealth  of  the  others,  their  vices  and 
even  their  virtues. 

But  all  this,  as  I  have  said  before,  when  speaking  of  the 
second  ministry  of  M.  Necker,  was  the  work  of  the  government, 
at  least  as  much  as  the  result  of  the  general  evolution  of  human 
things.  It  was  not  the  work  of  the  plebeian  class,  which 
merely  profited  by  it.  Equality  had  come,  so  to  say,  to  meet  the 
plebeians.  To  resist  its  advances  would  have  required  in  the 
greater  mass  of  men,  a  moderation  and  foresight  of  which  but 
few  privileged  individuals  are  capable. 

Equality  once  established  between  the  two  classes  by  new 
manners  and  accepted  by  public  opinion,  could  not  fail  to  be 

law  for  the  army.  He  became  lieutenant-general  in  1688.  In  the  following  year  he 
conducted,  in  Savoy  and  Piedmont,  a  campaign  which  has  remained  famous  (victories 
of  Staffarde  and  of  Marsaille).  Marshal  of  France  (1699).  Minister  Plenipotentiary 
at  Turin  (1695).  Again  at  the  head  of  the  army  of  Iialy  (1701),  he  commanded 
afterwards  in  Alsace,  and  died  in  171 2. 

1  Lieutenant-General  Comtede  Saint-Germain,  having  been  called  to  the  Ministry 
of  War,  tried  to  re-establish  discipline  in  the  army.  But  he  wished  to  introduce  into 
France  the  corporal  punishments  in  vogue  with  the  Germans  and  the  English.  Public 
opinion  was  aroused  against  this  innovation,  and  the  Comte  de  Saint-Germain  lost  all 
the  favour  he  commanded  when  he  took  office  (1776). 


THE   YEARS  PRECEDING  THE  REVOLUTION.  93 

established   by   law   as   soon    as   the   occasion    should    present 

itself. 

At  the  very  opening  of  the  States-General,  the  deputation 
of  the  third  order  began  the  attack  against  the  two  others.  Its 
leaders  were  men,  who  did  not  belong  to  the  Third  Estate,  but 
had  joined  it  out  of  spite  at  a  disappointed  ambition,  or  from  the 
desire  to  open,  by  means  of  popularity,  a  road  to  fortune.  They 
might  perhaps  have  been  easily  led  ;  the  need  of  it  was  not  felt 
until  success  would  no  longer  have  been  of  any  use. 

Whoever  is  called  upon  to  join  any  public  body,  should 
prove  his  fitness  to  become  a  member  of  it  and  produce  the 
titles  which  justify  his  appointment.  But  to  whom  should  he 
prove  it  ?  Evidently  to  those  whose  interest  it  is  that  no  one 
should  introduce  himself  into  this  body  by  means  of  sham  or 
incomplete  titles,  and  who  have  no  interests  contrary  to  those  of 
that  body,  if  it  be  already  formed  ;  and,  if  it  be  not,  to  those 
of  the  majority  of  the  members  who  are  appointed  to  form 
it,  and  to  none  other.  Reason  says  this,  and  the  policy 
of  all  peoples  has  been  at  all,  times  consonant  with  this 
principle. 

The  deputation  of  the  third  order,  however,  claimed  that 
the  members  of  each  deputation  ought  to  prove  their  competency 
before  the  three  orders,  and  that  to  effect  this  they  should  as- 
semble in  the  same  hall  ;  in  other  terms,  that  they  should  verify 
their  qualifications  in  common.  This  pretension  once  admitted, 
this  order  would  have  said  to  the  other  two  deputations :  By 
admitting  the  consequence,  you  have  necessarily  admitted  the 
principle,  and  this  verification  of  powers  supposes  that  the  three 
deputations  form  but  a  single  body  ;  a  single  body  admits  only 
of  deliberation  in  common,  and  of  individual  vote  ;  the  three 
deputations  forming  but  a  single  body,  there  are  no  more  orders, 
for  orders  cannot  exist  except  as  separate  and  distinct  bodies  : 
where  there  are  no  longer  orders,  the  titles  and  privileges  which 
constitute  them  must  cease.  This  is  what  this  deputation  wished 
to  achieve,  but,  not  daring  to  proceed  openly,  it  took  a  round- 
about way. 

Without  foreseeing,  perhaps,  all  the  consequences  of  its  pre- 
tension, or  denying  them,  it  insisted  ;  and,  while  discussing  and 


94  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

deliberating,  it  proclaimed  itself  a  National  Assembly,1  repre- 
senting thus,  implicitly,  the  two  other  deputations  as  simple 
conventicles,  and  pointing  them  to  popular  hatred  as  foreign 
to  the  nation  and  as  being  its  enemies. 

I  was  a  member  of  the  deputation  of  the  order  of  the  clergy. 
My  opinion  was  that  the  States-General  should  be  dissolved  ; 
but  that,  being  obliged  to  take  things  as  they  were,  they  should 
be  convoked  anew,  according  to  one  of  the  plans  I  have  indicated 
above.  I  submitted  this  advice  to  the  Comte  d'Artois,  who  was 
then  displaying  kindness,  and, — if  I  may  dare  to  quote  one  of  the 
expressions  he  made  use  of, — even  friendship  towards  me.  My 
advice  was  thought  too  risky ;  it  was  an  act  of  force,  and  there 
was  no  one  about  the  king  to  wield  force.  I  had,  in  the  evening, 
several  interviews  at  Marly,  all  of  which  proved  useless,  and 
convinced  me  that  I  could  be  of  no  service,  and  that,  in  this 
case,  it  would  be  folly  to  think  of  anything  but  self.2 

The  composition  of  the  States- General  evidently  reducing 
the  two  first  orders  to  mere  ciphers,  there  remained  but  one 
reasonable  course  to  take,  it  was  to  yield  without  being  forced  to 
do  so,  and  while  there  would  still  be  some  credit  in  doing  it. 
This  might  prevent  matters  being  carried  to  extremes  ;  it  com- 
pelled the  third  order  to  be  circumspect,  and  enabled  the  other 
two  orders  to  retain  some  influence  over  the  common  deliber- 
ations, and  to  gain  time,  which  often  means  to  gain  everything  ; 
and  if  there  was  still  a  chance  to  recover  lost  ground,  this  was 
the  only  one.  I  did  not  hesitate,  therefore,  to  join  the  men  who 
set  this  example. 

The  struggle  became  prolonged,  the  king  intervened  as 
mediator,  but  failed.  He  ordered  the  deputation  of  the  third 
estate  to  separate,  and  is  not  obeyed  ;  so  as  to  prevent  their 
meeting,  the  hall  in  which  they  held  their  sittings  is  closed.  They 
meet  in  a  tennis  hall,  and  take  oath  not  to  separate  until  they 
have  made  a  constitution,  that  is  to  say  until  they  have  destroyed 
that  of  the  kingdom.3     Then  it  occurs  to  arrest  by  force  the 

1  Sitting  of  June  17,  1789.  The  Third  Estate  proclaimed  itself  a  National 
Assembly,  on  the  motion  of  Lcgrand,  deputy  from  Berry,  and  not  on  that  of  Sieyes, 
as  is  generally  believed. 

2  See  the  Appendix,  page  104,  containing  M.  de  Bacourt's  account  of  these  inter- 
views. 

:!  June  20,  1789. 


THE  YEARS  PRECEDING  THE  REVOLUTION.  95 

movement  which  the  government  had  failed  to  foresee,  and  the 
instrument  of  force  escapes  from  the  hands  which  try  to  make 
use  of  it.  On  the  same  day,  the  whole  of  France,  cities,  villages, 
hamlets,  are  under  arms.  The  Bastille  is  attacked,  taken  or 
thrown  open  in  a  couple  of  hours,  and  its  governor  slaughtered.1 
Popular  fury  is  vented  on  other  victims.2  From  this  moment  the 
government  is  powerless,  there  are  no  longer  any  States-General  ; 
they  have  given  place  to  a  single  and  all-powerful  assembly  ;  and 
the  principle  of  equality  is  sanctioned.  Those  who  have  advised 
the  employment  of  force,  those  who  have  set  it  in  motion,  those 
who  have  been  its  leaders,  think  only  of  their  own  safety. 
A  number  of  the  princes  leave  the  kingdom,  and  emigration 
commences. 

The  Comte  d'Artois  had  been  the  first  to  give  the  signal  for 
it  ;  his  departure  caused  me  much  grief.  I  loved  him  ;  it  needed 
all  the  force  of  my  reason  to  keep  me  from  following  him,  and  to 
enable  me  to  resist  the  entreaties  made  to  me  on  his  behalf  by 
Madame  de  Carignan,  to  join  him  at  Turin.  It  would  be 
a  great  mistake  for  any  one  to  conclude  from  my  refusal  that  I 
blamed  those  who  emigrated  ;  I  did  not  blame  them,  but  I 
blamed  the  emigration.  Nearly  all  the  emigres  were  actuated 
by  a  noble  sentiment  and  by  a  deep  devotion  to  the  royal  cause ; 
but  emigration  was  a  false  step.  Whatever  may  have  been  its 
motive,  whether  the  fear  of  danger,  offended  self-love,  the  wish 
to  recover  by  force  of  arms  what  had  been  lost,  or  the  idea  of  a 
duty  to  fulfil,  it  appeared  to  me  under  all  these  aspects,  but  a 
poor  calculation. 

There  could  have  been  a  necessity  for  emigrating,  only  in  the 
case  of  a  personal  danger  against  which  France  could  have  offered 
no  refuge,  or  no  sufficiently  safe  refuge,  that  is  to  say,  in  case  of 
general  danger  for  the  nobles.  This  danger  did  not  exist  then  ; 
it  might  be  prevented,  while  the  first  effect  of  emigration  was  to 

1  Bernard  Jourdan  de  Launay,  issued  from  a  noble  family  of  Normandy,  born  in 
1740  at  the  Bastille,  of  which  his  father  was  governor;  he  also  filled  this  post  as 
successor  to  M.  de  jumilhac.  The  part  he  played  during  the  attack  of  July  14  is 
well  known  ;  how,  having  been  compelled  to  surrender,  he  was  massacred  with  several 
of  his  officers,  in  spite  of  the  efforts  of  Helie  and  of  Hulin,  the  leaders  of  the  assailants. 

2  Besides  the  governor  de  Launay  and  his  soldiers,  the  people  massacred  the 
Prevot  des  Marchands*  Flesselles,  and,  a  few  days  after,  the  intendant  Foulon  and  his 
son-in-law,  Bertier  de  Sauvigny,  intendant  of  Paris. 

*  Provost  of  the  Merchants — an  office  similar  to  that  of  Lord  Mayor  in  England. 


96  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

create  it.  Not  all  the  nobles,  nor  even  the  majority  of  them, 
were  able  to  leave  the  kingdom.  Age,  sex,  infirmities,  lack  of 
money  and  other  causes,  not  less  powerful,  were  an  insuperable 
obstacle  to  a  large  number.  Only  a  portion  of  them,  then,  could 
go  abroad,  and  this  absent  portion  must  inevitably  compromise 
those  who  remained.  Objects  of  suspicion,  which  soon  degenerated 
into  hatred,  the  nobles  who  could  not  leave  the  country,  must, 
through  fear,  swell  the  number  of  the  ruling  party,  or  become 
its  victims. 

The  only  loss  with  which  as  yet  the  spirit  of  liberty  threatened 
the  nobility,  was  that  of  its  titles  and  privileges.  By  emigration 
this  loss  was  not  prevented,  while  by  it  the  French  aristocracy 
ran  the  risk  of  adding  to  this  loss  a  still  greater  one,  that  of 
their  estates.  However  painful  for  the  nobility  the  loss  of  their 
titles  and  privileges  may  have  been,  it  was  incomparably  less  so 
than  the  situation  to  which  they  were  going  to  be  reduced  by  the 
simple  forfeiture  of  their  revenues.  The  loss  of  titles  alone 
could  be  softened  by  the  certainty  that  it  was  not  irreparable,  and 
by  the  hope  that  it  might  even  be  repaired.  In  a  great  and  ancient 
monarchy,  the  spirit  of  equality,  carried  to  its  utmost  conse- 
quences, is  a  disease  essentially  transient,  and  this  disease  might 
have  been  less  severe  and  of  much  shorter  duration  had  it  been 
less  combated.  But  property  once  lost  could  not  be  as  easily 
restored  as  titles  ;  it  might  have  been  transferred,  and  have  passed 
through  so  many  hands  as  to  make  it  impossible  ever  to  recover 
it,  and  even  dangerous  to  attempt  to  do  so.  The  loss  of  property 
would  then  be  an  incurable  disease,  not  only  for  the  nobles,  but 
for  the  entire  State,  the  natural  organization  of  which  could  be 
but  imperfectly  restored  as  long  as  one  of  its  essential  elements 
no  longer  existed,  except  partly.  For  nobility,  an  essential  element 
of  a  monarchy,  is  not  a  simple  element,  and  birth  without  wealth, 
or  wealth  without  birth  does  not  constitute,  politically  speaking, 
a  perfect  nobility. 

One  could  scarcely  delude  one's  self  so  far  as  to  believe  that 
what  the  entire  class  of  the  nobles,  with  the  means  of  action  and 
influence  that  remained  to  it,  had  failed  to  defend  and  preserve, 
could  have  been  recovered  with  the  mere  help  of  that  portion  of 
the  nobility  which   had  emigrated.     All   its    hope  would    then 


THE  YEARS  PRECEDING  THE  REVOLUTION.  97 

reside  in  the  help  of  foreigners.  But  was  there  nothing  to  be 
feared  from  such  assistance  ?  Could  it  be  accepted  without 
suspicion,  if  it  were  offered,  and  could  it  be  implored  without 
scruples  ?  The  greatness  of  the  injury  received  was  not  sufficient 
to  excuse  those  who  called  to  their  assistance  the  help  of  a  foreign 
force.  An  act  of  this  nature  can  be  justified  only  by  a  concurrence 
of  extraordinary  circumstances  ;  it  should  have  been  required  by 
the  vital  interests  of  the  country  itself ;  to  resort  to  it,  all  other 
means  must  have  previously  failed  ;  the  success  of  such  inter- 
vention must  have  been  certain,  and  there  must  have  been 
undeniable  proofs  that  neither  the  country,  its  integrity  nor  its 
future  independence  would  thereby  be  injured.  But  what  certainty 
could  there  be  as  to  the  next  action  of  the  foreigners,  having 
once  crushed  the  Revolution  ?  What  certainty  was  there  that  they 
could  crush  it  ?  Was  there  a  certainty  of  receiving  real  assistance, 
and  was  it  wise  to  trust  simply  in  hopes  ?  Why  go  to  meet 
assistance  which  perhaps  would  not  be  forthcoming,  when,  even 
with  the  certainty  of  its  coming,  reason  advised  to  keep  quiet  and 
await  its  arrival  ?  And,  while  waiting  for  it,  one  could,  if  the 
social  need  of  the  country  demanded  it,  co-operate  with  this 
assistance  in  a  more  efficacious  manner  ;  the  chances  of  success 
would  be  thus  increased,  and  nothing  be  compromised  ;  while,  in 
going  to  seek  assistance,  one  compromised  all,  relations,  friends, 
fortune,  and  the  throne  with  them  ;  and  not  only  the  throne,  but 
the  life  of  the  monarch  as  well,  and  that  of  his  family,  which, 
perhaps  one  day,  on  the  brink  of  the  abyss,  or  already  in  the 
abyss,  could  only  account  for  its  misfortunes,  by  crying  out : 
"  Behold,  see  where  emigration  has  led  us"  1 

Thus,  far  from  deserving  to  be  regarded  as  the  accomplish- 
ment of  a  duty,  the  emigration  needed  to  be  excused,  which  it 
could  be  only  by  the  immensity  of  a  personal  danger  from  which 

1  I  can  say  that  the  positive  opinion  of  Louis  XVI.  in  this  respect  is  found  in 
Memoirs  I  have  read,  and  of  which  M.  de  Clermont-Gallerande  is  the  author.  They 
are  written  in  his  hand,  and  are  now  in  the  possession  of  the  Mnrquis  de  Fontenille. 
In  them,  M.  de  Clermont  *  gives  an  account  of  the  mission  he  had  been  charged  by 
the  king  to  fulfil  at  Coblentz.  He  was  instructed  to  describe  to  the  king's  brothers  the 
personal  danger  in  which  his  life  had  been  placed  by  the  emigration  (Prince  Talleyrand). 

*  Charles,  Marquis  de  Clermont-Gallerande,  was  the  issue  of  a  noble  family  of  Maine.  Born  in 
1744,  he  became  brigadier-general,  took  part  in  the  defence  of  the  Tuileries  on  August  10,  and  was 
long  imprisoned  under  the  Terror.  It  was  he  who,  under  the  Consulate,  delivered  to  Bonaparte 
the  letter  by  which  Louis  XVIII.  invited  him  to  re-establish  him  on  the  throne.  Peer  of  France  in 
1814,  he  died  in  1823.     His  Memoirs  were  published  in  1825  at  Paris  (3  vols.  8vo). 

VOL.  I.  H 


98  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

there  was  no  other  way  of  escaping.  These  views,  if  another 
order  of  things  should  some  day  be  brought  about,  will,  I  hope, 
be  generally  shared  by  the  men  who  may  perhaps  still  have  to 
struggle  against  the  revolutionary  torrent. 

I  resolved,  therefore,  not  to  leave  France,  until  constrained  to 
do  so  by  personal  danger  ;  to  do  nothing  to  provoke  it,  not  to 
struggle  against  a  torrent  which  must  be  allowed  to  pass  ;  but  to 
hold  myself  in  a  position  enabling  me  to  save  those  who  could 
be  saved,  to  raise  no  obstacle  between  opportunity  and  myself, 
and  to  hold  myself  in  readiness  for  it. 

The  deputies  of  the  third  order  before  triumphing  over  the 
two  others  had  been  engaged  in  drawing  up  a  declaration  of 
rights  in  imitation  of  that  made  by  the  English  Colonies,  when 
they  proclaimed  their  independence.  They  continued  to  prepare 
it  after  the  fusion  of  the  orders.  This  declaration  was  nothing 
more  than  a  theory  of  equality,  a  theory  which  may  be  summed 
up  as  follows  : 

"  There  is  no  real  difference,  and  there  ought  to  be  no  per- 
manent distinction,  between  men,  other  than  that  which  proceeds 
from  personal  merit.  The  distinctions  which  are  inherent  to  the 
tenure  of  offices  are  accidental  and  ought  to  be  temporary,  in 
order  that  the  right  which  each  citizen  has  to  pretend  to  them, 
need  not  be  illusory.  All  political  power  proceeds  from  the  people 
and  returns  to  them.  To  them  alone  belongs  the  sovereignty. 
What  they  wish  is  the  law,  and  nothing  is  law  but  what  they  wish. 
If  they  cannot  exercise  the  sovereignty  themselves,  which  is  the 
case  when  their  numbers  are  too  great  for  assembling  together,  it 
must  be  exercised  by  representatives  of  their  choice,  who  can  do 
all  which  they  could  do  themselves,  and  whose  power  is  therefore 
without  limit." 

The  incompatibility  of  an  hereditary  monarchy  with  such  a 
theory  was  flagrant.  However,  the  Assembly  wished,  in  good 
faith,  to  preserve  the  monarchy  and  to  apply  to  it  the  republican 
theory  which  found  universal  support.  It  did  not  suspect  that  it 
was  difficult  to  conciliate  them  ;  ignorance  is  so  presumptuous, 
and  passions  are  so  blind.  By  the  boldest  and  most  insolent  of 
usurpations,  the  Assembly  arrogates  to  itself  this  sovereignty 
which  it  attributes  to  the  people;  it  declares  itself  constituted,  that 


THE  YEARS  PRECEDING  THE  REVOLUTION.  99 

is  to  say  invested  with  the  right  to  destroy  all  that  exists,  and  to 
substitute  in  its  place  all  that  may  please  itself. 

It  was  a  sad  certainty  that  if  the  government  wished  to  dis- 
solve it,  it  would  not  obey,  and  that  no  one  was  in  a  position  to  force 
it  to  obedience.  To  argue  against  it  would  have  served  no  purpose. 
In  restricting  one's  self  to  contesting  the  power  it  claimed,  one  did 
not  prevent  its  acting ;  to  protest  against  its  acts  was  a  measure 
full  of  danger,  and  unlikely  to  have  the  desired  effect.  But  the 
king  could  say  to  it : 

"  You  hold  as  a  principle  that  the  sovereignty  belongs  to  the 
people.  You  hold  in  fact  that  it  has  delegated  to  you  the  ex- 
ercise of  it  in  its  plenitude.  I  have  my  doubts  upon  that,  to 
say  the  least.  It  is  necessary,  above  all,  before  going  any  further, 
that  this  question  be  decided.  I  do  not  pretend  to  make  myself 
the  judge  ;  neither  can  you  be  ;  but  this  people  is  a  judge  that 
you  cannot  challenge.  I  will  interrogate  it  ;  let  its  answer  be 
our  law." 

All  the  probabilities  are,  that  if  skilfully  handled,  the  people, 
at  a  time  when  revolutionary  ideas  had  not  yet  tainted  the 
masses,  and  when  what  have  since  been  called  revolutionary 
interests  did  not  yet  exist,  would  have  disclaimed  the  doctrines 
and  disapproved  the  pretensions  of  the  Assembly.  Nothing  then 
would  have  been  easier  than  to  dissolve  it.  Being  thus  condemned, 
these  doctrines  and  these  pretensions  would  have  been  so  for 
ever.  If  the  people,  on  the  contrary,  had  sanctioned  them  by 
their  votes,  they  would  then  have  been  subjected  to  all  their 
consequences,  and  justly  subjected  to  them,  having  been  able  to 
preserve  themselves  and  not  having  willed  to  do  so  ;  and  no 
share  of  responsibility  would  have  rested  on  the  monarch.  From 
an  appeal  to  the  people,  there  would  have  followed,  it  is  true, 
the  necessity  of  recognizing  him  as  sovereign,  if  he  so  declared 
himself ;  and  this,  it  will  perhaps  be  said,  was  a  thing  to  be  avoided 
at  any  price.  But  the  appeal  to  the  people  at  the  stage 
which  was  reached,  would  not  have  created  this  necessity  ;  it 
would,  on  the  contrary,  have  presented  the  sole  chance  which 
still  existed,  of  avoiding  it,  in  rendering  it,  from  being  present 
and  absolute  as  it  was,  contingent  and  simply  possible.  The 
Assembly  attributed  to  itself  a  power,  ascribing  its  foundation  to 

H  2 


ioo  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

the  sovereignty  of  the  people,  and  which  could  have  no  other. 
This  sovereignty  was  therefore  acknowledged  as  soon  as  this 
power  was  acknowledged,  and  there  was  an  absolute  necessity 
for  acknowledging  it,  unless  the  Assembly  could  be  forced  to 
retract  or  to  dissolve  (two  things  equally  impossible),  or  the 
people  could  be  led  to  pronounce  against  its  decisions,  which 
could  not  be  done  without  making  them  the  judge.  In  this  case, 
the  people,  would,  as  I  believe,  have  fulfilled  the  hopes  placed  in 
them, — or  would  have  betrayed  these  hopes.  In  the  first  sup- 
position he  would  have  crushed  the  evil  at  its  birth,  and  caused 
the  Revolution  to  prove  abortive  ;  in  the  second,  he  would 
have  rendered  inevitable  that  which  could  only  have  been  pre- 
vented by  his  own  interference,  which  would  not  have  extended, 
but  have  simply  revealed  the  magnitude  of  the  evil.  The 
advantage  of  such  a  course  would  have  been  to  make  it  no 
longer  possible  to  entertain  any  delusion  as  to  the  real  nature 
of  this  evil  ;  it  would  no  longer  have  occurred  to  anybody  to 
check  it  by  means  that  were  only  calculated  to  aggravate  it.  It 
would  have  been  felt  that,  until  it  had  passed  through  all  its 
phases  of  development,  there  was  no  remedy  to  be  expected  from 
within  ;  its  contagiousness  would  have  become  plain  to  all,  and 
Europe  would  not  have  rocked  herself,  as  she  did,  in  a  false  and 
pernicious  security.  Thus,  even  by  the  worst  supposition,  the 
appeal  to  the  people  would  have  been  a  step  of  the  greatest 
utility,  without  any  admixture  of  inconvenience.  Why  then  was 
it  not  resorted  to  ?  From  prejudice,  perhaps,  or  from  passion, 
for  indeed  prejudices  and  passions  were  not  all  on  the  one  side  ; 
perhaps,  also,  because  this  remedy  did  not  occur  to  any  of  the 
men  who  formed  then  the  councils  of  the  king. 

After  a  few  attempts  at  force,  abandoned  almost  as  soon  as 
conceived,  they  trusted  entirely  to  intrigue  to  destroy  a  power 
that  they  had  allowed  to  become  too  strong  to  be  restrained, 
or  even  directed,  by  so  feeble  a  means.  The  Assembly  was 
therefore  left  almost  to  itself.  In  the  midst  of  the  passions 
which  agitated  it,  it  soon  lost  sight  of  all  the  constituent  princi- 
ples of  society.  It  no  longer  knew  that  there  is  for  civil  society 
a  necessary  mode  of  organization  without  which  it  could  not 
exist. 


THE  YEARS  PRECEDING  THE  REVOLUTION.  101 

Fascinated  by  the  chimerical  ideas  of  equality  and  of  the 
sovereignty  of  the  people,  the  Assembly  committed  endless  faults. 

The  king  was  styled  first  representative,  delegate  of  the 
people,  and  chief  of  the  executive  power  ;  none  of  which  titles 
were  his,  none  of  which  expressed  the  functions  which  he  ought 
to  fill  as  monarch. 

The  right  to  convene,  adjourn  and  dissolve  the  legislative 
body  was  taken  from  him. 

That  body,  having  risen  to  be  a  power,  became  permanent, 
and  was  to  be  renewed  at  fixed  periods.  It  was  to  form  but  a 
single  house. 

Every  Frenchman  of  age,  who  was  in  receipt  of  wages  and 
who  had  not  been  sentenced  to  penal  servitude  or  other  igno- 
minious punishment,  was  eligible  or  an  elector,  according  as  he 
paid  fifty  francs  in  yearly  taxes,  or  only  three  francs. 

The  elections  had  to  be  carried  out  by  a  medley  of  all 
professions. 

The  nomination  of  the  bishops,  judges,  and  public  officials 
was  ascribed  to  the  constituencies. 

The  king  had  only  the  power  of  suspending  provisionally 
public  officials.  The  right  of  dismissing  them  from  public 
service  was  vested  in  the  general  power  of  the  electors.  The 
judges  were  only  appointed  for  a  time. 

The  initiative  in  making  peace  or  war  rested  solely  with  the 
sovereign  ;  but  the  right  to  declare  the  latter  or  to  sanction 
peace  was  reserved  for  the  legislative  power. 

In  the  army,  a  scale  of  promotion  by  grades  was  established, 
which  deprived  the  king  of  two-thirds  of  his  power  of  nominating. 

The  king  could  reject  the  proposals  of  the  legislature,  but  with 
this  restriction,  that  what  three  successive  legislatures  should 
adopt,  should  become  law,  notwithstanding  the  refusal  of  the 
king  to  sanction  it. 

Such  were  the  constitutional  laws  imposed  upon  political 
and  civil  society  in  France  by  the  Assembly  ;  these  laws  only 
left  a  semblance  of  what  had  been  royal  power. 

The  men  who  had  been  the  most  anxious  to  destroy  this 
royal  power  perceived  at  last  that  they  had  gone  too  far,  and 
attempted  to  retrace  their  steps  ;  they  succeeded  only  in  losing 


102  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

their  popularity.  The  torrent  formed  by  ignorance  and  passion 
was  so  violent  that  it  was  impossible  to  stem  it. 

Those  who  foresaw  its  ravages  most  clearly,  were  compelled 
to  confine  themselves  as  much  as  prudence  allowed,  to  playing  a 
passive  part. 

This  I  resolved  to  do  on  most  questions.  However,  I  felt 
that  I  ought  to  speak  on  several  matters  relative  to  State 
finance.  I  opposed  the  creation  of  paper  money,  and  the  reduction 
of  the  interest  on  the  national  debt.  I  established,  in  a  rather 
extensive  essay,  the  principles  on  which  I  believed  a  national 
bank  should  be  founded.  I  proposed  the  establishment  of  uni- 
formity in  weights  and  measures.  I  charged  myself,  also,  with 
the  report  of  the  Constitutional  Committee  on  Public  Instruc- 
tion.1 To  accomplish  this  great  work,  I  consulted  the  most  learned 
men,  and  the  most  prominent  scholars  of  the  time,  amongst  whom 
I  may  mention  M.  de  Lagrange,2  M.  de  Lavoisier,3  M.  de  la  Place, 
M.   Monge,2  M.  de  Condorcet,  M.  Vicq  d'Azyr,3  and  M.  de  la 

1  The  following  is  a  brief  statement  of  the  part  played  by  Talleyrand  at  the  Con- 
stituent Assembly  :  He  proposed  the  nullification  of  the  imperative  mandates  (July  7, 
1789)  ;  was  elected  member  of  the  Committee  appointed  to  draft  a  constitution  (July 
1 3)  ;  urged  the  suppression  of  tithes  (August  11);  caused  the  adoption  of  certain  articles 
in  the  declaration  of  rights  (August  21)  ;  proposed  proper  measures  to  insure  a  loan 
(August  27)  ;  proposed  to  apply  the  wealth  of  the  clergy  to  the  needs  of  the  State 
(October  10)  ;  presented  a  police  regulation  for  Paris  (November  5)  ;  proposed  to  make 
an  inventory  of  the  properties  of  the  clergy  (November  7)  ;  was  appointed  to  examine 
the  state  of  the  Bank  of  Discount  (November  26)  ;  rendered  an  account  of  this  exam- 
ination (December  4) ;  proposed  to  consider  the  Jews  as  citizens  (January  28,  1790)  ; 
proposed  an  address  to  the  people  to  induce  calmness  (February  9)  ;  elected  President 
of  the  Assembly  by  373  votes  against  125  for  Sieyes  (February  26)  ;  proposed  a  method 
for  the  conveyance  and  sale  of  the  national  lands  (June  13)  ;  opposed  the  issue  of 
2,000,000,000  of  francs  *  of  paper  money  (September  18) ;  reported  on  the  rights  of 
registration  (November  22)  ;  speech  on  the  re-coinage  of  money  (December  12)  ; 
caused  the  adoption  of  a  project  of  law  on  the  unification  of  weights  and  measures 
(March  26,  1791)  ;  reported  on  a  decree  of  the  Department  of  Paris  relative  to 
religious  freedom  (May  7)  ;  drew  up  a  report    on  public  instruction  (September  10). 

■  Joseph-Louis  Lagrange,  born  at  Turin  in  1736  of  French  parents,  was  at  eighteen 
years  of  age  the  first  mathematician  of  Europe.  In  1766,  Frederick  II.  called  him  to 
Berlin  as  President  of  the  Academy.  He  came  to  Paris  in  1786,  entered  the  Institut 
in  1795,  was  appointed  senator  under  the  Empire,  and  died  in  1813. 

3  Laurent  Lavoisier,  born  at  Paris  in  1743,  entered  the  Academy  of  Sciences  at 
twenty-five  years  of  age,  and  obtained,  soon  after,  the  post  of  fermier-general.  He 
was  the  first  chemist  of  his  time.  Arrested  under  the  Terror,  he  was  guillotined  on 
May  8,  1794. 

4  Gaspard  Monge,  born  at  Beaune  in  1746,  was  at  first  professor  at  the  School  of 
Engineers  at  Mezieres.  He  entered  the  Academy  of  Sciences  in  1780.  Minister  of 
Marine  after  August  10,  he  was  appointed  a  member  of  the  Institut.  He  accom- 
panied Napoleon,  later,  to  Egypt,  and  became  President  of  the  Institute  of  Cairo. 
Napoleon  appointed  him  senator  and  Comte  de  Peluse.     He  died  in  1818. 

6  Felix  Vicq  d'Azir,  born  at  Valognes  in  1748,  studied  medicine,  and  opened,  in 
*  ,£80,000,000. 


THE   YEARS  PRECEDING  THE  REVOLUTION.  103 

Harpe.1  All  assisted  me.  The  reputation  this  work  has 
acquired  demanded  that  I  should  name  them. 

A  circumstance  occurred,  in  which,  in  spite  of  all  my  repug- 
nance, I  thought  it  necessary  to  come  to  the  front.  Here  are  the 
motives  which  decided  me. 

The  Assembly  pretended  to  regulate  alone  and  by  civil  law 
that  which  until  then  had  been  regulated  only  by  a  concourse 
of  the  spiritual  and  temporal  powers  and  by  canonical  and  civil 
laws.  It  made  a  particular  constitution  for  the  clergy,2  exacting 
from  all  the  ecclesiastics  in  function  an  oath  to  conform  to  it, 
under  pain  of  being  considered  as  resigning.  Nearly  all  the 
bishops  refused  to  do  so,  and  their  seats  being  considered  vacant, 
the  constituents  nominated  people  to  fill  them.  These  newly 
elected  bishops  were  only  too  ready  to  dispense  with  the  institu- 
tion given  by  the  Court  of  Rome  ;  but  they  could  not  do  without 
the  episcopal  character  which  could  only  be  conferred  upon  them 
by  men  who  had  received  it.  If  no  one  should  be  found  to  confer 
it  upon  them,  it  was  greatly  to  be  feared,  not  that  all  religion 
would  be  proscribed,  as  came  to  pass  a  few  years  after,  but,  what 
seemed  to  me  more  dangerous  seeing  that  it  might  have  been 
more  lasting,  that  the  Assembly,  by  the  doctrines  it  had  sanc- 
tioned, might  soon  force  the  country  into  Presbyterianism,  more 
in  accord  with  the  ruling  opinions,  and  that  France  could  not  be 
drawn  back  to  Catholicism,  whose  hierarchy  and  forms  are  in 
harmony  with  those  of  the  monarchical  system.  I  lent,  there- 
fore, my  services  to  consecrate  one  of  the  newly-elected  bishops, 
who  in  his  turn,  consecrated  the  others.3 

1773,  brilliant  lectures  on  anatomy.  Member  of  the  Academy  of  Sciences  (1774), 
and  of  the  French  Academy,  where  he  succeeded  Buffon.  First  physician  to  the 
queen  (1789).  He  was  the  last  chancellor  of  the  old  Academy  (June,  1793),  which 
was  suppressed  on  August  8  following.      He  died  June  20,  1794. 

1  J.-Fr.  de  la  Harpe,  born  in  Paris  in  1739,  litterateur  and  critic.  The  literary 
lectures  he  was  entrusted  with  at  the  establishment  that  Pilatre  des  Roziers  had  just 
founded  under  the  name  of  Lycee,  made  his  reputation.  La  Harpe  was  arrested  under 
the  Terror,  and  proscribed  on  Fructidor  18.      He  died  in  1803. 

s  The  civil  constitution  was  voted  by  the  Assembly  on  July  12,  1790.  It  is  known 
that  it  reduced  the  number  of  dioceses,  decreed  the  election  by  the  people  of  bishops 
and  curates,  and  suppressed  the  canonical  institution.  This  was  the  origin  of  the 
schism  which  divided  the  Church  of  France  into  sworn  and  unsworn  clergy. 

3  Talleyrand  had  been  chosen  as  consecrating  prelate,  and  with  him  Gobel,  Bishop 
of  Lydda,  and  Miroudot,  Bishop  of  Babylon.  On  February  24,  1791,  Talleyrand 
consecrated  the  first  two  constitutional  bishops — Expilly,  Bishop  of  Finistere,  and 
Marolles,  Bishop  of  Aisne — in  the  Church  of  the  Oratoire,  Rue  St.  Honore. 


104  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

This  done,  I  gave  in  my  resignation  of  the  bishopric  of 
Autun,  and  I  thought  only  of  abandoning  the  first  career  I 
had  followed  ;  I  put  myself  at  the  disposition  of  events,  and, 
provided  I  remained  a  Frenchman,  all  else  contented  me. 
The  Revolution  promised  new  destinies  for  the  nation  ;  I  fol- 
lowed its  course  and  ran  my  chances.  I  devoted  to  it  the  best 
of  all  my  energies,  being  resolved  to  serve  my  country  for  herself, 
and  I  placed  all  my  hopes  on  the  constitutional  principles  that 
were  believed  to  be  so  nearly  attained.  This  explains  how  and 
why,  at  several  periods,  I  entered,  and  re-entered  public  life  ; 
it  also  throws  light  on  the  part  I  have  played. 


APPENDIX.1 

Note  of  M.  de  Bacoart  on  the  interviews  of  Prince   Talleyrand 

with  the  Comte  d'A  rtois. 

We  wish  to  add  to  this  passage  some  details  which  M.  de 
Talleyrand  had  neglected  or  perhaps  forgotten. 

It  is  a  positive  fact  that  at  the  time  to  which  this  passage 
relates,  M.  de  Talleyrand  had  several  interviews  with  the  Comte 
d'Artois,  in  which  he  sought  to  convince  the  prince  of  the  neces- 
sity for  taking  forcible  measures,  and  while  maintaining  the 
concessions  which  the  king  had  already  made,  to  repress  with 
vigour  the  popular  agitation  which  was  manifesting  itself  daily, 
and  which  had  already  caused  bloodshed  in  the  streets  of  the 
capital.  The  most  important,  and  the  last  of  these  inter- 
views, took  place  at  Marly  on  the  night  of  the  16th  to  the  17th 
of  July,  1789,  that  is  to  say,  a  few  hours  before  the  prince  left 
France.  When  M.  de  Talleyrand  presented  himself  at  the 
residence  of  the  Comte  d'Artois,  this  prince  had  already  retired, 
but  nevertheless  received  him  for  an  interview  which  lasted  more 
than  two  hours.  M.  de  Talleyrand  exposed  anew  all  the  dangers 
of  the  situation,  and  begged  the  prince  to  make  them  known  to 
the  king.  The  Comte  d'Artois  was  much  affected,  arose  and  re- 
paired to  the  king,  and,  after  quite  a  prolonged  absence,  returned 
to  declare  to  M.  de  Talleyrand  that  nothing  could  be  effected 
with  the  king,  who  was  resolved  to  yield  rather  than  to  cause  a 
single  drop  of  blood  to  be  shed  by  resisting  the  popular  outbreaks. 
"As  for  me,"  added  the  Comte  d'Artois,  "  my  decision  is  made  ; 

1  See  page  94. 


THE   YEARS  PRECEDING  THE  REVOLUTION.  105 

I  depart  to-morrow,  and  I  leave  France."  M.  de  Talleyrand 
entreated  the  prince  in  vain  to  renounce  this  resolution,  repre- 
senting to  him  the  difficulties  and  dangers  it  might  bring  on  him 
in  the  present,  both  concerning  his  rights  and  those  of  his  children 
in  the  future.  The  Comte  d'Artois  persisted,  and  M.  de  Talley- 
rand concluded  by  saying  to  him  :  "Then,  Monseigneur,  it  only 
remains  for  each  of  us  to  think  of  his  own  interests,  since  the 
king  and  the  princes  desert  theirs  and  those  of  the  monarchy." — 
"  Indeed,"  replied  the  prince,  "  that  is  what  I  advise  you  to 
do  ;  whatever  happens  I  shall  never  blame  you  ;  and  you  may 
always  rely  on  my  friendship." — The  Comte  d'Artois  emigrated 
on  the  morrow. 

In  the  month  of  April,  18 14,  M.  de  Talleyrand,  having  be- 
come President  of  the  Provisory  Government,  found  himself  in 
a  position  to  announce  to  the  Comte  d'Artois,  who  was 
then  at  Nancy  with  his  attendants,  awaiting  the  issue  of  events, 
that  Louis  XVIII.  was  called  to  the  throne,  and  that  the  prince 
himself  was  invited  to  return  to  Paris  to  take  charge  of  the 
government  as  lieutenant-general  of  the  kingdom.  He  charged 
the  Baron  de  Vitrolles1  with  this  mission,  and  as  the  latter  was 
about  to  leave,  and  while  the  despatch  for  the  prince  was  being 
sealed,  Talleyrand  told  the  baron  the  story  of  the  interview  of 
the  night  of  July  16,  1789,  while  walking  up  and  down  the 
entresol  of  his  hotel  in  the  Rue  Saint  Florentin.  After  which 
he  said  to  him,  "  Do  me  the  favour  of  asking  the  Comte  d'Artois 
if  he  recollects  this  little  incident." 

M.  de  Vitrolles,  after  having  delivered  his  important  message, 
did  not  fail  to  put  to  the  prince  the  question  as  requested  by 

1  Eugene  d'Amaud,  Baron  de  Vitrolles,  was  born  in  1774  at  the  chateau  of  this 
name  in  Provence.  His  family  was  one  of  the  oldest  in  the  country.  He  was  the 
grand-nephew  of  the  illustrious  bailli  de  Suffren.  He  emigrated  in  1790,  and  entered 
as  volunteer  in  the  army  of  Conde.  He  returned  to  France  in  1797  after  the  18th  Bru- 
rnaire,  he  was  struck  off  the  list  of  the  emigres,  thanks  to  the  intervention  of  General 
Bernadotte,  who,  when  a  sergeant  in  the  regiment  of  the  Royal  Marines,  had  been 
his  fencing  master.  M.  de  Vitrolles  was  mayor  and  councillor-general  under  the 
Empire.  In  1812,  he  was  appointed  inspector  of  flocks — a  post  which  had  just  been 
created  for  inspecting  and  favouring  the  breeding  of  merinoes  in  France.  M.  de 
Vitrolles  took  a  leading  part  in  the  first  Restoration.  To  his  personal  action  was 
perhaps  due  the  decision  of  the  allied  sovereigns  to  march  on  Paris,  which  brought 
about  the  fall  of  the  Empire.  Minister  of  State  in  1814,  royal  commissioner  at 
Toulouse  in  181 5,  he  was  arrested  by  the  order  of  Napoleon,  and  remained  in  prison 
during  the  period  of  the  Hundred  Days.  He  was  a  Member  of  the  Chambre 
introuvable*  and  deprived  in  1818  of  his  post  of  minister.  In  1827,  Charles  X. 
appointed  him  minister  at  Florence,  and  peer  of  France  in  July,  1830.  M.  de  Vitrolles 
did  not  support  the  monarchy  of  July.  He  died  in  retirement  in  1854.  He  lett 
interesting  memoirs  on  the  Restoration,  which  are  well  known. 

*  The  Chambre  introuvable — This  was  the  name  given  to  the  Chamber  elected  in  1815,  on  account 
of  the  exaggeration  of  its  rovalist  opinions.  It  could  scarcely  have  been  anticipated  that  the  imperial 
constituencies  should  return  such  a  parliament.  On  learning  the  composition  of  this  Chamber,  which 
he  was  to  dissolve  ten  months  later,  Louis  XVIII.  was  delighted  and  said  several  times:  "Chambre 
introuvable  !  Chambre  introuvable  !"     It  exceeded  indeed  his  most  sanguine  hopes. — {Translator.) 


106  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

M.  de  Talleyrand  ;  to  which  the  Comte  d'Artois  replied,  "  I 
recollect  the  circumstance  perfectly,  and  M.  de  Talleyrand's 
account  is  exact  in  every  particular." 

Having  been  informed  that  M.  de  Vitrolles  had  related  this 
anecdote  to  several  persons,  we  thought  it  advisable  to  appeal 
to  his  memory  and  to  his  loyalty.  To  justify  this  expression 
"  loyalty,"  it  must  be  told  that  M.  de  Vitrolles,  after  the  Revolu- 
tion of  July,  1830,  had  ceased  all  intercourse  with  M.  de 
Talleyrand,  and  expressed  himself  very  severely  in  regard  to 
him.  This  will  explain  the  tone  of  hostility  and  of  bitter- 
ness which  pervades  M.  de  Vitrolles'  letter,  which  we  insert  here. 
We  think  that  for  the  reader,  as  for  us,  this  hostility  will  only 
further  confirm  the  sincerity  of  M.  de  Vitrolles'  declaration, 
and  the  authenticity  of  the  passage  in  the  memoirs  of  M. 
de  Talleyrand.  The  slight  divergence  which  will  be  observed 
between  the  account  given  to  us  by  M.  de  Talleyrand  and  that 
of  M.  de  Vitrolles'  letter  will  explain  itself  naturally  as  the 
effect  of  the  time  that  had  elapsed  since  the  occurrence,  and 
which  had  modified  the  recollections  of  the  two  narrators.  It, 
nevertheless,  remains  a  fact,  that  in  July,  1789,  M.  de  Talleyrand 
believed  that  the  progress  of  revolutionary  events  might  be 
arrested,  that  he  had  the  moral  courage  to  say  so,  and  to  pro- 
pose to  undertake  to  check  it.  He  is  not  the  only  one,  perhaps, 
who  boasted  of  so  doing  afterwards  ;  we  think  we  have  proved 
that  his  boast,  at  least,  was  not  unjustified.  Here  is  the  letter  of 
M.  de  Vitrolles  :— 

The  Baron  de  Vitrolles  to  M.  de  Bacourt.1 

Paris,  April  6tk,  1852. 

Sir, 

You  are  good  enough  to  consider  as  of  some  value  the 
testimony  I  might  furnish  respecting  a  particular  incident  in  the 
life  of  Prince  de  Talleyrand  ;  I  think  I  cannot  better  comply 
with  your  wishes  than  in  transcribing  here  what  I  wrote  many 
years  ago,  in  connection  with  the  events  of  18 14. 

When   His  Majesty  the  Emperor  of  Russia  and  the  Prince 

1  Adolphe  Fourier  de  Bacourt,  born  in  1801.  He  entered  diplomacy  in  1822, 
and  was  sent  in  1830  to  London.  M.  de  Talleyrand  noticed  him  there,  and 
attached  him  to  his  person.  In  1835,  he  was  appointed  minister  at  Carlsruhe,  and 
then  at  Washington,  1840.  Ambassador  to  Turin  in  1842,  he  resigned  in  1848.  He 
had  been  appointed  a  peer  of  France.  During  the  early  portion  of  his  career,  Bacourt 
had  made,  at  the  Hague,  the  acquaintance  of  the  Comte  de  la  Marck,  who  entrusted 
to  him  his  correspondence  with  Mirabeau.  He  published  it  in  1851.  He  undertook 
afterwards  the  publication  of  the  present  memoirs.  (It  is  known  that  Prince  de 
Talleyrand  had  left  the  care  of  their  publication  to  the  Duchesse  de  Dino,  his  niece, 

and,  in  case  she  died,  to  M.   de  Bacourt.)     He  died  in  1865.     He  left  memoirs, 

published  since  by  his  niece,  the  Comtesse  de  Mirabeau. 


THE  YEARS  PRECEDING  THE  REVOLUTION.  107 

de  Talleyrand  were  convinced  that  the  presence  of  the  king's 
brother  endowed  with  the  powers  of  lieutenant-general  of  the 
kingdom  was  necessary,  and  I  was  about  to  leave  with  the  object 
of  inducing  Monsieur  to  return  to  Paris,  I  had  several  con- 
ferences on  this  subject  with  the  President  of  the  Provisory 
Government.  In  a  last  interview,  at  the  moment  of  departure, 
we  had  talked  of  the  conditions  and  ceremonies  for  the  reception 
of  Monseignenr.  After  a  moment's  silence,  Prince  de  Talley- 
rand said,  with  his  wheedling  smile,  and  in  a  tone  which  he 
endeavoured  to  make  careless  and  almost  indifferent  : — 

"  I  beg  of  you  to  ask  the  Comte  d'Artois  if  he  recollects 
"  the  last  occasion  on  which  I  saw  him  ;  it  was  in  the  month 
"  of  July,  1789.  The  court  was  at  Marly.  Three  or  four  of 
"  my  friends,  struck  like  myself  with  the  rapidity  and  the  violence 
"  of  the  agitation  which  was  stirring  all  minds,  resolved  with  me 
"  to  acquaint  the  king,  Louis  XVI.,  with  the  real  situation  of 
"  affairs,  which  the  court  and  the  ministers  seemed  to  ignore. 
"  We  requested  His  Majesty  to  be  so  kind  as  to  receive  us  ; 
"  we  desired  for  his  good  as  for  our  own  that  this  audience 
"  should  be  kept  secret.  The  reply  was  that  the  king  had 
"  charged  his  brother,  the  Comte  d'Artois,  to  receive  us ;  the 
"  appointment  was  made  for  Marly,  in  the  pavilion  occupied  by 
"  the  Comte  d'Artois  alone.     We  arrived  there  at  midnight." 

M.  de  Talleyrand  named  to  me  the  precise  date,  and  the 
names  of  the  friends  who  accompanied  him  :  they  were  members 
of  the  National  Assembly  and  of  that  minority  of  the  nobility 
who  were  in  the  Third  Estate  ;  I  recollect  neither  the  date  nor 
the  names. 

"  When  we  were  in  the  presence  of  the  Comte  d'Artois," 
continued  M.  de  Talleyrand,  "we  exposed  to  him  in  all  frank- 
"  ness  the  situation  of  affairs,  and  of  the  State,  as  it  appeared  to 
"  us.  We  said  to  him  that  it  was  a  great  mistake  to  believe  that 
"  the  agitation  which  was  stirring  all  minds  could  easily  be 
"  calmed.  It  was  not  by  delays,  caution,  and  a  few  concessions, 
"  that  the  dangers  which  menaced  France,  the  throne,  and  the 
"  king  could  be  averted.  It  was  by  an  energetic  display  of  the 
"  royal  authority,  wisely  and  skilfully  employed.  We  know  the 
"  ways  and  the  means  and  the  position  which  would  enable  us  to 
"  undertake  this,  and  guarantee  our  succeeding,  if  the  con- 
"  fidence  of  the  king  should  entrust  us  with  it.  The  Comte 
"  d'Artois  listened  to  us  attentively,  and  fully  understood  us, 
"  though  he  was,  perhaps,  inclined  to  think  that  we  were  exag- 
"  gerating  the  danger  of  the  situation  and  our  importance  in 
"  remedying  it.  But,  as  he  said  to  us,  he  had  only  been 
"  instructed   by  the   king  to  hear  us,  and  to  report  to  him  what 


io8  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

"  we  wished  to  make  known  to  him  ;  he  had  no  answer  to  give 
"  us,  and  no  power  to  engage  the  will  or  the  word  of  the  king. 
"  When  we  had  reached  this  point,  we  begged  of  the  Comte 
"  d'Artois  permission  to  add,  that  if  the  application  we  now 
"  made  conscientiously  and  in  good  faith  was  not  appreciated,  if 
"  it  had  no  effect  and  led  to  no  result,  Monseigneur  must  not 
"  be  astonished  if,  not  being  able  to  resist  the  torrent  which 
"  threatened  to  carry  all  before  it,  we  should  support  the  new 
"  state  of  affairs.  .  .  .  Ask,  I  pray  you,  of  Monsieur"  repeated 
M.  de  Talleyrand,  "  if  the  conversation  of  that  night  has  left 
"  any  trace  in  his  memory.  It  was  almost  at  the  very  time 
"  when  he  left  France." 

I  admired  the  subtilty  of  this  mind,  which  found,  in  one  of 
its  recollections,  an  explanation,  an  excuse,  and  almost  a  jus- 
tification of  all  his  revolutionary  life  ;  he  could  have  found  many 
others  to  serve  him  in  very  different  and  even  contrary  circum- 
stances. In  listening  to  this  story,  which  was  related  with  a  sort 
of  indifference  and  unaffected  simplicity,  I  took  the  liberty  of 
doubting  whether  what  might  remain  in  the  memory  of  Monsieur 
would  be  entirely  consonant  with  the  words  I  had  just  heard. 
However,  when,  at  Nancy,  I  remembered  the  request  of  M.  de 
Talleyrand,  Monseigneur  said  to  me,  without  entering  into  any 
detail,  that  he  had  not  forgotten  this  circumstance,  and  that  all 
I  had  repeated  to  him  was  the  exact  truth. 

I  hope,  Sir,  that  this  testimony  will  meet  with  your  expecta- 
tions. I  thank  you  for  having  offered  me  this  opportunity  of 
giving  you  the  assurance  of  my  highest  regard. 

Baron  de  Vitrolles. 


END   OF   THE   FIRST   PART. 


PART    II. 

THE  DUC  D'ORLEANS.1 

General  considerations  on  the  importance  of  private  Memoirs  and  reliable 
biographies  to  history — Lineage  of  Louis-Philippe-Joseph,  fifth  Due 
d'Orle'ans — His  early  years  and  dispositions — His  education — Hisfrivolity 
and  dryness  of  heart — His  marriage  with  Mademoiselle  de  Penthievre — 
Associates  of  the  Due  d'Orle'ans — M.  de  Voyer— Abbe*  Yvon — M.  de 
Lille — M.  de  Voyer's  philosophy — M.  de  Voyer  and  M.  de  Maurepas — 
The  Prince  de  Lamballe — The  Marquis  de  Conflans — Cruel  indifference 
of  the  Due  d'Orle'ans — M.  de  Biron — The  liaisons  of  the  Due  d'Orle'ans 
— The  Princesse  de  Bouillon — The  Marquise  de  Fleury — The  Princesse 
de  Lamballe — Madame  de  Sillery,  Comtesse  de  Genlis — Her  influence 
over  the  Due  de  Chartres — Her  literary  productions — Count  de  Cagliostro 
— The  Chevalier  de  Luxembourg — Speculations  of  the  Due  d'Orle'ans 
— Outrageous  proceedings  of  this  prince  towards  his  treasurer,  Se"guin — 
The  Due  d'Orle'ans  wishes  to  become  grand-admiral — He  is  appointed 
colonel-general  of  hussars — Mademoiselle  Arnould,  the  famous  actress — 
Journey  of  the  Due  d'Orleans  to  England  and  to  Italy — He  falls 
seriously  ill  —  Grand-master  of  the  freemasons  —  Debauchery  and 
depravity  of  the  Due  d'Orleans — Agitation  in  France — Forebodings  of 
the  Revolution — The  deficit — M.  de  Calonne  summons  an  assembly  of 
the  Notables — Intrigues  of  the  Due  d'Orleans  against  the  king — The 
Marquis  Ducrest — Ambition  of  the  Due  d'Orleans— Measures  taken  by 

1  The  second  house  of  Orleans  descends  from  Philippe  I.,  Due  d'Orleans,  junior 
son  of  Louis  XIII-  Louis-Philippe-Joseph,  of  whom  we  are  about  to  speak  here, 
is  the  fifth  prince  of  this  house.  His  mother  was  a  Princess  de  Bourbon-Conti. 
He  was  born  in  1747.  Ail  his  life  he  carried  on  asystematic  opposition  to  the  Court, 
and  became,  in  1787,  the  leader  of  all  the  malcontents.  Exiled  in  1787,  Deputy  to 
the  States-General,  he  was  one  of  the  first  to  go  over  to  the  Third  Estate.  He  became 
a  member  of  the  Jacobin  Club.  The  part  he  played  in  the  Convention  is  well  known. 
He  died  on  the  scaffold,  November  6,  1793.  He  had  married  Louise  de  Bourbon- 
Penthievre,  daughter  of  the  Due  de  Penthievre  and  of  Marie  Therese  d'Este,  who  was 
one  of  the  most  virtuous  and  most  distinguished  ladies  of  her  time.  Imprisoned  in 
1793,  she  was  saved  by  the  coup  d'etat  of  Thermidor  9,  and  exiled  to  Spain  (1797). 
She  returned  to  Paris  in  1814.  The  Due  d'Orleans  had  three  sons  :  the  Due  de 
Chartres,  afterwards  King  Louis  Philippe,  the  Due  de  Montpensier,  and  the  Comte 
de  Beaujolais. 


no  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

the  Archbishop  of  Toulouse  against  the  ftarlements — M.  and  Mdme.  de 
Semonville— A  loan  of  ,£16,000,000— General  discontent  of  the  people 
— Louis  XVI.  refuses  to  allow  the  Due  d"Orleans  to  go  on  a  visit  to 
England — Differences  between  the  Queen  and  the  Due  d'Orleans — 
Trianon — The  Due  d'Orleans  becomes  the  head  of  all  malcontents — M. 
de  Limon's  ability — Abbe  Sabatier  de  Cabre — The  lits  de  justice — The 
Marquis  de  Lamognon — The  edict  of  1787  and  the  Protestants — The 
sitting  of  November  19,  1787 — M.  d'Espresmenil — Public  protest 
of  the  Due  d'Orleans  against  the  king's  orders — Lepelletier  de  St.- 
Fargeau — Imprisonment  of  the  Abbes  Freteau  and  Sabatier — Exile  of 
the  Due  d'Orleans — Popular  outburst  of  sympathy  on  this  measure  being 
known — Intervention  of  the  parlement  of  Paris — Energetic  attitude  of 
Louis  XVI. — The  Due  d'Orleans  forgiven  by  the  king — Struggle  between 
M.  de  Brienne  and  the  parlements — Stringent  measures  of  the  govern- 
ment— Premonitory  symptoms  of  the  Revolution — Riot  in  the  Faubourg 
St.-Antoine — M.  de  Laclos — Abbe"  Sidyes— Project  of  reforms  drawn  up 
by  the  Due  d'Orleans  for  the  States-General — Judgment  of  Prince 
Talleyrand  on  the  political  part  played  by  the  Due  d'Orleans — The 
origin  and  causes  of  the  Revolution. 

The  private  memoirs  and  lives  of  celebrated  men  are  the 
source  of  true  history  ;  as  compared  with  tradition,  which  is 
always  credulous  and  even  superstitious,  they  serve  to  criticize  its 
accounts  or  to  support  them,  and  help  with  it  to  give  history 
the  character  of  authenticity  to  which  it  lays  claim. 

Bythis  means  the  times  of  Henry  III.,  Henry  IV.,  Louis  XIII., 
and  of  Louis  XIV.,  have  become  well  known,  and  the  history  of 
these  reigns  has  been  received  with  more  confidence.  The  follow- 
ing period,  though  nearer  to  the  days  we  live  in,  has  not,  up  to  the 
present,  been  so  favourably  treated  ;  it  has  not  furnished  us  with 
such  abundant  sources  of  information.  It  seems  that  traditions 
alone  founded  the  historical  facts  generally  believed  with  regard 
to  these  times. 

The  Steele  de  Louis  XIV.,  by  M.de  Voltaire,  is  a  production 
sui generis.  It  belongs  to  the  style  of  memoirs  by  its  simple, 
natural  tone,  and  the  mention  of  a  few  anecdotes,  but  it  often 
rises  to  general  views  of  a  lofty  and  superior  order.  It  is 
evident  that  M.  de  Voltaire  did  not  intend  to  write  the  history 
of  the  reign  of  Louis  XIV,  and  that  he  wished  to  confine  him- 
self to  sketching  in  broad  outline  the  chief  events  of  that  reign. 

A  well-written  life  of  M.  de   Colbert  or  of  M.  de  Louvois 


THE  DUC  U ORLEANS.  1 1 1 

would  give  a  correct  idea  of  what  the  government  of  that  great 
king  was.  A  work  of  this  kind  on  the  ministry  of  the  Due  de 
Choiseul  would  acquaint  us  with  the  spirit  which  prevailed  at 
court  and  in  the  administration  under  the  reign  of  Louis  XV. 
I  have  thought  that  a  picture  of  the  life  of  the  Due  d'Orleans 
would  give  the  features  and  the  colour  of  the  weak  and  transient 
reign  of  Louis  XVI.;  that  it  would  set  forth  in  a  tangible  manner 
the  general  laxity  of  public  and  private  manners  under  that 
reign,  as  well  as  the  degradation  in  the  form  of  government  and 
in  the  habits  of  the  administration;  that  a  work  undertaken  with 
this  view,  would  faithfully  depict  the  character  of  an  important 
period  of  French  history. 

In  the  lapse  of  three  centuries,  at  very  nearly  equal  intervals, 
the  form  of  government  in  France  has  been  threatened  by 
outbreaks,  each  of  which  bore  a  particular  stamp.  The  first 
two,  the  Ligne  and  the  Fronde,  hastened  the  development 
of  national  greatness  and  power  ;  there  was  something  grand 
and  noble  in  the  audacity  and  in  the  methods  of  the  Guises 
and  of  Cardinal  de  Retz  :  it  was  the  seduction  of  that  time. 

As  for  the  last  outbreak,  that  which  we  have  just  witnessed,  it 
has  been  but  a  frightful  catastrophe.  The  Due  d'Orleans  who 
made  himself  conspicuous  in  it,  only  joined  in  it  from  his  love  of 
disorder,  his  contempt  for  decency,  and  his  self-abandonment ; 
such  were  the  glory,  the  taste,  and  the  intrigues  of  those  days. — 
I  now  enter  upon  my  subject. 

I  cannot  say  what  part  the  different  parties  who  ruled  in  France 
from  the  beginning  of  the  Revolution  will  ascribe  to  the  Due 
d'Orleans,  when  they  depict,  each  for  his  own  apology,  the  great 
scenes  of  that  Revolution.  Provided  that  they  attribute  to 
him  only  wrongs  which  can  result  from  the  most  extreme 
weakness  of  character,  the  facts  of  the  case,  though  not  correct, 
will  be  at  least  probable.  His  entire  life  would  prove  it.  The 
circumstances  in  which  he  was  placed,  changed  often,  but  he,  as 
a  child,  as  a  young  man,  or  as  a  man  of  mature  age,  was  always 
and  invariably  the  same. 

Although  I  can  furnish  the  most  curious  and  least  known 
details  concerning  the  life  and  character  of  the  Due  d'Orleans,  I 
would  allow  all  recollection  of  them  to  be  lost  to  my  memory  if 


112  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

they  were  merely  meant  to  gratify  curiosity,  but  it  struck  me 
that  they  might  serve  some  useful  end  ;  I  therefore  collected 
them. 

In  a  country  where  some  elections  still  take  place,  it  is 
advisable  to  furnish  the  characteristic  signs  by  which  the  men 
who  ought  to  be  removed  from  the  theatre  of  affairs  may  be 
recognized.  The  Due  d'Orleans  is  a  remarkable  instance  of  this. 
Any  man  who,  in  youth,  affects  deep  contempt  for  public 
opinion,  and  whose  habits,  besides,  are  so  depraved  that  he  does 
not  respect  himself,  will,  when  he  advances  in  years,  not  know 
any  other  limit  to  his  vices  than  the  sterility  of  his  own  imagina- 
tion or  of  that  of  the  persons  who  surround  him.  Were  it  not 
important  to  know  exactly  the  degree  of  consanguinity  which 
existed  between  Louis  XVI.  and  the  Due  d'Orleans,  there  would 
be  no  need  for  me  to  say  what  were  the  advantages  the  first 
prince  of  the  blood  of  the  House  of  Bourbon  could  boast.  It 
is  by  placing  the  latter  in  the  midst  of  all  the  advantages  he 
enjoyed,  it  is  by  confronting  him  with  all  his  obligations,  that 
his  character  will  be  better  understood.  It  will  be  seen  what  he 
trampled  under  foot,  what  ties  he  broke,  what  sentiments  he 
smothered,  what  position  he  degraded. 

It  was  a  powerful  title  to  the  love  of  the  French  to  be 
descended  from  Henry  IV.  France  was  accustomed  to  revere 
in  the  first  prince  of  the  blood,  the  first  of  subjects,  one  who 
was  great  enough  to  protect,  though  not  to  oppress  her,  who 
was  more  powerful  than  any  other  individual,  but  less  powerful 
than  the  law,  and  than  the  king,  who  was  the  living  representa- 
tive of  the  law.  He  was  one  of  the  most  natural  channels  by 
which  the  private  beneficence  of  the  king  could  descend 
upon  the  people,  and  the  gratitude  of  the  people  ascend  to 
the  throne.1 

It  need  not  be  expected  that  I  shall  give  full  details  as  to  the 
first  years  of  the  Due  de  Chartres.  I  will  not  imitate  those  who 
endeavour  to  seek  in  the  babblings  of  a  child  the  horoscope  of  his 
vices  and  of  his  virtues.  I  leave  that  to  persons  who  write  with 
a  system  ;  I  have  none. 

1  There  is  here  in  Talleyrand's  own  manuscript  a  blank  of  eight  leaves,  for  which 
we  have  vainly  sought  explanation. 


THE  D  UC  D' ORLEANS.  1 1 3 

The  Due  de  Chartres,  having  passed  from  childhood,  entered 
upon  his  education,  but  then  his  governesses  were  men,  for 
there  was  little  difference  between  his  nurses  and  his  first 
teachers,  other  than  the  difference  of  woman's  weakness  and 
man's  complaisance.  Yet  when  speaking  of  him,  people  often 
remarked,  "  If  he  is  not  very  well  brought  up,  he  will  at  least  be 
good.  The  Orleans  are  good."  That  goodness  of  which 
people  felt  so  sure,  led  the  prince's  tutors  to  devote  as  little 
attention  to  his  character  as  to  his  studies.  As  he  had  a  very 
elegant  figure,  they  sought  to  have  it  developed  by  physical 
exercises.  Few  young  people  could  ride  a  horse  as  well  and 
with  as  much  grace  as  he.  He  was  a  good  fencer  and  a  good 
shot ;  at  the  ball  he  always  attracted  notice.  All  the  members 
of  the  old  Court  of  France  who  are  still  alive  repent  having 
applauded  him  as  he  danced  the  Bearnaise  dressed  as  Henry  IV., 
or  other  aristocratic  steps  in  the  holiday  dress  worn  by  young 
people  at  the  court  of  Louis  XIV.  Although  in  the  defence  of  his 
petty  interests,  and  in  his  intercourse  with  children  of  his  age,  he 
displayed  a  certain  accuracy  of  judgment,  he  learned  absolutely 
nothing.  He  began  to  study  a  few  sciences,  and  a  few  languages, 
but  never  could  master  even  the  rules  of  orthography,  with 
which,  to-day,  every  woman  in  France  is  conversant.  His 
master  of  mathematics  told  me,  however,  that  he  believed  the 
prince  had  some  aptitudes  for  that  science.  But  he  was  too 
changeable  for  any  one  to  attempt  more  than  to  acquaint  him 
very  superficially  with  the  different  branches  of  knowledge ;  his 
attention  got  too  easily  tired  ;  he  only  listened  until  such  time 
as  he  began  to  have  a  faint  grasp  of  what  was  being  taught  him ; 
from  that  moment,  he  made  no  progress.  No  salient  feature 
could  as  yet  be  detected  in  his  character,  it  was,  however,  easy 
to  notice  that  he  found  a  sort  of  mischievous  pleasure  in  annoy- 
ing persons  who  approached  him,  a  species  of  gay,  meddlesome, 
naughty  wickedness  that  the  benevolent  called  waggishness. 

It  was  remarked  that,  in  his  early  youth,  he  never  showed 
gratitude  either  towards  his  relatives  or  his  masters,  and  that  he 
never  had  any  attachment  for  his  playfellows.  Although  these 
are,  in  children,  purely  negative  faults  which  do  not  characterize 
any  definite  propensity,  they  foretell  great  coldness  of  heart. 
VOL.  I.  I 


H4  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

Among  the  persons  who  assisted  in  his  education,  I  only  dare  to 
mention  the  Comte  de  Pont,  M.  de  Chateaubrun,1  and  M.  de 
Foncemagne  ; 2  I  only  name  these  gentlemen,  because  they 
have,  by  themselves,  just  claims  to  public  esteem. 

The  Due  de  Chartres  was  impatient  to  reach  the  age  of  inde- 
pendence, and  that  impatience  was  not  dictated,  as  is  the  case 
with  noble-minded  young  men,  by  the  wish  to  try  for  himself  the 
honourable  pursuits  of  life,  but  simply  by  that  to  escape  the  irk- 
some eye  of  his  tutors,  and  follow  the  impulse  of  his  bad  inclina- 
tions. That  moment,  which  ought  to  be  fixed  for  each  individual 
according  to  the  disposition  of  his  mind,  the  stamp  of  his 
character,  the  employment  he  has  made  of  his  time,  is,  in 
general,  wrongly  calculated  among  the  French.  They  leave 
almost  no  interval  between  childhood,  and  the  instant  when  a 
young  man  enters  without  guide  upon  a  world  of  which  he  is 
ignorant.  This  sudden  withdrawal  of  all  control  is  still  more 
harmful  for  princes.  Slaves  of  the  care  with  which  they  are 
surrounded,  they  remain  children  up  to  sixteen  years  of  age,  and 
all  at  once  they  are  told  that  they  are  even  more  than  the  rest  of 
men  ;  they  are  not  yet  fit  to  be  free,  and  already  they  command. 
Astonished  at  their  new  power,  impatient  to  abuse  it  in  order  to 
ascertain  its  properties,  they  find  themselves  surrounded  only  by 
seductions.  Their  most  faithful  servants  fear  to  warn  them,  lest 
the  warning  should  displease  them,  and  a  host  of  others  try  to  be 
agreeable  to  them  by  all  possible  means. 

Everything  was  to  be  feared  from  such  concurrence  of 
circumstances,  with  the  nature  already  noticed  in  the  Due 
de  Chartres.  If  he  had  been  armed  with  some  principle  that 
had  made  a  profound  impression  upon  his  heart,  there  might 
have  been  some  prospect  of  discovering  its  effects  in  those 
calm  moments  when  every  man  communes  with  himself. 
He  would  thus,  at  least,  have  given  to  his  tastes  the  conven- 
tional limits  of  public  opinion.    If  he  had  felt  a  strong  attraction 

1  Jean-Baptiste  Vivien  de  Chateaubrun  born  at  Angouleme  in  1686.  First  maitre 
(Thdtel  of  the  Due  d'  Orleans.  He  wrote  several  tragedies,  which  secured  his  election  to 
the  Academy  (1753).  He  was  appointed  under-governor  to  the  Due  de  Chartres,  and 
died  in  1775. 

2  Etienne  de  Foncemagne,  born  at  Orleans  in  1694.  He  made  himself  known  by 
some  historical  treatises.  Under-governor  of  the  Due  de  Chartres  (1752),  he  died  in 
1775- 


THE  DUC  U ORLEANS.  115 

for  any  science  whatever,  his  intellect  would  have  sought  to 
extend  itself,  his  attention  might  have  been  governed.  If  only 
he  had  been  truly  in  love,  his  mind,  always  active  to  please, 
would  not  have  been  worn  out,  or  depraved  by  lack  of  occu- 
pation ;  his  heart  would  have  rejected  all  the  defects  which  are 
obliged  to  vanish  before  a  true  sentiment.  Simple  happiness 
which  guards  itself  against  the  dangers  of  a  restless  imagination, 
self-abnegation  which  produces  all  our  generous  sentiments, 
would,  without  doubt,  have  developed  some  solid  qualities  in  the 
Due  de  Chartres. 

But  his  cold  heart  deprived  him  of  the  illusions  of  youth, 
while  his  inattentive  mind  knew  not  how  to  fix  itself  upon 
serious  matters.  Unbridled  in  his  taste,  making  of  his  pleasures 
a  rampart  around  himself,  even  against  love,  he  began  life  by 
the  abuse  of  everything,  and  displayed  constancy  only  in  his 
excesses. 

In  1769,  he  married  Mademoiselle  de  Penthievre.  She  was 
good,  fair,  fresh,  sweet,  and  pure  ;  she  pleased  him  so  long  as 
she  was  for  him  a  new  woman.  A  few  days  after,  on  the 
occasion  of  the  first  appearance  of  the  Due  and  Duchesse  de 
Chartres  at  the  opera  the  most  dashing  girls  of  Paris  were 
able  to  lay  aside  the  widows'  costumes  which  they  affected  to 
wear  there. 

On  entering  society,  the  Due  de  Chartres  formed  an  intimacy 
with  M.  de  Voyer,1  the  leader  of  the  corrupt  men  of  his  time 
A  large  fortune,  the  reputation  of  possessing  some  business 
abilities,  a  rather  brilliant  conversation  on  military  subjects,  and 
a  very  witty  mind,  gathered  around  Voyer  young  men  of  unruly 
passions,  men  whose  reputation  was  lost,  bad  characters  and 
intriguers  of  all  conditions.  Abbe  Yvon,2  better  known  by  the 
protracted  persecution  he  had  to  bear  than  by  some  articles  he 

1  Marc- Rene,  Marquis  de  Voyer,  son  of  the  Comte  Voyer  d'Argenson,  .Secretary 
of  State  at  War.  Born  in  1722,  he  became  lieutenant-general,  Governor  of  Vincennes, 
and  died  in  1782. 

-  Abbe  Yvon,  born  in  17 14  at  Mamers,  never  discharged  any  ecclesiastical  func- 
tion, and  was  always  in  open  contest  with  the  Sorbonne.  He  made  his  first  appear- 
ance in  literature  in  the  Encyclopedia,  where  he  wrote  the  articles  :  Soul,  Atheist, 
and  God.  Suspected  of  having  taken  part  in  the  thesis  sustained  by  Prades  in 
the  Sorbonne,  and  condemned  by  that  learned  body,  he  fled  to  Holland.  Returning 
soon  after,  he  was  appointed  historiographer  to  the  Comte  d'Artois,  and  died  in 
1791.     The  Abbe  Yvon  has  left  a  large  number  of  works  on  theology. 

I   2 


n6  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

contributed  to  the  Encyclopedia,  especially  by  the  article  "  Soul," 
which  brought  on  him  that  persecution,  had  initiated  Voyer  in 
high  metaphysics,  whose  language  he  had  adopted  even  for 
the  most  familiar  conversations.  It  was  always  "  the  soul  .  .  . 
space  ,  .  .  the  link  of  beings  .  .  .  abstractedness  .  .  .  matter  .  .  . 
composed  of  points  .  .  .  simple  .  .  .  without  extent  .  .  .  indivisible, 
&c."  All  these  words,  never  explained,  pronounced  at  intervals, 
with  gestures,  reticent  and  mystic  forms,  prepared  the  young 
adepts  to  believe.  They  were  then  taught  that  every  sentiment 
is  but  ridiculous  .  .  .  that  scruples  are  but  a  sign  of  weakness  .  .  . 
that  justice  is  a  prejudice  .  .  .  that  our  interest,  or  rather  our 
pleasure  only,  ought  to  determine  all  our  actions,  &c.  .  .  .  They 
naturally  dispensed  with  proofs. 

One  evening,  at  a  supper-party,  M.  de  Lille,1  an  officer  in  the 
regiment  of  M.  de  Coigny,  and  a  man  of  sense,  strongly  attached 
to  his  friends,  a  little  susceptible,  perhaps  too  familiar,  but,  on 
the  whole,  a  very  good  lad,  not  feeling  sufficiently  convinced  that 
justice  was  absolutely  a  prejudice,  allowed  himself  to  make  some 
objections.  "  It  is  my  fault,  my  dear  De  Lille,"  said  M.  de  Voyer, 
modestly ;  "  if  you  still  have  some  doubts,  it  is  because  I  did  not 
go  back  far  enough.  I  was  wrong,  I  ought  to  have  taken  the 
question  from  its  origin  .  .  .  Listen,  it  is  only  a  word  .  .  .  Every- 
body knows  that  existence  is  for  us  the  idea  of  the  permanence 
of  a  certain  collection  of  sensations  which  (follow  me  well)  in 
similar  or  nearly  similar  circumstances,  re-appear  constantly  the 
same.  .  .  .  You  understand,  De  Lille?  If  they  are  not  just 
exactly  the  same,  they  only  show  changes  which  are  subject  to 
certain  laws  which  govern  the  universe,  &c You  under- 
stand me  well,  do  you  not  ?  You  see  the  sequel  and  the  conse- 
quence of  all  this  for  a  man  like  yourself,  my  dear  De  Lille,  it  is 
not  necessary  to  develop  it  farther,  &c  ! !  !  " 

By  what  means,  if  he  would  preserve  his  self-love,  could  a 
young  man  avow  himself  incapable  of  understanding  this 
mysterious  language?  He  must,  indeed  confess  himself  con- 
vinced. M.  de  Lille  was  sensible  enough  not  to  understand 
the  sophism,  but  he  had  not  the  courage  to  say  it ;  and  it  was 

1  M.  de  Lille,  officer  in  the  regiment  of  Champagne,  born  at  Saint -Mihiel,  is  the 
author  of  a  collection  of  light  poetry. 


THE  DUC  H ORLEANS.  117 

not  until  ridicule  dared  to  attack  the  corruption  which  was 
the  only  thing  in  France  that,  until  then,  had  been  sacred  to 
him,  that  M.  de  Lille  related  this  conversation,  and  some 
others,  which  the  oddness  of  the  expressions  had  caused  him  to 
remember. 

In  the  midst  of  that  shapeless  rubbish  of  metaphysics,  this 
new  sect  only  taught  a  few  much  truncated  maxims,  and  a  few 
sententious  suggestions,  with  a  gilt  of  seductive  learning. 

The  fundamental  principle  of  M.  de  Voyer's  doctrine,  how- 
ever, was  simple.  He  denied  the  existence  of  morality,  sus- 
taining that  to  say  one  must  seek  sanction  in  one's  conscience 
was,  for  men  of  sense,  but  a  word,  with  nothing  real  in  it  ;  and 
that  thus,  it  did  not  exist  for  all  those,  who,  by  their  mind  and 
nature,  were  inaccessible  to  remorse.  As  a  deduction  from 
this,  frankness,  sincerity,  confidence,  natural  integrity,  all  the 
honourable  affections,  were  accused  and  denounced  as  silly. 

The  source  of  true  pleasures  being  thus  dried  up,  these  must 
of  course  be  replaced  by  monstrous  propensities.  Among  the 
initiated,  at  twenty,  all  illusions  were  already  destroyed.  Their 
organs  thus  depraved  had  need  of  strong  emotions.  Corruption 
alone  could  furnish  them  :  and  indeed  it  reigned  over  all  these 
young,  ruined  imaginations,  and  when  it  reigns,  it  is  with  over- 
ruling authority.  Sacrifices  do  not  soften  its  sway  ;  the  more  it 
obtains,  the  more  it  exacts  ;  candour,  fidelity,  uprightness,  are 
its  first  victims. 

When  one  is  but  an  adept,  he  is  obliged  to  believe :  M.  de 
Voyer,  who  was  an  innovator,  availed  himself  of  the  right  of 
leaders  of  sects,  and  did  not  believe  in  the  doctrine  he  pro- 
fessed ;  this  is  proved  by  a  host  of  details  on  his  life  and  death. 
He  always  expressed  the  most  absolute  scorn  for  public  opinion, 
and  the  judgments  of  the  public  were  his  torment. — "  Good 
company,"  he  said,  one  day,  "  will  fall  into  the  contempt  it 
deserves." — And  he  was  distressed  to  find  that  the  houses  of 
some  of  the  members  of  that  good  company,  which  he  thus 
despised,  were  closed  to  him.  The  total  disregard  of  every  kind 
of  feeling  enforced  on  him  by  the  part  he  affected  to  play,  some- 
times compelled  him  to  take  precautions  in  order  that  no  one 
should  come  to  know  the  assistance  he  afforded  to  some  unfor- 


n8  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

tunate  families.  At  "  The  Elms,"  x  on  his  estate,  chiefly  in  the 
most  out-of-the-way  districts,  he  did  much  good.  He  never 
spoke  of  the  court  except  with  derision,  any  more  than  of  the 
favours  it  granted  and  of  the  vile  characters  who  solicited 
them,  yet  he  indirectly  requested  for  himself  the  honour  of 
the  blue  riband2  which,  of  all  the  rewards  accorded  by  the 
king,  bore  the  plainest  imprint  of  favour.  It  was  at  Marly, 
the  habitual  seat  of  fetes  and  pleasures,  that  Louis  XVI., 
with  the  severity  of  honest  manners  and  the  brusqueness 
which  timidity  and  probity  combined  produced  in  him,  re- 
proached him  with  his  corruption,  in  the  presence  of  all  the 
court.  Astonished  at  the  first  moment,  M.  de  Voyer  could  find 
no  reply.  Having,  however,  collected  himself  a  little  he  called 
on  M.  de  Maurepas  in  order  to  acquaint  him  with  what  had 
occurred  and  to  beg  him  to  obtain  for  him  some  sort  of  apology. 
He  had  little  to  congratulate  himself  about  the  choice  of  his  in- 
termediate, from  whom  he  could  only  obtain  the  following  words  : 
"  We  shall  never  be  able  to  teach  politeness  to  the  king."  That 
insulting  word  politeness,  the  refusal  of  the  "  blue  riband,"  the 
harsh  expressions  of  the  king,  wounded  him  deeply,  and  all  who 
knew  him  intimately,  his  wife  for  instance,  had  no  doubt  that 
sorrow  was  the  cause  of  his  death,  which  occurred  soon  after. 

The  Due  de  Chartres,  who  only  knew  in  M.  de  Voyer  that  side 
of  his  character  which  he  displayed,  submitted  completely  to  the 
yoke  imposed  upon  him  by  the  society  of  the  former.  He  lost 
all  the  natural  sentiments  by  which  he  might  have  been  able  to 
reclaim  himself.  And  it  is  from  that  time,  from  that  second 
education,  given  at  the  age  when  men  are  the  disciples  of  all  that 
surrounds  them,  that  really  dates  the  corruption  of  the  Due 
d'Orleans.  Until  then,  he  only  had  unfortunate  tendencies ;  then, 
he  was  imbued  with  pernicious  apologetic  maxims,  and  contracted 
habits  which  he  never  gave  up.  If  one  would  explain  his  entire 
life,  it  is  necessary  to  go  back  to  this  period.  If  acquainted  with 
the  poison  with  which  he  was  impregnated,  one  would  no  longer 
be  surprised  at  his  fatal  errors.     Thus,  in  making  known  the 

1  Chateau  and  land  belonging  to  the  d'Argenson  family,  near  Tours. 

2  The  riband  of  the  order  of  the  Saint  Esprit  (Holy  Ghost),  the  highest  order  of 
the  old  monarchy.     It  had  been  created  by  Henri  III. — {Translator.) 


THE  D  UC  D'  OR  LEA  NS.  1 1 9 

doctrine  of  M.  de  Voyer,  I  have  pictured  the  Due  d'Orleans 
completely,  I  have  revealed  the  secret  of  his  life,  and  the  motive 
of  his  actions.  However  different  they  seem  to  be,  the  same 
principle  reappears  in  all.  There  never  was  a  man  more  com- 
pletely a  slave  to  his  belief.  What  ravages  have  been  produced 
in  the  present  generation  of  Frenchmen  by  that  system,  known 
among  the  disciples  under  the  name  of  desabusenient,  which,  until 
the  eighteenth  century,  shut  up  in  the  hearts  of  a  few  depraved 
men,  awaited  these  days  to  dare  to  shine  forth  as  an  opinion 
which  could  be  professed,  like  a  system  of  philosophy !  This 
phenomenon  of  audacity  merits  attention. 

The  history  of  the  French  people  has  paid  too  little  heed 
to  the  great  faults  of  the  human  mind,  as  if  there  were  not  a 
necessary  bond    between  its  errors   and  its  crimes.      Has  not 
morality,  for  example,  everything  to  gain,  when  it  can  reconcile 
the  opinions  of  the  Due  d'Orleans  with  the  different  acts  of  his 
life  ?     He  believed  there  was  nothing  just  but  that  which  was 
comfortable  for  him :   he  was  always  ignorant  of  the  fact  that 
man  depends  for  his  happiness  on  the  happiness  of  other  men  ; 
he   failed   to   recognize   this  reciprocal  need    of  services,   that 
powerful  motive  of  general  and  private  benevolence.     All  the 
pleasant  gifts  which  nature  only  confers  on  us  for  noble  purposes, 
he  subjected  solely  to  personal  intrigues,  directed  against  credu- 
lous  and    inexperienced    innocence.      Called    to   an    immense 
fortune,  he  did  not  see  in  the  good  he  wished  to  do  to  his  fellow- 
creatures  the  guarantee  of  that  which  he  received  from  them  ; 
his  narrow  egotism  did  not  permit  him  to  believe  that,  in  this 
exchange,  more  would  be  returned  to  him  than  he  would  give. 
In    early  youth,  when    one  calculates   sentiments,  one  does  it 
badly,  or  rather  one  only  calculates  upon    them   because  one 
has  none.     In  the  continual  change  of  inclinations  that  caprice 
causes  to  spring  up,  and  which  leads  the  soul  from  ardour  to 
indifference,  and  from  indifference  to  another  caprice,  there  is  no 
place  for   friendship.     Thus  the    Due  d'Orleans  loved    no  one. 
Some  young,  indulgent  persons,  who  took  this  indifference  for 
meekness,  had    an    attachment   for  him.     He    made  them   the 
companions  of  his   pleasures,  comrades  of  his  debauches,  but 
never  felt  any  real  friendship  for  them.  One  of  his  first  associates 


120  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

was  the  Prince  de  Lamballe  :  the  latter's  constitution  was  too 
weak  to  admit  of  his  bearing  long  the  kind  of  life  led  by 
his  brother-in-law. 

The  death  of  young  princes  is  never  believed  to  be  natural. 
This  death  made  the  Due  d'Orleans  so  prodigiously  rich,  and  he 
made  so  bad  a  use  of  his  fortune,  that,  in  several  works,  he  has 
been  accused  of  having  contributed  to  it  in  a  more  direct  manner 
than  by  sharing  the  orgies  of  the  deceased.  But  there  is  nothing 
to  prove  this  allegation.  I  ought  even  to  say,  as  the  result  of 
very  reliable  inquiries,  that  there  is  nothing  to  justify  the  sus- 
picion at  all.  It  is  quite  enough  to  say  that  the  Prince  de 
Lamballe  was  the  most  intimate  companion  of  the  Due 
d'Orleans,  that  he  was  corrupted  by  him,  that  he  died  of  it,  and 
was  not  even  the  object  of  a  regret. 

A  much  longer  intimacy  left  no  more  traces  on  the  heart  of 
the  Due  d'Orleans.  In  1788,  after  twenty-five  years  of  asso- 
ciation, he  showed  the  most  cruel  indifference  when  he  lost  one 
of  his  principal  companions,  the  Marquis  de  Conflans,1  a  man 
who  always  attracted  general  notice  for  his  beauty,  his  noble 
bearing,  his  figure,  his  skill,  and  by  his  faults  when  he  was  in  bad 
company,  by  his  aptitudes  when  he  was  with  military  men,  by 
the  shrewdness  of  his  mind  when  he  spoke  of  serious  things,  and, 
at  all  times  of  his  life,  by  the  freedom  of  his  tastes,  his  feelings, 
and  his  aversions.  M.  de  Conflans  was  suffering  from  a  disease 
which  was  to  cause  him  to  die  suddenly  ;  he  would  not  how- 
ever believe  himself  to  be  ill,  and  went  into  society  as  usual. 
On  the  day  of  his  death,  he  was  to  dine  with  the  Due  d'Orleans 
and  a  few  other  noblemen,  at  the  house  of  M.  de  Biron  -  at 
Montrouge.  They  were  waiting  for  him,  the  Due  d'Orleans 
more  impatiently  than  the  others,  because  he  wished  to  go  to 
the  theatre.  At  four  o'clock  every  one  was  present,  when  one 
of  M.  de  Conflans'  people  brought  the  message  that  he  had  just 
died.  All  who  were  in  the  room  expressed  their  regrets  ac- 
cording to  their  close  or  distant  relations  with  the  deceased. 
The  only  words  uttered  by  the  Due  d'Orleans  were  :  "  Lauzun, 

1  Louis-Gabriel,  Marquis  de  Conflans  d'Armentieres,  born  in  1735,  son  of  Marshal 
de  Conflans.     He  was  brigadier-general. 

2  The  Due  de  Lauzun  who  had  reassumed  his  family  name  at  the  death  of  Marshal 
de  Biron,  his  uncle  (1788). 


THE  DUC  D' ORLEANS.  121 

as  we  do  not  expect  any  one  now,  let  us  dine,  in  order  to  be  in 
time  to  see  the  beginning  of  the  opera." 

The  study  of  the  human  heart  does  not  explain  how  so 
barren  a  soul  could  Inspire  the  sentiment  of  friendship  ;  and  I 
regard  it  as  incredible  that  the  Due  d'Orleans  should  have  been 
sincerely  loved.  M.  de  Biron,  from  his  childhood  until  his  death, 
had  for  him  the  most  tender  feelings.  It  is  certainly  not  to 
the  Due  d'Orleans  that  one  can  attribute  the  honour  of  these 
sentiments  ;  it  is  to  M.  de  Biron  alone  that  it  belongs.  M.  de 
Biron  was  courageous,  romantic,  generous,  and  witty.  The  simi- 
larity of  their  ages,  a  position  almost  equally  brilliant,  mutual 
sympathy,  and  a  certain  analogy  of  mind  had  caused  an  intimacy 
to  spring  up  between  them.  It  very  soon  required  courage  to 
love  the  Due  d'Orleans,  generosity  to  defend  him.  The  exercise 
of  these  two  qualities  rendered  the  Due  d'Orleans  dearer  to  M. 
de  Biron,  and  his  romantic  nature  furnished  him  afterwards  with 
all  the  fancies  which  his  inward  soul  needed,  to  cultivate  this 
sentiment.  On  the  occasions  when  M.  de  Biron,  reduced  by  his 
prodigality  to  be  always  in  difficulties,  was  in  pressing  need  of 
money,  he  did  not  believe  that  the  Due  d'Orleans,  although 
enormously  rich,  could  lend  him  any,  since  he  did  not  offer  it ; 
and  it  was  by  this  same  logic  of  illusions  that  he  maintained 
that  the  Due  d'Orleans,  having  entered  on  political  life,  had  no 
secret  thoughts,  no  personal  intentions,  no  part  in  the  Revo- 
lution, since  he  had  never  made  any  confidence  to  him  on  this 
subject. 

I  do  not  speak  of  the  other  intimacies  of  the  Due  d'Orleans 
with  the  Vicomte  de  Laval,1  M.  Sheldon,  M.  de  Liancourt,  M. 
Arthur  Dillon,2  M.  de  Fitz-James,  M.  de  Saint-Blancard,  M.  de 
Monville,3  &c.  .  .  .  These  acquaintances  all  vanished  at  different 

1  Mathieu  Paul  Louis  de  Montmorency-Laval,  known  under  the  name  of  Vicomte 
de  Laval,  born  August  5,  1748.  He  was  at  that  time  colonel  of  the  regiment  of 
Auvergne,  and  became  brigadier-general  in  1788.     He  died  in  1809. 

2  Arthur,  Comte  de  Dillon,  born  in  Ireland  in  1750.  The  family  had  been  for  a 
century  in  the  service  of  France.  He  took,  as  colonel,  an  active  part  in  the  American 
war,  became  brigadier-general,  and  Governor  of  Tabago.  Deputy  from  Martinique 
to  the  States-General,  general-in- chief  of  the  Army  of  the  North,  he  was  guillotined  in 
1794.  Dillon  had  married  the  Comtesse  de  la  Touch e,  cousin  of  the  Empress 
Josephine. 

3  The  Baron  Thomas  Boissel  de  Monville,  born  in  1763  at  the  Chateau  of  Mon- 
ville (Normandy)  of  a  noble  family  of  this  province.     Counsellor  of  tiarlement  in  1 785, 


122  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

times.  Pleasure,  which  alone  had  formed  them,  is  not  a  bond 
strong  enough  to  last  through  a  whole  life.  Those  transient 
friendships,  lead  me,  against  my  will,  to  speak  of  the  throng  of 
mistresses  who  occupied  a  part  of  the  life  of  the  Due  d'Orleans ; 
they  were  the  source  of  so  few  incidents,  however,  that  I  do  not 
feel  bound  to  add  the  long  list  of  their  names.  My  task  will  be 
only  too  well  filled  in  saying  that  all  the  tastes,  all  the  caprices,  all 
the  fantasies  of  which  his  senses,  at  first  imperious,  afterwards 
impoverished,  had  need  in  order  to  be  gratified  or  excited,  were 
resorted  to  by  the  Due  d'Orleans. 

I  should  like  now  to  dwell  here  upon  sweeter  images, 
in  speaking  of  the  women  of  a  more  elevated  character,  who 
attached  themselves  to  the  Due  d'Orleans.  This  prince  some- 
times reappeared  in  society,  but  always  as  in  an  enemy's 
country,  where  he  sought  victims.  The  Princesse  de  Bouillon,1  the 
Marquise  de  Fleury,2  the  Princesse  de  Lamballe,  each  believed 
herself  loved  by  him,  and  proved  to  him  that  they  loved  him. 
Their  delicacy  became,  for  his  depraved  mind,  a  new  form  of 
libertinage,  which  satiated  him  like  all  the  others.  He  soon 
abandoned  them,  but  with  a  publicity,  which,  happily,  produced 
a  contrary  effect  to  that  which  the  Due  d'Orleans  expected. 
The  public  treated  them  with  indulgence  ;  it  pitied  them,  and 
they  afterwards  made  him  forget  their  errors. 

When  speaking  of  the  women  who  only  figured  for  a  while 
in  the  life  of  the  Due  d'Orleans,  I  could  not  name  Madame  de 
Sillery  ; 3  she  deserves  a  special  mention. 

he  was  one  of  the  most  active  members  of  the  opposition,  and  embraced  with  ardour 
the  principles  of  the  Revolution.  Under  the  Empire,  he  lived  in  retirement.  Peer  of 
France  in  1814,  he  died  in  1832.  Monville  was  a  distinguished  savant.  He  practised 
mechanics  and  manufactured  several  agricultural  machines. 

1  Marie-Christine  von  Hesse  Rheinfelz-Rothenburg,  married  in  1 766  to  Jacques  de 
la  Tour  d'Auvergne,  Prince  de  Bouillon,  born  in  1746. 

2  Claudine  de  Montmorency-Laval,  born  in  1750,  married  in  1768  to  Andre, 
Marquis  de  Fleury. 

3  Felicite  Ducrest  de  Saint- Aubin,  Marquise  de  Sillery,  Comtesse  de  Genlis,  born 
in  1746  near  Autun.  She  married  in  1762,  Charles  Brulart,  Comte  de  Genlis,  born  in 
1737,  captain  in  the  navy,  who  took  the  title  of  Marquis  de  Sillery  on  inheriting 
his  property  some  years  afterwards.  M.  de  Sillery,  later  Deputy  to  the  States- 
General,  was  guillotined  with  the  Girondists,  October  31,  1793.  His  wife,  who  retained 
all  her  life  the  name  of  Comtesse  de  Genlis  was  appointed  lady-of-honour  to  the 
Duchesse  de  Chartres  in  1770,  governess  to  Madame  Adelaide,  and  afterwards  tutor 
of  the  young  princes  d'Orleans.  She  emigrated  with  Madame  Adelaide  in  1792,  and 
retired  to  Switzerland  and  then  to  Berlin.  She  returned  to  France  in  1800,  where  she 
was  very  well  received  at  the  Consular  Court.     Madame  de  Genlis  wrote  much.     She 


THE  DUC  D 'ORLEANS.  123 

When  one  is  a  combination  of  ambition  and  moderation, 
of  communicativeness  and  of  reserve,  of  rigidity  and  com- 
placency, one  is  certainly  a  person  whose  life  and  intimacy 
must  offer  extraordinary  contrasts.  It  was  by  opposite  means, 
and  which  she  never  separated,  that  Madame  de  Genlis  suc- 
ceeded in  all  that  her  ambition  desired.  Being  young,  pretty, 
without  relations,  it  was  by  risking  morning  calls  to  men  that 
she  found  a  husband  ;  later,  she  affected  the  height  of  prudery, 
in  a  regular  career  of  gallantries  ;  with  the  same  pen,  she 
wrote  The  Knights  of  the  Swan,  and  Lessons  in  Morals  for 
Children  ; 1  on  the  same  desk,  she  composed  a  church  book  for 
Mademoiselle  de  Chartres  and  a  speech  to  the  Jacobins  for 
the  Due  d'Orleans.  All  her  life  presents  the  same  contrasts. 
Mademoiselle  de  Saint-Aubin — that  was  her  name — had  an 
elegant  figure  but  devoid  of  nobleness  ;  the  expression  of  her 
face  was  very  lively  ;  she  had  little  dash  in  conversation,  little 
charm  in  the  habitual  usage  of  her  mind,  but  possessed  at  her 
fingers'  ends  all  the  advantages  that  can  be  given  by  instruction, 
observation,  reserve,  and  the  tact  of  the  world.  When  she  had, 
for  better  or  worse,  married  the  Comte  de  Genlis,  it  became 
necessary  for  her  to  make  the  acquaintance  of  her  husband's 
family,  who,  as  she  knew,  were  not  well-disposed  towards  her. 
Talents,  affected  timidity,  and  time  enabled  her,  however,  to 
reach  her  aim.  She  managed  to  be  invited  at  Sillery.  In  a 
few  days,  she  succeeded  in  winning  the  favour  of  M.  de 
Puysieux,2  one  of  the  most  wearied  men  of  his  time,  and  in 
disarming  the  sour  old  temper  of  Madame  de  Puysieux.  She 
felt  indeed  that  she  was  then  truly  in  society  ;  and,  moving  in  it, 
for  the  first  time,  consequently  brought  all  her  methods  into  play  ; 
she  showed  herself  caressing,  attentive,  gay  without  blundering, 
and  was  even  able  to  be  continually  complacent,  with  a  shade 

left  a  number  of  novels,  and  works  on  education.  Under  the  Empire,  she  wrote  every 
other  week  in  different  periodicals,  at  the  request  of  Napoleon  himself.  She  left, 
besides,  interesting  memoirs.     She  died  in  1830. 

1  "  Les  Chevaliers  du  Cygne" — "  Lecons  de  Morale  pour  les  Enfants."  The 
former  is  not  exactly  intended  to  be  placed  in  the  hands  of  school-girls.   {Translator.) 

2  Louis  Brulart,  Marquis  de  Puysieux  and  de  Sillery,  born  in  1702,  first  entered  the 
army,  was  afterwards  ambassador  at  Naples  (1735),  Secretary  of  State  for  Foreign 
Affairs  (1747-175 1),  Minister  of  State  up  to  1756.  He  died  in  1770.  He  was  the 
great-uncle  of  the  Comte  de  Genlis  and  proprietor  of  the  estate  of  Sillery. 


124  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

of  compassion.  This  first  success  was  of  great  use  to  her  ;  a  few 
doors  were  thrown  open  to  her  ;  she  obtained  to  be  introduced 
to  the  Duchesse  de  Chartres,  who,  by  the  protection  she  accorded 
her,  destroyed  in  a  very  short  time  all  the  little  oppositions  of 
society  which  still  existed.  The  Due  de  Chartres  found  her 
charming,  told  her  this,  and  was  quickly  listened  to,  for  Madame 
de  Genlis,  to  avoid  the  scandal  of  coquetry,  always  yielded  easily. 
A  few  years  of  care,  indulgence  and  retired  life,  gave  her  such 
an  ascendency  over  the  Due  de  Chartres,  that  it  has  been  supposed 
that  she  had  a  kind  of  influence  over  his  actions,  or  rather  over 
the  events  of  his  life.  So  skilful  a  conduct  had  its  reward  ;  she 
succeeded  in  being  appointed  governess  or  rather  tutor  of  his 
children.  One  can  only  see  in  this  choice  of  the  Due  de  Chartres, 
the  intention  to  appear  peculiar,  and  to  mark  plainly  his  scorn 
for  accepted  usages. 

Madame  de  Genlis,  proved,  in  the  first  works  she  published, 
that  she  was  capable  of  directing  all  that  part  of  the  education 
which  pertains  to  the  mind.  Their  exceptional  nature  made  of 
the  eldest  son  of  the  Due  d'Orleans,  and  of  his  daughter 
Mademoiselle  two  superior  beings.1  Tried,  fortified,  instructed 
and  ennobled  by  misfortune,  they  showed  themselves  simple 
and  great  when  they  entered  upon  their  natural  destiny. 

The  best  works  of  Madame  de  Genlis,  with  the  exception  of 
Mademoiselle  de  Clermont >  date  from  this  time,  and  if  to-day 
she  has  fallen  in  reputation,  and  follows,  without  glory,  in  her 
quality  of  woman  of  letters,  a  singular  and  ill-considered  path,  it  is 
because,  intoxicated  by  her  first  successes,  she  yields  to  her  pride 
and  no  longer  consults  her  judgment  ;  it  is  because  she  wishes 
to  manage  the  jealous  independence  of  the  public,  as  she 
managed  formerly  the  obedient  submission  of  her  pupils  ;  it  is 
because  she  cannot  soften  her  morality  to  subjugate  the  public, 
as  she  has  formerly  done  to  subjugate  all  who  were  around  her. 
I  cannot  resist  remarking  upon  two  things :  one,  that  to  com- 
mand is  so  necessary  to  Madame  de  Genlis,  that  when  she  has 
no  more  princes  to  domineer,  she  takes  by  chance  the  first 
comer  to  make  a  pupil  of  him  ;  the  other,  that,  in  spite  of  the 
rigidity  of  manners  she  advocates,  and  the  morality  she  professes 

1  King  Louis-Philippe  and  Madame  Adelaide. 


THE  D  UC  U  OR  LEA  NS.  1 2  5 

in  her  writings,  one  always  meets  in  her  later  novels,  something 
of  the  freedom  of  her  earlier  manners  ;  there  is  always  in  them 
some  amours  or  some  illegitimate  children.  For  whom,  with 
what  object,  does  she  still  write  ?  It  may  be,  perhaps,  only  from 
love  of  fame  ;  she  was  more  sensible  in  her  youth. 

All  the  youth  of  the  Due  d'Orleans  was  spent  without  plans, 
without  projects,  without  result,  without  discretion.  All  he 
did  bore  the  stamp  of  irreflection,  frivolity,  corruption,  and 
deceit  To  instruct  himself  he  went  to  see  the  experiments  of 
Preval ;  he  ascended  in  a  balloon  ;  he  assisted  Cagliostro1  and 
the  Chevalier  de  Luxembourg 2  in  their  fantasmagoria  ;  he  went  to 
the  Newmarket  races  and  to  other  fashionable  places. 

To  increase  his  fortune,  which  was  already  immense,  he  made 
speculations  on  the  lands  of  the  Palais-Royal,3  the  dwelling  of 
Louis  XIII.,  Anne  of  Austria,  Louis  XIV.,  and  finally  of  Monsieur, 
by  whom  it  became  an  appanage  of  the  House  of  Orleans. 

Later,  in  a  moment  of  suspicion,  after  having  announced 

1  The  history  of  this  celebrated  adventurer  could  form  a  novel  made  up  of  the  most 
curious  adventures.  Born  at  Palermo  in  1745,  his  real  name  was  Giuseppe  Balsamo.  He 
travelled  all  over  Europe,  procuring  resources  by  most  disreputable  means.  He  had 
a  certain  knowledge  of  medicine  and  of  chemistry,  which  enabled  him,  in  working 
skilfully  upon  popular  credulity,  to  acquire  an  universal  reputation  as  a  magician 
and  healer.  He  came  to  France,  where  he  took  the  name  of  Comte  de  Cagliostro. 
He  found  a  protector  in  the  person  of  the  Cardinal  de  Rohan.  His  house  became 
the  meeting-place  of  all  Paris,  who  ran  to  witness  the  prodigies  of  the  skilful  charlatan. 
Compromised  in  the  affair  of  the  necklace,*  he  was  exiled  and  went  over  to  England  ; 
he  then  resumed  his  wandering  life,  and  ended  by  settling  in  Rome  in  1789.  He  was 
arrested  by  order  of  the  Inquisition,  and  accused  of  practising  freemasonry.  Con- 
demned to  death,  his  sentenced  was  commuted,  and  he  died  in  prison  in  1795. 

2  Anne  de  Montmorency- Luxembourg,  known  in  his  youth  under  the  name  of 
Chevalier  de  Luxembourg,  was  born  in  1742,  was  named  Captain  of  the  Guards  (1767), 
Marshal  of  Camp  (1784).  He  died  in  1790.  He  had  accepted  the  title  of  Grand 
Master  of  the  lodge  of  Egyptian  freemasonry,  founded  by  Cagliostro. 

3  The  Palais-Royal  was  built  between  the  years  1629  and  1636,  for  the  Cardinal  de 
Richelieu,  by  the  architect  Lemercier.  It  was  called  then  the  Palais-Cardinal.  Richelieu 
left  it  by  will  to  Louis  XIII.  (1643).  Under  the  regency,  Anne  of  Austria  came  to 
live  there  with  Louis  XIV.  It  was  then  that  it  took  the  name  of  Palais-Royal.  Louis 
XIV.  gave  it,  in  1693,  to  his  brother  the  Due  d'Orleans.  In  1763,  it  was  burned  and 
re-built  by  the  architect  Moreau,  who  designed  it  as  we  see  it  to-day.  Louis- 
Philippe  (grandson  of  the  Regent)  increased  its  dimensions  considerably  by  buying 
all  round  a  large  belt  of  lands.  The  Palais-Royal,  having  become  the  Palais 
National  under  the  Revolution,  was  used  as  the  residence  of  the  members  of  the 
Tribunate.  In  1814,  it  was  returned  to  the  family  of  Orleans.  Under  the  Second 
Empire,  it  became  the  dwelling  of  Prince  Napoleon.t  It  is  now  devoted  to  the  sittings 
of  the  Cour  des  Comptes  and  of  the  Conseil  (TEtat. 

*  See  footnote  4,  p.  59,  Part  I. 

t  Prince  Jerome  Napoleon,  son  of  King  Jerome  of  Westphalia  and  of  Queen  Catherine  of  Wur- 
temberg.  By  the  death  of  the  "  Prince  Imperial,"  he  has  become  the  head  of  the  Bonaparte  family 
— (Translate)?:) 


126  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

some  days  beforehand  to  Seguin,  his  treasurer,  his  wish  to  see 
for  himself  the  state  of  his  treasury,  he  had  him  arrested  in 
his  presence,  carried  away  the  keys,  and  seized  by  this  means 
all  the  money  which  Seguin,  forewarned,  had  borrowed  from  his 
own  friends,  in  order  to  replace  momentarily  that  which  he  had 
invested  in  private  speculations. 

A  spark  of  ambition  made  him  desirous  of  appearing  in  the 
squadron  of  M.  d'Orvilliers,1  hoping  thereby  to  acquire  a  title  to 
the  extremely  lucrative  reversion  of  grand-admiral  that  belonged 
to  his  father-in-law,  the  Due  de  Penthievre.  He  did  not,  however 
have  this  post,  and  doubts  were  raised  as  to  his  bravery.2  To 
prove  his  courage,  he  had  himself  applauded  at  some  of  the 
theatres  and  crowned  under  the  windows  of  Mademoiselle 
Arnould.3  Paris  amused  itself  then  in  a  satirical  but  very  unjust 
song  at  his  expense. 

Some  journeys  to  England,  a  run  to  Italy,  remarkable  only 
for  the  rapidity  with  which  it  was  performed  ;  the  glory  of  being 
elected  Grand-Master  of  the  freemasons  ;4  after  a  rather  serious 
illness,  a  Te  Dewn  sung  by  the  lodge  of  the  Nine  Sisters  f  some 

1  Louis  Guillouet,  Comte  d'Orvilliers,  born  at  Moulins  in  1708.  He  entered  the 
navy,  became  vice-admiral  in  1764,  and  lieutenant-general.  In  1777,  he  fought  the 
battle  of  Ouessant,  which,  although  indecisive,  was  glorious  for  French  arms.  He 
resigned  in  1779,  retired  to  a  convent,  emigrated  in  1789,  and  died  in  1791. 

2  To  make  up  for  his  disappointment,  the  king  appointed  him  to  the  office  of  colonel- 
general  of  Hussars. 

3  Sophie  Arnould,  a  celebrated  actress  of  the  Opera  (1744  to  1803). 

4  The  Due  d'Orleans  was  elected  Grand-Master  in  1771,  in  which  office  he  suc- 
ceeded the  Comte  de  Clermont.  It  was  he  who  suppressed  the  Grand  Lodge  of  France, 
and  replaced  it  by  the  Grand-Orient.  I  give  here,  as  a  curiosity,  the  acceptance  of 
the  Due  :  "In  the  year  of  great  light,  1772,  third  day  of  the  moon  of  Jiar,  fifth  day  of 
the  second  month  of  the  Masonic  year,  5772  ;  and  since  the  birth  of  the  Messiah,  fifth  day 
of  April  1772.  In  virtue  of  the  proclamation  made  in  the  Grand  Lodge,  assembled  on 
the  twenty-fourth  day  of  the  fourth  month  of  the  Masonic  year  5771  by  the  very  hi<*h, 
very  mighty  and  very  excellent  prince  H.S.H.  Louis-Philippe-Joseph  d'Orleans,  Due 
de  Chartres,  prince  of  the  blood,  as  Grand-Master  of  all  the  regular  lodges  of  France. 
And  of  that  of  the  sovereign  council  of  the  emperors  of  the  East  and  of  the  West,  sub- 
lime mother  lodge  of  Scotland,  on  the  twenty-sixth  of  the  moon  of  EIul  1 77 1 ,  as  sovereign 
Grand-Master  of  all  the  councils,  chapters  and  lodges  of  the  great  orb  of  France  ; 
an  office  which  the  aforesaid  S.  H.  has  willingly  accepted  for  the  love  of  the  royal  art, 
and  in  order  to  concentrate  under  a  single  authority  all  the  masonic  operations.  In 
witness  whereof,  the  aforesaid  S.  H.  has  appended  his  name  to  the  report  of  acceptance." 

5  The  lodge  of  the  Nine  Sisters  was  founded  in  1776  by  several  men  of  letters  and 
of  European  fame.  This  rather  profane  name  (the  nine  Muses)  caused  a  deal  of 
trouble  to  the  founders.  Their  lodge  was  even,  for  a  time,  erased  from  the  list  of  the 
order.  It  was  nevertheless  the  most  brilliant  lodge  of  the  day,  Franklin,  Helvetius, 
Roucher,  Voltaire  himself,  being  members  of  it.  In  1827,  it  amalgamated  with  the 
lodge  of  Saint-Louis  de  France,  but  kept  its  original  name. 


THE  DUC  U ORLEANS.  127 

pleasures,  or  rather  disorders  of  all  kinds  at   Mousseaux,1   filled 
the  following  years. 

The  Due  d'Orleans  was  approaching  the  age  when,  with  the 
greater  number  of  men,  the  passions  of  youth  begin  to  weaken 
and  to  yield  to  the  sway  of  a  new  tyrant.  Nevertheless,  he  did 
not  yet  display  symptoms  of  ambition,  which  latter  is,  doubtless, 
more  backward  in  hearts  withered  by  depravity  and  shrunken  by 
combinations  of  personal  interest. 

An  agitation  which  spread  all  over  France,  was,  however,  be- 
ginning to  manifest  itself,  and  could  already  be  heard  in  all  parts 
of  the  kingdom — those  dull  and  distant  rumblings,  the  forerunners 
of  volcanic  outbreaks.  The  French  people  had  been  called,  by  the 
government  itself,  to  consider  the  situation  of  the  finances,  and 
to  hear  the  statement  of  the  fortune  of  the  State.  A  light  so  new 
to  their  eyes  had  caused  a  lively  sensation  and  made  a  profound 
impression.  An  entirely  new  power  was  created  in  France,  that 
of  public  opinion.  It  was  not  the  clear  and  firm  opinion  which 
is  the  privilege  of  nations  who  have  long  and  peaceably  enjoyed 
their  liberties  and  the  knowledge  of  their  affairs,  but  that  of  an 
impetuous  and  inexperienced  people,  who  are  only  the  more  pre- 
sumptuous in  their  judgments  and  more  decided  in  their  will.  It 
is  this  formidable  instrument  that  M.  de  Calonne  dared  to  under- 
take to  handle,  in  order  to  adjust  the  old  springs  of  the  govern- 
ment. He  summoned  the  Notables ;  he  divided  them  into 
commissions,  over  each  of  which  presided  a  prince  of  the  royal 
family  or  a  prince  of  the  blood.  The  presidency  of  the  third 
commission  fell  to  the  Due  d'Orleans.  He  only  made  himself 
noticed  by  his  indifference  and  lack  of  application.  Diligence  at  the 
sessions  would  have  required  the  sacrifice  of  his  pleasures  or  of 
his  habits  for  a  considerable  time,  and  this  he  was  not  capable 
of  making.  He  began  by  absenting  himself  from  the  evening 
sittings,  and  ended  by  neglecting  the  day  meetings,  to  which  he 

1  The  hamlet  of  Mousseaux  or  Monceau,  now  a  district  of  Paris,  belonged  formerly 
to  the  parish  of  Clichy.  The  fermier-general  de  la  Reynierehad  acquired  the  lordship 
of  Monceau,  where  he  possessed  the  chateau  of  Belair.  The  Due  de  Chartres  became 
in  turn  its  purchaser.  He  built  on  it  a  country  seat  called  La  Folie  de  Chartres, 
and  designed  around  it  a  magnificent  park.  The  Convention  declared  the  Pare 
Monceau  national  property.  Later,  the  Emperor  gave  it  to  Cambaceres.  Louis 
XVIII.  returned  it  to  the  Orleans  family,  which  kept  it  until  the  passing  of  the  decree 
of  1852,  which  made  it  definitively  a  national  property. 


128  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

came  very  late,  and  sometimes  not  at  all.  He  pushed  his  frivolity 
to  the  extent  of  going,  during  one  of  the  sessions,  to  a  hunt  in 
the  woods  of  Raincy.  The  deer  which  he  pursued  was  captured 
in  the  ditches  of  the  Faubourg  Saint-Antoine,  under  the  eyes, 
and  to  the  great  scandal  of,  the  Parisians. 

His  partisans,  not  very  numerous,  thought  to  excuse  his  conduct 
by  remarking  that,  at  least,  he  was  no  party  to  the  intrigues, 
which,  after  having  scandalised  the  Assembly  of  the  Notables, 
had  ended  in  annihilating  all  the  hopes  its  meeting  had  given  rise 
to.  This  negative  praise  was  not  flattering ;  for  was  there  no 
other  part  for  the  Due  d'Orleans  to  play,  on  this  memorable 
occasion,  but  that  of  an  intriguer  ?  It  was  more  than  a  century 
and  a  half  since  France  had  seen  her  king  summon  so  important 
a  council.  The  greatest  lords,  the  first  magistrates,  the  wealthiest 
landowners  of  France,  had  met  together  to  give  their  advice  on 
the  principal  questions  of  the  administration.  It  was  meant 
thereby  to  oppose  the  power  of  a  stronger  and  more  enlightened 
opinion  to  the  resistance  of  the  parlement,  to  attack  the  Colossus 
of  ecclesiastical  privileges,  to  cause  the  yield  of  the  public  rates  and 
taxes  to  balance  the  expenditure  of  the  State  by  changing  the 
whole  system  of  taxation,  to  pass  long  desired  uniform  laws  on 
the  removal  of  the  barrieres,  on  statute  labour,  on  the  freedom  of 
the  corn  trade,  and  many  other  impediments  to  national  pros- 
perity. It  is  easily  conceived  that  the  men  or  the  organizations 
threatened  by  these  reforms  would  have  done  their  utmost  to 
render  them  impossible,  and  that  the  swarms  of  ambitious  men 
whose  aim  it  was  to  secure  office,  took  possession  of  this  vast  field 
to  carry  on  their  struggle.  But  that  a  prince  of  the  blood,  so 
foreign  to  interests  of  this  nature,  should  not  have  experienced 
the  noble  temptation  to  crush  all  these  petty  intrigues  under  the 
weight  of  his  independence,  that  he  should  have  viewed  with 
indifference  all  these  symptoms  of  rebellion,  that  he  should  have 
calmly  looked  on  the  dangers  of  the  king,  whose  weakness  was 
so  obvious  and  was  so  cruelly  relied  on,  I  cannot  conceive,  nor 
can  I  account  for  it  at  all.  He  was  bitterly  reproached  for  it  by 
the  nation,  which  took  only  too  much  interest  in  those  debates, 
and  which  had  already  lost  too  much  of  its  former  frivolous 
character,  to  excuse  a  prince  of  the  royal  blood,  scandalously 


THE  DUC  H ORLEANS.  129 

parading  his  indifference  :  and  the  murmurings  of  the  public  were 
not  slow  in  conveying  to  him  all  the  severity  of  this  judgment. 

To  thwart  its  effect,  the  advisers  of  the  prince  acknowledged 
the  necessity  of  a  prompt  proceeding  and  obtained  his  assent  to  it ; 
but  it  must  be  easy  of  execution  and  require  but  little  following 
up :  it  was  necessary  that  the  part  to  be  performed  should  be  in 
proportion  to  the  person  who  was  to  perform  it. 

The  Due's  chancellor  was  the  Marquis  Ducrest,1  one  of 
those  adventurers  whom  the  caprice  of  fortune  sometimes  raises 
to  the  top  of  the  tree,  and  who  think  they  deserve  such 
favour.  This  man  was  venturesome  to  foolhardiness  and  confi- 
dent even  to  imprudence.  He  had  reached  this  post  through  the 
influence  of  his  sister,  Madame  de  Genlis,  and  he  sustained  the 
importance  of  his  place  with  the  adroitness  of  a  charlatan,  rather 
than  with  the  skill  of  a  business  man.  The  affairs  of  the  Due 
d'Orleans  had  the  reputation  of  being  well  conducted,  and  this 
reflected  some  credit  on  M.  Ducrest.  Financial  projects  were 
then  the  mania.  M.  Ducrest  thought  fit  to  draw  up  a  memorial 
on  the  finances  of  the  State,  in  which  he  proved  easily  that  they 
had,  up  to  that  time,  been  badly  administered,  and  proposed,  in 
order  to  re-organize  them,  to  follow  the  plans  he  had  put  into 
practice  in  the  administration  of  his  master's  fortune.  It  was 
arranged  that  the  Due  d'Orleans  should  deliver  this  memorial  to 
the  king,  and  he  consented  more  willingly  to  doing  this  than  to 
discussing  the  arguments  set  forth  in  it.  It  was  enough  for  him 
that  the  plan  should  have  publicity  and  should  give  him,  with 
little  trouble,  the  appearance  of  displaying  zeal.  This  scheme 
was  at  first  successful.  The  king  received  the  memorial,  and  did 
not  allow  its  contents  to  transpire  ;  this  was  a  treatment  which  its 
author  did  neither  wish  nor  anticipate.  Piqued  by  this  silence, 
the  Due  composed  a  second  memorial  in  which  he  no  longer 
restricted  himself  to  criticizing  the  operations  of  the  ministry,  but 
openly  attacked  the  persons  of  the  ministers,  and  above  all,  the 
Archbishop  of  Toulouse.     As  to  the  point  in  hand,  he  did  not 

1  Charles  Louis,  Marquis  Ducrest,  born  in  1743.  He  was  the  brother  of  Madame 
de  Genlis.  He  served  first  in  the  navy,  then  in  the  army,  where  he  was  appointed 
colonel  of  grenadiers  in  1779.  He  was  for  some  time  chancellor  of  the  Due  d'Orleans, 
with  whom  he  quarrelled  later.  He  emigrated  to  Holland,  and  died  in  1824.  He 
left  some  works  on  political  economy  and  various  scientific  treatises. 

VOL.  I.  K 


130  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

hold  himself  solely  to  the  restoration  of  the  finances,  he  went 
directly  to  the  root  of  the  evil,  and  expressed  the  wish  of 
bringing  back  to  the  king  the  hearts  of  the  French,  which  had 
been  estranged  by  the  faults  of  the  government.  He  proposed, 
in  order  to  accomplish  both  these  ends  at  once,  to  establish 
councils  at  the  head  of  each  of  the  sections  of  the  administration, 
and  by  this  means  to  weaken  the  authority  of  the  ministers. 
But,  at  the  same  time,  he  wished  for  a  supreme  chief,  a  principal 
leader  at  the  head  of  the  council,  and  declared  himself  ready  to 
consent  to  play  this  leading  part  provided  that  he  was  entrusted 
with  unlimited  power,  and  supported  by  all  the  means  public 
opinion  could  devise  to  strengthen  this  power.  He  asked,  in 
consequence,  that  the  title  and  post  of  superintendent  of 
finances,  an  office  which  had  not  been  conferred  since  the 
disgrace  of  Superintendent  Fouquet,  under  the  reign  of  Louis 
XIV.,  should  be  re-established  in  his  favour.  The  easy  indul- 
gence of  Louis  XVI.,  to  whom  the  Due  d'Orleans  delivered  this 
second  memorial,  would  only  have  repaid  with  scorn  this  un- 
warrantable piece  of  impertinence.  Chance  did  men  justice  by 
divulging  it.  A  copy  of  this  document  was  found  on  the  person 
of  the  Comte  de  Kersalaun,  a  Breton  nobleman  whom  the 
governor  of  Brittany  had  had  arrested  in  connection  with  matters 
relating  to  his  jurisdiction,  and  the  secret  thus  spread  abroad 
enabled  people  to  appreciate  the  modest  talents  of  the  chan- 
cellor, and  the  prudence  of  his  master. 

This  discovery  exposed  both  to  many  jokes  in  verse  and  in 
prose,  of  which  we  only  cite  the  following  epigram,  as  it  may 
serve  to  indicate  the  ruling  tendencies  in  France,  at  this  period 
of  the  life  of  the  Due  d'Orleans  : — 

"  Par  tes  projets  bien  entendus, 
Modeste  Ducrest,  a  t'entendre, 
A  la  reine,  au  roi,  tu  vas  rendre 
Les  cceurs  francais  qu'ils  ont  perdus. 
Sans  miracle  cela  peut  etre  ; 
Helas  !  ils  n'ont  qu'a  le  vouloir. 
Mais,  en  preuve  de  ton  savoir, 
Fais-nous  avant  aimer  ton  maitre."  ' 


1  "  Thanks  to  your  well-concerted  plans, 

If  we  are  to  believe  you,  unassuming  Ducrest, 


THE  DUC  D 'ORLEANS.  131 

This  first  attempt  to  reconquer  public  favour  having  proved 
a  failure,  the  confidants  of  the  Due  d'Orleans  did  not  lose 
courage,  and  only  considered  themselves  warned  to  arrange 
matters  better  in  future. 

Occasions  could  not  be  rare  at  a  time  when  the  position  of 
affairs  was  changing  and  becoming  more  intricate  every  day. 
The  progress  of  ideas,  more  rapid  even  than  that  of  events,  was 
prodigiously  accelerated. 

At  the  beginning  of  that  same  year,  a  meeting  of  Notables 
had,  as  I  have  already  said,  surprised  everybody,  and  in  the 
month  of  July  following,  the  name  of  States-General  was  uttered 
in  the  parlement  of  Paris  itself  with  more  enthusiasm  than 
surprise.  The  courts  of  justice  everywhere  abdicated  their  old 
pretensions,  to  decide  the  amount  of  taxes  to  be  raised.  They 
refused  to  register  the  edicts,  and  sent  back  the  tax-laws  to  be 
discussed  by  the  States-General.  The  court,  astonished  at  this 
language,  tried  to  intimidate  the  parlements ;  that  of  Paris  was 
transferred  to  the  city  of  Troyes,  and  for  other  difficulties,  the 
parlement  of  Bordeaux  removed  to  Libourne.1  This  severity 
had  not  been  of  long  duration.  The  obstinacy  of  the  magistrates 
had  not  been  inflexible ;  half-way  measures  and  intrigues,  in 
which    M.    and    Madame    de    Semonville 2   (then    Madame  de 

You  will  win  back  to  the  queen,  and  the  king, 

The  French  hearts  they  have  lost. 

Without  miracle,  too,  that  may  be  ; 

Alas  !  they  have  only  to  wish  it. 

But  first  make  us  love  your  dear  master, 

And  your  power,  perhaps,  then  we  will  credit." 

1  The  parlement  of  Paris  was  exiled  to  Troyes,  August  15,  1787,  as  a  result  of  the 
deliberation  it  had  held  on  August  7  preceding,  to  protest  against  the  lit  de  justice, 
where  the  edicts  on  the  stamp-duty  and  on  the  territorial  subsidies  had  been  regis- 
tered by  force.  It  was  recalled  on  August  19  following  ;  the  ministry  had  decided  to 
agree  to  these  two  edicts.  As  to  the  parlement  of  Bordeaux,  it  had  been  exiled  to 
Libourne,  at  about  the  same  time,  for  having  protested  against  the  creation  of  pro- 
vincial assemblies.     It  had  even  forbidden  the  assembly  of  Limousin  to  meet  again. 

2  Charles  Louis  Huguet,  Marquis  de  Semonville,  born  in  1759,  was  received  as 
counsellor  at  the  parlement  of  Paris  in  1778.  In  spite  of  his  opposition  to  the  court, 
he  retained  the  favour  of  the  king,  was  charged  with  negotiating  the  reconciliation  of 
Mirabeau,  and  later,  that  of  the  Girondists.  Minister  at  Geneva  in  1791  ;  minister 
at  Florence  in  1793,  where  Danton  sent  him  to  negotiate  the  setting  at  liberty  of  the 
royal  family,  he  was  arrested  with  his  colleague,  Maret  (the  future  Due  de  Bassano), 
and  suffered  thirty  months'  captivity.  On  the  1 8th  Brumaire  he  was  named  minister  to 
Holland.  Senator  in  1805,  he  took  no  part  in  politics  under  the  Empire.  Peer  of 
France  in  18 14  ;  grand  referendary  of  the  court.  He  kept  aloof  during  the  Hundred 
Days,  took  up  his  functions  again  in  1815,  and  kept  them  until  1830.  He  then  made 
some  efforts  to  save  the  Bourbon  monarchy.  Nevertheless,  he  retained  his  office  under 

K   2 


1 32  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

Montholon)  appear  for  the  first  time,  in  different  capacities,  had 
brought  about  a  temporary  reconciliation  ;  but  it  was  only  a 
truce,  and  even  though  the  measures  taken  seemed  more  con- 
ciliatory, public  opinion  gradually  assumed  a  more  menacing 
aspect.  The  ears  of  the  ministers  became  familiar  with  the  name 
of  States-General ;  they  entered  into  new  engagements  on  every 
occasion  ;  the  efforts  of  the  ministry  were  directed  only  to 
putting  off  the  meeting  of  this  assembly  until  the  year  1792. 
This  delay  they  must  gain,  and,  in  the  meantime,  face  the 
taxes,  pay  off  the  sums  about  to  fall  due,  or  already  so,  and  meet 
extraordinary  expenses  ;  and  for  so  many  needs,  the  ministry 
mentioned  no  other  resource  than  that  of  a  loan  open  for  five 
successive  years,  and  whose  capital  was  to  reach  four  hundred 
millions. 

In  order  to  palliate  the  effect  of  this  enormous  demand,  they 
spoke  on  the  one  hand  of  reforms,  economies,  and  ameliorations  ; 
while  on  the  other,  they  added  to  the  bursal  edict  a  law  favour- 
able to  the  non-Catholics,  a  law  that  the  government  believed 
conformable  to  the  prevailing  ideas  and  calculated  to  rally 
many  supporters.  It  had  certainly  never  stood  in  greater  need 
of  them.  The  critical  mind  prevailed  everywhere  ;  everybody 
prided  himself  on  being  an  opponent,  it  was  the  general  dispo- 
sition ;  it  animated  all  the  corporations,  it  prevailed  in  all  the 
writings  ;  all  men  vied  with  each  other  as  to  who  should  attack 
a  ministry  that  no  one  dared  to  defend,  and  which,  after  all 
perhaps,  had  no  more  dangerous  enemy  than  its  own  incapacity. 
So  it  was  easy  to  win  victories  over  it,  and,  whatever  might  be 
the  issue  of  this  contest,  to  have  public  opinion  in  one's  favour. 

The  friends  of  the  Due  d'Orleans  pressed  him  to  aspire  to 
that  easy  success,  by  which  various  other  interests  could  be 
satisfied  at  the  same  time.  He  was  not  without  experiencing 
some  resentment  at  having  been  met  with  a  refusal,  the  last  time 
he  had  asked  to  be  authorized  to  go  to  England  ;  for  the  princes 
of  the  blood  could  not  go  out  of  France  without  the  permission 
of  the  king.     Political  reasons,  easy  to  be  conceived,  placed  all 

the  new  government.  He  died  in  1839.  Semonville  married  Mademoiselle  de 
Rostain,  widow  of  the  Comte  de  Montholon.  His  step-son  was  General  de  Montholon, 
who  accompanied  Napoleon  to  Saint  Helena.  One  of  hi^  step-daughters  married 
General  Joubert,  and  on  her  second  marriage,  Marshal  Macdonald. 


THE  DUC  D> ORLEANS.  133 

the  members  of  the  reigning  house  in  a  sort  of  dependence  on 
its  head  for  all  the  important  actions  of  their  private  life, — a  sort 
of  legitimate  subjection,  inasmuch  as  it  is  useful  for  the  public 
good,  and,  in  truth,  very  easy  to  support  when  so  many  enjoy- 
ments make  up  for  it.  The  Due  d'Orleans  in  vain  affected  to 
ignore  the  cause  of  that  refusal  which  had  so  offended  him  ;  it 
was  none  the  less  obvious  to  observant  eyes.  Some  scandalous 
reports  were  circulating  in  France  as  to  his  conduct  during  his 
first  two  journeys,  and  Louis  XVI.,  as  the  friend  of  decency  and 
good  manners,  wished  to  spare  him  a  new  occasion  for  indulging 
his  disorderly  conduct  and  parading  it  before  the  eyes  of  a 
neighbouring  nation. 

Perhaps  this  refusal  to  the  Due  d'Orleans  was  dictated,  in 
some  measure,  by  the  dread  of  the  influence  of  the  examples  and 
habits  of  a  free  country.  Such  a  fear  was  puerile  at  this  period 
of  history,  and  insulting  to  English  liberty,  for  it  would  have 
been  a  good  thing  for  the  Due  d'Orleans  to  acquire  a  taste  for 
and  understand  the  principles  of  it.  He  would  thus  have  learned 
to  know  what  true  liberty  is,  and  have  understood  that  each 
individual  has  duties  to  perform,  that  the  most  eminent  in  the 
social  scale  must  set  the  example  of  respect  to  the  king,  and  that 
it  is  a  crime  to  sacrifice  public  interest  to  one's  own  resentments. 
Those  of  the  Due  d'Orleans  were  more  particularly  directed 
against  the  queen,  and  they  were  kept  up  by  a  constantly  in- 
creasing series  of  society  quarrels.  Sharp  words  were  bandied 
about  on  both  sides,  and  courtiers  were  not  wanting  to  report 
them  to  those  at  whom  they  were  aimed. 

Such  miserable  wranglings  only  had  too  great  an  influence 
on  the  fate  of  the  unfortunate  queen.  Why  was  it,  that  from  the 
height  of  this  throne  where  her  beauty  alone  was  rivalled  by  her 
greatness  she  should  ever  have  consented  to  take  part  in  quarrels 
which  she  ought  to  have  ignored  ?  Sovereigns  are  doomed  to 
reign  without  relaxing  ;  they  should  never  permit  themselves 
to  forget  the  importance  of  their  private  actions,  for  they  can 
never  cause  them  to  be  forgotten  by  those  who  surround  them,  and 
their  negligence  simply  gives  birth  to  hatred,  their  least  prefer- 
ence to  jealousy,  and  their  slightest  offence  to  implacable 
resentment. 


134  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

The  Due  d'Orleans  saw  himself  each  day  farther  removed 
from  that  familiar  society  of  which  the  queen  had  given  the 
first  example  to  the  court  of  France,  and  of  which  Little  Trianon 
was  the  ordinary  rendezvous.  To  several  fetes  in  this  delightful 
garden,  to  that,1  among  others,  which  the  queen  gave  there  for 
the  archduke,  her  brother,  the  Due  d'Orleans  was  not  invited. 
It  is  true  that  no  prince  of  the  blood  was  favoured  on  this 
occasion.  Disagreements  of  another  character  likewise  kept  the 
Prince  de  Conde  2  and  his  family  away  from  the  parties  given  at 
Little  Trianon.  At  the  gates  of  this  charming  retreat,  the 
queen  felt  that  she  could  lay  aside  the  chains  of  her  grandeur. 
Queen  at  Versailles,  she  believed  she  paid  there  her  debt  to  the 
august  rank  she  occupied  ;  privately  at  Trianon,  she  wished 
to  be  there  only  the  most  amiable  of  women  and  to  know  only 
the  sweetnesses  of  intimacy.  Seeing  that  no  one  had  absolutely 
a  right  to  the  favour  of  being  admitted  to  these  little  excursions, 
it  was  only  the  more  desirable,  and  the  more  calculated  to  excite 
the  desire  of  being  invited.  The  Due  d'Orleans  could  not  conceal 
his  envy,  even  under  the  cloak  of  indifference.  At  one  of  these 
fetes,  he  planned  with  some  ladies  of  the  court  as  little  in  favour  as 
he  was,  the  means  of  mingling  with  the  people  admitted  to  look 
at  the  illuminations  ;  and,  having  thus  penetrated  into  the 
garden,  he  avenged  himself,  for  not  having  been  invited,  by  such 
loud  jeering  and  noisy  gaiety  that  the  queen  was  informed  of  it, 
and  keenly  hurt. 

These  little  fits  of  animosity  had  so  irritated  the  Due 
d'Orleans  that  it  was  not  difficult  to  lead  him  on  to  more  serious 
measures  of  opposition.  The  sway  of  fashion  alone  would 
have  sufficed  to  decide  him.  What  was  there  to  be  feared  in  a 
faction  which  the  pettiest  bailiwick  of  the  kingdom  joined  with 
impunity,  and  of  which  the  courtiers  professed  the  principles  even 
in  the  very  antechambers  of  the  king.     The  Due  d'Orleans  had 

1  Fete  given  to  Joseph  II.,  at  Trianon,  on  the  occasion  of  his  visit  to  France, 
June  13,  1777, 

2  Louis-Joseph  de  Bourbon,  Prince  de  Conde,  son  of  the  Due  de  Bourbon,  who 
was  first  minister  under  Louis  XV.,  and  fourth  descendant  of  the  great  Conde.  Born 
in  1736,  he  took  an  active  part  in  the  Seven  Years  War,  emigrated  in  1789,  and 
became  the  chief  of  that  body  of  tmigrh,  who  took  from  that  time  the  name  of  Army 
of  Conde.  He  retired  to  England  in  1801,  re-entered  France  at  the  Restoration,  and 
died  in  1818.     He  had  married  the  daughter  of  the  Marshal  Prince  de  Soubise. 


THE  DUC  U ORLEANS.  135 

only  to  present  himself,  in  order  to  be  proclaimed  leader  of  the 
malcontents  at  a  time  when  everybody  was,  or  affected  to  be, 
one.  This  position  was  often  presented  to  his  imagination  by 
the  men  who  had  succeeded  in  gaining  his  confidence.  It  belongs 
to  my  subject  to  make  them  known,  for  what  would  history  be 
if  it  painted  but  the  surface  alone,  without  ever  penetrating  into 
the  inner  life  of  men  who  have  played  a  prominent  part,  and 
without  disclosing  the  motives  which  caused  them  to  act  ? 

I  have  already  sketched  the  character  of  Chancellor  Ducrest, 
who  held  the  first  place  in  the  house  of  the  Due  d'Orleans.  M. 
de  Limon,1  had,  under  M.  Ducrest,  the  duties  and  the  title 
of  Intendant  of  Finances.  He  was  a  business  man,  adroit  be- 
yond measure  ;  he  had  had  the  management  of  the  pecuniary 
interests  of  Monsieur.  The  estate  of  the  former  Due  d'Orleans 
had  just  been  proved  ;  it  was  of  enormous  value,  but  involved, 
and  the  co-heirs  raised  all  sorts  of  difficulty.  M.  de  Limon  suc- 
ceeded in  clearing  this  chaos,  and  making  the  brother  and  the 
sister2  satisfied  with  each  other  and  with  himself.  By  this  service, 
he  secured  the  confidence  of  the  Due  d'Orleans  ;  and  he  was 
not  a  man  who  would  not  make  the  most  of  it  for  himself. 
While  following  the  litigation  relative  to  the  estate,  he  had  made 
the  acquaintance  of  the  chief  members  of  the  parlement  of  Paris, 
who,  being  then  engaged  in  higher  politics,  had  willingly  wel- 
comed the  intendant  of  a  prince  whose  name  could  give  weight 
to  their  opinions.  As  for  M.  de  Limon,  he  had  detected  some 
hope  of  making  himself  necessary,  and  he  cultivated  carefully 
his  new  acquaintances,  in  order  that  no  one  could  dispute  with 
him  the  part  of  medium  between  the  prince  and  the  parlement. 

M.  de  Limon  found  himself  powerfully  aided  by  Abbe 
Sabatier  de  Cabre,  one  of  the  most  stirring  members  of  the 
parlements  of  that  time.  A  friend  of  Madame  de  Sillery,  it 
had  been  easy  for  the  abbe,  who  attracted  general  notice  by 
a  rare  effrontery,  a  seducing  imagination,  a  sort  of  eloquence, 
abundant,  fantastic  and  fertile  of  abuse,  to  gain  access  to  the 

1  The  Marquis  Geoffroy  de  Limon  was  comptroller-general  of  the  Due  d'Orleans. 
Deeply  devoted  to  this  prince,  he  assumed,  during  the  Revolution,  a  rather  equivocal 
attitude.  It  is  even  pretended  that  he  wanted  to  have  the  Comte  d'Artois  poisoned. 
After  having  been  a  fervent  patriot,  he  emigrated,  and  became  a  firm  royalist.  He  it 
was  who  drew  up  the  manifesto  of  the  Duke  of  Brunswick.      He  died  in  1779. 

-  Madame,  the  Duchesse  de  Bourbon. 


136  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

intimacy  of  the  Due  d'Orleans.  He  pleased  the  latter,  and 
soon  succeeded  in  leading  him  on.  Though  enjoying  no 
esteem  in  the  par  lenient,  he  possessed  some  influence  there.  His 
fellow  counsellors  had  accused  him  of  having  been  the  spy  of  the 
last  ministry  ;  he  cleared  himself  by  harassing  the  new  one.  It 
was  he  who,  on  July  16,  1787,  suggested,  in  the  meeting  of  the 
courts,  the  convocation  of  the  States-General  ;  and  this  bold 
novelty  had  been  greatly  instrumental  in  drawing  attention 
to  him. 

What  an  advantage  for  a  man  of  this  stamp  if  he  could 
succeed  in  drawing  the  Due  d'Orleans  into  a  series  of  under- 
takings, respecting  which  his  incapacity  would  each  day  increase 
his  dependence !  Sabatier  understood  that  he  must  above  all 
smooth  the  difficulties  before  the  prince,  that  he  must  not  hope 
to  conquer  his  frivolity,  but  rather  confine  himself  to  exacting 
little  from  him  in  order  to  conciliate  all  his  failings.  So  the 
prince  had  merely  to  rehearse  the  part  arranged  by  the  abbe 
for  his  appearance  on  the  stage  of  public  affairs.  The  loan  of 
four  hundred  millions  of  which  I  have  already  spoken  furnished 
the  occasion  for  it.  It  is  from  then  that  the  part  taken  in 
public  affairs  by  the  Due  d'Orleans  ought  really  to  be  dated. 

In  order  to  better  understand  this  incident,  it  is  necessary 
to  make  known  a  few  of  the  forms  observed  then  in  France, 
when  the  government  had  need  to  borrow.  The  edicts  which 
created  the  loans,  and  which  determined  its  conditions,  had  the 
character  of  laws,  and,  like  other  laws  had  to  be  transcribed 
on  the  registers  of  the  parlements  of  the  kingdom.  This 
formality,  which  sanctioned  the  engagement  of  the  State, 
secured  the  lenders.  But  to  produce  such  powerful  effects, 
was  simple  form  sufficient  ?  Could  the  mere  act  of  a 
material  transcription  constitute  a  public  obligation,  and 
mortgage  the  revenues  of  the  State  ?  Was  not  then  the  regis- 
tering in  the  parlements  an  approval  of  measures  included  in 
the  edict  ?  And  does  not  the  right  of  approval  suppose  that  of 
disapproval  ?  Was  not  the  registering  a  witness  of  the  national 
consent ;  and  could  this  consent  be  sufficiently  expressed  by  a 
mechanical  operation,  blind  and  perfectly  passive  ?  All  these 
questions   recurred  without  ceasing,   and   being  always  eluded, 


THE  DUC  &  ORLEANS.     *  137 

never  made  clear,  were  an  inexhaustible  source  of  debates  and 
intrigues.  At  each  new  loan,  a  struggle  was  necessary  against  a 
resistance  into  which  the  magistrates  were  drawn  by  their  natural 
propensity,  for  their  power  being  purely  negative,  they  could 
only  exercise  it  by  refusals.  Besides,  they  had  not,  and  could 
not  have,  any  acquaintance  with  the  needs  of  the  State,  nor  with 
its  resources.  It  was  only,  then,  by  general  reasons  that  they 
could  be  convinced,  and  to  give  value  to  these  general  reasons, 
there  must  be  found  means  of  persuasion  for  each  magistrate. 
This  duty  was  entrusted  to  the  first  president  ;  and  when  he 
met  with  too  many  difficulties,  the  king  was  told  he  must 
display  his  authority.  It  was  then  that  he  summoned  a  lit  de 
justice. 

This  kind  of  assembly,  of  which  one  can  form  no  adequate 
idea  from  the  name  it  bears,  was,  in  fact,  the  annihilation  of  the 
remnant  of  liberty  and  of  justice,  which  had  taken  refuge  with 
the  resistance  offered  by  the  parlements.  Thus  M.  de  Fontenelle 
was  justified  in  saying  that  a  lit  de  justice  was  a  bed  where 
justice  slept.  Whether  the  king  came  himself  to  sit  in  the 
courts  of  the  parlement,  or  whether  he  obliged  its  members  to 
call  personally  with  the  registers  at  his  palace,  the  ceremony 
reduced  itself  to  a  reprimand  pronounced  by  the  monarch  and 
commented  upon  by  the  chancellor.  The  advocate-general  of 
the  king  arose  next  to  expose  and  often  to  blame  the  motive  of 
the  edicts,  concluding,  nevertheless,  that  they  must  receive 
without  delay  the  character  of  laws.  For,  it  is  to  be  remarked 
that  the  presence  of  the  king  did  not  deprive  the  advocate- 
general  of  the  liberty  of  expressing  his  opinion,  though  it 
imparted  a  certain  direction  to  his  summing-up.  When  all 
these  speeches  were  delivered,  the  king  ordered  the  transcription 
of  the  edict  on  the  register  of  laws,  and  after  this  act  of  authority 
to  which  the  magistrates  had  no  means  of  offering  resistance, 
there  remained  to  them  no  other  resource  than  that  of  remon- 
strance, a  species  of  tardy  warning  having  a  direct  action  on 
public  opinion,  and  often  hindering  the  progress  of  affairs. 

It  is  also  necessary  to  bear  in  mind  that  the  lits  de  justice 
were  the  corruption  of  an  ancient  French  custom  according  to 
which  the  kings  had  formerly  rendered  justice  in  person,  in   the 


138  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

bosom  of  the  parlement,  and  in  the  midst  of  the  princes  of  their  ' 
blood,  and  of  the  peers  of  their  kingdom.  At  these  royal 
sittings,  all  the  judges  gave  their  opinions ;  the  king  had  only 
his  own  vote  and  delivered  a  verdict  as  expressed  by  the  majority. 
But  his  presence  at  the  trial  of  private  cases  gave  weight  to 
the  measure  there  adopted — that  was  the  greatest  defect  of  this 
exercise,  otherwise  so  respectable,  of  the  functions  of  royalty. 
It  was  understood  later,  that  if  justice  is  the  debt  of  kings,  this 
debt  is  better  discharged  when  they  do  not  discharge  it  personally. 
Thus  the  king  no  longer  attended  the  trial  of  cases ;  but  he  had 
retained  his  right  of  sitting  in  the  midst  of  the  judges.  He  only 
made  use  of  it,  as  a  rule,  to  enjoin  personally  the  registering 
of  some  laws,  and  to  overcome  any  opposition  to  it  :  this 
visit  was  named  a  lit  de  justice;  the  direct  result  of  this  insti- 
tution was  that  even  in  the  matter  of  taxes  and  loans,  the  king 
was  sole  and  absolute  legislator  ;  for  the  co-operation  of  the  parle- 
uients  could  always  be  reduced  to  a  purely  passive  action  ;  and 
in  fact,  they  had  no  part  in  the  making  of  the  laws,  the  passing 
of  which  they  had  no  right  to  propose,  nor  to  prevent. 

The  only  counterpoise  to  the  royal  power  consisted  in  the 
national  manners,  and  in  public  opinion,  which  gives  force  to  the 
law  in  well-constituted  countries,  and  which,  in  purely  despotic 
countries,  fills  the  lack  of  institutions.  This  impalpable  force 
was  certainly  most  real  in  matters  of  loans  ;  for  the  govern- 
ment might  indeed  call  for  capital,  and  it  is  confidence,  and 
well-founded  confidence  which  brings  it.  The  Archbishop  of 
Toulouse,  Minister  of  Finances,  recognized  this  truth  ;  the  need 
of  more  than  four  hundred  millions  to  assess  on  the  five  years  to 
follow,  was  each  day  more  fully  demonstrated  to  him.  He 
understood,  at  the  same  time,  that  if  this  loan  were  only  regis- 
tered by  force,  it  would  be  announced  under  too  unfavourable 
auspices  and  would  never  be  covered.  The  /its  de  justice 
had  become  odious.  He  could  not  count  upon  a  free  consent  ; 
he  feared  the  results  of  a  consent  too  openly  wrenched.  He  felt 
the  need  of  bringing  authority  into  action,  and,  at  the  same  time, 
of  dissimulating  this  action.  He  thought  then  of  getting  the 
king  to  hold  a  sitting  in  the  park men t  of  Paris  ;  a  sitting  which 
should  be  a  compound  of  a  lit  de  justice  and  of  the  old  royal 


THE  DUC  U ORLEANS.  139 

sessions.  Of  these  he  borrowed  the  name  which  was  not  dis- 
credited, and  the  mode  of  suffrage,  which  permitted  each  member 
of  parlement  to  give  his  opinion,  and  develop  his  arguments.  He 
retained  the  essential  parts  of  the  lits  de  justice,  the  right  to 
enforce  the  registering,  without  regard  to  the  plurality  of  votes 
or  the  wish  of  the  majority. 

On  November  19th,  1787,  the  king  presented  himself  at  nine 
o'clock  in  the  morning  at  the  parlement.  The  Ducd'Orleans  was 
there,  and  the  other  princes  of  the  blood,  with  the  exception  of 
the  Prince  de  Conde,  who  was  then  occupied  in  holding  the 
estates  of  Burgundy.  The  king  brought  with  him  two  edicts, 
one  of  which  related  to  the  creation  of  the  loan  of  four  hundred 
millions,  and  formed  the  principal  object  of  the  session,  while 
the  second,  which  was  on  the  civil  condition  of  the  non-Catholics, 
had  only  been  conceived  in  order  to  throw  some  favourable  light 
on  the  bursal  edict. 

The  king  opened  the  session  by  a  speech  divided  into  two 
parts  ;  in  the  first,  he  announced  that  he  had  come  to  consult 
his  parlement  of  Paris  on  two  great  acts  of  administration  and 
of  legislation.  He  developed  very  little  of  the  purpose  of  these, 
leaving,  as  was  customary,  to  his  Keeper  of  the  Seals,  the  care 
of  the  details  and  of  the  explanations.  In  the  second  part, 
he  took  occasion  to  reply  to  the  remonstrances  that  the 
parlement  of  Paris  had  addressed  to  him  in  favour  of  the 
parlement  of  Bordeaux,  which  had  been  punished  by  a  re- 
moval to  Libourne  for  having  raised  difficulties  relative  to  the 
registering  of  a  law  on  the  provincial  assemblies.  The  king,  in 
this  part  of  his  speech,  employed  a  tone  of  authority,  which 
being  affected  and  not  even  sustained  during  the  little  time  he 
spoke,  served  only  to  make  perceptible  by  its  variations,  the 
hesitations  of  his  character. 

The  Keeper  of  the  Seals 1  spoke  after  him  ;  his  discourse 
embraced  a  vast  plan  ;  he  commenced  by  attacking  directly  the 

1  The  Keeper  of  the  Seals  was  then  Chretien  Francois,  Marquis  de  Lamoignon, 
cousin  of  the  illustrious  Malesherbes.  Counsellor  to  the  parlement  of  Paris,  then 
first  president  of  that  court,  he  was  exiled  in  1772  ;  he  was  appointed  Keeper  of  the 
Seals  in  1787,  in  the  place  of  De  Miromesnil  ;  he  drew  up  and  presented  to  the 
parlement  the  edicts  relative  to  the  stamp  duty  and  to  a  territorial  tax.  He  resigned 
in  1788,  and  died  in  the  following  year.  His  son  was  peer  of  France  under  the 
Restoration.     With  him  the  family  of  Lamoignon  became  extinct. 


140  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

demand  made  by  the parlement  for  an  immediate  convocation  of 
the  States-General.  Without  a  positive  refusal,  he  seemed  to 
oppose  to  this  demand  some  maxims  on  the  absolute  power  oi 
the  king,  which  rejected  the  demand  and  made  it  depend 
entirely  upon  the  king's  will.  His  constitutional  system  was 
drawn  from  the  most  absolute  doctrines  ever  professed  by  French 
ministers  at  any  period  in  our  history. 

From  these  principles  which  he  gave  as  a  peremptory  response 
to  the  demands  and  the  decisions  of  the  parlements,  the  Keeper 
of  the  Seals  passed  to  the  examination  of  the  proposed  laws. 
He  descanted  on  the  value  of  the  ameliorations  already  or- 
dered by  the  king,  his  measures  of  economy,  the  retrenchments, 
which  he  desired  to  make  in  his  personal  pleasures  rather 
than  on  the  establishments  devoted  to  the  defence  or  to  the 
splendour  of  the  State.  He  presented  as  a  work  of  genius  the 
skilful  conception  of  a  loan  of  four  hundred  millions  which 
would  suffice  at  the  same  time  to  extinguish  other  more  onerous 
debts,  to  make  useful  improvements,  to  fill  the  deficit  in  the 
revenue,  to  meet  the  foreseen  and  unforeseen  expenditure  during 
five  years,  and  even  the  cost  of  a  war, — for  which  it  was  said  every 
measure  had  been  taken, — if  such  a  misfortune  should  break  out, 
in  spite  of  the  justified  hopes  the  king  entertained  of  its  being 
deferred  for  a  long  time  by  the  wisdom  and  firmness  of  his 
negotiations.  (It  was  thus  that  the  minister  dared  to  describe 
the  conduct  of  the  court  of  France  towards  Holland  during  the 
course  of  the  year  1787.) 

This  description  of  the  benefits  of  the  present  administration 
led  finally  to  the  new  edict  on  the  non-Catholics.1  The  Keeper 
of  the  Seals  called  attention  to  the  great  advantages  that  this 
increase  of  population  would  give  to  industry  ;  the  benefit 
accruing  to  society  from  new  citizens  ;  the  laws  at  last  re- 
conciled with  nature  and  manners.  But  all  could  see  the 
object  of  this  philanthropy  adopted  for  the  circumstance,  and 
no  one  would  have  thought  of  irritating  the  minister  by  adjourn- 

1  The  edict  of  1787  on  the  Protestants  returned  to  them  a  civil  status  which  they 
had  lost  after  the  revocation  of  the  edict  of  Nantes.  It  is  known  that  the  registers 
relative  to  births,  marriages,  and  deaths  were  held  solely  by  the  cures,  so  that  the 
Catholics  alone  profited  by  them.  As  to  the  Protestants,  their  marriages  were  not 
recognized,  and  their  children  were  considered  as  illegitimate  by  law. 


THE  DUC  D  'ORLEANS.  141 

ing  these  benefits  of  a  tolerant  legislation,  provided  the  sanction 
of  the  loan  which  was  to  bring  four  hundred  millions  into  the 
public  treasury  had  been  voted  without  delay. 

After  the  Keeper  of  the  Seals  had  finished  his  exposition 
of  the  subject  under  examination,  the  deliberation  followed 
its  course,  and  took  the  usual  form  of  sessions  of  parlement. 
The  rapporteur  of  the  court  was  first  listened  to  on  the  subject 
of  the  edict  for  the  loan.  This  rapporteur  was  one  of  the 
magistrates  charged  with  examining  all  the  laws  that  the 
government  sent  to  the  parlement  for  registering.  This  magis- 
trate was  always  chosen  by  the  ministry  among  the  oldest 
judges  who  formed  between  themselves  a  privileged  section 
called  the  Grand'  Chambre,  which  they  entered  only  by  length 
of  service  according  to  their  order  of  reception.  The  title 
of  rapporteur  of  the  court  was  not  that  of  an  office,  but  of  a 
place  of  trust ;  it  was  the  road  to  ambition  and  to  fortune  ;  it 
was  conferred  almost  always  on  an  ecclesiastic,  because,  of  all 
the  means  of  recompensing  and  enriching  a  man,  the  easiest 
and  the  cheapest  was  to  give  him  abbeys.  It  was  in  this  post 
that  Abbe  Terray1  commenced  his  reputation  and  his  fortune  ; 
after  him,  an  exception  was  made  by  giving  this  post  to 
M.  d'Ammecourt,  protege  of  the  house  of  Orleans.  M.  de 
Calonne,  who  suspected  M.  d'Ammecourt  of  serving  the  minister 
unfaithfully,  because  he  wished  to  become  minister  himself, 
dismissed  him.  Abbe  Tandeau  succeeded  M.  d'Ammecourt  ;  he 
had  not  the  astonishing  ability,  the  great  aptitude  for  affairs,  the 
very  composed  appearance  of  that  magistrate  ;  but  the  essential 
part  of  the  office  was  to  repeat  faithfully  the  instructions  received 
from  the  council,  to  reply  to  the  questions  which  might  be  asked 
by  a  few  explanations,  too  trivial  to  really  enlighten,  but  sufficient 
to  appease  the  pretensions  of  the  large  number,  more  eager  for 
consideration  than  for  enlightenment.  Such  was  on  this  occasion 
the  report  of  Abbe  Tandeau,  a  long  and  fastidious  comment 
on  the  edict.     He  concluded  by  saying  that  the  extreme  im- 

1  Joseph  Terray,  born  at  Boen  (Forez)  in  1715.     He  was  at  first  counsellor  of 
parlement,  and  took  always  in  parliamentary  struggles  the  part  of  the  court.      He 
was  recompensed  by  being  named  rapporteur  (1775).      Comptroller-general  in  1769, 
he  became  all  powerful,  after  the  downfall  of  Choiseul,  with  Maupeou  andd'Aiguillon 
Exiled  by  Louis  XVI.,  he  died  in  1778. 


142  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

portance  of  such  a  loan  would  induce  him  to  ask  to  have  a 
commission  named  to  examine  the  edict  and  make  a  report  on 
it,  if  the  presence  of  his  Majesty  did  not  apprise  him  that  he  had 
come  into  the  bosom  of  his  parlement  to  seek  there  a  definitive 
opinion. 

After  the  speech  of  the  rapporteur,  the  discussion  was  opened  : 
each  member  in  his  turn  was  invited  by  the  first  president  to  give 
his  opinion.  The  Due  d'Orleans  in  a  very  few  words  advocated 
the  rejection  of  the  edict.  This  was  the  first  action  in  which  he 
openly  declared  himself  against  the  court. 

Those  orators  whose  talent  and  character  caused  them  to  be 
listened  to  ordinarily  with  more  interest,  redoubled  their  efforts 
on  this  day  to  make  themselves  noticed  by  the  king  and  to 
produce  an  impression  upon  him.  The  presence  of  the  sovereign 
indicated  nothing  likely  to  intimidate  courage  and  discard  the 
truth ;  he  was  said  to  have  come  to  the  Court  of  Peers  in 
order  to  obtain  the  opinion  of  his  natural  counsellors.  What 
a  glorious  success  for  the  magistrates,  if,  by  power  of  word,  they 
should  succeed  in  withdrawing  the  king  from  the  seductions  of 
mediocrity,  striking  his  mind  with  the  light  of  reason,  in  touching 
his  heart  by  the  picture  of  the  evils  from  which  France  was 
suffering,  and  which  she  did  not  attribute  to  him. 

M.  d'Espresmenil's1  object  was,  above  all,  to  achieve  this 
latter  point.  He  was  reputed  the  first  orator  among  the  mem- 
bers of  the  parlement  opposed  to  the  court,  and  he  did  not 
deceive  the  hopes  of  his  party.  On  this  important  occasion, 
his  speech  was  a  special  appeal  to  the  personal  feelings  of  the 
king.  He  begged  him  to  put  aside  the  advice  of  his  minister, 
the  settled  opinions  of  his  council,  to  weigh  without  prejudice  the 
truths  he  was  about  to  hear,  and  to  allow  himself  to  be  influenced 

1  Jean  Jacques  du  Val  d'Espresmenil,  born  at  Pondichery,  January  30,  1746,  was 
the  son  of  Jacques  d'Espresmenil,  Governor  of  Madras.  His  mother  was  the  daughter 
of  the  illustrious  Dupleix.  Having  come  to  France  at  five  years  of  age,  young 
d'Espresmenil  was  received  as  counsellor  of  parlement  in  1775  ;  he  put  himself  at  the 
head  of  the  opposition.  He  it  was  who  provoked  the  resistance  of  his  colleagues  to 
the  edicts  of  Brienne  suppressing  all  the  parlements.  Arrested  for  this,  he  was  de- 
tained some  time  in  the  island  of  Sainte- Marguerite.  Deputy  of  the  nobility  to  the 
States-General,  he  became  one  of  the  firmest  defenders  of  the  monarchy,  and  when  he 
found  his  efforts  powerless,  he  left  the  assembly  never  to  re-enter  it  (179 1).  He  was 
nearly  murdered,  August  10.  Imprisoned  at  the  Abbaye,  he  escaped  by  a  miracle 
from  the  massacres  of  September.  Arrested  anew  a  few  months  after,  he  was 
guillotined  in  1794.     His  wife  shared  the  same  fate. 


THE  DUC  D'ORLEANS.  143 

by  the  convictions  they  would  carry  with  them.  He  entreated 
him  to  believe  himself  in  the  bosom  of  his  family,  surrounded 
by  his  children,  and  not  to  restrain  the  emotions  that  this  sweet 
situation  ought  to  awaken  in  his  paternal  heart. 

Each  orator  seized  the  points  that  were  most  suited  to  his 
usual  views,  and  to  the  nature  of  his  talent.  The  austere 
Robert  de  Saint-Vincent,1  recapitulating  all  that  had  been 
said  by  the  Keeper  of  the  Seals  and  the  rapporteur  of  the 
court,  on  the  actual  sum  of  the  charges  of  the  State  and  the 
insufficiency  of  the  revenues,  on  the  eventual  ameliorations 
and  a  recognized  deficit,  on  the  future  economies  and  a  present 
poverty,  found  that  the  loan  had  no  other  guarantee  than  an 
enormous  deficit ;  that  thev  could  not,  without  fraud,  mortgage 
for  a  new  debt  the  old  taxes  already  given  as  a  guarantee  for 
the  preceding  loans  ;  and  that  the  parlement  would  share  in  the 
responsibility  of  this  crime  if  it  sought  the  confidence  of  the 
lenders,  by  covering,  by  the  credit  of  its  registering,  the  bottom- 
less abyss  into  which  they  would  precipitate  their  capital. 

M.  Freteau,  whose  too  ready  elocution  was  nourished  by  a 
badly  arranged  knowledge,  astonished  the  king  and  the  assembly 
by  the  comparisons  with  which  his  memory  furnished  him.  He 
attacked  directly  the  irregularity  of  the  double  position  of  the 
Keeper  of  the  Seals,  who,  while  still  in  possession  of  the  office 
of  first  president  of  the  parlement  of  Paris,  came  into  the  midst 
of  this  court  to  fill  there  the  functions  of  minister,  drawing  up 
projects  of  law  in  the  council,  and  pretending  to  deliberate  on 
these  same  projects  in  the  parlement,  accumulating  thus  sanction 
with  initiative,  the  partiality  of  a  maker  of  projects  with  the 
impartiality  of  a  magistrate.  He  concluded  with  proposing 
nothing  less  than  excluding  M.  de  Lamoignon  from  the  sitting 
when  they  should  come  to  count  the  votes.  Abbe  Lecoigneux 
established  the  same  motive  of  exclusion  against  M.  Lambert,2 

1  Robert  de  Saint- Vincent  (1 725-1 799)  was  the  issue  of  an  old  family  of 
magistrates.  Counsellor  to  parlement  in  1748,  he  always  displayed  hostility  to  the 
court,  notably  in  the  affair  of  the  necklace.  He  emigrated  at  the  Revolution,  and 
died  in  1799. 

2  Charles  Guillaume  Lambert,  born  in  Paris  in  1727.  Counsellor  of  parlement, 
Councillor  of  State,  member  of  the  Council  on  Finances,  member  of  the  assembly  of 
the  notables.  Deprived  of  his  honours  in  August,  1788,  he  was  re-instated  in  August, 
1789.     On  October  19,  1790,  the  Assembly  decreed  that  he  had  lost  the  confidence 


144  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

comptroller-general,  who  had  none  the   less  taken  his  seat  as 
honorary  counsellor. 

Abbe  Sabatier,  whom  I  have  already  named  as  one  of  the 
counsellors  of  the  Due  d'Orleans,  flattered  the  king  by  enco- 
miums which  rendered  only  more  cutting  the  bitter  satire  which 
he  pronounced  against  the  ministers.  He  insisted  on  his  favourite 
project,  the  convocation  of  the  States-General.  He  dwelt  upon 
the  incapacity  of  the  parlements  to  win  and  retain  the  public  faith 
for  the  future,  and  insisted  that  the  assemblies  of  the  nation  should 
meet  and  re-seize  the  conduct  of  their  affairs,  and  put  an  end  to 
the  depredations  for  which  they  alone  possessed  the  remedy. 

A  few  speakers  spoke  in  favour  of  the  edict.  The  court  was 
not  without  partisans  in  this  numerous  assembly.  Foremost 
among  those  who  declared  for  it,  was  the  Due  de  Nivernais,1 
who,  at  the  time  of  the  affairs  of  1771,  had  made  himself  noticed 
by  his  opposition  to  the  plans  of  Chancellor  Maupeou.  Men 
rarely  keep  their  energy  to  the  end  of  their  career.  Courtiers 
age  early,  and  nearly  all  the  men  who  age  early  become 
courtiers. 

Seven  hours  were  devoted  to  this  discussion,  to  which  the 
king  listened  with  sustained  attention,  and  often  with  manifest 
interest.  He  had,  above  all,  to  guard  himself  against  the  im- 
pression apparently  produced  upon  him  by  the  discourses  of 
MM.  d'Espresmenil,  Sabatier  and  Freteau.  But,  in  this  respect 
he  had  been  well  trained. 

After  having  heard  all  the  speakers,  the  moment  was  come  to 
collect  the  votes,  and  to  count  them,  when  the  Keeper  of  the 
Seals  was  seen  to  rise,  approach  the  king,  take  his  orders,  and 
return  to  his  place.  Then  the  king  pronounced  these  words  : 
"  I  ordain  that  the  edict  providing  for  .  .  .  be  transcribed  on 

of  the  nation.     He  retired  on  December  4  following.     Arrested  in  February,  1793,  he 
was  guillotined  a  few  days  after. 

1  Louis-Jules  Mancini-Mazarin,  Due  de  Nivernais,  was  the  grandson  of  the  Due 
de  Nevers,  who  was  the  nephew  of  Cardinal  Mazarin.  Born  in  1 716,  he  married 
Mademoiselle  de  Ponchartrain,  sister  of  M.  de  Maurepas.  He  had  by  her  a  daughter, 
who  married  the  Comte  de  Gisors,  son  of  the  Marshal  de  Belle-Isle,  killed  at  Crevelt 
in  1758.  Nivernais  followed  at  first  the  career  of  the  army,  and  fought  in  the 
campaigns  of  Italy  (1734),  of  Bohemia  (1742),  of  Bavaria  (1745).  He  was  afterwards 
ambassador  at  Rome,  then  at  Berlin  (1756),  and  at  London  (1762).  Under  the 
Revolution,  he  declined  to  emigrate.  Imprisoned  during  the  Terror,  he  was  delivered 
on  the  9th  Thermidor,  and  died  in  1798. 


THE  DUC  U ORLEANS.  145 

the  registers  of  my  parlement,  to  be  executed  according  to    its 
form  and  tenor." 

It  was  now  that  the  Due  d'Orleans  was  to  appear  upon  the 
scene.     But  better  to  understand  the  proceeding  agreed  upon  for 
him,  it  is  necessary  to  pay  attention  to  the  expressions  employed 
by  the  king.     The  formula  he  had  just  used  would  have  been 
the  proper  formula,  if  the  session  had  been  really  a  royal  session, 
that  is  to  say,  if  the  deliberation  had  been  completed  by  the  call 
for  the  votes,  and  if  the  king  had  not  ordained  anything  except 
as  a  consequence  of  the  known  and  stated  wish  of  the  majority. 
But  it  was  precisely  this  essential  characteristic  of  all  deliberations 
of  an  assembly  which  was  lacking  in  this.     They  had  discussed 
freely,  but  had  not   taken  the  votes.     It    is   believed,  that  if  a 
minister,  more  courageous  and  more  skilful,  had  dared  to  count 
the  votes,  the  result  would  have  been  favourable  to  the  edict.     It 
is  certain  that  all  measures  had  been  taken  to  secure  a  majority. 
They  had  chosen  the  moment  of  the  year  when  the  vacations  of 
the  parlement  were  strictly  finished,  but  a   well-known  custom 
prolonged  them  far  beyond  the  legal  term.     So  great  a  number 
of  members  were  absent,  that  of  six  presidents  there  were  only 
four  at  the  session,  while  the  Archbishop  of  Toulouse  had  not 
failed     to    notify   in    advance    those     upon    whom    he    relied. 
Besides,  they  had  swelled  the  numbers  of  the  assembly  beyond 
measure,  with   ordinary  counsellors,  who   seldom  made  use  of 
their  right  of  entrance  ;  maitres  des  requites,  dependent  by  reason 
of  their  situation,  had  been  chosen,  and  who  were  still  more  de- 
pendent by  their  character  or  their  ambition.     In  spite  of  so 
many  precautions,  the  ministers    had   not   dared  to  make  an 
appeal  to  the  majority  which  they  would  have  been  so  happy, 
however,  to  see  prevail,  and    the  sitting  ended  in  a  regular  lit 
de  justice,  infallible  sign  of  terror  for  the  support  it  had  wished 
to  attract.     One  cannot  avoid  remarking  the  imprudence  and 
timidity  displayed  on  this  occasion. 

The  ministers  had  thought  to  remedy  all  by  not  having  the 
king  pronounce  in  the  order  of  registering,  the  characteristic 
words  of  a  ///  de  justice  :  by  my  express  command.  In  withholding 
these  words,  they  flattered  themselves  that  they  would  impose 
upon  the  public,  and  believed  that  they  could  maintain  that  the 
VOL.    1.  L 


146  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

king  had  held  a  royal  session.  Therefore,  to  deprive  them  of 
this  subterfuge  was  to  deal  them  the  finishing  stroke  ;  this  was 
exactly  the  master-stroke  that  the  counsellors  of  the  Due 
d'Orleans  had  managed  for  him.  Hardly  had  the  king  finished 
speaking  than  the  Due  d'Orleans  arose  and  said  :  "  If  the  king 
holds  a  session  of  parlement  >  the  votes  ought  to  be  collected 
and  counted  ...  if  it  is  a  lit  de  justice  he  imposes  silence  upon 
us."  He  stopped  then,  and  the  king  not  replying,  he  continued 
thus  :  "  Sire,  allow  me  to  lay  at  your  feet,  my  protest  against  the 
illegality  of  your  orders."  It  is  necessary  to  revert  to  the  ideas 
then  ruling  in  France,  to  the  principles  of  authority  then  in  force, 
to  grasp  the  effect  which  must  have  been  produced  by  the  first 
instance  of  a  prince  of  the  blood  making  a  protest  in  the  midst 
of  parlement,  and  attacking  as  null  and  void,  in  the  presence  ot 
the  king  himself,  the  orders  he  had  just  given. 

The  whole  history  of  the  monarchy  offers  nothing  like  it. 
Princes  of  the  blood  had  been  seen  to  resist  with  arms  in  hand 
the  power  of  the  king ;  they  had  never  been  seen  to  try  to 
impose  constitutional  limits  to  his  authority. 

The  king,  surprised  and  embarrassed,  said  with  precipitation  : 
"  That  is  legal."  And  he  gave  orders  for  the  reading  of  the 
second  edict  to  be  proceeded  with  on  the  instant.  As  soon  as 
it  was  finished,  he  arose  and  went  out  with  his  two  brothers, 
after  a  sitting  of  eight  hours  and  a  half,  which  had  greatly  dis- 
turbed him,  and  furnished  him  with  many  causes  for  uneasiness. 

The  princes  and  peers,  and  with  them  the  Due  d'Orleans, 
arose  and  accompanied  him  according  to  custom,  then  returned 
immediately  to  take  up  again  the  deliberation  which  recom- 
menced with  more  heat.  The  partisans  of  the  court  wished  to 
break  up  the  sitting,  and  to  adjourn  for  a  week  to  give  time  for 
minds  to  calm  down.  They  represented  that  Messieurs  (this 
was  the  parliamentary  expression)  were  exhausted  with  fatigue 
and  that  they  had  need  of  repose. 

M.  Lepclletier  de  Saint-Fargeau,1  who,  in   spite  of  his  ex- 

1  Louis  Michel  Lepelletier.  Cornte  de  Saint-Fargeau,  belonged  to  an  ancient  family 
of  magistrates.  Born  in  1760,  he  was  successively  advocate-general,  then  president  a 
mortier  in  the  parlement  of  Paris.  Deputy  of  the  nobility  to  the  States-General,  he 
was  at  first  a  prominent  defender  of  the  monarchy.  Alone  with  the  Comte  de  Mirepoix, 
he  refused  to  unite  with  the  Third  Estate,  in  spite  of  the  order  of  the  king  (June  27, 


THE  DUC  U ORLEANS.  147 

treme  youth,  was  already  president  a  mortier,  proposed  also  an 
adjournment,  but  only  until  the  morrow.  This  advice  was  ap- 
propriate to  the  feebleness  of  his  mind  and  the  pusillanimity  of 
his  character,  which  caused  him  constantly  to  try  to  propitiate 
all  parties,  until  republicanism,  becoming  dominant  in  France, 
fixed  his  resolution.  He  little  expected  then  to  merit  one  day  as  a 
republican  the  honours  of  a  martyr  and  the  laurels  of  apotheosis. 
On  this  day,  he  was  strongly  opposed  by  Abbe  Sabatier, 
who,  classing  together  the  two  dilatory  opinions  to  destroy  them 
at  the  same  time,  maintained  "  That  Messieurs  ought  to  have 
hunger  and  thirst  only  for  justice,  and  that  they  ought  to  con- 
secrate to  it  the  remainder  of  the  present  day,  not  being  assured 
that  the  morrow  would  be  at  their  disposal."  In  pronouncing 
these  words  he  tried  to  give  to  his  accents  a  somewhat  prophetic 
character.  Abbe  Sabatier  then  invited  the  Due  d'Orleans  to 
draw  up  his  protest  in  writing,  and  for  fear  the  memory  of 
the  prince  might  not  be  accurate,  he  found  in  his  own  and  sug- 
gested to  him  the  expressions,  that  he  believed  he  had  heard  him 
utter.  With  this  aid  the  Due  d'Orleans  did  what  was  asked  of 
him,  and  had  it  written  on  the  registers  of  the  parlement,  that 
immediately  after  the  order  of  the  king  to  register  the  edicts 
he  had  risen  and  made  the  following  protest : 

"  Sire,  I  beg  your  Majesty  to  permit  me  to  lay  at  your 
feet,  and  in  the  midst  of  the  court,  the  declaration  that  I  regard 
this  registering  as  illegal,  and  that  it  would  be  necessary  for  the 
security  of  the  persons  who  are  accounted  as  participating  in 
it,  to  add  that  they  did  so  by  the  express  command  of  the  king." 

After  a  little  debate,  the  resolution  proposed  by  Abbe 
Sabatier  prevailed,  in  these  terms  : 

"  The  court,  considering  the  illegality  of  what  has  just  passed 
at  the  royal  sitting,  in  which  the  votes  were  not  counted  in  the 
manner  prescribed  by  the  ordinances,  so  that,  in  short,  the 
deliberation  was  not  completed — declares  that  it  wishes  to  be 
understood  as  taking  no  part  in  the  transcription  ordered  to  be 

1789).  After  July  14,  he  suddenly  changed  his  colours,  and  enrolled  himself  in  the 
most  advancedrevolutionary  party.  Deputy  of  Yonne  to  the  Convention,  he  displayed 
most  violence  in  the  trial  of  the  king ;  he  demanded  his  being  put  on  trial,  voted 
his  death,  and  refused  the  appeal  to  the  people.  On  January  20,  following,  he  was 
assassinated  at  the  Palais-Royal  by  a  former  body-guard  named  Paris.  He  was  given 
a  solemn  funeral  service  at  the  Pantheon, 

L  2 


1 48  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

made  on  the  registers,  of  the  edict  regarding  the  establishment  of 
loans,  gradual  and  successive,  for  the  years  1788,  1789,  1790, 
1791,  and  1792,  and  puts  off  the  deliberation  of  other  matters  to 
the  next  sitting." 

They  closed  the  sitting  at  eight  o'clock  in  the  evening.  The 
Due  d'Orleans  had  carried  off  all  the  honour  of  this  day,  and  it 
must  be  acknowledged  that  all  had  been  planned  and  conducted 
with  great  skill  by  him  and  by  his  friends. 

The  minister,  who  had  only  been  able  to  resort  to  trivial 
means  to  sustain  the  already  tottering  royal  authority,  found  his 
ends  defeated  by  the  protest  of  the  Due  d'Orleans,  and  by  the 
resolution  of  the  parlement,  which  exposed  to  the  broad  daylight 
the  ruse  employed  by  the  government,  and  proved  its  weakness. 

While  all  was  thus  succeeding  with  the  Due  d'Orleans,  in  the 
interior  of  the  Palais  de  Justice,  agents  stationed  outside  were 
publishing  the  proceedings  of  the  sitting,  and  proclaiming  the 
name  of  the  prince  of  the  blood  who  had  shown  himself  so  good  a 
citizen.  The  people  besieged  the  Palais  in  crowds,  and  could 
be  heard  speaking  of  the  pluck  and  success  of  the  Due 
d'Orleans.  When  he  appeared  to  enter  his  carriage,  the  waves 
of  this  fickle  people  carried  him  there,  overwhelming  him  with 
the  most  flattering  applause.  The  liberator  of  his  country  could 
not  have  had  a  more  splendid  triumph.  He  whom  they  had 
greeted  a  few  days  before  with  sarcasms,  was  to-day  covered 
with  blessings.  Such  are  the  judgments  of  that  throng  that  one 
pretends  to  honour  by  the  name  of  the  people. 

Unfortunately,  the  Due  d'Orleans  sought  no  purer  incense  ; 
this  one  was  just  to  his  mind  ;  as  he  had  not  been  capable  of 
making  true  sacrifices  to  public  opinion,  so  he  was  not  able,  cither 
to  detect  the  value  that  ought  to  be  attached  to  this  opinion, 
when  it  is  exalted  by  those  who  proclaim  it. 

The  cries  of  joy  of  an  ignorant  populace  flattered  his  passion 
against  the  court,  and  fortified  him  in  his  scorn  for  public  opinion 
by  showing  him  how  easily  it  could  be  conquered. 

The  Archbishop  of  Toulouse  and  the  Keeper  of  the  Seals, 
indignant  at  seeing  that  their  stratagems  had  become  snares 
against  themselves,  united  all  their  efforts  to  excite  the  anger 
of  the  king  and  to  represent  to  him  the  non-execution  of  their 


THE  DUC  jy ORLEANS.  149 

measures  as  a  public  misfortune.  "  A  prince  of  the  blood,"  they 
said,  "  who  ought  to  have  sustained  the  throne,  and  who  had 
dared  to  sap  its  foundations,  even  to  the  point  of  supposing 
limits  to  the  authority  of  the  king  and  to  say  it  in  his  presence ! 
Judges  bold  enough  to  accuse  of  prevarication  the  ministers, 
that  is  to  say  the  trustees  of  the  confidence  of  the  master,  the 
agents  of  his  will !  Such  an  excess  of  audacity  merited  punish- 
ment. The  exile  of  the  one,  the  detention  of  the  others,  were 
examples  necessary  in  order  to  put  a  stop  to  similar  scandals." 

It  was  by  such  discourses  that  this  feeble  minister  drew  the 
king  into  measures,  which,  being  the  outcome  of  passion,  could 
only  induce  all  ambitious  persons  of  the  same  stamp,  as  abbes 
Freteau  and  Sabatier,  to  wish  for  a  light  persecution.  The 
ministers  of  Louis  XVI.  were  ignorant  of  the  fact  that  arbitrary 
power  has  not  the  right  to  punish  with  moderation  those  who 
resist  it,  and  that  it  is  doomed  by  its  nature  either  to  tolerate  or 
to  crush  its  enemies. 

The  first  alternative  would  have  been  more  consonant  with  the 
character  of  the  king  ;  the  second  might  well  have  tempted  the 
ministers,  but  they  knew  that  they  were  not  strong  enough, 
either  with  the  king  or  in  the  eyes  of  the  nation,  to  take  it.  They 
thought  they  had  done  much  in  suggesting  the  exile  of  the  Due 
d'Orleans,  and  in  proposing  to  have  counsellors  Freteau  and 
Sabatier  carried  off  to  prison.  They  took  the  first  to  the  citadel 
of  Doullens,  and  the  second  to  the  chateau  of  Mont  Saint- Michel, 
a  kind  of  isolated  tower  on  a  rock  washed  by  the  waves  of  the  sea. 
It  was  Baron  de  Breteuil,  Minister  of  Paris,  who  went,  on 
the  20th  of  November,  at  six  o'clock  in  the  evening,  to  notifiy 
to  the  Due  d'Orleans  the  order  for  his  exile.  This  minister  was 
specially  entrusted  with  the  distribution  of  the  lettres  de  cachet} 
when  they  were  drawn  up  against  one  of  his  brother-ministers  or 
against  a  prince  of  the  blood.  It  was  customary  for  the  minister 
to  go  in  person  to  give  the  information,  and  this  mission  drew 
upon  him,  sometimes,  receptions  which  bore  the  impress  of  the 

1  Literally  sealed  letters.  Originally  they  only  conveyed  the  king's  orders  on  State 
business.  Since  the  sixteenth  century,  however,  they  were  subscribed  by  a  Secretary 
of  State,  and  solely  employed  to  notify  to  the  authorities  the  decision  of  the  king  to 
have  persons  of  rank  sent  to  prison  without  any  trial,  and  often  for  imaginary  offences. 
— {Translator.)   - 


i$o  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

temper  of  the  disgraced  ones.  Here,  the  position  was  so  much 
the  more  delicate  that  Baron  de  Breteuil  owed  his  fortune 
to  the  protection  of  the  house  of  Orleans.  His  uncle,  Abbe  de 
Breteuil,1  had  been  chancellor  of  the  late  Due  d'Orleans,  who 
had  loaded  him  with  riches  and  kindness,  and  had  opened  to  the 
nephew  the  road  to  favour  and  high  offices*  The  king's  letter, 
which  the  latter  handed  to  the  Due  d'Orleans,  contained  the 
order  to  go  that  very  night  to  his  Chateau  at  Raincy,2  in  order 
to  arrive  on  the  following  day  at  that  of  Villers-Cotterets,3  which 
was  about  eighteen  leagues  distant.  The  prince  received  this 
injunction  with  ill-humour,  and  took  care  to  make  the  bearer  of 
the  order  feel  it.  After  having  given  an  hour  to  a  few  private 
arrangements,  he  called  for  his  horses,  and  entered  his  carriage. 
The  baron  who,  according  to  his  instructions,  was  to  accompany 
him,  prepared  to  take  a  seat  by  his  side,  when  the  prince  stopped 
him  saying  :  "  What  are  you  doing  ? "  The  baron  showed  his 
orders.  "  Oh,  well,"  replied  the  prince,  "  get  up  behind,"  and  he 
started.  The  baron,  without  taking  any  notice  of  this  passing 
cloud  (that  is  the  expression  he  used  when  relating  this  little 
incident)  entered  his  own  carriage  and  followed  as  best  he  could. 
The  news  of  the  exile  of  the  Due  d'Orleans  spread  quickly 
in  Paris.  The  garden  of  the  Palais-Royal,  all  the  adjacent 
streets  and  places  were  filled  with  people,  and  resounded  with 
cries  oi"  Long  live  the  Due  d'Orleans  1 '"  On  the  21st,  in  the 
morning,  the  chambers  of  the  parlement  reassembled,  and  decided 
to  send  the  first  president  to  the  king  to  ask  him  to  recall  to  his 
presence  the  august  prince  whom  he  had  removed,  and  to  return  to 
the  court  two  members  whose  zeal  alone  had  dictated  their 
opinions.     At  noon  the  parlement  was  summoned  to  Versailles, 

1  The  Abbe  Theodore  de  Breteuil,  born  in  1710,  prior  of  Saint-Martin  des  Champs, 
at  Paris,  chancellor  of  the  Due  d'Orleans.     He  died  in  1781. 

2  Le  Raincy,  near  Bondy,  about  nine  miles  from  Paris,  had  been  at  first  an  abbey. 
In  the  seventeenth  century,  Jacques  Bordier  replaced  it  by  a  magnificent  chateau, 
which  belonged  afterwards  to  the  Princess  Palatine.  It  became,  in  1750,  the 
property  of  the  Due  d'Orleans.  It  was  sacked  during  the  Revolution,  and  entirely 
destroyed  in  1848. 

3  Villers-Cotterets,  chief  place  of  the  Canton  of  Aisne.  In  the  thirteenth  century, 
Charles  de  Valois  possessed  there  a  chateau  which  was  destroyed  during  the  war  of 
the  Hundred  Years.  Francis  I.  had  another  built  by  the  side  of  the  old  one,  which 
became  one  of  the  favourite  residences  of  the  court.  It  was  acquired  in  the  seven- 
teenth century  by  the  family  of  Orleans.  This  chateau  is  used  to-day  as  a  kind  of 
workhouse. 


THE  DUG  D' ORLEANS.  151 

and  the  king  gave  orders  for  the  resolution  taken  on  the  pre- 
ceding 19th  to  be  erased  from  the  registers.  The  speech  which 
he  delivered  on  this  occasion  is  worth  being  preserved. 

"  I  have  ordered  you,"  said  he,  "  to  bring  to  me  the  minutes 
of  the  resolution  taken  by  you  on  Monday  last,  after  my  leaving 
the  parlement.  I  cannot  allow  it  to  remain  on  your  registers, 
and  I  forbid  you  to  replace  it  in  any  other  manner. 

"How  can  my  parlement  say  it  has  taken  no  part  in  regis- 
tering the  edicts,  which  I  only  pronounced  after  having  listened 
during  seven  hours  to  the  advice  and  opinions  of  those  of  the 
members  who  wished  to  give  them,  and  when  it  was  certain  for  all 
as  for  myself,  that  the  majority  of  the  votes  were  in  favour  of  the 
registering  of  my  edict,  and  requested  me  to  hasten  the  meeting 
of  the  States-General  of  my  kingdom.  I  have  already  said  that 
I  would  convoke  them  before  1792,  that  is  to  say,  at  the  latest 
before  the  end  of  1791.     My  word  is  sacred. 

"  I  approached  you  with  confidence,  in  this  ancient  method,  so 
often  employed  by  the  parlement  of  the  kings,  my  predecessors 
and  it  is  at  the  moment  when  I  have  so  deigned  to  hold  council 
in  your  midst,  on  an  object  of  my  administration,  that  you  try 
to  transform  yourselves  into  an  ordinary  tribunal,  and  to  declare 
illegal  the  result  of  this  council  by  invoking  ordinances  and 
rules  which  concern  only  tribunals  in  the  exercise  of  their 
functions. 

"  The  claims  of  my  parlement  ought  to  come  to  me  only  in 
the  form  of  respectful  representations  or  remonstrances.  I  dis- 
approve always  of  resolutions,  which  declare  their  opposition 
to  my  will,  without  expressing  any  motives  for  it." 

After  this  speech,  remarkable  for  the  principles  it  sets  forth, 
and  by  the  formal  promise  of  the  States-General  it  contains, 
the  first  president l  obtained  the  permission  to  have  the  repre- 
sentations heard  which  had  been  resolved  upon  that  same 
morning,  relative  to  the  exile  of  the  Due  d'Orleans,  and  to  the 
detention  of  the  two  counsellors. 

The  king  replied  in  these  few  words  :  "  When  I  remove  from 
my  person  a  prince  of  my  blood,  my  parlement  ought  to  believe 
that  I    have   strong    reasons    for  so   doing.     I  have    punished 

1  The  first  president,  d'Aligre. 


152  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

two    malcontents   with   whom   I  had  good   reason    to   be   dis- 
satisfied." 

They  expected  such  a  cold  reply  ;  it  did  not  prevent  the 
parlement  from  making  a  fresh  attempt.  Its  example  was 
followed  by  all  who  had  the  right  to  raise  their  voices,  and  to 
cause  representations  to  reach  even  to  the  foot  of  the  throne. 
All  the  parlements  emulated  with  each  other  in  making  remon- 
strances ;  all  demanded  the  recall  of  the  prince  and  of  the  two 
magistrates.  The  princes  and  the  peers  were  forbidden  to  attend 
the  sittings  of  the  parlement,  which  were  almost  permanent 
and  drew  the  attention  of  the  people.  Experience  had  taught 
that  importunity  was  a  method  not  without  efficacy  with  a 
feeble  government. 

In  the  sitting  of  the  22nd  of  November,  the  parlement  had 
also  resolved  to  send  the  registrar  Isabeau  to  congratulate  the 
Duchesse  d'Orleans,  and  to  express  the  concern  they  felt  at  the 
exile  of  her  husband.  This  princess  had  already  departed  for 
Villers-Cotterets.  On  arriving  at  the  place  of  his  exile,  the  Due 
d'Orleans  had  hastened  to  beg  the  parlement  of  Paris  not  to 
take  any  notice  of  him.  He  knew  well  that  in  affecting  to  claim 
this  silence  for  himself,  he  would  only  attach  the  popular  party 
more  strongly  to  his  cause,  and  he  was  sure  that  the  zeal  of  the 
parlement  for  his  interests  would  not  be  slackened.  But  it  must 
not  be  possible  that  the  entreaties  of  that  body  should  be 
attributed  to  his  instigations,  otherwise,  they  would  be  more 
likely  to  embitter  the  king  than  to  appease  him.  The  latter 
could  not,  without  compromising  his  authority,  remit  so 
promptly  the  punishments  he  had  imposed. 

The  peers  submitted  unwillingly  to  the  prohibition  which 
had  been  laid  upon  them  to  enter  parlement.  They  met 
secretly  at  the  Hotel  de  Luyncs,  to  draw  up  an  address  in 
favour  of  the  exiled  prince.  Similar  requests,  as  I  have  said, 
came  from  all  parts.  And  yet  the  Due  d'Orleans  little  merited 
the  interest  he  inspired.  Little  impressed  by  the  eclat  of  his  role, 
he  complained  with  bitterness  of  the  privations  it  imposed  upon 
him.  Never  had  lighter  privations  been  supported  with  less 
patience  and  less  courage.  If  the  Parisians  could  have  read  to 
the  depths  of  the  heart  of  their  new  idol,  they  would  have  been 


THE  DUC  U ORLEANS.  153 

strangely  surprised  to  find  what  little  devotion  they  were  recom- 
pensing by  so  much  homage. 

The  orders  of  the  king  forbade  the  Due  d'Orleans  to  receive 
in  his  exile  other  visits  than  those  of  his  family  and  of  persons 
attached  to  his  service.  It  had  been  desired  to  avoid  the  im- 
mense concourse  of  visitors  which  would  not  have  failed  to 
gather  around  the  exile  to  honour  his  retirement,  and  above 
all  to  brave  the  dissatisfaction  he  had  incurred.  However, 
Villers-Cotterets  was  anything  but  a  solitude.  All  the  relations 
of  the  prince,  among  whom  must  not  be  forgotten  the  generous 
Madame  de  Lamballe,  considered  it  a  duty  to  gather  about  him  ; 
his  children  had  joined  him.  His  attendants  and  those  of  the 
Duchesse  d'Orleans  formed  a  numerous  society.  At  this  period 
of  his  life  he  was  intimately  acquainted  with  Madame  de  Bufifon,1 
a  young  and  pretty  person,  whose  disinterestedness  and  extreme 
devotion  have  won  the  indulgence  of  all  who  have  known  her. 
Once  a  week,  she  repaired  to  Nanteuil,2  a  small  city  situated  at 
equal  distance  from  Villers-Cotterets  and  Paris  ;  it  was  there  the 
Due  d'Orleans  went  to  see  her. 

With  these  resources,  in  a  magnificent  dwelling,  in  the  midst 
of  all  the  distractions  procurable  by  an  immense  fortune,  it 
would  only  have  required  a  very  ordinary  dose  of  moderation  to 
have  been  happy.  But  the  prince's  position  appeared  to  him 
unbearable,  and  it  is  impossible  to  deny  that,  at  this  time,  blind 
vengeance  became  the  ruling  passion  of  his  heart.  This  is  the 
secret  of  the  second  portion  of  his  life. 

While  those  ideas  of  vengeance  were  fermenting  in  his  head, 
he  nevertheless  used  every  means  to  obtain  his  liberty.  The 
Parisians,  who  wished  to  justify  their  enthusiasm,  related  that  he 
had  rejected  the  means  of  return  and  of  reconciliation  offered 
by  the  Archbishop  of  Toulouse.  According  to  them,  the  Due 
d'Orleans  had  refused  to  re-enter  into  favour  before  the  two 
counsellors  were  recalled,   and   also  before  the   motive   of  the 


1  Mademoiselle  de  Cepoy,  married  in  1784  to  Louis-Marie,  Comte  de  Buffon,  son 
of  the  illustrious  savant,  who  was  decapitated  in  1794.  The  relations  existing  between 
the  Due  d'Orleans  and  Madame  de  Buffon  determined  a  separation  (1789)  between 
her  and  her  husband,  and  this  was  converted  into  a  divorce  (1793). 

2  Nanteuil,  chief  seat  of  the  Canton  of  Oise  ;  1,600  inhabitants ;  fifteen  miles 
from  Senlis. 


154  THE  MEMOIRS  OE  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

severity  which  had  been  employed  towards  them,  should  have 
been  made  known  positively  to  all  three. 

These  rumours  were  credited  by  those  who  were  on  good 
terms  with  the  inmates  of  the  Palais  Royal,  where  all  mention 
of  the  vain  efforts  of  the  Prince  de  Conde  and  of  the  Due  de 
Bourbon  x  in  the  exile's  favour  was  carefully  avoided.  The  king 
had  received  those  princes  with  kindness.  He  had  not  dis- 
approved of  the  interest  they  had  shown  for  the  Due  d'Orleans, 
but,  pressed  by  them  to  explain  himself  on  the  duration  of  the 
exile,  he  contented  himself  by  replying :  "  Believe  me,  I  am  a 
good  kinsman." 

The  same  newsmongers,  as  fortunate  in  invention  as  in  reti- 
cence, abstained  also  from  speaking  of  the  letters  in  which  the 
Due  d'Orleans  had  directly  solicited  his  pardon.  In  these  letters, 
he  had  not  blushed  to  put  forward  motives  surely  much  more 
humiliating  than  any  prayer.  It  was  not  on  the  legitimacy  of  his 
conduct  nor  even  on  the  purity  of  his  intentions  that  he  based 
his  request.  In  order  to  move  the  king,  he  had  sought  the  most 
extraordinary  means.  Thus,  he  laid  weight  on  the  necessity  of 
resuming  and  superintending  the  work  commenced  at  the  Palais 
Royal,  the  suspension  of  which  caused  great  prejudice  to  his 
interests  ;  he  spoke  also  of  the  neglect  into  which  these  had  fallen 
through  the  illness  of  M.  de  Limon,  the  intendant  of  his  finances. 
In  order  to  try  everything,  he  spoke  of  his  health  and  of  that  of 
the  Duchesse  d'Orleans,  saying  they  could  not  do  without  re- 
turning to  Paris.  Finally,  he  laid  weight  on  the  retirement  of 
his  Chancellor  Ducrest,  as  an  expiatory  sacrifice  which  ought 
to  be  recompensed  by  a  return  of  favour,  or  at  least  by  a 
generous  forgetfulness  of  the  wrongs  of  which  this  "  imprudent 
favourite  had  rendered  himself  guilty." 

It  was  true  that  M.  Ducrest  had  just  given  in  his  resignation, 
and  the  letter  that  accompanied  it  had  been  circulated  in  public. 

1  Louis  Henry -Joseph,  Due  de  Bourbon,  was  born  August  13,  1776.  He  was  the 
son  of  the  Prince  de  Conde.  He  took  no  part  in  public  affairs  under  the  reign  of 
Louis  XVI.  He  emigrated  at  the  beginning  of  the  Revolution,  and  commanded  a 
corps  of  the  army  of  Conde.  He  retired  afterwards  to  England.  During  the 
Hundred  Days,  he  tried  without  great  success  to  raise  the  Vendee.  He  was  appointed, 
under  Louis  XVIII.,  grand  master  of  the  king's  household.  He  put  an  end  to  his 
life,  August  27,  1830,  at  Chantilly.  He  had  married  his  cousin,  the  Princesse 
Louise  d'Orleans,  and  was  the  father  of  the  unfortunate  Due  d'Enghien. 


THE  DUC  U ORLEANS.  155 

According  to  that  letter,  the  resignation  was  purely  voluntary ; 
the  faithful  servant  had  perceived  that  he  was  injuring  his 
master,  and  his  attachment  for  him  required  him  to  separate  from 
him.  Too  much  hatred  had  attached  to  him  as  the  author  of  the 
memoranda  handed  to  the  king  by  the  Due  d'Orleans,  for  him  to 
hope  that  he  could  do  the  latter  any  good.  He  flattered  himself 
that  the  vengeance  of  his  enemies  being  satisfied,  they  would 
seek  no  other  victim.  All  this  was  intermingled  with  phrases  on 
the  success  of  his  administration.  Neither  the  resignation  of 
Chancellor  Ducrest,  nor  his  letter,  nor  that  of  the  Due  d'Orleans, 
had  touched  the  heart  of  the  king,  and  severity  prevailed  still  in 
his  resolutions.  The  Due  d'Orleans  did  not  even  obtain  a 
written  answer ;  but  the  Comte  de  Montmorin,  Minister  of 
Foreign  Affairs,  was  instructed  to  see  him,  to  exhort  him  to 
patience,  and  to  say  to  him  that  the  king  did  not  write  in  order 
to  spare  himself  the  chagrin  of  refusing  him. 

The  parlement  >  where  princes  and  peers  had  at  last  obtained 
permission  to  reappear,  did  not  cease  to  insist  on  the  recall  of 
the  two  exiled  counsellors  and  of  the  prince.  All  the  month  of 
December  was  passed  in  waiting,  and  soliciting  replies  from  the 
government.  The  Prince  de  Conde  and  the  Due  de  Bourbon 
attracted  notice  by  their  assiduity  at  the  sittings  of  the  parlement, 
and  if  they  appeared  to  agree  with  the  ministers  on  some  points, 
they  could  not  be  reproached  with  failing  on  every  occasion  to 
speak  in  favour  of  the  three  exiles.  After  some  weeks  rigour 
at  last  ceased.  The  king  resolved  to  trust  to  mercy,  and  was 
pleased  to  accord  to  the  Duchesse  d'Orleans  that  which  he  had 
refused  to  the  entreaties  of  the  parlement. 

The  Archbishop  of  Sens  (M.  de  Brienne  had  exchanged  the 
Archbishopric  of  Toulouse  for  that  of  Sens,)  thinking  he  had 
obtained  a  truce  by  this  concession,  prepared  with  the  Keeper 
of  the  Seals  a  new  judiciary  organization,  the  effect  of 
which  was  to  suspend  the  functions  of  all  the  sovereign 
courts  of  the  kingdom  at  the  time  when  it  should  be- 
come law.  Sanction  was  to  be  given  to  this  new  project  in 
an  assembly  summoned  under  the  name  of  plenary  court,  in 
which  the  edicts  that  the  minister  had  proposed  to  the  parle- 
ment were  to  be  registered.     But  M.  de  Brienne   had  neither 


156  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

the  intellect  nor  the  energy  required  by  projects  so  vast  and 
circumstances  so  grave.1 

The  measures  taken  by  the  ministry,  and  the  mysterious 
silence  they  kept,  caused  great  uneasiness  :o  all  the  magis- 
trates. They  made  all  sorts  of  attempts  to  discover  the  projects 
of  the  government.  They  succeeded  .  MM.  d'Espresmenil  and 
Goislard  2  obtained  a  copy  of  the  edicts  and  some  documents 
which  related  to  them.  They  had  them  printed  and  distributed, 
without  the  ministry  having  even  had  knowledge  of  the  discovery 
that  had  just  been  made.  In  an  assembly  of  the  chambers  con- 
vened immediately,  and  at  which  the  Due  d'Orleans  was  not 
present,  after  all  the  peers  and  members  of  the  parlement  had 
taken  an  oath  not  to  recognize  as  a  courv  officer  any  except  those 
present,  and  to  reject  at  the  risk  of  their  lives  all  propositions 
tending  to  retard  the  convocation  of  the  States-General,  they 
declared  that  if  violence  made  it  impossible  for  the  court  to  watch 
personally  over  the  constituent  principles  of  the  French  monarchy, 
they  would  confide  this  duty  to  the  hands  of  the  king,  the  princes 
of  his  blood,  and  the  States-General. 

The  ministry,  informed  of  what  had  passed,  decided  to  have 
those  magistrates  arrested  whom  they  supposed  to  have  dis- 
covered and  published  their  projects.  M.  d'Espresmenil  and  M. 
Goislard  took  refuge  in  the  parlement.  A  detachment  of  the 
armed  force  that  was  in  Paris  followed  after  them.  After  some 
hours  they  gave  themselves  up  into  the  hands  of  M.  d'Agoult,3  who 

1  Brienne  undertook  to  destroy  the  parlements.  On  May  8,  1788,  the  king 
ordered  the  parlement  to  Versailles,  and  the  Keeper  of  the  Seals,  Lamoignon,  read 
the  following  edicts  : — The  first  instituted  under  the  title  of  Grands  Bailliages,  new 
courts  of  justice  which  were  to  decide  all  civil  and  criminal  cases  below  20,000 
livres.  The  parlements  were  only  cognizant  of  cases  above  that  figure,  as  also  of 
those  concerning  ecclesiastics  and  nobles.  The  second  edict  reduced  considerably 
the  number  of  counsellors  of  parlement.  The  third  suppressed  all  extraordinary 
tribunals.  The  fourth  abolished  the  previous  question.  The  fifth,  and  the  most 
important,  instituted  a  plenary  court,  charged  with  verifying  and  registering  the  laws 
for  the  whole  extent  of  the  kingdom.  This  court  was  composed  of  the  Chancellor  or 
of  the  Keeper  of  the  Seals,  of  the  great  chamber  of  the  parlement  of  Paris,  of  the 
princes  of  the  blood,  the  peers,  the  grand  officers  of  the  crown,  various  dignitaries 
of  the  Church  and  of  the  army,  a  certain  number  of  members  chosen  in  the  Council 
of  State  and  the  parlements  of  the  provinces.  The  court  had  the  right  of  remon- 
strance, but  the  king  reserved  to  himself  that  of  dictating  his  orders  at  lits  de  justice. 
Finally,  the  sixth  edict  published  an  interdict  against  all  existing  parlements,  and 
forbade  their  assembling  on  any  public  or  private  case. 

2  M.  Goislard  de  Monsabert  was  a  young  counsellor  of  parlement. 

3  Antoine  Jean,  Marquis  d'Agoult,  born  at  Grenoble  in  1750  of  an  old  family  of 
Dauphiny.     Lieutenant  of  the  body-guard  (17S1),  colonel  (1783).     He  emigrated  in 


THE  DUC  U ORLEANS.  157 

commanded  the  expedition,  and  who  had  declared  that  he 
would  rake  them  jway  by  force,  if  they  would  not  follow  him. 
M.  d'Espresmenil  was  taken  to  the  island  of  Saint  Mar- 
guerite. I  ought  to  observe,  for  the  sake  of  the  history  of 
the  odd  freaks  of  the  human  mind,  of  which  it  is  always  well  to 
take  account,  that  that  same  d'Espresmenil — just  as  in  the  as- 
sembly of  the  clergy  held  at  that  time,  the  Bishop  of  Blois,  like 
M.  de  Themines — they  both  being  then  leaders  of  the  opposition 
against  the  court,  and  decided  advocates  of  the  States-General, 
— made  himself  conspicuous,  during  all  the  time  of  the 
constituent  assembly,  by  sentiments,  opinions,  and  intrigues 
directed  against  the  new  order  of  things  which  he  had  himself 
produced. 

The  Archbishop  of  Sens  after  having  tried  for  twenty-four 
hours  a  kind  of  bankruptcy,  and  having,  for  some  days,  re- 
sorted to  a  certain  severity  against  the  parlements,  renounced 
all  his  plans,  and,  promised  to  summon  a  meeting  of  the  States- 
General,  in  order  to  gain  time,  but  he  did  not  gain  any,  and 
was  obliged  to  retire,  leaving  the  court  enfeebled,  public  opinion 
informed  of  its  own  strength,  and,  in  one  word,  the  Revolution 
commenced. 

The  Due  d'Orleans  had  no  influence  on  the  last  movements 
of  the  parlement,  and  his  name  was  hardly  mentioned  at  the 
States-General.  I  shall  not  therefore  dwell  on  the  events  which 
marked  this  important  period. 

The  government  had  itself  proclaimed  the  limits  of  its  power 
and  invited  the  public,  by  an  appeal  made  to  all  enlightened 
men.  to  devise  itself  the  best  method  of  convoking  the  States- 
General.  Was  it  not  imprudent  to  agitate  France  by  political 
discussion:  of  all  kindo  and  withoui  fixed  principle^  to  start 
with?  \o  fact,  the  first  cause  of  the  disorders  excited  by  the 
assembling  of  the  States-General  lay  here. 

The  first  symptoms  of  these  disorders  broke  out  in  the  Faubourg 
St.  Antoine,  and  everything  goes  to  prove  that  the  Due 
d'Orleans  was  not  a  stranger  to  them.    A  manufacturer  named 

1 791,  and  joined  the  army  of  Conde.  He  remained  attached  to  Louis  XVIII.  during 
all  his  exile,  and  only  returned  to  France  in  18 14.  He  died  in  1828,  peer  of  France 
and  Governor  of  the  Chateau  of  Saint-Cloud. 


158  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

Reveillon,1  a  very  respectable  man,  gave  employment  to  a  large 
number  of  workmen.  I  do  not  know  what  calumny  was  circulated 
among  them  concerning  him  who  gave  them  their  means 
of  livelihood.  At  the  same  time  money  was  distributed  to 
them  ;  and  the  crowd  having  mixed  with  them,  the  number 
increased,  and  the  riot  became  so  serious,  that  it  was  necessary 
to  employ  the  French  and  the  Swiss  Guards  to  restore  order. 
The  same  amount  of  money,  twelve  francs,  that  was  found 
on  each  of  the  rioters  killed  or  arrested,  proved  already  that 
some  one  of  a  superior  class,  had  directed  that  outbreak ;  the 
confessions  made  by  several  of  those  poor  wretches  allowed 
it  to  be  no  longer  doubted  that  the  sedition  had  been  brought 
about  by  the  agents  of  the  Due  d'Orleans.  The  depraved 
character  of  that  prince  made  him  enjoy  any  tumult  what- 
ever ;  he  was  delighted  to  agitate,  to  make  a  noise,  to  create 
embarrassment,  but  he  dared  not  do  any  more. 

This  disturbance  had  been  brought  about  by  M.  de  Laclos,2 
who  had  been  for  some  time  attached  to  the  person  of  the  Due 
d'Orleans  as  "  secretary  of  his  commands."  M.  de  Laclos  had  been 
introduced  in  Paris  to  a  few  houses  by  the  Vicomte  de  Noailles,3 
who  had    known    him    in    garrison  ;    his    ambition,  spirit,   and 

1  Reveillon  was  a  stained-paper  manufacturer  of  the  Faubourg  St.  Antoine.  He 
had  been  accused  of  having  used  harsh  and  unfriendly  language  to  his  workmen, 
which  had  provoked  a  furious  riot  (April  28,  1789).  His  house  and  factory  were 
destroyed.     The  riot  was  quelled,  but  not  without  much  bloodshed. 

-  Pierre- Ambroise  Choderlos  de  Laclos,  bora  at  Amiens  in  1741,  was  captain  of 
engineers  in  1778.  He  formed  an  intimacy  with  the  Due  d'Orleans,  and  became 
"secretary  of  his  commands."  He  was  actively  concerned  in  the  intrigues  of  the 
party  of  the  prince  at  the  outbreak  of  the  Revolution.  He  was  a  member  of  the 
Jacobins'  Club,  and  edited  its  journal.  After  the  flight  to  Varennes,  he  moved  the 
deposition  of  the  king,  and  drew  up  with  Brissot  the  petition  of  the  "  Champ  de  Mars." 
He  became  brigadier-general  in  1792.  Imprisoned  on  two  different  occasions  during 
the  Terror,  he  was,  later,  sent  to  the  army  of  the  Rhine  as  general  of  brigade.  In 
1803,  he  was  inspector-general  of  artillery  at  Naples,  when  he  died.  Laclos  has  left 
also  a  literary  reputation.  He  is  the  author  of  a  few  light  poems  and  several  novels, 
the  best  known  of  v  hich  is  entitled  Liaisons  Dangerenses. 

3  The  Vicomte  Louis  Marie  de  Noailles  was  the  second  son  of  Marshal  de  Mouchy. 
Born  in  1756,  he  became  colonel  of  the  Chasseurs  d'AIsace,  and  joined  in  the  expedi- 
tion to  America.  Deputy  of  the  nobility  of  Nemours  to  the  States-General,  he 
warmly  adopted  the  new  ideas,  joined  the  Third  Estate,  and  proposed  the  aboli- 
tion of  feudal  rights  (August  4).  President  of  the  constituent  assembly  in  1791, 
brigadier-general  in  1792,  he  was  defeated  at  Gliswal.  He  emigrated  soon  after.  In 
1803,  he  returned  to  France,  again  took  service  as  general  of  brigade,  and  was  killed 
in  sight  of  Havanna  whilst  capturing  an  English  frigate.  The  Vicomte  de  Noailles 
had  married  his  cousin  Anne,  granddaughter  of  Marshal  de  Noailles.  She  was  guil- 
lotined July  22,  1794,  with  her  mother,  the  Duchessc  d'Ayen,  and  her  grandmother, 
the  Marcchale  de  Noailles. 


THE  DUC  D 'ORLEANS.  159 

bad  reputation  had  caused  the  Due  d'Orleans  to  regard  him 
as  a  man  whose  support  it  was  by  all  means  good  to  have 
in  stormy  circumstances.  Un  Eloge  de  Vauban,  the  immoral 
novel  entitled  Liaisons  Dangerenses,  some  works  on  tactics, 
several  newspaper  articles  which  had  proved  the  flexibility 
of  his  opinions,  as  of  his  talent,  had  induced  the  Due  d'Orleans 
to  entrust  him  with  the  draft  of  the  instructions  he  wished  to 
give  to  the  different  persons  who  were  to  represent  him  in  the 
bailiwicks  of  his  appanage.  M.  de  Laclos  had  written  on  this 
occasion  a  sort  of  code  in  which  all  the  philosophical  ideas  of  the 
time,  treated  of  in  separate  articles,  did  not  seem  sufficiently 
veiled  to  the  Due  d'Orleans.  This  not  suiting  him,  he  sought 
another  compiler.  Abbe  Sieyes  was  suggested  to  him  as  the 
man  who  had  reflected  most  upon  the  questions  which,  it 
was  supposed,  the  States-General  would  discuss.  In  a  meeting 
which  took  place  with  Sieyes  at  the  house  of  M.  de  Biron  at 
Montrouge,  the  Due  d'Orleans  showed  to  the  abbe  the  draft  of 
M.  de  Laclos,  and  asked  him  to  make  such  changes  in  it  as  he 
thought  suitable.  Abbe  Sieyes,  who,  owing  to  the  disposition  of 
his  mind,  was  usually  little  pleased  with  the  work  of  others,  found 
that  nothing  could  be  preserved,  and  drew  up  a  new  project 
which  the  Due  d'Orleans  adopted  and  had  printed.1  My  opinion 
is  that,  from  that  time,  there  were  no  further  relations  between 

1  (Paris,  1789,  1  vol.  8vo. )  This  document  is  very  interesting ;  the  fact  that  it 
emanates  from  the  first  prince  of  the  blood  gives  it  much  more  value.  In  it,  the  author 
indicates  first  the  principal  articles  to  insert  in  the  cahiers*  namely,  individual  and 
political  freedom  ;  privacy  of  letters  ;  inviolability  of  property  ;  periodical  vote  of 
taxes,  and  their  equal  distribution  ;  responsibility  of  ministers  ;  divorce.  Passing  next  to 
the  regulation  of  the  assemblies,  he  requests  his  representatives  to  take  notice  only  of  the 
present  instructions,  without  paying  any  attention  to  the  regulation  joined  to  the  king's 
letters  of  convocation.  He  deplores  that  the  ministry  "by  an  inconsistency  worthy  of 
the  enlightenment  which  has  always  distinguished  them,"  should  have  adopted  the 
mode  of  deliberation  by  separate  orders.  "  The  only  important  deliberation  is  that 
of  the  Third,  for  it  alone  has  the  general  interest  in  view,  it  alone  is  the  depositary  of 
the  powers  of  the  nation,  and  it  feels  that  it  is  about  to  be  entrusted  with  its 
destinies."  And  farther  on,  he  adds  :  "  The  duty  of  the  States-General  will  then  be 
to  attack  the  despotism  of  the  aristocrats,  and  the  unlimited  prerogatives  of  the  royal 
power,  to  draw  up  a  declaration  of  the  rights  of  man,  and  to  establish  a  constitution 
on  the  following  bases  :  A  national  assembly  elected  in  the  third  degree  ;  the  parish 
assemblies  will  elect  cantonal  assemblies,  which  in  their  turn  will  elect  provincial 
assemblies,  which  will  choose  from  their  midst  the  national  representatives.  All  the 
deputies  will  be  subject  to  dismissal  by  their  constituents."  It  must  not  be  forgotten 
that  the  estates  of  the  Due  d'Orleans,  where  those  instructions  were  scattered,  had 
the  extent  of  three  or  four  French  Departments. 

*  The  instructions  given  by  the  constituencies  to  their  deputies  with  regard  to  the  reforms  that 
weremost  needed. — {Translator.) 


160  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

the  Due  d'Orleans  and  Abbe  Sieyes,  and  that  this  was  the 
only  time  they  met.  But,  as  those  instructions  caused  consid- 
erable stir,  and  their  author  was  known,  it  was  supposed,  at 
different  stages  of  the  Revolution,  that  there  was  a  secret  bond 
between  Abbe  Sieyes  and  the  Due  d'Orleans.  There  never 
existed,  perhaps,  two  men  more  incompatible,  and  nothing 
would  prove  it  better  than  to  show  Sieyes  as  he  is.  i  will 
try  to  make  a  sketch  of  him. 

Sieyes  has  a  mind  vigorous  in  the  highest  degree  ;  his  heart  is 
cold  and  his  soul  pusillanimous  ;  his  inflexibility  is  only  in  his 
head.  He  can  be  inhuman,  because  pride  will  prevent  his 
drawing  back,  and  fear  will  bind  him  to  crime.  It  is  not  out 
of  philanthropy  that  he  professes  equality,  it  is  out  of  violent 
hatred  against  the  power  of  others.  It  cannot  be  said,  how- 
ever, that  the  exercise  of  power  suits  him,  for  he  would  not 
be  at  his  ease  at  the  head  of  any  government,  but  would  like 
to  be  its  only  thinking  and  ruling  spirit.  Exclusive,  domineer- 
ing, he  does  not  confine  himself  to  a  continuous  and  regular 
action  ;  disdainful  of  that  which  is  known,  he  wishes  to  go  beyond 
it.  Obstacles  make  him  indignant,  he  scorns  every  compromise. 
What  he  calls  a  principle,  is  in  his  hands  a  brass  sceptre,  which 
does  not  bend  either  to  the  imperfections  of  nature,  or  to  the 
weaknesses  of  mankind.  He  is  equally  ignorant  of  the  virtues 
and  of  the  faults  which  are  inherent  in  a  feeling  mind.  His 
resolution  once  taken,  no  affection  can  stop  it.  Men,  in  his 
eyes,  are  but  pawns  to  be  moved  about  ;  they  occupy  his 
mind,  but  awake  nothing  in  his  heart.  When  he  draws  up  a 
constitution,  he  treats  the  country  for  which  it  is  intended  as 
a  place  whose  inhabitants  never  felt  or  saw  anything.1 

The  only  feeling  that  has  any  influence  over  Sieyes  is  that 
of  fear.  At  the  Convention  he  feared  death  since  then,  the 
fear   of  the   vengeance   of  the   house  of  Bourbon  rules  him. 

Sieyes  is  regular  in  his  habits,  methodical  in  his  conduct, 
obscure  in  his  dealings.  His  private  life  offers  nothing  philo- 
sophically remarkable.  In  his  tastes,  he  is  somewhat  choice  ; 
he  is  difficult  to  serve,  to  lodge,  to  furnish.  He  is  not  covetous, 
but  he  is  not  lofty  enough  to  despise  fortune  ;  his  pride,  even , 

1  Allusion  to  the  constitution  proposed  by  Sieyes  in  the  year  VITT. 


THE  D  UC  D 'ORLEANS.  1 6 1 

has  not  been  strong  enough  to  prevent  that  foible  detracting, 
from  his  political  consideration.  He  has  no  mental  ability ; 
he  cannot  argue,  because  he  only  knows  how  to  prescribe. 
He  converses  badly ;  he  has  no  desire  to  convince,  he  wishes 
to  subjugate.  His  humour  is  sad  :  it  is  possible  that  a  natural 
indisposition  which  forbids  him  intercourse  with  women 
contributes  to  this  ;  and  yet  he  does  not  disdain  to  jest  with 
them  ;  then,  he  has  a  kind  of  grace  ;  he  can  smile,  and  resort 
to  waggish  banter,  which  is  measured  and  rather  cutting, 
but  he  never  stoops  so  far  as  to  be  amiable.  Proud  and  timid, 
he  is  necessarily  envious  and  defiant  ;  so  he  has  no  friends, 
but  has  submissive  and  faithful  followers. 

Sieyes  may  be  a  leader  of  opinion  ;  he  will  never  be  a  leader 
of  a  party.  His  mind  is  more  superb  than  active.  He  is  all 
of  one  piece  ;  if  one  does  not  do  as  he  wishes,  he  sulks  in  his 
corner,  and  consoles  himself  that  he  is  looked  at  there.  He  has 
not  a  happy  countenance ;  it  bears  the  imprint  of  a  hard  and 
meditative  character.  His  look  has  somewhat  of  superiority, 
of  haughtiness,  and  only  lights  up  when  he  smiles.  His  pale 
complexion,  his  figure  without  precision  in  its  form,  his  slow 
and  gentle  walk,  all  his  outward  appearance  in  short,  seems  plain 
as  long  as  he  does  not  speak,  and  yet  he  does  not  speak  well. 
He  only  says  words,  but  each  word  expresses  a  thought  and 
indicates  reflection.  In  a  serious  conversation,  he  is  never 
captivating,  but  he  imposes. 

Does  all  I  have  just  said  apply  to  a  man  who  could  have 
submitted  his  character,  his  temper,  his  opinions,  to  those  of 
a  prince ;  who  could  have  the  complacencies  of  accessory 
ambition  ?     No  one  will  think  so. 

I  have  felt  obliged  for  once  to  destroy  by  means  of  reasons 
drawn  from  the  essence  of  their  characters,  the  generally 
established  opinion  that  the  Due  d'Orleans  had  any  concerted 
relations  with  Sieyes.  It  is  equally  true  that  there  was  not, 
between  him  and  any  of  the  remarkable  men  of  that  time,  any 
other  association  than  that  brought  about  naturally  by  private 
meetings,  entirely  foreign  to  all  personal  combinations. 

After    the    instructions    given   to   his    bailiwicks,   the    Due 
d'Orleans  ceased  to  be  politically  an  active  person  ;  his  feeble 
VOL.  I.  M 


1 62  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

character,  his  equivocal  and  unsettled  position  prevented  his 
becoming  so.  After  the  crime  of  his  vote,  he  was  no  longer 
of  importance,  people  had  no  further  need  of  him  ;  he  remained 
simply  in  the  ranks,  and  as  that  was  not  his  place,  he  was  there 
a  cipher,  was  disgraced  and  killed. 

What  becomes  then  of  the  opinion,  so  positively  accredited, 
that  the  Due  d'Orleans  was  the  prime  author  of  the  Revolution  ; 
that  his  name  served  for  the  rallying  of  a  numerous  class  of 
citizens ;  that  he  was  encouraged  by  the  ambition  of  a  few 
turbulent  minds,  to  raise  his  eyes  to  the  throne.  This  opinion 
cannot  be  held  before  the  picture  of  his  life.  For  immorality, 
extreme  frivolity,  want  of  reflection,  and  weakness,  suffice  to 
explain  his  agitations  as  well  as  his  inaction.  Furthermore, 
the  impulse  once  given,  the  rapid  and  violent  excitement  of 
minds  prevented,  at  every  stage  of  the  Revolution,  the  develop- 
ment of  private  ambitions.  All  ideas  tending,  from  the 
beginning,  to  establish  equality  and  to  weaken  all  power,  lofty 
ambitions  were  necessarily  discountenanced.  It  was  not  until 
very  much  later,  after  terrible  tests,  that  there  began  to  be  felt 
the  need  of  a  leader  to  modify  the  state  of  things  which  existed  ; 
it  was  then  that  Bonaparte  appeared.  The  Due  d'Orleans 
was,  doubtless,  not  the  last  person  to  perceive  the  disposition  of 
minds  which  I  have  just  indicated.  That  is  why  he  always 
concealed  the  real  aim  of  his  ambition.  He  was  not,  as  I  have 
said,  either  the  principle,  the  object,  or  the  motive  of  the 
Revolution.  The  impetuous  tide  carried  him  along  with  the 
others. 

The  Due  d'Orleans  fell  back  upon  himself,  his  tastes,  his 
needs.  Hence  the  secret  thought  which  led  him,  after  October 
6,  1789,  to  undertake  the  disgraceful  journey  to  England  for 
which   men   of  all  parties  have  reproached  him.1     From  that 

1  The  Due  d'Orleans  was  accused  of  having  been  concerned  in  the  events  of 
October  5  and  6.  The  court  and  a  portion  of  the  bourgeoisie  arose  against  him.  La 
Fayette  took  upon  himself  to  echo  these  recriminations — indeed,  these  menaces  ;  so 
much  so  that  the  prince,  being  intimidated,  left  for  England  on  a  fictitious  mission,  in 
spite  of  all  that  Mirabeau  could  do  to  restrain  him.  Immediately,  the  ChStelet 
opened,  on  the  events  of  October,  an  inquiry  destined  to  prove  the  culpability  of  the 
prince.  The  latter  returned  suddenly  to  Paris  on  July  7,  1790.  On  August  14  fol- 
lowing, the  court  of  the  Chdtelet  delivered  its  report  to  the  Assembly.  It  concluded 
by  asking  that  he  should  be  arraigned,  but  the  Assembly  refused  to  authorize  the 
prosecution. 


THE  DUC  D 'ORLEANS.  163 

moment  dates  the  disappearance  of  his  enormous  fortune,  which 
having  been  put  into  a  form  more  easy  of  handling,  left  even 
fewer  traces  than  did  the  superb  gallery  of  pictures  of  the 
Palais-Royal,  so  scattered  to-day.  The  free  cash  of  the  Due 
d'Orleans  passed  all  to  England  by  indirect  means  and  through 
secret  agents,  who,  on  account  of  their  obscurity,  were  enabled 
to  be  unfaithful,  and  to  enjoy  the  proceeds  of  their  theft.  Such 
is  the  opinion  of  the  men  who  were  then  at  the  head  of  affairs. 

If  historians  make  it  a  point  to  seek  the  men  to  whom  they 
can  award  the  honour,  or  address  the  reproach  of  having  made, 
directed,  or  modified,  the  French  Revolution,  they  will  give  them- 
selves unnecessary  trouble.  It  had  no  authors,  leaders,  nor 
guides.  It  was  sown  by  the  writers  who,  in  an  enlightened  and 
venturesome  century,  wishing  to  attack  prejudices,  subverted  the 
religious  and  social  principles,  and  by  unskilful  ministers  who 
increased  the  deficit  of  the  treasury  and  the  discontent  of  the 
people. 

It  would  be  necessary,  in  order  to  find  the  real  origin  and 
causes  of  the  Revolution,  to  weigh,  analyze,  and  judge  questions 
of  high  speculative  politics,  and  especially  to  submit  to  a  profound 
and  skilful  examination,  the  question  of  the  struggle  between 
philosophical  ideas  and  prejudices,  between  the  pretensions  of 
the  mind  and  those  of  power.  For,  if  we  were  to  take  into  con- 
sideration only  the  sole  results  of  that  Revolution,  we  should 
soon  fall  into  error,  and  end  by  mistaking  M.  de  Malesherbes  for 
Mirabeau,  and  M.  de  la  Rochefoucauld  for  Robespierre. 


END   OF   THE   SECOND   PART. 


M    2 


PART     III. 

THE  CONVENTION,  THE  DIRECTORY,  THE  CONSULATE, 
THE  EARLY  YEARS  OF  THE  EMPIRE. 

1791 — 1808. 

Dangers  threatening  the  royal  family — Talleyrand  goes  to  London  with  a 
letter  of  Louis  XVI.  to  the  King  of  England — Defeat  of  the  French 
troops  under  the  Due  de  Biron — August  10 — Abolition  of  royalty — 
Could  the  royal  family  have  been  saved  in  1792  ?— Talleyrand  entrusted 
with  a  scientific  mission  to  England — The  Marquis  of  Lansdowne — The 
Marquis  of  Hastings — Doctors  Price  and  Priestley — George  Canning — 
Samuel  Romilly — Jeremy  Bentham — Lord  Henry  Petty — Charles  Fox 
— The  responsible  authors  of  the  Revolution — The  Alien  Bill — Lord 
Melville — William  Pitt — Talleyrand  expelled  from  England — Starts  for 
America — Nearly  shipwrecked — Stay  at  Falmouth — General  Arnold — 
Lands  at  Philadelphia — M.  de  Beaumetz — William  Penn — The  Mor- 
avian brethren — The  spirit  of  enterprise  in  America — General  Hamilton 
— American  commercial  competition  and  its  results — Talleyrand  at 
Che'nier's  request  is  authorized  to  return  to  France — Starts  for  Ham- 
burg— Madame  de  Flahaut  and  Talleyrand — Returns  to  Paris — Elected 
a  member  of  the  Institut — Madame  de  Stael — Talleyrand  and  Barras — 
Talleyrand  appointed  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs — Why  he  accepted 
office — Carnot  and  Barras — Talleyrand's  first  letter  to  Bonaparte — 
Treaty  of  Campo-Formio — Lord  Malmesbury— Fructidor  18 — First 
interview  between  Bonaparte  and  Talleyrand — Catherine  of  Russia  and 
the  French  Revolution — The  Directory  and  Europe — Moreau — Talley- 
rand retires  from  the  Cabinet — Si^yes  and  the  Directory — Bonaparte  in 
Egypt — Brumaire  18 — Bonaparte  appointed  First  Consul — Talleyrand 
takes  office  again — Paul  I.  and  Bonaparte — Marengo — Treaty  of  Lune- 
ville — The  United  States  and  the  French  Republic — Lord  Cornwallis 
and  Joseph  Bonaparte — Treaty  of  Amiens — The  Concordat — Talley- 
rand's secularization — Bonaparte's  blunder — Annexation  of  Piedmont 
to  France — England  declares  war — Pichegru's  death — Assassination  of 
the  Due  d'Enghien — Proclamation  of  the  Empire — Napoleon  emperor 
and  king — The  camp  at  Boulogne — The  Austrian  campaign — Napoleon 
at  Schoenbrunn — Austerlitz — Napoleon  and  the  Faubourg  St.  Germain 
— Talleyrand  created  Prince  de  Be'ne'vent — Treaty  of  Presburg — Count 


THE  CONVENTION,  THE  DIRECTORY,  THE  CONSULATE.  165 

von  Haugwitz — Fox  and  Talleyrand — Lord  Yarmouth  and  Lord  Lauder- 
dale— Prussia  and  Hanover — Battle  of  Jena— Treaty  of  Tilsit — Napoleon 
and  Poland — War  with  Russia — Battle  of  Eylau — Battle  of  Friedland — 
The  interview  of  the  three  emperors — Napoleon  and  the  Queen  of 
Prussia — Napoleon's  return  to  Paris — Talleyrand  appointed  Vice  Grand 
Elector — Retires  from  the  Ministry— His  apology  for  doing  so — Napo- 
leon's designs  on  Spain — Defeat  of  Junot — Capitulation  of  Baylen — The 
Erfurt  interview — Talleyrand  and  the  Czar  Alexander — Failure  of 
Napoleon's  projects  against  Austria. 

What  was  left  of  the  royal  prerogatives  after  the  vote  of  the 
Constituent  Assembly  was  but  a  shadow,  growing  daily  fainter. 
It  was,  therefore,  of  paramount  importance  to  save  from  further 
ruin  the  frail  power  of  the  king,  which  all  efforts  made  in  view  of 
restoring  to  it  its  lost  reality  only  tended  to  diminish.  The  men 
who  still  affected  to  be  afraid  of  it,  such  as  it  was,  only  sought  a 
pretext  to  complete  its  destruction.  The  great  point  would  have 
been  not  to  have  offered  them  any.  They  were  not  satisfied 
that  the  king  should  imitate  the  reed,  that  withstands  the  fury  of 
the  wind,  simply  because  it  is  incapable  of  offering  any  resistance 
to  it :  they  wished  his  supporters  both  at  home  and  abroad  to 
indulge  in  utter  inaction,  and  to  abstain  from  expressing  any 
opinion  he  might  have  been  accused  of  sharing.  But  who  could 
be  induced  to  adopt  such  unspirited  policy  ?  The  revolutionary 
impulse  was  given  and  stirred  all  classes. 

The  cabinet  of  the  time,1  of  which  M.  Necker  was  no  longer 
a  member,  then  understood  the  necessity  for  royalty  to  obtain 
a  promise  from  the  chief  courts  of  Europe  either  to  disarm,  or 
not  to  arm  at  all.2     The  leaders  of  the  second  Assembly,  known 

1  This  was  the  Feuillant  ministry — the  first  ministry  of  the  king  under  the  new 
constitution  (November  1791 — March  1792).  It  was  thus  composed:  Justice,  Du 
Port ;  Foreign  Affairs,  De  Lessart  ;  Taxes  and  Public  Revenue  (Finances),  Tarbe  ; 
Marine,  Bertrand ;  Interior  (Home  Department),  Cahier  de  Gerville  ;  War  Depart- 
ment, Narbonne. 

2  The  Feuillant  ministry  had  no  warlike  intentions.  Thus  the  aim  of  all  the 
negotiations  it  then  began  with  the  various  courts  of  Europe  was  to  prevent  the 
breaking  out  of  hostilities.  The  policy  of  the  French  cabinet  was  to  win  over 
Prussia  and  England,  in  order  to  oppose  them  to  Austria.  M.  de  Segur  was  sent  to 
Prussia  (December  22,  1791).  At  the  same  time,  M.  de  Narbonne  sent  off  young 
Custine  to  the  Duke  of  Brunswick,  in  order  to  offer  him  the  post  of  commander-in- 
chief  of  the  French  forces.  In  England,  M.  de  Talleyrand  (the  author  of  these 
Memoirs)  was  officially  entrusted  with  the  negotiations  (January  12,  1792).  M.  de 
Lessart  was  also  endeavouring  to  keep  on  good  terms  with  Spain  (Bourgoing's  mission 
to  Madrid,  February,  1792) ;  he  reassured  the  Emperor  as  to  the  consequences  of  the 
reconciliation  which  it  was  sought  to  bring  about  with  England  (Lessart's  letter  to  M. 


1 66  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

under  the  name  of  Girondists,  had  insisted  on  this  step  under  the 
belief  that  the  king's  ministry  would  decline  to  take  it.  Their 
hopes  were  deceived.  M.  de  Lessart,1  who  was  then  Minister  of 
Foreign  Affairs,  took  up  the  suggestion,  and  proposed  that  I 
should  go  to  England  in  order  to  open  negotiations  on  the 
subject.  I  had  been  anxious  to  leave  France  for  some  time  ;  I 
was  tired  and  disgusted,  and  sure  though  I  felt  that  my  mission 
had  little  chance  of  success,  I  accepted  it.  The  king  wrote  to  the 
King  of  England  a  letter  of  which  I  was  the  bearer.2 

In  1790,  war  would  have  been  useful  to  royalty.  In  1792,  it 
would  only  have  upset  the  throne  ;  that  is  the  reason  why  the 
revolutionists  wanted  it.  They  thought  (as  one  of  them,  Brissot 
de  Varville,3  subsequently  confessed)  that,  if  war  were  once 
declared,  the  king,  having  the  direction  of  the  operations,  would 
be  left  at  their  mercy,  by  being  obliged  to  employ  only  those 
means  that  it  might  please  them  to  place  at  his  disposal,  and 
that  they  would  thus  be  enabled  to  urge  to  rebellion  both  the 
army  and  the  masses,  by  holding  the  sovereign  responsible  for 
disasters  which,  owing  to  their  own  action,  had  been  rendered  in- 
evitable ;  an  infamous  calculation  which  subsequent  events  proved 
to  have  been  made  with  the  utmost  skill.  This  hateful  machina- 
tion could,  perhaps,  have  been  thwarted  by  calling  upon  the  armed 

de  Noailles,  ambassador  to  Vienna,  January  16,  1792),  and  tried  to  prevent  all  inter- 
erence  on  the  part  of  the  Imperial  Diet  (M.  Barbe-Marbois'  mission,  January  1,  1792). 

1  Antoine  de  Valdec  de  Lessart,  born  in  1 742.  Was  successively  ?naitre  des  requites 
(1768),  comptroller-general  (December  1790),  Minister  of  the  Interior  (January,  1791,) 
and  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  (November,  1791).  On  Brissot's  motion,  the  Assembly 
decreed  his  arrest  and  trial,  March  2,  1792,  when  he  was  arrested  and  taken  to 
Orleans,  the  seat  of  the  national  High  Court  of  Justice.  He  was  massacred  at  Ver- 
sailles (September  9,  1792)  on  his  way  back  to  Paris,  where  he  had  been  recalled  by 
Danton's  orders. 

2  Talleyrand  was  also'the  bearer  of  a  letter  from  M.  de  Lessart  to  Earl  Grenville.  He 
had  instructions  to  secure  the  neutrality,  or,  if  possible,  the  alliance  of  England.  He 
started  on  his  mission,  January  12,  1792,  in  the  company  of  the  Due  de  Biron,  and 
returned  to  Paris  on  March  9  in  the  same  year.  (See  Sorel's  L?  Europe  et  la  Revolu- 
tion Francaise,  Part  II.,  Vol.  III.). 

3  Jean-Pierre  Brissot  was  the  thirteenth  child  of  a  Chartres  innkeeper.  He  was 
born  in  1754,  and  soon  added  to  his  name  that  of  Ouarville,  or  Warville,  the  village 
where  he  was  brought  up.  Having  come  to  Paris  he  founded,  in  1782,  Le  Patriote 
Francois,  a  journal  in  which  he  advocated  new  ideas  with  vigour  and  talent.  Having 
been  elected  a  member  of  the  Commune  of  Paris  in  1791,  and  deputy  to  the  National 
Assembly  and  to  the  Convention,  he  became  in  a  couple  of  years  one  of  the  leaders 
of  the  Girondist  party,  which  for  some  time  was  master  of  the  situation.  He,  at  first, 
endeavoured  to  save  the  king,  whose  death  he  eventually  voted,  subject  to  an  appeal 
to  the  people.  He  was  proscribed  with  all  his  friends  after  the  trial  of  the  Girondist 
party,  and  guillotined  May  31,  1793. 


THE  CONVENTION,  THE  DIRECTORY,  THE  CONSULATE.  167 

emigres1,  who  everywhere  threatened  the  frontiers,  to  withdraw 
and  by  placing  all  the  troops  on  a  footing  of  peace.  This  course, 
however,  was  not  adopted,  or  rather  the  steps  resorted  to  were 
so  full  of  indecision  as  to  render  them  utterly  useless  ;  as  to  the 
king,  his  natural  weakness  led  him — in  order  to  remove  all  sus- 
picion of  his  conniving  with  the  foreigners — to  be  induced  to 
propose  to  the  assembly  a  declaration  of  war  which  that  body 
hastened  to  accept.  The  fate  of  monarchy  was  then  sealed. 
The  events  which  took  place  on  the  frontier 2  served  as  a  pretext 
for  the  outrages  of  June  20,  and,  shortly  after,  for  the  crime  of 
August  10,  which  the  great  regard  I  had  for  the  Due  de  la 
Rochefoucauld,3  enabled  me  to  witness.  In  compliance  with  a 
letter  he  had  written  to  me,  I  had  come  back  to  Paris  in  order  to 
share  the  noble  and  praiseworthy  dangers,  which  the  popularity 
of  Petion,4  then  Mayor  of  Paris,  who,  in  accordance  with  a 
decision  of  the  administrators  of  the  Seine  department,  whose 
colleague  I  was,  had  been  temporarily  removed  from  office, 
caused  us  to  face.  I  may  add  that  the  marks  of  approval  given 
us  by  the  queen,  when,  on  the  Federation  day,  we  passed  under 

1  The  name  given  to  the  members  of  the  aristocracy  who,  at  the  time  of  the 
Revolution,  left  France  and  fought  in  the  ranks  of  the  foreigners,  but  especially  in 
what  was  termed  the  "army  of  the  princes,"  under  Prince  de  Conde. — {Translator). 

2  The  defeat  of  the  Due  de  Biron,  and  running  away  of  General  Dillon's  troops 
on  the  Belgian  frontier  (April  30,  1792). 

3  Louis-Alexandre,  Due  de  la  Roche-Guyon  and  de  la  Rochefoucauld  d'Enville, 
Born  in  1743,  he  at  first  entered  the  army.  Asa  member  of  the  Assembly  of  Notables. 
he  was  elected  deputy  of  the  nobility  to  the  States-General,  where  he  showed  himself 
favourable  to  new  ideas  and  voted  the  chief  reforms  of  the  Assembly.  He  was 
appointed  President  of  the  Paris  department  in  1791  ;  but  after  the  events  of  June  20, 
1792.  he  resigned  that  post  and  left  Paris.  Having  been  recognized  at  Gisors,  he  was 
stoned  to  death  by  the  infuriated  mob. 

4  Jerome  Petion  de  Villeneuve  was  born  at  Chartres  in  1753.  He  was  practising 
as  a  barrister  in  that  town,  when  he  was  elected  deputy  of  the  third  estate  *  to  the 
States-General.  He  soon  acquired  a  great  influence  in  the  Assembly  and  in  the  clubs. 
In  November,  1790,  he  was  elected  President  of  the  Assembly.  In  June,  1791,  he 
was  appointed  to  fetch  the  king  back  from  Varennes,  and  on  November  14th  of  the 
same  year,  he  was  raised  to  the  post  of  Mayor  of  Paris.  His  native  town  sent 
him  as  deputy  to  the  Convention,  of  which  he  was  subsequently  elected  President. 
He  eventually  sided  with  the  Girondists.  He  voted  for  the  death  of  the  king. 
Having  been  banished  and  arrested  on  May  31,  he  managed  to  escape,  reached  Caen 
and  endeavoured  to  organize  the  insurrection  in  the  west.  After  the  disaster  at  Vernon 
(July,  1793),  he  disappeared  from  the  scene,  and  wandered  in  the  south  for  nearly 
twelve  months.  In  June,  1794,  he  was  found  dead  in  a  field  near  Saint-Emilion  in 
the  Gironde  department. 

*  The  States-General  were  a  meeting  of  the  three  states;  the  clergy,  the'nobility,  and  the  third 
state  (chosen  from  the  upper  middle  classes).  The  States-General  only  assembled  on  solemn  occasions. 
Their  chief  function  was  to  decide  as  to  the  opportunity  of  raising  new  taxes,  in  order  to  meet  the 
financial  embarrassments  of  the  State. — (Translator.) 


1 68  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

the  balcony  where  she  was  with  the  king,  further  excited  the 
populace  against  us. 

After  the  events  of  that  day,  and  the  rout  of  the  Prussians  in 
Champagne,1  the  Revolutionists  flattered  themselves  that  they 
had  abolished  monarchy  for  ever.  They  were  blinded  by  their 
fanaticism  ;  but  not  less  so  the  men  who  were  of  opinion  that 
royalty  could  soon  be  restored,  and  Louis  XVI.  replaced  on  his 
throne  by  force.  At  this  stage,  it  was  no  longer  a  question  that 
the  king  should  reign,  but  that  he  himself,  the  queen,  their 
children,  his  sister  should  be  saved.  It  might  have  been  done. 
It  was  at  least  a  duty  to  attempt  it.  At  that  time,  France  was 
only  at  war  with  the  Emperor,'2  the  Empire,3  and  Sardinia. 
Had  all  the  other  States  concerted  themselves  to  offer  their 
mediation  by  proposing  to  recognize  whatever  form  of  govern- 
ment France  might  be  pleased  to  adopt,  with  the  sole  condition 
that  the  prisoners  in  the  Temple 4  should  be  allowed  to  leave  the 
country  and  retire  wherever  they  liked,  though  such  a  proposal, 
as  may  be  supposed,  would  not  have  filled  the  demagogues  with 
delight,  they  would  have  been  powerless  to  reject  it.  Indeed 
what  pretext  could  they  have  alleged  to  substantiate  their  refusal  ? 
Would  they  have  said  to  France  :  "  General  peace  is  offered 
us,  but  we  wish  for  a  general  war,  in  which  we  shall  stand 
alone  against  all  Europe.  .  .  .  Our  independence  is  recognized, 
but  we  wish  to  call  it  in  question  and  cause  it  to  depend  on  the 
chances  of  war.  .  .  .  We  are  not  denied  the  right  of  governing 
ourselves  as  we  think  best.  Nobody  thinks  of  forcing  a  king  on 
us,  but  we  want  to  murder  the  one  who  did  reign  over  us,  in 
order  that  his  rights  may  go  over  to  his  heirs,5  who  are  indeed 
no  longer  in  our  power,  and  whom  all  Europe  will  recognize 
although  we  do  not." 

So  little  were  the  demagogues  inclined  to  general  hostilities, 
that  they  hastened  to  make  pacific  declarations  to  all  the  govern- 

1  The  victory  of  Valmy,  September  20,  1792. 

2  The  Emperor  of  Austria  was  the  head  of  the  Holy  Roman  Empire,  of  which 
the  German  States  were  an  integrant  part. — [Translator.) 

■  Austria  and  the  various  German  States. — {Translator.) 

4  It  is  well  known  that  Louis  XVI.,  Marie  Antoinette,  Madame  Elizabeth,  and 
the  royal  children,  were  imprisoned  in  the  Temple. — (  Translator.) 

6  The  Comte  de  Provence  (afterwards  Louis  XVIII.),  and  the  Comte  d'Artois 
(afterwards  Charles  X.),  brothers  of  Louis  XVI.,  both  left  France  at  the  outbreak  of 
the  Revolution. — {Translator.) 


THE  CONVENTION,  THE  DIRECTORY,  THE  CONSULATE.  169 

ments  with  which  France  was  still  at  peace.  Indeed,  very  few 
amongst  them  thirsted  after  the  blood  of  Louis  XVI.  ;  and  if  they 
shed  it  afterwards,  that  was  owing  to  special  reasons,  not  one 
of  which  would  have  existed  had  Europe  embraced  the  course 
indicated  above. 

The  royal  family  might  therefore  have  been  saved.  A  war 
of  twenty-two  years,  which  threatened  all  the  thrones,  and  upset 
many,  which,  by  having  re-established  a  few,  though  not  on 
sufficiently  secure  bases,  now  threatens  civilization  itself,  might 
thus  have  been  averted.  The  revolutionary  government  (the 
barbaric  expression  of  polygarchy  could  be  suitably  employed 
here)  would  have  come  to  an  end  much  sooner  in  France,  where 
foreign  wars  and  victories  could  alone  sustain  it. 

After  August  10,  1792,  I  solicited  a  temporary  mission  to 
London  from  the  provisory  executive.  As  the  object  of  my 
mission,  I  chose  a  scientific  question  with  which  I  was  somewhat 
entitled  to  deal,  seeing  that  it  related  to  a  motion  previously 
made  by  me  in  the  Constituent  Assembly.  My  aim  was  to 
establish  for  the  whole  kingdom  a  uniform  system  of  weights  and 
measures.  After  the  exactitude  of  this  system  had  been  vouched 
for  by  the  most  competent  men  of  Europe,  it  might  have  been 
adopted  by  the  different  nations.  It  was  therefore  advisable 
to  confer  with  England  on  the  subject. 

My  real  object  was,  however,  to  leave  France,  where  it  seemed 
to  me  useless,  and  even  dangerous,  to  stay  any  longer,  but  I 
wished  to  leave  the  country  with  a  regular  passport,  in  order  that 
it  should  not  be  closed  to  me  for  ever. 

As  in  France,  the  tide  of  political  passions  ran  high  in  the 
various  cabinets  of  Europe.  It  was  thought  that  if  she  were 
attacked  on  all  sides,  France  could  not  resist.  Only  dreaming 
of  success,  they  decided  to  wage  war  against  her.  The  ad- 
vantages they  expected  to  reap  by  their  victory  were  such  as  to 
cause  them  to  lose  sight  of  the  dangers  of  the  royal  family.  It 
was  then  that  the  Republicans,  seeing  war  inevitable,  took  the 
initiative  in  declaring  it,  in  order  to  show  that  they  were  not 
afraid  of  it. 

I  resided  in  England  during  the  whole  of  the  dreadful  year 
1793  and  a  portion  of  1794.     There   I  was  welcomed  with  the 


i7o  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

utmost  kindness  by  the  Marquis  of  Lansdowne,1  whom  I  had 
known  in  Paris  ;  he  was  a  nobleman  of  lofty  views,  gifted  with 
abundant  and  lively  powers  of  elocution.  He  was  still  free  from 
the  infirmities  of  old  age.  Some  people  brought  against  him 
the  common-place  accusation  of  being  too  clever ;  an  accusation 
by  means  of  which,  in  England  as  well  as  in  France,  people  keep 
at  a  distance  all  the  men  whose  superiority  gives  them  umbrage, 
and  this  is  really  the  only  reason  why  he  never  was  in  office 
again.  I  saw  him  often,  and  he  kindly  sent  me  word  every 
time  he  received  the  visit  of  some  distinguished  person  whose 
acquaintance  he  thought  I  should  be  pleased  to  make.  It 
was  at  his  house  that  I  met  Mr.  Hastings,2  and  the  doctors 
Price,3  and  Priestley  ; i  there,  I  also  formed  an  intimacy  with 
Mr.  Canning,5  Mr.  Romilly,6  Mr.  Robert   Smith,  M.  Dumont,7 

1  William  Petty,  Marquis  of  Lansdowne,  Earl  of  Shelburne,  was  born  in  1737,  and 
at  first  joined  the  army.  In  1761,  he  entered  the  House  of  Lords.  Two  years  later, 
he  was  appointed  a  member  of  the  Privy  Council.  Having  been  Chief  Secretary  of 
State,  he  was  appointed  First  Lord  of  the  Treasury  in  1782  ;  a  post  which  he  resigned 
in  the  following  year.  Until  his  death,  in  1804,  he  remained  a  friend  of  France  and 
bitterly  opposed  to  Pitt's  policy. 

2  Francis  Rawdon,  known  successively  under  the  names  of  Earl  of  Huntingdon, 
Earl  of  Moira,  and  Marquis  of  Hastings,  was  born  in  1754.  He  was  descended  from 
a  Norman  family  settled  in  Ireland.  He  entered  the  House  of  Lords  in  1782,  and 
always  voted  with  the  Whig  party.  He  was  successively  Governor-General  of  the 
East  Indies  and  Governor  of  Malta.     He  died  in  1816. 

3  Richard  Price,  an  English  philosopher  and  political  writer,  was  born  in  1723. 
He  studied  finances,  and,  in  1772,  he  proposed,  for  sinking  the  public  debt,  a  new 
system  which  was  applied  with  success  by  Pitt.  He  was  on  intimate  terms  with  the 
chief  members  of  the  French  philosophical  party,  especially  with  Turgot,  and 
displayed  sympathy  towards  the  Revolution.  He  died  in  1791.  Talleyrand  is 
therefore  mistaken  in  asserting  that  he  had  seen  him  during  his  journey  to  London, 
seeing  that  he  only  visited  the  English  capital  several  months  after  Dr.  Price's  death. 

4  Joseph  Priestley,  famous  English  scientist  and  philosopher,  born  in  1733.  His 
political  and  religious  opinions  compelled  him  to  emigrate  to  America,  where  he 
died  in  1804.  He  had  been  elected  French  citizen  and  honorary  member  of  the 
Convention. 

5  George  Canning,  born  in  London,  in  1770,  from  parents  of  Irish  descent.  In 
1792,  he  had  already  distinguished  himself  as  a  speaker  at  public  meetings,  and  was 
considered  as  one  of  the  most  prominent  members  of  the  Whig  party.  Jn  1793,  he 
suddenly  changed  his  political  creed,  was  elected  a  member  of  the  House  of  Commons 
in  1794,  and  became  one  of  the  most  ardent  supporters  of  Pitt.  He  was  appointed 
Secretary  of  Foreign  Affairs  in  1807,  and  had  to  resign  this  post  in  1809,  in  conse- 
quence of  a  duel  with  his  colleague,  Lord  Castlereagh.  In  1814,  he  was  sent  as 
ambassador  to  Lisbon.  He  again  became  Chief  Secretary  of  Foreign  Affairs  in  1822, 
and  died  in  1827. 

6  Samuel  Romilly,  a  famous  English  jurist,  was  born  in  1757.  He  often  visited 
France,  and  was  on  intimate  terms  with  the  chief  writers  and  statesmen  of  the  time. 
He  entered  the  House  of  Commons  in  1815,  and  was  loud  in  his  protests  against  the 
imprisonment  of  Napoleon.     He  died  in  1818. 

7  Pierre  Dumont,  a  Swiss  writer,  born  at  Geneva  in  1759.  He  was  a  Protestant 
minister.     Civil  war  compelled  him  to  leave  his  country,  and  he  travelled  successively 


THE  CONVENTION,  THE  DIRECTORY,  THE  CONSULATE.  171 

Mr.  Bentham,1  and  Lord  Henry  Petty,2  the  son  of  Lord  Lans- 
downe,  who  at  this  time,  was  already  looked  upon  as  one  of  the 
hopes  of  England.  All  the  friends  of  Mr.  Fox,3  with  which 
gentleman  I  had,  on  several  occasions,  been  on  intimate  terms, 
did  their  best  to  render  my  stay  in  London  as  pleasant  as 
possible.  My  mornings  were  spent  in  penning  down  my  im- 
pressions of  the  previous  day,  and  when,  after  my  return  to 
France  from  America,  my  friends  forwarded  to  me  all  the  notes 
taken  during  the  time  I  resided  in  England,  I  was  extremely 
surprised  to  notice  that  they  could  be  of  no  service  to  me  for  the 
work  I  am  now  writing.  It  would  now  be  impossible  for  me  to 
relate  the  events  of  this  period,  I  do  not  recollect  them  ;  their 
connecting  link  is  lost  for  me. 

Besides,  my  absence  from  France  during  the  most  terrible 
years  of  the  Revolution  left  me  in  ignorance  of  the  details  of  its 
dreadful  events  ;  I  could  scarcely,  at  that  distance,  discern  their 
broad  outlines.  On  the  other  hand,  I  turned  away  from  these 
hideous  scenes,  in  which  so  much  abject  spirit  was  mingled 
with  so  much  fierceness,  too  often  to  be  able  to  depict  them.  The 
reign  of  Henri  IV.  and  that  of  Louis  XIV.  are  known  to  us  in  all 
their  details,  but  recent  events  appear  confused  and  problem- 
atical, even  to  the  very  men  who  played  a  part  in  them  ;  they 
followed  each  other  with  such  rapidity,  that  each  in  turn  almost 
stamped    out    the    recollection    of   what    had    occurred    before. 

in  Russia,  in  England,  and  finally  in  France,  in  1788.  Here  he  met  the  chief  leaders 
of  the  Revolution,  amongst  whom  Mirabeau,  concerning  whom  he  left  some  interesting 
memoirs  (Geneva,  1831),  and  Talleyrand.  He  went  back  to  Geneva  in  1814,  and 
died  in  1829. 

1  Jeremy  Bentham,  an  English  writer  and  moralist,  born  in  1747,  died  in  1832. 

2  Henry  Petty,  Marquis  of  Lansdowne,  son  of  William  Petty,  Earl  of  Shelburne 
and  Marquis  of  Lansdowne,  was  born  in  1780.  In  1802,  he  was  elected  member  of 
the  House  of  Commons.  In  1806,  he  was  appointed  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer  ; 
entered  the  House  of  Lords  in  1809.  In  1827,  he  was  Home  Minister  in  the  Cabinet 
of  Mr.  Canning,  and,  shortly  after,  held  the  same  office  in  the  short-lived  Cabinet  of 
Lord  Goderich.  In  1830,  he  re-entered  the  Cabinet  as  Lord  President  of  the  Council, 
resigned  in  1834,  held  the  same  office  again  in  1835,  and  remained  in  that  position  until 
1841.  In  1846,  he  again  resumed  office  as  Lord  President  of  the  Council,  and  retired 
to  private  life  in  1852. 

3  Charles  Fox,  born  in  1748,  was  the  son  of  Lord  Holland,  Secretary  of  State 
under  George  II.  At  the  age  of  nineteen,  he  was  elected  member  of  the  House  of 
Commons,  and  appointed  Lord  of  the  Treasury.  Having  been  removed  from  office 
in  1774,  his  powers  as  a  speaker  won  for  him  the  position  of  head  of  the  Whig  party. 
In  1782,  he  was  appointed  Chief  Secretary  of  Foreign  Affairs.  He  always  displayed 
sympathy  towards  France  and  the  Revolution,  and  showed  himself  a  decided  adversary 
of  Mr.  Pitt's  policy.  In  1806,  he  again  took  up  office  as  Chief  Secretary  of  Foreign 
Affairs,  and  died  a  few  months  after. 


172  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

Perhaps  also  the  mob  leaves  too  slight  an  imprint  on  its  work  ; 
its  deeds  have  but  a  transient  effect,  and  the  character  of  the  men 
who  serve  it  is  such  as  to  make  no  impression  on  one's  memory. 
Having  lived  in  obscurity  until  such  day  as  they  appear  on  the 
scene,  they  return  to  it  as  soon  as  their  part  there  is  played. 

I  confess  that  it  would  not  cause  me  the  slightest  concern  if 
the  details  of  this  awful  calamity  were  to  leave  no  trace  in  men's 
minds,  for  they  are  of  no  historical  importance.  Indeed,  what 
teachings  could  men  derive  from  deeds  performed  without  aim 
or  plan,  and  which  were  merely  the  outcome  of  ruthless  and 
unruly  passions  ? 

Teachings  of  all  kinds  are  rather  to  be  sought  in  the  know- 
ledge of  the  facts  preceding  the  catastrophe,  and  for  the  investi- 
gation of  which  every  material  exists ;  this  knowledge  will 
disclose  the  numerous  and  weighty  causes  of  the  revolution  ; 
this  is  the  truly  profitable  way  of  unfolding  men's  actions,  for 
it  bears  with  itself  lessons  equally  useful  to  sovereigns,  to  the 
upper  and  to  the  lower  classes.  I  have  recorded  in  these 
memoirs  all  the  events  which  occurred  in  the  time  closely 
preceding  that  dreadful  upheaval,  with  which  I  was  privately 
acquainted  ;  I  advise  my  contemporaries  to  do  likewise,  and 
I  feel  sure  that  they  will  succeed  better  than  I  have  done. 
The  study  of  those  already  distant  days  possesses,  it  seems  to 
me,  the  invaluable  advantage  of  cautioning  us  against  every 
form  of  intolerance.  When  considering  the  last  twenty  years 
of  the  old  monarchy,  there  is  no  man  of  any  elevation  of  mind 
and  good  faith  who,  on  remembering  what  he  did  or  said,  what 
he  wrote,  what  he  blamed  or  approved,  will  not  find  some 
fault  with  himself — if  this  man  possessed  any  influence  at  all : 
I  might  almost  add  that  no  one  knows  all  the  examples — good 
or  bad — he  must  have  set.  I  thus  deny  that  it  is  in  the  power 
of  any  of  the  men  I  have  known,  whether  princes  or  simple 
subjects,  to  decline  all  share  of  responsibility  in  the  subsequent 
outbreak. 

I  do  not  mean  to  say  that  the  amount  of  harm  caused  by  the 
want  of  foresight  of  these  men  was  the  same  in  every  case,  but 
simply  that  it  is  in  no  one's  power  to  ascertain  and  point  out 
exactly  the  share  of  reproach  deserved  by  each.     The  times  in 


THE  CONVENTION,  THE  DIRECTORY,  THE  CONSULATE.  173 

which  we  live,  the  circumstances  in  which  we  are  placed,  alter, 
or  at  least  modify,  the  spirit  of  all  our  actions.  What,  in  certain 
cases,  may  appear  but  natural  and  excusable,  will  deserve  blame 
in  others.  Thus,  I  only  insist  on  this  appeal  to  the  conscience 
of  all  Frenchmen,  that  I  may  eradicate  all  feelings  of  hatred  and 
intolerance,  and  replace  them  by  meekness  and  urbanity,  so  long 
banished  from  our  beautiful  country. 

It  was  not  my  intention  to  stay  long  in  England.  Though 
being  nominally  an  outlaw  in  France,  I  yet  did  not  wish  to  place 
myself  in  the  category  of  emigre,  which  I  really  was  not.  How- 
ever, the  English  Foreign  Minister  thought  it  advisable  to 
emphasize  his  zeal  for  the  general  cause  by  displaying  at  first 
his  antipathy  towards  the  emigres.  With  this  object,  he  availed 
himself  of  the  Alien  Bill,1  which  he  had  wrenched  from  Parlia- 
ment, to  send  me  orders  to  leave  the  country  within  twenty-four 
hours.  Had  I  acted  on  the  first  impulse,  I  should  have  started 
off  at  once,  but  my  dignity  required  of  me  to  protest  against  the 
unjust  persecution  of  which  I  was  the  victim.  In  consequence,  I 
applied  to  Mr.  Dundas,2  to  Mr.  Pitt,3  and  to  the  king  himself; 
being  unable  to  obtain  satisfaction  in  any  quarter,  I  had  but  to 
submit,  and  therefore  went  to  sleep  on  board  a  ship  which,  I  had 
been  told,  was  the  first  to  start  for  the  United  States.  The  state 
of  the  weather  and  some  business  which  the  captain  had  to 
transact  detained  us  nearly  a  fortnight  in  the  Thames.  In  the 
meantime,  a  friend  of  Mr.  Dundas  came  on  board  to  invite  me 
to  put  up — until  such  time  as  the  vessel  could  start — at  a  house 
of  his,  near  the  river-side,  but  I  declined  his  pressing  offer. 

1  The  first  Alien  Bill  was  passed  in  1782.  In  1793,  Lord  Grenville  obtained  from 
Parliament  a  Bill  placing  the  French  refugees  under  police  supervision,  and  giving  to 
the  authorities  necessary  powers  to  expel  them.  This  is  the  bill  applied  to  Talleyrand 
in  1794. 

2  H.  Dundas,  Lord  Melville,  was  born  in  1 741  from  a  noble  Scotch  family.  Sent 
to  Parliament  by  the  city  of  Edinburgh,  he  always  was  one  of  the  staunchest  advocates 
of  Pitt's  policy.  He  was  appointed  successively  Chief  Comptroller  for  India  in  1783, 
Home  Minister  in  1791,  Chief  Secretary  of  War,  Lord  of  the  Privy  Seal,  and  first 
Lord  of  the  Admiralty  in  1801.    He  died  in  181 1. 

6  William  Pitt,  second  son  of  Lord  Chatham,  was  born  in  1759.  At  twenty- two 
he  was  Member  of  Parliament  ;  at  twenty-eight,  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer  ;  in 
1783,  he  resigned,  but  re-entered  office  again  at  the  close  of  that  year  as  First  Lord  of 
trie  Treasury.  Pitt  was  the  moving  spirit  of  the  coalitions  against  France.  The 
treaty  of  Luneville,  in  1801,  compelled  him  to  retire  from  office,  but  the  breach  of  the 
Peace  of  Amiens  brought  him  back  at  the  head  of  affairs.  In  1805  he  brought  about 
the  third  coalition,  and  died  in  1806. 


174  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

I  then  experienced  some  satisfaction  in  refusing  people's 
services  :  unjust  though  persecution  may  be,  there  are  compen- 
sations in  it.  I  never  fully  ascertained  what  my  feelings  really 
were  at  the  time,  though  the  fact  is  I  was  somewhat  pleased. 
It  seems  to  me  that,  in  these  days  of  general  misfortune,  I 
should  almost  have  regretted  not  being  persecuted  too. 

We  sailed  at  last.  On  the  second  day  of  our  voyage,  after 
having  but  just  left  the  Thames,  we  met  with  a  violent  storm.  I 
was  then  between  England  and  France,  which,  indeed,  constituted 
one  of  the  most  critical  positions  in  which  any  one  could  be 
placed.  I  could  see  France.  .  .  .  my  head  was  in  danger  there 
....  I  ran  no  immediate  risk  by  returning  to  England,  but  it 
would  have  been  far  too  repugnant  to  me  to  solicit  the  hospitality 
of  a  government  who  had  tried  to  wound  me. 

Fortunately,  the  danger  we  were  running  was  noticed  on  shore, 
and  induced  some  Falmouth  lightermen  to  brave  the  fury  of  the 
sea  and  come  to  our  assistance.  With  their  help,  we  managed 
to  reach  the  harbour.  Whilst  our  ship, — all  the  rigging  of  which 
was  much  damaged, — was  being  repaired,  a  rather  striking 
incident  added  an  impression  of  a  special  kind  to  the  many  I 
was  to  experience  in  the  course  of  this  voyage.  The  innkeeper 
at  whose  place  I  had  my  meals,  informed  me  that  one  of  his 
lodgers  was  an  American  general.  Thereupon,  I  expressed  the 
desire  of  seeing  that  gentleman,  and,  shortly  after,  I  was  intro- 
duced to  him.  After  the  usual  exchange  of  greetings,  I  put  to 
him  several  questions  concerning  his  country,  but,  from  the  first, 
it  seemed  to  me  that  my  inquiries  annoyed  him.  Having  several 
times  vainly  endeavoured  to  renew  the  conversation,  which  he 
always  allowed  to  drop,  I  ventured  to  request  from  him 
some  letters  of  introduction  to  his  friends  in  America. — "  No," 
he  replied,  and  after  a  few  moments  of  silence,  noticing  my 
surprise,  he  added,  "  I  am  perhaps  the  only  American  who 
cannot  give  you  letters  for  his  own  country.  .  .  all  the  relations 
I  had  there  are  now  broken.  .  .  I  must  never  return  to  the  States." 
He  dared  not  tell  me  his  name.     It  was  General  Arnold  ! 1     I 

1  General  Arnold  had  been  sentenced  to  death  during  the  War  of  Independence 
for  having  furnished  the  English  with  information  concerning  the  positions  held  by 
the  United  Stales  troops. 


THE  CONVENTION,  THE  DIRECTORY,  THE  CONSULATE.  175 

must  confess  that  I  felt  much  pity  for  him,  for  which  political 
puritans  will  perhaps  blame  me,  but  with  which  I  do  not  reproach 
myself,  for  I  witnessed  his  agony. 

We  left  Falmouth  with  a  favourable  wind.  All  the  passengers 
were  on  deck,  and,  looking  in  the  direction  of  the  shore,  they 
all  said,  with  evident  pleasure  :  "  I  still  see  the  land."  I  was 
the  only  one  who  felt  relieved  on  seeing  it  no  longer.  The  sea, 
at  this  moment,  possessed  special  charms  for  me  ;  the  sensations 
I  derived  from  it  were  particularly  suited  to  my  disposition. 

We  had  been  sailing  for  several  weeks,  when  one  morning, 
the  word  I  feared, "  Land  !  Land  ! "  loudly  shouted  by  the  people 
on  board,  roused  me  from  my  sleep.  The  captain,  the  crew  and 
the  passengers  all  displayed  the  most  lively  joy.  On  reaching 
the  deck,  I  saw  the  pilot  who  was  to  take  us  up  the  Delaware, 
and,  at  the  same  time,  noticed  an  out-bound  ship  steering  round 
the  headland.  Having  ascertained  from  our  pilot  that  this  ship 
was  bound  for  Calcutta,  I  there  and  then  despatched  a  boat  to 
her  captain,  in  order  to  inquire  whether  he  had  room  for  one 
more  passenger.  The  ship's  destination  was  of  no  consequence 
to  me ;  she  was  going  on  a  long  voyage,  and  my  object  was,  if 
possible,  to  avoid  landing.  Unfortunately,  the  captain  being 
unable  to  accommodate  me,  I  had  no  choice  left  but  to  submit  to 
being  taken  to  Philadelphia. 

On  landing  in  that  city,  my  mind  was  totally  indifferent  to 
the  novelties  which,  as  a  rule,  excite  the  interest  of  travellers.  I 
had  the  greatest  trouble  in  rousing  my  curiosity.  I  met  in 
Philadelphia  M.  Casenove.a  Dutch  gentleman  whom  I  had  known 
in  Paris.  M.  Casenove  was  a  man  of  a  rather  enlightened,  though 
slow,  mind,  and  of  a  timid  and  most  careless  nature.  Both  his 
qualities  and  his  defects  made  him  very  useful  to  me.  As  he 
never  pressed  me  to  do  anything,  and  himself  felt  interested  in 
but  few  things,  I  had  no  occasion  to  resist  him.  Meeting  with 
neither  opposition,  advice  nor  direction,  my  instinct  alone  guided 
me  ;  thus  I  was  led  gradually  to  contemplate  more  attentively 
the  grand  sight  under  my  eyes. 

Only  twelve  years  had  elapsed  since  the  United  States  had 
ceased  to  be  a  colony,  and  the  years  of  their  independence  had 
been  lost  as  far  as  progress  in  material  prosperity  was  concerned, 


176  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

owing  to  the  inefficiency  of  their  first  constitution.  The  bases 
of  public  trust  not  having  been  properly  defined,  a  paper-money, 
more  or  less  discredited,  roused  everybody's  cupidity,  encouraged 
deceit,  disturbed  all  transactions,  and  caused  the  institutions 
which  had  been  rendered  necessary  by  the  recent  independence 
of  the  country  to  be  lost  sight  of.  It  was  only  in  1789,  at  the 
time  of  the  new  federal  constitution,  that  property  in  the  United 
States  began  to  rest  on  truly  solid  foundations,  that  social 
guarantees  securing  the  safety  of  foreign  intercourse  were  shaped, 
and  that  the  government  of  the  young  nation  was  admitted  to 
rank  with  older  powers. 

This  is  the  true  date  of  the  foundation  of  the  United  States. 

I  was  still  haunted  by  my  love  for  the  sea,  and  I  almost 
forgot  I  was  no  longer  sailing  on  it,  when  I  found  myself  in  that 
vast  country,  where  whatever  I  saw  reminded  me  of  nothing 
I  had  seen  before. 

Intending  to  tire  myself,  I  made  up  my  mind  to  leave 
Philadelphia,  and  therefore  proposed  to  M.  de  Beaumetz  1  and  to  a 
Dutch  gentleman,  of  the  name  of  Heydecoper,  to  travel  inland 
with  me.  They  both  accepted,  and  I  must  confess  that  I  was 
pleased  with  the  undertaking  from  the  beginning.  I  was  struck 
with  astonishment ;  at  less  than  a  hundred  and  fifty  miles  dis- 
tance from  the  capital,  all  trace  of  men's  presence  disappeared  ; 
nature  in  all  her  primeval  vigour  confronted  us.  Forests  old  as  the 
world  itself ;  decayed  plants  and  trees  covering  the  very  ground 
where  they  once  grew  in  luxuriance  ;  others  shooting  forth  from 
under  the  debris  of  the  former,  and  like  them  destined  to  decay 
and  rot ;  thick  and  intricate  bushes  that  often  barred  our  pro- 
gress ;  green  and  luxuriant  grass  decking  the  banks  of  rivers  ; 
large  natural  meadows ;  strange  and  delicate  flowers  quite 
new  to  me ;  and  here  and  there  the  traces  of  former  tornadoes 
that  had  carried  everything  before  them.  Enormous  trees,  all 
mowed  down  in  the  same  direction,  extending  for  a  consider- 
able distance,  bear  witness  to  the  wonderful  force  of  these  terrible 
phenomena.     On  reaching  higher  ground,  our  eyes  wandered, 

1  M.  de  Beaumetz  was  born  in  1769.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Sovereign  Council 
of  Artois.  As  deputy  to  the  States-General,  he  voted  with  the  Constitutional  party, 
lie  emigrated  in  1792,  went  to  England,  and  thence  to  the  United  States  and  to 
India,  where  he  died. 


THE  CONVENTION,  THE  DIRECTORY,  THE  CONSULATE.  177 

as    far    as    the    sight    could    range,    over    a    most    varied    and 
pleasant  picture.     The  tops  of  trees  and  the  undulations  of  the 
ground  which  alone  interfere  with  the  uniform  aspect  of  large 
extents   of  country,   produce  a  peculiar  effect.     In  the  face  of 
these  immense  solitudes,  we  gave  free  vent  to  our  imagination  ; 
our  minds  built  cities,  villages  and  hamlets  ;  the  mountain  forests 
were  to  remain  untouched,  the  slopes  of  the  hills  to  be  covered 
with  luxuriant  crops,  and  we  could  almost  fancy  we  saw  numerous 
herds  of  cattle  grazing  in  the  valley  under  our  eyes.     There  is 
an   inexpressible   charm   in  thinking  of  the  future  when  travel- 
ling  in   such  countries.     Such,  said  I  to  myself,  was  the  place 
where,  not  very  many  years  ago,  Penn  x  and   two   thousand  emi- 
grants laid  the  foundations  of  Philadelphia,  and  where  a  popula- 
tion of  eighty  thousand 2  people  is  now  enjoying  all  the  luxuries  of 
Europe.  Such  was  also  the  seat  now  occupied  by  the  pretty  little 
town  of  Bethlehem,3  whose  neat  houses  and  wonderfully  fertile 
environs,  due  to  the  energy  of  the  Moravian  brothers,  excite  the 
admiration  of  all  visitors.     After  the  peace  of  1783,  the  city  of 
Baltimore  was  but  a  fishing  village  ;  now  spacious  and  elegant 
dwellings  have    there  been    built  everywhere,   and  dispute    the 
ground  with  trees  whose  stumps  have   not   yet  been   removed. 
It  is  impossible  to  move  a  step  without  feeling  convinced  that  the 
irresistible  progressive   march   of  nature    requires    an    immense 
population  to  cultivate  some  day  this  large  extent  of  ground  lying 
idle  now  indeed,  but  which  only  wants  the  hand  of  man  to  produce 
everything  in  abundance.     I   leave  to  others  the  satisfaction  of 
foretelling  the  prospects  of  those  countries.     I  confine  myself  to 
noticing  that  it  is   impossible  to  walk  a   few  miles  away  from 
seaside  towns  without  learning  that  the  lovely  and  fertile  fields 

1  William  Penn,  born  in  London  in  1644.  He  was  the  son  of  Admiral  Penn. 
Having  become  a  Quaker,  he  was  subjected  to  numerous  persecutions,  and  imprisoned 
three  times.  A  state  bond  of  ^16,000  having  been  bequeathed  to  him,  he  received  in 
exchange  the  country  west  of  the  Delaware.  There,  he  founded,  in  1681,  a  colony- 
called  after  him  Pennsylvania  ;  he  built  Philadelphia,  and  gave  to  his  possessions  a 
constitution  which  became  the  basis  of  that  of  the  United  States.  He  returned  to 
England,  where  he  died  in  1718. 

-  Philadelphia  is  now  the  second  city  of  the  States  as  regards  commercial  import- 
ance.     In  1874  it  had  already  a  population  of  920,000  inhabitants. — {Translator.) 

3  Bethlehem,  a  small  town  in  Pennsylvania,  distant  about  sixty  miles  from  Phila- 
delphia. It  was  founded  in  1741,  by  the  Moravian  brethren,  a  religious  sect  dating 
from  the  fifteenth  century,  and  whose  members  are  the  descendants  of  the  old  Hussites. 
In  order  to  escape  oppression  and  persecution,  a  number  of  them  had  sought  refuge  in 
America. 

VOL.  I.  N 


178  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

we  now  admire  were,  but  ten,  but  five,  but  a  couple  of  years  ago, 
mere  wildernesses  of  forest.  Similar  causes  must  produce  similar 
effects,  especially  when  acting  with  ever  increasing  power.  The 
population  of  the  States  will  therefore  daily  reclaim  some  fresh 
portion  of  these  fallow  spaces,  the  area  of  which  far  surpasses 
that  of  the  ground  at  present  cultivated. 

Having  sated  myself  with  these  ideas,  or  rather  impressions, 
my  mind  being  neither  free  nor  active  enough  to  induce  me  to 
write  a  book,  I  returned  to  city-life,  wishing  at  the  same  time 
that  a  considerable  portion  of  the  capital  that  took  refuge 
in  America,  might  there  be  devoted  to  clearing  and  tilling  the 
ground  on  a  large  scale. 

A  new  nation,  whose  manners,  without  going  through  the 
slow  process  of  civilization,  takes  pattern  from  the  already  refined 
ways-  of  Europe,  stands  in  need  of  the  teachings  of  the  grand 
school  of  nature,  for  agriculture  is  the  basis  on  which  all  States 
are  founded.  It  is,  I  admit  with  the  economists,  agriculture  that 
forms  the  chief  wealth  of  the  social  state,  that  teaches  respect  for 
property,  and  warns  us  that  we  are  blind  to  our  own  interests  when- 
ever we  interfere  with  those  of  other  people  ;  it  is  agriculture 
that  clearly  points  out  to  us  the  indispensable  correlation 
existing  between  the  duties  and  the  rights  of  men  ;  by  binding 
the  tiller  of  the  soil  to  his  field,  it  binds  men  to  their  country. 
The  first  attempts  at  agriculture  teach  us  the  necessity  of  the 
division  of  labour,  that  marvellous  source  of  all  manifesta- 
tions of  public  and  private  prosperity  ;  agriculture  goes  deeply 
enough  into  the  hearts  and  interests  of  men  to  induce  them  to 
see  in  a  numerous  family  so  much  additional  wealth  ;  while,  by 
teaching  resignation,  it  subjects  our  intellect  to  the  supreme  and 
universal  rules  that  regulate  the  world.  From  all  this,  I  infer  that 
agriculture  alone  can  put  a  stop  to  revolutions,  because  it  is  the 
only  pursuit  that  usefully  employs  all  the  capabilities  of  men,  that 
imparts  to  them  calmness  and  moderation  without  indifference, 
that  inculcates  respect  for  that  experience  which  enables  men  to 
control  the  results  of  their  new  experiments  ;  which,  in  short, 
furnishes  constant  proofs  of  the  grand  results  to  be  obtained 
by  simple  regular  work,  and  which  neither  hurries  nor  delays 
in  anything. 


THE  CONVENTION,  THE  DIRECTORY,  THE  CONSULATE.  179 

In  times  of  revolutions,  rashness  is  regarded  as  skill,  and 
exaggeration  as  greatness.  To  put  a  stop  to  them,  circumspec- 
tion must  replace  audacity,  and  greatness  will  then  lie  in  moder- 
ation, and  skill  in  prudence.  A  government,  which  is  the  friend 
of  liberty  and  averse  to  disturbing  the  tranquillity  of  the  world, 
must  strive  to  act  with  moderation.  An  agricultural  nation 
settles  down,  it  does  not  wish  for  conquests.  Commerce,  on 
the  other  hand,  always  longs  for  increase  of  territory. 

After  the  French  Revolution,  commercial  transactions  with 
foreign  countries  met  with  too  many  obstacles  to  enable  them  to 
become  the  chief  pursuit  of  the  country,  and  therefore  to  exer- 
cise any  influence  on  the  manners  of  the  French  people  ;  but  if, 
in  consequence  of  the  excitement  and  vain  dreams  subsisting  in 
men's  minds,  the  nation,  as  there  is  too  much  reason  to  fear, 
turns  its  views  to  speculation  in  public  funds,  that  will  indeed 
be  a  very  great  evil,  because  in  operations  of  this  kind  deceit  is 
too  much  resorted  to,  and  the  attending  ruin  or  fortune  too 
rapid. 

The  American  government  allowed  itself  to  be  too  easily 
influenced  by  the  geographical  situation  of  the  States  ;  it  gave 
too  much  encouragement  to  the  spirit  of  enterprise,  for,  in  order 
to  increase  its  population,  America  annexed  Louisiana  ;  it  will 
now  be  obliged  to  annex  the  Floridas.  Commerce  requires  ports 
and  harbours  from  the  Sainte-Croix  river,  near  the  Saint- 
Lawrence,  to  the  Gulf  of  Mexico,  yet  nine-tenths  of  the  five 
hundred  millions  of  acres  composing  the  territory  of  North 
America  are  still  untilled.  Too  much  activity  is  devoted  to 
business,  and  not  enough  to  farming  ;  and  that  first  impulse 
given  to  all  the  ideas  of  the  country  unsettles  its  social  establish- 
ment. You  need  only  travel  a  bare  hundred  miles  inland  to  see 
people  paying  in  kind  for  whatever  they  buy,  whilst  others  draw 
bills  on  the  first  markets  of  Europe  :  the  contrast  is  too  shocking  ; 
it  is  the  symptom  of  a  social  disease.1 

I  saw,  sixty  miles  from  Boston,  six  thousand  feet  of  timber 

1  It  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  author  of  these  Memoirs  was  travelling  in  the 
States  as  far  back  as  1794,  and  therefore  long  before  the  great  influx  of  emigration 
that  induced  so  many  German  and  Irish  agricultural  labourers  to  go  to  America,  where 
they  performed  the  task  pointed  out  to  the  Americans  by  Prince  Talleyrand.  —  (M.  de 
Bacourt. ) 

N    2 


i8o  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

exchanged  for  a  bullock,  and,  in  Boston  itself,  twenty  pounds 
paid  for  a  Florence  straw  hat. 

At  Frenchman's  Bay,  on  the  border  of  the  Eastern  States,  a 
violent  storm  having  compelled  me  to  stop  at  Machias,1  I  entered 
into  conversation  with  the  man  at  whose  house  I  was  staying.  It 
was  indeed  the  best  house  in  the  district,  and,  as  people  say  in 
this  country,  the  landlord  was  a  most  respectable  man.  Having 
exhausted  the  chapter  relative  to  the  value  and  price  of  land,  I 
asked  him  whether  he  had  ever  been  to  Philadelphia.  He  replied 
that  he  had  not  yet  done  so.  He  was  a  man  of  about  forty-five 
years  of  age.  I  scarcely  dared  to  ask  him  whether  he  knew 
General  Washington.  "  I  have  never  seen  him,"  he  said.  "  If 
you  should  go  to  Philadelphia,"  I  went  on,  "  you  will  be  pleased 
to  see  that  great  man  ?  "  "  Why,  yes,  I  shall  ;  but,"  he  added  with 
an  excited  countenance,  "  I  should  very  much  like  to  see  Mr. 
Bingham,  who,  they  say,  is  so  wealthy." 

Throughout  all  the  States  I  met  with  a  similar  love  for  money, 
very  often  quite  as  coarsely  expressed.  The  country  was  too  soon 
acquainted  with  luxuries.  The  latter  are,  indeed,  ridiculous  when 
men  can  hardly  provide  themselves  with  the  necessaries  of  life. 
I  recollect  having  seen  in  the  drawing-room  of  Mrs.  Robert 
Morris,  a  hat  manufactured  in  the  birth-place  of  the  master  of 
the  house,  carefully  laid  on  an  elegant  Sevres  china  table, 
bought  at  Trianon  by  some  American.  An  European  peasant 
would  scarcely  have  consented  to  wear  such  a  hat. 

On  the  banks  of  the  Ohio,  Mr.  Smith  possessed  a  residence 
known  in  the  country  by  the  name  of  log-house.  The  walls  of  it 
were  formed  with  rough  trees.  The  drawing-room  contained  a 
pianoforte  enriched  with  most  beautiful  bronzes.  M.  de  Beau- 
metz  having  opened  it,  Mr.  Smith  said  to  him,  "  Please  do  not 
attempt  to  play,  for  the  man  who  tunes  it  lives  a  hundred  miles 
from  here,  and  he  has  not  come  this  year."  2 

1  Machias,  small  trading  port  in  the  State  of  Maine. 

2  Several  incidents  connected  with  this  journey  left  impressions  that  are  yet  present 
to  my  mind.  To  kill  time  is  not  so  easy  as  people  generally  think,  especially  when 
one's  mind  is  active  and  full  of  apprehension  as  to  news  from  one's  country.  Under 
such  ciicumstances,  impressions  can  only  be  produced  by  material  facts.  To  be 
riding  through  a  large  wild  forest,  to  lose  one's  way  in  it  in  the  middle  of  the  night, 
and  to  call  to  one's  companion  in  order  to  ascertain  that  you  are  not  missing  each  other  : 
all  this  gives  impressions  impossible  to  define,  because  each  incident  reflects  comically 


THE  CONVENTION,  THE  DIRECTORY,  THE  CONSULATE.  181 

To  us,  inhabitants  of  old  Europe,  there  is  something  awkward 
in  all  the  luxury  displayed  by  Americans.  I  grant  that  our 
luxury  often  shows  signs  of  improvidence  and  frivolousness,  but 
in  America,  luxury  only  denotes  defects  which  prove  that  refine- 
ment does  not  yet  exist  there,  either  in  the  conduct  of  life,  or 
even  in  its  trifles.  I  must  be  pardoned  for  dwelling  at  some 
length  on  America.  I  was  so  lonely  when  there,  that  many 
reflections,  which  would  otherwise  have  found  their  vent  in 
conversation,  now  come  rushing  to  my  pen. 

During  the  two  winters  I  spent  either  in  Philadelphia  or  in 
New  York,  I  availed  myself  of  the  opportunity  thus  afforded  me 
to  see  the  chief  personages  whose  names  the  American  Revolution 
has  handed  to  history,  especially  General  Hamilton,1  whose  mind 

on  the  others.  When  I  cried,  "So-and-so,  are  you  here?"  and  my  companion  replied, 
"  Unfortunately,  I  am,  my  lord,"  I  could  not  help  laughing  at  our  position.  That 
"  Unfortunately,  I  am,"  so  pitifully  uttered,  and  that  "my  lord,"  in  allusion  to  the 
Autun  bishopric,  sounded  most  ludicrous.  Once,  in  the  heart  of  Connecticut,  after  a 
long  day's  ride,  we  stopped  at  a  house  where  the  people  consented  to  give  us  bed  and 
supper.  The  food  supply  was  fortunately  better  than  we  usually  found  it  in  American 
houses.  The  family  was  composed  of  an  elderly  man,  his  wife,  about  fifty  years  of 
age,  two  grown-up  boys,  and  a  young  girl.  The  meal  consisted  of  smoked  fish,  ham, 
potatoes,  strong  beer,  and  brandy.  In  a  very  short  time,  the  beer  and  brandy  had  the 
effect  of  enlivening  the  conversation.  The  two  young  fellows,  who  were  rather 
elevated,  spoke  of  a  journey  they  were  about  to  undertake  ;  they  were  going  beaver- 
hunting  for  a  few  weeks.  They  spoke  of  their  future  expedition  in  such  glowing  terms 
that  they  roused  our  interest  and  curiosity  to  such  a  degree  that,  after  drinking  a 
few  glasses  of  brandy,  M.  de  Beaumetz,  M.  Heydecoper,  and  myself,  were  dying  to 
join  them.  This  would  have  been  a  novel  way  of  spending  or  wasting  a  few  weeks. 
At  each  question  that  we  put  to  our  hosts,  they  filled  our  glasses.  From  that  evening's 
conversation  I  learned  that  the  fur  of  beavers  is  good  only  in  the  fall  of  the  season  ; 
that,  to  shoot  them,  one  must  lie  in  wait  and  hold  out  to  them  spears  baited  with 
split-up  wood  ;  that,  in  frosty  weather,  the  hunters  attack  the  little  dens  the  beavers 
build  for  themselves,  thus  causing  the  timid  beasts  to  plunge  under  the  ice,  but,  as 
they  cannot  long  remain  under  water,  they  soon  come  up  to  breathe  at  holes  purposely 
made  in  the  ice,  when  they  are  captured  by  the  foot.  All  this  was  sufficiently  interesting 
to  induce  Beaumetz,  either  because  of  his  love  of  sport,  or  because  he  felt  more  merry 
than  we  did,  to  propose  that  our  hosts  should  allow  us  to  accompany  them  on  their 
expedition.  They  both  gave  their  assent,  and  we  were,  without  further  formality, 
enrolled  in  the  brotherhood  of  the  Connecticut  beaver- hunters.  Having  mutually 
pledged  our  word,  each  of  us  reached  his  bed  as  best  he  could.  When  morning  came, 
the  effect  of  the  brandy  having  passed  off,  and  sleep  becoming  imperious,  we  began 
to  think  the  various  implements  each  was  to  carry  too  heavy.  I  believe  that  the 
provisions  alone  weighed  about  forty  pounds  ;  we  also  began  to  realize  that  spending  a 
couple  of  months  in  woods  or  marshes  was  really  too  much  of  a  good  thing,  so  we 
endeavoured  to  quash  the  agreement  made  the  night  before.  We  got  free  with  a  few 
dollars,  and  resumed  our  journey,  feeling  rather  ashamed  of  what  we  had  done. 
(Prince  Talleyrand.) 

1  Alexander  Hamilton  was  born  in  1757  in  the  island  of  Nevis  (East  Indies),  of 
Scotch  parents.  When  still  very  young,  he  took  an  active  part  in  the  War  of 
Independence,  and  was  appointed  Colonel.  The  State  of  New  York  sent  him  to  the 
Congress  which  framed  the  Constitution.  Colonel  Hamilton  was  one  of  the  warmest 
supporters  of  the  federative  system.     In  1789,  Washington  appointed  him  Minister  of 


1 82  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

and  character  placed  him,  I  thought,  on  a  par  with  the  most 
distinguished  statesmen  of  Europe,  not  even  excepting  Mr.  Pitt 
and  Mr.  Fox. 

As   I  remarked  above,  I  had  noticed,  whilst  travelling  in  the 
States,  that  agriculture  was  less  encouraged  than  commerce,  that, 
having  to  choose  between  two  sources  of  prosperity,  government 
had  chosen  that  the  scale  should  fall  in  favour  of  commerce,  and, 
still  more  recently,  had  emphasized  this  intention,  by  adding  to 
all  the  real  wealth  of  their  country  the  fictitious  one  procured  by 
all  the  banking  establishments,  which  have  sprung  up  everywhere 
in  the  States,  and  which  serve  exclusively  the  ends  of  commerce. 
Such  an  impulse  once  started,  vanity  and  cupidity  could  not  fail 
soon  to  denounce  prudence,  moderation,  or  simple   probity,  as 
narrow  views.      By   overthrowing  the  barriers   formerly  raised 
by  the  metropolis,  which  centralized    all    the   products    of  its 
colonies   on    its   own    markets,  and   set  its   own  rules  to   their 
speculations,  the    United    States    take    able    advantage   of  the 
position    and  power   that   their  independence  has  obtained  for 
them.     They  send    to   all  the    markets   of  the  old   world   un- 
expected  quantities  of  all  sorts  of  goods,  the  arrival  of  which, 
by  altering  prices,  brings  about  commercial  crises  impossible  to 
avoid.     The  chief  cause  of  all  these  perturbations  proceeds  from 
the  great  distance  existing  between  the  eastern  and  southern 
ports    of  the  States,  whence  thousands  of  ships  loaded   with 
similar  products  start  every  year,  on  almost  the  same  day,  bound 
for  all  the  ports  of  Europe.     Thus,  for  a  long  time  to  come,  the 
commerce  of  America  to  Europe  will  be  left  to  chance. 

During  the  long  evenings  of  my  stay  in  the  States,  always 
thinking  of  my  unfortunate  country,  whose  troubles  so  deeply 
afflicted  me,  I  often  considered  what  her  future  prospects  were 
likely  to  be.  I  then  sought  the  means  of  removing,  or  at  least 
of  diminishing,  the  obstacles  which  prevented  the  establishment 
of  mutually  advantageous  commercial  relations. 

I  fully  realized  how  idle  the  wanderings  of  my  imagination 
were ;  yet  they  pleased  me.     To  put  off  conjectures,  as  reason 

Finances.  He  resigned  this  post,  from  his  own  free  will,  in  1795.  In  1798,  when 
war  was  on  the  point  of  breaking  out  with  France,  Hamilton  was  appointed  General. 
He  was  killed  six  years  later  (1804)  in  a  duel  with  Colonel  Burr,  Vice-President  of 
the  United  States. 


THE  CONVENTION,  THE  DIRECTORY,  THE  CONSULATE.  183 

dictated,  until  such  time  as  the  expected  quarrel  of  Spain  with 
her  colonies  should  be  settled,1  was  to  delay  one's  hopes  too 
long,  for  only  after  the  issue  of  this  quarrel  can  the  maritime 
and  commercial  interests  of  the  great  powers  assume  a  regular 
course.  Thus  my  hopes  of  regulation  were  daily  disturbed  by 
all  the  events  taking  place  under  my  eyes. 

In  1794,  I  witnessed  the  return  of  the  first  American  trading 
expedition  to  Bengal ;  the  shipowners  connected  with  it  were 
largely  repaid  for  their  outlay,  and  in  the  following  year,  fourteen 
American  vessels  started  for  India  from  different  ports,  in  order 
to  obtain  a  share  of  the  enormous  profits  secured  by  the  English 
company.  There  is  a  sort  of  hostility  in  the  sudden  appearance 
of  American  competition.  This  competition  immeasurably  in- 
creases the  risks  of  commerce,  and  thus  skilful  combinations 
are  seldom  rewarded  by  compensating  results.  All  this  has 
come  in  times  when  the  growth  of  population  in  all  civilized 
countries,  is  adding  daily  to  the  ordinary  stimulus  of  human 
passions  that  of  the  fresh  wants  it  creates. 

All  these  considerations  make  it  exceedingly  difficult  to  fore- 
see the  future,  and  well-nigh  impossible  to  direct  its  course. 

Yet  everything  seems  easy  to  a  man  driven  from  his  country 
and  obliged  to  put  up  at  an  inn  or  reside  in  indifferent  lodgings  : 
it  does  not  seem  quite  so  easy  to  him  who  is  quietly  seated 
under  his  own  roof.  I  therefore  took  advantage  of  the  disposi- 
tion of  mind  into  which  my  narrow  quarters  threw  me  to 
indulge  in  high  politics  and  set  the  world  to  rights.  Having, 
like  a  good  member  of  the  Constituent  Assembly,  waived  the 
question  of  the  characters  of  men,  I  had  recourse  to  a  philosophi- 
cal spirit,  and  devised  a  new  general  code  of  the  law  of  nations, 
which,  after  having  established  the  balance  of  the  interests  of 
nations  and  of  individuals,  should  unite  them  for  the  political  and 
reciprocal  benefit  of  the  powers,  and  introduce  liberal  equality 
into  their  habitual  intercourse.  I  even  fancy  that  I  was  on 
the  point  of  applying  the  system  of  the  economists  on  free 
trade  and  the  abolition  of  customs,  which  must  needs  be  com- 

1  This  settlement  was  the  emancipation  of  the  Spanish  colonies,  of  which  Mexico 
was  the  first  to  throw  off  the  yoke  of  the  metropolis,  in  1810.  In  1824,  Spain 
possessed  no  longer  any  territory  on  the  continent  of  America. 


1 84  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

prised  in  my  speculative  ideas,  when,  at  the  very  moment  I  was 
engaged  in  trying  to  solve  the  problem,  a  new  tariff  of  customs, 
adopted  by  the  American  Congress,  on  the  motion  of  my  friend 
Hamilton,  came  into  force.1  The  early  conversations  I  had  had 
with  the  learned  general  dwelt  on  this  branch  of  the  American 
administration  "  Your  economists,"  he  said  to  me,  "  made  a  grand 
dream,  but  it  is  the  chimerical  exaggeration  of  people  whose 
intentions  were  good.  Theoretically,"  he  added,  "  their  system 
might  perhaps  be  contested  and  its  unsoundness  exposed  ;  but 
we  must  leave  them  their  pleasant  illusions  ;  the  present  state  of 
the  affairs  of  this  world  suffices  to  prove  that,  at  least  for  the 
nonce,  their  plan  cannot  be  carried  out  ;  let  us  be  satisfied  with 
this  fact."  I  did  not  make  a  very  firm  stand  in  favour  of  the 
economists,  yet  I  could  scarcely  make  up  my  mind  to  accept  the 
idea  that  there  could  exist  "  liberal "  combinations  that  did  not 
result  in  mutual  advantages  for  all  commercial  nations.  Philan- 
thropic conceptions  rush  to  the  mind  when  one  is  an  outlaw. 

Mr.  Hamilton  did  not  seem  to  me  to  reject  so  peremptorily 
the  possibility  of  all  industries  being,  some  day,  permanently 
divided  among  the  nations  of  the  world. 

Europe,  said  I  to  him,  is  acquainted  with,  and  cultivates,  all 
branches  of  art,  and  excels  in  the  manufacture  of  all  articles  of 
luxury,  as  in  everything  that  tends  to  make  life  more  pleasant 
and  agreeable. 

The  new  world  possesses  a  kind  of  wealth  peculiar  to  itself : 
its  crops  will  always  surpass  those  of  any  rival  nation  in 
quantity. 

Might  not,  therefore,  the  distribution  of  these  two  modes  of 
applying  men's  abilities  serve,  at  least  for  a  considerable  time  to 
come,  as  the  measure  and  basis  of  the  relations  that  must  neces- 
sarily spring  up  between  nations,  some  of  which  daily  require  to 
buy  the  most  usual  necessaries  of  life  at  a  moderate  cost,  whilst 
others  are  anxious  to  acquire  all  that  tends  to  make  life  more 
pleasant  and  agreeable  ? 

Might  not  this  natural  balance  furnish   a  vast    ground   for 

1  There  is  a  curious  coincidence  between  this  fact  and  that  of  these  Memoirs 
appearing  at  almost  the  very  moment  of  the  adoption  of  the  bill  of  Major  McKinley, 
which  seems  to  prove  that  the  traditions  of  American  economists  of  the  early  school 
still  possess  numerous  advocates  in  the  States. — (Translator.) 


THE  CONVENTION,  THE  DIRECTORY,  THE  CONSULATE.  185 

intelligent  exchange  which,  being  ruled  by  international  con- 
ventions, would  constitute  the  commercial  intercourse  of  the 
different  powers  ? 

"  Your  idea,"  Mr.  Hamilton  said  to  me,  "  will  only  be  practical 
the  day  when — and  it  is  perhaps  not  very  remote — great  markets, 
such  as  formerly  existed  in  the  old  world,  will  be  established  in 
America. 

"  There  were  four  chief  markets  concentrating  all  the  products 
of  the  world  :  that  of  London,  which,  notwithstanding  our  com- 
mercial successes,  will  yet  be  the  first,  for  a  long  time  to  come  ; 
that  of  Amsterdam,  which,  if  things  do  not  mend  in  Holland, 
will  soon  be  removed  to  London  ;  that  of  Cadiz,  which  will 
eventually  pass  into  the  hands  of  our  northern  or  southern  ports  ; 
and  that  of  Marseilles,  which  owed  its  flourishing  state  to  Levan- 
tine trade,  but  is  now  on  the  eve  of  being  lost  to  you  Frenchmen. 

"  As  for  us,  we  only  need  two  markets,  but  they  are  indis- 
pensable to  us  :  one  for  the  Northern  and  one  for  the  Southern 
States. 

"  When  these  large  markets  are  established,  commerce  will 
be  able  to  resume  its  regular  course  ;  commercial  enterprise  will 
no  longer  rely  on  sole  hazard,  it  being  the  interest  of  each 
market  to  render  public  the  real  price  and  quality  of  the  various 
goods  finding  their  way  to  it ;  excessive  fluctuations  will  be 
thereby  avoided,  thus  keeping  within  reasonable  bounds  the 
losses  and  gains  of  all  speculations.  Then,  will  sailors  of  all 
nations  bring  in  all  confidence  their  cargoes  to  the  various  ports 
of  the  world." 

I  admired  the  spirit  of  general  order  always  apparent  in  the 
private  views  expressed  by  Mr.  Hamilton  respecting  the  prosperity 
of  his  country.  I  do  not  know  whether  they  will  ever  be  realized, 
but  if  they  do,  it  will  only  be  when  the  intrusive  and  invading 
spirit  of  America  will  have  ceased  to  alter  the  general  relations 
of  the  American  people  with  other  nations,  and  when,  by  a 
judicious  regard  for  its  own  interests,  it  will  endeavour  to 
conquer  its  own  country  by  turning  to  every  possible  advantage 
the  vast  extent  of  territory  belonging  to  it. 

I  had  acquainted  myself  with  almost  all  I  wanted  to  know  in 
America ;   I  had   been  spending  nearly  thirty  months  in  that 


1 86  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

country,1  without  any  other  aim  than  that  of  being  away  from 
either  France  or  England,  and  impelled  by  the  sole  interest  of 
seeing  with  my  own  eyes  the  great  American  nation  whose  history 
is  only  beginning. 

The  uncertainty  in  which  the  news  from  Europe  left  my  future 
prospects,  induced  me  to  launch  in  a  speculation  which,  being 
carried  on  with  skill  and  economy,  might  have  proved  most  profit- 
able. I  made  up  my  mind  to  go  to  the  East  Indies  on  board  a 
ship  I  had  chartered,  and  in  the  cargo  of  which  several  important 
Philadelphia  firms  and  some  Dutch  capitalists  had  an  interest. 
My  vessel  was  loaded  ;  and  I  was  about  to  start,  when  a  decree 
from  the  Convention,  permitting  me  to  return  to  France,  reached 
me.  This  measure  was  quite  unsolicited  by  me  ;  it  had  been 
taken  on  the  initiative  of  Messrs.  Chenier,2  and  Daunou,3  whom 
I  scarcely  knew,  and  to  whom,  however  different  their  political 
opinions  may  be  from  mine,  I  shall  always  bear  gratitude.4  It 
was  necessary  to  take  advantage  of  this  decree,  or  else  to  give 
up  for  ever  the  hope  of  returning  to  France.  M.  de  Beaumetz, 
whom   I  had  taken  into  partnership  in  my  speculation,  went  to 

1  During  his  stay  in  England  and  in  America,  Prince  Talleyrand  kept  up  with 
Madame  de  Stael  *  an  interesting  correspondence  recently  edited  by  the  present  Due 
de  Broglie  (the  editor  of  these  Memoirs)  in  the  January  and  April  numbers  of  the 
Revue  Diplomatique  (1890),  under  the  title  of  Lettres  de  M.  de  Talleyrand  a  Madame 
de  Stael,  extraites  des  Archives  du  Chdteau  de  Broglie. 

2  Marie  Joseph  Chenier,  born  in  Constantinople  in  1764.  He  was  the  junior 
brother  of  Andre.  +  He  at  first  entered  the  army,  but  left  it  to  devote  his  time  to 
literature,  and  wrote  several  republican  and  revolutionary  plays  which  gave  him  a 
certain  reputation.  As  Deputy  of  the  Department  of  Seine-et-Oise  to  the  Convention, 
he  voted  for  the  death  of  the  king.  He  was  President  of  the  Assembly  in  August, 
1795,  and  was  subsequently  elected  a  member  of  the  "Five  Hundred."  After 
Brumaire  1 8,  he  became  a  member  of  the  Tribunate.  Under  the  Empire,  he  was 
appointed  Inspector  of  Public  Education,  was  dismissed  in  1806,  and  died  in  181 1. 

3  Pierre  Daunou  was  born  in  1761.  He  joined  the  Order  of  the  Oratorians,  but 
gave  up  his  ecclesiastical  functions  after  his  election  to  the  Convention  by  the  Depart- 
ment of  Pas-de-Calais  in  1792.  He  protested  against  the  trial  of  the  king,  and  voted 
in  favour  of  banishment.  Having  been  arrested  with  seventy-three  of  his  colleagues 
on  October  31,  1792,  he  was  imprisoned  for  a  whole  year.  After  Thermidor  9,  he 
was  appointed  President  of  the  Convention.  He  was,  subsequently,  a  member  of  the 
"  Five  Hundred  "  and  of  the  Tribunate,  from  which  he  was  removed  in  1802.  He 
took  no  share  in  politics  under  the  Empire.  He  became  a  Deputy  under  the  Restora- 
tion, was  appointed  peer  of  France  in  1839,  and  died  in  1840. 

4  As  mentioned  here  by  Prince  Talleyrand,  the  decree  of  the  Convention  permit- 
ting his  return  to  France  was  proposed  by  Messrs.  Chenier  and  Daunou,  but  at  the 
pressing  request  of  many  of  his  friends,  amongst  whom  was  Madame  de  Stael. 

*  See  footnote  (2),  p.  47. 

t  The  author  of  remarkable  poems.  His  royalist  opinions  caused  him  to  be  arrested  during  the 
Terror.  The  revolutionary  tribunal  sentenced  him  to  death.  He  was  guillotined  in  1793. — 
(  Translator, ) 


THE  CONVENTION,  THE  DIRECTORY,  THE  CONSULATE.  187 

India  instead  of  me  and  died  in  that  country.  I  much  regretted 
to  part  with  M.  de  la  Rochefoucauld,1  for  whom  I  had  much 
affection,  and  with  Mr.  Hamilton,  who  will  always  occupy  a  fore- 
most place  in  my  recollections.  Having  taken  leave  of  my 
friends,  I  took  passage  on  board  a  wretched  Danish  vessel  bound 
for  Hamburg. 

Before  re-entering  France,  I  was  anxious  to  know  what  was 
going  on  there.  Madame  de  Flahaut,2  who  was  then  at  Hamburg, 
seemed  to  me  hardly  disposed  to  furnish  me  with  the  desired 
information,  for,  when  I  was  still  coming  up  the  Elbe,  she  sent 
me  word  by  M.  de  Ricce,  who  was  simple  enough  to  deliver  the 
message — not  to  land  but  go  back  to  America.  Her  reason  for 
so  doing,  she  told  M.  de  Ricce,  was  that  it  being  rumoured  that 
she  had  been  on  rather  intimate  terms  with  me,  she  feared  that 
my  presence  should  be  an  obstacle  to  her  marriage  with  M.  de 
Souza,  the  Portuguese  Minister.  However,  I  thought  I  could, 
without  any  impropriety,  take  no  notice  of  the  extraordinary 
reasons  alleged  by  M.  de  Ricce,  and  spent  a  month  in  Hamburg, 
in  the  society  of  persons  who  did,  no  more  than  I  did  myself, 
interfere  with  the  marriage  of  Madame  de  Flahaut  with  that 
dear  M.  de  Souza.  In  Hamburg,  I  met  Madame  de  Genlis, 
whom  I  found  exactly  the  same  as  I  had  known  her  at  Sillery, 
at  Bellechasse  and  in  England.  The  unchangeableness  of 
compound  natures  proceeds  from  their  suppleness. 

From  Hamburg,  I  went  to  Amsterdam,  where  I  spent  a 
fortnight,  thence  to  Brussels,  where  I  stayed  long  enough  to 
reach  Paris'  only  in  the  month  of  September  1796,  as  it  had  been 
my  intention. 

A  national  institute  of  arts  and  sciences  3  had  been  founded 

1  The  Due  de  la  Rochefoucauld- Liancourt. 

2  Adelaide  Filleul,  born  in  Paris  in  1761,  married,  when  very  young,  the  Comte 
de  Flahaut,  a  brigadier-general,  who  was  guillotined  in  1 793.  She  had  left  France 
in  1792.  After  Thermidor  9,  she  wished  to  return  to  France,  but  had  to  stay  at 
Hamburg,  where  she  made  the  acquaintance  of  the  Marquis  Jose  de  Souza-Bothelo, 
who  was  then  Portuguese  Minister  to  Denmark,  and  whose  wife  she  became  in  1S02, 
he  having  just  been  appointed  Minister  to  France.  The  Marquis  de  Souza  lost  his 
appointment  shortly  after,  but  resided  in  Paris  until  his  death  (1825).  Madame  de 
Souza  wrote  several  novels,  which  made  her  reputation.      She  died  in  1836. 

3  All  the  academies  had  been  done  away  with  in  1792.  The  Convention  inserted 
in  the  Constitution  of  the  year  III.  a  clause  providing  for  the  foundation  of  a  national 
institute  "entrusted  with  the  care  of  collecting  the  various  discoveries  and  improving 
arts  and  sciences."   A  bill  passed  in  1795,  regulated  the  organization  of  this  institute, 


1 88  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

in  Paris :  the  very  organization  of  this  institute  was  sufficient  to 
gauge  the  spirit  then  reigning  in  France.  It  had  been  divided 
into  four  sections,  of  which  that  of  physical  sciences  ranked  first, 
whereas  that  of  moral  and  political  sciences  only  came  next. 
During  my  absence,  I  had  been  elected  a  member  of  the  latter. 
To  pay  my  debt  as  academician,  I  read,  at  two  public  sittings 
closely  following  each  other,  a  couple  of  papers  which  attracted 
a  certain  notice.  The  first  of  these  papers  related  to  the 
United  States,  the  second  dealt  with  the  necessity  for  France  to 
secure  colonies.1  I  had  also  prepared  a  third  paper  on  the 
influence  of  society  in  France,  but,  as  it  was  based  chiefly  on  my 
recollections,  my  friends  did  not  think  it  suited  to  a  time  when 
France  was  ruled  by  the  Directory.     So  I  left  it  unfinished. 

Having  paid  my  literary  debt,  and  perceiving  no  element  of 
order  and  no  guarantee  of  stability  in  the  various  political  factions 
whose  struggles  I  witnessed,  I  took  care  to  keep  aloof  from 
active  politics.  Madame  de  Stael,  who  had  already  resumed  a 
certain  influence,  closely  insisted  on  my  going  with  her  to 
Barras,2  one  of  the  members  of  the  Directory.  I  demurred  at 
first ;  I  could  not  call  on  a  member  of  the  Directory,  without 
asking  to  see  all  the  other  Directors,  and  chiefly  those  3  who  had 
been  my  colleagues  in  the  Constituent  Assembly.  The  reasons 
alleged  to  justify  my  refusal  did  not  seem  valid.  Besides,  they 
had  to  be  conveyed  through  Madame  de  Stael,  who,  being  anxious 

which  was  divided  into  four  sections,  comprising  altogether  144  full  members  and  144 
associate  members.     The  Institute  only  resumed  its  old  name  of  academy  in  1816. 

1  These  two  papers  were  published  in  the  Recueil  des  Memoires  de  V Institut, 
section  of  moral  and  political  sciences,  vol.  ii.,  first  series,  1799.  In  the  first,  headed 
Sur  les  Relations  commerciales  de  F  Angleterre  et  des  Etats-  tints,  Germinal  5,  year  V. 
("The  Commercial  Intercourse  of  England  with  the  United  States"),  the  author's 
object  was  to  prove  that  England  did  not  lose  anything  by  the  declaration  of  indepen- 
dence of  her  great  colony,  and  that  she  will  always  find  in  America  a  regular  market  to 
buy  her  goods  and  adopt  the  overgrowth  of  her  population.  The  second  was  headed, 
Sur  les  Avantages  a  retirer  des  Colonies  nouvelles  ( "  Advantages  to  be  derived  from  New 
Colonies  ") ;  it  was  read  Messidor  25,  year  V.  The  main  idea  in  it  is  that,  as  a  con- 
sequence of  the  revolution,  it  is  necessary,  in  order  to  preserve  its  results,  to  apply 
the  forces  of  the  country  to  a  new  field  of  activity,  and  that,  in  the  present  state  of 
affairs  in  France,  the  government  ought  to  endeavour  to  supply  all  agitators  and  mal- 
contents of  all  parties  with  vast  territories  to  colonize. 

2  The  Comte  Paul  de  Barras,  born  at  Fox-Kmphoux,  in  the  Var  Department,  was 
a  captain  in  the  army  in  1789.  Having  been  sent  to  the  Convention,  he  voted  for  the 
death  of  Louis  XVI.  In  February,  1795,  he  was  appointed  President  of  the  Conven- 
tion. He  was  elected  a  member  of  the  Directory  at  the  time  of  its  foundation,  and 
only  left  it  on  Hrumaire  18,  when  he  retired  to  private  life.     He  died  in  1829. 

3  La  Reveillere-Lepeaux  and  Rewbell. 


THE  CONVENTION,  THE  DIRECTORY,  THE  CONSULATE.  189 

that  I  should  be  personally  known  to  Barras,  so  managed  matters 
that  the  Director  sent  me  a  note  inviting  me  to  dine  with  him  at 
Suresnes  on  a  certain  day.  I  had  no  alternative  but  to  accept. 
On  the  appointed  day,  I  was  at  Suresnes  at  about  three  o'clock 
in  the  afternoon.  In  the  dining-room,  which  I  had  to  cross  to  reach 
the  drawing-room,  I  noticed  covers  laid  for  five  persons.  Much  to 
my  surprise,  Madame  de  Stael  was  not  invited.  A  man  who  was 
rubbing  the  floor,  showed  me  a  cupboard  containing  a  few  odd 
books,  and  told  me  that  the  Director — the  title  given  to  Barras  in 
private  life — seldom  came  home  before  half-past  four.  Whilst  I 
was  engaged  in  reading  I  do  not  recollect  what  work,  two  young 
men  came  in  to  ascertain  the  time  by  the  drawing-room  clock, 
and  seeing  that  it  was  only  half-past  three,  they  said  to  each 
other,  "  We  have  time  to  go  for  a  swim."  They  had  not  been 
gone  twenty  minutes,  when  one  of  them  returned  asking  for 
immediate  help  ;  I  ran,  with  all  the  persons  in  the  house,  to  the 
riverside.  Facing  the  garden,  between  the  high  road  and  the 
island,  the  Seine  forms  a  kind  of  whirlpool  in  which  one  of  the 
young  men  had  disappeared.  The  watermen  of  the  neighbour- 
hood soon  rowed  to  the  spot,  and  two  of  them  most  courageously 
dived  to  the  bottom.  However,  all  the  efforts  made  to  save  the 
unfortunate  fellow  proved  vain.     I  went  back  to  the  house. 

The  corpse  of  the  young  man  was  only  found  the  next  day 
caught  in  weeds,  at  a  spot  distant  more  than  six  hundred  yards 
from  the  place  where  he  had  disappeared.  The  drowned  was  named 
Raymond,  Lodeve  was  his  birthplace.  Barras  was  very  fond  of 
him  ;  he  had  brought  him  up  and,  since  he  had  been  appointed  a 
Director,  he  had  made  him  his  aide-de-camp.  I  was  alone  in  the 
drawing-room,  not  knowing  exactly  what  to  do.  Who  was  to 
tell  Barras  the  misfortune  that  had  just  befallen  him  ?  I  had 
never  seen  the  Director.  My  position  was  really  unpleasant.  A 
carriage  drove  up.  On  opening  the  door,  the  gardener  said  : 
"  M.  Raymond  has  just  been  drowned,  yes,  Citizen  Director,  he 
has  just  been  drowned."  Barras  crossed  the  front  yard,  and 
rushed  upstairs  to  his  room,  crying  out  aloud.  After  waiting  some 
little  time,  one  of  his  servants  told  him  I  was  in  the  drawing-room. 
He  sent  me  word  to  excuse  his  not  coming  down,  and  requesting 
me  to  sit  down  to  dinner  at  once.  The  secretary  who  accompanied 


190  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

him  remained  upstairs.  Thus,  I  was  alone  at  Barras'  table.  A 
quarter  of  an  hour  having  elapsed,  a  servant  came  to  request  me 
to  go  up  to  the  Director's  room.  I  felt  thankful  for  his  supposing 
that,  under  the  circumstances,  the  dinner  served  to  me  could  have 
no  attraction.  I  felt  quite  upset.  As  I  entered  his  room,  he 
took  hold  of  both  my  hands  and  embraced  me ;  he  was  weep- 
ing. I  said  to  him  all  the  kind  things  which  the  position  in 
which  I  saw  him  and  that  in  which  I  was  myself,  could  dictate. 
The  sort  of  embarrassment  he,  at  first,  displayed  with  me,  an  utter 
stranger  to  him,  gradually  disappeared,  and  the  share  I  took  in 
his  trouble  seemed  to  do  him  good.  He  begged  of  me  to  go 
back  with  him  to  Paris ;  I  readily  accepted.  From  that  day,  I 
never  had  any  occasion  to  regret  having  made  his  acquaintance. 
He  was  a  man  of  an  excited  and  impulsive  nature,  easily  carried 
one  way  or  the  other :  I  had  known  him  scarcely  a  couple  of 
hours,  and  yet  might  have  almost  supposed  I  was  the  person  he 
liked  best  in  the  world. 

Shortly  after  my  first  interview,  the  Directory  wished  to  make 
a  change  in  the  Ministry.1  To  this  Barras  consented  with  the 
condition  that  his  new  friend  should  be  appointed  "  Minister  of 
Foreign  Relations."  He  defended  his  proposal  with  great  warmth, 
and  so  effectively  that  it  was  adopted  ;  at  ten  o'clock  the  same 
night,  a  gendarme  called  for  me  at  the  club  named  Salon  des 
Etrangers2  and  handed  to  me  the  decree  appointing  me 
Minister. 

The  absolute  character  of  all  the  measures  taken  by  the 
Directory,  the  pressing  requests  of  Madame  de  Stael,  and  above 
all  this,  the  belief  I  had  that  I  might  possibly  work  some  good, 
caused  me  to  dismiss  all  idea  of  declining  the  post.  On  the  follow- 
ing day,  I  therefore  called  at  the  Luxembourg,3  in  order  to  thank 
Barras  :  after  which,  I  went  to  the  Foreign  office. 

Under  my  predecessor,  Charles  de  Lacroix,4  all  State  matters 

1  During  the  summer  of  1797,  the  cabinet  was  entirely  modified.  Talleyrand  took 
the  Foreign  Office,  Lambrecht  the  Justice,  Letourneux  the  Home  Department,  General 
Scherer  the  War  Office,  Admiral  Pleville  le  Pelley  the  Marine  Department,  Sotin 
was  head  of  the  Police  Department,  and  Ramel  remained  Minister  of  Finances. 

2  Strangers'  or  Foreigners'  Club. 

3  The  residence  of  Marie  de  Medici.  After  passing  through  different  destinations 
during  the  Revolution,  it  became  the  official  residence  of  the  executive  during  the 
Directory.     It  is  now  devoted  to  the  sittings  of  the  Senate. — {Translator.) 

4  Charles  de  Lacroix  de  Constant  was  born  in  1754  ;  in  1789,  he  was  chief  clerk 


THE  CONVENTION,  THE  DIRECTORY,  THE  CONSULATE.  19 r 

concerning  his  department  were  previously  settled  by  the 
Directory.  Like  the  previous  secretary,  my  duties  were  confined 
to  signing  passports  and  other  administrative  documents,  and  to 
forwarding  to  the  proper  quarters  the  despatches  or  communica- 
tions already  drafted  by  the  executive  ;  yet,  I  often  delayed 
these  communications,  which  delay  enabled  me  to  soften  their 
terms,  when  the  impulse  under  which  they  had  been  written  had 
passed  away.  All  business  relative  to  home  affairs  was  kept  from 
me.  I  imparted  dignity  to  my  odd  situation,  by  trying  to  con- 
vince others,  and  myself  to  a  certain  degree,  that  all  progress 
towards  true  order  at  home  would  be  impossible  so  long  as  we 
did  not  have  peace  abroad,  and  adding  that,  since  I  had  been 
called  upon  to  contribute  to  its  restoration,  I  ought  to  devote 
myself  entirely  to  this  object. 

It  has  come  to  my  knowledge  that  some  people,  not  in  the 
days  I  speak  of,  but  since  the  Restoration,  considered  that  it  was 
wrong  to  accept  office  in  times  of  crisis  and  revolution,  when  it 
is  impossible  to  work  absolute  good.  Such  judgment  always 
appeared  to  me  most  superficial.  In  the  affairs  of  this  world,  we 
must  not  simply  consider  the  present.  That  which  is,  in  the 
majority  of  cases,  has  but  a  very  small  importance,  whenever  we 
lose  sight  of  the  fact  that  that  which  is  produces  that  which  shall 
be ;  thus  indeed,  as  we  frame  the  present,  so  will  the  future  be 
shaped  !  If  we  consider  matters,  without  prejudice  and,  above 
all,  without  envy,  we  plainly  see  that  men  do  not  always 
accept  office  so  as  to  gratify  their  personal  interests,  and  I  might 
add  that  it  is  no  mean  sacrifice  on  the  part  of  a  political  man  to 
consent  to  being  the  responsible  editor  of  other  people's  lucubra- 
tions. Selfish  and  timorous  people  are  incapable  of  so  much 
abnegation  ;  but,  I  repeat  it,  it  must  be  borne  in  mind  that,  by 
declining  official  posts,  in  times  of  upheaval,  one  simply  affords 
greater  facilities  to  the  enemies  of  public  order.  He  who  accepts 
does  so,  not  to  second  the  advocates  of  a  state  of  affairs  to  which 
he  is  opposed,  but  in  order  to  so  modify  their  action  that  it  may 

in  the  General  Comptroller's  office.  Having  been  elected  to  the  Convention,  he  voted 
for  the  death  of  the  king.  He  was  subsequently  a  member  of  the  "  Anciens,"  Minister 
of  Foreign  Affairs  (1796),  Ambassador  to  Holland  (1797),  Prefect  of  the  Bouches-du- 
Rhone,  and  afterwards  of  the  Gironde.  He  died  in  1808.  He  was  the  father  of  Eugene 
Delacroix,  the  famous  painter. 


192 


THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 


be  profitable  to  the  future.  "  En  toute  chose  il  faut  ccnsiderer  la 
fin" 1  said  good  old  La  Fontaine,  and  that  is  not  a  mere 
apologue. 

I  must  not  omit  to  state  that  Admiral  Bruix,2  for  whose 
character,  intellect,  and  talent  I  had  the  greatest  esteem,  was  to 
be  appointed  Minister  of  Marine  ;  I  was  thus  entering  upon  office 
with  a  colleague  as  unacquainted  as  I  was  myself  with  the  ways 
of  the  Directory,  and  with  whom  I  could  deliberate  as  to  what 
good  might  be  done  and  what  evil  prevented. 

To  give  a  clear  conception  of  what  I  have  termed  the  ways 
of  the  Directory,  I  think  it  will  be  sufficient  to  relate  the  inci- 
dents that  marked  the  first  council  at  which  I  was  present.  A 
quarrel  took  place  between  Carnot 3  and  Barras ;  the  latter 
charged  his  colleague  with  having  destroyed  a  letter  which 
ought  to  have  been  submitted  to  the  Directory.  They  were 
both  standing.  Carnot,  putting  up  his  hand,  said  :  "  I  give  you 
my  word  of  honour  that  that  is  not  so  !  "  "  Do  not  raise  your 
hand,"  replied  Barras,  "blood  would  drip  from  it."  Such 
were  our  rulers,  and  my  task  was  to  try  to  obtain  the  re-admis- 
sion of  France  to  the  councils  of  Europe,  whilst  such  men  were 
in  power.  Difficult  though  this  great  undertaking  was  I  did  not 
hesitate  to  confront  it. 

Nearly  all  the  enemies  France  had  had  since  the  beginning 
of  the  Revolution,  had  been  compelled  to  seek  safety  in  peace, 
which  most  of  them  bought  and  paid  for  with  territorial  cessions 
or  pecuniary  considerations.4     Austria,  defeated  both    in   Italy 

1  In  all  things  the  end  should  be  considered. 

2  Eustache  Bruix  was  born  at  San  Domingo  in  1759  ;  in  1789,  he  was  a  lieutenant 
in  the  navy  ;  in  1798,  he  was  appointed  Rear- Admiral  and  Minister  of  Marine,  and 
died  in  1805. 

3  Lazare  Carnot  was  born  at  Nolay,  in  the  Department  of  Cote  d'Or,  in  1753  ;  in 
1789,  he  was  an  officer  of  artillery.  He  sat  in  the  Legislative  Assembly  and  in  the 
Convention,  where  he  voted  for  the  death  of  the  king.  Having  been  appointed  a 
member  of  the  Committee  of  Public  Safety,  he  was  entrusted  with  the  organization  of 
the  army  and  the  direction  of  the  war.  Having  been  elected  a  member  of  the  Conseil 
des  Anciens  by  fourteen  Departments,  he  was  appointed  a  Director.  Having  been 
banished  on  Fructidor  18,  he  took  refuge  in  Geneva.  Under  the  Consulate,  he  was 
Minister  of  War,  and  afterwards  member  of  the  Tribunate.  In  1814,  he  was  appointed 
General  of  Division  and  Governor  of  Antwerp.  He  took  office  as  Minister  of  the 
Interior  during  the  Hundred  Days,  was  exiled  at  the  Second  Restoration,  and  died  at 
Magdeburg  in  1823. 

4  The  following  is  the  chronological  list  of  the  treaties  which  brought  the  war  of 
the  first  coalition  to  an  end  : — With  the  Grand  Duke  of  Tuscany,  Paris,  February  9, 
1795;  with  Prussia,  Basel,  April  5,  1795;  wiih  Spain,  Basel,  July  22,  1795;  with 


THE  CONVENTION,  THE  DIRECTORY,  THE  CONSULATE.  193 

and  in  Germany,  and  seeing  her  territory  invaded  on  both  sides 
and  her  capital  threatened  by  General  Bonaparte,  had  already 
signed  the  preliminaries  of  Leoben  with  her  victor,  and  was  now 
engaged  in  negotiating  the  definitive  treaty,  that  of  Campo- 
Formio. 

I  became  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  x  during  the  time  that 
elapsed  between  the  signing  of  the  preliminaries  of  peace  and 
the  conclusion  of  the  definitive  treaty.  On  learning  my  ap- 
pointment, General  Bonaparte  wrote  to  the  members  of  the 
Directory  to  congratulate  them  on  their  choice,  and  also  sent 
me  a  very  nice  letter.  From  that  day,  we  kept  up  a  close 
correspondence.2  All  the  young  victorious  general  did,  said, 
or  wrote  was  so  full  of  originality,  so  striking,  skilful  and  daring 
as  to  justify  building  great  hopes  on  his  genius.  A  few  weeks 
after  writing  his  first  letter  to  me,  he  signed  the  treaty  of 
Campo-Formio  (October  17,  1797).  * 

On  the  other  hand,  England  had  sent  J^ord  Malmesbury3  to 
France  with  proposals  of  peace  ;  but  in  this,  she  was  not  sincere. 
The  English  Cabinet  was  then  forced  to  feign  entering  on 
negotiations  with  us,  in  order  to  overcome  its  difficulties  at 
home.4 

Hesse-Cassel,  Basel,  August  28,  1795  ;  with  Sardinia,  Paris,  May  15,  1796  ;  with 
Wurtemberg,  Paris,  August  7,  1796  ;  with  the  Margrave  of  Baden,  Paris,  August  22, 
1796  ;  with  the  King  of  the  Two  Sicilies,  Paris,  October  11,  1796  ;  with  Parma,  Paris, 
November  5,  1796;  with  the  Pope,  Tolentino,  February  19,  1796;  with  Venice, 
Milan,  May  16,  1797  ;  with  Portugal,  August  20,  1797  ;  with  the  Emperor,  Campo- 
Formio,  October  17,  1797. 

1  July  18,  1797. 

2  The  following  is  the  first  letter  written  to  Bonaparte  by  Talleyrand  : — 

"Paris,  July  24,  1797. 

' :  I  have  the  honour  to  inform  you,  General,  that  the  Executive  Directory  has 
appointed  me  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs.  Fully  alive  to  the  fearful  responsibility 
my  duties  lay  on  me,  it  is  necessary  that  I  should  seek  confidence  in  the  fact  that  your 
glory  cannot  fail  to  facilitate  the  negotiations  I  may  have  to  carry  out.  The  mere 
name  of  Bonaparte  will  remove  all  obstacles. 

"  I  shall  diligently  acquaint  you  with  all  the  views  the  Directory  may  instruct  me 
to  bring  to  your  knowledge,  and  fame,  which  quickly  spreads  all  your  achievements, 
will  often  deprive  me  of  the  pleasure  of  informing  the  Directors  of  the  manner  in 
which  you  have  carried  out  their  views."  (Unpublished  official  correspondence  of 
Napoleon  Bonaparte  with  the  Directory,  the  Ministry,  &c.     Paris,  1819.   7  vols.  8vo.) 

3  James  Harris,  Earl  of  Malmesbury,  was  born  in  1746.  In  1768,  he  was  Secretary 
of  Embassy  ;  in  1771,  he  was  appointed  Minister  at  Berlin  ;  in  1777,  he  went  to  St. 
Petersburg  in  the  same  capacity  ;  in  1783,  he  was  sent  to  the  Hague;  in  1788,  he 
entered  the  House  of  Lords.  After  his  missions  to  France,  he  retired  to  private  life. 
He  died  in  1820. 

4  As  early  as  1796,  Pitt  had  made  overtures  of  peace,  and  sent  Malmesbury  to 
Paris.     The  negotiations  were  broken  off  on  December  19,  1796.     In  the  following 

VOL.  I.  O 


i94  THE  MEMOIRS  OE  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

Such  were  the  relations  of  France  with  foreign  countries 
when  I  joined  the  ministry. 

At  home  a  faction  was  plotting  the  overthrow  of  the  existing 
order  of  things,  to  replace  it  by  what  ?  Nobody  ever  knew  or 
ever  will  know  ;  for  this  faction  was  not  numerous,  and  was 
composed  of  Republicans  and  of  former  members  of  the  Con- 
stituent Assembly  and  of  the  National  Convention,  who  may 
have  been  united  by  common  hatred,  but  who  could  certainly 
not  work  any  plan  together. 

At  any  rate,  what  soon  became  evident  was  the  weakness 
of  this  faction,  easily  overcome,  and  whose  real  or  pretended 
leaders  were,  in  the  course  of  a  few  hours,  arrested  for  the  most 
part,  charged  with  plotting  against  the  established  government, 
convicted  without  being  heard,  and  transported  to  Cayenne,1 
by  virtue  of  what  was  then  termed  a  law. 

Civil  war  continued  to  desolate  the  western  provinces,  where 
the  Republicans  were  masters  of  nearly  all  the  towns.  This 
war, — the  organizers  of  which  handed  to  their  families  the 
proud  title  of  Vendeen,  afterwards  replaced  and  spoilt  by  that 
of  CJiouan, — was  then  confined  within  limits  beyond  which  some 
vainly  endeavoured  to  extend  it.  It  had  become  more  irksome 
than  dangerous  for  the  government. 

The  words  of  Republic,  Liberty,  Equality,  Fraternity,  were 
everywhere  inscribed  on  all  the  walls,  but  the  ideas  and  feelings 
they  expressed  were  nowhere  to  be  met  with.  From  the  highest 
authorities  to  those  of  the  lowest  rank,  there  was  scarcely 
one  that  was  not  most  arbitrary  in  its  formation,  its  composition 
and  mode  of  action.  All  was  done  with  violence,  and,  as  a 
natural  consequence,  nothing  could  last. 

The  young  general  Bonaparte,  who,  for  the  last  two  years, 
shone  so  brilliantly  on  the  stage  of  the  world,  refused  to  be 
swamped  amongst  the  crowd  of  single  generals  ;  he  wanted  to 
hear  his  name  bruited  abroad  more  yet,  and  to  continue  to 
attract  all  looks  upon  himself.     Besides,  he  feared  a  situation  in 

year,  Malmesbury  returned  to  Lille  (July  4),  and  began  fresh  negotiations,  which, 
however,  also  failed. 

1  This  was  the  coup  d'itat  of  Fructidor  18,  year  V.  (September  4,  1797),  made  by 
the  Directory  with  the  assistance  of  the  army  against  the  Councils,  where  the  elections 
of  the  previous  May  had  sent  an  anti-revolutionist  majority.  The  greater  portion  of 
these  elections  were  quashed,  and  sixty- five  Deputies  transported  to  Cayenne. 


THE  CONVENTION,  THE  DIRECTORY,  THE  CONSULATE.  195 

which  he  would  be  defenceless  against  the  very  dangers  to  which 
his  fame  might  give  birth.  Ambitious  enough  to  wish  to  be 
head  of  all,  he  was  yet  not  so  blind  as  to  think  this  possible  for 
him  in  France,  at  least  not  without  a  concurrence  of  events 
which,  at  that  time,  could  not  be  regarded  as  close  at  hand,  or 
even  as  probable. 

England  in  the  time  of  Cromwell  had  but  one  army.  Crom- 
well, who  had  selected  all  its  officers,  had  only  his  own  creatures 
among  them.  Outside  the  army  he  had  no  rival  in  fame.  Two 
hours'  fanaticism,  skilfully  employed,  sufficed  to  put  the  troops 
into  the  state  of  mind  he  wished.  Finally,  the  Long  Parliament, 
which  had  concentrated  all  power  within  itself,  had  played  its 
part ; 1  all  parties  had  grown  tired  of  its  tyranny  ;  they  all 
desired  its  overthrow. 

These  circumstances  were  all  lacking  in   Bonaparte's  case. 

But  if  he  had  not  yet  the  chance  of  ruling,  as  Cromwell,  in  his 

own  country,  it  was,  on  the  other  hand,  not  impossible  that  he 

might  cut    out   for  himself  a  sovereignty  elsewhere,  provided 

•  France  first  furnished  him  with  the  means. 

After  having  signed  the  peace  with  Austria  at  Campo- 
Formio,  and  paid  a  short  visit  to  Rastadt,  the  place  agreed  upon 
with  the  empire 2  for  treating  of  the  peace  (for,  after  the  example 
of  the  old  Romans,  the  French  Republic  had  adopted  the 
principle  of  never  comprising  two  of  its  enemies  into  the  same 
peace),  he  went  to  Paris  to  propose  the  conquest  of  Egypt  to 
the  Directory. 

I  had  never  seen  him.  At  the  time  of  my  nomination  to 
the  Ministry  of  Foreign  Affairs  he  had  written  to  me,  as  I  have 
already  mentioned,  a  long  letter,  carefully  compiled,  in  which  he 
wished  to  appear  under  a  different  character  from  that  which  he 
had  hitherto  played  on  the  stage  of  public  life.     This  letter  is 

1  The  Long  Parliament  is  the  name  given  in  England  to  the  last  Parliament 
convened  by  Charles  I.  Having  assembled  in  1640,  it  lasted  more  than  twenty 
years.  In  1648,  Cromwell  dismissed  all  members  who  were  hostile  to  his  own 
policy,  and  in  1653,  he  dissolved  it.  Recalled  in  1659,  and  nicknamed  The  Rump. 
This  Parliament  broke  up  in  1660. 

2  Since  the  treaty  of  Campo-Formio,  a  congress  had  met  at  Rastadt  (Grand 
Duchy  of  Baden)  to  regulate  the  questions  still  under  discussion  (navigation  of  the 
Rhine,  indemnities  to  dispossessed  princes,  &c).  Reassembled  at  the  beginning  of 
1 798,  it  was  suddenly  interrupted  by  war  at  the  beginning  of  the  following  year. 

O  2 


iq6  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

sufficiently  interesting  to  make  one  wish  it  to  be  inserted  at  the 
end  of  these  Memoirs}  The  evening  of  the  day  on  which  he 
arrived  in  Paris,  he  sent  me  an  aide-de-camp  to  ask  at  what 
hour  he  could  see  me.  I  replied  that  I  awaited  his  leisure  ;  he 
fixed  the  next  day  at  eleven  a.m.  I  informed  Madame  de  Stael 
of  this  ;  she  was  in  my  drawing-room  at  ten  o'clock.  There 
were  also  some  other  persons  whom  curiosity  had  attracted 
thither.  I  remember  that  Bougainville 2  was  there.  The 
general  was  announced,  and  I  went  to  meet  him.  While 
crossing  the  room,  I  introduced  Madame  de  Stael  to  him,  but 
he  bestowed  very  little  attention  upon  her.  Bougainville  was 
the  only  one  whom  he  condescended  to  notice,  and  to  whom 
he  paid  a  few  compliments. 

At  first  sight,  he  seemed  to  me  to  have  a  charming  face  ;  so 
much  do  the  halo  of  victory,  fine  eyes,  a  pale  and  almost  con- 
sumptive look,  become  a  young  hero.  We  entered  my  study. 
Our  first  conversation  was  full  of  confidence  on  his  part.  He 
dwelt  in  kind  terms  on  my  appointment  as  Foreign  Secretary, 
and  insisted  on  the  pleasure  it  afforded  him  to  correspond  with 
a  person  of  a  different  stamp  from  that  of  the  directors.  Almost 
abruptly  he  said  to  me,  "  You  are  the  nephew  of  the  Archbishop 
of  Rheims,  who  is  with  Louis  XVIII."  (I  noticed  that  he  did  not 
then  say  with  the  Comte  de  Lille  3) ;  and  he  added,  "  I  also  have 
an  uncle  who  is  an  archdeacon  in  Corsica,4  it  was  he  who 
brought  me  up.  In  Corsica,  you  know,  an  archdeacon  is  like  a 
bishop  in  France."  We  soon  returned  to  the  drawing-room 
which  had  become  filled  with  visitors,  and  he  said  in  a  loud 
voice  :    "  Citizens,  I  appreciate  the  attentions  paid   to  me  ;  I 

1  This  letter  has  not  been  found  among  the  papers  of  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand. 

'-'  Louis  Antoine  de  Bougainville,  born  in  1729,  was  at  first  secretary  of  embassy, 
and  afterwards  an  officer  of  Dragoons.  He  was  thirty-four  years  old  when  he 
entered  the  navy.  In  1766,  he  undertook  round  the  world  a  voyage  which  lasted 
three  years.  He  left  the  navy  in  1790,  entered  the  Institute  (1796),  was  made  a 
senator  under  the  empire,  and  died  in  1814. 

3  That  was  the  name  adopted  by  Louis  XVIII.  during  the  emigration. 

4  Joseph  Fesch,  born  in  1763,  at  Ajaccio.  He  was,  in  1789,  archdeacon  of  the 
chapter  of  that  town.  Having  protested  againt  the  civil  constitution  of  the  clergy, 
he  retired  from  the  chapter,  put  aside  his  ecclesiastical  functions,  and  became 
commissaire  des  guerres  to  the  army  of  Italy  (1795).  After  the  18th  of  Brumaire, 
Fesch  resumed  his  ecclesiastical  duties,  became  Archbishop  of  Lyons  (1802^  ;  cardinal, 
and  was  sent  as  envoy  extraordinary  to  Rome  (1804).  He  was  recalled  in  1808. 
Peer  of  France  during  the  Hundred  Days,  he  retired  to  Rome  at  the  Restoration 
and  died  in  1809. 


THE  CONVENTION,  THE  DIRECTORY,  THE  CONSULATE.  197 

waged  war  as  well  as  I  could,  and  as  well  as  I  could,  made  peace. 
It  now  rests  with  the  Directory  to  turn  the  latter  to  the  happi- 
ness and  prosperity  of  the  Republic."  We  then  went  together  to 
the  Directory. 

The  hesitations  and  jealousy  of  the  Directory  caused  a 
certain  annoyance  to  Bonaparte  during  the  first  weeks  of  his 
•  stay  in  Paris.  I  gave  a  fete  to  celebrate  his  victories  in  Italy 
and  the  glorious  peace  he  had  signed.  I  spared  no  trouble  to 
make  it  brilliant  and  attractive ;  although  in  this,  I  experienced 
some  difficulty  on  account  of  the  vulgarity  of  the  directors' 
wives,  who  of  course  enjoyed  precedence  over  all  other  ladies. 
My  apartments  had  been  decorated  as  tastefully  as  possible, 
and  everybody  congratulated  me. 

"  All  this  must  have  cost  you  a  lot,  Citizen  Minister?  "  Madame 
Merlin,1  the  wife  of  the  director,  said  to  me. 

"  Not  a  fortune,  Madam"  I  replied,  in  the  same  tone. 

The  next  day  numerous  other  jokes,  most  of  which  were 
quite  authentic,  were  going  their  round  in  Paris. 

The  Directory  were  then  contemplating  an  expedition  to 
Ireland2;  its  command,  at  first  intended  for  Hoche,3  who  died 
in  the  meantime,  was  afterwards  offered  to  General  Bonaparte, 
but  it  did  not  suit  his  views.  This  expedition,  whether  a 
success  or  a  failure,  could  evidently  not  last  long,  so  that  the 
young  general  would,  on  his  return,  have  found  himself  exactly 
in  the  same  situation  as  he  actually  was.  The  army  he  would 
have  led  to  Ireland  he  could  not  have  used  as  a  tool  to  further 
his  own  projects ;  and,  besides,  he  could  have  had  no  hope 
of  establishing  himself  firmly  in  that  country. 

Nor  did  he  think  of  obtaining  supreme  power  in  Egypt,  nor 
indeed  in  any  country  he  might  have  conquered  with  a  French 

1  Merlin  de  Douay  (1754-1838),  former  member  of  the  Constituent  Assembly  and 
of  the  Convention.  In  1795,  he  became  Minister  of  Justice,  then  Minister  of  General 
Police,  and  finally  a  director  after  the  18th  of  Fructidor  ;  he  was  chief  president  of 
the  Court  of  Cassation,  under  the  Empire. 

2  The  Directory  intending  to  attack  England  at  home,  Ireland  seemed  to  offer  a 
propitious  field  of  operations  ;  a  rising  of  her  inhabitants  might  be  expected.  A  first 
attempt  to  land  troops  on  that  island  had  failed  in  January  1797.  A  second  expedi- 
tion started  in  August.  General  Humbert  landed  with  i,ioo  men  in  the  bay  of  Sligo, 
was  victorious  at  Killala  and  at  Castlebar,  but  was  defeated  at  Ballinamuck  and 
obliged  to  surrender. 

3  Hoche  died  suddenly,  September  18,  1797.  He  was  then  commander-in-chief 
of  the  armies  of  "  Sambre-et-Meuse  "  and  of  "  Rhin-et-Moselle." 


198  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

army.  He  did  not  yet  anticipate  that  his  army  would  be 
satisfied  with  achieving  victories  that  would  only  benefit  him,  and 
consent  to  letting  him  take  a  crown,  and  still  less  placing  it  on 
his  head.  The  more  so,  that  the  troops  over  which  he  possessed 
most  command,  and  which,  for  this  very  reason,  he  most  wished 
to  take  with  him,  were  composed  of  the  very  men  with  whom 
he  had  just  been  campaigning  in  Italy,  and  whose  republican 
fanaticism  he  had  himself  aroused  and  carefully  kept  up.  All 
he  expected  from  them  was  that  they  should  enable  him  to 
appear  in  the  eyes  of  the  Christians  of  the  East  and  of  all 
Greeks,  as  a  liberator  ready  to  break  their  fetters  ;  as  for  the 
ultimate  realization  of  his  ambitious  dreams,  he  trusted  to  the 
number,  the  energy  and  gratitude  of  these  same  Greeks,  but 
above  all  to  some  unforeseen  chance.  Such  hopes,  if  they  could 
have  been  suspected,  would  not  have  been  likely  to  promote  the 
success  of  his  negotiation  with  the  Directory.  He  therefore 
affected  to  have  but  one  aim  in  view — to  further  the  interests  of 
France.  He  spoke  of  Egypt  as  of  a  colony  alone  worth  all  the 
colonies  France  had  lost,  and  whence  deadly  blows  could  be 
struck  at  the  English  power  in  India.  He  sometimes,  however, 
allowed  his  impetuous  imagination  and  natural  loquacity  to 
carry  him  beyond  the  limits  of  prudence,  and  talked  of  return- 
ing to  Europe  by  way  of  Constantinople,  which  was  not  exactly 
the  road  to  India  ;  so  that  it  did  not  require  much  penetration 
to  guess  that  if  ever  he  took  Constantinople,  the  result  of  his 
victory  would  not  be  to  consolidate  the  throne  of  the  successor 
of  the  Kalifs  or  to  substitute  a  republic  one  a?td  indivisible  to  the 
Ottoman  Empire. 

Yet  the  Directory  were  so  struck  with  the  importance  of 
getting  rid  of  a  man  who  caused  them  such  umbrage  and  whom 
they  felt  powerless  to  keep  in  check,  that  they  eventually  yielded 
to  Bonaparte,  agreed  that  an  expedition  should  be  sent  to 
Egypt,  appointed  him  to  the  command  of  the  troops  composing 
the  expedition,  and  thus  paved  the  way  for  events  they  were 
most  anxious  to  prevent. 

I  must  state  here  succinctly  what  was  the  situation  of 
Europe  towards  France  at  the  time  of  Bonaparte's  departure. 

The   Empress   Catherine    of  Russia    had    been  the    first   to 


THE  CONVENTION,  THE  DIRECTORY,  THE  CONSULATE.  199 

declare  against  the  French  Revolution,  but  all  her  policy  had 
been  limited  to  making  her  opinions  publicly  known  by  means 
of  despatches  which  her  ministers  were  instructed  to  show  in  the 
different  courts  to  which  they  were  accredited.  I  saw  a  great 
number  of  these  letters  in  the  hands  of  the  Prince  of  Nassau.1 
She  had  carefully  abstained  from  joining  in  a  war,  the  result  of 
which  was  necessarily  to  weaken  her  neighbours  and,  as  a  matter 
of  course,  to  increase  her  relative  power.  Having  no  fear  that 
French  principles  should  contaminate  her  subjects,  but  justly 
afraid  of  the  efforts  made  by  Poland  to  shake  off  her  anarchy, 
she  had  taken  advantage  of  the  moment  when  France,  Prussia, 
and  Austria  were  fighting  together  to  plot  the  dismemberment 
of  that  kingdom,  a  portion  of  which  she  had  already  added  to 
her  dominions,  leaving  the  rest  to  Austria  and  Prussia.2  She 
died  soon  after  (November  17,  1796). 

It  is  impossible  to  tell  what  her  successor,  Paul  I.,  who  had 
inherited  the  disease  of  his  father,  Peter  III.,3  would  have  done, 
but  for  the  invasion  of  Egypt  by  F ranee.  At  any  rate,  this 
invasion  became  for  him  a  decisive  and  peremptory  pretext. 

Since  the  time  of  Peter  I.,  Russia  had  never  ceased  to  con- 
sider European  Turkey  as  a  prey  which  was  eventually  to  fall  to 
her,  which  she  was  to  absorb  gradually,  being  unable  to  do  so  all 
at  once.  This  prey  would  have  slipped  from  her  for  ever  if, 
through  a  revolution,  Greece  had  recovered  her  independence  ; 
and  the  invasion  of  Egypt  not  only  caused  Russia  to  fear  this 
revolution,  but  pointed  out  to  it  as  being  inevitable. 

Paul  I.,  instead  of  the  natural  enemy  of  the  Turks,  at  once 
became  their  ally ;  he  entered  into  a  league  with  England. 
Austria  joined  them  all  the  more  readily  that  she  had  laid  down 
her  arms  against  her  will,  and  that,  since  the  peace  of  Campo- 
Formio,  France  had  caused  her  much  justifiable  alarm. 

1  The  Prince  Otto  von  Nassau- Siegen,  born  in  1745,  accompanied  Bougainville 
on  his  voyage  round  the  world  (1 766-1 769).  On  his  return,  he  took  service  in 
France,  went  afterwards  to  Spain,  where  the  title  of  grandee  and  the  rank  of  general 
were  conferred  on  him.  In  1787,  he  went  to  Russia,  was  appointed  head  of  a  naval 
squadron,  and  entrusted  with  sundry  diplomatic  missions  to  Vienna,  Versailles  and 
Madrid.  Vice-admiral  in  1790,  he  was  defeated  by  King  Gustavus  III.  He  then 
retired  to  private  life,  came  to  Paris  in  1802,  and  died  in  1809. 

2  This  was  the  third  and  final  dismemberment  of  Poland  (February  n,  1795). 

3  Through  debauchery  and  excesses  of  all  kinds,  Peter  III.  had  brought  on  him- 
self epileptic  fits. — {Translator.) 


200  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

Some  dispute  which  had  arisen  between  the  Vaudois  and 
the  senate  of  Bern,  their  sovereign,  afforded  a  pretext  to  the 
Directory  for  sending  troops  to  Switzerland,  to  both  places  at 
once,  and  change  the  confederation  into  a  republic  one  and 
indivisible} 

Under  some  other  pretexts  the  Papal  States  had  been 
invaded  by  French  troops,  the  Pope  Pius  VI.  taken  as  a 
prisoner  to  the  Chartreux  convent  of  Florence,  and  thence  to 
Valence,  in  Dauphiny,  where  he  died  ;  his  government  replaced 
by  what  was  then  called  a  repiiblican  administration.2 

The  King  of  Naples,  justly  afraid,  but  whom  prudence 
should  have  advised  to  keep  quiet  and  bide  his  time,  having 
rashly,  and  against  the  advice  of  the  court  of  Vienna,  begun 
hostilities  with  inexperienced  and  undisciplined  troops,  had 
to  take  refuge  in  Sicily,  abandoning  his  kingdom  of  Naples, 
which  the  French  Directory  soon  transformed  into  a  Partheno- 
pean  republic.3 

The  Directory  could  then,  if  they  had  wished  it,  have  made  of 
Italy  a  bulwark  for  France  by  forming  but  one  single  state  with 
the  former  fine  country.  But,  far  from  doing  so,  they  felt  much 
provoked  on  learning  that  the  fusion  of  the  new  republics  into 
one  was  secretly  prepared  in  Italy,  and  they  opposed  this  fusion 
with  all  their  might.  They  wanted  republics  which  made  them 
odious  to  monarchies,  but  they  wanted  only  small  and  weak 
republics,  in  order  to  occupy  militarily  their  territories  under  the 
guise  of  protecting  them,  but  in  reality  to  rule  them  and  feed 
their  troops  at  their  expense,  which  made  them  odious  to  these 
very  republics. 

All  these  upheavals  taking  place  in  the  immediate  neigh- 

"  1  The  Swiss  cantons  were  not  all  then  independent  as  to-day  The  canton  of 
Vaud,  for  instance,  was  subject  to  the  authority  of  Bern.  It  rose  in  insurrection 
against  the  latter  and  was  crushed.  Many  Vaudois  then  took  refuge  in  France.  They 
all  pretended  that  Switzerland  was  in  the  hands  of  the  Federalist  party,  which  was  itself 
serving  the  ends  of  Austria,  and  solicited  the  intervention  of  the  Directory.  Switzer- 
land was  invaded  (February  1798),  and  the  republic  of  Leman  proclaimed  with  a 
constitution  similar  to  that  of  France. 

-  On  December  27,  1797,  a  riot  had  broken  out  in  Rome,  General  Duphot  had 
been  killed  in  the  course  of  it.  On  February  10  following,  General  Berthier  became 
master  of  the  town.  Five  days  later,  the  Roman  republic  was  proclaimed  by  a 
popular  vote,  at  the  instigation  of  the  Directory. 

3  January  1799.  Ferdinand  IV.,  son  of  Charles  III.,  King  of  Spain,  was  then 
reigning  at  Naples.  He  had  married  Marie -Caroline,  daughter  of  the  Empress 
Maria-Theresa. 


THE  CONVENTION,  THE  DIRECTORY,  THE  CONSULATE.  2or 

hood  of  Austria,  modified  too  much  her  relative  situation  for  her 
to  witness  them  peaceably. 

Her  first  object  in  taking  up  arms  again  was  to  break  off  the 
negotiations  of  Rastadt :  in  this  she  succeeded  ;  but  it  is  unfor- 
tunate for  her  that  to  this  rupture  of  negotiations  should  have 
been  added  the  assassination  of  the  French  plenipotentiaries.1 
After  this  event  it  was  but  natural  to  expect  a  furious  renewal 
of  hostilities. 

The  Directory  were  not  wanting  in  soldiers  to  wage  the  war  ; 
but,  since  the  proscription  of  Carnot  (Fructidor  18),  they  had 
no  one  capable  of  directing  the  military  operations  ;  and  of  all 
their  renowned  generals,  Moreau  2  alone  was  in  France.  But  he 
was  accused,  if  not  of  having  been  implicated  in  the  anti- 
revolutionary  plans  of  his  friend  Pichegru,3  at  least  of  having 
known  them,  and  of  having  only  disclosed  them  when  too  late. 
For  this  reason,  he  was  so  much  in  disfavour  with  the  re- 
publicans, that  the  Directory  would  not  have  dared  to  entrust 
him  with  a  command  however  much  inclined  they  might  have 
felt  to  do  so.     By  authorizing  Moreau  to    enlist  as  a  simple 

1  Roberjot,  Bonnier  and  Debry  :  the  latter  was  the  only  one  to  survive  his 
wounds. 

2  Victor  Moreau,  born  at  Morlaix  in  1763,  was  in  1787,  prevost  of  the  school  of 
law.  He  took  service  as  a  volunteer  in  1792,  became  general  in  the  following  year 
and  commanded  successively  the  army  of  the  Rhine  (1796),  the  army  of  Italy  (1799), 
and  again  the  army  of  the  Rhine  (1800).  He  was  very  hostile  to  the  First  Consul ;  he 
was  implicated  in  the  conspiracy  of  Georges  Cadoudal,*  arrested,  tried  and  sentenced  to 
two  years'  imprisonment.  Bonaparte  commuted  this  sentence  into  banishment.  In 
1 81 3,  Moreau  returned  from  America,  where  he  had  been  residing,  served  in  the 
Russian  army  as  field-marshal,  and  was  mortally  wounded  at  Dresden  August  25. 

3  Charles  Pichegru  (1761-1804)  was  a  non-commissioned  officer  of  artillery  in  1789. 
In  1793)  he  was  appointed  general  commander-in  chief  of  the  army  of  the  Rhine, 
took  the  command  of  the  army  of  the  North  in  1794,  and  conquered  Holland.  He 
allowed  himself  to  give  way  to  the  solicitations  of  the  royalist  party,  and  plotted  with 
the  chiefs  of  Conde's  army.  Having  aroused  the  suspicions  of  the  Directory,  he  lost 
his  command  in  1796.  Having  been  elected,  in  1797,  a  member  of  the  Conseil  des 
Cinq-Cents,  he  became  the  leader  of  the  anti-revolutionary  party,  which,  on  Fructidor 
18,  led  to  his  arrest  and  transportation  to  Guyana.  He  managed^to  escape,  however, 
a  short  time  after,  reached  England,  joined  in  Cadoudal's  conspiracy  in  1803,  was 
arrested  in  Paris  and  strangled  himself  in  his  prison. 

*  Georges  Cadoudal,  one  of  the  most  famous  and  gallant  leaders  of  the  royalist  rising,  known  under 
the  name  of  C/w?ia/!nerie,wa.s  born  at  Kerleano  near  Auray,in  Morbihan  (Brittany).  His  father  was 
a  small  landowner  and  had  him  brought  up  at  the  college  ofVannes.  A  fervent  Catholic  and  loyal 
royalist,  Cadoudal  was  the  first  to  organize  the  insurrection  in  Vendee,  in  1793.  Though  often  crushed 
by  the  Republican  troops,  he  always  managed  to  escape,  soon  to  appear  again  elsewhere  at  the  head 
of  his  followers,  until  at  last  General  Brune  annihilated  them  completely  at  the  battle  of  Grand- 
Champ,  January  26,  1800.  Bonaparte,  admiring  Cadoudal's  indomitable  energy  and  courage,  sent  him 
a  safe-conduct  and  had  him  summoned  to  his  presence,  when  he  endeavoured  to  win  him  over.  But 
Cadoudal  declined  every  offer,  although  he  bound  himself  not  to  take  up  arms  again.  Having  been 
implicated  in  the  plot  of  December  1S00,  when  Bonaparte  miraculously  escaped  the  explosion  of  an 
infernal  machine  in  the  Rue  St.  Nicaise,  Cadoudal  was  arrested  with  many  of  his  accomplices  and 
executed  June  10,  1804.— (Translator.) 


202  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

volunteer  in  the  army  of  Italy,  they  considered  they  had  done 
much. 

The  presence  of  Moreau  at  the  army  of  Italy  did  not 
prevent  it  being  thoroughly  beaten  and  routed  at  the  very 
beginning  of  the  action.  Macdonald,1  who  was  coming  up 
from  the  heart  of  Italy  with  thirty-five  thousand  men,  in  order 
to  reinforce  it,  was  crushed  at  Trebia? 

All  these  sham  republics  raised  by  the  Directory,  vanished 
as  soon  as  reverse  befell  French  arms,  and,  but  for  the 
precaution  previously  taken  by  the  Directory  to  retain  in  trust  all 
the  fortresses  in  Piedmont,  all  the  French  troops  would  have 
had  to  evacuate  Italy.  By  rallying  in  and  around  these  places 
the  scattered  remnants  of  the  armies  of  the  Republic,  Moreau 
succeeded  in  stopping  the  progress  of  the  enemy. 

When  the  Directory  revolutionized  Switzerland,  they  did  not 
suspect  that  they  were  re-opening  an  inlet,  closed  for  centuries, 
by  which  foreigners  were  one  day  to  enter  France,  and  bring 
about  thither  the  great  change  so  much  dreaded  by  the  revolu- 
tionists. The  Directory  must  even  have  experienced  it  themselves, 
but  for  the  blunder  of  the  Archduke  Charles,3  who  evacuated 
Switzerland  in  order  to  besiege  Philipsburg  in  vain,  and  only 
left  behind  him  a  body  of  Russian  troops,  thus  enabling  Massena 
to  win  the  victory  of  Zurich,4  which  was  all  the  more  extolled  in 
Paris,  that  it  was  indispensable  to  the  safety  of  France. 

The  Directory  shared  the  fate  of  all  despots.  So  long  as  their 
armies  were  victorious,  people  hated  their  rule  but  feared  their 
power.  But  as  soon  as  the  hour  of  defeat  came,  that  govern- 
ment met  with  universal  contempt.  The  press  attacked  it, 
lampoon-writers  held  it  up  to  ridicule,  everybody  denounced  it. 

1  Alexandre  Macdonald  (1765-1840),  was  born  of  Irish  parents,  took  service  in 
Dillon's  Irish  troops,  became  general  of  division  in  1795,  governor  of  the  Papal 
States  in  1798.  He  fell  out  of  favour  in  1804,  again  took  service  in  1809,  became 
marshal  of  France  and  Due  de  Tarente  after  the  victory  of  Wagram.  In  1814,  he 
became  a  member  of  the  House  of  Peers,  and  high-chancellor  of  the  Legion  of  Honour 
in  1816. 

2  June  17,  18,  and  19,  1799. 

8  The  Archduke  Charles  was  born  in  1771  ;  he  was  the  son  of  the  Emperor  Leopold. 
He  became  field-marshal  of  the  German  empire  in  1795,  and  Minister  of  War  in  1802. 
Generalissimo  of  the  Austrian  armies  in  1805  and  1809,  the  Archduke  Charles  was  one  of 
the  first  captains  of  his  time,  and  the  most  formidable  of  Napoleon's  adversaries.  He 
died  in  1847. 

4  Massena  was  then  commander-in-chief  of  the  army  of  Helvetia.  The  battle' 
of  Zurich,  where  the  Russian  army  was  destroyed,  was  fought  on  August  26,  1799. 


THE  CONVENTION,  THE  DIRECTORY,  THE  CONSULATE.  203 

Naturally,  the  members  of  the  ministry  were  not  spared  ;  this 
offered  the  opportunity  I  was  looking  for  of  resigning  my  post. 
I  had  then  ascertained  that  what  little  evil  I  could  prevent  was  but 
insignificant,  and  that,  only  later,  could  any  real  good  be  worked. 
The  intention  I  had  had  for  a  long  time  of  resigning 
had  induced  me  to  take  certain  precautions.  I  had  acquainted 
General  Bonaparte  with  my  resolution  before  his  departure  for 
Egypt ;  he  fully  approved  the  reasons  which  had  led  me  to  take  it, 
and  kindly  used  his  influence  with  the  directors  to  solicit  for  me 
the  appointment  of  ambassador  to  Constantinople,  in  the  event 
of  it  being  possible  to  come  to  some  understanding  with  the 
Porte,  or  else  the  authorization  of  joining  him  at  Cairo,  where, 
there  was  reason  to  believe,  negotiations  might  have  to  be  opened 
with  the  agents  of  the  Sultan.1  Having  obtained  that  authoriza- 
tion, I  sent  in  my  resignation,  and  retired  to  the  country,  near 
Paris,  whence  I  watched  the  course  of  events.2 

The  staunch  demagogues,  who  had,  for  some  time  past,  resumed 
an  alarming  attitude,  agitated,  and  threatened  to  bring  about  a 
new  Reign  of  Terror.  But  their  clubs,  which  they  had  re- opened, 
and  which  Fouche 3  closed  as  soon  as  he  deemed  it  advisable, 
were  not  to  cause  the  overthrow  of  the  Directory  :  the  Directory 
fell  by  the  fault  of  its  own  members. 

Sieyes  was  envoy  extraordinary  and  plenipotentiary  minister 
of  the  Republic  in  Berlin,  when  he  was  elected  a  member  of  the 
Directory.  His  return  to  Paris  was  awaited  with  such  impatience 
that  the  time  he  required  to  take  leave  of  the  Prussian  court, 
start  on  the  journey  and  reach  the  capital  seemed  intolerably 
long  to  his  colleagues  of  the  government.  They  credited  him 
with  possessing  infallible  means  to  remedy  the  critical  situation 
of  France  at  home  and  abroad.     He  had  scarcely  alighted  than 

1  This  is  what  Napoleon  said  subsequently,  concerning  his  relations  with  Talley- 
rand, before  his  departure  for  Egypt  :  "  It  had  been  agreed  with  the  Directory  and 
Talleyrand,  that  immediately  after  the  departure  of  the  expedition  sent  to  Egypt, 
negotiations  should  be  opened  with  the  Porte  concerning  the  object  of  this  expedition. 
Talleyrand  was  even  to  be  the  negotiator  and  to  start  Jor  Constantinople  twenty-four 
hours  after  the  expeditionary  corps  to  Egypt  had  left  the  port  of  Toulon.  This  promise, 
expressly  claimed  and  positively  given,  had  been  forgotten,  not  only  did  Talleyrand 
remain  in  Paris,  but  no  negotiation  took  place,"  {Memoir es  de Napoleon  dictes  a  Saint- 
Helene  au  general  Gourgaud,  vol.  i.,  p.  62.) 

2  July  20,  1799. 

3  Fouche  had  been  appointed  minister  of  police,  on  Barras  motion. 


204  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE   TALLEYRAND. 

everybody  begged  of  him  to  divulge  those  means.  The  most 
influential  among  the  members  of  both  assemblies1  assured  him 
that  he  had  but  to  speak,  and  that,  in  all  in  which  they  can  help 
him,  they  will  strongly  assist  him.  Before  proposing  anything, 
Sieyes  desired  to  see  everything  with  his  own  eyes,  to  examine 
and  to  ponder.  The  result  of  his  investigations  was  that  nothing 
useful  could  be  accomplished  with  the  colleagues  he  had.  There 
and  then  three  of  them  were  removed.  Among  their  successors 
two  were  but  regular  ciphers,  the  third  was  devoted  to  him.2  Sieyes 
then  no  longer  complained  of  the  men,  it  was,  he  urged,  abso- 
lutely necessary  to  modify  the  institutions.  Five  rulers  were  too 
many ;  three  would  be  sufficient.  The  name  of  Directory  had 
become  hateful ;  it  must  be  replaced  by  some  other  appellation. 
It  was,  above  all  things,  indispensable  that  the  government 
should  comprise  among  its  members  a  military  man  possessing 
the  confidence  of  the  army,  as  unless  a  government  be  supported 
by  the  army,  it  is  powerless  to  do  any  good. 

Moreau,  having  been  sounded  as  to  whether  he  would  accept 
the  post  of  member  of  the  government,  declined  all  but  military 
functions.  General  Joubert  was  then  thought  of,  and,  in  order  to 
enable  him  to  win  the  desirable  fame  he  did  not  yet  possess,  he 
was  sent  to  Italy  with  a  command.  On  arriving,  he  fought 
imprudently  the  battle  of  Novi,3  and  was  killed  at  the  beginning 
of  the  action,  thus  causing  all  the  hopes  built  on  him  to  vanish. 
The  situation  remained  as  intricate  as  ever,  and  goodness  knows 
how  matters  would  have  ended,  but  for  an  event  which  the 
Directory  least  expected. 

After  the  conquest  of  Egypt,  Bonaparte  had  followed  up  the 
execution  of  his  plans  by  attempting  that  of  Syria.  But  Acre 
stopped  his  progress.  Although  he  had  lost  all  his  siege  guns, 
captured  by  English  cruisers,  on  the  way  from  Egypt  to  Syria,  he 
insisted  on  attacking  the  Turkish  stronghold.     After  furiously 

1  The  Conseils  des  Anciens  (Council  of  the  Elders)  and  the  Conseil  des  Cinq  Cents 
(Council  of  the  Five  Hundred). — {Translator.) 

2  This  change  of  directors  constituted  what  is  known  in  history  as  the  coup  d'itat 
of  Prairial  30  (May  1799),  aimed  by  the  assemblies  against  the  Directory.  Director 
Treilhard  was  removed,  and  Gohier  appointed  in  his  stead.  Lareveillere-Lepeaux 
and  Merlin  were  called  upon  to  resign,  being  replaced  by  Moulins  and  Roger  Ducos. 
The  latter  was  entirely  devoted  to  Sieyes. 

3  August  15,  1799. 


THE  CONVENTION,  THE  DIRECTORY,  THE  CONSULATE.  205 

storming  the  place  three  times,  he  was,  however,  compelled  to 
withdraw  and  bring  his  troops  back  to  Egypt,  where  the  English 
threatened  to  land.  His  magnificent  hopes  were  thus  vanishing  ; 
that  even  of  holding  his  own  in  Egypt  was  becoming  anything 
but  certain.  He  was  haunted  by  the  fearful  apprehension  of  being 
reduced  to  leave  the  country  only  through  a  capitulation,  which 
would  have  left  him  the  reputation  of  being  but  an  adventurer. 
Fortunately,  the  vicissitudes  of  the  French  arms  in  Italy  relieved 
him  from  his  perplexity,  by  giving  him  the  rashness  of  doing  what 
otherwise  he  never  would  have  dared  to  attempt.  Without  any 
authority  to  do  so,  he  handed  his  command  to  Kleber,  left  Egypt, 
escaped  from  English  cruisers,  and  landed  at  Frejus.1 

As  anticipated  by  him,  the  political  parties  of  France  saw  in 
him  not  a  man  who  was  to  account  for  his  conduct,  but  one  whom 
circumstances  rendered  indispensable,  and  whose  favour  it  was 
necessary  to  win. 

At  first,  some  people  thought  that  Barras,  the  author  of 
Bonaparte's  fortune,  who  of  all  former  directors  was  the  only 
one  still  in  office,  was  so  far  mistaken  in  his  judgment  of  the 
young  general  and  had  so  much  overrated  his  own  influence  over 
him,  as  to  flatter  himself  that  he  could  induce  him  to  play  the 
part  of  a  Monk  ;  but  Bonaparte  who,  even  if  he  had  been  able 
to  do  so,  would  have  declined  it,  was  really  not  at  that  time  in 
a  position  to  play  such  a  part. 

He  could  not,  therefore,  hesitate  long,  between  such  a  proposal, 
supposing  it  was  made  to  him,  and  the  offer  not  exactly  of 
supreme  power,  but  of  a  position  that  enabled  him  to  aspire 
to  it. 

A  great  number  of  his  supporters  would  doubtless  have 
preferred  to  see  him  appointed  simply  a  member  of  the  Directory, 
but  matters  had  reached  such  a  point,  that  everybody  was  obliged 
to  be  satisfied  with  whatever  Bonaparte  might  wish,  and  the  very 
nature  of  things  made  him  master  of  the  situation.  As  a  director, 
he  could  not  have  carried  out  his  ambitious  designs. 

It  was  therefore  agreed  that  the  Directory  should  be  replaced 
by  three  provisory  consuls  who,  with  the  assistance  of  two 
committees  from  the  conseils,  would  have  to  draft  a  new  consti- 

1  October  9,  1799. 


206  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

tution  to  be  submitted  to  the  approval  of  the  primary  assemblies, 
for  the  sovereignty  of  the  people  was  a  dogma  which  nobody 
was,  then,  dreaming  of  putting  into  question.1 

This  plan  having  been  arranged,  the  council  of  elders, 
according  to  the  rights  conferred  on  them  by  the  constitution, 
and  under  the  pretext  of  the  excitement  existing  in  Paris, 
transferred  the  seat  of  the  legislature  to  St.  Cloud.  By  so 
doing,  it  was  hoped  to  check  all  obstacles  to  the  measures  that 
had  been  concerted.  The  two  most  influential  members  of  the 
Directory  (Sieyes  and  Barras),  the  majority  of  the  council  of  the 
elders  and  a  portion  of  the  council  of  the  Five  Hundred,  were 
in  favour  of  this  step.  On  Brumaire  18  (November  9,  1799),  the 
Directorial  guards  under  the  command  of  Augereau,  who  had 
been  appointed  to  it  since  Fructidor  18,  a  host  of  general  officers 
and  other  military  men  of  all  ranks,  as  also  a  few  sightseers, 
amongst  whom  I  was,  repaired  to  St.  Cloud,  in  order  to  attend 
the  sitting. 

Notwithstanding  this  display  of   force,  the    council   of  the 

1  A  few  days  before  Brumaire  18,  my  house  was  the  scene  of  an  incident,  the  whole 
interest  of  which  lies  in  the  circumstances  that  attended  it.  General  -Bonaparte,  who 
was  then  residing  in  the  rue  Chantereine,*  called  on  me,  one  evening,  to  talk  about 
the  preliminaries  of  his  intended  coup  d'etat.  I  was  then  living  in  a  house  in  the  rue 
Taitbout,  which,  I  believe,  has  since  been  known  as  number  24.  It  was  situated  at 
the  back  of  a  yard,  and,  the  first  floor  of  it  communicated  with  rooms  overlooking  the 
street.  We  were  engrossed  in  conversation  in  the  drawing-room  which  was  lighted 
by  a  few  candles  ;  when,  at  about  one  o'clock  in  the  morning,  we  heard  a  great  noise 
in  the  street ;  it  sounded  like  the  riding  of  carriages  and  the  stamping  of  horses,  such 
as  might  be  produced  by  an  escort  of  cavalry.  .Suddenly  the  carriages  stopped  in 
front  of  my  house.  General  Bonaparte  turned  pale,  and  I  quite  believe  I  did  the 
same.  We  at  once  thought  that  people  had  come  to  arrest  us  by  order  of  the 
Directory.  I  blew  out  the  candles,  and  went  on  tiptoe,  to  one  of  the  front  rooms 
whence  I  could  see  what  was  going  on  in  the  street.  Some  time  elapsed  before  I  could 
ascertain  the  real  cause  of  all  this  uproar,  which,  however,  turned  out  to  be  simply 
grotesque.  As  in  those  days,  the  streets  of  Paris  were  hardly  safe  at  night,  all  the 
money  of  gambling-houses  was  collected,  at  closing-time,  and  removed  in  cabs,  for 
which,  in  this  case  the  proprietor  bad  obtained  from  the  police  that  an  escort  of 
gendarmes,  which  he  himself  paid,  should,  every  night,  accompany  the  cabs  as  far  as 
his  residence  which  was  in  the  rue  de  Clichy,  or  thereabout.  On  the  night  in  question, 
one  of  these  cabs  had  met  with  an  accident  exactly  in  front  of  my  door,  thus  causing 
the  whole  party  to  stop  on  their  way  for  about  a  quarter  of  an  hour.  We  laughed  a 
good  deal,  the  general  and  I,  at  our  panic,  which  however  was  but  natural  on  the 
part  of  people  acquainted  as  we  were  with  the  disposition  of  the  Directory,  and  the 
violent  measures  they  were  capable  of  resorting  to. — {Prince  Talleyrand.) 

*  In  1680,  it  was  but  a  small  lane  known  under  the  name  of  "  Ruellette  aux  maraisdes  Porcherons" 
(Little  lane  of  the  swineherds' swamp).  In  1734,  it  was  called  "  Ruelle  des  postes,"  changed  after- 
wards to  that  of  "rue  Chantereine."  There,  Bonaparte  possessed  a  residence,  where  he  came  to  live 
on  re-entering  France,  after  the  treaty  of  Campo-Formio.  From  this  circumstance,  that  street  received 
the  name  of  "  rue  de  la  Victoire."  In  1816,  it  resumed  its  former  name  of  rue  Chantereine,  and  in 
1832,  it  reassumed  the  name  of  rue  de  la  Victoire,  which  it  preserves  to  this  day.  It  is  situated  not 
far  from  the  Opera. — (Translator.) 


THE  CONVENTION,  THE  DIRECTORY,  THE  CONSULATE.  207 

Five  Hundred  offered  such  opposition  to  the  proposed  modifica- 
tion of  the  constitution,  as  to  jeopardize  the  execution  of  the  plan 
in  view,  although  its  object  was  merely  to  substitute  one  form  of 
polygarcJiy  for  another  (I  am  always  obliged  to  make  use  of 
this  barbaric  expression,  for  want  of  any  equivalent).  Thus  it 
is  easy  to  imagine  what  would  have  happened  to  him  who  had 
manifested  any  desire  to  play  the  part  of  Monk  ;  he  would  have 
had  against  him  nearly  all  the  men  to  whom  the  success  of  the 
coup  d'etat  of  Brumaire  1 8  was,  more  or  less,  due. 

At  last,  both  persuasion  and  threats  having  been  brought  to 
bear,  the  motion  was  carried.  The  Directory  was  dissolved, 
Sieyes,  Roger  Ducos,1  and  Bonaparte  were  appointed  consuls, 
and  the  committees  who  were  to  draft  the  project  of  constitution 
were  all  that  remained  of  the  Councils.  Ten  or  twelve  days 
later,  I  again  became  Foreign  Secretary. 

The  overthrow  of  the  Directory  could  not  fail  to  please,  or  at 
least,  be  indifferent  to  all  the  foreign  powers  friendly  with  France. 
There  being  no  reason  to  fear  any  modification  in  their  disposi- 
tion, no  special  steps  were  needed  to  inform  them  of  the  change 
of  government.  As  for  hostile  powers,  the  only  hope  of  altering 
their  attitude  towards  France  lay  in  fresh  victories.  Though  no 
negotiations  had  to  be  carried  on  abroad,  yet  at  home  a  most 
important  and  delicate  negotiation  was  being  proceeded  with, 
and  although  I  had  nothing  to  do  with  it  in  an  official  capacity, 
it  could  not  be  either  foreign  or  indifferent  to  me. 

It  became  necessary  either  to  re-establish  monarchy  or  else 
to  have  made  the  18  Brumaire  in  vain,  thus  postponing  to  an  un- 
certain and  perhaps  indefinite  date  the  hope  of  a  restoration  of 
monarchical  institutions.  Re-establishing  monarchy  did  not  mean 
raising  the  throne  again.  Monarchy  has  three  degrees  or  forms  : 
it  is  elective  for  a  time,  elective  for  life,  or  hereditary.  What  is 
called  the  throne  cannot  belong  to  the  first  of  these  three  forms, 
and  does  not  necessarily  belong  to  the  second.    Now,  to  reach  the 

1  The  Comte  Roger  Ducos,  born  in  1754,  had  been  a  member  of  the  National 
Convention,  where  he  voted  for  the  death  of  the  king.  He  was  elected  a  member  of 
the  Council  of  the  Elders,  of  which  he  became  the  president  in  1796.  On  Prairial  30, 
he  was  appointed  one  of  the  Directors.  On  Brumaire  18,  he  gave  active  support  to 
Bonaparte,  became  a  consul  pro  tempore,  and  was  appointed  a  senator  under  the  empire, 
in  1814  ;  he  was  appointed  a  peer  of  France,  during  the  Hundred  Days,  was  exiled  in 
1815,  and  died  at  Ulm  in  1816. 


2o8  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

third,  without  passing  successively  by  the  two  others,  unless 
France  were  in  the  power  of  foreign  forces,  was  a  thing  abso- 
lutely impossible.  It  might,  it  is  true,  not  have  been  so,  if  Louis 
XVI.  had  lived,  but  the  murder  of  that  prince  had  put  an  insur- 
mountable obstacle  in  the  way 

The  passing  from  polygarchy  to  hereditary  monarchy  could  not 
be  immediate,  the  result  being,  as  a  necessary  consequence,  that 
the  re-establishment  of  the  latter  and  the  re-establishment  of  the 
house  of  Bourbon  could  not  be  simultaneous.  Thus  it  was 
indispensable  to  pave  the  way  for  the  restoration  of  monarchical 
institutions  without  having  regard  for  the  special  interests  of 
the  house  of  Bourbon,  which  time  might  bring  back,  if  it  so 
happened  that  he  who  was  to  occupy  the  throne  proved  himself 
unworthy  and  deserved  to  lose  it.  It  was  necessary  to  make  a 
temporary  sovereign  who  might  become  sovereign  for  life,  and 
eventually  hereditary  monarch.  The  question  was  not  whether 
Bonaparte  had  the  qualities  most  desirable  in  a  monarch  ;  he 
had  unquestionably  those  which  were  indispensable  to  again 
accustom  France  to  monarchical  discipline,  as  she  was  still 
infatuated  with  every  revolutionary  doctrine  ;  and  no  one 
possessed  those  qualities  in  the  same  degree  as  he  did. 

The  real  point  was  how  could  Bonaparte  be  made  a  temporary 
sovereign  ?  If  one  proposed  to  appoint  him  sole  consul,  one 
betrayed  views  which  could  not  be  concealed  with  too  much 
care.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  one  gave  him  colleagues  equal  to 
him  in  rank  and  power,  one  remained  in  polygarchy. 

They  remained  in  polygarchy  if  they  established  a  legislative 
body,  either  permanent,  or  which  was  to  sit  at  fixed  dates  without 
previous  summons,  and  to  prorogue  itself.  If  this  body,  though 
divided  into  two  distinct  assemblies,  could  alone  make  the 
laws,  they  remained  in  polygarchy.  In  short,  they  remained  in 
polygarchy  if  the  high  officials,  and  chiefly  the  judges,  were  to 
continue  to  be  named  by  the  electoral  assemblies.  The  problem 
to  be  solved  was,  as  may  be  seen,  very  intricate,  and  bristling 
with  so  many  difficulties  that  it  was  almost  impossible  to  avoid 
arbitrary  measures  ;  and  they  were  not  avoided. 

Three  consuls  were  created,  a  first,  a  second,  and  a  third 
consul,  unequal  in  rank,  and  whose  respective  duties  were  such 


THE  CONVENTION,  THE  DIRECTORY,  THE  CONSULATE.  209 

that,  with  some  interpretations  (that  Bonaparte  knew  better  than 
any  one  how  to  give  when  his  own  power  was  at  stake),  the  First 
Consul  was  almost  alone  invested,  by  that  very  fact,  with  the 
share  of  authority  which,  in  limited  or  constitutional  monarchies, 
is  in  the  hands  of  the  sovereign.  The  only  essential  difference 
was,  that,  instead  of  limiting  his  power  to  the  sanction  of  the 
laws,  he  was  also  entrusted  with  proposing  them,  a  plurality 
of  power  which  proved  fatal  to  himself. 

In  order  to  render  the  power  of  the  First  Consul  still  more 
effective,  I  made,  on  the  very  day  of  his  installation,  a  proposi- 
tion which  he  readily  accepted.  The  three  consuls  were  to  meet 
every  day,  and  the  ministers  were  to  acquaint  them  with  the 
affairs  of  their  respective  departments.  I  pointed  out  to  General 
Bonaparte  the  fact  that  all  matters  connected  with  foreign  affairs, 
being  essentially  secret,  should  not  be  discussed  in  council, 
and  that  it  was  necessary  that  he  should  himself  alone  decide 
all  questions  of  foreign  policy,  which  the  head  of  a  government 
should  have  entirely  in  his  hands  and  manage.  He  fully  grasped 
the  utility  of  that  advice  ;  and  as,  when  organizing  a  new  govern- 
ment, everything  is  easier  to  settle,  it  was  agreed,  from  the  very 
first  day,  that  I  should  work  only  with  the  First  Consul. 

The  first  act  of  General  Bonaparte,  in  quality  of  First  Consul, 
was  to  write  to  the  King  of  England  a  letter  in  which  he  ex- 
pressed the  wish  for  a  prompt  reconciliation  between  the  two 
countries.  He  made  a  similar  advance  to  the  Emperor  of  Austria. 
These  two  attempts  led  to  no  reconciliation,  and  could  not  lead 
to  any,  but  they  had  a  happy  effect  upon  the  internal  peace  of 
the  country,  because  they  announced  dispositions  which  ought 
to  be  agreeable  to  the  people,  in  revealing  as  a  skilful  statesman 
the  great  general  who  had  become  the  head  of  the  government 
This  done,  the  refusal  of  the  two  cabinets  being  well  proved 
by  a  failure  to  reply  to  those  letters,  which  were  not  even  honoured 
with  an  acknowledgment,1  Bonaparte  no  longer  thought  of  any- 
thing but  taking  measures  to  go  to  meet  the  enemy  on  a  field 
of  battle,  where  he  was  to  find  none  but  Austrians. 

Paul  I.,  discontented  with  Austria,  by  whom  he  believed  him- 

1  Lord  Grenville  and  Herr  von  Thugut  both  replied  to  M.  de  Talleyrand  to 
reject  the  propositions  of  the  First  Consul. 

VOL.  I.  P 


210  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

self  to  have  been  betrayed,1  had  recalled  his  troops  from  Germany. 
The  First  Consul,  availing  himself  of  this  circumstance,  collected 
the  few  Russian  prisoners  who  were  in  France,  had  them  newly 
clothed,  and  sent  home  without  ransom.  He  directed  one  of 
the  officers  who  commanded  them  to  offer  to  the  Emperor  Paul 
the  sword  of  La  Valette  found  at  Malta.  It  is  known  that  the 
Emperor  of  Russia  had  taken  the  order  of  Malta  under  his 
special  protection.2  Touched  by  these  delicate  proceedings,  the 
Emperor  Paul,  who  got  easily  prejudiced,  directed  General  von 
Sprengtporten,3  to  make  overtures  of  peace  to  France  ;  these 
overtures  were  followed  up  by  M.  de  Kalitcheff,  and  led  to  a 
definite  treaty,  which  I  negotiated  and  signed  with  M.  de  Markoff.4 

1  Souwaroff  had  just  conquered  Piedmont,  and,  by  the  orders  of  his  master,  had 
written  to  the  King  of  Sardinia  to  invite  him  to  return  to  his  possessions.  Austria,  which 
coveted  Northern  Italy,  was  stirred  by  that  measure,  and  the  Aulic  Council,  which 
had  the  direction  of  the  military  operations,  rid  themselves  of  this  troublesome  ally  by 
sending  him  to  Switzerland.  The  Russian  army  suffered  cruelly  in  crossing  the  Alps, 
and  was  destroyed  at  Zurich.  The  Emperor  Paul  and  Souwaroff  were  much  irritated 
against  the  Austrians,  whom  they  accused  of  being  the  cause  of  this  disaster,  and  the 
Russian  troops  were  recalled. 

2  The  intervention  of  the  Czar  Paul  in  the  affairs  of  the  order  of  Malta  is  one  of 
the  singularities  of  the  history  of  that  time.     The  relations  between  the  two  powers 
date  from  1795.     The  order  possessed  great  wealth  in  Poland.     This  wealth  being 
included  in  the  territories  fallen  to  Russia  after  the  division  of  1795,  the  Grand- Master, 
Prince  de  Rohan,  endeavoured  to   negotiate  an   arrangement  with  Catherine.     The 
Emperor  Paul,  having  in  the  meantime  ascended  the  throne,  took  the  affair  to  heart, 
entered  into  relations  with  Malta,   and  was  inflamed  with  a  lively  admiration  for  the 
old  and  glorious  traditions  of  the  Knights  of  St.  John.     On  January  4,  1797,  there 
was  signed  an  instrument  by  the  terms    of  which  the  possessions  of  the  order  in 
Poland  were  transferred  to  the  grand  priory  of  Russia.     Seventy-two  commanderies 
were  created  in  one  year.     The  Czar  and  his  son  became  Knights  of  Malta.     After 
the  taking  of  the  island  by  the  French,  the  Czar,  on  the  request  of  the  grand  priory 
declared  himself  protector  of  the   order  (September   1798),   and  two  months  after, 
the  place  of  Grand  Master  having  become  vacant,  a  fraction  of  the  order  had  the 
idea  of  offering  it  to  the  Czar.     Paul  solemnly  accepted  this  new  dignity.   Bonaparte 
profited  skilfully  by  these  circumstances  to  conciliate  Russia,  and  to  detach  it  from 
Germany.     It  was  then  that  he  sent  to  the  Czar  the  sword  of  La  Valette,  the  Grand 
Master,    found  at   Malta  ;    or,    according   to   another  authority,    the   sword    of  the 
Grand  Master  Villiers  de  i'lle-Adam,  that  Leo  X.had  given  to  that  illustrious  warrior 
as  a  remembrance   of  his  fine  defence  of  Rhodes.     When  Malta  was  taken  by  the 
English,  Paul  claimed  it  in  quality  of  Grand  Master  (September  1800).     But  the  Eng- 
lish refused  formally  to  cede  this  important  post,  and  a  rupture  ensued.     The  death 
of  Paul  (March  1801)  terminated  this  curious  episode.     His  successor,  Alexander,  did 
not  claim  the  island,  and  the  matter  ended  there.     (Consult  the  Memoirs  of  Abbe 
Georgel. ) 

3  Baron  Joram  von  Sprengtporten,  a  Swedish  general,  and  one  of  the  authors  of 
the  Revolution  of  1772,  passed  afterwards  into  the  service  of  Russia.  He  became 
governor  of  Finland,  after  the  conquest  of  that  country  by  Russia,  and  died  in  oblivion. 

4  October  8,  1801.  Arcadi  Ivanovitch,  Count  Markoff,  was,  under  the  reign  of 
Catherine,  first  counsellor  of  foreign  affairs.  Having  fallen  into  disgrace  under  Paul 
I.,  he  was  recalled  by  Alexander,  and  appointed  ambassador  at  Paris  in  1801.  He 
incurred  the  enmity  of  Bonaparte,  who  demanded  and  obtained  his  removal.     On 


THE  CONVENTION,  THE  DIRECTORY,  THE  CONSULATE.  211 

M.  de  Markoff  had  made  his  first  appearance  in  public  life 
under  the  reign  of  the  Empress  Catherine,  and  had  been  sent 
later  to  Paris,  as  one  of  the  most  skilful  business  men  of  Russia. 
He  appeared  to  me  a  bad-tempered  man,  without  instruction,  but 
witty.  His  temper  bore  then  upon  his  own  government,  which 
is  very  convenient  for  the  minister  of  foreign  affairs  of  another 
country.  While  the  Emperor  Paul  lived,  business  relations  were 
easy  and  agreeable,  but,  at  the  accession  of  the  Emperor 
Alexander,  M.  de  Markoff  became  arrogant  and  insupportable. 
It  was  with  him  that  I  treated  the  important  matter  of  the 
secularizations  in  Germany.1 

Carnot,  member  of  the  Directory,  having  escaped  from 
Cayenne,  where  he  had  been  so  cruelly  exiled,  with  so  many 
others,  on  Fructidor  18,  had  for  some  time  been  holding 
the  post  of  minister  of  war.  His  first  care,  on  taking 
office,  was  to  assemble  two  armies,  one  on  the  Rhine,  the 
other  at  the  foot  of  the  Alps.  General  Moreau  had  the 
command  of  the  first  ;  Bonaparte  with  the  second  rushes 
upon  Italy  by  a  new  route,  and,  without  losing  a  cannon, 
crosses  Great  St.  Bernard,  May  20,  1800.  He  falls,  without 
warning,  upon  the  Austrians,  and,  after  several  fortunate  encoun- 
ters, he  gives  battle,  June  14,  at  Marengo  ;  after  a  hard  contest 
Fortune,   aided  by  General  Desaix,2  and   General    Kellerman,3 

his  return  to  Russia,  Markoff  was  often  entrusted  with  important  diplomatic  missions. 
He  died  at  a  very  advanced  age. 

1  It  would  need  a  volume,  and  perhaps  I  shall  make  it,  to  give  a  full  account  ot 
this  important  question.  The  Marquis  de  Lucchesini  (*)  has  tried  it,  but  in  his  work  he 
has  only  occupied  himself  with  personal  justifications — a  strange  way  of  writing  the 
history  of  one's  times,  for  it  rarely  modifies  the  opinions  of  one's  contemporaries.  When 
one  is  called  to  settle  political  questions  of  great  importance,  one  must  leave  to 
those  whose  private  interests  have  been  sacrificed  to  the  general  interest  the  consola- 
tion of  blaming  the  negotiators  and  of  calumniating  them  without  scruple.  Up  to  this 
time,  that  which  appears  to  be  most  exact  on  that  period  is  the  work  of  Baron  von 
Gagern  (t),  a  man  of  sense,  attached  to  the  house  of  Nassau. — {Talleyrand.) 

*  The  Marquis  Jerome  de  Lucchesini  (1752-1825),  a  Prussian  diplomatist,  was  ambassador  at 
Paris  in  1S02.  The  work  mentioned  above  :  Sidle  cause  e  gli  effecti  della.  confederazione  rhenana  (J) 
was  published  anonymously  in  Italian  (Florence,   1829). 

t  The  Baron  Juhan  von  Gagern  (1766-1852)  was  minister  of  the  Prince  of  Nassau  at  Paris,  under 
the  Consulate.     He  has  left  numerous  works  on  history  and  political  economy. 

\  Causes  and  Consequences  of  the  Confederation  of  the  Rhine. 

2  Louis- Antoine  Desaix,  issue  of  a  noble  family  originally  of  Ayat,  near  Riom,  and 
known  before  the  Revolution  under  the  name  of  Des  Aix  de  Veygous.  Born  in  1768, 
Desaix  was  in  1789,  sub-lieutenant  in  the  Brittany  regiment.  He  became  Commissary 
of  War  in  1791,  and  general  of  division  in  1794.  He  was  intimately  associated  with 
Bonaparte,  followed  him  into  Egypt,  returned  to  Europe  after  the  treaty  of  El  Arisch, 
and  was  killed  at  Marengo,  June  14,  1800. 

a  Francois-Etienne   Kellermann   (1770- 1835)   was  the   son   of  the   old   Marshal 

P    2 


212  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

declares  for  him  when  even  he  himself  no  longer  hoped  for  it. 
The  armistice  which  followed,  made  him  again  master  of 
Italy.  Warned  by  the  fears  that  he  had  had  of  a  defeat,  he 
knew  now  better  how  to  profit  by  his  victory  without  abusing  it. 
He  felt  the  need  of  strengthening  his  power  before  increasing 
it,  and  knowing  well  that  military  glory  would  be  his  principal 
title  to  power,  he  feared  those  victories  for  which  France  would 
not  be  indebted  to  him.  almost  as  much  as  the  reverses  he 
endured  himself.  So  he  hastened  to  set  up,  by  his  armistice,  the 
basis  of  a  new  peace,  in  which  the  empire  of  Germany  should  be 
comprised,  which  rendered  almost  useless  the  victory  of  Hohen- 
linden,1  which  had  opened  the  road  to  Vienna  to  General  Moreau. 
The  treaty  between  France  and  Austria  stipulating  for  herself 
and  for  the  empire,  was  to  be  negotiated  at  Luneville,  and 
Count  Louis  von  Cobenzl 2  had  been  designated  as  plenipoten- 
tiary by  the  emperor,  who  had  authorized  him  to  go  to  Paris 
before  the  opening  of  the  negotiations.  The  court  of  Vienna 
had  chosen  him  because  he  had  treated  at  Campo-Formio  with 
Bonaparte,  who  was  then  only  General  of  the  Army  of  Italy, 
and  because  intimate  relations  had  then  sprung  up  between  them 
which  Count  von  Cobenzl  believed  it  would  be  easy  to  renew, 
but  which  the  First  Consul  soon  caused  him  to  forget.  There 
happened  on  this  occasion  a  rather  curious  scene. 

Bonaparte  gave  Cobenzl  a  first  audience  at  nine  o'clock  in  the 
evening,  at  the  Tuileries.  He  had  attended  personally  to  the 
arrangement  of  the  room  in  which  he  wished  to  receive  the 
Austrian  plenipotentiary  ;  it  was  in  the  parlour  which  precedes 
the  king's  study.  He  had  caused  to  be  put  in  the  corner  a 
small,  table  in  front  of  which  he  was  seated  ;  all  other  seats  had 
been  removed,  there  only  remained  sofas,  which,  however,  were 
rather  far  from  the  table.     On  this  were  papers  and  an  inkstand 

Kellerman,  Due  de  Valmy.  He  was  general  of  brigade  at  Marengo,  where  he  decided 
the  viciory  at  the  head  of  his  cavalry.  He  became  peer  of  France  during  the  Hundred 
Days,*  was  excluded  from  the  Upper  House  by  Louis  XVIII.,  and  did  not  re-enter  it 
until  1830. 

1  A  village  of  Bavaria  thirty  kilometres  east  of  Munich.     The  victory  of  Moreau 
over  the  Archduke  Johan  was  obtained  December  3,  1800. 

2  Louis,  Count  von  Cobenzl  (1 758- 1808),  ambassador  from  Austria  at  Copenhagen, 

at  Berlin  and  at  St.  Petersburg,  plenipotentiary  at  Campo-Formio,  at  Rastadt  and  at 

Luneville.     Chancellor  of  State  and  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  in  1S02. 

*  The  period  extending  from  March  20,  18:5  (return  from  Elba),  to  June  28,  1815  (abdication  of 
Napoleon  at  Fontainebleau). — {Translator.) 


THE  CONVENTION,  THE  DIRECTORY,  THE  CONSULATE.  213 

with  writing  materials  ;  there  was  but  one  lamp  ;  the  chandelier 
was  not  lighted.  Count  von  Cobenzl  entered  :  I  led  the  way. 
The  gloom  of  the  room,  the  distance  which  separated  the  visitor 
from  the  table  at  which  Bonaparte  was  sitting  and  whom  the 
former  barely  perceived  ;  the  kind  of  embarrassment  resulting  from 
these  circumstances  ;  the  attitude  of  Bonaparte,  who  rose  and 
seated  himself  again  ;  the  impossibility  in  which  the  Count  was 
not  to  remain  standing,  set  each  at  once  in  the  right  place,  or, 
at  least,  in  the  place  the  First  Consul  intended  each  to  occupy. 

After  the  conferences  held  at  Luneville  between  Joseph 
Bonaparte  and  Count  von  Cobenzl,  they  soon  signed  the  treaty,1 
and  general  peace  was  thus  very  nearly  restored  on  the 
Continent. 

A  short  time  before,  a  convention  made  with  the  United 
States,  signed  at  Mortefontaine  also  by  Joseph  Bonaparte,  had 
terminated  all  the  differences  which  existed  between  the  French 
Republic  and  that  power.2 

England,  without  allies  abroad,  and  experiencing  some  em- 
barrassment within,  felt  herself  the  need  of  peace.  The  pre- 
liminaries, after  some  debates  rather  curious  for  all  the  wit 
displayed  for  and  against  a  maritime  armistice,  were  concluded 
at  London  between  Mr.  Addington  3  and  M.  Otto.4  It  was  at 
Amiens,  that  Lord  Cornwallis 5  and  Joseph  Bonaparte  signed 
the   definitive   treaty.     France,  who   had   lost  all  her  colonies, 

1  February  9,  1801. 

2  American  commerce  had  greatly  suffered  from  the  measures  taken  by  the  Conven- 
tion against  neutrals.  The  United  States  having  signed  a  treaty  with  England  which 
gave  to  that  power  the  right  of  confiscating  all  ships  carrying  enemies'  goods  (Novem- 
ber 1794),  the  Convention  retaliated  by  an  identical  measure,  and  broke  off  all 
relations  with  the  American  Cabinet.  On  its  side,  Congress  annulled  all  past  treaties 
with  France.  They  were  advancing  towards  an  open  rupture  when  Bonaparte,  coming 
into  power,  abolished  the  decrees  of  the  Convention.  A  treaty  signed  on  September 
30,  1800,  smoothed  all  difficulties,  and  the  relations  between  the  two  countries 
resumed  their  normal  course. 

3  Henry  Addington,  Viscount  Sidmouth,  born  in  1755-  Member  of  the  House  of 
Commons  in  1782.  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer  in  1801,  he  contributed  actively  to 
the  Peace  of  Amiens.  He  retired  in  1804,  but  re-entered  office  again  for  a  short 
time  in  1806.  In  18 12,  he  was  appointed  Home  Minister,  a  post  which  he  occupied 
until  1822.      He  died  in  1844. 

4  Guillaume  Otto,  Comte  de  Mosloy  (1754-1817),  was  minister  at  London  in  1800. 
He  became  minister  at  Munich,  Councillor  of  State,  ambassador  at  Vienna  (1809), 
Minister  of  State  in  1813. 

5  Charles  Cornwallis,  statesman  and  English  general,  born  in  1738,  Member  of 
the  Chamber  of  Lords,  1762,  Governor  of  India,  1786,  Governor  of  Ireland,  1793. 
In  1801  he  was  one  of  the  plenipotentiaries  at  Amiens.  Again  Governor  of  India  in 
1S05,  he  died  on  reaching  his  post. 


214  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

recovered  them  all,  without  having  to  restore  anything.  Per- 
haps her  dignity  may  have  suffered  from  her  having  left  all 
the  burden  of  the  compensations  to  the  charge  of  Spain  and 
Holland,  her  allies,  who  had  been  engaged  in  the  war  only  for 
her  sake  and  by  her  advice.1  But  that  is  a  consideration  made 
by  few  people,  and  which  never  presents  itself  to  the  minds 
of  the  multitude,  accustomed  to  take  the  success  of  bad  faith 
for  cleverness. 

I  must  not  omit  to  state  that  one  of  the  articles  of  the  treaty 
of  Amiens  stipulated  the  abandonment  of  Malta  by  the  English. 
Bonaparte,  who,  by  gaining  possession  of  this  island,  had  changed 
the  fate  of  the  Mediterranean,  put  great  stress  upon  having  it 
restored  to  its  old  masters,  and  could  not  bear  to  hear  me  say 
that  I  would  willingly  have  left  Malta  to  the  English,  provided 
the  treaty  had  been  signed  by  Mr.  Pitt  or  by  Mr.  Fox,  instead 
of  by  Mr.  Addington. 

Previous  to  those  treaties,  a  kind  of  compact  or  agreement 
had  put  an  end  to  the  civil  war  which  had  broken  out  anew  in 
Vendee  and  the  provinces  of  the  west. 

At  the  time  of  the  battle  of  Marengo,  a  secret  bond  was 
formed  between  Bonaparte  and  the  Papal  Court.3  The  victorious 
general  had  held,  at  Milan,  several  conferences  with  an  envoy 
from  Pius  VII.,  elected  at  Venice  as  successor  to  Pius  VI.  :  these 
conferences  eventually  led  to  the  Concordat*  subsequently 
signed  at  Paris  by  Cardinal  Consalvi.  This  compact  and  its 
immediate  ratification  reconciled  France  with  the  Holy  See, 
without  any  other  opposition  than  that  of  a  few  military  men, 
very  brave,  be  it  said,  but  whose  minds  were  not  lofty  enough 
for  a  conception  of  that  kind. 

It  was  after  this  reconciliation  with  the  Church,  to  which  I 
powerfully  contributed,  that  Bonaparte  obtained  from  the  Pope 

1  Spain  lost  the  island  of  Trinity,  and  Holland,  Ceylon. 

2  A  suspension  of  arms  had  been  signed  in  December  1799.  On  January  18, 
1S00,  M.  d'Autichamp  surrendered  in  the  name  of  the  provinces  of  the  left  bank  of 
the  Loire.  On  the  20th,  M.  de  Chatillon  did  the  same  in  the  name  of  the  right 
Wank.  In  Brittany,  M.  de  Bourmont  gave  himself  up  on  January  24,  and  Georges 
Cadoudal  on  the  27th,  so  that  the  whole  country  was  soon  pacified. 

3  As  early  as  June  1800,  Bonaparte  had  opened  negotiations  with  the  court  of 
Rome,  through  the  medium  of  Cardinal  Martiniane,  Bishop  of  Verceil. 

4  The  Concordat  was  signed  on  July  15,  1801.  Cardinal  Consalvi  was  the  Secretary 
if  State  to  the  Court  of  Rome. 


THE  CONVENTION,  THE  DIRECTORY,  THE  CONSULATE.  215 

a  brief  for  my  secularization.  The  brief  is  dated  from  Saint 
Peter's  of  Rome,  June  29,  1802.1 

It  seems  to  me  that  nothing  expresses  better  the  indulgence 
of  Pius  VII.  towards  myself,  than  what  he  said  one  day  to 
Cardinal  Consalvi,  in  speaking  of  me  :  "  M.  de  Talleyrand  !  ah  ! 
ah !  may  God  have  his  soul ;  as  for  me,  I  am  very  fond  of  him  !  " 

Switzerland,  whom  the  Directory,  at  the  instigation  of 
MM.  La  Harpe2  and  Ochs3  wished  to  transform  into  a  republic 
one  and  indivisible,  had  become  again,  as  she  desired,  a  con- 
federation with  the  ancient  leagues  ;  and  this,  by  virtue  of  an 
act  called  the  act  of  mediation,  because  France  had  served  as 
mediator  between  all  the  old  and  new  cantons.4 


1  ACTE   DU  GOUVERNEMENT. 

ARR£TE     DU     2     FRUCTIDOR,    AN     X. 

Les  Consuls  de  la  republique  ;  vu  le  bref  du  Pape  Pie  VII.  donne  a.  Saint-Pierre 
de  Rome  le  29  Juin,  1802  ; 

Sur  le  rapport  du  Conseiller  d'Etat  charge  de  toutes  les  affaires  concernant  les 
cultes  ; 

Le  Conseil  d'Etat  entendu  ; 

Arretent :  Le  bref  du  Pape  Pie  VII.  donne  a  Saint-Pierre  de  Rome,  le  29  Juin 
1S02,  par  lequel  le  citoyen  Charles-Maurice  de  Talleyrand,  ministre  des  relations 
exterieures  de  France,  est  rendu  a  la  vie  seculiere  et  la'ique,  aura  son  plein  et  entier 
effet. 

Le  premier  consul  :  BONAPARTE. 
Le  secretaire  d'Etat :  H.  B.  MARET.* 

2  Frederic-Cesar  de  la  Harpe  (1754-1838),  born  in  the  Canton  of  Vaud,  had  taken 
an  active  part  in  the  troubles  which  broke  out  in  that  country.  Proscribed  after  the 
victory  of  the  Canton  of  Bern,  and  obliged  to  take  refuge  in  France,  he  brought 
about  the  intervention  of  the  Directory  ;  he  was  named  director  at  the  time  of  the 
proclamation  of  the  Helvetian  Republic  (1798). 

3  Pierre  Ochs  (1749- 1824)  was  also  a  Swiss  refugee  compromised  after  the  rising 
of  the  Canton  of  Vaud.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Helvetian  senate  and  director  in 
1798. 

4  The  intervention  of  the  Directory  in  Switzerland  had  only  increased  the  disorder  ; 
so,  when  in  1802,  Bonaparte  proposed  his  mediation,  it  was  immediately  accepted. 
All  the  cantons  sent  deputies  to  Paris  who  entered  into  conference  with  MM. 
Barthelemy,  Fouche,  and  Roederer.  The  Act  of  Mediation  was  signed  February  19, 
1803.  It  fixed  for  each  canton  a  special  constitution,  and  organized  a  federal  power. 
On  October  19,  following,  a  treaty  of  alliance  was  made  between  France  and 
Switzerland. 

*  ACT    OF    THE    GOVERNMENT. 

ORDER     OF     FRUCTIDOR     2,     YEAR     X. 

The  Consuls  of  the  Republic  ;  according  to  the  brief  of  Pope  Pius  VII.  given  at  Saint-Peter  of 
Rome,  on  June  29,  1802  ; 

In  accordance  with  the  report  of  the  Councillor  of  State  entrusted  with  all  matters  relative  to  public 
worship  ; 

After  taking  the  advice  of  the  Council  of  State  ; 

Order  :  The  brief  of  Pope  Pius  VII.,  given  at  Saint-Peter  of  Rome  on  June  29,  1802,  according  to 
which  citizen  Charles  Maurice  de  Talleyrand,  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  of  France,  is  authorized  to 
resume  secular  and  lay  life,  shall  take  full  and  entire  effect. 

The  First  Consul:    BONAPARTE. 
The  Secretary  of  State  :  H.  B.  MARET. 


216  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

Spain,  in  accordance  with  the  clauses  of  the  treaty  of  Basel, 
had  restored  Louisiana  to  France  who,  in  consideration  of  the 
payment  of  a  certain  sum,  ceded  it  to  the  United  States 
(April  30,  1803).  The  latter  kept  a  portion  of  the  price  as 
indemnity  for  the  losses  sustained  by  American  citizens  in  con- 
sequence of  the  absurd  decrees  of  the  Convention. 

The  Ottoman  Porte,  Portugal,  the  Two  Sicilies,  had  re- 
newed their  old  ties  of  friendship  and  of  commerce  with 
France.1 

The  distribution  of  the  secularized  territories  in  Germany 
was  being  made  under  the  double  mediation  of  France  and  of 
Russia.2 

It  can  be  said  without  the  least  exaggeration,  that  at  the  time 
of  the  Peace  of  Amiens,  France  was  without  in  possession  of  a 
power,  a  glory,  an  influence,  than  which  the  minds  of  the  most 
ambitious  could  have  desired  no  greater  for  their  country  ;  and 
what  rendered  this  situation  more  marvellous  still  was  the 
rapidity  with  which  it  had  been  created.  In  less  than  two 
years  and  a  half,  that  is  to  say  from  the  iSth  Brumaire  (Novem- 
ber 9,  1799),  to  March  25,  1802,  date  of  the  Peace  of  Amiens, 
France  had  passed  from  the  humiliating  depths  into  which  the 
Directory  had  plunged  it,  to  the  first  rank  of  Europe. 

But  while  occupying  himself  with  foreign  affairs,  Bonaparte 
had  not  neglected  those  at  home.  His  incredible  activity  sufficed 
for  all.     He  had  given  new  regulations  for  the  administration, 

1  Treaty  with  Turkey,  June  25,  1802.  With  Portugal,  September  20,  1801. 
With  the  Two  Sicilies,  March  28,  1801.  These  last  two  powers  promised  to  close 
their  ports  to  the  English. 

2  Before  the  wars  of  the  Revolution,  the  left  bank  of  the  Rhine  was  covered  with 
secular  and  ecclesiastic  principalities.  The  treaties  of  Campo-Formio  and  Luneville 
in  ceding  to  France  all  those  territories  had  stipulated  that  the  lay  princes  should  be 
indemnified  with  the  wealth  of  the  secular  clergy.  It  remained  now  to  apply  the 
principle.  The  emperor,  who  would  have  had  to  take  this  affair  in  hand,  allowed 
himself  to  be  forestalled  by  the  First  Consul,  who,  being  solicited  by  several  of  the 
interested  princes,  was  careful  not  to  fail  to  profit  by  the  occasion.  He  assured  him- 
self of  the  concurrence  of  Prussia,  by  promising  that  country  considerable  advantages 
(secret  treaty,  May  23,  1802).  The  Emperor  Alexander,  whom  family  alliances  had 
united  to  the  Houses  of  Bavaria,  Baden,  and  Wurtemberg,  entered  into  his  views,  and 
declared  himself  the  protector  of  the  dispossessed  princes  (Convention  of  October  11, 
1802).  Immediately  secret  treaties  were  negotiated  between  France  on  the  one  side, 
and  Wurtemberg,  Baden,  Bavaria,  Hesse-Cassel  on  the  other,  which  assured  their 
share  to  each  of  these  States.  Those  treaties  were  submitted  to  the  Diet,  which 
adopted  the  whole  of  the  plan  of  indemnities  (decision  of  February  25,  1803)  and 
the  emperor,  after  much  hesitation,  ratified  that  decision  on  the  27th  of  the  following 
April.     (See  Lefebvre,  History  of  the  Cabinets  of  Europe,  vol.  L  ch.  vi.) 


THE  CONVENTION,  THE  DIRECTORY,  THE  CONSULATE.  217 

which  he  had  made  as  much  as  possible  monarchical.  He  had 
skilfully  re-established  order  in  the  finances.  The  ministers  of 
religion  were  honoured.  Not  satisfied  with  crushing  the  various 
political  parties,  he  had  sought  to  attach  them  to  himself,  and  he 
had  succeeded  to  a  certain  extent.  To  have  been  an  emigre,  or 
a  Jacobin,  was  no  longer  considered  a  reason  for  exclusion.  In 
order  to  further  isolate  Louis  XVIII.  and  to  take  away  from  him 
the  kingly  air  that  a  large  emigration  had  given  him,  Napoleon 
permitted  many  e'migres  to  re-enter  France.  He  bestowed 
appointments  on  many  of  them,  and  attached  some  to  his  own 
person.  The  Jacobins  forgot  their  aversion  for  personal  rule,  and 
the  emigres  were  led  to  regret  less  that  authority  had  passed  into 
other  hands.1 

In  spite  of  the  prolonged  troubles  of  the  Revolution,  indus- 
trial arts  had  reached  a  very  prosperous  state  in  France.  Much 
capital  had  been  attracted  by  them.  To  attain  high  internal 
prosperity,  all  that  was  now  necessary  was  security,  and  the 
general  opinion  of  France  was  that  Bonaparte  had  given  it. 

Thus  those  who  had  helped  in  raising  him  to  power,  had 
reason  to  congratulate  themselves.  He  had  used  his  authority  in 
a  manner  to  render  it  useful,  even  to  make  himself  loved.  One 
could  believe  that  he  had  put  an  end  to  the  Revolution.  In 
restoring  power,  he  had  become  the  auxiliary  of  all  the  thrones. 
The  salutary  influence  it  had  acquired,  gave  the  Consulate,  in 
the  eyes  of  Europe,  the  stability  of  an  old  government.  Con- 
spiracies, from  one  of  which  Bonaparte  had  miraculously  escaped, 
had  strengthened  the  sentiment  felt  towards  him  by  the  friends 
of  order.  Thus,  when  his  two  colleagues  proposed  the  primary 
assemblies  of  France  to  name  him  First  Consul  for  life,  this 
proposition  received  an  almost  unanimous  vote.2 

The  deputies  of  the  Cisalpine  Republic  repaired  to  Lyons,  in 

1  I  remember,  that  one' day,  as  I  seemed  astonished  at  seeing  some  of  the  most 
shameless  Jacobins  of  the  Revolution  leave  the  study  of  the  First  Consul,  he  said 
to  me  :  "  You  do  not  know  the  Jacobins.  There  are  two  classes  of  them  :  the  sweet 
and  the  salt*  The  one  you  just  saw  come  out  was  a  salt  Jacobin  ;  with  these,  I  do 
what  I  wish  :  no  one  better  fit  to  defend  all  the  daring  acts  of  a  new  power.  Some- 
times it  is  necessary  to  stop  them,  but  with  a  little  money  it  is  soon  done.  But  the 
sweet  Jacobins  !  ah  !  they  are  ungovernable.  With  their  metaphysics  they  would 
ruin  any  government." — {Talleyrand.) 

2  August  2,  1802. 

*  Lcs  Sucre's  et  lcs  sales,  that  is,  the  mild  and  the  violent. 


2i8  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

order  to  obtain  from  the  First  Consul  a  definitive  organization 
for  their  country.1  Although  the  business  which  was  to  be 
negotiated  at  Lyons  was  foreign  to  my  duties,  Bonaparte  made 
use  of  me  considerably  to  conduct  it.  I  was  obliged  to  proceed 
to  that  city  in  order  to  see  the  members  of  the  deputation.  In 
such  delicate  matters  he  did  not  much  rely  on  what  was  done  or 
said  by  M.  Chaptal,2  his  Minister  of  the  Interior,  whom  he  deemed 
heavy,  vain,  without  tact,  and  whom  he  abstained  from  dismissing 
in  order  not  to  grieve  Cambaceres 3  who  protected  him.  On 
arriving  at  Lyons,  I  saw  M.  de  Melzi,4  with  whom  I  had  been 
acquainted  a  long  time,  and  I  unbosomed  myself  to  him,  not  as  to 
what  the  First  Consul  desired,  but  as  to  what  should  be  the  de- 
mands of  the  Cisalpine  Republic.  In  a  few  days,  I  achieved  my  pur- 
pose. At  the  moment  Bonaparte  entered  Lyons  all  was  prepared. 
From  the  second  day,  the  principal  Milanese  pressed  him  to 
accept  the  presidency  for  life,  and  from  gratitude,  he  consented 
to  substitute  for  the  name  of  Cisalpine  Republic that  of  Kingdom 
of  Italy?  and  to  name  vice-president  M.  de  Melzi,  who,  having 

1  The  Cisalpine  Republic,  proclaimed  in  1791,  destroyed  in  1799,  re-established 
after  Marengo,  had  not  seen  its  government  reorganized  in  1800.  Bonaparte,  in 
conjunction  with  the  leading  men  of  the  country,  gave  it  a  definite  organization. 
There  were  three  electoral  colleges,  named  for  life  :  that  of  the  great  landlords,  that 
of  the  merchants,  that  of  the  men  of  letters  and  ecclesiastics — in  all,  700  electors.  These 
elected  a  Commission  de  Censure,  charged  to  name  to  all  the  bodies  of  the  State, 
namely,  a  Senate  of  eight  members,  a  Council  of  State,  and  a  Legislative  Body,  which 
had  the  same  privileges  as  in  France.  At  the  head  of  the  republic  were  a  president 
and  a  vice-president.  In  January,  1802,  Bonaparte  summoned  at  Lyons  a  large 
meeting  of  nearly  500  members  to  approve  the  constitution.  The  presidency  of  that 
meeting  was  awarded  to  him. 

2  Antoine  Chaptal,  born  in  1756,  was  already  an  illustrious  savant  when  he 
entered  upon  a  public  career.  He  became  Councillor  of  State  and  Minister  of  the 
Interior  after  the  18th  Brumaire,  then  senator  and  Comte  de  Chanteloup,  in  1804  ; 
minister  and  peer  of  France  during  the  Hundred  Days.  Louis  XVIII.  recalled  him 
to  the  Chamber  of  Peers  in  1819.     He  died  in  1832. 

3  Jean  Jacques-Regis  de  Cambaceres,  born  at  Montpellier  in  1753  of  an  °^  family 
of  magistrates.  Counsellor  at  the  Court  of  Accounts  of  Montpellier.  Deputy  from 
Herault  to  the  Convention,  he  voted  the  death  of  the  king,  with  this  restriction,  that 
the  decree  was  only  to  be  put  into  execution  if  France  should  be  invaded  by  the 
enemy.  He  was  president  of  the  Convention  after  the  9th  Thermidor,  then  member 
and  president  of  the  Council  of  Five  Hundred  ;  Minister  of  Justice  in  1798.  He  was 
elected  Second  Consul  after  the  18th  Brumaire.  In  1804,  Cambaceres  became  prince 
arch-chancellor  of  the  Empire  and  Due  de  Parma.     Exiled  in  1815,  he  died  in  1824. 

4  Francois  Melzi  d'Eril  (1753-1S16)  had  been,  from  its  foundation,  one  of  the  most 
ardent  defenders  of  the  Cisalpine  Republic.  He  became  afterwards  Due  de  Lodi, 
Crand-Chancellor  and  Keeper  of  the  Seals  of  the  Viceroy  Eugene. 

5  There  is  here  an  error  in  the  text.  The  kingdom  of  Italy  dates  only  from  1805 
(the  consecration  at  Milan  was  on  May  26).  M.  de  Talleyrand  has  evidently  meant 
to  say  that  in  1802,  the  official  denomination  of  Italian  Republic  was  substituted  for 
that  of  Cisalpine  Republic. 


THE  CONVENTION,  THE  DIRECTORY,  THE  CONSULATE.  219 

presented  to  him  the  keys  of  Milan  on  his  first  invasion,  was 
sufficiently  compromised  towards  Austria  for  Bonaparte  to  place 
in  him  every  confidence. 

Until  the  time  of  the  Peace  of  Amiens,  Bonaparte  may  have 
committed  many  faults,  for  what  man  is  free  from  them  ?  But 
none  of  the  plans  he  had  conceived  were  such  that  any  true  and 
patriotic  Frenchman  could  have  felt  any  reluctance  to  contribute 
to  their  execution.  One  may  not  always  have  agreed  as  to  the 
excellence  of  the  means  resorted  to  by  Bonaparte,  but  the  utility 
of  the  aim  could  not  be  contested,  being  simply,  on  the  one  hand 
to  bring  foreign  wars  to  an  end,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  to  close 
the  revolutionary  era  by  re-establishing  monarchy,  which,  in  my 
candid  opinion,  it  was  then  impossible  to  do  in  favour  of  the 
legitimate  heirs  of  the  last  king. 

The  Peace  of  Amiens  was  scarcely  concluded,  when  Bonaparte 
began  to  give  up  moderation  ;  the  provisions  of  that  peace  had 
not  yet  been  carried  out,  when  he  already  sowed  the  seeds  of 
new  wars  which,  after  overwhelming  Europe  and  France,  were  to 
lead  him  to  his  ruin. 

Piedmont  ought  to  have  been  given  back  to  the  King  of 
Sardinia  immediately  after  the  Peace  of  Luneville ;  it  was 
merely  in  trust  in  the  hands  of  France.  To  give  it  up  would 
have  been  both  an  act  of  strict  justice  and  a  very  wise  policy. 
Bonaparte,  on  the  contrary,  annexed  it  to  France.  I  made  vain 
efforts  to  dissuade  him  from  such  a  measure.  He  believed  his 
personal  interest  required  him  to  do  so,  his  pride  seemed  to  him 
to  claim  that  arbitrary  step,  and  all  the  counsels  of  prudence 
failed  to  alter  his  mind  in  that  respect.1 

Although  he  had  by  his  victories  contributed  to  the  aggran- 
dizement of  France,  none  of  the  territories  with  which  it  had 
been  aggrandized  had  been  conquered  by  the  armies  which  he 
had  commanded.     It  was  under  the  Convention  that  the  county 

1  On  December  9,  1798,  King  Charles-Emmanuel,  being  vanquished  and  dispos- 
sessed, had  renounced  the  throne  for  himself  and  heirs,  and  given  his  subjects  orders 
to  obey  in  future  the  French  authorities.  Thereupon,  Piedmont  was  subjected  to 
the  direct  rule  of  French  generals.  In  1800,  before  Marengo  and  Hohenlinden, 
Bonaparte,  in  his  preliminaries  of  peace,  offered  to  return  Piedmont  to  the  King  of 
Sardinia.  His  subsequent  victories  made  him  more  exacting,  and  on  the  occasion 
of  the  treaty  of  Luneville,  he  refused  to  bind  himself  at  all  in  that  respect.  On 
April  19,  1801,  Piedmont  was  divided  into  six  departments  and  became  a  military 
division  ;  on  September  4,  1802,  it  was  annexed  to  France. 


220  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

of  Avignon,  Savoy,  Belgium,  the  left  bank  of  the  Rhine  had 
been  added  to  France  ;  and  Bonaparte  could  not  claim  any  of 
those  conquests  as  coming  from  him  personally.  To  rule,  and 
to  rule  hereditarily,  as  he  aspired  to  do  over  a  country  aggran- 
dized by  generals  formerly  his  equals,  and  whom  he  wished  to 
become  his  subjects,  seemed  to  him  almost  humiliating,  and 
moreover,  might  arouse  an  opposition  which  he  was  anxious  to 
avoid.  It  was  thus  that,  in  order  to  justify  his  pretensions  to 
the  title  of  sovereign,  he  deemed  it  necessary  to  annex  to  France 
countries  which  he  alone  had  conquered.  He  had  crushed 
Piedmont  in  1796;  and  his  victories  in  that  quarter  seemed  to 
him  to  justify  the  arbitrary  views  he  entertained  towards  that 
country.  He  accordingly  caused  the  senate  to  assent  to  and 
proclaim  the  annexation  of  Piedmont  to  France,  never  think- 
ing that  any  one  might  call  him  to  account  for  so  monstrous  a 
violation  of  what  the  law  of  nations  consider  as  most  sacred. 
His  illusion  was  not  destined  to  last  long. 

The  English  government  had  made  peace  only  out  of 
necessity  ;  as  soon  as  the  home  difficulties  which  had  caused  the 
making  of  peace  almost  unavoidable,  were  overcome,  the  English 
cabinet  who  had  not  yet  restored  Malta,  and  wished  to  keep  it, 
seized  the  occasion  offered  by  the  annexation  of  Piedmont  to 
France,  and  took  up  arms  again.1 

But  events  quickened  Bonaparte's  resolution  to  transform 
the  consulate  for  life  into  an  hereditary  monarchy.  The  English 
had  landed  on  the  coasts  of  Brittany  a  few  devoted  and  most 
enterprising  emigres.  Bonaparte  took  advantage  of  this  new 
royalist  plot,  in  which  he  flattered  himself  to  implicate,  at  the 
same  time,  Dumouriez,2  Pichegru  and  Moreau,  his  three  rivals  in 
glory,  to  wrench  from  the  senate  the  title  of  Emperor.     But 

1  May  16,  1803. 

2  Charles-Francois  Duperrier-Dumouriez,  born  at  Cambrai  in  1739,  entered  the 
army  at  sixteen.  In  1763,  he  changed  the  swoid  for  diplomacy,  and  became  one 
of  the  most  active  secret  agents  of  the  king.  Under  Louis  XVI.,  he  was  appointed 
Governor  of  Cherbourg,  and  brigadier-general.  In  1792,  he  joined  the  Girondist 
Cabinet  as  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  (March  15),  and  three  months  later,  was 
appointed  general-inchief  of  the  army  of  the  north.  Victorious  at  Valmy  and  at 
Jemmapes,  but  defeated  at  Nerwinden,  and  on  the  point  of  being  tried,  he  entered 
into  negotiations  with  Prince  von  Coburg,  delivered  into  the  hands  of  the  Austrians 
the  Commissioners  sent  by  the  Convention  to  arrest  him,  and  himself  went  over  to 
the  enemy.  He  lived  abroad  until  his  death  (1823),  often  engaged  in  ro)alist 
intrigues  and  plots. 


THE  CONVENTION,  THE  DIRECTORY,  THE  CONSULATE.  221 

that  title,  which,  with  moderation  and  wisdom,  he  would  just  as 
well  have  obtained,  though  perhaps  not  quite  so  soon,  became 
the  meed  of  violence  and  crime.  He  ascended  the  throne,  but  a 
throne  besmeared  with  innocent  blood — blood  which  former  and 
glorious  recollections  made  dear  to  France. 

The  violent  and  unexplained  death  of  Pichegru,  the  means 
used  to  obtain  the  conviction  of  Moreau,  might  be  put  to  the 
account  of  policy ;  but  the  assassination  of  the  Due  d'Enghien,1 
committed  solely  in  order,  by  placing  himself  in  their  ranks,  to 
make  sure  of  those  whom  the  death  of  Louis  XVI.  caused  to 
fear  all  manner  of  power  not  coming  from  them,  this  assassina- 
tion, I  say,  could  be  neither  excused  nor  forgiven,  nor  has  it  ever 
been  so  ;  Bonaparte  has  therefore  been  reduced  to  boast  of  it.2 

The  new  war  in  which  Bonaparte  found  himself  engaged  with 
England  necessitating  the  employment  of  all  his  resources,  it 
only  needed  the  most  common  prudence  to  abstain  from  under- 
taking anything  that  might  induce  the  powers  on  the  Continent 
to    make    common    cause    with    his    enemy.     But    vanity    still 
prevailed  in  him.     It  was  not  sufficient  for  him  to  have  himself 
proclaimed  under  the  name  of  Napoleon,  Emperor  of  the  French  ; 
it  was  not  sufficient  for  him  to  have  been  consecrated  by  the 
Sovereign  Pontiff;  he  wished  besides  to  be  King  of  Italy,  in 
order  to  be  emperor  and  king  as  well  as  the  head  of  the  House 
of  Austria.    Consequently  he  had  himself  crowned  at  Milan,  and 
instead    of  taking  simply  the    title  of  King  of  Lombardy,  he 
chose  the  more  ambitious,  and,  therefore,   more    alarming  title 
of  King  of  Italy,  as  if  his  design  were  to  submit  Italy  entirely 
to  his  sceptre  ;   and  that  there  might  be  less  doubt  as  to  his 
intentions,  Genoa  and  Lucca,3  where  his  agents  had  skilfully 
aroused  fear,  sent  him  deputations  by  the  agency  of  whom  the 
one  gave  herself  to  him,  the  other  asked  as  a  sovereign  a  member 
of  his  family  ;  and  both  under  different  names,  since  then,  form 

1  March  21,  1804. 

2  Prince  Talleyrand  has  devoted  to  the  affair  of  the  Due  d'Enghien  a  special 
chapter,  which  will  be  published  in  one  of  the  subsequent  volumes  of  these 
Memoirs. 

3  After  the  conventions  of  October  10,  1796,  and  June  6,  1797,  the  Republic  of 
Genoa,  transformed  into  Ligurian  Republic,  was  the  ally  of  France.  It  was  on 
June  3,  1805,  that  the  senate  and  the  doge  solicited  the  annexing  of  their  city  to 
France,  which  was  immediately  enforced.  As  to  Lucca,  it  was  assigned  to  Elisa 
Bonaparte,  Princess  of  Piombino  (June  24,  1805). 


222  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

a  part  of  that  which  for  the  first  time  began   to  be  called  the 
great  empire. 

The  consequences  of  that  conduct  were  such  as  could  be 
naturally  foreseen.  Austria  took  up  arms,  and  a  continental  war 
became  imminent.  Then  Napoleon  tried  negotiations  on  all 
sides.  He  attempted  to  draw  Prussia  into  his  alliance,1  by  offering 
her  Hanover,  and  when  on  the  point  of  succeeding,  he  caused 
everything  to  fail  by  sending  to  Berlin  General  Duroc,2  who  by 
his  awkward  bluntness,  destroyed  the  good  effect  of  the  advances 
previously  made  according  to  my  instructions  by  M.  de  la  Forest,3 
who  was  there  as  Minister  of  France. 

The  emperor  was  more  fortunate  with  the  Electors  of  Bavaria, 
Wurtemberg  and  Baden,  whom  he  maintained  this  time  in 
his  alliance. 

The  camp  of  Boulogne,  which  he  formed  at  this  period  for 
the  purpose  of  menacing  the  coasts  of  England,  had  for  first 
result  to  make  the  war  popular  in  that  country,  and  of  creating 
there  an  as  yet  unheard-of  thing,  a  numerous  permanent  army. 
And  it  was  while  Napoleon  seemed  absorbed  by  the  organization 
of  that  camp,  that  the  Austrians  crossed  the  Inn,  traversed 
Bavaria,  occupied  the  centre  of  Suabia,  and  were  already  arriving 
on  the  banks  of  the  Rhine.  It  was  nevertheless  this  precipita- 
tion of  the  Austrians  which  preserved  Napoleon  from  the  more 
than  critical  position  in  which  he  would  have  been  placed,  if 
they  had  awaited  the  arrival  of  the  Emperor  Alexander  and 
his  hundred  thousand  Russians,  who  were  on  the  march  to 
join  themselves  to  them,  for  Prussia  would  have  been  infallibly 
drawn  into  the  coalition,  but  the  Austrians  wished  to  show  that, 
alone,  they  were  able  to  engage  the  struggle  and  win  the  day. 

Napoleon,  with  the  military  genius  and  the  celerity  which 
make  his  glory,  at  once  availed  himself  of  this  blunder.     In  a 

1  From  1803  to  1805,  Napoleon  on  the  one  side,  and  Austria  and  Russia  on  the 
other,  disputed  for  the  alliance  of  Prussia.  King  Frederick  William  dared  not  take 
any  decision.  However,  in  1805,  he  signed  with  France  a  simple  compact  of 
neutrality. 

2  Duroc  was  from  1796  the  favourite  aide-de-camp  of  Napoleon.  Born  in  1772, 
he  became  under  the  Empire  general  of  division,  Grand-Marshal  of  the  Palace,  and 
Due  de  Frioul.     He  was  killed  at  Wurtschen,  May  22,  1813. 

3  Antoine,  Comte  de  la  Forest  (1756-1847),  minister  at  Munich,  1801  ;  at  the 
Diet  at  Ratisbon,  1802  ;  at  Berlin,  1803  ;  ambassador  at  Madrid  in  1807.  Minister 
and  peer  of  France  under  the  Restoration. 


THE  CONVENTION,  THE  DIRECTORY,  THE  CONSULATE.  223 

few  weeks,  one  might  say  in  a  few  days,  he  transported  the 
large  army  of  the  camp  of  Boulogne  to  the  banks  of  the  Rhine, 
whence  he  led  it  to  new  victories. 

I  received  instructions  to  accompany  him  to  Strasburg,  there 
to    be  ready  to    follow  his  headquarters  according  to    circum- 
stances   (September,    1805).      A    fit    which    happened   to    the 
emperor  at  the  beginning  of  this  campaign  frightened  me  very 
much.     The  very  day  of  his  departure  from  Strasburg,  I   had 
dinner   with  him  ;    on    leaving    the  table,  he  went    to   see    the 
Empress  Josephine.     He  had  only  been  with  her  a  few  minutes, 
when  suddenly  he   came  out  of  her  apartment ;   I  was  in   the 
drawing-room,  he  took  me  by  the  arm  and  led  me  into  his  room. 
M.  de  Remusat,1  the  first  chamberlain,  who  came  for  instructions, 
entered   at  the   same  time.     We  were  hardly   there,  when  the 
emperor  fell    on    the    floor ;    he    had    barely  time    to  tell  me 
to  close  the  door.     I  tore  away  his  cravat,  because   it  seemed 
to  choke  him  ;  he  did  not  vomit,  he  groaned  and  foamed  at  the 
mouth.     M.  de  Remusat  gave  him  some  water,  and    I   bathed 
him  with  Cologne  water.     He  had  a  kind  of  convulsions  that 
ceased  after  a  quarter  of  an  hour  ;  we  placed  him  on  an  arm-chair  ; 
he  commenced  to   speak,  dressed  himself  again,  and   enjoined 
secrecy  on  us  ;  half  an  hour  later,  he  was  on  his  way  to  Carlsruhe. 
On  reaching  Stuttgart,  he  wrote  me  to  give  me  news  of  his  health  ; 
his  letter  ended  with  these  words,  "  I  am  well.     The  Duke  of 
Wiirtemberg  came  to  meet  me  as  far  as  outside  the  first  gate  of 
his  palace  ;  he  is  a  man  of  sense."    A  second  letter  from  Stutt- 
gart, bearing  the  same  date,  ran  as  follows  :  "  I  am  acquainted 
with  Mack's  movements  ;   these  are  all   I    could    desire.      He 
will  be  caught  in  Ulm,  like  a  fool  ! 2  " 

Some  people  have  since  endeavoured  to  spread  the  rumour 

1  Auguste,  Comte  de  Remusat,  born  in  1762,  was  in  1789,  an  advocate  to  the 
Cour  des  Comptes  at  Aix.  He  stayed  in  France  during  the  whole  of  the  Revolution. 
In  1802,  he  became  prefect  of  the  palace  ;  chief  chamberlain  in  1804,  and  superin- 
tendent of  theatres.  In  181 5,  he  was  appointed  prefect  of  the  Nord,  and  subse- 
quently of  the  Haute-Garonne  department.  He  was  dismissed  in  1821,  and  died 
in  1823. 

2  Charles,  Baron  von  Mack  von  Lieberich,  born  in  1752.  He  was  several  times 
in  command  of  Austrian  armies,  but  was  always  beaten.  He  signed  the  capitulation 
of  Ulm  on  October  19.  Having  been,  shortly  after,  tried  by  court-martial,  he  was 
sentenced  to  death,  but  the  Emperor  Francis  commuted  the  sentence  into  an  imprison- 
ment which  only  lasted  a  few  years.     He  died  in  oblivion  in  1828. 


224  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

that  Mack  had  been  bribed  ;  this  is  false  ;  it  was  only  their  pre- 
sumption that  caused  the  defeat  of  the  Austrians.  It  is  known 
how  their  army,  partially  beaten  on  several  points  and  driven 
back  into  Ulm,  was  obliged  to  capitulate  ;  it  remained  there 
prisoner  of  war,  after  having  passed  under  the  yoke. 

In  announcing  to  me  his  victory,  Napoleon  wrote  me  what 
were,  in  his  idea,  the  conditions  he  wished  to  impose  upon 
Austria,  and  what  territories  he  wished  to  take  from  her. 
I  replied  to  him  that  his  real  interest  was  not  to  enfeeble 
Austria,  that  in  taking  from  her  on  one  side,  he  must  return 
to  her  on  the  other,  in  order  to  make  of  her  an  ally.  The 
memorandum  in  which  I  set  forth  my  reasons,  struck  him  so  that 
he  placed  the  matter  for  deliberation  before  the  council  he  held 
at  Munich  whither  I  had  gone  to  meet  him,  and  induced  him 
to  follow  the  plan  I  had  proposed  to  him,  and  which  can  still 
be  found  in  the  archives  of  the  government.1  But  new  advan- 
tages brought  about  by  one  of  the  divisions  of  his  advance 
guard,  firing  his  imagination,  made  him  desire  to  march  upon 
Vienna,  to  hasten  to  new  successes,  and  to  date  decrees  from 
the  Imperial  Palace  of  Schoenbrunn. 

Master  in  less  than  three  weeks  of  all  Upper  Austria  and 
of  all  that  part  of  the  Lower  which  is  at  the  south  of  the  Danube, 
he  crosses  this  river  and  enters  in  Moravia.  If  then  sixty 
thousand  Prussians  had  invaded  Bohemia,  and  sixty  thousand 
others  come  by  Franconia  had  occupied  the  road  to  Lintz,  it 
is  doubtful  if  he  could  have  succeeded  in  escaping  with  his 
person.  If  the  Austro-Russian  army  that  he  had  in  front  of  him, 
and  which  was  about  one  hundred  and  twenty  thousand  men 
strong,  had  only  avoided  all  general  action  and  given  to  the 
Archduke  Charles  time  to  arrive  with  the  seventy-five  thousand 

1  This  memorandum  has  recently  been  published  in  the  Lettres  inedites  de  TalUy- 
rand a  Napotion,  par  tierre  Bertrand  (Pans,  1889,  I  vol.  8vo.  pp.  156).  Foreseeing 
that  the  design  of  the  emperor  was  already  to  crush  Austria  in  order  to  make  sooner 
or  later  his  junction  with  Russia,  Talleyrand  seeks  to  turn  him  aside  from  his  purpose, 
and  warmly  recommends  the  Austrian  alliance.  He  wishes  to  make  Austria  the  bulwark 
of  Europe  against  Russia,  and  for  this  end  to  put  her  in  contact  with  this  empire  by 
ceding  to  her  Moldavia,  Walachia,  Bessarabia,  and  a  part  of  Bulgaria.  In  exchange, 
they  could  then  take  away  all  her  possessions  in  Italy  and  Suabia.  This  system 
would  have  besides  another  advantage  ;  it  would  remove  all  contact  between  the 
empire  of  Napoleon  and  that  of  the  Hapsburgs,  and  suppress  thereby  all  pretext  for 
war.  Hence  the  Franco- Austrian  alliance  being  made  solid  and  durable,  would  be 
the  safeguard  of  all  western  Europe. 


THE  CONVENTION,  THE  DIRECTORY,  THE  CONSULATE.  225 

men  who  were  under  his  orders,  instead  of  dictating  laws, 
Napoleon  would  have  been  under  the  necessity  of  submitting 
to  them.  But,  far  from  coming  with  her  army,  Prussia  sent  a 
negotiator,  who,  out  of  folly  or  crime,  did  nothing  of  what 
he  was  charged  to  do,  and  dug  the  precipice  where  his  country 
itself  was  shortly  to  be  engulfed.1 

The  Emperor  Alexander,  who  was  wearily  waiting  at  Olmiitz, 
and  who  had  not  yet  seen  any  battle,  desired  to  have  the 
amusement  of  it ;  and,  in  spite  of  the  representations  of  the 
Austrians,  in  spite  of  the  advice  the  King  of  Prussia  had  sent 
him  to  abstain,  he  fought  the  battle  known  under  the  name 
of  Battle  of  Austerlitz,  and  lost  it  completely,  deeming  himself 
fortunate  to  be  permitted  to  withdraw  by  daily  stages,  as  the 
armistice,  subsequently  signed,  imposed  on  him  the  humiliating 
obligation  of  doing. 

Never  has  a  military  feat  been  more  glorious.  I  still  see 
Napoleon  re-entering  Austerlitz  on  the  evening  of  the  battle. 
He  lodged  at  a  house  belonging  to  Prince  von  Kaunitz  ;  and 
there,  in  his  chamber,  yes,  in  the  very  chamber  of  Prince  von 
Kaunitz,  were  brought  at  every  moment  Austrian  flags,  Russian 
flags,  messages  from  the  archdukes,  and  from  the  Emperor  of 
Austria,  and  prisoners  bearing  the  names  of  all  the  great  houses 
of  the  Austrian  monarchy. 

As  all  these  trophies  came  in,  I  remember  that  a  messenger 
entered  the  yard  bringing  letters  from  Paris,  together  with  the 
mysterious  portfolio  in  which  M.  de  La  Valette  2  inclosed  the 
secret  or  private  letters  which  were  of  any  importance,  and  the 
reports  of  all  the  French  police.  In  war,  the  arrival  of  letters  is  a 
most  pleasant  event.  Napoleon,  by  having  the  letters  imme- 
diately distributed,  relaxed  and  recompensed  his  army. 

1  The  King  of  Prussia  had  ended  by  yielding  to  the  entreaties  of  the  Emperor  of 
Russia,  and  had  signed  with  him  a  convention  (November  3,  1805),  according  to  which 
he  bound  himself  to  propose  his  armed  mediation,  and  if  it  were  not  accepted  by 
Napoleon  on  December  15,  to  declare  war  against  him.  Count  von  Haugwitz,  who 
was  entrusted  with  the  negotiation,  was  only  received  by  Napoleon  on  December  13, 
at  Schoenbrunn,  and  there,  frightened  by  the  menaces  of  the  emperor,  instead  of  acting 
according  to  his  instructions,  he  allowed  to  be  imposed  upon  him  a  treaty  of  alliance, 
of  which  Hanover  was  the  price  (December  15). 

2  Marie  Chamans,  Comte  de  la  Valette  (1 769-1830),  was  then  director-general  of 
the  post-offices  of  France.  He  had,  at  first;  entered  the  army,  and  had  become  a  captain 
and  confidential  aide-de-camp  of  Napoleon.     Sentenced  to  death  in  1815,  he  was 

VOL.  I.  O 


226  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

1  must  not  omit  to  mention  here  a  peculiar  incident  which 
fully  depicts  the  character  of  Napoleon  and  his  opinions.  The 
emperor,  who  at  this  time  had  great  confidence  in  me,  asked 
me  to  read  to  him  his  correspondence.  We  began  with  the 
deciphered  letters  of  the  foreign  ambassadors  in  Paris  ;  they 
interested  him  but  little,  because  all  the  great  news  of  the  world 
took  place  about  him.  We  then  went  on  to  the  police  reports  ; 
several  spoke  of  the  difficulties  of  the  Bank  of  France,  brought 
on  by  some  bad  measures  of  the  Minister  of  Finances,  M.  de 
Marbois.1  However,  the  report  to  which  he  paid  most  attention 
was  that  of  Madame  de  Genlis  ;  it  was  long  and  written  entirely 
in  her  own  hand.  She  spoke  of  the  spirit  of  Paris,  and  quoted 
a  few  offensive  conversations  held,  she  said,  in  those  houses 
which  were  then  called  the  Faubourg  Saint-Germain ;  she 
named  five  or  six  families,  which,  never,  she  added,  would  rally 
to  the  government  of  the  emperor.  Some  rather  biting  ex- 
pressions which  Madame  de  Genlis  reported  set  Napoleon  in 
an  inconceivable  state  of  fury  ;  he  swore  and  stormed  against  the 
Faubourg  Saint-Germain.  "  Ah  !  they  think  themselves  stronger 
than  I,"  said  he.  "  Gentlemen  of  the  Faubourg  Saint-Germain, 
we  shall  see,  we  shall  see."  And  that  we  shall  see  !  came  when  ? 
....  But  a  few  hours  after  a  decisive  victory  obtained  over  the 
Russians  and  the  Austrians.  So  much  strength  and  power  did 
he  recognize  in  public  opinion,  and  especially  in  that  of  a  few 
nobles,  whose  only  action  was  limited  to  keeping  aloof  from 
him.  So,  on  returning  to  Paris  later  on,  he  regarded  as  a  great 
achievement   the   fact   that    Mesdames    de    Montmorency,2   de 

saved,  thanks  to  the  devotion  of  his  wife,  Mademoiselle  Emilie  de  Beauharnais,  niece 
of  the  Empress  Josephine. 

1  Francois,  Comte,  afterwards  Marquis,  de  Barbe-Marbois  (1745-1837),  former 
deputy  to  the  Conseil  des  Anciens,  Director,  Minister  of  the  Public  Treasury  in  1802; 
he  was  later  (from  1808  to  1837)  first  president  of  the  Cour  des  Cotnptes.  In  con- 
nection with  a  financial  crisis  for  which  he  was  held  responsible,  he  was  dismissed 
from  the  cabinet  in  1806.  He  had  consented  that  certain  State-contractors,  forming 
a  company  known  under  the  name  of  Negotiants  reunis,  should  be  paid  in  such  a  way 
as  to  exclude  almost  entirely  the  control  of  the  Treasury.  That  company  had  betrayed 
the  confidence  of  the  minister,  and  compromised  the  finances  of  the  State  in  risky 
speculations,  the  result  of  which  was  that  in  October,  1805,  the  Bank  of  France  only 
possessed  ,£60,000  in  cash,  whereas  the  amount  of  payments  it  had  to  make  was 
£"3,680,000.  The  panic  that  ensued  much  disturbed  the  market  for  several  months. 
On  his  return  to  Paris,  the  emperor  appointed  M.  Mollien  to  M.  de  Barbe-Marbois' 
post.  (See  Thiers's  Le  Consulat  et  V Empire  [vol.  vi.  p.  3oandfol.,  187  and  fob, 
375I,  and  M.  Mollien's  Memoirs.) 

2  Valentine  de  Harchies,  married  to  Anne,  Comte  de  Montmorency  (1787- 1858). 


THE  CONVENTION,  THE  DIRECTORY,  THE  CONSULATE.  227 

Mortemart,1  and  de  Chevreuse,2  accepted  the  post  of  ladies  in 
waiting  to  the  empress,  thus  ennobling  Madame  de  Bassano3 
who  had  been  appointed  with  them. 

At  the  end  of  twenty-four  hours,  I  left  Austerlitz.  I  had 
spent  two  hours  on  this  terrible  battle-field  ;  Marshal  Lannes 
had  taken  me  there,  and  I  owe  it  to  his  honour,  and  per- 
haps to  military  honour  in  general,  to  say  that  this  same  man 
who,  on  the  evening  before,  had  performed  such  prodigious 
feats  of  valour,  who  had  displayed  unprecedented  courage  as 
long  as  he  had  enemies  to  fight,  was  about  to  faint  when  his 
eyes  gazed  on  the  dead  and  maimed  soldiers  of  all  nations  ;  he 
was  so  moved  that,  when  showing  me  the  different  points  where 
the  principal  attacks  had  been  made,  he  said  to  me :  "  I  cannot 
stay  longer,  unless  you  wish  to  come  with  me  to  knock  down 
these  villanous  Jews  who  are  robbing  the  dead  and  the  dying." 

The  negotiations,  of  which,  before  this  great  battle,  there  had 
only  been  a  pretence,  then  became  serious.  They  commenced 
at  Brunn  in  Moravia,  and  ended  at  Presburg,4  where  General 
Giulay 5  and  the  loyal  Prince  Johan  von  Lichtenstein G  had 
repaired  with  me. 

While  I  was  in  the  first  of  these  cities,  the  Emperor  Napo- 
leon dictated  to  Duroc,  and  Count  von  Haugwitz,  Minister  of 
Prussia,  signed,  a  treaty  (Dec.  15,  1805),  in  which  were  men- 
tioned the  cessions  exacted  from  Austria,  and  by  which  Prussia 

1  Eleonore  de  Montmorency,  born  in  1777,  married  to  Victor  de  Rochechouart, 
Marquis  de  Mortemart.      She  was  lady  in  waiting  to  the  empress  in  1806. 

2  Francoise  de  Narbonne-Pelet,  married  in  1802  to  Charles- Andre  d'Albert,  Due 
de  Luynes  and  de  Chevreuse.  She  was  lady  of  the  household  of  the  empress  in 
1807,  and  died  in  1813. 

3  Madame  Maret,  the  wife  of  the  emperor's  minister. 

4  December  26,  1805.  Austria  lost  all  her  Italian  possessions,  which  were  united 
with  the  new  kingdom  of  Italy.  The  Tyrol  and  Vorarlberg,  the  principality  of 
Eichstedt,  the  city  of  Augsbourg,  and  several  other  manors  were  assigned  to  Bavaria. 
The  Count  de  Hohenberg,  the  Landgrave  of  Nellenburg,  a  part  of  Brisgau,  and 
seven  other  important  cities  were  given  to  Wurtemberg.  The  Elector  of  Baden 
received  Orteuau,  the  rest  of  Brisgau,  and  Constance.  Finally,  the  title  of  King  was 
acknowledged  for  the  Electors  of  Bavaria  and  of  Wurtemberg,  and  that  of  Grand 
Duke  for  the  Elector  of  Baden. 

5  Count  Ignatius  Giulay  (1763-1831)  became  general  in  1800.  He  took  part  in  all 
the  wars  of  his  time,  became  field-marshal  in  1813,  chief  commander  of  Bohemia  in 
1823,  and  president  of  the  Aulic  Council,  1830. 

6  Johan  von  Lichtenstein,  Prince  Sovereign  of  Germany,  born  in  Vienna  in  1766  : 
general  in  the  Austrian  army  in  1794.  In  1 814,  he  retired  to  his  principality,  over 
which  he  reigned  until  his  death.  (Principality  of  Lichtenstein,  between  the  Tyrol 
and  Switzerland  ;  8,000  inhabitants  ;  chief  town,  Vaduz. ) 

Q  2 


228  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

herself  ceded  Anspach  and  Neufchatel,  in  exchange  for  Hanover 
which  she  received.  Napoleon  had  successes  of  all  kinds  ;  and  he 
abused  them  beyond  measure,  above  all  by  dating  from  Vienna, 
a  short  time  after,  the  insolent  decree  in  which  he  declared  that 
Ferdinand  IV.,  King  of  the  Two  Sicilies,  had  ceased  to  reign,  and 
gave  to  Joseph  Bonaparte,  his  eldest  brother,  the  kingdom  of 
Naples,  which  he  conquered  easily,  and  that  of  Sicily,  over 
which  his  imagination  only  has  ever  reigned. 

The  system  that  Napoleon  then  adopted,  the  secret  of  which 
I  have  mentioned,  was  the  first  act  that  must  be  reckoned  among 
the  causes  of  his  fall.  I  will  make  known  later,  with  special 
reference  to  each  of  the  new  kings  he  made,  all  that  there  was 
impolitic  and  destructive  in  this  method  of  overthrowing  govern- 
ments in  order  to  create  others  which  he  was  not  slow  to  pull 
down  again,  and  that  in  all  parts  of  Europe. 

Austria,  in  the  state  of  distress  to  which  she  now  was  reduced, 
could  not  do  otherwise  than  accept  the  conditions  imposed  by 
her  victor.  Those  conditions  were  harsh  indeed,  and  the  treaty 
made  with  Count  von  Haugwitz  made  it  impossible  for  me  to 
mitigate  them  in  any  other  clauses  than  those  relative  to  the 
indemnity  to  be  paid  to  France.  I,  at  least,  managed  that  the 
conditions  imposed  on  Austria  should  not  be  rendered  worse  by 
any  fallacious  interpretation.  Being  master  of  the  wording,  on 
which  Napoleon's  influence  was  minimised  by  the  distance  I  was 
from  him,  I  applied  myself  to  make  it  free  from  any  ambiguity  ; 
so  that,  although  he  had  obtained  everything  that  it  was  possible 
for  him  to  obtain,  the  treaty  did  not  please  him.  He  wrote  to 
me  some  time  after  :  "  You  have  made  'me,  at  Presburg,  a  treaty 
that  annoys  me  a  great  deal ; "  which  did  not,  however,  prevent 
him  giving  me,  a  short  time  after,  a  marked  proof  of  satisfaction 
by  creating  me  Prince  of  Benevento,  the  territory  of  which  was 
occupied  by  his  troops.  I  say  with  pleasure  that,  thereby,  this 
duchy,  which  remained  my  property  until  the  Restoration,  was 
saved  all  sorts  of  vexations,  and  even  conscription. 

Count  von  Haugwitz  surely  deserved  to  pay  with  his  head  for 
the  treaty  he  had  dared  to  make  without  authority  and  against 
what  he  knew  perfectly  well  to  be  the  wish  of  his  sovereign  ; 
but  to  punish  him  would  have  been  to  attack  Napoleon  himself. 


THE  CONVENTION,  THE  DIRECTORY,  THE  CONSULATE.  229 

The  King  of  Prussia  dared  not  disclaim  it  ;  he  had  even  the 
weakness  to  resist  the  noble  solicitations  of  the  queen  ;  and  yet, 
ashamed  to  give  his  approbation  to  such  an  act,  he  at  first  only 
ratified  the  treaty  conditionally.  But,  for  the  conditional  rati- 
fication which  Napoleon  rejected,  he  was  obliged,  under  pain  of 
having  him  for  an  enemy,  to  substitute  one  pure  and  simple, 
which  constituted  Prussia  at  war  with  England.1 

Napoleon,  since  he  was  emperor,  wished  for  no  more 
republics,  above  all  in  his  vicinity.  Consequently  he  changed 
the  government  of  Holland,  and  eventually  demanded  that  one 
of  his  brothers  should  be  king  of  that  country.2  He  did  not 
suspect  then  that  his  brother  Louis,  whom  he  had  chosen,  was 
too  honest  a  man  to  accept  the  title  of  King  of  Holland,  without 
becoming  a  thorough  Hollander. 

The  dissolution  of  the  German  Empire  was  already  im- 
plicitly operated  by  the  treaty  of  Presburg,  since  it  had  recog- 
nized as  kings  the  Electors  of  Bavaria  and  Wurtemberg,  and  the 
Elector  of  Baden  as  Grand-Duke.  This  dissolution  was  con- 
summated by  the  act  which  instituted  the  Confederation  of  the 
Rhine,3  an  act  which  cost  the  existence  of  a  host  of  small  states 
preserved  by  the  rescript  of  1803,  and  that  I  tried  once  more  to 
save.  But  I  succeeded  only  for  a  small  number  of  them,  the 
principal  confederates  not  wishing  to  accept  this  act  unless  they 
obtained  territorial  compensations. 

Murat,  one  of  Napoleon's  brothers-in-law,  to  whom  the 
countries  of  Cleves  and  Berg  had  been  given  in  sovereignty,  was 
included  in  that  confederation,  with  the  title  of  Grand-Duke  ; 
he  exchanged  it  later  for  that  of  King,  which  it  would  have 
been  much  better  for  him  never  to  have  obtained. 

1  Definitive  treaty  of  alliance  of  February  15,  1806,  ratified  by  the  King  of  Prussia, 
March  9. 

2  Louis  Bonaparte  was  proclaimed  King  of  Holland,  June  5,  1806. 

3  The  old  German  Empire  existed  no  longer,  except  in  name,  in  1806.  Napoleon 
gave  it  the  last  blow,  July  12,  1806,  by  the  compact  he  signed  with  thirteen  German 
princes,  the  principal  of  whom  were  Baron  von  Dalberg,  Archbishop  of  Mayence, 
Prince  Primate  of  Germany,  the  Kings  of  Bavaria  and  Wurtemberg,  the  Grand  Duke 
of  Baden,  the  Landgrave  of  Hesse-Darmstadt,  &c.  By  the  terms  of  this  compact,  the 
contracting  princes  separated  themselves  from  the  Empire,  and  constituted  a  Confedera- 
tion of  the  Rhine,  acknowledging  as  Protector  the  Emperor  Napoleon,  and  signed  with 
him  a  treaty  of  alliance,  offensive  and  defensive.  The  Emperor  Francis  could  but 
recognize  the  accomplished  facts.  On  August  6  following,  he  declared  the  German 
Empire  dissolved,  abdicated  the  title  of  Emperor  of  Germany,  and  took  that  of 
Emperor  of  Austria. 


230  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

While  the  King  of  Prussia  was  embroiling  himself  with 
England  by  occupying  Hanover,  the  latter  was  thinking  of 
treating  with  France.  Mr.  Pitt  being  dead,1  Mr.  Fox,  who  was 
not  destined  to  survive  him  long,  had  become,  by  dint  of  talent 
and  in  spite  of  the  repugnance  of  the  king,  chief  Secretary 
of  State  for  Foreign  Affairs  in  the  cabinet  of  which  Lord 
Grenville 2  was  the  nominal  head.  No  one  detested  more  than 
Mr.  Fox  the  oppression  of  the  government  of  Napoleon  ;  but 
whether  not  to  put  his  conduct  in  contradiction  with  the 
language  he  had  used  during  some  years  as  chief  of  the  oppo- 
sition, or  from  a  real  desire  for  peace,  he  believed  he  ought  to 
make  pacific  demonstrations.  He  wrote  to  me 3  to  inform  me 
of  an  intended  attempt  on  the  life  of  the  emperor  (or  of  the  leader 
of  the  French,  as  he  named  him  in  the  letter),  which  had  been 
revealed  to  him  by  one  of  the  wretched  authors  of  the  plot. 

I  eagerly  seized  this  occasion,  and  in  thanking  him  in  the 
name  of  the  emperor,  I  expressed  dispositions  which  were  soon 
followed  by  overtures  made  by  the  channel  of  Lord  Yarmouth. 
After  two  or  three  conferences,  Mr.  Fox,  to  be  agreeable  to  Lord 
Grenville,  adjoined  Lord  Lauderdale4  with  Lord  Yarmouth. 

On  his  side,  the  Emperor  Alexander  sent  to  Paris  M. 
d'Oubri  to  arrange  a  reconciliation.  I  induced  him  to  make  a 
treaty,  which  he  negotiated  with  Mr.  Clarke.5  The  Emperor  of 
Russia,  who  did  not  wish  to  go  so  far,  refused  to  ratify  it,  and 
disgraced  him  who  had  signed  it. 

As  to  the  negotiation  which  had  been  well  begun  by  Lord 
Yarmouth,  and  spoiled  by  Lord  Lauderdale,  it  ended  in  aven- 
ging England  on  Prussia  much  more  than  England  herself  would 
have  wished. 

1  January  23,  1806. 

-  William  Wyndham,  Lord  Grenville  (1759-1834),  Secretary  of  State  for  Hume 
Affairs,  and  afterwards  for  Foreign  Affairs  (1791).     He  retired  in  1S01. 

3  February  20,  1806. 

4  James  Maitland,  Earl  of  Lauderdale,  born  in  1759,  peer  of  Scotland  in  1789. 
He  came  to  France  at  this  period,  and  associated  himself  with  the  leading  Girondists. 
Always  a  friend  of  France,  he  combated  the  policy  of  Pitt,  became,  in  1806,  Privy 
« Councillor,  Keeper  of  the  Scotch  Seal,  ambassador  extraordinary  at  Paris.  In  1816, 
he  protested  loudly  against  the  detention  of  Napoleon.  He  died  in  retirement  in 
1839. 

5  October  14,  1806.  General  Comte  Clarke  (1765-1818),  became  in  the  following 
year  (1807),  Secretary  of  War,  and  was  created  Due  de  Feltre.  He  was  appointed 
Marshal  of  France  under  the  Restoration. 


THE  CONVENTION,  THE  DIRECTORY,  THE  CONSULATE.  231 

Peace  between  England  and  France  was  morally  impossible 
without  the  restitution  of  Hanover ;  and  Napoleon  having 
disposed  of  that  country  for  equivalents,  which  he  had  also 
disposed  of,  the  restitution  was  likewise  morally  impossible. 
But  the  emperor,  who  held  as  real  only  the  difficulties  which 
could  not  be  overcome  by  sheer  force,  did  not  hesitate  to  admit 
this  restitution  as  one  of  the  bases  of  the  agreement  to  be  made. 
He  said  to  himself :  "  Prussia,  who  has  received  Hanover  through 
fear,  will  return  it  through  fear  ;  and,  as  for  the  equivalents  which 
she  has  given,  I  shall  compensate  them  by  promises  which  will 
meet  the  pride  of  the  cabinet,  and  with  which  the  country  shall 
be  obliged  to  be  satisfied." 

Prussia  could  not  long  be  ignorant  of  this  treacherous  pro- 
ceeding ;  the  English  were  interested  in  making  Prussia  know  it, 
and,  in  addition,  Prussia  was  soon  to  be  the  victim  of  another 
perfidy. 

In  the  conversations  which  Count  von  Haugwitz  had  had  at 
Vienna  as  well  as  at  Paris,  with  the  Emperor  Napoleon,  the 
latter  had  spoken  to  him  of  his  project  of  dissolving  the 
German  Empire,  and  of  substituting  for  it  two  confederations, 
one  of  the  south,  the  other  of  the  north.  He  did  not  wish,  he 
said,  to  have  any  influence  except  over  the  first ;  Prussia  would  be 
at  the  head  of  the  second.  The  Prussian  cabinet  allowed  itself  to 
be  allured  by  this  project,  but  when  they  wished  to  proceed  with 
the  demarcation  of  the  two  confederations,  Napoleon  declared 
that  Prussia  could  not  include  in  her  part  either  the  Hanseatic 
cities  or  Saxony,  that  is  to  say,  the  only  countries  which  were 
not  already  under  the  influence  and  protection  of  Prussia.  The 
latter,  seeing  herself  cheated,  took  counsel  only  of  the 
irritation  which  reigned  in  all  classes  of  the  nation,  and  rushed 
to  arms. 

It  was  not  without  secret  uneasiness  that  the  emperor  went, 
for  the  first  time,  to  measure  his  strength  with  hers.  The 
ancient  glory  of  the  Prussian  army  imposed  upon  him  ;  but  after 
an  action  of  only  four  hours,  the  phantom  vanished,  and  the 
battle  of  Jena1  put  the  Prussian  monarchy  completely  at  the 
mercy  of  a  conqueror,  all  the  more   pitiless  that  the  wrongs 

1  October  14,  1806. 


232  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE   TALLEYRAND. 

were  on  his  side,  and  that,  besides,  he  had  had  some  fear,  and 
that  they  knew  it. 

Napoleon  was  already  at  Berlin,  when  he  received  an  im- 
prudent proclamation  from  the  Prince  of  the  Peace,  which  seemed 
to  announce  the  approaching  defection  of  Spain.1  He  then  made 
up  his  mind  to  destroy  at  any  price,  the  Spanish  branch  of  the 
House  of  Bourbon  ;  and  I,  I  took  inwardly  the  oath  to  cease,  at 
whatever  price,  to  be  his  minister,  as  soon  as  we  should  have 
returned  to  France.  He  confirmed  me  in  this  resolution  by  the 
barbarity  with  which,  at  Tilsit,  he  treated  Prussia,  although  he 
made  me  the  instrument  of  it.  This  time  he  did  not  apply  to  me 
to  treat  for  contributions  of  war  and  for  the  evacuation  of  the 
territories  by  his  troops.  He  charged  Marshal  Berthier2  with  this 
duty.  He  thought  that,  at  Presburg,  I  had  acted  in  a  manner  too 
much  opposed  to  what  he  believed  to  be  his  real  interests  ;  but 
I  am  anticipating  events. 

We  remained  but  a  few  days  at  Berlin.  Herr  von  Zastrow, 
confidential  aide-de-camp  of  the  king,  and  Herr  von  Lucchesini 
had  had  permission  to  repair  to  that  place.  Herr  von  Lucchesini 
passed  in  Prussia  for  being  very  capable  and  above  all  very  subtle. 
His  subtilty  has  often  recalled  to  me  the  mot  of  Dufresne,  "  Too 
much  sense,  that  is  to  say  not  enongli"  These  two  plenipotentiaries 
came  to  negotiate  an  armistice  which  perhaps  they  might  have 
obtained  if  they  had  not  been  informed  too  late  of  the  capitula- 
tion of  Magdeburg.  The  Russian  army,  it  is  true,  was  still 
intact,  but  it  was  too  small,  and  besides  the  Prussians  were 
completely  discouraged,  all  their  strong  places  had  opened  their 
gates,  and  finally  Polish  deputations  hastened  from  all  sides  to 

1  In  1806,  the  Spanish  government  had  for  a  moment  the  thought  of  breaking  off 
with  France.  The  unsuccess  of  her  struggle  with  England,  the  uneasiness  caused  her 
by  the  dispossession  of  King  Ferdinand,  all  contributed  to  force  her  that  way.  The 
Prince  of  the  Peace,  who  then  directed  the  politics  of  the  cabinet,  seized  the  moment 
when  Napoleon  was  engaged  with  Prussia,  and  issued,  not  in  the  name  of  the  king, 
but  in  his  personal  name,  a  rather  ambiguous  proclamation,  in  which,  without 
designating  any  one,  he  excited  the  Spanish  people  to  prepare  for  war.  After  the 
victory  of  Jena,  the  Prince  of  the  Peace,  frightened,  capitulated  immediately,  and  spread 
abroad  the  report  that  the  only  enemy  of  Spain  was  England,  but  no  one  was  deceived 
by  this  change  of  tactics — Napoleon  least  of  all. 

2  Marshal  Alexandre  Berthier,  born  in  1753,  was  major-general  of  the  Grand  Army, 
and  grand  master  of  the  hunt.  In  1807,  he  became  vice-constable,  Prince  de  Neuf- 
chatel  and  Prince  de  Wagram.  In  1814,  he  supported  Louis  XVIII.,  who  named  him 
peer  of  France  and  captain  of  the  guards.  During  the  Hundred  Days,  he  retired  to 
l'..imberg  (Bavaria),  where  he  died  June  I,  under  very  mysterious  circumstances. 


THE  CONVENTION,  THE  DIRECTORY,  THE  CONSULATE.  233 

meet  Napoleon.  It  did  rust  need  all  this  to  decide  him  to  leave 
Berlin,  and  to  march  on  rapidly  by  way  of  Posen   to  Warsaw. 

What  a  singular  sight  it  was  to  see  Napoleon  go  out  of  the 
cabinet  of  the  great  Frederick,  where  he  had  just  written  a 
bulletin  for  his  army,  pass  into  the  dining-room  where  Mollen- 
dorff,1  who  was  a  prisoner,  and  Miiller,2  who  was  the  historio- 
grapher of  the  Prussian  monarchy  dined  with  him  ;  to  offer  to 
one  and  the  other  appointments  which  they  accepted,  then  enter 
his  carriage  and  depart  for  Posen  ! 

He  had  sent  on  before  him  General  Dombrowski3  and 
Count  Wybicki,  who  had  both  served  under  his  orders  in  the 
campaigns  of  Italy.  It  was  from  Posen  that  they  dated  a  kind 
of  appeal  to  all  Poland,  announcing  its  re-establishment.  This 
document  which  had  been  committed  to  them  at  Berlin,  disclosed 
and  at  the  same  time  concealed  sufficiently  the  authorization  of 
Napoleon,  to  enable  him  to  own  or  disown  it,  according  as  circum- 
stances favoured  or  arrested  his  undertaking.  At  Posen,  they 
received  him  with  enthusiasm.  A  deputation  arranged  by  Murat, 
who  was  already  at  Warsaw,  and  composed  of  men  of  sufficient 
position  to  make  it  believed  that  they  spoke  in  the  name  of  the 
nation,  was  on  the  day  after  the  arrival  of  Napoleon,  at  the 
gate  of  the  palace  he  occupied. 

This  deputation  was  numerous ;  the  names  which  have 
remained  in  my  memory  are  those  of  Alexander  Potocki, 
Malachowski,  Gutakowski,  Dzialinski.  In  the  speech  they 
addressed  to  the  emperor,  they  offered  him  all  the  forces  of  the 
country.  Napoleon  seized  upon  this  offer,  and  explaining  him- 
self little  as  to  the  rest  of  their  demands,  replied  to  them : 
"  When  you  shall  have  an  army  of  forty  thousand  men,  you 
will  be  worthy  of  being  a  nation  ;  and   then   you  will  have  a 

1  Field-Marshal  Count  von  Mollendorff,  former  lieutenant  of  Frederick  II.,  and 
one  of  the  best  generals  of  the  Prussian  army.  He  had  been  grievously  wounded  at 
Auerstadt  (1 725-1816). 

2  Johan  von  Miiller,  German  historian,  born  at  Schaffhausen  in  1752,  was  Aulic 
councillor  at  Mayence,  then  at  Vienna.  He  came  to  Berlin  in  1795,  and  Frederic  II. 
named  him  private  counsellor  and  historiographer  of  his  house.  Napoleon  saw  him 
in  1806,  attached  him  to  himself,  and  employed  him  as  minister  of  state  of  the  new 
kingdom  of  Westphalia.      He  died  in  1809. 

3  Jean  Dombrowski,  Polish  general,  one  of  the  heroes  of  the  insurrection  of  1794. 
In  1795,  he  had  offered  his  services  to  the  Directory,  which  had  authorized  him  to 
raise  a  Polish  legion  for  the  service  of  France.     He  commanded  it  up  to  1814. 


234  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

right  to  all  my  protection."     The  deputation  returned  promptly 
to  Warsaw,  full  of  hope. 

It  was  at  Posen  that  the  emperor  treated  with  the  Elector 
of  Saxony,  until  then  an  ally  of  Prussia.  The  elector  joined 
the  Confederation  of  the  Rhine  and  took  the  title  of  king.1  On 
this  occasion,  Napoleon  received  the  list  of  pictures  that  M. 
Denon2  induced  him  to  take  from  the  gallery  of  Dresden.  He 
was  reading  it  when  I  entered  his  study,  and  he  showed  it  to  me. 
"If  your  Majesty,"  said  I  to  him,  "carries  away  any  of  the 
pictures  of  Dresden,  you  will  do  more  than  the  King  of  Saxony 
allowed  himself  to  do,  for  he  does  not  believe  he  has  the  power 
to  put  any  of  them  in  his  palace.  He  respects  the  gallery  as 
national  property." 

"  Yes,"  said  Napoleon,  "  he  is  a  very  good  man  ;  we  must 
not  cause  him  any  grief,  I  am  going  to  give  orders  not  to 
touch  anything.     We  will  see  later." 

The  emperor,  being  certain  of  having  a  new  army  corps  of 
at  least  forty  thousand  Poles,  left  a  few  days  after  for  Warsaw. 

Murat  alone  was  informed  of  the  exact  moment  of  his  arrival 
in  that  city,  which  he  entered  in  the  middle  of  the  night.  At  six 
o'clock  in  the  morning,  the  new  authorities,  all  created  by  the 
influence  of  the  French  officers  who  belonged  to  the  army  corps 
of  Murat,  received  the  order  to  repair  to  the  palace  where  they 
were  to  be  presented  to  the  emperor.  He  received  with  marked 
distinction  the  most  ardent  among  the  men  who  came  there  ; 
they  belonged  to  that  class  of  patriots  always  ready  to  welcome 
any  change  whatever  in  the  organization  of  their  country.  He 
showed  himself  more  severe  towards  the  others,  and  particularly 
towards  Prince  Joseph  Poniatowski,3  whom  he  blamed  very 
bitterly  for  not  having  consented  to  take  his  rank  in  the  army 
again  until  positive  orders  had  been  given  him  by  Murat  in  the 
name  of  the  emperor.  By  deserving  this  reproach  made  to  his 
fidelity,   Prince  Joseph  secured   a  special    place  in    the  esteem 

1  December  II,  1806. 

-  The  Baron  Denon  (1747-1825)  was  Director-General  of  Museums. 

3  Prince  Joseph  Poniatowski,  nephew  of  the  last  King  of  Poland,  Marshal  of 
France  in  1813.  He  was  drowned  in  the  Elster,  the  day  after  the  battle  of  Leipzig. 
In  1806,  he  put  himself  at  the  head  of  the  Polish  army,  after  having  exacted  and 
obtained  that  this  army  should  preserve  its  nationality  and  its  autonomy,  and  should 
not  be  incorporated  into  the  French  troops. 


THE  CONVENTION,  THE  DIRECTORY,  THE  CONSULATE.  235 

of  the  emperor,  who,  at  the   moment  he  gave  Poland  a  pro- 
visory government,  appointed  him  Minister  of  War. 

The  first  stay  of  Napoleon  at  Warsaw  was  very  short.  In 
all  the  conversations  he  had  had  with  the  most  influential 
persons  of  the  country,  he  had  announced  his  intention  to  march 
soon  upon  Grodno,  adding  that,  the  obstacles  being  insignificant, 
he  would  in  a  short  time  have  destroyed  all  what  he  already 
called  the  remains  of  the  Russian  army,  and  driven  back,  as  he 
said,  these  new  Europeans  into  their  former  frontiers.  The  quag- 
mires of  Pultusk1  delayed  for  some  time  the  execution  of  his 
plans,  without  however  modifying  his  language.  On  returning  to 
Warsaw,  he  announced  that  he  had  just  had  great  successes,  but 
that  he  did  not  wish  to  avail  himself  of  advantages  which  the 
season  rendered  very  painful  to  his  troops,  and  that  he  was 
going  to  take  up  his  winter  quarters. 

He  employed  that  period  of  rest  which,  after  all,  was  not  long, 
in  organizing  Poland  in  such  a  manner  that  she  became  a  great 
help  to  him,  at  the  opening  of  the  campaign. 

And  as  he  knew  that  imagination  only  rules  in  that  peculiar 
country,  he  devoted  his  whole  care  during  the  three  weeks  which 
he  spent  in  Warsaw,  to  exalting  the  military  spirit  of  the  nation, 
to  giving  fetes,  balls,  concerts,  to  showing  contempt  for  the 
Russians,  to  displaying  great  luxury,  and  to  speaking  of  John 
Sobieski.  He  also  laid  his  glory  publicly  at  the  feet  of  a  beauti- 
ful Polish  lady,  Madame  Anastase  Walewska,  who  followed  him 
to  Osterode  and  to  Finkenstein,  whither  he  betook  himself,  in 
order  to  visit  all  his  troops. 

I  was  to  remain  at  WTarsaw,  where  there  was  a  kind  of  diplo- 
matic corps  ;  I  was  surrounded  by  German  ministers,  whose 
masters,  in  these  destructive  times,  had  the  face  to  think  of  ob- 
taining enlargements  of  territory.  Austria,  from  different 
motives,  had  sent  there  Baron  de  Vincent.2     His  instructions 

1  Pultusk,  a  city  of  Russian  Poland  on  the  Narew  (4,800  inhabitants).     Victory  of 
Lannes  over  Benningsen  in  1807. 

2  Baron  Ch.  de  Vincent,  born  in  Lorraine,  entered  the  service  of  the  Empire  ;  he 
was  employed  in  the  negotiations  with  Pichegru  ;  was  one  of  the  signatories  of  the 
treaty  of  Campo-Formio,  became,  in  1814,  governor  of  the  Low  Countries  in  the 
name  of  the  allies,  and  was  afterwards  sent  as  ambassador  to  Paris.  The  provinces 
whose  interests  were  entrusted  to  his  care  in  1807,  were  the  Palatinates  of  Cracow, 
Sandomir,  and  Lublin,  whose  frontier  follows  the  course  of  the  river  Boug. 


236  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLE  YRAND. 

were  confined  to  seeing  that  order  was  not  disturbed  in  the 
former  Polish  possessions  which  had  fallen  to  the  share  of  the 
Emperor  of  Austria  since  the  last  partition  of  Poland,  and  which 
were  close  to  the  seat  of  war.  I  entered  into  his  views,  and 
helped  him  by  all  the  means  in  my  power  to  fill  his  mission 
satisfactorily. 

Napoleon  had  appointed  as  Governor  of  Poland  a  man  so 
utterly  incapable  that  he  instructed  me,  during  his  absence,  to 
watch  over  details  which  were  naturally  among  the  duties  of  the 
Governor.  Thus,  I  clothed  the  troops,  sent  them  off,  bought  the 
provisions,  visited  the  hospitals,  witnessed  the  dressing  of  wounds, 
distributed  gratuities,  and  had  even  to  go  so  far  as  to  indicate  to 
the  Governor  what  he  ought  to  put  in  the  orders  of  the  day. 
This  kind  of  occupation,  being  entirely  foreign  to  my  usual 
pursuits,  would  have  been  very  laborious,  had  I  not  found  in  the 
house  of  Prince  Poniatowski,  and  in  that  of  the  Countess  Vincent 
Tyszkiewicz,  his  sister,  all  sorts  of  help  and  assistance.  The 
marks  of  interest  at  first,  of  affection  afterwards,  which  I  received 
in  that  excellent  and  noble  family,  are  indelibly  engraved  on  my 
grateful  heart.  I  was  grieved  at  leaving  Warsaw.  But  the  battle 
of  Eylau  had  just  been  fought  with  a  certain  amount  of  success,1 
and  Napoleon,  being  anxious  to  enter  on  negotiations,  had  in- 
structed me  to  join  him.  However,  all  the  attempts  made  in 
that  direction  failed  ;  it  was  still  necessary  for  him  to  fight,  and, 
after  a  few  days,  he  understood  it.  The  taking  of  Danzig,2  had 
raised  again  what  is  called  the  spirit  of  the  army,  a  little  de- 
pressed by  the  difficulties  it  had  experienced  at  Pultusk,  by 
the  battle  of  Eylau,  by  the  climate,  and,  for  Frenchmen,  by 
too  prolonged  an  absence  from  their  country.  The  emperor,  with 
all  the  troops  he  had  collected,  marched  on  Heilsberg,  where  he 
won  a  first  victory  3  ;  pursuing  the  Russians,  he  beat  them  again 
at  Gutstadt  and  finally  at  Friedland.4 

The  terror  that  this  last  defeat  spread  among  the  Russians 
induced  them  to  desire  the  quick  termination  of  that  great 
struggle.  An  interview,  to  take  place  in  the  middle  of  the 
Niemen,  was  proposed  by  Alexander  ;  it  was  so  romantically 
conceived  and  might  be  so  magnificently  arranged,  that  Napoleon, 

1  February  8,  1807.  -  May  26.  3  June  II.  *  June  14. 


THE  CONVENTION,  THE  DIRECTORY,  THE  CONSULATE.  237 

who  saw  in  it  a  brilliant  episode  for  the  romance  of  his  life, 
accepted  it.  The  bases  of  the  peace  were  laid  out  there.  We  all 
repaired  immediately  after,  to  Tilsit,  where  my  instructions  were, 
not  to  negotiate  with  the  Prussian  plenipotentiaries,  General 
Kalkreuth1  and  Count  von  Goltz,2  but  to  sign  with  them  the  treaty 
which  contained  the  territorial  cessions  of  Prussia,  as  they  had  been 
agreed  upon  between  the  Emperor  Napoleon  and  the  Emperor 
Alexander.3  The  latter  did  not  confine  himself  to  making  peace, 
but  he  became, by  a  treaty  that  I  negotiated  and  signed  with  Prince 
Kourakin,4  the  ally  of  Napoleon,  and,  by  that  very  reason,  the 
enemy  of  his  own  former  allies.5 

The  Emperor  Alexander,  satisfied  with  losing  nothing,  and 
with  gaining  even  something  (which,  historians,  however  impartial 
they  may  be,  will  not  like  to  admit),  and  with  having  thus  screened 
the  interests  of  his  pride  in  regard  to  his  subjects,  thought  he 
had  fulfilled  all  the  duties  of  friendship  towards  the  King  of 
Prussia,  by  helping  him  to  retain  nominally  half  of  his  king- 
dom ;  after  which  he  left,  without  even  taking  the  precaution  of 
ascertaining  whether  the  half  which  the  king  was  to  keep  should 
be  promptly  restored  to  him,  whether  that  half  should  be  entirely 
restored,  and  whether  His  Prussian  Majesty  might  not  be  obliged 
to  buy  it  again  at  the  cost  of  fresh  sacrifices.     This  was  to  be 

1  Frederick-Adolphus,  Count  von  Kalkreuth  (1737-1818).  He  enlisted  in  1752, 
became  field-marshal  in  1807,  and  Governor  of  Berlin. 

'-'  Augustus  Frederick,  Count  von  Goltz  (1765-1832),  entered  in  1787  the  diplo- 
matic service  of  Prussia,  was  minister  at  Copenhagen,  at  Mayence,  at  Stockholm,  at 
St.  Petersburg.  He  became,  in  1814,  marshal  of  the  court,  then  deputy  of  Prussia 
to  the  Diet  and  councillor  of  state. 

3  July  9>  1807.  This  treaty  merely  reproduced  certain  articles  of  the  treaty  with 
Russia,  for  Napoleon,  out  of  increased  contempt  for  Prussia,  wished  to  appear  to  have 
consented  to  the  existence  of  that  state  solely  out  of  consideration  for  the  Emperor 
Alexander ;  thus  he  had  insisted  that  the  stipulations  concerning  Prussia  should 
appear  to  have  been  debated  only  between  the  Emperor  of  Russia  and  himself. 
Prussia  lost  all  she  possessed  between  the  Elbe  and  the  Rhine,  including  Magdeburg, 
and  nearly  all  her  Polish  provinces.  She  was  reduced  from  9,000,000  of  inhabitants 
to  4,000,000. 

4  Field- Marshal  Prince  Kourakin  had  been  minister  and  vice-chancellor  of  Russia. 
After  the  Peace  of  Tilsit,  he  was  ambassador  at  Paris. 

5  The  treaty  with  Russia  was  signed  on  July  7,  1S07.  The  Emperor  Alexander 
recognized  the  new  state  of  things  which  had  taken  place  in  the  west,  as  well  as  all 
the  kingdoms  recently  created  by  Napoleon.  Besides,  a  secret  treaty  of  alliance 
was  signed  on  the  same  day.  Russia  promised  to  declare  war  against  England  on 
December  1  following.  In  return,  France  promised  her  mediation  and,  if  need  be, 
her  alliance  against  Turkey,  and  a  plan  of  partition  of  the  Ottoman  Empire  was 
arranged.  An  expedition  to  India  was  likewise  mentioned.  Already,  the  winter  before, 
Napoleon  had  sent  General  Gardanne  to  Persia  to  prepare  the  way. 


238  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

feared  after  the  brutal  question  which  Napoleon  one  day  asked 
the  Queen  of  Prussia  :  "  How  did  you  dare  to  make  war  against 
me,  Madam,  with  such  feeble  means  at  your  disposal  ? "  "  Permit 
me,  Sire,  to  tell  your  Majesty  that  the  glory  of  Frederick  II.  had 
misled  us  as  to  the  true  state  of  our  power."  That  word  glory, 
so  happily  placed,  and  at  Tilsit,  in  the  very  study  of  the  Em- 
peror Napoleon,  seemed  to  me  superbly  dignified.  I  repeated 
this  fine  reply  of  the  queen,  often  enough  for  the  emperor  to  say 
to  me  one  day  :  "  I  cannot  imagine  what  you  think  so  fine  in  that 
saying  of  the  Queen  of  Prussia  ;  you  might  as  well  speak  of 
something  else." 

I  was  indignant  at  all  I  saw  or  heard,  but  was  obliged  to 
conceal  my  indignation,  and  I  shall  ever  be  thankful  that  the 
Queen  of  Prussia,  who  deserved  to  live  in  better  days,  was 
graciously  pleased  to  acknowledge  it.  If  in  the  recollections 
of  my  life,  several  are  necessarily  painful,  I  remember  at 
least  with  much  sweetness  the  things  which  she  then  had  the 
goodness  to  say  to  me,  and  those  which  she  almost  entrusted  to 
me.  "  Prince  de  Benevent,"  she  said  to  me  the  last  time  I  had 
the  honour  of  seeing  her  to  her  carriage, "  there  are  only  two 
persons  who  regret  my  having  had  to  come  here,  I  and  yourself. 
You  are  not  angry,  are  you,  at  my  thinking  so  ?  "  The  tears 
of  compassion  and  pride  that  filled  my  eyes  were  my  sole 
reply. 

The  efforts  made  by  this  noble  woman  were  without  avail 
with  Napoleon  ;  he  triumphed,  and  was  therefore  inflexible.  The 
promises  he  had  caused  to  be  broken,  and  those  he  had  obtained, 
had  intoxicated  him.  He  was  pleased  also  to  believe,  that  he 
had  made  a  dupe  of  the  Emperor  of  Russia ;  but  time  has  proved 
that  the  real  dupe  was  himself. 

By  the  treaty  of  Tilsit,  the  youngest  of  his  brothers,  Jerome 
Bonaparte,  had  been  recognized  as  King  of  Westphalia.  His 
kingdom  was  composed  of  several  of  the  provinces  ceded 
by  Prussia,  of  the  greater  part  of  the  electorate  of  Hesse, 
and  of  the  duchy  of  Brunswick-Wolfenbiittel,  conquered  but 
not  ceded.  Napoleon  desired  greatly  to  add  to  them  also  the 
principalities  of  Anhalt,  Lippe  and  Waldeck.  But,  taking 
advantage  of  the  real  embarrassment  in  which  he  found  him- 


THE  CONVENTION,  THE  DIRECTORY,  THE  CONSULATE.  239 

self  after  the  battle  of  Pultusk,  which,  however,  he  would 
not  acknowledge,  I  had  had  these  principalities  admitted  as  well 
as  those  of  Reuss  and  Schwarzburg  into  the  Confederation  of 
the  Rhine,  and  he  did  not  yet  dare  to  attempt,  as  he  did  later, 
anything  against  the  princes  he  had  admitted  to  that  body.  The 
treaty  of  Tilsit  having  been  signed  and  ratified,  we  could,  at 
last,  return  to  France. 

The  excitement  which  I  had  been  subjected  to  for  nearly  a 
year,  made  me  feel  inexpressibly  happy  and  comfortable,  while 
passing  through  Dresden,  where  I  spent  several  days.  The  noble 
and  quiet  manners  of  the  Court  of  Saxony,  the  public  and  private 
virtues  of  King  Frederick  Augustus,1  the  benevolence  and  sin- 
cerity which  appeared  everywhere,  made  me  preserve  a  special 
remembrance  of  this  stay  at  Dresden. 

Napoleon,  on  arriving  in  Paris,  created  for  Marshal  Berthier 
the  post  of  vice-constable,  and  for  myself  that  of  vice-grand- 
elector.  These  posts  were  honourable  and  lucrative  sinecures  ; 
I  then  left  the  cabinet  as  I  had  intended  to  do. 

During  all  the  time  I  had  charge  of  the  management  of 
foreign  affairs,  I  served  Napoleon  with  fidelity  and  zeal.  As 
to  the  emperor,  he  adhered,  for  a  long  time,  to  the  views 
which  I  considered  it  a  duty  to  suggest  to  him.  Those  views 
were  based  upon  these  two  considerations :  To  establish  for 
France  monarchical  institutions  which  should  secure  the  pre- 
rogatives of  the  crown  and  the  authority  of  the  sovereign, 
by  keeping  them  within  just  limits  ;  to  spare  Europe  in  order 
that  the  Powers  might  pardon  France  her  achievements  and 
glory.  In  1807,  Napoleon  had  already  for  a  long  time  past,  it 
must  be  owned,  kept  away  from  the  path  on  which  I  had  done 
my  best  to  keep  him,  but  I  had  been  unable,  until  the  occasion 
which  now  presented  itself,  to  give  up  the  nominal  direction 
of  foreign  affairs.  It  was  not  so  easy  as  one  might  suppose  to 
resign  a  post,  the  duties  of  which  brought  its  occupant  in  daily 
contact  with  him. 

1  Frederick  Augustus  I.,  born  in  1758,  Elector  of  Saxony  at  the  death  of  his 
brother  in  1763.  Married  Amelia,  Princess  of  Zwei-Briicken.  He  took  the  title  of 
King  in  1806,  and  remained  faithful  to  Napoleon  until  18 13.  The  Congress  of 
Vienna  gave  him  back  a  portion  of  his  possessions.  He  died  in  1827,  leaving  the 
throne  to  his  elder  brother,  Antoine. 


240  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLE  YRAND. 

Hardly  returned  from  Tilsit,  Napoleon  devoted  all  his  atten- 
tion to  the  execution  of  his  designs  on  Spain.  The  intrigue  of 
this  undertaking  is  so  involved  that  I  have  thought  it  necessary 
to  explain  it  separately.1  I  must  only  say  here  that  the 
emperor,  clinging  to  the  belief  that  I  approved  his  projects, 
chose  precisely  my  estate  of  Valencay,  to  become  the  prison 
of  Ferdinand  VII.,  his  brother,  and  their  uncle.  But  neither 
these  princes  nor  the  public  were  deceived  by  this.  He 
succeeded  no  more  in  making  people  believe  that,  in  this,  I  was 
his  accomplice,  than  he  did  in  the  conquest  of  Spain. 

When  the  Emperor  Alexander  and  he  had  separated  at 
Tilsit,  they  promised  to  see  each  other  again  soon.  This  was  a 
promise  Napoleon  had  no  desire  to  keep,  at  least  unless  the 
state  of  his  affairs  made  it  necessary.  But  when  General 
Junot  had  been  driven  from  Portugal  by  the  English,2  when 
General  Dupont  was  forced  to  capitulate  at  Baylen,3  and  when 
a  general  insurrection  in  Spain,  gave  prospects  of  a  resistance 
which  might  be  of  long  duration,  he  began  to  fear  that  Austria 
might  profit  by  these  circumstances,  and  felt  the  need  of 
making  more  sure  of  Russia's  intentions.  He  then  grew 
anxious  to  see  the  Emperor  Alexander  once  more,  and  invited 
him  to  an  interview  to  take  place  at  Erfurt.4  Although 
already  very  cold  with  me,  he  wished  me  to  accompany  him  ; 
he  was  persuaded  that  I  might  prove  useful  to  him  and  that 
sufficed  him.  The  numerous  and  piquant  incidents  of  this 
interview  form  an  episode  by  themselves  :  I  have  thought  it 
advisable  to  make  a  separate  chapter  of  them.5  The  intention 
of  Napoleon,  however,  must  find  a  place  here.     His  purpose  was 

1  See  Part  IV. 

2  General  Andoche  Junot,  Due  d'Abrantes,  had  been  placed  at  the  head  of  the 
army  of  Portugal.  At  first  successful  (1807),  he  was,  on  August  21,  1808,  defeated 
at  Vimeiro  by  the  Anglo-Portuguese  army,  and  forced  to  sign  at  Cintra  a  capitulation, 
by  the  terms  of  which  he  was  to  evacuate  Portugal. 

3  General  Pierre  Dupont  de  l'Etang  (1765-1839)  had  been,  in  180S,  placed  at  the 
head  of  the  Andalusian  army.  On  July  22,  being  attacked  by  superior  forces  com- 
manded by  the  Spanish  general,  Castanos,  he  capitulated  in  the  open  field  near 
Baylen.  8,000  French  soldiers  were  disarmed  and  sent  to  the  rocks  of  Cabrera 
(Balearic  Island.-),  where  they  died  for  the  most  part  from  sickness  and  misery. 
General  Dupont,  having  returned  to  France,  was  tried  by  a  court-martial,  and 
.sentenced  to  imprisonment  for  life.  He  came  out  of  prison  in  1814,  and  was  Minister 
of  War  under  the  first  Restoration. 

4  A  city  of  the  kingdom  of  Saxony  (to-day  annexed  to  Prussia)  on  the  Gera. 

5  See  Part  V. 


THE  CONVENTION,  THE  DIRECTORY,  THE  CONSULATE.  241 

to  induce  the  Emperor  Alexander  to  make  a  special  alliance 
with  him  against  Austria.  That  which  he  had  concluded  at 
Tilsit,  although  general,  was  particularly  directed  against  Eng- 
land. If  he  had  succeeded  at  Erfurt,  he  would,  under  some 
pretext  easily  invented,  have  sought  a  quarrel  with  Austria, 
and  after  a  few  military  successes  he  would  have  tried  to  do 
with  it  as  he  had  done  with  Prussia. 

The  complete  co-operation  of  Russia  would  have  thoroughly 
enabled  him  to  reach  his  goal.  Having  a  very  small  opinion  of 
the  genius  and  self-will  of  the  Emperor  Alexander,  he  hoped  to 
succeed.  His  intention  was  to  intimidate  the  Czar  at  first,  and 
then  to  arouse  both  his  vanity  and  his  ambition  ;  and,  indeed,  it 
was  to  be  feared  that  on  these  three  points,  the  Emperor  of  Russia 
might  prove  only  too  accessible.  But  the  star  of  Austria 
willed  that  M.  de  Caulaincourt,1  who  has  always  been  persistently 
misjudged,  should  inspire  the  Emperor  of  Austria  with  confidence, 
and  not  cause  the  Emperor  Alexander  to  lose  that  he  placed 
in  me.  I  had  seen  him  several  times  in  private  at  Tilsit.  I 
saw  him  nearly  every  day  at  Erfurt.  Our  conversations  were 
at  first  of  a  general  turn  concerning  the  common  interests  ex- 
isting between  the  great  powers  of  Europe  ;  the  conditions  on 
which  the  ties,  which  it  was  important  to  preserve  between  them, 
were  to  be  broken  ;  the  equilibrium  of  Europe  in  general ;  the 
probable  consequences  of  its  destruction  ;  then,  gradually  our 
conversations  turned  more  particularly  to  the  States  whose 
existence  was  necessary  for  this  equilibrium,  especially  to 
Austria.  These  conversations  put  the  emperor  in  such  a  state 
of  mind  that  the  coaxing,  the  persuasion,  and  the  threats  of 
Napoleon  were  a  dead  loss  ;  and  that,  before  quitting  Erfurt,  the 
Emperor  Alexander  wrote  in  his  own  hand  to  the  Emperor  of 
Austria  to  reassure  him  with  regard  to  the  fears,  which  the 
Erfurt  interview  had  caused  him.  It  was  the  last  service  I  was 
able  to  render  Europe,  as  long  as  Napoleon  continued  to  reign, 
and  this  service,  in  my  opinion,  I  was  also  rendering  to  himself 
personally. 

1  Louis  de  Caulaincourt,  born  in  1773  at  Caulaincourt  (Aisne),  of  noble  parentage. 
Under  the  Empire  he  became  general  of  division,  grand-equerry  and  Due  de  Vicence 
(Vicenza).  He  went  to  Russia  as  ambassador  in  1807,  was  appointed  Minister  of 
Foreign  Affairs  in  1813,  and  died  in  1827. 

VOL.  I.  R 


242  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

After  having  given  many  fetes  and  made  a  kind  of  treaty 
essentially  different  from  that  he  had  in  view  on  coming  to 
Erfurt,  the  emperor  returned  to  Paris,  and  M.  de  Champagny,1 
thereafter  had  the  sole  direction  of  the  department  of  Foreign 
Affairs.  As  for  me,  I  resumed  the  insignificant  life  of  a  grand 
dignitary. 

At  all  hazards,  I  did  what  was  in  my  power  to  obtain  the 
confidence  of  the  Emperor  Alexander,  and  I  succeeded,  suffi- 
ciently well  for  him  to  send  to  me,  as  soon  as  his  first  trouble  broke 
out  with  France,  Count  de  Nesselrode,  councillor  to  the  Russian 
Embassy  in  Paris,  who,  on  entering  my  room,  said  to  me,  "  I 
have  just  come  from  St.  Petersburg  ;  I  hold  an  official  situation 
with  Prince  Kourakin,  although  it  is  really  to  you  that  I  am 
accredited.  I  am  keeping  up  a  private  correspondence  with  the 
emperor,  and  now  bring  you  one  of  his  letters." 

1  Jean-Baptiste  Nompere  de  Champagny,  Due  de  Cadore  (i  756-1834),  former 
deputy  of  the  nobility  to  the  States-General,  became,  in  1800,  councillor  of  state, 
ambassador  at  Vienna  (1801),  and  Minister  of  the  Interior;  in  1807,  he  succeeded 
Talleyrand  as  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs. 


END   OF   THE  THIRD   PART. 


PART  IV. 

SPANISH   AFFAIRS. 

1807 

Napoleon  at  Finkenstein — His  love  of  deceit — Situation  of  France  at  the 
close  of  the  year  1807 — Napoleon's  designs  on  Spain — The  pretext 
he  chose  to  carry  them  out — Talleyrand  endeavours  to  dissuade  the 
emperor  from  wronging  the  old  ally  of  France. — Treaty  of  Fontainebleau 
— Napoleon's  shameful  breach  of  faith  towards  Charles  IV.  of  Spain — 
Don  Juan  de  Escoiquiz,  Canon  of  Toledo,  and  the  Prince  of  the  Asturias 
— The  intrigues  of  Godoy,  Prince  of  the  Peace — Don  Escoiquiz' plan  to 
thwart  them — The  French  ambassador  and  Don  Escoiquiz — Napoleon's 
ruse — Letter  of  the  Prince  of  the  Asturias  to  Napoleon — Letter  of  the 
Prince  of  the  Peace  to  the  Emperor — Provisions  of  the  treaty  of 
Fontainebleau — Projected  dismemberment  of  Portugal — Secret  Conven- 
tion aimed  at  Spain,  though  ostensibly,  at  Portugal — The  French  troops 
in  Spain — Arrest  of  the  Prince  of  the  Asturias — He  is  put  on  his  trial — 
Declared  not  guilty — Occupation  of  Navarra,  Catalonia  and  Guipuzcoa 
by  the  French— Fears  of  the  Prince  of  the  Peace — Projected  flight  of 
the  royal  family — Indignation  of  the  people — General  discontent  against 
Godoy,  Prince  of  the  Peace — The  Aranjuez  riots — Popular  hatred 
against  Godoy — Loyalty  of  the  people  towards  the  royal  family — Arrest 
of  Godoy— He  is  put  on  his  trial — Abdication  of  King  Charles  IV.  in 
favour  of  Ferdinand,  Prince  of  the  Asturias — Arrival  of  Ferdinand  VII.  at 
Madrid — The  Grand  Due  de  Berg  (Murat)  and  King  Ferdinand — Change 
of  the  people's  disposition  towards  the  French — Negotiations  between 
Don  Escoiquiz  and  the  Grand  Due  de  Berg — Murat  insists  on  the  sus- 
pension of  Godoy's  trial — Murat  demands  the  release  of  the  latter,  in 
Napoleon's  name — Ferdinand  VII.  sends  his  brother  Don  Carlos  to 
meet  Napoleon  on  his  way  to  Spain — Charles  IV.'s  protest — Retracts 
his  abdication — Don  Antonio  appointed  Regent — Ferdinand  VII.  leaves 
Madrid,  on  his  way  to  Bayonne — Free  for  eight  hours- — Lasciate  ogni 
speranza — Arrival  at  Bayonne — -Ferdinand  and  the  Infante  Antonio  prac- 
tically prisoners — Napoleon  unmasks  his  designs — Offers  to  Ferdinand 
the  kingdom  of  Etruria,  in  exchange  for  the  cession  of  the  rights  of  the 
latter  to  the  Crown  of  Spain — Refusal  of  Ferdinand — Noble  reply  of  the 
Marquis   de    Labrador  to    M.   de    Champagny — Napoleon    and    Don 

R   2 


244  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

Esco'fquiz — It  is  too  late  ! — Charles  IV.  at  Bayonne — Ferdinand's  re- 
nunciation of  the  crown — Murat  appointed  lieutenant-general  of  Spain 
— The  royal  princes  of  Spain  at  the  chateau  of  Valengay — Prince 
Talleyrand  welcomes  them — Inaptitude  of  the  princes  for  study — 
Everyday  life  at  Valencay — Talleyrand  summoned  to  Nantes — Napo- 
leon's bluster — Scathing  retort  of  Talleyrand — Rupture  between  Napo- 
leon and  Talleyrand — Talleyrand  summoned  to  Erfurt — Takes  leave  of 
the  Spanish  princes — Their  gratitude — By  the  grace  of  God — The 
Emperor  of  Russia  recognizes  Joseph  Bonaparte  as  King  of  Spain — 
Treaty  of  Valencay — Failure  of  Napoleon's  designs  on  Spain — The 
result  of  Napoleon's  threats  against  England — Want  of  dignity  of 
Ferdinand  VII. — His  return  to  Madrid — His  cruel  proceedings  towards 
his  faithful  supporters — England's  fault  in  Spain. 

NAPOLEON  was  at  Finkenstein,1  and  said  one  day,  in  a  cheerful 
moment,  "  I  know,  when  necessary,  how  to  throw  off  the  skin 
of  the  lion,  and  put  on  that  of  the  fox." 

He  was  fond  of  deceiving,  and  would  do  so  for  the  mere  love 
of  it ;  apart  from  his  policy,  his  instinct  would  have  made  it  a 
necessity  for  him.  For  the  carrying  out  of  the  projects  which  he 
was  always  meditating,  artifice  was  no  less  necessary  than  force. 
It  was  especially  in  the  accomplishment  of  his  views  on  Spain 
that  he  felt  that  force  alone  could  not  be  sufficient. 

Napoleon,  seated  on  one  of  the  thrones  of  the  House  of 
Bourbon,  considered  the  princes  who  occupied  the  other  two,  as 
his  natural  enemies,  whom  it  was  his  interest  to  overthrow. 
But  it  was  an  undertaking  in  which  he  could  not  fail,  without 
ruining  his  own  designs,  and  perhaps  himself  as  well.  It  was 
not  then  to  be  entered  upon,  without  being  fully  certain  of  success. 

The  first  condition  to  secure  that  success  was  that  there 
should  be  no  occasion  to  fear  a  diversion  on  the  Continent. 

At  the  end  of  1807,  Napoleon  was  master  of  the  whole  of 
Italy,2  and  of  that  portion  of  Germany  that  lies  between  the  Rhine 
and  the  Elbe.3  He  had,  under  the  name  of  duchy  of  Warsaw, 
restored  a  part  of  ancient  Poland,  extending  from  Silesia  to  the 

1  Head -quarters  of  the  Emperor  Napoleon  during  the  campaign  of  1807,  in 
Poland. 

2  The  treaty  of  Presburg  had  given  Venice  to  the  kingdom  of  Italy.  Joseph 
reigned  at  Naples.  Thus  the  Papal  States  alone  were  not  directly  dependent  on  the 
emperor. 

3  Jerome  Bonaparte  reigned  in  Westphalia  ;  Murat  at  Berg.  The  Kings  of  Bavaria 
and  Wurtemberg,  the  Grand  Duke  of  Baden,  and  the  other  princes  of  the  Rhenish 
Confederation,  were  at  the  time  thoroughly  devoted  to  France. 


SPANISH  AFFAIRS.  245 

Niemen,1  so  that  that  country  was  devoted  to  him.  Prussia  was 
almost  crushed.  Austria,  weakened  by  the  losses  of  all  kinds 
which  she  had  suffered,  was  not  in  a  position  to  undertake 
anything  alone  ;  on  the  other  hand,  Napoleon  had  easily  brought 
Russia  to  entertain  ambitious  plans,  and  in  giving  her  two  wars 
to  carry  on,  had  given  her  what  would,  for  a  long  time,  occupy 
all  her  forces.2  Therefore,  Spain  appeared  to  him  as  completely 
isolated  as  he  could  wish.  But  in  attacking  her  he  had  a  two- 
fold danger  to  fear. 

Since  the  Peace  of  Basel  between  France  and  Spain,  that  is 
to  say  for  eleven  years,  Spain  had  been  the  faithful  ally  of 
France.  Money,  ships,  soldiers,  she  had  put  everything  at  the 
disposal  of  the  latter,  she  had  lavished  all  on  her.  At  this 
time,  twenty  thousand  men,  the  flower  of  her  troops,  and  the  best 
of  her  generals  were  serving  in  the  French  army  at  the  further 
extremity  of  Europe.  How  could  he  declare  war  against  her  ? 
What  pretext  could  he  allege  ?  Could  he  divulge  the  motives  of 
his  dynastic  ambition  ?  In  making  them  known,  he  exposed 
himself  to  the  risk  of  turning  against  himself  the  feelings  of  his 
own  subjects  ;  and  all  his  contempt  for  the  human  race  did  not 
prevent  him  from  understanding  that  the  force  of  public  opinion 
must  count  for  something.  In  declaring  war  he  would  provoke 
Spain  to  resistance  ;  a  thousand  unforeseen  circumstances  might 
arise,  and,  however  successful  and  short  this  war  might  be,  it 
would  none  the  less  leave  to  the  Spanish  royal  family  both 
the  means  and  the  time  to  repair  to  its  possessions  on  the  other 
side  of  the  ocean.  Spain,  in  this  case,  would  become  for  him  a 
possession,  dangerous  and  difficult  to  govern,  for  the  nation, 
being  attached  to  the  royal  family,  would  have  formed  wishes 
for  the  success  of  its  legitimate  rulers,  and  always  sided  with  the 
American  colonies  ;  this  was  leaving  to  the  House  of  Bourbon,  a 
hope,  a  favourable  prospect  of  returning  to  Spain.  Besides, 
the  separation  of  the  Spanish  colonies  from  their  metropolis 
would  entail  serious  losses  on  French  commerce,  and  Napoleon 


1  The  Grand  Duchy  of  Warsaw,  formed  of  the  Polish  provinces  taken  from  Prussia, 
had  been  given  to  the  King  of  Saxony. 

2  The  first  against   Sweden  in  order  to  annex  Finland  ;  and  the  other  against 
Turkey,  in  the  hope  of  acquiring  the  Danubian  principalities. 


246  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

would  consequently  find  that  he  had  injured  one  of  the  dearest 
interests  of  his  people. 

He  must  then  employ  all  his  art  to  prevent  this  twofold  danger. 
If  it  were  possible  for  him  to  veil  the  odium  of  his  undertaking, 
knowing  the  inclination  of  men  to  pardon  successful  crimes,  he 
could  flatter  himself  that  the  impression  of  the  one  he  was  medi- 
tating would  be  much  weakened,  if  already  accomplished  when 
becoming  known. 

To  conquer  Spain,  without  striking  a  blow,  there  existed  but 
one  means :  it  was,  to  introduce  under  the  shadow  of  friendship, 
sufficient  forces  to  prevent,  or  to  suppress  everywhere,  what 
resistance  might  be  offered.  He  must  have  a  pretext.  The 
refusal  of  Portugal  to  break  off  relations  with  England  furnished 
it.  Napoleon  had  been  careful  to  prepare  that  pretext  at  Tilsit, 
in  his  treaty  of  alliance  with  Russia,  by  stipulating  that  should 
Portugal  remain  at  peace  with  England,  it  should  be  treated  as 
an  enemy.  Instead  then  of  declaring  war  against  Spain,  he 
concluded  a  new  alliance  with  her  against  Portugal.1  After  being 
conquered,  a  portion  of  that  kingdom  was  to  be  annexed  by  the 
Spanish  monarchy,  another  portion  was  to  be  handed  to  the 
Infanta  Maria  Louisa,  and  to  her  son,  as  indemnity  for  the 
kingdom  of  Etruria  which  had  been  given  to  Napoleon,2  and  the 
remainder  was  to  form  a  principality  for  the  Prince  of  the  Peace.  3 
That  was  the  bait,  by  means  of  which  the  emperor  persuaded  that 
traitor  to  obtain  the  signature  of  his  sovereign  to  the  treaty. 

The  emperor  had  spoken  to  me  several  times  of  his  project 
of  seizing  Spain.  I  opposed  this  plan  with  all  my  might, 
showing  the  immorality  and  the  dangers  of  such  an  undertaking. 
He  always  alleged,  as  an  excuse,  the  danger  which  a  diversion 
of  the  Spanish  government  would  cause  him,  if  he  should  meet 
with  any  reverse  on  the  banks  of  the  Rhine  or  in  Italy,  and  he 

1  Treaty  of  Fontainebleau,  October  27,  1807. 

2  The  Treaty  of  Luneville  had  given  the  Grand  Duchy  of  Tuscany  to  Louis,  Duke 
of  Parma,  son-in-law  of  Charles  IV.,  King  of  Spain,  in  exchange  for  his  States,  which 
were  annexed  to  the  kingdom  of  Italy.  Tuscany  then  took  the  name  of  Kingdom  of 
Etruria.  King  Louis  dying  in  1803,  his  son,  Louis  II.,  was  proclaimed  under  the 
regency  of  his  mother,  the  Infanta  Maria  Louisa.  The  secret  treaty  of  Fontainebleau, 
October,  1807,  dispossessed  the  King  of  Etruria,  whose  States  were  incorporated  with 
the  French  empire.  In  compensation  he  was  promised  the  future  kingdom  of  Lusi- 
tania,  which  was  to  be  created  at  the  expense  of  Portugal. 

3  Manuel  Godoy,  born  1767,  died  185 1 .  From  simple  body-guard,  he  rose  to  the 
post  of  Prime  Minister.  Was  created  Duke  of  Alcudia  and  Prince  of  the  1'eace  after 
the  signature  of  the  Peace  of  Basel. — {Translator.) 


SPANISH  AFFAIRS.  247 

quoted  to  me  the  unfortunate  proclamation  of  the  Prince  of 
the  Peace  on  the  occasion  of  the  battle  of  Jena.  I  had  often 
refuted  that  objection,  reminding  him  that  it  would  be  very  un- 
just to  hold  the  Spanish  nation  responsible  for  the  fault  of  a 
man  whom  it  detested  and  despised,  and  that  it  would  be  easier 
for  him  to  overthrow  the  Prince  of  the  Peace  than  to  seize  Spain. 
But  he  replied  to  me  that  the  idea  of  the  Prince  of  the  Peace 
might  be  adopted  by  others,  and  that  he  would  never  be  safe  on 
the  Pyrenean  frontier.  It  was  then  that,  driven  into  a  corner  by 
the  artful  arguments  of  his  ambition,  I  proposed  to  him  a 
plan  which  presented  the  guarantees  of  security  which  he  was 
pretending  to  look  for  in  Spain.  I  advised  him  to  occupy 
Catalonia  until  he  should  obtain  maritime  peace  with  England. 
"  You  will  declare,"  said  I  to  him,  "  that  you  will  keep  that 
pledge  until  the  peace,  and  by  so  doing  you  will  hold  the 
Spanish  government  in  check.  If  peace  should  be  deferred 
it  is  possible  that  Catalonia,  which  is  the  least  Spanish  of  all  the 
provinces  of  Spain,  might  become  attached  to  France  ;  there 
are  historical  traditions  for  that ;  and  perhaps  it  might  be- 
come definitely  united  with  France.  But  anything  further  that 
you  may  do  will  one  day  cause  you  bitter  regrets."  I  did  not 
convince  him,  and  he  mistrusted  me  on  this  matter. 

As  I  have  just  said,  he  tempted  the  cupidity  and  ambition  of 
the  Prince  of  the  Peace  by  a  treaty  relative  to  a  dismemberment 
of  Portugal. 

That  treaty  was  negotiated  secretly  and  signed  on  the  27th 
of  October,  1807,  at  Fontainebleau,  by  General  Duroc,  and 
Councillor  Izquierdo,1  (confidential  agent  of  the^  Prince  of  the 
Peace),unknown  to  M.  de  Champagny,  Foreign  Minister,  and  also 
unknown  to  me,  although  at  that  time  I  was  chief  Councillor  of 
State,2  and  was  residing  at  Fontainebleau. 

As  a  result  of  the  treaty  of  Fontainebleau  an  army  of  30,000 
Frenchmen  was  to  cross  Spain  to  unite  with  a  Spanish  army  in 
the  conquest  of  Portugal.  A  second  army  of  40,000  men  was  to 
be  assembled  on  the  Pyrenean  frontier  in  order  to  be  ready  in  case 

1  Don  Eugenio  Izquierdo  de  Ribera  y  Lezaun,  born  at  Saragossa,  was  a  secret 
agent  of  Spanish  diplomacy,  when,  in  1797,  he  obtained,  thanks  to  the  protection  of 
Godoy,  the  position  of  Privy  Councillor.  He  conducted  several  confidential  missions, 
principally  under  the  Directory,  and  later  in  1807.     He  died  in  1813. 

3  One  of  the  prerogatives  of  the  Chief  Councillor  of  State  was  to  sign  all  treaties. 


248  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

of  need  to  assist  the  first,  which  was  commanded  by  Marshal 
Junot.  This  second  army  crossed  the  frontier  under  various 
pretexts,  and  occupied  fortresses  in  the  north  of  Spain,  and  in 
Catalonia.  It  was  to  take  a  solid  footing  in  the  country,  which 
was  moreover  totally  without  an  army,  the  only  really  good 
troops  having  been  sent  to  serve  with  the  French.  These  troops 
mustering  20,000  men,  commanded  by  the  Marquis  de  La 
Romana,  had  been  sent  to  the  borders  of  Denmark.  Napoleon, 
as  one  may  see,  had  taken  every  precaution.1 

The  only  thing  that  Napoleon  might  still  have  to  fear,  was 
that  the  king  and  his  family,  taking  alarm,  should  retire  into  a 
distant  province,  and  give  from  there  the  signal  for  resistance, 
or  that  they  should  cross  the  sea. 

I  am  now  going  to  relate  by  what  shameful  ruses  Napoleon 
compelled  the  whole  of  this  unfortunate  family  to  deliver  itself 
into  his  hands. 

In  the  month  of  March,  1807,  the  Prince  of  the  Asturias,  who 
was  in  secret  correspondence  with  Don  Juan  de  Escoi'quiz,2 
Archdeacon  and  Canon  of  Toledo,  his  former  tutor,  sent  to 
him  at  Toledo,  where  he  lived,  a  private  confidant  of  his,  named 
Don  Jose  Maurrique.  The  prince  had  given  him  a  letter  which 
was  to  be  handed  to  Don  Escoi'quiz.  He  spoke  therein  of  his 
suspicions  as  to  the  ambitious  intentions  of  the  Prince  of  the 
Peace,  who,  obtaining  every  day  from  the  king  or  the  queen  some 
favour  or  other,  was  becoming  more  powerful.  He  commanded, 
with  the  title  of  generalissimo  and  admiral,  all  the  army,  the 
militia,  and  the  navy  ;  it  was  already  announced  that  the  King, 
Charles  IV.,  tired  of  state  affairs,  and  often  ill,  had  left  to  him 

1  In  1807,  Napoleon,  wishing  to  punish  the  Madrid  cabinet  for  the  hostile 
demonstration  which  it  had  made  at  the  time  of  the  rupture  with  Prussia  (proclama- 
tion of  the  Prince  of  the  Peace),  and  to  weaken  the  Spanish  army,  requited  the  despatch 
of  a  body  of  15,000  men,  destined  to  serve  in  the  north  of  Europe.  The  Marquis  de 
la  Romana,  lieutenant-general,  commanded  it.  He  was  quartered  in  Fionia  when  the 
news  of  the  events  of  1808  arrived.  La  Komana  entered  at  once  into  negotiations 
with  the  English  fleet,  which  was  cruising  in  the  offing,  and  had  his  troops  embarked 
and  transported  to  Spain.  La  Romana  at  their  head  fought  energetically  against  the 
French.     He  was  a  member  of  the  Supreme  Junta  when  he  died  (1811). 

a  Don  Juan  de  Escoi'quiz,  born  in  1762,  canon  at  Satagossa,  was  nominated  by  the 
Prince  of  the  Peace  tutor  of  the  Prince  of  Asturias,  over  whom  he  exercised  the  greatest 
influence.  He  became  Privy  Councillor  in  1808.  He  followed  the  prince  to  Valencay, 
was  imprisoned  at  Bourges,  returned  to  Madrid  in  1814,  was  appointed  minister,  but 
did  not  exercise  any  further  political  influence. 


SPANISH  AFFAIRS.  249 

the  regency  of  the  kingdom.  Once  regent,  the  death  of  the 
king  would  open  a  new  career  to  his  ambition,  the  bounds  of 
which  no  one  knew.  The  character  of  the  Prince  of  the  Peace, 
his  marriage,  which  had  placed  him  nearer  the  throne,1 
frightened  all  those  who  were  attached  to  the  royal  family. 
Don  Escoi'quiz,  alarmed  by  the  letter  of  the  Prince  of  the 
Asturias,  believed,  good  man  that  he  was,  that  he  had  only  to 
enlighten  the  king  and  queen  as  to  the  designs  of  the  Prince  of 
the  Peace.  He  believed  in  the  influence,  which  a  letter,  handed 
by  the  Prince  of  the  Asturias  to  the  queen  his  mother  would 
have,  and  in  which  he  would  show  the  danger  which  the  royal 
family  incurred  on  account  of  the  blind  confidence  which  the 
king  had  in  the  Prince  of  the  Peace.  This  letter,  too  full  of  logic 
and  truth,  frightened  the  Prince  of  the  Asturias,  who  did  not  dare 
to  deliver  it,  he  was  satisfied  with  copying  and  preserving  it. 
Ashamed  of  his  want  of  resolution  he  wrote  to  Don  Escoi'quiz 
that  he  considered  it  impossible  for  the  queen  to  be  unde- 
ceived, and  that  it  would  be  easier  to  make  matters  plain  to  the 
king,  if  he  should  chance  one  day  to  speak  to  him  in  tete-a-tete. 

The  good  canon  of  Toledo  wrote  a  note,  which  he  adapted  as 
well  as  possible  to  the  foibles  of  the  king,  and  he  sent  it  to  the 
Prince  of  the  Asturias  who  waited  in  vain  for  the  moment  when  he 
could  hand  it  to  his  father.  This  document,  like  the  first,  was 
copied  by  the  prince  himself,  and,  also  like  the  first,  locked  up 
in  his  desk,  where  it  was  found  when  his  papers  were  seized. 

The  Prince  of  the  Peace,  who  suspected  that  the  conduct  of  the 
Prince  of  the  Asturias  hid  some  project  scarcely  favourable  to  his 
views,  endeavoured  to  find  means  to  pry  into  the  privacy  of  the 
prince,  and  got  the  queen  to  propose  to  the  latter  to  marry  Dona 
Maria  Theresa,  his  (Godoy's)  sister-in-law,  second  daughter  of 
the  Infant  Don  Luis.  This  princess  had  a  beautiful  face,  was 
ambitious,  and  had  already  shown  little  aversion  for  love  affairs. 
The  prince,  who  only  knew  her  to  be  beautiful  and  pretty,  had 
given  his  consent  to  this  marriage.  But  for  some  months  the 
ambition  of  the  Prince  of  the  Peace  having  become  more  asserted 
and  bold,  this  match  was  no  longer  spoken  of.     Don  Escoi'quiz 

1  The  Prince  of  the  Peace  had  married  a  Spanish  princess,  daughter  of  the  Infant 
Don  Luis. 


250  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLE  YRAND. 

seeing  that  all  means  of  getting  the  king  and  queen  to  know 
the  truth  were  failing,  and  that  the  proposition  of  the  marriage 
with  Dona  Maria  Theresa  had  fallen  through,  fancied  that  a 
foreign  and  powerful  interest  would  alone  afford  real  support  to 
the  prince,  in  the  critical  position  in  which  he  found  himself, 
and  it  occurred  to  him  to  marry  the  latter  with  one  of  the 
daughters  of  Napoleon's 1  family. 

At  this  time  a  marriage  with  a  niece  of  Napoleon  seemed 
likely  to  ensure  to  the  Prince  of  the  Asturias  the  shaken  throne  of 
Spain,  and  to  put  this  beautiful  and  noble  country  beyond  the 
reach  of  divisions.  This  result  was  to  be  preferred  to  that  which 
unexpected  events  soon  brought  about. 

Don  Esco'fquiz  thought  more  every  day  of  the  plan  which  he 
had  adopted.  Rumours  disquieting  to  the  royal  family  assumed 
every  day  more  consistency,  and  were  spread  among  all  classes. 
Not  being  able  now  to  bear  the  idea  of  being  so  far  from  his  former 
pupil,  he  wished  to  be  nearer  the  centre  of  affairs  and  went  to 
Madrid.  There  he  made  the  acquaintance  of  the  Count  d'Orgaz,  a 
loyal  Spaniard,  particularly  attached  to  the  Prince  of  the  Asturias. 
He  spoke  to  him  of  his  fears  and  his  projects.  In  one  of  their 
conversations  Count  d'Orgaz  told  him  that  Don  Diego  Godoy, 
brother  of  the  Prince  of  the  Peace,  was  distributing  money  to  the 
Madrid  garrison,  and,  by  this  means  had  secured  the  support  of 
a  large  number  of  the  subaltern  officers  ;  a  colonel  of  the  dragoons, 
Don  Thomas  Jauregui,  who  was  in  the  garrison  kept  him  ac- 
quainted with  all  the  attempts  which  were  being  made  to  corrupt 
the  troops.  There  was  not  one  officer  of  note  to  whom  an  agent 
of  the  Prince  of  the  Peace  had  not  said,  "  You  see  the  wretched 
state  of  Spain,  the  Bourbon  dynasty  is  absolutely  on  the  decline  ; 
the  king  is  on  the  point  of  death ;  the  prince  is  an  imbecile ; 
measures  must  be  taken  ;  you  are  a  good  Spaniard,  we  count  on 
you."  A  thousand  propositions  of  this  sort  were  openly  made, 
and  by  men  who  inspired  confidence  on  account  of  their  repu- 
tation, and  the  positions  they  occupied.     Don  Luis  Viguri,  an 

1  This  project  had  for  a  moment  some  consistency.  Napoleon  being  sounded  on 
the  matter  had  appeared  to  reply  favourably  (letter  of  the  Emperor  to  the  Prince 
of  the  Asturias,  April  16,  1808,  Correspondence,  vol.  xvii.).  A  daughter  of  Lucien 
Honaparte  had  been  proposed,  but  this  plan  was  not  carried  out.  It  is  probable  that 
thj  emperor  never  intended  that  it  should  be. 


SPANISH  AFFAIRS.  251 

officer  in  the  commissariat  who  had  kept  up  relations  with  the 
chief  officers,  was  one  of  the  most  active  in  that  respect.     In  the 
schools,   in   the    academies,  in  all    public   buildings,   the  same 
language  was  used.    Abbe  Stala,  librarian  of  St.  Isidro,  had  been 
so  imprudent  even   as   to   show  the    documents  of  which  the 
purport  was  to  make  clear  to  the  Spanish  nation,  that,  in  the 
crisis  which  was  being  prepared,  there  could  only  be   safety 
in  placing  entire  confidence  in  the  Prince  of  the  Peace.     Don 
Escoiquiz  felt  that  there  was  not   a  moment  to  lose,  and  that 
all  the  friends  of  the  throne  must  unite  and  form  a  league  for 
its  defence.    With  this  aim,  he  asked  the  Prince  of  the  Asturias 
for  a  credential  in  order  that   he  could  explain    matters  con- 
fidentially to  the  Duke  of    Infantado,  a    young  man  of  noble 
birth,  of  a  fine  character,  and  pleasing  and  commanding  appear- 
ance, and  standing  well  in  public  opinion.  With  this  letter,  written 
by  the  prince,  the  canon  sought  the  Duke  of  Infantado,1    and 
spoke  to  him  with  the  greatest  frankness,  but  their  principles  not 
permitting  them  to  adopt  any  measure  which  could  be  contrary 
to  the  fidelity  they  owed  to  the  king,  they  confined  themselves  to 
taking  measures  of  precaution  for  the  time  when  the  king,  whose 
health  was  daily  getting  weaker  and  weaker,  should  die.     The 
Prince  of  the   Peace  had  it  in  his  power  to  conceal  for   some 
moments  the  death  of  the  king.     The  distrust,  and  the  hatred 
which   he    had    skilfully    inspired    in    the    queen    for   her    son, 
enabled  him  to  surround  and  fill  the  castle  with  devoted  troops. 
Supported  by  etiquette,  he  could,  and  that  was  his  intention,  have 
brought  the  Prince  of  the  Asturias  to  the  bedside  of  the  king,  who 
would  be  supposed  to  be  still  alive  ;  there  to  seize  him,  and  all 
the  royal  family,  and  make  them  sign  by  force,  all  the  necessary 
orders   to   place  the  authority  in  his  hands,  determining  after- 
wards what  should  be  done  with  the  princes. 

The  Duke  of  Infantado  and  Don  Escoi'quiz  considered  that 
the    only  means  of   preventing  this  outrage  would  be  to  have 

1  The  Infantado  was  an  ancient  manor  of  Castile,  so  named,  because  it  had  formerly 
been  the  appanage  of  the  heirs  presumptive  of  Spain.  The  duke,  of  whom  mention 
is  made  here,  belonged  to  the  Silva  family,  who  had  acquired  the  duchy  two 
centuries  before.  Born  in  1771,  he  became  the  friend  of  the  Prince  of  the  Asturias  ;  in 
1808,  he  recognized  at  first  King  Joseph,  but  soon  separated  from  him  and  took 
command  of  a  Spanish  army  corps.  President  of  the  Council  of  Castile  in  1820, 
he  retired  in  1826,  and  died  in  1836. 


252  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

an  act  given  beforehand  by  the  new  king,  which  would  place 
supreme  military  command  in  the  hands  of  the  Duke  of 
Infantado.  This  act  would  have  also  put  all  the  authorities,  even 
the  Prince  of  the  Peace,  under  his  absolute  command,  through- 
out New  Castile,  and  especially  at  Madrid,  and  in  all  the  royal 
residences.  With  this  order,  the  Duke  of  Infantado,  at  the 
first  news  he  should  have  of  the  coming  death  of  the  king,  was 
to  prepare  the  notification  of  his  powers,  take  the  supreme  com- 
mand of  all  the  military  forces,  appear  in  the  town,  and  in  the 
royal  houses  in  the  uniform  of  generalissimo,  and  even  have 
the  Prince  of  the  Peace  arrested  should  he  give  signs  of  the  least 
restlessness.  Don  Escoiquiz  drew  up  the  act  in  question,  and 
sent  it  to  the  prince,  explaining  to  him  the  object  of  the  mea- 
sure ;  he  persuaded  him  to  write  it  out  with  his  own  hand,  to 
sign  it,  and  to  place  on  it  his  seal.  The  prince  carried  out  all 
that  was  suggested.  The  act  was  handed  to  the  Duke  of 
Infantado,  who  was  to  keep  it  carefully  till  the  time  when  he 
should  be  called  upon  to  make  use  of  it.  This  act  read  as 
follows : — 

"We,    Ferdinand     VII.,   by   the    grace   of    God,    King   of 
Castile,  &c 

"The  Lord  having  deigned  to  take  to  Himself  our  dear  and 
well-beloved  father,  the  King  Charles  IV.,  whom  may  God  have 
in  His  holy  keeping,  and  consequently  having  ourselves  ascended 
the  throne  of  Spain,  as  his  natural  and  legitimate  heir,  knowing 
that  in  the  first  moments  of  suspension  of  authority,  which  is 
an  inevitable  consequence  of  the  death  of  kings,  it  may  happen 
that  there  are  persons  who  wish  to  take  advantage  of  it,  to 
disturb  the  public  peace,  as  the  public  voice  seems  to  indicate  ; 
and  considering  that  the  best  means  of  repressing  malevolence 
should  it  dare  to  take  the  form  of  any  project  of  that  sort,  is  to 
put  the  entire  military  forces  which  surround  us  in  the  hands  of 
one  whom  we  can  trust,  and  who,  besides  talent,  courage,  and 
noble  birth,  enjoys  public  esteem  ;  finding  in  you,  Duke  of 
Infantado,  my  cousin,  all  these  qualities  united,  we  have 
considered  it  our  duty  to  confer  on  you,  as  we  do  by  this 
decree,  the  supreme  command  of  the  entire  military  forces  in 
New  Castile,  and  in  all  the  royal  residences,  infantry,  cavalry, 
artillery,  militia,  &c,  without  any  exception,  not  even  the 
body-guard  and  the  troops  which  compose  our  Royal  Guard, 
nor  those  which  form  the  guard  of  the  generalissimo,  in  order 


SPANISH  AFFAIRS.  253 

that  you  may  make  use  of  them  in  the  way  in  which  you 
shall  deem  useful  or  necessary  to  put  down  any  rising,  to 
disperse  any  meeting,  to  dispel  every  seditious  project  against 
our  person,  or  the  Royal  Family,  or  any  which  is  capable  of  dis- 
turbing the  public  peace  in  any  way  whatever.  Our  wish  being 
to  suspend,  as  we  do  suspend,  every  authority,  even  all  military 
power,  which  do  not  come  under  your  orders,  to  that  of  the  Prince 
of  the  Peace  as  generalissimo,  as  well  as  that  of  the  Captain 
General  of  New  Castile,  we  order,  that  all  the  military  chiefs, 
of  whatever  class  or  rank  they  may  be,  obey  strictly  your  orders 
as  though  they  were  our  own,  in  everything  which  may  concern 
the  public  peace,  for  which  we  hold  you  responsible.  And  we 
declare,  subject  to  the  punishment  of  traitors  and  enemies  of 
the  country  all  those  who  by  ignorance,  affected  or  intentional, 
shall  oppose  your  orders,  or  shall  not  display  the  strict  obedience 
they  owe  you.  We  decree  also,  that  all  the  civil  and  military 
tribunals,  and  all  magistrates  of  whatever  class  they  may  be, 
assist  in  the  execution  of  your  orders,  and  all  that  concerns 
them,  under  the  same  penalties  for  not  so  doing. 

"  We  give  you  also  all  the  necessary  authority  to  imprison, 
if  it  be  necessary,  all  persons  of  whatever  class,  condition,  or 
rank  they  may  be,  without  any  exception,  who  shall  be  suspected 
of  wishing  to  disturb  the  public  peace,  or  who  shall  disturb  it. 

"  This  is  our  will,  as  also  that  this  decree,  although  not  bear- 
ing the  ordinary  sanction  of  one  of  the  ministers,  on  account  of 
the  urgency  of  the  circumstances  in  which  we  are  placed,  be 
observed  and  carried  out  as  though  it  had  the  signature  of  one 
of  our  ministers,  being  written,  signed  and  sealed  as  it  is,  by 
our  own  hand.  The  whole  to  be  carried  out  under  the  penalties 
of  high  treason  on  those  who  oppose  it. 

"At the of  the  year 

"Signed         Yo  El  Rl\" 

This  decree  had  the  date  in  blank,  and  it  was  to  be  filled 
in  at  the  moment  of  the  death  of  the  king,  by  the  Duke  of 
Infantado. 

Towards  the  middle  of  the  month  of  June,  1807,  Don  Escoi- 
quiz  received  another  letter  from  the  Prince  of  the  Asturias,  in 
which  his  Royal  Highness  told  him  that  he  had  had  it  handed  to 
him  by  Don  Juan  Manuel  de  Villena,  his  first  equerry,  who 
had  received  it  from  Don  Pedro  Giraldo,  colonel  of  Engineers, 
and    tutor  of  the  Infante  Don  Francisco,1  a  letter  which  was 

1  The  Infante  Don  Francisco  was  the  third  son  of  King  Charles  IV. 


254  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

intended  to  be  delivered  into  the  hands  of  his  Royal  Highness, 
and  was  written  by  an  individual,  who  said  he  belonged  to 
the  French  Legation.  The  contents  announced  a  very  secret 
communication,  which  M.  de  Beauharnais,1  the  ambassador  of 
France,  desired  to  make  to  his  Royal  Highness.  Don  Escoi'quiz, 
consulted  by  the  prince,  in  order  to  know  what  he  should  answer, 
told  him  to  say  to  the  persons  who  had  given  him  the  letter,  that 
he  did  not  interfere  in  any  matter,  and  did  not  make  any  private 
appointments.  He  offered  the  prince  to  find  out  exactly  if  this 
message  was  really  from  the  ambassador  of  France  or  not. 
To  be  certain  on  this  point  might  be  very  useful,  because,  if  the 
message  were  false,  the  aim  of  it  could  only  be  to  lay  a  trap  for 
his  Royal  Highness,  which  it  was  important  to  find  out;  and  that 
if  it  were  true,  it  was  of  the  greatest  consequence  for  the 
interests  of  the  prince  not  to  lose  the  opportunity  of  becoming 
acquainted  with  the  intentions  of  Napoleon,  both  as  regards  the 
position  of  the  Prince  of  the  Peace  to  the  emperor,  which  was  not 
sufficiently  known,  as  well  as  the  marriage  of  the  Prince  of  the 
Asturias  with  one  of  the  nieces  of  Napoleon,  a  subject  on  which 
vague  rumours  were  already  in  circulation.  The  reply  of  Don 
Escoi'quiz  showed  the  utility  as  well  as  the  security  which  the 
support  of  Napoleon  would  give  to  the  prince,  if  this  marriage 
should  suit  his  ambition  or  his  vanity. 

To  this  letter,  which,  owing  to  subsequent  circumstances, 
furnished  documentary  evidence  at  the  Escurial  trial,  the  Prince  of 
the  Asturias  replied,  giving  his  unreserved  approval.  Thereupon 
Don  Escoi'quiz  saw  the  Duke  of  Infantado,  and,  after  having 
told  him  of  this  new  intrigue,  asked  him  for  an  introduction, 
under  some  plausible  pretext,  to  the  ambassador  of  France, 
to  whom  he  was  not  known.  They  chose  as  the  pretext  for  the 
introduction  to  the  ambassador,  who  was  considered,  in  Spain, 
to  be  fond  of  literature,  the  presentation  to  him  of  a  work 
entitled  The  Conquest  of  Mexico,  an  epic  poem  written  by 
Don  Escoi'quiz.     The  ambassador,  without  showing  any  surprise 

1  Francois,  Marquis  de  Beauharnais,  brother-in-law  of  the  Empress  Josephine. 
Born  in  1756,  he  was  deputy  from  Sologne  ;  emigrated  in  1792,  and  served  in 
the  army  of  Conde ;  returning  to  France  in  1800,  he  was  nominated  ambassador 
at  the  court  of  the  King  of  Etruria  in  1805  ;  then  at  Madrid.  He  was  recalled 
in  1808,  and  exiled  to  Sologne.  Peer  of  France  under  the  Restoration,  he  died 
in  1823. 


SPANISH  AFFAIRS.  255 

at  his  supposed  literary  reputation  replied  to  the  Duke  that 
he  received  the  book  and  the  author  with  pleasure.  After 
a  few  words  about  the  conquest  of  Mexico,  and  a  few  questions 
or  remarks,  which  drew  gradually  nearer  the  object  of  his 
visit,  Don  Escoi'quiz  opened  his  mind  to  the  ambassador  on 
the  subject  of  the  message  which  was  attributed  to  him,  and 
of  the  wish  of  the  Prince  of  the  Asturias  to  know  the  truth. 

M.  de  Beauharnais  displayed  some  embarrassment,  evaded 
the  subject  of  the  message,  confining  himself  to  saying  that 
such  a  step  on  his  part  would  not  be  becoming  towards  the  heir 
to  the  throne,  adding  immediately,  that  his  respect  for  the 
Prince  of  the  Asturias  was  such  that  he  would  be  delighted  to 
have  private  opportunities  of  paying  his  court  to  his  Royal 
Highness.  Don  Escoi'quiz  clearly  saw  that  the  ambassador 
admitted  more  than  he  denied.  Emboldened  by  the  indecision 
of  M.  de  Beauharnais  he  explained  in  a  manner  more  precise, 
and  led  the  ambassador  to  say,  that  a  letter  from  the  prince  in 
his  hands  would  give  him  sufficient  confidence  to  speak  with 
him  (Escoi'quiz)  of  matters  of  the  greatest  interest  to  his  Royal 
Highness.  To  which  Don  Escoi'quiz  replied  laughing  that  it 
appeared  to  him  that  skilful  diplomats  liked  to  be  able  to  deny 
messages,  but  that  a  sign  agreed  upon  beforehand  could  produce 
the  same  effects,  and  give  the  same  amount  of  confidence.  It 
was  then  decided  between  them  that  as  the  court  was  coming  to 
Madrid  in  two  or  three  days,  the  ambassador  should  present 
himself,  according  to  custom,  at  the  head  of  the  diplomatic  corps, 
to  his  Royal  Highness,  and  that  there  the  prince  should  ask  him 
if  he  had  been  to  Naples  ;  that  on  leaving  the  ambassador,  and 
passing  to  another  foreign  minister,  he  should  draw  his  hand- 
kerchief from  his  pocket,  and  keep  it  in  his  hand  for  a  moment. 

On  the  1st  July,  the  ambassadors  attended  a  presentation  to 
the  princes,  and  his  Royal  Highness  made  the  sign  agreed  upon. 
Two  days  later,  Don  Escoi'quiz,  informed  of  what  had  taken 
place,  went  to  the  ambassador  of  France,  from  whom  he 
received  most  positive  assurances  of  the  affection  which  Napo- 
leon entertained  for  the  Prince  of  the  Asturias,  of  the  inclination 
which  he  had  to  favour  him  in  every  way  he  could,  and  at  the 
same  time  of  the   small  esteem  in   which  he   held  the   Prince 


256  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

of  the  Peace.  Vague  as  these  assurances  were,  Don  Escoi'quiz, 
somewhat  elated  at  the  new  part  he  was  playing,  and  anxious 
on  account  of  the  position  of  the  prince,  exploded  the  question 
of  marriage,  and  even  went  so  far  as  to  say  that  the  prince  left 
to  Napoleon  the  choice  of  that  niece  of  his  whom  he  should 
think  fit  to  give  him.  Secrecy  was  recommended  on  both  sides. 
M.  de  Beauharnais  wrote  at  once  to  Paris,  and  asked  for  the 
necessary  authorizations  to  negotiate  with  the  king,  Charles  IV., 
in  order  to  prevent  the  Prince  of  the  Asturias  being  com- 
promised in  the  eyes  of  his  father. 

The  vigilant  watch  kept  by  the  Prince  of  the  Peace  over  all 
that  concerned  the  French  Embassy,  had  determined  M.  de 
Beauharnais  and  Don  Escoi'quiz  to  select  for  their  first  inter- 
view a  retired  spot  in  the  garden  of  the  Retiro.  Twenty 
days  had  elapsed  when  Don  Escoi'quiz  received  notice  to  be  at 
the  spot  agreed  upon  at  two  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  when  the 
excessive  heat  would  drive  every  one  from  the  promenade.  The 
reply  which  the  ambassador  had  received,  was  rather  insignificant, 
and  did  not  allude  to  the  proposition  of  marriage.  M.  de  Beau- 
harnais attributed  this  silence  to  the  fact  that  there  was  nothing 
officially  written  on  the  part  of  the  prince,  and  he  advised 
Don  Escoi'quiz  to  get  His  Royal  Highness  to  write  direct 
to  Napoleon.  Don  Escoi'quiz  thought  this  step  likely  to  cause 
too  many  difficulties  for  him  to  dare  to  propose  it;  and  he 
persuaded,  on  his  part,  the  ambassador  to  point  out  in  his  next 
despatch,  that  the  position  of  the  prince  did  not  admit  of  such  a 
delicate  step  being  taken,  until  affairs  were  in  a  more  advanced 
stage.  It  may  be  doubted,  owing  to  the  vague  language  of  M. 
de  Beauharnais,  whether  he  had  positive  instructions  ;  but  either 
to  serve  the  interests  of  the  Beauharnais  or  that  of  the  Bonapartes1 
he  entered  into  an  intrigue  with  the  Prince  of  the  Asturias,  which 
intrigue  could  only  serve  the  views  of  the  emperor.  However 
it  may  be,  M.  de  Beauharnais  promised  to  write  again,  and  to 
send  to  Don  Escoi'quiz,  who  was  obliged  to  return  to  Toledo,  the 
answer  of  Napoleon. 

1  The  Beauharnais  wished  the  Prince  of  the  Asturias  to  marry  a  niece  of  the 
Empress  Josephine,  while  the  Bonapartes  wished  him  to  marry  a  daughter  of 
Lucicn.  The  emperor  only  wished  what  would  serve  his  purpose — {Prince  Talley- 
rand). 


SPANISH  AFFAIRS.  257 

Things  remained  in  this  state  during  the  whole  of  the  month 
of  August,  and  nearly  the  whole  of  September.  It  was  only  on 
the  30th  September,  1807,  that  Don  Escoiquiz  received  at  Toledo 
a  letter  from  the  ambassador  of  France,  in  which  were  extracts 
from  Napoleon's  letter,  the  following  words  being  underlined  : 

"  /  do   not   buy,    I  do   not  sell,    I  do   nothing  without 

guarantee.  Have  you  received  any  letter,  any  official  note  on  this 
matter  ?  "  The  terms  of  blunt  frankness  employed  in  this  letter, 
induced  Don  Escoiquiz  to  go  to  Madrid.  He  saw  M.  de  Beau- 
harnais  at  the  Retiro.  At  this  meeting,  the  ambassador  com- 
plained that  the  prince  had  not  had  confidence  in  his  first  pro- 
position, and  he  renewed  it  with  greater  insistence,  saying,  that 
nothing  was  possible  as  long  as  his  Royal  Highness  did  not  write 
himself.  Don  Escoiquiz,  who  for  a  long  time  had  been  of  opinion 
that  the  support  of  Napoleon  was  the  only  means  for  the  prince  to 
escape  from  the  dangers  he  was  incurring,  allowed  himself  to  be 
persuaded.  He  drew  up  a  draft  of  a  letter,  and  M.  de  Beau- 
harnais  having  agreed  that  the  terms  which  were  employed 
would  suit  Napoleon,  the  canon  sent  it  to  the  Prince  of  the 
Asturias,  who  made  a  copy  of  it  in  his  own  hand,  and  forwarded 
it  to  Don  Escoiquiz  to  give  to  the  ambassador.  He  inclosed 
with  it,  a  note  in  which  he  pointed  out  Don  Escoiquiz  as  the 
only  man  who  had  his  entire  confidence  in  this  matter.  The 
letter  of  the  Prince  of  the  Asturias  shows  too  clearly  the 
general  feeling  of  the  time,  for  it  not  to  be  here  reproduced  in 
its  entirety. 

The  Prince  of  the  Asturias  to  the  Emperor  Napoleon. 

"The  Escurial,  Oct.  11,  1807. 
"  SlRE, — I  consider  this  day  as  the  happiest  of  my  life,  seeing 
that  it  affords  me  the  opportunity  of  expressing  to  your  Imperial 
and  Royal  Majesty — to  a  hero,  destined  by  Providence  to 
restore  peace,  order,  and  prosperity  in  Europe,  threatened  as 
it  is  by  a  complete  overthrow,  and  to  strengthen  tottering 
thrones — the  sentiments  of  regard,  admiration  and  respect 
with  which  your  brilliant  qualities  inspire  me.  I  should  have 
had,  a  long  time  since,  this  satisfaction,  as  well  as  that  of  assuring 
your  Imperial  and  Royal  Majesty  of  the  sincere  desire  which  I 
have  to  see  increase  happily  the  existing  friendship  between 
our  two  houses,  and  to  see  this  alliance,  so  advantageous  to 
VOL.  1.  S 


258  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

both  nations,  become  closer  every  day,  by  means  of  a  marriage 
which  would  unite  me  to  a  Princess  of  your  Majesty's  family. 
But  circumstances  have  obliged  me  to  be  silent,  and  it  is 
only  in  consequence  of  the  explanations  of  M.  de  Beauharnais 
and  of  the  information  which  he  has  given  me  as  to  the  wishes 
of  your  Imperial  Majesty,  that  I  have  resolved  to  speak. 

"  I  fear  that  this  step,  so  innocent  in  the  terms  in  which  I 
make  it,  and  in  the  position  I- am  in,  might  be  considered  as  a 
crime  should  it  be  discovered. 

"  Your  Imperial  and  Royal  Majesty  knows  much  better  than 
I,  that  the  best  kings  are  the  most  exposed  to  become  victims 
of  the  artifices  of  the  ambitious  and  intriguing  men  who  surround 
them.  Our  court  is  not  free  from  such  men,  and  the  benevolence 
and  uprightness  of  my  dear  parents  expose  them  the  more  to 
be  the  victims  of  their  unloyal  plots.  I  fear  then,  that  those 
men  may  have  obtained  their  consent  to  some  other  projected 
marriage  for  me,  more  suitable  to  their  own  interests,  and  I  take 
the  liberty  of  asking  your  Majesty  to  open  the  eyes  of  my  dear 
parents,  and  to  get  them  to  adopt  the  alliance  which  I  beg  to 
ask  of  you. 

"  The  least  intimation  on  the  part  of  your  Majesty  will  suffice 
to  ruin  all  the  prospects,  and  to  destroy  all  the  projects  of  those 
selfish  and  malicious  men,  regarding  their  Majesties,  my  august 
parents,  who  love  your  Majesty  so  sincerely. 

"  As  for  myself,  full  of  respect  and  filial  obedience  towards 
their  Majesties,  I  can  only  play  a  passive  part  in  this  matter,  and 
this  will  be  to  refuse  any  alliance  which  shall  not  have  the  approval 
of  your  Majesty,  and  I  shall  expect  from  your  kind  offices,  the 
happiness  of  my  dear  parents,  that  of  my  country,  and  my 
own,  by  the  marriage  with  the  princess  whom  I  hope  to  receive 
from  their  hands,  and  from  those  of  your  Imperial  and  Royal 
Majesty. 

"  I  am,  &c, 

"  (Signed)  Ferdinand,  Prince  of  the  Asturias." 

The  Prince  of  the  Peace  was  informed  by  the  spies  whom  he 
had  in  the  house  of  M.  de  Beauharnais,  of  what  was  going  on, 
and  he  immediately  got  the  king  to  write  a  letter,  which  his 
ambassador,  Prince  Masserano,1  had  orders  to  carry  imme- 
diately to  Napoleon,  wherever  he  might  be.     This  letter  reached 

1  Carlo  Ferrero-Fieschi,  Prince  Masserano,  captain  of  the  body-guards  of 
Charles  III.,  ambassador  at  Paris  in  1805,  and  grandmaster  of  ceremonies  of  King 
Joseph.     He  died  in  1837. 


SPANISH  AFFAIRS.  259 

the  emperor  three  days  before  he  received  that  of  M.  de  Beau- 
harnais  at  Fontainebleau. 

The  King  of  Spain  complained  very  strongly  to  Napoleon 
of  his  being  in  secret  communication  with  his  son,  and  he 
spoke  of  the  letter,  which  no  doubt  Napoleon  had  received  from 
the  Prince  of  the  Asturias. 

For  some  weeks,  affairs  in  Spain  remained  in  suspense ; 
and  suddenly  they  assumed  a  new  aspect,  owing  to  the  unfore- 
seen arrival  of  the  French  army  in  several  provinces  of  the 
kingdom.  The  apparent  object  of  this  singular  arrangement 
was,  as  one  has  seen  above,  to  oblige  the  court  of  Portugal  to 
separate  its  cause  from  that  of  England.  It  was  in  consequence 
of  the  communications  made  by  the  Prince  of  the  Asturias,  and  of 
the  complaints  made  against  him  by  his  father  to  Napoleon, 
that  the  latter,  partly  by  threats,  and  partly  by  promises,  induced 
the  Prince  of  the  Peace  to  consent  to  the  stipulations  of  the 
two  treaties  of  the  27th  October,  1807,  which  we  consider  it  our 
duty  to  insert  here,  on  account  of  their  importance  in  the 
question  under  consideration.  We  have  already  said  that  these 
treaties  had  been  negotiated  at  Fontainebleau  with  the  utmost 
secrecy,  by  Don  Izquierdo,  the  secret  agent  of  the  Prince  of  the 
Peace,  and  Marshal  Duroc,  that  is  to  say,  in  reality,  Napoleon 
himself.     The  treaty  ran  thus  : — 

"  His  Majesty  the  Emperor  of  the  French,  King  of  Italy,  &c.  .  . 
and  His  Catholic  Majesty  the  King  of  Spain,  being  spontaneously 
desirous  to  regulate  the  interests  of  the  two  States,  and  to 
determine  the  future  condition  of  Portugal  in  a  manner  con- 
formable to  the  policy  of  the  two  nations,  have  appointed  for  their 
ministers  plenipotentiary,  namely:  His  Majesty  the  Emperor  of 
the  French,  General  of  Division  Michael  Duroc,  Grand  Marshal 
of  the  Palace,  &c,  and  His  Catholic  Majesty  the  King  of  Spain, 
Don  Eugene  Izquierdo  de  Ribera  y  Lezaun,  his  honorary  Coun- 
cillor of  State,  &c.  .  .,  who,  after  having  exchanged  their  full 
powers,  have  agreed  upon  what  follows  : 

"Art.  1. — The  provinces  lying  between  the  Minho  and  the 
Duero,  with  the  city  of  Oporto,1  shall  be  given  in  all  property  and 
sovereignty  to  His  Majesty  the  King  of  Etruria,  under  the  title 
of  King  of  Northern  Lusitania. 

1  That  is  to  say  the  northern  part  of  Portugal,   minus  the  province  of  Tras-os- 
montes. 

S    2 


260  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

"  Art.  2. — The  kingdom  of  Alentejo  and  the  kingdom  of  the 
Algarves,1  shall  be  given  in  all  property  and  sovereignty  to  the 
Prince  of  the  Peace,  to  be  henceforth  known  under  the  title 
of  Prince  of  the  Algarves. 

"  Art.  3. — The  provinces  of  Beira,  Tras-os-montes  and  Portu- 
guese Estramadura,2  shall  remain  in  pledge  until  the  general 
peace,  when  it  will  be  disposed  of  according  to  circumstances, 
and  in  a  manner  which  will  then  be  determined  by  the  high 
contracting  parties. 

"  Art.  4. — The  kingdom  of  Northern  Lusitania  shall  be  pos- 
sessed by  the  hereditary  descendants  of  His  Majesty  the  King  of 
Etruria,  conformably  to  the  laws  of  succession  adopted,  by  the 
reigning  family  of  His  Majesty  the  King  of  Spain. 

"  Art.  5. — The  principality  of  the  Algarves  shall  be  hereditary 
with  the  issue  of  the  Prince  of  the  Peace  conformably  to  the 
laws  of  succession  adopted  by  the  reigning  family  of  His 
Majesty  the  King  of  Spain. 

"  Art.  6. — In  default  of  a  descendant  or  legitimate  heir  of  the 
King  of  Northern  Lusitania,  or  of  the  Prince  of  the  Algarves, 
these  countries  shall  be  given  by  form  of  investiture  to  His 
Majesty  the  King  of  Spain,  on  the  condition  that  they  shall 
never  be  re-united  under  one  head,  nor  re-united  to  the  crown 
of  Spain. 

"  Art.  7. — The  kingdom  of  Northern  Lusitania  and  the  prin- 
cipality of  the  Algarves  recognize  also  as  protector  His  Catholic 
Majesty  the  King  of  Spain,  and  the  sovereigns  of  these  countries 
shall  not  in  any  case,  make  war  or  peace  without  his  consent. 

"  Art.  8. — In  case  the  provinces  of  Beira,  Tras-os-montes,  and 
Portuguese  Estramadura,  held  in  pledge,  should  be,  at  the 
general  peace,  returned  to  the  House  of  Braganza  in  exchange 
for  Gibraltar,  Trinity  and  other  colonies  that  the  English  have 
acquired  from  the  Spanish  and  their  allies,  the  new  sovereign  of 
these  provinces  shall  hold  towards  His  Majesty  the  King  of 
Spain  the  same  obligations  which  are  held  towards  him  by  the 
King  of  Northern  Lusitania  and  the  Prince  of  the  Algarves. 

"Art.  9. — His  Majesty  the  King  of  Etruria  cedes  in  all 
property  and  sovereignty  the  kingdom  of  Etruria  to  His 
Majesty  the  Emperor  of  the  French,  King  of  Italy. 

"  Art.  10. — When  the  definitive  occupation  of  the  provinces  of 
Portugal  shall  have  been  effected,  the  respective  princes  who  will 
be  put  in  possession  of  them,  shall  name  conjointly  commissioners 
to  fix  the  proper  limits. 

1  All  the  southern  part  of  Portugal,  situated  to  the  south  of  the  Tagus,  having 
about  6oo,coo  inhabitants. 

2  All  the  central  part  of  Portugal,  situated  between  the  Tagus  and  the  Douroand, 
besides,  the  province  of  Tras-os-montes,  that  is,  nearly  half  of  the  kingdom. 


SPANISH  AFFAIRS.  261 

"  Art.  1 1. — His  Majesty  the  Emperor  of  the  French,  King 
of  Italy,  guarantees  to  His  Catholic  Majesty  the  King  of 
Spain  the  possession  of  his  states  on  the  continent  of  Europe, 
south  of  the  Pyrenees. 

"Art.  12. — His  Majesty  the  Emperor  of  the  French,  King 
of  Italy,  consents  to  recognize  His  Catholic  Majesty  the  King 
of  Spain,  as  Emperor  of  the  two  Americas,  at  the  date  which 
shall  have  been  determined  by  His  Catholic  Majesty  to  take 
this  title,  which  will  take  place  at  the  general  peace, 'or  at  the 
latest  in  three  years  hence. 

"Art.  13. — It  is  understood  between  the  two  high  contracting 
parties  that  they  shall  divide  equally  between  themselves  the 
islands,  colonies  and  other  maritime  possessions  of  Portugal. 

"  Art.  14. — The  present  treaty  shall  be  kept  secret.  It  shall 
be  ratified,  and  the  ratifications  shall  be  exchanged  at  Madrid 
twenty  days  at  the  latest  after  the  date  of  the  signing. 

"Done  at  Fontainebleau,  October  27,  1807. 

"DUROC. 

"  E.    IZQUIERDO." 


Secret  Convention  of  the  Same  Day. 

"  His  Majesty  the  Emperor  of  the  French,  King  of  Italy, 
&c,  and  His  Catholic  Majesty  the  King  of  Spain,  desiring  to 
settle  the  bases  of  an  arrangement  relative  to  the  conquest  and 
occupation  of  Portugal,  in  consequence  of  the  stipulations  of 
the  treaty  signed  to-day,  have  named,  &c,  who,  after  having 
exchanged  their  full  powers,  have  agreed  upon  the  following 
articles. 

"  Art.  1. — A  corps  of  twenty-five  thousand  men  of  infantry, 
and  of  three  thousand  cavalry,  of  the  troops  of  His  Imperial 
Majesty  will  enter  Spain  to  repair  directly  to  Lisbon  ;  it  will  be 
joined  by  a  corps  of  eight  thousand  men  of  the  Spanish  infantry 
and  three  thousand  cavalry,  with  thirty  pieces  of  artillery. 

"  Art.  2. — At  the  same  time  a  division  of  ten  thousand  men 
of  the  Spanish  troops  shall  take  possession  of  the  province 
of  Entre-Minho-Duero  and  the  city  of  Oporto,  and  another 
division  of  six  thousand  men  of  the  Spanish  troops  shall  take 
possession  of  Alentejo  and  of  the  kingdom  of  the  Algarves. 

"Art.  3. — The  French  troops  shall  be  fed  and  supported 
by  Spain,  and  their  pay  shall  be  furnished  by  France  during  the 
time  of  their  march  across  Spain. 

"  Art.  4. — From  the  instant  when  the  combined  troops  shall 
have   effected   their   entrance    into    Portugal,   the   government 


262  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

and  administration  of  the  provinces  of  Beira,  Tras-os-montes 
and  of  Portuguese  Estramadura  (which  are  to  remain  in  pledge) 
shall  be  handed  to  the  general  commanding  the  French  troops, 
and  all  contributions  shall  be  raised  to  the  profit  of  France.  The 
provinces  which  are  to  form  the  kingdom  of  Northern  Lusitania 
and  the  principality  of  the  Algarves  shall  be  administered  and 
governed  by  the  Spanish  divisions  which  shall  take  possession  of 
them,  and  the  contributions  there  shall  be  levied  to  the  profit  of 
Spain. 

"  Art.  5. — The  central  corps  shall  be  under  the  orders  of  the 
commander  of  the  French  troops,  whom  the  Spanish  troops 
attached  to  this  army  shall  be  likewise  bound  to  obey.  Neverthe- 
less in  case  the  King  of  Spain  or  even  the  Prince  of  the  Peace 
should  judge  it  proper  to  join  this  corps,  the  French  troops  as 
well  as  the  general  who  shall  command  them,  shall  submit  to 
their  orders. 

"  Art.  6. — Another  body  of  forty  thousand  men  of  French 
troops  shall  be  assembled  at  Bayonne  on  November  20  next,  at 
the  latest,  to  be  ready  to  enter  Spain,  for  the  purpose  of  going  to 
Portugal  in  case  the  English  should  send  reinforcements  or 
threaten  an  attack.  Nevertheless,  this  new  corps  shall  not  enter 
Spain  until  the  two  high  contracting  parties  shall  have  mutually 
agreed  on  this  point. 

"  Art.  7. — The  present  convention  shall  be  ratified  and  the 
ratifications  shall  be  exchanged  at  the  same  time  as  those  of 
the  treaty  of  this  day. 

"  Done  at  Fontainebleau,  October  27,  1807. 

"  DuROC. 

"  IZQUIERDO." 


The  entry  of  the  French  troops  into  Spain  was  considered  in 
various  manners,  according  to  the  different  interests  which 
then  divided  this  unhappy  country. 

The  Prince  of  the  Peace  regarded  it  as  a  means  of  putting 
into  execution  his  views  on  the  sovereignty  of  a  part  of  Portugal, 
which  had  been  assured  to  him  by  the  treaty  of  Fontainebleau. 

The  persons  attached  to  the  Prince  of  the  Asturias  saw  in 
it  a  means  employed  by  Napoleon  to  impose  upon  them  the 
Prince  of  the  Peace,  whom  they  supposed  to  be  anxious  to  put 
an  obstacle  in  the  way  of  the  marriage  of  their  prince  and  of  the 
abdication  of  King  Charles  which  would  result  from  it. 

The  mass  of  the  Spanish  people  regarded  Napoleon  as  a  dis- 


SPANISH  AFFAIRS.  263 

interested  protector,  who  was  going  to  relieve  the  nation  from 
the  oppression  of  the  Prince  of  the  Peace,  and  establish  with  the 
country  relations  which  would  be  advantageous  for  France  and 
for  Spain. 

A  few  months  afterwards  all  these  chimeras  vanished.  In 
the  first  place,  the  Prince  of  the  Asturias  was  arrested  at  the  end 
of  the  month  of  October,  as  guilty  of  high  treason.  Later,  the 
Prince  of  the  Peace  barely  escaped  perishing  in  a  riot,  and  only 
escaped  death  by  being  in  his  turn  thrown  into  prison.  As  to 
the  Spanish  people,  who  had  so  desired  the  arrival  of  the  French, 
and  who  looked  upon  them  as  liberators,  they  had  to  suffer  on 
their  part  at  Burgos,  and  above  all  at  Madrid,  a  treatment 
which  they  had  been  far  from  anticipating. 

It  was  on  the  same  day  that  the  treaty  of  Fontainebleau 
was  signed,  October  27,  1807,  a*  ten  o'clock  in  the  evening,  that 
the  heir  to  the  crown  of  Spain  was  arrested  at  the  Escurial.  They 
accused  him — these  are  the  terms  of  the  writ  : — of  having  wished 
to  dethrone  his  father  and  of  having  tvislied  to  assassinate  him. 
The  same  writ  stated  that  the  king  had  received  this  intelligence 
from  an  unknown  source,  and  that  the  affair  would  be  tried 
before  a  tribunal,  composed  of  the  Governor  of  Castile,  Don 
Arias  Mon,  of  Don  Domingo  Fernandez  de  Campomanes,  and 
of  Don  Sebastian  de  Torres.  The  duties  of  clerk  to  the  court 
were  to  be  performed  by  Don  Benito  Arias  de  Prada,  the 
Court  alcade.  Out  of  regard  for  the  person  of  the  prince,  they 
charged  the  Governor  of  Castile  and  the  Minister  of  Justice, 
the  Marquis  de  Cavallero1  to  receive  his  declarations.  The 
persons  accused  as  accomplices  were  :  Don  Escoi'quiz,  the  Duke 
of  Infantado,  the  Marquis  d'Orgaz,  Count  de  Bornos,  Don  Juan 
Emmanuel  de  Villena,  Don  Pedro  Giraldo.  Imprisoned  in  the 
cells  of  the  Escurial,  they  were  deprived  of  all  communication 
between  themselves  and  the  outer  world.  To  the  three  judges  I 
have  just  named,  and  at  their  request,  after  two  months  and  a 
half  of  examination,  eight  other  judges  drawn  from  the  Council 

1  Joseph,  Marquis  de  Cavallero,  born  at  Saragossa  in  1760,  Fiscal  of  the  Supreme 
Council  of  war  in  1794,  Minister  of  Justice,  1798.  He  was  dismissed  in  1808,  but 
remained  Councillor  of  State  and  head  of  the  Council  of  Finances.  President  of  the 
Section  of  Justice  at  the  Council  of  State  under  King  Joseph,  he  took  refuge  in 
France  in  1814,  returned  to  Spain  in  1820,  and  died  in  1821. 


264  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

of  Castile  were  added.  The  number  of  judges  was  thus  increased 
to  eleven. 

They  declared  unanimously  on  January  II,  1808,  that  the 
prince  and  the  others  accused  were  not  guilty.  The  verdict 
was  sent  to  the  king  who  did  not  publish  it,  and  who,  a  few 
days  after,  exiled  to  various  different  parts  all  the  persons 
against  whom  the  accusation  had  been  directed.  The  Prince 
of  the  Asturias  was  consigned  to  his  palace. 

During  the  course  of  the  trial,  the  number  of  French  troops 
entering  the  kingdom  increased,  and  they  took  position  at  places 
near  Madrid,  such  as  Segovia,  Avila1  Olmedo  and  Aranda  de 
Duero. 

These  positions,  which  were  not  on  the  route  of  an 
expedition  coming  from  France  to  go  to  Portugal,  and  the 
manner  in  which  they  took  possession  of  Pampeluna  and 
Barcelona,2  might  lead  one  to  believe  in  some  menacing  inten- 
tions towards  Spain  itself.  Explanations  between  the  two 
governments  dissipated  for  a  moment  this  uneasiness,  but  not 
enough  however  to  prevent  the  Prince  of  the  Peace  believing  he 
ought  to  give  to  the  Spanish  troops  who  were  marching  towards 
Portugal,  under  the  command  of  Lieutenant-General  Solano, 
orders  to  retrace  their  steps.3 

The  ambassador  of  France  pretended  to  be  ignorant  of  this, 
and  a  few  days  after  received  an  order  to  say  that  the  Spanish 
government,  by  the  movement  it  had  just  had  made  by  its  troops, 
having  failed  in  the  plans  agreed  upon  and  necessary  for  the 
occupation  of  Portugal,  the  emperor  found  himself  obliged,  in 
order  to  ensure  the  success  of  the  expedition,  to  introduce  into 
Spain  forces  much  greater  than  those  of  which  the  treaty 
authorized  the  introduction.  For  fear  of  a  counter  order  from 
the  Spanish  government,  which,  in  effect,  arrived  soon  after, 
Napoleon  had  his  troops  make  forced  marches,  and,  in  a  few 
days,  he  occupied  other  places  in  Catalonia,  Navarra  and 
Guipuscoa  such  as  Figuera,  San-Sebastian,  &c. 

1  Segovia  and  Avila  are  situated  at  only  about  sixty  miles  north-west  of  Madrid. 

2  These  two  cities  were  carried  by  force  and  by  surprise  by  the  French  troops. 

3  Don  Francisco  Solano,  Marquis  del  Socorro  (1770- 1808).  A  fervent  admirer 
and  partisan  of  France,  he  served  as  a  common  soldier  in  the  army  of  Moreau. 
Named  later  Captain-General  of  Andalusia,  he  tried  to  prevent,  and  afterwards  to 
quell,  the  insurrection,  and  was  assassinated  at  Cadiz  in  a  riot. 


SPANISH  AFFAIRS.  265 

The  Court  of  Spain  wished  to  appear  reassured  ;  the  communi- 
cations between  the  two  governments  followed  the  usual  course, 
while  the  country  was  invaded,  without  at  all  comprehending 
such  grave  events.  The  Prince  of  the  Peace  began,  nevertheless, 
to  lose  a  little  of  the  confidence  he  had  in  Napoleon,  and  thought 
of  proceeding  with  the  royal  family  towards  the  port  of  Cadiz. 
Without  daring  at  first  to  disclose  all  his  projects,  he  confined 
himself  to  proposing  a  journey  to  Andalusia.  On  March  13,  1808, 
he  made  the  proposition  to  the  king,  who  adopted  the  plan  and 
gave  that  very  night  the  necessary  orders  to  the  Marquis  de 
Mos,  Grand  Master  of  the  Palace,  to  the  first  Secretary  of 
State,  Don  Pedro  Cevallos,1  and  to  the  Marquis  of  Cavallero, 
Minister  of  Justice. 

This  departure,  at  first  fixed  for  a  near  day,  was  put  off  to 
March  16,  which  gave  time  for  the  Marquis  de  Cavallero  to 
oppose  a  project  which  he  disapproved.  His  private  opinion 
was  that  the  king  ought  to  wait  at  Madrid  or  at  Aranjuez  for 
the  arrival  of  Napoleon  to  take  with  him  a  determination  upon 
the  political  affairs  of  the  two  countries.  The  reasons  given 
by  the  Marquis  de  Cavallero  to  the  king,  in  the  presence  of  the 
queen,  produced  a  sufficient  impression  to  cause  him  to  revoke 
the  order  for  the  journey,  which  was  beginning  to  be  no  longer  a 
secret.  The  requisitions  made  in  order  to  procure  carriages  and 
horses  for  conveyance,  the  departure  of  Madame  Tudo,1  who 
had  crossed  Aranjuez  in  a  travelling  carriage,  accompanied  by 
her  children  ;  all  these  circumstances  had  caused  agitation 
among  the  people. 

A  decree  badly  drawn  up,  whose  object  was  to  reassure,  and 
which  produced  a  contrary  effect,  increased  the  indignation 
already  so  strong  against  the  Prince  of  the  Peace.  They  accused 
him  loudly  of  having  counselled  the  king  to  abandon  Madrid. 
This  counsel,  they  said,  could  only  come  from  a  man  who  sought 
to  fill  the  soul  of  the  king  with  personal  fears  ;  the  moment  has 
come,  said  they,  for  delivering  the  country  from  his  oppressor. 

1  Don  Pedro  Cevallos,  born  in  1764,  was  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs.  Deeply 
attached  to  the  Prince  of  the  Asturias,  he  was  constantly  the  adversary  of  King  Joseph, 
and  became  the  leader  of  the  National  Junta.  He  was  disgraced  in  1820,  and  died  in 
1840.     He  had  married  a  niece  of  the  Prince  of  the  Peace. 

2  Dona  Josepha  Tudo  was  the  mistress  of  the  Prince  of  the  Peace.  Some  people 
have  pretended  that  they  were  united  by  a  secret  marriage. 


266  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

The  body-guard,  which,  for  several  months,  had  not  received 
their  pay,  showed  themselves  discontented  at  a  journey  burden- 
some to  them  ;  the  palace  servants,  whose  wages  were  equally 
behindhand,  and  who  found  some  aid  at  Madrid  and  at  Aran- 
juez,  were  in  great  uneasiness.  Their  fears  spread  among  the 
lower  people  ;  the  agitation  had  been  manifesting  itself  for 
several  days  ;  the  hatred  which  the  people  bore  towards  the 
Prince  of  the  Peace  was  still  increased  by  the  instigations  of  those 
who,  fearing  his  return  and  his  vengeance,  would  without  grief 
have  seen  him  perish  in  an  insurrection.  Popular  risings  are 
very  convenient  for  intriguers  ;  the  threads  are  broken  there 
and  researches  become  impossible.  No  measure  of  precaution 
had  been  taken  ;  there  were  at  Aranjuez  only  the  number  of 
troops  necessary  for  ordinary  duty  ;  and  besides  they  had  not 
chosen  those  upon  whom  they  might  count  the  most.  Two 
Swiss  regiments,  faithful  and  available,  had  been  left  and  almost 
forgotten  at  Madrid. 

In  this  state  of  affairs,  the  slightest  event  might  have  in- 
calculable results.  On  the  night  of  the  17th  to  the  iSth  of  March, 
before  midnight,  a  quarrel,  in  which  were  fired  several  pistol 
shots  between  a  patrol  of  carabineers  and  some  body-guards, 
became  the  signal  for  the  insurrection.  The  people  came  out  in 
crowds  ;  passion  carried  them  towards  the  house  of  the  Prince  of 
the  Peace  ;  they  broke  open  the  doors.  The  body-guard  who  were 
at  Aranjuez,  and  the  Spanish  guards  and  Walloons,  consulting 
only  their  duty,  endeavoured  to  quell  the  disturbance.  In  spite 
of  all  their  efforts  the  house  was  sacked  ;  the  rioters,  however, 
did  not  find  the  prince  who  had  taken  refuge  on  the  roof,  at  a 
place  which  by  foresight  he  had  had  prepared,  and  that  each  year 
of  his  administration  had  rendered  more  necessary.  The  people, 
in  the  midst  of  this  tumult,  were  particular  to  testify  by  the  cries 
of:  "Down  with  Godoy  !  Long  live  the  king!  Long  live  the 
queen  ! "  who  was  the  real  object  of  their  hatred ;  they  paid  even 
some  marks  of  regard  to  the  Princess  of  the  Peace  whom  they  led 
to  the  palace  with  the  Duchess  of  Alcudia,  her  daughter.  The 
effervescence  lasted  through  the  night,  and  at  daybreak,  the 
people  wishing  to  show  the  king  their  respect  and  attachment, 
repaired  to  the  palace,  demanding  to  see  the  king,  who  came  out 


SPANISH  AFFAIRS.  267 

upon  the  balcony  with  all  the  royal  family  ;  and  there,  several 
times,  they  were  applauded  and  greeted  by  the  most  lively 
demonstrations  of  love  and  fidelity.  A  few  signs  of  kindness  and 
of  sensibility  from  the  king,  and  the  condescension  shown  in  de- 
claring himself  that  he  would  deprive  the  Prince  of  the  Peace  of  the 
offices  of  general-in-chief  and  admiral,  sufficed  to  cause  the  with- 
drawal of  this  multitude  and  to  restore  tranquillity  for  that  day. 

The  troops,  re-assured  by  the  disposition  of  the  people 
towards  the  king,  saw  with  pleasure  the  humiliation  of  the 
Prince  of  the  Peace.  He  was  believed  to  have  fled,  and  the  crowd 
which  at  first  seemed  only  to  wish  to  be  delivered  from  him 
retired  and  appeared  satisfied.  On  the  19th,  however,  the  rumour 
spread  in  the  city  that  the  prince  was  hidden  in  his  house  ;  he 
had  been  discovered  by  a  sentinel  who  refused  to  give  him  the 
means  of  escape.  The  people  ran  in  from  all  sides  ;  the  prince, 
perceiving  some  troops  in  the  street,  darted  out ;  before  he  could 
reach  the  body-guards  who  surrounded  him,  he  received  several 
blows  upon  the  head.  The  king,  informed  of  what  was  taking 
place,  and  thinking  that  the  Prince  of  the  Asturias  would  have 
more  influence  over  the  people  than  himself,  induced  his  son  to  go 
and  announce  to  this  immense  crowd,  that  the  Prince  of  the  Peace 
would  be  put  on  his  trial.  The  Prince  of  the  Asturias  executed 
promptly  the  orders  of  his  father  ;  he  addressed  himself  to  those 
who  appeared  the  most  excited  and  promised  them,  if  they 
would  retire,  that  the  prince  should  be  led  to  prison  and  tried 
according  to  the  full  rigour  of  the  laws.  These  promises,  the 
distance  that  was  gradually  covered,  the  watch  of  the  body- 
guards brought  the  Prince  of  the  Peace  to  the  barracks  of  the 
guards.  They  closed  the  gates,  and  he  was  taken  to  a  room, 
which  by  one  of  those  chances  destined  to  give  men  great  lessons, 
happened  to  be  the  same  that  he  occupied  when  he  was  a  simple 
body-guard. 

In  the  first  moment,  the  king  resolved  to  send  the  Prince 
of  the  Peace  to  Grenada,  to  the  castle  of  the  Alhambra  ;  this 
project  was  soon  renounced,  because  it  was  feared  that  the 
people  might  manifest  displeasure  at  seeing  him  sent  away  and 
perhaps  escape,  for  whom  they  demanded  chastisement. 

The  irresolution  in  which  the  absence  of  the  Prince  of  the 


268  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

Peace  left  the  king,  the  uneasiness  which  filled  his  mind,  the  little 
confidence  he  had  in  himself,  the  perfectly  material  life  that  he 
had  led  for  many  years,  everything  in  fine  made  him  think  that 
his  health  was  feeble  enough  so  that  in  such  difficult  circum- 
stances, he  might,  without  dishonour,  abdicate  the  throne. 

Perhaps  he  was  also  influenced  by  the  fear  he  had,  as  well 
as  the  queen,  of  seeing  massacred  under  their  own  eyes  the  man 
who,  for  so  long  a  time  and  with  such  sway,  had  enjoyed  their 
confidence  and  all  their  favour  ;  but  finally,  this  determination, 
whatever  may  have  been  the  motive,  was  taken  without  having 
consulted  any  one.  The  king  had  Don  Cevallos  called  and 
ordered  him  to  draw  up  an  act  of  abdication.  Don  Cevallos 
had  already  been  informed  of  this  resolution  of  the  king  by 
the  members  of  the  diplomatic  corps  whom  His  Majesty  had 
seen  in  the  morning,  and  before  whom  he  had  formally  declared 
that  circumstances  impelled  him  to  put  into  execution  a  project 
which  his  age  and  his  infirmities  had  led  him  to  conceive  long 
before,  and  that  he  was  going  to  entrust  the  crown  to  hands 
younger  and  more  able  to  sustain  the  burden  of  it.  The  king, 
addressing  himself  afterwards  directly  to  Count  Strogonoff,1 
minister  of  Russia,  said  to  him,  with  an  air  of  satisfaction, 
that  he  had  never  taken  a  resolution  that  was  more  agreeable 
to  him.  His  language  was  the  same  throughout  the  day  with 
the  persons  whom  he  had  occasion  to  see,  and  particularly  with 
the  ministers,  the  captain  of  the  body-guard,  and  the  colonel  of 
the  Walloons. 

On  the  19th,  in  the  evening,  the  act  of  abdication  being  signed, 
and  invested  with  all  the  necessary  formalities,  the  king  ordered 
the  Prince  of  the  Asturias  to  come  into  his  presence,  com- 
municated it  to  him,  and  had  it  published.  The  prince, 
immediately  after  having  kissed  the  hand  of  the  king,  his  father, 
received  by  his  order  the  felicitations  and  homage  of  the  House 
of  His  Majesty  and  of  all  the  court. 

The  new  king,  desiring  to  have  the  first  act  of  his  reign 
agreeable  to  his  father,  took  on  the  instant,  the  measures  he 
judged  most  proper  to  arrest  the  movements  of  the  people  which 

1  Gregory  Alexandrowitch,  Count  Strogonoff,  ambassador  of  Russia  at  Constan- 
tinople, then  at  Madrid  and  at  London.     He  died  in  1857. 


SPANISH  AFFAIRS.  269 

at  Madrid  were  directed  against  the  relations  and  friends  of 
the  Prince  of  the  Peace.  The  ministers  of  the  King  Charles  IV. 
were  retained  in  their  offices,  with  the  exception  of  Don  Solar 
who,  being  a  partisan  of  the  Prince  of  the  Peace,  had  been 
obliged  in  the  first  moments  of  the  outbreak  at  Aranjuez  to  hold 
himself  aloof.  They  replaced  him  by  Don  de  Azanza,1  former 
viceroy  of  Mexico ;  the  Duke  of  Infantado,  to  whom  public 
opinion  was  favourable,  became  president  of  the  Council  of  Castile 
and  colonel  of  the  Spanish  Guards.  The  Prince  of  the  Peace  was 
transferred  to  Pinto  under  the  guard  of  Lieutenant-General 
Marquis  de  Castellar. 

The  first  arrangements  made,  the  new  king  thought  it  proper 
for  him  to  repair  to  Madrid  and  to  pass  some  time  there.  This 
resolution,  to  which  he  was  led  at  the  instance  of  the  people 
of  the  capital,  and  perhaps  also  by  the  secret  desire  that  he  had 
to  see  a  general  sanction  given  to  the  abrupt  and  important 
acts  which  had  taken  place  at  Aranjuez,  may  have  had  a  very 
great  influence  over  the  destinies  of  Spain,  since  by  this  step 
Ferdinand  closed  for  himself  the  road  to  Andalusia.  This 
reflection  was  no  doubt  overlooked  by  the  Grand  Due  de  Berg,2 
who,  on  being  informed  of  the  project  of  the  king,  instructed  M. 
de  Beauharnais  to  repair  to  Aranjuez,  to  dissuade  His  Majesty 
from  coming  to  Madrid,  while  so  many  French  troops  were 
there.  The  king  while  refusing  to  accede  to  the  proposition 
made  to  him  by  the  ambassador,  put  forward  the  engagements 
he  had  taken  with  his  capital. 

The  arrival  of  the  king  at  Madrid  was  announced  by  a 
proclamation,  and  had  the  effect  of  re-establishing  order  in  the 
city.  The  inhabitants  of  all  classes  hurried  to  meet  him,  and 
with  the  most  lively  and  most  affectionate  expressions,  testified 
to  him  their  joy,  and  showed  the  hopes  the  new  reign  raised  in 
them. 

1  Don  Jose  Miquel  de  Azanza,  born  in  1746,  was  at  first  charge  d'affaires  in 
Russia,  then  in  Prussia.  He  entered  the  army  afterwards,  was  appointed  Minister  of 
War  in  1795,  then  Viceroy  of  Mexico.  Having  returned  to  Spain  in  1799,  he 
became  Minister  of  Finances  on  the  accession  of  Ferdinand  (1808).  He  was  one  of 
the  first  to  attach  himself  to  King  Joseph,  became  Minister  of  Justice,  then  of  Foreign 
Affairs.     Exiled  in  1814,  he  took  refuge  in  France,  where  he  died. 

2  Murat,  Grand  Due  de  Berg,  was  then  lieutenant  of  the  Emperor  in  Spain,  and 
resided  at  Madrid. 


270  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

The  object,  which  at  this  moment  filled  all  minds  and  occupied 
them  solely,  did  not  allow  them  to  perceive  the  situation  in  which 
the  country  was  placed.  Very  few  of  the  inhabitants  of  Madrid 
knew  that  the  city  was  surrounded  by  60,000  Frenchmen,  and  on 
March  23,  when  the  Grand  Due  de  Berg,  followed  by  his  staff- 
officers,  entered  Madrid,  he  astonished  the  greater  number  of  the 
inhabitants  who  were  ignorant  of  his  arrival  in  the  kingdom,  and 
he  frightened  no  one.  The  species  of  revolutionary  giddiness 
which  agitated  the  minds,  led  the  multitude  to  believe  there 
were  no  dangers  which  could  not  be  conquered  by  men  who  had 
defeated  the  power  of  the  Prince  of  the  Peace. 

On  the  day  after  the  arrival  of  King  Ferdinand  VII.  in 
Madrid,  the  foreign  ministers,  with  the  exception  of  the  am- 
bassador of  France,  the  minister  of  Holland  and  the  charge 
d'affaires  of  Saxony,1  presented  themselves  at  the  palace  to  have 
the  honour  of  paying  their  respects  to  the  new  king. 

M.  de  Beauharnais,  ambassador  of  France,  saw  him  in  private, 
and  announced  the  approaching  arrival  of  the  emperor  in  Spain. 
The  relations  he  had  previously  had  with  the  king,  authorized 
him  in  believing  that  he  might  counsel  him  to  go  and  meet 
Napoleon.  He  tried  to  induce  him  even  to  pursue  his  journey 
as  far  as  Bayonne,  assuring  him  that  the  emperor,  touched  by 
this  proof  of  confidence,  would  not  delay  a  moment  in  recogniz- 
ing him  as  King  of  Spain,  and  according  him  one  of  his  nieces 
in  marriage.  The  ambassador  added  that  it  would  be  suitable 
for  the  king  to  take  the  necessary  precautions  for  putting  the  life 
of  the  Prince  of  the  Peace  out  of  all  danger,  and  for  giving  his 
orders  to  have  the  procedure  which  had  been  commenced  against 
him  suspended.  The  Grand  Due  de  Berg,  who  saw  King 
Ferdinand  VII.  at  the  house  of  the  Queen  of  Etruria  on  two 
occasions,  used  the  same  language,  with  this  difference,  that  in 
speaking  of  the  Prince  of  the  Peace,  his  expressions  were  less 
measured  than  those  of  M.  de  Beauharnais.  Both,  in  addressing 
the  king,  used  no  title  except  that  of  Royal  Highness,  and  even 
displayed  some  affectation  in  making  use  of  this  title.    The  king 

1  The  minister  of  Holland  was  M.  de  Verhuell,  and  the  charge  d'affaires  of 
Saxony  Baron  von  Forell.  As  is  known,  Louis  Bonaparte  was  then  King  of 
Holland  and  the  King  of  Saxony  was  entirely  devoted  to  Napoleon,  which  explains 
the  reserve  of  the  two  diplomatists. 


SPANISH  AFFAIRS.  271 

made  no  agreement  with  them  ;  his  replies  were  polite,  and  a 
slight  embarrassment  enabled  him  to  make  them  very  laconic. 

The  difficult  circumstances  in  which  King  Ferdinand  found 
himself,  induced  him  to  form  a  private  council  immediately. 
He  composed  it  of  Dons  Infantado,  Escoi'quiz,  San  Carlos,1 
Cevallos,  Cavallero,  Olaguer,  and  Gil  de  Lemos.  The  Duke  of 
San  Carlos  had  the  position  of  grand  master  of  the  household  of  the 
king, the  Marquis  de  Mos,  who  had  filled  it,  having  been  dismissed. 
The  king  charged  Don  Escoi'quiz  to  follow  up  particularly  all  the 
affairs  that  the  cabinet  might  have  to  treat  of  with  the  ambassa- 
dor of  France  and  the  Due  de  Berg.  The  choice  of  Don  Escoi'quiz 
had  been  determined  by  the  idea  that  the  ambassador  of  France, 
whose  position  was  believed  to  be  uneasy,  would  feel  more  at 
home,  or,  what  would  amount  to  the  same  thing,  more  em- 
barrassed with  Don  Escoi'quiz  than  with  any  other  member  of 
the  council. 

The  first  conference  of  Don  Escoi'quiz  with  the  ambassador 
of  France  took  place  a  few  days  later,  but  it  threw  no  light 
upon  the  state  of  affairs.  The  Grand  Due  de  Berg  was  present  ; 
the  language  used  was  the  same.  In  the  menacing  volubility  of 
Murat,  and  the  meek,  vague  and  reserved  words  of  M.  de  Beau- 
harnais,  Don  Escoi'quiz  believed  he  could  see  that  the  real 
interest  of  the  two  principal  personages  that  were  supposed  to 
act  by  direct  order  of  Napoleon,  bore  especially  upon  the 
journey  of  Ferdinand  VII.  to  Bayonne,  where  he  was  to  find 
the  emperor,  and  upon  the  interruption  of  the  trial  of  the  Prince 
of  the  Peace.  M.  de  Beauharnais,  restrained  and  directed  in  this 
conference  by  the  language  of  the  Grand  Due  de  Berg,  perceived 
that  he  had  not,  up  to  that  time,  been  thoroughly  on  the  side  of 
his  government,  and  like  people  who  change  opinion,  not  from 
reflection   but   solely  from    interest,   he  threw  himself  without 

1  Don  Joce  Miquel  de  Carvajal,  Duke  of  San  Carlos,  born  in  1771,  was  brigadier- 
general,  then  chamberlain  of  the  Prince  of  the  Asturias  and  governor  of  his  children  : 
Viceroy  of  Navarra  in  1807.  He  was  compromised  in  the  plot  of  the  Escurial  and 
disgraced  in  1808.  Ferdinand  afterwards  recalled  him  to  his  council.  The  duke 
followed  his  master  to  Valencay,  but  was  afterwards  confined  at  Lons-le-Saunier.  He 
returned  to  Spain  in  1814,  was  named  minister  of  state,  then  ambassador  at 
Vienna  (18 15)  and  at  London  (181 7).  After  the  Revolution  of  1820,  he  retired  to 
Lucca,  where  an  Infanta  of  Spain  (the  Duchess  Maria  Louisa,  former  Queen  of 
Etruria),  was  reigning,  and  was  named  by  her  minister  to  France.  After  the  return 
of  Ferdinand,  he  became  ambassador  of  Spain  at  Paris.     He  died  in  1828. 


272  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

reserve  into  all  the  ideas  of  the  Grand  Due  de  Berg,  in  whom 
he  did  not  inspire  so  much  confidence  as  that  he  had  lost  on  the 
part  of  King  Ferdinand.  The  Grand  Due  de  Berg  terminated 
this  conference  by  observing  to  Don  Escoi'quiz  that  it  was  im- 
portant to  take  measures  to  put  an  end  to  the  agitation  raised 
among  the  people  by  the  presence  of  so  large  a  number  of 
Frenchmen  in  Madrid. 

This  change  of  feeling  towards  the  French  came  from  the 
people's  believing  they  no  longer  had  need  of  them.  They  were 
delivered  by  their  own  efforts  from  the  oppression  of  the  Prince 
of  the  Peace,  and  were  full  of  confidence  in  their  new  king  ;  thus 
no  longer  regarding  the  French  as  liberators,  they  found  them 
very  dear  and  inconvenient  guests. 

Don  Escoi'quiz  reported  to  the  council  the  result  of  his 
conference  with  the  Grand  Due  de  Berg  and  the  ambassador 
of  France.  Thereupon  his  colleagues  associated  with  him  for 
further  conferences  the  Duke  of  Infantado ;  and  both 
were  instructed  by  the  king  to  go  to  Murat  and  say  to  him 
that  it  was  the  intention  of  King  Ferdinand  VII.  to  go  to 
meet  the  emperor  as  soon  as  he  should  have  certain  news  of  his 
arrival  on  the  frontier,  but  that  the  letters  from  France  did  not 
advise  him  yet  of  his  departure  from  Paris  ;  that,  as  to  the 
Prince  of  the  Peace,  his  trial  could  not  be  suspended,  because 
the  prosecution  and  the  publicity  of  this  act  of  justice  were 
one  of  his  duties  towards  the  nation,  but  he  promised  that  the 
sentence,  whatever  it  might  be,  should  not  be  executed  until 
after  having  been  submitted  to  the  approval  of  the  emperor. 
Dons  Infantado  and  Escoi'quiz  added  that  they  had  just 
taken  the  most  efficacious  measures  to  restore  tranquillity  in 
Madrid,  and,  in  effect,  it  had  been  ordered  that  all  house- 
owners  should  patrol  night  and  day  the  quarters  in  which 
they  lived.  The  garrison  of  Madrid,  at  the  request  of  the 
Grand  Due  de  Berg,  had  been  reduced  to  two  battalions  of 
Spanish  guards  and  Walloons,  and  the  body-guards.  This 
small  number  of  troops  were  employed  in  seeing  the  orders  of 
the  magistrates  of  police  executed,  and  in  putting  a  stop  to 
the  quarrels  which  might  arise  between  the  inhabitants  of 
the  city  and   the   French. 


SPANISH  AFFAIRS.  273 

These  answers  did  not  satisfy  Murat,  who,  after  having 
insisted  most  strenuously  as  to  the  suspension  of  the  trial 
of  the  Prince  of  the  Peace,  complained  bitterly  of  the  delays 
experienced  in  the  execution  and  even  in  the  replies  to  all 
the  demands  he  made  for  the  support  of  his  troops.  These 
new  complaints  would  furnish  special  motives  for  independent 
action,  of  which  he  could  make  use  according  to  his  views, 
and  this  remark  received,  a  few  days  after,  its  application.  A 
body  of  troops  on  horseback,  under  the  pretext  of  seeking 
fodder,  came  with  artillery  to  occupy  the  heights  of  Pinto. 
The  Marquis  de  Castellar  informed  the  king  of  this  new  move- 
ment of  the  French.  After  some  altercation  between  the  Grand 
Due  de  Berg  and  the  Spanish  government  on  this  subject,  the 
latter  decided  that  the  Prince  of  the  Peace  should  be  trans- 
ferred from  Pinto  to  the  Castle  of  Villa  Viciosa  situated 
three  leagues  from  Madrid,  and  where  there  were  no  French 
troops. 

The  council  of  the  king  believed  itself  perfectly  secure  on 
this  point,  when  the  Grand  Due  de  Berg  sent  for  the  Duke  of 
Infantado  and  Don  Escoi'quiz  and  declared  to  them  that  he 
had  received  new  orders  from  the  emperor  demanding  that  the 
person  of  the  Prince  of  the  Peace  should  be  delivered  into  his 
hands.  He  engaged  to  have  him  taken  out  of  Spain,  and  gave 
his  word  of  honour  that  he  should  never  re-enter  the  country, 
adding  that  the  will  of  the  emperor  was  so  precise  that  it  was 
his  duty  to  take  possession  of  the  Prince  of  the  Peace  by  force, 
if  he  were  not  given  up  immediately.  The  king  authorized 
Dons  Infantado  and  Escoi'quiz  to  reply  that  the  arrival  of  the 
emperor  was  announced  as  being  very  near  at  hand,  and  that 
it  Avould  be  so  decisive  for  the  internal  affairs  of  Spain,  of  which 
he  was  going  to  be  the  arbiter,  that  he  did  not  doubt  that  the 
Grand  Due  would  put  off  until  that  moment  the  mode  of 
action  which  he  had  threatened  to  employ.  They  added  that 
if  he  resorted  to  force  to  carry  off  the  Prince  of  the  Peace,  his 
safety  would  certainly  be  compromised,  in  consequence  of  the 
inevitable  popular  rising  which  would  be  provoked  by  such  a 
measure. 

To  the  menacing  instances  of  Murat  were  added  those  of 
vol.  1.  T 


274  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

the  ambassador  and  of  General  Savary.1  The  latter,  in  pre- 
senting the  same  demands  in  the  name  of  the  emperor,  whom 
he  had  left  only  a  few  days  before,  brought  positive  news  of  his 
arrival  at  Bordeaux.  He  was  pleased  to  speak  of  the  disposition 
of  Napoleon  for  Ferdinand  VII.,  employing  all  the  terms  calcu- 
lated to  inspire  confidence.  Thus,  he  assured  the  new  king  that 
he  would  be  recognized  ;  that  his  marriage  would  be  concluded  ; 
that  the  integrity  of  Spain  would  be  guaranteed  at  the  first 
interview  that  the  prince  would  have  with  the  emperor  ;  and 
that,  for  so  many  advantages,  the  emperor  wished  only  to  hear 
from  the  mouth  of  the  prince,  in  whom  he  confided,  that  Spain, 
under  his  authority,  would  be  as  faithful  an  ally  of  France  as  it 
had  been  after  the  Family  Compact.2 

The  same  demands,  the  same  replies  repeated  for  several 
days  left  matters  in  the  same  state,  up  to  the  8th  of  April,  when 
the  king,  after  having  taken  the  advice  of  his  council,  decided  to 
send  the  Infante  Don  Carlos  3  to  meet  Napoleon.  The  prince 
was  to  go  even  to  Paris,  if  he  did  not  find  the  emperor  on  the 
road.  He  was  the  bearer  of  a  letter  from  the  king,  his  brother, 
in  which,  after  having  spoken  of  the  desire  to  form  the  closest 
alliance  with  the  emperor,  and  having  renewed  his  demand  for 
one  of  his  nieces  in  marriage,  he  announced  that  he  would  go 
to  meet  His  Majesty,  as  soon  as  he  should  be  aware  of  his 
approaching  the  frontiers  of  Spain.  He  concluded  his  letter  by 
leaving  to  the  equitable  decision  of  His  Majesty  the  affair  of 
the  Prince  of  the  Peace. 

The   Infante    departed   with  this    letter  April  9.     He  was 
accompanied  by  the  Duke  of  Hijar,  Don  Vallejo,  Don  Macanaz,4 

1  Rene  Savary,  born  in  1774  a!  Marc,  near  Vouziers,  entered  the  army  at  an  early 
age,  and  was  colonel  of  gendarmes  in  1800.  Closely  attached  to  the  emperor,  he 
became  general  of  division  and  Due  de  Rovigo,  and  was  named  ambassador  at  St. 
Petersburg  in  1807.  In  1808,  he  commanded  for  a  short  time  the  French  troops  in 
Spain.  He  became  Minister  of  Police  in  1810.  Having  been  sentenced  to  death 
per  contumaciam  in  1815,  he  returned  to  France  and  had  the  sentence  quashed.  He 
lived  in  retirement  under  the  Restoration.  In  1831,  he  was  named  Governor  of 
Algeria,  and  died  in  1833. 

-  The  treaty  concluded  in  August,  1761,  by  which  all  the  branches  of  the  House 
of  Pourbon  agreed  mutually  to  assist  one  another. — {Translator.) 

3  The  Infante  Don  Carlos,  second  son  of  King  Charles,  was  born  in  1788.  In 
1S08,  he  accompanied  Ferdinand  to  Valencay,  and  did  not  return  to  Spain  until  1814. 
At  the  death  of  the  king,  his  brother,  he  vainly  claimed  the  throne  in  the  name  of 
the  Salic  law.     The  Carlist  party  dates  from  that  time. 

4  Don  Pedro  Macanaz,  born  in   1760,  was  Secretary  of  Embassy  in  Russia.     He 


SPANISH  AFFAIRS.  275 

and  the  Marquis  of  Feria.  At  Bayonne,  he  found  the  Duke  of 
Frijas,  the  Duke  of  Medina-Cceli,  and  Count  of  Fernan-Nunez,1 
already  sent  by  King  Ferdinand  to  pay  his  respects  to  Napo- 
leon, who  a  few  days  after  arrived  at  Bayonne. 

The  news  of  his  departure  from  Paris,  reached  Madrid  on 
April  11.  King  Ferdinand,  harassed  by  all  the  claims  of  the 
Grand  Due  de  Berg,  the  entreaties  of  General  Savary,  and  the 
suggestions  of  M.  de  Beauharnais,  took  the  resolution  of  leaving 
on  the  10th  for  Burgos.  His  ministers  had  advised  this  unani- 
mously. Seeing  that  the  king  could  neither  negotiate  nor  defend 
himself,  nor  escape,  they  thought  there  was  no  other  course  for 
this  unhappy  prince  to  take,  than  to  place  himself  with  confi- 
dence in  the  hands  of  Napoleon. 

They  could  not  negotiate  seeing  that  Ferdinand  VII.  had  not 
been  recognized  :  Napoleon  had  not  replied  to  any  of  his  letters, 
and  there  was  reason  to  suspect  that  the  frequent  communications 
which  took  place  between  the  king,  the  queen  and  the  Grand 
Due  de  Berg,  through  the  medium  of  the  Queen  of  Etruria,  had 
for  their  object  to  induce  King  Charles  to  withdraw  his  abdi- 
cation. These  secret  negotiations,  which  had  adjutant-general 
de  Monthion,2  for  messenger,  and  the  Queen  of  Etruria  for 
instrument,  produced  the  antedated  act  of  March  21,  in  which 
King  Charles  declares  : 

"  I  protest  and  declare  that  my  decree  of  March  19,  by  which 
I  abdicate  the  crown  in  favour  of  my  son,  is  an  act  to  which  I 
was  forced  in  order  to  prevent  the  greatest  misfortunes,  and  the 
shedding  of  the  blood  of  my  beloved  subjects.  It  must,  in  con- 
sequence, be  regarded  as  of  no  value. 

"  I,  the  King." 

accompanied  the  princes  of  Spain  into  France,  was  shut  up  for  some  time  at  Vin- 
cennes,  and  kept  afterward  under  supervision  at  Paris.  In  1 8 14,  he  became  Minister 
of  Justice,  was  arrested  for  malversations  and  suffered  two  years  imprisonment.  He 
died  shortly  after. 

1  Count  of  Fernan-Nunez,  born  in  1778,  was  one  of  the  most  ardent  supporters  of 
the  Prince  of  the  Asturias.  He  accepted,  nevertheless,  the  office  of  Grand  Veneur* 
at  the  court  of  King  Joseph  ;  but  having  been  convicted  of  treason,  he  was  forced  to 
fly.  In  1815,  he  was  named  by  Ferdinand  ambassador  at  London,  and  then  at  Paris 
in  1817.     He  died  in  1821. 

2  General  Monthion  had  been  instructed  by  Murat  to  approach  Charles  IV.  for 
the  purpose  of  pressing  him  to  protest  against  his  first  abdication  in  favour  of  Fer- 
dinand.    (See  on  this  episode  Memoirs  on  the  Affairs  of  Spain,  by  Abbe  de  Pradt.) 

*  Grand- Master  of  the  Hunt. 

T   2 


276  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

The  natural  result  of  this  protest,  which  was  as  yet  only 
suspected  by  the  ministers  of  Ferdinand  VII.,  must  be  an 
appeal  of  King  Charles  to  Napoleon  against  his  rebellious  and 
usurping  son. 

It  could  not  be  prevented ;  the  essential  forces  of  the  king- 
dom were  enfeebled  by  the  absence  of  a  corps  of  nearly  twenty 
thousand  men,  who,  under  the  command  of  the  Marquis  de  la 
Romana,  were  fighting  in  the  north  of  Europe  with  the  French 
armies.  Ferdinand  VII.  had  hardly  three  thousand  men  about 
him  ;  the  people  were  without  arms,  and  when,  under  any 
pretext  whatever,  the  government  spoke  of  bringing  a  few 
battalions  to  Madrid,  the  Grand  Due  de  Berg  opposed  it  with 
all  the  boldness  inspired  by  the  one  hundred  and  fifty  thousand 
men  whom  he  commanded. 

Flight  was  impossible  ;  the  least  preparation  would  have 
betrayed  the  project  ;  the  suspicion  aroused  by  the  attempted 
escape  of  Charles  IV.,  some  days  before,  kept  the  people  upon 
the  alert.  The  king  was  surrounded  by  spies,  perhaps  even 
in  the  very  council,  although  Don  Cavallero  and  Don  Olaguer 
were  no  longer  members  of  it,  and  had  been  replaced  by 
Don  Penuelas  and  Don  O'Farril.1  Besides,  to  retire  without 
an  army,  without  strongholds,  and  without  money,  even  to 
Algesiras,  was  a  desperate  step.  The  council  was  lacking  in 
energy. 

Besides,  it  was  known  that,  in  a  treaty  drafted  at  Paris  about 
March  20  by  Don  Izquierdo,  Napoleon  had  inserted  among  the 
bases  of  an  agreement,  the  obligation  for  Spain  to  cede  to  him 
a  portion  of  her  territory  by  fixing  the  Ebro  as  the  boundary  of 
the  two  countries.  No  one  revolted  at  this  idea  ;  everybody,  it 
is  true,  grieved  at  the  necessity  of  making  this  sacrifice,  but  it 
was  hoped  that,  at  the  moment  of  the  marriage,  Napoleon 
would  forego  his  project,  and  restrict  himself  to  securing  the 
military  route  which  was  necessary  for  France  in  order  to  com- 
municate with  Portugal,  and  to  obtain  for  French  commerce,  the 

1  Don  Gonzalo  O'Farril,  born  in  1753  of  an  Irish  family  in  the  service  of  Spain, 
was  lieutenant-general  and  inspector  of  infantry.  After  the  departure  of  the  king,  he 
was  a  member  of  the  Junta  of  government  presided  over  by  the  Infante  Don  Antonio. 
Nevertheless,  he  recognized  King  Joseph,  and  served  him  faithfully.  Condemned  to 
death  in  1814,  he  took  refuge  in  France,  where  he  died. 


SPANISH  AFFAIRS.  277 

free  introduction  into  France  of  the  products  of  the  Spanish 
colonies. 

Ferdinand  VII.,  before  leaving  Madrid,  entrusted  the  care  of 
the  government,  during  the  time  of  his  absence,  to  a  Junta 
presided  over  by  the  Infante  Don  Antonio,1  his  uncle,  and  com- 
posed of  Dons  Penuelas,  O'Farril  and  Azanza.  He  was  accom- 
panied by  the  Dukes  of  Infantado  and  of  San  Carlos,  and  by 
Dons  Cevallos,  Escoi'quiz,  Musquiz,  Labrador,2  and  a  very  small 
number  of  attendants.  He  had  with  him  only  a  single  squadron 
of  the  body-guards.  Two  companies  of  Spanish  guards  and 
Walloons  were  ordered  to  await  him  at  Burgos.  He  took  three 
days  to  reach  there.  The  determination  that  had  been  taken 
had  been  preceded  by  so  much  irresolution,  that  all  motives  for 
retarding  his  progress  agreed  with  the  disposition  in  which  the 
king  and  his  retinue  were  at  the  time.  The  king  found  the 
roads  covered  with  French  troops  all  armed,  and  did  not  meet 
with  a  single  Spanish  soldier  on  his  route.  At  Burgos,  Marshal 
Bessieres  was  in  command  of  a  body  of  nearly  ten  thousand 
men  ;  he  offered  to  the  king  to  reach  Vittoria  by  means  of  the 
relays  prepared  for  Napoleon  ;  the  king  availed  himself  of 
them.  General  Savary,  who  had  accompanied  him  so  far,  went 
on  in  advance  to  Bayonne,  whence  he  returned  on  the  18th 
to  Vittoria  with  new  instructions.  Vittoria  was  occupied  by 
the  first  brigade  of  General  Verdier's  division,  which  was 
composed  of  nearly  four  thousand  men.  General  Lefebvre 
had  brought,  on  the  evening  before,  from  Burgos,  two  hundred 
dragoons  of  the  guard,  and  Lieutenant-Colonel  Henri  was 
there  with  fifty  chosen  gendarmes.  On  the  20th,  Marshal 
Bessieres  was  to  be  there  with  four  battalions  of  Napoleon's 
guard. 

King  Ferdinand  VII.  took  up  his  quarters  at  the  Vittoria 
town-hall,  and  remained  there  three  days.  General  Savary 
brought   him    a  letter  from    Napoleon.      In   spite  of   the   ob- 

1  The  Infante  Don  Antonio,  brother  of  King  Charles  IV.,  was  born  in  1755.  He 
had  married  his  niece,  the  Infanta  Maria- Amelia. 

2  Pedro  Gomez  Kavelo,  Marquis  de  Labrador,  born  in  1775.  He  was  in  1807 
minister  of  Spain  at  Florence.  He  accompanied  King  Ferdinand  to  Valencay,  was 
in  1814  named  councillor  of  state,  ambassador  at  Paris,  and  plenipotentiary  at  the 
Congress  of  Vienna.  He  became  after  this,  ambassador  at  Naples,  then  at  Rome, 
and  died  in  1850. 


278  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

scurity  of  some  of  the  expressions  of  this  letter,  the  difficulties 
of  the  situation  in  which  King  Ferdinand  found  himself  were 
such  that  he  felt  inclined  to  put  a  favourable  interpretation  upon 
all  that  came  from  Napoleon,  and  this  disposition  was  shared 
by  all  the  persons  attached  to  the  king,  even  by  those  who 
had  preceded  him  to  Bayonne.  Count  of  Fernan-Nunez,  Dons 
Hijar,  Vallejo,  and  Macanaz  wrote  that  they  anticipated  the 
happiest  results  from  the  interview  about  to  take  place  between 
the  two  sovereigns. 

The  king,  decided  though  he  was  to  go  on  to  Bayonne, 
liked  to  have  reasons  given  him  for  continuing  his  route.  Several 
times  in  the  day,  he  took  the  advice  of  his  council,  and  although 
the  opinion  was  always  the  same,  he  consulted  them  still.  The 
slow  progress  occasioned  by  the  inaction  in  which  they  remained 
during  three  days,  gave  uneasiness  to  General  Savary,  who  had 
orders  to  bring  the  princes  to  Bayonne,  willingly  or  by  force. 
Plans  were  made  to  carry  them  off  on  the  19th,  if,  during  the 
day  of  the  18th,  a  last  attempt  at  persuasion  did  not  succeed. 
The  town-hall  was  to  be  surrounded  on  the  19th,  in  the 
morning,  by  the  infantry  of  General  Verdier ;  three  pieces  of 
artillery,  loaded  with  grape-shot,  were  to  be  placed  at  the  three 
gates  of  the  city  ;  General  Savary,  at  the  head  of  his  gendarmes, 
and  supported  by  a  hundred  men  of  light  infantry,  was  to  force 
his  way  into  the  palace.  All  these  arrangements  proved  useless, 
the  king  having  announced  that  he  would  leave  the  next  day 
at  nine  o'clock  in  the  morning.  At  the  moment  the  king 
stepped  into  his  carriage,  popular  instinct  collected  a  great 
crowd  around  it  ;  they  cut  the  traces  of  the  mules  ;  cries 
of  fury  were  heard  on  all  sides.  This  tumult  might  have 
become  very  serious,  if  the  king  had  not  decided  at  once 
to  make  a  proclamation  the  effect  of  which  upon  the  people 
was  remarkable ;  their  cries  became  tears,  and  shortly  after 
they  became  prostrated.  The  mules  were  again  put  to  the 
carriages  ;  the  body-guards  mounted  their  horses  and  all  set  out. 
At  eleven  o'clock  in  the  evening,  the  king  arrived  at  Irun  with 
his  retinue.  He  alighted  at  the  house  of  Don  Olazabal,  which 
was  outside  that  little  city.  It  was  guarded  by  a  battalion  of  the 
king's  regiment.     General  Savary  did  not  arrive  at  Irun  until  the 


SPANISH  AFFAIRS.  279 

20th  at  seven  o'clock  in  the  morning.  An  accident  to  his 
carriage  had  caused  this  delay. 

Thus,  the  king  and  his  attendants  were  eight  hours  alone, 
without  a  French  escort  in  a  Spanish  house  on  the  seashore, 
where  several  boats  were  fastened  to  stakes  placed  in  the  garden 
itself.  General  Savary,  on  alighting  from  his  carriage,  repaired 
in  great  haste  and  perplexity  to  the  house  where  the  king 
was  staying,  and  found  him  asleep.  At  eight  o'clock  in  the 
morning,  they  all  left  for  Bayonne.  At  the  moment  when  the 
king  arrived  on  French  territory,  detachments  of  the  Imperial 
Guards  surrounded  his  carriage.  Their  number  appeared  to  some 
of  the  Spaniards  rather  large  for  a  simple  escort  of  honour.  This 
remark,  vague  at  first,  became  a  sinister  foreboding,  when,  on 
passing  Ogunna,  they  read  on  the  arch  of  triumph,  these  words : 
"  He  ivho  makes  and  unmakes  kings  is  more  than  a  king  himself." 
Such  an  inscription  was  a  startling  menace  for  the  princes  of 
Spain,  and  said  to  them,  like  that  of  Dante  : 

"  Lasciate  ogni  speransa,  voi  ch'entrate." x 

Thus  was  achieved  the  most  memorable,  perhaps,  of  all  the 
outrages  of  Napoleon.  The  princes  of  Spain  were  outside  of 
Spanish  territory,  and  the  emperor  held  them  in  his  power. 

Their  sojourn  at  Bayonne  possesses  no  other  interest  than 
that  proceeding  from  the  different  means  the  imagination  of 
Napoleon  employed  to  deceive  himself,  or  that  his  character  and 
malice  furnished  him  for  prolonging  for  some  hours  the  error  of  his 
simple  and  unfortunate  victims,  and  for  exciting  gigantic  efforts 
on  the  part  of  France,  which  did  not  offer  any  other  prospect 
than  to  place  one  of  his  brothers  on  the  throne  of  Spain.  All 
that  passed  then  is  found  described  in  detail,  with  exactness  and 
interest,  in  the  work  of  M.  de  Pradt  f  and  therefore  my  object 

1  "  All  hope  abandon,  ye  who  enter  here." 

2  Dominique  Dufour  de  Pradt,  born  in  1759  at  Allanches  (Auvergne),  of  a  noble 
family.  He  was  at  first  an  officer,  but  left  the  military  career  to  enter  orders.  Vicar- 
general  at  Rouen,  he  was  afterwards  deputy  of  the  clergy  to  the  States-General.  He 
emigrated  in  179 1,  returned  to  France  under  the  Consulate,  and  became  chaplain  to  the 
emperor,  then  Bishop  of  Poitiers  (1805).  Napoleon  employed  him  in  the  affairs  of  Spain 
in  1808,  and  gave  to  him  soon  after  the  archbishopric  of  Malines.  He  was  ambassador 
to  Warsaw  in  1812.  In  1814,  he  was  named  Grand  Chancellor  of  the  Legion  of 
Honour.  He  was,  in  181 7,  elected  deputy  from  Clermont-Ferrand.  He  died  in  1837. 
M.  de  Pradt  has  written  much.  The  work  mentioned  above,  Memcires  Hisloriques 
sur  la  Revolution  d'Espagne,  was  published  in  Paris  in  1815. 


280  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

is  simply  to  follow,  as  a  mere  thread,  the  special  events  of  each 
of  the  days  that  the  young  princes  passed  at  Bayonne,  before 
proceeding  to  Valencay,  where  I  was  to  have  the  honour  of 
receiving  them,  and  where  I  was  fortunate  enough  to  be  able 
to  spare  them,  at  least,  some  anxiety  and  cares. 

Between  Vidante  and  Bayonne,  King  Ferdinand  met  the 
Infante  Don  Carlos,  who,  accompanied  by  Dons  Frias,  Medina- 
Cceli,  and  Fernan-Nunez,  came  to  meet  his  unhappy  brother. 
The  king  had  them  enter  his  carriage,  and  there  he  learned 
from  them,  with  the  greatest  surprise,  that  Napoleon  had 
declared  to  them  the  day  before  at  ten  o'clock  in  the  morning, 
that  they  should  never  return  to  Madrid,  and  that  one  of  his, 
Napoleon's,  brothers  was  to  occupy  the  throne  of  Spain.  I 
mention  the  hour  at  which  this  declaration  was  made  because  it 
proves  that  it  had  taken  eighteen  hours  to  bring  this  news  to 
Irun  ;  and  at  Irun,  as  has  been  seen,  King  Ferdinand  could  still 
have  released  himself  from  his  despoilers.  At  one  league  from 
Bayonne,  there  no  longer  remained  for  the  princes  anything  but 
sad  resignation  or  confidence  in  reasons,  on  the  force  of  which 
it  would  have  required  much  simplicity  to  rely. 

The  carriages  advanced  towards  Bayonne  ;  at  half-past 
twelve  the  princes  arrived  there,  and  a  few  moments  later,  King 
Ferdinand  received  a  visit  from  Napoleon.  In  this  first  inter- 
view, all  was  insignificant,  except  the  alarming  word  Elle 
employed  by  Napoleon,  and  this  word,  an  ordinary  expression 
of  regard,  was  as  applicable  to  the  title  of  Majesty  as  to  that  of 
Royal  Highness.  Ferdinand  VII.  hastened  at  once  to  repair  to 
the  palace  to  present  his  homage  to  Napoleon  who  had  paid 
him  the  first  visit.  Napoleon  invited  him  to  dine  at  the  Chateau 
of  Marrac  j1  he  also  invited  the  Dukes  of  San  Carlos,  of  Medina- 
Cceli,  and  of  Infantado  ;  the  Prince  dc  Neufchatel  was  the  only 
Frenchman  present  at  the  dinner.  They  did  not  speak  of  politics. 
On  the  morrow,  Napoleon  granted  private  audiences  to  the  Dukes 
of  San  Carlos,  and  of  Infantado  and  to  Don  Escoiquiz.  He 
told  them  he  was  determined  to  change  the  dynasty  that  reigned 

1  The  Chateau  of  Marrac,  situated  one  kilometre  south  of  Bayonne,  was  built 
in  1707  for  the  Queen-Dowager  of  Spain,  widow  of  Charles  II.,  refugee  in  France. 
Napoleon  bought  it  in  1807.     It  was  destroyed  by  fire  in  1825. 


SPANISH  AFFAIRS.  281 

on  the  throne  of  Spain,  and,  forgetting  that  he  had  repeated  a 
thousand  times  that  his  existence  at  the  head  of  France  was 
incompatible  with  that  of  a  prince  of  the  House  of  Bourbon  on 
one  of  the  thrones  of  Europe,  he  craftily  gave  for  the  date  and 
motives  of  his  projects  as  to  Spain,  the  proclamation  made  by  the 
Spanish  government  at  the  time  of  the  battle  of  Jena.  It  had 
been,  he  said,  regarded  in  France,  if  not  as  a  declaration,  at  least 
as  a  menace  of  war :  he  then  announced,  in  a  firm  voice,  that 
nothing  could  move  him  from  his  purpose.  There  he  stopped,  as 
if  to  note  the  full  effect  of  the  terrible  words  he  had  just  pro- 
nounced. After  a  moment  of  silence,  which  he  broke  by  the  softest 
expressions,  he  spoke  of  the  misfortunes  of  the  young  princes, 
and  said  that  his  policy  being  in  veritable  contradiction  to  his 
heart,  he  could  not  refuse  any  means  of  happiness  for  them, 
which  would  be  compatible  with  the  system  he  had  adopted. 
He  even  went  so  far  as  to  offer  King  Ferdinand,  provided  he 
would  cede  his  right  to  the  crown  of  Spain,  Etruria,  with  the 
title  of  King,  a  year  of  this  kingdom's  revenue  so  that  he  might 
form  his  establishment,  one  of  his  nieces  in  marriage,  and,  in 
case  he  died  without  children,  to  establish  the  succession  in  the 
male  line  of  the  princes,  his  brothers. 

Struck  by  what  they  had  just  heard,  the  Dukes  of  Infantado, 
and  of  San  Carlos,  and  Don  Escoi'quiz,  tried  to  combat  the  system 
of  Napoleon,  who,  entering  into  their  feelings,  but  as  a  man  whose 
ideas  are  irrevocably  settled,  bade  them  to  omit  nothing  which, 
on  returning  to  their  master,  they  might  reproach  themselves  for 
having  failed  to  mention.  With  one  mind  they  said  that  the 
object  of  the  emperor  being  to  secure  the  durable  alliance  of 
Spain,  the  known  character  of  the  young  king,  and  his  marriage 
with  one  of  Napoleon's  nieces,  was  for  the  time  being  a  guarantee 
preferable  to  all  others,  and  that,  if  they  wished  to  carry  forward 
their  ideas  to  a  distant  future,  they  must  own  that  besides  the 
track  of  human  policy  being  lost  in  its  mists,  the  descendants  of  a 
prince  of  the  House  of  Napoleon,  in  proportion  to  their  removal 
from  their  common  origin,  would  become  indifferent  to  family 
sentiment,  and.  might  even,  on  occasion,  endure  impatiently  the 
yoke  imposed  by  an  older  and  more  powerful  branch.  And  with 
a  noble  and  touching  expression,  they  added  that  it  would  be 


282  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

very  difficult  for  history,  to  whose  burin  he  had  furnished  such 
beautiful  illustrations,  to  set  down  the  motives  for  the  despoiling 
of  a  powerful  king,  who  had  come  in  confidence  to  render  homage 
to  a  sovereign,  who  had  been  his  ally  for  six  years.  Then  entering 
into  the  examination  of  the  political  consequences  of  the  resolu- 
tion of  the  emperor,  they  predicted  that  the  Spanish  colonies, 
whose  fidelity  under  the  actual  dynasty  was  nothing  less  than 
assured,  would  under  another  dynasty  become  the  prey  of 
England  or  constitute  themselves  an  independent  power  ;  that 
England  would  then  pour  therein  the  products  of  her  manufac- 
tures, and  that  this  new  and  great  outlet  would  secure  for  her  a 
commercial  superiority  absolutely  crushing  for  the  other  powers 
of  the  world.  These  reasonings,  which  seemed  more  like  the 
discharge  of  a  conscientious  duty  than  an  argumentation  from 
which  any  advantage  might  be  expected,  were  minutely  gone 
into.  Napoleon  listened  to  them  without  showing  any  impatience, 
but  said,  that  for  a  long  time  he  had  considered  the  question 
under  all  its  aspects,  that  Don  EscoTquiz  and  the  Dukes  of  San 
Carlos  and  of  Infantado  had  pointed  out  to  him  nothing  new, 
and  that  he  persisted  immovably  in  the  system  he  had  adopted. 

Dons  Infantado,  Escoi'quiz  and  San  Carlos  retired  and  reported 
to  the  persons  who  had  accompanied  Ferdinand  VII.,  and  who 
were  in  his  confidence,  the  conversation  they  had  had  with 
Napoleon,  and  added — believing  that  in  this  they  were  performing 
an  act  of  courage — that  their  opinion  was  that  his  offers  must 
not  be  declined. 

Their  grounds  for  this  opinion  were :  the  situation  of  the 
king  and  of  the  Infante,  now  in  the  hands  of  Napoleon,  the 
number  of  French  armies  actually  in  Spain,  the  positions  they 
occupied,  the  inefficiency  of  the  Spanish  army,  few  in  numbers 
and  scattered  about  the  country,  and  finally,  the  feebleness  of 
King  Charles  IV.,  who  was  lending  himself  to  all  the  wishes  of 
Napoleon.  Don  Cevallos,  who  was  the  only  one  of  a  contrary 
opinion,  based  it  upon  very  strong  considerations,  and  proposed 
as  a  sequel  to  the  negotiation,  to  refuse  all  verbal  communica- 
tion and  to  resort  to  written  notes,  as  if  Napoleon  were  still  in 
Paris,  King  Ferdinand  at  Madrid,  the  French  troops  in  Germany 
and  the  Spanish  troops  occupying  all  the  strong  places  on  the 


SPANISH  AFFAIRS.  283 

frontiers.  He  accused  of  weakness  and  even  of  cowardice,  the 
members  of  the  council  who  expressed  an  opinion  different  from 
his  own  ;  he  sustained  that  no  arrangement  must  be  made  whose 
basis  was  to  be  the  cession  of  the  crown,  and  he  demanded  that 
all  the  members  of  the  council  having  to  answer  for  their  opinion 
to  the  Spanish  Court  should  express  it  in  writing. 

Their  courage  returned  when  there  was  no  longer  need  for 
anything  but  resignation.  Is  it  not  remarkable  that  the  same 
men  who  in  Spain  had  not  known  how  to  resist  either  the 
Prince  of  the  Peace,  the  Grand  Due  de  Berg,  or  General  Savary, 
believed  they  could  achieve  anything  by  establishing  at  Bayonne, 
in  writing,  the  right  of  principles,  the  law  of  abdication,  the 
dangers  they  ran  on  the  subject  of  the  colonies,  &c.  ? 

Dons  Infantado  and  Escoi'quiz  were  instructed  to  acquaint 
Napoleon  with  the  decision  taken  by  the  princes  to  name  a 
plenipotentiary,  who  should  be  authorized  to  treat  in  writing  the 
points  which  were  to  be  settled.  Napoleon,  while  saying  that 
the  resolution  of  the  princes  did  not  appear  to  him  calculated  to 
advance  affairs,  complied  with  the  request  to  name  a  plenipo- 
tentiary. He  told  Dons  Infantado  and  Escoi'quiz  that  he  would 
give  his  powers  to  M.  de  Champagny,  his  Minister  of  Foreign 
Affairs.  He  asked  who  was  the  person  to  whom  the  princes 
would  give  their  powers.  The  Duke  of  Infantado  said  that  it 
would  probably  be  among  the  Spaniards  in  the  service  of  the 
department  of  Foreign  Affairs  that  the  princes  would  choose  their 
plenipotentiary,  and  he  named  as  attached  to  that  career,  Dons 
Cevallos,  Labrador,  Musquiz,  Vallejo,  and  Macanaz.  At  the 
name  of  M.  de  Labrador,  he  made  some  unkind  remarks,  the 
very  nature  of  which  were  honourable  for  the  character  and 
abilities  of  that  minister. 

Dons  Infantado  and  Escoi'quiz  acquainted  the  king's  council 
with  the  result  of  their  new  conference  with  Napoleon.  They 
proposed  there  and  then  to  name  a  plenipotentiary,  and  Don 
Cevallos  saw  in  Napoleon's  opinion  of  the  Marquis  of  Labrador 
only  another  motive  for  proposing  him  to  the  council.  The  king 
acted  upon  this  advice  and  appointed  the  marquis.  The  latter 
had  a  conference  with  M.  de  Champagny,  who  demanded,  as*  a 
preliminary  act,  the  cession  of  the  crown  of  Spain.    The  Marquis 


284  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLE  YRAND. 

of  Labrador  declared  that  he  had  not,  and  that  before  God,  lie  hoped 
he  never  would  have,  the  power  to  cede  it.  They  broke  up  the  con- 
ference, and  while  the  council  was  discussing  the  question  as 
to  whether  they  should,  or  should  not,  give  the  necessary  powers 
for  continuing  the  negotiation,  Napoleon  sent  for  Don  Escoi'quiz, 
and  told  him  that  if  before  eleven  o'clock  in  the  evening,  he  did 
not  bring  to  him  the  formal  renunciation  of  King  Ferdinand  to 
the  throne  of  Spain,  and  his  request  for  that  of  Etruria,  he  would 
treat  with  Charles  IV.,  who  was  to  arrive  on  the  morrow,  Don 
Escoi'quiz  reported  to  the  council  the  determination  of  Napoleon. 
Don  Cevallos  begged  the  king  to  refuse  unreservedly  the  pro- 
positions made  to  him.  On  the  following  day,  Don  Escoi'quiz 
ventured  to  speak  again  of  Tuscany  to  Napoleon  who,  with- 
out entering  into  the  matter,  said  to  him,  "  My  dear  sir,  it  is 
too  late." 

On  the  30th  at  four  o'clock  in  the  evening,  Charles  IV.  and 
the  queen  arrived  at  Bayonne.  Napoleon  had  sent  one  of  his 
chamberlains  to  congratulate  them  at  Irun.  In  the  carriage 
following  that  of  the  king  was  the  Duchess  of  Alcudia,  daughter 
of  the  Prince  of  the  Peace.  Orders  had  been  given  that  the  entry 
of  the  king  and  queen  into  Bayonne  should  be  brilliant.  The 
princes,  their  children,  went  to  meet  them  and  re-entered  the 
city  with  them.  The  Prince  of  the  Peace,  who  at  the  repeated 
request  of  the  Grand  Due  de  Berg  had  been  released  from  Villa 
Viciosa,  left  the  private  house  where  he  was  lodging,  and  went 
to  dwell  with  the  king  and  queen. 

The  arrival  of  King  Charles  changed  the  aspect  of  affairs  ;  he 
consented  to  everything.  Napoleon  charged  Don  Escoi'quiz  to 
tell  King  Ferdinand  that,  King  Charles  having  protested  against 
his  abdication,  the  duty  of  the  Prince  of  the  Asturias  was  to  return 
him  the  crown  by  a  renunciation  pure  and  simple.  The  council 
induced  Ferdinand  VII.  to  announce  his  submission,  but  to 
propose  to  perform  the  act  of  renunciation  only  at  Madrid. 

A  threatening  letter  from  King  Charles  to  his  son,  the  severity 
with  which  he  had  treated  him  in  the  presence  of  Napoleon,  the 
intention  he  had  announced  of  having  the  counsellors  of  King 
Ferdinand  tried  as  rebels  ;  all  these  means  combined  produced  the 
effect  Napoleon  had  hoped  from  them  ;  the  prince  sent  his  resigna- 


SPANISH  AFFAIRS.  2S5 

tion  pure  and  simple  to  King  Charles,  who  immediately  named 
the  Grand  Due  de  Berg  lieutenant-general  of  the  kingdom. 

This  nomination  put  an  end  to  the  powers  of  the  Infante 
Don  Antonio,  who  had  been  left  at  Madrid  by  the  young  king 
as  president  of  the  Junta.  He  had  been  ordered  to  Bayonne  by 
a  command  of  King  Charles  IV.,  addressed  to  the  Grand  Due  de 
Berg,  who  intimated  it  to  him  and  had  it  executed  immediately. 
The  Infante,  at  the  commencement  of  his  short  administration, 
had  been  under  the  unpleasant  necessity  of  being  forced  by  the 
Grand  Due  de  Berg  to  give  up  the  Prince  of  the  Peace  into  his 
hands.  Murat  had  declared  to  him  that  he  would  carry  him  off  by 
force  if  he  were  not  delivered  up  to  him,  and  he  had  added  that 
the  lives  of  the  princes  who  were  at  Bayonne  should  answer  for 
that  of  the  Prince  of  the  Peace.  Don  Antonio  had  believed  he 
ought  to  yield,  and  an  aide-de-camp  of  the  Grand  Due  de  Berg 
had  been  charged  to  escort  the  Prince  of  the  Peace  as  far  as 
Bayonne  where  he  had  arrived  on  the  25th.  On  the  road,  he 
had  incurred  some  danger,  particularly  at  Tolosa,  where  the 
people,  greatly  excited,  had,  in  order  to  detain  him,  unharnessed 
and  overturned  the  carriages  on  the  bridge.  The  prince  only 
owed  his  safety  on  this  occasion,  to  the  captain  of  the  cuirassiers 
who  commanded  the  escort. 

King  Charles  IV.  and  the  queen,  during  their  journey  from 
Madrid  to  Bayonne,  had  been  received  with  marks  of  neither 
hatred  nor  esteem. 

Murat,  on  the  arrival  of  the  powers  which  conferred  upon  him 
the  rank  of  lieutenant-general  of  the  kingdom,  had,  as  has  been 
seen,  hastened  the  departure  of  the  Infante  Don  Antonio  for 
Bayonne.  The  Queen  of  Etruria  arrived  there  at  the  same  time 
with  the  Infante  Don^Francisco. 

The  renunciation  pure  and  simple  of  Ferdinand  VII.  had 
been  sent  to  King  Charles.  Napoleon  believed  that  the 
moment  had  come  to  propose  to  the  Prince  of  the  Asturias,  his 
brothers,  and  his  uncle,  to  make  a  treaty  of  cession  of  all  their 
rights  to  the  crown  of  Spain.  He  agreed  to  give  them  the  territory 
of  Navarre,  and  to  allow  them  to  receive  .the  revenues  of  their 
commanderies  and  of  their  lands  in  Spain.  The  bases  of  this 
treaty,  the  drafting  of  which  was  entrusted  to  Don  Escoi'quiz  and 


2S6  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

to  General  Duroc,  having  been  settled,  the  princes  started  for 
Valencay,  where  Napoleon  sent  them  until  the  chateau  of 
Navarre  should  be  made  habitable.  They  stopped  two  days  at 
Bordeaux,  and,  on  the  19th  of  May,  they  made  their  entry  into 
Valencay.  I  had  been  there  several  days  when  the  princes 
arrived.  This  moment  has  left  on  my  mind  an  impression  which 
will  never  be  effaced.  The  princes  were  young,  and  over  them, 
around  them,  in  their  clothing,  in  the  liveries  of  their  servants,  was 
seen  the  image  of  bygone  centuries.  The  coach  from  which  I  saw 
them  alight  might  have  been  taken  for  a  carriage  of  Philip  V. 
This  air  of  antiquity,  in  recalling  their  grandeur,  added  to  the 
interest  of  their  position.  They  were  the  first  Bourbons  that  I 
saw  again  after  so  many  years  of  storms  and  disasters.  It 
was  not  they  who  felt  embarrassed,  it  was  I,  and  I  am  pleased 
to  say  it. 

Napoleon  had  had  them  accompanied  by  Colonel  Henri, 
a  superior  officer  of  the  gendarmerie  d'elite?-  and  one  of  those 
police-agents  who  believe  that  military  glory  is  acquired  by 
fulfilling  with  severity  a  mission  of  this  kind.  I  soon  perceived 
that  this  man  affected  to  show  his  suspicions  and  fears,  which 
might  make  the  sojourn  at  Valencay  insupportable  for  the 
princes.  I  adopted  with  him  the  tone  of  a  master,  in  order  to 
make  him  understand  that  Napoleon  did  not  reign  either  in  the 
apartments  or  in  the  park  of  Valencay.  This  reassured  the 
princes,  and  was  my  first  recompense.  I  surrounded  them  with 
respect,  attention  and  care  ;  I  allowed  no  one  to  present 
himself  before  them  until  after  having  obtained  permission 
from  them.  No  one  approached  them  except  in  full  dress  ;  I 
never  failed  myself  in  what  I  had  prescribed  in  this  respect.  All 
the  hours  of  the  day  were  distributed  according  to  the  habits  of 
the  princes  ;  mass,  hours  of  rest,  promenades,  prayers,  &c,  each 
of  these  had  its  proper  time.  Will  it  be  credited  that  at 
Valencay,  I  made  the  princes  of  Spain  acquainted  with  a  kind 
of  liberty  they  had  never  known  when  near  their  father's  throne  ? 
Never,  at  Madrid,  had  the  two  elder  princes  walked  out  to- 
gether without  a  written  permission  from  the  king.  To  be  alone, 
to  go    out  ten  times  a  day  in  the  garden,  in  the  park,  were 

1  A  picked  police  force. 


SPANISH  AFFAIRS.  287 

pleasures  new  to  them.     They  had  never  before  been  able  to  be 
so  unconstrained  towards  each  other. 

I  cannot  understand  why  hunting,  horse-riding,  and  dancing 
had  been  forbidden  them  in  Spain.  I  had  them  take  their  first 
shot  with  a  gun  ;  I  confided  them  to  the  care  of  a  former 
keeper  of  Monseigneur  the  Prince  de  Conde,  named  Aubry, 
who  had  taught  the  Due  de  Bourbon  how  to  shoot.  This  old 
man,  full  of  respect  and  affection,  mentioned  persons  of  their 
family  to  them,  on  every  occasion.  I  had  them  ride  horses  with 
Foucault  who  had  long  been  attached  to  me  ;  brought  up  in  the 
chief  stables  of  the  king,  he  had  been  special  attendant  of 
Madame  Elizabeth  of  France  ;  all  the  examples  he  cited,  all  his 
recollections,  were  drawn  from  their  House.  Boucher  put  all  his 
skill  and  all  his  heart  into  making  them  bad  Spanish  stews. 
The  terrace  which  is  in  front  of  the  chateau  became  our  ball- 
room, where  the  princes  could  witness,  as  by  chance,  some 
of  those  dances  the  French  call  rondes,  and  in  which  they  might 
join  without  knowing  how  to  dance.  Guitars,  and  amongst 
others,  that  of  Castro,  were  heard  in  all  corners  of  the  garden. 

I  had  endeavoured  to  have  them  spend  some  hours  in  the 
library  ;  in  this  I  did  not  meet  with  great  success,  although  the 
librarian,  M.  Fercoc,  and  I,  tried  all  the  means  that  we  could 
imagine  to  retain  them  there.  Having  failed  by  books  alone  to 
arouse  their  interest,  we  called  their  attention  to  the  beauty  of 
the  editions,  and  to  the  works  which  contained  engravings  ;  we 
even  resorted  to  common  pictures  ;  yet,  I  dare  not  say  how 
useless  all  our  efforts  proved.  Don  Antonio,  their  uncle,  who 
feared  for  them  the  greater  number  of  books  which  compose  a 
good  library,  soon  imagined  some  reason  for  inducing  them  to 
retire  to  their  apartments  ;  and  for  this  he  met  with  less  resistance 
than  when  he  wished  them  to  leave  the  exercises  and  the  amuse- 
ments which  form  the  charm  of  summer  evenings  in  the  country. 
In  addition  to  these  distractions,  which  everybody  about  the 
chateau  helped  me  to  organize,  the  princes  had  the  consolations 
of  religion  ;  great  misfortune  always  renders  faith  more  lively 
and  the  soul  more  sensitive.  Each  day  closed  with  a  public 
prayer  at  which  I  had  all  visitors  to  the  chateau,  the  officers 
of  the   departmental  guard    and  even  the   men  of  the  gendar- 


2S8  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

merie  attend.  Every  one  left  these  gatherings  with  softened 
hearts  ;  the  prisoners  and  their  guards  praying  on  their  knees, 
next  each  other,  to  the  same  God,  appeared  to  regard  one 
another  less  as  enemies  ;  the  guards  were  no  longer  so  fierce, 
nor  the  prisoners  so  alarmed  ;  perhaps  some  displays  of  interest 
made  them  even  conceive  a  little  hope.  The  feeling  hearts 
of  the  princes  led  them  to  ascribe  to  me  the  consolation  they 
experienced.  I  cannot  remember  without  emotion  the  grief  they 
showed  when,  a  letter  from  Napoleon,  on  his  way  from  Bayonne, 
directed  me  to  go  to  meet  him  at  Nantes,  and  leave  them  for  a 
few  days. 

The  emperor  had  for  some  time  been  wounded  at  the  opinion 
I  had  expressed  as  to  his  undertaking  in  Spain  ;  nay,  more,  he 
had  thought  that  the  plans  I  had  made  at  the  time  of  the  arrival 
of  the  princes  at  Valencay,  had  too  much  their  safety  in 
view.  Thus,  as  soon  as  we  met  at  Nantes,  we  had  some 
conversations — I  might  say  rather  some  irritating  discussions. 
On  one  occasion  among  others,  taking  a  bantering  tone  with 
me,  rubbing  his  hands,  and  walking  up  and  down  the  room, 
while  looking  at  me  with  a  mocking  air,  he  said  to  me,  "  Well, 
you  see  what  all  your  predictions  as  to  the  difficulties  I  should 
encounter  in  regulating  the  affairs  of  Spain  according  to  my 
views  have  amounted  to ;  I  have,  however,  overcome  these 
people  here  ;  they  have  all  been  caught  in  the  nets  I  spread 
for  them,  and  I  am  master  of  the  situation  in  Spain,  as 
in  the  rest  of  Europe."  Provoked  by  this  boasting,  so  little 
justified  in  my  eyes,  and  above  all  by  the  shameful  means  he 
had  employed  to  arrive  at  his  ends,  I  replied  to  him,  calmly, 
that  I  did  not  see  things  under  the  same  aspect  as  he,  and  that 
I  believed  he  had  lost  more  than  he  had  gained  by  the  events  at 
Bayonne.  "  What  do  you  mean  by  that  ? "  he  replied.  "  Mon 
Dieu"  I  said,  "  it  is  very  simple,  and  I  will  show  you  by  an 
example.  If  a  man  in  the  world  commits  follies,  has  mistresses, 
conducts  himself  badly  towards  his  wife,  does  even  grave  wrongs 
to  his  friends,  he  will  doubtless  be  blamed  ;  but  if  he  is  rich, 
powerful,  and  clever,  he  may  still  expect  to  be  treated  with  in- 
dulgence in  society.  If  he  cheats  at  gaming,  he  is  immediately 
banished  from  good    company,  which  will  never  pardon  him." 


SPANISH  AFFAIRS.  289 

The  emperor  turned  pale,  remained  confused,  and  spoke  to  me 
no  more  on  that  day  ;  but  I  can  say  that  from  this  moment 
dated  the  rupture  which,  more  or  less  marked,  took  place 
between  him  and  me.  Never  after  did  he  pronounce  the  name 
of  Spain,  of  Valengay,  or  mine,  without  adding  to  it  some 
injurious  epithet  which  his  temper  furnished.  The  princes  had 
not  been  three  months  at  Valencay  before  he  already  believed 
that  he  saw  all  the  vengeances  of  Europe  proceeding  therefrom. 
The  persons  who  surrounded  him  have  often  said  to  me  that  he 
spoke  of  Valencay  with  uneasiness,  whenever  his  conversation 
or  questions  bore  upon  that  place. 

My  absence  lasted  only  a  few  days  ;  the  princes  saw  me 
again  and  received  me  with  extreme  kindness.  A  letter  from 
Napoleon  which  I  found  on  my  return  merits  being  preserved  ; 
here  it  is  literally  : — 

"  Prince  Ferdinand,  in  writing  to  me  addresses  me  as  his 
cousin.  Try  to  have  the  Duke  of  San  Carlos  understand  that 
this  is  ridiculous,  and  that  he  must  simply  call  me  Sire." 

After  Ajaccio  and  Saint  Helena,  comment  is  useless. 

I  have  not  added  to  this  recital  any  fragments  but  what  are 
absolutely  necessary  to  the  subject,  the  others  being  found  in 
the  different  writings  which  are  already  published,  or  in  records 
which  are  not  at  my  disposal. 

Our  uneventful  life  at  the  chateau  continued  some  weeks 
longer,  and  only  ended  when  the  journey  to  Erfurt  recalled  me 
to  Paris.  On  my  departure  all  three  princes  came  to  take  leave 
of  me  in  my  apartment,  with  tears  in  their  eyes  ;  they  asked 
what  they  could  do  to  give  me  some  mark  of  their  friendship  and 
gratitude,  for  it  is  thus  they  expressed  themselves.  Each  of 
them  offered  me  the  old  prayer-book  which  he  used  at  church  ;  I 
received  them  with  respect,  and  with  an  emotion  I  shall  never 
have  the  temerity  to  express.  I  have  dared  to  recall  the  word 
gratitude  of  which  they  deigned  to  make  use  on  this  occasion, 
because  this  expression  is  so  rare  with  princes  that  it  honours 
those  who  employ  it.  It  is  in  order  to  avoid  discharging  this 
noble  debt  that  ancient  dynasties  affect  to  trace  their  origin  to 
Providence  :  "By  the  grace  of  God"  is  a  formula  of  ingratitude. 
vol.  1.  U 


290  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

On  leaving  Valencay,  I  returned  to  Paris ;  I  spent  only  a 
few  days  there  before  leaving  for  Erfurt,  where  Napoleon  and 
the  Emperor  of  Russia  were  to  meet.  The  details  of  this  inter- 
view will  form  a  separate  chapter.  The  frequent  conversations 
I  then  had  with  Napoleon,  led  me  to  apprehend  that  he  meditated 
causing  the  princes  of  Spain  to  fall  into  a  snare  that  his  minister 
of  general  police  had  laid  for  them  by  his  order.  The  results 
might  be  fatal  to  them  ;  I  believed  there  was  not  a  moment  to 
lose  to  forewarn  them  of  it,  so  I  had  M.  Mornard,  my  secretary, 
leave  immediately  for  Paris,  and  call,  with  the  utmost  speed, 
on  the  Duke  of  San  Carlos,  who  was  then  in  that  city.  His  zeal 
and  interest  for  the  princes  took  him  only  four  days  to  reach 
there. 

My  mind,  my  heart,  my  memories,  were  filled  with  interest 
for  the  princes  of  Spain.  I  have  still  present  to  my  mind  the 
effect  produced  upon  me,  at  the  first  interview  at  Erfurt,  when 
the  Emperor  of  Russia,  among  the  obliging  things  he  said 
to  Napoleon,  announced  to  him  that  he  had  recognized  his 
brother  Joseph  as  King  of  Spain. 

From  this  moment,  the  existence  of  the  princes  up  to  the 
time  of  their  return  to  Spain  was  uneventful  ;  all  that  can  be 
said  of  them  during  these  five  years  is,  that  they  lived. 

M.  dc  la  Forest  came  to  negotiate  at  Valencay  the  treaty1 
by  virtue  of  which  the  return  of  the  princes  to  Spain  was  con- 
sented to  by  the  Emperor  Napoleon,  who  signed  on  February  8, 
1 8 14,  at  Nogent-sur-Seine,  the  order  for  their  departure.  It  was 
desired  to  give  the  appearance  of  a  free  consent  to  an  order  which 
was  drawn  out  in  the  hope  of  preventing  the  army  of  the  coali- 
tion from  entering  France  by  the  frontier  of  the  Pyrenees.  The 
respectful  forms  employed  by  M.  de  la  Forest  in  all  his  relations 
with  the  Spanish  princes  must  have  been  so  much  the  more 
appreciated  by  them,  that  for  several  years  they  had  been 
obliged  to  preserve  themselves  from  the  bad  conduct  and  heavy 
dealings  of  MM.  de  Darby,   Henri,  Kolli,  and   a  host  of  other 

1  The  treaty  of  Valencay  was  signed  December  n,  1813.  The  integrity  of  Spain 
was  promised.  The  French  troops  were  to  evacuate  the  country,  the  Spanish  and 
English  armies  were  not  to  cross  the  Pyrenees.  Finally,  Ferdinand  had  admitted  in 
principle  the  idea  of  a  marriage  with  the  daughter  of  King  Joseph.  The  treaty  was 
brought  by  the  Duke  of  San  Carlos  before  the  Cortes,  and  Ferdinand  left  Valenray 
March  3. 


SPANISH  AFFAIRS.  291 

agents  who  had  been  placed  near  them  to  guard  and  spy  upon 
them.  Before  leaving  the  French  territory  the  princes  had  still 
to  submit  to  an  insult  provoked  by  the  Due  de  Feltre,  who, 
without  having  received  the  order  from  Napoleon,  but  in  the 
hope  of  pleasing  him,  had  one  of  them  stopped  on  the  frontier 
as  hostage. 

If  ever  the  success  of  an  enterprise  should  have  appeared 
infallible,  it  was  assuredly  an  enterprise  in  which  treason  had 
combined  everything  in  such  a  manner  as  to  leave  nothing  to 
be  done  by  force  of  arms.  It  must  have  seemed  impossible  that 
Spain,  invaded  before  she  could  possibly  expect  it,  deprived  of 
her  government  and  of  a  portion  of  her  strongholds,  with  a 
regular  army  mediocre  in  number,  and  more  mediocre  in  quality, 
without  harmony  between  her  provinces,  and  almost  without  the 
means  of  establishing  any,  could  think  for  a  moment  of  offering 
resistance,  or  of  attempting  to  do  so  except  for  her  ruin.  How- 
ever, those  who  knew  Spain  and  the  Spaniards  judged  otherwise, 
and  were  not  deceived.  They  predicted  that  Spanish  pride  would 
calculate  neither  ultimate  result  nor  present  dangers,  but  would 
find  in  indignation  and  despair,  a  vigour  and  resource  continually 
renewed. 

Napoleon,  in  menacing  England  with  an  invasion,  had  forced 
her  to  create  an  army  of  considerable  strength,  and  thus,  without 
foreseeing  it,  had  prepared  help  for  the  Peninsula.  Seventeen 
thousand  English,  and  some  thousand  Portuguese,  made  the 
French  evacuate  Portugal  ;  the  latter  re-entered  momentarily,  but 
were  unable  to  establish  a  firm  footing  there.  The  Portuguese 
soon  had  a  numerous  army,  brave  and  well-disciplined,  and,  with 
the  English,  developed  into  the  auxiliaries  and  the  support  of 
the  resistance  which  had  burst  forth  simultaneously  over  all 
parts  of  Spain,  and  which  could  be  entirely  suppressed  only  by 
immense  armies,  which  it  was  impossible  to  maintain  in  that 
country,  because  it  was  impossible  to  nourish  them.  The  title 
"  invincible "  that  the  continual  victories  over  regular  armies 
had  attached  to  the  name  of  Napoleon  became  contestable,  and 
it  was  from  Spain  that  Europe  learned  that  he  could  be  con- 
quered, and  how  it  could  be  done.  The  resistance  of  the  Spaniards, 
in  setting  a  precedent  prepared  that  made  later  by  the  Russians, 

U    2 


292  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

and  led  to  the  fall  of  the  man  who  had  promised  himself  the 
domination  of  the  world.  Thus  was  verified  what  Montesquieu 
had  said  of  the  projects  of  an  universal  monarchy :  that  they 
could  not  fail  in  a  single  point  without  failing  everywhere. 

At  the  first  indications  they  had  in  France  of  the  projects  of 
Napoleon  on  Spain,  a  few  persons  said :  "  This  man  is  under- 
taking a  thing  which,  if  it  fail,  will  ruin  him  ;  and  if  it  succeed, 
will  ruin  Europe."  It  has  failed  enough  to  ruin  him,  and  perhaps 
it  has  succeeded  sufficiently  to  ruin  Europe. 

Ferdinand  VII.,  at  Valengay,  humbled  himself  beyond  mea- 
sure, to  the  point  of  congratulating  his  oppressor  on  his  victories 
over  the  Spaniards.  Hardly  had  he  remounted  the  throne,  than 
without  discriminating  between  his  faithful  subjects  and  those 
who,  carrying  into  the  Cortes  the  revolutionary  spirit,  wished,  to 
annihilate  the  royal  power  to  substitute  their  own  to  it,  Fer- 
dinand VII.  sentenced  to  exile,  to  irons,  to  death  even,  those  who 
had  inflamed  their  countrymen  for  his  defence,  those  whose 
constancy  had  broken  his  irons  for  him,  those  by  whose  aid  he 
was  now  reigning.  All  the  weakness  he  had  shown  in  misfortune, 
changed  into  a  furious  craving  for  absolute  power.  The  English, 
who  boast  of  being  the  liberators  of  Spain,  who  ought  to  have 
made  stipulations  in  her  favour,  and  who  could  have  done  it,  did 
not  do  it.  They  confined  themselves  to  making  representations, 
the  inutility  of  which  could  easily  be  foreseen,  and  the  success 
of  which,  there  is  reason  to  believe,  was  most  indifferent  to  them, 
for  they  hate  tyranny  abroad,  only  when,  as  under  Napoleon,  it 
menaces  their  existence,  and  they  delight,  (we  need  not  furnish 
any  instance  of  it)  in  turning  the  subjection  of  peoples  to  the 
profit  of  their  pride  or  of  their  prosperity.  A  more  far-sighted 
policy  would  have  inspired  the  Cabinet  which  governed  England 
at  that  time  with  very  different  views. 

1  Qu'ils  ne  pouvaient  echouer  surun  seul  point  qu'ils  n'echouassent  partout. 


END  OF   THE   FOURTH   PART. 


PART    V. 

THE   ERFURT   INTERVIEW. 

1808. 

Napoleon  holds  out  a  bait  to  Russia — The  prospective  partition  of  Turkey 
— Silesia  to  France  as  compensation  for  Wallachia  and  Moldavia  to 
Russia — Alexander  incensed — Napoleon'sletterto  the  Czar,  desisting  from 
all  pretensions  to  Silesia  and  proposing  to  meet  him  in  order  to  arrange 
the  best  means  of  carrying  war  into  India — Reply  of  Alexander  accept- 
ing to  meet  Napoleon — Count  Romanzoff  and  Turkey — Russia  wants 
Constantinople — The  Turks  must  be  driven  back  to  Asia — France  and 
the    Porte — Russia   and    Sweden — Conquest    of    Finland — Talleyrand 
receives  orders  to  accompany  Napoleon  to  Erfurt,  the  emperors'  meet- 
ing-place— Confidence   displayed   by  Napoleon   towards    Talleyrand — 
A  brilliant  journey — Napoleon  wishes  to  dazzle  the  Germans — Invites 
Talleyrand   to   induce   the   kings    and    princes    to    come   to    Erfurt — 
Napoleon  and  Dazincourt — Choice  of  plays — Cinna— The  actors  of  the 
Comedie  Frau^aise  ordered  to  repair  to  Erfurt— The  military  retinue  of 
Napoleon — Napoleon  discloses  to  Talleyrand  his  projects  for  Erfurt — 
Orders  Talleyrand  to  draw  up  a  convention  aimed  against  England — 
Text  of  that   convention — Napoleon  objects   to  certain   expressions — 
Austria,    Napoleon's    enemy— Napoleon    insists    on  inserting    in    the 
convention  a  clause  directed  against  Austria — Rebukes  Talleyrand — 
Vflus    etes  toujours  Autrichien! — Final   instructions   of  Napoleon   to 
Talleyrand — Talleyrand's  arrival   at   Erfurt — M.  de   Caulaincourt  and 
Talleyrand — List  of  the  crowned  heads  and  eminent  personages  present 
at    Erfurt — Arrival    of    the     Emperor    Napoleon    at    Erfurt — General 
enthusiasm — The  attendant  kings  and  princes  humble  themselves  in  the 
presence  of  their  victor — Arrival  of  the  Czar  Alexander — His  friendly 
meeting  with  Napoleon — The  latter  introduces  changes  into  the  projected 
convention — Austria's  fears — M.  de  Vincent  and  Talleyrand — Interview 
between    Napoleon   and  Goethe — Napoleon's  judgment    on    Schiller's 
Thirty  Years'  IVar.—The  play  at  Erfurt — The  impressions  of  the  kings 
and  princes — Delight  of  the  Czar — Private  interview  between  Napoleon 
and  the  latter — Uneasiness   of  the  Austrian  envoy — The    Princess   of 
Tour  and   Taxis — Napoleon  invites   Goethe  and  Wieland  to  lunch — 
Napoleon's  judgment  as  to  the  influence  of  Christianity  on  the  development 


294  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

of  civilization — Conversation  of  Napoleon  with  Wieland — Interview 
between  the  Czar  and  Talleyrand — The  latter  endeavours  to  defeat  the 
projects  of  Napoleon — Induces  the  Czar  to  write  to  the  Emperor  of 
Austria,  in  order  to  soothe  his  apprehensions — Napoleon  fails  to 
persuade  the  Czar— He  lets  out  his  secret — Fete  at  Weimar — Napoleon's 
opinion  on  Tacitus — Wieland's  defence  of  the  great  Roman  historian — 
Return  to  Erfurt — Confidential  interview  between  Napoleon  and  the 
Czar — Conversation  with  Talleyrand — Napoleon  wants  to  divorce — 
Judgment  of  the  Czar  on  Napoleon — Napoleon  and  the  Czar  before  a 
pitfulof  kings  at  Erfurt — Napoleon's  opinion  of  ideologists — Christianity 
the  best  system  of  philosophy — Napoleon  starts  for  Spain — The  Erfurt 
convention. 

In  the  course  of  the  conferences  preceding  the  treaty  of 
Tilsit,  the  Emperor  Napoleon  often  spoke  to  the  Czar  Alexander 
of  Moldavia  and  Wallachia  as  provinces  destined  some  day  to 
become  Russian.  Affecting  to  be  carried  away  by  some  irre- 
sistible impulse,  and  to  obey  the  decrees  of  Providence,  he  spoke 
of  the  division  of  European  Turkey  as  inevitable.  He  then 
indicated,  as  if  inspired,  the  general  bases  of  the  sharing  of 
that  empire,  a  portion  of  which  was  to  fall  to  Austria,  in  order 
to  gratify  her  pride  rather  than  her  ambition.  A  shrewd  mind 
could  easily  notice  the  effect  produced  upon  the  mind  of  Alex- 
ander by  all  those  fanciful  dreams.  Napoleon  watched  him 
attentively  and,  as  soon  as  he  noticed  that  the  prospects  held 
out  allured  the  Czar's  imagination,  he  informed  Alexander  that 
letters  from  Paris  necessitated  his  immediate  return,  and  gave 
orders  for  the  treaty  to  be  drafted  at  once.  My  instructions  on 
the  subject  of  that  treaty  were,  that  no  allusion  to  a  partition  of 
the  Ottoman  Empire  should  appear  in  it,  nor  even  to  the  future 
fate  of  the  two  provinces  of  Wallachia  and  Moldavia.  These 
instructions  were  strictly  carried  out.  Napoleon  thus  left  Tilsit, 
having  made  prospective  arrangements  which  could  serve  him 
as  he  pleased  for  the  accomplishment  of  his  other  designs.  He 
had  not  bound  himself  at  all,  whereas,  by  the  prospects  he  had 
held  out,  he  had  allured  the  Czar  Alexander  and  placed  him, 
in  relation  to  Turkey  in  a  doubtful  position  which  might  enable 
the  cabinet  of  the  Tuileries  to  bring  forth  other  pretensions 
untouched  in  the  treaty. 

In  the  month  of  January  180S,  at  one  of  the  receptions  of 
the  court,  Napoleon  tried,  for  the  first  time,  to  take  advantage 


THE  ERFUR  T  INTER  VIE  W.  295 

of  that  situation.  He  went  up  to  M.  de  Tolstoi,1  then  Russian 
ambassador,  took  him  aside,  and,  in  the  course  of  a  conversation, 
in  which  he  called  attention  to  the  great  advantages  Russia  was 
likely  to  derive  from  the  possession  of  Wallachia  and  Moldavia, 
ventured  to  speak  incidentally  of  the  compensations  France 
was  to  obtain,  and  mentioned  Silesia  as  the  province  which 
would  suit  her  best.  On  this  occasion,  as  on  all  those  when  he 
meditated  some  fresh  aggrandisement,  he  emphasised  his  fears 
of  England's  ambition  :  that  country,  he  said,  refused  to  listen 
to  any  proposal  of  peace,  and  obliged  him  to  resort  to  all  the 
means  dictated  by  prudence,  in  order  to  reduce  the  power  of  all 
the  countries  with  which  there  was  some  reason  to  believe  she 
was  in  league.  For  the  present,  he  added,  all  prospects  of  a 
partition  of  the  Ottoman  Empire  must  be  abandoned,  because, 
to  make  an  attempt  upon  Turkey,  without  possessing  greater 
naval  facilities,  would  be  to  place  one's  most  valuable  possessions 
at  the  mercy  of  Great  Britain.  M.  de  Tolstoi  whose  duty  it 
was  to  listen,  and  who,  besides,  was  hardly  fit  for  any  other, 
reported  to  his  sovereign  the  hints  thus  given  him.  These  were 
received  most  unfavourably  by  the  Emperor  Alexander  who, 
rather  sharply,  said  to  the  French  ambassador  : 2  "  I  can  hardly 
believe  the  intelligence  contained  in  Tolstoi's  despatches ;  is  it 
intended  to  tear  up  the  treaty  of  Tilsit  ?  I  do  not  understand 
the  emperor  !  It  cannot  be  that  he  wishes  to  cause  me  personal 
trouble.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  indispensable  that  he  should  clear 
me  from  responsibility  in  the  eyes  of  Europe,  by  at  once  placing 
Prussia  in  the  situation  agreed  to  in  the  treaty.  This  is  really  an 
affair  of  honour  with  me." 

This  incident  gave  rise  to  certain  explanations,  culminating 
in  a  letter  from  the  Emperor  Napoleon,  which  reached  St.  Peters- 
burg about  the  end  of  February  1808.3    That  letter  contained: 

1  Pierre,  Count  Tolstoi,  born  in  1 769,  served  in  the  army  under  the  command 
of  Souvaroff,  and  became  general  in  1805.  After  Friedland,  he  was  employed  in 
negotiations,  and  in  1807,  he  was  chosen  as  ambassador  at  Paris.  Napoleon  asked 
and  obtained,  a  short  time  after,  his  recall,  which  was  granted.  In  1812,  he  commanded 
the  militia  in  Moscow,  and  served  in  the  campaigns  of  1813  and  1814.  Later,  he 
became  the  director  of  the  military  colonies,  made  the  campaigns  of  Poland  in  1834, 
became  president  of  the  department  of  Military  Affairs  in  the  Council  of  the 
Empire  ;  he  died  in  1844.     He  was  a  brother  of  the  grand-marshal  Count  Tolstoi. 

2  General  Caulaincourt,  Due  de  Vicence. 

3  A  letter  of  February  2,  1808,  Correspondance  de  Napoleon  /<"".,  t.  xvi. ,  p.  498. 


296  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

1st.  The  implicit  renunciation  of  all  pretensions  to  Silesia  ; 
2nd.  Fresh  suggestions  concerning  the  eventual  division  of  the 
agreed  portion  of  Turkish  territory  ;  3rd.  A  plan  for  carrying 
war  into  India  ;  4th.  A  proposal,  either  to  send  a  responsible 
person  to  Paris  to  settle  these  important  questions,  if  the  Czar 
could  not  come  himself,  or  to  appoint  a  suitable  place  where 
the  two  sovereigns  could  meet. 

It  may  be  noticed  that,  in  his  letter,  the  Emperor  Napoleon, 
whilst  proposing  a  partition  of  the  Ottoman  Empire,  made  no 
mention  of  the  manner  in  which  the  territories  wrenched  from 
Turkey  were  to  be  divided.  Thus,  with  the  exception  of  the 
difficulty  relative  to  Silesia,  which  was  now  removed,  things 
remained  in  the  same  uncertain  state.  Nevertheless,  the 
Emperor  Alexander  experienced  so  much  relief  at  being  no 
longer  obliged  to  stand  up  in  defence  of  the  private  interests  of 
the  King  of  Prussia,  that  he  received  the  letter  with  the  utmost 
satisfaction,  and  decided  there  and  then  to  have  an  interview 
with  the  Emperor  Napoleon  to  whom  he  wrote  to  that  effect  in 
reply. 

This  interview  was  sought  by  the  Emperor  of  Russia  only 
with  the  idea  and  upon  the  condition,  that  the  partition  of  Turkey 
should  be  settled  previously,  and  that  the  only  object  of  the 
interview  should  be  simply  to  come  to  a  thorough  understanding 
respecting  the  means  to  be  adopted  in  carrying  out  the  said  parti- 
tion, and  to  make  their  ratification  still  more  solemn  and  binding, 
by  mutually  pledging  their  word  as  man  to  man,  that  each 
should  conform  to  the  clauses  of  that  arrangement.  M.  de 
Romanzoff 1  was  instructed  to  open  negotiations  on  those  bases 
with  the  French  ambassador,  M.  de  Caulaincourt. 

It  is  most  important  to  indicate  here,  in  all  their  essentials, 
the  various  arrangements  and  the  special  intentions  of  the 
Emperor  Napoleon,  and  of  the  Czar  Alexander,  as  also  those  of 
Count  Romanzoff  as  the  representative  of  public  opinion  in 
Russia. 

1  Count  Nicholas  Romanzoff,  born  in  1750,  was  the  son  of  the  field-marshal  of 
that  name.  He  at  first  entered  the  diplomatic  service.  Later,  he  became  Minister 
of  Commerce,  and  afterwards  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  at  the  accession  of  Alex- 
ander. He  was  a  warm  advocate  of  the  French  alliance,  which  led  to  his  being 
obliged  to  resign  in  1812.     He  afterwards  lived  in  retirement  and  died  in  1826. 


THE  ERFURT  INTERVIEW.  297 

Count  Romanzoff  considered  the  destruction  of  the  Ottoman 
Empire  as  a  victory  for  his  family.  He  was  anxious  to  complete 
the  great  work  begun  by  his  father.  Thus,  if  the  point  to  be 
debated  in  the  conferences  consisted  of  a  mere  dismemberment, 
it  seemed  to  him  full  of  difficulties;  if,  on  the  contrary,  he  foresaw 
the  possibility  of  a  partition,  nothing  hindered  him  ;  he  became 
exceedingly  generous,  and,  first  of  all,  boldly  claimed  Constan- 
tinople and  the  Dardanelles  for  Russia.  "  Any  division,"  he  said, 
in  one  of  the  conferences, "  that  did  not  give  Constantinople  and 
the  Dardanelles  to  Russia  would  not  obtain  the  approval  of  the 
nation,  nay,  would  even  dissatisfy  it  more  than  the  present  state 
of  affairs,  bad  as  it  was  in  everybody's  opinion."  At  any  rate,  he 
offered  everything  in  exchange  for  that  advantage  :  fleets,  armies, 
and  the  co-operation  of  Russia  in  an  expedition  against  India, 
but  he  refused  that  co-operation  in  an  attack  against  Syria  and 
Egypt,  in  case  of  a  simple  dismemberment  that  would  leave 
Constantinople  to  the  Turks.  When  the  French  ambassador 
proposed,  as  a  compromise,  to  found  a  civilized  and  independent 
government  at  Constantinople,  alluding,  in  support  of  that 
suggestion,  to  the  intention  previously  expressed  on  the  subject 
by  the  Emperor  Alexander  ;  the  chancellor  dismissed  the 
proposal  by  saying  that  his  sovereign  no  longer  entertained  that 
idea.  Count  Romanzoff  wanted  Constantinople ;  that  acquisi- 
tion was  to  give  everlasting  glory  to  his  name.  With  the 
exception  of  Constantinople,  he  gave  up  the  rest  of  the  world  to 
France.  He  put  forth  no  pretensions  to  India,  and  was  quite 
willing  that  the  Emperor  Napoleon  should  place  the  crown  of 
Spain  on  the  head  of  one  of  his  brothers,  and  annex,  either  to 
France,  or  to  the  kingdom  of  Italy,  whatever  country  he 
thought  fit. 

The  Emperor  Alexander  affected  scarcely  to  care  about 
possessing  the  two  provinces  of  Wallachia  and  Moldavia  ;  his 
ambition  was  confined  to  acquiring  the  banks  of  the  Danube. 
"  And  yet,"  he  said,  "  it  is  merely  because  I  see,  in  that  arrange- 
ment, the  means  of  strengthening  our  alliance.  Anything  that 
suits  the  Emperor  Napoleon  will  suit  me  ;  if  I  wish  for  new 
territories,  it  is  merely  in  order  to  promote  the  attachment  of  my 
people  to  French  policy,  and  justify  our  undertakings."     When, 


298  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

in  the  course  of  discussion,  he  brought  forth  higher  pretensions, 
he  merely  seemed  to  uphold  the  plans  of  his  minister,  and  to 
yield  to  some  old  Russian  ideas  ;  he  seemed  to  be  more  in- 
fluenced by  philosophical  maxims  than  by  political  views.  "  It 
is  more  than  ever  the  case,"  he  remarked  one  day,  "  of  giving 
to  the  projects  we  formed  at  Tilsit,  the  liberal  appearance 
which  should  always  mark  the  acts  of  enlightened  sovereigns. 
The  times  we  live  in,  more  than  political  necessity,  doom  the 
Turks  to  be  driven  back  to  Asia.  It  is  a  noble  action  that 
of  ridding  those  beautiful  countries  from  Turkish  ignorance  and 
tyranny.  Humanity  requires  that  those  barbarians  should  no 
longer  remain  in  Europe.  Civilization  demands  it  ; "  and  so  on. 
I  repeat  word  for  word  what  he  said. 

The  French  ambassador,  a  faithful  agent  of  Napoleon,  made 
use  of  all  his  influence  and  dexterity  in  getting  the  Russian 
cabinet  to  indicate  how  far  they  carried  their  views,  and  at  each 
imperial  meeting,  he  exerted  himself  to  increase  the  infatuation 
for  Napoleon  which  possessed  the  Czar  Alexander,  so  as  to 
induce  the  latter  to  ask  for  an  interview  with  Napoleon,  as 
being  the  only  means  by  which  they  could  arrive  at  a  mutual 
understanding.  When  discussing  with  M.  de  Romanzoff,  he 
skilfully  came  to  the  point  ;  with  the  Czar  he  criticized  the 
plans  of  M.  dc  Romanzoff,  but  never  intimated  those  of 
Xapoleon  ;  he  refused  all,  but  did  not  ask  anything.  Like  the 
Emperor  Alexander,  he  was  of  opinion  that  the  requirements  of 
the  times  were  indeed  rather  imperative,  but  affected  to  be  fear- 
ful of  so  vast  an  undertaking  as  that  proposed  by  M.  de 
Romanzoff,  and  was  ever  calling  attention  to  difficulties  that 
could  be  solved  only  by  the  sovereigns  themselves.  The  vague- 
ness of  Alexander's  ideas  led  him  to  confess  the  truth  of  these 
statements,  and  the  interview  was  fixed  for  September  27, 
1808. 

The  cabinet  of  the  Tuileries  had  done  all  in  their  power  to 
raise  as  many  incidents  as  possible.  Unknown  to  Russia,  they 
gave  their  word  to  the  Ottoman  Porte  that  the  armistice  with 
Russia  should  be  prolonged.     The  report  of  General  Sebastiani,1 

1  Horace  Sebastiani,  born  in  1772  near  Bastia,  was  a  lieutenant  in  17S9,  general 
of  division  in  1805,  ambassador   at  Constantinople  in  1806,  where  he  distinguished 


THE  ERFUR  T  INTER  VIE  W.  299 

made  just  after  his  voyage  in  the  Levant,  was  communicated  to 
the  Russian  cabinet  ;  and  the  consequence  of  this  communica- 
tion was  to  render  problematical  all  that  had  been  said  and 
written  relative  to  the  division  of  Turkey,  of  whom  the  French 
cabinet  still  spoke  as  the  old  ally  of  France,  and  for  whom,  on 
every  occasion,  they  displayed  some  sort  of  interest.  Silesia  was 
no  longer  alluded  to,  but  the  right  to  delay  the  evacuation  of 
Russia  was  claimed  as  a  compensation  for  the  cession  of  the  two 
provinces. 

From  this  it  is  easily  seen  that  the  Emperor  Napoleon,  fully 
appreciating  the  strength  of  his  position  after  the  treaty  of 
Tilsit,  was  anxious  to  remove  all  pretexts  for  hostilities  in 
Europe  until  such  time  as  his  designs  on  Spain  were  accom- 
plished. Until  then,  the  project  of  a  war  in  India,  and  that  of  a 
division  of  the  Ottoman  Empire,  seemed  like  mere  phantoms 
intended  to  occupy  Russia's  attention.  Thus,  during  the  time 
that  elapsed  between  the  two  interviews  of  Tilsit  and  Erfurt, 
all  the  points  that  were  discussed  in  Paris  or  in  St.  Petersburg 
made  no  apparent  progress.  Nothing  had  been  done.  What 
the  Czar  Alexander  said  to  the  ambassador  of  France  five  days 
before  his  departure  for  Erfurt,  he  might  have  said  five  days 
after  the  departure  from  Tilsit.  "  We  must  come  to  terms, 
and  act  in  concert  in  order  to  obtain  mutual  advantages  ;  I 
shall  ever  remain  true  to  my  word,  for  I  have  always  done  so  ; 
what  I  have  said  to  the  emperor  and  what  he  said  to  me,  is  as 
sacred  and  binding  to  me  as  treaties,  and  so  on  .  .  .  ." 

The  words  were  the  same.  With  the  exception  of  the  con- 
quest of  Finland  x  on  the  one  hand,  and  of  the  invasion  of  Spain 
on  the  other,  the  situation  was  unaltered  on  the  27th  of  Septem- 
ber. 1808.  This  did  not  however  lead  to  any  remonstrance 
worth  mentioning  between  the   respective  cabinets.     Thus,  at 

himself  by  his  energy  at  the  appearance  of  the  English  squadron  in  the  Bosphorus. 
He  was  elected  a  deputy  under  the  Restoration  ;  was  appointed  Minister  of 
Foreign  Affairs  and  ambassador  under  Louis  Philippe,  and  Marshal  of  France  in 
1840.     He  died  in  1851. 

1  In  accordance  with  the  treaty  of  Tilsit,  the  Czar  Alexander  was  to  declare  war 
against  Sweden  if  that  power  did  not  break  off  with  England.  Sweden  having  by  a 
convention  dated  February  8,  1808,  renewed  her  relations  with  the  cabinet  of  London, 
Alexander  began  the  campaign  by  invading  Finland.  The  treaty  of  Friedrichshaum, 
September  5/17,  1809,  put  an  end  to  the  war.  According  to  the  treaty,  Sweden  joined 
the  continental  system  and  gave  up  Finland  to  Russia. 


300  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

Erfurt,  the  two  sovereigns    could  be   looked   upon   as  coming 
direct  from  Tilsit. 

The  part  I  had  taken  in  the  treaty  of  Tilsit  ;  the  marks  of 
special  kindness  which  the  Czar  Alexander  had  shown  me  ;  the 
annoyance  caused  to  the  Emperor  Napoleon  by  M.  de  Cham- 
pagny,  who,  as  His  Majesty  himself  said,  displayed  his  zeal  every 
morning  in  order  to  be  forgiven  his  blunders  of  the  day  before  ; 
my  intimacy  with  M.  de  Caulaincourt,  whose  great  abilities 
must,  in  justice,  be  acknowledged  some  day  ;  were  the  reasons 
that  induced  the  emperor  to  apologize  for  having  reproached 
me  so  violently  for  the  disapproval  I  had  dared  to  express  of 
his  designs  on  Spain.  He  then  proposed  that  I  should  follow 
him  to  Erfurt,  and  personally  conduct  the  negotiations  to  be 
carried  on  there,  with  the  exception  that  the  treaty,  likely  to 
result  from  those  negotiations,  should  be  signed  by  his  Minister 
of  Foreign  Affairs.  I  consented  to  this.  The  confidence  which 
he  displayed  in  our  first  interview  I  looked  upon  as  a  sort  of 
apology  for  his  treatment  of  me.  He  had  all  the  despatches 
of  M.  de  Caulaincourt  delivered  to  me  ;  I  found  them  everything 
that  could  be  desired.  In  a  few  hours,  he  acquainted  me  with  all 
the  negotiations  that  had  taken  place  at  St.  Petersburg  ;  and  my 
sole  object  was  so  to  check  the  spirit  of  enterprise  that  it  should 
not  get  the  upper  hand  at  this  singular  interview.  Napoleon 
wished  the  latter  to  be  very  brilliant.  It  was  his  custom  to  speak 
continually  tothose  about  him  of  the  one  idea  whichpossessed  him. 
I  was  still  grand  chamberlain.  At  every  moment,  he  summoned 
me  to  his  presence,  as  well  as  General  Duroc,  grand  marshal  of 
the  palace,  and  M.  de  Remusat,  who  had  the  management  of 
the  plays.  "  I  wish  my  journey  to  be  brilliant,"  he  repeated  to 
us  every  day.  At  one  of  his  lunches,  where  we  were  all  three 
present,  he  asked  me  who  were  the  chamberlains  on  duty.  "  It 
seems  to  me,"  he  said,  "  that  we  have  not  any  very  aristocratic 
names  ;  I  must  have  some.  The  fact  is,  that  the  members  of 
the  aristocracy  are  the  only  men  who  know  how  to  be  dignified 
at  court.  We  must  do  justice  to  the  French  nobility.  They  are 
admirable  in  that  respect." 

"  Sire,  you  have  M.  de  Montesquiou."  1 

1  The  Comte  Pierre  de  Montesquiou-Fezensac  was  born  in  1764.     He  was  an 


THE  ERFURT  INTERVIEW.  301 

"  Good."— 

"  Prince  Sapieha." * 

"  Not  bad." 

"  It  seems  to  me  that  two  will  be  sufficient.  The  journey 
being  short,  your  Majesty  could  always  have  them   with  you." 

"  Very  soon,  Remusat,  I  must  have  a  play.  Send  for 
Dazincourt 2 — is  he  not  the  director  ?  " 

"  Yes,  your  Majesty." 

"  I  wish  to  astonish  Germany  by  my  splendour." 

Dazincourt  was  out.  The  arrangements  for  the  play  were 
put  off  until  the  next  day. 

"  Your  Majesty's  intention,"  said  Duroc,  "  is  to  engage  cer- 
tain important  personages  to  come  to  Erfurt,  and  time  is  limited." 

"There  is  one  of  Eugene's3  aides-de-camp,"  replied  the 
emperor,  "who  leaves  to-day.  You  might  hint  to  Eugene  what 
he  must  say  to  his  father-in-law,  the  King  of  Bavaria  ;  and  if 
one  of  the  kings  come,  they  must  all  come.  But  no,"  he  added, 
"we  must  not  employ  him.  As  for  that,  he  is  not  quick 
enough.  He  knows  how  to  do  just  what  I  wish,  but  he  is  worth 
nothing  for  acting  a  part.  Talleyrand  would  do  better.  More- 
over," he  said,  laughing,  "  that,  to  criticize  me,  he  will  tell  them 
that  they  will  please  me  in  coming.  It  will  then  be  for  me  to 
show  that  I  am  perfectly  indifferent,  and  that,  if  anything, 
their  coming  has  annoyed  me." 

officer  in  the  cavalry  in  1789.  He  remained  in  retirement  during  the  Revolution.  In 
1804,  he  was  elected  deputy  of  the  legislature.  He  replaced  M.  de  Talleyrand  as 
High  Chamberlain  in  1808.  He  became  president  of  the  legislative  body,  1810; 
peer  of  France  under  the  first  Restoration,  again  High  Chamberlain  during  the 
Hundred  Days.     In  1819,  he  re-entered  the  House  of  Peers.     He  died  in  1834. 

1  Prince  Alexander  Sapieha,  descended  from  an  old  and  illustrious  Polish  family 
which  was  forced  to  exile  itself  after  the  reverses  of  its  country,  was  born  in  Strasburg 
in  1773.  Prince  Alexander  applied  himself  exclusively  to  study.  He  became 
chamberlain  to  the  Emperor  and  died  in  1812. 

2  Joseph  Albouis  Dazincourt,  born  in  1747  at  Marseilles,  was  first  librarian  to 
Marshal  Richelieu.  He  afterwards  joined  the  Theatre  Francais,  of  which  he  became 
associate  in  1778.  In  1808,  he  was  elected  professor  of  elocution  at  the  Conservatoire, 
and  director  of  the  Court  plays.     He  died  in  1809. 

3  Eugene  de  Beauharnais,  son  of  General  Vicomte  de  Eeauharnais  and  of  the 
Empress  Josephine,  was  born  in  1781.  He  enlisted  in  1796,  followed  Bonaparte 
in  Italy  and  Egypt,  and  became  brigadier-general  in  1804  ;  then  French  prince  and 
arch-chancellor  (Lord  High  Chancellor),  February  1,  1805.  In  June,  he  was  chosen 
as  Viceroy  of  Italy.  In  1814,  he  retired  to  Bavaria  where  he  died  in  1824,  under 
the  title  of  Duke  of  Leuchtemberg.  The  Prince  Eugene  married  Amelie,  daughter 
of  the  King  of  Bavaria.  His  eldest  daughter  married  the  prince  royal  of  Sweden, 
son  of  Bernadotte. 


302  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

At  lunch  the  next  day  the  emperor  had  Dazincourt  sent 
for.  The  latter  awaited  his  Majesty's  orders.  Napoleon  had 
told  M.  de  Remusat,  General  Duroc,  and  myself  to  meet 
Dazincourt  there. 

"  You  have  heard  that  I  am  going  to  Erfurt  ?  " 

"  Yes,  your  Majesty." 

"  I  should  like  the  Comedie  Francaise  to  come." 

"  Would  it  be  to  play  comedies  and  tragedies  ? " 

"  I  only  want  tragedies.  Our  comedies  would  be  of  no  use. 
They  would  not  understand  them  across  the  Rhine." 

"Your  Majesty  would  undoubtedly  wish  for  a  brilliant 
play." 

"  Yes,  our  most  beautiful  piece." 

"  Sire,  we  could  have  Athalie  represented." 

"■Athalie  !  fie  on  it !  Here  is  a  man  who  does  not  understand 
me.  Am  I  going  to  Erfurt  to  put  some  Joash  in  those  Germans' 
heads?  Athalie!  How  silly  of  you!  My  dear  Dazincourt, 
enough  of  this !  Tell  your  best  tragedians  that  they  must 
prepare  to  go  to  Erfurt,  and  I  shall  give  you  instructions  as 
to  the  day  of  our  departure  and  the  pieces  that  shall  be 
played.  How  stupid  those  old  people  are  !  Athalie,  indeed! — 
but  then  it  is  my  fault ;  why  consult  them  ?  I  should  not 
consult  any  one.  Still,  if  he  had  mentioned  Cinna.  That 
is  a  very  interesting  play,  especially  the  scene  of  mercy, 
which  is  always  good.  Though  I  knew  nearly  all  Cinna  by 
heart,  yet  I  never  could  declaim  well.  Remusat,  are  not  the 
following  lines  in  Cinna  ? — 

"  '  Tous  ces  crimes  d'Etat  qu'on  fait  pour  la  couronne 
Le  ciel  nous  en  absout  lorsqiiil  nous  la  donne.'1 

Cinna,  Act  V.,  Scene  II. 

I  am  not  sure  if  I  repeat  the  verse  correctly." 

"  Sire,  it  is  in  Cinna,  but  I  believe  that  it  is — Alors  quil  nous 
la  donne!' 

"  What  are  the  following  lines  ?     Take  a  Corncillc." 

1    "  All  those  foul  deeds  to  secure  a  crown, 

Heaven  condones  them,  when  this  it  p;ives  us." 


THE  ERFUR  T  IN  TER  VIE  IV.  303 

"  Sire,  it  is  not  necessary  ;  I  remember  them — 

"  iLe  ciel  nous  en  absout,  alors  qu'il  nous  la  donne  ; 
Et  dans  le  sacre  rang  01c  safaveur  l'a  mis, 
Le  passe  devient  juste  et  I'avenir  per  mis. 
Qui  pent  y  parvenir  ne  petit  etre  coupable  ; 
Quoi  qu'il  ait  fait  ou  fasse,  il  est  inviolable.'  "  J 

"  That  is  capital,  and  especially  for  those  Germans  who  always 
stick  to  the  same  ideas,  and  who  still  speak  of  the  death  of 
the  Due  d'Enghien.  Their  minds  must  be  enlarged.  I  do  not 
say  that  for  the  Czar  Alexander.  Such  things  have  no  effect 
upon  a  Russian  ;  but  it  is  a  good  thing  for  men  with  melancholy 
ideas  like  the  Germans,  and  Germany  is  full  of  such.  We  shall, 
then,  have  China  represented  :  that  will  do  for  the  first  day. 
Remusat,  you  will  look  up  the  tragedies  that  can  be  given  the 
following  days,  and  you  will  report  to  me  before  making  any 
final  arrangements." 

"  Sire,  does  not  your  Majesty  desire  that  a  few  good  actors 
be  left  in  Paris  ?  " 

"  Yes — substitutes.  We  must  take  all  the  good  ones.  It  will 
do  no  harm  to  have  too  many." 

The  order  to  be  present  at  Erfurt  for  September  22,  was  sent 
immediately  to  Saint  Prix,  Talma,  Lafont,  Damas,  Despres, 
Lacave,  Varennes,  Dazincourt,  Mademoiselle  Raucourt,  Mmc. 
Talma,  Mdlle.  Bourgoin,  Mdlle.  Duchesnois,  Mdlle.  Gros,  Mdllc. 
Rose  Dupuis,  and  Mdlle.  Patrat.2 

1   "  Heaven  condones  them,  when  this  it  gives  us  ; 
And  in  the  sacred  rank  obtained  from  its  favour, 
All  past  deeds  become  legitimate  and  future  ones  permitted. 
He  who  can  reach  it,  cannot  be  held  guilty  ; 
Whatever  those  deeds  may  be  or  have  been,  he  is  inviolable." 

2  They  were  given  before  their  departure  the  list  of  the  pieces  that  were  to  be 
played.  The  first,  as  we  have  already  mentioned,  was  Cinna.  then  Andromaque, 
Britannicus,  Zaire,  Mithridate,  CEdipe,  Iphigenie  en  Aulide,  PhZdre,  La  Mort  de 
Char,  Les  Horaces,  Rodogune,  Mahomet,  Radamiste,  Le  Cid,  Manlius,  Bajazet. — 
{Prince  Talleyrand. ) 

home  of  these  artists  have  become  famous.  The  first  among  them  was,  without 
doubt,  Talma  (1 766-1826),  the  most  celebrated  of  our  tragic  actors.  It  is  well  known 
that  Napoleon  was  very  fond  of  him,  and  honoured  him  with  his  protection  during 
his  reign.  Pierre  Lafon,  born  in  1775,  entered  the  Theatre  Francais  in  1800,  and 
contested  with  Talma  for  the  first  place.  He  excelled  equally  in  tragedy  and  comedy. 
Afterwards  came  St.  Prix,  whose  real  name  was  Foucault.  He  made  his  debut  in  1782, 
and  played  successively  at  the  Feydeau  theatre,  at  the  Odeon,  and  finally  at  the 
Theatre  Francais  in  1803.  Amongst  the  actresses,  the  best  known  of  them  are 
Mesdemoiselles  Raucourt  and  Duchesnois.     The  former  made  her  first  appearance 


304  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

The  journey  having  been  announced  in  the  Moniteur}  every 
one  tried  to  be  of  the  party.  The  emperor's  two  aides-de-camp, 
Savary  and  Lauriston,2  were  chosen  first.  The  military  retinue 
was  to  be  very  brilliant.  The  emperor  wished  to  be  accompanied 
by  those  lieutenants  whose  names  had  caused  most  excite- 
ment in  Germany.  First,  Marshal  Soult,  Marshal  Davoust, 
Marshal  Lannes,  the  Prince  de  Neufchatel,  Marshal  Mortier, 
Marshal  Oudinot,  General  Suchet,  General  Boyer,  General  Nan- 
souty,3  General  Claparede,4  General  St.  Laurent,5  M.  Fain  6  and 
M.  de  Meneval.7  These  two  last,  private  secretaries  of  the 
emperor,  received,  as  did  M.   Daru,8   M.  de    Champagny,  and 

on  the  stage  in  1772,  and  met  with  the  most  brilliant  success :  she  was  long  imprisoned 
under  the  Terror.  She  died  in  1815,  and  her  funeral  gave  rise  to  riotous  scenes  in 
Saint-Roch's  church.      Mademoiselle    Duchesnois  entered  the   Theatre  Francais  in 

1802,  and  soon  rose  to  the  foremost  rank  as  a  tragedian. 

1  The  official  gazette. 

2  Jacques  Bernard  Law,  Marquis  de  Lauriston,  was  born  at  Pondichery,  in  1758. 
He  was  the  grandson  of  the  famous  financier  of  the  Regency.  He  enlisted  in  the 
artillery  in  1793,  became  colonel  in  1795,  and  aide-de-camp  to  Bonaparte,  brigadier- 
general  in  1800.  He  was,  at  different  times,  charged  with  diplomatic  missions.  In 
181 1,  he  was  named  ambassador  at  St.  Petersburg.  He  remained  in  retirement  during 
the  Hundred  Days,  was  peer  under  the  Restoration,  then  minister  of  the  king's  house- 
hold, marshal  in  1823,  grand  master  of  the  hunt,  and  minister  of  state.  He  died  in 
1828. 

3  Etiene  Champion,  comte  de  Nansouty,  born  in  1768  of  a  humble  family  of 
Burgundy,  was  in  1789  captain  in  the  Lauzun  Hussars.  He  served  in  all  the 
campaigns  of  the  Revolution    and  of  the  Empire,    became    general  of  division  in 

1803,  and  had  (on    several    occasions)    important    commands    in    the   cavalry.     In 

1804,  he  was  appointed  first  chamberlain  to  the  empress  ;  then  first  equerry  to 
the  emperor  (1808).     He  died  in  1815.     He  had  married  Vergennes'  niece. 

4  The  comte  Claparede,  born  in  1774,  served  in  the  army  of  the  Republic,  and 
was  chief  of  battalion  in  1798.  Brigadier-general  in  1804,  he  took  part  in  all  the 
wars  of  his  time  ;  he  distinguished  himself  in  1809.  He  was  appointed,  under  the 
Restoration,  general-inspector  of  infantry  and  peer  of  France.     He  died  in  1841. 

6  Louis  St.  Laurent,  born  in  1763,  was  officer  of  artillery  in  1789,  became 
general  of  division  in  1807,  baron  of  the  Empire  in  1810.  He  left  the  army  in 
that  same  year  and  died  in  1832. 

6  F'rancois  Fain,  born  in  1778,  entered  the  administration  in  1794,  and  for 
twelve  years  was  engaged  in  sundry  employments  in  the  offices  of  the  conventional 
committees,  then  in  those  of  the  Directory  and  of  the  State  Secretary.  In  1805,  he 
became  private  secretary  of  the  emperor.  He  became  baron  of  the  Empire  and 
matt  re  des  requetes  in  1809.  He  followed  Napoleon  in  all  his  campaigns.  He  lived 
in  retirement  under  the  Restoration.  In  1830,  he  was  appointed  private  secretary 
of  the  king,  administrator  of  the  civil  list  and  councillor  of  State.  In  1834,  he  was 
elected  to  the  Chamber  of  Deputies.     He  died  in  1837. 

7  Francois  de  Meneval,  born  in  1778,  was  at  first  secretary  to  Joseph  Bonaparte 
in  1802.  He  entered  Napoleon's  service  as  secretary,  an  office  which  he  retained 
until  1815.  In  1812,  he  became  baron  of  the  Empire  and  maitre  des  requites. 
He  has  left  historical  memoirs  on  Napoleon  and  Marie  Louise  (three  octavo 
volumes). 

8  The  Comte  Daru,  born  in  1767,  was  lieutenant  in  the  artillery;  afterwards 
commissariat-officer.  Arrested  in  1793  he  remained  in  prison  until  Thcrmidor  9. 
In   1796,  he  became  commissaire-ordonnateur,  then  after,  Brumaire  18,  inspector  of 


THE  ERFURT  INTERVIEW.  305 

M.  Maret,  orders  to  repair  to  Erfurt.  General  Duroc  appointed 
M.  de  Canouville  to  make  arrangements  for  the  lodgings. 
"  Bring  Beausset,1  also,"  said  the  emperor.  "  We  really  must 
have  some  one  to  introduce  our  actresses  to  the  Grand  Duke 
Constantin.2  He  can  also,  at  dinner,  discharge  his  duties  of 
prefet  of  the  palace,  besides  he  bears  a  great  name."  Each 
day  some  one  left  for  Erfurt.  The  route  was  covered  with 
waggons  and  saddle-  and  coach-horses,  and  some  of  the 
emperor's  livery  servants. 

The  month  of  September  was  drawing  to  a  close.  I  had 
read  over  all  the  correspondence,  but  the  emperor  had  not  yet 
had  with  me  the  principal  conversation  on  those  affairs  that  were 
to  be  treated.  A  few  days  before  that  fixed  for  my  departure, 
the  grand  marshal  informed  me  that  the  emperor  desired  him  to 
tell  me  to  present  myself  at  the  grand  reception  that  evening. 
I  was  scarcely  in  the  drawing-room  than  he  led  me  to  his  study. 
"  Well,"  he  said,  "  so  you  have  read  all  the  Russian  correspond- 
ence ?  What  do  you  think  of  my  move  with  the  Czar 
Alexander  ?  "  and  then  he  recalled  in  an  amusing  retrospect  all 
he  had  done  and  written  for  the  past  year.  He  concluded  by 
pointing  to  me  the  influence  he  had  gained  over  the  Czar, 
whereas,  as  far  as  he  was  concerned,  he  had  executed  only 
what  suited  him  of  the  treaty  of  Tilsit.  "  Now,"  said  he,  "  I 
shall  go  to  Erfurt.  I  wish,  in  returning,  to  be  free  to  do  what  I 
wish  in  Spain.  I  wish  to  be  assured  that  Austria  will  be  afraid 
and  hold  back,  and  I  do  not  desire  to  be  engaged  in  too  precise 
a  manner  with  Russia  concerning  the  affairs  in  the  East.  Pre- 
pare me  a  convention  which  will  satisfy  the  Czar  Alexander, 
and  be  directed  especially  against  England,  and  in  which  I  shall 

reviews.  In  1800  he  was  chosen  as  general  secretary  to  the  minister  of  war,  and 
entered  the  Tribunate  in  1802.  In  1805,  he  became  intendant-general  of  the 
emperor's  household  and  councillor  of  state ;  intendant-general  of  the  grand  army, 
1806  ;  minister  at  Berlin  in  1807  ;  minister  and  Secretary  of  State  in  181 1.  He  lived 
in  retirement  under  the  Restoration,  and  died  in  1829. 

1  Louis  de  Beausset,  nephew  of  the  cardinal  of  that  name  and  born  in  1770, 
became  in  1805,  Prefet  of  the  Imperial  palace,  and  retained  that  appointment  until 
1815.  He  followed  then  the  Empress  Marie  Louise  to  Vienna,  and  was  for  a  time 
grand  master  of  her  household.      He  has  left  memoirs  on  the  Empire. 

2  The  Grand  Duke  Constantin  (1779-1834),  was  the  youngest  brother  of  the  Czar 
Alexander.  He  devoted  all  his  life  to  military  affairs,  but  never  obtained  any 
important  command.  In  1845,  he  was  appointed  generalissimo  in  the  army  of  the 
new  kingdom  of  Poland  and  retained  that  post  until  his  death. 

VOL.  I.  X 


3o6  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE   TALLEYRAND. 

be  perfectly  free  for  the  rest.  I  shall  help  you,  and  the  prestige 
shall  not  be  lacking."  I  was  two  days  without  seeing  him.  In 
his  impatience  he  had  written  what  he  wished  the  articles  to 
contain  and  sent  the  note  to  me,  requesting  that  I  should  bring 
them  to  him  drawn  up,  as  soon  as  possible.  I  did  not  make 
him  wait,  and  a  few  hours  later  I  went  to  him  with  the  projected 
treaty  drawn  up  as  he  had  indicated. 
It  ran  as  follows  : — 

"  His  Majesty  the  Emperor  of  the  French,  &c,  and  his 
Majesty  the  Czar  of  all  the  Russias,  &c,  wishing  to  render 
more  and  more  binding  and  durable,  the  alliance  which  unites 
them,  and  reserving  to  themselves  to  endeavour  to  come  to  an 
agreement,  as  soon  as  possible,  on  the  new  means  and 
methods  of  directing  an  attack  upon  England,  the  common 
enemy  of  themselves  and  of  the  Continent,  have  resolved  to 
set  down  in  a  special  convention  the  principles  they  have 
determined  to  follow — [Here  the  Emperor  interrupted  me  and 
said,  "Principles  is  good,  it  is  not  binding"]  and  which  will 
direct  them  in  all  their  steps  towards  the  restoration  of  peace. 
They  have  therefore,  to  that  effect,  named  for  their  pleni- 
potentiaries,   &c who   have    agreed     to    the    following 

articles : — 

"Art.  I. — His  Majesty  the  Emperor  of  the  French  and  his 
Majesty  the  Czar  of  Russia  confirm,  and  in  case  of  need,  will 
renew  the  alliance  agreed  upon  between  them  at  Tilsit,  not  only 
binding  themselves,  to  make  no  treaties  of  peace  with  the 
common  enemy,  but  also  not  to  enter  into  any  negotiations 
with  her — nor  to  listen  to  any  propositions  but  by  common 
consent. 

"Art.  II. — Resolved  to  remain  closely  united  in  peace  and 
in  war,  the  high  contracting  parties  agree  to  appoint  pleni- 
potentiaries to  treat  for  peace  with  England,  and  to  send  them 
into  such  continental  town  as  England  may  indicate. 

"  Art  1 1 1. — In  the  course  of  the  negotiation,  if  it  should  take 
place,  the  respective  plenipotentiaries  of  the  two  high  con- 
tracting parties  will  act  invariably  in  the  most  perfect  accord,  and 
it  will  not  be  permitted  to  either  of  them  to  accept,  or  approve, 
against  the  advice  of  the  other,  any  proposition  or  demand  of 
the  English  plenipotentiary. 

"Art.  IV. — The  two  high  contracting  parties  agree  not  to 
receive  on  the  part  of  the  enemy,  during  the  whole  of  the 
negotiations,  any  proposition,  offer  or  communication  whatever 


THE  ERFUR  T  INTER  VIE  W.  307 

without   letting  it  at  once  be  known   to  the   respective  pleni- 
potentiaries. 

"  Art.  V. — It  will  be  proposed  to  England  to  treat  all  ques- 
tions pending,  on  the  basis  of  the  uti  possidetis,  including  Spain  ; 
and  the  condition  sine  gua  11011  which  the  high  contracting  parties 
agree  never  to  depart  from,  will  be  that  England  recognize  on 
the  one  hand,  the  union  of  Wallachia  and  Moldavia,  and  of 
Finland  with  the  Russian  Empire,  and,  on  the  other,  Joseph 
Napoleon  Bonaparte  as  King  of  Spain  and  the  Indies. 

"Art.  VI. — The  Ottoman  Porte  having  experienced  since  the 
treaty  of  Tilsit  many  changes  and  revolutions  which  seem  not  to 
leave  to  it  any  possibility  to  give,  and  does  not,  consequently,  leave 
any  hope  of  obtaining  from  it,  sufficient  guarantees  for  the 
respect  of  the  lives  and  properties  of  the  inhabitants  of  Wallachia 
and  Moldavia,  his  Majesty  the  Czar  of  Russia,  who,  since  the 
said  treaty,  has  contracted  towards  them  special  engagements, 
and  who,  as  a  consequence  of  the  said  revolutions,  has  been 
involved  in  enormous  expenses  to  protect  those  provinces,  being 
for  those  motives  resolved  not  to  relinquish  them,  the  more  so 
as  their  possession  can  alone  give  his  empire  its  natural  and 
necessary  boundary,  his  Majesty  the  Emperor  Napoleon  will 
not  oppose,  as  far  as  he  is  concerned,  their  being  annexed  to  the 
Russian  Empire.  And  His  said  Majesty  foregoes  the  mediation 
offered  by  him,  and  accepted  by  Russia  in  the  treaty  of  Tilsit." 

("  I  will  not  have  this  article,  it  is  too  positive."  "  Never- 
theless, Sire,  lie  s'opposera  point,  is  certainly  one  of  the  expressions 
which  bind  the  least  ;  besides,  the  following  article  is  a  great 
corrective.") 

"Art.  VII. — Nevertheless  his  Majesty  the  Emperor  of  all  the 
Russias  will  limit  himself,  for  the  present,  to  continue,  as  in  the 
past,  to  occupy  Wallachia  and  Moldavia,  leaving  everything  on 
the  same  footing  as  it  is  to-day,  and  will  propose  to  open 
either  in  Constantinople,  or  in  an  island  of  the  Danube,  and 
under  the  mediation  of  France,  negotiations,  in  view  of  obtain- 
ing peacefully  the  cession  of  those  two  provinces.  Those 
negotiations,  however,  will  be  opened  only  when  the  negotiations 
with  England  shall  have  had  an  issue,  in  order  not  to  give  rise  to 
new  discussions  which  may  delay  the  peace." 

("  That  article  is  good  ;  with  my  mediation,  I  remain  the 
master,  and  the  preceding  article  will  perplex  Austria,  my  true 
enemy."     "Your  enemy,  Sire,  at  present,  perhaps,  but  at  heart 

X  2 


3o8  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLE  YRAND. 

her  policy  is  not  in  opposition  to  that  of  France ;  she  is  not 
aggressive,  but  conservative."  "  My  dear  Talleyrand,  I  know 
that  this  is  your  opinion  ;  we  will  speak  of  that  when  the 
Spanish  business  is  over.") 

"Art.  VIII. — His  Majesty  the  Emperor  Napoleon  will  act 
conjointly  with  his  Majesty  the  Czar  of  Russia,  in  order  to  obtain 
from  the  Ottoman  Porte  an  amicable  cession.  All  the  notes  of,  and 
all  the  steps  taken  by,  the  two  allied  courts,  in  order  to  reach  this 
end,  will  be  made  in  conjunction  and  in  the  same  spirit. 

"Art.  IX. — In  case  a  refusal  from  the  Ottoman  Porte  led 
to  a  renewal  of  the  hostilities  and  to  the  continuation  of  the 
war,  the  Emperor  Napoleon  would  take  no  part  in  it,  and  will  con- 
fine himself  to  help  Russia  by  his  good  offices.  But  if  it  should 
happen  that  Austria  or  any  other  power  made  common  cause 
with  the  Ottoman  Porte  in  the  said  war,  his  Majesty  the  Emperor 
Napoleon  will  at  once  make  common  cause  with  Russia,  being 
obliged  to  regard  this  case  as  being  that  of  the  general  alliance 
which  binds  the  two  empires." 

("  That  article  is  insufficient  ;  it  does  not  quite  convey  my 
idea.  Nevertheless,  proceed,  I  will  tell  you  what  you  must 
add  to  it") 

"  Art.  X. — The  high  contracting  parties  agree  besides,  to 
maintain  the  integrity  of  the  other  possessions  of  the  Ottoman 
Empire,  not  wishing  to  decide,  or  to  undertake  of  themselves, 
anything  with  regard  to  them,  nor  to  suffer  that  anything  be 
undertaken  by  whomsoever  without  their  having  previously 
agreed  upon  it. 

"Art.  XI. — In  the  negotiations  with  England,  his  Majesty  the 
Emperor  Napoleon  will  support  Russia's  claim  to  obtain  the 
recognition  of  Wallachia  and  Moldavia  as  provinces  of  the 
Russian  Empire,  whether  the  Ottoman  Porte  has  consented  to  it 
or  not. 

"Art.  XII. — In  return  for  the  relinquishment  made  by  the 
Emperor  Napoleon  in  the  above  article,  his  Majesty  the  Czar 
Alexander  desists  from  the  eventual  engagement  taken  towards 
him  by  the  fifth  of  the  secret  articles  of  the  treaty  of  Tilsit,  and 
the  said  article  remains  null  and  void — 

"  That  is  about  all  I  have  said  to  you  ;  leave  me  this  draft, 
I  will  arrange  it.  We  must  add  to  one  of  the  last  articles,  to 
that  one  where  I  stopped  you,  that,  in  case  Austria  gave  any 


THE  ERFUR  T  INTER  VIE  W.  3°9 

uneasiness  to  France,  the  Czar  of  Russia,  on  the  first  demand 
which  would  be  made  to  him,  pledges  himself  to  declare  against 
Austria,  and  to  make  common  cause  with  France,  this  case 
being  equally  one  of  those  to  which  the  alliance  which  binds 
the  two  powers  applies. — This  is  the  essential  article.  How 
could  you  have  left  it  out  ?  You  are  still  an  Austrian !  " — 
"  Somewhat,  Sire.  Yet  I  think  it  would  be  more  exact  to  say 
that  I  am  never  a  Russian,  but  always  a  Frenchman." 

"  Make  your  arrangements  to  leave  :  you  must  be  at  Erfurt 
a  day  or  two  before  me.  During  the  time  of  our  stay  there, 
you  try  to  see  the  Czar  as  often  as  possible.  You  know  him 
well,  you  will  speak  to  him  in  that  language  that  suits  him.  You 
will  tell  him  that  in  the  benefit  our  alliance  may  prove  to 
mankind,  one  recognizes  one  of  the  great  purposes  of  Providence. 
Together  we  are  destined  to  restore  general  order  in  Europe. 
We  are  both  young,  we  need  not  hurry.  You  will  insist  greatly 
upon  that — for  Count  Romanzoff  is  sanguine  about  the  Eastern 
question.  You  will  say  that  nothing  can  be  done  without  public 
opinion,  and  that  it  is  necessary  that,  without  being  scared 
by  our  combined  power,  Europe  should  see  with  pleasure  the 
achievement  of  the  great  undertaking  we  contemplate.  The 
security  of  the  neighbouring  powers,  the  respect  of  the  legiti- 
mate interest  of  the  Continent,  seven  millions  of  Greeks  restored 
to  independence.  All  this  constitutes  a  fine  field  for  philan- 
thropy. I  will  give  you  carte  blanche  for  that.  I  wish  only  that  it 
be  distant  philanthropy.     Good-bye." 

I  returned  home,  I  put  my  papers  in  order,  I  carried 
away  all  that  I  thought  I  should  require  and  I  got  into  my 
carriage.  I  arrived  at  Erfurt,  Saturday,  September  24th,  at  ten 
o'clock  in  the  morning.  M.  de  Canouville  lodged  me  in  a 
house  very  near  that  which  the  emperor  was  to  occupy.  A  few 
minutes  after  my  arrival,  M.  de  Caulaincourt  came  to  see  me. 
The  first  day  I  spent  with  him  proved  very  useful  to  me.  We 
spoke  of  St.  Petersburg,  and  of  the  disposition  in  which  the  two 
sovereigns  had  come  to  the  interview.  We  told  each  other 
what  we  knew,  and  soon  agreed  upon  all  points. 

I  found  all  Erfurt  in  excitement,  there  was  not  a  respect- 
able house  that  did  not  provide  accommodation  for  a  sovereign 


3io  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

and  his  retinue.  The  Emperor  of  Russia  arrived  there  with  the 
Grand  Duke  Constantin,  Count  Romanzofif,  Count  Tolstoi',  grand 
marshal,  General  Tolstoi',  ambassador  to  France,  Prince  Wol- 
konski,  Count  Oszarowski,1  Prince  Troubetzkoi',  Count  Ouwaroff,2 
Count  SchouwalofT,3  Prince  Gagarin,  M.  Speranski,  M.  Labenski, 
Herr  Bethmann,  General  Hitroff,  State  Councillors  Gervais  and 
Creidemann,  Herr  von  Schroder,  Prince  Leopold  of  Saxe- 
Coburg.4  I  think  that  I  have  mentioned  there  almost  all  those 
who  had  the  honour  to  accompany  the  Czar  Alexander.  He 
was  expected  a  day  later  than  the  Emperor  Napoleon,  having 
to  stop  twenty-four  hours  at  Weimar. 

A  chamberlain  of  the  King  of  Saxony  has  just  told  me 
that  his  master  would  sleep  at  Erfurt  on  the  25th,  and  that 
he  was  followed  by  Count  von  Bose,5  cabinet  minister,  Count 
Marcolini,"  master  of  the  horse,  Baron  von  Funck,7  Baron  von 
Gutschmidt,  Major  Thielemann,  Chamberlain  von  Gablenz, 
Herr  von  Marxhansky  and  by  Herr  von  Schonberg.  M.  de 
Bourgoing,8  minister  of  France  at  Dresden,  also  had  permission 
to  follow  the  king. 

1  Count  Adam  of  Alkcantara  Oszarowski,  descended  from  an  old  Polish  family 
allied  to  Russia.     He  was  the  Czar  Alexander's  aide-de-camp. 

2  Count  Theodore  Ouwaroff,  commander-in-chief  of  the  imperial  guard  and  first 
aide  de-camp  general  to  the  Czar.  He  had  been  one  of  the  conspirators  who  assas- 
sinated the  Czar  Paul. 

3  General  Count  Schouwaloff  (i 775-1823),  aide-de-camp  to  the  emperor.  He 
held  important  commands  in  all  the  wars  of  that  time.  In  1814,  he  was  one  of  the 
commissioners  charged  to  accompany  Napoleon  to  Frejus. 

4  Prince  Leopold  of  Saxe-Coburg  Saafeld,  born  in  1790,  son  of  Francis,  Duke 
of  Saxe-Coburg,  and  of  Caroline,  Countess  of  Reuss,  entered  the  Russian  army  quite 
young  with  the  grade  of  general.  In  1810,  he  was  obliged  to  leave  the  Russian  service 
to  obey  the  injunctions  of  Napoleon,  re-entered  the  ranks  in  1813,  served  in  the 
campaigns  of  Germany  and  France,  and  entered  Paris  with  the  allied  sovereigns  in 
1814  and  in  1815.  In  the  following  year,  he  married  the  Princess  Charlotte,  the 
grand-daughter  of  King  George  III.  and  heiress  to  the  Crown.  Leopold  was 
naturalized  English,  but  the  princess  died  in  the  following  year.  In  1830,  he  was 
elected  King  of  the  Belgians.  Two  years  later,  he  married  the  Princess  Louise 
d'Orleans,  the  eldest  daughter  of  King  Louis-Philippe.     He  died  in  1865. 

5  Frederick  William,  Count  von  Bose  (1753-1809)  was  minister  of  Saxony  at  Stock- 
holm, then  marshal  of  the  court  at  Dresden,  and  grand  chamberlain.  In  1806,  he 
signed  peace  with  Napoleon  and  became  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs. 

6  Count  Marcolini  (1739-1814)  was  grand  chamberlain  and  master  of  the  horse 
to  the  King  of  Saxony.  He  became  minister  of  state  in  1809.  He  was  devoted  to 
the  French  alliance,  to  which  he  remained  faithful  until  his  death. 

7  Baron  von  Funck,  a  Saxon  general  (1 761 -1828),  took  an  active  part  in  the  war 
of  1806.  In  1812,  he  served  in  our  ranks  in  the  campaign  of  Russia,. at  the  head  of 
the  Saxon  cavalry.  In  18 13,  he  was  employed  on  various  diplomatic  missions,  and 
was  minister  at  London  in  1818. 

s  Jean -Francois,  Baron  de  Bourgoing,  born  in  1748  at  Nevers,  was  at  first  an  officer 


THE  ERFUR  T  INTER  VIE  W.  311 

It  may  be  interesting  to  know  now  the  names  of  the  im- 
portant personages  who,  from  time  to  time,  arrived  at  Erfurt.1 
The  Duke  of  Saxe-Gotha,2  accompanied  by  Baron  von  Thiimmel, 
Herr  von  Studnitz,  Herr  von  Zigesar,  Barons  Herda  and  Wan- 
genheim,  and  by  Herr  von  Hoff;3  the  Duke  of  Saxe-Weimar 
with  the  hereditary  prince,4  Baron  von  Egloffstein,5  Baron  Ein- 
siedel,  Herr  Goethe,  and  Herr  Wieland,6  both  of  whom  were 
intimate  counsellors  of  Weimar;  the  Duke  of  Oldenburg,7  with 
Baron  von  Hammerstein,8  and  Baron  von  Gall  ;  the  Duke  of 
Mecklenburg-Schwerin,9  the  hereditary  prince  of  Mecklenburg- 
Strelitz,10  the  Prince  of  Dessau,11  the  princes  von  Waldeck,  Hesse- 
Homburg,  Reuss-Greitz,  Reuss-Ebersdorfr",  Reuss-Lobenstein,12 

and  then  secretary  of  embassy.  In  1787,  he  became  minister  of  France  at  Hamburg, 
then  at  Madrid  (1791),  and  was,  in  1795,  charged  to  negotiate  the  peace  at  Basel. 
Minister  at  Copenhagen,  then  at  Stockholm  under  the  Consulate,  he  became,  later  on, 
minister  to  Saxony,  and  died  in  181 1. 

1  In  the  long  enumeration  that  is  about  to  follow,  a  great  number  of  personages 
who  have  left  no  trace  in  history,  and  on  whom  we  have  not  been  able  to  procure 
any  information,  are  mentioned.  We  have  furnished  particulars  only  of  the  most 
important  among  them.  As  for  the  sovereign  princes,  we  noticed  only  those  who, 
by  their  fame  or  by  their  family  alliances,  deserved  special  mention. 

2  Augustus,  Duke  of  Saxe-Gotha  and  Altenburg  (1772-1822),  member  of  the  Con- 
federation of  the  Rhine  (December  15,  1806). 

3  Karl  von  Hoff  (1771-1831).  Secretary  of  embassy  in  the  service  of  the  Duke 
of  Saxe-Gotha,  and  afterwards  Aulic  Councillor  and  state  minister.  He  has  left 
numerous  books  on  politics  and  history. 

4  Karl  Augustus  of  Saxe-Weimar  (1757-1828),  member  of  the  Confederation  of 
the  Rhine  (December  15,  1806).  His  son,  Prince  Charles-Frederick,  married  the 
Princess  Marie,  daughter  of  the  Czar  Paul. 

6  Augustus,  Baron  von  Egloffstein  (1771-1834).  Officer  in  the  service  of  Prussia, 
then  of  the  Duke  of  Saxe-Weimar.  In  1807,  he  became  general  of  brigade  and  com- 
mander of  the  Saxon  troops  in  the  service  of  France,  in  Austria,  Spain,  and  Russia, 
and  during  the  siege  of  Danzig  (1814). 

6  Christopher-Martin  Wieland,  born  in  1733,  became  in  1792  the  preceptor  of  the 
Princes  of  Weimar,  then  intimate  counsellor.  He  was  a  member  of  the  academy  of 
that  town,  which  then  included  the  most  distinguished  men  and  the  most  illustrious 
savants  in  Germany.  He  has  left  many  works,  including  poems,  novels,  comedies,  &c. 
He  died  in  1813. 

7  Peter  Frederick,  Prince  of  Lubeck,  regent  of  the  duchy  of  Oldenburg,  in  the 
name  of  his  cousin.  His  son,  heir  presumptive  to  the  duchy,  married  the  Grand- 
duchess  Catherine,  daughter  of  the  Czar  Paul. 

8  Hans  Detlef,  baron  of  Hammerstein  (1768-1826),  minister  of  the  Duke  of 
Oldenburg.  Later  he  went  to  Hanover,  and  became  member  of  the  private  council 
of  war,  and  plenipotentiary  to  the  Diet  of  Frankfort. 

9  Frederick  Francois,  Duke  of  Mecklenburg-Schwerin,  born  in  1756.  His  son 
married  the  Grand-duchess  Helena,  daughter  of  the  Czar  Paul.  By  a  subsequent 
marriage  he  had  a  daughter,  the  Princess  Helena,  who  married  the  Due  d'Orleans. 

10  George  Frederick,  born  in  1779,  succeeded  his  father  1816.  He  was  brother  to 
Louise,  Queen  of  Prussia. 

11  Leopold,  Prince  von  Anhalt-Dessau  (1740-1817)  one  of  the  most  faithful  allies  of 
France,  member  of  the  Confederation  of  the  Rhine. 

12  The  house  of  Reuss  was  divided  into  four  reigning  branches,  the  Greitz,  Ebers- 


312  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

the  Duchess  of  Saxe-Hildburghausen,1  the  Prince  of  Schwarz- 
burg-  Rudolstadt,2  with  Herr  von  Kettelhutt,  Herr  von  Weisse 
and  Herr  von  Gleichen  ;  the  Prince  and  Princess  of  Tour  and 
Taxis3  with  Herr  von  Leikam  ;  the  Prince  of  Hesse-Rothenburg, 
the  Prince  of  Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen,4  with  the  Prince  of 
Reuss-Schleiz  and  Major  von  Falkenstein  ;  the  Duke  William 
of  Bavaria,  the  prince-primate5  (Furst  von  Dalberg),  to  whom 
each  inhabitant  of  the  town  readily  offered  lodging  accommo- 
dation ;  he  had  been  governor  of  that  town  and  was  beloved 
by  all :  the  Prince  of  Hohenzollern-Hechingen,6  with  the 
hereditary  prince  ;  Herr  von  Hovel,  Herr  von  Bauer  ;  the  he- 
reditary Prince  of  Baden,  with  the  Princess  Stephanie  Napoleon  ;7 
Frau  von  Venningen  and  Mile,  de  Bourjolly ;  Baron  von  Dalberg, 
minister  of  Baden  at  Paris,8  the  Prince  of  Reuss  XLL,  the 
hereditary  Prince    of  Darmstadt,9    Count   von  Keller,10   Prince 

dorff,  Lobenstein,  and  Schleiz.  All  these  princes  had  joined  the  Confederation  of  the 
Rhine  (April  1807). 

1  Member  of  the  Confederation  of  the  Rhine  (December  15,  1806). 

2  Member  of  the  Confederation  of  the  Rhine  (April  1807). 

3  Charles  Alexander,  Prince  of  Tour  and  Taxis,  born  in  1770,  Privy  Councillor  of 
the  Austrian  Empire.  He  was  grand-master  of  the  Imperial  post  offices,  a  post 
which  was  held  in  his  family  since  1695.  He  married  in  1773,  the  Princess  Theresa, 
daughter  of  the  Grand  Duke  of  Mecklenburg-Strelitz. 

4  Antoine,  Prince  of  Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen,  born  in  1762,  member  of  the  Con- 
federation of  the  Rhine  (July  12,  1806).  The  princes  of  the  different  branches  of 
the  house  of  Hohenzollern,  having  abdicated  in  favour  of  the  branch  of  the  house  of 
Hohenzollern-Brandenburg,  which  occupied  the  throne  of  Prussia,  the  King  of 
Prussia  assumed  the  sovereignty  of  these  principalities. 

5  Charles,  Prince  of  Dalberg,  born  in  1744,  took  holy  orders  and  became,  in  1772, 
intimate  counsellor  of  the  Elector  of  Mayence,  then  governor  of  Erfurt,  coadjutor 
of  the  Archbishop  of  Mayence,  to  whom  he  succeeded  in  1802.  He  was  afterwards 
named  Archchancellor  of  the  empire.  In  1806,  he  had  to  resign  this  dignity  ;  was  in 
compensation  named  by  Napoleon,  prince-primate  of  the  Confederation  of  the  Rhine, 
prince-sovereign  of  Ratisbonne,  Grand  Duke  of  Fulde  and  of  Hanau.  He  died  in  1817. 

6  Member  of  the  Confederation  of  the  Rhine  (July  12,  1806). 

7  Charles  Louis  Frederick,  hereditary  prince  of  Baden,  married  Stephanie  Tascher 
de  la  Pagerie,  cousin  of  the  Empress  Josephine,  an  adopted  daughter  of  Napoleon. 
He  became  Grand  Duke  in  181 1  and  died  1818.  He  was  member  of  the  Confedera- 
tion of  the  Rhine. 

8  Emeric-Joseph,  Baron  von  Dalberg,  born  in  1773,  entered  the  diplomacy  in 
the  service  of  the  prince  primate,  his  uncle.  In  1803  he  became  minister  of  Baden 
at  Paris.  From  that  time  dates  his  connection  with  M.  de  Talleyrand.  In  1809,  he 
became  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  of  Baden,  but  did  not  relinquish  his  situation  in 
Paris.  The  same  year,  he  was  naturalized  French,  was  created  Duke  by  Napoleon 
and  councillor  of  state  with  an  endowment  of  four  millions.  In  1814,  he  became 
member  of  the  provisory  government,  afterwards  peer  of  France  and  state  minister 
in  1815.     He  died  in  the  year  1817. 

9  He  was  the  son  of  Prince  Louis,  who  took  the  title  of  grand  duke  on  joining 
the  Confederation  of  the  Rhine  (July  12,  1806).  He  succeeded  his  father  in  1830, 
and  abdicated  in  1840. 

10  Louis  Christopher,  Count   von  Keller  (1757-1827),  was  first  chamberlain  and 


THE  ERFUR  T  INTER  VIE  IV. 


j' j 


Dolgorouki,1  Count  von  Lerchenfeld,  Prince  von  Leyen,2  Prince 
William  of  Prussia,3  Count  von  Goltz,  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  ; 
M.Le  Cocq,  M.  de  Dechen,  Jerome  Napoleon,  King  of  Westphalia, 
with  the  queen,  who  was  born  Princess  of  Wurtemberg ;  Prince 
of  Hesse-Philippsthal,4  Count  and  Countess  von  Bucholz,  Counts 
von  Truchsess  and  Wintzingerode,  the  King  of  Bavaria,5  Baron 
von  Montgelas,6  Counts  von  Wurtemberg  and  von  Reuss,  the 
King  of  Wurtemberg7  the  Prince  of  Hohenlohe,  the  Duchess  of 
Wurtemberg,  Count  von  Taube,  Baron  von  Gorlitz,  Baron  von 
Moltke,  Count  von  Salm  Dyck.8  I  surely  must  forget  some 
people,  and  apologize  for  so  doing. 

Already  the  emperor's  pages  had  arrived  and  were  walking 
about  the  town  in  full  dress.  The  military  duties  were 
performed  by  a  battalion  of  grenadiers  of  the  imperial  guard  ; 
a  detachment  of  picked  gendarmes  ;  the  6th  regiment  of 
cuirassiers  ;  the  1st  regiment  of  hussars  ;  and  the  17th  regiment 
of  light  infantry. 

counsellor  of  the  Embassy  of  Frederick  IT.,  minister  of  Prussia  at  Stockholm  (1779) 
at  St.  Petersburg,  and  at  Vienna.  In  181 1,  he  became  minister  of  the  Grand  Duchy 
of  Frankfort  at  Paris. 

1  There  were  then  several  princes  of  the  Dolgorouki  family.  He  who  attended 
the  meeting  at  Erfurt  is  doubtless  Prince  George,  Prussian  general  and  diplomat,  who 
commanded  in  Finland  (1795),  and  at  Corfou  (1804),  was  ambassador  at  Vienna 
and  to  Holland  ;  or  his  cousin,  Prince  Michel,  aide-de-camp  of  the  emperor,  and 
Major-general,  who  was  killed  a  short  time  later  in  Finland. 

2  Member  of  the  Confederation  of  the  Rhine. 

3  Prince  William  of  Prussia  was  the  fourth  son  of  Frederick  II.  He  was  general 
in  the  Prussian  Army,  and  took  an  active  part  in  the  wars  of  1806,  1813  and  1814. 
In  1831,  he  was  governor  of  the  Rhine  provinces. 

4  Francis  of  Hesse-Philippsthal,  died  in  1810.  He  was  the  brother  of  Louis  of 
Hesse-Philippsthal,  general  in  the  service  of  the  King  of  the  two  Sicilies,  who 
sustained  the  memorable  siege  of  Gaeta,  in  1806. 

5  Maximilian-Joseph  (1756-1825)  Duke  of  Bavaria  in  I799,:king  December  26, 
1805.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Confederation  of  the  Rhine.  His  daughter  married 
Prince  Eugene  de  Beauharnais,  Napoleon's  adopted  son. 

6  Maximilian-Garnerin,  Baron  von  Montgelas  (1759-1838),  Aulic  Counsellor  of 
Bavaria,  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  (1799).  He  was  a  sincere  ally  to  France  ;  he 
knew  how  to  profit  by  it  in  obtaining  great  advantages  for  his  country.  He  retired 
in  1814. 

7  Frederick  (1754-1816),  Duke  of  Wurtemberg  in  1797,  elector  in  1803,  king 
1805,  member  of  the  Confederation  of  the  Rhine  in  1806.  He  married  an  English 
princess.  One  of  his  daughters,  Princess  Frederique  Sophie  Dorothee,  married  the. 
King  Jerome  Napoleon. 

8  Joseph  Count  von  Salm-Reiferscheid-Dyck,  younger  branch  of  the  house  of 
Salm.  His  estates,  which  were  situated  near  Cologne,  were  united  with  Francein  1801, 
then  with  Prussia  in  1814.  He  received  in  exchange  a  pension  of  28,000  florins  and  the 
title  of  prince  (1816).  At  first,  he  married  Maria-Theresa,  Countess  von  Hatzfeld, 
and  afterwards,  Constance  Marie  de  Theis,  daughter  of  a  forests-superintendent  of 
Nantes.     The  latter  is  renowned  on  account  of  her  literary  works. 


314  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

The  emperor  entered  Erfurt,  September  27,  1808,  at  ten 
A.M.  An  immense  crowd  surrounded  the  avenues  leading  to  the 
palace.  Every  one  wished  to  see  and  would  approach  him  who 
dispensed  all  :  thrones,  misery,  fears,  and  hopes.  Augustus, 
Louis  XIV.  and  Napoleon  are  the  men  on  whom  most  praises 
have  been  bestowed.  Times  and  talent  gave  different  forms 
to  these  praises  ;  but  they  were,  in  reality,  the  same  thing.  My 
duties  as  grand  chamberlain  enabled  me  to  see  the  forced,  simu- 
lated, or  even  sincere  homage  which  was  rendered  to  Napoleon, 
more  than  I  could  have  done  otherwise,  and  gave  it  proportions 
which  appeared  to  me  monstrous.  Never  did  baseness  display 
so  much  genius  :  it  suggested  the  idea  of  having  a  hunt  on  the 
very  ground  where  the  emperor  had  gained  the  famous  battle 
of  Jena.  A  slaughter  of  wild  boars  and  beasts  was  there  to 
remind  the  victor  of  the  success  of  this  battle.  I  have  often 
remarked  that  the  more  resentment  people  were  justified  in 
feeling  against  the  emperor  the  more  they  smiled  at  his  good 
fortune,  which,  they  said,  was  Heaven's  will. 

I  am  inclined  to  believe  that  flattery  possesses  secrets  with 
which  princes  alone, — not  those  who  have  lost  their  thrones,  but 
those  who  subjected  their  crowns  to  some  ever-threatening 
protectorate, — are  acquainted  ;  they  know  skilfully  how  to  make 
use  of  them,  when  placed  in  the  presence  of  the  power  which 
rules  over  and  could  overthrow  them.  I  have  heard  the  following 
line,  of  I  know  not  what  wretched  tragic  play,  quoted  : 

"  Tu  rias  su  qn'obeir,  tu  serais  un  tyran."  x 

I  have  not  met  with  a  single  prince  at  Erfurt,  to  whom  I 
should  not  have  been  more  justified  in  saying: 

"  Tu  n'as  su  que  regnerj  tu  serais  un  esclave."  2 

It  is  easy  to  understand  this.  Mighty  sovereigns  wish  their 
courts  to  convey  the  idea  of  the  importance  of  their  power.  On 
the  contrary,  petty  princes  wish  theirs  to  disguise  the  narrow 
limits  of  their  rule.  Everything  magnifies,  or  rather  swells, 
about  a  petty  sovereign  :  etiquette,  regard,  and  flattery  ;  the 
latter  is    the    standard    of  his  greatness  ;    he   never    thinks   it 

1  "  You  would  be  a  tyrant,  seeing  that  you  have  only  known  how  to  obey." 

2  "  You  would  be  a  slave,  seeing  that  you  have  only  known  how  to  reign." 


THE  ERFUR  T  INTER  VIE  W.  315 

exaggerated.  This  way  of  judging  things  becomes  quite  natural 
to  him,  and  is  not  altered  by  the  vicissitudes  of  fortune.  Thus, 
if  victory  brings  into  his  dominions,  into  his  very  palace,  a  man 
before  whom  he  can  himself  be  but  a  courtier,  he  will  stoop,  in 
the  presence  of  his  victor,  as  low  as  he  wished  his  own  subjects 
to  do  before  himself.  He  cannot  conceive  any  other  form  of 
flattery.  At  powerful  courts,  they  know  another  means  of  raising 
themselves  :  it  is  to  bow  ;  petty  princes  only  know  how  to  crawl, 
and  remain  crawling  until  fortune  comes  to  raise  them.  I  did 
not  see  at  Erfurt  a  single  hand  nobly  stroking  the  lion's  mane. 

After  these  scathing  remarks,  illustrations  of  which  I  refrain 
from  giving,  I  am  happy  to  resume  my  subject.  On  September 
28,  news  came  of  the  arrival  of  the  Emperor  Alexander,  who 
had  been  spending  the  night  at  Weimar.  Napoleon,  followed 
by  his  aide-de-camp  and  by  his  generals  in  full  dress,  rode  up  to 
meet  him.  When  within  sight  of  each  other,  the  two  sovereigns 
rushed  to  each  other's  arms  in  the  most  friendly  fashion,  after 
which  Napoleon  led  the  Emperor  Alexander  to  the  residence 
prepared  for  him,  and  having  carefully  ascertained  that  the  Czar 
was  provided  with  everything  he  needed,  took  leave  of  him. 

I  was  in  the  Emperor  Napoleon's  palace,  awaiting  his  return. 
He  seemed  very  pleased  with  the  first  impressions  of  his 
journey,  and  he  told  me  that  he  augured  well  of  it,  but  that 
nothing  should  be  hurried.  "  We  are  so  glad  to  see  each  other 
again,"  he  said,  laughing  ;  "  that  we  must  be  allowed  to  enjoy 
that  feeling  a  little."  He  had  scarcely  finished  dressing  when 
the  Czar  arrived,  and  I  was  introduced  to  him.  "  He  is  an  old 
acquaintance,"  said  the  Emperor  of  Russia  ;  "  I  am  delighted  to 
see  him  again.  I  hoped  he  would  be  of  our  party."  I  wanted 
to  retire  ;  but,  as  Napoleon  wished  to  avoid  conversing  on  any 
serious  subject,  and  was  only  too  glad  that  I  should  be  there, 
he  desired  me  to  stay.  The  two  sovereigns  conversed  with 
the  most  lively  interest  on  insignificant  family  matters.  The 
Empress  Elizabeth  was  the  first  topic  of  conversation.1  Then 
it  turned  on  the  Empress  Josephine,  and  then  on  the  Grand 

1  Louise  Elizabeth,  daughter  of  Charles-Louis,  hereditary  prince  of  Baden  and  of 
Amelia  of  Hesse-Darmstadt,  born  in  1779.  Married  in  1793,  to  Alexander,  future 
Czar  of  Russia. 


316  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

Duchess  Anne,1  and  the  Princess  Borghese,2  &c.  Had  the  time 
of  a  first  visit  permitted,  there  probably  would  have  been  a 
word  about  the  health  of  Cardinal  Fesch.  The  two  sovereigns, 
feeling  quite  comfortable  as  to  the  state  in  which  they  had  left 
their  respective  families,  separated.  Napoleon  showed  the  Czar 
to  the  stairs,  and  I  the  Emperor  of  Russia  to  his  carriage. 
While  walking  together,  the  latter  said  to  me  several  times  : 
"Nous  nous  verrons"  3  and  that,  with  an  expression  that  proved 
that  M.  de  Caulaincourt,  who  had  met  him  on  his  arrival,  had 
told  him  that  I  knew  what  was  going  to  happen.  I  then  went 
up  to  the  emperor,  who  said  to  me  :  "  I  have  modified  the  draft 
of  the  treaty  ;  I  am  taking  more  precautions  against  Austria  ;  I 
will  show  it  you." — He  did  not  enter  into  any  more  particulars. — 
"  The  Czar  seems  to  me  disposed  to  do  anything  I  wish.  If  he 
speaks  to  you  on  the  subject,  tell  him  that  I  at  first  intended 
the  negotiation  to  be  made  between  Count  Romanzoff  and 
yourself,  but  that  I  have  changed  my  mind,  and  that  my  con- 
fidence in  him  is  such  that  I  think  it  better  for  everything  to 
pass  between  ourselves.  When  the  convention  is  settled,  the 
ministers  will  sign  it.  Remember,  though,  in  everything  you 
say,  that  any  delay  will  be  useful  to  me.  The  language  of 
all  the  kings  about  to  meet  here  will  be  submissive  ;  they  fear 
me.  Before  discussing  the  real  object  of  this  meeting,  I  wish 
the  Emperor  of  Russia  to  be  dazzled  by  the  sight  of  my  power. 
For  there  is  no  negotiation  that  it  could  fail  to   render  easier." 

On  returning  home,  I  found  a  note  from  the  Princess  of 
Tour  and  Taxis,  informing  me  of  her  arrival.  I  immediately 
went  to  her.  It  afforded  me  much  pleasure  to  see  her  again, 
she  was  such  an  excellent  lady.  She  told  me  she  had  come  to 
Erfurt  to  ask  the  Czar  to  use,  in  her  favour,  his  influence  over 


1  Anne,  daughter  of  the  Czar  Paul  and  of  Sophia  Dorothy,  Princess  of  Wurtemberg, 
born  in  1795,  married,  in  1816,  to  William  Prince  of  Orange,  who  in  1840  became 
King  of  the  Netherlands. 

-  Marie-Pauline  Bonaparte,  second  sister  of  the  emperor,  born  at  Ajaccio  in 
1780;  she  married  in  1801,  General  Leclerc,  whodied  at  San-Domingo  in  1802.  In 
1803,  she  married  the  Prince  Borghese,  the  head  of  one  of  the  most  illustrious  families 
of  the  Roman  nobility.  The  Princess  Pauline's  brother  had  created  her  Duchess  of 
Guastalla  in  1806,  but  this  country  was  shortly  after  incorporated  with  the  kingdom 
of  Italy.  In  1814,  she  accompanied  the  emperor  to  the  Island  of  Elba,  and,  in  the 
following  year,  went  to  Rome,  where  she  died  in  1825. 

3  "  We  will  see  each  other." 


THE  ERFUR  T  INTER  VIE  IV.  317 

the  German  Princes,  with  whom  her  husband,  grand  master  of 
the  German  Posts  and  relays,  vainly  tried  to  make  arrangements 
for  some  years.  I  was  not  with  her  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  when 
the  Czar  was  announced  ;  he  was  most  amiable  and  communi- 
cative, and  asked  the  princess  to  give  him  some  tea,  telling  her 
that  she  ought  to  give  us  some  every  evening  after  the  play  ; 
for  it  would  be  the  best  way  to  chat  at  one's  ease  and  finish  the 
day  pleasantly.  It  was  agreed  upon,  and  nothing  of  interest 
was  discussed  that  evening. 

This  interview  at  Erfurt,  without  Austria  being  invited  or 
even  officially  informed,  had  alarmed  the  Emperor  Francis,  who, 
of  his  own  accord,  had  sent  Baron  de  Vincent  straight  to  Erfurt 
with  a  letter  to  Napoleon,  and  I  also  think  one  to  the  Czar. 
M.  de  Vincent,  a  gentleman  from  Lorraine,  had  entered  the 
Austrian  service  long  before  the  French  Revolution,  on  account 
of  the  relationship  of  his  family  with  the  House  of  Lorraine.  I 
knew  him  well ;  for  ten  years,  I  had  had  frequent  intercourse 
with  him,  and  I  can  add  that  he  had  cause  to  congratulate  him- 
self that  he  knew  me,  for,  eighteen  months  before,  it  pleased  me 
to  render  his  mission  in  Warsaw  a  brilliant  one,  by  assuring  him 
that  the  influence  I  could  dispose  of — it  was  then  considerable — 
would  be  applied  to  thwarting  all  the  outbreaks  ready  to  take 
place  in  Galicia.  M.  de  Vincent  showed  me  a  copy  of  the  letter 
of  which  he  was  the  bearer  :  the  style  of  this  letter  was  noble, 
rendering  any  uneasiness  on  the  part  of  his  sovereign  impercep- 
tible. M.  de  Vincent  had  been  ordered  to  confide  in  me.  I  told 
him  that  his  mission  gave  me  much  pleasure,  for  I  was  not 
without  fear  concerning  the  opinions  of  the  two  sovereigns. 
At  the  beginning,  it  was  easy  to  see  from  Napoleon's  own 
words  that  he  recognized  me  to  be,  and  he  was  right,  a  partisan 
of  the  alliance  of  France  with  Austria.  I  then  thought,  and  I 
still  believe  that  such  alliance  was  to  the  interest  of  France.  I 
assured  M.  de  Vincent  that  I  had  done,  and  was  still  doing,  all 
in  my  power  to  prevent  any  of  the  resolutions  arranged  at  Erfurt 
causing  prejudice  to  the  interests  of  his  government. 

Napoleon,  faithful  to  his  present  dilatory  system,  had  dis- 
posed of  the  first  days  so  as  never  to  be  able  to  find  a  moment 
to  speak  of  business  matters.     He  spent  a  good  deal  of  time 


3i 8  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

over  his  lunch.  He  received  visitors  with  whom  he  willingly 
chatted  ;  then  followed  some  visits  to  the  public  establishments 
of  the  country,  from  whence  he  went  to  manoeuvres  outside  the 
town,  at  which  the  Czar  and  the  Grand  Duke  never  failed  to 
meet  him.  Then,  only  sufficient  time  remained  to  dress  for 
dinner,  which  was  succeeded  by  the  play,  which  took  up  the 
rest  of  the  day. 

I  have  known  many  of  those  dejeihiers  to  last  more  than  two 
hours.  To  them,  Napoleon  generally  bid  the  eminent  and 
remarkable  men  who  had  come  to  Erfurt  to  see  him.  Every 
morning,  he  perused,  with  much  interest,  the  list  of  new  arrivals. 
One  day,  having  noticed  the  name  of  Herr  Goethe  among  the 
number  of  newly-arrived  visitors,  he  sent  for  him. 

"  Monsieur  Goethe,"  he  said  to  him  on  seeing  him,  "  I  am 
delighted  to  see  you." 

"  Sire,  I  see  that  when  your  Majesty  travels,  you  do  not 
neglect  to  notice  even  the  most  insignificant  persons." 

"  I  know  you  are  Germany's  first  dramatic  poet." 

"  Sire,  you  wrong  our  country  ;  we  are  under  the  impression 
we  have  our  great  men.  Schiller,  Lessing,  and  Wieland  are  surely 
known  to  your  Majesty." 

"  I  confess  I  hardly  know  them.  However,  I  have  read 
La  Guerre  de  Trente  Ans,1  and  that,  I  beg  your  pardon, 
seemed  to  me  to  furnish  dramatic  subjects  only  worthy  of 
our  boulevards." 

"  Sire,  I  do  not  know  your  boulevards,  but  I  suppose  that 
popular  plays  are  given  there.  I  am  sorry  to  hear  you  judge  so 
severely  one  of  the  greatest  geniuses  of  modern  times." 

"You  generally  live  in  Weimar  ;  it  is  the  place  where  the  most 
celebrated  men  of  German  literature  meet  ? " 

"  Sire,  they  enjoy  great  protection  there;  but,  for  the  present, 
there  is  only  one  man  in  Weimar  who  is  known  throughout 
Europe  ;  it  is  Wieland." 

"  I  should  be  delighted  to  see  Monsieur  Wieland ! " 

"  If  your  Majesty  will  allow  me  to  ask  him,  I  feel  certain 
that  he  will  come  here  immediately." 

1  Geschichte  des  dreissigjiihrigen  Krieges,  Schiller's  chief  and  last  historical  work. 
It  was  published  in  1792. — {Translator.) 


THE  ERFUR  T  INTER  VIE  IV.  319 

"  Does  he  speak  French  ?  " 

"  He  knows  it,  and  has  corrected  several  French  translations 
of  his  works." 

"While  you  are  here,  you  must  go  every  night  to  our 
plays.  It  will  not  do  you  any  harm  to  see  good  French 
tragedies." 

"  I'll  go  willingly.  I  must  confess  to  your  Majesty  that  it 
was  my  intention;  for  I  have  translated,  or  rather  imitated,  some 
French  pieces." 

"  Which  ones  ?  " 

"  Mahomet  and  Tancrede." 

"  I  shall  ask  Remusat  if  he  has  any  actors  here  to  play  them. 
I  should  be  very  glad  for  you  to  see  them  represented  in  our 
language.     You  are  not  as  strict  as  we  are  in  theatrical  rules." 

"  Sire,  unity  with  us  is  not  so  essential." 

"  How  do  you  find  our  sojourn  here  ? " 

"Very  brilliant,  sire,  and  I  hope  it  will  be  useful  to  our 
country." 

"  Are  your  people  happy  ? " 

"  They  hope  to  be  so  soon." 

"  Monsieur  Goethe,  you  ought  to  remain  with  us  during  the 
whole  of  our  stay  and  write  your  impressions  of  the  grand  sight 
we  are  offering." 

"  Ah  !  sire,  it  would  require  the  pen  of  some  great  writer  of 
antiquity  to  undertake  such  a  task." 

"  Are  you  an  admirer  of  Tacitus  ? " 

"  Yes,  sire,  I  admire  him  much." 

"  Well,  I  don't ;  but  we  shall  talk  of  that  another  time. 
Write  and  tell  Monsieur  Wieland  to  come  here.  I  shall  return 
his  visit  at  Weimar,  where  the  duke  has  invited  me.  I'll  be  very 
glad  to  see  the  duchess  ;  she  is  a  lady  worthy  of  much  esteem. 
The  duke  was  troublesome  enough,  for  some  time.  But  he  has 
been  punished."  x 

"  Sire,  troublesome  though  he  may  have  been,  the  punishment 
was  a  little  severe.     But  I  am  not  a  judge  of  such  things ;  he 

1  The  Grand  Duke  of  Saxe- Weimar  had  taken  Prussia's  part  in  1806,  His 
troops  were  literally  crashed,  at  Jena,  and  his  capital,  which  was  on  the  line  of  retreat 
of  the  Prussian  army,  was  devastated  by  the  pursuers. 


320  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

protects  literature  and  sciences,  and  we  have  nothing  to  say 
against  him,  but  rather  everything  in  his  favour." 

"  Monsieur  Goethe,  come  to-night  to  IpJiigenie ;  it  is  a  good 
piece.  It  is  not,  however,  one  of  my  favourites,  but  the  French 
think  a  good  deal  of  it.  You  will  see  in  my  pit  a  great  number 
of  sovereigns.     Do  you  know  the  Prince  Primate  ?  " 

"  Yes,  sire  ;  almost  intimately.  He  is  very  clever,  very  well 
informed,  and  very  generous." 

"  Well,  you  will  see  him,  to-night,  fast  asleep  on  the 
shoulder  of  the  King  of  Wurtemberg.  Have  you  already  seen 
the  Czar  ?  " 

"  No,  sire,  never  ;  but  I  hope  to  be  introduced  to  him." 

"  He  speaks  your  language  ;  should  you  write  anything  on 
the  Erfurt  interview,  you  must  dedicate  it  to  him." 

"  Sire,  it  is  not  my  habit  to  do  so.  When  I  first  commenced 
to  write,  I  made  it  a  principle  never  to  dedicate  anything  to  any 
one,  in  order  that  I  should  never  repent  it." 

"  The  great  writers  of  Louis  the  Fourteenth's  time  were  not 
of  your  opinion." 

"  But  your  Majesty  cannot  be  sure  they  never  repented  doing 
what  they  did." 

"  What  has  become  of  that  scoundrel,  Kotzebue  ? "  x 

"Sire,  they  say  he  is  in  Siberia  and  that  your  Majesty 
will  solicit  his  pardon  from  the  Czar." 

"  But  he  is  not  the  man  for  me." 

"  Sire,  he  has  been  very  unfortunate,  and  is  a  man  of  great 
talent." 

"  Good-bye,  Monsieur  Goethe." 

I  followed  Herr  Goethe  to  invite  him  to  dine  with  me.  On 
coming  home,  I  wrote  this  first  conversation,  and,  while  at 
dinner,  I  ascertained,  by  different  questions  I  put  to  him,  that 

1  Augustus  von  Kotzebue,  born  in  1761,  at  Weimar,  entered  the  Russian  service, 
and  became  secretary  to  the  government  of  St.  Petersburg,  and  President  of  Justice 
in  Esthonia.  He  was  arrested  and  transported  to  Siberia  in  1800,  as  the  author  of 
libels  against  the  Czar  Paul  ;  he  returned  in  the  following  year,  and  was  appointed 
Aulic  councillor.  He  came  afterwards  to  Paris,  where  he  remained  from  1802  to 
1806.  After  the  battle  of  Jena,  he  fled  to  Russia,  where  he  circulated  pamphlets  of  a 
violent  nature  against  France  and  Napoleon.  In  1813,  he  was  one  of  the  promoters 
of  the  national  insurrection  of  Germany,  but  he  changed  his  colours  in  1815,  and 
became  one  of  the  most  ardent  political  defenders  of  the  Holy  Alliance.  He  was 
assassinated  in  1819. 


THE  ERFUR  T  INTER  VIE  W.  32 1 

what  I  had  written  was  correct.  On  rising  from  table,  Herr 
Goethe  went  to  the  theatre  ;  I  was  anxious  that  he  should  be 
near  the  stage,  but  that  was  difficult  enough,  for  the  seats  in  front 
were  occupied  by  the  crowned  heads,  and  the  chairs  placed 
behind  them  were  taken  up  by  the  hereditary  princes,  while  the 
seats  still  farther  off  were  filled  by  ministers  and  princes.  I, 
therefore,  recommended  Herr  Goethe  to  Dazincourt  who,  without 
wounding  propriety,  found  the  means  of  placing  him  advan- 
tageously. 

The  choice  of  the  pieces  for  those  plays  at  Erfurt  had  been 
made  with  great  care  and  art,  the  subjects  having  been  taken 
from  heroic  times  or  great  historical  events.  Napoleon's  idea  in 
causing  heroic  times  to  appear  on  the  stage,  was  to  mislead  all 
that  old  German  nobility  in  the  midst  of  which  he  was,  and  to 
carry  them  away  by  imagination  into  other  regions  where  men 
great  by  themselves,  fabulous  by  their  actions,  creators  of  their 
race,  and  pretending  to  draw  their  origin  from  the  gods,  passed 
before  its  eyes.  In  the  pieces  drawn  from  history,  the  repre- 
sentation of  which  he  ordered,  the  policy  of  some  chief 
character  always  recalled  some  circumstances  analogous  with 
those  which  occurred  daily  since  he  himself  had  appeared  on 
the  stage  of  the  world  ;  and  all  that  became  the  subject  of  flatter- 
ing allusions.  The  hatred  of  Mithridates  against  the  Romans 
called  to  mind  Napoleon's  hatred  against  England,  and  after 
hearing  the  following  verses  : 

"  Ne  vous  figurez  pas  que  de  cette  contree, 
Par  d'eternels  remparts,  Rome  soit  sdparee, 
Je  sais  tous  les  chemins  par  ou  je  dois  passer, 
Et  si  la  mort  bientot  ne  vient  me  traverser,"1 

everybody  whispered  :  "  Yes,  he  knows  all  the  roads  to 
success  ;  yes,  it  must  be  borne  in  mind,  he  knows  them  all." 

The  ideas  of  immortality,  glory,  undaunted  bravery,  and 
fatality,  which,  in  Iphigenie,  recur  constantly,  either  as  the  chief 
idea,  or  as  accessory,  served  the  purpose  of  his  main  thought, 

1  "  Do  not  fancy  that  from  this  country 

Rome  be  protected  by  everlasting  obstacles, 

I  know  all  the  paths  which  lead  to  that  city, 

And  if  death  does  not  soon  thwart  my  purpose,"  .  .  . 

—(Mithridates,  Act  III.,  Scene  I.) 

VOL.   I.  Y 


322  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

which  was  to  arouse  unceasing  amazement  in  all  who  approached 
him.  Talma  had  received  orders  to  deliver  slowly  the  following 
fine  passage  : 

"  L'honneur  parle,  il  suffit,  ce  sont  Ik  nos  oracles. 
Les  dieux  sont  de  nos  jours  les  maitres  souverains, 
Mais,  seigneur,  notre  gloire  est  dans  nos  propres  mains, 
Pourquoi  nous  tourmenter  de  leurs  ordres  supremes  ? 
Ne  songeons  qu'a  nous  rendre  immortels  comme  eux-memes, 
Et  laissant  faire  au  sort,  courons  ou  la  valeur 
Nous  promet  un  destin  aussi  grand  que  le  leur,"  .  .  } 

But  the  play  of  Napoleon's  choice,  that  which  indicated  best 
the  causes  and  the  source  of  his  power,  was  Mahomet,  because, 
during  the  whole  performance,  it  seemed  to  him  that  he  was  the 
chief  character.     From  the  beginning  of  the  first  act : 

"  Les  mortels  sont  egaux,  ce  n'est  point  la  naissance, 
Cest  la  seule  vertu  qui  fait  la  difference. 
II  est  de  ces  esprits  favorise's  des  cieux 
Qui  sont  tout  par  eux-memes  et  rien  par  leurs  aieux. 
Tel  est  l'homme,  en  un  mot,  que  j'ai  choisi  pour  maitre ; 
Lui  seul  dans  l'univers  a  merite"  de  l'etre  ; 
Tout  mortel  a  ses  lois  doit  un  jour  obe"ir,"  .  .  .2 

the  eyes  of  all  present  were  riveted  on  him  ;  they  listened 
to  the  actors  but  could  not  help  looking  at  him.  And,  in 
another  passage,  every  German  prince  must  naturally  have 
applied  to  himself  the  following  verses  uttered  by  Lafont  in  a 
dismal  tone  : 

"  Vois  l'empire  romain  tombant  de  toutes  parts, 
Ce  grand  corps  de'chire'  dont  les  membres  epars 

1  "  The  dictates  of  honour  suffice,  they  constitute  our  oracle. 

The  gods  are  the  sovereign  masters  of  our  life, 

But,  my  Lord,  our  glory  depends  on  ourseives, 

Why  trouble  about  their  supreme  orders  ? 

Let  us  only  think  of  becoming  immortal  like  themselves, 

And  letting  fate  take  its  course,  let  us  hasten  where  valour 

Holds  out  for  us  the  prospect  of  a  fate  as  great  as  their  own,"  .  .  . 

— {fphigenie,  Act  I.,  Scene  II.) 

2  "  All  men  are  equal,  it  is  not  to  birth, 

But  to  virtue  alone  that  difference  between  them  is  due. 

There  are  some  men,  favoured  by  Heaven, 

Who  are  everything  by  themselves  and  owe  nothing  to  their  ancestors. 

Such,  in  short,  is  the  man  I  chose  for  master  ; 

He  alone  in  the  world  deserved  to  be  mine  ; 

All  nations  will  some  day  submit  to  his  sway,"  .  .  . 

— {Mahomet  (Voltaire),  Act  I.,  Scene  IV.) 


THE  ERFUR  T  INTER  VIE  W.  321 

Languissent  disperses,  sans  honneur  et  sans  vie  ; 
Sur  ces  debris  du  monde  elevons  l'Arabie. 
II  faut  un  nouveau  culte,  il  faut  de  nouveaux  fers, 
II  faut  un  nouveau  Dieu  pour  l'aveugle  univers." 1 

At  this  point,  respect  only  prevented  the  audience  from 
demonstrating  their  approval  ;  and  the  applause  almost  broke 
forth  at  the  following  verse  : 

"  Qui  l'a  fait  roi  ?    Qui  l'a  couronne'  ?     La  Victoire."  2 

Mahomet,  Acte  L,  Scene  IV. 

Perhaps  they  only  affected  to  be  touched  when  Omar 
added  : 

"  Au  nom  de  conquerant  et  de  triomphateur, 
II  veut  joindre  le  nom  de  pacificateur."  3 

Mahomet,  Acte  I.,  Scene  IV. 

At  this  last  verse,  Napoleon  cleverly  evinced  an  emotion  which 
showed  that  it  was  there,  he  wished  them  to  find  the  explana- 
tion of  all  his  life. 

They  even  plainly  displayed  their  approbation  when  Saint- 
Prix,  in  La  Mort  de  Cesar,  said,  with  admirable  expression,  in 
speaking  of  Sylla  : 

"  II  en  etait  l'effroi,  J'en  serai  les  delices,  etc."4 

La  Mort  de  Ce'sar  (Voltaire),  Acte  I.,  Scene  IV. 

I  do  not  wish  to  quote  any  more  applications,  or  inductions 
of  the  same  kind  which  I  heard  people  make  every  day.  I  only 
cite  those  that  are  indispensable  in  order  to  enable  my  readers 
to  grasp  more  fully  the  spirit  of  this  great  assembly. 

After  each  play,  I  saw  the  Emperor  Alexander  at  the  house 
of  the  Princess  of  Tour  and  Taxis,  and  sometimes  M.  de  Vincent 

1  "  Behold  the  Roman  empire  breaking  up  everywhere, 

Great  tattered  body  whose  scattered  limbs 
Linger  disconnected  in  inglorious  death  ; 
We  must  raise  Arabia  on  this  wreck  of  the  world. 
A  new  worship  is  needed,  men  require  fresh  fetters, 
A  new  God  must  rule  over  blind  mankind." 

— (Mahomet,  Act  II.    Scene  V. ) 

2  "  Who  made  him  king  ?     Who  crowned  him  ?     Victory." 

3  "To  the  name  of  victor  and  of  conqueror, 

He  wishes  to  add  that  of  pacifier." 

4  "He  was  the  dread  of  Rome,  I  shall  be  her  delight  "... 

Y    2 


324  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

called  on  me.  Their  impressions  on  the  entertainment  were 
very  different.  The  emperor  was  always  delighted  with  the 
performance,  and  M.  de  Vincent  always  despondent.  He 
had  the  greatest  difficulty  in  persuading  himself  that  the  em- 
perors were  not  making  some  arrangement  ;  and  yet  he  was 
positive  that  during  the  first  days  no  business  had  been  touched 
upon.  However,  when  they  did  speak,  the  conversation  was  a 
long  one.  The  emperors  discussed  thoroughly  everything  that 
had  been  treated  of  between  the  two  cabinets  for  the  last  year,  and 
the  Emperor  Napoleon  finished  by  communicating  a  project  of 
convention  which,  he  said,  he  had  drawn  up  for  their  mutual 
advantage.  He  gave  it  to  the  Emperor  Alexander,  after  having 
made  him  promise  not  to  show  it  to  anybody  ;  not  even  to  one 
of  his  ministers.  It  was  an  affair,  he  added,  which  must  be 
treated  of  between  themselves,  and  to  prove  the  importance 
which  he  attached  to  its  being  kept  a  secret,  he  himself  had 
written  out  some  of  the  articles,  not  wishing  any  one  to  know 
them. 

The  words,  "  not  any  one,"  which  he  repeated,  were  evidently 
meant  for  Count  Romanzoff  and  me.  The  Emperor  Alexander 
had  the  goodness  not  to  understand  them  so  ;  and,  after  having 
begged  the  Princess  of  Tour  and  Taxis  to  admit  nobody,  he  took 
the  treaty  out  of  his  pocket.  Napoleon  had  taken  the  trouble 
to  copy,  as  well  as  he  could,  nearly  all  the  project  I  had 
given  him.  He  had,  however,  changed  one  or  two  articles, 
and  added  that  a  corps  of  the  Russian  army,  under  pretext  of 
the  position  of  the  cabinet  of  St.  Petersburg  with  regard  to 
the  Ottoman  Porte,  should  be  placed  near  the  Austrian  frontiers. 
The  Emperor  Alexander,  after  having  remarked  to  the  Em- 
peror Napoleon  that  the  bases  of  the  treaty  differed  from 
those  which  had  been  almost  decided  on  at  St.  Petersburg, 
reserved  to  himself  to  make  in  writing  any  observations  he 
should  think  proper.  Russian  secrets  seem  to  be  badly  kept, 
for  the  next  morning,  M.  de  Vincent  came  to  me  and  told  me 
that  he  knew  the  negotiations  had  commenced,  and  that  there 
was  already  a  project  of  convention  drawn  up.  I  advised  him 
to  keep  quiet,  and  take  only  the  necessary  steps,  and  above  all 
not  to  show  any  uneasiness.     I  also  told  him  that  I  was  placed 


THE  ERFUR  T  INTER  VIE  W.  325 

so  as  to  have  some  influence  on  the  resolutions  which  would  be 
taken,  and  he  knew  how  strongly  I  was  opposed  to  any  measures 
which  would  be  detrimental  to  the  security  or  dignity  of 
Austria. 

Two  or  three  days  elapsed  without  the  two  emperors 
seeing  each  other,  except  at  parade,  at  dinner  time,  or  at  the 
play.  I  continued  to  go  every  evening  to  the  Princess  of 
Tour's  ;  the  Emperor  Alexander  also  came  there  regularly  ;  he 
seemed  preoccupied,  so  I  did  my  best  to  make  the  conversation  as 
frivolous  as  possible.  One  day,  however,  as  I  was  looking  over 
Mithridate,  which  had  just  been  given  me,  I  remarked  on  the 
number  of  passages  in  the  piece  which  might  serve  as  allusions. 
Addressing  myself  to  the  Princess  of  Tour,  I  quoted  several 
verses,  but  my  little  plan  did  not  succeed.  The  emperor  said 
he  had  a  headache  and  withdrew,  but  his  last  words  were  "d 
demain?  Every  morning,  I  saw  M.  de  Caulaincourt.  I  asked 
him  if  he  did  not  think  that  the  Emperor  Alexander  was  growing 
cooler.  He  said,  No  ;  that  he  thought  he  was  only  perplexed, 
but  that  his  enthusiasm  for  Napoleon  was  still  the  same,  and 
that  his  perplexity  would  soon  cease. 

During  these  days  of  political  reserve,  the  Emperor  Napoleon 
continued  to  see,  every  morning  after  his  breakfast,  the  Germans 
he  prized  and  whose  suffrage  he  wished  to  have.  The  errand  he 
had  given  to  Herr  Goethe  had  been  faithfully  executed,  and 
Herr  Wieland  had  arrived.  He  had  them  both  invited  to  lunch. 
I  remember  that  the  prince-primate  and  many  other  people  were 
present  that  day.  The  emperor  was  always  anxious  to  shine  in 
conversation,  and  so,  carefully  prepared  some  subject,  which  he 
broached  unexpectedly  to  the  person  with  whom  he  was  speaking. 
He  was  never  embarrassed  by  a  direct  contradiction,  for  he  easily 
found  a  reason  for  interrupting  the  person  who  spoke.  I  have 
several  times  had  opportunities  for  remarking  that,  when  out  of 
France,  he  was  fond  of  speaking  on  elevated  subjects,  which  are 
generally  unknown  to  military  men  ;  this  fact  gave  him  at  once 
a  character  apart.  His  self-confidence  in  this  respect,  whether 
it  was  owing  to  the  brilliancy  of  his  life,  or  to  the  illusions  of  his 
pride,  would  not  have  been  shaken  by  the  presence  of  either 
Montesquieu  or  Voltaire. 


326  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

There  were  three  or  four  subjects  on  which  he  spoke  willingly. 
At  Berlin,  the  preceding  year,  addressing  himself  to  Johan  von 
Miiller,  he  had  tried  to  fix  the  different  epochs  of  the  great 
efforts  of  the  human  mind.  I  fancy  I  still  see  the  astonish- 
ment on  Muller's  face  when  he  heard  him  assert  that  the 
propagation  and  the  rapid  development  of  Christianity  had 
worked  an  admirable  reaction  of  the  spirit  of  Greece  against  that 
of  Rome,  and  lay  stress  on  or  applaud  the  skill  which  Greece, 
vanquished  by  physical  force,  displayed  in  dealing  with  the  con- 
quest of  the  empire  of  intellect,  a  conquest,  he  added,  which  had 
been  effected  by  taking  advantage  of  the  beneficial  seeds  of 
Christianity,  whose  influence  on  mankind  had  been  so  great. 
He  must  have  known  this  sentence  by  heart,  for  I  have  heard  him 
repeat  it  in  the  same  way  to  M.  de  Fontanes  x  and  to  M.  Suard.2 
Miiller  did  not  reply.  He  was  quite  taken  aback  ;  the  emperor 
took  advantage  of  this  opportunity  to  ask  him  to  write  his 
history. 

I  do  not  know  what  he  wished  to  obtain  from  Wieland,  but 
he  was  particularly  affable  with  him. 

"  M.  Wieland,  we  like  your  works  much  in  France  :  it  is  you 
who  are  the  author  of  Agathon  and  Oberon.  We  call  you  the 
Voltaire  of  Germany." 

"  Sire,  the  comparison  would  be  a  flattering  one,  if  it  were 
justified.     It  is  very  great  praise  from  very  kind  people." 

"  Tell  me,  Monsieur  Wieland,  why  your  Diogenes,  your 
Agathon,  and  your  Peregrinus  are  written  in  the  equivocal 
style  which  mixes  romance  with  history  and  history  with 
romance.  A  superior  man  like  yourself  ought  to  keep  each  style 
distinctly  separate.  What  is  mixed  is  generally  confused. 
That  is  the  reason  we  like  the  drama  so  little  in  France.  But 
I  am  afraid  to  say  too  much  on  this  subject,  because  I  am 
dealing  with  some  one  so  much  more  conversant  with  the 
matter  than  I  am ;  especially  as  what  I  say  has  as  much 
reference  to  Monsieur  Goethe  as  to  you." 

1  M.  de  Fontanes,  born  in  1787,  occupied  himself,  before  the  Revolution,  with 
literature  and  poetry.  He  entered  the  Inst  Out  under  the  Consulate,  became  a  member 
of  the  legislative  body  in  1804,  and  president  of  that  assembly  (1805).  Grand- 
master of  the  University  in  1808,  and  senator  in  1810.     He  died  in  1821. 

2  Jean  Baptiste  Suard,  litterateur  and  distinguished  writer,  member  of  the  French 
Academy.     He  became  Censor  under  the  Restoration.     (1733-1817.) 


THE  ERFUR  T  INTER  VIE  W.  327 

"  Sire,  your  Majesty  will  permit  us  to  point  out  to  you  that, 
in  the  French  theatre,  there  are  very  few  tragedies  which  are 
not  a  mixture  of  history  and  romance  ;  but  I  am  now  on  Herr 
Goethe's  land.  He,  will  reply  himself,  and  certainly  he  will 
reply  well.  As  to  myself,  I  wished  to  give  man  some  useful 
lesson.  The  authority  of  history  was  necessary.  I  intended 
that  the  examples  I  borrowed  should  be  easy  and  agreeable  to 
imitate,  and  to  do  that,  it  was  necessary  to  mix  the  ideal 
and  the  romantic.  Men's  ideas,  sometimes,  are  worth  more 
than  their  actions,  and  good  novels  are  more  valuable 
than  mankind.  Compare,  sire,  the  century  of  Louis  XIV. 
with  Tclemaque,  where  are  found  the  best  lessons  for  sovereigns 
and  for  the  people.  My  Diogenes  is  virtuous,  though  living  in 
a  cask." 

"  But  do  you  know,"  said  the  emperor,  "  what  happens  to 
those  who  always  display  virtue  in  their  stories  ?  They  cause 
the  impression  that  virtue  is  but  a  dream.  History  has  often 
been  calumniated  by  historians  themselves." 

This  conversation,  in  which  Tacitus  could  not  fail  to  be  intro- 
duced, was  interrupted  by  M.  de  Nansouty,  who  just  came  to 
tell  the  emperor  that  a  messenger  from  Paris  had  brought  him 
some  letters.  The  prince -primate  left  with  Wieland  and  Goethe, 
and  begged  me  to  go  with  them  to  dine  at  his  house.  Wieland, 
who  in  his  simplicity  did  not  know  whether  he  had  replied  well  or 
badly  to  the  emperor,  had  gone  into  his  room  to  write  the  con- 
versation he  had  just  had.  He  brought  that  recital  to  the  prince- 
primate,  such  as  has  just  been  read.  All  the  great  minds  of 
Weimar  and  suburbs  attended  that  dinner.  I  observed  a  lady  from 
Eisenach  who  was  seated  opposite  the  primate.  No  one  spoke  to 
her  without  giving  her  the  name  of  a  muse,  and  that  without 
affectation.  "  Clio,  will  you  have  so  and  so  ?  "  was  the  primate's 
manner  of  addressing  her,  to  which  she  would  reply  simply 
"  Yes  "  or  "  No."  She  was  called  Baroness  Bechtolsheim.  After 
dinner,  every  one  went  to  the  play,  and,  when  it  was  over,  follow- 
ing my  custom,  I  saw  the  emperor  home,  and  went,  afterwards, 
to  the  Princess  of  Tour's. 

The  Czar  Alexander  was  already  there.  His  face  did  not 
wear  its  ordinary  expression.     It  was  plain  that  his  uncertainties 


328  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

still  existed,  and  that  his  observations  on  the  project  of  the 
treaty  were  not  made. 

"  Has  the  emperor  been  talking  to  you  lately  ?  "  was  his  first 
question. 

"  No,  sire  ; "  and  I  ventured  to  add  that  if  I  had  not  seen 
M.  de  Vincent,  I  could  have  believed  that  the  Erfurt  interview 
was  only  a  pleasure  party. 

"  What  does  M.  de  Vincent  say  ?  " 

"  Sire,  only  very  reasonable  things.  He  hopes  that  your 
Majesty  will  not  allow  yourself  to  be  led  by  the  Emperor  Napo- 
leon to  take  threatening,  or  at  least,  offensive  measures  against 
Austria ;  and  if  your  Majesty  will  permit  me  to  tell  you  so,  I 
have  formed  the  same  opinion." 

"  I  should  also  like  to  refrain  from  them,  but  it  seems  very 
difficult  to  do  so,  for  the  Emperor  Napoleon  seems  to  me  much 
incensed." 

"  But,  sire,  you  have  certain  observations  to  make.  Can  your 
Majesty  not  consider  as  useless  those  provisions  relative  to 
Austria  and  say  that  they  are  included  in  the  treaty  of  Tilsit  ? 
It  seems  to  me  that  one  could  add  that  the  proofs  of  confidence 
ought  to  be  reciprocal ;  and  that  your  Majesty,  while  allowing  the 
Emperor  Napoleon  to  be,  in  a  measure,  the  judge  of  the  circum- 
stances where  certain  articles  of  the  draft  submitted  to  you  could 
be  executed,  has,  on  the  other  hand,  the  right  to  exact  that  he 
leave  you  to  judge  the  cases  where  Austria  might  become  a  real 
obstacle  to  the  projects  adopted  by  the  two  sovereigns.  This 
being  understood  between  you,  everything  concerning  Austria 
should  be  erased  from  the  draft  of  the  treaty.  And  if  your 
Majesty  thinks  of  the  fright  that  the  Erfurt  interview,  arranged 
without  the  knowledge  of  the  Emperor  Francis,  must  have 
caused  at  Vienna,  perhaps  you  would  like  to  re-assure  him  in  a 
letter,  on  everything  which  interests  him  personally."  I  saw 
that  the  Czar  Alexander  was  pleased.  He  took  notes  with  his 
pencil  on  all  that  I  had  said  ;  but  it  was  necessary  to  decide,  and 
that  he  had  not  yet  done.  It  was  M.  de  Caulaincourt  who,  by 
his  personal  influence  over  him  carried  his  determination. 

The  next  day  the  Czar  Alexander  showed  me  his  observa- 
tions  on   the  project   of  the   treaty,  and  said  to  me  blandly : 


THE  ERFUR  T  INTER  VIE  IV.  329 

"  You  will  recognize  yourself  there,  perhaps,  in  several  places.  I 
have  added  many  things  taken  from  the  past  conversations 
the  Emperor  Napoleon  and  I  have  had  together."  Those  obser- 
vations were  sufficiently  good.  I  found  him  decided  to  propose 
them  the  next  morning.  It  gave  me  pleasure,  for  his  expres- 
sion was  not  yet  so  free  from  anxiety  that  it  did  not  cause  me 
to  wish  the  first  step  had  been  taken.  My  fears  were  not  with- 
out foundation,  for  at  a  conference  which  lasted  three  hours,  he 
yielded  nothing  to  the  Emperor  Napoleon,  who  sent  for  me  at 
the  time  of  their  separating. 

"  I  have  done  nothing  with  the  Emperor  Alexander,"  he  said. 

"  Sire,  I  believe  your  Majesty  has  done  a  great  deal  since  he 
has  been  here,  for  the  Czar  Alexander  is  completely  under 
the  spell." 

"  He  is  simply  acting  a  part.     If  he  cares  so  much  for  me,  why 
does  he  not  sign  ?  " 

"  Sire,  there  is  something  so  chivalric  in  his  nature  that  so 
many  precautions  quite  shock  him.  He  believes  that  by  his 
word  and  his  affection  for  you,  he  is  more  bound  than  by 
treaties.  His  letters,  which  your  Majesty  gave  me  to  read,  are 
full  of  passages  which  prove  it." 

"  That  is  all  nonsense  !" 

He  walked  up  and  down  in  his  room,  interrupting  the  silence 
now  and  then  by  saying  : 

"  I  shall  not  return  to  that  subject  again  with  him — that 
would  show  him  that  I  placed  too  much  interest  in  it.  Our  only 
interview,  by  the  mystery  in  which  it  was  enveloped,  will  impose 
on  Austria.  She  will  believe  in  the  existence  of  secret  articles, 
and  I  shall  not  undeceive  her.  If,  at  least,  Russia,  by  her  example, 
induce  the  Emperor  Francis  to  recognize  Joseph  as  King  of  Spain, 
that  would  be  something,  but  I  don't  expect  it.  What  I  have 
done  in  eight  days  with  the  Czar  Alexander  would  require 
years  to  do  at  Vienna.  I  do  not  understand  your  leaning 
towards  Austria.     It  is  the  ancient  policy  of  France." 

"  Sire,  I  believe  that  such  ought  to  be  the  policy  of  the 
new  France,  and  if  I  dared  add  it,  your  own,  for  you,  sire, 
are  the  one  sovereign  on  whom  the  world  depends  most  to 
preserve  civilization.    The  presence  of  Russia  at  the  peace  of 


330  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

Tcschen  1  has  been  a  serious  misfortune  for  Europe,  and  a  grave 
error  on  the  part  of  France,  who  did  nothing  to  prevent  it." 

"  That  is  no  longer  the  question,  my  dear.  We  must  take 
things  as  they  are.  You  must  charge  M.  de  Vergennes  with  the 
responsibility  of  the  past.  Few  people  now  take  an  interest  in 
civilization." 

"  We  think  of  our  business." 

"  You  do  not  understand  ;  you  know  why  it  is  that  no 
one  deals  openly  with  me?  It  is  that  having  no  children, 
they  believe  I  only  have  a  life-interest  in  France.  That 
is  the  secret  of  all  that  you  see  here.  They  are  afraid  of 
me,  and  each  one  gets  out  of  trouble  as  well  as  he  can.  It  is 
a  bad  state  of  things  for  everybody.  And,"  he  added  gravely, 
"  it  must  needs  some  day  be  remedied.  Continue  seeing  the 
Czar  Alexander.  I  have  been  perhaps  a  little  brusque  in  our 
conferences,  but  I  desire  that  we  part  on  friendly  terms.  I  have 
still  a  few  days  before  me.  To-morrow  we  shall  go  to  Weimar 
and  it  will  not  be  difficult  to  be  gracious  on  the  grounds  of  Jena 
where  they  are  having  a  fete  for  me.  You  will  be  at  Weimar, 
before  myself ;  tell  the  duchess  who  is  too  grand  a  lady  to  come 
to  Jena,  that  I  should  like  to  see  all  the  savants  who  live  in  her 
midst,  and  that  I  beg  her  to  acquaint  them  with  my  wish.  It 
would  be  a  pity  that  all  the  plans  for  this  journey  should  fail." 

The  emperor  had  sent  all  the  Comedie  Francaise  to  Weimar. 
The  day  began  by  a  hunt  on  the  grounds  of  Jena,  afterwards 
there  was  a  grand  dinner  served  on  a  table  in  the  shape  of  a 
horse-shoe,  at  which  were  placed  only  reigning  princes.  I  lay 
stress  on  that  expression,  for  that  title  enabled  them  to  render  a 
fresh  homage  to  Napoleon  by  calling  on  the  prince  of  Neufchatel 
and  myself  to  sit  at  that  table.  On  leaving  the  table  they  went 
to  the  play,  where  La  Mort  de  Cesar  was  to  be  represented  before 
all  the  sovereigns  and  princes  who  had  come  from  Erfurt  to 
Weimar.     After  the  play,  we  passed  into  the  ball-room.     It  was 

1  The  peace  of  Teschen  (Silesia),  signed  on  May  10,  1779,  between  Austria  and 
France,  put  an  end  to  the  war  of  the  succession  of  Bavaria  that  the  Emperor  Joseph 
II.  had  instigated  in  the  preceding  year,  in  endeavouring  to  take  possession  of  that 
state,  after  the  death  of  the  Duke  Maximilian-Joseph.  King  Frederick  II.  being 
opposed  to  that  claim,  a  short  war  was  the  result.  The  Empress  Catherine  II.,  had 
been  clever  enough  to  place  herself  as  mediator  between  the  two  powers,  in  concert 
with  France. 


THE  ERFUR  T  INTER  VIE  W.  331 

a  very  beautiful  hall,  large,  lofty  and  square,  illuminated  from 
above,  and  adorned  with  many  columns.  The  impression  that 
La  Mort  de  Cesar  had  left  was  soon  driven  away  by  the  sight 
of  a  quantity  of  young  and  pretty  girls,  who  had  come  to  the 
ball.  Napoleon  loved  to  touch  upon  serious  questions  in  the 
drawing-room,  at  the  hunt,  at  a  ball,  sometimes  opposite  the 
gaming  table.  He  intended  to  prove,  by  it,  that  he  was  not 
susceptible  to  the  impression  that  such  displays  give  to  men 
in  general.  Having  made  the  rounds  of  the  room  and  pausing 
near  some  young  ladies,  the  names  of  whom  he  inquired  of 
Herr  Friedrich  von  M tiller,  the  duke's  chamberlain,  who  had 
received  the  order  to  accompany  him,  he  retired  at  a  distance 
from  the  vast  throng,  and  requested  Herr  von  Mtiller  to  fetch 
Herr  Goethe  and  Herr  Wieland.  Herr  von  Mtiller  is  not  of  the 
same  family  as  the  renowned  Johan  von  Mtiller,  the  historian, 
but  he  is  a  member  of  the  literary  society  of  Weimar,  and  I 
believe  that  he  is  the  secretary  of  it.  He  went  to  fetch  those 
gentlemen,  who,  with  a  few  other  members  of  that  academy, 
looked  upon  that  beautiful  and  extraordinary  sight.  Herr 
Goethe,  on  approaching  the  emperor,  asked  his  permission  to 
introduce  them.  I  do  not  give  their  names,  because  they  are  not 
found  in  the  notes,  albeit  quite  complete  in  other  respects, 
which  Herr  von  Mtiller  gave  me  the  next  day.  I  had  asked  him 
to  write  all  he  saw  on  this  journey,  so  that  I  might  compare 
them  with  what  I  had  written  myself. 

"  You  are  pleased  with  our  plays  I  hope,"  said  the  emperor 
to  Herr  Goethe.  "  Have  these  gentlemen  come  to  them  ?  " 
"  To  the  one  of  to-day,  sire,  but  not  to  those  at  Erfurt." 
"  I  am  sorry  for  it.  A  good  tragedy  should  be  looked  upon  as 
the  most  worthy  school  for  superior  men.  From  a  certain  point  of 
view,  it  is  above  history.  In  the  best  history,  very  little  effect  is 
produced.  Man  when  alone  is  but  little  affected,  men  assembled 
receive  the  stronger  and  more  lasting  impressions.  I  assure  you 
that  Tacitus,  the  historian,  that  you  are  always  quoting,  never 
taught  me  anything.  Could  you  find  a  greater  and,  at  times, 
more  unjust  detractor  of  the  human  race?  In  the  most  simple 
actions  he  finds  criminal  motives,  he  makes  emperors  out  as  the 
most   profound  villains,  in  order  to  awake  admiration    for  the 


332  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

genius  that  has  penetrated  them.  People  are  right  in  saying  that 
his  Annals  are  not  a  history  of  the  empire,  but  an  abstract  of  the 
prison-records  of  Rome.  They  are  always  dealing  with  accusa- 
tions, with  convicts,  and  with  people  who  open  their  veins  in  their 
baths.  He  who  speaks  incessantly  of  accusations,  he  is  the  most 
notorious  informer.  What  an  involved  style !  How  obscure  !  I 
am  not  a  great  Latin  scholar,  but  Tacitus'  obscurity  displays 
itself  in  ten  or  twelve  Italian  and  French  translations  that  I  have 
read.  I,  therefore,  conclude  that  his  chief  quality  is  obscurity, 
that  it  springs  from  that  which  one  calls  his  genius,  as  well  as 
from  his  style,  and  that  it  is  so  connected  with  his  manner  of 
expressing  himself  only  because  it  is  in  his  conception.  I  have 
heard  people  praise  him  for  the  fear  he  awakes  in  tyrants  ;  he 
makes  them  afraid  of  the  people.  That  is  a  great  mistake,  and 
does  the  people  harm.  Am  I  not  right,  Monsieur  Wieland  ?  But 
I  am  interrupting  you.  We  are  not  here  to  speak  of  Tacitus. 
Look !  how  well  the  Czar  Alexander  dances. 

"  I  do  not  know  why  we  are  here,  sire,"  replied  Herr  Wieland, 
"  but  I  know  that,  at  this  moment,  your  Majesty  makes  me  very 
happy." 

"  Ah  !  Really  ?     In  what  way  ?  " 

"  Sire,  the  manner  in  which  your  Majesty  has  spoken  to  me, 
makes  me  forget  that  he  has  two  thrones.  I  see  in  him  only  a  man 
of  letters,  and  I  know  that  your  Majesty  will  not  disdain  that  title, 
for  I  remember  that,  on  leaving  for  Egypt  he  signed  his  letters, 
'  Bonaparte,  membra,  de  Vinstitnt  et  general  en  chef.'  It  is,  then, 
to  a  man  of  letters,  sire,  that  I  shall  try  to  reply.  I  felt,  at 
Erfurt,  that  I  defended  myself  but  feebly  when  I  was  the  object 
of  your  criticism ;  but  I  believe  I  am  able  to  defend  Tacitus  better. 
I  understand  that  his  principal  aim  is  to  punish  tyrants — but  if 
he  denounces  them  it  is  not  to  their  slaves,  whose  revolt  would 
only  bring  a  change  of  tyranny ;  he  denounces  them  to  the  justice 
of  ages  and  to  mankind.  And  the  latter  ought  to  have  had 
enough  trouble  and  experience,  that  its  reason  should  henceforth 
acquire  the  rule  heretofore  solely  enjoyed  by  its  passions." 

"That  is  what  all  our  philosophers  say  ;  but  that  supremacy 
of  reason  I  look  all  about  for  and  find  it  nowhere." 

"  Sire,  it   is   not  long  since  Tacitus  began  to  have  so  many 


THE  ERFUR  T  INTER  VIE  IV.  333 

readers.  That  hankering  for  him  is  a  clear  progress  of  the  human 
mind,  for,  for  centuries,  he  was  shut  out  of  academies  as  well  as 
from  courts.  The  slaves  of  taste  were  quite  as  much  afraid  of  it 
as  the  servants  of  despotism.  It  is  only  since  Racine  named  him 
Le  plus  grand  peintre  de  tantiqnite}  that  your  universities  and 
our  own  have  thought  this  judgment  might  be  true.  Your 
Majesty  says  that  in  reading  Tacitus,  you  see  nothing  but 
assassins,  informers,  and  scoundrels  ;  but,  sire,  that  is  exactly 
what  the  Roman  Empire  was,  governed  by  those  monsters  fallen 
under  Tacitus'  pen.  The  genius  of  Tacitus  travelled  the  world  with 
the  legions  of  the  Republic.  The  genius  of  Tacitus  must  almost 
always  have  been  applied  to  the  study  of  the  prison-records  of 
Rome,  for  there  only  could  he  find  all  the  history  of  the  Empire. 
It  is  even  only  in  prison-records,"  said  he,  in  an  animated  voice, 
"  that  historians  can  become  acquainted  with  those  unhappy 
times,  amongst  all  nations,  when  princes  and  their  people, 
opposed  in  views  and  principles,  live  trembling  before  each 
other.  Then,  the  slightest  pretext  gives  rise  to  criminal  trials, 
and  death  appears  to  be  inflicted  by  centurions  and  executioners 
oftener  than  by  time  and  nature.  Sire,  Suetonius,  Dion,  and 
Cassius  relate  a  much  greater  number  of  crimes  than  Tacitus, 
in  a  style  void  of  energy,  while  nothing  is  more  terrible  than 
Tacitus'  pen.  However,  his  genius  is  as  impartial  as  it  is  inexor- 
able. Whenever  he  can  see  any  good,  even  in  the  monstrous 
reign  of  Tiberius,  he  looks  it  out,  takes  hold  of  it,  and  shows  it 
off  in  the  bold  relief  he  gives  to  everything.  He  can  find  even 
praise  for  that  imbecile  Claudius,  who  was  really  so  only  by 
nature  and  by  his  dissipation.  That  impartiality — the  most  im- 
portant quality  of  justice — Tacitus  exercises  on  the  most  opposite 
subjects,  on  the  republic  as  well  as  the  Empire  ;  on  citizens  as  well 
as  on  princes.  By  the  stamp  of  his  genius  one  would  believe  he 
could  love  only  the  republic.  One  could  confirm  that  opinion  by 
his  words  on  Brutus,  Cassius  and  Codrus,  so  deeply  engraven  in 
the  memory  of  our  youth ;  but  when  he  speaks  of  the  emperors 
who  had  so  happily  reconciled  what  was  thought  could  not  be 
reconciled,  the  Empire  and  liberty,  one  feels  that  the  art  of 
governing  appears  to  him  the  most  beautiful  discovery  on  earth." 

1  The  greatest  painter  of  antiquity. 


334  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

The  prince-primate  who  had  approached,  and  all  the  little 
academy  of  Weimar  which  surrounded  Wieland,  could  not 
contain  their  joy. 

"  Sire,"  he  continued,  "  if  it  be  true  to  say  of  Tacitus,  that 
tyrants  are  punished  when  he  paints  them,  it  is  still  more  true  to 
say  that  good  princes  are  rewarded  when  he  traces  their  images 
and  presents  them  to  future  glory." 

"  I  have  too  strong  a  party  to  cope  with,  Monsieur  Wieland, 
and  you  neglect  none  of  your  advantages.  I  think  you  knew 
that  I  did  not  like  Tacitus ;  do  you  correspond  with  Herr  von 
Midler,1  whom  I  saw  at  Berlin  ?" 

"  Yes,  sire." 

"  Confess  that  he  has  written  to  you  on  the  subject  of  our 
conversation  ? " 

"  It  is  true,  sire.  It  is  by  him  that  I  knew  your  Majesty 
liked  to  speak  of  Tacitus,  but  did  not,  however,  like  him." 

"  I  do  not  like  to  say  I  am  beaten,  Monsieur  Wieland :  to 
that  I  would  consent  with  difficulty.  To-morrow  I  return  to 
Erfurt,  and  we  shall  continue  our  discussion.  I  have  a  good  store 
of  weapons  in  my  arsenal  for  sustaining  that  Tacitus  has  not 
entered  far  enough  into  the  development  of  the  causes  of  events; 
that  he  has  not  sufficiently  shown  the  mystery  of  the  actions 
that  he  relates,  and  their  mutual  linking  together  in  order  to 
prepare  the  judgment  of  posterity,  which  must  judge  men  and 
governments  such  as  they  were  in  their  time  and  in  the  midst  of 
the  circumstances  which  surrounded  them." 

The  emperor  concluded  that  conversation  by  saying  to  Herr 
Wieland,  with  a  mild  expression,  that  the  pleasure  of  being  with 
him  caused  him  to  be  for  some  time,  an  object  of  scandal 
for  the  dancers,  and  he  went  away  with  the  prince-primate. 
After  having  paused  for  some  moments  to  witness  the  beautiful 
contre-dance,  and  having  spoken  to  the  Duchess  of  Saxe- 
Weimar  about  the  elegance  and  beauty  of  that  brilliant  fete,  he 
left  the  ball  and  went  back  to  the  magnificent  apartment  prepared 
for  him.  All  the  young  academicians,  fearing  to  trust  to  their 
memory,  had  already  gone  away  to  write  down  among  themselves 
all  that  they  had  just  heard.    And  the  next  day,  the  day  of  our 

1  Johan  von  Miiller,  the  historian. 


THE  ERFUR  T  INTER  VIE  W.  335 

departure,  Herr  von  Miiller  was  with  me  at  seven  o'clock,  to  ask 
me  if  the  onslaught  of  the  emperor  against  Tacitus  was  truthfully 
recorded.  I  had  altered  some  words  in  it,  and  that  gave  me  the 
right  to  have  a  complete  copy  of  these  gentlemen's  works, 
destined  for  the  archives  of  Weimar.  We  left  this  beautiful 
place  in  the  morning.  The  Kings  of  Saxony,  Wurtemberg,  and 
Bavaria  set  off  in  order  to  return  to  their  dominions. 

When  Napoleon  returned  to  Erfurt,  he  was  more  friendly, 
more  confidential  with  the  Czar  Alexander  than  he  had  been 
yet.  The  convention  that  had  become  so  insignificant,  was 
settled  almost  without  discussion  ;  the  emperor  did  not  appear 
to  take  a  real  interest  in  anything  except  in  what  pleased  his 
august  ally.  A  life  of  excitement  fatigued  him,  he  said  to  the 
Czar  Alexander.  He  needed  rest,  and  he  only  longed  at 
present,  after  the  time  when  he  could  give  himself  up  to 
domestic  life,  to  which  all  his  tastes  led  him.  "  But  that 
happiness,"  he  added  with  a  deeply  concerned  expression,  "  is 
not  for  me.  Is  there  any  home  without  children ;  and  can  I 
have  any  ?  My  wife  is  ten  years  older  than  myself — I  beg  your 
pardon,  this  must  all  appear  ridiculous  to  you,  but  I  obey  the 
dictates  of  my  heart,  which  it  soothes  me  to  unbosom  to  you." 
And  then  he  talked  about  the  long  separation,  the  great 
distance,  the  difficulty  in  seeing  each  other  again.  "  But  there 
is  only  a  short  time  before  dinner,"  he  said,  "  and  I  must  again 
assume  all  my  composure  in  order  to  give  M.  de  Vincent  his 
audience  of  leave."  That  evening  the  Czar  Alexander  was  still 
fascinated  by  the  charm  of  that  intimate  conversation.  I  was 
only  able  to  see  Napoleon  at  a  very  late  hour.  He  was  very 
much  pleased  with  the  day,  and  bade  me  stay  with  him  a  long 
time  after  he  had  retired.  His  agitation  was  singular.  He 
asked  me  questions  without  waiting  for  my  answer.  He  tried 
to  speak  to  me,  he  wanted  to  say  something  else  than  what  he 
did  say  ;  and,  at  last,  he  pronounced  the  one  word  divorce.  "  My 
destiny  exacts  it,"  he  said,  "  and  the  tranquillity  of  France 
demands  it.  I  have  no  successor ;  Joseph  is  nothing,  and  he 
has  only  daughters.  It  is  I  who  must  found  a  dynasty.  I  can 
only  do  so  by  getting  married  to  a  princess  from  one  of  the 
reigning   houses    of    Europe.      The    Emperor    Alexander   has 


336  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

sisters.  There  is  one  whose  age  suits  me.  Speak  of  that  to 
Romanzoff.  Tell  him  that  once  my  affairs  in  Spain  are  settled, 
I  will  enter  into  all  his  views  for  the  partition  of  Turkey ; 
besides,  other  arguments  will  not  fail  you,  for  I  know  you  are 
an  advocate  of  divorce.  The  Empress  Josephine  believes  in  it 
also,  I  can  tell  you." 

"  Sire,  if  your  Majesty  permits  I  will  say  nothing  to  Count 
Romanzoff,  although  he  be  the  hero  of  the  Chevaliers  du 
Cygnc  of  Mme.  de  Genlis.1  I  do  not  think  he  has  sense 
enough.  Besides,  after  I  have  told  him  what  you  have  suggested 
he  will  have  to  repeat  it  all  to  the  Czar  Alexander.  Will  he 
repeat  it  correctly,  or  will  he  choose  to  repeat  it  incorrectly  ? 
I  cannot  tell.  It  is  much  more  natural,  and  I  may  say,  much 
more  simple,  to  have  a  conversation  with  the  Czar  Alexander 
himself  about  so  important  a  question  ;  and  if  your  Majesty 
adopts  this  opinion,  I  shall  undertake  to  prepare  the  way  for 
him." 

"  Well  and  good,"  said  the  emperor,  "  but  remember  that  it 
is  not  as  coming  from  me  you  must  speak.  It  is  as  a  French- 
man that  you  must  address  him,  in  order  that  he  may  obtain  from 
me  a  decision  ensuring  the  stability  of  France  whose  fate 
would  be  uncertain  at  my  death.  As  a  Frenchman  you  could 
say  everything  you  liked.  Joseph,  Lucien  and  all  my  family 
offer  you  a  free  field.  Say  about  them  all  you  like,  they  are 
nothing  for  France.  My  son  even,  but  that  is  useless  to  say, 
would  need  to  be  my  son  over  again,  in  order  to  succeed  peace- 
fully to  the  throne  of  France." 

It  was  late,  I  ventured  however  to  go  to  the  Princess  of 
Tour,  whose  door  was  not  yet  closed.  The  Czar  Alexander 
had  remained  there  longer  than  usual.  He  related  with 
admirable  good  faith  to  the  princess  the  sad  scene  of  that 
morning. 

"Nobody,"  said  he,  "has  a  true  idea  of  that  man's 
character.     What   alarming  measures  he  sometimes  resorts  to, 

1  Les  Chevaliers  du  Cygne,  on  la  Cotir  de  Charlemagne,  is  a  historical  romance  of 
Madame  de  Genlis  in  the  style  of  the  romances  of  chivalry  of  the  eleventh  century. 
The  authoress  endeavoured  to  write,  in  the  guise  of  fiction,  numerous  allusions  to 
the  scenes  of  the  Revolution,  and  in  several  of  her  personages,  she  wished  to  depict 
certain  celebrities  of  her  time.  Count  Romanzoff  had,  it  appears,  been  one  of  her 
models. 


THE  ERFURT  INTERVIEW.  337 

for  other  countries,  he  is  by  his  position  forced  to  take.  We 
do  not  know  how  good  he  is.  You  think  so,  do  you  not,  you 
that  know  him  well  ? " 

"  Sire,  I  have  many  personal  reasons  for,  and  I  always  state 
them  with  great  pleasure.  Dare  I  ask  your  Majesty  if  to- 
morrow morning  you  can  grant  me  an  audience  ?  " 

"To-morrow?  yes,  willingly,  before  or  after  I  have  seen 
M.  de  Vincent.  I  have  a  letter  to  write  to  the  Emperor 
Francis." 

"  After,  sire,  if  you  permit  it.  I  should  be  very  sorry  to 
retard  that  good  work.  The  Emperor  Francis  is  in  great 
need  of  comfort,  and  I  have  no  doubt  that  your  Majesty's 
letter  will  procure  that  for  him." 

"  That  is  at  least  my  intention."  The  Czar  remarked  with 
astonishment  that  it  was  nearly  two  o'clock. 

The  next  day,  before  going  to  the  appointed  audience, 
M.  de  Vincent  called  on  me,  and  I  told  him  how  much 
reason  he  had  to  be  satisfied  with  every  one  in  general,  and 
with  the  Czar  Alexander  in  particular.  His  face  beamed  with 
satisfaction.  In  bidding  me  good  bye,  he  gave  me  an  affec- 
tionate and  grateful  grasp  of  the  hand.  He  set  off  for  Vienna 
immediately,  having  obtained  his  audience,  during  which  I 
weighed  in  my  mind  the  means  I  should  employ  to  discharge 
the  errand  I  had  accepted,  in  such  a  way  as  to  please  every  one  as 
well  as  myself.  I  confess  I  was  frightened  for  Europe  at  the 
idea  of  another  alliance  between  France  and  Russia.  As  for 
me,  it  was  necessary  that  the  idea  of  that  alliance  should  be 
sufficiently  admitted  by  Europe  to  satisfy  Napoleon,  and  that, 
on  the  other  hand,  it  contained  reservations  hindering  its 
application.  All  the  art  I  thought  I  wanted  was  useless  to 
me  with  the  Czar  Alexander. 

At  the  first  word,  he  understood  me,  and  he  understood  me 
precisely  as  I  wished  him  to. 

"  If  it  were  only  a  question  of  myself  I  would  willingly 
give  my  consent ;  but  my  consent  is  not  the  only  one  we  must 
have.  My  mother  has  retained  a  power  over  her  daughters, 
that  I  must  never  question.  I  can  try  to  give  her  certain  advice 
which  it  is  probable  she  may  follow,  but  I  do  not  dare  to  take 
VOL.  I.  Z 


333  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

it  upon  myself  to  say  she  will.  All  that,  inspired  by  a  real 
friendship,  ought  to  satisfy  the  Emperor  Napoleon.  Tell 
him  that  I  shall  be  with  him  in  a  moment." 

"  Sire,  your  Majesty  will  not  forget  that  that  conversation 
ought  to  be  solemn  and  affectionate.  Your  Majesty  will  speak 
of  the  interests  of  Europe  and  of  France.  Europe  requires  that 
the  throne  of  France  be  protected  from  every  storm,  and 
it  is  the  manner  of  reaching  that  great  end  which  your  Majesty 
is  about  to  propose." 

"  That  will  be  my  text.  It  is  a  fertile  field.  I  will  see  you 
this  evening  at  the  Princess  of  Tour's." 

I  informed  the  Emperor  Napoleon  of  the  result  of  my 
interview ;  he  was  delighted  with  the  idea  that  he  would  have 
to  reply  instead  of  asking.  I  had  scarcely  time  to  add  several 
words.  Already  the  Czar  Alexander  dismounted  from  his  horse 
in  the  yard.  The  two  sovereigns  remained  several  hours  to- 
gether, and  all  the  court  was  from  that  moment,  struck  with  the 
familiar  expression  of  friendship  that  existed  between  them  ; 
even  etiquette  seemed  to  be  relaxed  between  them  during  those 
last  days.  An  air  of  harmony  displayed  itself  everywhere,  and 
it  was  also  true  that  they  were  perfectly  happy  The  great 
divorce  question  was  mooted  ;  and  it  was  so  in  a  way  to  furnish 
Napoleon  with  replies  to  all  those  who,  attached  to  the  Empress 
Josephine,  found  in  her  accession  a  guarantee  of  their  personal 
situation. 

Napoleon  was  already  dreaming  of  founding  a  lasting  em- 
pire ;  the  Czar  of  Russia  believed  he  had  bound  Napoleon  to 
himself,  and  flattered  himself  that,  by  his  personal  influence 
he  had  given  to  Russian  policy  the  support  of  him  to  whom 
the  entire  world  rendered  homage,  and  before  the  genius  of 
whom  all  difficulties  vanished.  Thus,  at  the  play,  in  the  presence 
of  all  Erfurt,  he  arose  and  took  the  hand  of  Napoleon,  at  this 
line  of  (Edipe  ; 

"  Eamitie  (T  un  grand  hotntne  est  tin  present  des  dieux."  1 

—{CEdipe  (Voltaire),  Act  I.,  Scene  I.) 

They  then   both  looked  upon  each  other  as  essential   to  their 

1   "  The  friendship  of  a  great  man  is  a  gift  from  the  gods." 


THE  ERFUR  T  INTER  VIE  W.  339 

common  future.  When  the  number  of  days  that  should  occupy 
the  interview  had  passed,  they  separated  in  testifying  the  most 
sincere  regrets,  and  the  most  complete  confidence.  The  last 
morning  that  Napoleon  spent  at  Erfurt,  was  employed  in  seeing 
people.  The  scene  that  his  palace  presented  that  last  day  will 
never  vanish  from  my  memory.  He  was  surrounded  by  princes, 
of  whom  he  had  either  destroyed  the  armies,  or  reduced  the 
dominions,  or  humbled  the  pride.  There  was  no  one  who  dared 
ask  for  anything.  They  simply  wished  to  be  seen,  and  to  be 
seen  the  last  to  be  remembered  by  him.  All  such  humility 
was  without  recompense.  He  noticed  only  the  academicians 
of  Weimar.  It  was  to  them  alone  that  he  spoke,  and  he  desired 
at  the  last  moment  to  leave  with  them  a  new  variety  of 
impression.  He  asked  them  if  there  were  many  ideologists  in 
Germany. 

"Yes,  sire,"  replied  one  of  them,  "  a  sufficiently  large  number." 

"  I  pity  you.  I  have  some  at  Paris.  They  are  dreamers, 
and  dangerous  dreamers.  They  are  all  plain  or  disguised 
materialists. 

"  Gentlemen,"  he  said,  in  raising  his  voice,  "  philosophers 
labour  hard  to  create  systems ;  they  will  search  in  vain  for  a 
better  one  than  that  of  Christianity,  which,  in  reconciling  man 
with  himself  assures  at  the  same  time  public  order  and  the 
tranquillity  of  the  state.  Your  ideologists  destroy  all  illusions, 
and  the  age  of  illusions  is,  for  nations,  as  for  individuals,  the 
age  of  happiness.  I  take  away  with  me  on  leaving  you  a 
thought  that  is  very  precious  to  me,  it  is  that  you  will  preserve 
a  pleasant  remembrance  of  me."  A  few  minutes  after,  he  was 
in  his  carriage,  on  his  way,  as  he  thought,  to  the  conquest  of 
Spain. 

I  subjoin  here,  the  treaty,  such  as  it  was  signed  at  Erfurt. 
A  few  differences  will  be  found  in  the  order  of  the  articles, 
between  the  project  which  the  emperor  had  requested  of  me 
to  draw  up,  and  that  treaty.  The  article  concerning  Wallachia 
and  Moldavia  has  the  appearance  of  being  modified,  and,  never- 
theless the  Emperor  Napoleon,  though  he  had  formally  recognized 
the  union  of  those  two  provinces  with  Russia,  exacted  so  pro- 
found a  secret  on  the  consent  that  he  gave  to  that  union,  that  in 


34o  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLE  YRAND. 

his  thoughts  the  two  articles  had  very  nearly  the  same  sense.  It 
will  be  noticed,  especially  in  this  last  drafting  of  the  treaty, 
that  there  is  no  longer  any  question  of  the  two  articles  that  the 
Emperor  Napoleon  had  introduced  in  the  second,  the  one  by 
which  he  established  himself  as  judge  of  the  motives  that  should 
determine  Russia  to  declare  war  upon  Austria,  the  other  rela- 
tive to  the  march  of  a  body  of  Russian  troops  near  the  Austrian 
frontiers,  under  the  pretext  of  the  position  of  the  cabinet  of 
Saint  Petersburg  with  the  Ottoman  Porte. 


The  Erfurt  Convention,  October  12TH,  1808,  ratified 

on  the  13TH. 

"  H.M.  the  Emperor  of  the  French,  King  of  Italy,  protector  of 
the  Confederation  of  the  Rhine,  &c,  and  H.M.  the  Emperor  of 
Russia,  &c,  wishing  to  render  more  binding  and  for  ever 
durable  the  alliance  which  unites  them,  and  taking  it  upon 
themselves  to  come  to  an  ulterior  understanding,  if  there  should 
be  any  need  of  it,  on  the  new  decisions  to  take,  and  on  the  new 
methods  of  attack  to  be  directed  against  England,  their  common 
enemy  and  the  enemy  of  the  Continent,  have  resolved  to 
establish  in  a  special  convention  the  principles  that  they  have 
determined  to  invariably  follow,  in  all  their  undertakings,  to 
secure  the  restoration  of  peace. 

"  They  have,  to  that  effect  appointed,  namely,  H.M.  the 
Emperor  of  the  French,  &c,  H.  Exc.  M.  Jean  Baptiste  Nom- 
pere  de  Champagny,  Count  of  the  Empire,  &c,  his  Minister  of 
Foreign  Affairs. 

"And  H.M.  the  Czar  of  all  the  Russias,  &c,  H.Exc.  the 
Count  Nicolas  de  Romanzoff,  his  private  counsellor,  actually  a 
member  of  the  Council,  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  &c. 

"  Who  agree  to  that  which  follows  : 

"  Art.  I.— H.M.  the  Emperor  of  the  French,  &c.  and  H.M.  the 
Czar  of  all  the  Russias,  &c,  confirm,  and  inasmuch  as  there 
is  need,  renew  the  alliance  concluded  between  them  at  Tilsit, 
engaging  themselves  not  only  to  abstain  from  making  with  the 
common  enemy  any  separate  peace,  but  also  not  to  enter  with 
her  on  any  negotiation  and  not  to  listen  to  any  of  her  pro- 
positions except  by  mutual  consent. 

"Art.  II. — Thus  resolved  to  remain  inseparably  united  in 
peace  as  in  war,  the  high  contracting  parties  agree  to  name 
plenipotentiaries  to  treat  for  peace  with  England,  and  to  send 


THE  ERFUR  T  INTER  VIE  IV.  34  r 

them  to  that  effect  in  that  town  of  the  Continent  that  England 
shall  designate. 

"  Art.  III. — In  all  the  course  of  the  negotiation,  if  there  should 
be  one,  the  respective  plenipotentiaries  of  the  two  high  contract- 
ing parties  will  ever  act  with  the  most  perfect  harmony,  and 
it  will  not  be  permissible  to  any  one  of  them,  not  only  to 
support,  but  even  to  accept  or  to  approve  of,  against  the 
interests  of  the  other  contracting  party,  any  proposition  or 
request  from  the  English  plenipotentiaries  which,  taken  in 
itself,  and  being  favourable  to  the  interests  of  England,  might 
also  offer   some  advantages  to  one  of  the  contracting  parties. 

"  Art.  IV. — The  basis  of  the  treaty  with  England  will  be 
the  uti  possidetis. 

"  Art.  V. — The  high  contracting  parties  bind  themselves  to 
regard  as  the  absolute  condition  of  peace  with  England  that 
she  recognize  Finland,  Wallachia,  and  Moldavia,  as  forming  a 
part  of  the  Russian  Empire. 

"Art.  VI. — They  likewise  bind  themselves  to  regard  as  an 
absolute  condition  of  peace  that  England  recognize  the  new 
order  of  things  established  by  France  in  Spain. 

"Art.  VII. — The  two  high  contracting  parties  bind  them- 
selves not  to  receive  from  the  enemy  during  the  continuation  of 
the  negotiations  any  proposition,  offer,  or  communication  what- 
ever, without  immediately  reporting  the  same  to  their  respective 
courts,  and  if  the  said  propositions  are  made  at  the  congress 
assembled  for  the  discussion  of  peace,  the  plenipotentiaries  will 
communicate  the  same  to  each  other  respectively. 

"Art.  VIII. — H.M.  the  Czar  of  all  the  Russias  on  account 
of  the  revolutions  and  changes  which  agitate  the  Ottoman 
Empire,  and  leave  no  possibility  of  giving,  and,  consequently, 
no  hope  of  obtaining  sufficient  guarantees  for  the  persons  and 
property  of  the  inhabitants  of  Wallachia  and  Moldavia,  having 
already  extended  the  limits  of  her  empire  to  the  Danube,  on 
that  side,  and  annexed  Wallachia  and  Moldavia  to  her  empire, 
can  only,  on  that  condition,  recognize  the  integrity  of  the 
Ottoman  Empire.  H.M.  the  Emperor  Napoleon  therefore, 
recognizes  the  said  annexation  and  that  the  limits  of  the  Russian 
Empire,  on  that  side,  are  carried  to  the  Danube. 

"Art.  IX. — H.M.  the  Czar  of  all  the  Russias  binds  himself  to 
keep  in  utmost  secrecy  the  preceding  article,  and  to  open,  be 
it  at  Constantinople  or  elsewhere,  negotiations  in  view  of 
obtaining,  in  a  friendly  manner,  if  possible,  the  cession  of  those 
two  provinces.  France  renounces  her  mediation.  The  plenipo- 
tentiaries or  agents  of  the  two  nations  will  agree  on  the  language 
to  use  in  order  not  to  compromise  the  friendly  relations  exist- 


342  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

ing  between  the  French  nation  and  the  Porte,  as  well  as  the 
security  of  the  French  subjects  resident  in  Levantine  ports,  and 
to  prevent  the  Porte  from  throwing  itself  upon  the  protection 
of  England. 

"  Art.  X. — In  case  the  Ottoman  Porte  refuse  the  cession  of 
the  two  provinces,  war  shall  then  be  declared.  The  Emperor 
Napoleon  will  take  no  part  in  it,  and  will  limit  himself  to  em- 
ploying his  good  offices  to  decide  the  Ottoman  Porte ;  but,  if  it 
should  come  to  pass  that  Austria,  or  any  other  power  make 
common  cause  with  the  Ottoman  Empire  in  the  said  war, 
H.M.  the  Emperor  Napoleon  will  make  common  cause  imme- 
diately with  Russia,  such  case  being  one  of  those  foreseen  by 
the  General  Alliance  that  unites  the  two  empires. 

"  In  case  Austria  declared  war  against  France,  the  Czar  of 
Russia  binds  himself  to  declare  war  against  Austria,  and  to 
make  common  cause  with  France. 

"  Art.  XI. — The  high  contracting  parties  bind  themselves 
to  maintain  moreover  the  integrity  of  the  other  possessions  of 
the  Ottoman  Empire,  not  willing  to  make  themselves,  or  to 
suffer  that  there  should  be  made,  any  attempt  against  any 
portion  of  that  empire,  without  their  having  previously  agreed 
to  it. 

"Art.  XII. — If  the  attempts  made  by  the  two  high  contract- 
ing parties  to  bring  about  peace  should  fail,  be  it  that  England 
decline  the  propositions  that  shall  be  made  her,  or  that  the 
negotiations  be  broken,  Their  Imperial  Majesties  shall  meet 
again  within  the  delay  of  one  year,  to  agree  upon  the  mutual 
operations  of  the  war  and  upon  the  methods  or  means  to 
continue  it  with  all  the  resources  of  the  two  empires. 

"Art.  XIII. — The  two  high  contracting  parties,  willing  to 
recognize  the  loyalty  and  the  perseverance  with  which  the  King 
of  Denmark  has  sustained  their  common  cause,  bind  them- 
selves to  procure  him  compensation  for  his  sacrifices  and  to 
recognize  the  acquisitions  he  might  make  in  the  course  of  the 
war  above  alluded  to. 

"Art.  XIV. — The  present  convention  shall  be  held  secret 
during  the  space  of  at  least  ten  years. 

"  Erfurt,  October  12,  1808." 


END   OF   THE   FIFTH    PART. 


Richard  Clay  and  Sons,  Limited, 
london  and  bungay. 


o- 


C  0 


1 


University  of  California 

SOUTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY 

405  Hilgard  Avenue,  Los  Angeles,  CA  90024-1388 

Return  this  material  to  the  library 

from  which  it  was  borrowed. 


03  WINTER  2 HOURS 


CT  n  2  2001 
03  SPRING  2  HOUllS 

APR 17  2MB 


I0OM  11/86  Series  9482 


3  1205  01171  3250 


AA      000174  217    o 


University  of 
Southern  Re 
Library  Fa