Memoirs of the Prince de Talleyrand, Vol. IV (Charles Maurice de Talleyrand (Raphael Ledos de Beaufort, trans.), 1838)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1891 Putnam's edition, translated by Raphael Ledos de Beaufort (https://archive.org/details/memoirsofprinced04tall). Talleyrand's own account, Vol. IV — the Congress of Vienna and the Hundred Days.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

MEMOIRS 


OF   THE 


PRINCE   DE   TALLEYRAND 


777e  price  of  this  book  is  21  -  net,  and 
the  terms  on  which  it  is  supplied  to  the 
bookseller  do  not  admit  of  his  deducting 
any  discount. 


PRINCE   CHARLES-MAURICE    DE   TALLEYRAND,    AMBASSADEUR    A    LONDRES. 


MEMOIRS 


OF    Till 


PRINCE  DE  TALLEYRAND 


EDITED,    WITH    A    PREFACE    AND    NOTES,    BY 

THE    DUC    DE    BROGLIE 

Of  the  French  Academy 


TRANSLATED   BY 

Mrs.  ANGUS    HALL 


VOLUME    IV 


WITH  A    PORTRAIT 


GRIFFITH    FARRAN    AND    CO.,    LIMITED 

NEWBERY   HOUSE,  (HAKIM;  CROSS  ROAD,  LONDON 
\\l>  SYDNEY 

I  89  I 


The  Rights  of  Translation  and  Reproduction  arc  Reserved, 


- 


CONTENTS. 

PART  X.— Confirmed. 

THE   REVOLUTION   OF    1 830 — APPENDIX. 

1830 — 1832. 

The    choice  of  a  sovereign  for  Belgium  still  undecided — Talleyrand  by  a 
bold  stroke  obtains  the  recognition  of  tbe  neutrality  of  that  kingdom 
by  the  Powers — This  measure  is  strongly  supported  by  Lord  Palmerstun 
— The  Prince  of  Orange  very  unpopular  in  Belgium — A  violent  scene 
in  the  Congress  when  M.  Maclagan  brings  his  name  forward  for  the 
throne — Talleyrand  never  wavers  in  his  preference  for  Prince  Leopold 
of  Saxe-Coburg — He  considers  separation  of  Belgium   from   Holland 
of  greater  importance  than  the  choice  of  a   sovereign — The  Due  de 
Nemours  is  proclaimed  King  of  Belgium — Suggestion  to  nominate  the 
Prince  of  Orange  King  of  Poland — Talleyrand's  reply — M.  de  Kriidener 
and   Lord  Ponsonby  accused  of  intriguing  in  favour  of  the  Prince  of 
(  (range — M.  Bresson  for  the  Due  de  Leuchtenberg — France  asks  that 
Lord  Ponsonby  should  be  recalled  as  well  as  M.  Bresson — The  English 
government  refuses — Louis  Philippe  refuses  the  Belgian  crown  for  the 
Due  de  Nemours — A  fierce  onslaught  on  Tallevrand  in  the  Courrier 
Franqais — Great  alarm   everywhere  at  the  generally  unsettled  state  of 
the  Continent — Riots  in  Paris  on  the  anniversary  of  the  Due  de  Berry's 
death — Disturbances  in   Lisbon — Insurrectionary  movement  in  favour 
of  Donna  Maria — M.  Casimir    Perier  succeeds  M.  Lafitte  as  head  of 
the    French    Cabinet — The    Reform    Bill    presented    in    the   House   of 
Commons  by  Lord  John  Russell — Belgian  Deputies  arrive  in  London 
to  offer  the  crown  to  Prince  Leopold  of  Saxe-Coburg — His  conditional 
acceptance — He  is  elected  king  by  a  large  majority — Talleyrand  tries 
to  arouse   interest  in  favour  of  the  Poles — Their  brilliant  victories  in 
Lithuania  excite  great  sympathy  in  France — Lord  Grey,  influenced  by 
Princess     Lieven,    refuses    any    assistance — Private     letter    of     Lord 
Palmerston    respecting    Poland — Revolution    in    Brazil — Dom    Pedro 
and   his    family   take   refuge   on   board    an    English    man-of-war   and 
come   to    England — The   Dutch  troops,  despite  the   armistice,   invade 
Belgium— King  Leopold  appeals  to  France  for  aid — Animated  scene  in 


viii  CONTENTS. 

Parliament  between  Lord  Aberdeen  and  Lord  Grey  respecting  the 
King  of  France — The  King  of  Holland  is  commanded  to  withdraw 
his  troops— Louis  Philippe  wishes  half  the  French  forces  to  remain 
in  Belgium  for  a  time — Private  letter  of  Lord  Palmerston  to  Lord 
Granville  on  this  subject — Comte  Latour-Maubourg  is  sent  to  Brussels 
to  obtain  an  undertaking  from  King  Leopold  that  he  will  destroy 
the  frontier  fortresses — The  "  H.  B."  political  caricatures,  Lord  Palmer- 
ston resents  that  entitled  "  The  lame  leading  the  blind "  (Talley- 
rand and  himself) — Serious  disturbances  in  Paris  on  hearing  that 
the  Poles  have  been  defeated — Violent  discussions  in  the  Chambers 
—Lord  Londonderry  attacks  Talleyrand  hotly  in  the  House  of 
Lords — The  Duke  of  Wellington,  Lord  Holland,  and  others  on  both 
sides  of  the  House  warmly  defend  the  prince — Extract  from  the 
Times — The  Reform  Bill  is  thrown  out  of  the  Lords — The  French 
Peerage  Law  is  passed  by  the  Chamber  of  Deputies — Serious  riots  at 
Lyons — An  army  of  32,000  men  under  Marshal  Soult  and  the  Due 
d'Orleans  is  sent  to  put  them  down — M.  Latour-Maubourg's  mission  to 
Brussels  objected  to  by  the  Opposition  in  Parliament — Explanation 
of  this  step  by  Lord  Grey  and  Lord  Palmerston — Illness  of  General 
Sebastiani — The  Chamber  of  Peers  confirms  the  vote  of  the  Chamber  of 
Deputies  on  the  peerage  question — The  plot  of  the  Rue  des  Prouvaires 
— The  Emperor  of  Russia  sends  Comte  Orloff  to  the  Hague— 
The  French  expedition  to  Ar-cona  complicates  matters  in  London 
—  Comte  Orloff  arrives  in  England — Casimir  Perier  is  attacked  by 
cholera  in  Paris — The  Pope  finally  consents  to  the  liberal  concessions 
demanded  by  France — The  French  troops  to  remain  at  Ancona  until 
the  Austrians  have  evacuated  Papal  territory — The  ratification  of 
Russia  arrives  at  last — Madame  Adelaide  and  others  sound  Talleyrand 
as  to  whether  he  would  take  General  Sebastiani's  place — TalleyrancVs 
reply  to  Baron  Louis — Comte  Orloff  returns  to  Russia — Talleyrand 
asks  for  four  months'  leave  to  recruit  his  health — He  requests  that 
M.  Durant  de  Mareuil  should  replace  him  in  London  during  his  absence 
—Death  of  M.  Casimir  Perier — Account  of  the  meeting  at  Compicgne 
between  the  French  Royal  Family  and  King  Leopold — The  marriage 
is  arranged  between  him  and  the  king's  eldest  daughter — The  rising  in 
La  Vendee  is  put  down — A  serious  outbreak  takes  place  in  Paris  after 
the  funeral  of  General  Lamarque — Graphic  account  by  Madame  Adelaide 
of  the  insurrection  in  Paris — Talleyrand  leaves  London  on  the  20th  of 
June— Arrives  in  Paris  on  the  22nd — Appendix,  containing  some  further 
private  correspondence        .         .  .  Pages  1 — 32S. 


MEMOIRS 

OF   THE 

PRINCE    DE    TALLEYRAND 

PART    X.— Continued. 


vol.  iv.  r> 


PART    X.— Continued. 

THE    REVOLUTION    OF    1830.— APPENDIX. 

1830— 1832. 

The  choice  of  a  sovereign  for  Belgium  still  undecided — Talleyrand  by  a 
bold  stroke  obtains  the  recognition  of  the  neutrality  of  that  kingdom 
by  the  Powers — This  measure  is  strongly  supported  by  Lord  Palmerston 
— The  Prince  of  Orange  very  unpopular  in  Belgium — A  violent  scene 
in  the  Congress  when  M.  Maclagan  brings  his  name  forward  for  the 
throne — Talleyrand  never  wavers  in  his  preference  for  Prince  Leopold 
of  Saxe-Coburg — He  considers  separation  of  Belgium  from  Holland 
of  greater  importance  than  the  choice  of  a  sovereign — The  Due  de 
Nemours  is  proclaimed  King  of  Belgium — Suggestion  to  nominate  the 
Prince  of  Orange  King  of  Poland — Talleyrand's  reply — M.  de  Kriidener 
and  Lord  Ponsonby  accused  of  intriguing  in  favour  of  the  Prince  of 
Orange — M.  Bresson  for  the  Due  de  Leuchtenberg — France  asks  that 
Lord  Ponsonby  should  be  recalled  as  well  as  M.  Bresson — -The  English 
government  refuses — Louis  Philippe  refuses  the  Belgian  crown  for  the 
Due  de  Nemours — A  fierce  onslaught  on  Talleyrand  in  the  Courrier 
Francais — Great  alarm  everywhere  at  the  generally  unsettled  state  of 
the  Continent — Riots  in  Paris  on  the  anniversary  of  the  Due  de  Berry's 
death — Disturbances  in  Lisbon — Insurrectionary  movement  in  favour 
of  Donna  Maria — M.  Casimir  Perier  succeeds  M.  Lafitte  as  head  of 
the  French  Cabinet — The  Reform  Bill  presented  in  the  House  of 
Commons  by  Lord  John  Russell — Belgian  Deputies  arrive  in  London 
to  offer  the  crown  to  Prince  Leopold  of  Saxe-Coburg — His  conditional 
acceptance — He  is  elected  king  by  a  large  majority — Talleyrand  tries 
to  arouse  interest  in  favour  of  the  Poles — Their  brilliant  victories  in 
Lithuania  excite  great  sympathy  in  France — Lord  Grey,  influenced  by 
Princess  Lievcn,  refuses  any  assistance — Private  letter  of  Lord 
Palmerston  respecting  Poland — Revolution  in  Brazil — Dom  Pedro 
and  his  family  take  refuge  on  board  an  English  man-of-war  and 
come  to  England — The  Dutch  troops,  despite  the  armistice,  invade 
Belgium— King  Leopold  appeals  to  France  for  aid — Animated  scene  in 
Parliament  between  Lord  Aberdeen  and  Lord  Grey  respecting  the 
King  of  France — The  King  of  Holland  is  commanded  to  withdraw 
his  troops— Louis  Philippe  wishes  half  the  French  forces  to  remain 
in  Belgium  for  a  time — Private  letter  of  Lord  Palmerston  to  Lord 
Granville  on  this  subject — Comte  Latour-Maubourg  is  sent  to  Brussels 

J!    2 


4  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

to  obtain  an  undertaking  from  King  Leopold  that  he  will  destroy 
the  frontier  fortresses — The  "  H.  B."  political  caricatures,  Lord  Palmer- 
ston  resents  that  entitled  "  The  lame  leading  the  blind "  (Talley- 
rand and  himself) — Serious  disturbances  in  Paris  on  hearing  that 
the  Poles  have  been  defeated — Violent  discussions  in  the  Chambers 
— Lord  Londonderry  attacks  Talleyrand  hotly  in  the  House  of 
Lords — The  Duke  of  Wellington,  Lord  Holland,  and  others  on  both 
sides  of  the  House  warmly  defend  the  prince — Extract  from  the 
Times — The  Reform  Bill  is  thrown  out  of  the  Lords — The  French 
Peerage  Law  is  passed  by  the  Chamber  of  Deputies — Serious  riots  at 
Lyons — An  army  of  32,000  men  under  Marshal  Soult  and  the  Due 
d'Orleans  is  sent  to  put  them  down — M.  Latour-Maubourg's  mission  to 
Brussels  objected  to  by  the  Opposition  in  Parliament — Explanation 
of  this  step  by  Lord  Grey  and  Lord  Palmerston — Illness  of  General 
Sebastiani — The  Chamber  of  Peers  confirms  the  vote  of  the  Chamber  of 
Deputies  on  the  peerage  question — The  plot  of  the  Rue  des  Prouvaires 
— The  Emperor  of  Russia  sends  Comte  Orloff  to  the  Hague — 
The  French  expedition  to  Ancona  complicates  matters  in  London 
—  Comte  Orloff  arrives  in  England — Casimir  Perier  is  attacked  by 
cholera  in  Paris — The  Pope  finally  consents  to  the  liberal  concessions 
demanded  by  France — The  French  troops  to  remain  at  Ancona  until 
the  Austrians  have  evacuated  Papal  territory — The  ratification  of 
Russia  arrives  at  last — Madame  Adelaide  and  others  sound  Talleyrand 
as  to  whether  he  would  take  General  Sebastiani's  place — Talleyrand's 
reply  to  Baron  Louis — Comte  Orloff  returns  to  Russia — -Talleyrand 
asks  for  four  months'  leave  to  recruit  his  health — He  requests  that 
M.  Durant  de  Mareuil  should  replace  him  in  London  during  his  absence 
— Death  of  M.  Casimir  Perier — Account  of  the  meeting  at  Compiegne 
between  the  French  Royal  Family  and  King  Leopold — The  marriage 
is  arranged  between  him  and  the  king's  eldest  daughter — The  rising  in 
La  Vendee  is  put  down — A  serious  outbreak  takes  place  in  Paris  after 
the  funeral  of  General  Lamarque — Graphic  account  by  Madame  Adelaide 
of  the  outbreak  in  Paris — Talleyrand  leaves  London  on  the  20th  of 
June—  Arrives  in  Paris  on  the  22nd — Appendix,  containing  some  further 
private  correspondence. 

In  summing  up  the  various  points  of  Belgian  affairs,  at  the 
beginning  of  January,  1831,  we  were  brought  to  a  standstill, 
first  at  the  Hague  by  the  King  of  the  Netherlands,  who  had 
ended  by  acquiescing  in  the  independence  of  Belgium,  but 
accompanied  his  consent  with  impossible  conditions  as  to 
frontiers  and  the  division  of  the  debt ;  then  at  Brussels  by 
the  Congress,  which  still  advocated  the  reunion  of  Belgium  with 
France,  in  other  words — a  European  war,  or  calling  the  Due  de 
Nemours    to    the    throne,  thereby  securing   the  protection  of 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  5 

France,  and  the  annexation  of  Luxemburg,  which  would  equally 
entail  war  ;  again  at  Paris  by  the  fear  lest  the  choice  ol 
Prince  Leopold  of  Saxc-Coburg  might  appear  in  the  light  of  a 
humiliating  concession  to  England  ;  and  finally  in  London  by 
the  Russian  plenipotentiaries,  who,  while  authorised  by  their 
Sovereign  to  sign  the  Act  which  gave  Belgium  her  independ- 
ence, were  expressly  forbidden  to  consent  to  any  other  selection 
as  sovereign  of  that  country  than  a  prince  of  the  house  of 
Nassau. 

It  was  necessary  to  meet  these  complications  by  a  prompt 
and  bold  stroke.  I  therefore  decided  to  propose  to  the  other 
three  Powers  of  the  Conference  not  to  wait  for  Russia's  refusal 
respecting  the  choice  of  the  sovereign,  as  it  was  not  necessary 
that  the  recognition  should  be  simultaneous  ;  and  Belgium  would 
become  a  kingdom  as  soon  as  four  of  the  great  Powers  had 
recognised  her  as  such.  I  also  insisted  that  no  notice  should  be 
taken  of  the  objections  made  by  the  Dutch  and  Belgians,  and 
wrote  to  Paris1  as  follows  : 

"The  question  now  is  no  longer  one  of  such  and  such  a 
boundary,  or  whether  the  share  of  the  debt  is  to  be  large  or 
small  ;  it  no  longer  rests  with  the  house  of  Nassau  or  that  of 
Bavaria — it  is  solely  a  question  of  a  martial  or  a  pacific  system. 
The  former  will  inevitably  have  whatever  it  wants,  either  the 
re-union  of  Belgium  with  France,  or  the  acceptance  of  the 
choice  of  M.  le  Due  de  Nemours.  The  latter  will  be  satisfied 
with  the  selection  of  the  Prince  of  Naples,  which  the  Conference 
is  also  inclined  to  adopt.  But  it  is  very  important  that  the 
French  Government,  when  coming  to  a  decision,  should  ascertain 
the  inclinations  of  Belgium  on  this  point.  If  M.  de  Celles  is 
favorable  to  this  view,  he  might  be  very  useful  in  furthering 
arrangements.  Then  again,  our  Ministry  must  be  prepared  to 
contend  with  the  Mauguin  and  Lamarque  party  as  to  the 
Neapolitan  scheme  ;  they  are  certain  to  raise  some  objections 
either  in  Brussels  or  Paris.  If,  in  order  to  embarrass  us,  the 
intriguers  in  Paris  cause  M.  le  Due  de  Nemours  to  be  proclaimed, 
a  formal  refusal  on  the  part  of  the  king  puts  us  perfectly 
straight  with  respect  to  the  Powers.  The  dilatory  answer  men- 
tioned in  the  despatch  of  the  2nd,  which  I  have  just  received,  will 
I  fear  deal  a  very  serious  blow  to  the  confidence  of  the  cabinets. 

1   Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  Madame  Adelaide,  January  3rd,  1831. 


6  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

Russia,  ever  ready  to  take  umbrage  at  the  policy  of  England, 
will  profit  by  this  circumstance  to  push  social  hostilities  (which 
here  exercise  an  immense  influence)  to  extremes.  If  therefore 
the  king,  as  I  think,  believes  himself  strong  enough  to  preserve 
peace,  he  must  give  an  absolute  refusal  respecting  the  Due  de 
Nemours.  It  seems  to  me  that  there  is  a  very  erroneous 
opinion  abroad  in  France,  viz. :  that  we  could  keep  peace  with 
England,  while  making  war  with  the  rest  of  the  Continent  ;  it 
is  certain  that  enormous  sacrifices,  quite  incompatible  with  our 
dignity,  would  be  required,  and  would  even  then  probably  be 
insufficient  to  make  her  impartial.  M.  de  Flahaut,  who  did  not 
believe  this  on  his  arrival  here,  is  now  convinced  of  its  truth.1 
It  now  remains  to  be  seen,  whether  France  is  in  a  position  to 
make  war  with  the  Continent  :  I  believe  she  is,  but  is  she  able 
to  make  war  with  the  Continent  and  with  England  ?  I  do  not 
think  so.  When  I  read  our  newspapers  and  our  parliament- 
ary discussions,  I  am  dismayed  at  the  marvellous  ignorance> 
prejudice,  and  blind  presumption  which  pervade  them.  It  is 
noticed  here  that  the  tone  of  our  discussions  changes  ;  we  are 
blamed  for  this,  our  effervescence  causes  uneasiness,  but  they  do 
not  fear  us. 

"  I  feel  it  is  my  duty  not  to  conceal  all  this.  I  could  add  a 
great  deal  more  as  to  the  difficulty  of  a  position,  in  which  one  is, 
when  in  charge  of  the  affairs  of  a  kingdom  in  a  state  of  ferment 
and  amongst  people  who  are  still  in  the  old  groove.  My  devotion; 
however,  gives  me  courage  to  contend  against  the  old  English 
jealousy,  ever  ready  to  crop  up,  without  any  hope  of  pleasing 
my  own  country. 

"  But  the  Due  de  Nemours  once  set  aside,  if  Belgium  persists 
in  her  choice  of  him  or  of  the  Due  de  Leuchtenberg,  it  will  be 
necessary  to  recall  the  English  and  French  Commissioners,  who 
are  in  Brussels,  and  only  receive  jointly  whatever  communications, 
the  Belgians  may  wish  to  make.  If  they  go  to  war  with 
Holland,  or  Holland  with  them,  as  no  one  wants  war  at  his  own 
door,  it  will  be  necessary  to  blockade  the  ports  of  whichever 
country  attacks  the  other.  That  done,  we  can  rest  quietly,  and 
leave  it  to  time  to  bring  about  some  reasonable  combina- 
tion  " 

I  believed  these  observations  had   produced   some   effect  in 
Paris,  on  receiving  the  following  reply  from  General  Sebastiani,. 
dated  January  5th  : — 

1  It  will  be  remembered  that  the  Comte  de  Flahaut  had  been  sent  to  London  by- 
General  Sebastiani  to  propose  a  scheme  for  the  division  of  Belgium  to  M.  de  Talley- 
rand.    (See  vol.  iii.  p.  284.) 


the  revolution  of  1830.  7 

Mon  Prince.. 

We  have  never  wavered  as  to  the  side  we  should  take- 
respecting  Belgium.  We  should  unhesitatingly  refuse,  both  her 
re-union  with  France,  and  the  offer  of  the  crown  to  M.  le  Due  de 
Nemours.  It  is  true,  we  did  think  that  some  arrangement  other 
than  her  independence,  would  more  certainly  secure  the  peace  of 
Europe,  but  we  must  wait  till  the  Great  Powers  arc  convinced 
of  this,  especially  England.  However  far  removed  that  period 
may  be,  we  are  prepared  to  await  it. 

The  King  of  the  French  will  set  an  example  of  disinterested- 
ness and  political  loyalty,  that  will  serve  as  a  model.  This  he 
is  firmly  resolved  upon,  mon  Prince,  and  he  desires  me  to  tell 
you  so.  You  can  therefore  make  positive  engagements  on  this. 
head  with  the  Powers,  without  fear  that  anything  will  shake  his 
resolution.  Let  peace,  mon  Prince,  be  the  object  of  your 
labours,  and  after  this  declaration  there  is  nothing  I  think  that 
ought  to  compromise  its  preservation.  Our  language  towards 
the  Belgians  has  always  been  clear  and  positive.  I  trust  there- 
fore that  they  will  not  commit  any  follies. 

The  king's  confidence  in  your  sagacity  and  devotion  to  his 
service  is  so  great,  that  he  trusts  to  you  to  take  whatever  course 
is  most  conducive  to  the  dignity  of  his  crown  and  the  interests 
of  your  country. 

Feeling  assured  by  the  declarations  contained  in  this  letter, 
that  I  might  count  on  the  king's  support  (in  which  I  was 
wrong,  as  will  be  seen),  I  was  less  disturbed  by  the  flights  of 
fancy  in  which  General  Sebastiani  and  the  other  Ministers 
indulged,  and  still  less,  I  must  confess,  by  the  views  of  the  Bel- 
gians, which  one  of  the  Commissioners  at  the  Conference  in 
Brussels,  M.  Bresson,  certainly  did  not  depict  in  very  favourable 
colours  to  me.  I  did  not  therefore  at  all  expect  the  surprise  they 
had  prepared  for  us  in  that  quarter. 

A  new  candidate  for  the  Belgian  throne  had  suddenly  arisen 
in  Brussels,  in  the  person  of  Prince  Otto  of  Bavaria,  aged  four- 
teen. General  Sebastiani,  who  had  been  informed  of  this  by  M. 
Bresson,  had  at  once  replied  that  the  French  Government  would 
have  no  objection  to  the  selection  of  Prince  Otto,  provided  it 
was  quite  understood  that  he  would  marry  a  daughter  of  the 
King  of  the  French.  M.  Bresson  had  submitted  General  Sebas- 
tiani's  letter   to   the   principal   members   of  the   Congress,  who 


8  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

hastened  to  publish,  print  and  placard  it,  in  the  streets  of  Brussels. 
Such  a  communication  assumed  a  character  of  great  importance, 
when  made  by  an  agent  who  represented  at  once,  the  Conference 
and  the  French  Government.1 

As  soon  as  I  knew  that  there  was  a  question  of  Prince  Otto, 
I  wrote  to  Paris  on  the  6th  January  that  he  would  not  be 
assented  to  by  any  one  : — 2 

"  This  prince,"  I  said,  "  can  only  come  to  the  throne  sur- 
rounded by  counsellors,  who,  by  their  number  and  their  connec- 
tions, inspire  the  Cabinets  of  Europe  with  no  confidence  whatever.3 
We  have  not  yet  received  news  of  the  decision  which  has  been 
come  to,  but  when  the  last  courier  left,  it  was  considered  prob- 
able that  the  choice  would  fall  on  him,4  and  as  he  is  only  fourteen 
years  old,  M.  de  Merode  will  be  the  one  who  will  be  placed 
beside  him,  to  act  as  Regent. 

"  This  great  step  has  been  taken  with  a  degree  of  thought- 
lessness that  appears  extraordinary  to  every  one.  In  the  first 
place,  it  is  by  no  means  certain  that  the  King  of  Bavaria  will 
consent  to  it  ;  secondly,  it  is  unwise  5  to  place  a  new  kingdom  in 
the  hands  of  a  child  ;  thirdly,  a  new  dynasty  which  begins  with 
a  regency  is  very  liable  to  be  surrounded  by  intrigues,  and 
fourthly,  M.  de  Merode  has  relations  in  France  who  would  pro- 
bably create  dissension  among  several  of  the  powers." 

Three  days  later,  on  the  9th  January,  when  the  details  of 
what  had  taken  place  in  Brussels  became  known  to  the  Con- 

1  In  addition  to  this  publication,  M.  le  Comte  d'Arschot  had  read  to  the 
Congress  on  January  8th,  two  letters  from  Messrs.  Gendebien  and  Rogier,  in  which 
the  Belgian  envoys  at  Paris  said  that  M.  Sebastiani  had  given  them  a  formal  promise 
to  recognize  Prince  Otto,  who  would  marry  Princess  Marie  d' Orleans  (see  the  debates 
of  January  nth).  This  candidature  of  Prince  Otto  had  no  results.  The  party  which 
supported  him  very  soon  substituted  the  Due  de  Leuchtenberg  in  his  place. 

2  Prince  Talleyrand  to  Comte  Sebastiani. — This  letter  is  dated  January  7th  in  the 
text  of  the  archives.  We  shall  continue  as  heretofore  to  indicate  the  variation  in  the 
two  texts.  It  will  be  seen  that  M.  de  Talleyrand  has  generally  only  inserted  portions 
of  his  correspondence  with  M.  Sebastiani.  He  did  not  adopt  our  method  of  repro- 
ducing in  a  note  the  actual  text  of  the  dispatches,  and  we  have  kept  to  the  existing 
variations  in  the  passages-noted.     The  breaks  will  indicate  the  omissions. 

i  Var. :  .  .  .  .  a  Bntxelles ;  on  s'occupe  de  /aire  un  rot  qui  vraisemblablcment 
n' ' anra  Vassentiment  de  personne,  s'il  ne  doit  monter  sur  le  trone,  qu'entoure  des 
conseillers,  qui  par  leurs  noms,  etc.  =  in  Brussels ;  they  occupy  themselves  in 
making  a  king  who  probably  will  not  have  the  sanction  of  any  one,  if  he  only  mounts 
the  throne  surrounded  by  Counsellors,  who  by  their  names — &c. 

4  Var.  :  Sur  le  jeune  prince  Othon  de  Baviere  qui  deja  etait  destine  au  trone  de 
la    Grece.    =    on   the  young  Prince  Otto   of   Bavaria    who   was   already  destined 

for  the  throne  of  Greece. 

5  Var.  :  pas  tres  vraisemblable  =  not  very  likely. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  9 

fercnce,  I  renewed,  in  my  despatches  to  Paris,  the  disapprobation 
expressed  in  London  at  the  manner  in  which  this  affair  had  been 
carried  on.  I  did  not  stop  there,  but  wrote  to  Madame  Adelaide, 
the  king's  sister,  what  I  wished  her  to  communicate  to  his 
majesty  : — 

"  I  have  not  troubled  Mademoiselle  lately  with  all  my 
worries.  To  say  the  truth,  I  have  been  all  the  more  pained  by 
seeing  the  very  grave  injury  that  is  being  done  to  the  progress 
of  affairs,  distrust  increases  visibly,  and  it  requires  great  efforts, 
and  will  require  all  the  confidence  which  everyone  here  is  dis- 
posed to  show  me,  to  preserve  unchanged  the  position  of  the 
French  Ambassador.  My  own  feelings  are  of  little  consequence  ; 
but  I  am  keenly  alive  to  anything  that  may  injure  the  king's 
service.  I  will  give  Mademoiselle  an  example.  It  was  through  the 
corps  diplomatique  that  I  heard  of  the  letter placarded  at  Brussels. 
I  was  greatly  embarrassed  at  so  positive  a  fact,  and  one  which 
takes  from  my  words  the  credit  so  essential  to  them.  Any  one 
else  in  a  similar  position  would  undoubtedly  have  quitted  his 
post,  and  the  members  of  the  Conference,  who  dread  my  leaving, 
have  several  times  declared  to  me  that  my  departure  would  be 
the  signal  for  a  rupture.  I  have  therefore  remained,  actuated  by 
the  desire  not  to  allow  any  personal  consideration  to  interfere 
with  the  course  of  affairs,  and  feeling  also  that  being  Made- 
moiselle's ambassador  she  would  be  pained  if  I  thus  left  the 
place  where  she  wished  me  to  be.  But  I  could  not  be  of  service 
here,  unless  means  are  found  to  give  all  necessary  weight  to  my 
words,  and  to  satisfy  the  Powers  here  assembled.  It  appears 
from  the  papers,  for  the  despatches  from  Paris  do  not  mention  it, 
that  M.  Bresson  has,  without  authority,  caused  General  Sebas- 
tiani's  letter  to  be  placarded.  I  therefore  ask  that  the  imprudent 
zeal  of  M.  Bresson  should  be  censured,  that  he  should  be  sent 
back  to  his  post  in  London,  and  that  I  may  be  authorized  to  de- 
clare that  the  French  Cabinet  has  no  intention  of  separating 
itself  in  the  Belgian  question  from  the  course  adopted  by  the 
Great  Powers.  I  should  also  like  my  despatches  to  be  more 
carefully  read,  so  that  simple  propositions  are  not  mistaken  for 
absolute  decisions.  This  would  obviate  my  being  written  to, 
that  the  protocol,  which  never  existed,  is  coloured  with  partiality. 
It  is  necessary  that  the  Belgian  question  should  be  entrusted  en- 
tirely to  the  Conference,  otherwise  we  shall  always  be  accused  of 
playing  a  double  game.  The  king  will  thereby  be  the  gainer,  as 
he  will  no  longer  be  importuned  by  the  intrigues  of  the  Belgians, 
who  are  much  too  active  in  Paris.  .  .  ." 


io  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

The  members  of  the  Conference,  reassured  by  the  very  dis- 
tinct declarations  I  was  bound  to  give  them,  on  the  subject  of 
Prince  Otto  of  Bavaria,  signed  at  my  request  protocol  No.  9. 
In  this  (setting  aside  the  question  of  the  prince  as  if  it  did  not 
exist  as  far  as  we  were  concerned)  we,  in  the  firmest  manner 
possible,  invited  the  King  of  the  Netherlands,  on  the  one  hand,  to 
raise  the  blockade  of  the  port  of  Antwerp,  which  was  a  chief 
cause  of  irritation  to  the  Belgians,  and  on  the  other,  requested 
the  Belgians  to  cease  the  hostilities  they  were  keeping  up  in  the 
environs  of  Maastricht. 

I  also  insisted  at  Paris,  that  Lord  Ponsonby  should  be  allowed 
to  make  all  possible  attempts  at  Brussels  in  favour  of  the  Princes 
of  Nassau,  being  convinced  that  the  failure  of  these  attempts 
would  induce  the  English  Government  to  still  further  espouse 
the  cause  of  the  Prince  of  Saxe-Coburg,  who  in  my  estimation 
still  remained  the  candidate  most  to  be  preferred.  The  comite 
diplomatique  of  the  Brussels  Congress,  had  deputed  several  of  their 
members  to  proceed  to  Paris  and  London  to  arrange  with  us  as 
to  which  prince  would  be  most  agreeable  to  us.  I  counted  on 
this  deputation  to  aid  us  in  making  a  reasonable  choice,  and  was 
not  deceived  in  that  expectation.  From  that  moment  the  most 
able  man  of  the  deputation,  M.  van  de  Weyer,  entered  into  cor- 
respondence with  the  Prince  of  Coburg,  and  ably  supported  him 
in  Brussels,  in  spite  of  all  the  incidents  which  obstructed  the 
prince's  candidature. 

I  tried  to  alleviate  the  anxieties  that  were  apparent  every 
day  from  Paris,  by  writing  to  Mademoiselle  on  the  12th 
January : — 

"  I  have  not  written  for  the  last  few  days  to  Mademoiselle, 
because  I  wished  to  answer  when  fully  cognizant  of  the  matter. 
Mademoiselle  has  had  the  goodness  to  ask  my  advice' ;  it  is  im- 
possible lor  me  to  reply  categorically  respecting  a  state  of  affairs 
which  is  not  merely  very  complicated,  but  which  changes  from 
hour  to  hour.  The  dilatoriness  of  the  English,  the  vacillation  of  the 
Belgians,  the  obstinacy  of  the  Dutch,  and  the  necessity  of  having 
to  treat  with  people  who  only  acquiesce  unwillingly  in  concessions 
opposed  to  their  inclinations,  and  often  to  their  interests,  makes 
everything  difficult.  It  is  often  necessary  to  begin  again  the 
next  morning   that  which  had   been  definitely  decided  upon  the 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  11 

evening  before  ;  fresh  arguments  have  to  be  brought  forward  to 
efface  the  effect  of  a  letter  from  Lord  Ponsonby,  who  does  not 
always  take  the  same  views  as  M.  Bresson.  The  presence  and 
influence  of  the  Prince  of  Orange,  and  the  countenance  given  to 
him  by  Madame  de  Lieven,  Lord  Grey's  particular  friend  :  such 
are  the  obstacles  that  constantly  arise,  and  which  would  discour- 
age a  zeal  and  affection  less  sincere  and  ardent  than  I  possess. 
I  do  not  see  that  there  is  any  practical  advice  that  I  can 
give  at  this  moment.  The  king's  conduct  has  been  admir- 
able throughout  ;  I  ask  that  this  cautious  attitude  may  be  con- 
tinued for  a  few  days  longer.  I  believe  that  during  this  short 
delay,  the  English  Government  will  be  further  undeceived  as  to 
the  Prince  of  Orange's  chances  in  Belgium,  and  then  we  shall  be 
in  a  position  to  support  with  advantage  and  authority,  either 
the  Prince  of  Bavaria  or  the  Prince  of  Naples,  but  especially  the 
latter." 

On  January  13th  I  again  wrote  to  her  : — 

"  I  can  well  understand  that  the  dilatoriness  of  the  London 
Conference  is  displeasing  to  Mademoiselle  ;  I  venture  to  say 
that  I  am  no  less  vexed  thereat,  although  I  am  not  beset,  like 
the  king,  with  all  the  importunities  and  agitations  of  political 
wire-pullers,  so  active  with  us,  and  so  obstructive  to  our  Minis- 
ters. The  English  Cabinet  never  hurries  itself  about  anything 
for  it  has  no  impatient  demands  to  satisfy.  In  Paris  we  only 
think  of  pushing  on  the  Government;  here  they  only  think  of 
holding  it  back.  What  also  greatly  retard  our  progress  and 
take  up  a  great  deal  of  time  in  explanations  of  all  kinds,  are 
the  communications  made  and  published  by  the  Belgians.1  It 
is  necessary  to  explain  more  or  less  fully  all  the  utterances 
which  they  make  in  public,  and  repair,  as  far  as  possible,  the 
faults  these  political  debutants  commit  every  day.  The  English 
Cabinet  wishes  the  Belgian  question  settled  before  the  3rd  of 
April.  The  king  will  have  seen  by  protocol  No.  9,  that,  despite 
obstacles,  we  are  arriving  at  some  results,  and  that  all  parties 
are  following  suit.  There  is  no  Conference  to-day,  I  am  there- 
fore going  down  to  Brighton  to  pay  my  respects  to  the  king, 
and  get  a  breath  of  fresh  air.  .  .  ." 

On  my  return  from  Brighton  I  had  a  long  interview  with 
Lord  Grey  ;  I  sent  the  account  of  it  to  Paris  on  the  17th  of 
January  2 : — 

1  An  allusion  to  various  facts  that  had  occurred-in  Brussels,  (see  page  8,  also  page 
19)  the  Sebastiani-Rogier  incident. 

2  Prince  Talleyrand  (0  General  Sebastiani.     Official  despatch  already  published. 


12  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

" .  .  .1  have  had  a  long  conversation  this  morning  with  Lord 
Grey.  I  was  able  to  be  very  explicit  with  him,  being  authorised 
to  do  so  by  the  letter  you  did  me  the  honour  to  write  on  the  14th 
of  this  month,  and  in  consequence  of  information  I  have  obtained 
here,  which  has  shown  me  that  the  affairs  of  the  Prince  of  Orange 
were  less  settled  than  the  English  Government  is  pleased  to 
imagine.  I  told  Lord  Grey  that  the  delays  had  changed  public 
opinion  ;  that  the  Prince  of  Orange's  party  was  less  strong  than 
they  fancied  ;  that  the  Catholics  did  not  want  and  would  never 
have  him  ;  that  those  who  desired  the  re-union  with  France 
were  against  him  ;  that  to  follow  the  direction  now  taken  would 
inevitably  end  in  civil  war  ;  that  a  civil  war  in  Belgium  affected 
France  too  closely  not  to  complicate  all  other  questions  ;  that  it 
was  absolutely  necessary  to  come  to  some  decision  as  to  a 
sovereign  ;  that  this  sovereign  must  be  a  Catholic,  and  that  the 
choice  rested  between  Prince  John  of  Saxony,  Prince  Otto  of 
Bavaria,  and  Prince  Ferdinand  of  Naples.1 

"  Lord  Grey  then  replied  that  they  had  thought  it  expedient 
to  let  the  Prince  of  Orange  have  every  possible  chance,  so 
that  having  once  failed,  Russia  would  no  longer  have  him  to 
oppose  to  us,  and  would  agree  to  side  with  us  ;  that  as  to  the 
Prince  of  Bavaria,  he  could  not  understand  why  we  did  not  prefer 
the  king's  brother,  Prince  Charles.  '  Because,'  I  replied,  '  he  was 
strongly  opposed  to  the  last  revolution  in  France,  and  we  do 
not  want  to  have  a  prince  near  us  who  is  inclined  to  take  part 
in  everything  that  anti-French  politics  might  concoct.'  '  But 
Prince  Otto  of  Bavaria  is  too  young,'  objected  Lord  Grey  ;  'the 
Government  would  have  to  be  administered  by  a  Regency,  and 
who  would  be  the  Regents  ?  Some  of  those  agitators  of  whom 
we  have  so  much  cause  to  complain  ! '  '  Why  not  then  choose  the 
Prince  of  Naples  ? '  I  replied,  '  he  has  not  this  drawback,  as  he  is 
eighteen.'  'He  is  only  seventeen,'  2  he  answered,  'and  besides, 
he  is  too  nearly  allied  to  us  not  to  complicate  matters  with  Par- 
liament.' I  then  remarked  to  Lord  Grey  that  this  was  no  real 
difficulty,  for  a  similar  objection  might  have  been  made  when 
there  was  a  question  of  Prince  Leopold  of  Saxe  Coburg,  and 
that  I  had  deemed  it  no  obstacle.  Moreover,  it  was  our  desire 
to  act  in  concert  with  England,  but  it  was  absolutely  necessary 
for  us  to  break  through  the  dangerous  position  in  which  Belgium, 
had  placed  Europe,3  and  especially  France ;  that  whatever 
choice  was  made  by  them  and  by  us  would  certainly  be  adopted, 

1  Charles  Ferdinand,  Prince  of  Capua.     He  is  generally  known  under  the  name 
of  Prince  Charles. 

2  Prince  Charles  of  Naples  was  born  October  ioth,  1811. 

3  Var.  :  l'Europe  en  general  =  Europe  in  general. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  13 

but  that  to  accomplish  this,  mutual  concessions  were  necessary. 
'  The  reasons  you  give  for  refusing  the  Princes  of  Naples  and 
Bavaria,'  I  said  in  conclusion,  '  do  not  appear  to  me  sufficient, 
and  if  Europe  is  troubled  by  such  motives  it  will  not  reproach 
us.' 

"  The  impression  I  received  from  this  long  conversation  was, 
that,  the  chances  of  the  Prince  of  Orange  once  gone,  the  choice 
would  be  limited  to  the  three  houses  I  have  named  above.  My 
efforts  will  be  centred  on  the  Prince  of  Naples  ;  but  in  order  to 
keep  my  position  with  regard  to  the  members  of  the  Conference, 
I  must  allow  the  combination  in  favour  of  the  Prince  of  Orange 
to  exhaust  itself." 

At  the  same  time,  or  rather  I  should  say  on  the  top  of  this 
very  complicated  question  of  the  selection  of  a  future  sovereign 
for  Belgium,  there  was  another  even  more  immediately  threaten- 
ing, namely,  the  renewal  of  hostilities  between  the  Dutch  and 
the  Belgians,  which  would  inevitably  involve  a  general  European 
war.     The  King  of  Holland,  who,  as  has  been  already  stated, 
desired  war  above  all  things,  hoping  that  it  might  lead  to  the 
restoration  of  his  government  in  Belgium,  worked  with  untiring 
obstinacy   to  bring  it  about.     By  blockading  the  Scheldt,  and 
the  port  of  Antwerp,  he  put  a  stop  to  all  commerce  in  Belgium, 
and  thus  caused  extreme  irritation  among  the  Belgians,  who  as 
an  act  of  reprisal  besieged  the  town  of  Maestricht  which  was 
only  occupied  by  a  weak  Dutch  garrison.     Both  these  acts  were 
in  direct  contravention  to  the  armistice  made  under  the  auspices 
of  the   Conference.     We  had  therefore  notified  to  the  King  of 
Holland,  by  a  protocol,  that  he  must  raise  the  blockade  of  the 
Scheldt  not  later  than  January  20th,  and  to  the  Belgians  that 
they  must  cease  hostilities  round  Maestricht.1      So  far  neither 
one  side  nor  the  other  had  obeyed.     The  King  of  Holland  had 
ordered  his  troops  to  march  on  Maestricht,  and  Prussia  seemed 
quite  ready  to  aid  him  in  this  enterprise.     The  Bonapartist  and 
republican  party  in  Brussels   (who  had  taken  advantage  of  the 
irritation  caused  by  the   blockade  of   the   Scheldt  to  provoke 
hostilities  at  Maestricht)  only  waited  for  the  commencement  ot 
the  struggle  in  order  to  claim  the  aid  of  France,  cherishing  the 


*t>t> 


hope,  equally  with  the  King  of  Holland,  though  with  another 

1  Protocol  of  January  9th,  1831. 


]4  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND 

aim,  that  a  general  war  would  bring  about  the  overthrow  of  the 
French  Government  and  the  reunion  of  Belgium  and  France 
under  a  republic. 

It  was  imperative  to  provide  against  such  dangers.  The 
Conference  renewed  the  formal  notification  to  the  King  of 
Holland  to  raise  the  blockade  of  the  Scheldt,  and  threatened 
the  Belgians  with  a  blockade  of  all  their  ports  by  an  Anglo- 
French  squadron,  if  they  did  not  cease  their  attempts  on 
Maestricht.  It  had  been  proposed  by  some  members  of  the 
Conference  to  employ  the  Prussian  army  to  prevent  the  march 
of  the  Belgians  on  Maestricht  ;  this  I  peremptorily  opposed,  and 
so  obtained  the  adoption  of  the  threat  to  blockade  the  Belgian 
ports.  Here  I  found  the  advantage  of  my  having  already 
proposed  this  as  regards  the  Dutch  ports,  when  it  was  a 
question  of  forcing  King  William  to  raise  the  blockade  of 
Antwerp,  and  it  was  my  intention  to  turn  it  to  account  again, 
if  by  the  20th  January,  our  protocol  of  the  9th  had  not  been 
carried  out. 

But  all  these  measures  were  only  temporary  remedies  to 
secure  us  from  permanent  dangers.  For  several  days  I  had 
thought  over  a  counter-stroke  which  I  considered  would  be 
decisive,  inasmuch  as  it  would  put  an  end  to  the  hopes  of  the 
revolutionary  party  in  Belgium  and  France,  as  well  as  to  the  reac- 
tionary attempts  of  the  King  of  Holland  :  this  was,  a  declaration 
by  the  Powers  of  the  neutrality  of  Belgium.  I  submitted  it  to 
the  Conference  at  the  sitting  of  the  20th  of  January,  and  had  the 
satisfaction  of  obtaining  its  adoption,  and  insertion  in  the  pro- 
tocol of  that  day.1     The  account  of  this  sitting,  which  I  sent  to 

1  The  protocol  of  January  20th  contained  two  series  of  decisions.  It  fixed  the 
limits  of  Belgium  and  Holland  on  the  basis  of  the  statu  quo  of  1790  ;  it  then  pro- 
claimed the  neutrality  of  the  new  state  in  the  following  terms  : 

"  The  plenipotentiaries  .  .  .  are  unanimously  agreed  that  the  five  Powers  deem  it 
due  to  their  own  interests,  to  their  union,  to  the  tranquillity  of  Europe,  and  to  the 
accomplishment  of  the  views  recorded  in  their  protocol  of  December  20th,  to  make  a 
solemn  manifestation  and  striking  proof  of  their  firm  determination  not  to  seek  (in 
any  of  the  arrangements  respecting  Belgium,  or  under  any  circumstances  that  may 
still  arise)  any  increase  of  territory,  any  exclusive  influence,  or  any  isolated  advantage, 
and  to  give  to  that  country  itself,  as  well  as  to  the  states  which  surround  it,  the 
strongest  guarantees  for  peace  and  security.  In  consequence  of  these  resolutions,  and 
aftei  careful  consideration,  the  plenipotentiaries  have  decided  to  add  the  following  to 
the  preceding  articles  : 

"Art.  5th. — Belgium,  within  the  limits  arranged  and  defined  according  to  the 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  15 

Paris  on   the   21st    January,  will  show  the  importance  of    the 
results  I  had  obtained. 

The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  General  Sebastiani. 

M.  Le   Comte, 

I  have  the  honour  to  transmit  herewith  the  protocol 
of  our  Conference  yesterday.  By  it  you  will  see  that, 
following  up  the  idea  I  expressed  to  you  in  my  despatch  No.  70 
of  the  10th  of  this  month,  we  have  succeeded  in  procuring 
the  recognition  in  principle  of  the  neutrality  of  Belgium  by  the 
plenipotentiaries.  I  was  strongly  supported  in  this  by  Lord 
Palmerston,  whom  I  always  find  very  straightforward,  and  of  a 
really  pacific  disposition. 

I  need  hardly  tell  you  that  the  struggle  has  been  long  and 
difficult.  The  importance  of  this  decision  was  fully  felt  by  all 
the  members  of  the  Conference,  and  in  consequence,  our  sitting 
lasted  eight  hours  and  a  half. 

The  recognition  of  the  neutrality  of  Belgium  places  that 
country  in  the  same  position  as  Switzerland,  and  consequently 
upsets  the  political  system  adopted  by  the  Powers  in  181 5,  out 
of"  hatred  to  France.  The  thirteen  fortresses  of  Belgium,  by 
means  of  which  our  northern  frontier  was  perpetually  threatened, 
will  fall,  so  to  speak,  in  consequence  of  this  resolution,  and  we 
shall  henceforth  be  free  from  troublesome  obstructions.  The 
humiliating  conditions  proposed  in  181 5  caused  me  to  retire  at 
that  time  from  public  affairs,  and  I  confess  that  it  is  gratifying 
to  me  now  to  have  been  able  to  assist  in  retrieving  the  position 
of  France  in  this  respect. 

You  will  agree  with  me,  M.  le  Comte,  as  to  the  immensex 
advantage  that  this  resolution  will  afford  to  the  maintenance  of 
peace.  The  Belgians,  finding  themselves  isolated,  and  at  liberty 
to  choose  a  form  of  government  in  accordance  with  their 
traditions  and  customs,  will  cease  troubling  Europe,  and  will 
without  doubt  become  easier  to  manage  when  they  know  that 
their  follies  can  only  recoil  on  themselves.  As  to  France,  1 
have  reason  to  hope  that  she  will  in  this  find  a  brilliant  satis- 
faction for  the  past,  and  a  pledge  of  security  for  the  future. 

basis  laid  clown  in  Articles  1,  2,  and  4  of  the  present  protocol,  will  form  a  neutral 
state  in  perpetuity.  The  five  Powers  guarantee  her  this  perpetual  neutrality,  as  well 
as  the  integrity  and  inviolability  of  her  territory  within  the  above-mentioned  limits 

"Art.  6th. — Belgium  will  be  reciprocally  bound  to  observe  the  same  neutrality 
towards  all  the  other  states,  and  not  to  make  any  attempt  to  disturb  their  interior  or 
exterior  tranquillity." 

1  Suppressed  in  the  text  of  the  Archives. 


16  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

The  difficulties  I  experienced  during  the  discussion  were 
more  especially  with  reference  to  the  latter  part  of  the  protocol, 
in  which  I  had  inserted  that  other  countries  would  be  at  liberty 
to  join  in  the  recognized  neutrality  of  Belgium.  I  thought  that 
this  would,  later  on,  furnish  the  best  possible  solution  of  the 
thorny  question  of  the  duchy  of  Luxemburg.  The  Prussian 
minister  foreseeing  the  same  result,  resisted  for  a  long  time;  but, 
in  the  end  I  carried  my  point,  and  the  paragraph  was  inserted, 
though  in  a  rather  more  vague  form  than  I  desired.1 

However,  the  question  of  the  duchy  of  Luxemburg,  being 
under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Germanic  Confederation,  cannot 
be  dealt  with  here,  where  difficulties  would  only  be  raised  by 
persons  interested,  without  the  powers  of  solving  them. 

It  has  been  arranged  with  Lord  Palmerston  that  the  protocol 
is  not  to  be  sent  to  Brussels  for  some  days  ;  we  deemed  it 
better  first  to  settle  some  of  the  points  therein  laid  down.  .  . 

This  great  victory,  for  even  now  I  consider  it  as  such,  came 
just  in  time  to  enable  me  to  allay  the  anxieties,  and  disquietudes, 
constantly  reported  from  Paris  and  Brussels,  and  which  are 
fairly  summarised  in  the  following  letters  of  General  Sebastiani 
and  M.  de  Bresson. 

General  Sebastiani  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand. 

Mon  Prince, 

I  pray  you  to  read  the  account  of  yesterday's  sitting 
with  the  most  serious  attention  (the  sitting  of  the  French 
Chamber  of  Deputies  of  January  15th).  A  petition  from  a 
Belgian  furnished  General  Lamarque  with  an  opportunity  for 
a    speech,  in    which    he    reviewed    the    foreign    policy   of  the 

1  Var.  .  .  .  a  pen  prcs  comme  je  le  de'sirais  =  almost  as  I  wished.    The  same  day, 
January  21st,  Lord  Palmerston  wrote  to  Lord  Granville  : 

My  dear  Granville, 

The  protocol  which  I  send  you  is  the  result  of  two  long  days  of  work  .  .  .  Talley- 
rand wished  that  Luxemburg  should  be  included  in  the  neutrality,  but  objections 
were  raised  to  this  on  the  ground  that  that  duchy  belonged  to  an  independent 
sovereign,  and  to  a  confederation  of  which  he  is  a  member  ;  that  the  Conference 
has  not  the  right  to  negotiate  concerning  either  war  or  peace  as  regaids  Luxemburg, 
as  this  right  belongs  only  to  the  sovereign  of  the  country  and  to  the  Confederation. 
.  .  .  Talleyrand  fought  like  a  lion  over  this  ;  he  declared  that  he  would  not  consent 
to  the  neutrality  of  Belgium,  would  have  nothing  to  do  with  this  neutrality,  and  ended 
by  saying,  that  he  wanted  Philippeville  and  Marienburg  in  exchange  .  .  .  Finally, 
we  got  him  to  come  to  an  arrangement,  in  the  way  that  juries  are  made  unanimous, 
namely,  by  starvation.  Between  nine  and  ten  o'clock,  he  agreed  to  our  proposals, 
quite  satisfied  at  heart  I  feel  sure,  in  seeing  the  neutrality  of  Belgium  secured  .   .    . 

(Private  Correspondence  of  Lord  Palmerston,   translated   into    French   by  Aug. 
Craven.) 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  17 

government  since  the  revolution  of  July.  The  affairs  of  Bel- 
gium were  evidently  the  subject  he  proposed  to  handle.  His 
attacks  were  violent,  and  his  object  was  to  lead  us  into  war. 
I.  however,  refused  to  take  up  the  gauntlet,  and  the  whole 
Chamber  approved  my  discretion.  But  the  Orleanist  party, 
who  had  intended  broaching  these  questions,  declared  them- 
selves offended,  and  M.  Guizot  occupied  the  floor  for  a  long 
time.  M.  Mauguin  answered  him  with  great  vehemence  and  heat, 
and,  it  must  be  admitted,  thoroughly  roused  the  national  feeling 
which  is  so  strong  in  the  country.  M.  Dupin  was  not  happy  in 
his  reply,  and  General  La  Fayette  did  not  show  his  usual  tact,  so 
noticeable  in  all  party  questions.  The  effect  of  this  sitting  on  the 
nation  will  be  to  impose  a  still  greater  degree  of  caution,  if  possible, 
on  the  actions  of  the  government.  We  must  avoid  not  only 
injuring  the  interests  and  the  dignity  of  France,  but  we  must  also 
humour  her  pride,  and,  it  must  be  admitted,  her  earnest  desires. 

The  attempt  the  English  ministry  is  just  now  making  in 
Belgium,  compromises,  it  cannot  be  denied,  the  peace  of  Europe. 
The  Prince  of  Orange  heads  a  party,  but  it  is  weak,  timid  and 
vanquished,  though  less  by  force  of  arms  than  by  national  hatred. 
We  have  for  a  long  time  supported  the  cause  of  this  prince,  we 
have  tried  to  make  it  a  success  either  in  his  own  person  or  in 
that  of  his  children,  but  our  efforts  have  been  fruitless.  The 
sincere  wish  for  peace,  on  which  our  policy  is  founded,  has  guided 
and  will  continue  to  guide  our  conduct  with  regard  to  Belgium. 
The  Prince  of  Orange  is  about  to  renew  his  efforts,  supported  by 
the  influence  of  England.  We  shall  hold  aloof  from  this  move- 
ment ;  but  we  foresee  with  pain,  that  we  shall  not  be  able  to  do 
so  from  the  consequences  that  may  follow.  If  the  Prince  of 
Orange  is  called  to  the  throne  by  the  free  and  earnest  wish  of  the 
Belgians,  we  shall  respect  this  choice,  for  we  shall  always  honour 
the  independence  of  Belgium.  But  you  have  seen,  mon  Prince, 
what  has  been  the  success  of  the  proposition  made  to  the  Congress 
by  M.  Maclagan.1 

Does  the  English  Cabinet  thoroughly  understand  the  differ- 

1  M.  Maclagan  was  at  that  time  deputy  for  Ostend.  At  the  sitting  of  January 
1 2th,  he  presented  a  motion  in  favour  of  the  Prince  of  Orange,  which  provoked  a 
violent  uproar.     This  is  the  official  account  given  of  the  incident  : 

M.  Maclagan  does  not  approve  of  either  of  the  names  presented  (the  Due  de 
Leuchtenberg  and  Prince  Otto).  The  Powers  reserve  to  themselves  the  making  of  our 
laws  ;  we  are  not  independent.  The  Prince  of  Orange  will  bring  Limburg,  Luxemburg, 
and  the  left  bank  of  the  Scheldt  back  to  us,  and  the  Powers  ...  (at  the  word  "  Prince 
of  Orange,"  cries  of  "  order  !  "  "  Down  with  him  !  "  were  heard  from  all  sides.  The 
greatest  excitement  prevailed  in  the  assembly). 

M.  le  President. — I  beg  to  remind  M.  Maclagan,  that  he  has  no  doubt  forgotten 
that  the  Congress  has  for  ever  excluded  the  whole  House  of  Orange.  (Cries  of  Bravo  ! 
bravo  !"     In  the  midst  of  the  tumult,  the  voice  of  M.  A.  de  Rodenbach  was  heard 

VOL.  IV.  C 


1 8  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

encc  between  the  position  of  Belgium  before  the  exclusion  of 
Nassau,  and  her  present  position  ?  Then  everything  was  possible 
and  permissible  ;  but  now  an  armistice  has  been  concluded,  and 
placed  under  the  guarantee  of  the  Great  Powers,  subsequent  to 
the  exclusion  of  the  House  of  Nassau,  the  separation  of  Holland 
and  Belgium  has  been  pronounced,  and  the  independence  of 
Belgium  has  been  recognized.  How,  for  example,  could  the 
Prince  of  Orange  have  recourse  to  the  Dutch  forces,  without 
damaging  the  object  of  the  armistice — the  separation  and  inde- 
pendence of  Belgium  ?  Does  the  Prince  of  Orange  desire  to 
undertake  the  conquest  of  Belgium,  with  the  aid  of  his  Belgian 
partisans  ?  He  would  then  find  himself  struggling  with  the 
provisional  government  and  the  Congress,  and  would  embark  on 
a  civil  war,  which  France  could  hardly  regard  with  indifference 
when  at  her  very  doors.  Besides,  who  could  tell  what  such  a 
civil  war  might  not  bring  about  ?  You  must  admit,  mon  Prince, 
such  an  attempt  would  be  altogether  too  hazardous  for  me  to 
recognize  therein  the  long-sighted  and  wise  policy  of  such  a 
government  as  that  of  England.  But  the  prudence  of  Lord  Grey 
and  Lord  Palmerston  reassures  me.  Deceived  by  false  accounts 
of  the  lively  hopes  and  restlessness  of  the  Prince  of  Orange,  what 
has  just  taken  place  in  the  Congress  will  have  enlightened  them, 
and  I  have  no  doubt  but  that  they  have  cancelled  the  instructions 
they  gave  to  Lord  Ponsonby.  Our  attitude  will  be  calm,  our 
conduct  loyal,  but  our  anxiety  can  easily  be  imagined.  Both 
your  position,  mon  Prince,  and  that  of  the  Conference,  under 
such  very  grave  circumstances,  is  extremely  difficult.  I  can  quite 
understand  that  you  are  greatly  fatigued  with  all  this,  though 
no  one  has  ever  shown  a  nobler  nature  or  greater  ability  than 
you  have  done.  Never  let  them  lose  sight  of  the  fact  in  London 
that  the  Belgian  cannon  will  find  an  echo  in  France,  and  that 
in  this  world  it  does  not  do  for  a  country  to  look  to  its  own 
interests  alone.     .     .     . 

M.  de  Bresson,  on  his  part,  wrote  to  me  from  Brussels   as 
follows,  on  January  17th  : 

Mon  Prince, 

I   have  to  inform  you  that   Lord   Ponsonby  has  this 
evening  written  to  Lord  Palmerston  :  that  he  has  received  inform- 

exclaiming  :  "  He  is  English,  M.  Maclagan,  he  is  English  !  he  is  not  Belgian  ! 
Order  ! ") 

M.  le  President. — I  know  my  duty,  I  call  M.  Maclagan  to  order  .  .  . 

M.  Maclagan  declares  that  the  Congress  must  reconsider  its  sentence  of  exclusion, 
in  order  to  give  complete  liberty  to  its  commissioners.  (The  outcry  begins  again, 
until  M.  Maclagan  definitely  quits  the  tribune). 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  19 

ation  from  a  reliable  source,  that  advice  has  been  sent  from  the 
War  Department  of  France  to  the  Belgian  Government  to 
provision  and  prepare  for  siege  the  fortresses  of  Namur,  Liege, 
and  Huy.  I  do  not  know  whether  this  fact  has  any  founda- 
tion, and  if  it  is  true,  how  Lord  Ponsonby  has  arrived  at  its 
knowledge.  But  as  it  is  possible  that  explanations  may  be 
demanded  from  you,  I  thought  it  prudent  to  let  you  know  it 
beforehand. 

I  have  read  in  the  papers  M.  Sebastiani's  letter  to  M.  Rogier1 
with  unspeakable  pleasure.  The  Congress  and  the  Belgian 
government  needed  a  lesson  of  this  kind.2 

The  French  party,  thoroughly  dissatisfied,  (M.  Stassart,3  at 
its  head,)  proposes  in  order  to  revenge  itself  on  us,  to 
endeavour  to  take  the  Congress  by  surprise,  and  obtain  the 
election  of  M.  le  Due  de  Leuchtenberg,  under  the  pretext  that 
the  Belgians  had  only  this  means  left  of  asserting  their  independ- 
ence. I  trust  they  will  fail  ;  I  will,  at  least,  do  my  utmost  to 
bring  it  about. 

The  Prince  of  Orange's  party  has  now  also  begun  to  stir. 
The  crisis  is  approaching,  and  I  am  far  from  feeling  easy.     It  is 

1  Firmin  Rogier,  Belgian  diplomat,  born  in  1791,  was  first,  professor  at  the  French 
university.  After  1815,  he  took  up  journalism  and  opposed  the  government  of  King 
William.  In  1830,  he  was  made  Secretary  to  the  Embassy  in  Paris,  and  for  some  time 
acted  as  chai-ge  d'affaires.  Later  on  he  was  made  Minister  Plenipotentiary  and  did 
not  retire  till  1864. 

2  A  somewhat  irregular  incident  had  just  at  this  time  caused  some  bitterness 
between  the  French  Cabinet  and  the  Belgian  government.  M.  de  Celles  had  read 
aloud  from  the  tribune,  letters  from  M.  Firmin  Rogier  and  M.  Bresson,  relative  to  the 
candidature  of  the  Due  de  Leuchtenberg.  Count  Sebastiani  had  every  reason  to  be 
dissatisfied  with  the  way  in  which  the  Belgian  government  had  thus  made  public 
most  important  secret  documents,  and  that  words  he  had  spoken  in  familiar  conversa- 
tion had  been  officially  reported.  He  complained  bitterly  of  this  to  M.  Rogier,  and 
wrote  him  the  following  letter. 

Paris,  January  \qth. 
Monsieur, 

You  told  me  a  lew  days  ago,  that  the  papers  had  given  a  very  incorrect 
version  of  the  letters  you  had  written  to  the  provisional  government ;  but  they  now 
ascribe  a  fresh  despatch  to  you,  in  which  it  is  imposible  for  me  to  recognize  what  was 
said  at  our  last  interview. 

As  a  minister,  I  have  never  had  occasion  to  interview  the  king  as  to  any  arrange- 
ments connected  with  his  family.  The  king  has  therefore  been  made  either  to  refuse 
or  concede  what  has  never  been  demanded  of  him.  I  may  further  add  that  neither  as 
a  man,  nor  as  the  interpreter  of  the  royal  thoughts,  should  I  ever  have  expressed 
myself  with  such  levity  concerning  a  prince,  whose  memory  is  highly  esteemed  by  the 
king,  and  under  whose  orders  I  had  myself,  for  a  long  time,  the  honour  of  fighting  for 
the  glory  and  independence  of  France.  I  console  myself  in  thinking  that  the  letter  in 
question  was  not  written  by  you  ;  were  it  otherwise,  I  should  feel  obliged  never  to 
have  any  other  relations  with  you  except  in  writing. 

I  have  the  honour  to  be,  &c, 

Horace  Sebastiani. 

3  M.  de  Stassart,  governor  of  the  province  of  Namur,  was  at  that  time  Vice- 
President  of  the  Congress. 

C    2 


2o  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLE  YRAND. 

very  important  that  I  should  know  your  views  as  to  the  Prince 
of  Orange  and  Prince  Leopold.  We  have  to  do  with  a  strong 
and  well-supported  party  in  Paris.  For  the  last  three  days  there 
has  been  a  rumour  that  Generals  Excelmans,1  Fabvier,2  and 
Lallemand  3  were  at  Brussels  incognito.  It  is  now  said  that 
they  have  gone  to  Namur  and  Liege,  and  it  is  in  that  quarter 
that  the  French  movement  will  break  out,  if  the  Orange  move- 
ment takes  place  here  and  at  Ghent. 

We  shall  have  great  trouble  in  arriving  at  a  satisfactory 
solution  here.  It  is  knowledge  rather  than  good  will  which  is 
wanting  at  the  Congress,  but  it  is  ungovernable.  .  .  . 

All  this  greatly  complicated  matters,  and  it  became  ne- 
cessary, in  order  to  get  out  of  this  labyrinth  of  intrigues,  to 
adopt  a  decided  line  of  conduct,  and  not  allow  oneself  to  be 
turned  aside  from  one's  aim  by  passing  incidents.  According  to 
my  view,  there  seemed  no  other  course  for  us  but  to  remain 
firmly  united  to  England.  Our  union  meant  the  union  of  the 
other  three  powers,  and  assured  general  peace.  I  was  perfectly 
convinced,  that  dislike  to  the  House  of  Nassau  was  too  strong  in 
Belgium  for  the  Prince  of  Orange  even  to  hope  to  re-establish 
himself  there.  I  therefore  saw  no  risk  in  letting  England  make 
the  attempt.  I  knew  that  the  Cabinet  must  show  Parliament 
that  the  claim  had  been  allowed,  tried,  and  found  impracticable  ; 
that  a  certain  feeling  of  shamefacedness  obliged  them  to  give 
this  token  of  condescension  to  Holland,  whose  colonies,  which 
she  gave  up  in  exchange  for  the  Belgian  provinces,4    England 

1  General  Count  Excelmans  (1775-1852)  was  one  of  the  most  brilliant  cavalry 
generals  of  the  Empire.  He  was  at  that  time  a  peer  of  France.  In  1849  he  became 
Grand  Chancellor  of  the  Legion  of  Honour,  Marshal  of  France  and  a  Senator. 

2  General  Baron  Fabvier  was  born  in  1782,  entered  the  army  1804,  was  entrusted 
under  the  Empire  with  various  missions  to  Turkey,  and  later  on  to  Persia.  In  1814 
he  was  obliged  to  sign  the  Capitulation  of  Paris.  Placed  on  the  unattached  list  under 
the  Restoration,  he  went  to  Greece  in  1823,  and  served  in  the  War  of  Independence. 
In  1830,  he  was  made  Major-General,  then  Governor  of  Paris,  Lieutenant- General  in 
1839,  a  peer  of  France  in  1845.  In  1848,  he  was  elected  deputy  and  went  as 
Ambassador  to  Constantinople,  and  then  to  Copenhagen.     He  died  in  1855. 

3  General  Charles  Lallemand,  born  in  1774,  entered  the  service  in  1798,  and  was 
made  Brigadier- General  in  1815.  Condemned  to  death  as  defaulter,  at  the  second 
Restoration,  he  went  to  America,  returned  to  France  in  1830,  became  member  of  the 
Chamber  of  Peers,  and  died  in  1839. 

4  By  a  convention  dated  August  13th  and  14th,  1814,  England  undertook  to  restore 
to  the  King  of  the  Netherlands  the  colonies  she  had  taken  possession  of  during  the 
war,  with  the  exception  of  Cape  Colony,  and  various  other  possessions  on  the  coasts 
of  Guiana  and  Malabar. 


THE  RE  VOL  UTION  OF  I S30.  2 1 

had  retained  ;  and  finally  I  felt  convinced,  that  the  English 
Cabinet  would  later  on  give  me  credit  for  the  good  faith  we 
showed  in  not  openly  opposing  the  election  of  the  Prince  of 
Orange.  Strengthened  by  these  considerations,  I  determined 
not  to  occupy  myself  so  much  with  the  choice  of  a  sovereign  for 
Belgium,  as  with  the  care  of  widening  and  confirming  the  separa- 
tion of  that  kingdom  from  Holland. 

The  protocol  of  January  20th  had  established  the  first  basis 
of  this  separation,  by  declaring  the  neutrality  of  Belgium.  It 
now  remained  to  develop  this,  and  obtain  its  acceptance  by  the 
King  of  Holland.  This  sovereign  had  already  submitted,  with  a 
very  bad  grace  it  is  true,  to  the  protocol,  by  which  we  had  insisted 
on  his  raising  the  blockade  of  the  Scheldt  :  this  was  a  perpetual 
source  of  irritation  to  the  Belgians,  whose  commerce  was  thus 
completely  shut  out. 

I  believed  that  I  had  chosen  the  best  course,  and  was  follow- 
ing it  up  actively,  when  M.  de  Flahaut  again  appeared  in  London, 
the  bearer  of  a  letter  from  General  Sebastiani,  and  charged  to 
reopen  the  famous  project  of  the  partition  of  Belgium,  which  I 
believed  had  been  buried  in  oblivion.  En  route,  M.  de  Flahaut 
had  passed  the  courier,  who  carried  the  declaration  of  neutrality 
to  Paris  ;  consequently,  he  was  not  aware  of  it.  General  Se- 
bastiani's  letter  of  January  21st  was  the  theme,  by  means  of 
which  it  was  hoped  that  I  would  be  induced  to  participate  in 
the  dismay,  which  the  possibility  of  the  election  of  the  Due  de 
Leuchtenberg  had  caused  in  Paris  ;  it  was  on  this  point  that  M. 
•de  Flahaut  was  to  enlarge. 

Here  is  the  letter  : — 

Mon  Prince, 

You  will  have  heard,  almost  as  soon  as  we  did,  of  the 
position  of  Belgium.  The  Congress  is  to  elect  a  sovereign  on  the 
28th,  and  there  is  every  fear  that  its  choice  will  fall  on  the  Due 
de  Leuchtenberg.  M.  Bresson  has  received  orders  to  declare 
officially,  that  his  election  will  not  be  recognized  by  France. 
He  must  renew  the  refusal  to  consent  to  the  election  of  M.  le 
Due  de  Nemours,  and  also  the  re-union  of  Belgium  with  France. 
What  the  Belgians  want,  what  the  French  wish,  is  nevertheless 
this    very    re-union,  and   soon    perhaps  we   shall    not  be    in    a 


22  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

position  to  prevent  it.  We  will  continue  to  do  our  best,  but 
we  are  beginning  to  lose  hopes  of  success.  Our  strength  is 
exhausted  in  this  ungrateful  struggle.  The  earnest  desire  of 
France  is  to-day  expressed  by  the  lips  of  men  whose  prudence 
you  most  appreciate,  and  whose  character  you  most  admire. 
Our  situation  is  such,  that  the  King  and  the  Council  believe  it 
cannot  have  been  truly  represented  to  you  in  the  despatches,  and 
the  king's  government  has  decided  to  send  to  you  M.  le  Comte 
de  Flahaut,  who  will  be  able  to  make  you  acquainted  with  all 
the  facts,  and  place  them  before  his  Britannic  Majesty.  That  is 
his  mission  ;  it  remains  for  you  to  make  the  most  of  it  both  for  the 
service  of  the  King  and  of  France.  It  is  needless  to  write  you 
a  long  letter.  M.  de  Flahaut  will  tell  you  everything  that  it  is 
important  you  should  know.  Time  presses  ;  let  us  make  the 
best  use  we  can  of  the  days  and  hours,  and  let  us  preserve  that 
peace  which  can  alone  save  social  order  in  Europe. 

P.S. — We  have  been  so  taken  unawares  by  the  fatally  short 
date  of  the  28th,  that  we  are  unable  to  consult  you  before  decid- 
ing- to  send  to  London. 


*t> 


It  was  after  I  had  read  this  letter,  that  M.  de  Flahaut  tried 
to  prove  to  me  that  there  was  no  other  safety  for  France  and 
Europe,  but  the  partition  of  Belgium.  I  spoke  in  the  strongest 
possible  manner  against  this  view,  which,  according  to  my  ideas, 
was  both  impolitic  and  impracticable,  and  then  wrote  as  follows 
to  M.  Sebastiani  i1 

Monsieur  le  Comte, 

M.  le  Comte  de  Flahaut  arrived  here  the  night  before 
last,  and  handed  me  the  letter  with  which  you  had  entrusted 
him.     I  thank  you  for  having  chosen  him  to  bring  it  to  me. 

The  raising  of  the  blockade  of  Antwerp,  and  the  irritation  of 
the  King  of  Holland,  show  that  the  Conference  has  been,  as 
it  was  intended,  sufficiently  peremptory  towards  both' parties,  in 
order  to  obtain  the  results  aimed  at. 

The  conversation  of  M.  de  Flahaut  has  given  me  very  valuable 
information,  as  to  the  intentions  of  the  king's  government  respect- 
ing the  affairs  I  am  charged  with  here,  and  popular  opinion  in 
France.  Nevertheless,  I  regret  exceedingly,  that  he  should  have 
quitted  Paris  before  the  arrival  of  my  despatch  of  the  21st.  The 
news  it  contained,  of  the  resolution  adopted  by  the  Conference, 
must  necessarily  have  some  influence  on  the  views  of  the  King 

1  Official  despatch  already  published. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  23 

and  of  his  Council,  and  also  on  the  conduct  to  be  pursued  with 
regard  to  Belgium.  I  continue  to  congratulate  myself  on  the 
declaration  of  neutrality,  which  up  to  the  present  has  been 
received  with  immense  approbation  by  the  statesmen  of  those 
countries  who  have  been  told  of  it.  All,  no  matter  to  what 
party  they  belong,  look  upon  it  as  a  great  act  of  policy,  an 
honour  to  modern  civilization,  and  calculated  to  insure  the  main- 
tenance of  peace  by  the  facility  it  offers  for  conciliating,  if  not  all 
the  demands,  at  least  all  the  most  important  interests.  I  must 
add,  that,  in  agreeing  to  it,  they  all  without  exception  believe 
that  this  act  is  entirely  to  the  advantage  of  France. 

I  can  understand,  that  at  the  point  at  which  affairs  have 
arrived  in  Belgium,  and  in  the  difficulties  in  which  it  seems  likely 
to  involve  France  and  Europe,  men's  minds  have  been  ready  to 
adopt  the  most  opposite  schemes.  But,  neutrality  once  ac- 
knowledged, the  greater  part  of  these  schemes  are  rendered 
impossible,  and  I  am  enabled  to  bring  forward  again  advan- 
tageously the  question  of  the  Prince  of  Naples,  to  which  hitherto, 
so  much  opposition  has  been  raised.  I  believe  indeed  that  we 
shall  arrive  at  a  completely  successful  issue  on  this  point,1  by 
turning  Antwerp  into  a  free  port,  or  rather  by  making  it  a 
Hanseatic  town,  and  it  has  not  yet-  been  proved  to  me  that  this 
cannot  be  accomplished  without  Antwerp  ceasing  to  belong,  as 
a  free  port,  to  Belgium.  This  is  the  line  I  have  taken  ever 
since  the  protocol  has  been  signed,  and  which  I  will  continue  to 
hold  unless  you  send  me  orders  to  the  contrary. 

This  combination  has  the  advantage  of  showing  how  far  it 
would  be  useless  to  make  concessions  to  England  on  the  Con- 
tinent. I  may  even  say  that  it  is  with  the  view  of  putting  such 
an  idea  quite  out  of  the  question,  that  I  hold  to  the  course  I  am 
now  pursuing.  I  should  never  wish  to  see  the  king's  name  and 
yours  attached  to  a  clause,  which,  according  to  my  view,  would 
have  placed  our  government  on  the  same  level  as  those  who  give 
no  thought  to  the  judgment  of  future  ages. 

History  has  testified  to  the  great  difficulty  which  the  occupa- 
tion 3  of  Calais  by  the  English  entailed  on  us.  It  has  also  shown 
the  great  popularity  gained  by  the  Guises,  when  they  freed 
France  from  this  terrible  disgrace.  These  lessons  must  not  be  lost 
on  us  ;  the  same  faults  might  produce  the  same  results,  and 
tarnish  the  brilliancy  of  that  flower  of  independence  which  has 
marked  all  the  acts  of  the  king's  government.  I  feel  assured  that 
his  noble  mind  would  not  allow  him  to  retain  for  any  length  of 

1  Suppressed  in  the  text  of  the  Archives. 

2  Suppressed  in  the  text  of  the  Archives. 

3  Var.  :  prol->ngee  —  prolonged. 


24  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

time  views  which,  without  directly  affecting  our  country,  would 
not  remove  the  reproaches  that  would  be  cast  on  our  foreign 
policy. 

No  one  would  dream  of  denying  that  the  re-union  of  Belgium 
with  France  offers  great  advantages  to  the  latter,  though  an  ex- 
tension of  the  Rhenish  frontier  would  better  suit  my  views  of 
French  policy.  1  also  admit  that  this  re-union  would,  for  some 
time,  make  the  government  which  had  achieved  it  very  popular, 
notwithstanding  the  inconvenience  l  to  French  industry  accru- 
ing therefrom.  But  believe  me,  M.  le  Comte,  such  popularity 
would  be  very  fleeting,  if  it  had  to  be  purchased  at  the  price  pro- 
posed. There  is  not  a  reputation  that  would  not  be  shaken 
by  such  an  act,  there  is  not  an  individual  who  does  not  blame 
the  peace  of  Teschen  for  having  brought  the  Russians  into 
Europe  ;  what  severe  condemnation  would  not  be  passed  then  on 
those  who  should  introduce  the  English  on  to  the  Continent  ? 
One  should  never  come  into  collision  with  those  whom  one 
cannot  attack  at  home. 

I  am  convinced,  M.  le  Comte,  that  if  you  were  plenipotentiary 
here,  you  would  never  sign  your  name  to  an  act  which  not  even 
the  longest  and  most  unfortunate  war  could  justify.  .  .  . 

I  do  not  know  whether  this  despatch  convinced  those  to  whom 
it  was  addressed,  but  at  least  the  effect  was,  that  I  heard  no 
further  mention  of  the  intended  project  of  dividing  Belgium. 

It  is  perhaps  fair  to  say,  that  there  was  nothing  very  startling 
in  this  idea,  as  the  atmosphere  of  Paris  at  that  time  disturbed 
even  the  best  disposed  people.  This  is  evinced  in  some  passages 
of  the  following  letter,  which  the  Due  de  Dalberg  wrote  to  me  on 
the  22nd  January : 

The  Due  de  Dalberg  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand. 

Mon  cher  Prince, 

Here,  nothing  ever  recovers  itself  or  becomes  consoli- 
dated. The  Belgian  affairs  compromise  everybody,  beginning 
with  your  chief,  if  there  is  a  chief.  Lafitte's  proceedings  have 
brought  him  into  such  disrepute,  as  President  of  the  Council, 
that  they  greatly  prejudice  the  powers  that  be.  M.  Thiers  is 
pointed  at  on  account  of  his  baseness. 

I  had  a  talk  with  Pasquier  and  Semonville  yesterday.      We 

1  Var.  :  reels  =  real. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  25 

asked  each  other  how  all  this  could  possibly  go  on  ?  Semonville 
said  :  "  I  see  the  time  of  the  Directory  coming  again.  Soult  alone 
is  doing  his  work,  and  organizing  four  hundred  thousand  men  at 
the  expense  of  the  Treasury.  When  they  are  enrolled,  can  they  be 
kept  together  without  a  war?  If  we  go  to  war,  will  a  system  of 
pillage  and  requisition  be  renewed  ? "  These  are  questions  one 
cannot  solve.  Disorder  and  anarchy  are  behind  the  scenes,  be- 
cause there  is  no  authority  anywhere.  People's  minds  have  been 
so  strangely  excited,  that  there  is  no  talk  of  anything  but  the 
injuries  received  by  France  in  18 14  and  18 15,  and  how  they  must 
be  revenged  by  retaking  the  Rhine  frontier.  One  is  as  much 
out  of  it  as  a  Chinaman,  if  one  maintains  that  all  these  follies 
will  end  in  upsetting  the  country. 

The  Congress  in  Brussels  is  a  curious  comment  on  your 
Conference  in  London  ;  it  is  time  all  this  is  put  a  stop  to.  How 
is  it  that  no  military  commander  has  been  found  to  march  on 
Brussels  and  put  an  end  to  this  Congress  ? 

Poland  also  greatly  occupies  us,  but  she  does  not  exhaust  our 
purses.  The  Polish  Committee  have  up  to  now  only  collected 
sixty  thousand  francs,  of  which  twenty  thousand  come  from 
M.  de  la  Fayette. 

Poor  M.  de  Mortemart  x  is  playing  the  part  of  M.  de  Caulain- 
court  '2  but  with  less  wisdom  and  talent. 

What  is  your  idea,  mon  Prince,  as  to  the  best  ruler  for  Greece  ? 
Prince  Paul  of  Wurtemburg  3  worries  everyone  by  his  anxiety  to 
be  called  to  that  throne.  But  no  one  listens  to  him  here  ;  the 
minority  of  the  Prince  of  Bavaria  seems  favourable  to  the  claims 
of  Capo  d'lstria,  who  ought  to  be  left  at  his  post  there. 

The  appointment  of  M.  de  Bouille  to  Carlsruhe  and  of 
M.  Alleyne  to  Frankfort  has  caused  much  dissatisfaction.  It  is 
thought  that  the  latter  has  been  appointed  with  a  view  to  his 
doing  all  in  his  power  to  bring  about  a  rupture  in  the  Confedera- 
tion. I  believe  he  will  produce  the  opposite  effect.  No  one  can 
explain  the  King's  fancy  in  making  such  a  choice.  .  .  . 

1  Casimir  Louis  Victorien  de  Rochechouart,  Due  de  Mortemart,  born  in  1787, 
emigrated  in  1791,  returned  to  France  under  the  Consulate,  and  became  orderly  officer 
to  the  emperor.  At  the  Restoration,  he  was  made  peer  of  France  (1814),  then 
Brigadier-General  and  Ambassador  to  Russia.  On  the  July  29th,  1830,  Charles  X. 
desired  him  to  form  a  Cabinet,  but  his  efforts  failed,  and  he  joined  Louis  Philippe. 
He  was  sent  on  a  special  mission  to  St.  Petersburg  and  definitely  accredited  to  this 
post  in  1831.     He  became  senator  in  1852,  and  died  in  1876. 

2  M.  de  Caulaincourt  had  been  ambassador  under  the  Empire,  where  he  had  to 
undertake  the  delicate  task  of  gaining  over  Russian  opinion  to  the  policy  of  France  at 
that  period. — (Note  by  M.  de  Bacourt.) 

3  Paul,  Prince  of  Wurtemburg,  born  in  1785,  married  in  1805  to  the  Princess 
Catherine,  daughter  of  the  Duke  of  Saxe-Altenburg,  died  in  1S51.  He  was  the  brother 
of  the  King  of  Wurtemburg. 


26  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

It  required  a  certain  amount  of  perseverance  not  to  become 
discouraged  between  these  echoes  from  Paris,  the  follies  of  the 
Belgians,  and  the  obstinate  resistance  of  the  King  of  the  Nether- 
lands. Nevertheless,  I  was  not  much  disturbed,  and  firmly  and 
quietly  pursued  the  line  I  had  marked  out  for  myself  without 
concerning  myself  with  the  imprudent  velleities  in  Paris,  or  even 
the  Due  de  Leuchtenberg,  whom  they  wished  to  nominate  in 
Brussels.  I  felt  assured  he  would  never  be  recognized  by  the 
Powers,  and  urged  the  Conference  to  complete  the  separation  of 
Belgium  from  Holland.  In  our  sitting  of  the  27th  January,  we 
touched  upon  the  financial  and  commercial  questions  which  had 
reference  to  this  separation,  and  we  placed  them  upon  such  an 
equitable  basis  as  would,  later  on,  reconcile  the  true  interests  of 
both  parties.  In  sending  the  protocol  of  this  sitting  to  Paris  on 
January  29th,1  I  wrote  as  follows  : 

The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  General  Sebastiani. 

M.  le  Comte, 

I  send  you  the  protocol  of  our  Conference  of  the  27th  ; 
it  treats  of  various  financial  and  commercial  questions  connected 
with  the  separation  of  Holland  and  Belgium.  This  piece  of 
work  has  been  drawn  up  by  M.  le  Baron  de  Wessenberg  and 
M.  le  Comte  Matusiewicz,  who  considered  they  ought  to  subject 
the  measures  they  proposed  to  take  for  the  separation  to  the 
same  principles  which  had  formed  the  union.  These  two  pleni- 
potentiaries, especially  M.  de  Wessenberg,  possessed  information 
on  this  matter  of  which  everyone  else,  particularly  myself,  was 
ignorant.  Nevertheless,  in  sending  it  to  our  commissioners  in 
Brussels,  we  have  added  instructions,  by  which  we  have  left  it  to 
them  to  choose  the  most  opportune  moment  to  present  it  to  the 
Belgian  Government.  As  it  is  possible  that  this  protocol  may 
raise  fresh  difficulties  in  Brussels,  I  beg  you  to  retard  its  publica- 
tion until  you  know  what  our  commissioners  have  done  in 
Brussels,  after  having  sounded  the  opinion  of  those  persons  with 
whom  thev  come  most  in  contact.2 

0 

1  Official  despatch  already  published. 

2  This  protocol  of  January  27th  did  not  contain  any  decisions,  but  simply  the  pro- 
positions of  the  Conference,  which  had  no  executive  powers.  It  proposed  a  project 
for  the  division  of  the  debts  between  the  two  countries,  and  gave  Belgium  the  rght 
to  participate  in  the  colonial  commtrce  of  Spain. 

This  point  must  be  kept  in  view,  as  M.  de  Talleyrand  refers  to  it  later  on. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  27 

There  will  probably  be  a  good  deal  of  discussion  on  several 
questions  dealt  with  by  this  protocol,  but  we  believe  that  it  will  to 
a  great  extent  satisfy  the  needs  of  the  two  countries.  The  King 
of  Holland  is  sufficiently  well  treated,  so  that  the  relations 
between  him  and  Belgium  need  not  occasion  perpetual  difficulties 
which  would  end  in  becoming  insurmountable.  On  the  other 
hand,  the  Belgians,  being  great  manufacturers  and  producers, 
will  have  markets  which  will  remove  the  necessity  for  constant 
smuggling  with  France.  The  opinion  of  all  those  best  acquainted 
with  such  matters  in  England,  is  that,  if  we  insisted  on  less 
favourable  terms  for  Holland,  that  country  could  not  exist, 
owing  to  the  enormous  burden  with  which  she  would  be 
weighted.  It  is  for  you,  with  your  knowledge,  to  decide  this 
point  ;  you  will  no  doubt  find  that  it  touches  many  important 
political  interests 

I  quite  foresaw  that  neither  these  measures  nor  the  declara- 
tion of  the  neutrality  of  Belgium  were  of  a  nature  to  at  once 
satisfy  the  impatient  spirits  in  Paris,  or  the  requirements  of 
Brussels  and  the  Hague  ;  but  the  essential  point  was  to  maintain 
the  good  relations  between  ourselves  and  England,  and  by  this 
means  to  impose  on  the  other  Cabinets  resolutions  as  reasonable 
and  fair  as  we  should  have  done  between  ourselves.  All  else  was 
but  secondary,  as  far  as  I  was  concerned.  I  sought  the  true 
interests  of  France,  where  I  hoped  really  to  find  them,  and  not 
in  wild  dreams  that  could  only  lead  to  her  destruction. 

In  fact,  a  general  war,  even  if  only  against  the  three  northern 
Powers,  must  have  been  fatal  to  us,  for  it  would  immediately  have 
developed  a  revolutionary  character,  which  would  have  separated 
England  from  us.  It  was  therefore  necessary,  above  all  things, 
to  avoid  such  a  dangerous  state  of  affairs  ;  and  yet  it  was  equally 
important  to  do  so  by  means  which  were  not  dishonourable 
to  France,  but  might  even  turn  to  her  advantage.  All  I  had 
hitherto  done  entirely  followed  out  this  view.  Thus,  instead  of 
having  the  kingdom  of  the  Netherlands,  with  a  population  of 
seven  millions,  and  a  line  of  formidable  fortresses  opposed  to  us, 
we  had  already  obtained  the  separation  of  that  country  into  two, 
and  on  our  frontier  a  neutral  Belgium,  reduced  to  four  million 
inhabitants.  This  neutrality,  which  was  at  first  ridiculed  as  an 
impossibility,  is  nevertheless  pretty  solid,  and  will,   I    hope,  be 


28  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

more  durable  than  people  fancy,  as  long  as  France  does  not 
attempt  general  and  revolutionary  wars  against  the  whole  of 
Europe,  which  is  what  no  sound  policy  could  ever  admit  into  its 
calculations.  If  France  went  to  war  with  England,  we  should 
have  an  equal  interest  with  Germany  in  preserving  the  neutrality 
of  Belgium  ;  if,  on  the  other  hand,  France  goes  to  war  with 
Germany  without  the  participation  of  England,  the  latter  will 
defend  the  neutrality  of  Belgium.  In  any  case,  therefore,  this 
neutrality  is  secured,  provided  always,  that  we  are  the  first  to 
respect  it.  The  assured  neutrality  of  Belgium  will  give  us  the 
same  protection  from  Dunkirk  to  Luxemburg,  as  we  now  ex- 
perience from  Basle  to  Chambery  by  the  neutrality  of  Switzerland. 
This  neutrality  having  been  agreed  to  in  London  by  the  Con- 
ference of  the  Great  Powers,  I  confess  that  the  choice  of  the 
sovereign  to  reign  over  Belgium,  had  lost  much  of  its  importance 
as  far  as  I  was  concerned,  for  I  felt  sure  from  the  first,  that  the 
chief  interest  of  that  sovereign,  whoever  he  was,  would  be  to 
make  friends  with  France,  and  live  in  kindly  relations  with  her. 
It  was  most  important  that  the  separation  of  Belgium  and 
Holland  should  be  effected  on  such  an  equitable  basis,  that  the  two 
countries  might  prosper  individually,  and  that,  after  a  certain  lapse 
of  time  (to  allow  all  ill-feeling  to  subside),  friendly  intercourse 
might  be  resumed  between  them.  Towards  this  end  I  used  all 
my  endeavours  during  my  mission  in  London,  and  I  do  not  think 
that  I  have  failed. 

After  this  digression,  which  does  not  appear  to  me  out  of 
place,  we  will  return  to  the  course  of  events  which  were  still  to 
retard,  for  a  long  time,  the  accomplishment  of  my  views,  and 
to  begin  with,  we  will  cite  a  letter  from  M.  Bresson,  dated 
Brussels,  January  30th  : 

M.  Bresson  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand. 

Mon  Prince, 

Matters  here  grow  worse  from  day  to  day — general 
excitement  has  reached  the  last  stage  of  exasperation.  I  quite 
foresaw  that  at  any  moment  we  might  expect  a  disastrous  com- 
bination, when  I  supported  that  which  chose  the  Prince  of  Bavaria, 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  29 

though  in  itself  neutral  and  inoffensive.  I  told  you  then  that 
we  were  surrounded  by  dangers  ;  now  we  have  to  face  them. 
Unfortunately,  the  disapproval  has  come  too  quickly,  un- 
certainty has  succeeded  certainty,  the  field  has  been  thrown 
open  to  evil-doers  and  intrigues,  and  they  have  not  lost  their 
chance. 

Had  the  Prince  of  Naples,  or  any  other  candidate,  been 
brought  forward  in  time  (it  is  now  six  weeks  since  I  urgently 
requested  that  everything  should  be  subordinated  to  the  election 
of  a  head  for  the  State),  he  would  have  had  the  very  best 
possible  chance.  But  for  this,  the  co-operation  and  assistance  of 
England  were  required.  This  co-operation,  this  assistance,  we 
did  not  receive  even  against  the  Due  de  LencJitenberg ;  he  was 
allowed  to  gain  ground  ;  no  attempt  was  made  to  crush 
the  idea  that  he  migJit  be  acceptable  to  the  Powers,  just  because  he 
was  hostile  to  France  ;  and  even  now  promises  are  given  and  steps 
taken  in  his  favour.  The  result,  as  might  be  expected,  is  that 
the  friends  of  France,  of  their  own  accord,  and  despite  our 
previous  declarations,  have  brought  M.  le  Due  de  Nemours  for- 
ward in  opposition,  as  the  only  candidate  likely  to  be  successful. 
We  are  therefore  now  placed  between  a  choice  hostile  to  France, 
or  hostile  to  the  Powers,  a  cruel  alternative,  which  cannot 
be  decided  either  one  way  or  the  other,  without  terrible  mis- 
fortunes. 

People  were  greatly  mistaken  from  the  very  first,  as  to  the 
chances  of  the  Prince  of  Orange,  and  they  persevered  in  their 
efforts,  because  they  only  came  in  contact  with  people  of  the  same 
views.  No  doubt  (as  I  thought  myself,  and  wrote  to  you),  if  the 
Prince  of  Orange  was  unanimously  recalled,  it  would  settle  the 
whole  difficulty.  But,  mon  Prince,  it  is  no  longer  a  case  of  anti- 
pathy, it  is  downright  hatred.  I  have  heard  the  most  atrocious 
things  said,  and  miserable  wretches  come  forward  openly, 
offering  to  give  him  his  death-blow  if  he  returns.  The  Prince  of 
Orange  is  impossible  without  a  civil  war.  This  people  listens  to 
neither  reason  nor  interest,  it  only  obeys  its  passions.  The 
Prince's  life,  in  the  midst  of  these  demoniacs,  would  not  have 
been  safe.  Nevertheless,  in  the  hope  of  bringing  him  back 
all  the  reasonable  measures  we  have  offered  have  been  sacri- 
ficed ;  now  there  is  nothing  but  an  abyss  before  us.  What  will 
happen  ?  They  are  inclined  to  blame  others  for  the  faults  they 
have  themselves  committed.  Irritation  is  rife  everywhere,  and 
people  forget  their  own  words.  But  good  care  is  taken  not  to 
return  to  moderation. 

Matters  appeared  so  grave,   mon    Prince,  that   I   deemed   it 
necessary  to  go  to  Paris,  to  explain  them  in  person  to  the  king 


30  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

and  the  minister.  My  journey  only  occupied  sixty-six  hours. 
During  my  absence  the  protocol  of  the  20th  (that  respecting  the 
neutrality)  reached  Lord  Ponsonby,  and  was  communicated  by 
him.  You  will  hardly  credit  me.  The  scheme  contains  a  grand 
idea,  and  ought  to  excite  both  admiration  and  gratitude  ;  alas  ! 
it  has  only  provoked  anger.  You  may  judge  of  these  men  by 
this  one  act.  The  newspaper  I  send  herewith  will  give  you  full 
details.  To-morrow  or  the  day  after,  the  protest  will  be  discussed 
at  the  Congress. 1  .  .  .  . 

I  have  quoted  this  letter,  as  much  to  show  the  actual  state  of 
affairs  in  Brussels,  as  to  point  out  the  danger  brought  about  by 
the  despatches  of  a  too  excitable  agent.  M.  Bresson  was  un- 
doubtedly a  capable  and  intelligent  man,  but  he  wished  to 
justify  the  fault  he  had  committed,  in  supporting  the  candidature 
of  the  Prince  of  Bavaria  without  the  authority  of  the  Conference, 
whose  commissioner  he  was.  He  was  therefore  anxious  to 
throw  the  blame  on  his  colleague,  Lord  Ponsonby,  and  depicted 
in  fiery  language  and  with  evident  exaggeration  the  disposition 
of  the  people  in  Brussels.  He  had  made  a  journey  to  Paris, 
where  entire  credence  was  given  to  his  words,  and  I  quickly  felt 
the  consequences  in  London.  Fortunately,  I  did  not  allow 
myself  to  be  worried,  or  permit  my  plans  to  be  upset  by  the 
intemperate  warmth  of  others.  My  idea  as  to  the  choice  of  a 
sovereign  for  Belgium  had  never  wavered.  My  candidate  was 
and  would  always  be,  Prince  Leopold  of  Saxe-Coburg,  and  I  was 
in  no  way  disturbed  by  the  noise  and  excitement  which  existed 
everywhere  upon  this  question.  I  had  hopes  ;  first,  that  King 
Louis  Philippe  would  certainly  refuse  the  crown  for  his  son,  the 
Due  de  Nemours  ;  secondly,  that  the  Powers  would  reject  the 
Due  de  Leuchtenberg  ;    and  thirdly,   that  the  Belgians  would 

1  The  Congress  had  been  greatly  irritated  by  the  evident  intention  of  the  Con- 
ference to  settle  by  itself  the  questions  relating  to  Belgium.  The  following  phrase  of 
the  protocol  of  January  20th,  "  Holland  and  Belgium  each  possessing  enclosed  lands 
in  their  respective  territories,  the  five  Powers  will  make  such  exchanges  and  arrange- 
ments between  the  two  countries,  as  will  ensure  to  them  the  reciprocal  advantages  of 
an  entire  contiguous  possession,  &c,"  had  specially  startled  the  susceptibilities  of 
the  Assembly.  Finally,  the  question  of  Luxemburg  had  roused  the  patriotism  of  the 
deputies.  Thus  the  reading  of  the  protocol  at  the  sitting  of  January  20th  brought 
forth  violent  protestations.  "The  national  sovereignty,"  cried  one  deputy,  M. 
Nothcomb,  "  has  been  transferred  from  Brussels  to  the  Foreign  Office."  On  the  30th 
the  protest  was  carried  by  163  votes  against  9. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  31 

never  agree  to  recall  the  Prince  of  Orange.  Therefore,  without 
troubling  myself  on  this  matter,  I  wished  steadily  to  pursue  what, 
in  my  eyes,  was  the  really  important  question,  namely,  the 
separation  of  Belgium  from  Holland.  But,  if  I  was  at  case  on 
this  point,  there  was  no  lack  of  trouble  from  other  quarters,  and 
the  whole  of  February  was  passed  in  anxiety  as  to  the  course  of 
home  events  in  France,  and  the  indecision  of  the  French  Govern- 
ment.    This  requires  some  explanation. 

I  have  already  said  that  the  Conference,  by  its  protocol  of 
January  27th,  had  drawn  up  a  division  of  the  debts  between 
Holland  and  Belgium,  as  well  as  some  other  mercantile  measures, 
essentially  only  provisional,  and  with  the  exception  of  the  question 
of  the  frontier  limits  fixed  according  to  the  position  of  the  two 
countries  in  1790 — the  only  fair  and  admissible  one — the  rest  of 
this  protocol  was  open  to  discussion,  and  could  be  modified 
according  to  the  wishes  brought  forward  on  either  side.  It  was 
in  this  sense  that  I  had  written  to  Paris,  but  there  the  Belgian 
side  was  warmly  and  exclusively  adopted.  The  arrangements 
proposed  in  the  protocol  were  therefore  found  fault  with,  as  not 
being  favourable  enough  to  Belgium,  and  I  myself  was  blamed 
for  having  signed  the  protocol. 

A  few  days  after  the  signature  of  this  protocol,  several 
members  of  the  Conference,  alarmed  at  the  news  received  from 
Brussels,  which  represented  France  as  perpetually  intriguing  in 
favour  of  the  election  of  the  Due  de  Nemours,  proposed  on  the 
1st  February  to  draw  up  a  protocol,  in  which  the  five  Powers 
would  formally  undertake  (in  imitation  of  what  had  been  done 
when  choosing  a  sovereign  for  Greece)  that,  in  no  case,  should 
the  sovereign  of  Belgium  be  chosen  from  among  the  princes  of 
the  reigning  families  of  the  five  Courts  represented  at  the  Con- 
ference in  London.  I  persistently  refused  to  sign  this  protocol, 
which  seemed  to  me  to  show  distrust  of  France,  to  whom  alone, 
at  this  time,  it  could  possibly  apply. 

Having  given  these  explanations  to  make  plain  what  follows, 
I  will  now  confine  myself  to  inserting  in  chronological  order  the 
extracts  from  my  despatches,  and  the  letters  written  and  received 
during  the  month  of  February.  The  progress  of  events  will  be 
easily  followed  in  them. 


32  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  General  Sebastiani. 

London,  Feb.  ist,  1831. 

Monsieur  le  Comte, 

I  have  just  left  the  Conference,  which  lasted  until 
half-past  eight  this  evening.  The  courier,  by  whom  I  am 
sending  this,  is  hurried  on  account  of  the  tide  ;  I  have,  therefore, 
not  much  time  to  write  to  you.  Nevertheless,  on  reading  the 
protocol  I  have  the  honour  to  send  you,  you  will  see  that  I  have 
refused  to  sign  it.  I  am  bound  to  give  you  some  explanation  of 
this  refusal. 

When  the  English  plenipotentiary  elicited  the  opinion  which 
prevailed  at  the  Conference,  and  which  is  found  embodied  in  the 
protocol,  I  opposed  it  at  once,  stating  that  I  could  only  see  in 
this  resolution  a  direct  hit  at  France  ;  that  it  did  not  seem  to  me 
favourable  to  the  maintenance  of  friendly  relations  between  the 
Powers  ;  and  that  besides,  the  very  terms  of  protocols  11  and  12, 
on  which  such  stress  was  laid,  sufficiently  expressed  the  views  of 
the  five  Powers.     Here  are  the  terms  of  these  protocols  : 

"  Protocol  No.  11. — The  plenipotentiaries  are  unanimously 
agreed  that  the  five  Powers  owe  it  to  their  own  interests,  to  their 
union,  to  the  tranquillity  of  Europe,  and  to  the  accomplishment 
of  the  views  embodied  in  the  protocol  of  December  20th,  to  make 
a  solemn  manifestation  and  give  a  striking  proof  of  their  firm 
determination  not  to  seek  any  augmentation  of  territory,  any 
exclusive  influence,  any  isolated  advantage  in  the  arrangements 
relating  to  Belgium,  or  in  any  other  circumstances  that  may 
present  themselves. 

"  Protocol  No.  1 2. — The  sovereign  of  Belgium  must,  by  his 
individual  position,  necessarily  guarantee  the  security  of  the 
neighbouring  States." 

I  thought,  M.  ie  Comte,  that  after  such  very  decided  stipula- 
tions, it  would  be  useless  to  give  any  fresh  explanations  ;  for  this 
reason,  I  have  asked  that  the  matter  be  referred  to  the  govern- 
ment of  the  king,  and  also  for  instructions,  which  I  trust  you  will 
not  delay  in  sending  me. 

The  article  in  the  protocol  having  reference  to  Greece,  to 
which  Lord  Palmerston  alluded,  is  drawn  up  as  follows,  and  is 
under  date  of  March  22nd,  1829  :  "  In  no  case  shall  the  ruler  be 
chosen  from  among  the  princes  of  the  families  who  reign  at  the 
Courts  of  the  signatory  Powers.  .  .  . 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  33 

M.  Bresson  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand. 

Brussels,  Feb.  yd,  1831. 
Mon  Prince, 

H.R.H.  the  Due  de  Nemours  was  nominated  and  pro- 
claimed King  of  the  Belgians  at  twenty-five  minutes  past  four 
prccisely  this  afternoon. 

At  the  first  ballot  191  voted  ;  M.  le  Due  de  Nemours  had 
89  votes,  the  Due  de  Leuchtenbcrg  67,  and  the  Archduke 
Charles  of  Austria  35.     It  was  necessary  to  have  101  votes. 

At  the  second  ballot,  192  voted.  The  absolute  majority 
required  was  97.  M.  le  Due  de  Nemours  obtained  this 
exactly  ;  M.  le  Due  de  Leuchtenberg  had  47  votes,  and  the 
Archduke  21. 

The  President  of  the  Congress  then  proclaimed  the  Due  de 
Nemours,  King  of  the  Belgians,  subject  to  the  condition  of  his 
accepting  the  constitution  decreed  by  the  Congress. 

The  greatest  enthusiasm,  and  the  most  perfect  tranquillity, 
reign  in  the  town  .  .  . 

The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  General  Serastiani. 

London,  February  \th,  1831. 

Monsieur  le  Comte, 

Yesterday  evening,  I  received  your  letter  of  January  31st, 
and  this  morning,  that  of  February  1st,  which  I  hasten  to  answer. 

You  will  see  first  of  all  by  the  schedule  annexed  to,  protocol 
No.  12  (which  I  could  not  send  you  sooner,  because  it  was 
only  issued  yesterday  evening  from  the  Chancellor's  office),  that 
some  of  the  objections  raised  in  your  despatches  have  been 
solved  by  the  principles  contained  in  this  schedule.  Thus  you 
will  observe,  that  in  order  not  to  deviate  too  much  from  the 
system  that  has  been  adopted,  the  second  paragraph  relating  to 
financial  and  commercial  affairs  is  entitled:  Proposed  Arrange- 
uients,  which  allows  all  parties  both  time  and  means  to  furnish 
fresh  explanations.  This  title  gives  positive  indication,  that  we 
do  not  wish  to  settle  on  our  own  authority  all  the  questions 
which  are  enumerated  in  the  protocol  ;  and  this  is  so  evident, 
that,  in  the  instructions  given  to  our  commissioners  at  Brussels, 
we  recommend  them  to  sound  all  the  persons  of  influence,  whom 
they  come  across,  as  to  the  probable  effect  of  this  protocol.  At 
the  same  time,  we  leave  the  selection  of  their  opportunity  for  so 
doing  to  their  discretion.  I  wrote  to  you  to  this  effect  on 
January  29th. 

Your  opinion,  as  to  the  small  importance  to  Belgium  of  the 

VOL.  IV.  D 


34  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLE  YRAND 

commerce  which  she  would  gain  from  the  Dutch  colonies,  is 
opposed  to  that  of  the  chief  merchants  of  the  city  of  London. 
They  all  think,  and  the  most  able  have  been  consulted,  that  it 
is  to  this  commerce  that  Belgium  owes  the  development  of  her 
industries  for  the  last  fifteen  years  ;  the  petitions  from  North  and 
South  Flanders  confirm  this  opinion.  The  difficulty  which  you 
foresee  with  regard  to  Holland  in  the  execution  of  this 
condition,  would,  I  fancy,  be  easily  removed  at  the  time  of  the 
definite  treaty  :  guarantees  could  then  be  imposed  from  which 
it  would  be  impossible  for  Holland  to  escape. 

We  have  not  proceeded  any  further,  as  you  seem  to  think,  with 
the  question  of  the  Grand  Duchy  of  Luxembourg  ;  it  has  been 
referred  to  those  who  have  the  right  and  the  power  to  do  so. 
The  observations  on  this  subject,  contained  in  my  despatch 
No.  274,  cannot  have  escaped  you. 

As  to  the  fixture  of  the  territory  and  frontiers  of  Belgium,  it 
seems  to  me  that  it  was  impossible  to  adjust  them  otherwise 
than  we  have  done.  We  wished  to  recognize  the  independence 
of  Belgium  ;  to  this  end,  we  had  first  to  learn  what  was  Belgium, 
and  then  to  determine  the  frontiers  of  the  country  whose 
independence  we  were  initiating.  Could  we,  without  injustice, 
have  laid  down  any  others  than  those  which  existed  in  1790, 
when  Holland  and  Belgium  formed  two  separate  States  ?  The 
Conference,  too,  formally  declared  in  its  protocol  of  January 
20th,  that  both  parties  would  regulate,  under  its  mediation,  the 
limits  or  assignments,  and  thus  facilitate  definite  arrangements. 
That,  you  see,  comes  within  the  bounds  which  you  assign  to  the 
Conference. 

You  announce,  M.  le  Comte,  that  the  government  of  the 
king  has  not  adhered  to  the  protocol  of  January  27th.  I  do  not, 
I  confess,  understand  in  what  way  it  could  adhere  or  not  adhere 
to  a  provisionary  act  which  contains  nothing  but  contingent 
stipulations,  as  may  be  seen  by  the  schedule  I  send  you  to-day. 

In  replying  to  the  portion  of  your  letter  of  February  1st, 
relating  to  the  future  sovereign  of  Belgium,  I  ought  not  to 
conceal  from  you  the  uneasiness,  which  the  resolution  you  seem  to 
have  arrived  at,  should  the  Congress  designate  M.  le  Due  de 
Nemours,  causes  me.  I  do  not  think  it  would  be  at  all  pru- 
dent to  delay  in  expressing  your  refusal.  A  dilatory  answer,  in 
such  a  case,  would  excite  in  England  the  utmost  discontent  ; 
she  would  see  in  it  the  confirmation  of  those  intrigues  with 
which  she  reproaches  the  French  government  ;  and  Russia  will 
not  fail  to  profit  by  this  circumstance  to  accuse  you  of  keeping 
something  in  the  background.  This,  M.  le  Comte,  is  my 
opinion,  formed  from  my  relations  with  the  English  Cabinet. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  35 

As  to  the  Prince  of  Naples,  I  do  not  believe  it  is  necessary 
to  suspend  your  decision,  in  order  to  render  his  chances  more 
favourable.  It  is  for  you  to  judge  what  action  it  is  best  to  take 
at  Brussels,  respecting  this  choice.  You  can  see  by  my  corre- 
spondence, that  I  have  prepared  the  way  here  for  him  with  the 
English  Ministers  and  the  members  of  the  Conference,  and  I  do 
not  think  I  am  taking  too  much  on  myself  in  declaring  to  you, 
that  when  this  question  comes  forward,  we  shall  not  find  any 
opposition  on  the  part  of  the  English  government,  which  is  sure 
of  the  assent  of  Austria  and  Prussia ;  the  time  necessary  for 
instructions  will  retard  that  of  Russia.  This  happy  situation 
would  be  changed  by  irresolute  measures,  which  would  com- 
promise, without  doubt,  the  maintenance  of  peace  with  England, 
this  is  at  present  assured  to  us,  and  should  be  our  sole 
aim.  .  .  . 1 

Madame  Adelaide  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand.2 

Paris,  February  5//1,  1831. 

The  King  charges  me,  mon  cher  Prince,  to  acquaint 
you  with  the  view  he  takes  with  regard  to  the  last  protocol  which 
you  have  so  rightly  refused  to  sign,  and  of  which  I  am  sure 
you  will  feel  the  justice.  It  is  that  even  the  Powers  can- 
not compare  it  with  that  which  had  been  arranged  for 
Greece,  as  the  circumstances  are  entirely  different.  In  the 
case  of  Greece,  it  was  the  three  Powers  who  chose  and 
nominated  the  sovereign  ;  here  it  is  the  Belgian  Congress  and 
Belgium  (the  independence  of  which  has  been  recognized  by  the 
five  Powers),  who  must  choose  their  sovereign  without  restraint. 

Here  we  have  Nemours  elected,  in  spite  of  the  persistent 
refusal  of  the  King  and  his  government.  A  fresh  despatch 
reiterating  and  persisting  in  this  refusal,  was  sent  yesterday 
to  M.  Bresson,  at  Brussels,  four  hours  before  the  news 
of  the  election  of  Nemours  reached  us  by  telegraphic  de- 
spatch. We  are  consequently  open  and  loyal,  mon  cher 
Prince.  You  will  make  good  and  clever  use  of  this,  and  I  have 
firm  confidence  that  we  shall  come  out  of  it  with  honour  and 
glory  ;  we  only  want,  we  only  wish  for,  and  that  sincerely,  the  real 
welfare  of  all,  without  any  personal  interest.     Truth  will  triumph 

1  Suppressed  in  the  text  of  the  Archives. 

2  It  may  be  useful  to  notice,  that  by  following  the  chronological  order  in  which  the 
letters  are  written,  M.  de  Talleyrand  could  not  place  the  answers  exactly  following  the 
letters  themselves,  and  that  it  took,  at  that  time,  from  two  to  three  days,  according 
the  state  of  the  sea,   for  the  transmission  of  a  letter  to  Brussels  or  Paris,  and  vice 
versd. — (Note  of  M.  de  Bacourt.) 

D  2 


36  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLE  YRAND. 

over  stratagem  and  intrigue  ;  and  you  will  have  the  glory  and 
satisfaction  of  contributing  powerfully  to  it,  by  your  talent  and 
ability. 

I  long,  more  than  I  can  tell  you,  for  your  news,  but  you 
must  now  take  the  high  hand  in  London,  mon  cher  Prince. 
They  play  with  us,  they  leave  us  in  a  condition  which  is  neither 
peace  nor  war  ;  and  Belgium  is  on  the  brink  of  frightful  anarchy. 
This  cannot  be  endured  ;  we  must  understand  one  another,  and 
come  frankly  to  some  arrangement,  some  combination  which 
suits  them  and  gives  them  security,  and  then  all  will  go  well. 
But  for  them,  for  us,  and  for  everyone,  this  is  more  imperative 
than  I  can  tell  you.  Experience  (if  it  is  any  use  to  some 
people)  must  prove  to  them  that  too  much  time  has  already 
been  lost  over  a  miserable,  foolish  hope  in  the  Prince  of  Orange, 
which,  they  ought  to  see  clearly  now,  cannot  be  entertained  and 
must  be  absolutely  rejected.  .  .  . 

I  am  sure  that  Madame  Adelaide,  in  writing  this  letter,  and 
the  King,  in  dictating  it,  were  perfectly  sincere  in  their 
declarations ;  but  what  could  I  think  on  receiving  from 
Brussels,  the  same  day  and  under  the  same  date,  the  following 
letter  ? 

M.  Bresson  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand. 

Brussels,  February  $th,  1831. 
Mon  Prince, 

Forced  to  change  our  position,  and  to  engage  in  a 
contest  which  we  wished  to  avoid,  we  could  only  do  one  thing : 
it  was  necessary  to  gain  the  day,  and  we  have  gained  it.  Now 
we  have  to  think  of  the  consequences  of  this  success,  which  is 
not  yet  established.  An  idea  occurs  to  me,  which,  if  it  finds 
favour  with  you,  may  bear  fruit.  The  Prince  of  Orange  may,  in  a 
way,  consider  himself  deprived  of  his  possessions  by  us.  If  we 
procure  him  some  compensations,  which  will  at  the  same  time 
conduce  to  the  peace  and  equilibrium  of  Europe  ;  if  he  receives 
them  through  our  influence  and  friendly  intervention,  we  shall 
be  doing  at  once  an  act  of  goodwill  and  good  policy  ;  we  shall 
facilitate  the  solution  of  all  the  complicated  questions  which 
will  be  the  outcome  of  M.  le  Due  de  Nemours'  election,  and  we 
shall  allay  more  than  one  irritation  which  it  will  produce.  The 
Prince  of  Orange  is  the  Emperor  of  Russia's  brother-in-law  ; 1 

1  It  will  be  remembered  that  the  Prince  of  Orange  had  married  the  Grand-Duchess 
Anne,  sister  of  the  Emperor  Nicholas. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1S30.  37 

he  is  acceptable  to  England;  he  is  good-tempered  ;  his  manners 
are  charming ;  he  possesses  a  chivalrous  nature,  and  his 
frivolities  and  indiscretions,  which,  in  this  rigidly  Catholic 
country,  have  got  him  into  great  trouble,  may  be  looked  upon 
elsewhere  with  a  more  indulgent  eye.  Poland  asks  for  a  king  ; 
she  seems  determined  upon  a  long  and  bloody  resistance.  If  the 
Emperor  of  Russia  can,  before  the  rupture,  be  brought  to  an 
agreement,  he  will  yield  in  favour  of  the  Prince  of  Orange  more 
readily  than  of  any  other  ;  and  if,  at  our  initiative  and  our 
insistence,  such  a  termination  is  given  to  the  Polish  revolution, 
we  shall  have  served  at  once  the  cause  of  a  generous  nation, 
drawn  towards  us  all  hostile  or  disquieted  minds,  recomposcd 
the  European  system  destroyed  by  the  division  of  Poland,  and 
strengthened  the  throne  of  M.  le  Due  de  Nemours.  With  you, 
mon  Prince,  it  would  be  idle  to  enter  into  the  working  out  of 
this  idea.  I  confine  myself  to  placing  it  before  you.  But  I 
send  you  this  letter  by  express  ;  it  may  prove  a  sedative  best 
applied  at  the  beginning. 

I  am  already  exerting  myself,  and  shall  continue  to  do  so, 
to  prevent  the  chiefs  of  the  insurrection  at  Ghent  from  being 
put  to  death.1 

The  reign  of  our  young  and  amiable  prince  would  begin 
well  with  an  act  of  clemency  ;  we  must  keep  it  in  reserve. 

I  cannot  portray  to  you  too  strongly,  the  effect  that  a  refusal, 
or  only  a  conditional  acceptance  from  his  Majesty,  would 
produce  on  the  country.  It  would  mean  the  instantaneous  up- 
setting of  everything  ;  civil  war,  the  French  cockade,  the  Orange 
cockade,  disorder,  murder,  and  anarchy  in  all  their  fury.  We 
cannot  look  back  any  more,  mon  Prince.  A  retrograde  move- 
ment would  be  a  thousand  times  more  dangerous,  than  a  firm 
decisive  attitude. 

The  protest  of  our  government  against  the  protocol  of  January 
27th,  deprived  me  in  a  way,  of  my  functions  as  commissioner  of 
the  Conference.  I  had  communicated  it  to  M.  Van  de  Weyer, 
because  I  knew  that  it  would  procure  us  the  dissentient  voices  of 
Limburg  and  Luxemburg  ;  he  showed  it,  and  then  allowed  it  to 
be  taken  from  him,  and  it  was  read  from  the  Tribune  and  printed. 

There  is  a  very  delicate  point,  which,  if  the  king  accepts  for 
M.  le  Due  de  Nemours,  entails  another  protest  against  the 
protocol  of  January  20th.     Of  our  ninety-seven  votes,  twenty 

1  On  the  2nd  February,  an  Orangist  movement  had  broken  out  at  Bruges  anil  at 
Ghent.  Lieut. -Col  Gregoire  incited  his  regiment  encamped  at  Bruges  to  revolt. 
At  its  head,  he  penetrated  into  Ghent  and  forced  the  Governor  to  proclaim  the  Prince 
of  Orange.  But  he  was  at  once  attacked  in  the  town,  defeated,  and  arrested.  The 
movement  was  not  followed  up. 


38  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

belong  to  Luxemburg  ;  so  if  we  recognize  Luxemburg  as 
Dutch,  we  invalidate  the  election.  A  tacit  understanding  goes 
further  than  one  would  think.  But  the  Prince  of  Orange, proposed 
by  us  alone  for  Poland,  would  effectively  settle  many  things.  .  .  . 

I  do  not  know  if  the  grand  scheme  of  policy  shown  in  this 
letter,  originated  solely  in  M.  Bresson's  brain,  but  the  assurance 
with  which  he  insists  upon  it,  makes  me  suppose  that  he  is 
supported  in  some  quarter.  Be  that  as  it  may,  I  did  not  even 
take  the  trouble  to  answer  such  absurdities.  But  let  us  continue 
the  extracts  from  despatches. 

The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  General  Sebastiani. 

London,  February  6th,  1831. 
M.  LE  Comte, 

The  English  Cabinet  Council  is  at  this  moment 
deliberating  over  a  despatch  which  has  just  arrived  from  Lord 
Ponsonby,  in  which  he  announces  that  M.  Bresson  has  caused  a 
sort  of  declaration  from  the  French  government  to  be  circulated 
in  Brussels.  This  declaration,  of  which  I  am  quite  ignorant, 
contains,  it  is  said,  a  positive  assurance,  that  it  will  not 
acknowledge  the  last  protocols  of  the  London  Conference.1 

1  It  is  necessary  to  show  here  the  singularly  delicate  situation  of  M.  Bresson  at 
Brussels,  at  once  a  dependent  of  the  Conference  and  of  General  Sebastiani,  it  was 
often  very  difficult  for  him  to  obey  both  the  orders  from  London  and  from  Paris. 
Thus,  the  French  Cabinet  had  at  first  refused  to  recognize  the  protocols  of  20th  and  27th 
January,  and  the  7th  February  :  the  first,  fixing  the  limits  of"  Holland  and  Belgium  ; 
the  second,  regulating  certain  commercial  and  financial  questions  resulting  from  the 
separation  ;  the  third,  confirming  the  resolution  of  King  Louis  Philippe  already 
announced,  to  refuse  the  crown  offered  to  the  Due  de  Nemours.  M.  de  Talleyrand 
had  signed  these  protocols,  and  had  sent  them  to  M.  Bresson  to  be  communicated  to 
the  Belgian  government.  But  almost  the  same  day,  General  Sebastiani,  who  had 
instituted  a  line  of  policy  at  Paris  opposed  to  that  of  M.  de  Talleyrand,  wrote  to 
M.  Bresson  : 

"PARIS,  February  1st. 

"Sir, 

"  If,  as  I  hope,  you  have  not  yet  communicated  to  the  Belgian  government 
the  protocol  of  January  27th,  you  will  object  to  this  communication,  because  the 
government  of  the  king  has  not  adhered  to  its  resolutions.  In  the  question  of  liabili- 
ties, as  in  that  of  fixing  the  extent  and  limits  of  the  Belgian  and  Dutch  territories,  we 
have  always  understood  that  the  co-operation  and  free  consent  of  both  States  was 
necessary.  The  London  Conference  is  a  mediator,  and  the  intention  of  the  govern- 
ment of  the  king,  is,  that  it  should  not  lose  that  character  in  any  way. 

"  Receive,  &c. 

"  Horace  Sebastiani." 

M.  Bresson  communicated  this  letter  to  M.  Van  de  Weyer,  President  of  the 
Diplomatic  Committee,  who  read  it  to  the  Congress  on  February  3rd.  It  is  to  this 
incident,  which  greatly  astonished  him,  that  M.  de  Talleyrand  alludes  in  his  letter  of 
February  6th. 


THE  REVOLUriOX  OF  1S30.  3; 

It  has  produced  a  most  unfortunate  effect  here,  as  may  be 
easily  understood.  In  charging  their  plenipotentiaries  in 
London,  to  provide  for  the  difficulties  brought  about  by  the 
rising  in  Belgium,  the  five  Powers  have  had  in  view  the  preven- 
tion of  complications  which  would  disturb  the  peace  of 
Europe. 

In  accordance  with  the  treaties  between  the  Powers,  Bel- 
gium was  re-united  to  Holland  in  1814;  from  the  moment 
that  this  union  was  rendered  impossible  by  the  Belgian  revo- 
lution, these  same  Powers  were  under  the  obligation  of  seek- 
ing the  combinations  most  favourable  to  the  maintenance  of 
harmony  between  them,  and  which  would  offer  the  strongest 
guarantees  for  the  interests  of  each.  This  has  been  the  prin- 
ciple which  directed  the  London  Conference.  A  declaration, 
such  as  that  which  was  said  to  have  been  made  at  Brussels,  in 
the  name  of  the  French  government,  would  necessarily  attack 
that  principle,  and  would  prove  that  France  was  not  one  with 
the  other  Powers.  We  should  consequently  find  ourselves 
separated  from  the  policy  of  the  rest  of  Europe. 

People  are  astonished,  and  rightly  so  it  seems  to  me,  that  the 
French  Cabinet,  if  it  wished  to  express  its  disapprobation  of  the 
last  protocol  of  the  Conference,  did  not  address  itself  solely  to 
this  Conference,  instead  of  to  the  Belgians,  to  whom  the  last 
protocol  was  not  to  be  communicated.  Such  a  proceeding, 
M.  le  Comte,  I  will  not  conceal  from  you,  has  excited  most 
bitter  complaints  here,  and  has  rendered  my  position  extremely 
difficult.  You  must  lose  no  time  in  preventing  the  calamitous 
consequences  which  may  ensue  therefrom,  if  you  do  not  wish 
the  unfavourable  dispositions  of  several  Powers  respecting  us, 
to  develop. 

My  last  despatch  must  have  shown  you,  that  there  wras  never 
any  question  of  adhesion  or  non-adhesion  on  your  part,  to  a 
protocol  containing  only  proposals.  It  will  thus  be  easy  to 
retrace  this  useless,  or  at  least  imprudent  step. 

I  learnt  this  morning  by  a  courier  from  M.  Bresson,  the 
result  of  the  deliberations  of  the  Congress  at  Brussels ;  I  am 
convinced  that  the  king  will  refuse,  without  any  hesitation,  the 
crown  which  is  offered  to  M.  le  Due  de  Nemours.  You  must 
clearly  understand  that  all  measures  which  lead  to  consultations 
with  the  Powers,  will  be  regarded  as  dilatory,  and  that  a  decided 
and  spontaneous  refusal  will  alone  secure  England,  whose 
alliance  we  are  on  the  point  of  losing.  Your  despatches  have 
authorised  me  to  declare  that  there  will  be  a  refusal ;  I  have 
done  so,  and  I  continue  to  hope  that  the  assurances  I  have  given, 
will  be  supported  by  the  king  and  by  you. 


40  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

England  will  reject  M.  le  Due  dc  Leuchtenburg,  and  will 
accept,  without  doubt,  the  choice  of  the  Prince  of  Naples ; 
but  I  repeat,  it  will  be  at  the  price  of  a  prompt  and  decisive 
refusal  on  your  part,  to  grant  M.  le  Due  de  Nemours  to  the 
Belgians. 

You  see,  M.  le  Comte,  it  is  a  question  of  peace  or  immediate 
war.  I  frankly  avow,  that  I  do  not  consider  Belgium  sufficiently 
important,  for  us  now  to  sacrifice  peace  for  her. 

I  beg  you  to  write  me  a  letter,  as  promptly  as  possible, 
which  I  can  show  to  the  members  of  the  Conference,  and  in 
which  you  can  authorise  me  to  declare,  that  the  intention  of  the 
government  of  the  king  is  not  in  any  way  to  isolate  itself  from 
the  other  Powers.  .  .  . 


The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  General  Sebastiani. 

London,  February  7th,  1831. 

M.  le  Comte, 

The  Cabinet  Council,  of  which  I  had  the  honour  to 
acquaint  you  yesterday,  lasted  more  than  three  hours,  and  was 
occupied  exclusively  with  the  question  of  the  Due  de  Nemours' 
election.  All  the  ministers  agreed  as  to  the  necessity  of 
immediate  war,  should  this  election  be  recognized  by  France. 
If  I  am  properly  informed,  they  have  even  resolved  to  carry  out 
the  war  with  great  energy. 

Such  were  the  resolutions  adopted  by  the  English  Cabinet, 
M.  le  Comte,  when  I  received  your  despatch  of  the  4th  at 
seven  o'clock  yesterday  evening.  Warned  as  I  had  been  of  the 
decisions  of  the  Council,  I  lost  no  time  in  communicating  to 
Lord  Grey  and  Lord  Palmerston,  the  assurances  which  your 
despatch  contained  ;  they  were  received  with  the  most  lively 
satisfaction  by  the  ministers,  as  well  as  by  those  members  of  the 
diplomatic  body  to  whom  I  have  made  them  known.  I  tried  to 
see  as  many  people  as  possible  during  the  evening,  in  order  to 
destroy  the  effect  of  the  morning's  council.  The  loyalty  which 
directed  the  actions  of  the  French  government  has  been 
generally  recognized,  and  it  is  looked  upon  as  the  principal 
guarantee  of  the  maintenance  of  peace. 

It  is  my  duty,  however,  to  inform  you  of  the  effect  produced  by 
the  election  of  the  Due  de  Nemours,  and  above  all,  the  declaration 
which  was  to  have  been  made  in  the  name  of  France  to  Brussels, 
of  her  refusal  to  recognize  our  last  protocol.  These  two  facts 
have  been  considered,  not  only  in  the  city  and  among  mercan- 
tile men,  but   in   the  upper  classes  of  society,  as  an   imminent 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  4' 

cause  of  war.  All  the  ambassadors  of  the  Great  Powers  have 
declared,  that  the  decision  of  the  English  Cabinet  on  this  point 
would  serve  to  regulate  the  conduct  to  be  pursued  by  their 
governments.  To-day  this  language  has  totally  changed,  and 
the  rumours  of  war  have  given  way  to  protestations  of  peace 
and  friendship. 

I  am  able  to  judge  from  this  event,  M.  le  Comte,  of  the  im- 
portance that  our  government  has  regained  in  Europe  ;  on  it, 
evidently,  peace  or  war  henceforth  depend,  for  Belgium  counts 
for  little.  She  commits  too  many  foolish  acts  to  inspire  great 
interest.  You  will  desire  to  retain  the  advantageous  position 
which  we  now  occupy,  and  I  do  not  hesitate  to  repeat,  that  this 
can  only  be  done  by  founding  our  policy  on  a  close  union  with 
England.  This  union  will  guarantee  us  against  any  hostile  dis- 
positions that  the  other  Powers  may  cherish  ;  it  will  give  us 
time  and  means  to  strengthen  our  government,  whereas  by 
separating  ourselves  from  her,  we  shall  inevitably  bring  on  a 
general  war,  the  danger  of  which  it  is  easy  to  comprehend. 
Even  supposing  we  have  great  successes  on  the  Continent,  wrould 
they  compensate  for  the  ruin  of  our  commerce  and  industries  ? 
Will  they  prevent  factions  from  disturbing  the  interior  of 
France  ? 

The  powerful  armaments  which  England  is  in  a  position  to 
bring  forward,  and  of  which  I  have  already  told  you,  will  give 
you  an  idea  of  the  results  that  a  maritime  war  would  have 
for  us. 

I  am  convinced,  and  I  declare  to  you  on  my  own  responsi- 
bility, that  we  can  obtain  the  union  of  which  I  have  just  spoken, 
by  adopting  a  line  of  conduct,  at  once  firm  and  prudent,  such  as 
would  befit  the  dignity  of  the  King  of  France.  But  it  must  be 
borne  in  mind,  that  the  English  Cabinet  is  never  guided  but  by 
its  own  interests,  and  that  it  is  only  by  treating  these  with 
respect  (without,  however,  displaying  a  compliance  that  would 
compromise  our  own),  that  we  can  hope  on  our  side  for  an 
intimate  union.  I  have  remarked,  and  with  great  pleasure,  the 
passage  in  your  last  despatch,  where  you  express  the  intention 
of  not  isolating  our  policy  from  that  of  the  other  Powers  of 
Europe.  I  believe  that  this  resolution  will  have  the  most  happy 
results  for  us.  We  must  ever  remember,  that  there  can  be  no 
Holy  Alliance  when  France  is  a  member  of  the  Conference. 
That  will  answer  any  parliamentary  questions. 

I  send  you  the  protocol  of  our  conference  to-day,  which  the 
king,  I  hope,  will  peruse  with  pleasure.1 

1  This  protocol  declared,  that  the  Powers  would  not,  on  any  condition,  recognize 
the  Due  de  Leuchtenburg  as  King  of  the  Belgians. 


42  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  General  Sebastiani. 

London,  February  8/7/,  1831. 
M.    LE    COMTE, 

I  had  the  honour  to  receive  yesterday  evening,  a  few 
minutes  after  the  departure  of  M.  le  Comte  de  Flahaut,  your 
despatch  of  the  5th  instant.  I  judge  from  the  contents,  that 
your  disquietude  is  renewed  on  the  subject  of  Belgium.  I  am 
not  surprised  at  it.  The  position  in  which  the  government  is 
placed,  must  necessarily  create  fresh  embarrassments  each  day. 
There  is,  I  believe,  an  easy  method  of  getting  rid  of  these,  but  it 
must  be  employed  in  a  prompt  and  firm  manner. 

The  refusal  in  Paris  of  the  crown  of  Belgium  for  M.  le  Due 
de  Nemours,  and  the  assurance  given  in  London  that  the  Due 
de  Leuchtenburg  would  not  be  recognized  by  the  Powers,  places 
the  king's  government  in  a  position  to  declare  that,  as  it  is  in 
accord  with  the  Conference  on  the  necessity  of  regulating  the 
affairs  of  Belgium  in  such  a  way  as  to  reconcile  the  interests  of 
all  the  Powers,  it  henceforth  relegates  to  the  Conference  the 
task  of  arranging  them. 

In  making  such  a  declaration,  you  rid  yourself  of  a  question, 
of  which  it  is  beyond  your  power  to  make  an  end,  without  the 
joint  action  of  the  other  Powers.  If  you  attempt  it,  you  will 
turn  them  against  you,  and  you  will  bring  about  fresh  difficulties. 
In  my  opinion,  it  is  impossible  for  any  one  Power  to  take  upon 
itself  the  sole  charge  of  directing  Belgium  ;  whereas  the  authority 
vested  in  the  hands  of  the  Conference  gives  some  hope  of 
success.  This  Conference  may  meander  on  the  confines  of  in- 
tervention or  non-intervention,  without  getting  into  difficulties 
thereby,  and  it  will  believe  it  has  religiously  fulfilled  its  duties,  if 
it  preserves  the  independence  of  Belgium,  prevents  her  from 
troubling  her  neighbours,  and,  in  addition,  preserves  the  peace 
of  Europe. 

It  seems  to  me,  M.  le  Comte,  that  the  king  cannot1  find 
any  serious  inconvenience  in  the  step  that  I  now  advise ;  it 
accords  entirely  with  his  dignity  and  his  interests. 

However,  1  must  repeat  that  if  this  step  is  not  taken,  my 
presence  here  would  be  useless,  both  to  the  king  and  to  the 
affairs  of  France.  I  have  had  to  bear  the  brunt  (most  dis- 
agreeable for  me)  of  the  announcement  made  by  M.  Bresson 
at  Brussels,  because  I  was  sure  that,  if  I  retired  from  the  Con- 
ference, the  other  four  plenipotentiaries  would  withdraw  at  once, 
and  I  did  not  wish  to  be   the  cause  of  an  event  which  would 

1  Var.  :  nc  doit  —  ought  not. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  43 

have  had  such  unfortunate  results.  But  pray  understand,  that 
in  future,  it  will  be  impossible  for  me  to  play  any  other  rdlehere, 
than  that  which  belongs  to  the  ambassador  of  the  king. 

The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  General  Sebastiani. 

LONDON,  February  9//1,  1831. 

Monsieur  le  Comte, 

I  have  the  honour  to  send  you  herewith,  a  copy  of  the 
protocol  of  our  yesterday's  conference.  We  were  obliged,  as 
you  will  see  on  reading  it,  to  ask  for  the  fulfilment  of  the 
armistice,  which  continues  to  be  violated  by  the  Belgian  troops 
round  Maastricht.  The  King  of  Holland  having  raised  the 
blockade  of  the  Scheldt,  leaves  the  provisional  government  no 
pretext  whatever  for  the  evident  violation  of  an  undertaking 
given  to  the  Powers.  The  terms  of  this  undertaking  are  very 
positive.  "  The  privilege  will  be  accorded  to  both  parties,  of 
communicating  freely  by  land  and  sea  with  the  territories, 
fortresses,  and  positions  respectively  occupied  by  the  troops 
outside  the  limits  which  separated  Belgium  from  the  United 
Provinces  of  the  Netherlands,  before  the  treaty  of  Paris,  May 
30th,  1 8 14." 

When  there  was  a  question  of  transmitting  the  instructions 
(of  which  you  will  find  a  copy  herewith)  to  the  commissioners 
at  Brussels,  M.  Bresson  was  again  taken  into  consideration  as 
commissioner  of  the  Conference  ;  it  is  partly  out  of  regard  for 
me  that  they  have  here  shut  their  eyes  to  what  has  occurred  at 
Brussels,  but  such  a  situation  cannot  continue.  I  request  you, 
therefore,  to  send  M.  Bresson  back  here,  where  I  can  in  a  short 
time,  let  him  take  up  the  work  he  did  before. 

Our  conferences  will  not  be  so  continuous  just  now  ;  it  will 
be  well  to  suspend  them,  in  order  to  give  men's  minds  time  to 
calm  down.  When  the  Belgians  find  only  coolness  both  in 
Paris  and  London,  it  will  perhaps  be  possible  that  the  language 
of  reason  may  make  itself  heard,  and  then  will  be  the  time  for 
clever  agents  to  put  the  choice  of  Prince  Charles  of  Naples — 
whom  you  wish,  and  whom  England  will  not  oppose — into  their 
heads.  I  think  this  time  of  relaxation  will  be  useful  in  the 
interests  of  peace,  which  are,  and  will  continue  to  be,  my  one 
aim  here.  .  .  . 

LONDON,  February  iof/1,  1S31. 

Monsieur  le  Comte, 

You    have   requested    me   to   express  to  the   English 
government,  the  disquietude  that  maybe  caused  by  the  measures 


44  THE  MEMOIRS  OE  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

Lord  Ponsonby  continues  to  take  at  Brussels  in  favour  of  the 
Prince  of  Orange.  I  have  had  an  interview  on  the  subject  with 
Lord  Palmerston,  to  whom  I  stated  our  reasons  for  desiring  to 
prevent  efforts  which  could  only  result  in  civil  war.  Lord  Pal- 
merston quite  understood  me,  and  told  me  that  orders  would  be 
sent  to  Lord  Ponsonby,  to  discontinue  in  future  from  mixing 
himself  up  in  the  affairs  of  the  Prince  of  Orange.  .  .  . 

I  have  this  morning  received  your  despatch  of  the  8th,  in 
which  you  inform  me,  that  his  Majesty,  with  a  view  to  prevent  the 
vexatious  scenes  of  trouble  and  disorder  at  Brussels,  has  decided 
to  defer  the  official  announcement  of  his  refusal  to  the  Belgian 
deputation,  which  has  come  to  Paris  to  offer  the  crown  of  Bel- 
gium :  to  M.  le  Due  de  Nemours.  As  this  determination  is 
entirely  opposed  to  the  declaration  made  by  M.  de  Flahaut  and 
myself  to  the  English  ministers,  in  order  to  obtain  the  exclu- 
sion of  the  Due  de  Leuchtenberg,  I  have  decided  not  to  mention 
your  despatch  of  this  morning  to  Lord  Palmerston.  Whatever 
the  reasons  may  be  which  have  influenced  the  king's  decision, 
any  delay  in  the  refusal  will  only  give  occasion  here  for  sus- 
picion, and  I  think  we  ought  to  avoid  that  above  everything. 
Since  the  arrival  of  the  Paris  papers,  I  have  received  three  letters 
this  morning  from  members  of  the  English  Cabinet  best  disposed 
towards  us,  all  evincing  the  desire  that  a  firm  and  clear  refusal 
by  the  French  government  should  furnish  a  fresh  proof  of  its 
loyalty,  and  put  an  end  to  all  this  uncertainty.  .  .  . 


The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  General  Sebastiani. 

London,  February  12th,  1831. 

Monsieur  le  Comte, 

I  must  thank  you  for  your  despatch  of  the  9th  ;  it 
contains  assurances  from  you  and  the  king,  which  will 
contribute  powerfully  in  restoring  the  confidence,  which  recent 
circumstances  have  withdrawn  from  us. 

There  is  one  point  in  your  letter,  however,  which  will  not 
quite  satisfy  them  here,  and  respecting  which,  I  have  need  of 
precise  explanation.  You  tell  me,  with  regard  to  the  imprudent 
(to  say  the  very  least)  measures  of  M.  Bresson  at  Brussels  : 
"  that  it  is  possible  the  news  of  the  protocol  of  January  27th 

1  This  deputation  was  composed  often  members,  Messrs.  Surlet  de  Chokier,  Felix 
de  Merode,  d'Arschot,  Gendebien,  Lehon,  de  Brouckere,  Marlet,  the  Abbe 
Bouqueau,  Barthelemy,  and  de  Rodes.  The  Deputies  arrived  at  Paris  February  6th. 
It  was  only  the  17th  that  they  were  received  officially,  and  that  the  king  notified  his 
refusal  to  them.     (See  the  Debats  of  February  19th.) 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1S30.  45 

may  have  got  spread  abroad  in  Brussels  ;  that  it  had  produced 
a  very  bad  effect,  and  that  M.  Bresson,  in  order  to  calm  the 
suspicion  and  irritation,  had  been  led  to  publish  the  non- 
adhesion  of  the  French  government  to  the  stipulations  of  this 
protocol/' 

I  understand,  and  perhaps  I  may  succeed  in  making  them 
understand  here,  the  reasons  that  determined  the  course  adopted 
by  M.  Bresson  ;  but  it  is  absolutely  necessary  that  you  should 
declare  to  me  in  a  letter  for  public  use,  that  this  step  was  only 
taken  to  get  over  a  momentary  difficulty,  which  has  been 
successfully  overcome  by  this  means,  and  that  you  have  never 
ceased  to  be,  in  all  points,  at  one  with  the  Conference.  Some 
such  declaration  can  alone  reassure  the  English  Cabinet  and  the 
members  of  the  Conference  ;  it  will  also,  besides,  be  in  harmony 
with  all  that  M.  de  Flahaut  and  I  have  said,  and  without  laying 
stress  on  the  personal  interest  that  I  have  in  it,  I  must  tell  you, 
that  it  is  expected  here  v  as  a  guarantee  of  their  pledges.  .  .  . 


London,  February  13th,  1831. 

Monsieur  le  Comte, 

Yesterday  evening,  after  the  departure  of  the  courier  I 
sent  to  you,  I  received  intelligence  from  Lord  Palmerston  of  a 
letter  written  by  Lord  Ponsonby,  in  which  he  states  that 
M.  Bresson  has  refused  to  present  protocol  No.  15,  of  our 
conference  of  February  17th,2  to  the  Diplomatic  Committee  of 
the  Congress. 

This  new  departure  of  M.  Bresson's,  places  me  in  the 
greatest  embarrassment.  I  have  endeavoured  to  justify  the 
publication  of  your  letter  at  Brussels,  up  to  a  certain  point, 
by  considering  it  in  the  light  of  a  measure  of  urgency  ;  but  this 
excuse  will  not  avail  for  refusing  to  present  the  protocol  of  the 
29th  February. 

M.  Bresson  left  London,  entrusted  with  powers  by  the 
Conference  ;  it  is  in  this  capacity,  that  he  has  corresponded  with 
us  for  the  last  two  months,  when  all  at  once,  without  giving  any 
warning  to  this  Conference,  he  ceases  his  correspondence  with 
it,  and  acts  in  direct  opposition  to  its  instructions.  Such  conduct 
must  appear  inexplicable  even  to  the  most  unprejudiced  mind. 

1  Var.  :  par  uos  amis  =  by  our  friends. 

2  This  protocol  contained  a  fresh  affirmation  on  the  part  of  M.  de  Talleyrand, 
made  in  the  name  of  his  government,  that  the  king  would  not  accept  the  crown  offered 
to  the  Due  de  Nemours.  He  added,  with  regard  to  the  candidature  of  the  Due  de 
Lcuchtenberg,  that  this  prince  would  not  be  recognized  by  any  of  the  five  Powers.  By 
acting  as  he  was  doing,  M.  Bresson  only  obeyed  the  orders  he  had  received  from 
Paris. 


46  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

Everyone  here  therefore  declares,  that  it  is  quite  evident  M. 
Bresson  could  not,  of  his  own  accord,  first  protest  against 
the  protocol  of  January  27th,  and  then  refuse  to  present  that 
of  February  7th.  His  conduct  is  attributed  to  orders  received 
from  the  French  government,  and  as  such  orders  must  be  in 
direct  opposition  to  the  communications  that  you  have  in- 
structed me  to  make  here,  distrust  in  the  policy  of  our  Cabinet 
is  spread  abroad  ;  this,  a  new  government  ought  above  all  to 
avoid. 

The  ignorance  in  which  you  have  left  me,  as  to  the  motives 
which  have  guided  M.  Bresson  lately,  has  rendered  my  position 
here  extremely  difficult,  for  I  seem  to  be  either  unaware  of  the 
intentions  of  the  government  of  the  king,  or  else  in  agreement 
with  Paris  or  Brussels  to  mislead  the  Conference  here.  What 
I  have  just  said,  M.  le  Comte,  does  not  result  from  personal 
susceptibility,  but  I  have  found  positive  disadvantage  result- 
ing therefrom  to  the  French  government,  of  which  it  was  my 
duty  to  make  you  aware,  and  which  you  will  doubtless  be  able 
to  appreciate. 

I  require,  I  repeat,  a  frank  and  clear  explanation  of  all  that 
has  passed  between  Paris  and  Brussels  :  it  is  only  by  having  this 
explanation  that  I  can  regain  with  the  English  Cabinet,  and  the 
Conference,  a  position  useful  to  the  service  of  the  king.  You 
must  also  show,  that  no  confusion  is  made  between  what  is 
settled  and  what  is  proposed ;  as  for  instance,  the  protocol  of 
January  20th  and  the  protocol  of  the  27th. 

That  of  the  20th,  is  based  on  the  ancient  division  of  Holland 
and  Belgium,  and  map  in  hand,  it  cannot  be  contested.  That 
of  the  27th  is  open  to  discussion,  but  it  was  necessary  to  propose 
some  basis,  since  having  requested  that  the  Belgian  com- 
missioners sent  here,  should  be  given  power  to  act,  they,  on 
being  asked,  declared  they  had  none.  The  matter  would 
otherwise  become  interminable. 

You  cannot  send  M.  Bresson  back  here  too  soon,  for  his 
prolonged  residence  at  Brussels  will  only  increase  the  uneasiness 
of  all  the  Cabinets.  .  .  . 


M.  Bresson  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand. 

Brussels,  February  nth,  1831. 
Mon  Prince, 

I    received,    the    day    before  yesterday,   and    to-day, 
the  letters  which  you  did  me   the  honour   to   write,    dated   the 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  47 

7th  and  9th  inst., together  with  the  documents  that  accompanied 
them. 

You  are  so  considerate,  mon  Prince,  that  you  only  permit 
the  expression  of  your  dissatisfaction  to  reach  me  in  the  form 
of  an  enigma.  I  cannot  but  be  touched  by  conduct  so  replete 
with  goodwill,  and  could  I  believe  myself  guilty,  my  regret 
would  be  increased  a  thousandfold. 

But  I  confess  that  I  never  for  a  moment  imagined  that  you 
in  London,  were  not  informed  by  the  Foreign  Office,  as  I  was  in 
Brussels,  of  the  determination  come  to  by  the  Ministry,  not  to 
adhere  to  the  protocol  of  January  27th.  In  my  haste  to 
despatch  to  you  the  news  of  the  election  of  M.  le  Due  de 
Nemours,  I  forgot  to  send  you  what  was  not  a  placard, 
posted  up  in  the  streets,  but  a  document  printed  by  the 
Congress.1 

As  for  the  communications  and  publications  usual  in  such 
cases,  it  would  be  too  much  to  make  a  diplomatic  agent  here 
responsible  for  them.  The  Belgian  government  has  taken  no 
measures  at  all  with  respect  to  the  matter. 

It  would  be  most  imprudent  to  confide  to  paper,  details  of 
all  that  pertains  to  the  choice  of  a  Head  for  the  State.  I  will 
give  them  all  to  you  verbally,  when  I  have  the  honour  of  seeing 
you  again  ;  and  perhaps  then  (when  above  all,  you  know  those 
connected  with  my  journey  to  Paris)  you  will  be  more  inclined 
to  pity  than  to  blame  me. 

How  I  regret  that  the  protocol  of  the  7th  inst.  (that  which 
rejected  the  Due  de  Leuchtenberg)  was  not  drawn  up  a  month 
ago  !  The  crisis  which  is  coming,  and  which  I  believe  will  be 
terrible,  would  probably  then  have  been  avoided. 

This  protocol,  mon  Prince,  arrived  the  day  before  yesterday. 
Lord  Ponsonby  made  it  known,  without  even  consulting  me.  M. 
Van  de  Weyer  sent  it  back  to  him  yesterday,  under  the  pretext, 
that  the  Congress,  having  elected  M.  le  Due  de  Nemours,  could 
receive  no  communication  with  regard  to  this  election,  except 
through  the  deputation  now  in  Paris.  In  the  newspaper  sent 
herewith,  you  will  find  the  debates  in  the  Congress,  to  which  this 
incident  gave  rise.  I  have  just  been  assured  that  Lord  Ponsonby 
will  himself  to-day,  make  the  communication  direct  to  the  Presi- 
dent of  the  Assembly.  Seeing  the  extreme  state  of  agitation 
in  the  country,  I  would,  had  I  been  consulted  by  him,  most 
certa-inly  have  begged  him  to  withhold  this  communication  for 

1  That  is  to  say,  that  the  letter  of  General  Sebastiani  to  M.  Bresson  of  February 
4th  had  not  been  placarded  in  the  streets,  as  M.  de  Talleyrand  had  believed  after  the 
rumours  which  reached  London,  but  had  only  been  read  to  the  Congress,  and  naturally 
printed  in  the  account  given  of  the  sitting. 


48  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

a  few  days,  especially,  as  it  arrived  too  greatly  shorn  of  its  most 
favourable  points.  The  king,  alone,  can  soften  the  effect  of 
the  refusal,  and  calm  down  the  susceptibilities  which  it  will 
arouse. 

But,  mon  Prince,  I  was  not  given  the  choice.  Here  is  a 
paragraph  from  Lord  Ponsonby's  notification  :  "  I  was  given  to 
understand,  that  the  Conference  had  not  deemed  it  advisable  to 
engage  you  to  co-operate  with  me  in  communicating  this 
protocol  ;  it  awaits  the  explanation  or  disavowal  of  the  letter  of 
February  1st,  that  is  to  say,  the  one  from  Count  Sebastiani,  which 
you  communicated  to  the  Congress." 

From  that  moment,  I  considered  myself  suspended  from  my 
functions  as  commissioner  of  the  Conference,  until  further 
explanation,  and  it  is  this  explanation,  mon  Prince,  that  I  to- 
day beg  you  will  give  me.  Yesterday  the  instructions,  dated 
February  8th-,  arrived  safely,  addressed  to  both  Lord  Ponsonby 
and  myself.  But  I  begged  him  to  execute  them  by  himself, 
until  I  had  referred  to  the  Conference  that  paragraph  of  his 
letter,  which  indicates  a  distinction  made  between  him  and 
me,  and  a  species  of  interruption  of  confidence.  Have  the 
goodness  to  tell  me,  if  it  still  considers  me  as  invested  with  the 
same  position  and  powers  as  Lord  Ponsonby. 

Your  letter  of  the  9th,  mon  Prince,  restores  me  to  hope.  To 
return  to  you,  has  been  my  sole  ambition  since  I  left  you.  Here, 
for  having  faithfully  fulfilled  the  instructions  of  the  Conference 
and  of  the  king's  government,  I  am  openly  made  the  subject 
of  abuse  by  party  men  ;  for  three  weeks  past,  a  set  of  villains 
has  publicly  insulted  me  ;  my  life  is  menaced  every  day,  by 
anonymous  letters  in  the  cafes  and  smoking-rooms.  Sadness 
fills  my  heart  ;  my  health  is  undermined.  I  have  passed  through 
most  cruel  trials,  and  shall  probably  only  reap  reproaches.  It 
is  so  easy  to  sacrifice  a  poor  devil ! 

The  poor  devil  had  not,  however,  so  much  to  complain  of  as  he 
feared.  They  would  not  send  him  back  to  me,  lest  he  should 
give  me  too  clear  an  explanation  of  what  had  passed  between 
him  and  Paris  ;  but  a  few  weeks  later  they  gave  him  the  post  of 
Minister-plenipotentiary  to  Hanover,  and  a  few  months  later 
he  was  sent  to  Berlin.  I  was  very  glad  of  this,  as  also  of  having 
been  the  author  of  this  good  fortune,  by  sending  him  from 
London  to  Brussels.  I  was  besides  informed,  that  the  truth 
would  in  the  end  come  to  light  at  Paris  ;  the  Due  de  Dalberg 
wrote  to  me  as  follows : 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  49 

The  Due  de  Dalberg  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand. 

PARIS,  February  12///,   1S31. 

Mon  Prince, 

Your  letter  of  the  8th,  points  out  two  truths  with  which 
my  mind  has  been  impressed  for  some  time  :  one,  that  the  five 
Powers  alone  when  agreed,  must  dictate  to  the  Belgians,  swayed 
as  they  are  by  the  turbulent  passions  of  our  Paris  Jacobins  ; 
the  other,  that  these  miserable  intrigues  arc  cropping  up,  because 
those  who  rule  us,  are  disunited  and  incapable. 

You  have  done  well  to  put  up  with  the  indignities  which 
have  been  heaped  upon  the  London  Conference  and  its  pro- 
ceedings. You  will  gain  favour  by  it,  because  France  does  not 
want  war,  cither  to  bring  about  the  reunion  of  Belgium  or,  still 
less,  the  election  of  the  Due  de  Nemours. 

If  the  combination  in  favour  of  the  Prince  of  Naples 
succeeds,  so  much  the  better  ;  but  I  doubt  it.  The  Belgian 
deputies  do  not  relish  it.  What  I  gather  from  the  utterances  of 
the  most  capable  of  them  is  :  1st,  that  three-fourths  of  the 
country  does  not  trouble  itself  about  reunion  with  France ; 
2nd,  that  with  the  exception  of  those  who  were  inculpated 
in  the  revolution,  all  desire  complete  separation  from  Holland, 
though  admitting  the  sovereignty  of  the  House  of  Nassau,  in 
order  to  resume  the  relations  of  commerce  and  industry,  esta- 
blished between  the  two  countries. 

The  Prince  of  Naples  does  not  please  them,  because  they 
say  he  does  not  remove  any  of  the  difficulties  under  which  they 
labour,  owing  to  the  Custom  duties  which  restrict  and  smother 
them. 

Two  days  later,  the  Due  de  Dalberg  wrote  to  me  again, 
directly  after  the  scandalous  events  which  took  place  at  Paris  : 
the  pillage  and  burning  of  the  archbishop's  palace.1  His  letter 
is  characteristic  : 

The  Due  de  Dalberg  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand. 

PARIS,  February  14.///,  1831. 

Mon  cher  Prince, 

Our  situation   gets  worse  and  worse.     The  scenes  of 


t> 


yesterday,  which  the  authorities  ought   to  have   foreseen   and 

1  A  riot  had  broken  out  in  Paris,  February  14th,  on  the  occasion  of  the  anniversary 
of  the  death  of  the  Due  de  Berry  when  a  service  had  been  held  at  Saint  Germain 
l'Auxerrois.  The  populace  went  to  the  church  and  devastated  it.  The  archiepiscopal 
palace  shared  the  same  fate. 

VOL.  IV.  E 


5o  THE  MEMOIRS  OE  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

prevented,  were  very  serious.  The  Churches  of  St.  Etienne-du- 
Mont  and  of  St.  Germain  l'Auxerrois  have  been  pillaged.  The 
archbishop's  palace  is  entirely  stripped.  The  seminary  of  St. 
Sulpice  was  likewise  attacked.  Authority  is  ignored  every- 
where. The  idiotic  intrigues  with  respect  to  Belgium,  have 
brought  upon  the  king  and  his  ministers  discredit  such  as 
cannot  be  expressed.  One  risks  being  mixed  up  in  the  business 
even,  to  explain  things,  or  to  excuse  them,  on  the  plea  of  a 
father  wishing  to  gain  advantages  for  his  country  and  his  family. 
But  public  opinion,  which  has  more  sagacity  than  calmness,  is 
profoundly  irritated,  and  has  only  been  momentarily  duped  by 
all  this. 

The  War  party  in  its  frenzy,  would  compass  its  end  at  any 
price.  As  it  sees  that  Belgium  does  not  bring  it  about,  Italy 
has  been  put  in  motion,  and  Fayettisme  has  laid  hold  of 
Modena  and  Bologna,  where  all  was  ready,  and  where  the 
hot-bed  of  Italian  societies 1  is  to  be  found 

My  opinion  is  that  the  Austrians  will  interfere,  and  that 
it  will  be  of  no  use  stupidly  to  adhere  to  the  principle  of 
non-intervention;  we  must  bring  the  ordering  of  Italian  affairs 
before  a  new  Conference. 

Above  all,  the  five  Great  Powers  must  not  .be  embroiled,  so 
that  war  would  result  between  them.  I  am  not  sure  that  it  is 
possible  to  preserve  the  present  state  of  things  in  Europe  ; 
but  if  there  is  any  salvation,  it  is  decidedly  only  in  what 
may  result  from  a  deliberate  understanding  between  the  great 
Cabinets. 

If  M.  Sebastiani  had  believed  me,  he  would  not  now  be  the 
laughing-stock  of  the  diplomatic  body  and  the  Chambers  ;  he 
would  have  opposed  with  spirit  the  intrigues  of  the  Palais 
Royal.  He  has  acted  in  the  Belgian  business,  as  he  did  in  that 
of  Greece.  Under  such  direction  one  does  not  know  what  will 
happen.  The  Belgians  here,  do  not  seem  disposed  to  receive  the 
Prince  of  Naples.  They  say  that  they  do  not  want  a  prince  who 
can  only  bring  them  macaroni  and  Capuchin  monks.  The  intrigues 
of  M.  de  Celles,  from  what  I  can  hear,  incline  them  rather  to  wait 
and  see  what  will  turn  up.  Hasten,  then  the  decisions  in  London, 
and  let  them  prove  themselves  to  be  more  than  mere  words. 

M.  Sebastiani  told  a  person  from  whom  I  have  it : — "  These 
conferences  in  London  are  conversations,  nothing  more."  I  am 
sure  that  he  said  it,  and  yet  I  am  also  sure  that  he  does  not 

1  The  revolution  broke  out  at  Modena  on  February  3rd,  the  Duke  was  forced  to 
fly,  and  a  provisional  government  was  established  with  a  dictator  and  three  consuls. 
On  February  4th,  the  insurrection  triumphed  equally  at  Bologna  ;  the  pontifical  pro- 
legate  had  to  retire,  and  a  provisional  government  was  forthwith  installed. 


THE   R E  VOLUTION  OF  1830.  51 

think  it.  But  as  Rigny1  truly  says,  "He  puts  his  finger  in 
every  pie."  1  Ic  sees  both  Chatelain2  and  Bertin  dc  Vaux3  every 
morning.  All  this  is  pitiable.  Meanwhile  the  country  is  going  to 
ruin.  Lafitte  declared  to  me,  that  he  could  not  find  a  loan  of 
ten  millions  at  long  date  for  the  Treasury,  and  yet  they  talk  of 
making  war.  Peace,  mon  cher  Prince,  or  everything  will  go  to 
the  devil  ! 

1'iizzo  said  to  me  yesterday  :  "  I  warned  Sebastiani,  that 
England  knew  nothing  of  the  intrigues  at  Brussels,  and  that 
I  laliaut  would  weigh  but  one  ounce  in  the  scales  of  a  negotia- 
tion. M.  de  Talleyrand,  I  will  do  him  this  justice,  has  been 
the  only  one  who  lias  looked  at  things  as  they  ought  to  be 
looked  at. ' 

It  seems  that  M.  Sebastiani  was  not  convinced  by 
M.  Pozzo's  arguments,  or  was  irritated  at  being  found  out  in 
his  own  intrigues.  He  wrote  to  me,  to  complain  of  the  manner 
in  which  the  Conference  was  proceeding,  and  to  forbid  me  to 
accept  henceforth,  any  protocol  except  ad  referendum. 

The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  General  Sebastiani. 

London,  February  15th,  1S31. 
M.   LE   COMTE, 

I  this  morning  received  your  despatch  of  the  12th.     I 
cannot  loo  promptly  reply  to  its  contents. 

It  is  easy  to  judge  from  your  letter,  that  the  direction 
followed  by  the  Conference  has  not  had  the  approbation  of  the 

1  Henry  Gautier  Comte  de  Rigny,  born  in  1782,  entered  the  navy  in  1798.  He 
was  a  captain  in  1S16,  rear-admiral  in  1825,  and  vice-admiral  after  the  battle  of 
Navarino,  where  he  commanded  the  French  fleet.  On  the  13th  of  March,  1S31,  he 
was  appointed  Minister  of  Marine.  In  1S34  he  took  up  foreign  affairs.  He 
quitted  this  post  the  next  year,  but  kept  the  title   of  Cabinet    Minister  till   his  death 

(1835). 

'-'  Proprietor  of  the  Courrier  Franfais,  the  paper  holding  the  most  violent  opinions 
in  revolutionary  opposition.  (Note  of  M.  de  Bacourt.)  Rene  Theophile  Chatelain, 
born  in  1790,  had  served  in  the  armies  of  the  empire.  He  left  the  service  in  1830, 
and  became  a  journalist,  was  cm  the  staff  of  the  Courrier  Franfais  and  the  National 
for  a  long  time,  and  died  in  1838. 

:!  Proprietor  of  the  Journal  des  Debats,  which  supported  the  government.  (Note  of 
M.  de  Bacourt.) 

Louis  Francois  bertin  de  Vaux,  bom  in  1766;  began  as  far  back  as  1793,  t<> 
oppose,  in  connection  with  journalism,  the  revolutionary  parties  in  the  Journal 
Franfais,  C  Eclair,  and  the  Courrier  Universe/.  After  the  18th  brumaire,  he  founded 
he  Journal  des  Debats,  which  was  devoted  at  first  exclusively  to  art  and  literature, 
implicated  in  a  royalist  conspiracy,  Bertin  passed  eight  months  at  the  Temple,  and 
was  then  sent  to  Elba.  Reluming  to  Paris,  after  some  time,  he  resumed  the  direction 
ofhis  paper,  but  the  government  was  not  long  in  appropriating  this  public  organ.  A 
new    manager,    Fievee,  was  imposed  upon  it  and    its  name  changed  to  Join  mil  de 

E    2 


52  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

king's  government,  and  that  under  such  circumstances1  I  should 
have  done  wrong  to  adopt  its  views.  I  must  therefore  give  you 
some  explanation  on  this  subject. 

When  I  left  Paris  in  the  month  of  September  last,  I  was 
given,  a  quarter  of  an  hour  before  my  departure,  some  general 
instructions  on  questions  which  have  not  been  applicable  since 
I  have  been  here;  they  promised  to  send  me  detailed  instructions 
shortly  ;  since  that  time  however,  I  have  begged  in  vain  for  them, 
and  have  had  to  be  guided,  by  the  only  injunction  contained  in 
nearly  all  the  despatches  you  did  me  the  honour  to  send  me, 
namely,  to  maintain  peace,  consistent  with  preserving  intact  the 
dignity  of  France.  It  is  from  this  point,  M.  le  Comte,  that  I 
have  based  all  my  intercourse  with  the  Conference,  and  I  believe 
I  have  succeeded,  though  with  some  difficulty,  in  securing  the 
end  the  king  had  in  view.  You  do  not  share  this  opinion,  and 
you  wish  me  henceforth  only  to  act  upon  special  instructions. 
I  shall  submit  to  your  orders,  but  I  think  I  should  fail  in  my 
duty,  if  I  did  not  bring  to  your  notice,  the  serious  inconveniences 
which  this  method  of  conducting  business  will  entail.  It  will 
deprive  the  Conference  of  a  portion  of  the  weight  which  it  had 
on  public  opinion,  by  placing  each  of  its  members  in  a  state  of 
dependence,  which  will  arrest  all  negotiation,  and  of  this  I  can 
give  you  an  example  :  the  protocol  of  the  neutrality  of  Belgium 
was  signed  after  a  conference  which  lasted  ten  and  a  half  hours, 
two  days  later,  the  Prussian  plenipotentiary  would  probably 
not  have  signed  it. 

This  leads  me  to  tell  you,  that  in  the  question  of  boundaries, 
there  has  been  no  more  intervention,  than  there  has  been  in  that 
of  the  recognition2  of  Belgium,  which  resulted  in  the  determina- 
tion of  her  boundaries. 

The  boundaries  are  a  fact,  and  this  fact  is  an  old  one — the 
Conference  had  only  to  declare  it.  Geography  tells  us  what 
was  Belgium  and  what  was  Holland,  before  their  union.  Nothing 
has  been  changed  as  to  the  territory  of  the  two  countries  ;  even 
the  question  of  the  enclosed  lands  has  not  been  decided.  All 
the  members  of  the  Conference  say,  that  it  would  only  be  with 
the  idea  of  taking  away  some  of  its  own  territory  from  one  of 

T Empire.  In  spite  of  this,  the  Journal  de  P  Empire  was  seized  in  1811,  and  the 
copyright  confiscated,  by  the  State.  M.  Berlin  only  recovered  it  in  1814.  In  1815, 
he  followed  the  king  to  Ghent,  where  he  edited  the  Moniteur  de  Gaud.  Under  the 
Restoration.  Berlin  joined  the  moderate  opposition.  In  1830,  he  energetically  adopted 
the  new  monarchy.  The  Journal  des  Debats  was  at  this  period  the  first  organ  of  the 
Monarchical  party,  and  it  remained  so  durirg  the  continuance  of  the  government  of 
July.     Bertin  died  in  1841. 

1  Suppressed  in  the  text  of  the  Archives. 

2  Var.  :  De  V  indipendance  —  of  the  independence. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OE  1830.  53 

the  two  countries,  that  the  basis  which  has  been  adopted  could 
be  objected  to,1  and  that  such  a  change  would  be  a  real  interven- 
tion. It  is  therefore  plain,  that  in  the  protocol  of  January  20th, 
the  Conference  has  not  deviated  in  any  way,  and  has  not  wished 
to  deviate,  from  the  principle  of  non-intervention.2 

I  am  very  glad  to  be  able  to  show  you  once  more,  that  the 
Conference  has  not  departed  from  the  principle  of  non-inter- 
vention, with  regard  to  the  two  points  which  seem  to  have  chiefly 
attracted  your  attention. 

The  English  government,  which  ever  since  Canning's  time  is 
very  susceptible  on  this  score,  established  the  same  doctrine, 
and  would  not  have  consented,  any  more  than  ourselves,  to 
deviate  from  it.  Lord  Palmcrston  supports  it  now  in  the 
English  Parliament,  in  the  same  words  I  use  to  you. 

Besides,  I  ought  to  tell  you,  that  if,  in  my  own  opinion,  war 
became  imminent,  by  the  refusal  of  my  signature  to  a  protocol 
proposed  by  the  members  of  the  Conference  and  one  which  would 
not  affect  the  individual*  interests  of  France,  I  feel  it  would  be  my 
duty,  according  to  my  original  general  instructions,  to  sign  it. 
To-morrow,  I  will  answer  what  you  have  written  to  me,  relative 
to  Lord  Ponsonby  and  M.  de  Kriidener.  .  .  . i 


LONDON,  February  \6tJ1,  1831. 

Monsieur  le  Comte, 

I  have,  according  to  the  orders  of  the  government, 
spoken  to  Lord  Palmerston  about  the  recall  of  Lord  Ponsonby. 
I  believe  it  would  have  been  easy  to  obtain  it  before  the  publi- 
cation of  your  letter  by  M.  Bresson,  and  the  refusal  of  the  latter 
to  execute  the  orders  of  the  Conference  ;  but  now  it  would  put 
Lord  Ponsonby  and  M.  Bresson  on  the  same  level  with  regard 
to  the  Conference,  and  the  English  Cabinet  is  not  disposed  to 
consent  to  it. 

1  Yar.  :  altaquerait  —  would  attack. 

3  Var.  :  quant  a  la  question  des  dettes  on  a  fait  seulement  des  propositions  d'apres 
lesquelles  on  demande  a  etre  conduit  dans  une  route  juste  et  equitable  =  as  to  the 
question  of  the  debts,  only  a  proposal  has  been  made,  according  to  which  it  is  desired 
to  act  in  a  fair  and  equitable  manner. 

3  Suppressed  in  the  text  of  the  Archives. 

4  General  Sebastiani  had  announced  to  M.  de  Talleyrand,  that  M.  de  Kriidener, 
sent  by  the  Prince  de  Lieven,  had  openly  proposed  the  Prince  of  Orange  at  Brussels, 
and  that  Lord  Ponsonby  supported  him  energetically.  M.  de  Kriidener  was  an  old 
Russian  diplomat.  He  was  at  Brussels  without  any  official  mission,  and  was  the 
active  agent  of  the  Prince  of  Orange,  whose  interests  were  supported  by  Russia.  He 
proposed  to  have  him  excepted  from  the  exclusion  pronounced  upon  his  family.  M. 
de  Kriidener  was  expelled  by  order  of  the  Congress.  (See  Juste  :  Congress  of 
Brussels.) 


54  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

I  have  already  written  to  you,  that  Lord  Palmerston  has 
transmitted  orders  to  Lord  Ponsonby,  to  continue  to  watch  the 
tendency  of  opinions  without  meddling  in  any  way  with  the 
interests  of  the  Prince  of  Orange.  Lord  Palmerston  has, 
besides,  never  disguised  that  the  combination  that  would  place 
this  prince  on  the  Belgian  throne,  had  always  seemed  to  his 
government,  the  one  most  suited  to  the  prompt  termination  of 
the  affairs  of  Belgium,  of  which  England,  equally  with  us,  desires 
to  see  the  settlement  ;  but  he  no  longer  believes  in  his  success. 

I  also  spoke  to  the  Prince  de  Lieven,  both  yesterday  and  this 
morning,  on  the  subject  ©f  the  intrigues  that  are  attributed  to 
M.  de  Krudener  at  Brussels.  He  replied  that  M.  de  Krudener 
was  in  London  on  leave  ;  that  he  had  a  great  wish  to  learn 
from  him  the  state  of  things  in  Belgium  and  that  he  had  desired 
him  to  give  him  an  account  of  it.  He  assured  me  positively, 
that  he  had  given  him  no  order  relative  to  the  affairs  of  the 
Prince  of  Orange,  and  that  he  ought  to  limit  himself  to  instructing 
his  Court,  as  to  what  he  could  gather  respecting  the  chances  that 
the  prince  would  have  in  the  country.  The  active  party  of  the 
intrigue,  favourable  to  the  Prince  of  Orange,  is  headed  by  the 
inhabitants  of  the  two  Flanders,  of  whom  several  are  to  be  found 
at  this  moment  in  London,  working  in  his  interests.  M.  de 
Krudener  would  be  little  suited  to  fulfil  a  mission  entirely  of 
intrigue,  for  you  know  he  is  almost  completely  deaf.  You  will 
remember,  that  by  protocol  No.  15,  which  I  beg  you  to  reperuse, 
the  provisional  government  was  invited  to  stop  the  troops  then 
approaching  Maastricht,  and  to  retire  them,  as  had  been 
arranged,  within  the  limits  of  the  armistice.  The  answer  is  so 
long  in  coming,  and  the  Dutch  are  so  disquieted  at  the  state  of 
provisions  in  Maastricht,  that  if  it  does  not  arrive  to-morrow,  we 
shall  be  obliged,  in  common  justice,  to  allow  the  King  of  Holland 
to  re-establish  communications  with  that  town.  He  had  pre- 
viously, on  receipt  of  the  protocol,  stopped  the  march  of  his 
troops.     We  shall  meet  to-morrow  with  this  object. 

I  send  you  the  Times  of  to-day  ;  you  will  there  find  Lord 
Palmerston's  first  speech  since  he  has  been  Minister  of  Foreign 
Affairs  ;  you  should  read  it  attentively,  because  it  is  remarkable 
for  the  assurance  with  which  he  answered  the  different  questions 
which  were  put  to  him. 1 

You  will  also  find  in  the  same  paper  an  article  which 
contains  the  opinion  of  the  whole  of  England,  as  to  the  limits 
within   which    the    members   of   Parliament    who    question    the 

1  Sitting  of  the  House  of  Commons,  February  15th.  Vivian  put  a  question  to 
Lord  Palmerston  on  Belgian  affairs,  and  complained  particularly  of  the  concentration 
of  French  troops  in  the  Departcment  du  Nor  J. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  55 

ministers,    and    the    ministers    who    answer    them,    must    keep. 
This  article  seems  to  me  worth  studying.  .  .  . 

My  memory  recalls  the  fact,  that  M.  Scbastiani  never 
answered  these  two  last  despatches.  I  continue  to  give  mine, 
which  follow. 

London,  February  17th,  1831. 

Monsieur  le  Comte, 

I  am  able  to  acquaint  you  with  the  views  of  the 
English  Cabinet  and  the  members  of  the  Conference,  on  the 
choice  of  the  Prince  of  Naples  as  sovereign  of  Belgium.  The 
English  ministers,  in  spite  of  their  predilection  for  the  Prince 
of  Orange,  which  they  have  never  concealed  from  me,  will  not 
offer  an)-  obstacle  to  the  choice  of  the  Prince  of  Naples,  but 
we  must  not  count  on  their  concurrence  to  facilitate  it. 

The  Austrian  plenipotentiary  has  expressed  to  me,  his  desire 
to  see  this  arrangement  succeed  ;  when  I  asked  him  if  there 
was  an  Austrian  agent  at  Brussels,  he  added  that  there  was 
not,  but  if  there  was  one,  he  would  certainly  not  make  any 
difficult}-  in  seconding  the  interests  of  the  Prince  of  Naples. 

The  Prussian  minister  has  no  instructions  on  this  point  ;  but 
I  have  received  from  him  an  assurance,  that  his  sovereign  would 
only  look  with  pleasure  on  anything  that  would  tend  to  re- 
establish order  in  Belgium,  and  put  an  end  to  difficulties, 
the  consequences  of  which  he  dreads  for  the  neighbouring 
countries. 

As  for  Prince  Licven,  although  we  are  on  the  best  of  terms, 
he  is  not  obliged  to  communicate  his  opinion  upon  a  choice  which 
docs  not  enter  into  the  views  of  his  court.  But  Prince  Esterhazy 
told  me,  that  if  we  were  all  agreed  about  the  Prince  of  Naples,  he 
was  convinced  that  Russia  would  later  on,  be  brought  to  recognize 
him,  and  in  this  I  agree  with  him. 

You  can  judge  from  this,  the  state  of  opinion  on  this  question. 
It  remains  for  the  king's  government  to  decide  what  it  will 
do,  and  to  employ  all  its  efforts  at  Brussels  to  secure  success. 
If  it  does  not  find  support  from  all  the  Powers,  it  will  at  least 
meet  with  no  opposition  on  their  part ;  of  this  I  am  sure. 

I  ought  to  tell  you  that  in  all  the  conversations  which  I  have 
had  on  this  subject,  nothing  but  pacific  intentions  have  been  ex- 
pressed. The  English  ministers  and  all  the  plenipotentiaries  have 
assured  me,  that  the  earnest  desire  of  their  governments  is  to 
maintain  peace,  and  that  only  some  aggression  on  the  part  of 
France  would  furnish  ground  for  war. 


56  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

I  have  just  come  from  a  conference  at  which  the  protocol, 
which  I  announced  to  you  yesterday,1  has  been  drawn  up.  One 
would  lose  oneself  in  a  crowd  of  difficulties,  if  one  did  not  adhere 
to  the  previous  arrangements  agreed  to  between  the  Conference, 
Belgium,  and  Holland.  This  protocol  is  only  addressed  to  Lord 
Ponsonby,  because  M.  Bresson  refused  to  present  the  last 
one,  and  the  Conference  no  longer  looks  upon  him  as  its  repre- 
sentative in  Belgium.  From  the  tendency  of  opinion,  I  advise  you 
strongly,  if  your  intention  was  to  send  him  back  here,  to  delay 
his  return.  .  .  . 


London,  February  igf/i,  1831. 
Monsieur  le  Comte,2 

I  have  the  honour  to  transmit  to  you,  protocol  No.  18  of 
our  conference  yesterday.  You  will  find  in  it,  the  adherence  of 
the  King  of  Holland  to  the  protocols  of  January  20th  and  27th. 
This  adherence  is  complete  and  entire,  but  it  was  only  obtained 
with  difficulty  ;  the  resolutions,  with  which  he  was  menaced  by 
the  Conference,  decided  him  to  yield. 

An  English  schooner,  unloading  at  Poole,  brings  the  news 
that  when  she  left  Lisbon  they  were  fighting  in  the  streets  ;  the 
insurrection  was  very  formidable,  and  the  prisons  had  been 
broken  open. 

Dom  Miguel  had  placed  himself  at  the  head  of  the  troops. .  .  . 


3 


The  Due  de  Dalberg  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand. 

PARIS,  February  21st,  1831. 

Mon  cher  Prince, 

If  you  are  asked  where  France  will  have  got  to  six 
months  hence,  say  boldly  that  you  cannot  possibly  tell.  The 
king  sides  with  the  minority  as  Bonaparte  did,  as  also  did 
Louis  XVIII.  and  Charles  X.,  and  it  seems  to  me,  that  M. 
Lafitte  is  a  M.  de  Polignac  with  the  Jacobins,  as  M.  de  Polignac 
was  the  blind  instrument  of  the  emigres. 

All  parties  are  working  to  bring  about  the  dissolution  of  the 
present  session,  and  it  can  no  longer  be  averted.     It  was  said 

1  Var.  :  Et  que  je  vous  envoie  =  and  which  I  send  you. 

2  This  letter  is  not  found  in  M.  Pallain's  collection. 

3  On  February  7th,  the  government  of  Dom  M  iguel  had  given  orders  to  expedite  the 
trial  of  the  political  prisoners.  A  decree  of  February  9th  created  military  commis- 
sions to  this  end,  furnished  with  extraordinary  powers.  This  conduct  provoked  an 
insurrectionary  movement  in  favour  of  Donna  Maria.  Its  suppression  was  prompt 
and  sanguinary.    Two  Frenchmen  were  arrested  and  sent  to  Africa. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  57 

yesterday  that  the  quarrel  between  the  Minister  Montalivet1  and 
the  Prefect  of  the  Seine,  M.  Odilon  Barrot,  -  would  end  in  the 
retirement  of  the  former.  M.  d'Argout  was  to  replace  him, 
and  Rigny  was  destined  for  the  navy.  With  the  men  who 
govern  us  at  present,  one  could  amuse  oneself  by  repeating  a 
thousand  such  combinations  without  hitting  the  right  one.  Facts 
alone  tell.  All  minds  are  gloomy  with  various  apprehensions. 
If  we  are  lucky  enough  to  preserve  peace,  we  may  perhaps  ex- 
tricate ourselves  from  this  home  crisis,  and  find  ourselves  in 
smooth  water  once  more  ;  but  all  that  is  in  great  uncertainty.  .  .  . 

Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  General  Sebastiani. 

LONDON,  February  iyd,  1831. 

Monsieur  le  Comte, 

The  events  which  took  place  in  Paris  last  week,  caused 
a  disquietude  in  London  difficult  to  describe.  The  total  ab- 
sence of  news  from  France  during  the  19th,  20th,  and  21st,  was 
a  splendid  opportunity  for  the  speculators,  who  spread  the  most 
alarming  reports,  and  attained  their  ends  by  producing  a 
considerable  depreciation  in  the  public  funds.  Since  the  revolu- 
tion of  the  month  of  July  there  has  not  been  such  agitation 
"  On  'Change,"  and  among  all  classes  of  society  ;  the  idea  of  war 
is  believed  in  to  such  an  extent,  as  to  raise  insurance  policies  to  a 
very  high  premium.  I  think  I  have  used  the  most  suitable 
language  under  the  circumstances,  but  the  ignorance  in  which  I 
remain,  as  to  what  is  taking  place  in  Paris,  makes  my  position 
here  extremely  difficult.  My  house  is  never  free  from  people 
coming  for  news. 

I  yesterday  received  your  despatch  of  the  19th,  and  I  regret 

1  Comte  Bachasson  de  Montalivet,  born  1801,  entered  (1823,  by  heredity)  the 
Chamber  of  Peers.  In  1S30,  lie  became  Minister  of  the  Interior  (November  2nd), 
then  Minister  of  Education  and  Religion  (March  13th,  183 1),  and  again  Minister 
of  the  Interior  after  the  death  of  Casimir  Perrier  in  1832.  He  retired  October  10th. 
1832,  became  Intendant-General  of  the  Civil  List,  and  was  twice  again  Minister  of 
the  Interior  in  1836  and  1S37.  He  retired  into  private  life  in  184S.  In  1879  he  was 
made  a  permanent  Senator,  and  died  the  following  year. 

2  Odilon  Barrot,  born  in  1791,  son  of  the  member  of  the  National  Convention  of 
that  name,  was,  during  the  Restoration,  an  advocate  in  the  Court  of  Appeal.  In 
1830,  he  was  Secretary  to  the  Municipal  Commission,  and  was,  as  such,  one  of  the 
commissioners  charged  to  escort  Charles  X.  He  then  became  Deputy  and  Prefect  of 
the  Seine,  after  the  riot  of  February  14th,  against  which  he  could  not,  or  would  not,  act 
in  any  way.  He  was  publicly  censured  by  M.  de  Montalivet,  then  Minister  of  the  In- 
terior, and  dismissed  a  few  days  after.  He  kept  his  seat  in  the  Chamber  till  1852.  In 
February  1848,  he  was  charged  by  the  king  to  form  a  Cabinet  with  M.  Thiers,  but  he 
did  not  succeed  in  it.  In  the  month  of  December,  he  entered  the  first  Cabinet  of  the 
Prince-President.  He  withdrew  from  public  life  in  1852.  In  1872,  he  became  Vice- 
President  of  the  Council  of  State,  and  died  the  next  year. 


58  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

not  to  have  had  it  sooner.  According  to  the  orders  that  it  con- 
tains, I  should  not  perhaps  have  admitted,  excepting  ad  referen- 
dum, the  protocol  which  I  have  the  honour  to  send  you  to-day, 
and  the  rough  draft  of  which  I  agreed  to  on  the  19th.  If, 
conformably  to  your  letter  of  the  19th,  which  I  only  received 
on  the  22nd,  I  had  refused  to  sign  it,  I  should  have  put  myself  in 
opposition  to  what  you  have  written  to  me  several  times,  viz., 
that  you  wished  to  be  in  accord  with  the  Conference.  Besides 
you  will  certainly  notice  on  reading  it,  that  the  Conference  only 
wanted  to  make  clear  the  motives  which  have  guided  it  since  it 
has  assembled  ;  the  spirit  of  justice  and  the  moderation  which 
have  directed  all  its  deliberations,  are  again  referred  to,  so  as  to 
show  that  it  has  never  passed  the  limits  which  were  imposed  on 
it,  both  by  the  law  of  nations  and  by  respect  for  treaties.  The 
protocol  really  contains  nothing,  which  was  not  in  the  preceding 
protocols.1 

I  do  not  think  that  there  will  be  any  need  for  the  Conference 
to  reassemble  here  for  some  time  ;  but  whatever  may  be  the  aim 
in  future  of  its  meetings,  or  the  result  of  its  resolutions,  I  will 
not  affix  my  signature  to  a  single  essential  act,  before  receiving 
the  king's  authority,  as  you  enjoin  upon  me  in  your  despatch 
of  the  19th. 

I  have  acquainted  the  Conference,  and  particularly  the 
English  ministers,  with  your  desire  to  see  Lord  Ponsonby 
recalled  from  Brussels  at  the  same  time  as  M.  Bresson,  as  they 
are  no  longer  placed  on  the  same  footing.  I  was  told  that  a 
parallel  could  not  be  established  between  these  two  agents  ; 
that  Lord  Ponsonby,  as  commissioner  of  the  Conference,  had 
never    refused   to    execute   the   orders   which   he  had    received, 

3  The  protocol  of  February  19th,  is  only  a  lengthy  declaration  of  the  principles  on 
which  the  Conference  determined  to  intervene  in  Belgium.  It  declares  that  treaties  do 
not  lose  their  power,  whatever  changes  may  supervene  in  the  interior  organization  of 
nations  ;  that  the  spirit  of  the  treaty  of  1814  had  in  particular,  survived  the  dislocation 
of  the  kingdom  of  the  Netherlands,  and  that  it  pertained  to  the  Powers  to  take  into 
consideration  the  re-establishment  of  equilibrium  in  Europe  ;  that  the  tranquillity 
and  serenity  of  the  European  community  limited  the  rights  of  each  State  ;  that  the 
Powers  have  the  right,  and  that  it  is  their  duty,  to  prevent  all  source  of  conflict 
which  could  degenerate  into  an  actual  war.  In  consequence  of  these  principles  the 
Conference  decides  : — 

1.  That  the  arrangements  agreed  to  in  the  protocol  of  January  20th,  were  funda- 
mental and  irrevocable  ; 

2.  That  the  independence  of  Belgium  will  only  be  recognized  according  to  the 
conditions  of  the  said  protocol  ; 

3.  That  the  principle  of  the  neutrality  of  Belgium  was  obligatory  on  the  five 
Powers  ; 

4.  That  the  five  Powers  assure  to  themselves  the  full  right  of  declaring,  that  the 
sovereign  of  Belgium  must  be  answerable,  by  his  personal  position,  for  the  existence 
of  Belgium,  must  give  assurance  of  safety  to  the  other  States,  accept  the  protocol  of 
the  20th  January,  and  be  able  to  secure  free  enjoyment  of  it  to  the  lielgians. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  59 

while  M.  Bresson,  also  one  of  the  commissioners  of  the  Con- 
ference, has  refused  to  present  the  protocols  he  was  charged  to 
communicate.  I  have  several  times  tried  to  show  how  perfectly 
useless,  nay,  even  injurious,  Lord  Ponsonby's  presence  was  in 
Brussels,  but  his  family  connections  and  his  position  here, 
render  the  success  of  my  efforts  very  difficult  j1  all  the  more  so, 
because  Lord  Palmerston,  holding  a  despatch  of  Lord  Granville's2 
in  his  hand,  said  to  me,  "The  French  government  is  beginning 
to  do  justice  to  Lord  Ponsonby,  and  no  longer  imagines  that 
all  his  measures  are  taken  in  opposition  to  whatever  France 
desires." 

However,3  no  one  here  has  any  belief  in  the  chances  of  the 
Prince  of  Orange 


The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  Madame  Adelaide. 

LONDON,  February  23/7/,   1831. 

....  Mademoiselle  will  not  find  a  single  fresh  re- 
solution  in  the  protocol  I  am  sending  to  Paris  to-day;  it  only 
contains  the  resume  of  what  has  been  done  up  to  now,  and  the 
announcement  of  the  conservative  and  fundamental  principles 
for  which  we  have  striven.  I  flatter  myself,  that  the  king  will 
be  satisfied  with  the  spirit  that  directed  our  work.  I  feel 
assured  that  it  is  only  by  keeping  strictly  to  the  principles 
which  have  guided  the  members  of  the  Conference,  that  we 
shall  be  able  not  only  to  settle  Belgian  affairs,  but  also  to 
prevent  ancient  Europe  from  crumbling  to  ruins,  and  engulfing 
thrones,  kings,  institutions,  and  liberties  in  its  fall. 

I  will  not  weary  Mademoiselle  with  the  sad  thoughts  that 
have  for  the  last  few  days  preoccupied  me.  I  do  not  intend  to 
give  way  to  any  discouragement,  and  in  whatever  colours  the 
state  of  France  may  be  painted  to  the  outside  world,  I  have  full 
confidence  that  the  king's  wisdom  will  enable  the  sacred  cause 
of  liberty  to  triumph,  freed  from  all  the  blots  with  which  others 
seek  to  sully  it. 

I  believe  that  the  king,  by  keeping  allied  as  I  hear  he  wishes 
to  do,  with  the  four  Powers,  may  be  quite  at  ease  about  Belgian 

1  Lord  Ponsonby  was  Lord  Grey's  brother-indaw. 

2  Thomas  Leveson  Gown-,  Earl  Granville,  born  in  1773,  entered  the  House  of 
Commons  at  the  age  of  22,  became  a  Lord  of  the  Treasury  in  1800,  Chancellor  of 
tlie  Exchequer  in  1802,  and  Ambassador  at  St.  Petersburg  in  1804.  In  1815,  he  took 
his  seat  in  the  House  of  Lords.  He  was  nominated  Minister  at  the  Hague,  and  went 
thence  to  Paris,  which  he  did  not  quit  until  1828.  He  was  sent  there  again  in  1831 
until  1S34,  and  also  from  1835  to  1841.      He  died  in  1S46. 

:t  Var.  :  en  general  —  generally  speaking. 


60  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

matters,  with  which  it  is  best  to  meddle  as  little  as  possible  ;  if 
anything  unpleasant  has  to  be  dealt  with,  it  must  be  referred  to 
the  Conference. 

The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  General  Sebastiani. 

LONDON,  February  24//1,  1831. 

Monsieur  le  Comte, 

I  must  tell  you  of  the  effect  produced  here,  by  the 
king's  speech  in  reply  to  the  Belgian  deputation.  It  has 
made  a  most  favourable  impression,  and  this  morning,  at  the 
grand  reception  at  Court,  in  honour  of  the  Queen's  birthday, 
several  persons  spoke  to  me  about  it,  all  loud  in  its  praises. 

But  people  at  this  reception  were  also  much  concerned  by  the 
news  from  Paris,  which  had  caused  extraordinary  anxiety.  I 
do  not  exaggerate  when  I  tell  you.  that  had  I  kept  aloof  from 
the  four  Powers1  and  refused  to  sign  the  protocol  of  the  19th, 
people  here  would  have  believed  a  war  imminent,  the  funds 
would  at  once  have  fallen  three  or  four  per  cent.,2  and,  those 
in  Paris  would  have  also  been  strongly  affected  in    like  manner. 

You  will  have  noticed,  that  in  the  protocol  of  the  19th,  only 
the  treaty  of  18 14  is  mentioned,  which  treaty  had  been  as 
fortunate,  as  circumstances  permitted,  for  our  country  ;  for  our 
enemies  cleared  out  of  French  territory  at  the  end  of  six  weeks  ; 
ancient  France  had  become  greatly  enlarged,  her  borders  were 
altered  to  her  own  advantage,  and  by  the  possession  of  a  large 
part  of  Savoy,  Lyons  was  not  as  it  is  now,  almost  a  frontier 
fortress  ;  the  Musce  Napoleon  remained  intact,  and  the  archives 
of  France  were  enriched  by  those  of  Venice  and  Rome.  No 
reference  has  been  made  to  the  treaty  of  181 5,  with  which  I  had 
nothing  to  do,  for  I  sent  in  my  resignation  to  escape  signing 
it,  though  I  must  nevertheless  admit,  that  it  was  followed  by 
fifteen  years  of  peace. 

In  your  letters  to  me  of  the  9th  and  17th  of  this  month, 
you  said  that  we  must  go  with  the  Powers  ;  this  is  more  neces- 
sary than  ever  now.  I  do  not  know  what  may  be  the  outcome 
of  the  present  European  crisis,  but  it  is  essential  for  us  to  be  in 
accord,  as  long  as  possible,  with  the  four  Powers.  Such  a  union 
is  fruitful  in  resources,  and  there  ought  to  be  no  difficulty  in 
gaining  support  for  it  in  the  Chambers.  .  .  . 

I  was  not  quite  correct  when  I  wrote,  that  every  one  had 
approved  the  speech  made   by    King    Louis    Philippe   to    the 

1  Var.  :  Cinq  —  Five. 

-  Var.  :  Quatre  a  cinq  pour  cent  =  4  to  5  per  cent. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  61 

Belgian  deputation,  when  refusing  the  crown  for  the  Due  de 
Nemours,  which  they  had  come  to  offer  him.  I  have  found  a 
note  written  to  me  by  Lord  Grey  (the  Prime  Minister)  on  the 
occasion  of  this  speech,  which,  when  read  between  the  lines 
exhibits  a  distrust  that  only  the  facts  themselves  disproved 
later  on  : — 

Lord  Grey  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand. 

Downing  Street,  February  \t)th,  1831. 

Dear  Prince  Talleyrand, 

Accept  my  best  thanks  for  sending  me  the  answer  of 
your  king  to  the  Belgian  deputies.  I  think  it  will  probably  be 
criticized,  as  indicating,  under  the  expression  of  regret,  too 
much  desire  for  the  crown  which  is  refused  ;  but,  looking  at  the 
substance,  I  am  quite  satisfied  with  it. 

I  will  only  add  my  sincere  and  earnest  wish,  that  nothing 
may  arise  to  disappoint  our  endeavours  to  procure  peace. 

I  am,  .  .  . 

Grey. 

The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  General  Sebastiani. 

LONDON,  February  25///,   1831. 

Monsieur  le  Comte, 

The  birthday  of  H.M.  the  Queen  was  celebrated  yes- 
terday in  London  by  all  classes  of  the  nation,  with  the  greatest 
possible  enthusiasm.  Fetes,  brilliant  illuminations,  the  joyous 
shouts  of  the  populace,  all  testified  to  the  attachment  felt  for 
the  sovereign,  and  refute  the  slanderous  publications  of  some  of 
the  journalists. 

The  sittings  of  Parliament  become  more  interesting  each 
day.  The  Ministry  have  met  with  some  opposition,  in  the 
discussion  on  the  budget.  The  hesitation  they  have  shown  in 
some  of  their  measures,  has  emboldened  the  Opposition  and 
discouraged  their  own  party. 

In  a  few  days  the  Parliamentary  Reform  Bill  will  be  brought 
in  ;  it  ought  to  strengthen  the  government,  but  as  it  probably 
will  not  satisfy  all  the  demands  of  the  Reform  party,  it  will 
offer  as  good  a  pretext  for  opposition  to  those  who  want  com- 
plete reform,  as  to  those  who  do  not  want  any.  It  is  just 
possible,  that  when   it  comes  to  voting,  these  two  parties  may 


62  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

coalesce,  and  if  so,  the  position  of  the  English  Cabinet  must 
suffer. 

The  state  of  the  Continent  is  alarming  every  one  ;  the 
troubles  in  Paris,  the  attacks  on  the  clergy,  the  revolution  in 
Italy,1  the  disturbances  in  German}',  all  give  grave  cause  for 
reflection.  They  have  had  an  immense  influence  on  all  com- 
mercial transactions,  which  are  almost  completely  suspended 
just  now.2 

All  those  who  take  part  in  public  affairs,  believe  that  it  is  only 
by  maintaining  the  alliance  of  the  Great  Powers,  that  the  rapid 
progress  of  disorder  everywhere  can  be  arrested.  I  will  cite  Sir 
James  Mackintosh's  opinion,3  which  is  quite  above  suspicion 
in  this  question.  This  distinguished  man,  whose  career  has  been 
in  complete  opposition  to  the  various  Continental  governments,  is 
of  opinion,  that  only  the  solid  union  of  the  five  Great  Powers  can 
restore  tranquillity  to  Europe.  It  is  only  thus,  he  says,  that  we 
can  hope  to  overcome  the  dangers  of  despotism,  of  anarchy,  and, 
later  on,  of  martial  governments,  which  a  war  of  principles  would 
inevitably  bring  upon  the  world.  .  .  . 

London,  February  i^th,  1831. 

Monsieur  le  Comte, 

This  morning  I  was  summoned  to  the  Foreign  Office, 
together  with  the  other  members  of  the  Conference,  to  hear  a 
despatch  from  Lord  Ponsonby,  which  states  that  the  siege  of 
Maestrich  continues,  and  that  all  communication  with  that  place, 
as  well  as  Northern  Brabant  and  Aix-la-Chapelle,  has  been  com- 
pletely interrupted. 

After  reading  this  despatch,  it  was  suggested  to  draw  up  a 
protocol,  announcing  the  intention  of  at  once  taking  rigorous 
measures  against  the  Belgians,  in  accordance  with  protocol  No.  10 
of  the  1 8th  January,  in  order  to  put  down  this  fresh  breach  of  the 
armistice.  In  accordance  with  the  orders  I  had  received  from 
you,  I  said  that  I  must  first  refer  to  my  Court  before  signing 
anything  on  so  serious  a  matter.  It  was  then  decided  that  Lord 
Palmerston  should  send  off  a  courier  to  Lord  Granville,  and  that 
the  latter  should  be  directed  to  make  known  to  you  the  views  of 

1  The  insurrections  in  Modena,  Parma,  and  Romagna. 

-  Var.  :  Les  polices  d'assurances  augmentent  chaque  jour  =•  tire  insurance  policies 
increase  every  day. 

3  Sir  James  Mackintosh,  born  in  1765,  was  an  orator  and  a  political  writer.  He 
entered  the  House  of  Commons  in  1802,  and  was  appointed  Judge  at  Bombay.  On 
his  return  to  England,  he  re-entered  Parliament,  and  became  one  of  the  most  influen- 
tial orators  of  the  Whig  party.  In  1803,  he  formed  part  of  the  Whig  Cabinet  as  com- 
missioner for  India.  He  died  in  1832.  Sir  James  was  an  eminent  lawyer,  and  his 
name  was  equally  well  known  in  literature  and  philosophy. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  63 

the  plenipotentiaries,  and  to  ask  what  course  you  would  suggest, 
to  procure  the  fulfilment  of  an  act  which  had  been  agreed  to  by 
the  Belgian  Government  itself.  Lord  Granville  must  remind  you, 
that  you  approved1  of  the  cessation  of  hostilities  between  the 
Dutch  and  the  Belgians,  and  the  conditions  thereby  guaranteed, 
and  that  now  the  aim  of  the  Conference  is  to  insist  on  the  strict 
execution  of  a  Convention,  agreed  toby  all  parties. 

The  communication  that  will  be  made  to  you  on  this  subject 
will,  I  feel  sure,  be  done  with  all  the  deference  you  could  possibly 
desire,  for  great  stress  is  laid  on  acting  in  accord  with  you  in  all 
things,  for  the  sake  of  the  tranquillity  of  Luropc,  which  is  tremb- 
ling in  the  balance.  .  .  . 

London,  February  27 ///,  1S31. 

Monsieur  le  Comte, 

You  wished  me  to  have  an  explanation  with  M.  le 
Prince  de  Licven  as  to  M.  de  Kriidener's  journey  to  Brussels, 
and  the  steps  he  may  have  taken  to  favour  the  cause  of  the 
Prince  of  Orange  in  that  city.  I  have  had  this  explanation,  as 
I  have  already  had  the  honour  of  informing  you,  and  the  result 
is  that  the  Prince  de  Lieven  has  recalled  iM.  de  Krudener,  who 
is  now  in  London.  I  may  further  add,  that  as  far  as  this  matter 
is  concerned,  all  attempts  or  even  hopes  here,  regarding  the 
Prince  of  Orange,  have  been  completely  given  up. 

A  report  has  got  abroad,  that  M.  le  Due  de  Mortemart's 
mission  to  St.  Petersburg  has  been  unsuccessful.'  This  piece  of 
news  has  arrived  here  by  letter  from  Frankfort,  and  I  am  glad 
to  think  that  no  more  credence  need  be  given  to  this,  than  to 
the  report  which  will  probably  reach  you,  that  they  say  in 
Russia,  the  Russian  plenipotentiaries  in  London  only  agreed 
to  the  last  protocols  ad  referendum.  You  will  have  had  no 
difficulty  in  discrediting  this  report,  which  is  utterly  without 
foundation  :  the  signatures  to  all  the  protocols  by  Prince  de 
Lieven  and  Count  Matusiewicz,  have  been  perfectly  regular  and 
complete,  and,  I  think,  most  useful  to  us. 

The  nomination  of  Baron  Surlet  de    Chokier  as   Regent  of 
Belgium,  was  made  known  here  yesterday  morning.3     If,  as  is 

1  Var.  :  admis  —  allowed. 

-  It  will  be  remembered,  that  the  Due  de  Mortemart  had  been  sent  as  Ambas- 
sador extraordinary,  with  a  view  to  negotiate  closer  relations  between  the  two 
countries. 

:i  After  the  vote  of  the  Belgian  constitution  and  the  refusal  of  the  crown  by  the 
Due  de  Nemours,  the  Congress  decreed  that  a  Regency  should  be  established  to 
govern  the  kingdom,  until  the  nation  had  come  to  an  understanding  with  the  live 
Powers  as  to  the  choice  of  a  sovereign  (February  1S23).  The  following  day  M.  Surlet 
de  Chokier  was  elected  Regent  by  the  Congress,  by  108  votes,  against  43  for  M. 
Merode  and  5  for  M.  Cerlache. 


64  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

reported,  the  king  has  accredited  General  Belliard  1  to  Brussels,  it 
seems  to  me  that  there  is  nothing  further  to  prevent  M.  Bresson's, 
return  to  London  after  a  few  weeks'  stay  in  Paris.  I  will  under- 
take to  give  him  his  old  place  here,  and  I  think  that  his  remain- 
ing in  England  may  further  his  career. 

I  regret  you  did  not  receive  protocol  No.  19,  soon  enough 
to  enable  you  to  make  use  of  some  of  the  facts  and  arguments 
it  contains ;  it  would  have  shown  how  far  the  attacks  to 
which  you  had  to  reply  in  the  sitting  of.  .  .  .  were  without 
foundation.  .  .  .'2 


The  Due  de  Dalberg  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand. 

Paris,  February  27th,  1831. 

Mon  cher  Prince, 

The  position  of  matters  grows  worse  each  day.  No 
payment  can  be  got  anywhere.  France  has  never  witnessed 
such  a  state  of  affairs  since  the  time  of  the  Directorate.  There 
is  no  authority  anywhere,  and  intrigue  flourishes  everywhere. 

You  are  perfectly  right  in  saying,  that  the  London  Conference 
is  the  only  power  in  Europe  that  has  any  strength,  and  that  it 
must  be  maintained  at  any  price.  But  how  can  it  influence  our 
position  at  home  ?  The  Ministry,  by  its  complete  incapacity 
and  its  inclination  to  lean  on  the  extreme  Left,  has  placed  itself 
in  such  a  position  with  the  Chamber,  that  I  do  not  see  any 
possibility  of  patching  up  a  peace  between  the  two  parties. 
And  how  can  the  government  escape  getting  into  difficulties, 
when  for  three  months  it  has  been  without  the  support  of  the 
Chambers  ? 

The  late  events  3  clearly  prove  that  there  was  an  attempt  at 
a  Carlist  conspiracy, got  up  by  the  Buonapartist-Republican  party. 

1  General  Comte  Belliard,  born  in  1769,  entered  the  army  in  1792,  took  part 
in  all  the  campaigns  of  the  Revolution  and  the  Empire.  Made  a  General  in  1791,  he 
became  General  Commandant  of  the  Cavalry  of  the  Guard  in  1814.  Louis  XVIII. 
made  him  a  Peer  of  France  and  a  Major-General.  He  took  service  during  the  Hun- 
dred Days,  and  lived  in  retirement  during  the  second  Restoration.  In  1831,  he  was 
sent  as  Minister  Plenipotentiary  to  Brussels.  He  died  soon  after  on  the  28th 
January,  1832. 

2  At  the  sitting  of  23rd  February,  General  Sebastiani  had  made  a  communication 
on  foreign  policy  to  the  Chamber,  and  explained  the  king's  motive  for  refusing  the 
crown  to  the  Due  de  Nemours.  General  Lamarque  and  M.  Mauguin  had  risen,  and 
expressed  themselves  with  great  vehemence  against  the  conduct  of  the  Cabinet  in  this 
matter.  "I  cannot  but  grieve,"  the  former  had  concluded,  "at  the  refusal  of  the 
Belgian  throne.  I  can  but  mourn  at  the  undecided  measures,  the  hesitations,  the 
contradictions,  which,  when  brought  to  the  light  of  day,  have  shown  our  diplomacy  in 
a  state  of  nudity  it  has  no  reason  to  be  proud  of." 

3  The  riots  at  Paris  on  the  14th  and  15th  of  February. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  65 

This  latter  possesses  all  the  energy,  and  will  certainly  gain  the 
day,  if  the  king  does  not  think  and  act  in  such  a  way  as  to 
regain  the  people's  confidence  and  respect.  What  is  happening 
in  Belgium,  only  helps  to  strengthen  this  party,  and  if  to-morrow 
La  Fayette  wished  to  become  President  of  a  Regency  for  France, 
he  would  be  summoned  at  once,  and  dismissed  twenty-four  hours 
after. 

Your  correspondence  with  the  king  and  the  Ministry,  must 
have  made  you  aware  of  what  is  needed.  As  for  me  and  my 
friends,  we  constantly  ask  ourselves,  whence  will  come  the  thunder- 
clap which  shall  overthrow  the  miserable  edifice  we  have  in  front 
of  us? — A  sovereign  who  cannot  make  himself  obeyed  ;  a  Chamber 
of  Peers  without  any  foundation,  even  in  law  ;  a  Chamber  of 
Deputies  which  is  perpetually  insulted,  and  which  one  would  like 
to  get  rid  of  ;  a  National  guard  becoming  more  and  more 
disgusted,  and  which  is  not  allowed  to  strike  when  needed  ;  and 
a  regular  army  which  does  not  know  whom  it  is  to  obey.  That 
is  our  position  at  present.  Try  to  find  and  point  out  some 
remedy  for  such  a  state  of  anarchy. 

As  for  foreign  affairs,  we  see  nothing  but  underhand  dealings 
to  stir  up  the  nations,  and  no  unanimity,  no  force  to  stop  them, 
or  to  re-establish  order.  After  the  treaty  of  Westphalia,  an 
executive  army  was  constituted  to  see  that  the  decisions  come 
to  were  respected.  We  shall  have  to  resort  to  that  yet,  but  first 
of  all  it  must  be  understood,  upon  what  footing  the  nations  will 
be  allowed  to  establish  themselves. 

It  seems  to  me  that  we  shall  be  obliged  to  return  to  military 
law,  after  a  long  series  of  anarchist  agitations. 

My  family  left  Geneva  on  the  18th  of  this  month.  At  that 
time  everything  was  still  quiet  ;  but  although  here  we  knew  that 
a  body  of  insurgents  had  been  formed  at  Lyons  for  the  purpose  of 
invading  Savoy,  no  measures  were  taken  to  stop  them,  until  after 
they  had  started.1  And  then  people  are  surprised  that  Europe 
should  seek  security,  by  arming  herself  and  contending  against 
revolution  !  .  .  . 

Your  supposed  chief  Sebastiani,  according  to  Rigny  and 
Rayneval,2  puts  his  finger  in  every  pie.     The  editor  Chatelain 

1  In  consequence  of  the  disturbances  that  had  broken  out  in  Savoy,  the  Sardinian 
refugees,  who  were  in  great  numbers  on  the  French  frontier,  tried,  by  a  coup-de-main, 
to  re-enter  their  country  armed.  Five  or  six  hundred  of  them,  accompanied  by  a 
certain  number  of  the  National  Guard  of  Lyons,  attempted  to  put  this  project  into 
execution.  They  were  dispersed  by  a  squadron  of  cavalry  on  the  25th  of  February, 
and  the  incident  had  no  further  results. 

2  Francois  Maximilien  Gerard,  Comte  de  Rayneval,  born  in  1778,  was  succes- 
sively secretary  to  the  Embassies  of  Stockholm,  St.  Petersburg,  and  Lisbon.  Then 
again  to  St.  Petersburg,  and  secretary  to  the  French  Legation  at  the  Congress  of 
Chatillon,  Consul-General  in   London,  1S14  ;  Privy  Seal  to  the  Ministry,  1816  ;  and 

VOL.  IV.  F 


66  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

and  Bertin  de  Vaux,  breakfast  with  him  every  morning-.  The 
former  has  to-day  made  a  regular  onslaught  on  you.1  The 
fact  is  we  cannot  do  what  we  want.  .  .  . 

Were  we  to  go  to  war,  as  good  old  Jourdan  2  says,  it 
would  only  be  by  the  aid  of  a  Convention.  Let  the  king  look  to 
this! 

Accept  my  congratulations,  that  you  are  not  living  in  the 
turmoil  by  which  I  am  surrounded.   .  .  . 

Such  a  state  of  affairs  as  is  here  described  by  the  Due  de 
Dalberg,  could  not  continue  long,  and  the  king  who  had  not 
been  sorry  I  think,  to  let  the  men  and  the  principles  of  which 
M.  Lafitte  was  the  representative,  exhaust  themselves,  found 
himself  obliged  to  consider  the  best  means  of  escape  from  this 
state  of  anarchy.  The  Ministry  had  to  be  dismissed,  or  at  least 
some  of  its  members,  and  an  energetic  man,  who  fortunately 
was  ready  at  hand,  chosen  from  among  the  Conservative  party 
in    the    Chamber   of   Deputies  :    this  was    M.   Casimir  Perier.3 

Under-Secretary  of  State  in  1821.  He  was  then  sent  as  Minister  to  Berlin,  to  Berne, 
and  to  Vienna,  1829.  Recalled  in  1830,  he  lived  in  retirement  in  Paris,  until  Casimir 
Perier,  on  M.  de  Talleyrand's  recommendation,  sent  him  to  Madrid.  He  died  there 
soon  after  in  October  1832. 

1  See  the  Conrrier  Francais,  28th  February.  We  will  give  some  extracts  from  this 
article,  showing  the  opinion  of  the  Republican  opposition,  against  which  the  French 
Cabinet  and  M.  de  Talleyrand  had  to  contend.  "  A  letter  of  the  24th  from  London, 
which  we  saw  yesterday,  spoke  of  a  protocol  which  had  just  been  signed,  and  which 
will  completely  upset  all  the  principles  which  have  hitherto  apparently  directed  our 
policy.  It  can  hardly  be  conceived  that  a  diplomatic  body,  whose  acts  will  be  known 
to  the  whole  of  Europe,  should  dare  to  state,  that  the  treaties  of  1815  were  made 
between  nation  and  nation,  at  the  very  time  that  these  nations,  penned,  quartered, 
split  up,  and  treated  like  brute  beasts,  rose  up,  over  half  Europe,  to  escape  from  a 
situation  repugnant  alike  to  their  feelings  and  their  interests.  But  M.  de  Talleyrand  is 
there,  and  his  presence  renders  it  probable,  that  everything  will  be  done  to  uphold  the 
treaties  in  which  he  took  part.  It  is  certain  that  the  policy  of  Europe  and  the  policy 
of  France,  is  decided  in  London,  contrary  to  our  interests,  since  it  is  M.  de  Talleyrand 
who  there  presides.  If  anything  like  what  the  Temps  announces  has  been  signed  in 
London,  the  Ministry  has  nothing  further  to  do  than  to  recall  its  ambassador,  and 
exercise  the  liberty  still  permitted  us,  at  the  cost  of  a  general  war.  We  shall  then,  at 
any  rate,  have  the  advantage  of  no  longer  being  represented  by  M.  de  Talleyrand  ;  and 
also  of  regaining  our  independence.  Diplomacy  seems  too  much  inclined  to  forget 
what  France  is  ;  that  what  she  has  done,  she  can  do  again,  and  that  she  can  whenever 
she  likes,  again  influence  the  destinies  of  Europe.  It  only  needs  one  word  for  her  to 
remember  the  past.  If  upheavals  are  desired,  so  be  it  ;  the  signal  need  only  be 
given,  and  before  a  year  is  over  it  will  be  seen  who  remains  standing." 

2  Marshal  Jourdan,  then  sixty-nine  years  of  age,  had  during  the  first  days  of  the 
Monarchy  in  July,  temporarily  acted  as  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs.  However,  he 
retired  on  the  nth  August,  when  he  was  made  Governor  of  the  "Invalides."  He 
died  November  23rd,  1833. 

Casimir  Perier,  born  at  Grenoble  in  1777,  was  at  first  an  officer  of  engineers. 
After   quitting  the  service,  he,  conjointly  with  his  brother,  founded  a  large  banking 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1S30.  67 

Some  difficulties  arose  between  him  and  Marshal  Soult,  as  to 
the  presidency  of  the  Council  ;  these  however  were  easily  over- 
come. But  it  was  a  different  matter  with  the  conditions  made  by 
M.  Perier  on  taking  office,  and  which  did  not  at  all  please  the 
king.  He  was,  however,  obliged  to  yield  in  the  end,  in  the  face  of 
a  danger  which  threatened  to  carry  away  everything,  and  on  the 
13th  March  a  Ministry  was  formed,  which  took  its  name  from 
its  chief  M.  Perier.1  The  king  succeeded  in  keeping  General 
Sebastiani  as  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs. 

While  these  arrangements  were  being  made  in  Paris,  the 
Conference  in  London  had  some  little  respite,  in  consequence  of 
the  first  discussions  over  the  Reform  Bill,  which  then  occupied 
the  English  Cabinet.  This  Bill  had  been  presented  in  the  House 
of  Commons  on  the  1st  March  by  Lord  John  Russell,2  who  was 

establishment,  which  rose  rapidly  to  great  importance.  In  181 7,  he  entered  the 
Chamber  of  Deputies  and  sided  with  the  opposition  till  1830.  After  the  July  days 
he  became  President  of  the  Chamber  and  Minister  without  a  portfolio  in  the 
Cabinet  of  the  nth  August.  Head  of  the  Cabinet  on  the  13th  of  March,  he  only 
remained  in  power  one  year,  and  died  of  cholera  on  16th  May,  1832. 

1  The  Cabinet  of  May  13th  was  composed  as  follows  :  M.  Casimir  Terier, 
President  of  the  Council  and  Minister  of  the  Interior;  M.  Barthe,  Keeper  of  the 
Seals";  General  Sebastiani,  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs;  Baron  Louis,  Minister  of 
Finance ;  Marshal  Soult,  War  Minister ;  Admiral  Rigny,  Minister  of  Marine  ; 
the  Comte  de  Montalivet,  Minister  of  Public  Instruction  and  Religion  ;  and 
the  Comte  D'Argout,   Minister  of  Trade  and  Public  Works. 

It  is  not  without  interest  to  see  the  effect  produced  in  England  by  the  advent 
of  the  new  Cabinet.      Lord   Palmerston  wrote  to  Lord   Granville  as  follows  : 

("Private") 

Foreign  Office,  March  15//$,  1831. 
My  dear  Granville, 

We  are  delighted  with  the  nomination  of  Casimir  Perier  ;  this  event  i*,  we  hope, 
of  a  nature  to  give  peace  to    France  and  to  Europe.      Please  cultivate  the   new 
minister,  and  make  him  understand,  I  beg  of  you,  that  the  English  government  has 
great  confidence  in  him,  and  looks  upon  his  nomination  as  a  pledge  of  peace. 
( Confidi  nlial  Correspondence  of  Lord  Palmerston. ) 

2  Lord  John  Russell,  third  son  of  the  Duke  of  Bedford,  born  in  1792,  entered  the 
House  of  Commons  at  twenty-one  years  of  age  under  the  Whig  part}-.  In  1S30,  he 
was  made  Paymaster-General,  and  although  he  had  no  seat  in  the  Cabinet,  was 
appointed,  together  with  three  other  members  of  the  Ministry,  to  prepare  the  draft  of 
the  Electoral  Reform  Bill,  respecting  which  he  had  recently  (simply  as  a  member) 
brought  in  a  motion. 

The  Bill  was  presented  to  the  Commons  on  the  1st  March,  1831,  carried  at  the 
first  reading  by  one  vote,  and  thrown  out  at  the  second  reading.  After  the  dissolution 
of  Parliament,  and  on  the  assembly  of  the  new  one,  it  was  passed  by  345  votes 
against  236  (September  21st).  Taken  into  the  House  of  Lords,  on  the  22nd  of 
September  it  was  thrown  out.  Presented  again  in  December  with  a  few  slight 
modifications,  the  House  put  off  the  reading  for  three  months.  At  last,  on  June  4th, 
1832,  it  passed  the  Lords.  This  result  was  due  in  great  part  to  the  exertions  of  Lord 
John  Russell. 

In  1835,  he  was   made  Home   Secretary,  and   in  1S39  Colonial   Secretary.     In 

F    2 


68  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

generally  listened  to  in  the  House  with  great  good  humour. 
It  would  be  useless  for  me  here  to  enter  into  the  details  of  this 
great  measure,  destined  to  exercise  so  powerful  an  influence  on 
England's  future.  It  became  the  subject  of  prolonged  dis- 
cussions in  both  Houses  of  Parliament  ;  I  shall  confine  myself 
to  mentioning  the  results  thereof,  as  they  presented  themselves 
from  time  to  time. 

I,  on  my  side,  had  to  carry  on  a  discussion  of  a  different 
nature,  in  my  correspondence  regarding  the  Belgian  affairs, 
which  they  persisted  in  not  looang  at  from  my  point  of  view,  in 
Paris.  Thus  they  continued  to  insist  that  Lord  Ponsonby  should 
be  recalled  from  Brussels  at  the  same  time  as  M.  Bresson,  and 
that  the  Conference  should  show  itself  more  favourably  disposed 
to  Belgian  interests,  to  which  they  wished  to  give  exclusive 
support.  They  did  not  hesitate  to  accuse  the  Conference  of 
favouring  the  King  of  Holland  ;  whereas  he,  and  with  much 
greater  reason,  made  loud  complaints  to  Europe  against  us 
because  having  been,  as  he  said,  called  upon  by  him  for  aid,  we 
had  countenanced  a  revolution,  which  had  deprived  him  of  more 
than  half  his  States. 

The  Lafitte  Ministry,  or  more  correctly  General  Sebastiani, 
would  have  been  glad  I  fancy,  to  separate  the  policy  of  France 
from  that  of  the  other  four  Powers  in  the  Belgian  question,  so 
completely  was  he  the  dupe,  voluntarily  or  involuntarily,  of  the 
Buonapartist  and  Republican  intriguers,  who  alternately 
flattered  him  with  the  hope  of  the  reunion  of  Belgium  with 
France,  or  threatened  him  with  a  revolutionary  war.  But 
present  necessities  always  brought  him  back  to  the  Powers,  and 
the  events  which  followed  shortly  afterwards  in  Italy  and 
Spain,  obliged  him  at  any  rate  to  claim  the  assistance  of  Eng- 
land. 

The  revolutionary  party  in  Italy,  encouraged  by  their  friends 

1846,  he  became  First  Lord  of  the  Treasury,  and  remained  at  the  head  of  affairs 
till  1852.  In  December  of  the  same  year,  he  was  made  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs, 
then  successively  minister,  President  of  the  Council,  and  Colonial  Secretary  (1855). 
He  quitted  office  the  same  year,  remaining  leader  of  the  Whig  party  in  Parliament, 
signed  the  Treaty  of  Commerce  with  France  in  i860,  and  in  1861  was  created  a  peer 
of  the  realm.  He  succeeded  Lord  Palmerston  as  head  of  the  Cabinet  (1865),  and 
died  in  1878. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  69 

in  Paris,  had  taken  up  arms  in  the  Papal  States  ; '  two  members 
of  the  Buonaparte  family  had  gone  thither,  and  the  French 
government,  less  afraid  of  the  struggle  that  was  going  on  there, 
than  of  Austrian  intervention,  asked  mc  to  concert  with 
England  in  order  to  prevent  (by  a  mutual  understanding  with 
the  Powers,  if  such  were  possible)  the  separate  action  of  Austria. 
It  was  also  wished  in  Paris,  that  Spanish  affairs  should  be  treated 
jointly  by  France  and  England. 

In  answer  to  these  overtures,  I  wrote  to  General  Sebastian i 
on  the  5th  March,  1831,  as  follows  : 

Monsieur  le  Comte, 

I  have  to-day  (5th)  received  the  two  despatches  you 
did  mc  the  honour  of  writing  on  the  1st  of  this  month.2  (One 
related  to  the  affairs  of  the  Grand  Duchy  of  Luxemburg,  the 
other  to  the  affairs  of  Italy.) 

I  have  carefully  studied  the  instructions  they  contain,  and 
will  conform  to  them  on  every  point.  I  regret  that  I  am  obliged 
to  delay  communicating  the  contents  of  these  despatches  to  the 
English  Cabinet ;  but  the  lengthy  discussions  on  Parliamentary 
Reform  absorb  the  ministers  so  completely  night  and  day,  that 
it  is  impossible  to  get  them  to  attend  seriously  to  any  other 
matter  just  now.3 

A  somewhat  remarkable  incident  occurred  yesterday  in  the 
Commons.  Mr.  Wynn,  the  War  Minister,  rose  and  declared  that 
after  having  carefully  considered  the  proposed  Reform  Bill,  he 
found  he  could  not  assent  to  it,  and  therefore  withdrew  from 
the  Ministry.  .  .  .4 

I  have  spoken  to  M.  de  Bulow  and  M.  de  Wessenberg  with 
regard  to  Luxemburg."'  They  both  told  me  that  they  found 
it  very  difficult  to  write  to  Frankfort?  when  they  knew  that  the 

1  Bologna  had  revolted  on  February  2nd,  1831,  against  the  Papal  government. 
The  whole  of  Romagna  had  followed  suit.  The  two  sons  of  Louis  Buonaparte, 
Prince  Charles  and  Prince  Louis,  took  part  in  the  movement.  The  former  died  of 
some  malady  at  Forli  ;  the  latter,  who  subsequently  became  the  Emperor  Napoleon 
III.,  nearly  perished  at  Ancona. 

-  Var.  :  ainsi  que  les  pieces  qui  y  etaient  jointes  =  as  well  as  the  papers  that 
accompanied  them. 

3  Var.  :  On  pense  que  les  debats  finiront  dans  la  seance  du  7.  Je  verrai  aussitot 
apres  Lord  Palmerston  —  it  is  thought  the  debates  will  end  on  the  7th.  I  will  see 
Lord  Palmerston  immediately  afterwards. 

*  Mr.  Wynn  was  succeeded  by  Sir  Henry  Parnell,  who  in  the  same  session 
retired  for  the  same  reason. 

5  Var.  :  Dont  vous  me  parlez  dans  votre  lettre  du  22  =  about  which  you  speak  to 
me  in  your  letter  of  22nd. 

6  Suppressed  in  the  text  of  the  Archives. 


70  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

engagements  entered  into  with  them  were  not  kept,  and  that  up 
to  the  28th  of  February,  the  fortress  of  Maastricht  continued  to 
be  besieged  by  Belgian  troops,  despite  the  assurances  given 
by  the  Belgian  government,  and  the  orders  that  General  Mellinet 
had  received.1 

The  non-fulfilment  of  orders  issued  by  the  government, 
renders  any  sort  of  negotiation  difficult.  I  have  assured  them 
that  the  Regent  had  ordered  General  Mellinet,  under  pain  of 
dismissal,  to  reoccupy  the  positions  fixed  by  the  armistice,  and 
they  have  informed  me  that  as  soon  as  they  are  assured  of  the 
retreat  of  the  Belgian  troops,  they  will  at  once  write  to  Frank- 
fort to  postpone  all  the  movements  proposed  by  the  Germanic 
Diet.  .  .  .2 

London,  May  %th,  1831. 
Monsieur  le  Comte, 

I  have  read  the  information  on  the  state  of  Italy, 
contained  in  the  despatches  you  did  me  the  honour  to  send  on 
the  1st  of  this  month,  with  great  attention.  I  thoroughly  concur 
with  your  views  as  to  the  relations  of  France  with  Piedmont. 
As  to  the  measures  you  have  adopted  regarding  the  Papal 
States,  I  believe  it  would  be  very  expedient  and  quite  possible 
to  carry  them  out.  I  have  spoken  to  Prince  Esterhazy  and 
Baron  Wessenberg,  the  two  Austrian  plenipotentiaries,  on  the 
subject ;  they  did  not  seem  opposed  to  the  idea,  and  although 
they  had  no  instructions  from  their  Court  on  this  point,  I  saw 
plainly  that  they  were  not  indisposed  to  adopt  your  views,  and 
that  they  would  write  to  Vienna  in  that  spirit. 

This  morning  I  had  a  long  conversation  with  Lord  Palmerston, 
during  which  I  was  enabled  to  speak  to  him  on  everything 
mentioned  in  your  letter  of  the  1st.  The  impression  left  upon 
me  by  this  conversation  is,  that  it  will  be  quite  possible  to 
come  to  an  understanding  on  the  principal  points,  and  that  the 

1  Francois  Aime  Mellinet,  born  in  1769,  son  of  the  member  of  the  National 
Convention  of  that  name,  became  a  Colonel  in  1793.  He  acted  as  Sub-Inspector  at 
the  reviews  of  1800,  and  was  made  Chief  of  the  Staff  of  the  "young  Guard  "  during 
the  Hundred  Days.  He  lived  in  retirement  until  1830,  when  he  entered  Belgium  at 
the  head  of  a  body  of  volunteers,  commanded  the  artillery  at  Brussels  during  the  clays 
of  September,  and  was  placed  in  command  of  the  troops  which  besieged  Maastricht. 
The  Regent  having  deprived  him  of  his  command,  he  settled  in  Brussels,  where  he 
became  chief  of  the  Republican  party.  In  1848,  he  incited  a  revolutionary  movement, 
was  arrested,  condemned  to  imprisonment,  and  died  in  1852. 

2  The  Diet  had  just  been  influenced  by  King  William,  who,  as  Grand  Duke 
of  Luxemburg,  had  taken  upon  himself  to  ask  for  assistance  from  the  Germanic 
Confederation.  In  the  sittings  of  iSth  March,  the  Diet  decreed  the  formation  of  an 
army-corps  of  80,000  men,  to  re-establish  the  authority  of  the  King  of  the  Netherlands 
in  the  Grand  Duchy,  at  the  same  time  issuing  orders  for  provisioning  and  preparing 
the  fortresses  of  the  Confederation. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  71. 

difficulties   which  you    have  raised    respecting   several    of    our 
protocols,  are  of  a  nature  capable  of  explanation. 

Respecting  Italian  affairs,  Lord  Palmerston  told  me  that  he 
would  gladly  co-operate  with  our  Cabinet  and  that  of  Vienna, 
with  the  view  to  obtain  from  the  Papal  Government  such  con- 
cessions, as  would  place  some  portion  of  the  administration  of 
the  country  in  the  hands  of  the  laity.  He  greatly  praised  our 
conduct  as  regards  Piedmont,  and  expressed  much  satisfaction 
at  the  orders  issued  to  the  French  authorities  on  the  frontier,  for 
the  disarmament  of  the  Piedmontese  refugees. 

The  complaints  you  make  against  Spain,  have  led  us  to 
believe  that  it  might  doubtless  be  easy  to  obtain  the  withdrawal 
of  Spanish  troops  from  the  Pyrehean  frontier,  if  you  on  your 
side,  would  insist  on  the  Spanish  refugees  returning  to  the 
north  of  France. 

I  am  induced  to  think,  that  you  could  arrange  this  question 
very  advantageously  with  the  Spanish  Ambassador  in  Paris. 
However,  everything  that  you  may  ask  in  the  spirit  I  have  just 
expressed  to  you,  will  be  supported  by  the  English  Ministry. 

Immediately  after  my  conversation  with  Lord  Palmerston, 
the  Conference  assembled,  ostensibly  to  hear  the  despatch  read 
which  I  had  received  from  you  ;  there  also  I  found  a  decidedly 
favourable  impression,  and  I  believe  we  shall  end  by  coming  to 
a  mutual  understanding.  We  have  had  to  put  off  our  next 
meeting  till  Friday,  on  account  of  the  debates  in  parliament, 
which  do  not  leave  Lord  Palmerston  a  moment's  liberty. 
On  Friday,  therefore,  we  shall  begin  the  discussion  of  the 
various  points  dealt  with  in  your  letter.  If  it  is  proposed  to  draw 
up  a  protocol,  I  will  only  accept  it  ad  referendum,  and  will 
await  the  king's  instructions  before  signing  anything.  .  .   . 

When  sending  these  despatches,  I  also  wrote  to  Madame 
Adelaide  : 

Mademoiselle  will  find  that  we  have  arrived  at  the  wished- 
for  point  with  all  the  Powers,  for  they  now  realize,  that,  in  order 
to  secure  tranquillity  for  themselves,  it  is  necessary  that  the 
king's  peace  should  not  be  disturbed.  So  far  therefore  from 
desiring  anything  that  might  embarrass  his  government,  the)'  are 
rather  uneasy  when  any  movements  in  Paris,  the  Departments,  or 
the  Chambers,  indicate  an  inclination  towards  disorder.  Not  one 
of  the  Powrers  now  wishes  to  disturb  peace.  All  are  in  favour 
of  its  preservation,  and  if  it  is  not  preserved,  it  will  be  due  only 
to  the  restless  and  aggressive  spirit  displayed  by  France.  This 
short-sighted  policy  is  ever  ready  to  sacrifice  the  real  needs  of 


7^2  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

the  country,  to  dreams  of  glory  and  aggrandisement.  French- 
men forget,  or  fail  to  recognise,  that  to  call  everything  in 
question  abroad,  is  to  end  by  calling  everything  in  question  at 
home. 

The  throne  of  King  Louis  Philippe  now  dates  back  to  the 
days  of  St.  Louis.  War  will  make  it  a  matter  of  yesterday. 
You  have  directed  me  to  use  every  effort  to  avoid  a  war.  You 
have  asked  me  to  induce  the  different  Courts  to  become  amicably 
disposed  towards  us  ;  in  this  I  have  completely  succeeded,  and  I 
hope  that  Mademoiselle,  whose  wishes  I  have  ever  kept  in  view, 
in  all  I  have  done,  is  satisfied. 

I  cannot  refrain  from  observing,  that  I  have  not  as  yet 
received  any  reply  to  the  protocol  of  the  19th,  which  contains 
all  the  principles  so  desirable  in  a  new  monarchy.  The  diplo- 
matic body  in  London,  as  well  as  Rothschild,  have  for  more 
than  forty  hours  been  aware  that  this  document  has  reached 
Paris.  Our  newspapers  speak  of  it,  they  alter  the  spirit  of  it, 
they  change  its  expresions  ;  its  actual  publication  therefore, 
becomes  more  and  more  necessary.  It  is  beneficial  to  the  king's 
service,  that  the  country  should  know  at  what  point  in  this 
document  our  Court  takes  first  rank,  and  that  when  I  speak  of 
a  treaty,  it  is  that  of  18 14  to  which  I  refer. 

By  this  treaty,  France  remained  great  and  strong.  It  is  false 
therefore,  to  cite  that  of  18 15  as  the  point  of  departure.  I  had 
retired  before  the  stain  was  cast  upon  our  country  by  the 
treaty  of  18 15,  and  I  think  I  may  say  that  I  have  quite  as 
much  national  pride  as  anyone 

I  also  wrote  to  my  friend  the  Princess  de  Vandemont,  who 
was  on  terms  of  great  intimacy  with  Mme.  Adelaide  : 

It  is  possible,  since  they  say  so  in  Paris,  that  I  take  too 
high-flown  a  view  of  matters,  but  it  is  only  from  a  high  stand- 
point that  one  can  form  a  proper  opinion. 

It  is  impossible  to  place  any  reliance  on  such  foolish  and 
turbulent  people  as  the  Belgians.  Belgium  may  perhaps  come 
to  us  ;  but  that  will  be  later  on  ;  at  present  this  is  only  a  secon- 
dary interest.  The  pressure  of  affairs  leads  her  towards  France, 
but  France  must  be  first  thoroughly  matured,  and  this  she 
cannot  be,  except  by  joining  with  the  great  Powers,  who  now 
seek  her.  It  is  to  this  point  I  have  brought  matters  in  London. 
Let  us  not  quit  this  vantage  ground.  It  has  cost  me  much 
trouble  to  arrive  thereat ;  but  I  was  anxious  to  serve  the  king 
whom  I  love,  and  Mademoiselle.  Let  us  put  aside  all  trivial 
interests,  and  think  only  of  the  great  ones.     It  is  of  more  con- 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  73 

sequence  to  be  in  accord  with  the  great  Powers,  to  be  on  the 
same  footing  with  them,  and  to  be  their  ally  in  the  established 
order  of  things,  than  to  be  the  friend  of  M.  Van  de  Weycr  & 
Co. 

You  must  acknowledge  that  our  protocol,  which  Belgium  has 
sent  you,  is  reasonable.  The  objections  raised  in  France  are  very 
trifling.  They  say  that  it  exhibits  partiality  for  Holland.  This 
is  perfectly  false,  for  nothing  has  been  decided  as  to  the  question 
of  the  debts.  A  Basis  has  been  proposed,  subject  to  alteration 
when  the  two  parties  are  face  to  face.  We  are  accused  of 
favouring  the  Dutch  ;  Holland  reproaches  us  with  humouring 
the  Belgians.  The  King  of  Holland  abuses  us  regularly  every 
day ;  he  is  thoroughly  dissatisfied.  But  things  are  not  far 
wrong  when  all  in  turn  complain.  In  France  only  one  side  is 
listened  to,  that  of  M.  de  Celles,  and  to  say  truth,  that  is  the 
least  respectable 


The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  General  Sebastiani. 

London,  March  i^tk,  1831. 
Monsieur  le  Comte, 

The  Conference  we  were  to  have  had  yesterday  has 
again  been  adjourned,  and  we  shall  not  meet  until  to-morrow 
at  the  Foreign  Office.  I  will,  immediately  after,  inform  you  of 
the  result  of  my  communication  of  your  letter  to  the  members 
of  the  Conference,  and  also  of  any  resolutions  proposed.  I  will 
accept  ad  referendum  whatever  is  agreed  to  by  the  other  mem- 
bers ;  for  the  king's  government,  having  made  some  reservations 
to  the  protocols  of  the  20th  and  27th  Jan.,  I  must  not  sign 
without  orders,  any  document  which  might  result  in  discussions 
between  my  government  and  the  Conference.  I  called 
yesterday  on  Lord  Palmerston  to  discuss  the  different  subjects 
treated  of  in  your  last  despatches.  I  began  by  speaking  of  the 
events  in  Warsaw,  and  the  dangerous  consequences  to  the  peace 
of  Europe  that  might  result  therefrom,  if  the  Emperor  Nicholas 
did  not  act  with  moderation  and  generosity  towards  the  Poles, 
Lord  Palmerston  entered  completely  into  our  views  on  this 
subject.  The  English  Ambassador  at  St.  Petersburg  will  be  in- 
structed to  demand  from  the  Russian  Cabinet,  the  maintenance 
of  the  stipulations  of  18 14,  in  virtue  of  which  the  kingdom  of 
Poland  was  joined  to  the  Russian  Empire  :  he  will  above  all 
insist  that  Poland  shall  not  cease  to  be  a  separate  state,  and 
that  she  cannot  be  annexed  as  a  Russian  province.  Lord 
Palmerston  appreciates,  as  fully  as  we  do,  the  importance  to 


74  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

Europe  of  making  the  voice  of  reason  heard  at  St.  Petersburg, 
and  I  feel  assured  from  his  language,  that  the  instructions  sent 
to  the  English  Ambassador  in  Russia,  will  fully  accord  with 
those  you  have  given  to  M.  le  Due  de  Mortemart. 

I  then  informed  Lord  Palmerston  of  the  observations 
contained  in  your  letter  of  the  7th,  relative  to  the  affairs  of 
Greece.  He  replied,  that  Prince  de  Lieven  had  just  com- 
municated to  him  a  despatch  from  his  Court,  which  explains 
the  species  of  difficulty  in  which  Russia  finds  herself,  as  regards 
the  question  of  the  enlargement  of  the  Greek  frontier. 

As  a  portion  of  the  loan  made  to  the  Greeks,  will  be 
employed  to  indemnify  the  Turkish  Government  for  the 
territory1  it  will  lose  as  a  result  of  the  new  delimitation,  Russia 
(to  whom  this  money  will  ultimately  revert,  as  it  will  be 
employed  to  pay  off  the  contribution  imposed  by  the  Treaty  of 
Adrianople)  has  thought  it  in  better  taste  not  to  come 
prominently  forward,  when  it  is  a  question  of  claiming  an 
increase  of  territory  in  favour  of  the  Greeks.  "  That  is  the 
reason,"  said  Lord  Palmerston,  "  why  the  Cabinet  of  St.  Peters- 
burg has  decided  to  let  England  and  France  take  the  initiative  ; 
but  it  is  quite  willing  to  join  them  in  supporting  the  demands  in 
favour  of  Greece,  whenever  the  opportune  moment  arrives."  The 
Prince  de  Lieven  has  asked  for  an  interview,  as  he  wishes  to 
make  a  communication  to  me.  I  have  reason  to  believe  that  it 
will  be  the  same  he  has  made  to  Lord  Palmerston,  and  of  which 
I  have  just  informed  you. 

As  to  the  situation  of  Portugal,  and  the  questions  connected 
therewith,  which  formed  the  subject  of  your  despatches  of 
the  4th  inst.,  Lord  Palmerston,  to  whom  I  spoke  about  it,  has 
given  me  the  reasons  why  it  would  not  do  for  England  to  act 
in  concert  with  France,  to  obtain  redress  for  the  grievances 
which  both  Powers  have  against  the  Portuguese  Government. 
England  has  special  treaties  with  Portugal,  which  give  her 
some  advantages  we  do  not  enjoy,  and  oblige  her  to  act 
separately  in  all  transactions  with  that  kingdom.  Thus,  for 
instance,  when  a  difficulty  arises  in  which  an  Englishman 
is  specially  concerned,  the  English  Government  has  the  right, 
if  it  thinks  fit,  to  have  the  matter  tried  by  such  Portuguese 
magistrate  as  it  may  choose.  But  I  can  tell  you  that  Don 
Miguel's  recognition  is  further  off  than  ever,  and  I  can  give 
you  the  assurance,  that  whatever  ulterior  projects  England 
may  have  regarding  Portugal,  she  will  do  nothing  without 
acquainting  us.  .  .  . 

The  Reform  Bill  has  made  some  progress  lately  ;  petitions 

1  Var  :  pays,  country. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  75 

in  its  favour  have  come  in  from  all  parts,  and  the  Ministry  think 
they  are  sure  of  a  large  majority.  .  .   . 

As  I  have  already  said,  during  the  interval  of  the  negotiations 
which  I  have  just  related,  a  new  Cabinet,  with  M.  Perier  at  its 
head,  had  been  formed  in  Paris  on  March  13th.  The  Due 
de  Dalberg  wrote  to  me  about  this  Ministry : — 

The  Due  de  Dalberg  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand. 

Paris,  March  25?//,  1831. 

A  NEW  Administration  has  arisen,  mon  Prince.  It  replaces 
one,  at  once  the  most  foolish,  the  most  incapable,  and  the  most 
despicable  that  has  ever  been  intrusted  with  the  interests  of 
France  ;  bankruptcy  was  approaching  with  giant  strides  ;  general 
indignation  was  so  strong,  that  probably  the  Chambers  would 
have  hesitated  to  intrust  the  provisional  four-twelfths  to  M. 
Thiers  and  M.  Lafitte.  It  would  be  as  well  if  the  English  papers 
took  no  notice  of  this.  The  revolutionary  party  is  so  strong  here, 
that  our  papers  have  not  the  courage  to  judge  of  it  as  it  deserves. 
Meanwhile,  M.  Lafitte  has  found  himself  compelled  to  provide 
for  fifty  or  sixty  of  his  relations  and  friends,  and,  at  the  time  of 
his  dismissal,  to  put  nine  of  his  clerks  into  the  best  places  under 
the  Government. 

And,  now,  will  the  new  Ministry  be  able  to  last,  amid  the 
confusion  of  ideas  and  unbridled  insubordination  which  breaks 
up  all  organization  ?  Two  things  are  needed  for  its  support. 
First,  there  must  be  no  trifling  with  these  street  riots  ;  this  has 
been  decided  on  ;  70,000  men  are  around  Paris,  and  three  regi- 
ments of  cavalry  have  entered  the  town  ;  let  us  hope,  that  the 
deeds  will  be  equal  to  the  intentions.  Secondly,  it  is  necessary 
that  in  the  new  Chamber  (and  there  must  be  one)  the  Ministry 
should  have  a  majority.  I  believe  that  the  elections  will  result  in 
returning  a  large  number  for  the  Left  Centre  ;  if  so,  the  victory 
will  be  assured.  The  South  will  return  more  Carlists,  for  the 
domiciliary  visits  have  irritated  all  parties.  That  is  what  has 
been  gained  thereby. 

As  regards  foreign  matters,  the  retention  of  General  Sebastian  i 
is  a  mistake.  He  is  nothing  more  than  an  instrument  of  the 
weakness  and  intrigue  that  prevail  at  the  Palais  Royal.  General 
Sebastiani  does  not  want  war,  and  yet  he  has  not  been  able  to 
secure  peace.     This  is  a  grave  fault. 

Casimir  Perier  wishes  to  maintain  peace,  but  I  fear  matters 


76  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

have  gone  too  far.  By  assigning  as  a  reason  for  having  these 
huge  armaments,  that  Europe  wishes  to  attack  us,  the  people 
have  become  so  excited,  that  it  is  impossible  to  calm  them. 
The  utterances  of  the  men  who  surround  the  King,  such  as 
Valont,1  Runigny,2  and  Trevise,  are  pitiable.  To  listen  to  them,, 
one  would  fancy  that  we  could  easily  swallow  Europe,  and  that 
she  is  actually  outside  the  Barriere  St.  Denis.  .  .  . 

On  the  19th  March  I  wrote  to  General  Sebastiani : — 

Monsieur  le  Comte, 

Last  night  I  received  the  despatches  you  did  me  the 
honour  to  write  on  the  16th  of  this  month.  The  Belgian 
Regent's  proclamation  with  regard  to  the  Grand  Duchy  of 
Luxemburg,  produced  a  most  unpleasant  impression3  here,  and 
the  very  lucid  explanations  concerning  this  matter  contained  in 
your  letter,  make  me  regret  all  the  more  that  the  proclamation 
did  not  appear  fifteen  days  earlier.  The  instructions  you  have 
given  to  General  Belliard  would  have  been  most  useful  to  me,  in 
allaying  the  irritation  caused  here  by  the  fresh  follies  of  the 
Belgian  Government.4  I  could,  perhaps,  have  stopped  the 
departure  of  some  English  men-of-war  for  the  Scheldt  (which  has 
just  been  announced),  and  enabled  the  Prussian  plenipotentiaries 
to  give  some  positive  assurances  to  the  Diet  at  Frankfort. 

But,  anyhow,  M.  le  Comte,  I  will  not  neglect  to  make  the 
utmost  I  can  of  your  despatch  of  the  16th.  The  firm  determina- 
tion expressed  both  in  Brussels  and  London,  to  accord  with  the 

1  Jean  Valont,  born  in  1792,  second  in  the  prefectorial  administration  under  the 
Empire.  In  1822  he  joined  the  Orleanist  party,  was  elected  a  Deputy  in  1831,  and 
sat  in  the  Chamber  till  1848.  He  was  elected  President  of  the  Council  on  Municipal 
Buildings,  and  he  entered  the  Academy  in  1848,  and  died  in  the  same  year. 

2  Marie  Theodore  de  Gueulluy,  Comte  de  Runigny,  born  in  1789,  entered  the 
army  in  1805,  and  became  a  colonel  in  1814.  He  was  aide-de-camp  to  the  Due 
d'Orleans  during  the  Restoration.  In  1830  he  had  the  command  of  a  brigade,  and  was 
intrusted  with  the  pacification  of  Vendee  and  Brittany.  He  took  part  in  the  expedi- 
tion to  Antwerp,  and  was  elected  deputy  in  1831.  He  accompanied  Louis  Philippe 
into  exile  in  1848,  and  was  placed  in  retirement  by  the  Provisional  Government.  He 
died  in  i860. 

3  On  the  5th  March,  the  Governor-General,  Due  Bernard  de  Saxe- Weimar,  who 
had  been  sent  by  the  King  of  the  Netherlands  to  Luxemburg,  published  a  proclamation 
from  the  king,  which  promised  an  amnesty  to  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  Grand  Duchy 
who  tendered  their  submission.  In  reply  to  this,  the  Belgian  Regent,  M.  Surlet  de 
Chokier,  issued  a  counter  proclamation,  in  which  he  adjured  the  people  of  Luxem- 
burg to  remain  true  to  Belgium,  and  reject  the  advances  made  by  the  king.  He 
concluded  thus:  "accept,  in  the  name  of  Belgium,  the  assurance  that  your 
brethren  will  never  forsake  you  :  "  this  defiance  launched  at  the  decisions  of  the 
Conference,  caused  some  stir  in  Europe,  and  irritated  the  plenipotentiaries  in  London 
exceedingly. 

4  Var.  :  des  Beiges,  of  the  Belgians. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  77 

Powers,  will    I   hope,  lead  to    happy    results,  which   the    long- 
continued  delays  have  somewhat  endangered 

I  had  taken  care,  the  night  before,  to  address  the  following 
letter  to  M.  Casimir  Pericr,  and  which  even  now  I  read  with 
great  satisfaction,  as  being  a  true  exposition  of  the  political  views 
that  directed  my  conduct  during  my  mission  in  London  : — 

The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  M.  Casimir  Perier. 

London,  March  28///,  1831. 
Monsieur, 

After  fifteen  days  of  anxiety,  perplexity,  and  sorrowful 
anticipations  as  to  the  fate  of  our  beautiful  France,  the  horizon 
has  cleared,  and  all  hopes  have  revived  and  centred  themselves 
in  your  name.  It  is  with  real  pleasure  that  I  have  observed  this 
in  the  Moniteur.  It  satisfies  the  right-thinking  people  in 
England,  it  is  pleasing  to  all  the  enlightened  foreigners,  whom 
the  great  interests  of  Europe  have  assembled  here,  and  I  may 
also  add,  to  the  many  true  friends  of  France  now  in  this  country. 
I  am  almost  asked  to  express  their  satisfaction  to  you. 

I  must  now  render  an  account  to  the  President  of  the 
Council,  of  the  motives  which  have  guided  the  conduct  of  the 
French  Ambassador  at  London. 

His  principal  aim  has  been  to  preserve  peace,  which,  according 
to  his  view,  can  alone  consolidate  our  new  dynasty,  maintain 
France  in  the  position  she  ought  to  occupy,  and  save  the  whole 
of  ancient  Europe  from  a  seriously  threatened  dissolution.  This 
peace  I  could  not  be  prevailed  upon  to  sacrifice,  except  for  the 
independence  of  our  country,  and  never  at  any  period  has  it  been 
less  assailed.  It  is  this  that  has  led  me,  in  opposition  to  our 
youthful  enthusiasts,  to  estimate  the  Belgian  question  as  being 
of  less  importance  than  it  is  considered  in  France.  I  have  seen 
with  regret,  that  the  tendency  with  us  has  been,  to  lean  for 
support  on  a  mere  handful  of  men  who  are  anarchists  at  heart, 
and  by  too  much  complaisance,  to  endeavour  to  solve  a  question 
of  which  time  and  the  course  of  events  will,  at  a  more  favourable 
period,  undoubtedly  make  us  masters,  but  which,  until  then, 
would  only  cause  us  trouble.  Authority  is  needed  somewhere 
for  the  preservation  of  peace  and  good  order,  and  the  misfortune 
of  the  present  time  is,  that  it  is  hardly  to  be  found  anywhere  I 
can  only  perceive  it  in  one  direction,  that  is  in  the  alliance  of 
the  five  Powers,  which,  as  it  now  stands,  has  nothing  in  common 
with  the  Holy  Alliance.  Non-intervention,  when  applied  to  the 
internal    affairs    of   countries    which    change    or    modify    their 


78  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

government,  destroys  the  basis  on  which  the  Holy  Alliance 
rested,  and  then  non-intervention  stands  stripped  of  everything 
chimerical.  Enlightened  by  past  experience,  the  Powers  here 
united  will  know  what  necessary  concessions  to  make,  while  offer- 
ing to  society  those  safeguards,  without  which  it  is  impossible 
that  it  can  exist  ;  this,  according  to  my  view,  is  the  true  point 
d'appui  of  our  new  government. 

It  was  necessary  to  make  Europe  wish  for  our  establishment 
and  preservation,  as  the  one  thing  most  important  to  her  ;  this  I 
have  succeeded  in  doing.  Soon  our  influence  will  be  pre-eminent, 
but  first  we  must  reassure  them  abroad,  as  to  those  designs  of 
war  with  which  we  are  accredited,  and  also  show  ourselves  more 
masters  at  home,  than  we  have  done  for  the  last  three  months. 

The  principle  of  non-intervention,  very  convenient  in  itself, 
and  very  appropriate  to  a  given  circumstance,  becomes  very  little 
better  than  an  absurdity,  when  regarded  as  absolute  and  when  it 
is  desired  to  apply  it  under  conditions  widely  different.  This 
principle  is  a  matter  of  judgment,  when  to  set  it  aside,  and 
when  to  apply  it.  It  was  thus  understood  by  Mr.  Canning, 
and  as  it  is  a  matter  of  judgment,  you  will  know  better  than 
any  one  how  to  handle  this  new  instrument,  which  is  more  often 
an  excuse  for  doing  nothing,  than  a  reason  for  action. 

I  earnestly  hope  you  will  find  my  policy  analogous  to  that 
which  you  would  wish  to  adopt.  Nevertheless  I  am  too  old  not 
to  have  experienced  misgivings,  and  am  quite  willing  to  be  en- 
lightened by  all  the  considerations  you  may  wish  to  impress 
upon  me,  and  to  follow  the  course  which  may  seem  most  ex- 
pedient to  you. 

I  have  the  honour.  .  .  . 

I  have  reason  to  believe  that  this  letter  made  some  im- 
pression on  M.  Casimir  Perier,  who  was  besides  quite  determined 
to  follow  a  more  sensible  policy  than  that  of  the  preceding 
Cabinet.  The  modification  of  M.  Sebastiani's  language,  already 
noticeable  in  his  despatch  of  the  16th  March,  was  due  to  this 
determination.  In  order  therefore  to  keep  up  this  new  feeling, 
I  hastened  to  write  to  him  on  the  20th  March. 

Monsieur  le  Comte, 

I  have  this  morning  seen  Lord  Palmerston,  Prince 
Esterhazy,  and  Baron  de  Bulow  with  regard  to  your  despatch 
of  the  1 6th  ;  they  are  all  three  entirely  satisfied  with  what  I  told 
them  respecting  it,  and  said  they  would  be  glad  to  see  France 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  79 

rid  herself  at  last,  of  the  embarrassments  caused  by  Belgian 
affairs.  That  country,  they  each  told  me  separately,  only 
wishes  to  involve  France  ;  it  is  urged  on  by  a  revolutionary 
part)r,  whose  object  is  very  far  from  being  favourable  to  the 
tranquillity  of  France,  and  who  would  like  to  compromise  her, 
with  the  rest  of  Europe.  "  Belgium  has  proved,"  said  M .  de 
Biilow,  "that  the  Conference  judged  her  rightly,  when  it  made 
use  in  protocol  No.  7,  of  the  word  future  independence." 

I  have  given  you  the  decided  opinion  of  the  four  Powers,  with 
whom  it  is  important  we  should  act,  and  who  are  ready  to  act 
with  us.  The  three  members  of  our  Conference  whom  I  saw 
this  morning  again,  each  one  separately,  reiterated  the  most 
positive  assurance,  that  their  governments  wished  the  present 
state  of  affairs  in  France  to  become  permanent,  that  peace 
should  be  maintained  in  Europe,  and  that  France  should  take 
the  place  there  that  she  ought  naturally  to  occupy.  All  feel 
the  need  of  this,  and  it  is  this,  they  say,  which  will  always  guide 
their  views.  Besides,  the  Prussian  and  Austrian  Plenipoten- 
tiaries have  promised  me  to  write  to  Frankfort,  and  I  hope 
their  advice  will  put  a  stop  to  the  enterprises,  which  we  have 
reason  to  fear  on  the  part  of  the  Germanic  Confederation.  .  .  . 

The  Prince  of  Orange  embarked  from  London  for  Holland 
this  morning,  after  having  indulged  in  all  the  pleasures  of  this 
capital ;  he  pretty  loudly  expressed  his  regret  at  leaving.  His 
manner  of  life  here  gained  him  but  scant  consideration.  .  .  . 

The  promise  given  me  by  the  Austrian  and  Prussian 
Ministers  to  write  to  Frankfort,  was  not  superfluous.  The  pro- 
clamation of  the  Belgian  Regent,  in  which  he  openly  announced 
his  intention  to  demand  the  restitution  of  Luxemburg  to  his 
country,  had  excited  the  dissatisfaction  of  the  German  Diet  to 
the  highest  degree :  it  would  probably  take  some  rigorous 
measures  ;  but  thanks  to  the  communications  I  was  able  to 
make  to  M.  d'Esterhazy  and  M.  de  Bulow,  they  put  a  stop  to 
the  hostile  preparations  made  at  Frankfort,  by  insisting  strongly 
on  the  confidence  that  might  be  placed  in  the  new  French 
Ministry. 

1  had  received  instructions  from  Paris  to  propose  to  the 
English  Government,  that  an  English  agent  should  be  sent  to 
Italy,  to  countenance  the  steps  taken  by  our  government  for 
quieting    the    disturbances     that     were     taking     place     there, 


8o  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

especially  in  the  Papal  States,  and  if  possible,  to  prevent  the 
intervention  of  the  Austrians.  I  had  to  write  a  few  lines  on 
this  matter  to  Lord  Palmerston,  who  was  detained  in  the  House 
of  Commons  by  the  discussion  on  the  Reform  Bill.  The  House 
passed  this  bill  on  the  night  of  the  22nd  of  March,  by  a 
majority  of  one,1  and  Lord  Palmerston  then  wrote  me  the 
following  note  : 

My  dear  Prince, 

I  thank  you  for  your  congratulations.     Our  motto  is  : 
nil  j ne  suffit. 

Sir  Brooke  Taylor,  an  excellent  diplomat,  is  now  in 
Florence,  having  passed  the  winter  in  Rome  for  his  health.  He 
is  just  the  man  we  want,  and  I  will  send  him  the  necessary 
instructions  without  delay,  so  that  he  can  co-operate  with  you 
and  Austria.2 

It  appears  according  to  the  last  accounts  from  Florence, 
that  Bologna  is  not  Warsaw,  that  the  revolution  is  dying  out 
before  the  wind  which  blows  from  Milan,  and  that  Bianchetti,3 
and  another,  whose  name  I  forget,  had  just  arrived  in  Tuscany, 
wishing  to  embark  at  Livorna,  and  take  refuge  either  in  France 
or  England.  We  shall  not  have  much  difficulty  in  effecting  a 
reconciliation  between  the  Pope  and  these  insurgents. 

Ever  yours, 

Palmerston. 

Thus  all  the  questions  which  then  agitated  Europe,  were 
really  definitely  settled  in  London,  and  it  was  therefore  necessary 
to  make  a  careful  study  of  these  questions  so  as  to  be  in  a  position 
to  discuss  them  with  the  English  Cabinet  and  work  in  concert 
with  it.  This  Italian  affair  was  a  fresh  and  serious  complication 
for  the  French  Government,  but  before  entering  upon  it,  I  must 
continue  to  cite  several  despatches,  indicating  the  progress  of 
other  questions. 

1  The  Reform  Bill  was  not  actually  passed  on  the  night  of  the  22nd  of  March  ; 
this  was  only  the  first  reading.  The  principle  of  the  Bill  was  however  admitted,  but 
the  ministerial  project  was  destined  to  fall  through  after  the  second  reading. 

2  It  will  be  remembered  that  the  French  Cabinet  had  invited  England  to  act  in 
concert  with  her  in  Italy,  and  so  prevent  an  Austrian  intervention.     (See  pages  69  and 

7l-> 

•'  Comte  Cesar  Bianchetti,  formerly  Chamberlain  of  the  Emperor  Napoleon,  was 
one  of  the  chiefs  of  the  insurrection  in  Romagna. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  81 

The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  General  Sebastiani. 

London,  March  25///,  1831. 
Monsieur  le  Comte, 

I  have  not  neglected  speaking  to  Lord  Palmerston,  at 
various  times,  respecting  the  affairs  of  Poland,  as  you  have 
requested  in  several  of  your  despatches.  Judging  from  this 
Minister's  language,  I  have  every  reason  to  believe  that  the 
English  Cabinet  attaches  some  importance  to  the  Polish  cause, 
and  that  instructions  have  been  sent  to  Lord  Haytesbury,1  its 
Ambassador  at  St.  Petersburg,  desiring  him  to  urge  moderation. 

It  seems  to  me,  that  it  would  be  well  to  direct  M.  le  Due  de 
Mortemart  to  enter  into  communication  on  this  matter  with  Lord 
Haytesbury,  who,  I  believe,  has  received  directions  which  will  in 
no  wise  be  contrary  to  the  instructions  you  have  given  to  M.  de 
Mortemart — official  action  taken  simultaneously  by  both  these 
ambassadors,  assuredly  cannot  fail  to  produce  some  effect.  The 
reason  given  for  this  step  must  be,  to  demand  from  the  Russian 
Cabinet  the  maintenance  of  the  treaties  of  1814,  which  secured 
to  Poland  an  independent  existence  under  the  Emperor  of 
Russia's  rule.  The  manifesto  issued  by  that  sovereign  leads 
to  the  supposition  that,  in  case  of  non-submission  on  the  part  of 
the  Poles,  he  would  subdue  them  by  force,  and  at  once  incor- 
porate them  with  his  Empire  ;  such  a  measure  would  annul  a 
very  important  article  of  the  treaty  of  18 14,  the  fulfilment  of 
which  the  Powers  have  a  right  to  demand.  It  appears  to  me 
that  this  point  of  departure  will  give  weight  to  every  thing  that 
may  be  said  in  favour  of  the  Poles. 

I  have  this  morning  seen  the  new  Belgian  Envoy,  M.  le  Comte 
d'Arschot  ;  2  we  did  not  in  the  course  of  our  conversation  enter 
very  deeply  into  the  affairs  which  have  brought  him  to  London, 
for  the  Regent's  proclamation  has  caused  all  the  Ministers  who 
are  in  London,  to  show  some  coolness  to  the  Belgian  Deputy. 
Nevertheless,  I  was  able  to  make  good  use  of  a  passage  in  your 
letter  of  the  16th,  which   states  that  France  will  only  give  her 

1  William  A'Court,  Baron  Haytesbury,  born  in  1779,  entered  the  House  of 
Commons  in  1S1 7,  and  was  sent  as  Ambassador  to  Madrid  in  1820,  and  subsequently 
to  Lisbon  (1824).  On  his  return  to  London,  he  was  created  a  Peer  (1828),  and  was 
soon  after  accredited  to  St.  Petersburg.  He  remained  there  till  1833.  After  living 
ten  years  in  retirement,  he  was  made  Viceroy  of  Ireland  (1844),  but  only  held  this  post 
for  two  years. 

-  Comte  d'Arschot  Schoonhoven,  born  in  1781,  was  a  member  of  the  Council 
intrusted  to  revise  the  National  Law  (1815),  member  of  the  first  Chamber  of  the 
States  General  from  1825  to  1830,  and  Grand  Marshal  of  the  Palace  and  a  Senator 
under  Leopold  I.     He  died  in  1846. 

VOL.   IV.  G 


82  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

support  to  Belgium  so  long  as  she  does  not,  without  provocation, 
rush  into  paths  calculated  to  disturb  the  peace  of  Europe.  This 
passage,  rich  in  possibilities,  in  all  of  which  I  showed  great  in- 
terest, enabled  me  to  conclude  the  interview,  by  impressing  him 
with  the  view  which  the  Conference  took  of  the  position  of  his 
country.  "The  Belgium  of  to-day,"  I  said  to  him,  <:  is  the  Bel- 
gium of  1790,  plus  the  bishopric  of  Liege1  ;  her  independence 
is  on  the  point  of  being  recognized,  and  her  neutrality  has  been 
guaranteed  by  all  the  Powers.  All  these  advantages  have  been 
secured  to  her,  on  the  sole  condition  that  she  will  not  disturb  the 
peace  of  other  nations." 

I  am  looking  forward  to  hear  from  you,  the  result  of  the 
dispatches  sent  from  London  to  the  members  of  the  German 
Diet,  with  the  view  to  put  a  stop  to  the  hostile  measures  which 
the  Regent's  proclamation  had  induced  them  to  take.  Your 
direct  action  will  surely  have  produced  the  effect  you  ex- 
pected  

London,  March  iZth,  1831. 
Monsieur  le  Comte,2 

....  I  have  again  had  to  see  each  of  the  members  of 
the  Conference  separately,  in  order  to  ascertain  their  opinion  as 
to  the  choice  of  the  future  sovereign  for  Belgium,  and  I  have 
made  use  of  the  arguments  contained  in  your  letter  of  the  24th. 
They,  one  and  all,  corroborated  what  I  wrote  to  you  yesterday,  i.e., 
that  it  is  impossible  to  decide  on  a  sovereign  for  Belgium,  before 
determining  the  limits  of  the  country  over  which  that  sovereign 
is  to  reign.  To  act  differently,  would  only  be  exposing  this 
prince  to  the  difficulty  in  which  the  Regent  now  finds  him- 
self. He  would  be  obliged,  in  accepting  the  sovereignty,  to 
swear  to  a  constitution  which  contains  an  article  proclaiming 
the  maintenance  of  the  integrity  of  a  territory,  which  it  has 
pleased  the  Belgians  to  enlarge  to  suit  themselves.  It  is  easy  to 
foresee,  that  such  a  pledge  would  at  once  raise  more  difficulties. 
The  plenipotentiaries  are  therefore  unanimously  of  opinion,  that 
it  is  above  all  absolutely  necessary  to  adopt  the  protocol  pure  and 
simple,  which  fixes  the  limits  of  the  Belgian  territory.  At  the 
same  time  they  quite  recognize  that,  later  on,  it  will  be  necessary 
to  enter  into  some  arrangement,  as  to  which  of  the  enclosed  lands 
should  belong  to  Belgium  and  which  to  Holland.     The  question 

1  Liege  was  formerly  a  sovereign-bishopric.  The  bishop  was  a  prince  of  the 
Empire.  In  1801,  this  principality  had  been  joined  to  France  by  the  peace  of 
Luneville.  In  1815,  it  had  been  ceded  to  the  King  of  the  Netherlands.  In  1831, 
it  was  given  to  Belgium. 

2  Official  despatch  already  published. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  83 

as  to  the  Duchy  of  Bouillon,1  can  then  be  easily  settled.  You 
are  in  a  better  position  than  I  am  to  judge  of  the  advantages 
and  disadvantages  that  would  accrue  to  the  king's  government 
by  the  choice  of  the  Prince  of  Naples.  As  to  the  Prince  of  Saxe- 
Coburg,  I  have  not  seen  the  slightest  opposition  to  him,  on  the 
part  of  any  of  the  members  of  the  Congress  to  whom  I  have 
mentioned  his  name.  The  English  Cabinet,  which,  as  I  have 
often  stated,  always  considered  the  Prince  of  Orange  as  the  most 
suitable  person,  has  now  given  up  this  idea;  they  will  consent, 
without  much  trouble,  to  the  selection  of  the  Prince  of  Saxe- 
Coburg. 

I  have  not  been  able  to  discuss  the  subject  of  a  selection 
with  the  Russian  Ambassador,  as  his  instructions  do  not  admit 
of  his  interesting  himself  in  any  one  but  the  Prince  of  Orange. 
That,  however,  does  not  delay  Belgian  affairs.  What  we  sought 
was,  that  Russia  should  not  oppose  the  independence  of  that 
country,  and  this  has  been  obtained.  The  recognition  of  the 
sovereign  will  come  later  on. 

The  demolition  of  the  fortresses,  which  you  demand  if  the 
Prince  of  Saxe-Coburg  be  elected,  has  always  seemed  to  me 
easy  of  attainment,  for  according  to  my  view,  it  has  lost  its  real 
interest  since  the  declaration  of  neutrality. 

I  know  that  in  France,  less  importance  is  attached  to  this  de- 
claration than  it  deserves  ;  nevertheless  I  feel  convinced,  that 
this  neutrality  was  the  best  means  of  putting  an  end  to  the 
vexed  question  of  the  fortresses,  which,  when  I  left  Paris,  seemed 
to  the  most  enlightened  minds,  one  involving  the  self-love  of  all 
parties,  the  loss  of  many  millions,  and  quite  incapable  of  solution. 
However,  we  are  not  called  on  to  deal  with  it  just  at  present,  and 
I  shall  no  doubt  have  to  return  to  this  matter. 

My  personal  opinion  respecting  the  choice  of  a  prince 
(reducing  it,  as  you  have  done  in  your  despatch,  to  the  Prince 
of  Naples  and  the  Prince  of  Saxe-Coburg)  is,  that  it  is  best  to 
declare  for  whichever  has  the  best  chance  of  being  elected.  In 
the  position  of  affairs  four  months  ago,  the  Prince  of  Saxe- 
Coburg  seemed  more  feasible  than  any  of  the  others.  Since 
then,  your  instructions  having  been  different,  I  have  thought  no 
more  about  it.  .  .  . 

London,  April  ifh,  1831. 
Monsieur  le  Comte, 

In  the  last  letters  I  have  had  the  honour  to  write  to 
you,  I  have  often  pressed  you  to  answer  the  note  addressed  to 

1  The  Duchy  of  Bouillon  at  that  time  formed  part  of  the  Grand  Duchy  of  Luxem- 
burg.    In  1831  it  was  handed  over  to  Belgium. 

C    2 


84  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLE  YRAND. 

you  by  the  plenipotentiaries  of  the  four  Courts,  as  the  long' 
delay  in  giving  an  assent  or  any  explanations,  sometimes 
causes  wrong  interpretations,  and  makes  everything  more 
difficult.  They  endeavour  to  connect  the  silence  of  our  Cabinet 
with  your  adherence  to  the  boundaries  of  Holland  and  Belgium, 
such  as  I  understood  and  spoke  of  it,  in  accordance  with  your 
despatch  of  March  30th,  and  as  was  expressed  in  the  letters 
received  here,  from  the  Ambassadors  who  are  in  France. 

If  in  the  meantime,  you  have  any  doubts  about  the  question 
of  the  fortresses,  why  not  express  these  doubts  in  your  reply  to 
the  plenipotentiaries  of  the  four  Powers  ?  The  feeling  of  the 
Cabinets  is  friendly.  There  is  some  little  uneasiness,  but  I  do  not 
see  any  irritation  ;  nay,  I  may  even  say,  that  the  explanations 
given  by  our  Cabinet  relative  to  Bologna,  have  been  more  re- 
assuring than  alarming,  and  every  one  hopes  that  they  will  have 
the  desired  effect  in  Vienna. 

I  notice  that  the  choice  of  the  Prince  of  Orange  as  sovereign 
of  Belgium  is  looked  upon  here  with  less  favour  every  day ;  no 
one  is  really  interested  in  him,  and  not  a  single  government 
(unless  I  except  Russia)  will  make  a  move  in  his  favour. 

You  will  no  doubt  have  noticed,  that  the  Belgian  cause  is 
daily  losing  supporters  in  England  ;  it  is  thought  that  they  are 
but  ill  prepared  for  independence.  In  a  country  like  England, 
where  good  sense  is  a  predominant  feature,  the  deliberations  of 
the  Brussels  Congress,  do  not  find  much  favour. 

The  speech  of  the  President  of  the  Council  (M.  Casimer 
Perier)  has  made  a  great  sensation  here,  and  every  one  yesterday 
was  quoting  this  phrase  :  Les  prowesses  de  politique  interienre 
sont  dans  la  constitution ;  sagit  il  des  affaires  dn  deJiors  il  n'y  a 
de  prom  esses  que  les  traites.1 

Accept 


The  same  day  I  wrote  to  Madame  Adelaide  : 

London,  April  5//1,  1831. 

<:  I  venture  to  entreat  Mademoiselle  to  have  pity  on  her  old 
servant,  and  to  insist  that  either  M.  Bresson,  or  some  one  else  in 
his  place,  should  be  sent  here  without  delay.  Since  M.  Bresson's 
departure  for  Brussels  five  months  ago,  I  have  had  no  first 
Secretary  of  Legation,  and  have  only  had  M.  de  Bacourt  here, 

1  "  The  fulfilment  of  promises  in  home  politics,  rests  with  the  constitution  ;  when 
it  is  a  question  of  foreign  affairs,  the  only  real  promises  are  treaties."  Speech  made  in 
the  Chamber  of  Deputies,  March  30th,  1831. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  85 

with  whom  indeed  I  have  been  perfectly  satisfied,  but  who  for 
the  last  ten  days  has  been  seriously  ill  through  overwork.  The 
whole  bulk  of  the  business  therefore,  conferences,  meetings,  and 
embassy  details,  now  falls  on  my  shoulders,  and  despite  my 
earnest  endeavours,  and  the  incessant  assiduity  with  which  I 
devote  myself  to  them,  I  cannot  carry  on  matters  as  I  should 
like. 

"  I  do  not  wish  to  weary  Mademoiselle  with  a  long  political 
dissertation,  but  I  venture  to  tell  her,  that  we  have  arrived  at  the 
point  when  prompt  and  assured  peace  is  essential  to  us  ;  without 
it,  we  shall  be  dragged  by  the  restless  spirit  of  a  small  number  of 
daring  intriguers  into  a  war,  the  risks  of  which  make  me  tremble 
for  the  objects  of  my  most  tender  devotion.  Peace  will  be 
secured  to  us,  by  a  frank  declaration  from  France  to  the  Belgians. 
The  ancient  boundaries  of  Belgium  must  be  recognized,  with  the 
exception  of  a  few  exchanges  and  the  demolition  of  the  fortresses. 
It  is  essential  that  this  declaration  should  be  made  officially  both 
in  Brussels  and  to  the  Conference,  and  this  is  the  more  necessary, 
as  all  the  accounts  received  by  the  English  Ministry  state,  that  in 
Brussels  they  are  almost  prepared  to  yield  to  the  decision  of  the 
Conference,  as  soon  as  they  are  convinced  that  France  is  in 
accord  with  the  Powers  respecting  Belgium. 

"  I  am  staving  off  by  all  possible  means  an  outburst  from  the 
Germanic  Confederation,  but  it  can  only  be  a  question  of  days, 
and  the  delays  in  Paris  may  cause  serious  danger.  I  pray 
Mademoiselle  to  turn  all  her  attention  to  the  importance  of 
bringing  Belgian  affairs  to  a  speedy  termination.  I  ask  this 
from  a  conviction,  the  result  of  my  increasing  occupation  with 
them,  and  with  the  utmost  devotion  .  .  .  . " 


M.  Casimir  Perier's  accession  to  power  speedily  exercised  a 
beneficial  influence  on  home  affairs  in  France,  and  also  fortun- 
ately, soon  produced  an  equally  good  effect  on  our  foreign 
relations,  notably  those  affecting  the  Belgian  question.  The 
French  Government  at  last  decided,  to  accept  the  protocol  of  the 
Conference  of  the  20th  January,  which  fixed  the  boundaries 
between  Holland  and  Belgium.  General  Sebastiani  informed 
me  of  this  acceptance,  by  a  despatch  dated  April  4th.  It  will 
be  seen  by  what  motives  he  was  influenced.  The  following 
despatches  and  letters  will  suffice  to  show  the  various  incidents 
that  were  mixed  up  in  it.  I  will  begin  with  M.  Casimir  Perier's 
letters. 


86  THE  MEMOIRS  01  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

M.  Casimir  Perier  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand. 

Paris,  April  2nd,  1831. 
Mon  cher  Prince, 

You  will  excuse  my  employing  one  of  my  sons  as  an 
amanuensis,  but  my  handwriting  is  such  that  no  Cabinet 
possesses  the  key  to  it. 

I  regret  exceedingly,  that  unceasing  occupation  has  pre- 
vented my  sooner  thanking  you  for  all  the  kind  things  you  say 
of  me.  I  have  in  no  way  desired  what  has  come  to  me.  In  the 
present  state  of  affairs,  power  has  no  great  attraction  ;  but 
since  I  have  been  called  to  accept  it,  I  am  happy  to  find  that  I 
meet  with  confidence  and  receive  support  from  the  experienced 
and  enlightened  party.  I  trust  that  your  good  opinion  of  me 
will  not  prove  a  mistake,  and  that  my  name  may,  indeed,  secure 
a  few  more  friends  for  my  country. 

If  that  is  to  be  done  anywhere,  it  is  in  England.  According 
to  my  views,  the  two  countries  ought  to  be  more  and  more  closely 
united  ;  in  the  main,  their  cause  is  the  same.  Those  who  are 
prejudiced  will  not  admit  this,  but  experience  will  prove  it. 

I  now  tell  the  French  ambasador  that  we  are  anxious  for 
peace,  but  at  the  same  time,  we  are  inclined  to  think  that  others 
desire  it  quite  as  much  as  we  do.  Thus  with  every  wish  to  be 
fair,  we  shall  not  sacrifice  any  of  our  rights.  By  maintaining 
peace,  France  renders  Europe  a  service  sufficiently  important  to 
merit  consideration.  I  also  believe,  that  by  being  moderate  we 
are  of  more  use  to  other  nations,  than  if  we  went  proselytising, 
sword  in  hand. 

I  have  however  stated  the  whole  of  my  policy  from  the 
Tribune.  I  have  but  one.  I  shall  therefore  always  tell  you  my 
ideas  frankly,  and  if  there  is  the  slightest  change  in  my  views, 
I  will  write  to  you  at  once. 

I  know  that  just  now  you  are  occupied  with  the  question  of 
the  Belgian  throne.  It  is  wished  that  one  and  the  same  Act 
should  definitely  fix  the  frontiers  of  the  new  State.  It  is  greatly 
to  be  desired,  that  the  foreign  difficulties  which  are  at  the  bottom 
of  this  business,  will  not  retard  its  conclusion.  In  these  days  it 
is  generally  wise  to  have  a  prompt  and  decided  policy.  The 
shifts  and  evasions  up  to  now,  have,  I  know  well,  despite  your 
efforts,  greatly  prejudiced  the  success  of  our  affairs.  They  must 
not  however  be  allowed  to  continue,  for  they  might  lead  to  grave 
difficulties.  Your  intimate  and  profound  knowledge  of  men  and 
things,  mon  Prince,  will  suggest  the  best  means  of  giving  effect 
to  our  views. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  87 

Please  write  to  me  frequently.  I  really  must  know  every- 
thing, and  I  count  fully  on  your  frank  and  able  co-operation.  I 
have  sent  my  son  to  you,  and  ask  your  kind  interest  for  him.  I 
wish  him  to  become  acquainted  with  society  and  politics.  He 
could  not  be  in  better  hands  than  yours. 
Please  to  accept  .... 


M.  Casimir  Perier  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand. 

Paris,  April  4//1,  1831. 

I  have  not  been  able,  mon  Prince,  to  carry  out  at  once 
my  wish  of  establishing  direct  comunications  with  you,  from 
which  I  promise  myself  the  happiest  possible  results  for  the 
good  of  our  country.  When  the  king  sent  for  me  to  form  a 
Cabinet,  and  take  a  leading  part  in  the  government,  home  affairs 
claimed  my  first  attention.  Their  position  was  well  known  and 
had  for  a  long  time  occupied  my  thoughts,  and  I  was  able  to 
act  promptly  and  decisively,  according  to  views  and  plans 
arranged  beforehand. 

Our  foreign  relations,  though  no  less  bristling  with  difficulties, 
have  through  their  complications  and  the  secrecy  with  which  they 
are  necessarily  surrounded,  been  less  cavilled  at  by  those  who  take 
no  part  in  the  direction  of  affairs.  These  relations,  however,  have 
necessarily  been  the  object  of  my  most  earnest  study  from  the 
moment  of  my  joining  the  Council.  This  study,  which  does  not 
enter  into  my  special  department,  is  by  no  means  completed  ;  I 
need  special  enlightenment  on  many  points. 

The  despatch  agreed  to  in  Council,  which  you  will  receive 
together  with  this  letter,  furnishes  me  with  the  opportunity  of 
asking  you  to  give  me  the  benefit  of  that  assistance  which  an 
experience,  without  equal  in  Europe,  and  your  position  as  the  re- 
presentative of  France  at  these  Conferences  (which  may  exercise 
such  a  grave  influence  on  her  destiny)  enables  you  to  do. 

I  have  approved  the  diplomatic  Note  in  question.  It  seemed 
to  me  well  adapted  to  the  general  position  of  Europe,  the 
actual  state  of  the  negotiations,  and  the  recent  events  which 
have  arisen  to  complicate  the  question  of  peace  or  war.  But 
my  concurrence  is  due,  to  the  confidence  I  have  in  the  opinion 
of  my  colleagues  (who  almost  all  formed  part  of  the  last 
Cabinet),  rather  than  to  a  conviction  founded  on  actual  approval 
of  previous  diplomatic  proceedings,  or  the  progress  of  negotiations 
to  which  I  was  a  stranger. 

I  therefore  trust,  mon  Prince,  that  you  will  kindly  communi- 


88  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLE  YRAND. 

cate  confidentially  to  me,  by  one  of  the  next  couriers  if  possible, 
your  views  as  to  the  expediency  of  the  Note  that  has  been  sent 
you.  I  adhered  to  it  the  more  fully,  as  I  was  assured  that  it 
was  in  perfect  harmony  with  the  spirit  that  had  directed  the 
negotiations  relative  to  the  fate  of  Belgium  ;  and  that  it  would 
aid  the  impetus,  you  deemed  it  advisable  to  give  them.  I 
should  be  glad  to  receive  the  assurance,  mon  Prince,  that 
the  Note  is  indeed  calculated  to  further  the  aim  which  the 
government  has  in  view.  If,  on  the  contrary,  it  appears  to  you 
insufficient  or  incomplete  in  any  way  whatever,  it  is  of  moment 
to  me  to  be  sure  of  this,  so  that  the  future  decisions  of  the 
Cabinet  may  contribute  more  efficaciously  to  the  happy  solution 
of  a  question,  which  is  a  serious  difficulty  in  the  relations  of 
France  with  the  Great  Powers,  while  at  the  same  time  it  con- 
tinues to  furnish  nourishment  for  the  disturbances  and  agita- 
tions, that  are  stirred  up  at  home. 

Pray  accept.  .  .  . 

M.  Bresson,  who  had  spent  a  few  days  in  London  in  the  end 
of  March,  before  definitely  quitting  his  post,  also  wrote  to  me  : 

M.  Bresson  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand.  - 

Paris,  April  $th,  1831. 
Mon  Prince, 

I  have  worked  incessantly  to  carry  out  your  instruc- 
tions satisfactorily,  and  you  will  hear  to-night  that  the  Con- 
ference will  have  all  it  desires,  with  only  a  few  exceptions,  to 
which  I  think  it  as  well  to  yield  quietly,  and  spare  the  amour 
propre  of  those  who  find  themselves  compromised.  My 
principal  argument  has  been,  that  as  long  as  the  Belgians 
consider  themselves  to  be  a  stand-point  outside  the  Conference, 
they  will  be  less  inclined  to  submit  to  necessity  and  listen  to 
reason.  I  have  been  stimulated  by  the  wish  to  redeem  my  in- 
voluntary errors,  and  to  show  my  gratitude  for  your  kind 
indulgence,  as  well  as  that  of  the  other  members  of  the  Con- 
ference, whom  I  had  the  honour  of  seeing  during  my  last  stay 
in  London.  Kindly  make  known  to  them,  mon  Prince,  the 
feelings  which  have  guided  me. 

The  Ministry  frankly  proceeds  on  the  course  it  has  marked 
out  for  itself,  and  the  impulse  given  by  M.  Perier  is  very  strong. 
I  have  not  the  slightest  doubt,  but  that  the  dissolution  of  the 
Chamber  will  give  him  a  large  majority,  even  in  our  eastern 
departments,  which  are  apt  to  be  cautious.     As  for  you  per- 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  89 

sonally,  mon  Prince,  all  those  whose  opinion  can  be  of  any 
importance  to  you,  look  upon  you  as  the  hope  and  pledge  of 
peace  in  London  ;  and  peace  is  not  only  the  almost  universal 
desire,  but  it  is  a  necessity.  The  concessions  made  to  the  tur- 
bulent party  are  not  binding,  and  do  not  go  as  far  as  that  party 
supposes.  You  will  understand,  mon  Prince,  that  I  allude  to 
what  M.  Perier  promised  me  he  would  mention  to  you,  in  his 
private  letter. 

The  accounts  from  Belgium  are  unsatisfactory.  The 
reunionist  party,  pure  and  simple,  has  been  largely  increased  by 
the  present  difficulties  and  by  what  is  called  the  parcelling  out 
of  the  country,  which,  it  is  said,  renders  independence  im- 
possible. The  Prince  of  Saxe-Coburg  gains  favour  ;  but  I  am 
told  that  his  marriage  with  a  French  princess,  would  be  a  sine 
qua  non.  However,  the  effect  produced  in  France  by  his 
election,  would  decide  this  union.  .  .  . 

I  cannot  find  the  letter  in  which  General  Sebastiani  re- 
quested me  to  consider,  as  not  having  been  received,  the 
directions  he  had  imposed  upon  me,  respecting  the  protocol  of 
the  20th  January,  which  fixed  the  boundaries  of  Belgium. 

The  despatch  below  will  enable  the  reader  to  gather  the 
sense  of  his  letter. 

The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  General  Sebastiani.1 

London,  April  jf/i,  1831. 

Monsieur  le  Comte, 

I  have  this  morning  received  your  despatch  of  the  4th 
April.  I  have  no  doubt  that,  on  many  points,  it  will  satisfy 
the  Conference,  to  which  1  shall  communicate  it  either  on 
Monday  or  Tuesday  next.  You  will  perhaps  be  surprised  that 
I  put  off  this  communication  to  that  date;  but  it  is  unavoidable, 
as  several  members  of  the  Conference  are  absent  from  London. 

The  great  difficulty  that  remains  2  will  be  that  which  will 
supervene  on  the  exchanges  you  demand,  on  account  of  the 
position  of  Maastricht.  I  will  do  my  best,  and  will  make  use  of 
all  your  arguments,  to  obtain  what  you  enjoin  on  me  with 
regard  to  this,  in  your  despatch  of  the  4th.  Success  would  have 
been   much  easier  two  months  ago.     The  Belgians    would    not 

1  Official  despatch  already  published.     It  is  dated   April  6th  in  the  text  of  the 
Archives. 

2  Suppressed  in  the  text  of  the  Archives. 


90  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

have  then,  as  they  have  since  done,  excited  the  universal  dis- 
trust I  now  find  everywhere.  I  have  generally  noticed,  and  it  is 
as  well  to  draw  attention  thereto,  that  delays  are  against  us  ; 
they  do  not  simplify  anything,  and  only  serve  to  raise  fresh 
difficulties. 

In  one  of  your  previous  despatches,  you  spoke  of  the  re- 
solutions that  would  have  to  be  taken  respecting  the  fortresses  ; 
my  opinion  on  this  point  is,  that  you  will  obtain  the  demoli- 
tions you  require,  but  I  think  the  question  should  be  left  to 
stand  over  until  after  the  selection  of  the  king  ; x  self-im- 
portance might  now  be  offended  thereat.  This  question,  as  a 
requirement  on  the  part  of  the  Conference,  can  be  much  more 
advantageously  handled,  when  dealing  with  the  king. 

Lord  Grey  will  be  informed  before  any  of  the  other 
ministers,  of  the  communication  you  wish  me  to  make  to  the 
Conference,  for  I  am  engaged  to  spend  next  Friday  with  him  at 
his  country  seat,  where  he  is  now,  and  I  shall  have  an  oppor- 
tunity of  speaking  to  him  concerning  the  reassembly 2  of 
the  Conference,  for  which  I  shall  ask.  I  prefer  speaking  to 
writing,  on  subjects  that  are  3  under  discussion. 

1  have  this  morning  seen  Baron  de  Biilow  and  M.  le  Prince 
Esterhazy.  They  will  write  to  Frankfort  to-morrow  as  you 
wish.  Prince  Esterhazy  will  himself  write  to  M.  de  Munch,4 
to  induce  him  to  keep  the  Diet  in  a  conciliatory  mood,  re- 
specting the  Grand  Duchy  of  Luxemburg.  I  have  insisted 
strongly  that  their  action  should  be  prompt  and  decisive,  for  I 
feel  how  very  important  the  subjects  contained  in  your  de- 
spatches are  with  regard  to  this.  .  .  . 

I  thank  you  for  having  established  the  truth  of  the  facts, 
which  General  Lamarque  declared  he  could  not  remember, 
when  he  attacked  me  in  the  Chamber.0  I  have  not  read  what 
you  said  in  reply  thereto,  as  I  have  not  yet  received  the  French 
papers  of  the  5th,  which  are  the  only  ones  that  give  an  account 
of  this  sitting  ;  but  I  feel  sure,  that  I  shall  find  proofs  in  them 
of  our  old  friendship.  It  is  strange,  that  they  will  insist  upon 
my  having  been  a  member  of  the  Holy  Alliance,  whereas  it  was 

1  Var.  :  Beige  =  Belgian. 

2  Suppressed  in  the  text  of  the  Archives. 

3  Var.  :  Encore  =  still. 

4  Edouard  Joachim,  Comte  de  Miinch-Bellinghausen,  an  Austrian  diplomat,  had 
taken  up  a  municipal  career,  and  been  made  Mayor  of  Prague.  In  1823  he  went  as 
plenipotentiary  to  the  German  Diet.  As  Austria  took  precedence  at  this  Diet,  her 
plenipotentiary  received  great  consideration.  M.  de  Munch  became  Minister  of  State 
in  1841.     fie  retired  1848,  and  died  in  the  same  year. 

5  In  the  sitting  of  the  4th  April,  General  Lamarque  had  made  a  violent  attack  on 
the  foreign  policy  of  the  Cabinet.  M.  de  Talleyrand  was  taken  to  task  and  accused 
of  defending  the  Act  of  the  Congress  of  Vienna. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  91 

at  Aix-la-Chapcllc,1  two  years  after  my  ministry,  that    M.  de 
Richelieu  entered  into  this  new  contract. 

It  is  in  truth  a  very  grave  error,  to  say  that  the  Conference, 
by  its  acts,  recalls  the  Holy  Alliance.  To  be  convinced  of  this, 
it  is  only  necessary  to  compare  what  has  been  done  at  Naples 
and  in  Spain,2  with  what  is  now  being  done  in  Belgium,  the 
independence  of  which,  the  Conference  proclaimed  at  the  end  of 
two  months.  .  .  . 

General  Sebastiani,  who  had  shown  much  ill-humour  when 
asked  to  send  me  another  secretary  in  place  of  M.  de  Bacourt, 
who  had  fallen  seriously  ill,  was  forced  to  give  in  to  M.  Casimir 
Perier's  imperious  insistance.  M.  Sebastiani  wished  to  palm  off 
one  of  his  creatures  upon  me,  whereas  I  had  asked  him  to  send 
me  M.  Tellier,  a  clerk  dismissed  by  him  from  the  Foreign  Office, 
and  who  had  been  recommended  to  me  by  M.  Bourjot,  his  former 
chief.  M.  Tellier  at  last  arrived  in  London,  bringing  me  a 
letter  from  M.  Casimir  Perier.  He  was  also  charged  by  him  to 
tell  me,  that  the  king's  government  was  quite  determined  to 
master  the  Belgians,  in  the  same  way  as  they  had  succeeded  in 
putting  down  the  riots  in  Paris  ;  the  time  had  now  arrived  for 
showing  courage  and  firmness,  but  that,  in  order  to  facilitate  the 
action  of  the  government,  and  to  popularize  it,  so  as  not  to  give 
its  detractors  any  excuse,  it  was  necessary  to  obtain  the  evacua- 
tion of  those  portions  of  the  Papal  States,  which  the  Austrian 
troops  had  occupied.  M.  Perier  was  very  anxious  that  some 
resolution  should  be  promptly  come  to  on  this  point.  He 
himself  wrote  to  me  about  it  : 

M.  Casimir  Perier  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand. 

Paris,  April  8//1,  1S31. 
Mon  Prince, 

I  herewith  confirm  the  last  letter   I   had  the  honour 
to  write   to   you,  in  which  I  mentioned  the  despatch  relating 

1  The  Congress  of  Aix-la-Chapelle  (September  and  October  1S18)  put  an  end  to 
the  foreign  occupation  of  France,  by  means  of  a  pecuniary  indemnity  on  her  part.  In 
addition,  a  formal  treaty  permitted  France  to  join  the  Holy  Alliance,  from  which  she- 
had  been  excluded  1815. 

2  The  intervention  of  Austria  in  Naples  in  1S21,  when  General  Frimont  re- 
established the  absolute  power  of  King  Ferdinand.  The  war  in  Spain  (1823),  when 
France  went  to  the  aid  of  King  Ferdinand  VII,  and  helped  him  to  overcome  the  con- 
stitutionalists. 


92  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

to  Belgian  affairs,  which  you  would  receive  from  the  Minister 
for  Foreign  Affairs.  I  asked  you  to  point  out  to  me,  what  modi- 
fications you  would  consider  it  advisable  to  suggest,  respecting 
the  course  we  thought  of  adopting  with  regard  to  Belgium,  and 
which  seemed  to  us  to  be  in  accordance  with  the  protocol  signed 
by  you  in  London.  We  have  determined  to  speak  out  plainly 
to  that  small  body  of  individuals  who  have  too  long  ruled  our 
foreign  policy,  as  the  mob-leaders  have  ruled  our  home  policy. 
We  believe  that,  with  your  help,  we  shall  easily  attain  this  end. 

Here  matters  are  going  very  smoothly  ;  we  are  assured  as  to 
home  matters,  and  we  can  be  certain  of  maintaining  peace,  if 
Austria  will  give  us  satisfaction  for  her  occupation  of  the  Papal 
States.  There  must  be  some  means  of  arranging  matters  in  an 
honourable  way  for  both  countries.  If  England  is  sincere  and 
wishes  to  support  us,  she  can  effectually  assist  this  very  desirable 
arrangement. 

All  the  accounts  we  receive  from  Vienna  and  Russia  are 
most  reassuring.  M.  de  Mortemart's  last  despatch  was  very 
satisfactory,  although  it  was  sent  off,  before  the  formation  of  the 
new  Ministry  was  known  in  Russia. 

The  Chamber  will  be  prorogued  in  a  few  days,  *and  we  hope 
to  carry  all  our  measures  by  a  large  majority.     To-day's  sitting 
was  very  satisfactory  ;  the  Bill  for  the  extraordinary  credit  of 
ioo  millions,  had  only  thirty-two  black  balls  against  it. 

You  stand  so  high,  mon  Prince,  both  at  home  and  abroad, 
that  I  attach  the  greatest  possible  value  to  your  opinion  with  re- 
gard to  the  course  we  propose  to  follow  ;  I  shall  therefore  be  very 
gratified  if  you  will  send  me  your  views  and  ideas  on  this  matter. 
General  Sebastiani's  last  speech  in  the  Chamber  will  have  satis- 
fied you.  He  rendered  you  the  justice  that  was  your  due  ;  it 
was  high  time,  and  he  did  it  with  the  best  grace  in  the  world. 
M.  Tellier  is  taking  this  letter.  I  have  at  last  got  General 
Sebastiani  to  decide  on  sending  him,  in  place  of  M.  Bresson, 
knowing  that  you  would  prefer  this.  .  .  . 

M.  Perier's  letter  and  the  accounts  I  received  from  Paris,  all 
showed,  that  we  had  at  last  got  out  of  the  vexatious  groove  in 
which  matters  had  remained  so  long,  owing  to  the  action  of 
intriguers. 

I  felt  I  could  count  on  efficacious  help  from  M.  Perier,  and 
this  was  most  important  to  the  success  of  my  mission  in  England. 
M.    Perier   had    not   what   is   generally  called    esprit,   but    he 

1  The  Chamber  was  prorogued  to  the  15th  June,  by  order  of  15U1  April. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  93 

possessed  instead,  in  a  high  degree,  that  firmness  and  uprightness 
found  in  men  who  have  carved  their  own  fortunes.  He  saw  what 
was  wanted,  made  up  his  mind,  and  never  swerved  from  it.  He 
was  even  so  fortunate,  that  his  very  faults  became  valuable,  in  the 
difficult  position  in  which  he  was  placed.  He  was  self-willed, 
even  somewhat  obstinate,  and  at  times  passionate  ;  but  all  this 
gave  the  appearance  of  a  firm  and  indomitable  will,  and  produced 
the  best  possible  effect  at  a  time,  when  the  weakness  of  some, 
and  the  intrigues  and  violence  of  others,  needed  a  strong  barrier 
opposed  to  them.  For  my  part,  my  relations  with  him  were  very 
satisfactory,  and  .1  have  much  pleasure  in  acknowledging,  that  his 
presence  at  the  head  of  affairs,  contributed  greatly  to  facilitate 
the  solution  of  those  which  had  been  intrusted  to  me. 

I  gave  an  account  to  M.  Sebastiani  of  the  sitting  of  the 
Conference,  at  which  I  had  communicated  his  despatch  of 
April  4th. 

The  Prince  ue  Talleyrand  to  General  Sebastiani.1 

London,  April  ltf/i,  1831. 
M.  LE    COMTE, 

The  members  of  the  Conference  returned  to  town  the 
night  before  last,  and  met  yesterday  evening.  I  communicated 
to  them  the  despatch  of  the  4th  inst.,  which  you  did  me  the 
honour  to  send.  It  has  produced  a  very  favourable  impression ; 
they  were  very  pleased  to  see  that  the  views  of  the  king's 
government  are  so  closely  allied  to  those  of  the  Conference  ;  I 
also  noticed,  that  the  present  position  of  France,  the  progress  of 
public  opinion,  and  the  many  victories  of  his  Majesty's  Govern- 
ment, were  fully  and  justly  appreciated  by  all  the  members. 
They  asked  me  to  allow  a  copy  of  this  despatch  to  be  made  ;  but 
I  refused,  as  mention  is  made  therein  of  M  d'Appony  2, 
and  we  must  avoid  everything  that  would  displease  Austria.  .  .  . 
The  next  sitting  will  take  place  on  Thursday  or  Friday. 
Parliamentary  affairs  do  not  allow  of  an  earlier  meeting.  The 
Conference  will  send  you  a  speedy  reply,  and,  in  my  opinion,  one 
that  will  thoroughly  satisfy  you. 

1  Official  despatch  already  published. 

2  Antoine  Rudolph,  Comte  d'Appony,  was  at  that  time  Austrian  Ambassador  in 
Paris.  Born  in  1782  ;  he  had  been  accredited  to  Florence,  Rome,  and  London.  He 
remained  over  twenty  years  in  Paris,  which  he  did  not  leave  till  1849.  He  died  in 
1852.     Comte  d'Appony  was  one  of  Prince  Metternich's  most  intimate  friends. 


94  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLE  YRAND. 

I  deemed  it  advisable,  M.  le  Comte,  not  to  bring  the  subject 
of  your  despatch  of  the  8th  before  the  Conference;  but  I  have 
already  mentioned  it  to  each  of  the  members  separately,  and 
their  views,  so  far  as  I  have  seen,  lead  me  to  believe,  that 
the  greater  and  more  important  part  of  our  demands  will  be 
acceded  to. 

I  have  pointed  out  to  the  Austrian  Ambassador,  as  well  as  to 
the  Prussian  Minister,  how  very  undesirable  it  is,  that  their 
Cabinets  should  procrastinate  so  much  in  discussing  questions 
referred  to  them,  and  concerning  which  general  interest  requires 
a  speedy  solution.  Besides,  the  despatches  which  Prince 
Esterhazy  has  communicated  to  me,  and  which  area  re  ply  to  the 
demands  I  asked  him  to  forward  to  the  Court  of  Vienna,  do  not 
leave  any  doubt  that  M.  de  Metternich  is  quite  disposed  to 
second  the  wishes  and  hopes,  made  known  to  him  by  the  king's 
government.  These  despatches  also  speak  in  the  most  flattering 
manner,  of  the  feeling  of  security  which  the  ability  of  the  French 
Government  has  produced  in  the  other  European  States. 

The  sentiments  of  England  continue  equally  favourable 
towards  us,  and  her  Cabinet  will  support  us  in  everything  that 
M.  de  Sainte-Aulaire 1  has  been  directed  to  demand  from 
Rome? 

The  Reform  Bill  will  come  on  again  on  Monday  ;  an  animated 
discussion  is  expected,  as  the  Ministers  have  to  bring  forward 
some  modifications,  which  will  not  lessen  the  number  of  their 
opponents,  but  will  on  the  contrary,  alienate  many  advocates  of 
reform.  .  .  . 

Our  affairs  in  Paris  were  going  on  more  satisfactorily,  at 
least  those  with  which  I  had  to  deal.  But  complications  of  all 
sorts  did  not  fail  to  arise,  both  at  home  and  abroad  ;  we  only 
seemed  to  get  out  of  one,  to  tumble  into  another.  It  could  not 
be  expected,  that  the  sole  presence  of  M.  Perier  at  the  head  of 
the  government,  would  quiet  all  discord  and  re-establish  order. 
The  Due  de  Dalberg  thus  wrote  to  me  : 

1  Louis-Claire  de  Beaupoil,  Comte  de  Sainte-Aulaire,  born  in  1778,  had  been 
chamberlain  to  the  emperor  and  prefet  of  the  Meuse  (1S13).  Under  the  first 
Restoration  he  was  prifet  of  Haute-Garonne.  He  rejoined  the  emperor  during  the 
Hundred  Days,  entered  the  Chamber  in  1815,  was  removed  in  1816  by  the  age  clause, 
fixed  at  forty,  but  was  re-elected  in  181 8,  and  sided  with  the  moderate  Liberals.  He 
failed  in  the  election  of  1823,  but  re-entered  Parliament  in  1827,  became  vice- 
president  of  the  Chamber  and  Peer  of  France  in  1829.  In  1830,  he  took  up 
diplouiacy,  was  accredited  to  Rome  in  1831,  to  Vienna  in  1833,  and  to  London  1841. 
He  retired  in  1847,  and  died  in  1854.  M.  de  Sainte-Aulaire,  was  a  member  of  the 
Academie  Francaise.      His  daughter  married  the  Due  Decazes  in  1818. 

2  Suppressed  in  the  text  of  the  Archives. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  95 

The  Due  de  Dalberg  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand. 

Paris,  April  \ith,  1S31. 

THEY  will  tell  you,  mon  chcr  Prince,  that  matters  are  more 
settled  here  ;  I  do  not  believe  a  word  of  it.  Society  is  gradually 
going  to  pieces.  M.  Perier  has  just  made  an  incalculable  mis- 
take, by  the  decree  which  replaces  the  statue  of  Buonaparte  on 
the  column  in  the  Place  Vendome.1  The  Buonapartist  party, 
led  by  the  Republicans  and  Monarchists,  will  gain  fresh  strength. 
They  will  insist  on  the  return  of  the  whole  Buonaparte  family, 
and  this  will  serve  as  a  pretext  for  intrigues,  which  the  govern- 
ment will  not  be  able  to  deal  with.  The  Nuncio  told  me  that  in 
Italy,  they  wished  to  have  nothing  more  to  do  with  that  family. 
If  non-intervention  in  the  affairs  of  Italy  had  not  been  resolved 
upon  here,  Prince  Metternich  would  have  been  quite  ready  to 
make  use  of  the  Due  de  Reichstadt,  to  add  to  the  already  exist- 
ing dissensions  in  France.  You  may  take  that  as  certain.  The 
affairs  of  Poland  give  a  fresh  aspect  to  the  whole  situation. 
The  coalition  abroad  is  just  now  less  to  be  feared,  than  the 
increasing  embarrassments  of  the  Treasury.  The  loan  of  the 
19th  must  be  raised  at  all  hazards,  otherwise  payment  will  be 
suspended,2  and  what  shall  we  do  then  with  our  450,000  men  ?  .  .  . 

A  fund  of  truth  lay  beneath  M.  de  Dalberg's  somewhat 
exaggerated  humour,  but  nevertheless,  it  was  necessary  to  keep 
straight  to  one's  own  path,  and  provide  as  well  as  one  could,  for 
the  fresh  difficulties  that  each  day  brought  forth.  The  following 
despatches  give  an  account  of  some  that  had  arisen  : 

The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  General  Sebastiani.3 

London,  April  16th,  1831. 
Monsieur  le  Comte, 

I  have  received  your  despatch  of  the  12th,  in  which  you 
point  out  the  serious  grounds  for  uneasiness,  which  the  entry  of 
the  troops  of  the  German  Confederation  into  the  Grand  Duchy 

1  See  Casimer  Perier's  announcement  which  preceded  the  king's  proclamation, 
ordering  the  statue  of  Napoleon  to  be  replaced  {Journal  des  Dchats,  April  12th). 

-  The  loan  of  120  millions  at  5  per  cent.,  which  was  obtained  on  the  19th 
April.  It  was  at  first  suggested  to  raise  it  by  public  subscription,  but  only  twenty 
millions  were  thus  procured.  A  company  was  then  formed,  composed  of  all  the  most 
celebrated  financiers  in  Paris,  which  accepted  the  loan  at  the  rate  of  84  francs,  and 
thus  saved  the  situation. 

s  Official  despatch  already  published. 


96  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

of  Luxemburg  will  cause  France.  You  also,  M.  le  Comte, 
express  a  tear  that  the  Diet  may  be  drawn  into  a  war  through 
the  influence  of  its  President,  and  you  observe  with  reason,  that 
the  movement  of  the  Federal  troops  must  not  be  regulated 
solely  at  Frankfort,  adding,  that  to  the  representatives  of  the 
five  Powers  assembled  in  London,  is  left  the  decision  as  to  the 
time  when  this  important  step  will  have  become  necessary. 

I  believe  I  can  give  a  very  satisfactory  reply  to  these 
different  observations. 

The  king's  government  having,  from  the  very  commence- 
ment of  the  differences  between  Belgium  and  the  Germanic 
Confederation,  desired  that  the  Diet  should  not  take  any  hasty 
steps,  but  rather  adopt  a  wise  and  deliberate  policy,  I  have 
proceeded  on  these  lines  with  those  members  of  the  Conference 
whose  sovereigns  are  allied  to  the  Germanic  Confederation,  and 
I  feel  assured  that  their  advice  has,  in  reality,  had  a  powerful 
influence  up  to  the  present  on  the  deliberations  at  Frankfort, 
for  if  a  Federal  corps  has  been  decided  on  for  some  time,  you 
will  doubtless  have  noticed  the  dilatoriness  that  has  marked  its 
definite  organization. 

The  Diet  would  probably  have  continued  this  system  of 
temporizing,  if  the  recent  proclamation  of  the  Belgian  Regent 
relative  to  the  Grand  Duchy  of  Luxemburg,  and  the  discussions 
of  the  Congress,  had  not  given  sufficiently  grave  dissatisfaction 
to  the  Germanic  assembly,  to  determine  the  Diet  to  adopt 
stringent  measures,  in  order  to  put  themselves  beyond  the  reach 
of  censure. 

Nevertheless,  M.  le  Comte,  after  the  orders  you  transmitted 
to  me,  I  had  an  interview  with  Prince  Esterhazy  and  Baron  de 
Biilow,  both  of  whom  seem  quite  inclined  to  adopt  conciliatory 
views,  and  I  have  obtained  their  promise  to  use  their  best 
endeavours  with  the  President  of  the  Diet,  to  induce  him  to 
suspend  all  the  hostile  resolutions  which  appear  to  have  been 
adopted  at  Frankfort. 

The  daily  communications  I  have  had  with  these  two  mem- 
bers of  the  Conference,  leave  me  in  but  little  doubt  as  to  the 
actual  feelings  of  the  Diet,  and  everything  tends  to  assure  me 
that  they  are  not  of  a  nature  to  make  us  uneasy.  Its  military 
measures  do  not  point  to  any  immediate  action — they  are  only 
preparative.  You  will  no  doubt  have  noticed  from  what  a  dis- 
tance they  are  bringing  their  troops  :  contingents  from  Holstein, 
Oldenburg,  the  Hanseatic  towns,  and  Mecklenburg,  have  been 
ordered  to  march  towards  the  Rhine,  while  close  at  hand  they 
had  other  troops  which  they  could  have  sent  off  at  once.  But 
they  did  not  wish  to  do  this,  and  they  have  also  avoided  an 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  97 

appeal  to  the  Prussians,  foreseeing  that  their  intervention  would 
entail  other  disagreeables. 

It  therefore  seems  perfectly  plain  to  me,  that  the  disposition 
of  the  Diet,  as  well  as  its  military  measures,  are  not  of  a  charac- 
ter to  make  us  fear  any  immediate  act  of  aggression.  As  for  the 
President  of  that  assembly,  whom  private  information  has  de- 
picted to  you  as  desirous  for  war  with  Belgium,  I  do  not  think 
his  influence  is  stronger  than  the  wishes  of  his  government,  and 
we  know  for  certain,  partly  by  the  measures  countenanced  by 
Prince  Esterhazy,  and  partly  by  the  direct  and  indirect  com- 
munications of  his  Court,  that  Austria  has  no  desire  to  kindle 
war  in  any  part  of  Europe. 

In  addition  to  which,  the  Diet  is  not  in  a  position  to  pro- 
nounce alone  on  such  a  very  serious  matter.  The  Conference 
always  retains  the  power  of  advising  the  Diet  ;  and  I  can  assure 
you,  M.  le  Comte,  that  no  order  to  take  the  field  will  leave 
Frankfort,  before  the  Conference  has  made  known  to  them  that 
no  other  means  of  settlement  are  available.     . 

The  repeated  and  brilliant  successes  of  the  Poles  have  caused 
a  very  keen  sensation  here  as  well  as  in  France.1  If  the  rising 
that  has  broken  out  in  Lithuania,  near  the  borders  of  Courland, 
results  in  adding  to  the  number  of  Russia's  enemies,  it  must  not 
be  forgotten,  that  the  insurrection  in  Warsaw  will  have  produced 
much  more  serious  consequences  than  were  at  first  anticipated.2 
The  friends  of  peace  and  order,  M.  le  Comte,  cannot  but  applaud 
the  language  you  held  at  the  last  two  sittings  of  the  Chamber  of 
Deputies.  It  is  only  thus,  as  you  remark  in  the  end  of  your 
despatch,  that  we  can  put  an  end  to  the  disturbances  which  agitate 
Belgium. 

There  has  been  nothing  remarkable  in  the  Parliamentary 
discussions  here  during  the  last  two  days,  but  they  will  be  highly 
interesting  on  Monday  or  Tuesday  .... 


London,  April  19///,  1831. 
Monsieur  le  Comte,  3 

I  have  received  a  communication  from  Lord  Palmerston, 
informing    me,  that  in    consequence   of  some   of  his  Britannic 

1  The  Poles  had  been  victorious  at  Grochow  (February  19th).  After  the  drawn 
battle  of  Prague  (February  25th),  they  had  again  an  advantage  at  Waver,  Dembe  Wilkie 
(March  30  and  31),  and  at  Inganie  (April  10th).  Warsaw  had  been  relieved  and 
the  Russians  thrown  back  beyond  the  Bug.  Lithuania  revolted  at  the  same  time, 
and  a  Polish  army  had  gone  to  raise  Volhynia. 

2  Var.  :  Qu'on  avait  pu  d'abord  entrevoir  =  than  one  could  at  first  have 
foreseen. 

3  This  letter  is  not  in  M.  Pallain's  collection. 

VOL.    IV.  11 


98  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

Majesty's  subjects  having  suffered  outrage  and  insult  in  Portugal, 
which  the  Portuguese  authorities  have  condoned  rather  than 
punished,  the  English  government  has  at  once  despatched  two 
men  of  war  to  demand  reparation  and  indemnity.  If  these 
are  not  obtained,  the  commander  of  this  force  is  authorized  to 
declare,  that  he  will  take  the  law  into  his  own  hands,  and  will 
treat  with  severity  any  Portuguese  vessels  he  may  meet  at 
sea.1 

London,  April  20//1,  1831. 
Monsieur  le  Comte,2 

I  have  received  the  despatch  you  did  me  the  honour  to 
write  on  the  16th  instant,  relative  to  the  hostile  treatment  of 
Frenchmen  in  Portugal.  The  communication  made  to  me  by 
Lord  Palmerston,  of  which  I  acquainted  you  in  my  letter  of 
yesterday,  will  show  you  that  the  English  do  not  hesitate  to  act 
independently  and  alone,  in  their  dispute  with  Portugal.  They 
demand  reparation,  the  amount  of  which  they  will  decide  ;  and  if 
they  do  not  obtain  it,  the  capture  of  all  Portuguese  vessels  met  at 
sea,  will  follow  the  refusal  of  Dom  Miguel's  agents.  But  there 
is  no  doubt  that  the  cowardice  which  always  accompanies 
cruelty,  will  make  them  yield  at  once  and  offer  all  possible 
amends. 

I  inform  you  of  the  steps  taken  by  the  English  government 
in  this  matter,  as  you  may  probably  find  that  a  similar  course 
would  be  most  advantageous  for  us.  Lord  Palmerston  feels  sure, 
that  threats  are  all  that  are  needed. 

I  have  given  very  close  attention,  M.  le  Comte,  to  the 
details  you  did  me  the  honour  to  transmit,  relative  to  the  inhabit- 
ants of  Samos  ; 3  but  without  losing  sight  of  Greek  matters,  it 
has  been  impossible  lately  to  give  them  much  attention,  partly 
on  account  of  Belgian  affairs,  and  partly  owing  to  the  heavy 
Parliamentary  duties  of  the  English  ministers.  I  trust,  however, 
that  we  shall  soon  have  a  Conference  on  this  subject. 

1  For  some  months  past,  England  had  had  cause  of  complaint  against  Portugal. 
Iji  the  autumn  of  1830,  an  English*vessel  had  been  seized  by  Portuguese  ships.  At 
Lisbon,  the  English  residents  were  subjected  to  all  kinds  of  annoyance.  In  April 
1 83 1,  the  English  Cabinet  decided  to  take  action  and  send  a  squadron  to  the  Tagus. 
The  Portuguese  government  at  once  gave  in  (May  2nd).  France  followed  this  example, 
and  demanded  satisfaction  for  the  disgraceful  treatment  of  two  French  merchants  at 
Lisbon.  Upon  the  refusal  of  Portugal,  all  the  ships  of  that  country,  then  in  French 
ports,  were  seized.  In  addition,  a  French  squadron  under  Admiral  Roussin  was  held 
in  readiness  to  proceed  to  the  mouth  of  the  Tagus  (9th  July). 

2  Official  despatch  already  published. 

3  The  island  of  Samos  had  been  given  to  Turkey  in  addition  to  Candia,  but  the 
Conference  wished  to  impose  upon  the  Porte,  such  conditions  as  were  necessary  to 
protect  the  liberty  of  the  inhabitants  of  those  islands. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1S30.  99 

The  Ministry  have  just  suffered  a  defeat  on  General  Gas- 
coigne's  amendment  to  the  Reform  Bill.1  They  are  now  in 
consultation,  as  to  the  best  means  of  getting  out  of  the  difficulty 
thereby  created.  You  will  read  the  debates  with  great  interest  ; 
they  lasted  till  five  in  the  morning.  I  shall  not  hear  the  decision 
of  the  Council  to-day  till  after  post-time,  but  I  will  have  the 
honour  of  communicating  it  to  you  to-morrow  .... 

London,  April  21st,  1831. 
Monsieur  le  Comte,2 

In  my  letter  of  yesterday  I  had  the  honour  to  inform 
you,  that  the  Ministry  had  been  defeated,  and  that  the  Council 
was  then  assembled  to  consider  the  means  of  escaping  from  its 
difficulty.  The  position  has  become  still  more  difficult  since 
yesterday,  because  Lord  Wharnecliffe,  a  member  of  the  House 
of  Lords,  3  had  given  notice,  that  he  would  propose  an  address  to 
the  king,  praying  his  Majesty  not  to  consent  to  the  dissolution  of 
Parliament  which  his  ministers  might  recommend  to  him. 

This  state  of  affairs — the  uncertainty  as  to  the  king's 
intentions, — the  possible  influences  which  the  members  of  his 
family,  whose  views  are  in  opposition,  might  bring  to  bear  on  his 
Majesty — the  gravity  of  the  Reform  measure  itself — have  all  con- 
tributed to  produce  a  considerable  amount  of  tension  and 
uncertainty  everywhere,  during  the  last  twenty-four  hours. 

Nevertheless,  yesterday  morning,  the  Ministry  had  obtained 
a  positive  promise  from  the  king,  that  he  would  dissolve 
Parliament,  provided  the  Bill  relating  to  the  Queen's  dowry  is 
voted  before  the  dissolution,  which  would  cause  a  delay  of 
one  or  two  days.  But  the  announcement  of  Lord  Wharnclifife's 
proposal  having  shown  the  Cabinet  that  they  would  have  fresh 
difficulties  to  contend  with,  which  delay  would  only  increase,  his 
Majesty  determined  to  prorogue  Parliament  at  once,  which, 
according  to  custom,  is  followed  by  dissolution  twenty-four  hours 
afterwards.  For  this  purpose  the  king  went  to  the  House  to 
day. 

1  This  Bill  was  again  introduced  into  the  Commons  on  the  9th  of  April.  General 
Gascoigne's  amendment  to  retain  the  same  number  of  representatives  for  England  and 
Wales,  that  is,  to  keep  the  rotte)i  boroughs,  was  hotly  discussed.  The  Ministry 
opposed  this  amendment,  which  nevertheless  was  carried  by  299  votes  to  291. 

2  Official  despatch  already  published.  It  is  dated  April  22nd  in  the  text  of  the 
Archives. 

3  James  Stuart,  Lord  Wharncliffe,  born  in  1776,  first  entered  the  army,  but 
quitted  the  service  in  1801,  and  became  a  member  of  the  House  of  Commons  on  the 
Tory  side.  In  1826  he  succeeded  his  father  in  the  House  of  Lords,  and  was  one  of 
the  opponents  of  the  Reform  Bill  in  1831.  In  1834  he  became  Lord  Privy  Seal  in 
Mr.  Peel's  Cabinet.  In  1841  he  was  again  President  of  the  Council.  He  died  in 
1845. 

H    2 


ioo  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

You  are  aware,  M.  le  Comte,  that  forty  days  must  now  elapse 
before  a  new  Parliament  can  be  assembled.  Each  party  will 
take  advantage  of  this  respite  to  secure  votes,  and  the  great- 
est efforts  will  be  made  that  one  or  the  other  side  should 
triumph.  All  the  members  of  Parliament  are  already  preparing 
to  leave  town,  for  the  different  places  which  they  have  to  canvass 
for  their  elections. 

Four  Belgian  Deputies,  M.  le  Comte  de  Merode,  M.  Villain 
XIV,1  l'Abbe  Foere  2  and  M.  de  Brouckere  3  arrived  in 
London  yesterday. 

As  far  as  we  can  learn,  they  have  come  to  offer  the  crown  to 
Prince  Leopold  of  Saxe-Coburg.  In  my  next  despatch,  I  shall 
have  the  honour  to  inform  you  of  the  actual  object  of  their 
mission,  how  they  propose  to  carry  it  out,  and  the  reply  given 
thereto  by  the  prince. 4  It  is  probable  that  this  answer  will  be 
couched  in  rather  evasive  terms,  and  that  his  Royal  Highness 
will  avoid  expressing  either  an  actual  acceptance,  or  a  positive 
refusal,  until  Belgium  has  agreed  to  the  protocol  of  January  20th. 
Such  at  least  is  the  opinion  of  those  who  know  the  prince 
intimately.  .  .  . 5 

I  send  you,  herewith,  the  king's  speech  to  Parliament  this 
morning. 

London,  April  2$th,  1831. 
Monsieur  le  Comte,  ° 

I  have  this  morning  received 7  the  despatch  you  did 
me  the  honour  to  write  on  the  22nd  of  this  month.  I  experienced 
great  satisfaction  on  perceiving,  that  the  king's  government  had 
agreed  to  protocols  Nos.  21  8  and   22,  and  that  they  had  only 

1  Charles  Hippolyte  Villain  XIV.,  a  Belgian  diplomatist,  was  born  in  1796.  He 
had  been  returned  for  the  States  of  West  Flanders,  and  in  1830  was  elected  to  the 
Congress.  Under  King  Leopold's  reign,  he  was  Minister  at  Florence  (1840),  then  at 
Turin,  and  lastly  at  Naples  (1855). 

2  Leon  de  Foere,  born  in  1787,  was  Vicar  of  Bruges.  From  1815,  he  had  taken 
part  in  politics,  and  started  a  review  to  awaken  national  enthusiasm,  which  subjected 
him  to  numerous  prosecutions.  In  1830,  he  was  elected  deputy  for  Bruges.  In  the 
Congress,  he  was  one  of  the  chiefs  of  the  anti-French  party.  He  was  continuously 
re-elected  until  1848,  when  he  retired  from  public  life,  and  died  in.1851. 

3  Henry  de  Brouckere,  born  in  1801,  became  public  prosecutor  in  1830.  He  threw 
himself  hotly  into  the  Revolution,  and  was  elected  deputy.  In  1840  he  was  made  civil 
Governor  of  Antwerp.  He  was  appointed  Minister  of  State  in  1847,  and  President  of 
the  Council  in  1852.  He  retired  in  1855.  He  re-entered  the  Chamber  in  1857,  but 
did  not  take  up  public  affairs  again.     He  was  head  of  the  Liberal  party. 

4  Suppressed  in  the  text  of  the  Archives 

5  Suppressed  in  the  text  of  the  Archives. 

6  Official  despatch  already  published. 

7  Var.  :  Par  M.  Casimir  Ptrier  —  By  M.  Casimir  Perier. 

"  Protocol  No.  21  (April  17th)  confirmed  the  official  adhesion  of  France  to  the 
protocol    of  January   20th,  and  settled   some  points  of  detail  relative  to  territorial 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1S30.  101 

occasioned  some  slight  remarks.  I  shall  submit  them  to 
the  Conference,  supporting-  them  by  the  arguments  contained 
in  your  despatch. 

I  would  make  the  communication  to  them  at  once,  if  Lord 
Palmcrston  had  not  gone  to  Cambridge  concerning  his  re- 
election. He  will  not  return  till  the  middle  of  next  week,  but 
during  the  interval,  I  will  take  care  to  see  each  of  the  other 
members  of  the  Conference  separately. 

The  desire  of  the  king's  government,  that  the  five  Powers 
should  act  in  concert  to  determine  the  number  of  troops  that 
should  be  employed  in  Luxemburg,  and  to  fix  the  date  when 
they  should  move,  seems  to  me  very  fair,  and  quite  in  con- 
formity with  prudent  counsel  ;  I  believe  that  the  Conference 
will  be  quite  disposed  to  admit  this. 

As  to  the  evacuation  of  Vcnloo  and  the  citadel  of  Antwerp, 
it  does  not  seem  possible  that  any  difficulties  could  be  raised  on 
this  point,  since  the  Belgians  will  have  distinctly  adhered  to  the 
protocol  of  January  20th. 

Respecting  the  exchanges  to  be  effected  between  Holland 
and  Belgium,  you  are  aware,  M.  le  Comte,  that  by  protocol 
No.  21,  the-  Conference  had  declared  this  question  to  be 
premature,  and  that  it  must  be  adjourned  to  the  time,  when 
some  light  will  have  been  thrown  on  it  by  the  labours  of  the 
boundary  commissioners.  I  shall  find  it  very  difficult  to  change 
the  views1  here  on  this  point ;  it  will  no  doubt,  be  objected,  that 
the  King  of  Holland,  having  already  agreed  to  the  boundary 
protocol,  would  only  expose  himself  to  many  difficulties,  if  fresh 
modifications  are  now  brought  forward.  Nevertheless,  I  will  do 
my  utmost  to  induce  the  plenipotentiaries  to  adopt  the  views 
you  have  expressed. 

The  delay  that  you  wish  to  grant  the  Belgians  to  make  up 
their  minds  definitely,  seems  to  me,  I  must  confess,  too  pro- 
longed, if  extended  to  June  1st.  I  should  have  thought  it  would 
perhaps  have  been  better  for  his  Majesty's  government,  as  well 
as  for  the  English  government,  to  come  before  the  Chambers 
(which  in  both  countries  assemble  at  the  same  period),  after 
having  completed  all  the  principal  affairs  of  Belgium. 

arrangements  between  Belgium  and  Holland.  Protocol  No.  22,  signed  the  same  day, 
laid  down  that  the  commissioner  of  the  Conference  at  Brussels,  should  receive  orders 
to  communicate  to  the  Belgian  government  the  protocol  of  January  27th,  which 
fixed  the  basis  of  separation  of  the  two  States,  and  should  ask  for  formal  adhesion  to 
this  act,  by  insisting  that  Belgium  should  give  up  all  claim  to  Luxemburg.  In  the 
event  of  her  refusal,  the  Commissioner  was  ordered  to  quit  Brussels  at  once,  and 
the  Powers  warned  the  Belgian  government,  that  they  reserved  to  themselves  the 
right  to  compel  the  Belgian  troops  to  evacuate  Dutch  territory  by  force  of  arms. 

1  Var.  :  .   .  .   .  de  voir  ties  plenipotentiaires  sur  ce  point,  qui  rn'objecteront  —  the 
views  of  the  plenipotentiaries  on  this  point,  iv/io  will  object. 


102  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

Prince  Leopold  has  told  the  Deputies  of  that  country,  who 
have  come  to  offer  him  the  crown,  that  he  will  accept  it  on  the 
day  that  Belgium  agrees  to  the  boundary  protocol  issued  by 
the  five  Powers,  from  whom  he  does  not  intend  to  separate 
himself.  Some  of  these  Deputies  have  already  quitted  London  ; 
they  did  not  call  either  upon  me  or  upon  any  other  members  of 
the  Conference. 

England  is  at  this  moment  a  prey  to  the  most  violent 
agitation,  such  as  she  has  not  felt  since  the  revolution  of  1688. 
The  question  of  Parliamentary  reform  occupies  every  one,  has 
roused  all  interests,  and  divides  the  nation,  as  it  were,  into  two 
hostile  camps.  No  one  remains  neutral,  and  every  person  who 
belongs  to  a  party,  throws  himself  heart  and  soul  into  the 
conflict,  even  to  the  extent  of  his  fortune.1  Subscriptions  have 
been  opened  in  various  districts  ;  they  have  already  risen  to 
some  enormous  sums,  one  undertaking  alone  amounting  to  a 
hundred  thousand  pounds  sterling.  .  .  . 

The  agitation  in  England  has  communicated  itself  to  Ireland, 
and  in  addition  to  the  usual  state  of  excitement  in  that  country, 
serious  riots  are  now  disturbing  the  southern  provinces.  It  seems 
to  me,  that  this  state  of  affairs  gives  France  the  opportunity  of 
finding,  in  tranquillity,  all  those  advantages  that  England  loses 
by  agitation. 

Sir  Frederick  Lamb  is  appointed  Ambassador  to  the  Court  of 
Vienna.2     The  Due  de  Broglie  has  just  arrived  here.  .  .  . 

London,  April  26th,  1831. 
M.   LE   COMTE, 

I  had  the  honour  of  telling  you  yesterday,  that  some  of 
the  Belgian  Deputies  had  left  London.  This  information  is  not 
quite  correct.  Just  when  they  were  about  to  depart,  Prince 
Leopold  asked  them  to  dinner.  They  went  ;  Lord  Grey  was 
also  there,  and  Belgian  affairs  were  freely  entered  upon  ;  the 
discussion  which  had  taken  place,  was  renewed,  and  Prince 
Leopold,  while  persisting  in  the  reply  which  I  made  known  to 
you  yesterday,  has  given  fresh  reasons  and  new  motives  for  his 
decision.  .  .  . 

It  has  been  decided,  that  the  Abbe  de  P^ocre  shall  start  alone 
this  evening,  and  that  the  four  other  Deputies  shall  remain  here, 
to  await  the  result  of  the  efforts  he  will  make  in  Brussels.  This 
is  the  gist  of  what  was  said  to  those  Deputies  :  "  First  of  all, 
you  must  agree  to  the  protocol  of  January  20th,  and  elect  your 
sovereign  ;  these  two  points  being  settled,  you  can  proceed  to 

1  Var.  '.  en  lui  livrant  meme  =  even  to  the  extent  of  giving  up  his  fortune  to  it. 
3  .Sir   Frederick  Lamb  was  Lord  Melbourne's  brother. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  103 

negotiate  the  exchanges,  and  you  may  rest  assured  that  you 
will  find  the  Conference  very  well  disposed,  when  it  is  called 
upon  to  settle  any  points  upon  which  you  cannot  agree." 

Lord  Grey  argues  very  favourably  of  the  conversation  he 
and  Prince  Leopold  had  with  the  Deputies,  although  he  does 
not  conceal  that  matters  are  still  very  far  from  being  settled. 

Lord  Palmerston  has  not  yet  returned  ;  therefore  the  day  for 
our  Conference  is  not  yet  settled.  I  still  maintain  the  opinions  ex- 
pressed in  my  letter  of  yesterday,  and  I  believe  that,  on  the  whole, 
you  will  be  satisfied  with  the  replies  that  will  be  sent  you.  .  .  . 

A  great  stir  has  been  made  here,  about  a  Note  from  General 
Guilleminot  to  Rcis  Effendi,  which,  it  is  affirmed,  contains  three 
declarations.  The  first  is  intended  to  prove  to  the  Ottoman 
Porte,  that  the  principles  of  the  French  government,  being 
diametrically  opposed  to  those  professed  by  Russia  and  Austria, 
a  war  with  those  two  Powers  is  inevitable.  The  second  declara- 
tion announces,  that  England  will  either  remain  neutral,  or  will 
become  the  ally  of  France.  The  object  of  the  third  is  to  point 
out  to  the  Porte,  that  she  must  think  of  her  independence,  and 
the  doubtful  benefits  she  would  derive  from  an  alliance  with  the 
Powers  opposed  to  France. 

When  spoken  to  about  this  note,  I  was  obliged  to  say,  that 
I  knew  nothing  whatever  about  what  they  told  me  had  taken 
place  at  Constantinople,  and  that  the  loyalty  both  of  my  sovereign 
and  his  government  did  not  admit  of  my  belief  in  it.  .  .  . 

General  Guillcminot's  proceedings  at  Constantinople,  of 
which  mention  is  made  in  this  despatch,  had  in  truth  occasioned 
some  rather  serious  complaints  to  me  from  the  English  Cabinet. 
During  the  absence  of  Lord  Palmerston,  who  was  busy  with  his 
election  at  Cambridge,  the  Prime  Minister,  Earl  Grey,  had 
expressed  himself  to  me  with  much  warmth,  respecting  the 
conduct  of  our  Ambassador  at  Constantinople.  Being  in  total 
ignorance  of  the  facts,  I  could  but  declare  my  utter  incredulity. 
Next  day,  in  sending  me  the  reports  of  the  English  Ambassador 
at  Constantinople,  which  were  very  explicit,  he  wrote  as  follows  : 

Lord  Grey  to  Prince  de  Talleyrand. 

Downing  Street,  April  26/h,  1831. 
My  dear  Prince, 

I  send  herewith,  copies  of  the  information  which  has 
reached  this  government,  respecting  the  proceedings  of  the 
French  minister  at  Constantinople. 


io4  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

I  feel  confident,  that  conduct  so  contrary  to  good  faith, 
can  never  have  been  sanctioned  by  the  King  of  the  French,  and 
the  character  of  his  first  minister  affords  me  an  equal  assurance, 
that  it  requires  only  to  be  known  to  him,  to  be  disavowed  in 
the  most  direct  and  effectual  manner. 

I  therefore  forbear  to  offer  any  remarks  on  the  character  of 
the  accompanying  papers,  which  I  shall  be  obliged  to  you  to 
return  to  me,  after  having  read  them. 

I  am,  with  the  highest  regard  and  consideration, 

Dear  Prince  Talleyrand, 

Yours  most  faithfully, 

Grey. 

The  documents  he  sent  me,  did  in  fact,  confirm  the 
announcement  made  by  General  Guilleminot  to  the  Porte,  that 
France  was  about  to  declare  war  against  Russia  and  Austria, 
and  that  England  would  remain  neutral  or  join  France.  It  is 
difficult  to  understand,  how  so  experienced  a  man  as  General 
Guilleminot  could  have  hazarded  such  declarations,  without 
instructions  from  his  government.  Be  that  as  it  may,  as  soon 
as  M.  PeVier  became  aware  of  what  had  occurred,  he  at  once 
recalled  General  Guilleminot.  The  latter,  on  his  return  to  Paris, 
complained  loudly  of  being  disowned  and  abandoned  by 
General  Sebastiani,  and  the  truth  as  to  which  of  the  two  was  in 
the  wrong,  has  never  been  cleared  up.  But  it  remains  no  less 
certain,  that  such  an  incident  was  not  calculated  to  inspire 
confidence  in  our  government.  The  dates  fortunately  proved, 
that  the  proceedings  of  General  Guilleminot  had  taken  place  at 
Constantinople,  before  the  change  which  had  installed  M. 
Casimir  Perier  as  President  of  the  Council,  could  have  been 
known  there. 

To  return  to  my  despatches  : 

The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to   General   Sebastiani.1 

Monsieur  le  Comte, 

London,  April  z%th,  1831. 

The  assembly   of  the    new  Parliament   gave  occasion 
yesterday  for  numerous  illuminations,  as  well  as  a  good  many 

1  Official  despatch  already  published. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  105. 

disturbances  in  London  ;  the  mob  broke  the  windows  of  several 
members  known  to  be  opposed  to  the  Reform  Kill  ;  this  tumult 
however  was  not  of  a  serious  character,  nor  had  it  any  results. 
You  are  aware  that  the  parishes  have  to  bear  the  cost  of 
these  popular  outbreaks,  which  are  pretty  frequent  in  London. 
The  last  occurred  after  the  trial  of  Queen  Caroline,  and  on  the 
passing"  of  the  Catholic  Emancipation  Bill.  The  proof  that  the 
present  movement  is  not  a  serious  one  is,  that  it  has  had  no 
effect  whatever  on  the  public  funds.1  The  elections  for  the  City 
commence  to-morrow.  .  .  . 


London,  April  29///,  1831. 
Monsieur  lk  Comte,- 

I  have  just  had  a  long  interview  with  the  Belgian 
Deputies  who  have  remained  in  London,  which  I  must  relate  to 
you. 

I  began  by  showing  these  gentlemen  the  great  interest 
which  France  takes  in  the  welfare  of  Belgium.  I  added,  that 
this  interest  would  never  belie  itself,  and  that  being  fully 
convinced  of  the  intentions  of  my  government,  1  should  always 
be  ready  to  uphold  their  rights,  and  to  give  them  proofs,  as  far 
as  it  depended  on  myself,  of  the  sincere  and  disinterested 
friendship  of  France. 

M.  de  Merode  then  informed  me,  that  he  and  his  compatriots 
looked  upon  it  as  a  matter  of  conscience,  not  to  abandon  the 
inhabitants  of  the  Grand  Duchy  of  Luxemburg,  who  had  so 
unreservedly  joined  their  cause  and  shared  the  risk.  I  tried  to 
reassure  him  on  this  point  by  telling  him,  that  the  Conference 
had  taken  the  particular  position  in  which  Luxemburg  would 
be  placed,  into  serious  consideration,  and  that  the  right  of  the 
inhabitants  of  that  country  to  a  national  representation,  seemed 
to  me  assured,  not  only  by  the  last  protocol,  No.  21,  but  also  by 
the  fundamental  acts  of  the  Germanic  Confederation,  of  which 
the  Grand  Duchy  formed  an  integral  part. 

The  Deputies  having  passed  on  to  the  question  of  the 
exchanges,  I  begged  them  to  notice  how  carefully  with  regard 
to  this,  the  protocol  of  the  20th  January,  had  laid  down  the 
principle  for  these  exchanges,  and  the  contiguity  which  would 
have  to  be  established,  in  order  to  constitute  a  claim  to  the 
possessions  of  each  State.  If,  I  added,  the  execution  of  this 
clause    has    been    adjourned,  it    is    solely    for    the    purpose    of 

1  Var  :  lis  sent  aujourd  hui  a  79.    AujounV  htd  tout  est  rent  re  dans  tordre  —  The) 
are  to-day  at  79.     Everything  has  now  returned  to  its  former  state. 
-  Official  despatch  already  published. 


io6  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

allowing  the  boundary  commissioners  sufficient  time  to  collect  such 
views  on  these  questions  of  exchange,  as  would  better  enlighten 
the  five  Powers,  when  they  are  called  on  to  decide  those  points, 
on  which  Belgium  and  Holland  might  not  be  able  to  agree. 

I  wound  up  this  explanation  by  telling  the  Belgian  Deputies, 
that  when  the  Conference  once  commenced  this  important  work, 
they  might  rest  assured,  that  all  their  demands  which  were 
founded  on  reason  and  equity,  would  be  fully  taken  into 
consideration.  .  .   . 

They  then  finally  enlarged  on  the  difficulties  by  which  the 
present  government  of  Belgium  was  surrounded,  and  veliemently^ 
expressed  the  wish  to  have  a  sovereign  at  their  head,  who  could 
stand  up  for  their  rights.  I  told  them  that  they  ought  certainly 
to  make  the  choice  of  a  sovereign  the  object  of  their  earnest 
desires,  and  that  they  must  remember  that  probably  the  prince 
on  whom  their  choice  fell,  would  not  consent  to  accept  the 
crown,  until  Belgium  had  agreed  to  the  protocol  of  the  20th 
January,  for  he  would  recognize  that  this  adhesion  would  place 
him  from  the  very  commencement  of  his  reign,  on  a  proper 
footing  with  the  Great  Powers,  and  one  beneficial  to  Belgium. 
All  this  was  said  with  a  good  deal  of  circumlocution,  and  a 
repetition  of  all  the  arguments  we  have  used  for  the  past  month. 
This,  M.  le  Comte,  is  the  substance  of  my  interview  with  the 
Belgian  Deputies.  I  believe  they  will  have  found  in  it,  the 
frank  expression  of  my  desire,  always  to  support  the  views  of 
the  king's  government,  while  looking  after  their  interests  here. 
The  impression  I  received  from  this  interview  is,  without  doubt, 
entirely  favourable  as  to  the  honest  intentions  of  these  Deputies  ; 
but  I  could  not  fail  to  see,  that  they  were  very  new  to  the 
business.  .  .  . 


London,  May  1st,  1831. 
Monsieur  le  Comte,2 

The  elections  are  progressing  entirely  in  favour  of 
reform.  From  this  it  must  not,  however,  be  inferred,  that  this 
measure  will  be  the  same  as  that  brought  before  the  last  Parlia- 
ment, but  it  may  be  assumed  that  the  majority  of  the  electors 
wish  for  some  kind  of  reform,  and  that  very  certainly  they  will 
get  it. 

Lord  Palmerston  having  gone  back  to  Cambridge,  where 
his  return  is  not  at  all  certain,  and  M.  de  Wessenberg  being 
seriously  indisposed,  the  Conference  has  not  met  for  some  days, 

1  Suppressed  in  the  text  of  the  Archives. 

2  This  letter  is  not  in  the  text  of  the  Archives. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  107 

and  will,  not  assemble  again  till  next  week.  Meanwhile,  I  will 
try  and  make  the  best  possible  use  of  the  observations  con- 
tained in  your  despatch  of  28th  April,  on  the  proceedings 
attributed  to  General  Guillcminot. 

The  Belgian  Deputies  dined  yesterday  with  me.  I  did  not 
gain  much  thereby  ;  they  are  awaiting  replies  from  the  Abbe  de 
Foere.  .  .  . 

London,  May  yd,  1831. 
Monsieur  le  Comte,1 

Prince  Leopold  came  to  see  me  this  morning,  and   I 
had  a  long  conversation  with  him. 

The  prince  seems  to  have  decided  to  accept  the  Belgian 
throne,  but  he  is  perfectly  aware,  that  to  obtain  the  admission  of 
the  country  among  the  European  States,  it  is  necessary  that  it 
should  be  on  friendly  relations  with  the  Great  Powers,  and  that 
it  must  first  be  placed  in  a  position  analogous  to  that  of  the  King 
of  Holland — a  position  which  can  alone  end  the  difficulties,  which 
have  existed  for  ths  last  six  months. 

His  Royal  Highness  has  frequently  seen  the  Deputies  who 
are  in  London,  and  he  always  expresses  himself  to  them  in  the 
sense  I  have  just  indicated.  The  prince  reminded  them  of  the 
difficulties  that  had  taken  place  when  Antwerp  was  blockaded  ;  the 
care  and  the  efforts  that  had  been  expended,  to  induce  the  King 
of  Holland  to  remove  them  ;  that,  consequently,  it  was  necessary 
to  avoid  giving  that  sovereign  fresh  causes  for  disagreement,  as 
it  was  not  possible  to  see  where  it  would  end,  and  that  the  way 
to  prevent  this  was  to  agree,  as  he  had  done,  to  the  protocol  of 
the  20th  of  January.  In  addition,  the  prince  told  the  Deputies, 
that  as  soon  as  they  had  established  proper  relations  with  the 
Powers,  he  would  himself  take  the  deepest  interest  in  the  ex- 
changes, and  the  other  arrangements  which  concerned  them 
most.  He  pointed  out  to  them,  that  the  principle  of  these 
exchanges  had  been  included  in  the  protocol  of  January  20th, 
because  the  aim  of  one  of  the  conditions  was,  to  assure  to  the 
Belgians  and  the  King  of  Holland  the  contiguity  of  their 
possessions.  He  told  them  he  had  reason  to  believe,  that 
on  these  terms  the}'  would  receive  marks  of  goodwill  on  the 
part  of  the  Powers  ;  and  that  finally,  he  would  use  all  his  in- 
fluence, to  work  unceasingly  for  the  happiness  of  Belgium,  so 
that  that  beautiful  country  might  take  its  proper  place  in 
Europe,  and  develop  all  the  sources  of  prosperity  it  possessed. 

As  for  the  Grand  Duchy  of  Luxemburg,  perhaps  it  will  not 

1  Official  despatch  already  published. 


108  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

be  impossible,  M.  le  Comte,  that  while  leaving  the  fortress  with 
the  Germanic  Confederation,  some  arrangement  can  be  made 
with  the  King  of  Holland,  respecting  the  territorial  part.  Seeing 
it  is  so  far  distant  from  his  other  possessions,  it  is  probably  not 
of  great  value  to  him,  and  he  might  be  induced  to  give  ft  up  for 
a  sum  of  money,  always,  of  course,  after  the  Belgians  have 
agreed  to  the  protocol  of  January  20th.  .  .  . 

London,  May  6t/i,  1831. 
Monsieur  le  Comte,1 

I  have  received  the  despatch  you  did  me  the  honour 
to  write  on  the  third  of  this  month,  relative  to  the  recall  of 
General  Guilleminot.  The  information  contained  in  my  letter 
of  April  20th,  leaves  little  doubt  respecting  the  facts  which  I  had 
the  honour  to  mention  to  you,  and  which  I  attributed  in  part  to 
the  intrigues  of  the  Dragomans  ;  the  unpleasantness  that  this 
affair  created  in  our  relations  here,  has  quite  blown  over. 

The  king  will  not  go  to  the  dinner  to  which  the  City  of 
London  has  invited  him.  It  is  thought  better  to  avoid  every- 
thing that  gives  the  mob  an  excuse  to  congregate.  There  is 
reason  to  believe  that  Lord  Palmerston  will  not  be  elected  at 
Cambridge  ;  the  influence  of  the  clergy  is  very  strong  at  that 
university.2  The  Ministry  will  procure  his  election  for  some 
less  prominent  place,  which  they  have  at  their  disposal ;  if  any 
peers  are  made,  he  might  also  perhaps  be  among  those  selected 
by  the  king.3  Lord  Palmerston  will  probably  be  here  to-morrow. 
I  think  we  shall  then  be  able  to  hold  a  Conference,  and  that  M. 
de  Wessenberg's  health  will  permit  him  to  attend.  .  .  . 

The  Polish  Deputies,  who  are  in  London,  think  that  if  the 
engagement,  which  seems  likely  to  take  place  in  a  few  days, 
between  Russia  and  their  compatriots,  is  favourable  to  the  latter, 
Austria  and  Prussia  will  offer  their  mediation,  and  this  they 
dread.  If  France  and  England  would  take  part  in  this  media- 
tion, they  would  feel  satisfied.  It  seems  to  me,  that  England 
could  not  refuse  to  take  part  in  it  with  us.4  .  .  . 

1  Official  despatch  already  published. 

2  Lord  Palmerston  failed  at  Cambridge,  but  was  elected  for  the  borough  of 
ISletchingley. 

3  Var.  :  ainsi  que  Lord  Sefton,  qui  a  une  promesse  ancienne  =  as  well  as  Lord 
Sefton,  who  has  a  promise  of  long  standing. 

4  The  following  letter,  which  Lord  Palmerston  wrote  to  Lord  Granville,  will  be 
read  with  interest,  as  showing  the  policy  he  intended  to  pursue  with  regard  to 
Poland. 

Private.  "Foreign  Office, 

"29M  March,  1831. 

....  "The  Poles  are  fighting  gallantly,  and  the  Russians  have  suffered 
greater  losses  than  is  generally  supposed,  but  the  emperor  must  win  in  the  end.     I 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  109 

London,  May  9//1,  1S31. 
Monsieur  le  Comte,1 

Our  Conference  was  resumed  to-day.  We  discussed 
the  position  of  Belgium  with  regard  to  France  and  the  other 
Powers  of  Europe.  Full  justice  has  been  done  to  the  Deputies 
who  are  here,  and  who  seem  endowed  with  much  more  common 
sense,  than  those  who  have  hitherto  been  sent  to  us  ;  but,  like 
them,  they  have  no  powers,  and  therefore  no  progress  can  be 
made  in  the  questions  relating  to  their  country,  and  which  it  is 
high  time  were  settled. 

It  has  been  agreed,  in  accordance  with  the  wish  cNprcssed 
in  your  despatch  of  April  22nd,  that  the  Belgians  should  be 
allowed  until  June  1st,  to  reply  definitely  to  the  proposals  con- 
tained in  protocol  No.  22.  This  delay  will  be  announced  in 
the  first  protocol  drawn  up  by  the  Conference. 

I  have  the  honour  to  send  you,  in  case  you  have  not  already 
received  it,  the  detail  of  the  troops  of  the  Germanic  Confedera- 
tion, which  are  to  be  employed  in  the  Grand  Duchy  of  Luxem- 
burg. They  are  under  the  command  of  General  Hiniiber.  It 
appears,  according  to  the  accounts  received  here,  that  their 
progress   is  very  slow. 

I  have  seen  Prince  Leopold  to-day  ;  he  has  not  altered  his 
resolve  ;  he  will  not  accept  Belgium  as  it  was  defined  by  the 
Congress,  and  in  which  countries  not  even  occupied  by  Belgians 
were  included  ;  but  he  will  accept  Belgium  as  defined  by  the 
five  Powers,  and  independent  of  the  question  of  the  Grand 
Duchy  of  Luxemburg. 

The  prince  has  had  frequent  interviews  with  the  Deputies, 
and  is  always  perfectly  frank  and  open  with  them.  They,  on 
their  side,  are  gaining  confidence  in  him,  and  take  every  oppor- 
tunity of  expressing  their  desire  to  see  him  placed  at  their  head, 
as  they  believe  that  only  thus  will  peace  be  restored  to  their 
country  ;  but  Prince  Leopold  does  not  conceal  from  them,  that 
he  will  not  be  induced  to  go  amongst  them,  until  matters  are 
further  advanced,  and  there  is  no  longer  any  uncertainty  as  to 
the  resolutions  of  the  provisional  government,  respecting  the 
protocol  of  January  20th.  Matters,  you  see,  are  still  progress- 
have  had  some  conversation  with  Wielopolski  and  YValeski,  and  I  told  them  we  must 
hold  to  our  treaties,  and  that,  as  on  the  one  hand,  we  should  protest,  if  Russia  tried  to 
evade  the  treaty  of  Vienna,  we  cannot  on  the  other  do  so  ourselves,  by  assisting 
Poland  to  become  entirely  independent." 

(Private  correspondence  of  Lord  Palmerston,  I.  32.)    Lord  Palmerston  was  there- 
fore very  far  from  acceding  to  the  demands  of  the  Polish  Deputies,  who  wished  to 
procure  the  active  intervention  of  England. 
1  Official  despatch  already  published. 


no  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

ing  but  slowly.  ///  general  however,  the  members  of  the  Conference 
are  anxious  to  complete  affairs,  and  all  expressed  this  wish 
to-day}  .  .  . 


London,  May  lof/i,  1831. 
Monsieur  le  Comte,2 

I  have  the  honour  to  transmit  herewith,  the  protocol 
drawn  up  by  the  Conference  this  morning,  and  which  you  will 
find  is  in  thorough  accord  with  the  preceding  protocols.3  This 
protocol — the  well-known  adhesion  of  France  to  the  resolutions 
adopted  in  London — Prince  Leopold's  acceptance  conditionally 
announced  to  the  Belgian  Deputies,  provided  they  agreed  to  the 
boundaries  determined  by  the  protocol  of  January  20th — the  date 
of  June  1st,  which  is  fixed  for  their  decision — all  lead  one  to 
hope  that  reason  will  at  last  make  itself  heard  in  Belgium. 

Lest,  however,  the  Belgians  should  push  matters  to  ex- 
tremes, it  was  deemed  prudent  that  the  two  members  of  the 
Conference,  who  are  in  regular  correspondence  with  the  Diet  at 
Frankfort,  should  write  to  the  President  of  that  assembly, 
sending  him,  word  for  word,  what  we  hope  to  find  in  M.  de 
Miinch's  reply.  This  is  the  paragraph  which  will  be  inserted 
in  the  President's  letter : 

"  The  Confederation  will  not  send  the  troops  into  Luxem- 
burg, except  for  the  purpose  of  asserting  the  rights  of  the 
Royal  Grand  Duke,  and  the  supremacy  of  the  treaties.  Acting 
in  the  known  and  assured  interests  of  the  neighbouring  States, 
it  will  also  respect  the  neutrality  of  Belgium,  on  condition 
that  Belgium  herself  will  respect  these  principles." 

You  will  notice  that  these  precautions  are  only  applicable, 
in  case  the  Confederation,  after  the  1st  June  (the  limit  of  the 
period  granted  to  the  Belgians),  sees  itself  obliged  to  expel  by 
force,  those  who  are  occupying  territory  which  belongs  to  it. 

My  belief  is  that  the  Confederation  is  very  anxious  not  to 
be  compelled  to  have  recourse  to  severe  measures,  and,  above  all, 
not  to  send  its  various  contingents,  whose  movements  it  finds 
very  costly,  across  the  Rhine. 

1  Suppressed  in  the  text  of  the  Archives. 

2  Official  despatch  already  published. 

3  The  protocol  of  the  10th  May  (No.  23)  confirmed  protocol  No.  22  of  17th  April, 
and  in  completing  it,  fixed  the  1st  June,  as  the  limit  of  the  delay  granted  to  the  Belgians 
for  acceptance  of  the  said  protocol.  This  period  once  past,  the  Powers  declared  their 
intention  to  break  off  relations  with  Belgium  and  leave  the  Germanic  Confederation 
to  act  as  it  pleased  in  Luxemburg  ;  the  protocol  added,  that  violation  of  the  armistice 
with  Holland  by  the  Belgians,  would  be  looked  upon  by  the  Powers  as  a  casus 
belli. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  n  r 

London,  May  12th,  183 1. 
Monsieur  le  Comte,1 

I  have  received  the  despatch  you  did  me  the  honour  to 
write  on  the  10th  of  this  month  ;  it  describes  the  state  of 
Belgium  as  it  is  now,  and  as  we  know  it  to  be,  from  the  accounts 
received  here.  In  my  letter  of  the  9th,  I  informed  you  how 
anxious  the  members  of  the  Conference  were  to  wind  up  this 
matter,  but  desiring"  to  comply  with  your  expressed  wishes, 
they  extended  the  delay  accorded  to  the  Belgians  till  the  1st 
of  June. 

The  Belgian  Deputies  have  been  increased  by  another,  M. 
Devaux,2  who  is  a  member  both  of  the  Congress  and  the 
Ministerial  Council,  and  has  just  arrived  here  ;  but  he  has  no 
more  power  than  those  who  preceded  him. 

Prince  Leopold  has  seen  M.  Devaux  ;  he  told  him,  as  well  as 
his  colleagues,  that  he  was  quite  ready  to  accept  their  offer,  but 
that  he  would  not  give  his  assent  as  long  as  the  state  of  Belgium 
is  vague  and  uncertain,  and  above  all,  as  long  as  the  Belgians  are 
not  in  friendly  relations  with  the  principal  Powers  of  Europe. 

....  I  think  it  would  be  very  advantageous,  if  you  made 
known  to  General  Belliard  how  matters  stand  here  at  present, 
so  that  he  may  use  his  influence,  in  inducing  the  Belgians  to 
adopt  the  conciliatory  measures  proposed  to  them.  .  .  . 

I  have  nothing  further  to  add  to  these  despatches,  which 
show  sufficiently  the  numerous  obstacles  we  had  to  overcome  in 
our  complicated  negotiations.  I  must,  however,  make  known 
the  impression  they  made  in  Paris,  and  the  echoes  that  came 
back  to  me  from  there.  These  will  be  found  in  the  following- 
letters,  which  I  received  during  that  period,  and  which,  as  will 
be  seen,  came  from  persons  of  sufficiently  opposite  views  and 
ideas.     Thus  M.  Casimir  Perier  wrote  to  me: 

Paris,  April  zyd,  1S31. 

It  is  with  great  satisfaction,  mon  Prince,  that  we  have 
received  your  last  despatches,  and  the  two  protocols  you  have 
sent.     At  a  council  we  held  yesterday  on  this  subject,  we  suc- 

1  Official  despatch  already  published. 

-  Paul-Isidore  Devaux,  born  at  Bruges  in  1809,  very  quickly  made  a  name  for 
himself  as  a  journalist  on  the  Liberal  side.  He  was  made  deputy  of  the  Congress  in 
1830,  and  minister  without  a  portfolio  under  the  Regency  of  M.  Surlet  de  Chokier. 
He  went  to  London,  in  May  1831,  as  commissioner  to  the  Conference,  retired  from  his 
ministerial  duties  on  his  return,  but  remained  in  the  Chamber  of  Representatives  until 
1863.  At  that  period  he  was  attacked  with  blindness,  and  obliged  to  retire  from 
political  life. 


U2  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

ceeded  in  procuring  their  approval.  The  Minister  of  Foreign 
Affairs  is  sending  you  some  proposals  to-day  ;  we  shall  be  very 
glad,  if  you  will  take  into  consideration  the  one  relating  to  the 
exchanges  of  territory,  and  obtain  the  consent  of  the  Confedera- 
tion thereto.  These  arrangements  will,  we  believe,  facilitate  the 
negotiations  on  Belgian  affairs  ;  and  if  we  hear  that  they  have 
been  favourably  received,  we  shall  see  the  happy  commencement 
of  a  definite  solution  of  all  our  earnest  wishes.  General  Belliard 
is  about  to  leave,  bearing  instructions  in  conformity  with  the 
communications  made  to  you  by  the  Minister  of  Foreign 
Affairs  ;  nevertheless,  he  is  not  to  make  use  of  them,  until 
after  we  have  received  your  reply  on  this  subject. 

The  progress  of  home  affairs  becomes  more  satisfactory,  and 
the  government  is  advancing  more  successfully  towards  the  aim 
it  has  in  view.  Our  position  is,  however,  none  the  less  serious, 
and  in  the  midst  of  all  this  perturbation,  peace  is  a  necessity, 
not  only  for  France,  but  for  the  stability  of  all  the  States.  We 
especially  meet  with  obstacles  in  that  spirit  of  disorder  and  in- 
novation, which  is  no  longer  confined  to  France,  but  which  our 
example  seems  to  have  made  European. 

But  with  perseverance,  and  the  maintenance  of  peace,  in 
which  you  so  ably  support  us,  we  shall  escape  from  the  difficult 
position  in  which  we  have  been  placed.  This  is  our  hope  ;  and 
now  more  than  ever  do  we  feel,  that  there  is  a  necessity  and  a 
duty,  in  fulfilling  the  mission  we  have  imposed  on  ourselves.  .  .  . 

Comte  Alexis  de  Noailles,1  whom  I  may  cite  as  a  repre- 
sentative of  the  Faubourg  St.  Germain,  wrote  thus  to  me  on  the 
30th  of  April  : 

Mon  Prince, 

....  I  am  just  about  to  start  for  my  department,  to 
be  present  at  the  session  of  my  conseil general  and  the  elections. 
Opinions  vary  as  to  the  result,  but  every  one's  ideas  change  from 
day  to  day  ;  those  who  are  most  alarmed,  return  to  the  opinion 
that  the  elections  in  general,  will  be  for  the  moderate  party.  It 
is  even   asserted   that    M.    Demarcay,2  M.    Corcelles,3   and    M. 

1  Formerly  plenipotentiary  at  the  Congress  of  Vienna.  M.  de  Noailles,  a 
member  of  the  last  Chamber  of  the  Restoration,  had,  as  deputy,  taken  the  oath  to  the 
new  government,  but  he  was  not  re-elected  in  1831. 

2  Marc-Jean  Demarcay,  born  in  1772,  entered  the  service  when  very  young,  and 
retired  as  Brigadier-General  in  1810.  Under  the  Restoration  he  was  elected  deputy 
for  Deux-Sevres,  and  became  one  of  the  most  active  members  of  the  opposition.  He 
was  not  returned  in  1824,  but  was  elected  for  the  Seine  in  1827.  He  supported  the 
July  government  for  a  short  time,  but  soon  re-joined  the  opposition,  with  which  he 
remained  till  his  death  in  1839. 

3  Claude  Tircuyde  la  Barre  Corcelles,  born  in  1768,  was  an  officer  of  Cavalry  in 


7  HE  RE  VOL  UTION  OF  1 830.  1 1 3 

Salverte,1  will  not  he  re-elected  for  Paris.     The  latter,  being  by 

far  the  most  talented  of  all  the  members  of  the  Left,  will,  1  have- 
no  doubt,  be  always  re-elected.  As  for  the  others,  their  elec- 
tion is  in  fact  very  doubtful. 

What  a  fate  is  yours,  mon  Prince,  and  what  a  glorious 
political  destiny  yours  has  been  !  Thrice,  during  the  greatest 
events,  amidst  threats  of  the  immediate  dissolution  of  this 
country,  you  have  stepped  in,  guiding  the  vessel  almost  alone, 
and  have  succeeded  in  bringing  it  into  port.  This  time  your 
services  have  been  even  greater,  for  you  have  had  to  struggle 
and  contend,  against  an  almost  universal  opinion.  You  have 
swayed  not  only  negotiations  and  events,  but  even  opinions,  in 
accordance  with  your  views.  War  just  now  would  be  a  death- 
blow to  France.  The  government  is  doing  its  best  in  the 
interests  of  peace  ;  all  parties  have  come  round  to  this  opinion, 
and  no  one  would  venture  to  offer  another.  .  .  . 

Let  us  hear  what  the  Due  de  Dalberg  says  : 

Paris,  May  yd,  1831. 

....  The  old  fox  of  Luxemburg  (M.  de  Semonville  2)  holds 
to  his  prophecy  that  this  state  of  affairs  cannot  last,  and 
supports  it  by  so  many  reasons  that  it  is  difficult  not  to  agree 
with  him.  He  believes  in  the  recall  of  the  little  eaglet '(the  Due 
de  Reichstadt),  who  he  thinks  does  not  care  much  about  it,  but 
will  leave  the  field  open  to  other  combinations  among  the 
pretenders. 

I  am  almost  sure,  that  while  we  were  threatening  Austria  with 
war  in  Italy,  the  Buonapartist  party  here,  ever  active  and  on  the 
move,  received  promises  of  assistance.  Now,  quite  another 
tone  has  been  adopted  towards  that  party. 

1789.  lie  emigrated  in  1792  and  returned  to  France  ;  lived  in  retirement  till  1814. 
Appointed  Colonel  of  the  Rhone  National  Guards  during  the  Hundred  Days,  he 
was  put  under  arrest  after  the  second  Restoration,  and  although  released,  was  obliged 
to  quit  France,  not  returning  thither  till  1818.  In  1819,  he  was  elected  deputy 
for  the  Rhone,  and  offered  a  strong  opposition  in  the  Chamber  to  the  government. 
He  remained  on  this  side  after  1830,  retired  from  public  life  in  1835,  and  died  in 
1843. 

1  Anne-Joseph-Fu^-be  Paconiere-Salverte,  born  in  1 77 1,  was  an  advocate  at  the 
Chatelet  prior  to  17S9.  He  took  no  part  in  the  Revolution.  Compromised  under  the 
directory  in  the  Royalist  reaction,  he  was  condemned  to  death  for  contumacy  after  the 
13th  Vendemiaire  ;  but  he  appeared  before  his  judges  and  was  acquitted.  He  lived 
in  retirement  during  the  Empire,  occupying  himself  solely  with  philosophical  and 
literary  winks.  Under  the  Restoration,  he  made  a  name  for  himself  as  a  polemist 
in  the  Liberal  party,  and  was  elected  to  the  Chamber  of  Deputies  in  182S,  and 
sat  among  the  extreme  Left.  Re-elected  for  Paris  in  1831,  and  1834,  he  maintained 
the  same  attitude  towards  the  July  government,  and  died  in  1839. 

'-'   M.  de  Semonville  was  at  "that  time  chief  Referendary  to  the  Court  of  Peers. 

VOL.   IV.  I 


ii4  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

If  the  Austrians  are  forced  to  quit  the  Papal  States,  dis- 
turbances will  break  out  in  every  quarter.  The  conduct  of 
the  people  at  Parma  and  Modena  is  ridiculous. x 

Casimir  Perier  does  his  best,  but  he  has  more  difficulty  with 
those  above  him  than  those  below  him. 

The  recall  of  General  Guilleminot  has  made  some  impression. 
Latour-Maubourg,2  who  is  at  Naples,  ought  to  replace  him  ;  but 
it  is  said  that  Sebastiani  intends  sending  his  brother  there,3  which 
will  please  no  one  but  his  own  family.  .  .  . 

Paris,  May  \oth,  1831. 

....  The  party  spirit  which  reigns  here,  and  which  is 
fostered  by  the  weakness  of  the  government,  although 
the  latter  does  its  best,  renders  a  stay  here  more  unpleasant 
every  day. 

Buonapartism  is  now  completely  in  the  ascendant.  It  is  used 
as  a  means  to  work  upon  the  army  and  the  lower  classes,  who  are 
led  away  by  the  success  of  those,  who  have  risen  to  thrones 
and  become  the  recipients  of  fortune's  favours.  The  government 
is  wrong  not  to  express  more  clearly  its  opinion  of  Imperial  rule. 
Everyone  has  become  a  Buonapartist,  because  the  Palais  Royal 
and  its  camarilla,  have  neither  fear  nor  respect  for  any  other  party. 
The  result  is  that  the  movement  gains  strength.  Mauguin  said 
the  other  day,  to  a  man  from  whom  I  have  it,  ''  We  ought  to  have 
a  provisional  government,  and  a  regency  in  the  Due  de  Reich- 
stadt's  name,  and  we  shall  come  to  that." 

You  may  rely  upon  it,  that  if  war  broke  out  in  Italy,  Austria 
would  further  these  intrigues.  On  the  other  hand,  how  could  you 
restrain  the  ardour  of  the  army  which  has  been  assembled,  and 
that  of  the  French  populace,  which  has  been  so  foolishly  excited, 
by  rumours  of  the  foreigners  who  are  anxious  to  attack  France  ? 

However,  in    the   next    session   of   the   Chambers,  they  will 

1  The  Duke  of  Modena  and  the  Duchess  of  Parma  (the  ex-Empress  Marie-Louise) 
had  given  in  when  the  riots  broke  out,  and  had  gone  away. 

2  Just  de  Fay,  Marquis  de  Latour-Maubourg,  born  in  178 1,  entered  the  diplo- 
matic service  under  the  consulate,  became  secretary  to  the  Embassy  at  Copenhagen 
and  then  at  Constantinople,  where  he  continued  as  charge  d'affaires  till  18 12.  He  then 
went  to  Stuttgart  as  minister  (1813).  At  the  Restoration  he  was  made  minister  at 
Hanover,  then  ambassador  at  Dresden  (1819),  and  at  Constantinople  (1823).  The 
July  government  accredited  him  to  Naples  (1830),  and  then  to  Rome,  where  he 
remained  until  his  death.  M.  de  Latour-Maubourg  became  a  member  of  the  Chamber 
of  Peers  by  right  of  heredity  in  1831. 

3  Jean- Andre  Tiburce,  Viscomte  Sebastiani,  born  in  1780,  entered  the  army  in 
1806,  became  Brigadier-General  in  1823.  He  was  put  on  the  Reserve  list  and 
entered  the  Chamber  of  Deputies  in  1S28.  He  did  not  obtain  the  Embassy  at 
Constantinople,  but  was  made  Lieutenant-General  and  a  Peer  of  France  in  1837.  He 
retired  to  Corsica  in  1848. 


7  HE  RE  I VL  UTION  OF  1 830.  1 1  5 

have  to    see  how  they  can    best  exorcise  all  these   elements  of 
discord.  .  .  . 

I  will  wind  up  these  extracts  with  a  rather  long  letter  from 
Madame  Adelaide  d'Orleans,  dated  May  nth,  which,  as  will  be 
seen,  is  the  most  important  of  all. 

Madame  Adelaide  d'Orleans  to  the  Prince  de 

Talleyrand. 

St.  Cloud,  May  11///,  1831. 

It  is  much  to  be  regretted,  my  dear  Prince,  that  I  am  so  far 
behindhand  in  my  correspondence  with  you,  but  we  have  been 
so  busy  latch-  with  our  dear  king's  fete,  which  went  off  as  well 
as  we  could  possibly  have  wished,  and  then,  immediately 
afterwards,  in  settling  down  here,  that  it  was  impossible,  much  as 
I  wished  it,  to  find  a  spare  moment  to  write  to  you.  I  had  the 
pleasure  of  seeing  Madame  de  Dino  yesterday,  and  of  hearing 
from  her,  that  you  are  now  quite  well  again,  and  always  busily 
occupied  with  this  unfortunate  Belgian  business,  which  I  should 
much  like  to  see  concluded.  I  think  from  what  the  Prince  de 
Coburg  writes  to  me,  that  he  is  strongly  tempted  to  consent,  but 
that  his  experience  of  having  been  too  hasty  in  the  Greek  affair, 
prevents  his  acceptance  until  all  arrangements  are  made  ;  which 
I  must  admit  I  can  quite  understand.1  What  he  tells  me 
respecting  the  arrangements  for  Luxemburg,  seems  to  me  to 
be  very  reasonable.  It  would  be  extremely  desirable  for  the 
peace  of  France,  Germany,  and  Belgium,  if  the  King  of  Holland 
could  be  induced  to  cede  that  country,  either  for  or  against  an 
indemnity,  and  I  should  be  well  pleased  if  this  could  be  effected 
by  the  intervention  of  France  through  you,  if  it  is,  or  may  still 
be  possible.  It  seems  to  me  that  this  would  suit  us  in  every 
way,  but  perhaps  I  am  reasoning  thus,  being  only  an  ignoramus 
in  political  matters.  Forgive  me,  mon  cher  Prince,  and  tell  me 
your  opinion  about  it. 

I  was  in  hopes  of  being  able  to  tell  you,  that  we  were 
perfectly  quiet  here,    and    so  we  were  until  yesterday.     But  a 

1  Prince  Leopold  had  in  fact  been  almost  nominated  King  of  Greece.  Approved 
of  by  the  Powers  and  accepted  by  Greece,  he  would  not  however  agree  to  the  con- 
ditio'ns  imposed  by  the  Conference.  This  latter,  in  its  protocol  of  February  3rd,  1830, 
had  so  settled  the  boundaries  of  Greece,  that  Etolia  and  Acanarnia  Still  remained  to  the 
Porte,  together  with  the  islands  of  Candia  and  Samos.  Prince  Leopold  protested 
against  this  to  the  Conference  (letter  of  the  nth  of  February)  ;  the  latter  maintained  its 
decision,  and  the  prince  definitely  refused  the  crown. 

I    2 


n6  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

banquet  given  the  night  before  last,  to  the  leaders  of  those  who 
objected  to  the  cross  of  July,1  was  followed  by  songs,  shouts, 
crowds  in  the  streets,  and  some  disturbance.  Yesterday  the 
crowds  were  dispersed  several  times,  but  towards  evening,  the 
mob  having  assembled  in  greater  numbers  in  the  Place  de 
Vendome,  the  Riot  Act  was  read,  and  they  were  then  completely 
dispersed  by  a  charge  of  cavalry.  The  national  guard  and  the 
whole  population  of  Paris,  are  incensed  at  these  attempts  on 
the  part  of  a  small  number  of  the  rabble  to  create  disturbance. 
There  is  no  reason  for  uneasiness,  though  it  is  very  annoy- 
ing. I  trust  this  attempt,  which  is  generally  discountenanced 
and  disapproved  of,  will  be  the  last. 

The  king  starts  on  Monday  next  for  a  tour  in  Normandy, 
which  has  long  been  asked  for  and  desired,  and  which  is  sure  to 
have  a  good  effect.  He  intends  going  to  Rouen  and  Havre, 
returning  via  Eu.  He  expects  to  be  back  here  on  the  26th. 
During  that  time,  the  queen  and  I  will  remain  at  St.  Cloud, 
with  my  nieces  and  my  grand-nephews.  We  have  very  good 
accounts  of  our  clear  little  sailor  (the  Prince  de  Joinville),  who 
must  be  at  Toulon  just  now,  where  he  embarks  on  the  15th. 
He  will  go  first  to  Corsica,  then  to  Livorno,  Naples,  Sicily, 
Malta,  and  Algiers  ;  thence  to  Mahon,  where  he  will  perform 
quarantine.  It  is  a  lovely  trip,  and  will  benefit  him  in  every 
way.     Pie  will  be  back  in  about  three  months. 

I  have  become  quite  reconciled  to  my  stay  at  St.  Cloud,  to 
which  before  coming  here,  I  was  not  quite  inclined.  It  is  a 
lovely  spot  ;  the  environs  are  charming  and  the  drives  delightful  ; 
and  then  the  recollections  of  past  days  are  very  dear.  I  think 
we  shall  remain  here  about  six  weeks. 

Adieu,  mon  cher  Prince.  .  .  . 

P.S. — I  have  just  read  to  my  brother  the  political  ideas  ex- 
pressed in  my  letter  to  you,  and  have  not  received  the  compli- 
ments thereon  which  I  fully  expected.  He  told  me  that  he  would 
no  longer  meddle  with,  or  give  advice  to,  either  one  side  or  the 
other,  as  he  had  handed  over  the  matter  to  be  fought  out  by 
the  Conference,  being  rather  tired  of  the  distrust  so  constantly 

1  The  proclamation  of  the  13th  April,  in  accordance  with  the  law  of  December 
13th  preceding,  had  created  a  special  decoration  for  the  combatants  of  July.  The 
recipients  weie  required  to  take  the  oath  of  fidelity  to  the  king  and  obedience  to  the 
charter.  The  cross  bore  the  motto  "  Given  by  the  King  of  the  French."  These  two 
provisions,  the  oath  and  the  motto,  were  deemed  unconstitutional  by  the  citizens 
selected  for  the  decoration.  They  protested  against  them  and  refused  to  submit  to 
them.  The  matter  was  finally  arranged,  but  not  without  much  noise  and  some  dis- 
turbances in  the  vicinity  of  the  Vendome  Column.  It  was  on  this  occasion,  that  the 
Comte  de  Lobau  dispersed  the  rioters,  by  turning  upon  them  the  hoses  of  the  fire 
engines. 


7  HE  RE  VOL  UTION  OF  i S30.  117 

shown,  which  he  had  flattered  himself  he  was  beyond.  Also  that 
he  did  not  intend  favouring  Prince  Leopold  more  than  any  one 
else,  not  from  want  of  confidence  or  friendship  for  him,  quite 
the  contrary,  but  because  he  did  not  wish  his  advice  to  be  again 
misconstrued,  and  because  he  feared  that  if  he  did,  some  other 
motive,  rather  than  the  true  feelings  which  dictated  his  conduct 
in  this  matter,  would  be  attributed  to  him,  namely,  his  earnest 
desire,  and  even  impatience,  to  see  the  affairs  of  Belgium  brought 
to  a  conclusion  by  the  election  of  a  sovereign,  who  would  both 
insure  her  independence,  and  organize  a  government  capable  of 
maintaining  peace  and  good  order. 

He  desires  me  to  tell  you,  that  you  have  quite  surpassed  his 
expectations,  by  the  ability  and  boldness  with  which  you  have 
induced  the  Conference,  to  break  up  the  kingdom  of  the 
Netherlands  and  detach  Belgium  from  Holland,  or  rather  to 
recognize  their  separate  independence.  But  he  thinks  that 
since  this  great  step  has  been  effected,  the  antipathy  which  the 
Belgians  have  inspired,  has  perverted  the  principal  point  of  this 
measure,  and  that  in  the  difficulty  of  managing  them,  the 
necessity  of  prevailing  upon  them,  above  all,  to  choose  a 
sovereign,  has  been  lost  sight  of.  And  my  brother  tells  me,  that 
he  has  never  ceased  to  think,  to  say,  and  to  reiterate,  that  this 
choice  once  effected  to  the  satisfaction  of  Europe,  and  par- 
ticularly of  France,  there  would  be  no  more  trouble  with  the 
Belgians,  for  their  co-operation  would  be  assured,  or  at  any  rate 
easy  to  obtain  ;  whereas  by  insisting  that  the  Belgians  should 
act  by  themselves,  matters  have  been  thrown  into  the  laby- 
rinth of  governing  assemblies.  That  it  was  running  a  great 
risk,  either  to  obtain  nothing  from  them,  (as  had  happened)  but 
spontaneous  and  unacceptable  selections,  or  to  see  the  present 
state  of  anarchy  and  want  of  government  still  further  prolonged, 
thereby  throwing  them  more  and  more  into  the  arms  of  the 
propaganda,  and  wild  dreams  of  war  and  of  a  republic. 

My  brother  tells  me  he  never  hesitated  one  moment  about 
the  protocol  of  the  20th  January,  and  that  he  has  never  ceased 
to  tell  the  Belgians  this  himself;  but  that  he  did  not  wish  to 
retard  the  choice  of  a  sovereign,  a  delay  which  the  Republican 
party  has  always  desired,  as  it  thought  that,  if  the  sovereign 
was  once  chosen,  the  Republican  party  would  be  beaten,  and 
that  it  ought  to  be  a  matter  of  perfect  indifference  to  their 
sovereign,  whether  this  acceptance  of  the  protocol  of  the  20th 
January,  was  insisted  on  before,  or  after  his  election,  for  every- 
one would  know  it  had  been  insisted  on.  .  .  . 

But  in  allowing  me  thus  to  send  you  his  personal  views,  my 
brother  wishes  me  to  say,  that  he  is  always  ready  to  give  you 


Ii8  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

this  mark  of  his  confidence,  and  that  he  knows  he  need  not  tell 
you  to  keep  them  to  yourself.  He  wishes  you  to  look  upon 
this,  as  if  it  were  a  conversation  he  had  had  with  you  sitting 
beside  him  on  the  couch,  and  not  in  any  way  as  an  official  com- 
munication, of  which  he  would  never  wish  me  to  become  the 
medium.  .  .   . 

I  must  pause  at  this  long  postscript  to  Madame  Adelaide's 
letter,  which  had  evidently  been  dictated  by  the  king.  This,  while 
re  establishing  the  facts,  will  enable  me  briefly  to  recall  the 
point  at  which  the  Dutch  affairs  had  arrived,  and  which  threat- 
ened to  bring  us  to  a  dead-lock. 

The  Belgian  Congress  had  voted  for  a  constitution  in  which 
the  territory  comprising  Belgium,  such  as  the  Belgians 
wished  it,  was  clearly  defined.1  In  this  definition  they  had  in- 
cluded territories  to  which  they  had  no  claim  whatever,  under 
the  pretext,  that  as  the  inhabitants  of  these  countries  had  joined 
them  in  their  revolution,  they  were  in  honour  bound  to  demand 
their  incorporation,  and  the  sovereign  to  be  elected  by  them, 
when  accepting  the  crown,  was  to  promise  to  maintain  a  consti- 
tution drawn  up  in  this  sense.  In  opposition  to  this  constitution, 
was  the  protocol  of  the  Conference  of  January  20th,  by  which 
the  boundaries  of  Belgian  territory  had  been  fixed  in  accordance 
with  treaties  and  historic  precedents.  The  King  of  Holland 
deprived  of  Belgium,  had  consented,  although  reluctantly,  to  the 
boundaries  fixed  by  the  Conference.  This  was  the  state  of 
affairs,  when  the  Belgian  Congress  decided  to  offer  the  crown 
to  Prince  Leopold.  The  most  ordinary  prudence  clearly  de- 
manded, that  this  prince  should  not  accept  the  crown  until  after 
the  Belgians  had  renounced  their  ill-founded  claims.  Any  other 
course  would  have  placed  him  in  a  most  false  and  dangerous 
position.  In  fact,  if  after  having  accepted  the  crown  and  the 
constitution,  he  had  then  insisted  upon  the  Belgians  giving  up 
the  territories  which  they  could  not  be  permitted  to  retain,  he 
would  have  put  himself  in  opposition  to  the  constitution  ;  or, 

1  The  Belgian  Constitution  was  passed  on  the  7th  of  February.  Article  I. 
enumerated  the  territories  claimed  by  the  Congress,  namely,  the  provinces  of 
Antwerp,  Brabant,  East  and  West  Flanders,  Hainault,  Liege,  Namur,  Limburg,  and 
Luxemburg,  excepting  as  regards  its  relations  with  the  Germanic  Confederation, 


THE  RE  I VL  L  TTJON  OF  \  830.  1 1 9 

even  supposing  the  Belgians  had  given  in  to  his  urgency, he  would 
then  have  begun  his  reign  under  the  worst  possible  auspices,  for 
hewould  have  been  reproached  with  not  having  obtained  what  was 
hoped  for  from  his  election.  If,  on  the  contrary,  Prince  Leopold, 
having  once  become  king,  supported  and  upheld  the  ill-founded 
claims  of  the  Belgians,  he  would  thereby  put  himself  in  direct 
opposition  to  the  five  Powers  represented  at  the  Conference  in 
London,  and  also  to  the  Germanic  Confederation,  which  claims 
the  Grand  Duchy  of  Luxemburg.  It  was  therefore  quite 
natural,  that  King  Leopold  should  refuse  to  accept  so  com- 
promising a  position.  This  answers  the  observations  of  King 
Louis  Philippe,  given  in  Madame  Adelaide's  letter  cited 
above. 

It  may  be  useful  to  recall,  once  more,  the  facts  concerning 
the  Grand  Duchy  of  Luxemburg.  It  must  not  be  forgotten, 
that  this  Grand  Duchy  belonged  to  the  King  of  Holland  per- 
sonally ;  it  had  been  ceded  to  him  in  18 14,  in  exchange  for  the 
territories  which,  as  a  prince  of  the  House  of  Nassau,  he  had  the 
right  of  claiming  in  Germany,  and  of  which  part  had  been  given 
to  Prussia.  In  ceding  the  Grand  Duchy  to  him,  it  had  been 
specially  stipulated,  that  it  should  remain  connected  with  the 
Germanic  Confederation  on  account  of  the  fortress  of  Luxem- 
burg, which  was  situated  in  it,  and  had  been  declared  a  Federal 
fortress.  The  King  of  Holland,  at  that  time  King  of  the  Nether- 
lands, had,  it  is  true,  subsequently  united  this  Grand  Duchy  to 
the  Netherlands  to  facilitate  its  administration  ;  but  this  union 
had  not  been  complete,  because,  as  Grand  Duke  of  Luxemburg, 
he  still  remained  a  member  of  the  Germanic  Confederation,  and 
was  in  consequence  obliged  to  furnish  a  military  contingent 
(drawn  from  the  Grand  Duchy  itself)  to  the  Federal  arm)'. 

France,  whatever  may  have  been  said  about  it  in  Paris,  had 
only  a  very  secondary  interest  in  all  these  questions.  The 
immense  advantages  she  had  gained  by  the  dissolution  of  the 
kingdom  of  the  Netherlands,  the  declaration  of  the  inde- 
pendence and  the  neutrality  of  Belgium,  and  likewise  by  the 
demolition  of  a  certain  number  of  Belgian  fortresses,  had  all 
been  obtained  without  a  war.  Could  it  possibly  benefit  her  to  risk 
war,   in  order  to  insure  a  more  or  less   limited   frontier  to   the 


120  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

Belgians?  Assuredly  not.  I  therefore  troubled  myself  but  very 
little  with  the  declarations  that  came  from  Brussels  and  Paris 
on  this  subject,  and  pursued  my  own  line  of  attaining  as  equit- 
able an  arrangement  of  Belgian  affairs  by  the  Conference,  as 
was  possible.  They  began  at  last  fortunately  to  realize  in  Paris, 
that  Prince  Leopold  was,  of  all  the  aspirants,  the  one  who 
offered  the  best  guarantees,  and  this  somewhat  facilitated  my 
task,  which  continued  to  be  sufficiently  burdensome  for  some 
months  to  come. 

Before  continuing  my  despatches,  I  must  mention  a  matter 
of  no  great  importance  in  itself,  but  which  gave  rise  to  the  most 
absurd   comments  in   certain   newspapers,  and   with    regard    to 
which  I  am  very  glad  to  be  able  to  state  the   truth,    so  far  as 
concerns  myself.     It  is  well  known  that  the  Duchesse  de  Saint- 
Leu,1  after  the  death  of  her  eldest  son  in  Florence,  during  the 
disturbances  in  the  Papal  States,  in  which  he  had  taken  part, 
had   gone  to   Paris   incognito,  accompanied  by  her  second  son, 
Prince  Louis  Napoleon.     She  was  obliged  to  make  her  presence 
in   the  capital,  known  to  the  king  and  M.  Casimir  Perier  who 
tolerated  her  stay  there  until  her  son,  who  was  said  to  be  unwell, 
was   able  to   continue    his   journey.     From   Paris    she  went   to 
London,  and  the  king's  government  informed  me  of  her  arrival, 
giving  me  the  details  of  her  sojourn  in  Paris.     She  expressed  a 
desire  to  see  me,  but  I  deemed  it  more   prudent  to  avoid  an 
interview  with  her,  and  I  begged  my  niece,  Madame  de  Dino, 
to  call  on  her,  and  ask  in  what  way  I  could  be  of  service  to  her. 
She  wanted  a  passport,  to  proceed  with  her  son  through  France 
into  Switzerland,  where   she  has  a  residence.      I  transmitted  this 
request   to  Paris,  where,  after  some  hesitation,  they  decided  to 
authorize  me  to  grant  her  a  passport,  which  I  hastened  to  do. 
I  should  have  felt  no  awkwardness  in  seeing  her,  if  my  so  doing 
would   have  been  of  any  service   to  her.     I  had  several  times 
met  Lucien  and  Joseph  Buonaparte,  the  Emperor   Napoleon's 
two  brothers,  in  London   society,  and  I  had  the  same  regard  for 
them  that  I  always  shall  have  for  the  members  of  that  family. 
If,  as    I    did   in    1814,   I    now  think    the  Napoleonic    policy 

1  This  was  the  name  adopted  by  Queen  Hortense  during  her  exile.     It  will  be 
remembered  that  her  eldest  son,  Prince  Charles,  died  at  Forli. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  121 

dangerous  to  my  country,  I  cannot  forget  what  I  owe  to  Napo- 
leon, which  is  a  sufficient  reason  for  always  exhibiting  an 
interest  founded  on  gratitude,  to  the  members  of  his  family,  but 
without  permitting  it  to  exercise  any  influence  on  my  political 
views.  Madame  la  Duchesse  dc  Saint-Leu  wrote  to  me  as 
follows,  with  respect  to  the  passport,  which  confirms  all  I  have 
just  said : 

The  Duchesse  de   Saint-Leu   to  the   Prince   de 

Talleyrand. 

Tunbridge  Wells,  1S31. 
Prince, 

I  am  authorized  to  ask  you  for  a  passport  for  Madame 
la  Comtesse  d'Arenenberg  (this  was  the  name  of  her  property 
in  Switzerland)  and  her  suite.  If  you  think  the  names  of  the 
persons  composing  the  suite  should  be  designated,  you  can  add  : 
her  son,  Mademoiselle  Masuyer,  two  servants,  and  a  lady's  maid. 
I  want  my  passport  made  out  simply  for  Switzerland,  whither  I 
expect  to  go  towards  the  end  of  this  month.  I  am  very  glad, 
Prince,  to  have  this  opportunity  of  thanking  you  for  the  kind- 
ness you  have  shown  me  in  this  matter.  I  am  sorry  not  to 
have  seen  Madame  de  Dino  before  my  departure.  Kindly 
express  my  regret  to  her,  and  receive  for  yourself,  as  well  as 
for  her,  the  expression  of  my  sentiments. 

Hortense. 

We  will  now  continue  the  despatches.1 

Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  General  Sebastiani. 

London,  May  \6th,  1S31. 
Monsieur  le  Comte, 

....  No  greater  importance  than  they  deserve,  was  attached 
here  to  the  late  events  in  Paris  ;  on  the  contrary,  the  continued 
rise  of  the  funds  was  quite  noticeable.  Nevertheless,  it  is  very 
desirable  that  the  attention  of  the  foreign  Powers  should  not  be 
drawn  to  us  by  the  recurrence  of  such  scenes. 

The  English  papers  announce  to-day,  that  Dom  Miguel's 
government  had  acceded  to  all  the  demands  of  the  commander 
of  the  British  forces,  and  they  add,  that  probably  it  will  request 
the  good  offices  of  England  to  arrange  their  differences  with  us. 

1  All   the  subsequent  despatches   up    to   p.    1C5   arc   official   and  departmental 
despatches,  and  have  already  been  published. 


122  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

No  communication,  however,  has  as  yet  been  made  to  me  to 
justify  this  allegation. 

Lord  Ponsonby  arrived  in  London  yesterday.  He  brought 
me  a  letter  from  General  Belliard,  informing  me,  that  they  both 
found  it  almost  impossible  to  carry  out  the  resolutions  of  the 
Conference,  seeing  that  the  government  in  Brussels  dared  not 
bring  forward  any  discussions  on  this  subject.  This  state  of 
affairs  is  becoming  more  and  more  critical ;  it  requires  strong 
measures,  for  it  is  quite  evident  that  the  longer  the  delay 
granted  to  the  Belgians,  the  graver  becomes  their  position.  The 
Conference  will  take  cognizance  of  the  facts  made  known  by 
Lord  Ponsonby  to  his  government.  I,  on  my  side,  will  com- 
municate to  it  the  information  transmitted  to  me  by  General 
Belliard,  and  we  will  endeavour  to  arrive  at  such  measures  as 
are  best  applicable  to  the  state  of  things. 

The  information  received  in  London  as  to  affairs  in  Brussels, 
states,  that  Frenchmen  have  taken  a  very  active  part  in  the 
late  disturbances,  that  out  of  seventeen  persons  arrested, 
twelve  belonged  to  France,  and  that  on  one  of  them 
was  found  a  sum  of  twenty-two  thousand  francs.  It  is  also 
added,  that  the  combination  in  Paris  is  in  active  correspondence 
with  that  in  Brussels,  furnishing  it  with  arms  and  money.  I 
must  draw  your  attention  to  these  reports,  which  are  circulated 
pretty  widely. 

I  yesterday  saw  the  three  Belgian  Deputies,  who  were  still  in 
London,  some  hours  before  their  departure.  I  again  urged  them 
most  strongly,  to  use  all  the  influence  they  possessed  in  Brussels, 
to  make  the  Belgians  realize  their  position.  I  combated  some 
objections  they  yet  had,  respecting  consideration  for  national 
honour,  which  would  not  allow  them  to  abandon  Luxemburg,  or 
renounce  their  claim  to  the  possession  of  Maastricht.  I  told 
them,  that  views  of  national  honour  were  not  applicable  to 
territories  which  never  formed  part  of  their  country  ;  that  they 
must  first  of  all  enter  the  world  of  Europe,  and  then  discuss  the 
questions  now  occupying  them,  one  by  one,  according  to  their 
degree  of  importance. 

Finally,  I  did  my  utmost  to  give  them  a  good  impression, 
and  instil  some  sensible  ideas  which  they  might  transmit  to 
Brussels,  but  I  found  them  greatly  discouraged,  and  very  anxious 
as  to  the  future  fate  of  their  country.  .  .  . 

London,  May  1S//1,  1831. 

....  Yesterday  we  had  a  conference  respecting  the 
situation  of  Belgium   and   to  hear  Lord   Ponsonby's  statement. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  123 

Having  received  your  despatch  of  the  15th,  a  few  hours 
before,  I  went  to  this  Conference  greatly  desirous  to  procure 
the  adoption  of  the  conciliatory  views  which  Lord  Pon- 
sonby  had  to  bring  forward.  You  will  see  by  my  answer  to 
General  Belliard,  to  whom  I  have  given  full  details  as  to  the 
results  of  the  Conference,  that  a  promise  has  been  made  to  the 
Belgians,  to  open  negotiations  with  the  King  of  Holland,  relative 
to  the  cession  of  Luxemburg,  but  that  at  the  same  time  they 
have  been  told,  that  any  aggression  on  the  territory  of  that 
sovereign,  will  be  repelled  by  the  means  which  the  Powers  have 
at  their  disposal. 

We  trust  that  language  so  well  disposed,  though  determined, 
will  produce  a  good  effect  in  Brussels.  The  other  members  of 
the  Conference  have  written  in  the  same  sense. 

Lord  Ponsonby  will  probably  leave  this  evening,  after  having 
seen  M.  de  Zuylen,  who  has  just  arrived  here.  He  is  charged 
by  the  Court  at  the  Hague,  to  point  out  the  necessity  of  inducing 
the  Belgians  to  fulfil  the  conditions  of  the  separation  of  their 
country  from  Holland.  They  are  becoming  uneasy  at  the 
Hague,  at  the  delays  which  the  Belgians  have  obtained.  They 
would  like  to  ascertain  what  measures  will  be  adopted  in  case 
of  refusal.  The  Dutch  government  likewise  complains  of  some 
partial  aggressions  on  the  part  of  Antwerp,  close  to  Luxemburg, 
&c.  You  will,  no  doubt,  find  full  details  in  a  despatch  which  M. 
de  Mareuil1  has  sent  you  from  the  Hague,  and  which  I  have  the 
honour  to  transmit  herewith.  .  .  . 

The  members  of  the  Conference  on  the  Affairs  of  Greece, 
have  heard  with  much  pleasure,  that  the  king's  government  has 
taken  steps  to  send  500  men  of  General  Schnieder's2  brigade  to 
the  assistance  of  Comte  Capo  dTstria's  government.  They 
have  requested  me  to  express  to  you  their  gratitude  for  this 
arrangement.  .  .  . 

London,  May  igf/i,  1831.3 

The   arrival  of  M.  de  Zuylen,  who  appears  to   be   much  in 
the   King  of  Holland's  confidence   with  respect  to  the  Belgian 

1  Baron  Duraud  de  Mareuil  had  been  minister  at  the  Hague  since  1830  ;  he  had 
been  previously  accredited,  once  before  to  the  Hague  in  182 1,  then  to  Washington 
in  1823,  to  Rio  in  1829,  and  finally  became  ambassador  at  Naples  in  1832. 

'-'  Antoine  Schneider,  born  in  1780,  entered  the  Engineers  in  1799.  He  became 
a  colonel  in  1815,  and  took  part  in  the  Spanish  campaign  in  1823  ;  in  182S  he  was 
sent  to  the  Morea  as  general  of  brigade,  and  became  commander-in-chief  after  the 
rture  of  Marshal  Maison.  On  his  return  to  France,  he  became  lieutenant- 
general  (1831),  was  elected  Deputy  in  1834,  and  sat  in  the  Chamber  until  his  death 
(1847).     He  was  War  Minister  for  a  short  time,  from  1839-1S40. 

:i  This  letter  is  dated  May  20th  in  the  Archives. 


124  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

question,  delays  Lord  Ponsonby's  departure  for  two  days.  I  will 
have  the  honour  to  acquaint  you,  by  the  first  courier,  of  the  result 
of  the  communications  that  will  take  place  to-day  and  to- 
morrow. 

London,  May  10th,  1831. 

....  The  account  which  Lord  Ponsonby  gave  us  of  the  situa- 
tion in  Belgium,  of  the  weakness  of  its  government,  and  the 
anarchy  to  which  this  country  has  been  given  up,  need  not  be 
retailed  to  you,  as  you  thoroughly  estimated  it  when  you  informed 
me  in  the  despatch  of  the  10th,  which  you  did  me  the  honour  to 
write,  that  the  voice  of  reason  would  not  be  listened  to  in 
Brussels.  The  king's  government  deemed  that  this  state  of 
affairs  still  demanded  consideration  on  its  part,  and  I  have 
received  instructions  to  endeavour  to  prevent  the  employment 
of  force  and  the  renewal  of  hostilities.  This  I  did,  and  you 
have  seen  by  my  despatch  No.  143,1  that  the  Conference 
has  made  a  decided  concession  to  your  views,  by  promising 
the  Belgians  to  open  up  negotiations  with  the  King  of  Holland, 
in  order  to  bring  about,  if  possible,  some  understanding  respect- 
ing Luxemburg.  Nevertheless,  I  ought  not  to  conceal  from  you, 
that  the  members  of  the  Conference  think  that  such  a  concession, 
instead  of  lessening  the  difficulties,  will  only  render  them  still 
greater,  by  furnishing  the  Belgians  with  fresh  encouragement  for 
their  foolish  hopes.  But  the  Confeience  was  anxious  to  give 
fresh  proof  of  its  deference  to  His  Majesty's  government,  and 
its  desire  for  conciliation. 

If  this  concession  is  not  properly  appreciated  by  the  Belgians, 
if  it  does  not  induce  them  to  accede  to  the  fair  demands  that 
have  been  made  to  them  during  the  last  five  months,  if,  on 
the  contrary,  it  induces  them  to  persist  still  further  in  their 
course  of  resistance  to  the  Powers,  I  must  tell  you  candidly, 
that  in  that  event,  the  Conference  will  consider  it  has  exhausted 
all  possible  means  of  conciliation.  The  king's  government  will 
then  have  to  send  me  fresh  instructions.  .  .  . 

M.  de  Zuylen  has  no  powers,  which  will  permit  him  in  any 
way  to  further  the  matters  we  have  now  in  hand.  He  declares 
that  his  sovereign,  having  reason  to  fear  aggressive  measures  on 
the  part  of  the  Belgians,  has  put  himself  in  a  position  to  repel 
them. 

Lord  Ponsonby  is  still  in  London  ;  he  goes  down  to 
Claremont,  to-morrow,  to  have  an  interview  with  Prince 
Leopold.     I  have  reason    to   believe  that  the  English  govern- 

'  See  page  122,  despatch  May  1S1I1. 


THE  RE  VOL  UTION  OF  1 830.  12  5 

mcnt  intends  to  further  the  prince's  acceptance  of  the  Belgian 
crown  ;  but  I  do  not  think  it  will  succeed,  as  Prince  Leopold  is 
not  inclined  to  accept  anything  which  is  uncertain.  .  .  . 

London,  May  22nd  1831. 
Monsieur  le  Comte, 

My  despatch,  No.  143,  will  have  informed  you  of  the 
concession  the  Conference  was  disposed  to  make  to  the  Belgians, 
respecting  the  Grand  Duchy  of  Luxemburg.  Since  then,  it  has 
been  busily  occupied  concerting  measures  to  facilitate  prince 
Leopold's  acceptance  of  the  Belgian  throne.  That  prince  has 
seen  several  of  the  members  of  the  Conference,  and  has  given 
them  fresh  proofs  of  his  wish  to  accept  it. 

We  met  again  yesterday,  and  have  drawn  up  protocol 
No.  24,  of  which  I  have  the  honour  to  send  you  a  copy  herewith.1 
You  will  see,  that  Prince  Leopold  of  Saxe-Coburg  is  men- 
tioned in  this  protocol  in  such  a  manner,  as  to  show  the 
Belgians,  that  if,  as  there  is  reason  to  believe,  their  choice  falls 
on  this  prince,  the  Powers  will  give  their  consent  thereto.  I 
also  beg  you  to  notice,  that  this  protocol  is  signed  by  the  two 
plenipotentiaries  of  the  Russian  government,  which  up  to  the 
present,  owing  to  its  strong  affection  for  the  House  of  Nassau, 
had  raised  objections  to  the  choice  of  Prince  Leopold  ;  and  that, 
consequently,  it  has  now  given  its  consent  to  this  choice. 

It  is  imperative,  that  the  government  of  the  king  should  now 
use  all  the  influence  it  possesses  in  Brussels,  to  induce  the 
Belgians  to  accede  to  such  friendly  overtures. 

You  will  also  observe,  that  the  action  of  the  Germanic 
Confederation  has  been  adjourned,  and  subordinated  to  the 
negotiations  with  Holland,  which  will  be  a  source  of  tranquillity 
to  all  parties. 

For  some  time  it  seemed,  as  if  the  Belgian  question  was 
never  likely  to  come  to  an  2  issue  ;  now,  however,  there  appears 
to   me  to   be   a  prospect  of  this,  which  I  hope  will  conduce3  to 

1  This  protocol,  signed  May  21st,  following  on  Lord  Ponsonby's  report  of  the 
situation  of  Belgium,  deals  with  two  subjects  : 

1st.     The  acquisition    of    Luxemburg,  on  conditional  terms,  by  Belgium. 

2nd.     The  eventual  acceptance  of  the  crown  by  Prince  Leopold. 

With  regard  to  the  first,  the  Conference  undertakes  "to  open  negotiations  with 
the  King  of  the  Netherlands  with  the  object  of  assuring,  if  possible,  the  possession  of 
Luxemburg  to  Belgium,  by  means  of  such  fair  compensation  as  would  still  preserve 
its  present  relations  with  the  Germanic  Confederation."  It  adds,  "that  its  object  in 
thus  acting,  is  to  clear  up  the  difficulties  which  might  prevent  Prince  Leopold's 
acceptance  of  the  sovereignty  of  Belgium,  if,  as  everything  leads  one  to  believe,  this 
sovereignty  should  be  offered  to  him." 

-  Var.  :  satisfaisante  =  satisfactory. 

3  Var.  :  aujourd'hui  nous  en  avons.cree  une  qui  pourra,  je  l'espere,  nous  con- 
duire  =  now  we  have  created  one  which  may,  I  hope,  lead  us. 


126  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

the  end  we  have  in  view.  I  am  congratulating  myself  all  the 
more,  as  I  have  seldom  had  to  conduct  any  business  that  required 
greater  care.  I  most  earnestly  hope  that  the  negotiations  in 
which  I  have  taken  part,  may  prove  as  successful  as  could  be 
wished  ;  I,  at  any  rate,  have  left  nothing  undone  that  could 
further  the  interests  of  France  and  the  maintenance  of  peace. 
Lord  Ponsonby  leaves  for  Brussels  to-day.  .  .  . 

London,  May  24//1,  1831. 

....  You  did  me  the  honour  to  inform  me,  on  the  21st  of 
this  month,  that  the  king's  government  had  learnt  with  satis- 
faction, that  the  Conference  had  decided  to  open  up  nego- 
tiations relative  to  the  cession  of  Luxemburg  to  Belgium.  You 
will  have  seen  by  protocol  No.  24,  attached  to  my  despatch  of 
the  22nd,  what  has  been  the  sequence  of  this  decision,  which  has 
become  a  means  of  advancing  Belgian  affairs,  if  they  only  know 
how  to  appreciate  and  take  proper  advantage  of  it. 

It  would  not  be  quite  true,  M.  le  Comte,  to  attribute  the 
adoption  of  the  measure  just  decided  upon,  solely  to  Lord 
Ponsonby,  and  to  the  impression  he  has  made  on  the  Con- 
ference. The  letter  I  had  received  from  General  Belliard,  and 
which  I  communicated  to  the  Conference,  produced  far  more 
effect,  than  Lord  Ponsonby's  expose ;  the  proof  of  this,  is  the 
marked  attention  with  which  it  was  listened  to,  and  the  request 
from  Lord  Palmerston,  that  I  should  read  it  to  them  a  second 
time.  Whatever  additional  circumstances  there  may  have  been 
to  influence  the  minds  of  the  plenipotentiaries,  and  whatever 
measures  may  have  been  employed,  I  think  we  have  all  the 
more  reason  to  congratulate  ourselves  on  the  decision  that  has 
been  taken,  as  I  had  but  little  hopes  of  obtaining  it  the  evening 
before  the  Conference,  or  even  a  few  hours  before.  I  think, 
however,  that  weariness,  as  well  as  the  desire  to  see  it  ended, 
probably  contributed  thereto. 

I  never  understood,  that  the  relations  which  might  still 
subsist  between  the  Grand  Duchy  of  Luxemburg  and  the 
Germanic  Confederation,  were  applicable  to  anything  beyond  the 
fortress  ;  for  it  would  be  impossible  that  Belgium,  having  become 
neutral,  her  neutrality  should  not  extend  to  the  Grand  Duchy 
of  Luxemburg,  as  well  as  to  any  other  acquisitions  she  may 
in  future  receive. 

I  had  the  honour  of  seeing  Prince  Leopold  this  morning. 
He  told  me  that  Lord  Ponsonby  was  about  to  leave,  which  I 
have  since  ascertained  he  has  clone.  Thus  Belgian  affairs  are 
tending  towards  a  solution,  which  could  easily  be  arrived,  at  if 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  127 

they  would  only  have  the  sense  in  Brussels  to  appreciate  the 
consideration  which  the  rowers,  (of  which  the  Conference  is  the 
organ),  have  shown  to  the  Belgians  ;  for  it  is  impossible  not  to 
admit,  that  their  government  has  now  every  reason  to  be 
satisfied,  and  possesses  the  means  of  replying  to  the  unreasonable 
demands  of  the  factionists,  by  whom  it  is  surrounded. 
Lastly,  the  chief  points  of  the  difficulties  have  been  removed, 
and  it  only  now  remains  to  arrange  details.  Nevertheless, 
Prince  Leopold  feels  as  I  do,  that  the  crisis  is  not  yet  over,  and 
we  quite  expect  that  this  uncertainty  will  continue  until  next 
Tuesday,  May  31st,  the  day  before  that  on  which  the  respite 
granted  to  the  Belgians  to  make  known  their  decision  expires. 

The  conversation  I  have  had  with  Prince  Leopold,  has  given 
me  fresh  proofs  of  his  determination  to  accept  the  sovereignty  of 
Belgium,  a  determination  based,  however,  on  the  condition  that 
the  Belgians  accept  the  terms  fixed  by  the  protocol  of  January 
20th,  otherwise  the  prince  does  not  consider  himself  as 
pledged.  .  .  . 

London,  May  z$th,  1831. 
Monsieur  le  Comte, 

There  is  no  doubt  that  the  King  of  Holland  hoped, 
that  the  resistance  of  the  Belgians  having  at  length  exhausted 
the  patience  of  the  Powers,  chances  of  a  war  would  present 
themselves,  on  which  he  would  eagerly  have  seized. 

I  have  the  honour  to  inform  you,  that  M.  de  Zuylen  arrived 
here  in  order  to  submit  to  the  English  government  and  to  the 
Conference,  such  considerations,  as  might  decide  them  to  have 
recourse  to  rigorous  measures. 

But   conciliatory  views   having    on    the    contrary  prevailed, 

and    protocol     No.    24    having    been    adopted,    the    hopes    of 

war,   nourished    by    Holland,  must    have    become  considerably 

damped  ;   on   the  other  hand,  however,  wre  have  to  fear  that  she 

will  not,  without  great  difficulty,  agree  to  enter  into  negotiations 

for  the  cession  of  Luxemburg.     It  is  with  the  view  of  prevailing 

upon  her  to  assent  to  this  transaction,  and  in  order  to  lessen  as 

much  as  possible  the   difficulties  surrounding  this  affair,  that  I 

and  several  other  members  of  the  Conference,  have,  since   the 

adoption    of    protocol    No.    24,  and    the    departure    of    Lord 

Ponsonby,  more    particularly  sought    out  the    Dutch  ministers 

who  are  in   London.     We  have  shown    them,  that  we    are    as 

anxious    as    they   can   be,  to    see  the   King    of   Holland    freed 

from  all  foreign  anxieties,  and  able  to  devote  himself  entirely  to 

the   administration   of  his  kingdom.     We  also  added,  that   the 

general  interest,  which  cannot  be  separated  from  his  own,  seems 


128  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

to  demand,  that  he  should  lend  himself  to  the  negotiations 
that  will  be  opened  up  with  him,  when  the  Belgians  have 
acquiesced  in  the  proposals  just  made  to  them,  and  as  soon  as 
they  have  made  their  choice  of  a  sovereign. 

We  shall  also  point  out  to  them,  that  Luxemburg  is  a 
country  far  removed  from  the  other  Dutch  States,  and  very 
unwilling  to  come  under  King  William's  rule  ;  that  the  fewer 
points  of  contact  they  have  with  the  Belgians,  the  less  likely  are 
occasions  for  dispute  to  arise  between  them,  and  that  a  large 
capital,  or  a  well-regulated  revenue,  presents  great  advantages  to 
so  enlightened  a  statesman  as  the  King  of  Holland.  In  fact, 
we  shall  not  neglect  a  single  argument,  good  or  bad,  in  order  to 
procure  their  adoption  of  our  views,  as  to  the  utility  of  a  measure 
to  which  our  governments  attach  the  greatest  importance,  as  it 
will  be  the  means,  and  probably  the  only  means,  of  settling 
Belgian  affairs. 

I  have  the  honour  to  send  you  a  copy  of  a  note,  which  a 
Belgian  agent,  named  Michiels,1  residing  at  Frankfort  where  he 
has  started  in  business,  had  remitted  to  the  President  of  the 
Diet,  who  communicated  it  to  the  members  of  the  Conference. 
It  is  known  here,  through  Frankfort,  that  this  agent  is  in 
correspondence  with  M.  Lebeau,2  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  in 
Brussels.  You  will  see,  on  reading  this  letter,  that  we  should 
be  justified  in  believing  that  the  Belgian  government  is  desirous 
of  being  closely  united  to  the  Germanic  Confederation,  and  that 
it  places  its  connection  with  Germany,  far  above  its  relations 
with  France.  I  think  the  king's  government  might  find  some 
useful  hints  in  this  document.  .   .  . 

London,  May  26//1,  183L 

At  a  time  when,  no  doubt,  you  are  anxious  to  receive 
frequent  information  on  all  matters  relating  to  Belgian  affairs, 
which  are  approaching  a  settlement,  I  will   not  allow  a  single 

1  T.  Michiels,  who  had  resided  at  Frankfort  since  1830,  was  not  the  official  agent 
of  the  minister,  and  was  not  recognized  by  the  Diet. 

2  Jean  Louis  Joseph  Lebeau,  a  Belgian  statesman,  born  in  1794,  had  been 
an  advocate  and  journalist  under  King  William's  government,  to  whom  he  was 
violently  opposed.  In  1S30,  he  was  made  Advocate-General  at  Liege,  that  city 
sending  him  at  the  same  time  to  the  Congress.  There  he  opposed  the  reunion  with 
France,  and  in  order  to  prevent  the  election  of  the  Due  de  Nemours,  he  was  among 
those  who  proposed  the  candidature  of  the  Due  de  Leuchtenburg.  M.  Lebeau 
became  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  in  183 1,  and  as  such  supported  Prince  Leopold. 
He  formed  one  of  the  deputation  sent  to  offer  the  crown  to  that  prince.  In  1832,  lie 
was  re-elected  as  Deputy,  made  Minister  of  Justice,  and  then  Governor  of  the  Province 
of  Namur  (1834).  In  1839,  he  was  accredited  to  the  Diet,  and  in  1840  became 
Minister  for  Foreign  Affairs  and  President  of  the  Council.  He  retired  in  1841,  but 
kept  his  seat  in  the  Chamber,  where  he  sat  on  the  Liberal  side. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OE  1830.  129 

day  to   pass  without  writing,  even  if  I  have  not  much   to  tell 
you.  .  .  . 

M.  van  Pract,1  who  formed  part  of  the  last  Belgian  deputa- 
tion, and  who  remained  here,  has  just  been  with  me.  The 
account  he  gave  me  of  the  condition  of  his  country  is  most 
disquieting,  and  reduces  itself  to  this :  that  the  government  has 
no  power,  no  authority,  and  is  master  of  nothing.  He  told  me 
that  a  large  number  of  Frenchmen  were  among  the  volunteers, 
and  that  they  received  money  from  a  bank  in  Paris,  which,  it 
appears,  has  large  funds  at  its  disposal.  This  fact  is  cor- 
roborated by  a  letter  received  by  M.  van  Praet  from  his 
government,  and  which  I  have  read.  The  banker's  name  is  not 
mentioned,  but  General  Belliard  could  easily  procure  informa- 
tion on  this  point.  This  is  a  serious  matter,  and  deserves  the 
attention  of  the  king's  government.  .  .  . 

London,  May  2gt/i,  1S31. 

....  I  have  received  several  letters  from  General  Belliard, 
relative  to  the  position  of  Belgian  affairs,  of  which  he  tells  me 
he  has  had  the  honour  of  sending  you  copies.  That  which 
followed  Lord  Ponsonby's  arrival  in  Brussels,  created  some  cause 
for  anxiety,  as  to  how  the  proposals,  contained  in  the  protocol  of 
May  20th,  would  be  received.  However,  a  letter  of  the  27th, 
which  reached  me  this  morning,  gives  better  hopes  of  success. 
You  will  also  have  received  a  copy  of  this. 

The  Conference  met  to-day  to  discuss  this  information,  and 
likewise  a  despatch  from  Lord  Ponsonby,  which  also  arrived 
this  morning.  We  had  to  determine,  whether,  in  order  to  ac- 
celerate the  arrangement  of  Belgian  affairs,  it  would  be  better 
to  grant  the  Belgians  some  further  concessions,  which  these 
reports  seemed  to  indicate  were  necessary.  These  concessions 
would  have  been  relative  to  territory  which  the  Belgians  never 
have  possessed,  and  do  not  even  now  possess. 

The  Conference  decided,  that  it  could  add  nothing  further  to 
the  conditions  contained  in  the  last  protocol,  and  that  if  the 
Belgians  did  not  agree  to  the  basis  of"  the  protocol  of  January 
20th,  by  the  1st  June,  Lord  Ponsonby  must  quit  Brussels,  in 
conformity  with  the  instructions  he  had  received  on  this  subject. 

I  hastened  to  acquaint  General  Belliard  of  the  results  of  this 
Conference,  by  at  once  sending  to  him  Colonel  Repecaud,  who 
arrived  here  yesterday  with  despatches. 

1  Jules  van  Praet  was  born  in  1806  at  Bruges,  was  secretary  of  the  Legation  in 
London  in  1831.  Soon  afterwards  he  became  secretary  to  the  king's  Cabinet,  and, 
in  1S40,  master  of  the  king's  household,  which  post  he  retained  until  the  reign  of 
King  Leopold  II. 

VOL.  IV.  K 


i3o  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

I  have  the  honour  to  send  you  a  copy  of  my  letter,  in  order 
that  you  may  estimate  the  considerations,  which  the  Conference 
is  desirous  of  turning  to  the  best  account  at  Brussels.  You 
will  observe,  that  I  have  requested  General  Belliard  to  refer 
again  to  the  instructions  given'  him  when  he  was  still  at  Paris  ; 
they  would  be  applicable,  in  case  the  Belgians  should  refuse 
to  accede  to  the  basis  of  the  protocol  of  January  20th. 

London,  May  list,  1831. 

News  has  been  received  here  from  the  Hague,  but  it  arrived 
too  late  for  me  to  send  you  particulars  by  yesterday's  courier. 
The  King  of  Holland,  on  learning  the  last  resolutions  of  the 
Conference,  and  the  proposed  cession  of  the  Grand  Duchy  of 
Luxemburg,  in  exchange  for  compensations,  expressed  great 
dissatisfaction  and  a  very  decided  determination  not  to  sub- 
scribe to  it. 

He  declared,  that  as  he  had  shown  great  deference  to  the 
decisions  of  the  Powers  by  being  the  first  to  agree,  several 
months  ago,  to  the  basis  of  the  separation,  the  Belgians  ought 
in  this  respect,  to  put  themselves  in  a  position  similar  to  his. 
He  therefore  considers  himself  entitled  to  demand,  that  the 
protocols,  having  become  obligatory  upon  him,  should  also  be 
carried  out  by  the  Belgians,  and  that  until  they  have  retired 
within  their  own  boundaries  and  have  submitted  to  the  con- 
ditions of  the  separation,  the  king  does  not  think  that  he 
should  be  asked  to  sanction  any  exchange  of  territory,  or  any 
arrangement  concerning  Luxemburg  ;  nor  does  he  see  what 
means  of  compensation  can  be  offered  him  for  the  Grand 
Duchy. 

This  intelligence  is  of  a  nature  to  make  us  think,  that  we 
shall  meet  with  some  obstacles  at  the  Hague,  but  I  do  not 
doubt  we  shall  surmount  them,  if  the  Belgians  agree  to  the 
basis  of  the  separation.  It  would  be  well,  I  think,  that  our 
Legation  at  the  Hague,  should  endeavour  to  overcome  the 
obstinacy  of  the  King  of  Holland  :  a  disposition  which  is 
further  increased,  under  present  circumstances,  by  the  irritation 
he  experiences  at  the  loss  of  four  millions  of  his  subjects,  the 
weakness  of  his  stability  in  Europe,  and  also  by  the  conviction 
he  must  have  that,  notwithstanding  the  losses  he  has  sustained, 
he  has  agreed  to  the  basis  of  the  separation,  while  those  who 
are  reaping  all  the  benefits,  are  continually  making  difficulties 
about  accepting  them. 

We  must1  be  all   the  more  urgent  in  our  dealings  with  the 

Var.  :  Je  crois  =  I  think. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  131 

King  of  Holland,  as  there  is  no  doubt  that  he  is  quite  ready 
to  go  to  war,  if  the  Belgians  only  furnish  him  with  sufficient 
reason  for  so  doing,  to  prevent  his  being  reproached  with  having 
been  the  aggressor. 

You  have  data  as  to  the  military  strength  of  Holland.  The 
land  forces  amount  to  about  60,000  men,  without  including  the 
militia,1,  and  the  navy  is  very  formidable,  for  besides  fourteen 
ships  of  war,  which  are  cruising  before  Antwerp,  there  are  in 
that  neighbourhood  about  three  hundred  pieces  of  ordnance. 
The  braver)'  and  impetuosity  of  the  Belgians  is  well  known 
here,  but  it  is  thought  that  their  military  resources  are  far 
inferior  to  those  of  Holland. 

As  a  fact,  the  state  of  the  finances  of  this  kingdom,  would  not 
admit  of  her  maintaining  a  considerable  force  on  a  war  footing 
for  any  length  of  time  ;  but  this  is  all  the  greater  reason,  that 
the  Dutch  should  desire  to  see  themselves  speedily  engaged  in 
hostilities.  .  .  . 

London,  June  yd,  1S31. 

Monsieur  le  Comte, 

I  have  received  the  despatch  which  you  did  me  the 
honour  to  write  on  May  31st,  relative  to  the  letter- which  Lord 
Ponsonby,  on  his  arrival  in  Brussels,  addressed  to  the  Belgian 
Minister  for  Foreign  Affairs. 

You  have  had  too  much  experience  in  business,  Monsieur 
le  Comte,  for  one  moment  to  credit  the  Conference  with  that 
letter,  and  I  cannot  believe  that  you  could  seriously  have 
expressed  any  doubt,  as  to  the  part  I  could  have  had  in  its 
production.  That  letter  was  not  drawn  up  in  London,  and  it 
certainly  does  not  emanate  from  the  Conference  ;  you  have  only 
to  read  it,  to  be  assured  of  this.     Besides,  the  Conference  would 

1  Suppressed  in  the  text  of  the  Archives. 

2  Lord  Ponsonby,  immediately  on  his  return  from  London,  had  written  a  private 
letter  to  M.  Lebeau,  in  which  he  exaggerated  and  distorted  the  views  of  the  Con- 
ference. This  letter,  which  was  read  to  the  Congress  on  the  28th  of  May,  by  M. 
Lebeau,  roused  a  very  strong  feeling  in  Belgium.  Lord  Ponsonby  exhorted  ihe 
Belgian  government  to  submit  to  the  question  of  limitations  decided  on  by  the  Con- 
ference, and  not  to  raise  fresh  difficulties,  which  might  end  in  the  total  extinction  of 
the  Belgian  name.  He  added  that  the  acceptance  by  the  Congress  of  the  protocol  of 
January  20th,  would  be  rewarded  by  the  abandonment  of  Luxemburg.  "A  week 
ago,"  he  said,  "the  Conference  considered  the  preservation  of  this  duchy  to  the 
House  of  Nassau,  if  not  actually  necessary,  at  least  extremely  desirable,  and  now  it 
is  disposed  to  mediate,  with  the  avowed  intention  of  obtaining  this  duchy  for  the 
sovereign  of  Belgium." 

This  transaction  had  indeed  been  contemplated  by  the  Conference,  but  Lord 
Ponsonby  had  never  been  authorized  to  hold  such  decisive  language,  nor  to  mention 
the  proposed  scheme  to  the  Belgians.  (See  Lord  Ponsonby's  letter  in  the  Debats  of 
May  2 1st.) 

K    2 


132  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

not  have  stated  what  Lord  Ponsonby  wrote  to  M.  Lebeau, 
respecting  changes  which,  in  the  space  of  one  week,  have  taken 
place  in  its  ideas,  relative  to  the  Grand  Duchy  of  Luxemburg. 
Moreover,  Lord  Ponsonby  himself  says  that  his  letter  had 
been  written  very  hurriedly,  which  proves  that  it  had  not  been 
given  him  before  he  left  London. 

In  accordance  with  the  usual  routine,  it  ought  to  have  been 
communicated  to  General  Belliard,  before  it  was  sent  to  the 
Belgian  government,  and  from  the  way  in  which  Lord 
Ponsonby  spoke  of  General  Belliard,  while  here,  there  is  no 
reason  to  suppose  that  such  an  omission  could  have  taken 
place.  Nevertheless,  it  might  be  explained  up  to  a  certain 
point,  as  this  letter  was  a  private  letter. 

We  see  by  the  information  that  has  reached  us  here  from 
Brussels,  and  which  General  Belliard  renders  more  exact  and 
interesting,  by  the  letters  he  is  good  enough  to  send  me,  that 
Prince  Leopold  is  about  to  be  elected  sovereign  of  Belgium,  but 
that  the  Congress  will  attach  the  same  conditions  to  his 
election,  which  it  did  to  that  of  Monsieur  le  Due  de  Nemours  ; 
moreover,  that  if  it  gives  any  sort  of  adhesion  to  the  basis  of  the 
separation,  it  will  only  be  in  a  very  cautious  manner,  and 
without  mentioning  the  word  protocol  ;  and  finally,  that  the 
Congress  does  not  renounce  its  claims  to  Venloo,  Maastricht, 
and  Limburg. 

It  is  to  be  feared,  that  in  following  this  course,  the  Belgians 
may  frustrate  the  end  in  view,  and  that  they  will  find  great 
difficulty  in  getting  Prince  Leopold  to  accept  the  crown 
they  intend  to  offer  him  ;  at  least,  that  is  the  opinion  one 
can  form  from  the  replies  he  gave  the  Deputies  who  came  to 
London. 

Besides  this,  Maastricht  and  Venloo  are  the  only  serious 
difficulties,  for  if,  as  the  Belgians  declare,  they  were  the 
possessors  before  1790  of  five-sixths  of  Limburg,  and  if  only 
fifty-four  communes  scattered  through  that  province  belonged 
to  Holland,  these  are  facts  which  the  Boundary  Commissioners 
can  easily  verify.  It  seems  to  me  that  any  rights,  however  well 
established  they  may  appear  to  the  eyes  of  the  Belgians,  ought 
not  to  prevent  their  adhesion  to  the  basis  of  the  separation,  the 
more  so,  as  the  protocol  of  January  20th,  lays  down  a  principle 
of  exchange,  which  will  necessarily  apply  to  the  Dutch  Com- 
munes, which  form  the  enclosed  lands. 

As  to  the  idea  of  a  mixed  or  a  foreign  garrison  in 
Maastricht,1    I    do    not  think  it  would  ever  be  adopted.     The 

1  Maastricht  had  formerly  been  bought  by  Charles  V.     It  was  thus  it  had  come 
into  the  Spanish  Netherlands,  but  in  1784,  the  Emperor  Joseph  II.  had  ceded  it  to 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  133 

claim  of  Belgium  to  sovereignty  over  Maastricht  is  quite  new  ; 
that  of  Holland  is  very  old,  dating  back  to  the  treaty  of  Munster  ; 
and  there  would  besides,  be  many  serious  difficulties  in  placing 
Hanoverian  troops  in  that  fortress,  as  General  Belliard  pro- 
posed. 

Thus,  Monsieur  lc  Comte,  the  affairs  of  Belgium  still  present 
man}-  difficulties.  Nevertheless,  the  majority  who  have  spoken 
in  favour  of  Prince  Leopold  in  the  Congress,  declare,  that  the 
necessity  of  putting  an  end  to  the  painful  state  of  affairs  in  that 
country,  is  strongly  felt  in  Belgium.  But  the  obstinacy  of  the 
Belgians  in  not  openly  adhering  to  the  basis  of  the  separation, 
and  in  not  relinquishing  any  of  their  claims,  may  lead  to  very 
troublesome  results,  which  we  have  for  a  long  time  tried  to 
prevent.  I  am  induced  to  believe,  that  the  measures  indicated 
in  the  end  of  your  despatch,  combined  with  Lord  Ponsonby's 
departure,  and  the  recall  of  General  Belliard,  may  be  the  best 
means  of  escaping  from  a  difficult  position,  and  one  opposed 
to  the  conciliatory  and  pacific  views  of  the  principal  States  ot 
Europe. 

This  is  the  opinion  expressed  by  those  members  of  the 
Congress  whom  I  have  seen  privately,  during  the  absence  of 
the  ministers  at  Ascot.  .  .  . 

London,  June  \ih,  1831. 

I  have  received  the  despatch  you  did  me  the  honour  to 
write  on  the  2nd  of  this  month  ;  it  shows  the  importance 
attached  by  the  king's  government,  to  the  punctual  observance 
of  the  provisions  adopted  by  the  Conference,  relative  to  the 
affairs  of  Belgium.  I  will  take  great  pains,  to  persuade  them 
to  look  upon  the  prolongation  of  the  delay  accorded  to  the 
Belgians  by  General  Belliard,  as  a  decision  which  he  has  taken 
upon  himself.  I  must  suppose  that  he  consulted  Lord  Ponsonby 
on  this  matter,  as  his  instructions  prescribed  ;  nevertheless,  I  am 
somewhat  anxious  on  this  point,  because  General  Belliard, 
when  telling  me  that  he  had  taken  on  himself  to  retard,  until 
the  ioth  of  this  month,  the  delay  which  had  been  fixed  for  the 
1st,  added,  "  I  believe  that  Lord  Ponsonby  will  be  of  my 
opinion." 

I  am  vexed  at  the  delay  there  has  been  in  carrying  out  the 
orders  given  by  you  and  the  Conference,  because  this  will 
probably  deprive  us  of  the  effect,  which  the  departure  of  the 
French    and     English     agents    would     have     produced.     The 

Holland.  Belgium,  therefore,  bad  no  right  whatever  to  it  in  1830,  and,  indeed,  it 
was  finally  annexed  to  Holland. 


134  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

reflections  which  their  recall  would  have  caused  the  Belgians, 
might  have  contributed  to  make  them  revert  to  their  true 
interests,  whereas  now,  they  will  believe  much  less  in  our 
threats.  .  .  . 

We  have  just  received  news  from  Lisbon,  dated  May  26th. 
I  transmit  them  to  you  herewith,  as  it  is  possible,  that  the 
steamer  which  brought  them  to  Portsmouth  may  not  have 
carried  any  despatches  for  your  department,  or  that  of  the  navy. 
The  French  squadron  has  taken  three  Portuguese  vessels ; 
the  commander  has  informed  the  merchantmen,  through  the 
medium  of  Mr.  Hoppner,  the  English  Consul,  that  he  had  no 
orders  to  blockade  Lisbon,  but  that  he  would  take  reprisals  on 
all  the  Portuguese  vessels  he  should  meet  at  sea.  An  embargo 
has  been  laid  by  Dom  Miguel,  on  all  the  Portuguese  ships  that 
were  in  the  port  of  Lisbon  ;  neutrals  do  not  meet  with  any 
obstacles  on  leaving.  This  information  does  not  come  from  the 
government,  but  from  English  commercial  circles.  .  .  . 

I  must,  here  again,  interrupt  the  series  of  my  despatches,  to 

point   out  the    nature  and  cause  of  the  fresh  embarrassments, 

which   had    arisen    to   interrupt  the  negotiations    between    the 

Conference   and    the    Belgian    Congress.      Ponsonby,   intrusted 

with  the  powers  of  the  Conference  (with  the  view,  no  doubt,  of 

frightening   the    Belgians),   had   made   the   serious    mistake   of 

telling  M.  Lebeau,  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  in  Brussels,  in  a 

private  letter,  that  should  the  Congress   elect  Prince  Leopold, 

according   to   the    conditions    imposed  by  the  Conference,  the 

Grand  Duchy  of  Luxemburg  would  be  ceded  to  Belgium  ;  but 

if  they  did    not  do  so,   the  Powers  had    decided  to  break  up 

Belgium.     I    need   hardly   say,  that    there    never   had   been    a 

question  in  the    Conference   of  such    an    alternative.     General 

Belliard,    for   his    part,  influenced   by  the   intrigues  that  came 

from  Paris,  had  been  weak  enough  to  prevail  upon  his  chief  to 

grant   the   Belgians   an    extension    of  the    time    fixed    by   the 

Conference,   and  to  endeavour,  with  the  aid  of  the  leaders  of 

the  Congress,  to  find  means  of  evading  the  conditions  of  the 

Conference.     It  was    thus  that  the  strange  proposals  arose,  of 

giving  the  town  of  Maestricht  to  the  Belgians,  and  placing  a 

Hanoverian    garrison    in   the    fortress,  which    had    belonged   to 

Holland  since  the  peace  of  Westphalia.     My  despatches  have 

shown  the  effect  produced  on  the  Conference  by  these  strange 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  135 

departures.  Consequently,  I  did  not  confine  myself  to  my 
despatches,  but  wrote  direct  to  M.  Casimir  Perier,  who  replied 
to  me  as  folloivs  on  this  subject : 


M.  Casimir  Perier  to  the   Prince  de  Talleyrand. 

Paris,  June  2nd,  1831. 
Mon  Prince, 

I  have  only  time  to  say  two  words,  in  reply  to  the 
letter  you  did  me  the  honour  to  write  on  May  30th,  being 
anxious  to  add  this  to  the  despatches,  which  the  Minister  of 
Foreign  Affairs  is  sending  you  by  courier. 

By  those  despatches,  you  will  see,  mon  Prince,  that  the 
government  has  not  in  any  way,  modified  its  principles  with 
regard  to  Belgian  affairs,  nor  changed  its  views  on  the  very 
serious  questions,  which  form  the  subject  of  your  letter  ;  and  that 
the  instructions  which  had  been  sent  to  General  Belliard,  are 
in  every  respect  identical  with  the  spirit,  in  which  you  concurred 
in  the  deliberations  of  the  Conference. 

General  Belliard,  as  you  had  foreseen,  did  go  beyond  his 
instructions  with  regard  to  this  subject,  in  his  dealings  with  the 
Belgian  government.1  The  Minister  for  Foreign  Affairs  justly 
blamed  him  for  such  great  imprudence.  This  is  another  proof 
of  the  difficulty  of  founding  a  Power,  when  it  is  a  question  of 
small  men  or  great. 

I  will  reply  to-morrow,  to  that  portion  of  your  letter  relative 
to  the  measures  for  compelling  the  Belgian  government  to 
subscribe  to  the  acts  of  the  Conference — measures  as  to  which 
you  tell  me  you  desire  to  know  all  my  views.  .  .  . 

1  "General  Sebastiani  to  General  Belliard. 

".  .  .  .  I  have  learnt  with  the  greatest  surprise,  that  you  have  taken  upon  yourself 
to  extend  by  ten  days,  the  delay  granted  by  the  Conference  to  the  Belgians,  in  order 
to  agree  to  its  resolutions,  which  had  been  fixed  for  the  1st  of  this  month.  This 
.step  has  appeared  to  me  still  more  extraordinary,  as  your  often  repeated  instructions 
direct  you  to  support  the  measures  of  the  representative  of  the  Conference.  My  letter 
of  May  31st,  directs  you  to  quit  Brussels  at  the  same  time  as  Lord  Ponsonby,  if  the 
refusal  of  the  Belgians  to  agree  to  the  decisions  of  the  Conference,  imposed  that 
necessity  on  him.  I  hasten  to  repeat  this  order  in  the  most  positive  manner,  and  if, 
when  this  despatch  reaches  you,  the  obstinacy  of  the  Belgians  has  obliged  Lord  Pon- 
sonby to  leave,  you  must  at  once  quit  Brussels  without  addressing  any  species  of 
written  communication  to  the  Belgian  government." 

General  Belliard  left  Brussels  the  same  day  he  received  this  despatch,  that  is 
to  say,  the  nth  of  June.  In  fact,  the  Belgian  minister,  instead  of  agreeing  to 
the  protocol  of  the  Conference,  had,  by  order  of  the  Congress,  opened  up  fresh 
negotiations. 


136  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

Paris,  June  $th,  1831. 
Mon  Prince, 

The  despatches  the  Minister  for  Foreign  Affairs  is 
sending  you  by  the  courier  who  takes  this  letter,  give  a  most 
satisfactory  and  complete  reply  to  the  different  questions  re- 
specting which,  you  wish  instructions. 

By  them  you  will  see,  mon  Prince,  that  the  view  which 
dominated  our  approval  of  protocol  No.  22,  is  always  and 
entirely  the  same  ;  that  our  decision  as  to  the  necessity  of 
adopting  the  measures  therein  specified,  in  order  to  induce  the 
Belgian  government  to  subscribe  to  the  deliberations  of  the 
Conference  contained  in  that  protocol,  have  in  no  way  changed  ; 
and  finally,  that  the  instructions  given  to  General  Belliard, 
according  to  which,  in  a  certain  event,  he  should  withdraw  at  the 
same  time  as  Lord  Ponsonby,  are  all  in  the  same  sense  and 
quite  identical. 

You  will,  however,  feel  that  if,  unfortunately,  it  becomes 
necessary  to  put  into  execution  the  final  measures  laid  down  by 
the  protocol,  that  is  to  say,  the  entry  of  the  troops  of  the 
Germanic  Confederation  into  Luxemburg,  we  should  look  to 
your  far-sighted  prudence  (as  the  despatches  will  inform  you), 
seeing  the  effect  such  a  measure  would  have  on  public  opinion  in 
France,  to  use  your  best  endeavours  in  the  decisions  of  the 
Conference,  with  respect  to  the  employment  of  a  military  force 
in  such  a  manner,  as  to  enable  us  to  judge,  according  to  the 
circumstances,  how  best  to  attain  the  end  which  we  desire  in 
every  way,  for  more  reasons  than  one.  This  remark,  mon  Prince, 
does  not  in  any  way  refer  to  the  modifications  to  which  our 
decisions  may  have  been  subjected,  but  its  sole  object  is  to  fore- 
stall any  difficulties  which  might  prevent  our  more  surely 
obtaining  our  aim. 

We  must  not  conceal  from  ourselves,  that  matters  are  very 
serious  ;  but  we  may  hope  the  election  of  the  Prince  of  Saxe- 
Coburg,  of  which  the  despatches  convey  to  you  the  intelligence, 
will  help  to  ameliorate  the  embarrassing  position  in  which  we 
find  ourselves  placed.  We  cannot,  however,  as  yet,  say  anything 
on  this  subject,  since,  having  up  to  the  present  only  received  a 
telegraphic  despatch,  we  are  ignorant  as  to  what  conditions  may 
have  been  imposed  at  the  election  of  the  prince. 

The  king,  as  you  will  have  learnt  from  the  papers,  starts  on 
a  long  tour  to-morrow.  This  political  tour  will  serve,  as  did  the 
first,  to  draw  closer  the  ties  which  unite  France  to  the  sovereign 
she  has  chosen  ;  it  places  the  government,  however,  in  a 
more    difficult    position   respecting    foreign   matters,  as  we    are 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  137 

deprived,  during  his  absence,  of  His  Majesty's  valuable  support 
and  enlightened  judgment.  This  is  another  reason  for  the  wish 
I  have  expressed  above. 

In  my  next  letter  I  will  take  the  liberty,  mon  Prince,  of  tell- 
ing you  about  our  position  here,  which  seems  to  improve  in 
many  respects,  but  still  allows  those  who  are  at  the  head  of  affairs, 
to  foresee  innumerable  difficulties.  For  fifty  years  we  have 
striven  for  liberty  ;  the  problem  to  be  solved  to-day,  is  to  find 
the  means  of  founding  a  government,  which  can  conciliate 
the  requirements  of  those  who  wish  for  liberty,  and  who  as  yet 
understand  it  so  little.  .  .  . 

These  letters  from  M.  Casimir  Perier  gave  me  the  full 
assurance  that  I  could  count  on  his  firm  support,  but  unfortu- 
nately I  had  not  to  do  with  him  alone  ;  I  felt  there  was  always 
a  hot-bed  of  intrigue  in  Paris,  whence,  by  means  of  wicked 
insinuations,  attempts  were  perpetually  made  to  impede  my 
proceedings.  Thus  the  Courier  Franqais,  a  newspaper  pat- 
ronized by  General  Sebastiani,  dared  to  assert,  that  it  was  I  who 
had  suggested  Lord  Ponsonby's  awkward  letter  to  M.  Lebeau 
(whereas  it  was  from  Paris  I  first  heard  of  it),  and  that  it  had 
been  severely  condemned  by  the  Conference. 

I  do  not  know  how  far  all  this  was  authorized  by  General 
Sebastiani,  and  I  am  induced  to  believe  that  he  was  quite  as 
much  a  dupe  as  a  leader,  of  the  Buonapartist  intrigue,  the  repre- 
sentatives of  which  surrounded  the  king  and  his  ministers.  The 
Due  de  Dalberg  wrote  to  me  about  this  period  : 

M.  le  Due  de  Dalberg  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand. 

Paris,  June  5///,  1831. 
Mon  cher  Prince, 

I  know  nothing  about  the  Congress  except  what  is 
stated  in  the  papers.  I  myself  think  it  will  only  lead  to  embroil- 
ing matters  still  further,  and  end  in  a  war.  The  real  Congress 
is  in  London.     If  it  remains  in  accord,  and  if  no  fresh  intrigues 

are  started  here,  peace  will  be  maintained  ;  otherwise not. 

The  coalition  is  complete  ;  it  is  a  great  mistake  for  people 
here  to  believe,  that  the  mountebanks  of  the  Empire  will  bring 
back  the  victories  of  Buonaparte.  The  fancy  that  Louis 
Philippe  has  for  those  sort  of  people  is  inexplicable.      The  Due 


138  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

de  Rovigo  says  he  has  got  his  promise  of  appointment  as 
Ambassador  to  Constantinople.  I  know  that  in  the  Council  both 
Sebastiani  and  Soult  support  this,  but  that  the  other  ministers 
object  to  it,  as  an  insult  offered  to  Europe.  I  thus  spoke  to  one 
of  them  about  it.  Can  the  king  possibly  forget  the  catastrophe  of 
the  Due  d'Enghien,  the  Spanish  negotiations,  and  many  other 
facts  ?  If  he  is  nominated  to  the  Chamber  of  Peers,  I  ask 
myself — Can  any  man  of  honour  remain  in  it  ? 

The  question  of  hereditary  peerages  loses  support  every  day. 
The  rage  for  equality  so  engrosses  people's  minds,  that  there 
was  all  but  a  riot,  because  the  management  of  museums  issued 
tickets,  available  for  different  hours  than  those  in  which  the 
crowd  makes  it  impossible  to  remain  in  the  galleries.  Unfortu- 
nate country  !     Remain  in  London,  my  friend.  .  .  . 

The  Due  de  Dalberg's  last  piece  of  advice  was  decidedly  good, 
and  I  had  not  waited  for  it  to  make  up  my  mind  to  remain  in 
London,  as  long  as  I  could  possibly  be  of  any  use  there,  and 
secure  the  maintenance  of  peace — that  peace  which  seemed  ever 
to  evade  us  just  when  we  thought  we  had  attained  it.  At  this 
time,  the  Belgians,  by  their  foolish  demands,  threatened  to 
compromise  all  our  efforts.  This  takes  me  back  to  the 
continuation  of  my  despatches  to  Paris.1 

The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  General  Sebastiani. 

London,  June  6th,  1831. 
Monsieur  le  Comte, 

An  English  courier  from  Brussels,  has  this  evening 
brought  a  letter,  in  which  General  Belliard  informs  me,  that  at 
the  sitting  of  the  4th  inst,  the  Congress  elected  Prince  Leopold 
of  Saxe-Coburg,  King  of  Belgium  by  a  majority  of  155  votes 
to  44,  and  that  a  deputation  of  ten  members,  headed  by  M.  de 
Gerlache,  was  about  to  start  for  London,  to  convey  the  result  of 
this  sitting  to  the  prince. 

If,  as  I  had  the  honour  of  informing  you  in  my  letter  of  the 
4th,  the  French  and  English  representatives  had  quitted  Belgium 
on  the  1st  of  June,  according  to  the  instructions  from  their 
governments  and  of  the  Conference,  this  determination  would 
probably  have  had  such  a  moral  effect  on  the  Belgians,  that  the 
employment  of  force   might  have  been  dispensed  with ;  now, 

1  The  official  despatches  to  the  department  already  published. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  139 

however,  we  have  entered  upon  another  phase  altogether,  which 
will  render  it  necessary  to  take  up  other  questions. 

The  news  received  from  Belgium  during  the  last  few  days, 
and  the  arrival  of  the  courier  this  evening,  occasioned  a  meeting 
of  the  Conference.  The  conduct  of  Lord  Ponsonby  (whose  good 
intentions  however  no  one  doubts)  was  unanimously  condemned, 
as  being  totally  opposed  to  his  instructions,  and  his  immediate 
recall  has  been  decided  on.1 

I  here  add  a  copy  of  the  letter,  which  is  to  be  sent  him  by  a 
courier  who  will  leave  in  a  few  hours  ;  it  does  not  point  out  the 
reasons  of  his  recall,  for  the  Conference  thought  that  by  leaving 
them  vague,  they  would  produce  greater  effect,  and  that  each 
party  could  then  put  their  own  interpretation  upon  it.2 

The  views  of  France,  which  are  so  very  similar  to  those  of 
the  other  Powers,  coupled  with  the  instructions  which  only  re- 
cently were  sent  to  General  Belliard,  leave  no  room  to  doubt,  that 
he  will  quit  Brussels  at  the  same  time  as  Lord  Ponsonby.  As  for 
M.  Lehon,3  who  is  probably  in  Paris  just  now,  I  think  I  ought  to 
point  out  to  you,  that  his  government  having  given  just  cause  for 
discontent  to  that  of  the  king,  it  does  not  seem  possible  that  he 
should  remain  in  France  after  the  departure  of  General  Belliard. 
Moreover,  I  would  also  add,  that  the  protocol  No.  22,  which 
seems  almost  to  have  foreseen  some  of  the  events  which  have 
now  occurred,  stipulated,  that  in  the  event  of  Lord  Ponsonby 
being  obliged  to  quit  Brussels,  through  the  conduct  of  the 
Belgians,  their  envoy,  who  is  in  London,4  would  be  called  upon 
to  leave  at  once.  Lord  Palmerston  made  this  request  this 
morning. 

The  Conference  then  discussed  the  measures,  which  the 
position  taken  by  the  Powers  with  regard  to  Belgium,  might 
oblige  them  to  adopt  ;  but  the  plenipotentiaries  thought  it 
indispensable,  that  they  should  first  ascertain  the  king's  wishes 
on  various  points,  to  which  I  shall  have  the  honour  of  drawing 
your  attention,  and  to  which  I  beg  you  will  kindly  send  me 
replies  with  the  least  possible  delay. 

The  first  of  these  points,  or  rather  the  first  question  is,  What 

1  Lord  Ponsonby  had  refused  to  present  to  the  Belgian  government,  the  protocol 
of  May  10th  (No.  23),  which  fixed  the  1st  of  June,  as  the  limit  accorded  to  the  Belgians 
for  accepting  the  boundaries  laid  down  by  the  Conference.  The  strange  letter  he 
wrote  to  M.  Lebeau  will  also  be  remembered. 

-  Var.  :  ltd  attribuer  une  cause  particuliere  =  attributed  to  it  a  particular  reason. 

3  Charles,  Comte  Lehon,  born  in  1792,  was  originally  an  advocate  at  Liege,  and 
then  a  Deputy  for  that  town  to  the  States-General  of  the  Netherlands.  In  1831,  he 
formed  one  of  the  deputation  sent  to  offer  the  crown  to  the  Due  de  Nemours,  and 
soon  after  went  to  Paris  as  Ambassador.  He  held  this  post  till  1852,  then  returned 
to  Belgium,  and  was  elected  Deputy.     He  died  in  1868. 

4  Var.  :  Paris. 


140  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

coercive  measures  can  the  king's  government  take  with  regard 
to  the  Belgians,  which  would  not  put  it  to  any  serious  incon- 
venience ? 

Second  question.  Would  such  measures  consist  in  sending 
troops  beyond  French  territory,  or  merely  in  concentrating 
a  force  on  the  French  frontier  ? 

With  regard  to  this,  I  think  I  ought  to  say,  that  in  my 
opinion,  it  would  suffice  merely  to  assemble  a  force  on  our 
frontier :  first,  because  troops  thus  assembled  can  at  any 
moment,  if  required,  enter  the  neighbouring  territory,  and 
because,  as  a  consequence,  their  presence  may  of  itself  produce 
the  desired  effect.  I  would  add  that  these  troops  should  be 
picked  troops,  and  placed  under  the  command  of  a  cautious  and 
decided  chief. 

Third  question.  Would  a  French  squadron  take  part  in 
blockading  the  coast  and  ports  of  Belgium  ? 

It  seems  to  me  that  if  the  Powers  decide  on  this  blockade,  it 
would  be  advisable  for  France  to  take  part  in  it,  and  that  her 
forces  should  act  in  concert  with  those  of  England.  I  think  I 
can  recall  to  your  recollection,  that  you  thought  of  thus  con- 
centrating the  maritime  powers  of  these  two  nations,  when  there 
was  a  question  of  relieving  Antwerp,  at  the  time  blockaded  by  a 
Dutch  squadron. 

The  replies  to  these  various  questions,  which  I  hope  you 
will  have  the  kindness  to  send  me,  will  put  me  in  a  position,  to 
satisfy  the  demands  which  the  Conference  may  address  to  me. 
All  the  Powers  are  in  accord  as  to  their  views  and  dispositions, 
for  they  all  wish  to  maintain  their  present  position,  and  to 
fulfil  any  engagements  they  may  have  in  common,  and  likewise 
because  France,  England,  and  Prussia,  being  more  specially 
called  on  by  their  position  to  undertake  these  mutually 
obligatory  engagements,  are  determined  to  carry  out  their 
decisions  in  perfect  harmony. 

An  agent  from  Dom  Miguel  has  arrived  here,  to  ask  the 
English  government  to  interpose  in  the  differences  between  him 
and  France.  He  has  been  told  that  the  government  does  not 
wish  to  interfere  in  this  dispute,  but  that  if  it  did  give  any 
advice  to  the  Portuguese  government,  it  would  be  to  accede  to 
the  demands  of  France  ;  and  there  the  matter  rests.  .  .  . 

London,  June  yth,  1831. 

The  Dutch  ministers  in  London  have  addressed  two  notes  to> 
Lord  Palmerston  ;  one  to  ask  what  resolution  the  Belgians  had 
come  to,  at  the  expiration  of  the  delay  granted  them  to  give 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  141 

their  decision  on  the  bases  of  the  separation  ;  the  other,  to  com- 
plain of  the  letter  addressed  by  Lord  Ponsonby  to  M.  Lebeau, 
the  Minister  for  Foreign  Affairs  at  Brussels.  These  two  notes 
having  been  communicated  to  the  Conference,  it  was  decided  to 
reply  to  them.  I  have  the  honour  to  send  you  copies  of  these 
various  documents,  to  which  is  added  one  of  protocol  No.  25, 
relative  to  the  recall  of  Lord  Ponsonby. 

You  will  see  by  the  replies  of  the  Conference  to  the  notes  of 
the  Dutch  ministers,  that  their  object  is  to  keep  King  William 
in  that  course  of  moderation  from  which  he  has  not  yet  de- 
parted, to  calm  the  irritation  caused  by  the  conduct  and  the 
pretensions  of  the  Belgians,  and  to  give  him  satisfactory  ex- 
planations with  regard  to  the  cession  of  Luxemburg,  on  con- 
ditional terms. 

We  have  reason  to  believe,  that  these  notes  will  produce  at 
the  Hague  the  effect  hoped  for  here,  and  that  they  will  prevent 
all  aggressive  acts  on  the  part  of  the  Dutch. 

It  was  at  the  same  time  decided,  that  the  ministers  of  the 
five  Powers  should  write  a  letter  to  the  representatives  of  their 
Courts  at  the  Hague,  of  which  I  have  the  honour  to  transmit 
you  the  substance,  and  which  is  intended  to  submit  to  the  King 
of  Holland,  in  a  combined  and  uniform  manner,  the  observations 
and  reasons  likely  to  reassure  him,  as  to  the  intentions  of  the 
Powers,  and  the  maintenance  of  his  rights.  I  think  the  king's 
government  will  deem  it  best  to  send  M.  le  Baron  de  Mareuil 
some  instructions,  deduced  from  these  documents. 

I  have  just  received  the  despatch  you  did  me  the  honour  to 
write  on  the  5th.  I  have  reason  to  believe  that  when  this 
despatch  was  sent  off,  you  were  not  fully  cognizant  of  the 
particulars  of  the  act  which  nominates  Prince  Leopold  King  of 
Belgium.  As  they  wished  to  compel  him,  to  swear  to  uphold 
the  integrity  of  territories  which  have  not  yet  been  settled,  and 
to  which  the  Belgians  have  added  towns  they  do  not  possess.1 
I  have  but  little  doubt  as  to  Prince  Leopold's  decision,  which  I 
think  will  be  in  conformity  with  what  he  has  always  expressed 
to  the  Belgian  Deputies,  who  came  here  to  ascertain  his  views. 

The  Belgians  ought  to  have  known,  that  the  first  thing  they 
had  to  do,  was  to  accede  to  the  basis  of  the  separation  from 
Holland,  and  I  notice  in  the  letter  of  the  French  Charge 
d'Affaires  at  Berlin  {of  zchich  you  sent  me  a  copy)?  that  my  views 

1  Var.  :  d'un  territoire,  qui  n'est  pas  encore  regulieremcnt  determine,  et  qui  dans 
les  idies  les  Beiges  doit  s'&endre  <}  des  villes  qu'ils  ne  possedent  mime  pas.  .  .  .  =  to 
a  territory  which  is  not  yet  properly  settled,  and  which,  according  to  Belgian  ideas, 
ought  to  extend  to  towns  they  do  not  even  possess. 

-  Suppressed  in  the  text  of  the  Archives. 


142  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

on  this  matter,  are  the  same  as  those  of  the  Prussian  Cabinet ;  for 
M.  de  Bernstorff  told  him,  that  to  attain  the  end  the  Powers  had 
in  view,  they  must  first  induce  the  Belgians  to  see  the  necessity 
of  conforming  to  the  protocol,  which  had  fixed  the  boundaries 
of  their  territory.  All  the  Cabinets  take  the  same  view  of  this 
question. 

As  for  the  arrangements  respecting  Limburg,  they  can  follow, 
but  they  cannot  precede,  the  recognition  of  the  boundaries.  The 
proposals  communicated  to  you  by  General  Belliard,  and  con- 
cerning which  you  also  wrote  to  me,  were  presented  here  by 
the  Belgians  some  time  ago,  but  without  success. 

You  will  have  seen  by  my  letter  of  yesterday  that  the  steps 
the  king's  government  may  take,  must  be  subordinated  to  the 
convenience  of  home  affairs.  I  feel  sure  that  every  facility  will 
be  offered  it  on  this  point. 

You  will  see  by  the  documents  of  which  I  have  the  honour  to 
send  you  copies,  that  no  one  here  doubts  the  recall  of  General 
Belliard,  which  you  authorized  me  to  announce  as  the  consequence 
of  that  of  Lord  Ponsonby.  .  .  . 

London,  June  qth,  1831. 
Monsieur  le  Comte, 

You  did  me  the  honour  to  inform  me,  by  your  despatch 
of  the  5th,  that  the  king's  government  desires  that  the  fortress  of 
Luxemburg  should  be  no  longer  a  Federal  fortress,  but  should  be 
demolished,  adding  that  the  carrying  out  of  this  negotiation  was 
intrusted  to  me. 

I  fully  realize  the  importance  of  this  matter,  but  I  do  not 
think  it  can  be  dealt  with  in  London,  as  it  affects  the  special 
interests  of  the  Germanic  Confederation,  and  it  is  outside  the 
questions  which  the  Conference  has  been  called  upon  to  decide. 
The  Conference  has,besides,  no  special  powers  from  the  Germanic 
Confederation  ;  it  is  true,  two  of  the  members  are  in  continuous 
correspondence  with  it,  and  exercise  some  influence  on  its 
decisions,  but  they  have  no  powers. 

I  think  this  negotiation  should  be  carried  out  either  in  Berlin 
or  Paris  ;  and  I  see  by  the  letter  of  the  French  Charge 
d'Affaires  (a  copy  of  which  accompanied  your  despatch),  that  the 
Prussian  Cabinet  seems  quite  willing  to  give  its  assent  to  the 
request  of  His  Majesty's  government.  That  is  one  more  reason 
for  continuing  to  treat  direct  with  M.  de  Bulow  respecting  it,  to 
whom  I  have  spoken  privately  on  this  subject,  and  who  shares 
my  opinion,  in  thinking  this  matter  should  be  left  to  be 
negotiated  at  Berlin. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  143 

"Vou  will,  no  doubt,  have  noticed,  in  the  documents  I  had  the 
honour  to  transmit  to  you  the  day  before  yesterday,  the  manner 
in  which  the  Conference  refutes  the  allegations  of  some  public 
papers,  which  tried  to  infer,  that  it  was  cognizant  of  Lord 
Ponsonby's  letter  to  M.  Lebeau.  The  note  addressed  to  the 
Dutch  Cabinet,  completely  removes  any  doubt  on  that  matter,  if 
any  could  have  existed. 

I  have  not  made  known  to  General  Belliard,  the  decisions 
that  are  about  to  be  taken,  as  explanations  give  occasion  for 
argument,  and  besides,  it  is  only  from  you  that  he  should  receive 
his  orders. 

The  Belgian  deputation,  which  is  instructed  to  offer  the  crown 
to  Prince  Leopold,  arrived  in  London  yesterday.1  Two  com- 
missioners, M.  Devaux  and  M.  Nothomb,'2  arrived  at  the  same 
time  ;  they  have  seen  Prince  Leopold,  and  have  informed  him 
that  they  were  intrusted  with  powers,  but  did  not  specify  their 
particular  object.  If  these  powers  are  elastic,  they  may  facilitate 
the  arrangement  of  Belgian  affairs. 

Prince  Leopold's  conduct  is  straightforward  and  quiet  ;  he 
will  probably  accept  the  offer  of  the  Belgians,  if  the  powers 
possessed  by  the  two  Belgian  commissioners  are  of  a  nature  likely 
to  lead  to  satisfactory  results.  These  powers  have  not  been 
communicated  to  the  members  of  the  deputation.3  In  a  conver- 
sation I  had  yesterday  with  Prince  Leopold,  he  expressed  the 
wish,  that  if  matters  were  settled,  General  Belliard  might  be  sent 
to  him. 

We  have  heard  here,  through  a  merchantman  coming  from 
Brazils,  that  the  Emperor  Dom  Pedro,  having  been  unable  to 
quell  the  efforts  of  the  so-called  National  party,  found  himself 
obliged  to  quit  Rio  de  Janeiro,  together  with  the  empress  and 
all  his  family.  It  is  added,  that  he  has  abdicated  in  favour  of  his 
son,  but  it  is  not  known  to  whom  he  has  confided  this.  It 
appears  that  the  emperor  has  embarked  for  England. 

This  revolution  may  have  a  great  influence  on  the  affairs 

1  It  consisted  of  M.  de  Gerlache,  president ;  Messrs.  F.  de  Merode,  Van  de 
Weyer,  the  Abbe  de  Foere,  d'Arschot,  H.  Vilain  XIV.,  Osy,  Destauvelles,  Duval  de 
Beaulieu,  and  Thorn. 

2  Jean-Baptiste  Nothomb,  born  in  1805,  began  as  an  advocate  at  Luxemburg, 
and  was  the  political  editor  of  the  Courrier  des  Pays-Bas.  Became  a  member  of  the 
Constitution  in  1S30,  and  Deputy  to  the  Congress,  where  he  was  one  of  the  leaders 
of  the  French  party.  He  became  Chief  Secretary  to  the  Minister  for  Foreign  Affairs 
(February,  183 1),  and  went  to  London  after  King  Leopold's  election,  and  negotiated 
the  Treaty  of  the  Fifteen  Articles.  He  remained  in  the  Foreign  Office  till  1836,  then 
became  Minister  of  Public  Works  (1837-1840),  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  and 
President  of  the  Council  in  1843.  He  retired  in  1845,  after  which  he  was  sent  on 
various  diplomatic  missions  to  Germany. 

3  Var.  :  Les  commissaires  n'ont  pas  communique  ces  pouvoirs  au  =  the  com- 
missioners have  not  communicated  these  powers  to. 


144  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

of  Portugal.  It  has  caused  some  anxiety  here  as  to  English 
commerce,  which  has  considerable  dealings  with  Brazil,  and  the 
public  funds  have  consequently  fallen  somewhat. 

News  from  Portugal  has  been  received  in  London  up  to 
May  29th.  It  announces  that  the  commander  of  the  French 
squadron  had  blockaded  the  port  of  Lisbon,  but  only  as  regards 
Portuguese  ships.  It  seems  that  Dom  Miguel's  government, 
having  given  up  all  hope  of  English  intervention  in  his  differ- 
ences with  France,  is  now  going  to  solicit  the  mediation  of 
Spain. 

There  are  some  rather  serious  popular  demonstrations  in 
Yorkshire  and  Northumberland.  The  Ministry  are  taking  steps 
to  put  them  down.1 

P.S. — Since  writing  this  letter,  I  learn  that  the  revolution  at 
Rio  de  Janeiro  broke  out  on  April  7th,  in  consequence  of  the 
emperor's  decided  refusal  to  dismiss  his  Ministry.  On  the  8th  he 
went  on  board  the  English  frigate  Warspite,  where  he  signed  an 
act  of  abdication  in  favour  of  his  son,  and  nominated  a  Council 
of  Regency.  This  act  was  proclaimed  at  Rio  de  Janeiro  on  the 
9th,  and  on  the  same  day  Dom  Pedro,  accompanied  by  the 
empress,  his  daughter,  and  a  few  other  persons,  embarked  in 
the  English  frigate  Volage  bound  for  Portsmouth.  They  say 
that  it  will  not  be  possible  for  the  Council  of  Regency  to  hold 
out,  and  that  a  Federal  Union  or  a  Republic  will  be  pro- 
claimed in  a  few  days.  .  .  . 

London,  June  12th,  1831. 

I  have  received  the  despatch  you  did  me  the  honour  to  write 
on  the  9th  of  this  month,  and  have  carefully  made  myself  ac- 
quainted with  the  instructions  contained  therein. 

Here  nothing  is  as  yet  decided.  Prince  Leopold  wisely  takes 
his  time,  ere  giving  an  answer,  which  must  in  truth  require  some 
serious  consideration.  The  Belgian  Deputies  continue  to  be 
entirely  satisfied  with  his  attitude  and  his  frankness,  and  place 
great  hopes  on  their  future  sovereign  ;  but  up  to  this,  they  have 
not  made  a  single  concession  on  those  points  which  are  the  real 
difficulties. 

In  thinking  over  the  general  interests  to  which  this  event 
may  give  rise,  does  it  not  seem  that  it  might  be  advisable  for 
France  and  England,  to  guarantee  the  existence  of  Belgium 
(when  she  has  been  constituted,  and  placed  within  assured  and 
recognized  boundaries)  by  a  special  treaty  ?     I  have  gone  into 

1  These  were  local  riots,  due  to  the  excitement  of  the  elections. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1S30.  145 

this  question  several  times,  and  it  appears  to  me,  that  in  the 
reasons  for  this  treaty,  means  could  be  found  of  extending  its 
stipulations  to  much  higher  interests,  which,  by  insuring  tran- 
quillity to  Europe,  would  contribute  to  the  glory  of  France.  .  .  . 


London,  Jimc  i$tk,  1831. 

I  have  this  morning  received  your  telegraphic  despatch  of 
the  nth,  which  confirms  those  you  did  me  the  honour  to  write 
on  the  5th  and  9th. 

You  think  that  the  Conference  has  been  too  precipitate  in 
carrying  out  the  measures  it  has  adopted,  and  has  rather  lost 
sight  of  the  modifications  which  recent  circumstances  should 
exercise  on  its  proceedings. 

These  remarks  seem  to  me  unfounded,  and  I  think  I  can 
answer  them,  by  asking  you  to  take  notice  that  the  Conference, 
being  specially  charged  with  the  maintenance  of  peace,  has  not 
been  able  to  concentrate  its  attentions  solely  on  Belgium 
Holland  also  has  needed  close  supervision,  especially  when  such 
an  amount  of  irritation  exists  in  that  country,  that  the  slightest, 
circumstance  may  give  rise  to  the  most  serious  consequences. 
It  became  necessary,  therefore,  to  endeavour  to  allay  both  the 
Belgian  and  Dutch  irritation,  and  to  prevent  the  collision  which, 
we  cannot  but  foresee,  is  imminent  between  these  two  parties. 

These  are  the  considerations  that  have  guided  me,  since  the 
Conference  was  informed  of  the  obstinate  refusal  of  the  Bel- 
gians to  agree  to  the  bases  of  the  separation,  a  refusal  which  has 
so  greatly  excited  the  Dutch  and  their  government.  I  believe 
that  the  replies  given  to  their  plenipotentiaries  here,  have  had 
the  desired  effect  at  the  Hague,  and,  consequently,  the  causes  for 
anxiety  and  hostility  have  thereby  been  for  a  short  time  re- 
moved. 

The  difficulties  that  we  meet  with  here,  in  Belgium,  and  in 
Holland,  proceed  on  one  side,  from  the  Cabinet  of  the  Hague, 
which  is  anxious  to  involve  the  Powers  in  a  war,  and  on  the 
other,  from  the  Russian  Cabinet,  whose  object  is  to  distract 
the  attention  of  the  Powers  by  turning  it  forcibly  on  the  affairs 
of  Western  Europe.  My  language  at  the  Conference  has  always 
been  :  "  We  do  not  wish  for  war,  but  we  are  ready  for  it  and  are 
not  afraid  of  it." 

Yet  I  do  not  think  that  the  Belgian  government  has  any 
decided  design,  but  is  only  trying  to  create  fresh  embarrassments 
for  us,  in  order  thereby  to  obtain  something  favourable  for 
itself. 

VOL.  IV.  L 


1 46  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

Under  these  circumstances,  I  see  Prince  Leopold  every  day, 
and  likewise  the  English  ministers,  as  I  am  convinced,  that  with 
them  alone  shall  we  find  the  same  views  and  interests. 

In  conclusion,  my  opinion,  is  that  there  will  be  no  necessity 
to  have  recourse  to  the  military  measures  for  which  I  asked  you 
to  be  prepared.  We  ought  to  be  ready,  but  I  think  that  we 
shall  get  out  of  the  difficulty  by  quiet  and  conciliatory  means, 
and  without  having  to  fire  a  shot.     This  is  my  firm  opinion.  .  .  . 


London,  June  \\th,  1831. 

General  Belliard,  before  his  departure  from  Brussels,  informed 
me  that  a  proposal  would  be  submitted  to  the  Congress,  sug- 
gesting that  a  Belgian  and  a  Dutch  commissioner  should  be  sent 
to  London  to  deal  with  the  boundary  question.  He  seemed  to 
think  this  proposal  would  be  entertained. 

It  might  answer  very  well,  if  the  commissioners  had  full 
powers,  and  if  the  arrangements  they  made  did  not  require  to 
be  submitted  to  the  Congress ;  but  if  this  is  not  the  case,  you 
will  quite  see,  they  could  only  be  provisional  arrangements, 
against  which  the  Congress  could  protest. 

Prince  Leopold  saw  the  Belgian  Deputies  yesterday ;  they 
make  some  slight  progress  every  day. 

The  English  Ministry,  while  intimating  their  desire  to  return 
at  an  early  period  to  the  affairs  of  Greece,  gave  me  to  under- 
stand, that  it  might  be  advisable  to  place  Prince  Frederick  of 
Nassau,  the  second  son  of  the  King  of  the  Netherlands,  on  the 
Greek  throne,  instead  of  offering  it  to  Prince  Otto  of  Bavaria. 
I  was  obliged  to  decline  this  proposal,  observing,  that  in  my 
opinion  it  would  be  nominating  a  Russian  prince,  and  that  my 
authority  for  so  thinking,  was  the  great  interest  taken  in  the 
House  of  Nassau  for  the  last  six  months,  by  the  Court  of  St. 
Petersburg.  .  .  . 

London,  June  15///,  1831. 

....  You  will  have  seen  by  my  letters  of  yesterday  and  the 
day  before,  that  Belgian  matters  have  made  some  progress, 
although  no  definite  arrangement  has  yet  been  arrived  at.  The 
King  of  the  Netherlands'  plenipotentiaries  offer  resistance,  and 
increase  the  difficulties  with  which  we  have  to  contend.  In  this 
position,  M.  le  Comte,  and  despite  the  hope  I  still  entertain  of 
arriving  at  a  successful  issue,  I  think  that  the  king's  government 
must  hold  itself  in  readiness,  but  my  opinion  is,  that  there  will  be 
no  necessity  for  action. 


THE  REVOLIUTON  OF  1830.  147 

I  had  the  honour  to  inform  you,  that  the  feeling  here  was  quite 
in  favour  of  the  Poles,  and  that  their  treatment  in  Galicia  has 
been  universally  condemned.  The  English  government,  relying 
on  the  opinion  of  the  Crown  lawyers,  who  declare  that  the  law 
of  nations  has  been  violated  by  the  Austrian  Court,  has  made, 
and  will  continue  to  make,  representations  to  Vienna.  But  they 
will  act  independently,  and  there  is  no  need  to  form  a  compact 
on  this  subject,  since  England  is  the  only  Power  with  whom  we 
could  act  in  concert.  Everyone  here  will  learn  with  satisfaction, 
that  the  king's  government  was  the  first  to  employ  its  good 
offices  in  favour  of  General  Dwernicki  and  the  Poles  under  his 
command,1  but  we  must  not  look  for  any  great  efforts,  because 
the  English  government  never  takes  up  more  than  one  subject 
earnestly  at  a  time,  and  is  at  this  moment  rather  over-burdened, 
as  it  has  got  two — the  Reform  Bill  and  Belgium  ! 

For  this  reason,  the  arrival  in  Europe  of  the  Emperor  Dom 
Pedro  and  his  family,  has  produced  but  a  very  slight  sensation, 
and  I  can  assure  you,  that  this  event  is  not  causing  any  political 
combination  at  present ;  but  we  shall  come  back  to  it,  and  have 
to  attend  to  it  later  on.  .  .  . 

London,  June  16//1,  1831. 

We  are  continuing  our  negotiations  with  the  Belgian  Deputies 
and  commissioners.  Prince  Leopold  sees  them  ;  they  also  come 
continually  to  me,  as  well  as  to  the  other  members  of  the 
Conference,  upon  whose  goodwill  they  have  reason  to  count. 
Our  relations  are  at  last  becoming  more  intimate,  and  we  may 
hope  for  some  result  from  these  conciliatory  interviews  ;  but  the 
news  received  this  morning,  through  commercial  sources,  from 
Belgium,  again  increases  our  difficulties.  There  is  a  report  that 
the  Belgians  have  attacked  the  Dutch  at  Antwerp,  and  that 
having  got  possession  of  Fort  St.  Laurent,  they  opened  a  heavy 
fire  on  the  vessels  in  the  harbour.     General  Chasse  -  had  fortun- 

1  Joseph  Dwernicki,  a  Polish  general,  born  in  1779,  took  part  in  most  of  the 
campaigns  of  the  Empire  with  the  French  army,  and  was  made  colonel  in  1814.  He 
returned  to  Poland  in  1815.  Made  a  general  in  1830,  he  obtained  the  command  of 
an  insurrectionary  army  corps.  Successful  at  first,  he  was  intrusted  to  direct  the 
rising  in  Volhynia,  and  ended  by  being  surrounded  and  overpowered  by  numbers, 
when  he  retired  into  Galicia.  The  Austrian  government  arrested  and  tried  him  as 
a  prisoner  of  war,  together  with  the  men  who  were  under  his  command.  He  was 
released  at  the  end  of  the  war,  when  he  retired  to  France,  and  settled  down  at  Lem- 
berg,  where  he  died  in  1859.  The  conduct  of  the  government  on  this  occasion, 
provoked  the  intervention  of  France  and  England. 

-  Baron  Chasse,  a  Dutch  general,  born  in  1765,  had  served  in  the  French  army 
till  1814.  He  returned  to  Holland  in  1S15,  was  Governor  of  Antwerp  under  King 
William  in  1830,  and  defended  this  town  in  1S32  against  the  French.  lie  died  in 
1849. 

L    2 


148  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

ately  been  sufficiently  firm  not  to  allow  a  return  fire  from  the 
citadel  ;  the  inhabitants  of  Antwerp,  however,  justly  alarmed, 
sent  a  deputation  with  all  haste  to  Brussels.  The  Regent  at 
once  issued  orders  ;  the  War  Minister  went  to  Antwerp ;  but 
their  authority  was  ignored ;  they  were  powerless  to  stop  the 
Belgians,  and  everything  tended  to  prove  that  the  anarchist  or 
war  party  have  got  the  upper  hand. 

You  will  perceive  to  how  many  well-founded  observations 
on  the  part  of  the  Dutch  plenipotentiaries,  this  incident  will  give 
rise.  They  assured  me  last  night,  in  the  most  positive  manner, 
that  there  was  no  attack  on  their  side.  In  fact,  if  all  accounts 
are  true,  it  is  clearly  the  Belgians  who  were  the  aggressors. 

This  occurrence  will,  no  doubt,  render  the  arrangements  for 
which  we  have  been  striving  for  some  days,  more  difficult ;  and 
objections  will  be  raised,  and  with  truth,  that  while  the  Belgians 
have  a  deputation  in  London,  charged  with  an  entirely  pacific 
mission,  they  make  an  unprovoked  attack,  and  entirely  ignore 
an  armistice,  which  nevertheless  is  strictly  insisted  on  by  the 
Powers,  who  are  engaged  in  securing  their  independence.  This 
conduct  is  evidently  the  result  of  all  those  disturbances,  which 
are  initiated  by  the  enemies  of  peace  and  good  order,  who, 
being  unable  to  set  France  alight,  endeavour  to  raise  a  con- 
flagration in  Belgium.  .  .  . 

London,  June  \Wi,  1831. 

I  have  received  the  despatches  you  did  me  the  honour  to 
write  on  the  13th  and  16th  of  June,  as  well  as  a  telegraphic 
despatch  of  the  evening  of  the  14th. 

When  I  thought  that  some  arrangement  could  be  come  to 
between  England  and  ourselves,  relative  to  Belgium,  it  was,  as 
it  were,  only  as  a  last  resource,  and  in  case  the  arrangements  we 
were  endeavouring  to  effect,  could  not  be  carried  out — in  fact, 
to  try  and  do  together  with  England,  what  we  could  not  do  with 
the  other  Powers  ;  but  owing  to  the  course  the  negotiations  are 
now  taking,  we  need  not  fall  back  upon  this  combination,  and 
there  is  no  reason  to  give  any  further  consideration  to  the  idea 
suggested  in  my  letter  of  the  12th  inst. 

The  members  of  the  Conference  are  discussing  with  Prince 
Leopold  and  the  two  Belgian  commissioners,  the  removal  of 
the  obstacles  which  still  present  themselves  to  the  arrangement 
of  Belgian  affairs — obstacles  always  connected  with  the  posses- 
sion of  Maastricht,  and  the  enclosed  land  belonging  to  Holland. 
If  the  commissioners  and  the  Belgian  Deputies  (as  I  had  the 
honour  of  telling  you  before),  were  men  better  versed  in  nego- 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  149 

tiations,  and  more  familiar  with  the  manner  in  which  these  are 
carried  on  amongst  old  dynasties,  these  difficulties  would  be 
more  easily  overcome ;  nevertheless,  I  hope  we  shall  arrive  at 
a  fairly  satisfactory  result. 

I  have  told  Lord  Palmerston,  after  what  you  did  me  the 
honour  to  notify  on  the  13th,  that  on  his  arrival  at  Lisbon, 
Rear-Admiral  Roussin !  will  put  himself  in  communication 
with  the  English  Consul,  in  order  to  arrange  for  the  protection 
of  the  persons  and  interests  of  his  Britannic  Majesty's  subjects. 
Lord  Palmerston  seemed  much  satisfied  with  this  arrangement 
on  the  part  of  our  government,  which  answers,  in  anticipation, 
the  remarks  I  addressed  to  you  on  the  16th,  as  to  the  anxiety 
felt  here  in  English  commercial  circles. 


'tv 


London,  June  21s/,  1831.2 

Lord  Palmerston  invited  me  to  the  Foreign  Office  yesterday, 
in  order  to  have  a  conference  with  the  Russian  plenipo- 
tentiary, as  to  the  affairs  of  Greece  ;  I  was  prepared  for  this 
interview,  by  the  despatch  you  did  me  the  honour  to  write  on 
the  1st  of  this  month. 

Lord  Palmerston  spoke  to  us  of  the  troubles  that  have  lately 
disturbed  Greece,  and  the  anxiety  they  had  caused  to  Comte 
Capo  d'Istria's  government ;  he  stated,  that  he  thought  all  the 
Powers  ought  to  feel  desirous  to  see  order  re-established  in  that 
unhappy  country,  and  particularly  insisted,  as  did  also  Comte 
Capo  d'Istria  in  his  letter  to  Prince  Soutzo,3  on  the  necessity,  of 
either  guaranteeing  a  loan  in  favour  of  Greece,  or  of  giving  her 
prompt  monetary  assistance.  I  declined  the  former  of  these 
proposals,  making  use  of  the  views  indicated  in  your  letter  of 
10th  June,  and  recalling  the  fact,  that  the  guarantee  had  only 
been  agreed  to  by  the  Powers,  when  it  was  a  question  of  Prince 
Leopold's  acceptance,  as  it  was  with  him  alone  that  the  Powers 
had  had  any  engagements. 

As  to  the  question  of  monetary  assistance,  I  pointed  out  to 
them,  that  it  equally  applied  to  the  refusal  of  Prince  Leopold, 
and  I  evaded  a  direct  reply,  although  the  case  is  not  the  same  ; 
as  similar  assistance  has  been  given  since  this  refusal. 

1  Baron  Roussin,  born  1781  at  Dijon,  entered  the  navy  at  twelve  years  of  age  ; 
obtained  the  command  of  a  vessel  in  1815  ;  rear-admiral  in  1822;  commanded  the 
expedition  against  Rio  in  1828,  and  was  placed  in  command  of  the  fleet  sent  to  the 
Tagus  in  1831.  Promoted  to  vice-admiral,  he  went  as  ambassador  to  Constantinople. 
Became  admiral  in  1840,  and  Minister  of  Marine  from  1840-1843.     He  died  in  1854. 

-  This  letter  is  not  found  in  M.  Pallain's  collection. 

3  Agent  to  the  Greek  government  in  France.  He  was  officially  accredited  to 
Taris  the  following  year. 


ISO  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

The  Conference  however  came  to  no  resolution  at  this  sitting  ; 
but  Lord  Palmerston  did  not  fail  to  give  me  to  understand,  that 
the  guarantee  of  a  loan,  being  subordinate  to  the  choice  of  a 
sovereign  for  Greece,  and  this  choice,  to  a  fresh  delimitation,  it 
was  to  be  feared,  that  the  departure  of  the  French  Ambassador 
from  Constantinople,  might  indefinitely  postpone  the  negotia- 
tions he  was  instructed  to  carry  out  on  this  subject,  jointly  with 
the  Russian  and  English  plenipotentiaries.  I  therefore  beg  you 
will  let  me  know,  what  steps  you  think  most  advisable,  in  order 
to  arrive  at  a  definite  solution  of  the  Greek  affairs.  .  .  . 


London, /«/z£  21st,  1831.1 

I  have  the  honour  to  send  you,  herewith,  the  speech,  made 
by  the  King  of  England,  at  the  opening  of  Parliament  this 
morning.2 

This  speech,  as  you  will  perceive,  is  very  moderate  and 
perfectly  pacific.  Referring  to  Belgian  affairs,  he  said  that 
they  had  not  yet  been  definitely  settled,  but  that  the  best  under- 
standing continued  to  exist  between  the  Powers,  whose  pleni- 
potentiaries were  assembled  in  conference  in  London  ;  that 
these  conferences  were  conducted  on  the  principle  of  non- 
intervention in  the  home  affairs  of  Belgium,  but  on  the  condition 
that,  in  the  exercise  of  their  rights  by  the  Belgian  people,  the 
security  of  the  neighbouring  States  should  not  be  compromised. 

This  speech  was  thoroughly  approved  of  by  all  right-minded 
men.  .  .  . 

The  conferences  between  Prince  Leopold,  the  two  pleni- 
potentiaries of  the  Powers  and  the  Belgian  Deputies,  still  go  on. 
There  are  no  longer  any  real  difficulties  but  merely  quibbles, 
which,  without  having  any  actual  foundation,  nevertheless  prolong 
the  discussions,  which  ought  to  have  been  ended  days  ago.  I  am 
doing  all  in  my  power  to  bring  about  a  conclusion.  .  .  . 

And  in  truth,  I  did  all  I  possibly  could  ;  so  much  so,  that  I  fell 
seriously  ill,  due  partly  to  the  fatigue  and  the  late  sittings, 
necessitated  by  this  troublesome  matter,  and  perhaps  also  to  the 
impatience,  which  the  shuffling  of  the  Belgian  Deputies  caused 
me.  I  was  confined  to  my  bed  for  several  days  ;  but,  never- 
theless, I  continued  to  take  part  in  the  deliberations  of  the 
Conference,  which  assembled  at  my  bedside.     I  also  in  the  same 

1  Official  despatch  already  published. 

-  This  speech  is  copied  in  the  Journal  des  Debats,  June  23rd. 


THE  RE  I VL  UTION  OF  i  S30.  1  5 1 

way,  interviewed  the  Belgian  commissioners,  from  whom,  I  must 
confess,  I  did  not  conceal  my  dissatisfaction.  I  even  went  so 
far  as  to  threaten  them,  that  if  they  persisted  in  their  obstinate 
resistance,  I  should  advise  the  partition  of  their  kingdom,  which 
could  be  effected  without  the  war,  which  their  foolish  conduct 
would  most  certainly  bring  about. 

As  I  never,  even  for  a  single  day,  interrupted  my  corre- 
spondence with  Paris,  the  reflex  of  these  various  impressions  will 
be  found  in  the  following  letters  : 

The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  General  Sebastiani. 

London,  June  22nd,  1831. 
Monsieur  le  Comte, 

I  have  received  the  despatch  you  did  me  the  honour  to 
write  on  the  20th,  in  which  you  observe,  that  you  have  had  no 
news  from  London  for  two  days.  This  reproach  has  no  founda- 
tion, for  I  have  never  allowed  forty-eight  hours  to  elapse,  without 
having  the  honour  of  writing  to  you  ;  and  if  there  has  been  a  day 
on  which  I  did  not  send  you  a  despatch,  it  was  because  it  was 
one  on  which  the  Conference  sat  so  very  late,  that  I  had  not  the 
necessary  time. 

You  will,  no  doubt,  have  received  a  letter  from  me,  very  shortly 
after  the  departure  of  your  courier. 

The  Belgians  do  not  bring  such  a  conciliatory  spirit  into  the 
negotiations  in  which  we  are  engaged,  as  one  would  expect  if 
they  really  wished  to  complete  them.  Of  this  you  may  judge 
from  the  following  fact.  A  few  days  ago  they  sent  another  note 
as  to  their  demands.  The  two  members  of  the  Conference  who 
more  specially  deal  with  the  details  of  this  negotiation,  made 
their  remarks  on  these  demands,  expecting  that  they  would 
be  discussed.  The  Belgian  commissioners,  however,  did  not  take 
that  line,  and  instead  of  replying,  they  have  sent  a  second  note, 
renewing  all  their  demands  without  the  least  alteration,  or 
making  the  slightest  concession. 

If  the  Belgians  persevere  in  this  course,  if  they  will  not  yield 
a  single  point,  if,  on  the  contrary,  they  continue  in  their  obstinate 
resistance,  it  will  be  impossible  to  negotiate  with  them,  or  to 
arrive  at  an  arrangement. 

After  having  exhausted  every  means  of  persuasion  and  con- 
descension, and  after  having  gathered  so  little  fruit  for  all  the 
labour  expended,  I  believe  it  would  really  be  better  to  carry  out 


152  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

the  idea1  of  dividing  Belgium,  in  which  division  France  would,  no 
doubt,  be  able  to  obtain  the  share  that  would  best  suit  her.  You 
may  be  quite  sure  that  this  measure  would  not  produce  war 
sooner  than  any  other,  if  we  cannot  come  to  some  definite 
arrangement  ;  but  of  this  latter  I  have  not  yet  given  up  all 
hope. 

I  believe  the  Belgians  would  have  shown  themselves  much 
more  conciliatory,  if  they  were  less  confident  of  the  support 
which  the  agitators  in  every  country  have  led  them  to  expect, 
and  if  they  were  not  encouraged  to  believe,  that  tenacity  alone 
will  gain  the  end  they  have  in  view.  They  find  encouragement 
also  in  the  general  condition  of  Europe,  the  repulses  the  Russians 
have  experienced,2  and  the  peculiar  position  of  France  and 
England. 

I  believe  it  would  be  well  to  inform  M.  Lehon,  in  rather 
stern  language,  that  France  had  been  led  to  hope  that  the 
affairs  of  Belgium  would  be  decided  by  the  negotiations  in 
London,  but  that  she  thought  these  negotiations  would  be  of  a 
frank  and  conciliatory  nature,  and  that  the  king's  government 
is  greatly  and  justly  dissatisfied  to  learn  that,  instead  of  nego- 
tiating, the  Belgian  Deputies  do  not  even  reply  to  the  negotia- 
tions addressed  to  them,  but  ensconce  themselves  within  a 
circle  of  demands,  from  which  they  do  not  seem  disposed  to 
emerge.  Time  is  passing,  and  it  seems  as  if  the  Belgians  had 
some  special  motive  for  not  turning  it  to  better  account. 

I  thank  you  for  having  sent  me  the  information  you  have 
received  from  St.  Petersburg,  dated  the  4th  of  this  month.  The 
particulars  contained  in  M.  de  Mortemart's  letter,  which  you 
have  been  good  enough  to  send  me,  furnish  another  proof  of 
some  of  the  difficulties  we  have  to  contend  with  here  on  the 
part  of  Russia. 

P.S. — Last  night  Prince  Leopold  and  Lord  Melbourne 
thought  all  was  completed  ;  this  morning  fresh  difficulties  have 
arisen,  but  I  had  to  think  about  them  lying  in  bed,  for  I  am 
very  unwell.  .  .  . 

London,  June  i\th,   1831.3 

Although  unwell  for  the  last  six  days,  I  have  never  omitted 
seeing  Prince  Leopold  and  the  members  of  the  Conference,  and 
likewise  the  Belgian  Deputies.  We  have  been  in  conference  for 
the  last  forty  hours,  but  the  Deputies  are  so  little  accustomed 

1  Var.  :  qui  est  mon  idee  favorite  =  which  is  my  favourite  idea. 

2  In  the  war  with  Poland. 

3  Official  despatch  already  published. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  153 

to  such  matters  as  they  have  now  to  deal  with,  and  raise  so 
many  difficulties,  that  there  is  no  getting  on  ;  nothing  is  finished  ; 
and  I  confess  to  you  I  am  completely  worn  out. 

A  conference  took  place  to-day  at  Prince  Leopold's,  which 
lasted  till  eight  o'clock  ;  it  will  be  continued  at  my  house  this 
evening,  and  will  probably  last  far  into  the  night.  I  will  have 
the  honour  to  write  to  you  as  soon  as  anything  is  decided. 


London,  June  26th,  1831.1 

I  believe  that  Belgian  affairs  are  at  last  in  a  fair  way  of 
being  settled  as  we  desire. 

I  have  the  honour  to  send  you,  herewith,  the  articles  that 
have  been  agreed  upon  between  the  Conference  and  the 
Belgian  Deputies.2  All  the  points  that  must  be  arranged,  con- 
sequent on  the  separation  of  Belgium  from  Holland,  are  so 
dealt  with  in  these  articles,  as  to  remove  the  difficulties 
which  will  be  raised,  without  interfering  with  the  rights  of 
the  King  of  Holland  to  such  an  extent  as  would  make  it  im- 
possible for  him  to  give  his  adhesion  to  them.  Belgium  is 
undoubtedly  favoured  in  these  arrangements,  and  this  she  owes 
to  the  influence  of  France.  You  will  see  how  her  interests  have 
been  looked  after  and  protected,  by  the  manner  in  which  the 
articles  connected  with  Maastricht  and  the  Grand  Duchy  of 
Luxemburg  have  been  drawn  up. 

Prince  Leopold  received  the  Belgian  deputation  at  10 
o'clock  this  evening.  I  send  you  a  copy  of  his  reply  to  the 
President's  address.  The  prince  handed  him  the  articles  which 
had  previously  been  drawn  up. 

The  Deputies  leave  for  Brussels  this  evening,  in  order  to 
submit  these  articles  to  the  Congress.  Representing  as  they 
do,  the  views  and  all  shades  of  opinion  which  exist  in  the 
Congress,  the  Deputies  seem  persuaded  they  will  gain  the  assent 
of  that  assembly.  As  soon  as  it  has  been  given,  the  Deputies 
will  return  to  London,  and  offer  the  crown  to  Prince  Leopold, 
who  will  accept  it  and  proceed  to  Brussels  without  delay. 

I  think  that  when  the  Congress  has  approved  the  articles, 
France  can  at  once  recognize  Prince  Leopold  as  King  of 
Belgium.  The  other  Powers  will  do  so  a  little  later,  but  this 
delay  will  not  cause  any  difficulty. 

M.  le  Baron  de  Wessenberg,  one  of  the  Austrian  plenipoten- 

1  Official  despatch  already  published. 

-  This  is  the  draft  of  the  treaty  adopted  by  the  Congress  on  the  9th  of  July,  and 
known  under  the  name  of  the  Eighteen  Articles.     See  text  of  this  treaty  in  Appendix. 


154  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

tiaries  at  the  Conference,  and  who  has  for  a  long  time  resided 
at  the  Court  of  the  Netherlands,  starts  for  the  Hague  on 
Tuesday,  in  order  to  exert  all  the  influence  he  possesses  with 
King  William,  to  prevail  upon  him  to  accede  to  our  articles. 
M.  de  Wessenberg  has  a  better  chance  than  anyone  else  of 
carrying  out  this  mission  successfully.  If,  notwithstanding  some 
further  concessions  which  are  sought  from  the  King  of  the 
Netherlands,  his  consent  is  gained,  the  affairs  of  Belgium  will 
then  be  in  a  position  to  allow  the  Powers'1  to  recognize  her  inde- 
pendence, and  this  independence  will  have  been  established 
without  a  war,  or  even  any  military  preparations. 

You  perhaps  will  deem  it  advisable,  to  instruct  M.  Lehon  to 
write  to  Brussels,  or  even  to  go  there,  so  that  he  may  use  his 
influence  to  procure  the  adoption  of  the  articles  by  the 
Congress. 

Two  d clock  in  the  morning.  I  attach  hereto  Prince  Leopold's 
speech  ;  it  is  not  what  I  could  have  wished,  nor  what  I  sug- 
gested to  him.  All  that  has  passed  between  the  prince  and 
myself  on  this  subject,  will  be  fully  explained  to  you  by  the 
letter  I  have  just  written  to  the  prince,  of  which  I  have  the 
honour  to  send  you  herewith  a  copy.  .  .  . 

Speech  of  Prince  Leopold  to  the  Belgian   Deputies 

June  26//1,  1 83 1. 

"  Gentlemen, 

"  I  am   profoundly  sensible  of  the  earnest  desire,  of 
which  the  Belgian  Congress  has  constituted  you  the  exponents. 

"  This  mark  of  confidence  is  all  the  more  flattering  to  me, 
as  I  have  not  sought  for  it. 

"  Human  destiny  offers  no  nobler  or  more  useful  task,  than 
that  of  being  called  to  uphold  the  independence  of  a  nation  and 
to  consolidate  its  liberties. 

"  A  mission  of  such  high  importance  could  alone  induce  me 
to  relinquish  an  independent  position,  and  to  sever  myself  from 
a  country  to  which  I  am  attached  by  the  most  sacred  ties  and 
recollections,  and  which  has  given  me  so  many  proofs  of  its 
goodwill  and  sympathy. 

"  I  therefore,  gentlemen,  accept  the  offer  you  make  me,  on 
the  understanding,  that  the  Congress  of  the  representatives  of 
the  nation  will  adopt  those  measures  which  alone  can  constitute 
the  new  State,  and  thereby  secure  for  it  the  recognition  of  the 
States  of  Europe. 

1  Suppressed  in  the  text  of  the  Archives. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  155 

"  It  is  only  by  so  doing,  that  the  Congress  will  enable  me  to 
devote  myself  entirely  to  Belgium,  to  consecrate  to  her  welfare 
and  prosperity  the  relations  which  I  have  formed  with  those 
countries  whose  friendship  is  essential  to  her,  and  to  ensure  to 
her  as  far  as  lies  in  my  power,  a  happy  and  independent  ex- 
istence." 


The  Prince  de  Talleyrand   to  Prince  Leopold. 

Hanover  Square,  London,  June  17th,  1831, 

Otic  o'clock  in  the  Morning. 
MONSEIGNEUR, 

I  have  just  read  your  Royal  Highness's  reply,, 
addressed  this  evening  to  the  Belgian  Deputies.  I  am  sending 
it  to  Paris.  My  government  will,  I  do  not  doubt,  be  well 
pleased  that  this  difficult  and  complicated  business  is  at  last 
ended  ;  but  I  regret  exceedingly  that  our  Ministry  will  not  find  in 
your  speech  that  which  is  needed  to  lessen  French  prejudices. 
I  intreated  your  Royal  Highness,  in  your  reply  to  the  Belgians, 
not  to  dwell  on  your  attachment  to  England  only,  and  I  notice 
with  much  pain,  even  in  your  own  interest,  Monseigneur,  that  at 
the  last  moment  you  have  omitted  the  conciliatory,  advantageous, 
and  prudent  phrase,  which  you  permitted  the  French  Ambassador 
to  send  you  in  writing,  which  I  reminded  you  of  last  night,  and 
which  you  promised  me  you  would  insert.  When  it  is  a 
question  of  furthering  the  present  and  securing  the  future,  it  is 
necessary,  carefully  to  avoid  wounding  the  vanity  or  prejudices 
of  others. 

I  am.  .  .  . 


The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  General  Sebastiani. 

London,  June  2-jfh,  1S31. 
Monsieur  le  Comte, 

I  sent  Prince  Leopold  two  or  three  phrases  which 
ought  to  have  been  inserted  in  his  reply  to  the  Belgian  Deputies, 
and  which,  I  think,  would  have  produced  a  good  effect.  He 
promised  me  to  insert  them,  and  yet  I  have  not  found  them 
there.  I  was  exceedingly  annoyed  at  this,  and  at  once  wrote  a 
letter  to  Prince  Leopold,  a  copy  of  which  I  have  the  honour  to 
enclose.  This  morning  I  received  a  reply,  which  1  send  here- 
with, as  it  contains  explanations  which  may  prove  of  use  at  some 
time  or  other. 


156  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

The  Belgian  question  appears  to  me  to  be  now  arranged  as 
well  as  could  be  hoped  for,  and  I  think  the  king's  government 
will  be  able  to  repel  any  attacks  that  may  be  made  on  that 
subject.  If  any  party  writers  were  now  to  come  forward,  and 
compare  the  London  Conference  with  the  Holy  Alliance,  they 
would  not  be  dealing  honestly  ;  for  the  peace  of  Europe  and  the 
independence  of  Belgium  have  resulted  from  this  Conference, 
and  there  is  nothing  in  common  with  these  results  and  those 
obtained  by  the  Holy  Alliance. 

The  Belgian  Deputies  leave  to-night.  M.  de  Wessenberg, 
who,  as  I  informed  you  yesterday,  returns  to  the  Hague,  quits 
London  this  evening.  I  have  the  honour  to  send  you  a  copy  of 
protocol  No.  26,1  of  which  he  is  the  bearer,  and  also  of  the 
instructions  which  have  been  given  to  him.  They  are 
confidential,  and  should  be  secret.  I  thought  I  ought  to  write  and 
request  the  French  Charge  d'Affaires  at  the  Hague,  to  do  all  in 
his  power  to  further  the  success  of  M.  de  Wessenberg's  mission, 
and  work  in  concert  with  him,  so  that  France  should  not 
appear  a  stranger  to  what  was  being  done  there.  You  will,  no 
doubt,  think  it  right  to  send  him  some  instructions  on  this 
subject. 

The  objects  of  the  Emperor  Dom  Pedro's  journey  to  London, 
are  not  yet  known  ;  he  is  living  in  a  furnished  house,  under  the 
title  of  Due  de  Braganza. 

I  think  I  must  again  ask  the  king's  government  to  keep  the 
arrangements,  that  have  been  made  with  regard  to  Belgium, 
strictly  secret.  The  enemies  of  peace  must  not  be  given  the 
chance  of  influencing  the  Belgian  population  and  the  members 
of  the  Congress,  and  thus  preventing  the  adoption  of  the 
articles,  which  the  Deputies  are  taking  to  Brussels.2  .  .  . 

Prince  Leopold's  Reply  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand. 

Marlborough  House,  June  27th,  1831. 
Mon  cher  Prince, 

What  I  said  with  regard  to  England,  is  simply  the 
relation  of  a  past  historical  fact.  I  greatly  wished  to  say 
something  more  positive  about  France,  but  I  used  the  words 
which  your  colleagues  said  were  yours  in  the  draft  of  the 
Conference. 

1  This  protocol  of  June  26th,  contained  the  eighteen  articles  proposed  by  the  Con- 
ference as  preliminaries  of  peace  between  Holland  and  Belgium. 

-  This  letter  concludes  the  first  volume  of  M.  Pallain's  work,  7alleyrand's  Em- 
bassy in  London,  the  only  one  which  has  yet  been  published.  Our  comparison  of  the 
two  must  necessarily  therefore  end. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1S30.  157 

However,  feeling  the  necessity  of  doing  something,  after  my 
speech,  I  invited  the  whole  deputation  to  express  themselves  strongly 
and  officially  in  my  )iame  to  the  Congress  on  one  point,  which  I 
considered  very  important  :  "  that  I  was  aware  that  some 
newspapers  had  pointed  to  the  present  arrangement  as  being 
hostile  to  France  ;  that  nothing  could  be  more  false;  that 
intimate  relations  had  existed  for  many  years  with  the  present 
reigning  family  of  France  ;  that  there  were  few  countries  I 
knew  so  well  as  France,  having  lived  there  a  great  deal  in  my 
youth,  and  that  so  far  from  being  hostile  to  her,  I  looked  upon 
her  as  an  ally,  as  important  as  she  was  useful  to  Belgium." 

This  cannot  fail  to  be  widely  known  as  soon  as  they  arrive 
in  Brussels,  and  to  be  at  once  printed.  I  think  you  should  com- 
municate what  I  now  tell  you,  to  your  government,  to  which  I 
am  most  grateful  for  all  the  marks  of  confidence  and  goodwill 
with  which  it  has  honoured  me. 

I  may  add  that  the  Deputies  asked  me  to  send  a  few'ex- 
planatory  words  to  the  Regent,  as  it  was  indispensable  to  tell 
the  Congress  that  its  acceptance  of  the  articles  would  be  suf- 
ficient for  me,  and  thus  prevent  its  thinking  that  my  actual 
acceptance  would  be  subject  to  the  adhesion  of  Holland. 

Pray  accept 

Leopold. 

The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  General  Sebastiani. 

London,  fune  29/A,  1831. 
Monsieur  le  Comte, 

The  Dutch  plenipotentiaries  went  last  night  to  Lord 
Grey  with  great  complaints  against  the  Conference,  but  they  did 
not  bring  any  written  protests  as  had  been  reported.  Difficulties 
can  now,  however,  no  longer  come  from  them  ;  they  will  proceed 
from  the  Hague ;  for  this  reason  we  may  congratulate  ourselves, 
that  the  articles  which  accompany  protocol  No.  26,  will  arrive 
there  signed  by  the  plenipotentiaries  of  the  five  Powers ;  this 
fact  will  make  the  King  of  Holland  see,  that  he  will  not  be  openly 
supported  in  his  resistance  by  a  single  Cabinet  having  any 
influence  in  Europe. 

If  the  king's  government  decides  to  recognize  Prince  Leo- 
pold as  King  of  the  Belgians  as  soon  as  the  articles  have  been 
adopted  by  the  Congress  in  Brussels,  I  believe  that  this  recogni- 
tion will  be  most  helpful  in  the  establishment  of  that  country, 
and  I  also  think  it  will  be  advantageous  for  France  to  be  able  to 
place  Belgian  affairs,  with  the  exception  of  a  few  questions  rof 
detail,  among  matters  that  are  settled.  .  .  . 


iSS  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

Belgian  affairs  were,  however,  less  settled  than  I  stated  in  this 
despatch,  as  will  only  be  too  plainly  seen  by  what  follows  ;  but  I 
wished  that  the  French  government  should  be  less  occupied 
with  them,  and  rather  employ  its  skill  in  detracting  public 
attention  from  this  quarter.  I  ventured  to  convey  this  insinua- 
tion in  my  despatch,  though  I  must  own  that  it  came  very  mal 
a  propos,  for  at  the  very  time  we  thought  we  had  reached  the 
end  of  this  tedious  negotiation,  fresh  and  still  graver  complica- 
tions suddenly  arose,  and  almost  made  us  think  we  should  fail 
altogether.  Perhaps  the  extracts  I  have  hitherto  given  from  my 
despatches  have  been  too  long,  but  I  have  had  a  double 
motive  :  to  clear  up  thoroughly  the  various  points  relating  to  the 
affairs  with  which  I  had  to  deal,  and  also  to  teach  those  young 
diplomatists  into  whose  hands  these  memoirs  may  one  day  fall, 
that  patience  is  one  of  the  first  rules  in  the  art  of  negotiation. 
The  extracts  from  my  despatches  will  be  briefer  in  future,  and  the 
letters  I  received,  will  doubtless  afford  greater  interest  and  better 
support  my  narrative.  I  had  sent  my  last  despatches  to  Paris 
by  young  M.  Casimir  Perier,  one  of  the  secretaries  of  the 
Embassy,  who  immediately  after  his  arrival  wrote  to  me  as 
follows  : 


Monsieur   Casimir   Perier,   Fils.,  to   the  Prince  de 

Talleyrand. 

Paris,  July  $th,  1831. 

Mon  Prince, 

The  bearer  of  good  news,  and  anxious  according  to 
your  Highness's  wishes,  to  be  the  first  to  announce  them,  I 
made  all  possible  haste,  and  nothing  was  known  until  my 
arrival  here.  The  Minister  for  Foreign  Affairs  and  my  father, 
whom  I  saw  a  few  minutes  later,  received  me  with  marked 
satisfaction,  and  appeared  to  me  to  be  very  glad  to  find,  that 
just  on  the  eve  of  the  elections,  the  Belgian  question,  if  not 
actually  settled,  was  at  least  greatly  simplified.  Whatever  the 
papers  may  say  of  the  mouvement,  the  opinion  of  the  majority 
here,  has  declared  itself  in  favour  of  the  results  of  this  long  and 
tiring  negotiation.  Reasonable  people  (and  there  are  some  still, 
notwithstanding  all  one  sees  every  day)  acknowledge  most  fully 
what  France  owes  to  her  ambassador. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  159 

As  for  home  affairs,  I  found  the  minister  less  uneasy  than 
I  had  expected,  respecting  the  result  of  this  month's  events. 
Measures  have  been  taken  to  prevent  any  unpleasant  scenes. 
Fetes,  no  doubt  intended  to  occupy  the  people,  will  be  organ- 
ized to  celebrate  the  anniversary  of  a  revolution,  which  some 
people  would  like  to  see  begin  again.  Nothing,  however,  has 
as  yet  been  arranged  about  this  matter. 

On  the  other  hand,  it  is  the  eve  of  the  elections,  and  both 
parties  are  in  evidence,  without  either  side  daring  to  count  on 
victory.  In  Paris,  I  think  my  father  stands  a  good  chance  in 
the  first  arrondissement  ;  but  I  fear  that  the  other  constituencies 
will  prove  themselves  less  moderate. 

However,  the  Ministry  seems  determined,  no  matter  what 
the  result  of  the  electoral  struggle,  to  present  itself  to  the 
Chambers.  It  knows  that  men  when  assembled  together,  are 
often  not  the  same  as  when  you  take  them  separately,  and  it 
feels  too  deeply,  how  very  serious  matters  are,  to  resign  until 
every  chance  of  success  has  disappeared.  .  .  . 


General  Sebastiani  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand. 

Paris,  July  5I/1,  1S31. 

Mon  Prince, 

You  have  obtained  a  success  on  which  I  congratulate 
you,  and  thank  you  in  the  name  of  the  king,  who  feels  its  full 
importance.  If.  as  I  hope,  you  can  add  thereto  the  dismantling 
of  the  fortresses  that  have  been  reared  against  us  since  181 5, 
the  whole  of  France  will  applaud  an  arrangement  which  assures 
her  a  long  and  honourable  peace.  Prince  Leopold  must  feel, 
that  it  is  only  on  those  terms  that  he  can  count  on  the  friend- 
ship of  so  powerful  a  neighbour,  sincerely  desirous  to  unite 
herself  with  him  by  indissoluble  ties.  It  is  essential,  to..allay  the 
natural  irritation  of  a  country  unable  to  support  any  longer  the 
insults  of  the  Holy  Alliance  (your  personal  enemy)  which,  on 
your  withdrawal  from  affairs,  began  that  system  of  abasement 
of  our  country  which  it  has  pursued  ever  since  that  fatal  period. 
The  new  King  of  Belgium  will  be  popular  in  France,  as  soon  as 
it  becomes  known  that  he  does  not  share  the  hateful  passions  of 
our  enemies,  and  that  we  inspire  him  with  well-merited  confidence. 
It  is  necessary,  moreover,  that  we  should  be  assisted  in  over- 
coming the  enemies  of  social  order  in  Europe,  and  this  victory  can 
only  be  gained,  when  unjust  suspicion  gives  place  to  those 
sentiments  which  are  our  due.  It  is  for  your  own  fame's  sake, 
mon  Prince,  that  I  commend  this  matter,  the  most  delicate,  the 


i6o  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

most  important  of  all,  to  your  care.  Our  peace  at  home  depends 
thereon. 

The  king  is  delighted  with  his  journey,  which  has  produced 
an  excellent  effect. 

We  hope  that  our  elections  will  be  satisfactory  ;  we  shall 
however  have  many  new  Deputies  but  little  accustomed  to 
business.  Some  disturbance  is  expected  on  the  14th  July, 
but  it  will  probably  not  take  place,  or  will  be  easily  put 
down. 

The  Chamber  being  in  session,  and  the  precautions  that 
the  government  has  taken,  reassure  us  as  to  the  27th,  28th, 
and  29th. 

It  appears  that  the  Russian  general  intends  trying  to  cross 
the  Vistula,  close  to  the  Prussian  frontier.  The  Polish  general 
has  scattered  his  troops  too  much.  The  insurrection  in  Lith- 
uania is  taking  a  serious  turn.  Volhynia  and  Podolia,  both  require 
the  presence  of  a  considerable  force,  and  even  the  Ukraine 
itself,  shows  but  little  affection  for  Russia.  Your  letter  has 
given  me  much  pleasure,  which  you  can  easily  understand.  .  .  . 

General  Sebastiani's  letter  is  so  far  curious,  inasmuch  as 
beneath  the  flatteries,  with  which  he  clumsily  tries  to  overwhelm 
me,  one  can  plainly  detect  the  views  which  the  Buonapartist 
and  Republican  factions  then  strove  to  make  prevalent  in  France, 
in  order  to  inflame  public  opinion  and  rouse  slumbering  passions, 
instead  of  trying  to  soothe  them.  The  question  of  the  Belgian 
fortresses,  which  he  so  specially  commended  to  my  care,  had 
already  been  settled  by  a  secret  protocol  of  the  Conference  in 
the  preceding  month, 1  a  protocol  in  which,  be  it  understood, 
I  took  no  part  whatever  except  to  provoke  it. 

1  Protocol  of  April  1 7th  : 

"The  plenipotentiaries  of  the  four  Courts  are  unanimously  of  opinion,  that  the 
new  position  of  Belgium,  her  neutrality  being  recognized  by  France,  must  alter  her 
system  of  military  defence  ;  that  the  fortresses  are  too  numerous  to  be  properly 
defended ;  that  the  inviolability  of  Belgian  territory  offers  a  security  which  did  not 
exist  before,  and  that,  lastly,  a  portion  of  those  fortresses,  that  were  erected  under 
different  circumstances,  may  now  be  demolished. 

"Consequently,  the  plenipotentiaries  have  decided,  that  negotiations  shall  be 
entered  into  between  Belgium  and  the  four  Great  Powers,  to  decide  the  number  and 
importance  of  the  fortresses  that  are  to  be  dismantled. 

"ESTERHAZY,    WeSSENBERG,    PALMERSTON, 
"DULORD,    LlEVEN,  MATUSIEWICZ." 

Following  this  protoco1,  a  Conver.t'.on  was  signed  on  December  16th,  1831, 
between  the   representatives  of  the  foir  Courts  and  Belgium,  which  directed  the 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  161 

The  plenipotentiaries  of  the  four  Courts,  Austria,  Great 
Britain,  Prussia,  and  Russia,  had  recognized,  that  in  consequence 
of  the  declaration  of  the  independence  and  neutrality  of 
Belgium,  a  certain  number  of  Belgian  fortresses  ought  to  be 
dismantled.  This  had  to  suffice  us  for  the  present ;  the  carrying 
out  of  the  admitted  fact  could  not  fail  to  be  accomplished  later 
on.  But  in  Paris  they  insisted  on  its  being  done  at  once,  so 
that  they  might  pompously  announce  the  fact  to  the  Chambers, 
and  thereby  gain  a  certain  amount  of  popularity.  It  was 
necessary,  therefore,  to  find  some  means  of  satisfying  this 
requirement,  and  I  obtained  the  consent  of  the  Conference 
to  the  mention  of  its  decision  respecting  the  demolition  of 
the  fortresses,  by  the  king  in  his  speech. 

In  general,  and  herein  lay  my  greatest  difficulty,  matters 
were  only  looked  at  from  one  point  of  view  in  Paris,  and  that 
view  was  exclusively  a  French  one,  without  a  thought  of  what 
was  due  to  others.  If  it  was  a  question  of  the  affairs  of 
Belgium,  they  only  considered  the  Belgians,  and  gave  no  thought 
to  the  King  of  the  Netherlands,  whose  interests  therefore  the 
other  Cabinets  had  to  protect.  They  forgot,  or  pretended  to 
forget,  that  there  was  an  English  Parliament,  to  whom  the 
English  Cabinet  was  responsible  for  the  measures  they  adopted, 
and  they  only  troubled  themselves  about  what  they  should  say 
to  the  Chamber  of  Deputies  in  France.1  In  the  very  complicated 
position  of  Europe,such  adisposition  caused  me  infinite  embarrass- 
ment ;  my  duty  was  to  get  out  of  it  as  well  as  I  could,  and  this 
was  not  easy.  Under  these  circumstances,  I  urged  Prince 
Leopold  to  give  the  French  government  such  assurances  as 
would  tranquillize  it,  and  I  drew  the  following  letter  from 
him  : 

demolition  of  the  fortresses  of  Menin,  Ath,  Mons,  Philippeville,  and  Marienburg. 
The  other  fortresses  were  to  be  kept  in  good  repair  by  Belgium. 

1  ".  .  .  .  The  French  government  constantly  tells  us  that  we  ought,  or  ought  not,  to 
do  certain  things,  in  order  to  satisfy  public  opinion  in  France;  but  it  ought  to  remember, 
that  public  opinion  exists  in  England  as  well  as  in  France,  and  that,  although  this 
feeling  is  not  so  easily  roused  by  small  matters  as  it  is  in  France,  there  are  neverthe- 
less some  topics  (and  Belgium  is  one  of  them)  respecting  which  this  feeling  is  ex- 
tremely susceptible,  and  when  once  roused,  it  is  not  easily  appeased." — [Lord 
Palmerston  to  Lord  Granville,  August  nth,  1831.]  (Private  Correspondence  of  Lord 
1'almerston.) 

VOL.  IV.  M 


1 62  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

Marlborough  House,  July  nth,  1S31. 
Mon  ciier  Prince, 

I  lose  no  time  in  replying  to  the  remarks  you  have 
communicated  to  me,  relative  to  the  ultimate  fate  of  the  fortresses 
which  were  constructed  in  consequence  of  the  treaties  of  181 5. 

My  opinion  is,  that  the  relations  between  France  and  Belgium 
ought  to  be  based  on  confidence  and  friendship. 

Seeing  no  reason,  whatever,  why  the  Belgian  nation  should 
not  approve  the  conciliatory  views  of  the  five  Powers,  you  may 
count  on  my  sincere  co-operation  in  the  furtherance  of  any 
measure,  the  object  of  which  is  the  adoption  of  these  bases. 

Pray  accept.  .  .  . 

Leopold. 

When  Prince  Leopold  wrote  me  this  letter,  cautious  and 
reserved  like  himself,  he  was  already  King  of  the  Belgians.  He 
had  been  elected  the  evening  before  by  the  Congress  of  Brussels,1 
which  had  previously  accepted  the  eighteen  articles  proposed  by 
the  Conference,  by  a  majority  of  fifty-six  votes  (126  against  70). 
This  was  a  great  victory  gained,  but  I  was  not  long  permitted  to 
enjoy  it.  The  following  very  remarkable  letter  from  M.  Casimir 
Perier,  quickly  called  my  attention  to  another  quarter,  where, 
unfortunately,  there  was  but  little  reason  to  hope  for  success. 

The   President   of    the    Council    to    the   Prince  de 

Talleyrand. 

Paris,  July  7th,  1831. 
Mon  Prince, 

I  am  taking  the  opportunity  of  my  son's  departure,  to  say 
a  few  words  to  you.  He  bears  you  an  important  despatch,  resolved 
upon  by  mutual  agreement  in  the  Cabinet  Council,  on  theaffairs  of 
Poland.  Very  likely,  mon  Prince,  you  will  consider  this  step  too 
hasty,  but  the  situation  of  the  Poles,  our  correspondence  from  St. 
Petersburg,  the  tendency  of  public  opinion  in  France,  always  more 
or  less  in  sympathy  with  the  Polish  cause,  and  last  of  all,  the 
attitude  taken  in  relation  to  France  by  our  article  in  the  Messager, 
as  well  as  the  near  approach  of  the  session,  do  not  permit  our  not 
following  up  our  first  overtures  to  the  Russian  government. 
Under  all  circumstances,  therefore,  the  Council  has  deemed  it 
good  policy  to  make  an  overture  to  the  London  Cabinet,  whatever 

]   Trince  Leopold  obtained  152  votes  out  of  196. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  163 

the  result  of  it  may  be.  Moreover,  we  set  great  value  on  receiving 
a  prompt  rep!)-,  and  we  can  only  confide  ourselves  as  regards  this, 
to  your  care  and  prudence.1 

A  telegraphic  despatch  from  M.  de  Sainte-Aulairc,  just  come 
in,  informs  us  that  by  mutual  consent,  and  under  a  pledge  given 
in  presence  of  all  the  ambassadors,  the  Austrian  troops  will  have 
entirely  evacuated  the  Papal  States  before  July  15th.2 

There  now  only  remain  the  affairs  of  Belgium.  The  news  we 
have  received  to-day  is  better;  a  favourable  resolution  is  promised 
us  either  to-morrow,  or  the  day  after,  by  a  majority  of  one  hundred 
and  twenty  out  of  one  hundred  and  eighty.  I  hope  it  will  be  so,  and 
still  more  earnestly  wish  it,  but  I  shall  not  believe  it,  till  it  is  an 
actual  fact.  At  the  same  time,  if  matters  do  develop  themselves  in 
this  way,  it  would  be  imperative  on  Prince  Leopold  to  go  at  once 
to  Belgium.  A  revolutionary  spirit  is  stirring  up  the  agitators,  and 
those  who  wish  to  support  law  and  order  need  a  leader  and  a 
rallying-point. 

General  Sebastiani  is  writing  to  you  about  the  fortresses  ;  we 
are  longing,  mon  Prince,  to  have  this  matter  settled. 

Our  elections  are  nearly  over  :  my  son  takes  you  the  list  of 
Deputies  elected  up  to  six  o'clock  this  evening.  So  far  as  results 
are  known,  the  public  feeling  is  favourable  ;  we  have  not  yet  got 
the  Convention  promised  us  by  M.  Odilon  Barrot,  nor  shall  we,  I 
hope,  find  it  in  the  legislative  assembly  either.  Moderate  men,  up 
to  the  present,  are  far  the  most  numerous  ;  we  hope  that  the  elec- 
tions yet  to  come  will  retain  the  same  character.  If  these  men  add 
a  courageous  patriotism  to  their  spirit  of  moderation  in  politics, 
we  shall  perhaps  be  able  to  make  a  stand  ;  but  the  cause  of  all 
the  evils  we  have  to  fear,  lies  specially  in  the  audacity  of  our 
adversaries,  strengthened  by  the  feeble,  one  might  almost  say 
timorous  attitude  of  our  side.  All  will  depend  on  the  first 
majority.  I  am  very  much  afraid,  that  the  country  does  not  realize 
the  seriousness  of  the  evil  under  which  she  is  suffering,  and  that 
she  will  keep  her  eyes  closed  to  the  light,  until  she  is  awakened 
by  the  noise  of  a  catastrophe.     No  doubt  it  is  still  distant  ;  but  I 

1  An  entirely  platonic  effort  in  favour  of  the  Poles,  had  already  been  made  by 
France  to  the  Czar,  during  the  month  of  June.  It  had  no  result.  Underpressure, 
therefore,  of  public  opinion,  which  grew  more  and  more  violent,  the  Cabinet  proposed 
to  England  and  Prussia  to  unite  their  efforts  with  France  to  bring  about  a  joint 
mediation.     Both  Berlin  and  London  refused  to  intervene. 

2  It  will  be  remembered  that  after  the  insurrection  which  had  arisen  in  the  Papal 
States,  the  Austrians  had  entered  Bologna  (March  21st).  The  Cabinet  of  the 
Tuileries  demanded  the  withdrawal  of  the  troops.  Austria  answered  by  requiring  the 
Powers  to  guarantee  the  temporal  power  of  the  Pope.  PYance,  on  her  side,  declared 
that  she  would  not  subscribe  to  such  a  guarantee,  unless  the  Pope  accorded  the  liberal 
reforms  demanded  by  the  insurgents.  Austria  ended  by  yielding,  and  withdrew  her 
troops  on  July  15th. 

M    2 


1 64  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

look  upon  it  as  inevitable,  if  from  the  opening  of  the  session 
about  to  commence,  the  government  is  not  supported  by  the 
Chamber  in  the  vigorous  and  firm  attitude  which  it  must  assume. 
You  see,  mon  Prince,  with  what  frankness  I  am  giving  my 
opinion  as  to  the  position  of  our  affairs.  Do  not  however 
imagine  that  I  despair  of  the  success  of  our  efforts  ;  far  from  it  ; 
I  should  even  say  that  the  remedy  was  easy  if  home  affairs  were 
not  incessantly  overshadowed  by  foreign  ones,  and  vice  versa. 
The  reaction  of  these  two  vital  questions  upon  one  another,  and 
the  support  that  the  question  of  foreign  affairs  finds  in  the  military 
party,  as  well  as  the  somewhat  vainglorious  tendency  of  our 
nation,  plainly  render  the  gravity  of  the  situation  more 
difficult  to  surmount.  We  seem  under  the  impression,  that  we 
still  have  at  our  disposal,  the  armies  of  the  emperor  and  the 
finances  of  the  Restoration,  and  that  we  are  able  to  pay  both 
interest  and  capital  at  once,  by  making  war  ourselves  ;  no  doubt 
we  should  not  want  for  armies,  but  no  one  seems  to  remember, 
that  the  first  shot  may  bring  about  a  general  war.  Let  us  hope 
that  the  good  sense  of  the  country,  aided  by  the  remembrance  of 
past  misfortunes,  will  prevail,  and  save  it  from  the  spirit  of 
infatuation,  which  has  already  carried  away  too  many  people. 

Pray  accept.  .  .  . 


I  quite  understood  the  interest  taken  by  the  king's  govern- 
ment in  the  cause  of  Poland,  which  M.  Perier  recommended  so 
strongly  to  me  in  this  letter.  There  was  no  need  to  urge  me 
with  regard  to  it.  The  efforts  I  had  made  in  favour  of  Poland,  with 
the  Emperor  Napoleon  in  1807,  and  at  the  Congress  of  Vienna  in 
1 81 5,  I  was  quite  ready  to  make  again  with  the  English  govern- 
ment, but  I  was  met  by  coldness  and  opposition.  The  Tories 
were  plainly  unfavourable  to  Poland,  and  Lord  Grey,  influenced 
by  Madame  de  Lieven,  sought  for  pretexts  to  avoid  all  inter- 
vention on  the  part  of  England  in  a  cause  that  was  looked  upon 
as  lost.  Motives  of  humanity  have  but  little  weight  in  English 
politics  ;  and  no  one  would  then  have  dared  to  maintain  openly, 
that  war  against  Russia  ought  to  have  been  undertaken  to  save 
Poland.  To  my  great  regret,  I  did  not  succeed  in  extracting  any 
effectual  measures  from  the  English  Cabinet  for  this  noble  cause. 
After  having  informed  M.  Perier  and  the  government  of  this,  I 
wrote  a  letter  to  Madame  Adelaide  d'Orleans,  which  plainly 
depicts  the  situation  of  affairs  at  that  time. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  16; 


The  Prince  de  Talleyrand   to  Madame  Adelaide 

d'Orleans. 

London,  July  20/I1,  1S31. 

Mademoiselle  will  have,  ere  this,  received  a  letter  from  Prince 
Leopold  himself,  written  on  French  ground,  which  he  desired 
to  pass  through,  in  order  to  have  one  more  opportunity  of  showing 
his  respect  and  attachment  to  the  king.  His  last  words,  the  night 
before  he  left  for  Brussels,  expressed  his  desire  to  be  allied  to  the 
king  by  the  closest  ties.  I  made  no  response  to  his  observations, 
but  I  must  repeat  them  to  Mademoiselle. 

Dom  Pedro  had  the  greatest  wish  to  go  to  Paris.  Put  he 
finds  in  his  wife's  name  a  drawback  to  doing  so,  and  he  does  not 
want  to  cause  any  trouble.1  He  dines  with  me  to-morrow  ;  his 
inclination  is  entirely  towards  France. 

People  here  are  still  very  indifferent  to  the  Polish  cause. 
Russians  abound  everywhere,  since  the  arrival  of  the  Grand 
Duchess  Helena2  and  Madame  de  Nesselrode ;  they  go 
on  a  twenty-four  hours'  journey  to  Sidmouth,  where  the  Grand 
Duchess  is  taking  the  baths,  and  come  back  to  London  to  use 
their  influence  against  Poland. 

Prince  Paul  of  Wurtemburg  has  been  to  see  his  daughter, 
and  is  now  here,  where  he  is  endeavouring  to  prove  that  no  one 
is  more  suitable  than  himself  to  be  King  of  Greece.  I  do  not 
think  that  a  single  member  of  the  diplomatic  body  is  of  his 
opinion. 

I  am  impatiently  awaiting  the  king's  speech  ;  I  believe  that 
the  Belgian  fortresses  will  be  spoken  of  in  a  manner  that  will 
be  acceptable  to  Mademoiselle.  The  King  of  Holland  is  difficult 
to  deal  with  ;  I  was  very  vexed,  that,  while  M.  de  Wessenberg  was 
at  the  Hague,  there  was  no  French  minister  there.  M.  de 
Wessenberg  much  regretted  it.  A  Frenchman  could  have  made 
use  of  different  inducements  to  bring  about  an  acceptance.  "We 
shall  still  have  some  difficulty  with  Holland.  Real  losses  and  a 
naturally  bad  temper  render  the  acceptance  of  good  advice  some- 
what slow.  .   .  . 

The  news  from  the  Hague  was,  in  truth,  sufficiently  annoying 
to  the  Conference.  M.  de  Wessenberg  had  not  succeeded  in  over- 

1  The  Emperor  Dom  Pedro  had  married,  as  his  second  wife,  in  1829,  the  Princess 
Amelie-Auguste-Eugenie  de  lieauharnais,  daughter  of  Prince  Eugene. 

-  Frederique  Charlotte- Marie  (Helene  Paulowna),  born  in  1807,  daughter  of 
Prince  Paul  of  Wurtemburg,  married  in  1824  to  Michael  Paulowitch,  brother  of  the 
Emperor  Nicholas. 


1 66  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

coming  the  ill  humour  of  the  king,  who  after  all  the  concessions 
he  had  already  made,  would  not  add  any  more,  and  flatly  refused 
to  consent  to  those  contained  in  the  eighteen  preliminary  articles 
sent  to  the  Belgian  Congress  and  accepted  by  it.  Some  expedi- 
ent was  therefore  necessary  to  extricate  ourselves  from  the  dead- 
lock to  which  we  were  brought ;  the  most  feasible  seemed  to  be, 
to  propose  a  definite  treaty,  although  the  preliminaries  had  not 
yet  been  accepted  ;  this  was  rather  unusual,  it  is  true,  but  the 
circumstances  were  sufficiently  exceptional  to  warrant  the  adop- 
tion of  unusual  methods.  Only  we  could  hardly  hope  that 
Austria,  Russia,  and  Prussia  would  follow  us  in  this  step,  which,  it 
must  be  confessed,  was  not  precisely  one  of  equity  ;  and  it  is  pro- 
bable that  we  should  not  have  succeeded  in  maintaining  harmoni- 
ous relations  in  the  Conference  on  this  point,  if  King  William 
himself  had  not  aided  us  by  committing  a  fault,  as  will  presently 
be  seen,  which  could  not  fail  to  injure  his  position.  One  fact  at 
any  rate,  resulted  from  the  King  of  Holland's  refusal,  which  was, 
that  the  Conference  did  not  sacrifice  the  interests  of  Belgium,  as 
the  French  papers  and  the  opposition  in  the  Chamber  of  Deputies 
declared.  Meanwhile,  Madame  Adelaide  sent  the  following 
reply  to  my  letter,  quoted  above  : 

Madame  Adelaide    d'Orleans   to  the    Prince  de 

Talleyrand. 

Paris,  July  ^oth,  1831. 

This  same  day  a  year  ago,  mon  cher  Prince,  we  were  in  a 
state  of  great  excitement,  and  truly  we  can  but  congratulate 
ourselves  on  the  generous  and  courageous  resolution  taken  by 
my  brother  at  that  time,  and  on  the  result  of  his  loyal  and  noble 
conduct.  He  has  just  now  received  a  most  gratifying  recom- 
pense, in  the  frank  and  sincere  expression  of  affection  manifested 
by  the  whole  populace  during  the  three  fete  days  which  have 
just  passed.  I  have  never  seen  anything  like  the  real  enthu- 
siasm, the  affection,  and  the  confidence  which  has  been 
shown  him  and  expressed  in  every  face  ;  it  is  a  genuine  triumph  ! 
It  is  very  remarkable,  and  most  reassuring  for  the  future,  that  at 
the  end  of  a  year,  in  spite  of  real  grievances  and  the  machina- 
tions that  have  been  at  work  to  lead  these  good,  honest  people 
into  error,  we  should  find  greater  enthusiasm  than  ever  amongst 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  \(q 

them,  and  a  wish  to  keep  the  man  they  have  chosen  and  in 
whom  they  have  confidence.  Indeed,  it  speaks  well  for  his  good 
sense  and  good  judgment,  which  truly  merit  all  confidence.  I 
am  delighted  with  the  past  three  days,  which  have  been  splen- 
did. I  am  quite  sure  you  will  share  my  satisfaction  with  all 
your  heart  ;  I  have  therefore  hastened  to  tell  you  of  it,  and  at 
the  same  time  to  thank  you  for  both  your  charming  letters  of 
July  20th  and  25th,  which,  to  my  great  regret,  I  have  been  unable 
to  do  until  to-day.  I  am  delighted  that  you  are  satisfied  with 
the  speech  of  our  dearly  loved  king  ;  it  has  produced  an  ex- 
cellent effect  in  the  Chamber  ;  especially  the  announcement  of 
the  destruction  of  the  Belgian  fortresses,  which  was  very  neces- 
sary for  our  country.  I  am  vexed  at  the  wrong  way  in  which 
the  Belgians  took  it  at  first  ;  it  was  quite  a  mistaken  irrita- 
bility, which  they  will  surely  on  reflection  think  better  of,  for 
certainly  it  is  quite  as  much  in  their  interests  as  in  ours,  and 
this  they  will  soon  feel.  I  confess  I  am  not  very  uneasy,  for  I 
am  persuaded  that  they  must  soon  agree  with  us  about  it. 

Prince  Leopold  wrote  me  a  nice  kind  letter  from  Calais,  in 
answer  to  that  in  which  I  reproached  him  with  not  having 
mentioned  France  in  his  first  speech  to  the  Belgian  deputa- 
tion. This  time  he  has  said  a  word  for  France  ;  but  why,  when 
responding  to  the  fine,  straightforward  speech  of  M.  Surlet  dc 
Chokier,  did  he  not  speak  of  our  king,  whom  the  Belgian 
Regent  had  so  truly  and  so  justly  eulogized  ?  I  confess  I  am 
very  much  astonished  at  such  a  terrible  blunder,  and  I  shall 
say  something  about  it  to  Prince  Leopold  when  I  answer  the 
very  amiable  little  letter  which  he  has  just  written  to  me.  I 
have  known  for  some  time  of  his  wish  to  be  allied  to  the  king 
by  the  closest  ties  ;  but  you  will  understand  that  I  can  say  no- 
thing on  that  point. 

Dom  Pedro  arrived  here  on  the  26th,  just  as  we  were  going 
to  dinner.  We  had  a  large  dinner  party  on  that  day,  which  was 
somewhat  postponed  on  his  account,  and  music  in  the  evening, 
when  he  was  also  present,  and  as  well  as  on  the  three  following 
fete  days.  These  were  a  good  and  very  opportune  spectacle 
for  him  ;  he  ought  to  be  very  pleased  with  the  reception  the 
king  gave  him.  I  should  have  liked  him  to  leave  his  wife,  and 
his  little  daughter,  the  Queen,  here  with  us  ;  and  if  he  con- 
sulted his  real  interests,  after  paying  his  visit  to  England,  he 
would  return  here  with  her  ;  but  I  fear  that  he  has  no  settled 
plans. 

You  ask  me  what  I  think  of  the  Chamber.  The  reception  it 
gave  the  king  on  the  occasion  of  his  speech  gives  me  hopes  of 
its  being  satisfactory.      I   am  all    impatience   for   news  of  those 


1 68  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

brave,  interesting  Poles.  Everyone  is  just  now  greatly  interested 
in  them,  and  I  am  grieved  to  see  England  so  indifferent  about 
them. 

Adieu,  mon  cher  Prince.  .   .  . 

I  have  given  this  letter  in  full,  as  it  shows  so  plainly  the 
various  illusions,  in  which  even  so  sensible  a  person  as  Madame 
Adelaide  could  share.  But  we  had  no  time  to  indulge  in  illusions  ; 
facts  came  only  too  soon  to  recall  us  to  reality.  The  King  of 
the  Netherlands,  irritated  at  seeing  the  independence  of  Belgium 
confirmed  by  the  election  and  the  acceptance  of  Prince  Leopold, 
hurt  at  not  being  supported  in  his  resistance  by  a  single  Power, 
and  no  doubt  flattering  himself  with  the  hope  of  bringing  about 
a  general  war  in  Europe,  suddenly  took  the  desperate  resolution 
of  attacking  Belgium  with  the  army  under  the  command  of  his 
son,  the  Prince  of  Orange. 

On  August  4th,  he  announced  the  rupture  of  the  armistice 
to  the  Conference,  and  on  the  5th  his  troops  entered  Belgian 
territory.  On  the  other  side,  King  Leopold,  hardly  in  possession 
of  the  crown,  found  himself  surrounded  by  inextricable  diffi- 
culties. It  had  been  arranged  before  his  departure  from  London, 
that  as  soon  as  he  was  installed  at  Brussels,  he  should  send  two 
Belgian  commissioners,  charged  with  the  necessary  powers,  to 
negotiate  under  the  mediation  of  the  Conference,  a  definite 
treaty  for  the  separation  of  Holland  and  Belgium,  based  on  the 
twenty-eight  articles.  The  Cabinet  which  he  had  summoned, 
flatly  refused  to  send  the  commissioners,  and  maintained  that  the 
Belgians  could  treat  with  the  Dutch  without  meeting  in  person. 
King  Leopold  had  immediately  informed  the  Conference  of  this 
difficulty,  telling  them  cf  the  hostility  of  the  Dutch,  and  that  he 
had  begged  for  aid  from  France.  It  was  necessary  at  once  to 
provide  against  the  effect  of  these  new  and  troublesome  com- 
plications. Strange  to  say,  just  then  I  had  been  for  twelve 
days  without  any  communication  from  my  government.  There 
was,  however,  no  time  to  lose  in  taking  action.  The  Conference 
drew  up  a  protocol,  in  which,  while  severely  blaming  the  rupture 
of  the  armistice  by  the  Dutch,  it  approved  the  employment  for 
a  limited  time,  of  the  French  army  whose  entry  into  Belgium 


THE  REVOLUTION  OE  1830.  169 

King  Leopold  had  solicited,  and  decided  that  an  English  squad- 
ron should  proceed  to  the  defence  of  the  Belgian  coasts,  and 
repulse  the  attacks  of  Holland  in  that  quarter.1 

This  protocol  was  essential  to  prevent  a  general  conflagra- 
tion resulting  from  the  intervention  of  a  French  force  in  Belgium. 
I  can  give  no  better  idea  of  the  incidents  of  this  affair,  than  by 
citing  the  correspondence  to  which  it  gave  rise  between  Madame 
Adelaide  and  myself. 

Madame  Adelaide    d'Orlkans   to   the    Prince  de 

Talleyrand. 

Paris,  August  jfh,  1831. 

I  am  sure,  mon  cher  Prince,  that  you  were  no  less  sur- 
prised than  we  were,  at  the  incomprehensible  declaration  of  war 
by  the  King  of  Holland,  which  certainly  fully  justifies  and  makes 
us  feel  the  immense  advantage  we  gain  by  the  wise  and  noble 
conduct  of  our  well-beloved  king  and  his  government  towards 
Belgium,  and  how  fortunate  it  is  that  you  have  conducted  and 
finished  this  important  and  difficult  negotiation,  with  so  much 
prudence,  zeal,  and  ability.  By  the  agreement  of  the  five  Powers, 
we  are  now  enabled  to  hasten  to  the  aid  of  this  unhappy  country, 
at  the  entreaty  of  her  king,  against  the  infamous  aggression  of 
the  King  of  Holland,  who  ignores  the  treaties  agreed  upon  and 
just  concluded  between  the  five  Powers,  and  does  not  even  con- 
sult them  as  to  this  inconceivably  culpable  step,  which  I  can  only 
explain  by  looking  upon  him  as  mad. 

It  seems  to  me  incredible  that  when  the  King  of  the  Belgians 
asks  for  help  and  assistance  from  England,  she  should  not  at  once 
send  her  fleet  to  the  Scheldt,  in  like  manner  as  our  king  has 

1  Protocol  No.  31  (August  6th,  1831). 

The  Conference  further  decided,  that  the  French  troops  should  confine  themselves 
to  expelling  the  Dutch  from  Belgian  territory,  without  entering  Holland.  Neither 
were  they  to  invest  Maestricht  or  Venloo,  so  as  not  to  approach  the  German  frontier. 
finally,  the  French  government  was  to  undertake  to  recall  its  troops  as  soon  as 
hostilities  ceased. 

It  was  difficult  to  obtain  this  protocol  from  the  Conference,  for  the  entry  of 
French  troops  into  Belgium  caused  an  indescribable  feeling  in  the  English  cabinet. 
Lord  Palmerston  even  went  so  far  as  to  accuse  France  of  having  a  secret  understand- 
ing with  Holland.  "This  is  a  nice  performance  of  the  King  of  the  Netherlands*" 
he  wrote  to  Lord  Granville.  "I  cannot  imagine  who  has  set  him  on  ;  we  rather 
suspect  Prance.  ...  If  you  remember,  Talleyrand  proposed  to  me  some  time  ago 
to  excite  the  Dutch  to  break  the  armistice,  in  order  to  raise  an  outcry  against  them, 
then  overrun  Belgium  with  troops  and  arrange  everything  to  our  own  satisfaction. 
Can  this  be  the  realization  of  the  first  act  of  the  plot?"  (Lord  1'almerston's  private 
correspondence.) 


170  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

sent  his  two  sons  and  his  army  into  Belgium  ; *  but  you  can  well 
imagine,  with  what  impatience  we  wait  to  hear  from  you  that  this 
has  been  done  !  I  am  convinced,  that  the  best  way  to  end  this 
incomprehensible  and  unexpected  struggle  by  a  durable  peace, 
is  for  England  to  ally  herself  openly  with  us,  which  I  confess  I 
have  every  confidence  she  will  do.  It  also  appears  to  me  utterly 
impossible,  that  Prussia,  however  closely  allied  by  relationship 
and  affection  to  the  House  of  Nassau,  should  support  her  in  an 
attempt,  undertaken  in  defiance  of  the  treaties  which  she  herself 
has  just  signed,  and  against  all  the  laws  of  nations.2  It  is  a  pity, 
that  in  the  first  instance,  the  Powers  did  not  use  such  candid  and 
firm  language  as  would  have  convinced  the  king  ;  but,  on  the  con- 
trary, he  saw  there  was  a  wish  to  bring  him  back  and  keep  him 
in  Belgium,  and  this  has  given  him  confidence  to  attempt  this 
incomprehensible  enterprise ;  hoping  by  it  to  bring  about  a 
general  war. 

The  king  particularly  wishes  to  know  from  you,  and  he  begs 
me  to  ask  you  at  once  and  privately,  what  you  think  should  be 
done  in  order  to  put  an  end  to  this  by  a  definite  arrangement, 
which  would  no  longer  leave  peace  or  war  an  uncertainty,  and 
would  allow  us  to  withdraw  our  troops  from  Belgium  as  soon  as 
possible.  This  is  what  my  brother  wishes,  but  of  course  it  must 
be  done  in  such  a  way  as  not  to  compromise  our  interests,  or 
those  of  the  King  of  the  Belgians,  and  the  independence  of  that 
country.  You  would  have  been  pleased  with  the  admirable 
letter  which  our  dear  king  has  written  to  the  King  of  the  Belgians. 
Please  write  to  me  as  soon  as  possible. 

Paris,  August  gf/i,  1831. 

"  When  I  wrote  to  you  yesterday,  mon  cher  Prince,  I  was 
very  far  from  expecting  such  inconceivable  conduct  on  the  part 
of  King  Leopold  towards  the  king,  France,  and  the  army  !  How 
is  it,  that  for  all  response  to  the  admirable  letter  the  king  wrote 
to  him  on  the  4th,  in  answer  to  his  of  the  3rd  asking  for  help, 
we  have  only  the  poor  pretence,  I  can  call  it  nothing  else,  of  an 
article  of  the  Belgian  Constitution,  which  no  reason  whatever 
could  support,  put  forward  and  upheld  by  some  absurd  and  foolish 
articles  in  the  Belgian  papers  ;  and  up  to  the  present,  not  a  line 

1  The  Due  d'Orleans  and  the  Due  de  Nemours.  The  former  commanded  a 
brigade  of  cavalry,  the  latter  a  regiment  of  lancers.  The  force  was  under  the 
command  of  Marshal  Gerard. 

-  Madame  Adelaide  is  mistaken  here.  The  King  of  the  Netherlands  had  not 
signed  any  treaty  in  person  ;  his  fault  was  having  broken  an  armistice  which  he  had 
concluded  eight  months  before,  under  the  mediation  of  the  five  Powers. — (Note  of  M. 
dc  Bacourt.) 


THE  RE  VOL  UTION  OF  1 830.  171 

from  him  to  the  king?  I  cannot  understand  it.1  Meanwhile 
I  hope  that  at  this  moment  our  army  is  entering  Belgium, 
avoiding  the  fortresses,  and  marching  straight  against  the  Dutch, 
who  are  devastating  and  desolating  that  unhappy  country.  The 
king's  orders  are  to  fly  to  her  help,  and  to  drive  out  the  Dutch  ; 
and  I  am  proud,  I  confess,  of  the  greatness  and  generosity  of  our 
king  and  his  conduct.  1  am  sure  that  you  too  will  be  so,  and 
that  you  will  turn  it  to  account,  and  make  use  of  it  to  bring 
about  an  honourable,  sound,  and  advantageous  peace,  for  human- 
ity and  for  Europe. 

I  am  very  indignant  at  Lord  Aberdeen's  speech  in  the 
House  of  Lords,  which  you,  knowing  me  so  well,  will  under- 
stand and  feel  more  than  anyone.  But  I  am  delighted  with 
Lord  Grey's  reply  ;  the  king  is  quite  touched  by  it  ;  it  would 
be  well  to  tell  him  of  this.2  It  seems  from  the  English  papers, 
that  the  fleet  has  orders  to  enter  the  Scheldt,  and  that  the 
English  government  and  the  Conference  look  upon  the  rash 
deed  of  the  King  of  Holland  as  it  deserves,  which  pleases  me 
greatly  ;  but  I  shall  not  be  satisfied,  until  I  know  all  this  from 
you,  and  until  you  have  given  me  your  ideas  and  opinions  on 
the  subject.  I  therefore  await  your  first  letter  with  indescribable 
impatience.  I  am  vexed  that  poor  King  Leopold  did  not 
freely  follow  out  his  first  idea,  and  that  he  had  no  good  adviser 
near  him  to  show  him  the  blunder  he  made  by  following  his 
second,  a  blunder  into  which  he  was  drawn,  I  believe,  by  evil 
counsels.     I  fear  that  the  delay  in  the  arrival  of  our  troops  in 

1  There  was  a  party  in  Belgium  which  viewed  with  impatience  the  idea  of  ouing 
its  deliverance  to  France,  and  desired  to  preserve  to  itself  the  honour  of  repulsing  the 
Dutch.  M.  de  Muelnaere,  Foreign  Minister,  who  shared  these  ideas,  declared  that 
the  Constitution  interdicted  any  foreign  army  occupying  Belgian  territory,  unless  by 
Act  of  Parliament,  and  he  begged  the  king  not  to  allow  the  French  army  to  cross  the 
frontier.  The  king  yielded,  and  wrote  to  this  effect  to  Paris.  But  after  the  dis- 
persion of  the  army  of  the  Meuse,  he  changed  his  mind,  and  begged  Marshal  Gerard 
to  hasten  his  advance. 

-  House  of  Lords,  sitting  of  August  6th. 

Lord  Aberdeen  protested  violently  against  French  intervention  at  Lisbon  and 
the  inaction  of  England.  He  called  upon  the  Cabinet  to  protect  the  independence  of 
Dom  Miguel.  "The  government,"  he  said,  "has  nothing  to  do  with  the  character 
of  the  King  of  Portugal,  but  to  see  who  is  really  the  sovereign  of  that  country.  Our 
position  with  regard  to  Dom  Miguel  is  the  same  as  it  was  with  the  King  of  the  French, 
after  he  had  seized  the  inheritance  of  his  young  nephew,  in  favour  of  whom  Charles  X. 
abdicated.  I  say  more  :  if,  instead  of  the  real  Due  d'Orleans,  that  monster  d'Egalite 
had  been  chosen,  would  not  our  policy  have  been  still  the  same  ?  .   .  . 

Lord  Grey.  ...  "I  will  not  speak  of  the  expressions  of  the  noble  lord  when 
he  said  that  the  King  of  France  seized  the  inheritance  of  his  nephew."  .   .   . 

Lord  Aberdeen.  .  .   .  "I  did  not  say  seized,  but  occupied."  .  .  . 

Lord  Grey.  .  .  .  "  That  requires  no  answer.  I  would  rather  congratulate  Lord 
Aberdeen  himself  and  his  old  colleagues,  on  the  promptitude  they  have  shown  in 
recognizing  the  true  sovereign  of  France.  The  conduct  of  France  in  the  affairs  of 
Portugal  has  been  entirely  candid  and  loyal."  .    .   . 


172  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

Belgium  will  have  placed  his  army  in  danger,  for  they  say  that 
in  spite  of  the  advice  of  our  king  he  intends  to  commit  himself 
to. a  battle,  the  consequences  of  which,  if  he  lost  it,  would  be 
terrible  for  him.  This  is  very  probable,  according  to  what  is 
said  of  the  state  of  his  troops.     Adieu,  mon  cher  Prince.  .  .  ." 

The    Prince    de    Talleyrand    to    Madame    Adelaide 

d'Orleans. 

London,  August  loth,  1831. 

I  received  Mademoiselle's  letter  of  the  7th,  and  now  hasten 
to  answer  it. 

Mademoiselle  asks  me  a  question,  to  which  the  protocol  sent 
by  Neukomm  is  for  the  most  part  an  answer.  For  it  shows  the 
path  that  must  be  pursued  in  order  to  arrive  at  a  definite  arrange- 
ment. This  protocol  was  lengthily  and  hotly  discussed.  The 
Russian  plenipotentiaries, particularly,  were  very  difficult  to  bring 
round  to  our  way  of  thinking  ;  we  spent  eight  hours  one  day 
and  six  the  next  over  it  ;  I  think  that  I  have  obtained  all  that 
was  possible,  at  a  moment  when  the  minds  of  all  parties  were 
very  much  disturbed.  If  the  King  of  Holland  yields,  we  shall 
only  have  some  minor  details,  which  will,  I  hope,  prove  much 
less  difficult  than  those  we  have  had  to  contend  with  over  this 
very  thorny  business.  Our  troops  can  then  retire,  and  perhaps 
in  returning  to  France,  put  an  end  themselves  to  the  question 
of  the  fortresses.  My  own  opinion  is  that  this  will  cause  dis- 
pleasure, but  will  not  go  beyond  irritation.  I  only  refer,  of 
course,  to  the  fortresses  erected  by  the  Holy  Alliance.  The 
march  of  our  troops  has  startled  most  people,  but  it  was  the 
advance  to  the  front  that  made  everyone  uneasy.  What  they 
might  do  at  Maastricht  may  lead  to  serious  complications  ;  but 
their  retreat  will  be  upheld,  because  all  sides  will  approve  of  this 
measure.  They  can  thus  pay  themselves  for  the  expenses  of  the 
war,  and  surely  it  must  suit  the  King  of  the  Belgians  better,  that 
an  operation  of  this  kind,  which  must  sooner  or  later  be  done, 
should  be  performed  by  us,  from  whom  he  is  obliged  to  ask  for 
troops,  the  military  force  at  his  disposition  being  so  weak.  It 
also  seems  to  me,  that  the  destruction  of  the  fortresses  by  a 
French  army  itself,  would  please  the  French  people,  and  satisfy 
the  most  exacting  requirements. 

London,  August  nth,  1831. 

"  I  executed  Mademoiselle's  commission  to  Lord  Grey  this 
morning.     He  was  extremely  touched  by  it,  and   said   feelingly 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  173 

"  You  cannot  too  strongly  express  to  the  king  how  much  I  feel 
the  message  he  was  graciously  pleased  to  send  me."  After  a  few 
moments'  silence,  Lord  Grey  asked  me  if  I  was  acquainted  with 
the  contents  of  the  despatches  that  Lord  Palmerston  had  just  re- 
ceived from  Holland.  I  told  him  that  I  had  come  to  him  first,  and 
was  going  on  to  Lord  Palmerston  afterwards,  as  he  had  appointed 
two  o'clock  for  a  Conference.  "You  will  see  a  letter  there,"  he 
said,  "  from  the  Hague,  which  announces  that  orders  have  been 
given  for  the  Dutch  troops  to  withdraw  into  Holland  at  once. 
You  know  what  trouble  we  arc  having  over  all  this;  you  must 
have  seen  the  agitation  produced  by  the  entry  of  your  troops 
into  Belgium.  I  implore  you  to  get  the  king  to  recall  them, 
directly  he  has  official  knowledge  .of  the  orders  given  by  the 
King  of  Holland.  We  need  this  proof  of  moderation  on  your 
part.  It  is  essential  both  for  us  and  for  you.  Tell  the  king  so 
from  me.  Two  governments  desirous  to  be  quite  in  accord, 
must  pay  some  regard  to  each  other  under  all  circumstances, 
and  I  repeat  that  we  shall  be  much  embarrassed  here  if  you  do 
not  withdraw  your  troops." 

I  went  on  to  Lord  Palmerston,  who  read  me  M.  Verstolk's 
letter  j1  it  is  explicit  as  to  the  recall  of  the  Dutch  troops.  It 
would,  I  think,  be  very  serious  if  we  refused  to  comply  with 
England's  present  request,  for  the  last  twenty-four  hours  have 
altered  the  state  of  affairs.  The  retreat  of  the  Dutch  troops,  on 
the  one  hand,  and  King  Leopold's  request,  which  he  has  made 
known  here,  on  the  other,  are  two  very  important  incidents.  It 
is  certain  that  the  English  Ministry  would  not  be  able  to  face  the 
general  outcry  that  would  be  raised  against  it,  if,  when  the  Dutch 
retire,  we  were  to  remain  in  Belgium.  The  Tories  are  not  alone 
in  blaming  the  conduct  of  the  English  Cabinet  in  the  Dutch 
question  ;  and  the  leading  article  in  to-day's  Times  (the  minis- 
terial organ)  is  a  very  marked  sign  of  this.  But  as  our  military 
manoeuvre  ought  not  to  remain  without  some  result  for  France,  we 
must,  it  seems  to  me,  obtain  or  extract  from  Belgium  and  her 
king,  their  pure  and  simple,  but  official  consent  to  the  demolition 
of  the  fortresses.  Marshal  Gerard  could  easily  make  this  treaty 
when  he  leaves. 

King  Leopold,  before  quitting  London,  wrote  me  a  letter  on 
this  subject,  which  I  sent  on  to  the  government.  When  he 
arrived  at  Brussels,  he  changed  his  language,  but  now  he  must 
utter  something  definite. 

1  Jean  Gilbert  Verstolk  van  Soelen,  a  Dutch  statesman,  born  in  1777,  was  judge 
at  Rotterdam  in  1S01,  then  Governor  of  Guelderland.  Under  the  French  rule  he 
was  appointed  preTet  of  Friesland.  In  1815,  he  became  administrator  of  the  Grand 
Duchy  of  Luxemburg,  and  then  minister  at  St.  Petersburg.  In  1825.  he  entered  the 
Foreign  Office,  and  remained  there  until  1840.     He  died  in  1845. 


174  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

*  When  once  we  have  only  the  question  of  the  fortresses  to 
discuss  with  the  four  Powers,  matters  will  have  advanced  greatly, 
because  they  have  all  been  fully  dealt  with  in  the  protocol  of  the 
17th  April. 

In  all  that  has  taken  place  in  Belgium,  England  might  well 
have  found  reasons  for  thinking  that  it  was  not  possible  for 
Belgium  to  exist  any  longer,  and  that  Europe  could  only  obtain 
a  positive  guarantee  of  general  peace  in  the  scheme  of  partition. 
But  England  is  very  far  from  entertaining  such  an  idea,  and 
everywhere  else  also  there  are  different  views  ;  ambition  has 
ramified  somewhat.  What  is  the  opinion  of  France  on  this 
matter  ? 

This  is  a  long  letter  ;  old  servants,  however,  are  never  brief, 
but  they  are  warmly  and  truly  attached " 


What  other  advice  could  I  give  to  the  French  government, 
under  circumstances  which  revealed  such  complications  ?  King 
Leopold  did  not  want  to-day  what  he  wanted  yesterday,  and  the 
blustering  of  the  Belgians  culminated  in  a  disgraceful  flight 
before  the  Dutch  troops.1  One  might  really  be  tempted  to  believe 
that  neither  Belgium  nor  a  King  of  the  Belgians  existed  !  But  all 
this  was  most  inconvenient  when  no  one  had  desired  a  partition 
of  the  country.  In  England  they  feared  increasing  the  power  of 
France  ;  in  France  they  wanted  M.  le  Due  de  Nemours  ;  the 
Russians  and  Prussians  wanted  the  Prince  of  Orange,  and 
Austria  would  have  preferred  a  continuance  of  the  present 
disorder,  so  as  to  annoy  France  in  that  quarter.  All  these  causes 
had  brought  about  the  present  situation.  It  had  been  my  busi- 
ness to  avoid  war,  and  so  far  it  had  not  arisen.  At  any  rate 
we  had  had  time  given  us  to  raise  an  army.  The  one  essential  was 
that  M.  Perier  should  remain  in  power,  because  opinion  abroad 
was  entirely  with  him.  National  tranquillity  and  French  com- 
merce were  due  to  him  ;  it  would  not  therefore  do,  to  allow  a 
handful  of  seditious  men  to  lay  down  the  law.  I  was  resolved, 
while  making  as  much  as  possible  out  of  this  critical  moment,  to 
finish  up  this  tedious  matter.  As  usual,  I  was  not  in  any  way 
assisted  by  France,  where  new  demands  were  put  forward  as  fast 

1  The  Belgians  had  been  beaten   at  Hasselt   on  August  8th,  and   at  Louvain 
on  the  1 2th. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  175 

ay    I    obtained  concessions  in   London,  as  the  following  letters 
will  show  : 

Madame  Adelaide  d'Orleans  to  the  Prince  de 

Talleyrand. 

Paris,  August  13th,  1831. 

Mon  ciier  Prince, 

Up  to   now   you  have  performed  wonders.      But   the 
king  has  acquainted  Marshal  Gerard,  in   a  letter  sent   the  day 
before  yesterday,   that  he  must   wait  till   you    have   done  still 
more,  and  that    your  ability    would    succeed   in    obtaining    all 
that  was  necessary  for  a  lasting  peace.     The  demolition  of  the 
Belgian  fortresses  will  no  longer  be  considered  a  sufficient  satis- 
faction, nor  a  sufficient  security,  after  the  attempt  which  the  King 
of  Holland  has  just  made,  and  which,  but  for  the  prompt  action 
of  our  king,  and  the  arrival  of  our    army  in    Belgium,    would 
assuredly  have  been  successful,  at  least  momentarily  so,  and  then 
King  Leopold  would  have  been  dethroned.     We  wish  to  support 
him  as  far  as  it  depends  on  us  ;  but  to  make  this  possible  for  the 
king  and  his  government,  you  must  obtain  such  compensation  as 
will  satify  the  national  amour propre  and  the  general  opinion  in  our 
country,  which  is  quite  unanimous  on  this  point.     I  am  perfectly 
convinced,  and  I  repeat  to  you  in  all  friendship  and  confidence, 
that  this  is  of  the  greatest  importance  both  for  our  beloved   king, 
his  government,  and  your  own  existence  as  his  ambassador.     We 
learn  this  morning  by  telegraph,  that  my  nephews  Chartres  and 
Nemours  entered   Brussels  yesterday  at   two  o'clock,   amid   the 
acclamations  and  delight  of  the  whole  population,  who  were  await- 
ing them  with  great  impatience.     The  inhabitants  had  been  in 
such  a  state  of  terror  at  the  prospect  of  the  arrival  of  the  Dutch, 
that,  the  night  before,  M.  d'Arschot  could  find  no  other  way  of 
pacifying  them,  than  by  causing  a  dinner  to  be  prepared  for  my 
nephews  at  the  Hotel  d'Arenberg,  and  stating  that  they   were 
coming.    Here,  the  discussion  on  the  address  in  the  Chamber  of 
Deputies  still  continues  ;  we  hope  for  a  good  majority.     There 
is  no  doubt  that  these  late  events  have  been  very  useful  to  the 
government,   and   have  strengthened  it   considerably.     But   we 
must  not  ignore  the  fact  that  all  these  advantages  will   be  lost, 
and  we  shall  even  fall  lower  than  we  were  before,  if,  in  the  end, 
there  is  no  record,  no  compensation  given,  which  will  satisfy  our 
nation.     This  matter  cannot  be  in  better  hands   than  in   yours, 
mon  Prince  ;   I  feel  that  the  task  is  a  difficult  one,  but   you  will 
overcome  it,  I  am  sure,  especially  when  might  and  right  are  on 
your  side 


1 76  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

General  Sebastiani  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand. 

Paris,  August  i^th,  1831. 

Mon  Prince, 

My  official  despatch  of  to-day  explains  our  position. 
The  debates  in  the  Chamber  of  Deputies  will  show  you  our 
perplexities.  Belgium  is  a  very  delicate  question,  which  needs 
careful  handling  of  every  description,  and  at  all  times.  Our 
policy  is  neither  changed  nor  modified  ;  we  want  to  keep  peace, 
without  making  any  unreasonable  demands,  which  might  offend 
the  Powers  ;  but  the  feelings  of  the  country,  which  believes  itself 
injured  by  the  fortresses  which  have  been  raised  against  us,  must 
be  judiciously  dealt  with.  The  treaty  of  18 15,  which  you  rejected, 
is  still  our  great  difficulty.  We  do  not  want  to  destroy  it.  But 
the  Powers  must  prove  to  France  that  the  systematic  ill-will 
which  imposed  it  on  us,  is  no  longer  the  sentiment  by  which  they 
are  animated  ;  you  alone  can  make  them  clearly  understand  this. 
Your  high  position  in  Europe  and  in  London,  the  confidence 
which  you  inspire,  will  create  a  real  union  between  the  govern- 
ments, whose  good  understanding  and  concord  will  preserve  social 
order  from  the  dangers  which  threaten  it.  As  soon  as  the 
Belgian  territory  is  evacuated  by  the  Dutch  army,  twenty 
thousand  of  the  French  army  will  withdraw  into  France. 
Marshal  Gerard  will  only  retain  thirty  thousand,  who  will  fall 
back  upon  this  side  of  Nivelles.  This  diminution  of  our  forces 
is  a  guarantee,  that  we  are  anxious  to  prove  the  loyalty  of  our 
intentions  to  our  allies.  You  see  that  your  observations  have 
exercised  a  great  influence  over  our  decisions.  We  desire  to  give 
the  English  Cabinet  every  proof  of  our  wish  to  act  with  them  ; 
but  our  position  is  even  more  embarrassing  than  theirs.  Your 
presence  in  London  reassures  us  as  to  the  preservation  of  peace, 
which  is  the  object  of  all  our  endeavours,  and  which  you,  like  us, 
wish  to  be  both  honourable  and  dignified.  The  Chamber  begins  to 
work  more  with  the  Ministry,  and  if  our  foreign  affairs  were  easier, 
we  should  be  sure  of  a  large  majority.  It  is  not  the  French 
Cabinet  that  we  wish  to  preserve,  but  peace.  .  .  . 

These  were  indeed  fine  words,  but  it  was  easier  to  write 
them,  than  to  satisfy  the  claims  that  they  concealed.  I  had 
obtained  from  the  Conference  the  sanction  of  the  entry  of  the 
French  troops  into  Belgium  to  aid  King  Leopold  against  the 
Dutch  invasion  ;  it  was  felt  that  this  decision  of  the  Conference 
had  greatly  strengthened  the  position  of  the  French  Cabinet  with 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  i77 

regard  to  the  Chambers.  Now  the  Cabinet  asked  for  the  de- 
molition of  the  fortresses,  which  had  already  been  accorded  in 
principle  by  the  Powers  represented  at  the  London  Conference, 
in  the  month  of  April ;  and  it  also  wished  to  prolong  the  French 
occupation  of  Belgium,  until  the  entire  demolition  of  the  for- 
tresses was  carried  out  by  order  of  the  Powers.  This  it  was 
plainly  impossible  to  obtain,  just  at  the  time  when  the  Dutch 
troops  had  retired  within  their  own  borders  by  order  of  the 
Conference.  The  security  of  the  Belgians  and  their  king  being 
assured  by  this  step,  the  continuance  of  the  French  troops  in 
Belgium  could  only  excite  the  distrust  of  all  the  Powers,  and 
provoke  attacks  without  reply  in  the  English  Parliament,  under 
which  the  Ministry  would  succumb.1  The  Tories,  who  would 
succeed  it,  pledged  by  their  policy  to  oppose  the  occupation  of 
Belgium  by  any  French  army,  would  be  intractable  on  this 
point,  and  war  would  be  inevitable.  It  was  necessary,  therefore, 
to  assist  the  English  Cabinet  to  keep  in  office,  and  not  to  put 
forward  unreasonable  demands  on  the  part  of  France,  some 
portion  of  whose  government  was  a  prey  to  evil  influences. 
One  can  judge  of  this  by  what  the  Due  de  Dalberg  wrote  to 
me  on  the  subject. 

The  Due  de  Dalberg  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand. 

Paris,  August  13///,  1831. 

Mon  cher  Prince, 

I  have  only  time  to  tell  you,  that  Providence  is  more 
watchful  over  France  than  those  are  who  govern  her.  We  are 
employed  in  educating  200  new  Deputies,  who  are  more  suited 

1  The  attitude  which  the  English  Cabinet  wished  to  preserve,  on  the  question  of 
the  retreat  of  the  French  troops  and  the  demolition  of  the  fortresses,  is  clearly  shown 
in  the  following  letter  from  Lord  Palmerston  to  Lord  Granville  : 

"{Private.)  "Foreign  Office, 

"August  17th,  1831. 

"My  dear  Granville, 

"  I  have  just  been  speaking  to  Talleyrand,  who  gave  me  a  private  letter  to 
read,  which  Sebastiani  wrote  to  him  on  the  14th.  In  this  letter  Sebastiani  announced  the 
return  to  France  of  20,000  French  troops  and  the  withdrawal  of  the  rest  on  Nivelles  ; 
but  there  is  an  ugly  passage  relating  to  the  fortresses,  inferring  that  some  arrangement 
must  be  made  about  them  before  the  French  evacuate  Belgium  entirely. 

"Talleyrand  asked  me  what  I  thought  of  this  letter.  I  said  that  his  government 
was  mistaken,  if  it  thought  that  we  should  ever  mix  up  the  question  of  the  fortresses 
with  that  of  the  evacuation  of  Belgium  ;  that  the  French  government  had  promised  to 

VOL.   IV.  N 


178  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

to  regulating  the  affairs  of  a  commune,  than  to  deciding  those  of 
an  empire.  The  last  two  days  have,  I  think,  shown  an  improve- 
ment in  things.  The  Dutch  invasion  is  of  great  moment ;  it 
subdues  the  cackling  of  the  Belgian  and  French  revolutionists, 
furnishes  the  government  with  an  opportunity  of  showing  a 
little  energy,  and  proves  that  England  does  not  separate  herself 
from  the  interests  created  by  the  revolution  of  July.  I  advise 
the  hastening  of  a  final  arrangement  between  Holland  and 
Belgium,  and  keeping  a  just  and  equitable  balance  in  favour  of 
the  former.  You  must  have  the  consent  of  the  King  of  Holland, 
or  you  can  settle  nothing. 

The  folly  which  emanates  from  the  French  Tribune  becomes 
truly  insipid.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  high  time  that  the 
camaraderie  of  the  Palais  Royal  with  the  scum  of  the  revolution 
should  cease.  Europe  is  asking  how  those  in  power  can 
strengthen  themselves  by  such  means  !  Messieurs  Appony  and 
Pozzo  complain  of  the  language  used  by  the  French  agents  in 
Italy  and  Germany.  You  may  be  sure  that  directly  there  is  any 
insurrectionary  movement  in  Italy  the  Austrians  will  invade  it. 
In  my  opinion,  they  will  be  doing  right. 

Good  Casimir  Perier,  to  whom  we  have  been  holding  on 
like  grim  death  lest  he  should  escape  us,  talks  of  nothing 
but  retirement.  The  lowest  intrigues  are  therefore  now  being 
hatched  for  the  composition  of  the  Ministry  which  is  to  succeed 
him.  The  heads  of  it  are  Odilon  Barrot,  Salverte,  and  Clausel,1 
who  has  been  given  the  marshal's  baton  to  augment  his  import- 
ance. All  this  puts  anything  reasonable  out  of  the  question  ; 
and  you  may  think  yourself  lucky  to  be  away  from  such 
follies 

The  Due  de  Dalberg  touched  in  his  letter,  on  the  plan  to 
which  I  was  resolved  to  adhere,  as  soon  as  we  should  have 
passed   the   present    crisis    in    Belgian    affairs  ;    this    was    to 

quit  Belgium,  and  that  we  must  wait  for  the  fulfilment  of  that  promise ;  that  as  to  the 
fortresses,  we  could  not  even  take  the  question  of  their  demolition  into  consideration 
before  the  French  troops  were  out  of  Belgium.  We  have  quite  decided  to  dismantle 
several  of  these  Belgian  fortresses,  but  we  will  never  suffer  France  to  lay  down  the 
law  to  us  on  this  matter,  at  the  point  of  the  bayonet."  (Private  correspondence  of 
Lord  Palmerston.) 

1  Bertrand  Clausel,  born  in  1772,  captain  of  the  Pyrenean  Legion  in  1792,  was 
made  brigadier-general  in  1799,  and  took  part  in  all  the  campaigns  of  the  Empire, 
notably  in  Spain.  Condemned  to  death  for  contumacy  in  1815,  by  his  conduct 
during  the  Hundred  Days,  he  fled  to  America,  returned  to  France  after  the  amnesty 
(1820),  and  was  elected  deputy  in  1827.  In  1830,  he  received  the  command  of  the 
army  in  Algiers,  was  recalled  in  1831,  and  appointed  marshal  of  France  (July  30th). 
Appointed  governor-general  in  1835,  he  returned  to  France  the  year  after  the  failure 
of  the  expedition  of  Constantine.     He  died  in  1842. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  179 

pursue  without  intermission  the  conclusion  of  a  definite  treaty 
which  would  settle  matters.  Only  I  was  quite  determined  that, 
if  the  King  of  Holland  persisted  in  his  system  of  opposition  to  a 
final  settlement,  I  would  content  myself  with  a  solemn  treaty 
between  the  five  Great  Powers  and  Belgium,  as  I  felt  convinced, 
that  such  a  treaty  would  protect  the  Belgians  from  a  fresh 
invasion  and  insure  the  maintenance  of  peace.  But  before 
arriving  at  this  point,  the  excitement  in  Paris  must  be  quieted 
and  the  requirements  of  the  really  embarrassing  position  of 
the  English  Cabinet  met  ;  to  this  end  I  wrote  to  Madame 
Adelaide. 


The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  Madame  Adelaide 

d'Orleans. 

London,  August  17th,  1831. 

I  have  but  one  thought  ever  before  me,  the  service  of  the 
king  and  the  real  welfare  of  France,  which  so  many  conflicting 
passions  greatly  compromise.  Accidents  also,  it  must  be 
admitted,  often  cause  our  efforts  and  plans  to  miscarry  ;  and 
the  present  complication  seems  to  me,  without  exception,  the 
most  annoying  of  any  during  this  long  and  painful  negotiation. 
For  instance,  the  entry  of  our  troops  into  Belgium  was  forced 
upon  us,  and  their  withdrawal  presents  difficulties,  which,  from 
their  nature  it  appears,  may  compromise  the  existence  of  the 
wise,  firm,  peaceful,  and  enlightened  Ministry  which  surrounds 
the  king.  The  excitable  French  mind,  roused  by  military 
demonstrations,  must  have  victories  and  conquests.  The  retreat 
of  the  Dutch  renders  victories  impossible  ;  and  the  interests  of 
the  Powers,  whether  rightly  or  wrongly,  are  opposed  to  con- 
quests. While  this  dilemma  occupies  the  king's  Council, 
events  of  importance  are  also  taking  place  here. 

On  the  very  day  our  troops  passed  the  frontier,  a  reaction 
commenced  in  the  minds  of  the  English  public,  of  which  the 
Times,  which  you  should  certainly  read,  gives  some  striking 
proofs.1     This  reaction  has  extended  visibly  ;    it    menaces  the 

1  "You  will  have  seen  the  violent  language  of  the  Times  against  France:  we 
cannot  prevent  it.  The  Times  breaks  out  now  and  then,  and  goes  its  own  road,  but 
the  tone  it  has  adopted  lately  cannot  have  done  much  harm,  for  it  may  serve  to  con- 
vince the  French,  that  the  language  of  the  English  government  on  the  Belgian  question 
might  have  been  still  more  forcible,  without  going  beyond  the  general  feeling  on  the 
subject. " — Lord  Palmerston  to  Lord  Granville,  August  26th.  (Private  correspondence 
of  Lord  Palmerston.) 

N    2 


180  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

present  Cabinet ;  it  is  becoming  national ;  it  is  even  putting 
reform  in  the  background.  Old  jealousies  are  aroused,  and  irri- 
tability is  displayed  on  all  sides,  for  there  is  an  English 
sentiment,  which  has  for  200  years  been  so  completely  in 
unison  with  the  Dutch  question  and  that  of  the  Netherlands, 
that  one  cannot  touch  it  with  impunity.  Lord  Grey  and  the 
entire  Cabinet  do  not  conceal  this,  and  do  not  hide  from  me 
that  it  concerns,  not  only  their  continuing  in  office,  but  the  pre- 
servation of  peace.  If  they  were  to  consent  to  the  prolonged 
presence  of  our  troops  in  Belgium,  the  Tories,  who  know  that 
war  alone  can  put  off  reform,  will  urge  it  with  all  their 
might,  and  will  find,  in  the  national  amour  propre,  an  echo 
which  up  to  now  has  failed  them  in  the  country.  If  Lord 
Grey's  Ministry  goes  out,  it  will  be  replaced  by  one,  hostile 
to  all  that  concerns  peace.  If  Lord  Grey  is  to  stay  in, 
he  must  be  able  to  say  that  our  troops  will  return  to  France, 
or  that  he  has  decided  to  act  against  us,  as  his  country  thinks 
best. 

In  this  situation,  what  is  the  best  way  to  conciliate  every- 
body ?  No  plan  presents  itself  to  me ;  I  see  difficulties  every- 
where. That  which  seems  to  me  to  offer  the  fewest  would 
be  this :  it  was  at  King  Leopold's  request  that  the  king's  troops 
entered  Belgium  ;  it  was  to  his  aid  that  we  hastened  with  a 
speed  and  an  expenditure  for  which  he  ought  to  be  grateful. 
It  is  no  less  certain  that  we  have  rendered  signal  service,  both 
to  him  and  to  his  country,  which,  in  a  few  hours,  would  have 
become  a  prey  to  war.  Some  mark  of  gratitude  is  due  to  us, 
we  have  certainly  earned  some  compensation.  To  ask  for  this 
from  the  Conference  would  be  a  false  measure ;  the  English 
would  say,  We  shall  not  ask  for  it  ;  and  the  other  members  of 
the  Conference  would  become  uneasy.  It  seems  to  me  that  we 
must  apply  to  King  Leopold.  A  direct  agreement  between  one 
independent  sovereign  and  another,  seems  to  me  the  most  likely 
to  extricate  us  from  the  difficulty  we  are  in.  If  therefore 
General  Gerard  and  General  Belliard  went  straight  to  Prince 
Leopold,  with  the  energy  and  promptitude  that  is  used  in 
military  treaties,  and  if  they  said  to  him,  "  The  retreat  of  our 
troops  depends  on  such  and  such  a  thing ;  take  advice  of  your 
Council  and  swear  it  to  secrecy  ;  we  will  do  the  same  with  Paris, 
and  sign  in  two  hours,"  what  was  agreed  to  then,  would  be  a 
settled  fact ;  the  Powers  would  have  to  agree  to  it  without  war,  for 
the  treaty  would  have  been  made  between  recognized  Powers, 
who  have  the  right  to  do  what  they  please,  so  long  as  they 
observe  the  regular  forms  of  their  own  countries.  Prince 
Leopold  did  not  consult  the  Powers  when  he  called  the  forces  of 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  181 

France  to  his  aid  ;  he  has  no  need  to  call  upon  them  to  make 
the  troops  retire.  The  necessity  for  urgency  should  regulate  the 
whole  of  this  question. 

No  one  here  appreciates  the  withdrawal  of  20,000  of  our 
troops,  because  30,000  are  sufficient  to  conquer  the  whole  of 
Belgium  when  there  are  only  Belgians  in  it. 

In  my  despatch  of  to-day,  I  did  not  speak  of  the  idea 
contained  in  this  letter,  because,  with  the  king  my  duty  is  to 
hazard  everything,  but  with  the  Cabinet  one  must  keep  within 
the  bounds  of  prudence.  The  king  will  see  if  what  I  have 
suggested  to-day  is  worth  anything.  My  time  is  spent  in 
searching  for  expedients/but  if  this  is  worth  nothing,  it  might  be 
better,  perhaps,  to  follow  out  Lord  Grey's  views.  He  again  this 
morning  pledged  himself  to  the  demolition  of  the  fortresses 
when  the  time  for  this  arrives.  He  wants  it  to  be  done,  but 
not  by  us. 

I  have  given  the  king's  letter  to  Dom  Pedro's  Charge 
<f  Affaires ;  he  is  to  send  it  to  him  to-day.  Dom  Pedro  left  here 
yesterday,  with  all  his  family ;  he  is  not  very  pleased  with  his 
late  stay  in  England.  .  .  . 


London,  August  ig//i,  1831. 

At  the  end  of  my  last  letter,  I  spoke  to  Mademoiselle  of  my 
idea  of  treating  with  Prince  Leopold,  but  what  I  proposed  must 
be  kept  a  profound  secret.  The  moment  it  is  patent  that  we 
want  to  do  something,  we  shall  fail,  and  shall  displease  all  the 
Powers.  At  the  point  where  matters  are  now,  one  can  no  longer, 
without  danger,  do  anything  but  make  known  officially  the  letter 
Prince  Leopold  wrote  to  me  at  the  time  of  his  departure  ;  the 
copy  of  it  is  at  Paris.  You  may  be  sure  that  the  fortresses  will 
be  demolished.  Lord  Granville  will  repeat  the  assurance  of  it 
to  the  king  ;  I,  personally,  have  no  doubt  of  it.  Indeed,  I  think 
there  is  only  one  thing  that  would  prevent  it,  viz.,  the  desire  to 
do  it  ourselves.  This  would  make  it  a  question  of  amour  propre, 
and  between  great  nations  no  one  could  foresee  what  that  might 
lead  to. 

The  king  will  have  some  good  news  to  tell  Dom  Pedro :  the 
Comte   de  Villaflor  has  landed  at  St.  Michael1  with  1500  men. 

1  The  island  of  St.  Michel  is  the  most  important  of  the  archipelago  of  the  Azores. 
Comte  de  Villaflor  took  possession  of  it  on  the  1st  of  August,  in  the  name  of  the 
Regency  of  Terceira. 

The  Comte  de  Villaflor,  general-in  chief  of  Dom  Pedro's  troops,  was  born  in 
1790.  He  enlisted  at  eighteen,  and  became  general  of  brigade  in  1826,  on  the 
outbreak  of  the  civil  war.     He  sided  with  Dom  Pedro.     In  1829  he  went  to  Ter» 


1 82  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

He  is  master  of  the  island,  in  which  there  was  a  large  force  of 
artillery  and  2000  regular  troops.  There  are  now  therefore  5000 
men,  including  those  which  were  at  Terceira,  at  the  disposal  of 
the  young  queen,  whose  adventurous  life  would  demand  that  she 
should  be  prettier. 

The  English  Ministry  has  just  had  a  parliamentary  defeat ;  it 
is  to  be  hoped  that  it  will  recover  itself,  for  it  is  very  necessary 
to  us.  .  .  } 

After  long  discussions  in   the  Conference,  during  which  I 
energetically  maintained  that  the  prolonged  stay  of  the  French 
troops  was  necessary  to  the  safety  of  Belgium,  we  at  last  agreed 
to  impose  on  the  King  of  Holland  a  new  armistice  of  six  weeks, 
during    which  a  definite   treaty  should   be   concluded    between 
Holland  and  Belgium,  under  the  guarantee  of  the  five  Powers. 
Protocol  No.  34,  which  contained  these  stipulations,  declared  at 
the  same  time  that  in  consideration  of  such    guarantees,  the 
presence  of  French  troops  in  Belgium  ceased  to  be  indispensable, 
and    that    they   ought  to   retire,   without  however   fixing   any 
precise  term  for  their  withdrawal.      The  English  Ministry  had 
insisted  on  obtaining  this  declaration,  as  vital  to  the  existence  of 
the    Cabinet.     It   will    be    seen  that  in   Paris    they  considered 
themselves  equally  lost,  if  the  French  troops  had  to  leave  Belgium 
without  having   obtained   either  the   immediate    demolition   ot 
the  fortresses,  or   new  guarantees  for  their  future  demolition. 
King  Louis  Philippe  himself,  usually  calmer  and  more  capable 
than  those  who   surrounded   him,  gave  way  to  suspicions  and 
uneasiness,  which  are  plainly  visible  in  the  letters  I  am  about  to 
quote,  and  which,  in  my  opinion,  do  more  honour  to  his  patri- 
otism   and    loyalty,  than    to    his    political    foresight.     He  sent 
General  Baudrand,  his  son's  aide-de-camp,  to  me  in  great  haste, 
bringing  the  following  letters  with  him  to  London : 

ceira,  whence  he  departed  in  1831,  at  the  head  of  the  expedition  which  accomplished 
the  fall  of  Dom  Miguel  and  the  accession  of  Dona  Maria.  In  1836,  he  was  Prime 
Minister  for  several  months.  During  the  whole  period  of  the  troubles  which  agitated 
Portugal  for  so  long,  he  remained  constaht  to  Queen  Dona  Maria  and  the  liberal 
charter.  He  died  in  i860.  Comte  de  Villaflor  was  created  Due  de  Terceira  in  1833. 
1  In  the  House  of  Commons,  August  19th,  the  Marquis  of  Chandos  had  presented 
an  amendment,  which  proposed  to  accord  the  right  of  suffrage  to  all  agriculturists, 
who  had  had,  for  one  year,  a  lease  of  land  of  the  value  of  £$o  sterling.  This 
amendment,  although  opposed  by  the  Ministry,  was  carried  by  a  majority  of  232 
to  148. 


the  revolution  oe  1830.  183 

King  Louis  Philippe  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand. 

PARIS,  Saturday,  August  27th,  1 83 1. 

I  feel,  mon  cher  Prince,  that  I  must  open  my  mind  to  you 
about  the  protocol  that  you  have  just  signed.  If  such  acts  are 
required,  as  I  can  very  well  believe,  to  maintain  the  English 
Cabinet,  I  cannot  conceal  from  you  that  they  are  of  a  nature  to 
ruin  my  government,  and  upset  everything  again  here.  The 
honour  of  France,  which  has  been  confided  to  me,  and  which  is 
as  my  own  ;  her  safety,  for  which  I  am  responsible,  and  which 
constitutes  mine,  all  forbid  me  to  look  upon  myself  as  being 
bound  by  this  protocol,  unless  other  measures  are  taken  to 
modify  it  and  render  it  acceptable  to  my  ministers.  I  wish 
to  warn  you  of  this  myself,  and  ask  you  to  use  all  your  efforts 
to  have  them  adopted.  You  would  be  rendering  me  a  very 
great  service,  and  I  think  the  construction  of  the  second  para- 
graph gives  you  an  opening  for  it. 

I  confess,  mon  cher  Prince,  that  there  is  something  strange  to 
my  eyes  in  this  step  taken  by  the  Conference.  I  sent  an  army  into 
Belgium  to  uphold  its  work ;  without  the  presence  of  that  army, 
Belgium  would  have  been  conquered,  and  Leopold  dethroned. 
I  promised  to  withdraw  my  troops,  as  soon  as  there  was  no 
longer  any  danger  of  leaving  the  Belgians  and  their  new  sovereign 
at  the  mercy  of  the  Dutch,  and  the  matter  was  so  understood. 
But  what  may,  nay,  what  must  happen,  were  I  to  decide  to  recall 
the  whole  army  into  France  in  consequence  of  your  last  protocol? 
We  should  find  ourselves  again  in  the  same  position,  as  when  it 
was  necessary  to  come  to  an  instantaneous  decision,  and  take 
action  with  miraculous  rapidity  in  order  to  save  Belgium  and 
Leopold's  throne.  We  ought  not  to  expose  ourselves  afresh  to 
such  great  dangers.  Holland  has,  at  this  moment,  more  than  a 
hundred  thousand  men  at  the  gates  of  Belgium,  and  the  Belgians 
have  nothing,  absolutely  nothing,  to  oppose  to  them.  Thus,  if 
scorning  afresh  the  good  faith  of  the  armistice,  Holland  invaded 
Belgian  territory  a  second  time,  or  even  if  the  suspension  of 
aims  expired  without  any  treaty  having  been  concluded,  it  is 
clear  that  the  overthrow  of  the  Belgian  throne  would  be  still 
easier  and  more  certain  than  it  was  before.  One  might  then 
well  ask,  if  the  Conference  really  wishes  to  destroy  that  which 
it  has  almost  brought  to  an  issue  with  so  much  care  and  trouble, 
or  whether  it  desires  that  Leopold,  left  to  himself  and  denuded 
of  power,  should  fall,  dethroned,  and  without  defence,  and  that 


1 84  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

Belgium,  a  prey  to  anarchy  and  desolation,  ruined  by  the  double 
scourge  of  war  and  inundations,  should  find  her  only  salvation 
in  reverting  to  the  House  of  Nassau  ? 

Really,  mon  cher  Prince,  I  must  say  with  all  the  frankness 
of  the  friendship  which  binds  me  to  you,  that  I  cannot  under- 
stand how  the  position  of  Belgium,  of  my  government,  and  of 
myself  has  so  far  escaped  you,  that  you  should  have  made  no 
difficulty  about  signing  this  strange  protocol.  You  must  abso 
lutely  find  some  way  of  getting  us  out  of  this  crisis,  which 
menaces  the  peace  of  Europe  in  the  highest  degree.  My 
Ministry  points  out  a  way  to  you,  which  seems  to  me  easy 
of  adoption  ;  for  to  reject  it,  would  be  to  justify  the  sus- 
picions from  which,  as  I  told  you,  I  with  difficulty  defend 
myself.1 

Finally,  mon  cher  Prince,  believe  me,  and  endeavour  also  to 
convince  your  colleagues  at  the  Conference,  that  all  it  was  pos- 
sible to  do,  humanly  speaking,  I  have  done  ;  that,  after  having 
given  very  strong  guarantees  to  my  allies  of  the  purity  of  my 
intentions,  I  owe  my  country  others  still  more  efficacious  than 
such  as  would  result  from  your  last  protocol,  and  this  under  pain 
of  seeing  myself  powerless  to  restrain  the  fury  and  impetuosity 
of  the  nation.  It  is  my  thorough  knowledge  of  this,  mon  cher 
Prince,  which  makes  me  so  strongly  urge  the  demolition  of  the 
fortresses  ;  for  looked  upon  as  they  are  on  all  sides  as  objects  of 
temptation,  which  must  not  be  allowed  to  stand  within  reach 
or  sight  of  the  players  ;  they  cause  all  the  perplexities  and  are 
the  source  of  all  the  alarms. 

Weigh  well  what  I  have  said,  and  you  will  see  that  my 
eagerness  to  have  this  business  ended,  is  the  most  positive  proof 
of  the  loyalty  of  my  intentions  towards  Belgium,  and  the  straight- 
forward policy  of  my  government  towards  England  and  the 
other  Powers.  Be  assured  also,  that  it  is  this  same  loyalty  and 
straightforwardness,  which  induce  us  not  to  wish  to  withdraw  all 
our  troops  from  Belgium,  until  efficacious  measures  have  been 
taken  to  insure  the  preservation  of  Leopold  on  his  throne. 
You  know  the  prince  ;  and  my  friendship  for  him  need  not 
prevent  us  from  acknowledging,  that  his  disposition  is  a  sure 
guarantee  that  he  would  not  have  asked  to  be  allowed  to  keep 

1  The  expedient  demanded  by  the  Cabinet  was,  that  the  French  troops  should  not 
leave  Belgium  until  they  had  obtained  from  the  Belgian  government  a  formal  engage- 
ment to  proceed  with  the  demolition  of  the  fortresses.  It  was  to  this  end,  that  M. 
de  Talleyrand  obtained  assurances  from  the  English  government  that  they  would  not 
insist  further  on  the  withdrawal  of  the  French  troops,  and  that,  at  the  same  time,  the 
Cabinet  of  the  Tuileries  should  send  M.  de  Latour  Maubourg  to  Brussels,  charged 
with  negotiating  a  secret  arrangement  with  King  Leopold  as  to  the  question  of  the 
fortresses. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  185 

our  troops,  had  he  not  been  convinced  that  he  could  not  do 
without  them. 

Another  very  strong  consideration  is,  that  the  King  of  Hol- 
land has  had  great  trouble  to  assemble,  keep,  and  pay  his 
110,000  men  ;  but  he  cannot  afford  to  pay  this  artificial  force 
much  longer,  and  it  is  therefore  evident  that  he  only  keeps  it 
together  to  invade  Belgium,  where  the  distances  are  so  short, 
that  it  is  quite  possible  for  whoever  enters  first  to  outstrip  his 
adversary  at  every  point.  Far  from  diminishing  this  overwhelm- 
ing army,  the  King  of  Holland  continues  to  augment  and  re- 
cruit it  at  any  cost  all  over  Germany.  Now,  I  ask,  what  con- 
fidence can  one  place  in  any  armistice  with  him,  in  which  the 
disbanding  of  this  army  is  not  insisted  upon  ? 

But  I  see,  mon  cher  Prince,  that  my  letter  is  already  longer 
than  I  could  have  wished.  You  must  attribute  it  to  my  desire 
to  speak  openly  to  you,  and  I  hope  you  will  only  see  in  my 
frankness,  one  more  proof  of  my  friendship  and  regard  for  you. 

Yours  affectionately, 

Louis  Philippe. 


The  King  added  the  following  note  on  the  same  day,  August 
27th,  4  P.M.  : 

After  I  had  written  this  long  letter,  mon  cher  Prince,  I  de- 
cided to  send  it  to  you  by  Lieut-General  Baudrand,  my  eldest 
son's  aide-de-camp,  who  returned  yesterday  from  Brussels  with 
him.  He  fully  understands  the  state  of  that  country,  and  the 
painful  and  even  precarious  position  of  king  Leopold,  who  has 
neither  troops  nor  a  government.  It  would  be  condemning 
him  to  annihilation  if  he  was  refused  the  real  and  moral  sup- 
port that  the  presence  of  our  troops  can  alone  insure  him,  after 
the  violent  shock  he  has  just  experienced. 

I  have  every  confidence  in  General  Baudrand,  and  I  know 
that  the  terms  he  was  on  with  the  English  army  in  18 16,  have 
made  him  favourably  known  in  England,  and  while  there  he 
can,  if  you  think  well,  give  a  true  picture  of  the  state  of  things 
both  in  France  and  in  Belgium.  .  .  . 

General  Baudrand  also  brought  me  letters  from  Mademoiselle 
and  from  General  Sebastiani,  written  in  the  same  strain  as  that 
of  the  king.  I  will  only  give  General  Sebastiani's  letter,  who 
Avas  even  still  more  alarmed  than  the  king. 


1 86  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

General  Sebastian i  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand. 

Paris,  August  27/I1,  1831. 
Mon  Prince, 

Protocol  No.  34,  places  us  in  a  position  of  which  it  is 
impossible  to  foresee  the  results.  The  most  probable  and  most 
imminent  is,  undoubtedly,  the  dissolution  of  the  Ministry.  It  is 
impossible  for  us  to  agree  to  the  immediate  evacuation  of 
Belgium,  without  any  other  guarantee  than  the  suspension  of 
arms  for  six  weeks,  when  Holland  is  still  keeping  and  increasing 
her  army  of  a  hundred  thousand  men,  and  has  just  shown  so  little 
regard  for  the  pledges  she  gave  to  the  Powers.  It  is  not  enough 
for  us  to  be  convinced,  that  the  proposed  suspension  of  arms  will 
bring  about  a  near  and  lasting  peace,  without  any  fresh  danger 
to  King  Leopold.  This  conviction  must  be  shared  by  the 
nation  and  the  Chambers,  and  this  we  cannot  hope  for.  Bel- 
gium is  in  a  state  of  anarchy,  her  army  is  dissolved  ;  King 
Leopold  cannot  organize  either  his  army  or  the  administration 
of  the  government,  if  he  is  not  protected  by  a  force  of  some  kind* 

The  matter  of  the  fortresses  gives  rise  to  suspicions  that 
have  their  origin  in  only  too  many  circumstances. 

The  indulgent  and  kind  disapprobation  expressed  towards 
the  King  of  Holland  does  not  reassure  us  at  all.  All  the 
ministers  of  the  Powers  at  the  Hague,  including  Sir  Charles 
Bagot,1  the  English  Ambassador,  went  to  the  Princess  of  Orange 
to  congratulate  her  on  the  victories  of  the  prince,  as  soon  as  the 
news  of  the  battle  of  Louvain  reached  them.  We  send  General 
Baudrand  to  explain  to  you  the  real  state  of  affairs  ;  send  him 
back  as  soon  as  you  can  spare  him  ;  he  is  at  your  service. 
Settle  this  business  for  us,  if  you  would  prevent  the  formation 
of  a  warlike  Cabinet.  We  hope  everything  from  your  ability 
and  your  love  of  peace.     This  is  indeed  a  crisis.  .  .  . 

At  the  same  time  that  General  Baudrand  brought  me  these 
cries  of  alarm,  M.  de  Latour  Maubourg  had  been  sent  to 
Brussels,  to  induce  King  Leopold  and  his  government  to  sign  a 
treaty  by  which  they  engaged  themselves  to  demolish  certain 
fortresses.  I  was  informed  of  this  (though  not  by  the  govern- 
ment) in  time  to  warn  M.  de  Latour  Maubourg  of  the  difficulties 
he  would  meet  with,  and  the  traps  that  would  be  set  for  him. 
He  wrote  to  me  on  the  28th  of  August  from  Brussels. 

1  Sir  Charles  Bagot,  born  in  1781,  member  of  the  Privy  Council,  Minister -Pleni- 
potentiary at  the  Hague,  later  on  Governor- General  of  Canada.     He  died  in  1843. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  1S7- 

The  Comte  de  Latour  Mauhourg  to  the  Prince  de 

Talleyrand. 

Brussels,  August  2$///,  1831. 
Mon  Prince, 

The  letter  you  were  so  good  as  to  write  to  me  here  has 
just  arrived.  The  special  object  for  which  I  came  to  Brussels 
is  not  yet  carried  out ;  the  people  here  are  timid,  distrustful, 
anxious  to  obtain  rather  than  to  give,  and  taken  up  with  the 
care  of  insuring  their  responsibility  against  any  future  attacks. 
I  was  assured  when  I  left  Paris  that  it  would  be  quite  a  simple 
matter.  On  my  arrival  I  soon  found  that  it  was  a  very  com- 
plicated one.  I  foresaw  the  rock  ahead  pointed  out  to  me  by 
your  remarks  transmitted  to  Paris  ;  thanks  to  your  directions,  I 
have  tried  carefully  to  avoid  it,  and  I  think  I  have  succeeded. 
The  English  minister,  Sir  Robert  Adair,1  is  displeased  with  the 
alarm  shown  by  the  Belgian  Cabinet  on  receiving  the  last  pro- 
tocol, No.  34.  If,  say  the  Ministers,  the  six  weeks'  armistice 
passes  without  the  negotiation  being  finished,  we  shall  then  be 
without  arms  or  any  guarantee  against  the  attacks  of  our 
enemy.  France  could  no  longer  aid  us  as  she  has  now  done, 
with  the  approval  of  the  Powers,  and  without  compromising  the 
general  peace.  We  tell  them,  that  in  such  a  case  a  new  pro- 
tective armistice,  like  the  former  ones,  will  shelter  them  from  all 
attempts  from  Holland.  We  do  not,  however,  succeed  in  con- 
vincing them.  They  say  that  King  William  continues  to  recruit 
his  army  ;  that  the  Rhine  is  covered  with  boats  bringing  men 
into  Holland,  without  uniform,  but  completely  equipped,  and 
coming,  according  to  them,  from  regiments  by  permission  of 
Prussia.  It  is  certain  that  until  the  Conference  succeeds  in 
bringing  about  the  reduction  of  the  Dutch  army,  we  shall 
have  great  difficulty  in  inspiring  the  Belgians  with  a  sense  of 
security.  .  .  . 

I  had  taken  steps,  even  before  receiving  the  letters  from  the 
king  and  General  Sebastiani  of  August  27th,  to  satisfy,  as  far  as  it 
was  possible  to  do  so,  the  demands  made  in  them,  and  owing  to 
my  urgent  importunity,  the  Conference  consented  to  shut  its 
eyes  to  the  prolonged  sojourn  of  the  French  troops  in  Belgium, 

1  Sir  Robert  Adair,  English  diplomat,  born  in  1763,  entered  Parliament  at  a  very 
early  age,  and  sat  on  the  Whig  side.  He  was  charged  with  a  special  mission  to 
Vienna  in  1806;  then  to  Constantinople.  Fiom  1831-1851  he  was  accredited  to 
Brussels;  on  his  return  he  was  made  a  member  of  the  Privy  Council.  He  died  in. 
1855- 


188  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

without  however  expressing  their  consent  in  writing  ;  this  was 
all  that  was  necessary.  After  having  obtained  this  new  con- 
cession from  the  Conference,  I  waited  several  days  to  allow 
General  Baudrand  time  to  judge  of  the  state  of  opinion  in 
London,  and  then  sent  by  him  the  following  letter  to  King 
Louis  Philippe : 

The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  King  Louis  Philippe. 

London,  September  ind,  1831. 

Sire, 

Your  Majesty  has  written  to  me  yourself,  which  is 
treating  me  with  a  graciousness  of  which  I  am  fully  sensible, 
and  which,  if  there  was  any  need,  would  still  further  increase 
my  attachment  to  your  person,  and  my  zeal  for  your  service.  Both 
have  urged  me  towards  that  honourable  preservation  of  peace, 
which  the  king  gave  me  as  my  watchword  when  I  left  France. 
The  numerous  events  that  have  since  then  succeeded  each 
other  in  every  part  of  the  globe,  have  not  rendered  this  peace 
any  the  less  necessary,  but  have  rather  tended  to  make  it  more 
difficult. 

The  latest  events,  especially,  in  bringing  into  question  the 
interests  of  France  and  England,  have  opened  up  the  most 
delicate  point  of  the  whole.  I  trust  indeed  that  it  will  be 
determined  peaceably,  and  that  by  avoiding  any  rivalry  we 
shall  arrive  at  last  at  a  definite  position,  which  will  insure  for 
some  time  at  least  the  tranquillity  of  Europe.  This  definite 
position  can  only  be  so  comparatively  however,  for  we  must 
not  conceal  from  ourselves  that  we  can  only  act  provisionally  ; 
but  if  this  provisional  arrangement  lasts  long  enough  to  en- 
able France  to  quietly  regain  her  level,  its  final  solution  will 
naturally  turn  to  her  profit.  This  is  the  spirit  in  which  I  have 
conducted  everything  here,  with  which  I  have  had  to  do.  I  must 
say,  I  thought  that  matters  had  been  advanced  a  good  deal  in 
our  favour  by  protocol  34,  which  it  seems  has  excited  such 
discontent  in  Paris,  as  I  find  it  difficult  to  comprehend.  It  con- 
tained nothing  but  an  armistice,  and  I  thought  that  the  less 
we  said,  the  better  we  should  carry  it  through.  To  make  any 
official  stipulation  respecting  the  stay  of  our  troops  in  Bel- 
gium, seemed  impossible. 

General  Baudrand,  whom  I  took  to  visit  all  the  members  of 
the  Cabinet,  and  whom  I  subsequently  asked  to  call  upon  them 
alone,  will  tell  you  his  views  with  regard  to  this,  and  you  can 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  189 

perfectly  trust  to  his  clear  understanding  in  the  matter.  The 
retreat  of  our  troops  will  not  be  ostensibly  pressed.  The  eyes 
of  the  plenipotentiaries  will  be  closed,  as  much  as  possible,  to  the 
slowness  more  or  less  of  their  retreat ;  but  the  English  Cabinet 
cannot  possibly  grant  anything  in  writing,  as  to  their  prolonged 
sojourn  ;  and  all  King  Leopold's  attempts,  as  well  as  mine,  will 
result  in  nothing,  in  face  of  the  question  to  be  or  not  to  be,  which 
Parliament  places  each  day  before  the  ministers. 

I  must  beg  the  king  to  allow  me  to  make  an  observation, 
which  I  think  may  be  of  much  service  to  him.  It  is,  that  the 
greatest  danger  in  all  critical  moments  comes  from  the  zeal  of 
those  who  are  new  to  their  work.  This  zeal  prevents  them 
distinguishing  matters  of  importance,  from  those  which  are  only 
of  secondary  interest  ;  I  am  sorry  to  see  that  your  Majesty  has 
no  minister  at  the  Hague.  Here  I  confine  myself  to  turning 
aside  and  smoothing  over  difficulties.  If  I  had  attached  any 
importance  to  the  officious  narratives  and  the  benevolent  anxiety 
of  petty  newsmongers,  we  might  have  believed  ourselves 
menaced  by  the  whole  of  Europe,  and  perpetually  on  the  eve  of  a 
general  war,  of  which  happily  there  has  been  no  question  except 
in  the  newspapers.  If  your  Majesty  will,  with  that  attention 
which  you  give  to  everything,  read  to-day's  despatch  from  me  to 
the  Foreign  Office,  you  will  see  the  true  state  of  matters  and  of 
opinions.  I  beg  your  Majesty  to  trust  to  what  is  said  in  it.  I 
have  always  said,  that  the  question  of  the  fortresses  could  not  be 
fairly  treated  by  any  but  the  four  Powers  whose  representatives 
are  now  together  here,  and  that  so  apparent  a  mission  as  that  of 
M.  de  Latour  de  Maubourg  would  find  itself  impeded  by  the 
irritation  to  which  it  would  give  rise  with  the  ministers  of  Russia, 
Prussia,  and  Austria.  I  fear  my  conjecture  was  right,  but  that 
does  not  make  me  doubt,  for  a  moment,  that  the  Powers  will 
keep  to  their  engagements  of  the  protocol  of  April,  which  they 
have  several  times  renewed  to  me  since  then. 

I  thank  the  king  for  having  sent  me  General  Baudrand.  I 
was  anxious  that  a  man  in  his  Majesty's  special  confidence 
should  see  England  just  now.  .  .  . 

I  also  wrote  to  M.  Casimir  Perier. 
The  Prince  de  Tallyrand  to  M.  Casimir  Perier. 

LONDON,  September  yd,   1831. 

It  is  a  long  time,  monsieur,  since  I  have  had  the  honour  of 
writing  to  you,  but  knowing  how  occupied  you  are  with  all  our 


igo  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

great  political  questions,  I  did  not  wish  to  give  you  another 
letter  to  read,  and  I  have  left  it  to  your  son  to  inform  you  of  all 
that  is  going  on  here  ;  I  am  sure  that  he  does  it  well,  and  I  have 
every  confidence  in  what  he  writes  to  you ;  I  place  him  in  a 
position  to  be  able  to  judge  of  things,  and  I  am  quite  content 
with  the  work  that  he  does  for  me.  I  sometimes  put  a  stop  to 
his  zeal,  because  in  our  career  zeal  is  fraught  with  danger.  The 
reserve  that  I  prescribe  is  not  very  popular,  but  I  believe  it  to  be 
useful. 

At  such  an  important  and  delicate  crisis,  I  cannot  suffi- 
ciently draw  your  attention  to  the  species  of  directions  I 
ought  to  receive  from  Paris.  It  is  certain,  that,  if  everyone  keeps 
cool,  and  we  are  allowed  time  to  carry  it  out,  in  six  weeks  from 
now  (and  after  all,  that  is  not  very  long)  we  shall  arrive  at  the 
signature  of  a  definite  treaty,  which  will  assure  to  us  the  peace 
which  we  desire,  without  having  wounded  either  French  or 
English  vanity,  which  are  equally  susceptible.  If  they  were  not 
so  ignorant  in  France,  as  they  are,  of  what  goes  on  outside  their 
own  country,  they  could  not  fail  to  understand  that  we  have 
obtained  in  one  year,  a  position  that  could  never  have  been 
hoped  for  in  the  first  year  after  a  revolution.  But  do  not  let  us 
be  too  hasty.  We  shall  be  refused,  if  we  ask  officially  for  things 
which  it  has  been  already  decided  to  grant  us.  The  fortresses  are 
to  be  done  away  with,  that  is  quite  settled ;  a  formal  agreement 
to  this  effect  would  prejudice  the  English  government  sufficiently 
to  menace  its  existence.  What  I  ask  for  is  that  we  do  not  give 
offence  by  too  much  agitation.  Your  presence  in  the  Ministry 
is  above  everything  most  useful  to  me,  in  calming  the  un- 
easiness which  for  a  whole  year  has  been  caused  and  kept  up 
in  every  way  by  blunders.  So  long  as  you  are  in  the  Ministry, 
no  one  will  believe  that  Europe  can  be  disturbed.  Let  me  say 
again,  that  you  are  essential  not  only  to  the  destinies  of  France, 
but  to  the  preservation  of  law  and  order  in  Europe ;  you  give 
strength  to  the  government  ;  I  hear  this  on  all  sides.  Adieu, 
monsieur.     Again  assuring  you.  .  .  . 

After  having  thus  appeased,  at  least  for  a  time,  the  perpetual 
agitation  always  going  on  in  Paris  with  regard  to  foreign 
affairs,  I  gave  all  my  attention  to  the  negotiation  of  a  definite 
treaty  between  Holland  and  Belgium  under  the  mediation  of 
the  five  Powers.  Circumstances  were  favourable  to  this.  The 
great  Cabinets  were  displeased  with  the  rash  attack  of  the  Dutch 
on  Belgium,  which  for  a  moment  had  threatened  to  bring  about 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1S30.  191 

a   general   war.     They  were    therefore  the  better    disposed  to 
impose  a  decision  on  the  King  of  Holland.     Belgium,  a  little 
ashamed  of  her  defeat,  and  the  necessity  she  was  under  of  having 
recourse  to  the  protection  of  France,   felt  compelled  to  bring 
matters  to  an  end,  and  emerge  from  her  painful  state  of  uncer- 
tainty.   It  was  therefore  decided  in  Brussels  to  nominate  an  envoy, 
charged  with  full  powers  to  conclude  a  definite  treaty  :  this  was 
M.  Van    de  Weyer,  who  arrived  in  London   the  beginning  of 
September.    The  work  this  month  had  been  a  little  too  harassing 
for  my  age  and  strength,  for  while  we  had  to   continue  our 
wearisome  negotiation,  the  coronation  of  the  English  king  took 
place  on   September  8th.     The  ceremony,  though  very  grand, 
was  very  fatiguing.     We  had  to  be  at  Westminster  at  8.30  in 
the  morning,  and  to  remain  there  until  4.30  in  the  afternoon  ; 
then,  in   the   evening,  to  be  present  at  a  grand   dinner  at  the 
Foreign    Office.     Towards    the   end    of  the   same    month,   the 
Reform  Bill  was  to  be  brought  before  the  House  of  Lords,  a 
circumstance  which  did  not  tend  to  make  the  English  ministers 
more  easy  to  deal  with. 

In  this  last  respect,  an  incident,  apparently  trivial,  but  for  me 
very  serious  in  its  results,  occurred  to  complicate  my  relations 
with  Lord  Palmerston,  and  make  them  for  the  time  being  most 
difficult.  I  am  obliged  to  mention  it,  however  ridiculous  it 
may  seem,  because  it  had  some  very  disagreeable  consequences 
for  me. 

There  exists  in  England  a  collection  of  political  cari- 
catures, dating  back,  I  am  told,  to  the  Ministry  of  Lord 
Chatham.  A  clever  draughtsman  of  that  period  made  some 
caricatures  of  the  principal  personages  of  the  day,  on  the 
occasions  of  the  different  events  that  brought  them  into  promi- 
nence. These  caricatures  were  signed  H.  B.,  by  which  name 
the  collection  has  been  known.  One  caricature,  which  formed 
part  of  it,  was  published  during  the  year  1831.  It  was 
entitled  "  The  Lame  Leading  the  Blind"  and  was  a  perfect  repre- 
sentation of  Lord  Palmerston  and  myself.  There  was  nothing 
in  it  that  at  all  exceeded  the  ordinary  limits  of  lampoon  and 
caricature,  but  it  seems  that  Lord  Palmerston  resented  it  deeply, 
and   I  was  not   long  in  seeing  that   he  was  disposed,  whether 


192  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

willingly  or  not,  to  show  me  that  he  did  so.  From  that  time 
until  I  left  England  in  1834,  I  very  often  came  across  traces 
of  this  resentment.  I  could  do  nothing  ;  there  was  no  other 
course  than  to  ignore  it,  if  I  did  not  wish  to  compromise  the 
success  of  the  matters  that  I  had  to  carry  through  with  him, 
and  this  I  did  most  scrupulously,  but  I  must  confess  it  was 
now  and  then  very  awkward.  Happily,  Lord  Palmerston's 
humour  did  not  impede  my  efforts  to  arrive  at  the  conclusion  of 
the  treaty,  which  I  considered  to  be  the  only  means  of  solidly 
assuring  the  maintenance  of  peace.  The  Cabinet,  of  which  he 
formed  part,  was  no  less  interested  than  we  were  in  settling  the 
Belgian  business.  The  following  letters  will  show,  that  just  then 
it  was  principally  from  Paris,  that  the  difficulties  arose  which 
threatened  to  compromise  my  work. 

King  Louis  Philippe  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand. 

Paris,  Saturday,  September  yd,  1831. 

I  have  been  at  work,  mon  cher  Prince,  on  a  map  which 
General  Sebastiani  is  sending  you,  and  although  he  is  sure  to 
give  you  all  necessary  explanations,  I  am  very  glad  to  furnish 
you  with  my  views  as  to  the  proposed  division. 

One  of  the  points  I  consider  most  important,  is  that  our 
propositions  should  not  only  obtain  the  cordial  assent  of  the 
English  government,  but  that  they  should  help  to  repulse  the 
home  attacks  to  which  it  is  exposed,  because  no  one  desires 
more  than  I  do,  that  Lord  Grey  and  his  colleagues  should 
remain  in  office.  I  trust  that  the  new  demarkation  will 
reconcile  the  interests  of  England  with  the  natural  and  just 
demands  of  Belgium.  Thus  I  quite  see,  on  the  one  hand,  that 
Belgium  had  a  right  to  demand  that  the  sluices  of  her  canals, 
and  the  dykes  which  protect  her  against  inundations,  should  not 
be  in  the  power  of  the  Dutch,  because  she  could  have  no  safety 
or  independence,  as  long  as  it  rested  with  her  enemies  to  inundate 
her  land,  ruin  her  for  years,  and  place  Bruges  and  Ghent 
under  the  sea.  On  the  other  hand,  Holland  was  right  to  pre- 
serve on  her  side  a  well-defended  frontier.  I  think  too  that  one 
of  the  best  means  of  satisfying  England,  and  protecting  the 
responsibility  of  the  English  ministers  from  any  settled  attack, 
is,  that  Holland  should  continue  to  possess  the  whole  length  of 
the  Houdt,  or  Western  Scheldt,  and  that  she  should  retain,  even 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  193 

on   the   left    bank,   a   sufficient   barrier    to    guarantee   her   the 
possession  of  it. 

I  believe,  mon  cher  Prince,  that  on  examining  our  mripp 
you  will  find  these  different  advantages  included  in  the  new 
demarkation  ;  for  if  it  is  true  that,  in  order  to  make  Belgium 
independent,  Holland  must  renounce  the  right  or  power 
given  to  her  by  the  demarkation  of  1790,  to  inundate  the 
country  when  she  pleased,  she  must  first  of  all  abandon  : 
i°,  the  Sluys  (which  is  really  the  sluice  of  Bruges  and  the  key 
of  all  the  waters  of  West  Flanders)  ;  2°,  the  Sas  de  Gand  (that 
is  to  say  the  sluice),  which  is  at  once  the  sluice  of  Ghent  and 
the  key  to  the  waters  of  East  Flanders.  Therefore  the  Belgian 
frontier  must  be  carried  outside  these  sluices,  namely,  to  the 
boundary  of  the  first  canal  beyond  the  dykes,  through  which 
cuttings  could  always  be  made  (as  has  already  been  done  in  so 
deplorable  a  manner),  if  they  did  not  belong  to  Belgium. 

I  am  sure  that  the  safety  and  independence  of  Belgium 
cannot  be  guaranteed,  if  her  frontier  is  not  extended  to  the 
lines  I  suggest  ;  and  I  also  believe,  that  by  fixing  it  there, 
Holland  is  deprived  of  a  means  of  attacking  Belgium,  and 
yet  still  preserves  all  means  of  defence  for  herself  that  she  can 
possibly  require.  She  loses  the  sluices  of  Ghent,  Philippine, 
Ardenburg,  and  Sluys,  with  a  territory  of  twelve  to  thirteen 
square  leagues,  but  retains  intact  the  course  of  the  Scheldt  as 
she  now  possesses  it.  She  keeps  the  whole  of  the  island  of 
Cadsand,  on  which  is  the  fortress  of  Breskens,  which  guards 
the  mouth  of  the  Scheldt  on  the  south,  as  Flushing  does  on  the 
north  ;  she  keeps  Ter-Neuzen  and  the  fortresses  of  Ysendyke, 
Axel,  and  Hulst,  which  suffice  to  constitute  a  barrier  behind  a 
line  of  canals  of  separation,  which  of  themselves  already  form 
an  excellent  one. 

I  believe  that  by  adopting  this  division,  subject  to  such  slight 
modifications  as  the  localities  may  require,  which  are  better 
settled  on  the  spot,  a  perfect  neutrality  would  be  established 
between  the  two  States,  from  Antwerp  to  the  sea ;  for  as  both 
would  be  removed  from  reciprocal  aggressions,  all  collisions 
between  them  would  be  rendered  impossible. 

But  I  cannot,  mon  cher  Prince,  impress  upon  you  too  strongly, 
that  it  is  the  present  situation  of  the  two  countries  which  dis- 
quiets me  more  than  the  future.  I  cannot  conceive  how,  in  the 
last  protocol,  the  Powers  who  all  wish  for  and  have  need  of 
peace,  did  not  insist  upon  the  reduction  of  the  Dutch  army.  A 
Dutch  army  of  more  than  a  hundred  thousand  combatants, 
seems  to  me  a  monstrosity  in  the  political  order  of  Europe, 
which  can  no  longer  be  allowed  to  exist  without  great  danger. 
VOL.  iv.  O 


i94  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLE  YRAND. 

It  alone  was  the  cause  of  our  invading  Belgium,  and  it  alone 
retards  our  complete  evacuation.  When  once  this  army  is 
reduced  to  a  reasonable  size,  in  accordance  with  the  safety 
and  the  resources  of  Holland,  there  will  be  no  more  difficulties 
about  anything,  because  there  will  be  security  for  everyone  ; 
and  it  is  the  most  efficacious  measure  for  achieving  that  general 
disarmament,  which  I  desire  for  many  reasons,  but  most 
of  all,  because  I  consider  it  the  best  means  of  assuring  peace  to 
Europe.  Pray  tell  Lord  Grey  and  Lord  Palmerston,  that  the 
reduction  of  this  army  is  also  the  best  way  of  reassuring  France 
and  Belgium,  and  that  it  will  quiet  all  demands  and  fears,  as 
well  as  quench  all  hopes  of  war  among  those  who  are  deluded 
enough  to  wish  for  it.  Unfortunately,  mon  cher  Prince,  I  feel 
bound  to  tell  you,  that  all  the  reports  we  receive  indicate  an 
opposite  course,  and  it  seems  that  the  King  of  Holland  continues 
to  recruit  his  army  from  all  the  vagabonds  he  can  collect  in 
Europe,  so  that  the  last  report  of  his  effective  forces  gives  a 
total  of  114,000  men. 

Such  facts,  mon  cher  Prince,  are  to  my  mind  more  striking, 
than  all  the  arguments  that  I  could  put  forward,  to  show  that  it 
is  not  with  a  view  to  peace  and  defence  that  the  King  of 
Holland  is  taking  upon  himself  such  a  burden,  and  that 
there  is  not  a  moment  to  lose  in  forcing  him  to  free  his 
neighbours  and  his  kingdom  from  it.  I  am  convinced  that  the 
interests  of  England  are  one  with  ours  on  this  point,  and  that 
it  is  equally  so  with  all  the  other  Powers. 

I  am  adding  an  explanatory  note  to  the  scheme  of  delimita- 
tion which  General  Sebastiani  sends  you. 

I  must  also  tell  you,  that  I  have  been  persuading  Dom 
Pedro  to  take  a  journey  to  London,  in  order  to  assist  at  the 
coronation  of  the  English  king  ;  believing,  from  what  you  said, 
that  he  would  thereby  be  doing  what  is  agreeable  to  the  king 
and  his  Ministry.     I  do  not  yet  know  what  he  will  do. 

Let  me  again  assure  you,  mon  cher  Prince,  of  my  friendship 
and  regard  for  you. 

Yours  affectionately, 

Louis  Philippe 

General  Sebastiani  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand. 

Paris,  September  7th,  1831. 

Mon  Prince, 

I  have  this  instant  received  your  despatches  of  the 
5th,  numbered  215  and  216.  It  seems  that  the  Conference  and 
the  London  Cabinet  have  no  idea  of  the  situation  of  France. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  195 

Heaven  grant  that  the  fruit  of  so  much  toil  may  not  be  lost ! 
The  Whig  Ministry  might  easily  have  sacrificed  the  peace  of 
the  world  to  their  convenience.  I  am  going  to  communicate 
your  letters  to  the  king ;  the  Council  meets  again  to-morrow. 
In  a  few  moments  I  shall  have  an  interview  with  M.  Pcrier.  1 
am-  sorry  your  voice  has  been  powerless  to  bring  reason  into 
the  Councils.  Are  we  the  only  ones  who  have  been  moderate 
and  sincere  ?  God  only  knows  whither  the  affairs  of  Belgium 
will  lead  us. 

Ever  yours.  .  .  . 

PARIS,  September  lot/i,  183 1. 

Mon  Prince, 

Among  the  reasons  that  make  us  defer  the  complete 
evacuation  of  Belgium,  until  the  30th  of  this  month,  is  one 
which  could  not  be  included  in  my  official  despatch,  but  of 
which,  nevertheless,  I  would  not  have  you  ignorant.  We  are 
now  on  the  eve  of  the  opening  of  the  legislative  debates  on  the 
peerage  question.  Necessarily  these  debates  will  rouse  the 
feelings  of  the  people  afresh.  We  thought  it  would  give  them 
another  pretext,  and  inflame  them  still  more,  if  the  return  of 
our  entire  army  into  France  coincided  with  this  discussion  ;  and 
therefore  we  wished  to  avoid  it.  You  can,  mon  Prince,  use  this 
consideration,  in  confidence  with  your  colleagues,  wherever  you 
may  judge  it  necessary,  to  prevent  a  protest  on  their  part 
against  the  period  assigned  by  us  for  the  evacuation. 

I  have  just  left  the  Chamber.  Some  members  of  the  opposi- 
tion brought  the  affairs  of  Belgium  and  the  Polish  question  on 
the  tapis,  also  the  conduct  of  Prussia  with  regard  to  Poland. 
We  avoided  being  drawn  into  a  discussion  on  these  points,  and 
considered  it  still  more  useless  to  answer  our  adversaries,  as  the 
majority  of  the  Chambers  showed  weariness  at  the  eternal  repro- 
duction of  opinions  and  assertions,  to  which  we  have  done  full 
and  ample  justice.  .  .  . 

The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  the  Princess  de 

Vaudemont. 

LONDON,  September  15///,  1831. 

You  seem  surprised  that  the  convenience  of  the  French 
Cabinet  is  not  sufficiently  considered  here.  Those  who  say 
so,  deceive  you.  The  French  Ministry  is  liked  and  supported 
here  by  all  men  of  any  weight,  no  matter  to  which  party 
they  belong  ;  that  is  a  positive  fact.     But  they  think  that  we 

O  2 


196  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

are  too  energetic,  and  that  we  are  too  excitable ;  and  a  new- 
government  which  is  excitable,  disturbs  everyone.  We  have 
need  to  become  more  staid,  and  constant  action  produces  the 
contrary  effect.  With  a  conqueror,  perpetual  action  explains 
itself ;  but  when  the  throne  is  reached  by  the  choice  of  the 
people,  tranquillity  is  looked  for  in  the  sovereign.  He 
cannot  calm  the  universal  excitement,  except  by  means  of 
peace.  He  must  only  speak  of  peace  ;  and  it  must  be  the 
theme  of  all  his  speeches  and  all  his  actions.  This,  and  this 
alone,  will  establish  him  firmly  ;  we  cannot  too  energetically 
dispel  all  the  military  dreams  of  those  who  surround  our  Royal 
family.  Such  people  know  and  wish  for  nothing  else  ;  it  is  not 
to  cur  interest  ever  to  listen  to  them.  It  may  be  all  very  well 
for  them,  but  will  never  do  them  any  credit  ;  we  must  establish 
ourselves.  The  king  and  his  family  are  and  will  be,  beloved  by 
France,  for  it  has  need  of  them.  If  we  have  peace,  it  will  be 
through  them  that  this  happiness  comes  to  us  ;  if  we  have  war, 
it  will  be  through  the  military  element,  which  wishes  to  pander 
to  the  vanities  of  the  country,  and  these  vanities  only  last  for  a 
time.  The  king  is  a  founder,  and  peace  is  his  only  measure. 
Adieu. 

The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  the    Princess  de- 

Vaudemont. 

London,  September  ijih,  1831. 

....  They  ought  to  recollect  at  the  Palais  Royal  that  all, 
absolutely  all,  that  has  been  undertaken  by  Paris,  has  been 
unsuccessful.  They  have  even  been  obliged  to  retract  what  they 
had  asked  for,  and  that  has  never  happened  here  to  a  single 
thing  with  which  I  have  had  to  do.  All  this  comes  from  a  desire 
to  be  doing  something,  which  must  be  excused  in  persons  quite 
new  to  the  work.  As  regards  the  fortresses,  it  has  been 
necessary  to  refer  the  matter  again  to  us  here,  where  all  had 
been  done,  as  I  wrote  to  you,  three  months  ago,  since  when 
there  has  been  no  change.  Action,  when  it  is  of  no  use, 
only  impedes.  The  disarming  of  Holland  will  take  place  ; 
but  a  treaty  must  be  made,  and  this  will  be  done  in  the  month 
of  October.  Put  no  faith  in  a  rupture  of  the  armistice  ;  I  can 
state  positively  that,  as  far  as  Holland  is  concerned,  it  will  not 
take  place.  The  Powers  do  not  wish  it,  and  the  king  has  been 
warned  of  this.  You  may  depend  on  this.  We  shall  draw  up 
the  treaty,  and  it  will  be  done  in  such  a  way  that  the  King  of 
Holland  can  sign  it  ;  without  his  signature,  the  Belgian  business 
will  remain  undecided.     This  is  carrying  out  the  principles,  and 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  197 

when  five  Powers  take  matters  into  their  hands,  they  must  act 
according  to  principles.  Holland  will  revert  to  what  she  was  in 
1790,  with  part  of  Luxemburg  in  addition.  It  might  be  better 
to  create  her  anew,  but  that  would  be  to  enter  on  a  sea  of 
intrigues  and  pretensions.  What  I  write  is  only  for  your 
conversations.1     Adieu. 

King  Louis  Philippe  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand. 

Neuillv,  September  15///,   1831. 

A  few  days  ago,  mon  cher  Prince,  General  Sebastiani 
sent  on  to  me,  with  some  despatches  for  my  perusal,  a  letter 
from  you,  but  it  slipped  into  the  pile  of  papers  for  signature, 
with  which  my  desk  is  too  often  encumbered,  and  in  spite  of  my 
impatience  to  read  it  and  learn  your  opinion,  which  I  always 
prize  so  highly,  it  was  only  yesterday  that  I  succeeded  in  finding 
it,  and  now  I  do  not  lose  a  moment  in  thanking  you  for  it. 

The  aspect  of  things  has  already  changed.  We  have,  as  you 
see,  arrived  at  the  most  critical  point  of  this  great  Belgian 
business,  from  the  necessity  we  are  under  of  compromising  our- 
selves one  way  or  the  other,  either  by  leaving  our  troops  in 
Belgium  as  an  advanced  guard,  or  by  withdrawing  them  alto- 
gether; and  never,  as  you  say,  was  there  a  more  delicate  question 
to  handle.  I  may  perhaps  be  permitted  to  say,  that  it  required 
more  loyalty  and  more  resolution,  to  decide  that  our  troops  should 
evacuate  Belgium  on  the  30th  of  September,  than  it  did  to  send 
them  into  the  country  on  the  4th  of  August ;  and  what  is  still 
more  strange  and  no  less  true,  is  that  the  same  motives,  and  the 
same  object,  determined  both  these  measures,  which  the  pre- 
sumptuous superficiality  of  our  time  will  probably  represent  as 
contradictory.  The  former  step  obtained  general  assent,  and  its 
success  confirmed  it  ;  if  the  latter  does  not  at  first  obtain  equal 
approbation,  I  am  still  confident  that  its  results  in  one  or  the 
other  hypothesis,  of  the  renewal  or  non-renewal  of  hostilities  by 
the  Dutch,  will  eventually  insure  it  that  unanimity  of  agreement, 
which  was  perhaps  wanting  at  first. 

.  .  .  .  et  pour  etre  approuves, 
De  semblables  desseins  veulent  etre  acheves.2 

I  write  therefore,  mon  cher  Prince,  to  ask  you  to  give  me 
all  the  assistance  of  which  you  are  so  capable,  in  order  to 
compass  this  happy  consummation. 

1  The  conversations  with  Madame  Adelaide,  who  communicated  them  to   the 
king. —  (Note  by  Prince  de  Talleyrand.) 

2  .  .   .  .  and  to  be  approved, 
Such  schemes  need  to  be  completed. 


198  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

It  seems  to  me  that  there  are  three  principal  points  to 
negotiate  and  to  ask  for,  in  the  definite  treaty  between  Holland 
and  Belgium  ;  for  I  do  not  now  speak  of  the  question  of  the 
debts,  the  basis  of  which,  badly  arranged,  in  my  opinion,  in  the 
month  of  January,  seems  now  to  have  been  suitably  and  justly 
set  right  by  the  eighteen  articles  j1  these  three  points  are  : 

i.  The  conferring  of  the  country  of  Luxemburg  on  Belgium, 
in  consideration  of  an  equivalent  price,  and  the  preservation  of 
the  fortress  of  Luxemburg  and  its  surrounding  district,  to  the 
Germanic  Confederation. 

2.  The  preservation  of  Maastricht  to  Holland,  compensating 
Belgium  for  this  by  the  rights  of  the  Bishop  of  Liege,  and  giving 
her  some  contiguous  territory  between  Maestricht  and  Holland, 
which  did  not  exist  in  1790. 

3.  A  guarantee  against  the  inundation  of  Belgian  Flanders, 
by  giving  Belgium  the  possession  of  the  sluices  of  the  canals 
and  the  dykes  which  protect  her  from  the  sea,  without  which 
her  independence  would  be  a  chimera,  as  the  possession  of  the 
sluices  and  dykes  are  its  key  and  rampart. 

I  foresee  no  serious  difficulty  respecting  the  first  point,  and  I  do 
not  think  there  will  be  any  on  the  part  of  the  King  of  the 
Belgians  regarding  the  second  if  the  third  is  given  to  him  ;  but 
he  strongly  objects  to  consent  to  the  second,  until  he  has 
some  certainty  that  the  third  will  be  conceded.  I  must  confess 
I  think  this  quite  reasonable,  for  I  agree  with  him,  that  he 
cannot  maintain  his  position  in  Belgium,  unless  he  obtains  it. 

The  possession  of  the  fortress  of  Maestricht  is,  without  doubt, 
a  great  inconvenience,  and  even  a  great  danger  to  Belgium,  but 
treaties  can  efficiently  protect  her  on  that  point ;  and  provided 
that  the  frontier  is  properly  established,  and  the  passage  past  the 
fortress  assured  to  Belgian  vessels,  descending  and  ascending 
the  Meuse,  I  think  the  matter  could  easily  be  arranged.  As 
for  the  Flanders  side,  there  can  be  no  safety  or  independence  as 
regards  Belgium  there,  unless  her  frontier  is  carried  beyond  the 
neap  tides,  thus  giving  her  the  possession  of  the  sluices'  and 
dykes,  which  preserve  her  present   territory  from  danger   and 

1  The  Conference  had  to  choose  between  two  schemes  respecting  the  question  of 
the  division  of  the  debt  between  Holland  and  Belgium:  either  "to  allow  the  joint 
expenditure  to  stand,  to  amalgamate  the  liabilities  and  make  both  countries  jointly 
and  severally  responsible,"  or  "to  apportion  the  debt  in  accordance  with  its  origin, 
relieving  Belgium  of  what  she  had  not  herself  contracted,  and  dividing  between  the 
two  countries,  in  fair  proportion,  the  expenses  contracted  in  common  since  1815." 
The  protocol  of  January  27th  had  adopted  the  first  scheme,  based  on  the  protocol  of 
July  21st,  1814,  which  established  community  of  expenses.  The  Treaty  of  the 
Eighteen  Articles  adopted  the  second  scheme,  which  the  Belgian  Congress  had 
always  supported.  A  protocol  of  the  6th  October  following,  regulated  the  division 
of  the  debt  in  conformity  with  this  principle. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  199 

inundation.  The  map  with  the  red  and  yellow  lines  was 
intended  to  show  what  was  imperatively  needed  to  achieve  this 
end,  and  to  prove  that  such  cession  only  deprived  Holland  of  a 
means  of  attack,  but  did  not  in  any  way  lessen  her  means  of 
defence.  It  would  only  cost  her  four  small  towns,  fortified  it  is 
true  ;  some  villages  ;  less  than  six  thousand  inhabitants  ;  and 
twelve  and  a  half  square  leagues  of  a  country  devastated  by  fever, 
which  the  recollection  of  Walcheren  will  cause  to  be  wel! 
remembered  in  England.1 

I  know,  mon  cher  Prince,  that  the  first  objection  to  this 
arrangement  will  be,  that  in  1790  Holland  possessed  this  terri- 
tory ;  but  it  is  also  right  to  consider,  that  at  that  time  Belgian 
Flanders  was  part  of  the  great  Austrian  monarchy,  whose  policy- 
was  always  similar  to  that  of  Holland,  and  in  whose  support 
Holland  found  that  valuable  protection  which  she  could  not  do 
without  ;  neither  must  it  be  forgotten  that  on  her  side,  Austria 
sacrificed  the  commerce  and  riches  of  Belgium  to  those  of 
Holland,  by  consenting  to  the  closure  of  the  Scheldt,  and  by 
allowing  Antwerp,  Ghent,  and  Bruges  to  be  ruined,  in  order 
to  benefit  Amsterdam  and  Rotterdam.  As  such  a  state  of 
things  no  longer  exists,  or  can  possibly  exist,  the  reciprocal 
relations  which  resulted  therefrom  cannot  exist  either,  and 
Belgium,  now  independent  and  neutral,  can  no  longer  exist 
under  the  same  conditions  and  restrictions  as  when  she  formed 
only  one  or  more  Austrian  provinces. 

I  desired  to  communicate  these  reflections  to  you,  mon 
cher  Prince,  as  they  suggest  themselves  to  me,  to  convince 
you  that  it  is  not  from  dislike  to  Holland — a  sentiment  that 
is  far  from  me,  for  I  desire  her  preservation  as  much  as  any- 
one— nor  owing  to  a  predilection  for  Belgium,  that  we  insist 
upon  this  cession  to  her  of  twelve  square  miles  of  Zealand 
'Flanders,  but  with  the  view  to  establish  the  division  of  the 
two  countries  on  the  only  practicable  basis,  namely,  the  separa- 
tion of  the  interests  and  the  independence  of  each,  thus  putting 
an  end  to  all  cause  for  collision  between  them.  I  cannot  under- 
stand how  a  sound  and  definite  treaty  can  be  carried  out 
except  on  this  basis,  and  it  is  this  which  induces  us  not  to 
acknowledge  any  arrrangement  in  which  it  is  not  adopted. 
But  my  paper,  which  is  finished,  warns  me  to  end  my  letter  by 
assuring  you  of  my  constant  friendship  for  you. 

P.S. — Pray,  my  dear  Prince,  do  not  lose  sight,  even  from  a 
commercial  point  of  view,  of  the  fact  that  the  cession  of  twelve 

1  An  expedition  undertaken  against  Antwerp.  The  English  troops  were  almost 
entirely  decimated  by  fever  in  the  isle  of  Walcheren,  situated  at  the  mouth  of  the 
Scheldt.     The  remainder,  attacked  by  Bernadotte,  had  to  re-embark. 


200  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

square  leagues  will  not  materially  injure  Holland,  since  she  has 
necessarily  lost  the  closing  of  the  Scheldt,  and  that  the  opening 
of  this  great  water-way  restores  to  the  town  of  Antwerp  the 
commerce  which  it  had  lost.  Do  not  forget,  also,  the  state  of 
desolation  and  ruin  into  which  Belgian  Flanders  has  been 
plunged  for  many  years,  and  that  it  is  only  fair  to  give  her 
compensation,  as  much  for  those  inundations,  which  nothing 
could  justify,  as  for  the  expenses  and  other  evils  occasioned  by 
the  invasion  of  Belgium  without  justification  by  the  Dutch 
army.1 

It  appears  to  me  neither  equitable  in  itself,  nor  consistent  with 
the  dignity  of  the  Powers,  that  there  should  be  no  expiation 
for  the  violation  of  the  armistice  at  three  days'  notice,  instead  of 
a  month,  and  in  contempt  of  the  guarantee  given  by  the  Con- 
ference. Without  doubt  nothing  must  be  required  of  Holland 
which  could  compromise  her  future  existence,  but  it  is  equally 
necessary  not  to  compromise  that  of  Belgium,  and  I  am  per- 
suaded that  not  only  will  this  equilibrium  be  maintained  by  the 
arrangement  which  we  propose,  but  that  it  is  the  only  means  of 
establishing  it. 

Madame  Adelaide  d'Orleans  to  the  Prince  de 

Talleyrand. 

Paris,  Monday,  September  igt/i,  1831. 

I  have  for  some  time  past,  mon  cher  Prince,  so  overwhelmed 
you  with  my  letters  and  my  writing  that  I  wanted  to  leave  you 
in  peace,  knowing  also  how  very  busy  you  were  and  all  the 
writing  that  you  have  to  do.  But  to-day  I  feel  I  shall  be  giving 
you  pleasure,  by  telling  you  our  news  and  describing  what  is 
going  on  here,  which  is  sure  otherwise  to  reach  you  in  a  very 
exaggerated  form.  Unfortunately,  since  Saturday  evening  riots 
have  commenced  again."  Agitators  of  all  kinds  found  that  the 
sad  news  of  the  defeat  of  the  Poles  (for  whom  so  much  sympathy 
exists  here)  and  the  taking  of  Warsaw,  afforded  a  favourable 
opportunity  for  creating  fresh  disturbances.  They  therefore  let 
loose  their  pack  of  hounds  (for  one  can  call  it  nothing  else)  ;  but 
in  spite  of  all  their  efforts,  the  populace  would  take  no  part 
whatever.  There  are  plenty  of  idlers,  lookers-on,  and  small 
groups  of  agitators,  who  excite  the  people  to  anarchy  and 
disorder  ;  the  Carlists,  Buonapartists,  and  so-called  Republicans 

1  The  Dutch  had,  at  the  opening  of  hostilities,  destroyed  several  dykes  round 
Antwerp  to  stop  the  operations  of  the  Belgian  army. 

2  The  insurrection  of  the  16th  to  19th  of  September. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  201 

arc  perfectly  agreed  on  this  point.  Their  language  is  the  same, 
and  their  sole  aim  is  the  overthrow  of  Louis  Philippe  ;  of  this 
there  can  be  no  doubt.  Happily  they  meet  with  no  response  ; 
the  people  and  the  country  will  have  none  of  it.  In  the  midst 
of  the  crowd  you  see  at  most  a  hundred  men,  children,  and  out- 
casts, who  shout :  "  Long  live  Poland  !  Down  with  the  ministers  ! " 
Yesterday  evening  a  good  many  arrests  took  place  ;  among 
others  two  chiefs  of  the  Ami du  Pcuple,  who  had  already  figured 
in  former  disturbances.  Now  all  is  quiet  in  this  part  of  the 
town  ;  the  crowd  and  the  agitators  have  gone  to  the  Chamber 
of  Deputies,  where  they  hope  to  make  a  disturbance,  in  order  to 
frighten  the  Chambers  ;  but  I  hope  that  it  will  have  the  opposite 
effect  on  the  majority,  and  that  the  explanations  and  speeches 
which  the  President  of  the  Council  and  the  Minister  for  Foreign 
Affairs  intend  making,  will  serve  to  show  the  sound  portion  of 
the  Chamber,  that  they  must  rally  round  and  support  the  king's 
government  and  the  Ministry,  strongly  and  openly,  and  thus 
repress  all  those  factions  and  their  hopes  of  upsetting  everything. 
Carlism  has  had  much  to  do  with  these  last  troubles.  It  is 
evident  that  the  men  were  paid,  and  that  the  riot  was  mainly 
caused  by  foreigners,  refugees,  and  released  criminals.  .  .  . 

Tuesday,  September  20//1,  1831. 

I  continue  my  letter,  which  I  was  not  able  to  finish  yesterday. 
What  I  foresaw  was  happily  verified  yesterday  in  the  sitting  of 
the  Chamber,  which  was  a  very  satisfactory  one.  General 
Sebastiani's  speech  was  perfect  ;  he  answered  the  attack  made 
on  him  triumphantly,  and  completely  refuted  the  absurd  accu- 
sations of  M.  Mauguin.  The  General  had  the  greatest  possible 
success,  and  so  also  had  the  President  of  the  Council  and  M. 
Barthe.1  The  Ministry  gained  a  decided  victory,  and  the 
Chamber  seemed  very  favourably  disposed  during  the  whole 
sitting.  Small  knots  of  agitators  were  scattered  in  various  parts 
of  the  town  all  day  long,  and  in  the  evening  the  rioting  began 
again  near  the  Palais  Royal,  and  there  were  cries  of  "  Down 
with  the  ministers  !  " 

The  National  Guard  and  the  regular  troops  dispersed  them, 
and  the  night  passed  off  quietly.  The  National  Guard  is  very 
well  disposed,  furious  with  the  agitators,  and  eager  to  put  an 

1  Felix  Barthe,  born  in  1795,  an  advocate  of  Paris  under  the  Restoration. 
Attorney-General  at  the  Courts  of  Paris  in  1830,  Deputy,  then  Minister  of  Public 
Instruction.  Lord  Chancellor  in  1831,  peer  of  France  and  first  President  of  the  Court 
of  Exchequer  in  1834.  Minister  of  Justice  in  the  Mole  Cabinet,  1837 — 1839.  He 
>vas  appointed  a  senator  in  1852,  and  died  in  1863. 


202  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

end  to  the  whole  thing  ;  they  only  ask  to  be  allowed  to  fall  on 
them.  In  this  and  in  everything  else,  they  are  in  perfect  accord 
with  the  army.  The  hostile  papers  this  morning  give  a  per- 
fectly false  account  of  what  took  place  yesterday.  They  say 
the  soldiers  were  intoxicated,  whereas  they  had  not  had  a  drop 
of  wine,  only  a  little  vinegar  and  water  had  been  served  out ; 
of  course  all  this  is  done  with  the  view  to  rouse  the  populace, 
but  it  will  meet  with  no  success. 

Up  to  the  present,  nothing  has  occurred  to-day  ;  but  fresh 
groups  keep  on  forming  ;  they  are  angry  because  they  see 
they  cannot  influence  the  Chamber,  and  I  think  they  will 
attempt  further  disturbances.  They  see  that  their  game  is  lost, 
notwithstanding  all  their  efforts  ;  but  all  our  measures  have  been 
well  taken,  and  the  movement  will  be  put  down.  The  good 
feeling  in  the  Chamber  is  a  great  thing.  Marshal  Soult  is  to 
speak  to-day  ;  and  I  hope  to-morrow,  or  the  day  after,  at  latest, 
we  shall  hear  no  more  of  those  odious  cries  ;  I  feel  sure  that  if 
anything  more  is  coming,  it  will  only  be  a  very  slight  affair. 

Chartres  (the  Due  d  Orleans)  returned  yesterday  morning 
from  his  little  expedition  to  Belgium.  The  King  of  the  Belgians 
was  most  kind  to  him  ;  his  army  is  being  organized,  a  most 
necessary  measure,  for  he  is  in  a  very  difficult  position. 

I  should  like  again  to  say,  mon  cher  Prince,  that  the  king  is 
as  anxious  as  you  are  to  see  a  definite  treaty  concluded 
between  Holland  and  Belgium,  for  that  will  be  a  pledge  of 
peace.  He  tells  me  that  he  is  not  uneasy,  except  with  regard 
to  Zealand  Flanders,  without  which  Belgium  cannot  exist.  He 
told  me  just  now,  to  bring  to  your  notice,  what  would  be  the 
effect  if  a  line  of  Dutch  custom-houses  were  established  between 
Bruges  and  the  Sluys,  and  above  all  between  Ghent  and  the  Sas 
de  Gand,  which  for  thirty  years  have  had  free  communication  ; 
but,  he  added,  "  Tell  my  ambassador  that  I  depend  upon  him  to 
induce  the  Conference  to  see,  what  no  one  else  could  perhaps 
succeed  in  doing,  namely,  that  Leopold  in  Belgium  is  the 
pledge  of  peace,  and  that,  consequently,  the  giving  up  by  the 
King  of  Holland  of  twelve  square  leagues  must  be  the  sine  qua 
non  of  the  treaty,  for  common  sense  tells  us,  and  Leopold  too  is 
convinced  of  it,  that  he  cannot  hold  his  position  without  it." 

Therefore  you,  mon  cher  Prince,  who  are  so  persuasive,  must 
use  all  your  eloquence,  and  if  you  succeed  you  will  have 
rendered  to  the  king,  to  France,  and  to  Europe,  the  greatest 
service  that  has  ever  been  achieved. 

The  King  of  the  Belgians  has  the  same  fear  for  Maastricht 
and  the  right  bank  of  the  Meuse  ;  he  is  told  that  he  must 
submit  to  it,  but  if  he  does  not  get  the  other  part,  it  is  very  pro- 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  203 

bable  that  he  will  succumb,  and  not  be  able  to  hold  his  ground. 
If  that  were  to  happen,  we  should  indeed  have  cause  for  alarm, 
for  then  would  not  war  be  inevitable  ?  I  much  want  to  know 
what  you  think  of  all  this.     Adieu. 

Need  I  again  repeat,  after  reading  such  letters,  what  my 
position  was  in  the  Conference,  where  all  the  members  were  as 
well  informed  as  I  was  of  everything  that  was  taking  place 
at  Paris  ?  Representative  of  a  government  that  was  daily 
threatened  with  destruction,  I  had  nevertheless  to  be  so  im- 
portunate, as  to  ask  for  concessions  and  wrest  new  territories 
from  the  king  of  the  Netherlands,  already  despoiled  of  the 
greater  part  of  his  kingdom.  Yet,  notwithstanding  this,  they 
were  astonished  in  Paris  that  I  did  not  succeed  immediately, 
and  accused  the  governments  who  were  represented  in  London, 
of  being  distrustful  of  France,  and  me  of  being  their  dupe ! 
But  to  continue. 

The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  the  Princess  de 

Vaudemont. 

London,  September  23rd,  1831. 

I  have  not  written  to  you  lately,  because  the  whole  of 
London  and  all  the  papers,  were  full  of  the  alarming  events  that 
had  taken  place  in  Paris.  To-day  it  seems,  according  to  the 
letters,  that  things  are  quieter  ;  I  therefore  write.  I  send  by 
courier  to-day,  a  protocol  signed  on  the  19th,1  which  in  my 
opinion,  reinstates  the  French  government  in  the  position  which 
the  recent  days  of  feebleness  had  taken  from  her.  The  path 
opened  up  by  this  protocol  is  a  path  of  safety.  I  hope  the  king 
feels  the  full  value  of  it,  and  I  believe  he  will  do  so.  It  is  a 
protocol  of  principles  in  accordance  with  what  we  have  done, 
which  admits  that  in  it  we  were  influenced  by  peace  and 
the  love  of  order.     In  addition,  it  puts  us  in  accord  with  all  the 

1  Protocol  No.  41,  signed  September  15th,  and  not  19th.  It  notices  the  declara- 
tion announced  by  Prince  Talleyrand  that  the  French  government  will  with- 
draw the  last  body  of  troops  from  Belgium,  which  had  only  been  left  there  by  the 
express  wish  of  the  sovereign  of  that  country,  and  that  the  retreat  of  this  body  will 
commence  on  September  25th,  so  as  to  be  completed  by  the  30th. 

In  reply  to  this  declaration,  the  plenipotentiaries  of  the  four  Courts  "  testified  to 
the  plenipotentiary  of  France,  the  satisfaction  with  which  they  received  it.  This 
fresh  manifestation  of  the  high  principles  that  governed  the  policy  of  France,  and  her 
love  for  peace,  was  only  what  the  allies  expected,  and  the  plenipotentiaries  begged 
Prince  Talleyrand  to  rest  assured,  that  their  Courts  would  know  how  to  appreciate  at 
its  true  value  the  determination  taken  by  the  French  government." 


204  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

existing  treaties.     The   Belgians  have   their   rights,   but    they 
must  not  attack  those  of  others. 

Since  the  events  of  July,  nothing  has  caused  so  much  uneasi- 
ness in  London  among  all  classes,  as  the  state  of  things  which  has 
existed  for  the  last  three  days,  and  is  not  yet  quite  over.  Adieu. 
I  am  very  tired.  Pray  tell  Mademoiselle,  that  it  is  by  adhering  to 
principles  that  one  gains  a  strong  and  honourable  position. 
Without  this,  one  is  a  prey  to  intrigues  of  every  sort.  I  think 
the  protocol  of  to-day  will  put  the  king  at  his  ease,  as  to  the 
affairs  of  Belgium.  He  can  always  say :  "  It  is  not  I,  it  is  the 
Conference."  It  would  be  still  better,  to  say  nothing  at  all. 
Lose  no  time  in  seeing  Mademoiselle. 

The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  M.  Casimir  Perier. 

LONDON,  September  2\th,  1 831. 

You  have  achieved  a  triumph  for  which  all  Europe  will  be 
grateful  to  you.1  As  a  Frenchman,  I  thank  you  in  the  name  of 
our  country  ;  through  you  she  is  enabled  to  appear  once  more 
untarnished  and  honoured.  Here  we  are  doing  all  we  can  to 
forward  the  disarmament  which  you  mentioned  so  opportunely. 
If  we  succeed  in  effecting  it,  it  will  be  due,  principally,  to  the 
laborious  week  which  you  have  brought  to  so  happy  a 
termination. 

I  leave  it  to  your  son  to  tell  you  of  our  past  alarms  and  our 
present  satisfactions.  All  the  intelligent  men  of  England,  and 
there  are  plenty  of  them,  have  shared  our  anxiety. 

Adieu,  monsieur.  I  will  only  add  my  wishes  for  your  welfare 
and  that  of  France.  .  .  . 

The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  Madame  Adelaide 

D'Orleans. 

London,  September  24//1,  1831. 

Mademoiselle  is  right :  I  quite  believe  in  Sebastiani's  friend- 
liness ;  he  has  just  given  me  a  fresh  proof  of  this  by  apprising 

1  The  Ministry  had  to  submit,  in  the  sittings  of  September  19th,  21st  and  22nd, 
to  a  series  of  questions  from  several  deputies  of  the  opposition.  The  question  of 
foreign  policy  was  the  special  subject  of  debate,  for  the  events  at  Warsaw  had  greatly 
excited  the  public  mind.  Home  policy  was  also  violently  attacked.  After  long 
speeches  from  MM.  Mauguin,  Lamarque,  and  Thiers,  and  answers  from  MM. 
Casimir  Perier  and  Sebastiani,  the  Chamber,  on  September  the  22nd,  by  221  votes 
to  136,  passed  an  order  of  the  day,  in  which  "it  declared  itself  satisfied  with  the 
explanations  given  by  the  ministers,  and  trusted  in  their  solicitude  for  the  dignity  of 
France  abroad. 


THE  RE  J  VL  UTION  OF  1 8 30.  205 

mc  by  telegraph  of  the  happy  result  of  the  sitting  of  the  22nd, 
which  is  so  important  to  us,  and  which  I  awaited  with  an  anxiety 
that  made  me  quite  feverish  yesterday — I  venture  to  say,  that  it  is 
not  the  first  time  this  has  happened  under  like  circumstances. 
At  my  age  the  nerves  are  easily  shaken,  but  I  hope  I  shall  not 
have  to  give  this  trying  proof  of  my  devotion  to  the  interests  of 
the  king  any  more.  Those  interests  have  indeed  been  most 
nobly  and  ably  defended  in  the  Chamber  of  Deputies.  It  pro- 
duced a  most  favourable  impression  here,  and  I  have  made  as 
much  of  it  as  I  possibly  could. 

Concerning  the  treat)'  we  have  in  hand, everyone  seems  equally 
animated  with  goodwill ;  all  are  anxious  to  make  a  good  piece 
of  work  of  it.  We  have  communicated  to  each  party  the  pro- 
positions of  the  other.  They  will  present  their  ideas  to  us  on 
Monday  the  26th,  and  in  the  discussion  which  will  follow,  I 
shall  make  use  of  the  arguments  with  which  the  king  has  been 
so  good  as  to  furnish  me.  There  is  a  general  disposition  to  be 
fair  and  equitable  to  everyone,  and  conclude  this  matter. 

The  vessels  that  arrived  from  Lisbon  yesterday,  apprised 
us  of  fresh  cruelties  perpetrated  by  Dom  Miguel  ;  this  will 
facilitate  the  efforts  of  M.  de  Palmella,1  whom  I  met  again 
yesterday  with  great  pleasure,  and  who  leaves  in  a  few  days  for 
Paris. 

The  English  Ministry  is  entirely  occupied  with  reform ; 
petitions  are  coming  in  from  all  parts  ;  the  great  debate  will 
begin  on  the  3rd  of  October.  .  .  . 


The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  the  Princess  de 

Vaudemont. 

LONDON,  September  27 tk,  1831. 

The  business  of  the  fortresses  is  causing  great  trouble,  and  T 
am  very  sorry  for  it  ;  but  the  fact  is,  that  it  has  been  complicated 
by  M.  Latour  Maubourg's  embassy  to  Brussels.  For  the  past 
year,  I  have  made  a  point  of  showing  that  we  only  acted  jointly 
with  the  other  Powers,  particularly  with  England.  All  the  con- 
fidence that  I  have  gained  respecting  this,  has  been  destroyed 
by  the  separate  action  taken  through  M.  Latour  Maubourg  at 
Brussels.     You  will  remember,  that  I  told  you  all  this  at  the 

1  The  Marquis  de  Palmella  was  at  that  time  Dom  Pedro's  ambassador  in  London. 
He  was  shortly  afterwards  placed  at  the  head  of  the  Regency  of  Terceira,  then 
became  Minister  for  Foreign  Affairs  and  President  of  the  Council.  M.  de  Palmella 
had  formerly  known  M.  de  Talleyrand  at  Vienna,  where  he  represented  Portugal  at 
the  Congress. 


206  THE  MEMOIRS  Oh  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

time.  Now  we  must  extricate  ourselves  from  the  position  in 
which  it  has  placed  us,  and  endeavour  not  to  forfeit  the  confi- 
dence that  we  have  enjoyed.  This  is  difficult,  and  such  a 
termination  of  the  question  is  most  unpleasant  for  me. 

We  have  had  fogs  here  for  the  last  eight  days,  which  have 
not  improved  my  head,  already  greatly  confused  by  this  fortress 
question,  which  ought  to  have  been  settled,  if  they  had  not 
interfered  with  it  in  Paris.  I  wished  above  all  things  to  show 
that  I  was  not  intriguing  ;  that  was  my  strong  point.  In  Paris 
they  did  not  like  such  a  simple  process,  and  they  made  a  little 
side  intrigue,  which  now  has  forced  the  others  to  take  precautionary 
measures  against  us.    All  this  wearies  me  to  death.    Adieu.  .  .  . 

The  following  letter  from  a  friend  of  General  Sebastiani's  (a 
favourite  adviser  at  the  Palais  Royal,  and  whose  wish  to  replace 
me  in  London  was  even  stronger  than  to  keep  his  post  in  Berlin, 
where  he  only  remained  three  months)  is  a  sufficiently  curious 
proof  of  the  influence  which  change  of  residence  exercises  over 
certain  minds  : 


The  Comte  de  Flahaut  to  the  Prince  de 

Talleyrand. 

Berlin,  September  25//?,  1831. 

I  received  protocol  No  41,  which  you  were  so  good  as  to  send 
me  yesterday  ;  had  it  not  been  for  that,  I  should  not  have  known 
a  word  of  what  was  going  on,  for  the  Ministry  gives  no  in- 
formation whatever  to  its  minister  at  Berlin.  I  think  that  the 
terms  (of  the  protocol)  are  excellent,  and  repair  the  ridiculous  and 
embarrassing  position  in  which  the  speech  of  Marshal  Soult  : 
placed  us. 

To  act  in  conformity  with  his  words,  it  would  have  been 
necessary  to  break  the  most  solemn  and  distinct  engage- 
ments. 

I  hope  to  leave  Berlin  this  evening,  and  profit  by  the  holiday 
which  the  king  has  given  me.  For  three  weeks  now,  I  have  not 
been  at  all  well,  and  besides,  I  want  to  go  to  Paris  on  private 
business.  Shall  I  see  you  there  ?  It  seems  to  me  that  you,  more 
than  anyone,  have  the  right  to  take  a  rest,  if  your  task  is  finished 
by  the   10th.     You  are  quite  right  in  saying  that  our  welfare 

1  Marshal  Soult  had  declared,  that  the  French  army  would  remain  in  Belgium  until 
the  independence  of  that  country  should  be  solemnly  recognized  and  proclaimed. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  207 

depends  entirely  on  peace.  -  War  will  either  hand  us  over  to 
foreigners,  or  to  our  own  blunders.  The  Poles  serve  to  further 
these  last,  and  I  am  beginning  to  keep  aloof  from  them.  They 
will  alienate  their  best  friends  by  such  behaviour.  They  now  turn 
our  kindness  to  them  into  a  crime.  Meanwhile,  their  armies  hope 
to  obtain  good  terms  by  resistance  ;  and  I  believe  they  will  only 
further  injure  their  interests,  for  the  soldiers  are  gradually 
leaving  their  regiments  and  returning  home.  They  would  have 
done  better  to  profit  by  the  favourable  terms  offered  them  by 
Paskiewicz,1  but  if  courage  is  an  attribute  of  this  warlike  nation, 
they  are  certainly  not  distinguished  for  common  sense.  They 
say  that  Romarino  has  entered  Galicia  with  ten  thousand  men, 
and  that  the  army  at  Modlin  appears  to  wish  to  fly  into 
Prussia.2     You  know.  .  .  . 


The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  the  Princess  de 

Vaudemont. 

LONDON,  September  loth,  1S31. 

Read  the  Times  of  to-day,  the  30th.  You  must  read  it  in 
the  original,  because  the  French  papers,  either  intentionally  or 
unintentionally,  will  misinterpret  it.  Lord  Londonderry3  at- 
tacked me,  with  regard  to  the  influence  I  was  exercising  over  the 

1  Ivan  Feodorowitch  Paskiewicz,  Russian  field  marshal,  born  1777,  went  through 
the  campaigns  of  1805,  1806,  1S12,  and  1813.  In  1826,  he  received  the  command  of 
the  army  of  the  Caucasus.  In  1831,  he  replaced  Marshal  Dielbitsch  at  the  head  of  the 
army  of  Poland,  and  after  the  peace,  received  the  rank  of  field  marshal  and  the  title 
of  Prince  of  Warsaw.  He  was  then  appointed  Viceroy  of  Poland.  In  1849,  he  com- 
manded the  Russian  troops  sent  into  Hungary.  Finally,  in  1854,  when  at  the  head 
of  the  aroiy  of  the  Danube,  he  was  seriously  wounded  before  Silistria.  He  died 
in  1856. 

-  After  the  peace  of  Warsaw,  the  remains  of  the  Polish  army,  under  Generals 
Romarino  and  Rybinski,  retreated  on  Modlin.  After  a  desperate  resistance,  it  was 
dispersed  and  took  refuge  in  Prussia  and  Austria.  General  Romarino  passed  into 
Galicia  on  September  16th. 

3  Charles  William  Stewart,  Marquis  of  Londonderry,  brother  of  Lord  Castlereagh, 
who  was  often  mentioned  at  the  Congress  of  Vienna  under  the  name  of  Lord  Stewart, 
This  is  a  portion  of  his  speech  which  relates  to  M.  de  Talleyrand.— "  House  of 
Lords,  September  29th. — The  Marquis  of  Londonderry.  .  .  .  France  seeks 
every  means  of  diminishing  the  influence  of  England  and  of  forcing  her  to  give  way 
to  her  ascendency.  The  crafty  diplomatist  who  represents  her  here,  is  no  sooner 
beaten  on  one  point  than  he  turns  to  another.  I  made  use  of  rather  a  strong  ex- 
pression, in  speaking  of  the  personage  who  at  present  directs  the  affairs  of  France  in 
this  country.  I  do  not  think  you  could  find  another  such  character  in  the  whole 
world.  He  was,  successively,  the  minister  of  Napoleon,  of  Louis  XVIII.,  and  of 
Charles  X.  When  one  sees  the  English  ministers  going  one  after  the  other  to  con- 
sult such  a  person,  one  is  naturally  filled  with  disgust.  If  your  lordships  want  to 
know  on  what  grounds  my  opinion  of  Prince  Talleyrand  are  based,  I  ask  them  to 
read  the  memorandum  he  addressed  to  the  First  Consul,  on  the  15th  Brumaire,  in  the 
year  XI. 


208  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

Conference  and  the  English  Ministry  ;  and  all  this  coupled  with 
ingenious  and  subtle  epithets,  which  were  rather  malevolent. 
The  Duke  of  Wellington  rose,  and  energetically  repulsed  the 
attack  made  on  me,  and  insisted  above  all  that  I  had  always 
defended  the  interests  of  France,  without  anyone  being  able  to 
attack  my  loyalty  and  straightforwardness.  (This  will  prove  to 
you  that  the  man  who  loves  you  is  both  loyal  and  sincere.)  Lord 
Holland  spoke  after  the  Duke  of  Wellington  to  the  same  effect, 
and  very  forcibly.  Thus  all  parties  united  in  a  manner  most 
flattering  to  me.1 

1  This  is  the  extract  from  the  Times,  to  which  reference  is  made  in  this  letter  :  — 
"House  of  Lords,   Thursday,  September  29th,  1831 

After  Lord  Londonderry's  attack  on  M.  de  Talleyrand, 

Lord  Goderich  said  in  the  course  of  his  speech  : 

"Another  part  of  his  noble  friend's  speech  to  which  he  desired  to  advert,  was  that 
which  related  to  Prince  de  Talleyrand,  whom  his  noble  friend  had  supposed  to  have 
great  influence  upon  the  councils  of  this  country,  and  whom,  proceeding  on  that  sup- 
position and  upon  certain  parts  of  that  illustrious  person's  past  life,  this  noble  friend 
has  thought  he  was  justified  in  pursuing  with  the  most  acrimonious  animadversion, 
although  an  ambassador  from  a  friendly  Power.  {Loud  cries  of  "  Hear")  His  noble 
friend,  to  do  him  justice,  had  not  dipped  his  arrows  so  deeply  in  gall  on  this  as  on  a 
former  occasion  ;  but  still  he  must  say,  that  he  had,  even  on  this  occasion,  indulged  in 
language  the  most  imprudent  and  the  most  indiscreet  that  any  public  man  could  be 
betrayed  into  with  regard  to  an  ambassador  of  a  friendly  Power.  (Cheers.)  He 
would  not  willingly  have  touched  upon  this  part  of  his  noble  friend's  speech,  because 
he  thought  the  sooner  it  was  forgotten  the  better ;  but  then,  if  he  were  silent  with 
regard  to  it,  it  might  be  supposed  that  the  government  were  of  opinion  that  those 
animadversions  were  not  misplaced  :  and,  if  that  were  the  case,  the  plain  inference 
was  that  Prince  de  Talleyrand  ought  not  to  be  allowed  to  remain  here.  If  the 
government  entertained  the  same  opinion  as  his  noble  friend  of  Prince  de  Talleyrand, 
it  would  be  their  duty  to  represent  to  his  Majesty,  the  King  of  the  French,  that  they 
could  not  transact  business  with  such  a  person.  He  felt  it  necessary,  therefore,  to 
speak  as  he  had  spoken  respecting  these  aspersions  of  the  character  of  an  individual, 
whose  station  ought  to  have  shielded  him  from  such  an  assault.  (Cheers.)  He  knew 
that  his  noble  friend  would  say,  that  because  he  protested  against  this  indiscreet, 
imprudent,  and  unjustifiable  language,  the  government  was  truckling  to  France.  Let 
him,  however,  remind  his  noble  friend  that  Prince  de  Talleyrand  had  been  the 
minister  of  the  last  two  kings  of  France  ;  that  Prince  de  Talleyrand  had  also  had  a 
large  and  important  share  in  the  deliberations  of  the  Congress  of  Vienna,  the  result 
of  which  deliberations  the  noble  marquis  thought  so  wise  and  so  good.  (Cheers.) 
Surely,  the  noble  marquis  might  have  thought  of  these  facts  ;  but  if  he  had,  he  would 
never  have  entered  upon  the  unjust,  as  well  as  the  invidious,  occupation  of  ransacking 
every  portion  of  Prince  de  Talleyrand's  life,  and  bringing  up  in  judgment  against 
him,  as  present  deeds  and  acts  of  this  day,  transactions  which  had  taken  place  when 
the  circumstances  of  France  were  so  different,  and  when  no  man  could  act  as  his 
reason  or  his  inclination  dictated,  but  as  the  strong  and  uncontrollable  tide  of  affairs 
compelled  him  to  fashion  his  course. 

"The  Duke  of  Wellington. — Before  he  stated  what  his  view  of  the  subject 
was  (Femploi  d'officiers  Francais  dans  Varmee  Beige),  he  must  be  allowed  to  say  a  few 
words  respecting  an  illustrious  individual  (Prince  de  Talleyrand),  who  had  been  so 
strongly  animadverted  upon  by  his  noble  friend  near  him.  True  it  was,  that  that 
illustrious  individual  had  enjoyed,  in  a  very  high  degree,  the  confidence  of  his  noble 
friend's  deceased  relative  ;  and  true  it  also  was,  that  none  of  the  great  measures  which 
had  been  resolved  upon  at  Vienna  and  at  Paris,  had  been  concerted  or  carried  on 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  209 

In  Paris,  for  which  I  am  working  myself  to  death,  no  one 
would  think  of  doing  so  much.  They  think  enough  has  been 
done  when  you  have  written  me  a  few  kind  words,  and  I  am 
induced  to  believe  that  they  are  right. 

The  fate  of  the  Reform  Bill  is  still  uncertain  ;  but  it  is 
certain  that,  whether  the  Bill  is  rejected  or  adopted,  the 
ministers  will  remain  in. 

Just  now  we  have  conferences  of  from  five  to  six  hours  a 
day  ;  we  wish  to  finish  and  we  intend  to  finish  these  matters. 
The  King  of  Holland  will  not  attack,  whatever  the  papers  and 
Messrs.  Celles  and  Co.  may  say.  Even  if  it  was  necessary  to 
prolong  the  armistice  for  a  few  days,  I  believe  he  would  agree  to 
it.     If  we  are  only  left  alone,  we  shall  finish  all  right.     Adieu. 

without  the  intervention  of  that  illustrious  person.  He  had  no  hesitation  in  saying, 
that  both  at  that  time,  in  every  one  of  the  great  transactions  that  took  place  then, 
and  in  every  transaction  in  which  he  had  been  engaged  with  Prince  de  Talleyrand 
since,  the  latest  of  which  had  occurred  during  the  short  period  in  which  he  (the  Duke 
of  Wellington)  had  been  in  his  Majesty's  councils  after  the  late  revolution  in  France, 
— he  had  no  hesitation  in  declaring  that  in  all  those  transactions,  from  the  first  to  the 
last  of  them,  no  man  could  have  conducted  himself  with  more  firmness  and  ability 
with  regard  to  his  own  country,  or  with  more  uprightness  and  honour  in  all  his 
communications  with  the  ministers  of  other  countries,  than  Prince  de  Talleyrand. 
(Cheers.)  They  had  heard  a  good  deal  of  Prince  de  Talleyrand  from  many  quarters, 
but  he  felt  himself  bound  to  declare  it  to  be  his  sincere  and  conscientious  belief,  that 
no  man's  public  and  private  character  had  ever  been  so  much  belied,  as  both  the  public 
and  the  private  character  of  that  illustrious  individual  had  been.  (Much  cheering.) 
He  had  thought  it  necessary,  in  common  justice,  to  say  this  much  of  an  individual 
respecting  whose  conduct  and  character  he  had  had  no  small  means  of  forming  a 
judgment. 

"  Lord  Holland. — There  was  one  part  of  the  noble  duke's  speech  which  had 
given  him  the  greatest  pleasure,  and  which  reflected  the  highest  credit  upon  the 
noble  duke.  He  need  hardly  say  that  he  alluded  to  the  temper,  the  manliness  and  the 
generosity  with  which  the  noble  duke  animadverted  upon  what  had  fallen  from  the 
noble  marquis  with  regard  to  Prince  de  Talleyrand.  On  public  as  well  as  on  private 
grounds,  he  thanked  the  noble  duke  for  that  part  of  his  speech.  There  could  be  little 
difference  of  opinion,  as  to  the  injustice  and  the  want  of  generosity  of  speaking  in 
harsh  and  insulting  terms  respecting  the  ambassador  of  a  friendly  Power,  resident 
amongst  us.  On  the  other  hand,  he  felt  that  there  could  be  no  good  taste  in  dwelling 
upon  the  virtue  and  the  merit  of  a  man's  own  acquaintance,  in  an  assembly  like  that  of 
their  lordships  ;  yet  he  trusted  that  he  might  be  allowed  to  observe,  that  forty  years' 
acquaintance  with  the  noble  individual  who  had  been  alluded  to,  enabled  him  to  bear 
his  testimony  to  the  fact,  that  although  those  forty  years  had  been  passed  during  a  time 
peculiarly  fraught  with  calumnies  of  every  description,  there  had  been  no  man's 
private  character  more  shamefully  traduced,  and  no  man's  public  character  more 
mistaken  and  misrepresented,  than  the  private  and  public  character  of  Prince  de 
Talleyrand." 

If  one  takes  into  consideration  the  well-known  uprightness  and  truthfulness  of  the 
Duke  of  Wellington,  and  the  friendship  that  existed  for  forty  years  between  Lord 
Holland  and  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand,  the  most  prejudiced  mind  cannot  fail  to  see, 
that  what  took  place  at  this  sitting  of  the  English  House  of  Lords  was  specially 
flattering  to  M.  de  Talleyrand.  We  must  not  lose  sight  of  the  fact,  that  the  Duke  o 
Wellington  was  the  head  of  the  opposition,  of  which  Lord  Londonderry,  the  attack- 
ing party,  was  a  member,  while  Lords  Gooderich  and  Holland  were  members  of  the 
Ministry. — (M.  de  Bacourt.) 

VOL.   IV.  P 


2io  THE  MEMOIRS  OE  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

M.  Casimir  Perier  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand. 

Paris,  October  ist,  1831. 

I  have  received  the  two  letters,  mon  Prince,  which  you 
addressed  to  me ;  you  know  what  a  pleasure  it  is  to  me  to 
receive  news  direct  from  you. 

I  was  very  sensible  of  the  kind  remarks  you  were  good 
enough  to  make  to  me,  respecting  the  events  of  the  past  week. 
I  only  did,  not  perhaps  without  some  peril,  what,  under  the  cir- 
cumstances, was  required  by  the  gravity  of  the  disorders  and  the 
necessity  of  thwarting  evil  designs,  the  pretext  for  which  was 
furnished  by  an  incident  abroad. 

Having  succeeded  in  establishing  order,  and  surmounting  an 
evil  which  had  found  an  echo  in  annoying  parliamentary 
debates,  we  shall  not  neglect  any  effort  to  rescue  France  from 
the  perils  with  which  she  is  threatened  by  this  trouble,  and  with 
her,  the  civilization  of  the  whole  of  Europe.  As  you,  mon  Prince, 
on  your  side,  apply  yourself  so  nobly  to  this  end,  so  will  I 
also  use  all  my  endeavours,  as  long  as  it  is  given  to  me  to  be  at 
the  head  of  affairs,  in  the  difficult  task  of  restoring  social  order, 
disturbed  as  it  has  been  by  party  attacks,  and  but  little  upheld 
by  men  of  worth  in  general. 

We  have  received  your  last  despatch,  mon  Prince,  to  which 
was  added  protocol  No.  44.  The  Conference,  feeling  the 
necessity  of  putting  an  end  to  the  Belgian  business,  has  decided 
to  take  the  initiative.  It  has  resolved  to  draw  up  a  project  for  a 
definite  treaty  between  the  two  countries.1  We  cannot  fail  to 
recognize  the  benefit  of  this  measure. 

We  are  equally  desirous,  of  course,  to  see  the  question  finally 
settled,  and  to  deprive  agitators  of  the  pretexts  for  which  they 
are  ever  on  the  watch  ;  but  above  all,  we  hold  that  the  basis 
established  by  General  Sebastiani  in  his  different  despatches, 
must  be  perpetuated  in  the  projected  treaty.  Should  the  period 
till  October  10th,  be  too  short  to  obtain  this  result  completely 
and  securely,  we  ought  then  to  beg  for  an  extension  of  another 
fortnight. 

It  is  of  essential  consequence  in  the  position  we  now  hold, 
that  the  solution  of  Belgian  affairs  should  satisfy  the  views  as  well 

1  In  the  execution  of  the  preliminary  Treaty  of  the  Eighteen  Articles,  the  Con- 
ference proposed  on  September  24th,  a  scheme  for  a  •definite  treaty  which  they 
addressed  to  the  Dutch  and  Belgian  plenipotentiaries.  They  replied  on  the  26th,  by 
two  counter-projects,  entirely  dissimilar.  The  Conference  decided  that  these  two 
parties  would  never  agree  if  they  were  left  to  themselves ;  it  therefore  drew  up  a 
protocol  (No.  44  of  September  26th),  in  which  it  decided  to  settle  the  articles  of  the 
projected  treaty  on  its  own  authority.  It  was  in  consequence  of  this  protocol,  that 
the  Treaty  of  the  Twenty-four  Articles  was  drawn  up. 


THE  RE  VOL  U TION  OF  1 830.  211 

as  the  requirements  of  the  government.  This  solution  includes, 
up  to  a  certain  point,  the  question  of  our  possibly  remaining 
in  power. 

For  this,  mon  Prince,  a  separation  of  the  two  countries, 
which  removes  from  both  any  motive  or  pretext  for  quarrel,  the 
possibility  for  both  to  enjoy  in  peace  the  independence  which 
is  necessary  to  them,  and  the  advantages  attached  to  their  re- 
spective positions  ;  in  fact,  the  adoption  of  such  conditions  as 
France  has  a  right  to  insist  upon,  are  necessities  with  which 
your  wise  prudence  must  be  fully  impressed. 

Some  overtures  have  been  made  to  the  government  with 
the  idea  of  placing  a  prince  of  the  House  of  Nassau  on  the 
throne  of  Greece.  Without  prejudging  the  result  of  these  over- 
tures, they  might  be  looked  upon  as  a  possible  means  of 
facilitating  arrangements  as  far  as  Holland  is  concerned.  The 
government  would  not  be  averse  to  entertaining  them  in  that 
light.  .  .  . 

In  this  last  paragraph  of  his  letter,  M  Casimir  Perier  alludes 
to  the  idea  that  had  been  put  forward  by  Russia — compensating 
the  King  of  the  Netherlands  by  giving  the  throne  of  Greece  to 
Prince  Frederick,  the  youngest  and  favourite  son  of  that 
sovereign.  But  the  king  himself  rejected  the  proposal,  and  the 
matter  went  no  further. 

The  Due  de  Dalberg  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand. 

Paris,  October  yd,  1831. 

Your  letter  dated  29th  inst,  mon  cher  Prince,  was  a  real 
comfort  to  me.  You  had  maintained  so  prolonged  a  silence, 
that  I  could  not  account  for  it.  In  spite  of  the  multiplicity  of 
your  engagements,  I  always  hoped  that  you  would  find  a 
moment  to  tell  me  of  your  health  and  welfare.  You  may  feel 
assured  that  no  one  is  more  earnest  in  his  wishes  for  your 
happiness  than  I  am.  I  shall  congratulate  Europe,  and 
especially  France,  if  the  Dutch  question  is  settled  by  an 
equitable  arbitration.  So  long  as  there  is  an  impending  question 
of  war,  it  is  not  possible  to  hope  for  a  return  of  confidence. 

It  is  impossible  to  deceive  oneself  as  to  the  consequences  of 
war.  It  will  lead  to  upheavals  of  every  kind,  and  France 
cannot  flatter  herself  that  they  will  be  to  her  advantage.  All 
my  information  from  Italy  and  Germany  confirms  me  in  the 
idea,  that  if  the  nations  applauded  the  July  revolution,  they  all 
see  and  calculate  the  consequences  of  the  faults  which  are  being 

P  2 


212  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

committed  here  now.  A  friend  holding  a  high  position  in 
Germany  writes  to  me  : 

"  Your  France  and  your  Paris  are  really  beginning  to  disgust 
us  all.  Take  care !  Some  fine  day  you  may  easily,  in  a  general 
war  with  us,  share  the  fate  of  Belgium  in  the  last  squabble  with 
Holland.  It  is  not  written  in  the  book  of  fate,  that  victory  will 
be  everywhere  and  always  faithful  to  the  French  army. 
Remember  the  last  years  of  Louis  XIV.  and  of  Napoleon.  This 
so-called  sympathy  of  the  nations  is  growing  less  and  less. 
Everyone  is  wearied  by  your  insurrections,  and  the  aggressive 
boastings  of  your  various  factions." 

Travellers  returning  from  Cologne  confirm  these  observations. 
At  Cologne,  the  Prussians  have  a  park  of  artillery  of  200  guns, 
horsed.  Comte  Nostitz,1  who  commands  part  of  the  army  there, 
said  to  a  person  whose  name  I  cannot  give,  "  We  shall  defend 
our  treaty  against  France.  She  may  do  what  she  likes  at  home, 
but  she  must  refrain  from  interfering  with  the  position  of  her 
neighbours.  Our  army  wishes  for  war ;  we  can  enter  the  field 
with  200,000  men.  Our  organization  and  our  numbers  assure 
us  of  success.  Prince  Metternich  has  promised  to  support  us. 
The  Austrians  and  the  German  contingents  will  put  the  same 
number  of  men  on  the  Rhine,  and  they  will  have  as  many  more 
with  the  Piedmontese  in  Italy.  If  the  King  of  France  does 
not  wish  to  become  a  mere  King  of  Jacobinism,  let  him  seek 
another  theatre  than  Europe  for  his  operations  ;  we  shall 
certainly  defend  ourselves." 

At  Munich,  the  king  has  given  himself  over  entirely  to  the 
Prince  of  Wrede.  Sixty  thousand  Bavarians  are  at  the  dis- 
posal of  the  Cabinet  of  Vienna.  For  six  months,  Pfeffel 2  has 
not  received  a  single  word  in  reply  to  all  the  nonsense  with 
which  they  credit  him  here  at  the  Foreign  Office.  There  is  a 
M.  Mortier  at  Munich,3  who  is  very  high  flown  and  weak  ;  he 
•is  disliked   by    the  king   and    everyone,  and  receives  the   cold 

1  Comte  de  Nostitz-Rieneck,  general  of  cavalry,  went  through  the  campaigns  of 
1806,  1813,  1814,  and  1815  ;  after  the  peace,  he  commanded  the  cavalry  of  the 
guards.  In  1830,  Prince  William,  the  king's  brother,  having  been  sent  into  the 
Rhenish  provinces  as  civil  and  military  governor,  Count  Nostitz  accompanied  him  as 
chief  of  his  staff.  He  left  the  army  in  1848,  was  appointed  minister  to  Hanover  in 
1850,  retired  in  1859,  and  died  in  1866. 

2  Chretien  Hubert,  Baron  Pfeffel  de  Kriegelstein.  son  of  the  historian  and  diplo- 
matist of  that  name,  who  had  formerly  served  in  the  office  of  M.  de  Vergennes.  Born 
in  1765,  he  entered  the  diplomatic  service  of  Bavaria,  and  died  as  minister  plenipoten- 
tiary of  that  csuntry  in  1835,  at  Paris. 

3  Comte  Hector  Mortier,  nephew  of  Marshal  Due  de  Trevise,  born  in  1 797.  Was 
first  secretary  at  Berlin  under  the  Restoration.  After  the  Revolution  of  July,  he  was 
appointed  minister  plenipotentiary  to  Munich,  then  to  Lisbon,  1833  ;  to  the  Hague, 
1835  ;  to  Berne,  1839  ;  and  to  Parma,  18^4.  He  was  created  peer  of  France  in  1845. 
In  185 1,  he  became  first  chamberlain  to  Prince  Jerome  Napoleon,  and  died  in  1864. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  213. 

shoulder  from  all.  Runigny  is  much  regretted  there,  as  although 
he  was  rather  a  gossip,  he  never  made  mischief. 

Louis  de  Rohan  has  returned  to  Vienna.  He  says  they  are 
furious  there  against  everything  French,  and  that  they  are 
prepared  to  make  a  most  vigorous  defence.  One  of  my  friends, 
head  of  one  of  the  Cantons  of  Switzerland,  wrote  to  me  on 
September  20th  : 

''The  troubles  that  are  agitating  us  all  originate  in  your 
clubs.  Mauguin,  who  took  a  journey  to  Switzerland  this 
summer,  has  regularly  stirred  up  the  people.  Several  of  our 
leaders,  who  have  been  in  Paris,  boast  of  having  been  encouraged 
by  La  Fayette  and  Lamarque  and  urge  on  our  demagogues. 
All  this  is  odious,  and  is  preparing  great  trouble  for  you.  Europe 
cannot  continue  in  this  state." 

Regarding  Poland,  mon  cher  Prince,  you  ought  to  have  mor.e 
reliable  news  than  I  can  give  you.  However,  this  is  what  I  think 
and  what  I  know.  The  Polish  revolution  was  confined  to  the 
army  ;  the  war  to  the  Vistula.  The  Cabinets  have  the  names  of 
twenty-seven  individuals  who  left  Paris  to  stir  up  discontent  in 
Warsaw.  The  first  successes  were  due  to  a  splendid  Polish 
army,  completely  equipped,  ready  for  the  field,  and  possessed  of 
from  twenty  to  thirty  millions  of  ready  money.  Some  most 
respected  names  were  involved,  and  help  was  expected  from 
here.  It  had  been  promised ! ! !  Marshal  Diebitsch  attacked 
them  with  an  insufficient  force,  and  winter  fought  on  the  side 
of  the  Poles.  When,  however,  the  Prussians  at  last  got  their  army 
together  and  crossed  the  Vistula,  victory  did  what  she  generally 
does,  sided  with  the  strongest.  The  Poles  were  shamefully 
treated  ;  Warsaw  surrendered  ;  the  Polish  army,  which  the 
Emperor  Nicholas  did  not  intend  should  exist  any  longer, 
retreated,  and  opened  negotiations  ;  but  while  awaiting  an 
answer  from  St.  Petersburg,  it  gradually  dwindled  away.  Only 
about  six  thousand  men  remained  under  arms.  In  one  day,  six 
hundred  officers  tendered  their  submission.  Defection  is  uni- 
versal. This  revolution  began  with  assassination  and  crime,  and 
finishes  in  the  same  manner. 

The  following,  I  believe,  is  the  course  the  Russian  Cabinet  in- 
tends to  pursue.  It  will  not  permit  the  intervention  of  any  other 
Cabinet.  It  will  allow  the  boundary  and  the  name  of  the  kingdom 
of.- Poland  to  remain,  but  it  will  no  longer  consent  to  the 
existence  either  of  a  Diet,  or  a  Polish  army.  And  in  my  opinion 
it  will  be  right.  At  the  present  time,  the  only  ability  needed, 
is  to  organize  a  strong  authority  and  then  maintain  it. 

The  Palais  Royal  has  so  broken  up  all  the  bonds  of  political 
society,  that  it  is  time  to  look  into  this  carefully.     I  advise  our 


214  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

Ministry  thoroughly  to  realise  this  truth.  It  is  to  this  end  that 
I  approve  of  all  the  arrangements  favourable  to  the  Dutch. 
Further,  let  me  submit  to  you  an  observation  founded  on  histori- 
cal facts.  Holland,  strong  and  powerful  as  a  State,  and  possess- 
ing a  navy,  is  of  more  consequence  to  France  than  Belgium, 
boastful  and  turbulent  as  she  is  and  will  continue  to  be,  for  some 
time  to  come.  Several  days  ago  I  remarked  to  M.  Casimir 
Perier,  that  all  this  solicitude  for  the  Belgian  revolution  seemed 
to  me  absurd,  whereas  whatever  is  done  for  Holland  will  be  of 
real  use.     At  least  that  is  my  opinion. 

I  had  got  so  far,  mon  Prince,  when  the  English  papers  giving 
an  account  of  the  idiotic  behaviour  of  Lord  Londonderry,  were 
brought  to  me.  He  is  what  he  has  always  been  ;  but  I  must 
congratulate  you  on  the  result  of  this  parliamentary  debate,  so 
highly  complimentary  to  your  position.  I  rejoice  at  it  for 
your  sake. 

Try  and  put  an  end  to  the  Dutch  business.  If  the  King  of 
Holland  insists  on  having  territory  instead  of  money,  you  must 
give  it  to  him.  Luxemburg  possesses  240,000  inhabitants. 
The  fortress  with  its  surroundings  may  be  taken  at  40,000 
inhabitants.  Well  !  let  the  remaining  200,000  be  given  around 
Venloo  and  Maastricht.  What  does  it  matter  whether  the 
Belgians  have  a  few  villages  more  or  less  ?  The  essential  thing 
is  to  preserve  peace.  The  day  before  yesterday  there  was  a  very 
lively  discussion  on  this  subject  between  M.  Sebastiani,  Werther 
(the  Prussian  minister)  and  Pozzo.  The  account  of  it  was  given 
me  by  one  who  was  present.  The  former  argued  against  the 
result  of  the  arbitration.  He  declared  that  he  could  not  defend 
it  from  the  tribune  ;  he  even  said,  that  rather  than  adhere  to  it, 
France  would  withdraw  her  representatives,  and  would  witness 
the  end  of  the  Conference  without  regret.  M.  de  Werther1 
opposed  him  ;  Pozzo  said  little,  but  as  they  left  the  room  he 
said  to  Werther,  •"  Why  do  you  argue  with  him  ?  You  know 
quite  well  that  it  is  not  with  him  that  we  do  business."  I 
therefore  think,  mon  Prince,  that  M.  Perier  will  not  leave  you 
in  the  lurch.  Matters  must  come  to  an  end,  as  you  truly 
say.  Later  on,  the  infinite  service  that  you  have  rendered  to 
France  will  be  recognized. 

I  have  little  to  tell  you  of  our  Chambers.  That  of  the 
Deputies  is  excessively  dull ;  and  the  Ministry  and  the  king 
have  abandoned  that  of  the  Peers.  This  is  one  of  the  greatest 
of  the  many  indiscretions  that  are  being  committed  every  day. 

Pray  accept  ...  . 

1     Prussian  Minister  at  Paris.     His  son  was  Prussian  Ambassador  at  Paris  in  1870, 
2X  the  time  war  was  declared. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  215 

I  did  not  accept  everything  that  M.  de  Dalberg's  letter 
contained,  as  entirely  exact ;  but  I  had  to  admit  that  there  was 
a  great  deal  of  truth  in  it. 

The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  the  Princess  de 

Vaudemont. 

London,  October  3rd,  1831. 

I  find  that  in  Paris,  Belgian  affairs  are  very  badly  understood 
just  now.  They  are  trying  to  make  a  Belgium,  by  taking  one 
part  from  here  and  another  from  there  ;  that  is  easy  enough, 
anyone  knows  how  to  do  that  ;  but  that  is  not  the  point.  We 
have  to  replace  Holland  and  Belgium,  in  the  respective  positions 
which  they  occupied  with  regard  to  one  another  in  1 790.  Before 
that  time  Holland  did  not  inundate  Belgium  ;  there  was  a  treaty 
of  1785,  which  prevented  any  devastation  of  that  kind.1  This 
might  be  renewed,  and  the  proximity  of  France  will  have  much 
more  influence  over  Holland  than  Austria  who  is  so  far  off  could 
have.  In  truth,  all  the  difficulties  that  are  made  at  Paris, 
and  which  originate  in  the  brains  and  are  the  result  of  the 
machinations  of  M.  de  Celles,  are  very  feeble  ;  they  could  all  be 
settled  by  a  child.  It  is  singular  however,  that  we  allow  ourselves 
to  be  the  dupes  of  such  a  worthless  individual  as  M.  de  Celles, 
who  dares  not  return  to  Belgium,  and  who  fears  matters  will 
never  be  settled.  This  Belgian  question  is  a  question  on  which 
peace  or  war  depends  ;  it  can  be  satisfactorily  ended  ;  when  I  say 
satisfactorily,  I  mean  to  the  advantage  of  Belgium,  without  putting 
the  King  of  Holland  in  a  position  to  refuse  his  adherence.  Why 
rob  anyone  ?  Would  that  be  a  just  treaty  ?  What  is  wished  in 
France  will  not  be  consented  to  here.  It  is  really  seeking  for 
hindrances.  My  common  sense  shows  me  nothing  but  misfor- 
tunes if  we  hold  to  the  foolish  ideas  that  the  wire-pullers  have 
started  amongst  us. 

Adieu  ;  I  would  willingly  only  be  annoyed,  but  I  am  more 
than  that, —  1  am  grieved 

London,  October  4///,  1831. 

The  first  debate  on  the  Reform  Bill  took  place  yesterday  in 
the  House  of  Lords  ;  it  continues  to-day,  and  perhaps  will  not 
end  till  to-morrow.  The  same  uncertainty  still  exists  about  it  ; 
but  it  is  thought  that  several  bishops  were  favourably  inclined 
to  the  Ministry  yesterday  evening. 

1  Article  VI.  of  the  treaty  of  November  8th,  1785,  between  the  Netherlands  and 
the  Emperor. 


2i6  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

c 

In  the  House  and  around  it,  there  was  an  enormous  crowd. 
I  am  now  going  to  the  Conference.  We  are  ready  to  wind  up 
matters,  if  they  would  refrain  from  trying  to  create  a  chimerical 
Belgium  in  Paris ;  but  they  can,  if  they  will,  have  a  genuine 
Belgium.  Stipulations  will  be  made  to  'prevent  inundations  ; 
there  will  be  both  Dutch  and  Belgian  overseers  at  the  sluices  ; 
so  there  will  be  no  more  danger  in  that  quarter.  Belgium  will 
have  two  more  routes  for  introducing  her  products  and  merchan- 
dise into  Germany.  She  will  receive  an  increase  of  population  of 
50,000  souls,  and  France  will  see  the  destruction  of  the  fortresses, 
which  were  designated  by  M.  Latour-Maubourg,  and  with  regard 
to  which,  General  Goblet l  is  now  here  with  us. 

It  seems  to  me  that  this  is  enough  to  content  us.  Therefore 
let  us  end,  and  seek  fresh  strength  in  peace.  It  is  in  this,  that 
the  government  will  find  support  and  security  of  every 
kind  .... 

King  Leopold  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand. 

Brussels,  October  ^th,  1831. 
Mon  cher  Prince, 

I  had  charged  Baron  Stockmar2  with  a  letter  for  you  ;  as 
he  has  been  ill,  it  is  possible  that  he  has  not  yet  been  able  to 
deliver  it  to  you. 

We  are  awaiting  the  arrival  of  the  courier  here  from  the 
Hague.  As  time  presses,  I  have  had  to  make  my  military 
arrangements  just  as  if  war  was  certain  ;  but  what  else 
could  I  do  ?  I  cannot  wait  until  the  last  moment.  Urge  the 
Conference  to  some  energetic  measure  ;  it  is  plain  that  the  King 

1  Albert-Joseph  Goblet,  Comte  d'Alviella,  a  Belgian  general,  born  in  1790,  left 
the  Polytechnic  school  in  181 1,  and  served  till  1815  in  the  French  army.  At  that 
date  he  passed  into  the  service  of  the  King  of  the  Netherlands.  In  1830,  he  took 
part  with  the  provisional  Belgian  government,  which  appointed  him  General  of 
Brigade  and  War  Minister.  In  1831,  he  was  sent  to  London  as  commissioner  to  the 
Conference.  In  1832,  he  became  Minister  for  Foreign  Affairs.  In  1836,  he  was  elected 
deputy,  and  the  following  year  sent  to  Lisbon  as  minister  plenipotentiary.  On 
returning  to  Belgium  (1843-)  he  again  took  up  foreign  affairs.  He  retired  1845.  He 
was  elected  deputy  over  and  over  again,  and  always  sat  on  the  Liberal  side.  He  died 
in  1873. 

2  Christian-Frederic,  Baron  Stockmar,  born  at  Coburg  in  1787,  was  physician  in 
that  town.  In  1815,  he  made  the  acquaintance  of  Prince  Leopold,  who  attached 
him  to  his  person  and  took  him  to  London.  He  lived  with  him  during  his  whole 
residence  in  England,  was  made  physician  to  the  Royal  family,  and  was  specially 
intimate  with  the  Duke  of  Kent,  father  of  Queen  Victoria.  His  position  soon 
became  a  very  important  one.  He  was  the  influential  counsellor  and  confidant 
of  Queen  Victoria.  Thus  the  souvenirs  and  historical  notes  that  he  has  left  are  a  very 
precious  source  of  information  concerning  the  history  of  this  period.  M.  S.  Rene- 
Taillendier  took  from  them  matter  for  a  series  of  articles  which  came  out  in  the 
Revue  des  Deux  Mondes  of  1876  to  1878.  After  having  remained  many  years  in 
London,  M.  de  Stockmar  retired  to  Coburg,  where  he  died  in  1863. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  217 

of  Holland  will  try  and  complicate  matters,  so  as  to  profit  by 
them.  However,  it  is  very  desirable  for  everyone  that  war  should 
not  break  out.  You  may  count  upon  me  ;  you  know  my  opinions  ; 
I  can  flatter  myself  that  I  have  contributed  towards  the  mainten- 
ance of  peace,  and  I  shall  not  cease  to  uphold  it.  My  object  has 
always  been  to  preserve  good  feeling  between  France  and 
England  ;  I  have  succeeded  up  to  now  ;  help  me  on  your  side. 
I  look  upon  it  as  the  real  welfare  of  the  whole  of  Europe.  But 
in  the  present  crisis,  the  Conference  must  display  energy ; 
without  that,  matters  will  fall  into  the  utmost  confusion.  Present 
my  compliments  to  Madame  de  Dino  ;  still  retain  a  little  affec- 
tion for  me,  and  accept  the  assurances  of  my  warmest  regard. 

Leopold. 

The  Due  de  Dalberg  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand. 

Paris,  October  <\t/i,  1831. 

Mon  cher  Prince, 

M.  de  Mortemart  has  arrived  (from  St.  Petersburg). 
It  is  reported  that  he  was  very  well  treated  by  the  Emperor 
Nicholas  on  his  departure.  Do  not  believe  a  word  of  it :  the 
Emperor  was  polite,  that  was  all.  You  may  also  believe  that 
Pozzo  no  longer  possesses  his  master's  confidence.  The  emperor 
wanted  to  recall  him.  Nesselrode  upheld  him,  by  begging  the 
emperor  to  consent  to  his  likewise  retiring  from  his  post  of 
Minister  for  Foreign  Affairs.  The  emperor  thereupon  suspended 
his  decision. 

If  they  do  not  use  the  utmost  caution  here  in  their  relations 
with  the  coalition,  we  shall  have  war  in  the  spring.  It  is  my 
opinion  that  the  Dutch  business  must  be  concluded,  or  the  Hague 
will  remain  a  Pandora's  box. 

At  Berlin,  the  king  alone  refuses  to  go  to  war.  Flahaut  has 
made  a  poor  show  there. 

Here  the  Peerage  question  inclines  towards  the  adoption  of 
M.  Teste's  project,1  an  invention  of  Semonville's  ;  they  hoped  to 
carry  it  yesterday,  but  I  think  they  are  sure  of  nothing. 

1  M.  Teste  had  proposed  an  amendment,  in  terms  of  which  the  peerage  should  be 
transmitted  to  the  eldest  son  of  a  peer,  on  condition  that  he  was  declared  worthy  by 
an  electoral  college.     This  amendment  was  rejected. 

Jean  Baptiste  Teste,  born  in  1780,  was  advocate  at  Paris,  then  at  Nimes,  and 
Commissioner  of  Police  at  Lyons  during  the  Hundred  Days.  Proscribed  under  the 
second  Restoration,  he  took  refuge  at  Liege,  where  he  remained  till  1830.  He  then 
returned  to  Paris,  was  elected  deputy  in  1831.  Then  he  became  Vice-President  of 
the  Chamber  ;  Lord  Chancellor  in  1839,  Minister  of  Public  Works  in  1840,  peer  of 
Erance,  and  First  President  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  1843.  Implicated  in  1847  in. 
the  action  entered  against  General  Cubieres,  he  was  arraigned  before  the  Court  of 
Peers,  and  condemned  to  three  years'  imprisonment.     He  died  in  1850. 


21 8  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 


Madame     Adelaide    d'Orl^ans    to     the     Prince    de 

Talleyrand. 

Paris,  October-  -jth,  1831. 

I  have  been  longer  than  I  liked,  mon  cher  Prince, 
without  writing  to  you  ;  but  we  have  been  in  such  a  state  of 
confusion  getting  into  the  Tuileries,  and  I  am  still  so  unsettled 
and  so  uncomfortable,  that  until  I  can  get  into  the  rooms  of 
the  Captain  of  the  Guard,  which  are  being  got  ready  as  far  as 
possible,  I  am  literally  camping  out.  But  putting  all  other 
matters  on  one  side,  I  must  tell  you  how  much  I  rejoice  over 
the  triumph  you  have  just  had  in  the  English  Parliament,  and 
I  congratulate  you  with  all  my  heart. 

Now  what  we  must  have  as  a  result  from  this,  is  a  really  good 
treaty  for  Belgium,  which  will  give  security  and  the  assurance 
that  the  King  of  Holland  can  no  longer  with  ease,  inundate 
that  unfortunate  country,  or  invade  it  if  the  fancy  takes  him. 
He  must  be  made  to  disarm,  and  then  you  will  be  able  to  rest  a 
little  from  all  your  fatigues,  which  I  have  observed  with  much 
pain,  after  what  you  have  told  me  as  to  the  state  of  your  health, 
which  is  of  such  importance  to  us.  I  trust  you  have  not  ex- 
perienced another  attack  of  that  fever  you  spoke  of  in  your  last 
letter  ;  I  am  longing  to  be  assured  of  this  by  yourself.  We  are 
also  impatiently  awaiting  the  result  of  the  second  reading  of  the 
Reform  Bill. 

Our  establishment  in  these  melancholy,  detestable  Tuileries, 
is  said  to  have  produced  a  most  favourable  impression.  We 
certainly  need  that  to  console  us,  for  it  was  a  great  sacrifice  for 
the  king  to  leave  his  beautiful,  charming  Palais  Royal,  our  child- 
hood's home,  which  we  loved  so  dearly,  and  come  to  this  dreary 
palace,  the  most  uncomfortable  place  in  the  world,  in  which  it  is 
impossible  to  settle  down  conveniently  or  pleasantly,  without 
making  great  changes  and  causing  much  trouble.  But  patience  ! 
We  must  keep  the  end  solely  in  view,  and  move  on  towards  it 
without  stopping  to  think  of  what  we  like  or  dislike,  making 
every  sacrifice  to  arrive  thereat.  This  is  what  our  beloved  king 
does  with  the  best  grace  in  the  world,  and  in  the  most  touching 
and  admirable  manner  ;  I  always  feel  assured  that  he  will  be 
amply  rewarded,  and  I  have  need  of  this  faith  when  I  see  how 
his  life,  ever  since  he  became  king,  has  been  one  succession  of 
sacrifices  and  privations.  Happily,  in  the  midst  of  all  this,  his 
health  continues  good.  He  charges  me  with  a  thousand  remem- 
brances to  you,  as  also  does  the  queen,  who  finds,  with  only  too 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  219 

much  reason,  an  immense  difference  between  her  apartments 
at  the  Palais  Royal  and  those  she  has  here.  It  is  going  from 
good  to  bad.  Chartres  and  Nemours  left  us  on  Sunday  night 
for  Maubeuge  ;  we  have  news  of  their  safe  arrival  there  .... 


The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  the  Princess  de 

Vaudemont. 

London,  October  St/i,  1831. 

....  The  Reform  Bill  has  been  rejected  by  the  House  of 
Lords  ;  the  majority  against  it  was  forty-one  ;  it  is  much  larger 
than  was  expected.  This  number  will  probably  prevent  the 
creation  of  any  peers  ;  all  judgment  is  suspended,  and  everyone 
asks  what  line  the  king  and  the  Ministry  will  take.  A  Cabinet 
Council  has  been  sitting  ever  since  the  morning.  No  one  knows 
what  the  result  will  be.  . 

London,  October  \zth,  1831. 

....  Every  day  I  receive  apologies  for  the  foolish  act  com- 
mitted at  Brussels,  in  posting  up  a  letter  of  Sebastiani's,  which 
stated  that  the  decisions  of  the  Conference  would  not  be  recog- 
nized. Here  it  has  had  such  a  bad  effect,  that  it  has  been  found 
necessary  to  abandon  this  step  and  to  attribute  it  to  local  causes, 
which  necessitated  such  a  communication  being  made,  in  order 
to  prevent  some  folly.  All  this  does  not  increase  the  respect  for 
the  course  the  government  is  pursuing  ;  they  do  everything 
much  too  hurriedly.  England  does  not  appreciate  it.  The 
Emperor  Napoleon,  who  was  a  man  of  action,  was  always 
grateful  to  me  for  retarding  the  execution  of  his  orders,  as  it 
gave  him  the  opportunity  of  abandoning  a  resolution  often  made 
too  hastily.  I  will  adhere  to  my  views  of  things  to  the  end  ;  I 
intend  to  do  all  I  can  to  secure  peace ;  that  is  my  mission  ;  and 
everything  that  is  necessary  to  that  end  I  will  do,  without  regard 
to  whom  I  may  or  may  not  offend.  .  .  . 

The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  the  Duchess  de 

BauffremoNt. 

London,  October  13th  1831. 

....  Yesterday  evening  there  was  somewhat  of  an  uproar  in 
London.    The  windows  of  the  Duke  of  Wellington's  house,  those 


22a  THE  MEMOIRS  OE  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

of  Lord  Bristol1  and  Lord  Londonderry,  were  broken.  To-day 
all  is  quiet.  In  the  country  there  have  also  been  disturbances, 
but  they  have  not  been  very  numerous.  I  believe  the  con- 
viction that  the  Ministry  will  remain  in,  will  put  an  end  to  all 
these  disturbances.  But  it  is  none  the  less  a  moment  of  great 
difficulty  and  fraught  with  danger,  in  the  opinion  of  those  who 
know  what  a  political  movement  is  when  it  is  taken  up  by  the 
people. 

I  have  conferences  here  every  day,  and  I  think  that  our 
Belgian  affairs  will  be  ended,  as  far  as  the  Conference  is  con- 
cerned, in  eight  days.  But  after  that  comes  the  adherence  of  the 
Kings  of  Belgium  and  Holland,  and  the  ratifications  of  the  great 
Cabinets  of  Europe.  .  .  . 


The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  Madame  Adelaide 

d'Orleans. 

London,  October  22nd,  1831. 

I  hope  we  are  at  last  approaching  the  end,  and  that  this 
difficult  business  of  Belgium  will  soon  be  finished.  The  day  on 
which  I  know  it  is  decided,  will  be  the  happiest  of  my  life,  for  I 
shall  have  been  of  service  in  performing  something,  which  in  all 
respects  must  please  the  king  and  Mademoiselle.  It  seems  to 
me  that  this  will  make  everything  much  easier  for  France  ;  a  great 
weapon  of  attack  will  be  taken  away  from  the  evil  disposed,  and 
the  benefit  of  peace  ought  to  unite  all  interests  round  the  throne. 
I  shall  be  very  happy  when  I  see  you  great  and  tranquil. 

We  must  now  turn  the  attention  of  active  minds  to  home 
improvements,  with  which  they  can  occupy  themselves  without 
fear  in  times  of  peace.  The  decentralization  of  the  administra- 
tion should,  it  seems  to  me,  first  claim  the  king's  attention.  It 
is  necessary  to  give  everyone  something  to  do. 

People  are  very  clever  in  showing,  as  the  King  of  England 
did  in  his  speech,2  how  far  the  Conference  has  been  of  use,  and 
also  how  far  removed  its  work  has  been  from  that  done  by 
the  Holy  Alliance.  I  could  write  volumes  about  all  this,  and 
Mademoiselle  knows  it  even  better  than  I  do.     I  beg  her.  .  .  . 

1  Frederick  William  Hervey,  Marquis  of  Bristol,  born  in  1769,  a  member  of  the 
House  of  Commons  from  1796  to  1803,  when  he  succeeded  his  father  in  the  House  of 
Lords.  He  was  Minister  for  Foreign  Affairs  from  1801-1803.  Lord  Bristol  was  one 
of  the  most  zealous  members  of  the  Tory  party,  and  an  opponent  of  the  Reform  BilL 
He  died  in  1859. 
_     2  Speech  at  the  prorogation  of  Parliament,  October  20th. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  221 

As  this  letter  states,  the  Conference  had  somewhat  advanced 
in  the  work  of  mediation  between  Holland  and  Belgium,  which 
it  had  pursued  so  wearily  for  nearly  a  year.  It  had  been  neces- 
sarily obliged  to  retract  some  of  its  first  resolutions,  subsequent 
events  having  altered  their  bases.  The  reasons  for  this  were  ex- 
plained in  the  protocols  of  October  15th.  I  will  confine  myself 
to  quoting  a  few  extracts  here : 

Unable  any  longer  to  leave  uncertain  those  questions 
whose  immediate  solution  has  become  a  necessity  for  Europe  ; 
obliged  to  decide  them,  under  pain  of  seeing  the  terrible  evil  of 
a  general  war  resulting  therefrom  ;  enlightened,  in  addition,  by 
the  information  that  has  been  given  to  them  by  the  Belgian 
plenipotentiary  and  the  plenipotentiaries  of  the  Netherlands, 
the  undersigned  have  only  carried  out  a  duty,  which  their  Courts 
owed  to  themselves  as  well  as  to  the  other  States,  and  which  all 
the  efforts  of  direct  mediation  between  Holland  and  Belgium 
have  failed  to  accomplish.  They  have  only  caused  the  principal 
law,  which  guards  the  chief  interests  of  Europe,  to  be  re- 
spected ;  they  have  only  yielded  to  a  necessity,  which  has  become 
more  and  more  imperious,  in  fixing  the  conditions  of  a  definite 
arrangement,  which  Europe,  the  friend  of  peace,  and  possessing 
the  right  to  enforce  its  continuance,  has  for  a  whole  year  sought 
for  in  vain,  in  the  proposals  made  by  the  two  parties  or  agreed 
to  by  one  and  rejected  by  the  other,  in  turn.  .  .  . 

....  The  five  Powers,  reserving  to  themselves  the  task,  and 
undertaking  the  responsibility  of  obtaining  the  adherence  of 
Holland  (and  Belgium)  to  the  articles  in  question,  even  if  they 
are  at  first  rejected,  and  also  of  guaranteeing  their  execution,  and 
feeling  convinced  that  these  articles,  founded  on  incontestable 
principles  of  justice,  offer  to  Belgium  (and  to  Holland)  all  the 
advantages  which  could  be  claimed  as  a  right,  can  only  here 
declare  their  firm  determination  to  oppose,  by  all  the  means  in 
their  power,  any  renewal  of  a  struggle  which,  having  now  no 
object,  would  be  a  fertile  source  of  grave  evils  for  both  countries, 
and  would  menace  Europe  with  a  general  war,  which  it  is  the 
first  duty  of  the  five  Powers  to  prevent.  But,  in  proportion 
as  this  determination  is  calculated  to  reassure  Belgium  (and 
Holland)  as  to  its  future,  and  also  the  circumstances  which  now 
cause  such  great  anxiety,  so  it  will  authorize  the  five  Powers 
to  make  use  of  all  the  means  in  their  power,  to  bring  about 
the  assent  of  Belgium  (and  of  Holland)  to  the  articles  men- 
tioned below,  in  case,  contrary  to  all  expectation,  it  should  be 
refused 


222  THE  MEMOIRS  OE  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

Following  the  protocols  of  October  15th,  the  Conference  had 
drawn  up  the  basis  of  separation  between  Belgium  and  Holland, 
in  twenty- four  articles,  which  it  addressed  to  the  Hague  and  to 
Brussels,  requesting  the  agreement  of  the  two  governments  to 
them.  This  step  of  the  Conference  was  irrevocable,  and  put  a 
stop  to  a  renewal  of  hostilities  between  the  two  parties,  since 
their  differences  would  in  future  be  settled  by  Europe.  The 
correspondence  which  follows,  will  show  that  the  matter  was 
regarded  in  that  light  at  Paris  as  well  as  everywhere  else. 


Madame  Adelaide  d'Orleans  to  the  Prince  de 

Talleyrand. 

October  igt/i,  1831. 

I  hasten  with  the  greatest  eagerness  to  congratulate  you 
most  heartily,  mon  cher  Prince,  on  your  great  success  in  termi- 
nating in  so  fortunate  a  manner,  this  long  and  complicated 
Belgian  business.  Our  beloved  king  charges  me  also  to  say  how 
very  pleased  he  is,  and  how  satisfied  with  his  ambassador.  I 
know  that  these  are  the  best  thanks  I  can  give  you  from  him. 
I  look  upon  it  as  insuring  peace  for  us  ;  and  that  is  everything  ; 
for  with  peace,  confidence  will  be  restored,  and  with  it  the 
prosperity  of  our  beautiful  France.  This  great  good  news  has 
created  a  wonderful  effect,  and  caused  general  joy.  I  hope  that 
now  you  will  be  able  to  rest  and  take  care  of  your  health,  while 
enjoying  your  successes  and  the  great  results  they  will  have. 
I  do  not  for  an  instant  doubt  the  acceptance  of  the  King  of  the 
Belgians  ;  his  people  ought,  indeed,  to  be  only  too  delighted. 

As  for  the  King  of  Holland,  he  may  well  be  content  with 
what  the  Conference  has  done  for  him.  I  must  confess  I  am 
not  troubled  on  his  account. 

The  fact  that  the  English  Ministry  remains  in  office,1  and 
that  everything  is  settling  down  quietly  and  tranquilly  from  the 
real  confidence  it  inspires,  is  another  very  good  thing  for  us. 

God  grant  that  our  great  Peerage  question  may  end  happily  ! 
We  are  in  the  same  state  of  suspense  over  it,  that  you  were  in 
England  over  the  Reform  Bill.  However,  mon  cher  Prince,  I 
am  always  very  hopeful,  and  it  seems  to  me  that  we  are  really 
making  some  progress 

1  It  had  been  feared  that  the  English  Cabinet  would  go  out  of  office,  in  con- 
sequence of  the  vote  in  the  House  of  Lords,  rejecting  the  Reform  Bill. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  223 


Monsieur  Casimir  Perier  to  the  Prince  de 

Talleyrand. 

PARIS,  November  yd,  1831. 

Ineed  not  tell  you,  mon  Prince,  what  great  pleasure  I  felt  in 
receiving  the  last  letters  you  did  me  the  honour  to  write.  The 
return  of  my  son,  bearer  of  the  first  of  these  letters,  left  me 
nothing  to  desire,  since  I  at  the  same  time  received  your  news 
and  the  certainty  that  the  important  and  difficult  work  confided 
to  your  great  prudence  has  at  last  been  accomplished. 

That  work,  mon  Prince,  you  have  brought  to  an  end,  to  our 
greatest  possible  satisfaction  ;  it  is,  and  will  remain,  in  spite  of  the 
attacks  of  the  malevolent  and  the  base  interests  that  it  thwarts, 
a  fresh  and  immense  service  rendered  to  the  country.  Its  effect 
has  already  made  itself  felt,  though  party  spirit  sought  and  still 
seeks  to  inspire  fears,  as  to  the  reception  this  great  determination 
will  meet  with  from  the  parties  directly  interested. 

A  continuous  peace,  a  peace  reposing  henceforth  on  a  solid 
basis,  is  an  event  which  can  only  have  favourable  results  for 
France,  both  in  respect  to  her  home  and  her  foreign  policy  ; 
and  this  event,  which  so  thoroughly  justifies  your  opinion  as  to 
the  utility  of  the  Conference,  we  owe,  and  so  does  France,  mon 
Prince,  to  your  noble  efforts.  But  what  causes  me  the  most 
satisfaction  is,  that  posterity  will  do  you  that  full  justice, 
which  in  times  of  social  agitation,  men  charged  with  the 
public  interests  cannot  expect  to  receive  from  their  contem- 
poraries. 

Thus,  mon  Prince,  it  is  with  sincere  pleasure  I  tell  you,  that 
our  situation  is  without  any  doubt  greatly  improved  by  the 
maintenance  of  peace  in  Europe  ;  we  must  not,  however,  conceal 
from  ourselves  that  we  have  still  much  to  do,  that  the  problem 
is  not  yet  solved,  and  that  we  must  find  the  real  basis  of 
support. 

Among  the  home  difficulties  which  we  have  still  to  surmount, 
that  of  the  peerage  is  not  the  least  perplexing.  Various  con- 
siderations, not  without  weight,  which  cannot  have  escaped 
your  observation,  made  us  desirous  to  avoid  making  any 
additions  to  the  Chamber  of  Peers  until  after  the  adoption  of 
the  Bill,  but  we  found  that  this  was  not  possible,  and  that  an 
immediate  creation  was  indispensable. 

Yesterday  we  received  the  news  of  the  acceptance  of  the 
twenty-four  articles  by  the  Belgian    Chamber  of  Representa- 


'22+  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

tives  ;  it  is  stated  that  the  Senate  will  follow  their  example 
at  once.1  Holland  we  must  believe  will  accept.  Thus  the 
perilous  difficulties  abroad  will  be  smoothed  over ;  the  great 
duty,  which  the  present  state  of  the  nations  of  Europe  has 
imposed  on  the  men  placed  at  their  head,  namely,  that  of  pre- 
venting all  collision  between  them,  will  have  been  accomplished. 
This  is  the  happy  result,  mon  Prince,  of  that  confidence  in  the 
disinterested  and  loyal  views  of  the  King's  government  which 
you  have  been  able  to  inspire. 

The  fatigue  that  you  have  undergone,  mon  Prince,  has  made 
me  fear  for  your  health.  As  your  last  letters  do  not  refer  to  it, 
I  hope  that  you  no  longer  feel  its  effects.  I  cannot,  however, 
refrain  from  entreating  you  to  take  care  of  a  health  so  precious 
to  the  State  and  so  dear  tome 


The  Due  de  Dalberg  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand. 

Paris,  November  4f/i,  1831. 

Mon  cher  Prince, 

....  The  Ministry  continues  to  negotiate  with  the 
Chamber  of  Peers,  trying  to  persuade  it  to  commit  suicide.  M. 
Perier  has  been  to  see  me  twice  to  discuss  the  question. '  I 
cannot  but  admit,  that  the  king  and  the  Ministry  have  them- 
selves to  blame  for  bringing  this  question  up,  but  I  have 
promised  to  assist  in  removing  the  too  great  dissidence  between 
the  two  Chambers.  To  obtain  the  passing  of  the  Bill,  thirty  or 
forty  peers  would  have  to  be  created,  and  to  my  knowledge  ten 
or  twelve  creations  have  been  refused.  However,  I  believe  an 
arrangement  will  be  come  to. 

M.  Sebastiani  has  given  us  another  sample  of  his  way  of 
managing  the  affairs  of  his  office.  No  one  has  any  longer  a  doubt 
that  the  duplicata  addressed  to  General  Guilleminot 2  had  no 
primata.  .  .  . 

1  The  treaty  of  the  Twenty-four  Articles  was  adopted  on  November  1st  in  the 
Chamber  of  Deputies,  by  a  majority  of  59  against  38,  and  on  November  3rd  in  the 
Senate,  by  35  votes  against  8. 

2  The  reasons  which  had  provoked  the  recall  of  General  Guilleminot,  the  Ambas- 
sador at  Constantinople,  will  be  remembered.  On  his  return  to  Paris,  the  General 
spoke  in  the  Chamber  of  Peers  (sitting  November  2nd),  and  in  order  to  justify  himself, 
declared  that  as  he  had  never  received  any  instructions  from  the  French  government, 
he  could  not  be  accused  of  having  transgressed  against  them  ;  that  he  had  indeed 
received  with  his  order  of  recall,  the  duplicate  of  a  despatch  which  ought  to  have  been 
sent  to  him  before,  but  that  he  never  had  received  this  despatch.  General  Sebastiani 
declared  that  he  had  sent  it,  and  the  question  was  never  cleared  up. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  225 

Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  the  Princess  de 

Vaudemont. 

London,  November  10th,  1831. 

....  The  King  of  Holland  will  put  off  his  acceptance, 
until  the  return  of  the  courier  he  has  sent  to  St.  Petersburg  to 
ascertain  the  opinion  of  the  Russian  Cabinet,  which  he  believes 
differs  from  that  of  its  plenipotentiaries  in  London.  The 
answer  will  arrive  in  the  beginning  of  December,  and  his  reply 
to  the  Conference  through  his  plenipotentiaries  will  follow. 
We  shall  therefore  still  have  to  wait  for  twenty  days.  This 
gives  the  papers  ample  time  to  utter  and  write  all  sorts  of 
conjectures,  one  more  senseless  than  the  other.  .  .  . 

London,  November  \^th,  1831. 

Our  articles  are  signed.  The  Belgians  will  cry  out,  but 
they  are  wrong  ;  all  has  been  done  equitably,  and  I  think 
favours  the  Belgians,  which  is  what  I  wanted,  particularly  as 
regards  the  frontier  adjoining  France.  Belgium  pays  a  much 
smaller  share  of  the  National  Debt  than  she  did  before  the 
separation,  so  she  cannot  complain.  Her  population  is  increased, 
and  her  home  commerce  will  benefit  greatly  by  the  facilities 
given  her.  Two  routes  for  commerce  between  Belgium  and 
Germany,  the  right  to  use  all  the  interior  canals,  the  junction  of 
the  Scheldt  and  the  Rhine,  and  the  benefit  of  all  that  has  been 
done  at  Mayence  for  the  navigation  of  the  rivers — all  these 
advantages  Belgium  will  at  once  be  able  to  enjoy. 

I  am  terribly  fatigued  ;  yesterday  our  conference  lasted  till 
5  A.M.,  and  the  day  before  till  4.  I  believe  I  have  obtained  every- 
thing that  it  was  possible  to  obtain.  France  must  do  all  she  can 
in  Brussels  to  support  our  articles,  which  are  admirable.  .  .  . 

The  result  of  which  I  spoke  in  my  letter  to  Madame  de 
Vaudemont,  was  brought  about  by  the  Conference  as  follows. 
The  Belgian  Chambers,  after  some  very  animated  discussions, 
accepted  the  twenty-four  articles  which  we  had  addressed  to  the 
Dutch  and  Belgian  governments  on  October  15th,  but  the 
Belgian  Ministry  had  pledged  itself  not  to  give  its  definite 
consent : 

1st,  until  it  had  obtained,  or  attempted  to  obtain,  some 
modification  of  the  articles  ; 

VOL.  IV.  Q 


226  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

2nd,  until  it  had  acquired  the  certainty,  that  the  king  chosen 
by  the  Belgians  would  be  immediately  recognized. 

The  Belgian  plenipotentiary  in  London  had  sent  us  a 
memorandum  on  November  12th,  insisting  on  these  restrictions.1 
The  Conference  answered  the  same  day,  that  the  twenty-four 
articles  could  not  be  modified,  and  that  it  was  no  longer  possible 
for  the  five  Powers  to  alter  any  of  them.  By  a  second  memo- 
randum on  November  14th,  the  Conference  informed  the  Belgian 
plenipotentiary,  that  there  was  nothing  to  prevent  the  twenty-four 
articles  receiving  the  sanction  of  a  treaty  between  the  five  Powers 
and  Belgium,  which  would  satisfy  the  demand  that  the  king 
elected  by  the  Belgians  should  be  recognized. 

Meanwhile  the  Conference  informed  the  Dutch  pleni- 
potentiaries on  the  13th  of  November,  of  Belgium's  acceptance, 
and  offered  them  the  initiative  in  signing  the  treaty.  Their 
answer  on  November  15th  having  been  in  the  negative,  the 
treaty  was  signed  between  the  plenipotentiaries  of  the  five 
Courts  and  that  of  Belgium.  This  treaty  first  of  all  reproduced 
the  Twenty-four  Articles,  to  which  the  three  following  were  added : 

"Article  25. — The  Courts  of  Austria,  France,  Great  Britain, 
Prussia,  and  Russia,  guarantee  to  his  Majesty  the  King  of  the 
Belgians  the  execution  of  all  the  preceding  articles. 

"Article  26. — In  consequence  of  the  stipulations  of  the 
present  treaty,  peace  and  friendship  will  be  established  between 
their  Majesties  the  Emperor  of  Austria,  the  King  of  the 
French,  the  King  of  the  United  Kingdom  of  Great  Britain  and 
Ireland,  the  King  of  Prussia,  and  the  Emperor  of  Russia  on  the 
one  part,  and  his  Majesty  the  King  of  the  Belgians  on  the  other 
part,  their  heirs  and  successors,  their  States  and  subjects, 
respectively,  in  perpetuity. 

"  Article  27. — The  present  treaty  shall  be  ratified,  and  the 
ratifications  will  be  exchanged  in  London  within  the  period  of 
two  months,  or  sooner  if  it  can  be  done." 

1  In  his  memorandum  of  November  12th,  M.  Van  de  Weyer  asked  under  the  first 
head,  1st,  a  revision  of  the  calculations  which  had  served  the  Conference  as  a 
basis  for  the  partition  of  the  debt  between  Holland  and  Belgium  ;  2nd,  a  rectification 
of  the  frontiers  in  favour  of  Belgium,  at  those  points  where  the  frontier  line  Separal  d 
the  metal  factories  from  the  ore  necessaiy  for  carrying  on  their  business  ;  3rd,  free 
access  to  and  free  navigation  of  the  Moselle  to  the  inhabitants  of  Luxemburg. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  227 

After  the  signing  of  this  treaty,  one  might  have  imagined 
that  the  question  of  the  fate  of  Belgium,  which  for  nearly  a  year 
had  kept  Europe  in  a  state  of  suspense,  was  definitely  settled,  if 
not  as  regards  Holland,  at  least  in  all  that  concerned  Belgium 
and  the  five  Powers  ;  but  it  will  be  seen  that  the  matter  was  not  so 
simple,  and  that  I  was  still  a  long  way  from  the  end  of  my 
labours.  As  hitherto,  I  shall  let  the  correspondence  describe 
(which  it  will  do  far  better  than  I  could  myself)  the  new 
difficulties  that  cropped  up. 

The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  the  Princess  de 

Vaudemont. 

London,  Nox>ember  \6th,  1831. 

....  Yesterday  we  signed  the  treaty  with  Belgium,  so  now 
Prince  Leopold  is  recognized,  as  well  as  his  country.  This  is  a 
great  matter  accomplished.  The  signature  of  the  five  Powers  to 
the  treaty  necessarily  involves  the  consent  of  the  King  of  Holland. 
It  is  no  use  his  being  obstinate,  he  must  give  in.  I  think  that  at 
the  Tuileries,  they  will  welcome  the  courier  whom  I  send  with 
this  treaty.  It  is  the  first  the  king  has  made,  and  it  is  important 
to  France,  whose  frontier  it  protects,  and  to  Belgium,  whom  it 
renders  independent. 

I  am  not  thinking  of  returning  to  Paris  ;  I  have  not  said  so 
to  anyone  ;  it  is  one  of  the  tales  invented  by  Madame  de  Flahaut, 
who  is  ever  hoping  she  may  come  to  England,  where  however  she 
will  not  come,  because  she  is  detested,  and  because  her  husband 
is  not  a  sufficiently  important  personage  for  the  Embassy  in 
London  ;  in  other  respects  he  might  suit.  He  is  amiable,  knows 
plenty  of  people,  and  speaks  English  well  ;  but  that  is  not  all  that 
is  required  here. 

I  am  going  to  Brighton  for  a  breath  of  fresh  air  and  to  pay 
my  respects  to  the  king.  I  have  been  working  beyond  all  reason 
and  require  a  rest.  Tell  me  who  is  the  so  called  "  statesman,"  who 
has  written  the  history  of  the  Restoration.  It  is  only  true  chrono- 
logically, and  is  full  of  falsehoods  and  inaccuracies  l  .  .  .  . 

Madame  Adelaide  d'Orleans  to  the  Prince  de 

Talleyrand. 

Paris,  November  iSt/i,  183 1. 

The  treaty  arrived  yesterday  evening,  mon  cher  Prince.  I  can- 
not express  to  you  the  pleasure,  that  the  sight  of  the  row  of  seals 

1  See  page  294. 

0    2 


2  23  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

of  the  representatives  of  the  five  Powers,  placed  on  our  beloved 
colours,  gave  me.  You  have  accomplished  a  great  work  ;  I 
must  congratulate  you  and  compliment  you,  with  all  my  heart. 
Truly  it  has  required  all  your  zeal,  all  your  talent,  all  your 
ability,  to  achieve  this  fortunate  result,  so  important  to  the 
happiness  of  our  beloved  country,  and  indeed  to  that  of  all 
Europe. 

All  that  is  now  required  to  complete  this  great  work,  is  to 
compel  the  King  of  Holland  to  declare  himself  and  to  execute 
the  treaty.  It  is  essential  for  everyone  that  this  should  be  done 
promptly,  but  specially  so  for  the  King  of  the  Belgians,  for  if 
this  uncertainty  is  prolonged,  it  will  place  him  in  an  awkward 
position  with  his  subjects,  and  one  quite  contrary  to  the  dignity 
and  undertakings  of  the  five  Powers,  who  have  just  signed  this 
treaty.  I  am  sure  you  will  take  the  same  view  of  this  matter, 
and  that  all  your  efforts  will  be  directed  to  the  speedy  and 
complete  execution  of  the  treaty,  which,  at  least  it  seems  so  to 
me,  is  quite  as  important  as  obtaining  the  King  of  Holland's 
signature  to  it. 

There  is  nothing  fresh  as  yet  with  regard  to  our  Peerage 
Bill,  which  is  also  a  momentous  question.  I  am  as  ignorant  and 
expectant  regarding  this  as  I  was  when  I  last  wrote  to  you. 
Madame  de  Vaudemont  communicated  your  last  letter  to  me, 
and  I  made  its  contents  known  to  the  right  person  .... 


King  Louis  Philippe  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand. 

Paris,  November  iqtk,  1831. 

Mon  cher  Prince, 

The  treaty  of  London  of  November  15th,  183 1,  will  be 
a  great  epoch  in  history.  The  more  its  consequences  develop 
themselves,  the  more  France  will  appreciate  the  great  service 
you  have  just  rendered  her,  and  I  hasten  to  testify  to  you,  how  fully 
I  join  in  this  appreciation,  and  in  all  the  sentiments  that  this 
great  success  ought  to  call  forth  towards  you.  It  is  indeed  a 
complete  answer,  to  all  the  attacks  which  have  vainly  attempted 
to  upset  the  action  of  my  government  and  your  plans,  during 
these  long  and  laborious  negotiations. 

It  is  to  me  the  best  recompense,  for  the  constancy  and 
tenacity  with  which  I  and  General  Sebastiani  have  upheld  you 
in  all  the  different  phases  of  this  long  struggle.  Now  at  last  it 
is  terminated,  in  a  manner  both  durable  and  honourable,  for  I 
regard  the  treaty  that  you  have  just  signed,  as  putting  an  end  to 


TH1-:  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  229 

the  hopes  of  those  who  think  they  can  overthrow  everything  by 
war,  and  who  only  proclaim  it  as  inevitable,  in  order  to  give 
themselves  a  greater  chance  of  bringing  it  about.  It  is  very 
remarkable  that  this  has  been  the  language  both  of  the  Absolu- 
tionists  and  of  the  Propagandists  in  all  countries  ;  keep  therefore 
in  mind,  that  to  succeed  in  paralyzing  their  efforts,  we  must 
obtain  the  King  of  Holland's  signature  and  execution  of  the 
treaty,  with  the  least  possible  delay.  You  give  us  an  assurance 
that  he  will  decide  to  do  this,  and  I  accept  the  omen  with  the 
greater  pleasure,  since  I  believe  that,  not  only  my  own  interests 
and  even  the  interests  of  the  whole  of  Europe  require  it,  but 
that  it  is  eminently  his  own  interest  and  that  of  Holland  which 
enjoins  him  to  relinquish  the  system  of  procrastination,  to  which 
he  seems  to  be  inclined,  and  from  which  I  think,  only  misfortunes 
for  himself  and  his  neighbours  can  be  expected.  It  seems  to 
me  that  the  happy  concord  which  is  established  between  all 
the  plenipotentiaries  of  the  Conference,  and  which  you  have  so 
efficaciously  contributed  to  maintain,  ought  to  suffice  to  make 
him  feel  that  this  is  the  best  thing  he  can  do  now. 
Assuring  you,  mon  cher  Prince 


The  Comte  de  Flahaut  to  the  Prince  de  Talley- 
rand. 

Paris,  November  19//1,  1831. 

At  last  you  have  reached  the  end,  though  not  without  anxiety. 
Your  having  succeeded  in  maintaining  peace,  in  the  midst  of  all 
these  revolutions  and  distractions,  is  a  great  achievement.  Who 
would  have  thought  that  the  kingdom  of  the  Netherlands,  that 
work  of  the  Holy  Alliance,  so  hostile  to  France,  could  have  been 
wiped  out  without  a  general  war  ?  It  has  needed  all  your  skili. 
You  have  been  well  supported  by  the  present  Ministry  ;  but  at 
first  you  had  to  contend  with  some  difficulties  here.  However, 
now  you  are  at  the  goal  ;  for  I  do  not  believe  in  real  opposition, 
either  from  Holland  or  Belgium.  Yesterday  Marshal  Gerard 
was  sent  to  Brussels,  to  tell  them  plainly  that  no  assistance  need 
be  looked  for  from  here  in  resisting  the  stipulated  conditions. 
They  thought  of  sending  me  ;  but  Gerard  is  much  better  fitted, 
and  will  have  greater  influence. 

The  Peerage  Bill  was  passed  by  the  deputies  with  a  majority 
of  343  votes.  There  is  no  resisting  so  pronounced  a  manifesta- 
tion. However,  it  is  not  yet  known  what  the  Peers  will  do. 
Something  idiotic,  I  presume  .... 


23o  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND, 

The  Due  de  Dalberg  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand. 

Paris,  November  i\st,  1831. 

Your  short  letter  of  the  15th,  only  reached  me  yesterday 
evening.  I  thank  you  most  heartily  for  it.  Each  time  you  write 
to  me  you  show  me  a  light  in  the  midst  of  the  darkness,  and  I 
see  that  you  are  pursuing  with  energy,  the  task  undertaken  by 
the  Conference.  The  separation  of  Belgium  from  Holland, 
destroys  a  powerful  engine  of  war  placed  at  the  most  vulnerable 
points  on  our  frontier.  This  is  due  to  you  ;  and  it  is  only  the 
crass  ignorance  of  our  deputies  and  journalists,  their  bad  faith, 
and  their  passionate  language,  which  prevents  this  being  openly 
stated  and  acknowledged. 

The  King  of  Holland  has  a  right  to  resent  vehemently  the 
discourteous  treatment  of  his  allies.  As  Prussia  and  Russia  have 
consented  to  sacrifice  their  family  connections,  and  these  two 
Cabinets  seem  to  be  sincere  in  their  wish  to  maintain  peace  in 
Europe,  I  believe  the  King  of  Holland  will  accede  to  the  agree- 
ments already  drawn  up,  and  even  if  his  consent  does  not  arrive 
in  the  beginning  of  December,  it  cannot  be  delayed  long  after  that 
time.  Besides  you  have  allowed  him  two  months,  and  I  suppose 
you  did  this,  so  as  to  receive  the  answer  from  the  north.  He  will 
therefore  yield,  but  he  will,  like  his  ancestors  William  II.  and 
William  III.,  remain  the  most  irreconcilable  enemy  of  France, 
and  will  draw  round  him  a  perfect  hotbed  of  intrigues,  with  the 
view  to  overthrow  our  government.  There  are  powerful  elements 
at  his  hand,  and  the  alliance  which  has  been  formed  with  this 
object  between  the  Carlists  and  Buonapartists,  will  second  and 
foster  his  efforts. 

Just  now  the  attitude  of  the  European  Cabinets  is  calm. 
They  are  weighing  their  position  and  looking  about  them.  But 
the  feeling  of  distrust  is  still  there,  and  how  could  it  be  other- 
wise ?  The  speeches  in  our  Chambers,  the  revolutionary  intrigues 
that  originate  here  without  the  government  being  able  or  willing  to 
prevent  them,  and  the  wild  and  insulting  language  of  our  journals, 
are  all  so  many  incentives  to  them  to  confine  themselves  to  the 
treaties  of  Chaumont,  which  were  signed  against  the  French 
Revolution.  I  am  almost  sure  that  the  three  Great  Powers  have 
come  to  a  fresh  understanding  as  to  this.  The  language  of  their 
legations  in  Germany  and  Italy,  though  honeyed  to  our  repre- 
sentatives, is  very  exciting  towards  the  smaller  States.  They 
represent  France  as  needing  the  strictest  surveillance,  and  they 
try  to  strengthen  and  assure  the  bonds  of  a  close  alliance, 
in  case  the  revolutionary  and  advanced  party  here  should  regain 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  231 

the  upper  hand.  It  is  impossible  that  it  should  be  otherwise. 
Until  Europe  is  convinced,  that  the  Revolution  of  July  is  con- 
solidated, France  will  not  be  welcomed  anywhere. 

Nevertheless,  believe  me,  as  things  are  at  present,  they  are 
already  thinking  of  a  marriage,  both  here  and  at  St.  Petersburg,  if 
what  has  now  been  established,  becomes  permanent  in  two  years  ; 
and  Pozzo,  who  failed  with  that  of  the  Due  de  Berry,  will  try  to 
achieve  this  one,  which  might  perhaps  be  entertained.  It  is  with 
this  prospect,  that  the  request  of  the  King  of  Bavaria  for  his  son 
has  been  declined  at  St.  Petersburg.  I  do  not  doubt  that  if  this 
project  is  ventilated  in  London  and  Vienna,  those  Courts  will 
attempt  to  thwart  it,  as  the  latter  has  done  all  she  can  at  Naples, 
to  prevent  a  princess  of  Orleans  going  there.  All  this,  mon  cher 
Prince,  proves  to  me  that  it  will  be  difficult  to  establish 
confidence,  and  that  everything  that  can  injure  it  must  be 
avoided. 

You  ask  me  who  the  statesman  is,  who  published  that 
indifferent  history  of  the  Restoration.  He  is  a  man  named 
Capefigue,1  a  newspaper  editor,  and  author  of  several  other 
works.  Connected  with  Mignet  under  M.  Mole,  he  had  access 
to  the  archives  ;  he  went  to  Mole  and  Pasquier,  who  read  and 
corrected  his  publication.  For  several  years,  he  tried  to  get 
together  a  number  of  anecdotes  by  conversing  with  this  one 
and  that  one,  and  he  hoped  to  make  some  money  in  this  way. 
After  the  publication  of  the  two  first  volumes,  I  was  introduced 
to  him  by  M.  Buchon  ;'2  I  wished  to  correct  some  facts  put 
forward  by  him,  but  my  efforts  were  useless.  He  writes  for  his 
bookseller ;  he  intends  to  have  ten  volumes  ;  and  in  order  to 
fill  them,  he  makes  use  of  everything  that  comes  to  his  hand. 
M.  Decazes  has  now  taken  him  up,  and  is  furnishing  him  with 
materials  for  writing  something  about  his  ministry.  M.  Capefigue 
had,  some  time  ago,  a  memorandum  which  he  said  had  come 
from  London,  and  from  persons  who  were  with  you.  It  contained 
the  suggestion  of  an  alliance  between  France,  England,  and 
Austria,  which  was  being  negotiated.  He  wrote  some  articles 
on  it  for  the  papers  ;  it  made  some  talk  ;  but  the  initiated  at 
once  said  that  it  was  a  blind  ;  that   M.  de  Metternich  perhaps 

1  Baptiste-Honore,  Raymond  Capefigue,  born  at  Marseilles  in  1801,  journalist 
and  political  writer.  He  contributed  under  the  Restoration  to  a  great  number  of 
newspapers,  principally  to  the  Messager  des  Chambres,  which  supported  the  Martignac 
Ministry,  lie  is  also  equally  known  by  a  large  number  of  historical  works,  which  at 
first  he  always  issued  under  the  pseudonym,  Un  Homme  d'  Eta!.      He  died  in  1S72. 

2  Jean  Alexandre  de  Buchon,  editor  and  political  writer.  Under  the  Restoration 
he  wrote  for  the  Censeur  Europien  and  the  Cunstittttionnel.  He  took  up  history  as 
well,  and  published  the  Chroiiiqius  Nalionales  E'rancaises,  a  large  work  in  forty- 
seven  volumes. 


232  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

might  allow  such  a  possibility  to  be  supposed,  but  that,  in 
reality,  he  would  hold  to  the  continental  alliance  with  the 
Courts  of  Berlin  and  St.  Petersburg. 

At  the  present  time  there  must  be  no  division  among  the 
Powers.  The  world  is  sinking  and  dissolving  beneath  the  blows 
of  the  mental  anarchy,  which  has  invaded  society.  We  must 
always  talk  of  reforming  abuses,  even  do  so  a  little,  but  we 
must  re-establish  authority. 

The  events  at  Bristol,1  and  those  with  which  London  seems 
threatened,  reveal  the  deep  sore  which  is  eating  into  the  heart  of 
England.  Lord  Grey  and  his  colleague  Lord  Brougham,  have 
taken  up  reform  on  too  vast  a  scale.  It  is  like  M.  Necker  with 
his  doublement  die  tiers.  When  the  masses  rise,  urged  on  by 
mischief  makers  and  by  La  Fayettes,  who  can  stop  them  ?  It  is 
from  this  point  of  view,  that  the  success  of  the  Belgian  revolution 
produces  an  injurious  effect,  and  it  must  be  neutralized.  Mean- 
while, the  Emperor  Nicholas  is  doing  this  with  Poland.  Men's 
minds  must  be  restored  to  calmness,  or  everything  will  go  to  the 
devil. 

In  Germany  they  are  becoming  quite  foolish.  The  orators 
of  Munich  and  Carlsruhe  are  in  a  state  of  frenzy.  At  Berlin  and 
Vienna  they  are  asking  how  this  can  be  grappled  with.  I  advise, 
that  the  Diet  of  Frankfort  should  decide  that  the  debates 
shall  not  be  published,  and  that  the  laws  of  the  general  Con- 
federation are  not  subjects  for  discussion.  That  would  put  a  stop 
to  it. 

Our  Chamber  of  Peers  has  at  last  to-day  received  its  finishing 
stroke.2  M.  Casimir  Perier  and  the  king  have  turned  it  into  a 
corpse.  The  former  thinks  of  dissolving  the  Chamber  of  Deputies, 
after  the  Budget  for  1832  is  voted.  I  do  not  advise  this:  they 
will  probably  get  a  worse  one.  We  ought  to  let  the  present 
Chamber  exhaust  its  stupidities. 

Prince  Paul  of  Wurtemberg  begs  me  to  remind  you,  of  his 
wish  and  his  ambition  to  undertake  the  risks  of  that  unfortunate 
Capo  dTstria.  I  think  the  choice  of  him  as  King  of  Greece,  would 
not  be  a  bad  one 

1  A  sanguinary  riot  had  taken  place  at  Bristol  on  October  29th,  on  the  occasion 
of  the  arrival  in  that  town  of  Sir  Charles  Wetherall,  one  of  the  members  who  had 
shown  himself  the  most  opposed  to  the  Reform  Bill.  For  two  days,  the  town  had 
been  completely  in  the  hands  of  the  rioters,  who  had  set  fire  to  the  greater  part  of  the 
public  buildings. 

2  An  allusion  to  the  order  of  November  20th,  which  had  created  thirty-six  new 
peers.  The  object  of  this  was  to  modify  the  majority  of  the  Upper  Chamber  and 
make  it  more  favourable  to  the  Bill  passed  in  the  Chamber  of  Deputies,  which 
abolished  hereditary  peerages.  On  the  29th  December  following,  therefore,  the 
Chamber  of  Peers  pronounced  against  hereditary  peerages  by  a  majority  of  thirty- 
three. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  233 

The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  the  Princess  de 

Vaudemont. 

London,  December  2nd,  1831. 

....  I  know  nothing  of  the  affair  at  Lyons,  except  from 
the  papers  ;  it  creates  great  uneasiness  here.1  The  recollection 
of  Bristol,  and  fears  for  Manchester,2  do  not  tend  to  free  the 
country  from  anxiety.  It  is  earnestly  hoped  that  an  end  will  be 
put  to  it,  and  that  some  arrangement  will  be  made  which, 
without  being  too  much  of  a  concession,  will  satisfy  those  who 
have  no  means  of  livelihood  except  the  daily  wage  which  is  paid 
them  in  the  large  manufactories.  It  is  a  problem  difficult  to 
solve.  In  my  opinion  the  population  is  not  too  numerous  for 
the  country  as  a  whole,  but  it  is  not  properly  distributed,  and  it 
is  with  this  distribution  that  the  government  ought  to  deal.  To 
this  end,  instead  of  giving  help  en  masse  in  any  place  or 
populous  town,  work  should  be  given  in  some  department 
where  large  clearings  have  to  be  made  and  marshes  drained. 
Men  from  other  departments  who  would  come  there,  would  be 
paid  for  this  work,  for  they  will  always  flock  where  work  and 
wages  are  to  be  got.  Thus,  in  Auvergne,  Limousin,  Nivernais 
and  Berry,  there  are  not  sufficient  hands  ;  efforts  should  be  made 
to  attract  people  there.  This  would  ease  those  provinces  that 
had  too  many,  and  would  enrich  those  that  had  too  few.  In 
Berry,  for  example,  we  want  about  three  hundred  thousand  men  ; 
in  Nivernais  there  are  also  some  needed.  The  advantages  given 
to  those  who  go,  will  bring  many  others  :  that  is  what  is  meant 
by  good  administration 

M.  Casimir  Perier  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyand. 

Paris,  December  4//1,  1832. 

Mon  Prince, 

I  have  been  wishing  for  a  long  time,  to  again  express  to 
you  the  gratitude  we  owe  you,  for  all  your  trouble  in  the  difficult 
course  of  these  negotiations,  in  the  midst  of  which  you  have 
assured  to  the  representative  of  France,  that  position  and  in- 
fluence which  are  his  by  right. 

1  A  terrible  insurrection  hud  broken  out  at  Lyons  on  November  21st,  provoked 
by  a  fall  in  the  price  of  silk.  It  was  not  a  political  movement.  After  two  days' 
fighting,  the  troops  had  to  evacuate  the  town  and  await  the  arrival  of  an  army  of 
32,000  men,  under  the  command  of  Marshal  Soult  and  the  Due  d'Orleans,  before 
re-entering  it. 

2  A  repetition  of  the  scenes  at  Bristol  was  feared  at  Manchester. 


234  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

The  government  could  expect  nothing  less  from  that  great 
experience,  that  has  so  happily  accomplished  the  treaty,  which 
has  just  placed  the  relations  of  the  great  Powers  on  a  footing  of 
political  equality  and  community  of  interests,  henceforth  in- 
contestable to  everyone. 

I  congratulate  myself,  mon  Prince,  in  having  to  thank  you, 
both  as  President  of  the  king's  Council,  as  deputy,  and  as  a 
Frenchman,  for  the  leading  part  that  you  have  taken  in  the 
important  transaction,  which,  as  it  were,  commences  the  new  era 
of  another  national  law,  the  sole  object  of  which  will  be  to  assure 
rest  to  the  nations,  and  the  peaceful  development  of  the  benefits 
of  civilization. 

But  Europe,  mon  Prince,  having  entered  on  this  path,  can 
no  longer  allow  anyone  to  strew  it  with  obstacles.  In  this 
you  will  agree  with  me.  Therefore  I  do  not  doubt  that  you 
will  urge,  and  will  continue  to  urge,  with  untiring  perseverance, 
that  the  foolish  obstructions  which  the  King  of  Holland  still 
seems  desirous  to  oppose  to  the  determinations  of  the  Powers, 
should  be  removed.  It  is  quite  time  it  should  end.  The  king 
wishes  it  as  sincerely  as  his  allies,  who,  with  him,  have  undertaken 
to  insure  the  execution  of  the  twenty-four  articles,  and  I 
venture  to  ask  on  your  part,  for  the  most  active  exertions  to 
bring  about  this  final  guarantee  for  the  work  of  pacification,  the 
consolidation  of  which  you  will  have  all  the  more  at  heart,  as 
you  have  had  the  most  to  do  with  it.  It  is  the  indispensable 
accompaniment  to  the  general  disarmament  which  is  the  desire 
and  to  the  interest  of  all,  and  of  which  an  isolated  incident  should 
not  be  permitted  to  postpone  the  execution. 

I  cannot,  mon  Prince,  speak  of  the  interests  of  the  State  to 
you,  without  seizing  the  opportunity  of  congratulating  myself 
on  the  closer  relations  which  have  been  established  between  us, 
and  which  my  son's  presence  with  you,  makes  so  very  valuable 
to  me.  I  am  glad  to  think  that,  by  his  diligence  and  zeal,  he 
helps  to  bring  his  father  to  your  remembrance,  and  my  ardent 
wish  is,  that  his  future  life  should  some  day  testify  to  all,  under 
whose  auspices  he  entered  the  service  of  his  king  and  of  his 
country. 

The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  M.  Casimir  Perier. 

London,  December  \oth,  1831. 

Monsieur, 

In  the  letter  you  did  me  the  honour  to  write  on  the  4th 
instant,  your   friendship    has   caused  you   to  say   what  I  value 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  235 

very  highly.  You  forget  that  what  I  had  to  do,  became  far  less 
difficult,  from  the  moment  that  the  administration  of  our 
country  was  directed  by  a  strong  will,  and  with  that  straight- 
forwardness, which  I  hear  highly  praised  every  day,  and  which 
has  become  a  guarantee  of  safety  to  Europe. 

The  obstinacy  of  the  King  of  Holland  prevents  our  saying 
that  the  affairs  of  Belgium  are  now  ended  ;  but  the  fact  remains, 
that  sooner  or  later,  that  is  in  a  few  weeks,  he  must  give  in. 
The  methodical  course  that  we  have  pursued  has  succeeded 
with  Belgium  ;  by  not  precipitating  matters,  we  shall  succeed 
equally  with  Holland.  The  friendly  feeling  which  exists,  and 
which  must  be  carefully  maintained,  between  the  great  Powers, 
will  finally  remove  the  difficulties  which  still  remain.  The  answers 
from  St.  Petersburg  ought,  according  to  Prince  de  Lieven,  to 
arrive  in  a  few  days,  and  dissipate  the  illusions  with  which  King 
William  is  still  possessed.  Let  us  wait,  if  it  is  necessary. 
Deliberation  in  measures  that  have  to  be  taken,  has  one  great 
advantage,  namely,  that  when  we  do  not  hurry  it  is  a  proof  that 
all  is  well. 

Permit  me  to  persuade  you,  to  allow  the  Assembly  to  make 
as  many  economies  as  it  pleases  ;  it  is  not  worth  the  trouble  of 
breaking  lances  over  it  every  day  ;  common  sense  will  soon 
change  all  that  the  love  of  popularity  has  done  this  year.  As  the 
civil  list  is  settled  for  the  whole  reign,  it  alone  is  worthy  of  your 
efforts. 

I  am  very  glad  you  will  allow  your  son  to  remain  with  me 
for  some  time.  In  the  course  of  his  career,  he  will  certainly 
find  few  circumstances  under  which  he  can  learn  so  much — not 
only  the  political  business  that  he  goes  through  with  me,  but 
the  parliamentary  discussions  of  this  year,  will  be  of  use  to  him 
all  his  life.  I  cannot  give  him  too  much  praise  for  his  diligence, 
the  desire  he  has  to  be  useful,  and  the  manner  in  which  his  mind 
develops  every  day. 

Assuring  you,  monsieur.  .  .  . 

P.S. — Do  not  be  discouraged.  That  is  all  that  Europe  asks 
of  you. 

The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  the  Princess  de 

Vaudemont. 

London,  December  15///,  1831. 

An  answer  from  Holland  has  just  arrived.  It  is  fort)'  folio 
pages,  and  I  have  to  read  it. 

I  assure   you  I  would  rather  read  fort)'  pages  of  your  bad 


236  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

writing.  The  result  is,  that  the  King  of  Holland  accepts  the  bound- 
aries ;  submits  to  the  re-division  of  the  debt ;  and  asks  that  a  treaty 
which  he  wishes  to  negotiate,  shall  be  made  between  him  and 
Belgium,  in  order  to  establish  the  navigation  of  the  rivers 
and  the  right  to  the  canals.1  That  is  to  say,  he  adopts  what 
is  good  for  himself,  viz.,  the  boundaries,  and  he  refuses  what 
is  beneficial  for  Belgium,  viz.,  the  free  navigation  of  the  rivers 
and  canals.  All  this  will  be  settled,  but  not  without  some 
trouble.  King  Leopold  embarrasses  us  somewhat,  by  declin- 
ing to  carry  out  his  promise  as  to  the  fortresses,  a  promise 
that  he  gave  to  M.  Latour-Maubourg,  as  well  as  in  a  letter  he 
wrote  to  King  Louis  Philippe.2  We  must  settle  it  so  as  not  to 
offend  him  too  much.  The  principle  of  demolition  is  established 
and  recognized  ;  the  injury  done  to  France  is  repaired  ;  and  the 
forty-four  millions  which  the  fortresses  cost  the  allies,  have  been 
wasted.  That  is  the  real  result  of  this  treaty,  which  would  have 
been  a  better  one  without  the  separate  negotiation  which  was 
attempted  in  Brussels,  and  which  made  everyone  here  very 
distrustful.  .  .  . 

London,  December  17th,  1831. 

....  I  am  going  to  hear  the  Note  of  forty  pages  read,  which 
was  sent  yesterday  to  the  Foreign  Office.  When  one  has  right  on 
one's  side  one  does  not  write  forty  pages.  In  Paris  there  will  be 
some  discontent  about  the  fortresses  in  the  treaty  ;  but  I  have 
nothing  to  do  with  this  matter,  in  the  Conference  between  the  four 

1  This  memorandum,  dated  December  14th,  protests  against  the  joint  surveillance 
of  the  pilotage,  the  buoys,  and  the  police  of  the  Scheldt ;  it  claims  the  course  of  the 
river  in  Dutch  territory,  as  Dutch  property,  and  also  protests  against  the  participation 
of  the  Belgians  in  the  navigation  of  the  intermediary  waters  between  the  Scheldt  and 
the  Rhine. 

2  The  Belgian  government  had  signed  the  following  pledge  on  September  8th  : 
"His  Majesty  the  King  of  the  Belgians  has  authorized  the  undersigned  Minister  for 
Foreign  Affairs  to  communicate  to  the  French  government,  by  M.  le  Marquis  de 
Latour-Maubourg,  that  he  consents  and  agrees  (in  conformity  with  the  principle 
enunciated  in  the  protocol  of  April  17th,  183 1)  to  join  with  the  four  Powers,  at 
whose  expense  the  fortresses  were  partly  erected,  in  prompt  measures  for  the  demoli- 
tion of  the  fortresses  of  Charleroy,  Mons,  Tournay,  Ath,  and  Menin,  erected  since 
1815  in  the  kingdom  of  the  Netherlands." 

But  during  the  negotiation  in  London  as  to  this  question  of  the  fortresses,  General 
Goblet,  the  Belgian  plenipotentiary,  seeing  the  repugnance  of  the  Conference  to 
agree  to  the  dismantling  of  Tournay  and  Charleroy,  had  allowed  those  infinitely  less 
important  fortresses  of  Philippeville  and  Marienbourg  to  be  substituted  for  them.  The 
French  Cabinet  protested  energetically,  basing  its  protest  on  the  formal  promise 
given  by  the  Belgian  government  on  September  8th.  To  this  King  Leopold  replied, 
that  the  arrangement  was  not  a  formal  pledge,  but  a  simple  preliminary  which  pro- 
mised nothing.  France  had  to  accept  the  matter  as  settled.  The  agreement  of 
December  14th,  between  Belgium  on  the  one  part,  and  the  four  Powers  on  the  other, 
sanctioned  this  substitution.  The  following  pages  will  show  the  course  of  these 
negotiations.  See  also  on  this  serious  question  of  the  fortresses  Hue  Mission  a  Londres 
en  1831,  by  General  Goblet. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  237 

Powers  and  the  Belgian  plenipotentiary.  France  may  suggest, 
but  must  not  answer  or  lead.  Besides,  Lord  Grey  is  alarmed  at 
Lord  Aberdeen's  motion,1  which  is  supported  by  the  Duke  of 
Wellington,  making  it  thus  more  difficult  to  defend  the 
question  of  the  fortresses.  Since  the  negotiation  of  the  matter 
has  been  transferred  to  Brussels,  there  is  distrust  arising  here  ; 
that  business  of  a  separate  treaty  has  given  great  displeasure 
since  it  has  become  known.  I  advised  that  it  should  be  kept 
secret,  but  this  was  not  done 

To  thoroughly  understand  this  letter  and  those  which  follow, 
it  is  necessary  to  speak  once  more  of  the  demolition  of  the 
Belgian  fortresses.  The  affair  at  this  period  gave  me  the  most 
trouble,  because  it  had  for  some  time  retarded  the  despatch  of 
the  French  ratification  of  the  treaty  of  November  15th.  By 
repeating  the  explanations  already  given,  I  shall  go  back  to  the 
beginning  of  the  question.  It  is  of  sufficient  importance,  to 
gain  me  this  indulgence  from  those  who  are  condemned  to 
read  it. 

I  have  already  said  that  at  my  instigation,  and  by  a  protocol 
which  I  had  not  signed,  the  plenipotentiaries  of  the  four  Courts 
of  Austria,  Great  Britain,  Prussia,  and  Russia,  had  admitted  the 
necessity  for  the  demolition  of  a  certain  number  of  the  Belgian 
fortresses.  I  think  I  ought  here  to  give  the  protocol,  which  bears 
the  date  of  April  17th,  1831  : 

The  plenipotentiaries  of  Great  Britain,  Austria,  Prussia,  and 
Russia,  being  assembled,  have  jointly  taken  into  consideration 
the  matter  of  the  fortresses  in  the  kingdom  of  the  Netherlands 
(which  were  built  after  the  year  18 15  at  the  expense  of  the  four 
Courts),  and  how  they  are  to  be  dealt  with,  when  the  separation 
of  Belgium  from  Holland  shall  have  been  finally  settled. 

After  mature  consideration  of  this  question,  the  plenipoten- 
tiaries of  the  four  Courts  are  unanimously  of  opinion,  that  the 
new  position  in  which  Belgium  will  be  placed  (her  neutrality 
being  recognized  and  guaranteed  by  France)  ought  to  change 
the  system  of  military  defence  adopted  for  the  security  of  the 

1  Lord  Aberdeen  had  then  an  idea  of  proposing  a  motion  in  the  House  of  Lords, 
opposed  to  the  Treaty  of  the  Twenty-four  Articles  and  the  convention  of  December 
14th  ;  but  the  illness  of  the  Duke  of  Wellington,  who  had  promised  to  support  it, 
decided  him  to  defer  his  motion  until  after  the  Christmas  recess,  December  26th  ;  it 
was  therefore  brought  forward  on  January  26th.  Lord  Grey  successfully  defended 
the  policy  of  the  government,  and  the  House  approved  it  by  132  votes  to  95. 


238  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

Netherlands  ;  that  the  above  fortresses  are  too  numerous  for  the 
Belgians  to  keep  in  a  proper  state  of  defence  ;  that,  moreover,  the 
unanimously  admitted  inviolability  of  the  Belgian  territory  now 
offers  a  security,  which  previously  did  not  exist,  and  that,  in  fact, 
some  of  the  fortresses,  built  under  totally  different  circumstances, 
might  for  the  future  be  demolished.  The  plenipotentiaries  have 
consequently  decided,  that  as  soon  as  there  shall  be  a  govern- 
ment in  Belgium,  recognized  by  the  Powers  who  are  taking  part 
in  the  Conferences  in  London,  negotiations  will  be  entered  into 
between  the  four  Courts  and  that  government,  in  order  to 
determine  which  of  the  said  fortresses  shall  be  demolished. 

This  protocol  is  as  succinct  and  categoric  as  possible  ;  I 
knew  of  it  as  soon  as  it  was  signed.  There  existed  therefore  a 
positive  undertaking  on  this  point,  on  the  part  of  the  four 
Powers. 

It  will  be  remembered,  that  at  the  time  of  Prince  Leopold's 
departure  for  Brussels,  I  had  endeavoured  to  obtain  from  him  a 
written  declaration,  which  should  confirm,  on  his  part,  the  reso- 
lution adopted  by  the  four  Powers.  The  prince,  it  is  true,  gave 
me  but  a  vague  reply,  but  the  terms  in  which  it  was  couched, 
made  it  possible  to  deduce  an  undertaking  therefrom.  The 
French  government  was  not  satisfied  either  with  this  letter,  or 
with  the  protocol  of  the  17th  of  April,  which,  it  is  true,  had  not 
been  published.  It  desired,  when  the  French  Chambers  opened, 
to  proclaim  a  fact  of  such  a.  nature,  as  would  produce  a  certain 
effect  on  the  new  Chamber  just  assembled,  and  on  men's  minds 
in  general  throughout  France.  The  plenipotentiaries  of  the  four 
Courts  at  my  request,  therefore,  consented,  that  the  protocol  of  the 
17th  of  April  should  be  made  public,  and  it  was  accordingly 
notified  officially  to  me  by  them,  on  the  14th  of  July.  They 
also  addressed  a  notification  to  the  Belgian  government  on  the 
29th  of  the  same  month.  But  before  this  last  notification,  King 
Louis  Philippe,  when  opening  the  Chambers  on  the  23rd  of  July, 
had  announced  the  demolition  of  the  fortresses.  This  caused 
great  excitement  in  Brussels  and  embarrassment  to  King 
Leopold,  who  in  the  face  of  the  expostulations  of  the  Belgians, 
showed  at  first  some  hesitation  in  complying  with  the  conditions 
imposed  upon  him  by  the  four  Courts.  In  my  opinion  they  were 
needlessly  alarmed  in  Paris,  and  M.  de  Latour-Maubourg  was 


7  HE  R  !■:  I  'OL  UTION  OF  1 8  30.  2  39 

sent  at  once  to  Brussels  to  obtain  an  acquiescence  from  the 
Belgian  government,  which  just  then  was  greatly  compromised  by 
the  unfortunate  expedition  of  the  Dutch  against  Belgium.  The 
King  of  the  Belgians,  impelled  by  these  circumstances,  ended  by 
issuing  a  declaration  on  the  8th  of  September,  which  announced 
that,  in  conformity  with  the  principle  laid  down  in  the  protocol  of 
the  17th  of  April,  he  was,  conjointly  with  the  four  Powers,  about 
to  take  steps  for  the  demolition  of  a  certain  number  of  designated 
fortresses. 

M.  de  Latour-Maubourg  carried  this  declaration  to  Paris, 
and  General  Goblet  arrived  in  London,  intrusted  with  powers 
from  the  Belgian  government  to  carry  out  the  negotiation 
named  in  the  protocol  of  the  17th  of  April,  conjointly  with  the 
plenipotentiaries  of  the  four  Courts. 

The    publicity   which    King    Louis    Philippe's   speech   had 

given  to  this   protocol,  raised  some  questions    in    the    English 

Parliament  on  this  subject.     Lord  Grey  had  to  lay  the  protocol 

of  April  17th,  before  the  House   of  Lords,  Lord    Palmerston 

doing  the  same  in  the  Commons,  stating  that  it  was  only  a 

question  of  arrangement  between  the  four  Courts  and  Belgium, 

from  which  France  was  excluded.     This  silenced  the  clamours 

of  the  Opposition,  but  their  disquietude  was  revived  when  it  was 

known,  that   a    separate  negotiation  was   being  carried    on    at 

Brussels   between    M.    de    Latour-Maubourg   and    the   Belgian 

government,  whilst  French  troops  still  occupied  Belgium.     This 

was  a  direct  contradiction  to  the  statements  made  in  Parliament. 

Lord   Granville  expressed  his  anxiety  to   M.   Sebastiani,  who 

to    appease    it    asked    the    four    Powers    to    draw   up    another 

protocol    confirming    that  of  the   17th  of  April,  which  would 

still    further   bind    the    Belgian    government   to  carry  out    the 

dismantling  of  a  certain  number  of  fortresses,  and  which  would 

take  the  place  of  the  convention  made  at  Brussels.     To   this 

they  agreed,  but  they  forgot  in  this  protocol,  drawn  up  on  the 

29th  of  August,  183 1,  to  name  the  fortresses  which  were  to  be 

dismantled,  as  had  been  done  in  the  convention  drawn  up  at 

Brussels  between    M.    de    Latour-Maubourg   and    the    Belgian 

government. 

Not  only  was   I   excluded  from   all   these  transactions,  but 


240  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

even  the  French  government  itself  kept  them  secret  from  me. 
None  the  less,  however,  did  I  feel  the  effect  of  the  distrust,  that 
such  a  method  of  procedure  could  not  fail  to  instil  into  the 
plenipotentiaries  of  the  four  Courts.  I  had  great  difficulty  in 
removing  it,  as  far  as  it  concerned  me  personally.  This  distrust, 
made  the  most  of  by  General  Goblet,  the  Belgian  plenipotentiary 
in  London,  brought  about  several  modifications  in  the  selection 
of  fortresses  to  be  demolished  ;  thus  in  the  declaration  given  by 
the  King  of  the  Belgians  to  M.  de  Latour-Maubourg,  the 
fortresses  named  for  demolition  were  Charleroy,  Mons,  Tournay, 
Ath,  and  Menin,  while  in  a  convention  signed  the  14th  of 
December,  between  the  plenipotentiaries  of  the  four  Courts  and 
General  Goblet,  those  of  Menin,  Ath,  Mons,  Philippeville,  and 
Marienbourg,  were  indicated  for  demolition.  This  last  con- 
vention gave  rise  to  the  following  correspondence,  which  we 
think  we  have  now  made  clear : 

King  Louis  Philippe  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand. 

Paris,  December  16th,  1831. 
Mon  cher  Prince, 

From  the  despatches  which  General  Sebastiani  has 
just  given  me,  I  see  that  the  negotiations  relative  to  the 
dismantling  of  the  fortresses,  are  taking  a  shape  which  causes 
me  great  anxiety,  and  which  is  doubly  painful  to  me  personally, 
owing  to  the  solemn  engagement  I  entered  into  on  this  subject 
with  the  Chambers  and  the  nation,  on  the  faith  of  the  assurances 
given  me.  This  has  decided  me  to  write  to  you  myself,  in 
addition  to  what  General  Sebastiani  will  send  you  officially,  so 
that  you  may  be  the  depositary  of  my  personal  views,  and  that 
you  may  be  in  a  position,  if  necessary,  to  make  them  known  to 
those  with  whom  I  like  to  think  they  might  have  some  weight.1 

1  It  will  perhaps  be  as  well  to  complete  this  account,  by  giving  a  resume  of  the 
various  phases  of  the  negotiation  respecting  the  fortresses  since  the  convention  of  the 
14th  December,  up  to  the  final  settlement  of  the  question.  In  fact,  this  convention, 
so  far  from  ending  the  discussion,  only  revived  it.  The  following  letter  puts  us  an 
fait  as  to  the  opposite  views  taken  in  the  debates,  but  it  would  be  difficult  to  follow 
the  thread,  if  we  did  not  first  know  the  principal  lines. 

The  French  Cabinet  was  dissatisfied  with  the  convention  of  the  14th  December, 
and  for  two  reasons  :  first,  that  they  wished  to  see  Charleroy  and  Tournay  substituted 
for  Philippeville  and  Marienbourg  ;  the  second,  and  more  important,  that,  according 
to  the  text  of  the  first  article,  the  Powers  seemed  to  arrogate  to  themselves  "a  kind 
of  present  and  future  patronage  of  the  dismantled  fortresses,"  and  this  all  the  more  as 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  241 

I  must  therefore  begin  by  telling  you,  mon  cher  Prince,  that 
I  should  not  have  signed  the  arrangements  for  Belgium,  and  that 
I  should  not,  above  all,  have  agreed  to  her  perpetual  neutrality,  if 
I  had  not  trusted  to  the  undertaking  that  the  fortresses  which 
had  been  erected  to  threaten  us,  would  be  demolished,  or  if  I 
could  have  believed  that  it  was  intended  to  allow  armed 
arsenals  to  exist  on  neutral  territory!  Why,  just  think  for  a 
moment,  mon  Prince.  In  point  of  law,  this  preservation  of  the 
fortresses  makes  it  no  longer  necessary  for  us  to  respect  them,  and 
after  the  promises  given  us,  they  would  in  my  eyes  be  a  legitimate 
object  for  war.  I  do  not  tell  you  that  I  therefore  intend  to 
make  it  in  this  instance,  but  merely  that  our  right  is  incon- 
testable, and  that  the  question  of  making  or  not  making  war, 
would  be  optional.  I  do  not  think  that  it  would  suit  England, 
or  any  other  member  of  the  Conference,  to  place  France  in  a 
position  in  which  she  thinks  she  has  this  right ;  especially  after 
the  good  faith  and  loyalty  we  evinced  last  summer,  when  we 
evacuated  these  fortresses  after  having  occupied  them. 

Naturally,  I  shall  be  asked  why  I  do  not  wish  Philippeville 
and  Marienbourg  to  be  demolished  like  the  other  fortresses,  and 
to  this  question  I  shall  reply  with  the  same  frankness,  that  these 
two  fortresses  were  not,  like  the  others,  built  with  the  money  of 
the  Powers,  but  were  ceded  by  France,  and  it  is  just  because 
they  were  French,  that  the  national  pride  would  consider  their 
demolition  an  insult.1  We  must  not  conceal  from  ourselves, 
mon  cher  Prince,  that  the  cession  of  these  two  fortresses  is  an 
ever  open  wound  to  our  national  vanity  ;  that  the  voice  of  the 
country  would  certainly  be  disposed  to  reproach  me,  as  well  as 
my  government,  for  not  having  insisted  at  all  hazards  on  their 
peremptory  restitution  ;  and  I  think  I  may  assert  that  there  is  no 
other  way  to  appease  it,  than  to  preserve  Philippeville  and 
Marienbourg  and  destroy  the  other  fortresses. 

France  had  been  excluded  from  this  convention.  It  had,  in  fact,  only  been  signed  by 
the  four  Powers  on  the  one  side  and  Belgium  on  the  other. 

M.  de  Talleyrand  received  instructions  to  obtain  some  modifications  from  the 
Powers  on  these  two  points  of  the  convention,  and  the  Cabinet  of  the  Tuileries  added, 
that  it  would  reserve  its  ratification  of  the  treaty  of  the  15th  November,  until  satis- 
faction had  been  given  to  France.  M.  de  Talleyrand  differed  with  the  Ministry  on 
this  question.  He  dreaded  seeing  the  whole  of  his  work  compromised  for  some 
detail  which  he  declared  was  quite  secondary.  He  therefore  wanted  to  create  a 
delay  by  proposing  to  adjourn  the  discussion  about  Philippeville  and  Marienbourg  ; 
but  this  evasion  was  not  appreciated  in  Paris,  where  they  demanded  a  prompt  and 
frank  decision.  It  was  not  till  the  23rd  of  January,  and  after  many  innumerable 
delays,  that  M.  de  Talleyrand  obtained  the  declaration  (p.  269)  from  the  Powers  which 
put  an  end  to  the  discussion.  Nevertheless,  the  French  Cabinet  was  beaten  on  the 
question  of  Philippeville  and  Marienbourg. 

1  Philippeville  and  Marienbourg  had  been  given  to  France  by  the  Treaty  of  the 
Pyrenees,  in  1659.     The  treaty  of  1815,  deprived  her  of  them  again. 

VOL.  IV.  R 


242  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

If  instead  of  this  arrangement,  on  which  I  thought  I  might 
count,  France  sees  Philippeville  and  Marienbourg  destroyed, 
while  Ypres,  Tournay,  and  Charleroy  are  preserved,  I  believe  a 
feeling  will  be  roused,  the  consequences  of  which  will  be  terrible  ; 
in  fact  it  is  certain  that  Ypres  at  one  end,  and  Charleroy 
and  Namur  at  the  other,  connected  by  Tournay  as  the  central 
point,  present  to  France  a  line  of  operations -which  reduces  the 
neutrality  of  Belgium  to  a  mere  farce.  Moreover  the  pre- 
servation of  these  fortresses  is  ill  judged,  both  as  regards  France 
and  also  the  other  Powers,  in  the  present  state  of  affairs ;  for  it 
must  be  admitted,  without  wishing,  Heaven  knows  !  to  raise 
suspicions  against  any  one,  that  treachery  or  deceit  could  at  any 
moment,  so  long  as  these  fortresses  exist,  deliver  them  into 
the  hands  of  either  one  or  the  other  party  ;  and  that  con- 
sequently their  existence  is  at  once  a  cause  of  anxiety  and  an 
attraction,  of  which  it  is  desirable  for  all  parties  to  rid 
themselves. 

It  is  besides  very  important  in  the  interests  of  Belgium,  as 
well  as  those  of  Europe,  that  she  should  not  be  weighed  down 
by  expenses,  which  she  might  find  oppressive  and  pro- 
bably could  not  in  any  way  support.  Such,  however,  would 
certainly  be  the  maintenance  of  the  fortresses  it  is  wished  to  pre- 
serve, especially  of  their  garrisons,  without  which  I,  more  than  any 
one  else,  may  be  permitted  to  say,  they  would  be  at  our  mercy, 
which  I  do  not  in  any  way  desire.  France  could  never  consent 
that  these  fortresses  should  be  looked  upon  as  a  depot  of 
the  Powers,  left  in  the  hands  of  the  King  of  the  Belgians, 
which,  in  default  of  Belgian  troops,  they  might  wish  to  con- 
fide to  the  care  of  strangers,  for  this  would  not  only  create 
a  legitimate  cause  for  Avar,  but  would  force  France  to  make  war 
in  order  to  oppose  it.  The  exclusion  of  the  King  of  the 
Belgians  from  the  Germanic  confederation  is  insufficient  to 
remove  all  fear  on  this  head,  and  therefore  I  can  only  say,  that 
the  greater  the  inability  of  Belgium  to  support  these  fortresses 
and  place  proper  garrisons  in  them  at  her  own  cost,  the  greater 
becomes  the  need,  in  the  interests  of  all,  that  they  should  be 
demolished. 

I  know,  mon  cher  Prince,  that  your  opinion  and  that  of  my 
ministers,  is  in  accord  with  what  I  have  just  pointed  out  to  you. 
But  I  am  desirous  that  you  should  know  my  personal  views  for 
I  always  like  to  confide  them  to  you,  and  to  seize  every 
opportunity  of  proving  to  you,  how  greatly  I  appreciate  all  you 
have  done  in  the  thorny  mission  in  which  you  have  just 
obtained  a  success  as  brilliant  and  important  for  you,  as  for 
France  and  myself.     I  hope  you  will  succeed  in  consolidating  it, 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  243 

by  leading  the  negotiations  respecting  the  fortresses  in  a  better 
direction  than  they  seem  disposed  to  give  them.  M.  Perier  and 
M.  Sebastiani  will  do  their  best  to  second  you,  as  they  have 
always  done,  and  your  united  efforts  will  preserve  France  and 
Europe  from  the  dangers  to  which  this  direction  might  give  rise  ; 
for,  do  not  deceive  yourself — this  matter  is  very  serious,  and  we 
have  to  deal  with  much  friction  and  irritability. 

Pray,  mon  cher  Prince,  accept  the  assurance  of  all  those 
sentiments  which  you  know  I  have  so  long  felt  for  you,  and 
which  are  thoroughly  sincere.  .  .  . 


Madame  Adelaide  d'Orleans  to  the  Prince  de 

Talleyrand. 

Paris,  December  igf/i,  1831. 

I  thank  you  much,  mon  cher  Prince,  for  your  letter  of  the 
15th  of  December,  and  I  am  charmed  that  you  are  satisfied 
with  mine  ;  but  I  cannot  tell  you  how  surprised  and  grieved  I 
am,  at  the  way  in  which  the  Conference  tries  to  conclude  the  affair 
of  the  fortresses,  and  at  King  Leopold's  conduct  in  this 
business,  which  is  entirely  opposed  to  the  engagements  he 
undertook.  All  this  is  very  wrong  and  scandalous,  especially 
when  our  beloved  King  and  his  government  have  shown  nothing 
but  loyalty  and  frankness  on  their  side ;  but  it  is  impossible  to 
allow  ourselves  to  be  made  game  of  like  this.  I  am  very  vexed 
that  you  were  not  present  at  the  Conferences,  when  this 
detestable  decision  was  taken,  for  I  am  very  sure  you  would 
have  prevented  it.  Now,  it  will  be  for  you  to  bring  it  round 
again.  I  quite  feel  that  this  is  a  difficult  task,  but  such  suits 
you  best,  and  you  have  good  and  strong  weapons  ready  to  your 
hand,  by  making  use  of  the  frankness  and  loyalty  of  our 
beloved  King  in  this  matter,  and  also  by  the  withdrawal  of  our 
troops  from  these  Belgian  fortresses  in  the  month  of  August, 
relying,  as  we  did,  on  the  honour  of  those  who  made  the  fine 
promises,  which  you,  mon  cher  Prince,  must  now  have  carried  out. 
This  is  a  serious  matter,  and  of  the  greatest  possible  importance 
both  to  our  dearly  loved  King  and  to  France.  The  task  that, 
you  have  to  perform  is  a  grand  and  a  noble  one,  and  I  am 
firmly  persuaded,  I  can  assure  you,  mon  Prince,  that  when 
the  Conference  is  once  convinced  that  the  King  will  not  accede 
to  this  arrangement,  it  will  do  that  which  is  alone  compatible 
with  the  dignity  of  France. 

It  was  because  the  King  saw  this  tendency  that  he  decided 
to  send  M.  de  Maubourg  to  Brussels,  to  deal  direct  with  Prince 

R  2 


244  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

Leopold  in  this  matter,  and  obtain  an  undertaking  from  him, 
which  you  could  not  do  from  London,  and  which  you  must 
acknowledge  it  is  well  now  to  have. 

I  am  very  vexed  about  this  whole  business,  but  nevertheless, 
mon  cher  Prince,  I  have  every  trust  in  our  good  right,  and  in 
your  zeal  and  talent  in  seconding  the  efforts  of  our  beloved 
King,  which  makes  me  feel  thoroughly  confident  that  he  will 
come  out  of  this  horrid  business  advantageously.  I  am  longing 
to  hear  from  you,  and  what  you  think  of  all  this  ;  but  this  time 
everything  must  be  finished,  and  the  King  of  Holland  made  to 
explain  himself,  and  to  adhere  to  what  has  been  promised.  .  .  . 

The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  King  Louis  Philippe. 

London,  December  22nd,  1831. 
Sire, 

Your  Majesty  attaches  great  importance  to  the  demo- 
lition of  the  Belgian  fortresses,  which  were  built  in  order  to 
recall  our  defeats,  and  your  Majesty  feels  that  it  is  for  you  to 
efface  these  insulting  witnesses  of  our  misfortunes.  But  Sire,  it 
would  be  taking  too  gloomy  a  view,  to  attribute  what  has  just 
taken  place,  to  a  return  to  the  Holy  Alliance. 

The  pledges  of  wisdom  and  moderation  which  your  govern- 
ment gives  to  Europe  every  day,  have  for  ever  destroyed  this 
league,  which  was  formed  against  the  liberty  of  the  nations. 

I  am  intensely  grieved  that  any  trouble  or  anxiety  should 
reach  your  Majesty,  from  a  quarter  where  you  are  good  enough 
to  believe  I  have  some  influence.  I  should  wish  to  have  nothing 
to  report  to  you  but  what  your  eyes  could  rest  on  with 
pleasure. 

The  Belgian  intrigues,  in  which  all  the  weakness  of  a  new  and 
uncertain  government  is  plainly  visible,  have  brought  about  the 
convention  of  which  we  have  to  complain.  The  grave  circum- 
stances in  which  the  English  Ministry  now  finds  itself  placed, 
and  the  exaggerated  fears  inspired  by  Lord  Aberdeen's  bitter 
attacks,  have  also  assisted  the  Belgian  intrigue.  The  evil  has 
come  from  Brussels  ;  the  remedy  therefore  can  only  come  from 
the  same  quarter.  In  saying  this,  my  object  is  not  to  spare 
myself  any  trouble,  for  I  unhesitatingly  discuss  it  with  every  one 
of  influence,  not  merely  with  the  members  of  the  Conference,  but 
with  all  those  who  have  any  weight  in  the  English  Cabinet. 
This  evening,  when  thinking  over  the  events  of  the  day,  my  con- 
viction grows  stronger,  and  I  feel  fully  persuaded  that  no 
effectual  action  can  be  taken  except  by  Belgium.     It  is  therefore 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  245 

your    Majesty's   influence  on    Prince   Leopold    that   can    alone 
effect  the  change  you  desire. 

This  question  is  full  of  difficulties,  for  the  only  solution  that 
would  suit  us,  is  not  one  which  the  Belgian  government  would 
sanction,  and  yet  this  solution,  which  may  be  the  only  possible  one, 
might  compromise  the  fate  of  the  treaty  of  November  15th, 
which  forms  ties  between  us  and  the  Powers,  which  in  the 
present  state  of  Europe  it  would  be  very  unfortunate  to  see 
weakened. 

Your  Majesty's  strong  and  far-sighted  observations  gave  me 
fresh  material  for  discussion  with  Lord  Grey  and  Lord  Palmer- 
ston,  and  by  adopting  an  injured,  rather  than  an  excited  tone,  I 
think  I  left  nothing  unsaid  that  could  prove  to  them  your  just 
resentment.  Lord  Grey,  who  professes  a  sincere  admiration  for 
your  Majesty,  expressed  himself  greatly  grieved  at  the  manner 
in  which  this  matter  of  the  fortresses  has  been  taken  up  in 
France.  Lord  Palmerston,  also,  regretted  that  the  result  of  this 
negotiation  should  be  displeasing  to  your  Majesty's  government. 
I  believe  that,  so  far,  they  are  quite  sincere  in  saying,  that  they 
neither  of  them  can  understand  why  the  King's  government 
should  be  so  greatly  hurt  (as  I  said  they  were)  about  this 
matter. 

I  am  deeply  distressed,  Sire,  at  the  annoyance  your  Majesty  is 
experiencing  ;  but  I  cannot  help  feeling  that  I  am  not  to  blame  for 
it  in  any  way.  All  this  would  have  been  avoided,  if  the  Belgians 
when  here  had  acted  with  less  secrecy,  not  to  say  less  intrigue, 
and  also,  probably,  if  the  engagement  at  Brussels  had  been  kept 
more  secret. 

I  am  .... 

The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  Madame  Adelaide 

d'Orleans. 

London,  December  27th,  1831. 

From  the  way  in  which  the  Belgians  have  conducted  this 
business  of  the  fortresses,  I  fear  it  will  now  be  impossible  to 
carry  out  the  King's  wishes  respecting  them.  Mademoiselle 
may  feel  assured  that  I  have  done  my  very  best.  But  if  we  look 
at  the  matter  fairly,  we  shall  find  that  its  importance  is  not  so 
great  after  all.  Ath  and  Mons,  the  fortresses  nearest  us,  will  be 
demolished  :  thus  one  reparation  has  been  made  to  France. 
We  must  make  the  most  of  this,  and  remember  for  the  future 
that  new  and  weak  governments  must  not  be  left  to  themselves. 
In  the  crisis  which  is  still  threatening,  and  will  do  so  for  some 


246  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

time  in  Europe,  it  is  of  the  greatest  importance  that  those 
governments,  which  have  any  affinity  whatever,  should  hold 
together.  Interest  in  the  Polish  affair  unites  three  of  the 
governments  ;  two  alone  have  a  separate  interest ;  it  is  important 
that  these  two  should  remain  united,  and  even,  if  necessary, 
make  some  sacrifices  to  this  end.  I  confide  my  opinions  to 
Mademoiselle  that  she  may  make  what  use  of  them  she  deems 
best.  .  .  . 


King  Louis  Philippe  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand. 

PARIS,  December  26ih,  1831. 

Mon  cher  Prince, 

Your  letter  of  the  22nd  seems  to  demand  some  ex- 
planations from  me,  and  I  am  the  more  anxious  to  give  them  to 
you  myself,  as  General  Sebastiani 1  is  seriously  ill,  which  grieves 
me  intensely.  He  is  quite  unable  to  write  to  you  or  attend 
to  any  business,  and  I  am  most  desirous  that  you  should 
thoroughly  understand  the  view  I  take  of  this  very  important 
Belgian  matter. 

We  are  blamed  for  several  reasons,  one  of  which  seems  to  you 
well  founded — for  although,  with  your  usual  thoughtful  kindness 
for  me,  you  have  not  mentioned  it  in  your  letter,  you  have 
several  times  spoken  of  it  in  your  despatches — and  that  is  M.  de 
Latour  Maubourg's  mission  to  Brussels.  If  this  mission  was  in 
a  way  characteristic  of  distrust,  it  could  only,  according  to  my 
view,  be  with  regard  to  King  Leopold  or  the  Belgian  government, 
but  certainly  not  towards  you,  mon  cher  Prince,  nor  against  the 
four  Powers.  As  for  you,  neither  I  nor  my  ministers  have,  nor 
could  possibly  have,  either  suspicions  or  mistrust  of  any  kind. 
The  protocol  of  April  17th,  was,  in  away,  your  own  work,  and  it 
is  certainly  due  to  you  that  France  succeeded  in  obtaining  it. 
More  than  that,  you  conceived  the  happy  idea  of  asking  King 
Leopold  for  a  letter,  which  contained  an  undertaking  respecting 
the  demolition  of  the  fortresses,  that  is  to  say,  an  undertaking 
almost  similar  to  the  object  of  M.  de  Latour  Maubourg's  mission  ; 
but  the  letter  he  wrote  you  was  less  an  undertaking,  than  an 
announcement  that  he  would  not  pledge  himself  to  anything. 
It  was  therefore  only  natural,  especially  after  the  small  service 
we  had  rendered  him  meanwhile,  that  we  should  seek  to  obtain 
from  him  in  Brussels  the  promise  which  he  had  not  given  you 
in  London. 

Jt  was  no  more  an  act  of  distrust  towards  the  Powers,  than 

1  General  Sebastiani  had  just  had  a  stroke  of  apoplexy. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  247 

was  your  demand  to  Prince  Leopold.  It  was  solely  a  desire  to 
obtain  the  same  pledge  from  him,  as  the  Powers  had  given 
us  by  the  protocol  of  April  17th,  so  that  the  two  parties  who 
were  to  make  a  treaty  between  them  and  outside  of  us,  on 
matters  which  were  not  foreign  to  us  except  in  a  pecuniary 
point  of  view,  should  be  bound  to  us  by  a  similar  covenant. 
Surely,  mon  cher  Prince,  we  have  some  right  to  insist 
that  the  Powers  should  not  accuse  us  of  distrust  towards  them, 
looking  to  the  conduct  of  France  during  the  whole  course  of 
these  Belgian  transactions,  and  more  especially  the  manner  in 
which  we  evacuated  the  Belgian  fortresses,  when  it  was  in  our 
power  to  blow  them  up  at  any  moment.  If  my  contemporaries 
do  not  do  me  the  full  justice  in  this  matter  which  I  consider  I 
deserve,  I  have  at  any  rate  the  firm  belief  that  I  shall  obtain  it 
from  posterity. 

I  also  see,  in  one  of  your  despatches,  that  we  are  accused  of 
having  hampered  this  business  by  giving  too  great  publicity  to 
the  protocol  of  April  17th. 

Here,  mon  cher  Prince,  I  must  remind  you,  that  before  my 
council  decided  that  it  should  be  mentioned  in  the  speech  from 
the  throne,  General  Sebastiani  consulted  you  about  it,  and  you 
agreed  with  us  that  it  might  be  done  ;  and  I  can  assure  you,  that 
if  wre  considered  this  communication  might  be  helpful  in  satis- 
fying our  national  pride,  we  also  thought  that  it  would  serve  to 
show  that  the  Powers  did  not  wish  to  wound  it,  or  in  any  way 
injure  the  interests  of  France  ;  but,  above  all,  we  deemed  such  an 
announcement  better  suited  than  anything  else,  to  reconcile 
public  opinion  to  the  choice  of  Prince  Leopold,  who,  as  you  are 
aware,  was  not  popular  in  France,  being  generally  looked  upon 
here  only  as  a  lieutenant  of  England  or  of  the  Holy  Alliance. 
We  desired  to  show  France  and  also  Belgium  (where  it  would 
not  have  answered  any  better),  that  the  policy  of  181 5  had  been 
abandoned  by  the  Powers,  and  that  the  dissolution  of  the  kingdom 
of  the  Netherlands,  which  sufficed  to  render  it  impossible,  as 
well  as  the  demolition  of  the  fortresses  of  181 5,  and  the  exclu- 
sion of  the  King  of  the  Belgians  from  the  Germanic  confederar 
tion,  was  a  pledge  thereof.  I  have  not  the  faintest  doubt, mon  cher 
Prince,  that  all  this  was  eminently  necessary,  as  much  for.  the 
maintenance  of  peace,  as  for  the  support  of  my  government  at 
home,  and  the  establishment  of  King  Leopold  in  Belgium. 

It  is  not  therefore  the  intrinsic  value  of  these  acts  which  has 
given  the  turn  we  now  deplore  to  the  negotiations  of  the 
fortresses  ;  but  it  is  the  simultaneous  action,  and  perhaps  united 
opposition,  of  the  Tories  and  Belgian  intriguers.  You  have  done 
well  to  make  this  known  to  the  English  ministers,   for   it  will 


248  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

prove  to  them  that  it  is  not  to  their  interests,  any  more  than 
ours,  that  M.  Van  de  Weyer's  or  M.  Goblet's  treaty  should  be 
maintained  in  the  terms  in  which  it  was  signed. 

King  Leopold  and  his  government  ought  to  feel  this  even 
more,  for  what  would  become  of  them,  if,  in  consequence  of  this 
unfortunate  obstruction,  the  treaty  which  the  Conference  of  the 
five  Powers  signed  on  the  15th  of  November,  was  annulled  ? 
You  say  with  truth,  mon  cher  Prince,  and  all  the  more  reason 
for  fearing  it,  that  this  is  just  what  the  King  of  Holland  wishes, 
and  probably  the  Emperor  of  Russia  also.  I  think  this  is  a 
point  of  which  you  can  make  very  effective  use  with  the  English 
government,  and  no  one  is  better  able  than  you,  to  give  full  weight 
to  these  fears,  which  are  only  too  well  founded. 

I  have  no  hesitation,  mon  Prince,  in  asserting  that  the  desire 
to  go  to  war  is  as  far  removed  from  the  English  government  as 
it  is  from  that  of  France,  and  that  on  the  contrary,  both  equally 
feel  the  necessity  for  peace  and  the  wish  to  preserve  it  ;  but 
peace  really  depends  on  the  friendly  solution  of  the  Belgian 
question,  and  this  solution  cannot  be  effected  except  by  the  close 
union  of  France  and  England.  Nevertheless,  in  order  that  this 
union  may  continue,  it  is  necessary  that  they  should  first  understand 
one  another,  before  making  arrangements  with  others  who  might 
disturb  it.  Such  has  been  the  result  of  the  mystery  shown  to  us, 
both  in  London  and  Brussels,  with  respect  to  the  arrangements 
for  the  fortresses.  They  did  not  wish  us  to  interfere  in  this 
negotiation,  as  we  had  not  co-operated  in  that  which  preceded 
it — this  one  could  understand  ;  but  if  they  had  told  us  what 
they  intended  to  arrange,  they  would  not  have  placed  us, 
nor  would  they  have  placed  themselves,  in  the  difficult  position 
from  which  it  will  now  take  all  your  efforts  and  all  your  skill  to 
extricate  us.  But  if  the  English  government  on  the  one  side, 
will  only  be  thoroughly  convinced  that  we  have  no  arriere pensee 
in  what  we  now  seek,  and  if  we  on  the  other,  only  ask  that  it 
should  not  renew  or  perpetuate  an  impossible  system,  (such  as 
that  on  which  the  kingdom  of  the  Netherlands  was  founded),  it 
will  then  see  the  danger  which  threatens  us  from  Holland  and 
Russia,and  will  modify  the  treaty  respectingthe  fortresses  in  such 
a  manner,  that  King  Leopold  will  not  in  future  be  placed  in 
relations  with  four  of  the  five  Powers,  other  than  those  which 
have  been  established  with  all  five.  This  must  be  a  sine  qua  11011 
for  France,  the  rest  is  but  a  secondary  matter. 

Although  this  letter  is  already  far  too  long,  I  wish  still  to 
draw  your  attention  to  what  would  be  King  Leopold's  position, 
if  he  were  to  ratify  a  treaty  with  four  Powers  collectively,  before 
the   fourth  had  even   ratified  this  particular  treaty,  much  less 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  249 

the  general  treaty  of  the    five    Powers    which   establishes  the 
independence  of  his  kingdom  and  recognizes  its  king. 

I  think,  therefore,  that  under  the  circumstances,  the  rati- 
fication of  the  treaty  with  the  four  Powers  ought  not  to  take 
place,  as  long  as  Russia  does  not  adhere  to  that  of  the 
15th  November;  all  the  more  so,  that  as  long  as  Russia  does 
not  adhere  to  it,  neither  of  the  five  Powers  can  be  called 
on  to  ratify  it,  and  France  less  than  either  of  them,  so 
long  as  the  treaty  of  the  fortresses  has  not  been  modified. 
But  if  it  were,  and  I  can  see  no  reason  why  this  should  not 
be  possible,  since  there  is  no  real  difference  of  interests  between 
the  five  Powers  as  regards  the  fortresses,  then  the  united 
action  of  France  and  England  would  oblige  the  King  of 
Holland  to  ratify  it,  and  Russia  would  no  longer  oppose  it. 
Without  such  agreement,  believe  me,  mon  cher  Prince,  not 
only  will  Holland  refuse  to  ratify,  but  King  Leopold  will  pro- 
bably have  much  trouble  in  keeping  his  position  in  Belgium, 
where,  in  my  opinion,  he  cannot  maintain  himself  without  the 
support  and  consent  of  France  and  England.  This  support 
and  consent  my  government  have  always  given  him,  and  are 
anxious  to  continue  to  do  so  ;  but  it  must  be  made  possible  to 
us,  and  nothing  must  be  required  from  us  that  others  would 
not  themselves  agree  to. 

This  letter  is  a  thousand  times  too  long,  but  since  it  is 
written,  it  may  go.  I  am  sending  it  open  to  M.  Perier,  so  that 
he  may  read  it  before  forwarding  it  to  you,  and  I  again  repeat 
with  all  my  heart,  the  assurance  of  all  those  sentiments  you 
know  I  have  for  you. 

L.  P. 

P.S. — Are  you  aware  that  this  place,  Marienbourg,  which  is 
counted  as  one  of  the  fortresses,  is  a  miserable  hole  with  five 
earthworks,  and  an  area  about  as  extensive  as  the  parterre  of 
the  Tuileries  ? 

M.  Casimir  Perier  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand. 

Paris,  December  27//1,  1831. 

Mon  Prince, 

I  have  the  honour  to  inform  you,  that  General  Sebastiani 
is  very  seriously  unwell,  and  that  the  King  has  entrusted  the 
Portfolio  of  Foreign  Affairs  to  me  for  the  time  being.  Were  it 
not  for  the  sad  circumstance  which  necessitated  this  step,  I 
should  congratulate  myself  greatly  on  being  thus  called  upon  to 
hold  continuous  official  communications  with  you.     But  kindly 


250  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

excuse  me  if  I  make  this  a  very  brief  letter,  and  do  not  here 
enter  into  particulars  of  our  position.  I  must,  however,  tell 
you  that  the  Chamber  of  Peers,  in  to-day's  sitting,  adopted 
Article  I.,  on  the  law  respecting  the  peerage,  by  a  majority  of 
103  votes  against  67.  I  shall  have  the  honour  of  writing  more 
fully  to  you  to-morrow.  .  .  . 

M.  Due  de  Dalberg  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand. 

Paris,  December  28//1,  1831. 

Mon  cher  Prince, 

I  do  not  wish  another  year  to  commence,  without 
adding  my  wishes  for  your  happiness,  to  the  many  others  that 
will  be  offered  you  ;  pray  believe  that  they  are  really  sincere. 

The  Chamber  of  Peers,  as  might  have  been  expected,  has 
acted  in  a  most  suicidal  manner.  It  is  a  monument  of  dastard- 
liness  worthy  the  Senate  of  Napoleon.  It  has  caused  a  very 
painful  feeling  here.  All  the  peers  declared  that  the  King  was 
alone  to  blame  for  having  brought  matters  to  such  a  state.  If, 
some  day,  a  fresh  crisis  arises,  he  who  heads  it  will  find  that  the 
principle  of  hereditary  right  will  ensure  him  a  hearty  welcome 
at  the  Luxembourg.  This  was  the  remark  made  to  me  by  M. 
de  Bassano,  who  wished  to  be  my  neighbour. 

I  was  not  mistaken  as  to  the  replies  received  from  St. 
Petersburg  respecting  Belgian  affairs.  Fresh  indications, 
both  from  thence  and  Berlin,  make  one  wish  that  the  King  of 
Holland  would  be  satisfied  with  some  other  protocols.  The 
position  of  the  home  navigation  is  inadmissible  even  for  the 
Dutch  ;  it  would  be  a  perpetual  source  of  bickering  ;  how  is  it 
that  Wessenberg,  who  is  up  in  all  these  details,  did  not  perceive 
this  ? 

The  illness  of  your  chief,  Sebastiani,  is  entirely  due  to  his 
idiotic  behaviour  when  he  presented  himself  on  the  tribune  of  the 
Luxembourg.  He  puffed  himself  out  like  a  toad,  trying  to  look 
important,  and  the  blood  flew  to  his  head.  The  public  and  the 
diplomatic  body  would  like  M.  Perier  to  replace  him.  There 
was  some  idea  of  getting  Mounier1  to  join  d'Argout  ;  but  the 
former  has  refused  a  place  in  the  Ministry.  All  confidence 
in  the  future  is  growing  less  and  less.  The  language  held  by 
the    Russian    agents    contributes    greatly    to   this.     It    is    very 

1  Baron  Claude  Mounier,  born  in  1784,  auditor  to  the  Conseil  d 'Etat  in  1806, 
then  Intendant  of  Saxe  Weimar  and  Silesia,  Intendant  of  the  Royal  Palaces,  Con- 
scillcr  d' Etat  (1815),  and  peer  of  France  in  1817.  He  refused  to  join  the  Ministry  in 
1840,  but  was  made  Director-General  of  the  Administrative  Department.  He  sat  in 
the  Chamber  of  Peers  till  his  death  in  1843. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1S30.  251 

evident  that  General  Pozzo  has  no  longer  the  confidence  of  his 
government.  The  Austrians  also  declare  that  sooner  or  later 
Belgium  will  have  to  be  restored  to  Holland. 

People  are  asking  themselves  how  the  foreign  affairs  of 
France  can  be  carried  on,  when  there  is  no  minister  either  at 
Berlin,  Copenhagen,  Madrid,  or  Constantinople.  The  complaints 
in  the  offices  increase  daily,  respecting  the  total  absence  of 
protection  in  the  different  countries.  It  is  only  right  that  you 
should  know  this.  .  .  . 


M.  Bresson  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand. 

Berlin,  December  29//1,  1831. 

.  Mon  Prince, 

I  yesterday  received  the  letter  you  did  me  the  honour 
to  write  on  the  20th  ult.  I  have  not  been  able  to  see  either 
M.  de  Bernstorff  or  M.  Ancillon,  but  I  have  arranged  that  this 
letter  should  be  long  enough  in  their  possession,  to  enable  them  to 
show  it  to  the  King  if  they  thought  fit.  I  have  done  more  :  the 
words  it  contains  are  so  noble  and  so  wise,  that  they  cannot  fail 
to  do  good  wherever  they  are  read,  and  the  Emperor  of  Russia 
himself  shall  receive  an  extract,  omitting  the  first  paragraph.  I 
hope,  mon  Prince,  that  you  will  condescend  to  approve  of  this. 
Unfortunately,  there  is  no  longer  time  for  action  by  the  King  of 
Prussia,  if  he  decides  to  take  any,  to  produce  so  desirable  a 
change  in  the  Emperor  of  Russia's  resolutions1  before  the 
15th  of  January. 

The  Prussian  Cabinet,  whose  intentions  seem  very  frank  and 
loyal,  has  neglected  nothing  to  impress  on  St.  Petersburg  all  the 
danger  that  would  attend  a  disagreement  on  the  important  act 
of  November  15th  between  the  five  Powers,  whose  Ministers 
signed  it.  We  have  but  faint  hope  that  these'  representations 
may  produce  some  effect.  The  King  of  Prussia  has  not  with- 
drawn his  promise  to  ratify,  but  M.  de  Bernstorff  and  M.  Ancillon 
think  that  the  non-ratification  of  one  of  the  five  Powers  annuls 
the  treaty.  Their  argument  is,  that  unanimity  has  been  the 
basis  of  all  the  transactions  of  the  Conference,  and  that  the 
appeal  of  the  King  of  the  Netherlands  was  addressed  to  all  the 
five  Powers,  as  was  laid  down  in  the  protocol  of  Aix-la-Chapelle. 
Nevertheless,  I  think  it  important  that  Prussia  should  give  her 
ratification,  such  as  it  is,  and  I  trust  it  will  be  sent  to  you  within 

1  This  was  in  reference  to  a  direct  application  from  the  Ring  of  Prussia  to  the 
Russian  Emperor,  with  the  object  of  inducing  him  to  ratify  the  treaty  of  November 
15th. — (Note  by  M.  dt  Bacourt.) 


252  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

the  time  limited  for  the  treaty.  Should  any  unforeseen  accident 
upset  this  act,  which  settled  everything,  we  might  then  perhaps 
have  recourse  to  the  two  measures  proposed  by  M.  Ancillon. 
But  I  think  the  second  one,  that  is  to  say,  the  unanimous  de- 
claration of  the  Jive  Powers,  that  Holland  and  Belgium  SHALL 
NOT  recommence  hostilities,  would  be  the  true  point  of  departure 
to  take  ;  the  first,  or  its  equivalent,  that  is  to  say,  offers  of  media- 
tion from  the  Conference  for  a  treaty  betiveen  Holland  and 
Belgium  on  the  basis  of  the  twenty-four  articles,  might  then  be 
tried. 

When  M.  Ancillon,  in  October,  did  me  the  honour  to  com- 
municate these  twenty-four  articles  to  me,  I  at  once  placed  my 
finger  on  that  which  accorded  home  navigation  to  Belgium,  and 
told  him  that  all  the  difficulties  would  rise  from  that  source.  It 
has  had  the  effect  of  bringing  the  King  of  Holland  and  his  sub- 
jects together,  who,  before  this  clause,  neither  considered  or 
viewed  the  Belgian  question  in  the  same  light.  .  .  . 

The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  Madame  Adelaide. 

LONDON,  December  loth,  1831. 

I  am  unceasingly  occupied  with  the  affairs  of  the  fortresses, 
though  I  feel  sure  the  importance  of  it  is  greatly  exaggerated. 
This  matter  has  assumed  a  false  aspect  in  Brussels,  the  doubts 
and  suspicions  which  spoil  everything  have  induced  every  one  to 
grow  too  cautious.  Hence  all  the  objections  and  secret  protocols. 
However,  we  must  get  out  of  it  as  best  we  can,  and  I  think  the 
King  cannot  fail  to  be  struck  with  the  remarks  and  explanations 
that  Lord  Granville  has  given  him  ;  but  we  must  go  further  than 
that.  I  shall  have  the  honour  to  write  to  the  King  as  soon  as  I 
know  more.   .  .  . 


The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  the  Princess  de 

Vaudemont. 

London,  December  yoih,  1S31. 

I  am  truly  sorry  for  Sebastiani's  mishap  ;  he  was  sometimes 
a  little  troublesome,  but  he  also  had  his  good  points.  He  had 
ability,  he  knew  how  to  behave,  and  I  am  sure  he  was  good 
hearted  ;  all  that  is  something.  He  will  be  a  loss  to  the  King 
whom  he  served  faithfully.  So  the  affair  of  the  peerages  is 
finished  at  last,  and  finished  without  shaking  the  ministry.  We 
must  now  finish  the  Belgian  matters,  and  this  we  shall  do  what- 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  253 

ever  people  may  say.  I  could  almost  die  of  it,  like  Sebastiani, 
only  that  it  is  my  battlefield.  Please  Heaven,  it  may  prove  a 
field  of  honour ! 

Your  Belgians  are  weak  and  false,  besides  they  have  been 
fighting  in  Luxemburg;1  all  this  is  not  honourable.  I  still  hope 
to  get  the  ratifications  from  Berlin  before  the  15th  January  ;  and 
if  we  receive  them,  we  shall  not  have  to  wait  long  for  those  from 
Vienna.  St.  Petersburg  exhibits  her  grandeur,  as  the  beau 
vwndc  in  Paris  show  their  gentility,  by  arriving  late.  .  .  . 

The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  M.  Casimir  Perier. 

London,  January  znd,   1832. 

Monsieur, 

I  have  received  the  departmental  despatch  under  date  of 
30th  of  last  month,  and  I  think  that  in  addition  to  the  official  reply, 
contained  in  my  despatch  of  to-day,  it  is  my  duty,  in  face  of  the 
sincere  friendship  I  have  expressed  for  you,  to  draw  your 
attention  to  the  want  of  exactness  in  the  facts  and  arguments 
which  have  been  sent  to  me  from  Paris.  Moreover,  rather  too 
much  zeal  is  being  displayed,  and  I  also  think  that  the  pen  of  the 
head  of  a  department  should  never  be  made  the  medium  of  his 
own  individual  opinion.  In  affairs  like  those  we  have  to  deal 
with,  it  is  very  important  not  to  set  up  any  system,  for  a  system 
in  political  matters  is  very  apt  to  be  based  on  suppositions,  and 
then  one  is  soon  led  astray.  On  the  contrary,  one  must,  not  try 
to  find  anything  in  the  acts,  but  what  is  actually  there.  If  they 
were  to  make  it  a  rule  in  the  various  Foreign  Offices,  to  follow  the 
steps  taken  by  the  Powers,  by  always  crediting  them  with  Holy 
Alliance  schemes,  a  phantom  would  quickly  be  raised,  that  would 
end  in  misrepresenting  and  embroiling  everything.  Your  clear 
judgment  will  enable  you  to  direct  the  affairs  over  which  you 
preside  into  a  better  channel. 

I  notice,  with  much  regret  that  the  affair  of  the  fortresses 
(which,  if  the  papers  get  hold  of  it,  may  give  the  government 
some  trouble,  but  which  in  itself  is  only  a  secondary  matter) 
has  somewhat  retarded  the  progress  of  a  much  more  important 
matter,  namely,  that  of  the  disarmament,  to  which  you  gave  so 
happy  an  impulse.  In  that,  you  will  find  a  ready  answer  for  all 
those  who  only  see  the  Holy  Alliance  in  everything.  Can  there 
be  the  slightest  sign  of  such  a  league,  when  all  the  Cabinets,  even 

1  An  Orangist  insurrection  had  broken  out  on  the  20th  December,  in  Luxem- 
burg, under  the  leadership  of  Baron  Torcano.  The  insurgents,  victorious  at  first,  had 
proclaimed  the  restoration  of  King  William.  The  civic  guards  and  the  Belgian 
troops  soon,  however,  overcame  this  movement. 


254  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

that  of  Russia,  express  the  wish  to  reduce  their  armies,  in  order 
to  relieve  their  people  ?  Believe  me,  Monsieur,  we  must  take 
care  that  in  attaching  too  great  importance  to  this  affair  of  the 
fortresses,  we  do  not  appear  to  rather  flatter  or  humourthe  extreme 
party — a  party  which  the  Powers  have  looked  upon  as  vanquished, 
since  your  acceptance  of  office.  The  banner  of  the  Holy  Alliance 
has  been  lowered  before  that  of  France  by  the  protocol  of  April 
17th  ;  we  might  wish,  but  we  should  do  wrong  to  ask  for  more. 
The  principle  of  demolition  has  been  admitted  ;  demolition  once 
commenced,  we  must  on  the  whole  be  satisfied. 

I  pray  you,  Monsieur,  take  up  again  quickly  the  disarmament 
question,  which  will  add  so  pure  a  glory  to  all  your  successes,  and 
will  so  happily  lighten  the  French  Budget.  We  were  obliged 
to  increase  our  taxes  when  we  deemed  ourselves  threatened  ; 
but  I  do  not  think  we  ought  to  continue  them  on  account  of 
combinations,  the  result  of  which  can  be  of  no  real  importance  ; 
for  the  fortresses  that  are  left  to  Belgium  will  either  fall  in  ruins, 
or  become  our  property  at  some  time  or  other.  All  that  is 
really  necessary  for  the  firm  establishment  of  France  will  con- 
solidate itself,  if  we  keep  our  present  relations  with  England. 
All  the  efforts  of  the  Powers  are  directed  to  prevent  this  :  I 
hope  and  I  believe,  that  they  will  fail.  .  .  . 

The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  the  Princess  de 

Vaudemont. 

London,  January  ind,  1832. 

I  would  really  like  to  know  how  Sebastiani  is  ;  on  one  side  I 
hear  that  he  is  very  ill,  others  say  that  after  a  few  days'  rest  he  will 
be  able  to  return  to  his  work  again.  Pray  tell  me  what  is  true 
of  all  this,  for  I  always  believe  what  you  say.  When  I  like  a 
person,  I  believe  them  ;  sometimes  I  have  been  mistaken  ;  never- 
theless such  is  my  nature.  This  business  of  the  fortresses,  which 
is  exciting  every  one  so  greatly  in  Paris,  more  especially  our 
chiefs,  is  really  only  of  secondary  importance.  What  is  really 
essential  to  us,  is  to  secure  the  ratification  of  Prussia  and  Austria, 
and  keep  united  with  England  ;  the  rest  are  but  cavillings  which 
must  arise  sooner  or  later.  The  principle  of  the  fortresses  had 
to  be  obtained  :  this  we  have  got  ;  therefore  let  the  King  be 
satisfied.  I  have  done  all  in  my  power  to  secure  the  ratifications 
of  the  treaty  of  November  15th,  and  hope  I  have  succeeded.  I 
only  really  care  for  those  of  Vienna  and  Berlin  ;  having  got  them, 
the  others  will  follow,  even  your  dearly  beloved  King  of  Holland. 

I  am  working  too  hard  ;  I  write  all  day,  and  will  end  with 
some  mishap,  like  Sebastiani. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  255 

M.  Casimir  Perier  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand. 

Paris,  January  1st,   1832. 

Mox  Prince, 

I  am  taking  advantage  of  Messrs.  Rothschild's  courier, 
to  send  you  the  King's  speech  in  answer  to  the  ambassadors. 
This  speech  is  much  more  pacific  than  our  diplomatic  reports. 
Nevertheless,  we  trust  that  you  will  still  succeed  in  changing 
the  views  of  the  English  Cabinet  with  regard  to  the  Belgian 
fortresses.  I  believe  we  shall  end  in  procuring  the  ratification 
of  Prussia  and  Austria  without  any  conditions.  I  am  just 
expecting  the  English  ambassador,  who  is  to  inform  me  of 
the  communication  made  by  his  Cabinet  to  the  Courts  of 
Berlin  and  Vienna,  relative  to  the  delays  interposed  by  Russia, 
to  the  ratification  of  the  treaty  of  the  15th  November.  If  this 
communication  is  firm,  and  peremptorily  insists  on  the  fulfil- 
ment of  the  promises  given,  I  have  no  doubt  whatever  that  it  will 
decide  Prussia,  and  especially  Austria,  whose  political  views  on 
this  question  seem  to  be  more  nearly  allied  to  those  of  England. 

The  despatches  I  have  to-day  received  from  M.  Bresson, 
inform  me  that  Prussia,  in  the  midst  of  all  her  hesitations,  has, 
nevertheless,  not  dared  to  promise  definitely  to  follow  the  line 
Russia  seems  inclined  to  adopt.  I  therefore  think  that  if  we 
remain  firm,  as  we  have  every  right  to  do,  we  shall  succeed  in 
conquering  this  difficulty. 

There  then  still  remains  the  treaty  of  the  fortresses,  which 
will  have  to  be  modified,  and  I  earnestly  hope,  both  for  our  peace 
as  well  as  that  of  Europe,  that  you  will  succeed  (as  I  had  the 
honour  of  telling  you  in  my  confidential  letter)  in  obtaining  those 
modifications  which  we  deem  indispensable.  I  must  add  that 
the  position  we  have  taken  here  towards  the  ambassadors,  show- 
ing our  dissatisfaction  in  a  guarded,  though  in  a  decided  way, 
seems  to  us  to  have  made  a  great  impression. 

We  have  no  wish  to  abuse  our  position,  but  considering  the 
frankness  and  loyalty  we  have  shown  in  all  our  relations,  we  have 
the  right  to  count  upon  their  being  respected. 

Accept,  mon  Prince 

M.  de  Flahaut  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand. 

PARIS,  January  2nd,   1832. 

I  think  I  can  announce  to  you  Sebastiani's  restoration  to 
health-  To-day  he  is  so  much  better,  that  I  trust  his  convalescence 
will  be  more  rapid  than    I  at  first  dared  to  hope.     His   illness 


256  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

occurred  at  a  most  inopportune  moment,  but  I  do  not  think  it 
will  cause  any  change  in  the  Ministry.  He  will  be  able  to  return 
to  his  work  before  his  temporary  substitute,  d'Argout,  will  have 
had  time  to  grasp  the  details. 

People  here  are  disquieted,  by  the  report  which  has  got 
abroad  that  the  ratifications  will  not  reach  us  by  the  15  th.  That 
would  be  very  unfortunate,  and  would  greatly  increase  the 
strength  of  the  war  party  ;  and  if  war  once  broke  out,  instead  of 
a  few  million  florins,  and  the  navigation  of  some  canals,  it  will  be 
a  question  of  the  destruction  of  France,  or  the  overthrow  of  all 
the  thrones  of  Europe  ;  for  even  sane  people  here  will  arm 
themselves  with  a  stick  surmounted  by  the  red  cap  of  Liberty. 
If,  after  all  the  efforts  that  have  been  made  to  preserve  peace, 
the  foreign  governments  make  game  of  us  and  ignore  their 
ambassadors,  there  is  nothing  left  but  to  draw  the  sword. 

The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  the  Princess  de 

Vaudemont. 

London,  Ja7iuary  $tk,  1832. 

I  am  sending  you  to-day  a  huge  bundle  of  papers,  which 
will  probably  weary  you  more  in  reading,  than  they  did  me  in 
writing  them.  I  have  found  a  solution  of  this  question  of  the 
fortresses,  which  occupies  the  King  far  too  much.1  By  it  I  have 
secured  all  that  it  was  possible  to  obtain  under  extremely  difficult 
circumstances,  owing  to  the  action  taken  in  Brussels.  We  need 
now  no  longer  dread  the  phantom  called  the  Holy  Alliance, 
which  can  never  exist  as  long  as  we  keep  friends  with  England. 
That  is  the  real  support  of  our  new  dynasty.  Everything  in 
Europe  can  be  settled  without  war,  if  we  and  England  remain 
united.  France  has  never  before  adopted  this  policy  ;  it  was 
reserved  for  the  King  to  demonstrate  its  importance.  I  shall 
end  my  career  with  brilliancy,  by  attaching  my  name  to  this 
grand  union 

The  following  note  was  sent  by  Baron  Pasquier,  President  of 
the  Chamber  of  Peers,  to  the  Princess  de  Vaudemont  for 
communication  to  M.  de  Talleyrand. 

1  M.  de  Talleyrand,  seeing  the  hostility  that  the  Convention  of  the  14th  December, 
met  with  in  Paris,  and  in  the  face  of  the  refusal  of  the  Powers  to  substitute  Tournay 
and  Charleroy  for  Philippeville  and  Marienbourg,  had  proposed  the  following  wording  : 
"The  plenipotentiaries  of  the  four  Courts  have  begun  by  decreeing  the  demolition  of 
Mons,  Ath,  and  Menin,  reserving  to  themselves  to  decide  later  on  the  fate  of  the 
other  fortresses."  The  French  Cabinet  did  not  admit  this  solution,  for  it  always 
allowed  it  to  be  supposed  that  France  did  not  recognize  the  sovereign  right  of  the 
Powers  to  dispose  ultimately  of  the  Belgian  fortresses. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  257 

Paris,   Tuesday,  January  4th,  1832. 

It  is  important  that  M.  de  Talleyrand  should  know  this : 
I  have  just  returned  from  seeing  the  President  of  the  Council, 
and  have  had  a  long  talk  with  him  about  our  present  foreign 
relations.  His  position  with  respect  to  these  affairs  is  really 
very  difficult,  and  as  every  one  both  at  home  and  abroad  is 
interested  in  his  retention,  it  is  as  well  this  should  be  known,  in 
order  to  act  accordingly.  I  found  him  full  of  confidence  in  M.  de 
Talleyrand,  and  quite  sensible  that  he  alone  was  able  to  guide 
the  vessel  of  these  negotiations,  in  the  handling  of  which  he  has 
shown  so  much  ability,  safely  into  port.  This  ability  was  never 
more  needed  than  it  is  at  present.  There  are  two  points  in 
dispute — the  ratifications,  and  the  treaty  signed  between  the  four 
Powers  relative  to  the  Belgian  fortresses.  In  themselves  these 
points  are  not  perhaps  so  important  as  is  supposed,  but  what 
matter,  if  the  result  is  the  same?  I  have  no  doubt  that 
sooner  or  later  the  ratifications  will  arrive.  The  affair  of  the 
fortresses  affects  our  self-esteem  more  than  our  actual  interests, 
but  it  is  just  on  this  account  that  it  acquires  a  real  importance. 
If  the  treaty  was  accepted  as  it  stands,  I  do  not  believe  that  the 
present  or  any  other  Ministry,  could  carry  out  the  agreement.  It 
would  be  considered  too  great  a  humiliation,  and  there  is  no  good 
reason  or  explanation  that  could  efface  or  even  palliate  this  view. 

If  England  therefore  wishes  to  see  the  '  present  order  of 
things  in  France  consolidated,  and  it  seems  to  me  that  this 
would  be  to  her  interest,  her  Cabinet  must  come  to  some 
arrangement  on  this  point.  I  have  no  doubt  that  both  countries 
have  the  same  difficulties  to  contend  with,  and  that  the  English 
Cabinet  has  to  humour  the  Tory  opposition,  as  the  French 
Ministry  has  equally  to  humour  the  Liberal  and  Republican 
opposition  ;  but  the  cases  are  not  quite  the  same,  for  the  position 
here  is  much  more  threatening. 

M.  de  Talleyrand  has  already  rendered  enormous  services, 
but  in  my  opinion  he  cannot  perform  a  greater  one  for  futurity 
than  that  in  which  he  is  engaged,  for  this  act  will  consolidate  all 
the  others.  It  would  result  in  bringing  about  a  fresh  arrange- 
ment and,  above  all,  a  fresh  form  of  arrangement,  with  respect  to 
the  fortresses.  It  is,  in  my  opinion,  indispensable  that  whatever 
arrangement  is  made,  must  be  agreed  to  and  signed  by  the  five 
Powers,  else  it  will  always  be  looked  upon  here  as  an  affront, 
and  there  will  be  an  explosion.  Though,  in  reality,  if  they 
liked,  they  could  easily  see  in  France's  request  for  the  demolition 
of  the  fortresses  a  proof  of  her  good  faith,  for  it  is  perfectly 
evident  that,  at  the  very  first  signs  of  a  rupture,  these  fortresses 

VOL.  IV,  S 


258  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

would  fall  into  her  hands,  and  that  it  would  suit  her  better  to 
have  them  fortified  than  dismantled. 

Let  them  therefore  think  twice  before  they  turn  a  question, 
so  trifling  in  itself,  into  a  cause  for  rupture.  If,  on  the  contrary, 
this  question  is  once  arranged,  I  do  not  see  how  any  opposition 
could  make  a  stand  against  the  close  union  of  France  and  England 
— a  union  of  which  both  countries  would  soon  feel  the  benefit. 

M.  de  Talleyrand  has  already  done  much  to  further  this 
work  !  Let  us  hope  that  he  will  accomplish  it,  otherwise  one 
cannot  help  foreseeing  great  difficulties,  if  not  something  worse. 

The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  the  Princess  de 

Vaudemont. 

London,  January  jth,  1832. 

I  have  received  your  letter  of  the  5th,  inclosing  one  from 
M.  Pasquier.  M.  de  Maubourg's  mission,  which  is  constantly 
thrown  at  my  head  in  all  the  conferences  here,  annoys  me 
greatly.  The  refrain  is  always  :  "  You  make  use  of  us  when  it 
suits  you,  but  you  manage  your  affairs  independently  when  you 
think  it  is  more  to  your  advantage."  No  confidence  can  be 
established  in  that  way.  I  am  sending  M.  Tellier  to  Paris,  to 
explain  what  they  do  not  seem  able  to  understand. 

I  have  written,  dictated,  and  conferred  so  long,  that  I  am 
fairly  exhausted.  The  fortresses  (the  principle  of  their  de- 
molition having  once  been  accepted)  are  a  very  minor  matter  if 
rightly  understood.  The  fact  is,  no  one  considers  it  of  any 
importance.  It  is  only  our  self-love  that  is  affected  by  it,  and 
very  foolishly  so.  If  there  is  no  war,  they  will  fall  to  ruin,  for 
no  one  will  repair  them ;  if  there  is  a  war,  we  shall  take  them  ; 
that  is  how  it  stands. 

Return  my  best  thanks  to  him  who  sent  you  the  note. 

M.  Bresson  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand. 

Berlin,  January  7th,  1832. 

I  have  just  sent  you  the  following  telegraphic  despatch, 
via  Metz  : 

"  Prussia  will  not  exchange  the  ratifications  which  she  is 
sending  to  London  to-morrow,  unless  all  the  other  Powers, 
without  exception,  ratify." 

The  Prussian  Cabinet  is  greatly  exercised.  It  would 
certainly  have  wished  the  Emperor  of  Russia  to  ratify  purely 
and  simply.     Now  it  will  not  commit  itself  either  with  him  or 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  259 

with  us,  and  takes  shelter  behind  its  interpretation  of  the  acts  of 
the  Conference.  It  never  from  the  first  approved  the  treaty  of 
November  15th.  Nevertheless,  it  ratified  it  from  love  of  peace, 
which  is  a  distinctive  trait  of  its  policy  and  the  inclinations  of 
its  king.  It  only  made  two  reservations :  the  first  was,  the 
rights  of  the  Confederation  over  Luxemburg ;  the  second,  that 
Prussia  would  never  join  in  any  active  coercive  measures  against 
the  King  of  the  Netherlands.  The  refusal  of  St.  Petersburg  has 
supervened,  accompanied  by  pressing  solicitations  to  Prussia 
and  Austria  to  follow  her  example.  They  were  probably  not 
disinclined  to  accede  ;  but  I  at  once  declared,  that,  in  that  case, 
there  remained  no  other  alternative  for  our  government,  than  to 
take  Belgium,  as  constituted  by  the  twenty-four  articles,  under 
her  protection,  and  boldly  announce  that  neither  Holland  nor 
any  of  the  other  Powers,  should  touch  her.  Thereupon,  after 
some  mature  reflection  and  much  hesitation,  the  somewhat  equi- 
vocal line  was  adopted,  an  account  of  which  I  sent  to  Paris  and 
communicated  to  you  briefly  by  my  telegraphic  despatch. 

The  Emperor  of  Russia  will  not  succeed  in  inducing  the 
Prussian  Cabinet  to  adopt,  either  violent  views  or  hostile 
measures.  Here,  all  the  advantages  derived  from  the  statu  quo 
are  fully  appreciated  and  will  not  be  forfeited.  I  am  convinced, 
that  M.  de  Billow  will  receive  instructions  to  favour  any  measures 
and  any  arrangements  which  would  prevent  a  rupture  of  the 
negotiations,  or  the  secession  of  one  or  more  of  the  Powers. 

M.  Ancillon  has  announced  to  me  in  due  form,  that  the  King 
of  Prussia  considers  himself  the  guardian  of  the  peace  of  Europe  ; 
but  his  policy  is  an  entirely  impartial  and  non-aggressive  one,  and 
that  he  will  always  respect  the  rights  of  those  who  will  respect  his. 

You  have  received  the  ratifications  ;  they  have  been  signed  by 
the  king,  but  their  interchange  will  be  suspended,  until  all  the 
other  Powers  have  given  in  theirs.  This  is  not  what  you  would 
have  wished,  mon  Prince  ;  nevertheless,  it  is  a  good  deal.  The 
Emperor  of  Russia  remains  isolated  in  his  refusal,  whereas  he 
expected  greater  compliance.  .  .  . 

Lord  Palmerston  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand. 

Stanhope  Street,  January  yd,  1832. 

Mon  cher  Prince, 

The  report  that  Esterhazy  and  Wessenberg  have  just 
brought  me,  of  the  communication  they  have  received  from  their 
Courts,  is  not  nearly  so  bad  as  that  which  your  government 
seems  to  have  received  from   Count  Appony.     It  appears  the 

S  2 


260  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLE  YRAND. 

Court  of  Vienna  admits,  that  the  Conference  found  itself  obliged 
to  arbitrate  between  Holland  and  Belgium  ;  that  this  same  Court 
approves  the  Act  of  Arbitration  laid  down  in  the  twenty-four 
articles  ;  that  it  considers  these  articles,  accepted  as  they  are  by 
Belgium,  as  constituting  a  solemn  convention  between  the 
Belgian  government  and  the  five  Powers,  and  as  the  treaty 
is  in  effect  the  articles,  the  Court  of  Vienna  has  decided  to  ratify 
it ;  but,  nevertheless,  it  will  for  the  present  postpone  the  ratifica- 
tion, in  the  hope  of  inducing  the  Court  of  Russia  (sic). 

You  will  see  that  all  this  does  not  look  like  an  official 
declaration  made  by  Austria  in  the  name  of  Russia  and  Prussia. 

I  am  very  sorry  that  your  Court  thinks  of  refusing  its  ratifica- 
tion to  the  treaty  of  November  15th,  because  it  is  displeased 
with  the  convention  of  the  14th  of  December.  But  how  can  it 
find  any  valid  reasons  for  connecting  two  entirely  different  and 
separate  transactions  ?  How  can  it  refuse  its  ratification,  without 
disowning  you  and  recalling  you  ?  And  what  a  triumph  this 
would  be,  for  all  those  who  have  perpetually  tried  to  inspire  us 
with  distrust  of  France  !  Is  this  method  of  treating  thus  lightly 
the  solemn  transactions  between  governments,  conducive  to  in- 
spiring confidence  in  those  who  will  in  future  have  to  do  with 
France  ?  But  I  am  sure  that  it  is  quite  needless  for  me  to 
suggest  to  you,  all  the  grave  considerations  which  cannot  fail  to 
have  already  presented  themselves  to  your  mind,  with  regard  to 
this  unpleasant  subject.  .  .  . 

This  letter  from  Lord  Palmerston  will  show  the  nature  of  the 
opposition  which  I  encountered  in  London,  in  trying  to  satisfy 
the  requirements  of  the  French  government  concerning  the 
convention  of  the  14th  December,  relative  to  the  demolition  of 
certain  fortresses.  I  had,  nevertheless,  succeeded  in  obtaining 
some  concessions,  under  the  form  of  an  explanatory  protocol, 
from  the  convention.  I  sent  it  to  Paris  by  M.  Tellier,  the  first 
secretary  of  my  embassy,  whom  I  also  intrusted  with  full 
explanations.  The  following  letters  will  show  the  result  of  this 
fresh  line  of  negotiation  : 

The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  the  Princess  de 

Vaudemont. 

London,  January  10th,  1832. 

I  hope  that  all  the  explanations  I  have  given,  besides  those 
which  M.  Tellier  bears,  will  induce  our  Cabinet  to  come  to  some 


THE  DEVOLUTION  OF  1830.  261 

decision  which  will  preserve  our  friendly  relations  with 
England,  for  it  is  to  this  end  I  have  worked  for  the  last 
eighteen  months,  and  it  will  prove  our  salvation.  My  belief  is, 
that  there  will  be  delays,  but  no  refusals  with  regard  to  the 
ratifications.  When  once  they  have  arrived  and  been  inter- 
changed, matters  will  be  arranged  without  much  difficulty. 
There  will  then  only  be  a  King  of  Greece  to  be  decided  on. 
Have  you  got  anyone  in  view  ?  They  say  that  Greece,  in  her 
present  state,  will  need  a  sovereign  who  has  both  good  and  bad 
qualities.  This,  probably,  has  made  some  people  think  of 
Prince  Paul  of  Wiirtemberg.  He  has  a  few  good  qualities — 
ability  and  intelligence,  these  are  very  fair — and  faults  in 
abundance.  .  .  . 

LONDON,  January  12//1,  1832. 

I  received  your  letter  of  the  10th,  about  an  hour  ago.  I  have 
read  the  information  it  contained  with  close  attention.  This  is 
how  matters  stand  at  present.  On  the  31st,  positively,  we  shall 
have  the  ratifications  from  Austria  and  Prussia,  those  from 
Russia  will  come  later  on.  We  shall  not  wait  for  them  to  effect 
the  interchange.  This  once  done,  Holland  will  enter  into  some  ex- 
planations, and  we  will  do  our  very  best  ;.the  fact  is,  we  want  to 
arrange  and  finish  everything.  No  difficulties  can  come  from 
Belgium.  They  can  only  come  from  France,  which  by  twofold  in- 
trigues always  embarrasses  its  affairs.  It  is  a  fact,  that  but  for 
M.  de  Latour-Maubourg's  mission  to  Brussels  and  M.  Sebas- 
tiani's  conferences  with  Lord  Granville,  which  brought  about  the 
protocol  of  the  29th  of  August,  of  which  I  was  not  even  informed 
from  Paris,  matters  would  never  have  been  plunged  into  a 
series  of  complications  from  which  it  is  very  difficult  to  get 
clear. 

The  protocol  to  which  I  refer  was  not  my  work,  but  that  of 
the  four  Powers,  who  sent  it  to  Lord  Granville,  who  in  turn 
passed  it  on  to  Sebastiani.  I  first  heard  of  it  by  a  letter  from 
General  Belliard,  written  to  me  in  the  end  of  December.  Is 
that  the  way  to  conduct  and  carry  on  business  ? 

They  mismanage  everything,  and  then  turn  round  on  me. 
I  am  beginning  to  get  very  tired  of  all  this.  Nevertheless,  I  will 
go  on  to  the  end.  I  should  like  to  finish  the  business  I 
have  taken  in  hand.  After  that  they  mav  spoil  it  if  they 
like.  .  .  . 

Whilst  I  was  sending  letters  and  despatches  in  this  spirit 
from  London,  I  received  the  following  from  Paris : 


262  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

M.  Casimir  Perier  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand. 

Paris,  January  gf/i,  1832. 

Prince, 

My  official  despatch,  which  will  reach  you  at  the  same 
time  as  this  letter,  will  make  known  to  you  the  various  solutions- 
of  the  serious  difficulty  that  has  arisen  from  the  treaty  of  the  14th 
December,  and  the  inadequacy  of  the  modifications  contained 
in  the  diplomatic  Note  which  you  have  received  from  the 
ambassadors  of  the  four  Powers.  As  a  despatch  does  not 
permit  of  a  detailed  explanation  of  the  reasons  which  prevent 
the  consent  of  the  king's  government  to  the  interchange  of 
ratifications, —  as  doing  away  with  his  adhesion  to  the 
principles  sanctioned  by  the  treaty  of  the  14th  December,  if  it 
was  not  first  modified — I  have  asked  my  brother  Camille1  to  go 
to  you.  My  conversations  with  him  have  made  him  acquainted 
with  the  question.  He  will  corroborate  all  I  have  had  the 
honour  to  tell  you,  as  to  the  annoying  effect  of  the  serious  fault 
committed  by  the  Powers,  in  leaving  their  intentions  respecting 
the  interchange  of  the  ratifications  so  long  uncertain,  and  also 
the  necessity  of  giving  such  a  form  to  the  acts  which  will 
terminate  this  delicate  negotiation,  as  will  make  them  unob- 
jectionable in  the  eyes  of  a  people  so  justly  jealous  of  whatever 
touches  the  national  honour. 

In  an  interview  I  had  this  morning  with  Lord  Granville;  I 
renewed  the  assurance  of  the  desire  of  the  king's  government 
to  strengthen  the  ties  which  unite  both  nations,  and  to  continue 
the  same  policy  which  has  reconciled  their  interests  since  the 
revolution  of  July  ;  but  I  also  entered  into  the  reasons  which 
would  not  allow  us  to  accept  the  treaty  of  December  14th. 
My  communications  went  so  far  as  to  discuss  confidentially  the 
measures  for  solving  the  fresh  difficulties  raised  by  it.  He  did 
not  in  any  way  disapprove  these  measures,  which  induces  me  to 
hope  that  you  will  find  sufficient  support  in  the  co-operation  of  the 
British  Cabinet,  to  obtain  the  adoption  of  some  of  them.  .  .  . 

M.  Casimir  Perier  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand. 

Paris,  January  nth,  1832. 

Prince, 

I  have  read  the  despatches  you  sent  me  by  M.  Tellier 
with  great  interest.     You  will  have  seen  by  those  I  intrusted  my 

1  Camille  Perier  (1781-1844)  formerly  auditor  to  the  Conseil  d'Etat  and  p-efet 
under  the  Empire  and  the  Restoration.  He  had  been  a  deputy  since  1828.  He  was 
made  a  Peer  of  France  in  1837. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  263 

brother  to  give  you,  and  which  you  will  by  this  time  have 
received  and  read,  that  we  have  in  a  manner  met  half  way,  as  to 
the  means  of  getting  out  of  the  difficulty  which  the  treaty  of  the 
14th  December,  relative  to  the  fortresses,  has  caused,  both  to  the 
London  Cabinet  and  our  own.  I  wish  most  earnestly  that  you 
could  finish  this  important  affair. 

You  will  see,  Prince,  by  my  official  despatch  of  to-day, 
that  we  give  you  greater  latitude  than  in  those  my  brother 
brought  you  ;  in  a  word,  if  you  cannot  end  the  matter  in  the 
way  pointed  out  by  the  protocol  I  have  sent  you,  we  shall  con- 
tent ourselves  with  the  expedient  suggested  to  us  in  your 
despatch  No.  291.  But  it  is  indispensable,  Prince,  that  the 
declaration  should  be  clear  and  distinct  throughout,  like  the 
protocol  we  have  sent  you.  The  Kingdom  of  Belgium,  and  its 
king,  must  be  entirely  absolved  from  all  engagements,  anterior 
or  posterior  to  the  acts  of  the  five  Powers  who  recognize  the 
independence  and  the  neutrality  of  Belgium  ;  this  is  what  the 
country  demands,  rightly  or  wrongly,  this  is  what  it  wants  ;  and 
friends  or  enemies,  all  would  abandon  us,  if  we  gave  in  on  this 
point.  As  for  the  root  of  the  question,  we  do  not  lay  greater 
stress  on  it  than  it  deserves  ;  with  the  exception  of  Philippeville 
and  Marienburg,  which  are  not  included  among  the  fortresses, 
in  the  list  of  the  protocol  of  April  17th,  it  does  not  matter 
much  to  us  whether  this  or  that  fortress  is  demolished  ;  but 
when  the  four  Powers  have  once  decided  which  fortresses  are  to 
be  so  dealt  with,  the)-  must  have  no  further  rights  over  these 
fortresses,  except  such  as  would  be  common  to  the  five  signatory 
Powers  of  the  15th  of  November. 

I  shall  await  the  result  of  this  affair,  both  for  our  country 
and  our  Cabinet,  with  great  impatience  ;  but  even  if  the  three 
Powers  do  not  accord  their  ratifications  at  once,  it  will  suffice  if 
France  and  England  are  agreed  by  the  respective  interchange 
of  their  ratifications,  for  the  moral  effect  of  this  decision  would 
prevent  all  serious  thoughts  of  a  collision  that  might  lead 
to  war.  It  would  be  evident  to  everyone,  that  France  and 
England  once  united,  would  make  it  difficult,  not  to  say  im- 
possible, for  the  other  governments  not  to  yield  to  the  decision 
of  these  two  great  Powers. 

I  need  not  repeat,  Prince,  what  I  have  already  had  the 
honour  to  tell  you,  that  our  policy  with  regard  to  England  is 
entirely  in  conformity  with  yours.  I  have  directed  M.  Tellier, 
with  whom  I  have  entered  into  full  explanations,  to  reiterate 
this  particularU',  and  to  tell  you  how  urgent  it  is  for  Europe  and 
for  us,  that  we  should  frankly  enter  upon  the  system  of  dis- 
armament,   which  «we    have    announced    so  decidedly   on    the 


264  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLE  YRAND. 

strength  of  the  promises  of  all  the  ambassadors,  who  assured  us 
in  the  most  explicit  manner,  that  the  ratifications  of  their 
Cabinets  to  the  treaty  of  November  15th,  would  only  be  a 
matter  of  form. 

I  wish  still  to  believe  that  there  is  no  wrong  intent  on  the  part 
of  the  different  Powers,  above  all  those  of  Austria  and  Prussia  ; 
but  they  have  committed  a  serious  fault  (if  they  sincerely 
wish  for  peace,  as  they  have  so  often  assured  us)  in  not  ratifying 
at  the  appointed  time,  and  thereby  shaking  the  power  and  moral 
strength  of  our  Cabinet,  in  its  system  of  peace  and  disarma- 
ment. If  the  difficulty  respecting  the  fortresses  disappears 
between  us  and  England,  and  our  ratifications  are  inter- 
changed, we  can  once  more  ward  off  this  danger.  The  fall  in 
the  public  funds,  the  general  anxiety  in  everyone's  mind,  will 
all  show  you  the  imminence  of  the  danger  far  better  than  I 
could  describe  it. 

Our  fate,  Prince,  lies  in  your  hands.  I  trust  entirely  and 
unreservedly  to  your  great  wisdom  and  your  patriotism  to  wind 
up  this  negotiation,  on  which  the  peace  of  our  country  and  the 
civilization  of  the  world  may  depend.  I  have  given  Lord 
Palmerston's  letter  to  M.  Tellier  ;  it  has  only  been  read  by  the 
king  and  myself. 

Accept  .... 

Casimir  Perier. 

P.S. — I  recommend  my  brother  to  your  kindness  if  he  is  still 
with  you. 

King  Louis  Philippe  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand. 

PARIS,  Ja?iuary  nf/i,  1832. 

I  have  this  moment,  mon  cher  Prince,  received  your  letter 
of  the  8th,  brought  by  M.  Tellier,  and  also,  two  days  ago,  that  of 
the  5th.  Much  as  I  should  have  liked  to  have  seen  and  spoken 
to  you,  I  am  nevertheless  very  glad  you  did  not  come,  for  in 
addition  to  the  fatigue  and  inconvenience  of  such  a  journey 
during  this  weather,  I  should  have  looked  upon  your  absence 
from  London,  when  the  despatches  M.  Perier  sent  you  by  his 
brother  arrived,  as  a  real  misfortune. 

I  think  they  will  have  allayed  your  anxieties,  and  that  you 
will  find  the  proposals  they  contain  well  calculated  to  overcome 
all  the  difficulties,  and  to  enable  the  Jive  Poivers  to  escape  from 
the  false  position,  in  which  the  deplorable  treaty  of  December 
14th,  has  placed  them  with  regard  to  one  another.  I  sincerely  wish 
that  it  may  prove  so,  and  I   hope  that  the  English  government 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  265 

will  see  therein  a  fresh  proof,  of  the  great  value  both  I  and  my 
government  place  on  the  continuance  of  those  cordial  relations 
between  us,  which  arc  the  best  guarantee  for  the  peace  of 
Europe,  and  the  stability  of  social  order.  This  treaty  must  be 
so  arranged,  that  the  former  engagements  of  the  King  of  the 
Netherlands  are  not  curtailed  by  the  King  of  the  Belgians,  and 
that  in  future,  his  position,  his  relations  and  his  engagements,  are 
identically  the  same  with  all  the  five  Powers,  so  that  no  single 
one  of  these  Powers  retains  a  special  suzerainty  over  the  fortresses 
in  his  territory,  and  then  nothing  can  further  disturb  cither  our 
union  with  England,  or  consequently  the  general  peace. 

You  may  give  the  assurance,  mon  cher  Prince,  for  I  know  that 
M.  Perier  has  also  given  you  the  same  with  fuller  details,  that 
this  is  all  that  France  wants,  but  that  it  is  what  she  does  want, 
and  that  it  is  really  extraordinary  that  people  should  see  any- 
thing but  what  it  really  is,  in  a  demand  so  just,  so  simple,  and  so 
moderate,  and  that  they  should  desire  pretexts  to  arouse  suspicion 
and  accuse  us  of  having  mental  reservations,  which  our  own 
proposal  denies  in  so  plain  a  manner,  and  which,  I  venture  to  say, 
the  whole  of  my  conduct  and  that  of  my  Cabinet,  should  suffice 
to  refute. 

Besides,  it  is  rather  singular,  that  it  should  be  the  very  people 
who  made  a  mystery  to  us  of  this  treaty,  while  insisting  as  a  sine 
qua  11011  on  the  signature  of  that  of  November  15th,  which  was 
a  joint  one,  who  imagine  they  have  a  right  to  suspect 
us,  and  that  a  want  of  sincerity,  which  is  certainly  not  on 
our  side,  would  injure  the  confidence  we  ask  for,  and  of  which,  it 
seems  to  me,  England  has  had  ample  proofs. 

Moreover,  it  is  because  we  had  the  firm  conviction  that  the 
views  of  the  present  government,  relative  to  Belgium,  were  in 
entire  conformity  with  ours,  that  we  were  lulled  into  such 
complete  security  respecting  the  negotiations  of  the  fortresses. 
It  is  precisely  because  we  had  no  anxiety  to  fear  from  that 
quarter,  that  we  did  not  seek  to  obtain  from  it  any  other  engage- 
ment than  the  protocol  of  April  17th,  but  it  is  also  because, 
after  what  had  happened,  we  could  not  have  the  same  confidence 
in  the  Belgian  government,  that  we  wished  to  have  a  special 
undertaking  from  it,  and  sent  M.  de  Latour-Maubourg  there  on 
a  mission,  to  which  we  gave  all  possible  publicity,  communicating 
all  these  particulars  to  Lord  Granville  and  Sir  Robert  Adair, 
who  were  full)- cognizant  of  what  we  intended  to  ask.  The  forms 
and  terms  of  the  engagement  demanded  of  the  King  of  the 
Belgians,  had  been  arranged  with  them,  it  having  been  con- 
tracted with  their  full  cognizance  and  even  approbation,  without 
which  King  Leopold  would  not  have  signed  it. 


266  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

I  must  confess,  mon'' cher  Prince,  that  I  cannot  even  now 
understand,  notwithstanding  all  the  explanations  we  have  re- 
ceived respecting  the  suspicions  that  this  mission  has  excited, 
how  such  could  ever  have  arisen.  But  let  us  put  the  past  on  one 
side,  and  occupy  ourselves  exclusively  with  the  present  and  the 
future. 

We  are  fully  persuaded  that  the  fear  of  the  attacks  of  the 
Tories,  seconded  by  the  Belgian  intrigues,  decided  the  form  and 
the  terms  of  the  treaty  of  the  14th  December.  We  believe  that 
the  present  English  government  has  entirely  renounced  the 
policy  of  the  Holy  Alliance,  neither  does  it  favour  that  which 
seeks  to  make  Belgium  a  tcte-de-pont  against  France,  and  that 
it  has  substituted  the  wiser  policy,  which  we  also  have  adopted, 
of  the  permanent  neutrality  and  independence  of  that  new 
State. 

All  we  now  wish,  all  we  now  ask  for,  is  the  frank,  full,  and 
entire  execution  of  this  policy  of  Belgian  neutrality  and  inde- 
pendence. We  have  no  mental  reservations  either  with  regard  to 
Philippeville,  Marienbourg,  or  anything  else.  We  do  not  attach 
the  slightest  importance  to  these  two  fortresses,  which  are  value- 
less to  France,  except  as  regards  the  memories  attached  to 
them — memories  which  ought  to  have  been  kindly  dealt  with, 
instead  of  being  made  a  subject  of  irritation.  My  government 
has  never  had  any  other  wish  than  to  allay  this  feeling,  and  only 
spoke  of  these  fortresses  with  that  intent,  and  in  order  to  be 
able  to  say  that  it  had  done  so  ;  but  when  it  was  found  that 
this  demand  might  prove  an  impediment  to  the  grand  object  of 
a  universal  peace,  it  desisted  ;  and,  as  a  fact,  you  are  aware 
that  there  has  been  no  question  about  these  fortresses  since,  either 
in  London  or  Brussels,  at  least  by  us  ;  for  I  believe  that  many 
others  have  busied  themselves  about  this  matter  in  a  contrary 
spirit,  and  of  this  the  treaty  of  December  14th,  is  sufficient  proof. 

We  were  so  anxious  to  avoid  everything  that  might  recall 
the  memories  of  Philippeville  and  Marienbourg,  that  when  the 
French  army  entered  Belgium,  Marshal  Gerard  was  instructed 
not  to  occupy  those  two  fortresses. 

I  pray  you,  mon  cher  Prince,  to  have  the  goodness  to  tell 
Lord  Palmerston,  with  my  compliments,  that  this  is  my  personal 
policy,  quite  as  much  as  it  is  that  of  my  government,  and  you 
may  also  add — if  you  can  do  so  without  offending  him,  which  I 
particularly  wish  you  to  avoid — that  it  was  only  from  your 
despatch  that  I  learnt  the  assertions  of  the  National,  which  I  do 
not  read  any  more  than  the  other  papers,  and  which  is  the 
bitterest  enemy  both  to  me  and  my  government.  If  he  still 
desires  to  learn  more  about  it,  I  should  like  him  to  hear  the 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  267 

opposite  side  to  the    extracts  from   the  National,    La    Tribune, 
and  Co. 

I  again  renew,  most  sincerely,  mon  cher  Prince,  the  assurances 
of  my  old  friendship  for  you. 

Louis  Philippe. 

The  Prinxe  de  Talleyrand  to  the  Princess  m 

Vaudemont 

London,  January  \\tlt,  1S32. 

The  Prussian  ratification  has  arrived  !  A  courier  from  Berlin 
brought  it  this  morning.  The  Belgian  question  has  thus  been 
powerfully  strengthened.  It  is  believed  that  Austria's  ratifica: 
tion  will  arrive  next  week,  but  certainly  before  the  end  of  the 
month.  This  is  a  great  point  settled,  and  we  may  now  hope 
that  this  thorny  Belgian  business  will  end  without  a  war. 
Peace  must  now  do  her  part  in  allaying  the  excitement.  The 
agitators  will  lose  their  greatest  levers  for  creating  disturbances, 
by  peace.  .  .  . 

LONDON,  January  \-jlii,    1832. 

....  I  am  trying  to  obtain  the  explanations  demanded  from 
me  in  Paris,  respecting  the  demolition  of  the  fortresses.  I  hope  I 
shall  obtain  satisfactory  ones,  but  this  is  not  easy.  You  know 
what  it  is  when  a  matter  has  been  badly  started,  and  people 
are  trying  to  pull  it  both  ways.  I  have  had  more  trouble  here 
in  undoing,  than  in  making.  The  word  "jobber,"  which  was  used 
formerly,  often  recurs  to  me  now  ;  but  we  must  make  the  best  of 
it,  for  there  are  some  natures  that  one  cannot  change,  and  poor 
Sebastiani  was  ben  so,  though  it  does  not  prevent  his  having 
a  fair  share  of  intelligence. 

Is  it  true  that  a  violent  attack  on  the  budget  is  expected  ? 
I  hope  and  think,  that  everyone  ought  to  wish  the  Ministry  to 
come  triumphantly  out  of  it,  for  it  will  require  all  M.  Perier's 
strength  of  character  and  ability  to  bring  matters  into  order 
again.  The  king  needs  him  specially.  That  is  the  opinion  of 
everyone  here.  If  M.  Perier  leaves  the  Ministry,  all  the  Poweis 
would  at  once  expect  a  new  order  of  things. 

Parliament  reassembles  to-day,  but  there  will  be  nothing  of 
importance  till  next  week.  .  .  . 

London,  Januat y  igt/i,  1832. 

I  think  all  the  Cabinets  are  becoming  more  friendly,  and  that 
the   ratifications    will    now  soon   arrive.     If  some  of  them  are 


268  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

slightly  delayed,  that  will  not  affect  the  decision.  Consideration 
for  the  King  of  Holland,  more  than  anything  else,  has  occasioned 
these  delays.  I  believe  I  shall  arrive  at  what  our  government 
wishes  with  regard  to  the  fortresses  ;  we  shall  receive  such 
explanations  as  even  the  most  sensitive  could  not  cavil  at.   .  .   . 

LONDON,  January  iyd>  1832. 

M.  Camille  Perier  returns  to  Paris  this  evening.  He  takes 
documents  back  with  him,  which  I  think  will  be  thoroughly 
satisfactory.  I  have  had  to  be,  what  I  am  not  fond  of  being, 
most  tenaciously  importunate;  but  I  have  succeeded;  there  was 
no  possible  chance  of  obtaining  anything  more.  I  can  assure 
you  I  am  working  far  too  hard,  but  I  shall  come  out  of  it  with 
honour.  .  .  . 

In  order  to  make  plain  what  M.  Camille  Perier  took  back  to 
Paris,  I  must  here  give  an  extract  from  the  convention  of  the 
14th  December,  1831,  between  the  four  Powers  and  Belgium, 
relative  to  the  fortresses.  I  will  confine  myself  to  giving  the 
text  of  Article  I.  of  the  convention,  which  is  the  most  important: 

"  Article  I. — In  consequence  of  the  changes  that  the  in- 
dependence and  the  neutrality  of  Belgium  have  wrought  in  the 
military  position  of  that  country,  as  well  as  in  the  measures 
which  might  be  required  for  her  defence,  the  high  contracting 
parties  consent  to  the  demolition  of  such  of  the  fortresses  as 
were  raised,  repaired,  or  enlarged  in  Belgium  after  the  year  181 5, 
either  in  whole  or  in  part,  at  the  cost  of  the  Courts  of  Austria, 
Great  Britain,  Prussia,  and  Russia,  as  the  maintenance  of  these 
would  in  future  be  a  needless  expense. 

"  In  accordance  with  this  principle,  therefore,  all  the  fortifica- 
tions of  the  fortresses  of  Menin,  Ath,  Mons,  Philippeville,  and 
Marienbourg,  will  be  demolished  within  the  time  specified  in  the 
articles  below." 

The  articles  that  followed,  regulated  the  manner  of  the 
demolitions. 

The  French  government,  fancying  they  saw  in  the  drawing 
up  of  these  articles,  a  desire  on  the  part  of  the  four  Powers  to 
claim  a  sort  of  special  patronage,  both  present  and  to  come, 
over  the  fortresses  to  be  demolished — a  patronage  from  which 
France  was  excluded — I  had  to  insist  on  obtaining  a  distinct 
declaration  from  the  plenipotentiaries   of  these  Powers,  which 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  269 

should  put  an  end  to  any  uncertainty  on  this  point.  After 
innumerable  efforts,  I  at  last  succeeded  in  inducing  them  to 
adopt  the  following  declaration,  dated  January  23rd,  1S32  : 

"  The  plenipotentiaries  of  the  Courts  of  Austria,  Great 
Britain,  Prussia,  and  Russia,  in  proceeding  to  exchange  the  rati- 
fications of  the  convention  of  the  14th  December  last,  now  declare  : 

"  1st.  That  the  stipulations  of  the  convention  of  14th 
December  last,  caused  by  the  change  that  has  taken  place 
in  the  political  position  of  Belgium,  cannot  and  must  not  be 
understood  except  with  the  reservation  of  the  full  and 
entire  sovereignty  of  H.  M.  the  King  of  the  Belgians  over  the 
fortresses  mentioned  in  the  said  convention,  and  also  of 
the  neutrality  and  independence  of  Belgium — an  indepen- 
dence and  neutrality  which,  guaranteed  under  the  same 
titles  and  the  same  rights  by  the  Powers,  establishes  in  this 
respect  an  identical  bond  between  them  and  Belgium. 

"  2nd.  That  the  sums  mentioned  in  Article  V.  shall  not 
be  reckoned  except  for  deduction,  it  being  the  intention  of  the 
Courts  that  if  the  deduction  shows  a  balance,  this  balance 
should  go  to  assist  Belgium  with  the  expenses  she  will  be  put 
to,  in  demolishing  the  fortresses  mentioned  in  Article  I. 

"  3rd.  Finally,  the  reservation  made  by  the  four  Courts  to 
Article  VI.,  having  no  reference  to  Articles  II.  and  III.,  applies 
consequently  only  to  the  fortresses  that  are  to  be  demolished. 

"  By  this  declaration  on  the  above  three  points,  the  pleni- 
potentiaries of  the  Courts  of  Austria,  Great  Britain,  Prussia,  and 
Russia,  place  beyond  a  doubt,  that  all  the  clauses  of  the  con- 
vention of  December  14th,  are  in  complete  accordance  with 
the  character  of  the  independent  and  neutral  power,  assigned  to 
Belgium  by  the  five  Courts." 

This  was  the  declaration  that  M.  Camille  Perier  took  back  to 
Paris,  and  which  was  at  last  deemed  sufficiently  explicit  : 

M.  Casimir  Perier  to  the  Prince  de   Talleyrand. 

Paris,  January  "zyd,  1832. 
Prince, 

I  have  seen  with  great  satisfaction  from  your  official 
despatch,  and  more  especially  from  your  private  letter,  that  you 
expect  to  obtain  the  modifications  we  have  asked  for  relative  to 
the  convention  of  December  14th,  which  was  so  opposed  to  our 
rights  and,  I  venture  to  say,  to  our  dignity. 


270  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

M.  Van  de  Weyer  ought  by  this  time  to  have  received  the 
most  positive  instructions  from  his  government,  directing  him 
to  arrange  with  you  the  modification  of  the  articles  which  have 
so  justly  offended  us. 

We  therefore  hope,  Prince,  that  you  will  be  enabled  to  over- 
come the  obstacles  which  prevented  the  exchange  of  the  rati- 
fications of  the  treaty  of  November  15  th,  to  which  we  called 
your  attention  by  the  model  protocol  which  we  drew  up,  while 
explaining  to  you  in  the  most  explicit  manner,  how  impossible 
it  would  be  for  us  to  ratify,  if  we  did  not  obtain  entire  satisfac- 
tion on  all  these  points. 

Now  that  you  know  all  our  difficulties,  Prince,  (if,  as  you  give 
me  reason  to  hope,  they  have  been  settled  in  a  manner  con- 
formably to  our  wishes  and  instructions,)  we  cannot  see  any 
objections  to  your  signing  the  ratifications  on  the  31st  of  this 
month.  This  will  be  an  immense  service  you  will  have 
rendered,  and  one  more  obligation  for  which  Europe  will  be 
indebted  to  you. 

If  we  and  England  ratify  alone,  before  the  other  Powers,  we 
must,  I  think,  reserve  to  ourselves  the  means  of  not  excluding 
entirely  all  ways  of  reconciliation  between  Holland  and  Belgium, 
as  regards  navigation  ;  above  all,  it  is  necessary,  that  England 
should  not  be  able  some  day  to  hold  up  our  signature  of  the 
treaty  of  November  15th  to  us,  as  a  sine  g?cd  non  that  would 
present  an  invincible  obstacle  to  these  modifications,  which  are 
the  only  reasonable  pretext  for  opposition  that  the  King  of 
Holland  can  bring  forward,  in  the  position  in  which  he  is  placed. 

I  quite  approve  of  what  you  say,  Prince,  that  it  is  best  not  to 
make  these  ratifications  a  matter  of  too  great  importance  with 
the  other  Cabinets  ;  but  such  a  step  would  give  them  something 
to  think  about,  and  while  we  do  not  wish  to  separate  ourselves 
from  them,  it  is  as  well  that  they  should  see  we  can  do  without 
them,  and  it  will  not  escape  them,  as  you  so  truly  remarked, 
that  such  an  understanding  between  England  and  ourselves  is, 
in  fact,  an  offensive  and  defensive  treaty.  .  .  . 

The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  the  Princess  de 

Vaudemont. 

London,  January  27//1,  1832. 

The  English  Ministry  has  got  very  well  out  of  the  attack 
made   on    it    by    Lord    Aberdeen.1     Lord    Grey,  in    his  reply, 

1  Lord  Aberdeen  had  interrogated  the  English  Cabinet  on  the  affairs  of  Belgium, 
and  had  violently  opposed  the  French  intervention. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  271 

brought  forward  some  very  strong  points  in  favour  of  France. 
The  Duke  of  Wellington  supported  Lord  Aberdeen,  but  he 
respected  all  the  usages  of  the  House,  which  had  been  completely 
violated  by  Lord  Aberdeen. 

But  enough,  we  will  not  waste  time  over  this  political  gossip. 
The  real  point  is,  that  our  union  with  England,  and  that  alone, 
will  establish  us  securely.     All  my  policy  is  confined  to  this. 

I  await  impatiently  your  opinion  of  all  I  have  sent  by  I\I. 
Camillc  Pcrier.  I  believe  that  my  demands  will  be  granted. 
I  must  receive  the  ratifications  before  the  31st.  .  .  . 


Madame  Adelaide  d'Orleans  to  the  Prince  de 

Talleyrand. 

PARIS,  January  29//1,  1832. 

It  is  with  great  eagerness,  mon  cher  Prince,  that  I  hasten  to 
thank  you  for  your  letter  of  the  23rd,  and  to  tell  you  what  sincere 
pleasure  it  gave  me  to  hear,  that  the  greatest  difficulty  in  this 
long  and  painful  negotiation  about  Belgium,  has  been  overcome. 
I  congratulate  myself  as  well  as  you,  most  heartily,  and  it  is 
surely  only  fair  to  give  you  the  full  credit  of  it.  Truly  it  is  a 
grand  and  noble  thing,  that  this  Belgian  question  has  ended  in 
this  way,  more  especially  as  we  must  unfortunately  admit,  that  it 
was  very  badly  seconded  by  the  Belgians  themselves,  for  this  last 
difficulty  was  certainly  their  work, and  I  can  quite  understand  what 
all  this  must  have  been  for  you.  However,  we  must  console  our- 
selves, for  all  that  somewhat  wounds  our  small  conceits,  or  our 
national  glory,  if  you  prefer  it,  by  constantly  repeating  what 
you  wrote  to  me,  "  There  was  nothing  further  to  be  obtained." 
And,  truly,  Philippeville  and  Marienbourg  are  not  worth  a  war. 
The  chief  point  has  been  gained  ;  of  that  there  can  be  no  doubt, 
thanks  to  your  zeal  and  your  ability.  I  hope  and  very  earnestly 
wish,  that  as  you  say,  next  month  will  see  the  end  of  your 
labours.  I  know,  mon  cher  Prince,  that  you  have  great  need  to 
take  care  of  yourself  and  get  some  rest,  and  we  can  but  be 
thankful  that  your  health  has  so  far  borne  up  under  all  this  great 
moral  and  physical  fatigue.  I  trust,  from  the  bottom  of  my 
heart,  that  now  you  will  only  have  to  enjoy  your  successes,  and 
the  happy  results  arising  therefrom,  for  our  dear  France  and  our 
beloved  king,  who  also  stands  in  need  of  some  repose. 

Sebastiani  is  much  better,  in  fact  almost  well.  The  difficulty 
now  is,  to  get  him  to  take  a  sufficiently  long  rest,  and  not 
resume  work  too  soon,  which  I  think  is  most  important  to 
thoroughly  re-establish  his  health.  .  .  . 


272  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  the  Princess  de 

Vaudemont. 

LONDON,  January  ^\st,  1832. 

I  have  exchanged  the  ratifications  of  France  with  Belgium 
this  evening,  and  am  very  pleased  to  think  that  England  has 
also  in  the  same  way,  exchanged  her  ratifications  with  Belgium  ; 
this  business  is  therefore  happily  ended. 

That  France  and  England  should  co-operate  in  anything, 
is  more  than  I  dared  to  hope  for.  Now  we  must  patiently  bide 
our  time  ;  the  rest  will  follow.  We  must  be  neither  exacting 
nor  triumphant,  nor  embarrass  England  by  what  she  has  done, 
or  the  whole  Tory  party  will  censure  her.  We  must  not  let  her 
think,  that  by  her  alliance  with  us,  she  has  been  forced  to 
go  further  than  she  would  otherwise  have  done.  This  is  a 
matter  that  requires  prudence  and  discretion.  The  English 
Cabinet  must  be  treated  with  the  utmost  consideration,  for 
their  position  here  is  a  very  delicate  one.  In  my  opinion,  we 
shall  not  have  very  long  to  wait  for  the  ratifications  of  Prussia 
and  1  Austria ;  those  of  Russia  will  follow  shortly.  Having 
obtained  these,  we  may  safely  wait  for  Holland — for  whatever 
she  says,  will  not  affect  anyone  much.  Spain  once  took  eighty 
years  to  assent  to  a  similar  recognition,  and  Europe  was  quite 
undisturbed  thereby,  and  settled  her  own  affairs  independently. 

Of  the  internal  state  of  France  I  know  little.  I  fear  however 
it  is  not  very  satisfactory;  but  as  to  her  foreign  affairs,  the 
policy  we  have  just  followed,  has  placed  her  in  the  position  the 
king  desired,  but  hardly  dared  to  hope  for. 

This  must  rather  astonish  the  croakers  against  the  policy  of 
non-intervention,  who  made  a  noise  and  believed  in  war.  We 
have  adopted  an  excellent  system,  namely,  leaving  the  protocol 
open,  as  to  the  proposals  of  Russia,  Prussia,  and  Austria. 

The  way  in  which  this  protocol  has  been  drawn  up  ought  to 
give  great  satisfaction  at  the  Tuileries.  .  .  . 


King  Louis  Philippe  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand. 

Paris,  February  \th,  1832. 

Mon  cher  Prince, 

I  heard  a  great  deal  in  my  youth  about  the  talents  of 
the  Comte  d'Avaux,  and  the  length  and  the  difficulties  of  the 
treaty  of  Westphalia.  That  was  the  infancy  of  diplomacy,  and 
I  think  the  five  months  of  the  London  Conference,  the  fifty-five 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  273 

protocols,  all  signed  unanimously  by  the  plenipotentiaries  of  the 
five  Great  Powers,  present  a  far  more  imposing  spectacle  of 
talent,  and  difficulties  overcome,  than  anything  that  has  ever 
preceded  it.  It  will  be  a  grand  thing  for  you,  for  my  ministers, 
and  I  venture  to  say  also,  for  me,  that  following  the  revolution 
of  July,  this  great  crisis  has  been  conducted  in  such  a  manner, 
as  to  produce  the  results  ultimately  arrived  at,  without  the  internal 
peace  of  France  being  disturbed,  or  Europe  becoming  a  prey 
to  the  conflagration  with  which  it  was  threatened. 

You  see,  mon  cher  Prince,  that  I  agree  with  your  opinion 
that  the  ratifications  of  France  and  England,  mutually  ex- 
changed, insure  the  exchange  of  the  other  three,  for  it  has 
almost  become  a  matter  of  course  to  say,  that  when  France  and 
England  are  agreed  there  is  no  longer  any  fear  of  war  in 
Europe. 

I  have  always  thought  our  two  countries  might  understand 
each  other  and  work  together,  without  either  one  or  the  other 
losing  any  share  of  their  national  honour  or  their  political 
interests  ;  but  I  have  also  felt  that  for  both  nations  to  approve 
such  an  undertaking,  it  must  be  made  evident  to  them  that  their 
governments  had  not  sacrificed  anything  for  it,  and  for  this 
reason,  therefore,  mon  cher  Prince,  was  I  so  often  persistent  about 
some  points  of  the  negotiations,  which  my  government  had  real 
cause  for  wishing  to  rectify.  Now  success  has  crowned  both  its 
efforts  and  yours  ;  and  this  is  perhaps  the  best  answer  to  the 
abuse  of  which  we  are  all  the  object. 

I  earnestly  wish,  mon  cher  Prince,  that  the  ratifications  of  the 
other  Powers  should  not  be  long  delayed.  It  is  to  their  interest 
as  well  as  ours,  for  nothing  but  a  complete  interchange  will  prove 
to  the  unbelievers,  that  they  must  relinquish  all  hopes  of  war 
and  disturbances.  By  that  alone,  will  they  be  convinced  of  the 
stability  of  the  actual  state  of  affairs,  and  the  impotency  of 
their  efforts  to  upset  it. 

It  is  always  with  my  whole  heart,  mon  cher  Prince,  that  I 
renew  the  assurances  of  my  sincere  friendship  for  you.  .  .  . 

The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  Madame  Adelaidi 

d'Orleans. 

London,  February  6//t,  1832. 

I  entreat  Mademoiselle  to  let  me  hear  from  her.  The  night 
of  the  2nd  of  February,  must  have  been  a  night  of  agon}-,1  and 

1  M.  de  Talleyrand  here  alludes  to  the  so-called  plot  of  the  "  Rue  des  Prouvaires." 
Two  or  three  thousand  men  had  been  hired  by  the  legitimist  agent  Poncelet  to 
attempt  a  coup  de  main  on  the  royal  family.     The  police  arrested  the  heads  of  the 

VOL.    IV.  T 


274  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

although  the  danger  was  not  known  until  it  was  virtually  over, 
you  must  have  passed  some  anxious  hours.  It  is  very  hard 
when,  as  you  all  do,  one  only  thinks  of  doing  good,  to  meet  with 
difficulties  and  intrigues  of  all  kinds  at  ever)-  step.  I  am 
uneasy  at  not  hearing  ;  no  one  writes  to  me.  I  conjure  you, 
Mademoiselle,  not  to  leave  me  any  longer  in  such  complete 
ignorance,  on  a  matter  which  is  of  such  great  interest  to 
vou.  .  .  . 

J 

Madame  Adelaide  d'Orleans  to  the  Prince  de 

Talleyrand. 

PARIS,  Monday,  February  j//i,  1832. 

Mon  cher  Prince, 

It  is  truly  amiable  and  good  of  you  to  have  written  to 
me  at  once,  at  two  in  the  morning,  as  soon  as  the  ratifications 
between  Belgium,  France,  and  England,  had  been  effected.  I 
cannot  tell  you  how  greatly  I  appreciate  it,  and  I  thank  you 
with  all  my  heart.  This  good  and  important  piece  of  news 
arrived  most  opportunely,  to  compensate  our  beloved  King 
somewhat  for  all  he  has  suffered  from  the  infamous  plots  of  the 
Carlists  and  republicans,  who  for  the  present  seem  of  one  mind 
in  their  intrigues,  and  their  very  culpable  aim.  You  will  learn 
by  the  papers,  of  the  foolish  but  shameful  conspiracy  which, 
thanks  to  God,  was  discovered  just  as  it  was  about  to  be 
carried  out.  The  police  on  this  occasion  behaved  splendidly, 
for  the  whole  affair  was  ended  without  causing  the  slightest 
disturbance  in  Paris.  It  all  took  place  during  our  grand  ball 
of  the  2nd,  which,  notwithstanding,  lasted  till  five  in  the  morning. 
It  was  whispered  in  the  ball-room  that  some  attempts  at  a  riot 
were  expected  during  the  night,  but  we  were  far  from  imagining 
that  it  was  so  serious  a  matter.  It  was  only  at  three  o'clock, 
when  the  Queen  and  I  retired  from  the  ball,  that  we  heard 
of  the  arrest  that  had  been  made  of  that  armed  band.  They  can- 
not raise  any  more  riots  in  the  streets  ;  the  people  will  not 
have  them  ;  they  resort  to  conspiracies,  and  horrors  like  the 
infernal  machine  of  Napoleon's  time.  A  hundred  and  ten 
people  all  bearing  arms  were  arrested.  This  time  therefore 
there  can  be  no  doubt  as  to  their  good  intentions.  I  trust  this 
will  lead  to  some  satisfactory  result,  and  I  feel  sure  it  will  be 
advantageous  to  the  government.  The  King  is  admirably  calm 
and  self-possessed.  I  confess  to  you  that  I  think  he  is  always 
too  confident ;  it  is  a  subject  we  often  discuss.  .  .  . 

plot  on  the  night  of  the  1st  of  February,  in  a  house  in  the  Rue  Prouvaires,  and  the 
movement  was  quelled. 


the  revolution  of  1830.  275 

The   Prince   de  Talleyrand  to   Madame   Adelaide 

d'Orleans. 

London,  February  13///,  1832. 

....  The  Emperor  of  Russia  has  sent  Comtc  Orloff1  to  the 
Hague,  to  inform  the  King  that  if  he  will  not  decide  to  adhere- 
to  the  articles  of  the  Conference,  he  must  not  in  an)'  way,  or 
under  an)'  circumstances,  count  on  his  assistance.  This  will 
probably  delay  the  despatch  of  the  Russian  ratifications  for 
eight  or  ten  days,  but  it  is  quite  certain  that  they  have  decided 
to  send  them.  .  .  . 

London,  February  14///,  1832. 

....  I  only  heard  of  the  despatch  of  troops  to  Italy  when 
it  was  a  fact ;  as  a  project,  I  knew  nothing  of  it.  But  I  suppose 
that2  some  understanding  has  been  come  to  with  Austria,  re- 
specting this  matter  ;  for  otherwise,  complications  will  arise 
which  will  cause  more  trouble  than  profit.  However,  I  know 
nothing,  and  can  only  reason  about  all  this  in  a  blind  fashion  ; 
I  will  not  therefore  speak  of  it  to  any  one  but  you.  It  is  quite 
enough  to  trouble  ourselves  about  what  is  entrusted  to  us  ;  only 
a  fool  would  meddle  with  other  people's  business,  especially 
when  he  knows  but  little  about  it. 

I  wrote   to  you   yesterday   respecting  the  arrival  of  Comte 

1  Alexis  Feodorowitch,  Cornte,  afterwards  Prince,  Orloff,  was  born  in  1786,  and 
served  in  the  Russian  army  during  the  wars  of  the  Empire.  He  was  made  general  in 
1828.  In  1829,  he  signed  the  treaty  of  Adrianople  with  the  Porte,  and  was  sent  to 
Constantinople  as  ambassador  in  1S30.  In  1832,  he  was  entrusted  with  an  important 
mission  to  the  Hague  and  London  ;  on  his  return  to  Russia,  he  obtained  command  of  the 
army  sent  into  Turkey  against  Ibrahim  Pasha,  and  signed  the  treaty  of  Unkiar-Skelessi 
( 1S33).  Soon  after  he  was  made  State  Councillor,  Director  of  the  Secret  Police,  took 
part  in  the  Conferences  of  Berlin  and  (Jlmutz(i853)  and  represented  Russia  at  the 
Congress  of  Paris  (1S56).  Shortly  after  he  received  the  title  of  Prince,  was  made 
President  of  the  Council  of  the  Empire,  and  of  the  Council  of  the  Ministers.  lie 
died  in  1S61. 

2  This  was  in  reference  to  the  expedition  to  Ancona.  This  town  was  occupied  on 
the  22nd  February,  1832.  It  will  be  remembered  that  in  July,  1831,  M.  Casimir  Perier 
had  succeeded  in  getting  the  Austrian  troops  to  evacuate  the  pontifical  territory.  A 
few  months  after,  however,  fresh  disturbances  arose  in  the  Papal  Slates.  The  Pope 
appealed  to  the  Austrians,  who  hastened  thither  in  January,  1S32.  M.  Casimir  Perier 
saw  injury  to  the  dignity  of  France  in  this  act,  and  wished  her  to  participate  in  the 
honour  of  defending  the  Holy  See.  This  was  the  cause  of  the  expedition  which  left 
Toulon  for  Ancona,  taking  that  town  by  surprise  during  the  night  of  the  21st  of 
February.  Austria's  anger  was  very  great,  though  impotent,  and  the  other  Cabinets 
were  much  excited.  The  Russian  ambassador  received  orders  to  quit  Paris,  if  the 
Austrian  ambassador  demanded  his  passports.  In  London,  the  Tory  Opposition,  led 
by  the  Duke  of  Wellington,  were  loud  in  their  recriminations.  Put  it  all  ended  in 
words. 

T    2 


2/6  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

Orloff  at    the   Hague.     This  mission   will   probably    delay  the 
ratifications  for  ten  or  twelve  days,  but  it  insures  them.  .  .  . 


M.  Casimer  Perier  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand. 

PARIS,  February  i^th,  1832. 

Prince, 

I  delayed  longer  than  I  wished  before  answering  the 
two  private  letters  you  did  me  the  honour  to  write,  but  the 
opening  discussions  on  the  Budget  have  been  very  troublesome 
and  laborious  for  me.  So  far  we  have  carried  all  the  important 
questions.  We  had,  more  especially,  to  oppose  the  Chamber  on 
retrenchments  and  economies  which  might  greatly  embarrass 
the  government.  However,  we  were  determined  to  fight 
to  the  end,  and  not  to  allow  purely  financial  questions  to  be 
made  party  ones,  and  we  shall  continue  to  use  all  our  endeavours 
to  consolidate  that  system  of  policy  at  home,  the  recognition  of 
which  you,  Prince,  have  so  powerfully  contributed  to  abroad. 

I  received  yesterday  the  Belgian  ratifications  which  you  sent 
me,  together  with  your  despatch  of  the.  ...  I  noticed  therein 
with  great  satisfaction,  what  you  say  about  Lord  Palmerston's 
speech,  which  I  have  seen  this  morning.  The  King's  government 
congratulates  itself  warmly  on  this  conformity  of  views  and 
feelings,  from  which  the  two  countries  may  expect  such  happy- 
results. 

This  frank  and  sincere  manifestation  may  apply  to  many 
things,  and  be  of  real  use  to  us.  In  it,  we  shall  find  a  confir- 
mation of  our  foreign  policy,  justified  by  so  happy  a  result  in 
its  most  important  aim. 

My  first  official  despatch,  Prince,  will  give  you  full  details 
respecting  Italian  affairs,  but  in  answer  to  your  wish,  I  hasten 
to  inform  you  at  once,  that  we  have  reason  to  hope  his  Holiness 
will  accede  to  the  urgent  entreaties  we  have  addressed  to  him, 
and  will  be  decided  by  them,  to  withdraw  his  refusal  to  per- 
mit us  to  occupy  Ancona,  the  news  of  which  M.  de  Saint-Aulaire 
junior  has  brought  us.1 

Our  troops  have  received  provisional  orders  to  enter  Ancona, 
unless  the  Austrians  are  there  before  them.  In  that  case  they 
will  go  to   Civita  Vecchia,  and  will  occupy  that  place. 

We  do  not  intend  turning  aside  from  the  object  we  have  in 

1  General  Cubieres  had  sent  to  Rome  to  advise  the  Pope  of  the  occupation  of 
Ancona  by  the  French  troops.  The  Pope  was  at  first  very  angry  at  this  act  of  violence, 
and  protested  loudly  against  it  to  M.  de  Saint-Aulaire.  It  was  not  till  the  16th  of 
April,  that  a  convention  was  made  between  the  Cabinet  of  the  Tuileries  and  the  Court 
of  Kome,  in  accordance  with  which  the  I'opc  authorized  the  French  occupation. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  277 

view,  namely,  to  show  Austria  that  wc  only  permit  the  oc- 
cupation of  the  Romagna  if  it  is  for  a  short  period,  and  to  show 
the  Holy  See  that  we  wish  to  obtain  from  it  the  concession 
solemnly  promised  by  it  to  the  Powers.1 

However,  without  in  any  way  departing  from  this  constant 
desire,  we  do  not  intend  to  give  up  our  policy,  which  we  wish 
to  be  both  moderate  and  just,  and  at  the  same  time  firm  and 
.vorthy  of  France  ;  and  we  shall,  as  long  as  we  can,  avoid  a 
collision,  against  which  our  efforts  have  always  been  directed.  .  . . 

Tin-:  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  the  Princess  dl 

VaudEmont. 

LONDON',  February  17 /A,   1832. 

....  In  England,  up  to  now,  the  Portuguese  question  has 
only  been  glanced  at.  I  am  surprised  at  the  small  amount  of 
interest  shown  in  this  matter,  either  in  one  way  or  the  other. 
When  the  climax  arrives,  perhaps  this  will  be  changed.  The 
Reform  Bill  and  Belgium  have  engrossed  all  the  anxieties  of 
the  nation.  I  begin  to  think  I  must  have  gained  some  credit  in 
Paris,  as  I  see  I  am  being  libelled  in  the  newspapers  and 
pamphlets.  One  must  submit  to  that  if  one  wishes  to  serve 
one's  country,  and  if  one  tries  to  find  means  to  stem  the  popular 
torrent.     Moreover  this  will  pass  over  like  everything  else. 

February  24///,   1832. 

There  will  be  no  Congress  just  now.  Comtc  Orloff  keeps 
all  in  suspense  ;  he  has  not  been  entirely  open  with  any  one  in 
Berlin.  If  Pozzo  says  so,  he  is  inventing  ;  he  knows  no  more 
than  M.  de  Lieven,  who  knows  nothing.  Comtc  Orloff  ought  to 
have  arrived  at  the  Hague  on  the  20th,  he  will  remain  there 
five  or  six  days,  perhaps  eight,  and  then  he  comes  on 
here.  If  Lamb-  and  Esterhazy  have  succeeded  in  despatching 
Austria's  ratifications,  as  they  ought  to  have  done  ;  if 
Metternich  has  the  good  sense  not  to  let  Austria  be  taken  in 
tow  by  Russia,  then  we  shall  have  no  further  trouble  whatever. 
It  is  time  that  Russia's  pride  should  give  way.  .  .  . 

February  2$//i,    1S32. 

I  am  told  that  Maubrcuil  is  again  going  to  appear  on  the 
scene,  and  bring  forward  some  very  injurious  complaints  against 

1  The  Austiian  occupa'ion  only  ended  in  July,  1S31,  (  n  the  promise  by  the  Pope, 
made  to  France  (a-  mediatrix),  and  to  Austria,  of  an  amncs  y  and  libeial  reforms. 
'-'  English  ambassador  at  Vienna. 


27S  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

me  in  my  capacity  as  President  of  the  Provisional  Government 
in  1814.1  This  will  cause  a  day  or  two's  scandal,  and  will  end 
in  not  being  proved.  However,  this  wearies  me,  but  does  not 
greatly  trouble  me.  It  is  one  of  the  peculiarities  of  the  age, 
that  I  can  be  attacked  by  a  man  whom  I  have  never  seen,  and 
who  in  1814,  tied  the  Cross  of  the  Legion  of  Honour  to  his 
horse's  tail,  and  that  such  a  man  should  now  have  as  his  partisans 
the  Liberals  of  the  present  day. 

February  27///,   1832. 

....  I  know  nothing  of  Comte  Orloff  except  by  hearsay, 
but  I  know  that,  whatever  demands  he  may  make,  I  shall  not 
give  in  to  the  alteration  by  France  of  a  single  comma  in  a 
treaty  that  I  have  signed.  The  other  Powers  must  ratify;  that 
done,  I  shall  become  complaisant,  and  will  consent  to  the  modi- 
fications between  Belgium  and  Holland  being  made  according 
to  agreement  ;  I  will  facilitate  them  and  encourage  them  as 
much  as  I  can.  I  even  go  further,  for  I  am  ready  to  guarantee 
the  treaty  (if  England  will  consent  to  do  the  same)  which  will 
be  made  between  Holland  and  Belgium.  That  is  my  pro- 
gramme ;  it  will  not  be  changed.  I  am  of  opinion  that  I  shall 
succeed  in  what  I  want  to  do,  and  that  before  very  long.  .  .  . 


February  28///,  1S32. 

....  We  have  obtained  all  the  concessions  from  the  Pope 
that  the  Liberals  could  reasonably  ask.  Though  this  has  been 
done,  the  Liberals  are  rebelling  once  more  ;  we  cannot  again 
interfere.  It  is  now  a  question  of  police,  in  which  the  Pope 
must  do  as  seems  best  to  him.  But  we  have  done  all  that  we 
owe  to  those  principles  which  we  profess,  by  inviting  the  Pope 
to  take  that  course  which  the  ideas  of  the  age  in  which  he  lives 
force  him  to  adopt.  This  therefore  does  not  concern  us  at 
present.  It  is  by  keeping  this  line  that  we  shall  inspire  Europe 
with  confidence,  and  be  safe  from  disturbance  by  any  one. 
Besides,  it  is  well  to  make  our  policy  known,  it  is  a  convenience 
to  all.  This  is  my  way  of  reasoning  in  the  midst  of  all  my 
turmoils. 

Do  you  know  that  Dom  Pedro's  expedition,  with  my  idea  of 
neutrality,  will  probably  succeed,  if  we  can  depend  on  the  ac- 
counts from  Lisbon,  which  are  more   reliable   than   those  from 

1  We  do  not  know  to  what  incident  M.  de  Talleyrand  here  alludes.  At  this 
period  M.  de  Maubreuil,  entirely  forgotten  and  snipped  of  all  resources,  was  travelling 
abroad.     He  was  for  some  time  in  England. 


THE  RE  VOL  UTION  OF  1 83a  2 ;  9 

Pozzo.1  If  we  keep  united  with  England,  we  are  in  a  position  to 
settle  our  home  affairs  without  being  disturbed  bv  foreign 
matters,  which  makes  Metternich  furious.  Spain,  which  is  held 
up  as  a  bugbear  to  every  one,  has  not  a  penny,  and  is  in  a  very 
critical  position  ;  hers  may  certainly  be  called  the  army  of  bare- 
footed friars,  of  whom  there  arc  dozens  in  the  so-called  penin- 
sula. 

Here  party  spirit  is  getting  more  bitter  ;  each  side  thinks  it 
will  be  victorious  when  the  discussion  comes  on  in  the  House  of 
Lords.  I  believe  that  the  Ministry  will  have  a  majority  at  the 
second  reading,  but  in  Committee,  where  they  no  longer  vote  by 
proxy,  the  matter  is  not  so  sure.'2  Lord  Grey's  answer  in  Par- 
liament ought  to  please  the  French  Government.  He  showered 
contempt  on  Lord  Aberdeen,  who  was  very  bitter,  and  whose 
language  respecting  France  was  in  the  worst  possible  taste. 
Let  us  keep  as  wc  are  ;  let  us  say  it  and  maintain  it,  and  we 
shall  soon  be  clear  of  all  difficulties. 

I  will  not,  in  these  or  the  following  letters,  pause  longer  over 
Italian  affairs  and  the  occupation  of  Ancona  than  to  state,  that 
I  differed  with  the  French  Government  on  both  these  points. 
I  thought  it  had  thereby  involved  itself  in  fresh  difficulties 
before  solving  those  which  had  deferred  peace  for  the  last 
eighteen  months,  and  I  did  not  consider  this  sound  policy.  I 
was  perfectly  aware  that  in  Paris,  the  Opposition  made  a  great 
outcry  with  reference  to  the  entry  of  the  Austrian  troops  into 
the  Legations,  but  I  thought  that  by  using  a  little  firmness  one 
might  have  silenced  these  outcries,  and  awaited  the  time  when 
the  treaty  of  Nov.  15th,  ratified  by  all  the  Powers,  would  place 
the  French  Cabinet  in  a  better  position  to  insist  upon  the  with- 
drawal of  the  Austrian  troops  from  the  Papal  States,  by  threat- 
ening to  send  a  French  expedition  to  free  them.  I  feel  assured, 
that  we  should  have  received  the  assent  of  the  English  Govern- 
ment to  such  an  action,  founded  as  it  would  be  on   the  treaties 

1  Dom  Pedro  had  smarted  on  his  expedition  to  Portugal.  He  left  Belle  Isle  on 
February  13th,  and  landed  at  Terciera  on  March  3rd.  He  appeared  before  Oporto 
on  July  8ih. 

-  According  to  English  procedure  in  Parliament,  every  public  Pill  must  first  be 
discussed  by  the  Commons,  and  then  by  the  whole  House  in  committee.  The  word 
"committee"  does  not  in  this  instance  mean  a  commission,  selecied  by  the  member^ 
for  the  purpose  of  discussing  the  Bill,  it  means  the  whole  House-.  When  the  assembly 
of  the  committee  is  announced,  the  Speaker  leaves  his  seat,  and  from  that  moment,  by 
a  fiction  consecrated  by  usage,  the  sitting  of  the  House  i<  suspended,  and  that  of  the 
committee  begins. 


28o  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

and  the  principle  of  non-intervention,  in  this  instance  prudently 
applied.  Whatever  may  be  said  on  this  point,  there  would  have 
been  greater  dignity  and  real  vigour  in  such  a  policy,  than  in  the 
furtive  capture  of  Ancona,  from  whence  we  should  have  far 
greater  difficulty  in  withdrawing  than  we  had  in  entering. 
Every  one  will  appreciate  my  opinion,  which  I  wish  to  express 
very  plainly  here,  and  which  will  besides  be  found  throughout  my 
correspondence  on  Belgian  affairs.  This  matter,  which  was  my 
real  occupation,  continued  to  pass  through  such  varied  phases  as 
might  have  tired  out  the  most  patient  individual.  Thus  M. 
Bresson  wrote  to  me  from  Berlin  on  the  23rd  February,  that  he 
had  just  sent  a  courier  to  Paris,  announcing  that  the  Emperor 
Nicholas  had  decided  to  disavow  his  plenipotentiaries  in  London, 
that  he  would  not  ratify  the  treaty  of  Nov.  15th,  and  *that  he 
had  notified  this  to  the  Prussian  Cabinet  ;  then  a  few  days  later 
I  received  the  following  letter  from  him,  stating  quite  the 
opposite. 

M.  Bresson  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand. 

Berlin,  March  1st,  1832. 
Mon  Prince, 

I  have  only  a  moment  before  the  courier  starts,  to 
inform  you  that  a  Russian  courier,  who  passed  through  here  at 
four  o'clock  this  morning,  brought  an  order  to  Comte  Orloff  to 
declare  to  the  King  of  the  Netherlands,  that  the  Emperor  has 
been  very  grieved  to  see  the  project  of  the  treaty  which  the 
Dutch  plenipotentiaries  have  communicated  to  the  Conference  ; ' 
that  he  considers  that  the  King,  by  refusing  to  admit  the 
political  separation  of  Belgium  as  a  settled  fact,  calls  into 
question  all  the  negotiations  carried  on  by  the  Powers  during 
the  last  eighteen  months  ;  that  to  act  thus  is,  to  desire  war  and 
not  peace  ;  and  that  if  the  King  does  not  abandon  this  inadmis- 
sible proposal,  the  Emperor  might  consider  himself  freed  from 
the  engagements  which  bind  him,  and  modify  on  various  points 
Comte  Orloff' s  instructions,  especially  with  regard  to  the  very 
important  one  concerning  the  non-recognition  of  King  Leopold, 
until  this  has  been  done  by  the  King  of  the  Netherlands 
himself. 

1  Project  of  a  treaty  communicated  confidentially  to  the  Conference  by  the  pleni- 
potentiaries of  the  Netherlands,  dated  January  30th,  1832.  Martins  vol.  xxiii. 
P-  349- 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  i8jo.  2 3 1 

The  Russian  Charge  cF Affaires  at  the  Hague  will  make  this 
communication,  if  Comte  Orloff  has  already  left  that  city  for 
London.  .  .  . 

The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  the  Princess  de 

Vaudemont. 

London,  March  \st,  1832. 

There  is  no  news  whatever.  The  Dutch  mail  is  five  days 
behind  time.  I  do  not  know  what  day  Comte  Orloff  will 
arrive,  but  he  is  expected  at  the  Lievcns,  who  are  giving  enter- 
tainments to  show  that  they  are  pleased  at  his  coming  to 
London.  The  truth  is  they  are  greatly  put  out  by  it.  I  persist 
in  the  opinion  that  all  will  be  satisfactorily  settled,  and  within 
a  few  days  of  the  time  I  said. 

The  King  of  Bavaria  has  accepted  the  Greek  crown  for  his 
son  Otto  ; l  this  is  a  choice  which  shows  the  disinterestedness  of 
the  Powers,  as  it  was  necessary  it  should  do,  besides  which, 
the  King  of  Bavaria  was  the  only  prince  in  Europe  who 
appeared  at  all  favourably  disposed  towards  the  Greeks.  I  did 
not  suggest  this  choice,  but  I  consented  to  it  for  want  of  a 
better.  The  choice  of  Prince  Paul  of  Wurtemburg  would  not 
have  inspired  anyone  with  confidence;  the  Prince  of  Saxony'2 
and  the  Margrave  William  of  Baden  :3  had  both  refused.  Bolivar  i 
was  dead.     Who  else  was  there  ? 

March  6th,   1832. 

This  capture  of  Ancona  places  me  in  a  very  awkward 
position.  Why  enter  the  place  by  force  ?  Had  no  arrangement 
been  made  with  Austria  as  to  what  would  be  done  ?  In  order 
to  get  out  of  this,  the  Pope  will  have  to  fulfil  his  promise,  the 
action  of  the  officer  who  commanded  the  squadron  must  be 
disowned,  and  Vienna  must  be  informed  by  England,  that  we 
are  read}*  to  retire,  as  soon  as  the  Pope  has  carried  out  the 
engagement  he  has  entered  into  with  the  Austrian,  English,  and 

1  The  crown  of  Greece  had  been  offered  by  the  Conference  to  Prince  Otto,  in 
January.  His  father  accepted  in  hi-;  name,  and  on  the  7th  May  following,  a  definite 
convention  was  signed  to  this  effect,  between  Bavaria  on  the  one  part,  and  Erance, 
Russia,  and  England  on  the  other. 

J  Prince  John  of  Saxony,  born  in  1S01.  He  had  married  Amelia,  daughter  of  King 
Maximilian  of  Bavaria.  lie  succeeded  to  the  throne  in  1854,  and  died  in  1S73. 
Eiance  favoured  his  selection  for  the  Greek  throne. 

:;  Guillaume- Louis- Auguste,  Margrave  of  Baden,  burn  1792,  married  to  Elizabeth 
Princess  of  Wurtemburg.     He  died  in  1 859. 

1  Simon  Bolivar,  the  famous  liberator  of  South  America  (1-783  to  1S30).  He  had 
been  made  dictator  of  Columbia  and  Venezuela  in  1 S 1 9.  He  retired  from  power  a 
few  months  before  his  death. 


282  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

French  plenipotentiaries.  And  all  this  must  be  done  at  once. 
Delays  do  not  help  to  repair  foolish  actions  ;  they  must  be  made 
good  before  other  people  become  embittered,  and  proceed  to 
measures  that  might  prove  troublesome.  That  is  what  I  should  do 
if  I  was  M.  Perier,  and  what  I  should  advise  him  to  do  were  I 
near  him.  But  as  I  had  the  good  fortune  not  to  be  mixed  up  in 
this  matter,  and  had  not  to  give  my  opinion  thereon,  I  do  not 
wish  you  to  quote  me.  If  anyone  asks  you  what  M.  de  Talleyrand 
says  about  it,  you  can  say  :  "  He  has  nothing  whatever  to  do 
with  it  ;  he  has  enough  on  his  hands  with  Comte  Orloff,  and  I 
do  not  think  that  what  has  just  taken  place  in  Italy,  will  make 
this  any  easier  for  him." 

Our  friends  in  England  are  in  despair  ;  they  will  be  attacked 
in  Parliament,  and  will  not  know  what  answer  to  make  about 
this  infernal  expedition.  The  ministers  will  be  closely  pressed 
by  Lord  Aberdeen's  bitter  arguments.  The  Austrians  will 
cause  mischief — this  business  of  Ancona  will  serve  them  as  a 
pretext.   .  .  . 

London,  March  jth,  1832. 

....  Comte  Orloff  is  expected  to  arrive  here  by  the  steamer 
of  the  9th.  If  you  see  the  king,  tell  him  that  England  considers 
it  necessary,  that  the  action  of  the  officer  (who  I  am  told  went 
beyond  his  instructions  by  entering  Ancona)  must  be  disowned. 
When  a  matter  is  important,  one  must  never  complicate  it 
with  interests  that  may  prejudice  it,  even  if  they  are  foreign 
to  it.  .  .  . 


M.  Perier  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand. 

Paris,  March  ■jth,  1832,  8  p.m. 

Mon  Prince, 

Having  just  quitted  the  Chamber,  I  hasten  to  send 
you  the  speech  I  made,  in  the  general  discussion  on  the  budget 
of  foreign  affairs.  You  will  be  pleased  to  hear,  mon  Prince, 
that  the  policy  adopted  by  the  government  has  been  fully- 
approved. 

This  morning  I  received  very  satisfactory  news  from  Vienna, 
both  with  regard  to  Italian  affairs  and  the  ratifications.  As, 
however,  they  wrote  to  me,  while  still  under  the  first  impression, 
I  do  not  know  what  view  may  perhaps  be  taken  of  our  some- 
what irregular  entry  into  Ancona,  especially  as  the  consent  of 
the  Holy  See  had  not  been  given  in  a  sufficiently  explicit 
manner. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1850.  283 

I  am  not  sending  you  a  long  letter  to-day,  mon  Prince,  as  1 
think  you  will  like  to  receive;  the  earliest  accounts  of  to-day's 
sitting.  .  .  . 

The    Prince    de   Talleyrand    to   the   Princess    de 

Vaudemont. 

London,  March  13///,  1832. 

The  King  of  the  Netherlands  is  now  making  use  of  this 
Ancona  business,  and  the  hope  that  the  Reform  Bill  will  not  be 
passed,  to  retard  the  departure  of  Comte  Orloff ;  this  is  in- 
supportable. M.  Ouvrand,  and  also  M.  de  la  Rochejacquelin, 
mix  themselves  in  all  the  King  of  Holland's  affairs,  and  every 
means  of  intrigue  they  furnish  to  the  king  is  welcomed  by  him. 
I  will  not  lose  courage,  but  this  business  will  end  by  killing  me. 
This  fresh  difficulty,  which  keeps  Comte  Orloff  at  the  Hague,  is 
very  unpleasant  for  me.  It  must  now  be  admitted,  that  if  we 
had  not  obtained  the  ratification  from  England,  and  if  we  had 
not  allied  ourselves  with  her,  we  should  at  present  be  utterly 
powerless.  By  remaining  as  we  are,  joined  together  with  Eng- 
land, we  shall  pull  through  ;  that  is  the  solid  basis  of  our  dynasty. 
I  attach  the  greatest  possible  importance  to  this. 

The  Reform  Bill  will  pass  the  second  reading  as  it  is  ;  there 
will  probably  be  some  amendments  when  it  goes  into  com- 
mittee. As  to  this,  they  are  not  quite  agreed.  I  do  not  think 
that  the  alterations  will  affect  the  principles  of  the  Bill.  .   .  . 

March   llth,  1832. 

Vexatious  as  it  is,  we  must  not  imagine  that  Comte  Orloffs 
procrastination  will  cause  more  than  a  fortnight's  delay,  for  I  am 
certain  the  ratifications  will  arrive,  and  but  fortius  business  about 
Ancona,  they  would  have  been  here  already.  As,  however,  so 
much  has  been  said  at  the  Hague,  that  this  affair  would  alter  all 
the  resolutions  of  the  St.  Petersburg  Cabinet,  and  that  it  was 
necessary  to  await  the  effect  it  would  produce,  before  coming  to 
London,  as  it  might  possibly  change  the  instructions  that  Comte 
Orloff  had  received,  he  has  consented  to  stay  on.  But  we  shall 
be  so  stiff  with  him  here  that  he  must  come.  I  expect  all  this  will 
take  about  a  fortnight.  Except  for  the  buccaneering  expedition 
t  1  Ancona,  all  would  have  been  finished  by  the  10th,  as  I  had  said. 
If  no  fresh  incident  occurs,  this  will  be  the  case  by  the  30th.  Of 
this  I  am  quite  sure.  I  do  not  care  about  your  speaking  of  the 
bad  effect  of  Ancona,  because  that  would  harm  the  Ministry,  and 
they  must  be  supported  in  every  way.  .  .  . 


234  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

M.  Casimer  Pkrier  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand. 

Paris,  March  14//1,  1832. 
Prince, 

My  son,  who  is  returning  to  his  post,  will  take  this 
letter  to  you.  He  will  tell  you  that  General  Sebastiani,  who  is 
much  better,  has  taken  up  work  again  to-day.  I  think  it  is  best 
to  leave  foreign  affairs  in  his  hands,  at  a  t:me  when  France  has 
taken  a  suitable  place  in  all  her  relations  with  the  other  Powers, 
and  when  we  have  better  hopes  than  ever  of  securing  peace  and 
disarmament,  a  result  towards  which  all  our  wishes  and  all  our 
efforts  have  been  directed.  To  arrive  at  this  end,  we  always 
count,  Prince,  on  your  kind  and  powerful  co-operation.  I  must 
confess  to  you,  that  the  ardent  wish  to  succeed  in  securing  this 
peace,  so  necessary  to  our  country,  can  alone  make  me  endure 
the  painful  task  with  which  I  find  myself  charged.  The  session 
which  is  almost  ended  has  been  a  very  trying  one  for  me.  We 
found  a  spirit  and  a  tendency  in  the  Chamber,  which  are  the 
natural  consequence,  foreseen  by  us,  of  a  change,  such  as 
that  resulting  from  its  last  electoral  laws.  We  have  in  great 
part  to  do  with  men  who  are  not  able  to  think,  and  whose  hands 
are  more  fitted  to  pull  down  than  build  up.  With  such  materials, 
it  is  easy  to  revolutionize,  but  not  to  consolidate.  We  have 
therefore  had  to  contend  with  many  obstacles  in  our  Parliamen- 
tary procedure.  Lastly,  we  have  been  worried  by  economies  very 
embarrassing  to  us,  and  without  any  advantage  to  France. 
Nevertheless,  I  must  say,  that  the  truth  (which  we  have  not 
hesitated  often  to  utter  distinctly)  has  not  been  quite  thrown 
away.  The  country  is  returning  to  ideas  of  order  and  govern- 
ment. Without  fear  of  being  accused  of  self-praise,  we  may 
affirm,  that  at  no  period  has  our  home  policy  been  more  solid  or 
better  able  to  withstand  attacks  than  now. 

I  will  not  enlarge,  Prince,  on  our  relations  with  the  Powers  ; 
my  two  last  despatches  will  have  told  you  of  our  system  of 
home  policy.  After  the  exchange  of  the  ratifications,  which  we 
are  impatiently  expecting,  we  shall  have  nothing  further  at 
heart,  but  to  see  the  speedy  termination  of  Italian  affairs.  I 
think  we  shall  arrive  at  this,  with  the  help  of  the  representatives 
of  the  Powers  at  the  Court  of  Rome.  I  had  a  meeting  this 
morning  with  the  ministers  of  the  five  Powers  on  this  subject. 
Two  schemes  were  discussed.  The  first  was,  to  continue  the 
simultaneous  occupation  by  the  Austrian  and  French  troops, 
while  soliciting  the  prompt  settlement  of  the  differences  of  the 
the  Holy  See  with  the  Legations  ;  the  second  was,  to  replace  the 
present  occupation   by  Swiss  regiments   from  the   kingdom  of 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830. 

Naples.  But  as  this  last  measure  would  entail  long  delays,  we 
arc  very  anxious  that  matters  should  be  settled  before  the  time 
required  to  put  this  scheme  into  execution.  All  this,  however, 
has  been  nothing  more  than  a  simple  conversation  between  the 
Ministers  of  the  five  Courts  and  myself. 

The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  the  Princess  de 

Vaudemont. 

London,  March  \~th,  1832. 

Notwithstanding  all  the  dilatory  measures  adopted  by  the 
King  of  the  Netherlands,  I  believe  now  that  Comtc  Orloffs 
ratifications  will  arrive  at  the  same  time  as  himself,  and  that  he 
will  be  here  in  a  fortnight  at  latest.  The  Dutch  ministers'  courier 
has  arrived  with  a  memorandum  ;  but  I  fancy  they  will  have 
some  difficulty  in  making  a  fresh  communication  to  us,  before 
we  have  sent  Comtc  Orloff  an  answer  to  the  Note,  added  to  the 
draft  of  the  treat}-  which  he  transmitted  to  us  a  month  ago.  But  as 
I  am  quite  determined,  and  as  England  is  also,  to  listen  to  noth- 
ing, before  the  ratifications  have  arrived,  they  are  greatly  exercised 
to  find  some  way  of  entering  into  relations  with  us.  This  de- 
termination will  compel  the  dispatch  of  the  ratifications.  But  this 
business  about  Ancona  must  be  settled  in  Paris,  as  it  serves  as 
a  pretext  for  everything  that  is  said  against  the  French  govern- 
ment at  the  Hague.  Ill-disposed  persons  always  connect  Hol- 
land's system  of  delay,  with  the  hope  that  the  English  or  French 
Ministry  will  be  forced  to  go  out  of  office.  .  .  . 

March  22nd,  1S32. 

The  effect  produced  by  this  affair  of  Ancona  increases  every 
day.  People  are  terrified,  and  one  constantly  hears  :  "  Revo- 
lutionary times  are  come  back  again."  Italian  affairs  caused 
the  despatch  of  the  last  courier  by  Comte  Orloff.  The  Pope 
has  sent  Captain  Gallois' x  proclamation  everywhere  ;  it  has 
greatly  exercised  both  friends  and  enemies.  If  we  arc  in  this 
position  when  the  Reform  Bill  comes  up  for  decision,  I  do  not 
know  what  will  happen.  I  must  tell  you  candidly,  that  it  would 
seem  very  hard  to  me  to  founder  within  sight  of  the  haven,  after 
eighteen  months  of  difficulties  successfully  overcome,  all  for  the 
sake  of  a  foolish  expedition  devoid  of  even-  grain  of  common 
sense.  Of  what  good  are  two  or  three  thousand  men  at  Ancona 
when  the  Austrians  have  sixty  thousand  in  Milan  ?  It  is  enough 
to  drive  one  mad.  .  .  . 

1  Captain  Gallois  commanded  the  squadron  sent  to   Ancona.     He  became  rear- 
admiral  in  1S35. 


286  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  M.  Casimir  Perier. 

London,  March  22nd,  1832. 

The  confidence,  nay,  I  may  say  the  friendship,  you  have  shown 
me,  monsieur,  make  it  my  duty  to  draw  your  attention  to  the 
extreme  importance  of  present  circumstances.  The  expedition 
to  Ancona  has  greatly  complicated  them,  our  friends  have  be- 
come alarmed,  and  a  very  lively  satisfaction  is  evident  among 
the  enemies  of  our  government,  who  seek  means  therein  for 
attacking  the  loyalty  of  our  Cabinet,  which  they  have  not  had 
the  opportunity  of  doing,  since  you  have  been  at  the  head  of 
affairs.  Your  thorough  uprightness  has  given  a  strength  to  our 
Cabinet,  which  we  must  on  no  account  lose ;  you  would  have  less 
power  to  contend  against  home  follies,  if  Europe  ceased  to  look 
upon  you  as  the  preserver  of  good  laws  and  good  order. 

I  therefore  beseech  you  to  bring  this  affair  of  Ancona  to  a 
speedy  termination,  and  lay  the  blame  of  it  on  some  juniors  who 
have  not  yet  quite  forgotten  the  days  of  the  Revolution.  The 
opinion  of  all  parties  here  is  very  strong  on  this  matter ;  the 
English  Cabinet  does  not  know  how  to  explain  or  to  justify  it. 
You  will  see  by  my  despatch  of  to-day,  though  I  toned  down  the 
words,  how  the  King  of  England  spoke  about  it  to  me  this 
morning.  If  this  tiresome  business  is  not  settled  before  the 
Reform  question  comes  on,  and  if  the  latter  turns  out  badly  for 
Lord  Grey's  Ministry,  I  really  do  not  know  what  will  happen. 
Truly,  three  thousand  men  at  Ancona  is  too  trifling  a  matter 
to  satisfy  the  amour-propre  of  France  ;  and  yet  our  sojourn 
there  threatens  to  involve  the  whole  of  the  south,  and  increase 
the  difficulties  and  prolong  the  delays  in  northern  affairs. 

From  this  letter,  monsieur,  which  I  write  with  regret,  you 
will  see  how  greatly  the  interests  of  our  government  and  your 
glory,  in  especial,  occupy  me. 

Accept.  .  .  . 

The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  the  Princess  de 

VaudEmont. 

London,  March  2~/h,  1832. 

Comte  Orloff  is  to  arrive  in  London  to-morrow.  He  gained 
nothing  at  the  Hague.  The  king  would  not  agree  to  anything. 
There  is  no  doubt  that  we  shall  receive  the  ratifications  of 
Prussia  and  Austria  in  a  few  days.  The  declaration  made  by 
Comte  Orloff  before  leaving,  expresses  itself  very  forcibly  a.  to 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  287 

what  the  Emperor  Nicholas  wished  pointed  out  to  the  king. 
He  says  that  as  the  king  has  refused  to  follow  his  advee,  he  can 
no  longer  count  on  any  support  from  him. 

Matters  are  progressing  as  I  desire.  We  shall  triumph,  but 
the  Belgians  must  not  commit  any  follies.  Who  is  to  be  sent 
as  our  minister  to  Brussels  ?  They  cannot  be  too  careful  in 
selecting  a  discreet  man.  The  debate  yesterday  on  the  Reform 
Bill  was  favourable  to  the  Ministry  ;  the  Bill  will  pass  the 
second  reading,  which  is  fixed  for  April  3rd,  after  which  some 
amendments  will  be  proposed  in  committee.  .  .  . 

March  28//1,  1832. 

Comte  Orloff  arrived  last  night,  as  I  informed  you  yesterday. 
He  came  to  see  me  this  morning.  During  this  first  visit,  I  con- 
fined myself  entirely  to  the  reserve  of  a  visit  of  ceremony. 
He  spoke  to  me  of  his  journey  to  Holland  ;  he  praised  M.  de 
Mareuil  (I  have  mentioned  this  in  my  despatch),  and  appeared 
to  infer,  so  it  seemed  to  me,  that  he  had  plainly  asked  the  king 
whether  he  would — yes  or  no,  adopt  the  twenty-four  articles. 
The  king  having  said  no,  he  had  delivered  a  declaration,  of 
which  M.  de  Fagel  has  a  copy,  and  left  for  London.  That  is 
all  that  is  known  so  far.  .  .  -1 

March  30///,  1S32. 

,:  They  had  promised  to  send  French  troops  into  Italy,  if  the 
Austrians  entered  the  Papal  States."  That  is  what  they  said  to 
you.    Well,  it  is  utter  foolishness.    To  whom  were  they  promised  ? 

1  This  is  the  declaration,  which  is  sufficiently  decisive  :  "After  having  exhausted 
all  means  of  persuasion  and  every  method  of  conciliation,  to  assist  I  lis  Majesty  the 
King  of  the  Netherlands,  to  establish  by  a  friendly  arrangement,  and  at  the  same  time 
one  compatible  with  the  dignity  of  bis  crown  and  the  interests  of  his  subjects  who 
have  remaine  1  faithful  to  him,  the  separation  of  the  two  great  divisions  of  the  kingdom 
of  the  Netherlands,  the  emperor  does  not  see  the  possibility  in  future  of  lending  him  any 
aid  or  support. 

"  However  dangerous  may  be  the  position  in  which  the  king  has  placed  himself,  or 
whatever  may  be  the  consequences  of  this  isolation,  His  Majesry,  while  silencing  the 
feelings  of  his  heart  with  inexpressible  regret,  feels  it  his  duty  to  leave  Holland  to 
take  the  sole  responsibility  of  the  consequences  that  may  result  from  this  state  of 
affairs.  Faithful  to  his  principles,  His  Majesty  will  not  join  in  any  coercive  measures, 
the  object  of  which  is  to  constrain  the  King  of  the  Netherlands,  by  force  of  arms,  to 
subscribe  to  the  twenty- four  articles. 

"  But  seeing  that  1  hey  contain  the  only  bases  on  which  the  separation  of  Belgium  and 
Holland  can  be  effected,  ....  His  Imperial  Majesty  recognizes  it  as  just  and 
necessary,  that  Belgium  should  remain  in  the  present  enjoyment  of  the  advantages 
resulting  to  her  from  the  said  articles,  notably  that,  which  declares  her  neutrality  to  be 
already  recognized  in  principle  by  the  King  of  the  Netherlands  himself.  As  a  natural 
sequence  of  this  principle,  His  Imperial  Majesty  could  not  oppose  the  regressive 
measures  that  the  Conference  may  take  to  guarantee  and  defend  this  neutrality,  if  it 
should  be  violated  by  a  resumption  of  hostilities  on  the  part  of  Holland " 


288  THE  MEMOIRS  OE  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

To  the  Pope  ?  He  never  asked  anything  from  France.  Was 
it  to  Austria  ?  The  very  idea  is  ridiculous.  It  was  therefore 
either  to  M.  Mauguin,  or  to  M.  Lamarque  :  a  fine  promise 
truly !  Is  it  possible  to  compare  the  position  of  Austria,  vis-a- 
vis to  Rome,  with  that  of  France?  When  there  is  any  popular 
demonstration  in  the  Legations,  Austria,  being  next  door,  is 
threatened  ;  is  that  the  case  with  France  ? 

I  tell  you  again,  that  Lord  Holland,  Sir  Francis  Burdett,1 
and  Lord  Grey,  all  declare,  that  there  is  no  possible  excuse  for 
this  expedition  ;  they  put  it  in  a  very  friendly  way,  but  this  is 
their  opinion.  Anything  that  needs  constant  excuses,  is  pretty 
sure  to  be  wrong.  I  stand  up  in  its  defence  as  far  as  I  can,  only 
because  it  is  my  duty  to  support  whatever  my  government  does  ; 
but  nothing  but  trouble  can  come  of  it,  for  it  changes  the  anti- 
propagandist  position  we  have  wished  to  take  up.  Truly  at  a 
time  when  there  are  disturbances  in  Vendee,  and  the  south  is 
ready  to  rise  in  many  quarters,  it  is  madness  to  introduce  ques- 
tions and  differences  with  Rome,  which  possesses  such  influence 
in  Vendee  and  in  several  of  the  southern  towns.  Finish  this 
affair  of  Ancona,  and  everything  else  will  go  right.  I  will  take 
care  of  that.  Only  this  morning,  Comte  Orloff  said  to  me, 
"  This  expedition  is  a  matter  for  which  we  can  see  no  plausible 
reason  ;  not  that  it  really  is  any  concern  of  mine.  I  only 
mention  it  to  you,  as  being  a  mere  outsider  I  can  touch  on 
every  topic.  .  .  . 

April  \tli,  1832. 

Russia  keeps  us  waiting  some  time.  The  order  for  the 
exchanges  has  not  yet  arrived  ;  probably  we  shall  get  it  to- 
morrow ;  this  however  pleases  the  Russians,  who  like  to  think- 
that  other  people  have  to  wait  for  them,  which  is  not  quite  the 
case,  though  on  the  whole  it  suits  us  very  well.  The  affair  ends 
there,  for  we  may  consider  the  matter  as  settled.  .  .  . 

In  the  interval  of  our  negotiations,  cholera,  which  had  been 
in  London  for  several  months,  broke  out  in  Paris,  and  M. 
Casimir  Perier,  President  of  the  Council,  was  attacked,2  which 
produced  the  following  letter  from  General  Sebastiani : 

:  Sir  Francis  Burdett  (1770-1844).  Me  entered  the  House  of  Commons  in  1796, 
where  he  became  one  of  the  principal  leaders  of  the  Whig  party.  He  represented  the 
borough  of  Westminster  in  I  S3 1 ,  and  energetically  supported  the  Reform  Bill. 

-  The  cholera  had  overrun  Europe  towards  the  end  of  1831.  In  January,  1832,  it 
reached  London.  On  the  29th  March,  it  was  noted  in  Paris,  where  it  immediately 
assumed  formidable  intensity.  On  the  3rd  April,  M.  Casimir  Perier  was  attacked  on 
his  return  from  a  visit  he  had  paid  to  the  Hotel  Dieu,  together  with  the  Due  d'Orleans. 
He  struggled  for  six  weeks  against  this  scourge,  but  succumbed  on  the  16th  of  May. 


the  revolution  of  1830.  289 

General  Sebastiani  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand. 

Paris,  April  \itli,  1832. 
Mon  Prince, 

I  can  to-day  speak  with  entire  confidence  and  certainty 
as  to  the  state  of  the  President  of  the  Council.  Not  only  is  he 
out  of  danger,  but  there  seems  to  be  no  longer  any  doubt  that 
he  will  before  long  be  able  to  resume  his  work.  For  my  part,  I 
had  quite  decided  to  leave  the  office,  if  his  health  had  neces- 
sitated his  retiring  into  private  life.  Fortunately,  however,  for 
France  and  for  Europe,  we  shall  be  able  to  keep  him  at  the  head  of 
the  Ministry,  and  all  the  interests  of  primary  importance,  which 
are  so  closely  allied  to  the  policy  we  have  adopted,  will  find  in 
the  assured  continuance  of  this  system,  the  guarantees  they  need. 

However,  as  you  may  imagine,  mon  Prince,  the  adversaries  of 
the  government  have  not  failed  to  make  the  most  of  the  uncer- 
tainties  to  which  the  President's  serious  illness  at  first  gave  rise, 
to  prepare  men's  minds  for  fresh  ministerial  combinations.  But 
their  powerlessness  in  this  respect  was  too  notorious  to  make 
much  impression  ;  and  discovering  very  soon,  from  the  sustained 
character  of  public  anxiety,  how  small  their  influence  was,  they 
have  thought  it  best  to  change  their  tactics,  and  now  express  the 
earnest  desire  that  M.  Perier  may  remain  at  the  head  of  affairs 
so  that,  as  they  say,  they  may  see  him  succumb  later  on  to  the 
strain  of  his  own  system. 

All  this,  mon  Prince,  is  only  very  foolish  but  not  at  all 
alarming.  The  Ministry  will  continue  to  pursue  the  same 
course  with  firm  steps,  and  if  the  President's  health  requires  that 
for  some  time  he  should  use  great  care,  circumstances  now, 
fortunately,  no  longer  oblige  him  to  wear  himself  out  with  arduous 
labour,  as  he  has  been  compelled  to  do  during  the  past  year. 

The  session  is  drawing  to  an  end.  To-morrow,  or  the  day 
after,  the  Chamber  of  Deputies  will  be  closed  ;  they  are  all 
anxious  to  finish  and  return  to  their  homes.  You  will  have 
noticed  this,  from  the  rapidity  with  which  they  voted  the  last 
legislative  proposals. 

The  king's  government  will  therefore  find  itself  less 
hampered  and  more  at  liberty  to  act  ;  it  will  no  longer  have 
to  waste  the  time  which  the  actual  interests  of  the  country 
claim  almost  entirely,  in  useless  and  often  inopportune  dis- 
cussions. The  cause  of  peace  cannot  but  gain  thereby,  and  it 
will  not  be  our  fault,  mon  Prince,  if  the  Powers  do  not  profit  by 
this  interval,  to  strengthen  and  draw  closer  those  tics,  the 
maintenance  of  which  is  equally  important  to  all. 

Accept.  .  .  . 

VOL.  IV.  U 


2go  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  the  Princess  de 

Vau  demon  t. 

London,  April  i6t/i,  1832. 

The  Austrian  and  Prussian  ratifications  have  arrived  ;  the 
power  of  exchange  has  also  come  ;  but  a  strong  wish  is  expressed 
at  Berlin  to  await,  if  possible,  the  return  of  the  Russian  courier. 
The  object  of  all  this  is  to  place  the  responsibility  on  M.  de 
Bulow  and  M.  de  Wessenburg,  who  are  not  liked  in  Berlin  and 
Vienna,  as  they  signed  the  treaty  of  November  1 5th.  I  am  urging 
them,  though  not  too  strongly,  for  the  truth  is,  that  at  the  time 
when  the  treaty  was  signed  they  were  very  good,  very  courageous, 
and  very  decided,  believing  they  were  doing  what  was  best  for 
their  governments.  All  will  be  settled  to-morrow  evening.  Will 
three  or  four  more  days  be  granted,  or  will  matters  be  completed 
tc-morrow  ?     I  cannot  yet  give  an  opinion  on  that.  .  .  . 

«  Evening  of  the  16I/1. 

'  I-wrote  to  you  this  morning  when  half  asleep.  The  sitting 
in  the  House  of  Lords  was  not  over  till  seven  in  the  morning, 
and  I  wished  before  going  to  bed,  to  inform  you  by  telegraph 
of  the  success  of  the  English  Ministry.  There  was  a  majority 
of  19  votes  ;  that  is  a  good  thing  finished.  I  had  therefore 
told  the  government  exactly,  what  the  result  of  this  important 
affair  would  be.  The  committee  for  arranging  the  details 
of  the  Reform  Bill  will  not  meet  until  after  Easter,  for 
everyone  is  tired  and  wants  to  get  away  to  the  country. 
Nothing  fresh  from  Russia.  We  are  waiting,  for  we  can 
do  nothing  else  ;  but  everyone  is  getting  impatient.  I  will  hold 
out  to  the  end.  I  will  not  consider  my  age  until  the  ratifica- 
tions have  arrived  ;  after  that,  I  will  think  a  little  about  it,  and 
talk  about  it  seriously.  I  am  pleased  to  think  that  I  shall  end 
my  career  with  a  great  work  and  a  great  act  of  devotion  ;  the 
great  work  is,  peace  and  our  union  with  England  ;  the  act  of  de- 
votion is,  having  given  up  two  years  of  time,  while  undergoing 
strong  mental  fatigue,  with  a  complete  change  of  life,  in  order  to 
establish  our  dynasty  abroad,  this  required  a  solid  basis  at  any 
price,  and  it  is  in  England  that  this  will  be  found.  I  can  assure 
you  it  will  not  be  at  Ancona,  whatever  they  may  say,  that 
troubles  will  spring  up.  There  has  been  too  much  desire  to 
please  the  Opposition  ;  all  that  has  been  misunderstood;  It  is 
no  use  trying  to  please  them  ;  nothing  ever  will  do  so.  You  must 
restrain  them,  and  you  can.  I  can  reason  thus  dispassionately,  for 
I  am  not,  and  would  not  on  any  account,  be  in  office  again.  .  .   . 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  291 

Evening,  April  ljl/i,   1832. 

The  reply  to  the  despatch  of  March  14th,  sent  by  Comte 
Orloffwhen  at  the  Hague,  has  arrived  at  the  Russian  Embassy 
here  ;  but  as  it  is  not  decisive,  we  shall  proceed  independently  of 
it  to-morrow,  and  induce  the  Austrian  and  Prussian  pleni- 
potentiaries to  exchange  their  ratifications  with  the  Belgian 
plenipotentiary.  To-morrow  therefore,  the  18th,  at  four 
o'clock,  this  matter  will  be  completed.  Then  there  will  remain 
only  Russia,  and  she  will  certainly  acquiesce  by  the  end  of  this 
month.  To  have  waited  any  longer  for  her,  would  have  been 
too  great  a  deference  to  Russia.  Consideration,  I  can  under- 
stand and  admit,  but  a  deference  which  would  seem  to  recognize 
her  superiority,  we  neither  could  or  would  agree  to.  To-morrow, 
therefore,  we  shall  quietly  put  Russia  on  one  side,  and  get  the 
other  two  ratifications  exchanged.  One  must  not  be  unbending, 
unless  it  is  necessary,  but  when  it  is  necessary,  one  must  be 
immovable. 

April  iyd,  1832. 

I  do  not  understand  a  word  of  what  our  Foreign  Office  in 
Paris  writes  to  me,  respecting  the  ratifications  of  Prussia  and 
Austria.  The  fact  is,  the  Austrian  and  Prussian  ministers  were 
not  authorized  to  make  their  exchanges  except  with  the  con- 
sent of  Russia  (or  at  least  at  the  same  time  as  Russia),  and 
this  consent  they  have  not  got — that  is  to  say,  not  just  yet,  as 
the  Russian  ratifications  have  not  yet  arrived.  I  fancy  it  is  in 
order  to  deprive  me  of  the  small  amount  of  credit  this  affair 
deserves,  that  they  have  taken  the  trouble  to  declare  that  M.  de 
Biilow  had  received  positive  instructions  to  make  the  exchanges 
at  once.  However,  it  really  matters  very  little  to  me,  for  here, 
they  know  the  rights  of  the  case.  .  .  . 

The  Princess  Adelaide  d'Orleans  to  the  Prince  de 

Talleyrand. 

Paris,  April,  10th,  1832. 

I  thank  you  heartily,  mon  cher  Prince,  for  having  told 
Madame  de  Vaudemont  to  communicate  to  me  the  letter  you 
wrote  to  her  on  the  17th.  This  she  did  yesterday  with  friendly 
anxiety  for  me,  and  by  six  o'clock,  the  king  received  by 
telegraphic  despatch  the  confirmation  of  the  important  and 
good  news  of  the  exchange  of  the  Austrian  and  Prussian  rati- 
fications, which  had   taken   place  on  the   1 8th,  as  you  had  in- 

U    2 


2g2  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

formed  us  the  night  before.1  I  must  express  to  you  at  once  my 
satisfaction  thereat,  and  offer  you  my  congratulations,  for  it  is 
certainly  due  to  your  long  labours,  your  ability,  and  your 
firmness,  especially  in  this  last  business,  that  we  are  indebted  for 
this  happy  result,  which  insures  us  the  great  and  incalculable 
advantages  of  peace,  in  which  I  have  always  believed.  But  the 
prolonged  delay  of  the  ratifications  by  Austria  and  Prussia, 
placed  a  powerful  weapon  in  our  enemies'  hands  to  throw  doubt 
on  it  and  spread  anxiety  respecting  it,  which  did  great  harm. 
Thanks  to  you,  it  is  at  last  finished,  and  without  waiting  for 
the  ratification  of  Russia,  which  is  a  great  victory  for  us,  and  I 
feel  convinced  that  no  one  but  you  could  have  gained  it. 

This  piece  of  good  news  came  just  in  time,  to  somewhat 
comfort  and  console  our  good  king  for  all  his  trouble  and 
anxiety.  This  terrible  cholera  has  attacked  us  here  in  a  very 
sharp  and  cruel  manner,  and  plunged  us  into  the  deepest 
distress  ;  it  is  a  frightful  calamity.  M.  Perier  had  it  very 
severely,  he  is  now  convalescent,  but  it  seems  that  the  con- 
valescence after  this  illness  is  a  very  tedious  matter.  M. 
d'Argout  has  also  had  a  severe  attack.  You  can  imagine  how 
very  anxious  all  this  makes  the  king.  .  .  . 

Saturday,  April  i\st. 

I  take  up  my  letter  again,  as  I  could  not  finish  it  yesterday. 
All  foreign  difficulties  seem  to  quiet  down,  for  the  king  yester- 
day received  the  news,  that  the  Pope  consents  to  our  troops 
remaining  at  Ancona  as  long  as  the  Austrians  are  in  his  States, 
and  this  morning  he  heard  of  the  recall  of  Cardinal  Albani.'2  I 
am  glad  to  be  able  to  send  you  this  good  news,  which  I  hope 
will  reconcile  you  somewhat  to  our  expedition  to  Ancona,  which, 
if  you  think  it  did  us  no  good  (as  some  people  of  your  acquaint- 
ance, and  of  mine  maintain)  you  will  at  least  agree  has  done  no 
harm,  and  that  is  something. 

1  The  ratifications  of  Austria  and  Prussia  contained  a  reservation  respecting  the 
rights  of  the  Germanic  Confederation  as  to  the  articles  concerning  the  exchange  of 
part  of  Limburg  for  part  of  Luxemburg.  Moreover,  by  a  declaration  inserted  in  the 
protocol,  the  Austrian  plenipotentiary  provided  for  the  necessity  of  a  future  arrange- 
ment between  Holland  and  Belgium  for  the  conclusion  of  a  treaty  containing  the 
twenty-four  articles,  with  such  modifications  as  the  five  Powers  might  consider 
admissible. 

The  Prussian  ratification  was  a«  perfectly  plain  and  ordinary  one.  Nevertheless, 
M.  de  Billow  verbally  adhered  to  the  Austrian  reservation,  and  also  inserted  a  declara- 
tion in  the  protocol,  showing  the  great  sympathy  his  government  felt  towards  that  of 
the  Hague,  and  his  wish  ultimately  to  make  such  additional  articles  to  the  treaty,  as 
might  improve  the  position  of  Holland. 

2  Joseph  Albani,  of  the  illustrious  Roman  family  of  that  name,  was  Apostolic 
Commissioner  in  the  Romagna,  where  he  signalized  himself  by  extremely  rigorous 
dealings.     He  died  in  1834. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  293 

The  Courrier  Anglais  contains  a  very  good  article,  which  I 
read  this  morning,  on  Louis   Philippe's  right  to  the   throne,   in 
answer  to  Sir  Robert  Peel's  detestable  speech  in  the  discussion 
on  Monday  about  the  Brazilian  captures.1     But    I   should  have 
liked  it  to  have  been  shown  that  Dom  Miguel  had  accepted  the 
Regency,  and  that  consequently  he  only  held  the  crown  of  Donna 
Maria  (which  he  appropriated  to  himself)   in   trust  ;    whereas 
Louis   Philippe  had  undertaken   no  engagement  whatever,   he 
absolutely  did  not  wish  for  the  crown,  and  only  decided  to  accept 
it,  when  he  felt  convinced  that  there  was  no  other  means  of  saving 
our  beloved  France  from  anarchy  and  the  most  serious  disasters. 
It  was  only  then  that  he  gave  in  to  the  universal  and  earnest 
wish;  of  this  you  were  at  that  time  witness,  as  well  as  I.  .  .  . 

The   Prince    de    Talleyrand    to    the    Princess    de 

Vaudemont. 

London,  April  24///,  1832. 

....  The  letter  I  have  received  from  Mademoiselle  is  full 
of  Ancona.  I  am  delighted  that  this  business  is  taking  a  proper 
turn  ;  it  was  its  revolutionary  aspect  that  frightened  all  our 
friends.  The  Austrians  had  been  called  in  ;  we  had  not  ;  in  this 
lay  all  the  difference.  When  the  Emperor  Napoleon  entered 
into  Spain — a  detestable  enterprise,  from  which  period  dated  the 
decline  of  his  power — he  got  the  King  of  Spain  to  summon  him, 
and  took  care  that  this  was  carried  out.  We  are  just  out  of  a 
revolution,  and  in  such  a  case,  if  you  want  to  establish  a  footing, 
you  must  show  the  other  governments,  who  are  naturally  dis- 
quieted, that  you  have  no  revolutionary  tendencies.  This  I 
have  always  kept  in  view  since  I  have  been  here,  and  therefore 
I  have  succeeded.  .  .  . 

The  Comte  de  Flahaut  to   the   Prince   de 

Talleyrand. 

Paris,  April  24H/,  1832. 

....  Our  home  and  foreign  affairs  would  go  all  right,  but 
for  the  vexatious   complications  caused    by  the    illness   of   M. 

1  In  the  House  of  Commons  on  the  l6lh,  a  discussion  arose  respecting  the  claims  of 
the  English  subjects,  on  account  of  the  capture  of  English  merchantmen  made  by  the 
Brazilian  government,  then  at  war  with  the  Argentine  Republic.  Brazil  had  pro- 
mised an  indemnity,  which  had  never  been  paid.  Sir  Robert  Peel  rose,  and  at  once 
took  up  the  question  on  political  grounds  ;  he  protested  against  the  support  given  by 
England  to  Dom  Pedro.  He  compared  Dom  Miguel  to  Louis  Philippe.  "  In  what 
way,"  he  said,  "are  his  rights  inferior  to  those  of  Louis  Philippe  to  the  crown  of 
France?     Surely  not  on  the  grounds  of  legitimacy.   .  .   . 


294  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

Perier  and  M.  d'Argout,  and  the  state  of  Sebastiani,  although 
the  latter  has  greatly  recovered.  M.  Perier  is  no  longer  laid  up 
with  cholera,  but  a  recovery  like  that  of  Broussais1  is  worse  than 
a  mortal  illness.  Meanwhile  the  ministerial  intrigues  go  on  as 
usual,  and  there  are  always  traitors  in  the  camp.  .  .  . 

The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  the  Princess  he 

Vaudemont. 

London,  May  ist,  1832. 

How  can  I  tell  you  about  the  Russian  ratifications, 
before  they  are  known  in  Paris  ?  It  is  from  Paris  alone  that 
I  hear  about  them,  and  they  only  arrived  here  last  night,  whereas 
in  Paris  you  knew  of  them  three  days  ago.  Lord  Palmerston 
does  not  return  from  the  country  until  Thursday,  3rd.  Between 
this  and  then,  we  shall  hear  nothing  reassuring.  On  the  3rd,  we 
shall  have  a  conference,  and  I  will  on  that  dav  write  both  to 
you  and  to  the  Office. 

Madame  Adelaide  d'Orleans  to  the  Prince  de 

Talleyrand. 

Paris,  April  29H1,  1832. 

The  ratification  of  Russia  has  arrived  ;  it  is  a  splendid 
triumph,  mon  cher  Prince,  and  one  which  assures  us  the  best  of 
all  things — peace. 

Our  king  had  need  of  this  good  piece  of  news  to  console 
and  comfort  him  for  the  fresh  embarrassments  caused  by  the 
illness  of  M.  Perier,  which  grieves  him  greatly.  Unfortunately, 
his  convalescence  is  far  from  being  an  established  fact,  and  his 
present  state  leaves  the  greatest  uncertainty  as  to  what  the 
result  may  be.  But  whether  his  illness  is  prolonged  or  not,  the 
king  intends  following  the  same  system  of  government,  which  I 
know  is  yours  also.  It  is  for  this  reason,  even  without  saying  a 
word  to  our  beloved  king,  to  whom  just  now  especially  I  would 
not  cause  any  additional  worry,  that  I  want  to  consult  you  about 
a  fresh  difficulty,  which  the  state  of  poor  General  Sebastiani's 
health  (about  which  I  am  not  at  all  satisfied)  makes  me 
dread.  If  he  should  not  be  able  to  return  to  the  Foreign 
Office,  what  would  you  advise  respecting  the  very  important 
choice  of  the  person  who  is  to  replace  him  ?  I  ask  this  in  all 
confidence,  and  you  can  answer  me  in    the  same  way,  feeling 

1  Doctor  Broussais,  professor  of  medicine  in  Paris   (1772-1838),  head  of  the  icole 
physiologique,  who  after  enjoying  a  wide  popularity  fell  into  great  disrepute. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1S30.  295 

quite  sure  that  this  will  remain  between  you  and  me.  But  I  lay 
great  stress  before  occasion  arises,  on  getting  your  views  on 
this  matter,  which  I  consider  very  important  as  your  ex- 
perience is  so  great.  I  will  give  this  little  note  to  Madame  de 
Vaudemont,  so  that  it  may  reach  you  through  safe  hands,  but 
she  is  perfectly  ignorant  of  its  contents.  You  will  see  what 
value  I  place  on  this  remaining  entirely  secret  between  you  and 
me,  so  that  no  one  should  suspect  the  question  I  have  asked 
you,  the  more  so  as  it  is  only  provision  for  the  future,  and 
any  indiscretion  would  run  the  risk  of  disturbing  and  spoiling 
the  present.  .  .  . 

This  letter  from  Madame  Adelaide,  although  she  infers  that 
the  king  was  in  utter  ignorance  of  it,  was  probably  dictated  by 
him  in  order  to  sound  me  as  to  what  my  personal  views  were 
on  the  question  which  formed  the  subject  of  the  letter.  Other 
people  had  written  to  me  from  Paris  to  know  whether  I  would 
not  join  the  Ministry,  either  in  M.  Perier's  place  or  that  of 
General  Sebastiani,  if  these  two  ministers  retired.  Several 
envoys  were  even  sent,  and  instructed  to  make  overtures  to  me 
from  different  quarters  on  the  same  subject.  This  decided  me 
to  write  the  following  letter  to  Baron  Louis,  who  had  been  em- 
ployed as  an  intermediary,  begging  him  to  make  what  use  of  it 
he  deemed  best  : 

The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  Baron  Louis. 

London,  May  yd,  1832. 

It  is  a  long  time  since  I  have  seen  your  handwriting,  mon 
cher  Louis.  Your  letter  has  given  me  much  pleasure.  It  will  be 
treated  confidentially,  and  thereby  replaces  me  in  the  position  I 
have  always  wished  to  hold  with  you. 

My  opinion  is  that  one  ought  to  devote  oneself  to  what  one 
can  do,  and  never  undertake  what  one  is  not  sure  of  being  able 
to  perform  better  than  anyone  else.  That  is  win  you  wished  to 
undertake  the  control  of  the  finances,  and  no  one  could  be  better 
there  than  you.  For  the  same  reason  I  came  to  London,  be- 
lieving that  I  was  better  able  to  secure  the  maintenance  of  peace 
than  anyone  else.  We  have  both  been  right ;  for  our  finances 
are  in  a  satisfactory  position,  and  peace  has  been  secured.  This 
will  close  my  political  life.      I  have  served  France  for  fifty  years, 


296  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLE  YRAND. 

for  she  always  had  to  be  considered  ;  you  have  thought  and 
acted  in  the  same  manner.  At  every  period,  good  has  to  be 
effected,  or  evil  prevented,  and  therefore,  when  one  loves  one's 
country,  one  can,  and  in  my  opinion  one  must,  serve  it  under 
whatever  government  it  may  choose  to  adopt. 

Now  I  must  tell  you,  that  I  intend  to  remain  here  until  I  am 
fully  assured  that  the  object  of  my  journey  has  been  reached, 
or  is  about  to  be  so.  Then  I  shall  ask  for  four  months'  leave  to 
drink  the  waters  and  look  after  my  own  affairs,  about  which, 
for  the  last  two  years,  I  have  known  nothing  ;  for  since  I  have 
been  in  London,  I  have  not  given  a  thought  to  anything  but 
what  would  further  the  result  we  desired  so  much,  as  without 
peace  no  one  could  tell  where  we  might  end. 

Do  not  therefore  think  of  me  for  any  ministerial  post,  which 
I  should  most  certainly  refuse.  You  speak  of  a  Minister  for 
Foreign  Affairs  ;  there  are  only  two  who  could  be  chosen,  M. 
de  Rigny,  or  M.  de  St.  Aulaire.  Anyone  else  under  present  cir- 
cumstances would  be  a  mistake,  and  would  throw  our  foreign 
relations  back  into  that  system  of  distrust,  out  of  which  M.  Perier 
and  I  have  drawn  it.  M.  de  Bassano  would  be  a  fatal  choice, 
and  such  old  servants  of  the  emperor  as  you  and  I,  ought  to 
know  this  better  than  anyone,  for  in  truth  it  was  he  who  caused 
his  master's  fall.  He  is  with  reason  considered  both  incapable 
and  hostile.     Write  to  me  what  they  think  of  doing.     Adieu. 

A  thousand  eood  wishes, 

T 


The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  the  Princess  de 

Vatjdemont. 

London,  May  $th,  1832. 

This  morning  at  3  A.M.  the  ratifications  were  exchanged 
with  Russia,  and  it  has  been  a  long  and  difficult  business,  be- 
cause the  ratification  was  not  a  pure  and  simple  one.1  It  was 
necessary  to  strengthen  it,  and  this  I  think  we  succeeded  in 
doing.  I  have  not  attended  to  anything  but  this  for  the  last 
thirty-six  hours.  Now  matters  are  satisfactorily  arranged. 
Comte  Orloff  leaves  to-night.  I  am  writing  both  officially  and 
privately    to   ask   for   four    months'  leave,  with    permission   to 

1  The  Russian  ratification  contained  an  important  reservation.  The  Emperor 
Nicholas  only  ratified  "  subject  to  the  modifications  and  amendments  to  be  brought 
into  a  definitive  arrangement  between  Holland  and  Belgium  respecting  Articles  9,  12, 
and  13."  Now  the  articles  in  question,  relating  to  the  navigation  of  the  intermediary 
waters  and  the  division  of  the  debt,  were  precisely  those  that  the  Hague  refused  to 
recognize. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  297 

take  it  at  whatever  time  I  may  find  it  most  convenient.  I  ab- 
solutely need  some  rest  ;  for  the  last  twenty  months  I  only 
exist  to-day,  to  maintain  the  ground  that  I  attained  yesterday 
I  must  spare  my  limbs  and  my  eyes,  and  look  after  my  affairs. 
I  have  asked  that  M.  Durant  de  Mareuil1  should  replace  me 
here,  but  without  prejudice  to  his  advancement,  pointing  him 
out  as  the  only  person  fit  to  handle  a  difficult  matter.   .  .  . 


London,  May  Zth,  1832. 

The  first  schedule  of  the  Reform  Bill  names  a  certain  num- 
ber of  boroughs  which  will  lose  their  franchise  ;  the  second 
schedule  points  out  a  certain  number  of  large  towns  which  will 
acquire  the  electoral  privilege. 

Lord  Lyndhurst2  proposed  that  the  second  schedule  should 
be  discussed  first.  This  motion,  opposed  by  Lord  Holland  and 
Lord  Grey,  was  supported  by  Lord  Harrowby  and  some  others 
of  that  party,  and  carried  by  151  votes  against  116,  that  is  to 
say,  by  a  majority  of  35  against  the  Ministry.  Lord  Ellen- 
borough3  in  the  form  of  suggestions,  made  several  objections  to 
the  Bill,  in  more  than  a  liberal  spirit,  with  a  view  to  making 
the  government  unpopular.  In  this  he  acted  like  our  Gazette  de 
France,  with  its  universal  suffrage.  In  their  dread  of  being 
liberal,  all  these  people,  no  matter  of  what  party,  become 
radical.  Is  it  not  curious  that  Lord  Ellenborough  should  take 
his  political  views  from  M.  Genonde  ? 4  These  are  strange 
times ! 

Lord  Grey  and  the  Chancellor  went  to  Windsor  this  morn- 
ing to  request  the  creation  of  sixty  peers,  or  the  acceptance  of 
their  resignation.     They  will  not  return  till  night. 

This  is  how  matters  stand  now.  .  .  . 

1  At  that  time  French  ambassador  at  the  Hague. 

-  John  Singleton  Copley,  Baron  Lyndhurst,  born  in  1772,  had  been  first  a  member 
of  the  House  of  Commons.  He  was  Lord  Chancellor  in  the  Wellington  Cabinet. 
He  retired  in  1830,  again  took  this  office  in  1834  and  1841.     He  died  in  1863. 

3  Edward  Law,  Earl  of  Ellenborough,  born  in  1790.  Member  of  the  House  of 
Commons,  he  succeeded  his  father  in  the  Lords  in  1S18,  where  he  sided  with  the  Tory 
party.  In  1834,  he  was  made  President  of  the  India  Board,  and  Governor-General 
of  India  1841.  First  Lord  of  the  Admiralty  in  1846,  and  President  of  the  Indian 
Board  of  Control  in  1S58. 

*  Antoine  Eugene  Genonde,  born  in  1792,  was  at  fust  professor  at  the  university. 
Later  on  he  made  a  name  for  himself  as  an  ultra  royalist  political  writer  and  journalist 
under  the  Restoration.  After  1830,  he  continued  his  fight  in  favour  of  legitimacy  in 
the  Gazette  de  France,  of  which  he  was  the  proprietor  and  chief  editor.  He  was 
elected  a  deputy  in  1846,  and  died  in  1849.  M.  Genonde  entered  Holy  Orders  in 
1834.  Just  when  the  electoral  law  was  under  discussion,  the  Gazette  de  France  had 
asked  for  universal  suffrage,  with  the  sole  object  of  opposing  the  Cabinet,  which 
demanded  a  qualification  of  two  hundred  francs. 


298  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 


London,  May  gt/t,  1832,  10  a.m. 

The  king  has  accepted  the  resignation  of  the  ministers.  He 
has  not  yet  called  upon  anyone  to  form  a  new  government.1 

At  home  we  must  show  great  calmness,  continue  to  follow 
the  same  course,  retain  the  same  ministers,  await  M.  Perier's 
restoration  to  health,  and  congratulate  ourselves  on  having  come 
to  some  settlement  in  Italy,  and  that  all  the  ratifications  have 
been  exchanged.  .  .  . 

May  \oth,  1832. 

....  Here,  nothing  is  yet  decided.  Pourparlers  are  still 
going  on,  and  probably  the  whole  day  will  pass  in  this  way. 
Pray  let  nothing  but  curiosity  be  shown  with  us  regarding  the 
change  of  Ministry  in  England.  We  must  be  quiet,  and  the 
advantage  of  being  quiet  is,  that  in  the  eyes  of  others,  we  appear 
to  have  no  anxieties,  because  we  are  immovable. 

This  affair  of  Madame  la  Duchesse  de  Berry  2  proves  how 
very  weak  the  Carlist  party  is.  The  only  really  dangerous 
party  is  the  Republican  one,  and  it  has  every  reason  to  believe 
that  any  disturbances,  no  matter  from  which  side  they  come, 
are  to  its  advantage.  Our  government.,  on  the  contrary,  ought 
to  wish  for  stability  everywhere  ;  that  is  the  only  way  to  become 
firmly  established.  I  shall  have  much  to  say  on  that  point,  but 
it  is  too  long  for  a  letter.  .  .  . 

May  12th,  1832. 

Nothing  is  yet  completed.  The  only  thing  that  is  sure  is, 
that  the  Duke  of  Wellington  and  Lord  Lyndhurst  have  been 
nominated  and  have  accepted. 

If  under  such  circumstances  we  were  to  seek  for  strength 
among  the  revolutionary  party,  everything  would  become 
difficult,  and  no  difficulty  can  be  removed  with  men  who  are 
involved  in  the  movement.     If  we  are  quiet,  Europe  will  accept 

1  The  king  had  refused  to  create  the  sixty  peers  for  which  Lord  Grey  and  Lord 
Brougham  had  asked.  He  preferred  accepting  the  ministers'  resignations.  The  Duke 
of  Wellington  was  requested  to  form  a  new  Ministry,  but  his  efforts  were  unsuccessful, 
while  at  the  same  time  a  strong  "opposition  was  shown  in  the  Cabinet  against  any 
change  of  Ministry.  At  last,  after  a  crisis  which  lasted  sixty  days,  Lord  Grey  withdrew 
his  resignation,  and  the  Cabinet  was  reconstructed. 

-  Madame  la  Duchesse  de  Berry  had  disembaiked  on  the  coast  of  Provence  on  the 
29th  of  April ;  the  next  day  there  was  an  attempt  at  insurrection  in  Marseilles,  which 
was  speedily  quelled.  The  Duchesse  seeing  that  she  had  failed  in  the  south,  travelled 
secretly  across  France,  reached  Vendee,  and  arrived  on  the  15th  of  May  at  the 
Chtaeau  Dampierre  in  Saintonge,  whence  she  organized  the  rising  which  broke  out  in 
the  west,  during  the  night  of  the  3rd  June. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  299 

us,  and  that  completely.  If  we  become  propagandists,  she 
will  never  accept  us.  That  idea  must  be  given  up;  there  is 
nothing  to  be  gained  by  taking  up  that  line.  .  .  . 

King  Louis  Philippe  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand. 

Paris,  May  \2tI1,  1832. 

In  truth,  mon  cher  Prince,  and  I  am  delighted  to  tell  you 
so,  you  have  most  happily  achieved  the  principal  aim  of  the 
grand  mission  with  which  I  entrusted  you.  This  success 
therefore,  which  has  so  often  seemed  to  escape  us,  is  a  crushing 
answer  to  all  the  diatribes  of  our  journalists,  to  whose  foolish 
predictions  it  has  given  the  lie.  Nothing  less  than  your  per- 
severance, your  ability,  and  your  devotion,  could  have  succeeded 
in  solving  one  of  the  most  difficult  and  most  thorny  questions 
that  European  diplomacy  has  ever  had  to  deal  with,  and  it  is 
only  fair  that  you  should  now  give  yourself  a  little  rest,  by 
taking  the  leave  you  have  asked  me  to  grant  you.  I  grant  it 
with  all  the  greater  pleasure,  as  it  will  give  me  the  satisfaction 
of  seeing  you  again,  of  conversing  with  you,  and  telling  you  of 
my  old  and  constant  friendship  for  you. 

My  ministers  agree  entirely  with  the  wish  you  have  expressed 
to  me,  that  M.  de  Mareuil  should  take  charge  during  your 
absence,  which  will  only  be  short,  and,  as  you  wish,  when  most 
convenient  to  you.  M.  de  Mareuil  will  join  you  as  soon  as  we 
can  replace  him  at  the  Hague,  the  importance  of  which  post 
you  will  fully  recognize,  and  from  wrhence  we  receive  only  bad 
news  and  bad  indications.  That  Cabinet  still  hopes  to  initiate  a 
war,  and  they  think  that  as  long  as  the  King  of  Holland  refuses  his 
consent,  there  is  a  chance  of  collision  between  the  Powers.  I 
therefore  consider  that  the  chances  of  a  war  will  not  be  entirely 
removed,  until  the  King  of  Holland  has  signed  the  treaty  with 
the  King  of  the  Belgians,  and  more  especially,  until  the  citadel 
of  Antwerp  has  been  evacuated,  and  the  treaty  of  November  1 5th 
has  been  fully  executed  ;  this  we  may  still  have  some  difhculty 
in  getting  carried  out,  all  the  more  so  as  the  dissolution  of  Lord 
Grey's  Cabinet  will  probably  inspire  the  King  of  Holland  with 
fresh  hopes,  though  he  ought  to  know,  that  England  is  not  likely 
to  change  her  foreign  policy,  and  that  the  concord  between  the 
five  Powers  will  not  be  disturbed. 

Nevertheless,  mon  cher  Prince,  it  seems  to  me  that  you  must 
not  dream  of  quitting  London,  until  matters  have  resumed  their 
former  position,  and  I  do  not  hesitate  to  ask  you  to  make  this 
fresh   sacrifice.     As   soon   as    the   Ministry    is    reorganized,  the 


300  THE  MEMOIRS  OE  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

Conference  will  take  up  the  question  of  the  King  of  Holland's 
reply,  which  will  again  be  a  refusal,  judging  from  his  answer  on 
the  subject  of  M.  de  Thorn.1  I  am  convinced  that  this  arrest 
and  these  arrogant  replies,  have  been  made  in  the  hope  of  draw- 
ing the  Belgians  into  hostilities,  and  thus  bringing  about  a  war. 
I  trust  we  shall  be  able  to  thwart  these  fatal  schemes  ;  but  until 
they  are  upset,  you  will  be  greatly  needed  in  London,  and  I 
repeat  again  that  this  business  will  not  be  finished,  until  the 
King  of  Holland  has  signed  the  treaty  with  the  King  of  the 
Belgians,  and  until  Antwerp  is  evacuated.  Let  us  try  and 
achieve  this  as  soon  as  possible.  Meanwhile,  mon  cher  Prince,  I 
again  renew.  .  .  . 

The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  the  Princess  de 

Vaudemont. 

London,  May  \6th,  1832. 

The  Grey  Ministry  remains  in  ;  the  details  of  this  arrange- 
ment are  being  carried  out  while  I  am  writing  to  you.  The 
crisis  is  nearly  over.  We  certainly  have  passed  through  the 
strangest  three  days  that  the  history  of  any  country  could  show. 
Every  one  returns  to  his  place  this  evening.  I  am  most  anxious 
that  all  that  has  taken  place  here  should  be  fully  understood  in 
Paris,  and  when  fully  understood,  it  certainly  does  not  militate 
against  the  Duke  of  Wellington's  character  as  a  man. 

I  have  got  my  leave,  and  Durant  will  start  for  London  when- 
ever I  write  to  him  ;  he  has  been  appointed  officially.  Lord 
Granville  returns  to  Paris. 

I  will  not  take  my  leave  until  matters  are  fairly  settled  here, 
and  have  got  back  into  their  old  groove. 

The  king's  dinner  party  yesterday  was  a  curious  one,  not  a 
single  minister  or  high  official  being  present.  The  resignations 
were  not  withdrawn  till  ten  o'clock  in  the  evening.  .  .  . 

General  Sebastiani  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand. 

Paris,  May  16th,  1832. 
Mon  Prince, 

I  have  to  announce  a  sad  piece  of  news  to  you.     M. 
Perier  has  ended  his  honourable  and  laborious  career. 

1  M.  de  Thorn,  a  senator,  and  the  King  of  Belgium's  governor  at  Luxemburg, 
had  been  arrested  by  order  of  the  Dutch  government  on  the  17th  of  April,  1832. 
King  William,  in  a  note  dated  May  7th,  made  it  a  condition  of  his  liberation,  that  those 
persons  who  had  been  arrested  in  Belgium  during  the  Revolution  should  be  set  free, 
and  all  persecutions  against  therdnsurgents  stopped.  M.  de  Thorn  was  not  liberated 
till  November  23rd. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  301 

You  will  share  with  me,  mon  Prince,  and  with  all  those  who 
appreciated  the  enlightened  devotion  of  this  noble  citizen,  the 
deep  sorrow  that  his  premature  loss  causes  us — a  loss  which 
we  now  feel  all  the  greater,  as  a  crisis,  which  we  trusted  might 
terminate  favourably,  led  us  to  hope  up  to  the  last  few  days,  that 
he  would  be  restored  to  his  work  and  to  his  country. 

In  these  first  moments,  given  up  to  regrets  at  the  sad  ending 
of  so  noble  a  life,  nothing  has  yet  been  arranged,  mon  Prince, 
that  it  is  important  you  should  know. 

When  the  ranks  of  those  whom  one  loves  and  esteems,  are 
being  thinned,  it  is  necessary  to  cling  still  closer  to  those  who  are 
left  to  us.  The  sad  news  which  forms  the  subject  of  my  letter, 
affords  me  the  opportunity,  mon  Prince,  of  renewing  the  ex- 
pressions of  my  devotion  and  my  confidence  in  your.  .  .  . 


The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  the  Princess  de 

Vaudemont. 

May  iyd,  1832. 

The  sitting  in  the  House  of  Lords  yesterday  passed  off  as  I 
expected.  Many  of  the  Peers  in  the  Opposition  withdrew,  many 
did  not  vote  at  all,  the  result  being  a  majority  for  the  Ministry 
of  fifty-two  votes,  on  the  important  question  which  has  been 
decided.1  The  other  clauses  will  probably  share  the  same  fate, 
and  the  question  will,  I  believe,  be  settled  on  Wednesday,  30th. 

The  grief  felt  here  at  the  death  of  M.  Perier,  has  shown  itself 
in  all  sorts  of  ways,  and  among  all  classes  of  people.  It  has 
been  noticed  with  some  surprise,  that  M.  le  Due  d'Orleans  did 
not  hold  one  of  the  cords  of  the  canopy.  Here  on  several 
occasions,  this  office  has  been  performed  by  the  most  important 
persons,  such  as  the  Prince  of  Wales  and  the  Duke  of  York.2 
Each  country,  it  is  true,  has  its  customs,  and  our  precedents  arc 
not  in  England.  Moreover,  it  is  a  matter  of  small  moment,  and 
more  a  piece  of  society  gossip  where  one  side  is  always  ready  to 
find  fault.  Let  me  know  when  Sebastian i  goes  to  drink  the 
waters  ;  I  should  like  to  see  him  before  he  goes,  and  this  I  think 
is  only  natural.  .  .  . 

1  .The  House  had  assented  to  the  clause  in  the  Bill  which  entrusted  the  electoral 
franchise  to  one  of  the  London  suburbs  ;  this  clause,  and  likewise  all  those  which 
gave  additional  members  to  the  large  populous  centres,  had  been  hotly  contested 
by  the  Tory  party. 

-  Frederick,  Duke  of  York  and  Albany,  second  son  of  George  III.,  born  in  1763, 
married  to  the  Princess  Frederica,  daughter  of  the  Prince  Royal  of  Prussia.  He  died 
in  1827. 


302  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

London,  May  24//1,  1832. 

The  Tories  are  not  very  numerous  in  the  House  of  Lords. 
The  Bill  is  passing  very  quietly,  the  discussions  yesterday  not 
being  half  so  bitter  as  on  the  preceding  days.  This  does  not 
lessen  the  hatred,  which  is  very  strong  between  both  parties,  but 
it  delays  the  action.  The  king  has  announced  that  he  wished 
the  Bill  to  pass,  and  it  will  pass.  Those  who  are  opposed  to  it, 
have  absented  themselves. 

M.  de  Remusat1  has  arrived  here  with  his  wife,  and  brought 
me  some  letters  from  Paris.  .  .  .  Nothing  fresh  about  Holland  ; 
the  Dutch  ministers,  here,  have  received  no  answer  to  the  last 
communication  they  were  directed  by  the  Conference  to  send  to 
the  Hague. 

I  have  neither  love  nor  the  opposite  for  the  Belgians  ;  I 
have  undoubtedly  been  of  greater  service  to  them  than  any- 
one, but  I  do  not  want  them  to  commit  such  follies  as  would 
perhaps  involve  us  in  a  universal  war,  and  they  have  so  little 
sense,  that  they  cannot  understand  this.  .  .  . 

May  i$th,  1832. 

Ever  since  M.  Perier's  death,  the  tone  of  the  despatches  of 
our  department  for  Foreign  Affairs  does  not  please  me  ;  there 
is  a  very  perceptible  change.  I  should  not  have  noticed  it,  but 
that  I  must  not  let  matters  retard  my  departure.  I  am  doubt- 
ful about  this  journey  to  Compiegne.2  It  will  make  the  Belgians 
still  more  difficult  to  please,  and  nothing  can  be  settled,  unless 
they  on  their  part  facilitate  matters.  People  think  themselves 
very  clever  when  they  manage  to  raise  difficulties  !  A  fine 
science  truly  !  Anyone  can  do  that  !  But  to  resist  no  further 
than  is  necessary  and  to  know  when  to  stop,  is  what  very  few 
people  can  accomplish.  The  King  of  Holland  asks  for  nothing 
better  than  to  initiate  reasons  for  fresh  delays,  and  yet  he  must 
not  be  pressed  ;  first,  because  it  would  not  be  easy  to  do  so,  but 
still  more,  because  it  would  be  neither  fair  nor  profitable.  This  I 
will  maintain  as  long  as  I  am  entrusted  with  the  affairs  of 
France.  I  hope  that  during  my  absence  they  will  do  the  same, 
but  I  do  not  feel  quite  sure  of  this.  However,  Durant,  if  he  is 
allowed  to  do  so,  will  follow  my  line  better  than  anyone  else. 

1  Francis  Marie  Charles,  Comte  de  Remusat,  born  in  1797,  nephew  of  Casimir 
Perier,  was  at  that  time  deputy  for  Muret.  He  became  Undei-Secretary  of  State  for 
the  Interior  in  1840.  He  lived  in  retirement  under  the  Empire.  In  1871,  he  was 
made  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs.     He  died  in  1875. 

2  King  Louis  Philippe  went  to  Compiegne  to  meet  the  King  of  the  Belgians,  and 
arrange  the  preliminaries  of  the  marriage  of  the  latter  with  the  Princess  Louis- 
d'Orleans. — (Note  by  M.  de  Bacourt.) 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  i.S 30.  303 

We  arc  living  in  strange  times,  and  they  are  strange  every- 
where. What  things  have  I  not  seen  during  the  past  fifteen 
days  !     Enough  to  talk  about  for  a  year  ! 

The  English  are  sending  a  fleet  to  the  Tagus  ;  I  suppose  we 
shall  do  the  same.  When  troubles  threaten  any  place,  it  is 
necessary  to  protect  the  people  of  our  country  who  may  be 
exposed  thereto.  .  .  . 

London,  May  27//1,  1832. 

In  eight  days,  the  third  reading  of  the  Reform  Bill  will  come 
on,  and  the  Bill  will  be  passed  precisely  as  it  was  brought  in. 
Thus  the  temper  shown  by  the  Tories,  will  deprive  them  of 
some  ameliorations  that  would  have  occurred  during  the  dis- 
cussion. I  have  a  talk  every  day  with  Madame  de  Remusat, 
who  in  the  name  of  all  M.  Perier's  friends,  urges  me  to  accept 
the  Presidency  of  the  Council  in  Paris.  I  am  greatly  flattered 
by  their  opinion,  but  I  have  quite  decided  not  to  accept  any- 
thing. I  say  this  quietly  and  temperately,  as  one  does  when 
one  is  immovable.  .  .  . 

May  2%th 

There  was  a  grand  reception  at  Court  to-day,  in  honour  of 
the  king's  birthday ;  it  was  a  very  brilliant  gathering  ;  both 
parties  were  present,  and  all  on  the  best  terms  with  each  other. 

I  know  nothing  of  Holland.  The  king  wishes  to  stir  up 
the  Belgians,  hoping  that  in  that  way  some  quarrel  or  some 
steps  taken  on  his  territory,  would  give  him  an  excuse  for  hos- 
tile action  without  any  fear  of  reproach.  .  .  . 

King   Louis   Philippe   to  the   Prince  de  Talleyrand. 

St.  Cloud,  Sunday  Evening,  May  27th,  1832. 

Mon  Prince, 

There  was  no  need  that  you  should  tell  me  of  all  the 
care  and  discretion  with  which  you  will  arrange  for  everything, 
during  your  absence  from  the  important  post  where  you  have 
done  such  great  service  both  to  France  and  me.  I  feel  sure  that 
you  would  not  leave,  until  your  absence  could  not  cause  any 
troublesome  mishaps.  I  earnestly  hope  that  that  period  may 
not  be  too  far  distant,  but  I  must  confess  that  I  do  not  think- 
that  it  has  yet  arrived. 

General  Sebastiani  will  have  told  you  of  the  interview  about 
to  take  place  between  King  Leopold  and  myself.  You  know 
the  reasons  for  it,  and  you  can  have  some  idea  of  the  subjects 
to  be  discussed.     The  ratifications  of  the  Great  Powers  having 


304  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

been  exchanged,  we  deemed  it  best  that  the  interview  should  no 
longer  be  deferred,  and  that  it  would  even  help  to  accelerate  the 
King  of  Holland's  compliance.  I  am  not  taking  any  of  my 
daughters  to  Compiegne  ;  and  you  will  understand  that,  as  this 
interview  may  exercise  a  great  influence  on  my  eldest  daughter's 
destiny,  there  is  the  more  reason  for  my  not  taking  any  of  them 
there.  I  am  therefore  only  going  with  the  queen  and  my 
second  son.  .  .  . 

I  had  written  very  fully  to  King  Leopold,  but  unfortunately 
without  success,  urging  him  to  accede  to  the  proposals  of  the 
Conference,  by  declaring  his  readiness  to  enter  into  negotiations 
with  the  King  of  Holland  ;  he  has  done,  or  at  any  rate  his 
ministers  have  made  him  do  just  the  contrary  ;  he  has  very 
foolishly  taken  on  himself  the  chances  of  a  refusal,  which  the 
King  of  Holland  seemed  determined  to  spare  him.1  Never- 
theless, I  hope  this  is  not  irrevocable,  and  that  with  the  assistance 
of  General  Sebastiani,  who  accompanies  me  to  Compiegne,  we 
shall  succeed  in  dissuading  him  from  following  the  erroneous 
course  he  has  pursued.  But  there  is  all  the  greater  need,  mon 
cher  Prince,  that  the  Conference  should  take  such  action  towards 
the  King  of  Holland,  as  will  make  him  cease  his  resistance  as 
soon  as  possible.  Above  all  he  must  evacuate  the  citadel  of 
Antwerp,  for  that  is  the  crucial  point  of  the  matter.  It  is  for 
England  to  strike  the  decisive  blow,  and  this  will  in  every  way 
suit  us  best,  and  will  also,  it  seems  to  me,  conduce  more  to  the 
general  interest  of  Europe. 

Completely  absorbed,  and  with  reason,  in  the  stupendous 
affair  of  the  Reform  Bill,  the  English  government  cannot  well 
trouble  itself  with  continental  matters,  until  that  is  passed  ;  but, 
this  affair  once  ended,  not  a  moment  must  be  lost  in  dealing 
with  the  King  of  Holland  in  such  a  decisive  manner,  as  can  alone 
settle  this  affair.  You  may  rest  assured,  that  he  is  quite  as  well 
aware  as  we  are,  that  the  peace  of  Europe  cannot  be  fully  insured 

1  The  Conference  had  signed  a  protocol  on  the  4th  May,  by  which  Belgium  and 
Holland  were  invited  to  enter  at  once  into  the  negotiations  for  signing  a  definite  treaty. 
King  Leopold  replied  to  this  invitation,  by  a  note  dated  May  nth,  which  declared 
that  he  would  not  entertain  any  negotiations  until  the  execution  of  the  treaty  of 
November  15th,  had  commenced.  He  insisted  on  the  evacuation  of  Belgian  territory, 
especially  Antwerp,  and  the  free  navigation  of  the  Meuse.  Through  some  careless- 
ness, this  note  was  published  in  the  papers  before  it  was  sent  officially  to  the  Conference. 
The  Belgian  government  drew  up  another,  which  General  Goblet  brought  to  London 
in  the  beginning  of  June.  It  repeated  in  precise  terms,  the  note  of  the  nth  of  May. 
The  Dutch  Government  likewise  replied  to  the  Conferenca  by  a  note  dated  7th. 
In  this  note  it  declared  "  that  it  saw  with  deep  regret,  that  the  plenipotentiaries 
of  the  five  powers  looked  upon  the  treaty  of  November  15th,  as  the  unalterable 
basis  of  the  separation,  the  independence,  and  the  actual  state  of  possession  of 
Belgium,  while  for  its  part  it  must  continue  to  consider  this  treaty  as  completely 
opposed  to  the  protocol  of  January  27th,  1831." 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  305 

until  General  Chasse  has  left  Antwerp,  and  until  he  has  entered 
into  negotiations  with  King"  Leopold.  It  is  to  this  point,  there- 
fore, that  you  must  direct  all  your  diplomatic  energies,  and  it  is 
only  when  this  last  success  has  been  obtained  (without  doubt 
the  most  difficult  of  all)  that  you  will  have  completed  the  great 
task  which  you  undertook  with  so  much  devotion,  and  which  you 
have  carried  out  with  so  much  talent  and  skill. 

I  will  say  no  more,  mon  cher  Prince,  and  will  confine 
myself  to  renewing,  with  all  my  heart,  the  assurance  of  my  sin- 
cere friendship  for  you. 

Louis   Philippe. 

P.S. — I  have  signed  M.  de  Mareuil's  credentials  as  you 
wished  ;  he  will  go  to  you  as  soon  as  the  Marquis  de  Dalmatic1 
has  arrived  at  the  Hague. 


General  Sebastiani  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand. 

Paris,  May  28//1,  1832. 
Mon  Prince, 

I  leave  for  Compiegne  in  a  few  hours,  and  expect  to 
arrive  there  in  the  evening.  To-morrow  we  shall  see  King 
Leopold,  and  will  discuss  the  business  with  him,  that  takes 
him  there.  This  meeting,  the  importance  of  which  you  will 
no  doubt  appreciate,  will  give  me  a  valuable  opportunity  of 
working  more  directly  and  without  any  intermediaries,  on  the  feel- 
ings of  the  head  of  the  Belgian  government,  and  proving  to  him 
that  the  welfare  of  his  country  (to  which  our  sovereign  consents 
to  unite,  by  a  fresh  tie,  the  destiny  of  ours)  depends  as  much  upon 
his  confidence,  as  upon  the  projects  of  our  Cabinet  and  those  of 
our  allies.  In  this  way,  we  shall  continue  the  work  at  Compiegne 
which  you  have  so  ably  conducted  in  London,  and  you  will 
be  punctually  informed  of  all  the  results  that  may  interest 
you. 

Having  spoken  about  State  affairs,  mon  Prince,  I  must  now 
say  a  few  words  about  our  own.  My  doctor  has  ordered  me  to 
take  the  waters  of  Bourbonne,  and  my  intention  is  to  go  there 
about  the  2nd  of  July.  Among  the  many  reasons  which  have 
decided  me  to  put  off  till  then,  a  journey  which  I  believe  is 
necessary  for  my  health,  you  can  certainly,  mon  Prince,  count 

1  Napoleon  Hector  Soult,  Marquis,  then  Due  de  Dalmatie,  son  of  the  Marshal. 
Born  in  1S01,  he  entered  the  army,  became  Captain  of  Artillery,  but  retired  in  1830, 
when  he  entered  the  Diplomatic  Service.  He  was  successively  accredited  to  Stock- 
holm in  1831,  to  the  Hague,  1832,  to  Turin  and  to  Berlin.  He  was  elected  deputy  in 
1843,  an(i  d'ec*  m  J857. 

VOL.    IV.  X 


306  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLE  YRAND. 

my  wish  to  await  you  in  Paris  and  meet  you  there.  After  an 
absence  which  events  have  made  long,  though  the  time  has  been 
short,  you  will  hardly  credit  how  much  value  I  attach  to  a  few 
hours'  conversation  with  you,  and  the  pleasure  I  shall  have  in 
repeating  by  word  of  mouth,  the  expressions  of  affection  I  here 
beg  you  to  accept.  .  .  . 


The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  the  Princess  de 

Vaudemont. 

London, /////v  2mf,  1832. 

I  am  working  hard,  so  that  Durant  may  find  our  affairs  with 
Holland  in  a  fair  way  of  being  settled,  and  I  really  believe  that 
the  interests  of  Holland  will  oblige  the  king  to  give  in.  All 
the  support  he  counted  on  has  failed  him.  I  shall  remain  here 
until  after  Durant's  arrival,  and  will  set  him  going  fairly. 

Everyone  here  is  exceedingly  gracious  to  me  ;  they  insist  on 
my  giving  my  word  of  honour  that  I  shall  return.  I  have 
given  my  promise,  but  my  movements  will  depend  upon  the 
state  of  France  ;  that  must  decide  me.  I  have  done  what  no 
one  else  was  able  to  do,  that  is,  keep  all  the  five  Powers  united  ; 
they  are  so  now,  and  my  mission,  if  I  wish  it,  is  ended,  though 
it  was  considered  more  than  a  difficult  one.  The  king  will  I 
hope,  by  some  act,  convince  all  Europe  that  he  intends  to  follow 
M.  Perier's  system  at  home  and  mine  abroad.  .  .  . 

Madame  Adelaide  d'Orleans  to  the  Prince  de 

Talleyrand. 

St.  Cloud,  June  2nd,  1832. 

I  have  been  in  such  a  whirl  of  excitement  for  the  last  week, 
mon  cher  Prince,  that  notwithstanding  my  wish  to  do  so,  I  have 
found  it  utterly  impossible  to  write  to  you.  But  having  re- 
turned yesterday  evening  from  our  trip  to  Compiegne,  I  hasten 
to  give  you  an  account  of  this  little  journey,  which  has  been 
most  satisfactory  in  every  way.  Our  beloved  king,  as  he  well 
deserves,  was  received  everywhere  with  the  greatest  tokens  of 
affection,  and  his  appearance  and  his  speeches  have,  as  they 
always  do,  produced  the  best  possible  effect  at  Compiegne. 
This  makes  me  regret  that  he  cannot  go  about  more  frequently, 
as  nothing  can  equal  the  good  effect  of  his  words. 

We   are    perfectly   contented    with   King    Leopold.      It    is 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  307 

impossible  for  him  to  be  more  satisfactory  than  he  is  at  present. 
He  was  perfect  and  good.  The  great  business  of  the  marriage 
has  therefore  been  settled,  and  I  am  anxious  to  be  the  first  to 
tell  you  of  it.  The  date  at  which  it  is  to  take  place,  has  not 
yet  been  decided,  but  it  will  be  in  August  at  latest.  This 
marriage,  so  suitable  from  a  political  point  of  view,  is  also 
from  King  Leopold's  character,  his  affection  for  us,  and  the 
proximity  of  our  two  countries,  equally  that  which,  according  to 
our  dear  Louise's  inclination,  offers  her  the  greatest  chances  of 
happiness.  But  the  poor  dear  child  is  greatly  affected  at  the 
thought  of  being  separated  from  her  father,  her  mother,  and 
all  of  us  ;  that  is  only  natural.  What  is  now  needed  to  insure 
the  security  and  happiness  of  this  union  is,  that  you  should 
succeed  in  getting  the  Dutch  to  evacuate  Antwerp.  This  is  of 
the  utmost  importance,  not  only  for  Belgium,  which  will  always 
be  disturbed  as  long  as  they  are  there,  but  also  for  us,  for  in 
France  as  well  as  Belgium,  most  people  will  not  believe  in  peace, 
until  the  King  of  Holland  is  brought  to  reason,  and  submits  to 
the  treaties  of  November  15th.  It  will  be  for  you  to  conclude 
this  great  and  noble  work,  and  it  is  very  important  for  the 
general  peace  that  it  should  be  done  quickly. 

We  have,  fortunately,  received  very  good  accounts  of  the 
chouans1  and  La  Vendee.  Thanks  to  the  measures  that  have  been 
taken  by  the  government,  the  good  feeling  of  the  people,  and  the 
National  Guard  in  those  parts,  the  scheme  of  a  general  rising  has 
fallen  through,  and  been  found  to  be  impossible.  It  is  true 
there  are  some  slight  mishaps  to  deplore,  and  those  who  thus 
stir  up  and  foment  a  civil  war,  are  truly  criminal.  But  in  the 
end,  I  have  no  doubt  that  this  evil  will  result  in  good.  What 
appears  to  me  incredible,  though  unfortunately  a  fact,  is  that  no 
one  seems  to  know  for  certain  where  Madame  la  Duchesse  de 
Berry  is,  whether  in  France  or  in  Spain.2  This  uncertainty  is 
very  trying,  not  on  account  of  what  she  can  do,  but  because  of 
the  anxiety  and  worry  which  all  this  causes  us. 

We  have  very  good  accounts  from  Chartres.  His  journey 
has  been  very  successful,  and  I  believe  that  just  now  his  presence 
in  the  south  is  most  useful.  He  will  not  return  till  the  end  of 
this  month  or  the  beginning  of  next ;  and  you,  mon  cher  Prince, 
what  are  your  plans  ?  I  am  longing  to  get  a  letter  from  you, 
and  to  learn  your  opinion  of  what  is  passing  in  England.  I 
will  leave  off  here,  as  I  want  this  letter  to  go  as  early  as 
possible. 

Accept  again,  mon  cher  Prince.  .  .  . 

1  Royalist  insurgents. 

-  The  Duchesse  de  Berry  was  then  in  Vendee. 

X    2 


308  THE  MEMOIRS  OE  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

The    Prince     de    Talleyrand    to    the    Princess     de 

Vaudemont. 

London,  June  7th,  1832. 

The  courier  has  arrived,  but  has  brought  me  no  letters  from 
you,  when  the  whole  town  is  filled  with  the  deplorable  news 
from   Paris.     I  am  terribly  anxious.  .  .  .* 

King  LEorc-LD  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand. 

Brussels,  June  5th,  1832. 
MON   TRES   CHER   PRINCE, 

I  received  your  kind  letter  by  M.  de  Bacourt  shortly 
before  starting  for  Compiegne,  and  I  have  waited  until  my  re- 
turn, in  order  to  write  to  you.  You  know  the  friendly  ties 
that  have  so  long  bound  me  to  the  Royal  Family  ;  you  can 
therefore  easily  understand  how  pleased  I  was  to  spend  a  few 
days  with  them.  The  king,  the  queen,  and  Madame  Adelaide, 
are  all  equally  and  truly  attached  to  you,  and  we  spoke  a  great 
deal  about  you. 

The  marriage  of  the  Princess  Louise  is  now  settled  to  the 
satisfaction  of  all  parties.  This  event  seems  to  cause  great 
pleasure  in  France,  and  the  masses,  who  are  not  easily  influenced, 
all  testified  their  goodwill  towards  me.  This  affair  of  La 
Vendee  has  caused  some  little  anxiety ;  nevertheless,  I  fancy  it 
may  rather  strengthen  the  government.  I  pray  you  in  your 
wisdom,  advise  them  so  that  they  may  act  vigorously.  The  ex- 
treme kindness  the  king  has  hitherto  shown  to  this  party,  now 
doubly  entitles  him  to  do  this. 

Notwithstanding  my  week's  absence,  and  the  great  distance 
I  was  away,  there  has  not  been  the  very  slightest  disturbance  in 
Belgium  ;  I  think  I  have  a  right  to  proclaim  this  aloud.  But 
it  is  time  all  this  was  ended  ;  the  army  and  the  zealous  patriots 
are  very  eager  for  war,  and  it  might  so  happen  that  I  should  not 
be  able  to  restrain  them. 

England  is  determined  to  finish  the  matter.  Nothing  is  easier. 
Let  a  fleet  be  stationed  in  the  English  Channel,  and  the  Dutch 
be  told,  that  after  a  certain  date  they  will  lose  the  arrears  of  the 
debt,  and  that  a  portion  of  the  capital  of  the  debt  will  be  deducted 
each  day.  I  believe  these  two  measures  would  have  great  in- 
fluence, without  any  danger  whatever.  The  last  reply  from 
Holland  renders  the  execution  of  the  treaty  imperative. 

1  After  General  Lamarque's  funeral,  there  was  a  terrible  outbreak  in  Paris.  It 
began  on  the  5th  of  June,  and  continued  until  the  middle  of  the  next  day,  the  6th. 
These  two  days  are  known  in  history  as  "the  days  of  June."— (Note  by  M.  de 
Bacourt.) 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  309 

As  forme,  they  may  rest  assured  that  I  will  do  my  utmost  to 
maintain  peace,  and  I  have  on  this  point  faithfully  performed 
my  duty  ;  but  I  wish  it  to  be  clearly  understood,  that  I  will  not 
allow  myself  to  be  overthrown  without  defending  myself  to 
the  last,  and  causing  many  others  to  fall  with  me.  I  have 
come  to  this  decision  with  the  greatest  deliberation.  It  is 
absolutely  necessary  for  the  tranquillity  of  France,  that  the 
Belgian  question  should  be  definitely  settled.  Louis  Philippe 
told  me  himself,  and  with  great  reason,  that  confidence  would 
not  be  restored  in  France  until  this  matter  was  ended.  The 
kindness  you  have  shown  to  M.  Van  de  Weyer  has  given  me 
great  pleasure;  he  merits  it  fully,  and  he  has  been  very  unfairly 
treated  here. 

Kindly  recall  me  to  the  recollection  of  Madame  de  Dino,  if 
she  has  not  entirely  forgotten  me,  and  believe  in  the  feelings  of 
esteem  and  sincere  friendship  which  I  shall  always  have  towards 
you. 

Leopold. 

The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  the  Princess  de 

Vau  demon  t. 

London,  June  Sfli,  1S32 

I  begin  my  letter  before  having  received  any  news  from 
Paris.  I  have  heard  nothing  since  nine  o'clock  on  the  morning 
of  the  6th  ;  you  can  understand  my  anxiety.  I  trust  all  has 
ended  favourably  for  the  government,  and  that  the  government 
will  take  advantage  of  it  to  re-establish  by  strong  and  constitu- 
tional measures  the  order,  which  has  been  so  seriously  disturbed. 
It  is  in  constitutionally  established  order  that  one  must  seek  for 
popularity  ;  such  policy  alone  is  sound.  Pampering  the  rabble 
only  emboldens  them,  and  does  no  good. 

It  is  said  that  the  king  showed  great  calmness  and  firmness 
on  the  evening  of  the  5th,  and  during  the  whole  night,  which 
he  spent  on  horseback  ;  his  conduct  is  much  approved  of 
here.  .  .  . 

King  Louis  Philippe  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand. 

Paris,  Friday,  June  y//i,  1832. 

Mon  cher  Prince, 

I  know  that  General  Sebastian i  has  written  to  you  in 
detail,  concerning  the  events  that  have  taken  place  in  Paris.  You 
will  share  in  my  grief  that  French  blood  should  have  been  spilt, 
but  you  will  also  share  the  true  satisfaction  I  feel  in  being  able 


3io  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

to  glory  in  the  fact,  that  I  have  no  more  provoked  this  struggle, 
than  I  have  omitted  anything  that  could  terminate  it  happily 
and  honourably  for  France  and  for  myself.  Those  who  have 
both  at  home  and  abroad  so  constantly  declared,  that  the  throne 
of  July  would  fall  before  the  union  of  the  Carlists  and  Repub- 
licans, like  the  walls  of  Jericho  before  the  trumpets  of  Gideon, 
will  now  have  to  recognize  that  a  frank  and  real  nationality,  a 
holy  respect  for  the  sworn  faith  and  for  the  institutions,  the 
laws  and  the  liberties  of  one's  country,  are  better  bulwarks  for 
the  throne,  than  absolute  power  with  its  mob  of  courtiers  and 
satellites. 

But  having  gained  this  great  victory,  we  must  now  con- 
solidate it,  and  utilize  the  strength  we  have  won  thereby,  to  put 
an  end  to  all  the  uncertainties  and  evasions  from  without,  which 
might  still  endanger  our  safety  abroad  and  disturb  the  general 
peace. 

I  congratulate  you  most  sincerely,  mon  cher  Prince,  on  the 
great  success  you  have  obtained,  in  procuring  the  ratification  ot 
the  treaty  of  the  15th  November  by  all  the  five  Powers  ;  but  it 
is  as  much  due  to  their  dignity,  as  it  is  absolutely  necessary  for 
France  and  England,  that  the  execution  of  the  treaty  just  ratified, 
should  at  once  follow  the  exchange  of  the  five  ratifications  al- 
ready effected.  I  must  tell  you  that  the  63rd  protocol  seems  to 
me  on  this  point  to  be  surprisingly  weak  and  feeble.1  But  be 
that  as  it  may,  now  that  this  mark  of  consideration  has  been 
shown  to  the  King  of  Holland,  the  manner  in  which  he  has 
received,  it  is  a  still  further  reason  for  adopting  a  different  tone, 
and  insisting  on  his  fixing  a  definite  period  for  handing  over 
the  citadel  of  Antwerp  to  the  Belgians.  I  believe  that  the 
English  government,  is  like  ourselves,  ready  to  make  this 
explicit  declaration  to  the  King  of  Holland,  and  that  it  realizes 
quite  as  strongly  as  we  do,  that  it  is  only  by  compelling  His 
Majesty  of  the  Netherlands  to  evacuate  that  citadel,  that  we 
shall  get  him  to  recognize  the  independence  of  Belgium  and 
sign  the  treaty  with  King  Leopold. 

I  feel  assured  that  the  three  Powers,  Prussia,  Austria,  and 
even  Russia,  quite  expect  France  and  England  will  jointly 
make  this  declaration  to   the  King  of  Holland,  and  that  they 

1  This  protocol  had  been  drawn  up  on  May  31st,  in  answer  to  a  note  addressed  to 
the  Conference  by  the  Dutch  plenipotentiaries  containing  some  fresh  proposals. 

In  this  protocol  the  Conference  declared  "that  the  proposals  in  this  note  did  not 
differ  in  any  way  from  those  which  had  been  presented  to  Comte  Orloff  at  the  Hague, 
more  than  two  months  ago,  and  which  occasioned  his  declaration  of  the  27th  March 
last."  That,  consequently,  there  was  no  need  for  the  Conference  to  take  any  notice  of 
the  said  note,  "and  that  it  must  now  occupy  itself  with  the  resolutions,  which  the 
gravity  of  the  circumstances  demanded." 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  311 

will  not  place  any  obstacles  in  the  way,  for  they  are  quite  as 
well  aware  as  we  are,  that  this  declaration  is  the  only  measure 
that  will  oblige  the  King  of  Holland  to  relinquish  his  futile  re- 
sistance, and  quench  the  foolish  hopes  he  still  entertains,  of 
becoming  the  general  disturber  of  the  peace  of  Europe.  Besides, 
I  think  it  will  be  perfectly  easy  to  prove  to  those  who  do  not 
wish  us  to  attack  the  King  of  Holland,  that  the  only  way  to 
prevent  this,  is  to  convince  him  that  he  will  be  attacked, 
if  he  does  not  evacuate  the  citadel  of  Antwerp  on  the  clay 
fixed  by  us.  You  may  fully  assure  the  English  government  and 
the  Conference,  that  we  on  our  side  are  most  anxious  not  to  be 
obliged  to  send  our  troops  to  besiege  this  citadel,  but  that  we 
have  decided  on  so  doing,  if  we  find  there  is  no  other  way  left 
of  forcing  him  to  carry  out  this  evacuation  on  the  day  named. 
It  would,  I  think,  be  well  to  fix  this  for  the  1st  of  July  prox. 

If,  as  I  do  not  doubt,  the  English  government  combines 
with  mine  in  adopting  this  course,  then  I  think  it  would  be 
advisable  for  you  to  make  a  declaration  jointly  with  Lord 
Palmerston  to  the  Dutch  plenipotentaries,  stating,  that  you  will 
not  receive  any  communication  from  them,  until  their  king  has 
given  an  undertaking,  that  he  will  accede  to  the  views  of  the 
five  Powers  by  evacuating  Antwerp,  and  that  if  this  evacuation 
is  not  carried  out  by  the  1st  of  July,  the  Dutch  ports  will  be 
blockaded  by  our  combined  squadrons. 

I  fancy  that  I  am  right  in  thinking  that  this  mode  of  pro- 
cedure will  suit  England,  and  as  for  us,  we  shall  infinitely  prefer 
it  to  the  more  costly  measure  of  sending  troops  into  Belgium. 
This  would  expose  us  to  various  complications  which  we 
are  doing  our  utmost  to  avoid,  but  which  nevertheless  we  are 
determined  to  risk,  if  the  shuffling,  that  we  neither  can  nor  will 
any  longer  tolerate,  is  persisted  in. 

You  will  perceive,  mon  cher  Prince,  that  according  to  the 
popular  saying,  I  wanted  to  have  my  say  out  with  you,  as  I  know 
well  you  will  only  make  a  good  use  of  it,  and  because  I  like  to 
be  open  with  you  in  all  confidence,  according  to  the  old  habit, 
which  I  always  wish  to  keep  up  with  you.  I  was  all  the  more 
induced  to  do  this,  as  the  matter,  after  the  crisis  we  have  just 
passed  through  so  triumphantly,  is  a  very  serious  one,  and  it  is 
therefore  desirable  that  you  should  make  use  of  the  short  time 
you  will  still  be  in  London,  to  give  the  right  impetus  to  this 
affair,  which  you,  more  than  anyone  else,  have  the  means  of  doing. 
1  have  not  time  to  tell  you  of  my  interview  with  King 
Leopold  at  Compiegne.  I  will  only  say,  that  we  have 
settled  his  marriage  with  my  eldest  daughter,  and  that  I  also 
found  him  so  well  disposed,  that  I  had  no  difficulty  in  obtaining 


312  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

from  him  all  I  told  you  I  intended  asking  of  him.     He  has  also 
promised  me  to  send  M.  Van  de  Weyer  at  once  to  London. 

Good-night,  mon  cher  Prince  ;  you  know  all  my  friendship 
for  you. 

Louis  Philippe. 

Madame  Adelaide  d'Orleans  to  the  Prince  de 

Talleyrand. 

Tuileries,  Friday,  June  St/i,  1832. 

I   hasten,    mon    cher    Prince,    as   soon    as    I    have  a   spare 
moment,  to  give  you   news  of  us,   feeling  sure  that   you  would 
be  anxious  to  hear,  after  the  very  important   events  which  have 
just  taken  place.     It  has  been  a  most  anxious  and  painful  time, 
owing  to  the  blood  that  has  been   shed.     The  whole   affair  had 
been  prepared  for  some  time  by   the  two  factions  which   now 
only  form  one — the  Carlists  and  the  Republicans  ;  and  there  is  no 
doubt  that  this  conspiracy  is  connected  with  those  disturbances 
in   the  south  and    La  Vendee.     Our   dearly  loved   king,  as   he 
always  does,   quickly   decided   and   secured  the  victory  by  his 
presence  here,  his   firmness,  his  courage,   and  his  energy.     No 
sooner  did  he  hear  at  Saint  Cloud,  on  Tuesday  evening,  what  was 
taking  place  in  Paris,  than  he  ordered  his  horses,  and  the  queen, 
Nemours,  Marshal  Gerard,  and  I  got  into  the  carriage  with  him, 
and  along  the  whole  route  all  the  people  we  met,  all  the  carts  and 
all  the  public  conveyances  rang  with  the  cry  of   Vive  le  roil''' 
It  was  the  same  when  we  reached  Paris.     You  cannot  have  the 
slightest  idea  of  the  enthusiasm  of  the  troops  and  the  National 
Guard,  who  were  in  the  Place  du  Carrousel.     After  he  had  re- 
viewed them,  and  on  leaving,  the  king  said,  "  To-morroiv,  dear 
comrades,  I  shall  count  on  yon."     These  words  were  rapturously  re- 
peated.    "  Yes,  yes ;  to-morroiv,  to-morrow  /"  and  in  truth  the)' 
all     behaved    admirably,  and     our    beloved    king    encouraged 
them  afresh,  by  showing  himself  in  every  part  of  Paris,  greatly 
against  the  advice  of  Marshal  Lobau,  who  strove  to  prevent  him 
from  going  to  those  parts  of  Paris  where  fighting  was  still  going 
on  ;  but,    thank    heaven,   the    bullets    spared    him  !       Marshal 
Gerard,  who  was  with  him,  told  me  that  he  had  never  seen  any- 
thing like  the  enthusiasm  of  the  whole  population.    They  followed 
his    steps    in   crowds   shouting,  "  Vive  le  roi,    (Long    live    the 
king).    A  has  les  Carlistes  !    (Down  with  the  Carlists).    A  das  les 
Rcpublicains !     (Down    with    the    Republicans)."     There    were 
also  cries  of,  "  Prepare  Paris  for  a  state  of  siege  !  "  and  numbers 
coming  up  to  the  king,  as  close  as  they  could,  called  out,  "Above 
all,  no  mercy  to  the  Carlists." 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830. 


j' j 


Never  has  our  beloved  king  received  greater  proofs  of 
affection  and  devotion,  than  at  that  moment.  All  the  National 
Guard  from  the  outskirts  came  pouring  in,  and  did  wonders  ; 
they  fought  like  lions.  Yesterday,  all  those  from  the  depart- 
ment of  the  Seine  and  Oise  arrived,  and  when  those  at  Havre 
heard  what  was  taking  place,  they  also  wanted  to  come.  Ah  ! 
our  dear  Louis  Philippe  is  very  strong  and  thoroughly  identified 
with  our  great  and  beloved  nation.  This  is  a  satisfactory  reply 
to  all  those  who  were  in  doubt  as  to  whether  he  could  remain 
on  the  throne,  and  whether  he  would  have  strength  enough  to 
contend  against  all  the  factions.  I  trust  the  European  Powers 
will  now  feel  reassured  o\\  this  point,  and  believe  that  when  the 
safety  of  his  kingdom  requires  it,  Louis  Philippe  knows  how  to 
be  both  strong  and  energetic. 

This  wicked  and  shameful  conspiracy  has  occasioned  much 
bloodshed  ;  it  grieves  us  greatly,  but  the  results  are  immense. 
I  think  it  would  be  a  good  time  to  get  the  Conference  to  put  an 
end  to  matters  with  the  King  of  Holland, and  showhim  plainly  that 
he  must  earn-  out  the  treaty  signed  by  the  five  Powers.  In  truth, 
it  is  not  possible  any  longer  to  give  either  reason  or  excuse  for 
prolonging  this  state  of  uncertainty,  so  hurtful  and  so  contrary 
to  the  interests  of  France  and  Belgium.  Your  zeal  and  your 
ability  will  enable  you  to  insure  this  decision,  and  I  hope,  mon 
cher  Prince,  that  you  will  bring  us  this  good  piece  of  news. 

Our  beloved  king  wishes  to  write  to  you,  and  hopes  to  do  so 
as  soon  as  he  can  find  a  spare  moment,  as  he  is  very  anxious 
about  the  evacuation  of  Antwerp,  and  that  the  Conference  with 
regard  to  this,  should  not  delay  in  taking  measures  to  force  the 
King  of  Holland  to  comply,  if  he  will  not  do  so  willingly. 

We  have  very  good  accounts  from  Chartres  ;  he  is  very  well 
satisfied  with  his  journey.  We  know  by  telegraphic  despatches 
that  he  arrived  at  Marseilles  on  the  7th  of  June,  at  three  in  the 
afternoon,  amid  a  great  concourse  of  people  and  loud  accla- 
mations. Here  we  are  all  in  very  good  health,  and  I  wish  that 
you  could  say  the  same  for  yourself. 

So  the  Reform  Bill  is  passed  !    Accept,  mon  cher  Prince.  .  .  . 

The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  the   Prinxess  de 

Vaudemont. 

London,  June  io//t,  1832. 

At  present,  everyone  here  is  convinced  that  it  was  the  people 
of  Paris  who  commenced  the  insurrection  ;  everyone  therefore 
approves  the  action  of  the  government.     It  ought  to  gain  suffi- 


314  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE   TALLEYRAND. 

cient  strength  from  this  circumstance,  to  prevent  such  a  crisis 
ever  occurring  again.  The  king  must  remember  that  in  all  the 
crises  in  which  the  government  has  won,  the  elections  have  gen- 
erally been  satisfactory,  and  that  in  all  those  in  which  it  has  lost 
they  have  been  the  reverse.  The  refugees  ought  also  to  be  sent 
away,  without  exception.  They  do  no  good  in  Paris.  They 
should  be  scattered  in  small  numbers  through  the  various  de- 
partments ;  the  refugees  of  the  south,  in  the  towns  of  the  north, 
and  the  refugees  of  the  north,  in  the  towns  of  the  south.  The 
Loire  should  be  the  line  of  demarcation.  Spaniards  and  Portu- 
guese to  Normandy  and  Picardy,  Piedmontese  to  Flanders, 
and  Poles  to  Algiers.  They  would  then  either  fight  or  colonize 
there.  .  .  . 

June  nth,  1832. 

If  money,  and  a  good  deal  of  money,  has  been  distributed 
among  the  rioters  in  Paris,  it  seems  impossible  to  me  that  they 
cannot  discover  where  the  money  comes  from.  Caution  is  not 
usual  with  the  class  of  people  who  take  five,  ten,  and  twenty 
francs. 

As  far  as  Holland  is  concerned,  I  am  quite  disposed  to  press 
for  a  decision,  but  I  do  not  think  we  must  hurry  anything. 
We  must  not,  now  more  than  ever,  take  any  separate  action 
from  that  of  the  other  four  Powers.  In  that  lies  the  strength  of 
the  king  and  his  dynasty.  We  must  never  for  one  moment  lose 
sight  of  this.  I  think,  and  I  believe,  that  England  will  at  present 
act  with  us,  but  soon  all  the  other  Cabinets  will  try  their  best  to 
separate  her  from  us.  Are  we  sure  that  she  will  resist  ?  or  that 
she  will  resist  for  long?  If  a  change  of  Ministry  takes  place 
here,  what  would  then  happen  ?  You  must  not  imagine  that  there 
is  not  a  strong  party  against  us  here.  All  this  gives  grave 
matter  for  thought.  A  hasty  decision  may  lead  us  all  astray. 
Let  us  make  yet  one  more  attempt  ;  that  done,  all  conciliatory 
measures  will  have  been  exhausted,1  and  then  the  Powers  who 
do  not  act,  must  tell  us  that  we  are  free  to  do  so.  That  is 
my  way  of  looking  at  it.  Believe  me,  disturbances,  no  matter 
how  well  they  are  put  down,  give  the  impression  abroad,  that 
fresh  troubles  may  at  any  moment  arise  again,  and  that  is  not 
conducive  to  confidence.  Let  us  not  therefore  separate  ourselves 
from  the  other  four  Powers,  unless  by  their  advice.  .  .  . 

1  The  Conference,  in  effect,  had  renewed  the  negotiations  with  the  King  of  the 
Netherlands,  by  the  protocol  of  June  nth.  It«contained  the  concessions  which  the 
Conference  deemed  they  might  grant  to  the  Netherlands.  On  the  30thjune,  the  Dutch 
plenipotentiaries  replied,  but  their  answer  did  not  yet  end  the  matter.  All  these 
documents  are  in  vol.  xxiii.  of  Marten's  Collection,  page  415,  and  following  pages. 


7  HE  RE  I  OL  UTION  OF  1 830.  315 

June  12///,   1S32. 

I  am  awaiting  Durant  ;  I  will  leave  a  position  in  his  hands 
which  I  consider  excellent,  namely,  the  confirmed  union  of  the 
five  Great  Powers,  based  on  the  maintenance  o.f  property  and 
principles.  This  alone  can  arrest  the  progress  made  by  the 
spirit  of  the  times,  towards  destroying  actual  civilization  in 
order  to  arrive  at  a  chimerical  one.  Tell  me  when  the  king  ex- 
pects me.  I  shall  not  leave  here  till  I  am  no  longer  needed,  that 
is  certain  ;  but  I  should  like  to  know  when  I  am  expected. 

As  I  do  not  wish  to  fill  any  post  in  France  I  should  prefer 
arriving  there  when  everything  has  settled  down  again,  and  when 
all  the  places  and  situations  have  been  filled.  I  am  only  of 
use  here  ;  one  must  do  the  work  to  which  one  is  called.  I  shall 
therefore  return  here,  no  matter  what  they  say.  I  shall  leave 
this  on  the  21st,  at  latest,  and  be  in  Paris  on  the  24th.  .  .  . 

London,  June  \$th}  1832. 

I  expect  Durant  here  on  Sunday,  the  17th.  I  will  give  him  the 
1 8th  and  19th,  for  his  introductions.  That  done,  and  a  few 
directions  given,  I  will  proceed  slowly  towards  Paris.  I  have 
arranged  matters  in  such  a  way,  that  after  we  have  exhausted  all 
considerations,  England  and  France  will  be  at  liberty  to  act 
as  they  think  best,  without  fear  of  any  coolness  with  the  other 
Powers  resulting  therefrom.  I  have  taken  upon  myself  to 
prolong  the  delay  till  the  30th  June,  because  I  consider  the 
union  of  the  three  Powers  as  the  chief  point,  and  because  I  feel 
sure  that  after  having  consented  to  this  delay,  which  they 
themselves  wished,  they  would  look  upon  a  combined  maritime 
action  by  France  and  England  as  a  matter  of  course.  The 
French  Cabinet  would  like  more  prompt  action,  but  I  think  they 
have  rather  succumbed  to  the  urgency  of  the  Belgians,  who 
hurry  on  our  Ministry,  through  M.  Lehon. 

General  Goblet,  who  is  in  London,  and  M.  Van  de  Weyer,  who 
is  in  Brussels,  are  of  the  same  opinion.  I  therefore  maintain  my 
view  ;  and  in  truth,  a  delay  of  fifteen  days  is  no  very  great  matter, 
when  one  feels  assured  that  this  complaisance  has  gained  the 
assent  of  the  Great  Powers,  who  are  our  colleagues  in  this  affair. 
And  then  all  will  be  done,  and  I  am  sure  that  it  is  well  done. 

I  am  writing  to  you  during  an  interval  in  this  morning's 
conference,  at  which  we  have  to  settle    the   fate   of  M.  Thorn.1 

1  M.  Thorn,  a  Belgian  subject,  had  been  arres'.ed  by  the  Dutch  authorities  in  the 
fortress  of  Luxemburg,  the  territory  of  which  belonged  to  the  King  of  Holland,  but 
the  fortress  belonged  to  the  Germanic  Confederation. — (Note  by  M.  de  Bacourt.) 


31 6  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

We  shall  insist  upon  the  Germanic  Confederation  ordering  him 
to  be  set  at  liberty,  and  allowed  to  leave,  despite  any  objections 
the  King  of  Holland  may  raise.  Durant  will  only  have  to  follow 
my  lead  :  union  with  England,  accord  between  the  five  Powers, 
a  joint  armament  with  England  to  oblige  the  King  of  Holland  to 
give  Belgium  back  her  territory,  and  above  all  to  force  him  to 
evacuate  Antwerp.  I  think  I  have  placed  and  left  the  affairs  of 
France,  in  this  respect,  in  a  very  good  position  .... 

.  As  a  fact,  I  did  leave  London  on  the  20th  June,  and  a  few 
hours  before  my  departure,  I  received  the  following  note  from 
Lord  Palmerston  : 


Lord  Palmerston  to  the  Prince  ue  Talleyrand. 

Foreign  Office,  June  lgf/i,  1832. 
My  dear  Prince, 

I  have  just  received  the  three   memoranda,1   which    I 
have  signed  and  will  send  off  at  once. 

Good-bye  once  again  ;  give  good  advice  where  you  are  going  ; 
take  care  of  your  health,  get  over  the  fatigues  of  our  long 
conferences  as  quickly  as  you  can,  and  come  back  here  soon  ; 
but  above  all — come  back. 

Ever  yours, 

Palmerston. 

I  reached  Paris  on  the  22nd  of  June. 

1  Memorandum  addressed  to  the  Austrian,  Prussian,  and  Russian  plenipotentiaries 
by  the  French  and  English  plenipotentiaries,  dated  June  19th. 

This  memorandum  declared  that  the  French  and  English  plenipotentiaries  had 
consented  to  enter  into  fresh  negotiations  with  the  King  of  the  Netherlands,  solely 
because  they  did  not  wish  to  break  through  the  united  action  of  the  five  Powers  ;  that 
the  object  of  this  fresh  negotiation  was  to  suspend  the  execution  of  the  treaty  of  the 
15th  November  ;  that  it  was  greatly  to  be  regretted  that  the  plenipotentiaries  of  the 
three  Powers  could  not,  for  want  of  instructions,  assign  a  limit  to  this  suspension, 
that,  nevertheless,  the  undersigned  thought  they  ought  to  warn  the  plenipotentiaries 
of  the  three  Courts,  that  they  could  not  consider  this  suspension  as  unlimited,  and 
that  if  by  the  31st  of  August,  the  King  of  the  Belgians  demanded  the  execution  of 
the  tieaty  of  November  15th,  their  governments  could  not  refuse  to  satisfy  him. 


END    OF    THE    TENTH    PART 


APPENDIX. 


As  in  the  preceding  volume,  this  appendix  is  added,  containing  a 
certain  number  of  private  or  confidential  letters,  which  seem  to  us  to  offer 
a  special  interest.  All  these  letters,  selected  from  M.  de  Talleyrand's 
papers,  have  been  copied  from  the  original  manuscripts  which  are  among 
the  Prince's  documents. 


Madame  Adelaide  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand.1 

Paris,  January  yd,  1831. 

This  wretched  Belgian  business  is  worrying  our  beloved  king  more  than 

I  can  tell  you,  mon  Prince,  and  places  him  in  such  a  difficult  position  that  he 

does  not  see  his  way  out  of  it.     You  know  how  fond  of,  how  attached  we  are 

to  the  Prince  of  Coburg,  and  the  king  would  certainly  in  every  way  prefer  him 

to  any  one  else,  but  unfortunately  here  he  is  only  looked  upon  as  a  tool 

of  England,  and,  it  must  be  admitted,  is  exceedingly  unpopular.     If  he  were 

to  reach  the  Belgian   throne  by  marriage  with  one  of  our   dear   girls,  it 

would  be  regarded  here,  as  a   sale  of  that  country  to  England  ;  and  the 

king    neither  can  nor  will,  expose   himself  to  such   a  risk,  which   might 

deprive  him   of  all   his  popularity  here,  and   probably  would  not,  for  the 

same  reason,  be  acceptable  to  Belgium.     What   she  wants  is,  either  the 

Due  de  Nemours,  or  to  be  united  to  France  ;  this  latter  would  inevitably 

bring  on  war,  and  must  not  therefore  be  thought  of  ;  Nemours,  the  Powers 

would  likewise  not  accept,  and  besides,  even  if  they  did  consent,  there  are  so 

many  difficulties  in  the  way,  that  the  king  is  far  from  wishing  it.    A  Regency 

would  have  to  be  appointed  :  how  and  of  whom  would  it  be  composed  ? 

Who  is  there  to  send  with  that  child  ?     Such  a  future  frightens  both  the 

father  and  king,  who  sees  therein   nothing   but   troubles,   difficulties,   and 

anxieties,  without  any  assured  advantages.     Besides,  the  vexed  question  of 

Luxemburg   adds   still   further   to   the   perplexity ;    the    Belgians   will   not 

recognize  the  decision  of  the  Diet  in  that  matter,  it  excites  them  more  and 

more,  and  makes  them  eager  for  war  ;  and  then,  add  to  all  this,  the  bad  faith 

of  the  King  of  Holland,  who  is  always  deceitful,  and  does  all  he  can  on  his 

side  to  bring  on  a  war,  and  who  by  his  unworthy  conduct  towards  them  has 

exasperated  the  whole  of  that  unhappy  country. 

As  to  Prince  Charles  of  Naples,  nobody  wants  him.     The  king  really 
does  not  know  which  way  to  turn  in  this  unfortunate  business  ;  it  makes  him 

1  See  rages  6,  10,  and  12. 


31 S  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

terribly  anxious,  for  he  cannot  see  what  side  he  ought  to  take.  ...  In 
pity,  write  and  give  me  your  advice,  entirely  in  confidence,  and  tell  me  what 
you  think  is  best  to  be  done  ;  but  do  not  lose  sight  of  the  fact  that  the 
irritation  which  exists  here  on  this  Belgian  question  is  very  great,  and  the 
nation's  desire  to  see  her  become  French  again  is  very  strong,  for  it  is  only 
the  king  who  hesitates  about  it ;  and  it  needs  all  the  confidence  and  all  the 
love  every  one  has  for  him,  to  induce  them  to  be  patient  over  this  matter. 
But  if,  when  the  arrangements  are  made,  it  is  thought  that  any  foreign 
Power  has  been  specially  favoured,  it  will  be  very  dangerous  both  for  the 
king  and  our  peace  at  home.      Keep  this  well  in  view,  for  it  is  a  fact.  .  .  . 


Madame  Adelaide  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand.1 

Paris,  January  $th,  1831. 

The  hot-headed  party  here  would  like  to  entangle  us  in  these  Belgian 
affairs,  and  force  France  into  a  war,  by  asking  for  the  reunion  of  Belgium, 
and  hoisting  the  French  tricolor  cockade ;  they  flatter  themselves  that 
such  an  attraction  would  be  irresistible  ;  but  they  flatter  themselves  in 
vain.  My  brother  has  declared  that  he  will  not  encourage  this  vain  hope, 
and  that  he  will  show  them  whether  it  is  the  king,  or  the  students  of  Paris, 
who  will  decide  the  question  of  peace  or  war.  .  .  . 

He  was  much  perplexed  the  day  before  yesterday,  as  he  could  not  see 
what  arrangement  would  really  suit  the  Belgians,  and  wrote  to  ask  your 
advice  as  to  suggesting  one  ;  but  a  despatch  from  M.  Bresson  having 
informed  him  that  the  Belgians  were  disposed  to  ask  for  Prince  Otto  of 
Bavaria,  he  at  once  put  aside  any  other  idea,  and  accepted  this  suggestion, 
not  that  it  might  be  said  that  he  desired  to  impose  this  Prince  or  any 
other  on  Belgium,  but  in  order  to  show  that  he  had  no  objection  to  him, 
that  he  thought  the  matter  ought  to  be  finished  quickly,  and  that,  con- 
sequently, he  was  very  pleased  with  the  choice.  ... 


Private. 


M.  Bresson  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand.'3 

Brussels,  January  i$t/i,  1831 


Mon  Prince, 

I  received  the  night  before  last,  the  letter  you  did  me  the  honour 
to  write  on  the  9th  ult,  as  well  as  the  documents  which  accompanied  it. 
I  have  taken  it  so  much  to  heart  that  I  should  have  displeased  you,  that 
I  attach  the  greatest  importance  to  making  clear  to  you  the  circumstances, 
which  led  to  the  sudden  combination,  which  I  see  plainly  now,  could  not 
have  suited  the  Conference. 

The  Republican  and  French  parties  had  all  their  batteries  ready;  we 
were  being  hurried  onwards  ;  we  dreaded  either  a  popular  demonstration,  or 
a  proclamation  of  the  reunion  with  France,  from  Liege  or  Verviers.  We 
thought  that  if  there  was  the  least  complication,  the  Congress  would  declare 
itself  in  favour  of  M.  le  Due  de  Nemours.  These  dangers  were  imminent, 
and  were  those  which  our  Government  dreaded  most.  It  was  necessary 
to  make  a  diversion,  and  offer  an  object  of  some  sort  to  the  moderate  and 
sensible  people. 

A  Bavarian  prince  was  therefore  brought  forward,  and  as  I  had  been 
informed  from   Paris  that   anything  would  be   better   than  M.  le  Due  de 

1  See  page  7.  "  See  page  9. 


APPENDIX. 


319 


Nemours  or  the  reunion,  and  believing  we  had  not  forty-eight  hours  before 
us,  I  saw  no  objection  to  this  idea,  and  I  therefore  allowed  it  to  go  on. 
But,  mon  Prince,  I  should  wish  the  Conference  fully  to  understand,  that  what 
has  been  done  in  this  matter  was  done  in  opposition  to  the  indefatigable 
efforts  of  the  war  party,  and  without  any  other  idea  or  arriire-pensie.  Lord 
Ponsonby,  who  was  cognisant  of  all  my  actions,  can,  and  I  am  sure  will, 
confirm  all  this. 

Moreover,  mon  Prince,  immediately  on  receipt  of  your  letters,  I  did  my 
very  utmost  to  enlighten  the  members  who  had  adopted  this  arrangement, 
as  to  its  very  great  disadvantages,  which  you  had  pointed  out  to  me,  and 
they  at  once  abandoned  it.  We  shall  now  have  time  to  look  around  us. 
The  Congress,  it  is  true,  has  decided  in  to-day's  sitting,  that  no  special 
commissioners  will  be  sent  either  to  London  or  Paris  to  facilitate  the 
choice  of  a  head  for  the  State  ;  but  the  negotiation  remains  in  the  hands  of 
the  agents  who  are  with  you  now,  and  we  need  no  longer  dread  any  of  those 
sudden  and  hurried  decisions  with  which  we  have  been  threatened  for  the 
last  ten  days.  .  .  . 

General  Sebastiani  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand.1 

Paris,  January  i^//i,  1831. 
Mon  Prince, 

.  .  .  The  new  direction  that  your  despatches  have  given  to  him 
(M.  Bresson)  has  been  a  matter  of  great  surprise  to  the  king;  and  the 
despatch  Lord  Ponsonby  has  received  from  his  Government,  causes  us 
serious  anxiety  as  to  the  issue  of  the  Belgian  question.2  The  advice  it  gives 
will  encourage  the  few  partisans  of  the  Prince  of  Orange,  and  will  irritate 
the  Catholic,  the  Republican,  and  the  Constitutional  parties.  The  revolu- 
tionary feeling  will  be  prolonged,  and  will  bear  bitter  fruits.  The  renewal  of 
hostilities  can  no  longer  be  prevented,  and  it  is  difficult  to  see  where  all  this 
will  end.  Is  it  the  Prince  of  Coburg  whom  they  are  keeping  in  the  back- 
ground, whom  they  are  working  for,  and  whom  they  hope  to  secure  ?  That 
combination  is  no  longer  possible.  We  were  quite  in  favour  of  the  one  for 
the  Princes  of  the  House  of  Nassau,  as  long  as  we  thought  it  had  any  chance 
of  success.  We  were  also  quite  as  sincere  in  our  acceptance  of  the  Prince 
of  Coburg  ;  but  time  has  revealed  the  truth  to  us  :  the  Belgians  must  have  a 
Catholic  prince.  Let  him  therefore  be  chosen  from  among  the  Houses  of 
Saxony,  Naples,  or  Bavaria  ;  we  don't  mind  which,  provided  he  puts  down 
anarchy  and  establishes  a  proper  government  at  once.  The  English  Ministry 
has  a  great  respect  for  public  opinion,  and  they  are  right  ;  but  they  ought 
also  to  admit  that  we  likewise  must  respect  it  ;  and  France  has  shown 
sufficient  generosity,  loyalty,  and  disinterestedness,  to  be  allowed  some  voice 
in  the  selection  of  a  sovereign  who  will  reign  at  her  very  doors. 

If  Belgian  affairs  affect  the  policy  of  England  and  of  the  other  Powers, 
they  equally  affect  our  policy,  and  even  actual  safety.  The  London  Con- 
ference has  counted  too  much  on  its  influence  in  Belgium  ;  its  slow 
and  measured  progress  rather  recdls  the  old  policy  of  those  wearisome 
negotiations  of  the  Treaty  of  Westphalia.  .  .  . 

I  am  sure,  mon  Prince,  you  yourself  must  be  tired  of  this  easy-going  part 
which  they  wish  France  to  play,  and  that  you  would  far  rather  take  one 
suitable  to  a  powerful  king  and  a  great  nation.     Europe  will  never  clearly 

1  See  page  12. 

-  Respect  11.;  the  disagreement  between  M.  de  Talleyrand  and  the   French  Cabinet,  of  which  M 
Bresson  suffered  the  coi.sequer.ee.',  see  1  age  38.     Lord  Ponsonby  on  his  side  received  ins:ructions  i:. 
favour  ef  the  Princ;  of  Orange. 


320  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

understand  our  policy  until  she  realizes  that  it  is  not  the  fear  of  war  that 
stops  us,  but  rather  the  fear  of  seeing  social  order  in  Europe  overthrown,  of 
letting  loose  all  the  evil  passions,  and  exposing  nations  and  their  Governments 
to  endless  dangers — such  a  fear  is  alone  worthy  of  us,  for  it  is  a  moral  one, 
and  is  both  politic  and  far-seeing.  People  are  also  apt  to  forget,  that  our 
power  over  the  wishes  of  the  country  has  its  limits,  and  that  it  would  be 
most  imprudent  for  us,  and  fatal  to  Europe,  to  go  beyond  these.  .  .  . 


The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  Madame  Adelaide.1 

London,  January  \6th,  1831. 

I  herewith  send  Mademoiselle  a  document  which  will  interest  her, 
but  which  no  one  except  herself  and  the  king  must  know  anything  about. 
Written  in  the  name  of  the  Prince  of  Orange,  it  is  Lord  Grey  who  is  the 
real  author.  He  was  so  interested,  and  laid  such  great  stress  on  it,  that  we 
could  not  refuse  to  allow  him  to  make  this  fresh  trial.  If  it  succeeds, 
matters  will  be  arranged  according  to  the  king's  wishes  ;  if  it  fails,  it  will 
leave  us  a  freer  hand,  to  propose  what  we  deem  best  and  most  needful  to 
- ecure.  .  ,  . 

Document  included  in  the  above  Letter. 


Letter  of  the  Prince  of  Orange  to  .  .  .  .2 

The  late  events  in  Belgium  have  drawn  such  misfortunes  on  me,  on  my 
family,  and  on  the  nation,  as  I  can  never  cease  to  deplore. 

Nevertheless,  in  the  midst  of  these  calamities,  I  have  not  renounced  the 
fond  hope,  that  a  time  might  come  when  the  purity  of  my  motives  will  be 
recognized,  and  when  I  may  personally  co-operate  in  the  happy  work  of 
reconciling  all  parties,  and  restoring  peace  and  prosperity  to  a  country,  to 
which  I  am  united  by  the  ever-sacred  ties  of  duty  and  the  most  tender 
affection. 

The  choice  of  a  sovereign  for  Belgium,  since  its  separation  from  Holland, 
has  been  accompanied  by  difficulties  which  it  is  needless  to  describe.  May 
I  without  presumption  believe,  that  my  presence  now  offers  the  best  and 
most  satisfactory  solution  of  these  difficulties? 

There  is  no  doubt  .  .  .  that  the  five  Powers,  whose  confidence  it  is  so 
necessary  to  secure,  would  see  in  such  an  arrangement,  the  surest,  the 
quickest,  and  easiest  way,  to  restore  tranquillity  at  home  and  insure  universal 
peace  abroad. 

There  is,  too,  no  doubt  that  recent  and  detailed  communications,  received 
from  the  principal  towns  and  from  several  provinces  of  Belgium,  offer  a 
striking  proof  of  the  confidence  still  accorded  to  me  by  a  large  portion  of 
the  nation.  .  .  . 

As  far  as  I  am  concerned,  the  past  will  be  completely  shrouded  in 
oblivion  ;  I  shall  make  no  personal  distinctions  due  to  political  actions,  and 
my  constant  efforts  will  be  directed  to  secure  for  the  service  of  the  State, 
those  men,  without  exception  and  without  regard  to  past  conduct,  whose 
talents  and  experience  render  them  best  fitted  to  properly  carry  out  public 
duties. 

1  See  page  17. 

-  This  letter  was  written  by  the  Prince  ol    Crange  to  those  whom  he  considered    devote. 1   to  his 
cau^e  in  Belgium. 


APPENDIX  321 

I  shall  devote  the  utmost  care  to  assure  to  the  Catholic  Chun  h  and  its 
ministers,  the  constant  protection  of  the  Government,  and  to  surround  them 
with  the  respect  of  the  nation.  .  .  . 

One  of  my  most  earnest  desires,  as  well  as  first  duties,  will  be  to  join  my 
efforts  to  those  of  the  Legislature,  in  order  to  complete  the  arrangements 
which,  founded  on  the  basis  of  national  independence,  will  give  security  to 
our  relations  abroad,  while  improving  and  extending  our  means  of  prosperity 
at  home.  .  .  . 

I  come  thus,  with  all  the  frankness  and  sincerity  that  our  mutual  position 
demands,  to  offer  myself  to  the  Belgian  nation.  On  the  intelligence  that 
guides  her  in  appreciating  the  needs  of  the  country,  and  on  her  attachment 
to  its  liberty,  I  rest  my  chief  hope. 

It  only  remains  to  assure  her,  that  in  my  present  action,  I  have  con- 
sulted my  own  interests  less,  than  my  earnest  and  constant  desire  to  see 
reparative,  peaceful,  and  conciliatory  measures  put  an  end  for  ever  to  all 
those  evils  with  which  Belgium  is  still  afflicted. 

M.  Bresson  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand.1 

Private.  BRUSSELS,  January  20//1,  1831. 

One  o'clock  in  (he  morning. 

Mon  Prince, 

The  partisans  of  the  Due  de  Leuchtenberg  were  quite  prepared  to 
make  their  grand  coup  during  the  last  forty-eight  hours.  M.  le  Due  de 
Bassano  and  M.  Meje"an2  are  the  principal  actors  in  this  deplorable  scheme. 
1  have  been  forced,  in  order  to  parry  these  imminent  dangers,  to  assume  a 
responsibility  which  I  can  only  justify  by  my  earnest  desire  to  prevent  great 
misfortunes. 

I  declared  that,  if  M.  le  Due  de  Leuchtenberg  was  elected,  I  should  at 
once  break  off  all  communication  with  the  Belgian  Government,  and  quit 
Brussels  within  twenty-four  hours.     This  declaration  did  us  good  service. 

It  seems  incredible  to  me,  that  you  can  have  been  left  in  ignorance  as 
to  our  instructions  with  regard  to  the  Prince  of  Naples  and  Prince  Otto  of 
Bavaria  ;  I  will  not  therefore  enter  into  them  here. 

There  were  not  sufficient  reasons  for  opposing  the  Piince  of  Naples  to 
the  Due  de  Leuchtenberg,  but  sufficient  to  create  a  diversion.  We  availed 
ourselves  of  it  by  opposing  to  these  intrigues  a  medium  proposal.  The 
conclusions  of  the  report  of  the  central  section,  which  were  in  favour  of  the 
immediate  choice  of  a  sovereign,  did  not  obtain  priority. 

The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  Madame  Adelaide.' 

January  24///,  1831. 

THE  arrival  of  M.  de  Flahaut,  who  was  able  to  answer  all  my  questions, 
and  give  me  good  reports  of  the  Palais  Royal  and  of  Paris,  has  afforded 
me  °Teat  pleasure.  He  found  Belgian  affairs  far  more  advanced  than  he 
imagined,  and  he  has  already  been  able  to  assure  himself  that  this  neutrality, 
which  has  been  gained  with  so  much  labour  amid  the  present  discussions, 

1  §€6  T332G  21. 

2  Etienne  Comte  Mejean,  born  1766.  Advocate,  then  journalist  during  the  Revolution.  On  the 
18th  Brumaire  he  became  Secretary- General  to  the  Prefecture  of  the  Seine.  Subsequently  he  fallowed 
Prince  Eugene  to  Italy,  then  became  State  Councillor,  and  in  1816  was  elected  by  the  Prince  as 
governor  to  his  children.     He  died  in  1846.  ;;  See  page  24. 

VOL.    IV.  V 


322  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

appears  to  all  right-thinking  people  the  only  solution  of  the  great  problem. 
1  feel  convinced  that  Mademoiselle's  quick  and  sensitive  mind  will  have  fully 
appreciated  all  these  advantages.  I  believe  in  truth,  that  this  measure  was 
the  only  one  that  could  have  resulted  in  peace  for  us,  and  the  only  one  by 
which  we  can  indemnify  England  without  admitting  her  supremacy.  To 
have  given  her  an  actual  footing  in  Belgium,  would  have  been  like  giving  her 
a  new  Gibraltar  in  the  north,  and  some  day  we  should  find  ourselves  vis-d-vis 
to  her,  and  in  the  same  position  as  the  Peninsula  is.  Such  an  expedient  would 
be  making  too  dangerous  a  sacrifice  of  the  future  to  the  present,  and  at  a  price 
which  one  may  safely  put  down,  as  equal  to  that  of  ten  lost  battles.  The 
annexation  of  the  remainder  of  Belgium,  would  be  but  a  poor  equivalent, 
compared  to  this  first  footing  on  the  Continent. 

If  France  had  any  need  to  extend  her  frontier,  she  should  look  towards 
the  Rhine,  it  is  there  that  her  real  interest  lies,  and  where  she  will  gain  real 
power  and  acquire  a  useful  frontier,  but  just  now,  peace  is  worth  far  more 
than  all  this  to  us.  Belgium  would  bring  us  more  trouble  than  profit,  and 
this  latter  has  been  pretty  well  secured  to  us  by  her  neutrality.  .  .  , 

Madame  Adelaide  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand.1 

Paris,  January  2§f/i,  1831. 
Mon  cher  Prince, 

.  .  .  Certainly  when  M.  de  Flahaut  left  here  he  did  not  expect  to 
find  matters  so  far  advanced  with  you.  It  is  a  great  success  2  ;  nothing  but 
your  zeal  and  your  talents  could  have  achieved  it,  and  we  are  greatly  touched 
and  fully  convinced  by  the  reasons  which  make  you  doubly  rejoice.  As  you 
truly  say,  all  those  who  think  and  reflect  cannot  fail  to  appreciate  the  im- 
mense advantages  that  this  neutrality  must  give  us.  You  will  see  that  the 
discussion  yesterday  in  the  Chamber  of  Deputies  was  very  satisfactory,  and 
entirely  favourable  to  the  Government3,  which  is  supported  by  the  Chamber, 
owing  to  dread  of  a  ministry  from  the  extreme  left,  which  it  is  determined  to 
keep  out ;  for  we  must  not  conceal  from  ourselves  that  the  earnest  desire  of  a 
large  number,  not  to  say  the  generality  of  people  in  France,  is  in  favour  of  the 
annexation  of  Belgium,  and  that  the  tiresome  dilatoriness  England  has  shown, 
in  not  obliging  the  Belgian  Congress  to  decide  on  the  choice  of  a  sovereign, 
places  us,  both  as  regards  France  and  Belgium,  in  a  very  difficult  position  ; 
and  all  this,  because  of  the  arriere-pensee  on  the  part  of  England,  to  try  and 
bring  back  the  Prince  of  Orange.  The  inadmissible  question  of  the  Due  de 
Leuchtenberg  has  arisen  ;  we  could  not  but  reject  it.  England  is  aware  of 
this  and  admits  it,  but  at  the  same  time  Lord  Ponsonby  says  that  he  has  no 
instructions  with  regard  to  it.  So  now  this  question  has  become  freshly 
complicated,  in  a  very  unpleasant  and  tormenting  manner.  Whose  fault  is 
it  ?  Certainly  not  ours,  for  we  have  been  thoroughly  frank,  loyal,  and  straight- 
forward. .  .  . 

Saturday  Mor?iing,  Ja)iuary  i^tJi. 

P.S. — We  have  just  learnt  that  there  is  no  longer  any  alternative  possible 
in  Brussels,  except  either  Nemours  or  Leuchtenberg.  Could  one  believe  that 
under  these  circumstances  Lord  Ponsonby  gives  a  decided  preference  to 
Leuchtenberg?     Truly  it  passes  all  comprehension  !     Nevertheless  it  is  the 

1  See  page  15. 

2  The  protocol  of  January  20th,  which  insured  the  neutrality  of  Belgium   and   had  been  very 
cordially  welcomed  by  the  Cabinet  of  the  Tuileries. 

3  At  the  sitting  of  the  27th  January,  M.  Mauguin  questioned  General  Sebastiani  as  to  the  attitude 
of  the  Government  respecting  the  Polish  question. 


APPENDIX.  323 

fact.  What,  however,  is  less  certain,  though  it  is  reported,  and  to  judge 
from  Lord  Ponsonby's  language  seems  only  too  probable,  is,  that  M.  Van  de 
Weyer  has  brought  assurances  from  London,  that  Engiand  would  recognize 
Leuchtenberg  if  he  were  elected.1 

M.  Bresson  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand.4 

BRUSSE]  S,  March  8//1,  1831. 

Mon  Prince, 

Not  being  able  to  obtain  any  decision  from  the  Conference  respecting 
myself,  I  have  determined  to  forestall  it.  1  have  the  honour,  therefore,  to 
send  you  my  resignation  of  the  post  of  its  Commissioner  in  Belgium.  I  also 
transmit  the  same  by  Lord  l'onsonby.  Herewith  inclosed  you  will  find  the 
letter  I  have  written  to  the  Conference,  and  which  I  beg  you  will  lay  before 
it,  together  with  copies  of  my  letters  to  Lord  Ponsonby  and  M.  Van  de 
Weyer. 

I  expect  to  leave  this  for  Paris  on  Friday  or  Saturday.  I  shall  make  but 
a  short  stay  there  ;  my  earnest  wish  is  to  find  myself  once  again  with  you.3 

General  Sebastiani  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand.4 

Paris,  March  20th,  1831. 

I  have  nothing  fresh  to  tell  you  about  the  formation  of  the  Ministry.  You 
know  the  members  of  whom  it  is  composed  as  well  as  I  do  ;  the  peace 
party  is  almost  strong  enough  for  unanimity.  I  think  you  would  do  well  to 
write  a  line  to  M.  Casimir  Perier,  who  will  be  charmed  to  receive  a  letter 
from  you.  He  gives  unity  to  the  action  of  the  Government,  and  shows 
himself  determined  to  fight  vigorously  against  the  anarchists.  .  .  . 

.  .  .  M.  Lafitte  has  most  unwillingly  retired  from  office,  and  shows  some 
little  irritation.  The  financial  state  of  his  affairs  was  the  chief  cause  of  his 
political  overthrow.  The  Bourse  made  a  stir,  which  found  an  echo  in  the 
Chambers. 

The  elections  are  just  now  the  great  business  of  the  day.  I  believe  the 
result  will  give  us  a  Moderate  Chamber,  which  will  be  a  great  support  for  the 
maintenance  of  order,  and  to  the  Government. 

I  believe  we  shall  avoid  a  war.  If  the  Austrians  do  not  enter  the  Papal 
States,  peace  is  assured  ;  I  have  devoted  all  my  energies  to  its  preservation. 

Despatch  of  Sir  R.  Gordon5  to  Lord  Palmerston.6 

Confidential. 

Constantinople,  March  3 1  .■. /.  1831. 

My  Lord, 

Since  my  last  confidential  despatch  of  the  25th,  Reis  EfTendi 
has  assured  me  that  the  French  Ambassador  has  presented  a  note  to  the 
Porte,  which,  although  much  more  reserved  than  his  verbal  communications, 
contains  the  three  following  very  important  points. 

1  ,  The  principles  of  theFrench  Government  are  so  diametrically  opposed 

1  M.  Van  de  Weyer  was  mistaken,  for  on  the  7th  February,  eight  days  later,  the  London  Con- 
ference signed  a  protocol  n  hi.  h  excluded  the  Due  de  Leuchtenl  i  i  page  48. 

:;  M  Bresson  did  not  return  to  London.  After  a  short  stay  in  France,  he  was  set.:  to  Berlin,  to 
which  at  the  end  of  some  months  he  was  definitely  accredited.  ■  page  67. 

5  Sir  R.  Gordon,  Lord  Aberdeen's  brother.  was  English  Ambassador  at  Constantino  | 

'■  See  page  103.  It  will  be  remembered  thai  General  Guilleminot,  French  Ambassador  at  Con- 
stantinople, was  recalled  in  consequence  of  the  incidents  which  caused  this  despatch. 

Y   2 


324  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

to  those  professed  by   Russia  and  Austria,  that  a  war  between  these  two 
Powers  and  France  is  inevitable. 

2°,  In  this  war  England  will  either  remain  neutral,  or  will  become  the  ally 
of  France. 

3°,  The  French  Ambassador,  on  the  part  of  his  Government,  therefore, 
prays  the  Porte  immediately  to  take  the  necessary  measures  to  insure  her 
independence,  warning  the  Ottoman  Government  that  if,  on  the  contrary, 
she  espouses  the  cause  which  is  opposed  to  the  principles  and  views  of  the 
French  nation,  the  Porte  will  later  on,  seek  in  vain  for  exemption  from 
those  losses  which,  as  a  necessary  consequence  of  the  war,  she  will  have  to 
submit  to. 

I  have  the  honour  .... 

{Signed)  R.  Gordon. 

The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  Madame  Adelaide  d'Orleans.1 

Jane  27th,  1 831. 

After  having  overwhelmed  Mademoiselle  with  copies  of  my  last  night's 
correspondence  by  the  courier  of  to-day,  I  must  still  send  her  King  Leopold's 
reply,  which  I  have  just  received,  although  it  does  not  satisfy  all  my  French 
requirements,  and  though  friendly  letters  are  but  a  very  poor  substitute,  for 
what  would  have  been  far  better  stated  officially.  However,  we  must  per- 
force be  satisfied  ;  it  is  no  use  being  otherwise.  It  is  as  well,  however,  that 
my  letter  of  yesterday  has  brought  forth  the  Prince's  written  explanation, 
which  contains  some  slight  excuse.  He  tries  to  justify  himself,  by  what  some 
of  the  other  members  of  the  Conference  may  have  said  to  him.  It  would 
have  been  much  simpler,  and  more  straightforward,  if  he  had  kept  to  the 
phrase  I  wrote  to  him  and  left  with  him.  Let  us  now  hope  that  the  Belgians, 
ever  ready  to  be  carried  beyond  bounds,  will  not  forget  the  assurances  of 
devotion  for  France  that  the  Prince  has  made  them. 

Mademoiselle  will  remember  that  the  first  accounts  of  whatever  1  have 
lately  written,  must  come  from  Brussels. 

Wessenberg  is  to  try  and  make  the  King  of  the  Netherlands  more 
amenable.     It  is  no  easy  task  we  have  set  him. 

Lord  Palmerston  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand.2 

Saturday,  July  ^th,  1831. 

My  dear  Prince, 

We  have  received  letters  from  Brussels,  dated  the  evening  of  the  6th. 
All  was  going  on  well,  and  they  expected  to  have  a  large  majority.  It  was 
thought  that  out  of  J  74  who  would  vote,  125  would  be  in  favour  ;  but  I  think 
the  most  incontestable  proof  that  the  proposals  will  be  accepted  is,  that  Van 
de  Weyer  has  promised  to  speak  in  their  favour,  and  our  little  friend,  like 
Cato's  gods,  likes  to  find  himself  on  the  side  of  the  victors,  and  he  would 
not  have  shifted  his  ground,  had  he  not  felt  a  strong  presentiment,  that 
Victory  would  range  herself  on  the  side  of  the  Prince's  proposals. 

Lebeau's  speech  has  converted  many,  among  others  Rodenbach  3  and 
Coppens,4  and  they  declared  in  Brussels,  that  this  speech  had  made  a  stam- 
merer speak  and  a  blind  man  see.  However,  it  was  thought  that  the  decision 
would  not  take  place  till  to-day. 

1  See  page  156.  -  See  page  162. 

3  Alexander  Rodenbach.  born  in  1786.  a  Belgian  politician  and  writer.  He  had  made  a  name  for 
himself  under  King  William-!;  Government  as  a  Liberal  journalist.  He  was  elected  Deputy  in  1830. 
He  sat  in  the  Chamber  till  iS66,  and  died  in  1869.  M.  Rodenbach  had  been  blind  since  his  eleventh 
year. 

4  Deputy  of  the  Congress,  and  one  of  the  most  turbulent  members  of  the  Assembly. 


APPENDIX.  325 

The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  the  Princess  de  Vaud^mont.1 

July  15///,  1831. 

The  King  of  Holland  has  not  yet  replied,  but  Wessenberg's  power  went 
no  further  than  according  a  few  days'  delay.  His  reply  will  not  be  given  till 
Wednesday  evening,  and  Wessenberg  will  start  on  Friday  (that  is  to-daj  . 
My  opinion  is,  that,  notwithstanding  some  explanations  that  have  been  given, 
the  king's  reply  will  not  be  a  favourable  one.  What  result  does  he  expect 
to  gain  by  this  attitude?  I  really  can  say  nothing,  for  matters  have  come  to 
such  a  point  that  it  is  no  longer  possible  to  give  in.  One  may  ameliorate 
matters  by  explanations,  but  it  is  impossible  to  go  further.  Prince  Leopold 
will  therefore  leave  here  to-morrow  as  arranged.  He  is  desirous  of  pleasing 
you  all,  and  is  going  via  Calais  for  this  reason.  He  is  most  anxious  to 
marry  one  of  our  Princesses  ;  he  said  so  again  to  me  this  morning.  They 
are  very  foolish  in  France  when  they  will  insist  on  looking  upon  Prince 
Leopold  as  an  English  Prince  ;  he  is  quite  the  opposite. 

This  last  difficulty  with  the  King  of  Holland  is  very  unpleasant  for  us, 
and  will  also,  I  think,  be  perfectly  useless  for  him.  We  must  wait  for  his 
first  letters,  they  will  tell  us  his  views  exactly.  .  .  . 

Admiral  de  Rignv  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand.- 

Paris,  December  28//1,  1831. 
Mon  Prince, 

You  will  have  seen  how  we  came  out  of  the  peerage  question 
yesterday.  In  the  other  Chamber,  there  is  a  sort  of  revolutionary  murmuring, 
which  sufficiently  indicates  what  would  have  been  the  result  of  the  rejection 
of  the  law.     Such  is  the  country. 

Sebastiani  has  had  a  slight  attack  of  apoplexy  ;  he  is  better,  but  it  is 
thought  that  it  will  be  some  time  ere  he  can  resume  his  work.  His  anxiety 
on  this  point  is  very  evident.  Pozzo  does  not  attempt  to  conceal  his  satis- 
faction, and  promises  us  much  greater  facilities  in  all  matters.  To-morrow  he 
is  to  interview  the  Corps  Diplomatique  on  the  subject  of  Belgian  affairs,  and 
he  promised  me  yesterday  evening  that  he  would  try  and  obtain  the 
demolition  of  Tournay,  instead  of  Philippeville  and  Marienburg.  If 
this  arrangement  seems  advisable  to  you,  kindly  send  me  word  through 
Madame  de  Dino,  and  I  will  act  here  accordingly,  for  I  can  do  things  more 
easily  now.  .  .  . 

Accept  .... 

De  Rigny. 

M.  Bresson  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand.3 

Berlin,  January  26th,  1S32. 
Mon  Prince, 

I  was  aware  that  your  letter  of  December  20th,  had  been  laid 
before  H.M.  the  King  of  Prussia.  He  wrote  to  the  Emperor,  urging  him 
too  strongly  rather  than  too  gently  fat  least  so  M.  de  Bernstorff  told  me),  to 
accede  to  the  views  of  the  allies.  Thus,  mon  Prince,  the  effect  you  desired 
has  been  produced. 

On  learning  that  the  exchange  of  the  ratifications  had  been  postponed 

1  See  page  165.  -  See  page  246.  page  272. 


326  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

until  January  31st,  great  regret  has  been  expressed  here,  that  it  was 
not  fixed  for  March  1st.  I  made  some  fresh  efforts  yesterday,  to  get  the 
ratification  pure  and  simple  of  the  treaty  of  November  15th;  but  they 
proved  ineffectual.  The  English  Minister,  who  was  intrusted  with  a  similar 
mission  by  his  Government,  was  not  more  fortunate  either.  Prussia  main- 
tains the  same  position  she  has  taken  since  the  Emperor  of  Russia's  refusal, 
and  the  postponement  has  not  in  any  way  altered  her  views.  There  is  only 
one  alteration  in  M.  de  Biilow's  instructions,  which  I  think  rather  important. 
He  has  been  directed  to  point  out  to  the  Conference,  that  if  on  January 
31st,  one  or  several  of  the  Powers,  think  it  expedient  to  exchange  their 
ratifications  with  the  Belgian  plenipotentiary,  the  protocol  should  be  left  open 
as  regards  the  others,  until  some  definite  period,  say  March  15th,  for 
instance  ;  always  with  the  reservation,  on  the  part  of  Prussia,  that  the  treaty 
even  then  should  not  be  valid,  unless  all  the  Powers  in  turn  had  fully  ratified 
it.  Such  a  postponement  has  its  advantages  as  well  as  its  disadvantages. 
M.  Ancillon  thinks  that  such  an  interval  of  time  might  be  profitably 
employed,  either  in  bringing  Russia  round  to  the  decisions  adopted  by  the 
Conference,  or  in  convincing  or  satisfying  the  King  of  Holland.  A  rough 
draft  of  a  definite  treaty  between  Holland  and  Belgium  might  be  drawn  up 
and  submitted  to  both  of  them  ;  or  else  some  additional  and  explanatory 
arrangements  might  be  added  to  the  twenty-four  articles,  which  would  bring 
about  the  acceptance  of  the  Cabinet  of  the  Hague,  or  decide  Russia  to 
consider  herself  free  from  all  engagements  or  undertakings  towards  her. 
These  are  the  ideas  of  the  Berlin  Cabinet.  I  thought  that  it  would  interest 
you  to  know  them,  mon  Prince.  .  .  . 

Madame  Adelaide  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand.1 

Tuileries,  March  4//1,  1832. 

...  So  we  are  actually  at  Ancona,  and  openly  and  with  all  loyalty,  for 
the  Pope  as  well  as  the  Austrians  knew,  that  if  they  entered  the  Papal 
States  a  second  time  we  should  go  to  Ancona  ;  of  this  they  had  been 
informed  long  ago.  I  quite  think,  between  you  and  me,  that  they  flattered 
themselves  we  should  not  dare  to  do  it,  just  as  the  King  of  Holland  flattered 
himself  that  we  should  not  enter  Belgium  ;  therefore  I  must  own  to  you,  mon 
cher  Prince,  that,  on  this  same  account,  I  am  very  glad  that  we  have  kept 
our  word  in  this  as  well  as  in  everything  else.  All  the  ambassadors  were 
simultaneously  informed,  when  the  order  was  given,  of  the  departure  of  our 
expedition  ;  and  as  we  most  certainly  do  not  want  a  revolution  in  Italy,  but, 
on  the  contrary,  promise  to  use  all  possible  means  to  prevent  it,  as  vv  II 
be  and  has  already  been  very  clearly  explained,  I  do  not  feel  disposed  to 
worry  myself  as  to  the  result  of  this  expedition,  which  proves  to  the  Poweis 
that  what  we  say,  we  do — a  very  great  advantage  in  my  eyes. 

Lord  Palmerston  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand.2 

Stanhope  Street,  March  15/h,  1832. 
My  dear  Prince, 

Our  Cabinet  took  the  question  into  consideration  last  night,  as  to 
what  would  be  the  best  course  to  pursue  respecting  the  proposals  which 
Holland  has  announced  she  intends  to  make  us,  and  the  opinion  of  our 

1  See  page  275.  2  See  page  285. 


APPENDIX.  327 

Government  is,  that  I  can  neither  say  or  do  anything  at  the  Conference, 
except  to  ask  the  plenipotentiaries  of  the  three  Courts  :  Will  you,  or  will  you 
not  ratify  ? 

It  appears  to  us,  that  as  long  as  the  five  Courts  are  not  agreed  respecting 
the  all-important  question  of  the  ratifications,  it  is  impossible  for  the  Con- 
ference to  reply  to  the  Dutch  communication,  or  to  make  any  communication 
whatever  to  Holland. 

If  we  call  upon  the  King  of  Holland  to  give  a  categorical  answer,  as  to 
whether  he  will  accept  the  twenty-four  articles  within  a  given  time,  that 
would  naturally  infer,  that  when  the  period  had  expired  we  should  proceed  to 
carry  out  the  treaty,  whether  Holland  were  willing  or  not.  But  would  the 
three  Courts  be  ready  to  join  us  in  arranging  coercive  measures  ?  Certainly 
not,  at  least  as  far  as  one  can  judge.  The  same,  demand,  therefore,  would 
not  mean  the  same  thing  for  all  the  Courts.  For  us,  the  question  would  mean 
coercive  measures  ;  for  the  other  three  Courts,  relinquishment,  but  inaction. 
It  therefore  seems  to  us,  that  we  should  do  well  to  hold  the  ground  we  now 
occupy,  and  not  allow  ourselves  to  be  drawn  into  any  joint  discussion  or 
action  with  the  Conference,  before  knowing  with  certainty  whether  we  arc 
two  or  five. 

If  you  can  come  to  the  Office  to-morrow  between  three  and  four,  you  could 
then  tell  me  what  you  think  of  this  business. 

Ever  yours. 

The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  Lord  Palmerston.1 


Private. 


March  17//1,   1S32. 


Dear  Lord  Palmerston, 

I  agree  with  you,  that  after  all  these  delays,  we  are  decidedly  bound 
to  have  a  Conference,  to  ask  the  Austrian  and  Prussian  plenipotentiaries 
what  decision  they  have  come  to  respecting  the  exchange  of  the  ratifications. 
Every  possible  consideration  has  been  granted  them,  and  all  the  ordinary 
delays  have  been  liberally  extended.  I  think  matters  have  now  reached 
their  limit,  and  that  we  should  only  be  abusing  the  influence  we  have  with 
Belgium,  if  we  still  further  postponed  the  time  of  her  deliverance  from  the 
anxiety  which  is  distressing  her. 

To  again  prolong  the  delays,  would  be  an  excess  of  condescension  that 
might  be  called  by  another  name. 

I  will  come  to  you  after  the  Levee  to-morrow,  ready  to  do  whatever  you 
think  best  and  most  conducive  to  preserve  intact  the  dignity  which  our  two 
countries  must  maintain. 

Lord  Palmerston  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand.2 


*32. 


Stanhope  Street,  April  5///,  iS; 
My  dear  Prince, 

I  beg  you  to  come  to  the  Office  at  three.  Biilow  has  not  yet  received  his 
authority,  and  I  think  we  shall  have  to  put  the  question  we  spoke  of,  to  the 
Conference.  I  wish  to  propose  to  you  that  we  should  say  to  the  plenipo- 
tentiaries of  the  three  Courts  :  Two  months  have  now  elapsed  since  the  31st 
of  January  ;  the  protocol  of  ratification  is  still  open  ;  the  season  is  advancing, 
and  the  roads  are  quite  passable  ;  have  you  all  received  your  ratifications 

1  See  page  285.  -  See  page  285. 


328  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

and  are  you  ready  to  exchange  them  ?     Those  of  you  who  are  not,  have  the 
goodness  to  state  on  the  protocol,  the  reasons  that  prevent  your  doing  so. 
I  shall  invite  Comte  Orloff  to  come,  so  that  we  may  speak  to  him. 


The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  the  Princess  de  Vaudemont.1 

Evening  of  May  1st,  1832. 

The  ratifications  have  arrived  ;  they  are  conditional,  but  I  will  arrange 
all  that  and  make  them  plain,  by  the  declarations  I  shall  obtain  from  the 
Russians  ;  but  do  not  mention  this  to  any  one,  for  the  orders  I  might  receive, 
no  matter  from  whom  or  whatever  their  nature  might  be,  would  hinder  me, 
and  I  want  to  have  all  finished  before  Friday.  For  this  reason  I  do  not 
wish  any  one  to  write  to  me,  therefore  complete  and  total  silence  ! 

The  hope  of  seeing  you  next  month,  has  restored  all  the  powers  of  my 
youth,  and  all  my  energy  for  the  business  I  am  intrusted  with,  the  conclusion 
of  which  I  am  longing  to  see. 

Adieu.  I  may  die  in  the  attempt,  but  I  shall  succeed.  Would  that  all 
Government  employe's  would  do  as  much  to  insure  peace. 

Adieu,  dear  friend. 

1  See  page  294. 


END   OF   VOL    IV. 


RICHARD    CLAV    AND    SONS,    LIMITED,    LONDON    AND    BUNGAY. 


/ 


o 


?  / 


10w-5,'65(F 


University  of  California 

SOUTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY 

405  Hilgard  Avenue,  Los  Angeles,  CA  90024-1388 

Return  this  material  to  the  library 

from  which  it  was  borrowed. 


WINTER  L l1 


JUIxd 


faC         APRm)06 


Ml  II I 
A  A      000  174  220    4