Memoirs of the Prince de Talleyrand, Vol. III (Charles Maurice de Talleyrand (Raphael Ledos de Beaufort, trans.), 1838)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1891 Putnam's edition, translated by Raphael Ledos de Beaufort (https://archive.org/details/memoirsofprinced03tall). Talleyrand's own account, Vol. III — the fall of Napoleon and the Bourbon Restoration.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

MEMOIRS 

OF  THE 

PRINCE    DE    TALLEYRAND 


The  price  of  this  book  is  21  -  net,  and 
the  terms  on  which  it  is  supplied  to  the 
bookseller  do  not  admit  of  his  deducting 
any  discount, 


jfff 


CHARLES    MAURICE   DE   TALLEYRAND-PERIGORD,    PRINCE   DE   BENEVENT. 

{After  F.  Gerard.) 


MEMOIRS 


OF    THE 


PRINCE  DE  TALLEYRAND 


EDITED,    WITH   A   PREFACE   AND   NOTES,    BY 

THE    DUC    DE    BROGLIE 

Of  the  French  Academy 


TRANSLATED   BY 

Mrs.  ANGUS    HALL 


VOLUME    III 


WITH  A    PORTRAIT 


GRIFFITH    FARRAX    OKEDEN    AND   WELSH 

NEWBERY  HOUSE,  CHARING  CROSS  ROAD,  LONDON 
AND  SYDNEY 

1 89I 


The  Rights  of  Translation  and  Reproduction  are  Reserved. 


CONTENTS. 

PART   VIIL— Continued. 

CONGRESS   OF  VIENNA. 

1815. 

Talleyrand  wins  over  Lord  Castlereagh — The  Emperor  of  Russia  wishes 
the  King  of  Saxony  to  form  a  kingdom  on  the  left  bank  of  the  Rhine — 
Talleyrand  proposes  further  alliances  in  case  of  war  — He  denies  the 
right  of  Spain  to  demand  satisfaction  for  the  dismissal  of  M.  Casa 
Florez — Prussia  wishes  to  absorb  the  whole  of  Saxony — Lord  Castle- 
reagh favours  her  demands — Bavaria,  Hanover  and  Holland  join  the 
Triple  Alliance — Lord  Castlereagh  is  brought  to  see  the  necessity  of 
preserving  a  Saxon  Kingdom — His  utter  ignorance  of  military  topo- 
graphy and  continental  geography — Anecdote  of  Prince  Kaunitz — 
Account  of  the  expiatory  ceremony  of  the  21st  January  at  Vienna — 
All  the  sovereigns  present  attend  it — The  Austrian  Emperor's  want 
of  confidence  in  Metternich — Talleyrand's  reasons  for  disapproving 
of  the  proposed  marriage  between  the  Due  de  Berry  and  the  Arch- 
duchess Anne  of  Russia — King  Louis's  satisfaction  at  the  Duke  of 
Wellington  replacing  Lord  Castlereagh  at  Vienna — Prussia  dis- 
satisfied with  the  share  of  Saxony  assigned  her — Swedish  Plenipo- 
tentiary complains  of  the  tone  of  the  French  Press  as  regards  Berna- 
dotte — Conversation  between  Wellington  and  the  Emperor  Alexander 
respecting  France — Arrangements  for  Saxony  completed — The  question 
of  the  Slave  Trade  settled — Anecdote  of  Prussian  arrogance — Question 
as  to  the  retention  of  the  Legion  of  Honour — Lord  Castlereagh  quits 
Vienna — Stops  in  Paris  on  his  way  home — Progress  of  Italian  affairs — 
Archduchess  Marie  Louise  objects  to  receiving  Lucca  in  place  of  Parma 
— -Metternich  unwillingly  admits  the  necessity  of  abandoning  Murat — 
Talleyrand  expatiates  on  the  principle  of  legitimacy— Considers  that 
the  English  by  their  rule  in  India  have  lost  all  ideas  of  right  and 
fairness — Conversation  between  the  Emperor  Alexander  and  Talleyrand 
on  European  affairs — Pecuniary  compensations  easier  to  England  than 
any  others — Her  offer  to  pension  off  Murat,  if  France  will  abandon 
the  Slave    Trade   at  once — Talleyrand  sees  his  way  to    utilising  this 


viii  CONTENTS. 

"  Mania" — Summary  of  the  treaties  between  the  Allied  Powers  in  1813 
against  France — Metternich  asks  to  postpone  the  Italian  affairs  until 
after  the  King  has  seen  Lord  Castlereagh — details  of  the  laws  for 
the  navigation  of  the  Rhine — Russian  duplicity  with  regard  to  Switzer- 
land and  Poland — Anecdotes  showing  the  estimation  in  which  the 
Emperor  Alexander  was  held  in  Vienna — Buonaparte  escapes  from 
Elba — Swiss  affairs  finally  concluded — Reception  by  the  King  of  Saxony 
at  Presburg,  of  Talleyrand,  Metternich  and  Wellington — Orders  sent  to 
the  allied  troops  to  hold  themselves  in  readiness  to  move — Declaration 
of  the  Allies  against  Buonaparte — The  Island  of  Elba  to  be  occupied  in 
the  name  of  the  Allies — Special  Conference  summoned  to  consider  the 
present  position — Declaration  of  Austria  as  to  the  Valtelline,  Bormio, 
and  Chiavenna — Disposition  of  the  troops  sent  against  Buonaparte — 
Emperor  of  Austria  orders  Madame  de  Montesquiou  to  give  up  the 
charge  of  his  grandson — King  Louis  obliged  to  quit  Paris — Goes  to 
Ostend — Emperor  Alexander's  protestations  of  friendship  and  support 
— Wellington  leaves  Vienna  to  take  command  of  the  troops — Treaty  of 
March  25th  consequent  on  Buonaparte's  invasion — Murat  invades  the 
Papal  States — Count  Blacas's  narrative  of  the  King's  departure  from 
France — Conversation  between  the  Emperor  Alexander  and  Lord 
Clancarty  respecting  the  future  Government  of  France — The  former 
wishes  the  Due  d'Orleans  to  replace  Louis  on  the  French  throne — 
Talleyrand  leaves  Vienna  to  join  the  King — Successfully  frustrates  a 
design  to  postpone  signing  the  final  act  of  the  Congress.     Pages  1 — 127 


PART   IX. 

THE   SECOND    RESTORATION — ADDENDUM— TALLEYRAND'S     REPLY    TO   HIS 

ACCUSERS. 

1815. 

Talleyrand  reaches  Brussels  just  after  the  Battle  of  Waterloo — Joins  the 
King  at  Mons — Tries  to  persuade  the  King  to  establish  himself 
temporarily  at  Lyons — Insists  the  King  should  not  return  to  Paris 
except  as  undisputed  sovereign — The  King  adheres  to  his  original 
intention — Talleyrand's  report  to  King  Louis  of  the  work  done  at  the 
Congress — Points  out  in  what  the  first  restoration  failed — Suggests 
remedies  for  adoption  by  the  second  restoration — Letter  from  M.  de 
Metternich — The  Allied  Sovereigns  arrive  at  Mannheim — Louis  XVI 1 1. 's 
second  proclamation  from  Cambray — His  choice  of  Fouche"  as  Minister 
of  Police  very  unpopular — The  Duke  of  Wellington's  letter  respecting 
the  restoration  of  the  works  of  Art  to  foreign  countries — Talleyrand's 
indignation  thereat — The  Due  de  Richelieu  refuses  to  take  office  in 
France — Talleyrand's  answer — Royal  proclamation,  dissolving  the  exist- 
ing Chamber  of  Deputies — Letter  of  M.  de  Bourrienne— Complains  of 
the  scandalous  behaviour  of  the  Austrian  troops  in  France — Fouche 


CONTENTS.  ix 

carries  his  point  with  regard  to  the  prosecutions  of  those  who  had 
formed  the  Chamber  of  Peers  during  the  hundred  days — Talleyrand's 
appeals  for  clemency  not  attended  to — His  arguments  in  favour  of 
hereditary  peerages— Overbearing  order  issued  by  Comte  Wurmser  of 
the  Austrian  Army— King  Louis's  expostulation — The  allies  make  more 
satisfactory  arrangements — Talleyrand's  reply  to  the  allies  on  their 
demand  for  guarantees — Lord  Castlereagh's  memorandum  respecting 
the  art  galleries — Talleyrand's  reply  in  defence — Lord  Wellington's 
"brutal"  answer — Ultimatum  of  the  four  Powers  as  to  the  guarantees 
required — Talleyrand  indignant  at  the  "  insolence  "  of  the  demands — 
Considers  a  prudent  answer  necessary — His  note  to  the  propositions  of 
the  allies — Reply  of  their  ministers — King  Louis  dreads  the  consequences 
of  a  breach — Advises  conciliatory  measures — Talleyrand  convinced  that 
weakness  at  this  point  is  fatal — Offers  to  retire — Metternich  tries  in  vain 
to  persuade  him  to  continue  in  office — His  characteristic  repl) — The  King 
accepts  his  resignation  — Close  of  this  period  of  his  political  career. 

Addendum — Talleyrand's  reply  to  his  accusers  respecting  the  murder 
of  the  Due  d'Enghien Pages  128—223 


PART  X. 

THE   REVOLUTION   OF    1830 — APPENDIX. 
1830 — 1832. 

Effect  of  the  Revolution  of  July  in  Europe — Louis  Philippe's  anxiety  to  get 
his  Government  recognized  by  England — Talleyrand  recalled  to  public 
life — Is  sent  as  Ambassador  to  London — His  arrival  at  Dover — Contrasts 
his  present  journey  to  England,  with  his  previous  one  thirty-six  years 
before,  when  an  exile  from  France — Satisfactory  interviews  with  Lord 
Aberdeen  and  the  Duke  of  Wellington — Favourable  attitude  of  the 
English  Ministers  towards  France —Talleyrand  laments  the  inefficiency 
of  his  staff — This  is  counterbalanced  by  the  presence  of  his  niece,  the 
Duchesse  de  Dino — She  becomes  a  great  favourite  in  English  society 
— Outbreak  of  the  Revolution  in  Belgium — Will  England  maintain  her 
policy[of  non-intervention  ? — Lord  Aberdeen  thinks  France  and  England 
should  mediate  between  the  King  of  the  Netherlands  and  the  Belgians 
— Mediation  is  not  intervention — Talleyrand's  sketch  of  William  IV. — 
England  will  act  in  concert  with  France  respecting  Belgium  and  Portugal 
— Animated  correspondence  as  to  the  seat  of  the  Conferences — Decided 
eventually  to  hold  them  in  London — State  of  affairs  in  Portugal — Great 
disquietude  in  France — Russia  continues  her  war  preparations — Is  anxious 
to  support  the  King  of  the  Netherlands — Considers  England  is  pledged 
to  do  the  same — Copy  of  Count  Nesselrode's  secret  despatch  to  the 
Russian  Ambassador  in  London — Talleyrand's  account  of  the  opening 
of  Parliament,  after  William  IV.'s  accession— Popular  demonstrations  in 
England  in  favour  of  Louis  Philippe — Excitement  over  the  "  Reform 


CONTENTS. 

Bill" — The  Duke  of  Wellington's  ministry  resign — Formation  of  the 
new  Cabinet  under  Lord  Grey — The  Princess  de  Lieven,  wife  of  the 
Russian  Ambassador — Her  great  influence  in  politics — Sketches  of  the 
different  members  constituting  the  Conference — Arrival  in  England  of 
M.  de  Flahaut — He  brings  a  scheme  from  the  French  Cabinet;  for 
dividing  Belgium  between  the  powers — Talleyrand's  reply — Points  out 
the  fatal  policy  to  France  of  such  a  measure — England  determines  to 
maintain  the  independence  of  Belgium — Various  names  brought  forward 
for  the  Belgian  throne — The  Belgians  ask  for  the  Due  de  Nemours — 
Louis  Philippe  refuses — The  rising  in  Poland  hastens  the  solution  of  the 
Belgian  question — Talleyrand'sviews  as  to  the  restoration  of  the  kingdom 
of  Poland— Letter  from  Aldme.  Adelaide  announcing  the  result  of  the  trial 
of  Charles  X.'s  ministers— Futile  protest  of  the  King  of  the  Netherlands 
against  the  decision  of  the  Conference — Prince  Leopold  of  Saxe-Coburg 
refuses  the  Crown  of  Greece — It  is  offered  to  Prince  Otto  of  Bavaria — 
M.  Van  de  Weyer  sent  to  London  to  offer  the  crown  of  Belgium  to 
Prince  Leopold — Efforts  of  M.  de  Celles  to  secure  the  union  of  Belgium 
with  France,  or  the  crown  for  the  Due  de  Nemours — Close  of  the 
eventful  year  of  1830— Appendix  containing  some  of  Prince  Talleyrand's 
private  correspondence Pages  224 — 324 


MEMOIRS 


OF    THE 


PRINCE   DE   TALLEYRAND 


MEMOIRS 

OF  THE 

PRINCE    DE    TALLEYRAND 

PART  VIII.— Continued. 


VOL.  III.  B 


PART     VII  I .— Continued. 

THE  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA. 

1815. 

Talleyrand  wins  over  Lord  Castlereagh — The  Emperor  of  Russia  wishes 
the  King  of  Saxony  to  form  a  kingdom  on  the  left  bank  of  the  Rhine — 
Talleyrand  proposes  further  alliances  in  case  of  war— He  denies  the 
right  of  Spain  to  demand  satisfaction  for  the  dismissal  of  M.  Casa 
Florez — Prussia  wishes  to  absorb  the  whole  of  Saxony — Lord  Castle- 
reagh favours  her  demands — Bavaria,  Hanover  and  Holland  join  the 
Triple  Alliance — Lord  Castlereagh  is  brought  to  see  the  necessity  of 
preserving  a  Saxon  Kingdom — His  utter  ignorance  of  military  topo- 
graphy and  continental  geography — Anecdote  of  Prince  Kaunitz — 
Account  of  the  expiatory  ceremony  of  the  21st  January  at  Vienna — 
All  the  sovereigns  present  attend  it — The  Austrian  Emperor's  want 
of  confidence  in  Metternich — Talleyrand's  reasons  for  disapproving 
of  the  proposed  marriage  between  the  Due  de  Berry  and  the  Arch- 
duchess Anne  of  Russia — King  Louis's  satisfaction  at  the  Duke  of 
Wellington  replacing  Lord  Castlereagh  at  Vienna — Prussia  dis- 
satisfied with  the  share  of  Saxony  assigned  her — Swedish  Plenipo- 
tentiary complains  of  the  tone  of  the  French  Press  as  regards  Berna- 
dotte — Conversation  between  Wellington  and  the  Emperor  Alexander 
respecting  France — Arrangements  for  Saxony  completed — The  question 
of  the  Slave  Trade  settled — Anecdote  of  Prussian  arrogance — Question 
as  to  the  retention  of  the  Legion  of  Honour — Lord  Castlereagh  quits 
Vienna — Stops  in  Paris  on  his  way  home — Progress  of  Italian  affairs — 
Archduchess  Marie  Louise  objects  to  receiving  Lucca  in  place  of  Parma 
— Metternich  unwillingly  admits  the  necessity  of  abandoning  Murat — 
Talleyrand  expatiates  on  the  principle  of  legitimacy— Considers  that 
the  English  by  their  rule  in  India  have  lost  all  ideas  of  right  and 
fairness — Conversation  between  the  Emperor  Alexander  and  Talleyrand 
on  European  affairs — Pecuniary  compensations  easier  to  England  than 
any  others — Her  offer  to  pension  off  Murat,  if  France  will  abandon 
the  Slave  Trade  at  once — Talleyrand  sees  his  way  to  utilising  this 
"  Mania" — Summary  of  the  treaties  between  the  Allied  Powers  in  1813 
against  France — Metternich  asks  to  postpone  the  Italian  affairs  until 
after  the  King  has  seen  Lord  Castlereagh — Details  of  the  laws  for 
the  navigation  of  the  Rhine — Russian  duplicity  with  regard  to  Switzer- 
land and  Poland — Anecdotes  showing  the  estimation  in  which  the 
Emperor  Alexander  was  held  in  Vienna — Buonaparte  escapes  from 
Elba — Swiss  affairs  finally  concluded — Reception  by  the  King  of  Saxony 
at  Presburg,  of  Talleyrand,  Metternich  and  Wellington — Orders  sent  to 
the  allied  troops  to  hold  themselves  in  readiness  to  move — Declaration 


THE  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA.  3 

of  the  Allies  against  Buonaparte — The  Island  of  Elba  to  be  occupied  in 
the  name  of  the  Allies — Special  Conference  summoned  to  consider  the 
present  position — Declaration  of  Austria  as  to  the  Valtelline,  Bormio, 
and  Chiavenna — Disposition  of  the  troops  sent  against  Buonaparte- 
Emperor  of  Austria  orders  Madame  de  Montesquiou  to  give  up  the 
charge  of  his  grandson — King  Louis  obliged  to  quit  Paris — Goes  to 
Ostend — Emperor  Alexander's  protestations  of  friendship  and  support 
— Wellington  leaves  Vienna  to  take  command  of  the  troops — Treaty  of 
March  25  consequent  on  Buonaparte's  invasion — Murat  invades  the 
Papal  States — Count  Blacas's  narrative  of  the  King's  departure  from 
France — Conversation  between  the  Emperor  Alexander  and  Lord 
Clancarty  respecting  the  future  Government  of  France — The  former 
wishes  the  Due  d'Orleans  to  replace  Louis  on  the  French  throne — 
Talleyrand  leaves  Vienna  to  join  the  King — Successfully  frustrates  a 
design  to  postpone  signing  the  final  act  of  the  Congress. 


No.  20. — The   Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  King 

Louis  XVIII. 

Vienna,  Jan.  6,  1815. 

Sire, 

The  courier  by  whom  I  had  the  honour  to  send  your 
Majesty  the  convention  which  was  signed  by  M.  de  Metternich, 
Lord  Castlereagh,  and  myself,  on  the  3rd  January,  had  already 
been  gone  twenty-four  hours,  ere  I  received  the  letter  dated 
Dec.  27th,  with  which  your  Majesty  has  deigned  to  honour  me. 

In  strengthening  the  hope  I  indulged  that  I  had  on  this 
occasion  done  nothing  contrary  to  your  Majesty's  views  and 
intentions,  your  letter  was  the  highest  reward  for  the  efforts  I 
had  made  to  obtain  a  result  so  happy,  though  apparently  so 
improbable,  and  I  could  only  feel,  with  scarcely  less  profound 
emotion,  how  gratifying  it  is  to  serve  a  master  whose  feelings 
both  as  king  and  man  are  so  generous,  touching,  and  noble. 

I  had  just  received  your  Majesty's  letter  when  Lord  Castle- 
reagh called  to  see  me.  I  thought  I  ought  to  read  to  him  those 
passages  which  referred  to  himself  and  the  Prince  Regent.  He 
was  extremely  touched  by  them,  and  wishing  to  acquaint x  his 
Government  of  the  terms  in  which  your  Majesty  speaks  of  the 
Prince,  he  begged  I  would  allow  him  to  make  a  note  of  them,  to 
which  I  consented,  induced  by  the  twofold  consideration  of  his 
assurance  that  it  should  be  regarded  as  an  inviolable  secret, 
and  that  the  praise  given  to  the  Prince  Regent  by  your  Majesty 

1  Text :  "et  desirant  de  pouvoir  faire  connaitre  "  =  "and  wishing  to  be  able  to 
make  known."    Var.  :  " et  desirant  faire connaitre  —  "and  desiring  to  make  known.  ' 

B    2 


4  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLE  YRAND. 

would,   under    present    circumstances,    produce    the    very   best 
effect. 

The  Emperor  of  Russia  is  sending  General  Pozzo  back  to 
Paris,  after  having  detained  him  here  for  two  months  and  a  half, 
without  having  once  seen  him,  and  there  are  those  who  maintain 
that  he  has  ordered  his  return  because  he  looks  upon  him  as  a 
Censor  who  speaks  too  frankly,  and  whom  therefore  he  desires 
to  remove.  The  Emperor  of  Russia  would  wish  your  Majesty 
to  believe  that  it  is  out  of  regard  to  your  Majesty,  and  in  order 
to  do  something  that  will  be  agreeable  to  you,  that  he  has  con- 
ceived the  idea1  of  giving  to  the  King  of  Saxony,  in  place  of  his 
own  kingdom,  several  hundred  thousands  of  souls  on  the  left 
bank  of  the  Rhine.  General  Pozzo  is  to  be  charged  with  the 
task  of  obtaining  your  Majesty's  consent  to  this  arrangement. 
But  your  Majesty  knows  that  the  question  of  Saxony  must  not 
be  looked  at  solely  upon  the  grounds  of  fairness,  but  likewise  of 
balance  of  power,  that  the  principle  of  right  would  be  violated 
by  the  forced  removal  of  the  King  of  Saxony  to  the  Rhine,  and 
that  the  King  of  Saxony  would  never  give  his  consent  thereto. 
Lastly,  that  putting  fairness  on  one  side,  Saxony  could  not  be 
given  to  Prussia  without  materially  altering  the  relative  strength 
of  Austria  and  entirely  destroying  the  whole  balance  of  power 
in  the  Germanic  confederation. 

The  attempts  of  the  Emperor  of  Russia  in  Paris  as  well  as 
in  Vienna,  will  therefore  completely  fail,  owing  to  the  prescience 
of  your  Majesty,  who  has  always  aspired  to  uphold  those  prin- 
ciples, without  which  there  can  be  nothing  stable  in  Europe,  nor 
in  any  single  state,  as  they  alone  can  guarantee  security  to  each, 
and  peace  to  all.  The  tone  adopted  by  General  Pozzo  at  Vienna 
was  too  favourable  towards  France  to  be  in  accord  with  what 
the  Emperor  of  Russia  desired  to  do  here.  M.  Pozzo  is  there- 
fore to  leave  on  Sunday  or  Monday,  that  is  on  the  8th  or  9th. 

I  still  believe  that  the  occasion  for  war,  owing  to  the  alliance 
between  your  Majesty,  Austria  and  England,  will  not  supervene  ; 
nevertheless,  as  it  is  only  prudent  to  foresee  the  worst  and  be 
prepared  for  all  emergencies,  it  appears  to  me  necessary  lest  such 
should  happen,  to  consider  the  best  means  of  strengthening  the 
union  by  inducing  other  powers  to  join  us.  I  have  therefore 
proposed  to  Lord  Castlereagh  and  M.  de  Metternich,  to  unite 
with  us  in  negotiating  with  the  Ottoman  Porte,  to  make,  if 
needed,  an  advantageous  diversion.  They  have  fallen  in  with 
my  proposition,  and  it  has  been  agreed  that  we  shall  give  joint 
instructions  to  the  ministers  of  the  three  courts  at  Constanti- 

'  Text:   "  qu'il  a  concu  l'idee  "  =  as  translated.     Var.  :  "qu'il  a  donne  l'idee " 
=  "that  he  had  given  the  idea." 


THE  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA.  5 

nople.     I  think  it  advisable  that  your  Majesty  should  hasten  the 
departure  of  your  ambassador. 

It  would  perhaps  be  advantageous  to  establish  similar  rela- 
tions with  Sweden,  but  the  method  of  carrying  this  out  will 
have  to  be  carefully  weighed,  and  I  shall  reserve  entering  upon 
this  with  your  Majesty  in  another  letter. 

The  funeral  service  on  the  21st  Jan.  will  be  held  in  the 
cathedral  here,  the  Archbishop  of  Vienna  officiating.  He  is 
an  old  man  of  eighty-three,  by  whom  the  Emperor  was  brought 
up.  Nothing  that  can  render  the  ceremony  imposing  1  will  be 
omitted. 

I  have  the  honour  to  be.  .  .  . 


No.  23. — The  Ambassadors  of  the  King  at  the  Congress, 
to  the  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  at  Paris. 

Vienna,  January  6,  181 5. 

Monsieur  le  Comte, 

The  accord  between  the  Austrian  and  English  legations 
and  ourselves  is  increasing.  There  is  perfect  unanimity  on  the 
broad  principle,  that  the  Courts  of  Berlin  and  St.  Petersburg 
cannot  be  permitted  to  lay  down  the  law.  The  work  of  the 
Statistical  Commission, which  proves  that  Prussia  does  not  require 
Saxony  to  obtain  more  than  what  the  treaties  had  assured  to 
her,  is  now  at  an  end,  and  since  yesterday  there  are  signs  that  the 
Prussian  ministry  does  not  feel  itself  on  quite  such  firm  ground  as 
it  at  first  believed.  It  now,  therefore,  awaits  fresh  proposals, 
which  are  being  prepared.  Whether  more  or  less  territory  is 
taken  from  Saxony  or  ceded  to  the  Grand  Duchy  of  Warsaw,  is 
an  Austrian  question,  which  if  carefully  handled,  need  not  pro- 
voke our  direct  intervention,  and  we  have  only  to  see  that  the 
general  balance  of  power  is  preserved. 

On  our  arrival  here,  every  thing  seemed  at  a  standstill. 
Austria,  or  rather  her  minister,  took  but  a  feeble  interest  in  this 
question  of  equilibrium.  Now  every  one  feels  the  importance  of 
boundary  limitation,  and  if  it  is  not  satisfactorily  settled,  it  will 
be  the  fault  of  the  Court  of  Vienna,  and  its  Cabinet.  As  far  as 
it  rests  with  us,  we  are  hastening  the  conclusion  of  matters,  so  as 
to  terminate  the  Congress  as  soon  as  possible. 

The  report  on  the  affairs  of  Switzerland  is  being  prepared. 
News  received  from  Berne  announces  a  change  in  the  home 
revenues  of  this  Canton.  This  will  facilitate  the  conclusion  of 
Swiss  affairs,  and  we  have  informed  the  deputy  of  the  Canton 

1  Text:  "imposante"   =   as   translated.     Var.  :     "//us  imposant"    =    "more 
imposing." 


6  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

of  Berne  that  if  he  obtained  the  Bishopric  of  Basle  and  the  return 
of  the  funds  which  are  in  England,  it  would  be  advantageous  for 
his  country  to  consent  to  it,  and  to  join  in  the  general  scheme 
which  the  powers  judge  most  expedient  under  present  circum- 
stances.    No  further  result  has  been  achieved. 

Be  pleased  to  accept 

No.  163.— King  Louis  XVIII.  to  the  Prince  de 

Talleyrand. 

Paris,  Ja?iuaryj,  1815. 
Mon  Cousin, 

I  have  received  your  letter  number  18.     I  am  very  well 
satisfied  with  your  converse  with  the  two  brothers.1 

I  confess  I  thought  the  time  was  passed  when  they  would 
desire  to  exclude  my  plenipotentiaries  from  the  most  important 
of  the  deliberations.  Your  firmness  has  prevented  its  recurrence, 
but  we  must  not  stay  our  hand  on  account  of  this  success  ;  the 
germ  of  the  evil  will  still  continue  to  live,  as  long  as  the  powers, 
whose  alliance  ought  to  have  ended  last  April,  believe  in  its 
existence.  Your  letter  to  Lord  Castlereagh  is  perfect,  and  I 
defy  anyone  to  gainsay  the  conclusion  thereon,  but  I  confess  it 
grieves  me  to  see  a  false  pity  turning  against  the  King  of  Saxony, 
the  sophistry  used  by  Robespierre,  to  hasten  the  consummation 
of  the  greatest  of  his  misdeeds. 

I  am  glad  the  Emperor  of  Austria  has  taken  the  law  into  his 
own  hands  and  defends  the  rights  of  Saxony,  provided  he  does 
not  do  the  same  to  maintain  the  usurpation  of  Naples. 

He  does  not  perhaps  know  the  real  state  of  affairs  there,  but 
the  discoveries  lately  made,  and  the  measures  recently  taken, 
ought,  however,  to  have  enlightened  him,  and  give  you  a  grand 
opportunity  of  proving  to  him,  that  there  will  always  be  those 
who  desire  the  unity  of  Italy,  so  long  as  there  is  fire  on  the 
hearth. 

They  speak  of  undertakings,  and  they  pretend  to  wish  that 
they  had  not  been  kept,2  but  it  is  not  thus  that  wrong  has  been 
wrought.  There  is  another  cause,  and  one  more  shameful  than 
history  has  yet  recorded  ;  for  if  Antony  basely  abandoned  his 
fleet  and  his  army,  it  was  at  least  himself,  and  not  his  minister, 
whom  Cleopatra  had  subjugated.  But  despicable  as  is  this 
obstruction,  it  is  none  the  less  real,  and  the  only  way  to  recall  a 

1  Lord  Castlereagh  and  Lord  Stewart. 

2  Text :  "  on  pretend  desirer  qu'ils  n'ont  pas  ete  tenus  "  =  as  translated.  Var.  : 
"  on  pretend  desirer  des  preuves  qu'ils  n'ont  pas  ete  tenus"  =  "They  pretend  to 
wish  for  proofs  that  they  have  not  been  kept." 


THE  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA.  7 

man  to  his  senses,  is  to  give  him  so  many  noble  motives,  that  he 
will  find  in  them  a  safeguard  against  his  little  weaknesses.1 

I  await  with  impatience  the  letter  you  mention  respecting  the 
marriage.  This  subject  seems  but  secondary  compared  with 
those  now  being  dealt  with  at  Vienna  ;  but  it  is  urgent,  in  the 
interests  of  France,  that  the  Due  de  Berry  should  marry,  and  to 
this  end  it  is  important  that  the  Russian  matter  should  be 
settled. 

I  am  much  gratified  by  and  quite  reciprocate  your  good  wishes 
for  the  coming  year.  Wherefore  I  pray  God  may  have  you,  my 
dear  cousin,  in  His  safe  and  holy  keeping. 

Louis. 


No.  24. — The  Ambassadors  of  the  King  at  the  Congress 
to  the  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  at  Paris. 

Vienna,  January  10,  181 5. 

Monsieur  le  Comte, 

Affairs  here  are  much  the  same  as  we  had  the  honour 
to  describe  to  you  in  our  last  despatch. 

As  we  therein  announced,  a  first  proposition  has  been  made 
on  the  part  of  Russia.  She  has  asked  for  a  counterproposal  and 
Prussia  is  engaged  in  drawing  up  a  plan  on  which  she  bases  her 
reconstruction. 

The  sacrifices  demanded  of  Saxony,  do  not  seem  objection- 
able to  England  and  still  less  so  to  Austria,  although  the  latter 
is  interested  in  not  appearing  to  lend  herself  to  them. 

The  affairs  of  Italy  have  not  advanced  since  the  delivery  of 
the  Austrian  memorandum  on  the  subject  of  Tuscany  and 
Parma. 

The  report  on  the  affairs  of  Switzerland  is  finished  ;  it  will  be 
discussed  at  a  sitting  of  the  commission  to  be  held  the  day  after 
to-morrow,  the  12th.  As  soon  as  it  is  definitely  adopted,  we 
shall  communicate  it  without  delay  to  the  ministry. 

Be  pleased  to  accept.  .  .  . 

1  This  passage  in  the  king's  letter  refers  apparently  to  the  supposed  attachment  of 
Prince  Metternich  for  Queen  Caroline  of  Naples,  wife  of  Murat,  an  attachment  which 
prevented  his  pronouncing  against  Murat,  and  in  favour  of  the  re-establishment  of  the 
House  of  Bourbon  in  the  Kingdom  of  Naples. 


THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 


No.  2 12. — The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  King 

Louis  XVIII. 

Vienna,  December  7,  181 5. 

Sire, 

I  should  not  have  had  the  honour  of  writing  to  your 
Majesty  to-day,  if  I  had  not  had  to  give  a  reply,  asked  of  me,  by 
direction  of  the  Comte  de  Jaucourt. 

It  is  with  regard  to  the  satisfaction  demanded  by  the  Court 
of  Madrid,  for  the  dismissal  of  M.  Casa  Florez. 

My  opinion,  since  your  Majesty  has  deigned  to  ask  for  it,  is, 
that  no  satisfaction  whatever  is  due  ;  because  satisfaction  supposes 
a  wrong,  whereas  your  Majesty's  Cabinet  has  done  none  ;  further, 
if  any  satisfaction  were  due,  it  could  not  be  of  such  a  nature  as 
the  Court  of  Madrid  demands. 

I  will  not  trouble  your  Majesty  by  recapitulating  the  grounds 
on  which  I  form  this  opinion,  having  already  fully  explained  them 
in  the  letter  which  M.  de  Jaucourt  will  have  the  honour  to  submit 
to  you. 

The  extradition  theory,  which  M.  de  Cevallos  endeavours  to 
establish  in  accordance  with  the  privileges  of  the  Jews  and  the 
customs  of  some  ancient  nations,  is  altogether  absurd. 

M.  de  Labrador,  to  whom  I  showed  his  letter,  greatly  deplored 
it.  I  am  inclined  to  believe  that  the  Court  of  Madrid  has  some 
cause  of  complaint  which  I  cannot  fathom,  but  which  is  quite 
outside  the  dismissal  of  M.  de  Casa  Florez,  which  only  serves 
them  as  a  pretext. 

This  I  gather,  from  the  complaints,  that  Spain  is  not  supported 
here  by  France,  in  the  affairs  of  Naples  and  the  Queen  of  Etruria. 

It  is  only  I  believe  in  Spain,  that  it  has  happened,  that  your 
Majesty's  Embassy  has  not  begun  by  demanding  the  restitution 
of  Naples  to  its  legitimate  sovereign,  and  also  repeated  this  same 
demand  on  every  occasion,  both  byword  of  mouth  and  in  writing, 
confidentially  and  officially.  M.  de  Labrador  has  assured  me 
that  in  none  of  our  dispatches  has  he  found  cause  to  think  that 
we  did  not  second  him  to  the  utmost  of  our  power.  The  Court 
of  Madrid  therefore  is  raising  grievances,  which  it  must  be 
perfectly  aware,  have  no  foundation  whatever. 

Affairs  here  have  made  no  visible  progress  since  my  last 
letter.  We  shall  I  believe,  have  a  Conference  to-morrow,  which 
has  been  delayed  for  several  days  by  the  Prussians,  who  were  not 
ready.  The  subject  for  discussion  will  be  the  affairs  of  Poland 
and  Saxony. 

Of  the  two  principles  involved  in  the  Saxon  question,  one,  that 


THE  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA.  9 

of  justice,  will  be  quite  secured  ;  ]  the  other,  that  of  balance  of 
power,  will  be  less  completely  so.  Lord  Castlereagh  has  not 
entirely  renounced  his  former  views ;  his  inclination  is  still 
strongly  in  favour  of  Prussia.  He  persuades  himself  that  a  too 
limited  restriction  of  the  sacrifices  of  the  King  of  Saxony,  will 
be  an  incalculable  source  of  discontent  to  Prussia.  He  is 
naturally  irresolute  and  weak.  His  memorandum  of  the 
ioth  October  embarrasses  him.  He  would  not  like,  he  told  me, 
to  contradict  himself  like  M.  de  Metternich,  who  according  to 
him  has  no  character  to  sustain,  and  never  hesitates  to  change 
his  opinion.  On  the  18th  of  last  month,  he  considered  it  would 
suffice  to  give  Prussia  400,000  souls  in  Saxony  ;  to-day  he  would 
give  double  the  number  without  any  scruple;  on  the  23rd  of 
October  he  wanted  her  total  destruction. 

The  annihilation'2  of  Saxony,  as  regards  equilibrium,  means 
that  of  Austria  more  than  any  other  power. 

But  M.  de  Metternich  treats  the  whole  with  a  flippancy  and 
indifference  which  always  astonish  me,  accustomed  as  I  am,  to 
these  traits  in  him. 

As  for  us,  Sire,  in  order  not  to  contradict  ourselves  or  change 
our  language  from  one  day  to  another,  we  have  only  to  carry 
out  your  Majesty's  commands.  This  is  the  advantage  gained 
by  following  principles  which  do  not  change,  instead  of  mere 
fancies  which  change  perpetually. 

The  service  on  the  21st  January  will  positively  be  held  in  the 
cathedral.  The  Archbishop,  who  has  been  unwell  for  the  last 
few  days,  is  now  better,  and  it  would  require  a  very  serious 
relapse  to  prevent  his  officiating. 

I  have  the  honour  to  be  ...  . 


No.  if. — King  Louis   XVIII.   to  the  Prince  de 

Talleyrand. 

PARIS,  January  11,  181 5. 

Mon  Cousin, 

I  have  received  your  letter  No.  19.  This  letter  will  be 
a  short  one.  Complete  satisfaction  with  your  conduct ;  entire 
approval  of  the  treaty  of  which  the  courier  brings  you  the  ratifi- 
cation— there  you  have  the  contents! — I  will  despatch  General 
Ricard  with  all  possible  speed  and  complete  secrecy,  of  which  I 
see  the  necessity. 

1  Var.  :  "et  c'est  celui  qui  nous  itnportait  le plus"  =  "and  this  is  what  concerns 
us  most." 

-Text:  "La  destruction"  =  as  translated.  Var.:  "  La  question"  =  "the 
question." 


io  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

I  am  greatly  touched  by  the  service  which  is  to  take  place 
on  the  2 ist.  You  will  learn  with  equal  sentiments,  that  here  on 
the  same  day,  the  precious  remains  of  the  King  and  Queen  will 
be  conveyed  to  St.  Denis.  I  pray  that  God  may  keep  you,  my 
cousin,  in  His  safe  and  holy  keeping. 

Louis. 

P.S. — Whilst  we  are  doing  so  well,  let  us  endeavour  to  finish 
the  Neapolitan  affair.1 

12th,  Morning. 
I  re-open   my  letter  to  tell  you  that  General   Ricard  is  at 
present  at  Toulouse,  where  he  commands  a  division.     I  have 
to-night  despatched  a  courier  conveying  his  immediate  summons 
to  Paris. 

L. 

No.   1 83.— King  Louis  XVIII.  to  the  Prince  de 

Talleyrand. 

Paris,  January  15,  1815. 

Mon  Cousin, 

I  have  received  your  letter  No.  20.  In  my  last  despatch, 
believing  I  was  more  pressed  than  I  really  was  (not  having 
correctly  calculated  the  time  required  to  draw  up  the  ratification), 
I  was  exceedingly  laconic,  but  pray  believe,  that  in  reading  your 
No.  19, 1  experienced  feelings  similar  to  yours  on  the  receipt  of 
my  despatch  of  the  27th  December.  I  am  not  indifferent  nor 
ever  shall  be  indifferent,  to  such  interests  as  those  which  form  the 
subject  of  the  Congress  of  Vienna.  I  can  however  be  quite  as 
secure  as  Alexander,  and  even  share  in  that  security,  for  I  have 
not  told  you  to  communicate  a  portion  of  my  letter  to  Lord 
Castlereagh,  knowing  well  that  you  would  do  so  of  your  own 
accord. 

I  earnestly  wish  to  see  realised  the  hope  expressed  in  your 
letter  to  the  Comte  de  Jaucourt,  that  Prussia  would  be  satisfied 
without  usurping  Saxony.  Then  all  would  be  smooth  and  we 
should  have  the  glory  of  cutting  the  gordian  knot  without  the 
aid  of  the  sword.  Nevertheless  I  approve  of  negotiating  with 
the  Porte  and  will  hasten  the  departure  of  the  Marquis  de 
Riviere.2  He  has  not  quite  recovered  from  a  very  severe  illness, 
but  I  know  his  zeal. 

1  This  postscript  does  not  appear  in  the  text  of  the  archives. 

2  Charles-Francois  de  Riffardeau,  Marquis,  afterwards  Due  de  Riviere,  born  in 
1763.  Entered  the  French  Guards  at  seventeen.  He  emigrated  in  1789  and  became 
aide-de-camp  to  the  Comte  D'Artois,  who  entrusted  him  with  several  missions  to 
Brittany  and  Vendee.     Returning  to  France  with  Pichegru  in  1804,  he  was  arrested, 


THE  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA.  n 

I  am  fully  prepared  for  General  Pozzo  di  Borgo.  Were  it  a 
question  of  a  prince,  not  already  a  sovereign,  I  might  with  pleasure 
see  him  form  a  small  state  on  my  frontier ;  but  to  the  King  of 
Saxony,  supposing  he  did  consent  to  the  exchange,  I  could  not 
yet  extend  my  hand.  To  be  just  to  oneself  is  a  sacred  duty,  to 
be  so  towards  others  is  no  less  so  ;  and  he,  who  when  only 
having  alms  to  live  on,  refused  to  abandon  his  rights,  will  not 
betray  those  of  others,  equally  legitimate,  when  he  commands 
more  than  twenty-five  millions  of  men,  and  when  besides  justice, 
he  has  the  general  interests  of  Europe  to  defend. 

The  Swedish  question  is  a  very  delicate  one.  The  last  treaty 
placed  Russia  in  such  a  position,  that  without  much  trouble, 
she  could  occupy  Stockholm.1  Is  it  prudent  to  involve  a  kingdom 
in  so  dangerous  a  war,  without  at  the  same  time  guaranteeing2 
to  it,  in  case  of  reverses,  some  indemnity  which  it  would  even  be 
difficult  to  find  ?  Gustavus  IV.  has  more  than  once  told  me,  that 
he  considered  his  uncle  was  the  legitimate  King  of  Sweden  ;  but 
in  abdicating  for  himself,  was  that  unfortunate  Prince  able  also 
to  abdicate  for  his  son  ? 3  In  admitting  this  hypothesis,  which 
would  legitimize  the  election  of  Bernadotte,  are  there  no  conse- 
quences which  might  cause  one  to  hesitate  ere  forming  an 
alliance  with  him  ?  I  shall  read  with  interest  your  reflections  on 
these  two4  points. 

But  the  existence  of  Bernadotte  leads  me  back  to  another 
and  much  more  dangerous  one,  that  of  Murat.  My  despatch  of 
27th  December  related  to  Naples  and  Saxony.  We  are  in  a 
good  position  as  regards  the  latter,  let  us  work  with  the  same 
zeal  and  success  for  the  former. 

The  Sardinian  ambassador  has  asked  me  for  an  audience, 
the  Comte  de  Jaucourt  will  tell  you   the  result.     Wherefore  I 

tried  by  a  military  commission  and  condemned  to  death.  Pardoned  by  the  inter- 
cession of  the  Empress  and  Murat,  he  was  at  first  confined  in  the  Fort  of  Jouy,  and 
afterwards  condemned  to  transportation  for  life.  In  1815,  Louis  XVIII.  appointed 
him  Brigadier-General,  and  Ambassador  at  Constantinople  ;  but  the  return  of  the 
Emperor  prevented  his  departure.  At  the  second  restoration  he  was  created  a  peer 
of  France,  and  governor  of  Corsica,  and  subsequently  again  appointed  Ambassador 
to  the  Ottoman  Porte.  He  was  recalled  in  1820,  created  hereditary  Duke  in  1825, 
and  became  Governor  to  the  Due  de  Bordeaux  in  1826.     He  died  in  1828. 

It  is  well  known  that  the  Venus  of  Milo,  discovered  by  the  Comte  de  Marcellus, 
was  brought  to  France  by  the  Due  de  Riviere. 

1  The  Treaty  of  Fredrichsham  (Sept.  17,  1810)  by  which  Sweden  ceded  Finland 
to  Russia. 

2  Suppressed  in  the  text  of  the  archives. 

3  Gustavus  IV.,  when  compelled  to  abdicate  in  1809,  refused  to  extend  this  act  to 
his  son.  In  1814  he  addressed  a  protest  to  the  Congress  against  the  usurpation  of 
Bernadotte,  and  claimed  the  Swedish  throne  for  his  son.  He  was  however  not 
listened  to.  His  son,  known  as  the  Prince  de  Wasa,  became  a  Field- Marshal  in  the 
Austrian  service. 

4  Text:   "deux"  =  as  translated.     Var.  :  "divas"  =  "different." 


12  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

pray    God  to    guard    you,   my    cousin,    in    His   safe    and   holy 
keeping. 

Louis. 


No.   19A — King  Louis  XVIII.  to  the  Prince  de 

Talleyrand. 

Paris,  January  19,  181 5. 

Mon  Cousin, 

I  have  received  your  letter,  No.  21.  I  was  not  in  doubt 
as  to  your  opinion  on  the  Spanish  matter,  but  I  am  very  glad  to 
find  it  is  in  accord  with  the  measures  I  had  taken.  I  am  also 
pleased  that  M.  de  Labrador  does  not  share  the  insane  ideas  of 
his  cabinet.  May  he  inspire  it  with  views  more  in  accordance 
with  reason  and  its  own  interests. 

Last  week  I  Was  well  satisfied,  but  to-day  I  note  with  dis- 
quietude Lord  Castlereagh's  tendency  to  return  to  his  former 
weaknesses,  and  also  Prince  Metternich's  fickleness.  The  former 
should  bear  in  mind,  that  that  which  elevates  a  reputation,  is  to 
uphold  justice  or  return  to  it  loyally,  if  unfortunately  it  has  been 
deviated  from.  The  latter  forgets  that  to  aggrandize  Prussia,  is 
to  weaken  Austria. 

As  for  me  I  will  never  lend  myself,  as  you  know,  to  the  entire 
spoliation  of  the  King  of  Saxony. 

I  believe  he  will  be  obliged  to  cede  something,  but  if  they 
exact  what  would  reduce  him  to  a  fourth  or  even  a  third-rate 
power,  I  shall  be  no  party  to  it.  I  await  with  impatience  the 
result  of  your  conference,  and  I  am  no  less  anxious  to  see  at 
last  the  commencement  of  the  great  Neapolitan  affair. 

We  are  in  the  midst  of  mourning  and  grief.  I  would  I  could 
have  been  present  at  the  ceremonies  which  take  place  on 
Saturday.  The  fear  of  gout  however  prevents  me,  but  one 
suffers  as  much  in  arranging  for  them  as  in  being  present. 

Pray  thank  the  Archbishop  on  my  behalf,  for  having  himselt 
officiated.  Wherefore,  my  cousin,  may  God  have  you  in  His 
safe  and  holy  keeping. 

Louis. 


No.  25. — The  Ambassadors  of  the  King  at  the  Congress 
to  the  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  at  Paris. 

Vienna,  March  19,  181 5. 

Monsieur  le  Comte, 

We  have  the  honour  to  forward  to  you  a  copy  of  the 
protocol  of  the  last  meeting  of  the  14th  December.      At  the  one 


THE  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA.  13 

held  on  the  14th  of  this  month  and  of  which  the  protocol  will 
not  be  signed  until  next  meeting,  Prince  de  Metternich  com- 
municated the  reply  of  the  Sardinian  court,  with  respect  to  the 
reunion  of  Genoa  and  Piedmont,  and  although  this  document 
only  concerns  the  next  protocol,  we  transmit  it  to  the  ministry 
herewith. 

The  fate  of  the  imperial  fiefs,  over  which  the  Sardinian 
legation  reserves  the  contingent  rights  of  its  sovereign,  cannot 
be  definitely  settled  until  the  other  affairs  of  Italy  are  arranged. 
The  report  on  Swiss  affairs  has  been  signed  and  been  submitted 
to  the  conference  of  the  eight  powers.  As  soon  as  a  final  decision 
has  been  arrived  at,  it  will  be  made  known  to  the  king. 

If  the  influence  of  the  Emperor  of  Russia  had  not  opposed 
the  best  interests  of  Switzerland,  perhaps  something  better  could 
have  been  arranged  ;  but  his  hand,  protecting  as  it  does  what- 
ever pertains  to  ill-conceived  or  badly-exercised  liberties,  is 
sufficiently  powerful  to  obstruct  those  principles  which  would 
bring  about  a  true  re-establishment. 

We  have  nevertheless  obtained  all  it  was  possible  to  do  in 
this  matter,  and  it  has  been  agreed  to  grant  indemnities  for  the 
acts  of  violence  committed  on  certain  estates  in  the  Pays  de 
Vaud,  and  the  Valtelline. 

The  commission  appointed  to  regulate  the  navigation  of 
the  large  rivers  has  not  yet  assembled. 

The  English  ministers  have  asked  for  instructions  and 
supplementary  information  on  this  subject.  The  Prussian 
ministers  would  like  to  exclude  France  from  all  participation  in 
the  control  and  administration  of  the  Rhine  navigation.  We 
find  the  same  difficulty  here  that  has  met  us  everywhere  and  we 
hope  equally  to  triumph  over  it ;  but  you  will  understand,  M. 
le  Comte,  that  this  will  form  a  fresh  subject  for  discussion. 

The  Prince  de  Hardenberg  has  brought  forward  a  scheme 
for  the  reconstruction  of  Prussia,  and  you  will  observe  with  some 
surprise  that  the  whole  of  Saxony  is  therein  assigned  to  Prussia. 
But  as  this  plan  shows  an  excess  of  six  hundred  and  eighty-one 
thousand  souls  over  the  population  of  Prussia  in  1805,  and  gives 
seven  hundred  thousand  souls  to  form  a  domain  for  the  King  of 
Saxony,  this  affords  some  room  to  vindicate  the  question  of 
recognition  of  rights  and  balance  of  power,  in  arranging  the  new 
Germanic  Confederation. 

Bavaria  has  formally  agreed  to  the  union  formed  between 
France,  Austria  and  England,  the  object  of  which  is,  not  to 
suffer  any  of  the  powers  individually  to  dictate  to  Europe. 
Holland  and  Hanover  will  also  agree  to  this. 

You  have  been  informed,  M.  le  Comte,  that  the  embassy  of 


14  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

the  king  deemed  it  becoming  to  hold  a  funeral  service  on  the 
2 ist  January.  The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  has  requested  the 
king's  minister  at  the  court  of  Vienna  to  make  known  to  the 
sovereigns  in  the  name  of  the  French  embassy  that  the  service 
will  take  place  in  the  cathedral  at  Vienna.  The  sovereigns  have 
not  only  replied  that  they  would  assist  at  the  ceremony,  but 
all  have  added  expressions  of  sympathy  for  the  king. 

The  Empress  of  Austria  told  M.  de  la  Tour  du  Pin,  that  her 
health  would  not  admit  of  her  being  present,  that  she  dare  not 
expose  her  nerves  to  such  painful  emotions,  and  begged  him 
therefore  to  present  her  excuses  to  the  king,  adding  that  she 
would  do  so  herself  to  Madame  la  Duchesse  d'Angouleme.  The 
Archduchess  Beatrice,  her  mother,  replied  at  once  that  she  would 
be  present.  There  remain  only  the  Emperor  and  Empress  of 
Russia  whose  replies  have  not  yet  been  received,  but  who,  no 
doubt,  will  also  attend. 

This  ceremony,  solemn  as  it  is  seemly,  will  recall  an  epoch 
very  unfortunate  for  France,  and  the  century  that  has  just  passed, 
but  it  will  also  give  rise  to  beneficial  reflections  among  nations. 

I  have  the  honour  to  be.  .  .  . 


No.  222. — The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  King  Louis 

XVIII. 

Vienna,  Jan  19,  1815. 
Sire, 

I  have  received  the  letter  your  Majesty  has  deigned  to 
honour  me  with,  and  found  fresh  motives  for  devotion  and  courage 
in  the  evidences  of  goodwill  therein  contained. 

I  have  the  honour  of  writing  to  your  Majesty  to-day,  only 
that  there  may  not  be  too  long  an  interval  between  my  letters, 
for  I  have  no  news  whatever  to  communicate. 

Matters  progress  but  slowly  ;  nevertheless  we  are  not  idle. 
Bavaria  has  joined  the  triple  alliance.  Hanover  and  Holland 
will  follow  later.  The  Grand  Duke  of  Darmstadt  has  joined 
Bavaria  with  the  same  object,  and  promises  6,000  men. 

The  Commissioners  are  at  work  on  the  affairs  of  Italy, 
Switzerland  and  general  statistics.  My  letter  to  the  British 
cabinet,  which  will  be  submitted  to  your  Majesty,  will  show  you 
how  matters  stand  in  this  respect,  the  obstacles  that  arise,  and  how 
it  is  that  everything  cannot  be  arranged  as  might  be  desired. 
Austria,  England,  Bavaria,  Holland,  Hanover,  and  nearly  the 
whole  of  Germany  are  in  accord  with  us,  as  to  keeping  the  king 
and  a  kingdom  of  Saxony.  A  Saxon  kingdom  will  therefore 
be  preserved,  although  the  Prince  de   Hardenberg,  in    a  scheme 


THE  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA.  15 

he  recently  submitted  for  the  reconstruction  of  Prussia,  dared  to 
ask  for  the  whole  of  Saxony.  M.  de  Metternich  has  to  reply 
to  this  scheme,  and  I  have  been  waiting  for  his  answer  ere  de- 
spatching my  courier ;  but  it  is  not  yet  finished.  I  have  only 
seen  the  outlines  which  are  all  thoroughly  satisfactory.  More- 
over a  single  glance  at  the  Prussian  scheme  shows  that  what  she 
had  in  1805  would  be  restored  to  her,  which  is  all  that  she  has  a 
right  to  expect,  and  that  five  hundred  thousand  subjects  would  be 
preserved  to  Saxony.  But  Prussia  pretends  that  she  ought  to  have 
six  hundred  thousand  more  than  she  had  in  1805,  under  the 
pretext  of  the  additions  obtained  by  Russia  and  Austria.  Lord 
Castlereagh,  M.  de  Metternich  and  myself,  being  fully  agreed 
upon  the  principle  of  right,  it  now  remains  for  us  to  understand 
each  other  respecting  the  balance  of  power  in  order  to  make  a 
unanimous  proposition. 

This  therefore  occupies  us  daily,  and  to-day  again  I  had  a 
conference  with  them  on  this  subject.  M.  de  Metternich,  at  first, 
seemed  quite  inclined  to  make  endless  concessions.  I  had  to 
restrain  him  by  making  him  face  the  consequences  which  such 
acquiescence  (by  placing  his  kingdom  in  danger)  would  bring 
on  himself.  He  now  hotly  defends  what  before  he  would  have1 
abandoned.  I  have  advised  him  to  bring  some  of  the  ablest 
Austrian  officers  to  our  conferences,  to  give  their  opinions  and 
the  reasons  for  those  opinions  ;  and  in  order  to  oblige  him  to 
follow  this  advice,  I  told  him  that  if  he  did  not  bring  them,  I 
would  say  that  I  had  told  him  to  do  so.  He  has  decided  to  adopt 
my  suggestion.  The  Prince  de  Schwartzenberg  will  have  a  talk 
with  Lord  Stewart,  and  will  come  with  some  of  his  officers  to  a 
conference  we  shall  hold  the  day  after  to-morrow.  Unfortun- 
ately, Lord  Castlereagh,  even  should  he  in  spite  of  his  old  leaning 
towards  Prussia,  and  the  fear  he  has  of  compromising  what  he 
calls  his  character,he  willing  (after  having  in  his  note  of  the  nth 
October,  given  up  the  whole  of  Saxony)  now  to  allow  only  a  very 
small  share  to  Prussia,  has  on  all  questions  of  military  topography, 
and  even  on  the  simplest  matters  of  continental  geography,  such 
imperfect  notions,  I  may  say,  such  utter  ignorance,  that  while  it 
is  necessary  to  prove  the  smallest  details  to  him,  it  is  extremely 
difficult  to  convince  him  of  them.  It  is  said  that  an  Englishman 
who  was  here  in  Prince  Kaunitz's  time,  retailed  a  number  of 
absurdities  respecting  the  German  states,  and  that  Prince  Kaunitz, 
instead  of  amusing  himself  by  refuting  them,*2  exclaimed  in  a 
tone  of  the  greatest  surprise,  "  It  is  really  marvellous  how  ignor- 

1  Text:  "ce  qu'il  aurait "  =  as  translated.     Var.  :  "ce  qu'il  avait"  =  "that 
which  he  had." 

2  Suppressed  in  the  text  of  the  archives. 


1 6  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

ant  the  English  are ! "  How  often  have  I  had  occasion  to 
mentally  make  the  same  observation  during  my  conferences  with 
Lord  Castlereagh  ! 

In  the  arrangement  that  is  being  carried  out  in  Italian  affairs, 
we  have  reason  to  hope  that  the  Archduchess  Marie  Louise  will 
be  put  down  for  a  considerable  pension.  I  must  tell  your 
Majesty  that  in  this  matter  I  am  greatly  interested,  for  as  a 
result,  the  name  of  Bonaparte,1  will  certainly,  for  the  present  and 
also  the  future,  be  struck  off  the  roll  of  sovereigns  ;  the  island  of 
Elba  being  only  life-hold,  and  the  son  of  the  archduchess  being 
debarred  from  the  possession  of  an  independent  state. 

The  preparations  for  the  ceremonial  of  the  21st  are  nearly 
completed.  The  desire  to  be  present  is  so  great  that  it  will  be 
difficult  for  us  to  accede  to  all  the  requests.  The  church  of  St. 
Stephen,  the  largest  in  Vienna,  would  not  hold  all  who  wish  to 
come. 

The  sovereigns  have  all  had  notice  of  the  ceremony,  and  all, 
except  the  Emperor  and  Empress  of  Russia  who  have  not  yet 
replied,  have  intimated  their  intention  of  being  present. 

The  Empress  of  Austria,  whose  health  does  not  admit  of  her 
attendance,  begs  to  be  excused  by  your  Majesty  ;  these  are  the 
words  she  herself  used.  But  her  mother,  the  Archduchess 
Beatrice,  will  be  present. 

The  ladies  will  all  be  veiled,  this  being  the  mark  of  the 
deepest  mourning. 

General  Pozzo  is  still  awaiting  his  instructions.  He  is  told 
to  hold  himself  in  readiness,  and  this  he  has  done  for  more  than 
a  week,  but  his  orders  have  not  yet  arrived. 

General  Andreossy2  passed  through  here  on  his  return  to 
Constantinople.  His  language  is  fair.  He  gave  me  all  the 
assurances  of  good  faith  I  could  desire.  He  is  a  man  of  intelli- 
gence who  has  filled  responsible  positions,  and  much  appreciates 
being  employed. 

I  have  the  honour  to  be.  .  .  . 

1  Var.  :   "Buonaparte." 

2  Antoine-Francois,  Comte  Andreossy,  born  1761.  Was  Lieutenant  of  Artillery 
in  1789,  became  General  of  Brigade  in  1797.  He  accompanied  Buonaparte  to  Egypt 
and  returned  with  him  in  1799,  aided  him  on  the  18th  Brumaire,  and  became  shortly 
afterwards  an  Inspector  of  Artillery.  He  was  Ambassador  to  London  in  1802,  and 
subsequently  at  Vienna  and  Constantinople  in  1809.  He  was  recalled  in  1814.  In 
1815,  Andreossy  was  one  of  the  Commissioners  with  the  foreign  armies.  He  retired 
from  public  life  after  the  second  restoration,  and  died  in  1828. 


THE  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA.  \T 


No.  23-. —The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  King 

Louis  XVIII. 

Vienna,  Jan.  21,  181 5. 
Sire, 

I  have  the  honour  to-day  to  send  to  your  Majesty  a 
report  of  the  ceremony  that  took  place  here  this  morning. 

I  have  had  a  short  but  circumstantial  account  drawn  up  for 
insertion  in  the  Moniteur  if  your  Majesty  approves  l  of  it.  I 
thought  it  would  be  only  necessary  to  relate  the  facts  and 
abstain  from  offering  any  opinions  or  remarks  which  the  readers 
will  naturally  make  for  themselves  and  probably  be  more 
impressed  thereby. 

This  account  includes  the  address  delivered  by  the  cure  of 
St.  Anne,  a  Frenchman  by  birth.  It  is  not  a  funeral  oration  or 
a  sermon  but  an  address.  There  were  only  a  few  days  in  which 
to  compose  it,  to  make  it  harmonize  with  the  object  of  the 
ceremony  as  well  as  with  present  circumstances;  and  the  position 
of  the  principal  people  who  would  assist  thereat  ;  and  it  was 
therefore  less  important  that  it  should  be  eloquent  than  that  it 
should  be  guarded,  and  those  who  heard  it  thought  that  in  this 
respect  it  left  nothing  to  be  desired. 

Nothing  was  wanting  to  the  ceremonial  ;  neither  the  pomp 
due  to  the  object,  the  choice  of  the  spectators,  nor  the  grief  that 
the  event  it  recalled  must  ever  excite.  It  ought,  as  the 
memorial  of  a  great  misfortune,  to  offer  a  solemn  lesson.  It  had 
both  a  moral  and  a  political  aim  ;  and  the  heads  of  the  great 
embassies  and  people  of  the  highest  rank  who  dined  with  me 
to-day,2  led  me  to  believe  that  this  end  has  been  attained. 

I  cannot  speak  too  strongly  in  praise  of  the  kindness  and 
attention  shown  by  the  Emperor  of  Austria  in  permitting  and 
ordering  such  arrangements  as  would  add  either  to  the  proper 
conduct  or  the  grandeur  of  the  ceremonial.  He  alone,  among 
all  the  sovereigns,  appeared  in  black  ;  the  others  wore  uniform. 

I  have  received  the  greatest  assistance  on  all  sides,  especially 
from  M.  le  Comte  Alexis  de  Noailles. 

M.  Moreau,  the  architect  charged  with  all  the  preparations, 
displayed  both  zeal  and  intelligence.  The  music  was  pro- 
nounced very  fine.    It  was  by  M.  Neukomm,"'  who  conducted  the 

1  See  the  Moniteur  of  January  30th.  2  Suppressed  in  the  text  of  the  archives. 

3  Sigismond  Neukomm,  a  German  composer,  born  at  Salzburg  in  1778.  A 
pupil  of  Haydn's.  In  1804  he  went  to  St.  Petersburg,  where  he  was  appointed 
musical  director  of  the  Imperial  Theatre.  He  went  aftewards  to  Vienna,  and  sub- 
sequently in  1S09  to  Paris,  where  he  was  presented  to  M.  de  Talleyrand  who  intro- 
duced him  into  society.  He  lived  with  the  Prince  till  1814,  and  accompanied  him  to 
Vienna,  where  a  requiem,  composed  by  him  for  the  occasion,  was  sung  on  the  21-1 

VOL.   III.  C 


1 8  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

performance  jointly  with  M.  Salieri.1  I  entreat  your  Majesty  to 
have  the  kindness  to  bestow  on  these  three  artists,  as  well  as  on 
M.  Isabey2  who  has  been  of  the  greatest  use,  a  proof  of  your 
satisfaction  by  sending  me,  for  them,  the  decoration  of  the 
Legion  of  Honour. 

I  also  entreat  your  Majesty  to  accord  me  the  same  honour 
to  MM.  Rouen,3  Formont,4  Damour,  Saint-Mars  5  et  Sers,  attaches 
to  your  Majesty's  embassy,  with  whose  conduct  I  have  reason  to 
be  extremely  satisfied,  and  who  alone,  amongst  the  attache's  of 
the  various  embassies  at  the  Congress,  have  no  decoration. 

On  Wednesday  I  will  despatch  a  courier,  by  whom  I  shall 
have  the  honour  to  write  to  your  Majesty  on  the  subject  of  the 
marriage,  of  the  great  importance  of  which  I  am  fully  aware, 
and  have  never  lost  sight.6 

I  have  the  honour  to  be.  .  .  . 

No.  26. — The  Ambassadors  of  the  King  at  the  Congress 
to  the  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  at  Paris. 

Vienna,  Jan.  24,  181 5. 
Monsieur  le  Comte, 

We  have  the  honour  to  submit  herewith  the  protocol  of 
the    conference    of   the    eight    powers,   held  Jan.    16th.      The 

of  January  in  the  church  of  St.  Etienne  of  that  city  by  300  choristers.  In  1816  he 
accompanied  the  Due  de  Luxemburg  to  Rio  de Janeiro,  to  which  the  latter  had  been 
accredited.  Returning  to  Paris,  he  resumed  his  residence  with  the  Prince  de  Talley- 
rand and  followed  him  to  London  in  1830.     He  died  in  1857. 

1  Antonio  Salieri,  a  celebrated  Italian  composer,  was  born  in  1750.  He  came  to 
Vienna  in  1766,  with  Grosman,  director  of  the  Imperial  Chapel,  to  whose  office  he 
succeeded  in  1775.  Salieri  went  to  Paris  several  times  and  there  brought  out  some 
operas  which  had  a  brilliant  success  {The  Dana'ides,  which  he  composed,  but  which 
Gluck  wrote,  Tar ar e  il  Pastor  fido).  He  returned  to  Vienna  in  1789  and  devoted 
himself  entirely  to  church  music.     He  died  in  1825. 

-  Jean-Baptiste  Isabey,  born  at  Nancy  in  1767,  early  made  a  name  for  himself  as 
a  painter.  He  studied  under  David,  was  presented  at  Court,  and  painted  portraits  of 
the  Due  d'Angouleme  and  Due  de  Berry.  He  lived  in  Paris  during  the  whole  of  the 
Reign  of  Terror.  Later  on  he  joined  Buonaparte,  whom  he  painted  standing,  and 
who  appointed  him  to  superintend  the  decoration  and  even  the  ceremonial  of  court 
solemnities  at  the  Tuileries. 

He  went  to  Vienna  in  1847  and  there  painted  a  celebrated  picture  representing 
the  meeting  after  a  conference  of  all  the  personages  who  took  part  in  the  Congress. 
He  lived  until  1855. 

3  M.  Rouen,  a  French  diplomat,  commenced  his  career  in  1813,  at  Weimar,  as 
attache  to  the  legation.  Followed  M.  de  Talleyrand  to  Vienna,  was  secretary  at 
Turin  in  18 16.  Subsequently  Consul-General  in  Greece  (1S28),  and  Minister  at  Rio 
de  Janeiro  in  1836. 

4  M.  de  Formont  was  employed  at  the  Foreign  Office  in  1814.  He  was  attached 
to  the  French  Embassy  at  Vienna.  Afterwards  he  became  Consul-General  at 
Livorno. 

5  M.  de  Saint-Mars  was  the  translator  at  the  Foreign  Office,  and  was  attached  as 
such  to  the  French  Embassy.     He  remained  on  at  Vienna  as  chief  secretary. 

6  Var.  :  "  P.  S. — The  departure  of  General  Pozzo  appears  to  be  fixed  for  Tuesday, 
.24th." 


THE  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA.  19 

question  of  the  slave-trade  has  been  since  modified  by  the  effect 
of  a  convention,  entered  into  between  Lord  Castlereagh  and 
the  Portuguese  ambassador.  The  latter,  in  the  name  of  his 
government,  has  agreed  that  Portugal  shall  give  up  the  slave- 
trade  north  of  the  equator  from  this  time  forward.  England  in 
return  paying  an  indemnity  of  ,£300,000  sterling  for  the  damage 
.done  by  English  cruisers  ;  ^500,000  sterling  towards  a  loan 
which  Portugal  has  to  repay,  and  annulling  the  last  treaty  of 
commerce  signed  in  1810.1  Portugal  likewise  covenants  that  at 
the  end  of  eight  years,  the  slave-trade  shall  no  longer  be  carried 
•on  in  any  of  her  possessions.  Spain  has  insisted  that  the  date, 
already  stipulated  for  in  her  treaties,  should  remain  fixed 
•definitely. 

France  retains  the  position  she  occupied  after  the  treaty  of 
Paris,  ever  ready  to  discourage  the  slave-trade,  and  fixing  five 
3rears  as  the  term  for  its  abolition. 

You  will  see,  M.  le  Comte,  that  the  great  advantages  offered 
by  England  to  Portugal  will  dispose  her  the  more  readily  to 
enter  into  arrangements  for  the  immediate  abolition  of  the 
slave-trade. 

It  will  be  for  you  to  consult  with  the  Minister  of  Marine  on 
this  matter  ;  if,  as  it  is  said,  our  traders  do  not  carry  arms  in 
quest  of  slaves,  some  arrangement  might  perhaps  be  possible 
without  any  loss  to  France.  This  idea,  however,  can  only  be 
touched  upon  with  great  caution. 

The  negotiations  as  to  the  limits  of  Poland  and  Saxony  are 
being  carried  on.  In  two  days  the  Vienna  cabinet  is  to  submit 
a  counter-project. 

The  Prussians  seem  disposed  to  answer  this  by  an  ultimatum, 
and  the  Emperor  of  Russia  holds  out  some  hopes  of  interposing 
his  good  offices  with  the  court  of  Berlin,  to  induce  her  to  relin- 
quish her  claim  to  annex  the  kingdom  of  Saxony. 

Lord  Castlereagh  always  appears  disinclined  to  discuss  this 
question  thoroughly  ;  he  often  repeats  that  he  will  only  insist  on 
the  preservation  of  conservative  principles,  and  that  he  neither 
can  nor  will  pledge  the  English  nation  to  make  sacrifices  on  a 
simple  question  of  greater  or  less  population.  Notwithstand- 
ing this  obstacle,  we  nevertheless  hope  that  if  Saxony  agrees  to 
give  up  five  or  six  hundred  thousand  souls,  she  will  be  allowed 
to  exist. 

This  we  trust  to  announce  definitely  ere  eight  days  have 

1  A  friendly  treaty  of  commerce  and  navigation,  between  England  and  Portugal, 
signed  at  Rio  de  Janeiro,  on  the  19th  of  February,  1810.  This  treaty,  imposed  by 
England,  had  stipulated  for  some  very  hard  conditions,  especially  regarding  the 
commerce  of  the  Brazils,  which  was  then  a  Portuguese  colony. 

C    2 


20  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

elapsed.  Austria,  who  should  receive  back  the  district  of 
Tarnopol,  lost  in  Poland  in  1809,  1S  willing  to  give  it  up  on 
condition  that  Russia  cedes  a  larger  territory  to  Prussia.  All 
this  tends  to  the  solution  of  this  first  and  most  important 
question  which  has  blocked  the  progress  of  the  congress. 

Italian  affairs  have  not  progressed  ;  they  are  at  a  standstill 
in  the  office  of  M.  de  Metternich. 

Those  of  Switzerland  are  about  to  be  discussed  in  the 
conference  of  the  eight  powers.  According  to  the  latest 
accounts  received  from  Berne,  the  deputy  of  that  canton  has 
received  authority  to  accept  the  bishopric  of  Bale  as  indemnity 
for  its  losses,  on  the  condition  that  it  is  to  be  given  over  to  them 
entirely,  and  that  no  privileges  shall  be  claimed  for  its  inhabit- 
ants which  would  not  accord  with  those  formerly  enjoyed  by 
the  old  canton  of  Berne.  The  Bernese  have  at  the  same  time, 
expressed  their  gratitude  for  the  generous  sacrifices  which  his 
Majesty  was  prepared  to  make  in  order  to  procure  the  restora- 
tion of  their  ancient  territory.  We  believe  that  his  Majesty 
will  find  them  most  faithful  and  devoted  allies. 

We  cannot  conclude,  M.  le  Comte,  without  informing  you  of 
the  effect  produced  here  on  every  one  by  the  ceremony  of  Jan. 

2 1  st.  We  thought  that  one  of  the  best  and  most  efficacious 
means  of  consecrating  those  principles  which  we  are  endeavour- 
ing to  establish,  was  to  invite  all  the  sovereigns  and  plenipoten- 
tiaries to  attend  it. 

It  having  been  decided  in  the  beginning  of  January  to  cele- 
brate this  anniversary,  the  ambassadors  of  the  king  hastened  to 
make  their  intention  known  to  the  Austrian  court  as  well  as  to 
the  English,  Spanish,  and  Portuguese  legations,  and  sought  to  give 
as  much  eclat  as  possible  to  the  ceremony  by  their  preparations. 

Although  it  was  in  the  interest  of  all  the  sovereigns  to  do 
honour  to  the  memories  which  this  anniversary  recalls,  the 
king's  ambassadors  are  too  fully  cognisant  of  the  terrible 
impressions  left  by  the  Revolution,  to  expect  that  universal 
homage  would  be  accorded,  unless  great  pains  were  taken  in 
the  matter. 

Even  on  the  evening  before  the  ceremony,  the  Emperor  of 
Russia  declared  that  there  was  no  object  to  be  gained  by  it, 
and  his  envoy  at  the  Austrian  court  alleged  various  pretexts 
for-  not  being  able  to  attend. 

But  you  will  see,  M.  le  Comte,  that  we  have  succeeded  in 
triumphing  over  all  these  obstacles  and  that  the  sovereigns,  the 
envoys  and  the  people  of  Vienna,  all  assisted  at  the  ceremony 
with  feelings  of  the  deepest  respect. 

The  legation  has  been  engaged  in  drawing  up  an  address. 


THE  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA.  21 

which,  if  somewhat  lacking  in  that  degree  of  eloquence  which 
such  grand  memories  should  inspire,  has  nevertheless  produced 
the  best  possible  effect,  in  showing  the  position  of  France,  her 
regrets  and  her  love  for  her  king,  without  accusing  or  assigning 
guilt  to  any  one. 

The  king's  ambassadors  were  not  satisfied,  however,  merely 
to  proclaim  these  views  from  the  pulpit.  The  Prince  de  Talley- 
rand, inspired  M.  de  Gentz  to  write  an  article  which,  in  drawing 
the  attention  of  Europe  to  this  ceremonial,  will  prove  to  you 
that  the  object  we  had  in  view  has  been  attained.  The  article 
is  in  the  Observatoire  of  Vienna.  January  23rd.1 

You  will  have  been  able  to  form  an  opinion,  M.  le  Comte, 
from  our  first  report,  already  forwarded  to  the  king,  of  the 
general  feeling  inspired  by  the  ceremony,  the  emotion  that  has 
been  manifested,  and  the  reminiscences  it  will  leave  in  this 
country. 

On  the  same  day,  all  the  most  distinguished  among  the 
visitors  and  inhabitants  of  Vienna  hastened  to  express  their 
condolences  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand. 

The  Emperor  of  Austria  ordered  a  fete  (which  was  to  have 
taken  place  on  the  21st)  to  be  put  off  till  next  day.  Perhaps 
you  will  deem  it  advisable  that  in  all  the  principal  papers,  the 
account  of  the  fete  of  the  22nd,  should  be  preceded  by  these 
words  : — "  The  entertainments,  interrupted  by  order  of  the 
Emperor  on  account  of  the  21st  January,  have  recommenced."2 

The  catafalque  has  remained  on  view  in  the  cathedral  since 
the  day  of  the  ceremony.  Numbers  of  people  still  go  there  to 
testify  their  profound  respect. 

Be  pleased  to  accept.  .  .  . 


No.  24A — The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  King  Louis 

XVII  I. 

Vienna,  January  25,  181 5. 
Sire, 

I  was  present  at  a  conference  yesterday  with  Prince 
de  Metternich  and  Prince  Schwaizenberg,  the  object  of  which 
was  to  decide  what  portion  of  Saxony,  in  the  opinion  of  the 
Austrian  officers,  could  or  could  not  be  given  up  to  Prussia,  with- 
out compromising  the  safety  of  Austria. 

The   Emperor  of   Austria  wished  this    conference  to  take 
place  and  also  desired  that  I  should  be  present. 

Two  plans  were  submitted.     The  one  preserved  Torgau  to 

1  See  the  Moniteur  of  February  2nd.         2  See  the  Moniteur  of  February  2nd. 


22  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

Saxony,  provided  the  fortifications  of  Dresden  were  rased.  The 
other  gave  Torgau  to  Prussia,  but  unfortified  ;  Dresden  being 
likewise   dismantled. 

In  both  schemes,  Prussia  would  keep  Erfurth. 

It  was  decided  to  submit  both  plans  to  the  Emperor  of 
Austria,  and  that  whichever  he  adopted  should  then  form  the 
subject 1  of  a  memorandum,  which  he  would  himself  give  to  Lord 
Castlereagh  :  for  it  is  Castlereagh  who  must  be  satisfied. 

Russia  has  offered  to  give  back  to  Austria,  the  district  of 
Tarnopol,  which  contains  four  hundred  thousand  inhabitants. 
Austria  will  renounce  this,  on  condition  that  an  equal  population 
is  given  to  Prussia,  of  that  part  of  Poland  which  adjoins  her,  in 
order  to  diminish,  as  much  as  possible,  the  sacrifices  Saxony  has 
to  make.    This  will  be  fully  explained  in  the  memorandum. 

I  am  unaware  which  of  these  two  plans  has  been  adopted, 
but  I  know  that  Lord  Castlereagh  was  sent  for  by  the  Emperor 
of  Austria  this  evening.  I  will  inform  your  Majesty  by  the  next 2 
courier,  what  passed  at  this  audience. 

Your  Majesty  will  judge  of  the  confidence  placed  by  the 
Emperor  of  Austria  in  his  minister,  when  you  hear  that  this 
morning  he  sent  the  Comte  de  Sickingen  to  me,  to  ask  whether 
what  had  been  reported  to  him  by  M.  de  Metternich,  respecting 
yesterday's  conference,  was  true. 

The  Emperor  Alexander,  with  his  liberal  ideas,  has  found  so 
little  favour  here,  that  they  have  been  obliged  to  triple  the  details 
of  the  police  in  order  to  protect  him  from  being  insulted  by  the 
people,  during  his  daily  walks. 

I  have  the  honour  to  forward  to  your  Majesty  an  article  from 
the  Beobachter,  which  I  got  M.  de  Gentz  to  draw  up.  I 
attach  the  translation  which  he  did  himself  and  which  is  very 
good.  I  thought  the  article  might  be  inserted  in  the  Monitear 
under  the  head  of  "  Vienna."  It  is  of  such  a  nature,  that  the 
other  papers  will  be  able  to  insert  it  as  well. 

I  have  the  honour  to  be 


The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  King  Louis  XVIII. 

{Private) 

Vienna,  January  25,  1815. 

Sire, 

It  appears  that  General  Pozzo  is  to  leave  this  week  and 
to  return  to  Paris.  He  has  probably  received  instructions  from 
the    Emperor  Alexander   relative   to  the  marriage.      I   think  I 

1  Text:  "lesujet"  =  as  translated.     Var.  :  "  le  projet,"  "  draft." 

2  Text:   "leprochain"  =  as  translated.     Var.  :  "le  premier,"  "the  first." 


THE  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA.  23 

ought  to-day  to  submit  to  your  Majesty  some  views  on  a  subject 
so  delicate  and  so  important1  in  its  various  aspects. 

Your  Majesty  desires,  and  has  every  reason  to  desire,  that  the 
princess,  whoever  she  may  be,  whom  the  Due  de  Berry  is  to 
espouse,  should  come  into  France  as  a  Catholic  princess.  Your 
Majesty  makes  this  condition  an  absolute  one,  and  cannot  well 
refrain  from  doing  so.  As  the  most  Christian  king  and  eldest 
son  of  the  Church,  you  could  not  on  this  point,  carry  condescen- 
sion further  than  did  Buonaparte,2  when  he  asked  for  the  hand 
of  the  Grand  Duchess  Anne.  If  this  condition  is  accepted  by 
the  Emperor  Alexander,  your  Majesty,  on  the  supposition  that 
you  have  given  your  promise,  would  certainly  not  feel  at  liberty 
to  retract  it.  But  it  appears  that  the  emperor,  without  desiring 
to  oppose  his  sister's  change  of  religion,  does  not  wish  it  to  be 
supposed  that  he  has  had  any  hand  in  this  change,  as  might  with 
reason  be  inferred  if  it  had  been  made  a  stipulation.  He  would 
prefer  it  looked  upon  as  the  result  of  the  princess's  own  decision 
when  she  becomes  subject  to  other  laws,  and  that  the  change 
should  take  place  after,  instead  of  before,  the  marriage.  He 
therefore  considers  that  his  sister  should  enter  France  with  her 
private  ecclesiastical  establishment,  though  he  is  willing  that  the 
pope3  who  accompanies  her  should  wear  a  lay  garment.  The 
reasons  which  make  him  adhere  to  this,  are,  his  personal  scruples, 
being  strongly  attached  to  his  own  faith,  and  the  fear  of  hurting 
the  feelings  of  his  people  on  such  a  tender  point. 

By  insisting  on  these  provisos  for  himself,4  he  will  release  your 
Majesty  from  all  engagements  to  the  contrary,  and  will   himself 
furnish  the  excuse  for  such  release,  by  deferring  his  consent  to 
the  conditions  of  the  marriage. 

Now  I  am  fain  to  confess  to  your  Majesty  that  everything 
that  can  tend  towards  such  release,  seems  to  me  to  be  most 
desirable. 

Eight  months  ago  when,  in  the  midst  of  joys  excited  by  the 
present,  and  bright  hopes  which  it  was  pleasant  to  cherish  for  the 
future,  it  was  nevertheless  impossible  to  look  upon  events  with 
that  feeling  of  security  which  fears  no  alarm,  and  a  family  alliance 
with  Russia  might  then  appear,  and  did  seem  to  me,  to  offer 
advantages,  the  importance  of  which  ought  to  raise  it  above  all 
considerations  and  which  in  another  aspect  of  affairs,  I  should 
have  placed  in  the  first  rank  and  looked  upon  as  decisive. 

But  to-day,  when  Providence  has  seen  fit  to  secure  the  throne 

1  Text:   "si  delicate  et   si  grave"  =  as  translated.     Yar.  :   " aussi  delicate  et 
aussi grave"  —  "equally  delicate  and  equally  important." 

-  Var.  :   "Buonaparte."  3  Priest  of  the  Greek  Church. 

4  Suppressed  in  the  text  of  the  archives. 


24  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

she  has  so  miraculously  restored,  when  it  is  surrounded  and 
guarded  by  the  loyalty  and  love  of  the  nation,  when  the  coali- 
tion is  dissolved  and  France  has  no  longer  any  need  to  count  on 
the  help  of  strangers,  but  that  on  the  contrary,  the  other  powers 
look  to  her — your  Majesty  in  coming  to  a  decision  will  no  longer 
have  to  make  a  sacrifice  to  the  exigencies  of  combined  strength, 
but  only  consult  the  expediences  which  are  unavoidable  in  such 
alliances. 

The  Grand  Duchess  Anne,  of  all  the  five  daughters  of  the 
Emperor  Paul,  is  said  to  be  the  one  endowed  by  nature  with  the 
greatest  beauty,  a  gift  most  precious  and  most  desirable  in  a 
princess  who,  in  the  course  of  events,  may  be  called  upon  some 
day  l  to  sit  on  the  throne  of  France,  for  the  French,  more  than 
any  other  nation,  feel  the  need  of  being  able  to  say  of  the  princes 
-whose  subjects  they  are  : 

"Le  monde  en  les  voyant,  reconnaitrait  ces  maitres."2 

The  Grand  Duchess  seems  to  have  been  brought  up  with  the 
greatest  care,  combining,  from  what  one  hears,  inward  goodness 
with  outward  beauty.  She  is  twenty-one  years  of  age,  so  that  we 
need  not  fear  those  sad  consequences,  that  so  often  follow  a  very 
■  early  marriage.  She  was  originally  destined  for  the  reigning 
Duke  of  Saxe-Cobourg,  before  Buonaparte 3  demanded  her  hand. 
It  only  rested  with  him  to  I'rge  his  suit,  for  it  is  certain  that  if  he 
had  been  willing  and  able  to  wait,  they  would  have  asked  nothing 
better  than  to  bestow  her  upon  him.  I  do  not  know  whether 
these  two  circumstances  might  be  considered  as  disadvantageous 
to  the  union  of  this  princess  with  the  Due  de  Berry  ;  candidly,  I 
should  have  preferred  that  they  had  not  occurred,  if  the  marriage 
;is  to  take  place. 

Again,  looking  at  the  condition  of  the  mental  faculties  of  the 
Grand  Duchess's  grandfather,  Peter  III.,  and  her  father  Paul  I., 
in  conjunction  with  those  of  the  late  King  of  Denmark,  the  reigning 
Duke  of  Oldenburg,  and  the  unfortunate  Gustavus  IV.,  and  the 
fact  that  their  deplorable  infirmity  may  be  regarded  as  the  fatal 
lot  of  the  House  of  Holstein?  I  cannot  help  dreading,  lest  through 

1  Suppressed  in  the  text  of  the  archives. 

2  "The  world  on  seeing  them,  would  recognize  its  masters." 

3  Var.  :   "Buonaparte." 

4  Holstein  belonged  formerly  to  the  House  of  Schauenburg.  This  line  becoming 
extinct  in  1459,  the  states  elected  as  chief  Count  Christian  of  Oldenburg,  nephew  to 
the  last  Count  of  Holstein  Schauenburg,  who  had  just  died.  Christian  of  Olden- 
burg had  been  elected  King  of  Denmark  in  1448,  as  descended  in  the  female  line 
from  the  ancient  royal  family  of  the  Waldemars,  which  had  also  become  extinct. 
The  grandsons  of  Christian  I.  divided  Holstein  (1544)  and  thus  became  the  founders 
•  of  the  two  branches  :    the  eldest  or  royal  branch,    which  reigned  in  Denmark  in  a 


THE  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA.  25 

such  a  marriage,  this  taint  may  be  conveyed  to  the  royal  family 
of  France,  and  perhaps  to  the  heir  to  the  throne} 

The  necessity  which  obliges  the  Grand  Duchess,  not  merely 
to  change  her  religion,  but  to  change  it  in  such  a  manner,  that 
it  will  be  impossible  to  attribute  it  to  any  other  but  purely  political 
motives,  would,  it  seems  to  me,  furnish  a  sufficiently  strong 
objection. 

For  such  an  act  would  inevitably  tend  to  foster  among  the 
people  those  feelings  of  religious  indifference  which  are  the  great 
evil  of  the  times  in  which  we  live. 

Marriages  unite  not  merely  those  who  contract  them,  but 
also  their  respective  families.  Cordial  relations  between  them 
are  of  the  utmost  importance,  even  among  private  individuals  ; 
how  much  more  so,  in  the  case  of  kings,  or  princes  who  may 
one  day  become  sovereigns  ?  That  the  House  of  Bourbon  should 
ally  itself  with  other  Houses  inferior  to  it,  is  a  necessity,  since 
Europe  cannot  offer  one  that  is  its  equal.  I  will  therefore  raise 
no  objection  to  the  House  of  Holstein,  which  although  occupying 
the  three  Northern  thrones,  is  comparatively  young  among 
sovereigns. 

But  I  should  certainly  say  that  when  the  House  of  Bourbon 
deigns  to  honour  another  with  her  alliance,  it  would  be  better  that 
it  should  be  one  which  would  feel  itself  honoured,  rather  than 
pretend  to  equality  on  the  grounds,  that  nobility  and  ancient 
lineage  can  be  compensated  for  by  extent  of  territory.  Of  the 
Grand  Duchess  Anne's  four  sisters,  one  has  married  an  arch- 
duke, and  the  three  others,  small  German  princes.2  Shall  Russia, 

direct  line  till  1S63,  and  the  younger  or  ducal  branch,  which  was  again  sub-divided 
into  two  lines,  that  of  Holstein-Gattorp,  and  that  of  Holsiein-Gattorp-Eulin.  The 
first  of  these  ascended  to  the  throne  of"  Russia  in  1762  as  Peter  III.,  son  of  Charles 
Frederic,  Duke  of  Holstein-Gattorp,  and  Anne,  daughter  of  Peter  the  Great.  The 
second  line  gave  birth  in  1 710  to  Adolphus  Frederic,  Duke  of  Holstein-Gattorp- 
Eulin,  who  at  the  Peace  of  Abo  in  1743,  was  placed  on  the  throne  of  Sweden  by 
Elizabeth,  Empress  of  Russia,  in  place  of  the  Prince  Royal  of  Denmark.  Thus  the 
reigning  families  of  Denmark,  Sweden,  and  Russia,  were  descended  from  the  same 
source.  On  the  other  hand  the  deplorably  weak  mind  of  the  Czar  Peter  III.  cannot 
be  ignored,  nor  how  very  precarious  was  the  mental  weakness  of  his  son  the  Czar 
Peter.  As  for  the  King  of  Denmark,  Christian  VII.,  he  became  insane  in  1772.  In 
the  same  way  the  Duke  of  Holstein  Oldenburg  became  incapable  of  reigning,  and  was 
replaced  by  his  cousin,  the  Prince  of  Lubeck.  Nevertheless,  despite  what  M.  de 
Talleyrand  says,  it  does  not  appear  that  Gustavus  IV..  King  of  Sweden,  had  in- 
herited this  infirmity  of  the  House  of  Holstein  in  the  same  degree. 

1  The  whole  of  this  paragraph  does  not  appear  in  the  text  of  the  archives. 

2  It  must  be  remembered  that  the  Emperor  Paul  had  five  daughters,  Alexandra, 
born  in  17SS,  married  to  Joseph  Antonio,  Archduke  of  Austria,  brother  to  the 
Emperor  Francis.  Helena,  born  in  1784,  married  to  Frederic-Louis,  hereditary 
Prince  of  Mecklenburg-Schwerin.  Marie,  born  in  1786,  married  in  1804  to  Charles 
Frederic,  hereditary  Prince  of  Sax- Weimar.  Catherine,  born  in  1788,  married  in  1809 
to  Paul  Frederic  Augustus,  hereditary  Prince  of  Holstein  Oldenburg.  Lastly,  Anne, 
born  in  1795,  tne  one  referred  to. 


26  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

who  has  not  been  able  to  place  any  of  her  princesses  on  a  throne,, 
now  see  one  of  them  called  to  that  of  France  ? 

Such  a  prospect  would,  I  must  confess,  be  too  great  a  piece 
of  luck  for  her,  and  I  should  be  sorry  that  the  Due  de  Berry 
should  find  himself  in  such  very  close  and  intimate  relationship, 
with  a  host  of  princes,  all  in  the  lowest  ranks  of  sovereignty. 

Russia,  in  marrying  her  princesses  as  she  has  done,  aims,, 
above  all  things,  at  having  a  pretext  for  interfering  with  the 
affairs  of  Europe,  to  which  she  has  been  almost  a  stranger  for 
the  last  century.  The  effects  of  her  intervention,  so  far,  have 
sufficiently  manifested  the  danger  of  her  influen  e.  How  much 
greater  would  not  this  influence  become,  if  a  Russian  princess 
was  called  to  sit  on  the  throne  of  Fiance  ! 

A  family  alliance,  I  know,  is  not  a  political  one,  neither  does 
the  one  necessarily  lead  to  the  other. 

The  projected  marriage  would  certainly  not  incline  France 
to  favour  the  ambitious  views  and  revolutionary  ideas  possessed 
by  the  Emperor  Alexander,  and  which  he  tries  to  veil  under  the 
specious  name  of  liberal  opinions.  But  how  to  prevent  other 
powers  from  taking  a  different  view,  and  conceiving  such  an 
amount  of  distrust  as  would  weaken  the  ties  they  had  with  us,  or 
deter  them  from  entering  into  such  alliances,  or  Russia  from 
taking  advantage  of  this,  to  gain  her  own  ends  ?  These,  sire, 
seem  to  me  the  possible  objections  to  the  marriage  of  the  Due 
de  Berry  with  the  Grand  Duchess  Anne.  I  felt  I  ought  to  point 
them  out  frankly  to  your  Majesty,  but  1  have  certainly  not 
exaggerated  them.  Your  Majesty  will  best  be  able  to  judge 
whether  they  are  as  weighty  as  they  seem  to  me. 

I  would  add,  that  it  appears  to  me  due  to  the  greatness  of  the 
House  of  Bourbon,  especially  at  this  time  when  all  her  branches, 
blown  down  by  the  same  tempest,  have  sprung  up  again  simul- 
taneously, only  to  consult  your  own  heart  as  to  the  means  for 
perpetuating  your  lineage.  I  hear  great  praise  of  the  young 
Princess  of  Sicily,  daughter  of  the  Prince  Royal.1  Portugal, 
Tuscany  and  Saxony  offer  many  others,  among  whom  your 
Majesty  might  make  a  selection.  I  have  the  honour  to  send  a 
list  of  them  herewith. 

Should  the  impossibility  of  coming  to  an  understanding,  on 
account  of  religion,  cause  the  negotiations  respecting  the  marriage 

1  Marie-Caroline-Therese  de  Bourbon,  born  in  1798,  daughter  of  Francois,  here- 
ditary Prince  of  the  two  Sicilies,  and  of  Marie  Clementine,  Archduchess  of  Austria 
in  1816.  She  married  the  Due  de  Berry  who  died  four  years  after.  On  September 
29,  1820,  she  gave  birth  to  the  Due  de  Bordeaux.  It  will  be  remembered  how  she 
tried  to  stir  up  revolts  in  18.32  in  favour  of  her  son.  Arrested  on  November  7,  1832, 
she  was  confined  in  the  Chateau  de  Blaye  and  was  taken  back  to  Sicily  the  following 
year.     She  died  in  1870. 


THE  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA.  27 

with  the  Grand-Duchess  to  fall  through,  or  if  your  Majesty 
should  consider  it  advisable  to  give  it  up,  I  would  entreat  you 
to  arrange  matters  in  such  a  way,  that  the  affair  shall  not  be 
finally  decided,  until  after  those  which  occupy  us  here  are  com- 
pleted. For  if  the  Empercr  Alexander  has  shown  us  so  little 
good-will  notwithstanding  the  hopes  of  a  brilliant  settlement  for 
his  sister  and  the  advantage  to  him  of  such  a  prospect,  what  may 
we  not  expect  from  him,  when  it  is  once  lost  ? 
I  have  the  honour  to  be 


No.  203. — King  Louis  XVIII.  to  the  Prince  de 

Talleyrand. 

Paris,  January  28,  1S15. 

Mon  Cousin, 

1  have  received  your  letter,  No.  22.  Long  before  this 
reaches  you,  you  will  have  seen  the  Duke  of  Wellington,  whose 
appointment  in  place  of  Lord  Castlereagh,  was  very  agreeable  to 
me.1  I  saw  him  before  he  left,  and  was  more  than  satisfied  with 
him,  and  I  hope  he  has  not  departed  dissatisfied  with  me.  He 
also  has  a  "character"  to  keep  up,  that  of  King,  not  Maker,  but 
what  is  much  better  Restorer.  He  is  besides  not  at  all  troubled 
by  what  his  predecessor  has  done,  since  if  he  wishes  to  walk  in  his 
footsteps,  he  has  as  it  were,  merely  to  choose  between  the  two 
extremes.  I  do  not  exactly  know  the  amount  of  the  population  - 
of  Saxon\-.  I  believe  the  king  will  have  to  consent  to  a  reduction 
of  fifteen  hundred  thousand  inhabitants,  but  if  more  than  this 
number  is  required,  remember  what  I  wrote  to  you  last  time. 

Count  Jules  de  Polignac3  arrived  here  on  Sunday.  His 
reports,  identical  with  those  I  have  previously  received  from 
various  quarters,  describe  Italy  as  in  the  greatest  state  of  ferment, 
and  the  existence  of  Murat  as  most  dangerous.  I  have  reason 
to  believe  that  England  would  enter  into  some  agreement  to 
assure  this  man  pecuniary  aid  if  he  would  relinquish  his  usurped 
throne.      I    would   gladly   assent  to  this    arrangement    provided 

1  Wellington  had  just  been  appointed  ambassador  to  the  Congress  (January  24). 

2  Var.  :   "total." 

3  Auguste-Jules,  Count,  afterwards  Prince  de  Polignac,  born  in  1780,  was  at  the 
first  restoration  nominated  Major-General,  Commissioner  Extraordinary  at  Toulouse, 
and  Minister  to  the  Holy  See.  On  April  17,  1815,  he  was  made  a  peer  of  France. 
Jn  1S20  Count  Polignac  received  the  title  of  Roman  Prince  from  the  Pope.  Ambas- 
sador at  London  in  1823,  he  became  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  and  President  of  the 
Council  in  1829.  After  the  departure  of  Charles  X.,  from  whom  he  had  separated. 
Prince  de  Polignac  was  arrested  at  Granville  on  August  15,  and  taken  to  Vincennes. 
The  Chamber  of  Peers  condemned  him  to  perpetual  imprisonment  (dead  in  law). 
He  was  pardoned  in  1836  and  withdrew  to  England,  and  returned  to  die  in  Paris  in 
1847. 


28  THE  MEMOIRS  OE  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

that  it  is  at  the  same  time  agreed,  that  if  he  is  obstinate,  force 
should  do  what  negotiations  have  failed  in  effecting. 

The  sad,  yet  consoling  ceremony  of  Saturday  passed  off  very 
satisfactorily.  I  beg  you  will  express  my  sentiments  to  the 
sovereigns  who  assisted  at  that  at  St.  Etienne,  and  particularly 
to  inform  the  Empress  of  Austria  how  greatly  I  was  touched  by 
her  wishes  and  the  regrets  she  desired  to  show  me  on  this 
occasion. 

Wherefore,  my  dear  cousin,  I  pray  God  may  have  you  in  His 
safe  and  holy  keeping. 

Louis. 

P.S.  General  Ricard  arrived  here  yesterday,1  and  will  be  in 
Vienna  soon  after  this  letter. 


No.  27. — The   Ambassadors  of    the  King  at   the   Con- 
gress to  the  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  at  Paris. 

Vienna,  January  31^/,  1815. 

Monsieur  le  Comte, 

The  counter-project  announced  in  our  last  despatches 
has  been  sent  in  by  the  Vienna  cabinet.  Seven  hundred  and 
eighty-two  thousand  souls  have  been  taken  from  Saxony.  As 
soon  as  it  is  officially  communicated  to  the  French  embassy,  we 
shall  have  the  honour  to  forward  it  to  you. 

The  Prussians  do  not  appear  satisfied  with  it.  Nevertheless, 
the  Emperor  Alexander  seems  to  approve  and  we  hope  he  will 
prevail  upon  his  ally  to  accept  it,  and  so  put  an  end  to  a  question 
which  for  so  long  has  divided  the  congress.  It  will  be  decided 
in  a  few  days. 

Yesterday,  Lord  Castlereagh  received  his  recall  to  England, 
and  the  arrival  of  the  Duke  of  Wellington  is  announced. 

Lord  Castlereagh  leaves  Vienna,  preserving  his  favourable 
views  as  regards  Naples.  He  seems  to  lay  great  stress  on 
keeping  on  good  terms  with  France. 

Neither  the  affairs  of  Switzerland  nor  those  of  Italy  have 
occupied  the  conference.  M.  de  Metternich  has  not  considered 
it  expedient  to  bring  them  forward  since  the  question  arose  as  to 
deciding  their  order  of  precedence. 

Confidence  in  the  king's  judgment,  and  the  consideration 
shown  to  his  ambassador  at  the  congress  increase  in  proportion 
as  every  one  is  persuaded  that  justice  and  judgment  prescribe 
all    the    measures   of  the   French  cabinet.      From  day  to   day 

1   Suppressed  in  the  text  of  the  archives. 


THE  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA.  29 

we  note  marked  indications  that  the  coalition  is  dissolved, 
and  that  the  union  of  the  Southern  Powers  against  a  system  of 
expediency,  so  strongly  urged  by  the  Northern  Powers,  will 
consolidate  peace,  and  act  as  a  guarantee  against  an)-  fresh 
troubles  that  might  arise. 

Be  pleased  to  accept.  .  .  . 


No.  25-.— The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  King 

Louis  XVIII. 

Vienna,  February  1,  181 5. 

Sire, 

The  audience  given  to  Lord  Castlereagh  by  the 
Emperor  of  Austria,  only  resulted  in  the  former's  declaring  that 
the  emperor  appeared  to  him  full  of  integrity  and  frankness. 
Beyond  this  Lord  Castlereagh  was  staunch  in  his  opinion,  that 
Prussia  ought  to  be  great  and  powerful,  and  that  she  should 
receive  a  large  part  of  Saxony,  and  in  particular  Torgau.  I 
wished  to  save  this  place ;  the  Austrians  wanted  it  at  first,  and 
then,  as  is  their  custom,  relinquished  it.  The  consequence  is  that 
neither  one  nor  the  other  of  the  schemes  I  had  the  honour  to 
mention  to  your  Majesty  has  been  adopted.  A  third  has  now 
been  drawn  up  by  which  seven  hundred  and  eighty-two  thousand 
Saxons  are  given  up  to  Prussia,  and  this  scheme  of  the  Austrians, 
in  the  shape  of  a  rough  draft,  has  been  submitted  to  the 
Prussians,  who  have  accepted  it  ad  referendum  :  their  answer  has 
not  yet  been  received. 

We  had  announced  from  the  first  that  we  would  consent  to 
Saxony  being  deprived  of  from  four  to  five  hundred  thousand  souls ; 
Lord  Castlereagh  after  having  at  first  given  it  up,  and  because 
he  had  done  so,  obstinately  insisted  that  they  should  lose  a 
million.  Though  very  badly  supported  by  the  Austrians,  I 
succeeded  in  getting  it  arranged,  that  the  mean  of  these  two 
numbers  should  be  adopted,  and  I  am  even  now  surprised  at  my 
success.  The  Saxon  minister,  who  is  here,  had  drawn  up  a 
plan  of  the  different  parts  of  the  kingdom,  which  might  be 
considered  as  not  absolutely  necessary  to  its  existence.  The 
population  of  these  parts  was  about  750,000.  In  the  scheme 
only  32,000  more  are  ceded,  and  of  these,  some  portion  must 
through  exchanges,  revert  to  the  ducal  houses  of  Saxon)-. 

The  Prussians  they  say  are,  or  feign  to  be,  but  little  disposed 
to  be  content  with  what  is  offered  them.  It  is  not  merelv  a 
question    of  territory  with   them,   but   also  one  of  self-esteem. 


3o  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

After  having,  and  that  only  recently,  demanded  the  whole  of 
Saxony,  after  having  occupied  it,  after  all  the  powers,  except 
France,  had  given  it  up  to  them,  after  having  over  and  over 
again  declared  they  would  never  surrender  it,  it  must  be  rather 
painful  for  them  now  to  have  to  renounce  two-thirds  of  the 
kingdom.  But  they  will  not  fight  ^without  the  help  of  Russia, 
and  the  Emperor  Alexander,  who  has  got  what  he  wanted  in 
Poland  and  who  only  takes  a  selfish  interest  in  Saxony,1  will, 
according  to  all  appearance,  advise  the  Prussians  to  accept  the 
proposals  made  to  them.  We  have  reason  to  believe  that  with 
some  slight  alteration,  they  will  be  accepted. 

Nothing  seemed  more  irrevocably  settled  than  the  fate  of 
Saxony  when  we  arrived  here.  Prussia  demanded  the  whole  of 
it  for  herself,  and  Russia  backed  her  up.  Lord  Castlereagh  had 
completely  abandoned  her,  and  so  had  Austria,  except  as  re- 
gards some  minor  frontier  arrangements.  Your  Majesty  alone 
took  up  the  defence  of  Saxony ;  you  alone  maintained  the 
principles  of  right.  You  had  to  overcome  all  kinds  of  influences  ; 
the  spirit  of  coalition  which  was  very  strong,  and  what  was 
perhaps  more  difficult,  the  self-esteem  of  all  the  great  powers, 
who  by  their  pretensions,  declarations  and  concessions  had  so  far 
compromised  themselves,  as  to  make  it  almost  impossible  for 
them  to  recede  without  shame  ;  but  by  noble  opposition  to  an 
injustice,  all  but  accomplished,  your  Majesty  has  gained  the 
glory  of  overcoming  all  these  obstacles,  and  not  only  have  you 
triumphed  over  them,  but  the  coalition  has  been  dissolved, 
and  your  Majesty  has  come  to  an  understanding  with  two  of 
the  greatest  powers,  which  may  perhaps,  later  on,  save  Europe 
from  the  dangers  which  menace  it,  through  the  ambition  of 
some  of  the  states. 

Saxony,  which  was  a  third-rate  power,  will  continue  to  be 
so.  Her  population,  joined  to  that  of  the  ducal  possessions, 
and  those  of  the  Houses  of  Reuss  and  Schwarzburg,  which 
are  incorporated  in  the  kingdom,  will  still  present  two  million 
inhabitants,  to  interpose  between  Prussia  and  Austria  and 
between  Russia  and  Bavaria. 

The  affairs  of  Saxony  once  settled,  I  shall  give  myself  up  to 
those  of  Naples,  and  for  this  purpose  will  put  forth  all  the 
energy  and  tact  1  possess. 

England  will  not  oppose,  but  will  not  assist  us  openly  or  in 
any  decided  way,  seeing  that  she  has  again  compromised  herself 
in  that  affair,  as  your  Majesty  will  perceive  by  the  document 
which  I  have  the  honour  to  send  you  herewith. 

Lord  Castlereagh  had,  on  this  point,  received  instructions 

1  Suppressed  in  the  text  of  the  archives. 


THE  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA.  31 

from   his  government,  given  after  the  letter  which  I  wrote  to 
him,  but  which  are  in  the  sense  I  have  indicated. 

Lord  Castlereagh  will  only  remain  here  eight  days  with  Lord 
Wellington.  I  have  reason  to  believe,  from  what  he  told  me  of 
the  despatches  he  had  received  from  his  government,  that  his 
partiality  for  Prussia,  and  his  obstinacy  on  the  Saxon  question, 
must  be  imputed  to  Lord  Liverpool 1  as  much  as  to  himself. 
Lord  Bathurst  sends  instructions  that  Prussia  is  to  be  treated 
with  great  liberality,  and  that  having  gone  so  far  as  they  had 
done  regarding  Saxony,  it  was  a  point  of  honour  with  the 
English   government   not  to  draw  back.2 

Nevertheless,  the  treaty  he  has  just  concluded  is  entirely 
approved  of,  and  he  has  been  informed  that  the  ratifications  will 
be  sent  to  him  by  the  next  courier. 

He  dilated  greatly  on  his  wish  to  see  the  best  possible  feeling 
established  between  England  and  France.  He  did  not  deceive  him- 
self into  believing  that  the  result  of  the  arrangements  made  here 
could  be  a  peace  of  long  duration.  His  desire  is  that  war  should 
not  break  out  again  for  two  years.  His  prayer  is  that  France, 
England,  and  Austria  should  be  friends,3  and  as  he  deems  it 
necessary  to  be  always  prepared,  and  to  arrange  everything  in 
advance,  he  proposes  to  keep  up  a  direct  correspondence  with 
me.  But  he  considers  a  change  of  the  ministry  would  be  desir- 
able in  Austria,  as  they  are  very  weak,  to  say  nothing  more. 

I  was,  on  the  whole,  well  satisfied  with  the  views  he  expressed. 

He  proposes  to  ask  for  an  audience  of  your  Majesty  on  his 
way  through  Paris. 

1  have  the  honour  to  be 


1  Robert  Jenkinson,  Earl  of  Liverpool,  born  in  1770,  entered  the  House  of  Com- 
mons in  1790,  and  became  Commissioner  at  the  India  Office,  Master  of  the  Mint, 
and  Member  of  the  Privy  Council.  He  joined  Lord  Addington's  Cabinet  as  Secre- 
tary of  State  for  Foreign  Affairs  (1801),  and  was  Home  Secretary  under  Pitt  in  1804. 
This  he  held  till  1808,  when  he  was  made  War  Minister,  and  finally  became  First  Lord 
of  the  Treasury  in  181 2.  He  remained  at  the  head  of  affairs  till  1827,  and  died  the 
following  year. 

2  Text:  "  retrograder"  =  as  translated.  Var.:  "  trop  retrograder  "  =  "draw 
back  too  much." 

3  Text:   "soient  amies"  =  as  translated.  Var.  :   "  soient  units"  =  "  be  united." 


32  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 


No.  2 13. — King  Louis  XVIII.  to  the  Prince  de 

Talleyrand. 

Paris,  February  4,  181 5. 

Mon  Cousin, 

I  have  received  your  letters  Nos.  23  and  24.  I  did  not 
answer  the  first  at  once,  as  it  did  not  treat  of  business,  though  I 
was  not  the  less  satisfied  or  touched  by  its  contents.  Neither  St. 
Denis,  nor  any  of  the  other  churches  in  Paris,  except  St.  Thomas- 
d'Aquin,  where  the  preacher  only  read  the  last  will  of  the  Martyr 
King,  have  re-echoed  a  discourse  which  could  in  any  way 
approach  that  pronounced  at  St.  Etienne.  I  wish  you  to  make 
my  opinion  known  to  the  author.1 

I  was  also  greatly  pleased  with  M.  de  Gentz's  article,  which 
I  sent  off  at  once  to  the  Moniteur,  Further,  I  have  given  orders 
to  the  Count  de  Jaucourt  on  the  subject  of  the  rewards  you 
desire  of  me  for  the  artists  who  assisted  at  the  ceremony  of 
the  2 1  st. 

The  cession  of  Erfurth  to  Prussia  does  not  trouble  me  much, 
but  I  shall  be  sorry  to  see  the  fortifications  of  Dresden  destroyed, 
especially  if  the  King  of  Prussia  retains  Torgau.  I  wish  how- 
ever that  the  Emperor  Francis  would  at  least  give  the  first 
scheme  the  preference,  and  make  Lord  Castlereagh  adopt  it,  the 
latter,  however,  is  probably  no  longer  in  Vienna.  You  are  aware 
how  strongly  the  Duke  of  Wellington  urged  the  abolition  of  the 
slave-trade  when  here.  You  will  shortly  receive  the  report  on 
St.  Domingo,  made  to  me  at  the  council  last  Monday,  by  M. 
Beugnot.  I  confess  that  I  am  beginning  to  see  the  benefit 
which  may  accrue  from  the  almost  immediate  abandonment  of  a 
traffic,  which,  it  appears  to  me,  would  be  very  difficult  to  continue 
beyond  the  time  fixed  by  the  treaty. 

Marshal  Soult  is  writing  to  you  about  Bouillon.2  The  point 
in  question  is  one  of  protection,  not  of  possession,  and  for  that 
reason  it  is  important  that  this  duchy  should  remain  under  the 
Prince  de  Rohan,  who,  moreover,  notwithstanding  the  protection 

1  Count  Alexis  de  Noailles,  one  of  the  plenipotentiaries  at  the  congress,  wrote  the 
address  read  by  the  priest  at  the  ceremony  of  Jan.  21,  in  the  Church  of  St.  Etienne. 

2  Charles-Alain-Gabriel,  Prince  de  Rohan  Guemene,  Due  de  Montlucon 
and  de  Bouillon,  born  in  1754  emigrated  in  1791,  entered  the  Austrian  army 
and  rose  to  the  rank  of  Field  Marshal.  In  1 814,  he  was  made  a  peer  of  France. 
The  Congress  of  Vienna  recognized  him  as  sovereign  of  the  Duchy  of  Bouillon,  but 
this  was  contested  by  the  English  Admiral  Phillip  d'Auvergne.  The  matter  being 
referred  by  the  Congress  to  supreme  arbitrators,  decided  in  favour  of  the  Prince  de 
Rohan.  These  arbitrators  acknowledged  the  right  to  an  indemnity  on  the  part  of  the 
King  of  the  Netherlands  for  the  cession  made  to  him  of  the  Duchy.  But  the  tribunal 
of  Liege  upset  this  decision.     The  Prince  de  Rohan  died  in 


THE  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA.  33 

accorded  by  England  to  his  antagonist  has  a  hundred  times  as 
much  right  to  it. 

Wherefore,  my  dear  cousin,  I  pray  God  may  have  you  in  His 
safe  ami  holy  keeping.  LOUIS. 

P.S.  Your  ideas  with  regard  to  the  marriage,  are  absolutely 
mine.  I  shall  receive  General  Pozzo  di  Borgo,  and  not  hasten 
anything. 


No.  28.— The  Ambassadors  of  the  King  at  the  Con- 
gress to  the  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  at  Paris. 

Vienna,  February  8,  181 5. 
M.  LE  Comte, 

The  rough  draft  of  the  arrangements  to  be  made 
respecting  the  King  of  Saxony  and  his  kingdom,  proposed  by 
the  Austrian  cabinet,  seems  to  have  been  accepted  with  a  few 
slight  modifications.  There  is  even  a  talk  of  the  King  of  Saxony 
leaving  Berlin,  and  going  to  Prague,  or  even  Vienna,  if  the 
Austrian  court  wishes  it. 

If  under  these  circumstances  no  more  favourable  results 
have  been  secured  for  Saxony  and  Poland,  it  can  only  be 
attributed  to  the  prejudice  of  the  English  cabinet,and  the  weakness 
of  that  of  Vienna.  The  difficulties  to  be  overcome  were  endless, 
but  the  cause  of  royalty,  legitimacy  and  right  is  saved,  and  that 
portion  of  Saxony  which  has  been  preserved,  joined  to  the 
territories  of  the  ducal  houses,  opposes  a  mass  of  two  million 
inhabitants  between  Austria  and  Prussia. 

The  details  of  the  arrangement,  as  it  is  to  be,  will  be  delayed 
here  a  few  days,  but  will  follow  closely  on  this  despatch,  which 
conveys  the  announcement  that  the  principal  difficulties  to  the 
progress  of  affairs  at  the  congress,  have  been  overcome. 

Lord  Castlereagh  leaves  here  on  Monday  next,  and  in  order 
to  have  the  honour  of  seeing  the  king,  will  pass  through  Paris 
and  embark  at  Calais.  We  trust  that  his  departure,  and  the 
manner  in  wThich  Lord  Wellington  has  spoken  in  reference  to 
Neapolitan  affairs,  will  not  injure  that  cause  to  which  we  must 
now  devote  all  our  energies  and  zeal. 

The  affairs  of  Switzerland  will  be  gone  into  this  week. 
M.  de  Metternich  promises  an  answer  on  those  of  Italy.  The 
conferences  for  the  settlement  of  the  rights  of  navigation  on  the 
large  rivers  still  continue,  and  those  respecting  the  affairs  of 
Germany  will  be  resumed. 

We  have,  M.  le  Comte,  again  to  draw  your  attention  to  the 
French  journals,  and  especially  to  what  they  say  of  the  Prince 

VOL.  III.  D 


34  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

Royal  of  Sweden.  They  mix  him  up  with  Murat,  without  any 
regard  to  the  difference  in  their  positions  and  our  engagements 
with  them.  The  present  state  of  Europe,  which  has  everything 
to  fear  from  the  encroaching  nature  of  the  Russian  government 
and  everything  to  hope  from  unanimous  accord  between  the 
older  cabinets,  compels  us  to  be  most  careful  in  the  handling  of 
Sweden,  and  seems  to  make  it  imperative  on  us  to  neglect 
nothing,  in  order  to  preserve  friendly  relations  with  her. 

We  think  we  ought  to  report  some  observations,  of  an  almost 
official  character,  addressed  to  M.  de  Noailles  by  M.  le  Comte 
de  Lowenhjelm,  Swedish  plenipotentiary  at  the  congress.  We 
send  you  his  actual  words : — 

"  The  ex-King  of  Sweden  proposes  to  go  to  France.  I  have 
reason  to  believe  that  he  wishes  it ;  the  papers  say  so.  We  have 
seen  what  he  has  done  for  the  House  of  Bourbon  ;  we  could  not 
suppose  that  the  King  of  France,  whose  generosity  is  so  well 
known,  would  refuse  him  shelter.  We  only  ask  for  some  sort  of 
communication  on  this  subject,  and  we  shall  be  satisfied. 

"  The  Prince  Royal  is  quite  settled  in  Sweden  since  the 
union  with  Norway.  He  is  very  popular  and  much  looked  up 
to.  He  wishes  to  be  on  good  terms  with  France.  We  do  not 
ask  much  from  you.  The  Prince  of  Sweden  has  not  forgotten 
his  origin  ;  he  must  always  be  somewhat  anxious  ;  he  needs 
some  token  of  friendship.  He  is,  when  all  is  said,  a  parvenu,  and 
he  has  all  the  susceptibilities  of  one  which  we  cannot  prevent. 
But  he  will  be  very  sensible  to  the  least  kindness.  For  instance, 
one  word,  one  sign  of  kindness  from  the  king  to  the  Princess 
Royal,  who  is  in  Paris,  will  touch  him  deeply  and  have  the  best 
possible  effect. 

"  Your  papers  continually  speak  of  the  prince  in  an  un- 
pleasant way,  inserting  paragraphs  which  must  do  him  harm  by 
their  stinging  observations.  The  Foreign  Office  in  all  countries 
has  some  influence  over  the  press.  Put  a  stop  to  these  invectives, 
which  do  not  proceed  from  your  cabinet.  I  reiterate  this 
request — nay,  I  conjure  you  !" 

Be  pleased  to  accept.  .  .  . 


No.  26. — The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  King 

Louis  XVIII. 


Sire, 


Vienna,  February  8,  181 5. 


The  Duke  of  Wellington  arrived  on  the  evening  of  the 
1st.     The  next  day,  the  Emperor  of  Russia  went  to  see  him  at 


THE  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA.  35 

ten  in  the  morning,  and  began  by  saying,  "  Everything  is  going 
wrong  in  France,  is  it  not  ?" 

"  By  no  means,"  replied  the  duke,  "  the  king  is  greatly 
beloved  and  respected,  and  behaves  with  exemplary  prudence." 

"  You  could  tell  me  nothing  that  would  give  me  so  much 
pleasure,"  replied  the  Emperor.     "  And  how  about  the  army  ?  " 

"  As  far  as  offensive  warfare  goes,  no  matter  against  what 
power,"  Lord  Wellington  answered,  "  the  army  is  as  good  as  it 
ever  was,  but  in  questions  of  home  policy,  it  is  worth  nothing." 

These  answers,  according  to  what  Prince  Adam  told  me, 
impressed  the  emperor  more  than  he  cared  to  show.  They 
certainly  influenced  the  resolution  he  had  been  urged  to  come 
to,  respecting  the  affairs  of  Saxony,  which  when  Lord  Wellington 
arrived,  still  presented  a  good  many  difficulties.  These  may  now 
be  considered  as  removed. 

It  is  not  to  the  Emperor  of  Russia  alone  that  the  Duke  of 
Wellington  eulogises  your  Majesty.  Wherever  he  goes  he  sings 
your  praises,  not  limiting  himself  to  general  terms,  but  entering 
into  details,  and  citing  facts,  thus  adding  to  the  high  esteem  in 
which  your  Majesty  is  held  here.  He  spoke  of  the  affair  at 
St.  Roche  T  as  a  mere  trifle  ;  the  German  papers  had  greatly 
exaggerated  it.  He  admitted  that  everything  in  France 
was  not  yet  quite  as  one  could  wish,  but  he  added  that  all 
would  come  right  in  time.  According  to  him,  what  is  most 
wanted  there,  is  a  ministry.  There  are  ministers,  he  says,  but 
no  ministry. 

The  conclusions  to  be  drawn  from  his  utterances  are,  that  as 
in  matters  of  interior  policy,  the  army  is  not  yet  quite  sound,  it 
will  be  necessary  above  all  things  to  avoid  raising  questions  in 
which  it  may  have  to  play  a  part  ;  and  that  as  for  the  animosity, 
which  may  still  linger  in  men's  minds,  it  should  occasion  neither 
surprise  nor  uneasiness.  A  too  sudden  conversion  is  always 
suspicious.  This  is  the  view  I  take,  and  the  whole  world  has 
recognized  its  justice. 

Last  Saturday  I  gave  a  state  dinner  in  honour  of  Lord 
Wellington,  and  asked  all  the  members  of  the  congress  to  meet 
him.  I  was  very  pleased  that  it  should  be  the  French  legation 
which  introduced  him. 

The  Austrian  scheme,  respecting  which  I  had  the  honour  to 
write  to  your  Majesty  in  my  last  letter,  did  not  satisfy  the 
Prussians.  They  wanted  more — especially  Leipzig.  The  King 
of  Prussia,  in  an  audience  he  granted  Lord  Castlereagh,  expressed 
himself  very  strongly  on  this  point,  pretending  that,  after  having 

1  There  had  been  some  confusion  and  a  species  of  riot  at  the  church  of  St.  Roche, 
on  the  occasion  of  the  burial  of  an  actress — Mademoiselle  Raucourt. 

D    2 


36  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

given  him  Saxony  and  allowing  him  to  occupy  it,  it  was  making 
him  play  a  most  humiliating  part,  now  to  assign  him  only  a 
small  portion  ;  that  he  had  conquered  Leipzig,  and  that  all  the 
allies,  after  the  battle  was  won,  considered  the  town  belonged  to 
him,  and  had  congratulated  him  thereon. 

Lord  Castlereagh,  ever  firmly  impressed  with  the  view  that 
Prussia  ought  to  be  powerful,  and  wishing  above  all  to  avoid 
war  (Lord  Wellington  is  himself  of  opinion  that  England  is 
not  in  a  position  to  take  the  field,  and  that  F ranee  is  the  only 
power  that  could  do  so),  maintained  that  in  order  to  pacify  the 
Prussians,  it  was  necessary  to  give  them  something  more. 

With  a  view  therefore  to  enlarge  their  portion,  Holland  has 
been  diminished  by  one  hundred  thousand  souls  and  Hanover 
by  fifty  thousand  ;  Fulda  has  also  been  given  to  them.  The 
Emperor  of  Russia  who,  to  do  him  justice,  desired  to  contribute 
to  this  arrangement,  gave  them  back  the  town  of  Thorn  ;  so  that 
the  matter  may  now  be  considered  arranged,  but  not  definitely  so. 

Saxony  will  be  reduced  to  less  than  fifteen  hundred  thousand 
inhabitants,  but  to  this  number  must  be  added  the  population  of 
the  Duchies  of  Saxony  and  the  States  of  Schwarzburg  and 
Reuss,  incorporated  in  the  kingdom,  and  which  if  the  latter 
had  belonged  to  Prussia  would  also  necessarily  have  belonged  to 
her.  Non-consent  to  the  reduction  of  Saxony  to  less  than  fifteen 
hundred  thousand  souls,  would  have  necessitated  a  protest,  and 
such  a  protest  would  have  compromised  the  principles  of  legiti- 
macy, which  it  is  so  important  to  preserve  and  which  we  have 
preserved  as  it  were  by  a  miracle. 

Prussia  would,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  have  obtained  two  millions 
of  subjects,  which  she  could  not  acquire  without  danger  to 
Bohemia  and  Bavaria  ;  and  the  imprisonment  of  the  king,  who 
will  now  be  free,  would  probably  have  been  prolonged  inde- 
finitely. (I  have  asked  Prince  Hardenburg  to  allow  the  king  to 
go  to  Prague  and  that  orders  to  that  effect  might  be  given  at 
once  ;  to  this  he  consented  and  gave  me  his  promise  ;  to-morrow 
the  order  will  be  sent  to  Berlin  and  the  king  will  be  allowed  to 
depart.) 

Saxony,  though  we  have  been  unable  to  obtain  all  we  desired, 
remains  a  third-rate  power.  If  it  is  a  misfortune  that  she  has  not 
a  few  hundred  thousand  inhabitants  more,  this  misfortune  is  com- 
paratively slight,  and  perhaps  not  without  a  remedy  ;  whereas  if 
Saxony  had  been  sacrificed  in  the  face  of  Europe,  which  either 
would  not  or  could  not,  save  her,  such  a  misfortune  would  have 
been  very  great  and  fraught  with  the  most  dangerous  conse- 
quences. It  was  therefore  necessary,  above  all  things,  to  save 
her,  and  your  Majesty  has  the  sole  glory  of  having  done  so. 


THE  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA.  37 

There  is  not  a  single  person  who  does  not  feel  and  admit  this, 
and  yet  it  has  all  been  accomplished  without  becoming  at  variance 
with  any  one,  while  at  the  same  time,  acquiring  fresh  support  in 
Neapolitan  affairs. 

Lord  Castlereagh,  whom  I  informed,  in  order  to  flatter  him, 
that  your  Majesty  has  done  me  the  honour  to  say  that  you  wish 
to  see  him  on  his  way  through  Paris,  has  decided  on  returning 
by  that  route ;  he  had  originally  intended  going  via  Holland.  Lady 
Castlereagh  has  asked  permission  to  visit  the  Duchess  of  Angou- 
leme.  They  will  only  be  in  Paris  for  twenty-four  hours.  They 
intend  leaving  here  on  Monday  the  13th,  but  not  without  Lord 
Castlereagh's  having  taken  some  steps  relative  to  the  Neapolitan 
question  which  I  thought  it  advisable  he  should  do.  The  Duke 
of  Wellington  is  all  right  in  this  respect.  I  hope  Russia  and 
Prussia  will  also  be  with  us.  Nevertheless,  I  foresee  more  than 
one  difficulty,  but  I  will  do  my  best  to  overcome  them. 

It  would  both  complicate  and  damage  this  affair,  to  allow 
Bernadotte's  matter,  which  is  of  quite  a  different  nature,  to  be 
mixed  up  with  it. 

Bernadotte  did  not  obtain  Sweden  by  conquest  but  by 
adoption  of  the  reigning  king,  and  the  consent  of  the  nation.  He 
is  not  king,  but  only  heir  presumptive.  One  cannot  attack  him 
without  attacking  the  king  who  adopted  him,  a  king,  whose 
legitimacy  the  very  man  who  is  to  succeed  him  acknowledges, 
whom  all  Europe  recognizes,  and  whom  your  Majesty  also 
acknowledges,  having  made  peace  with  him  direct.  As  long  as 
the  king  lives  Bernadotte  has  only  contingent  rights,  which  as 
regards  Europe,  are  almost  non-existent ;  consequently  the 
litigation  of  which  they  would  form  the  subject,  is  neither  within 
the  cognisance  of  Europe  nor  the  congress. 

It  is  no  doubt  a  misfortune,  and  a  great  misfortune,  that  this 
man  should  have  been  called  to  the  Swedish  throne.  But  it  is 
an  evil  for  which  if  there  is  no  remedy,  we  can  only  leave  to 
time  and  the  course  of  events  to  ameliorate. 

War,  which  no  one  has  any  wish  to  bring  about,  and  which 
almost  every  one  is  unable  to  undertake,  will,  in  all  probability 
not  occur.  There  will  therefore  be  no  occasion  to  propose  an 
alliance  with  Sweden,  or  for  Sweden  to  demand  a  guarantee, 
which  your  Majesty  might  fear  to  give. 

General  Ricard  has  arrived  ;  but  I  hope  that  under  present 
circumstances  his  journey  will  have  been  unnecessary. 

General  Pozzo  has  not  yet  left,  I  have  even  persuaded  him 
not  to  take  any  steps  to  hasten  his  departure.  I  find  him  very 
useful,  in  matters  I  wish  brought  to  the  Emperor  of  Russia's 
notice. 


38  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

I  understand  that  the  King  of  Saxony  is  to  go  to  Presburg 
till  affairs  are  concluded. 

In  a  conference,  held  to-day  the  negro-question  was  settled. 
Spain  and  Portugal  will  definitely  cease  the  slave-trade  in  eight 
years.  Eight  years  for  those  two  countries  are  much  less  than 
five  years  were  for  us,  taking  into  account  the  immense  differ- 
ence of  the  respective  possessions  and  above  all  their  enlighten- 
ment. 

We  have  ceded  nothing,  nevertheless  the  English  are  quite 
satisfied  with  us.  Lord  Castlereagh  thanked  me  in  open  con- 
gress, for  the  great  assistance  I  had  given  him. 

Another  conference  took  place  this  evening,  to  receive  the 
Prussian  reply  to  the  propositions  made  them.  The  gist  of  their 
answer  is  an  acceptance.  They  will  get  neither  Luxemburg  nor 
Mayence.  Your  Majesty's  instructions  proscribed  their  obtaining 
the  latter  place  ;  they  will  not  get  the  former  either. 

The  next  few  days  will  be  occupied  in  drawing  up  and  signing 
the  articles  for  insertion  in  the  protocol,  of  the  arrangements 
agreed  on  for  Poland,  Prussia  and  Saxony. 

I  have  the  honour  to  be 


No.  22. — King  Louis  XVIII.  to  the  Prince  de 

Talleyrand. 

Paris,  February  u,  1815. 

Mon  Cousin, 

I  am  in  receipt  of  your  letter  No.  25.  The  praise  bestowed 
by  Lord  Castlereagh  on  the  Emperor  of  Austria  would  have  been 
very  flattering  to  a  private  individual ;  but  when  bestowed  on  a 
sovereign  who  had  just  displayed  great  weakness,  it  almost 
sounded  like  irony.  As  for  me,  I  ought  certainly  to  be  satisfied, 
seeing  how  matters  have  stood  for  the  last  three  1  months,  respect- 
ing the  fate  of  the  King  of  Saxony  ;  but  I  had  hoped  for  better 
things  from  the  Emperor  Francis,  and  I  shall  not  be  easy  until  I 
see  at  least  his  last  plan  adopted. 

The  document  added  to  your  despatch  is  anything  but 
reassuring  to  the  King  of  Naples,  in  whom  I  take  a  very  different 
interest  to  what  I  do  in  the  King  of  Saxony  ;  but  although  it 
unveils  the  most  repulsive  secret  in  diplomacy  ever  heard  of,  it 
does  not  discourage  me,  and  I  feel  assured  that  by  maintaining 
a  resolute  front,  from  which  I  will  never  depart,  we  shall  end  by 
removing  the  danger  and  scandal  of  Murat. 

I  am  surprised  that  the   Duke  of  Wellington  did   not  reach 

1  Text:  as  translated.     Var  :    "  quatre"  =  "four." 


THE  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA.  39 

Vienna  on  the  first  of  the  month,  but  I  do  not  fancy  he  has  made 
any  needless  delay.  I  suppose,  therefore,  that  Lord  Castlereagh 
will  be  here  towards  the  end  of  next  week.  To  say  truth,  I  have 
not  been  very  much  impressed  by  his  conduct  at  the  congress  ;  but 
I  am,  and  with  reason,  too  much  wedded  to  the  alliance  I  have 
just  formed,  not  to  take  care  that  he  shall  go  home  thoroughly 
satisfied  with  me.  Wherefore  I  pray,  my  dear  cousin,  that  God 
may  have  you  in  His  safe  and  holy  keeping. 

Louis. 


No.  29.— The  Ambassadors  of  the  King  at  the  Congress 
to  the  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  in  Paris. 

Vienna,  February  12,  181 5. 
M.   LE   COMTE, 

We  have  the  honour  to  transmit  herewith  the  protocol  of 
the  conference  of  the  eight  powers,  on  the  question  of  rank  and 
precedence.  At  a  second  conference  held  since,  this  subject  was 
submitted  for  fresh  consideration,  and  returned  for  examina- 
tion to  the  commission  specially  charged  with  it.  Lord 
Castlereagh,  who  left  for  London  this  morning,  announced  that 
his  government  had  sent  instructions  respecting  salutes  at  sea, 
and  named  which  of  the  English  plenipotentiaries  were  prepared 
to  discuss  it.  We  shall  therefore  be  able  to  judge  as  to  the 
degree  of  moderation  in  their  views  on  this  subject. 

The  affairs  of  Saxony  are  definitely  arranged.  The  different 
articles  determining  the  divisions  have  been  settled,  as  well  as 
the  arrangements  in  the  North  of  Germany  resulting  from  the 
reconstruction  of  Prussia. 

The  King  of  Saxony  has  been  informed  of  the  results 
obtained,  and  has  been  invited  to  come  near  Vienna.  We 
believe  that,  as  far  as  the  political  existence  of  Saxony  and  her 
sovereign  are  concerned,  everything  has  been  obtained  that 
ordinary  negotiations  could  secure. 

The  claim  of  Prussia  to  keep  Leipsic  has  been  energetically 
combated  ;  they  at  last  abandoned  it  in  exchange  for  Thorn,  an 
important  military  post,  which  the  Emperor  of  Russia  consented 
to  give  back  to  them.  We  may  here  mention  a  rather  remark- 
able fact,  as  showing  the  revolutionary  and  bragging  spirit  of  a 
nation  which  has  troubled  the  peace  of  Europe  for  the  last  sixty 
years,  and  whose  government,  more  than  any  other,  furthered 
the  progress  of  the  revolution  for  its  own  ends. 

One  of  their  principal  officers,  General  Grollmann,1  known  as 

1  Charles- Guillaume  de  Grollmann,  born  in  Berlin  in  1777,   enlisted  in  1795,  and 
served  in  the  lower  grades  all  through  the  campaigns  of  1806  and  1807.     In  1809 


4o  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 


one  of  the  chiefs  of  the  League  of  Virtue  (Tugendbund)  and 
whom  the  Prussian  cabinet  had  sent  to  Vienna,  in  order  to 
take  advantage  of  what  he  could  learn  there,  wrote  to  Lord 
Wellington  to  tell  him  that  the  army  would  never  consent  to 
the  separation  of  Leipsic  (which  stood  as  a  monument  of  glory) 
from  the  Prussian  kingdom  ! 

East  Friesland  has  been  ceded  by  Prussia  to  Hanover  ;  by 
this  arrangement  England  obtains  a  communication  by  the 
Ems,  which  is  of  some  importance  as  regards  her  continental 
relations. 

We  were  just  about  to  enter  upon  Swiss  affairs,  when  a  fresh 
demand  from  Austria  adjourned  the  examination  of  the  report 
sent  in  by  the  commission. 

After  the  proposals  made  by  M.  de  Metternich  respecting 
Parma  and  Etruria,  we  had  hopes  of  carrying  out  this  affair 
according  to  the  spirit  of  our  instructions.  But  the  opposition 
which  the  Archduchess  Marie  Louise  appears  desirous  of 
raising  to  the  cession  of  Parma,  will  renew  the  uncertainties  in 
this  matter. 

The  affairs  of  the  South  of  Germany  next  claim  our  atten- 
tion. The  interests  of  Austria  and  Bavaria  will  probably  cause 
some  delay.  The  main  point  of  difficulty  is  a  special  treaty 
entered  into  at  Paris  between  these  two  powers,  and  which  it 
will  now  be  impossible  to  carry  out,  owing  to  the  greater  part  of 
the  available  territory  having  been  much  diminished  by  the 
cessions  made  to  Russia,  Prussia,  Holland,  and  Hanover. 

In  addition,  M.  le  Comte,  we  have  to  bring  to  your  notice  a 
matter  to  which  it  is  desirable  you  should  draw  his  Majesty's 
attention. 

The  Royal  Almanack  has  added  to  its  list  of  the  Legion  of 
Honour,  all  those  foreign  sovereigns,  and  other  persons  not 
French,  who  have  received  this  decoration.  Several  times 
already  we  have  been  asked  whether  the  king  had  retained  this 
order,  and  under  what  form,  and  whether  foreigners  could 
and  ought  to  continue  to  wear  it  ;  and  that  if  so,  an  official 
communication  to  that  effect  either  from  the  Minister  of  Foreign 
Affairs  in  Paris,  or  the  Chancellor  of  the  Order,  would  be  de- 
he  entered  the  Austrian  service  and  was  attached  to  the  staff  of  the  Archduke 
Charles.  An  implacable  enemy  to  France,  he  quitted  Austria  after  the  peace,  and 
went  to  Spain,  where  he  obtained  a  command  in  the  Foreign  Legion,  which  had  just 
beemorganized  by  the  Junta  of  Cadiz.  Included  in  the  capitulation  of  Valencia,  he  was 
made  prisoner  and  confined  in  Beaune.  He  contrived  to  make  his  escape,  returned 
to  Prussia  and  entered  the  staff  of  the  Prussian  army.  After  the  peace  he  was  made 
general  and  was  sent  to  the  Congress  of  Vienna.  He  again  took  part  in  the  cam- 
paign of  1815.  Later  on  he  filled  some  important  posts  in  the  administration  and 
obtained  various  commands.     He  died  in  1843. 


THE  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA.  41 

sirable.      It   could  be  sent  to  the  various  legations  in  Paris  and 
through  those  of  France  in  other  countries. 

We  also  think  it  would  make  a  good  impression  to  continue 
payment  to  those  foreign  officers,  who  have  received  a  brevet 
of  pension,  with  the  decoration. 

From  time  immemorial,  England  has  always  had  a  vast 
number  of  foreign  military  pensioners.  She  has  thus  made 
many  friends.  if  France  continues  these  pensions,  however 
reduced,  to  the  Poles,  the  Germans,  and  the  Italians,  she  will 
attach  valuable  men  to  herself  and  thereby  gain  partisans,  of 
whom,  by  the  course  of  events,  she  has  been  deprived. 

Such  an  example  of  fairness  and  generosity  will  greatly 
influence  the  success  of  the  demands  which  many  French  military 
men  have  still  to  make  from  abroad. 

We  entreat  you,  M.  le  Comte,  to  take  the  king's  commands 
on  this  matter,  and  to  make  them  known  to  us,  so  that  we  may 
be  in  a  position  to  answer  the  questions  addressed  to  us. 

Be  pleased  to  accept.  .  .  . 


No.  27. — The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  King 

Louis  XVIII. 

Vienna,  Feb.  15,  181 5. 
Sire, 

Lord  Castlereagh  leaves  to-day,  the  15th,  and  although 
he  will  rest  every  night,  he  expects  to  arrive  in  Paris  the  eighth 
day  after  his  departure.  He  will  remain  there  the  following  day, 
so  as  to  reach  London  on  the  1st  or  2nd  of  March. 

The  fate  of  the  Duchy  of  Warsaw,  that  of  Saxony,  that 
which  is  here  known  as  the  reconstruction  of  the  Prussian 
monarchy,  the  additions  given  to  Hanover,  the  circumscription 
of  the  United  Provinces,  which  will  now  bear  the  title  of  the 
Netherlands,  are  all  matters  completely  settled.  These  were  the 
most  difficult  points,  and  the  only  ones  likely  to  bring  about 
war.  Lord  Castlereagh  therefore  bears  to  England  the  news, 
that  peace  will  be  preserved.  Saxony  will  retain  about 
1,300,000  souls.  The  king,  to  whom  a  courier  has  been  de- 
spatched, will  be  after  the  end  of  this  month,  not  at  Presburg 
(I  represented  that  the  choice  of  that  place  was  rather  like 
banishment)  but  at  Briinn,  on  the  road  to  Vienna,  to  which  place 
nothing  will  prevent  his  going,  as  soon  as  he  has  consented  to 
the  cession  agreed  upon  by  the  powers. 

The  Duchy  of  Luxembourg,  together  with  Limburg,  and 
some    adjoining   territories    have    been   given   to  the  Prince  of 


42  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

Orange,  as  an  indemnity  for  his  ancient  hereditary  lands,  which 
he  has  ceded  to  Prussia,  and  the  latter  does  not  approach  our 
frontier  anywhere,  which  I  think  your  Majesty  considers  very 
important.1 

The  Duchy  of  Luxembourg  in  other  respects  remains  German, 
and  the  fortress  of  Luxembourg  will  be  a  federal  one. 

The  retrocessions  demanded  by  Austria  from  Bavaria, 
and  the  equivalents  to  be  given  back  to  the  latter,  are 
the  most  important,  and  indeed  the  only  important,  matters 
as  regards  territorial  arrangements  still  to  be  settled  in 
Germany.  The  two  courts  each  claim  our  support  ;  the 
one  wants  to  concede  nothing  for  which  she  does  not  get  an 
equivalent,  and  will  not  give  up  those  things  which  the  other 
specially  desires.  We,  from  different  motives,  have  an  almost 
equal  interest  in  treating  both  with  consideration,  which  makes 
arbitration  a  very  delicate  matter.  Nevertheless  I  trust,  that 
whatever  may  be  the  difficulties  that  arise,  they  will  not  be 
beyond  our  powers.  As  to  the  territorial  arrangements  in  Italy, 
the  commission  charged  with  the  preparation  of  a  scheme  for 
them,  has  proposed  to  give  back  to  the  Queen  of  Etruria,  Parma, 
Placentia,  and  Guastalla,  with  legations  at  the  Papal  court,  and 
to  give  Lucca,  the  Precidios,2  the  sovereignty  of  Piombino,  and 
the  reversion  of  the  island  of  Elba  to  the  Grand  Duke  of 
Tuscany.3  The  Archduchess  Marie  Louise  would  only  receive 
a  pension  from  Tuscany,  and  some  fiefs  formerly  held  by  the 
German  Empire,  and  now  belonging  to  the  Grand  Duke  of 
Tuscany,  to  whom  they  were  given  by  the  Imperial  Diet  as 
part  of  an  indemnity.  These  fiefs,  situated  in  Bohemia,  bring  in 
a  revenue  of  400,000  florins. 

This  scheme  was  brought  forward  through  our  influence, 
and  met  with  approval  for  two  reasons  ;  the  first,  because  it 
diminished  the  number  of  small  sovereigns  in  Italy  ;  the  second 
and  most  important,  because  it  removed  the  son  of  the  arch- 
duchess and  took  all  prospect  of  a  sovereignty  from  him. 

Austria  has  been  more  than  a  month  without  coming  to  a 
decision.     The  emperor  has  at  last  resolved  to  restore  the  two 

1  See  the  treaty  of  May  31,  1815,  concluded  between  the  Netherlands  on  one 
part  and  Great  Britain,  Austria,  Prussia,  and  Russia  on  the  other,  which  definitely 
constituted  the  new  kingdom  according  to  the  decision  arrived  at  by  the  Congress. 

2  Under  this  name  was  designated  that  part  of  the  Tuscan  littoral  which  Philip  II., 
King  of  Spain,  had  reserved  for  himself  when  he  abandoned  Sienna  and  its  territory 
to  the  Florentines.  This  coast-line  extended  from  the  mouth  of  the  Ombrone  to  the 
Roman  frontier.  In  1801  it  was  ceded  to  France,  which  gave  it  to  the  King  of 
Etruria.      In  1814  it  remained  with  Tuscany. 

3  Ferdinand,  Archduke  of  Austria  (1769-1824)  son  of  the  Emperor  Leopold, 
created  Grand  Duke  of  Tuscany  in  1 79 1,  deposed  in  1799,  Elector  of  Salzburg  in  1803, 
Grand  Duke  of  Wurzburg  in  1805,  reinstated  in  his  Tuscan  states  in  1844. 


THE  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA.  43 

duchies  to  the  Queen  of  Etruria  ;  he  could  not  in  fairness,  he 
said,  retain  for  himself  and  his  heirs,  one  of  the  states  belonging 
to  the  House  of  Bourbon,  with  whom  it  was  both  his  wish  and 
his  interest  to  remain  on  good  terms.  But  knowing  that  his 
daughter  made  a  point  of  having  an  independent  establishment, 
he  thought  of  Lucca,  and  has  charged  his  minister  to  negotiate 
this  affair  with  the  archduchess,  giving  him  instructions  which 
contained  the  arguments  he  was  to  use  for  this  purpose. 

M.  de  Metternich  has  therefore  made  a  counter-project, 
according  to  the  wishes  of  the  emperor,  which  he  has  transmitted 
to  us  ;  and  which  is  almost  completely  acceptable  to  us  ;  as  the 
son  of  the  archduchess  is  not  named  therein,  and  the  reversion 
of  Lucca  falls  to  Austria  or  Tuscany.  Although  we  may  yet 
have  several  objections  to  raise,  I  believe,  from  my  conversation 
with  M.  de  Metternich  on  the  subject,  that  he  will  give  in  to 
them. 

This  counter  project  declares  : 

That  the  duchies  shall  be  restored  to  the  Queen  of  Etruria, 
with  the  exception  of  Placentia  and  a  district  round  the 
town,  containing  a  population  of  30,000  souls. 

That  Lucca  shall  be  given  to  the  archduchess  for  her  life 
only,  with   two  pensions,  one   from   Austria,  the  other 
from  France  ; 
That  Austria  shall  receive  absolutely  : 

1.  Placentia  and  the  surrounding  district  above-named. 

2.  That  part  of  Mantua  which  lies  on  the  bank  of  the 

Po. 

3.  The  Valtelline. 

4.  Lucca,  after  the  archduchess. 

5.  Lastly,  the  Imperial  fiefs  ;  as  much  to  compensate  to 

the    State  of  Parma  for  the  town  and  country 
round  Placentia,  as  by  way  of  exchange. 

The  propositions  to  levy  a  pension  on  France  as  a  compensa- 
tion for  matters  by  which  she  will  gain  nothing  ;  to  make  Lucca 
revertible  to  the  Austrian  monarchy  ;  and  to  place  at  the  dis- 
position of  Austria  the  Imperial  fiefs  (even  those  which  are 
inclosed  in  the  neighbouring  states)  were  almost  equally  in- 
admissible, and  this  M.  de  Metternich  was  all  but  prepared  to 
admit. 

There  would  have  been  less  objection  to  surrendering  to 
Austria  that  part  of  Mantua  which  is  on  the  right  bank  of  the 
Po,  or  even  to  abandoning  Placentia,  which,  according  to  what 
General  Ricard  told  us,  is,  from  its  actual  situation  and  the 
present  position  of  Italy",  of  very  little  real  importance. 


44  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

The  Valtelline  is  no  longer  as  it  was  formerly,  indispensable 
to  Austria's  communication  with  Lombardy,  and  therefore,  un- 
important to  take  away  from  her.  Switzerland,  to  whom  it 
formerly  belonged,  has  reclaimed  it,  it  has  been  promised  to  her, 
and  the  Emperor  of  Russia,  as  I  shall  have  occasion  later  to  tell 
your  Majesty,  seems  to  make  it  a  point  that  it  should  be  given 
up  to  her. 

It  was  before  he  had  been  to  see  the  archduchess,  that  M. 
de  Metternich  presented  his  counter-project,  and  discussed  it 
with  me.  His  great  conceit  and  excessive  levity  prevented  his 
foreseeing  that  it  could  not  be  a  complete  success.  But  at  the 
very  first  word  the  Archduchess  Marie  Louise  did  not  seem 
satisfied  about  Lucca,  nor  even  to  care  about  this  principality, 
where,  she  said,  she  would  not  care  to  live  as  long  as  Napoleon 
was  in  the  island  of  Elba.  She  wants,  or  rather  her  councillors 
want,  rights  equal  with  those  accorded  her  by  the  treaty  of 
April  ii.  She  does  not  ask  to  keep  Parma  but  she  wishes 
for  an  equivalent,  or  something  approaching  to  it.  There  would 
be  no  other  way  of  satisfying  her  but  to  give  her  the  legations, 
at  the  same  time  assuring  the  reversion  to  the  Holy  See.  But 
the  court  of  Rome,  which  cannot  even  reconcile  herself  to  the 
idea  that  she  has  lost  Avignon,  would  exclaim  at  this,  and  might 
even  go  so  far  as  to  have  recourse  to  arms,  which  would  com- 
promise her  greatly.  M.  de  Metternich  has  asked  for  three  days 
to  make  up  his  mind  as  to  taking  either  one x  side  or  the  other, 
after  which  he  will  give  me  an  answer. 

These  difficulties  once  removed,  there  will  be  nothing  more 
of  importance  except  the  report  on  the  Italian  question,  to  which 
I  shall  come  presently. 

The  arrangements  respecting  the  free  navigation  of  rivers  are 
as  yet,  only  in  embryo,  but  the  basis  has  been  agreed  upon,  and 
this  will  assure  all  the  advantages  to  commerce  that  European 
industry  could  demand,  and  to  France  especially  those  which  the 
possession  of  Belgium  would  secure  to  her,  by  the  navigation  of 
the  Scheldt. 

Lastly,  the  abolition  of  the  slave-trade,  a  matter  regarded  by 
the  English  with  a  passion  bordering2  on  frenzy,  has  been  agreed 
to  by  the  only  two  nations  who  had  not,  as  yet,  relinquished  it. 

Lord  Castlereagh  is  therefore  sufficiently  armed  against  all 
the  attacks  of  the  opposition,  and  carries  with  him  everything 
needed  to  flatter  public  opinion. 

But  as  I  took  pains  to  point  out  to  him,  the  ministers  of  a 
representative  government   must   not  only   satisfy   the  popular 

1  Text :  as  translated.     Var. :   "  cc  parti  "  =  "this  side." 

2  Text:  as  translated.     Var.:    "  portee"  =  "  carried." 


THE  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA.  45 

party,  but  they  must  also  satisfy  the  government.  "  This,"  I  said, 
"you  can  only  do  if  you  work  together  with  us  and  according  to 
our1  views,  in  the  affairs  of  Naples." 

I  have  employed  the  last  eight  clays  in  trying  to  bring  him  to 
face  this  question,  and  if  I  have  not  succeeded  in  making  him  take 
our  side,  which  he  does  not  feel  at  liberty  to  do,  I  have  at  least  made 
him  desirealmost  as  earnestlyas  ourselves, the  expulsion  of  Murat, 
and  he  has  gone  away  determined  to  do  his  utmost  to  get  his 
government  to  consent  to  this.  Two  things  perplex  him  :  the 
one  how  to  pronounce  against  Murat  without  seeming  to  violate 
the  promises  given  him  2  (this  is  what  Lord  Castlereagh  calls  not 
compromising  his  character),  the  other,  to  decide  on  the  means 
necessary  to  insure  success  in  case  of  resistance,  without  com- 
promising the  interests  or  wounding  the  prejudices  and  exciting 
the  fears  of  any  one.  He  has  promised  that  three  days  after  his 
arrival  in  London,  he  will  despatch  a  courier  with  the  decisions 
of  his  court,  and  imbued  as  he  is  with  my 3  reasons,  he  hopes  this 
will  be  favourable.  What  I  wish  is,  that  without  entering  into 
discussions,  which  always  weaken  the  point  at  issue,  Lord 
Wellington  should  be  authorized  to  declare  that  his  court  re- 
cognizes Ferdinand  IV.  as  King  of  the  Two  Sicilies.  I  pray  your 
Majesty  to  speak  to  Lord  Castlereagh4  in  this  spirit  when  he 
comes  to  Paris.  During  the  latter  part  of  his  stay  in  Vienna  he 
showed  himself  very  willing  to  follow  the  line  I  urged  upon 
him.  He  spoke  against  Murat  to  the  Emperor  of  Russia,  whom 
he  saw  with  the  Duke  of  Wellington.  He  told  the  Emperor  of 
Austria,  "  Russia  is  your  natural  enemy.  Prussia  is  devoted  to 
Russia.  You  cannot  count  upon  any  power  on  the  Continent 
except  France  ;  it  is  your  interest  therefore  to  be  friends  with 
the  House  of  Bourbon,  and  this  you  cannot  be  until  Murat 5  is 
expelled." 

The  Emperor  of  Austria  replied  :  "  I  fully  admit  the  truth 
of  what  you  say." 

Finally,  when  he  and  Lord  Wellington  went  together  to  M. 
de  Metternich,  he  said,  "  You  will  have  a  very  hot  discussion  over 
the  affairs  of  Naples.  Do  not  imagine  you  can  escape  it.  This 
business  will,  I  warn  you,  be  brought  before  the  congress.  Take 
your  measures  accordingly,  and,  if  necessary,  send  troops  into 
Italy." 

They  each  told  me  separately,  that  this  declaration  threw  M. 

1  Text:  as  translated.     Var. :   "  un  autre  sens'  ="  another  view." 
-  It  will   be  remembered  that  by  the  treaty    of  January   IX,    1814,  Austria  had 
guaranteed  the  throne  of  Naples  to  Murat.      England  had  recognized  this  treaty. 

3  Text  :  as  translated.     Var.:   "nos"=" our." 

4  Text:  as  translated.     Var.:   "lui"="him." 

5  Text:  as  translated.     Var.:   "sans  que  "="  unless." 


46  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLE  YRAND. 

de  Metternich  into  un  grand  abattement :  these  are  their  words, 
and  your  Majesty  will  the  better  understand  M.  de  Metternich's 
despondency  when  you  have  read  the  secret  articles  of  the  treaty 
he  made  with  Murat,  and  of  which  I  have  the  honour  to  send 
you  herewith  a  copy.  That,  under  such  circumstances,  he  should 
have  guaranteed  him  the  kingdom  of  Naples  one  can  easily 
conceive.  But  that  he  should  have  carried  degradation  to  such 
a  point,  as  to  insert  a  clause  in  this  treaty,  by  which  Murat 
generously  renounces  his  right  to  the  kingdom  of  Sicily  and 
guarantees  that  kingdom  to  Ferdinand  J  V.,  is  something  almost 
beyond  belief,  even  when  it  is  proved.1 

Your  Majesty  will  no  doubt  learn  with  some  little  surprise 
that  the  principle  of  legitimacy  enters  but  little  into  the  calcula- 
tions of  Lord  Castlereagh  or  even  those  of  the  Duke  of  Wellington 
as  regards  Murat.  It  is  a  principle  which  does  not  affect  them 
greatly  and  which  they  hardly  seem  to  understand.  With  Murat, 
it  is  the  man,  not  the  usurper,  whom  they  detest.  The  principles 
pursued  by  the  English  in  India  have  deprived  them  of  any 
exact  ideas  of'2  fairness.  Nothing  made  such  an  impression  on 
Lord  Castlereagh,  who  wants  peace  above  all  things,  as  my 
declaration  to  him  that  peace  was  impossible  if  Murat  was  not 
expelled,  seeing  that  his  remaining  on  the  throne  of  Naples  is 
incompatible  with  the  existence  of  the  House  of  Bourbon. 

I  also  had  an  interview  with  the  Emperor  of  Russia  last 
Monday  morning,  the  13th  instant.  I  only  wished  to  see 
him  about  Naples,  and  remind  him  as  to  the  promises  he  had 
given  me  in  this  matter.  But  he  took  the  opportunity  to  speak 
about  many  other  things  of  which  I  shall  have  to  inform  your 
Majesty.  I  pray  that  your  Majesty  will  permit  me  to  relate  them 
in  the  form  of  a  dialogue  as  I  have  often  done  before  in  other 
letters. 

I  began  by  telling  the  emperor  that  I  had  for  some  time 
forborne   to   intrude   upon   him,   in   order  not  to  interfere  either 

1  The  actual  treaty  of  alliance  signed  January  11,  1814,  between  Austria  and 
Naples,  was  followed  by  various  secret  articles  of  which  the  following  is  an  analysis  : 

The  Emperor  of  Austria  undertakes  to  obtain  in  favour  of  his  Majesty  King 
[oachim  Napoleon  and  his  descendants  a  formal  act  of  renunciation  from  his  Majesty 
the  King  of  Sicily,  himself  and  his  heirs  in  perpetuity,  of  all  his  claims  to  the  king- 
dom of  Naples.  This  renunciation  shall  be  recognized  and  guaranteed  to  his  Majesty 
the  King  of  Naples,  by  his  Majesty  the  Emperor  of  Austria,  and  his  Imperial 
Majesty  will  do  his  utmost  to  obtain  the  same  recognition  and  guarantee  from  the 
other  allied  powers. 

On  his  part,  the  King  of  Naples  promised  to  guarantee  Sicily  to  King  Ferdinand, 
and  undertook  to  pay  him  an  indemnity  (Art.  I.). 

The  Emperor  of  Austria  likewise  guaranteed  to  the  King  of  Naples  a  good 
military  frontier  in  the  north  (Art.  IV.).  An  additional  article  promised  him  an 
increase  of  four  hundred  thousand  souls  taken  from  the  Roman  States. 

2  Text:  as  translated.     Var. :   "  stir  la  "="  respecting." 


THE  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA.  47 

with  his  business  or  his  pleasures ;  but  that  as  the  carnival 
had  put  an  end  to  the  latter,  and  as  the  former  had  been 
settled,  I  was  now  anxious  to  see  him.  I  added  that  even 
the  congress  had  only  one  important  matter  still  to  decide. 

"  You  wish  to  speak  of  the  Neapolitan  affairs  ?  " 

"  Yes,  sire,"  and  I  reminded  him  that  he  had  promised  me 
his  support. 

"But  you  must  help  me." 

"We  have  done  so  as  far  as  matters  depended  on  us.  Your 
Majesty  knows  that,  as  it  was  impossible  to  attempt  the  complete 
re-establishment  of  the  kingdom  of  Poland,  we  have  not  been, 
on  account  of  these  special  arrangements,  in  opposition  to  your 
views,  and  your  Majesty  has  surely  not  forgotten  that  at  the 
beginning  of  the  congress,  the  English  were  very  adverse  on  the 
question." 

"  How  about  the  affairs  of  Switzerland  ?  " 

"  I  am  not  aware  that  in  Swiss  matters  we  have  ever  been  in 
opposition  to  your  Majesty.  We  were  desired  to  do  our  very 
utmost  to  allay  irritation.  I  do  not  know  how  far  we  have 
succeeded  in  this,  but  it  is  all  we  have  aimed  at.  The  Bernese 
were  the  most  incensed,  for  they  had  lost  the  most,  and 
therefore  had  more  to  reclaim.  An  indemnity  was  offered 
them,  which  they  considered  quite  insufficient ;  we  have  in- 
duced them  to  be  satisfied  with  it.  I  only  know  that  they 
ask  for  the  bishopric  of  Basle  absolutely,  and  that  they  are 
quite  determined  to  accept  nothing  less." 

"And  what  will  you  do  for  Genoa?" 

"  Nothing,  sire." 

"Oh!"  in  a  surprised  and  reproachful  tone. 

"  It  is  impossible  for  us  to  do  anything.  The  king  will 
never  give  up  anything  French." 

"  Could  nothing  be  obtained  from  Sardinia  ?  " 

"  I  cannot  possibly  say." 

"  Why  did  you  cede  the  Valtelline  to  Austria  ? "  1 

"  On  this  point,  sire,  nothing  has  yet  been  decided.  The 
affairs  of  Austria  having  been  so  badly  managed 

"  It  is  her  own  fault,"  said  the  emperor,  "  why  does  she  not 
employ  clever  men  ? " 

"Austria  having  been  induced  to  make  many  sacrifices, 
which  must  have  cost  her  a  good  deal,  I  thought  it  only  fair, 

1  The  Valtelline,  formerly  an  imperial  fief,  had  in  former  times  been  given  to  the 
bishops  of  Coire.  These  had  ceded  it  to  the  Grisons  in  1530,  which  for  a  long  time 
had  to  defend  it  against  Spain.  Napoleon  joined  this  district  to  the  kingdom  of  Italy 
and  formed  it  into  the  department  of  the  Adda.  In  18 14  it  was  given  to  Austria, 
which  in  1859  ceded  it  to  Piedmont  together  with  Lombardy. 


48  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLE  YRAND. 

especially  in    matters  of   small  importance,  to  do  what  would 
be  agreeable  to  her." 

"  The  Valtelline  formed  part  of  Switzerland,  and  it  had  been 
promised  to  be  given  back  to  her." 

"  The  Valtelline  has  been  separated  from  Switzerland  for  more 
than  eighteen  years  ;  she  never  knew  the  rule  under  which  your 
Majesty  would  replace  her.  To  give  her  back  to  the  Grisons, 
to  which  she  formerly  belonged,  would  be  to  make  her  very 
unhappy.  It  therefore  seems  most  suitable  to  me  to  form1 
her  into  a  separate  canton,  if  Austria  does  not  obtain  her." 

"  That  can  be  arranged  ;  and  now  what  are  you  doing  for 
Prince  Eugene  ? " 

"  Prince  Eugene  is  a  French  subject,  and  as  such  has 
nothing  to  demand.  But  he  is  the  King  of  Bavaria's  son-in- 
law  ;  having  become  so,  in  consequence  of  the  position  to  which 
France  has  attained,  and  of  the  influence  she  possesses,  it  is 
therefore  only  fair  that  France  should  endeavour  to  secure  for 
him  what,  owing  to  this  alliance,  it  is  only  reasonable  and 
possible  that  he  should  have.  We  therefore  are  desirous  of 
doing  something  for  him.  We  wish  him  to  become  a  depend- 
ent prince  of  the  House  of  Bavaria,  and  that  in  consequence 
of  this,  the  king's  share  in  the  distribution  of  the  disposable 
territories  should  be  a  larger  one." 

"  Why  not  give  him  a  sovereignty  ?  " 

"  Sire,  his  marriage  with  a  Bavarian  princess  is  not  sufficient 
ground  for  so  doing.  Prince  Radziwill  is  the  King  of  Prussia's 
brother-in-law,  but  he  has  no  sovereignty."2 

"  But  why  not  give  him  Deux  Ponts  for  instance  ?  It  would 
be  a  very  trifling  matter." 

"  I  beg  your  Majesty's  pardon.  The  Duchy  of  Deux  Ponts 
has  always  been  looked  upon  as  something  considerable  ;  besides 
which,  hardly  enough  disposable  land  remains  to  fulfil  the  engage- 
ments already  entered  into." 

"  And  the  marriage  ?  " 

"  The  king  has  done  me  the  honour  to  inform  me  that  he 
still  earnestly  desires  it." 

"And  so  do  I,"  replied  the  emperor,  "and  my  mother  does 
the  same.     She  speaks  about  it  in  her  last  letters  to  me." 

"The     king,"    I    answered,    "awaiting    a    reply    from    your 

1  Text:  as  translated.     Var. :   "/aire"  =  il  make." 

-  There  is  an  error  here.  Prince  Antoine-Henry  de  Radziwill,  Governor  of  the 
Grand  Duchy  of  Posen,  had  married  in  1796  the  Princess  Frederica-Dorothea-Louise, 
daughter  of  Ferdinand,  Prince  of  Prussia,  and  grand-daughter  of  King  Frederic- 
William  I.  He  was  therefore  by  marriage  cousin-german  to  King  Frederic-William 
III. 


THE  CONGRESS  OE  VIENNA.  49 

Majesty,  has  refused  several  other  proposals  that  have  been 
made  to  him." 

"  I  also  have  refused  one.1  The  King  of  Spain  asked  my 
sister  in  marriage,  but  being  informed  that  she  would  require  to 
have  her  own  private  ecclesiastical  establishment,  and  that  this 
was  a  necessary  condition,  he  withdrew  his  demand." 

"  The  conduct  of  his  Catholic  Majesty  in  this  matter  will 
show  you  in  what  way  his  most  Christian  Majesty  would  be 
obliged  to  act.  The  king  thought  it  would  be  better  first  to 
finish  the  affairs  of  the  congress,  before  treating  of  this  matter."  2 

"  I  should,  however,  like  to  know  where  I  am." 

"Sire,  the  last  orders  I  received  were  in  conformity  with 
what  General  Pozzo  told  your  Majesty." 

"  Why  do  you  not  carry  out  the  treaty  of  April  1  ith  ? " 

"  Having  been  absent  from  Paris  for  five  months,  I  do  not 
know  what  has  been  done  in  this  matter." 

"  The  treaty  has  not  been  carried  out  and  we  must  insist  on 
its  fulfilment.  This  is  a  point  of  honour  with  us  ;  we  could  on 
no  account  depart  from  it.  The  Emperor  of  Austria  is  as 
anxious  as  I  am  about  it,  and  is  very  much  offended  that  it  is 
not  carried  out." 

"  Sire,  I  will  not  fail  to  report  what  your  Majesty3  has  told 
me.  But  I  must  bring  to  your  Majesty's  notice 4  that  owing  to 
the  agitation  prevailing  in  the  countries  bordering  on  France, 
especially  Italy,  there  might  be  some  danger,  if  means  for  intrigue 
were  furnished  to  persons  who  might  be  only  too  ready  to  make 
use  of  them."3 

Finally  we  returned  to  Murat.  I  briefly  recapitulated  all 
the  legitimate,  moral,  and  beneficial  reasons  which  ought  to  com- 
bine Europe  against  him.  I  pointed  out  the  difference  between 
his  position  and  that  of  Bernadotte,  which  the  emperor  quite 
realized  ;  and  in  support  of  what  I  had  said,  I  quoted  the 
Almanack  Royal,  which  I  had  just  received.  He  begged  me  to 
send  it  to  him,  adding  :  "  What  you  tell  me  has  given  me  the 
greatest  pleasure.  I  feared  the  contrary,  and  Bernadotte 
dreaded  it  even  more  than  I." 

Thereupon  the  emperor  spoke  of  Murat  with  the  greatest 
contempt.  "  He  is,"  said  he,  "  a  scoundrel  who  has  betrayed  us ; 
but,"  he  added,  "whenever  I  take  up  a  thing,  I  always  like  to  be 

1  Text  :  as  translated.     Var. :  "  mats  fai  ete  en  meme  temps  refuse,"  —  "but  I  at 
the  same  time  have  been  refused." 

-  Suppressed  in  the  text  of  the  archives. 

x  Text  :  "  Votre  Majestie  me  fait."     Var.:   "  Vous  me  faites  "=  "you  do  me." 

4  Text:  "  Dois  faire  observer. "     Var.:     'dois  observer. " 

5  These  last  phrases   refer   to  the  Emperor   Napoleon,   to   whom   the    French 
government  had  not  paid  the  moneys  as  agreed  by  the  treaty  of  April  11,  1814. 

VOL.  III.  E 


50  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

sure  of  bringing  it  to  a  satisfactory  conclusion.  If  Murat  resists, 
he  must  be  driven  out.  I  have  spoken  about  this 1  to  the  Duke 
of  Wellington.  He  thinks  it  would  require  a  very  large  muster 
of  troops,  and  that  when  it  came  to  a  question  of  embarkation, 
great  difficulties  would  arise." 

I  answered  that  I  did  not  want  troops  (for  I  know  they 
would  have  been  refused  me)  but  only  one  line,  a  single  line, 
inserted  in  the  future  treaty,  and  that  France  and  Spain  would 
undertake  the  rest ;  upon  which  the  emperor  replied,  "  You  may 
count  upon  my  support." 

During  the  whole  course  of  this  conversation  he 2  was  very 
distant,  but  on  the  whole  I  was  rather  satisfied  than  dissatisfied 
with  him. 

Lord  Castlereagh  has  spoken  to  me  with  great  warmth 
respecting  the  treaty  of  April  nth,  and  will,  I  have  no  doubt, 
also  speak  of  it  to  your  Majesty.  The  matter  has  been  revived 
again  lately,  and  is  now  in  every  one's  mouth.  I  must  inform 
your  Majesty  that  it  often  crops  up,  and  in  a  very  unpleasant 
manner.  It  has  sensibly  influenced  the  question  of  the  Mont 
de  Milan?  which  interests  so  many  of  your  Majesty's  subjects 
and  servants. 

It  has  therefore  occurred  to  me  that  your  Majesty  might 
extricate  yourself  from  whatever  is  difficult  of  fulfilment  in  the 
treaty  of  April  nth,  by  coming  to  some  understanding  with 
England. 

During  the  first  days  of  my  stay  here,  Lord  Castlereagh 
expressed  a  wish  to  offer  France  some  compensation  if  she 
would  at  once  renounce  the  slave-trade.  Pecuniary  compensa- 
tions are,  as  a  rule,  easier  for  England  than  any  others.  I  then 
thought  it  advisable  to  defer  this  proposal  without  actually 
refusing  it,  and  reserve  it  for  future  consideration. 

Latterly,  in  speaking  of  Murat,  and  the  provision  it  would 
be  indispensable  to  make  him,  if  (Europe  having  pronounced 
against  him),  he  submits  to  her  decision,  Lord  Castlereagh  did 
not  hesitate  to  say  that  England  would  willingly  undertake 
to  assure  an  income  to  Murat,  by  assigning  him  a  sum  in  the 
English  funds,  if  France  consented  to  renounce  the  slave- 
trade.  If  such  an  arrangement  were  deemed  practicable,  I  have 
no  doubt  but  that  it  would  be  easy  to  include  the  pensions 
stipulated  for  by  the  treaty  of  April  nth,  in  the  payments 
provided  for  by  England. 

This  arrangement,  owing  to  the  mania  of  the  English  for  the 

1  Text:  as  translated.     Var. :  "  a-t-il  ajottte  "="  he  added." 

2  Text :  as  translated.    Var. :  "  I'Empereur  a  ete  froid  "  =  "the  Emperor  was  very 
distant." 

3  A  Life  Insurance  Office  instituted  by  Napoleon. 


THE  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA.  51 

abolition  of  the  slave-trade,  would  certainly  have  the  advantage 
of  drawing  England  into  a  closer  alliance  with  our  cause  in 
Naples,  and  inducing  her  to  second  our  efforts  there. 

It  now  remains  to  be  seen  whether,  in  the  present  state  of 
her  colonies,  France,  in  renouncing  the  slave-trade  for  the  four 
years  and  three  months  it  has  still  to  run,  would  make  a  greater 
or  less  sacrifice  than  the  actual  good  to  be  hoped  for  from  the 
arrangement  which  I  have  just  mentioned.  I  therefore  venture 
to  entreat  your  Majesty  to  examine  this  question  closely,  so  as  to 
make  your  intentions  on  this  point  known  to  Lord  Castlereagh, 
who  will  probably  not  fail  to  speak  to  your  Majesty  about  it. 

I  could  have  wished  that  the  treaty  of  January  3rd,  (which,  the 
congress  once  ended,  will  be  void)  might  have  been  prolonged  to 
some  more  or  less  distant  date,  if  only  by  a  mutual  declaration. 
But  there  were  some  difficulties  about  this,  as  the  character  of  M. 
de  Metternich  does  not  inspire  much  confidence.  Lord  Castle- 
reagh assured  me,  however,  that  when  the  treaty  expires,  the  spirit 
which  dictated  it  will  survive.  He  is,  above  all  things,  anxious 
not  to  give  offence  to  the  other  continental  powers,  but  this 
does  not  prevent  his  wishing  to  establish  intimate  relations 
between  the  two  governments,  and  that  they  should  not  cease 
in  their  mutual  desire  for  the  preservation  of  peace.  In  a  word, 
he  has  left  Vienna  with  views  I  cannot  but  praise,  and  in  which 
he  will  be  confirmed  by  what  he  hears  from  your  Majesty's 
own  lips. 

I  perceive  that  my  letter  is  somewhat  voluminous,  and  I  fear 
lest  your  Majesty  may  find  it  too  long  for  all  that  it  contains. 
But  I  would  rather  run  the  risk  of  being  too  lengthy  than  sup- 
press any  details  which  your  Majesty  might  consider  necessary. 

By  the  next  courier,  I  shall  have  the  honour  to  forward 
the  treaties  of  the  coalition,  which  I  have  succeeded  in  obtaining. 
When  your  Majesty  has  examined  them,  I  would  beg  you  to 
send  them  to  M.  de  Jaucourt,  in  order  that  they  may  be  deposited 
in  the  Foreign  Office. 

The  departure  of  General  Pozzo  has  again  been  talked  of.1 
I  have  the  honour  to  be.  .  .  . 

No.  23. — King  Louis  XVIII.  to  the  Prince  de 

Talleyrand. 

Paris,  February  iS/A,  18 15. 

Mon  Cousin, 

I   have  received  your  letter  No.  25,2  and  have  read  it 
with  much  satisfaction.     I  should  certainly  have  preferred  that 

1  Text:  as  translated.     Var. :   "  On  a  reparle  "="  They  have  spoken  again. " 
-'  Var.:   "No.  26." 

E    2 


52  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

the  King  of  Saxony  should  keep  his  entire  kingdom,  but  I  never 
expected  it,  and  I  consider  it  quite  a  miracle,  seeing  how  little 
support  we  received,  that  we  were  enabled  to  secure  to  him  what 
is  left.  On  one  point  I  have  great  pleasure  in  expressing  to  you 
my  satisfaction.  That  is,  that  Prussia  has  got  neither  Luxem- 
bourg nor  Mayence.  Such  near  neighbourhood  would  have 
been  very  much  opposed  to  the  future  peace  of  France.  Let  us 
leave  the  sword  in  its  scabbard.  General  Ricard's  journey  will 
have  been  useless,  but  it  will  have  proved  to  my  allies  my 
eagerness  to  be  quite  straight  with  them. 

Lord  Wellington's  conduct  touches l  but  does  not  surprise 
me  ;  he  is  a  loyal  man  ;  your  remarks  upon  what  he  said  are 
perfectly  true. 

I  expect,  equally  with  yourself,  difficulties  in  the  Neapolitan 
affair,  but  we  must  overcome  them.  Setting  aside  all  sentiment, 
Murat's  existence  becomes  every  day  more  dangerous.  Berna- 
dotte's  case  is  a  peculiar  one,  but  the  principle  once  allowed,  you 
must  admit  the  consequences. 

The  papers  are  full  of  the  admirable  conduct  of  the  governor 
(whose  name  I  cannot  at  this  moment  recollect)  of  the  fortress 
of  Konigstein.2  I  should  like  to  make  him  a  Commander  of  the 
Legion  of  Honour  ;  but  before  doing  so,  I  want  to  know,  first  if 
the  facts  are  true  ;  secondly,  would  the  King  of  Saxony  like  my 
giving  him  this  decoration  ;  I  desire  you  to  ascertain  these  two 
points.  Whereupon  I  pray  God  may  have  you,  my  cousin,  in 
His  safe  and  holy  keeping. 

Louis. 


No.  28.— The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  King 

Louis  XVIII. 

Vienna,  February  20th,  181 5. 

Sire, 

I  have  the  honour  to  send  your  Majesty  the  documents 
mentioned  in  my  last  despatch.  Even  if  they  are  not  a  complete 
collection  of  the  treaties  entered  into  by  the  allied  powers,  they 
are  at  least  the  most  important  ones  :  they  are : — 

1  Text:  as  translated.     Var. :   "  a  Vienne  "=  "  at  Vienna." 

2  The  Moniteurs  of  the  6th  and  10th  February,  1815,  give  an  account  of  the  for- 
tress of  Konigstein.  It  is  probable  that  the  fact  to  which  the  king  alludes  is  the  one 
reported  in  the  following  terms  on  the  10th  February  :  "  The  fortress  of  Konigstein, 
situated  about  three  leagues  from  the  Bohemian  frontier,  plays  just  now  as  prominent 
a  part  as  during  the  Seven  Years'  War.  The  great  allied  powers  had  already  recog- 
nized its  neutrality  at  the  time  that  Buonaparte's  armies  still  occupied  these  countries. 
General  de  Zeschau  gave  up  his  command  at  this  time  to  escape  the  proposals  made 
to  him  and  which  compromised  his  honour." 


THE  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA.  53 

A  convention  made  in  the  form  J  of  a  memorandum,  between 
Austria  and  Russia  on  the  29th  March,  18 13,  and  called  the 
Convention  of  Kalisch.2 

The  treaty  of  peace  and  alliance  between  Russia  and 
Prussia.  This  has  often  been  spoken  of  as  the  treaty  of  Kalisch, 
because  it  was  negotiated,  and,  as  it  seems,  also  drafted  there. 
But  it  was  signed  at  Breslau  on  the  26th  February,  18 13.3 

The  treaty  of  Reichenbach,  in  the  same  year,  and  dated 
June  27,  between  Austria,  Russia,  and  Prussia. 

The  treaty  of  Toplitz  of  September  9,  between  the  same 
powers,  together  with  the  secret  articles  of  this  treaty. 

Lastly,  that  of  Chaumont,  which  was  to  perpetuate  the 
alliance  against  France  for  twenty  years  after  the  war,  which  it 
was  proposed  to  renew  before  the  expiration  of  that  time,  and 
which  tended  to  render  that  coalition  perpetual.  This  the  treaty 
of  January  3  has  dissolved. 

It  may  interest  your  Majesty  to  look  over  these  various 
documents.  In  them  you  will  find  an  explanation  of  some  of 
the  difficulties  we  have  had  to  contend  against  ;  also  the  reason 
of  the  embarrassment  experienced  by  the  allies  themselves, 
especially  Austria,  from  not  having  made,  when  it  entirely 
depended  on  herself,  such  stipulations  as  the  most  ordinary 
common  sense  ought  to  have  made  her  see  were  indispensable. 

I  pray  your  Majesty  to  have  the  kindness,  after  having  read 
these  documents,  to  send  them  to  M.  le  Comte  de  Jaucourt,  for 
safe  custody  at  the  Foreign  Office. 

I  have  already  had  the  honour  to  announce  to  your  Majesty 
that  the  Kings  of"  Bavaria  and  Hanover  had  agreed  to  the  treaty 
of  alliance  of  the  3rd  January.  I  wished  to  send  them  their 
deed  of  agreement,  at  the  same  time  as  that  for  Holland  ;  but  as 
this  latter  is  not  yet  finished,  and  the  Prince  de  Wredehas  urged 
on  me  the  exchange  of  the  ratifications  with  that  of  Bavaria,  I 
have  the  honour  to  forward  them  to-day  to  your  Majesty.  I 
also  send  duplicates  of  the  deeds  of  agreement  which  I  have 

1  Text:  as  translated.     Var.:  "fonnent  "=  "  form." 

2  There  is  apparently  some  confusion  here.  There  never  was  a  Convention  of 
Kalisch  on  March  29,  1813,  between  Austria  and  Russia.  Besides  at  that  time  Austria 
was  still  the  ally  of  France.  Perhaps  M.  de  Talleyrand  meant  to  speak  of  the  Con- 
vention signed  on  March  19,  at  Breslau,  between  Russia  and  Prussia,  to  regulate  the 
manner  of  occupying  the  countries  of  the  Rhine  Confederation  as  well  as  their 
administration. 

3  The  treaty  of  alliance  between  Russia  and  Prussia  was  signed  at  Breslau  on 
February  27,  and  not  on  the  26th,  by  M.  de  Hardenberg,  and  on  February  28  at 
Kalisch,  by  Prince  Koutousoff.  The  treaty  of  Rechenbach  was  signed  between 
England  and  Prussia  on  June  14,  and  not  on  the  25th.  Austria  took  no  part  in  it 
then.  On  the  contrary  she  adhered  to  the  treaty  of  Toplitz  of  September  9,  after  the 
rupture  of  the  Congress  of  Prague. 


54  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

signed.  These  two  last  deeds  are  those  for  ratification  by  your 
Majesty.  I  pray  you  to  have  the  goodness  to  send  them  to 
M.  le  Comte  de  Jaucourt,  that  he  may,  if  your  Majesty  thinks 
fit,  prepare  the  ratifications. 

A  courier  just  arrived,  brings  me  the  letter  of  the  I  ith  of  this 
month,  with  which  your  Majesty  has  honoured  me. 

I  shall  await  with  great  impatience  the  next,  in  which  your 
Majesty  will,  I  hope,  inform  me  of  the  result  of  your  interviews 
with  Lord  Castlereagh.  I  should  like  the  paragraph  about 
Naples  to  be  of  such  a  nature  that  it  may  be  shown  to  M.  de 
Metternich,  it  cannot  be  too  positive. 

I  have  the  honour  to  be 


No.  29. — The   Prince  de   Talleyrand   to  King 

Louis  XVIII. 

Vienna,  February  24,  181 5. 

Sire, 

Joachim's  minister  here,1  has  received  a  complete  me- 
morandum, with  instructions  to  send  it  to  me  after  having  shown 
it  to  M.  de  Metternich,  to  whom  he  has  in  fact  communicated  it. 

The  object  of  this  memorandum  is  to  ask  for  an  explanation 
of  certain  steps  which  he  says  I  have  taken  against  him  at  the 
congress,  and  to  demand  whether  your  Majesty  considers  that 
you  are  at  peace  with  him  or  not.  Joachim's  minister  feeling 
sure  that  this  memorandum  was  written  and  ordered  to  be  sent 
to  me  in  consequence  of  some  statements  he  himself  had  made, 
on  the  supposition  that  no  arrangement  would  be  arrived  at 
respecting  Saxony,  and  that  war  would  break  out,  thought  he 
could  not  now  make  use  of  it  (this  supposition  having  fallen 
through)  without  compromising  his  master's  interests  rather  than 
serving  him.  He  has  therefore  taken  upon  himself  to  suppress 
the  memorandum  and  it  is  not  to  be  sent  to  me. 

I  heard  all  these  details  from  the  Duke  of  Wellington  and 
consulted  with  him  as  to  what  course  should  be  taken  with  regard 
to  the  communication  M.  de  Metternich  had  received  respecting 
the  note.  We  both  agreed  that  M.  de  Metternich  must  be 
persuaded  to  utilise  it,  in  order  to  send  a  declaration  to  me  as 
well  as  to  the  Due  de  Campo-Chiaro,  to  the  effect  that  Austria 

1  This  was  the  Due  de  Campo-Chiaro,  who  was  first  an  officer  in  the  Neapolitan 
army,  then  Councillor  of  State  and  Master  of  the  King's  Household,  under  King 
Joseph,  and  subsequently  Minister  of  Police  under  Murat.  He  was  at  various  times 
charged  with  diplomatic  missions.  He  was  sent  to  Vienna  in  1814,  but  was  not 
recognized.  After  the  restoration  he  was  removed  from  office,  became  for  a  short 
time  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  but  was  obliged  soon  after  to  retire  in  1820. 


THE  CONGRESS  OE  VIENNA.  55 

will  not  permit  any  foreign  troops  to  pass  through  her  territory, 
and  to  support  this  declaration  by  recalling  the  troops  now  on 
the  frontiers  of  Poland  and  Saxony1  and  sending  them  to  Italy. 

The  Duke  of  Wellington  spoke  in  the  same  sense  to  M.  de 
Mettcrnich,  whom  I  afterwards  saw  and  to  whom  I  expressed 
myself  in  similar  terms  The  result  is  that  to-day  the  Emperor 
of  Austria  has  ordered  the  despatch  of  150,000  men  to  Italy, 
and  that  the  declaration  mentioned  above  will  be  sent  to  us  to- 
morrow. 

Austria's  principal  pretext  for  putting  off  Neapolitan  affairs 
was  that  she  was  not  ready  and  that  she  feared  Murat  might 
bring  about  a  revolution  in  Italy.  This  objection  was  not  with- 
out weight  and  made  some  impression  on  the  English  and  the 
Russians,  but  it  will  fall  to  the  ground  the  moment  the  Austrians 
have  a  considerable  force  in  Italy. 

For  this  we  are  indebted  to  Joachim's  memorandum,  which 
makes  us  look  upon  that  incident  as  a  very  happy  one. 

The  fact  of  the  failure2  of  this  memorandum  seeing  that  it 
was  both  insulting  and  contrary  to  its  author's  interests,  since 
the  affairs  of  Saxony  have  been  arranged,  proves  that  we  may 
congratulate  ourselves  on  this  having  occurred ;  in  fact,  but  for 
this,  Austria  would  have  been  unable  to  send  a  large  force  into 
Italy.  If  I  can  obtain  a  copy  of  the  memorandum  from  M. 
de  Metternich,  I  will  have  the  honour  to  forward  it  to  your 
Majesty. 

In  this  state  of  affairs,  does  not  your  Majesty  consider  that 
the  assembly  of  troops  in  the  south  of  France  under  any  pretext 
except  the  real  one,  might  be  advantageous  ? 

Swiss  affairs  will  in  all  probability  be  completed  in  a  few 
days,  with  the  exception  of  one  point,  that  of  the  Valtelline 
which  it  seems  decided  to  leave  unsettled,  and  always  excepting 
the  consent  of  the  cantons  to  the  proposals  made  to  them. 
For  it  was  decided  to  propose  to  them  what  was  considered  most 
expedient,  before  insisting  on  it. 

Austria  and  Bavaria  are  in  negotiation  respecting  the  retro- 
cession, demanded  by  Austria,  of  territory  occupied  by  Bavaria, 
and  a  compensation  to  be  given  to  the  latter.  As  these  two 
powers  are  far  from  coming  to  an  understanding,  it  has  been 
suggested  to  ask  France  and  England  to  mediate.  But  it  seems 
to  me  that  by  allowing  England  to  have  the  sole  honour  of  this 
mediation,  France  will  be  able  to  influence  the  arrangements 
without  compromising  herself  with  either  of  those  two  powers 
whom  it  is  equally  her  interest  to  conciliate. 

1  Suppressed  in  the  text  of  the  archives. 

2  Text:  as  translated.     Var.  :  "  non  remise  "  —  "non-delivery." 


56  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

M.  de  Metternich  has  come  to  ask  mc  with  an  air  of  great 
mystery  to  let  Italian  affairs  stand  over  till  the  5th  or  6th  of 
March,  by  which  time  he  fancies  I  shall  have  received  the 
commands  which  your  Majesty  may  be  pleased  to  send  me  after 
having  seen  Lord  Castlereagh. 

Although  unable  to  discern  the  motive  for  this  request,  I 
could  not  well  refuse  it.1  But  on  the  other  hand  I  see  incon- 
veniences must  arise,  inasmuch  as  Austria  has  arranged  all  that 
concerns  her  interests  outside  of  Italy,  and  that  the  affairs  of 
that  country,  which  really  are  the  most  important  to  us,  will 
remain  exposed,  to  chance  and  we  ourselves  to  all  the  difficulties 
Austria  may  place  in  our  way.  I  therefore  do  not  want  Ba- 
varian matters  to  be  concluded  too  quickly.  Thus,  though  my 
impatience  to  be  once  again  near  your  Majesty  after  such  a  long 
absence,  needs  not  the  spur  of  the  ennui  with  which  Vienna 
seems  to  be  affected  since  the  opening  of  the  congress,  I  find 
myself  obliged  not  to  hurry  matters  just  now  ;  on  the  contrary 
to  retard  all  action  as  much  as  I  can,  and  to  wait. 

I  attach  to  this  letter  the  deed  of  agreement  with  Holland, 
which  I  have  just  signed.  I  pray  your  Majesty  after  having 
ratified  the  deed,  to  order  its  return  to  me  by  M.  le  Comte  de 
Jaucourt. 

I  have  the  honour  to  be 


No.  4. — Le  Comte  de  Blacas  D'Aulps  to  Prince 

Talleyrand.2 

Paris,  February  25,  1 81 5. 

Prince, 

The  king  has  received  your  despatch  No.  27,  but  his 
Majesty  having  at  present  a  rather  severe  attack  of  gout  defers 
replying  to  you  until  he  has  seen  Lord  Castlereagh  whom  we 
expect  at  any  moment. 

1  This  is  the  explanation  of  the  mysterious  conduct  of  M.  de  Metternich.  To- 
wards the  middle  of  February  the  Congress  were  all  agreed  on  the  question  of  Parma. 
That  duchy  was  to  return  to  the  ancient  dynasty.  Marie-Louise  was  to  get  the 
duchy  of  Lucca,  which  at  her  death  was  to  be  re-united  to  Tuscany.  But  the 
empress  positively  refused  to  take  Lucca,  and  insisted  on  having  Parma.  Metter- 
nich was  forced  to  yield  to  her  wishes.  He  therefore  resolved  to  give  Parma  to  the 
empress  and  to  indemnify  the  Queen  of  Etruria  by  means  of  Lucca  and  some  pen- 
sions. But  foreseeing  violent  opposition  on  the  part  of  Talleyrand  whose  personal 
views  obliged  him  to  hold  very  strong  opinions  on  questions  of  legitimacy,  he  pre- 
ferred addressing  himself  to  Louis  XVIII.  direct.  Lord  Castlereagh,  who  was 
returning  to  London,  undertook  the  charge  of  this  negotiation  on  his  way  through 
Paris.  It  was  for  this  reason  that  M.  de  Metternich  asked  for  a  few  days'  respite  to 
give  the  English  minister  time  for  an  interview.  (See  what  the  king  says  about  his 
interview  with  Lord  Castlereagh  in  his  letter  of  March  3.) 

-  This  letter  is  not  to  be  found  in  M.  Pallain's  collection. 


THE  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA.  57 

I  do  not  however  like  the  courier  to  leave  without  sending 
you  news  of  the  king.  The  attack  of  gout  came  on  rather 
mildly,  and  for  the  last  few  days  his  Majesty  has  already  felt 
better.  After  what  you  have  said  as  to  the  state  of  the  negotia- 
tions, it  is  very  evident  that  you  are  not  by  any  means  near  the 
end  of  your  efforts.  The  consent  of  the  King  of  Saxony,  not- 
withstanding the  subtraction  of  thirty  thousand  souls,  will  not, 
I  hope,  retard  the  settlement  of  this  great  question  :  that  of 
Naples  presents  many  other  difficulties,  which  would  be  still 
more  formidable,  but  for  the  resolute  firmness  to  which  you  have 
accustomed  the  congress,  and  the  useful  co-operation  afforded 
by  Lord  Wellington,  who  seems  greatly  disposed  to  second  you, 
and  to  combat  the  prejudices  or  scruples  of  M.  le  Prince  de 
Metternich.  The  king  will  leave  nothing  undone  to  convey  to 
England  through  Lord  Castlereagh,  the  most  decisive  expressions 
on  a  subject  so  closely  allied  to  the  interests  of  all  the  powers 
which  only  seek  the  consolidation  of  peace. 

As  to  the  abolition  of  the  slave-trade,  if  it  is  found  necessary 
to  make  any  concessions  on  this  point,  let  us  at  least  endeavour 
to  obtain  a  fair  return,  by  formal  engagements  on  the  part  of  the 
cabinet  of  St.  James's  ;  and  let  us  make  sure  that  it  will  agree  to 
the  re-establishment  of  Ferdinand  IV.  on  the  throne  of  Naples. 
This  is  the  aim  towards  which  every  step  must  henceforth  be 
taken  to  further  the  king's  views  on  a  matter  which  becomes  as 
it  were  of  paramount  importance. 

Accept  Prince 

Bl.ACAS  D'Aulps. 


No.  30. — The   Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  Ktng 

Louis   XVIII. 

Vienna,  February  id,  181 5. 

Sire, 

I  have  the  honour  to  send  your  Majesty  a  copy  of  M.  de 
Metternich's  declaration  mentioned  in  my  last  despatch,  also  a 
copy  of  the  reply  I  sent  him. 

Your  Majesty  will  see  that  this  reply  is  absolutely  in  accord- 
dance  with  the  import  of  the  letter  written  by  me  to  Lord 
Castlereagh,  in  which  I  said,  that  in  the  operations  against  Murat, 
we  should  not  pass  through  Italy. 

I  could  have  wished  that  the  declaration  of  Austria  against 
Murat  was  more  explicit.  But  it  was  dangerous  to  give  him  a 
pretext  for  violent  action,  as  the  Austrians  are  not  fully  prepared 
in  Italy.  Orders  have  been  issued  to  hurry  on  the  troops.  They 
will  have   a   hundred  and  fifty  thousand   men  there,  and   also  a 


58  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

reserve  of  fifty  thousand  in  Carinthia,  which  will  be  sufficient  to 
inspire  Murat  with  respect,  or  stultify  his  attempts.  But  as  matters 
move  very  slowly  here,  the  Prince  de  Schwarzenberg  has  asked 
for  a  delay  of  seven  weeks  to  admit  of  his  forces  reaching  their 
destination.  The  memorandum  which  decided  their  departure, 
always  seems  to  me  a  happy  incident.  I  am  going  to  Presburg 
to-morrow  to  visit  Madame  de  Brionne  x  who  received  the  sacra- 
ments yesterday  and  who  has  asked  to  see  me.  I  shall  be  back 
again  on  Monday  night  or  Tuesday,  and  as  affairs  are  still  in 
abeyance  they  will  not  suffer  in  any  way  from  my  two  days' 
absence. 

General  Pozzo  leaves  for  certain  on  the  istor  2nd  of  March, 
he  will  be  about  ten  days  on  the  road. 

The  Emperor  of  Russia  is  very  busy  with  the  Archduchesss 
Marie- Louise's  affairs.  He  has  had  a  scheme  drawn  up  by  which 
the  legations  would  be  almost  entirely  taken  away  from  the  Pope. 
In  so  doing  he  places  himself  in  opposition  to  the  principles 
agreed  upon  between  the  plenipotentiaries  of  the  great  powers. 
At  present  his  new  scheme  rests  in  the  portfolio  of  M.  d'Anstett. 

I  have  the  honour  .... 


No.  24. — King  Louis  XVIII.  to  the  Prince  de 

Talleyrand. 

Paris,  March  3,  181 5. 

Mon  Cousin, 

I  have  received  your  letters  numbered  27  and  28.  I  did 
not  write  to  you  last  week,  first  because  I  awaited  the  arrival 
of  Lord  Castlereagh,2  and  afterwards,  as  is  usual  when  an  attack 
of  gout  comes  on,  I  was  very  feverish,  which  does  not  conduce 
to  the  dictation  of  a  letter.3 

Lord  Castlereagh  arrived  on  Sunday  evening,  I  saw  him 
on  Monday  and  Tuesday,  and  found  him  very  well  disposed 
to  the  basis  of  the  Neapolitan  matter,  but  as  a  minister,  some- 


1  Louise  Julie  Constance  de  Rohan  Montauban  was  born  on  March  6,  1734. 
Married  October  3,  1748,  Louis  Charles  of  Lorraine,  Prince  of  Lambese,  Comte  de 
Brionne,  became  a  widow  January  28,  1 761,  and  died  March  29,  1815,  at  Presburg. 
She  had  welcomed  M.  de  Talleyrand  on  his  first  entrance  into  Parisian  society,  and 
he  retained  the  warmest  affection  for  her  to  the  day  of  her  death. 

2  Text:  as  translated.  Var.  :  "J'attendais  Lo)-d  Castlereagh  a  totd  moment  et 
ensuite  parcequ'azwjz'  que  e'est  mon  usage,  au  commencement  de  la  gouttc,  fai  eu  la 
fievre  ce  qui  ne  rend  pas  tres  apte  a  dieter"  =  "  I  awaited  Lord  Castlereagh  at  every 
moment,  and  then,  as  is  my  habit  when  gout  comes  on,  I  got  feverish,  which  is  not 
conducive  to  dictation." 

3  The  king  here  makes  a  mistake,  all  the  rough  drafts  of  his  letters  written  by 
himself  are  still  in  the  archives  of  the  Foreign  Office  at  Paris. 


THE  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA.  59 

what    fastidious    and    very    strongly    attached    to    the    Vienna 
cabinet. 

After  repeating  all  you  had  yourself  told  me  he  had  said  to 
Prince  Metternich,  he  went  on  to  various  proposals  on  which 
he  said  he  was  quite  agreed  with  the  Austrian  minister.  The 
gist  of  these  propositions  is,  that  the  court  of  Vienna  asks 
nothing  better  than  to  co-operate  in  the  expulsion  of  Murat, 
"  provided  "  he  added  "  that  your  Majesty  shows  as  much  con- 
sideration for  the  north  of  Italy,  as  Austria  has  manifested  for 
the  interest  of  the  south,  and  that  Parma,  Placencia,  and 
Guastalla  are  given  to  the  Archduchess  Marie-Louise,  the 
three  branches  of  the  house  of  Bourbon  undertaking  to  indem- 
nify the  house  of  Etruria."  x  I  assured  him  that  the  state  of 
Parma  was  an  hereditary  succession,  which  had  come  into  my 
family  through  Queen  Elizabeth  Earnese,2  that  neither  France, 
Spain,  nor  the  kingdom  of  Naples  had  anything  to  do  with  it,3 
and  that  therefore,  setting  aside  all  family  interest,  justice  alone 
forbids  my  allowing  those  to  whom  this  principality  belongs 
to  be  robbed  of  it  ; 4  but  that  if  Austria  insisted  on  the  con- 
vention of  April  nth  as  regards  the  Archduchess  Marie- 
Louise  being  carried  out,  I  would  consent  to  the  Queen  of 
Etruria  or  rather  her  son,  receiving  Lucca  and  the  Presidios  as 
an  indemnity,  provided  that  the  sovereignty  of  Parma  is  re- 
cognized as  belonging  to  him,  and  will  revert  to  him  on  the 
death  of  the  Archduchess  Marie- Louise.  Then  Lucca,  as  well 
as  the  Presidios,  will  be  reunited  to  Tuscany. 

1  Var.  :  "  '  Mats,'  m'a-t-il  dit,  '  en  cedant  pour  le  sud  de  P 'Italic,  die  attend  la 
mc/ue  complaisance  de  la  part  de  votre  Majestc  pour  la  par  tic  die  uord,  et  elle  voudrait 
que  Parme,  Plaisance  et  Guastalla  appartinsscut  a  l'archiduchesse  Marie- Louise  et 
que  les  trots  cours  de  la  maison  de  Bourbon  se  cliargeasseut  d'indemniser  la  reine 
d'Etrurie'"  =  "' But,' he  said  to  me,  'in  ceding  thus  for  the  south  of  Italy,  she 
expects  your  Majesty  to  show  the  same  complaisance  for  the  northern  part,  and  she 
would  wish  that  Parma,  Placenzia  and  Guastalla  should  belong  to  the  Archduchess 
Marie  Louise,  and  that  the  three  courts  of  the  House  of  Bourbon  should  charge  them- 
selves with  indemnifying  the  Queen  of  Etruria.'  " 

-  The  duchy  of  Parma  had  belonged  ever  since  154  to  the  family  of  Farnese. 
The  male  line  died  out  in  1731.  Elizabeth,  the  niece  of  the  last  duke,  married  to 
Phillip  V.,  King  of  Spain  (the  first  Bourbon  king),  got  this  duchy  presented  to  her 
son  Don  Carlos.  The  treaties  of  the  quadruple  alliance  (1781),  the  treaty  of  Vienna, 
between  France  and  Austria  (1725),  and  the  treaty  of  Seville,  between  France  and 
England  (1729),  assured  him  the  possession  of  it.  Duke  Charles  having  been  called 
to  the  throne  of  Naples,  the  duchy  of  Parma  passed  on  to  Austria  (treaty  of  Vienna, 
1736).  The  treaty  of  Aix-la-Chapelle  (1748)  returned  the  duchy  to  Don  Phillip,  the 
second  son  of  Phillip  V.  and  Elizabeth  Farnese.  In  this  way  the  duchy  of  Parma 
returned  finally  to  the  House  of  Bourbon. 

3  Var.  :  "  que  cela  n'avait  rien  de  commune  avec,"  etc  =  "  that  this  had  nothing 
in  common  with." 

4  Var.  :  " expropritr  une  branche  de  ma  famillc"  —  " dispossess  one  branch  of 
my  family." 


60  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

He  did  not  seem  disinclined 1  to  this  arrangement,  which 
after  all  is  of  greater  interest  to  Austria 2  than  to  England. 

Yesterday  I  saw  Baron  Vincent,  who  brought  a  special  and 
secret  message  for  me.  He  gave  me  a  confidential  memorandum 
on  the  principal  point  which  related  to  Parma,  concerning  which 
I  have  just  written  to  you,  and  on  which  head  he  told  me  his 
instructions  were  very  precise  and  imperative.  I  replied  by  a 
counter-project  in  the  same  sense  as  my  answer  to  Lord  Castle- 
reagh,  and  we  parted,  each  maintaining  his  own  ground.3 
Nevertheless  I  believe  it  will  not  be  difficult  to  arrange  this 
matter.  M.  de  Vincent  told  me  that  after  this  preliminary  over- 
ture, Prince  Metternich  would  prefer  to  carry  on  the  negotiations 
in  Vienna,4  but  entirely  between  you  and  himself,  and  without 
the  presence  of  any  other  member  of  the  French  legation. 
Not  seeing  any  objection  5  to  this  I  promised  that  it  should  be 
so  ;  and  I  will  send  you  by  the  first  courier  the  two  documents6 
of  which  I  speak,  with  a  few  words  7  of  instruction. 

Your  conversation  8  with  the  Emperor  of  Russia  has  interested 
me  much,  although  his  part  of  it  is  somewhat  volatile  and 
erratic.  I  am  however  thoroughly  satisfied  with  the  way  in 
which  you  spoke  to  him. 

I  must  not  forget  9  to  tell  you  that  Lord  Castlereagh  insisted 
strongly  on  two  points  when  I  saw  him  ;  first  on  the  article 
of  the  treaty  which  assures  the  payment  of  the  English  debt  ; 
second  on  the  fulfilment  of  the  convention  of  April  nth 
respecting  the  Buonaparte  family  (a  matter  to  which  I  will 
revert  in  my  next  letter).  He  did  not  say  a  word  about  the 
slave-trade. 

My  gout  is  better,  I  am  in  hopes  that  this  attack  will  not 
last  so  long  as  usual.  Whereupon  I  pray  God  may  have  you, 
my  cousin,  in  His  safe  and  holy  keeping. 

Louis. 


1  Var.  :  " //  ne  m'a  parn  du  tout  eloigne  "  =  "  he  did  not  seem  at  all  dis- 
inclined." 

2  Var.  :  "  Hens  plus  a  FAtdriche  qiCa  "  =   "is  more  to  Austria  than  to." 

3  Var.  :  "  nous  nous  sommes  separes  chacun  sur  son  terrain,  mais  je  crois  "  = 
"  we  parted,  each  on  his  own  ground,  but  I  think." 

4  Var.  :  "  mais  il  m'a  dit  qu'apres  cette  premiere  ouverture/a?'/*"  a  moi  pcrsonelle- 
ment,  M.  de  Metternich  desirait  que  la  negociation  continudt  a.  Vienne  "  =  "but  he 
said  to  me,  that  after  this  first  overture,  made  to  me  personally,  M.  de  Metternich 
wished  the  negotiation  to  be  continued  at  Vienna." 

5  Var.  :  "N'jr  voyant  pas  de  difficultes  "  =  "  not  seeing  any  difficulties  in  this." 
H  Var.  :  "  copie  des  deux  pieces"  =   "a  copy  of  the  two  documents." 

7  Var.  :  " Notes"  =  "Memorandums." 

*  Var.  :  "Je  vous  dirai  en  peu  de  mots  que  votre  conversation  "  =  "I  will  tell  you 
in  a  few  words  that  your  conversation." 

9  Var.  :  "  encore  oublier  "  =  "also  forget." 


THE  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA.  61 

P.S. — I  have  just  received  your  letter  numbered  29.  I  think1 
with  you  that  the  incident  of  Murat's  memorandum  not  having 
been  delivered  is  very  satisfactory.  You  will  find  in  this  letter 
and  will  receive  further  detailed  in  the  next,  the  key  to  the 
mysterious  request  made  to  you  by  M.  de  Metternich. 


No.  30. — The  Ambassadors  of  the  King  at  the  Congress 
to  the  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  at  Paris. 

Vienna,  March  3,  181 5. 

Monsieur  le  Comte, 

By  the  fifth  article  of  the  treaty  of  Paris,  the  signatory 
powers  were  bound  to  proceed  in  future  Congress  to  frame  laws 
for  the  navigation  of  the  Rhine,  equally  favourable  to  the 
commerce  of  all  nations.  The  special  commission  charged 
with  this  part  of  the  negotiations  has  adopted  a  basis  in  con- 
formity with  the  treaty  of  Paris,  and  has  decided  among  other 
questions  of  importance  to  French  commerce,  that  the  tariffs 
should  not  be  increased,  and  that  the  powers  should  each 
separately  contribute  towards  the  revenue  accruing  from  the 
dues,  a  sum  proportionate  to  the  distance  traversed  by  the  river 
through  their  respective  territories.  France,  which  only  possesses 
one  bank,  will  have  to  share  with  the  opposite  bank  that  portion 
of  the  revenue  which  will  devolve  on  her. 

This  however  was  not  the  most  difficult  question  to  decide. 
The  right  to  participate  in  the  administration  of  the  dues  was 
denied  to  France,  and  she  was  only  to  send  a  French  delegate  to 
the  central  commission,  which  is  to  be  charged  with  that 
administration.  This  was  a  subject  of  the  hottest  discussion,  but 
the  firmness  and  constancy  which  have  won  success  for  the 
king's  embassy  in  matters  of  much  greater  importance,  have 
again  prospered  on  this  occasion.  This  is  the  more  satisfactory 
as  the  obstacles  were  difficult  to  surmount,  for  in  addition  to 
special  interests  it  was  necessary  to  overcome  the  unfriendly 
attitude  assumed  by  more  than  one  of  the  intervening  powers 
towards  France  in  this  matter. 

It  was  further  agreed  that  France  if  she  wished,  might  levy 
dues  in  advance,  on  the  navigation  between  Bale  and  Strasburg, 
and  in  this  respect  revert  to  the  convention  of  1804  under  which 
dues  were  only  payable  from  Strasburg  to  Holland.  But 
although  we  deemed  it  best  to  secure  this  right  for  ourselves,  it 
will  be  well  to  ascertain  whether  it  would  interfere  with  our 
trade,   and  whether  it   may  not   favour  land  transport  on   the 

1  Var.  :  "considere"  =  "consider." 


62  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

German  bank,  to  the  detriment  of  water  carriage.  We  there- 
fore pray  you,  Monsieur  le  Comte,  to  ask  the  Financial  Secretary 
of  State  to  consult  the  Chambers  of  Commerce  of  the  depart- 
ments bordering  on  the  Rhine,  on  this  matter.  They  will  be 
able  to  point  out  how  far  the  measure  will  be  advantageous  or 
injurious,  and  whether  it  will  be  better  to  establish  the  same 
regulations  as  exist  on  the  rest  of  the  river  or  to  give  this 
portion  unlimited  licence. 

You  will  find  attached  hereto,  Monsieur  le  Comte,  a  memo- 
randum which  we  beg  you  will  read  carefully.  The  remarks  in 
it  respecting  the  conduct  of  a  custom-house  official  are  of  no 
importance,  but  we  thought  we  ought  to  accept  the  proposals 
of  the  bureaux  of  Neubourg  and  Germersheim,  as  they  put  a 
stop  to  an  abuse  of  which  the  merchants  of  Strasburg  were  the 
principal  victims.  We  allude  to  the  increase  in  the  tariff  of  dues 
between  Strasburg  and  Mannheim.  Formerly  there  was  only 
one  bureau,  that  of  Neubourg,  for  both  towns  ;  the  allies  estab- 
lished another  at  Germersheim.  France  being  no  longer  possessed 
of  the  territory  between  Strasburg  and  Mannheim  can  only  there- 
fore levy  dues  for  that  portion  of  her  former  territory  through 
which  the  Rhine  flows.  This  demand  is  fair,  and  we  beg  you, 
M.  le  Comte,  to  consult  with  the  Minister  of  Finance  on  this 
matter  as  well  as  on  the  preceding  ones,  so  as  to  put  in  operation 
the  arrangement  between  the  bureaux  of  Germersheim  and 
Neubourg  dealt  with  in  the  memorandum,  and  apportion  the 
collection  in  such  a  manner,  that  France  and  the  provisional 
directory  of  customs,  shall  only  receive  between  them  the  sum 
due  by  the  commerce  of  Mannheim  and  Strasburg,  in  accordance 
with  the  convention  of  1804  and  proportionate  to  the  distance 
traversed  by  the  river  through  their  respective  territories. 

Be  pleased  to  accept.  .  .  . 


No.  31. — The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  King 

Louis  XVIII. 
Sire, 

The  Duke  of  Saxe-Teschen,1  who  went  as  far  as  Briinn 
to  meet  the  King  of  Saxony,  has  returned  here  this  morning. 
The  king  rests  to-day  about  two  stages  from  Vienna,  and  will 

1  Albert,  Due  de  Sax-Teschen,  son  of  August  II.,  Elector  of  Saxony  and  King 
of  Poland,  was  consequently  the  uncle  of  Louis  XVIII.  and  of  King  Frederic- 
Augustus.  Born  in  1738,  he  married  in  1766  the  Archduchess  Marie-Christine, 
daughter  of  the  Emperor  Francis  I.  He  was  made  Governor  of  the  Netherlands, 
commanded  the  Austrian  troops  in  that  country  in  1792  and  laid  siege  to  Lille.  He 
became  a  Field  Marshal  and  died  in  1822. 


THE  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA.  63 

await  at  Presburg  the  departure  of  the  two  northern  sovereigns, 
who  would  certainly  feel  embarrassed  by  his  presence  here  and 
whom  he  himself  probably  has  no  wish  to  meet.  It  was  thought 
that  he  would  be  too  far  away  at  Briinn  ;  there  was  however  no 
suitable  residence  to  offer  him  between  Briinn  and  Vienna,  hence 
the  preference  for  Presburg,  notwithstanding  the  reasons  I  had 
the  honour  to  communicate  to  your  Majesty  in  one  of  my 
former  letters. 

The  Emperor  of  Russia  talks  of  leaving,  and  preparations 
for  his  departure  have  even  commenced.  Report  fixed  it  for  the 
14th  of  this  month,  then  the  17th,  and  now  they  talk  of  the  20th. 
The  emperor  has  promised  to  be  at  home  for  the  Russian 
Easter,  and  I  believe  this  is  the  only  one  of  all  the  promises  he 
has  made  that  he  will  keep,  for  he  would  find  it  inconvenient 
not  to  do  so.  When  he  is  once  gone,  the  other  sovereigns  will 
not  remain  either.  The  Emperor  of  Austria  who  for  his  part, 
has  for  some  time  meditated  a  journey  into  his  Italian  provinces, 
does  not  wish  to  postpone  it  beyond  the  month  of  April.  Thus 
the  necessity  or  the  wish  of  every  one  to  leave,  will  hasten  the 
conclusion  of  affairs. 

I  have,  as  I  promised  M.  de  Metternich,  allowed  those  of 
Italy  to  remain  dormant  until  I  hear  of  Lord  Castlereagh's  visit 
to  Paris,  and  his  arrival  in  London. 

Austria  and  Bavaria  are  agreed  on  all  but  one  point,  that  of 
Salzburg,  which  Austria  wants  entirely,  while  Bavaria  desires  to 
retain  a  part.  I  have  strongly  advised  each  of  the  two  negotia- 
tors separately,  to  endeavour  to  come  to  some  understanding, 
rather  than  incur  the  intervention  of  Russia  and  Prussia,  which 
will  become  inevitable  if  they  do  not  agree.  I  trust  my  advice 
will  bear  fruit,  and  I  gave  it  in  order  to  avoid  the  necessity  of 
having  to  pronounce  in  favour  of  one,  which  I  could  l  not  do, 
without  displeasing  the  other,  while  it  is  almost  equally 
important  to  us  to  be  friends  with  both. 

Swiss  affairs  are  or  will  shortly  be  laid,  by  the  commission 
which  has  prepared  them,  before  the  Conference  by  which  they 
have  to  be  confirmed.  There  is  no  longer  a  question  of  retaining 
Porentruy  ;  this  together  with  the  bishopric  of  Bale  is  given  as 
we  desired  to  the  canton  of  Berne  ;  the  fate  of  the  Valtelline 
alone  remains  undecided  until  Italian  matters  are  settled  ;  even 
Russia  has  agreed  to  this. 

Laharpe,  the  philosopher,  who  thinks  he  never  can  do  harm 
enough  to  the  Bernese,  took  it  into  his  head  to  exclude  the 
canton  of  Berne   from   the  Supreme  Executive  Council  of  the 

1  Var. :    "  pou vait  "  =  "  would. " 


64  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

Federation,1  and  he  succeeded  in  getting  his  illustrious  pupil  to 
support  this  foolish  idea,  in  consequence  of  which  a  Russian 
minister  went  to  one  of  the  ministers  of  Ferdinand  IV.  whom 
he  did  not  know  and  said  to  him,  "  Try  and  obtain  the  consent 
of  France  to  the  exclusion  of  the  canton  of  Berne  from  the 
number  of  the  executive  cantons,  and  the  Emperor  Alexander, 
who  is  singularly  desirous  to  be  satisfied  on  this  point,  will  be  on 
your  side."  The  same  minister  went  on  the  same  day  to  M.  de 
Metternich  to  whom  he  said,  "  The  Emperor  Alexander  has  not 
yet  made  up  his  mind  about  Murat,  he  will  aid  you  to  uphold 
him  as  you  wish,  if  you  will  agree  that  the  canton  of  Berne  shall 
not  be  one  of  the  executive  cantons."  M.  de  Metternich  replied 
that  such  a  proposal  was  not  tenable.3  I  on  my  part  rejected  it 
the  moment  he  uttered  the  first  words.  The  Russians  have 
consequently  withdrawn  their  scheme,  and  have  by  this  attempt 
only  gained  the  disgrace  that  attaches  to  such  gross  duplicity, 
which  they  apparently  hold  to  be  most  admirable  diplomatic 
finesse. 

When  the  Emperor  Alexander  first  asked  for  the  greater 
part  of  the  duchy  of  Warsaw,  he  said  it  was  in  order  to  form  a 
kingdom  to  console  the  Poles,  by  giving  them  a  semblance  of 
their  ancient  political  existence,  and  to  atone  as  far  as  possible 
for  the  outrage  done  to  morality  by  the  division.  Subsequently 
he  abandoned  this  point,  and  announced4  that  he  would  give  to 
that  portion  of  the  duchy  of  Warsaw  which  he  should  obtain, 
a  special  constitution,  but  now  he  wavers  even  as  to  this.  Prince 
Adam  Czartoryski,  whose  penetration  does  not  nearly  equal  his 
loyalty,  begins  to  see  that  he  has  been  nursing  a  chimerical  hope, 
and  of  this  he  complains. 

It  is  probable  that  the  Emperor  Alexander  will  get  out  of 
the  difficulty  with  the  Poles,  by  stopping  only  a  moment  in 
Warsaw,  and  with  Prince  Czartoryski,  by  parting  from  him 
coldly  and  avoiding  all  explanations.  Your  Majesty  will  be 
able  to  judge  how  much  the  emperor  will  be  regretted  when  he 
leaves  here,  by  what  happened  a  few  days  ago. 

1  The  Act  of  Mediation  of  1803  had  decided  that  the  Helvetian  Diet  should  meet 
alternately  at  Friburg,  Soleure,  Bern,  Basle,  Zurich,  and  Lucerne.  The  cantons  of 
which  these  towns  were  the  capitals  then  became  cantons  directeurs  for  one  year. 
The  avoyer  or  burgomaster  of  the  can/on  direcleur  then  became  by  right  tauda- 
mann  of  Switzerland  for  one  year.  He  had  charge  of  the  seal  of  the  Confederation. 
All  foreign  ministers  wtre  accredited  to  him.  He  had  a  right  of  police  over  the 
other  cantons  and  also  to  call  out  the  troops.  Laharpe  tried  to  deprive  Bern  of  the 
right  to  become  in  her  turn  a  canton  directeur. 

-  It  will  be  remembered  that  M.  de  Laharpe  had  been  tutor  to  the  Emperor 
Alexander. 

3  Var. :  "que  ce  qui  Ton  demandait  "  =  "  that  that  which  was  asked  for." 

4  Var. :  ':  mais  annonca  "  =  "  but  announced." 


THE  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA.  65 

In  the  difficulty  of  knowing  how  to  pass  the  time,  now  that 
there  are  no  more  dances,  and  how  best  to  overcome  the  ennui 
with  which  every  one  is  assailed,  all  sorts  of  games  and  amuse- 
ments are  being  started.  One  of  them  which  has  become  very 
much  the  fashion,  is  getting  up  lotteries  at  the  different  reunions. 
The  night  before  last,  a  lottery  of  this  kind  took  place  at  Princess 
Marie  Esterhazy's.1  She  wished  with  much  ingenuity  (which  has 
been  severely  criticized)  to  arrange  matters  in  such  a  way,  that 
the  four  principal  prizes  should  fall  to  ladies  specially  taken 
notice  of  by  the  Emperor  of  Russia  and  the  King  of  Prussia, 
both  of  whom  were  present.  But  this  arrangement  was  upset  by 
Prince  Metternich's  little  daughter,  who  went  up  to  the  basket 
containing  the  tickets  and  drew  one  out  of  her  turn.  This  ticket 
was  found  to  entitle  her  to  the  most  magnificent  prize  of  all 
which  the  Emperor  of  Russia  had  brought.  The  emperor  could 
not  hide  his  annoyance,  to  the  great  amusement  of  all  those 
present  (your  Majesty  will  remember  that  the  emperor  latterly 
did  not  attend  any  of  M.  de  Metternich's  balls  and  did  not  even 
speak  to  him  when  he  met  him  elsewhere).  Everything  went 
wrong  with  the  emperor  that  evening.  A  prize  brought  by  the 
young  Princess  d'Auersperg,  whom  the  emperor  rather  affected, 
was  won  by  one  of  the  King  of  Prussia's  aides-de-camp.  The 
emperor  insisted,  he  even  went  so  far  as  to  point  out  that  it 
had  been  intended  for  her,  but  the  aide-de-camp  replied  that  it 
was  far  too  precious  for  him  to  give  up.  This  delighted  every 
one  ;  so  much  so,  that  the  emperor  is  beginning  to  find  the  evening 
parties  in  Vienna  not  quite  so  pleasant  as  he  did  on  his  first 
arrival. 

I  have  just  seen  the  detail  of  the  troops  that  are  marching 
towards  Italy.  There  are  120  battalions  and  84  squadrons, 
making  in  all  120,000  infantry  and  15,000  cavalry.  The  generals 
in   command    are   Bianchi,2    Radetzky,3    Frimont,4   and  Jerome 

1  Marie-Josephine  de  Lichtenstein,  born  in  1768,  married  in  1783  to  Nicholas, 
Prince  Esterhazy  de  Galantha,  Austrian  Master  of  Ordnance. 

-  Bianchi  was  a  Field  Marshal  Lieutenant  in  181 5.  He  commanded  an  Austrian 
corps  at  Leipsig  in  1813,  and  in  1814  he  was  placed  in  command  of  the  troops  sent 
to  operate  against  Lyons.  In  1815  he  directed  the  campaign  against  Murat  and  took 
Naples.     He  was  made  Governor  of  Galicia  in  1815  (1768-1855). 

:t  General  Radetzky  was  born  in  1766,  entered  the  army  in  1788,  became  chief  of 
the  staff  of  Prince  de  Schwartzenberg  in  1814.  In  1831  he  took  command  of  the 
Austrian  troops  in  Lombardy,  remained  a  long  time  in  that  country  and  had  to  put 
down  the  insurrection  there  during  1848- 1849.  He  retired  in  1854,  and  died  the 
following  year.     He  had  been  Field  Marshal  since  1836. 

4  Jean-Philipe,  Comte  de  Frimont,  Prince  d'Antrodoco,  was  born  in  1756  in 
Belgium  and  belonged  to  a  French  family.  He  served  first  in  France,  emigrated  in 
1791,  and  rejoined  the  army  of  Conde.  He  then  entered  the  Austrian  service  and 
became  Field  Marshal  Lieutenant.  In  181 2  he  commanded  an  Austrian  auxiliary 
corps  of  the  Grand  Army.     He  subsequently  went  through  the  campaign  of  1813  and 

VOL.  III.  F 


66  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLE  YRAND. 

Collorido.1       There    is    besides    a   reserve    of   50,000   men    in 
Carinthia,  Styria,  .... 

General  Pozzo  is  waiting  a  last  despatch  from  the  emperor 
before  starting. 

I  have  the  honour  to  be 


No.  35-— The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  King 

Louis  XVIII. 

Vienna,  March  7,  181 5. 

Sire, 

I  feel  sure  your  Majesty  is  already  aware,  or  will  have 
learnt  before  the  receipt  of  this  letter,  that  Buonaparte  has 
quitted  the  island  of  Elba,  but  in  any  case  I  hasten  to  transmit 
the  news2  to  your  Majesty. 

I  first  heard  of  it  in  a  letter  from  M.  de  Metternich,  to  which 
I  replied,  that  I  saw  from  the  dates  that  Buonaparte's  escape  was 
connected  with  Murat's  request  to  Austria,  to  allow  his  troops  to 
march  through  his  provinces.  The  Duke  of  Wellington  shortly 
afterwards  sent  me  a  despatch  from  Lord  Burghersh,3  the  English 
minister  at  Florence^  of  which  I  have  the  honour  to  transmit 
herewith  a  translation,  as  well  as  an  extract  from  a  letter  from 
the  vice-consul  at  Ancona,  also  sent  me  by  Lord  Wellington. 

Buonaparte  embarked  at  Porto-Ferrajo,  at  nine  o'clock  on 
the  evening  of  the  26th  of  February.  He  had  with  him  about 
twelve  hundred  men,  ten  pieces  of  artillery,  six  of  them  field- 
pieces,  and  some  horses,  and  provisions  for  five  or  six  days.  The 
English,  who  had  undertaken  to  watch  his  movements,  have  done 
it  so  carelessly  that  they  will  find  some  difficulty  in  excusing 
themselves.  The  direction  he  has  taken  towards  the  north  seems 
to  indicate  that  he  intends  proceeding  to  Genoa  or  the  south  of 
France. 

1814,  and  commanded  the  army  of  occupation  in  France  until  1818.     In  1821  he 
was  sent  to  put  down  the  insurrection  in  the  kingdom  of  Naples.     He  died  in  1831. 

1  Jerome,  Comte  de  Collorido,  second  son  of  the  minister  to  the  Emperor  Leo- 
pold II.,  born  in  1775.  He  particularly  distinguished  himself  in  1813.  He  com- 
manded an  Austrian  corps  at  Dresden  and  won  a  victory  at  Kulm.  After  the  war  he 
was  made  Master  of  Ordnance,  and  Commander-in-Chief  in  Bohemia. 

2  The  news  had  reached  Vienna  on  March  6.  It  was  not  made  public  till 
March  11. 

3  John  Fane,  Earl  of  Westmoreland  (1784-1859)  known  till  his  father's  death 
(1841)  under  the  title  of  Lord  Burghersh,  first  entered  the  army  and  served  in  Sicily 
and  Portugal.  In  1 813  he  was  attached  to  the  staff  of  de  Schwartzenberg.  In  18 14 
he  was  appointed  Minister  at  Florence.  In  1822  he  became  Privy  Councillor  and 
was  then  sent  as  Ambassador  to  Naples  (1825),  then  to  Berlin  (1841),  where  he 
remained  till  185 1,  and  finally  to  Vienna.     He  retired  in  1855. 

4  Suppressed  in  the  text  of  the  archives. 


THE  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA.  67 

I  cannot  believe  he  would  dare  to  make  any  attempt  on  our 
southern  provinces.  He  would  not  risk  doing  so,  except  in 
consequence  of  such  favourable  intelligence  as  there  is  no  reason 
to  suppose  he  has  received.  It  is  however  none  the  less  necessary 
to  take  every  possible  precaution  in  that  quarter,  and  to  send 
picked  and  perfectly  safe  men  there.  As  for  the  rest,  any  enter- 
prise of  his  against  France  will  be  that  of  a  bandit  ;  as  such  he 
will  have  to  be  dealt  with,  and  all  measures  permissible  against 
brigands  ought  to  be  employed  against  him. 

It  seems  to  me  much  more  probable  *  that  he  intends  oper- 
ating in  the  north  of  Italy.  The  Duke  of  Wellington  tells  me 
that  there  are  two  thousand  English  and  three  thousand 
Italians  in  Genoa  who  fought  in  Spain  2  and  then  entered  the 
King  of  Sardinia's  service  ;  he  has  no  doubt  but  that  these 
troops  who  fought  in  Spain,  and  who,  he  says  are  admirable,  will 
do  their  duty. 

The  King  of  Sardinia  is  at  Genoa  just  now,  and  must  have 
his  guard  there.  There  are  also  three  English  frigates  in  the 
harbour.  If  therefore  Buonaparte  made  an  attempt  on  Genoa 
with  his  twelve  hundred  men  it  would  fail.  The  only  fear  is 
that  he  may  cross  the  mountains  towards  Parma  and  Lombardy, 
where  his  presence  would  be  the  signal  for  a  long  planned  revo- 
lution, which  the  shameful  behaviour  of  the  Austrians  and  the 
false  policy  of  their  cabinet  has  only  too  greatly  favoured,  and 
which,  supported  by  the  troops  of  Murat  with  whom  no  doubt 
Buonaparte  is  in  accord,  would  set  the  whole  of  Italy  in  a  blaze. 
The  Prince  of  Schwartzenberg  and  M.  de  Metternich  have  both 
told  me  that  if  Buonaparte  was  to  reach  the  north  of  Italy  it 
would  embarrass  them  terribly,  as  they  are  by  no  means  yet 
prepared.  Express  messengers  were  sent  last  night  to  all  the 
troops  destined  for  Italy,  to  hasten  their  departure  ;  but  what- 
ever despatch  these  forces  may  use  it  will  be  quite  a  month  or 
more  ere  they  reach  their  destination,  and  many  events  may 
happen  in  a  month. 

It  appears  that  the  Prince  de  Schwartzenberg  will  himself  be 
ordered  to  Italy.  In  any  case  your  Majesty  will  assuredly  con- 
sider it  necessary  to  concentrate  sufficient  troops  in  the  south,  to 
act  according  to  circumstances. 

The  results  of  this  occurrence  cannot  yet  be  foreseen,  but 
they  may  prove  fortunate  if  they  can  only  be  turned  to  good 
account.  I  will  do  all  that  in  me  lies  to  prevent  any  delay  here 
and  to  make  the  congress  come  to  some  resolution  which  will 
reduce  Buonaparte  from  the  rank  which,  through  some  unaccount- 

1  Var. :  "  vraisemblable "  =  "probable." 
-  Suppressed  in  the  text  of  the  archives. 

F    2 


68  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

able  weakness  he   was   allowed  to  retain,  and  thus   place  him 
beyond  the  possibility  of  preparing  fresh  disasters  for  Europe. 

There  has  been  some  deliberation  as  to  the  method  of  making 
the  King  of  Saxony  acquainted  with  the  cessions  which  the 
powers  have  decided  he  must  make  to  Prussia  and  to  which  his 
consent  is  necessary.  It  has  been  decided  to  prepare  an  extract 
from  the  general  protocol  containing  these  and  embody  it 
in  a  private  protocol,  which,  out  of  greater  consideration,  will 
be  delivered  to  the  King  by  the  Duke  of  Wellington,  the  Prince 
de  Metternich,  and  myself.  For  this  purpose  we  shall  all  three 
go  to  Presburg  the  day  after  to-morrow. 

Refusal  on  the  part  of  the  King  of  Saxony  would  not  only 
be  futile  as  regards  himself,  but  very  vexatious  for  every  one, 
especially  at  present,  when  it  is  most  important  to  unite  all  views 
and  opinions  against  the  enterprises  of  the  man  from  Elba.  We 
will  do  all  we  can  to  induce  the  King  of  Saxony  to  submit  with 
a  good  grace  to  the  exigencies  of  circumstances. 

The  affairs  of  Switzerland  are  at  length  concluded.  The 
Russians,  compelled  to  give  up  the  idea  of  excluding  the  canton 
of  Berne  from  the  number  of  directorial  cantons,  demanded  that 
it  should  at  least  be  required  to  modify  its  constitution  by  the 
introduction  of  a  representative  party.  All  the  powers  agreed  to 
this  request,  which  is  in  accordance  with  the  spirit  of  the  times,, 
and  France  could  not  well  refuse  it. 

The  letters  of  M.  de  Watteville1  and  M.  Mulinen 2  show  that 
this  demand  is  not  of  a  nature  to  raise  serious  difficulties  in 
Berne.     This  also  is  the  opinion  of  M.  de  Zerleeder. 
I  have  the  honour  to  be 


No.  25.— King  Louis  XVIII.  to  the  Prince  de 

Talleyrand. 

Paris,  March  7   18 15. 

Mon  Cousin, 

I  have  received  your  letter  number  30.  I  believe 
that  M.  de  Metternich's  declaration,  with  which  under  other 
circumstances  I  should  not  be  very  well  satisfied,  is  explained  by 

1  Nicholas-Rodolphe  de  Watteville,  a  Swiss  statesman,  born  in  1760,  member  of 
the  Grand  Council  of  1796,  member  of  the  Swiss  deputation  that  went  to  Paris  in 
1802,  was  landamann  in  1804,  181 1,  and  1815.     He  died  in  1832. 

2  Frederic  de  Mulinen,  born  in  1760,  was  a  member  of  the  Grand  Council  before 
the  Revolution.  In  1802  he  was  one  of  the  leaders  of  the  insurrectionary  movements 
and  came  to  Paris  as  member  of  the  deputation  :  again  entered  the  Grand  Council 
and  was  made  avoyer.  Later  on  he  became  President  of  the  Confederation,  and  died 
in  1833. 


THE  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA.  69 

what  I  told  you  the  other  day  and  by  the  documents  sent  here- 
with. The  instructions  will  sufficiently  acquaint  you  with  my 
wishes,  so  that  it  is  superfluous  to  add  more  here. 

I  had  intended  to-day  to  resume  the  subject  of  the  convention 
of  the  1 1  th  of  April  last.  Buonaparte  has  spared  me  the  trouble. 
Before  receiving  this  despatch  you  will  no  doubt  have  heard  of 
his  audacious  attempt.  I  have  at  once  taken  all  the  measures  I 
considered  best  to  make  him  repent  it.  I  count  with  confidence 
on  their  success.  I  this  morning  received  the  ambassadors,  and 
addressing  them  each  in  turn,  I  requested  them  to  inform  their 
courts  that  they  had  seen  me,  and  that  I  was  not  at  all  disquieted 
by  the  news  I  had  received,  being  fully  persuaded  that  it  will  no 
more  upset  the  tranquillity  of  Europe  than  it  has  my  own. 

My  gout  has  improved  greatly  since  the  other  day. 

Whereupon,  my  cousin,  may  God  have  you  in  His  safe  and 
holy  keeping. 

Louis. 

No.  26.1— King  Louis  XVIII.  to  the  Prince  de 

Talleyrand. 

Paris,  March  11,  1 81 5. 
Mon  Cousin, 

I  cannot  write  to  you  as  to  the  position  in  which  I  now 
find  myself,  but  I  send  the  Due  de  Rohan  Montbazon,2  who  will 
give  you  all  the  information  you  desire.  I  hope  he  will  be 
useful  to  you  with  the  Emperor  of  Austria. 

My  confidence  in  you  leaves  me  no  room  to  doubt  that  you 
will  under  these  circumstances  do  all  that  such  important  interests 
as  those  which  the  Due  de  Rohan  will  communicate  to  you, 
require. 

Whereupon  I  pray  God  may  have  you,  my  cousin,  in  His 
safe  and  holy  keeping. 

Louis. 


No.  33. — Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  King  Louis  XVIII. 

Vienna,  March  12,  181 5. 
Sire, 

I  have  received  the  letter  of  the  third  of  this  month 
with  which  your  Majesty  has  deigned  to  honour  me.  I  await 
that   which   will   contain   the   instructions  relative   to  the  affair 

1  This  letter  is  not  found  in  M.  Pallain's  collection. 

2  Charles- Alexis-Gabriel,  Due  de  Rohan  Montbazon,  born  in  1764,  emigrated  in 
1791,  entered  the  Austrian  service  and  became  Field  Marshal.  He  returned  to 
France  in  18 14  and  became  a  peer  of  France. 


70  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLE  YRAND. 

with  M.  de  Metternich,  who  has  already  asked  me  if  I  was  not 
yet  in  a  position  to  deal  with  it.  The  mystery  in  which  he 
wished  to  envelop  it,  the  step  he  has  taken  with  your  Majesty 
unknown  to  me,  and  his  wish  to  arrange  it  with  me  alone,  all  go 
to  prove  that  he  knows  as  well  as  any  one,  the  many  objections 
to  which  his  scheme  is  open.  In  acquiescing  in  it  your  Majesty 
will  certainly  be  making  a  great  sacrifice,  and  in  my  opinion 
even  one  which  cannot  but  be  of  consequence.  I  admit  never- 
theless it  would  not  seem  too  great  to  me,  if  Austria  in  return 
would  honestly  join  us  against  Murat,  and  if  M.  de  Metternich  is 
sincere  in  his  offer. 

On  Wednesday  evening,  the  Duke  of  Wellington,  M.  de 
Metternich  and  I,  went  to  Presburg,  where  we  arrived  at  four 
in  the  morning.  At  mid-day  the  King  of  Saxony  received  us 
together.  He  took  the  protocol  which  M.  de  Metternich  gave 
him,  and  handed  it  unopened  to  his  minister  who  was  present, 
saying  that  he  would  acquaint  himself  with  its  contents,  and 
then  turning  to  us,  addressed  a  few  civil  words  but  in  a  very 
cold  and  distant  manner.  At  one  o'clock  we  had  the  honour  of 
dining  with  him  and  the  Queen.  In  the  evening  he  received  us 
separately,  M.  de  Metternich  at  four  o'clock,  myself  at  five,  and 
the  Duke  of  Wellington  at  six.  Several  times  he  expressed 
sentiments  of  gratitude  to  your  Majesty.  Next  day  we  all 
three  had  a  very  long  conference  with  his  minister,  Comte 
d'  Einsiedel,  who  does  not  understand  French  very  well  and  speaks 
it  still  worse.  At  these  interviews  we  exhausted  all  the  reasons 
which  should  induce  the  king  to  consent  to  the  reductions  agreed 
upon  by  the  powers  for  the  benefit  of  Prussia. 

The  king  and  his  minister  overwhelmed  us  with  objections  ; 
they  seemed  to  nourish  the  hope  that  all  which  had  been  settled 
was  still  open  to  negotiation.  This  hope  being  again  expressed 
in  a  memorandum  addressed  to  us  by  the  king's  minister  on  the 
Saturday,  we  deemed  it  necessary  to  crush  it  by  a  positive 
declaration  contained  in  the  reply  which  we  sent  him  just  as  we 
were  leaving  Presburg.  I  have  the  honour  to  send  herewith 
copies  of  these  two  documents. 

The  Prussians  have  demanded,  that  that  part  of  Saxony 
which  has  been  given  to  them,  should  at  once  pass  from  a  military 
occupation  to  a  regular  administration,  and  that  the  other  part 
should  be  provisionally  held  under  military  occupation.  This 
demand,  which  it  would  be  difficult  to  refuse,  will  probably 
determine  the  King  of  Saxony  to  assent. 

According  to  the  information  we  have  received,  he  wishes 
to  consent,  but  at  the  same  time  wants  to  appear  to  his  people 
to  have  yielded  only  to  stern  and  overpowering  necessity. 


THE  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA.  7i 

We  received  intelligence  at  Presburg  that  Buonaparte,  re- 
pulsed by  a  cannonade  at  Antibes,  which  he  had  summoned  to 
surrender,  had  disembarked  in  the  Bay  of  Juan.1  These  are  the 
last  news  we  have  of  him.  It  is  thought  that  he  cannot  have 
had  any  correspondence  either  with  Marseilles  or  Toulon,  since 
he  did  not  go  there,  nor  with  Antibes,  where  he  was  repulsed. 
This  intelligence  is  very  reassuring.  But  the  powers  have  none 
the  less  thought  over  the  best  means  of  offering  aid  to  your 
Majesty,  should  it  be  needed.  An  order  to  concentrate  and 
hold  themselves  in  readiness  has  been  sent  to  the  English, 
Prussian,  and  Austrian  troops,  which  are  in  the  neighbourhood 
of  the  Rhine.  The  Emperor  of  Russia  has  directed  his  army, 
which  had  returned  to  the  Vistula,  to  draw  near  the  Oder  and 
the  Elbe. 

As  long  as  we  were  ignorant  of  Buonaparte's  destination, 
or  what  he  intended  doing,  no  declaration  against  him  could 
be  issued.  We  however  took  action  as  soon  as  we  knew 
this. 

The  document  has  been  drawn  up  by  the  French  legation, 
and  sent  to  the  Duke  of  Wellington  and  the  Prince  de  Metternich. 
It  will  be  read  to-morrow  in  committee  of  the  eight  powers  who 
signed  the  treaty  of  Paris,  where  it  will  probably  undergo  some 
alterations.  When  it  has  been  agreed  on,  I  shall  have  the 
honour  to  transmit  it  to  your  Majesty  by  a  courier,  who  will 
leave  a  copy  with  the  prefect  of  Strasburg,  to  whom  I  will  send 
orders  to  print  and  distribute  it  both  in  his  own  and  the  neigh- 
bouring departments.  I  will  do  the  same  to  Metz  and  Chalons. 
I  will  also  tell  M.  de  Saint-Marsan  to  take  the  same  steps  to 
promulgate  it  in  Nice,  Savoy,  and  Dauphine. 

The  Emperor  of  Russia,  who  on  the  whole  proves  generally 
staunch  in  present  circumstances,  is  despatching  General  Pozzo 
with  a  letter  to  your  Majesty,  to  whom  he  offers  all  his  troops. 
This  is  aid  which  it  would  be  sad  if  France  could  not  dispense 
with,  and  yet  it  should  not  be  positively  refused.  Your  Majesty 
will  surely  not  feel  obliged  to  accept  it,  except  in  an  extreme 
case,  which  I  hope  will  not  present  itself. 

Your  Majesty  has  no  doubt  ordered  troops  into  the  south. 
If  I  might  venture  to  suggest  a  chief  to  place  at  their  head,  I 
would  mention  Marshal  Macdonald,  a  man  of  high  honour, 
whom  one  can  trust  completely  as  possessing  the  confidence  of 

1  Napoleon,  who  disembarked  at  three  o'clock  on  the  1st  of  March  in  the  Gulf  of 
Juan,  immediately  sent  a  detachment  of  twenty-five  men  to  secure  the  batteries  on 
the  coast.  The  company  arrived  at  Antibes,  the  Commandant,  Colonel  Cuneo- 
d'Ornano  allowed  them  to  enter  and  then  made  prisoners  of  them,  despite  the  ferment 
among  his  own  soldiers.  This  was  the  sum  total  of  the  affray  at  Antibes.  Not  a 
single  cannon  was  fired. 


72  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

the  army,  and  because,  having  signed  the  treaty  of  April  I  ith  for 
Buonaparte,  his  example  in  marching  against  him  would  carry 
great  weight. 

I  have  seen  a  list  of  the  general  officers  named  for  the 
command  of  the  30,000  men  whom  your  Majesty  has  ordered  to 
assemble  between  Lyons  and  Chambery.  Several  of  the  names 
are  unknown  to  me,  but  there  are  some  in  whom  I  could  have 
no  confidence,  among  others  General  Maurice-Matthieu,1  who  is, 
I  believe,  a  devoted  adherent  of  Joseph  Buonaparte. 

His  presence  in  the  Pays  de  Vaud  cannot  but  be  dangerous 
at  this  moment.  I  will  work  to  get  him  removed  by  the  aid  of 
England  and  Russia,  and  also  Austria,  who  has  some  influence  in 
the  canton.2  The  Emperor  of  Russia  (I  must  do  him  this  justice) 
has  already,  of  his  own  accord,  written  to  the  new  cantons  in  a 
manner  very  satisfactory  to  us.3  I  have  informed  M.  Auguste 
de  Talleyrand 4  of  this,  advising  him  to  discuss  it  with  Baron 
Kriidener,0  the  Russian  cJiarge  d'affaires. 

This  incident  of  Buonaparte's  appearance  in  France,  in  other 
respects  so  disagreeable,  will  at  least  have  this  advantage,  that 
it  will  hasten  the  conclusion  of  matters  here.  It  has  redoubled 
the  zeal  and  eagerness  of  every  one.  The  deed  committee  will 
begin  its  work  in  earnest.  Thus  the  end  of  our  sojourn  here 
may  be  shortened  by  several  weeks. 

I  have  the  honour  to  be 


1  Maurice  Mathieu,  Comte  de  la  Redorte,  was  an  officer  of  cavalry  in  1789.  He 
became  General  of  Division  in  1799,  had  command  both  in  Germany  and  Italy  and 
passed  thence  into  Spain,  where  he  was  made  Governor  of  Barcelona  and  Chief  Com- 
mandant of  Catalonia.  He  was  made  a  peer  of  France  in  1819.  General  Mathieu 
had  married  Mademoiselle  Clary  and  was  therefore  brother-in-law  to  King  Joseph 
and  Bernadotte, 

2  Joseph  was  at  Prangins  when  he  heard  of  his  brother's  disembarkation.  He 
quitted  this  chateau  on  the  evening  of  the  19th,  and  passed  the  frontier  during  the 
night.  It  was  fortunate  that  he  departed  so  quickly,  for  the  next  morning  a  Commis- 
sary of  the  Federal  Government  arrived  with  a  picket  of  soldiers,  to  take  possession 
of  his  person  and  conduct  him  to  Bern.  In  acting  thus,  Switzerland  acceded  to  the 
pressure  put  on  her  by  the  foreign  ministers,  who  were  accredited  to  the  Diet. — 
{Memoirs  of  King  jfoseph,  Vol.  X.) 

3  Var. :   "qui  nous  a  convenu  "="  which  suited  us." 

4  At  that  time  French  ambassador  in  Switzerland. 

5  Alexis  Constantine,  Baron  de  Kriidener,  born  in  1774,  a  Russian  statesman, 
formerly  secretary  to  the  Embassy  at  Madrid  and  Warsaw,  then  Minister  at  Curland, 
Ambassador  at  Vienna  (1784),  at  Copenhagen  (1786),  and  at  Berlin  (1800).  He  died 
in  1802.  He  had,  in  1783,  married  Mademoiselle  Wietinghoff,  who  as  Baronne  de 
Kriidener,  acquired  a  well-known  celebrity. 


THE  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA.  73 


No.  34. — The   Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  King 

Louis  XVIII. 

Vienna,  March  13,1  181 5. 
Sire, 

I  have  just  come  from  the  conference,  where  the  declara- 
tion, which  I  had  the  honour  of  mentioning  to  your  Majesty  in  my 
letter  of  yesterday,  has  been  signed.  It  was  drawn  up  this 
morning  in  the  conference  of  the  five  powers.  This  evening  it 
was  submitted  to  that  of  the  eight  powers,  who  adopted  it.  I 
hasten  to  forward  it  to  your  Majesty.  I  am  also  sending  copies 
to  the  prefects  of  Strasburg,  Besangon,  Lyons,  Nancy,  Metz,  and 
Chalons-sur-Marne,  asking  them  to  print  and  circulate  it  in  their 
respective  departments  and  amongst  the  prefects  of  the  neigh- 
bouring ones.  I  feel  assured  your  Majesty  will  deem  it  advisable 
to  order  its  publication  in  all  parts  of  the  kingdom.  M.  de 
Saint-Marsan,  to  whom  I  have  sent  a  copy,  is  forwarding  it  to 
Geneva  and  Nice. 

I  think  the  strength  of  this  document  leaves  nothing  to  be 
desired,  and  I  hope  it  will  not  fail  to  produce  the  required  effect, 
not  only  in  France,  but  throughout  Europe,  where  it  will  be 
widely  distributed. 

One  of  Buonaparte's  sisters  (Pauline  Borghese),  who  crossed 
over  from  the  island  of  Elba  to  the  continent  of  Italy,  was 
stopped  at  Lucca,2  and  Jerome,  who  was  at  Trieste,  will  be 
taken  with  Joseph  to  Gratz,  as  soon  as  the  Canton  de  Vaud 
has  complied  with  the  demand  I  have  desired  M.  de  Talley- 
rand to  make,  jointly  with  the  Austrian  and  Russian  ministers. 
Austrian  and  Russian  officers  bear  the  request  to  the  Pays  de 
Vaud,  and  are  instructed  to  conduct  Joseph  Buonaparte  as  far 
as  Gratz. 

Orders  have  been  issued  to  occupy  the  island  of  Elba  in  the 
name  of  the  allies. 

Thus  all  tends  towards  the  same  end,  with  a  unanimity  and 
concord  between  all  the  powers  such  as  I  do  not  believe  has 
ever  before  been  witnessed. 

I  have  made  inquiries  about  the  generals  nominated  to  com- 

1  Var.  :  March  14. 

-  We  have  nowhere  found  this  arrest  of  the  Princess  Pauline  confirmed,  which 
would  only  have  been  a  useless  violation  of  personal  rights.  It  is  affirmed  on  the 
contrary,  that  she  passed  the  period  of  the  Hundred  Days  at  Naples  and  at  Rome. 
As  for  King  Jerome,  he  certainly  was  at  Trieste,  together  with  the  queen,  when  at 
the  moment  of  being  carried  off  by  the  Austrian  police,  he  was  enabled  to  embark 
secre'ly  on  board  a  Neapolitan  frigate  which  had  been  sent  him  by  Murat,  and  thus 
gain  France  in  safety, 


74  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

mand  the  troops  between  Chambery  and  Lyons.  Generals 
Semele,1  Dijeon,2  and  above  all  General  Marchand,3  are,  I  am 
informed,  worthy  of  all  confidence.  I  have  not  met  any  one  who 
knows  General  Roussel  d'Urbal.4 

I  have  the  honour  to  be.5  .... 


Declaration. 

The  powers  who  signed  the  treaty  of  Paris,  assembled  in 
congress  at  Vienna,  being  informed  of  Napoleon  Buonaparte's 
escape  and  his  entry  by  force  of  arms  into  France,  feel  it  due  to 
their  own  dignity  and  to  the  interests  of  social  order,  to  make  a 
solemn  declaration  of  the  sentiments  with  which  this  event  has 
inspired  them. 

In  thus  breaking  the  agreement  by  which  he  was  established 
in  the  island  of  Elba,  Buonaparte  has  destroyed  the  only  safe- 
guard attached  to  his  existence.  In  reappearing  in  France  with 
designs  of  disorder  and  revolution,  he  has  by  his  own  act  deprived 
himself  of  the  protection  of  the  laws,  and  manifested  to  the  world 
that  neither  peace  nor  truce  can  be  made  with  him. 

The  powers  consequently  declare  that  Napoleon  Buonaparte 
has  placed  himself  beyond  the  pale  of  civil  and  social  relations, 
and  that  as  the  enemy  and  disturber  of  the  world's  peace,  he  has 
delivered  himself  up  to  public  justice.  They  likewise  declare 
that,  firmly  resolved  to  maintain  intact  the  treaty  of  Paris  of 
May  30th,  1 8 14,  and  the  provisions  sanctioned  by  this  treaty, 
together  with  those  which  they  have  suspended,  or  will  still 
suspend  with  the  view  to  complete  and  consolidate  it,  they  will 

1  The  Baron  de  Semele  was  born  in  1773,  served  as  a  volunteer  in  1792,  and 
became  General  of  Division  in  181 1  ;  he  took  service  during  the  Hundred  Days,  and 
was  on  this  account  put  on  the  non-effective  list  under  the  second  restoration. 

2  The  Vicomte  Dijeon,  born  in  1771,  the  son  of  a  former  general,  became  an 
ensign  in  1792.  He  was  made  General  of  Division  in  1813.  In  1815  he  accom- 
panied the  Comte  d'Artois  to  Lyons.  He  was  made  a  peer  of  France  under  the 
second  restoration,  and  War  Minister  in  1823.     He  died  in  1828. 

3  Jean  Gabriel,  Comte  Marchand,  born  in  1765,  was  first  a  barrister,  then  enlisted  ; 
became  a  General  in  1805  and  took  part  in  all  the  campaigns  of  the  Empire.  He 
was  in  command  at  Grenoble  in  1815,  tried  to  resist  Napoleon,  but  was  forced  to 
retire.  He  was  tried  by  court-martial  in  1816,  but  acquitted.  Nevertheless  he  was 
exiled.      He  was  created  a  peer  of  France  by  Louis  Philippe  and  died  in  185 1. 

4  Nicholas-Francois  Roussel  d'Urbal,  born  in  1763.  Served  at  first  in  the 
Austrian  army  and  became  Major-General  in  1809.  Admitted  into  the  French 
service  in  1811,  he  became  General  of  Division  in  1812,  and  Inspector-General  of 
Cavalry  in  1815.      He  died  in  1849. 

5  Var.  :  "  P.S. — -Je  crois  qu'apres  la  declaration  il  doit  y  avoir  un  trait  Hen 
marque  qui  la  separe  dit  protocole  a  la  fin  duquel  doivent  etre  toutcs  les  signatures  comme 
elles  se  trouvent  dans  la  copie  ci  jointe"  —  "  I  think  that  after  the  declaration  there 
ought  to  be  a  very  marked  line,  so  as  to  separate  it  from  the  protocol,  at  the  end  of  which 
all  the  signatures  ought  to  come,  the  same  as  they  are  in  the  copy  sent  herewith." 


THE  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA.  75 

employ  every  means  and  unite  all  their  efforts,  in  order  that 
universal  peace,  the  object  of  Europe's  prayers  and  the  constant 
aim  of  her  labours,  shall  not  again  be  disturbed,  and  to  secure 
her  from  all  attempts  which  would  threaten  to  again  plunge  the 
nations  into  the  disorders  and  miseries  of  revolution. 

And  although  thoroughly  convinced  that  the  whole  of  France 
by  rallying  round  her  legitimate  sovereign,  will  completely 
frustrate  this  last  attempt  on  the  part  of  an  impotent  and  mad 
criminal,  all  the  sovereigns  of  Europe,  animated  by  the  same 
sentiments  and  guided  by  the  same  principles,  declare  that  if, 
contrary  to  all  expectation,  an)'  real  danger  whatsoever  shall 
result  from  this  event,  they  will  be  ready  to  give  to  the  King  of 
France  and  to  the  French  nation,  or  to  any  other  government  that 
is  attacked,  and,  as  soon  as  they  have  been  requested  to  do  so, 
the  assistance  necessary  to  re-establish  public  tranquillity,  and 
will  make  common  cause  against  all  those  who  would  attempt 
to  compromise  it. 

This  present  declaration,  inserted  in  the  protocol  of  the  con- 
gress assembled  at  Vienna  at  the  sitting  of  March  13th,  l8i5,will 
be  made  public. 

Signed  and  approved  by  the  plenipotentiaries  of  the  eight 
powers  who  signed  the  treaty  of  Paris. 

Vienna,  March  13,  181 5. 

(Here  follow  the  signatures,  in  the  alphabetical  order  of  their 
courts). 

Austria. — Le  Prince   de  Metternich,   le  Baron 

de  Wessenburg. 
Spain  (Espagne). — P.  GOMEZ  LABRADOR. 
France. — Le  Prince  de  Talleyrand,  le  Due  de 

Dalberg,  La  Tour-du-Pin,  le  Comte  Alexis 

de  Noailles. 
Great    Britain.— WELLINGTON,     Clancartv,    Cath- 

cart,  Stewart. 
Portugal. — Le    Comte  de  Palmella,    Saldanha, 

Lobo. 
Prussia.— Le  Prince  de  Hardenberg,  le  Baron  de 

Humboldt. 
Russia.— Le  Comte  de  Rasoumowski,  le  Comte  de 

Stackelberg,  le  Comte  de  Nesselrode. 
Sweden. — LOWENHIELM. 


76  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 


No.   35. — The  Prince  de  Talleyrand   to   King 

Louis  XVIII. 


Sire, 


Vienna,  March  4,  181 5. 


The  courier  whom  I  am  sending  off  to-day,  carries  into 
Switzerland  to  M.  le  Comte  de  Talleyrand,  an  order  to  take  steps 
in  concert  with  the  ministers  of  Austria  and  Russia,  as  I  had  the 
honour  of  informing  your  Majesty  yesterday,  to  remove  Joseph 
Buonaparte  from  the  French  frontiers.  This  messenger  will  be 
much  longer  on  the  road  than  those  who  go  direct  to  Paris,  but 
I  did  not  wish  to  despatch  him  without  sending  a  letter  to 
your  Majesty,  although  1  have  nothing  fresh  to  say,  and  the 
courier  who  is  bringing  me  the  instructions  your  Majesty  has 
done  me  the  honour  to  announce  in  your  letter  of  the  2nd  of  this 
month,  has  not  yet  arrived. 

I  trust  those  instructions  will  not,  as  M.  de  Metternich  flatters 
himself,  be  of  such  a  nature  as  to  put  off  indefinitely  the 
decision  respecting  the  fate  of  Murat.  We  cannot  and  must 
not  believe  any  of  M.  de  Metternich's  promises  on  this  head.1  Only 
to-day  I  had  a  very  emphatic  explanation  with  him  on  this 
matter.  My  opinion  is  that  if  Murat's  affair  is  postponed,  it  is 
lost  to  us,  and  thus  the  general  opinion,  which  to-day  is  all  in 
our  favour,  will  be  destroyed. 

I  have  procured,  and  will  send  to  your  Majesty  in  the  next 
letter  I  have  the  honour  of  writing  to  you,  a  document  signed 
by  the  powers,  who,  at  the  time  it  was  drawn  up,  still  called  them- 
selves allies.  It  will  enable  your  Majesty  to  judge  of  the  position 
in  which  your  ambassadors  at  the  congress  found  themselves 
on  their  arrival  in  Vienna,  as  regards  those  powers,  and  how  very 
different  that  position  is  to-day. 

I   send  herewith  one  of  the  declarations  which  have  been 
printed  in  Vienna  and  distributed  all  over  Germany. 
I  have  the  honour  to  be.  .  .  . 


No.  36.— Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  King  Louis  XVIII. 

Vienna,  March  15,  181 5. 
Sire, 

My  letter  No.  35  will  not  reach  your  Majesty  until 
after  that  which  I  have  the  honour  of  writing  to  you  to-day, 
as  the  courier  who  takes  it  goes  round  by  Zurich. 

1  Suppressed  in  the  text  of  the  archives. 


THE  CONGRESS  OE  VIENNA.  77 

Although  Buonaparte  has  only  a  handful  of  men  with  him,  I 
have  deemed  it  best  to  remove  from  him  those  in  particular 
who,  not  being  French,  and  finding  themselves  far  from  their  own 
country,  might  for  this  double  reason  be  more  devoted  to  him. 
I  have  therefore  requested  that  all  the  Poles  who  had  followed 
him  should  be  recalled  by  their  government. 

My  proposal  has  been  eagerly  welcomed,  and  the  order  for 
their  return  drawn  up  at  once  under  my  directions. 

The  courier  whom  I  now  send,  will  take  it,  as  well  as  a  copy 
I  have  the  honour  of  sending  you.  I  entreat  your  Majesty  to 
have  the  goodness  to  give  orders  that  the  necessary  routes  may 
be  furnished  to  these  troops.  The  Emperor  of  Russia  and 
Prince  Czartoryski  were  very  gracious  in  this  little  matter. 

A  Prussian  courier  who  arrived  here  about  twelve  hours  before 
the  one  sent  to  me  on  the  8th  brought  the  news,  which  is  fully 
confirmed  in  all  my  letters  from  Paris.  This  news,  which  quickly 
became  known,  has  excited  general  satisfaction  here.  Every 
one  applauds  the  wrisdom  of  the  steps  your  Majesty  has  taken. 
Every  one  feels  certain  that  Buonaparte  cannot  escape  punish- 
ment, and  is  rejoiced  thereat. 

M.  de  Jaucourt  speaks  of  the  good  effect  a  declaration  from 
the  congress  wrould  produce.  He  even  speaks  as  if  this  came 
from  your  Majesty.  Your  Majesty  knows  by  this  time  that  your 
wishes  on  this  point  have  been  anticipated. 

I  sent  by  yesterday's  courier  the  printed  declaration  for  dis- 
tribution on  the  Swiss  frontiers  ;  I  have  the  honour  to  transmit 
to-day  a  few  copies  to  your  Majesty.  The  heading,  Vienna,  and 
the  type  of  the  Austrian  chancellor's  printing  office,  appeared  to 
me  very  satisfactory. 

The  principles  of  legitimacy  which  it  was  necessary  to  recover 
from  beneath  the  ruins  under  which  they  had  been  buried,  as  it 
were,  by  the  overthrow  of  so  many  old  dynasties  and  the  growth 
of  so  many  new  ones,  were  at  first  coldly  received  by  some  and 
utterly  rejected  by  others,  but  now  under  our  guidance,  they  are 
at  length  better  appreciated.  Our  x  perseverance  in  defending 
them  was  not  in  vain.  This  honour  however  is  entirely  due  to 
your  Majesty,  and  the  unanimity  with  which  the  powers  have 
pronounced  against  Buonaparte's  fresh  attempt,  is  a  proof  of  it. 

I  have  often  had  the  honour  of  telling  your  Majesty  that 
the  allies  originally  intended  we  should  be  mere  specta- 
tors at  the  congress,  but  I  thought  that  there  was  only  a 
verbal  understanding  between  them  on  this  point,  and  never 
imagined  they  had  agreed  to  it  in  writing.  The  two  pro- 
tocols I  have  the  honour  of  sending  your  Majesty,  prove  the 
1  Text:  =  "our."     Var.  :  "votre"  =  "your." 


78  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

contrary,  and  also  show  how  very  little  our  actual  position 
resembles  that  which  it  was  intended  we  should  take.  These 
two  protocols  are  copies  of  two  originals  which  I  have  had  in 
my  own  hands.  Certainly  the  difference  between  what  they 
desired  on  the  22nd  of  September  and  the  declaration  which 
has  just  been  issued  by  all  the  powers,  is  immense. 

I  shall  have  the  honour  to  reply  to  your  Majesty  by  one  of 
the  next  couriers,  relative  to  the  directions  you  have  given  me 
respecting  the  arrangements  in  Italy.  I  only  received  them 
this  morning. 

I  have  the  honour  to  be.  .  .  . 


No.  37.— Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  King  Louis  XVIII. 

Vienna,  March  16,  181 5. 

Sire, 

Finding  I  had  to  send  another  courier  to  Paris  to-day 
with  the  order  of  recall  for  the  Poles  who  are  with  Buonaparte, 
and  which  was  inadvertently  not  enclosed  in  last  night's 
despatches,  I  take  advantage  of  this  to  have  the  honour  of 
telling  your  Majesty  how  much  I  wish  to  be  kept  constantly 
informed,  and  as  exactly  as  possible,  of  everything  that  takes 
place  in  France,  also  how  very  important  this  is. 

However  well  disposed  the  sovereigns,  and  even  the  people 
of  Vienna  may  be,  it  would  be  a  marvel  if  there  were  not  some 
evil-disposed  individuals  eager  to  proclaim  alarming  news,  and 
many  credulous  persons  ready  to  welcome  and  spread  it.  It  is 
therefore  important  that  your  Majesty's  legation  should  always 
be  in  a  position  to  contradict  them. 

The  news  of  Buonaparte's  entry  into  France  caused  a  fall  in 
the  funds  here,  but  the  declaration  of  the  congress  has  made 
them  rise  again.  I  hope  it  will  produce  the  same  effect  in 
France.  Perhaps  the  news,  received  here  this  morning,  will 
affect  them  again. 

The  Regency  of  Geneva  wrote  to  the  Federal  Government  at 
Zurich  on  the  8th,  that  it  had  that  morning  heard  that  a 
regiment  sent  against  Buonaparte,  having  joined  him  instead,  he 
had  entered  Grenoble  at  seven  or  eight  in  the  evening  and  that 
the  whole  town  was  illuminated.  The  Regency  therefore  asked 
for  assistance  lest  Geneva  should  be  threatened  by  Buonaparte. 
The  King  of  Wiirtemberg  had  sent  these  tidings  to  the  Emperor 
Alexander  1  by  express.       I  have   endeavoured  to  combat  this 

1  "  Every  one  near  him  spoke  of  it  that  morning." 


THE  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA.  79 

report  by  some,  at  least,  possible  explanations  ;  but  they  do  not 
suffice  to  destroy  an  impression  which,  I  believe,  is  entirely  due 
to  the  alarm  of  the  Genevese. 

I  have  the  honour  to  be.  .  .  . 


No.  38. — Prince   de  Talleyrand  to  King  Louis  XVIII. 

Vienna,  March  17,  181 5. 

Sire, 

I  have  the  honour  to  send  herewith  a  letter  received 
this  morning  from  Murat's  minister  here.  I  forward  the  original, 
so  that  there  may  be  no  delay  in  its  transmission,  and  also 
because  I  no  longer  need  it  here.  The  Due  de  Campo  Chiaro 
has  made  the  same  communication  to  the  Duke  of  Wellington, 
and  also  repeated  it  to  the  court  of  Vienna,  to  whose  minister  in 
Naples  it  had  already  been  made.  This  step,  coupled  with 
the  news  which  reached  us  here  to-day,  and  the  attitude  of  the 
plenipotentiaries  of  the  great  powers,  enables  me  to  foresee  that 
if  Buonaparte  is  making  his  way  towards  Paris,  and  if  the 
powers  unite  their  forces  on  our  frontiers,  it  will  be  almost 
impossible,  not  only  to  get  the  congress  to  pronounce  against 
Murat  in  favour  of  Ferdinand  IV.,  but  even  to  get  Austria,  and 
perhaps  England,  to  take  an  actual  and  positive  stand  against 
him.  I  therefore  pray  your  Majesty  to  graciously  give  me  your 
final  instructions  on  this  point.  We  must  think  of  ourselves 
before  thinking  of  others. 

News  has  been  received  to-day  by  M.  de  Metternich  by  way 
of  Milan.  It  announced  the  defection  of  two  regiments,  Buona- 
parte's entry  into  Grenoble,  and  his  departure  thence  on  the  8th, 
for  Lyons.  It  is  added  that  the  feeling  in  the  provinces  he  has 
traversed  is  very  bad. 

This  news  appeared  sufficiently  serious  to  cause  a  special1 
conference  of  the  Austrian,  English,  Russian,  Prussian,  and 
French  legations  to  be  summoned.  The  following  questions 
were  submitted  for  deliberation  : 

I.  What  political  ground  will  the  powers  take,  supposing 
that  Buonaparte  succeeds  in  re-establishing  himself  in  Paris  ? 

II.  What  is  the  actual  disposable  military  force  ? 

III.  What  are  the  means  of  preparation  ? 2 

The  political  ground  is  already  decided  by  the  declaration  of 
the  congress.     This  will  be  adhered  to. 

A  military  commission  has  been  appointed  to  consider  the 
other  two  questions.     It  consists  of: — 

1  Suppressed  in  the  text  of  the  archives. 

2  Var.  :  "proposer"  =  "proposed." 


80  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

Schwartzenberg,  Wellington,  Volkonsky  (Russian),  Knese- 
beck  (Prussian).1 

The  commission  will  assemble  this  evening.  The  Emperor 
of  Russia  wishes  to  be  present.  If  by  this  evening  I  learn  what 
they  have  decided,  I  shall  not  wait  till  morning  to  send  off  a 
fresh  courier  to  your  Majesty. 

The  Austrians  having  reason  to  suspect  that  M.  Anatole  de 
Montesquiou's  visit  here,  ostensibly  to  see  his  mother  (?) 2  had 
quite  another  object  not  without  political  significance,  I  have 
requested  him  to  return  to  Paris  without  delay. 

I  have  grounds  for  believing  that  the  Emperor  of  Austria  will 
take  Buonaparte's  son  into  his  palace  and  under  his  charge,  to 
prevent  his  being  carried  off.  It  has  been  affirmed  that  such  an 
abduction  was  the  object  of  M.  Anatole's  journey.  We  are  led 
to  believe  this  from  the  tenor  of  his  mother's  language,  reported 
by  the  Austrian  detectives  placed  over  her. 
I  have  the  honour  to  be 


No.  39. — The   Prince   de  Talleyrand  to  King 

Louis  XVIII. 

Vienna,  March,  19,  1815. 
Sire, 

The  Duke  of  Wellington  is  to-day  sending  a  courier 
to  London,  who  will  take  Paris  on  his  way,  if  possible.  I  take 
advantage  of  it  to  inform  your  Majesty  that  at  the  military  con- 
ference held  the  evening  before  last,  and  at  which  the  Emperor 
of  Russia  was  present,  it  was  determined  that  Buonaparte,  with 
whom  none  of  the  powers  would  ever  treat  again,  must  be  stopped 
with  prompt  and  strenuous  measures.  They  have  consequently 
stayed  the  renewal  of  the  treaty  of  Chaumont,  of  which  I  had 
the  honour  to  send  your  Majesty  a  copy.  But  it  is  solely  against 
Buonaparte  that  this  will  be  directed,  and  not  against  France, 
which,  on  the  contrary,  will  accede  to  it.  Sardinia,  Bavaria,  Wur- 

1  Charles-Frederic,  Baron  Knesebeck,  born  in  176S,  went  through  the  campaigns 
of  1792  and  1794,  and  subsequently  that  of  1806,  with  the  Prussian  army.  Being  an 
implacable  enemy  to  France  he  took  service  in  Austria  in  1809,  received  in  181 1  a 
secret  mission  to  Russia  and  took  part  as  a  General  in  the  campaigns  of  1813  and  1814. 
He  became  later  Field  Marshal  General,  and  died  in  1848. 

2  Anatole,  Comte  de  Montesquiou-Fezensac,  born  in  1788,  enlisted  in  1808,  be- 
came in  1809  Orderly  Officer  to  the  Emperor,  and  Colonel  in  1814.  During  the 
Hundred  Days  he  went  to  Vienna  to  join  his  mother,  who  had  accompanied  the  King 
of  Rome,  being  his  governess.  Suspected,  not  without  reason,  of  a  desire  to  carry 
off  the  young  prince,  he  received  orders  to  withdraw.  Being  at  first  proscribed,  at 
the  second  restoration  he  was  pardoned  and  became  attached  to  the  household  of  the 
Due  d'Orleans.  In  1830  he  was  charged  with  various  diplomatic  missions  and 
became  Brigadier-General,  and  subsequently  peer  of  France.     He  died  in  1867. 


THE  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA.  Si 

temburg  and  Baden  will  also  agree  to  it,  as  well  as  Holland  and 
Hanover. 

The  Ottoman  Porte  will  not  be  asked  to  take  part  in  the 
war,  but  merely  not  to  receive  either  French  rebels  or  their 
vessels. 

Steps  will  also  be  taken  as  regards  Switzerland.  The 
question  is  one  quite  outside  that  of  neutrality,  the  man  who 
forces  Europe  to  arm  being  nothing  more  than  a  brigand. 

I  have  received  a  declaration  from  Austria  relative  to  the 
Valtelline,  Bormio,  and  Chiavenna,  which  declaration  expresses 
that  these  places  must  enter  into  the  arrangements  for  Italy  and 
serve  her  as  compensation.1 

I  have  the  honour  to  be 


THE  DECLARATION  SENT  WITH  THE  PRECEDING 

DESPATCH. 

Vienna,  March  18,  1815. 

The  undersigned  has  been  commanded  to  make  known  to 
his  highness,  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand,  that  their  Majesties,  the 
Emperor  of  all  the  Russias,  the  King  of  Great  Britain,  and  the 
King  of  Prussia,  have  agreed  with  his  Imperial  and  Royal 
Apostolic  Majesty,  that  the  valleys  of  the  Valtelline,  Chiavenna, 
and  Bormio,  which  up  to  this  date  formed  part  of  the  kingdom 
of  Italy,  shall,  under  the  denomination  of  the  department  of  the 
Adda,  be  united  to  the  Italian  states  of  his  Imperial  and  Royal 
Majesty.  As  these  states,  however,  have  been  placed,  by  special 
negotiations  between  the  courts  of  Vienna  and  the  Tuileries, 
among  the  territories  which  might  serve  for  exchange  or  com- 
pensation, in  arranging  the  affairs  of  Italy,  and  particularly  those 
which  concern  the  future  establishment  of  her  Majesty  the 
Infanta  Marie  Louise  of  Spain,  and  her  son,  the  undersigned 
is  authorized  to  give  on  this  subject  the  most  positive  declaration, 
that  the  definite  reunion  of  the  said  territories,  which  at  this 
moment  has  become  a  matter  of  necessity  prescribed  by  the 
most  imperative  circumstances,  will  not  in  any  way  derogate 
from  the  previous  arrangements,  and  that  they  will  none  the  less 
be  given  credit  for,  in  estimating  the  lands  which  are  to  serve  as 
compensation  for  the  establishment  claimed  by  the  Infanta 
Marie  Louise. 

The  undersigned  begs  his  highness  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand 
to  accept  the  assurances  of  his  high  consideration. 

Metternich. 

1  The  courier  who  left  Paris  on  the  nth   has  arrived  without  any  difficulty. 
VOL.  III.  G 


82  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

No.  40. — Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  King  Louis  XVIII. 

Vienna,  March  19,  1815. 
Sire, 

No  news  whatever  has  reached  us  to-day.  It  is  now  six 
o'clock  in  the  evening,  when  I  have  the  honour  of  writing  to 
your  Majesty. 

The  affairs  of  Switzerland  were  concluded  this  morning. 
The  deputation  which  was  in  Vienna,  is  to  bear  the  declaration 
agreed  upon  and  signed  by  all  the  powers.  I  am  sending  a 
copy  to  M.  de  Talleyrand.1  The  Swiss  plenipotentiaries  do  not 
think  it  will  completely  satisfy  one  party,  or  greatly  dissatisfy 
the  other,  thus  the  stipulations  it  contains,  will,  they  believe,  be 
generally  adopted. 

The  first  news  received  by  us,  will  decide  the  day  of  Lord 
Wellington's  departure.  His  courier  ought  to  arrive  on  the 
2 1st  or  22nd,  he  will  then  decide  what  to  do. 

Here  the  feeling  is  excellent.    Buonaparte  alone  is  in  every 
one's  mind.     All  the  documents  will  be  in  accordance  therewith. 
I  have  the  honour  to  be.  .  .  . 

No.  41. — Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  King  Louis  XVIII. 

Vienna,  March  19,  181 5  {evening). 

Sire, 

I  have  the  honour  to  forward  to  your  Majesty  a  letter  I 
have  just  received  from  the  Russian  minister.  It  seems  to  me 
to  leave  nothing  more  to  be  desired  on  the  subject  of  which  it 
treats.  The  sentiments  expressed  therein  are  very  good,  and 
quite  in  accordance  with  the  language  held  by  the  emperor 
under  these  circumstances.  Everything  that  depends  on  him  is 
done  in  the  very  best  spirit. 

It  is  proposed  to  have  three  armies  in  the  field  and  two  in 
reserve. 

One,  operating  from  the  sea  to  the  Main,  will  be  composed  of 
English,  Dutch,  Hanoverians,  contingents  from  the  north,  and 
Prussians.  They  will  all  be  under  the  orders  of  the  Duke  of 
Wellington. 

The  second  will  have  its  line  of  operations  from  the  Main  to 
the  Mediterranean,  and  will  be  commanded  by  Prince  Schwart- 
zenberg.  This  army  will  be  composed  of  Austrians,  Pied- 
montese,  Swiss  and  contingents  from  southern  Germany. 

The  army  of  Italy  has  no  commander  as  yet. 

1  M.  Auguste  de  Talleyrand,  Minister  in  Switzerland. 


THE  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA.  83 

Of  the  two  armies  of  reserve,  one  will  be  called  the  reserve 
army  of  the  north,  and  commanded  by  Marshal  Bliicher. 
General  Barclay  de  Tolly1  will  command  the  other,  which  will 
be  the  reserve  army  of  the  south. 

All  this  has  only  been  proposed,  but  seems  to  meet  with  the 
approval  of  Austria  and  England.     We  expect  immediately  to 
hear  something  as  to  the  strength  of  each  of  these  armies. 
I  have  the  honour  to  be.  .  .  . 


No.  42.— Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  King  Louis  XVIII. 

Vienna,  March  20,  181 5. 
Sire, 

The  Emperor  Francis  has  just  ordered  Madame  de 
Montesquiou  to  send  him  the  child  she  has  charge  of.  Her 
language  in  the  present  state  of  affairs  is  so  opposed  to  the 
resolutions  expressed  by  Austria  and  the  other  powers,  that  the 
emperor  did  not  wish  her  to  be  any  longer  near  his  grandson. 
To-morrow  she  will  receive  orders  to  return  to  France.  The 
child  will  stay  at  the  palace  in  Vienna.  Thus  he  cannot  be 
carried  off,  which  several  circumstances  seemed  to  render 
probable. 

I  have  the  honour  to  be 

No.  43.— Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  King  Louis  XVIII. 

Vienna,  March  23,  181 5. 
Sire, 

M.  le  Due  de  Rohan-Montbazon  arrived  here  the  night 
before  last,  and  gave  me  your  Majesty's  letter  which  he  had 
brought.  All  measures  had  been  taken  several  days  2  before  his 
arrival,  and  he  saw  the  printed  notice  of  the  declaration  of  14th  s 
of  this  month  near  the  Rhine.  It  ought  to-day  to  be  known  all 
over  France.  I  trust  that  its  effect  may  be  to  destroy  the  confi- 
dence of  the  evil-disposed,  and  restore  that  of  loyal  men. 

The  troops  which  Austria,  Russia,  England,  Prussia,  Holland, 
the  German  States,  and  Sardinia  will  place  in  the  field,  will, 
including  the  garrisons,  form  a  total  of  seven  hundred  thousand 
men,  ready  to  act  whenever  required.  The  Prussians  have 
already  eighty  thousand  men  on  the  Rhine  ;  the  English,  Dutch, 

1  Michel,  Prince  Barclay  de  Tolly,  Russian  Field  Marshal,  born  in  1755,  of  a 
Scotch  family,  settled  in  Livonia,  became  War  Minister  in  1810,  and  commanded  the 
main  body  of  the  Russian  army  in  1812.     He  died  in  1818. 

2  Suppressed  in  the  text  of  the  archives. 

3  Var.  :"of  13th." 

G    2 


84  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLE  YRAND. 

and  Hanoverians  a  similar  number,  and  two  hundred  and  fifty 
thousand  Russians  will  arrive  there  by  the  end  of  April  with 
590  pieces  of  cannon.  I  believe  that,  instead  of  three,  there 
will  be  four  armies  in  the  field  ;  one  of  them  will  be  under  the 
command  of  General  Bliicher. 

The  powers  themselves  earnestly  hope  that  no  part  of  this 
force  may  be  required,  and  that  France  will  be  able  to  do 
without  their  aid.  But  they  only  wait  your  Majesty's  request 
to  give  it. 

The  papers  received  to-day  from  Paris,  and  which  are  up  to 
the  14th  inclusive,  allow  me  to  hope  that  your  Majesty  will  not 
be  obliged  to  quit  Paris.  If  on  the  contrary  this  is  found  abso- 
lutely necessary,  it  is  thought  here,  that  it  would  be  desirable  for 
your  Majesty  to  withdraw  to  some  place  in  the  north  of  which 
you  are  quite  sure,  followed  by  both  Chambers,  and  that  part  of 
the  army  which  has  remained  faithful,  increased  by  a  portion  of 
the  National  Guard.  It  being  most  important  to  avoid  as  much 
as  possible  even  the  semblance  of  your  Majesty's  being  isolated, 
or  that  your  cause  and  that  of  the  nation  is  separate,  when  in 
reality  it  is  one  and  the  same. 

Lord  Wellington  would  like  even  now  to  be  in  Belgium  with 
the  troops  under  his  command,  so  as  to  be  prepared  for  any 
emergency.  This  makes  him  quite  ready  to  hurry  on  the  affairs 
here  that  have  still  to  be  concluded. 

There  have  been  some  difficulties  respecting  the  departure 
of  Madame  de  Montesquiou,  and  to-day  they  talk  of  sending 
her  to  Lintz. 

Your  Majesty  will,  no  doubt,  be  grieved  to  hear  that 
Madame  de  Brionne  died  last  night.  She  was  eighty  years  1 
of  age. 

I  have  the  honour  to  be 

No.  44.— Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  King  Louis  XVIII. 

Vienna,  March  23,  181 5  {evening). 

Sire, 

This  letter  is  carried  to  your  Majesty  by  a  Prussian 
courier,  who  starts  to-day. 

I  have  just  heard  of  a  letter  written  by  Buonaparte  with  his 
own  hand  to2  Marie  Louise.  It  is  dated  the  nth  from  Lyons, 
and  announces  that  he  will  be  in  Paris  about  the  21st.  This 
letter,  which  has  been  forwarded  by  General  Songeon,3  who  has 

1  Var.  :  "eighty-one  years." 

2  Var. :  "a  I archiduchesse"  =  "  to  the  archduchess." 

3  Jean-Marie- Songeon,  born  in  1  771,  enlisted  in  1793,  made  General  of  Brigade 
in  1813.     He  retired  in  1816,  and  died  in  1824. 


THE  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA.  85 

been  false  to  your  Majesty,  was  brought  by  an  officer  of  the  7th 
Hussars  named  Nyon,  to  M.  de  Bubna,1  who  sent  it  on  here.  It 
is  written  with  a  double  motive  :  the  first  to  make  his  army  and 
his  partisans  believe  he  is  on  friendly  terms  with  Austria  ;  the 
second  to  persuade  Austria  that  he  has  an  enormous  number  of 
adherents  in  France.  Added  to  this  letter  were  a  whole  host  of 
dreadful  proclamations.  He  speaks  of  a  previous  letter,  which, 
however,  has  not  come  to  hand.2 

At  Lyons  his  force  consisted  of  the  14th  Hussars,  and  the 
23rd,  24th,  5th,  7th,  and  nth  Regiments  of  the  Line.  None  of 
these  regiments  were  over  a  thousand  strong.  These,  added  to 
those  he  had  already,  gives  him  a  force  of  about  nine  or  ten 
thousand  men.     (1 3  am  speaking  of  the  date  up  to  the  nth.) 

It  was  stated  that  he  was  going  towards  Charolais,  where  the 
feeling  generally  is  not  supposed  to  be  very  favourable.  He  was 
still  at  Lyons  on  the  13th. 

Here  the  good  understanding  is  perfect ;  on  this  your  Majesty 
may  rely.     I  can  answer  for  it. 

In  order  to  hasten  matters,  the  Emperor  of  Russia  has  pro- 
posed drawing  up,  in  a  special  treaty  between  Russia,  England, 
and  Prussia,  the  stipulations  relative  to  Poland.  This  was  agreed 
to  at  the  conference  this  morning.  This  special  agreement  will 
appear  in  the  general  treaty. 

The  Prince  of  the  Netherlands  takes  the  title  of  King  of  the 
Netherlands.  The  notification  of  this  will  be  made  to-morrow 
and  signed  the  same  day. 

We  are  about  to  take  in  hand  the  affairs  of  Italy,  in  which 
we  have  gained  ground  greatly  as  far  as  Murat  is  concerned. 

I  have  succeeded  in  getting  M.  de  Schraut  (the  Austrian 
minister  in  Switzerland,  who  has  used  most  unparliamentary 
language)  recalled.  It  appears  that  his  bad  temper  is  owing  to 
ill-health. 

I  am  sending  M.  de  Latour  du  Pin  to  France,  as  just  now 
I  have  no  use  for  him  here.  My  object  is  to  place  him  near 
Marshal  Massena,  to  encourage  the  marshal  to  take  possession 
for  your  Majesty  of  all  the  places  momentarily  occupied  by 
Buonaparte,  and  to  tell  him,  without  startling  him  too  much,  of 
the  dispositions  arranged  by  the  powers,  and  to  offer  him  what- 
ever outside  help  your  Majesty  may  consider  needful.     No  steps 


1  Ferdinand,  Comte  de  Bubna-Littiz,  an  Austrian  Field  Marshal  then  command- 
ing at  Turin.  He  had  been,  in  1S05,  President  of  the  Aulic  Council,  and  in  18 13 
Ambassador  at  Paris.     In  1821  he  became  Governor  of  Italy,  and  died  in  1S25. 

2  Napoleon  had  written  a  previous  letter  to  the  Empress  Marie  Louise,  dated 
Grenoble,  March  8. 

3  Var.  :  "z//>ar/e"  =  "he  speaks." 


86  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

will  be  taken  in  this  direction,  except  on  receipt  of  a  formal 
written  order,  signed  by  yourself. 

I  have  the  honour  to  be 


No.  V.1— The  Comte  de  Blacas  d'Aulps  to  Prince  de 

Talleyrand. 

Bruges,  March  24,  181 5. 

{At  2  a.m.,  just  as  his  Majesty  is  leaving  for  Ostend.) 2 

Prince, 

The  king  was  obliged  to  quit  Lille  yesterday  at  three 
in  the  afternoon.  Marshal  Mortier  still  held  the  garrison,  though 
it  had  already  declared  for  Buonaparte  ;  but  his  presence  per- 
mitted his  Majesty  to  quit  the  town,  if  not  without  danger,  at 
least  without  any  accident,  and  the  king  reached  Menin,  accom- 
panied by  an  escort  and  followed  by  a  picket  of  Chasseurs,  many 
of  whom  did  not  wish  to  abandon  him.  The  National  Guard 
of  Lille,  which,  like  that  of  Paris  and  all  other  towns  in  France, 
is  thoroughly  loyal,  accompanied  his  Majesty  up  to  the  gates  of 
Menin,  where  they  found  some  English  troops,  who  probably 
will  not  delay  in  crossing  the  frontier.  The  entire  population  of 
France  will  join  those  troops  who  are  coming  to  re-establish 
legitimate  authority  ;  the  opinion  of  the  inhabitants  is  strongly 
pronounced  in  this  respect,  but  the  whole  of  France  is  domineered 
over  by  a  rebel  soldiery,  and  twenty-six  millions  of  people  are 
now  enthralled  by  forty  thousand  troops. 

The  king  slept  the  night  at  Bruges  ;  he  hopes  to  reach  Ostend 
this  evening  ;  there  he  will  await  news  of  his  household,  who 
were  to  proceed  to  Dunkirk.  His  Majesty  will  join  them  there 
as  soon  as  he  hears  that  they  have  all  arrived.  It  was  not 
thought  safe  to  go  from  Lille  to  Dunkirk  either  by  Cassel  or 
St.  Oraer,  and  I  have  already  informed  you  that  the  king  could 
no  longer  remain  at  Lille  without  exposing  himself  to  great 
danger. 

We  do  not  know  what  has  become  of  Monsieur,  he,  as  well 
as  the  Due  de  Berry,  were  to  remain  with  his  Majesty's  house- 
hold, but  we  have  reason  to  believe  that  they  have  embarked 
at  Dieppe,  with  the  intention,  no  doubt,  of  going  to  the  south, 
where  M.  le  Due  d'Angouleme  is  already,    or    to  the  western 

1  This  letter  does  not  appear  in  M.  Pallain's  collection. 

2  Louis  XVIII.  left  the  Tuileries  on  March  19,  at  eleven  at  night.  He  arrived 
at  Abbeville  on  the  20th,  and  there  stayed  the  night  and  the  following  day.  On  the 
evening  of  the  21st  he  departed  for  Lille,  where  he  arrived  next  day  at  noon.  On 
the  23rd  he  left  that  town  and  reached  Belgium.  He  passed  through  Bruges  and 
arrived  at  Ostend  on  March  24.     Thence  he  went  back  to  Ghent  and  remained  there. 


THE  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA.  87 

provinces,  which  arc  now  stirring,  and  are  under  the  orders  of 
M.  le  Due  de  Bourbon.1 

As  soon  as  the  king  comes  to  any  definite  decision  I  will 
at  once  inform  you  of  it,  and  will  keep  you  acquainted  with 
everything  it  is  important  that  you  should  know.  While  at 
Lille,  the  king  received  the  letter  you  sent  him  by  General 
Ricard,  also  the  Declaration  of  the  Powers  united  in  Congress 
at  Vienna,  which  gratified  his  Majesty  extremely.  He  expects 
the  happiest  results  from  the  measures  announced  therein. 

I  will  write  to  you  from  Ostend  ;  I  have  only  time  now  to 
renew  to  you  the  assurance  of  my  inviolable  attachment  and 
high  consideration. 

BLACAS  D'AULPS. 

P.S. — I  could  not  post  this  letter  till  we  reached  Ostend, 
where  we  have  found  the  Comte  de  Jaucourt,  who  will  write  to 
you  more  fully  as  to  our  position  here. 


No.  27.— King  Louis  XVIII.  to  the  Prince  de 

Talleyrand.2 

Ostend,  March  26,  181 5. 

Mon  Cousin, 

I  take  advantage  of  an  English  courier  who  will  pro- 
bably arrive  at  Vienna  before  the  letters  written  to  you  by  the 
Comte  de  Blacas,  and  the  Comte  de  Jaucourt.  The  total  de- 
fection of  the  troops  left  me  no  choice  as  to  what  I  must  do. 
They   say   that    my  life    is  necessary  to  France.       I    therefore 

1  On  the  first  news  of  the  landing  of  Napoleon,  all  the  princes  of  the  royal 
family  had  been  appointed  to  military  commands.  The  Comte  d'Artois  arrived  at 
Lyons  on  March  8th,  but  the  defection  of  the  troops  on  the  approach  of  Napoleon, 
compelled  him  to  leave  on  the  10th.  He  returned  to  Paris  and  left  it  again  on  the 
19th,  at  the  head  of  the  king's  household  troops.  He  arrived  on  the  25th  at  Ypres 
in  Belgium  and  went  to  rejoin  the  king  at  Ghent. 

The  Due  de  Berry  remained  with  the  king,  and  eventually  received  the  com- 
mand of  the  forces  they  endeavoured  to  assemble  between  Melun  and  Paris.  He 
followed  his  father  into  retirement. 

The  Due  d'Angouleme  was  at  Bordeaux  when  Napoleon  disembarked.  Armed 
with  full  powers  he  organized  and  maintained  the  royal  prestige  in  the  south,  and 
assembled  his  forces  at  Nimes  and  Marseilles.  But  he  was  surrounded  at  Montelinart 
and  forced  to  surrender  to  General  Grouchy  (April  8).  He  was  put  on  board  ship  at 
Cette  and  reached  Spain.  During  this  time  the  duchess  remained  at  Bordeaux  where 
after  vain  efforts  in  the  royal  cause,  she  was  compelled  to  embark  on  April  2.  She 
rejoined  the  king  at  Ghent. 

As  for  the  Due  de  Bourbon,  he  was  appointed  Governor  of  the  Western  Depart- 
ments, hastened  to  Nantes  and  endeavoured  to  instigate  a  general  rising  in  Vendee  ; 
but  seeing  no  chance  of  success,  he  fled  into  Spain. 

2  This  letter,  according  to  M.  Pallain,  is  wanting  in  the  manuscript  at  the  Foreign 
Office. 


88  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

deemed  that  its  security  might  be  risked  if  I  waited  some 
hours  longer  at  Lille.  Buonaparte  has  now  all  the  armed  force, 
but  all  the  hearts  belong  to  me  ;  of  this  I  have  had  ample  proof, 
all  along  my  route.  The  powers  cannot  therefore  be  in  any 
doubt  this  year  as  to  the  desires  of  France :  there  you  have  the 
text,  I  rely  on  you  to  enlarge  upon  it.  I  cannot  too  highly 
praise  Marshal  Macdonald  and  Marshal  Mortier.  The  former 
behaved  just  in  the  same  way  as  he  did  at  Lyons,  the  latter, 
although  he  had  received  a  telegraphic  message  to  arrest  me, 
insured  my  departure  from  Lille  and  my  route  as  far  as  Menin. 
Whereupon  I  pray  that  God  may  have  you,  my  cousin,  in  His  safe 
and  holy  keeping.  Louis. 


No.  45. — The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  King 

Louis  XVIII. 

Vienna,  March  26, 181 5. 

Sire, 

The  Emperor  Alexander  having  sent  last  night  to  say 
that  he  wished  to  see  me,  I  went  to  him  this  morning  at  eleven 
o'clock.  He  has  never  been  so  pleasant  to  me  since  I  have  been 
in  Vienna.  We  must,  he  said,  avoid  all  recrimination,  not  go 
back  to  the  past}  but  occupy  ourselves  in  a  straightforward  and 
profitable  manner  with  the  present  state  of  things,  and  not 
endeavour  to  seek  causes,  but  to  remedy  them.  He  spoke 
frequently  and  enthusiastically  of  his  attachment  to  your 
Majesty.  He  will  give  up  if  necessary  his  last  man  and  his  last 
coin  for  you,  he  even  used  the  language  of  a  valiant  soldier  who 
fears  not  to  risk  his  limbs  or  his  life,  he  would  sooner  sacrifice  it, 
than  abandon  a  cause  to  which  he  considers  his  honour  is  pledged. 
I  on  my  side  showed  him  the  greatest  confidence,  and  continue  to 
do  so  through  those  who  come  more  closely  in  contact  with  him, 
and  with  whom  I  am  intimate.  If  the  aid  of  a  foreign  power 
becomes  a  necessity,  it  is  better  for  us  that  he,  whose  ambition 
cannot  affect  France,  should  play  the  principal  part. 

More  than  once  he  repeated  to  me  "  Tell  the  king  that  this 
is  not  the  time  for  mercy,  he  has  to  defend  the  interests  of 
Europe."  He  several  times  praised  your  Majesty  for  having 
decided  not  to  quit  Paris. 

The  forces  ready  for  action,  and  of  which  he  had  a  statement, 
amount  to  eight  hundred  and  sixty  thousand  men. 

The  treaty  of  Chaumont,  the  conditions  of  which  have  been 
renewed,  alone  gives  six  hundred  thousand  men  without  counting 

1  Suppressed  in  the  text  of  the  archives. 


THE  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA.  89 

the  army  of  Italy,  which  will   consist   of  one  hundred  and  fifty 
thousand,  and  the  Russian  and  Prussian  reserves. 

The  Prussians  have  already  seventy  thousand  infantry,  seven 
thousand  cavalry,  and  five  thousand  artillery  on  the  Rhine. 
They  are  sending  in  addition,  one  hundred  and  fifty-nine  thou- 
sand infantry,  nineteen  thousand  cavalry,  and  six  thousand 
artillery. 

The  Russians  are  beginning  to  persuade  themselves  that  they 
cannot  have  entire  confidence  in  Austria  as  long  as  she  is  not 
compromised  as  regards  Murat.  I  have  found  the  emperor  very 
well  disposed  on  this  point. 

We  meet  this  evening  to  sign  the  treaty  of  co-operation.  I 
yesterday  suggested  the  insertion  of  the  following  article  ; 

"  The  sole  object  of  the  present  treaty  being  to  support 
France  or  any  other  country  against  the  attempts  of  Buonaparte 
and  his  adherents,  his  most  Christian  Majesty  will  be  specially 
invited  to  agree  to  it,  and  to  make  known  in  case  he  should 
require  the  aid  of  the  forces  mentioned  in  Article  ....  what 
assistance  circumstances  will  allow  him  to  devote  to  the  object 
of  the  present  treaty." 

Although  this  article  has  not  been  definitely  adopted,  I  have 
every  reason  to  believe  that  it  will  be. 

I  have  the  honour  to  be  ...  . 


No.  46.— The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  King 

Louis  XVIII. 

Vienna,  March  29,  181 5. 
Sire, 

There  is  no  need  for  me  to  express  to  your  Majesty  the 
feelings  with  which  I  heard  of  the  disastrous  events  which  have 
succeeded  each  other  with  such  incredible  rapidity.  You  will 
judge  of  this  from  my  attachment  to  your  person,  which  is  as 
well  known  to  your  Majesty  as  my  zeal  and  my  devotion.  All 
the  powers  I  possess  will  always  be  consecrated  to  your  service. 
I  say  so  now  and  I  will  not  again  repeat  it  to  your  Majesty. 

The  treaty  of  co-operation  was  signed  on  the  evening  of  the 
25th,1  and  was  officially  communicated  to  me  on  the  27th.  I 
have  the  honour  to  send  your  Majesty  herewith  a  copy  of  this 
treaty  and  of  the  memorandum  transmitted  to  me  at  the  same 
time  by  the  plenipotentiaries,  and  my  reply  thereto. 

This  important  matter  finished,  the  Duke  of  Wellington  did 

1  Treaty  of  the  Quadruple  Alliance,  between  Great  Britain,  Austria,  Prussia,  and 
Russia,  to  which  France  agreed  by  an  official  note  from  M.  de  Talleyrand  of  March  27. 


90  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

not  wish  to  delay  any  longer  in  joining  his  army,  he  therefore 
left  Vienna  at  six  o'clock  this  morning. 

We  are  redoubling  our  efforts  to  get  the  affairs  finished  which 
the  congress  has  still  to  arrange  ;  I  think  it  will  end  in  April.  I 
consider  it  is  more  than  ever  necessary  that  it  should  close 
with  a  solemn  act,  for  such  an  act  will  prove  to  all  the  world 
that  the  powers  are  in  accord  and  absolutely  determined  to 
maintain  that  order  of  things  which  Buonaparte's  attempt  tends 
to  destroy. 

As  your  Majesty  might  find  it  inconvenient  just  now  to 
defray  from  the  French  chancellor's  office  the  expenses  of  your 
embassy  at  the  congress  and  also  those  of  the  couriers  and 
persons  sent  to  obtain  information,  I  have  made  arrangements 
with  England  to  see  to  this.  Your  Majesty  therefore  need  not 
give  yourself  any  further  concern  in  the  matter. 

I  am  most  anxious  to  hear  from  your  Majesty  and  to  learn 
that  you  have  arrived  at  the  place  where  you  have  decided  to 
stay.  I  trust  your  Majesty  has  carried  away  with  you  all  the 
letters  I  had  the  honour  of  writing  to  you,  and  that  your  Majesty 
has  directed  M.  de  Jaucourt  to  take  away  with  him  everything 
that  relates  to  the  congress.  There  are  many  things  in  my 
letters  which  would  certainly  be  displeasing  to  the  powers,  who 
now  are  willing  to  be  friendly,  but  whose  attitude  six  months 
ago  may  often  have  been  severely  censured. 

I  keep  here  with  me  two  reliable  couriers  for  communication 
between  this  place   and  wherever  your  Majesty  may  have  to 
remain.      They   will    never    enter    France    except    across    such 
frontier  as  your  Majesty  may  consider  safe. 
I  have  the  honour  to  be.  .  .  . 


Treaty  of  the  25TH  March,   181 5,  mentioned  in  the 
preceding  Despatch  dated  29/ra  March. 

In  the  name  of  the  Holy  and  Indivisible  Trinity,  his  Majesty 
the  Emperor  of  Austria,  King  of  Hungary  and  Bohemia,  and 
his  Majesty  the  King  of  the  United  Kingdom  of  Great  Britain 
and  Ireland,  having  taken  into  consideration  the  consequences 
which  the  invasion  of  France  by  Napoleon  Buonaparte  and  the 
actual  position  of  that  kingdom  may  have  on  the  security  of 
Europe,  have  by  common  consent,  together  with  his  Majesty  the 
Emperor  of  all  the  Russias,  and  his  Majesty  the  King  of  Prussia, 
resolved  to  apply  to  this  important  circumstance  the  principles 
laid  down  by  the  treaty  of  Chaumont.     In  consequence  of  which 


THE  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA.  91 

they  have  agreed  to  renew  by  a  solemn  treaty,  signed  separately 
by  each  of  these  four  powers  with  each  of  the  other  three,  the 
undertaking  to  preserve,  against  all  attempts  to  the  contrary,  the 
order  of  affairs  so  happily  re-established  in  Europe,  and  to  decide 
upon  the  most  efficacious  means  of  carrying  this  undertaking 
into  effect  and  of  giving  it  all  the  possible  latitude  so  imperiously 
demanded  by  present  circumstances.  With  this  view  his  Majesty 
the  Emperor  of  Austria,  King  of  Hungary  and  Bohemia,  has  for 
the  purpose  of  discussing,  concluding,  and  signing  the  conditions 
of  the  present  treaty  with  his  Majesty  the  King  of  the  United 
Kingdom  of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland,  named  the  Sieur.  .  .  .and 
his  Britannic  Majesty  having  on  his  side  named  the  Sieur.  .  .  . 
the  said  plenipotentiaries  after  having  exchanged  their  full 
powers  and  found  them  in  proper  and  due  form,  have  drawn  up 
the  following  articles  : 

Art.  I. — The  high  contracting  parties  above  named  solemnly 
engage  to  combine  in  making  every  effort  within  their  respective 
states,  to  maintain  in  all  their  integrity,  the  conditions  of  the 
treaty  of  peace  concluded  in  Paris,  May  30th,  18 14,  as  well  as 
the  stipulations  drawn  up  and  signed  at  the  Congress  of  Vienna, 
with  the  object  of  completing  the  arrangements  of  that  treaty, 
and  guarding  them  against  all  attacks,  and  particularly  against 
the  designs  of  Napoleon  Buonaparte.  For  this  purpose  they 
engage  themselves,  if  required,  to  direct  together  and  with  mutual 
consent  in  the  spirit  of  the  declaration  of  the  13th  of  March 
last,  all  their  efforts  against  him  and  against  all  those  who  have 
joined  his  faction  or  may  do  so  later,  in  order  to  compel  him  to 
desist  from  his  projects  and  place  him  beyond  the  possibility  of 
disturbing  for  the  future,  the  tranquillity  and  general  peace  under 
the  protection  of  which,  the  rights,  the  liberty  and  the  independ- 
ence of  the  nations  have  just  been  established  and  assured. 

Art.  II. — Although  it  is  impossible  to  estimate  the  measures 
necessary  to  attain  so  great  and  beneficent  a  result,  and  although 
the  high  contracting  parties  are  determined  to  devote  to  it  all 
those  which  according  to  their  respective  positions  they  can 
command,  they  are  nevertheless  agreed  to  keep  permanently  in 
the  field  a  total  of  one  hundred  and  fifty  thousand  men  each,  at 
least  one-tenth  of  which  shall  be  cavalry  and  a  proper  proportion 
of  artillery,  without  reckoning  the  garrisons,  and  to  employ  these 
actively  and  jointly  against  the  common  enemy. 

Art.  III. — The  high  contracting  parties  reciprocally  under- 
take not  to  lay  down  arms  except  by  common  consent  and  until 
the  object  of  the  war  named  in  the  first  article  of  the  present 
treaty  has  been  attained,  and  so  long  as  Buonaparte  shall  not 
have  been  placed  absolutely  beyond  the  possibility  of  raising 


92  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

fresh  disturbances  and  renewing  his  attempts  to  seize  the  supreme 
power  in  France. 

Art.  IV. — This  treaty  being  solely  applicable  to  present  cir- 
cumstances, the  stipulations  of  the  treaty  of  Chaumont,  and 
particularly  those  contained  in  Article  XVI.,  will  again  come 
into  full  force  as  soon  as  the  actual  end  has  been  attained. 

Art.  V. — All  that  which  relates  to  the  command  of  the  allied 

armies,  their  maintenance will  be  regulated  by  a  special 

convention. 

Art.  VI. — The  high  contracting  parties  will  have  the  power 
respectively,  of  accrediting  to  the  generals  in  command  of  the 
troops,  certain  officers  who  will  be  at  liberty  to  correspond  with 
their  governments,  and  keep  them  informed  of  military  events 
and  everything  relating  to  the  operations  of  the  armies. 

Art.  VII. — The  engagements  entered  into  by  the  present 
treaty  having  for  their  aim  the  maintenance  of  universal  peace, 
the  high  contracting  parties  have  resolved  between  them  to  ask 
all  the  other  powers  of  Europe  to  agree  to  them. 

Art.  VIII. — The  present  treaty  having  been  solely  entered 
into  for  the  purpose  of  supporting  France  or  any  other  country 
that  may  be  invaded,  against  the  attempts  of  Buonaparte  and 
his  adherents,  his  most  Christian  Majesty  will  be  specially  asked 
to  give  his  consent  thereto,  and  to  make  known,  in  case  he  should 
require  the  forces  named  in  Article  II.,  what  assistance  circum- 
stances will  permit  him  to  bring  forward  towards  the  object  of 
the  present  treaty. 

Art.  IX. — The  present  treaty  shall  be  ratified,  and  the  ratifi- 
cations thereof  shall  be  exchanged  in  two  months,  or  sooner  if 
necessary. 

In  witness  whereof  the  respective  plenipotentiaries  have 
hereunto  signed  their  names  and  set  their  seals. 

Executed  at  Vienna,  March  25,  in  the  year  of  our  Lord,  18 15. 

The  Prince  de  Metternich. 
The  Baron  de  Wessenberg. 
The  Duke  of  Wellington. 

On  the  same  day  the  same  treaty  was  concluded  between 
Russia  and  Great  Britain,  and  likewise  between  Great  Britain  and 
Prussia. 


THE  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA.  93 


No.  47. — The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  King 

Louis  XVIII. 

Vienna,  March  30,  181 5. 
Sire, 

General  Pozzo  is  about  to  start  and  join  your  Majesty. 
I  do  not  wish  him  to  leave  without  taking  a  letter  to  you.  All 
the  powers  are  quite  agreed  on  the  destruction  of  Buonaparte  ; 
they  look  upon  it  as  a  matter  of  personal  interest.  The  Emperor 
of  Russia  is  the  most  enthusiastic  ;  he  is  sending  all  his  troops, 
and  considers  that  this  question  is  one  on  which  he  is  bound  to 
spend1  his  last  coin.     He  will  himself  accompany  them. 

I  trust  the  corps  diplomatique  has  followed  your  Majesty.     I 
am  extremely  anxious  to  receive  news  from  you. 
I  have  the  honour  to  be 


No.  48. — The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  King 

Louis  XVIII. 

Vienna,  April  3,  181 5. 

Sire, 

As  Lord  Clancarty  is  sending  a  courier  to  London  who 
will  pass  through  Belgium,  I  take  advantage  of  it  to  make  known 
to  your  Majesty  the  actual  state  of  affairs.  Some  days  ago  we 
heard  here  that  Murat 2  had  entered  the  Papal  States  and  that  the 
Pope  had  to  quit  Rome.  This  event  has  at  last  opened  the  eyes 
of  Austria  and  put  an  end  to  all  her  hesitation.  We  are  now 
therefore  almost  entirely  in  accord  with  regard  to  Italian  affairs, 
which  will  soon  be  arranged  ;  we  shall  then  have  only  to  combine 
all  the  articles  agreed  upon,  in  order  to  draw  up  the  act  which 
will  terminate  the  congress  ;  for  I  strongly  hold,  and  now  more 
than  ever,  that  there  must  be  an  act. 

There  is  no  change  in  your  Majesty's  embassy  here.  The 
same  consideration  is  shown  towards  it,  and  it  exercises  the 
same  influence  as  if  your  Majesty  was  still  in   Paris  and  your 

1  Var. :   "  son  dernier  homme  et"="his  last  man  and." 

2  Murat  as  soon  as  he  heard  of  the  landing  of  Napoleon,  thought  to  profit  by  it, 
and  put  himself  at  the  head  of  a  similar  movement  and  proclaimed  himself  King  of 
Italy.  He  marched  into  Upper  Italy,  overran  the  Roman  States  and  Tuscany,  and 
drove  back  the  Austrians  as  far  as  the  Po  ;  but  he  had  soon  to  retreat,  he  was 
defeated  at  Tolentius  and  driven  back  on  Naples.  He  embarked  for  France,  and 
Queen  Caroline  was  conducted  to  Trieste  with  her  two  children  (May  20).  As  for 
Murat,  after  remaining  some  time  in  France,  he  passed  over  to  Corsica,  and  there 
assembled  a  small  number  of  followers,  with  whom  he  attempted  a  landing  in  his 
former  states.  He  was  captured  almost  immediately  and  shot  at  Pizzo  (October  13, 
1815). 


94  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

authority  was  not  ignored  in  any  part  of  the  kingdom.  I  can 
give  your  Majesty  the  assurance  that  this  position  is  fully 
maintained. 

I  have  not  as  yet  received  any  news  from  your  Majesty  since 
you  quitted  Paris.     I   await   it  with  the  greatest   impatience.     I 
venture  to  say  it  is  of  the  utmost  importance  that  I  should  be 
kept  informed  as  to  your  movements  and  intentions. 
I  have  the  honour  to  be 

P.S. — I  much  wish  that  your  Majesty'  would  acquaint  me  in 
detail  of  those  who  followed  you  and  those  whom  you  await. 
Only  Christian  names  are  necessary.  Was  the  Archbishop  of 
Rheims  able  to  follow  your  Majesty?1  I  have  heard  nothing 
from  M.  de  Jaucourt.  May  I  take  the  liberty  of  enclosing  a 
letter  to  him  under  cover  to  your  Majesty  ? 

M.  de  Vincent  arrived  this  morning  ;  the  Austrian  govern- 
ment will  probably  receive  a  letter  from  Buonaparte  or  the  Due 
de  Vicence  2  through  Lefebvre,3  the  secretary  of  the  legation, 
but  this  communication  will  receive  no  reply  and  will  have  no 
effect. 

My  letter  number  45,  which  has  been  returned  to  me,  will 
show  your  Majesty  those  that  are  missing. 


No.  49.— The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  King 

Louis  XVIII. 

Vienna,  April  8,4  181 5. 
Sire, 

The  events  which  have  taken  place  in  France  have  in  no 
way  altered  the  position  of  your  Majesty's  embassy  at  the 
congress,  where  the  affairs  concerning  the  future  arrangements 
of  Europe  continue  to  be  discussed  as  heretofore.  I  have  reason 
to  hope  that  what  still  remains  to  be  decided  will  be  carried 
out  in  accordance  with  the  wishes  expressed  to  me  by  your 
Majesty. 

In  several  letters  I  had  the  honour  of  writing  to  your 
Majesty  and  which  perhaps  have  not  reached  you,  I  mentioned 
that  it  seemed  of  the  utmost  importance  to  every  one  here,  and 
also  to  myself,  that  your  Majesty  should  not  quit  French  territory, 
or,  if  that  was  unavoidable,  that  you  should  go  no  further  away 

1  The  Cardinal  de  Talleyrand-Perigord,  the  author's  uncle. 

2  The  Due  de  Vicenre  had  just  been  made  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs. 

3  M.   Pallain  writes  "Lefeburo."     He  had  been  Secretary  to  the  Embassy   at 
Paris. 

4  This  letter  is  dated  5th  April  in  the  text  of  the  archives. 


THE  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA.  95 

than  was  absolutely  necessary.  If  I  might  venture  to  express 
my  opinion,  which  is  also  that  of  the  plenipotentiaries  of  all  the 
powers,  I  should  say  that  your  sojourn  in  a  town  so  near  the 
sea  as  Ostend  cannot  but  greatly  injure  your  cause  in  public 
estimation,  as  it  may  lead  people  to  think  that  your  Majesty  is 
desirous  of  quitting  the  continent  and  placing  the  sea  between 
yourself  and  your  country. 

The  place  which  under  present  circumstances  would  seem 
most  suitable  for  your  Majesty  (provided  the  state  of  affairs 
permits),  is  the  town  of  Liege,  which  the  disposition  of  the  troops 
seems  to  render  safe. 

We  are  occupied  here  with  the  second  declaration  of  the 
congress,  confirming  the  arrangements  made  by  the  powers  in 
that  of  March  13th.  It  will  answer  all  the  proclamations  issued 
by  Buonaparte  since  he  became  master  of  Paris,  and  will,  I  feel 
sure,  produce  a  great  effect  wherever  it  is  made  known.  It  has 
been  specially  written  for  the  temper  of  the  French  people. 

The  only  letter  I  have  received  from  your  Majesty  since  you 
left  Paris  is  that  with  which  your  Majesty  deigned  to  honour  me 
dated  March  26th.  I  have  received  none,  either  from  M.  de  Blacas 
nor  from  M.  de  Jaucourt,  and  I  must  inform  your  Majesty  that  this 
neglect  is  extremely  painful  to  me  and  very  injurious  to  affairs 
here. 

I  have  the  honour  to  be 

P.S.  I  enclose  herewith  a  letter  sent  by  a  courier  which  has 
come  back  to  me,  as  well  as  a  letter  which  the  same  courier 
carried  to  M.  de  Jaucourt. 


No.  28. — King  Louis   XVIII.  to  the  Prince 
de  Talleyrand. 

Ghent,  April  io,1  1815. 
Mon  Cousin, 

I  have  received  by  Prince  Victor  de  Rohan 2  your 
letter  No.  46.  The  expressions  of  your  attachment  are  always 
agreeable  to  me,  and  perhaps  even  more  so  at  such  a  painful 
moment,  but  I  did  not  need  them  to  count  fully  on  them. 

The  treaty  of  March  25th,  the  sequel  and  completion  of  the 
declaration  of  the  13th,  being  solely  directed  against  Buonaparte, 

1  Var.:   "9th  April." 

2  Victor,  Prince  de  Rohan,  born  in  1764,  was  Grand  Chamberlain  in  17S9  ; 
banished  shortly  afterwards,  he  entered  the  Austrian  army  and  became  Major-General 
and  Field  Marshal.  He  returned  to  France  in  1814  and  quitted  it  again  in  1S30,  and 
died  in  Austria  (1835). 


96  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

I  do  not  hesitate  to  charge  you  to  adhere  to  it  in  my  name.  If 
you  require  a  direction  ad  hoc  you  shall  have  it  whenever  you 
wish,  but  meanwhile  I  authorize  you  to  act  as  if  you  had  already 
received  it. 

The  weight  that  I  can  throw  into  the  scale  is  nineteen- 
twentieths  of  the  French  nation,  whose  sentiments  neither  I  nor 
the  powers  need  doubt.  But  this,  powerful  as  it  is,  cannot  be 
utilized  without  foreign  aid.  It  will  therefore  be  necessary  for 
the  allied  armies  to  enter  France,  and  that  as  soon  as  possible. 
Every  moment's  delay  lessens  my  power.  The  nature  of  fierce 
enthusiasm  is  gradually  to  cool  down,  whereas  delay,  on  the 
contrary,  gives  to  the  enemy  facilities  for  concentrating  his 
troops  and  the  means,  which  he  knows  only  too  well  how  to 
employ,  of  turning  in  his  favour  those  who  to-day  only  ask  to 
take  up  arms   and  fight  for  me. 

The  Duke  of  Wellington,  whom  I  saw  yesterday,  and  whose 
dispositions  I  cannot  praise  sufficiently,  has  sent  off  a  courier  to 
ask  for  permission  to  act  without  waiting  till  all  the  forces  have 
joined.  I  need  not  impress  upon  you  to  support  this  request 
urgently.  If  we  wait  for  the  complete  junction  of  the  troops, 
it  will  be  impossible  to  do  anything  before  the  first  of  June.  I 
have  no  doubt  as  to  our  success,  but  Buonaparte  will  never  be 
crushed  except  beneath  the  ruins  of  France,  whereas  speedy 
action,  by  more  surely  destroying  him,  might  preserve  her,  and 
this  should  be  the  aim  of  every  one,  but  especially  ourselves.1 

The  Duke  of  Wellington  tells  me  that  the  counter  project 
which  I  sent  you  on  March  7th,  has  been  adopted.  I  was  very 
pleased  to  hear  this.  I  am  also  thoroughly  satisfied  with  the 
arrangements  you  have  made  about  the  chancellor's  office,  the 

couriers It  is  a  relief  to  my  finances,  which   are  very 

low  just  now. 

I  have  brought  away  with  me  all  letters  and  documents  you 
have  sent  me  since  you  were  in  Vienna,2  and  have  directed  M.  de 
Jaucourt  to  do  the  same.  Your  courage  has  not  been  crushed,  as 
I  felt  sure  it  would  not  be,  by  these  events.  You  see  that  mine 
is  not  affected  either. 

Whereupon  I  pray  God  that  He  may  have  you,  my  cousin, 
in  His  safe  and  holy  keeping. 

Louis. 


1  Var  :  "ce  peut  ne  pas  etre  lebut  de  tout  le  monde,  mais  ce  doit  etre  le  notre"  = 
' '  this  may  not  be  the  aim  of  all  the  world,  but  it  must  be  ours. " 

2  This  passage  in  the  king's  letter  proves  that  Buonaparte  would  not  have  found 
the  treaty  of  January  3  in  the  escritoire  in  the  Tuileries. 


THE  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA.  97 


No.  VI.1 — The  Comte  de  Blacas  d'Aulps  to  the 
Prince  de  Talleyrand. 

Ghent,  April  10,  181 5. 
Prince, 

The  despatches  which  you  sent  by  Prince  Victor  de  Rohan 
reached  us  at  Ghent  ;  you  will  have  heard  that  the  king  went 
thither  on  leaving  Ostend,  where  his  continued  residence  seemed 
to  him,  to  give  colouring  to  the  false  reports  of  his  embarkation. 
No  one  can  deplore  more  than  myself  the  necessity  which  obliged 
his  Majesty  to  quit  his  country,  but  you  will  see  by  the  very  full 
account  I  have  the  honour  of  sending  you  herewith,2  the  im- 
perative necessity  with  which  he  was  forced  to  comply,  and  the 
painful  duties  imposed  on  those  faithful  subjects  who  dreaded 
everything  for  the  king's  honour,  everything  for  the  last  resources 
of  the  Monarchy,  during  those  critical  moments,  when  counsel 
became  so  difficult. 

The  king  had  several  marshals  with  him,  by  whose  advice 
he  was  guided,  respecting  the  troops,  which  in  this  sudden  revolu- 
tion, have  become  the  sole  arbiters  of  the  destiny  of  France. 
Never  has  pretorian  power  exercised  a  more  fatal  ascendency. 
You  would  have  been  indignant  at  the  irresistible  violence 
beneath  which  the  national  will  and  inclination  have  been 
compelled  to  bow.  It  is  fortunate  that  the  European  powers 
desire  to  maintain  peace,  and  prevent  the  calamities  ready  to  fall 
on  themselves,  for  it  is  only  on  this  interest  and  this  assistance 
that  we  can  count,  to  deliver  our  unhappy  country  from  the 
extreme  disorder  into  which  France  has  been  plunged. 

M.  le  Due  d'Angouleme  alone  seems  to  have  been  able  to 
rally  some  troops  in  the  south.  May  God  grant  that  treason 
does  not  baffle  our  efforts  !  It  seems  that  those  of  Madame 
were  not  able  to  preserve  the  town  of  Bordeaux. 

You  will  no  doubt  think  that  under  such  circumstances  you 
cannot  too  urgently  hasten  the  measures  already  determined 
upon.  It  is  above  all  most  important  to  prevent  the  evil  effects 
which  the  king's  sojourn  out  of  France  might  produce,  and  the 
powers,  through  their  relations  with  his  Majesty,  can  surround 
him  with  such  a  force,  as  will  alone  supplement  the  supremacy 
of  which  he  has  for  the  moment  been  deprived. 

Lord  Wellington,  who  arrived  here  yesterday,  does  not  seem 
to  have  the  least  doubt  about  our  future  success,  nor  the  slight- 
est uncertainty  respecting  the  restorative  character  that  must  be 

1  This  letter  is  not  in  M.  Pallain's  collection. 

2  See  this  account  further  on. 

VOL.  III.  H 


98  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

given  to  the  war,  but  he  does  not  wish  to  commence  operations 
until  all  his  forces  are  assembled,  and  during  this  delay,  France  is 
suffering,  and  resistance  becomes  discouraged.  This  painful 
thought  however  must  not  weigh  against  the  certain  calcula- 
tions which  direct  the  aggressive  preparations. 

The  treaty  of  March  25  th  is  drawn  up  in  the  most  satisfactory 
manner,  and  we  may  hope  everything  from  the  effect  which  its 
publication  will  produce  in  France. 

The  Paris  journals  have  announced  the  approaching  arrival 
in  France  of  the  Archduchess  Marie-Louise.  It  would  be  very 
desirable  to  give  the  utmost  publicity  to  any  facts  which  contradict 
this  assertion.  As  for  the  rest,  prince,  we  cannot  do  better  than 
rely  on  your  zeal  and  your  judgment.  It  is  to  you  and  to  the 
centre  of  the  European  confederation,  of  which  you  are  a 
member,  that  we  must  look  for  hopes  of  a  happier  future. 

M.  Pozzo  de  Borgo  has  reached  Brussels,  and  will  be  here  in 
the  course  of  to-day.  I  do  not  know  how  long  the  king  will 
remain  here,  his  intentions  in  this  respect  depend  upon  the 
measures  taken  by  the  Duke  of  Wellington.  We  are  trying  to 
gather  together  the  remains  of  the  household  troops  ;  they  are 
now  assembled  at  Alost,1  to  the  number  of  four  or  five  hundred 
men. 

Lord  Harrowby  and  Mr.  Wellesley  Poole 2  have  arrived  on  the 
part  of  their  government  to  arrange  the  preliminary  measures 
for  the  approaching  campaign  with  Lord  Wellington.  They 
saw  the  king  on  their  way  through  Ghent,  and  his  Majesty  has 
every  reason  to  be  satisfied  with  the  dispositions  they  showed  to 
him.  M.  de  Chateaubriand,3  and  M.  de  Lally-Tollendal,4  and 
M.  d'Angles,5  are  here  now  ;  the  king,  I  believe,  means  to  consult 
them. 

Accept,  prince,  the  assurance  of  my  most  devoted  attachment 
and  highest  consideration. 

Blacas  d'Aulps. 

1  Alost,  a  town  in  Belgium  near  Ghent. 

2  Sir  William  Wellesley  Poole,  an  English  statesman,  born  in  1763,  Master  of  the 
Mint  and  member  of  the  House  of  Commons. 

3  Chateaubriand  was  about  to  be  appointed  Minister  at  Stockholm,  when  the 
Hundred  Days  interfered.  He  followed  the  king  to  Ghent,  and  became  a  Minister 
of  State. 

4  M.  de  Lally-Tollendal,  formerly  member  of  the  Constituent  Assembly,  was  then 
a  Privy  Councillor. 

5  Comte  Jules  d'Angles,  born  in  1778,  Auditor  to  the  State  Council,  Master  of 
Appeal  in  1809,  Director  of  Police  of  the  Departments  beyond  the  Alpes,  Police 
Minister  under  the  Provisional  Government  in  1814,  State  Councillor  under  the  first 
restoration.  In  March,  1815,  he  accompanied  Comte  d'Artoisas  Civil  Commissioner, 
and  then  followed  the  king  to  Ghent.  On  the  return  of  the  king  he  became 
Minister  of  State,  then  Prefet  of  Police  under  the  Decaze  Ministry.  He  tendered 
his  resignation  after  the  assassination  of  the  Due  de  Berry,  and  died  in  1828. 


THE  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA.  99 

P.S. — General    Pozzo  de  Borgo  has   just  arrived.  General 

Fagel 1  this  morning  presented  his  credentials  to  the  king,  as 
minister  of  the  King  of  the  Belgians. 


Narrative  Attached  to  the  Preceding  Letter. 

A  catastrophe  as  baneful  as  it  was  unexpected,  has  just 
struck  Europe  with  amazement.  A  king  surrounded  by  the 
confidence  and  love  of  his  people  has  been  obliged  to  quit  his 
capital,  and  soon  afterwards  his  kingdom,  which  has  been  invaded 
by  the  man  whose  odious  name  recalls  nothing  but  crimes  and 
calamities  ;  and  France,  from  the  state  of  profound  peace  and 
progressive  prosperity  which  she  had  regained,  has  in  less  than 
three  weeks,  been  replunged  into  an  abyss  of  ills  which  she 
believed  had  been  closed  for  ever. 

It  is  most  important  that  it  should  be  known  by  what 
process  of  irresistible  causes,  treason  has,  under  these  circum- 
stances, been  enabled  to  enslave  public  opinion  and  the  national 
will. 

On  the  5th  of  March  the  king  was  apprised  by  telegraphic 
despatch,  that  Buonaparte  had  disembarked  on  French  territory 
at  the  head  of  eleven  hundred  men.  This  attempt  might  be 
looked  at  from  two  different  points  of  view.  It  was  either  the 
result  of  a  plot  supported  by  widely  spread  correspondence,  or  the 
act  of  a  madman,  whose  ambition  and  passionate  character  would 
no  longer  suffer  him  to  endure  the  inactivity,  which  only  left  him 
a  prey  to  the  uneasiness  of  remorse.  Under  this  twofold 
supposition  it  was  necessary  to  take  every  measure  that 
prudence  could  suggest  or  the  most  imminent  danger  demand. 
Nothing  was  neglected.  Orders  were  issued  with  all  haste  for 
the  assembly  of  the  troops  at  Lyons.  Satisfactory  accounts 
were  received  from  the  commandant  at  Grenoble,  and  the  conduct 
of  the  garrison  at  Antibes  inspired  the  hope,  that  Buonaparte  had 
been  mistaken  in  the  belief  that  he  would  be  able  to  gain  over 

1  Robert,  Baron  de  Fagel,  born  in  1772,  of  an  ancient  and  illustrious  Dutch 
family.  Entering  the  army  young,  he  took  part  in  the  campaigns  of  1793  an(l  J794 
against  France.  Being  exiled  by  the  fall  of  the  House  of  Orange,  he  did  not  return 
to  his  country  till  1813.  In  1814  General  Fagel  was  appointed  Minister  at  Paris. 
He  remained  there  until  1854. 

II    2 


ioo  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

the  king's  troops.  Nevertheless,  if  he  had  some  secret  corre- 
spondents, they  might  favour  his  first  progress,  but  a  force 
stationed  at  Lyons  would  be  able  to  check  this.  Monsieur, 
therefore,  started  at  six  in  the  morning,  to  assume  the  com- 
mand ;  he  was  followed  the  next  day  by  M.  le  Due  d'Orleans. 

All  the  marshals  and  generals  employed  in  the  departments 
received  orders  to  rejoin  their  respective  head-quarters,  and 
started  at  once.  Marshal  Ney,  who  was  in  command  at 
Besancon,  and  could  from  thence  very  efficiently  second 
Monsieur  s  operations,  came  to  take  leave  of  the  king,  and  on 
kissing  hands,  said  to  him,  in  a  tone  of  devotion,  and  with  an 
elan  that  seemed  the  outcome  of  a  soldier's  frankness,  that  if  he 
came  across  the  king's  enemy  and  that  of  France,  he  would 
bring  him  back  in  an  iron  cage.  Events  soon  showed  with  what 
base  dissimulation  a  project  of  the  blackest  perfidy  had  even 
then  inspired  him. 

Monsieur  was  enthusiastically  received  at  Lyons  ;  everything 
was  prepared  for  the  most  vigorous  resistance,  but  unfortunately 
there  were  no  munitions  of  war. 

It  was  soon  known  that  the  garrison  of  Grenoble  had 
opened  the  gates  of  that  town  to  the  enemy,  and  that  a  regiment 
from  Chambery,  under  the  command  of  M.  de  la  Bedoyere *  had 
joined  the  rebels.  Only  a  small  number  of  troops  had  as  yet 
arrived  at  Lyons,  but  Monsieur,  whom  Marshal  Macdonald 
hastened  to  rejoin,  nevertheless  decided  to  make  a  stand  behind 
the  barricades  that  had  been  hastily  thrown  up.  But  the 
appearance  of  the  first  of  the  dragoons  who  preceded 
Buonaparte,  caused  general  disaffection  amongst  Monsieur's 
troops.  All  the  remonstrances  of  the  Due  de  Tarente  were 
in t  vain;  and  then,  as  ever  since,  the  troops  assembled  to 
oppose  the  torrent,  only  served  to  increase  it  and  add  to  its 
violence. 


1  Charles  Huchet,  Comte  de  la  Bedoyere,  born  in  1786,  enrolled  as  a  volunteer  in 
1806,  became  Aide-de-Camp  to  Prince  Eugene  in  1809,  and  Colonel  in  1814.  In 
1815  he  commanded  the  7th  Regiment  of  the  Line  at  Grenoble.  It  was  known  that 
he  was  one  of  the  first  to  declare  in  favour  of  Napoleon  and  that  he  brought  his  regi- 
ment to  him  at  Vizille.  He  became  General  of  Brigade  and  peer  of  France  during 
the  Hundred  Days.  He  was  arrested  on  the  4th  of  August  following,  brought  before 
a  court  martial  and  shot  (August  19th). 


THE  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA.  101 

On  the  tenth  we  learnt  by  a  telegraphic  despatch,  and  there- 
fore without  any  details,  that  Buonaparte  had  entered  Lyons 
that  same  day.  The  return  of  M.  le  Due  d'Orleans,  who  arrived 
in  Paris  on  the  twelfth,  and  also  that  of  Monsieur,  was  speedily 
followed  by  information  which  raised  to  the  highest  pitch,  the 
alarm  which  such  a  rapid  succession  of  disasters  could  not  fail  to 
create. 

But  public  opinion,  excited  by  so  many  fears  and  suspicions, 
seeks  elsewhere  for  the  cause  of  his  lamentable  success,  than  in 
the  fatal  ascendency  of  a  man  so  abhorred.  No  one  be- 
lieved it  possible  that  the  mere  fascination  of  his  presence  could 
have  such  an  effect  on  the  troops.  Marshal  the  Due  de  Dalmatie, 
the  war  minister,  had  been  the  last  to  uphold  in  France  by  force 
of  arms,  the  fallen  fortunes  of  Napoleon.  Some  people  seemed 
to  see  in  this  former  proof  of  devotion  an  indication  of  present 
treachery.  The  public  voice  was  raised  against  the  marshal, 
who  then  sent  in  his  resignation  and  tendered  his  sword x  to  the 
king.  His  Majesty  with  that  reliance  which  has  never  failed 
him  amid  the  most  terrible  treachery,  summoned  the  Due  de 
Feltre,  to  whom  public  opinion  pointed  for  selection,  and  handed 
him  the  portfolio  of  war  minister,  which  post  he  had  previously 
held  under  Buonaparte,  until  the  restoration.  This  action  has 
been  fully  justified  by  the  Due  de  Feltre's  2  fidelity. 

There  was  nothing  further  to  be  done,  than  to  withdraw  the 
troops,  which,  when  advancing  towards  the  enemy,  supplied  him 
almost  everywhere  with  auxiliaries.  It  was  decided  to  form  an 
army  corps  before  Paris  by  assembling  there  as  many  of  the 
National  Guard  and  volunteers  as  could  be  got  together,  The 
Due  de  Berry  was  on  the  nth  nominated  general  of  this  force, 
and  Marshal  Macdonald  was  on  his  arrival  appointed  to  the 
command  under  the  prince's  orders. 

But  nevertheless  the  orders  sent  to  hasten  the  organization  of 
the  volunteers  and  the  mobile  columns  of  the  National  Guard, 
could  neither  reach  their  destination  nor  be  carried  out  for  some 
days,  and  every  moment  brought  forth  fresh  dangers.     Buona- 

1  The  marshal's  resignation  is  dated  nth  March.     Some  days  after  Napoleon 
created  him  peer  of  France  and  Major-General. 

2  The  Due  de  Feltre  followed  the  king  to  Ghent. 


102  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

parte  marched  with  a  rapidity  the  enormous  advantage  of  which 
he  foresaw,  and  several  regiments,  which  were  necessarily  near 
his  route,  joined  him,  some  even  taking  possession  in  his  name 
of  various  towns  in  Burgundy.  One  of  them  preceded  him  into 
Auxerre. 

There  was  still  some  faint  hope  that  the  regiments  of  the 
first  military  division,  and  those  forming  the  garrison  of  Paris, 
might  remain  loyal.  An  imminent  danger,  just  averted  by  the 
fidelity  of  the  commandant  of  La  Fere  and  the  arrest  of  the 
traitors  d'Erlong  and  Lallemand,  likewise  gave  some  little  con- 
fidence as  to  the  state  of  the  departments  in  the  north.1  The  Due 
de  Reggio,  though  deserted  by  the  Old  Guard,  has  succeeded  in 
keeping  the  other  regiments  under  his  command  faithful.  It  was 
decided  to  form  an  army  of  reserve  at  Peronne,  where  the 
troops,  being  together,  would  be  less  exposed  to  temptation  and 
would  be  under  the  supervision  of  the  Due  de  Trevise,  to  whom 
was  given  the  command  of  this  army  corps.  The  Due  d'Orleans 
went  there  shortly  afterwards. 

It  was  at  this  time  that  the  king,  impressed  by  the  greatness 
of  the  danger,  but  equally  sensible  of  the  grave  duties  which 
the  painful  circumstances  attendant  on  his  situation  imposed 
upon  him,  went  to  the  representatives  of  the  nation  by  whom 
he  desired  to  be  surrounded  at  the  first  approach  of  danger. 
His  speech  to  the  assembly  of  the  two  Chambers  made  a  great 
impression  in  the  capital,  the  inhabitants  of  which  unanimously 
testified  their  sentiments  of  devotion  to  the  king  and  the  country  ; 
but  the  National  Guard,  composed  chiefly  of  fathers  of  families, 
could  not  furnish  a  sufficient  number  of  volunteers  to  give  any 
hopes  of  successful  resistance  ;  and  the  Comte  de  Dessoles 2  who 

1  On  the  news  of  Napoleon's  landing,  a  military  rising  broke  out  in  the  North. 
Generals  Lallemand  at  Laon,  Drouet-d'Erlon  at  Lille,  and  Lefebvre-Desnouettes  at 
Noyon,  who  for  some  time  had  prepared  a  coup  de  main,  wished  to  assemble  their 
troops,  march  upon  Paris,  and  keep  the  king  a  prisoner  there.  Lefebvre-Desnouettes 
gave  the  signal  by  endeavouring  to  carry  off  the  depot  of  artillery  at  la  Fere,  but  he 
was  prevented  by  the  firmness  of  General  d'Aboville  (March  9).  The  conspirators 
then  took  possession  of  Chauny,  but  having  been  thwarted  at  Compiegne,  they  dis- 
persed and  the  movement  failed.  At  the  second  restoration  these  three  generals 
were  condemned  to  death  in  default. 

2  Jean  Dessoles,  born  in  1767,  enlisted  in  1792,  became  General  of  Division  and 
Chief  of  the  Staff  of  the  Army  of  Italy  in  1798,  and  State  Councillor  in  1801.  He 
remained  a  long  time  in  retirement  during  the  Empire,  and  then  became  Chief  of  the 


THE  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA.  103 

commanded  it,  was  so  explicit  on  this  point,  that  there  was 
nothing  left  but  to  amalgamate  the  citizens  with  the  troops  of 
the  line,  in  order  to  keep  the  latter  faithful. 

Every  other  plan  of  defence  being  impracticable,  it  became 
apparent  that  the  principal  means  of  resistance  was  reduced  to 
some  regiments,  whose  fidelity  was  more  than  doubtful,  strength- 
ened by  a  small  number  of  brave  and  devoted  volunteers,  to 
whom  would  be  added  the  body  of  cavalry  belonging  to  the 
king's  household. 

On  the  17th  an  overwhelming  piece  of  intelligence  ren- 
dered these  preparations  still  less  hopeful.  Marshal  Ney,  who 
was  supposed  to  be  in  pursuit  of  the  rebels,  had  joined  them  ;  at 
the  same  time  issuing  a  proclamation  intended  to  spread  the 
disaffection  still  further.  This  news  struck  terror  into  the 
departments  adjoining  Paris.  The  town  of  Sens  declared  itself 
unable  to  resist ;  the  enemy  would  shortly  be  at  Fontainebleau  ; 
and  the  troops  in  Paris,  on  whom  every  means  had  been  exhausted 
in  order  to  excite  their  patriotism,  either  remained  perfectly  silent 
or  showed  signs  of  a  desire  to  abandon  their  colours. 

Hardly  had  they  started  for  the  rendezvous  assigned  to  them, 
than  their  evil  inclinations  degenerated  into  open  rebellion. 
On  the  morning  of  the  19th  it  became  known  that  there  was 
not  a  single  regiment  before  Paris  which  was  not  overtaken 
by  this  contagious  defection  ;  thus  there  was  nothing  to  prevent 
Buonaparte's  approach,  and  the  only  thing  left  for  the  king  was 
to  withdraw,  accompanied  by  his  household  troops,  on  whose 
fidelity  he  could  in  future  alone  rely. 

His  Majesty,  who  had  sent  the  Due  de  Bourbon  to  the  depart- 
ments of  the  west,  and  who  had  given  the  Due  d'Angouleme  the 
necessary  powers  for  arming  the  southern  provinces,  deemed  it 
best  that  he  himself  should  go  to  the  northern  departments  and 
endeavour  to  keep  possession  of  the  strongholds  and  use  them  as 
a  point  d'appni  for  the  assembly  of  those  faithful  subjects  who 
might  rally  there.     The  king  left  at  midnight  on  the  19th,  and 


Staff  to  Prince  Eugene  in  1S12.  In  1814  he  was  appointed  by  the  Provisional  Govern- 
ment, General  Commandant  of  the  National  Guard.  At  the  first  restoration  he  be- 
came a  State  Minister,  peer  of  France,  and  Major  General  of  the  National  Guard.  In 
1818  he  was  for  some  months  President  of  the  Council,  and  died  in  182S. 


104  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

was    followed   an   hour   later  by   his    household    troops    under 
Monsieur,  and  by  the  Due  de  Berry. 

Reaching  Abbeville  on  the  20th  at  five  in  the  afternoon, 
the  king  rested  there  the  next  day  to  await  the  arrival  of  the 
household  troops ;  but  Marshal  Macdonald,  who  joined  his 
Majesty  at  midnight  on  the  21st,  pointed  out  to  the  king  the 
necessity  of  leaving  at  once  ;  and  after  hearing  his  report 
his  Majesty  determined  to  retire  to  Lille,  and  sent  orders 
to  the  household  troops  to  rejoin  him  there  by  way  of 
Amiens. 

At  one  in  the  afternoon  on  the  22nd,  the  king,  preceded  by 
the  Due  de  Tarente,  entered  Lille,  where  he  was  received  by  the 
inhabitants  with  the  most  enthusiastic  demonstrations  of  affec- 
tion and  fidelity.  He  had  also  been  preceded  by  the  Due 
d'Orleans  and  the  Due  de  Trevise,  who  thought  they  ought  to 
call  out  the  garrison.  This  last  circumstance,  of  which  the  king 
had  not  been  advised,  might  greatly  disconcert  the  plans  of  re- 
sistance which  had  been  decided  on.  If  the  troops  had  not  been 
called  out,  the  national  guards  and  the  king's  household  troops, 
seconded  by  the  loyalty  of  the  inhabitants  of  Lille,  might  have 
secured  to  the  king  this  last  refuge  on  French  territory.  With 
a  large  and  ill-disposed  garrison  the  scheme  seemed  very  difficult 
of  execution  ;  his  Majesty  however  determined  to  make  the 
attempt.  The  enthusiasm  of  the  people  had  already  been  roused 
to  the  highest  pitch  by  his  presence.  An  eager  crowd  followed  him, 
making  every  effort  to  enlist  the  sympathies  of  the  soldiers,  and 
repeatedly  shouting  their  cherished  cry  of  "  Vive  le  Roi ! "  The 
soldiers,  dejected  and  indifferent,  maintained  a  gloomy  silence — 
an  alarming  warning  of  their  approaching  defection  ;  indeed, 
Marshal  Mortier  frankly  told  the  king  that  he  would  not  answer 
for  the  garrison. 

When  questioned  as  to  the  utmost  expedients  it  might  be 
possible  to  employ,  he  declared  further  that  it  would  be  out  of 
his  power  to  make  the  troops  leave  the  town.  In  the  meanwhile, 
the  declaration  published  at  Vienna  on  March  1 3th,  in  the  name 
of  all  the  European  powers  united  in  congress,  arrived  at  Lille. 
The  king  directed  it  to  be  distributed  and  placarded  at  once, 
hoping,  though  in  vain,  thereby  to  show  the  troops  the  fatal 


THE  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA.  105 

results    that    would   follow  their  defection,  and    the  inevitable 
misfortunes  it  would  bring  on  their  country. 

On  the  23rd  his  Majesty  heard  that  the  Due  de  Bassano, 
who  had  been  made  minister  of  the  interior,  had  sent  orders 
from  Buonaparte  to  the  prefet  of  Lille.  On  the  same  day,  at 
one  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  Marshal  Mortier  came  to  inform 
the  master  of  the  king's  household  that  a  report  having  got 
abroad  that  the  Due  de  Berry  was  approaching  with  the  house- 
hold troops  and  two  Swiss  regiments,  the  whole  garrison  was 
prepared  to  rise.  He  entreated  that  the  king  would  leave,  in 
order  to  avoid  the  most  terrible  disasters,  and  added  that  he 
hoped  by  personally  escorting  his  Majesty  beyond  the  gates  of  the 
town,  to  keep  a  check  on  the  soldiers,  which  it  would  be  impos- 
sible for  him  to  do  if  the  departure  was  delayed  for  a  single 
moment.  The  king  therefore  deemed  it  necessary  to  send 
orders  to  his  household  troops  to  proceed  to  Dunkirk,  which 
order  unfortunately  never  reached  them  ;  but  being  unable 
himself  to  go  straight  to  that  town,  he  decided  to  proceed  to 
Ostend.  His  Majesty  left  Lille  at  three  o'clock,  accompanied 
by  Marshal  Mortier,  and  followed  by  the  Due  d'Orleans.  At 
the  foot  of  the  glacis,  the  Due  de  Trevise  deemed  it  advisable  to 
turn  back  to  prevent  any  disturbance  the  garrison  might  commit 
during  his  absence.  The  Due  d'Orleans  also  returned  to  the 
fortress,  and  did  not  depart  till  several  hours  later.  Marshal 
Macdonald  did  not  leave  the  king  till  they  reached  the  gates  of 
Menin,  and  to  the  last  moment  afforded  to  his  Majesty,  as  did 
also  the  Due  de  Trevise,  the  comforting  proof  that  the  sacred- 
ness  of  an  oath  and  the  fidelity  of  a  man  of  honour  are  not 
scorned  by  all  the  gallant  men  on  whom  the  French  army 
prides  itself. 

A  picket  of  the  national  guard  of  Lille,  a  detachment  of 
cuirassiers  and  the  king's  chasseurs,  followed  his  Majesty  as  far 
as  the  frontier.  Some  of  the  latter,  together  with  several  officers, 
did  not  wish  to  leave  him,  and  accompanied  him  into  Belgian 
territory.  The  king  arrived  at  Ostend  hoping  to  proceed  to 
Dunkirk  as  soon  as  that  town  was  occupied  by  his  household 
troops.  During  this  time,  these  unfortunate  troops,  who  had 
been  joined  by  a  large  number  of  volunteers  of  all  ages  and 


106  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLE  YRAND. 

ranks,  had  followed  the  route  taken  by  the  king  on  his  way  to 
Lille.  Monsieur  and  the  Due  de  Berry,  always  at  the  head  of 
this  brave  elite  and  sharing  its  fatigue,  had  good  cause  to  admire 
its  heroic  constancy.  Young  lads,  who  for  the  first  time  carried 
heavy  arms,  and  old  men,  had  joined  these  faithful  troops,  doing 
forced  marches  on  foot  on  roads  rendered  almost  impassable  by 
heavy  and  continuous  rains,  and  were  not  discouraged  either  by 
privation  or  the  still  more  cruel  uncertainty  of  a  march,  which 
they  were  conscious  the  defection  of  the  surrounding  garrisons, 
might  render  still  more  disastrous.  In  the  absence  of  orders,  which 
the  king  could  not  prevent,  and  hearing  also  that  his  Majesty 
had  left  Lille,  the  column  marched  straight  to  the  frontier,  but 
in  crossing  a  heavy  country,  over  which  the  horses  could  only 
pass  with  extreme  difficulty,  they  were  unable  to  defile  quickly 
enough  to  follow  Marshal  Marmont,  who  led  them  under 
the  orders  of  the  princes,  with  an  activity  and  zeal  worthy  of 
better  success,  and  a  portion  of  these  unfortunate  men  were 
forced  to  remain  behind,  when  Monsie?tr,  fearing  their  devotion 
would  only  lead  them  into  useless  perils,  gave  them  leave  to 
withdraw.  But  being  quickly  surprised  and  shut  up  in  Bethune 
by  orders  received  from  Paris,  they  did  not  all  succeed  in  dis- 
persing, and  left  to  Monsieur  only  the  hope  of  rallying  round 
him  by  degrees,  those  amongst  them  whom  he  could  collect  on 
the  frontier  ;  for  which  purpose  he  remained  there. 

At  eight  o'clock  on  the  morning  of  the  25  th,  the  king  heard 
that  Monsieur  had  reached  Ypres,  and  the  news  of  what  had 
befallen  his  household  troops  added  fresh  weight  to  the  sorrows 
with  which  he  was  already  overwhelmed. 

In  the  midst  of  this  terrible  disaster,  his  Majesty  has  received 
the  most  gratifying  tokens  of  fidelity,  but  they  in  a  measure 
serve  only  to  increase  his  regrets.  He  is  forced  to  leave  his 
people,  good  and  devoted  as  they  are,  to  the  tender  mercies  of 
an  excited  soldiery,  and  he  cannot  gather  round  him  his  staunch 
and  brave  followers.  There  are  evidences  of  unswerving  fidelity 
among  many  of  the  chiefs  of  that  army  which  the  king  would 
like  to  call  his  own,  and  yet  he  cannot  offer  any  other  recompense 
than  that  esteem  and  praise  which  France  and  posterity  will  one 
day  acknowledge  as  their  due. 


THE  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA.  107 

Among  the  memories  which  are  indelibly  engraved  on  the 
king's  heart  and  the  honourable  sentiments  of  which  he  has 
received  the  most  convincing  proof,  those  which  he  retains  of  the 
conduct  of  Marshal  Mortier  occupy  the  first  rank.  Since  the 
arrival  of  his  Majesty  at  Ostend  he  has  heard  through  the 
Due  d'Orleans  that  an  order  to  arrest  him  and  all  the  princes 
had  reached  the  marshal  ;  a  staff  officer  carrying  a  despatch 
from  Marshal  Davoust,  in  which  the  same  order  was  enclosed, 
arrived  at  Lille  after  the  king  had  left  it ;  but  the  Due  de 
Trevise  arranged  matters  so  that  nothing  transpired  until  after 
the  departure  of  the  Due  d'Orleans.1 

This  brief  narrative  of  the  principal  events  which  mark  the 
short  and  unfortunate  period  just  described,  will  enable  you  to 
judge  of  the  sudden  and  innumerable  difficulties  by  which  the 
king  sees  himself  surrounded.  Never  have  such  unexpected 
and  rapid  events  changed  the  aspect  of  a  vast  monarchy  ;  but 
never  before  has  the  marked  difference  between  the  disposition 
of  the  soldier  and  the  citizen  so  completely  paralyzed  patriotism, 
weakened  authority,  and  invested  with  a  magic  terror  the  man, 
who,  arriving  almost  alone  on  French  soil,  was  enabled  two  days 
later  to  array  a  mass  of  armed  men  against  a  defenceless  people. 

Moreover  this  simultaneous  and  general  defection  of  the 
army  has  not,  it  is  evident,  been  based  on  any  motive  that  could 
for  a  length  of  time  attach  it  to  the  fate  of  the  man  who  has 
resumed  so  baneful  an  ascendency  over  it.  The  tacit  compact 
he  has  made  with  it,  will  quickly  be  broken  by  the  reverses  that 
await  him.  It  is  not  Buonaparte  proscribed,  rejected  and  shortly 
to  be  overwhelmed  by  the  whole  of  Europe,  whom  this  credulous 
soldiery  desired  to  follow.    They  saw  before  them  the  devastator 

1  .  ..."  I  then  decided  to  leave  {Lille)  in  the  night  It  was  not  until  I  had 
come  to  this  determination  that  I  learnt  from  Marshal  the  Due  de  Trevise  (who  had 
had  the  extreme  delicacy  to  hide  it  from  me  as  well  as  the  king)  that  a  telegraphic 
despatch  of  fifteen  lines,  had  been  sent  him,  by  which  he  was  enjoined  to  arrest  the 
king  and  all  the  Bourbons  who  might  be  at  Lille.  He  told  me  besides,  that  since 
the  king's  departure  one  of  Marshal  Davoust's  aides-de-camp  had  presented  himself 
at  the  gate,  that  he  had  sent  for  him  and  found  that  he  brought  orders  to  arrest  the 
king  and  myself.  He  assured  me  that  he  could  trust  this  aide-de-camp,  and  begging 
me  to  take  no  notice  of  what  I  had  just  learnt,  he  asked  me  to  stay  at  Lille  as  long  as 
if  I  had  known  nothing  about  it.  I  already  appreciated  all  the  qualities  of  Marshal 
the  Due  de  Trevise,  for  whom  I  had  a  sincere  friendship,  and  I  had  no  need  of  this 
fresh  proof  of  loyalty  to  do  justice  to  the  nobleness  of  his  character." — My  Journal. 
Events  of  1S15,  by  Louis  Philippe  d'Orleans  (i.  256). 


io8  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

of  the  world,  ready  to  give  them  up  the  spoil.  His  prestige  once 
destroyed,  Buonaparte  will  soon  lose  his  borrowed  strength  ;  it 
is  for  this,  for  the  reflex  which  follows  the  intoxication  of  a  great 
illusion,  which  the  king  waits,  with  all  the  impatience  to  which 
the  happy  results  he  expects  from  it,  give  rise. 


No.   50. — The  Prince  de  Talleyrand   to   King 

Louis  XVIII. 

Vienna,  April  13,  1S15. 

Sire, 

As  Buonaparte  has  made  himself  master  of  Paris,  the 
powers  consider  that  it  might  be  advisable  to  renew  by  a  second 
declaration,  the  manifestation  of  the  sentiments  expressed  in 
that  of  the  13th  of  March.  There  is  every  reason  to  believe, 
that  with  the  exception  of  a  few  individuals,  every  one  in  France 
of  whatever  shade  of  opinion,  desires  the  same  thing,  the  downfall 
of  Buonaparte.  It  would  be  well  therefore  to  utilize  this  general 
feeling,  in  order  to  annihilate  him.  This  object  once  accomplished, 
the  particular  opinions  of  each  party  will  find  themselves  without 
support,  without  strength,  and  without  means  of  action,  and  will 
no  longer  present  any  obstacles. 

The  declaration  has  therefore  been  drawn  up  in  such  a 
manner  as  to  induce  the  representatives  of  all  parties  to  compel 
Buonaparte  to  retire.  Though  fully  agreed  as  to  the  basis  of  the 
declaration,  we  have  not  yet  come  to  an  understanding  as  to  its 
form  ;  and  its  publication  is  for  the  moment  delayed.  It  is  even 
suggested  to  substitute  for  a  declaration  by  the  congress,  a  pro- 
clamation, to  be  issued  simultaneously  by  all  the  commanders-in- 
chief  of  the  allied  troops,  at  the  moment  that  those  troops  enter 
French  territory,  and  I  am  not  disinclined  to  adopt  this  idea, 
which  seems  to  me  to  possess  many  advantages. 

All  I  hear  from  France  proves  that  Buonaparte  finds  himself 
greatly  embarrassed.  I  also  judge  of  this  from  the  two  emissaries 
he  has  sent  here. 

One  of  them,  M.  de  Montrond,  with  the  help  of  the  Abbe 
Altieri  attached  to  the  Austrian  legation  in  Paris,  has  come  as 
far  as  Vienna.  He  had  no  ostensible  mission  nor  any  despatches, 
and  he  has  most  probably  been  sent  by  the  party  which  favours 
Buonaparte,  not  by  Buonaparte  himself.  That  at  least  is  my 
impression.  He  was  the  bearer  of  messages  to  M.  de  Metternich, 
M.  de  Nesselrode,  and  myself.  He  was  to  ascertain  whether  the 
foreign    powers   were    seriously   determined    not   to   recognize 


THE  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA.  109 

Buonaparte,  but  to  go  to  war  with  him  ;  he  had  also  a  letter  for 
Prince  Eugene.  What  he  was  told  to  ask  me  was,  How  I  could 
possibly  resolve  on  stirring  up  a  war  with  France  ?  "  Read  the 
declaration,"  I  replied  ;  "  it  does  not  contain  one  word  which  I  do 
not  fully  endorse.  Besides,  it  is  not  a  question  of  war  against 
France,  it  is  war  against  the  man  of  the  island  of  Elba." 

He  asked  M.  de  Metternich  whether  the  Austrian  govern- 
ment had  completely  lost  sight  of  the  views  they  held  in  March, 
1814.  "A  regency?"  replied  M.  de  Metternich,  "we  do  not 
want  one."  Finally  he  tried  to  find  out  from  M.  de  Nesselrode 
what  were  the  Emperor  Alexander's  views.  "  The  destruction 
of  Buonaparte  and  all  his  people,"  was  the  reply,  and  there  the 
matter  ended. 

It  was  decided  to  make  M.  de  Montrond  at  once  acquainted 
with  the  number  of  troops  that  will  immediately  take  the  field, 
and  likewise  with  the  treaty  of  March  25th.  He  has  returned  to 
Paris  carrying  this  information  and  these  answers  back  with  him  ; 
it  will  give  those  who  have  attached  themselves  to  Buonaparte's 
fortunes,  something  to  think  about. 

The  second  emissary  he  sent  was  M.  de  Flahaut.1  When  he 
arrived  at  Stuttgart  the  King  of  Wurtemburg  had  him  arrested 
and  conducted  back  to  the  frontier.  He  carried  despatches 
for  the  Emperor  of  Austria,  the  Emperor  Alexander,  the  Empress 
Marie-Louise,  and  for  your  Majesty's  legation  at  Vienna.  They 
were  we  presume  (the  despatches  being  all  separate)  letters  to 
annul  the  powers  of  your  Majesty's  embassy. 

The  sovereigns  continue  very  well  disposed.  I  can  assure 
your  Majesty  that  it  is  an  extremely  difficult  matter  to  get  so 
many  people  all  to  go  the  same  way  ;  I  never  cease  in  my  efforts 
to  prevent  any  of  them  from  turning  aside.  The  territorial 
arrangements  for  the  north  of  Germany  were  concluded  yester- 
day ;  in  a  few  days  more  I  hope  the  congress  will  have  finished 
all  that  it  has  to    do. 

I  shall  have  the  honour  to  send  your  Majesty  by  the  first 
English  courier,  who  leaves  on  Saturday  the  15th,  the 
declaration  of  war  (very  badly  drawn  up)  by  Austria,  against 

1  Comte  de  Flahaut  de  la  Billarderie,  born  in  1785,  enlisted  in  1798,  took  part 
in  all  the  campaigns  of  the  Empire,  and  became  a  General  in  1813,  and  Aide-de-Camp 
to  the  emperor.  In  18 14  he  adhered  to  the  restoration,  but  was  one  of  the  first  to 
rally  round  the  emperor  at  the  period  of  the  Hundred  Days.  On  his  return  from 
his  fruitless  mission  to  Vienna  he  was  made  a  peer  of  France.  He  was  exiled  at  the 
second  restoration,  and  tendered  his  resignation  in  1817.  The  Revolution  of  July 
gave  him  back  his  rank  and  his  peerage.  In  183 1  he  was  for  a  brief  space  Ambas- 
sador at  Berlin,  and  became  in  1837  equerry  to  the  Due  d'Orleans.  In  1841  he  was 
appointed  Ambassador  at  Vienna,  and  held  this  post  till  1848 ;  he  was  created 
senator  in  1853,  and  Grand  Chancellor  of  the  Legion  of  Honour  in  1864.  He  died 
in  1870. 


no  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

Murat.     This  matter  will  very  shortly  I  trust  be  concluded  to 
your  satisfaction. 

I  have  the  honour  to  be 

P.S. — This  letter  is  taken  by  M.  Fauche  Borel.1 

No.  51. — The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to   King 

Louis  XVIII. 

Vienna,  April  15,  181 5. 

Sire, 

I  have  returned  the  three  letters  which  your  Majesty 
desired  M.  de  Jaucourt  to  send  me.  I  ventured  to  tell  him  (owing 
to  some  questions  put  to  me  the  object  of  which  was  to  ascertain 
whether  your  Majesty  approved  of  the  declaration)  that  the 
emperors  expected  to  find  in  these  letters  some  expressions  of 
satisfaction  on  this  subject.  Nevertheless  their  words  and  their 
actions  all  show  that  the  greatest  unanimity  reigns  among  them, 
and  I  will  do  my  utmost  to  foster  this  feeling  to  the  end. 

M.  Pozzo  will  have  told  your  Majesty  how,  under  even  less 
difficult  circumstances,  it  was  no  easy  matter  to  make  interests, 
apparently  at  variance,  take  the  same  line. 

The  Russian  troops  arrived  in  Bohemia  four  days  before  they 
were  expected.  It  would  not  surprise  me  if,  although  going  by 
way  of  the  Vistula,  they  reached  the  Rhine  before,  or  at  any  rate 
as  soon  as,  the  Austrian  troops. 

Reports  here  as  to  the  actual  force  and  position  of  the  army 
under  the  command  of  the  Duke  of  Wellington  vary  so  con- 
siderably, that  I  should  much  like  your  Majesty  to  order  M.  de 
Jaucourt  to  send  me  positive  information  on  this  point,  especially 
as  to  the  time  when  they  may  be  expected  to  enter  France. 

Marshal  de  Wrede  leaves  here  in  two  days.2  The  force  under 
his  command,  and  also  the  Prussian  troops,  are  much  excited. 

The  Austrians  have  received  news  from  Italy  dated  April  7th, 
with  which  they  are  on  the  whole  satisfied  ;  but  then,  they  are 

1  Louis  Fauche -Borel,  a  Swiss  political  agent  of  French  origin.  Born  at  Neuf- 
chatel  in  1762  he  rendered  great  services  to  the  emigres.  In  1795  he  acted  as 
intermediary  between  the  Prince  de  Conde  and  Pichegru,  and  was  mixed  up  in  all 
the  royalist  intrigues  and  conspiracies  in  France  up  to  1801.  He  was  then  arrested 
in  Paris  and  detained  for  eighteen  months.  At  the  intervention  of  the  King  of 
Prussia,  he  was  liberated.  He  then  retired  to  Berlin  in  1805.  Owing  to  the 
demands  of  Napoleon,  he  was  compelled  to  take  refuge  in  London.  In  1814  and 
181 5  he  received  numerous  missions  and  travelled  frequently  between  Ghent  and 
Vienna.  He  was  at  length  arrested  at  Ghent  by  order  of  M.  de  Blacas.  In  1816  he 
received  from  the  King  of  Prussia  the  title  of  Councillor  to  the  Embassy  ;  but  soon 
after,  abandoned  by  all  and  quite  forgotten,  he  was  reduced  to  want,  and  ended  by 
killing  himself  (1829). 

2  Var.  :  "he  will  stop  four  days  at  Munich  and  go  thence  to  his  army  corps." 


THE  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA.  in 

satisfied  with  very  little.  The  reason  of  this  satisfaction  is  that 
Murat's  army  corps,  after  having  in  vain  tried  to  force  the  bridge 
of  d'Occhiobello,has  retired, and  his  whole  army  is  now  between 
Modena,  Ferrara,  and  the  sea.  General  Frimont  hoped  to  be  in 
a  position  to  attack  about  the  12th. 

I  have  the  honour  to  send  your  Majesty  the  declaration 
against  Murat,  which  has  been  communicated  to  me  officially  by 
M.  de  Metternich. 

I  have  the  honour  to  be 

No.  29.1 — King  Louis  XVIII.  to  the  Prince 
de  Talleyrand. 

Ghent,  April  22,  1815. 

Mon  Cousin, 

I  was  about  to  answer  your  letter  No.  49,  enclosing 
No.  38.  when  I  received  your  letter  No.  50,  inclosing  No.  44. 
You  have  without  doubt  influenced  the  declaration  of  the  sove- 
reigns. I  hope,  if  there  is  still  time,  you  will  likewise  influence  that 
of  the  generals,  which  will  be  a  very  important  document.  If  it 
is  wished  that  it  should  produce  all  the  effect  desirable,  it  is 
necessary  that,  in  conformity  with  the  declarations  of  March  1 3th, 
and  Article  III.  of  the  treaty  of  the  25th,  Europe  should  declare 
herself  the  ally  of  the  king  and  the  French  nation,  and  against  the 
invasion  of  Napoleon  Buonaparte,  the  friend  of  all  those  who 
declare  for  the  former,  and  the  enemy  of  all  those  who  arm  in 
favour  of  the  latter,  at  the  same  time  excluding  all  ideas  of 
conquest  and  of  all  intermediate  parties,  the  possibility  of  which 
must  not  even  be  supposed. 

1  M.  Pallain  here  inserts  another  letter  of  the  king's  to  M.  de  Talleyrand,  dated 
21st  April.  According  to  the  number  of  the  prince's  despatches  ,to  which  the  king 
says  he  has  replied,  it  is  probable  that  the  letter  of  the  22nd  is  the  only  one  that  was 
sent.  The  contents  are  besides  almost  similar,  one  phrase  being  identical.  However 
here  is  the  letter  : — 

Ghent,  April  21,  1S15. 
Mon  Cousin, 

I  have  received  your  letter  numbered  49,  and  also  38  which  was 
enclosed.  After  you  had  despatched  it  you  would  have  received  my  letters  which 
I  have  continued  to  send,  but  which,  in  default  of  the  means  I  possessed  when  in 
Paris,  necessarily  cause  unpunctuality  in  the  correspondence. 

I  am  very  anxious  to  get  the  declaration  which  you  mention,  and  in  the  drafting 
of  which,  according  to  your  letter,  I  hope  you  have  assisted.  The  Chevalier  Stuart 
has  just  told  me  it  was  signed  on  the  nth.  For  my  part,  I  am  busy  with 
the  proclamation  which  I  must  publish  when  I  again  enter  France.  I  will  send  it  to 
you  as  soon  as  it  is  drawn  up,  and  been  seen,  by  the  Duke  of  Wellington  and  General 
Pozzo  di  Borgo.  If  the  sovereigns  are  still  in  Vienna  when  it  arrives,  I  hope  you  will 
gain  their  goodwill  for  it.  Nevertheless,  I  trust  it  may  not  find  them  there  ;  speed  in 
all  the  operations  is  what  is  now  most  needed  ;  all  the  reports  from  the  interior  are 
excellent,  but  we  must  not  give  the  enemy  any  time. 

Louis. 


112  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

For  my  part,  I  am  preparing  the  declaration,  or  proclamation 
I  shall  have  to  issue,  when  I  again  set  foot  in  France.  I  will 
send  it  to  you  as  soon  as  it  is  drawn  up,  but  I  sincerely  hope  that 
it  may  no  longer  find  you  in  Vienna. 

Your  letter  No.  50,  speaks  of  the  termination  of  the  con- 
gress. It  will  of  course  be  necessary  for  you  to  sign  in  my  name, 
the  treaty  which  will  end  it ;  but  I  long  greatly  to  have  you  near 
me,  especially  in  the  present  state  of  affairs. 

You  will  have  heard  of  the  unfortunate  issue  of  my  nephew's x 
brave  enterprise  and  also  that  even  my  niece  was  unable  to  save 
Bordeaux.  Public  opinion  in  France  is  not  changed,  all  the 
reports  are  unanimous  on  this  point.  It  is  essential  to  act 
promptly,  and  this  is  both  the  wish  and  the  opinion  of  the 
Duke  of  Wellington. 

I  will  only  say  one  word  as  to  your  letter  No.  38,  viz., 
that  the  letter  of  the  Due  de  Campo-Chiaro  is  worth  preserving 
as  a  record  of  the  notorious  perfidy  of  his  master. 

Wherefore  I  pray  God  to  have  you,  my  cousin,  in  His  safe  and 
holy  keeping. 

Louis. 


No.  52. — The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  King 

Louis  XVIII. 

Vienna,  April  23,  181 5. 
Sire, 

Something  has  just  occurred  here  which  I  would  fain  keep 
from  your  Majesty,  as  it  will  I  fear  greatly  vex  you,  but  which  it 
is  important  you  should  know,  being  closely  connected  with  your 
Majesty's  present  position,  and  a  matter  you  would  without  fail 
hear  from  others  without  perhaps  being  informed  of  circumstances 
which  would  tend  to  ameliorate  and  counterbalance  it. 

For  some  time  past  I  have  had  occasion  to  notice,  that  if  the 
Emperor  of  Russia  was  often  opposed  to  what  your  Majesty 
wished  done,  he  was  sometimes  influenced,  not  merely  by  what 
he  himself  desired,  but  because  he  was  often  offended  as  well. 

1st.  Because  your  Majesty  had  not  offered  him  the  cordon  bleu> 
having  given  it  to  the  Prince  Regent. 

2nd.  Because  of  the  futility  of  his  intercession  and  entreaties 
in  favour  of  the  Due  de  Vicence,  in  whom  he  takes  a  great 
interest,  and  who  was  excluded  from  the  chamber  of  peers. 

3rd.  Because  of  the  firmness  with  which  your  Majesty,  on 

1  This  refers  to  M.  le  Due,  and  to  Madame  la  Duchesse,  d'Angouleme. 


THE  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA.  113 

the  subject    of  the    marriage,    refused   to  accede  to  his  wishes 
on  the  religious  point. 

4th.  and  lastly.  Because  the  constitutional  charter  differed  in 
many  respects  from  the  views  he  had  expressed  in  Paris  on  this 
subject,  and  which,  from  his  attachment  to  liberal  ideas,  he 
regarded  as  very  beneficial  and  of  great  importance. 

I  knew  that  for  some  time  he  had  complained  of  this 
privately  in  pretty  strong  terms}  but  I  did  not  then  think  it  of 
much  importance.  Now  however  I  am  convinced,  that  these 
feelings  influence  his  judgment  as  to  the  situation  of  France  and 
that  of  your  Majesty. 

According  to  the  news  from  France  and  the  reports  of 
those  who  come  thence,  the  whole  bulk  of  the  nation  is  for 
your  Majesty  ;  and  against  you  are  two  parties,  that  of  the 
army,  which  is  entirely  for  Buonaparte  (those  in  it  who  are  well- 
intentioned  being  subjugated  or  carried  away  by  the  mass)  ; 
and  the  party  composed  of  what  remains  of  the  old  revolutionary 
factions.  The  latter  has  only  joined  the  former,  because  the 
first  having  taken  the  lead,  the  second 2  found  itself  obliged  to 
follow.  They  are  only  agreed  on  the  one  point,  that  both 
wanted  a  change,  but  not  for  the  same  reasons  nor  for  the  same 
end.  The  army,  tired  of  the  long  peace,  wanted  a  chief  who 
would  give  them  back  the  chances  of  danger,  fortune,  and  fame, 
to  which  they  had  been  accustomed  for  the  last  twenty-two  years. 
Buonaparte  was  evidently  therefore  the  man  for  them.  The 
chiefs  of  the  other  party  know  Buonaparte  and  hate  him  ;  they 
know  his  insatiable  love  of  power,  they  are  aware  that  civil 
liberty  has  no  more  cruel  enemy,  they  know  well  that  wherever 
a  rebel  army  is  invested  with  supreme  authority,  only  the  merest 
shadow  of  a  civil  government  can  exist ;  that  outside  this  civil 
government,  they  are  as  nothing,  and  that  passive  obedience  will 
be  their  fate  as  well  as  that  of  the  rest  of  the  people.  They  are 
perfectly  aware  of  the  motives  which  induced  Buonaparte  to 
approach  them,  they  know  that  his  union  with  them  is  a  forced 
union,  that  the  ties  by  which  they  will  try  to  hold  him  and 
which  at  this  moment  he  acknowledges,  will  only  be  binding  so 
long  as  he  has  not  the  power  of  breaking  them,  and  that 
victories,  if  he  gains  any,  will  give  him  this  power.  They  do  not 
conceal  from  themselves,  that  what  the  army  has  done  once,  it 
may  do  a  second  or  a  third  time,  and  that  in  such  a  state  of 
affairs  there  would  be  no  security  either  for  the  master  or  the 
slaves.  Undeceived  as  to  their  old  chimeras,  they  no  longer 
dream    of  a   republic  ;    the   titles   and    the    fortunes   they  have 

1  Suppressed  in  the  text  of  the  archives. 

-  Var.  :  "  ennuyee  du  repos  "  —  "tired  of  inactivity." 

VOL.  III.  I 


U4  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

acquired,  bind  them  to  the  monarchical  system.  They  were  not 
opposed  to  the  legitimate  dynasty,  but  they  could  not  endure  a 
system  of  government,  which  by  excluding  them  from  holding 
any  office,  they  believed  x  deprived  them  of  all  political  existence, 
and  menaced  them  for  the  future  with  even  still  greater  losses. 
Their  aversion  to  this  state  of  affairs  is  such,  that  they  would 
gladly  remove  it  at  any  price,  and  rather  than  relapse  into  it 
again,  they  will  plunge  themselves  into  the  horrors  and  dangers 
of  revolutionary  rule. 

Buonaparte's  first  object  is  to  nationalize  the  war  he  will 
have  to  carry  on.  The  first  aim  of  the  Powers  is  to  prevent 
this.  He  well  knows  he  cannot  attain  this  end  by  persuasion, 
and  that  he  can  only  arrive  thereat  by  means  of  terrorism.  But  his 
army  which  he  must  unite  on  the  frontier,  and  which  will  be 
fighting  with  a  foreign  power,  will  not  suffice  him  ;  he  must 
have  other  means,  and  these  he  can  only  find  in  that  party  to 
which  he  himself  once  belonged,  on  the  ruins  of  which  he  has 
raised  himself,  which  he  has  for  a  long  time  oppressed,  and 
from  which  he  is  now  seeking  support. 

The  Powers  thought  that  this  party  (if  it  was  deemed  best  to 
calm  its  fears)  might  be  induced  to  separate  itself  from  a  man 
whom  it  does  not  love,  and  that  thus  Buonaparte  would  be 
deprived  of  his  chief  resource  and  of  that  which  can  make  his 
resistance  much  longer  and  more  dangerous. 

A  scheme  for  a  declaration  on  these  lines  has  been 
drawn  up. 

When  it  was  only  a  question  of  Europe  arming  herself,  not 
against  France,  but  for  France,  that  she  recognized  no  enemies 
but  Buonaparte  and  his  adherents,  that  she  would  never  negotiate 
with  him,  that  she  would  grant  him  neither  peace  nor  truce,  and 
would  not  lay  down  her  arms  till  she  had  overthrown  him,  all 
opinions  were  unanimous  ;  but  when  it  became  a  question  of 
further  expressing  in  the  declaration,  that  the  final  aim  of  the 
war  was  the  re-establishment  of  the  legitimate  dynasty,  opinions 
were  divided. 

"If  you  do  not  mention  this  re-establishment,"  said  some, 
"  those  who  in  the  provinces  armed  themselves,  and  whom  the 
declaration  of  the  1 3th  of  March  induced  to  take  up  arms  for  the 
King's  cause,  will  consider  themselves  abandoned,  you  will 
deprive  yourself  of  a  certain  support,  in  order  to  obtain  an  un- 
certain one.  If  you  merely  announce  your  intention  of  over- 
throwing the  usurper,  and  allow  it  to  be  supposed  that  this  object 
accomplished,  France  may  do  as    she  likes,  you  will  hand  her 

1  Var. 


THE  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA.  115 

over  to  Jacobinism   and  to  factions  more  dangerous  to  Europe 
than  Buonaparte  himself." 

"  The  re-establishment  of  the  legitimate  dynasty,"  said 
others,  "  is  a  matter  with  respect  to  which  the  intentions  of  the 
Powers  cannot  be  mistaken.  The  declaration  of  March  13th 
expresses  them  sufficiently.  By  insisting  on  them  afresh  in  too 
absolute  a  manner,  the  original  aim  (that  of  detaching  those 
from  Buonaparte  who  cannot  be  brought  back,  except  by  such 
concessions  as  the  Powers  might  hint  at,  but  which  the  king 
alone  can  promise  and  perform)  will  be  destroyed." 

Matters  were  at  this  stage  when  the  Emperor  Alexander  sent 
for  Lord  Clancarty,  who,  since  the  departure  of  Lord  Castlereagh 
and  the  Duke  of  Wellington,  is  at  the  head  of  the  English  embassy. 
The  account  of  their  conversation  was  given  me  partly  by  Lord 
Clancarty,  but  in  much  further  detail  by  Lord  Stewart  and  M.  de 
Metternich. 

The  task  of  having  to  relate  it  to  your  Majesty  is  the  more 
painful  to  me,  that  finding  myself  placed,  from  various  causes, 
between  respect  and  devotion,  I  fear  that  what  I  give  to  the  one, 
I  may  seem  to  withhold  from  the  other.  But  your  Majesty, 
whose  interest  it  is  to  know  the  feelings  of  your  most  powerful 
ally,  could  but  imperfectly  judge  of  them,  if  you  were  not  ac- 
quainted with  the  reasons  he  gives,  as  well  as  the  objections  by 
which  he  pretends  to  justify  them.  The  exigency  of  this  con- 
sideration alone  constrains  me  to  relate  them. 

The  emperor  first  asked  Lord  Clancarty  why  he  did  not 
approve  of  the  draft  declaration.1  "  Because,  in  my  opinion," 
replied  Lord  Clancarty,  "  I  do  not  think  it  says  all  it 
should  say.  It  is  not  enough  to  overthrow  Buonaparte ;  the 
door  must  not  be  thrown  open  to  the  Jacobins,  who  would  be 
still  less  to  my  taste  than  Buonaparte  himself."  "  The  Jacobins," 
replied  the  Emperor  Alexander,  "  are  only  to  be  feared  as 
Buonaparte's  auxiliaries  ;  and  it  is  on  that  account  one  must  try 
to  separate  them  from  him.  If  he  falls,  it  will  not  be  they  who 
will  recover  his  heritage;  the  first  point  therefore  is  to  overthrow 
him  ;  on  this  we  are  all  agreed.  As  for  me,  I  will  devote  all  my 
strength  and  will  never  rest  until  this  has  been  accomplished. 
However,  I  am  quite  willing  to  consent  to  put  off  a  declaration 
or  proclamation,  until  our  troops  are  close  to  France,  indeed 
I  should  advise  this.  But  Buonaparte's  overthrow  is  not 
the  sole  point  on  which  it  is  necessary  for  us  to  understand  each 
other.  In  such  a  huge  enterprise  as  that  in  which  we  are  now 
engaged,  it  is  necessary  from  the  very  beginning  to  keep  the 
end  in  view.  Buonaparte's  overthrow  is  only  half  of  the  work  ; 
1  Var.  :  "and  what  objection  he  had  to  make  to  it." 

I    2 


n6  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

the  security  of  Europe  must  be  provided  for,  she  cannot  be  at 
peace  so  long  as  France  is  not,  and  France  cannot  be  so,  except 
with  a  government  that  suits  all  parties." 

"  France,"  said  Lord  Clancarty,  "  was  happy  under  the  King's 
government  ;  all  the  votes  of  the  nation  are  for  him." 

"  Yes,"  replied  the  Emperor,  "  of  that  portion  of  the  nation 
which  has  always  been  passive,  which  for  twenty-six  years  has 
put  up  with  all  the  revolutions,  which  only  bewails  them  but 
does  nothing  to  prevent  them.  But  the  other  portion,  which 
apparently  is  the  entire  nation,  because  it  alone  is  in  evidence, 
or  makes  any  stir  and  takes  the  lead,  will  it  willingly  submit 
itself  and  be  faithful  to  the  government  which  it  has  betrayed  ? 
Would  you  impose  it  upon  them,  whether  they  like  it  or  not  ? 
Would  you,  for  this,  carry  on  a  war  of  extermination,  and  perhaps 
an  endless  one,  and  have  you  any  certainty  of  success  at  last  ? " 

"  I  feel,"  replied  Lord  Clancarty,  "  that  duty  ends  where 
impossibility  begins  ;  but  until  impossibility  has  been  reached,  I 
hold  it  to  be  the  duty  of  the  Powers  to  support  the  legitimate 
sovereign  and  not  even  raise  the  question  of  his  abandonment." 

"  Our  first  duty,"  answered  the  Emperor,  "  is  towards  Europe 
and  ourselves.  Even  if  the  re-establishment  of  the  government 
were  an  easy  matter,  as  long  as  there  is  no  certainty  as  to  its 
stability,  what  would  its  re-establishment  do,  but  prepare  fresh 
misfortunes  both  for  France  and  Europe  ?  If  what  has  once 
occurred  should  happen  again,  should  we  be  all  united  as  we  are 
now  ?  Should  we  have  nearly  a  million  of  men  under  arms  ? 
Should  we  be  ready  at  the  very  moment  that  the  danger  broke 
forth,  and  what  probability  is  there  (the  elements  of  disorder 
being  the  same)  that  the  government  of  the  king  will  in  future 
be  more  stable  than  it  has  been  ?  However,  whatever  opinions 
others  may  have  on  this  matter,  I  hold  that  the  re-establishment 
of  the  King,  which  we  all  desire  and  which  I  particularly  wish,  is 
likely  to  meet  with  so  many  unsurmountable  obstacles  when  it 
does  take  place,  that  we  ought  to  look  ahead,  and  arrange  in 
advance,  what  will  then  have  to  be  done.  Last  year  a  regency 
might  have  been  established  ;  but  the  Archduchess  Marie-Louise, 
to  whom  I  have  spoken,  will  not  return  to  France  at  any  price. 
Her  son  must  have  an  establishment  in  Austria,  and  beyond 
that  she  does  not  seek  anything  more  for  him.  I  have  also 
ascertained  that  Austria  no  longer  desires  a  regency.  Last  year 
it  seemed  to  me  that  such  a  measure  would  have  reconciled  all 
opposing  interests  ;  but  the  situation  is  no  longer  the  same.  It 
is  therefore  no  use  thinking  any  more  about  it.  I  see  no  one  so 
fitted  to  conciliate  all  parties  as  the  Due  d'Orleans ;  he  is  a 
Frenchman,  a  Bourbon  ;  he  has  married  a  Bourbon,  and  he  has 


THE  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA.  117 

sons.  He  also,  when  young,  served  the  constitutional  cause.  He 
has  worn  the  tricolor  cockade,  which  I  often  maintained,  when 
in  Paris,  ought  never  to  have  been  discarded.  In  him  all  parties 
would  be  united.  Do  not  you  agree  with  me  in  this,  my  Lord, 
and  what  would  be  the  opinion  of  England  about  it  ?  " 

"  I  cannot  possibly  say,"  answered  Lord  Clancarty,  "  what 
would  be  the  opinion  of  my  government  on  an  idea  which  would 
be  as  new  to  them  as  it  is  to  me.  As  for  my  personal  opinion,  I 
do  not  hesitate  to  say,  that  it  seems  to  me  extremely  dangerous 
to  abandon  the  legitimate  line  and  rush  into  any  kind  of 
usurpation.  But  your  Majesty  will  surely  wish  me  to  acquaint 
my  government  with  that  which  you  have  done  me  the  honour 
to  communicate  ?  " 

The  Emperor  told  him  to  write,  and  after  pointing  out  how 
necessary  it  was  to  ascertain  as  far  as  possible  what  might  be  the 
result  of  so  grave  an  undertaking,  withdrew. 

Lord  Clancarty  did  write,  but  dwelt  very  strongly  on  the 
reasons  why  England  should  remain  firm  to  your  Majesty's  cause. 

M.  de  Metternich,  to  whom  Lord  Stewart  and  Lord  Clancarty 
had  communicated  this  conversation,  thought  that  the  question 
raised  by  the  Emperor  was  quite  out  of  place.  That  it  was 
wrong  to  wander  off  into  hypothetical  questions  which  would 
never  present  themselves,  and  that  it  was  necessary  to  wait  till 
they  did  so,  and  grapple  with  each  in  turn. 

He  has  instructed  the  Austrian  embassy  in  London  to 
express  itself  in  this  sense. 

The  Emperor  Alexander,  who  hardly  understands  the 
principle  of  legitimacy,  has,  without  waiting  to  hear  the  opinion 
of  the  English  cabinet,  inserted  an  article  in  the  Gazette  de 
Francfort,  which  I  have  now  before  me,  and  which  declares,  that 
all  that  the  Powers  desire,  is  the  overthrow  of  Buonaparte,  but 
that  they  have  no  intention  of  interfering  with  the  internal 
government  of  France  or  of  imposing  a  government  upon  her  ; 
and  that  she  will  be  at  liberty  to  choose  that  form  which  she 
prefers.  But  up  to  the  present  he  is  alone  in  this  view.  Even 
Prussia,  accustomed  as  she  is  to  consult  her  own  wishes  alone,  is 
favourable  to  your  Majesty  ;  she  has  even  expressed  the  wish 
that  your  Majesty  should  issue  a  proclamation,  and  that  this 
proclamation  should  precede  the  meeting  of  the  assembly  of 
electors,  which  Buonaparte  has  summoned  to  Paris.  This  also 
is  the  wish  of  the  greater  part  of  the  Powers.  It  is  considered 
important  that  your  Majesty  should  endeavour  to  rally  all 
parties  round  you,  by  assuring  to  all,  without  distinction,  the 
advantages  of  a  constitutional  government.  The  Powers  believe 
that  a  declaration  from  your  Majesty,  made  in  this  spirit,  would 


i  iS  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

prove  an  admirable  auxiliary  to  the  forces  they  are  about  to 
deploy.  Several  indeed  think  that  your  Majesty  should  lay  the 
blame  of  any  faults  that  may  have  been  committed  on  your 
ministers,  and  form  a  fresh  ministry,  as  if  you  were  in  France,  in 
the  composition  of  which  each  party  would  find  the  guarantee  it 
desires.  I  have  been  asked  to  write  to  your  Majesty  about  this, 
and  have  even  been  informed  that  this  wish  will  be  hinted  at  by 
the  ministers  about  to  be  accredited  to  you,  and  I  therefore  hope 
your  Majesty  will  be  beforehand  with  them. 

To  all  that  which  the  Emperor  of  Russia  told  Lord  Clancarty, 
I  have  to  add  utterances  on  his  part,  that  have  reached  me  from 
sources  which  I  have  every  reason  to  believe  are  reliable.  On 
several  occasions  he  repeated,  that  when  he  was  in  Paris  a  year 
ago,  all  he  then  saw  and  heard,  made  him  fear  that  the  govern- 
ment could  not  hold  its  ground.  It  seemed  to  him  that  it  would 
be  difficult  for  the  ideas  and  opinions  of  the  princes  to  harmonize 
with  the  opinions  and  habits  of  a  generation  which  had  arisen 
during  their  absence,  and  which  had  not,  on  many  points,  either 
the  ideas  or  customs  of  their  fathers.  "  Now,"  he  observed,  liking 
always  to  deal  in  general  views,  "  one  cannot  govern  in  opposition 
to  the  ideas  of  the  times." 

He  said  that  his  fears  had  increased  when  he  found  that  your 
Majesty  had  summoned  men  to  your  council  and  ministry  who, 
though  no  doubt  very  estimable,  had  been  away  from  France  or 
in  retirement,  during  the  period  of  the  Revolution,  and  not 
knowing  France  or  being  known  to  her,  were  consequently 
wanting  in  that  experience  of  affairs  which  even  genius  cannot 
supply.  He  considers  they  have  done  the  royal  cause  great 
harm,  although  he  believes  that  a  similar  evil  will  in  future  be 
avoided  because  your  Majesty  would  make  a  different  choice. 
I  ought  to  mention  that  he  made  the  remark,  that  the  minister, 
concerning  whom  there  were  most  complaints  from  every  one, 
was  more  in  your  Majesty's  confidence  than  any  one  else.1 

He  even  went  so  far  as  to  say,  that  the  greatest  harm  has 
been  done  by  the  amount  of  power  your  Majesty  has  given  to,  or 
allowed  to  be  assumed  by  the  princes,  who  were  ever  near  you  ; 
that  the  prejudices  that  have  arisen  against  them  seemed  to 
him  an  evil  without  a  remedy  ;  that  those  to  which  your  Majesty 
would  have  been  personally  exposed,  would  have  produced  a  far 
less  vexatious  effect,  seeing  that  the  dissatisfaction  against  him 
who  reigns  is  tempered  and  softened  by  the  hopes  placed  on  his 
successor,  whereas  when  it  is  the  successors  who  are  feared,  this 
hope  falls  to  the  ground. 

1  It  was  with  reference  to  the  Comte  de  Blacas  that  the  Emperor  Alexander  made 
this  remark. 


THE  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA.  119 

The  Emperor  in  general  conversation,  says  that  he  is 
quite  willing  to  believe  that  if  your  Majesty  were  alone, 
you  would  suit  France  and  be  both  beloved  and  respected, 
but  as  you  cannot  be  disconnected  from  all  your  surroundings, 
he  fears  you  will  never  be  firmly  established.  I  notice  with 
great  satisfaction  that  the  Powers  are  all  sincerely  interested  in 
your  Majesty  ;  even  the  utterances  of  the  Emperor  of  Russia 
are  the  outcome  of  temper  and  the  philosophic  ideas  which 
predominate  his  character,  rather  than  from  any  premeditated 
design.  I  should  be  pleased  if  I  could  add  that  this  interest 
extends  to  Monsieur  and  the  Due  d'Angouleme  and  the  Due 
de  Berry.  But  power  once  exclusively  placed  in  the  hands  of 
your  Majesty  and  with  some  responsible  ministers  possessing  your 
confidence  and  that  of  the  nation,  the  exaggerated  views,  both 
at  home  and  abroad,  caused  by  errors  or  inadvertencies,  will 
gradually  disappear. 

The  Baron  de  Talleyrand  :  arrived  here  with  the  letter  your 
Majesty  has  honoured  me  with,  dated  April  10th.  I  never  cease 
stirring  up  enthusiasm  here,  and  pointing  out  how  important 
it  is  to  hasten  matters.  But  the  Duke  of  Wellington,  in 
a  letter  of  later  date  than  that  which  your  Majesty  has  done 
me  the  honour  to  mention,  writes,  that  after  the  vexatious  news 
received  from  the  south,  he  feels  the  necessity  of  not  com- 
mencing operations  until  a  general  attack  can  be  made  every- 
where by  all  the  forces.  Yet  with  the  best  will  in  the  world, 
the  distances  to  be  traversed  are  so  great,  that  the  Austrians 
could  not  place  a  hundred  thousand  men  on  the  Rhine  before 
the  end  of  May. 

Your  Majesty  will  be  pleased  to  learn  that  the  Austrian 
troops  in  Italy  have  had  successes,  which  promise  still  greater 
ones.  Prince  Leopold  -  will  leave  here  in  a  few  days  to  join  the 
Austrian  army.  The  Vienna  papers  have  at  last  left  off  talking 
of  King  Joachim,  they  simply  say  Murat. 

M.  de  Bom  belles,3  the  former  Portuguese  ambassador,  canon 

1  Alexandre-Daniel,  Baron  de  Talleyrand,  cousin-german  to  the  Prince,  Coun- 
cillor of  State,  afterwards  Minister  at  Florence  (1832)  and  Copenhagen  (1835),  Peer 
of  France  (1838).     He  died  in  1839. 

-  Leopold,  Prince  of  Salerno,  second  son  of  King  Ferdinand.  Born  in  1790, 
married  in  181 6  the  Archduchess  Marie-Clementina.  He  arrived  at  Teano,  the 
Austrian  headquarters,  on  the  21st  of  May,  and  took  possession  of  the  country  in  his 
father's  name. 

3  Marc-Marie,  Marquis  de  Bombelles,  born  in  1744,  belonged  to  a  family  of 
Portuguese  origin  settled  in  France,  ami  afterwards  entered  the  service  of  Austria. 
He  at  first  took  to  diplomacy,  and  became  French  Ambassador  to  Portugal.  Being 
exiled  in  1792,  he  served  in  Conde's  army. 

He  then  entered  holy  orders,  and  was  made  Canon  of  Breslau.  Under  the 
restoration  he  became  almoner  to  the  Duchess  de  Berry,  and  Bishop  of  Amiens.  He 
died  in  1821. 


120  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

of  Glogau  and  father  of  Bombelles,  who  was  in  Paris,  wishes  to 
re-enter  the  diplomatic  service  ;  he  believes  he  would  in  this  last 
capacity  be  of  great  use  at  Munich,  and  8,000  francs  would,  he 
considers,  be  enough  for  him  to  live  upon. 

I  am  taking  advantage  of  the  zeal  of  the  Comte  Alexis  de 
Noailles,  who  will  have  the  honour  of  carrying  this  despatch  to 
your  Majesty.  He  has  been  most  useful  here  in  every  way,  and 
I  fancy  no  one  could  better  inform  your  Majesty  as  to  the  politi- 
cal and  military  situation  of  all  the  cabinets,  whose  assistance 
we  now  so  greatly  need.  I  entreat  your  Majesty  to  have  the 
goodness  to  let  him  be  the  bearer  of  the  despatches  you  will 
have  to  send  me.  He  ought  to  be  back  here  before  the  close  of 
the  congress  ;  and  the  affairs  of  Germany  and  Italy,  which  we 
must  conclude,  progress  so  slowly,  that  he  will  arrive  here  in 
ample  time  to  append  his  signature  to  them. 
I  have  the  honour  to  be 

No.  53. — The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  King 

Louis  XVIII. 

Vienna,  May  1,  1815. 

Sire, 

The  Baron  de  Vincent  leaves  to-day  to  join  your 
Majesty,  and  has  offered  to  take  charge  of  the  letter  I  have  the 
honour  of  writing  to  you.  When  commencing  hostilities,  Murat 
counted  on  an  insurrection  in  Italy,  but  in  this  expectation  he 
was  completely  disappointed.  Full  of  confidence,  he  advanced 
as  far  as  the  banks  of  the  Po.  where  the  first  engagements  took 
place.  Since  then  he  has  met  with  nothing  but  defeat.  He  is 
retiring  in  haste  to  the  kingdom  of  Naples,  dreading  lest  his 
retreat  should  be  cut  off  by  an  Austrian  corps  occupying 
Tuscany.  The  last  engagement  of  which  we  have  received 
official  accounts  took  place  near  Cesena,  where  he  repassed  the 
Ronco,  suffering  considerable  loss.  His  army,  already  much 
weakened  by  the  number  of  prisoners  taken,  amounting  to  7,000, 
is  diminishing  every  day,  owing  to  numerous  desertions.  There 
is  every  reason  to  hope,  that  before  long  this  war  will  have  come 
to  an  end. 

Replacing  Ferdinand  IV.  on  his  throne  will  not  be  the  only 
advantage  resulting  from  Murat's  overthrow.  By  freeing  the 
troops  now  employed  against  him,  and  removing  all  anxiety  as 
to  the  maintenance  of  peace  in  Italy,  our  operations  against 
Buonaparte  will  be  greatly  aided.  It  will  also  produce  a  very 
favourable  effect  in  France,  by  proving  to  every  one  that  Europe 
will  not  tolerate  these  new  dynasties,  founded  on  violence  and 
injustice,  and  is  determined  to  upset  them. 


THE  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA.  121 

This  is  the  result  of  the  efforts  we  have  made  here  to  uphold 
the  principle  of  legitimacy.  This  principle  is  now  fully  recog- 
nized. A  treaty  has  just  been  signed  by  M.  de  Metternich  and 
Commander  Ruffo,1  King  Ferdinand's  minister  at  Vienna.  This 
treaty  covenants  for  the  assistance  to  be  given  by  Sicily  in  the 
war  against  Murat,  and  instead  of  the  20,000  men  your  Majesty- 
had  designed  for  this  war,  King  Ferdinand,  from  what  I  hear, 
has  undertaken  to  send  25,000. 

My  next  despatches  will  acquaint  your  Majesty  with  all  the 
stipulations  of  the  treaty,  which  I  have  not  yet  seen. 

Leopold,  prince  of  the  Two  Sicilies,  leaves  here  on  the  4th 
of  this  month  for  the  headquarters  of  the  Austrian  army. 

Although  matters  respecting  Parma  are  not  yet  concluded, 
the  Emperor  of  Austria  has  issued  an  order  by  which  he  assumes 
positive  control  of  the  three  duchies  3  in  his  daughter's  name. 
Thus  your  Majesty  will  perceive  that  the  arrangements  to  be 
settled  by  the  congress  are  being  carried  out  before  they  have 
been  decided,  which  does  not  greatly  matter,  but  which  we  have 
not  the  power  to  prevent. 

The  Austrian  and  Russian  troops  continue  their  march. 
The  headquarters  of  Prince  Schwarzenberg  are  at  Heilbronn,  in 
Wurtemberg.  He  himself  proceeded  there  yesterday,  passing 
through  Bohemia,  where  he  will  remain  a  few  days. 

The  arrangements  with  Bavaria,  which  I  informed  your 
Majesty  were  finished  but  not  signed,  are,  after  having  caused 
fresh  discussions,  at  last  concluded.  Nevertheless  they  are  only 
provisionally  so.  They  will  not  be  definitely  completed  till  after 
the  war,  because  being  dependent  on  the  negotiations  with  the 
courts  of  Baden  and  Darmstadt,  which  have  concessions  to  make 
to  Bavaria,  and  to  receive  indemnities  on  the  left  bank  of  the 
Rhine,  these  courts  will  not  accept  any  compensations  which 
the  chances  of  war  (supposing  it  to  be  a  disastrous  one)  might 
take  from  them. 

General  Walterstorff,4  the    Danish  minister,  is   to    leave    to- 
morrow for  your  Majesty's  court.     He,  as  well  as  M.  de  Vincent, 
are  accredited  commissioners  to  the  Duke  of  Wellington. 
I  have  the  honour  to  be  ...  . 

1  Commander  Ruftb,  an  Italian  diplomat,  was  the  King  of  Naples'  Minister  at 
Paris  in  1797.  Returning  to  Naples  in  1798,  he  followed  the  Court  to  Sicily  in 
1805,  and  was  charged  with  a  mission  to  Portugal.  In  1815  he  went  to  Vienna  as  a 
plenipotentiary  to  the  Congress.      He  died  in  1825. 

-   See  d'Angeberg,  Congris  de  Vienne,  p.  1 156. 

:i  Parma,  Placentia  and  Guastalla. 

1  Ernest  Frederick  de  Walterstorff,  born  in  1755,  Licutenant-General  and 
Chamberlain  to  the  King  of  Denmark,  Minister-Plenipotentiary  at  Paris  from  1810. 
He  died  in  1S20. 


122  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 


No.  54.— The   Prince  de  Talleyrand   to   King 

Louis  XVIII. 


Sire, 


Vienna,  May  5,  181 5. 


A  former  chamberlain  x  of  Buonaparte's,  who  having 
accompanied  the  Archduchess  Marie-Louise  hither  was  made 
chamberlain  to  the  Emperor  Francis,  and  who  had  some  time 
ago  returned  to  Paris,  has  been  lately  sent  here  with  a  letter 
from  Buonaparte  to  the  Emperor,  and  another  from  M.  de 
Caulaincourt  for  M.  de  Metternich.  By  virtue  of  his  title  as  an 
Austrian  chamberlain,  he  got  as  far  as  Munich,  where,  however, 
he  was  stopped,  and  the  letters  he  carried  were  sent  on  here. 
Both  letters  demand  the  return,  for  various  reasons,  of  the 
Empress  and  her  son.  The  tone  adopted  by  Buonaparte  and 
his  minister  is  moderate,  but  injured.  The  letters  remained 
sealed  until  the  conference  assembled,  and  were  then  opened 
in  the  presence  of  the  ministers  of  the  allied  Powers.  It  was 
decided  not  to  reply  to  them  ;  this  opinion  was  unanimous. 
Your  Majesty  will  see,  therefore,  that  Buonaparte's  attempts  to 
establish2  some  kind  of  relations  with  the  foreign  Powers,  have 
been  repulsed  and  proved  abortive. 

The  English  ministers,  with  whom  I  communicated  relative 
to  defraying  the  expenses  of  your  Majesty's  embassy  at  the 
congress,  and  who  showed  themselves  quite  willing  to  do  so, 
have  received  letters  from  their  government,  authorizing  them 
only  to  advance  100,000  fs.  in  the  course  of  six  months. 

The  credits  we  had  on  France,  and  which  were  far  from 
being  exhausted,  have  been  suspended  since  March  21st.  This 
leaves  us  to  meet  expenses  incurred,  and  which  ought  to  have 
been  paid  on  April  1st.  Moreover,  no  one  attached  to  the 
embassy  has  received  pay  from  Paris  since  the  month  of 
January. 

The  most  reduced  expenditure  for  the  months  of  April  and 
May,  even  without   paying  off  all  that  is  still  owing,  will  take 

1  Baron  de  Stassart.  Born  in  1780  at  Malines,  he  had  been  under  the  Empire 
Auditor  to  the  State  Council,  then  Intendant  of  the  Tyrol  (1805)  and  of  West 
Prussia  (1807).  In  1810  he  was  appointed  Prefet  of  Vaucleuse,  and  in  1811  of  the 
Bouches  de  la  Meuse.  After  the  fall  of  Napoleon  he  was  received  by  the  Emperor 
of  Austria,  whose  subject  he  was,  and  appointed  his  chamberlain.  Having  returned 
to  Paris  during  the  Hundred  Days,  he  left  it  again  on  the  17th  April  with  despatches 
from  Napoleon.  He  was  stopped  at  Lintz,  and  retired  to  Weltz,  whence  he  sent  his 
despatches  to  Vienna.  He  returned  to  his  native  country  after  Waterloo,  and  was 
several  times  elected  to  the  States-General.  In  the  reign  of  Leopold  he  became 
President  of  the  Senate.  M.  de  Talleyrand  makes  a  mistake  in  calling  him  a  former 
Chamberlain  of  Buonaparte's  :  he  never  held  that  office. 

-  Var.  :  "obtenir"  =  "obtain." 


THE  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA.  123 

a  considerable  portion  of  the  sum  promised  me  by  the  British 
minister  ;  the  balance  will  not  reach  us  before  the  beginning  of 
August,  at  which  date  your  Majesty  will  have  to  consider  what 
steps  it  will  be  possible  for  you  to  take  in  this  matter. 
I  have  the  honour  to  be  ...  . 


No.  30. — King  Louis  XVIII.  to  the  Prince 
de  Talleyrand. 

Ghent,  May  5,  1815. 

Mon  Cousin, 

I  have  received  by  M.  de  Noailles  your  letter  No.  52. 
I  enclose  with  this  despatch  the  proclamation  I  intend  to  issue, 
with  which  I  natter  myself  the  sovereigns  will  be  as  fully  satisfied 
as  the  ministers  who  are  resident  here,  have  been.  But  this 
matter,  although  an  important  one,  is  not  the  most  so.  There  is 
another  point  in  your  despatch,  which,  since  its  receipt,  has  been, 
and  still  continues  to  be,  the  subject  of  my  most  serious  con- 
sideration.1 In  order  to  solve  it  I  need  the  very  best  advice, 
and  this  cannot  be  given  in  writing.  I  therefore  requested  you 
to  join  me  here  as  soon  as  you  had  signed  the  final  act  of  the 
congress  in  my  name,  but  now  I  still  more  urgently  need  your 
presence.  If  therefore  this  signature  will  detain  you  more  than 
two  or  three  days,  leave  without  waiting  for  it.  It  is  really  a 
matter  of  indifference  which  of  my  plenipotentiaries  signs  the 
treat)-,  but  it  is  most  important  I  should  have  you  here.  Where- 
fore I  pray  God  to  have  you,  my  cousin,  in  His  safe  and  holy 
keeping. 

Louis. 


No.  55.— The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  King 

Louis  XVIII. 

Vienna,  May  14,  1S15. 
Sire, 

The  Comte  de  Noailles  has  arrived  and  delivered  the 
letter  of  May  5th  with  which  your  Majesty  has  honoured  me. 
His  arrival  is  so  closely  followed  by  the  departure  of  the  courier 
of  whom  I  wish  to  take  advantage,  that  I  can  only  send  your 
Majesty  a  very  short  reply. 

1  These  were  the  representations  which,  under  the  guise  of  a  conversation  witli  the 
Emperor  Alexander,  M.  de  Talleyrand  made  to  the  King  with  regard  to  the  interior 
policy  of  his  government.  The  King  himself  and  several  members  of  his  govern- 
ment— M.  de  Lancourt  in  particular — anxiously  desired  M.  de  Talleyrand's  return  to 
combat  the  influence  of  what  was  then  called  the  parti  resti hnigri. 


124  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

My  anxiety  to  be  with  you  would  make  me  leave  to-morrow, 
if  matters  were  sufficiently  advanced  to  require  only  a  signature, 
or  if  the  close  of  the  congress  were  still  distant.  But  Italian 
affairs  are  not  yet  concluded,  though  nearly  so.  The  delay 
caused  thereby  has  kept  M.  de  Saint-Marsan  and  Commander 
Ruffo  some  days  longer  here,  although  the  departure  of  the 
latter  is  very  urgent,  and  the  former  has  been  recalled  to  Turin, 
where  he  has  been  appointed  war  minister.  On  the  other  hand, 
the  sovereigns  are  about  to  leave,  and  as  in  a  coalition  every 
step  is  subject  to  a  thousand  interpretations,  I  could  not  hasten 
the  period  of  their  departure  without  causing  more  harm  than 
benefit  to  your  Majesty's  affairs.  However,  I  shall  make  all 
preparation,  so  that  the  difference  can  only  be  a  matter  of 
forty-eight  hours  more  or  less.  Besides,  I  do  not  think  it  would 
be  well  in  our  present  circumstances  to  leave  just  at  a  time  when 
every  one  else  is  necessarily  hurried. 

I  had  a  rather  long  interview1  with  the  Emperor  Alexander 
to-day,  which  I  shall  have  the  honour  to  relate  to  your  Majesty. 
I  confine  myself  now  to  telling  you  that  his  utterances  were  very 
satisfactory,  and  that  he  expressed  himself  in  the  most  spirited 
and  favourable  manner  as  to  our  affairs.  His  opinion  is,  that 
just  at  present  very  little  action  should  be  taken  either  by  your 
Majesty  or  those  around  you.  He  is  very  desirous  to  have  it 
understood,  that  any  steps  that  might  be  taken  by  a  single 
Power  in  connection  with  a  common  danger,  ought  to  be  under- 
taken by  the  unanimous  desire  of  all.  This  is  the  chief  object 
in  despatching  ministers  to  all  the  army  corps,  and  I  think  this 
rule  will  have  to  be  adopted  by  your  Majesty. 
I  have  the  honour  to  be  ...  . 


No.  56. — The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  King 

Louis  XVIII. 

Vienna,  May  17,  181 5. 
Sire, 

It  has  been  decided  to  substitute,  for  the  proposed 
declaration,  which  I  had  the  honour  of  mentioning  several  times 
to  your  Majesty,  a  statement  which  will  fulfil  the  same  object. 
This  will  be  published  in  the  Gazette  de  Vienne,  and  will  im- 
mediately after  appear  in  the  different  journals  of  Germany  and 
also  in  those  of  other  countries,  having  first  been  printed  at  the 
Austrian  Chancellor's  office.  I  have  the  honour  to  send  your 
Majesty  several  copies. 

1  Var. :  "  un  asses  long  entretien"  =  "sufficiently  long  interview." 


THE  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA.  125 

You  will  sec  that  this  statement  fully  confirms  the  arrange- 
ments come  to  by  the  Powers  in  the  declaration  of  March  13th  ; 
that  the  sophistry  of  Buonaparte  is  refuted,  and  his  impostures 
brought  to  light.  But  you  will  specially  notice  that  Europe 
does  not  appear  as  if  making  war  for  your  Majesty,  and  at  your 
request,  but  that  she  does  so  for  herself,  because  her  interests 
require  it,  and  because  her  safety  demands  it.  Not  only  is  this 
view  of  the  war  alone  accurate,  but  every  one  thinks  it  is  the 
only  one  suited  to  your  Majesty.  It  is  the  only  one  that  docs 
not  place  you  in  a  false  position,  as  regards  your  own  subjects, 
for  nothing  might  contribute  more  towards  alienating  their 
affection,  than  if  they  were  left  in  any  doubt  as  to  the  cause  of 
the  war.  They  must  never  be  able  to  attribute  to  your  Majesty 
the  evils  which  it  will  bring  upon  them. 
I  have  the  honour  to  be .  .  .  . 

P.S. —  I  have  according  to  your  Majesty's  orders,  written  to  the 
sovereigns  and  archdukes  who  are  here,  asking  for  permission  to 
take  my  leave. 

I  have  sent  to  M.  de  Jaucourt  the  letters  from  M.  de  la 
Tour  du  Pin,  which  may  interest  your  Majesty.  That  of 
M.  d'Osmond  1  which  encloses  them,  gives  the  latest  details 
respecting  Italian  affairs. 


No.  57. — The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  King  Louis 

XVIII. 

Vienna,  May  25,-  1S15. 

Sire, 

At  my  farewell  audiences,  I  received  from  all  the 
sovereigns  the  warmest  expressions  of  esteem  for  your  Majesty. 
These  audiences  were  not  merely  formal,  they  were  much  longer 
than  is  usually  accorded  under  similar  circumstances.  I  shall 
have  the  honour  to  tell   your   Majesty  about  them. 

Although  everything  is  not  yet  completed,  the  anxiety  I  felt 
to  be  with  your  Majesty  had  decided  me  to  leave  to-morrow, 
but  M.  de  Metternich,  M.  de  Nesselrode,  and  the  Chancellor  de 
Hardenberg,  having  begged  me  to  sign,  together  with  the  heads 
of  the  other  cabinets,  the  protocols  which  comprise  the  ar- 
rangements decided  on  by  the  congress,  I  felt  I  ought  to  accede 

1  M.  d'Osmond  was  the  King's  ambassador  at  Turin.  It  has  been  mentioned 
previously  that  M.  de  la  Tour  du  Pin  had  gone  from  Vienna  to  the  south  of  France 
where  he  flattered  himself  he  might  be  of  use  to  the  royal  cause. 

-  Var.  :  "May  23,  1815." 


126  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

to   their   request,  as  it   will  only  retard  my  departure  by  two  or 
three  days. 

The  protocol  will  contain  the  final  draft,  with  the  exception 
of  a  few  modifications,  which  can  only  affect  the  expressions  of 
the  articles  which  are  to  form  the  deed  of  congress.  A  com- 
mission consisting  of  a  plenipotentiary  from  each  of  the  Powers, 
will  remain  here  to  put  these  articles  into  suitable  form,  and 
separate  those  which  determine  special  relations,  from  those 
which  concern  general  interests.  I  shall  leave  M.  de  Dalberg 
here  to  represent  France  on  this  commission.  This  business 
will  only  last  nine  or  ten  days,  if  the  delegates  work  with  a  little 
more  assiduity  than  their  chiefs  have  done. 

I  have  the  honour  to  send  your  Majesty  two  letters  from  the 
Due  d'Angouleme.  I  had  the  honour  to  write  one  to  him  which 
is  probably  lost.  We  shall  perhaps  see  it  in  a  few  days  in  some 
of  the  French  journals.  I  have  to-day  sent  a  letter  by  courier 
to  Lady  Castlereagh  for  Madame  la  Duchesse  d'Angouleme. 
In  order  that  your  Majesty  may  have  a  complete  collection  of 
my  voluminous  correspondence,  I  have  the  honour  to  send  you 
copies  of  those  numbers  which  I  presume  have  not  reached  you. 
If  no  unforeseen  obstacles  arise,  I  shall  be  at  your  Majesty's 
orders  in  Ghent  on  Sunday,  June  4th. 

I  have  the  honour  to  be    .... 


No.  58. — The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  King 

Louis  XVIII. 

Vienna,  May  27,  1815. 
Sire, 

I  can  now  tell  your  Majesty  of  the  great  anxiety  I 
have  experienced  during  the  last  eight  days.  A  question  arose 
as  to  whether,  under  the  circumstances,  which  necessitated  leaving 
some  points  undecided,  the  signing  of  the  Act  of  Congress  ought 
not  to  be  postponed  to  some  future  date.  A  rather  deep  intrigue 
lay  beneath  this.  Its  object  was  to  make  doubtful,  matters 
which  had  already  been  decided,  and  to  frustrate  decision  on 
several  others  which  ought  to  be  decided. 

Nothing  was  of  greater  importance  to  your  Majesty's  interest, 
than  that  your  name  should  be  appended  to  an  act  which 
announced  the  union  of  all  the  Powers.  All  my  efforts  therefore 
were  concentrated  towards  this  end.  In  this  I  have  been  well 
supported  by  the  English  and  Austrian  embassies.  The  act  will 
be  signed  to-morrow  or  the  day  after. 

I  have  the  honour  to  transmit  to  your  Majesty  a  declaration 
by  the  Helvetian  Diet  to  the  ministers  accredited  to  it ;  and  also 


THE  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA.  127 

a  convention  signed  between  these  ministers  and  those  of 
Switzerland.  Your  Majesty  will  see  that,  if,  in  the  declaration, 
Switzerland  seems  to  wish  to  preserve  her  neutrality,  her  inten- 
tion (which  is  clearly  explained  in  the  convention)  is  neverthe- 
less to  do  all  that  can  possibly  be  expected  of  her  for  the  cause 
of  Europe.  And  in  case  of  necessity  (of  which  the  allied 
generals  are  to  be  the  judges)  she  will  authorize  the  passage  of 
the  allied  troops  through  Swiss  territory. 

In  all  the  letters  received  here  yesterday  by  the  ministers  of 
the  Powers  in  Vienna,  great  praise  is  given  to  M.  Auguste  de 
Talleyrand  for  his  efforts  in  attaining  this  advantageous  end. 
Both  from  a  moral  as  well  as  a  military  point  of  view,  this  action 
on  the  part  of  Switzerland,  is  looked  upon  by  the  allies  as  being 
of  the  greatest  possible  use. 

I  shall  not  have  the  honour  of  writing  again  to  your  Majesty 
from  Vienna.  I  start  at  once  to  lay  at  your  Majesty's  feet  my 
most  respectful  homage  and  devotion.  I  take  no  papers  away 
with  me. 


END   OF   THE   CORRESPONDENCE   OF   THE   CONGRESS 
AND   OF   PART   VIII. 


PART    IX. 

THE   SECOND   RESTORATION- 
ADDENDUM— TALLEYRAND'S  REPLY  TO  HIS    ACCUSERS. 

1815. 

Talleyrand  reaches  Brussels  just  after  the  Battle  of  Waterloo — Joins  the 
King  at  Mons — Tries  to  persuade  the  King  to  establish  himself 
temporarily  at  Lyons — Insists  the  King  should  not  return  to  Paris 
except  as  undisputed  sovereign— The  King  adheres  to  his  original 
intention — Talleyrand's  report  to  King  Louis  of  the  work  done  at  the 
Congress— Points  out  in  what  the  first  restoration  failed — Suggests 
remedies  for  adoption  by  the  second  restoration — Letter  from  M.  de 
Metternich — The  Allied  Sovereigns  arrive  at  Mannheim — Louis  XVIII.'s 
second  proclamation  from  Cambray — His  choice  of  Fouche  as  Minister 
of  Police  very  unpopular — The  Duke  of  Wellington's  letter  respecting 
the  restoration  of  the  works  of  Art  to  foreign  countries — Talleyrand's 
indignation  thereat — The  Due  de  Richelieu  refuses  to  take  office  in 
France — Talleyrand's  answer — Royal  proclamation,  dissolving  the  exist- 
ing Chamber  of  Deputies — Letter  of  M.  de  Bourrienne — Complains  of 
the  scandalous  behaviour  of  the  Austrian  troops  in  France — Fouche 
carries  his  point  with  regard  to  the  prosecutions  of  those  who  had 
formed  the  Chamber  of  Peers  during  the  hundred  days — Talleyrand's 
appeals  for  clemency  not  attended  to — His  arguments  in  favour  of 
hereditary  peerages — Overbearing  order  issued  by  Comte  Wurmser  of 
the  Austrian  Army — King  Louis's  expostulation— The  allies  make  more 
satisfactory  arrangements — Talleyrand's  reply  to  the  allies  on  their 
demand  for  guarantees — Lord  Castlereagh's  memorandum  respecting 
the  art  galleries — Talleyrand's  reply  in  defence — Lord  Wellington's 
"brutal"  answer — Ultimatum  of  the  four  Powers  as  to  the  guarantees 
required — Talleyrand  indignant  at  the  "  insolence  "  of  the  demands — 
Considers  a  prudent  answer  necessary — His  note  to  the  propositions  of 
the  allies — Reply  of  their  ministers — King  Louis  dreads  the  consequences 
of  a  breach — Advises  conciliatory  measures — Talleyrand  convinced  that 
weakness  at  this  point  is  fatal— Offers  to  retire  — Metternich  tries  in  vain 
to  persuade  him  to  continue  in  office — His  characteristic  reply — The  King 
accepts  his  resignation— Close  of  this  period  of  his  political  career. 

Addendum — Talleyrand's  reply  to  his  accusers  respecting  the  murder 
of  the  Due  d'En^hien. 


THE  SECOND  RESTORATION.  129 

My  departure  from  Vienna  was  retarded  several  days  beyond 
the  date  mentioned  in  my  letter  to  the  king  of  May  27th. 
The  intrigue  which  had  been  started  to  prevent  the  signature 
of  the  final  Act  of  the  Congress,  had  not  been  put  down  ;  they 
hoped  to  exhaust  my  patience.  But  I  felt  the  importance  of 
not  yielding  too  strongly,  to  give  in.  I  considered  it  absolutely 
necessary  to  have  written,  signed,  and  irrevocable  pledges  from 
the  Powers,  before  commencing  a  war,  the  issue  of  which  might 
for  a  long  time  be  doubtful.  No  one  could  foresee  that  these 
same  Powers  would,  after  their  victory,  fail  in  their  engagements, 
and  that  we,  on  our  side,  should  have  erred  in  leaving  them  the 
means  of  doing  so.  Be  that  as  it  may,  my  duty  seemed  plain, 
and  I  performed  it.  I  did  not  quit  Vienna  till  June  10th,  the 
final  Act  of  the  Congress  having  been  signed  the  evening  before. 
Thus,  as  has  been  seen,  when  I  reached  Belgium,  I  heard  the 
result  of  the  battle  of  Waterloo. 

The  king  had  left  Ghent  before  I  arrived  in  Brussels,  and 
I  could  not  join  him  till  I  reached  Mons.  He  was  following 
the  English  army  ;  it  was  this  I  wished  to  prevent.  When  I 
presented  myself  he  was  just  about  to  step  into  his  carriage. 
He  said  a  few  kind  words  to  me  ;  I  did  not  conceal  from  him 
how  grieved  I  was  to  see  the  manner  in  which  he  intended 
returning  to  France,  that  I  felt  he  ought  not  to  appear  there 
among  the  ranks  of  foreigners,  that  he  was  ruining  his  cause, 
that  in  wounding  the  national  pride  he  would  damp  the  attach- 
ment felt  for  his  person,  and  that  my  advice  was,  that  he  should 
proceed  with  some  kind  of  escort,  or  better  still  without  any  at 
all,  to  some  part  of  the  French  frontier  which  the  foreigners  had 
not  yet  reached,  and  there  establish  the  seat  of  his  government. 
I  named  the  town  of  Lyons  as  suitable  for  the  execution  of  my 
scheme,  both  from  its  importance  and  its  position.  "  The  king," 
I  said  to  him,  "  could  from  thence  exercise  his  power  quite 
independent  of  all  the  allies.  I  would  precede  him  there  if  he 
liked  ;  and  return  to  acquaint  him  with  the  feeling  of  the  town. 
That,  once  in  Lyons,  he  could  make  an  appeal  to  his  faithful 
subjects  ;  that  those  who  had  been  led  astray  would  probably 
be  the  first  to  return  ;  that  he  could  there  convoke  the 
Chambers  ;  that  there  would  be  time  to  make  all  organic  laws 
vol.  in.  K 


130  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

ere  party  spirit  stepped  in  to  introduce  obstacles  ;  that  from 
Lyons  he  could  protect  France,  whereas  from  Paris  he  could 
not  ;  that  it  was  necessary  to  provide  for  the  chance  of  the  allies 
turning  round  both  in  intention  and  language,  after  the  victory 
they  had  just  gained,  and  using  against  France  those  successes 
which  they  had  solemnly  declared  they  only  wished  to  obtain 
for  her.  "  There  are  several  indications,"  I  added,  "  which  make 
me  dread  such  a  change.  Their  return  to  the  principles  of 
legitimacy  is  too  recent,  to  prevent  our  having  nothing  to  fear 
from  people  accustomed  to  found  their  rights  on  their  pre- 
tensions, and  their  pretensions  on  their  power.  But  if  from 
allies  they  turned  to  enemies,  and  the  king  had  then  to  treat  with 
them,  he  would  nowhere  be  so  much  at  their  mercy  as  in  his 
capital."  I  therefore  insisted  that  the  king  should  not  return 
there,  until  he  could  reign  as  undisputed  sovereign,  and  until 
Paris  should  be  equally  rid  of  factions  and  all  foreign  troops. 
I  wound  up  these  explanations  by  telling  the  king  that  if  he 
decided  to  act  differently,  it  would  be  impossible  for  me  to  con- 
tinue to  direct  his  affairs.  I  placed  my  resignation  in  his  hands 
and  then  withdrew,  having  given  him  the  subjoined  memoir.1 
It  is  a  resume 'of  our  labours  at  the  congress,  and  a  statement  of 
the  measures  I  deemed  necessary,  to  repair  the  faults  committed 
during  the  first  Restoration. 

Report  made  to  the  King  during  his  journey  from 

Ghent  to  Paris. 
Sire, 

In  April,  1814,  France  was  occupied  by  three  hundred 
thousand  foreign  troops,  with  five  hundred  thousand  more  ready 
to  follow  them.  She  had  but  a  handful  of  her  own  soldiers  left, 
who  had  performed  prodigies  of  valour,  but  who  were  now  fairly 
worn  out.  Abroad  she  had  large  armies,  but  these  dispersed 
and  without  communications  could  no  longer  be  of  any  use  to 
her,  nor  even  assist  each  other.  One  portion  of  these  forces 
was  shut  up  in  distant  towns,  which  they  could  hold  for  a  longer 
or  shorter  period  ;  but  which  would  inevitably  fall  if  simply 
invested.     Two  hundred  thousand  Frenchmen  were  prisoners  of 

1  This  resignation  did  not  take  place  then.     M.  de  Tallyrand  did  not  resign  till 
September  24th. 


THE  SECOND  RESTORATION.  131 

war.  In  such  a  state  of  affairs  it  became  necessary  at  any  price 
to  cease  hostilities  by  concluding  an  armistice.  This  was  done 
on  the  23rd  of  April.1 

The  armistice  was  not  merely  a  necessity,  it  was  an  act  of 
great  policy,  for  it  was  necessary  above  all,  that  the  power  of  the 
allies  should  be  succeeded  by  a  feeling  of  confidence,  and  for  this 
it  was  essential  to  inspire  them  with  it.  The  armistice  moreover 
deprived  them  of  nothing  which  they  had  the  least  hopes  of 
preserving.  Those  who  believed  that  by  delaying  the  surrender 
of  the  fortified  towns  until  the  conclusion  of  peace,  better  terms 
could  have  been  made,  either  ignored  or  forgot  the  fact,  that, 
setting  aside  the  impossibility  of  obtaining  an  armistice  for 
France  without  surrendering  those  towns,  any  attempt  to  pro- 
long their  occupation  would  have  excited  the  suspicion  of  the 
allies,  and  consequently  changed  their  intentions. 

The  arrangements  agreed  upon  were  such  as  France  could 
well  be  satisfied  with.  They  were  much  more  favourable  than  she 
had  any  right  to  expect.  The  allies  were  welcomed  as  liberators, 
and  the  praises  lavished  on  their  generosity  stimulated  them  to 
show  more.  It  was  necessary  to  profit  by  this  sentiment  while 
it  was  favourable,  and  not  allow  it  to  cool.  It  was  not  enough 
to  obtain,  cessation  of  hostilities  ;  it  was  necessary  to  induce 
them  to  evacuate  French  territory.  It  was  imperative  that 
the  interests  of  France  should  be  fully  settled,  and  that  there 
should  be  no  uncertainty  as  to  her  fate,  so  that  your  Majesty 
could  then  and  there  take  the  position  which  was  yours  by 
right.  To  make  peace  on  the  best  possible  terms,  and  to  draw 
therefrom  all  the  advantages  that  it  would  bring,  its  immediate 
signature  was  essential. 

By  the  treaty  of  May  30th  France  only  lost  what  she  had 
conquered,  and  not  even  all  that  she  had  gained  in  the  course 
of  the  conflict  which  it  brought  to  an  end.  It  took  nothing 
from  her  that  was  essential  to  her  safety.  She  lost  the  means 
of  ruling  which  were  foreign  to  her  happiness,  and  which  she 
could  not  retain,  coupled  with  the  advantages  of  a  durable 
peace.  In  order  to  form  a  fair  estimate  of  the  character  of  the 
peace  of  18 14,  it  is  necessary  to  consider  the  impression  it  made 

1  Var.  :  22nd  April. 

K    2 


132  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

on  the  allied  nations.  At  St.  Petersburg  and  Berlin  the  Em- 
peror Alexander  and  the  King  of  Prussia  were  not  only  received 
with  coldness,  but  with  murmurs  of  discontent,  because  the 
treaty  of  May  30th  did  not  fulfil  the  expectations  of  their  subjects. 
France  had  everywhere  levied  heavy  war  contributions,  and  it 
was  quite  expected  that  these  in  return  would  be  levied  on  her. 
She  was  required  to  pay  none  ;  she  remained  in  possession  of 
all  the  art  treasures  she  had  acquired  ;  all  her  monuments  were 
respected,  and  it  is  not  too  much  to  say,  that  she  was  treated 
with  a  degree  of  moderation  which  under  similar  circumstances 
has  no  parallel  in  history. 

All  the  direct  interests  in  France  had  been  provided  for, 
while  those  of  other  states  remained  subordinate  to  the  decision 
of  the  future  congress.  France  was  summoned  to  assist  at  this 
congress,  but  when  the  plenipotentiaries  arrived  there,  it  was 
found  that  the  rancour,  which  the  treaty  of  May  30th  ought  to 
have  extinguished,  and  the  prejudices  which  it  ought  to  have 
dispelled,  together  with  the  possible  regrets  which  still  lingered 
with  the  Powers,  had,  since  its  conclusion,  sprung  up  afresh, 
therefore  the  Powers  continued  to  call  themselves  allies  as  if 
the  war  was  still  going  on. 

Being  the  first  to  arrive  in  Vienna,  these  Powers  had  under- 
taken by  written  protocols  (the  existence  of  which  the  French 
legation  suspected  from  the  first,  but  was  unable  to  make  sure 
of  till  four  months  afterwards)  not  to  admit  the  intervention  of 
France,  except  as  a  matter  of  form . 

Two  of  these  protocols,  which  are  before  your  Majesty,  and 
which  are  dated  September  22nd,  1814,1  stipulated  in  substance — 
"  That  the  allied  powers  will  take  the  initiative  in  all  matters 
that  have  to  be  discussed  ;  [under  the  name  of  allied  powers 
only  Austria,  Russia,  England,  and  Prussia  were  named,  because 
these  four  powers  were  more  closely  allied  together  than  any 
others,  as  much  by  their  treaties  as  by  their  views]. 

"  That  they  alone  should  arrange  between  them  the  distribu- 
tion of  the  disposable   provinces,    but   that   France   and   Spain 
should  be  allowed  to  give  their  opinions,  and  bring  forward  their 
objections,  which  would  then  be  discussed  with  them. 
1  See  d'Angeberg's  Congress  of  Vienna,  p.  249. 


THE  SECOND  RESTORATION.  133 

"  That  the  plenipotentiaries  of  the  four  Powers  would  not 
confer  with  those  of  the  two  Powers  on  any  matter  relating  to 
the  territorial  distribution  of  the  duchy  of  Warsaw,  that  of 
Germany  or  that  of  Italy,  until  they  had  fully  decided  and 
were  perfectly  agreed  among  themselves  on  these  three  points." 

It  was  intended,  in  fact,  that  France  should  play  a  purely 
nominal  part  at  the  congress.  She  was  simply  to  be  a  spectator 
of  what  was  being  done  by  the  others,  instead  of  taking  part  in 
it  herself;  she  was  still  an  object  of  distrust,  nourished  by  the 
recollection  of  her  numerous  invasions,  and  of  animosity  ex- 
cited by  the  many  evils  with  which  she  had  only  recently  over- 
whelmed Europe.  She  was  still  feared  ;  her  power  was  still 
dreaded  ;  and  it  was  thought  that  peace  could  only  be  secured 
by  forming  a  European  union  against  her  ;  in  fact,  the  coalition 
still  existed. 

Your  Majesty  will  permit  me  to  recall  the  earnestness  with 
which,  on  every  occasion,  I  maintained  and  tried  to  persuade 
even  the  highest  officers  in  the  army,  that  it  was  for  the  in- 
terest of  France,  as  well  as  their  own  glory,  to  renounce  willingly 
all  thoughts  of  regaining  Belgium  and  the  left  bank  of  the 
Rhine.  I  believed  that  unless  this  patriotic  sacrifice  was  made, 
there  could  be  no  peace  between  France  and  Europe,  and  as 
a  fact,  although  France  no  longer  owned  these  provinces,  her 
power  and  grandeur  held  Europe  in  such  a  state  of  terror,  that 
she  was  obliged  to  preserve  a  hostile  attitude. 

So  great  is  our  power,  that  now,  when  Europe  is  at  her 
maximum  strength  and  France  at  her  minimum,  the  former 
still  doubts  the  success  of  the  struggle  she  has  undertaken.  My 
opinions  on  this  matter  were  only  the  expressions  of  your 
Majesty's  sentiments,  but  most  of  your  principal  statesmen,  the 
worthiest  writers,  the  army,  and  the  greater  part  of  the  nation 
did  not  share  these  moderate  views,  without  which  any  durable 
peace  or  even  the  semblance  of  it  was  impossible  ;  and  these 
ambitious  views,  which  with  some  reason  were  looked  upon  as 
those  of  France,  served  still  further  to  increase  and  justify  the 
terror  her  strength  inspired. 

It  was  on  this  account  that  the  public  journals  teemed  with 
insinuations  and  accusations  against  France  and  her  plenipoten- 


134  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

tiaries.  They  remained  isolated,  no  one  ventured  to  approach 
them  ;  even  the  few  ministers  who  did  not  share  these  prejudices, 
avoided  them  lest  they  too  should  be  compromised.  Everything  it 
was  proposed  to  do  was  carefully  hidden  from  us ;  conferences  were 
held  without  our  knowledge  ;  and  when  at  the  commencement  of 
the  congress  a  commission  was  appointed  to  organize  the  German 
federation,  all  the  ministers  who  composed  it  were  pledged  on 
honour,  not  to  communicate  to  us  anything  that  passed  there. 

Although  your  Majesty's  government  had  none  of  the  views 
imputed  to  it,  although  it  had  nothing  to  ask  for  itself  and  had 
no  wish  to  ask  for  anything,  all  that  was  to  be  arranged  by  the 
congress  was  of  the  utmost  importance  to  it.  But  if  its  interests 
in  these  arrangements  differed  from  the  actual  or  momentary 
interests  of  some  of  the  Powers,  it  was  happily  in  conformity  with 
those  of  the  majority,  and  even  with  the  permanent  interests  of  all. 

Buonaparte  had  overthrown  so  many  governments,  added  so 
much  territory  and  so  many  diverse  populations  to  his  empire, 
that  when  France  ceased  to  be  the  enemy  of  Europe  and 
returned  within  the  limits  beyond  which  she  could  not  preserve 
friendly  relations  with  other  states,  there  were,  in  almost  every 
part  of  Europe,  vast  countries  without  any  governments.  The 
states  which  he  had  despoiled  without  wholly  destroying  them, 
could  not  recover  the  provinces  they  had  lost,  because  these  had 
in  part  passed  under  the  rule  of  princes  who  had  since  then 
become  allies.  It  therefore  became  necessary  that  the  countries 
without  rulers  (owing  to  their  renunciation  by  France),  should  have 
some  kind  of  government,  and  in  order  to  indemnify  the  states 
which  had  been  despoiled  by  her,  that  these  countries  should  be 
divided  among  them.  However  repugnant  or  degrading  to 
humanity  such  a  distribution  of  men  and  countries  may  be,  it 
was  rendered  indispensable  through  the  violent  usurpations  of 
a  government,  which,  using  its  strength  merely  to  destroy,  had 
brought  about  the  necessity  for  reconstruction  from  the  debris 
it  had  left. 

Saxony  was  conquered,  the  kingdom  of  Naples  was  in 
possession  of  a  usurper,  and  it  was  necessary  to  determine  the 
fate  of  these  states. 

The  treaty  of  Paris  declared  that  these  arrangements  would 


THE  SECOND  RESTORATION.  135 

be  carried  out  in  such  a  manner  as  to  establish  a  real  and  durable 
equilibrium  in  Europe.  None  of  the  powers  denied  the 
necessity  of  having  to  conform  to  this  principle,  but  the  special 
views  of  some,  deceived  them  as  to  the  means  of  accomplishing 
this  object.  On  the  other  hand  it  would  have  been  useless  to 
establish  this  equilibrium,  without  at  the  same  time  constituting 
those  principles,  which  alone  could  ensure  the  domestic  tranquil- 
lity of  the  states,  while  at  the  same  time  preventing  their  being 
solely  under  the  dominion  of  the  strongest,  in  their  relations  one 
with  another. 

Your  Majesty  on  re-entering  France,  desired  that  principles 
of  political  morality  should  return  with  you,  and  become  the 
rule  of  your  government.  Your  Majesty  felt  it  was  also 
necessary  they  should  pervade  in  the  cabinets,  and  show  them- 
selves in  the  relations  between  the  different  states,  and  you  had 
commanded  us  to  use  all  the  influence  your  Majesty  possessed 
and  to  devote  all  our  energies,  to  obtain  their  complete 
recognition  by  the  whole  of  Europe. 

This  task  presented  many  difficulties.  The  effects  of  the 
revolution  were  not  confined  merely  to  French  territory,  they 
had  spread  themselves  abroad  by  force  of  arms,  by  the 
encouragement  given  to  every  kind  of  passion,  and  by  general 
licentiousness.  Holland  and  several  parts  of  Italy  had,  at 
different  periods,  seen  revolutionary  governments  replace 
legitimate  ones.  Since  Buonaparte  had  become  master  of 
France,  not  only  was  the  fact  of  conquest  sufficient  to  do 
away  with  sovereignty,  but  people  became  accustomed  to 
seeing  sovereigns  dethroned,  governments  annihilated,  and 
whole    nations    disappear  entirely    by  simple   decrees. 

Although  such  a  state  of  affairs,  if  allowed  to  continue,  must 
necessarily  lead  to  the  total  destruction  of  civilized  society, 
custom  and  fear  made  people  still  endure  it,  and  as  it  was 
favourable  to  the  momentary  interests  of  some  of  the  powers, 
the  others  did  not  sufficiently  dread  the  reproach  of  taking 
Buonaparte  for  their  model. 

We  pointed  out  all  the  dangers  of  this  false  policy.  We 
showed  that  the  existence  of  all  the  governments  was  com- 
promised in  the   highest  degree  by  a   system  in   which   their 


136  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

preservation  depended  either  on  faction  or  the  fate  of  war. 
We  at  last  made  them  see  that  it  was  above  all  necessary,  in 
the  interests  of  the  nations,  to  establish  the  legitimacy  of 
governments,  because  legitimate  governments  can  alone  be 
stable,  while  those  that  are  illegitimate,  having  no  other  support 
than  that  of  violence,  fall  as  soon  as  this  support  is  withdrawn, 
and  the  nation  falls  a  prey  to  a  succession  of  revolutions  of 
which  it  is  impossible  to  see  the  end. 

These  principles  were  long  in  being  understood,  being  too 
severe  for  the  politics  of  some  courts  ;  they  were  opposed  to  the 
policy  followed  by  the  English  in  India,  and  perhaps  irksome  to 
Russia,  as  she  had  disowned  them  in  several  important  and 
recent  contracts.  Before  we  succeeded  in  making  their  import- 
ance felt,  the  allied  powers  had  already  made  arrangements 
which  were  quite  opposed  to  them.  Prussia  had  demanded  the 
whole  of  Saxony,  Russia  had  asked  this  for  her.  England  had 
by  official  notes,  not  only  consented  unreservedly  to  this  transfer, 
but  even  tried  to  make  out  that  it  was  fair,  and  a  matter  of 
necessity.  Austria  had  also  officially  given  in  her  adhesion  to 
this  measure,  excepting  only  some  frontier  stipulations.  Saxony 
was  thus  completely  sacrificed  by  special  arrangements  entered 
into  between  Austria,  Russia,  England  and  Prussia,  to  which 
France  was  a  complete  stranger. 

Nevertheless  the  language  of  the  French  embassy,  its  reason- 
able, serious,  and  uniform  attitude,  free  from  all  ambitious  aims, 
began  to  make  itself  felt.  Confidence  began  to  spring  up 
around  it.  It  was  felt  that  its  utterances  were  not  more  in  the 
interests  of  France  than  in  those  of  Europe  and  of  each  par- 
ticular state.  People's  eyes  were  opened  to  the  dangers  France 
had  pointed  out.  Austria  was  the  first  to  desire  to  withdraw 
from  what  had,  if  I  may  say  so,  been  decided  upon  relative 
to  Saxony,  and  declared  in  a  note  sent  to  Prince  Hardenberg 
on  December  ioth,  1814,  that  she  would  not  consent  to  the 
destruction  of  that  kingdom. 

This  was  the  first  advantage  obtained  by  us  in  following 
the  line  laid  down  by  your  Majesty. 

I  blame  myself  for  having  so  constantly,  in  the  letters  I  had 
the   honour  of  writing  to  your    Majesty,   complained    of    the 


THE  SECOND  RESTORATION.  137 

difficulties  we  had  to  contend  with  and  of  the  delays  which 
constantly  impeded  the  progress  of  affairs.  Now  I  am  thankful 
for  these  delays,  for  if  matters  had  been  concluded  with  greater 
rapidity,  the  congress  would  have  terminated  before  the  end  of 
March,  the  sovereigns  would  have  returned  to  their  capitals, 
the  armies  would  have  been  disbanded,  and  then  what  difficulties 
there  would  have  been  to  encounter  ! 

M.  de  Metternich  having  officially  communicated  to  me  his 
note  of  D'ecember  10th,  I  could  make  known  the  views  of  France, 
and  I  therefore  sent  both  to  him  and  to  Lord  Castlereagh,  a  full 
profession  of  political  faith.  I  declared  that  your  Majesty 
desired  nothing  for  France,  that  you  only  asked  for  simple  justice 
for  every  one,  and  that  what  you  wanted  above  all,  was  that 
revolutions  should  be  put  an  end  to,  that  the  doctrines  these 
had  given  rise  to  should  no  longer  be  allowed  to  enter  into  the 
political  relations  of  nations,  so  that  each  government  could 
either  prevent  or  crush  them  completely,  if  menaced  or  attacked 
by  them. 

These  declarations  served  to  dissipate  the  doubts  of  which 
we  were  at  first  the  victims.  But  these  soon  gave  place  to  very 
different  sentiments ;  nothing  was  done  now  without  our  con- 
currence, not  only  were  we  consulted,  but  our  approbation  was 
sought  after.  Public  opinion  was  completely  changed  respecting 
us,  and  shoals  of  people,  who  before  had  shown  themselves 
timid,  now  hastened  to  put  an  end  to  the  isolation  in  which  we 
had  at  first  been  left. 

It  was  more  difficult  for  England  than  it  had  been  for 
Austria,  to  go  back  from  her  promise  to  Prussia,  of  giving  up  to 
her  the  whole  of  Saxony.  Her  notes  were  more  decided  ;  she 
had  not,  like  Austria,  given  in  to  the  surrender,  because  of  the 
difficulty  of  finding  any  other  means  of  indemnifying  Prussia, 
by  possessions  equally  conveniently  situated,  for  the  losses  she 
had  sustained  since  1806.  Moreover,  the  position  of  the  English 
ministers  obliged  them,  under  pain  of  losing  .what  is  called  in 
England  their  character,  not  to  diverge  from  the  path  they  have 
once  entered  upon,  and  in  choosing  this  road,  their  politics  must 
always  conform  to  the  probable  opinions  of  Parliament.  Not- 
withstanding  this,   the  English   legation    was  also    brought    to 


138  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

reconsider  its  promise,  to  change  its  line  of  action,  to  withdraw 
its  acquiescence  in  the  destruction  of  the  kingdom  of  Saxony, 
to  improve  its  relations  with  France,  and  even  to  join  her  in  a 
treaty  of  alliance  with  Austria.  The  treaty,  specially  remark- 
able as  being  the  first  conciliatory  step  whose  joint  interests 
would  sooner  or  later  oblige  them  to  support  each  other,  was 
signed  on  the  3rd  of  January.  Bavaria,  Holland,  Hanover  and 
the  Netherlands  also  joined,  and  it  was  only  then  that  the 
coalition,  which  in  spite  of  the  peace  had  continued  to  exist,  was 
finally  broken  up. 

From  that  moment  the  greater  number  of  the  Powers  adopted 
our  principles.  The  others  showed,  plainly,  that  they  would  not 
hold  out  much  longer  ;  it  therefore  only  remained  to  press  the 
point 

Prussia  deprived  of  the  support  of  Austria  and  England, 
though  still  backed  by  Austria,  found  herself  under  the  necessity 
of  limiting  her  pretensions  to  receiving  only  a  portion  of  Saxony. 
Thus  this  kingdom,  whose  fate  seemed  irrevocably  settled  and 
whose  destruction  had  been  pronounced,  was  saved  from  ruin. 

Buonaparte  after  having  taken  possession  of  the  kingdom  of 
Naples  by  force  of  arms,  had  given  it,  (in  defiance  of  the  law  of 
nations,  and  as  if  it  were  a  private  possession  of  his  own,  or  as 
he  would  have  done  with  an  ordinary  estate,)  to  one  of  his 
generals  as  a  reward  for  services  rendered.  It  would  have  been 
nothing  less  than  a  violation  of  the  laws  of  legitimacy  to  allow 
the  possession  of  that  kingdom  under  such  a  law.  His  downfall 
was  inevitable  ;  it  could  no  longer  be  doubtful,  when  he  himself 
accomplished  it  by  his  aggression.  Seven  weeks  have  scarce 
elapsed  since  this  aggression,  and  the  usurper  no  longer  reigns  ; 
Ferdinand  IV.  has  already  remounted  his  throne.  In  this  im- 
portant question  the  English  minister  had  the  courage  to  side 
completely  with  the  policy  of  France,  despite  the  indiscreet  and 
misplaced  clamours  of  the  opposition,  and  the  foolish  and 
inconsiderate  utterances  of  English  travellers  on  all  matters 
relating  to  Italy. 

France  has  also  to  congratulate  herself  on  the  way  in  which 
most  of  the  other  arrangements  of  the  congress  have  been 
carried  out. 


THE  SECOND  RESTORATION.  139 

The  King  of  Sardinia  having  no  male  heir  in  the  actual 
reigning  branch  of  his  house,  there  was  some  fear  lest  Austria 
should  attempt  to  get  the  succession  passed  on  to  one  of  the 
Archdukes  who  had  married  one  of  his  daughters,  by  which  the 
whole  of  upper  Italy  would  then  be  placed  in  the  hands  of 
Austria  or  one  of  her  princes.  The  right  of  succession  of  the 
branch  of  Carignan  to  the  states  of  the  King  of  Sardinia,  has 
been  acknowledged.  These  states,  increased  by  the  district  of 
Genoa,  and  being  the  heritage  of  a  family  whose  every  interest 
attaches  to  France,  will  thus  form  a  counterpoise  to  the  power 
of  Austria  in  Italy,  necessary  to  maintain  the  equilibrium  in 
that  country. 

If  it  was  not  possible  to  prevent  Russia  from  obtaining  some 
portion  of  the  duchy  of  Warsaw,  the  half  at  least  of  that  duchy 
will  go  back  to  its  ancient  owners. 

Prussia  has  not  got  either  Luxemburg  or  Mayence.  She 
does  not  anywhere  border  on  France  ;  on  all  sides  she  is  sepa- 
rated by  the  Netherlands,  whose  natural  policy  since  her 
territory  has  been  augmented,  gives  France  the  assurance  that 
there  will  be  nothing  to  dread  from  her. 

The  benefits  of  perpetual  neutrality  have  been  assured  to 
Switzerland,  an  advantage  almost  as  great  for  France,  whose 
frontier  on  that  side  is  perfectly  open  and  undefended,  as  to 
Switzerland  herself.  But  this  neutrality  does  not  prevent 
Switzerland  from  joining  Europe  to-day  in  her  efforts  against 
Buonaparte.  What  she  has  desired  and  what  has  been  assured  to 
her  for  ever,  she  will  enjoy  during  any  wars  that  may  take  place 
between  the  different  states.  But  she  herself  felt  that  she  ought 
not  to  claim  this  privilege  in  a  war  which  is  not  made  against 
a  single  nation  ;  a  war  which  Europe  has  been  forced  to  under- 
take for  her  own  safety,  and  which  concerns  Switzerland  herself 
as  much  as  it  does  other  nations.  She  is,  therefore,  desirous  to 
join  in  the  cause  of  Europe  in  such  a  manner,  as  her  position, 
her  organisation,  and  her  resources  will  allow  her  to  do. 

France  has,  by  the  treaty  of  Paris,  undertaken  to  abolish  the 
slave-trade  at  the  expiration  of  a  given  date,  which  may  be  con- 
sidered as  a  sacrifice  and  a  concession  she  would  have  made,  even 
if  the  other  maritime  Powers  which  do  not  share  in  the  sentiments 


140  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

of  humanity  which  dictated  this  measure,  had  not  also  adopted 
it.  Spain  and  Portugal,  the  only  ones  among  these  Powers  who 
joined  in  this  treaty,  undertook  to  abolish  it  as  well  as  France. 
It  is  true  they  reserved  to  themselves  a  longer  period  of  delay, 
but  this  delay  is  proportionately  less,  when  the  needs  of  their 
colonies  are  taken  into  consideration,  and  when  it  is  remem- 
bered that  in  these  somewhat  backward  countries,  opinion  on 
such  a  matter  has  to  be  educated. 

The  navigation  of  the  Rhine  and  the  Schelde  has  been  placed 
under  proper  regulations,  equally  the  same  for  all  nations. 
These  regulations  prevent  the  states  bordering  on  the  rivers, 
from  placing  any  special  obstruction  in  the  way  of  the  naviga- 
tion, or  imposing  upon  it  any  dues  other  than  those  which  have 
been  established  for  their  own  people.  These  arrangements 
give  back  to  France,  by  the  facilities  which  they  afford  to  her 
commerce,  the  greater  part  of  those  advantages  which  she 
formerly  derived  from  Belgium  and  the  right  bank  of  the  Rhine. 

All  the  principal  points  have  been  arranged  to  the  satisfac- 
tion of  France,  as  much  and  more,  perhaps,  than  we  could  have 
hoped  for.  Even  in  details  quite  as  much  consideration  was 
shown  for  her  special  convenience,  as  that  of  any  other  country. 

Having  got  rid  of  their  prejudices,  the  Powers  found  that 
in  order  to  establish  a  permanent  order  of  things,  it  was  necessary 
that  each  state  should  feel  it  had  gained  those  advantages  it  had 
a  right  to  expect.  All  therefore  worked  together  with  goodwill 
to  procure  for  each,  what  would  not  harm  the  other.  This  was 
a  stupendous  undertaking  ;  it  meant  the  reconstruction  of  that 
which  twenty  years  of  disorder  had  destroyed  ;  it  meant  the 
conciliation  of  contradictory  interests  by  equitable  arrangements, 
the  compensation  of  partial 1  inconveniences  by  greater  advan- 
tages, and  to  subordinate  even  the  idea  of  absolute  perfection  in 
political  institutions  and  in  the  distribution  of  the  forces,  to  the 
establishment  of  a  durable  peace. 

The    principal    obstacles    had  been    successfully    overcome, 

the   most  thorny  questions   had  been  settled,  every  effort  was 

made  to  leave  nothing  undecided.     Germany  was  to  receive  a 

federal    constitution    resulting   from    the    deliberations    of    the 

1  Suppressed  in  the  text  of  the  archives. 


THE  SECOND  RESTORATION.  141 

congress,  which  would  have  arrested  the  tendency  observable 
among  some,  to  form  a  league  of  the  north  and  a  league  of  the 
south.  The  powers  were  about  to  oppose  by  wise  and  just 
measures  in  Italy,  an  efficient  barrier  to  the  recurrence  of  those 
frequent  revolutions  which  have  harassed  the  people  of  that 
country  for  centuries.  Wise  measures  were  being  concerted  to 
insure  the  reciprocal  interests  of  the  different  countries,  and  to 
multiply  their  points  of  contact,  as  well  as  the  revenues  of  their 
industries  and  commerce,  and  all  useful  intercourse  was  perfected 
and  facilitated,  according  to  the  principles  of  a  liberal  policy. 

We  flattered  ourselves  in  fact  that  the  congress  would  crown 
its  labours,  by  substituting  for  these  fleeting  alliances  (the  result 
of  necessities  and  momentary  calculations)  a  permanent  system 
of  universal  guarantees  and  general  equilibrium,  the  advan- 
tages of  which  we  had  succeeded  in  making  all  the  powers 
appreciate.  Lord  Castlereagh  had  drawn  up  a  very  good 
document  on  this  subject.  The  Ottoman  Empire  entered  into 
this  great  scheme  of  preservation,  and  probably  the  information 
given  her  by  England  and  ourselves,  contributed  in  determining 
her  to  repulse  all  Buonaparte's  advances  ;  thus  the  order  estab- 
lished in  Europe  would  be  placed  under  the  perpetual  protection 
of  all  the  parties  interested,  who  by  wisely  concerted  plans,  or 
by  sincerely  united  efforts  would  crush  at  the  very  outset, 
any  attempt  to  compromise  it. 

Then  revolutions  would  be  prevented,  and  governments  would 
be  able  to  devote  their  time  to  home  administration  and  real 
reforms,  in  conformity  with  the  needs  and  wishes  of  the  people, 
and  in  the  execution  of  numerous  salutary  schemes,  which,  owing 
to  the  dangers  and  convulsions  of  past  times,  had  unfortunately 
been  in  abeyance. 

The  re-establishment  of  your  Majesty's  government,  whose 
interests,  principles,  and  wishes  were  all  directed  towards  the 
preservation  of  peace,  afforded  Europe  the  means  of  placing  her 
happiness  and  tranquillity  on  a  solid  basis.  The  maintenance 
of  your  Majesty  on  your  throne  was  necessary  to  the  success  of 
this  great  work  ;  the  terrible  catastrophe  which  for  a  time  has 
separated  you  from  your  people  has  acted  as  a  check.  It  has 
been  found  necessary  to  bestow  less  care  on  the  prosperity  of 


142  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

nations,  and  devote  more  to  rinding  measures  for  the  safety  of 
their  existence,  which  was  menaced.  Many  matters  ready 
planned,  had  to  be  adjourned,  and  others  less  matured  and  less 
thought  out,  than  if  full  care  and  attention  could  have  been 
given  them,  had  to  be  substituted. 

The  congress  having  thus  been  forced  to  leave  uncompleted 
the  work  it  had  undertaken,  it  was  suggested  that  the  signature 
of  the  Act  that  would  ratify  it,  should  be  put  off  until  such  time 
as  the  business  should  be  completed. 

Several  of  the  cabinets  were  of  this  opinion,  probably  with 
the  secret  hope  of  taking  advantage  of  the  coming  events.  I 
looked  upon  this  adjournment  as  a  very  great  misfortune  for 
your  Majesty  ;  less  on  account  of  the  uncertainty  that  would 
remain  as  to  the  intentions  of  the  Powers,  than-  as  to  the  effect 
such  an  act  would  have  on  public  opinion  in  France,  affecting 
as  it  would,  all  the  highest  interests  of  Europe,  and  in  which, 
despite  the  actual  circumstances,  your  Majesty  appears  as  one 
of  the  principal  actors.  I  therefore  did  my  utmost  to  accom- 
plish the  ratification,  and  I  consider  myself  fortunate  that  it 
was  finally  agreed  to. 

The  great  consideration  in  which  your  Majesty's  govern- 
ment ought  to  be  held  at  all  foreign  courts,  would  not  be 
complete,  except  by  securing  to  your  subjects  that  esteem  which 
belongs  by  right  to  the  members  of  a  great  nation  and  of  which 
the  fear  inspired  by  the  French  had  deprived  them.  Since 
the  month  of  December,  1814,  not  a  single  Frenchman  has 
come  to  Vienna,  no  matter  on  what  business,  without  receiving 
the  greatest  possible  attention,  and  I  may  inform  your  Majesty 
that  on  March  7th,  181 5,  the  day  on  which  the  news  of  Buona- 
parte's arrival  in  France  became  known,  the  fact  of  being  a 
Frenchman  became  a  passport  to  the  kindness  of  every  one  in 
Vienna.  I  knew  the  great  stress  your  Majesty  laid  on  this 
evidence  of  good  feeling  and  I  am  happy  to  be  able  to  inform 
you,  that  your  wishes  in  this  respect  have  been  thoroughly 
carried  out. 

I  entreat  your  Majesty  to  allow  me  to  bring  to  your  notice 
the  great  assistance  given  me  by  the  Due  de  Dalberg,  the  Comte 
de  la  Tour-du-Pin,  and  the    Comte  de  Noailles,  whom    your 


THE  SECOND  RESTORATION.  143 

Majesty  sent  here  with  me  as  ambassadors  ;  likewise  M.  de  la 
Besnardierc,  who  accompanied  me,  in  bringing  the  negotiations 
to  a  successful  issue.  They  have  not  only  been  of  the  greatest 
use  by  their  work  on  the  different  commissions  to  which  they 
were  attached,  but  also  by  their  social  qualities,  their  language 
and  the  pleasant  impression  they  gave  of  themselves  as  well  as 
the  government  they  represented.  It  is  owing  to  their  skilful 
co-operation,  that  I  was  enabled  to  overcome  so  many  obstacles, 
to  change  so  many  adverse  dispositions,  and  destroy  numerous 
false  impressions,  and  finally  to  restore  to  your  Majesty's 
government  all  the  weight  and  influence  it  ought  to  have  in  the 
affairs  of  Europe.  It  was  only  by  firmly  maintaining  the  prin- 
ciples of  legitimacy  that  we  attained  this  important  end.  The 
presence  of  all  the  sovereigns  who  were  in  Vienna  and  likewise 
all  the  members  of  the  congress,  at  the  expiatory  ceremony  of 
the  2 1st  of  January,  was  a  striking  homage  rendered  to  this 
principle. 

But  while  it  triumphed  at  the  congress,  it  was  attacked  in 
France.  What  I  am  about  to  say  to  your  Majesty  on  this 
subject,  was  probably  more  evident  at  a  distance  than  it  was 
in  Paris.  Outside  of  France,  attention  being  less  distracted 
facts  became  known  en  masse,  and  being  separated  from  sur- 
rounding circumstances  could,  to  a  certain  extent,  be  judged 
more  fairly ;  nevertheless  I  would  not  rely  implicitly  on  any 
observations  that  were  merely  my  own.  Having  filled  a  position 
abroad  for  a  long  time,  my  duty  to  your  Majesty  obliges  me  to 
do  what  the  Foreign  Office  enjoins  on  all  those  in  its  employ. 
They  are  bound  to  render  an  account  of  the  opinions  formed  by 
the  countries  to  which  they  are  accredited,  of  the  various  acts 
of  their  own  government,  and  the  different  impressions  produced 
by  these  acts,  on  enlightened  and  able  men. 

It  is  quite  possible  to  become  reconciled  to  a  settled  state  of 
affairs,  even  if  it  jars  somewhat  with  one's  principles,  because 
one  need  not  dread  the  future  ;  but  not  to  an  unsettled  state  of 
things,  which  changes  every  day,  for  in  this  latter  case,  each  day 
brings  forth  fresh  fears,  to  which  one  can  see  no  end.  The 
Revolutionists  took  their  stand  against  the  first  acts  of  your 
Majesty's  government,  then  they  became  alarmed  at  what  was 


144  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

done  in  the  course  of  ten  days,  a  month — six  months — and 
resigned  themselves  to  the  expulsions  in  the  Senate,1  but  could 
not  tolerate  those  of  the  Institute,'2  although  these  latter  were 
far  less  important.  The  changes  made  in  the  Court  de  Cassation  3 
since  your  Majesty  considered  them  necessary,  ought  to  have 
been  effected  eight  months  before. 

The  principle  of  legitimacy  suffered  still  further,  and  in 
perhaps  a  still  more  dangerous  manner,  from  the  faults  of  the 
defenders  of  legitimate  power,  for  they  confused  two  things  so 
completely  opposite,  as  the  source  of  power,  and  its  exercise, 
persuading  themselves  (or  acting  as  if  they  were  so  persuaded) 
that  as  the  power  was  -legitimate,  it  must  therefore  necessarily 
be  absolute. 

But  however  legitimate  power  may  be,  its  exercise  must  vary 
according  to  the  object  to  which  it  is  applied,  both  as  regards 
time  and  circumstance.  Furthermore  the  spirit  of  the  times  in 
which  we  live,  requires  that  in  all  civilized  states,  supreme  power 
is  never  to  be  exercised,  except  in  concert  with  certain  bodies 
from  the  midst  of  the  society  it  governs. 

To  contend  against  this  opinion  would  be  to  contend  against 
universal  opinion  ;  and  a  great  number  of  those  persons  placed 
near  the  throne,  were  essentially  injurious  to  the  government, 
because  their  views  were  in  opposition  to  it.  All  your  Majesty's 
power  was  based  on  the  opinion  formed  by  the  people  of  your 
virtues  and  good  faith.     This  some  acts  tended  to  weaken.     I 

1  The  Chamber  of  Peers  created  by  Louis  XVIII.  consisted  of  504  members,  of 
whom  eighty-four  were  old  senators ;  fifty-three  senators  were  excluded — twenty-three  as 
being  no  longer  Frenchmen,  and  the  other  thirty  for  political  reasons.  Among  the 
latter  the  best  known  were  Cambaceres  Chaptal  de  Lapparent,  Cure  Fouche,  Sieges 
Roger-Ducos,  Francois  de  Neufchateau,  the  Abbe  Gregoire,  Gorat,  Lambrechts 
Roederer,  Cardinal  Fesch,  &c. 

2  By  the  proclamation  of  the  10th  of  March  the  fourth  class  of  the  Institute— that 
of  the  Fine  Arts— was  suppressed.  In  addition,  Prince  Lucien,  Cardinal  Fesch, 
Cardinal  Maury,  Cambaceres,  Gorat,  Marlin,  Roederer,  and  Sieges  were  excluded 
from  the  French  Academy  ;  the  Emperor  Napoleon,  Mouge,  Guyton  de  Morneau,  and 
Carnot  from  the  Academy  of  Sciences ;  King  Joseph,  Lakanal,  and  the  Abbe 
Gregoire  from  the  Academy  of  Inscriptions.  * 

s  The  highest  Court  of  Appeal  in  France.  By  the  proclamation  of  February  1 6th, 
1815,  the  composition  of  this  Court  underwent  the  following  modifications: — The 
first  President,  the  Comte  Muraire,  was  replaced  by  M.  Deseze.  Of  the  three 
presidents  two  remained— M.  Barris  and  M.  Heurion  de  Pensey.  The  third, 
M.  Mourre,  was  made  Attorney-General,  in  place  of  Merlin  de  Douay,  dismissed, 
and  was  replaced  by  M.  Brisson.  As  for  the  judges,  fourteen  of  them  were  deprived 
of  their  seats. 

*  The  Academy  of  Inscriptions  and  Belle  Lettres,  was  founded  by  Colbert.     Translator. 


THE  SECOND  RESTORATION.  145 

will  only  cite  as  an  instance  the  forced  constructions  and 
subtilties,  by  which  some  of  the  conditions  of  the  constitutional 
charter  seemed  to  be  evaded  ;  particularly  in  the  ordinances 
which  subvert  the  institutions  founded  on  the  laws.1  Then  arose 
doubts  as  to  the  sincerity  of  the  government  ;  it  was  thought 
that  the  charter  was  only  regarded  as  a  temporary  act,  granted 
under  the  exigencies  of  circumstances,  and  which  it  was  pro- 
posed to  allow  to  fall  into  disuse,  if  representative  vigilance 
would  permit  it.  Reactions  were  dreaded,  and  some  nomina- 
tions justified  these  fears  ;  for  example,  the  appointment  of 
M.  de  Bruges  2  to  the  Chancellorship  of  the  Legion  of  Honour 
(whatever  his  personal  qualities  might  have  been)  displeased 
every  one  in  France,  and  I  may  tell  your  Majesty,  also  astonished 
every  one  in  Europe. 

The  general  state  of  uneasiness  attracted  all  those  to  the 
revolutionary  party,  who  without  sharing  its  errors,  were  at- 
tached to  constitutional  principles,  and  also  all  those  who  were 
interested  in  the  maintenance,  not  of  the  doctrines  of  revolution, 
but  of  that  which  had  been  effected  by  their  influence. 

It  is  more  owing  to  this  cause  than  from  any  real  attachment 
to  his  person,  that  Buonaparte  succeeded  in  finding  some 
partisans  outside  the  army,  and  even  a  great  number  of  those 
he  possessed  in  the  army ;  because  having  been  brought  up 
in  the  midst  of  the  Revolution,  they  were  attached  by  various 
ties 3  to  the  men  who  were  the  chief  actors  in  it. 

However  great  the  advantages  of  a  legitimate  government 
may  be,  it  is  impossible  to  deny  the  fact,  that  it  is  also  liable  to 
great  abuses,  and  on  this  point,  opinion  is  very  strong ;  for  during 
the  twenty  years  that  preceded  the  Revolution,  the  tendency  of 
all  political  writings  has  been  to  make   them  known  and   to 

1  This  alludes  to  the  police  proclamation  of  June  7th,  1814,  respecting  the 
observance  of  Sundays  and  fetes,  as  being  a  violation  of  the  charter  which  had 
guaranteed  religious  freedom. 

2  Henry  Alphonse,  Vicomte  de  Bruges,  born  1764,  became  Naval  Lieutenant  in 
1789.  He  emigrated,  and  served  in  Conde's  army ;  later  on  he  was  attached  to  the 
English  army.  In  1815  he  was  appointed  Brigadier-General  and  Grand  Chancellor 
of  the  Legion  of  Honour,  in  place  of  M.  de  Pradt.     He  died  in  1820. 

3  Text  :  "  Parce  que  eleves  avec  la  revolution  ils  etaient  attaches  par  toutes  sortes 
de  liens"  =  as  translated.  Var.  :  "  Parce  que  elev'e  avec  la  revolution  il etait  attach!: 
par  toute  sorte  de  liens  "  =  "  because  having  been  brought  up  in  the  midst  of  the 
revolution,  he  was  attached  by  various  ties." 

VOL   III.  L 


146  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

exaggerate  them.  Few  people  really  know  how  to  appreciate 
the  advantages  of  legitimacy,  for  they  are  still  in  the  future. 
Whereas  all  the  world  can  see  abuses,  for  they  crop  up  at  any 
moment  and  show  themselves  on  every  occasion.  Who,  during 
the  last  twenty  years,  has  given  time  enough  to  reflection,  to 
realize,  that  if  a  government  is  not  legitimate  it  cannot  be 
stable  ;  that  in  offering  to  all  ambitious  spirits  the  hope  of  over- 
throwing it,  in  order  to  replace  it  by  another,  it  is  always  being 
threatened  and  bears  within  it  a  revolutionary  ferment  ready  to 
burst  forth  at  any  moment  ?  The  impression  unfortunately 
exists  in  people's  minds,  that  legitimacy  in  assuring  the  crown 
to  the  sovereign,  no  matter  how  he  governs,  gives  him  too  great 
facilities  to  place  himself  above  the  laws. 

With  this  disposition,  which  is  now  found  in  every  nation, 
and  at  a  time  when  all  things  are  examined,  discussed,  and 
analysed,  political  subjects  above  all,  people  ask  themselves,  what 
is  legitimacy,  whence  has  it  sprung,  and  what  constitutes  it  ? 

During  the  period  when  religious  sentiments  were  deeply 
engraved  on  human  hearts,  and  when  they  exercised  an  all-power- 
ful influence  on  the  mind,  men  might  have  believed  that  the 
sovereign  power  was  indeed  a  divine  gift.  They  might  have 
believed  that  the  families  placed  by  Heaven  on  thrones  which 
they  had  occupied,  by  its  will,  for  a  length  of  time,  reigned  over 
them  by  divine  right  ;  but  in  these  days,  when  there  hardly 
remains  the  faintest  trace  of  these  sentiments,  and  the  bonds  of 
religion  if  not  entirely  broken,  are  at  least x  relaxed,  such  a 
theory  of  legitimacy  is  no  longer  tenable. 

The  general  opinion  of  the  present  day  (and  it  would  be  vain 
to  try  to  weaken  it)  is  that  governments  exist  only  for  the  people  ; 
a  necessary  consequence  of  this  opinion  is,  that  the  only  legiti- 
mate power  is  that  which  can  best  secure  their  happiness  and 
peace.  Hence  it  follows  that  the  only  legitimate  power  is  that 
which  has  existed  for  a  long  succession  of  years,  in  fact  a  power 
strengthened  by  the  respect  due  to  the  recollection  of  the  past, 
and  by  the  attachment  which  is  natural  among  men  for  the 
dominant  race  (having  for  it  the  old  feeling  of  possession  which 
is  a  right  in  the  eyes  of  every  one,  being  that  of  the  law  which 

1  Var. :  " bien"  relache  =  "much  relaxed." 


THE  SECOND  RESTORATION.  147 

governs  private  property),  and  therefore  exposes  the  people  more 
rarely  than  any  other,  to  the  fatal  risks  of  revolution.  It  is  to 
such  a  power  therefore  that  their  dearest  interests  compel  them 
to  submit ;  but  if  unfortunately  any  cause  is  given  to  induce  the 
belief,  that  the  abuses  of  this  power  are  greater  than  the  advan- 
tages derived  from  it,  legitimacy  is  then  looked  upon  as  a 
chimera. 

What  then  is  needed  to  give  people  confidence  in  legitimate 
authority  and  to  preserve  to  this  authority  the  respect  which 
insures  its  stability  ?  It  is  sufficient,  but  also  indispensable, 
that  it  should  be  constituted  in  such  a  manner  that  all  causes 
for  fear  which  it  may  inspire  should  be  eliminated.  It  is  no  less 
in  the  interests  of  the  sovereign  than  of  his  subjects  that  it  should 
be  thus  constituted,  because  absolute  power  in  these  days  would 
be  as  heavy  a  burden  to  him  who  wields  it,  as  to  those  who 
are  under  its  influence. 

Before  the  Revolution,  power  in  France  was  restricted  by 
ancient  institutions,  it  was  modified  by  the  action  of  the  large 
body  of  the  magistracy,  the  clergy,  and  the  nobility,  who,  were 
necessary  elements  to  its  existence,  and  of  whom  it  made  use  for 
the  purpose  of  governing.  Now  that  all  these  institutions  are 
destroyed,  and  these  great  means  of  governing  are  annihilated, 
others  must  be  found,  of  which  public  opinion  will  not  disapprove  ; 
and  it  is  even  necessary  it  should  itself  point  them  out. 

Formerly,  religious  influence  could  support  royal  authority  ; 
it  can  do  so  no  longer,  now  that  religious  indifference  has  per- 
vaded all  classes,  and  become  almost  universal.  Royal  authority 
can  therefore  only  derive  support  from  public  opinion,  and  to 
obtain  this  it  must  be  in  accord  with  that  opinion. 

It  will  have  this  support,  if  the  people  see  that  the  govern- 
ment, though  all  powerful  to  do  good,  can  do  nothing  to  the 
contrary.  But  they  must  also  have  the  certainty  that  there  is 
nothing  arbitrary  in  its  proceedings.  The  mere  desire  to  do 
good  will  not  suffice  ;  such  a  desire  might  change,  or  mistaken 
measures  might  be  employed,  to  achieve  its  end.  It  is  not  enough 
that  confidence  should  be  based  merely  on  the  virtues  and  noble 
qualities  of  the  sovereign,  which  like  himself  are  perishable,  it  is 
necessary  to  found  it  on  the  strength  of  permanent  institutions  ; 

L  2 


148  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

it  needs  even  more  than  this.  No  institutions,  no  matter  what 
their  nature,  could  insure  happiness  to  a  nation,  or  even  inspire 
it  with  any  confidence,  if  they  did  not  establish  such  a  form 
of  government,  as  would  in  the  general  opinion  of  the  times 
be  considered  the  only  fitting  one  to  attain  the  end  in  view. 

Guarantees  are  required,  both  for  the  sovereign  and  for  the 
people,  but  they  will  not  be  believed  to  exist  unless  : 

[a]  "  Individual  liberty  is  legally  safe  from  all  attacks." 
(&)  "  The  liberty  of  the  press  is  fully  assured,  and  the  law 
does  not  hesitate  to  punish  its  misdemeanours." 

(c)  "The  judicial  bench  is  independent,  and  on  that  account 
composed  of  persons,"  permanently  appointed.1 

(d)  "  Legal  judgments  are  not  in  certain  cases  reserved  to 
be  dealt  with  by  the  administration  or  any  bodies  other  than 
the  courts  of  justice." 

(e)  "  The  ministers  are  fully  responsible  for  the  proper 
exercise  of  the  power  with  which  they  are  intrusted." 

(/)  "  No  other  persons  except  those  actually  responsible,  are 
permitted  to  influence  the  councils  of  the  sovereign." 

Finally,  "  Unless  the  law  is  the  outcome  of  a  will  formed  by 
the  union  of  three  distinct  wills." 

In  large  and  ancient  communities  where  the  intellectual 
capacity  is  developed  with  the  needs,  and  the  passions  with  the 
intelligence,  it  is  necessary  that  public  authority  should  acquire 
a  proportionate  strength,  and  experience  has  proved,  that  it  is 
strengthened  by  being  divided. 

These  opinions  are  no  longer  confined  to  one  country.  They 
are  common  to  almost  all.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  constitutions 
are  asked  for  everywhere,  the  need  is  everywhere  felt  of  establish- 
ing something  analogous  to  the  more  or  less  advanced  state  of 
political  society,  and  preparations  are  everywhere  being  made  to 
this  end.  The  congress  did  not  give  Geneva  back  to  Sardinia, 
Lucca  to  the  Infanta  Marie  Louise  of  Spain,  restore  Naples 
to  Ferdinand  IV.,  nor  return  the  legations  to  the  Pope,  without 
stipulating  for  such  arrangements  for  those  states,  as  their  actual 
condition  seemed  to  permit  or  require.  I  have  not  met  a  single 
sovereign  or  a  single   minister,  who  dismayed   by  the  results, 

1  Text :  inamovibles  =  irremovable. 


THE  SECOND  RESTORATION.  149 

that  must  befall  Spain  under  the  system  of  government  carried 
out  by  Ferdinand  VII.,  did  not  bitterly  regret  that  the  latter 
should  have  been  allowed  to  regain  his  throne  without  the  con- 
dition being  made  by  Europe,  that  he  should  give  his  states  such 
institutions  as  were  in  harmony  with  the  ideas  of  the  times. 
I  have  even  heard  sovereigns,  whose  people  were  too  little 
advanced  in  civilization,  to  appreciate  institutions  suitable  to  a 
high  degree  of  culture,  lament  over  this,  as  if  it  were  a  misfortune 
from  which  they  suffered  themselves. 

I  have  gathered  these  opinions  in  the  midst  of  the  delibera- 
tions of  assembled  Europe,  I  have  come  across  them  in  every 
conversation  I  have  had  with  the  sovereigns  and  their  ministers. 
They  are  expressed  in  all  the  letters  written  by  the  Austrian  and 
Russian  ambassadors  to  London,  and  also  in  those  of  Lord 
Castlereagh.  It  was  my  duty  therefore  to  submit  this  report  to 
your  Majesty.  I  felt  I  could  still  less  avoid  doing  so,  when  the 
sovereigns  in  the  farewell  audiences  accorded  to  me,  all  advised 
my  telling  your  Majesty  that  they  were  perfectly  convinced  that 
France  would  never  be  at  peace,  if  your  Majesty  did  not  fully 
share  these  opinions  and  take  them  as  the  sole  rule  for  your 
government.  That  everything  in  France  must,  without  exception, 
be  obliterated,  that  any  exclusion  would  be  dangerous,  and  no 
guarantees  would  be  found  for  the  sovereign,  until  he  gave  them 
to  all  parties,  and  that  these  guarantees  would  not  be  sufficient 
unless  they  were  accepted  as  such  by  all  classes  of  society  ;  that 
it  seemed  absolutely  necessary  to  adopt  some  complete  system 
which  would  restore  and  render  evident,  the  sincerity  of  each 
party  ;  which  would  from  the  commencement  clearly  show  the 
object  the  government  had  in  view,  and  which  would  enable 
every  one  to  understand  his  proper  position  and  leave  no  one  in 
any  uncertainty.  They  added,  that  if  your  Majesty  was  interested 
more  than  any  one  else  in  maintaining  the  tranquillity  of  France, 
they  in  reality  were  no  less  so,  for  the  emergency  in  which  your 
Majesty  is  now  placed,  compromises  the  existence  of  all  Europe  ; 
and  finally  that  all  the  efforts  made  during  the  past  year  would 
be  very  difficult  to  renew,  when  once  they  had  returned  to  their 
own  countries. 

After  having  read  the  declaration  which  your  Majesty  lately 


150  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

addressed  to  your  subjects,  the  sovereigns  further  informed  me 
that  they  had  noticed  with  regret  a  phrase  by  which  your  Majesty 
implied  (though  expressed  with  much  circumspection)  that  you 
had  consented  to  accept  their  help,  from  which  it  might  be 
inferred  that  even  if  you  had  refused  it,  peace  could  still  have 
been  maintained.  They  fear  that  from  this  it  may  appear  to 
the  people  of  France,  as  if  your  Majesty  had  wrongfully  yielded 
to  pressure  from  the  sovereigns.  They  think  therefore  that  in 
order  not  to  confirm  an  opinion  so  opposed  to  the  interests  of 
France,  it  will  be  advisable  for  your  Majesty  as  well  as  for  those 
around  you,  to  take  very  little  action  in  the  matter.  Your 
Majesty  will  have  some  difficulty  in  carrying  this  out,  for  it  means 
restraining  zeal  and  even  repressing  it.  According  to  their  view, 
your  Majesty  ought  to  lament  over  what  is  being  done,  instead  of 
co-operating  with  it  ;  you  will  have  to  place  yourself  (or  be 
placed  by  them)  between  the  allied  sovereigns  and  your  people, 
to  lessen  as  much  as  lies  in  your  power  the  evils  of  war,  and  to 
assure  the  allies  of  the  loyalty  of  the  fortresses  which  have  been 
surrendered,  and  which  according  to  the  arrangements  which  I 
presume  your  ministers  will  make  with  the  Duke  of  Wellington, 
will  be  handed  over  to  persons  chosen  by  yourself.  Lastly,  they 
consider  that  in  order  not  to  appear  as  provoking  a  war,  or  even 
desiring  to  make  it  yourself,  neither  your  Majesty  nor  any  prince 
of  your  family  should  be  seen  with  the  allied  armies.  Never 
before  have  politics  required  such  delicate  handling.1 

1  M.  de  Talleyrand  here  alludes  to  the  following  proclamation,  which  the  king 
had  signed  on  June  25th,  when  he  returned  to  France  : — 

"  Frenchmen, 

"  From  the  time  when  the  most  wicked  of  enterprises,  seconded  by  the  most 
inconceivable  defection,  obliged  us  to  temporarily  quit  our  kingdom,  we  have  warned 
you  of  the  dangers  which  menaced  you  if  you  did  not  hasten  to  throw  off  the  yoke  of 
the  tyrant  usurper. 

"We  did  not  wish  to  join  our  arms  or  those  of  our  family,  to  those  of  the  instru- 
ments which  Providence  has  used  to  punish  this  treason.  But,  now  that  the  powerful 
exertions  of  our  allies  have  dispersed  the  tyrant's  adherents,  we  hasten  to  re-enter  our 
country,  in  order  to  re-establish  the  constitution  we  have  given  to  France,  to  repair 
by  every  means  in  our  power  the  evils  which  are  the  necessary  result  of  revolt  and  war, 
to  recompense  the  good,  to  enforce  the  law  against  the  guilty,  and  finally,  to  gather 
round  our  ancestral  throne  that  large  body  of  Frenchmen,  whose  fidelity  and  devotion 
have  brought  such  comfort  and  consolation  to  our  hearts. 
"  Chateau  Cambresis,  25th  June,  1815. 

"  Louis. 
"  In  the  name  of  the  King. 

"  Secretary  of  State  for  War,  Due  de  Feltre." 


THE  SECOND  RESTORATION.  151 

If  owing  to  the  events  about  to  take  place,  any  portion  of 
France  should  succeed  in  escaping  from  Buonaparte's  yoke,  I 
believe  your  Majesty  could  not  do  better  than  go  thither  at 
once,  take  your  ministry  with  you,  convoke  the  chambers  and 
assume  the  government  of  your  kingdom,  just  as  if  it  was 
entirely  subject  again.  The  plan  of  an  expedition  to  Lyons 
(which  I  earnestly  desire  on  account  of  the  effective  result  it 
would  produce  on  the  southern  provinces)  might  allow  this  idea 
to  be  carried  out  with  much  advantage. 

The  announcement  of  the  large  number  of  commissioners  to 
be  sent  to  the  armies  has  not  been  well  received.  I  believe  that 
all  the  steps  which  your  Majesty  may  take,  will  have  to  be  in 
concert  with  the  allies,  almost  indeed  with  their  consent.  This 
deference  should  aid  in  placing  clearly  before  them  the  object 
of  the  war,  which  I  may  say,  is  not  quite  the  same  with  all  the 
cabinets.  For  though  England  particularly  and  really  desires 
your  Majesty's  return,  I  am  not  so  sure  that  Russia  would  not 
prefer  some  other  combinations  ;  nor  can  I  say  that  Austria, 
though  I  believe  she  sides  with  us,  is  very  eager  about  it,  while 
Prussia's  first  consideration  is  certainly  her  own  aggrandisement. 

Would  it  not  be  possible  for  your  Majesty,  just  as  the  foreign 
troops  are  about  to  enter  France,  to  address  a  second  declaration 
to  your  subjects,  carefully  guarding  the  French  amour  propre 
which  wishes,  and  with  reason,  that  nothing,  not  even  that  which 
it  most  desires,  should  be  due  to  foreign  aid.  This  declaration 
first  pointing  out  that  Buonaparte  is  endeavouring  to  mislead 
the  people  as  to  the  actual  cause  and  object  of  the  war,  might 
then  go  on  to  state,  that  it  is  not  on  your  Majesty's  account  that 
the  foreign  powers  have  undertaken  it,  because  they  know  that 
France  only  needs  to  be  protected  from  oppression,  but  that 
it  is  for  their  own  individual  security  ;  that  they  would  not  have 
undertaken  it  had  they  not  felt  convinced  that  Europe  would  be 
menaced  with  the  most  terrible  disasters,  as  long  as  the  man 
who  has  for  so  long  oppressed  it  is  master  of  France ;  that  the 

It  was  this  manifesto  which  had  alarmed  M.  de  Talleyrand,  and  which,  having 
been  laid  by  him  before  the  Council  and  the  Corps  diplomatique,  became  the  subject 
of  strong  representations,  which  were  afterwards  submitted  by  him  and  the  Duke  of 
Wellington  to  the  king,  who  gave  in,  and  three  days  later,  on  June  28th,  issued  a 
second  proclamation,  countersigned  by  Talleyrand,  which  will  be  found  on  p.  156. 


152  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

return  of  this  man  to  France  is  the  sole  cause  of  the  war,  and  its 
immediate  and  principal  object  to  wrest  from  him  the  power  he 
has  thus  usurped.  And  in  order  to  mitigate  the  evils  of  war,  and 
prevent  the  disasters  and  arrest  devastation,  should  such  occur, 
that  your  Majesty  surrounded  by  Frenchmen,  will  place  your- 
self as  an  intermediary  between  the  foreign  sovereigns  and  your 
people,  in  the  hope  that  the  consideration  which  is  accorded 
to  you,  may  be  utilised  for  the  benefit  of  your  country;  that  this 
is  the  only  position  your  Majesty  intends  to  occupy  during  the 
war,  and  that  you  do  not  wish  any  of  the  princes  of  your  house 
to  take  service  with  the  foreign  armies. 

Then  passing  on  to  the  interior  arrangements  of  France,  your 
Majesty  might  make  it  known,  that  you  are  prepared  to  give 
whatever  guarantees  may  be  deemed  necessary.  As  the  choice 
of  your  ministers  is  one  of  the  most  important  you  can  offer,  you 
will  at  once  announce  a  change  of  ministry.  Your  Majesty 
ought  to  say  that  the  ministers  thus  selected  will  only  be 
temporarily  appointed,  because  you  desire  to  reserve  the  forma- 
tion of  a  cabinet  until  you  return  to  France,  so  that  it  may  be 
one  adapted  to  all  parties,  all  opinions,  and  calculated  to  remove 
all  uneasiness. 

Lastly,  it  would  be  well  if  this  declaration  made  some 
reference  to  national  property,  and  in  such  a  manner  as  to  convey 
a  more  positive  and  more  absolute  assurance  on  this  subject, 
than  that  contained  in  the  charter  of  constitution,  the  provisions 
of  which  have  not  been  sufficient  to  allay  the  uneasiness  of  the 
purchasers  of  such  property.  As  the  sale  of  the  public  forests 
(the  produce  of  which  will  become  much  more  necessary  than 
heretofore)  has  been  thereby  prevented,  it  is  important  just  now 
to  allay  all  doubts  and  to  give  no  pretext  whatever  for  them, 
but  rather  to  afford  every  encouragement. 

It  is  generally  considered  that  it  would  be  wise  and  even 
necessary  for  your  Majesty  to  address  your  people  in  this  sense, 
and  I  confess  to  your  Majesty  that  such  also  is  my  opinion.  I 
also  think  it  indispensable  that  with  regard  to  the  guarantees, 
your  Majesty  should  make  them  thoroughly  satisfactory.  If,  as 
I  venture  to  hope,  your  Majesty  shares  this  opinion,  you  will 
no  doubt  depute  some  persons  who  are   honoured  with   your 


THE  SECOND  RESTORATION.  153 

confidence,  to  prepare  and  submit  to  your  Majesty  the  draft  of 
this  declaration. 

I  have  now  given  your  Majesty  a  full  and  exact  account  of 
the  result  of  the  negotiations  that  have  taken  place  during  the 
Congress  and  the  impressions  French  affairs  have  made  in  Vienna. 
It  only  remains  for  me  to  speak  of  a  few  details  of  no  great 
importance.  Since  I  have  been  here  a  mass  of  papers  has 
accumulated  on  my  hands.  The  greater  part  are  not  of  sufficient 
importance  to  be  required  again.  Your  Majesty  has  copies  of 
all  the  others,  so  that  I  need  not  take  them  away.  I  have  there- 
fore burnt  a  great  many  and  have  left  the  rest  in  Vienna  in  safe 
keeping. 

I  am  happy  to  be  able  to  wind  up  this  long  business  (which 
the  nature  of  the  matters  I  had  to  submit  to  your  Majesty  often 
rendered  very  painful  to  me)  by  bringing  to  your  notice  the  zeal 
and  devotion  quite  beyond  praise,  of  which  your  ambassadors 
and  ministers  to  the  various  courts,  have  given  you  increasing 
proofs  during  the  whole  course  of  the  congress.  Their  position, 
difficult  at  first,  from  the  same  causes  which  threw  so  many 
obstacles  in  my  way  at  Vienna,1  became  still  more  so  later  on,  in 
consequence  of  the  disastrous  events  which  have  succeeded  each 
other  since  the  beginning  of  March.  They  however  only  saw  in 
these  difficulties  a  further  occasion  to  exhibit  the  attachment  they 
feel  towards  your  Majesty.  Several  of  them  also  have  already 2  for 
some  time  past  been  placed  in  pecuniary  difficulties  ;  they  did 
their  very  utmost  to  live  in  accordance  with  the  different  posts 
your  Majesty  had  confided  to  them.  Some  arrangements  will 
surely  have  been  made,  to  mitigate  the  circumstances  in  which 
they  find  themselves.3 

Prince  de  Talleyrand. 

This  memoir  produced  as  little  effect  as  my  words  upon  the 
king,  who  ordered  his  horses  and  proceeded  towards  France. 
I  had  suggested  Lyons  as  his  residence,  because  it  was  the  second 
town  in  the  kingdom  and  I  knew  we  should  not  on   that   side 

1  Suppressed  in  the  text  of  the  archives.  2  Ibid. 

3  Var.  :   "  Plnsieurs  eprouvent  des  besoins  tres  pressants"=  "  Many  experience 
very  pressing  needs." 


154  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

come  in  contact  with  the  Austrian  troops.     Lyons  could  also  be 
quickly  reached  by  the  Rhine  and  Switzerland. 

I  remained  twenty-four  hours  at  Mons,  during  which  time 
messages  arrived  for  me  from  all  parts  ;  among  others  I  received 
the  following  letter  from  Prince  de  Metternich  which  quite 
confirmed  me  in  my  opinion. 

Mannheim,  June  24,  1815.1 

Here,  dear  Prince,  is  an  address  to  the  French  nation 
which  I  have  drawn  up,  and  to  which  Prince  Schwartzenberg  has 
attached  his  signature.  I  flatter  myself  that  you  will  find  it 
correct  both  in  principle  and  language,  and  above  all  quite  in 
accordance  with  our  proceedings.2 

M.  de  Vincent,  and  in  default  of  him  M.  Pozzo,  received 
orders  to  draw  attention  to  the  objection  raised  to  the  nomina- 
tion of  royal  commissioners  to  our  armies.  The  matter  went 
entirely  against  the  king.  I  refer  in  this  report  to  what  I  send 
to  de  Vincent,  and  I  inclose  herewith  for  your  private  informa- 
tion a  copy  of  a  letter  I  wrote  to  Lord  Wellington  in  answer 
to  one,  in  which  he  desired  to  prove  to  me  the  great  benefit  that 
would  result  from  requisitions  made  in  the  name  of  the  king. 
I  can  see  nothing  in  such  a  step  but  great  inconvenience  and 
useless  complications  with  the  allied  generals,  besides  serious 
difficulties  as  regards  home  policy.  Remain  firm  to  your 
idea,  make  the  king  go  to  France,  to  the  south,  to  the 
north,  to  the  west,  no  matter  where,  provided  only  that  it  is 
in  his  own  country,  surrounded  by  Frenchmen,  and  away  from 
foreign  bayonets  and  foreign  aid.  It  is  sufficient  to  follow 
Buonaparte's  system  of  government  to  be  convinced,  that  the 
great  weapon  he  means  to  make  use  of,  is  emigration. 

The  king  will  cease  to  be  an  emigre r3  the  day  he  returns 
home  to  his  own  people.  It  is  necessary  that  the  king  should 
rule  and  that  the  Royal  troops  should  act  at  a  distance  from 
the  allied  armies.  As  soon  as  the  king  has  formed  a  nucleus 
at  home,  we  will  send  all  those  who  desert  to  our  armies,  to 
him. 

Vincent's4  wound  troubles  me  greatly.  I  am  in  hopes  of 
hearing    from    him    to    know    whether    I    should    send    you    a 

1  The  allied  sovereigns  were  at  that  time  at  Mannheim. 

2  See  the  Monitcur  of  July  loth,  1825. 

3  Refugee.  —  Translator. 

4  The  Baron  de  Vincent  was  at  the  time  Austrian  minister  accredited  to  King 
Louis  XVIII.,  and  commissioner  with  the  Duke  of  Wellington  ;  he  was  wounded  in 
the  hand  on  the  morning  of  the  battle  of  Waterloo,  which  he  believed  at  first  to  be 
lost,  and  hastened  to  carry  the  news  to  Ghent,  and  it  was  not  until  late  in  the  night 
of  the  18th  and  19th  of  June  that  they  learnt  the  victory  of  the  allies. 


THE  SECOND  RESTORATION.  155 

substitute,   for    it  is    in    every  way  necessary    that  you  should 
have  some  one  near  you  who  can  act  as  an  intermediary. 

Here  all  goes  well;  now  that  the  Russian  troops  are  in  line 
(and  this  step  is  a  wise  and  most  necessary  one)  the  operations 
will  be  carried  on  with  much  vigour.  The  main  body  of  the 
Austrian  army  will  pass  the  Rhine  at  Basle  on  the  25th,  that  of 
Frimont  will  be  in  Geneva  on  the  26th,  another  army  will  on 
the  same  day  cross  the  Mont  Cenis,  and  a  third  will  disembark 
without  ceasing  in  the  south.  The  advance-guard  yesterday 
passed  the  centre  of  the  frontier. 

The  accounts  that  have  reached  us  from  the  interior  show 
that  the  fermentation  increases  everywhere  ;  Fouches  reports 
are  sufficient  to  prove  this.  I  trust  soon  to  see  you  again, 
somehow  or  other  mon  Prince. 

Always  yours, 

Metternich. 

But  at  Mons  the  king's  friends  harassed  me  by  representing 
the  dangers  he  ran,  and  I  was  not  a  little  surprised  to  find 
among  these  ardent  followers  M.  de  Chateaubriand,  who  while 
in  Vienna,  in  the  end  of  18 14,  had  so  bitterly  complained  of 
what  was  being  done  in  France.  He  was  then  dissatisfied  with 
all  the  world  and  with  everything ;  thought  it  strange  that  he 
should  be  sent  back  to  Stockholm  as  the  king's  minister,  and 
ended  by  declaring  that  he  intended  to  apply  to  enter  the 
Russian  service.  His  letter  ought  to  be  in  the  archives  of  the 
Foreign  Office  among  the  papers  relating  to  the  Congress  of 
Vienna.  At  last,  pestered  and  pursued  by  those  who  described 
to  me  the  absolute  desolation  to  which  the  king  would  be 
reduced  by  his  craze  to  return  to  the  Tuileries,  and  by  the 
fears  that  the  strangers  amongst  whom  he  would  be  alone 
would  take  advantage  of  his  position  adverse  to  France,  I  gave 
up  my  own  convictions,  and  followed  the  king  to  Cambray, 
to  become  like  him,  part  of  the  baggage  of  the  English  army. 

My  arrival  at  Cambray  had  at  least  the  result  of  obtaining 
from  the  king  a  second  public  declaration,  fitted  to  allay,  if  not 
to  do  away  with,  the  evil  effects  of  the  unfortunate  one  which 
had  been  issued  on  June  25th,  at  Chateau  Cambresis. 

This  is  what  I  drew  up,  which  the  king  signed,  and  which  I 
countersigned.  I  even  now  believe  that  it  was  the  best  that 
could  be  uttered  under  the  circumstances. 


156  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

Declaration  of  King  Louis  XVIII. 
Given  at  Camb ray  June  2%th,  1815. 

Learning  that  one  of  the  gates  of  my  kingdom  is  open  to  me, 
I  hasten  to  present  myself.  I  do  so  in  order  to  recall  my  mis- 
guided subjects ;  to  mitigate  those  evils  I  had  desired  to 
prevent  ;  to  place  myself  a  second  time  between  the  allied  armies 
and  the  French,  in  the  hope  that  the  feelings  of  regard  of  which 
I  may  be  the  object,  may  benefit  my  people.  In  this  way  only 
have  I  thought  fit  to  take  part  in  the  war.  I  have  not  suffered 
any  prince  of  my  family  to  appear  in  the  ranks  of  the  foreigners, 
and  have  restrained  the  ardour  of  those  of  my  servants  who 
were  able  to  marshal  themselves  around  me. 

Now  that  I  have  returned  to  my  native  land,  I  feel  great 
satisfaction  in  speaking  to  my  people  as  a  friend.  When  I 
reappeared  among  them,  I  found  men's  minds  were  disturbed 
and  carried  away  by  opposing  passions.  Whichever  way  I 
looked,  nothing  but  difficulties  and  obstacles  presented  them- 
selves. My  government  may  have  made  mistakes  and  probably 
has  done  so,  for  there  are  times  when  the  purest  motives  are 
insufficient  to  guide,  and  may  even  occasionally  mislead  ; 
experience  alone  can  teach  us  ;  it  will  not  have  done  so  in  vain. 
The  preservation  of  France  is  the  object  of  all  my  wishes. 
Severe  trials  have  taught  my  subjects  that  the  principle  of  the 
legitimacy  of  sovereigns  is  one  of  the  fundamental  bases  of  social 
order,  the  only  one  on  which  a  great  nation  and  a  moderate  and 
well  ordered  liberty  can  be  established.  This  doctrine  has  now 
been  proclaimed  as  that  of  the  whole  of  Europe.  I  had  already 
consecrated  it  by  my  charter,  and  I  purpose  to  add  to  this 
charter  all  the  guarantees  which  can  ensure  its  success.  The 
unity  of  the  ministry  is  the  strongest  that  I  can  offer.  I  intend 
that  it  shall  be  permanent,  and  that  the  frank  and  decided  policy 
of  my  council  shall  secure  all  interests  and  quiet  all  appre- 
hensions. Of  late  the  re-establishment  of  the  tithe  and  feudal 
rights  has  been  spoken  of ;  this  fable  invented  by  the  common 
enemy  needs  no  refutation.  It  will  not  be  expected  that  the 
King  of  France  should  stoop  to  refute  calumnies  and  falsehoods, 
the  success  of  which  only  too  clearly  betrays  their  origin.  If 
the  acquirers  of  national  property  are  under  any  apprehensions, 
the  charter  should  have  sufficed  to  reassure  them.  Did  I  not 
myself  propose  to  the  Chambers  sales  of  these  properties,  and 
cause  them  to  be  completed  ?  This  proof  of  my  sincerity  needs 
no  comment. 

I  have  of  late  received  from  all  classes  of  my  subjects  equal 


THE  SECOND  RESTORATION.  157 

proofs  of  affection  and  fidelity  ;  I  would  have  them  know  how 
deeply  I  appreciate  this  ;  and  it  will  be  my  pleasure  to  select 
those  who  are  to  be  around  my  person  and  my  family  from 
among  all  classes  of  Frenchmen. 

I  only  intend  to  exclude  from  my  presence  those  men 
whose  reputation  is  a  source  of  grief  to  France  and  of  terror  to 
the  rest  of  Europe.  In  the  conspiracy  hatched  by  these  men,  I 
see  many  of  my  subjects  who  have  been  misled  and  a  few 
who  are  culpable.  I,  who  as  all  Europe  knows,  never  promised 
anything  without  fulfilling  it,  now  promise  as  regards  those 
Frenchmen  who  have  been  misled,  to  pardon  everything  that 
has  taken  place  from  the  day  when  I  left  Lille  in  the  midst 
of  so  many  tears,  up  to  the  time  when  I  entered  Cambray 
amid  so  many  rejoicings.  Nevertheless  the  blood  of  my  subjects 
has  been  shed  through  treachery  such  as  the  annals  of  Europe 
afford  no  example.  This  treachery  has  brought  foreigners  into 
the  heart  of  France,  and  each  day  reveals  some  new  calamity  to 
me,  therefore  I  owe  it  to  the  dignity  of  my  throne,  to  the  interest 
of  my  people,  and  to  the  repose  of  Europe,  to  exempt  from 
pardon  the  authors  and  agents  of  this  detestable  conspiracy.  They 
will  be  handed  over  to  be  dealt  with  by  the  two  Chambers  which 
I  propose  to  summon  at  once. 

Frenchmen,  these  are  the  sentiments  with  which  I  again 
appear  among  you  :  he,  whose  sentiments  which  time  cannot 
change,  misfortune  wear  out,  nor  injustice  depress,  your  king, 
whose  fathers  reigned  over  your  fathers,  for  more  than  eight 
centuries,  now  returns  to  devote  the  rest  of  his  days  to  defend 
and  to  comfort  you. 

Louis. 
The  Prince  de  Talleyrand. 

I  nevertheless  admit,  that  I  was  much  disheartened  in 
having  to  abandon  the  hope  I  had  conceived,  that  by  prevailing 
upon  the  king  to  go  to  Lyons,  an  order  of  things  would  have 
been  established  by  which  a  recurrence  of  the  events  of  the  20th 
of  March  would  have  been  averted.  I  was  convinced  that  France 
could  only  find  quiet  and  freedom  in  a  constitutional  monarchy. 
The  organic  law  known  as  the  charter,  consisting  only  of  a 
collection  of  maxims,  applicable  to  every  kind  of  government, 
appeared  to  me  to  require  for  its  interpretation  a  body  of 
institutions  fitted  to  regulate  the  affairs  of  the  country.  Yet 
how  was  a  true  constitution  to  be  framed  in  Paris  in  the  presence 
of  sovereigns,  either  absolute  or  aspiring  to  be  so,  and  of  necessity 


158  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

not  very  anxious  to  see  a  great  country  offer  an  example  they 
had  no  wish  to  follow  ?  Far  from  being  able  to  hope  that  they 
would  be  found  favourable  to  the  constitutional  system  in 
France,  there  was  only  too  much  reason  to  fear,  that  the  party 
still  holding  the  principles  of  the  emigres,  would  make  use  of 
them,  if  not  for  the  immediate  accomplishment  of  their  purposes, 
at  any  rate  as  a  preparation  for  future  triumphs. 

The  king,  by  only  treating  with  the  foreigners  at  a  distance, 
and  keeping  his  family  about  him,  would  have  cut  the  thread 
of  every  intrigue,  and  would  at  any  rate,  only  have  returned 
to  Paris  soon  enough  to  have  tendered  his  thanks  to  the  allied 
sovereigns,  if  indeed  they  had  not  demanded  a  price  for  their 
services,  which  would  have  freed  him  from  showing  any  gratitude. 
The  king  would  have  appeared  in  his  capital  with  a  ministry 
already  formed.  The  choice  of  M.  Fouche  as  minister  of  police, 
which,  as  I  told  the  king,  appeared  to  me  a  weakness,  would  not 
at  Arnouville 1  have  received  the  support  of  Monsieur  to  whom 
he  presented  himself,  introduced  by  the  bailli  of  Crussol  as 
representing  the  royalists  who  had  remained  in  Paris.  The 
Duke  of  Wellington  would  not  have  considered  it  necessary, 
that  in  order  to  check  the  savage  enterprises  of  General 
Bliicher,  and  to  have  the  glory  of  being  the  first  to  enter 
Paris,  he  should  both  at  Senlis  and  afterwards  at  Neuilly  have 
to  confer  with  M.  Fouche,  and  other  intriguers,2  who  only 
thought  of  making  capital  of  the  power  which  they  no  longer 

1  A  country  house  near  St.  Denis  where  the  king  spent  some  days  before  his 
entry  into  the  capital. 

2  The  provisional  government  on  the  27th  of  June  appointed  an  Armistice  Com- 
mission, composed  of  General  Comte  de  Valence,  peer  of  France  ;  General  Comte 
Andreossy ;  M.  Flaugergues,  deputy ;  Comte  Boissy-d'Anglas,  peer  of  France ; 
and  M.  de  la  Besnardiere.  Their  instructions,  drawn  up  by  M.  Bignon,  Minister  for 
Foreign  Affairs,  authorized  them  to  offer  the  Somme,  with  a  strong  fortress,  as  the 
line  of  demarcation  during  the  armistice.  They  were  forbidden  to  respond  to  any 
overtures  that  might  be  made  to  them  respecting  the  future  government  of  France. 
The  negotiators  quitted  Paris  on  the  28th,  met  Bliicher,  who  escorted  them  at  Noyon, 
and  rejoined  Wellington  on  the  29th  at  Estrees  Saint  Denis,  a  village  situated  ten 
miles  north-west  of  Compiegne,  and  not  at  Senlis.  This  mission  had  no  result 
whatever. 

Respecting  the  conferences  at  Neuilly,  M.  de  Talleyrand  has  in  view  the  negotia- 
tions which  preceded  the  nomination  of  Fouche  to  the  Ministry.  Fouche  several 
times  met  Wellington  at  Neuilly.  He  had  persuaded  him  that  the  obstacles  which 
prevented  the  re-establishment  of  royalty  obliged  the  king  to  have  recourse  to  men 
of  the  Revolution.  The  result  of  these  conferences  was  to  induce  Wellington  to 
bring  Fouche  favourably  to  the  king's  notice. 


THE  SECOND  RESTORATION.  159 

possessed,  and  could  only  give  him  such   advice  as  tended  to 
relieve  them  from  their    personal   embarrassment.1     No  sooner 

1  This  is  the  letter  written  to  me  by  the  Duke  of  Wellington  on  the  subject.  I 
retain  all  the  faults  of  style  in  this  letter,  recollecting  that  the  commander-in-chief  of 
the  British  army  was  not  bound  to  write  French  like  a  member  of  the  Academy. 

Prince, 

M.  Boissy  d'Anglas  and  General  Valence,  General  Andreossy,  M.  de  la 
Besnardiere,  and  M.  de  Flaugergues,  have  been  sent  to  me  from  Paris  to  ask  for  a 
suspension  of  hostilities,  and  I  have  had  an  interview  with  them  of  so  much  interest 
to  the  king,  that  I  think  it  advisable  to  write  to  you  without  loss  of  time. 

I  explained  to  them  that  in  my  opinion  the  abdication  of  Napoleon  does  not  offer 
such  security  to  the  allied  powers  as  would  justify  a  suspension  of  hostilities  ;  and 
after  some  further  discussion  I  said  to  them  that  I  could  only  look  upon  our  object  as 
secured,  if  Napoleon  was  delivered  up  to  the  allies,  and  Paris  occupied  by  our  out- 
posts ;  and  if  such  a  government  was  established  as  would  give  confidence  not 
only  to  France  but  to  Europe. 

After  some  hesitation  these  gentlemen  requested  me  to  explain  what  I  meant  by 
such  a  government.  I  told  them  I  had  no  authority  to  speak  on  this  subject,  but  my 
private  advice  would  be,  to  recall  the  king  without  any  conditions,  and  that  the  honour 
of  France  demanded  this  step,  before  anyone  could  suppose  that  the  intervention  of 
the  powers  had  been  the  sole  occasion  of  his  recall. 

All  these  gentlemen  agreed  with  me,  and  though  apparently  they  think  that  some 
changes  in  the  constitution  would  be  necessary,  especially  as  regards  the  ministry  and 
the  framing  of  the  laws,  they  admitted  it  would  be  better  to  let  the  king  make  these 
changes  rather  than  impose  them  upon  him  as  conditions. 

M.  de  Flaugergues  said  he  did  not  believe  that  the  two  chambers  would  agree  to 
the  king's  recall  without  conditions.  Our  conversation  then  turned  upon  the  manner 
of  bringing  about  what  everyone  desired,  without  infringing  the  principles  respecting 
the  quiet,  natural  and  unconditional  restoration  of  the  king.  During  the  discussion 
we  received  the  king's  declaration,  dated  the  28th,  and  countersigned  by  your  high- 
ness, and  these  gentlemen  consider  it  admirably  fitted  to  fulfil  all  our  intentions,  if  the 
two  articles  herewith  appended  are  withdrawn,  or  at  any  rate  made  clearer. 

The  individuals  indicated  in  article  No.  I.  are  the  persons  included  in  the  late 
conspiracy  ;  but  this  not  being  sufficiently  explained,  it  is  thought,  or  it  might  be 
thought,  that  you  therein  include  the  regicides.  I  opposed  this  view,  because  the 
king  having  consented,  before  his  departure,  to  the  principle  of  employing  Fouche, 
could  not  actually  refuse  to  employ  either  him  or  any  other  minister,  and  the  preceding 
sentence  explains  this  clearly  enough.  Nevertheless  it  w-ould  be  well  to  explain  it,  or 
to  withdraw  it  altogether. 

Article  II.  is  displeasing  to  these  gentlemen,  because  it  contains  a  threat.  It 
appears  useless  to  them  because  it  comprises  too  many  persons,  and  above  all,  because 
the  expressions  are  stronger  than  becomes  the  king,  and  their  opinion  is  that  it  should 
be  suppressed. 

They  strongly  feel  as  to  the  words  marked  in  No.  III.,  and  they  are  of  opinion 
that  the  recall  of  the  king  will  not  be  effected  in  the  manner  most  advantageous  to  his 
majesty,  and  the  public  welfare,  if  the  chambers  learn  that  they  are  to  be  dismissed 
at  once.  I  therefore  recommend  that  the  words  underlined  be  omitted  ;  the  king  will 
then  have  the  means  of  summoning  a  new  assembly  or  of  continuing  the  present 
chambers  if  he  thinks  proper.  He  could  not  admit,  a  priori,  that  the  present 
chambers  constitute  a  lawful  assembly,  but  there  is  no  necessity  for  his  informing 
them  to  begin  with,  that  they  are  to  be  dismissed.  Your  highness  will  perceive  from 
all  that  has  passed,  that  my  wish  is  to  restore  the  king — 1st,  unconditionally,  2nd,  in 
such  a  manner  that  it  may  not  appear  to  be  the  effect  of  compulsion  by  the  allies,  and 
probably  you  will  agree  with  me  that  such  a  result  is  well  worth  a  few  sacrifices. 

I  am  about  to  see  General  Bliicher,  and  will  try  to  persuade  him  to  agree  to  the 
armistice  on  the  conditions  stated  below.  I  earnestly  hope  to  receive  your  reply  early 
to-morrow.  Meanwhile  I  think  the  king  should  come  to  Roze,  leaving  a  garrison  in 
Cambray.  Wellington. 


160  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

therefore  had  we  arrived  at  Paris,  than  we  met  with  nothing 
but  difficulties.  We  had  in  the  first  place  to  contend  against 
the  outrages  and  depredations  of  the  Prussians,  who,  filled 
with  a  long-cherished  animosity  which  they  had  been  unable 
to  gratify  the  year  before,  were  now  making  up  for  the  con- 
straint which  had  then  been  laid  upon  them.  We  were  unable  to 
preserve  many  warehouses  which  they  plundered,  but  we  saved 
the  bridge  of  Jena  which  they  purposed  destroying  on  account  of 
its  name.  An  admirable  letter  from  the  king  however  saved  it.1 

A  compromise  was  made,  and  the  bridge  of  Jena  took  the 
name  of  the  bridge  of  I'Ecole  Militaire,  a  designation  which 
satisfied  the  savage  vanity  of  the  Prussians,  and  which  as  a 
play  of  words,  is  perhaps  even  a  more  pointed  allusion,  than  the 
original  name  of  Jena. 

The  Duke  of  Wellington  himself  I  am  sorry  to  say,  headed 
those  who  wished  to  despoil  the  museum.  Monuments  of  art 
ought  perhaps  never  to  have  been  included  in  the  spoils  of  our 
conquests,  and  if  we  were  to  blame  when  we  carried  them  off 
from  other  nations,  it  might  have  been  perfectly  just  to  recover  a 
portion  of  them  from  France  in  1814,  when  she  was  an  enemy ; 
but  to  recover  them  from  France  in  181 5,  when  she  is  an  ally, 
would  be  an  act  of  violence.  At  least  it  would  have  been  right 
to  distinguish  those  works  which  had  been  yielded  to  us  by 
treaty,  apart  from  those  which  had  not.  No  distinction  was 
however  made,  and  all  was  taken  ;  and  this  is  what  the  Duke  of 
Wellington  pretended  to  justify  in  a  letter  in  which  he  lectured 
France  in  the  name  of  morality,  of  which  he  constituted  himself 
the  champion,  as  no  doubt  he  had  done,  when  he  served  in 
India,  where  Lis  government  of  course  does  nothing  which  is 
not  highly  moral. 

1  King  Louis  XVIII.  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand. 

Paris,  July  15,  1815.     Saturday,  10  o'clock. 

I  have  just  learned  that  the  Prussians  have  mined  the  bridge  of  Jena  and  that 
probably  they  intend  to  blow  it  up  this  very  night.  The  Duke  of  Otranto  has  told 
General  Maison  to  prevent  it  by  every  means  in  his  power,  but  you  know  well  that  he 
has  none.  Do  all  that  is  in  your  power,  either  by  yourself  or  through  the  Duke  of 
Wellington  or  Lord  Castlereagh.  As  for  me,  I  shall  if  necessary  go  to  the  bridge, 
and  they  can  blow  me  up  with  it  if  they  choose. 

I  was  very  well  satisfied  with  the  contribution  from  the  two  lords. 

Louis. 


THE  SECOND  RESTORATION.  161 

If  nothing  further  had  been  intended,  than  taking  pictures  and 
statues  back  frt)m  France,  this  letter  was  unnecessary,  and  the 
Duke  of  Wellington  need  not  have  taken  the  trouble  to  write 
it ;  but  it  had  another  object,  which  was  to  let  us  know,  that  our 
deliverers  were  not  so  much  our  allies,  as  to  preclude  them  from 
justly  exercising  over  us  all  the  rights  of  conquest,  and  to 
prepare  us  for  the  demands  which  the  allied  Cabinets  were 
meditating,  but  which  they  felt  a  difficulty  in  broaching,  because 
they  knew  not  what  name  to  give  to  their  intentions. 

I  pause  here,  as  I  do  not  wish  to  treat  of  the  negotiations  I 
had  to  carry  on  with  the  allied  powers,  before  reverting  to 
certain  points  relating  to  the  home  affairs  of  France,  during  the 
month  of  July,  1815. 

The  day  after  the  king's  return  to  Paris,  July  9th,  a  royal 
proclamation  announced  the  formation  of  the  new  ministry,  to 
the  head  of  which  I  was  called  as  President  of  the  Council  and 
Minister  for  Foreign  Affairs.  I  had  procured  the  nomination  of 
Marshal  Gouvion  l  as  War  Minister,  and  the  Comte  de  Jaucourt 
as  Minister  of  Marine,'2  Baron  Pasquier  as  Minister  of  Justice 
and  Baron  Louis  of  Finance.  It  was  necessary  to  counter- 
balance the  unfortunate  choice  of  the  Duke  of  Otranto,  who 
had  been  appointed  Minister  of  Police,  in  consequence  of  Louis 
XVIII.  yielding  to  the  solicitations  of  Monsieur  and  the  Duke 
of  Wellington.     M.  Fouche,   during  the    Hundred    Days,    had 

1  Laurent,  Gouvion-Saint-Cyr,  born  at  Toul  in  1764,  joined  in  1792,  became 
General  of  Division  in  1794,  Commander-in-Chief  of  the  Army  of  Rome  in  1798,  and 
of  that  of  Naples  in  1803.  He  was  but  little  in  favour  during  the  Empire. 
Nevertheless  he  received  the  Marshal's  baton  in  1812.  In  1813  he  capitulated 
at  Dresden,  and  was  kept  a  prisoner.  In  1814  he  again  served  under  Louis  XVIII. , 
and  from  1815  to  1821  was  several  times  War  Minister.  He  died  in  retirement  in 
1830. 

-  Etienne  Denis,  Baron,  afterwards  Duke  Pasquier,  born  in  1767,  became 
Parliamentary  Counsel  at  Paris  in  1 787.  Was  imprisoned  during  the  Reign  of  Terror, 
and  was  saved  by  the  9th  Thermidor.  In  1806  he  was  appointed  Master  of  Appeal 
to  the  Council  of  State,  then  State  Councillor  and-  Prefet  of  Police  (1810).  Under 
the  first  Restoration  he  became  Director-General  of  Roads  and  Bridges  ;  held  aloof 
during  the  Hundred  Days,  became  Keeper  of  the  Seals  in  1815,  then  Minister  of 
State,  Privv  Councillor,  Grand  Cross  of  the  Legion  of  Honour,  and  President  of  the 
Chamber  of  Deputies. 

On  the  12th  January,  1817,  he  was  again  made  Keeper  of  the  Seals.  He  quitted 
the  Ministry  in  September,  1818,  and  re-entered  it  in  1819  as  Minister  of  Foreign 
Affairs.  He  retired  in  December,  1821,  and  was  then  made  a  Peer  of  France.  In 
1830  he  became  President  of  the  Chamber  of  Peers,  then  Chancellor  of  France  (1837), 
and  received  at  the  same  time  the  title  of  Duke.  Duke  Pasquier  retired  into  private 
life  in  1848  and  died  in  1862. 

VOL.   III.  M 


1 62  THE  MEMOIRS  OE  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

engaged  in  secret  correspondence,  first  with  M.  de  Metternich,1 
then  with  the  Court  of  Ghent,  and  finally  witn  the  Duke  of 
Wellington,  persuading  them  all,  that  he  was  indispensable  to 
the  restoration  of  the  monarchy,  because  he  held  the  threads  of 
all  the  intrigues  that  had  overthrown  it.  The  confidential 
friends  of  Monsieur,  thought  they  had  achieved  a  great  success 
in  securing  for  the  king  so  able  a  man,  not  seeing  that  his  very 
name  would  be  a  disgrace  to  the  royalist  party,  rather  than  a 
terror  to  the  revolutionists. 

The  Duke  of  Wellington,  deceived  by  the  prejudices  current 
in  England,  as  to  the  immense  influence  of  the  Due  d'Otranto, 
thought  him  alone  capable  of  establishing  the  king  on  his  throne, 
and  M.  de  Metternich  was  also  inclined  to  this  opinion.  While 
however  this  choice  was  pleasing  to  both  the  English  and 
Austrian  Cabinets,  it  could  not  fail  for  the  same  reason  to  dis- 
please the  Emperor  Alexander,  who  moreover  bore  me  a  grudge, 
for  having  so  strongly  defended  the  interests  of  legitimacy  and 
of  France,  at  the  Congress  of  Vienna.  It  had  therefore  become 
essential  to  smooth  down  the  susceptibilities  of  this  sovereign, 
who  played  so  important  a  part  in  the  coalition,  and  it  was  with 
this  view,  that  I  had  proposed  to  the  king,  not  to  fill  up  the 
appointments  of  Master  of  his  Household  and  Minister  of  the 
Interior,  in  order  that  he  might  give  these  posts  later  on,  to  two 
men  who  would  be  acceptable  to  the  Emperor  of  Russia,  namely, 
the  Due  de  Richelieu  and  M.  Pozzo  de  Borgo,  who  were  both 
still  in  the  Russian  service.  M.  Pozzo  de  Borgo  is  a  very  clever 
man,  and  as  much  a  Frenchman  as  Buonaparte,  against  whom 
he  cherished  a  hatred — the  hatred  of  a  Corsican  which  till 
then  had  been  the  ruling  passion  of  his  life.  He  had  been  a 
member  of  the  Legislative  Assembly  in  1791,  and  had  thus  been 
associated  with  the  first  events  of  the  French  Revolution  ;  his 
presence  in  the  ministry  therefore,  would  only  have  a  reassuring 
tendency  for  all  parties  with  whose  views  he  was  in  accord, 
either  on  one  or  another  particular  point.  But  this  combination 
fell  through  after  various   consultations  had   been    held.       M. 

1  For  the  intrigues  between  Fouche  and  M.  de  Metternich,  and  the  curious 
negotiation  of  Basle,  consult  Thiers  (vol.  xviii.,  p.  488,  ct  seq.)  and  the  Memoires 
of  M.  Fleury  de  Chaboulon  (vol.  ii.,  p.  1-42). 


THE  SECOND  RESTORATION.  163 

Pozzo  preferred  to  remain  in  the  Russian  service,  and  as  for  the 
Due  de  Richelieu,  I  will  insert  here  the  correspondence  inter- 
changed between  us  on  the  subject,  which  will  show  the  grounds 
of  his  refusal. 


The  Due  de  Richelieu  to  the  Prince  de 
Talleyrand. 

Paris,  July  20,  181 5. 
Mon  Prince, 

His  Majesty  the  Emperor  of  Russia  has  been  pleased 
to  inform  me  of  the  conversation  he  has  had  with  the  king 
respecting  myself.  Feeling  assured  after  what  your  Highness 
did  me  the  honour  to  tell  me  the  other  day,  that  you,  Prince,  are 
the  cause  of  the  request  addressed  by  the  king  to  the  emperor,  I 
have  thought  it  my  duty  to  submit  to  you  the  reason  for  the 
irrevocable  determination  at  which  I  have  arrived,  and  which  I 
will  ask  you  to  be  good  enough  to  lay  before  the  king. 

I  have  been  absent  from  France  for  twenty-four  years. 
During  this  long  period  I  have  only  appeared  there  for  a  very 
short  time  on  two  occasions  ;  I  am  a  stranger  there,  both  to  men 
and  things,  I  am  ignorant  of  how  public  affairs  are  managed, 
everything  connected  with  the  administration  is  unknown  to  me. 
At  no  time,  would  it  be  more  indispensable  for  me  to  know  all 
that  of  which  I  am  ignorant,  than  in  the  times  in  which  we  now 
live.  No  one  is  less  fitted  than  I  am,  to  fill  a  place  in  the 
ministry  anywhere,  and  above  all  here.  I,  Prince,  know,  better 
than  any  one  else,  what  I  am  worth  and  for  what  I  am  fitted  ; 
it  is  perfectly  clear  to  me  that  I  am  in  no  way  suited  for  the 
post  which  is  offered  me  ;  so  much  so,  that  were  I  to  occupy  it, 
I  feel  sure  that  I  could  not  keep  it  six  weeks.  It  would  be  very 
painful  to  me  to  think  that  my  refusal  might  produce  an  un- 
favourable impression  in  the  public  mind,  but  I  cannot  take 
blame  to  myself  in  the  matter,  since  the  nomination  was  made 
without  my  knowledge,  and  while  I  was  still  at  Nancy. 

Excuse  my  frankness,  Prince,  but  I  prefer  to  speak  openly  to 
you  as  to  the  resolution  I  have  taken.  I  must  also  add  further, 
that  having  been  for  twenty-four  years  in  the  Russian  service, 
and  for  twelve  years  employed  in  a  department  to  which  I  am 
much  attached,  I  could  not  think  of  throwing  it  up  at  present. 

Be  good  enough,  Prince,  to  lay  my  excuses  and  my  regrets  at 
the  feet  of  the  king,  and  accept  the  homage  of  those  respectful 
sentiments  with  which  I  have  the  honour  to  be  your  highness's 
most  humble  and  obedient  servant. 

Richelieu, 
m  2 


1 64  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 


The   Prince  de  Talleyrand  to   the  Due  de 

Richelieu. 

Paris,  July  28,  181 5. 

Monsieur  le  Due, 

In  informing  the  king  of  the  resolution  which  you 
assure  me  you  have  irrevocably  taken,  I  must  confess  I  could  have 
wished  to  have  been  able  to  justify  your  grounds  for  it,  better 
than  you  have  put  me  in  a  position  to  do. 

You  have  been  long  you  say,  a  stranger  to  men  and  things  in 
this  country  ;  but  since  revisiting  it,  you  must  have  observed,  that 
there  is  a  large  number  of  persons,  who  though  they  have  never 
been  away  from  it,  are  all  the  more  out  of  harmony  with  the 
ideas  of  moderation  and  prudence,  which  the  king  has  conceived, 
and  with  which  it  is  his  purpose  henceforth  to  inspire  his 
ministry,  and  you  have  the  advantage  over  them  of  having 
conceived  these  ideas,  and  carried  them  out  intelligently  in 
practice,  in  countries  far  more  strange  and  new  to  you,  than 
France.  You  foresee  great  difficulties,  but  I  do  not  hesitate  to 
tell  you,  Monsieur  le  Due,  that  in  accepting  the  confidence  of  the 
king,  we  are  none  of  us  blind  either  to  the  present,  or  the  future. 
We  too  have  seen  the  immeasurable,  and  innumerable  difficulties, 
which  every  day  and  every  instant  must  put  our  zeal  and  our 
ability  to  the  proof. 

This  outlook  has  alarmed  us  and  still  does  so  ;  but  we  have 
seen  France  overwhelmed  with  evils,  Europe  encompassed  with 
peril,  the  king's  mind  a  prey  to  cruel  anxiety,  and  under  these 
circumstances  we  felt  we  had  no  longer  the  right  to  choose. 
Finally,  Monsieur  le  Due,  you  say  that  j/ou  are  bound  by  interests 
and  engagements  to  a  country  you  have  long  served,  but  permit 
me  to  remind  you,  that  the  name  you  bear  has  shone  with  lustre 
during  two  of  the  most  brilliant  centuries  of  our  history  ;  and  do 
you  not  think  that  this  glory  which  is  for  ever  attached  to  it, 
imposes  obligations  on  you,  with  which  other  duties  can  never 
effectually  compete,  and  from  which  at  this  present  time  you 
dare  no  longer  try  to  free  yourself? 

I  have,  as  you  see,  delayed  answering  the  letter  you  did  me 
the  honour  of  writing  ;  you  will  readily  understand  my  reason 
for  so  doing.  I  had  hoped  some  of  these  ideas  would  have  pre- 
sented themselves  to  your  mind,  and  would  have  suggested  some 
other  decision. 

I  have  the  honour  to  be  ...  . 

Prince  de  Talleyrand. 


THE  SECOND  RESTORATION.  165 

I  will  only  make  one  remark  on  the  Due  de  Richelieu's 
refusal,  in  which  he  persisted.  Either  the  reasons  he  alleged 
for  refusing  the  comparatively  less  important  post  of  master 
of  the  king's  household  were  insufficient,  or  they  were  valid  ; 
how  then  could  he,  two  months  later,  become  President  of  the 
Council  and  govern  France  ? 

The  refusal  of  M.  Pozzo  and  the  Due  de  Richelieu  rendered 
it  necessary  to  appoint  M.  Pasquier,  Keeper  of  the  Privy  Seal, 
ad  interim  Minister  of  the  Interior,  and  the  Comte  de  Pradel 
Master  of  the  Household.  The  king  had  returned  to  Paris  on 
July  8th,  and  on  the  13th,  a  royal  proclamation  announced  the 
dissolution  of  the  Chamber  of  Deputies,  and  convoked  the 
Electoral  Colleges  for  August  25th. 

This  proclamation  is  conceived  in  such  a  liberal  and  prudent 
spirit,  that  it  deserves  to  be  recorded. 


Proclamation  dissolving  the  Chamber  of  Deputies 
convoked  by  the  electoral  colleges,  and 
making  Provisional  Regulations  for  the 
Elections. 

Louis,  by  the  grace  of  God,  King  of  France  and  Navarre,  to 
all  whom  these  presents  may  concern,  greeting  : 

We  had  announced  that  it  was  our  intention  to  propose  a 
law  to  the  Chambers,  for  the  proper  regulation  of  the  election  of 
the  deputies  of  departments.  Our  purpose  was  to  modify,  in 
conformity  with  the  lessons  gained  by  experience,  and  the  well- 
known  wishes  of  the  nation,  several  articles  of  the  charter,  con- 
cerning the  qualifications  and  number  of  the  deputies,  and  some 
other  dispositions  respecting  the  formation  of  the  Chambers, 
the  initiation  of  legislation,  and  the  mode  of  its  deliberations. 

The  misfortunes  of  the  time  having  interrupted  the  session 
of  the  two  Chambers,  we  have  thought,  that  as  the  number  of 
deputies  of  departments,  had,  through  divers  causes,  become  so 
greatly  reduced,  the  nation  is  insufficiently  represented.  Under 
these  circumstances,  it  is  above  all  things  necessary,  that  the 
national  representatives  should  be  numerous,  that  their  powers 
should  be  renewed,  that  they  should  emanate  more  directly  from 
the  electoral  colleges,  and  finally  that  the  elections  should 
express  the  actual  opinion  of  our  people. 


166  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

We  have  therefore  determined  to  dissolve  the  Chamber  of 
Deputies,  and  to  summon  a  new  one  without  delay.  But  as  it 
is  impossible  to  regulate  the  mode  of  election  by  a  law,  or  to 
make  modifications  in  the  charter,  we  have  deemed  it  within 
our  province,  to  admit  the  nation  to  enjoy  the  advantages  at 
once,  which  it  will  derive  from  a  more  numerous  representation, 
and  one  elected  under  less  restricted  conditions,  it  being  more- 
over our  pleasure,  that  in  no  case  should  any  modification  of  the 
charter  become  definite,  except  under  constitutional  forms.  The 
regulations  of  this  present  proclamation,  shall  be  the  first  object 
of  the  deliberations  of  the  Chambers.  The  entire  legislative 
power  will  settle  the  law  of  elections,  and  the  alterations  to  be 
made  in  the  charter  with  reference  thereto,  alterations  as  to 
which  we  only  take  the  initiative,  in  respect  of  the  most  indis- 
pensable and  urgent  points,  while  pledging  ourselves  to  keep 
as  much  as  possible  to  the  charter,  and  the  forms,  previously 
in  use. 

For  these  reasons  we  declare  and  have  declared,  ordained 
and  have  ordained,  the  following  : 

Art.  I.  The  Chamber  of  Deputies  is  dissolved. 

Art.  II.  The  electoral  colleges  of  districts  shall  assemble  on 
the  14th  of  August  of  the  present  year. 

Art.  III.  The  electoral  colleges  of  departments  shall  meet 
eight  days  after  the  opening  of  the  electoral  colleges  of 
districts. 

Art.  IV.  The  number  of  departmental  deputies,  is  fixed  in 
conformity  with  the  schedule  hereto  annexed. 

Art.  V.  Each  district  electoral  college  shall  elect  a  number  of 
candidates  equal  to  the  number  of  deputies  of  the  department. 

Art.  VI.  Our  prcfets  shall  transmit  to  the  president  of  the 
departmental  electoral  colleges,  the  lists  of  candidates  prepared 
by  the  district  electoral  colleges,  which  lists  shall  be  transmitted 
to  them  by  the  presidents  of  these  colleges. 

Art.  VII.  The  departmental  electoral  colleges  shall  choose 
at  least  one  half  of  the  deputies  from  these  candidates.  If  the 
total  number  of  the  deputies  of  the  department  is  uneven,  the 
division  shall  be  made  in  favour  of  that  portion  which  is  to  be 
chosen  from  among  the  candidates. 

Art.  VIII.  The  electors  of  the  district  electoral  colleges  may- 
take  their  seats,  provided  they  are  of  the  full  age  of  twenty-one 
years.  The  electors  of  the  departmental  colleges  may  also  do 
so  at  the  same  age,  but  they  must  have  been  chosen  from  the 
list  of  those  who  are  rated  the  highest. 

Art.  IX.  If  the  number  of  members  of  the  Legion  of  Honour, 
who,  in  conformity  with   the  decree   of  February  22,  1806,  may 


THE  SECOND  RESTORATION.  167 

be  added  to  the  district  or  departmental  colleges,  is  not  com- 
plete, our  prefcts  shall,  at  the  request  of  the  members  of  the 
Legion  of  Honour,  propose  further  nominations,  which  shall  be 
provisionally  confirmed.  Nevertheless  all  members  of  the  Legion 
of  Honour,  who  are  admitted  to  the  departmental  colleges,  must, 
in  conformity  with  Art.  IX.  of  the  Charter,  pay  at  least  three 
hundred  francs  in  direct  taxes. 

All  nominations  made  since  March  1st,  18 15,  are  null  and 
void. 

Art.  X.  Deputies  may  be  elected  at  the  full  age  of  twenty- 
five  years. 

Art.  XI.  Conformable  to  former  laws  and  regulations,  every 
election  in  which  the  half  of  the  college  plus  one,  shall  not  have 
taken  part,  shall  be  null.  The  absolute  majority  of  the  members 
present,  is  necessary  to  the  validity  of  the  election. 

Art.  XII.  If  the  district  electoral  colleges  have  not  com- 
pleted the  election  of  the  number  of  candidates  they  are  entitled 
to  choose,  the  departmental  college  shall  nevertheless  proceed 
to  exercise  its  function. 

Art.  XIII.  The  election  returns  shall  be  examined  in  the 
Chamber  of  Deputies,  which  shall  pronounce  as  to  the  regularity 
of  the  elections.  The  elected  deputies  shall  be  required  to 
produce  to  the  Chamber,  their  certificate  of  birth,  and  an 
abstract  of  their  assessments,  showing  that  they  pay  at  least  one 
thousand  francs  in  taxes. 

Art.  XIV.  Articles  16,  25,  35,  36,  37,  38,  39,  40,  41,  42,  43. 
44,  45,  and  46,  of  the  charter  shall  be  submitted  for  revision  to 
the  legislative  power  at  the  next  session  of  the  Chambers. 

Art.  XV.  The  present  proclamation  shall  be  printed  and 
affixed  to  the  place  of  meeting  of  each  electoral  college. 

The  articles  of  the  charter  above  mentioned  shall  be  printed 
conjointly  with  it. 

Art.  XVI.  Our  minister  of  the  interior  is  charged  with  the 
execution  of  the  present  proclamation. 

Given  at  the  palace  of  the  Tuileries  this  13th  day  of  July,  in 
the  year  of  grace,  one  thousand  eight  hundred  and  fifteen,  and 
the  twenty-first  year  of  our  reign. 

(Signed)     Louis. 

The  proclamation  having  been  published,  the  selection  of 
the  prdfets  who  were  to  be  charged  with  its  execution  in  the 
departments  had  to  be  provided  for,  and  this  selection  was  not 
an  easy  one.  It  was  necessary  that  the  new  prefots  should  be 
moderate  as  well  as  energetic  men,  in   order  to  carry  out  the 


1 68  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

views  of  the  government,  and  to  resist  as  far  as  possible,  the 
exactions  of  the  allied  troops  in  the  departments  occupied  by 
them,  and  also  the  reactionary  tendencies  of  certain  departments 
in  the  south. 

The  greater  number  of  the  prefets  appointed  during  the 
Empire,  inspired  the  royal  government  with  no  confidence,  and  the 
men  recommended  by  the  advisers  of  Monsieur  and  the  princes, 
were  dangerous  from  the  violence  of  their  opinions.  It  was 
not  easy  under  these  circumstances  to  find  eighty-six  men, 
possessing  the  qualities  necessary  to  carry  out  so  delicate  a 
mission  as  that  of  the  new  prefets,  and  there  is  the  less  reason 
for  surprise,  that  the  result  has  been  to  give  France  a  Chamber 
of  Deputies,  which  even  while  I  am  now  writing,1  distinguishes 

1  I  will  only  cite  one  letter  from  a  prefet  of  that  time,  to  show  how  difficult  was 
the  task  of  the  government  and  of  its  agents. 

m.  de  bourrienne,*  prefet  of  yonne,  to  the 
Prince  de  Talleyrand. 

AuXERRE,    August   20,    1815. 

Prince, 

Four  days  ago  this  department  was  in  despair  ;  the  public  funds  were 
seized  and  carried  off,  there  were  enormous  requisitions  and  exaggerated  demands  of 
every  description  ;  maltreatment  and  threats  of  military  executions,  and  a  studied 
contempt  for  the  king's  agents.  Such  was  the  conduct  of  the  Bavarians,  when  I  made 
my  complaint  to  Comte  de  Rechburg,t  brother  of  the  minister  of  that  Court,  at 
Paris.  He  told  me  that,  not  having  been  invited  to  assist  in  drawing  up  the  memor- 
andum of  the  24th  of  July,  J:  and  perceiving  that  there  was  an  intention  to  exclude 
them  from  a  share  in  the  war  contributions,  the  Bavarians  were  under  the  necessity  of 
looking  after  themselves,  and  taking  their  share  of  what  they  could  get.  Then,  loudly 
expressing  his  hatred  of  the  Austrians,  Comte  de  Rechburg  added  :  "  We  have  sixty 
thousand  men  under  arms,  and  we  could  soon  give  a  good  account  of  one  hundred 
thousand  Austrians  in  a  pitched  battle." 

However,  as  I  spoke  to  him  with  some  determination  and  above  all  with  much 
show  of  reason,  he  told  me  that  although  administrative  measures  were  not  his  busi- 
ness, he  would  confer  on  the  matter  with  the  Commissary  of  the  army. 

All  this  took  place  on  the  eighteenth,  and  on  that  day  no  rigorous  measures  were 
taken.  Yesterday  the  news  of  the  arrangements  made  on  the  seventeenth,  arrived 
from  Paris,  and  the  circular  to  the  prefets  has  produced  a  great  change,  both  in  the 
situation  of  the  country  people,  and  in  the  conduct  of  the  Bavarians.  Please  God  that 
they  do  not  come  again,  and  tell  us  that  they  know  nothing  of  the  arrangement  and 
have  nothing  to  do  with  it.  Up  to  now  hostilities  have  ceased,  and  we  are  awaiting 
the  arrival  of  Prince  de  Wrede  on  the  twenty-second,  to  see  if  their  first  system  of 
isolation  is  to  be  continued,  or  if  they  will  range  themselves  under  the  general  stand- 
ard of  the  allies,  to  plunder  us  in  a  regular  and  methodical  fashion. 

Together  with  the  news  of  the  announcement  of  the  seventeenth,  came  the  royal 

*  M.  de  Bourrienne  was  not  prefet  of  Yonne.  He  was  at  that  time  candidate  for  the  post  of  deputy 
of  this  department  and  was  elected  a  few  days  afterwards. 

t  Count  Joseph  de  Rechburg  (1769  to  1833),  general  in  the  Bavarian  Army  1814  to  1815,  and 
afterwards  minister  at  Berlin, 

t  This  note,  addressed  by  Austria,  Russia.  Prussia  and  England,  to  the  French  cabinet,  had  for 
its  object  the  regulation  of  the  government  of  the  territories  occupied  by  the  allies  in  France.  Article 
VIII.  particularly  specifies  that  no  contribution  was  to  be  levied  singly  by  the  commissaries  of  the 
different  armies. 


THE  SECOND  RESTORATION.  169 

itself  by  its  reactionary  spirit  and  its  want  of  prudence  and 
moderation.1 

The  appointment  of  extraordinary  royal  commissioners, 
which  had  been  previously  made,  in  the  departments  of  the 
South,  either  by  the  Due  d'Angouleme,  or  the  king  himself, 
would  still  further  have  complicated  the  situation  of  the  new 
pn'fets  ;  but  the  council  advised  the  king  to  recall  the  powers  of 
all  these  commissioners  by  proclamation.  This  proclamation 
became  one  of  the  principal  grievances  of  one  part  of  the  court, 

proclamation  as  to  the  war  contribution  of  a  hundred  millions.  I  may  tell  you,  prince, 
that  it  lias  been  almost  received  with  pleasure;  not  a  single  complaint  has  been 
raised.  The  general  expression  was  :  shedding  one's  money  is  not  like  shedding 
one's  blood. 

Here  payment  will  be  prompt,  and  also  in  the  other  departments,  because  men 
are  grateful  to  the  government  for  having  considered  how  much  these  departments 
have  suffered  through  sacrifices  and  losses.  I  think  I  may  assure  you,  prince,  that 
every  demand  for  money  will  be  received  without  murmuring,  provided  it  is  justly 
apportioned  and  its  destination  is  known.  It  is  almost  certain  that  we  shall  not  have 
Dumolard  *  as  deputy.  As  for  Desfourneaux,t  I  am  not  quite  sure  of  him.  It  is 
true,  I  have  already  succeeded  in  excluding  him  from  the  list  of  candidates,  but  since 
then,  he  has  redoubled  his  intrigues  and  solicitations.  He  presents  himself  in  all  the 
communes  of  his  department,  his  big  red  ribbon  outside  his  coat,  and  a  huge  new 
badge  on  his  left  side,  and  when  it  is  represented  to  him,  that  this  royal  favour  is  of 
last  year's  date,  and  that  it  only  brings  his  treachery  more  prominently  forward,  he  at 
once  answers,  by  showing  two  letters  dated  August  1815,  one  from  the  Due  d'Otranto, 
the  other  from  the  Due  d'Havre.J  both  of  them  describing  him  as  the  man  most 
worthy  to  represent  the  department  of  the  Vonne.  On  the  one  hand,  the  government 
desires,  and  with  reason,  to  remove  such  intriguers  ;  and  on  the  other  hand,  one  of 
the  ministers  and  a  captain  of  the  guards,  solicit  the  good  will  of  the  authorities  and 
the  public,  on  his  behalf. 

I  have  been  obliged  to  inform  you,  prince,  of  this  circumstance,  so  that  you  may 
not  blame  me  too  much  if  I  am  unsuccessful.  I  have  read  with  as  much  pleasure  as 
gratitude,  the  name  of  the  Marquis  de  Louvois  §  on  the  list  of  peers  ;  this  choice  has 
given  general  satisfaction.  I  like  to  believe,  prince,  that  you  have  remembered  what 
I  told  you  about  him.  I  shall  always  gratefully  acknowledge  the  great  kindness  you 
have  shown  me,  by  unbounded  devotion  and  unshaken  fidelity.  I  am,  with  the 
greatest  respect,  Your  Highness's  very  humble  and  obedient  servant, 

BOURRIENNE. 

1  It  is  to  be  observed  that  this  portion  of  the  Memoirs  was  written  in  1816  at  the 
time  the  Chambre  intronvable  was  sitting. 

*  Bonvier-Dumolard,  born  in  1781,  at  first  auditor  to  the  Privy  Council  ;  then  commissary  of 
Corinthia  in  Saxony  and  charged  with  the  organization  of  the  Venetian  States.  In  1810  he  was  ap- 
pointed pre/et  and  again  during  the  hundred  days,  when  he  was  also  elected  a  deputy.  At  the  second 
restoration  he  was  ordered  to  leave  Paris. 

t  Comte  Etienne  Desfourneaux,  born  in  1769,  became  sergeant  in  1789.  went  to  St.  Domingo  in 
1792,  where  for  his  successes,  he  was  appointed  General-in-chief  in  1793.  In  1798  he  became  governor 
of  Guadeloupe.  In  1802  he  commanded  a  division  in  the  Expedition  to  St.  Domingo.  He  relumed 
shortly  afterwards  to  France,  and  retired  to  the  department  of  Yonne  and  was  elected  deputy  in  1813 
and  again  during  the  hundred  days.     He  was  not  elected  in  1825. 

\  Joseph  Anne  Auguste  Maximilhan  de  Croy,  Due  d'Havre,  prince  of  the  Holy  Empire  and 
grandee  of  Spain,  born  in  1744,  lieutenant-general  in  1749.  Deputy  from  the  bailiwick  of  Amiens  to 
the  States-General  peer  of  France  at  the  Restoration,  and  captain  of  the  king's  guards.  He  died 
in  1839.  _ 

§  Auguste-Michel  Le  Tellier  de   Sonore.  Marquis  de  Louvois,  born  in  1738,  was  chamberlain  to 
the  emperor  in  1809  and  peer  of  France  under  the  Restoration.     He  took  no  part  in  politics,  but  hel 
an  important  position  in  trade.     He  died  in  1844. 


170  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

against  the  ministry,  and  it  accordingly  encountered  opposition 
on  all  sides. 

We  had  infinite  trouble  in  inducing  the  king  to  issue  another 
proclamation  respecting  the  press,  which,  except  as  regards 
the  journals,  gives  it  complete  freedom,1  but  I  was  less  fortunate 
in  another  very  serious  question,  in  which  M.  Fouche  carried  his 
point  against  me.  I  wanted  the  king  to  dispense  with  all 
measures  of  severity,  excepting  that  all  those  peers  of  the 
Chamber  of  1814,  who  had  consented  to  form  a  part  of  the 
Chamber  of  peers  created  by  Napoleon  during  the  hundred  days, 
should  forfeit  their  seats.  I  believed  that  by  thus  striking  at  the 
highest  persons  in  the  state,  a  sufficient  example  would  be  made 
to  punish  the  abettors  of  the  revolution  of  the  20th  of  March, 
and  to  secure  in  future  the  sanctity  of  the  oath,  so  unworthily 
betrayed  by  those  who,  within  so  short  a  space  of  time,  had 
abandoned  the  royal  cause.  But  this  measure  did  not  satisfy  the 
royalist  reaction,  which  demanded  legal  persecution,  and 
proscriptions.  In  vain  I  urged  waiting  for  the  meeting  of  the 
Chambers,  to  whom  if  it  were  necessary,  might  be  left  the 
responsibility  of  pointing  out  the  guilty.  I  hoped  that  by 
retarding  the  measure,  time  would  aid  us  to  soften  it  down,  if 
not  to  get  rid  of  it  altogether  ;  but  my  efforts  were  in  vain. 
Pressure  was  put  on  the  Due  d'Otranto,  who,  embarrassed  by  the 
close  relations  he  had  entered  into  with  the  extreme  royalist 
party,  and  with  the  foreign  courts,  laid  a  list  before  the  council 
of  more  than  a  hundred  persons,  who  he  demanded  should  be 
either  proscribed  or  tried  by  court-martial. 

After  a  painful  struggle,  which  lasted  several  days,  and  the 
king  having  declared  himself  for  the  odious  measure,  it  was 
necessary  to  yield  ;  but  the  list  was  reduced  to  fifty-seven 
persons.  Nineteen  of  these,  almost  all  military  men,  were  to 
be  brought  before  a  court-martial,  or  the  court  of  assizes, 
while  the  other  thirty-eight,  were  to  leave  Paris  in  twenty-four 

1  The  first  proclamation,  dated  20th  July,  1814,  ordered  the  chief  librarian  and 
the prefets  not  to  make  use  of  Articles  III.,  IV.  and  V.  of  the  law  of  October  21st, 
1814.  These  articles  gave  them  the  right  to  submit  all  writings  of  less  than  twenty 
printed  leaves,  to  a  preliminary  inspection  of  the  censors.  A  second  proclamation, 
dated  8th  August  1815,  subjected  all  the  journals  to  fresh  authorization  from  the 
minister  of  police,  and  all  periodical  literature  had  to  be  submitted  to  examination  by 
a  committee. 


THE  SECOND  RESTORATION.  171 

hours,  and  betake  themselves  to  places  appointed  them  by  the 
police.  Those  comprised  in  the  first  category,  were  all  warned 
in  time,  so  that  they  might  escape  if  they  thought  proper ;  but 
the  measure  was  nevertheless  an  act  of  blundering  folly,  cal- 
culated only  to  create  difficulties  and  dangers  for  the  govern- 
ment.1 

Notwithstanding  this  proclamation,  the  proposal  I  had  made 
respecting  the  Chamber  of  Peers,  could  no  longer  be  put  aside, 
and  I  had  in  my  turn,  to  draw  up  the  list  of  peers,  who,  having 
sat  in  the  chamber  of  the  hundred  days,  could  no  longer  form 
part  of  the  Chamber  of  Peers  which  had  been  constituted  on  a 
new  basis,  since  I  had  induced  the  king  (much  against  his  will) 
to  admit,  that  the  peerage  should  henceforth  be  hereditary. 
The  list  of  peers  eliminated,  comprised  the  Count  d'Aboville 
the  Marshal  Due  d'Albufera,  the  Comte  de  Barral,  the  Arch- 
bishop of  Tours,  the  Comte  Belliard,  the  Comte  Boissy- 
d'Anglas,  the  Due  dc  Cadore,  the  Comte  de  Canclaux,  the 
Comte  de  Casabianca,  the  Comte  Clement  de  Ris,  the  Comte 
Colchen,  the  Marshal  Due  de  Conegliano,  the  Comte  Cornudet, 
the  Comte  de  Croix,  the  Marshal  Due  de  Dantzig,  the  Comte 
Dedeley  d'Agier,  the  Comte  Dejean,  the  Marshal  Prince 
d'Essling,  the  Comte  Fabre  de  l'Aude,  the  Comte  Gassendi,  the 
Comte  de  Lacepede,  the  Comte  de  Latour-Maubourg,  the  Comte 
de  Montesquiou,  the  Due  de  Plaisance,  the  Comte  de  Ponte- 
coulant,  the  Due  de  Praslin,  the  Comte  Rampon,  the  Comte  de 
Segur,  the  Marshal  Due  de  Trevise,  the  Comte  de  Valence. 

This  proclamation  also  bore  the  date  of  the  24th  of  July  ; 
but  on  the  17th  of  August  following,  the  king  issued  another  at 

1  This  is  the  list  of  the  persons  comprised  in  the  proclamation  of  the  21st  of  July, 
1815. 

Category  of  the  nineteen  who  were  prosecuted  and  brought  to  trial  :  Marshal  Ney, 
Labedoyere,  both  brothers  Lallemand,  Drouet  D'Erlon,  Laborde,  Lefebvre — Des- 
nouttes,  Ameille,  Brayer,  Gilly,  Mouton-Duvernet,  Grouchy,  Clausel,  Debelle, 
Bertrand,  Drouot,  Cambronne,  Lavalette,  Rovigo  ; 

Category  of  the  thirty-eight,  ordered  to  leave  Paris  in  three  days  and  proceed  to 
places  appointed  by  the  police. 

Marshal  Soult,  Generals  AHx,  Exelmans,  Vandamme,  Marbot,  Lamarque,  Lobau, 
Pire,  Dejean  junior,  and  Hullin,  M.  Felix,  Lepelletier,  Boulay  de  la  Meurthe, 
Mehee-Latouche,  Fressinnet,  Thibaudeau,  Carnot,  Hard,  Barrere,  Arrighi  (of  Padua) 
Arnault,  Pommereuil,  Regnauld  de  Saint-Jean-d'Angely,  Real,  Garrau,  Bouvier- 
Dumolard,  Merlin  de  Douai,  Durbach,  Dirat,  Defermont,  Bory,  de  Saint  Vincent, 
Felix  Desportes,  Gamier  de  Saintes,  Mellinet,  Cluys,  Courtin,  Forbin-Janson  the 
elder  and  Lelorgne  d'Idevile. 


172  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

my  suggestion,  by  which  ninety-two  new  peers  were  created,  and 
which  restored  the  Comtes  D'Aboville  and  de  Canclaux,  who 
proved  that  they  had  not  sat  in  the  Chamber  of  the  hundred 
days,  and  also  M.  Boissy  d'Anglas,  as  a  reward  for  his  noble 
and  courageous  conduct  at  the  Convention,  and  the  special 
services  he  had  rendered  the  king. 

I  also  added  to  this  list,  the  three  sons,  still  minors,  of  the 
Due  de  Montebello,  and  Marshals  Berthier  and  Bessieres. 

The  king,  in  signing  this  proclamation,  made  some  objection 
to  the  name  of  M.  Mole,  who  had  served  during  the  hundred 
days  ;  but  I  persisted,  saying,  "  May  the  king  be  pleased  to 
restore  this  name.  It  is  Mathieu  Mole,1  who  asks  it  of  you,"  and 
the  king,  who  had  at  first  erased  it,  replaced  it  with  his  own 
hand. 

At  last,  on  the  20th  of  August,  the  proclamation  constituting 
the  peerage  appeared  ;  it  had  been  discussed  in  the  Council  for 
several  days. 

The  king  vigorously  opposed  the  hereditary  peerages,  as 
depriving  him  of  all  personal  influence  over  the  members  of  the 
Chamber  ;  but  I  argued  against  this  view,  as  being  in  comparison, 
secondary  to  the  weight  and  stability  the  heredity  of  its 
members  would  give  to  the  Chamber.  Accordingly  in  the 
preamble  of  the  proclamation,  the  king  declared  that,  "  Wishing 
to  give  his  subjects  a  fresh  pledge  of  the  value  which  he  attached 
to  founding  those  institutions,  on  the  most  permanent  basis  on 
which  a  government  can  rest,  and  convinced  that  nothing 
secures  the  quiet  of  the  State  more  than  that  heredity  of  feeling, 
which  in  families  is  joined  to  heredity  of  high  public  functions, 
and  thus  creates  an  uninterrupted  succession  of  subjects,  whose 
fidelity  and  devotion  to  their  king  and  country,  are  guaranteed 
by  the  principles  and  examples  they  have  inherited  from  their 
fathers.  .  .  ." 

The  harsh  measures  introduced  by  M.  Fouche  were  not  long 
in  bearing  fruit.  Frightful  tumults  and  bloody  scenes  broke  out 
in  various  places  in  the  south,  where  the  royalist  reaction,  deem- 

1  M.  Mole  the  fifth  descendant  in  the  direct  line  from  the  first  President,  Mathieu 
Mole.  During  the  hundred  days  he  refused  the  portfolios  of  the  Interior  and  of 
Foreign  Affairs.     He  was  appointed  peer  of  France,  but  never  sat  in  the  Chamber. 


THE  SECOND  RESTORATION.  173 

ing  itself  encouraged  by  these  measures,  indulged  in  horrible 
massacres  ;  the  government  made  every  effort  to  put  a  stop  to 
them,  and  the  king  published  the  following  declaration,  in  which 
he  said : 

"  We  have  learnt  with  grief,  that  in  the  departments  of  the 
south,  many  of  our  subjects  have  recently  been  guilty  of  the 
most  criminal  outrages  ;  that  under  pretence  of  making  them- 
selves the  instruments  of  public  vengeance,  Frenchmen  have 
shed  the  blood  of  Frenchmen,  to  gratify  their  private  hatred  and 
revenge,  even  after  our  authority  had  been  universally  re-esta- 
blished and  acknowledged  throughout  our  kingdom.  That 
horrible  treachery  and  great  crimes  have  been  committed,  which 
plunged  France  into  an  abyss  of  evils,  is  doubtless  an  indis- 
putable fact  ;  but  the  punishment  of  these  crimes  must  be  a 
national,  solemn,  and  regular  one.  The  guilty  persons  must  fall 
by  the  sword  of  justice,  and  not  under  the  weight  of  vengeance. 
All  social  order  would  be  upset,  if  men  were  allowed  to  consti- 
tute themselves  both  judge  and  executioner,  either  as  regards  the 
injuries  they  have  received,  or  the  outrages  committed  against 
our  person. 

"  We  hope  that  this  odious  attempt  to  forestall  the  action  of 
the  law,  has  already  ceased.  It  is  an  offence  against  France  and 
ourselves,  and  however  deeply  it  may  pain  us,  nothing  shall  be 
left  undone  to  punish  such  outrages.  We  have  therefore  strictly 
enjoined  our  ministers  and  magistrates,  to  enforce  absolute 
obedience  to  the  laws,  and  to  show  neither  weakness  nor  indul- 
gence in  prosecuting  those,  who  have  offended  against  them." 

This  declaration,  however  natural  under  the  circumstances, 
nevertheless  offered  a  pretext  to  the  extreme  royalist  party  to 
censure  the  ministry  ;  while  M.  Fouche,  alarmed  at  the  mischief 
he  had  done,  by  flattering  the  evil  passions  of  that  party,  wished 
to  retrace  his  steps  and  get  out  of  the  difficulty,  by  an  act  of 
perfidy,  calculated,  as  he  thought,  to  bias  public  opinion  in  his 
favour,  and  to  still  further  weaken  the  government.  He  made 
two  confidential  reports  to  the  king,  one  in  which  he 
depicted  the  deplorable  condition  to  which  the  conduct  of  the 
allied  troops  was  reducing  the  population  of  the  provinces  they 
occupied,  and  the  consequences  that  could  not  fail  to  result 
therefrom.  The  second  report  was  no  less  emphatic  than  the 
first,  in  the  picture  it   drew    of  the  outrages   committed   in   the 


174  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

south,  and  the  violent  party  rancour  displayed  in  every  part  of 
France.  Up  to  this  point  there  was  nothing  to  find  fault  with. 
M.  Fouche  had  but  done  his  duty,  and  we  are  quite  ready  to  ad- 
mit that  the  contents  of  these  reports  were  not  far  from  the 
truth.  But  these  reports  were  confidential  and  should  only 
have  been  communicated  to  the  king  and  his  Council. 

This,  however,  was  not  what  M.  Fouche  did.  He  at  first 
concealed  them  from  the  ministry,  and  after  having  given  a  copy 
to  the  king,  he  made  them  public,  while  asserting  that  they  had 
been  stolen  from  him,  and  that  it  was  not  he  who  had  published 
them.  It  was  impossible  to  maintain  any  relations  with  a  man 
who  had  recourse  to  such  measures.  I  asked  the  king  for  his 
dismissal  from  the  ministry,  and  it  was  not  long  ere  he  was 
removed. x 

But  the  greatest  and  most  painful  difficulty  that  affected  the 
situation,  was  the  conduct  of  the  allied  sovereigns  and  their 
troops.  This  is  a  point  on  which  I  must  now  touch,  leaving  it 
to  historians  to  relate  the  events  of  this  period,  which  are 
universally  known.  For  my  part  I  shall  confine  myself  to  ex- 
posing the  painful  negotiations  I  was  condemned  to  carry  on, 
as  well  as  some  of  the  occurrences  connected  with  them.  I 
hasten  to  finish  these  odious  recollections. 

The  most  urgent  point  in  these  negotiations,  and  the  one  to  be 
first  treated  of,  was  that  which  settled  the  allowances  that  were 
to  be  made  for  the  services  of  the  innumerable  armies  who  had 
invaded  France  and  were  devouring  her  ;  while  at  the  same  time, 
insisting  everywhere  on  the  most  scandalous  exactions,  in  the 
name  of  the  Powers,  who  at  Vienna  had  signed  the  agreement, 
to  arm  themselves  in  aid  of  their  ally  the  King  of  France. 

I  have  already  quoted  the  letter  of  the  prcfet  of  Yonne,  on 
the  conduct  of  the  Bavarian  generals.  I  wish  also  to  record  an 
order  of  the  Commissary-General  of  the  Austrian  Army,  to  show 
how  far  the  revolutionary  spirit  (for  I  can  call  it  by  no  other 
name)  had  carried  these  governments,  who  loudly  proclaimed 
that  they  only  made  war   against   revolution  in  the  person  of 

Buonaparte. 

1  19th  September. 


THE  SECOND  RESTORATION.  175 


The  Imperial,  Royal,  and  Apostolic  Army  of  Italy. 

We,  Count  de  Wurmser,  Chamberlain,  Privy  Councillor  of 
State  to  his  Imperial,  Royal,  and  Apostolic  Majesty,  Commander 
of  the  Royal  Order  of  Saint-Stephen  of  Hungary,  President  of 
the  Aulic  Commission,  charged  with  the  superintendence  of  the 
survey  of  the  monarchy,  and  Commissary-General  of  the  Imperial 
and  Royal  Army  of  Italy. 

Considering,  on  the  one  hand,  that  the  general  and  subordin- 
ate receivers  of  the  departments  and  districts,  have  been  com- 
pelled to  sign  bonds  to  the  order  of  the  treasury,  for  the  pay- 
ment on  fixed  dates,  of  the  sums  received  from  direct  and 
indirect  taxation,  and  that,  on  the  other  hand,  these  payments 
and  taxes  in  those  parts  of  the  French  territory,  occupied  by  the 
troops  of  the  allied  armies,  have,  according  to  military  law  and 
the  law  of  nations,  devolved  on  the  said  powers,  we  order  and 
decree  as  follows  : 

Article  I. — That  all  bonds  payable  to  the  French  treasury 
by  the  general  and  subordinate  receivers,  and  other  revenue 
officers  of  those  parts  of  French  territory  occupied  by  the 
Imperial  Austrian  Army  of  Italy,  or  which  shall  be  so  occupied 
in  future,  are  not  available,  either  for  arrears  or  for  current  pay- 
ments of  any  public  taxes  or  imposts  whatever.  The  said 
receivers  and  revenue  officers  are  therefore  forbidden  to  discharge 
them  on  any  pretxt  whatsoever. 

Article  II. — Any  infraction  of  this  prohibition  will  involve 
not  only  the  personal  responsibility  of  each  receiver  and 
revenue  officer,  but  will  further  be  punished  with  all  the  rigour 
of  martial  law,  as  an  act  of  connivance  with  the  enemy. 

Article  III. — These  dispositions  apply  to  the  bonds  and 
drafts  delivered  by  the  purchasers  of  national  and  communal 
property,  and  those  who  have  acquired  the  right  to  fell  timber  in 
the  State  forests. 

Article  IV. — The  courts  are  forbidden  to  entertain  any  suits 
for  payment  of  the  said  bonds  or  drafts,  under  pain  of  being 
dissolved,  and  being  further  dealt  with  according  to  the  rigour 
of  military  law. 

Article  V. — All  prefcts  and  sub-prefets  are  charged  with  the 


176  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

immediate  printing  and  placarding  of  the  above  order,  wherever 
it  may  be  necessary. 

Given  at  headquarters,  Nantua,  July  18th,  1815. 
{Signed)   COUNT  DE  WURMSER. 
By  order  of  his  Excellency  the  Commissary-General, 

CUVELIER, 
Commissary. 

King  Louis  XVIII.,  who  had  discovered  when  too  late,  the 
grave  error  he  had  committed  in  not  following  the  advice  I 
had  given  him,  not  to  return  to  his  capital  before  he  had  settled 
everything  with  the  foreign  governments,  now  strove  vainly  to 
repair  this  fault,  by  addressing  the  iollowing  letter  to  me,  which 
I  communicated  to  the  allied  plenipotentiaries. 


King   Louis   XVIII.   to   the   Prince   de 
Talleyrand. 

Paris,  July  21,  181 5. 

The  conduct  of  the  allied  armies  will  very  soon  drive  my 
people  into  arming  themselves  en  masse  after  the  example  of 
the  Spaniards.  Were  I  a  younger  man,  I  would  place  myself  at 
their  head  ;  but  if  age  and  infirmities  prevent  my  doing  so,  I 
will  not  at  any  rate  even  seem  to  connive  at  the  outrages  I 
lament.  I  am  therefore  resolved,  if  I  cannot  obtain  justice,  to 
retire  from  my  kingdom,  and  ask  the  King  of  Spain  for  an 
asylum.  If  those,  who  even  after  the  capture  of  the  man 
against  whom  alone  they  had  declared  war,  continue  to  treat 
my  subjects  as  enemies,  and  who  consequently  must  regard  me 
also  as  such,  wish  to  interfere  with  my  freedom,  they  are  at 
liberty  to  do  so.  I  would  rather  be  a  prisoner,  than  remain  at 
the  Tuileries,  a  passive  spectator  of  the  miseries  of  my  people. 

Louis. 

In  consequence  of  this  letter  and  a  proposal  for  an  arrange- 
ment made  by  Baron  Louis,  Minister  of  Finance,  the  allied 
plenipotentiaries  addressed  a  note  to  me  on  the  25th  of  July 
drawn  up  in  these  terms  : 

"  The  undersigned  ministers  have  carefully  considered  the 
proposals  transmitted  to  them  by  the  ministers  of  the  king, 


THE  SECOND  RESTORATION.  177 

through  his  Excellency  Baron  Louis.  They  are  too  firmly  con- 
vinced of  the  necessity  of  taking  the  most  speedy  and  effectual 
measures,  as  regards  administrative  action,  not  to  accept,  with 
the  utmost  readiness,  the  views  which  are  expressed  in  these 
overtures.  They  are  therefore  of  opinion  that  the  following 
arrangements,  which  have  just  been  adopted,  will  be  the  most 
efficacious  for  reconciling  the  king's  wishes  with  the  position  in 
which  the  allied  armies  will  be  placed  during  their  stay  in 
France." 

The  arrangements  referred  to  in  this  note,  laid  down,  that  in 
exchange  for  a  contribution  of  a  hundred  millions,  conceded  by 
the  French  government,  it  was  agreed  that  a  line  of  demarca- 
tion should  be  traced,  to  fix  the  departments  that  would  be 
occupied  by  the  allied  troops  and  assigned  for  their  mainte- 
nance. The  royal  authority  was  to  be  restored,  and  the  prefets 
and  sub-prefets  re-established  in  their  official  functions.  Military 
governors  were  to  be  appointed  by  the  departments,  within 
the  radius  of  each  army.  They  were  to  protect  the  authori- 
ties, ensure  the  supplies  to  the  armies,  and  supervise 
their  relations  with  the  French  officials.  An  administrative 
commission  was  to  sit  in  Paris  to  transact  direct  all  affairs 
between  the  king's  government  and  the  foreign  authorities. 
Orders  were  immediately  to  be  given  to  put  a  stop  to  all 
the  irregular  contributions  which  had  been  levied  on  the 
departments. 

This  point  settled,  the  remainder  would  have  been  soon 
arranged,  if  the  sovereigns  had  been  true  and  faithful  allies  of 
the  King  of  France.  But,  as  I  have  already  stated,  when 
speaking  of  the  arrival  of  the  foreign  armies  in  Paris,  the 
allied  cabinets  were  puzzled  how  to  bring  forward  their  de- 
mands, as  they  could  find  no  name  for  their  wishes.  At  first 
they  only  used  the  word  guarantees.  They  wished  for  general 
guarantees  without  specifying  for  what  purposes,  upon  which  I 
addressed  the  following  note  to  them,  dated  July  31st,  18 15  : 

"  The  king's  minister  has  the  honour  to  communicate  to  their 

Excellencies  the  ministers  and  secretaries  of  State  of  the  allied 

powers,  three    proclamations    by  his   Majesty.     One  issued  at 

Lille  for  the  disbanding   of  the  French  army,  and  two  others, 

VOL.  III.  N 


178  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

which  are  as  yet  only  drafted,  and  relate  to  the  organization  of 
a  new  army  ;  it  being  no  less  necessary  for  Europe  than  for 
France  herself,  that  she  should  have  an  army.  The  king  has 
tried,  and  believes  he  has  succeeded,  in  reconciling  this  necessity 
with  the  still  greater  one,  common  to  both  parties,  that  of 
coming  to  some  decision,  without  reverting  to  revolution. 

"  It  is  now  twenty-six  years  since  France,  seeking  guarantees 
against  the  abuses  of  an  uncontrolled  ministerial  power,  exercised 
without  unity  or  supervision,  strayed  from  the  true  path,  and 
lost  herself  in  that  species  of  equality,  the  inevitable  consequence 
of  which,  is  the  dominion  of  the  multitude,  that  is  to  say,  its 
tyranny,  which  is  the  most  frightful  of  all  tyrannies,  and  for 
that  very  reason  the  least  durable.  This  tyranny  gave  place,  as 
it  always  has  and  always  will  do,  to  the  despotism  of  a  single 
individual,  who,  by  temperament  and  clever  calculation,  carried 
the  revolution  into  another  channel,  by  altering  its  motive  power, 
and  transporting  it  from  the  interior  to  the  exterior,  and  sub- 
tituting  the  spirit  of  conquest  for  the  spirit  of  equality. 

"  The  late  events  have  proved,  how  greatly  both  these  had 
been  weakened,  since  the  usurper,  who  had  summoned  both  to  his 
aid,  did  not  obtain  sufficient  support  from  either,  to  counteract 
the  effect  of  a  first  and  single  reverse. 

"  But  as  the  chances  of  revolution  can  never  cease,  unless  they 
are  both  entirely  extinguished,  or  so  controlled,  that  they  never 
can  again  become  dominant,  all  the  thoughts  of  the  king  during 
his  retreat  into  Belgium  were  concentrated  on  the  best  means 
of  obtaining  this  result,  and  every  act  of  his,  since  his  return, 
has  been  in  furtherance  of  this  end. 

"  The  doctrine  of  complete  equality  may,  no  doubt,  still  have 
its  apostles  and  partizans  among  those  speculative  minds,  who  set 
up  theories  for  an  imaginary  world,  and  among  a  certain  number 
of  men,  to  whom  this  doctrine  alone  gave  a  temporary  power, 
which  they  then  abused,  and  which  they  now  regret.  But  the 
masses  themselves  have  long  been  undeceived  by  the  cruel  ex- 
periences they  have  undergone.  This  doctrine  will  never  make 
proselytes,  and  its  spirit  will  never  be  formidable,  so  long  as  every 
man's  civil  rights  are  secured  against  all  arbitrary  measures, 
by  a  political  constitution,  which  excludes  from  power  all  those 
who  are  not  in  the  position,  in  which  the  sense  of  preservation, 
is  not  stronger  than  the  necessity  and  desire  of  acquisition. 

"  Such  is  the  character  of  the  political  system  by  which  France 
will  be  governed. 

"  The  Chamber  of  Peers  will  be  hereditary.  The  Chamber 
of  Deputies  will  be  formed  on  the  only  principle  which  can 
bring    it    into   harmony   with  the   two    other   branches  of  the 


THE  SECOND  RESTORATION.  179 

legislature,  a  principle  which  it  will  be  our  endeavour  to  re- 
establish and  to  enforce  in  all  civil  institutions.  It  will  share 
with  the  king,  the  right  of  framing  the  laws,  a  right  which 
previously  he  had  reserved  to  himself. 

"  The  manner  in  which  the  laws  will  be  framed,  gives  the 
strongest  possible  assurance  of  their  impartial  equity,  since  it 
will  be  the  expression,  not  of  the  will  of  a  single  person,  or  a 
single  body,  but  of  a  will  arising  from  the  concurrence  of  three 
distinct  wills. 

"  A  ministry  is  already  constituted,  each  of  whose  members 
have  their  own  special  province,  which  has  been  decided  on  after 
joint  discussion.  It  has  therefore  all  the  active  force  which 
unity  gives,  and  it  is  also  responsible,  which  is  a  preservative 
against  the  abberations  of  power. 

"  The  judges  will  be  irremovable,  which  assures  the  indepen- 
dence of  the  courts. 

"  In  criminal  matters  the  trial  by  jury,  now  existing,  will  be 
maintained.     Confiscation  is  in  all  cases  and  for  ever  abolished. 

"  Finally  the  restrictions  laid  on  the  freedom  of  the  press  have 
already  been  removed. 

"This  institution,  by  placing  the  state,  equi-distant  between 
absolute  power  and  anarchy,  will  not  afford  either  means  or 
pretexts  to  the  latter,  wherewith  to  assert  its  power. 

"  This  same  institution  will  no  less  happily  repress  the  spirit 
for  conquest,  which  has  arisen  under  circumstances,  and  sup- 
ported by  causes,  which  will  never  occur  again. 

"  There  will  no  longer  be  a  revolutionary  dynasty  in  France, 
interested  in  the  overthrow  of  legitimate  sovereigns,  in  order  to 
set  up  others  in  its  own  likeness. 

"  There  will  no  longer  be  a  tyrannical  dynasty  in  France, 
which  requires  to  withdraw  the  attention  of  the  people  from 
the  evils  it  permits,  by  soothing  them  with  the  delusions  of  a 
glory  purchased  with  their  noblest  blood. 

"  Buonaparte  is  in  the  power  of  the  allies,  and  has  ceased  for 
ever  to  be  formidable. 

"  The  instigators  and  principal  supporters  of  his  late  crimes, 
have  been  handed  over  to  justice.  The  principal  instruments  of 
his  despotism,  the  most  ardent  of  his  admirers,  have  either  gone 
from  France,  or  left  the  capital,  and  been  deprived  of  all  public 
functions. 

"  The  spirit  of  conquest  was  not  that  of  France  ;  for  her  it  has 
been  nothing  but  a  cruel  calamity.  It  only  reigned  in  the  army, 
for  it  requires  success  to  sustain  it,  and  it  perishes  under  reverses. 
The  preceding  campaigns  had  gradually  weakened  it,  nor  does  it 
seem  possible  that  it  should  survive  this  last  one.     Those  who 

N    2 


i So  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

are  still  infected  by  it,  cannot  conceal  from  themselves,  that  they 
will  no  longer,  as  heretofore,  find  Europe  divided,  and  that  against 
united  Europe  they  can  hope  for  nothing  ;  no  man  persists  in 
hoping  where  there  is  no  hope.  The  spirit  of  conquest  was  further 
maintained  by  the  almost  unlimited  duration  of  military  service, 
which  caused  the  soldier  at  last  to  recognise  no  other  home  and 
no  other  country,  than  the  army.  This  cause  will  be  removed 
by  the  present  scheme  of  organization,  which  by  frequently 
restoring  the  soldiers  to  the  habits  and  affections  of  civil  and 
domestic  life,  will  no  longer  dispose  them  to  encourage  interests 
and  feelings  opposed  to  those  of  their  country. 

"  The  king  believes  that  this  conjunction  of  facts,  dispositions, 
and  measures,  will  give  to  France,  to  Europe,  and  himself,  all 
the  guarantees  of  security  that  can  b?  desired. 

"  The  king's  ministry  are  of  the  same  opinion.  They  therefore 
request  their  Excellencies,  the  ministers  and  secretaries  of  state 
of  the  allied  Powers,  to  be  good  enough  to  inform  them,  whether 
they  share  this  opinion,  or  if  in  their  judgment  anything  else 
ought  to  be  added  to  these  dispositions,  and  in  that  case  what 
they  believe  to  be  desirable  to  be  so  added. 

"  The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  has  the  honour  to.  .  .  ." 

Paris,  July  25th,  1815. 
Under  the  given  circumstances,  and  with  honourable  allies, 
the  observations  contained  in  the  following  memorandum  could 
have  admitted  of  no  reply,  but  I  had  already  discovered  that  it 
was  not  with  such  allies,  that  I  had  to  deal.  I  refer  to  the 
occasion  of  the  spoliation  of  our  art  galleries,  which  gave  rise 
to  an  interchange  of  Notes,  which  I  omitted  to  mention  when 
speaking  of  this  matter  before.  I  will  here  make  good  this 
omission,  so  as  to  complete  the  documents  connected  with  the 
negotiations  of  this  sad  period.  I  shall  begin  with  the  first  Note 
on  this  subject,  addressed  to  me  by  Lord  Castlereagh,  nth  of 
September,  181 5. 

Translation  of  a  Memorandum  from  Lord  Castlereagh 
to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand. 

"  Representations  having  been  made  to  the  ministers  of  the 
allied  Powers,  by  the  pope,  the  Grand  Duke  of  Tuscany,  the  King 
of  the  Netherlands,  and  other  sovereigns,  reclaiming  (through 
the  intervention  of  the  high  allied  Powers,)  the  restoration  of  the 
statues,  pictures,  manuscripts,  and  other  works  of  art,  of  which 


THE  SECOND  RESTORATION.  181 

their  respective  countries  have  been  systematically  and  persist- 
ently despoiled  by  the  late  revolutionary  government  of  France, 
contrary  to  every  principle  of  justice,  and  the  established  and 
accepted  rules  of  war,  and  these  representations  having  been 
submitted  to  the  consideration  of  his  Court,  the  undersigned  has 
received  instructions  from  the  Prince  Regent,  to  call  the  attention 
of  his  allies,  to  the  following  remarks  on  this  engrossing  topic. 

"  It  is  now  for  the  second  time,  that  the  European  Powers  have 
been  compelled  to  invade  France,  in  defence  of  their  own  liberty 
and  to  insure  the  tranquillity  of  the  world,  and  their  armies  have 
by  conquest,  twice  taken  possession  of  the  capital  of  the  country, 
in  which  the  art  treasures  and  the  spoils  of  the  greater  part  of 
Europe  have  been  accumulated. 

"  Twice  also  has  the  legitimate  ruler  of  France  been  enabled, 
under  the  protection  of  these  armies,  to  re-occupy  his  throne, 
and  to  obtain  from  the  signal  indulgence  of  the  allies,  a  peace 
for  his  people,  which  their  conduct  to  their  own  sovereigns  and 
to  other  states,  gave  them  as  a  nation  no  right  to  expect. 
That  the  purest  feelings  of  regard  for  Louis  XVIII.,  deference 
for  his  ancient  and  illustrious  name,  and  respect  for  his  mis- 
fortunes, invariably  guided  the  councils  of  the  allies,  has 
been  amply  proved  by  the  care  they  took  last  year,  to  lay 
down,  as  the  express  basis  of  the  treaty  of  Paris,  the  preserva- 
tion of  the  complete  integrity  of  France,  (and  more  especially 
after  having  lately  seen  their  hopes  so  cruelly  deceived,)  by  the 
efforts  they  are  still  making  to  definitely  combine  the  actual 
integrity  of  France,  with  an  equivalent  measure  of  temporary 
precautions,  which  may  satisfy  what  they  owe  to  the  security  of 
their  own  subjects. 

"  But  it  would  be  the  height  of  weakness  (and  the  effect  of  it 
would  be  far  more  likely  to  mislead  the  French  people  than  to 
bring  them  back  to  moral  sentiments  and  peaceable  views),  if 
the  allied  sovereigns,  from  whom  the  world  expected  protection 
and  repose,  were  to  refuse  a  just  and  generous  application  of  this 
principle  of  integrity  to  other  nations  who  are  their  allies  (and 
above  all  to  those  who  are  weak  and  defenceless),  when  they  are 
on  the  point  of  granting  it  a  second  time,  to  a  nation  against 
which  they  have  so  long  fought. 

"  By  what  right  can  France  at  the  termination  of  such  a  war, 
expect  to  retain  the  same  extent  of  territory  as  before  the 
Revolution,  and  at  the  same  time  wish  to  keep  the  chefs  d'azuvres 
robbed  from  every  other  country  ?  Can  there  be  a  doubt  as 
to  the  issue  of  such  a  controversy,  or  of  the  power  of  the  allies  to 
carry  out  what  justice  and  policy  demands  ?  If  not,  then  by 
what  right  is  France  deprived  of  its  late  territorial  acquisitions, 


1 82  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

and  at  the  same  time  left  in  possession  of  the  spoils  of  those  very 
territories,  which  all  modern  conquerors  have  invariably  respected, 
as  inseparable  from  the  country  to  which  they  belong  ? 

"  The  allied  sovereigns  have  perhaps  to  justify  themselves 
before  Europe,  as  to  their  conduct  in  this  matter,  when  they 
were  at  Paris  last  year.  It  is  true  they  never  made  them- 
selves accomplices  of  the  criminality,  involved  in  such  wholesale 
robberies,  so  far  as  to  sanction  them  by  any  stipulation  in  their 
treaties :  such  an  acknowledgment  they  always  steadily  re- 
fused, but  it  is  certain  that  they  used  their  influence  to  repress 
the  expression  of  these  reclamations,  in  the  hope  that  France, 
subdued  as  much  by  their  generosity  as  by  their  arms,  would  be 
disposed  to  maintain  inviolable  a  peace,  which  had  been  carefully 
established,  in  order  to  serve  as  a  bond  of  reconciliation  between 
the  nation  and  the  king. 

"  But  now  the  question  is  a  very  different  one,  and  to  act  in 
the  same  manner  under  circumstances  so  essentially  altered, 
would,  in  the  opinion  of  the  Prince  Regent,  be  as  imprudent  for 
France,  as  it  would  be  unjust  towards  the  allies,  who  have  a 
direct  interest  in  the  question. 

"  His  Royal  Highness  however,  in  giving  this  opinion,  feels 
that  it  is  necessary  to  protect  himself  against  the  possibility  of 
misinterpretation.  While  deciding  that  it  is  the  duty  of  the 
allied  sovereigns,  not  only  not  to  hinder,  but  even  to  facilitate  the 
restoration  of  these  art  treasures  to  the  places  whence  they  have 
been  taken,  he  deems  it  no  less  suitable  to  their  good  feeling, 
not  to  permit  the  position  of  their  armies  in  France,  or  the 
removal  of  these  objects  from  the  Louvre,  to  be  the  direct  or 
indirect  means,  of  taking  back  to  their  own  dominions,  a  single 
article,  which  at  the  time  of  their  conquest,  did  not  belong  to 
their  respective  family  collections,  or  to  the  countries  over 
which  they  at  present  reign. 

"  Whatever  value  the  Prince  Regent  might  attach  to  such 
perfect  specimens  of  the  fine  arts,  if  they  had  been  otherwise  ac- 
quired, he  has  no  wish  to  become  possessed  of  them  at  the  expense 
of  France,  and  above  all,  by  following  a  principle  in  warfare, 
which  he  holds  to  be  a  reproach  to  the  country  which  adopts  it. 
And  so  far  from  desiring  to  profit  by  the  opportunity,  to  acquire 
from  the  lawful  owners,  any  object  which  they  might  have 
resolved  to  give  up  for  pecuniary  considerations,  his  Royal 
Highness  wishes  on  the  contrary  to  give  them  the  means  of 
replacing  them,  in  those  temples  and  art  galleries,  of  which  they 
have  so  long  been  the  ornaments. 

"  If  it  were  possible  that  the  sentiments  of  his  Royal  Highness 
for  the  person  and  the  cause  of  Louis  XVIII.  could  be  doubted, 


THE  SECOND  RESTORATION.  183 

or  that  the  position  of  his  Most  Christian  Majesty,  with  respect 
to  his  own  people  could  suffer  from  it,  the  Prince  Regent  could 
not  but  arrive  at  this  decision  with  the  greatest  possible  re- 
pugnance. 

"  But  on  the  contrary,  his  Royal  Highness  is  firmly  convinced 
that  the  affection  and  respect  of  his  Most  Christian  Majesty's 
subjects,  for  his  person,  will  increase  in  proportion,  as  he 
separates  himself  from  these  memories  of  a  system  of  Revolu- 
tionary warfare. 

"  These  spoils  which  are  an  obstacle  to  the  moral  reconciliation 
of  France  with  the  countries  which  she  has  invaded,  are  not 
necessary  to  recall  the  exploits  of  her  armies,  which  despite  the 
cause  in  which  they  were  achieved,  must  always  make  the  arms 
of  the  nation  respected  by  others.  But  so  long  as  these  objects 
remain  in  Paris,  constituting  as  it  were  the  title-deeds  of  the 
countries  which  have  been  surrendered,  the  desire  to  re-unite 
them  to  France  will  never  become  extinct  and  the  spirit  of  the 
French  people,  will  never  be  able  to  accustom  itself  to  the 
diminished  territorial  extent  assigned  to  the  nation  reigned  over 
by  the  Bourbons. 

"  In  giving  this  opinion,  the  Prince  Regent  has  no  intention  of 
humiliating  the  French  nation.  The  general  policy  of  his  Royal 
Highness,  the  conduct  of  his  troops  in  France,  his  anxiety 
immediately  after  Buonaparte's  surrender,  to  restore  to  France 
the  freedom  of  her  commerce,  and  above  all,  the  desire  he  has 
recently  testified,  to  definitely  preserve  to  France  with  some 
slight  modifications,  her  territorial  integrity,  are  the  best  proofs 
that  no  ungenerous  feeling  towards  her,  but  a  wish  to  do  justice 
to  others,  and  the  desire  to  heal  the  wounds  inflicted  by  the 
Revolution,  have  been  the  sole  motives  of  this  decision. 

"  The  whole  question  reduces  itself  to  this  :  Are  the  powers  of 
Europe  now  arranging  a  true  and  lasting  agreement  with  the 
king,  and  if  so,  on  what  principles  shall  it  be  concluded  ?  Shall 
it  be  on  the  retention  or  the  abandonment  of  the  spoils  of  the 
Revolution  ?  Can  the  king  suppose  that  he  increases  his  own 
dignity,  by  surrounding  himself  with  monuments  of  art,  which 
only  serve  to  recall  the  sufferings  of  his  own  illustrious  house, 
no  less  than  those  of  the  other  nations  of  Europe  ? 

"  If  the  French  wish  to  retrace  their  steps,  can  they  reason- 
ably desire  to  retain  this  source  of  animosity  between  them- 
selves and  other  nations  ?  and  if  they  do  not,  is  it  politic  to 
flatter  their  vanity  and  to  keep  alive  those  hopes,  which  the 
contemplation  of  these  trophies  must  arouse  ? 

"  Can  even  the  army  itself  reasonably  desire  it  ?  The  recol- 
lection of  its  campaigns  can  never  perish ;  they  are  recorded  in 


1 84  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

the  military  annals  of  Europe,  they  are  engraved  on  the  public 
monuments  of  its  own  country.  What  need  therefore  to  as- 
sociate with  the  glory  acquired  on  the  field  of  battle,  a  system 
of  pillage,  contrary  to  the  present  laws  of  warfare,  and  by  which 
the  chief  who  led  them  to  battle,  has  in  reality  tarnished  the 
lustre  of  his  arms  ? 

"If  we  really  wish  to  return  to  peace  and  the  old  maxims,  it 
cannot  be  prudent  to  retain  so  many  vestiges  of  past  abuses,  and 
the  king  cannot  wish,  when  escaping  from  the  shipwreck  of  the 
Revolution,  of  which  his  family  have  been  the  principal  victims, 
to  perpetuate  in  his  house  this  odious  monopoly  of  the  fine  arts. 

"  The  rich  collections  which  France  possessed  before  the 
Revolution,  augmented  by  the  Borghese  collection  (one  of  the 
finest  in  the  world)  which  has  been  since  purchased,  will  give 
the  king  ample  means  to  suitably  beautify  the  capital  of  his 
kingdom,  and  the  king  can  safely  give  up  these  valuable 
objects  derived  from  an  impure  source,  without  prejudicing  the 
culture  of  art  in  France. 

"In  applying  a  remedy  to  this  dangerous  evil,  it  does  not 
seem  possible  to  adopt  a  middle  course,  that  would  not  tend 
to  recognize  various  spoliations  made  under  the  form  of 
treaties,  and  the  character  of  which  is,  if  possible,  still  more 
startling,  than  the  acts  of  open  plunder,  by  which  these  relics 
have  in  general  been  collected. 

"  The  principle  of  property,  regulated  by  the  reclamations  of 
the  countries  whence  these  works  of  art  have  been  taken,  is  the 
surest  and  the  only  guide,  which  justice  must  follow  ;  and  there 
is  nothing  perhaps,  which  can  at  present  contribute  further  to 
establish  public  feeling  in  Europe,  than  such  homage  offered 
by  the  king  to  the  principle  of  virtue,  of  conciliation,  and  of 
peace. 

"  CASTLEREAGH." 

To  this  note  I  answered  : 

"  The  king's  minister  has  received  the  note,  which  his  Excel- 
lency Lord  Castlereagh  has  done  him  the  honour  to  write, 
respecting  the  art  treasures  which  belong  to  France.  His 
Majesty,  to  whom  the  note  has  been  submitted,  has  ordered  him 
to  return  the  following  reply. 

"  The  protestations  made  by  his  Excellency,  were  not 
required  to  convince  the  king  of  the  disinterestedness  shown 
by  the  Prince  Regent,  in  the  demand  which  he  has  thought 
it  his  duty  to  direct  his  minister  to  address  to  the  French 
government.  His  Majesty  has  even  pleasure  in  recognizing, 
in  the  reasons  which  have   dictated    this   step,   those    feelings 


THE  SECOND  RESTORATION.  185 

of  goodwill  which  his  Royal  Highness  has  always  shown  to- 
wards the  king.  But  the  arguments  on  which  these  reasons 
are  founded,  seem  to  him  to  be  based  only  on  inaccurate  sup- 
positions, or  on  mistakes  ;  in  fact  his  Excellency  seems  pleased 
to  imagine,  that  the  wars  of  1814  and  of  1815,  are  both  of 
the  same  nature,  and  that  the  second,  ought  to  be  terminated 
by  a  treaty  of  peace,  as  was  the  first.  But  these  two  wars  are 
of  a  perfectly  different  nature  ;  the  first  was  really  a  war  with 
the  French  nation,  because  it  was  a  war  with  a  man,  who  was 
recognised  as  its  head  by  all  Europe,  in  whose  name  everything 
was  administered,  to  whom  all  were  subject,  who,  in  a  word, 
disposed  of  all  the  resources  of  France,  and  who  disposed  of 
them  legitimately.  The  war  being  made  against  the  nation,  a 
treaty  of  peace  was  necessary  ;  in  181 5  on  the  contrary,  this 
same  man,  against  whom  Europe  has  made  war,  was  not  re- 
cognized by  any  Power  as  ruler  of  France.  If  he  partly  used 
the  same  instruments,  he  did  not  use  them  lawfully,  and  sub- 
mission was  far  from  being  complete.  It  was  against  him  alone, 
and  the  factions  which  recalled  him,  and  not  against  the  nation 
that  Europe,  as  her  own  declaration  showed,  has  made  war. 
The  war  therefore  was  brought  to  a  close,  and  peace  was 
restored,  by  the  sole  fact  of  the  overthrow  of  the  usurper,  the 
dispersion  of  his  adherents,  and  the  punishment  of  their  leaders. 
It  is  therefore  not  easy  to  see  how  the  war  of  18 15,  could  be  a 
valid  ground  for  changing  the  state  of  affairs  established  by  the 
peace  of  18 14. 

"  His  Excellency  Viscount  Castlereagh,  has  furthermore  laid 
it  down  as  a  fact,  that  objects  of  art  cannot  be  acquired  by 
conquest.*  The  king's  ministry  are  very  far  from  wishing  to 
apologise  for  any  kind  of  conquest.  Would  to  God  that  the 
name  or  the  thing  had  never  existed !  But  since  after  all,  this 
form  of  acquisition  by  nations,  is  sanctioned  by  the  usages  of  all 
people  and  all  times,  the  king's  minister  does  not  hesitate  to 
express  his  conviction,  that  the  conquest  of  inanimate  objects, 
the  sole  use  of  which  is  to  produce  physical  or  intellectual 
enjoyment,  is  far  less  objectionable,  than  that  by  which  people 
are  separated  from  the  society  to  which  they  belong,  are  sub- 
jected to  new  laws  and  customs  which  are  not  their  own,  united 
to  people  whom  their  natural  dispositions  make  uncongenial  to 
them,  and  lose  even  the  surname  which  they  have  always  borne. 

"  As  regards  the  art  treasures,  which  have  from  time  to  time 
been  brought  into  France,  a  distinction  should  have  been  made, 
which  appears  not  to  have  been  done.  Among  the  countries 
which  France  gave  up  in  18 14,  many  belonged  quite  legitimately, 
to  her,  or  to  her  former  ruler,  because  they  had  been  ceded  to 


1 86  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

her.  She  had  the  right  therefore  to  dispose  of  the  art  treasures 
which  were  there.  When  she  gave  up  these  countries,  she  re- 
stored them  just  as  they  were  at  the  time  of  their  restitution,  and 
it  is  difficult  to  see  by  what  right  their  present  possessors  could 
now  claim  articles,  which  were  not  included  in  the  surrender 
that  France  then  made. 

"  Lastly,  other  art  treasures  also  belong  to  France,  by  a 
title  no  less  legitimate.  They  belong  to  her  in  virtue  of  the 
cessions  made  under  solemn  treaties. 

"  As  to  the  moral  considerations  dwelt  upon  in  the  note  of 
his  Excellency  Viscount  Castlereagh,  his  Excellency  has  every 
reason  to  believe  that  the  king  would  be  glad  to  be  able  to  yield 
to  them,  and  that  he  would  hasten  to  restore  all  that  has  been 
carried  away  and  brought  to  France  during  the  course  of  the 
Revolution,  were  he  free  to  follow  only  his  own  inclination  ;  but 
his  Excellency  is  mistaken  in  supposing,  that  the  king  is  now 
in  a  position  to  do  so,  any  more  than  he  was  in  1814,  and  the 
ministry  has  no  hesitation  in  affirming,  that  if,  which  they  do 
not  doubt,  any  cession  of  the  ancient  territory  (supposing  the 
king  were  to  consent  to  it)  would  be  imputed  to  him  as  a  crime, 
cessions  of  the  works  of  art  would  be  no  less  so,  as  giving 
a  severer  blow  to  the  national  self-esteem. 

"Prince  de  Talleyrand,  president  of  the  ministerial  council  has 
the  honour  to  be  ...  . 

"  Paris,  Sept.  19th,  18 15." 

It  was  the  Duke  of  Wellington,  as  I  have  already  said,  who 
undertook  to  reply  to  this  note.  He  did  so  with  the  roughness, 
I  might  even  say,  with  the  brutality  of  a  soldier.  This  was  his 
reply : — 

"  That  at  the  time  of  the  conferences  for  the  capitulation  of 
Paris,  the  French  negotiators  had  wished  to  have  an  article  in- 
serted, with  reference  to  the  art  galleries  and  the  preservation  of 
the  works  of  art.  That  Prince  Bliicher  had  opposed  this,  seeing 
that  there  were  pictures  in  the  museums  which  had  been  taken 
from  the  King  of  Prussia,and  which  Louis  XVIII.  had  promised  to 
restore."  The  Duke  of  Wellington  added,  "  that  being  as  it  were, 
the  representative  of  the  other  nations  of  Europe,  at  the  time 
of  the  capitulation,  it  was  his  duty  to  reclaim,  all  that  had  been 
taken  from  the  Prussians  ;  that  though  he  had  no  instructions 
relative  to  the  art  galleries,  nor  any  official  knowledge  of  the 
opinions  of  the  sovereigns  on  this  point,  he  must  nevertheless 
presume,  that  they  would  strongly  insist  on  the  fulfilment  of  the 


THE  SECOND  RESTORATION.  187 

promises  of  the  King  of  France,  in  accordance  with  the  obliga- 
tions they  were  all  under,  to  cause  the  restoration  to  their 
dominions,  of  those  pictures  and  statues  which  had  been  removed 
from  them,  contrary  to  the  regular  usages  of  war,  during  the 
terrible  period  of  the  French  Revolution.  The  sovereigns  could 
not  be  unjust  to  their  subjects,  in  order  to  satisfy  the  pride  of 
the  army  and  of  the  French  nation,  who  must  be  made  to  feel,  that 
notwithstanding  some  partial  and  temporary  advantages,  over 
several  European  States,  the  hour  for  restitution  had  arrived, 
and  the  allied  sovereigns  could  not  permit  such  an  occasion  to 
pass,  for  giving  the  French  a  great  moral  lesson." 

What  could  be  done  in  the  face  of  such  language,  supported 
by  force  ?  An  armed  resistance,  with  the  help  of  the  national 
guard  of  Paris,  would  only  result  in  a  useless  struggle  and 
certain  defeat,  solely  calculated  to  justify  the  vengeance  of  our 
infuriated  enemies,  and  to  irritate  those,  who,  like  the  Duke  of 
Wellington  himself,  desired  to  show  themselves  more  kindly  dis- 
posed towards  us  in  the  general  negotiations.  We  were  forced 
therefore  to  bow  our  heads  beneath  this  act  of  violence,  more 
damaging  to  those  who  committed  it,  than  to  those  who  had  to 
submit  to  it,  and  on  this  point  history  will  be  in  accord  with  the 
general  sentiment  of  France,  and,  I  dare  venture  to  say,  of  Europe. 

A  passage  in  the  Duke  of  Wellington's  answer,  reveals  one 
of  the  most  serious  difficulties  with  which  the  French  negotiators 
had  to  contend,  and  which  it  will  be  best  to  describe  here. 
It  will  have  been  seen,  that  the  Duke  of  Wellington  resented  my 
demand  in  favour  of  our  art  galleries,  on  the  plea,  that  the 
assent  to  this  demand  had  already  been  refused  on  the  capitula- 
tion of  Paris  ;  this  capitulation,  agreed  to  by  the  Chamber  of 
Deputies  of  the  Hundred  Days,  after  they  had  in  vain  asked  for 
an  armistice  from  the  Duke  of  Wellington  and  Marshal  Bliicher, 
preferring  to  treat  with  strangers,  rather  than  with  the  legitimate 
King  of  France.  The  Chamber  of  Representatives  had  even 
done  worse.  A  deputation  chosen  by  themselves,  had  gone  to 
the  foreign  sovereigns  at  Hagenau,  and  there,  carried  away  by 
hatred  to  the  house  of  Bourbon,  had  all  but  consented  to  a 
cession  of  territory,  if  Louis  XVIII.  had  not  been  re-established 
on  the  throne  !  And  it  was  these  people,  who  called  themselves 
staunch  patriots,  who  dared  to  suggest  such  proposals  ! 


1 88  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

If  they  were  not  accepted,  they  left  a  no  less  deplorable 
impression,  which  I  found  fatally  adverse  all  through  the 
negotiations.  When  I  rejected  the  first  overtures  made  to  me 
by  the  allied  plenipotentiaries,  as  to  cession  of  territory,  declar- 
ing that  the  whole  of  France  would  oppose  such  cession  in  the 
strongest  manner,  I  was  informed  that  the  interviews  at  Hage- 
nau  showed  quite  a  different  spirit,  since  it  was  the  party  which 
claimed  to  be  most  devoted  to  the  interests  of  France,  which 
had  itself  brought  forward  this  cession  of  territory. 

While  the  so-called  patriotic  party  had  thus  weakened  our 
means  of  resistance,  against  the  demands  of  the  allies,  the 
emigre  party,  who  had  secret  relations  with  the  foreign 
diplomats,  all  declared  that  the  concessions  claimed  by  the 
allies  ought  to  be  admitted,  since  the  restoration  of  the  house 
of  Bourbon  was  entirely  due  to  them. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  four  Powers,  notwithstanding  all  our 
efforts,  were  unanimous  in  imposing  the  severest  conditions  on 
us.  The  Emperor  Alexander,  terribly  annoyed  that  he  was  not, 
as  in  1 8 14,  the  principal  author  of  the  second  restoration,  did 
not  forgive  me,  either  for  having  while  in  Vienna,  defended  the 
cause  of  the  people  and  of  legitimate  governments,  nor  for  having 
brought  about  the  treaty  of  the  3rd  of  January,  181 5.  The 
Prussians,  more  violent  than  ever  in  their  hatred  and  vengeance, 
hotly  demanded  the  dismemberment  of  several  French  pro- 
vinces. M.  de  Metternich,  who  at  first  seemed  inclined  to  keep 
to  his  engagements,  and  side  with  the  more  moderate  views  of 
England,  ended  by  dreading  lest  this  moderation  should  prejudice 
him  with  Germany,  and  espoused  the  intense  feelings  of  hatred 
of  Prussia.  England  therefore  alone  remained,  represented  by 
the  Duke  of  Wellington  ;  and  from  her  sense  of  fairness,  some 
help  might  be  hoped  for.  But  even  in  this  direction  the  Russian, 
Austrian,  and  Prussian  Plenipotentiaries,  had  found  a  mode  of 
action  detrimental  to  us.  They  had  persuaded  the  English  that 
the  new  kingdom  of  the  Netherlands,  their  own  creation,  would 
require  to  be  fortified  against  France,  whom  it  would  be  ne- 
cessary to  deprive  of  several  of  her  frontier  fortresses,  and  thus 
weaken  her,  by  giving  to  the  Netherlands,  what  would  con- 
solidate that  kingdom. 


THE  SECOND  RESTORATION.  189 

What  contributed  still  further  to  embarrass  and  compromise 
the  situation  of  the  French  negotiators,  was  the  fact,  that 
mysteries  were  made  about  everything  with  them  ;  they  were 
not  admitted  to  the  conferences  where  the  allied  plenipoten- 
tiaries mutually  discussed  their  projects,  and  it  was  only  by 
hints  and  insinuations,  that  the  views  which  were  guiding  them, 
could  be  guessed  at. 

In  this  manner  the  whole  of  August  and  part  of  September 
were  spent,  when  at  last,  in  the  middle  of  the  latter  month,  I 
received  the  following  note  from  the  plenipotentiaries  of  the  four 
Powers,  which  they  presented  to  me,  as  a  sort  of  ultimatum  of 
the  guarantees  they  demanded  from  France  : — 


Number  I. 

"  The  following  document  which  is  here  tendered,  is  the  result 
of  the  obligations  due  to  their  people  by  the  allied  sovereigns, 
and  of  their  desire  to  reconcile  these  obligations  to  the 
sentiments  which  they  have  pledged  to  H.M.  the  King  of 
France. 

"  It  is  in  this  form  that  they  present  their  united  views,  which 
they  have  agreed  to  hold  with  regard  to  France." 


Number  II. — Bases  of  the  final  Arrangement  proposed  to  France 

"  1st.  The  confirmation  of  the  treaty  of  Paris  in  all  those 
particulars,  which  shall  not  be  modified  by  the  new  treaty. 

"  2nd.  Rectification  of  the  frontiers  as  established  by  the 
treaty  of  Paris.  By  this  article,  nearly  two-thirds  of  the  territory 
that  the  treaty  of  Paris  had  added  to  that  of  ancient  France, 
will  be  separated  from  her. 

"  The  King  of  the  Netherlands  will  receive  back  the  greater 
number  of  the  districts  which  formerly  belonged  to  Belgium 
and  the  King  of  Sardinia  will  again  come  into  possession  of  the 
whole  of  Savoy.  There  will  also  be  several  changes  in  the 
direction  of  Germany.  The  towns  of  Conde,  Philippeville, 
Marienburg,  Givet,  Charlemont,  Sarrelouis,  and  Landau  are 
comprised  in  the  cessions  demanded  of  France. 

"  3rd.  The  destruction  of  the  fortifications  of  Hiiningen, 
with  the  understanding  that  they  are  never  to  be  rebuilt. 


igo  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

"  4th.  A  contribution  of  six  hundred  millions,  as  indemnity  for 
the  expenses  of  the  war. 

"  5th.  The  further  contribution  of  a  sum  of  two  hundred 
millions,  to  cover  in  part  the  expenditure,  devoted  to  the  con- 
struction of  new  fortified  places  in  the  countries  adjacent  to  France. 

"  6th.  The  occupation  for  seven  years  of  a  military  line  on  the 
northern  and  eastern  frontiers,  by  an  army  of  one  hundred  and 
fifty  thousand  men,  under  the  command  of  a  general,  to  be 
nominated  by  the  allies,  and  which  army  will  be  kept  up  at  the 
expense  of  France." 


Number  III. — Project  of  the  Treaty. 

"  The  allied  powers  having  by  their  united  efforts,  and  the 
success  of  their  armies,  delivered  the  French  nation  from  the 
calamities  with  which  it  was  being  threatened,  by  the  last  attempt 
of  Napoleon  Bonaparte,  and  having  preserved  Europe  from  the 
upheavals  which  menaced  her,  in  consequence  of  the  revolu- 
tionary system  which  had  been  reproduced  in  France,  in  order 
to  ensure  the  success  of  that  attempt ; 

"  And  now  sharing  with  His  Most  Christain  Majesty, 
the  wish  to  offer  to  Europe,  by  the  inviolable  maintenance 
of  the  Royal  authority,  and  by  putting  into  force  the  constitu- 
tional charter,  the  most  reassuring  guarantees  for  the  sta- 
bility of  the  order  of  things  happily  re-established  in  France, 
and  to  consolidate  the  friendly  relations  and  great  harmony,  which 
the  treaty  of  Paris  had  restored  between  France  and  the  neigh- 
bouring countries,  and  to  remove  everything  that  might  alter  or 
compromise  these  friendly  relations  ; 

"  Their  Imperial  and  Royal  Majesties  have  promised  to  His 
Majesty  the  King  of  France  and  Navarre,  the  bases  of  an 
arrangement,  which  would  insure  to  them,  full  indemnities  for 
the  past,  as  well  as  solid  guarantees  for  the  future,  these  being  the 
only  conditions  by  which  it  would  be  possible  to  arrive  at  a 
prompt  and  durable  pacification ;  and  His  Most  Christian 
Majesty  having  acceded  to  the  said  propositions,  it  was  agreed  to 
insert   them  in  a  definite  treaty. 

"  To  this  effect,  the  high  contracting  parties  have  named.  .  .  . 

"  Who,  after  exchanging  their  full  powers,  which  were 
produced  in  good  and  due  form,  have  signed  the  following 
articles  : — 

"Article  No.  I. — The  treaty  of  the  30th  May,  18 14,  is  con- 
firmed, and  will  be  carried  out  in  those  particulars  which  will  be 
found  not  to  be  modified  by  the  present  treaty. 


THE  SECOND  RESTORATION.  191 

"Article  No.  II. — The  high  contracting  parties  having 
learnt  by  experience,  the  drawbacks  which  are  attached  in 
several  particulars  both  military  and  administrative,  to  the 
designation  of  the  limits  of  French  territory,  that  had  been 
established  by  Article  No.  II  of  the  treaty  of  the  30th  May, 
1814,  and  desiring  in  this  particular,  to  adopt  a  system  for  the 
future,  which  would  be  equally  favourable  to  the  maintenance 
of  general  tranquillity,  and  the  welfare  of  their  subjects,  have 
definitely  fixed  the  line  of  demarcation,  between  the  said  ter- 
ritory and  the  neighbouring  states,  in  the  following  manner. 

"  On  the  North,  this  line  will  follow  the  demarcation  fixed 
by  the  treaty  of  Paris,  as  far  as  the  point  where  the  Schelde 
enters  the  department  of  Jemmapes,  and  from  this  river,  as 
far  as  the  frontier  of  the  canton  of  Conde,  which  will  remain  out- 
side the  French  frontier.  From  Ouievrain,  the  demarcation  will  be 
traced  along  the  ancient  frontier  of  Belgium  and  of  the  former 
bishopric  of  Liege,  as  far  as  Villers  near  Orval,  leaving  the 
territory  of  Philippeville  and  Marienburg,  which  are  both  enclosed 
therein,  and  the  canton    of  Givet,  outside  the  limits  of  France. 

"  From  Villers  to  Bourg,  to  the  right  of  the  road  leading 
from  Thionville  to  Treves,  the  demarcation  will  remain  as  it 
has  been  fixed  by  the  treaty  of  Paris.  From  Bourg  it  will 
follow  a  line  which  will  be  drawn  over  Lannsdorf,  Waltwich, 
Schardorf,  Niederlingen,  Palweiler,  as  far  as  Houvre,  leaving  all 
these  places  and  their  appurtenances  in  the  hands  of  France. 
From  Houvre,  the  frontier  will  follow  the  ancient  limits  of  the 
district  of  Saarbruck,  leaving  Sarrelouis  and  the  course  of  the 
Sarre,  with  the  places  situated  on  the  right  of  the  above-named 
line  and  their  appurtenances  in  the  hands  of  Germany.  From 
the  limits  of  the  district  of  Saarbruck,  the  demarcation  will 
follow  that  which  actually  separates  the  department  of  the 
Moselle,  and  that  of  the  lower  Rhine  from  Germany,  as  far  as 
the  Lauter,  which  will  serve  as  a  frontier  up  to  its  confluence 
with  the  Rhine,  in  order  that  Landau,  enclosed  in  the  projection 
formed  by  the  Lauter,  shall  remain  German,  whereas  Lauter- 
bourg  and  Weissembourg,  both  situated  on  this  river,  shall 
remain  in  the  hands  of  France.  On  the  east  the  demarcation 
shall  remain  as  it  was  established  by  the  treaty  of  Paris,  from 
the  mouth  of  the  Lauter  as  far  as  Saint-Brais,  in  the  depart- 
ment of  the  Upper  Rhine.  This  demarcation  will  then 
follow  the  Doubs  as  far  as  fort  Joux,  in  order  that  the  town 
of  Pontarlier,  situated  to  the  right  of  the  Doubs,  and  the  land 
adjacent  may  belong  to  France,  and  the  fort  of  Joux,  situated  to 
the  left  of  the  same  river,  to  the  Helvetian  confederation. 
From  the  fort  of  Joux  the  boundary  line  will  follow  the  crests  of 


192  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

the  Jura  as  far  as  the  Rhone,  leaving  the  fort  of  the  Ecluse 
beyond  the  French  frontier. 

"  From  the  Rhone,  as  far  as  the  sea-coast,  the  line  of  de- 
marcation will  be  made  by  that  of  the  frontiers,  which  in  1790 
separated  F ranee  from  Savoy  and  the  country  of  Nice. 

"  France  shall  resign  any  claim  to  keep  a  garrison  in  the 
principality  of  Monaco. 

"  The  neutrality  of  Switzerland  shall  be  extended  as  far  as 
the  territory,  north  of  a  line  traced  from  Ugine — including 
this  town — to  the  south  of  the  lake  of  Annecy,  past  Taverge,  as 
far  as  Lecheraine,  and  from  thence  to  the  lake  of  Bourget  to 
the  Rhone,  in  the  same  way  that  it  has  been  extended  to  the 
provinces  of  Chablais  and  Francigny  by  article  92  of  the  final 
act  of  the  Congress  of  Vienna. 

"Article  III. — The  fortifications  of  Hiiningen  being  an 
element  of  perpetual  disquietude  to  the  town  of  Basle,  the  high 
contracting  parties,  wishing  to  give  a  further  proof  of  their  good- 
will and  solicitude  to  the  Helvetian  confederation,  have  agreed 
to  abolish  the  fortifications  of  Hiiningen,  and  for  the  same 
reasons,  the  French  government  pledges  itself  never  to  replace 
them,  nor  to  replace  them  by  any  other  fortifications  within 
a  distance  of  three  hours  from  the  town  of  Basle. 

"  Article  IV. — The  responsibilities  of  the  allied  sovereigns 
towards  the  people  they  govern,  having  compelled  them  to 
demand  a  compensation  for  the  pecuniary  sacrifices,  which  the 
late  general  armament  had  imposed  on  countries,  already 
heavily  drained  by  this  long  succession  of  wars,  carried  on 
against  the  revolutionary  powers  of  France,  and  His  Most 
Christian  Majesty  not  being  able  to  refuse  to  admit  the 
principle  on  which  this  claim  is  founded,  the  sum  of  six 
hundred  millions  of  francs  will  be  furnished  by  France,  by 
way  of  indemnity.  The  manner  and  the  terms  of  this  payment, 
to  be  regulated  by  a  special  convention,  which  will  have  the 
same  force  and  weight,  as  if  it  had  been  actually  inserted  in  the 
present  treaty. 

"  Article  V. — Considering,  furthermore,  that,  in  the  course  of 
the  wars  brought  about  by  the  events  of  the  Revolution,  all 
the  countries  adjacent  to  France,  notably  the  Netherlands, 
Germany,  and  Piedmont,  have  successively  witnessed  the 
demolition  of  those  fortified  places  which  formed  their 
barriers,  and  that  the  security  of  these  countries  and  the  future 
peace  of  Europe  render  it  equally  desirable,  that  an  equilibrium, 
essentially  favourable  to  the  maintenance  of  general  peace, 
should  be  established  between  them,  for  their  mutual  means  of 
defence,  the  allied  Powers  believed  they  could  not  better  attain 


THE  SECOND  RESTORATION.  193 

this  object,  than  by  proposing  to  France  to  take  upon  herself,  a 
part  of  the  expenses  connected  with  the  construction  of  a 
certain  number  of  fortified  places  on  the  frontiers  opposed  to  her 
own,  and  to  facilitate  and  complete  this  measure,  by  giving  up 
in  favour  of  the  allies  all  claim  to  some  of  those  places  situated 
on  the  most  advanced  points  of  the  line  of  fortifications  ;  and 
His  Most  Christian  Majesty,  fully  sensible  of  the  advantages 
that  France,  after  such  long  and  continued  agitations,  will 
reap,  by  the  consolidation  of  a  general  peace,  and  ready,  in 
order  to  obtain  so  great  a  benefit,  to  submit  to  any  sacrifice 
which  does  not  compromise  the  substantial  integrity  of  his 
kingdom,  having  acceded  to  the  propositions  of  the  Powers,  it  is 
agreed,  that,  independently  of  the  pecuniary  indemnity  stipu- 
lated for  in  the  preceding  article,  the  French  government  shall 
furnish  the  allies,  with  a  sum  of  two  hundred  millions,  to  cover 
in  part  the  expenses  resulting  from  the  re-establishment  of 
their  defensive  system,  and  shall  cede  the  fortified  towns  of 
Conde,  Givet,  Charlemont  and  Saarlouis,  with  sufficient  radius 
of  territory,  as  has  been  designated  in  Article  II. 

"Article  VI. — The  state  of  disquiet  and  ferment,  which 
France  must  experience  after  so  many  violent  upheavals,  and 
more  especially  after  the  last  catastrophe,  the  duration  of  which, 
in  spite  of  the  paternal  intentions  of  her  king  and  the  advan- 
tages secured  by  the  constitutional  Charter  it  is  difficult  to 
determine,  demanding,  for  the  security  of  the  neighbouring 
states,  precautionary  measures  and  temporary  guarantees,  it  has 
been  judged  indispensable,  to  occupy  provisionally,  by  a  body 
of  troops,  certain  military  positions  along  the  French  frontier, 
with  the  express  understanding,  that  this  occupation  shall 
cause  no  prejudice  to  the  sovereignity  of  His  Most  Christian 
Majesty,  nor  to  the  state  of  possession,  such  as  is  recognized  and 
drawn  up  in  this  present  treaty. 

"  The  number  of  these  troops  shall  never  exceed  one  hun- 
dred and  fifty  thousand  men.  The  commander-in-chief  of  this 
army  shall  be  nominated  by  the  allied  powers. 

"This  army  corps  shall  occupy  the  towns  of  Valenciennes, 
Bouchain,  Cambrai,  Maubeuge.  Landrecies,  le  Ouesnay,  Avesnes, 
Rocroi,  Longwy,  Thionville,  Bitche,  and  the  entrance  of  the 
bridge  of  fort  Louis. 

"  The  town  of  Strasbourg  shall  be  evacuated  by  the  troops 
of  the  line,  and  committed  to  the  civic  guards,  the  citadel 
remaining  occupied  by  the  allies. 

"  Or  it  will  be  entirely  evacuated,  disarmed,  and  entrusted 
to  the  local  guards. 

"  The  line  which  will   separate  the   allied  and  the  French 

VOL.  III.  O 


194  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

armies,  shall  be  specially  indicated.  The  towns  comprised  in 
this  line,  and  unoccupied  by  the  allied  troops,  shall  be  entrusted 
to  the  civic  guard. 

"  The  maintenance  of  the  army  destined  for  this  purpose, 
falling  on  France,  a  special  convention  will  also  regulate  the 
relations  of  the  army  of  occupation,  with  the  civil  and  military 
authorities  of  the  country. 

"The  duration  of  this  military  occupation  will  be  limited  to 
seven  years.  It  will  come  to  an  end  before  the  expiration  of 
this  time,  if,  at  the  end  of  three  years,  the  assembled  allied 
sovereigns,  taking  into  consideration  the  state  of  France,  agree, 
that  the  grounds  which  necessitated  this  measure,  have  ceased 
to  exist.  But  at  the  expiration  of  seven  years,  all  the  towns 
and  positions  occupied  by  the  allied  troops  shall  without 
further  delay  be  evacuated  and  restored  to  His  Majesty  Louis 
XVIII.,  or  to  his  heirs  and  successors. 

"Paris,  September  1815/' 

(Here  follow  the  signatures.) 

I  was  filled  with  the  profoundest  indignation  on  the  receipt 
of  this  communication,  which  was  more  insolent  in  its  form, 
than  in  the  actual  demands  it  contained. 

There  was  only  one  opinion  in  the  council  as  to  the  reply 
that  I  proposed  to  make  to  it,  and  the  king  fully  shared  this 
opinion.  I  therefore  addressed  the  following  note  to  the  allied 
plenipotentiaries,  regretting  deeply  that  I  was  unable  to  express 
in  it  the  indignation  that  I  felt ;  the  circumstances  however  de- 
manded a  painful  reticence  and  prudence  : — 


Note  of  the  French   Plenipotentiaries  in  reply  to 
the  Propositions  made  by  the  Allies.1 

"The  undersigned  plenipotentiaries  of  His  Most  Christian 
Majesty,  have  immediately  brought  to  his  knowledge  the  com- 
munications made  to  them  in  yesterday's  conference,  by  their 
excellencies,  the  plenipotentiaries  of  the  four  Powers  assembled 
regarding  the  definite  arrangement,  for  the  basis  of  which  their 
excellencies  have  proposed  : 

"  1.  The  cession  by  His  Most  Christian  Majesty,  of  an 
amount  of  territory  equal  to  two-thirds  of  that  which  had  been 
added  to  ancient  France  by  the  treaty  of  the  30th  May,  and 

1  The  reply  is  dated  21st  September. 


THE  SECOND  RESTORATION.  195 

whichwouldcompri.se  the  towns  of  Conde,  Philippevillc,  Marien- 
bourg,  Givet,  Charlcmont,  Saarlouis,  Landau,  and  the  forts  of 
Joux  and  of  the  Eclusc. 

"  2.     The  destruction  of  the  fortifications  of  Hiiningcn. 

"  3.  The  payment  of  two  sums,  one  of  six  hundred  millions, 
as  an  indemnity,  the  other  of  two  hundred  millions,  wherewith  to 
construct  fortified  places  in  the  countries  adjacent  to  France. 

"4.  The  occupation  for  the  space  of  seven  years,  of  the 
fortresses  of  Valenciennes,  Bouchain,  Cambrai,  Maubeuge,  Lan- 
drecies,  le  Quesnay,  Avesnes,  Rocroi,  Longwy,  Thionville,  Bitche, 
and  the  head  of  the  bridge  of  fort  Louis,  as  well  as  a  line, 
following  the  northern  and  eastern  frontiers,  by  an  army  of  one 
hundred  and  fifty  thousand  men,  under  the  command  of  a 
general  to  be  nominated  by  the  allies,  and  subsidised  by 
France. 

"  His  Majesty  being  extremely  anxious,  to"  hasten  as  far  as  in 
him  lies,  the  conclusion  of  an  arrangement,  the  delay  of  which 
has  caused  such  innumerable  evils  to  his  people — which  he 
daily  deplores — and  has  prolonged,  and  continues  to  prolong,  the 
internal  agitation  in  France,  which  have  excited  the  solicitude  of 
the  great  Powers  :  and,  being  still  further  animated  by  the 
desire  to  communicate  his  friendly  dispositions  to  the  sov- 
ereigns his  allies,  has  desired  that  the  undersigned  should  com- 
municate to  their  excellencies  the  plenipotentiaries  of  the  four 
courts,  without  loss  of  time,  the  principles  on  which  he  believes 
that  the  negotiation  relating  to  each  of  the  proposed  bases, 
should  be  carried  on,  and  by  ordering  them  to  submit  the 
following  observations  on  the  first-named  basis,  which  concerns 
the  territorial  cessions,  in  which  this  important  subject  is 
viewed  under  the  twofold  aspect  of  justice  and  of  utility, 
which  it  would  be  dangerous  to  separate  from  it. 

The  absence  of  any  common  arbitrator,  possessing  authority 
and  power  to  put  an  end  to  the  dissensions  of  the  sovereigns, 
would  leave  no  other  course  open  to  them,  when  they  can  no 
longer  adjust  these  differences  amicably,  than  to  resort  to 
arms,  which  would  thus  constitute  a  mutual  state  of  war. 

If  therefore  under  such  circumstances,  the  possessions  of  one 
party  were  occupied  by  the  adversaries'  troops,  these  possessions 
would  be  in  occupation  ;  and  by  right  of  conquest  the  full 
enjoyment  and  possession  of  the  same,  would  be  acquired  by  the 
occupants,  during  the  entire  period  of  occupation,  or  until  peace 
be  re-established 

Justice  demands  that,  as  a  condition  of  this  rc-cstablishment 
of  peace,  the  territory  thus  occupied,  should  be  ceded  to  the 
occupier  in    whole  or  in  part,  and  that  as  soon  as  the  cession 

O  2 


196  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

has  taken  place — the  character  of  the  tenure  being  changed 
from  temporary  to  actual  possession, — the  occupier  should  be- 
come its  sovereign.  This  way  of  acquiring  territory  is  authorized 
by  international  law. 

But  the  state  of  war,  conquest,  and  the  right  to  demand 
territorial  cessions,  are  facts  which  precede  and  depend  on  each 
other,  so  that  the  first  named  is  a  necessity  for  the  existence  of 
the  second,  and  the  third  an  absolute  sequence  of  the  second,  as, 
apart  from  a  state  of  war,  no  conquest  can  take  place,  and  where 
there  has  been  or  is  no  longer,  any  conquest,  the  right  to  demand 
cessions  of  territory  could  not  exist,  as  no  nation  can  demand 
to  keep  that  which  it  never  possessed  or  ceases  to  possess. 

No  conquests  can  be  made  excepting  in  a  state  of  war,  and 
as  from  those  who  have  nothing,  nothing  can  be  taken,  conquests 
can  only  be  made  over  those  who  have  possessions  ;  from  which 
it  follows  that  there  must  be  war  between  the  occupiers  and  the 
possessor  or  sovereign  of  a  country,  before  any  conquest  can 
ensue,  the  rights  of  possession  and  the  sovereignty  of  a  state, 
being  inseparable  or  rather  identical. 

If  therefore  war  is  made  in  a  country,  and  against  a  number 
more  or  less  great  of  the  inhabitants  of  that  country,  but  that 
the  antagonism  is  not  extended  to  the  sovereign  thereof,  it  is 
clear  that  war  is  not  made  against  this  state,  this  last  expression 
only  signifying  that  the  domain  is  taken  for  the  possessor.  There- 
fore a  sovereign  is  excluded  from  a  war  which  foreigners  make 
in  his  territories,  as  long  as  they  recognize  him  and  interchange 
ordinary  peaceful  relations  with  him.  War  is  then  made  against 
the  people,  to  whose  rights  their  antagonists  could  not  succeed, 
they  having  no  rights  over  which  any  conquests  could  be  made. 

The  aim  or  effect  of  such  a  war  could  not  be  to  conquer,  but 
only  to  recover :  therefore  those  who  recover  what  does  not 
belong  to  them,  can  only  do  so  with  the  object  of  restoring  it  to 
whomsoever  they  recognize  as  the  legitimate  owner. 

For  a  state  to  believe  itself  to  be  at  war  with  any  other 
country,  without  including  the  sovereign  of  that  country,  who 
had  formerly  been  recognized  as  such,  would  necessitate  one  of 
two  things  :  either  the  sovereignty  must  be  regarded  as  being 
transferred  from  the  sovereign  to  those  who  are  being  fought 
against,  by  the  act  itself  for  which  they  are  being  fought ;  that 
is,  sanctioning  and  recognizing  those  doctrines,  which  have  over- 
thrown so  many  thrones,  and  which  have  been  the  cause  of  the 
general  war  made  against  them  by  the  whole  of  Europe  ;  or  else 
to  believe  that  such  an  anomaly  as  a  double  sovereignty  could 
exist ;  whereas  a  sovereignty  is  essentially  one,  and  can  never 
be  divided.     It  may  exist  in  various  forms  :  either  collective  or 


THE  SECOND  RESTORATION.  197 

individual,  but  never  in  both  forms  in   the  same  country,  which 
cannot  acknowledge  two  sovereigns  at  the  same  time. 

The  allied  powers  did  not  however  take  either  of  these 
two  views. 

They  considered  Bonaparte's  enterprise  as  the  most  heinous 
crime  that  man  could  commit,  the  mere  attempt  of  which  puts 
him  outside  the  pale  of  international  law.  In  his  adherent^ 
they  only  saw  the  accomplices  of  this  crime — accomplices  whom 
it  was  their  duty  to  fight,  quell  and  punish,  which  effectually 
excluded  the  supposition,  that  they  could  possess,  acquire,  con- 
fer, or  transfer  any  rights  whatsoever. 

The  allied  powers  have  never  for  an  instant  ceased  to  recog- 
nize His  Most  Christian  Majesty  as  king  of  France,  nor  conse- 
quently denied  to  him  the  rights  which  appertain  to  him  in  this 
capacity.  They  have  never  ceased  to  be  on  friendly  terms  with 
him,  which  fact  alone  binds  them  to  respect  his  rights.  They 
took  upon  themselves,  formally  as  well  as  implicitly,  to  respect 
these  rights  by  their  declaration  of  the  13th  of  March,  and  in 
the  treaty  of  the  25th.  This  engagement  was  further  circum- 
scribed by  including  the  king,  through  his  accession  to  the 
treaty,  in  their  alliances  against  a  common  enemy.  If  therefore 
no  conquests  can  be  made  over  a  friendly  power,  they  can  still 
less  be  made  over  an  ally.  It  cannot  be  said  that  the  king  could 
only  be  allied  with  the  other  powers,  by  co-operating  with  them 
actively,  and  that  he  failed  to  do  so.  If  the  total  defection  of  the 
army,  which  was  already  known  and  reputed  inevitable  at  the 
time  of  the  treaty  of  25th  March,  prevented  his  making  use  of 
the  regular  forces,  those  Frenchmen,  who  to  the  number  of  sixty 
or  seventy  thousand  took  up  arms  for  him  in  the  Southern  and 
Eastern  departments,  and  those  who  showed  themselves  dis- 
posed to  bear  arms  (forcing  the  usurper  into  the  necessity  of 
dividing  his  forces),  as  well  as  those  who,  in  lieu  of  the  resources 
of  men  and  money,  he  required  after  his  defeat  at  Waterloo,  only 
left  him  the  alternative  of  totally  abandoning  the  enterprise, 
were  very  real  and  useful  auxiliaries  to  the  allies. 

Finally  the  allied  powers,  as  their  forces  gradually  advanced 
into  the  French  provinces,  re-established  the  authority  of  the 
king,  which  measure  would  in  itself  have  annulled  any  con- 
quests in  these  provinces,  even  if  any  such  had  in  reality  been 
made. 

It  is  therefore  evident  that  the  territorial  cessions  demanded 
cannot  be  based  on  any  conquests  made. 

Neither  can  they  be  based  on  the  sums  disbursed  by  the 
allied  powers,  as  if  it  be  just  that  the  sacrifices  they  were  forced  to 
make  for  a  war,  entered  into  for  the  general  good,  though  for  the 


198  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

more  especial  good  of  France,  should  not  be  at  their  expense  ; 
it  would,  on  the  other  hand,  be  equally  fair  that  they  should 
be  satisfied  with  a  compensation  commensurate  with  the 
sacrifices  made.  The  allied  powers  have  not,  however,  sacrificed 
any  territorial  possessions. 

We  live  in  times  in  which,  more  than  in  any  others,  it  is 
important  to  strengthen  confidence  in  the  promises  of  kings. 
The  cessions  required  from  His  Most  Christian  Majesty  would 
produce  quite  the  opposite  effect,  after  the  declaration,  in  which 
the  powers  announced,  that  they  were  only  armed  against 
Bonaparte  and  his  adherents,  and  after  the  treaty  in  which  they 
undertook  to  maintain,  in  their  integrity,  the  stipulations  of  the 
30th  May,  1814,  which  cannot  be  maintained  if  that  of  France 
be  abandoned,  after  the  proclamation  of  their  commanders-in- 
chief,  in  which  the  same  assurances  are  renewed. 

Any  cessions  demanded  of  His  Most  Christian  Majesty 
would  deprive  him  of  the  means  of  extinguishing  completely 
and  for  ever,  the  spirit  of  conquest  amongst  his  people ;  that 
spark,  which  fanned  by  the  usurper  into  a  flame,  would  infallibly 
burst  forth  again,  in  the  desire  to  recover  that  which  the  French 
nation  would  never  believe  it  had  been  justly  deprived  of. 

Any  cessions  exacted  from  His  Most  Christian  Majesty, 
would  be  regarded  as  a  crime  committed  by  him,  as  if  he  had 
thereby  bought  the  succour  afforded  by  the  allied  powers,  and 
would  thus  be  an  obstacle  to  the  strengthening  of  that  royal 
prerogative,  which  is  so  essential  to  legitimate  dynasties,  and  so 
necessary  for  the  peace  of  Europe,  in  as  far  as  this  peace 
depends  on  the  internal  tranquillity  of  France. 

Lastly,  the  cessions  exacted  from  His  Most  Christian 
Majesty,  would  destroy,  or  at  any  rate  alter,  the  equilibrium,  to 
the  establishing  of  which  the  powers  have  devoted  so  much  care 
and  made  so  many  sacrifices  and  efforts.  They  themselves 
were  the  arbitrators  of  the  boundaries  of  France.  How  there- 
fore can  the  measures  they  considered  necessary,  only  a  year 
ago  now,  cease  to  be  so  regarded  ?  On  the  European 
continent,  there  already  exist  two  powers,  surpassing  France  in 
extent  and  population ;  their  relative  greatness  would  neces- 
sarily increase  in  proportion  to  the  actual  decrease  of  the  great- 
ness of  France.  Would  this  be  in  conformity  with  the  interests 
of  Europe  ?  Would  this  eventuality  even  be  in  accordance  with 
the  interests  of  those  two  states,  taking  into  consideration  the 
relations  which  they  occupy  to  each  other  ? 

If  in  a  small  democracy  of  ancient  times,  the  mass  of  the 
people,  learning  that  one  of  their  generals  was  about  to  propose 
a  measure,  which,  though  beneficial,  was  not  in  accordance  with 


THE  SECOND  RESTORATION.  199 

strict  justice,  all  rose  in  a  body  and  declared  unanimously  that 
they  did  not  desire  even  to  know  what  this  measure  was,  can  it 
be  doubted  that  the  monarchs  of  Europe  would  unanimously 
deprecate  a  step,  not  only  unjust  in  itself  but  also  pernicious  ? 

It  is  therefore  with  the  greatest  confidence  that  the  under- 
signed have  the  honour  to  submit  the  preceding  remarks  to  the 
allied  sovereigns. 

His  Majesty,  however,  in  spite  of  the  grave  inconvenience 
attaching  to  all  territorial  cessions,  will  consent  to  the  re-establish- 
ing of  the  former  limits  at  those  points,  where  an  accession  was 
made  to  the  boundaries  of  ancient  France,  by  the  treaty  of  the 
30th  May. 

He  also  consents  to  the  payment  of  an  indemnity,  but  of  such 
a  nature  as  would  leave  him  the  means  to  supply  the  want  of 
the  home  administration  of  the  kingdom,  in  default  of  which  it 
would  be  impossible  to  achieve  the  establishment  of  that  order 
and  tranquillity,  which  were  the  sole  aim  of  the  war. 

He  will  also  consent  to  a  provisional  occupation. 

The  duration  of  this  occupation,  the  number  of  fortresses, 
and  the  extent  of  country  to  be  occupied,  will  be  the  subject  of 
further  negotiations. 

But  the  king  does  not  hesitate  to  at  once  declare,  that  an 
occupation  of  seven  years'  duration,  being  incompatible  with  the 
tranquillity  of  the  kingdom,  is  utterly  inadmissible. 

The  king  therefore  admits  primarily,  the  cession  of  any  terri- 
tory which  did  not  form  part  of  ancient  France ;  the  payment  of 
an  indemnity  ;  a  provisional  occupation  by  a  number  of  troops, 
and  for  a  certain  period,  to  be  determined  later  on. 

His  Most  Christian  Majesty  is  impressed  with  the  belief,  that 
the  allied  sovereigns  will  consent  to  establish  negotiations  on  these 
three  fundamental  principles,  and  that  they  will  introduce  into  the 
negotiations  that  spirit  of  justice  and  moderation,  by  which  they 
are  actuated,  in  order  that  the  arrangements  may  be  promptly 
concluded,  to  their  mutual  satisfaction. 

If  these  principles  be  not  adopted,  the  undersigned  are  not 
authorized  either  to  entertain  or  to  propose  any  others. 

(Signed)  Prince  de  Talleyrand. 
The  Due  de  Dalberg. 
Baron  Louis." 

I  am  still  firmly  convinced,  that  by  clinging  with  energy  and 
decision  to  the  principles  and  ideas  developed  in  this  Note,  we 
should  have  triumphed  over  the  demands  of  the  plenipotentiaries 
of  some  of  the  allies,  and  that  we  should  have  maintained  our 


200  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

position,  conceding  only  (i),  an  insignificant  cession  of  territory 
under  pretext  of  a  rectification  of  the  frontier ;  (2),  a  contribution 
of  at  most  three  or  four  millions  of  francs  ;  (3),  a  temporary 
occupation  by  foreign  troops  of  a  few  fortresses,  in  order  to 
give  time  to  reorganize  the  army.  But  those  foreign  cabinets 
which  were  animated  by  the  greatest  spirit  of  revenge  and 
rapacity,  and  who  besides,  were  informed  of  the  network  of  in- 
trigues by  which  the  king's  weakness  was  surrounded,  insisted 
on  the  pretentions  formulated  in  the  Note  of  the  15th  September, 
and  replied  to  the  Note  of  the  20th  by  the  following  : — 


Reply  of  the  Ministers  of  the  Allies. 

22  September,  181 5. 

"  The  undersigned  plenipotentiaries  of  the  four  allied  courts, 
have  received  the  Note  in  which  the  plenipotentiaries  of  France 
have  replied  to  the  communications  which  had  been  made  to 
them  in  the  conference  of  the  20th  of  this  month,  relating  to  a 
definite  settlement  of  affairs.  They  have  been  surprised  to 
find  in  this  draft,  a  long  series  of  remarks  on  the  right  of 
conquest,  on  the  nature  of  the  wars  to  which  it  may  be  applied, 
and  on  the  grounds  which  should  have  prevented  the  Powers 
from  resorting  to  it  in  the  present  instance. 

"  The  undersigned  believe  themselves  to  be  all  the  more 
exempt  from  prosecuting  this  argument  with  the  French  pleni- 
potentiaries, that  none  of  the  propositions  that  they  made,  by 
order  of  their  august  sovereigns,  to  adjust  the  present  and 
future  position  of  France  with  Europe,  were  based  on  right  of 
conquest,  and  that  they  studiously  avoided  anything  in  their 
communications  which  could  lead  to  a  discussion  on  this  right. 

"  The  allied  courts,  always  taking  into  consideration  the 
re-establishment  of  order  and  the  consolidation  of  the  royal 
authority  in  France  as  the  principal  object  of  the  steps  they 
had  taken,  but  being  also  convinced  that  France  could  never 
enjoy  a  permanent  peace,  if  the  neighbouring  countries  con- 
tinued to  nourish  either  feelings  of  bitterness  or  continual 
alarm  towards  her,  consider  that  the  principle  of  due  com- 
pensation for  the  losses  and  sacrifices  incurred  in  the  past, 
as  well  as  that  of  a  sufficient  guarantee  for  the  future  safety  of 
the  neighbouring  countries,  is  the  only  proper  means  of  putting 
an  end  to  all  discontent  and  fear :  and  that  this  consequently  is 


THE  SECOND  RESTORATION.  201 

the  sole  and  true  basis  of  any  permanent  or  durable  arrange- 
ment. It  was  on  these  two  principles  only,  that  the  allied 
courts  based  their  propositions,  and  the  drawing  up  of  the 
project  itself,  which  the  undersigned  had  the  honour  to  hand  to 
the  French  plenipotentiaries,  stated  the  same  most  distinctly  in 
each  article. 

"The  French  plenipotentiaries  themselves,  whilst  maintaining 
complete  silence  with  regard  to  the  second  of  these  principles, 
recognize  the  justice  of  the  first. 

"  It  is  however  evident,  that  the  necessity  of  guarantees  for 
the  future,  has  become  more  perceptible  and  more  urgent  than  it 
was  at  the  time  of  the  signing  of  the  treaty  of  Paris.  Recent 
events  have  struck  terror  and  alarm  throughout  the  whole  of 
Europe.  At  a  time  when  sovereigns  imagined  they  were  about 
to  enjoy  a  long  interval  of  peace  after  numerous  troubles,  these 
events  have  provoked  agitation,  changes,  and  sacrifices  in  all 
quarters,  such  as  are  inseparable  from  a  general  upheaval. 

"  It  is  impossible  immediately  to  efface,  from  the  minds  of 
contemporaries,  the  recollection  of  such  an  upheaval.  What 
might  therefore  have  satisfied  them  in  18 14,  would  entirely  fail 
to  do  so  in  18 15.  The  line  of  demarcation  which  sufficed  to 
reassure  the  states  contiguous  to  France  at  the  period  of  the 
treaty  of  the  30th  May,  can  no  longer  answer  to  the  just  claims 
they  now  make.  France  is  now  bound  to  offer  them  some 
further  pledge  of  security.  This  she  should  determine  to  do  as 
much  from  a  feeling  of  justice  and  expediency,  as  with  a  view  to 
her  own  personal  interests  ;  and  in  order  to  compass  the  happi- 
ness and  tranquillity  of  the  French  nation,  it  is  imperatively 
necessary  that  their  neighbours  should  be  in  the  same  state. 

"  These  are  the  powerful  motives  which  have  actuated  the 
allied  courts,  when  making  their  demands  of  territorial  con- 
cessions from  France.  The  inconsiderable  extent  of  these 
cessions,  the  choice  of  the  positions  on  which  they  bear,  suffi- 
ciently prove  that  they  are  not  in  keeping  with  any  views  of 
aggrandizement  or  conquest,  and  that  the  safety  of  the  adjoining 
states  was  their  sole  and  single  aim  in  making  these  demands. 
These  cessions  are  not  of  a  nature  to  attack  the  substantial 
integrity  of  France  ;  they  only  embrace  detached  portions  of 
land  and  very  advanced  points  of  her  territory  ;  they  could  not 
weaken  her  materially  in  either  her  administrative  or  military 
position  ;  her  system  of  defence  would  not  be  affected  by  them  ; 
France  will  remain  none  the  less  a  state  which  is  one  of  the  best 
defined,  best  fortified  in  Europe,  and  the  richest  in  resources 
of  all  kinds,  to  enable  her  to  resist  any  danger  from  invasion. 

"Without  entering  into  these  major  considerations,  the  pleni- 


202  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

potentiaries  of  France,  however,  admit  the  principle  of  con- 
cessions relating  to  those  points  which  the  treaty  of  Paris  had 
added  to  the  limits  of  ancient  France.  The  undersigned  have 
some  difficulty  in  comprehending  on  what  this  distinction  could 
be  founded,  and  in  what  the  essential  difference  between  the 
former  and  present  territory  would  consist  from  the  point  of 
view  of  the  allied  powers.  It  is  impossible  to  suppose  that  the 
French  plenipotentiaries  would  wish  to  insinuate  in  these 
present  transactions,  the  doctrine  of  the  pretended  inviolability  of 
the  French  territory.  They  are  only  too  well  aware  that  this 
doctrine  was  brought  forward  by  the  chiefs  and  apostles  of  the 
revolutionary  system,  and  formed  one  of  the  most  revolting 
chapters  of  the  arbitrary  code  they  wished  to  impose  upon 
Europe.  To  assert  the  principle  that  France  is  able  to  extend 
her  dimensions,  acquire  provinces,  unite  them  to  her  territory 
by  conquests  or  treaties,  whilst  she  alone  enjoys  the  privilege 
of  never  losing  any  of  her  ancient  possessions,  either  through 
the  misfortunes  of  war,  or  by  those  political  arbitrations  which 
would  ensue  therefrom,  would  completely  destroy  all  notion  of 
equality  or  reciprocity  between  the  great  powers. 

"  With  regard  to  the  last  portion  of  the  Note  of  the  French 
plenipotentiaries,  the  undersigned  reserve  to  themselves  a 
complete  explanation,  until  they  meet  at  a  conference  they 
have  the  honour  to  propose  to  the  French  plenipotentiaries. 

"  (This  last  paragraph  related  to  the  duration  of  the  stay  of 
the  foreign  troops  in  French  territory.)" 

(Here  follow  the  signatures.) 

When  I  took  this  Note  to  Louis  the  XVIIIth,  I  found  him 
much  alarmed  as  to  the  results  it  might  have.  The  emigrant 
faction,  who  above  all  dreaded  being  abandoned  to  their  own 
resources,  had  so  convinced  the  king,  that  to  irritate  the  allies  by 
any  peremptory  refusals,  would  compromise  both  himself  and 
the  kingdom  of  France,  that  his  courage  at  last  gave  way. 
He  informed  me  that  negotiations  must  still  be  continued,  that 
various  temperaments  must  be  gauged,  and  that  although  only 
at  the  last  extremity  must  the  present  position  be  abandoned, 
yet  when  that  point  was  reached,  full  concessions  must  be  made. 
But  to  treat  with  a  demand  for  cessions  was  virtually  to  admit 
that  they  were  legitimate  ;  it  meant  reducing  the  dispute  merely 
as  to  the  amount  to  be  considered  ;  in  short,  rendering  us 
powerless  to  do  anything  but  concede. 


THE  SECOND  RESTORATION.  203 

For  my  part  I  felt  convinced  that  this  measure  would  stultify 
all  my  former  proceedings  at  Vienna,  and  would  cancel  all  the 
precautions  I  had  taken,  lest  at  any  time  the  alliance  then 
formed  against  Bonaparte,  should  be  turned  against  ourselves. 
I  was  therefore  immovably  determined  never,  under  any  plea 
whatsoever,  to  recognize  a  right  which  the  allies  could  not 
possibly  have,  nor  to  affix  my  signature  to  any  act  treating  of 
the  concession  of  any  portion  of  territory.  The  other  ministers 
were  of  the  same  mind.  The  king,  however,  placed  between 
the  allies  who  were  reiterating  their  demands,  the  courtiers  who 
feigned  an  anxiety  for  the  safety  of  his  person  which  they  did 
not  really  feel,  and  a  minister  whose  views  were  immovable, 
and  who  did  not  fear  to  oppose  himself  to  the  princes  of  the 
council,  found  himself  in  so  hopeless  and  cruel  a  dilemma,  that 
I  felt  obliged  to  relieve  him,  by  tendering  him  my  resignation, 
the  other  ministers  also  offering  to  retire  from  office.1 

I  would  not  listen  to  the  entreaties  of  M.  de  Metternich, 
Lord  Castlereagh,  and  his  brother  Lord  Stewart,  who  all  three 
came  to  beg  me  not  to  separate  myself  from  them.  Lord 
Castlereagh  went  so  far  as  to  say,  "  Why  will  you  not  become 
minister  of  Europe  with  us  ? "  "  Because,"  I  replied,  "  I  wish 
only  to  be  minister  of  France,  and  this  you  will  see  by  the 
manner  in  which  I  have  replied  to  your  Note." 

My  resignation  was  irrevocably  tendered.  The  king 
accepted  it  with  the  air  of  a  man  greatly  relieved.  My  re- 
tirement was  also  a  relief  to  the  Emperor  of  Russia,  who  did 
me  the  honour  to  hate  in  me,  not,  as  he  said,  the  friend  of  the 
English  (he  knew  well  enough,  that  if  I  had  made  auxiliaries 
of  the  English  against  him,  when  he  had  flattered  himself  that 
he  would  carry  the  frontier  of  his  empire  as  far  as  the  banks  of 
the  Oder,  I  was  on  that  account  no  more  their  friend  than  the 
interest  of  Europe  in  general  and  those  of  France  in  particular 
demanded)  but  the  man,  who  having  seen  him  in  close  proximity 
in  many  different  situations,  in  good  and  in  bad  fortune,  knew 
exactly  how  far  to  count  on  the  generosity  of  his  character,  on 
his  former  liberalism,  and  on  his  recent  devotion  ;  he  required 
a  dupe,  and  this  I  could  not  be.     But  what  pleased  him  most 

1  24th  September. 


204  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

was,  that  the  man  who  succeeded  me  in  the  double  functions  ol 
President  of  the  Council  and  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  was  a 
Russian  Lieutenant-General,  formerly  governor  of  Odessa,  the 
Due  de  Richlieu,  an  undoubtedly  good  man,  but  a  novice  in 
diplomacy,  and  somewhat  credulous.  Fully  persuaded,  that 
among  the  images  of  the  divinity  on  earth,  there  was  none 
nobler  than  the  Emperor  Alexander,  he  thought  he  could  not 
do  better,  when  assuming  charge  of  the  affairs  of  France,  than 
secure  the  abilities  and  support  of  this  monarch. 

I  retired  from  office  without  very  great  regret ;  truth  to 
say,  the  honour  of  governing  France  ought  to  be  the  aim  of  the 
noblest  ambition,  but  circumstances  at  that  time  were  such, 
that  the  gratification  of  this  ambition  would  have  been  too 
dearly  purchased  by  me. 

Independent  of  the  sacrifices  demanded  by  our  allies  (now 
become  our  enemies),  I  should  have  had  to  encounter  difficulties 
which  affected  me  personally,  and  which  would  have  made  the 
exercise  of  power  almost  impossible  for  me.    Louis  XVIII.,  even 
whilst  granting  the  Charter,  only  admitted  with  regret  the  con- 
sequences in  what  related  to  the  independence  of  his  ministers, 
and  bore  with  scarcely  concealed  dislike,  the  burden  of  gratitude 
be    felt    he   owed  to    me.     His   courtiers,    encouraged    by    the 
success   of  the  elections  which  had  resulted  in  a  Chamber  of 
deputies  eager  for  reaction,  would  have  constantly  endeavoured 
to  undermine  the  cabinet  over  which  I  presided.     The  Chamber, 
itself,  supported  by  the  secret  opposition  of  the  king,  would  not 
have  failed  to  exhibit  even  more  animosity  and  violence,  than 
it  did  in  the  presence  of  a  ministry  which  had  chosen  modera- 
tion for  its  badge.     I  had   sufficiently  appreciated  the  value  of 
the  inflammatory  battles  of  the  tribune  during  1789  and  1 791,  to 
know  that  in  France  they  can  but   end  in  disorder,  if  there  is 
not  sufficient  authority  to  confine  them  to  the  simple  and  calm 
discussions  of  the  affairs  of  the  kingdom.     My  age  too,  and   the 
fatigue  I  had  undergone  through  past  events,  would  have  pre- 
scribed the  retirement  for  which  I  yearned.     I  can  therefore  say 
that  it  was  without  regret  that  I  withdrew  from  public  affairs, 
fully  determined  never  again  to  take  their  leadership. 

It  will  only  be  by  my  votes,  that  I  can  in  future  serve  my 


THE  SECOND  RESTORATION.  205 

country  and  the  government  I  have  desired  for  her,  because  I 
believe  it  to  be  the  one  best  adapted  to  her  happiness  and  her 
actual  needs.  If  our  new  institutions  are  really  understood 
and  sincerely  carried  into  effect,  I  have  the  firm  hope  that 
France  will  again  very  speedily  take  the  place  which  she  ought 
to  occupy  in  Europe,  both  for  her  own  glory  and  the  interests 
of  civilization  and  the  world. 

I  here  finish  these  recollections  which  must  close  the  end  of 
my  political  career.  In  writing  these  last  lines  I  am  happy  in 
being  able  to  bear  witness  to  myself,  that  if  I  have  committed 
faults,  and  errors  during  this  perhaps  too  protracted  career,  they 
have  only  been  to  my  personal  disadvantage,  and  that,  animated 
by  the  most  profound  love  for  France,  I  have  always  served  her 
conscientiously,  seeking  for  her  that  which  I  honestly  believed 
would  benefit  her  most.  Posterity,  rather  than  contemporaries, 
will  judge  more  liberally  and  more  independently  of  those,  who, 
placed  like  myself  on  the  great  stage  of  the  world,  during  one 
of  the  most  extraordinary  epochs  of  history,  have  by  this  fact 
the  right  to  be  judged  with  greater  impartiality  and  greater 
equity. 

VALENCAY,  August,   1 8 16. 


ADDENDUM.1 

Paris,  January,  1824. 

I  FIND  myself  obliged  to  add  a  few  words  to  these  recollec- 
tions, while  at  the  same  time  regretting  the  necessity  of  having 
to  recall  so  painful  and  sad  an  event,  which  I  did  not  even  wish 
to  touch  upon  in  the  preceding  pages. 

I  have  always  disdained  to  reply  to  the  libellous  and  wicked 
accusations,  which  in  times  like  those  I  lived  in,  could  not  fail 
to  reach  the  persons  who  devoted  themselves  to  any  great 
public  work.  But  there  is  a  limit  to  this  disdain,  and  when 
bloody  questions  are  raised,  such  silence  (at  least  as  regards 
posterity)  is  no  longer  possible.  The  wickedness  and  the 
crimes  of  my  accusers,  shamelessly  exposed  by  their  own 
recitals,  would  possibly  in  ordinary  cases  be  a  sufficient 
refutation  of  their  accusations.  But  in  this  actual  affair,  the 
nature  of  the  facts,  their  historical  importance,  the  fraction  of 
truth  in  the  recitals  themselves,  the  high  position  of  the  persons 
concerned,  the  honour  of  my  name  and  family — all  force  me  to 
throw  off  the  stigma  of  blood,  that  cupidity  and  passionate 
hatred  would  fain  cast  upon  me. 

I  have  been  accused  by  M.  Savary,  Due  de  Rovigo,  of  being 
the  instigator,  and  consequently  the  author,  of  the  horrible  out- 
rage (of  which  he  confessed  himself  to  have  been  the  instrument) 
perpetrated  twenty  years  ago  upon  the  Due  d'Enghien.  M.  le 
Marquis  de  Maubreuil2  on  the  other  hand,  declares  that  in  18 14 

1  This  addendum  was  written  in  1825,  to  answer  the  accusations  of  the  Due  de 
Rovigo.  The  duke  had  published  in  1823,  an  extract  from  his  memoirs  relative  to- 
the  Due  d'Enghien,  in  which  he  formally  accuses  M.  de  Talleyrand  of  having  pro- 
posed and  advised  the  arrest  and  execution  of  this  prince.  M.  de  Talleyrand  herein 
defends  himself. 

J  Marie-Armand  Guerri  de  Maubreuil,  Marquis  d'Orsvault  (1 782-1855),  belonged 
to  an  ancient  Breton  family.  At  the  Revolution  he  followed  his  family  abroad,  and 
returning  to  France  in  1797,  served  in  the  ranks  of  the  Vendeans.  Later  on  he 
entered  the  army,  and  became  equerry  to  King  Jerome.  Falling  into  disgrace,  he 
led  from  that  time  a  most  exciting  existence,  and  launched  into  numerous  specula- 
tions.     In  1814  he  became  mixed  up  in  the  singular  adventures  related  in  this  ad- 


ADDENDUM.  207 

I  attempted  to  bribe  him,  to  assassinate  the  Emperor  Napoleon 
while  in  the  island  of  Elba.  Madness  has  strange  aberrations 
sometimes  !  That  is  all  I  have  to  say  about  this  last  accusation, 
which  is  so  absurd  and  so  senseless,  that  it  could  only  have 
been  invented  by  a  fool  or  a  madman.  But  M.  Savary  is 
neither  the  one  nor  the  other,  and  I  wish  therefore  to  reply  to 
him  first. 

All  M.  Savary's  accusations,  it  is  true,  are  lost  sight  of  in 
those  he  has  made  against  himself.  Never  did  a  man  cognisant 
of  a  crime,  more  imprudently  and  shamelessly  unmask  himself. 
Is  it  necessary  to  follow  him  into  the  abyss  into  which  he  has 
voluntarily  thrown  himself,  in  order  to  answer  vain  and  false 
accusations  ?  These  allegations  are  however  connected  with 
publications  which  come  from  a  different  source.  Documents 
have  come  or  are  said  to  have  come  from  St.  Helena,  and  have 
been  published  with  the  sole  object  of  re-establishing  a  great 
reputation,  defiled  by  the  studied  and  impassioned  calumnies, 
of  all  the  most  celebrated  contemporaries.  I  therefore  feel 
honoured,  in  seeing  my  name  continually  associated  with  those 
of  all  the  princes  and  ministers  of  the  day.  I  cannot  but  con- 
gratulate myself  that  so  large  a  share  should  have  been  reserved 
for  me,  in  the  expressions  of  anger,  the  chief  motive  of  which 
was  to  satisfy  implacable  and  jealous  hatreds,  and  to  punish 
France  for  her  past  glory,  her  recent  misfortunes,  and  her  hopes 
of  the  future.  Nothing  that  has  been  found  in  these  crude  col- 
lections of  idle  discourses,  vain  boastings,  pedantic  dissertations 
and  libellous  calumnies,  could  be  brought  forward  as  a  proof 
against  any  one. 

In  these  writings,  the  same  as  in  M.  Savary's  pamphlet,  two 
letters  of  mine  have  been  mentioned  ;  they  have  not  however 
been  correctly  reported.  I  will  now  give  them  word  for  word 
as  they  ought  to  be  in  the  archives,  and  I  assume  all  the 
responsibility  of  them  to  this  day.  These  letters  however  do 
not  represent  the  painful  part  of  the  duty  I  had  then  to  per- 
form ;  I  have  nothing  to  hide  about  this  shocking  catastrophe, 
for  the  share  I  had  in  it  has  been  made  public,  and  if  it  inspires 
me  with  painful  regrets,  it  leaves  me  without  any  remorse. 

dendum,  and  which  have  not  yet  been  cleared  up.  Being  arrested  in  April,  1814, 
released  in  March,  1815,  and  re-arrested  by  the  emperor's  orders,  he  managed  to 
escape  into  Belgium,  but  was  there  seized  by  Louis  XVIII.  He  was  released  by 
order  of  the  King  of  the  Netherlands,  and  returned  to  Prance.  In  18 16  he  was 
again  arrested,  and  again  escaped,  it  is  said  by  connivance  of  the  police.  After 
many  vicissitudes,  he  revisited  Paris  in  1827.  He  assaulted  M.  de  Talleyrand,  whom 
he  blamed  for  all  his  misfortunes,  in  the  cathedral  of  Rheims  on  the  21st  of  January, 
for  which  he  was  condemned  to  five  years'  imprisonment.  Nothing  more  was  heard 
of  him  after  this. 


2o8  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

Let  me  briefly  recall  the  facts  ;  it  will  be  the  best  way  to 
refute  the  lying  imputations  of  M.  Savary. 

It  is  well  known  that  in  the  end  of  1803  and  the  beginning 
of  1804,  there  were  numerous  plots  against  the  life  of  the  first 
consul.  Grave  proceedings  were  instituted  during  the  first 
months  of  1804  against  George  Pichegru,  Moreau,  and  others, 
who  were  accused.  During  the  course  of  the  investigations 
made  by  the  police  at  home,  traces  of  other  plots  abroad  were 
discovered,  and  it  was  but  natural  to  connect  the  one  with  the 
other.  The  head  of  the  general  police  had  been  vacant  for 
several  months  ;  one  of  the  state  councillors  had  been  put  in 
charge  of  this  department,  which  had  thus  been  placed  under 
the  direction  of  Chief  Justice  Regnier.1  This  minister  on  the  7th 
of  March  1804,  (16  Ventose  year  XII)  made  the  following  report 
to  the  first  consul  : 

Citizen  First  Consul, 

There  is  a  society  in  Offenburg  in  the  electorate  of  Baden, 
and  in  all  the  departments  of  the  Rhine,  paid  by  the  English 
government.  This  society  is  composed  of  French  emigres,  re- 
tired general  officers,  knights  of  St.  Louis  ;  their  object  is  to 
try  and  stir  up  disaffection  in  the  heart  of  the  republic,  by  all 
possible  means. 

Their  principal  agent  is  an  emigre  called  Mucey,  a  man  well 
known  for  some  time  past  for  his  intrigues  and  the  implacable 
hatred  he  has  sworn  against  his  country. 

This  miserable  wretch  is  charged  by  his  party,  to  introduce 
into  France  and  to  circulate  freely,  the  incendiary  mandates  of 
the  rebellious  bishops,  as  well  as  the  infamous  libels  which  are 
concocted  abroad,  against  France  and  her  government. 

A  man  called  Trident,  postmaster  at  Kehl,  is  the  individual 
employed  by  the  society,  to  transmit  their  correspondence  to 
their  confidential  agents  at  Strasburg.  These  agents  are  known, 
and  orders  have  been  given  for  their  arrest. 

I  do  not  think  however  that  these  measures  will  suffice. 
Public  tranquillity  as  well  as  the  dignity  of  the  nation  and  its 
chief,  require  the  destruction  of  this  nest  of  intriguers  and  con- 
spirators, who  are  in  Offenburg,  and  who  come  to  brave  the 
republic  and  its  government  at  its  very  gates,  as  it  were  !     It  is 

1  Claude- Ambroise  Regnier,  Due  de  Massa,  born  in  1736,  was  a  barrister  at 
Nancy  in  1789,  when  he  was  elected  deputy  to  the  States-General.  In  the  end  of 
year  III.  he  seconded  Buonaparte  on  the  18th  Brumaire,  became  State  Councillor, 
Supreme  Judge,  Minister  of  Justice,  and  was  for  a  short  time  Minister  of  Police  (in 
1804).  Later  on  he  became  a  senator,  and  was  appointed  President  of  the  Corps 
LegislatiJ 'in  1813.     He  died  in  1814. 


ADDENDUM. 


209 


necessary  that  both  should  be  avenged,  by  their  prompt  punish- 
ment. 

I  therefore  propose,  Citizen  First  Consul,  that  you  at  once 
demand  from  his  Serene  Highness  the  Elector  of  Baden  the 
extradition  of  Mucey,  Trident,  and  his  accomplices. 

With  salutations  and  respects.  .  .  . 

(Signed)  Regnier. 
Certified  correct. 
Secretary  of  State,  HUGUES  Maret. 

The  First  Consul,  when  showing  me  this  report,  told  me  to 
forward  it  to  the  government  of  the  Electorate  of  Baden,  and  to 
demand  the  extradition  of  the  persons  therein  named. 

Here  is  the  note  I  thereupon  wrote  to  M.  le  Baron  d'Edels- 
heim,  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  to  his  Serene  Highness  the 
Elector  of  Baden  : 


Paris,  19  Ventose,  Year  XI  I.  (10  March,  1804). 


"  The  undersigned,  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  to  the  French 
republic,  has  the  honour  to  send  to  M.  le  Baron  d'Edelsheim, 
a  copy  of  a  report  which  the  chief  justice  has  made  to  the 
First  Consul.  He  begs  your  Excellency  will  place  this  import- 
ant document  before  his  Serene  Highness  the  Elector  of 
Baden.  His  Highness  will  therein  find  fresh  and  undeniable 
proofs,  of  the  kind  of  warfare  the  English  government  pursues 
towards  France;  and  he  will  learn, with  grieved  astonishment, 
that  in  his  own  state  of  Offenburg,  there  exists  an  association 
of  French  emigres  who  are  among  the  most  active  instruments 
in  all  these  horrible  plots. 

The  undersigned  is  charged  to  formally  demand,  that  the 
individuals  who  form  this  society  in  Offenburg,  should  be 
arrested  and  delivered  up  with  all  their  papers  to  the  French 
officers  ordered  to  receive  them  at  Strasburg. 

The  official  demand,  which  the  undersigned  presents  with 
regard  to  this  matter,  is  founded  on  the  text  of  Article  I.  of 
the  treaty  of  Luneville.  And  when  it  is  a  question  of  a  state 
conspiracy,  the  known  facts  of  which  have  already  roused  the 
indignation  of  Europe,  the  individual  feelings  of  friendliness 
that  exist  between  France  and  his  Serene  Highness  the  Elector, 
leave  no  room  to  doubt  that  he  will,  at  the  request  of  the 
French  government,  hasten  to  execute  this  chief  stipulation  of 
the  treaty  of  Luneville,  and  also  in  other  ways  further  assist  to 
unveil  these  machinations,  which  menace  at  the  same  time,  the 
VOL.  ill.  p 


210  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

life  of  the  First  Consul,  the  safety  of  France,  and  the  peace  of 
Europe.1 

The  undersigned  is  ordered  to  demand,  that  sweeping  and 
irrevocable  measures  should  be  taken,  to  send  away  all  the 
French  emigres  from  the  lands  that  form  the  Electorate  of  Baden. 
Their  stay  in  the  part  of  Germany  nearest  to  France,  cannot 
but  be  a  source  of  disquietude  and  of  trouble,  as  well  as  a 
temptation  to  themselves,  to  enter  into  intrigues,  by  which 
England  profits  and  which  she  utilizes  to  further  her  own 
detestable  schemes. 

And  when  it  is  remembered  that  the  Emigres,  who  are  still 
out  of  France,  are  all  men,  plotting  against  the  present  govern- 
ment of  their  old  country,  men  whom  it  has  been  impossible  to 
reconcile  to  any  changes  or  circumstances,  and  who  are  in  a 
perpetual  state  of  antagonism  against  France,  it  is  evident  that 
they  are  among  those  persons  who  in  accordance  with  the  terms  of 
the  treaty  of  Luneville,  should  find  neither  refuge  nor  protection 
in  the  German  states.  Their  exclusion  is  therefore  a  stern  right. 
But  even  if  it  only  depended  on  the  well-known  principles  and 
feelings  of  his  Serene  Highness  the  Elector,  there  could  be  no 
doubt  that  he  would  make  every  effort  to  drive  forth  from  his 
states,  such  dangerous  characters,  and  thus  give  another  proof 
to  the  French  government,  of  the  great  value  he  attaches  to  the 
friendly  relations  which  so  many  circumstances  have  combined 
to  establish  between  France  and  the  Electorate  of  Baden. 

The  undersigned  therefore  awaits  with  full  confidence  the 
decision  that  will  be  made  by  his  Serene  Highness  the  Elector 
on  the  two  demands  he  has  been  charged  to  convey  to  him,  and 
he  takes  this  opportunity  to  renew  the  assurance.  ..." 

This  note  and  the  memorandum  that  accompanied  it,  fully 
prove  that  it  was  only  on  the  information  furnished  by  the 
police,  that  the  French  government  demanded  the  extradition 
of  some  persons  and  the  expulsion  of  others  from  the 
Electorate  of  Baden  ;  and  it  will  also  be  seen  that  the  informa- 
tion, on  the  strength  of  which  the  prosecutions  against  the  Due 
d'Enghien  were  instituted,  did  not  emanate  from  the  Foreign 
Office. 

My  note  was  despatched  on  the  ioth  of  March  :  a  few  hours 
later  I  was  summoned  to  the  presence  of  the  First  Consul.  I 
found  him  in  a  state  of  violent  excitement.     He  reproached  M. 

1  The  article  of  the  treaty  of  Luneville  which  covenants  for  peace  between  the 
Empire  and  France,  lays  down:  "That  no  assistance  or  protection  shall  be  given, 
either  directly  or  indirectly,  to  those  who  desire  the  injury  of  either  of  the  contracting 
parties." 


ADDENDUM.  211 

Real,1  State  Councillor  in  charge  of  the  general  police  arrange- 
ments, and  who  was  present,  for  not  having  known  that  the 
Due  d'Enghien  was  at  Ettenheim  with  General  Dumouriez,'2  and 
plotting  against  the  safety  of  the  republic  and  against  his,  the 
Consul's,  life,  and  that  the  chief  centre  of  these  plots  was  at 
Offenburg.  Then  quickly  turning  towards  me,  he  reproached 
me  in  the  same  way,  asking  how  it  was  that  the  French  charge 
d'affaires  at  Carlsruhe,  M.  Massias,3  had  not  notified  such  a  state  of 
affairs.  As  soon  as  I  could  put  in  a  word,  which  was  not  easy  (for 
his  passion  was  such  that  he  gave  no  opportunity  for  a  reply),  I 
reminded  him  that  he  had  been  for  some  time  perfectly  aware 
that  the  Due  d'Enghien  was  in  the  Electorate  of  Baden,  and 
that  he  had  even  told  me  to  inform  the  Elector  of  Baden  that 
the  prince  might  reside  at  Ettenheim  ;  that  as  to  the  intrigues 
that  were  planned  at  Offenburg,  the  charge'  d'affaires  at 
Carlsruhe,  M.  Massias,  might  have  forgotten  or  neglected  to 
mention  them  in  his  correspondence,  either  because  he  attached 
no  importance  to  them,  or  because  he  feared  to  compromise  the 
Baroness  de  Reich,  who  it  is  said,  was  a  relation  or  friend  of  his 
wife's. 

I  tried,  but  in  vain,  to  soften  the  wrath  of  the  First  Consul. 
He  showed  us  the  reports  sent  to  him  by  General  Moncey,  Chief 
Inspector-General  of  gendarmerie,  which  in  fact  announced  the 
presence  of  Dumouriez  at  Ettenheim.  These  reports,  like  all 
those  of  a  similar  nature,  were  founded  more  on  inferences  than 
on  positive  facts,  save  only  that  of  Dumouriez's  presence,  which 
was  asserted,  and  which  nevertheless  was  not  true. 

But  the  First  Consul  was  filled  with  apprehension ;  nothing 
would  persuade  him  that  these  intrigues  were  not  connected 
with  the  plots,  inquiries  into  which  were  being  prosecuted  in 
Paris.  Consequently  he  then  and  there  took  the  fatal  step,  to 
order  the  arrest,  by  French  troops  on  Baden  territory,  of  all  the 

1  Pierre  Francois,  Comte  Real,  born  in  1765,  attorney  at  Chatelet  in  1799,  was 
Deputy  Attorney  to  the  Commune,  and  Public  Prosecutor  to  the  revolutionary  tribunal. 
He  became  Commissary  of  the  department  of  the  Seine  under  the  Directorate. 
After  the  18th  Brumaire  he  was  appointed  State  Councillor,  and  attached  to  the 
Police  Ministry.  He  was  Prefect  of  Police  during  the  Hundred  Days,  and  was 
exiled  at  the  second  restoration,  but  returned  shortly  after  to  France,  and  died  in 

1834. 

-  The  emigre  Thumery,  who  was  then  with  the  Due  d  Enghien,  was  mistaken 
for  Dumouriez.  The  resemblance  of  manner,  added  to  a  German  accent,  caused 
this  error  on  the  part  of  the  police  agents. 

3  Nicolas,  Baron  Massias,  a  man  of  letters  and  a  French  diplomat,  born  in  1764, 
was  first  an  officer,  then  professor  of  polite  literature.  He  entered  the  diplomatic 
service  under  the  Directorate,  was  appointed  charge  d'affaires  to  the  district  of 
Suabia,  at  Carlsruhe,  and  then  to  the  Grand  Duke  of  Baden.  In  1807  he  became 
Consul-General  at  Dantzig.  He  retired  in  1S15.  and  devoted  himself  entirely  to 
literature  until  his  death  (1848). 

P    2 


212  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

emigres  who  were  then  at  Offenburg  and  Ettenheim.  He 
himself  dictated  the  orders  to  the  war  minister  for  the  execution 
of  these  instructions,  and  ordered  me  to  make  known  to  the 
Elector  of  Baden,  when  too  late,  the  steps  he  had  deemed  it 
necessary  to  take.  I  therefore  wrote  the  letter  which  I  here 
insert,  to  the  Baron  d'Edelsheim. 

Paris,  20th  Ventose,  Year  XII.  (11  March,  1804). 
3  o'clock  in  the  morning. 

"  M.  le  Baron, 

I  had  just  written  a  note  to  you  the  object  of  which  was 
to  demand  the  arrest  of  the  society  of  French  emigre's  residing 
at  Offenburg,  when  the  First  Consul  became  aware,  through  the 
arrest  of  the  numerous  robbers  with  which  the  English  govern- 
ment has  deluged  France,  and  also  from  the  result  of  the 
investigations  that  have  taken  place  here,  of  the  large  share 
taken  by  the  English  agents  at  Offenburg  in  the  horrible  plots 
devised  against  his  person  and  against  the  safety  of  France. 
He  has  also  learnt  that  the  Due  d'Enghien  and  General 
Dumouriez  were  at  Ettenheim,  and  as  it  is  impossible  that  they 
should  be  in  that  town  without  the  permission  of  his  Serene 
Highness  the  Elector,  the  First  Consul  has  seen  with  the  deepest 
grief,  that  a  Prince  to  whom  it  has  pleased  him  to  show  the 
most  special  marks  of  the  friendship  of  France,  should  have 
given  refuge  to  his  most  cruel  enemies,  and  allowed  them 
quietly  to  hatch  such  unheard-of  conspiracies. 

Under  such  extraordinary  circumstances,  the  First  Consul 
considered  it  necessary  to  send  two  small  detachments  to 
Offenburg  and  Ettenheim,  to  seize  the  instigators  of  a  crime, 
which  from  its  nature,  place  those  who  have  been  convicted  of 
taking  part  in  it,  outside  the  pale  of  the  law  of  nations. 

General  Caulaincourt  is  charged  with  the  orders  of  the  First 
Consul  in  this  respect.  You  may  feel  assured  that  he  will 
exercise  all  the  consideration  that  his  Serene  Highness  the 
Elector  could  possibly  wish  in  their  execution.  He  will  have 
the  honour  to  convey  the  letter  to  your  Excellency  which  I 
have  been  ordered  to  write. 

Receive,  M.  le  Baron,  the  assurance  ..." 

In  sending  this  letter  to  General  Caulaincourt,  I  wrote  him  the 
following  lines  : — 

PARIS,  21  Ventose,  YearXU.  (11  March,  1804). 

"General, 

I    have   the    honour   to   send    you    a    letter   for   Baron 
d'Edelsheim,  Prime  Minister  of  the  Elector  of  Baden,  which  you 


ADDENDUM.  213 

will  have  the  goodness  to  send  him  as  soon  as  your  expedition 
to  Offenburg  is  completed.  The  First  Consul  desires  me  to  say, 
that  if  you  are  not  in  a  position  to  take  the  troops  into  the 
Electoral  states,  and  if  you  hear  that  General  Ordener1  has  not 
either  done  so,  this  letter  is  to  remain  in  your  hands,  and  must 
not  be  placed  in  those  of  the  Elector.  I  am  directed  to  give 
you  special  orders  to  take  possession  of  and  carry  away,  the 
papers  of  Madame  de  Reich.2 

I  have  the  honour  ..." 

I  have  given  these  three  letters  in  their  entirety,  as  they 
constitute  the  only  real  share  I  had  in  the  deplorable  affair  of 
M.  le  Due  d'Enghien.  It  will  be  easy  to  judge  of  my  share  in 
all  this,  by  examining  these  letters  with  a  little  care. 

The  First  Consul  had  been  for  some  time  aware  of  the 
presence  of  the  Due  d'Enghien  in  the  Electorate  of  Baden,  the 
French  charge  d'affaires  at  Carlsruhe  had  informed  us  of  it  in 
the  name  of  the  Elector  of  Baden,  and  he  had  been  informed  in 
reply,  that  the  inoffensive  conduct  of  the  prince,  of  which  he 
had  given  an  account,  placed  no  obstacle  whatever  to  his  re- 
maining there.  The  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  took  no  part  what- 
ever in  the  investigations  made  at  that  time  by  the  French  police, 
in  the  countries  adjoining  our  Rhenish  frontier.  These  investiga- 
tions were  made,  either  by  the  prefet  of  Strasburg,  in  com- 
pliance with  the  orders  of  State  Councillor  Real,  in  charge  of 
the  general  police  of  the  Republic,  or  by  the  officers  of  the 
local  gendarmerie,  in  accordance  with  the  orders  of  General 
Moncey,  chief  inspector  of  gendarmerie.  M.  Real  and  M. 
Moncey  sent  the  reports  they  received  direct  to  the  First 
Consul.  I  never  heard  anything  about  these  matters,  except 
what  the  First  Consul  told  me,  when  he  had  an)-  orders  to  give 
me.  Thus,  as  has  been  seen,  I  transmitted  to  Baron  d'Edels- 
heim  the  report  of  the  chief  judge,  M.  Regnier,  in  which  no 
mention  whatever  was  made  of  M.  le  Due  d'Enghien,  when  on 
the  receipt  of  fresh  information,  the  authenticity  of  which  I 
tried  to  disprove,  I  received  the  peremptory  order  to  write  a 
second  time  to  Baron  d'Edelsheim.  My  letter  could  not  have, 
in  any  way,  had  a  share  in  the  arrest  of  the  prince,  as  it  was 

1  Michael  Ordener  ( 1 755—181 1 )  enlisted  at  the  age  of  eighteen,  became  a  non- 
commissioned officer  in  1789.  On  the  iSth  Brumaire  he  was  appointed  Command- 
ant of  the  Consular  Cavalry  Guard.  He  it  was  who  commanded  the  detachment 
ordered  to  carry  off  the  Due  d'Enghien.  In  1805,  Ordener  became  a  general  of 
division,  then  a  senator  (1806),  and  first  equerry  to  the  Empress. 

-  The  Baroness  de  Reich  had  already  been  arrested  at  Offenburg  by  order  of 
the  Baden  government,  delivered  up  by  it  to  the  Frer.ch  authorities,  and  with  her 
papers  carried  off  to  Strasburg. 


214  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

only  intended  to  inform  M.  d'Edelsheim  of  the  arrest,  after  it 
had  been  already  effected.  The  letter  to  General  Caulaincourt 
still  further  proves,  that  I  had  provided  against  the  violation  of 
the  Baden  territory,  thereby  clearly  showing  that  I  was  ignorant 
of  how  precise,  imperative,  and  unavoidable  of  execution,  were 
the  orders  given  by  the  War  Minister  for  the  entry  of  the 
troops  into  the  states  of  the  Elector.  A  still  further  reason  why  I 
must  have  been  ignorant  of  the  sanguinary  project,  which  the 
First  Consul  had  in  his  own  mind  decided  upon. 

I  lay  stress  on  these  facts,  which  are  supported  by  all 
published  and  unpublished  documents,  for  they  refute,  in  the 
most  peremptory  manner,  M.  Savary's  perfidious  assertions  and 
insinuations.  With  the  exception  of  the  letters  cited  above,  I 
was  in  complete  ignorance  of  everything,  and  M.  Savary,  with- 
out knowing  it,  and  certainly  against  his  own  wishes,  had  taken 
care  to  confirm  this. 

It  will  be  seen,  that  in  one  of  the  most  important  para- 
graphs of  his  libel,  he  tries  to  prove  that  during  this  time,  the 
police  investigations  were  not  extended  beyond  the  frontiers, 
and  that  my  office  was  alone  responsible  for  foreign  matters. 

Nevertheless,  further  on,  he  states  that  the  first  Consul 
was  ignorant  of  the  name  and  even  the  very  existence  of  the 
Due  d'Enghien,  thus  not  hesitating  to  remove  all  semblance  of 
truth  in  his  recitals,  by  putting  forth  such  an  absurdity.  He 
then  goes  on  to  show,  in  fullest  detail,  all  the  police  measures  and 
devices,  and  the  means  taken  by  State  Councillor  Real  and  the 
head  of  the  gendarmerie,  in  order  to  obtain  correct  information 
as  to  the  sojourn,  the  departures,  the  various  correspondents, 
and  the  journeys  of  this  unfortunate  prince. 

It  was  in  fact  on  the  strength  of  their  reports,  and  those  of 
their  agents,  that  the  villainous  and  fatal  determination  was 
taken,  and  neither  I,  nor  the  representatives  of  my  office  abroad, 
took  part  either  in  the  premeditation  or  execution  of  any  of 
these  measures. 

State  Councillor  Real  and  the  First  Consul  knew  perfectly 
well  that  they  would  not  suit  my  character,  any  more  than  the 
principles  of  my  office  ;  that  to  expect  my  intervention  in  the 
matter  would  be  useless,  and  that  therefore  it  was  better  to 
keep  me  in  total  ignorance. 

As  to  the  two  letters  addressed  to  Baron  d'Edelsheim,  I 
do  not  think  they  require  any  apology  ;  but  if  such  is  deemed 
necessary,  it  will  be  found  in  the  official  position  I  held  at  this 
period,  in  the  critical  position  in  which  great  events  had  then 
placed  France,  and  finally  in  the  new  and  entirely  unexpected 
relations,  which  these  same  events  had  created,  between    the 


ADDENDUM.  215 

government  lately  established,  and  the  other  governments  on 
the  Continent. 

I  must  also  here  be  allowed  to  make  some  remarks  on  the 
duties  of  men  in  official  positions  during  those  calamitous  times, 
when  it  pleases  Providence  to  interpose  violently  between  the 
personal  fate  of  kings  and  that  of  their  people. 

Then  the  monarch  is  absent,  his  future  is  hidden,  and  his 
special  adherents  cling  to  his  fate  and  share  his  misfortunes,  his 
dangers,  his  hopes.  In  leaving  their  native  soil,  they  bind  them- 
selves indissolubly  to  his  lot,  and  \  do  not  refuse  either  my 
respect  or  my  admiration  to  this  self-devoted  party.  But  as  for 
the  others,  their  country  still  remains  to  them.  She  has  a 
right  to  be  defended,  and  to  be  governed.  She  has  also  in- 
contestably  another  right,  that  of  claiming  from  them  the  same 
services  they  owed  to  and  gave  her  before  the  departure  of  the 
sovereign.  It  was  according  to  this  view  that  I  tried  to 
regulate  my  conduct. 

At  this  period  France,  though  again  engaged  in  war  with 
England,  was  at  peace  with  all  the  rest  of  the  world.  It  was 
therefore  the  duty  of  the  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  to  do  all 
that  lay  in  his  power,  within  the  limits  of  right  and  justice,  to 
preserve  this  peace. 

With  regard  to  this,  it  is  almost  impossible  to  describe  the 
very  complicated  nature  of  such  a  duty.  Standing  between 
governments  which  were  terrified,  touchy,  and  uneasy  as  to  their 
danger,  though  all  more  or  less  reconciled  to  each  other,  and  a 
powerful  sovereign,  whose  genius,  character,  and  ambition  only 
gave  too  just  cause  for  disquietude  and  umbrage,  the  Minister 
for  Foreign  Affairs  had  constantly  to  exercise  an  equal  degree 
of  vigilance  on  the  policy  he  had  to  restrict,  and  on  that  which 
he  had  to  combat. 

His  negotiations  with  his  own  government  were  often  much 
more  difficult,  and  much  longer,  than  those  he  had  to  carry 
through  with  governments  which  he  had  to  tranquillize. 

The  letter  addressed  to  General  Caulaincourt,  which  I  have 
given  above,  throws  a  vivid  light  on  this  matter. 

It  plainly  shows  that  the  First  Consul  had  guarded  himself 
against  all  such  negotiations,  and  this  fact  of  itself  proves,  that 
I  had  done  everything  to  prevent  occurrences  which  must 
inevitably  have  led  my  office  into  great  and  inextricable 
difficulties.  My  letters  to  the  Minister  of  the  Elector  of  Baden 
were  the  prelude  to  this  ;  which  must  not  be  lost  sight  of,  if  the 
true  view  of  the  matter  is  desired,  that,  fortunately  for  myself,  I 
had  only  to  justify  those  measures  of  which  I  was  cognizant. 

To  prevent   a  weak    prince  from   drawing  on    himself  the 


216  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

enmity  of  a  powerful  neighbour,  to  remove  from  the  French 
frontiers  the  assembly  of  enemies,  who  could  not  harm  the 
existing  government  except  by  imprudent  attempts,  as  fatal  to 
the  peace  of  Europe  as  to  that  of  France  ;  to  prevent,  in  fact,  all 
causes  of  misunderstanding  between  the  French  Government 
and  the  neighbouring  states,  this  was  the  object  of  my  first 
letter. 

It  is  true  the  second,  contained  a  scarcely  founded  justi- 
fication of  an  act  which  attacks  one  of  the  principles  of  public 
right.  And  for  this  error  I  blame  myself,  but  that  is  altogether 
different  from  more  or  less  plausibly  justifying  or  counselling 
such  an  act  and  taking  part  in  its  execution.  The  former  only 
enforces  a  painful  and  unhappy  necessity,  the  latter  is  a  crime. 

I  speak  too  strongly  in  describing  an  infraction  of  public 
right  as  a  crime,  when  it  only  means  the  simple  violation  of  a 
neighbouring  territory.  During  this  war,  and  in  the  course  of 
all  other  wars,  much  graver  crimes  have  been  committed  by  the 
enemies  of  France,  by  France  herself,  and  by  the  governments 
that  ordered  them.  They  were  not  described  as  criminal,  nor 
were  their  ministers,  who  undertook  to  carry  them  out,  and  then 
had  to  apologize  for  committing  them. 

In  the  present  instance  it  was  a  crime,  but  only  as  regards 
the  aim  in  view,  when  thus  violating  strange  territory  ;  and  my 
ignorance  of  this  aim  is  my  exculpation.  Here  the  crime  con- 
sisted in  the  fatal  consequences  brought  about  by  this  violation. 

But  is  it  fair  in  my  accusers  to  assert,  without  proof,  that  I 
was  cognizant  of  them  ?  Such  horrible  knowledge  could  only 
have  been  possessed  by  accomplices. 

I  must  add  some  further  observations  to  those  I  have  already 
made  above,  on  the  duties  of  men  in  office  during  exceptional 
times.  When  through  force  of  circumstances  a  man  finds  him- 
self obliged  to  live  under  and  serve  a  government,  which  has  no 
other  guarantees  for  the  safeguard  of  its  power,  than  the  events 
which  have  caused  its  rise,  and  the  need  of  the  nation^ 
many  conjunctions  may  arise  in  which  he  has  to  decide  as 
to  the  nature  of  the  duties  connected  with  the  position  he 
occupies.  Should  the  government  under  which  he  lives  order 
him  to  commit  a  crime  ?  Incontestably  and  without  hesitation 
he  must  disobey;  he  must  at  all  risks  incur  its  displeasure  and 
submit  to  all  the  consequences.  But  should  the  government, 
without  his  knowledge  commit  a  crime  ?  In  that  case  an 
argument  may  be  raised  on  a  double  hypothesis.  If  the  crime 
is  against  public  order,  if  it  draws  or  may  draw  the  country  into 
great  danger,  if  it  tends  to  social  disorganization,  contempt  of 
the  laws,  or  the  ruin  of  the  state,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  not 


ADDENDUM.  217 

only  must  it  be  resisted,  but  the  yoke  must  be  thrown  off,  and 
arms  taken  up  against  a  power  which  has  become  the  enemy  of 
the  country  it  has  lost  the  power  of  governing. 

But  if  the  crime  is  of  an  isolated  nature,  if  it  is  circumscribed 
in  its  object,  as  well  as  in  its  effect,  if  it  has  no  other  result  than 
to  tarnish  the  name  of  the  man  who  has  committed  it,  and  to 
hold  up  to  public  condemnation  the  names  of  those  who  have 
been  its  instruments,  its  executioners,  or  its  accomplices,  then 
one  is  forced  to  grieve  over  the  mixture  of  grandeur  and  feeble- 
ness, of  exaltation  and  abasement,  of  energy  and  perversity,  that 
flash  forth  in  some  characters  which  it  has  pleased  nature  to 
produce  ;  but  the  distribution  of  the  share  of  glory  or  of  infamy,' 
which  is  their  respective  due,  must  be  left  to  the  justice  of 
future  ages.  Only  the  fame  of  those  who  have  committed  these 
crimes  is  compromised,  and  if  the  law  of  nations,  general 
morality,  the  safety  of  the  state  and  public  order  are  not  affected 
by  them,  then  it  is  right  to  continue  in  office.  Were  it 
otherwise,  picture  the  position  of  a  government  suddenly  deserted 
by  all  the  capable,  generous,  enlightened,  and  conscientious  men 
in  the  country,  and  all  its  departments  filled  by  the  scum  and  the 
dregs  of  the  population  !  What  terrible  results  would  not  arise 
from  such  a  state  of  affairs,  and  which  could  only  be  attributed 
to  the  neglect  of  that  principle  which  has  just  been  referred  to, 
and  which  not  only  justifies  the  engagements  which  men  most 
inimical  to  legitimate  governments  may  findthemselves  voluntarily 
obliged  not  only  to  make  but  also  to  be  faithful  to,  so  long 
as  the  maintenance  of  social  order  and  the  defence  of  national 
rights  against  foreign  enterprises  are  thereby  preserved  ? 

Herein  we  can  find  an  apology  for  the  French  administra- 
tion during  the  whole  of  this  period.  It  must  not  be  forgotten, 
that  only  a  short  time  previously,  social  order  at  home  and  the 
political  system  abroad,  had  both  been  a  prey  to  anarchy.  It 
was  left  to  the  French  government  to  put  an  end  to  these 
excesses,  and  this  noble  task  it  has  performed  with  as  much 
zeal  as  success.  It  will  be  for  historians  to  relate  all  that  was 
then  done  to  calm  down  the  disturbed  spirits,  to  place  a  curb 
on  unbridled  passions,  and  to  restore  order,  regularity,  modera- 
tion, and  justice,  in  all  the  branches  of  the  services.  A  good 
financial  system,  the  establishment  of  prefectures ;  the  formation 
and  proper  composition  of  a  large  army,  the  keeping  up  of  the 
roads  and  the  publication  of  the  civil  code,  all  date  from  this 
period,  and  attest  the  good  services  done  during  that  time  by 
the  civil  and  military  branches  of  the  French  administration 
The  peace  of  Amiens,  the  political  organization  of  Italy,  the 
Swiss  mediation,  the  first  trial  of  the  establishment  of  a  German 


2i8  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

Federal  system,  all  bear  witness  to  the  activity,  the  wisdom,  and 
the  high  standing  of  the  government  which  I  had  formed  and 
which  I  directed.  If  later  on,  the  rules  of  prudence  and 
moderation,  which  with  indefatigable  patience  I  established, 
maintained,  and  defended,  were  allowed  to  fall  into  disuse,  my 
decision  to  give  up  office  and  the  period  when  that  decision 
was  taken,  will  exculpate  me  in  the  eyes  of  posterity  from  all 
participation  in  this  change.  But  what  was  possible  to  me  in 
1807  was  n°t  so  m  J8i4,  for  in  the  latter  case  I  should  have  de- 
serted the  great  duties  that  I  felt  myself  called  upon  to  render 
to  my  country.  This  view  of  matters  was  shared  by  many 
others  as  well  as  myself,  and  it  is  needless  to  recall  that  not  a 
single  voice  was  raised  in  the  country  to  protest  against  the 
frightful  outrage  of  which  M.  le  Due  d'Enghien  was  the  victim. 
It  is  sad  to  have  to  say  this,  but  it  is  the  actual  truth,  and  can 
only  be  explained  by  the  dread  possessed  by  every  one  of 
disturbing  a  government  which  had  succeeded  in  rescuing 
France  from  anarchy. 

Whatever  may  be  thought  of  the  reasons  I  have  given,  and 
which  I  believe  to  be  just  and  well  founded,  I  will  sum  up  the 
points  which  bear  on  this  deplorable  affair,  and  go  over  those 
which  concern  myself. 

1.  That  it  was  neither  through  the  Foreign  Office  nor 
consequently  through  me,  that  the  First  Consul  was  informed 
as  to  the  plots,  real  or  pretended,  that  were  being  hatched  at 
that  period  on  the  other  side  of  the  Rhine. 

2.  That  I  had  nothing  further  to  do  with  the  whole 
business  of  the  Due  d'Enghien,  than  transmitting  to  the 
Minister  of  the  Elector  of  Baden,  first  the  report  of  the  minister 
of  justice,  and  later  on  to  inform  him,  when  too  late,  of  the 
orders  given  by  the  First  Consul,  to  Generals  Ordener  and 
Caulaincourt,  orders  over  which  I  had  not,  and  could  not  have 
had,  any  influence  whatever. 

Then  as  touching  the  sentence  and  execution  of  M.  le  Due 
d'Enghien,  it  will  not,  I  think,  be  difficult  for  me  to  prove  that  I 
had  no  share  in  it  whatever.  As  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  I 
could  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  selection  of  the  council  of 
war,  nor  with  the  execution,  of  which  M.  Savary  so  boldly 
accepts  the  responsibility. 

For  me  therefore  to  have  taken  any  part  in  this  bloody 
drama,  it  must  be  supposed  that  I  had  done  so  voluntarily,  and 
that  I  had  interfered  for  no  other  reason  than  the  love  of  blood- 
shed. If  my  character  and  my  antecedents  did  not  place  me 
above  such  an  odious  and  infamous  suspicion,  there  is  another 
question  I  could  put  before  my  accuser,  which  he  is  in  a  better 


ADDENDUM.  219 

position  to  answer  than  any  one  else,  namely,  What  interest 
could  I  have  in  the  murder  of  the  Due  d'Enghien  ?  I  had  taken 
no  part  in  any  of  the  crimes  of  the  French  Revolution,  I  had 
given  sufficient  proofs  to  the  First  Consul,  of  my  devotion  to  the 
order  of  things  he  had  established,  not  to  need  to  inflame  his 
passionate  anger,  in  order  to  obtain  a  confidence  which  I  had 
fully  possessed  for  the  last  five  years.  Posterity  will  judge 
between  me  and  M.  Savary,  and  all  those  who,  like  him,  for  one 
reason  or  another,  seek  to  throw  on  me  the  responsibility  of  a 
crime  which  I  repudiate  with  horror.  I  have  not,  and  will  not 
accuse  any  one,  and  have  confined  myself  to  writing  the  sub- 
joined letter  to  the  king,  which  is  followed  by  M.  de  Villele's 
answer : — 

To  King  Louis  XVIII. 

Sire, 

I  am  not  telling  your  Majesty  anything  fresh  when  I  say, 
that  I  have  a  great  many  enemies,  both  near  the  throne  and  also 
far  removed  from  it.  Some  of  them  have  not  yet  forgotten  that  I 
took  a  different  view  to  theirs,  of  the  first  troubles  of  the  Re- 
volution, but  whatever  their  opinion  may  be,  they  must  know 
that  it  is  due  to  the  stand  I  then  took,  that  I  owe  the  happiness  of 
having,  during  a  time  specially  marked  by  Providence, contributed 
so  fortunately  to  the  restoration  of  your  august  throne  and  the  tri- 
umphs of  legitimacy.  It  is  this  same  restoration  and  this  same 
triumph  that  my  enemies  have  not  and  never  will  pardon.  Hence 
all  those  libels,  those  voluminous  recollections  from  St.  Helena,  in 
which  during  the  last  two  years  I  have  incessantly  been  insulted 
and  defamed  by  men  who,  in  selling  the  true  or  imputed  words 
of  a  deceased  celebrity,  make  capital  out  of  the  famous  person- 
ages of  France,  and  who  by  this  shameless  traffic  have  con- 
stituted themselves  the  testamentary  executors  of  Napoleon 
Buonaparte's  revenge. 

Sire,  in  this  latter  class  I  must  place  the  former  minister  of 
the  Emperor,  the  only  one  whose  name  I  dare  not  even 
pronounce  before  your  Majesty  ;  this  man  who,  in  an  access  of 
insanity,  has  recently  denounced  himself  to  public  prosecution, 
as  the  actual  perpetrator  of  a  horrible  assassination  ;  happy  if, 
by  plunging  himself  in  blood,  he  can,  by  joining  my  name  to  his, 
drag  me  down  with  him,  and  dishonour  the  chief  agent  of  both 
Restorations !  Yes,  Sire,  of  both  Restorations  !  In  me  they 
persecute  the  days  of  the  30th  of  March,  18 14,  and  the  13th  of 
April,  181 5  !  Days  of  glory  for  me  and  of  happiness  for  France  ; 
days  which  have  joined  my  name  to  the  constitutional  charter 
that  we  owe   to  your  Majesty.      But  it   is  in   vain   that  envy 


22o  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

hatred,  and  baffled  ambition,  coalesce  to  deprive  me  of  my  right 
to  contemporary  esteem  and  historical  justice  ;  I  shall  be  enabled 
to  defend  and  transmit  these  intact  to  the  inheritors  of  my  name. 

During  the  numerous  storms  that  have  marked  the  past 
thirty  years,  calumny  has  heaped  many  insults  upon  me.  But 
there  is  one  which  up  to  now  has  been  spared  me.  Not  a  single 
family  has  felt  itself  entitled  to  demand  from  me  the  blood  of 
any  of  its  members  ;  and  now  a  madman  imagines  that,  suddenly 
giving  up  these  peaceful  habits,  these  moderate  views,  which 
even  my  enemies  have  never  disputed,  I  should  have  become  the 
author  and  instigator  of  a  most  horrible  assassination  !  I,  who 
have  never — and  I  thank  heaven  for  it — spoken  a  word  of 
hatred  or  counselled  revenge  against  any  one,  not  even  against 
my  most  bitter  enemies,  that  I  should  choose  to  make  a  single 
exception,  and  that  exception,  whom  ?  A  prince  of  the  family 
of  my  sovereigns.  And  that  he  should  be  the  victim  to  signalize 
my  debut  in  the  career  of  an  assassin  !  And  that  not  only 
should  I  have  advised  this  atrocious  crime,  but  that,  in  addition, 
I  used  every  endeavour  to  subvert  the  First  Consul's  clemency, 
and  that  in  spite  of,  and  against  Buonaparte's  orders,  and  at  the 
risk  of  the  greatest  and  most  awful  responsiblity,  I  should  have 
hurried  on  the  execution  of  the  sentence  ! 

And  who  is  the  man  who  dares  to  accuse  me  of  such 
atrocities  ?    My  accuser  has  made  himself  sufficiently  well  known. 

Nevertheless,  Sire,  my  name,  my  age,  my  character,  the  high 
position  I  owe  to  your  goodness,  do  not  permit  me  to  submit  to 
such  an  outrage  without  seeking  satisfaction.  As  a  peer  of 
France,  I  must  not  ask  this  satisfaction  from  the  tribunals 
entrusted  by  law  with  the  punishment  of  calumny  ;  I  shall  there- 
fore indite  my  accuser  before  the  Chamber  of  Peers  ;  from  it  I 
shall  obtain  an  inquiry  and  judgment.  This  trial,  Sire,  which 
I  claim  from  your  sense  of  justice,  you  will  no  more  dread  for 
me,  than  I  do  for  myself.  Then  calumny  will  be  confounded, 
and  its  impotent  rage  will  expire  before  the  great  light  of  truth. 
I  have  the  honour  to  be,  with  the  most  profound  respect  .... 

Prince  de  Talleyrand. 

Paris,  %th  Novembei-,  1S23. 

M.  de  Villele  to  Prince  de  Talleyrand. 

Prince, 

The  king   has  read  your  letter  of  8th    November   with 
great  attention. 

His  Majesty  desires  me  to  say,  that  he  notices  with  surprise, 
that  it  is  your  intention  to  call  for  a  special  investigation  in  the 


ADDENDUM.  221 

Chamber  of  Peers  of  the  facts  just  published  by  M.  le  Due  de 
Rovigo.  His  Majesty  wishes  that  the  past  should  be  buried  in 
oblivion,  excepting  always  as  regards  the  services  rendered  to 
France  and  to  himself. 

The  king  could  not  therefore  approve  such  a  needless  and 
unusual  step,  which  would  give  rise  to  vexatious  debates,  and 
revive  the  most  painful  recollections. 

The  high  place  which  you  continue  to  hold  at  court,  Prince, 
is  a  convincing  proof,  that  the  imputations  which  hurt  and  vex 
you  have  made  no  impression  whatever  on  his  Majesty. 

I  am,  Prince,  your  Excellency's  most  humble  and  obedient 

servant, 

Joseph  de  Vilelle. 

Paris,  15//*  November,  1823. 

This  letter  imposed  silence  upon  me  ;  I  have  observed  it  ;  for 
though  I  have  deemed  it  necessary  to  expose  what  has  just  been 
read,  it  is  only  because  it  will  not  be  published  until  long  after 
my  death,  when  it  will  establish  the  truth  of  the  facts,  without 
provoking  the  scandals  dreaded  in  1823. 

An  announcement  inserted  in  the  papers  of  the  17th  March, 
1823,  stated  : 

"  The  king  has  forbidden  the  Due  de  Rovigo  to  enter  the 
palace  of  the  Tuileries." 

A  few  days  after  the  receipt  of  M.  de  Vilelle's  letter,  when  I 
presented  myself  at  the  palace,  to  pay  my  respects  to  the  king, 
his  Majesty  on  seeing  me  said  :  "  Prince  de  Talleyrand,  you  and 
yours  can  come  here  without  fear  of  any  unpleasant  encounters." 

I  have  nothing  further  to  add  to  this  recital. 

And  now  one  word  as  to  M.  de  Maubreuil's  accusation. 
This  is  so  utterly  absurd,  that  it  will  suffice,  I  think,  to  speak  of 
it  in  the  words  used  by  its  author,  to  cause  it  to  fall  to  the 
ground.  It  is  necessary  first,  however,  to  know  who  M.  de 
Maubreuil    was. 

Descended  from  an  old  and  honourable  family  in  Brittany, 
M.  de  Maubreuil  entered  the  military  service,  under  the 
Empire,  in  1807.  After  serving  for  some  time  with  the  army  in 
Spain,  he  was  dismissed  at  a  time  when  no  one  was  removed 
from  the  army,  unless  for  a  very  grave  fault  indeed,  every 
soldier  being  urgently  needed.  His  name,  and  the  introduc- 
tions he  contrived  to  get,  secured  him  a  place  at  the  court  of 
Jerome  in  Westphalia.  This  court,  as  is  well  known,  was  not 
over  scrupulous  in  its  choice  of  those  who  composed  it  ;  the 
appointment  of  M.  de  Maubreuil  as  equerry  to  the  king,  after 
the    incident  in    Spain,    would   be    proof  enough  if  this    were 


222  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

needed.  Nevertheless,  Maubreuil  contrived  to  get  again  dis- 
missed, even  from  this  court.  Returning  to  Paris,  and  being  in 
possession  of  a  considerable  fortune,  Maubreuil  next  launched 
into  business,  but  into  business  with  people  of  his  own  stamp, 
as  an  army  contractor.  Whether  through  too  great  sharpness 
on  his  part  and  that  of  his  associates,  or  else  through  their  dis- 
honesty, differences  soon  arose  between  them  and  the  govern- 
ment, resulting,  as  he  declared,  in  heavy  losses  to  himself,  which 
irritated  him  greatly  against  the  Emperor  Napoleon.  Such  was 
his  position  at  the  fall  of  the  Empire,  and  it  was  then,  according 
to  himself,  that  in  the  beginning  of  April  1814,  he  was  several 
times  sent  for  to  my  hotel  by  M.  Roux  Laborie,1  who  filled  the 
post  of  secretary  to  the  Provisional  Government,  and  who,  in 
my  name,  had  suggested  to  him  the  assassination  of  Napoleon  ; 
that  rewards  were  offered  to  him  to  carry  out  this  secret 
mission  as  he  calls  it,  but  always  through  M.  Roux  Laborie,  for 
Maubreuil  states  that  he  has  never  spoken  to  me.  These 
rewards  were  to  be  (I  quote  his  actual  words)  "horses,  carriages, 
the  rank  of  Lieutenant-General,  the  title  of  Duke,  and  the 
government  of  a  province."  He  avows  that  he  accepted  them 
all,  and  took  measures  to  carry  out  his  secret  mission.  It  was 
only  after  leaving  Paris,  and  when  already  en  route,  that  he  ex- 
perienced some  scruples,  and  began  to  realize  the  horror  of  the 
crime  he  was  about  to  commit.  He  thereupon  generously 
resolved  to  abandon  it,  but  as  he  wished  to  mark  his  return  to 
virtue  by  a  good  action,  he  took  advantage  of  the  first  occasion 
that  presented  itself.  On  his  road,  he  encountered  Queen 
Catherine,  princess  of  Wurtemburg,  and  wife  of  Jerome  Buona- 
parte, his  sovereign  in  Westphalia.  Stopping  her  carriage,  he 
ransacked  the  waggon  which  followed  it,  robbed  her  of  all  her 
money,  jewels,  and  other  effects,  and  returned  in  triumph  to 
Paris,  where  he  was  greatly  astonished  at  being  pursued  and 
arrested  as  a  common  highway  robber.  This  is  the  abridged 
history  of  my  accuser,  M.  de  Maubreuil. 

I  ask,  is  not  this  sufficient  in  itself  to  refute  the  accusation  ? 

There  is  only  one  point  upon  which  I  have  not  touched.  I 
wished,  ere  mentioning  it,  to  say  that  even  now  I  cannot  quite 
understand  it,  and  can  only  bring  forward  conjectures  to  explain 
it.     At  the  moment  of  his  arrest,  Maubreuil  was  in  possession 

1  Antoine  Roux  Laborie,  born  in  1769,  Secretary  to  the  Minister  of  Foreign 
Affairs  in  1792,  took  refuge  abroad  after  the  10th  of  August.  Returning  to  France,  he 
was  made  Chief  Secretary  of  Foreign  Affairs,  after  the  18th  Brumaire  ;  but,  compro- 
mised in  the  Royalist  conspiracies  of  that  date,  he  had  to  conceal  himself,  and  lived 
in  retirement  till  1814.  Later  on  he  was  made  Secretary-General  to  the  Provisional 
Government  ;  followed  the  Court  to  Ghent  in  1815,  and  at  the  second  Restoration 
was  elected  Deputy  of  the  Somme,  but  was  not  re-elected  in  1816.    He  died  in  1840. 


ADDENDUM.  223 

of  passports  and  regular  safe-conducts,  given  by  the  allied  armies 
and  by  the  French  authorities,  in  which  he  was  described  as 
charged  with  a  mission,  which  required  the  utmost  expedition. 

It  will  be  remembered  that  in  the  beginning  of  April  18 14, 
the  Provisional  Government  sent  emissaries  into  all  parts  of 
France,  to  announce  the  overthrow  of  the  Imperial  Government 
and  the  accession  of  the  legitimate  government.  It  be- 
came necessary  to  choose  persons  at  haphazard,  to  carry  out 
these  missions,  and  I  can  easily  believe,  that  a  loudly  expressed 
hatred  to  Napoleon  would,  at  that  moment,  have  been  a  suffici- 
ent recommendation  to  obtain  one  of  these  appointments,  which 
were  those  of  a  courier.  There  was  not  much  time  to  make 
inquiries  as  to  the  moral  status  of  those  who  were  thus 
employed  ;  and  a  man  presenting  himself  under  the  name  of  the 
Marquis  de  Maubreuil,  and  as  a  victim  of  the  Emperor's 
persecutions,  would  have  been  accepted  without  any  further 
inquiries.  The  words  secret  mission,  mentioned  in  his  passports, 
are  quite  naturally  explained  by  the  circumstances  of  the  case, 
for  the  persons  so  entrusted  with  orders  from  the  Provisional 
Government,  were  liable  to  meet  detachments  of  the  French 
army,  or  other  authorities,  who  might  have  been  disposed  to 
hinder  their  mission,  if  aware  that  its  object  was  to  proclaim 
everywhere  the  overthrow  of  the  Imperial  Government.  I  can 
see  no  other  possible  explanation  of  these  passports  and  safe- 
conducts  which  were  in  Maubreuil's  possession  when  he  was 
arrested. 

Then,  even  as  to  the  grounds  for  the  supposition,  that  I  could 
have  conceived  the  idea  of  assassinating  the  Emperor  Napoleon 
(putting  quite  aside,  for  the  moment,  the  revolting  nature  of  such 
an  idea),  I  would  fain  ask,  what  possible  interest  would  it  be  to 
me,  to  burthen  myself  with  so  odious  a  crime,  when  there  was 
no  necessity  whatever  for  it  ?  Before  his  abdication,  the  Emperor 
was  at  Fontainebleau,  surrounded  by  the  glorious  remains  of  his 
army,  and  it  would  not,  I  fancy,  have  entered  into  any  one's  head 
to  go  there  to  assassinate  him.  After  the  abdication,  he  was  a 
fallen  enemy,  whose  existence  was  no  longer  dangerous  to  any 
one.  Finally,  who  would  ever  believe  that  the  title  of  duke,  and 
the  government  of  a  province  would  be  offered  to  a  base 
assassin,  and  that  such  a  man  as  M.  de  Maubreuil  could  credit 
the  reality  of  any  such  offers  ?  But  I  have  already  said  more 
than  enough  to  refute  an  accusation,  if  possible  even  more  absurd 
than  it  is  infamous.  Therefore,  in  conclusion,  I  again  repeat. 
that  it  could  only  have  been  invented  by  a  fool  or  a  madman. 

END  OF  THE  NINTH  PART. 


PART   X. 

THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1S30— APPENDIX. 

1830— 1832. 

Effect  of  the  Revolution  of  July  in  Europe — Louis  Philippe's  anxiety  to  get 
his  Government  recognized  by  England — Talleyrand  recalled  to  public 
life — Is  sent  as  Ambassador  to  London — His  arrival  at  Dover — Contrasts 
his  present  journey  to  England,  with  his  previous  one  thirty-six  years 
before,  when  an  exile  from  France — Satisfactory  interviews  with  Lord 
Aberdeen  and  the  Duke  of  Wellington — Favourable  attitude  of  the 
English  Ministers  towards  France —Talleyrand  laments  the  inefficiency 
of  his  staff — This  is  counterbalanced  by  the  presence  of  his  niece,  the 
Duchesse  de  Dino — She  becomes  a  great  favourite  in  English  society 
— Outbreak  of  the  Revolution  in  Belgium — Will  England  maintain  her 
policy  of  non-intervention? — Lord  Aberdeen  thinks  France  and  England 
should  mediate  between  the  King  of  the  Netherlands  and  the  Belgians 
— Mediation  is  not  intervention — Talleyrand's  sketch  of  William  IV. — 
England  will  act  in  concert  with  France  respecting  Belgium  and  Portugal 
— Animated  correspondence  as  to  the  seat  of  the  Conferences — Decided 
eventually  to  hold  them  in  London — State  of  affairs  in  Portugal — Great 
disquietude  in  France— Russia  continues  her  war  preparations — Is  anxious 
to  support  the  King  of  the  Netherlands — Considers  England  is  pledged 
to  do  the  same — Copy  of  Count  Nesselrode's  secret  despatch  to  the 
Russian  Ambassador  in  London — Talleyrand's  account  of  the  opening 
of  Parliament,  after  William  IV.'s  accession— Popular  demonstrations  in 
England  in  favour  of  Louis  Philippe — Excitement  over  the  "  Reform 
Bill" — The  Duke  of  Wellington's  ministry  resign — Formation  of  the 
new  Cabinet  under  Lord  Grey — The  Princess  de  Lieven,  wife  of  the 
Russian  Ambassador — Her  great  influence  in  politics — Sketches  of  the 
different  members  constituting  the  Conference — Arrival  in  England  of 
M.  de  Flahaut — He  brings  a  scheme  from  the  French  Cabinet,  for 
dividing  Belgium  between  the  powers — Talleyrand's  reply — Points  out 
the  fatal  policy  to  France  of  such  a  measure — England  determines  to 
maintain  the  independence  of  Belgium — Various  names  brought  forward 
for  the  Belgian  throne — The  Belgians  ask  for  the  Due  de  Nemours — 
Louis  Philippe  refuses — The  rising  in  Poland  hastens  the  solution  of  the 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  225 

B  -Igian  question— Talleyrand's  views  as  to  the  restoration  of  the  kingdom 
of  Poland — Letter  from  Mdme.  Adelaide  announcing  the  result  of  the  trial 
of  Charles  X.'s  ministers — Futile  protest  of  the  King  of  the  Netherlands 
against  the  decision  of  the  Conference— Prince  Leopold  of  Saxe-Coburg 
refuses  the  Crown  of  Greece — It  is  offered  to  Prince  Otto  of  Bavaria — 
M.  Van  de  Weyer  sent  to  London  to  offer  the  crown  of  Belgium  to 
Prince  Leopold— Efforts  of  M.  de  Celles  to  secure  the  union  of  Belgium 
with  France,  or  the  crown  for  the  Due  de  Nemours — Close  of  the 
eventful  year  of  1830— Appendix  containing  some  of  Prince  Talleyrand's 
private  correspondence. 

I  NEVER  imagined  when,  in  18 16,  I  finished  the  recital  of  some 
of  the  events  of  my  life,  and  my  times,  that  I  should  ever  again 
take  part  in  public  affairs,  and  that,  consequently,  I  should  have 
reason  to  take  up  my  pen  again  to  complete  this  narrative.  It 
is  true,  I  was  not  wholly  satisfied  as  to  the  wisdom  and  ability 
of  those  who  then  had  the  direction  of  affairs  in  France,  but  I 
did  not  think  that  they  would  lead  her  to  ruin.  For  a  long  time, 
I  confess,  I  Mattered  myself  with  the  hope,  that  I  should  die 
peacefully  in  the  shadow  of  that  throne  which  my  efforts  had  in 
some  degree  contributed  to  restore  ;  and  if  from  18 16  to  1829,  I 
was  often  disquieted,  by  seeing  into  what  dangerous  paths  the 
government  was  sometimes  led,  my  fears  never  went  so  far  as  to 
imagine  the  possibility  of  another  Revolution.  I  tried,  at 
different  times,  to  give  such  warnings  as  I  was  able.  I  expressed 
my  views,  sometimes  in  the  Chamber  of  Peers,  sometimes  in 
private  conversation,  but  while  doing  so  with  caution,  I  never- 
theless did  not  hesitate  to  point  out  the  perils  of  the  home  and 
foreign  policy,  that  had  been  adopted  by  the  government,  or 
rather  had  been  imposed  upon  the  government,  by  a  party  more 
imprudent   than   culpable. 

When  Charles  X.  took  the  foolish  step,  in  1829,  of  changing 
his  ministry,  and  summoning  the  most  unpopular  men  to  his 
council,  men  who  had  no  other  merit  than  that  of  obedience,  an 
obedience  that  was  as  blind,  as  was  the  obstinacy  of  the  un- 
fortunate king.  It  was  impossible  to  conceal  from  ourselves, 
that  we  were  hastening  towards  destruction. 

I  can  here  honestly  declare,  that  I  never  ceased  to  desire  the 
continuance  of  the  Restoration,  and  this  was  only  natural,  con- 
sidering the  part  I  had  taken  in  it  ;  I  did  nothing  to  disturb  it, 
and  utterly  repudiate  all  connection  with  those  who  boast  that 
VOL.  III.  Q 


226  .  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

they  helped  in  its  downfall.  In  1814  and  181 5  I  believed,  and  I 
think  so  still,  that  France  could  have  no  solid  and  durable  insti- 
tutions, except  such  as  were  at  the  same  time  based  on  legiti- 
macy, and  on  those  liberal  and  wise  principles,  of  which  the 
Revolution  of  1789  had  shown  the  practical  possibility.  Such 
will  always  be  my  opinion  and  my  political  faith  ;  but  from  the 
moment  that  legitimacy  herself  betrayed  her  own  principles,  by 
breaking  her  vows,  it  became  necessary  to  look  to  the  safety  of 
France  at  all  hazards,  and  at  least  rescue,  if  it  were  possible,  the 
monarchical  principle,  independent  of  legitimacy,  in  the  great 
tempest  thus  raised.  The  idea  of  substituting  the  younger  for 
the  elder  branch  of  the  Royal  family,  similar  to  what  had  been 
done  in  England  in  1688,  had,  as  it  were,  become  common 
town-talk  ever  since  the  formation  of  Charles  X.  last  ministry. 
The  newspapers,  both  those  that  were  friendly  and  those  that 
were  inimical  to  this  ministry,  discussed  it  openly,  it  was  in  every- 
one's thoughts  ;  and  it  was  by  no  means  one  of  the  least  foolish 
acts  of  this  said  imbecile  ministry,  to  have  thus  influenced  public 
opinion.  There  was  no  lack  of  warning  in  this  respect,  but 
there  was  a  decided  want  of  that  courageous  loyalty  and  firm- 
ness, which  might  have  arrested  a  feeble  and  credulous  prince 
on  the  downward  path.  And  that  was  a  crime,  it  can  be  called 
by  no  other  name,  for  it  was  the  cause  of  the  Revolution  of  July 
1830.  If  Charles  X.  had  not  had  cowardly  servants,  ready  to 
sign  the  fatal  proclamations  of  that  period,  they  would 
necessarily  have  remained  unpromulgated. 

But  be  that  as  it  may,  as  it  is  not  my  intention  to  make  this  a 
history  of  the  faults  of  the  Restoration,  I  will  confine  myself  to 
the  simple  facts  of  the  necessity  France  was  under,  in  con- 
sequence of  these  faults,  of  choosing  another  government.  It  is 
the  more  easy  for  me  to  declare,  that  the  choice  she  then  made 
was  the  best  possible,  under  the  given  circumstances,  as  I  took 
no  part  whatever  in  its  formation.  I  accepted  it,  I  clung  to  it  as 
to  a  sheet  anchor,  and  I  served  it  energetically ;  for  if  this  govern- 
ment fell,  I  saw  nothing  before  us  but  another  Republic  and  the 
terrible  consequences  it  would  entail — anarchy,  a  revolutionary 
war,  and  all  the  other  evils  from  which  France  had  been  rescued 
with  so  much  difficulty  in  181 5.  I  did  not  even  go  into  the 
question  as  to  whether  Louis  Philippe  would  have  done  better, 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  227 

if  he  had  simply  taken  the  title  of  lieutenant-governor  of  the 
kingdom,  and  refused  the  crown.  It  had  been  decided  by  the 
men,  who  had  placed  themselves  at  the  head  of  the  movement 
set  on  foot  by  the  proclamations,  and  who  believed  that  legitimate 
royalty  would  never  pardon  them  for  the  part  they  had  taken. 
Those  men  placed  Louis  Philippe  in  the  dilemma,  either  of 
accepting  royalty,  or  delivering  France  over  to  a  Republic.  His 
acceptance  decided  the  conduct  of  those  who  wished  to  save 
their  country  above  all  things.  It  is  easy  to  reason  when  the 
danger  is  past  ;  that  is  the  only  answer  I  will  give  to  those  who, 
on  the  day  of  danger,  kept  quietly  aloof,  and  on  the  morrow 
appeared  in  public,  loudly  blaming  and  criticising,  what  they 
had  not  had  the  courage  to  prevent. 

I  saw  King  Louis  Philippe  soon  after  the  vote  of  the  8th  of 
August,  which  had  assigned  the  crown  to  him.1  The  first  subject 
we  touched  on  was  naturally  the  impression  which  this  new  Revo- 
lution would  produce  in  Europe  ;  we  both  realized  that  the  first 
step  to  be  taken,  was  to  procure  the  recognition  of  the  principle 
of  this  Revolution  by  the  foreign  governments,  and  obtain,  if  not 
their  good-will,  at  least  their  absolute  non-interference  with  the 
home  affairs  of  France.  We  naturally  looked  first  to  England, 
our  nearest  neighbour,  and  who,  by  her  institutions  and  her  past 
revolutions,  ought  to  be  the  power  best  disposed  towards  us.  The 
king  at  once  sent  over  his  aide-de-camp  General  Baudrand,2 
who  soon  returned  bringing  a  recognition  of  our  government  by 
that  of  Great  Britain,  and  with  fairly  friendly  sentiments  from  the 
the  English  Ministry.  This  first  step  gained,  the  king  felt,  and 
so  did  I,  that  though  this  recognition  would  probably  bring  about 
that  of  the  other  cabinets,3  it  was  in  London,  that  the  new  gov- 
ernment must  seek  for  directions  as  to  its  foreign  policy.  It  was 
therefore  indispensable  that  an  experienced  ambassador  should 
be  sent  there,  and  one  already  well  known  in  Europe.  The  king 
at  once  offered  me  this  somewhat  difficult  post.  I  objected  on 
account  of  my  great  age,  the  activity  that  such  a  mission  required, 

1  The  voting  of  the  Chamber  took  place  on  the  7th  August. 

2  General  Comte  Baudrand  (1774  to  1848)  entered  as  a  volunteer  1792,  and 
served  in  the  corps  of  engineers.  He  became  colonel  in  1815,  and,  after  the  Revolu- 
tion of  1S30,  lieutenant-general  and  peer  of  France. 

3  England  recognized  the  new  French  government  in  the  end  of  August.  In  the 
end  of  October,  Russia,  Austria,  Prussia,  and  Spain,  and  all  the  secondary  powers  of 
Kurope  likewise  acknowledged  it.     See  Appendix,  Letter  No.  6. 

Q  2 


228  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

and  the  endless  difficulties  that  were  necessarily  connected  with 
it ;  but  I  was  forced  to  give  in  to  the  solicitations  of  the  king 
and  his  Ministry,1  particularly  of  M.  Mole,  at  that  time  Minister 
of  Foreign  Affairs.  I  therefore  in  this  instance,  like  in  so  many 
others  during  the  course  of  my  life,  made  up  my  mind  to  be 
guided  by  the  feeling  of  duty,  and  the  thought  of  serving  my 
country.  I  thought  the  new  government  could  only  gain 
stability  by  the  maintenance  of  peace,  and  although  at  that 
time  everyone  was  against  me  and  was  of  opinion  that  war  was 
inevitable,  I  felt  assured  that  my  name,  the  services  I  had 
rendered  Europe  in  former  days,  and  all  my  efforts,  would 
perhaps  succeed  in  averting  that  most  terrible  of  all  evils,  a 
revolutionary  and  general  war.  I  am  happy  to  think  I  suc- 
ceeded in  this  before  my  career  was  ended. 

We  were  in  the  month  of  September,  and  on  the  3rd,  I 
received  the  following  note  from  M.  Mole  : — 

"  It  is  half-past  six  ;  I  have  just  returned  from  the  Palais 
Royal,  dead  with  fatigue  and  with  a  bad  headache.  The  king 
is  determined,  insists  on  it  more  than  I  can  tell  you.  You  will 
see  and  judge  for  yourself.  It  will  be  discussed  this  evening  at 
the  council  at  eight  o'clock.  Were  I  less  exhausted  and  in  less 
pain,  I  would  come  and  tell  you  all  about  it. 

"  I  am  yours  in  everything  and  for  everything. 

"  Mole.2 

"  Friday,  St/i  September,  1830,  6.30  P.M." 

Two  days  later  the  king  wrote  to  me  :  "  I  wish  to  have 
the  gratification  of  telling  you  myself,  that  the  Monitenr  of 
to-morrow  will  announce  an  appointment  which  I  have  had  great 
pleasure  in  making.  If  my  London  ambassador  is  disengaged 
to-morrow  at  4  o'clock,  I  shall  be  delighted  if  he  will  come  and 
see  me.  L.  P. 

"  Sunday,  $th  September,  1830,  9.30  P.M." 

1  The  following  formed  the  Ministry  of  the  nth  of  August: — M.  Dupont  de 
l'Eure  had  received  the  portfolio  of  Minister  of  Justice  ;  Comte  Mole,  that  of  Foreign 
Affairs ;  M.  Guizot,  of  the  Interior ;  the  Due  de  Broglie,  of  Public  Instruction, 
Religion,  and  President  of  the  State  Council ;  Baron  Louis,  of  Finance  ;  General 
Gerard  was  War  Minister;  General  Sebastiani,  Minister  of  Marine,  and  MM. 
Lafitte,  Casimir  Perier,  Dupin,  and  Bignon  were  ministers  without  portfolios. 

2  My  reason  for  inserting  this  note  will  be  seen  later  on.  I  wish  to  say  here,  once 
for  all,  that  I  shall  intersperse  my  Memoirs  with  as  many  letters  and  notes  as  I  can, 
for  I  think  the  best  recital  in  the  world  does  not  equal  the  articles  actually  written  at 
the  time  when  the  events  occurred. — {Note  by  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand.) 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  229 

Thus  I  was  Ambassador  at  London,  and  it  behoved  me  to 
make  all  my  preparations  with  the  utmost  despatch.  Lord 
Aberdeen1  was  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  in  the  Cabinet 
presided  over  by  the  Duke  of  Wellington.  I  had  had  intimate 
relations  with  both  in  18 14  and  181 5,  and  I  informed  them  of  my 
appointment,  by  writing  to  Lord  Aberdeen,  who  at  once  replied 
to  me. 

Foreign  Office,  20th  September,  1830. 
Mon  Prince, 

I  am  too  much  flattered  by  your  recollection  of  me,  not 
to  feel  the  necessity  of  expressing  my  feelings  to  you.  If, 
during  a  most  remarkable  period,  I  was  fortunate  enough  to  be 
in  accord  with  your  Excellency,  it  is  truly  not  for  me  to  ignore 
this  privilege  and  pleasure. 

Allow  me  therefore  to  assure  you,  mon  Prince,  that  when  you 
arrive  in  England,  you  will  find  me  eager  to  renew  these  friendly 
relations, — the  more  so,  as  I  hope  I  am  not  deceived  in  thinking, 
that  the  principal  object  of  your  mission,  is  to  confirm  the  good 
understanding  between  our  two  countries. 
Accept  .... 

Aberdeen. 

Assured  that  I  was  understood  by  the  man  with  whom  I 
should  have  to  do  with  principally,  I  had  only  to  prepare  for  my 
departure.  I  left  Paris  on  the  22nd  of  September  reaching 
Dover  on  the  evening  of  the  24th.  When  I  heard  the  noise  of 
the  guns  from  the  fortress,  announcing  the  arrival  of  the  French 
Ambassador,  I  could  not  help  remembering  the  time,  when, 
thirty-six  years  before,  I  had  quitted  these  same  English  shores, 
exiled  from  my  country  by  revolutionary  troubles,  and  repulsed 
from  British  soil  by  the  intrigues  of  the  emigres ;  now  I 
returned  filled  with  hope,  and  above  all  with  the  wish,  to  bring 
about  at  last  that  alliance  between  France  and  England,  which 
I  had  always  considered  to  be  the  most  solid  guarantee  for  the 
happiness  of  both  nations,  and  the  peace  of  the  whole  world. 
But   what  obstacles  there   would  be  to  overcome,  ere  this  end 

1  George  Gordon,  Earl  of  Aberdeen,  born  in  17S4,  was  Ambassador  at  Vienna  in 
1814  at  the  Congress.  In  1828  he  became  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  in  the  Duke  of 
Wellington's  Cabinet,  and  retired  with  that  ministry  on  the  1 6th  November,  1S30. 
He  returned  to  public  life  in  November  1834  under  the  short  Wellington  ministry, 
as  Colonial  Secretary,  and  again  in  1841  in  the  Peel  Cabinet.  In  1852  he  was  head 
of  the  ministry  that  made  an  offensive  and  defensive  alliance  with  France.  II 
retired  in  1855,  and  died  in  i860. 


230  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

should  be  attained  !  But  if  I  hid  them  from  others,  in  order  not 
to  discourage  them,  they  were  none  the  less  apparent  to  myself: 
they  were  numerous,  grave,  and  of  a  two-fold  nature;  on  the 
one  hand  was  France,  with  a  hastily-constituted  government, 
fighting  daily  for  its  existence,  and  unable  therefore  to  inspire 
foreign  powers  with  any  real  confidence.  On  the  other  hand,  I 
was  quite  aware  that  a  Conservative  and  Tory  ministry  governed 
England,  and  that  notwithstanding  its  ready  recognition  of  our 
Revolution,  it  could  not  look  upon  it  in  a  favourable  light,  more 
especially  after  this  rising  in  Belgium,  the  news  of  which  had 
reached  me  at  Calais.1  These  were  my  reflections  as  I  traversed 
the  rich,  beautiful,  and  peaceable  country  of  England,  and 
entered  London  on  the  25th  September,  1830.  Fortunately, 
however,  they  did  not  shake  either  my  resolutions  or 
convictions.  And  this  was  as  well,  for  ere  long  I  received 
letters  from  France  which  were  anything  but  reassuring,  M. 
Mole   wrote    as   follows  : 

Paris,  26th  September,  1830. 

Mon  Prince, 

I  received  your  kind  letter  from  Calais  yesterday.  I 
saw  with  much  pleasure,  that  you  had  borne  the  journey  comfort- 
ably. The  papers,  incorrect  as  their  accounts  have  been,  will 
have  informed  you  of  what  has  happened  here  since  your  de- 
parture. At  one  time,  I  feared  that  our  official  correspondence 
would  have  ceased  ere  it  had  begun.  Now,  I  believe  that  it  will 
commence,  though  I  cannot  say  how  long  it  may  continue. 
Madame  de  Dino,  whom  I  saw  yesterday,  and  with  whom  I  dine 
this  evening,  will  tell  you  more. 

Accept  .  .  . 

The  Due  de  Dalberg  also  wrote  to  me  on  the  date  of  27th  of 
September  : — 

You  have  but  just  quitted  Paris,  my  dear  Prince,  and 
the  papers  will  have  made  known  to  you,  the  various  matters 
that   have  occupied  us  for    the  last  few  days  ;  I  should  there- 

1  On  the  25th  of  August,  the  people  of  Brussels  rose  in  the  name  of  National 
independence.  On  the  1st  of  September,  the  Prince  of  Orange,  the  eldest  son  of  the 
king,  arrived  beneath  the  walls  of  the  town,  but  he  was  recalled  by  his  father,  who 
feared  that  he  might  side  with  the  insurgents.  On  the  23rd  of  September,  his 
brother,  Prince  Frederic,  entered  the  town,  but  was  forced  to  evacuate  it  after  a 
struggle  of  four  days.  On  the  3rd  of  October  following,  a  Provisional  Government 
proclaimed  the  independence  of  Belgium. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  231 

fore  have  deemed  it  unnecessary  to  write  to  you,  if  Madame 
de  Dino  had  not  wished  to  bring  you  something  more,  than  the 
mere  expressions  of  my  sincere  devotion  to  you. 

I  have  sent  word  to  you,  that  we  were  on  the  verge  of  a 
democratic  anarchy.  The  ministry  was  about  to  be  dissolved. 
Lafittc a  was  to  have  formed  another  ministry,  from  which  I 
am  assured  the  king  has  excluded  General  Lamarque2  and 
Mauguin.3 

Lafittc  withdrew,  when  he  found  that  ninety  deputies  were 
ranged  in  opposition,  that  petitions  were  being  signed  at  the 
Bourse,  and  that  the  reports  from  the  departments  were  un- 
favourable to  a  power  that  took  so  low  a  stand.  It  remains  to  be 
seen  whether  matters  will  continue  as  they  are,  until  the  end  of 
October.  The  important  question  now  is,  will  Belgium  come  to 
some  arrangement  with  her  sovereign,  who  seems  to  me  to  be 
very  obstinate,  and  who  does  not  speak  out  frankly  and 
positively  ?  If  Belgium  rises  and  resists,  you  will  have  a  change 
of  government  here,  followed  by  a  war.  Marshal  de  Trevise 
said  to  me  this  morning,  "  The  Belgians  have  begun  six  months 
too  soon,"  and  Marshal  Soult,  who  was  next  him,  remarked  that 
here  we  were  behindhand.  If  diplomacy  is  to  be  carried  on  by 
opinions  such  as  these,  1  would  counsel  you,  mon  Prince,  to 
retire.     You  could  never  do  anything.  .  .  . 

So  much  for  France.  The  following  extract  from  my  second 
letter  to  M.  Mole,  will  give  a  correct  idea  of  the  views  of  the 
English  ministry  with  regard  to  us. 


1  Jacques  Lafitte,  born  in  1767,  entered  the  office  of  the  banker  Perregaux  in  1788, 
whose  confidence  he  gained  completely  and  became  his  partner  in  1800.  At  his 
death,  he  succeeded  him,  became  governor  of  the  bank  of  France  in  1814,  and 
deputy  of  the  Chamber  of  Representatives  in  1815.  He  was  re-elected  in  1816-17. 
After  the  Revolution  of  July,  he  joined  the  ministry  of  the  nth  August,  and  was 
president  of  the  Cabinet  of  the  3rd  November,  1S30.  He  retired  in  March,  1831. 
He  was  re-elected  each  time  to  the  Chamber,  except  during  a  short  interval  in  1837  ; 
he  kept  his  seat  in  the  ranks  of  the  opposition  until  his  death  (1844). 

-  Maximilien,  Comte  Lamarque,  born  in  1770,  served  as  a  volunteer  in  1791, 
became  a  Brigadier-General  in  1801,  Chief  of  the  Staff  of  the  army  of  Naples  in  1807, 
and  General  of  Division  the  same  year.  During  the  hundred  days,  he  was  made 
governor  of  Paris,  and  later,  Commander-in-Chief  of  the  army  of  Vendee.  He  was 
exiled  during  the  second  restoration,  returned  to  France  in  1818,  and  was  elected 
deputy  in  1828,  becoming  one  of  the  most  active  members  of  the  opposition.  He 
died  of  cholera  in  1S32.  His  funeral  gave  rise  to  great  disturbances  and  occasioned 
much  bloodshed  (5th  and  6th  of  June). 

3  Francois  Mauguin,  born  in  1785,  called  to  the  bar  of  Paris  in  1S13,  defended 
M.  de  Labedoyere  in  1S15,  and  was  pleader  in  most  of  the  political  trials  on  the 
restoration.  In  1827  he  was  elected  deputy  for  Cote-d'Or,  and  from  that  time 
forth  kept  his  seat  in  the  Chamber,  until  1851.  He  sided  with  the  advanced  opposi- 
tion in  1830,  and  was  the  friend  of  General  Lamarque.  He  died  on  the  4th  of 
June,  1854. 


232  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

London,  September  27th,  1830. 

M.    LE    COMTE, 

Lord  Aberdeen  having  returned  to  town  to-day,  I  have 
requested  M.  de  Vaudreuil 1  to  inform  him  of  my  arrival  and  to 
ask  him  at  what  time  I  could  see  him.  He  answered  imme- 
diately that  he  was  ready  for  me,  and  would  not  go  out.  I  had 
every  reason  to  be  satisfied  with  this  first  interview.  He  most 
kindly  told  me,  that  when  he  heard  of  my  arrival  in  London,  he 
had  shortened  his  stay  in  the  country  and  hastened  back  to 
town.  Although  my  visit  was  a  lengthy  one,  we  touched  only 
(as  I  intended  we  should)  on  general  topics,  into  which  I  could 
easily  introduce  those  principles  which  govern  the  policy  of 
France.  To  do  this  I  had  only  to  remember  the  instructions 
the  king  had  given  me.  I  could  see  at  once,  that  his  Britannic 
Majesty's  minister  was  far  more  ready  to  praise,  than  to  combat 
them.  I  could  not  but  be  satisfied  with  what  he  said  on  this 
subject. 

On  leaving  Lord  Aberdeen,  I  went  to  the  Duke  of  Welling- 
ton, who  had  also  returned  this  morning.  Here  also  I  had  every 
reason  to  be  well  pleased  with  the  reception  accorded  to  the 
king's  minister.  The  Duke's  sentiments  were  quite  favourable 
to  the  state  of  things  which  fortunately?  now  exists  in  France. 
Nevertheless,  as  in  the  course  of  our  conversation,  he  made  use 
of  the  word  unfortunate  in  speaking  of  the  Revolution,  brought 
on  by  the  foolish  actions  of  the  late  government,  I  thought  I 
ought  to  take  notice  of  this  expression,  and  said  that  no  doubt 
it  had  been  suggested  to  him,  by  a  very  natural  feeling  of  pity 
for  those,  whom  this  Revolution  had  dethroned  ;  but  that  he 
must  feel  convinced  that  it  was  not  a  misfortune,  either  for 
France — saved  by  it  from  the  terrible  position  in  which  the 
policy  of  the  late  government  had  placed  it — or  for  the  other 
States,  with  whom  we  are  desirous  of  remaining  on  friendly 
terms,  and  from  which  we  shall  never  deviate,  if,  as  we  have  the 
right  to  demand,  the  dignity  of  France  is  always  respected. 

After  this  observation  of  mine,  made  in  a  somewhat  excited 
tone,  the  duke  rather  withdrew  the  expression  he  had  used,  by 
hastening  to  endorse  the  view  I  had  suggested  to  him. 

I  believe,  M.  le  Comte,  thatT  can  certainly  augur,  from  these 
first  interviews,  that  the  personal  feelings  of  the  English  ministers 
will  not  complicate  the  difficulties  that  may  arise  from  the  very 
nature  of  the  matters  I  shall  have  to  treat  of  with  them. 

Lord  Aberdeen  has  not  yet  been  able  to  tell  me  at  what  date 

1  Victor  Louis  Rigaud,  Vicomte  de  Vaudreuil,  was  born  in  1799,  entered  the 
diplomatic  service  in  1815  and  had  been  secretary  at  the  Hague,  at  Cassel,  at  London, 
and  at  Lisbon.  In  1830  he  was  Chief  Secretary  in  London.  He  was  soon  after 
appointed  minister  at  Weimar,  and  then  at  Munich,  where  he  died  in  1834. 

2  Suppressed  in  the  text  of  the  archives. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1S30.  2.33 

the  king  can   grant  mc  an   audience,  nor  whether  it  will  be  in 
London  or  at  Brighton. 


These  letters  and  despatches  will  suffice  to  prove  the  great 
delicacy  of  my  position  here.  The  future  (which  fortunately  for 
man  is  hidden  from  him)  did  not  reveal  to  mc,  how  greatly  this 
position  would  be  still  further  embarrassed  by  fresh  complica- 
tions, and  I  therefore  set  to  work  with  good  courage. 

My  staff  at  the  embassy  was  but  a  mediocre  one  ;  it  had 
been  in  great  part  arranged  for  me  ere  I  left  Paris,  and  I  was 
forced  to  make  many  changes,  before  it  was  as  effective  as  it 
afterwards  became.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  my  niece,  the 
Duchesse  de  Dino,  had  consented  to  accompany  mc  to  London, 
and  I  knew  that  her  charming  manner  and  disposition,  would 
greatly  assist  me  in  conciliating  that  very  exclusive  English 
society,  the  goodwill  of  which,  I  saw  with  pleasure,  she  very 
quickly  gained.  It  was  no  easy  matter,  however,  for  the  majority 
of  the  English  aristocracy  had  not  accepted  our  revolution  as 
readily  as  the  ministry  had  done  ;  and  in  this  aristocracy,  there 
were  besides  outside  influences  at  work  (to  which  I  shall  have 
occasion  to  refer  to  later),  which  were  in  active  operation  against 
us  on  our  first  arrival,  but  which  we  succeeded,  though  not  with- 
out some  trouble,  in  overcoming. 

Events  rapidly  took  a  more  serious  aspect  in  Belgium.  The 
revolt  in  Brussels,  changed  into  a  general  rising  over  the  whole 
country,  and  partly  through  the  fault  of  the  government  and  its 
unpopularity,  and  partly  from  the  desire  to  imitate  what  had 
taken  place  in  France,  a  revolution,  as  complete  as  ours,  had 
taken  place,  with  only  this  marked  difference  ;  that  whereas  in 
France,  the  revolution  was  partly  the  result  of  the  ungodliness 
of  the  clergy,  in  Belgium  it  was  the  clergy  themselves  who 
instigated  it.  A  serious  lesson  given  to  all  governments,  who 
had  once  again,  to  learn  the  double  danger,  of  favouring  one 
religion  more  than  another  (as  was  done  in  the  Netherlands),  or 
of  vesting  the  religion  in  the  government,  as  was  attempted  in 
France. 

This  incident  of  the  Belgian  revolution,  singularly  increased 
the  difficulties  of  our  first  relations  with  the  English  Govern- 
ment ;  for  if  I  was  obliged,  from  the  commencement,  to  utilize 


234  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

in  favour  of  our  revolution,  the  principle  of  non-intervention, 
generally  adopted  by  this  Government,  I  nevertheless  could  not 
forget,  that  the  creation  of  the  kingdom  of  the  Netherlands,1  by 
the  union  of  Belgium  and  Holland,  had,  in  1814,  been  the  work 
of  England,  and  of  those  same  English  statesmen,  whom  I  now 
again  found  in  power  in  1830.  Would  these  men  consent  to 
accept  the  consequences  of  the  principles  of  non-intervention, 
the  result  of  which  would  be  the  overthrow  of  a  combination, 
adopted  out  of  hatred  or  fear  of  France,  when  this  same  France 
must  appear  still  more  dangerous  to  them,  after  the  revolution 
she  had  just  effected  ?  A  very  delicate  primary  question  to  lay 
before  the  English  ministers  ! 

I  nevertheless  did  not  hesitate  to  do  so,  as  soon  as  the  news 
reached  London,  that  the  Dutch  had  been  repulsed  from  Brussels, 
and  that  the  King  of  the  Netherlands  was  quite  unable  to  re- 
establish his  power  in  Belgium. 

I  must  do  the  English  Government  the  justice  to  say,  that 
it  at  once  and  most  loyally,  recognized  the  rights  of  the  principle 
of  non-intervention  ;  but  its  application  to  the  present  case, 
presented  certain  considerations  which  were  not  without  force. 
The  following  was  the  view  taken  by  the  Cabinet : 

"  If  it  is  proved  that  the  King  of  the  Netherlands  cannot 
possibly  restore  order  in  his  country,  it  is  none  the  less  im- 
portant to  the  interests  of  Europe,  that  matters  should  not 
remain  in  the  state  they  are  in  at  present.  We  cannot,  neither 
can  you  any  more  than  we,  remain  indifferent  to  what  is  happening 
there.  Thus,  while  supporting  the  principle  of  non-intervention, 
it  is  necessary  that  we  should  together,  find  means  to  prevent 
those  States,  which  fear  the  spread  of  the  revolutionary  spirit, 
from  taking  such  violent  action,  as  would  render  a  war  inevitable. 
Would  it  not  be  possible  by  judicious  advice,  to  effect  a  recon- 
ciliation, advantageous  to  both  Holland  and  Belgium,  by  which 
each,  in  making  some  sacrifice,  would  obtain  the  essential  part 
of  what  she  had  a  right  to  demand  ?  Giving  advice  is  not 
interfering,  if  he  who  gives  it,  makes  no  attempt  to  follow  it  up 
by  coercion.     By   not  overstepping   this   friendly   position,  the 

1  Since  the  year  1815  the  Dutch  Constitution,  which  had  been  extended  to 
Belgium,  had  been  submitted  for  approbation  to  the  leading  men  of  Belgium.  It 
was  rejected  by  796  votes  against  527,  and  among  the  members  of  the  majority,  126 
had  specially  given,  as  the  reason  for  their  vote  lilfie  articles  relating  to  religion." 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  235 

independence  of  the  State  so  counselled  is  not  hurt,  and  no  other 
Government  could  possibly  take  umbrage  at  it.  All  Europe 
agreed  to  the  formation  of  the  Netherlands  in  18 14.  It  would  be 
a  great  mistake  to  suppose,  that  if  the  dismemberment  of  that 
kingdom  is  allowed,  the  peace  of  Europe  would  not  be  disturbed." 

Lord  Aberdeen  said  in  conclusion,  that  it  was  the  duty  of 
the  Powers  who  could  in  any  way  influence  the  King  of  the 
Netherlands,  to  use  that  influence  now,  but  only  in  the  way  of 
persuasion,  and  carefully  avoiding  any  steps  which  might  be 
interpreted  as  having  a  different  character,  in  order  to  prevail 
upon  the  two  parties,  frankly  to  make  concessions,  so  that  an 
understanding  might  be  arrived  at ;  and  that  as  France  and 
England  were  alone  in  a  position  to  act,  they  should  do  so  at 
once,  the  urgency  of  the  circumstances  requiring  it ;  and  he  there- 
fore thought  it  fell  to  them,  to  offer  their  advice  in  this  matter. 

These  considerations  had  the  more  weight  in  my  eyes,  that 
having  no  reason  to  doubt  the  sincerity  of  the  intentions  of  the 
English  Government,  I  saw  herein  from  the  very  first,  the 
necessity  it  felt  of  concerting  with  us  in  a  matter  in  which  its 
interests  were  involved.  It  therefore  seemed  to  me  quite  out 
of  the  question  that  we  should  entrench  ourselves  behind  the 
general  principle  of  non-intervention,  and  take  up  a  passive 
attitude,  which  was  not  without  danger  to  the  peace  of  Europe, 
and  by  which  we  should  lose  part  of  the  influence  the  English 
Government  seem  desirous  we  should  possess.  I  therefore  sup- 
ported in  Paris,  the  views  that  Lord  Aberdeen  presented  through 
Lord  Stuart  of  Rothesay,  the  English  ambassador  there. 

On  the  6th  October,  while  awaiting  the  answer  from  Paris 
to  these  proposals,  I  had  an  audience  of  the  King  of  England,  at 
which  I  presented  my  credentials.1  On  that  occasion  I  addressed 
the  following  speech  to  him  : 

Sire,  His  Majesty  the  King  of  the  French  has  chosen  me 
as  the  interpreter  of  his  feelings  towards  your  Majesty. 

I  gladly  accepted  a  mission  which  gave  so  noble  an  object 
to  the  last  days  of  my  career. 

Sire,  of  all  the  vicissitudes  that  my  great  age  has  witnessed, 
of  all  the  divers  changes  that  forty  years  teeming  with  events, 
have  mingled  in  my  life,  perhaps  none  has  so  completely  fulfilled 
my  wishes  as  the  selection  which  brings  me  back  to  this  happy 

1  See  Appendix,  Letter  No.  6 


236  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

country.  But  what  a  difference  between  the  two  periods  !  The 
jealousies,  the  prejudices  that  have  so  long  divided  France  from 
England,  have  now  given  place  to  feelings  of  esteem  and  en- 
lightened affection.  Common  interests  will  draw  the  ties  between 
the  two  countries  still  closer.  England  repudiates  abroad  equally 
with  France,  the  principle  of  intervention  in  the  home  affairs  of 
her  neighbours,  and  the  ambassador  of  a  sovereign  chosen 
unanimously  by  a  great  nation,  feels  himself  at  ease  on  a  soil 
of  liberty,  and  near  a  descendant  of  the  illustrious  house  of 
Brunswick.  I  appeal  with  confidence  to  your  goodwill,  sire, 
with  reference  to  the  matters  I  am  charged  to  bring  to  your 
notice,  and  I  pray  you  to  graciously  accept  the  homage  of  my 
profoundest  respect. 

William  IV.,  to  whom  I  was  accredited,  had  been  in  the 
navy,  and  had  retained  the  tone  and  manners  which  that  service 
generally  gives.  He  was  an  honest  man,  rather  narrow-minded, 
and  whom  the  Whig  party  had  always  counted  in  its  ranks  ; 
nevertheless,  since  his  recent  accession  to  the  throne  (26th  June, 
1830)  he  had  retained  the  Tory  ministry  of  his  brother  and  pre- 
decessor, George  IV.  He  received  me  very  kindly,  stammered 
a  few  friendly  phrases  in  his  incorrect  French  about  King  Louis 
Philippe,  and  expressed  the  pleasure  he  had  felt  on  hearing  that 
the  Societes  populaires l  had  been  closed  in  Paris.  I  wish  to 
say  here,  so  that  I  need  not  refer  to  it  again,  that  during  the 
four  years  of  my  embassy  in  London,  I  have  nothing  but  praise 
to  record  of  the  behaviour  of  the  King  and  Queen  of  England, 
who  eagerly  took  every  opportunity  of  making  themselves  pleasant 
both  to  me  and  to  my  niece,  the  Duchesse  de  Dino. 

Before  M.  Mole's  answer  to  the  proposals  of  the  English 
Cabinet  reached  me,  I  received  two  letters  from  him,  which  con- 
tained some  quite  unfounded  reproaches.2  The  following  extract 
from  the  despatch  which  I  sent  him  on  the  6th  of  October,  after 
seeing  the  king,  will  sufficiently  explain  both  the  nature  of  the 
reproaches,  and  the  small  foundation  for  them  : — 

....  We  must  not  reproach  Lord  Aberdeen  for  not 
having  made  known    to   me,  a   demand    for  assistance  which 

1  It  is  not  quite  right  that  the  clubs  were  shut  up  at  this  date  (6th  October).  It 
is  true  that  on  the  25th  of  the  preceding  September,  a  discussion  had  taken  place  in 
the  Chamber  on  this  subject,  and  MM.  Guizot  and  Dupin  had  urged  the  Cabinet  to 
take  vigorous  action,  but  the  ministers  had  refused  to  discuss  it.  Nevertheless  the 
same  evening  the  Societe  des  Ami  du  Peuple,  situated  in  the  Rue  Montmartre,  was 
invaded  and  dispersed  by  the  inhabitants  of  that  quarter  of  the  town. 

3  See  Appendix,  Letters  Nos.  3  and  5. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  237 

he  was  said  to  have  received  from  the  Government  of  the 
Netherlands.  I  can  give  you  the  assurance  that  no  such 
step  had  been  taken,  and  that  nothing  of  the  sort  has 
occurred.  Fears  have  been  expressed,  needs  have  been  re- 
vealed, troubles  and  difficulties  have  been  spoken  of,  but  no 
positive  demand  had  been  made.  The  actual  request  for  sup- 
port and  assistance  only  arrived  this  evening  at  midnight.  Lord 
Aberdeen  has  just  confirmed  what  I  have  written  to  you  on  this 
subject.  The  English  Government  will  not  reply  until  it  has 
come  to  some  arrangement  with  us.  This  arrangement  is  now 
eagerly  desired  by  the  English  cabinet,  and  it  seems  to  me  that 
to  arrive  at  such  a  result,  not  much  time  has  been  lost  between 
the  27th  of  September  and  the  3rd  of  October,  when  I  zorote  to 
you.1  I  deemed  it  preferable  that  the  proposal  should  come 
from  the  English  Government,  and  I  am  still  of  this  opinion, 
without  however  greatly  insisting  on  it,  since  I  have  seen  the 
letter — I  mention  this  in  passing — which  you  wrote  to  the  Duke 
of  Wellington,  without  informing  me  of  the  fact,  that  overtures 
were  being  made  on  our  side.  This,  however,  is  not  a  point  of 
real  importance.  The  affair  is  on  the  right  road,  and  the  favour- 
able dispositions  here  are  on  the  increase.  Every  means  are 
sought  in  thorough  good  faith,  to  solve  the  difficulty,  and  you 
will  meet  with  very  few  obstacles  on  the  part  of  the  English 
government.  Those  which  it  will  make,  will  have  reference  to 
undertakings  named  in  special  treaties,  but  objections  of  this 
nature  are  not  insurmountable  when  a  powerful  government 
really  wishes  to  settle  matters. 

Lord  Aberdeen  told  me  some  days  ago,  that  we  were  to  have 
a  conference  on  the  affairs  of  Portugal,  but  he  added  that  there 
was  no  immediate  hurry.  I  will  therefore  write  to  you  later  on 
as  to  this  matter.  It  will  be  difficult  for  you,2  to  get  the  English 
Government  to  recognize  (according  to  my  instructions)  the 
government  of  Terceira  as  an  actual  government;3  for  it  is  an 
undoubted  fact  that  it  emanates  from  Dom  Pedro,  that  it  is  paid 
by  him,  and  that  he  nominates  its  members.  When  you  come 
to  treat  of  this  question,  this  is  the  objection  that  England  will 
probably  raise. 

When  going  away  the  King  said  to  me,  "An  revoir  a 
Brighton"  and  I  think  I  shall  go  there,  as  soon  as  1  find  that 
affairs  no  longer  require  my  presence  here.  .  .  . 

As  I  was  informed  that  it  was  thought  in  Paris  I  had  not 
written    frequently   enough    during    the    weeks    I    had    been  in 

1  Suppressed  in  the  text  of  the  archives.  -  Var.:  "ttous"="xis." 

3  The  inland  of  Terceira  (Azores)  was  the  seat  of  Queen  Donna  Maria's  govern- 
ment during  the  usurpation  of  Dom  Miguel  (1829 — 1833). 


238  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

London,  and  that  uneasiness  was  expressed  thereat,1  I  did  not 
rely  on  my  despatch  of  the  8th  October  having  been  read,  but 
wrote  a  private  letter  to  M.  Mole,  which  I  here  insert,  in  order 
to  show  in  what  spirit  I  intended  carrying  out  the  mission 
entrusted  to  me. 

London,  8fk  November,  1830. 

We  know  one  another,  we  love  one  another,  we  desire  the 
same  things  ;  we  understand  them  in  the  same  way,  we  wish 
them  to  be  carried  out  similarly,  our  point  of  departure  is  the 
same,  our  goal  is  the  same.  Why  then,  being  on  the  same  road, 
do  we  not  understand  each  other  ?  There  is  something  here 
which  I  cannot  comprehend,  and  which  J  trust,  is  but  of  a  passing 
nature. 

Our  correspondence  is  neither  friendly  nor  official  ;  I  think 
that  it  should  be  otherwise  between  us,  and  I  come,  with  all  my 
old  friendship,  to  pray  you,  that  it  may  be  so.  A  less  complete 
confidence,  a  less  intimate  understanding,  might  seriously  harm, 
impede,  or  delay  affairs  ;  our  friendship  would  suffer,  and  this 
would  grieve  me  greatly.  If  my  way  of  carrying  on  affairs  is 
out  of  date,  it  would  be  better  to  tell  me  so  frankly.  Let  us 
then  be  quite  open  with  one  another  ;  we  can  do  no  real  good, 
unless  we  treat  affairs  with  that  ease  and  frankness,  which 
begets  confidence.  You  will  find  that  I  shall  always  tell  you 
everything,  except  what  I  think  is  of  no  importance  ;  it  was 
thus  I  carried  on  affairs  with  the  emperor,  as  well  as  with 
Louis  XVIII.  I  know  that  modern  France  does  not  hold  with 
this  old  style  ;  that  she  is,  what  is  called  progressive ;  but 
standing  here  on  the  soil  of  ancient  Europe,  I  feel  that  we  must 
leave  these  matters  to  time,  and  that  undue  haste  is  too  much 
opposed  to  English  habits  not  to  somewhat  lessen  the  degree 
of"  weight  which  we  must  give  to  all  our  proceedings.  The 
English  Government,  you  may  rest  assured,  is  well  inclined 
towards  us. 

With  kindest  regards.  .  .  . 


-a" 


Together  with  this  letter,  I  sent  a  despatch,  giving  a  full 
account  of  what  the  ministry  knew  and  thought  of  Belgian 
affairs.  Prussia,  to  whom  the  King  of  the  Netherlands  had  also 
appealed  for  help,  replied  that  she  would  only  act  in  concert 
with  England.  It  was  thought  that  Austria  would  do  the  same, 
but  nothing  of  course  was  as  yet  known,  as  to  the  views  of  St. 

1  Madame  Adelaide  had  made  herself  the  interpreter  of  the  prince's  sentiments 
(see  Appendix,  letter  7,  written  to  him  on  the  8th  of  October.  M.  de  Talleyrand 
replied  to  it  on  the  29th,  justifying  himself,  letter  11). 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  239 

Petersburg,  on  this  question.     Much  uneasiness  has  been  felt  at 
Prince  Frederic  of  the  Netherlands' x  march  on  Brussels. 

The  same  day  these  letters  were  sent  off,  M.  Bresson,2  chief 
clerk  at  M.  Mole's  office,  arrived  in  London,  having  been  made 
first  secretary  of  my  embassy,  in  place  of  M.  Challaye,  who 
had  been  sent  to  Smyrna  as  consul-general.  I  had  need  of  such 
reinforcement  for  the  daily  work,  which  required  much  time. 

The  reply  from  Paris  to  the  overtures  of  the  English  Govern- 
ment arrived  at  last :  the  answer  was  virtually  an  acceptance  of 
the  English  proposals,  but  at  the  same  time  expressing  a  resolute 
desire,  that  the  conferences  on  the  Belgian  question,  should  take 
place  in  Paris.  M.  Mole's  reply  to  my  letter  was  written  in  a 
very  friendly  spirit,  and  all  appeared  to  be  going  on  smoothly. 

When  I  acquainted  Lord  Aberdeen  with  the  wishes  of  the 
French  Government,  relative  to  the  locality  for  the  conferences, 
he  said  he  must  consult  his  colleagues  on  this  matter,  though  he 
himself  saw  no  objection.  He  soon  however  informed  me,  that 
at  a  cabinet  council,  at  which  the  proposal  of  the  French 
Government  had  been  submitted,  he  and  his  colleagues  had 
decided  that  it  could  not  be  accepted.  The  Duke  of  Wellington, 
whom  I  saw  after  this  communication,  told  me  the  reasons 
which  had  decided  them  to  reject  our  proposal.  They  considered, 
he  said,  that  under  the  circumstances,  the  question  of  time  was 
everything  ;  that  it  was  all  important  to  discuss  and  decide 
matters  quickly,  and  that  everything  was  ready  in  London,  for 
arriving  at  a  prompt  and  definite  decision.  He  considered  that 
this  was  quite  in  our  interest,  for  our  position,  notwithstanding 
the  recognition  of  the  powers,  would  not  be  assured,  until  after 
the  pacification  of  Belgium,  and  he  added,  that  it  was  now  also 
important  for  England,  that  this  position  should  not  only  be 
assured,  but  that  it  should  also  be  great  and  powerful.  He 
thought  he  was   sure  of   the  foreign    ministers    who  would  be 

1  Frederic-Guillaume-Charles,  Prince  of  the  Netherlands,  son  of  King  William  I., 
was  born  in  1797,  made  administrator-general  of  the  war  department  and  admiral, 
by  his  father.  In  1830  he  was  placed  at  the  head  of  the  army,  that  was  to  operate 
against  Brussels.  He  entered  that  town  on  the  22nd  of  September,  but  was  forced  to 
evacuate  it  after  a  struggle  of  four  days. 

2  Charles  Comte  Bresson,  born  in  1798,  entered  the  diplomatic  service  under  the 
Restoration.  In  1830  was  appointed  chief  secretary  at  London,  and  in  1833  charge 
d'affaires  at  Berlin.  In  November  1834  he  became  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  and 
was  created  a  peer  of  France.  In  1S41  he  went  as  ambassador  to  Madrid,  and  in 
1847  to  Naples,  and  committed  suicide  a  few  days  after  his  arrival  there. 


240  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

summoned  to  the  conference,  if  it  was  held  in  London  ;  many 
indeed  had  their  credentials  already,  and  those  who  had  not  yet 
got  them,  would  follow  the  lead  of  the  others,  and  all  would 
sign  what  France  and  England  wished.  He  greatly  doubted 
whether  it  would  be  the  same  in  Paris,  where  the  foreign 
ministers  would  not  venture  to  sign  anything,  without  first  con- 
sulting their  respective  courts.  A  few  days  lost  now,  might  com- 
plicate matters  to  such  an  extent,  that  it  would  be  extremely 
difficult  to  remedy  them,  or  come  to  any  mutual  understanding. 

I  tried  in  vain  to  combat  these  views,  according  to  the 
instructions  I  had  received  from  Paris.  I  pointed  out  specially, 
the  word  resolute  contained  in  those  instructions  ;  but  I  could 
gain  nothing,  and  was  only  able  to  write  to  Paris,  that  from 
whichever  side  the  concession  came,  whether  from  France  or 
England,  France  would  find  the  English  cabinet  equally  well 
disposed  towards  her. 

I  must  nevertheless  admit  that  on  this  point  I  agreed  with 
the  English  Cabinet  for  reasons  hardly  yet  realized.  It 
did  not  seem  to  me  advisable  to  assemble  the  conference  in 
the  midst  of  Paris,  given  up  either  to  riots  or  daily  disturbances, 
and  when  the  precarious  position  of  the  Government,  disquieted 
by  the  coming  trial  of  the  ministers  of  Charles  X.,1  could  not 
inspire  any  confidence  in  the  foreign  ministers,  charged  with 
maintaining  the  peace  of  Europe.  Besides  I  knew  that  in  Paris 
M.  Pozzo  2  would  be  the  leading  spirit  at  the  conference,  owing 
to  the  influence  he  had  over  M.  Mole  :  and  the  Duke  of 
Wellington's  reputation  in  Europe  seemed  to  me  preferable  to 
that  of  Pozzo.  Nevertheless  I  did  my  utmost,  to  induce  the 
English  ministers  to  agree  to  Paris,  as  the  scene  of  the  negotia- 
tion. But  I  still  believe  that  they  did  wisely  in  refusing  to 
comply  with  this  request.3 

There  was,  besides,  another  question,  which  at  that  time 
complicated  the  relations  between  the  new  French  Government 
and  England,  i.e.,  the  affairs  of  Portugal.     I  have  already  alluded 

1  The  trial  of  the  Ministers  was  to  commence  on  the  15th  of  December  before  the 
Chamber  of  Peers. 

2  Count  Pozzo  de  Borgo  was  at  that  time  Russian  ambassador  at  Paris. 

3  M.  de  Talleyrand  in  his  private  correspondence  insists  repeatedly  on  the  great 
influence  of  the  Duke  of  Wellington,  on  his  European  reputation,  and  on  the  necessity 
of  fixing  the  seat  of  the  conferences  in  London.  (See  Appendix,  letters  No.  Sand 
No.  10.) 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  241 

to  them,  but  it  is  necessary  here,  briefly  to  recall  the  facts,  in 
order  to  understand  the  question  better.1 

It  will  be  remembered  that  Dom  Miguel,  having  returned  to 
Portugal,  had,  with  the  consent  of  the  powers,  taken  up  the 
government  of  the  country  until  his  niece,  Dona  Maria,  whom 
he  was  to  marry,  came  of  age.  It  was  thought,  that  in  this 
way  the  difficult  question  as  to  the  rights  of  Dom  Pedro  (Dona 
Maria's  father,  who  on  being  made  Emperor  of  Brazil,  had 
renounced  the  crown  of  Portugal)  and  the  pretensions  of  Dom 
Miguel,  who  after  this  renunciation  had  claimed  the  crown  of 
Portugal,  might  become  reconciled.  Dom  Miguel  however  had 
no  sooner  entered  Portugal,  than  he  threw  aside  the  mask,  and 
broke  all  his  promises.  He  abolished  the  constitution,  governed 
the  kingdom  in  his  own  name,  and  relentlessly  persecuted  his 
nieces'  partisans,  who  were  at  the  same  time  the  partisans  of 
the  constitutional  institutions  granted  by  King  John  VI.  The 
emperor  Dom  Pedro,  enraged  at  this  conduct,  sent  an  expedition 

1  In  order  to  understand  the  position  of  Portugal,  it  is  necessary  to  refer  to 
events  some  little  way  back.  King  John  VI.  died  in  1826,  after  having  accepted,  and 
actively  worked  out  the  constitution  imposed  by  the  Cortes  in  1821.  He  left  two 
sons,  the  eldest  Dom  Pedro  remained  in  Brazil,  when  his  family  returned  to  Lisbon 
(in  1 821)  and  was  proclaimed  Emperor  of  Brazil  (1822)  having,  together  with  his  father, 
signed  a  treaty  in  1825,  according  to  the  terms  of  which,  the  separation  of  the  two 
states  was  recognized,  and  the  two  crowns  were  never  again  to  be  united.  The  second 
son,  Dom  Miguel,  had  always  protested  against  the  constitutional  tendencies  of  his 
father,  and  had  even  stirred  up  plots  against  him. 

Before  King  John  died,  he  instituted  a  provisional  regency  under  the  presidency  of 
his  daughter,  Isabella  Marie,  until  the  wishes  of  him  to  whom  the  crown  belonged  were 
made  known.  This  ambiguous  wording  was  the  cause  of  long-continued  troubles. 
On  the  one  hand,  Dom  Pedro  declared  himself  King  of  Portugal,  notwithstanding  the 
treaty  of  separation  of  1825.  He,  however,  abdicated  very  soon  after,  having  granted 
a  new  constitution,  in  favour  of  his  daughter  Dona  Maria  da  Gloria,  whom  he  destined 
to  marry  Dom  Miguel,  thinking  by  this  union,  to  reconcile  the  two  branches  of  the 
family.  But  Dom  Miguel,  after  making  a  pretence  of  submission,  and  with  the 
concurrence  of  his  mother  and  his  uncle  Ferdinand  VII.,  King  of  Spain,  as  well  as 
the  moral  support  of  the  principal  courts  of  Europe,  who  looked  with  displeasure  on 
the  establishment  of  constitutional  ideas  in  Portugal,  raised  the  standard  of  absolutism 
October  1826.  The  Miguelists  were  at  first  victorious:  the  Regent  Isabelle  Marie 
resigned  her  power  in  favour  of  Dom  Miguel,  and  the  Cortes  proclaimed  him  King  of 
Portugal,  July  1828.  Then  a  general  civil  war  broke  out.  The  town  of  Oporto 
declared  in  favour  of  Queen  Maria,  and  the  greatest  terror  was  spread  all  over  the 
country.  Meanwhile  the  Emperor  Dom  Pedro  wished  to  uphold  his  daughter's  rights 
by  force  of  arms.  The  Azores  having  declared  for  her,  became  the  rallying  point  of 
the  Constitutionalists.  A  regency  was  established  there  in  the  name  of  the  young 
queen  in  1830,  but  it  was  not  recognized  by  the  continental  courts.  Dom  Miguel 
was  even  able,  as  legitimate  sovereign,  to  negotiate  a  loan  of  fifty  millions.  Such 
were  the  respective  positions  of  the  two  parties,  when  the  revolution  of  July,  by  a 
counter-stroke,  changed  the  whole  face  of  matters  in  Portugal.  Dom  Miguel  lost  the 
support  of  France  and  England.  He  was  forced  to  resign,  and  the  Queen,  Maii.i  da 
Gloria,  ascended  the  throne  in  1834. 

VOL.    III.  R 


242  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

from  Brazil,  composed  entirely  of  Portuguese,  who  had  settled  in 
Terceira  and  who,  not  being  powerful  enough  to  land  in  Portugal 
with  any  chance  of  success,  had  proclaimed  Dona  Maria's 
government  in  the  island,  together  with  the  charter  which  Dom 
Pedro  had  given  to  Portugal,  before  abdicating  the  throne  of 
that  country  in  favour  of  his  daughter. 

Up  to  the  time  of  my  arrival  in  London,  Dom  Miguel's 
government,  and  the  changes  he  had  made,  were  not  recognized 
by  the  Powers,  neither  was  the  government  established  in  the 
island  of  Terceira. 

The  new  French  government  would  have  liked  England  to 
pronounce  in  favour  of  the  Regency  installed  at  Terceira, 
whereas  the  cabinets  of  the  other  great  powers,  with  England 
at  their  head,  leant  towards  Dom  Miguel.  It  is  easy  to  under- 
stand the  motives  which  influenced  both  one  side  and  the 
other.  France,  having  just  ended  a  liberal  revolution,  naturally 
wished  to  support  her  political  principles  wherever  she  saw  they 
existed  ;  she  might  have  met  with  sympathy  from  England  on 
this  point  had  not  the  interests  of  the  latter  placed  an  obstacle 
in  the  way.  The  truth  was  that  England  was  not  at  all  sure 
that  the  majority  of  the  Portuguese  nation  did  not  prefer  the 
rule  of  Don  Miguel,  and  above  all  she  felt  convinced  that  any 
struggle  would  cause  great  disturbances  between  her  commerce 
and  that  of  Portugal,  a  commerce  of  such  great  importance  that 
the  latter  country  might  almost  be  looked  upon  as  an  English 
colony.  The  Duke  of  Wellington's  Tory  ministry,  even  while 
blaming  Dom  Miguel's  infamous  conduct,  would  have  preferred 
to  uphold  his  government  and  thus  avoid  civil  war,  fresh  revolu- 
tions, and  all  those  changes  so  hurtful  to  commercial  relations. 
The  cabinets  of  Vienna,  Berlin,  and  St.  Petersburg  were  all 
influenced  by  the  same  motives  as  England,  and  Dom  Miguel, 
cruel  despot  as  he  was,  had  gained  their  favour,  as  representing 
a  monarchy  without  a  constitutional  government.  Thus  it  was 
not  easy  to  reconcile  such  very  opposite  views. 

I  thought  therefore,  that  troubled  as  we  were  at  home,  both 
by  our  own  affairs  and  those  of  Belgium,  it  would  have  been 
unwise  to  quarrel  with  England  respecting  Portugal.  I  deter- 
mined to  work  according  to  my  instructions,  and  urge  the  English 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  243 

cabinet  to  separate  themselves  from  Dom  Miguel's  party  and 
acknowledge  the  Regency  of  the  island  of  Tcrccira,  but  to  do 
so  with  moderation,  in  order  not  to  compromise  our  good  rela- 
tions on  other  questions.  I  referred  specially  to  the  faults  of 
Dom  Miguel,  which  gave  me  fair  grounds  to  work  upon.  In 
October  1830,  Lord  Aberdeen  and  his  cabinet  still  believed  that 
they  would  be  able  to  obtain  a  general  amnesty  from  Dom 
Miguel,  as  the  price  of  England's  recognition,  and  it  was  by 
means  of  this  measure,  that  they  hoped  to  justify  themselves  to 
the  Liberals  in  England,  for  having  recognized  the  odious  tyranny 
of  Dom  Miguel. 

On  the  19th  of  October,  in  sending  an  account  of  the  state 
of  the  Portuguese  question  to  Paris,  I  wrote  the  following : 

The  news  we  have  received  from  Portugal  describes  that 
unhappy  country  as  given  up  entirely  to  the  distrust  and  fury 
of  Dom  Miguel.  The  effect  of  this,  however,  will  not  be  to 
retard  the  recognition  of  his  government  by  the  Powers,  that  is 
a  matter  which  has  already  been  pretty  well  decided,  self- 
interest  raising  it  above  all  other  considerations.  There  is 
reason  to  believe  even  now,  that  the  amnesty,  insisted  on  from 
Dom  Miguel,  as  a  primary  condition,  will  only  be  promised  as 
it  were,  and  not  carried  into  effect,  until  a  distant  period, 
mutually  agreed  on,  between  the  English  government  and  Dom 
Miguel.  The  ordinary  usages  will  not  even  therefore  be 
observed.  This  morning  I  pointed  out  to  Lord  Aberdeen  what 
a  scandal  would  result  therefrom.  He  assured  me  that  the 
amnesty  would  necessarily  follow  the  recognition  ;  but  I  do  not 
feel  disposed  to  put  much  faith  in  this. 

Such  was  at  this  period,  the  state  of  the  Portuguese  question 
to  which  I  shall  have  to  refer  several  times.  We  will  now 
revert  to  the  Belgian  affair,  a  much  graver  matter,  since  it 
threatened  to  disturb  the  whole  of  Europe.  The  French 
government,  that  is  to  say  M.  Mole,  notwithstanding  the 
necessity  there  was  for  urgency  in  this  matter,  vehemently 
insisted  that  the  conferences  should  take  place  in  Paris.  I 
received  still  more  urgent  instructions  on  this  point,  which  I 
was  obliged  to  communicate  to  the  English  government.  I 
will  here  give  another  extract  from  the  despatch    in  which    I 

R  2 


244  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

gave  an  account  on  the  25th  of  October,  of  the  fresh  explana- 
tions I  had  had  with  the  Duke  of  Wellington  :— 

I  have  not  lost  a  moment  in  pressing  for  a  decision  con- 
formably to  the  wishes  expressed  in  your  despatch  of  the  20th 
ult.  I  spoke  again  about  it  yesterday  to  the  Duke  of  Welling- 
ton, who  then  discussed  the  subject  with  the  Austrian  ambass- 
ador and  the  Prussian  minister.  I  brought  forward  your 
arguments  and  developed  and  enlarged  upon  them  ;  I  don't 
think  I  omitted  a  single  plea  that  could  convince  them.  But 
they  all  three  took  the  same  view.  The  late  occurrences  in 
Paris  seemed  rather  to  have  strengthened  their  opposition. 
They  see  in  our  persistency  to  hold  the  conference  there,  some- 
what of  a  desire  to  discuss  the  Belgian  question  in  the  midst  of 
what  they  call  the  revolutionary  whirlpool  ;  and  this  opinion 
they  maintain,  having  the  French  journals  in  their  hands.  In 
this  they  certainly  do  not  sufficiently  separate  the  king's 
government,  from  the  factious  influences  against  which  it  has  to 
fight.     But  their  disquietude  explains  their  errors. 

This  disquietude  is  very  great,  and  is  fully  justified  by  facts, 
of  the  exact  truth  of  which,  you  are  better  aware  than  I  am. 
They  say  they  have  been  informed  that  some  French  officers  who 
are  fighting  in  the  ranks  of  the  Belgians,  have  not  been  censured 
in  any  way  by  the  king's  government,  and  that  notwithstand- 
ing the  promises  given  (for  these  were  admitted)  to  repulse  all 
the  overtures  and  solicitations  of  the  Belgians,  and  to  abstain  from 
all  direct  or  indirect  co-operation,  in  the  success  of  their  cause, 
these  officers  (whose  number  no  doubt  is  exaggerated)  are 
kept  on  the  strength  of  the  French  army.  The  name  of  M,  de 
Pontecoulant  is  often  brought  up  in  connection  with  this 
subject.  They  think  that  sufficiently  effective  measures  have 
not  been  taken,  to  put  a  stop  to  the  expedition  of  the  Spanish 
refugees.1  They  have  seen  several  French  names,  among 
those  sent  them  from  Spain,  which  have  awakened  their 
suspicions.  I  should  be  hiding  the  truth,  if  I  did  not  tell  you, 
that  the  feelings  of  the  cabinets  and  their  ministers  have  changed 

1  The  reaction  which  had  followed  the  return  of  King  Ferdinand  to  absolute 
power,  had  decided  several  liberal  Spaniards  to  seek  refuge  abroad.  After  the  revolu- 
tion of  July,  they  formed  themselves  into  revolutionary  committees,  with  the  view  of 
attempting  a  bold  stroke  and  entering  Spain  by  force  of  arms.  The  government  of 
Madrid  appealed  to  the  cabinets  of  Paris  and  London.  The  latter  took  some 
stringent  measures,  but  in  France  the  government  either  could  not  or  would  not  put 
a  stop  to  the  enterprise.  Colonel  Francisco  Valdes  and  the  celebrated  Mina,  penetrated 
into  Navarre  at  the  head  of  500  men,  and  took  possession  of  the  town  of  d'Urdax. 
This  expedition  failed.  Beaten  and  driven  back,  the  revolutionary  troops  were  obliged 
to  re-pass  the  frontier. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  245 

somewhat  towards  us  ;  their  anxiety  has  been  awakened,  now 
that  their  security  seems  likely  to  be  endangered.  The  Duke 
of  Wellington  specially  remarked,  that  the  action  of  the  king's 
government,  should  tend  to  reassure  the  different  Powers  as  to 
the  state  of  agitation  in  France  which  absorbs  the  attention  of 
all  Europe.  The  ministers  would  see  in  the  concession  made 
now,  a  common,  and  consequently  conciliatory  action,  if 
you  accede  to  their  proposition  to  hold  the  conferences  in 
London,  where  the  five  great  Powers  have  men,  fully  possessing 
their  confidence.  They  agree  in  saying,  that  these  conferences- 
ought  to  be  held  at  the  Hague.  The  former  engagements  of 
Europe  have  induced  them  to  take  this  view  :  and  in  abandoning 
it,  they  specially  take  into  consideration  the  urgency  of  the  circum- 
stances, and  the  great  need  of  expedition,  which  according  to  them 
can  only  be  effectually  attained  in  London,  where  they  again 
assert,  every  one  is  ready,  while  no  one  is  so  elsewhere.  They 
declare  that  we  shall  isolate  ourselves  from  the  other  Powers  by 
insisting  on  taking  a  contrary  step  ;  that  much  precious  time 
will  be  wasted,  and  that  the  weeks  or  rather  days,  which  change 
the  state  of  affairs  in  Belgium,  also  change  the  feelings  and 
views  of  the  cabinets. 

You  will  perceive,  M.  le  Comte,  that  I  am  reporting  exactly 
what  I  have  been  told,  and  that  I  refrain  from  all  personal 
opinions.  The  Duke  of  Wellington  told  me  he  had  written  a 
letter  to  you,  in  which  he  gave  his  reasons  for  his  persistence. 
I  have  tried  in  vain  to  combat  them  ;  the  state  of  Paris  too 
completely  pre-occupies  both  his  mind  and  that  of  the  ministers 
accredited  here  ;  and  they  cannot  consider  the  centre  of  such 
great  excitement  a  suitable  place  for  diplomatic  discussions. 
But  these  discussions,  which  according  to  them,  cannot  take 
place  there,  do  not  appear  to  them  less  urgently  necessary 
elsewhere  ;  however  quickly  the  events  in  Belgium  may  progress, 
whatever  arrangements  may  be  made  between  the  Prince  of 
Orange  and  the  Belgians,  the  success  either  of  the  provisional 
government  or  of  the  prince,  will  not,  according  to  them  settle 
the  question.  The  union  of  the  Netherlands  has  been  guaran- 
teed by  the  great  Powers  ;  that  is  the  state  of  affairs  which  has 
been  recognized ;  what  still  remains  to  be  recognized  is  the  state 
of  affairs  which  has  been  substituted;  and  then  the  important 
question  of  fortresses  will  inevitably  reappear.1 

1  The  treaties  of  1815  in  creating  the  kingdom  of  the  Netherlands,  only  desired  to 
place  a  barrier  between  Fiance  and  the  northern  powers.  To  this  effect  they  had 
given  to  the  new  kingdom,  a  strong  line  of  fortresses  ;  Courtray,  Tournai,  Mons, 
Charleroi,  Namur,  Liege,  Luxemburg,  Philippeville,  Manenbourg,  and  Bouillon, 
intended  as  a  check  against  any  enterprises  on  the  part  of  France.  These  fortresses 
were  to  be  kept  in  thorough  efficiency  by  the  King  of  Holland.     The  allied  sovereigns 


246  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

Amid  the  difficulties  that  such  delicate  deliberations  will 
bring  about,  when  concessions  will  be  required  on  all  sides, 
and  previous  engagements  will  have  to  be  amended,  they  con- 
sider that  many  things  will  have  to  be  settled  by  word  of  mouth, 
and  that  conferences  therefore  are  worth  more  than  memoran- 
dums, or  any  other  political  documents  ;  and  this  remark  is 
perfectly  true. 

There  remained  another  and  still  more  powerful  reason, 
concerning  which  the  Duke  of  Wellington  and  the  ministers 
spoke  to  me  separately  yesterday.  They  pointed  out  to 
me  that  the  English  parliament  was  about  to  assemble ; 
that  the  king  would  have  to  give  his  views  on  the  Belgian 
question,  and  that  his  speech  would  have  immense  weight  and 
importance.  Should  he  say  that  conferences  have,  or  have  not, 
been  opened  in  London,  his  declaration  will,  one  way  or  the 
other,  have  either  a  tranquillizing  or  disquieting  effect.  They 
even  go  so  far  as  to  assert,  that  this  announcement  may  entirely 
change  the  whole  aspect  of  affairs,  and  that  it  is  therefore  most 
important  his  speech  should  be  as  reassuring  as  possible. 

Here  again,  M.  le  Comte,  I  pray  you  not  to  believe  that  my 
opinion  coincides  with  these  observations  of  the  English  cabinet 
and  the  foreign  ministers.  I  have  not  yielded  a  single  point,  I 
have  tried  to  modify  opinions  which  appeared  to  me  too 
decided,  but  they  are  too  important,  and  indicate  too  marked  a 
change  from  the  former  views  of  the  Powers,  for  me  not  to 
make  them  known  to  you,  such  as  I  found  them.  I  send  this 
despatch  by  M.  de  Chenoise,  to  whom  I  recommend  all  speed  ; 
you  will  no  doubt  deem  it  necessary  to  send  him  back  with  a 
prompt  and  decisive  answer.  The  English  parliament  opens 
on  the  2nd  November. 

Four  days  later,  on  the  29th  October  I  sent  some  further 
details  to  M.  Mole,  which,  without  having  direct  reference  to  the 
question  of  the  seat  of  the  conference,  were  nevertheless  of  a 
nature  to  cause  some  reflection  as  to  the  views  of  the  Powers : — 

.  .  .  There  is  no  doubt,  that  an  unlimited  credit  has  been 
opened    for    Charles    X.    with    an    Edinburgh    banker.1      This 

had  even  a  right  of  watch  and  inspection  over  them.  If  the  state  of  affairs  created  in 
1815  was  done  away  with,  Europe  would  lose  this  precious  guarantee  against  the 
still  dreaded  iniquities  of  France.  What  then  would  happen,  it  this  line  of  fortresses 
were  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  a  new  kingdom,  the  friend  and  ally  of  the  very  nation 
against  which  it  had  been  directed? 

1  Var. :  " chezle premier  banquier  <T  Edimboterg,  dont  le  110m  est,jecrois,  Forbes," 
—  "  with  the  principal  banker  in  Edinburgh,  whose  name  I  believe  is  Forbes." 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  247 

strange  generosity  has  greatly  astonished  and  occupied  the 
English.1  It  is  generally  attributed  to  the  Emperor  Nicholas, 
and  I  am  the  less  inclined  to  doubt  this,  knowing  how  very 
unfavourably  he  is  disposed  towards  us.  He  is  passionately 
devoted  to  foreign  matters,  which  in  his  own  mind  he  mixes  up 
with  the  home  affairs  of  his  kingdom.  In  several  instances  he 
has  expressed  himself  on  the  actual  state  of  affairs  in  anything 
but  pacific  terms.  He  believes  that  nothing  but  force  will 
arrest  the  doctrines  of  disorder.  These  prejudices  might  easily 
shake  M.  Pozzo,  who  has  striven  to  lead  the  emperor's  views 2 
in  another  direction.  M.  de  Matusiewicz 3  who  held  the  same 
opinions  and  worked  in  accord  with  him,  is  not  himself  at  all 
sure  about  it  now.  The  strangest  thing,  and  which  yet  is 
nevertheless  a  fact,  is  that  M.  de  Metternich  does  not  now  take 
the  same  view  as  the  Emperor  Nicholas,  but  he  could  very  easily 
be  brought  round  again.  The  Prussian  cabinet  is  divided. 
The  Prince  Royal,4  and  M.  Ancillon,5  are  all  for  war ;  M. 
Guillaume  de  Humboldt,6  brother  of  the  sa vant  in  Paris,  and  M. 
de  Bernstorff,7  would  like  if  possible,  to  avoid  it.  This  is  a  very 
critical  period.  Events  in  Belgium  are  very  complicated. 
Those  of  Spain  add  still  further  to  the  difficulties.  M.  de  Zea 
Bermudez 8  has  received  no  news  of  any  kind  from  his  govern- 
ment for  some  days  ;  and  his  anxiety  is  great. 

1  M.  de  Talleyrand,  kept  the  court  of  the  Tuileries  minutely  informed  as  to  the 
life  of  Charles  X.,  the  princes  and  their  suites.     See  Appendix,  letters  No.  4 — No.  18. 

2  Variante,  " sur  les  evenements  de  Paris' '  —  "as  to  the  events  in  Paris." 

3  Andre  Joseph,  Comte  de  Matusiewicz,  at  that  time  temporary  Russian  minister 
in  England  during  the  absence  of  Prince  de  Lieven.  He  was  the  son  of  Thaddeus 
de  Matusiewicz,  a  Polish  noble,  who  had  been  Minister  of  Finance  in  the  Grand 
Duchy  of  Warsaw  in  181 2. 

4  Frederick  William  (1795 — 186 1)  son  of  King  Frederick  William  III.,  who 
ascended  the  throne  in  1840. 

5  Jean  Pierre  Frederic  Ancillon,  descended  from  a  Protestant  family,  originally  of 
Metz,  who  had  taken  refuge  in  Berlin,  after  the  revocation  of  the  Edict  of  Nantes. 
Born  in  1766,  he  decided  to  enter  the  Church,  became  known  by  his  philosophical 
and  historical  works,  and  in  1806  was  appointed  governor  to  the  Prince  Royal  of 
Prussia.  Later  on  he  entered  the  Foreign  Office,  became  leader  of  the  political 
section  (1825)  and  minister  in  June  1831.     He  died  in  1837. 

6  William  de  Humboldt  at  this  time  did  not  fill  any  public  position.  He  had 
just  quitted  the  ministry.  His  brother  Alexander,  the  celebrated  savant,  had  come 
to  Paris  after  the  July  Revolution,  commissioned  officially  to  recognize  King  Louis- 
Philippe. 

7  Christian,  Comte  de  Bernstorff,  born  in  1769,  descended  from  a  Danish  family, 
was  first  Danish  ambassador  at  Berlin  and  Stockholm,  and  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs 
in  1797.  He  resigned  in  1810,  and  in  181 1,  was  appointed  ambassador  at  Paris. 
In  1815  he  represented  Denmark  at  the  Congress  of  Vienna.  In  1818  he  entered  the 
service  of  the  King  of  Prussia,  who  made  him  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  and  whom 
he  represented  at  the  various  conferences  of  the  Holy  Alliance.  In  1830  M.  Ancillon 
was  sent  to  assist  him,  and  finally  he  replaced  him  in  1S31.  M.  de  Bernstorff  died  a 
few  months  after. 

8  Francois  Zea  de  Bermudez,  born  in  1772,  was  a  Spanish  statesman.  He  began 
as  Secretary  to  the  Embassy,  and  was  then  made  minister  at  Constantinople,  and 


248  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

I  expect  the  answer  to  the  despatch  I  sent  you  by  M.  de 
Chenoise,  either  to-morrow  or  Sunday. 

At  last  this  despatch  arrived,  which  had  only  been  written 
by  M.  Mole  at  the  last  minute  on  the  afternoon  of  the  31st  of 
October.  I  will  give  it  here  in  extenso,  that  others  may  the 
better  judge  of  the  spirit  that  dictated  it,  and  how  little 
reassuring  were  the  news  it  brought  me  : 


Paris,  31  st  October,  1830. 
Sunday,  3  P.M. 

I  had  retarded  the  departure  of  M.  de  Chenoise  until  I 
could  announce  the  formation  of  the  Ministry  to  you.1  But  the 
letter  which  I  have  this  evening  received  from  the  Duke  of 
Wellington,  will  not,  mon  Prince,  allow  me  to  delay.  I  would 
send  you  a  copy  of  my  reply,  but  that  I  had  not  even  time  to 
have  it  copied.  The  King  has  charged  me  to  authorize  you  to 
join  the  conference  at  once,  and  take  part  in  everything  that 
may  have  reference  to  Belgian  affairs.  Were  I  still  Minister  I 
should  perhaps  send  you  either  to-morrow  or  the  day  after,  a 
plenipotentiary,  fully  instructed,  and  I  need  hardly  say  that  I 
should  have  selected  one  as  much  as  possible  in  conformity 
with  your  views.  As  however  the  urgency  of  the  circumstances 
obliges  you  to  commence  negotiations  by  yourself,  I  believe 
that  you  will  be  able  to  carry  them  through  to  the  end  without 
any  assistance.  Many  things  may  arise  out  of  this  Belgian 
question,  without  reckoning  on  war  or  peace.  No  one  knows 
better  than  you,  mon  Prince,  all  that  it  embraces,  and  therefore 
it  will  be  best  to  leave  it  entirely  in  your  hands. 

We  have  just  passed  through  a  most  stormy  week,  and  for 
no  one,  perhaps,  has  it  been  a  more  anxious  time,  than  for  me. 
I  am  not  mistaken  as  to  the  source  of  the  efforts  made  to  aid 
me,  but  they  were  such   that  it  would  be  impossible   for  me  to 

later  at  London.  In  1824  he  was  appointed  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  but  only 
kept  this  post  one  year.  He  went  as  ambassador  to  London  in  1828,  and  remained 
there  till  1832.  He  then  returned  to  Madrid,  and  was  Prime  Minister  there  for  a 
short  time,  but  had  to  leave  bis  country,  when  the  Liberal  policy  of  minister  Martiney 
de  la  Rosa  triumphed  in  1844.  Returning  to  Spain,  he  entered  the  Senate  in  1845, 
and  died  in  1850. 

1  The  Ministry  was  replaced  on  November  2nd  by  a  new  cabinet.  It  was  composed 
as  follows  :  M.  Lafitte,  President  of  the  Council,  and  Minister  of  Finance  ;  Marshal 
Maison,  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  ;  Dupont  de  l'Eure,  Keeper  of  the  Seals  ;  the 
Comte  de  Montalivet,  Minister  of  the  Interior  ;  Merilhon,  Minister  of  Public  Education 
and  Religion;  Marshal  Gerard,  Minister  of  War;  General  Sebastiani,  Minister  of 
Marine. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  249 

give  you  any  idea  of  the  situation  in  which  I  was  placed. 
Nothing  has  yet  been  decided.  Both  parties  of  the  Government 
have  several  times  already  refused  to  remain  in  office,  but  they 
have  both  always  been  obliged,  owing  to  the  state  of  affairs,  to 
come  in  again  and  try  the  effect  of  a  coalition  ministry.  M.  de 
Broglie  and  M.  Guizot  are  now  quite  out  of  the  question,  which 
greatly  complicates  it  according  to  my  view,  and  also  as  far  as 
I,  personally,  am  concerned.  If  I  retire  however,  I  shall  leave 
our  foreign  relations  on  the  best  possible  footing,  or  at  any  rate 
the  least  unfavourable.  I  have  received  very  satisfactory  assur- 
ances from  Berlin  ;  they  do  us  justice  both  as  regards  Belgium, 
and  all  other  species  of  propaganda  ;  they  show  us  entire  con- 
fidence, and  would  be  quite  willing  that  the  conferences  should 
take  place  at  Paris.  The  Berlin  Cabinet  would  even  have  pro- 
posed this  to  the  Cabinet  of  St.  Petersburg,  asking  their  consent 
thereto.  Let  the  Duke  of  Wellington  be  informed  of  this,  I 
pray  you,  that  he  may  see  that  it  is  to  his  wishes  we  yield.  The 
truth  is,  he  has  been  far  less  accommodating  than  any  of  the 
others.  My  opinion,  well  thought  out,  and  I  believe  fairly 
argued,  is,  that  it  would  be  better  for  everything  and  every  body, 
that  the  conferences  should  take  place  here  ;  but,  if  they  are  to 
be  held  in  London,  they  cannot,  as  far  as  France  is  concerned, 
do  without  you,  and  the  second  plenipotentiary  would  be  entirely 
useless.  I  owe  you  several  letters,  but  I  do  so  everywhere,  and 
to  all  who  write  to  me.  For  the  last  six  days  I  have  been  in 
consultation,  from  six  in  the  morning  till  twelve  at  night, 
respecting  the  arrangement  of  the  Ministry. 

Adieu,  mon  Prince,  you  may,  I  can  assure  you,  consider 
yourself  fortunate  not  to  be  here.  The  elections  are  very 
satisfactory,  but  a  Ministry  will  be  formed  anyway.  I  always 
thought  this  would  be  inevitable. 

Accept Mole. 

This  letter  requires  some  comment  in  order  to  point  out  its 
contradictions  and  errors.  M.  Mole,  though  with  evident  reluc- 
tance, gave  in  to  the  question  of  the  seat  of  the  conferences  ;  he 
agreed  to  their  being  held  in  London,  nevertheless  maintaining 
that  it  would  have  been  better  to  have  held  them  in  Paris  ;  yet 
in  the  same  breath  what  a  picture  does  he  draw  of  the  state  of 
that  capital,  of  its  government  and  its  ministry,  one  portion  of 
which  disputes  the  power  of  the  other  !  And  this  is  the  spectacle 
he  would  like  to  exhibit  to  the  plenipotentiaries  of  the  great 
European    Powers,  who  are  charged  with    maintaining   peace, 


250  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

based  on  the  strength  of  the  opposition  of  the  French  Govern- 
ment to  revolutionary  tendencies.1  Truly  it  would  be  impossible 
to  understand  such  an  idea,  except  by  seeking  the  explanation 
in  a  personal  matter,  namely  the  desire  to  carry  through  the 
negotiations  himself.  They  would  not  however  have  remained 
long  in  his  hands,  as  forty-eight  hours  after  he  had  written  that 
letter  he  was  dismissed  from  the  office  of  Minister  of  Foreign 
Affairs,  which  post  passed  into  the  very  inexperienced  hands  (as 
will  be  admitted)  of  Marshal  Maison.2 

I  put  on  one  side  all  that  is  unpleasant  as  regards  myself  in 
this  letter,  and  his  intention  of  sending  me  a  second  plenipo- 
tentiary if  he  had  continued  as  minister.  All  that  is  of  small 
interest ;  but  what  is  important,  is  the  erroneous  view  he  took 
of  the  political  position  of  France  abroad.  Was  it  only  in  order 
to  praise  himself,  or  did  he  really  believe  it,  when  he  wrote  on 
the  31st  October,  1830,  that  he  would  leave  our  affairs  abroad 
on  the  best  possible  footing  ?  In  order  to  prove  how  greatly  he 
was  mistaken  on  this  point,  I  am  obliged  here  to  insert  the  long 
despatch  which  the  Comte  de  Nesselrode,  Russian  Minister  of 
Foreign  Affairs,  addressed  to  Comte  Matusiewicz,  Russian 
minister  in  London,  on  October  19th,  1830.  It  is  very  curious  in 
every  respect,  and  shows  with  how  much  friendliness  the  situa- 
tion, considered  so  satisfactory  by  M.  Mole,  was  regarded  at 
St.  Petersburg !  This  secret  despatch  I  need  hardly  say  is  per- 
fectly authentic,  though  it  is  not  necessary  to  mention  here,  by 
what  chance  it  fell  into  my  hands. 

1  The  Chamber  of  Deputies  had  in  the  course  of  three  months  lost  113  of  its 
members  through  invalidation  and  resignations.  Complemental  elections  had  taken 
place  on  October  22nd. 

2  Nicholas  Joseph  Maison,  born  1771,  entered  the  army  as  a  volunteer  in  1792. 
After  going  through  all  the  campaigns  of  the  Revolution  he  became  Brigadier-General 
in  1805,  General  of  Division  in  1812,  and  Commander-in-Chief  of  the  army  of  the 
north  in  the  end  of  1813.  At  the  first  restoration  he  was  made  a  peer  of  France  and 
governor  of  Paris.  He  held  himself  aloof  during  the  Hundred  Days.  In  1828  he 
commanded  the  expedition  to  the  Morea,  which  gained  him  a  Field  Marshal's  baton. 
He  became  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  November  2nd,  1830,  was  soon  after  nominated 
Ambassador  at  Vienna  (November  17th),  then  at  St.  Petersburg  f  1833),  and  returned  to 
Paris  in  1835  to  take  his  place  as  War  Minister  (April  30th).  lie  retired  in  1836  and 
died  in  1840. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1S30. 


Despatch  of  the  Cointe  de  Nessclrode  to  the  Couite  de  Matusiewicz. 

St.  Petersburg,  October  igt/i,  1830. 

Commodore  Awinoff  handed  mc  on  October  7th,  your 
Excellency's  despatches  of  September  26th  and  October  8th.  I 
have  not  lost  a  moment  in  submitting  them  to  the  Emperor,  and 
I  now  hasten  to  inform  your  Excellency,  as  to  his  Imperial 
Majesty's  decision  concerning  them. 

Your  previous  reports  of  September  9th  and  1 2th,  had  already 
made  known  to  us  the  point  of  view  taken  by  the  English 
Cabinet  with  regard  to  the  Netherlands.  The  Duke  of  Welling- 
ton and  Lord  Aberdeen,  both  recognize  King  William's  right  to 
ask  the  assistance  of  the  alliance,  to  maintain  the  union  of 
Belgium  and  the  Dutch  provinces.  They  both  seem  quite  con- 
vinced of  the  necessity  of  granting  such  assistance  to  the  King 
of  the  Netherlands,  should  he  be  in  a  position  to  require  it, 
rather  than  allow  an  edifice,  erected  in  the  interest  of  England 
as  much  as  in  that  of  Europe,  to  fall  to  the  ground.  Both,  in 
fact,  have  protested  loudly  against  the  claims  of  the  French 
Government,  not  to  permit  any  foreign  interference  in  the  affairs 
of  Belgium. 

After  so  frank  and  so  decided  an  avowal  of  the  views  of  the 
English  Government,  we  were  quite  prepared  to  come  to  a  similar 
decision,  when  the  time  arrived,  as  we  had  foreseen,  for  the  King 
of  the  Netherlands  to  make  a  formal  demand  for  assistance, 
while,  on  the  other  hand,  the  French  Government  persisted  in 
its  extraordinary  demands. 

Nevertheless  your  Excellency's  last  despatches  announce, 
that  at  this  decisive  moment,  the  Cabinet  of  London  has 
deemed  it  necessary  to  adopt  another  line  of  conduct,  and 
recognizing  the  impossibility  of  now  coming  to  the  assistance 
of  the  King  of  the  Netherlands  (seeing  the  inefficiency  of 
the  means  at  the  disposal  of  the  English  Government)  has 
exhausted  every  endeavour  in  order  to  preserve  peace,  by 
inviting  France  to  take  part  in  the  negotiations,  which  the 
allied  courts  have  agreed  to  open  with  that  of  the  Netherlands, 
relative  to  the  separate  administration  of  Belgium  and  the 
Dutch  provinces. 

Every  effort,  the  object  which  is  to  assure  to  Europe  the 
benefits  of  peace,  must  on  that  account  alone,  be  entitled  to  the 
suffrage  of  our  august  master.  His  Imperial  Majesty  would 
therefore  be  quite  ready  to  approve  the  plan  proposed  by  the 
Duke  of  Wellington,  if  it  did  not  in  its  execution  and  results, 


252  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

present  some  difficulties,  which  the  Duke,  with  that  penetration 
and  frankness  which  so  eminently  characterize  him,  himself 
pointed  out  in  the  interviews  he  had  with  your  Excellency. 
We  will  not  stop  to  inquire  into  the  different  possibilities  that 
may  arise,  during  the  negotiations  about  to  be  opened  with  the 
concurrence  of  the  French  Government.  Your  Excellency  has 
foreseen  them  all  in  your  despatch.  The  difference  of  the 
interests  of  France,  as  regards  the  Belgian  fortresses,  and  her 
refusal  to  consent  to  employing  an  armed  force  to  carry  out 
the  arrangements  agreed  upon,  may  give  rise  to  complications 
which  would  compromise  the  very  aim  of  the  negotiations. 
But  what,  in  the  Emperor's  eyes,  is  a  real  and  very  serious 
difficulty  is,  that  these  negotiations,  so  far  from  at  once  deciding 
the  principal  question,  namely,  the  submission  of  the  insurgent 
Belgians,  only  puts  it  off;  that  much  precious  time,  which 
ought  to  be  efficiently  employed,  will  thereby  be  frittered  away, 
that  the  rebels  will  be  enabled  to  complete  their  culpable  enter- 
prise, furnishing  a  baneful  encouragement  to  the  revolutionary 
spirits  of  other  countries,  and  will  thus  add  to  the  difficulties 
and  obstacles  which  we  shall  have  to  combat,  when,  after  all  is 
said  and  done,  it  will  be  unanimously  deemed  indispensable  to 
intervene  by  force  of  arms. 

Fully  convinced  that  such  will  be  the  inevitable  result  of 
the  system  of  pacification,  proposed  by  his  Britannic  Majesty's 
Prime  Minister,  the  Emperor  would  have  greatly  desired  that 
the  Cabinet  of  London,  should  have  been  disposed  to  send  a 
large  force  at  once  to  act  in  concert  with  its  allies,  and  thus 
maintain  the  combination  to  which  it  contributed  so  largely  in 
1814  and  1815. 

Nevertheless,  his  Imperial  Majesty  wishes  on  this  occasion, 

again  to  give  a  fresh   proof  of  his  constant   desire   to   remain 

united  with  his  allies,  and  to  show  his  deference  to  their  wishes. 

Consequently  you  are  invited,  M.  le  Comte,  to  declare  to 

the  British  Government : 

"  That  if  France  consents  to  negotiate  on  the  Belgian 
question,  the  Emperor  will  on  his  side  consent  to  her  being 
admitted  to  the  conferences,  which  have  for  their  object  the 
pacification  of  the  kingdom  of  the  Netherlands  by  means  of  a 
change  in  the  conditions  of  the  union  of  Belgium  with  Holland, 
but  maintaining  the  integrity  of  this  State  under  the  rule  of  the 
House  of  Orange,  together  with  the  full  security  of  the  fortresses 
which  are  to  protect  her  independence. 

"  That  in  the  event  of  these  conferences  being  held  in  London, 
you  are  authorized  to  take  part  in  them,  M.  de  Gourieff 1  being 

1  Russian  Minister  at  the  Hague. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  253 

already  provided  with  similar  powers,  to  enable  him  to  assist  at 
these  conferences  if  they  were  held  at  the  Hague. 

"That  his  Majesty  hopes  the  result  of  the  negotiations  will 
be  vigorously  upheld  by  the  allied  Powers,  and  that,  however 
great  may  be  the  opposition  of  France,  they  will  if  necessary 
even  employ  force  of  anus,  in  order  to  carry  out  the  arrangements 
agreed  on. 

"That  his  Imperial  Majesty  accepts  with  the  greatest  satis- 
faction the  positive  assurances  given  you  on  this  point  by  the 
Duke  of  Wellington. 

"  That  if  France,  nevertheless,  refuses  to  agree  to  the  negotia- 
tions proposed  to  her,  or  will  not  take  any  part  in  them,  except 
on  condition  that  the  hypothesis  of  an  armed  intervention  be 
excluded,  and  that  thereby  the  intentions  of  that  Power  are  no 
longer  subject  to  any  doubts,  the  Emperor  trusts  the  English 
Cabinet  will  take  such  energetic  measures  as  the  fulfilment  of 
its  treaties  and  its  own  dignity  require. 

"  That  as  regards  the  first  alternative,  i.e.  the  consent  of 
France  to  the  negotiations  in  question,  it  must  not  be  forgotten 
that  if  these  negotiations  have  the  advantage  of  preventing  a 
universal  war  and  compromising  the  French  in  some  ivay  with  the 
Belgian  insurgents,  they  would  not,  on  the  other  hand,  arrest  the 
progress  of  the  insurrection  itself,  and  that,  since  England  is  not 
in  a  position  to  act  at  present,  though  she  agrees  with  us  as  to 
the  necessity  of  preserving  Belgium  and  the  allied  fortresses  to 
the  House  of  Orange,  it  would  at  least  be  imperative  to  utilize 
the  interval  of  the  negotiations,  in  making  important  military 
preparations,  lest  the  employment  of  an  armed  force  should  be- 
come indispensable  :  that  the  Emperor  in  this  case  counts  on  the 
foresight  of  the  British  Cabinet,  and  that  on  his  side  his  Imperial 
Majesty  will  not  only  assemble  his  contingents  on  the  frontier, 
but  a  considerable  army  ready  to  march  as  soon  as  military  action 
shall  have  been  agreed  on  by  common  consent." 

Such,  M.  le  Comte,  are  the  decisions  to  which  his  Imperial 
Majesty  has  deemed  it  right  to  adhere  for  the  present.  As  for 
the  rest,  M.  le  Prince  de  Lieven,1  who  will  immediately  return 
to  his  post  as  ambassador  to  his  Britannic  Majesty,  will  have  full 
powers  to  arrange  with  the  English  Government,  and  the  represen- 
tatives of  the  Courts  of  Vienna  and  Berlin,  all  military  or  other 
combinations  and  all  declarations,  which  the  general  conjunctures 
or  the  affairs  of  Belgium  and  the  policy  of  France  may  indicate 
as  being  necessary. 

Accept Nesselrode. 

1  Christopher  Andreiewitch,  Prince  de  Lieven,  descended  from  a  noble  family  of 
Livonia,  was  made  General  in  1807.     In  1801   he  went  to   Berlin   as  Minister  Pleni- 


254  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

This  despatch  plainly  shows  Russia's  disposition  towards  us 
at  this  period,  and  whether  M.  Mole  had  grounds  for  congratu- 
lating himself  on  the  footing  on  which  he  should  leavers  he  said, 
our  foreign  relations  !  It  is  very  plain  to  me  that  the  Emperor 
Nicholas  would  never  have  consented  to  empower  M.  Pozzo  to 
deal  with  Belgian  affairs  in  Paris  ;  and  that  even  while 
authorizing  Prince  Lieven  and  Comte  Matusiewicz  to  deal  with 
them  in  London,  in  conference  with  the  five  Powers,  he  by  no 
means  made  the  road  smooth  for  the  French  plenipotentiaries. 

If  such  was  the  state  of  affairs  abroad,  it  was  not  any  easier 
for  me  in  Paris,  where  for  eight  days  the  split  among  the 
ministers  had  suspended  all  action,  had  prevented  my  receiving 
not  only  any  instructions,  but  even  the  simplest  information, 
and  almost  amounted  to  a  complete  change  of  ministry, 
but  little  reassuring  to  Europe.  Whatever  might  be  the 
good  intentions  of  the  new  Cabinet,  presided  over  by  M. 
Lafitte,  one  could  not  disguise  the  fact,  that  the  names  of  some 
of  its  members,  would  not  inspire  Europe  with  any  great  confi- 
dence in  the  maintenance  of  peace  ;  a  fresh  obstacle  for  who- 
ever was  called  on  to  negotiate  in  a  conference  of  the  plenipo- 
tentiaries of  the  Powers,  who  were  disquieted  by  what  had 
already  occurred,  and  as  to  what  might  still  occur  in  France. 
But  I  was  not  discouraged,  and  fortified  at  last  with  authority 
to  begin  the  negotiations,  I  informed  Lord  Aberdeen  that  I  was 
ready  to  take  part  in  them. 

The  King  of  England  had  during  this  interval 1  opened  the 
parliamentary  session  with  a  speech  in  which  the  following 
passages  relating  to  foreign  policy  occurred  : 

"  Since  the  dissolution  of  the  last  Parliament,  events  of  the 
greatest  interest  and  importance  have  taken  place  on  the  Con- 
tinent of  Europe. 

"  The  senior  branch  of  the  House  of  Bourbon  no  longer  reigns 
in  France,  and  the  Due  d'Orleans  has  been  called  to  the  throne, 
under  the  title  of  King  of  the  French. 

"  Having  received  from  the  new  sovereign  a  declaration  of 
his  ardent  desire   to    cultivate  the  good  understanding,  and  to 

potentiary,  passed  thence  to  London  as  Ambassador  (1812),  and  remained  there  for 
twenty-two  years.     Recalled  in  1834,  he  was  made  Governor  to  the  Hereditary  Prince 
Alexander,  and  died  in  1839. 
1  November  2nd. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1S30.  255 

maintain  intact  the  existing  engagements  with  this  country,  I 
have  not  hesitated  to  continue  my  diplomatic  relations  and 
cordial  intercourse  with  the  court  of  France. 

"  I  have  seen  with  profound  regret  the  present  state  of  affairs 
in  the  Netherlands. 

"  I  greatly  deplore  that  the  enlightened  administration  of  the 
King  has  not  guaranteed  his  States  from  a  revolt,  and  that  the 
wise  and  prudent  measure,  to  submit  the  wishes  and  complaints 
of  his  people  to  the  deliberations  of  an  extraordinary  session  of 
the  States-General,  has  not  led  to  a  satisfactory  result.  I  am 
endeavouring,  in  concert  with  my  allies,  to  re-establish  peace  by 
such  means  as  may  be  compatible  with  the  well  doing  and  the 
good  government  of  the  Netherlands,  as  well  as  the  future  security 
of  the  other  States.  Scenes  of  tumult  and  disorder  have  pro- 
duced great  uneasiness  in  different  parts  of  Europe  ;  but  the 
assurances  of  a  friendly  disposition,  which  I  continue  to  receive 
from  all  Foreign  Powers,  justifies  the  hope  that  I  shall  be 
enabled  to  preserve  to  my  people  the  blessing  of  peace. 

"  Convinced  of  the  necessity  of  at  all  times  respecting  the 
faith  of  national  engagements,  I  am  firmly  persuaded  that  my 
determination  to  maintain,  together  with  my  allies,  those  general 
treaties,  by  which  the  political  system  of  Europe  has  been 
established,  will  offer  the  best  guarantee  for  the  peace  of  the 
world. 

"  I  have  not  yet  accredited  my  ambassador  to  the  court  of 
Lisbon,  but  the  Portuguese  Government,  having  decided  to  per- 
form a  great  act  of  justice  and  humanity,  by  according  a  general 
amnesty,  I  believe  that  the  time  will  soon  arrive  when  the 
interests  of  my  subjects  will  require  a  renewal  of  those  relations 
which  have  for  so  long  existed  between  the  two  countries." 

In  transmitting  this  address  to  Paris,  I  was  able  to  state 
that  on  leaving  Westminster  Hall  I  followed  the  king's  carriage 
to  the  palace,  that  on  my  way  there,  I  was  the  object  of  the 
kindest  and  most  friendly  demonstrations,  having  reference 
solely  to  the  king  whom  I  have  the  honour  to  represent,  that 
cries  of  "  Long  live  Louis  Philippe  !  "  were  heard  on  all  sides,  and 
that  our  national  cockade  attracted  universal  attention.1 

The  king  opened  Parliament  on  the  2nd  of  November,  and 
Lord  Aberdeen  fixed  the  4th  of  November  for  the  first  meeting 
of  our  conference.     This  I  therefore  attended,  being  authorized 

1  Mdme.    de   Dino  sent   the  account  of  this  ceremony  to  Mdme.  Adelaide.     See 
Appendix,  Letter  12. 


256  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE   TALLEYRAND. 

to  do  so  by  M.  Mole  s  last  letter,  but  I  had  no  instructions 
whatever  as  to  my  line  of  conduct,  either  from  M.  Mole  or 
from  Marshal  Maison,  who  succeeded  him  as  Minister  of  Foreign 
Affairs  on  the  2nd  of  November. 

Before  entering  into  the  deliberations  of  the  conference  at 
London l  in  detail,  it  is  necessary  to  recall  briefly  the  events 
which  had  taken  place  in  Belgium  and  which  were  the  cause  of 
this  conference. 

As  has  already  been  stated,  the  King  of  the  Netherlands  had 
been  beaten  in  his  struggle  with  the  Belgians,  and  with  the 
exception  of  the  fortress  of  Antwerp,  which  was  still  occupied 
by  the  Dutch  troops,  these  latter  had  entirely  evacuated  the 
territory  which  formed  the  old  provinces  of  Belgium ;  and  the 
Dutch  and  Belgian  troops  found  themselves  face  to  face  on  their 
respective  frontiers  and  quite  ready  to  continue  the  war. 

A  provisional  government  had  been  established  in  Brussels, 
and  although  many  of  its  members  were  honest  and  temperate 
men,  there  was  such  a  diversity  of  opinions  among  them,  that  it 
was  very  difficult  to  foresee  which  would  prevail  in  the  end.  In 
the  actual  country,  the  House  of  Orange  had  still  many  partisans, 
who  nevertheless  were  not  represented  in  the  provisional  govern- 
ment. This  was  composed  of  ardent  Catholics,  who  would  no 
longer  hear  of  having  the  Protestant  Princes  of  Nassau,  of  a 
few  Republicans  without  weight  or  real  support  in  the  country, 
and  lastly  of  men  who  anxiously  desired  the  reunion  with  France. 
These  last  were  old  officials  of  the  French  Empire,  mostly  in- 
triguers of  not  over  good  repute,  and  who  had  opened  up  rela- 
tions with  the  Imperialists  of  Paris,  some  of  whom  had  easy 
access  to  Louis  Philippe.  The  greatest  plotter  among  them  was 
the  Comte  de  Celles,2  the  grandson  of  Mdmc.  de  Genlis.     The 

1  At  the  Conference  of  London,  which  began  on  November  4th,  only  England, 
France,  Prussia,  Russia,  Austria  and  the  Netherlands  were  represented. 

2  Antoine  Charles  Fiacre,  Comte  de  Wisher  de  Celles,  born  in  1779,  was  made 
Deputy  to  the  States-General  of  Brabant,  and  member  of  the  Municipal  Council  of 
Brussels.  Napoleon  nominated  him  Master  of  Requests  to  the  Council  of  State  and 
pre/el  of  the  Loire  hiferieure,  and  also  of  Zuyder  Zee.  After  the  events  of  1814, 
having  again  become  a  subject  of  the  King  of  the  Netherlands,  he  was  elected  for 
some  time  to  the  provincial  states.  In  1830  became  the  head  of  the  French  party  in 
Belgium,  who  asked  for  the  Due  de  Nemours  as  king.  Nevertheless,  King  Leopold 
sent  him  as  Minister  Plenipotentiary  into  France.  After  some  time  he  there  became 
naturalized,  and  was  elected  Councillor  of  State  in  1833.      He  died  in  1841. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  257 

Belgian  provisional  government  was  naturally  the  expression  of 
the  Chamber  of  Deputies  which  had  created  it,  and  it  will  readily 
be  seen,  that  all  this  formed  sufficiently  discordant  and  un- 
manageable elements  to  contend  with.1 

The  position  of  the  King  of  the  Netherlands  was  no  less 
complicated.  His  eldest  son,  and  heir  to  the  throne,  the  Prince  of 
Orange,  working  for  his  own  ends,  had  tried  to  place  himself 
between  the  revolted  Belgians  and  his  father  the  king.  lie 
would  willingly  have  agreed  to  an  arrangement,  which,  by  pro- 
visionally separating  Belgium  from  Holland,  would  have  placed 
the  former  under  his  rule:  trusting  to  again  re-unite  the  two 
kingdoms  after  his  father's  death.  He  had  allowed  this  scheme 
to  become  apparent,  in  a  proclamation  issued  from  Antwerp, 
which  had  greatly  incensed  both  his  father  and  the  Dutch  nation 
against  him.  Nevertheless,  being  finally  rejected  by  the  Belgians, 
the  prince  had  to  retire  to  the  Hague,  where  it  was  no  easy  matter 
to  reconcile  him  to  the  king,  and  appease  the  popular  feeling  that 
had  manifested  itself  against  him.  In  order  to  extricate  him  from 
the  false  position  in  which  he  found  himself  in  Holland,  the 
king  shortly  after  sent  him  temporarily  to  England,  under  the  pre- 
text of  upholding  the  interests  of  Holland  at  the  conference. 

Such  was  the  position  of  this  question,  when  the  first  meeting 
of  the  conference  took  place  on  the  4th  of  November,  an 
account  of  which  I  sent  to  Paris  on  the  25th. 

London,  November  5//1,  1830. 

M.  LE  MlNISTRE, 

Conformably  to  the  authority  given  me  by  the  king, 
cind  which  was  transmitted  to  me  by  M.  le  Comte  Mole,  undcr 
date  of  31st  October  last,  to  assist  at,  and  participate  in,  all  the 
conferences  which  might  take  place  respecting  the  affairs  of 
Belgium,  I  went  yesterday  morning  to  Lord  Aberdeen's,  whither 
I  had  been  summoned,  together  with  the  Austrian  ambassador 
and  the  Prussian  and  Russian  ministers. 

We  have  held  our  first  conference.  The  Duke  of  Wellington, 
who  was  present,  spoke  first,  and  expressed  the  sentiments  of 
all  the   members  of  the    conference,  by  pointing  out  that  the 

1  The  provisional  government,  called  together  on  the  25th  of  September,  was 
composed  of  the  Baron  d'Ho  'ghworst,  M.  Charles  Rogett,  the  Comte  A.  de  Merode, 
MM.  Gendebien,  Van  de  Weyer,  Jolly,  Van  der  Linden,  Nicholai,  and  de  Coppin. 
M.  de  Potter  joined  it  three  days  later. 

VOL.    III.  S 


258  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

Powers  must  endeavour  to  find  the  most  persuasive  and  con- 
ciliatory means  of  arresting  the  effusion  of  blood  in  Belgium, 
of  calming  the  extreme  irritation  of  the  people,  and  restoring 
national  tranquillity.  It  seemed  to  us  that  humanity  as  well  as 
policy  demanded  that  our  first  efforts  should  be  directed  to  this 
end,  and  that  such  would  be  more  surely  attained,  if  it  were 
possible,  first  to  procure  a  provisional  armistice  between  the  two 
parties,  until  the  deliberations  of  the  Powers  were  concluded. 
This  proposal  was  unanimously  agreed  to,  and  it  was  decided 
that  we  should  meet  again  this  evening,  to  consult  as  to  the 
means  of  making  known  at  the  Hague  and  at  Brussels  the  views 
of  the  five  great  Powers  represented  at  the  conference. 

M.  Falck,1  ambassador  of  the  Netherlands,  was  present  at 
the  evening  conference,  in  accordance  with  Article  IV.  of  the 
protocol,  agreed  to  on  November  15th,  18 18,  at  Aix-la-Chapelle, 
which  runs  as  follows  : 

"When  special  assemblies,  either  among  the  august  sovereigns 
themselves,  or  between  their  respective  ministers  and  plenipo- 
tentiaries, shall  have  for  their  object  any  matters  specially  con- 
nected with  the  interests  of  the  other  states  of  Europe,  such 
meetings  will  not  take  place  except  in  pursuance  of  a  formal 
invitation  on  the  part  of  those  States  whom  the  said  affairs 
concern,  and  with  the  express  reservation  of  their  right  to  par- 
ticipate in  them  directly  or  by  their  plenipotentiaries." 

M.  Falck  has  agreed  to  the  proposal  of  an  armistice,  which  the 
five  ministers  signed  this  morning,  and  which  he  has  undertaken 
to  transmit  to  the  King  of  the  Netherlands.  It  will  be  sent  to 
Brussels  this  evening  by  two  commissioners,  and  as  I  wished 
France  to  appear  prominently  in  this  great  humanitarian  act,  I 
suggested  that  it  would  be  both  suitable  and  expedient  if  one  of 
the  two  commissioners  was  French,  and  I  got  the  five  Powers  to 
select  M.  Bresson.  Mr.  Cartwright,2  the  English  minister  at 
Frankfort,  was  the  other  commissioner  chosen. 

I  hasten  to  send  you  a  copy  of  this  protocol. 

This  proposal  is  advantageous  in  every  way,  and  justice  will 
be  done  to  the  intentions  which  brought  it  about,  even  if  it  falls 
short  of  the  desired  effect. 

1  Ant->ine  Reinhard,  Baron  Falck,  a  Dutch  statesman,  born  1776,  formerly  secretary 
to  the  Embassy  at  Madrid.  On  the  accession  of  King  Louis,  he  retired  into  private 
life  until  after  the  evacuation  of  Holland  by  the  French  in  1813.  He  was  then  made 
secretary  to  the  provisional  government,  later  on  Secretary  of  State,  and  in  1818 
Minis  er  of  Education  and  the  Colonies.  After  the  Revolution  of  1830  he  re-entered 
the  diplomatic  service  and  was  appointed  Minister  in  London,  and  in  1840  at  Brussels. 
He  died  in  1843. 

-  Sir  Thomas  Cartwright,  an  English  statesman,  born  in  1795.  He  was  specially 
attached  to  Lord  Palmerston,  whose  secret  foreign  agent  he  became.  He  was 
Minister  at  Stockholm  when  he  died. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  259 

The  speech  of  the  King  of  England  at  the  opening  of  Parlia- 
ment occasioned  some  interesting  debates.  The  opposition 
complained,  that  the  principle  of  non-intervention  in  the  affairs 
of  Belgium  was  not  made  sufficiently  plain.  Active  intervention  is 
assuredly  not  the  intention  of  the  English  Cabinet ;  intervention 
by  counsel  and  advice  is  not  of  an  alarming  nature,  and  the 
guarantee  given  by  the  five  Powers  to  the  union  of  Belgium  and 
Holland,  rendered  this  step  necessary  in  presence  of  the  events 
which  had  dissolved  it.  The  opposition  also  raised  the  question 
of  parliamentary  reform,  on  which  the  king's  speech  had  not 
touched.  Contrary  to  general  expectation,  the  Duke  of  Wel- 
lington, instead  of  trying  to  evade  or  adjourn  it,  declared  that  as 
long  as  he  remained  at  the  head  of  affairs  he  would  never  con- 
sent either  to  a  radical  or  a  partial  reform.  His  friends  had 
not  expected  that  he  would  express  himself  thus  plainly,  and 
Mr.  Peel,  while  the  duke  was  addressing  the  House  of  Lords, 
replied  to  similar  remarks  in  the  House  of  Commons,  but  with 
greater  caution  and  reserve.  This  declaration  greatly  vexed 
those  who  favour  the  present  administration.  .  .  . 

The  instructions  from  Paris  for  which  I  had  asked  with  so 
much  urgency,  arrived  at  last.  They  were  sent  to  me  by 
Marshal  Maison,  together  with  a  letter  announcing  his  appoint- 
ment as  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs. 

Here  are  these  instructions  : — 

I  do  not  know  what  can  have  retarded  M.  de  Chenoise's 
arrival,  but  as  I  know  that  he  was  bringing  you  the  authority  to 
open  the  conferences  and  to  take  part  in  them,  I  have  nothing 
further  to  write  to  you  on  that  head,  unless  it  is  to  say  that  the 
king  impatiently  awaits  the  details,  which  you  will  send  me 
respecting  all  that  has  taken  place. 

As  regards  the  instructions  you  asked  for,  I  will  occupy 
myself  in  drawing  them  up,  and  will  meanwhile  tell  you  their 
substance,  without  waiting  to  discuss  what  might  have  been 
possible  at  one  time  but  is  so  no  longer. 

1st.  That  we  believe  that  the  only  possible  basis  of  arrange- 
ment in  the  present  state  of  affairs  is,  that  Belgium  should  be 
separated  from  Holland,  and  raised  into  an  independent  state 
under  a  sovereign  prince  ; 

2nd.  That  this  prince  should  if  possible  be  the  Prince  of 
Orange  ; 

3rd.  That  if  it  cannot  be  the  Prince  of  Orange,  the 
Belgians  should  be  called  upon  to  declare  their  wishes  as  to  the 
choice  of  the  prince  who  is  to  become  the  head  of  the  state  ; 

S    2 


26o  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

4th.  That  you  must  set  aside  all  demands  that  may  be  made 
to  you,  to  entrust,  even  temporarily,  any  other  fortress  except 
that  of  Luxemberg,  to  any  foreign  garrisons  whatsoever. 

I  have  the  honour  moreover  to  inform  you  that  what  I  am 
writing  to  you  is  strictly  confidential  and  secret,  and  that  no 
one  in  London  must  know  that  I  have  written  it  to  you.  I  have 
only  told  you  of  it  in  order  that  you  may  know  the  special 
directions  given  in  your  instructions,  and  consequently  the  line 
your  communications  with  the  English  Government  must  take 
in  order  to  attain  the  end  which  the  king  has  in  view.  This  end 
is  to  bring  about  an  arrangement  compatible  with  the  equili- 
brium of  Europe,  as  established  by  existing  treaties,  and  at  the 
same  time  to  show  that  France  is  determined  to  maintain  her 
engagements,  to  manifest  her  complete  disinterestedness,  no 
matter  how  great  may  be  the  sacrifices  to  which  she  resigns 
herself,  in  order  to  give  neither  motive  nor  pretext  for  war,  and 
to  ensure  the  continuance  of  universal  peace. 

The  king  desires  that  you  will  also  inform  the  Duke  of 
Wellington  that  his  Majesty  has  seen  with  great  pleasure  the 
assurances  given  by  him  on  this  point,  in  his  speech  in  the 
House  of  Lords. 

I  must  also  inform  you  that  these  instructions  alter  nothing, 
but  on  the  contrary  confirm  whatever  my  predecessor  sent  you, 
and  that  you  are  not  at  present  to  make  any  special  proposals 
at  the  Conference,  but  to  accept  those  that  will  be  made,  ad 
referendum,  and  transmit  the  same  to  me,  in  order  that  I  may 
take  the  king's  instructions  and  make  known  his  wishes  to  you. 

It  will  be  seen  that  these  instructions  had  been  dictated  by 
the  king- himself  to  Marshal  Maison,who  was  too  little  an  courant 
with  matters  to  have  initiated  and  drawn  them  up.  Such  as 
they  were  they  sufficed  me  for  the  moment. 

Simultaneous  with  the  arrival  of  the  Prince  of  Orange  in 
London,  without  any  other  object  than  to  conceal  his  awkward 
position  in  Holland,  the  provisional  government  of  Belgium  sent 
over  a  kind  of  agent,  charged  to  find  out  whether  the  foreign 
Cabinets  would  be  disposed  to  accept  one  of  Eugene  Beauharnais, 
sons  as  king  of  Belgium  ; l  these  suggestions  were  not  however 
even  listened  to.    But  another  storm  was  gathering  on  the  horizon, 

1  There  had  been  a  question  of  August  Charles  Eugene  Napoleon,  Due  de 
Leuchtenberg  and  Prince  of  Eichstadt,  the  eldest  son  of  Prince  Eugene,  born  1810. 
The  opposition  of  the  French  government  put  an  end  to  his  candidature.  In  1834  he 
married  Dona  Maria,  Queen  of  Portugal,  but  died  shortly  after  in  1S35. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  261 

and  threatened  to  oppose  fresh  obstacles  to  the  progress  of  affairs. 
No  sooner  had  the  late  French  Ministry  been  replaced  by  a 
Cabinet,  tainted  with  the  reputation  of  a  revolutionary  spirit,  than 
the  existence  of  the  English  Cabinet  was  in  its  turn  shaken.  It 
will  be  remembered  that  when  giving  an  account  of  the  debates 
in  the  House  of  Lords,  on  the  king's  speech,  I  mentioned  that  the 
Duke  of  Wellington  had  spoken  with  extreme  warmth  against  any 
kind  of  reform  in  the  electoral  system  of  the  House  of  Commons. 

This  warmth  was  to  prove  fatal  to  the  Cabinet  over  which  he 
presided. 

The  king  had  accepted  an  invitation  to  dine  with  the  lord 
mayor,  on  which  occasion  the  ministers  and  the  whole  corps 
diplomatique  were  to  be  among  the  guests,  numbering  over  five 
hundred.  It  was  natural  that  such  a  sight  would  attract  a 
great  crowd,  which  no  doubt  would  take  this  opportunity  to 
exhibit  the  feelings  that  agitated  them,  either  for  or  against 
reform,  and  that  if  the  king  was  cheered,  the  same  feeling 
might  not  be  shown  towards  the  Ministry.  This  dinner  was  to 
take  place  on  the  9th  of  November.  On  the  8th,  Mr.  Peel,  the 
Home  Secretary,  wrote  to  the  lord  mayor,  stating  that  their 
Majesties,  the  king  and  queen,  would  not  be  present  at  the 
dinner,  as  they  feared  the  cortege  might  provoke  disorder,  and 
endanger  the  lives  of  his  Majesty's  subjects. 

This  decision  caused  great  agitation  all  through  the  town. 
Large  crowds  gathered  in  the  city ;  the  funds  fell  on  the 
exchange  ;  and  after  much  consultation  the  dinner  was  put  off 
indefinitely.1  But  such  an  incident  could  not  stop  there,  and 
necessarily  increased  the  animation  of  the  debates  in  Parliament, 
where  Mr.  Brougham,2  on  the  16th  November,  gave  notice  of  a 
motion  on  Parliamentary  reform.3 

1   See  M.  de  Talleyrand's  letter  to  Madame  Adelaide,  Appendix,  No.  14. 

-  Henry,  Lord  Brougham,  a  writer,  barrister,  and  statesman,  was  born  in  1779, 
elected  a  member  of  Parliament  in  1810.  He  sided  with  the  Whigs.  As  a  lawyer,  he 
did  most  of  the  political  law  business  of  the  House.  It  was  he  who  defended 
Queen  Caroline  in  the  trial  brought  against  her  by  her  husband  George  IV.  In  the 
House,  as  at  the  bar,  he  stood  equally  in  the  first  rank  as  an  orator.  In  1825  the 
University  of  Glasgow  elected  him  Chancellor.  Finally,  in  1830,  he  took  part  in  the 
Government.  Created  a  peer  of  England  and  Lord  Chancellor,  he  joined  the  Cabinet 
of  Lord  Grey,  and  helped  to  pass  the  Reform  Bill.  He  retired  in  1834.  Up  to  his 
death  in  1868  he  often  spoke  in  the  House  of  Lords. 

3  The  Reform  Bil]  thrown  out  by  Wellington,  again  brought  forward  by  Lord 
Brougham,  was  finally  brought  forward  in  the  Commons  in  183 1  by  Lord  John  Russell. 


262  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

While  awaiting  the  results  of  the  sitting  of  the  16th,  the 
Plenipotentiaries  met  several  times  in  Conference,  without,  how- 
ever, making  any  marked  progress,  as  we  had  not  yet  heard 
how  the  proposal  for  an  armistice  had  been  received  at  the  Hague 
and  Brussels.  But  during  this  interval  I  received  a  remarkable 
document  which  I  had  to  consider  as  supplementing  my  in- 
structions. This  was  a  statement  of  the  Belgian  question  drawn 
up  by  Louis  Philippe  himself,  and  which  I  will  give  here  in  its 
entirety.  It  was  addressed  to  Marshal  Maison,  the  Minister  of 
Foreign  Affairs,  who  sent  it  on  to  me  just  as  he  had  received  it. 
It  is  dated  nth  November,  1830. 

It  seems  to  me  to  be  most  important,  my  dear  Marshal, 
that  M.  de  Talleyrand  should  be  somewhat  enlightened  as  to 
the  present  state  of  Belgium,  in  order  that  he  may  acquaint  us 
what  arrangements  for  the  formation  of  a  government  could  be 
obtained  from  the  Belgians,  and  ratified  by  the  Prussians  ;  for 
that  is  the  problem  which  has  to  be  solved,  and  the  solution  is 
not  an  easy  one  ;  especially  when  you  add  thereto  our  pre- 
dominant concern  in  the  matter,  so  that  the  interests  of  France 
may  not  be  injured,  either  in  the  present  or  in  the  future. 

We  have  established  as  a  primary  basis,  the  separation  of 
Holland  from  Belgium.  This  is  what  both  the  Dutch  and  the 
Belgians  wish  themselves,  but  which  the  King  of  the  Nether- 
lands does  not  want.  Can  he  be  compelled  to  accede  to  it  ? 
That  is  the  question,  for  force  cannot  be  used  to  bring  this  about  ; 
and  yet,  to  arrive  at  it  by  negotiation,  it  would  be  necessary 
either  to  show  him  some  special  advantages,  which  we  can  find 
nowhere,  or  at  least  to  obtain  unanimity  amongst  the  Powers  as 
to  what  they  require  of  him,  and  to  accomplish  this  is  more  than 
doubtful. 

If  we  had  been,  or  were  even  now,  able  to  induce  the  Belgians 
to  accept  the  Prince  of  Orange  as  their  king,  I  believe  the 
Powers  could  have  been  brought  (without  encountering  any  in- 
surmountable difficulties)  to  insist  unanimously  on  this  being 
ratified  by  the  king  his  father,  which  he  would  have  been  com- 
pelled to  do.  A  satisfactory  arrangement  of  the  limits  of  the 
two  countries  would,  however,  still  have  been  necessary  ;  this 
would   have   been    a   source   of   great   difficulty,   and    it   is  as 

It  did  away  with  the  representation  of  three  hundred  rotten  Boroughs,  increased  that 
of  the  towns,  and  added  largely  to  the  number  of  members  of  Parliament.  Thrown 
out  in  1 83 1  by  the  Lords,  this  Bill  was  not  carried  in  both  Houses  till  June  7th, 
1832. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  263 

well  to  pause  a  little  in  order  to  look  into  it  ere  going  any 
further. 

In  the  proposal  for  an  armistice,  to  which  M.  de  Talleyrand 
very  wisely  agreed,  the  Conference  decided  as  a  first  step,  on  a 
line  of  demarcation,  which  secured  to  the  Belgians  the  evacua- 
tion of  the  fortress  of  Antwerp  ;  but  this  advantage  is  balanced 
by  the  preservation  to  the  King  of  the  Netherlands,  of  Maestricht, 
Stephenswerdt,  Venloo,  that  is  to  say,  the  line  of  the  lower 
Meuse,  which  protects  Belgium  from  the  aggressions  of  Germany, 
and  the  inhabitants  of  which  are  attached  to  Belgium  by  their 
customs,  habits,  and  ideas ;  although  they  originally  formed 
part  of  Holland,  and  not  of  the  Netherlands.  It  is  partly  from 
knowing  the  moral  disposition  of  the  people,  and  partly  from 
want  of  troops  to  form  proper  garrisons,  that  the  king  has 
already  removed  all  the  war  material  from  Maestricht  by  way 
of  the  Meuse.  It  also  appears  that  the  moral  and  political  feel- 
ings of  Breda,  Bois-le-duc,  and  Dutch  Brabant,  are  similar, 
and  that  they  also  wish  to  make  common  cause  with  Belgium 
and  not  with  Holland. 

As  for  that  portion  of  Belgium  which  is  on  the  right  bank  of 
the  Meuse,  and  which  was  formerly  part  of  Lower  Austria,  that 
is  to  say,  Ruremonde,  Virours,  Limburg  .  .  .  the  inhabitants  of 
these  places  are  entirely  Belgian,  and  there  is  even  reason  to 
believe  that  all  these  districts  have  already  sent  their  deputies 
to  the  National  Congress  at  Brussels. 

With  regard  to  the  more  southern  portion  on  the  right  bank 
of  the  Meuse,  the  inhabitants  are  still  more  Belgian  than  any- 
where else.  But  here  fresh  complications,  much  more  difficult 
of  adjustment,  present  themselves. 

These  countries  consist  of  the  duchies  of  Buillon,  Luxem- 
burg, the  ancient  abbeys  of  St.  Hubert,  Stavelot,  and 
Malmedy  .  .  .  the  duchy  of  Luxemburg  has  been  incorporated 
in  the  German  confederation  ;  the  fortress  of  Luxemburg  has 
become  a  Federal  fortress  and  has,  under  this  name,  been 
occupied  for  fifteen  years  by  a  Prussian  garrison.  It  is 
needless  to  say  anything  further  in  order  to  show  the  difficulties 
that  would  be  experienced,  either  by  uniting  these  countries  to 
the  new  Belgian  state,  or  retaining  them  for  the  King  of  Holland, 
and  re-establishing  his  authority,  which  has  everywhere  been  an- 
nulled, except  in  Luxemburg  itself,  where  it  has  been  preserved 
if  not  in  reality  at  least  in  name,  by  the  Prussian  garrison. 

Doubtless  all  these  complications  would  disappear  were  it 
possible  to  induce  the  Belgian  National  Congress  to  ask  for  the 
Prince  of  Orange  as  their  sovereign,  and  it  is  the  weight  of  these 
considerations  which  makes  it  so  essentially  desirable  that  he 


264  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

should  be  chosen,  for  then  there  would  be  nothing  to  arrange 
between  Belgium  and  Holland  except  a  question  of  boundary, 
which  would  be  of  very  slight  importance  to  Europe,  and  in 
which  France  would  have  no  further  interest,  than  to  take 
care  that  the  Prussian  occupation  should  be  limited,  as  it  is  now, 
to  the  fortress  of  Luxemburg  only.  It  would  have  to  be  stipu- 
lated that  neither  Bouillon  nor  Maastricht  .  .  .  could  be  oc- 
cupied, except  by  the  troops  of  the  sovereign,  to  whom  those 
places  belong  ;  for  it  will  not  escape  either  your  perspicuity  or 
your  patriotism,  my  dear  Marshal,  that  if,  for  example, 
Maestricht  and  Venloo  were  to  be  occupied  by  German 
garrisons,  France  would  have  the  right  to  demand,  in  the  way 
of  security  and  compensation,  that  Bouillon  and  Philippeville 
should  in  their  turn  be  held  by  French  garrisons.  But  this  is  a 
useless  and  perhaps  even  a  dangerous  point  to  discuss,  and 
every  way  it  is  preferable  to  arrange,  that  the  fortress  of  Luxem- 
burg shall  continue  to  be  the  only  one  which  can  be  occupied 
by  a  German  garrison.  It  is  necessary  to  try  and  eliminate 
from  the  discussion,  everything  that  might  lead  to  the  suppo- 
sition that  France  has  ambitious  views,  which  she  has  not,  since 
her  greatest  wish  is,  that  the  general  peace  of  Europe  should 
not  be  disturbed,  and  that  each  Power  should  continue  within 
its  present  limits. 

The  most  important  question  at  present,  therefore,  is  to 
ascertain  whether  the  Prince  of  Orange  can  still  become  King 
of  Belgium,  or  whether  he  cannot.  If  he  can,  there  is  no  doubt 
that  he  should  have  the  preference,  as  much  in  the  interest  of 
France  as  that  of  the  other  Powers  ;  but  if  this  is  no  longer 
possible,  it  will  be  necessary  for  the  Powers  to  agree  as  to  the 
choice  of  whoever  becomes  his  substitute. 

It  is  on  this  important  point  that  it  will  be  necessary  to 
instruct  M.  Bresson  to  gain  the  most  precise  information  in  the 
shortest  possible  time.  The  choice  of  the  Prince  of  Orange  is, 
above  all  desirable,  in  order  to  paralyze  the  war  party  in  the 
foreign  Cabinets,  especially  that  of  St.  Petersburg,  where,  it  is 
said,  this  selection  is  the  only  one  that  will  obtain  the  consent 
of  the  Emperor  Nicholas.  It  is  asserted  that  the  King  of  the 
Netherlands  is  the  more  opposed  to  the  choice  of  his  eldest  son, 
as  he  has  no  love  for  him,  and  that  he  is  persuaded  that  if  he 
can  but  succeed  in  stirring  up  a  continental  war,  the  result  for 
himself  would  be,  not  only  the  recovery  of  Belgium,  but  also  the 
addition  of  French  Flanders  and  some  other  fortified  towns  to 
his  states.  These  dreams,  founded  on  the  same  chimeras  with 
which  the  Cabinets  deluded  themselves  in  1792,  will  .probably 
have  the  same  result  now  as  they  had  then  ;  that  is  to  say,  the 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1S30.  265 

King  of  the  Netherlands  will  stand  a  greater  chance  of  losing 
Holland  by  a  war,  than  of  regaining  Belgium  and  of  adding 
French  Flanders  to  his  states  ;  but  we  must  expect  him  to 
oppose  every  obstacle  he  can  to  the  choice  of  his  eldest  son,  and 
still  more  to  that  of  any  one  else. 

It  appears  that  the  composition  of  the  National  Congress  of 
Brussels  is  almost  analogous  to  that  of  1790,  under  Van  der 
Noot  and  Van  Eupcn,1  that  is  to  say,  it  is  composed  principally 
of  the  aristocracy  and  the  clergy  of  the  country.  It  is  even  said 
that  more  than  one-fourth  of  its  members  are  ecclesiastics.  This 
circumstance  will  make  the  selection  of  a  Protestant  prince  still 
more  difficult,  and  it  is  even  asserted  that  they  have  decided  upon 
the  total  exclusion  of  the  House  of  Nassau,  not  only  of  the 
Prince  of  Orange,  but  of  his  son,  who,  some  people  flattered 
themselves,  they  might  proclaim  under  the  regency  of  some 
distinguished  Belgian,  such  as,  for  instance,  Comte  Felix  de 
Merode,2  a  member  of  the  provisional  government,  to  whom  so 
much  influence  is  attributed,  that  he  might,  if  he  chose,  be  elected 
hereditary  Grand  Duke  of  Belgium,  or  even  king.  He  is  the 
grandson  of  M.  de  La  Fayette,  and  his  relatives  in  Paris,  as  well  as 
his  friends,  speak  openly  of  the  possibility,  or  even  according  to 
them,  the  probability  of  such  a  choice.  They  consider  him  a 
triumph  over  the  republican  party  of  Potter3  and  Theilmann  4 

1  Henry  Charles  Nicholas  Van  der  Noot,  a  Belgian  politician,  born  in  1735,  dis- 
tinguished himself  in  1759  by  his  energy  in  throwing  off  the  Austrian  yoke.  He  tried 
to  interest  England,  Prussia  and  Holland  in  the  Belgian  cause,  placed  himself  at 
Breda,  together  with  the  Abbe  Van  Eupen,  at  the  head  of  a  committee  of  Belgian  emigres 
and  on  the  24th  October,  1789,  proclaimed  the  independence  of  Belgium.  His  attempt 
seemed  likely  to  succeed.  He  entered  Brussels  and  called  a  Congress  together,  over 
which  he  exercised  a  powerful  influence  ;  but  in  November,  1799,  the  approach  of  the 
Austrians  obliged  him  to  fly.  He  took  refuge  in  Holland  and  was  no  more  heard  of 
till  his  death  in  1827. 

2  Philippe  FelixComte  de  Merode, born  1 791, was  descended  fromar.  old  and  illustrious 
Belgian  family.  He  married  Mademoiselle  de  Grammont,  and  was  living  in  Franche 
Comte  when  the  news  of  the  revolution  called  him  to  Brussels.  He  entered  the 
provisional  government.  His  name  and  his  influence  placed  him  foremost  for  the 
regency,  and  even  for  royalty.  Nevertheless  he  furthered  the  election  of  King 
Leopold  and  was  several  times  Minister  during  his  reign.  He  retired  in  1839,  and 
died  in  1857. 

3  Louis  Joseph  Antoine  de  Potter,  a  political  writer  and  Belgian  historian,  born 
1786.  He  did  not  begin  his  political  career  till  1828.  The  attitude  he  took  caused 
him  to  be  greatly  censured.  He  was  condemned  to  eight  years  exile  when  the 
revolution  of  1830  broke  out.  Returning  to  Brussels  he  placed  himself  at  the  head  of 
the  Republican  party.  Seeing  that  his  efforts  were  ineffectual,  he  returned  to  Paris 
in  1831,  whence  he  energetically  combated  the  policy  of  King  Leopold.  He  went 
back  to  Brussels  in  1838,  and  lived  there  in  retirement  till  his  death  in  1859. 

4  Jean  Francois  de  Theilmann,  lawyer  and  Belgian  statesman.  He  was  one  of 
the  most  active  members  of  the  Liberal  party,  and  was  exiled  in  1830  together  with 
his  friend  Potter.  Returning  to  Brussels  the  following  August,  he  was  made  Adminis- 
trator-General of  the  Interior,  member  of  the  Constitutional  Commission.  Minister  of 
the  Interior,  and  Governor  of  the  Provinces  of  Antwerp  and  Liege.  He  was  deputy  for 
Brussels.    He  was  also  nominated  Councillor  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  for  Brabant.    He 


266  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLE  YRAND. 

who,  notwithstanding  the  power  afforded  them  by  the  large 
armed  force  under  their  authority  in  Brussels,  have  not  had 
influence  enough  to  be  elected  members  of  the  National 
Congress.  It  is  further  added,  that  the  clergy  are  favourable  to 
the  idea  of  Comte  Felix  de  Merode,  who  is  said  to  be  very 
devout ;  and  we  must  not  lose  sight  of  the  fact,  that  the  clergy 
and  the  religious  spirit  of  Catholicism,  will  for  some  time  to 
come  have  an  enormous  influence  in  Belgium.  We  must  also 
not  forget  that  the  Belgian  clergy  blame  the  French  clergy  for 
having  joined  in  the  defence  of  absolute  power,  and  profess 
loudly  that  to  defend  religion  effectually,  the  clergy  must  show 
that  they  defend  the  liberty  of  the  people. 

Under  these  circumstances  therefore  it  appears,  that  if  it  is 
difficult  to  flatter  ourselves  that  the  Prince  of  Orange  or  his  son, 
still  a  minor,  will  be  chosen,  it  is  no  less  difficult  to  procure  the 
choice  of  a  Protestant  prince,  and  the  selection  must  therefore 
be  confined  to  the  small  circle  of  Catholic  princes. 

There  has  been  some  question  in  Brussels  as  to  the  Due  de 
Leuchtenberg  ;  and  M.  de  Talleyrand  informs  us  that  this 
suggestion  was  not  even  listened  to  in  London.  It  is  very 
desirable  that  it  should  not  be  so  anywhere. 

The  list  of  Catholic  princes  who  might  be  chosen  by  the 
Belgians  is  unfortunately  very  small.  It  is  thought  that  they 
are  desirous  to  ask  for  one  of  my  sons,1  but  this  idea  must  be 
put  aside,  and  must  not  even  be  discussed,  since  in  the  present 
state  of  Europe  such  a  discussion  would  be  dangerous,  and 
could  have  no  possible  chance  of  success.  The  same  may  be 
said  of  the  Austrian  Archdukes,  who  must  also  be  eliminated. 

There  remain  therefore  only  the  families  of  Naples,  Saxony, 
and  Bavaria,  from  which  a  choice  could  be  made.  France 
would  not  object  to  this,  and  there  seems  no  reason  why  any 
of  the  other  Powers  should  do  so  either.  But  we  must  not 
conceal  from  ourselves  that  the  unpopularity  of  the  Neapolitan 
Royal  family,  leaves  but  scant  hope  that  the  choice  of  the  Belgians 
might  fall  on  Prince  Charles  of  Naples,2  who  is  nineteen  years 
old,  and  who  is  well  spoken  of.  Thus  we  must  realize  that  there 
is  no  other  alternative  than  the  choice  of  Prince  John  of 
Saxony,3  who  is  thirty  years  old,  of  Prince  Otto  of  Bavaria,4 

retired  from  public  life  in  1847,  and  devoted  himself  exclusively  to  magisterial 
work.  x  The  Due  de  Nemours. 

3  Charles  Ferdinand,  Prince  of  Capua,  born  181 1,  son  of  Francis  I.,  King  of  the 
two  Sicilies. 

3  John  of  Saxony,  born  1801,  son  of  King  Anthony,  married  to  the  Princess 
Amelie,  daughter  of  the  King  of  Bavaria.  He  succeeded  to  the  throne  on  the  death 
of  his  brother  in  1854,  and  died  in  1873. 

4  Otto  Frederick  Louis,  Prince  of  Bavaria,  born  1815,  son  of  King  Louis,  was 
elected  King  of  Greece  in  1832,  obliged  to  resign  the  Crown  in  1862,  and  died  in  1867. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  267 

who  is  only  ten  or  eleven  years  of  age,  and  of  Comte  Felix  de 
Merode,  either  as  Regent,  or  as  hereditary  Grand  Duke. 

The  result  is  doubtless  not  very  satisfactory.  Let  us  hope 
that  more  favourable  opportunities  may  present  themselves,  but 
let  us  be  content  with  those  arrangements  which,  being  more 
practicable,  can  alone  insure  the  continuance  of  European 
peace.     La  Fontaine  says  truly  : 

"  Les  plus  accommodants,  ce  sont  les  plus  habiles. 
On  hasarde  de  perdre  en  voulant  trop  gagner." 

One  cannot  but  admire  in  what  a  very  judicious  and  dis- 
interested way  the  king  in  these  lines  appreciates  the  various 
views  of  the  Belgian  question,  but  it  is  also  apparent  that  he  is 
quite  aware  of  the  numerous  difficulties  which  surround  its 
solution.  In  communicating  to  him  the  news  that  the  Belgians 
had  agreed  to  the  armistice,  I  felt  bound  to  tender  him  the 
following  remarks  :  x 

I  have  read  and  re-read  the  statement  of  the  Belgian  ques- 
tion, which  is  written  by  so  august  a  hand  ;  and  I  was  deeply 
struck  by  the  deep  reasoning  and  profound  knowledge  of  the 
source  from  which  it  is  borrowed. 

This,  as  far  as  the  information  I  have  gathered  enables  me 
to  judge,  is  the  situation  of  the  country  and  of  the  different 
parties. 

The  Belgian  Congress  is  the  real  exponent  of  the  national 
sentiment  ;  the  majority  of  opinions  is  incontestably  in  favour 
of  monarchy. 

This  is  demonstrated  by  their  first  proceedings  as  well  as  by 
their  choice  of  a  president.2 

The  republican  party,  and  the  one  desirous  of  a  reunion 
with  France,  are  represented  in  about  equal  numbers. 

Were  the  monarchical  party  unanimous  in  their  choice  of  a 
prince,  the  advantage  would  undoubtedly  be  theirs  ;  but  this 
question,  which  is  of  greater  importance  than  even  the  royalist 
principle  and  form  of  government  to  the  majority,  especially 
the  clergy,  will  probably  cause  a  division  among  them.     There 

1  This  fragment  is  extracted  from  a  letter  to  Madame  Adelaide,  dated  1830. 

2  The  Congress,  which  had  begun  its  sittings  on  the  10th  of  November,  had  on  the 
22nd,  by  a  vote  of  174  out  of  197,  declared  in  favour  of  a  monarchical  form  of  govern- 
ment, only  thirteen  members  voting  for  a  Republic.  On  the  nth  November,  Baron 
Surlet  de  Chokier  had  been  elected  president.  He  was  one  of  the  chiefs  of  the 
monarchist  party.  He  it  was  who,  later  on,  in  the  middle  of  the  Congress,  brought 
forward  a  motion  in  favour  of  the  election  of  the  Due  de  Nemours. 


268  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLE  YRAND. 

is  a  fraction  of  the  monarchical  party  who  are  even  more  opposed 
to  the  Prince  of  Orange  personally  and  to  the  House  of  Nassau 
generally,  than  they  would  be  to  the  establishment  of  a  republic. 
That  is  the  quicksand  which  we  have  to  dread.  If  the  discussion 
be  not  preceded  by  a  previous  agreement,  and  by  mutual  con- 
cessions, so  that  the  monarchical  party  in  the  Congress  may  be 
impressed  by  an  appearance  of  unanimous  action,  the  opposing 
factions,  strengthened  by  these  divisions,  will  as  surely  regain  the 
upper  hand.  The  proclamation  of  the  republic  will  be  their  first 
tentative  act  ;  union  with  France  their  second,  should  the  first  fail. 

Whilst  admitting  the  unity  of  the  royalist  party,  there  would 
still  be  another  danger  to  be  avoided.  Were  the  Prince  of 
Orange  elected,  the  tactics  of  his  opponents  would  resolve  them- 
selves into  attacking  the  Congress  in  the  integral  parts  of  its 
constitution,  which  they  would  assume  to  be  unpopular  ;  they 
would  contest  its  rights,  invalidate  its  decisions,  and  inflame  the 
country  with  antagonism  against  it.  But  their  being  in  the 
wrong,  they  would  be  more  vulnerable. 

The  portion  in  the  monarchical  party  in  favour  of  the  Prince 
of  Orange,  and  individually  opposed  to  all  the  other  princes,  is 
the  strongest  and  the  most  numerous  ;  it  is  stronger  and  even 
more  numerous  than  the  other  parties  also  taken  individually. 

In  saying  this,  I  assume  that  the  choice  of  the  Due  de 
Nemours,  would,  as  a  matter  of  wisdom,  be  set  entirely  aside  and 
put  out  of  the  question  ;  for  he  would  at  once  turn  the  scale. 
The  bombardment  of  Antwerp,  and  his  trip  to  the  Hague,  have 
greatly  prejudiced  the  cause  of  the  Prince  of  Orange,  and  it  will 
be  difficult  to  regain  the  advantage  he  has  lost.  It  is  possible 
that  judicious  hints  made  with  the  utmost  caution  by  the  great 
Powers,  might  be  productive  of  some  good. 

M.  de  Merode  cannot  be  regarded  as  the  head  of  any  party, 
being  merely  a  tool,  chiefly  of  the  clerical  party.  Neither  he, 
nor  M.  d'Oultremont,  nor  M.  d'Hoogworst,1  have  any  real  chances. 

The  Duke  of  Leuchtenberg  would  have  no  following,  were 
it  not  that  his  name  is  connected  with  recollections  of  the  Empire, 
and  French  sympathies  generally.  Without  the  support  of  the 
great  Powers,  he  is  practically  of  no  importance. 

The  Archduke  Charles2  is  supported,  in  default  of  M.  de 
Merode,  by  the  same  party. 

Left  to  itself,  this  subdivision  of  the  Catholic  monarchical 
faction  would  be  completely  inert.     It  might  decide  the  question 

1  Emmanuel  Vanderlinden,  Baron  de  Hoogworst,  a  Belgian  General  (1781-1866), 
commanded  the  National  Guard  of  Brussels  in  1830,  was  made  a  member  of  the 
Provisional  Government,  and  Commander-in-Chief  for  life  of  the  whole  Belgian 
National  Guard. 

-  The  son  of  the  Emperor  Leopold,  and  the  celebrated  adversary  of  Napoleon. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  269 

by  strengthening  the  party  of  the  Prince  of  Orange,  or  of  one  of 
his  sons,  a  change  of  religion  being  the  condition  of  their  sup- 
port in  the  election  of  either  the  above  named.  On  no  other 
terms  would  they  capitulate.  As  to  the  princes  of  Naples, 
Bavaria  or  Saxony,  their  names  have  not  even  been  suggested 
to  the  Belgians.  They  have  no  party,  but  they  may  become  a 
necessity. 

The  entire  situation  is  an  extremely  complicated  one,  and 
there  is  no  doubt  that  the  election  of  the  Prince  of  Orange  is 
the  easiest  solution  of  it. 

Just  at  this  time,  and  whilst  these  questions,  in  themselves 
so  momentous,  were  being  discussed,  another  fresh  obstacle,  as 
1  mentioned  before,  threatened  to  delay  the  proceedings  of  the 
conference. 

The  English  ministry,  having  been  defeated  in  some  in- 
significant matter  in  the  House  of  Commons,  determined  to 
retire.  The  cause  of  this  action  on  their  part  was  a  discussion 
as  to  the  desirability  of  referring  the  bill  relating  to  the  civil  list 
to  a  special  committee  ;  the  Government  opposed  this  step,  as  con- 
trary to  established  precedent.  A  majority  of  twenty-nine  votes 
in  437  having  pronounced  against  the  Government,  the  Duke  of 
Wellington  and  his  colleagues  tendered  their  resignation,  which 
was  accepted  by  the  king.  This  occurred  on  the  15th  November, 
the  ministers  preferring  to  retire  at  this  first  manifestation  of 
the  hostility  of  the  Commons,  rather  than  await  the  discussion 
of  Mr.  Brougham's  motion.  The  king  thereupon  summoned 
Earl  Grey,1  and  entrusted  him  with  the  formation  of  a  Cabinet 
from  the  moderate  Whig  party.  This  event  might  influence  the 
result  of  our  important  negotiations  in  various  ways  ;  if,  per- 
sonally, I  regretted  Wellington's  withdrawal  from  office,  having 
had  long-standing  and  reliable  relations  with  him,  and  he  being 
one  of  those  who  enjoyed  as  did  no  other  man  in  like  degree 
the  confidence  of  Europe  ;  on  the  other  hand,  the  presence  of 

1  Charles  Grey,  born  in  1764,  entered  Parliament  in  1786,  and  allied  himself  closely 
with  Fox.  He  was  head  of  the  Whig  party  from  1792  till  1802.  In  1806  this  party 
having  come  into  power,  Mr.  Grey  was  made  First  Lord  of  the  Admiralty,  and  after 
the  death  of  Fox,  Minister  for  Foreign  Affairs.  He  retired  in  1807,  and  succeeded  his 
father  the  same  year,  when  he  entered  the  House  of  Lords.  In  1830,  Earl  Grey  was 
requested  to  form  a  Cabinet,  which,  after  a  short  break  in  1832,  lasted  till  1834.  He 
died  in  1845. 


270  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

the  Whig  party  at  the  head  of  affairs,  being  more  liberal  in  its 
general  tendencies,  gave  rise  to  the  hope  that  it  might  offer 
certain  facilities  for  the  progress  of  the  negotiations.  This  party- 
was  in  no  way  responsible  for  the  transactions  of  1815  ;  and 
having  so  frequently  deprecated  and  attacked  the  same,  they 
would  in  no  way  feel  themselves  bound  to  uphold  them  in  all 
their  integrity.  It  is  true  this  advantage  was  somewhat  neu- 
tralized by  the  fear,  that  the  revolutionary  party,  which  was  then 
in  such  violent  agitation  on  the  Continent,  might  hope  to  find, 
and  eventually  did  find,  allies  in  those  ministers,  who  whilst 
they  were  in  opposition,  encouraged,  and  at  times  even  inflamed 
their  aspirations.  Nevertheless,  we  were  forced  to  accept  this 
change,  and  to  turn  the  same  to  the  greatest  possible  advantage 
to  ourselves. 

The  retiring  ministry  had  announced  their  intention  of  re- 
taining- the  direction  of  affairs  until  another  administration 
should  be  formed.  Lord  Aberdeen  therefore  convoked  the 
conference  after  his  resignation  had  been  sent  in. 

At  this  sitting  our  commissioners,  who  had  returned  from 
Brussels,  handed  in  the  consent  of  the  provisional  government 
to  the  proposal  of  an  armistice.1  This  consent  had  not  been 
granted  without  some  discussion  as  to  the  territorial  limits  which 
had  been  fixed  by  our  protocol,  but  the  same  objection  was 
raised,  and  with  greater  force,  by  M.  Falck,  the  plenipotentiary 
of  the  King  of  the  Netherlands,  who  protested,  in  the  name  of 
his  sovereign,  against  the  proposed  limits,  as  being  too  prejudicial 
to  Holland.  The  conference  then  drew  up  two  protocols,  a 
public  and  a  secret  one.  In  the  first,  the  consent  given  to  the 
armistice  with  the  Hague  and  with  Brussels  was  accepted  in  its 
integrity  ;  but  in  the  secret  protocol,  the  commissioners,  who 
were  returning  to  Brussels,  were  desired  to  try  and  obtain  the 
limits  demanded  by  the  King  of  the  Netherlands  ;  should  they 
however   encounter  too   many  difficulties  in  their  efforts,  they 

1  It  was  on  the  ioth  November  that  the  congress  accepted  the  proposed  armistice. 
The  protocol  of  the  4th  November,  which  enjoined  it,  gave  as  the  line  of  demarcation, 
"the  boundaries  of  Holland,  previous  to  the  treaty  of  Paris  of  the  30th  May,  1814." 
M.  Bresson  and  Mr.  Cartwright,  who  had  brought  the  news  of  the  acceptance  to 
London,  returned  to  Brussels  on  the  19th  November,  and  submitted  the  second 
protocol  of  the  17th  November  to  the  congress,  which  was  also  accepted  by  the 
Provisional  Government  (November  21). 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  271 

were  to  keep  to  the  primary  basis  of  the  protocol  of  the  4th 
November.  There  was  no  actual  question  of  a  definite  demarca- 
tion, which  was  no  more  prejudiced  by  the  armistice  than  were 
all  the  various  other  questions  to  which  the  events  in  Belgium 
had  given  rise. 

Mr.  Cartwright  and  M.  Bresson  returned  to  Brussels  armed 
with  deeds  and  full  powers  from  the  conference,  which, 
having  obtained  the  suspension  of  hostilities,  could  now  await 
with  greater  security  and  calmness,  the  formation  of  a  new- 
ministry  in  England. 

M.  Bresson's  absence  caused  me  much  inconvenience.  As  I 
have  already  observed,  my  embassy  was  rather  ill  assorted  ; 
several  young  men  had  been  sent  to  me  who  had  been  selected 
from  amongst  what  was  termed  the  p7'ogressive  part)-.  They 
were  utterly  useless  for  the  work  of  the  embassy,  in  which  they 
were  incapable  of  taking  part,  and  they  compromised  its  dignity 
by  their  follies  and  indiscretions.  Thus,  one  member,  assisted  at 
a  radical  banquet  given  in  honour  of  Poland,  and  there  proposed 
a  revolutionary  toast ;  another  announced  his  intention  of  not 
drinking  the  health  of  King  Louis-Philippe  until  that  monarch 
had  abdicated.  I  had  much  trouble  in  ridding  the  embassy  of 
these  awkward  and  discordant  elements.  I  earnestly  implored, 
that  some  one  might  be  sent  to  me  who  was  capable  of  under- 
taking the  work  ;  but  it  was  not  till  the  end  of  November  that 
M.  de  Bacourt  appeared  on  the  scene. 

The  formation  of  the  new  Cabinet  was  attended  by  a  rather 
serious  complication. 

The  Duke  of  Wellington  had  succumbed  to  an  unexpected 
and  sudden  alliance,  composed  of  the  Whig  party,  and  a  fraction 
of  the  extreme  Tory  party  (who  had  never  forgiven  the  duke  for 
his  action  in  the  Catholic  Emancipation  Bill;, *  and  lastly  of  a  few 

1  The  position  of  Ireland  before  the  Emancipation  Bill  is  well  known.  Among  her 
seven  nidi  ion  inhabitants,  nearly  six  millions  were  Roman  Catholics,  who  were 
ineligible  for  election,  could  not  enter  any  of  the  liberal  professions,  and  had  not 
even  the  right  of  owning  property.  After  many  vicissitudes,  thanks  to  the  efforts  and 
the  influence  of  O'Connell,  a  strong  opposition  was  formed  in  1823,  known  as  the 
Catholic  Association.  From  that  time,  the  rapidly  increasing  agitation  frightened  the 
Government  and  hastened  its  dissolution.  Four  times  already,  an  Emancipation  Bill, 
passed  by  the  Commons,  had  been  rejected  by  the  Lords,  when  at  last  in  1829,  it 
was  presented  by  Wellington  and  Peel,  and  was  adopted  on  the  10th  of  April.  The 
Catholics  were  admitted  to  the  rights  of  citizenship. 


272  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

partisans  of  Mr.  Canning's,  who  had  separated  from  the  Tory 
party  some  two  or  three  years  previously.  Lord  Grey  repre- 
sented the  Whig  party,  the  Duke  of  Richmond1  the  extreme 
Tories,  and  Lord  Palmerston  "2  the  Canningites.  In  order  to 
obtain  anything  like  a  fusion  of  these  three  parties  for 
the  formation  of  a  Cabinet,  it  was  of  primary  necessity  to 
come  to  an  understanding  as  to  the  principles  which  should 
guide  them,  and  the  measures  they  should  propose  ;  hence  the 
delays  and  difficulties  that  arose.  Only  to  cite  one  amongst 
many.  The  fall  of  Wellington's  ministry  was  evidently  due  to  his 
too  explicit  declaration  against  all  parliamentary  reform.  It 
was  hardly  possible  that  public  opinion  could  be  thus  directly 
shaken  in  this  matter  without  great  danger.  Some  parliamentary 
reform  must  necessarily  therefore  form  one  of  the  measures  of 
the  new  Cabinet. 

But  one  of  the  fundamental  principles  of  the  extreme  Tories, 
and  of  Canning's  administration,  had  always  been  a  stern 
opposition  to  any  parliamentary  reform.  Would  they  still  hold 
to  this  doctrine  in  all  its  rigour?  If  so,  they  could  hardly  act 
in  concert  with  the  Whigs  ;  and  if  the  pressure  of  circumstances 
caused  them  to  coalesce,  they  would  only  reproduce  the 
precedent  of  the  Duke  of  Wellington  and  Mr.  Peel  on  the 
Catholic  Emancipation  question.  Furthermore,  this  action 
would  separate  them  from  many  of  their  old  and  faithful  political 
friends  ;  and  if  it  brought  them  new  allies,  these  would  by  the 
very  act,  prove  that  their  fidelity  was  only  conditional.  Up  to 
the  time  I  am  speaking  of,  it  was  very  rare  for  Englishmen  to 
make  any  compromise  in  the  political  principles  which  they  had 
once  professed  ;  and  the  desertion  of  their  party  would  have 
been  an  unpardonable  and  unprecedented  offence. 

Furthermore,  even  though  public  opinion  ardently  desired 
some  parliamentary  reform,  the  accession  to  power  of  the  Whig 

1  Charles,  Duke  of  Richmond,  born  in  1791,  entered  the  House  of  Lords  in  1819, 
on  the  death  of  his  father.  lie  was  Postmaster- General  in  1830  in  Earl  Grey's 
Cabinet. 

-  Henry  John  Temple  (Viscount  Palmerston),  born  in  1784,  entered  the  House  of 
Commons  in  1807,  was  Lord  of  the  Admiralty  in  the  Portland  Cabinet  in  1807,  and 
Secretary  of  State  for  War  in  1809.  He  retained  this  place  until  1828.  He  then 
became  Secretary  for  Foreign  Affairs  from  1830  till  1841,  and  again  from  1846  till 
1851,  Home  Secretary  from  1852  till  1855,  First  Lord  of  the  Treasury  from  1855  till 
1858,  and  again  in  1859  until  his  death  in  1865. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  273 

party,  inspired  public  men  with  a  certain  amount  of  dread,  and 
this  dread  showed  itself  by  a  considerable  fall  in  the  public 
funds.  For  the  last  century  England  had  become  so  used  to  a 
Tory  administration,  the  intervals  of  Whig  Government  had  been 
so  short,  and  I  might  add  so  little  successful,  that  the  majority  of 
people  who  were  in  any  way  important  either  by  their  position 
or  by  the  interests  they  represented,  did  not  welcome  their 
return.  The  Times,  that  newspaper  which  had  been  so  long 
the  organ  of  their  party,  and  which  was  always  ready  to  uphold 
them,  was  nevertheless  obliged  to  express  the  impressions  of  the 
"  City,"  where  the  principal  financial  and  commercial  operations 
of  London  take  place,  in  the  following  terms  : 

"  General  feeling  is  not  very  favourable  to  a  Whig  ministry, 
inasmuch  as  the  Whigs,  and  the  men  of  this  party,  do  not 
possess  that  financial  reputation  to  which  public  opinion 
attaches  so  great  an  importance ;  but  it  is  difficult  to  see  what 
other  alternative  remains.  All  practical  men  are  of  opinion  that 
a  government  could  hardly  be  called  to  take  office  at  a  time 
beset  with  greater  difficulties." 


:=>* 


All  this,  it  is  very  apparent,  was  the  reverse  of  reassuring. 
But  I  did  not  feel  absolutely  alarmed  thereat,  and  believed 
that  relations  with  England  would  not  be  materially  affected  by 
the  recent  change.  It  is  true  we  had  been  on  good  terms  with 
the  retiring  ministry  ;  and  it  is  not  always  wise  to  try  to 
improve  a  good  position.  But  I  thought  that  the  new  adminis- 
tration might  adopt  principles  approximate  to  those  of  their 
predecessors  in  their  foreign  policy,  and  that  we  might  thus 
reap  a  further  advantage  :  and  acting  in  concert  with  them,  in 
the  same  way  as  we  should  have  done  with  the  late  Cabinet,  it 
would  probably  be  viewed  with  greater  popularity  in  France, 
consequent  on  the  opinions  which  were  dominant  there  at  the 
time. 

The  ministry  was  formed  at  last,  and  was  composed  as 
follows: — 1 

Earl  Grey,  First  Lord  of  the  Treasury  ;    Lord  Palmerston, 

1  See  M.  tie  Talleyrand's  views  on  this  new  ministry  in  Appendix,  Letter  No.  15. 
VOL.  III.  T 


274  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

Foreign  Secretary  ;  Lord  Melbourne,1  Secretary  of  State  for 
Home  Affairs ;  Lord  Goderich,2  Secretary  of  State  for  War  and 
the  Colonies  ;  Lord  Althorp,3  President  of  the  Indian  Council  ; 
Lord  Lansdowne,  President  of  the  Council  ;  Lord  Durham,4  son- 
in-law  of  Lord  Grey,  Lord  Privy  Seal  ;  Mr.  Brougham, 
Chancellor,  with  the  title  of  Lord  Brougham  ;  Lord  Holland,5 
Chancellor  of  the  Duchy  of  Lancaster  ;  Lord  Auckland,0 
Secretary  of  the  Board  of  Trade,  without  a  seat  in  the  council  ; 
the  Duke  of  Richmond,  Grand  Master  of  the  Ordnance. 

While  this  Cabinet  was  being  formed  in  London,  a  new 
modification  had  taken  place  in  the  French  ministry,  General 
Sebastiani  having  become  Minister  of  Marine,  in  place  of 
Marshall  Maison,  who  had  been  nominated  ambassador  to  the 
Court  of  Vienna.7  These  perpetual  changes  did  not  facilitate 
the  progress  of  affairs  ;  but  it  must  be  admitted  that  a  state  of 
semi-revolution    was    almost    general    everywhere,     and     it     is 

1  W.  Lamb,  Viscount  Melbourne,  born  in  1779,  entered  the  House  of  Commons 
in  1805,  and  the  House  of  Lords  in  1828  on  the  death  of  his  father.  He  was  Home 
Minister  in  1830,  became  First  Lord  of  the  Treasury  in  1834,  and  continued  at  the 
head  of  the  Government,  save  for  a  brief  interruption,  until  1841.      He  died  in  1848. 

2  Sir  Frederick  John  Robinson  (Karon  Ripon,  and  Viscount  Goderich),  born  in 
1782,  Member  of  the  House  of  Commons  in  1806,  Under  Secretary  of  State  for  the 
Colonies  in  the  Portland  Ministry  in  1807,  member  of  the  Admiralty  Commission  in 
1810,  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer  in  1823,  Colonial  Secretary  in  1S27,  entered  the 
House  of  Lords  the  same  year,  under  the  title  of  Viscount  Goderich.  In  i827-i828he 
was  for  some  months  First  Lord  of  the  Treasury,  than  again  Colonial  Secretary,  Lord 
Privy  Seal  in  1833,  President  of  the  Board  of  Trade  in  1841,  and  of  the  India  Office 
in  1843.      He  retired  in  1846,  and  died  1859. 

3  John  Charles  Spencer,  Viscount  Althorp,  afterwards  Earl  Spencer,  born  in 
1782,  entered  the  House  of  Commons  in  1804,  Lord  of  the  Treasury  in  1806, 
became  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer  in  1830,  entered  the  House  of  Lords  in  1834. 
On  the  fall  of  the  Grey  Ministry  he  retired  from  public  affairs,  and  died  in  1845. 

4  John  George  Lambton,  Earl  of  Durham,  born  in  1792,  entered  the  House  of 
Commons  at  a  very  early  age,  was  created  a  peer  in  1828,  and  joined  Lord  Grey's 
Cabinet  as  Lord  Privy  Seal  in  1830,  was  Ambassador  at  St.  Petersburg  in  1830, 
then  Governor  of  the  North  American  Colonies.     He  died  in  1840. 

5  Henry  Richard  Vassall  Fox,  Baron  Holland,  nephew  of  the  celebrated  Fox, 
born  in  1773,  succeeded  his  father  in  the  House  of  Lords,  was  Lord  Privy  Seal 
in  1806-1807.  In  1830  he  was  made  Chancellor  of  the  Duchy  of  Lancaster,  which 
appointment  he  kept,  save  for  a  brief  interval  in  1835,   until  his  death  in   1840. 

6  George  Eden,  Earl  of  Auckland  (1784-1849),  entered  the  House  of  Commons 
in  1810,  and  in  1814  succeeded  his  father  in  the  House  of  Lords.  In  1830  he 
joined  the  Grey  Ministry  as  President  of  the  Board  of  Trade  and  Master  of  the 
Mint,  and  in  1834  he  became  First  Lord  of  the  Admiralty  under  Lord  Melbourne's 
Ministry.  In  1836  he  was  made  Governor-General  of  India.  He  retained  this  until 
1842.  Then  in  1846  he  again  became  First  Lord  of  the  Admiralty,  and  died  a  few 
years  later  (ist  January  1849). 

7  On  the  17th  of  November.  Marshal  Gerard  was  at  the  same  time  replaced 
as  War  Minister  by  Marshal  Soult,  the  Comte  d'Argout  replaced  General  Sebastiani 
as  Minister  of  Marine. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  275 

well  to  know  how  to  deal  with  any.  popular  phase  that  may 
arise. 

I  had  insisted  most  peremptorily  at  the  last  sitting  which 
Lord  Aberdeen  had  attended,  that  the  affairs  relating  to  the 
armistice  between  the  Dutch  and  the  Belgians  should  be  con- 
cluded, and  in  order  to  effect  this,  our  sitting  had  to  be  pro- 
longed far  into  the  night.  I  had  succeeded  in  infecting  the 
other  members  of  the  conference  with  my  eagerness  in  this 
matter. 

This  eagerness  was  based  on  my  anxiety,  that  the  matter 
should  assume  such  proportions  as  might  insure  us  the  co-opera- 
tion of  the  new  ministers  on  the  same  lines  we  had  opened  out 
to  them  ;  my  idea  being,  to  ask  that,  on  their  first  taking  office, 
they  would  accept  all  the  decisions  with  reference  to  Belgium 
which  had  been  arrived  at  at  the  various  conferences,  as  being 
thoroughly  sound  and  well  digested,  and  that  they  should  them- 
selves declare  this  conviction  on  the  first  occasion  that  might 
present  itself.  I  therefore  brought  as  much  pressure  to  bear  on 
the  new  ministers  as  I  could  on  this  point,  being  convinced 
that  it  must  exercise  considerable  influence  over  any  delibera- 
tions that  the  Belgians  might  ultimately  have  on  the  subject. 
We  were  constrained  to  steer  between  two  opposing  currents  ; 
some  persons  reckoning  too  much  on  the  Belgians,  and  others 
looking  most  to  the  King  of  the  Netherlands.  I  had  thus  to  go 
charily  between  these  two  parties  and  avoid  giving  undue 
umbrage  to  either.  Events,  however,  turned  out  as  favourably 
as  I  could  have  wished  ;  and  it  will  be  seen  later  on,  that  the 
new  Cabinet  entered  entirely  into  my  views  as  to  the  best  way 
of  conciliating  those  interests,  in  themselves  so  diverse  and 
complicated,  in  which  not  only  Belgian  questions  but  also  those 
of  European  moment,  were  involved.  In  order  to  make  my 
meaning  easier  of  comprehension,  it  will  not  perhaps  be  super- 
fluous to  cast  a  rapid  glance  on  the  particular  dispositions  of  the 
several  cabinets  existing  at  the  time  we  are  treating  of.  After 
which  we  will  briefly  sketch  those  of  their  representatives  in  the 
conference  of  London,  and  delineate  their  general  character. 

Austria,  greatly  alarmed  by  the  revolution  which  had  taken 
place  in  France  and  the   disturbances   that  had   broken   out   in 

T  2 


276  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

Brunswick,  Saxony  and  Hesse,1  continued  to  stir  up  discords  in 
Germany,  hoping  by  these  measures  to  oblige  the  federal  army 
to  take  active  steps,  or  at  any  rate  to  make  up  its  full  comple- 
ment, and  tried  to  find  some  pretext  for  engaging  her  own  army 
on  some  point  of  foreign  territory.  M.  de  Metternich,  far  from 
regretting  that  he  had  made  no  sacrifices  to  the  exigencies  of 
the  times,  was  only  vexed  not  to  have  further  aggravated  them, 
and  did  not  despair  of  being  able  to  make  up  for  lost  time. 

The  dispositions  of  Russia  were  much  on  the  same  lines  ; 
she  also  was  preparing  considerable  armaments.  She  wished  to 
entrust  these  to  General  Diebitch,2  who  had  been  sent  to  Berlin, 
where  with  the  help  of  the  intrigues  of  Austria,  of  the  Prince 
Royal,  and  of  M.  Ancillon,  he  sought  to  destroy  the  credit  of 
M.  de  Bernstorf,  and  to  persuade  the  king  into  adopting  the 
armed  intervention,  which  the  King  of  the  Netherlands  so 
ardently  desired. 

But  happily  the  King  of  Prussia,  enlightened  by  his  past 
experiences  and  his  profound  knowledge  of  the  state  of  men's 
minds  in  Germany  and  particularly  in  Russia,  and  also  one 
may  say  from  the  natural  honesty  of  his  character,  resisted  all 
the  influences  and  the  pressure,  which  were  being  brought  to 
bear  upon  him.  Will  he  however  continue  to  resist  them  ?  The 
maintenance  of  peace  was  hanging  on  the  solution  of  this  ques- 
tion ;  and  many  others  also  were  bound  up  with  it.  In  the 
state  of  affairs  I  have  just  described,  one  was  forced  to  con- 
jecture whether  the  change  which  had  taken  place  in  the 
English  ministry  would  make  the  courts  of  northern  Europe 
more   pliable    or   more    persistent    in   their   demands.     Would 

1  An  insurrection  had  just  broken  out  in  the  Duchy  of  Brunswick.  The  duke, 
who  had  steadily  refused  to  accept  the  constitution  of  1820,  was  forced  to  seek  refuge 
in  England,  and  abandoned  the  Government  to  his  brother  William  on  the  7th  Sep- 
tember. In  Hesse  Cassel  a  similar  rising  took  place,  against  the  Landgrave  William. 
He  retired  to  Hanau,  whence  he  granted  his  subjects  a  very  liberal  charter.  Finally 
in  Saxony,  both  Dresden  and  Leipzig  became  the  scenes  of  the  most  serious  insur- 
rectionary movements.  King  Anton  was  obliged  to  dismiss  his  ministry  and  promise 
his  people  a  constitution. 

2  Jean,  Comte  de  Diebitch-Zabalkanski,  born  in  1785,  entered  the  army  in  1797. 
Went  through  the  campaigns  of  1805,  1806,  and  1807.  In  1812  he  was  made  Major- 
General,  signed  the  treaty  of  Reichenbach  with  England  and  Prussia  in  June,  18 1 3,  and 
was  made  Lieutenant-General  after  the  battle  of  Leipzig.  After  the  peace  he  was 
made  head  of  the  Imperial  Staff  (1820),  and  Field  Marshal  in  1829.  He  commanded 
the  Russian  army  during  the  war  in  Poland  in  1831,  but  died  during  the  campaign 
on  the  9th  of  June. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  277 

they  consider  themselves  capable  of  entering  into  contest 
with  a  Whig  ministry  which  they  could  not  hope  to  coerce, 
or  would  they  think  it  necessary  to  make  serious  prepara- 
tions for  hostilities  ?  Would  they  become  more  suspicious, 
more  irritable  ?  Finally,  would  they  consider  that  they  had 
reached  a  pass,  where  they  ought  to  hazard  everything,  in  order 
possibly  to  win  everything  ? 

It  was  thus  with  a  mind  preoccupied  by  all  these  con- 
siderations, and  the  eventualities  that  might  ensue  therefrom, 
that  I  carefully  weighed  the  language  I  should  use  at  the  forth- 
coming meeting  of  the  conference,  which  the  new  Minister  for 
Foreign  Affairs,  Lord  Palmerston,  was  about  to  summon.  This 
conference  was  composed  as  follows  : 

Austria  was  represented  by  Prince  Paul  Esterhazy,1  who  had 
for  fifteen  years,  held  the  post  of  ambassador  in  London,  where 
he  was  liked  and  esteemed  by  society  and  the  aristocracy  of 
England.  Beneath  an  appearance  of  great  ease,  and  a  tempera- 
ment which  was  always  gay  and  of  singular  amiability,  he  hid 
greater  perspicacity  and  greater  business  qualities,  than  he  has 
been  given  credit  for.  His  position  as  an  influential  Hungarian 
magnate  endowed  him  with  more  liberal  views  than  those  held 
by  M.  de  Metternich,  whilst  his  long  residence  in  England 
having  familiarized  him  with  the  usages  of  constitutional 
government,  had  enlarged  his  ideas,  and  prepared  the  way  for 
those  concessions  which  were  inevitable  under  the  present  state 
of  affairs  in  Europe.  Somewhat  later,  by  Prince  Metternich's 
orders,  he  was  joined  by  Baron  de  Wessenberg,  the  object  of 
this  appointment  being,  either  to  remove  the  latter  from  Vienna 
where  his  presence  was  obstructive,  or  else  to  restrain  Prince 
Esterhazy,  whose  influence  M.  de  Metternich  might  possibly  fear. 
If  this  last  was  his  object,  he  was  deceiving  himself  hugely,  as 
M.  de  Wessenberg  was  far  more  susceptible  of  being  led  away 
than  was  Prince  Esterhazy  himself.  I  had  already  made  the 
acquaintance  of  the  Baron  de  Wessenberg  at  the  congress  of 

1  Paul  Antoine,  Prince  Esterhazy  de  Galantha,  an  Austrian  diplomat,  born  in 
1786.  Began  as  Secretary  to  the  Embassy  at  London,  then  Ambassador  at  Westphalia 
in  1810,  at  Rome  in  1814,  and  at  London  from  1815  to  1818.  He  returned  to  London 
in  1830,  and  remained  there  until  1838.  In  1848  he  formed  one  of  the  Bathyani 
Ministry.     He  died  in  1866. 


278  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

Vienna,  and  I  then  recognized  in  him  a  clever  man  of 
business,  energetic  and  hard  working,  but  nothing  more.  As  a 
statesman,  his  views  are  too  confined  ;  thoroughly  honest  in 
himself,  he  believes  he  has  an  accurate  knowledge  of  everything, 
from  having  for  the  last  forty  years  been  in  a  position  to  hear 
and  to  remember  all  the  scandal  and  gossip  of  Europe. 

The  Prussian  minister,  Baron  de  Biilow,1  is  fully  conversant 
with  general  affairs ;  he  is  a  man  of  ability  and  humour,  of  the 
Prussian  type,  sometimes  pushing  adroitness  to  the  verge  of 
cunning.  He  has  married  the  daughter  of  William  de  Humboldt, 
but  has  in  no  way  espoused  the  anti-French  mania  of  the  latter, 
which  was  so  unpleasant  to  me  at  the  congress  of  Vienna.  M.  de 
Biilow  wished  to  please  both  the  parties  which  divided  the  court 
of  Berlin  ;  that  of  the  king,  who  was  old  and  cautious,  and  that 
of  the  Prince  Royal,  who  might  at  any  moment  succeed  to  his 
father's  throne  and  whose  leanings  were  distinctly  towards 
Russia.  I  had  several  times  to  draw  him  away  from  these  in- 
admissible sympathies,  in  order  to  get  him  to  appreciate  clearly 
the  actual  course  of  events. 

Russia  had  two  official  representatives  at  the  conference  in 
London  ;  Prince  Lieven,  and  Comte  Mantusiewicz.  The  latter, 
a  Pole  by  birth,  had  been  educated  in  France,  and  was  justly 
proud  of  having  gained  the  highest  prize  and  honours,  in  the 
competition  of  1811  at  the  University  of  Paris;  his  habits, 
manners  and  mental  faculties,  have  remained  intensely  French, 
and  he  possesses  rare  gifts,  and  a  great  editorial  capacity.  He 
had  been  sent  to  London  to  take  part  in  the  negotiations  relat- 
ing to  Greece,  and  he  had  remained  as  Russian  representative 
ad  interim,  during  Prince  Lieven's  temporary  absence ;  I  found 
him  filling  this  post  on  my  arrival  in  London.  He  had  shown 
his  conciliatory  views  at  the  beginning  of  Belgian  affairs,  in  spite 
of  the  antipathy  which  he  knew  his  sovereign  felt  towards  the 
new  order  of  things  established   in  France  ;  but  when,  a  little 

1  Henri,  Baron  de  Biilow,  born  in  1790,  entered  the  army  in  18 13,  went  through 
the  campaigns  of  1814  and  1815,  and  was  sent  to  Frankfort  after  the  peace  as  Minister 
Plenipotentiary.  In  1817  he  was  attached  as  Secretary  to  the  London  Embassy  ;  he 
returned  to  Berlin  and  became  Privy  Councillor  and  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs.  In 
1827  he  was  appointed  Ambassador  at  London,  where  he  remained  till  1840,  passed 
thence  to  Frankfort  (1841),  and  was  made  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  in  1842.  He 
retired  in  1844,  and  died  in  1846. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  279 

later  on,  there  was  a  rising  in  Poland,  he  showed  his  great  ability 
in  being  able  to  retain  his  position  as  Russian  plenipotentiary 
at  the  conference  in  London.  It  will  easily  be  seen  that  his 
equivocal  position,  as  a  Pole,  did  not  render  him  as  amenable  in 
our  negotiations  as  he  would  doubtless  otherwise  have  been. 
As  for  Prince  Lieven,  I  owe  him  the  testimony  of  having  helped 
us  greatly  by  his  loyalty,  and  his  resistance  to  the  ill-advised 
outbursts  of  anger  of  the  Emperor  Nicholas.  M.  de  Lieven  has 
more  ability  than  is  generally  supposed  ;  in  this  respect  however 
the  presence  of  his  wife  is  detrimental  to  him,  and  she  moreover 
effaces  him  much  more  than  is  expedient  under  the  circum- 
stances. 

It  was  generally  reported  in  London  that  his  conciliatory 
attitude  arose  chiefly  from  his  desire  to  retain  his  appointment 
as  ambassador  ;  this,  however,  seemed  to  me  unlikely,  and  in 
any  case  was  an  unsuccessful  attempt  on  his  part,  as  he  ended 
by  being  recalled.  But  I  should  be  giving  an  incomplete  and 
defective  description  of  the  .Russian  legation  in  London,  and 
the  important  part  it  was  playing  there,  if  I  omitted  to  mention 
Madame  de  Lieven.1  She  would  perhaps  forgive  me  less  easily 
than  would  any  one  else,  were  I  to  pass  her  name  over  in  silence. 
Madame  de  Lieven  had  been  resident  in  England  for  nineteen 
years,  having  come  over  in  18 12,  during  the  time  when 
Napoleon's  foolish  enterprise  against  Russia,  had  led  the 
Emperor  Alexander  to  seek  the  friendship  of  England.  It 
must  be  remembered  that  at  this  time,  not  a  single  legation 
had  been  for  some  years  accredited  to  the  court  of  St.  James, 
with  whom  every  continental  cabinet  had,  either  really  or  only 
apparently,  been  forced  to  sever  official  relations.  The  appear- 
ance, therefore,  of  an  embassy  from  Russia,  created  an  immense 
sensation.  The  Prince  Regent,  the  court,  the  aristocracy,  in 
fact  the  whole  English  nation,  received  the  representative  of  the 

1  Dorothee  de  Benkendorf,  Princess  Lieven,  born  in  17S4,  married  at  sixteen  to 
the  Prince  de  Lieven,  appointed  Lady-in-Waiting  in  1828  to  the  Empress  of  Russia. 
When  the  Prince  was  recalled  to  St.  Petersburg  she  remained  in  Paris.  In  1848  >he 
retired  to  Brussels.  Again  returning  to  Paris,  she  remained  there  until  1854,  the  date 
of  the  Crimean  War,  when  she  went  back  to  Brussels,  but  soon  again  returned  to  Paris, 
where  she  died  in  1857.  Mdme.  de  Lieven  left  many  souvenirs  in  London  and  Paris, 
where  she  had  been  on  intimate  terms  with  the  most  prominent  political  men.  Canning, 
and  later  on  Lord  Grey,  were  the  most  constant  attendants  of  her  salcn. 


28o  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

Russian  emperor  with  a  warmth  amounting  almost  to  enthu- 
siasm. M.  de  Lieven  was  welcomed  everywhere  throughout 
the  country,  and  Madame  de  Lieven,  who,  during  her  husband's 
mission  in  Berlin,  had  already  acquired  some  celebrity,  naturally 
shared  the  ovations  given  to  her  husband.  At  the  court,  in  the 
absence  of  an)-  queen,  the  first  place  became  hers  by  right,  and 
the  Prince  Regent  delighted  to  attract  her  to  Brighton,  where 
her  presence  offered  some  pretext  for  that  of  the  Marchioness 
of  Coningham,  whom  few  ladies  in  English  society  cared  to 
meet.  The  aristocracy,  renowned  for  their  hospitality,  received 
the  new  ambassadress  with  open  arms,  and  willingly  granted 
her  all  those  little  privileges  which  are  shown  to  women  whose 
beauty,  wit,  or  fortune,  place  them  at  the  head  of  fashionable 
society ;  the  undoubted  empire  exercised  by  Madame  de 
Lieven  over  English  society,  dates  from  this  time  ;  and  having 
once  gained  it,  she  had  the  great  merit  of  preserving  it  for  some 
considerable  time  ;  and  this  was  entirely  due  to  her  own  wit  and 
charm,  for  it  does  not  appear  that  she  ever  had  any  real  beauty. 
But  even  when  age  had  tarnished  the  bloom  of  youth,  she  knew 
how  to  supply  its  place  by  great  dignity,  an  exquisite  manner, 
and  a  commanding  air,  which  gave  her  a  noble  and  somewhat 
haughty  appearance,  closely  resembling  the  power  she  wields. 
Without  much  education,  and  stranger  still,  without  having  ever 
read  much,  she  has  great  natural  ability  ;  her  style,  when  writing 
French,  is  singularly  charming,  being  varied,  original  and  easy. 
She  writes  far  better  than  she  speaks,  this  being  no  doubt  due 
to  the  fact,  that  in  her  conversation  she  seeks  less  to  please  than 
to  dominate,  to  interrogate,  and  to  satisfy  her  own  insatiable 
curiosity  ;  she  is  therefore  more  piquante  by  the  boldness  of  her 
questions,  pushed  even  to  provocation,  than  by  the  vivacity  of  her 
replies  ;  and  she  gives  the  impression  of  rather  preferring  the 
satisfaction  of  embarrassing  others,  than  of  wishing  to  please 
them  by  setting  them  at  their  ease  in  her  society.  She  evinced 
this  desire  of  thus  treating  her  audience,  which  was  rather 
numerous,  at  one  of  our  earliest  meetings. 

"  You  may  say  and  do  what  you  will,"  she  exclaimed 
suddenly,  "  but  what  has  just  taken  place  in  France  is  nothing 
more  or  less  than  a  flagrant  piece  of  usurpation." 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  281 

"You  are  quite  right,  Madame,"  I  replied,  "but  the  only 
thing  to  be  regretted  in  the  matter  is,  that  it  did  not  take  place 
fifteen  years  ago,  when  your  master,  the  Emperor  Alexander, 
so  ardently  desired  it." 

I  am  bound  to  say  that  since  then,  she  has  never  provoked 
me,  and  that  we  got  on  very  friendly  terms,  although  she  quietly 
did  all  in  her  power  to  frustrate  our  negotiations,  and  this 
antagonism  could  hardly  fail  to  be  productive  of  unfavourable 
results,  more  especially  after  the  change  which  had  so  lately 
taken  place  in  the  English  ministry.  Madame  de  Lieven, 
perhaps  in  remembrance  of  her  youth,  was  rather  volatile  in  her 
political  likings  ;  but  her  ability  was  chiefly  conspicuous,  in 
being  able  invariably  to  be  even  on  better  terms  with  the 
incoming  ministers,  than  with  those  who  were  retiring.  Thus, 
after  having"  carefully  cultivated  the  friendship  of  the  Duke  of 
Wellington  for  a  considerable  time,  she  quietly  dropped  him,  in 
order  to  gain  that  of  Mr.  Canning.  On  the  death  of  the  latter, 
the  duke  having  again  taken  up  the  direction  of  affairs,  Madame 
de  Lieven  was  not  in  the  same  high  favour  with  him,  she  there- 
fore spared  no  arts  of  coquetry  to  win  over  Lord  Grey  as  soon 
as  he  came  into  power,  and  I  had  many  an  opportunity  of 
perceiving  that  in  this  she  had  to  a  certain  extent  succeeded. 

A  description  of  Lord  Palmerston,  who  succeeded  Lord 
Aberdeen  in  office,  will  complete  this  sketch  of  the  members  of 
the  conference. 

Lord  Palmerston  is  certainly  one  of,  if  not  quite  the  ablest 
of  statesmen  I  have  ever  met  with  in  all  my  official  career.  He 
possesses  all  the  aptitude  and  capacity  which  most  contributes 
to  form  such  a  man  in  England — extensive  and  varied  information, 
indefatigable  activity,  an  iron  constitution,  inexhaustible  mental 
resources  and  great  facility  of  speech  in  Parliament.  Without 
being  what  is  called  a  great  debater,  his  style  of  eloquence  is 
biting  and  satirical,  his  talent  lying  more  in  his  power  of 
crushing  an  adversary  under  the  weight  of  his  iron)-  and 
sarcasm,  than  of  convincing  his  auditors  ;  and  furthermore, 
he  has  great  social  qualities  and  highly  finished  manners. 
There  is  one  point  in  his  character,  however,  which  to  my  mind, 
entirely  outweighs  all  these  advantages,  and  would  prevent  his 


282  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLE  YRAND. 

being  considered  in  the  light  of  a  real  statesman — he  allows  his 
passions  to  influence  him  in  public  affairs,  to  the  extent  of 
sometimes  sacrificing  the  greatest  interests  to  his  personal 
feelings.  It  may  be  said,  that  nearly  every  political  question 
resolves  itself  with  him  into  a  personal  one  ;  and  whilst 
seeming  to  defend  the  interests  of  his  country,  it  is  nearly 
always  those  of  his  hatred  or  revenge  that  he  his  serving.  He 
is  very  skilful  in  hiding  this  secret  motive,  under  what  I  might 
call,  patriotic  appearances  ;  and  it  is  by  this  same  skill  that  he 
nearly  always  contrives  to  influence  a  considerable  portion  of 
public  opinion,  which  he  leads  in  whatever  direction  his  own 
personal  passions  indicate.  I  shall  often  have  the  opportunity 
of  proving  the  truth  of  these  remarks,  which  explains  how  Lord 
Palmerston  has  always  retained  a  certain  popularity,  even  when 
changing  his  party,  and  whilst  lending  his  great  talents  and 
abilities  in  turn,  to  the  Tories,  the  Whigs,  and  even  at  times  to 
the  radicals.  There  are  few  Englishmen  who  know  as  well  as 
he  does,  how  to  excite  John  Bull's  patriotic  feelings.  We 
worked  very  amicably  together  during  the  first  months  of 
the  conference,  and  it  is  to  this  accord  that  the  excellent 
results  that  were  obtained,  may  be  attributed.  Having  now 
spoken  of  the  principal  men  concerned,  we  may  revert  to  the 
affairs  which  occupied  them. 

Lord  Grey,  according  to  my  desire,  had  taken  the  oppor- 
tunity of  his  first  speech  in  Parliament — in  which  he  laid  down 
the  lines  on  which  the  new  ministry  proposed  to  act — to  proclaim 
his  peaceful  and  friendly  intentions  towards  France  ;  he  also 
said  that  he  considered  the  governments  of  the  two  countries 
were  founded  on  the  same  principles.  This  speech  made  a 
great  impression  on  the  public.  It  was  essential  that  our 
friendly  relations  with  England  should  be  established  on  a  firm 
foundation,  and,  this  being  done,  we  had  to  turn  it  to  the 
greatest  advantage. 

An  incident  moreover  supervened,  which  by  irritating  the 
Courts  of  Austria,  Prussia,  and  especially  that  of  Russia,  made 
it  still  more  important  that  there  should  be  perfect  concord 
between  France  and  England.  Before  even  ratifying  an  armistice 
with  Holland,  which  had  been  obtained  through  the   mediation 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  283 

of  the  conference,  the  Belgian  congress  had  quite  recently 
proclaimed  the  total  exclusion  of  the  House  of  Nassau  as 
candidates  for  the  throne  of  Belgium.  Fortunately  for  us, 
this  decision  had  been  arrived  at,  in  defiance  of  vigorous  steps 
taken  by  the  French  Government  to  prevent  the  same,  which 
clearly  demonstrated  the  good  faith  it  had  shown  in  this 
matter.1 

At  the  first  meeting  of  the  conference  under  the  presidency 
of  Lord  Palmerston,  who  informed  us,  that  the  Hague  and 
Brussels  had  definitely  accepted  our  proposals  of  an  armistice, 
I  propounded  some  views  to  the  assembled  plenipotentiaries, 
which  I  thought  should  be  transmitted  by  them  to  their  several 
governments.     I  told  them  : 

Gentlemen,  we  now  have  the  assurance  that  hostilities  will 
be  permanently  suspended  and  that  all  bloodshed  will  cease  ;  the 
time  has  therefore  arrived  for  some  agreement  to  be  arrived  at 
as  to  the  proper  means  of  settling  the  very  thorny  question 
which  has  been  entrusted  to  our  care.  It  is  very  evident  that 
we  shall  not  attain  this  end,  if  we  do  not  bring  a  spirit  of  con- 
ciliation into  this  council,  and  if  we  do  not  all  unite  in  having  one 
common  aim — that  of  the  maintenance  of  peace,  which  is  such  a 
crying  necessity  to  all  parties.  It  is  impossible  to  ignore  the 
fact,  that  whatever  may  have  been  the  motives  of  the  Revolution 
which  has  taken  place  in  France,  it  has  more  or  less  shaken 
nearly  every  throne  in  Europe,  and  has  everywhere  weakened 
the  fundamental  principle  of  authority. 

This  I  deplore  with  you,  and  as  much  as  you  do  ;  but  I  can 
see  only  one  remedy  for  this  evil,  namely,  that  we  unanimously 
agree  to  repair  it,  by  giving  each  other  reciprocal  help.  There  is 
no  doubt  that  our  governments  will  severally  feel  increased 
internal  strength,  when  able  to  speak  in  the  name  of  the  five 
greatest  Powers  of  Europe.  My  own  government  has  recently 
given  you  a  conclusive  proof  of  the  sincerity  of  its  intentions,  by 
trying  to  prevent  the  Belgian  congress  from  pronouncing  the 
exclusion  of  the  House  of  Nassau.  I  much  regret  it  has  not  been 
more  successful  in  this  matter,  and  I  shall  together  with  you, 
loyally  seek  means  of  repairing  this  misfortune,  if  it  be  still 
possible  ;  but  whatever  may  be  the  issue  of  our  efforts  on  this 

1  See  page  257  and  note.  The  question  of  excluding  in  perpetuity  the  members 
of  the  House  of  Nassau  from  all  power  in  Belgium,  was  brought  before  the  congress 
by  M.  Rodenbach  on  the  23rd  of  November.  It  was  decided  by  121  votes  against 
twenty-eight. 


284  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

point,  it  is  well  to  be  prepared  for  every  eventuality  that  may 
occur,  and  to  introduce  thorough  confidence  and  firmness  (which 
can  alone  insure  the  preservation  of  peace)  into  our  future 
deliberations. 

These  remarks,  which  I  think  possessed  the  merit  of  being 
true,  had  sufficient  effect  for  me  to  hope,  that  the  maintenance 
of  peace  might  be  attained. 

It  was  agreed  during  this  sitting,  that  the  field  should  be  left 
open  to  the  endeavours  made  by  the  Belgian  partisans  of  the 
House  of  Nassau,  to  restore  the  Prince  of  Orange  into  favour  with 
the  congress  ;  and  to  occupy  ourselves  meantime  with  those 
details  which  it  would  be  necessary  to  regulate  in  any  case,  i.e. 
those  appertaining  to  the  difficulties,  which  had  unsettled  the 
boundaries  existing  between  Holland  and  Belgium,  the  under- 
standing which  should  be  established  with  the  Germanic  con- 
federation with  regard  to  Luxemburg,  the  division  of  the 
debt,  &c  .  .  . x 

At  the  time  the  conference  was  beginning  to  discuss  these 
important  questions,  an  emissary  arrived  in  London  from  the 
newly  constructed  French  ministry,  or  at  least  from  several  of 
its  members.  This  was  the  Comte  de  Flahaut.  His  mission  was 
a  somewhat  complicated  one ;  the  pretext  given  being  his 
former  social  and  amicable  relations  with  some  of  the  members 
of  the  new  English  ministry,  Lord  Grey  and  the  Marquis  of 
Lansdowne  amongst  others,  and  it  was  supposed  that  the 
friendly  protection  which  I  had  given  to  M.  de  Flahaut  at  the 
outset  of  his  official  career,  would  make  his  presence  an  agreeable 
adjunct  under  existing  circumstances.  M.  de  Flahaut  had  also 
come  with  the  object  of  preparing  the  way  for  his  own  nomina- 
tion as  ambassador  in  London,  when  circumstances  should 
oblige  me  to  resign  that  post.  I  quickly  extricated  these 
personal  particulars  from  beneath  the  official  covering  which  had 
been  given  to  his  embassy,  for  he  was  the  bearer  of  a  despatch 
and   several  letters   in  which    General  Sebastiani   solicited   my 

1  It  is  very  important  to  consult  the  correspondence  of  M.  Bresson  and  M.  de 
Talleyrand  on  these  various  points.  We  have  therefore  inserted  a  few  of  these  letters, 
which  complete  what  M.  de  Talleyrand  says  respecting  these  negotiations,  in  the 
Appendix.     See  letters,  Nos.  16,  17,  21. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  285 

opinion  and  advice  concerning  the  foreign  policy  of  France  ; 
and  he  had  also  been  instructed  to  introduce  some  hints  in  his 
intercourse  with  me,  relating  to  the  manner  in  which  it  was 
thought  desirable  to  conclude  the  Dutch-Belgian  question,  after 
the  Belgian  congress  had  passed  the  vote  excluding  the  House 
of  Nassau.  The  plan  unfolded  to  me  by  Comte  Flahaut,  a  plan 
which  had  evidently  been  inspired  by  M.  de  Cellcs  and  a  few- 
other  intriguers  of  the  same  species,  and  had,  I  have  reason  to 
believe,  been  accepted  by  General  Sebastiani,  was  as  follows.  It 
was  argued  that,  as  Belgium  had  rejected  the  House  of  Nassau, 
and  the  King,  Louis-Philippe,  had  not  consented  to  the  election 
of  the  Due  de  Nemours  as  sovereign  of  the  newly  formed 
State,  there  remained  only  one  way  of  conciliating  all  parties ; 
i.e.  the  division  of  Belgium.  By  dividing  this  country  in  such  a 
way  that  the  neighbouring  States  should  be  interested  in  the 
division,  their  consent  to  the  proceeding  would  easily  be 
obtained.  The  King  of  the  Netherlands  would  thus  receive  a 
portion,  and  he  would  doubtless  prefer  this  arrangement  to  the 
total  loss  of  the  Belgian  States  ;  Prussia  would  have  her  share 
of  territory,  and  that  of  France  would  of  course  be  the  largest  of 
all ;  but  as  it  would  be  impossible  to  prosecute  this  measure 
without  the  consent  of  England,  her  claims  would  have  to  be 
remembered,  and  she  would  be  offered  the  city  and  port  of 
Antwerp,  and  the  banks  of  the  Scheld  as  far  as  the  sea  coast. 
The  Comte  de  Flahaut's  mission  was  to  induce  me  to  agree  to 
accept  this  marvellous  conception. 

It  did  not  require  much  reflection  on  my  part,  to  grasp 
how  utterly  senseless  and  dangerous  such  a  project  would  be, 
nor  how  entirely  it  was  opposed  to,  and  would  prevent,  the  main- 
tenance of  a  permanent  peace  ;  above  all,  how  adverse  it  was  to 
the  real  interests  of  France,  even  supposing  that  it  could  be 
accepted  by  the  other  Powers.  I  recalled  what  it  had  cost 
France,  and  how  much  bloodshed  it  had  necessitated,  to 
achieve  the  expulsion  of  the  English  from  the  Continent  in  past 
centuries,  and  I  vowed  that,  for  my  part,  I  would  rather  cut  off 
my  right  hand,  than  sign  any  deed  which  should  be  the  means 
of  bringing  them  back  there.  The  extension  which  it  was  pro- 
posed to  offer  to  Prussia  in  the  direction  of  our  northern  frontiers. 


286  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

seemed  to  me  no  less  objectionable  than  the  proposal  to  offer 
England  continental  territory.  I  therefore  hotly  rejected  a 
a  scheme  so  suicidal  to  international  safety,  and  which  bore 
no  other  character  but  that  of  an  intrigue.  There  was  to 
my  mind,  only  one  possible  issue  to  the  question  which  could  in 
any  way  benefit  France  ;  and  that  was  the  creation  of  a  kingdom 
of  Belgium,  placed  under  the  sovereignty  of  some  prince  who 
should  be  too  weak  to  give  us  any  anxiety,  and  who  should  not 
even  possess  the  means  of  keeping  up  the  garrisons  in  the  belt 
of  fortresses,  which  were  erected  and  maintained  at  great 
expense,  in  hostility  to  ourselves. 

M.  de  Flahaut  was  obliged  to  be  content  with  this  reply  from 
me,  and  to  be  the  bearer  of  it,  as  well  as  a  despatch,  to  Paris, 
in  which  I  unfolded  my  views  on  French  foreign  policy,  thus 
replying  to  the  questions  that  had  been  put  to  me  by  General 
Sebastiani. 

The  despatch  ran  as  follows  : — 1 


LONDON,  November  17th,  1830. 

"  Monsieur  le  Comte, 

I  am  greatly  obliged  to  you  for  having  persuaded  M. 
de  Flahaut  to  come  to  London  ;  he  is  on  good  terms  with  the 
new  Ministry,  and  in  this  way  his  presence  has  been  very  useful 
to  me  ;  while  his  great  tact,  guided  him  as  to  the  language 
which  it  would  be  most  expedient  for  him  to  use. 

I  hasten  to  reply  to  the  general  questions  which  have  been 
put  to  me,  as  to  the  foreign  policy  which  France  might  be  induced 
to  follow  under  present  circumstances.  France  must  not  dream 
of  forming  what  are  termed  alliances.  She  must  be  friendly 
with  all  parties,  and  only  allow  herself  special  terms  of  friend- 
ship with  some  Powers  ;  which  friendship  she  should  only 
express,  when  political  events  require  it. 

Such  ties  should  exist  on  a  different  basis  from  the  alliances 
of  former  times ;  the  progress  of  civilization  will  in  future 
create  the  ties  of  our  political  relationships.  We  should 
therefore  seek  the  friendship  of  those  governments  who  have 
made  the  greatest  advances  in  civilization  ;  and  thus  establish 
really  friendly  embassies.  This  leads  us  naturally  to  look  upon 
England  as  the  Power  with  whom  it  is  wisest  to  have  close 
and  intimate  relations,  and  I  should   further  remark,  that   there 

1  This  is  not  mentioned  in  M.  Pallain's  collection. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  287 

arc  many  principles  we  hold  in  common  with  that  country,  it 
being  the  only  one  with  whom  we  are  agreed  as  regards 
essentials.  If  in  some  points  we  have  the  advantage  over 
England,  there  are,  on  the  other  hand,  matters  in  which  she  is 
our  superior.  It  would  therefore  be  a  mutual  benefit  to  both 
countries,  to  be  on  terms  of  closer  intimacy.  All  feelings  of 
rivalry  are  moreover  greatly  diminished,  owing  to  the  severe 
colonial  losses  we  have  sustained. 

Europe  is  certainly  at  this  moment,  passing  through  a  great 
crisis.  Well,  England  is  the  only  Power  which,  like  ourselves, 
honestly  desires  to  establish  peace.  The  other  great  Powers 
still  believe  in  the  phantom  of  some  sort  of  Divine  right. 
France  and  England  alone  no  longer  hold  to  the  belief  of  this 
origin.  The  principle  of  non-intervention  has  been  adopted  by 
both  countries,  and  I  would  add,  that  it  is  a  significant  fact,  that 
just  now  there  is  a  kind  of  sympathy  between  the  two  nations. 

It  is  my  opinion  that  we  should  make  use  of  all  these  points 
of  assimilation,  in  order  to  obtain  that  peace  for  Europe  which 
she  so  urgently  needs.  Whatever  may  be  the  opinion  of  some 
other  nations  as  to  the  desirability  of  peace,  it  is  necessary  that 
both  France  and  England  should  declare  that  they  desire  it, 
and  that  this  declaration,  emanating  from  the  two  strongest  and 
most  civilized  countries  in  Europe,  should  be  made  known  with 
all  the  authority  which  their  power  gives  them. 

Some  Ministries,  still  sailing  under  the  colours  of  Divine 
right,  have  at  this  present  time  ancient  means  of  coalition  ;  they 
can  agree,  as  they  have  principles  in  common  ;  these  principles, 
it  is  true,  have  in  some  places  lost  much  of  their  strength,  but 
they  nevertheless  exist ;  and  when  their  Ministries  parley  with 
each  other,  they  soon  come  to  some  agreement.  They  support 
their  theory  of  Divine  right  by  their  muskets  ;  but  England  and 
France  will  henceforth  support  public  opinion  by  principles  ; 
principles  are  capable  of  universal  propagation,  whilst  muskets 
have  only  a  range  which  can  be  calculated  and  measured  to  a 
nicety. 

Europe  is  therefore  divided  between  these  two  principles  of 
government  ;  they  are  those  which  rule  her  in  the  present  da)-. 
The  forces  are  pretty  nearly  equally  divided  between  the  principle 
which  sets  in  motion  the  Austrian  and  Russian  armies,  and  the 
principle  which,  acting  by  public  opinion,  commands  forces  which 
are  nearly  if  not  quite  equal.  This  latter  will  meet  with  many 
allies  in  the  countries  which  are  opposed  to  it,  whereas  its  anta- 
gonists could  hardly  reckon  on  any  sympathizers,  exceptingin  the 
Faubourg  St.  Germain.  If  there  is  a  doubt,  we  must  weigh  down 
the  scale  in  our  favour,  and  the  method  of  arriving  at  this,  is  to 


288  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

induce  Prussia  to  hold  views  which  are  less  new  to  her  than  they 
would  be  to  the  other  northern  countries.  These,  it  appears  to 
me,  are  the  views  which  the  two  Cabinets  of  London  and  of  Paris 
should  hold.  I  enlarged  upon  these  ideas  at  great  length,  with 
Lord  Palmerston  yesterday,  and  again  to-day  with  Lord  Grey  ; 
their  opinions  coincided  with  my  own,  and  they  will  instruct  their 
ministers  in  Berlin  to  the  same  effect.  It  is  very  important 
that  our  envoys  at  that  court  should  be  men  of  great  observation 
and  powers  of  persuasion. 

You  have  asked  me,  M.  le  Comte,  what,  in  the  actual  con- 
dition of  France,  should  be  the  political  system  it  would  be  well 
for  her  to  adopt.  I  have  endeavoured  to  answer  this  question,  on 
which,  however,  not  a  single  letter  but  a  complete  volume 
might  well  be  written  ;  the  book  might  be  open  to  objections  ; 
and  even  this  letter  may  not  be  wise. 

I  will  now  follow  the  train  of  thought,  and  apply  those 
principles,  to  which  I  have  given  vent,  during  the  negotiations 
in  which  we  are  at  present  engaged.  I  am  convinced  that  it  is 
with  England  that  France  should  try  to  act,  and  I  think  that  the 
dispositions  of  the  new  English  Cabinet  will  greatly  facilitate 
this  move  on  our  part.  I  was  very  pleased  to  see  this  morning 
how  satisfied  the  English  Ministry  were  with  our  measures,  in 
sending  M.  de  Langsdorf  to  Brussels.1  The  object  of  this 
mission  has  been  ably  enlarged  upon  by  M.  Pozzo,  in  a  letter 
written  by  him  to  M.  de  Matusiewicz  ;  he  speaks  therein  with 
much  praise  of  a  conversation  he  had  had  with  you,  and  which 
preceded  this  mission. 

I  am  inclined  to  believe  that  if  the  Belgians  have  not  com- 
pletely lost  their  senses,  we  shall  attain  what  we  desire.  It  is 
very  difficult  to  gain  any  real  influence  over  the  people  who  are 
directing  the  movement  in  Belgium  ;  for  it  appears  that  it  is  the 
clergy  who  are  exciting  the  populace,  and  silently  dominate 
the  deliberations  of  the  Congress.  In  my  private  conversations 
with  Lord  Grey  and  with  Lord  Palmerston,  I  gathered  that  if 
the  attempt  to  reinstate  the  Prince  of  Orange  was  unsuccessful, 
they    might    possibly    think  of  the    Archduke    Charles    as    a 

1  It  was  M.  de  Langsdorf  who  brought  the  urgent  request  of  the  French  Govern- 
ment to  the  Belgian  Congress,  not  to  decide  on  the  exclusion  of  the  House  of  Nassau. 
As  will  have  been  seen,  however,  this  step  led  to  no  results.  (Note  by  M.  de 
Bacourt). 

Emile,  Baron  de  Langsdorf  (1S04-1867),  was  Secretary  to  the  Embassy  at  Florence 
in  1828.  During  the  days  of  July  he  formed  part  of  the  deputation,  together  with 
M.  de  Semonville  and  M.  d'Argout,  who  went  to  ask  Charles  X.  to  withdraw  the 
proclamations.  After  his  mission  to  Brussels,  he  was  named  successively  secretary  at 
Rome,  at  Turin,  at  Munich,  at  Constantinople,  at  Berlin,  and  at  Vienna  ;  after  that 
he  was  made  Chargi  d' Affaires  at  Rio  de  Janeiro,  at  Baden,  and  at  the  Hague.  He 
retired  in  1848. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  289 

candidate.  This  I  regretted,  and  told  them  that  the  presence  of 
a  Prince  of  the  House  of  Austria  as  ruler  of  Belgium,  would 
have  too  much  the  appearance  of  a  restoration;  adding,  that  it 
might  be  well  to  remember  (what  I  had  forgotten),  i.e.  the  im- 
pressive words  uttered  by  Mr.  Fox  fifteen  years  ago,  that  "  the 
worst  of  all  kinds  of  revolutions  is  a  restoration." 

Up  to  this  time  I  had  not  mentioned  the  name  of  any 
candidate,  although  that  of  Prince  Charles  of  Bavaria  several 
times  occurred  to  me,  he  being  a  Catholic,  of  forty-eight  years  of 
age,  and  at  the  same  time  a  man  of  ability  and  of  courage.1  This 
idea  has  not  yet  occurred  to  any  one  here,  and  if  it  were  pro- 
pounded by  the  French  Government,  they  might  have  the  credit 
of  having  done  so  with  the  court  of  Bavaria. 

In  order  to  explain  to  you  everything  in  detail  with  which  I 
had  been  charged  in  this  mission,  I  must  not  omit  to  mention  the 
affairs  of  Greece.  As  yet  the  great  Powers  have  not  suggested 
anything  on  this  head,  the  Belgian  affair  having  absorbed  general 
attention  and  interest ;  I  do  not  think  that  any  minister  has 
given  the  matter  a  thought,  not  a  single  name  for  Greece  having 
been  mentioned  at  any  of  our  Conferences.'2 

As  to  Algiers,  I  have  avoided  speaking  of  it,  and  I  should 
be  glad  if  our  newspapers  observed  the  same  reticence  ;  it  is 
well  that  the  world  at  large  should  get  accustomed  to  our 
occupation,  and  silence  is  the  best  means  to  attain  this  end.  I 
believe  that  in  England  public  opinion  has  undergone  some 
change  on  this  subject,  and  that  we  shall  experience  no  insur- 
mountable difficulties  when  we  begin  to  treat  of  it."  3 

M.  de  Flahaut  returned  to  Paris  with  this  despatch,  and 
my  remarks  on  the  proposed  division  of  Belgium,  which  project, 

1  Prince  Charles  Theodore  of  Bavaria,  brother  of  King  Louis,  was  at  that  time 
thirty-five,  not  forty-eight  years  of  age.      He  was  born  in  1795,  and  died  in  1876. 

-  The  Conference  of  London  had  also  to  settle  the  affairs  of  Greece.  The  treaty 
of  Adrianople  (14th  September,  1829),  between  Russia  and  Turkey,  had  proclaimed  the 
independence  of  Greece  ;  it  was  necessary  now  to  find  a  sovereign  for  ihis  new  kingdom. 
The  names  of  the  Due  de  Nemours,  Prince  Charles  of  Bavaria,  his  brother  Prince 
Otto,  the  Prince  of  Hesse  Homburg,  Prince  John  of  Saxony,  Duke  Bernard  of  Saxony, 
and  Prince  Leopold  of  Saxe-Coburg,  had  all  been  brought  forward.  The  last  named 
had  even  gained  the  suffrage  of  all  the  Powers,  but  he  refused  the  crown  (May  21, 
1830).  It  was  not  till  the  year  1832  that  this  question  was  settled  by  the  advancement 
to  the  throne  of  Prince  Otto  of  Bavaria. 

3  The  news  of  the  expedition  to  Algeria  had  been  received  both  with  anger  and 
anxiety  in  England,  and  the  English  Cabinet  had  made  some  very  violent  and  tl  retell- 
ing complaints  to  the  government  of  Charles  X.  Perhaps  it  will  not  be  without 
interest  to  recall  here  the  proud  answer  which  the  English  Ambassador  one  day  drew 
on  himself  from  Charles  X.  "Monsieur  l'Ambassadeur,"  said  the  king,  "the 
kindest  thing  I  can  do.  for  your  government,  is  not  to  listen  to  what  I  have  just 
heard."     The  events  of  July  calmed  down  all  this  excitement. 

VOL.  III.  U 


290  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

however,  was  again  revived,  but  I  succeeded  in  quashing  it 
completely,  as  will  be  seen  later  on.  As  regards  M.  de  Flahaut 
himself,  he  went  shortly  afterwards  to  represent  France  at  the 
court  of  Berlin,  where,  instead  of  trying  to  conciliate  the 
Prussian  Government  towards  us,  he  took  up  the  cause  of 
Poland  with  such  great  ardour,  that  at  the  end  of  two  or  three 
months  he  found  himself  obliged  to  leave  his  post,  disgusted  at 
not  being  able  to  exert  any  influence  on  either  of  the  three 
Courts  which  had  divided  Poland  between  them. 

The  Russian  Ambassador,  M.  de  Lieven,  who  was  on 
leave  when  I  arrived  in  England  (where  however  he  had  left  his 
wife),  returned  to  London  towards  the  end  of  November,  and  lost 
no  time  in  giving  assurances  of  the  pacific  intentions  of  his  govern- 
ment, both  to  the  English  minister  and  to  me.  In  answer  to 
the  question  I  put  to  him  respecting  the  arming  of  Russia 
which  so  greatly  disquieted  Europe,  he  replied    categorically  : 

"  The  war  preparations  we  have  made,  were  owing  to  the 
original  request  of  our  ally  the  King  of  the  Netherlands,  and 
their  only  object  was  to  show  that  troops  were  in  readiness, 
should  circumstances  arise  requiring  them.  But  I  may  inform  you 
authoritatively,  for  I  have  the  right1  to  do  so,  that  our  armies  will 
not  and  could  not  act,  except  with  the  consent  of  the  four  2 
Powers  ;  I  vouch  for  the  truth  of  this  and  you  can  do  the  same 
to  your  government.  I  have  said  the  same  to  Lord  Grey  and 
Lord  Palmerston." 

I  replied  that  I  knew  Lord  Grey  had  pointed  out  to  him, 
that  such  a  large  force  naturally  would  and  did  cause  great 
disquietude  to  France,  and  that  the  Russian  government  ought 
to  endeavour  to  allay  this  ;  while  the  delay  in  forwarding  the 
credentials  of  the  Russian  Ambassador  in  Paris,  could  not  but 
still  further  augment  this  anxiety.  I  added,  that  he  knew 
Europe  too  well  not  to  have  noticed,  that  there  was  now  a 
touchiness  among  nations,  which  required  careful  handling,  and 
that  the  surest  way  to  accomplish  this  was  to  remove  all  causes 
for  disquietude.     To  this  he  replied  : 

"  I  am  positive  the  Russian  ambassador  in  Paris  will  receive 

1  Var.  :   "  le  pouvoir"  =   "the  power." 

2  Var.:   "  les  cinq  "  =  "the  five." 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  291 

his  credentials  at  once,  if  he  has  not  already  done  so.  As  for 
the  rest,  I  am  very  glad  to  have  had  this  opportunity  of  giving 
you  personally  the  tranquilizing  assurance  I  have  just  done." 

The  rising  in  Poland  soon  gave  us  the  required  opportunity 
of  testing  the  sincerity  of  these  new  feelings  on  the  part  of 
Russia.1  However  I  did  not  hesitate  to  take  in  good  faith 
Prince  de  Lieven's  declared  assurances,  and  in  transmitting 
them  to  Paris,  I  urged  that  they  should  be  accepted  there  in 
like  manner.  I  pointed  out  that  in  the  explanations  of  the 
Russian  ambassador,  there  had  been  no  question  as  to  the 
peculiar  position  of  France,  and  I  added  : 

"We  must  for  the  future  avoid  touching  on  this  subject. 
France  has  again  taken  her  place  among  the  great  Powers,  and 
she  cannot  allow  the  least  doubt  on  this  matter  to  be  raised. 
While  maintaining  the  character2  with  which  the  events  of  the 
month  of  July  have  stamped  us,  we  are  none  the  less  at  liberty 
to  take  an  equal  share  with  the  other  Powers  in  the  negotiations 
of  Belgium.  It  is  our  duty  to  uphold  the  principle  of  non- 
intervention ;  but  this  principle  can  be  perfectly  reconciled  with 
that  of  the  maintenance  of  frontier  treaties.  I  am  glad  to  be 
able  to  submit  these  remarks  to  you,  for  if  you  adopt  them,  as 
I  have  no  doubt  you  will,  it  will  greatly  contribute  to  strengthen 
our  political  position  as  regards  the  other  states.  Our  dif- 
ficulties at  present  can  only  come  from  Belgium.  The  Belgians, 
after  agreeing  to  the  prescribed  boundaries,  now  raise  claims 
which  are  not  tenable  ;  they  are  wrong,  both  as  to  facts  and 
rights,  in  their  assertions,  relative  to  the  line,  which  before  the 
treaty  of  May  30th,  18 14,  separated  the  possessions  of  the 
reigning  Prince  of  the  United  Provinces,  from  those  which  were 
added  to  his  territory  to  form  the  kingdom  of  the  Netherlands. 
The  instructions  of  Lord  Ponsonby    were  quite  in  accordance 

1  The  Polish  insurrection  broke  out  at  Warsaw  on  the  night  of  the  29th  November. 
The  whole  of  Poland  rushed  to  arms  and  assembled  under  the  banner  of  General 
Chlopicki,  who  was  proclaimed  dictator.  After  a  struggle  of  ten  months,  Russia 
triumphed.  Warsaw  was  taken  on  the  7th  September,  1831 .  See  the  impression  this 
insurrection  made  in  Paris  in  M.  de  Talleyrand's  letter,  number  18  in  Appendix. 

2  The  political  character. 

3  Lord  Ponsonby  had  been  sent  to  Brussels  as  Minister  of  the  Conference,  to 
replace  Mr.  Cartwright,  who  was  obliged  to  go  to  his  post  at  Frankfort  as  English 
Minister.  — (M.  de  Bacourt). 

John,  Viscount  Ponsonby,  was  born  in  1770,  took  his  seat  in  the  House  of  Lords 

U    2 


292  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

with  this  opinion,1  he  will  maintain  the  same  as  we  do,  that  the 
Belgians  have  falsified  the  line,  by  the  manner  in  which  they 
represent  it. 

I  must  tell  you  that  England  has  quite  decided  upon  the 
independence  of  Belgium  ;  and  that  Lord  Ponsonby,  who  left 
this  morning,  is  not  to  raise  any  difficulties  on  this  point.  He 
is  instructed  to  renew  the  assurances  of  non-intervention,  but, 
like  ourselves,  his  government  does  not  apply  this  principle  to 
boundary  difficulties,  which  may  be  violated  either  by  one  side 
or  the  other." 

It  will  be  seen  by  the  extract  from  this  despatch  that  the 
English  Government  had  been  induced  to  recognize  that 
Belgium  must  be  irrevocably  separated  from  Holland.  This 
separation  being  recognized  without  entailing  war,  was  an 
immense  success  for  French  policy.  Provided  that  a  Republican 
government  was  not  established  in  Brussels,  the  choice  of  the 
actual  sovereign  was,  according  to  my  view,  quite  a  secondary 
question  ;  for  I  felt  sure  that  whoever  the  sovereign  might  be, 
he  would  be  a  near  and  faithful  ally  to  France.  Indeed  about 
this  time  a  certain  union  was  suggested,  which  offered  the  best 
possible  solution  as  to  the  choice  of  this  sovereign,  since  it 
would  both  please  England  and  satisfy  us.  This  had  reference  to 
Prince  Leopold  of  Saxe-Coburg,  who,  after  being  elected  by  the 
Belgians,  and  recognized  by  the  Powers,  was  then  to  marry  one  of 
Louis  Philippe's  daughters.  But  this  solution  will  have  to  pass 
through  many  vicissitudes  ere  arriving  at  its  accomplishment.'2 

Our  affairs  were  therefore  going  on  satisfactorily  in  London, 
and  if  the  vexatious  delays  of  the  King  of  the  Netherlands,  and 
the  ridiculous  demands  of  the  Belgians,  caused  some  difficulties 
at  the  Conference,  the  good  understanding  which  existed  among 
the  members,  gave  the  assurance  that  these  difficulties  would 
finally  be  overcome  ;  besides  which,  the  news  of  the  insurrection 

in  1806,  and  sided  with  the  Whig  Party.  He  entered  the  diplomatic  service,  and 
was  accredited  to  Buenos  Ayres,  to  Rio  de  Janeiro,  to  Brussels  1830,  and  Naples  1832. 
He  was  subsequently  ambassador  at  Constantinople,  and  then  at  Vienna  in  1846.  He 
retired  in  1851,  and  died  in  1855. 

1  With  what  I  have  the  honour  of  telling  you  on  this  subject. 

2  For  the  preliminary  steps  of  this  union,  and  ihe  first  negotiations  connected  with 
it,  see  M.  de  Talleyrand's  letters  to  Mdme.  Adelaide,  of  the  13th  and  14th  December 
and  that  of  M.  Bresson  to  the  Prince  on  the  25th  December  in  Appendix.' 


THE  REVOLUTION  OE  1S30.  293 

in  Poland,  which  reached  us  in  the  beginning  of  December, 
acted  as  an  additional  and  powerful  motive  for  Russia,  Prussia 
and  Austria,  to  show  a  conciliatory  spirit  in  the  arrangement  of 
Belgian  affairs.  But  it  was  not  of  a  nature  to  produce  a  similar 
effect  in  Paris,  where  it  greatly  excited  the  populace  just  at  the 
moment  when  the  trial  of  Charles  X.'s  ministers  might  perhaps 
provoke  dangerous  agitations.  It  was  well  known  that  the 
revolutionary  party  would  employ  all  their  resources  to  turn 
this  incident  to  account.  Would  the  government  be  strong 
enough  to  maintain  order,  and  make  the  course  of  justice  re- 
spected ?  This  was  a  matter  of  the  greatest  anxiety  in  Paris, 
and  this  anxiety,  as  well  as  its  cause,  did  not  render  the  position 
of  the  French  ambassador  in  London  any  the  more  comfort- 
able. It  is  not  easy  for  a  negotiator  to  adopt  a  high  and  firm 
tone,  when  at  any  moment  he  may  be  asked,  "  Does  your 
government  still  exist  at  this  present  time  ? "  The  sad  result 
of  revolutionary  times,  which  must  be  overcome  but  which 
often  entails  very  sorrowful  reflections. 

Nevertheless  I  did  not  permit  myself  to  be  discouraged,  and 
I  eagerly  seized  the  opening  afforded  me  by  the  obstinacy  of  the 
King  of  the  Netherlands,  and  the  more  friendly  feelings  of  the 
Congress  at  Brussels,  to  attain  the  end  I  was  above  all  most 
anxious  to  secure — the  dissolution  of  the  kingdom  of  the  Nether- 
lands. This  is  what  I  wrote  to  M.  Sebastian?  on  the  17th  of 
December  : — ■ 

M.  LE  COMTE, 

The  Ambassador  of  the  Netherlands  has  written  to  say 
he  is  ill.  I  believe  that  he  wishes  to  make  use  of  this  indisposi- 
tion to  retard  the  work  of  the  Conference,  and  I  have  just  learnt 
a  decision  on  the  part  of  his  sovereign,  which  confirms  me  in  the 
opinion,  that  this  Prince  is  endeavouring  to  throw  all  possible 
obstacles  in  our  way.  M.  Falck  has  been  informed,  that  on  the 
receipt  of  the  protocol  of  our  fifth  Conference,  the  King  of  the 
Netherlands  had  selected  M.  Zuylen  de  Nyeweldt  l  to  proceed  to 

1  Hugo,  Baron  de  Zuylen  de  Nyeweldt  (1 781-1853),  a  Dutch  diplomat,  was 
secretary  of  the  embassy  at  Paris  (1805),  and  then  at  Madrid  (1807).  He  retired 
during  the  accession  of  Louis  Buonaparte.  After  1814  he  re-entered  the  diplomatic 
career,  was  made  minister  at  Stockholm,  at  Constantinople,  and  plenipotentiary  at 
London.  He  became  Minister  of  State  in  1833,  then  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs, 
and  finally  Minister  of  Religion  (1842).     He  retired  in  1848. 


294  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

London  as  second  plenipotentiary,  and  bringing  fresh  instructions. 
It  is  evident  that  this  nomination  is  nothing  but  a  measure  to 
gain  time,  for  no  one  could  be  better  fitted  to  carry  on  the  king's 
affairs  here  than  M.  de  Falck.  Besides  M.  de  Falck's  reticence 
lately,  and  especially  just  now,  only  show  too  plainly  that  he  is 
embarrassed,  and  that  his  government  is  not  keeping  faith. 

After  carefully  thinking  over  this  incident,  I  decided  that 
there  was  only  one  way  to  put  an  end  to  our  uncertainties, 
namely,  to  ask  for  the  immediate  declaration  of  the  independence 
of  Belgium.  I  think  I  was  justified  in  making  this  demand,  for 
from  the  beginning  of  our  negotiations  it  was  agreed  that  while 
France  was  to  exert  her  influence  to  induce  the  Belgians  to  sign 
an  armistice,  England  would  use  hers  to  prevail  upon  the  King 
of  Holland  to  take  the  same  step.  We  have  been  completely 
successful.  The  Belgians  agree  to  everything,  and  we  owe  them 
this  reward  for  the  willingness  they  have  shown  us.  The  English 
Cabinet,  notwithstanding  all  its  efforts — and  they  have  been  quite 
sincere — has  not  been  able  to  obtain  the  positive  declaration  from 
the  court  at  the  Hague,  which  we  must  naturally  receive.1  The 
character  of  the  King  of  Holland  is  an  obstacle  to  everything, 
but  this  obstacle  must  be  overcome,  and  I  do  not  know  of  any 
better  method  to  arrive  thereat,  than  to  induce  the  Conference  to 
declare  2  the  independence  of  Belgium.  I  intend  therefore  to 
speak  about  this  to  Lord  Palmerston  before  the  Conference,  and 
then  to  lay  the  proposition  formally  before  the  plenipotentiaries  of 
the  four  Powers.  If  I  obtain  this  to-morrow,  and  I  hope  I  shall 
do  so,  we  shall  have  made  a  great  step. 

It  is  possible  that  after  my  conference  with  Lord  Palmerston, 
I  may  get  him  to  make  the  proposal  himself ;  it  would  be  pre- 
ferable that  it  came  from  him,  for  it  would  carry  more  weight 
with  the  King  of  the  Netherlands.  As  for  the  rest,  I  will  decide 
upon  what  is  best  after  the  conference,  and  will  send  off  the 
courier  you  have  sent  to  me 

As  I  have  given  this  despatch  I  cannot  do  better  than  con- 
tinue to  give  those  which  followed,  and  which  will  explain  more 
clearly  than  any  narrative,  how  matters  were  progressing. 

London,  December  10th,  1830. 
M.   LE   COMTE, 

I  announced  to  you  in  my  last  despatch  the  return,  on 
the  morrow,  of  the  courier  you  had  sent  me  ;  but  the  amount  of 
business  and  the  length  of  our  conferences,  did  not  allow  me  to 

1  Var.  :  "attendre"  =  "expect."  2  Var.  :   "demain"  =  "to-morrow. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  295 

carry  out  this  intention,  and  it  is  only  to-day  that  I  am  in  a 
position  to  acquaint  you  with  the  important  result  of  our  de- 
liberations. The  Conference  has  assembled  every  day,  and 
one  of  our  sittings  lasted  over  seven  hours.  You  will  not  be 
surprised,  M.  le  Comte,  at  the  length  of  these  discussions,  when 
you  learn  that  the  English  plenipotentiary  and  I,  were  alone 
agreed  about  the  question  of  the  independence  of  Belgium,  and 
that  we  had  to  induce  the  four  other  plenipotentiaries  to  share 
our  opinion.  But  I  attached  too  great  importance  to  carrying 
out  the  king's  wishes  not  to  press  forward  as  much  as  lay  in  my 
power,  a  resolution  which  it  was  so  important  we  should  pass. 
I  therefore  send  you  the  protocol  of  our  Conference,  which  has 
this  moment  been  signed  ;  you  will  perceive  that  it  embraces 
all  that  we  could  reasonably  hope  for.  I  trust  the  king  will  be 
satisfied  with  it.  The  signature  of  the  Russian  ambassador  was 
most  valuable,  and  difficult  to  obtain,  but  you  will  find  it 
there.1 

Receive 


1  The  independence  of  Belgium  dated  from  the  signature  of  this  protocol, 
December  20th,  1830.     On  account  of  its  importance  we  here  insert  it. 

"  The  plenipotentiaries  of  the  five  courts  having  received  the  formal  adhesion  of 
the  Belgian  Government  to  the  armistice  which  was  proposed  to  it,  and  which  the 
King  of  the  Netherlands  has  also  accepted ;  and  the  Conference  having  thus,  bv  arrest- 
ing the  effusion  of  blood,  accomplished  the  first  task  it  had  undertaken,  the  plenipo- 
tentiaries have  assembled  to  discuss  the  future  measures  which  ought  to  be  taken,  in 
order  to  remedy  the  derangements  which  the  troubles  that  have  fallen  on  Belgium, 
have  wrought  on  the  system  established  by  the  treaties  of  1814  and  1815. 

"In  uniting  Belgium  and  Holland  by  the  said  treaties,  the  signatory  Powers  of 
these  same  treaties,  and  whose  plenipotentiaries  are  at  this  moment  assembled,  intended 
to  establish  a  fair  equilibrium  in  Europe,  and  to  ensure  the  maintenance  of  the  general 
peace. 

"The  events  of  the  last  four  months  have,  unfortunately,  demonstrated  that  this 
perfect  and  complete  amalgamation,  which  the  Powers  desired  to  effect,  between  these  two 
kingdoms,  has  not  been  arrived  at,  that  it  will  in  future  be  impossible  to  effect  it,  that 
thus  the  very  object  of  the  union  of  Belgium  with  Holland  has  been  frustrated,  and 
that  it  will  henceforth  be  indispensable  to  have  recourse  to  fresh  arrangements,  in 
order  to  fulfil  the  intentions,  for  the  carrying  out  of  which,  this  union  was  to  have  served 
as  a  means. 

"Joined  to  Holland,  and  forming  an  integral  part  of  the  kingdi  im  of  the  Netherlands, 
Belgium  had  to  perform  her  share  of  the  European  duties  ol  ibis  kingdom,  as  well  as 
the  obligations  which  the  treaties  had  enjoined  upon  her  towards  the  other 
Powers.  Her  separation  from  Holland  will  not  free  her  from  this  part  of  her  duties 
and  obligations. 

"  The  Conference  will  therefore  occupy  itself  in  discussing  and  arranging  the  best 
possible  fresh  arrangements,  which  will  combine  the  future  independence  of  Belgium 
with  the  stipulations  of  the  treaties,  and  the  interests,  and  the  safety  of  the  other  Powers, 
and  at  the  same  time  preserve  the  equilibrium  of  Europe.  To  this  effect,  the  Con- 
ference, while  still  continuing  these  negotiations  with  the  plenipotentiaries  of 
H.  M.  the  King  of  the  Netherlands,  will  undertake,  that  the  provisional  govern- 
ment of  Belgium  shall,  as  soon  as  possible,  send  commissioners  to  London, 
provided   with   instructions   and    powers,    sufficiently   ample,  to   be   consulted    and 


296  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLE  YRAND. 

London,  December  21st,  1830. 

Monsieur  le  Comte, 

I  was  rather  hurried  yesterday  by  my  wish  to  send  off 
the  courier  who  is  bringing  you  the  protocol  of  our  Conference. 
To-day  I  can  better  appreciate  the  importance  of  the  resolution 
that  has  been  adopted,  and  I  am  already  in  a  position  to  inform 
you,  that  it  has  produced  a  powerful  impression  on  the  influential 
people  of  this  country  to  whom  it  is  known.  It  is  looked  upon, 
if  not  as  an  actual  guarantee  for  the  maintenance  of  peace,  at 
least  as  taking  away  from  the  partisans  of  war  a  very  powerful 
means  of  stirring  up  restless  spirits.  This  view  I  fully  endorse, 
and  I  firmly  believe  that  even  in  the  present  state  of  Europe,  the 
recognition  of  Belgium  as  an  independent  State  by  the  five 
great  Powers,  must  have  a  very  beneficial  result  for  us. 

The  events  that  have  supervened  in  Poland,  have  recalled  to 
me  what  I,  when  still  young,  felt  equally  with  all  France,  at  the 
time  of  the  division  of  that  kingdom.  It  is  impossible  ever  to 
forget  the  impression  it  produced  in  the  last  century.  It  de- 
stroyed the  policy  of  France,  and  neither  the  Due  d'Aiguillon, 
Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  nor  Cardinal  de  Rohan,  Ambassador 
at  Vienna,  ever  recovered  from  the  disgrace  of  having  ignored 
the  negotiations  which  preceded  this  great  act  of  injustice  and 
spoliation. 

Later  on,  a  most  favourable  opportunity  presented  itself  for 
re-establishing  the  kingdom  of  Poland.  In  1807  and  in  181 2  1 
the  Emperor  Napoleon  could  easily  have  restored  its  in- 
dependence (so  important  to  the  equilibrium  of  Europe)  to  this 
kingdom  ;  he  would  not,  however,  do  so,  and  I  need  not  recall 
to  your  memory,  M.  le  Comte,  the  grave  error  which  was 
then  committed.  In  18 14  the  chances  of  war  had  placed  us  in 
the  position  of  being  unable  to  think  of  anything  beyond  our 
mere  existence,  and  we  were  forced  to  keep  silence,  when  the 
subjection  of  Poland  was  completed.  Now  that  our  voice  has 
regained  its  weight  in  the  Councils  of  Europe,  it  must  no  longer 
be  the  same.  I  believe  that,  without  disturbing  peace,  it  will  be 
quite  possible  for  you,  with  the  assistance  of  England,  and  by 
choosing  a  favourable  opportunity,  to  offer  our  mediation,  and  to 

listened  to,  on  everything  that  can  facilitate    the  definite  adoption  of  the  arrange- 
ments of  which  mention  has  been  made  above. 

"  These  arrangements  cannot  in  any  way  affect  the  rights  which  the  King  of  the 
Netherlands  and  the  German  confederation,  exercise  over  the  Grand  Duchy  of 
Luxemburg. 

"  estertraz,  talleyrand,  bulord,  lleven, 
"  Wessemberg,  Palmerston,  Matusiewicz." 

1  Suppressed  in  the  text  of  the  archives. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1S30.  297 

succeed    in    turning   the   late  events   regarding   Poland,   to    the 
advantage  of  Europe. 

Every  one  now  clearly  sees  that  the  kingdom  of  Poland, 
strongly  constituted,  would  form  the  best  possible  barrier  against 
the  menacing  invasions  of  Russia.  Many  ways  present  them- 
selves of  arriving  at  this  result,  and  if  England  would  enter 
frankly  into  our  views,  I  fancy  we  should  find  powerful  aids 
against  Russia,  in  the  Grand  Duchy  of  Posen,  in  Gallicia,  in  the 
Polish  provinces  of  Russia,  in  Finland,  perhaps  even  in  Sweden, 
and  also  in  Turkey.  It  seems  to  me  that  it  would  be  quite 
possible  to  attain  the  end  of  which  I  speak  without  having 
recourse  to  war  ;  the  Cabinet  of  St.  Petersburg,  properly  ad- 
vised, would  perhaps  in  time,  give  in  to  wisely  combined 
measures. 

All  this  would  require  to  be  well  and  carefully  thought  out. 
1  have  only  wished  to  give  you  some  reflections,  to  which  I  will 
add  further  details  if  your  views  coincide  with  mine  on  this 
matter. 

Accept 

While  I  was  obtaining  the  important  declaration  of  the  in- 
dependence of  Belgium  from  the  Conference  in  London,  the 
French  Government  in  Paris  gained  a  great  and  glorious  victory 
over  the  revolutionary  party,  and  on  the  22nd  of  September  the 
trial  of  the  ministers  oi  Charles  X.  took  place  before  the  Court 
of  Peers,  without  a  single  capital  punishment  having  been 
awarded,  and  without  any  demonstrations  from  the  mob,  ob- 
structing the  course  of  justice.  I  received  the  news,  I  must 
confess,  with  immense  satisfaction,  and  the  letter  in  which 
Madame  Adelaide  announced  it  to  me,  is  too  honourable  to  her, 
and  gave  me  too  great  pleasure,  not  to  insert  it  here. 

Paris,  December  zyd,  1830. 

Here  we  are  at  last,  past  the  crisis  of  this  terrible  trial ; 
this  great  drama  has  ended  in  a  manner  worthy  of  our  revolu- 
tion and  the  king  who  governs  us.  Truly,  it  needed  all  his 
strength,  his  composure  and  his  patience,  to  arrive  at  so 
splendid  and  happy  a  climax.  He  is  now  doubly  rewarded  by 
all  the  tokens  of  affection  and  esteem  that  are  everywhere 
showered  on  him.  He  has  just  gone  out  for  a  ride,  amid 
general  acclamations,  to  make  the  round  of  the  different  wards, 
in  order  to  express  his  satisfaction  to  the  brave  and  excellent 


298  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

National  Guard  for  their  admirable  conduct,  which    was  quite 
beyond  all  praise. 

We  have  passed  through  three  most  anxious  days,  but  we 
are  now  more  than  rewarded  for  them.  I  know  that  General 
Sebastiani  sent  a  courier  to  you  last  night,  and  that  you  will 
already  have  received  the  good  news  when  this  letter  reaches 
you.  It  was  most  necessary  that  you  should  be  fully  informed 
as  to  what  had  really  occurred,  as  no  doubt  many  false  and 
alarming  rumours  have  reached  London,  for  there  has  evidently 
been  a  concerted  scheme  to  spread  alarm  and  terror  abroad. 
Even  here,  from  one  quarter  and  another,  we  received  the  most 
erroneous  and  vexatious  accounts,  which,  but  for  the  king's 
calmness  and  sangfroid,  might  have  resulted  in  the  adoption  of 
perfectly  wrong  measures. 

I  congratulate  you  with  all  my  heart  on  the  fortunate  result 
of  your  Conferences  ;  it  is  a  grand  and  most  satisfactory  success, 
at  which  I  rejoice  doubly,  mon  cher prince,  both  for  you.  as  well 
as  ourselves.  The  king  is  enchanted  thereat,  and  very  proud 
indeed  of  the  success  of  the  Ambassador  of  his  choice.  He 
desires  me  to  tell  you  a  thousand  charming  things.  .  .  . 

What  now  disquiets  us  is  the  fate  of  those  poor  Poles.  I 
greatly  fear  for  them x 

Our  affairs  had  now  taken  a  turn  for  the  better;  the  termina- 
tion of  the  ministerial  trial,  greatly  relaxed  the  strain  of  the  situa- 
tion in  Paris,  whilst  the  independence  of  Belgium,  cordially 
agreed  to  by  the  five  Powers,  assured  the  maintenance  of  peace, 
at  least  for  the  time.  This  was  a  great  gain,  but  many  knotty 
points  had  yet  to  be  decided.  The  Ministry,  presided  over  by 
M.  Lafitte,  had  neither  strength  nor  credit  in  France  or  abroad  ; 
commerce  and  industries  were  nearly  ruined  ;  and  business 
generally  was  bad,  the  views  and  the  weakness  of  the  Ministry, 
inspiring  the  people  with  but  little  confidence. 

There  was  also  a  very  serious  complication  in  connection 
with  the  proclamation  of  the  independence  of  Belgium,  namely 
the  grand  duchy  of  Luxemburg,  which  was  attached  to  the 
Germanic  confederation  by  very  special  arrangements.  The 
Belgians  claimed  the  right  to  this  province,  which  in  1814  had 
been  given  to  the  King  of  the  Netherlands,  and  in  which  there 
was   a  federal   fortress,  forming  part  of  the  general   system   of 

1  See  M.  de  Talleyrand's  reply  to  this  letter,  No.  22  in  Appendix. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1S30.  299 

defence  of  the  Confederation.  It  was  necessary  therefore  both 
to  pacify  the  Confederation,  and  to  satisfy  the  claims  of  the 
King  of  the  Netherlands,  as  well  as  those  of  the  Belgians. 

This  was  the  subject  of  very  long  negotiations  which  lasted 
several  years,  and  finally  ended  in  a  very  suitable  arrangement, 
but  which,  for  a  long  time,  was  the  cause  of  endless  trouble  ;  for, 
in  proportion  as  the  political  horizon  got  clearer  in  Europe,  so 
much  more  did  the  German  Powers  show  themselves  indisposed 
to  make  any  concessions. 

The  protocol  of  the  20th  December,  which  sanctioned  the 
independence  of  Belgium,  naturally  brought  forth  the  most 
grievous  complaints  from  the  Hague.  The  King  of  the  Nether- 
lands sent  a  most  vehement  protest  against  our  decision.  It 
cannot  be  denied  that  he  had  some  just  grounds  for  complaint, 
when  it  is  remembered  that  the  Belgian  provinces  were  ceded  to 
him  in  18 14  in  exchange  for  the  Dutch  Colonies,  of  which 
England  had  taken  possession.  But  it  was  for  England  to  get 
out  of  that  awkward  corner  ;  as  for  me,  I  had  only  to  procure 
the  admission  of  one  point  and  that  was,  that  the  kingdom  of 
the  Netherlands  having  been  formed  out  of  hatred  to,  and  as  a 
threat  against,  France,  it  was  now  proved  that  this  piece  of  work 
had  had  its  day,  and  could  no  longer  be  allowed  to  exist.  The 
Conference  received  the  protest  of  the  King  of  the  Netherlands, 
made  no  reply  to  it  whatever,  and  continued  its  labours  for  the 
consolidation  of  the  independence  of  Belgium,  full)'  determined 
to  carry  them  through  without  the  concurrence  of  the  King  of 
the  Netherlands,  should  he  persist  in  his  opposition. 

I  believe  I  have  already  stated,  that  before  the  assembly  of 
the  conference  of  the  five  Powers  to  regulate  the  affairs  of 
Belgium,  there  was  another  conference  in  London,  composed  of 
the  representatives  of  France,  Great  Britain,  and  Russia,  which 
was  occupied  in  arranging  the  affairs  of  Greece.  By  virtue  of 
the  treaty  concluded  between  these  three  Powers  on  the  3rd 
July,  iS2y,1  the  independence   of  Greece  had  been   recognised. 

1  The  treaty  of  July,  1827,  was  negotiated  and  signed  in  London  by  the  Prince  de 
Polignac,  Lord  Dudley,  and  the  Prince  de  Lieven.  The  three  Powers  undertook  to 
offer  their  mediation  to  both  parties,  and  obtain  the  adoption  of  an  arrangement  on 
the  following  bases  :  the  Greeks  to  be  dependent  on  the  Sultan  as  on  a  Suzerain  Lord  ; 
they  will  pay  him  an  annual  tribute  ;  they  will  be  governed  by  Civil  authorities,  whom 


3oo  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

Since  the  conclusion  of  this  treaty,  there  had  been  numerous 
tedious  negotiations  in  order  to  obtain,  first,  the  consent  of  the 
Ottoman  Porte  to  this  dismemberment  of  its  empire;  secondly, 
the  recognition  by  the  other  Powers  of  this  new  state,  which  for 
more  than  a  year  had  been  temporarily  governed  by  Count  Capo 
d'Istria.  The  three  protective  powers  of  Greece  had  at  first  been 
zealously  occupied  in  consolidating  the  independence  they  had 
succeeded  in  procuring  ;  but  latterly  this  zeal  had  somewhat 
abated,  partly  owing  to  the  obstacles  introduced  into  the  negotia- 
tions by  Russia,  who  now  perceived  that  the  independence  of 
Greece  did  not  insure  her  the  advantages  she  had  anticipated, 
and  partly  to  the  events  which  had  lately  occurred  in  France, 
and  which  had  greatly  disturbed  all  the  Cabinets. 

It  nevertheless  became  important  to  put  an  end  to  the 
uncertainty  which  still  existed  as  to  the  ultimate  fate  of  Greece  ; 
consequently  the  three  Powers  were  again  called  together  in 
conference,  and  we  had  our  first  meeting  in  the  end  of  December, 
1830. 

Before  speaking  of  this  sitting,  it  will  be  well  to  recall  briefly 
the  facts  which  were  to  form  the  subject  of  our  deliberations. 

The  treaty  of  the  3rd  July,  1827,  had  arranged  the  bases  ot 
the  independence  of  Greece  ;  it  settled  the  boundaries  of  the  new 
state  ;  its  relations  with  Turkey  ;    the   constitution   that  would 

govern    it And    the    three    protective    Powers,    while 

reserving  to  themselves  the  right  of  nominating  the  prince  who 
would  be  called  on  to  govern  Greece,  had  provisionally  author- 
ized Count  Capo  d'Istria  (whom  the  Greeks  had  asked  for) 
to  administer  the  government  of  that  country. 1 

As  soon  as  the  conditions  of  the  treaty  became  known  in 
Greece,  complaints  arose  as  to  the  boundary  lines  laid  down  for 
the  new  state.  Count  Capo  d'Istria  at  once  forwarded  these 
complaints  ;  but  Russia,  as  I  have  already  said,  had  lost  her 
interest  in  Greece ;    England  also  was  not   very  well   disposed 

they  themselves  shall  name,  but  in  whose  nomination  the  Porte  will  also  have  a  voice. 
An  additional  article  added,  that  if  the  Porte  persisted  in  refusing  a  pacific  arrange- 
ment, the  signatory  Powers  would  afford  Greece  the  support  of  force. 

1  Capo  d'Istria  was  elected  supreme  head  for  seven  years  by  the  National 
Assembly  of  Trezene  (March  31st,  1827).  He  arrived  in  Greece  in  January,  1828, 
and  held  this  power  for  nearly  four  years.  He  was  assassinated  on  the  6th  October, 
1831. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  301 

towards  her  ;  the  Grecian  loan  had  been  arranged  in  London 
during  the  War  of  Independence,  and  the  provisional  govern- 
ment of  Greece  would  neither  pay  the  interest  nor  even 
guarantee  it.  This  fact,  and  probably  also  the  surmise,  that  the 
neighbourhood  of  Greece,  independent,  might  prove  troublesome 
to  the  government  of  the  Ionian  Islands,1  and  that  the  mer- 
cantile marine  of  Greece  might  occasion  a  competition  injurious 
to  the  English  mercantile  service,  all  combined  to  make  the 
cause  of  Greece  very  unpopular  in  England.  I" ranee  alone  had 
remained  faithful  to  her,  without  any  arriere  poisce.  This  is  a 
piece  of  justice  with  which  the  government  of  Charles  X.  must 
be  credited,  and  it  deserved  all  the  greater  praise,  for  after  the 
catastrophe  which  overthrew  the  throne,  the  poor  king  only  made 
one  reproach  against  his  government,  that  of  having  encouraged 
the  revolution  by  recognizing  the  independence  of  Greece. 

However  that  might  be,  this  question  of  the  badly  defined 
boundaries  of  Greece  had,  as  will  be  seen,  brought  on  complica- 
tions of  various  kinds.  After  many  pourparlers,  the  three  courts 
had  offered  the  crown  of  Greece  to  Prince  Leopold  of  Saxe- 
Coburg,  the  husband  of  the  late  Princess  Charlotte  of  England, 
who  had  accepted  it.  But  when  the  conditions  of  this  acceptance 
came  to  be  discussed,  Prince  Leopold  declared  openly  that  the 
three  Powers  must  guarantee  him  a  large  loan  necessary  for  the 
establishment  of  his  government,  and,  above  all,  that  better  boun- 
daries must  be  obtained  for  the  new  state.  These  propositions  were 
rejected,  and  Prince  Leopold  withdrew  his  acceptance.  It 
therefore  became  necessary  to  seek  for  another  prince  to  re- 
place him,  and  matters  were  at  this  point  when  the  revolution  of 
July  broke  out  in  France.  The  commissioners  of  the  three  courts 
in  Greece  seconded  the  entreaties  of  the  Count  Capod'Istria  by 
asking  that  an  end  might  be  put  to  the  precarious  state  in  which 
the  country  was  placed,  almost  rent  in  twain  by  the  various 
factions  and  the  ambitious  views  of  some  of  its  chiefs. 

1  After  the  treaties  of  1815,  the  Ionian  Islands  were  under  the  protection  of 
England.  They  were  formed  on  the  lines  of  a  Republic.  The  executive  power 
was  vested  in  a  Senate,  the  President  of  which  was  nominated  by  England.  An 
English  commissioner  acted  as  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs.  This  system  continued 
until  1863,  w:hen  England  gave  up  her  protectorate.  The  islands  were  then  handed 
over  to  Greece. 


302  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

Such  was  the  situation,  when  Lord  Palmerston  convoked  a 
meeting  of  the  Conference  on  the  28th  December,  1830.  This 
is  the  account  of  the  sitting  that  I  sent  to  Paris  : 

We  have  this  morning  had  a  conference  on  Greek  matters. 
Lord  Palmerston  read  aloud  the  last  protocols,  which  had  been 
drawn  up  at  the  Conferences  in  which  my  predecessor  had 
taken  part,  and  which,  owing  to  the  refusal  of  Prince  Leopold, 
had  led  to  no  results.  The  enlargement  of  Greek  territory  has 
been  agreed  upon  between  us.  This  done,  I  wished  to  point  out, 
that  as  alterations  were  to  be  made  in  the  last  protocols  to 
which  the  Porte  had  given  its  acquiescence,  it  was  better  to 
arrange  the  proposed  boundary  line  to  suit  Greece,  rather  than 
make  some  merely  unimportant  changes,  and  that  the  line 
from  the  Gulf  of  Volo  to  that  of  Arta,  seemed  to  me  very 
suitable.  Lord  Palmerston  warmly  supported  this  proposal, 
giving  it  weight  by  bringing  forward  various  powerful  reasons 
which  he  had  collected  from  all  his  different  correspondence. 

Russia  no  longer  shows  the  same  interest  in  Greece 
since  she  has  re-established  her  former  relations  with  the 
Ottoman  Porte,1  and  this  makes  her  plenipotentiaries  ex- 
tremely cautious,  and  little  disposed  to  do  anything  on  their 
own  responsibility. 

In  this  state  of  affairs,  we  have  agreed  that  England  should 
empower  Mr.  Dawkins,  Jier  commissioner  in  Greece?  to  tell  Count 
Capo  d'Istria  confidentially,  that  the  Greek  frontier  would  be 
improved  and  to  ask  him  not  to  divulge  these  intentions  of  the 
three  courts,  but  to  find  some  plausible  pretext,  for  not  carrying 
out  the  evacuation  agreed  on,  of  the  posts  of  Arcania  and 
Etolia,  which  were  then  occupied  by  the  Greeks.  While  this 
was  being  done  the  Russian  plenipotentiaries  would  ask  their 
government  for  authority  to  sign  the  Acts,  necessary  to  carry 
out  the  improvements  of  the  boundary  line  of  Greece,  by  a  con- 
vention, made  to  work  smoothly  by  means  of  a  certain  sum  of 
money,  this  sum  to  be  taken  from  the  loan  which  will  be 
guaranteed  by  the  three  Powers. 

If  the  Ottoman  Porte  agrees  to  these  changes,  the  boundary 
commissioners  will  all  have  similar  duties  to  carry  out.  It  will 
therefore  be  important  that  the  French  commissioner  should 
proceed  there  quickly,  and  take  part  in  all  the  work  that  will 
be  done,  so  that  the  Greeks  may  fully  understand  that  France 
defends  her  interests. 

1  Treaty  of  peace  of  Adrianople  (14th  September,  1829). 

2  Suppressed  in  the  text  of  the  archives. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  303 

I  pray  you  to  confirm  the  powers  given  to  my  predecessor 
or  to  grant  me  new  ones,  if  you  have  any  other  project  as  to 
the  choice  of  a  sovereign  for  Greece  ;  but  if  you  insist,  as  it 
seems  to  me  the  other  Powers  are  inclined  to  do,  on  nomin- 
ating one  of  the  sons  of  the  King  of  Bavaria,  it  would  be 
important,  that  the  administration  of  the  kingdom  should  be 
left  with  Count  Capo  d'Istria,  and  even  to  beg  him,  as  his 
health  is  not  strong,  to  suggest  a  scheme  of  regency. 

You  will  probably  recollect  that  the  government  under- 
took by  an  Act  3rd  May,  1830,  to  guarantee  a  loan  of  sixty 
millions  agreed  on  by  Art.  IV.  of  the  Protocol  of  20th  February, 
1830. 

I  request  your  commands  as  to  this  matter. 

Receive  .... 

I  wrote  again  two  days  later  on  the  same  subject : 

In  my  despatch  of  the  day  before  yesterday,  I  sent  you 
the  result  of  my  last  conference  on  the  affairs  of  Greece  with 
Lord  Palmerston  and  the  Prince  de  Lieven. 

The  conversations  I  have  since  had  on  this  subject  with  the 
English  ministers,  have  shown  me,  that  the  choice  by  their 
government  of  a  sovereign  for  the  new  Greek  state  was  fixed 
on  Prince  Otto  of  Bavaria.  We  must  therefore  no  longer  look 
upon  this  resolution  of  the  London  Cabinet  as  a  project,  but  as 
a  point  which  is  almost  settled  ;  but  my  predecessor  was 
authorized  to  give  his  adhesion  to  it.  In  a  correspondence  that 
took  place  with  the  King  of  Bavaria,  matters  had  gone  so  far  as 
asking  what  income  he  was  prepared  to  give  his  son  in  order 
that  when  he  first  went  to  Greece,  he  should  not  find  himself 
dependent  on  the  country.  .  .   . 

I  will  return  later  on  to  this  Greek  question  when  events 
bring  us  back  to  it.  At  the  point  at  which  we  had  arrived,  it 
seemed  less  important  to  think  of  the  prince  who  should  govern 
Greece,  than  of  him  who  should  be  chosen  to  govern  the  Belgian 
provinces  ;  for  on  the  choice  of  this  latter,  depended  the 
pacification  of  the  revolutionary  party  in  Belgium  and  even  in 
France,  and,  consequently,  the  peace  of  Europe. 

It  has  already  been  seen  that  the  name  of  Prince  Leopold 
of  Saxe-Coburg  has  been  brought  forward.  Lord  Ponsonby 
had  supported  it  with  the  Diplomatic  Committee  of  the  Congress 


304  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

of  Brussels,1  which  meant  that  it  had  been  approved  of  by  the 
English  Cabinet,  and  I  was  enabled  to  assure  myself  of  this  in 
conversations  with  Lord  Grey  and  Lord  Palmerston.  The 
President  of  the  Belgian  Diplomatic  Committee,  Mons.  Van  de 
Weyer,  was  then  en  route  for  Paris  and  London,  where  he  was 
commissioned  to  obtain  the  consent  of  Prince  Leopold. 

This  prince  had  addressed  himself  to  me  direct,  and  I  had 
hastened  to  assure  him,  that  for  my  part  I  should  be  very  well 
pleased  if  his  candidature  was  successful. 

In  truth  I  knew  of  no  other  Prince  in  Europe  who  was  so 
well  suited  as  he  was,  for  such  a  delicate  and  complicated 
position. 

I  had  had  the  opportunity  of  becoming  acquainted  with  him 
at  the  Congress  of  Vienna,  where  he  had  shown  great  intelli- 
gence and  loyalty,  and  had  supported  the  interests  of  the  King 
of  Saxony  against  Prussia  and  Russia  ;  and  I  remembered  the 
firmness  and  boldness  with  which  he  then  resisted  the  cajoleries, 
as  well  as  the  threats  of  the  Emperor  Alexander,  though  he  had 
served  for  some  years  in  the  Russian  army.  Prince  Leopold  as 
King  of  Belgium,  and  married  to  a  French  princess,  seemed  to 
me  the  best  possible  choice  that  could  be  made,  to  solve  the 
difficulties  with  which  we  had  to  contend.  Time  has  proved 
that  in  this  I  was  not  mistaken. 

But  this  choice  completely  upset  the  calculations  of  some 
conspirators  in  Brussels,  who  wished  to  unite  their  personal 
interests  to  those  of  the  French  Government,  and  who  sought 
to  drag  it  into  their  intrigues.  They  commenced  by  bruiting 
abroad  the  project  of  choosing  Prince  Leopold,  which  had  been 
communicated  confidentially  (as  I  have  already  stated)  to  the 
Diplomatic  Committee  of  Brussels.  M.  de  Celles,  who  was  a 
member  of  this  committee,  had  hastened  to  write  to  his  friends  in 
Paris,  with  the  result,  that  some  members  of  the  extreme  left  of 
the  Chamber  of  Deputies,  at  once  made  use  of  this  project,  for 
the  purpose  of  making  an  attack  on  the  French  Government ; 
with  what  effect  will  be  seen  by  the  following  letter  : 

1  The  Diplomatic  Committee  had  been  appointed  by  the  provisional  government 
on  the  20th  November  to  expedite  affairs.  It  was  composed  of  M.  Vande  Weyer, 
President  Comte  de  Celles,  Comte  D'Arschot,  and  MM.  Destriveaux  and 
Nothomb. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1S30.  305 

General  Sebastiani  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand. 

1'  \RIS,  December  30//1,  1830. 

Mon  Prince, 

The  discussion  which  has  taken  place  in  the  Chamber  in 
consequence  of  the  late  disturbances,  has  just  terminated.  It 
has  removed  the  general  distrust,  which  was  the  real  danger  of 
our  position.  Order  has  been  completely  restored,  for  people's 
minds  have  again  become  tranquil  and  everything  leads  us  to 
hope  that  the  labours  of  the  government  will  no  longer  be 
impeded  by  the  vexatious  incidents  that  irritation  and  dis- 
quietude daily  brought  to  light. 

Questions  of  foreign  policy  were  debated  in  the  Chamber 
during  this  discussion.  They  were  therefore  brought  under  the 
influence  of  the  preoccupation  and  prejudice,  which  the  position 
of  home  affairs  must  inevitably  have  caused.  The  Belgian  question 
occupied  the  greater  part  of  the  sitting  of  yesterday  and  also  of 
to-day.  The  king's  ministers  were  very  reserved  and  cautious, 
but  this  did  not  prevent  their  showing  frankly  and  positively, 
that  their  intentions  were  wholly  pacific  and  far  removed  from 
propagandism. 

The  Prince  of  Coburg  was  violently  attacked,  yesterday 
by  M.  Mauguin,  and  to-day  by  General  Lamarque.  This  storm 
which  broke  out  in  the  Chamber  was  caused  by  the  newspapers, 
and,  also  it  must  be  admitted,  by  public  opinion.  The  king,  who 
has  a  sincere  friendship  for  the  Prince  of  Coburg,  is  the  more  vexed, 
as  he  sees  the  impossibility  of  leading  the  public  mind  back  to 
this   view. 

It  will  therefore  be  neccessary  to  look  elsewhere  for  another 
Prince,  who  will  be  acceptable  both  to  Belgium,  France,  and 
Europe  ;  and  this  is  not  the  least  of  the  difficulties  that  you 
have  to  solve. 

The  Belgians  as  a  nation  would  wish  either  that  their  country 
should  be  re-united  to  France,  or  that  the  Due  de  Nemours 
were  called  upon  to  reign  over  them.  In  order  to  obtain  this  im- 
portant result,  they  will  willingly  consent  that  Antwerp  shall 
become  a  free  town,  and  they  would  perhaps  even  add  Ostend 
also.  In  the  reunion  of  Belgium,  or  in  the  choice  of  the  Due  de 
Nemours,  France  would  find  a  just  reparation  for  the  past,  and 
a  prospect  of  peace  for  the  future.  This  arrangement  would,  in 
fact,  become  a  pledge  of  peace  to  Europe.  Nevertheless  we 
should  not  wish,  in  order  to  arrive  at  this,  to  place  ourselves  in 
such  violent  opposition,  as  would  oblige  us  to  make  war  against 
the  whole  of  Europe,  and  overthrow  all  social  order,  which  is 

VOL.  in.  x 


3o6  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

already  trembling  in  the  balance.  Notwithstanding  this,  the 
idea  of  a  political  system,  which  would  be  so  satisfactory  to  us 
and  the  other  states,  must,  with  all  its  greatness  and  all  its  truth, 
recommend  itself  to  your  intelligence,  mon  Prince.  If  we  must 
abandon  it,  the  sacrifice  will  be  all  the  more  painful,  that  no 
thought  of  ambition  has  interfered  to  mar  its  purity. 

We  cannot  conceal  from  ourselves  that  in  the  exclusion  of 
the  House  of  Nassau,  Belgium  has  included  all  the  other 
Protestant  houses  as  well  as  the  German  dynasties,  excepting 
Bavaria  and  Saxony.  But  a  Bavarian  Prince  (when  the  head  of 
that  house  possesses  Landau,  which  is  a  dismembered  portion  of 
France),  could  not  be  received  with  any  pleasure  here.  The 
brother  of  the  King  of  Naples,  a  young  prince  of  nineteen  years 
of  age,  who  shows  great  intelligence  and  has  a  fine  character, 
would  probably  be  the  one  whose  elevation  would  meet  with  the 
least  opposition  in  the  minds  of  the  French  nation.  It  is  to  you, 
mon  Prince,  that  the  high  mission  has  been  entrusted,  of  solving 
so  delicate  a  question  in  a  manner  conformable  to  the  dignity 
and  interests  of  our  country.  The  king  awaits  your  answer 
with  a  degree  of  impatience  that  you  will  easily  understand. 
Your  experience,  your  consummate  wisdom,  will  enlighten  us  as 
to  what  it  is  possible  to  do  to  gain  the  consent  of  the  great 
Powers.  Would  England  still  adhere  to  the  ways  of  a  narrow 
and  jealous  policy  ?  Her  government,  so  enlightened  as  it  now 
is,  could  it  not  throw  this  aside,  and  only  see  in  this  arrangement 
for  Belgium,  a  combination  for  the  purpose  of  preventing  war 
for  a  long  term  of  years,  and  allowing  reason  to  extend  her  empire 
in  Europe  ? 

The  king  has  this  morning  seen  M.  Gendebien.1  He 
spoke  to  him  with  a  touching  frankness,  and  did  not  conceal 
from  him  that  his  policy  should  never  be  accused  of  bad  faith, 
and  that  he  would  carry  out  all  the  engagements  he  had  entered 
into  with  the  Powers  not  to  turn  the  revolution  in  Belgium  to 
his  own  advantage.  He  has,  therefore,  refused  the  proposal  of 
the  re-union,  as  well  as  that  of  the  elevation  of  his  son.  As  for 
the  rest,  mon  Prince,  Europe  is  more  interested  than  we  are  in 
the  elimination  of  this  cause  of  war,  which  constantly  and  aggres- 
sively crops  up.     We  trust  that  the  issue  may  be  satisfactory. 

Accept 

Horace  Sebastiani. 

1  Jean  Francois  Gendebien,  born  in  1753,  Deputy  of  Hainault,  and  President  at 
the  Congress  of  Berlin  in  1770.  After  its  union  with  France,  he  was  elected  one  of 
the  Five  Hundred,  and  also  member  of  the  Legislative  Assembly.  After  1815  he  took 
his  seat  in  the  States-General  of  the  Netherlands.  In  1830  he  was  elected  President 
of  the  Belgian  Congress.  Later  on  he  was  made  President  of  the  Tribunal  of  Mons, 
and  died  in  1838. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  307 

Simultaneously  with  the  receipt  of  this  letter,  M.  Bresson, 
the  French  Commissioner  of  the  Conference  at  Brussels,  wrote 
to  me  as  follows  : — 

Brussels,  December  31^7,  1830. 

Mon  Prince, 

My  anxieties  increase  as  to  the  state  of  this  country. 
The  King  of  Holland,  by  closing  the  Scheldt,  has  upset  all  the 
plans  of  the  Conference.  Disorder,  anarchy,  and  civil  war  are 
at  our  very  door.  I  do  not  know  what  to  advise,  but  it  is  only 
a  powerful  mind  and  strong  measures,  that  can  turn  aside  the 
storm  which  is  rapidly  growing  darker.  A  French  Prince  is  im- 
possible, he  would  certainly  entail  war  ;  and  yet,  perhaps,  it  is 
only  by  some  concession  of  this  kind  that  the  turbulence  of  the 
Belgians  will  be  restrained.  What  to  say  ! — How  to  act ! — the 
solution  is  quite  beyond  my  powers. 

Lord  Ponsonby  maintains  that  matters  are  more  hopeful  than 
I  think.     I    trust,  with  all  my  heart,  that  he  is  not  mistaken  ;  but 
then  his  country  has  not  so  much  at  stake  as  we  have,  and  it  is 
therefore  natural  that  our  anxiety  should  be  greater. 
Pray  accept     

It  will  be  seen  that  the  horizon  had  become  greatly  obscured 
at  Brussels,  owing  to  the  intrigues  of  M.  de  Celles  and  his 
friends,  who  had  even  succeeded  in  winning  over  General 
Sebastian  i  to  their  views.  The  letter  which  has  already  been 
given,  proves  that  he  had  entered  into  their  intrigues,  and  that 
his  judgment,  ordinarily  sound  and  clear,  had  become  warped 
by  the  false  information  he  had  received.  In  any  case,  no  one 
but  a  madman  could  for  a  moment  imagine,  that  the  great 
Powers  would  ever  have  consented  to  the  re-union  of  Belgium 
with  France  ;  or,  what  comes  to  the  same,  the  elevation  of  the 
Due  de  Nemours  to  the  throne  of  Belgium,  without  a  desperate 
war,  in  which  France  by  herself,  would  have  to  prove  victorious 
over  four  other  Powers. 

I  have  already  several  times  spoken  of  M.  de  Celles  without 
explaining  who  he  was,  or  how  he  had  been  able  to  acquire  a 
sort  of  influence  both  in  Belgium  and  at  Paris.  The  Comte  de 
Celles,  descended  from  a  noble  Belgian  family,  was  still  quite 
young  at  the  time  of  the  conquest  of  Belgium  by  the  French 
Republic,    but  he  had    contrived   to  distinguish   himself    then 

X  2 


3oS  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLE  YRAND. 

by  the  licentiousness  of  his  life  and  excesses  of  every  kind. 
He  was  among  the  first  of  the  Belgians  who  rallied  round  the 
imperial  system  of  Napoleon,  who  first  appointed  him  to  the 
State  Council,  and  then  made  him  successively  Prefet  of  Nantes 
and  of  Amsterdam.  He  won  for  himself  the  execration  of  the 
Dutch,  as  much  by  the  excessive  rigour  with  which  he  carried 
out  the  severest  measures  of  the  imperial  rule,  as  by  the 
cynicism  of  his  conduct  and  his  habits.  After  the  fall  of  the 
Empire  he  remained  in  obscurity  for  several  years  ;  he  was  then 
elected  Member  of  the  Chamber  of  the  Netherlands,  where  he 
sat  with  the  opposition.  Later  on,  on  his  return  from  a  journey 
to  Rome,  he  approached  the  King  of  the  Netherlands,  who  at 
that  time  was  somewhat  troubled  in  his  relations  with  the  Court 
of  Rome.  He  succeeded  in  persuading  that  Sovereign  that  no 
one  could  so  effectually  serve  him  at  the  Pontifical  Court  as 
himself,  and  boasting  that  his  atheistic  and  philosophical  views 
prevented  his  being  made  a  dupe,  while  his  wife  through  her 
piety  had  gained  great  credit  at  that  court.  The  King  of  the 
Netherlands  thereupon  appointed  him  Ambassador  to  the  Holy 
See,  and,  as  a  fact,  a  few  months  later,  M.  de  Celles  concluded  a 
concordat,  which  however  did  not  fulfil  the  king's  expectations, 
and  even  became  the  source  of  all  the  religious  discussions  in 
Belgium,  and  of  the  discontent  of  the  Belgian  Catholics  with  the 
King  of  the  Netherlands.1  M.  de  Celles  had  again  taken  his 
seat  in  the  second  Chamber,  but  he  had  fallen  equally  into  dis- 
repute with  the  Dutch  for  his  past  conduct,  and  with  the  Belgian 
Catholcis,  who  accused  him  of  having  tried  to  betray  their 
interests,  for  those  of  the  king.  This  was  M.  de  Celles'  position 
at  the  time  of  the  revolution  of  1S30.     He  was  one  of  the  first 

1  This  concordat  was  signed  on  the  18th  of  June,  1827,  during  the  Pontificate  of 
Leo  XII.  It  declared  that  the  concordat  of  1801,  signed  by  Pius  VII.  and  the  first 
Consul,  would  remain  in  force  in  the  southern  provinces  of  the  kingdom,  and  would 
be  also  applicable  to  the  northern  provinces  with  the  following  modifications  : — Each 
diocese  shall  have  its  own  chapter  and  seminary.  When  a  vacancy  to  an  episcopal 
see  has  to  be  filled,  the  chapter  shall  present  a  list  of  the  candidates,  who  must  be 
approved  of  by  the  king.  This  approval  gained,  the  chapter  can  choose  any  one  it 
likes  from  this  list.  The  election  shall  then  be  submitted  to  the  Pope  for  canonical 
sanction.  The  Pope  completed  these  provisions  by  apostolic  letters,  in  which  he 
reserved  to  himself  the  right  of  appointing  the  pastors  to  the  Belgian  churches.  The 
bishops  might  take  the  oath  to  the  king,  but  they  were  to  choose  their  own  grand 
vicars,  as  well  as  all  the  cures,  and  would  have  full  authority  over  the  seminaries. 
Lastly  all  the  clergy  were  to  receive  an  endowment  from  the  Crown. 


THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1830.  309 

who  joined  this  revolution,  and  having  been  elected  a  member 
of  the  National  Congress  by  the  Liberal  party,  he  was  no- 
minated as  Vice-President  of  the  Diplomatic  Committee,  which 
had  to  decide  all  questions  concerning  the  foreign  relations  of 
Belgium. 

M.  de  Celles  had  married  the  daughter  of  General  Vallence, 
who  had  married  a  daughter  of  Mdme.  de  Genlis.  Mdme.  de 
Celles'  sister  was  married  to  Marshal  Gerard.who  had  been  made 
War  Minister  after  the  revolution  of  July.  Mdme.  de  Genlis' 
other  daughter,  the  Marquise  de  Laevestine,  married  to  a 
Belgian,  had  left  a  son,  who  had  distinguished  himself  as  one  of 
the  leaders  of  the  Buonapartist  party  in  France. 

It  will  be  seen  what  great  influence  this  relationship  gave  M. 
de  Celles,  through  Mdme.  de  Genlis,  with  the  Palais  Royale,  and 
through  Marshal  Gerard  with  the  government.  It  was  by  these 
means  that  he  intrigued  and  plotted,  to  secure  the  re-union  of 
Belgium  with  France,  or  at  any  rate,  the  sovereignty  to  the  Due 
de  Nemours,  with  the  idea,  that  such  a  result  would  give  him  an 
influential  position  in  France,  and  would  withdraw  him  from 
Belgium,  where  he  felt  he  had  fallen  into  disrepute. 

I  have,  perhaps,  dwelt  too  long  on  this  very  uninteresting 
person,  but  this  digression  was  necessary  in  order  to  expose 
the  hot-bed  of  intrigue  which  impeded  the  progress  of  our  affairs 
in  England. 

It  was  under  these  very  unfavourable  auspices  that  the  year 
1830  closed  ;  a  year  made  memorable  by  the  events  which 
marked  its  course. 


APPENDIX. 

In  this  Appendix  a  certain  number  of  letters  have  been  inserted, 
relating  to  the  events  of  1830 — 1831,  taken  from  the  papers  of  M.  de 
Talleyrand,  which,  although  not  included  by  him  in  the  text  of  his  Memoirs, 
nevertheless  seemed  to  possess  a  certain  historical  and  documentary 
interest.  All  these  letters  have  been  copied  literally  from  the  autograph 
text  of  the  Prince  and  his  correspondents. 

In  particular,  letters  will  be  found  from  M.  de  Talleyrand  to  Madame 
Adelaide  and  Madame  de  Vaudemont.  In  fact  it  is  well-known  that  he 
carried  on  a  close  correspondence  with  the  sister  of  King  Louis  Philippe,  in 
which  he  kept  her  well  informed,  as  to  the  various  phases  of  the  negotiations 
which  were  being  carried  on  in  London.  These  letters  were  then  submitted 
to  the  King.  They  were  strictly  confidential,  and  entirely  distinct  from  the 
Ambassador's  official  correspondence  with  the  Cabinet. 

As  for  the  letters  to  Madame  de  Vaudemont,  a  very  old  and  intimate 
friend  of  M.  de  Talleyrand,  they  were  likewise,  for  the  most  part,  communi- 
cated to  the  Royal  family,  which  renders  them  all  the  more  important. 


No.  1.— The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  the  Princess  de 

Vaudemont. 

Valencay,  May  20th,  1 830. 

I  have  read  the  famous  proclamation  ! :  and  I  see  that  by  it  every  one's 
arrangements  for  the  summer  have  been  upset  !  Up  to  now,  it  only  strikes 
me  as  a  coup  detat  against  country  house  visiting  ;  perhaps,  later  on,  some- 
thing more  may  come  of  it. 

The  expedition  to  Algiers  is  rather  a  piece  of  folly,  which  may  perhaps 
lead  to  very  grave  results.  Also,  why  does  not  the  English  Government, 
which  is  ready  to  interfere  in  the  formation  of  a  Brazilian  2  constitution, 
interfere  in  the  formation  of  a  Ministry  at  Paris?  That  would  surely  be  a 
benefit  to  all  the  world.  Indeed,  under  present  circumstances,  I  believe  it 
would  be  most  important ;  for  then,  closely  allied  with  England,  we  could 
hold  whatever  language  we  pleased,  and  all  small,  insignificant  opposition 

1  The  proclamation  of  May  i6th,  dissolving  the  Chamber  of  Deputies. 

2  This  is  an  allusion  to  the  policy  of  the  Wellington  Ministry,  which,  more  or  less  openly,  supported 
Dom  Miguel  against  his  brother  Dom  Pedro,  Emperor  of  Brazil. 


APPENDIX.  311 

would  cease.  I  know  well  that  it  is  not  pleasant  to  have  to  submit  to  the 
will  of  another,  but  if  that  other  does  not  know  what  he  wants,  then  it 
becomes  insupportable. 

We  must  trust  that  foreign  affairs  will  not  become  more  complicated,  but 
with  such  a  Ministry,  can  one  be  sure  of  anything  ?  Everything  is  done  in  a 
reckless  manner,  and  the  results  of  this  folly  may  produce  serious  embarrass- 
ment. If  this  Algerian  enterprise  is  an  expedient  with  the  view  to  facilitate 
some  home  matters,  they  will  find  themselves  greatly  mistaken.  Much 
simpler  means  were  at  hand  :  the  taxes  should  have  been  reduced.  Since 
the  time  of  the  Emperor's  Government,  they  have  increased  by  more  than  two 
hundred  millions  ;  while  in  England,  during  the  same  period,  they  have 
diminished  by  four  hundred  million  francs.  But  these  are  the  reflections  of 
a  veritable  rustic  !  I  will  at  least  not  make  them  lengthy,  and  will  therefore 
conclude.     Adieu. 


No.  2.— The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  the  Princess  de 

Vaudemont. 

Valencay,/;/;^  wth,  1830. 

As  some  one  is  leaving  here  for  Paris,  I  take  the  opportunity  of  sending 
you  a  few  lines. 

The  decisive  moment  approaches  /  I  can  see  neither  compass  nor  pilot, 
and  nothing  to  prevent  a  shipwreck  :  this  it  is  which  disquiets  every  one  and 
people  of  every  class. 

The  death  of  the  King  of  England  is  a  momentous  event.  Everything 
seems  to  become  more  complicated,  and  we  have  neither  a  head  to  guide, 
nor  scissors  to  cut  the  knot.  Morally  and  physically,  it  is  a  year  of  storms  : 
here,  during  the  last  week,  there  have  been  at  least  two  each  day.  This 
however  has  not  prevented  the  Archbishop  and  the  Pre/et  from  taking  long 
and  charming  drives. 

Will  England  keep  her  present  Ministry  ?  It  will  be  well  if  she  does  not 
change.  When  a  country  like  ours  is  so  far  from  being  quiet,  it  is  all  the 
more  important  that  the  others  should  remain  firm. 


No.  3. — The  Comte  Mole  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand. 

Paris,  October  1st,  1830. 

....  In  your  letter  of  the  27th,  mon  Prince,  you  tell  me  that  you 
have  had  your  first  interview  with  Lord  Aberdeen,  and  subsequently  with 
the  Duke  of  Wellington.  I  looked  eagerly,  I  must  confess,  for  the  word 
Belgium,  but  was  surprised  not  to  find  it  anywhere.  The  events  which  are 
pressing  forward  in  this  country,  seem  to  make  it  imperative  that  we  should 
be  explicit,  one  with  another.  I  should  like  much  to  have  heard  from  you 
how  you  found  your  two  interlocutors  disposed,  with  regard  to  this  matter. 
The  following  are  the  views  we  hold  here,  with  which  yours  will  assuredly 
accord. 

As  long  as  the  struggle  between  the  King  of  the  Netherlands  and  that 
portion  of  his  subjects  continues,  we  shall  keep  within  the  limits  of  the 
strictest  neutrality  ;  we  shall  steadfastly  reject  all  overtures  from  the  Belgians 


312  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

which  tend  towards  their  joining  us  ;  but,  should  they  prove  the  stronger  in 
this  struggle,  and  succeed  in  making  themselves  independent,  we  will  not 
allow  any  government  to  be  imposed  upon  them  by  force  of  arms.  If  it  is 
desired  that  this  important  question  should  at  once  be  brought  within  the 
scope  of  the  negotiations,  we  shall  be  quite  willing,  and  we  will  honestly 
endeavour,  in  concert  with  the  other  Cabinets,  to  find  a  solution  for  it, 
which,  while  protecting  the  interests  of  every  one,  might  be  voluntarily 
accepted  by  Belgium.  Think  over  this  carefully,  mon  Prince;  you,  better 
than  any  one  else,  will  know  how  to  solve  this  problem,  and  hit  upon 
some  arrangement  which  will  satisfy  that  principle  of  national  independence, 
which  our  existence  is  interested  in  making  respected,  and  at  the  same  time 
insure  general  peace,  instead  of  destroying  it. 

Our  Minister,  Bertin  de  Veaux  l  leaves  to-morrow  for  the  Hague,  with 
instructions  drawn  up  in  this  spirit.  In  order  to  avoid  giving  umbrage  as  much 
as  possible,  he  will  go  via  Luxemburg  or  Ghent,  and  thus  give  no  occasion  for 
demonstrations,  which  would  certainly  have  marked  his  passage  through 
Brussels.  Finally,  the  provisional  Government  now  established  in  Brussels 
has  sent  a  Deputy  here,  chosen  by  its  members.  This  Deputy  arrived 
yesterday,  but  I  refused  to  see  him. 

Notwithstanding  the  silence  preserved  in  your  letter,  mon  Prince,  I  have 
no  doubt  that  these  serious  matters  were  discussed  at  your  conference  with 
the  English  Ministers,  and  that  I  shall  soon  receive  a  despatch  from  you,  in- 
forming me  fully,  how  you  found  them  disposed  generally. 

I  may  say  the  same  respecting  Portugal,  concerning  which  Lord  Stuart 
has  made  me  a  very  important  communication :  I  will  shortly  write  more 
fully  on  this  matter,  and  hope  I  shall  before  then  have  received  more 
particulars  from  you,  as  to  the  line  the  English  Cabinet  desires  to  take. 

Accept,  mon  Prince,  the  renewed  assurances  of  my  high  esteem  and 
unalterable  attachment. 

Mole. 


No.  4.— The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  Madame  Adelaide. 

London,  October  2nd,  1830. 

Mademoiselle  has  commanded  me  to  write  to  her  :  I  obey. 

The  crossing  was  very  bad,  but  two  hours  after  I  thought  no  more 
about  it. 

At  first  sight,  London  struck  me  as  being  much  handsomer  than  when  I 
left  it  ;  several  parts  are  entirely  new — Mademoiselle  would  hardly  recognize 
it.  The  population  has  increased  immensely  ;  there  are  now  fifteen  hundred 
thousand  souls — if  one  can  thus  designate  the  selfish  egotists  who  live  here. 
To  my  great  surprise,  I  found  fairly  bright  sunshine  here  on  the  24th  of 
September;  the  Ministers  took  advantage  of  it  to  leave  town  and  go  into 
the  country.  I  wish  ours,  and  especially  the  King,  might  sometimes  do  the 
same. 

Charles  X.  is  to  quit  the  seaside  ;  he  has  accepted  the  magnificent 
mansion  of  Lord  Arundel,  which  is  about  fifty  miles  inland.  The  English 
Government  hinted  to  him,  that  by  residing  so  close  to  the  seashore,  he  gave 
a  pretext  to  numerous  intriguers  to  make  out,  by  frequent  crossings,  that  they 
were  intrusted  with  commissions  which  they  had  never  received.     The  Duke 

1  Louis  Francois  Bertin  de  Veaux,  brother  of  the  founder  of  the  Journal  des  Debats  (1771-1842). 
He  was  elected  deputy  in  1820,  and  became  peer  of  France  in  1832.  In  1830  he  accepted  a  mission 
to  the  Hague,  but  returned  soon  after  to  Paris. 


APPENDIX.  313 

of  Wellington  gave  me  these  few  details.  The  English  Government  is 
thoroughly  loyal  in  this  matter. 

Charles  X.  has  written  to  Vienna  to  ask  for  permission  to  reside  in  the 
hereditary  States  ;  it  is  not  yet  known  what  answer  has  been  sent  him. 

I  think  the  Duke  is  now  quite  convinced  that  the  movement  of  the 
French  in  July  was  not  due  to  any  one  person,  but  that  it  was  entirely 
caused  by  the  state  of  general  dissatisfaction  ;  that  there  was  no  single 
intrigue;  that  M.  le  Due  d'Orleans  was  forced  to  become  Lieut.-General  of 
the  Kingdom,  and  subsequently  to  accept  the  crown  ;  that  in  so  doing  he 
had  fulfilled  a  duty  ;  and  that  in  fulfilling  this  duty  he  has  rendered  an 
essential  service  to  the  whole  of  Europe. 

The  King  has  many  admirers  here,  and  many  persons  who  love  him  ; 
his  praises  are  in  every  one's  mouth.      .  .  . 

The  desire  of  all  our  political  partisans  is,  that  the  Ministry  should 
remain  in,  and  that  the  Chambers  should  not  be  dissolved.  This  opinion  I 
have  gathered  from  our  warmest  friends  here 

I  am  not  kept  sufficiently  informed  respecting  news  from  Belgium. 
Whatever  I  learn  of  this  matter,  I  always  hear  from  the  English  Cabinet. 


No.  5.— The  Comte  Mole  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand. 

Paris,  October  \th,  1830. 

Prince, 

You  ask  me  for  news  by  telegraph,  and  I  ask  you  what  is  happening  in 
London.  Your  letter  of  the  1st  of  October,  which  I  have  this  instant  received, 
leaves  me  still  in  complete  ignorance  on  this  head.  The  King  desires  me  to 
tell  you  that  he  yesterday  heard  privately,  that  England  had  sent  a  negative 
reply  to  the  demand  of  the  King  of  the  Netherlands  for  assistance. 

After  your  two  conferences  with  the  Duke  of  Wellington  and  Lord 
Aberdeen,  you  would  have  a  right  to  complain  if  the  English  Government 
has  kept  this  fact  hidden  from  you  ;  yet  the  King  can  hardly  believe  that 
the  reply  can  have  been  communicated  to  you,  since  you  have  said  nothing 
to  us  about  it. 

I  do  not  know  either,  whether  the  English  Cabinet  has  also  left  you  in 
ignorance  as  to  its  intentions  regarding  Portugal,  but  Lord  Stuart  made  a 
most  important  communication  to  me  three  days  ago  on  this  subject,  of  which 
I  should  be  much  surprised  to  find  you  had  heard  nothing  in  London. 

You  will  assuredly,  mon  Prince,  see  the  necessity  which  obliges  me  to 
ask  you  for  an  entirely  different  style  of  correspondence.  Hitherto  you 
have  kept  me  in  complete  ignorance  as  to  the  intentions  of  the  London 
Cabinet,  and  your  communications  with  it,  a  state  of  affairs  that  cannot  but 
prove  injurious  to  the  business  and  interests  with  which  you  and  I  have  been 
intrusted. 

Accept  the  renewed  assurances  of  my  great  consideration  and  attachment. 

Mole. 

No.  6. — The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  Madame  Adelaide. 

London,  October  yth,  1830. 

Mademoiselle  must,  I  think,  be  struck  with  the  improvement  in  our 
position,  for  the  news  from  France  seems  to  me  all  that  one  could  wish  for  in 
home  matters,  while  foreign  affairs,  regarded  from  this  distance,  also  appear 


3i 4  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

to  me  to  be  proceeding  as  the  King  would  desire  ;  they  improve  each  day. 
His  Ambassador  enjoys  an  amount  of  consideration  here  never  accorded  to 
those  of  Charles  X.  Attentions  are  lavished  on  the  Embassy  from  all  sides. 
The  on  dits,  which  circulate  so  freely  in  London  clubs  and  drawing-rooms, 
both  on  small  and  great  matters,  are  all  of  a  nature  to  prove  that  we  have 
taken  the  right  course,  both  as  regards  business  and  society.  The  Belgian 
question  is  on  the  road  it  ought  to  be,  to  avoid  a  war.  Each  day  it  pro- 
gresses further  in  this  direction,  but  if  we  were  to  endeavour  to  unduly 
hasten  the  operations  of  the  English  Cabinet,  if  time  were  not  given  to 
round  the  sharp  angles,  we  should,  I  think,  not  do  such  good  work.  In  this 
respect  I  find  foreign  affairs  rather  too  hurried. 

These  are  all  the  observations  that  time  and  reflection  have  enabled  me 
to  make.  Prussia  and  Austria  have  placed  themselves  under  English  in- 
fluence and  guidance  in  all  the  Belgian  complications,  and  this  influence  is 
all  in  favour  of  the  preservation  of  peace.  I  look  upon  this  as  a  benefit  which 
we  owe  entirely  to  time.  It  was  necessary  to  allow  it  to  take  proper  effect,  to 
let  people  recover  from  their  first  surprise  ;  it  was  necessary  to  efface  some 
prejudices  ;  and  above  all  was  it  necessary  to  give  our  Government  time 
to  reassure  by  its  acts  the  foreign  Powers,  who  were  quite  ready  to  believe 
that  we  were  on  the  verge  of  anarchy.  Not  a  single  step  could  have  been 
made  without  endless  trouble,  if  taken  in  opposition  to  the  excited  feeling  of 
the  clubs.  Now  matters  are  on  the  footing  they  ought  to  be,  and  I  think 
here  we  have  done  what  would  best  suit  the  French  Government,  by  inducing 
England  to  bring  forward  sensible  proposals.  It  seemed  to  me  that  had 
we  taken  the  initiative,  we  should  not  have  been  such  free  agents,  and  I 
regret  that  they  have  thought  differently  in  Paris. 

I  discerned  somewhat  of  youthful  indiscretion  in  the  step  taken  by  M. 
Mole  towards  the  Duke  of  Wellington,  and  which  I  only  heard  of  from  the 
latter  ;  he  has  thereby  exposed  himself  to  finding  that  the  determination  of 
which  it  was  the  object  had  already  been  taken  two  days  ago.  However, 
it  is  done,  and  it  is  no  use  going  over  what  is  past  and  cannot  be  undone. 

My  presentation  took  place  yesterday.  I  have  every  reason  to  be 
satisfied  with  it  and  the  address,  which  Mademoiselle  knows  has  been 
greatly  approved  even  by  the  King's  immediate  surroundings.  I  trust  it  will 
give  satisfaction  in  France.  Speaking  in  the  name  of  our  King  and  of 
France,  I  found  that  I  spoke  as  if  in  my  place  in  the  Constituent  Assembly. 

Mademoiselle  will,  I  trust,  now  permit  me  to  leave  her  for  the  sunshine, 
which  is  so  rare  here,  and  which  I  will  go  and  enjoy  for  a  few  moments. 

T. 

P.S. — I  inclose  for  Mademoiselle's  private  information  a  copy  of  a  letter 
I  have  to-day  sent  to  M.  Mole.  It  is  quite  a  private  letter,  written  purposely 
with  the  object  of  putting  an  end  to  some  tendency  to  irritation,  which  I 
always  try  to  avoid.1 


No.  7.— Madame  Adelaide  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand. 

Paris,  October  Zth,  1830. 

....  The  remarks  made  by  the  Duke  of  Wellington  as  to  the  incon- 
venience of  Charles  X.  residing  near  the  coast  is  quite  true.  There  is  no 
doubt  that  there  are  constant  goings  backwards  and  forwards  which  can  lead 
to  no  good.     I  am   very  glad  that  the  Duke  at  last  views  our  grand  and 

1  See  this  letter,  page  238. 


APPENDIX.  315 

splendid  Revolution  more  fairly,  and  likewise  the  noble  and  loyal  conduct  of 
my  beloved  brother.  Here  matters  are  very  satisfactory,  and  become 
stronger  and  more  consolidated  every  day.  I  think  there  could  not  be  any- 
thing more  generous  and  touching  than  the  petition  of  the  wounded, 
begging  the  Chamber  of  Deputies  to  abolish  the  punishment  of  death  for 
political  offences.  It  is  doubtful  whether  this  measure  will  be  passed  at  once, 
but  I  hope  it  will  be  carried  out. 

M.  de  Montesquieu1  arrived  here  yesterday  at  four  o'clock  from  Naples, 
bringing  the  recognition  and  credentials  from  the  King  of  Naples  to  Prince 
de  Castelsicala,'-'  and  those  of  the  Pope  to  the  Nuncio.  I  am  delighted 
that  this  latter  arrived  so  quickly  ;  it  will  quite  smooth  away  the  anxieties 
and  difficulties  of  the  clergy,  at  least  it  will  no  longer  leave  any  excuse.  We 
also  expect  Athalin  every  moment.  His  last  letter  was  dated  the  iSthof 
September.     He  was  enchanted  with  the  Emperor,  who  had  been  most  kind 

to   him The    Belgian    affairs    have   troubled  us   greatly,   but 

fortunately  from  what  I  have  heard  it  seems  to  me  that  they  are  quieting 
down  a  little,  and  that  happily  (which  I  hope  with  all  my  heart)  the  general 
peace  will  not  be  disturbed. 

You  complain  that  you  are  not  kept  sufficiently  informed  as  to  news  from 
Belgium.  Though  I  do  not  wish  that  my  correspondence  with  you  should  in 
any  way  be  a  political  one,  I  must  tell  you  in  confidence,  both  in  your  own 
interest  and  in  that  of  the  matter  which  we  are  so  anxious  to  see  progress 
satisfactorily,  that  here  complaints  are  also  made  of  want  of  sufficient 
detail  in  your  despatches,  and  that  you  do  not  keep  them  here  sufficiently  ait 
fait  of  what  happens  in  London.  This  is  between  you  and  me,  and  I  ask 
you  to  let  it  remain  so.  I  feel  sure  that  you  will  do  justice  to  my  motive  in 
telling  you  of  it. 


No.  8. — The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  Madame  Adelaide. 

October  l$th,  1830. 

.  .  .  .  The  foreign  Ministers  continue  in  the  same  friendly  relations  with  us 
at  the  conferences.  Whatever  the  Duke  of  Wellington  proposes  or  maintains 
is  always  adopted  by  them.  I  think  it  is  most  important  for  us  that  he 
should  be  kept  at  the  head  of  affairs  as  long  as  possible,  at  any  rate  until  the 
fate  of  Belgium  is  decided  ;  for  we  cannot  conceal  from  ourselves  that 
Russia  tries  to  thwart  all  our  efforts  with  those  Courts  over  which  she  has 
any  influence.  The  language  of  M.  de  Matusiewicz  has  therefore  changed 
somewhat  now.  M.  de  Lieven  will  arrive  here  in  a  few  days.  Madame  de 
Lieven,  who  has  been  very  distant  to  the  Duke  since  Mr.  Canning  has  been 
Minister,  now  tries  to  approach  him  again. 

The  majority  or  minority  of  votes  on  Mr.  Brougham's  motion  in  the 
coming  session  is,  I  think,  of  very  great  importance  ;  you  will  be  informed  of 
it  as  soon  as  it  is  over,  but  probably  Rothschild  will  already  have  had  his 
courier.  The  English  Cabinet  always  obtain  their  information  by  him  ten 
or  twelve  hours  before  the  arrival  of  Lord  Stuart's  despatches,  and  this  is 
not  to  be  wondered  at,  seeing  that  the  vessels  which  carry  Rothschild's  cou- 
riers belong  to  that  firm,  they  take  no  passengers,  and  start  at  all  hours 

3  The  Comte  de  Montesquieu  had  been  commissioned  to  make  the  new  French  Government 
known  to  the  Courts  of  Naples  and  of  Rome. 

'-  Ambassador  to  the  King  of  the  Two  Sicilies  in  Paris.  He  had  held  that  post  since  1S14,  having 
previously  been  Ambassador  in  London  in  1796,  and  President  of  the  State  Junta,  created  by  the 
Minister  Acton. 


316  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 


No.  9.— The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  the  Princess  de  Vaudemont. 

London,  October  15th,  1S30. 

I  AM  sending  this  to  you  by  M.  de  la  Rochefoucauld,1  who,  to  my  great 
regret,  is  leaving  us.  He  is  an  excellent  young  fellow,  a  fine  character,  and 
of  good  abilities,  and  I  wish  him  all  possible  success.  It  is  for  this  reason 
that  I  want  him  to  go  to  Berlin  as  First  Secretary,  for  that  will  advance  him 
in  his  career  ;  but  if  he  does  not  go  there,  he  would  like  (and  so  should  I)  to 
return  to  London. 

I  am  perfectly  satisfied  as  to  the  frankness  and  loyalty  of  the  English 
Cabinet  here,  and  particularly  so  with  the  Duke  of  Wellington.  One  can 
and  one  must,  be  open  with  him,  if  one  ever  hopes  to  effect  anything  real 
and  solid.  That  is  what  we  need  ;  whether  it  be  popular  or  not,  it  is  what 
we  require,  for  it  is  only  in  this  way  that  we  shall  thoroughly  establish  our 
new  dynasty.  I  am  giving  you  here  my  firm  conviction  ;  it  is  the  only  pos- 
sible means,  and  I  earnestly  desire  that  both  the  King  and  Mademoiselle 
may  be  convinced  of  it.  As  for  Mold,  that  is  a  matter  of  utter  indifference  to 
me  :  when  he  once  finds  that  it  is  to  his  own  interest,  he  will  quickly  follow 
that  line 

I  was  in  the  country  yesterday,  at  Lady  Jersey's,  who  has  a  house  you 
would  like  immensely  ;  it  is  beautiful,  decorated  in  thorough  good  taste,  and 
full  of  the  rarest  and  most  lovely  antiques.  The  Duke  was  also  there.  He 
was  very  well,  and  whatever  they  may  tell  you  in  Paris,  he  is,  and  will 
remain,  the  master.     Adieu. 


No.  10. — The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  the  Princess  de 

Vaudemont. 

London,  October  igt/i,  1830. 

I  have  just  returned  from  the  country  ;  I  took  advantage  of  the  splendid 
sunshine  we  have  here  just  now,  to  go  to  Lady  Jersey's.  The  Duke  also  went, 
and  when  he  is  not  in  London,  the  presence  of  the  Ambassadors  is  not  de 
Matusiewicz  was  also  there. 

You  have  at  last  obtained  the  recognition  of  St.  Petersburg.  I  believe 
that  Pozzo  would  have  liked  it  to  have  been  the  first  to  reach  us,  but  the 
delay  has  not  done  us  any  harm. 

I  presume  that  in  M.  Mole's  Cabinet,  England  is  not  greatly  in  favour  : 
it  was  Pozzo  who  made  him  Minister.  I  believe,  however,  that  he  will  use  his 
influence  to  strengthen  the  establishment  of  our  Government.  Pozzo  is  a 
man  of  sense,  and  would  have  much  liked  that  the  conferences  which  will 
decide  the  fate  of  Belgium  should  be  held  in  Paris.  The  Duke  of  Wellington 
particularly  wishes  to  have  them  here,  and  he  is  right  ;  the  Ministers  here 
are  under  his  influence,  and  the  Duke's  name  in  Europe  is  rather  different 
from  that  of  Pozzo  and  Mole.  We  shall  therefore,  I  hope,  finish  this  great 
business  in  a  fortnight,  or  even  less.  If  it  turns  out  badly  it  will  embroil  all 
Europe  ;  for  we  must  not  conceal  from  ourselves  that  it  is  England  which 
has  decided  the  recognition  of  St.  Petersburg.     However,  I  do  not  meddle 

1  Comte  Hyppolyte  de  la  Rochefoucauld,  Second  Secretary  in  London,  had  just  been  madeFirsl 
.Secretary  at  Berlin. 


APPENDIX.  317 

with  it,  for  it  might  appear  as  if  I  was  interested  in  it,  but   S is  there 

ready  to  utter  plain  and  unvarnished  truths  on  this  matter. 

In  a  word,  if  the  conferences  were  held  in  Paris,  Pozzo  would  have  had 
the  upper  hand  ;  if  they  take  place  here,  it  will  be  the  Duke  of  Wellington, 
who  is  more  interested  than  any  one,  in  establishing  a  good  order  of  things 
in  Belgium.  Adieu.  I  pray  you  to  read  this  letter,  and  then  to  burn  it. 
My  firm  conviction  is  (and  it  is  this  which  decides  my  view)  that  this  great 
question  should  be  settled  here. 


No.  11.— The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  the  Princess  de 

Vaudemont. 

London,  October  22nd,  1830. 

The  Duke  of  Wellington,  dear  friend,  understands  our  Revolution  as  it 
ought  to  be  understood.  For  some  time  past  the  proceedings  of  the  Govern- 
ment of  that  unfortunate  Charles  X.  made  him  foresee  a  catastrophe  ;  there- 
fore it  did  not  surprise  him.  His  opinions  now  are  just  as  far  removed  from 
those  of  the  Carlists  as  they  are  from  those  of  the  Republicans  ;  and  if  we 
do  nothing  foolish,  and  do  not  seek  for  the  impossible,  he  will  do  his  utmost 
to  establish  a  dynasty.  From  this  may  result  either  peace  or  war,  for  the 
sentiments  of  England  towards  us  will  decide  those  of  Europe,  and  we  shall 
commit  a  grave  error  by  seeking  support  elsewhere. 


No.  12. — The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  Madame  Adelaide. 

October  29th,  1 830. 

It  is  possible  that  I  have  not  sufficiently  repeated  in  detail  the  conver- 
sations I  may  have  had  with  the  English  Ministry,  but  I  pray  Mademoiselle 
to  recall  a  maxim  given  me  by  the  Emperor  Napoleon,  and  which  I  have 
found  infallible  during  a  period  of  fifteen  years.  He  considered  conversa- 
tional ambassadors  (it  was  thus  he  described  them)  as  very  inferior,  be- 
cause, he  said,  their  conversations  were  always  more  or  less  manufactured, 
by  the  wish  to  please  their  own  Governments,  and  they  were  therefore  of  no 
value,  and  taught  nothing.  He  only  prized  those  who  transmitted  nothing 
to  their  Governments  but  the  general  impression  they  had  received,  and  this 
he  believed  in,  more  or  less,  according  to  the  intelligence  possessed  by  him 
who  wrote. 


No.  13.— The  Duchesse  de  Dino  to  Madame  Adelaide. 

November  2nd,  1830. 

I  have  this  moment  returned  from  the  Royal  ceremonial.  Madame  will 
read  the  speech,  but  what  I  must  write  to  tell  you  is,  that  when  the  carriage  of 
the  French  Ambassador  appeared,  the  vivas,  the  hurrahs,  the  "  Louis  Philippe 
for  ever,  no  Charles  X."  commenced  and  continued  all  the  way  from  the 
House  of  Lords  up  to  Bond  Street.    There  were  also  a  good  many"  Viva 


3i8  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

Prince  Talleyrand  !  "  and  when  I  returned,  the  servants  wearing  the  tricolour 
cockade,  the  people  shouted  "  A  French  lady  !  "and  I  was  saluted,  and  loud 
cries  of  Viva  sounded  all  the  way  home.  All  the  Princes  of  the  Royal 
family  who  were  present  in  the  hall,  came  to  ask  for  news  of  our  King,  of 
Mademoiselle,  and  of  the  Queen,  and  to  inquire  with  anxiety  (I  must  say  it) 
if  our  Ministry  had  changed.  The  King  had  had  a  chair  prepared  for  M.  de 
Talleyrand  near  him,  that  he  might  be  seated  ;  but  this  kindness  was  not 
accepted  by  M.  de  Talleyrand,  who  remained  standing  all  the  time  in  the 
Diplomatic  Gallery. 

The  enthusiasm  of  the  people  for  the  King  was  very  demonstrative  ;  he 
must  have  been  well  satisfied  with  his  day.  I  must  beg  Madame's  pardon 
for  a  postscript  which  is  longer  than  the  letter  itself,  but  I  thought  that  the 
details  of  this  morning  might  be  of  some  interest. 

DUCHESSE  DE   DlNO. 


No.  14. — The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  Madame  Adelaide. 

November  10th,  1830. 

LONDON  is  pretty  quiet  just  now  ;  there  are  still  a  few  people  left  here  and 
there  in  town,  but  the  rush  and  excitement  is  over.  The  Duke  attended  the 
King's  levee  this  morning,  where  I  met  him  ;  he  seemed  very  placid,  and 
replied  as  I  desired,  to  the  request  I  made  him,  to  continue  our  conferences, 
which  had  been  interrupted  for  a  few  days.  I  believe  he  will  propose  that 
we  shall  meet  to-morrow  at  two  o'clock. 

When  it  became  known,  the  day  before  yesterday,  that  there  would  be  no 
dinner  in  the  City,  the  Marquis  of  Wellesley  l  said  out  loud  in  the  House  of 
Lords,  "  This  is  the  boldest  act  of  cowardice  I  ever  heard  of."  Mademoiselle 
will  consider  that  this  is  more  clever  than  kind. 

Nothing  special  will  be  done  in  Ministerial  affairs  before  December  16th. 
The  Opposition  will  set  all  their  machinery  in  motion,.  The  Duke  has 
perfect  confidence  in  his  position ;  and  thinks  he  will  have  a  majority 
against  Mr.  Brougham's  motion.  In  six  days  this  great  struggle  will  be 
decided.  I  have  not,  nor  has  anyone  else,  an  idea  as  to  the  result  of  this 
sitting,  for  there  are  a  great  many  new  members  whose  opinions  are  not 
yet  known.  .  .  . 


No.  15.— The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  Madame  Adelaide. 

November  igi/i,  1830. 

The  Ministry  will  be  known  to-morrow.  Here  are  the  names  of  those 
whom  I  believe  to  be  certain  this  evening  (here  follows  the  list  given  on  page 
248).  The  Duke  of  Wellington  has  been  asked  to  become  Commander-in- 
Chief,  in  the  place  of  Lord  Hill.2      The  King  has  himself  carried  on  this 

1  The  Marquis  of  Wellesley  (1760-1842),  eldest  brother  of  the  Duke  of  Wellington.,  formerly 
Governor-General  of  India  and  Lord-Lieutenant  of  Ireland,  was  one  of  the  most  distinguished  states- 
men of  the  Whig  party. 

2  General  Viscount  Hill,  born  in  1772,  was  an  old  soldier  of  the  wars  of  the  Revolution  and  the 
Empire.  He  had  fought  principally  in  Egypt  and  in  Spain.  In  1S2S  he  was  made  Commander-in- 
Chief  of  the  English  army,  which  appointment  he  held  till  his  death  in  1842. 


APPEXDIX.  319 

negotiation.  I  believe  that  Lord  Grant1  has  received  a  portfolio,  but  of 
this  I  am  not  sure.  This  Government  will  be  strong  and  favourable  to  us. 
I  have  much  friendly,  intercourse  with  the  principal  members  who  form  it. 
They  speak  quite  frankly  of  the  changes  that  have  taken  place,  and  are  still 
needed  in  France  :  that  is  the  word  they  use.  They  wish  that  England  and 
France  should  be  in  accord  in  all  the  dealings  they  may  have  with  the  other 
Powers  ;  they  look  upon  the  prosperity  and  strength  of  France  as  a  necessity 
to  the  peace  of  Europe,  and  all  speak  of  the  King  with  the  greatest 
respect.  This  is  what  Frederick  Lamb  told  me  this  morning.  I  should  like 
to  see  him  Ambassador  at  Pans. 

All  the  Ambassadors,  having  invited  the  Prince  of  Orange  to  dinner,  and 
as  he  has  paid  his  rirst  visit  to  the  King's  Ambassador,  I  thought  I  ought  to 
ask  him  to  dine  with  me.  As  invitations  are  sent  out  here  eight  or  ten  days, 
beforehand,  I  find  that  I  have  invited  the  chief  members  of  the  late  Ministry, 
and  important  personages  connected  with  the  Court,  who  will  probably  send 
in  their  resignations  to-morrow  .-  it  is  somewhat  awkward,  but  ten  days  ago 
no  one  had  any  idea  of  what  has  now  happened. 

....  Mademoiselle  must  have  said  something  which  has  caused  the 
Embassy  in  London  to  be  no  longer  neglected  by  the  Ministry  as  it  used 
to  be.  During  the  last  eight  days  I  have  received  more  and  fuller 
despatches,  than  have  been  sent  me  during  the  two  preceding  months.  I 
thank  Mademoiselle  for  this.  .  .  . 


No.  16.— M.  Bresson  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand. 

Brussels,  November  24///,  1830. 
Private. 

Mon  Prince, 

M.  de  Langsdorf  arrived  here  this  morning.  He  brought  me  orders  to 
urge  the  provisional  Government  and  the  Congress  to  put  an  end  to  the 
discussion  as  to  the  definite  exclusion  of  the  House  of  Nassau. 

I  have  made  persistent  and  fruitless  efforts  ;  but  160  votes  against  68 
carried  it.     This  will  greatly  complicate  matters. 

I  will  return  to  the  question  of  Luxemburg.  The  restriction  to  the 
declaration  presents  a  somewhat  ambiguous  meaning.  It  would  seem  to 
infer  that  Belgium  claims  the  Grand-Duchy,  while  preserving  her  connection 
with  the  German  Confederation.  The  negotiations  relative  to  the  army  are 
progressing  ;  I  do  not  think  the  present  events  will  injure  it.  At  the  con- 
ference last  night,  we  settled  all  the  principal  points  :  the  respective  accept- 
ance of  the  armistice,  the  line  of  demarcation  of  1814,  &c.  ;  thus  the  claim 
to  the  whole  left  bank  of  the  Scheldt  and  to  the  Enclosures  -  of  Limburg 
have  been  set  aside.  The  discussions  now  only  have  reference  to  the 
more  or  less  extended  meaning  of  the  Protocol  of  the  17th,  and  the 
return  of  the  prisoners.  I  trust  soon  to  be  able  to  send  you  a  full  account, 
but  (and  there  is  not  much  cause  for  surprise  at  it)  we  have  not  yet  heard 
whether  Holland  on  her  side  has  taken  steps  to  carry  out  the  suspension  of 
hostilities.  If  there  is  any  bad  faith  or  needless  delay  in  that  quarter,  all  our 
work  here  will  have  been  in  vain 

I  lay  at  the  feet  of  Madame  de  Dino,  and  beg  to  offer  you,  mon  Prince, 
the  homage  of  my  respectful  attachment,  and  my  most  sincere  regard. 

Bresson. 

1  Charles  Grant.  Lord  Glenelg,  born  1780,  had  been  President  of  the  Board  of  Trade  under  the 
Wellington  Ministry.     He  joined  the  Cabinet  of  Lord  Grey  under  the  India  Board. 

-  These  inclosures  referred  to  certain  portions  of  land  bordering  the  Scheldt,  and  inclosed  in  the 
territory  of  Limburg. — Translator. 


320  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

No.  17. — M.  Bresson  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand. 

Brussels,  December  2nd,  1830,  11  p.m. 
Private. 

ALTHOUGH  my  fingers  almost  refuse  to  hold  the  pen,  I  must  communicate 
to  you,  mon  Prince,  the  most  important  points  of  a  despatch  which  I  have  this 
evening  forwarded  to  M.  Sebastiani,  in  reply  to  one  he  wrote  to  me  on  the 
28th  of  November,  and  which  he  has,  no  doubt,  made  known  to  you.  I  send 
him  a  duplicate  of  the  one  for  London  to-day,  together  with  the  documents 
accompanying  it.  It  will  therefore  be  unnecessary  for  you,  mon  Prince,  to 
forward  it  to  him. 

"  By  excluding  the  House  of  Nassau  for  ever  from  all  power  in  Belgium, 
the  Congress  not  only  annuls  all  its  former  rights  to  the  crown,  which  it 
might  wish  to  put  forward,  but  also  takes  from  it  the  possibility  of  ever  being 
recalled  thereto  by  re-election.  This  unfortunately  is  how  the  resolution 
taken  by  the  Congress  is  viewed,  and  how  it  has  been  announced  to  the 
nation.  Your  Excellency  will  readily  perceive  how  little  chance  there  is,  in 
this  phase  of  the  question,  of  again  influencing  it  in  favour  of  a  son  of  the 
Prince  of  Orange,  with  one  exception,  which  he  himself  interdicts.  I  must 
say,  however,  that  since  this  grand  coiip  has  been  effected,  doubts,  regret,  and 
disquietude  have,  with  the  greater  number  of  people,  replaced  the  first  feelings 
of  anger,  and  would,  if  the  advice  had  been  given  sooner,  have  taken 
proper  effect,  and  many  complain  of  having  pledged  and  compromised 
themselves  too  soon.  It  might  not  be  impossible  to  utilize  this  return  to 
calmer  and  more  temperate  ideas 

" There  is  one  point    I    find   some  difficulty  in  speaking  of, 

which,  nevertheless,  is  a  fact ;  that  is,  if  the  occupation  of  Luxemburg  by  the 
German  Confederation  might  seem  natural  and  right  in  France,  and  if  it 
would  not  cause  dangerous  conflicts,  we  should  not  have  much  to  complain 
of,  for  the  terror  it  would  inspire  here,  would  immensely  facilitate  the  solu- 
tion of  the  Belgian  question  in  the  interests  of  universal  peace.  But  would 
this  peace  be  possible  after  the  occupation  of  Luxemburg  ? 

" We   can   count   on  five  or  six  weeks  before  the  election  of 

the  king.     This  strange  fancy  for  having  a  native  as  king,  has  been  almos 
entirely  given  up  ;  of  this  I  can  assure  your  Excellency. 

I  can  also  further  give  you  the  assurance,  that  if  we  must  relinquish  all  hope 
of  making  the  Belgians  see  the  great  advantages  and  security  which  the 
adoption  of  a  member  of  the  House  of  Nassau  would  afford  them,  we  can, 
at  least,  induce  them  to  renounce  the  absurd  project  of  balloting  for  a  king, 
and  having  first  to  solicit  the  assent  of  the  Powers  to  another  choice. 

"  I  am  also  certain,  from  positive  knowledge,  that  M.  Van  de  Weyer  will 
proceed  to  Paris  in  a  few  days  ;  that  he  will  then  submit  to  your  Excellency 
a  project  of  such  a  nature  as  will  conciliate  both  French  and  English 
interests  (Prince  Leopold  with  a  French  princess,  or  some  other  similar 
union)  ;  that,  after  having  obtained  your  views,  he  will  address  himself  to 
the  London  Conference  and  ascertain  theirs.  Only,  in  order  to  humour  the 
amour propre,  always  very  susceptible  in  men  and  nations  on  their  debut, 
if  you  do  not  agree  to  the  proposal  which  will  be  made  to  you,  perhaps  you 
will  arrange  that  that  which  you  substitute  for  it,  instead  of  appearing  here 
as  coming  from  you,  will  seem  as  if  it  emanated  from  the  country  itself. 
Indeed  this  is  an  innocent  subterfuge  for  the  sake  of  securing  so  such  great 
a  gain.  .  .  . 

"  I  shall  recommend  M.  Van  de  Weyer  to  go  straight  to  you  and  M.  le 


APPENDIX.  321 

Prince  de  Talleyrand,  so  that  he  should  not  fall  into  the  hands  of  those  who 
would  ask  nothing  better  than  to  lead  him  astray " 

There,  mon  Prince  !  These  are  facts  which  it  is  well  you  should  know. 
I  await  news  from  you  with  the  greatest  impatience.  Would  that  I  were 
near  you  !  Here  I  have  some  cruel  moments,  and  the  work  is  quite 
beyond  my  powers. 

Accept,  mon  Prince,  all  my  devotion  and  all  my  respects 

Bresson. 


No.  18.— Madame  Adelaide  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand. 

Paris,  December  9/A,  1830. 

The  longer  your  Congress  delays  in  treating  with  the  Belgians 

and  making  them  a  proposal  which  they  would  possibly  accept,  the  more  the 
difficulties  increase.  I  always  dread,  from  what  we  know  of  their  views,  and 
from  certain  information,  that  after  this  declaration,  already  so  vexatious, 
from  its  exclusion  of  the  House  of  Orange,  they  will  make  a  second  one. 
which  will  be  still  more  troublesome  and  more  embarrassing  to  us — that  of 
proclaiming  the  Due  de  Nemours  as  their  king.  It  is  therefore  necessary 
that  we,  in  concert  with  the  other  Powers,  should  hasten  to  offer  them 
another  choice  ;  otherwise  this  fresh  accession  of  discord  will  come  to  us 
all  the  sooner,  because  those  unhappy  Belgians  are  so  fatally  blind  as  to  wish 
for  war,  instead  of  dreading  it,  and  we  have  some  misguided  individuals  who 
are  of  the  same  opinion. 

The  Moniteur  announces  the  nomination  of  Marshal  Mortier  as  Ambas- 
sador to  Russia  ;  until  now,  the  King  refused  to  sanction  this  publication, 
after  the  unpleasant  behaviour,  to  call  it  nothing  worse,  of  the  Emperor  of 
Russia  ;  but  he  thought  that,  under  present  circumstances,  he  ought  to  make 
some  small  personal  sacrifice  by  giving  in  to  the  advice  of  his  Council,  who 
were  unanimous  on  the  subject  of  announcing  the  nomination  in  the  Moniteur. 
Pozzo  is  delighted  at  it  ;  he  believes  that  this  will  smooth  many  things 
especially  when  joined  to  the  proposal  about  to  be  made  to  the  Emperor 
Nicholas  to  send  to  himon  a  special  mission,  some  one  in  whom  he  had,  a  short 
time  ago  at  least,  great  confidence  and  esteem  ;  you  know  no  doubt  to  whom 
I  refer. 

December  \itli. 

Madame  de  Dino  having  delayed  her  departure,  I  have  again  taken  up 
my  letter  where  I  left  off,  and  during  this  interval  how  startling  is  the  news 
of  the  Revolution  at  Warsaw  !  How  I  long  to  know  what  you  think  of  it  in 
London  !  Those  poor  Poles,  sacrificed  for  so  long  a  period,  interest  me 
greatly,  and  I  very  much  fear  they  will  be  overwhelmed.  But  the  names 
that  are  at  the  head  of  the  movement  lead  me  to  hope  that  it  is  of  some 
magnitude.  As  far  as  we  are  concerned,  this  will  certainly  give  us  more 
time. 

Ah  !  if  Prussia  and  Austria  would  only  understand  their  own  interests, 
how  splendid  would  it  be  for  England  and  ourselves,  if  we  could  obtain  a 
fairer  and  more  tolerable  state  of  things  for  poor,  unhappy  Poland!  The  interest 
in  her  is  very  great  and  very  general  here.  The  Powers  are  now  reaping  what 
the  Holy  Alliance  sowed,  and  if  they  do  not  wish  to  see  and  feel,  that  in  order 
to  exist  they  must  change  their  system,  I  very  much  fear  that  we  shall  see 

VOL.   III.  Y 


322  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLEYRAND. 

Europe  in  a  blaze,  for  they  will  be  forced  into  it,  and  therefore  it  is  better  to 
prevent  it  ;  but  how  can  we  hope  that  they  will  do  this  after  what  we  have 
seen  !     Nevertheless,  I  hope  much  from  England  and  from  you. 

It  seems,  according  to  the  last  letters  received  from  Belgium,  that  they 
are  becoming  wiser  and  more  reasonable  there,  more  inclined  to  enter  into 
pourparlers,  and  to  agree  to  what  is  possible 

I  will  leave  off  here.  Madame  de  Dino  will  tell  you  all  I  have  not  written 
about — that  the  removal  of  the  Ministers  to  the  Luxemburg  passed  off  very 
quietly  ;  that  to-day  there  was  a  slight  attempt  made  by  some  hundred 
young  men  and  others,  to  disturb  the  order  of  the  funeral  of  Benjamin 
Constant  by  shouting,  when  it  was  leaving  the  Temple,  that  he  should  be 
conveyed  to  the  Pantheon  ;  that  the  National  Guard  behaved  admirably  ; 
that  the  people  did  not  join  in  it  at  all  ;  and  that  the  whole  thing  was  over  at 
once.  They  were  very  soon  silenced,  and  the  body  was  carried  to  Pere  la 
Chaise,  without  any  disorder  or  riot.  This  is  a  good  preamble  to  the 
trials. 


No.  19.— The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  Madame  Adelaide. 

London,  December  i^th. 

Mademoiselle  will  perhaps  have  the  goodness  to  tell  the  King,  that  Lord 
Grey  and  Lord  Palmerston  have  spent  a  couple  of  days  at  Claremont  with 
Prince  Leopold  of  Saxe-Coburg.  There  is  no  doubt  that  during  this  little 
trip,  which  is  spoken  of  as  being  required  forrest,the  subject  of  the  future  King 
of  Belgium  has  been  discussed.  This  affair,  and  the  consequences  immediately 
resulting  from  it,  deserve  that  the  King  should  give  them  his  Royal  attention 
and  fatherly  forethought.  Prince  Leopold  dines  with  me  on  the  17th.  If 
he  should  say  anything  to  me  which  means  more  than  ordinary  conversation, 
I  will  beg  him  to  write  direct  to  Mademoiselle.  However,  Prince 
Leopold  intends  going  over  to  Paris,  either  the  end  of  this  month  or  the 
beginning  of  next 

I    would  much  like    if   Mademoiselle  would  have   the   great 

goodness  to  send  a  portrait  of  the  King  to  the  French  Legation  in  England. 
Later  on  I  will  make  the  same  request  for  Valencay.  But  there  I  could 
venture  to  ask  for  a  portrait  of  Mademoiselle. 


No.  20. — The  Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  Madame  Adelaide. 

Tuesday,  December  \\th,  1830. 

I  HAVEjust  had  a  most  interesting  conversation  with  Lord  Palmerston. 

"  There,"  I  said,  "  is  the  armistice  all  but  concluded  ;  it  seems  to  me  that 
the  time  has  arrived  to  broach  the  important  question  of  the  future  King  of 
Belgium." 

He  seemed  very  willing,  and  even  quite  ready,  to  enter  into  this.  Many 
names  were  suggested,  but  some,  like  that  of  Prince  Paul  of  Wiirtemberg, 
were  not  even  discussed. 

"  Then  you  would  not  have  the  Archduke  Charles  ?"  I  told  him  that  we 
were  forced  to  exclude  him,  and  also  the  Due  de  Leuchtenberg,  and  that  if 
he  liked  to  press  me  still  further,  I  would  also  exclude  M.  de  Me"rode.     I 


APPENDIX.  323 

then  felt  bound  to  tell  him,  "  The  Belgians  think  a  great  deal  of  M.  le  Due  de 
Nemours,  but  the  King  wishes  to  put  aside  this  proposal.  I  do  not  know 
whether  he  will  succeed,  but  I  hope  so.  He  is,  in  fact,  placed  in  a  most 
singular  position,,  for  he  is  forced  to  employ  all  the  skill  he  possesses  to 
refuse  that  which  others  use  in  order  to  gain  what  they  want." 

"  It  would  be  difficult  to  get  the  other  Powers  to  adopt  M.  le  Due  de 
Nemours,"  replied  Palmerston,  "  but  let  us  try  and  find  some  one  else  who, 
by  marriage,  might  satisfy  every  one." 

"  I  consider  that  every  one  means  you  and  us,"  I  replied. 

All  this  gradually  worked  up  to  Prince  Leopold,  who  would  marry  one  of 
our  princesses,  and  whose  name  Lord  Palmerston  himself  brought  forward. 
I  exhibited  some  slight  astonishment,  as  if  this  idea  were  quite  new  to  me,  but 
my  astonishment  rather  took  the  form  of  a  pleasant  surprise.  I  had  to  say 
that  I  would  at  once  report  the  whole  of  this  conversation  to  Paris,  and  we 
could  then  soon  discuss  it  further. 

That  is  as  far  as  we  have  got.  It  is  quite  evident  that  Belgium  given 
to  Prince  Leopold  (who  would  then  marry  a  French  princess)  would  suit 
the  English  perfectly.  I  think,  if  you  approve  of  this  idea,  that  the  proposal 
should  be  made  at  the  Conference  by  Lord  Palmerston,  and  I  will  undertake 
to  make  him  do  it.  If  you  think  otherwise,  pray  give  me  your  commands  ; 
I  believe  that  whatever  you  think  best  will  be  done. 


No.  21. — M.  Bresson  to  the  Prince  de  Talleyrand. 

Brussels,  December  25//1, 1S30. 
Private.  Midnight. 

Mon  Prince, 

M.  Van  de  Weyer  was  in  Paris  when  the  Protocol  of  the  20th  Decem- 
ber arrived  there.  M.  le  Comte  Sebastiani  communicated  it  to  him.  He 
took  fright  at  once,  and  returned  here  in  all  haste.  He  thought  everything  was 
lost.  If  we  had  spoken  of  Luxemburg,  and  he  said  so  in  Paris,  we  had  not 
spoken  of  nothing.  But  M.  le  Comte  Sebastiani  has  authorized  him  to  make 
known  to  the  Congress,  that  the  independence  of  Belgium  had  been  recognized 
in  principle  by  the  Congress  of  London,  and  he  will  announce  this  to-morrow. 
Then  he  will  immediately  depart  to  bring  you  full  powers.  But  we  shall  not 
appear  in  this  at  all ;  he  must  get  matters  settled  by  this  country  itself,  mon 
Prince ;  from  one  moment  to  another,  by  the  very  slightest  accident,  the 
whole  affair  may  slip  through  our  fingers,  and  result  in  some  disastrous 
resolution. 

In  Paris,  M.  Van  de  Weyer  has  broached  the  question  of  a  prince. 
He  has  asked  for  the  Due  de  Nemours  ;  nothing  was  said  to  him  about  Prince 
Leopold.  They  wanted  to  know  if  a  Neapolitan  or  Bavarian  prince  would 
be  acceptable.  But  nothing  has  been  decided.  Whoever  it  is  to  be,  he  ought 
to  be  sent  here  quickly  ;  there  is  not  a  moment  to  lose.  Whenever  a  fresh 
difficulty  arises,  their  great  argument  for  getting  out  of  it,  is  the  adoption  of 
the  tricolour  cockade.  The  country  without  Luxemburg  would  be  quite  in- 
complete. It  will  be  necessary  to  give  it  to  some  one  it  can  like,  so  that  it  may 
cling  to  him,  and  not  be  so  ready  to  surrender  itself  to  its  neighbour.  M. 
Sebastiani  writes  to  me  to-day,  in  plain  language,  that  if  the  King  of  Holland 
does  not  raise  the  blockade  with  a  good  grace,  France  will  undertake  to  make 
him  do  so  by  force.  So  be  it  ;  but  if  we  go  that  length,  it  will  be  desirable 
that  England  should  take  part  in  these  coercive  measures.  There  would  be 
great  danger  in  our  undertaking  them  alone.    I  send  this  evening  by  courier 


324  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  TALLE  YRAND. 

a.  ministerial  despatch  to  M.  de  la  Rochefoucauld,  requesting  him  to  make 
known  to  the  Dutch  Government,  these  views  of  the  King's  Government.  Per- 
haps King  William  may  have  tried  to  bring  matters  to  this  crisis. 

After  your  two  letters  of  the  25th,  vwn  Prince,  I  received  the  one  you 
did  me  the  honour  to  write  on  the  16th.  I  resign  myself  to  remaining 
here,  since  such  is  your  wish.  But  we  are  still  far  from  the  goal,  and  I  shall 
not  see  you  for  a  long  time 

Deign  to  accept,  mon  Prince,  the  assurance  of  my  most  respectful 
devotion.  BRESSON. 


No.  22.— Prince  de  Talleyrand  to  Madame  Adelaide. 

December  26th,  1830. 

This  memorable  week  has  here  been  given  up  entirely  to  the  most  ter- 
rible anxiety  as  to  the  state  of  Paris  1  especially  for  me,  who  have  never  for 
one  moment  had  the  Palais  Royal,  out  of  my  mind.  I  have  therefore  no 
news  to  send  Mademoiselle,  but  I  must  tell  her  that  never  has  a  heavier, 
or  more  painful  weight  rested  near  my  heart.  The  King's  sagacity  will 
afford  him  aid  in  dealing  with  the  Government.  This  crisis  will  have  made 
known  to  him  who  are  his  true  and  who  are  his  false  friends  in  the  Ministry, 
and  will,  in  this  way,  have  done  him  good  service.  I  have  never  felt  myself 
more  entirely  the  King's  servant  than  during  these  two  last  days,  nor  more 
proud  of  representing  him  than  to-day.  I  pray  Mademoiselle  to  ask  the  King 
to  accept  my  homage,  and  also  to  receive  for  herself  my  most  tender  and 
respectful  compliments,  as  well  as  my  best  wishes  for  a  happy  New  Year. 

1  The  trial  of  the  Ministers  commenced  on  the  15th    of  December,  was  not  concluded   till    the 
21st,  and  during  this  period  riots  and  disturbances  had  taken  place  daily  in  Paris. 


END   OF   VOL.  III. 


RICHARD   CLAY   AND   SONS,    LIMITED,    LONDON    AND    BUNGAY. 


LIST  of  BOOKS 

TO  BE  PUBLISHED  DURING  THE 

SPRING  PUBLISHING  SEASON,   1891, 


BY 


GRIFFITH    FARRAN    OKEDEN    &    WELSH, 

NEWBERY  HOUSE  CHARING  CROSS  ROAD  LONDON  AND  AT  SYDNEY. 


Memoirs    of   the    Prince    de    Talleyrand. 

Edited,  with  a  Preface  and  Notes,  by  The  Due  de  Broglie,  of  the  French 
Academy.  Translated  by  R.  Ledos  de  Beaufort  ;  with  an  Introduction 
by  The  Hon.  Whitelaw  Reid,  American  Minister  in  Paris.  To  be  com- 
pleted in  5  vols.  Vols.  I.  and  II.,  8vo,  with  Portraits.  Ready  in  March. 
£\   is.  od.  each  net. 

N.B. —  This  Book  is  supplied  to  the  Bookseller  on  such  terms  as  to  allow  him  tt  sell  it  at 
lis.  net  only. 

The    Letters    of    S.    G.   O.      A   Series   of 
Letters  on   Public  Affairs, 

Written  by  The  Rev.  Lord  Sidney  Godolphin  Osborne,  and  published  in 
the   Times,  1844-1888.     Edited  by  Arnold  White.     In  2  vols.,  Demy  8vo, 

cloth _____     Price  £2  2s.  od. 

The  memory  of  these  letters  will  still  be  fresh  in  every  reader's 
mind,  and  the  collection  will  serve  as  an  historical  record  of  many 
burning  questions  of  the  time.  Among  the  chief  subjects  on  which  he 
wrote  are — ''The  English  Agricultural  Labourer" — "Free  Trade  and 
Protection"  in  which  he  naturally  supported  Peel — "  Education  " — 
" Women's  Questions" — "  Criminal  Investigation'" — "Emigration" — 
"Public  Charities" — "Irish  Politics"  etc.,  etc. 

Fortunes  Made  in  Business.     A  Series  of 

Original  Sketches,  Biographical  and  Anecdotic,  from  the  Recent  History 

of  Industry  and  Commerce,  by  various  Writers.     Edited  by  James  Hogg. 

New   Edition,   revised   and   enlarged    (First   Series),    with   Six   Portraits. 

Crown  8vo,  cloth       _... Price  ~.s. 

These  remarkable  lives  reflect  the  small  beginnings  and  marvellous 
expansion  of  commercial  houses  whose  members  have  won  wealth,  social 
rank,  and  a  world-wide  reputation.  The  facts  and  anecdotes  have  been 
taken  down  from  the  lips  of  the  living,  and  gathered  from  out-of-the-way 
storehouses.  By  the  aid  of  men  of  practical  knowledge  the  tangled 
history  of  complex  mechanical  inventions  and  industrial  improvements 
has  been  unravelled,  and  justice  done  to  the  skill  atid  sagacity  which 
have  helped  to  make  England  great. 

As  has  been  remarked  by  "  The  Saturday  Review"  "there  are  here 
many  narratives  which  exhibit  some  of  the  best  qualities  of  the  self-taught 
Englishman.  Patience,  perseverance,  contentment  in  poverty,  gene- 
rosity in  affluence,  kindness  to  friends  and  dependents,  happy  selection 
of  chances,  instruments  and  agencies,  discoveries  amounting  to  inspira- 
tion, an  infinite  capacity  for  taking  pains,  are  all  well  brought  out." 

The  book  shows  that  the  old  Eastern  story  of  "Aladdin's  Wonderful 
Lamp "  was  only  a  prophetic  mirror  of  the  romantic  incidents  in 
modern  industry  and  commerce. 


(  2  ) 


the 


De    Fidiculis     Bibliographia:      Being 

Basis  of  a  Bibliography  of  the  Violin  and  all  other  Instruments  Played 
with  a  Bow  in  Ancient  and  Modern  Times.  Catalogue  Raisonne  of  all 
Books,  Pamphlets,  Magazines  and  Newspaper  Articles,  Book  and  Dictionary 
Extracts,  Dramas,  Romances,  Poems  Methodes,  Instruction-Books  and 
Theoretical  and  Scientific  Works  relating  to  Instruments  of  the  Violin 
Family  hitherto  found  in  Private  or  Public  Libraries,  or  referred  to  in 
known  Works  on  the  subject.  By  Edward  Heron-Allen,  Author  of 
11  Violin  Making — As  it  was  and  is,"  "  The  Ancestry  of  the  Violin," 
"  Hodges  versus  Chanot,"  "A  Fatal  Fiddle,"  etc.     Part  II.   -     Price  ZS.  6d. 


fiction  cm6  l&eUes  JLettxes. 

Belle     Rue;      or,     The     Story     of     Rolf. 

By  W.  L.  M.  Jay,  Author  of  "  Shiloh,"  &c.     Crown  8vo,  cloth.     Price  6*. 
A  New  Story  of  Village  Life  and  of  Religions  Coteries,  after  the 
style  of '"  Shiloh? 


Stories  from  Newbery  House. 
Authors. 

Crown  8vo,  paper,  is.       -         -         - 

CONTENTS. 


By  various 

Cloth,  15.  6d. 


The  Story  of  Captain  Smith,  late  of 

the  Royal  Navy.     Vin  Vincent. 
Shut  up   in   his   own   Prison.     Rev. 

Canon  Benham. 
Christmas  Bells.      Vin  Vincent. 
The   Warden   and  his    Ward.     Rev. 

Geo.  Huntingdon. 
Brownie's     Last     Gallop.    Rev.    J. 

Hudson. 


What  is  Spring  $    Helen  Milman. 
Karl's  Easier  Offering.     Miss  N.  J . 

Blatchford. 
Through     Bush,      Through     Briar. 

M.  Benham. 
Jack  Hamble.     H.  G.  Far  rant. 
Ruby,  V.C.     Amy  Wilson. 


"  Cooee."     Tales    of    Australian     Life.       By 
Australian  Ladies. 


Edited  by  Mrs.  Patchett  Martin,     i  vol.,  Crown  8vo,  cloth.      Price  5$. 

CONTENTS. 

The    Bushman's    Rest.      By     Mrs. 

Lance  Rawson. 
The    Story    of   a    Photograph.     By 


An  Old-time    Episode  in  Tasmania. 

ByuTasma." 
Mrs.  Drummond  of  Quondong.     By 

Mrs.  Henry  Day. 
Victims  of  Circe.     By   Mrs.    Man- 

nington  Caffyn. 


A   Wild    Blossom. 

Crown  8vo,  paper    - 


Margaret  Thomas. 
The  Bunyip.  By  Mrs.  Campbell Praed. 
The  Tragedy  in  a  Studio.     By  Mrs. 

Patchett  Martin. 

By    Mrs.    Batchelor. 

Price  is. 


(     3     ) 

fiction  cm&  ^3efCes  ^cffrcs. 

Through  Misty  Veils.     Verses  of  the  Past 
and  of  Day- Dreamland. 

By  Rowe  Lingston.     Fcap.  8vo,  cloth        ....        Price  2S.  6d. 

The    Moore     Birthday    Book.     Selections 
from    the  Writings  of  Thomas    Moore. 

Compiled  by  E.  W.  H.     32mo,  cl  ;th     -----       Price  is. 

The    Scott    Birthday   Book.     Compiled  by 
Edith  M.  Welsh. 

32mo,  cloth _...      Price  is. 

The    Shelley    Birthday    Book.     Compiled 
and   Edited  by  J.   R.   Tutin. 

32mo,  cloth         -  Price  is. 

The  Proverbial  Birthday  Book.    Arranged 
by  M.   E.   Donald. 

32mo,  cloth Price  is. 

The    Temple    of   Fame,    and    other    Poems. 
By  Ganymede. 

1  vol.,  Fcap.  8vo,  cloth -       Price  3s.  6d. 

Younger      American     Poets,     1830 — 1890. 

Edited  by  Douglas  B.  W.  Sladen,  B.A.  With  an  Appendix  of  Younger 
Canadian  Poets,  edited  by  Goodridge  Bliss  Roberts,  of  St.  John,  X.B. 
Crown  8vo,  cloth -  Price  3s.  6d. 


(     4     ) 

"SSoofrs  for  t&e  ^oung. 


Sweet    Content.     By    Mrs.     Molesworth. 

Uniform   with    the   "  Old    Pincushion."     Illustrated  by  W.  Rainey.     4to, 
cloth,  bevelled  boards  and  gilt  edges         .....       Price  6s. 

A  Story  for  Girls  from  10  to  15.  Its  heroine  is  a  somewhat"  spoilt" 
child,  whose  "spoiling"  however,  has  not  gone  far  enough  to  be  very 
disastrous  in  its  results,  and  she  owes  much  to  the  unconscious  influence 
of  high-minded  young  companions.  The  story  is  also  intended  to  be  a 
warning  against  superficial  judgment  of  others. 


Uniform  with  the  above  in  size  and  price 


o 


Stories  for  Somebody.  By  Edith 
Carrington.  Profusely  Illustrated 
by  Dorothy  Tennant  (Mrs.  H.  M. 
Stanley).   Uniform  with  ''Birdie." 

When  We  Were  Children.  By 
E.  M.  Green,  Author  of  "The 
Child  of  the  Caravan,"  &c. 
Illustrations  by  W.  Burton. 

The  Little  Ladies.  By  Helen 
Milman,  Author  of  "  Boy."  With 
50  Illustrations  by  Emily  J.  Har- 
ding. 

An  Old  Pincushion;  or,  Aunt  Clo- 
tilda's Guests.     By  Mrs.  Moles- 


worth.  With  numerous  Illustra- 
tions by  Mrs.  Adrian  Hope  (Laura 
Troubridge). 

When  I'm  a  Man  ;  or,  Little  Saint 
Christopher.  By  Alice  Weber. 
Profusely  Illustrated  by  W.  H. 
Groome. 

Birdie  :  A  Tale  of  Child  Life.  By 
Harriet  Childe  Pemberton. 
Profusely  Illustrated  by  W.  Rainey. 

His  Little  Royal  Highness  :  A 
Story  for  Children.  By  Ruth 
Ogden.    Illustrated  by  W.  Rainey. 


POPULAR  SIXPENNY  EDITIONS  OF 


The     Three     Commanders.      By     the     late 
W.  H.  G.   Kingston. 


8vo,  sewed 


Price  6d.,  or  cloth,  is. 


The     Young     Franc     Tireurs    and     their 
Adventures  in  the  Franco-Prussian  War. 

By  G.  A.  Henty.     8vo,  sewed      -  Price  6d.,  or  cloth,  is. 

Uniform  with  the  above  : 


The  Three  Midshipmen.    By  W.  H.  G. 
Kingston. 


The     Three    Lieutenants.      By 
W.  H.  G.  Kingston. 


Peter  the  Whaler.     By  W.  H.  G.  Kingston. 


a 


(     5     ) 

)c  Igiext  ^fitng"    Series. 


"DOE  YE   NEXTE  THYNGE." 

After  Easter  Messrs.  Griffith  Far ran  &  Co.  propose  to  issue  "The 
Next  Thing"  Series. 

"The  Next  Thing"  Series  is  written  for  wage-earning  girls,  by  those 
who  know  and  care  about  them. 

"The  Next  Thing"  Series  will,  by  degrees,  contain  as  many  kinds  of 
tales  as  there  are  kinds  of  readers  in  this  class.  The  Series  will  begin  with 
simple  tales,  but  all  for  growing-up  or  grown-up  girls. 

"The  Next  Thing"  Series  will  show  how  to  deal  with  all  the  little 
worries  which  none  but  women  understand  in  each  other's  lives. 

"  The  Next  Thing  "  Series  will  be  pretty,  cheap  and  attractive. 


In  attractive  Covers,  96  pages,  Fcap.  8vo,  Illustrated,  price  6d.  each. 

1.  Shoulder  to  Shoulder.     By  Miss  Hawker. 

Illustrates  the  value  of  sympathy,  of  kindly  actions,  and  of  good 
example  and  influence. 

2.  The  Work  of  a  Witch.     By  M.  Hook. 

Shows  the  importance  of  trust  in   God,  and  of  consulting  Him  in 
prayer  on  every  step  in  life. 

3.  Tenant  of  the  Laurels.     By  Magdalen  Brooke. 

Full  of  good  lessons  on  conduct  in  life.  * 

4.  The  First  Turning.     By  J.  E.  A.  Brown. 

Deals  with  the  duties  of  daily  life. 

5.  Ellen  Devar's  Investment.     By  Mrs.  Somerset. 

Shows  the  value  of  thrift  and  charity. 

6.  Golden  Silence.     By  Mrs.  Powell. 

Illustrates  the  advantage  of  the  control  of  the  tongue. 

(Others  to  follow.) 

In  attractive  Covers,  48  pages,  Fcap.  8vo,  Illustrated,  price  3d.  each. 

1.  Annie  Parker's  Wedding  Dress.     By  Millicent  Ryan. 

Teaches  lessons  of  responsibility,   and  deals  with  some  ideals  of 
marriage,  etc. 

2.  Out  for  the  Day.     By   Petrel. 

Shotvs  the  evils  of  deception,  even  in  the  smallest  things. 

3.  Miss  Girdlestone's  Mother.     By  M.  dal  Vero. 

Inculcates  honour  to  parents,  and  the  remembering  of  what  they 
have  done  for  us  in  our  infancy. 

4.  Nothing  to  Learn.     By  Hope  Carlyon. 

Faithfulness  in  work  is  the  subject  dealt  with  in  this  story. 

5.  Granny's  Story.     By  Ella  Sloane. 

Is  a  story  of  faithful  service. 

6.  With  None  to  Help.     By  C.  M.  Hallett. 

Shows  the  value  of  religious  instruction  and  of  daily  perusal  of 
God's   Word.  (Others  to  follow.) 


(     6     ) 

Iglexv  @6ucafionaf  li$oo!\$. 

Recitation.  A  Handbook  for  Teachers  in 
Public  Elementary   Schools. 

By  Arthur  Burrell,  M.A.     Crown  8vo,  cloth        -         -       Price  3*.  6d. 

The  aim  of  this  book  is  to  enable  teachers  to  bring  out  the  good 

reading  powers  which  children  undoubtedly  possess.     The  book  is  quite 

free  from  long  lists  of  dry  rides,  and  the  treatment  of  the  subject  is  novel. 

The  pieces  chosen  for  illustration  are  published  separately  for  the  use  or 

children,  as  follows  : 

Exercises  in  Speech  and  Simple  Recita- 
tions for  Standards  L,   II.  &  III. 

Paper,  sewed Price  \d. 

Exercises  in  Speech  and  Simple  Recita- 
tions for  Standards  III.  &  IV. 

Paper,  sewed         --.---._.         Price  ^d. 

Exercises  in  Speech  and  Simple  Recita- 
tions for  Standards  IV.  &  V.,  and  for 
higher  Classes. 

Paper,  sewed         -- Price  4^. 

Arithmetic  for  Standards  I.  &  II.  The 
Teachers'  Aid. 

By  E.  Page.     Crown  8vo,  sewed       ------     Price  6d. 

The  aim  of  this  little  work  is  to  save  the  time  which  a  teacher  of 
Standards  I.  and  II.  must  otherwise  spend  in  collecting  suitable  exercises 
in  Dictated  Arithmetic.  By  well-tried  plans  the  children  are  given 
different  sums,  in  sets  ;  but  each  child  is  contending  with  the  same 
difficulty  at  the  same  time,  thus  enabling  a  teacher  to  work  up  and  test 
his  class  on  any  particular  point,  where  he  may  find  a  weakness. 


(     7      ) 

Drawing     Under    the    Education     Code. 

A  Practical  Guide  for  the  Teacher  of  Drawing  in  Elementary  Schools. 

In  Preparation. 

This  little  book  shows  a  teacher  who  has  never  taught  drawing 
before  how  to  set  about  the  work,  so  as  to  earn  the  highest  grant.  It 
clearly  indicates  what  are  the  requirements  in  each  standard,  and  how 
they  are  to  be  met ;  what  the  teacher  must  do  ;  what  the  children  must 
do  ;  and  what  are  the  special  points  to  be  attended  to  in  each  subject, 
in  order  to  ensure  success.  The  book  does  not  teach  drawing — no  bonk 
can  do  this — but  as  the  outcome  of  many  years'  practical  experience  in 
success/id  school  work  it  is  believed  that  teachers  will  find  in  it  just  the 
help  they  require. 

Songs    for    Schools.     Words    by    Edward 

Oxenford.     Music  by  A.  Scott  Gatty  and  S.  C.  Cooke.     Small   4to, 
cloth   ...........     Price  is.  6d 

A  Companion  Volume  to  "  Hymns  for  Elementary  Schools." 
Designed  to  meet  the  ever -increasing  demand  for  school  songs  of  a 
simple  character,  with  easy,  taking  airs,  etc.  The  accompaniments  have 
also  been  written  in  such  a  manner  that  children  shall  be  able  to 
accompany  children  in  their  homes  where  an  instrument  is  available. 


The    Ministry   of   Catechising. 

By  Monseigneur  Dupanloup,  Bishop  of  Orleans,  Member  of  the  French 
Academy.     Translated  into  English.     Crown  8vo,  cloth,  with  a  Portrait. 

Price  7$.  6d. 
The  words  "  Catechism  "  and  "  Catechising "  have  a  somewhat 
wider  meaning  on  the  Continent  than  with  us.  They  cover  the  whole 
ground  of  religious  education,  and  '"  Catechising11  has  therefore  been 
said  by  Bishop  Dupanloup  to  be  the  most  important  work  in  the 
department  of  religious  instruction.  His  great  book,  entitled  ''  The 
Jlfinislry  of  Catechising,11  goes  into  the  principles,  the  method,  the 
application  to  Catechism  for  the  various  stages  of  youth,  all  in  very 
great  detail,  and  providing  for  almost  every  difficulty,  some  of  which 
would  be  different  in  England,  but  the  principles  are  applicable  to 
every  Christian  country. 

Methodism   and  the  Church    of  England. 

A  Comparison.     By  a  Layman.     Crown  8vo,  cloth  -  Price  2s.  6d. 

This  is  a  stirring  little  book,  by  an  anonvmous  writer.  It  will  be 
of  special  interest  to  Churchmen  and  Wesleyans,  as  it  contains  a  very 
complete  revelation  of  the  inner  life  of  Wesleyanism. 


(     8     ) 

The  Sacrifice  of  Praise;  or,  The  Holy 
Eucharist,  according  to  the  use  of  the 
Church  of  England. 

Interleaved  with  Instructions  and  Devotions  for  the  use  of  Communicants. 
Together  with  the  Litany,  or  General  Supplication  appointed  by  the  Church 
to   be   used   at  Communion  on  certain  days.     And  a  Brief  Introduction 
concerning  the  Meaning  of  the  Christian  Sacrifice  and  the  Ritual  Accessories 
of  the  Service         _---.-.--_         Price  2s. 
Its   special  features  are:   (i)  A  brief  marginal  analysis   of  the 
Prayers  in   the  Holy    Communion ;    (2)  a  careful  indication  of    the 
various  sections  of  the  service,  with  notes  on  the  opposite  page  explana- 
tory of  their  meaning  and  sequence ;    (3)  the   marking  by  a  different 
type  from  the  others  of  such  rubrical  directions  as  are  not  contained  in 
The   Book  of  Common    Prayer.     It  will   be  published   uniform    with 
"  The    Churchman"1  s  Altar  Manual"   to  which  it  will  be  a  companion 
volume. 

The  Shield  of  Faith.  A  Sketch  of  the 
Answers  to  Objections  and  Difficulties 
alleged  against  Christianity  and  the  Church. 

By  A.  St.  Leger  Westall,  M.A.     Crown  8vo,  sewed     -         -    Price  is. 

This  is  intended  to  present  in  a  concise  form  the  answers  to  modern 
doubts  and  difficulties  about  Christianity  in  general  and  the  Church 
of  England  in  particular.  It  is  designed  with  the  view  of  furnishing 
many  who  have  neither  time  nor  money  for  the  study  of  elaborate  works 
with  the  results  of  recent  controversy.  Most  of  the  objections  urged 
against  the  Faith  are  noticed,  and  the  manner  in  which  they  may  be 
dealt  with  is  indicated  sufficiently  to  arm  the  reader  with  "  reasons  for 
the  hope  that  is  in  him.''''  Shortness  and  clearness  have  been  aimed  at 
in  order  to  bring  the  work  within  the  reach  of  the  slenderest  purse. 

Simple   Thoughts  for  the   Church's  Year. 

By  A.  B.  Tucker,  Author  of  the  "  Kingdom  of  Christ." 

Brief  meditations   for  the    Church's   Seaso7is  and  Saints'1  Days, 
intended    chiefly    to   suggest    key-notes   for   spiritual    reflection,   and 
practical  endeavour,  in  the  "  daily  round." 

Instruction  on  the  Creed.  Intended  chiefly 
for  the  use  of  Schools. 

By  C.  Thayne.     Crown  8vo,  paper Price  is. 

The  Clergyman's  Duty  in  Relation  to 
the  Lord's  Day.     An  Essay. 


By  the  Rev.  Morris  Fuller,  Vicar  of  Bishop's  Tawton,  Author  of  "  Our 

Title  Deeds,"  &c.     Crown  8vo,  cloth Price 

In  Preparation. 
Deals  with  the  Sunday  Question  in  relation  to  the  Creator  to  Jehovah ; 
to  the  Law  Given  to  the  Redeemer ;   to  the   Congregation   and  to  the 
Country. 


(     9     ) 

Eucharistica.        Meditations     and     Prayers 

on  the  Most  Holy  Eucharist,  from  old  English  Divines.     With  an  Introduc- 
tion  by  Samuel  Wilberforce,  D.D.     321110,  cloth  boards,  red  edges. 

Price  is. 
Red  Line  Edition,  24mo,  cloth,  coloured  edges,  price  2s. 

32mo,  cloth,  bevelled  red  edges,  price  2s.  6d. 

Communion    with    God.      Aids    to    Private 
Prayer. 

By  Mrs.  M.  L.  M.  Dawson.     With  Preface  by  Rev.  John  Dawson,  B.A. 
32mo,  cloth,  red  edges -  Price  is. 

Dangers   of   the    Apostolic  Age.     By  the 

Right  Rev.  Jas.  Moorhouse,  D.D.,  Bishop  of  Manchester.     Crown  8vo, 

cloth -  Price  2s.  bd. 

Written  to  give  as  vivid  a  picture  as  possible  of  the  great  spiritual 
struggles  which  arose  out  of  the  approach  of  the  dangers  of  the  Galatian 
Lapse,  the  Colossiau  Heresy,  and  the  Hebrew  Apostasy. 

The  Sacred  Way  from  Advent  to  Advent. 

By  Miss  Gave.     Crown  8vo,  cloth      -  Price  xs.  6d. 

The     Throne     of    Canterbury;    or,     The 
Archbishop's  Jurisdiction. 

By  the  Rev.  Morris  Fuller,  Vicar  of  Bishop's  Tawton,  Author  of  "  Our 
Title  Deeds,"  &c.     Crown,  8vo,  cloth       -----       Price  5.?. 

The  object  of  the  "  Throne  of  Canterbury  "  is  to  explain  the  juris- 
diction of  the  Archbishop.  With  this  view  the  development  of  the 
"  Hierarchy  "  of  the  early  Christian  Church  is  unfolded.  This  is 
followed  bv  a  discussion  on  the  "  Oath  of  Canonical  Obedience"  made 
by  the  Bishop-elect  to  the  Metropolitan.  The  meaning  of  the  term 
"  Jurisdiction  "  is  then  exhaustively  treated.  Two  chapters  then  follow 
on  Metropolitans,  illustrated  by  canonical  authorities :  (1)  Foreign  ; 
(2)  Anglican.  The  main  point  of  the  argument  is  thus  reached,  viz., 
"  the  Metropolitan  Jurisdiction  of  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury."  This 
is  fully  illustrated  by  a  historical  and  legal  survey,  and  the  argument 
is  followed  up  by  tracing  the  Archbishop's  jurisdiction  in  Convocation. 
The  judicial  functions  of  Metropolitans  are  more  fully  explained, 
references  being  made  to  the  Colonial  Church  and  Letters  Patent.  The 
Reformatio  Lcgum  is  also  discussed,  as  affording  illustrative  matter. 
The  chapter  on  the  law  of  Primates  and  Metropolitans  embraces  the 
prospects  of  the  Colonial  Churches,  suggestions  being  nuidc  as  to  their 
better  organisation  and  consolidation.  Practical  conclusions  are  then 
summed  up,  the  making  of  the  Anglican  Patriarchate,  the  centralising 
of  the  Appellate  jurisdiction  in  Canterbury  for  Home  and  Colonial 
causes,  and  its  application  to  Liturgical  and  other  questions  which 
require  final  and  definitive  solution. 


(       10      ) 

^e  Ancient  anb  ^iobevn  ^idrcm?  of 
^eofogicaf  ^iferafuve. 

Cloth,  uncut  edges,  is.  each  volume. 
Or  in  cloth,  bevelled  boards,  red  edges,  price  is.  6d. 

THE  VOLUMES  ALREADY  PUBLISHED  ARE: 


Vol.  i.  The      Confessions       of       S. 
^Augustine. 
A     Kempis'      Imitation      of 

Christ. 
George     Herbert's     English 

Poems,  &c. 
Keble's  Christian  Year. 
Wilberforce's  Five  Empires. 
Andrewes'    Sermon    on    the 

Incarnation. 
B.p.    Jeremy    Taylor's    Holy 

Living. 
Baxter's  Saint's  Rest.     Vol.1. 
Baxter's         Saint's         Rest. 

Vol.  II. 
Law's  Serious  Call. 
Platina's  Lives  of  the  Popes. 

Vol  I. 
Giles   Fletcher's    Victory    of 

Christ. 
The   Orations   of  S.  Athan- 

asius. 
The   First    Prayer    Book   of 

Edward  VI. 
The  Whole  Duty  of  Man. 
The  Second  Prayer  Book  of 

Edward  VI. 
Platina's  Lives  of  the  Popes. 

Vol.  II. 

1 8.  Paley's  Horae  Paulinae. 

19.  Wilberforce's  Practical  View 
of  the  Religious  System 
of  Professed  Christians. 

20.  The  Apostolic  Fathers.  Vol.  I. 

21.  Isaac  Williams'  Cathedral. 


2. 


4- 

5- 
6. 


8. 
9- 

10. 
n. 

12. 


14. 

15. 
16. 

17. 


Vol.22. 


The 
Vol. 


II. 


Apostolic       Fathers 


23- 
24. 

25. 
26. 


Ken's  Prose  Works. 


27. 

28. 

29. 
30. 
31. 

32. 
33. 
34- 

35- 
36. 

37- 
38. 

39- 
40. 


Baptism. 
Baptism. 


Vol.  I. 
Vol.  II. 
Prayer 


Pascal's  Provincial  Letters. 
Apology  of  Justin  Martyr. 
Tertullian's         Ecclesiastical 

History  of  the  Second  and 

Third  Centuries. 
Wall     on     Infant 

Vol.  I. 
Wall     on     Infant 

Vol.  II. 
Cur  Deus  Homo. 
Hare's  Victory  of  Faith 
Tertullian  Apology. 
Massillon's  Sermons. 
Massillon's  Sermons. 
Oueen     Elizabeth's 

Book. 
Life  and  Times  of  S.  Cyprian. 
Some  Writings  and  Opinions 

of  S  Clement  of  Alexandria. 
S.    Augustine's  City  of  God. 

Vol.  I. 
S.  Augustine's  City  of  God. 

Vol.  II. 
Stanley's    Sermons    on    the 

Apostopcal  Age. 
Pearson  on  the  Creed.  Vol.1. 
Pearson  on  the  Creed.  Vol.  II.   ) 
Christ      and      Christendom. 

Plumptre. 
Landon's  Councils.     Vol.  I. 
Landon's  Councils.     Vol.  II. 


f    £.2 


a. 


(  II  ) 


fye   "gSfe-sfmmsfer    c$i6varp. 


Under  the  above  title  we  propose  to  publish,  in  handsome 
Library  form,  a  Series  of  Monthly  Volumes  of  Standard 
Theological  Literature.  The  scope  and  intent  of  the  Library 
may  be  best  indicated  by  the  titles  of  the  earlier  volumes 
which   we  propose   to    issue. 

The  size  will  be  Crown  Svo,  the  printing  and  paper  will 
be  of  the  first  quality,  and  the  binding  will  be  in  elegant 
and  attractive   Library  form. 

The  volumes  will  be  published  at  2s.  6d.  each,  and  the 
first  will  be  ready  during  the  month  of  February. 


These  Volumes  are  supplied  to  the  Booksellers  on  such  terms  as  to  allow 

them  to  be  sold  at  2s.  6d.  net. 


IN    PREPARATION : 

THE    CONFESSIONS    OF    ST.    AUGUSTINE. 

THE    FIRST    PRAYER    BOOK    OF    EDWARD    VI. 

THE    SECOND    PRAYER    BOOK    OF    EDWARD    VI. 

THE    PRAYER    BOOK    OF    QUEEN    ELIZABETH. 

THE    APOSTOLIC    FATHERS.     Vol.  I. 

„  ,,  Vol.  II. 

SERMONS    AND     ESSAYS    ON     THE    APOSTOLIC    AGE.      DEAN 
STANLEY. 

THE    PROSE    WORKS    OF    BISHOP    KEN 


(  12  ) 


"gvo  £>co  ei  gjccfesta. 


cc 


33 


ITEW   .A. IN" ID    OLD 

FOR   SEED-TIME   AND   HARVEST. 

AN  ILLUSTRATED   MAGAZINE    FOR    ALL    READERS. 

(New  Series.) 


ONE   PENNY  MONTHLY. 

The  Best  Church  Periodical  for  Localising. 

Definite  Church  Teaching — Interesting  Articles — Bright  Stories 

Attractive  Pictures — Convenient  Size.     Published  regularly. 

Send  for  Specimen.     Special  advantages  to  parishes  introducing  it. 


Among  those  who  have  promised  contributions  in  the  coming  year,  are — 


Rt.  Rev.  Lord   Bishop  of   Wake- 
field, 

Rev.  Canon  Knox  Little, 

,,      Canon  Jelf, 

„      Prebendary  Hingeston  Ran- 
dolph, 

Henry  Thompson, 

G.  C.  Green, 

Arthur  H.  Brown, 
Mrs.  Herbert  Martin, 
Hon.  Mrs.  Arthur  Nash, 
Mrs.  Molesworth, 
Mrs.  Gellie, 


V 


Miss  Carrington, 

Miss  Alice  Weber, 

Miss  Euphemia  Bussell, 

Mrs.  C.  F.  Hernaman, 

Miss  Armstrong, 

Miss  Jenner, 

"  Vin  Vincent," 

Mrs.  Looker, 

Mrs.  C.  M.  Norris, 

Helen    Milman     (Mrs.    Caldweli 
Crofton), 

Miss  Childe  Pemberton, 


And  many  others. 


Griffith  Farran  Okeden  &  Welsh, 

Newbery  House,  Charing  Cross  Road,  London, 

and  of  all  Booksellers. 


fj 


University  of  California 

SOUTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY 

405  Hilgard  Avenue,  Los  Angeles,  CA  90024-1388 

Return  this  material  to  the  library 

from  which  it  was  borrowed. 


GL  t£if)#  200T 
'03  SPW 


'APR17  20U 


4G  2  HOURS 


2.  HOURS 


3   1205  00533  0475 


UC  SOUTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY 


AA      000  174  219    6 


^Bc^fi  ts  fc V* £1  ■  .;">  «v^?Tvi. ^ 


University  of  Califon 
Southern  Regional 
Library  Facility